


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 




AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF 

THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


A STUDY IN INDO-BURMESE HISTORICAL AND 
CULTURAL RELATIONS FROM THE EARLIEST 
TIMES TO THE BRITISH CONQUEST 


BY 

NIHARRANJAN RAY 

M.A. (Cal.). D.Lett. & Phil. (Leiden), Dip. Lib. (Lond.), F.L.A. 
Premchand Roychand Scholar 

University of Calcutta 



UNIVERSITY OF CALCUTTA 
1946 


Fjrst Edition : 1946 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY NISHITCHANDRA SEN, 
SUPERINTENDENT (OFFG.), CAfXUTTA UNIVERSITY PRESS 
48. HAZRA ROAD. BALLYGUNGE, CALCUTTA 


I445B -August. 1946 ^-^e. 



To 

PROFESSOR BENIMADHAV BARUA 

WHO INITIATED ME INTO 

INDO-BURMESE STUDIES 

IN DEEP ESTEEM AND ADMIRATION 




CONTENTS 


Subjects Pages 

CHAPTER ONE 

EABLY TRACES : FROM THE ALLEGED ASOKA- 1-87 

MISSION TO THE FALL OF THATON 

I. The Background .. .. 1-7 

II. The Asoka-Mission : Legend and 

History . . . . . . 7-13 

III. Buddhism in the Kirata country . . 14-18 

IV. Buddhism in Lin- Yang . . 18-24 

V. The Buddhaghosa Tradition : 

Legend and History . . 24-33 

VI. Buddhism in Old Prome . . 33-46 

VII. Buddhism in Old Prome (contd.) . . 46-55 

VIII. Buddhism in Old Prome {contd.) . . 55-57 

IX. Buddhism in Old Prome {contd.) . . -IZ 

X. Buddhism in Pegu . . . . 73-75 

XI. Buddhism in Thaton . . . . 76-83 

XII. A Resume . • . . . . 83-87 

CHAPTER TWO 88-168 


EFFLORESCENCE : FROM THE INTKODUCTION 
OP THERA VA DA BUDDHISM IN PAGAN iN 1057 
TO THE FALL OF THE PAGAN DYNASTY, 

C. 1287 A.D. 


I. Sources and Source-materials . . 89-97 

II. The Early Phase .. .. 97-110 

III. , Maramma Samgha and Sihala 

Samgha .. .. .. 110-118 

IV. The Religion in the Talaing country 118-122 

V. The Dimming of the Religion . . 122-125 

VI, Monastic Scholarship . , , . 125-132 



Vlll 


CONTENTS 


Subjects 

VII. Durenidana and Avidurenidana 
Stories 

VIII. rnrtlier Corroborative Archaeologi- 
cal Evidence 

IX. Roligioixs Eclecticism of Pagan 

X. Insxaiptions of Pagan : A Postscript 

CHAPl’KR adIREE 

Tim GKEAT Rli’/KOKMATJON AND ITS PREAMBLE : 
FOURTEENTH AND FrETElCNTII CTONI'URIES 

I. The I'^iurtccntli Century 

II. Religion and Scholarship in the 
Valaing country 

III. The Fifteenth Centuiy 

IV. Dhammaceti’s Reformation of the 

Samgha . . 

V. A Monastic! I.iibT‘ary 
CHAPTER FOldl 

CLOUDS GATHER : SIXTEENTH AND SEVEN- 
TEENTH CENTURIES 

I. Maraminarattlia 
II. 'fhe Burmans and the Talaings 
CHAPTER FIVE 

A GREAT' CONT’ROVERSy : EIGHTEI'IxN'J'H CEN- 
TURY AND AE'l'ER 

I. Tlic Bacliground 
11. Beginning of the Controversy 
I I I . The ( h ushing of tlic '^I'alaings 
TV. The Pealv of the (’'ontroversy 
V. Re-organisat ion of t he S<‘imgha 

CHAPTER SIX 

Burma’s return gifts to CEAmoN : nine- 
teenth CENTURY AND AFTER : THE 

“ AMARAPURA SAMGHA ” OF CEYLON 


Paces 

133-141 

142-147 

147-151 

151-168 

169 105 


1 () 0-174 

174-176 

177-182 

182-192 

192-195 

196-216 

196-204 

204-216 

217-236 

217-218 

219-223 

223-226 

226 - 2.33 

233-236 

237-249 



CONTEISTTS 

Subjects 

CHAPTER SEVEN 

SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 

I. Summary . . 

II. Character and Ideal of the Religion 

III. What Buddhism has done for Burma 

IV. The Samgha and the Society 

V. The Samgha and the King : Political 
Activities 

VI. The Samgha and its Constitution : 
Samgharaja 

VII. The New Conditions 
Select Bibliography 
Bibliographical Index 
General Index 
Additions and Corrections 


ix 

Pages 

250-277 

250-260 

260-262 

262-266 

266-269 

269-272 

272-276 

276-277 

279-288 

289-292 

293-302 

303-306 


B-I446B 




PREFACE 


TJiis book was written in 1934, in part fulfilment of 
the scheme of Indo-Burmese studies in which I had 
engaged myself since 1928. For reasons beyond my 
control and of no particular interest to the reader, the 
book could not be pul)lished earlier. But this delay has 
enabled me to alter the text tind make additions to it 
from time to time in such way as to incorporate the 
results of latest literary investigations aud archaeological 
finds, to the extent that the following pages may be 
said to represent our up-to-date knowledge of the subject. 
Between the first draft and what aj)pears in print, the 
text thus suHVuxhI so many additions and alterations 
tliat I am afraid, one may find the book rather loosely 
knit and uru^qual reading in parts. Whih' I (;rave 
indulgence of my readers for this short-coming, I plead 
that it could not be helped. Since 1936 I have l)een 
drawn to other fields of studies and academic activities, 
and inspite of repeated attempts 1 have iiot been able 
to got back to ray original sphere of work. Indeed, 
since 1934 1 liavti not boon giv( n the opportunity to 
visit Burma, not even to check tlio draft of this book 
on the spot which T feel was so very necessary. More- 
over, the war that intervene<l has left Burma in such 
a state as not to allow, 1 am alraid, resumption of his- 
torical and archaeologi(^al activities in another couple 
of years or so. I have therefore thought it advisable 
to present rny study of the subject as it is, that is, without 
trying to improve upon it. Sintie 1 do not claim this 
book to be anything more than a more introduction to 



XU 


PREFACE 


the subject'/, I would leave that to scholars more favoured 
and well-equipped than myself. 

Notwithstanding the wide range of subjects covered 
by a handful of European and Burmese scholars and 
the valuable work done by them in the domain of Burmese 
history and archaeology, there has yet been very little 
study in the history of Buddhism and the extent r eached 
by that religion in Burma. Yet Buddhism of th? Thera- 
vada scliool has been for centuries and is oven to-day 
a most vital factor in Bitrmese life and a great social 
force in the country. Buddhism indexed is the tie that 
binds Burma with India, and whatever is of any account 
in Burmese life; and society is d(U‘ived from that great 
religion. Not only from the view point of Burma alone, 
but from that of the history of tlic religion as well its 
career in Burma where it is still a living faith is well- 
worth a study ; for, it is in Burma alone, besid<;s Ceylon 
and Siam, that we can yet hnd a noaoist appr’oach to 
the ear liest and purest form and exjrression of th(} religiorr. 
But to this subject of absorbing interest lew unfortunately 
have devoted their time and attention. An admirabk> 
beginning was made by Dr. Mabel H. Bodc' by her (xlition 
of the Sasaiiavamsa in 1897, and later by her monograph 
on the Pali Lilerature of Burma in 1909. Her introduc- 
tion to the Sasanavamsa may well be regarded as an 
important contribution to the subject ; no less remark- 
able is her lattsr rnonogr'aph which incidentally gives an 
outline of the history of the religion. But her scope 
was admittedly limited and it was outside her scheme 
to give a systematic study of the career of the religion 
througli centuries. Moreover, she began her account 
with the middle of the eleventh century and ignored 
the earlitrr centuries altogether. Besides Dr. Bode, 
notable direct and indirect/ contributions to the subject 
have been made by Messrs. Charles Duroiselle, G. E. 



tBEI'AOE 


xiii 

Harvey, Pe Mating Tin, G. H. Luce, C. O. Blagden and 
a few others. 

To all these scholars, especially to Dr. Bode, my 
indebtedness is obvious, I have fully utilised their 
valuable publications and used many of their findings 
to my advantage ; these I have everywhere fully acknow- 
ledged in footnotes. But if one cares to read the follow- 
ing pages he will find in them inucii that is entirely new 
and original. He will see that the early history of the 
religion, of which very little is known so far, has 
been reconstructed, as far as possible, from epigraphic, 
archaeological and literary sources. This has been 
attempted perhaps for the first time. Here I have laid 
under examination all available Pali and Sanskrit ins- 
criptions relevant, to the subject and presented well- 
known traditions in a new perspective. In respect of 
other periods as well, more particularly u[) to about 
1500, I humbly claim to have utilised a much greater 
mass of materials in the shape of epigraphic records, 
native chronicles in Burmese and Talaiug, Pali texts, 
etc., in a much mor-o (comprehensive manner than it had 
been witliiu the scope of Dr. Bode oi- any body else to 
use in this or similar connection. For the rest of the 
period covered I have depended mainly on the 8asana- 
vamsa and a few contemporary European accounts. 

1 have been able, I hope, to achieve a more or loss com- 
plete and connected narrative which it has always been 
my aim to present in a new manner and perspective 
consist(mt with the evidence furnished by the huge mass 
of materials, I have critically examined my sources 
and have cared to give my readers an idea about their 
nature and character. The more important events in 
the history of the religion have been elaborately des- 
(•ribed and the significance, as I understand, of the reform 
movements effected in the church clearly brought out. 



XIV 


PEEPACE 


Throughout, it has been my aim to bring out in prominent 
relief the character and ideal of the religion in Burma, 
the relation of the Samgha and the king, the literary 
and scholarly activities of the monks, and the place of 
the Samgha in the life of the people. All these I have 
sought further to summarise in the concluding chapter 
of the book. 

I have, however, chosen to leave out any interpreta- 
tion of the doctrines of the religion or tracing their 
evolution and transformation as may have taken place 
in Burma. This has been owing partly to the fact that 
such evolution and transformation liave not been of any 
very great consequence in the history of Burmese 
Buddhism nor have giv(vu it any significant orientation, 
and partly to their not being strictly within the scope 
of this work. 

It will be seen too, that I have often made extensive 
quotations from inscriptions, native chronicles and con- 
temporary or almost contornpoi-ary accounts. This has 
been because I wanted the story to bo told more by the 
people of the land than by myself ; 1 wanted it to be 
nnjre of the soil, and to instil into it a bit of the atmos- 
phere of old. 

I never entertaiji the vain hope ihat all my findings 
and conclusions will endure and stand the test of more 
scholarly criticism or finther ^•esoarches in the field. 
What I have attom|)ted is to fill up a void and supply 
a starting point on a subject which has long been as 
good as not woi’ked upon in any critical and t;ompro- 
hensivt) manner. If 1 have succeedod in it I would 
feel myself amjjly justified in the atkanpt. 

It remains for me to acknowltHlge my obligations. 

I acknowledge with thanks and iwatitufle tlie willing 
help and co-operation I have received, whenever sought 
for, from Mr. Charles Duroiselle, Dr. C. O. Blagden, 



PBBFAOE 


XV 


Prof. G. H. Luce, Prof. Pe Maimg Tin, Mr. G. E. Harvey, 
Prof. B. M. Barna, Mr. S. N. Mitra and the Superintendent 
of the Archaeological Survey of Burma. To my young 
friends Mr. Devaprasad Guha and Mr. Sukeschandra 
Chandra, who gave me ungrudging help in reading the 
proofs and in preparing the Index, my affectionate thanks 
are due. To Dr. Syamaprasad Mookerjee and Dr. 
Bimala Churn Law whose active interest in my literary 
and scholarly pursuits has always been a source of ins- 
piration to me my moi’al indebtedness is too deep and 
abiding for words. 

I crave the indulgence of my readers for the many 
errors and misprints that escaped my eyes. Such errors 
and misprints as are of grave consequence have been 
corrected in the Additions and Corrections. 


December 20, 1945. 


NIHABRANJAN RAY 




THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


CHAPTER ONE 

EARLY TRACES 

From the Alleged Asoka-Mission to the Fall of 
ThATON in 1057 A.D. 

I 

THE BACKGROUND 

On the map, at first sight Burma looks like an outstretched 
hand of the Indian continent, but a little closer scrutiny 
shows that it is geographically a part of the Indonesian 
peninsula and is ^timately connected with Malayasia, Siam 
and Indo-China. Ethnologically also the peninsula is more 
closely connected with Indonesia than with India proper. 
Lower or peninsular Burma which forms one unit with 
Malayasia is cut off from the Indian continent by wide seas, 
while the upper or continental Burma is separated from the 
main land of India by the highly inaccessible Assam and 
Manipur hills as well as by the Arakan hill ranges ; but 
neither the hill ranges nor the wide sea could prove to be 
insuperable barriers to the early Indian traders and colonists. 
Lower Burma especially, known to early traditions as well 
as in early Indian literature as Suvannabhumi, lay open 
from very early times to the maritime traffic between China 
on the one hand and India, Arabia, Egypt, Greece and 
Rome on the other. In fact, the geographical position of 
Suvannabhumi along with Malayasia invested the peninsula 
with a high degree of commercial importance, nor did the 



1 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


hilly regions of upper Burma remain immune from onslaught 
from either the Indian side or Chinese through the 
difficult mountain passes. .We have no\v more or less 
definite evidences of occasional though difficult intercourse 
between India and Burma through Assam and Manipur. 
But doubtless the sea route was easier and more popular. 
Regular maritime intercourse between India and the Far 
East is testified to by various sources from at least as early 
as the first century A.D., and if Pali tradition is to be given 
any credence this intercourse goes back to at least about 
6th or 5th century B.C. A volume of literature has grown 
around this interesting topic of early Indian maritime inter- 
course between India and the Far East and it is needless- to 
refer to it in detail. It is sufficient to refer our readers to 
the author of the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea and to that 
celebrated geographer, Ptolemy, who have preserved for us 
a detailed account of this intercourse. 

It is, however, necessary to speak in some detail about 
references to Suvannabhctmi in early Indian literature and 
tradition. These references no doubt point more or less 
exclusively to trade and commercial activities which 
undoubtedly were for a long time the primary, if not the only 
incentive to these difficult maritime adventures, but they also 
help to serve as the background of later Indian religious and 
missionary activities through which Buddhism flowed into the 
peninsula. Traders and merchantmen came first and along 
with their merchandise they brought also elements of their 
culture. And, it was almost always later when adventurous 
Ksatriya princes came to seek their fortunes, or individual 
monk or bands of missionaries came to propagate their 
religious doctrines. We have evidence of both, but all such 
evidences point to a later period. The subsequent history of 
individual colonies show that this peaceful penetration of the 
Indians resulted in the fusion of Indians with diverse races 
inhabiting the colonies and in the evolution of a new culture 



THE BACKGROUND 


i 


that partook of elements of bdth. The dominant race 
imposed its language, religion and social customs, but could 
not efface all traces of indigenous elements in respect of 
any of these. As years went on and the contact with India 
grew less and less, the native elements again asserted 
themselves, but could not wholly supplant the imported ones. 

That lower Burma including a portion of the Burmese 
hinterland was known in medieval times as Suvannabhumi 
is testified to by the Kalyani inscriptions of king Dhammaceti 
(1476 A. D.).' The same inscription gives another name to 
Suvannabhumi, namely Ramannadesa (Suvannabhumi natta- 
samkhata Ramannadesa).^ In the Po-U-Daung inscription 
(1774 A.D.) of Burma we have reference to a country 
called Suvannaparanta which means the western end or 
extremity of Suvannabhumi. Suvannaparanta included the 
country between the lower Irrawadi and Chindwin and the 
Arakan Yoma. ‘ Suvannabhumi, therefore, seems to include 
a large portion of Burma, both inland and peninsular. It is 
convenient here to refer to Ptolemy’s account of this part 
of India Extra-Gangem. Ptolemy refers to two countries : 
Chryse Chora = golden land and Chryse Chersonesus — golden 
peninsula. He clearly distinguishes them as two different 
regions, both adjoining Besyngeitai.^ A similar distinction 
is also hinted at by the Periplus oj the Erythrean Sea/' 
Dr. R. C. Majumdar has shown that Ptolemy’s Chryse 
Chersonesus points to the Malay Peninsula and his Chryse 
Chora a region to the north of it, that is, Suvannabhumi,'' 
which is exactly the Sanskrit counterpart of the Greek Chryse 
Chora (Chryse = gold = suvarna, and Chora = land = bhumi). 

^ EP. Birm.t Vol. Ill, p. II. 

* Ihid. ; also Ind. Ant,, XXII, p. 151. 

Majumdar, Suvarnadvipa , Vol. I, p. 47. 

4 Coedes, Textes, pp. 38-43, 53, 56, 60, 66. 

® Schoff*8 edn., paras. 56 and 63. 

^ Also see Majumdar, ibid., pp. 38-46. 



4 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

Suvannabhumi or the land of gold as a rich source of 
wealth and a big centre of commercial enterprise was known 
to Indians from very ancient times. The country is cele- 
brated in several Jataka stories. According to the Maha- 
janaka Jataka, prince Mahajanaka led a band of merchants 
in a ship to Suvannabhumi.’ His evident object was to gather 
riches there. According to the Supparaka Jataka another 
band of merchants had come to Bharukacca from Suvanna- 
bhumi and initiated a journey of Indian merchants to 
Suvannabhumi.® Kaulilya in his Arthasastra ■' also refers 
to this land of gold which was evidently a source for 
the valuable product of aguru, while the Milindapafiha 
makes an interesting reference to Suvannabhumi across the 
high seas, along with Takola and Cina.’“ The MahaJ^arma- 
Vibhanga makes a reference to merchants who used to sail 
to Suvannabhumi from Mahakosali and Tamralipti.'‘ The 
Divyaoadana describes the difficulties one has to face to 
reach the great Suvannabhumi (Ed. Cowell, p. 107). But 
the most important reference to Suvannabhumi is to be found 
in the celebrated Buddhist work, the M ahaniddesa . In 
giving a long list of countries and islands along the south- 
eastern seas the author of the Niddesa cites the name of 
Suvannabhumi in a context that reveal a very intimate 
knowledge of the region now covered by Burma, Malayasia, 
Indo-China and Insulindia. The passage of the 
Mahaniddesa has been elaborately commented upon by 
M . Sylvain Levi who has drawn attention to the points of 
agreement between the list of the Mahaniddesa and that 
of Ptolemy. He has also suggested that both must belong 

^ Vol. VI, p. 22, Jataka references are to the FausboII’s edn. 

8 Vol. IV, p. 86; also read along with it Jaiakomalot No. XIV, and jatak.a% HI* 
p. 124. 

^ Artha^dstTQy Bk. 11, Chap. XJ. 

MiUndapanha. p. 359; S.B.E., XXXVI, p, 269. 

MahakarmavibhangOf Ed, S. Levi, p. 50 ff. 

Etudes Asiatiques, Jl, pp. 1-55, 431. 



THE BACKGROUND 


5 


approximately to the same period. But Dr. R. C. Majumdar 
thinks that the list of the Niddesa must have been 
drawn up between the end of the first and the begin- 
ning of the third century A.D. The Arab writers 
also seem to have been acquainted with the name 

Suvarnabhumi along with Suvarnadvipa. In one place 
Alberuni says that “ The island of the Zabaj is called by 
the Hindus Suvarnadvipa that is the gold-island,’' while in 
another he says : “ The island of the Zabaj is called the 
gold-country (that is, Suvarnabhumi), because you obtain 
much gold as deposit if you wash only a little of the earth 
of that country. ’ Still in another place Alberuni includes 
Suvarnabhumi, evidently following the Brhafsamhita, in the 
list of countries in the South-East.” 

Dr. Majumdar has rightly drawn pointed attention 
to the fact that “ the contrast between Suvarnabhumi and 
Suvarnadvipa that is gold-land and gold-island which we 
meet with in the Indian sources is also faithfully reflected iir 
the nomenclature used by the western authors, some of them 
calling it an island and the others, either a land or a penin- 
sula.” This is evident not only in the account of Ptolemy and 
in the Periplus but also in that of Alberuni. These accounts 
along with the old tradition of a land whose soil was golden, 
lying along the coast of the eastern sea, were no doubt derived 
from India. Not only the Puranas refer to a country outside 
Bharatavarsa the soil and mountains of which consist of 
gold, but the Divyavadana also refers to a region beyond the 
seas where the soil is golden. Suvannabhumi was thus un- 
doubtedly the generic name which included not only Suvarna- 

Suvarnadvipa, pp. 56*61, where there is ai7 excellent analytical summary of 
Levi s di.scussion as well as a discussion of the extraordinary routes leading to 
Suvannabhiimi and Suv.r.rinapura culled from the Puranas, tltc V imanavatthu, the 
Jaia\as^ the Milindapanha, the Niddesa^ tlie Brhotkatha^lckascrpgraha, the Gana- 
palha on Panini and Katyayana’s Variika. 

For accounts of Arab writers on this topic, see, Ferrand, J.A., XX, 

pp. 52 ff. 



6 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


dvipa but also places like Suvarnapura, Suvarnakudyaka, 
and other places connected with and reminiscent of the 
tradition of the golden soil. On the whole, therefore, 
Dr. Majumdar seems to be right when he says that there are 
“definite evidences that Burma, Malay Peninsula and 
Sumatra had the common designation of Suvarnabhcmi, and 
the name Suvarnadvipa was certainly applied to Sumatra and 
other islands in the Archipelago. ’ But, in view of the 
fact that the term Suvannabhcmi or Suvarnabhumi was later 
on applied only to the main land as distinguished from 
Suvarnadvipa which stood for the Island or islands adjacent 
to Suvarnabhumi one is led to assume that a time came when 
the generic term Suvannabhumi came to be applied in a 
limited sense to the main land alone to distinguish it from 
Suvarnadvipa. 

The story of the evolution of this relation between India 
and countries and islands beyond the seas has been admirably 
summarised by Dr. Majumdar and no apology is needed 
to quote extracts from this summary."’ 

It is quite clear that from a very remole time the Indians possessed a vague 
idea of the countries in the f ar East across the sea. The relation, no doubt, 
originated in trade, and the tradition of fabulous wealth earned by that trade gave rise 
to ail sorl.s of mythical s'oiies about the golden land * ^ * 

The steady development of this trade i.s reflected in the /utof^as, Brhafk.atha, 
Kauti]yvt-ArthQ^dstra and Milindapahha, where we have not only a more definite 
idea of the region, now railed Suvannabhumi, but also a knowledge of important 
localities within it. Tliis intimate intercourse may be referred lo the two or three 
centuries immediately preceding the Christian era. 

“ During the first two centuries of the Christian era, the mercantile relations led 
to colonisation on a fairly large scale. This is evidenced both by the various stories 
as well as by Sanskrit names applied to many localities within this region. Ptolemy 
and Niddesa represented this stage of development which may thus be regarded as 
an accomplished fact of the second century A,D. 

“ The literary evidence leaves no doubt that the trade was the chief stimulus of 
this intercourse between India and the Far East. Missionary and political activities 
must have followed in the wake of trade * * * 

StiVartiadv'tpa, p. 48. The whole chapter indeed is very interesting and is 
well-worth close study, pp. 37-64. 

/hrd. , pp. 61-62. 



ASOKA MISSION 


1 


“ Indeed the evidence of a commercial origin of this intercourse with the Far East 
must show by every step .. Some traditions, no doubt, represent Kshatriya adventurers 
from India as having conquered territories in the Far East, but they must have followed 
in the wake of merchants.” 

It is against the background of this commercial inter- 
course between India and Suvannabhiimi going to as 
far back as the sixth and fifth centuries B . c . that we have 
to read the traditional story of the mission of Sona and 
Uttara, alleged to have been sent by Asoka, to evangelise 
Suvannabhumi. This tradition, loud and insistent, is 
the starting point of the history of Buddhism in Burma. 

II 

THE ASOKA MISSION : LEGEND AND HISTORY 

There is hardly any tradition so universal in the Buddhist 
monastic organisation of Burma and so often repeated in her 
chronicles as the story of the first introduction of the religion of 
Gautama, the Buddha, by thera Sona and thera Uttara, sent by 
Moggaliputta mahathera, the teacher of Asoka, to evangelise 
the land. The tradition rests primarily on the authority 
of the two Sinhalese chronicles, the Dipavamsa '* and the 
Mahavarnsa,^^ the latter containing a more detailed version 
of the narrative.'"' 


When the th.era Moggaliputta, tlie illuminator of the religion of the Con- 
queror, had brought the ( Third) Council to an end, when looking into tlic* future, 
he had beheld the purging of the religion in adjacent countries, {(hen) in the 
month of Kattika he sent forth theras, one here and one there. I he thera Majjhan- 
tika he sent to Kai^mira and Gandhaia ; the thera Mahadeva lie sent to Mahisaniandala. 
To Vanavasa, he .sent the thera Rakkhita ; and to Aparantaka the Yona named 
Dhammarakkliila ; to Maharattha (he sent) the thera Mahadharnmarakkhita ; but 
the thera Maharakkhita he sent into the country of the Yona. He sent tlie thera 
Majjhima to the Flimalayan country, and to Suvannabhumi he sent the theias Sona 

Geiger, D'ipaVamsa, VIII, 1-13. 

Geiger, MahaVamsa^ Xll, I -54, 

Ihid., XII. The chapter on The Converting of Different Countries.” 



8 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


and Uttara. The great thera Mahinda. the theras luhiya, Uttiya, Sambala and 
Bhaddasala, his disciples, these theras he sent forth with the charge ' Ye shall found 
in the lovely island of Lanka, the lovely religion of the Conquerer/’ 

The account goes on into details regarding each of the 
missions. In respect of Suvannabhumi it is laid down : 

Together with the thera Uttara, the thera Sona of wondrous might go to 

Suvannabhumi ...Many were the people who came unto the (three) refuges and 

the precepts of duty; sixty thou.sand were converted to the true faith. Three thousand 
five hundred sons of noble families received it likewise. Thenceforth when a prince 
was born in the royal palace, the kings gave to such the name Sonathera.’* 

With these traditional accounts preserved in the name 
and to the credit of religious teachers, one may also read 
the accounts of missionary activities recorded by Asoka 
himself to his own credit. Besides organising a prosely- 
tising band of zealous missionaries to carry the message of 
the Master to every nook and corner of Jambudvipa, he is 
said to have sent missionaries “ to Tarnbapanni (Ceylon), 
as well as to all his neighbours as far as six hundred 
leagues, where the king of the Greeks named Antiochus 
lives, and beyond that Antiochus (where live) the four 
kings named severally (Turamaya) Ptolemy, f Amtekina) 
Antigonos, (Maga or Maka) Magas, and (Alikasudara) 
Alexander ” 

The historicity of the mission to the Greek countries 
and Ceylon has hardly been doubted, since they have been 
recorded by Asoka himself in his Edicts (RE. V and Xlll). 
The story of the missions to the Himalayan countries 
and Kasmira is also generally believed."' Gandhara, 

Mahavamsa, p. 82, 

Mahavamsa, p. 86. 

Rhys Davids doubted the authenticity of Asoka’s missions to Greek countries 
{Baddhist India, pp. 298-99) ; but his arguments are no longer seriously advanced, 

2"' Geiger in his introduction to the Mahavamsa adduces very important argu- 
ment.s not only in favour of the mission to Ceylon but of the general historicity of 
all the mission.s referred to in the Ceylone.se chronicles. 

Mahavamsa, Introd., pp. XIX-XX, Rockhilb Li/e of the Buddha , p. 167; 
Cunningham, The Bhilsa Topes, pp.^267, 289, 319. 



ASOtCA MISSION 


9 


Mahisa-mandala, Vanavasa, Aparanta and Maharattha were 
all within Asoka’s dominions, and Asoka himself claims, in 
his edicts, to have left no place in Jambudvipa out of his 
missionary campaigns and activities. These direct and 
indirect corroborations from independent sources of practically 
all the missions referred to in the Sinhalese chronicles 
naturally warrants the presumption that the story of the 
one mission not yet upheld by any independent evidence, r.e., 
the one to Suvannabhumi, is also true in its main outlines. 
It is admitted that the account of the Sinhalese chronicles 
may not as historical evidence, commend itself wholly to 
scholars, but there is also nothing absurd in the story of 
Moggaliputta Tissa’s mission to Suvannabhumi headed by 
the two chief theras, Sona and Uttara. 

But Vincent Smith dismissed the tradition as ‘ mythical,' 
and Kern ‘ felt grave suspicions ’ concerning its authenti- 
city."'' Kern wrote in 1896 and Smith within a decade of 
that date. Much light has since been thrown by historical 
and archaeological researches on the interesting problem of 
early Indo-Burmese commercial, historical and cultural 
relations. But though nothing has been found definitely 
to establish the historicity of the mission itself, the force of the 
opposition seems to have subsided to a considerable extent. 

Kern’s objections are easily met. He suspects the 
duumvirate Sona-Uttara, and thinks that the chroniclers 
confused the thera Sonuttara or simply Uttara of Duttha- 
gamani’s time with the theras alleged to have been sent 
by Moggaliputta. But one fails to understand why the 
chroniclers should confuse any one of the two theras or both 
with the thera Sonuttara or Uttara living in the time of 
Dutthagamani (101-77 B.C ). Sona and Uttara of Asoka’s 
time were removed by at least a century and a half from 

Smith, Asoka (1901), p. 5^ ;lnd. Ant., 1908, pp. 198 ff ; Kern, Manual of 
Buddhism, 1896. p. 117. 

2-1445B 



10 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Sonuttara or Uttara of Dutthagamani’s lime ; and there is 
hardly any evidence in ihe Sinhalese chronicles of such a 
curious confusion. As to the later name Sonuttara or Uttara, 
it is not unusual to adopt names of earlier theras, sometimes 
of single individuals, sometimes of two jointly. Kern 
further argues that the duumvirate Sona and Uttara are 
unknown to northern Buddhists. This argument is at best 
an example of argumentum ex silentio. Majjhima, Kassapa 
and Majjhantika and their missions are also equally unknown 
to northern Buddhists, nor are they mentioned in any of 
the edicts of Asoka ; but there is no more any room for 
doubting their authenticity. (See, Geiger's Introduction, 
pp. xix-xx, to his edition of the MahaVarpsa.) 

Vincent Smith's objections are more substantial. Much 
of his statements and arguments would not have, it is certain, 
been repeated to-day had he lived to tackle the problem 
now after a lapse of about half a century. What remains 
to-day of his long discourse may be summarised in two 
arguments : (a) Rock Edict Nos. V and XI 11 give a list 
of the countries to which he sent missionaries to propagate 
the religion, but there is absolutely no mention in this list 
of the mission to Suvannabhumi. “ 1 he silence of the edicts 
concerning the alleged fact goes a long way towards dis- 
proving its reality, for Asoka seems to have intended to 
give a complete account of his missionary opeialions, and 
if he had really sent emissaries to Suvannabhumi previous 
to tlie publication of tiic Rock Edicts, it is inconceivable 
that he should have omitted to mention in them an event 
of such importance...” Elsewhere he states, “Facts vouched 
for by the inscriptions of Asoka may, therefore, be accepted 
without question, because the testimony is good on the face 
of it, and no better can be looked for. When the evidence 
of the inscriptions differs from that of later literary traditions, 
the epigraphic authority should be preferred without hesi- 
tation.” (h) There is no mention of the mission of Sona 



ASOKA MISSION 


11 

and Uttara also in the Kalyanl inscriptions (1476 A.D.) 
which give a summary of the history of the introduction 
and progress of Theravada Buddhism in Burma. ^ Of the 
two arguments the first one still holds good, but the second 
is practically of no force to-day. For, it has recently been 
pointed out by Dr. Blagden, the learned editor of the 
Kalyani inscriptions, that a reference to the mission of 
Sona and Uttara does occur in the celebrated records. 
We shall, therefore, meet the second argument first, though 
it is less material in view of the fact that the story of the 
history of the introduction and progress of Buddhism in 
Burma cis recorded in the Kalyani inscriptions is not original 
and independent, but seems rather io have been brought from 
Ceylon by the monks who were sent by king Dhammaceti 
(1460-9!) to the island to re-introduce a canonically valid 
monastic succession in lower Burma where the Order had 
long been split up into schlsmatlcal sects. Moreover, the 
evidence of the Kalyani inscriptions, in respect of its historical 
v^alue, is no better than that of the Ceylonese chronicles; 
it is also about nine centuries later in date. The crux of the 
question rests finally, therefore, on the value of the Ceylonese 
chronicles themselves. 

It is to tlie credit of king Dhammaceti of Pegu that the 
present Buddhist Church and organisation of Burma stands 
as it is to-day. This reformer-king caused a long delailecJ 
history of Buddhism in Burma to be recorded in the celebrated 
Kalyani inscriptions (1476 A.D.) of Pegu. The story is 
prefaced by a good deal of historical matter jelating to earlier 
periods in the long history of Buddhism and particularly to its 
vicissitudes in Ceylon and its introduction and development 
in Burma. These interesting details are introduced by a 
statement regarding Asoka’s reformation of the Buddhist 
church and the mission of Sona and Uttara to SuvannabhOmi, 


Ep. Birm., Vo!. Ill Pari H. p, 82. 



12 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


“ At the coDcIusion of this Council (the Third Buddhist Council convened 
by Asoka) Moggaliputta Tissa mahSthera reflected that in the future the religion 
would be established in neighbouring foreign countries and sent such theras as 
Majjhantika thera with the injunction: “Do you establish the religion in those 
neighbouring foreign countries ? ” Of these theras, he sent out lord Mahinda thera 
to establish the religion in the island of Tambapanni, and Sonathera and Uttara- 
thcra to establish the religion in the Mon country which was a so called Suvanna- 
bhumi.” 

Here is then a definite mention of the Asoka-mission 
otherwise than in Ceylonese chronicles. Dr. Blagden would 
have us, therefore, believe the statement of the Kalyani 
inscriptions to be not ‘ altogether devoid of any founda- 
tion/ “ Sona and Uttara/’ he says, “ herve long been 
claimed by Burma as founders of their branch of the 
church ; and though the tale has been embellished with 
many legendary accretions in the course of ages, it can 
hardly on that account be dismissed. Evidence is gradually 
accumulating from various different quarters which tends 
to show that Indian influence made itself felt in Indo-China 
from about the beginning of the Christian era, or possibly 
even two or three centuries before that date ; and there seems 
to be nothing antecedently improbable in the story of a 
Buddhist mission being sent there at a relatively earlier period, 
though it may well be hazardous to fix that date exactly.’' 

We now turn to the first argument of Smith. That 
argument is convincing so far as it goes, but it does not 
go very far. There is no gainsaying the fact that when 

the evidence of the inscriptions (of Asoka) differs from that 
of later literary traditions, the epigraphic authority should 
be preferred without hesitation/ We, therefore, must accept 
first of all and without reserve the testimony of Asoka’s 
Rock Edicts V and Xlil in respect of the list of countries 

57 Ep. B irm., Vol. Ill, Part 11, p. 185, Text A, lines 3-6. T he identification of 
Suvannabluimi with the Mon country rests on this passage. Dr. Blagden adds a 
riotc and states, “So far as can be conjectured from the fragmentary remains of 
the Mon text, it probably expresses itself in this way— /n Suvannahhiimi uhich is 
ihe Mon country. 



ASOKA MISSION 


13 


where missionaries were sent. But, we may go also 
one step further, for, we have already seen that the tradition 
with regard to at least two of the countries, namely, Kasmira 
and the Himalayan countries lo which, according to the 
Sinhalese chronicles, Asoka is said to have sent missions, are 
not mentioned in the list as supplied by the Edicts, but is 
nevertheless upheld by other independent sources, already 
well-known. The evidence of the chronicles has, therefore, 
some claim to be considered at least as supplementing that of 
the Edicts. 1 he other side of the argument involves a 
well-known logical fallacy. That ^ the silence of the Edicts 
concerning the alleged fact does not go very far towards 
disproving the lealitj^ of any of the missions referred to in 
the Dtpavamsa and Mahdvamsa is shown by the historicity of 
the missions to Kasmira and the Himalayan countries to 
which no reference is made in the records of Asoka. The 
omission, therefore, of the mission of Sona and Uttara in the 
records of Asoka does not prove or disprove the authenticity 
of the Sinhalese tradition. Moreover, it must be remembered 
that Asoka claims in his edicts to have sent missionaries to 
other countries as well besides those which he chose to 
mention by name. 

If an attempt has been made above to meet the argu- 
ments of Kern and Smith, it is not intended to assert that the 
Sinhalese story of the mission to Suvannabhumi is 
absolutely certain, or to say that it is definitely estab- 
lished. All that is suggested is that once the general 
historicity of the story of the missions listed in the 
Sinhalese chronicles is accepted, and we have seen that there 
is hardly any difficulty in accepting it, the presumption will 
always be in favour of the Sona-Uttara tradition.*^ 

“ The scepticism with which modern scKolais have received it is perhaps 
unmentech hut the preaching of these missionaries, if it ever took place, cannot at 
present be connected with other historical events. Nevertheless, the statement of 
the Dlpavamsa (and also of the MahaVamsa) is signilicant. T ire work 


was com- 



14 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


111 

BUDDHISM IN THE KIRATA COUNTRY : 3rD CENTURY A.D. 

An interesting side-light on the probability of the intro- 
duction of Buddhism in Burma towards the early centuries 
of the Christian era seem to be thrown by one of the ins- 
criptions discovered at Nagarjunikonda in the ancient 
Andhra country of the Deccan. The record was inscribed in 
the 14th regnal year of a king Madhariputa who seems 
to be identical with king Madhariputa Sri Virapurisa- 
data of the Iksvaku dynasty (3rd century A.D.), and belonged 
to a shrine stated to have been dedicated ‘‘ for the benefit 
of the fraternities (of monks) of Tarpbaparpna who had 
converted Kasmira, Gandhara, Cina, Cilata, Tosali, 
Avaramta, Varnga, Vancivasi, Yavana (?), Damila(?) 
Palura {?) and the Isle of Tarnbaparnni. ’ ' It will be seen 
that some of these countries already find mention in the 
Sinhalese chronicles among the regions won over to 
Buddhism after the Third Council ; these are Kasmira, 


posed in the foiiith century A.D. , and taken fiom older chionicJes. It may, there- 
fore, be concluded tfial in the early centuries of our era, Burma had the reputation 
of being a Buddfiist country ’ Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism, III, pp. 50-51. 

M. Louis Finot, who is, however, gravely suspicious of the Buddhaghosa tradi- 
tion, also thinks that the historicjty of tlie Asoka nvission has been contested with- 
out much convincing reason, ]A., XX, 1912, pp, 121 ff. In this connection. 
1 aranatha’s testimony also, I think, de.serves consideration. According to him 
HinaySnism in tire Koki land (which, he states, included Pukham Pagan, and 
Harnsavatl “ Pegu) was preached from the days of Asoka onwards, but Mahayfirrism 
was not known until the disciples of V'asubandhu introduced it. 

The Mahakorma-vihhafiga crcd'ils a mythical hero Gavampati with the conver- 
sion of Suvarinabhumi (p. 62) ; the v^oyage of Gavampati to Suvannabhumi is also 
referred to in the Sasanavamsa, though it does not say that it was he who converted 
the land to Buddhism (p. 36). The evidence of the Mahakorma-vibhohga shows 
however that the conversion of Suvannabhumi to Buddhism was known to early 
Buddhist tradition. 

Ep. Jnd,^ XX,, pp. 22-23, Second Apsidal Temple, Insc. F. 



BUDDHISM IN THE KIRATA COUNTRY 


15 


Gandhara, Vanavasa, Aparantaka and Yona/^^ Some of 
these regions are also referred to in two passages of the 
Milindapanha as having been often visited by Indian 
traders for purposes of trade. In the Mahavamsa as 
well as in the text just referred to, the region mentioned 
along with Cina is Cilata “ which is important for our 
purpose. 

I he Cilatas are evidently none other than the Kiratas, well- 
known to Sanskrit literature, particularly to the authors of the 
Mahabharata^ Harivarnsa and {he Puranas . The Pancatanira 
characterises the Kiratas as dishonest traders. 1 hey seem 
also to have been known to Greek and Roman traders and 
geographers. Ptolemy, lor example, locates the Cirrhadae 
“ beyond the Ganges mouth called Antibolei ” He says: 

Beyond this (Dosarene), the course tending towards the 
north there are many barbarous tribes, among whom are the 
Cirrhadae, a race of men with flattened noses, very savage.” 
The Cirrhadae of this passage, are evidently none other than 
the Kiratas. In another passage, included in his chapter on 
Frans-Gangetic India, Ptolemy describes the Tiladai 
(alternative reading, Piladai) also called the Saesadai, as hairy 
dwarfs, with a flat face and a white skin. The Tiladai also 
are none other than the Kiratas, Tiladai being evidently a 
rendering in Greek of the word Cilada or Cilata. 

The Marf^andeya Parana, in one place, locates the Kiratas 
in a legion lying to the east of what we know as India, 
while in another place they are referred to in the north, 
along with the Jagudas, Aupadhas, Aupamadhas, Tarnasas, 
etc., all of whom seem to have inhabited a region ‘ along 

Mahavamsa, X(I ; Dipiavamsa, Vlll. 

Trenckner s ec3n., pp. 327. 331. 

TKe ieaclin^>^ in the Milinda text i? Vilapa. but Prol. Lt;vi ba.s riirhtly shown 
that it is an error for Cilata. 

Ptolemy. Vill, 2. 15. 

MarkP., LVII. 6~8. See also in this connection Parj^iitt't X, eHn., p. 284, notes 

on 7-8. 



16 


THERAVAbA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


the greater part of the southern side of the Himalayas,’ “ and 
evidently were members of the rude Tibeto-Burman group 
of races. In a third place they appear in a list of tribes 
‘ resting against the mountains,’ obviously the Himalayas/'' 
while in a fourth, among the tribes inhabiting the 
western regions, along with the Barbaras, Paradas, etc. 
The Kiratas in the western region are evidently out of place ; 
but their location along the southern slopes of the Himalayas 
as well as in north-east India along with some other rude 
little known tribes may be taken to indicate that Indian 
tradition used to designate all semi-barbarous rude Mongoloid 
people under the composite appellation Kirata. But when 
the Markondeya Parana locates them along the eastern 
boundary of India they at once come to be invested with a 
wider denotation and presumably point to the Mongoloid 
peoples inhabiting the coastal regions of Arakan and lower 
Burma. And, furthermore, when both Epic and Puranic 
traditions are set against the background of the references 
made by Ptolemy, and specially against the ethnic 
description of the people as given by that Greek geographer, 
it becomes apparent that the flat-faced, flat-nosed and white- 
skinned Kiratas are none other than the members of the 
Mon-Khmer group of peoples of the Indonesian sub- 
continent inhabiting the regions contiguously to the 
east of Bharatavarsa and lying along the coast. We 
know that the Pyus and the Talaings, the earliest known 
exponents of Indian religion and culture in the Burmese 
Peninsula belonged to this group of Mongoloid races with 
white skin, flat nose and flat face, and it is not unreasonable to 
think that Indian tradition knew these and other allied tribes, 
rude and savage in Indian eyes, of the eastern regions as 
Kiratas. That the realm of the Kiratas lay along the eastern 

Pargiter, op. cit., p, 322, note on Kiratas. 

36 Mark. P.,LVi[, 57. 

37 Mark, P.^LVIU, 50. 



I 


BUDDHISM IN THE KIRATA COUNTRY 


17 


coastal regions of the Bay of Bengal will be evident from 
the following passage of the Ramdyana : 


AmamTnasanascapi Kirala dvVpavasinah I 
antarjalacara gKora nam~vyaghra iti smratah ii 


The Kiratas are here described as dvipavasinah, f.e., island- 
dwellers, but in view of the references in Ptolemy and the 
Puranas cited above in this section and elsewhere in a 
previous one, dvipa here may safely be taken to mean 
‘ peninsular region ’ which is also another dictionary meaning 
of the word dvipa. That the Kiratas belonged to the main 
land of the peninsular region and not to any island 
will also be evident from the fact that both in the 
Milindapanha and the Nagarjunikonda inscription referred to 
above, the Cilata country is invariably mentioned along with 
Cina with whose people they had deep racial affinities as 
well. In the Kurmavibhaga section of the Brhatsamhitd also, 
the Kiratas are mentioned along with the Cmas. 

Coming back to the passage of the Nagarjunikonda ins- 
cription, we find that this Kirata or Cilata country was 
along with other countries converted to the faith of the 
Buddha by the fraternities of monks of Tanibaparnna which 
has generally been taken to be identical with Sihala or 
Ceylon, but which may also be taken to mean the region 
in southernmost India through which flowed the river 
Tamraparni, he., the Pandya country. The fact that the 
fraternities of monks of Tambapanina is stated to have 
converted the ‘ isle of Tambapamni ’ seems to indicate 
that Tambapamna and the isle of 1 ainbaparnni were two 
different regions. Moreover, one maj^ also point out the 
difference in spelling between the two words Tambapamna 
and Tambapamni in one and the same sentence, besides 
between mere ‘ 1 ambapamna ’ and ‘ isle of Tambapamni,’ 
again in the same sentence. We know that there was a 



3- 1445B 



18 


1HERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


river in the Tinnevelly region of the Far South callecl 
Tamraparnl which is sometimes identified with the Tamba- 
pamni mentioned in the R. E. II and XIII of Asoka. It is not 
therefore, unlikely that the Tatnbapatnna of the Nagarjunikonda 
record is the country through which flowed the river Tamra- 
parnl. The Tatnbapamni of Asoka may or may not be the 
region of the Tamraparni river, but the Nagarjunikonda record 
seems to suggest that there must have been some difference 
between ‘ Tambapamna ’ and the ‘isle of Tatnbapamni,’ 
the former standing for the Far South of India while the 
latter may be taken to be identical with the island of Ceylon. 
This is however merely a suggestion ; but the fact remains 
that as the inscription is dated in the regnal year of 
the Iksvaku kings of the eastern Deccan who flourished 
in the third century A.D., the conversion of the Kirata 
country by the fraternity of monks of Tarnbapamna must 
have taken place sometime before that date. 

If the identification of the Kirata country with the regions 
now known as Arakan and lower Burma (i.e., Suvanna- 
bhumi of the Pali texts and medieval tradition) stand to 
reason, we have then in the Nagarjunikonda record a definite 
reference to the prevalence of Buddhism in Burma sometime 
before the third century A.D. 


IV 

BUDDHISM IN LIN- YANG : C. 250 A.D. 

Early Chinese texts speak often of a country, among 
others of Indo-China, called Chin-lin or “ Frontier of Gold.’’ 
Prof. Pelliot long ago drew attention of scholars to these 
texts, and it is to him that we are indebted for information 
from Chinese sources regarding the islands and countries 
of the Far-East including Campa, Kamboj, Siam, Laos, 
Java, Sumatra, Borneo and even some parts of Eastern 
India. Here we shall concern ourselves with only a few 



BUDDHISM IN LIN- YANG 


19 


references from Chinese texts that directly refer to our 
present subject.'® 

About the beginning of the third century A.D. Fii-nan, 
which included modern Cambodia and the major portion of 
Siam, was gradually expanding its power. One of its kings, 
(Fan)-wan, a brave and capable man. attacked and subdued 
the neighbouring kingdoms and took the title of the Great 
King of Fii-nan. He then boarded a few great ships and 
traversing the vast ocean attacked more than ten king- 
doms including Ch’u-tu-kun, Chin-chih and Tien-siin, thus 
extending the kingdom of Fii-nan five or six thousand li. 
Then he projected a subjugation of the kingdon of Chin-lin 
or Frontier of Gold ; but as he fell ill, he could not achieve 
his end.™ The date of the death of (Fan)- wan, the Great 
King of Fii-nan, is shown by Prof . Pelliot to have been c.225- 
30 A.D.^” Moreover, in the time of Wu (a.D. 222-80), Chu 
Ying and K’ang Y’ai, Prof. Pelliot points out, were sent on 
an embassy to the country of (Fan)-hsun. The date of this 
embassy is fixed by him to have been c. 245-50 A.D.^' 
“The kingdoms, which they passed through or heard of , were 
a hundred and several tens ; ’ but the evidence as given 
in the Liang Shu (ch. 54, f. 2 recto and verso) does not 
warrant such a long list. It includes Tu-K’un, Chu-li, Tun- 
Hsun and Chin-lin Tu-K’un and Chu-li must be looked for 
somewliere in the Malay Peninsula, Tun-Hsun (Tien-siin) 
has been identified with Tennasserim, and Chin-Hn or the 
Frontier of Gold with Suvannabhumi of Pali literature. The 

Pelliot’s researches are mostly contained in liis masterly contribution, Deux 
Itineraries, published in the BEFEO,, IV, 1904. See also, in this connection, Luce, 
JBRS., XIV, Part 2. 

3* BEFEO.. 1903, pp. 256-57. 

<0 /bid., p. 303. 

Ibid., p, 303, p. 430. 

« Ibid., pp, 275^77. 

For Pelliot’s discussion* on the identifications of these regions see Ibid., 
pp. 263-69; also see Laufer, JA ., 1 uin-Aout, 1918, pp. 24-31, 



20 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


identification of the last-named country is generally accept- 
ed/^ Chindin thus refers to the region of the gulf of 
Martaban which is certainly the same as the * great bay of 
the Frontier of Gold ’ referred to in the Chinese texts/’"' 

The kingdom of Chin-lin was also called Chin-ch’en. The 
T'ai-p-'ing yu Ian (ch. 790, f. 23) has two quotations. Prof, 
Pelliot points out, about the kingdom of the Frontier of Gold, 
The first is taken from Iwu chih according to which Chin-lin 
is called Chin-ch’en. It is above 2000 li from Fu-nan. The 
second extract is taken from the Wai f^uo cK nan according 
to which one can reach Chin-ch’en by going west for more 
than 2000 li from Fii-nan. Prof. Pelliot sees in Chin~ch*en a 
graphic alteration of Chin-lin. That the two are identical is 
also proved by Prof. Luce who points out that “the variants 
Chin-lin and Chin-ch’en, both perhaps of equal antiquity, 
are sufficiently close in sound to suggest that the name may 
be a transcription, and not a translation, of the native 
names ; and this would explain the variant writings of //n, 
one of which, Chin-lin has no semantic value... If the 
I wu chi is the Nan chou i wu chih of Wan chen, the 
identification of Chin-ch’en with Chin-lin is as old as the 
third century; the name Chin-ch’en is also said to occur in 
the Wai Kuo cK nan which may be the actual work of K'ang 

Pelliot, Ibid., p, 266, n. 5, wliere the readev would hud arguments in 
favour of the identification. 

For additional argiiment^ in support of the identification see JBRS.f 
VoL XIV, Pt. 11, p. 153, where Prof. Ch Id. Luce remarks: *‘Chin-}in, quite 
irrespective of its meaning or connection with Su vanriablinmi, might be placed on 
geographical g,irounds on the Gulf of Martaban. Chin-cfi’en, or Chin-lin, is said 
to be more than 2000 li west of Fii-nan; Pieu-ton, Tu-Koun, Chudi and Pi-Sung 
are 3000 li south of Cdiindin on the one hand ; d’u K’un and Fun-hsitn over 3000 
Ji south of nan on the other. It .seems a natural conclusion that Tu-KLin, 
etc., were somewhere on the Malay Peninsula, roughly equidistant from (the 
capital of >) Fii nan (Cambodia) on the one side, and the Gulf of Martaban on 
the other "Fhe mention of the ‘great Fiay’ is a .strong argument : and the 
reference to the white population of tFiese part.s tallies with Ptolemy’s similar 
account of Chryse.” 

Pelliot, Ihid,, p. 266, n. 5. 



BUDDHISM IN LIN-YANG 


21 


Tai (befeo., 1904, p. 270, n. 3), and in the fifth century 
Fa- nan chi oi Chu Chih.” '’ 

It is in the last-named text, i.e., the Fu-nan chi of Chu 
Chih that there is an interesting reference to what may be 
said to have an important bearing on our present subject of 
study. Here is Prof. Pelliot’s version of the portion of the 
text as quoted in the Shui Ching Chu (ch. 1,/, 7, verso) : 
“ The kingdom of Lin- Yang (old pronunciation : Liem-(d) 
iang) is 2000 li by land-route from that of Chin-ch en. One 
goes there by carriage or on horseback ; there is no route 
by water. A// the people Worship the Buddha.' This 
kingdom of Lin- Yang is the subject of a paragraph in the 
T ai p ing yu Ian (ch. 787, f. 13); it is mentioned, according 
to the report of the travels of K’ang T’ai, as being 7000 li 
south-west of Fii-nan, and according to the Nan chou i wu 
chi of Wan Chen, as being the same distance, but west. In 
the time of K ang T’ai there were already in this country, 
according to his report, “ several thousand Sramanas." 
K’ang T’ai, according to Prof. Pelliot, should be referred to 
the middle of the third century A.D. It is thus evident that 
Buddhism was already a flourishing religion at that time in 
the kingdom of Lin-Yang. But which is the region referred 
to as Lin-Yang in the Chinese texts ? 

The kingdom of Lin-Yang is said to he 2000 li by horse 
or carriage from Chin-ch'en or Chin-lin which is Suvanna- 
bhumi or Thaton region of Burma on the gulf of Martaban. 
Chin-lin again is said to be of the same distance to the west 
from Fii-nan that included modern Cambodia and the major 

JBRS., Vol. XIV, Part 11, p, 153. 

How unrelinble are these mcasurenients of di.stanres hs given in these text.s 
is appciieiil in thi.s stalemeut. From Fii-nan C hin lln is dcsorihed to be 2(100 li 
and from Chin-lin to L in-Yang the distance is the same. I he two distance 
lines thus foim the two aim.s or .sides of e'qnal length of a triangle whose third 
side may be said to be supplied by the dislance line of 7('00 li from Fii-nan to 
Lin-Yang an impossible pioposition /torn the gecmctrical point of view. For the 
third side (7000 li) cannot be greater in any case than the other two sides taken 
together* Viz., 4000 U. 



22 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


portion of Siam. From FU-nan, Lin- Yang was, however, 
7000 li to the west or south-west. From these data as well 
as from the statement that it could not be reached by water, 
Prof. Luce infers that Lin-Yang might have been situated 
in the north or centre of Burma.”' 1 do not follow why 
Lin-Yang should be located so high up in the peninsula 
as in the north, though one may possibly be disposed 
to locate it in the centre. It is difficult to ascertain 
from where all distances in respect of Fii-nan were counted ; 
was it from the capital or from the nearest borderland — and 
what again should be our attitude with regard to the dis- 
tances and directions as stated in the texts which are our only 
source of information? Should we interpret them literally 
or accept merely their sense? That they are sometimes 
absolutely unreliable is well known. 1 hese are some of the 
difficulties with respect to any identification of Lin-Yang ; 
but let us go by the facts as they are stated. If, then, the 
identification of Chin-ch’en or Chin-lin with the Thaton 
region is correct, and Prof. Luce admits that it is so, the 
capital of Fii-nan from where presumably all distances in 
respect of that country were counted or the nearest border 
region of that kingdom, must be situated, on the authority 
of the / wu chih as quoted in the T’ai p ing yu Ian referred 
to above, some 2000 li east of Thaton.®" The distance of 
Lin-Yang from Chin-ch’en is also stated as 2000 li, but the 
direction is not given. It cannot, however, be southwards 
from Chin-ch’en, for that way stretches the Malay Peninsula 
which borders on the sea, nor can it be direct westwards 


« JBRS., Vol. XIV, Part II, p. 154. 

M The of Fu-nfiin was at T c-mui ancf was 500 li froin tfic scaj evidently 

the South China Sea. We should, therefore, search for it somewhere, probably on 
the Mekong up Vien Tiane. PeiUot would, however, locale it between Chandonc 
and Phnompenh, perhaps near VySdhapura f Angkor Borei). BEFEO.y 1902, p. 128; 
1903, p. 247, 269-90; 1904, p. 214, The difficulty with regard to the identification 
is that Chin-lin is not due west from such a location ; the distance too is more 
than 500 li. 



bUDDHISM IN LIN-YANG 


23 


from Thaton. According to Cunningham’s computation 
one Chinese li in H 3U3in-Chuang’s time was equivalent to 
one-sixth of an English mile if it is assumed that Chinese 
li measured the same distance in the third century as well, 
we have roughly over 300 English miles as the distance from 
Chin-ch’en or Thaton to Lin-Yang. But this distance must 
not be measured as the crow flies, for cart or horse tracks in 
those days lay necessarily in a zigzag course. Nor should 
they, 1 think, be taken too literally. If we take this into 
consideration and allow some concession as to the measure- 
ment of the distance in li, 1 think, we cannot go higher up 
northwards than Hmawza, the site of the capital of the old 
kingdom of Prome. In fact, 1 infer that the kingdom of 
Lin-Yang may be the same as the kingdom of old Prome 
that lay, even in those days, much to the interior at con- 
siderable distance from the coast, and could not be reached 
by water especially from the region of Chin-ch’en. The 
identification with Prome may also find support from the fact 
that only two centuries later we have definite evidence of the 
prevalence of Buddhism in the capital city of this old king- 
dom where Pali canonical literature was studied in its doctrinal 
and most intricate aspects. 

But whether the identification of Lin-Yang with Prome 
stands or is just a tnere conjecture, we cannot doubt that this 
kingdom must be sought for somewhere in Burma, either in 
the region of Prome or higher up in the central districts of 
the peninsula, where Buddhism was already in the middle 
of the third century very well established with several 
thousand sramanas adhering to the Faith, and the whole 
people subscribing to the worship of the Buddha. If the 

Cunningham's Ancient Geography oj India, App, B., p. 571 ff. 

But It should be borne in mind that the entire discussion centering on 
Lin-Yang is based on the identification of Chin-iin (Chin-ch’en) with the region 
bordering on the gulf of Martaban, which, however, is generally accepted. But 
sec Luce, ]BRS , Voi. XI V, Part II, p. 155, n. 1. 



24 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

identifications set forth above are correct, and it seems they 
are quite plausible, then there can be no doubt that Buddhism 
was already an established faith in certain places in Burma 
in about the third century A. D/”' This piece of evidence 
and that of the Nagarjunikonda record may thus be said to 
support each other in their assertion of Buddhism having 
been a prevalent form of religion in Burma in the third 
century A.D. 


V 

THE BUDDHAGHOSA TRADITION ; LEGEND AND HISTORY 

C. 400-450 A.D. 

Burmese chronicles preserve to this day a strong 
and insistent tradition current everywhere in the Buddhist 
hierarchy of Burma that Buddhaghosa, the celebrated Buddhist 
commentator and author of a number of Buddhist texts, 
was a native of Burma. Born in Thaton, he is said to have 
made a voyage to Ceylon in the year of religion 943, 
r.e., 400 A.D.°^ The Burmans ascribe a new era in their 
religion to the time when the great scholar reached their 
country back from Ceylon."’’ He succeeded in his under- 
taking. He made use of the Talaing characters in trans- 
cribing the manuscripts which were written in the character 
of Magadha. The Burmans lay much stress on that voyage, 
always carefully noting down the year it took place. In 

In 1 un-hfiiin Tennaseiim) Brahmanism was at this time at least one of 

the prevalent forms of religion, preached evidently by Indian coloni.sts. “ The 

kingdom of i un-hsiin depends on Fu~nan In this country there are 500 families 

of Hu of India;, two Fo t u, and more than a thousand Brahmanas of India, The 
(people of; l un-hsiin practice their doctrine and give them their daughters in 
marriage, so many of these brahmanas do not depart, 1 hey do nothing but read 
the holy books of the heavenly spirits and constantly offer unto them white bases of 
perfumes and flowers without ceasing, day and night.” BEFBIO., Ill, p, 279 ff, 

5^ Rogers, Buddhaghosa* s parables, p. xvi, n. h 
55 Hardy. Manual of Buddhism, p. 532. 



BUDDHAGHOSA TRADITION 


25 


fact, it is to Buddhaghosa that the people of the shores of 
the gulf of Martaban owe the possession of Buddhist 
scriptures/"'^' He is said to have also brought over from 
Ceylon to Burma a copy of Kaccayana’s Pali grammar 
which he translated into Burmese, and to have written ^ 
commentary as well upon it/" A volume of parables in 
Burmese is also attributed to him."^^ The Burmese Code 
of Manu is said to have been introduced into Burma from 
Ceylon by the same Buddhist scholar, though the Code 
itself is silent on the point. '' 

Here is an example how the tradition is recorded in the 
chronicles of the country. It is (aken from the Hmarman 
Yazawin which, like most other Bur'mese chronicles, claims 
Buddhaghosa to have been a native of Thaton from where he 
is said to have crossed over to a seaport called Bhangiri in 
the Deccan. J hence he reached Ceylon by ship. It then 
proceeds to give an account of his early life and career, and 
then of his sojourn in Ceylon including the story of the writing 
of the commentaries These accoirnts follow on the whole 
those of the Sinhalese chionicies. 

" Ttius when tlu* £:>ieat eider Asliiii Budclt»agiio8a had t/ven king Mcdianainan a 
white elephant and sought leave to dep.art, he }>rought one out of I he tlirce copies 
of the Visuddlnma^l^^a vvhicli he had made together with tiie three Piiakas, and 
crossed over to Jainl^ud vipa . And Sakka came to him and said : ‘ hi JambudvTpa, in 
the middle country, tiicre is no standing place for lire religion. The religion 
' iiould shine I he religicrn s’.all Jtand and sh.ine for five thousand years in suclj 
places as the distant jungle setdeir.eiils in tl.e soulh-cast corner of the iniiidle country, 
.line hundred (yojana) in circumference I harcklii I (ura, 1 liiripyissaya (and) 
Rarnannadesa. Carry li ! hither! So he took it and crossed over and reached the city 
^'f Ihaton, called udharnrnavati. And when the tidings were known, there 
was a genera] cry ihioughont all the kingdom of Ramaana, and king and queen, 
men and women, niuiiks and laymen, aM welcomed the religion willi Qi\ersc‘ festivals, 
a.ssernhlie.s, celebrations, and almsgivings. As though the i.ord Omni.scient had 


Ibid 

Ind. Ant., xix, 1890, p. 532. 

Ibid. 

Ibid. In this connection ace also Dr. B. C. I .awn The Li fe and Work of 
Puddhaghosa , 11, pp. 40-42. 

4 I445B 



26 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


appeared in their midst, they reverently raised the Pitok/^s, and coming to the city 
pal ace they built a tabernacle in a lovely place in front of the golden palace, and there 
they laid the treasures of the religion. 

** At the time the chief elder of the religious order was Ashin Anomadassi. 
This is his lineage : of the two monks of the I'hird Council, Sona and Uttara, who 
came to Suvarinabhumi in the cause of religion, Ashin Sona the elder had ten 
jfjrfpils who abode with him, the chief of whom was Ashin Mahasobhita ; — his 
pupil was Ashin Mahasomadatta ; his pupil, Ashin Surnantissa ; his pupil, 
Ashin Sobhaga ; his pupil, Ashin Somadatta ; his pupil, Ashin Anomadassi. 
When Ashin Anomadassi was in charge of the religion, diverse saints and 
monks who were practising piety in the countries of Burma, Mon, Arakan, 
Shan Yun, Linzin and Sokkati, came one by one and studied and took 
away the sacred Pali and the commentary, which had only been handed down by 
word of mouth from teacher to teacher; and so in diverse distant places even now 
the religion spreads and shines. I his agrees with the Sasanovarnsa and the 1 baton 
Chronicle... 

“ ... The Great Chronicle says that it wa.s irr th.e forty-second year after the 
accession ol King f hinlikyaung (hat Ashin Buddhaghosa crossed ov’er (o C eylon. 
But in the forty-fourth year of the reign of ihi.s king, being the 930lh year of the 
religion or 308, Malianarnan had not even come to the throne; (here is a gap of 
sixteen years. So it was not in the reign of king T hinlikyaung. but in the fifteentli 
year of the reign of his srm Kyaungdwit that Malianarnan became king, in tlie 946lh 
year of the religion c>r 324. I his is found in the Dlpavamso and agrees with the 
Kalyanl inscriptioms, and the Sasanavamsa. 

" The above account has been omitted in the Great and Middle Clironicles, but 
is here inseiled with extracts according to the books, in order to make plain the story 
of the arrival in Burma of the Pitak^s, of tlie religion. ’’ 


Thus, so far as legend is concerned here obviously is an 
example of how the chroniclers of a later date satisfied their 
natural vanity by claiming as many celebrities of the religion 
they could as their own. Foulkes and Smith'’' even 
doubted if there was ever a historical personage as Buddha- 
ghosa. But we can readily ignore that argument now, for 
the celebrated Buddhist scholar has long been proved to have 
been a real historical personage. More substantial arguments 
in opposition are offered by Prof. Hackmann and Prof. 
Louis kinot. 


“ F3uddhaghosa, ” ind. Ant., xix, 1889, p. 122. 

.AsokaT alleged mission to Pegu,” /nJ. Ant., xxxiv, 1905, pp. 185 86. 
Buddhism as a Religion, p. 68 



BUDDHAGHOSA TRADITION 


27 


There is ground ” says Prof. Hackmann, “ for doubting the statement that 
this man (Buddhaghosa) brought Buddhism to Burma. I he chronicles of Ceylon 
to which we ov^e the information about Buddhagljosa and which must have been 
wclhinformed on the subject, give no account of his journey to Fuither Iiuha. Indeed, 
one cf the most important inscriptions in Burma, which was erected at the end of the 
!5th century A.D. at the instance of the king of Pegu makes no mention wliatsoever 
of Buddlmghosa. The Burmese tradition winch referfi to Kim does so on act ount 
of hi* translations and writings having become fundamental in the country, probably 
al«o because his intclle*clual influence may have inaugurated a new epoch in Burmese 
Buddhism. ” 

Prof, Finot, the distinguished French scholar, also speaks 
in the same strain. 

“ In Indo-China, lie (F^uddhaghosa) passes for the grand apostle who 
biougbt to those peoples the treasure of the sacred books, Ecicb country of the 
Peninsula is a claimant ; the Bmmese make him a monk of 1 haton, modern 
Cambodia places him at the beginning of its religious tradition and has kept hi* 
name as one of the most elevated titles of ecclesiastical liierarcliy ... Ihe t Burmese j 
chronicle* either secular or ecclesiastical are orrly tin* er ho of Sinhalese history, 
altered by an insatiable national vanity. As they make lluddira travel in tire valley 
of the Irrawady for predicting the foundation of diverse capitaks, they substitute 
Thaton for Magadha as the point of departure o: of r( (urn in tfie voyage of Buddha- 
ghosa to Ceylon Not only is this tradition afrocryplial, it is not even old ; it cannot 
go back in any case further tlran the Ihlh centiny. We have a decjsive proof of it 
in the insciiptioas of .. If tlic belief in 'he introduction of the scriptures to 

Pegu by Buddhaghosa had asserted at that time, the j-uous king would have no 
doubt reserved to it a place of honour in his aliridgc ment ol the histeny of the 
Church. But he does not mention the name ol the great t oinmentrilor ; tfuis it 
follows that in his time no connection had yet been established between Buddha 
gliosa and Tliatori.” 


Who would deny that there is great weight in these 
criticisms which are just and reasonable ? The character 
itself of the tradition is such as to raise suspicion in a critical 
mind ; and the omission, moreover, of any account of the 
great schokirCs adventure in further India in the Ceylonese 
chronicles as well as in the Kalyani inscriptions is indeed too 
serious an objection to overcome. The argument of 
omission, it is true, does not go very far, but it must be 

*5 Ihe Legend of Buddhaghosa. translaled /tern ihe Frciirh hy P. C Bag, hi, 
Ca/. Rev., 1923, pp. 63-67. 



28 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

admitted that in the present instance it goes a great way 
towards confirmitig the suspicions already created in our 
minds by the nature of the tradition itself. The omission 
in the Ceylonese chronicles may, however, be ignored; 
but not that in the Kalyani inscriptions where the pious 
and zealous king Dhammaceti made it a point, as it 
were, to record each and every step in the course of the 
progress of the religion in the Peninsula' up till his reign, 
and it is indeed difficult to assume that he forgot to record 
such an important event. 

Fur ihermore, F^ioF B. M. Barua ' has recently introduced us 
to a second 3uM laghosa. a Buddhist scholar and divine, and 
an elder contemporary of the Buddhaghosa of the Visuddhi- 
magga fame Evidence, unforiunaiely, is so meagre on the 
point that it is very dilTcult lo establish his identity; we only 
know that it was at h s Instance that the ^^ounger, but the 
more celebrated Buddhaghosa undertook' to prepare his 
famous commentary on the Vihhanga, the Sammohavlnodini. 
It may be argued that tht? elder Buddlraghosa ma\/ have 
been a native of Buima, and the chroniclers fathered on him 
all that passed in the name of the younger and the more 
celebrated one. But such an cissumption is unwarranted ; 
and if ail that is claimed by the tradition current in Burma is 
to be believed, it is certain that none else than the younger 
and the more celebrated, the scholar Buddhaghosa, is 
meant / ' 


' 1 wo BuCdha^rliosr.s, ’ Indian CuJiiitc, I, No. 2, pp. 294-95, 

“ r.ho B».ui.ncso tradition Bucidliagliosa was a ualivc of I halon and 

rcUzrru'd ihitSa-L lioia (deyum nioriis inoro atlcntioii llian it has received. It can 
easiiy be f.ixp’ainc'd away as patrivotic fancy. On tlie otfier Iiand^ if Buddhaghosa’s 
object wa,'-. to invigoiate Hiiiayanisin in India Inc result of lus really .stupendous 
labours was siinvai.ariy ; nia)i , for in India his name is connected with no religious 
mov’cinont. But il we suppose that lie went to Ceylon by way of the holy places 
in Mag itllia and leturncd from t]ie Corcunandal coast to Burma where Hjnayani.srn 
afterwards li oiiiished, we liave at least a coherent narrative.'’ Eliot, Hinduism and 
Buddhism, III, p. .32 



BUDDHAGHOSA TRADITION 


29 


But all this is more destructive or .speculative. The 
tradition so loud and persistent, may not be without a 
meaning, a significance. Is it not possible to suggest some- 
thing constructive, something that may help us to see the 
indication of history through the thick mass of legends ? We 
may not be able to hit upon any positive evidence, but we 
may be able to throw, though in a small measure, some light 
on a tradition that has vexed scholars for long. 

Recent archc^eological finds mainly at Hmawza, a small 
village rich in ancient ruins, five miles south of the present 
town of Prorne, and the oldest seat, so far known, of king- 
ship in lower Burma, have d(-cisively proved that Thera- 
vada or Pali Buddhism was already well known in and 
around that couniry in the fifth and sixth centuries of the 
Christian era. Here have been di^3Coverecl a number of 
epigraphs relating to well-known texts from canonical Pali 
literature inscribed on stone and gold plates in what is very 
closely allied to the Kadamba script, paleographically 
belonging to ih.e 5th and 6th centuries A.D. Two of these 
plates begin with the well-known Buddhist formula 

“ Ye dhamma hetiippahhaOa. ' etc., in Pali, and refer 

respective]}^ to the 19 categories of Buddhism ,, and the equally 
well-known praise of the Iri-ratna as contained in the 
Anguttara Nrkdi/a." Another epigraph contains an extract 
either from the Dhammasafigani or l ihhafiga ; while a third 
which is a gold leaf manuscript is inscribed with an exiract 
giving the chain of causation or palicca-mmuppdda and other 
extracts from the Sutta, Vinaya, and Abhidhawma 
All these texts which w^e shall refer to in detail in the next 
section belong decidedly to Pali or Tlieravada Buddhism, 

il may be noted nere li>al Buridbagbosa m coinir.eii! ing on tlie Ahi;uilora 
14. 6, describes ibe rneicbanl of Ukkaia obvious ly a foun of Utkalai 
as having !;een in balivitants of Asitanjana in fbe region of Marnsavati or Pegu. It 
sbovv;-; Buddhagbosa’s acquaintance with ibe regirm of deltaic Burma. Vtclc 
r orebammer. Notes on the Ancient Geography of Burma, 7 be Sliwedagr>n 
Pagoda,” Rangoon, 1911. 



30 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

and the epigraphs prove once for all that this Buddhism was 
known and practised at old Prome (Hmawza) as early as 
when those epigraphs were inscribed, /.e., in the 5th and 6lh 
centuries A.D, Images of the Buddha in traditional poses and 
attitudes and belonging to the same period as well as 
stupas and other monuments, belonging to the creed of 
Theravada Buddhism by reason of the iconography of the 
sculptures that embellish them have been discovered 
in considerable numbers at the same locality. To all these 
we shall turn in greater detail in subsequent sections. These 
finds known to scholars for several years are important by 
themselves, but when we consider the period to which 
they belong and the tradition of art and palaeography 
which they are affiliated to on the one hand, and on the other 
the period when Buddhaghosa flourished and the country or 
countries which he was more or less associated with, they 
become at once invested with a deeper significance. 

According to Dhammakitti's account in the MahaVarnsa, 
Buddhaghosa flourished in the first half of the !:>th century 
A.D. This account is supported by Burmese tradition and 
other internal evidences from the works of Buddhaghosa 
himself Most of his years of activity he lived, it is true, 
in Ceylon, but tradition strongly connects him with South 
India as well, more definitely with Conjeeveram or ancient 
Kancipuram which the great Buddhist scholar and preacher 
is credited with having developed into an important centre 
of Theravada Buddhism. Tradition and history also associate 
him intimately with the Godavari region on the one hand, 
and the Kaveri region on the other. In fact, if tradition 
is to be given any value, it is to the credit of Buddhaghosa 
that Theravada Buddhism had a new lease of life in South 
India. 

We shall presently see in the sections immediately follow- 
ing, that from the fifth century onwards down to the middle of 


Law, 7 he Life and Work, of Buddhaghosa, pp. 9 11. 



BUDDHAGHOSA TRADITION 


31 


the eleventh there is a continuous record of a very flourish- 
ing state of Buddhism in and around the kingdom of 
old Prome, in fact, in lower Burma. The fifth century 
indeed seems to be very significant from what we shall 
presently see in the history of Buddhism in Burma. This 
century saw, in the old kingdom of Prome, a sudden 
awakening of Theravada Buddhism, a new start, as it were, 
of an old faith. It found from somewhere a strong impetus, 
a new urge of life, at about this period, and this new urge 
expressed itself in a wide outburst of activities in all direc- 
tions chips of which have come down to us in the shape 
of a number of Pali inscriptions, a large number of Buddhist 
sculptures and Buddhist monuments. Is it or is it not 
possible to connect this impetus, this outburst of Buddhist 
religious activity, suddenly in about the fifth century, with the 
Buddhaghosa legend P In any case the appearance or re- 
appearance of Theravada Buddhism in the old kingdom 
of Prome as evidenced by her old epigraphs and sculp- 
tures and monuments thus almost coincides not only with 
the period in which Buddhaghosa flourished, but also with 
the establishment and development of great centres of 
Theravada Buddhism on the Krsna-Godavari and Kaveii 
valleys, in places like Kancipuram, fCaveripattanam and 
Uragapurarn, all intimately associated with the Buddhaghosa 
tradition. The coincidence seems rather to be significant, 
and when we examine the Burmese tradition from this point 
of view the story of the great scholar s visit may not seem 
to be altogether without a foundation, though one is cons- 
cious that such an argument involves a certain kind of logical 
fallacy. Besides, one has also to bear in mind the possibility 
of earlier prevalence of Buddhism in Burma that we have 
indicated in the previous sections. The surgence of the 
religion in the peninsula from about the 5ih century referred 
to above suggests that there must have taken place some- 
where near before that date a movement that spurred into 



32 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


activity elements that had already been in existence for some 
time past. 

Along with what hcis beep stated above in this section 
and in a following one in support of a surgence of Theravada 
Buddhist activities in lower Burma in about the fifth and 
and sixth centuries may also be considered the Mon inscrip- 
tion found at Lobpuri in Siam ascribed to about the same 
date; references to 1 baton, the capital of the Ramannadesa or 
Talaing country, in several passages of Buddhist coinmen- 
tarial literature which in their Pali recensions are dated about 
the 5th century A.D. ; and references to Hamsavati or Pegu 
in the Jataka NidanaJ^atha (vOL. 1, p. 37) as “ Nagaram 
f^adumottaia-Buddhassa in several places in the Manoratha- 
puran'u the commentary of the Ahgutiara Nih^aya (Sinhalese 
edn., 1904) and other f)lace3. Both 1 baton and Pegu, it 
may be remembered, are associated with the Bucldhaghosa 
tradition. 

In respect of the Buddhaghosa tradition it may, 
therefore, be assumed that there are cogent reasons for 
doubting it, but we must not treat the problem as closed 
or as decided once for all, 1 liere is, indeed, a probability 
of the tradition having something to c^o with actual facts, 
and it is, therefore, more reasonable to keep ihe door open 
for more light, and re-examine the legend in the light of 
evidences that are daily growing m volume and importance 
in favour of an early introduction of Theravada Buddhism 
in Burma. But, Buddhaghosa or no Buddhaghosa in Burma, 

It is immaterial with regard to our study of the history of 
Buddhism in the Peninsula. If the tradition be given any 
value, the great Buddhist scholar must then have made his 
influence felt in Burma some time in the first half of the 
fifth century A.D. If it be dismissed, it would matter little, 

.v 

for almost immediately after, we have definite epigraphic 
evidence of the prevalence of Theravada Buddhism, the 
religion of the Master, in its pure and unsullied form, in 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 33 

lower Burma where Buddhaghosa is said to have established 
one of his centres of activity. 


VI 

BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME : C. 400-600 A.D. 

EVIDENCE OF PALI INSCRIPTIONS 

As early as 1897 there were discovered at Maunggan, a 
small village close to the ancient ruins of Hrnawza, two gold 
plates bearing writings in Pali inscribed in characters that 
have long been recognised as having a very close affinity 
with the Kadamba script of the fifth and sixth centuries A.D. 
Each of the two plates contains three lines which are in 
perfect state of preservation and the letters are so distinct 
as to leave no room for doubt as to their decipherment. 
They begin each with the well-known Buddhist formula : 

Ye dhamma hetuppabhava tesarn hetu ’’ but differ 

in the text of the extracts that follow.'"^ 1 his will be evident 
from what follows of the two plates. 

First Plate 

L. 1. Ye dhamma- hetuppabhava tesam-hetum-1 atha- 
gato aha 

tesafi-cha-yo-nirodho evamvadi-mahasamano-ti 

L. 2. Catvaro-iddhipada catvaro-samappadhana catvaro- 
satipatthana catvari-ariyasaccani chatuvesarajjani 
panchindriyani pancha-chakkhuni chha 

L. 3. Asaddharariani satta-bhojjhanga ariyo-atthangiko- 

maggo nava-lokuttara dhamma dasa-balani cuddasa 
Buddha-koni attharasa-Buddhadhammani 

Ep, Incl., V, p. 101 ff. For a more correct rcadinfj and interprotafion sec 
Finot. Un nouveau document siir ie buddisrne birman/' /A., xx, 1912, p, 121 ff. 


5 - 1445B 



34 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

Second Plate 

L. i . Ye-dhamma-hetuppabhava {te)8a(fn)-hetu-Tathagato- 
aha tesan-cha-yo-nirodho evamvadi-mahasamano-ti 
iti-pi-so-bhagava araham 

L. 2. sammasambuddho vijjacharanasampanno sugato- 
lokavidu 

anuttaro-purisadhammasarathi sattha-devamanus- 
sanam 

Buddho bhagava-ti 

L. 3. svakkhyato bhagavata-dhammo sanditthiko akaliko 
ehipassiko opanayikopachchattam-veditavvo vinnuhl-ti. 

It is evident that in the first plate there is, besides the 
well-known formula, an enumeration of the categories of 
Saddhamma, evidently from the Ahhidhamma, in a pro- 
gressively numerical order. These categories are separately 
alluded to or discussed in more or less detail, in most of the 
Ahhidhamma texts ; but it is probably in the Vibhanga, 
one of the seven books of the Ahhidhamma, that these 
categories, some of them at least, if not all, are often alluded 
to and treated in detail. At least in one place the Vihhatiga 
enumerates as follows some of the categories in a 
progressively numerical order. 

Cattaro satipatlhana cattaro sammappadhana cattaro 
iddhipada pancindriyani panca balani satta bhojjhanga ariyo 
atthangiko inaggo {Vihhafiga, P.T..S. edn., p. 372). 

This plate may, therefore, roughly be said to consist 
of a very short synopsis of some of the contents of the 
Vibhanga, a sort of a short note to help the memory or 
to serve as a guide to a teacher of the religion. The 
enumeration of the categories in arithmetical progression 
can also be found in the Digha A't^dya (p.t.S. edn.. Ill, 
p. 102), the Majjhima Nikaya (p.T.S. edn., II, p. 245), 
the Afiguttara Nikaya (P.T.S. edn , iV, pp. 125-26) and 
the Udana (p.T.S. edn., p. 56). 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


35 


The second plate begins in the same manner as the 
first ; and to any student of Pali canonical literature it will 
be evident that the first line is followed in the second and the 
third by the well-known praise of the Buddha, as described in 
the Mahaparinibbdna Sutta of the Digha Nik,dya, We may 
find it, for example, in the PunnabhisandaVagga of the 
Anguttara a book of ihe Sutta PitaJ^a, where the 

continuity of the text, as in our plate, is broken by an 
introductory and a concluding sentence in each case. This 
will be clearly evident from the extract reproduced below 
from the Anguttara : 

Idha bhikkave ariyasavako Buddhe aveccappasadena 
samannagato hoti — iti pi so bhagava araham sammasam- 
buddho vijjacaranasampanno sugato lokavidu anuttaro puri- 
sadammasarathi sattha devamanussanam buddho bhagava ti. 
Ayam bhikkhave pathamo punnabhisando kusalabhisando — 
sukhaya samvattati , 

Puna ca param bhikkhave ariyasavako dhamme aveccappa- 
sadena samannagato hoti — svakkhato bhagavata dhammo 
sanditthiko akaliko ehipassiko opanayiko paccattarp veditabbo 
vinnuhiti. Ayam bhikkhave dutiyo punnabhisando kusala- 
bhisando — sukhaya samvattati. 

A reference to the praise of the Buddha may be 
found also in the Samannaphala, Ambattha, Patika and 
Sahgiti suttas of the Digha NiJ^dya, as well as in the Pardjik.d- 
\anda^ Sutta Vibhafiga, of the Vinaya Pital^a. 

A few more important Pali inscriptions were discovered at 
Hmawza not earlier than twelve years later. In 1910-11 while 
clearing the small debris round the base of the Bawbawgyi 
Pagoda were unearthed two fragments of a stone inscription 
in Pdi ; the third fragment completing the inscription was 
found the year after close by the same spot. The inscription 


PT.S., Edn., Vol. II, 52, P 56. 



36 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


was edited and translated for the first time by Prof. Finot 
in his very interesting article already referred 10 ,'*^ The text 
runs as follows : 

(1 ) (Samphusa)na samphus{i)tattam vedanakkhandho 
sannakhandho sankharakkhandho 

(2) . , .ditthivipphanditarn ditthiayam vuccati chajaya- 
tanapaccaya phasso laitha katam (a) (pha)ssa paccaya vedana 
yam ceta(s)i(kam). 

(3) Sannojanam ga(ho) patilaho patiggaho abhiniveso 

paramaso mummago 

Evidently the text is something of the sort of a discon- 
nected note of some of the essentials of Buddhist psychology. 
That it is an extract from a canonical text, there can be no 
doubt, and Prof. Finot suggested ' that it might probably 
be an extract, not necesscirily word for word, from the 
Dhammasafigani, a book of the Abhidhamma, while 
M. Duroiselle pointed it out to be an extract from 
the Vibhaiiga, another book of the same Pitaka. That the 
subject of the text of our inscription concerns itself directly 
with those portions of the Dhammasangani which deal with 
the questions of dhamma l^usala and dhamma akusald 
must needs be admitted, but nowhere in the Dhamma- 
safigani the subject is presented in the way we have 
in the inscription. Duroiselle’s suggestion seems to be 
rather precise, though in that case also the text of 
the inscription does not follow the order as w^c find it in 
the Vdbhahga. It is evident that the text of our fragments is 
nothing but a cursory and indifferent note, loosely arranged, 
of an important article of the Vibhanga, iWhat purpose these 
or such notes served or whom these were intended for is 
somewhat difficult to ascertain; but, as I have already 


79 An.R.AS.B., m4,p. 22. 
7' Finot, op, cit. 

72 An R.A.SB,, 1924, p. 22 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


37 


suggested, it is likely that these short epigraphs, by way of 
very short notes on essentials of the religion, served the 
purpose of a guide book, a book of points to help the 
memory, for those preachers of the faith who early took 
upon themselves the task of evangelising the land of 
SuvannabhOmi. It is not unlikely on the other hand that 
following the well-known Indian Buddhist custom, these 
short epigraphs had been enshrined as sacred objects of the 
religion within the stupas and temples from the ruins of 
which they were eventually picked up. 

But the most important record hitherto discovered of Pali 
Buddhism in lower Burma, again from the ruins of old 

Hmawza, is a book of twenty leaves of gold, exactly of the 

nature of old palm-leaf manuscripts of India, each inscribed 
on one side only, placed within two covers of the 

same metal. This unique record was discovered in 

1926 last, and has recently been edited and published* 
Each of the first eighteen leaves of the manuscript contains, 
like the Maunggan plates, three lines, the nineteenth four 
lines, and the twentieth only two. Altogether the twenty 
leaves contain nine extracts from the different texts of the 
Pali Pitakas : this will be evident from the excerpts quoted 
below from the reading of Mr. Lu Pe Win/^ 

(Roman numerala brackets indicalc the text number, while Arabic 

numerals indicate the number of the line on a leaf.) 


Excerpt No. / . 

Siddhani Avijjapaccaya sankhara sarikharapaccaya 
vinnana (1-1) viiinanapaccaya namarupam namarupapaccaya 
sajayatanam (1-2) salayatana paccaya phasso phassapaccaya 
vedana vedanapaccaya (1-3) tanha tanhapaccaya upadana 
upadanapaccaya bhavo bhava paccaya (H-l) jati jatipaccaya 

« AnR.A.S. B.. m6-39, pp. n-22. 

At,.R.A.S. B., ibiJ. 



38 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


jara maranam sokaparidevita-dumkhado (II-2) manussupayasa 
sambhavanti. Evametassakevalassa dukkhakhandba (11-3) ssa 
samudayo hoti ti. Avijjaya tveva asesaviraganirodha (111-1) 
sankharanirodho sankharanirodha vifinananirodho vifinanani- 
rodha (111-2) namarupanirodho namarupanirodha salayatanani- 
rodho sajaya (111-3) tananirodha phassanlrodba pKassanirodha 
vedananirodho (lV-1 ) vedananirodha tanhanirodho tanhanira- 
dha upadana nirodho (iV-2) upadananirodha bhavanirodho 
bhavanirodha jatinirodho (lV-3) jatinirodha jaramaranasoka- 
paridevitadumkhadomanassupaya (V-1) sa nirujjhantiti. Eva- 
metassakevalassa dumkhakhandhassa nirodho (V-2) hoti ti. 

Excerpt No. 2. 

Udayavaya bhangabhaya adinnava nibbida mumjana 
upekkha (V-3). 

Excerpt No. 3. 

Siddha cattaro satipatthana cattaro samappadhana cattaro 
iddhipada (VI- 1) pancindriyani pancabalani satfabojjharigani 
ariyo attha (Vl-2) rigiko maggo. 

Excerpt No. 4. 

Cattarimani bhikkhave tathagatassa vesarajjani (VI-3) 
yehi vesarajjehi samannagato tathagato asabhanthanam pati 
(VII- 1 ) janati parisasu sihanadam nadati brahmacakkamvatleti 
(V II-2) Katamani cattari sammasatpbuddhassa te patijanati 
ime dhamma (Vll-3) anabhisanibuddha ti tattra vata mam 
samano va brahmano va devo va (VIII- 1) maro va koci va 
lokasmim sahadhammena paiicodessanti ti (VllI-2) nimitta- 
metarn bhikkhave na samanupassami. Etam paham 
bhikkhave nimitta (VI 11-3) metarn asamanupassanto khema- 
patto abhayapatto vesarajjapatto (IX- 1) viharami. Khinasa- 
vassa te patijananto ime asava (lX-2) aparikkhinati tattra vata 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


39 


mam samano va brahmano va devo va (IX-3) maro va koci 
va lokasmim sahadhammena paticodessantiti nimittame-(X- 1 ) 
tarn bhikkhave na samanupassami. Etam paham bhikkhave 
nimittam asa-(X-2) manupassanto khemapatto abhayapatto 
vesarajjapatto viharami (X-3). Ye kho pana te antarayika 
dhamma vutta te pabsevanto nalam antara-(XI-l ) yayali 
tattra vata mam samano va brahmano va devo va maro (Xl-2) 
va koci va lokasmim sahadhammena paticodessatf ti nimitta- 
metarn (XI-3) bhikkhave na samanupassami. Etam paham 
bhikkhave nimittam asamanu (Xll-I) passanto khemapatto a- 
[b] bhayapatto vesarajjapatto (Xll-2) viharami. Yassa kho 
pana te atthaya dhammo desito so [nini] (XII-3) yati takka- 
rassa samma dukkhakhayaya [ti] tattra vata mam samano va 
brahma (XIII- 1 ) no va devo va maro va koci va lokasmim 
sahadhammena patico (XIII-2) dessantiti nimittametarn 
bhikkhave na samanupassami. Etarn paham bhikkha 
{XIlI-3) ve nimittam asamanupassanto khemapatto abhaya- 
patto viha (XlV-l) rami. Imani kho bhikkhave cattari 
tathagatassavesara (XlV-2) jjani titi. 

Excerpt No. 5. 

Katamehi bhagava cuddasehi buddhafiane (XlV-3) hi 
samannagato Tathagato ? Dum[khe l nanarn buddhananam. 
Dukkhasamudaye (XV- 1) nanarn buddhananam. Dukkhani- 
rodhenanarn buddhananam. Dukkhanirodha (XV-2) gamini- 
patipade nanarn buddhanaria. Atthapabsarnbidhe nanani 
{XV -3) buddhananarn. Dhammapabsarnbidhenanarn buddha- 
iianatn nirutti {XVI- 1) pab sarnbhidenanarn buddhananarn,. 
Patibhanapabsabhi (XVI-2) de riaiiarn buddhafianarrr. Yama- 
kapabheranaiiarn buddhanariarn (XV 1-3) [ma] hakaruiiasa- 
mapatbya naiiarn buddhanariarn. Sabba tarlanarn 

buddha (XVII-1) nariarn. Anavaraiiananarn buddhanana. 
Imehi bhagava (XVI 1-2} cuddasehi buddhanaiiehi samanna- 
gato ti ti. (XVIl-3). 



40 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

Excerpt No. 6. 

Magganatthangiko settho, 

saccanam caturo pada, 

virago se (XVIlI-1) ttho dhammanam, 

dipadanam ca cakkhuma tl. 

Excerpt No. 7. 

Siddhatn Danto dantehi (XVIll-2) sahapuranajatilehi 
vippamuttehi simginikasavanno rajagaham pavisi bhagava 
{XVlII-3). Mutto muttehi sahapuranajatilehi siginikasavanno 
rajagaham pavisi bhagava (XIX- 1 ). Tinno tinnehi saha- 
puranajahlchi vippamuttehi siginikavanno rajagaham pa 
(XlX-2) visi bhagava. Dasabale dasav[a jso dasadhamma- 
cupeto so dasasata[rn]parivaro rajagaham pavisi bha {XIX-3)- 
gava. 

Excerpt No. 8. 

Yo[v] iro sabbavidanto 

suddho appatipuggalo 

araham sugato loke 

tassaharn paricarako ti. (XlX-4). 

Excerpt No. 9. 

hi pi so bhagava araham sarnmasambuddho vijjacarana 
sampanno sugato lokavidu anuttaro (XX- 1 ) purlsadammasa- 
rathi sattha devamanussana buddho bhagava ti. Abhibhavatu 

(XX-2). 

It will be readily seen that the first excerpt relates itself 
to the very well-known Pahccasamuppada Sutta or the Sutta 
of the twelve nidanas quoted so often in different canonical 
texts. This is to be found in the Majjhima Nik.aya (P.T.S. 
edn., I, pp. 261, 263-64, III, pp. 63-64), the Afiguttara 
NiJ^aya (p.T.S. edn., V, p. 184), the Samyutta Nil^aya 
P.T.S. edn., II, pp. 1-2, III, p. 135, V, p. 388), the V inaya 
PHak.am (Oldenberg’s edn., I, pp. 1-2), the Vihhafiga of the 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PRCME 


41 


Abhidhamma Pitak^ (Rhys Davids’ edn., pp. 135, 138-'39, 
165-68) and the Dhammasangani (P.T.S. edn., p. 229). 
The second excerpt enumerates the seven kinds of Vipassana- 
nana. “ The Visuddhimagga, however, on page 639, Volume 
II of the P.T S. edn., gives eight kinds and the Abhidham- 
mattha Safigaha enumerates ten kinds. The text in our manus- 
cript has omitted one, namely, the pahsankhanupassanananaof 
the Visuddhimagga and three, namely, the sammasananana, 
paUsahkhanana and anulomanana of the Abhidhammattha 
Safigaha.'* '' The third excerpt is an enumeration of the 
37 categories of the saddhamma in a progressively numerical 
order which can be traced to the Digha Ni\aya (P.T.S. edn.. 
Ill, p. 102), the Anguttara Ni^aya (P.T.S. edn., IV, pp. 125- 
26), the Majjhima Nil^dya (p.T.S. edn., 11, p. 245) and the 
Uddna (P.T.S. edn., p. 56). The fourth excerpt classifies 
the four perfections of the Buddha to be found in the Maha- 
sihanada Suttanta of the Majjhima NiJ^dya (P.l’.S. edn., 1, 
pp. 71-72) as well as in the Catukkanipata of the Anguitara 
Nihidya {p.T .S, edn., 1, pp. 8-9). The fifth excerpt is also 
an enumeration of the fourteen kinds of knowledge of 
the Buddha which can be traced to the Paiisambhidarnagga 
of the Khuddal^a NiJ^dya {p.T.S. edn., I, p. 133). 1 he 

sixth can be traced to the Dhammapada (v. 203) and gives 
an account of the categories of things that are best. 1 he 
seventh describes the journey of the Buddha to Rajagaha 
with his disciples, the three Kassapa brothers. This episode 
of Buddha’s life can be traced to many sources but particular 
reference may be made to the Vinaya Pitak,a (P.T.S. edn., 
Mahdvagga, p. 38) and to the Jdiakatthakathd (f ausbolFs 
edn., I, p. 84). The eighth is a verse and can be traced to 
the Vinaya Piiaka (vOL. 1 ; p. 38, P.T.S. edn.). The last and 
ninth refer to the well-known praise of the Buddha as des- 
cribed in the Mahaparinibbana Sutta of the Digha Nik.dya. '^ 

An R.A.S B.^ o/j. cit. 

For these ideiUilications, see also An, R,A.S.B,f op. cit. 


6 1445B 



42 


THERA V AD A BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


A comparison of these excerpts as well as those of the 
Maunggan plates and Bawbawgyi fragments with the Pali 
canonical texts cited above would show that most of the 
excerpts, giving due allowance to the scribes’ errors and 
slips, do not correspond word for word or passage for 
passage with those to which references have already been 
cited. This would probably warrant an assumption that the 
monks in Burma had before them texts that have not 
come down to us. 

The citation of the pahccasamuppada sutta in the first 
excerpt is interesting. It consists of the sutta itself as well as 
its nirodha, but no vibhanga, and the text is just as we find 
it in the Pali canon. But what is more interesting is that it 
is perhaps one of the earliest epigraphic record of the 
PaUccasamuppada formula in Pali.^' 

Another gold-leaf, inscribed with characters exactly similar 
to the one just considered and similarly datable in the fifth 
or sixth century A.D. was recovered in 1928-29 from the 
Kyundawza village near Hmawza. The plate, broken in the 
process of cleaning in several fragments, bears an inscription 
in two lines. It is in Pali and contains the first part of 
the well-known Buddhist formula in praise of the 

Thf* PratTtya Samutpada SiiJra in its Piakrit and Sanskrit versions is 
mentioned in very ancient texts. The earlie.st in Prakrit can be found in the 
KliarostliJ inscription on a Kurrain Casket edited by Sten Konow (C,/./ , Vol. II, 
Pt. 1, No. LXXX) ; and the latest in Sanskrit can be found in a Brahmi inscription 
on two Nalanda bricks edited by Dr. N. P. Chakravarty, Ep, IncJ., Vol. 2}. 
For a very valuable and intereslinfi: note on the Sutra, see Ep. Ind., Vol. 23, 
A Note on the P raid y a Samiiipada Sutra" by Dr P. Bagchi. The result of 
Dr. Bagclii’s analysis as to tl^e chronology of the text.s as quoted in inscriptions 
iuid Chinese texts may in the light of further researches {] .R. A .S., 1938, pp. 547-53) 
be set forth as follows : Kuirarn Insc. text (consisting -of Prafitya alone/- 
c. 100 A D ; Sutrdlamk,ara text (consisting of Prailiya and Nirodha^ ~~c. 100 A D. ; 
Kasia /use. text (consisting of Pratitya and Nirodha) — c 450-75 A.D. ; Chinese 
Samytiiia text (consi.sting of Prailiya and Vibhanga — 414 A.D. ; Gopaipur bricks 
Insc, text (from both anuloma and pratiloma aspects) c. 500 A.D. ; Nalanda Insc. 
text (con si.stirig of PraUtya and V ihhanga) ~ c. 520 A.D. and now this Hmawza 
insc, text (consisting of the Poticca and the Nirodha in Pali) c. 500 A.D. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


43 


Buddha discussed above in connection with the second 
Maunggan gold-plate and the gold-leaf Buddhist note-book. 
Though in the latter portion of the second line the letters are 
not so distinct, the inscription which runs as follows can be 
read without any difficulty : 

1st line : Iti pi so bhagava araham sammasambuddho 

vijjacaranasampanno sugato lokavidu anuttaro 
purisa(dammasarathi saltha) 

2nd line : devamanussanam buddho bhagava li.'" 

^ Whatever be the textual consideration of these and 
similar other epigraphs, they would hardly affect the general 
deductions that we are even now in a position to make in 
respect of the position of Theravada Buddhism in old Prome. 
These records were inscribed in ci familiar script, long 
known to our epigraphists as the Kadamba script, of 
the fifth and sixth centuries of the Christian era. This 
script was used in the records of the Kadambas and early 
Calukyas and was prevalent in the ancient Kuntala 

''' " The formula whic}i is in praise of the F3ijcldha, is a stereotyped one 

occuirinp in tfio I'inaija and ^at(a Fifakas The Pyus appear to have iiad a pre- 
dilection for copying sliort extracts from these two Pitakas cspe^cially from tiie 
Ahhiflhamma, on gold and silver plates, which were enshrined within j:>agocJas, 
as well as on terraco'la plaqires and stones.” — Duroiselle, An. R.A.S.l.^ 1928 29, 
PP. 108-09, 

In the same /Report (p. lOZg Duroiselle informs us of the discm''ery of some 
terracotta tablets from a mound at Pyogingyi-Kon bearing efligies of the 
Buddha on the obverse. The reverse of some of these contains short extracts 
from the Abliidhamma. One tablet, of which only the lower half remains, 
contains on the obverse a short inscription. All these epigraphs are iri the same 
Kanadfi-Telugu script of the 6th-7th century A.D, The short inscription just 
mentioned, is an extract from the Abhidhamma and is quite legible : 

{adhi) patipoccajja anantara paccoyo 

The extract is probably from the Paithana or the seventh book of the Abhidhamma. 
Another tablet contains an extract which appears to be from the Dhammasarigani, 
the first book of the Abhidhamma. It may be read as follows: — 

Kusala (dhamma aku) 
sala dhamma avyak (ta) 
dhamma 



44 THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

(Kanarese district) and Andhra (comprising the valleys of 
the Krsna and the Godavari) regions. The affinity of 
the Hmawza script with the Kadamba script is obvious, 
but it seems there is also an evident resemblance with 
the script used in the records of the Iksvaku kings found 
at Nagarjunikonda,' ' and Jaggayyepeta,"^® both in the Krsna 
valley, and palaeographically datable in the third century. 
This seems to indicate that the Hmawza script belongs to 
the Deccanese variety of the Brahmi script current in the 
Andhra-Kuntala region, and is palaeographically datable in 
about the fourth and fifth centuries of the Christian era. 
The language of the above records, we have already 
seen, is Pali, and they relate themselves to the doctrines of 
Theravada Buddhism. We can, therefore, safely conclude 
in the light ot what we have discussed above, that 
(/) Buddhism of the Theravada school was already an estab- 
lished religion, at least as early as the fifth century A.D. ; 
(ii) Pali as the language of Theravada was known and under- 
stood in at least the capital city by a certain section of the 
people ; {iii) Pali canonical texts were known and studied 
in their doctrinal and most abstruse aspects ; (iv) and finally, 
the source from where this Buddhism was fed and nourished 
was evidently the Andhra-Kuntala-Pallava region of the 
Deccan and South India, from such centres as Amaravati, 
Nagarjunikonda, Kancipuram, KaveripaUanam and Uragapu- 
ram where Theravada Buddhism during these centuries had 
established famous and flourishing strongholds. All these 
places incidentally were intimately connected with the 
Buddhaghosa tradition. It is, therefore, reasonable to assume 
that Theravada Buddhism which in Burma to-day is of the 
Sinhalese form was originally introduced not from Ceylon 
but from the Deccan and South India, where in the 
time of the celebrated Chinese pilgrim Inching (671-95) 


79 An.R.SJ E., 1916, p. 92; 1927, pp. 71-74. 

A.S.S.I., I.,pp. 1 10” 1 1 1 ; Plo/es LXII and LXIII. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


45 


* all followed the Sthavira nikaya though there existed 
a few adherents of other nikayas also.’®^ This will further 
be evident from what we know of Asoka’s missionary 
activities in the Deccan and the Far South as well as 
from the evidence of the Nagarjunikonda inscriptions discuss- 
ed above, Hsiian-chuang’s itinerary and the Buddhaghosa 
tradition. All available sources seem to suggest that eastern 
Deccan and the Far South sheltered, till as late as the 6th 
and 7th centuries, important centres of Buddhist activities. 
In fact it seems that it was not till the middle of the twelfth 
century that Ceylon came io play any important role in the 
history of Buddhism in Burma. It was in 1167 that 
Panthagu, the then Primate of the Burmese kingdom, chose 
Ceylon as his refuge, and in 1 180 Uttarajiva, the Primate 
who had succeeded Panthagu, returned from a pilgrimage to 
Ceylon as the First Pilgrim of Ceylon. ’ In 1190 Capata, 
Utiarajiva’s disciple, earned the title of the “ Second Pilgrim 
of Ceylon.” and on his return tried to convert the whole 
realm to the Sinhalese form. These missions coupled 
with Capata s attempts to .Sinhalese Burmese Buddhism 
led to the gradual predominance of Sinhalese Buddhism 
in Burma and the wiping out of even the memory of the 
original source. But to this chapter of the history of the 
religion in Burma we shall have occasion to turn later on. 

It is somewhat curious to find that in the whole 
range of Pali commentaries and chronicles composed in 
Ceylon during the fifth, sixth and seventh centuries, there 
is nowhere any mention of the old kingdom or capital of the 
Pyus which, as testified to by the Pali inscriptions and 
Buddhist sculptures and monuments datable from about the 
sixth to about the tenth century, was an important centre 
where Theravada Buddhism had a flourishing existence. 
There in the Sinhalese chronicles and in the huge mass of 


81 


lakakusu, J tsing's Records of the Buddhist Religion, pp. xxiii-xxiv, 



46 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


con7mentarial literature incidental references to places, made 
well-known by their association with Buddhism, are but 
numerous ; one can, therefore, reasonably expect to find a 
reference to this centre of Buddhism in Suvannabhtimi in the 
Mahavamsa or at least in the CulloVarnsa, but there is none. 
It is not unlikely that the place has been mentioned in some 
name which has not yet been identified; or, as the Buddhism 
of old Prome was not introduced from Ceylon and had 
consequently nothing to do with their country, the chroniclers 
and commentators did not feel inclined to mention it in 
their works. It may also be accounted for by the secular 
hostility during all these centuries between the natives of 
Ceylon and the Indians of the south, a fact that naturally 
disposed the Sinhalese authors to ignore the work of their 
enemies. 


Vil 

BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME {contd.) : C. 673-700 A.D. 

The deductions from epigraphic evidence are strikingly 
corroborated by Chinese literary sources of a period closely 
following the date of the inscriptions. The most important 
evidence in this respect is supplied by the itinerary of the 
celebrated Chinese pilgrim Tching. But it seems most 
unfortunate to the student of the history of Buddhism and 
the different Buddhist schools that this devoted scholar of the 
religion who travelled by sea from China to India Via the 
ancient kingdom of iSrivijaya, and spent about twenty-five years 
(671 '•695) abroad interesting himself in the study of Buddhism 
could find no opportunity to visit any of the regions border- 
ing the sea-coast of Burma or situated at some distance to 
the interior. But if he could not actually visit any country 
in Burma, as he could not do most of the islands of the 
Malay archipelago and countries of Indo-China of which 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


47 


he speaks nevertheless,^" he certainly took pains to acquaint 
himself about the state of the religion in all these countries 
lying to the east of the Bay. That he succeeded to some 
extent is proved by a note in his Nan hai chi k.uei nai fa 
ch' nan (ch. I, f. 3, verso). 

“ At the (eastern) extremity (of the eastern frontier countrie.s, r.e., East 
India), there is the so-called ‘ Great Black’ mountain, which is, I think, on the 
.southern boundary of Tu-fan (Tibet, according to Takakusii). Tliis mountain is 
said to be on the south-west of S hu-Chuan (Ssu-Ch’uan) from which one can reach 
litis mountairt after a journey of a month or so. Southward from this and close to 
the sea-coast there is a country called ^riksetra (Shih-Ii-ch’a-ta-lo) ; on the South- 
east of this is Lankasu (Lang-chia-shu) ; on the east of this is Dva (ra) pati (She- 
ho'po-ti) ; at the extreme east Lin-i. The inhabitant.s of ail the.se countries greatly 
revere the three Gems (evidently the Buddha, Dharma and Samgha) . There 
are many who hold firmly to the precepts and perform the begging duhia which 
constitutes a custom in these coun tries.’’ 


lakakusu, 1-ising s Records of the Buddhist Religion, pp. 8- 1 I. 

1 he begging dhuta is one of the thirteen dhutaries which are enumerated 
in Pali in the following order: 

a. Pamsukulikangam 

b. I ecivarikaiigam 

c. Pindapatikarigarn 

d. Sapadanacarikaiigam (begging from door to door) 

c. Ekasanikaiigam 

/. Patlapindikaiigam (begging with a bowl) 

g. fChalupacchabhattikangam 

h. Arannakaiigam 

i. Riikkhamulikatigam 

j. Abbhokasikafig^arn 

k. . So-sanikaiigaro 

/. Yalhasanthatikangam 

m. Nesajjikarigarrj 

Of these Nos. d and / are not found in the Sanskrit list of Dhutaiigas (for 
Chinese counter-terms, see Takakusii, Ibid., pp. 56-57: Childers, Dhutangam). 
I'ching’s reference perhaps includes all the three kinds of begging. 

Takakusu, Ibid., pp. 9- 10 ; Pelliot, BEFEO, 1904, pp. 4'>5-06; Chavannes, 
Beligieux Eminents, p. 58 n. 

As to the state of the religion in Lin-i, there i.s a further reference in i-cliing’s 
Record (lakakusu, op. cit., p, 12) : “ Setting out from Kwari-chou (Huan-chou), 
a district in Annam, right to the south one will reach Pi-king after a journey of 
father more than half-a-month on foot, or after only five or six tides if aboard ship; 
and proceeding till southward.s one ai rives at Campa, i e. , Lin-i. In this country 
Buddhists generally belong to the Aryasamn^itinihaya, and there are also a few 
lollowers of the SarVastivadanikaya. ^ 



48 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Of the countries alluded to in the above passage, Lind 
has been sought to be identified with Campa, She-ho-po-ti 
with Dvaravati (mod* Ayuthia in Siam), Shih-)i-ch’a' ta~lo 
with Sriksetra or the old kingdom of Prome (whose capital 
is represented by the ruins of the village of Hmawza, 6 
miles to the south of the present town of Prome), and 
Lang-chia-shu with the kingdom of Chia-mo lang-chia or 
Kamalanka of Hsiian-chuang/' Of these, the identifications 
of Lin-i, She-ho-po-ti (also mentioned by Hsilan-chuang as 
To lo'-po-ti) and Shih-li-ch'a-to-lo are generally accepted, 
the latter country having also been mentioned by Hsiian- 
chuang as situated to the north-east of Samatata by the side 
of a great sea in a valley of mountains. 

But it is difficult to be equally definite with regard to 
Lang chia-shu or Lahkasu, though 1 have elsewhere sought 
to identify the place with the entire Tennasserim division 
{Sarisl^rit Buddhism in Burma, pp. 24-29). It is generally 
assumed that I-ching’s Lang-chia-shu or Lankasu is the 
same as Hsiian-chuang's Chia-modang-chia or Kamalanka, 
the reason being that Lang-chia-shu is placed by i-ching 
exactly in the same relation to iSriksetra and Dvaravati 
(To-lo-po-ti) as Chia-mo-lang-chia is placed by Hsiian- 
chuang in relation to the same two kingdoms (/.e., Sriksetra 
and Dvaravati).^' 


For these identifications, see Takakusii, op. cit., pp. li-lii ; Phayre, History oj 
Burma, p, 32; Beal, Buddhist Records of the Ik" estern World, Vol. II, p. 200, n. 34 ; 
Chavannes, op. cit. ; and above all Peliiot’s “ Deux itineraires ” in BEFEO., 1904, 

“ Flsiian-chijang’s orientation of .'^rlksetra is evidently wrong; for it lies 
far to the south-east, not to the north-east of Samatata. The only solution that 
occuis to me is that ^sriksetra means (as is not improbable), not the capital, but 
the kingdom presumably of the Pyu ; that at the time of Hsiian-chuang the Pyu 
kingdom extended, not as Phayre conjectured; “ for a few miles north and south 
of Prome, but as in 806 A.D., over upper Burma; and that the road into Burma 
from Samatata started in a north-easterly direction, probably leading througli 
Manipur and joining the Karnarupa route detailed by Chia Fin (785-805 A.D) 
(/BR5., XIV. II, p. 161), 

“ 1 hence north-east (I’.e,, from Samatata) beside the great sea in a Vtdley 
of the hills, is the kingdom of Shi-li-ch’a-ta-lo ; thence to the south-east, in a 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


49 


There can thus be no objection to the two kingdoms 
being the same ; nor can there be any valid argument 
against their being identified, as has been done,'’'* with 
Pegu and the deltaic region of the Irrawady. But as 
Lang-chia-shu has been identified with a considerable 
number of similar names found in Chinese and other sources, 
possibilities of identification of the kingdom with other 
regions in Indo-China have very naturally suggested them- 
selves, and it is difficult to ignore them. It is pointed out 
that Lang-chia or Lang-chia-shu is mentioned several times 
by I-cliing as a port visited by the pilgrims whose lives he 
records, on their way to India To quote one such passage : 

Tao ltn, a Chinese pilgrim, was tossed bn shipboard over the seas of the 
south. He pas.sed the pillars of Copper and r., cached tiie kingdom of Lang-cliia, 
lie crossed tlie kingdom of Ho-lirig (Java) and traversed the country of the naked 

people (Nicobar) After several years he reached Bastern India, in the kingdom 

of I'an-mo-li-ti { I amralipd) . " 

It seems clear from this passage that 1-ching’s Lang- 
chia (-shu) “ was on the west coast of the Peninsula, on 
the route somewhere between Annam and java ; and if 
so, how can it be both south-east of 5nksetra and west of 
Dvaravati which is placed on the basin of the Menam ? 1- 
ching, when he sent his Lives of the Pilgrims back to China, 
had lived about eight years in the seas of the south, mostly 
at Palembang. Could he have made any mistake about 

the position of Lang-chia-shu ? Or did he know, 

without troubling to distinguish them, two kingdoms of the 
name Lang-chia ( shu), the one somewhere in Tennasserim, 
the other on the east side of the Peninsula south of the 
isthmus of Kra ? Or is 1-ching here merely echoing 

corner of the great sea is the kingdom of Chia-mo-lang-cltia : tdience in the east , 

! he kingdom of To-lo-po-ti. Thi.s i.s from Hsiian-chuaTig's Records ] compare 
d with l-ching quoted above. 

Op. cih 

Chavannes, Religieux Eminenta, p. 100. 

7 H445B 



50 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Hsuan-chuang, but substituting for Kamalanka (a name 
unknown to him), one that was familiar, Lang-chia-shu, 
without much regard for geographical accuracy ? ’ ’ *’ These 
are some of the very pertinent questions that have been 
raised, and they have to be considered very carefully. 

Meanwhile, Lang-chia-shu has been taken to be iden- 
tical with the kingdom of Lang-ya or Lang-ya-hsun which 
is referred to in the Liang shu (ch. 54, f. 3 verso) and with 
that of Lang-ya-hsu mentioned in connection with Ch ang 
Chun’s embassy to Ch’ih-t’u kingdom in 607-08 A.D. (Pei 
Shih, ch. f. 3 recto; Sui shu, ch. 82. f. 1. verso).’" 

Without going into the details of these texts which have 
been ably weighed and considered by Chavannes, Schlegel, 
Pelliot and Luce,”’ it may be said that the position of 
these kingdoms as described in the Chinese texts referred 
to, seem to be quite in accordance with that of 1-ching’s 
Lang-chia-shu, i.e., they were situated somewhere in the 
east coast of the Malay Peninsula south of the Isthmus 
of Kra in the southern sea. Furthermore, Lang-chia-shu 
has also been identified with Ling-yu-ssu-chia mentioned 
by Chau-ju-kua (1225) as one of the fifteen dependencies of 
San-fo-ch’i (Palembang = 8rivijaya = Sumatra), which again, 
^cedes thinks," is the same as (a) Ilangasogam oftheTanjore 
Tamil inscription of Rajendracola (1012-1042), and (b) the 
Lenkasuka, a dependency of the Majapahit, mentioned in 
the old Javanese poem Nagarakrtagama (14th century). Prof. 
Peliiot thinks that Lang-chia-su = Lang-ya-hsiu = Lang-ya- 
hsu =Ling-ya-ssu (-chia) = Lenkasuka were one and the same 

Luce, JBRS., Of), cii., pp. 162-^63. 

91 ]bid.,pp. 164-65. 

Pelliot, op. ciL, BEFhO.y 1903 and 1904, Cftavannets, op. cii. ; Schlegel, 
T'oung Pao^ IX. 193 ; Luce, op. cit. 

Chau-jii-kua, Ed. by Hirth and Rockhill. This kingdom is also referred 
to as l,.,ir)g-ya-ssu. 

9^ BEFiEO., 1918, No. 6. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


51 


kingdom which he identifies with Tennasserim. Ferrand 
agrees with him but further identifies it with llahgasogam, 
Locac of Marco Polo”'' (end of the 1 3th century), and 
finally with Lang-saka of an Arabic manuscript of the 
16th century, situated on the east coast of the Malay 
Peninsula.”' He, therefore, fixes the position of the kingdom 
on the Isthmus of Ligor. But ^oedes, while finding in 
Lang-chia-shu of 1-ching, Lang-ya-hsiu of the Liang shu 
and the Lang-ya-hsii of the Sui shu one and the same place, 
sees in the llahgasogam of Rajendracola's inscription, the 
Ling-ya-ssy-chia of Chau-ju-kua and the Lenkasuka of the 
Nagarakrtagama quite a different place."’ He identifies 
the former with Tennasserim just as Prof. Pelliot does, and 
the latter with Gunong Jerai or Kedah Peak, in the south of 
the Kedah state. 

1 have in short reproduced above the various identifica- 
tions of 1-ching’s Lang-chia-shu and the data on which 
they are based. None of them evidently is free from 
objections. Prof. Pelliot was obviously influenced by the fact 
that l-ching located the kingdom south-east of Sriksetra and 
west of Dvaravati which one cannot certainly ignore. But 
1 do not understand Ferrand’s arguments for placing it on 
the Isthmus of Ligor ; his identification does neither suit 
the statement that it was situated south-east of Sriksetra 
and west of Dvaravati nor the fact which 1-ching elsewhere 
seems to indicate, according to some, that it was on the 
opposite coast of the Peninsula somewhere on the route 
between Annam and Java. The first identification of ^oedes 
is understandable but the distinction he makes between the 
two sets of names is open to objections which have been 


BEFEO., 1904, pp. 405-407, 

Yule and Cordier’s edn. Vol. !I, p. 276. 

97 JA.JuilleUAoui, 1918, pp. 134-45, 153-54. 

98 A translation ol the Keddah Annals, /. Incl. Arch., Ill, pp. 11-13. 



52 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


ably pointed out by Prof. Luce.’*^ For the present, however, 
I am rather disposed to agree, though it is not conclusive, 
with Prof. Pelliot, and identify I-ching’s Lang-chia-shu with 
at least that portion of the present Tennasserim division which 
extends from Tavoy to Tennasserim, /.e., the region watered 
by the Tennasserim river which is really to the south-east 
of Sriksetra and west of Dvaravati (in the lower valley of 
the MenamT’ '^ As for other references by l~ching to 
Lang-chia-shu, I think they can be reconciled in the follow- 
ing way : the boats that carried the Chinese Buddhist pilgrims 
kept generally to the coast line till they passed Fii-nan (or 
Chen-la as it was then called) whence they did no longer 
follow the coast line, but favoured by the current crossed 
the gulf of Siam almost diagonally till they came to anchor 
somewhere at the head of the gulf on the east coast of the 
peninsula, whence they crossed over to Ho~ling or Java, 
and thence via Nicobar to Tamralipti. For the rest, we 
can safely assume that the kingdom of Lang-chia-shu 
extended from coast to coast of the peninsula. 

Accepting this identification for the present, we are now 
in a position to use more or less definitely I-ching’s data 
as to the state of Buddhism in the countries we are concerned 
with in our present subject of study. Of the various 
countries in Indo-China that practised Buddhism in his time, 

JBRS., XIV, II, pp. 168-69. 

Per>onaily J wculd likt* to assume that Lang-chia-shu was practically 
identical with the entire 1 enas.serim Divisiofi of to-day extending from I haton to 
l eriassenni. Tin: position then of the various kingdoms (not of the islands but 
of the continent) bordering the southern seas may be stated briefly as follows : 
First, Shi-li-cira-ta-lo or Sriksetra, /.e., the old kingdom of Prome of the P’iao or 
Pyu ; second-, Lang-cliia-.sliu or Chia-mo-lang-chia (Kamalaiika) to the south-west 
of .‘Sriksetra and west of Dvaravati; third She-ho-po-ti or Fo-lo-po-ti (Dvaravati) on 
tlie lower valley of the Menam in modern Siam ; fourth, P‘an-p’an to the south of 
Dvaravati and south-vvesl of Lin-i (Uampa) in a corner of the sea; fifth, Chen-la 
or old Fu nan (Cambodi^i) to the east and soutii-east of P’an-p’an ; and lastly, 
Lin-i to tlie extreme east extending as far as the coast. 

Cijavannes. Rcligtcnix Emmenis, pp. 57, 78, 100. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


53 


puB.t Btuing ui papnpui Xjaiiugap SI ‘-a-i ‘3uo 

other also we have, for the present, identified with a region 
that is included in the same country. According to I-ching, 

‘ the inhabitants of both these countries greatly revere 
the “Three Gems’’, and many of them hold .firmly to the 
precepts and perform the begging dhuta which constitutes 
a custom in these countries.’ That in one of the two 
countries, namely, Lang-chia-shu, Chinese Buddhist priests 
used to be received in those days with honour and treated 
with a great deal of respect will be evident from the two 
following passages which we quote on the authority of 
Chavannes ; 

I-latig, Chih-itgan and l-hsiian, three C hinese pilgrims, having reached We- 
ir i (a small sea-port west of Pakhoi in Canton) sailed on a merchant ship f hey 

patised Fii-nan, and anchored in the coutitry of Lang-chia-shu ; and were treated by 
the king of that counlr 3 '’ with Cf^remo^;v tfiat is usually accorded to very honoiired iind 
distinguished guests. 

Further, Tao lin, another Chinese pilgrim, also visited 
the kingdom ol Lang-chia ; he too was welcomed by the 
king of the country with the greatest courtesy, and was 
treated with utmost care and respect. ' 

It now remains to be considered : to which school this 
Buddhism of ^riksetra and Lang-chia-shu (in the 7th cen- 
tury) really belonged ? On this point, I-ching himself, I 
think, gives us a very illuminating and a most definite lead. 
He speaks of the four nikayas or schools of Buddhism in his 
time: the Aryamahasanghiko the AryasthaVira 

nil^aya, the Aryamulasarvastivada niJ^aya, and the Arya- 
sammiii nik^ya, though “ which of the four schools should 
be grouped with the Mahayana or with the Fhnayana is not 
determined.” In South India generally and Ceylon 
exclusively 'all follow the Sthavira ni\ayad or Theravdda, 
which was certainly included in the Hmaydna. Sammiti 

Clravannes, RcUgieux Eminetiis, p. 57 
I hie}., p. 100 



54 


IHERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


nil^aya also evidently was a Hinayanist school.'”'' 1-ching 
seems also to include the Sarvestivada nik,aya in limayana. 
For, when he speaks of the “ Islands of the Southern Sea, 
consisting of more than ten countries, where the Mulasarvas- 
tivada nil^aya has been almost universally adopted, he 
states rather baldly that “Buddhism is embraced in all these 
countries, and mostly the system of the Hinayana (Smaller 
Vehicle) is adopted except in Malayu (Sri Bhoja = Sri Vijaya = 
Sumatra) where there are a few who belong to the Mahayana 
(Larger Vehicle).’’ And on this point 1 ching certainly could 
not misstate facts, for he himself subscribed to the 
school of the Sarvastivadins.""’ This is more clear in 
the statement he elsewhere makes : “In Northern India 
(where ‘all belong to the SarVastiVada nil^aya, though 
we sometimes meet the followers of the M ahasanghik.a 
ni/foya’) and in the islands of the Southern Seas they 
generally belong to the Hinayana, while those in the 
Divine Land or Red Province (meaning in both cases 
China) devote themselves to the Mahayana ; in other places 
(obviously excluding South India and Ceylon where Slhavita 
nil^aya was followed) some practise in accordance with one 
some with the other. It, therefore, follows that 1-ching 


Hyiian-chuaiig, the older pilgrim, defmilely labels the Sammitiya school 

as Hinayanist, Watters, Yuan Chwang, II, pp. 178, 242, 246, 247, 249, 252, 256, 
238, etc. 

“ In I ching s time the Sarvastivada school flourished most in North India 
and in Magadha in Central India (Madhya-desa) , and had also seme followers in 
East and West ; liut was entirely absent in C'eylon and had very few adherents in 
South India. No other school, so far as we can ascertain, ever flourished so widely 
as the Sarvastivada, either before or after the seventh century ; though its adherents 
in India alone, in Hsiian chuang’s time weie not so numerous as those of other 
schools" JHAS., 1819, p. 420; 1 akakusu, op. cif., xxii. 

l-ching's line of distinction between the two Buddhist systems, Hinayana 
and Maliayana, is likely to be considererd liberal from the orthodox point of view. 
“ Those who worship the Bodhisattva and read the Mahayana Sutras are called 
the Mahayani.st.s, while those who do not perform these are called the Hinayanists 
1 here are but two kinds of the so-called Mahayana ; the Madhyamikas (of Nagairjuna) 
and Yoga (or Yogacara of Asanga).” Ibid., pp. 14-15. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


55 


considered, and rightly so, SarVastitiada nil^aya as belonging 
to the Hinayana, though he does not expressly say so. 

From 1-Ching’s clear and somewhat detailed account of 
the distribution of the different schools of Buddhism, we are 
thus, 1 think, in a position to assume that the two countries 
of Burma (Srlksetra and Kamalanka or Lahkasu), where 
Buddhism was practised in his time, belonged to the Hina- 
yana which included not only the Theravada, or Sthaoira 
niJ^dya as 1-ching calls it, but the SarvdstiVdda nil^dya as 
well. The prevalence of the latter sect may, in our 
present state of knowledge, seem somewhat startling, but, 1 
think, we have somewhat independent evidence to 
prove its existence, at least in the capital of the old Prome 
kingdom in about the seventh and eighth centuries, and at 
Pagan in the subsequent centuries, till the twelfth (see, my 
Sansl^rit Buddhism in Burma, 1932). As to the prevalence 
of the Theravada, the Pali inscriptions found at Hmawza and 
discussed elsewhere bear ample and eloquent testimony. 

Vlll 

BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME (contd.) 

//' 

.A' 

EVIDENCE OF t’aNG CHRONICLES : C. 800 A.D. 

But before we take leave of the information afforded by 
valuable Chinese sources we have to consider one or two 
relevant passages relating to the kingdom of P’iao (Pyu), in 
about the eighth century, from the chronicles of the T ang 
dynasty of China (61 S-OO? A.D.),'"' so far as they relate to our 

Hsiian-chuang also very loosely distinguishes between the two, though he had 
great personal leanings towards Mahayana. 1 his explains why he sometimes 
describes even the Sthavira .school as belonging to Mahayana. See Walters, op, cit., 

II. pp. 136, 198,234,241. 

Chin-V ang-sha of Li Hsu, etc., and Hsin-t' ang-shti of Ou Yang Hain and 
Sung Ch’i. 



56 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


present subject of study. The Hsin-t' ang-shu (ch. 222 C, 
f. 2 verso) mentions eighteen kingdoms as vassal states of 
P’iao who are mentioned elsewhere in the same chronicle as 
having thirty-two chief settlements that were presumably 
distributed over the region extending from at least the mouths 
of the Salween in the south to so far north as to include the 
whole of Upper Burma. The capital of the P’iao or Pyus 
has long been successfully identified with Hsiian-Chuang's 
Shi-li-cha-ta-lo (^riksetra) or Prome ; the evidence therefore 
of the T’ang chronicles in respect of the religion of the 
country is certainly of interest inasmuch as it follows close 
upon that of hching. 

** When ihe P iao King goes out in liis palanquin, he lies on a conch of golden 
cord. For long distances l\e rides an elephant. He has several hundred women to 
wait on him. The wail of his city built of green i.sh glazed tiles, is 160 li round, with 
twelve gales and with pagodas at each of tlie four corners. T he people live 
inside. .. 7 he.v flisJikc tak.i'^S 6 / 0 . They greet each other by elapsing the arm 
with the hand. They know how to make astronomical calculations.^^® They are 
Buddhists and haffe a hundred n^onasleries, with bricks of glass embellished 
with gold arid silver vermilion, gay colours and red kino.. At seven years 0 / age, 
the people cut ihdr hair and enter a monastery : if at the age of twenty they hove 
not grasped the doctrine they return to lay estate . For cloths they use skirts made 
of cotton, for they hold that silk .should not be worn as it involves the taking of 
life ...” 

The annalist continues, “There is a huge elephant (or 
image) a hundred feet high ; litigants burn incense and kneel 

Sec, P/IFEO,, 1904, F'^tdliol s Deux I tineraires, p. 223; also Fcrrand, JA., 
Marz A vrih 1919, p. 251 ; Luce, JBRS., p. 161. 

The remains that are clearly defined of this extensive wall can still be 
seen round the ruins of tlie city ; and three of the four pagoda.s at the four corners 
can perliaps be traced in the Bawbawgyi, tfie Payagyi and the Pyama stupas. 

This probably refers to the Brahmana court astronomers whose influence 
in the Buddhist courts of Indo China was considerable. They are again and again 
mentioned in Mon Inscriptions of the Ilth-13th centuries. It is not improbable that 
the Buddhists liad some knowledge of astronomical calculations learnt from the 
Brahmana priests whose existence in the old capital of Pronie during these centuries 
is proved by the discovery of Brahrnanical images mainly Visnuite, Ray. Brahma- 
nical Gods in Burma, Calcutta, 1932, 

Parker, Burma with special reference to the relations with China, 1893, 

p. 12. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


57 

before it, reflecting within themselves whether they be right 
or wrong, and then they retire. When there is any disaster 
or plague, the king also kneels before it and blames 
himself.” 

The evident conclusion is that during the eighth and 
ninth centuries Buddhism in the capital city of Prome conti- 
nued as strong as ever, and claimed — this at least is 
the impression left by the passage quoted above — the 
large majority of the population, each individual member of 
which was required to spend some specified years of life as a 
monk, a custom that is still widely prevalent in Burma. 
The reference to a hundred monastic establishments need not 
be taken literally, but it certainly indicates a flourishing state 
of the religion in the country where the doctrine of ‘ non- 
killing ’ had taken so deep a root as not to escape the notice 
of even foreign sojourners. 


IX 

BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME {contd.) 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE: C. 500-950 A.D. 

What is indicated by epigraphic and literary evidences 
discussed in the preceding sections receives direct and 
definite corroboration from what is revealed by archaeological 
finds made at the ruined site of old Prome. 1 hese finds 
range from at least about the beginning of the sixth to 
about the end of the tenth century A.D., and consist of a 
number of ancient monuments, a large number of stone 
and bronze images, terracotta tablets with or without 
inscriptions and reliquaries, all at and around Hmawza, 
a village full of ruins, five miles to the south of the 
modern town of Prome, and belonging definitely to the 
Buddhist creed. Out of this huge mass of evidence that 


a-1445B 



58 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


has been collected in the small local museum and in 
the office of the Archaeological Survey of Burma and des- 
cribed in the Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey of 
Burma and India, a few only of the significant ones will be 
discussed here. 

A consideration of the sculptures in the small brick monu- 
ments that still stand in the midst of the ruins of the old 
city and of the relics yielded by excavations round and about 
their bases, notably the Bebe, the Lemeythna and the Yahan- 
dagu, enables us to ascertain that these monuments were 
all dedicated to the worship of the Buddha ; and judged 
from their sculptural and architectural style they cannot 
be assigned to a date later than the seventh or eighth 
century A.D. It is possible further to assume tentatively 
from a consideration of the art and iconography of the 
images that these temples were in the main patronised by the 
followers of the Theravada faith. And, if the Pali stone 
inscription fragments found from the debris of ruins of the 
railings and base of the famous Bawbawgyi stupa had 
originally formed part of the monument which, it seems, they 
did, then we can assuredly count the Bawbawgyi also as one of 
the many religious foundations cf the Theravadins at Hmawza. 
So must also have been the monuments from the ruins 
of which the longer Pali epigraphs discussed in a previous 
section were recovered, since such records, whether on terra- 
cotta tablets or gold leaves, were presumably deposited inside 
the shrines as sacred relics. Other monuments such as the 
East Zegu, the Mahtaw village stupa, the Payagyi and the 
Payama stupas were also evidently dedicated to the worship 
of the Master and his faith. 

The stone figure sculptures attached to some of these 
temples and terracotta votive tablets recovered from their 
relic chambers or from their debris of ruins do not all seem to 
have belonged to the contemporary traditionof art of the regions 
whence the Pali epigraphs described in the previous section 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


59 


or below in this section seem to have owed their inspiration, 
namely the Andhra-Pallava zone of India. A considerable 
number seems, however* to affiliate themselves with the 
north-east Indian tradition of the later Guptas, and not 
unoften have inscriptions on them in early eastern Nagari 
characters. To select only one example at random, the main 
image of the East Zegu temple is one of the Buddha himself 
flanked by what appears to be two bejewelled and crowned atten- 
dants. The attitude is one of preaching and the wheel flanked 
by two gazelles and two worshippers in the attitude of adoration 
on the pedestal seem to relate the incident to the famous 
clharmacakyapravartana at the Mrgadava at Sarnath. This 
piece of sculpture plainly and frankly derives its style and 
iconography from the familiar East Indian tradition. “ It 
can hardly be assigned to a later date, ^ says Sir John 
Marshall, “ than the seventh century A.D. and may be 
earlier. " Such scenes from the Buddha's life on terracotta 
tablets or stone reliefs recovered from the ruins of old Prome 
are by no means rare and the majority of them belongs to 
the east Indian tradition of art and iconography, and may 
safely be ascribed to a date ranging from about the 6th to 
about the 10th century A.D. Apart from the monuments 
referred to above, every year the excavator's spade is bring- 
ing to light the ruins of large and small brick monuments 
that appear from the contents of sculptures, terracotta votive 
tablets and other relics recovered from their ruins to have 
been dedicated to the faith of the Buddha* and almost all of 
them by reason of the style of the sculptures or the paleo- 
graphy of the epigraphs on the votive tablets may safely be 
ascribed to a date between the 6th and the 10th century 
A.D, 

The ruined site of the old capital of the Pyus extending 
over many miles have so far yielded to the excavator’s spade 


■'2 An.R.A.S.B., 1909-10, Art 33. 



60 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


a very large number of sculptures in stone and bronze, 
terracotta votive tablets and other objects that are evidently 
affiliated to the Buddhist creed. Not unoften the sculptures, 
and in most cases the votive tablets bear short epigraphs on 
them \n Pyu or Pali or Sanskrit or sometimes in Pyu and Pdi 
or Pyu and Sanskrit written in either the Kadamba-Telegu 
script of the Andhra-Pallava region or in later Gupta-Brahmi 
of north-eastern India. It is not necessary here to refer to 
each one of such finds whose number is legion and descrip- 
tions of which can be gathered from the Annual Reports 
of the Archaeological Surveys of India and Burma; 

for our purpose it would be enough if we could bring 

out the significance of some typical and representative 

objects. But before we can turn to a consideration of these 
archaeological documents it is necessary to take notice of the 
few faint lines of the political history of the kingdom of 

Prome during the four centuries, from about the seventh to 
about the tenth, of the Christian era, to which period the 
monuments, sculptures, bronzes, terracotta tablets, etc., may 
be assigned, stylistically and paleographically. 

Besides casual references in the chronicles of the T ang 
dynasty to the eighteen vassal states of P’iao and thirty-two 
different settlements to which reference has already been made 
in a previous section, there has been found from the ruins of 
Hmawza a number of epigraphs in the little known Pyu langu- 
age referred to above. They are embossed or inscribed on 
earthenware funerary urns or on stone, and record the names 
of certain kings of old Prome with endings in ‘ varman ’ and 
‘ vikrama.’ The first set of these names were found recorded 
in a number of inscriptions on several funerary urns recovered 
in 1911-13 from an ancient vault near the Payagi pagoda ; 
these inscriptions record the names of kings Suriyavikrama, 
Harivikrama and Sihavikrama, evidently of Hmawza, who 
ruled according to Dr. Blagden, the learned editor of these 
inscriptions, presumably in the seventh and eighth centuries 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


61 


A.D.^^^ The second set of names which, by the way, 
happens to be the names of a king Sri Prabhuvarma and his 
queen Sri Prabhudevi were found recorded in another one 
line Pyu epigraph inscribed around the lower rim of a votive 
stupa. This stupa, it should be mentioned, has another line 
of Pali inscription around the rim of the top of the cover, 
in a script which has long been recognised by M. Finot for 
the first time,’’^ to have very close affinities with the Kadamba 
script (Kanada-Telegu, according to Biihler) of South India, 
,of the fifth and sixth centuries of the Christian era. The 
significance of Pali epigraphs in this particular script will be 
discussed in a succeeding section ; for the present we shall 
confine ourselves to the importance of these Pyu epigraphs 
with special reference to their bearing on the subject of our 
study. 

The name-ending ‘ varman ' led M. Duioiselle very 
naturally to surmise * that the ruling dynasty or dynasties, 
apparently of Indian blood, had their original home some- 
where in South India, evidently in the Cola-F^allava country 
where royal dynasties with name-endings in ' varman ’ were 
rather common ; in fact, the kings of the Pallava dyanasty 
had their name-endings in 'varman/ There are also 
reasons for assuming that there were two ruling dynasties, 
a ‘ varman (e.g., ^n-Prabhuvarman) and a ‘ vikrama ’ 
dynasty (e.g., Suriyavikrama, Harivikrama, etc.), both 
having their original home in South India. A long inscrip- 
tion, not in Pyu or Pali, but in Sanskrit and interspersed with 

Blagdffn, Ep. Ind,. VIJ, pp. 127-32. Dr. Blagden told iru,' in 1936 that 
he was no longer sure about these dates. 

} “ Un nouveau document sui le bucldhisrne Ijirman, JA., XX, 

JuilAoui, 1912-27, pp. 121 ft. 

,5./. , 1926-27, p. 172 and plate XXXVIII, o. 1 hese inscriptions 
have not yet been edited, but a short notice appeared in above. 

1 he kings of the South Indian Kadamba dynasty had their name -endings 
in “ vikrama.” C/. the nigamana of the Ahhiclhamrnavatdra of Buddhadatta who 
was a native of Uragapura (Uraiyur) and flourished during the reign of king 
Acyutavikranta or Acyuta-vikrama. 



62 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Pyu words and phrases which are nothing but translations of 
the Sanskrit version, in clear north-eastern Gupta-Brahmi 
script of about the sixth and seventh centuries was very 
recently recovered from the ruins of the old city."' This 
record is important from more than one point of view. It 
supplies a definite starting-point in the political history of old 
Prome and throws considerable light on the contemporary 
history of Buddhism in the capital city. Moreover, it contri- 
butes substantially to the elucidation of the origin of the 
Pyu script. 

It may now definitely be stated that the Pyu script is 
nothing but a local adaptation of the Indian Brahmi script ; 
and so far as the evidence of the few^ inscriptions discovered 
up to date may help us to ascertain, it seems that this 
adaptation took place sometime about the filth century A.D. ; 
for Pyu alphabets and numerals show a very close resem- 
blance with those of Brahmi of the Gupta period. But it is 
not yet possible definitely to ascertain whether it was the 
north-eastern or southern Brahmi that served as the source for 
the newly-evolved script, though it may be pointed out that 
the elongated character of the alphabets is more southern than 
north-eastern. 

The epigraph alluded to above is inscribed on the four 
sides of the pedestal of a torso of a Buddha image seated 
in dhyanamudra and VajraparyQf\\a attitude. Stylistically 
the image is definitely of late Gupta tradition and may safely 
be ascribed to exactly the same period as determined by the 
palaeography of the inscription. The record in beautiful 
Sanskrit verse seems to have been set up by king Jayacandra- 
vaiman at the instance of his religious teacher (arya) with 

This important itcoid, llie first of its kind in Eurma, is still unpublished. 
Hut ttie enurtfsy of Mr. K. N. Dikshit of the Archa ological Survey of India, has 
enabled me to study the record, a summary of the results of which I am incorporat- 
ing here. 1 acknowledge Mr. Dikshit’s kindness and courtesy with thanks. A 
notice of tl.e inscription appeals, however, in An. R.A.S.I.t 1927-28, pp. 128, 143. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


63 


the express purpose of establishing and enhancing peace, 
amity and good-will, it seems, between Jayacandravarman, 
the king and his younger brother {tasyanuja) Harivikrama 
who had built two cities {pwadvayam), evidently side by side, 
and one for each, even in one day (ekoik^divase). The 
import of the record allows us to arrive at some tentative 
conclusions : first, there presumably have existed some 
rivalry between the two brothers Jayacandravarman and 
Harivikrama, and the rivalry was put an end to it by 
providing two cities, one for each, from where they 
ruled, probably side by side and contemporaneously, so 
that there could be no loss of peace and good-will between the 
two brothers. Secondly , jayacandravarman and Hari- 
vikrama both belonged to one and the same dynasty, not to 
two different dynasties by reason of their having had different 
name-endings, though it is possible that they had branched 
off in two different lines and ruled separately. There was 
thus no ‘ vikrama ’ or ‘ varman ’ dynasty in Prome as hither- 
to assumed. The different sets of names so far known of this 
Indianised dynasty of Prome can be provisionally arranged, 
in the light of the above assumption, in the following 
way ; — 

First line Second line 

Suriyavikrama(688 A.D.?) 

Jayacandravarman tasyanuja Harivikrama (695 ?) 

Sri Prabhuvarma(n) ... Sihavikrama (718 ?) 

Sri Prabhudevi 

Thirdly, the dynasty seems to have become Indianised to 
the extent of not only accepting Buddhism as their religion 
but also Indian names, a practice that was becoming universal 
in Indonesia and Insulindia. They had also adopted an Indian 
script and an Indian language, in the present instance north- 
eastern Brahmi of about the seventh century and Sanskrit 
respectively. It should be mentioned in this connection that 



64 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


the image round whose pedestal the epigraph is found 
inscribed belongs to the late Gupta tradition of art. 
Fourthly, and this is important from our point of view, 
the dynasty to which these ‘ varman ’ and ' vikrama ’ kings 
belonged was evidently a Buddhist dynasty. This is proved 
firstly by the Pyu inscription round the silver-guilt reliquary 
stupa, referred to above, on which there are images repousse 
in high relief of the four last Buddhas, with their names 
inscribed in Kadamba script, respectively below them.”'’ 
They are Konagamana, Kakusandha, Kassapa and Gotama 
with their attendants Kasab (Kassapa), Maulana (Moggallana), 
Sari (Sariputta) and ...da (Ananda), the four disciples of the 
Buddha. It is significant that the names are given in their 
Pali form, and that these names are followed by a short extract 
consisting of what seems to be words and phrases taken from 
Pali scriptures. The characters of the record suggest that 
the source of inspiration of the subject of the record was the 
Pallava-Kadamba region of South India. This is also 
strikingly confirmed by a stylistic consideration of the images 
moulded in high relief on the stupa ; they belong to an art 
tradition having remarkable Pallava affinities. A further and 
more definite evidence of the cult professed by the initiator 
of these images and the epigraph is provided by the Sanskrit 
inscription round the pedestal of the Buddha image, just 
referred to above. As the record was set up by the king 
himself who chose the pedestal of a Buddha image for 
recording an important episode of his family, it may safely 
be assumed that Jayacandra varman and his dynasty profess- 
ed the Buddhist creed. The kingdom of Prome was thus 
ruled over during, roughly speaking, the seventh, eighth and 
ninth centuries by an Indianised Buddhist dynasty of kings ; 
and it was presumably under the aegis of this dynasty that 

It is unfortunate tliat tlie.se in.sciiplions have not yet been edited, nor 
their contents made known in any detad. For short notices, however, see 

An.R.A.S.L. 1926-27, pp. -17273. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PR OME 


65 


most of the monuments of the capital of the kingdom were 
probably built, epigraphs inscribed, sculptures modelled^ 
bronzes cast, and terracotta tablets moulded. 

We may now turn to the sculptures themselves. Apart 
from the ones already referred to , attention may be drawn 
to several sculptures and their fragments depicting scenes 
from the life of the Buddha, Such sculptures though 
not so numerous as from Pagan of a later period are never- 
theless unearthed from time to time, and are really significant. 
One such is a scene carved on a piece of stone representing 
the well-known story of the Buddha about to partake of the 
food offered to him by the two merchants, Trapusa 
and Bhallika, which is detailed not only in the Jatak.as 
but in the MahaVastu and the Lalitavistara as well. 
Following this story and connected with it in an in- 
separable way is that of the four Lokaf)ala devas who 
brought four stone bowels from which the Master was 
to eat the food offered by the two merchants. This story 
is depicted in another relief in which the Budc^ha is repre- 
sented as seated in bhumisparsa muchci on a lotus pedestal, 
and on his left is placed what seems to be an alms bowl. 
He is flanked by four standing personages, two on either 
side, and each of them holding a bowd in bolh hands. 
Presumably they are the four Lokapala devas in the act of 
offering bowls to the Buddhad' ‘ What also seems to be a 
Jdtalia story is represented on a plaque where the main 
figure is dressed in crowns and armlets as a prince and is 
seated cross-legged on a lion-throne with his hands in 
clhydnamudrd. He is flanked by two standing figures 
turned towards him ; that on the proper left is, as if it were, 
in the act of striking with a club held in bolh hands, the 
other on the right seems to be scratching the prince’s arm. 
It is tempting to identify the scene as a representation of 

An.R.A.S.J., 1927-28, p. 129; fo: Iwo other scenes in Buddha’s career, 
pp. 130, 131, plate LV, hgs. 4 and 10. 

9-14436 



66 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


the Mugapakkha On another terracotta votive 

tablet the Buddha is flanked by two figures on each side, 
those to the right are in monkish dress, and to the left in 
secular dress. Below them are represented six persons, three 
on each side of what seems to be the dharmacal^ra. Lower 
below are two gazelles flanking the Wheel of Law which 
helps us at once to locate the scene at the Deer Park or 
Mrgadava of Benares ; and if the five figures to the right 
are all monks, the scene must refer itself to the story of 
the first five converts of the Master, the Paficavagglya 
bhikk^^tis. There are also other fragments of stone and 
terracotta which depict the main scenes in the life of the 
Master. Such examples and numerous others mostly in 
stone and terracotta which represent the Buddha in one or 
other of his traditional madras and asanas and with or 
without his disciples and attendants, may stylistically 
be said to derive their inspiration from the familiar Gupta 
tradition of eastern India, and ascribed on the same con- 
sideration to a period ranging from the sixth to about the 
ninth century of the Christian era. They are indubitable 
proofs of the existence of Buddhism in the old kingdom of 
Prome during these centuries. 

Some of the Buddha images in stone — and there is a 
good number of them, fairly large in size — are frankly works 
of local artists and craftsmen. Such examples are almost 
invariably seated in paryanJ^asana with the right hand in 
bhumisparsa mu dr a and the left placed on the lap and 
holding an almsbowl. This limited and orthodox icono- 
graphic type may perhaps be said to afford some argument 
for these images to be considered as belonging to the orthodox 
or Theravada school, an assumption which is supported 
not only by their facial and physiognomical features, dis- 
tinctly local as opposed to Indian, but also by the stylised 

An.R.A.S.L, 1926^27, p. 171. 

521 1909J0. p. 123, plate XLIX. tig. 8. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD FROME 


67 


. rendering of the artistic and iconographic type traditionally 
inherited from the Indian masters. One such image can 
still be seen carved on a large slab of stone in the Bebe 
pagoda which is a small square building surmounted by a 
pyramidal roof in three stages superimposed by a sil^hara. 
I he Buddha is seated in paryanh^asana and is flanked by 
two figures seated cross legged with aureole round their 
heads, their hands raised to the chest and clasped in adora- 
tion. They are evidently disciples. But what is interesting 
in this piece of sculpture is to see the Buddha’s left hand, 
not the right, in bhuniisparsa mudra, and the right placed 
on the lap and holding the alms bowl. This example 
is one good evidence to show how the local craftsmen while 
translating on stone the first lessons in iconography they 
received from their Indian teachers made mistakes that 
obviously the local converts did not consider grave. Another 
example of similar figures — the iconography is, however, 
quite correct in these Instances — may be seen sculptured in 
groups on a large rectangular slab of stone at the 
Yahandagu pagoda. Eight images here sit cross-legged in 
a row, all with their right hand in hhumisparsa mudra and 
the left placed on the lap and holding an almsbowl. The 
schematic curls of the hair are treated in mass ; and the 
safighati is indicated only by its edges as also by the fold 
treated in mass that hangs from the left shoulder. Figures 
of the Buddha of similar iconographic type but belonging 
probably to a different artistic tradition may be seen at the 
Lemyethna temple, also another small rectangular structure 
whose roof is supported by a heavy square obelisk 
m the centre. Facing the cardinal points there appear 
originally to have been slabs of stone with figure sculptures 
executed on them in bold relief embedded in the square pillar. 
Two only of these slabs, those on the south and west, 

Ibid., 1909-10, p. 120, fig. 3 on p. 121. 

1909-10, Plate LI. 



68 


THER^VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


remain ; that on the south bears on it an image of the Buddha, 
represented as seated cross-legged on a throne with what 
seems to be three flower vases in front, The sculpture has 
suffered so badly that the image has lost its head, and the 
two accessory figures flanking him, portions of their body 
as well. The right hand of the principal figure is placed 
on the right knee with the palm down and the fingers raised 
upwards which probably suggests that it is in what may be 
called the Varada mudra. The standing figure on the right is 
probably that of a male, and that on the left of a female, 
but it is difficult to identify them owing to their very bad 
state of preservation. On the stone facing west the Buddha 
is flanked not by two human figures but by two caityas, and 
is provided with an aureole round the head. He is, more- 
over, seated on a lotus throne “ v/ith the feet, not the legs, 
crossing each other, thus showing the sole of one foot, that 
is the right foot which is placed just above the other, instead 
of both soles. The left hand is placed on the lap, but the 
right hand instead of being placed over the right leg with 
the fingers pointing to the earth and the palm inward, is 
stretched out and placed over the light knee.” " Duroiselle 
has rightly suggested an iconographical affinity of this type 
with the Buddha images of Amaravali in South India ; 
and, 1 think, that his assumption is supported by artistic 
considerations as well. 

Recent explorations at Hmawza have brought to light 
a few more stone sculptures that are significant from our 
point of view. One slab depicts the famous story of the 
taming of the infuriated elephant Ndagiri at Rajagaha, 
while three others represent respectively the birth of the 
Bodhlsattva Gautama, the scene of the conquest of Mara 


Ibid., p. 120, pi. XLVJJ, fig. 6. 

^25 An.R.A.S.L. 1924-25, p. 26, Plate 111, fig. 2. 
Ibid., TJ. 27. 



BUDDHISM IN OLD PROME 


69 


and the twin miracle at Savattbi.^^' Stylistically they can 
be assigned to about the 7th or 8th century A.D. and seem 
to affiliate themselves to the contemporary east Indian 
tradition though the impress of local craftsmanship is but 
too apparent on them. A comparison of similar scenes as 
depicted in the later reliefs from Pagan would show that the 
Hmawza ones must have been the prototypes of those from 
Pagan. 

Another stone slab recovered from one of the three stupas 
south of the Bawbawgyi show^s an arched niche containing 
the image of the Buddha seated in dhyana muclra and flanked 
by tw^o worshippers. The slab^ is inscribed, partly in Pyu 
and partly in Sanskrit, both in the well-known Andhra- 
Kadamba script of about the sixth century. A Buddha in 
bronze seated in bhumisparsa muclra contains the first five 
letters of the Buddhist formula ye dhamma incised in east 
Indian Gupla-Btahmid"' Another stone Buddha image has 
the ceiitral portion of its throne Inscribed similarly with the 
first few letters of the Buddhist formula d 

Amongst other sculptures from Hn)awza may be men- 
tioned a good number of stone reliefs representing the 
Buddha seated or standing and flanked by two Bodhisattvas, 
Avalokitesvara and Maitreya. It is now well-known that 
these two Bodhisattvas were recognised as members of the 
Hinayana pantheon in Burma. The iconographic representa- 
tion of such reliefs from Burma has an exact parallel in 
contemporary sculptures of eastern India. 

Besides stone sculptures,’^* almost a deluge of small 
terracotta votive tablets has been unearthed from the ruins of 
the old capital, and every year the spade brings fresh hordes 

Ibid., 193(^-39, pp. 7-9, Plate III, figt,. b and c. 

R./1. 5./.. 1934-35, p. 45,^ 

/btd., p. 47. pi. XXII, i. 

'30 Ibid. , p. 71. 

'3' See also, in thi.s cciirecticn, Ray, Scrtsbi'd Bvddhiam in Burma, Chap, 
ili, pp. 40-49, Chap. VI, pp. 88-91. 



70 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


on the surface. These tablets easily fall into several well- 

defined types. A good number of them are embossed with 
short epigraphs recording the well-known Buddhist formula 
of the extolment of the qualities of the Buddha beginning 
with “ iti pi so bhagava araham. . . * already known 
to us from the longer Pali epigraphs discussed in a preceding 
section. There is besides a small number of such tablets 
that bear on them short legends in Pyu. But the script in 
both these types is the well-known east Indian script of the 
8th- 1 0th centuries. Still a smaller number, with or without 
any epigraph, represent gods and goddesses of the Sanskrit 
Buddhist pantheon. The large majority of the tablets, how- 
ever, bear on them the popular Buddhist formula ye 
dhamma, . . ,etc., in Pali embossed invariably in east Indian 
characters of the 8th- 1 0th centuries. Such tablets with the 
formula in Pali but paleographically somewhat later in dale 
(11th- 12th) have also been picked up from the ruins of 
old Prome and Pagan. But they all seem to have been 
locally copied to order from Sanskrit originals. Of such 
Sanskrit epigraphs recording the Buddhist formula in Nagari 
script we have literally a deluge both from old Prome and 
Pagan as well as from other sites, for example, from 
Sameikshe near Thazi. These tablets were generally depo- 
sited, probably as relics inside the relic chamber housed 
within the shrines and was also sometimes used by wander- 
ing devotees as moving shrines, a practice still not unknown 
among wandering preachers. Exactly similar tablets with the 
Buddhist formula inscribed in Sanskrit have been found in large 
numbers in Eastern India, at Sarnath, Bodhgaya, Nalanda and 
other places ; and not in a few instances the tablets found in 
Burma were presumably bodily carried over by Indian 
emigrants to Burma and by Burmese pilgrims who came to 
pay homage at the sacred sites sanctified by association with 
the Master. 

For a short notice of these records, see A n.R. A .S ,1 . , 1927-28. p. 145. 



Buddhism in old prome 


71 


It is evident from a stylistic examination of the sculptures 
and the terracotta tablets that they are affiliated to two 
different traditions. A small number of stone sculptures 
frankly owe their artistic inspiration to the Andhra-Pallava 
zone whence came also the impress of the Kadamba-Telegu 
script of those records that are written in Pali. These 
undoubtedly belong to the Theravada. But the large 
majority of stone sculptures and terracotta tablets seem 
to have derived their inspiration from the contemporary 
art tradition of eastern India. This is corroborated by 
the use of contemporary east Indian Nagari script in a 
large nu nber of epigraphs inscribed or embossed on 
them. Those sculptures and tablets using Sanskrit or re- 
presenting Bodhisattvas and their Saktis, must be held 
to belong to one or other of the various schools and 
sects of Sanskrit Buddhism. Those that use Pali, in what- 
ever script can safely be said to have belonged to the 
Theravada. 

It is strange that from what have up-to-date been re- 
covered by research and exploration in the shape of inscrip- 
tions, sculptures and terracotta tablets from the ruins of 
the old capital, it becomes apparent that during the fifth, 
sixth and seventh centuries the Pyu kingdom was in intimate 
relation more with the Andhra-Pallava-Kadamba zone 
than with any other part of India. But from about the 
seventh, eastern India seems to have come into more 
direct relation with realm of the Pyus and Talaings. 
in fact, e^st Indian influences on the art and iconography of 
the sculptures, terracotta tablets and Sanskrit epigraphs of 
Hmawza are only much too evident. 1 his is a fact that has 
hardly yet been fully recognised. It is not the place here to 
go into a detailed discussion of the problem, but the fact 
remains that besides the Pali epigraphs discussed in a 
preceding section, a few terracotta tablets bearing Pali 
Writings, and a small number of sculptures, there has been 



72 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


recovered from Hmawza hardly any object that can definitely 
be said to betray south Indian influences, whereas there 
has been picked up from the huge mass of ruins a countless 
number of sculptures and terracotta tablets that frankly 
derive their style from the familiar Post-Gupta and Pala 
sculptures of Eastern India. In inscriptions as well, without 
in any way under-estimating the value in this respect of the 
Pali records in South-lndian script, one can point out that 
the importance of the long Sanskrit inscription recovered 
from Kan wet-khaung-kon and the numberless votive 
tablets with Sanskrit epigraphs, all in north-east-lndian script, 
is not much the less. A systematic study of the monuments 
of Prorne is yet to be made, but here also as elsewhere, one 
may point out that not only the stupas like the Bawbawgyi 
but also the rectangular edifices like the Bebe betray north- 
east-lndian traits as revealed respectively in the contemporary 
Dhamek stupa of Sarnath and replicas of rectangular temples 
with Ukharas sculptured on some of the reliefs of Bihar and 
Bengal, no doubt of a later date. 

The sculptures and monuments referred to above by no 
means exhaust even a small fraction of what the old site of 
the ruined capital has yielded to archaeological research and 
exploration. It has been possible for us to make notice of 
only a few, just to show that with very few epigraphic records 
and reliable chronicles at our disposal, these sculptures, 
bronzes, terracotta tablets and monuments constitute in fact 
the main, if not the only data for re-writing the very little 
known account of the early history of Buddhism in Burma. 
The main conclusion as revealed by a study of these docu- 
ments is now well determined, and it may be stated that 
Buddhism during the centuries from the sixth to at least 
the tenth was a popular and flourishing religion in the capital 
city of the old kingdom of Prome, and presumably at other 
centres of the kingdom as well, expressing itself in numerous 
monuments, votive tablets and images in stone and bronze, 



BUDDHISM IN PEGU 


73 


and deriving its inspiration not only from south India but 
from eastern India as well. 


X 

BUDDHISM IN PEGU. C. 1000-1050 A.D. 

We have so long confined our narrative mainly to the 
capital city of the Pyus whence hall almost all archaeological 
sources of our information. But this does not necessarily 
mean that the neighbouring realms of Pegu and Thaton, 
both included in the ancient Suvannabhumi, were left . un- 
touched by the waves of the great faith. Pegu or Hamsavati 
was well-known to the early Buddhist tradition, at least 
amongst those who followed the Lower Vehicle or the 
Hinayana. It has already been pointed out that the 
place is referred to in the Durenidana section of the Jatal^aSj 
and is frequently mentioned in the M anorat hapurani , the 
commentary of the Anguitara Nil^dya, Sujata, the first 
lay woman convert was, it is said, born at Plamsavati in a 
previous existence. Citta, the Upasika and a number of 
other important personages of the Buddhist Order are said 
to have been born there. This intimate association of 
Harnsavati or Pegu with early Buddhist tradition probably 
points to the fact that the realm had already come to achieve 
some sanctity in the eyes of the Buddhists by about the 5th 
and 6th centuries of the Christian era when the large mass 
of Buddhist comrnenlarial literature in its Pali recension came 
probably to be recorded down. 

But Buddhism does not seem (o have been the only 
religion in the realm of Pegu as it was neither in the 
capital city of the Pyus nor in 1 baton or Suddhamma- 
vati. In Sriksetra, the capital of the Pyus, Brahmanical 
Hinduism was a strong rival, ^ ‘ and the same condition 

See, Ray, Brahmanical Clods in Burma, C al. Univ. , 1932. 

10 - 1443B 



74 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


seems to have prevailed in Pegu and Thaton as well. 
In Pegu, moreover, it seems to have sometimes claimed 
homage and patronage from the reigning kings ; and the 
two religions at times even came into conflict with each 
other. The tradition of such a conflict is preserved in the 
Slapat Rajawan^ a local Burmese chronicle. There is much 
of legendary element in the story which is reproduced at 
some length below, but to any careful reader its historical 
value is obvious. The following story which relates itself to 
king Tissa of Pegu, assigned according to local or Burmese 
reckoning to the middle of the eleventh century (1043-57), 
affords a key to the position of Buddhism in Pegu during his 
reign, and shows how it was sometimes persecuted; but that 
seems to be an attempt of the chroniclers who were all 
Buddhists of a much later date at proving the superiority of 
the religion they themselves professed. 

Tibsa was a heretic king of Pegu. He... made no obeisance to the Buddlia, to 
tlie Law he iiearkeried not, ite honoured tfie Biahmnnas. He thretv down the 
images of I he Buddha and cast them away into ditcfter. and marshes. 

“ Now I here w'as a certain merchant ’s dauglitcr wlto clung to true religion. 
BhadradevT wasfliis maiden's name. From lier tenth year she went out to listen witli 
her parents and hearkened continually to the l..aw. She had exceeding great joy in 
the 1 hree Gem.s i Friiatna 1 Daily she said tlic 1 lirce Names of Refuge ^Buddho, 
Dhamma , Sanigha) with care. And it came to pas-s that the time when she was in 
her hr.st youth \va,«; tlie lime when ihe king cast down the images of the Buddha. 
At that time the maiden wenf down to ha* lie, and hy cliance she thrust her hand 
against an image of Buddlia. .And she drew it up and it glistened with gold. She 
asked, ‘ wlio has caused this image lo he cast away >’ And the old slav«'j-woman 
made answer, ‘ L.acly, this king lollow.s the word ol fal.se-teachers. Verily it is 
the king who lias caused this image of Buddha to he ca.st av/ay ? Whoever greets, 
honours or liows before tluddl.ia at the pagodas, liim the king causes to he slain and 
to be brought to naught, thus said the slave-woman. ’ When the maiden had 
lieard these words, she spake on t}u.jwise, ‘ 1 obey the Three Gems. I can endure 
death. First wash the image clean, then set it up at a pagoda.' She herself and 
the slave-woman washed it and set if. up at a pagoda. 

*' Now as she was settinrg up the image, these things were told to the king. And 
he sent runners to call her. 1 he maiden, that ring adorned with gems beyond 
price, spoke to the king’s runners saying. ‘Let me abide here before the image.' 
And she made haste to wa.sh every image of Buddha as many as were there^ and to 
set them up every one. And, after a time he sent naore runners. When the maiden 
came before him. she spake unto him. But he listened with anger and spake in 



BUDDHISM IN PEGU 


75 


tliiswise, ‘Take her (o the elephants that they may trample her to death, ' Then 
the maiden caused gentleness to soften the king and the elephants and the elephant- 
men, and continually she said, ‘ 1 take refuge in the Lord ’ and she called on the 
1 hree Names of Refuge. And the elephant dared not tread on her, hut he roared 
with his voice, neither could the elephant-men make him run at her.. So men 
told the king in fear. When the king heard these things, he spake in thiswise, 
‘ Cover her with straw for the funeral pyre. But the maiden caused gentleness to 
work again, and she called on the Three Names of Refuge. Men stirred themselves 
to burn her, yet she burned not. So they told the king in fear. Thus spake the 
king, and he said, ‘O maiden, when I see the image of Buddha, thy teacher fly up 
into heaven, then mayesi thou live. But if from the image of thy teacher there fly 
not up seven images, eight images, I will have thee cut into seven pieces.’ And he 

had her led to the foot of the ditch and .slie prayed on thiswise, ‘O image ol 

the Lord of Bliss! I. thy hand-maiden, set up thy images. Buddha is lord 
everywhere, his Law is lord everywhere, hi.s SamgJia is lord everywhere. A.s 
Buddha his Law, his Church are ev'erywliere lord, so may eight images of Buddha 
fly up into heaven at the king’s hall.’ And in the twinkling of an eye there flew 
eight images up into heaven towards the king’s hall. And tht^ rnaideff returned 
and pointed it out to the king ..Then said the maiden, ‘ O earthly king, Buddlta, my 
teacher, is gone to Nirvana. I hou hast been able to see only his images fly up into 
lieaven in his stead. Thou hast followed false teachers and called them belter. 
Let thy hand-maiden see them fly up. ' Then the king commanded them to fly. 
But the false teachers gould not fly. And the king drove tliem away... and he cau.sed 
the maiden to bathe, and he raised her to be his chief c'jueen .....and hfj: returned 
thanks and followed true religion ever after.” 

Thenceforth Tissa became a faithful follower of Buddhism 
and proved himself to be a patron of the haith. Here is 
another passage, from another chronicle : 

“ In Benares land there wa.s an ancient pagoda on tlie top of the river (Lange.s- 
bank. When the bank was washed away men picked up lire relic.s and holy images 
lliat had been enshrined tliere, and gave litem to tlieir children to play, lor there 
was no longer anyone to v/orsl\ip Tieni. Now Nga Dula, a sltip s raptain, saw tliis, 
and he thought, ‘ Tire folk of tlie east country deem these images divine and 
vvoeship them. 1 shall get gain if I sell tin m to the folk of east country. So he 
bought them lor a fitting price and came with them to the landing stage at 

Pegu Men told king lissa . and he rewarded Nga Dula richl 3 ' and ennobled 

him.” b5.5 

Incidentally it gives an idea of the attitude of the Peguan 
people towards Buddhist images; they considered these 
images divine, and worshipped them. 

‘ Schmidt, Slopai RagaWari datow smin ron. Bitch dcs Ragawan,, dot 
Konigsgcschichic^ Vienna, I9C6. 

Shicernadaw 7 hamaing. 



76 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


XI 

BUDDHISM IN THATON : C. 1050-57 A.D. 

Like Pegu or Hamsavati^ Thaton or Sudhammavali, the 
capital of Ramannadesa or the Talaing country, seems to 
have been well-known to the Buddhist tradition of about the 
5th and 6th centuries of the Christian era. The city is 
referred to in several passages in the commentaries which in 
their Pali recension are generally dated about that time. But 
in the absence of any archaeological finds of such an early 
date or of other evidences to which a more or less early and 
definite date can be assigned, it is difficult to further press 
the assumption. Indeed, not before the middle of the 
eleventh century, 1057 to be more exact, do we have any 
idea of the state of the religion in this part of peninsular 
Burma. But when in 1057 the curtain is lifted before us we 
achieve a clear view not of faint traces but of a vast pano- 
rama in which lire as in Buddhism is in full pla}^. This 
view is provided by the story of the introduction of Thera- 
vada Buddhism in Pagan in Upper Burma following the 
conquest of Thaton by King Anawrahta in 1057. 

Anawrahta s conquest of Thaton is described in detail in 
all the standard Burmese chronicles as well as in the Sasana- 
vamsa, and is rightly given the importance it deserves. The 
long Kalyani inscriptions, however, make a short reference ; 
the reason is obvious, for king Dhammaceti s primary object 
was to record the history of the reformation of the Order by 
himself, and everything else was only of secondary impor- 
tance, coming in only as an introduction to his own great 
work. The successful march on Thaton is viewed with 
importance by all later chroniclers, not so much for the 
actual conquest of the Talaing country and assertion of 
Burmese supremacy, as for the introduction of Buddhism 
in its purest form into Upper Burma and the consequent 
beginning of actual intercourse of the Marammadesa with 



BUDDHISM IN THATON 


77 


the outside world. The introduction of the new religion 
produced a general outburst of faith, and kings and minis- 
ters, rich and poor, queens and maids, nobles and commons 
vied with one another in devoting themselves to works of 
merit, and to the erection of sacred edifices of diverse 
plans and styles which stand to this day, in various stages 
of decay, as silent witnesses to the religious zeal that 
pervaded the whole country for nearly three centuries. It is 
therefore very interesting to read in the chronicles the rapid 
and dramatic march of events which led to this great awaken- 
ing of faith and enthusiasm. 

Shin Arahan was a young Talalng monk of Thaton 
well- versed in the sacred books of Theravada Buddhism. 
Burning with the zeal of a fervent proselyte and with the 
intent of preaching the Law to the people of ‘ Tampadipa ’ 
he came to Pagan, and dwelt in a forest ‘ not near, net far ' 
from the capital. One day he was brought to the capital before 
Anawrahta, the then reigning monarch ol the realm of Pagan. 

“ And Anawratha said, ‘Master, of what race art 

thou.^ Whence comest thou? Whose doctrines c^ost thou 
follow?’ And Shin Arahan made answer ‘My race is that 
of the Lord Buddha, possessor of the nine qualities beginning 
with sanctity, the six glories beginning with lordship, and 
the four incomprehensible beginning with intuition. Thou 
sayest, whose doctrine do 1 follow? I follow the doctrine of 
the sermon of authority, most fine, subtle, difficult and 
profound, preached by the Lord — the Lord Buddha.’ And 
the king was full of joy and rapture, and spake again, 
entreating him, ‘ My Lord, preach me somewhat — yea, but a 
little — of the Law preached by the Lord, the Master.’ And 

According lo a seventeenth century inscription, quoted by BurmCsSe diplo- 
mats in negotiation with the British Government and tianslated for his Government 
Ijy Colonel Burney, at that time Resident at Ava, 1 ampadipa included the districts 
of Pagan, Ava, Pinya and Myirigyan. Yule, Mission lo the Court of Ava. The 
British Burma Cazetteer, how'cver, equals Tampadipa with the uijper portion of 
the [ heyet district, on the east bank of the Irrawady.. (Vol. ii, p. 746.) 



78 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

Shin Arahan preached the Law... When he had made an 
end of preaching the king spake again : ‘ Where is my 

Master, the Lord — the Lord Buddha ? How much is the 
sum of the Law preached by the Lord? Liveth there any 
disciple and son of the Lord save thee, my Master?’ ” - 

To all these Shin Arahan made adequate and satisfactory 
replies. 

And when Anawrahtaminsaw heard the words of 
Ashin Arahan, he was seized with an ecstasy of faith 
unbounded, and he said, ‘ Master, we have no other refuge 
than thee ! From this day forth, my Master, we dedicate 
our body and our life to thee ! And Master, from thee I 
take my doctrine !’ And he built and offered him a monas- 
tery in the forest When the king and all the people 

forsook their own opinions and were established in the 
good Law, the Ari lords lost their gain and honour and bore 
great hatred against Shin Arahan, And the king fearing 
that the Ari would practise ill against him, took good heed 
and appointed guards enough to defeat the thirty Ari lords 
and their sixty thousand disciples. At that time there 
came many saints and novices from Fhaton, and made 
saints and ghostly counsellors of those who were faithful in 
the religion. ..” 

But the religion that Shin Arahan had introduced could 
not thrive, there being no sacred text in Pagan, for, ‘ without 
the scriptures there can be no study, without study there 
can be no intuition.’ But where were the scriptures to 
come from.^ And Shin Arahan said, ‘ In the country of 
Thaton are thirty sets, the three Pitakas in each set. There 
are also many sacred relics !’ So Anawrahta sent a wise 
minister with a store of gifts and presents to Manuha, the 
king of Thaton, to beg of him certain sacred texts and relics. 
But Manuha grew jealous, and ‘ answered ill ’ .' “ It is not 

seemly to send the three Pitakas and the relics to such as 


Glcas Palace Chronicle, pp. 73-7‘3. 



BUDDHISM IN THATON 


79 


you, who hold false doctrines — even as the fact of the maned 
lion can be kept in a bowl of gold and not in a vessel of 
clay.”’®* It was a direct hint at Anawrahta’s former 
patronage of the Samanakuttaka heresy, and an insulting 
refusal. Ana wrahta grew furious and marched on Thaton 
with a huge force, by land and sea, and laid seize to the city. 
The rest of the story is briefly told. Anawrahta’s men 
captured Manuha with his family and ministers who were all 
taken captive to Pagan. But Anawrahta’s objective was still 
something more than Manuha himself or his kingdom ; he 
wanted scriptures, and learned teachers to explain and preach 
all that was contained in them. He therefore “ brought 
away the sacred relics which were kept in a jewelled casket 
and worshipped by a line of kings in Thaton ; and he placed 
the thirty sets of Pitakas on the king’s thirty-two white 
elephants and brought them away... Moreover, to the Noble 
Order acquainted with the books of the Pitakas he made fair 
appeal and brought them away.” Manuha was perhaps 
at first treated with consideration and allowed to pass the rest 
of his days at Myinkaba, in the outskirts of the royal capital, 
where he built two edifices, the Nanpaya which contains his 
throne room, and the other named and still known after him 
and where there is a colossal figure of the Buddha entering the 
parinirVana. Later on, Anawrahia seems to have dedicated 
him and his family as slaves to the Shwezigon pagoda, thus 
rendering them outcasts for ever." ' 

SasonaVarnsa, p. 62. Saclljarnmapurindo IVlanoliaii nama raja pi m^icchera- 
citio hulva tumhadit anarp miGchadiuhinarn thane pipikaltayam sariradltatu ca pahini 
!um na yutla lilakaggas.sa fii .sammasambuddhastia sasanani saiiimaditlliTnam thane 
Ve va patitdiassali yalha nanin kt-sarasihaiajassa vat^a suvannapaliyarn yeva na matli- 
Labhajane li. 

Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. IS 79. 

I he NclV Chroniele, however, denies this, and adduces an interesting 
rcdf’on ; “Various cluoniclcs say that Anawrahia dedicated Manuha, king of 
I iiaton, to the Shwezigon ... (f Manuh.i was so dedicated hi.s grandson would 
not have been married to king Narapati’s daughter.” 1 he SasanaVarjua loo seems 
to suggest that Manuha (or Manohari) was not ungenerously treated by Anawrahta. 
(pp. 63-64), See also Fotchammer’s Report, Jan., (89 [, pp. 7-8. 



80 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Shin Arahan had now got all that he wanted to have, 
and his mission received, as a result, a wonderful fillip. He 
had now at his service a large band of monks devoted to 
his cause, and a library of sacred texts at his disposal. 
The abominable Aris — the heretic Samanakuttakas, as the 
Sdsanavamsa would call them — were already at bay ; the 
king with his counsellors and ministers had already been 
won over ; and the field was ready for the Arhanta to sow 
his seeds. And he lost no time. With the king and the 
court behind him and all the resources they could com- 
mand, with the services of a devoted band, but above 
everything, with the zeal and fervour of a preacher and 
reformer and the will to win, his work of propagation of 
the sacred religion of the Sakyamuni went apace till within 
a very short time he had won thousands of converts to his 
side. Hundreds came forward to receive ordination, and 
entered the sacred Order, burning with the zeal and 
enthusiasm of new converts. At the head of them all, to 
guide them all was Shin Arahan, the primate of a kingdom 
daily growing and expanding. 

This, in short, is the account of the introduction of 
Theravada Buddhism in Pagan in Upper Burma. From this 
account it is evident that in the middle of the eleventh cen- 
tury Theravada Buddhism had a very flourishing existence in 
the Ramannadesa, the land par excellence of the Talaings ; 
and its capital Thaton .in the land of Thudammawadi 
( = Sudhammavati) ‘ ‘ swarmed with hundreds of monks who 
lived in monasteries that must have housed libraries 

I"*' The scripture.s that were brought f j om Thaton were all housed Ty 
AnawratKa in a libi ary hall specially built for the put pose. 1 his building known 
as the Bidagataik ( Tripitaka taik or Tripitaka library), an edifice of wooden 
origins, stands to this day in the midst of the jungle of ruins of Pagan. 

Thaton was anciently known as Sudhammapura or Sudhammanagara (law 
Sein Ko, “ F^reliminary Study of the Kalyanl Inscriptions,” /nd. Ant. Voh xxii, 

p. 17). 

Paklai Talaing Chronicle 



BUDDHISM IN TOATON 


81 


containing not only the books of “ the Three Pitakas but 
also the Four Books of Divination ’ ’ 

...And the king of Arimaddanapura, having possesaion of king Manuha, 
look away the saintly monks, who were full ol learning and piety ; he took away the 
monks who knew the Three Scriptures and the Four Books of Divination .. 
he look them all to the land of Arimaddana (Pagan).'* 

Moreover, the kings of Thaton were 

famous and mighty kings who upheld the religion of the Lord; all the 
people followed the command of almsgiving and all other commands of 
righteousness.” 

There were in Thaton also different orders of monks 
besides the one to which Shin Arahan himself belonged. 

And thou hast a-^ked is there any monk of the Order, save myself, a disciple of 
(he Lord? Yea, verily; besides myself there are the Paramattha Order and Samuti 

Order.” 

Pali as the language of the religious texts must have 
been known there and understood by the entire body of 
monks and at least by a section of the lay people ; Pali 
literature, mainly canonical and commentarial, was also 
presumably more or less widely read. It is evident that this 
reputation of Thaton as centre of the religion of the 
Buddha was not built in a day ; it must have taken some 
time to enable Thaton to attain the glory she came to share 
with Kailcipuram and Kaveripattanam in South India on the 
one hand and Ceylon on the other which incidentally, were 
the three other contemporary centres of Theravada Buddhism. 
We may, therefore, start with the assumption that Theravada 
Buddhism was introduced into Suvannabhumi, the land of 
the Mons or Talaings, at least several centuries earlier, and 
gradually established itself not only at Thaton, but also 
at other places in lower Burma. 

Ihid. 

^^6 Ihid. 

Hmannarif 1, 252. 

The Glass Palace Chronicle (Hmannan), p, 74, 

11-H45B 



82 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


But at the same time it must also be borne in mind that 
all our sources of information regarding Anawrahta’s sack 
of Thaton and consequent introduction of Theravada 
Buddhism in Upper Burma — the Kalyani inscriptions, the 
Hmannan and other Burmese chronicles — belong to a much 
later date. In fact the Kalyani Inscriptions are the earliest 
datable record alluding to this important historical event, 
and they cannot be dated earlier than the 15th century. 
In recent years quite a large number of inscriptions 
from Pagan in Mon, Pyu and Burmese and datable 
from the llth to the 14th century, have been discovered 
and deciphered, and it is strange that not even one of them 
contains any reference to this important and glorious histori- 
cal event, glorious of course from the Fagan point of view. 
It is difficult to explain the silence of contemporary and 
almost contemporary records of the Pagan kings and the 
nobility to whose credit must have been due the vigorous 
religious and cultural drive that we witness in Pagan during 
the reign of the Anawrahta dynasty. Indeed the omission is 
so significant as to lead one to doubt the authenticity of the 
whole story as contained in later inscriptions and chronicles. 
Yet one must reasonably account for the deluge of epigraphic 
records pervaded by the unmistakable spirit of Buddhism, the 
countless number of temples, stupas, monasteries, all dedicat- 
ed to that noble faith and containing images of gods and 
goddesses belonging to the Buddhist pantheon, and stone 
reliefs and terracotta tablets bearing stories and legends of the 
Buddhist faith that suddenly begin to crop up at Pagan 
onwards from about the middle of the eleventh century. 
One cannot help feeling that this sudden outburst must 
have been due to some outside contact, some event or 
achievement that brought Pagan in touch with the march of 
a civilised and cultured life unknown to these northern 
barbarians who had swooped from their hilly retreats on to 
the torrid plains of the Upper Irrawady. And strangest of 



A RESUME 


83 


all strange things, the Pagan records do not make any 
mention of any such contact, any such historic upheaval. 
It is indeed a pity that one has to fall back upon an explana- 
tion contained in records that are at least four centuries later 
than actual events. But it is almost impossible not to 
admit that these records, though late, offer on the whole a 
trustworthy and perhaps convincing explanation. 

Xll 

A RESUME 

In the foregoing pages has been traversed a wide 
expanse of time covering a period over twelve hundred years 
in an attempt to find out traces of Buddhism, mainly of 
the Fheravada denomination, in Burma up to Anawrahta’s 
conquest of Thaton and consequent introduction of 
Theravada Buddhism in Pagan in about the middle of the 
eleventh century of the Christian era. Not all the traces of 
footprints of the march of the religion through all these 
centuries are, it is true, equally distinct and pronounced; 
some of them are beyond reasonable doubt and may be 
treated as authentic, some are less certain since they rest on 
certain assumptions not yet definitely proved, but accepted 
none the less as working hypotheses ; some even are based 
merely on traditions which fall far short of history, but 
critically considered they have strong claims to be recognised 
as containing germs of sober and authentic history that lie 
enmeshed in the thick web of mythical and legendry details. 
On the whole, we are thus able to present at least some 
unconnected facts in the early history of the most important 
school of Buddhism in Burma. These facts may be 
summarised as follows ; — 

(a) Asoka sends an ecclesiastical mission headed by 
Sona and Ultara to evangelise the land of Suvannabhumi 



84 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


(c. 250 B.C.)- This is based on a tradition recorded five 
hundred years later. Circumstantial evidence lends no doubt 
a colour of probability to the tradition, but it cannot as yet 
be accepted as a fact of history. It cannot be dismissed 
outright either. The correct historical attitude would 
be to keep the door open for further research and investiga- 
tion. 

(b) Along with China, a part of Burma, known to Indian 
tradition as the land of the Kiralas or Cilatas, seems 
to have been converted to Buddhism by a fraternity of 
monks from Tambaparnna (before C. 250 A.D.). This 
fact rests on the proposed identification of the Cilata 
or Kirata country with a part of Burma, an identifica- 
tion that appears to be upheld by all available sources of 
information. 

(c) Chinese travellers see Buddhism a flourishing religion 
at Lin-Yang, identical with either Prome or some region in 
central Burma (c. 250 A. D.). This point rests on the identi- 
fication of Chin-Lin with Chin-ch en which has so far been 
generally accepted. 

(d) Buddhaghosa or one of his celebrated contemporaries 
infuses new life into the religion in Lower Burma (c. 400- 
450 A.D.). The character of the tradition is suspicious, 
but circumstantial evidence leads a colour of probability to 
it. At least there is nothing antecedently improbable in the 
Buddhaghosa tradition. 

(e) Pali as the language of Theravada Buddhism is 
known and understood, and Pali canonical texts, at least the 
more Important of them, are studied in their doctrinal and 
metaphysical and most abstruse aspects (c. 450-500 A.D.). 
Early Buddhalogy also seems to have been more or less a 
familiar subject, at least in the old Pyu capital, i.e., old 
Prome. This point is beyond doubt. 

(/) 1-ching testifies to the prevalence of Buddhism in 
^riksetra (old Prome) and Lang-chia-shu or Lankssu 



A RESUME 


83 


( = Tennasserim) (c. 675-700 A. D.). This point is absolute- 
ly certain ; the identification of Lahkasu with Tennasserim is, 
however, tentative. 

(g) T’ang chronicles refer to Buddhism as the religion 
of the people in the capital of the kingdom of P’iao ( = Pyu), 
identical with old Prome (c. 750-850 A.D.). This is as 
good as sober history. 

(h) Sculptures, bronzes, terracotta votive tablets, epigra- 
phic documents and monuments of the ruined capital of old 
Prome point to a very flourishing condition of the religion 
(c. 550-1000 A.D.). This is definite. 

(i) Burmese chronicles refer to the prevalence of 
Buddhism in Pegu where it sometimes came into conflict 
with Brahmanical Hinduism (c. 1000-1050 A D.). This tradi- 
tion seems to contain germs of sober and authentic history. 

ij) And lastly, the story of Anawrahta's conquest of 
Thaton points to a very flourishing state of the religion in the 
Talaing kingdom towards the middle of the eleventh century 
(c. 1057 A.D.). 

It is readily seen that from about the fifth century 
onwards we are on more definite grounds. Epigraphic 
documents prove beyond doubt the prevalence of the ortho- 
dox school of Buddhism, and the texts they quote reveal that 
the religion stressed the doctrinal and metaphysical aspects 
more than anything else. All the quotations are significant 
and refer to the fundamental creeds and tenets of the reli- 
gion. Onwards from that date the continuity of archaeo- 
logical evidence is maintained throughout, but they no longer 
yield materials that throw light on the character of the 
religion, nor can one say with any amount of certainty that 
the wealth of archaeological materials in the form of sculp- 
tures, bronzes, terracotta tablets and epigraphs all belong 
to the Theravada denomination. In fact, it is now evident 
that by about the seventh and eighth centuries, Mulasarvasti- 
vada was one of the nil^ayas in practice in the capital city 



86 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


of the Pyus. This is testified to not only by I-ching but also 
by a number of archaeological objects recovered from the 
ruins of the city. And, if the style and iconography of the 
gods and goddesses represented in sculptures and bronzes 
and on terracotta tablets and the paleography of the embossed 
epigraphs are any indication, then it must be recognised that 
Mahayanism of the east-lndian affiliation was also welh 
known in old Prome by at least about the ninth and tenth 
centuries of the Christian era.'"^ It is, however, difficult 
to say in what relations Theravada stood in the realm of the 
Pyus in respect of the other niliayas of Buddhism. 

If the identification of Cilata or Klrata country with a 
part of Burma stand to reason, and if we lay aside tire 
claim of the Asoka-mission, we have then to admit that 
Burma received the message of the Buddha for the first time 
from the hands of a Buddhist fraternity of southern India. 
The Pdi epigraphs in the Andhra-Kadamba script also point 
unmistakably to the fact that contemporary Theravada 
Buddhism of the Pyu capital was directly affiliated to such 
centres of Buddhism in South India as Amaravatl, Nagarjuni- 
konda, Uragapura, Kaiicipura, etc. Other vihayas of 
Buddhism which we have evidence of at the Pyu capital, e.g., 
Sarvastlvada and Mahayana, seem to have been affiliated 
to the respective east-lndian religious traditions. This is 
determined by the style of art of the sculptures and terracotta 
tablets as well as by the paleography of the writings on 
most of them.’^” 

But Sarvastlvada and Mahayana were not the only 
religions Theravada Buddhism had to measure steps with. 
Brahmanical Hinduism was also another Indian religion that 
had to be taken into account from at least about the sixth or 
seventh century A.D. Archaeological explorations have 

For both Sarvafctivacia and Mahayana in old Prome see rny Sartsk^i^ 
Buddhism in Burmo, Cal. Univ. , 1936. 

Ibid, 



A RESUME 


87 


up to now brought to light several Brahmanical sculptures 
from old Prome and Thaton that can be dated on stylistic 
grounds from about the sixth or seventh to about the tenth or 
eleventh century A.D. Burmese tradition in respect of Pegu 
referred to in a preceding section, and Chinese tradition as 
recorded by Prof. Pelliot in respect of Tun-hsun or Tennasserim 
seem to point to the same conclusion. Existence of 
Brahmanas and prevalence of Brahmanism in the realm of 
the Pyus and Talaings from very early times seem now 
to be beyond doubt,’*' but at no period of Burmese history 
does it appear to have achieved any considerable importance, 
and the account of the sack of Thaton by Anawrahta as 
preserved in the Burmese chronicles seem to reveal that 
Theravada Buddhism which used to receive patronage of the 
Talaing royalty was the most dominant faith in the realm at 
that time. 

Pelliot. BEFEO; 190.3. p. 279, 

See my Brahmanical Gods in Burma, Cal, Univ., l932, and Art. R. A. S L, 
1930-1937- 



CHAPTER TWO 


EFFLORESCENCE 

FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN 
PAGAN IN 1057 TO THE FALL OF THE PAGAN 
DYNASTY : C. 1287 A.D. 

Whoever has cared to study the local chronicles of Burma 
must have laken notice of one characteristic feature common 
to almost all of them. He must have seen that with the 
occupation of the Pagan throne by Anawrahta the chronicler 
becomes infused as it were with new life ; his account 
becomes fuller with details, events begin to move with force 
and vigour, the narrative becomes more vivid, lively and 
continuous, information more definite, and the chronicle 
comes to stand against a more or less secure chronological 
background. It is from this time that the chronicler seems to 
give us a more or less exact history of the peninsula. In 
fact, there is in these chronicles and thamaings (prose his- 
tories of pagodas, monasteries and towns) and in the historical 
ballads a continuous history of Burma, full of details, not 
unoften with interpretations thereof, from the conquest of 
Thaton down to the British conquest of Burma ; and on the 
whole the information and the interpretation furnished by 
them are reliable. This has been amply demonstrated by 
the chronicles and thamaings themselves agreeing with one 
another on all essential points as well as with independent 
archaeological and monumental sources of information. A 
good deal of caution is indeed necessary in dealing with 
evidences from such sources, but that is more or less true of 
all literary and semi-historical materials; even then such 



EFFLORESCENCE 


89 


sources can be turned to the best advantage if the husk 
can be carefully separated from the grain. 

A modern historian attempting to write a history of 
Burma from 1057 onwards has therefore reasons to be more 
happy about his materials which are far from scanty and arc 
generally of reliable authenticity. It is thus possible for him 
to present his readers with a detailed, complete and continu- 
ous readable account whether of political or religious history 
without burdening it with discussions of details and examina- 
tions of materials that are otherwise necessary. The story of 
the religion from the memorable event of the sack of Thaton 
and eventual iniroduction of Theravada Buddhism into 
Pagan onwards is, therefore, told with less difficulty. 


SOURCES AND SOURCE-MATERIALS 

A series of inscriptions originally engraved on ten 
upright stones at the Kalyanisima, Pegu, for example, consti- 
tute a most important evidence, and mciy be considered to be 
a dependable foundation on which a structure of the events of 
Buddhism during the four centuries and a half from C. 1057 
to c. 1 500 A. D. can be built.’ They are, moreover, our 
earliest sources, and since they devote themselves entirely 
and exclusively to recording the events and vicissitudes 
of the religion irrespective of any political or military acti- 
vities of contemporary kings and dynasties they go 
to furnish us with an exhaustive and a most dependable 
account, simply and faithfully told. These inscriptions, it is 
well-known, were set up at the instance of king Dharnmaceti 
of Pegu (1472-92) to record the re introduction by the king, 
referred to in the inscriptions as Ramanfiadhipati, of a 
canonically valid monastic succession from Ceylon where, 
according to him, such a succession had been preserved, 

^ See Appendix lo this chapter. 


I2-1443B 



90 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


while in his own realm it had long been split up into 
schismatical sects. The validity of such succession depends 
on the ordination, strictly in accordance with the rules of the 
Vinaya, being handed down by successive ordinations on the 
one hand, and on the previous and proper consecration of 
the places where such ordinations are carried out. Dhamma- 
ceti had sent a mission of twenty monks to Ceylon to receive 
their re-ordination at the hands of the great theras of the 
Mahavihara. When they came back and when an adequate 
number of validly ordained monks had become available, king 
Dhammaceti caused them to consecrate in due form a stma or 
ordination site at Pegu. To this he gave the name of 
Kalyanisima to commemorate the fact that the monks who 
had been sent to Ceylon had received their upasampada 
ordination in a sima on the Kalyani river. When the king 
had thus succeeded in creating a good deal of interest in the 
great work he had performed, large numbers of monks of 
his realm came flocking together to receive re-ordination at 
the hands of the monks already re-ordained in Ceylon. 
Dhammaceti was thus able to bring about a closing down of 
all schisms and effect an unity in the Buddhist Order of 
Burma on the basis of a canonically valid succession. In 
recording an account of this good and great achievement, the 
inscriptions begin no doubt with a full reference to king 
Asoka’s reformation of the Buddhist Order and the mission 
of Sona and Uttara to Suvannabhumi, but then take a long 
jump over more than 1 200 years and at once refer themselves 
to the reign of king Manohari or Manohar (Manuha) of 
Sudhuim (Thaton) and the eventual conquest of Sudhuim and 
introduction of the religion into Arimaddanapura by king 
Anuruddha (Anawrahta). It is, in fact, from the account of 
the origin and consequences of the schismatical divisions of 
the Order in Burma, in Burma proper, i.e., in the realm of 
Pagan, but with special reference to the Mon country, that 
the narrative becomes full of minute and exhaustive details 



EFFLORESCENCE 


91 


furnishing a complete record of the great work king 
Dhammaceti had so successfully performed.^ 

Of other standard sources for a religious history of the 
period mention must be made of the Mahdvamsa, the 
CuUavamsa, the Gandhavamsd' and tlie Sdsanavamsa. the last 
a Pali work written in Burma by a Burmese scholar, and the 
Pitakattha-mairi,^ a twentieth century work. All these books 
have been utilised by Dr. Mabel Bode as furnishing elabor- 
ate bibliographies of Pali literature of Burma and Ceylon ; 
they are indeed the indigenous accounts of the Pali literature 
of Burma furnishing us with an almost complete record of 
more or less well-known authors and their works. But at 
the same time they also throw much welcome light on the 
history and vicissitudes of the religion, and have a more or 
less complete record of the religious activities that were res- 
ponsible for bringing into existence such a store of Pali 
literature in Burma. The Gandhavamsa which is the earlier 
chronicle belonging to about the seventeenth century is not 
so full of details as the later Sdsanavamsa ; it is in fact 
very sparing of information with regard to the period and 
chronology of the works it enumerates. The Gandhavamsa 
thus suffers from a serious drawback which is further 

^ ' i he Pali text ol llie Kalyani inscriptions with a translation and .some notes as 
well as an introduction was first edited and published in 1893 by Mr, Taw Sein 
Ko in the Indian Antiquary, Vol. xxii ; some additional notes were appended in 
the two years following under the title Some remarks on tlie Kaiyani Inscrip- 
tions ” fVols. xxiii, xxiv). These publications were issued in separate form, which, 
however, was further supplemented by a transcript in tlie Burmese, character of the 
actual Pali text, as it survives in a fragmentary state on the stones. 

The Mon text of the inscriptions was edited in a most admirable manner by 
Dr. C. O. Blagden {Ep. Birmanica, Vol. Ill, part IJ, 1928, Rangoon). He gives 
a full reading of the Mon text, tested and verified by the Pali text, and portions 
of it by two copies of a palm-leaf manuscript in tlie possession ol thi; Kahnyaw 
monastery, Bilugyun, and the Bernard Free Library. Ibis is prefaced by a very 
good descriptive account and followed by an able traicslalion based upon the 
Mon text and its Pali counterpart. 

* GandhaVariisa , Ed. by Minayeff. ]PI S., 1836. IikF x. 1896 
^ SasanaVarnsa, Ed. by Dr. M.ibel Bode, JP JS,, 1897 
^ Pitakkotthamain (in Burmese), Rangoon, 1006. 



92 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

complicated by the very meagre information it gives of 
the events and vicissitudes of the faith in Burma. But 
much more useful from our point of view is the Sdsana- 
vamsa which fully utilises the older Burmese chronicles, 
for example, the RdjaVamsa, which is most often referred 
to, the Mahdrdjavamsa or the national chronicle, the Attha- 
l^athd and even the inscriptions of the Kalyanisima. 
It has, moreover, a reliable chronological sequence and even 
assigns dates to events, authors and their works which are 
verifiable with reference to other independent sources. Its 
value lies in that it enables us to present a brief but connect- 
ed account of the religion. But the Sdsanavarnsa has its 
limitations : “It is conlused, rambling and prejudiced. The 
author (Pafulasami) who dates his book 1223 B.E.= 1861 A.D., 
was the tutor of King Mindon-min and himself a pupil of 
the Samgharaja, or Head of the Order at Mandalay, a high 
ecclesiastic of Mindon-min’s reign, belonged by all his 
convictions and traditions to the Sihala Samgha (as distinct 
from and opposed to the Maramma Samgha or Burmese 
School) an important school or sect, having, as the name 
shows, a close connection w^ith the Buddhist fraternity of 
Ceylon. As for the other communities whose spiritual fore- 
fathers refused to look on the Mahavihara (of Ceylon)... 
as the very centre and hearth of orthodoxy, they interest 
him only moderately . I heref ore, we must beware of 
considering the Sdsanavarnsa a complete record of monastic 
work. Nevertheless, the author’s own point of view is 
instructive, and we have no right to say that he does not try 
to be impartial. ” 

The Sdsanavarnsa professes to be a general history of 
Buddhism and begins, therefore, with the birth of the 
Buddha and gives a short and running summary of events 
in the light of the Sinhalese tradition up to the sending 


Bode. Pali Litei ature of Burma, luUoduction, pp. xi-xii. 



EFFLORESCENCt: 


93 


forth of missionaries by Asoka, more definitely by 
Moggaliputta Tissa Mahathera, to nine different countries. 
The later history of the religion is then followed in these 
nine countries, a separate chapter being given to each; 
but it is with only two of these nine that we are concerned, 
O/z., Chapter Hi dealing with Suvannabhiimi lower 

Burma for all practical purposes) and Chapter VI dealing 
with Marammamandala (he., Burma proper) in Aparanta- 
rattha (t e., Upper Burma with its centre at Pagan or 
Arimaddanapura), The account of Suvannabhumi together 
with that of Sihala (Ceylon) is far more complete and shows 
more knowledge of the subject than those of Yonakarattha, 
Vanavasa, Kasmira, Ganclhara, Mahimsakamandala, Cinarauha 
and MaharaUha. But even the account of the religion in 
Suvannabhumi is meagre compared to that of Maramma- 
mandala (Chap. VI) which practically occupies three-fifths of 
the entire Sasanavamsa, and which is by far the longest and 
most important chapter. But what is interesting is that 
neither of the accounts of the two realms gives us any exact 
detail (besides referring to the Asoka mission in Suvanna- 
bhumi and vaguely speaking of the SamanakuUaka heresy 
at Arimaddana) of the vicissitudes of the religion before 
the occupation of the Pagan throne by Anawrahta and the 
subsequent conquest of Ihaton. It is only with the histori- 
cal event that the Sasanavamsa begins to be interesting 
and convincing. From this point it promises a fuller and 
detailed narrative, not only with regard to Marammamandala 
alone, but with regareJ to Suvannabhumi as well which, by 
the way, included, according to the Sasanavamsa, the 
Ramanna country ( Fhaton), Harpsavati (Pegu) and Muttima 
(Martaban). ' 


For an account of the arrangement and contentn of the Sasanacarnsa, 
PTS cdn., Introduction, pp. 1-10, 

" Sasanavamsa, p. 35. 



94 


THERAVADA buddhism JN BURMA 


The Pita^Jiatthamain is a twentieth century (1906) 
Burmese bibliography of Buddhist works written in 
Rangoon, and is dependable as a book of reference. It is 
of little importance as a chronicle of the events of the 
religion and as such is not indispensable, but it is useful 
with regard to dates and authors of Buddhist works, and 
as it records the tradition of older chronicles it has its im- 
portance in the history of Pali literature of Burma. 

Apart from purely ecclesiastical works we have at our 
disposal a number of standard chronicles,” one of which, the 
Y azawingyaw , a work of Shin Thiiawantha, goes as far back 
as the fifteenth century. Its historical value is almost nothing, 
as it speaks more of the history of Buddhism in India and 
Ceylon than in Burma. Other chronicles are the sixteenth 
century Razadarit Aycdawpon by Binnya Dala, and the 
Pawtugi Yazawin. The most important chronicles belong, 
however, to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; such 
are the Great Chronicle by Maung Kala, the New Pagan 
Chronicle written in 1785, the New Chronicle written towards 
the end of the eighteenth century by Twinthin Mahasithu 
and lastly the Umannan Yazawin compiled by a royal 
commission in 1829. Besides these, there is a number 
of other chronicles of lesser importance such as the Tagaung 
Chronicle, the F^akhaing Chronicle, the Tharehkittara 
Chronicle, the Hngeppyiitaung Chronicle, the Pagan 
Chronicle, the Varnsadipant and perhaps yet others which 
may be included in this list. There are still others which 
deal with particular periods or aspects of history ; such, for 
example, are the Talaing Chronicles, Pegu Chronicles, Tavoy 
Chronicle, Cetival^athd, Ceiivamsa, and so forth. But since 
I have not been able to examine for purpose of my study 
chronicles other than the standard ones, it is hardly of any 

® Kor an account of these chronicles and their value sec Harvey, History oj 
Burma, pp. xvi-xix ; Maung Tin and Luce, The Class Palace Chronicle, 
pp, xiii xxii. 



EFFLORESCENCE 


95 


use giving a long list. But this is just to impress on the 
reader that there is indeed no reason to complain about the 
dearth of historical materials in Burma, though one may, 
however, doubt their quality or standard/*^ 

Of the standard chronicles enumerated above and which 
1 have been able to consult, the Hwannan Yazawin is by 
far the most complete and authoritative. The first two 
chapters of this chronicle are devoted to a mere repetition 
of the story of Buddhism and of the Buddhist kings of India, 
but with the third chapter, the story moves to Burma where it 
opens with the history of the three kingdoms ol Tagaung, 
Tharekittara and Pagan, and in a string of several chapters 
it brings the history of Burma with the main outlines of her 
political and religious vicissitudes down to 1752. It was 
compiled by a committee of scholars consisting of learned 
monks, learned Brahmanas and learned ministers appointed 
under the orders of king Bagyldaw in 1829. “ The king of 

the Law seeing many discrepancies and repetitions in the 
former chronicles gave thought to the matter. Being con- 
vinced that a chronicle of kings should be the standard, a 
balance, so to speak, for all duties of the king, for all affairs 


^ Mr. Harvey in evaluating the quality and standard of the Burmese chronicles 
in the introduction of his admirable w’ork, Hiaiorij of Burma, writes, “ Our main 
authority is the standard Burmese chronicles. Jt is impossible to study these 
especially in conjunction with the other native r*"-cords w'ithout acquiring consider- 
able respect for them. No otlier country on the main hand of Indo-China can show 
so impressive continuity, f he great record of substantially accurate dates goes 
back for no less than nine centuries, and even the earlier legencls have a substratum 
of truth. But that which gives continuity also gives false perspective ; the record 
is that of the Burmese, the eriergetic and the dominant minority who possessed 
an abiding place and a continuous tradition. Wiitlcn in the shadow of tlie 
throne, the chronicles tell little: of general conditions and their story is not that of 
the peoples of Burma, or even of the Burmese people, but simply that of ih.e 
dynasties of Upper Burma, In a land of centrifugal tendemdes, facts are distorted 
to fit into a centripetal scheme, and tire Burmese capital is made to occupy the 
whole of the canvas, while races such as the Shans who for centuries were of at 
least equal Importance, and the Talaings, who were probably the leaders of 
civilization to the very end, are scarcely mentioned save as a foil." {Ibid., p. xix.) 

t 



96 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


of state, for all matters of religion, and not a thing full of 
conflicting and false statement, he assembled his ministeis 
and ecclesiastical teachers. . and caused the chronicle to 
be purified by comparing it with other chronicles and a 
number of inscriptions each with the other, and adopting 
the truth in the light of reason and traditional books.” The 
Hmannan is Indeed based largely on earlier sources, e.g., a 
large number of inscriptions, almost all the standard chro- 
nicles and those of lesser and local importance and a 
large number of lhamaings, besides Pali chronicles and 
Burmese poetical literature. Discrepancies among the 
chronicles there E\re, but they are never vital and do hardly 
affect the fundamental facts or factors of history except in one 
or two minor details, and those even only with regard to 
very early times, hrom cjur point of view and with regard 
to the period under survey agreement rather than difference 
among the difierent standard chronicles is the general rule ; 
events of the religion in the one is practically repeated 
in the other with very few minor discrepancies. I have, 
therefore, thought it convenient to draw largely upon 
one chronicle, the Hmannan, which practically contains all 
that is given in the earlier chronicles, especially with regard 
to all matters concerning the vicissitudes of the religion. 
Like all other sources, the Hmannan, too, is very sparing of 
details so far as it relates itself to happenings before the days 
of king Anawrahta, but with him the account of the Hmannan 
becomes more lively and inter esling and more full of details, 
connected and complete. 

There is another class of Burmese historical literature 
called the Thamaings, important from both political anci 
religious points of view. They are frequently very late, 
but as they profess to be based on older materials it is not 
unoften that they contain valuable tradition. Their con- 
tents are mainly of a religious nature, and they are generally 
associated with the foundation and history, usucilly of a 



EARLY PHASE 


97 


pagoda or monastery and sometimes even of a town. The 
account in most of the thamaings is a queer admixture of 
legends and facts, but incidentally it sometimes throws wel- 
come light on some political or religious event or events. 
The Shwemadaw Thamaing is perhaps one of the earliest, 
and the Shwesandaw Thamaing probably follows close. 
Among other thamaings may be mentioned the Thaton 
Shwezayan Hpayazyi Thamaing, the Shwenattaung Tha- 
maing, the Hop-u-Thamaing and the Zat-ngaya Thamaing 
which are all based on the older Shwesandaw Thamaing, 
and the Ke-Hl^ayaina Thamaing, which was written only 
about two decades ago. The majority of the thamaings are 
written in prose, but some, for example, the Shwezigon 
Thamaing LinJ^a, are also written in verse. But 1 have not 
been able to find the thamaings to be of much use for 
purposes of my present study ; in fact I have not found it 
possible to use any of them to any very good advantage. 
They do not seem to contribute much towards the history of 
Buddhism of the period under review. 

11 

THE EARLY PHASE 

The story of the introduction of Theravada Buddhism in 
Pagan in Upper Burma as a sequel to the conquest of Thaton 
in 1057 by Anawrahta has already been detailed in the 
preceding chapter. That memorable sack of Thaton, if we 
are to believe our available sources, is indeed a significant 
event in the history of Burma : it marks the starting point of 
authentic Burmese history. Before 1057 there is hardly any 
exact history of the peninsula ; available records speak but 
very little of the activities of its people prior to this date, 
and even the scanty information that can be gleaned with 
difficulty are so wrapped in mist and woven with myths that 
a reconstruction of the history of that period means but a 

I3_|445B 



98 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

careful knitting together of sorr\e hypothetical guesses con- 
firmed in a very few instances by literary or archaeological 
evidences. From the Burmese point of view there is in fact 
little importance attributed to the period prior to Anawrahta’s 
conquest of Thalon ; local chronicles of which we have a 
very good number from about the fifteenth century onwards 
dismiss the pre-Pagan period of their accounts in one or two 
chapters which are but composed of hazy and indefinite 
half-historical, half-legendary tales thinly interspersed with 
stray notices of happenings unconnected with one another. 
The information supplied is meagre, and the sources for the 
chroniclers who sat down at a much later period to record 
them down must have been still more so. Events of great 
importance must have taken place, and the course of history 
must have been as vigorous and as full of life as it was after- 
wards, but our sources have hardly any record of them 
except in stray and meagre, often unintelligible, references. 
But it is as if by a magic touch that the situation changes with 
that memorable year of 1057. With the occupation of the 
Pagan throne by Anawrahta the chronicler becomes infused 
as it were with new life, his account becomes fuller with 
details, events begin to move with force and vigour, the 
narrative becomes more vivid, lively and continuous, in- 
formation more definite, and his chronicle comes to stand 
against a more or less reliable background. It is from this 
date that the chronicles seem to give us a more or less exact 
history of the peninsula in matters political, religious and 
cultural . 

We have already seen that the most important trophy of 
the conquest of Thaton was Shin Arahan himself at the head 
of a large fraternity of 1 alaing monks brought over to Pagan 
and the great faith of their Master recorded in the Tripitaka, 
the repository of Buddhist wisdom. As a result of the zeal, 
enthusiasm, energy and sincerity with which Shin Arahan, 
with Anawrahta always ready by his side to add strength to 



fc:ARLY PHASE 


99 


Ills elbows, had devoted himself to his noble mission 
of evangelising the land of Pagan, the work of propagation 
of the pure and simple religion of Sakyamuni went apace 
till within a very short time he had won thousands of con- 
verts to his side. Hundreds from all parts of the country 
came to receive ordination and entered the sacred Order, 
burning with the zeal and enthusiasm of new converts. 
The fame of Pagan as a centre of Theravada faith was thus 
firmly established, it spread even outside and crossing 
the sea reached Ceylon where the religion had suffered 
from Brahmanlcal persecution of the Damllas (Tamils) of 
South India. The Damilas were none but the Colas who 
were at the zenith of their power at this time and they 
were making themselves felt in Ceylon. The Sinhalese 
king Vijayabahu ( 1065 - 1120 ) sought Anawrahta’s aid 
against the Colas, but before any help was cwailable 
he was himself able to inflict a defeat on the Colas. 
But the ravages on the religion the Colas had done 
needed repair. Scriptures had become so rare and monks 
so few that it was difficult to convene a chapter and 
make valid ordinations according to the rules of the Vhnaya. 
Vijciyabahu, therefore, sent ships to request Anawicihta for 
scriptures and monks and the Pagan king gladly complied 
with. He not only sent the monks and scriptures risked 
for, but added a white elephant as a present for the king of 
Ceylon, asking in return the tooth-relic of the Buddha which 
was the property of the Sinhalese king. Vijayabahu was 

rhe story is referred to in the Kalyani inscriptioiiH, and elaborated in the 
Hmannan (1.264) and the MahaOomso, LV, 4 and L..VHI 8. Miilh r, in his /Incient 
Inscriptions in Ceylon (1883) fixes the date of N/ijayabahu ’s request for monks and 
scriptures at 1071 A.D. or just after. According to the Hmannan, tlic name of the 
Sinhalese king was Dhatui?ena ; while according to the Great Chronicle the Ceylon 
king was Sirisairtghabodhi, which however, is argued against by Hmannan 
I he CuIlaVanisa stales that Vijayavahii wrote with his own hand in Pali a letter of 
'^5reat merit to the king of Arimaddana, that he made great frietidship with tlie latter, 
-ind that he gave gieat delight to the monks that dwelt in Lanka and Arimaddana. 



too THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

not slow to return the courtesy ; he parted with the sacred 
relic and made a present of it to Anawrahta. 

But this was not the only sacred relic that Anawrahta 
claims to have come in possession of. Earlier he is said 
to have secured some relics from Tharekittara. These 
relics he enshrined in the great Shwezigon stupa which he 
had begun to build at the advice of Shin Arahan. When 
he had finished the three terraces, there arrived from Ceylon 
the tooth-relic which also was enshrined in the great stupa." 
But the monarch did not live to see the completion of 
this great undertaking.'^ The great stupa was completed 
by his worthy son Kyanzittha. Anawrahta built quite a 
good number of other shrines, all dedicated to the religion 
to which he became devotedly attached. All these are said 
to contain the sacred tooth-relic of the Buddha which in 
reponse to Anawrahta s prayer were miraculously repro- 
duced from the tooth-relic of Ceylon ! 

Anawrahta’s contribution to the new faith was yet 
something more than building of these shrines and these mad 
campaigns and prayers for sacred relics. He sent four 
ministers of the religion to bring copies of the Three Pitakas 
from Ceylon, and having brought them, he had them 
compared by Shin Arahan with the copies of the Pitakas 
brought by the latter from Sudhammanagara or Thaton. 
Shin Arahan also edited and corrected them in the light 


Hmahnah, pp. 88 89. 

The Shwezigon “ is a solid Pagoda of the kind so common all over Burma; 
yet it attracts worshippers daily> while the finer temples built by his successors are 
deserted Its popularity is due to the exceptional sanctity of the relics, and to 
the shrines of ^he entire pantheon of the thirty-seven Nat spirits who, as if were, 
have come circling round in homage to these relics. If any one doubts the debt 
Burma owes to Buddhi.sm, or wishes to see what she would have been without it, 
let him wander here and contemplate these barbarous images of the heathen god 
Asked why he allowed them, Anawrahta said, ‘ Men will not come for the sake of 
the true faith. Let them come for their old gods, and gradually they will be won 
over . ' Harvey, History of Burma, p. 33. 



EARLY PHASE 


101 


of the copies brought from Ceylon which admittedly were 
more reliable.^® 

Anawrahta’s is a heroic and remarkable personality in 
the history of Burma. In a single lifetime he had estab- 
lished and spread a true religion throughout a large portion 
of his dominions, and suppressed all heretical sects and 
beliefs ; from a chieftainship he raised his principality 
to the position of the most powerful political authority in 
Burma, and by introducing the Talaing culture of lower 
Burma to civilise the north, he set the people of Maramma- 
desa (as distinct from Ramannadesa) on the road to culture 
and civilisation that made the annals of the Pagan dynasty a 
most glorious record in the history of mankind. 

Anawrahta was unfortunate in his successor, Sawlu ; 
for according to the Hmannan, he “ lived only in the 
enjoyment of worldly pleasures. He preferred not his 
father’s work of merit.’’ But in Kyanzittha Buddhism found 
a loyal and devoted servant. 

He completed the building of the Shwezlgon, but his 
chief work of merit was the building of the Ananda Temple, 
the one monument which has spread the name of Pagan 
beyond the boundaries of Burma, and which, with its 
white garb bathed in the tropical sun, shines as the crown- 
jewel on the head of Eastern architecture. There at 
the end of the western aisle in the darkness of the lofty 
but narrow vaults stands a colossal statue of the Buddha 
flanked by two kneeling figures with hands clasped in 
adoration. One is a crowned head, that of the devout 
founder-king Kyanzittha; the other a shaven head, that 
of the royal primate, Shin Arahan, the teacher of Kyanzittha 
and the man who led him to the throne by the hand at 


AmJruddKfuaja yeva cattaro mahayodhe Siiialadipatn peselva tato pitakatta- 
yam anesi. Sihaiadipato aniapitakatlaycna Sudhammapurato anitapib-ikaltayain 
annamannanp yojetva samsandelvi Arhantathcro Vlmamsesi. 5asMnat)omsu, p, 64. 



102 


THERAVADA buddhism in BURMA 


the time of his coronation. Inside the first corridor formed 
by the outer and inner walls of the temple there are eighty 
niches containing sculptures representing the incidents of 
Buddha’s own life until the attainment of the boJhi, The 
series begins with the request of the gods in the Tusita 
heaven asking the Boddhisattva to be reborn in his very 
last existence and to become the Buddha, and the succession 
of scenes follows the pradatisina , Besides these, there are 
in each of the four porticoes sixteen sculptures, mostly 
repealing themselves, but representing like those of the 
corridors, scenes from the last existence of the Master. 
They include scenes like the Parileyya incident, the descent 
from the Trayastrimsa heaven, the subjection of the Nalagiri 
elephant, etc. In the small vaulted passages intersecting 
the corridors more stone sculptures are found represent- 
ing scenes mostly belonging to the clurenidana cycle and 
illustrating the anterior lives of the Buddha, r.e., the JataJ^as. 
The eighty scenes in the outer corridor of the Ananda 
Temple are devoted to represent the principal events of 
the Bodhisattva’s last existence, from the time of his birth 
to that of his attainment of the bodhi. A few of the events of 
this subsequent career up to the Parinibbana are also 
represented, but they are all on the walls of the four 
porticoes. It has been very ably argued by M. Duroiselle 
that the present arrangement and distribution of the scenes 
on the sculptures of the porticoes were not the original one, 
and he has been able to show that all the events subsequent 
to the attainment of Buddhahood must certainly have been 
represented in the sixty-four scenes of the porticoes. What- 
ever that may have been, the arrangement of the scenes 
on the walls of the corridor as well as those few of the 
porticoes follows a verj^ well-known order, that of the 
Niddnakatha, It proves, therefore, that in addition to 
every important event in the life of the Master which had 
by this time become well-known in Upper Burma, the Niddna- 



EARLY PHASE 


103 


katha was also known and studied at least by those who 
ministered to the religious needs of the people. 

But it was not the incidents of the last existence alone 
of the Master that were known to the new converts of 
the faith ; the Jala\a stories also were equally well-known 
by this time and the Ananda bears eloquent testimony 
to it. The basement and the walls and the terraces of the 
temple are ornamented with a huge wealth of glazed 
terracotta plaques. The plaques on the basement walls 
relate themselves to two important phases of the Buddha's 
attainment of the bodhi, namely, the attack of Mara and 
his retinue on the Buddha, and the eventual jubilation 
among the gods who came to glorify him. Each plaque 
is inscribed at the bottom with a short legend in Talaing, 
The second story is also similarly embellished ; here also 
there is a wealth of glazed tiles illustrating five hundred 
and forty-seven Jatakas, the entire series of JdtaJia stories. 
But the most interesting thing in the Ananda is that on 
the walls of the upper terraces there are nearly four hundred 
bas-reliefs which illustrate the last ten great JdtaJ^as, so 
that each Jdlah^a story occupies, on average, about forty 
bas-reliefs for itself, each relief being explained by a 
legend in Talaing inscribed at the bottom. M. Duroi- 
selle finds this series to be a most interesting and unique 
feature which is found only at the Ananda, According to 
his counting, the number of these reliefs from the basement 
to the uppermost terrace is one thousand four hundred and 
seventy-twod^ 

My purpose in giving an account of the stone-sculptures 
and terracotta plaques of the Ananda is to show the extent 
to which Theravada Buddhism with its myths and legends 

Diuoise)l(“, The Stone Sculptures in the Ananda Temple, ARASL, 
1913-14, where he gives a long and full description of the temple and the stone 
acuiptuies inside it. An elaborate account of the bas-reliefs and the explanatory 
epigraphs IS, however, contained in Ep. Birminica, II, i and ii. 



104 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


had already taken root in Pagan in less than two scores of 
years since it had been introduced for the first time in the 
royal capital. These sculptures and terracotta plaques served 
as illustrative texts to hundreds of those who daily flocked 
to worship at the temple. In employing them as such, 
Kyanzittha and Shin Arahan only adopted an usual and 
well-known method of popularising the religion among the 
ordinary people and it was perhaps one of their methods for 
the propagation of the faith. The same method was also 
employed in later temples and stupas, obviously with the 
same object in view, for example, in the Petleik temples, in 
the Shwezigon, in the Mingalazedi, in the Nagayon and 
others. These sculptures and the terracotta plaques are of 
special historical importance inasmuch aS they afford us 
indubitable proof of the knowledge of the Jatal^as and the 
Nidanakatha in Upper Burma in the last quarter of the 
eleventh century. 

It was in the seclusion of the Ananda Temple that 
Acariya Dhammasenapati, according to the Gandhavamsa 
(pp. 63, 73), wrote his KariJ^a, a grammatical work in Pali. 
He is also said to have composed two other works, the Eti- 
masamidiparii and the Manohara. The same source tells 
us that Dhammasenapati wrote his KariJia at the instance of 
the monk iNanagambhlra who was a resident of Pagan.'’ 

What a softening influence Buddhism wielded on the lives 
of these sturdy and swarthy tyrants will be evident from an 
extract from one of the inscriptions set up by Kyanzittha. 

“ With loving kindness shall king Kyanziliim wipe away the tears of those 

who are parted from their trusted friends .. ..his people shall be unto him as a 

child to its mother’s bosom he shall soften the hearts of those who intend evil. 

With wisdom, which is even as a hand, shall king Kyanzittha draw open the bar 
of the Gate of Heaven, which is made of gold and wrought with gems.” 


^5 Bode, Pali Literature of Burma, p. 16 and fn. I. 

The Great Talaing Inscription of the Shwezigon Pagoda, Ep. 


90 . 


Birminica, I, ii. 



EARLY PHASE 


105 


It ranks almost as literature, and the typically Buddhist 
sentiment in it is unmistakable. It is a pity that neither the 
local chronicles nor the SasanaVamsa dwells at any length on 
the service Kyanzittha rendered to the cause of the religion. 
The /SdsanaUamsa has not even a passing reference to the 
great personality or to his work. Yet, besides being person- 
ally deeply influenced by the new religion and performing 
various works of merit, it was he who was the first Burmese 
king to restore the holy shrine at Bodh-Gaya, and who in his 
zeal and enthusiasm for the new faith exhorted a Coja king 

to accept Buddhism. His exhortations were successful. 

\ 

King Kyanzittha gathered together gems of diverse kinds and sent them in a 
ship to build up the holy temple at Bodh-Gaya, and to offer lights which should 
burn for ever there. Thereafter, king Kyanzittha builded anew, making them finer 
than before, the great buildings of king Asoka for they were old and in ruins. In 
this respect no other king is like king Kyanzittha. Thereafter, lie presented all the 
lords of the Sarngha who dwelt in the city of Arirnaddanapura with four 
necessaries on every occasion. In that respect, too, no other king is like him..d^ 

“ At the same time king Kyanzittha heard that a Cola lord had arrived, and he 
bethought him that apart from the 1 hree Jewels there is no other single thing that 
can give great happiness in this world or in the world to come, or confer Nirvana 
upon all beings: the Three jewels alone can give it. Therefore, he wrote concern- 
ing the grace of the jewel of the Lord (Buddha), the jewel of his Law (Dhamma) 
and the Jewel ol his Clergy (Samgha), with vermilion ink upon leaf of gold and 
sent it unto the Coja Lord. 1 hus hearing tire grace of the Buddha, the Law and 
ihe Clergy by reason of king Kyanzittha’s sending word unto him, the Cola Lord 
with all his retinue cast off his adhesion to false doctrine; he saw, he was pleased, 
he was happy...” 

Kyanzittha was fortunate in his love-child born of 
1 hambula in exile. For when having reigned for 28 years 
he fell sick unto death, this son, Yazakumara, made solemn 
offerings and set up a stone-post which is still in its place, at 
the Myazedi pagoda, south of Pagan. 

The post is inscribed on its four faces with the same 
matter in four different languages — Pali, Talaing, Pyu and 

The Third Talaing Inscription ol the Shwesandaw Pagoda, Prome, Ep. 
Birfninica, I, ii, 153. 

18 Ibid. 

i4-H45B 



106 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Burmese. Extracts from it are worth quoting for the senti- 
ments expressed, as well as for incidental references to a 
number of venerable theras of the time, and to the practice 
of dedication of slaves to the shrines. 

Glory and honoul be to Buddha ! Jn the one thousand six hundred and 
twenty-eighth year of religion ( 1084 A. D.) Kyanzittha became king in this city of 

Arimaddanapura Now the king having reigned twenty-eight years fell sick unto 

death. Then Yazakumara remembering the benefits wherewith the king had 

nourished him, made a golden Buddha and went into the presence and showed 
it to the king saying, ' This Golden Buddha have I, thy slave, made to assi.st my 
lord. The three villages of slaves which my lord gave unto me, I now dedicate 
unto tins Buddha, May my lord api)rove!’ Then was the king well pleased and 
said, ‘ Well done ! Well done!’ And in the presence of the image, of the 
primate, of the venerable lords Moggaliputta Tissa, Sumedha, Brahmapala, Brahma- 
diw, Sona, and very learned Sarnghasena, in the presence of all these venerable 
lords the king made offering of poured water. When it was done, the son of the 
beloved queen made this cave-temple with a golden spire and enshrined therein 
the golden Buddha. And in dedicating this shrine and Buddha, the queen’s son, 
brought up the men of Sakmunalon, one village, Rapay, one village, Henhuiy, one 
village, all those three slave villages, and made offering of poured water for the 
golden Buddha and the shrine wherein he had enshrined it; and thus he prayed, 

‘ May this act of mine be unto me for the attainment of divine wisdom ! If any 
hereinafter, be it my son, grandson, kinsman, or any other, oppress the slaves 
whom I have dedicated unto this Buddha may he never behold the most high 
Buddha Arimiltiya (Maitreyaj.”^'-^ 

Shin Arahan, the Primate, had grown old, and his days 
were gradually drawing to a close. Early in Alaun- 
gsithu’s reign (1112-67) he breathed his last, about the 
year 1115 A.D., full of years — he was about 80 — and full 
of glory. Few are destined to witness so successful 
an achievement of the ideals and missions of their lives. 
Shin Arahan perhaps achieved more than he had dreamt ; 
his was a record of unbroken chain of success. It was a 
mere chance that brought him before the king, and once the 
king was won over, the rest followed almost as a matter of 
course till finally he saw himself as the Primate of the 
kingdom and the acknowledged head of a church organi- 

Myazedi InsciipLion, Ep. Birminicat 1. i. 

'•’« An. Rep A.S.B., 1915, p, 23. 



EARLY PHASE 


107 


sation that embraced within its fold hundreds of monas- 
teries and thousands of monks ready to carry the message 
of the religion into the remotest parts of the far-flung 
kingdom. He performed almost a miracle; in almost a 
lifetime he with the help of his patrons was successful in 
keeping the degenerate Aris at bay and putting a definite 
check to their vile and abominable practices, and in esta- 
blishing in the place of crude and primitive beliefs in heathen 
‘ Nats,’ one of the purest faiths mankind has ever known. 
It is due to him than to anybody else that Burma owes 
to-day her allegiance to Theravada Buddhism and the 
Burmese people their admission into the world of culture 
and civilization. 

Shin Arahan was succeeded by Panthagu, son of Seinny- 
ekmin, as Primate. His royal disciple, Alaungsithu, was 
a devout and faithful follower of the religion. Along with 
the elevation of Panthagu to the position of Archbishop ‘ the 
king presented the elder Ananda and the elder Bodhi, both 
men fulfilled with all virtuous qualities, with golden litters 
of state and pole and awning.’ He also exhorted 
Letyaminnan, the prince of Arakan, who was restored by 
the Pagan king to the throne of his fathers, to repair 
the shrine at Bodh-gaya which had fallen to decay. 
Letyaminnan, therefore, under the guidance of Panthagu, 
the Primate, sent an envoy with men and money to Bodh- 
gaya to do all that was necessary to repair the sacred shrine 
at Vajrasana. Xhe work was executed with care and the 
fact is recorded on stone at the spot."* He built the great 
Thatpyiiinu (Sabbanna — All-knowing or Omniscient, 
i.e., the Buddha) temple in 1144, and the Shwegu 
which stands close by. In this small but beautiful 
temple he was destined to die, and on its walls can still be 
read the long inscription recording in Pali verse the beauti- 

Rajenciralal Mitra. Buddhagaya ; Furgusson, History of Indian and Eastern 
Architecture, I, p. 78 An Rep A.S B., 191 1, p. 181. 



108 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


ful and typically Buddhist ideas and sentiments of the 
king : 


By this my gift, whatever boon I ^seek, 

It is the best of boons, to profit all ; 

By this abundant merit I desire 
Here nor hereafter no angelic pomp 
Of Brahmas, Suras, Maras; nor the stale 
And splendours of a monarch ; nay, not even 
To be the pupil of the conqueror. 

But I would build a causeway sheer athwart 
1 he river of Samsara, and all folk 
Would speed across thereby until they reach 
I he Blessed city. I myself would cross 
And drag the drowning over. Aye, myself 
Tamed, I would lame the wilful; comforted, 

Comfort the timid ; wakened, wake the asleep ; 

Cool, cool the burning; freed, set free the bound 
Tranquil and led by the good doctrines 1 
Would hatred calm The three immortal states. 
Greed, hate, delusion, rooted all in self, 

0 may they die, wherever born in me I 

* # re # 

*' As the best ol men 

Forsaking worldly wealth and worthless fame 
Fled, for he saw tfu'ir meaning . so would 
All worldly we^alth forsaking draw me near 
Religion and the thieelold course ensue. 

1 would fulfil hereafter great .ind small, 

T hose rules the 1 eacher gave for our behoof. 

Borne through ihe elements the spotless moon 
Outdazzle.s all the constellated stars; 

So I delighting in the Master’s Lore, 

1 he Saint’s Religion, virtuously yoked, 

W’ould shine among disciples, 1 would know 
Sutta, and Ahhfdhamma, V inaya 
The Master s mind, his ninefold Doctrines fraught 
With words and meaning. By the Conqueror’s Law 
1 would do good toothers and myself. 

What the great Sage forbids ! would not do. 

* * * # 

“ By merits of this act 1 would behold 
Mettaya, captain of the world, endowed 
With two and thirty emblems, where he walks 
Enhaloed on a rainbow pathway fair. 


K 



EARLY PHASE 


109 


There might I hear good Law, and bending low 
Offer the four things needful to the Lord 
And all his monks, till clad in virtues eight. 

Informed by such a Teacher, I become 
Buddha in the eyes of spirits and men. ”22 

Alaungsithu’s death was followed by a fratricidal struggle 
between the two brothers, Narathu and Minshinsaw. At the 
request of Narathu, Panthagu, the Primate, had to intervene, 
but the intervention led to unfortunate results and Panthagu 
in scorn and disgust left the shores of Burma and went to 
Ceylon, refusing to live in a kingdom ruled over by so vile a 
king as Narathu. The incidents leading to this unhappy 
sequel is briefly but vividly related in the Hmannan, and it 
is difficult for a modern historian to improve upon the 
narrative. When Minshinsaw heard that his royal father, 
Alaungsithu, was no more, he began marching with his army 
towards Pagan to occupy the throne. Narathu scented 
danger, and designed a secret plot by which he was to secure 
the throne without shedding a drop of blood. So he went to 
Panthagu who ‘ ‘ was worshipped like the Lord by the whole 
country of Pagan,” and said : 

‘ It will take long if thus he (Minshinsi^wf marcheth wjtli fiis army, and the 
home affairs of the kingdom will suffer. Lo f 1, thy servant, am here already. 
Call rny brother, and let him come speedily with a sword and a horse only and 
ascend the throne !’ But Panthagu, the elder replied : ‘ If I call him and he come, 
and thou abide without raising him to be king, J have sinned against the saintly 
law.’ So Narathu swore a mighty oath that he would shoulder Iris brother's sword 
and set him on the throne, And Panthagu the elder believed the oath sworn by 
Kalagya and went to the place of Minshinsaw arid told him all. And Minshirrsaw, 
hearing the words of the elder, trusted them, and he set him on a single barge of 
gold and came downstream. When he reached Lappaa port, Narathu, according 
lo the oath he had sworn, went down to the boat and shouldering his brother’s 
sword, he raised and set him on the throne. After his anointing, his food Was 
poisoned and that night he died.” 

Next day Narathu was crowned king and the whole 
people came to offer allegiance to him. But Panthagu, 

22 } B.R S , 1920, English rendering in verse by Maung Tin and Luce, 

Shwcgugyi Pagoda Inscription. 



no 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


though old, would not do so. When he heard that 
Minshinsaw was poisoned and dead, he burnt with fury and 
anger , and going to the palace cried : 

Thou vile king ! Thou foul king ! Thou fearcst not the woe thou shalt 
suffer in Sarpsara. Though now thou reignest, thinkest that thy body shalt not grow 
old, not die? A king more damned than thou there is not in all the world !' * Nay 

Master, said Narathu, ‘ I shouldered my brother’s sword and set him on the 
throne. But the noble master made reply ; * A man more vile and foul than thou 
there is not in the world of men ! And (te departed and went to the island of 
Ceylon ” 0167) 

And he did not come back so long as Narathu was in the 
land of the living. 


III 

MARAMMA SAMGHA AND SIHALA SAMGHA 

Narathu was succeeded by Naratheinka (1171-73 ). He 
had, it seems, neither the mind nor the opportunity to do 
anything for the religion which his fathers served and patro- 
nised with such great care and devotion. But his successor 
Narapatisithu s reign i 1 I 73-1220) is important for more 
than one reason. He will be remembered for his noble 
patronage of the religion, and more for the fact that his 
reign saw the first formation of the Sihala Samgha or 
Sinhal Order in Burma and the beginning of the long and bitter 
rivalry between the Sihala Samgha and the Maramma Sarngha 
or Burmese Order that continued to disturb the Buddhist 
clergy of Burma till it ended three hundred years later in the 
final triumph of the Sihala Sarpgha. 

“2“ An inscription from Saggaing in the Saggaing district refers to the gift 
of a plot of land by Zeyathura Mingyi in 533 Sakkarac which is equivalent to 
Zeyathura (Vlingyi ivS king Naraf)atisithu. This inscription therefore 
seems to prove that Narapatisithu was already on the throne in 1171 An R A S / 

1936-37. p. 115. 



MARAMMA SAMGHA AND SIHALA SAMGHA 1 1 1 

Narapatisithu himself was a king of advanced views, 
and devoted to the new religion ; ‘ in order that men 

might follow the Path and reach fruition in Nirvana ’ he 
built a number of ‘ works of merit,’ setting up colossal images 
of Buddha in all of them. Among the bigger temples he 
built for the furtherance of the religion were the majestic 
Gawdawpalin, the Sulamani and the Dammayazaka ; of 
smaller but nevertheless beautiful works were the Mimalung- 
kyaung and the Chaukpala. “ He succoured with the things 
needful scholars of the noble Order learned in Pdi, in the 
commentaries and sub-commentaries, who practised piety 
throughout all the homeland, and they gave instruction in 
the books.’ Narapati’s reign was peaceful and prosperous, 
and was one of the brightest epochs of monastic scholarship 
in Burma. 

Panthagu, the Primate, lived in self-banishment for only a 
few couples of years. From his refuge in Ceylon he heard 
of the devoted patronage of the newly-crowned king, Nara- 
patisithu, and soon after the accession of this monarch he 
returned home (I 173) hoping to spend the rest of his days 
in peace amidst the purer atmosphere of a more prosperous 
and benevolent rule. He was warmly received and was 
again treated as Primate ; but he was already old — about 
ninety — and did not live long to enjoy the king’s patron- 
age. 

Panthagu was succeeded in the Primateship by a Talaing 
monk, Uttarajiva by name, a pupil of Shin Ariyavamsa, the 

Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 142. 

' An inscription in Burme.se recovered from the ruin.s near Kotheinnayon 
at Pagan and recording the dedication of slaves to a monastery before several monks 
mentions the name of one Panthagugyi as one of the monk witnesses. I hia took 
place in 1247 A.D. It has been suggested that Panthagugyi is the celebrated Primate 
Panthagu. But Panthagu in about 1 173 wa.s already ninety and if he really continued 
to be alive in 1247 it would mean he was then about 162 years of age- obviously 
very difficult to believe. Panthagugyi of this insc. may have been some other indivi- 
dual. R. ^,5./., 1936-37, p. 114. 



112 


TOERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


elder of Thaton. Uttarajiva, like Shin Arahan, claimed 
to belong to the direct line (acariyaparampara) of Sona 
and Uttara. The religion in Ceylon had for some time been 
in disrepute, and had fallen into soilure and decay,” as 
the Hmannan puls it, perhaps again owing to Brahmanical 
persecution by the Tamils (Dramilas). But Parakkaroabahu 
proved himself to be a strong and resolute king ; he saved 
the religion from Tamil persecution, and initiated a re- 
formation of the church organisation. This led to a re- 
awakening of religious activities in the island. The fervour 
rose to such a height that the fame of the church reached 
the Burmese capital,"' where it roused the eagerness and 
enthusiasm of Uttarajiva for pilgrimage to the island. He 
took with him 

many disciples of the Order and went to worship the Mahazedi pagoda in 
the island of Ceylon. Among these disciples wa.s a novice of about twenty years 
of age from the village Capata, on the outskirts of the Bassein town. When 
Uttarajiva the elder, Capata the novice (.so named from his native village', and the 
many disciple.s of the Order reached the island of Ceylon, they had conversed with 
the eldeis of Ceylon concerning the religion, and, incjuiring of each olher*s lineage, 
they found that the elders in Ceylon island were heirs of Shin Mahinds, the noble 
saint, and Uttarajiva the elder was of the lineage of Shin Sona the elder and Uttara 
the elder. Then they ordained Capata the novice, saying, * let us perform a priestly 
act of pure validity 

Capata was thus received into the Sinhalese religious 
brotherhood . 

The ordination of Capata was to have far-reaching results ; 
in fact, it was the first frank admission of the superiority 
of the Sinhalese over the Burmese Order. Evidently the 
elders of Ceylon did not consider the ordination ceremony 
by the Burmese brotherhood as a priestly act of pure validity 

Evidence of a very active maritime intercourse between Ceylon and Burma 
during this time is afforded by Sinhalese Chronicles as well as by Burmese inscrip- 
tions of the period. See, also MahaVamsay Ixxvi, 10-75, fOr a quarrel between 
Ceylon and Burma in about 1 180 A.D. when the Sinhalese king despatched an 
expedition against Burma. 

Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 142-43. 

‘^6 Ibid., p. 143 



MARAMMA SAMGHA AND SIHALA SAMGHA 


113 


and the Burmese monks were not, therefore, considered 
to have been validly ordained, since, according to the 
Kalyani inscriptions, the Sasanavamsa, the Hmannan and 
other chronicles, they belonged to an acariyaparampara of 
lesser aristocracy. However, a section of Burmese monks 
must have had a very great respect for the Sinhalese 
brotherhood and their monastic conduct and learning, 
for, when Uttarajlva, after the ordination of Capata, came 
with his disciples back to Burma, he was hailed as the “ First 
Pilgrim of Ceylon. ’’ Already Shin Arahan had admitted 
the comparatively better reliability of the Sinhalese Pitakas 
than those he had brought from Thaton ; and now was 
admitted the superiority of the Sinhalese Order itself. 

Capata did^not return home with his teacher Uttarajlva; 
the latter stayed behind in Ceylon and for full ten rainy seasons 
he studied and acquired a full knowledge of the T hree Pitakas 
and their commentaries. Fie thus earned the designation of 
a mahathera. 

Beint? now desirou'? of roturnin" to Pugama lie veRected thus : ‘ If I were to 
return home alone, and if, in the event of the death of UlUirajiva mahathera, I did 
not wish to as‘jcciatc with the monks of Pugama in the performance of ecclesiastical 
ceremonies, how could I, in the absence of panca-vagsaganay perform such function 
S’parattdy ? It is perhaps proper, therefore, that 1 sliould return home in thes 
company of four other monks, who are well vcr.sed in the 1 ipipika. After 

rc:flecting tlius, he appointed Malialhcra Sivili, a native of I amalitlhi ( f amralipti in 
Bvrngal), the ,\^ahat.her i f ain ilinda the son of the Raja of Kamboj, th.e Mahatl'iera 
Aeanda, a native of bvaficTpura, and tli.- Maliathera Raliida, a native of C.cylon, to 
accompany him.” 

Capata with his four colleagues returned to Pagan 
(1 181-82) after having observed the Vassa in a monastery at 
Bassein. These five monks of the Order were called the 
Second Pilgrims of Ceylon.” 

The Pali text of the Kalyani inscriptions, /'.p. Born,, HI, n. p. 190, footnote 6. 
The passage in the Hmannan (p. 143) is .Similar in purport. 

28 The Mon and Pali text of the Kalyani inscriptions, £p. Birm., Ill, ii, 

pp. 190^91. 

Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 144. 

15- I443B 



114 


THERWADA. BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Now, Uttarajiva had died in the meanwhile and was 
buried a few days before Capata and his company could 
reach Pagan. So, when they arrived they went to the 
chaplain’s grave and worshipped there. The demise of 
Uttarajiva gave rise to a very curious situation in the Burmese 
church organisation, due no doubt to the high-brow and 
supercilious attitude of Capata. But it is best told in the 
Kalyani inscriptions which is quoted almost verbatim in the 
Glass Palace Chronicle. Capata is said to have addressed 
his companions thus ; 

‘ As I he Mahatheras of Ceylon associated with our teacher the venerable 
Uttarajlvamahathera (at the time of his visit to Ceylon), in the performance of 
ecclesiastical ceremonies, it is proper that we should now perform such functions 
after assoc ierting ourselves with the monks of Puganiii, who are thei* spiritual successors 
of Sonathera and Uttaratliera. However, our teacher, the Mahalhera IJitarajiva. 
who was a native of the Mon country, was formerly the sole head of the Church, 
but now that the Burmese monks have become .supreme, we do not wi.sh to 
associate witli them in (Ire performance of ecclesiastical ceremonies.’ Thus, 
through pride, tire Mahathera Capata declined to associate with the monks of 
Pukharn in the performance of ecclesiastical ceremonies and Ire performed such 
functions separately.” 

It was thus that the Sinhalese Church or the Sihala 
Samgha, as it has been called m the Sasanavarnsa^ came to 
be established in Pagan, According to the Mon text of the 
Kalyani inscriptions, this event took place “ in the 1 24th year 
that had elapsed since the introduction of the religion into 
Pukam (Pagan), the Burmese country, from Sudhuim 
fThaton) in the Mon country,” /.e., in 1 181-82 A.D. 

When Capata had come back to his own country, he 
evidently returned with a strong faith in Sinhalese orthodoxy. 
He also believed that it was the Mahavihara alone of Ceylon 
that could claim to have kept the acariyaparampara direct 
from the thera Mahinda, and that the Sinhalese Order 

Ep. Bum.. II. ii, pp. 191-92; footnote 7 of p. \9\ , Glass Palace 

Chronicle, p. 144. 

Ep, Btrm., IH, ii, p. 192. 



MARAMMA SAMGHA AND SiHALA SAMGHA 1 1 5 

could alone confer the valid upasampada ordination. 
Naturally enough, .he was eager to establish the Sinhalese 
Order in Burma, evidently to bring the Burmese Order in 
the direct ‘ line of descent.’ But it was equally natural that 
the older Burmese school would resent and resist this claim 
of the Sinhalese church. They could argue, and perhaps 
they did, with equal force and logic that since they belonged 
to the direct line of descent from Sonathera and Uttara- 
thera, they had as good an authority to perform a valid 
ordination as the Sinhalese school itself. But their argument 
seems to have carried little weight, and their influence was 
gradually on the wane. 

From the very outset the Sinhalese church was fortunate 
in receiving the warm patronage of the king. The reigning 
king Narapatisithu ‘ conceived a feeling of great esteem and 
reverence for the five Mahatheras,’ he ‘caressed and regarded 
them beyond measure,’ and he gave all the patronage he 
could to this newly- founded church. He caused a raft of 
boats to be put together on the river Irrawady and requested 
the five Mahatheras to confer upasamp::dd ordination on the 
many monks who desired to receive it. 

Many novices were ordained as monks. Thus they 
multiplied in the course of time till their influence and their 
following grew in numbers. The school thus founded by 
Capata and his colleagues came to be known as paccagana 
or the later school while the Burmese school was known as 
purimagana or the earlier school."" 

But dissensions were soon in sight among these five 
Mahatheras which resulted in the splitting up of the Sihala 
Samgha into four factions. The stories of these dissensions, 
not without their human interest, are elaborately told in the 
local chronicles, for example, in the Hmannan, and in the 
KalyanI inscriptions, and are briefly summarised in the 


Sdsanavamsa, p. 67. 



116 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Sdsanaoamaa. Of the four Tvlahatheras that accompanied 
Capata to Pagan, Rahula was the most erudite, but his learn- 
ing was of little avail ; for, in a great almsgiving ceremony 
held by Narapatisithu in their honour, Rahula fell desperately 
in love and lost his heart to a beautiful girl. “ He lusted 
after her and delighted no more in the law of the clergy 
but strove to quit the Order ” He longed to be a layman 
and made preparations to carry out his object. The Maha- 
thera Capata and three other Mahatheras “ repeatedly ex- 
pounded religious discourses to him, in a body entreated him 
to turn away from the course he had resolved to take.” But 
nothing could prevent Rahula from taking his course ; he 
became a layman and went to Malayadipa (Malay peninsula). 
There the king of Malaya received from him instructions ” in 
the meaning of the text of the whole Vinaya ” and studied 
the Khuddaliasi'iil^hd, a compendium of the Vinaya written 
in Ceylon, with its commentary. Pleased with Rahula, 
he made valuable presents to him which the thera accepted, 
and as a consequence quitted the Order, became a layman, 
married, finally settled down in the country, and was no 
more heard of. Rahula s deflection was certainly a severe 
blow to the monastic discipline of the newly-established 
Sihala Samgha. 

Soon after this Capata died, and Sivali (or Sivili), Ananda 
and Tamalinda (or Tamulinda) remained to continue “to 
maintain the religion in splendour at Pukham.’ But 
differences of opinion on questions of monastic discipline 
arose among them, and readily they fell out and each 
founded a new school for himself. 

On a certain occasion king Narapatisithu presented 
the three Mahatheras each with one elephant. In pursuance 
of the rules of the Vinaya, Sivali and Tamalinda liberated 
their elephants in a forest but Ananda shipped it off and 
made a present of it to his relatives in' Kaficipuram, an 
action which Sivali and Tamalinda considered to be against 



117 


MARAMMA SAMGHA AND SIHALA SAMGHA 

the rules of monastic discipline. This led to the secession of 
’Ananda who thenceforward performed his ecclesiastical 
ceremonies separately from Sivali and lamalinda. 

A long while thereafter Sivali and Tamalinda disagreed 
on a more important question of discipline. The latter 
“ sought to advance the welfare of his pupils who excelled 
in wisdom, strength and courage, and by word*suggestion 
obtained for them ” from the pious laity the four things 
needful. Sivali took strong exceptions to this indirect 
process of receiving gifts, referred to by a technical name 
vacwinfiatti in the SusanaVarnsa and the Kalyani inscriptions, 
saying that the Buddha had disapproved of such gifts. *' After 
some argumentation which proved useless, Sivali refused 
to have any relation with 1 amalinda, and both of them 
founded separate schools. 

“From that day fort.h four several sects the Order weie kiK.vvn in the 
kingdom of Pagan. One sect of I fie Order was of the race ol Shin Arahan . . . ; 
one sect of the Order wac of the race ol Sivali the eldtn ; one ticct, of the race of 
famaiinda; one of the lacc of Ajiarida. Of thes<.‘ lour sects iltat of the jace ol 
Shin Arahan who fn si came from Sudharnma city was called the hornurr Order. 
Of the three elders who came from the island of Ceyion were called tlio Latter 
Order, 

The Former Order or the monks who were of the 

religious succession of those that came from Thafon has 

been referred to in the SCuanaVomsa as the Maramrna 

Satpgha or Burmese Order as distinguished from the 

Latter Order referred to as Sihala Sarngha in tire 
SasanaVamsa and the Kalyani inscriptions, for the monks 
of that Order belonged to either of the three sects 

of the religious successions of those who had returned from 
Ceylon. 

2’' For the opinion <d the Vinaya on this point, see I tnatya Fifaka (Oldenberg'.s 
Edn.), ill, pp. 227, 256, V. p. 125. 

Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 146-47; .see also Kalyani inscriptions, Fp. Bum., 

HI. ii, p, 195 



118 


THERAVADA buddhism in BURMA 


Sivali and Tamalinda had already attained Nirvana when 
Ananda died in 1245-46 (the j^ear 607 of the Common Era). '*’ 
But their deaths did not mean the cessation of the work, 
namely the spread of the influence of the Sinhalese frater- 
nity, they had begun in so right earnest. Among their 
disciples and followers, especially of Sivali and Ananda, 
there were at least one or two who grew to be as wise as their 
gurus and who were ready to carry the message of the 
religion outside the Marammamandala or upper Burma. 
Indeed, even during their lifetime Ananda and Sivali had 
the satisfaction of witnessing the prestige and influence of 
the Sihala Samgha spreading in the Mon or Talaing country 
and the Martaban (Pali : Muttima ; Mon : Mattama) region 
under the willing patronage of king Narapatisilhu. 


IV 

THE RELIGION IN THE TALAING COUNIRY 

One might assume that the carrying awciy by Anawrahta 
of all sacred texts and almost the entire clergy of Thaton 
had practically strangled Buddhism in the Talaing countiy, 
and the realm had reverted to its primitive faith or faiths. 
Anawrahta’s sack of Thaton was no doubt a severe blow 
to the religion in the Talaing countiy, but there is hardly 
any reason to think that the light that once burnt bright was 
altogether extinguished. Indeed, there must have been 
centres of the religion and monastic scholarship in the interior 
regions of the realm where Anawrahla’s fury hardly pene- 
trated. Conquering raids in ancient days were often confined 


Ep. Birm., Ill, ii, p. 1.95. 



RELIGION IN THE TALAING COUNTRY 


119 


to the area where it actually took place ; the rest of the 
’ country was also affected, of course, but private life, espe- 
cially monastic life in its seclusion and solitude, went on 
in much the usual way, and in those days of difficult 
communication it was not sometimes affected at all. 
Moreover, it is possible that the Talaing country, 
so intimately in touch with Ceylon, Further India 
and the Indian mainland through maritime intercourse, 
received from time to time monks and religious texts that 
infused new vitality in the old organisation which had 
been robbed of its glory through Anawrahta s exhibition 
of power. And then, the Burmese who had now come 
in possession of the realm of the Talaings could have 
no possible objection in the continuance of the 
religion they themselves had adopted. It was rather 
likely that they would encourage further propagation 
of the faith under the aegis of their rule, in fact, the 
Kalyani inscriptions seem to indicate that a fraternity of 
monks, ecclesiastical successors of Sonamahathera and 
Uttaramahathera, had been flourishing at Dala and Martaban 
regions when during the reign of Narapatisithu the 
Sinhalese fraternity came to be established there. 

Sariputta, a native of Padippajeyya village (near Ran- 
goon) in the province of Dala, was a sdinancvci of the frater- 
nity of monks who belonged to the line of descent from Sona 
and Ultara. But going to Pagan, he received the upasam- 
pada ordination at the hands of Anandarnahathera, and 
came thus to belong to the Mahavihara tradition oi Ceylon^ 
His deep knowledge of the Dhamma and Vinaya attracted 
the notice of the reigning king Narapati who wanted to make 
him his preceptor. But as Saiiputta suffered from a 
physical deformity (one of the big toes of ihe monk was 
too short), the king could not offer him the appointment. 
But he “presented him with a great many offerings, conferred 
on him the title of Dhammavilasathera and dismissed him 



120 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


with the injunction : ‘ Do you maintain the religion in 

splendour in the Mon country’ 

“ DKamniavilasa proceeded to iKe Mon country, and taught the Dhamma and 
the Vinaya to a great many monks in Daia. The people of the Mon country 
called the fraternity of these monks at Dala the *' Sihalapakkhabhikkhusamgha,** 
and designated as the “ Ariyarahantapakkhabhikkhusarngha,” the fraternity of 
monks who Were already in Ihe country and were of ecclesiastical successors of 
Sonarnahathera and Uf taramaltathera,’ 


It is permissible, I think, to identify this Dhammavilasa- 
thera with one Dhammavilasa mahathera who is mentioned 
as the donor of a number of stone images of the Buddha 
seated in hhCirnisparsa mudra recovered from the ruins of 
a stupa at Thiyipyitsaya, five miles from Pagan. The name 
of Dhammavilasa mahathera is inscribed on the pedestal 
of these images and paleographically considered the images 
may be said to belong to about the twelfth or thirteenth 
century A.D. If this identification be correct, then here 
is another confirmation of the tradition recorded in the 
KalyanI inscriptions and in the SasanaVamsa. 

The “ Ariyarahantapakkhabhikkhusamgha ’ came later 
on to be known as the “ fraternity of the Mahathera of the 
Krom (Kamboja) Market,” and still afterwards as the 
” fraternity of the Krom Market,” and finally simple as 
the ‘‘Krorn fraternity.”'’' However, at that time in the city 
of Dala, there were two fraternities, the Ariyarahanta 
fraternity and the Ceylon fraternity. 

Ep, Birm., 111. ii, p. 196; SasanaVarpsa, p. 4). The SasanaVamsa account 
is a Vjit different, but seem to be more plausible, Sariputta at that time had grown 
extremely old and feeble. The king, out of consideration for him, did not like 
to burden him at that age with the heavy and responsible work of the royal acaiiya. 
He, however, presented him with offerings and conferred the title of Dhamma- 
vilasa on him. I'he king also charged him with the work of purifying the religion 
in the Mon country which meant that he was to represent the Ceylone e Church 
there, 

Ep. Birm., ill, ii, p. 196. 

38 Ep. Birm., Ill, ii, pp. 196-97, where an explanation is given why th- 

fraternity was so named. 



RELIGION IN THE TALAING COUNTRY 


121 


The Sinhalese fraternity established itself also in the 
Martaban region where the Krom or Kamboja, /.e., the Ari- 
yarahanta fraternity had already been in existence. But 
very soon the Sinhalese fraternity in Martaban came 
to be split up into five different sects. It may be observed 
that the local, i.e., Maramma Samgha or Arahanta SamgKa, 
whatever we may like to call it, so long as its power and 
influence counted in the religious life of the country, was 
one undivided Order and was never split up into sects, 
while the Sihala Sarngha from the very beginning though 
believing in the common Mahavihara orthodoxy and 
firmly holding to the Sinhalese tradition, showed signs 
of dissensions within itself that led to the splitting up 
of the Order into different sects. It was so in Pagan, it 
was the same story in Martaban. It is no doubt very 
difficult to find out what was there in the tradition of the 
Sinhalese fraternity that led to such dissensions ; but 
it may be argued, — and this is indicated by the Kalyani 
inscriptions — that the Sihala Samgha was more concerned 
with the Vinaya, i,e., with the rules of conduct of monastic 
life; and any infringement of the rules, or any new inter- 
pretation of the rules other than the traditional and generally 
accepted ones by any leading member of the fraternity, 
led to dissensions, and eventually to the founding of new 
sects, of course within the Order. 

In Martaban the successors of Sivali (or Sivili), Ananda 
and Tamalinda, all of the Sinhalese fraternity, established 
three different sects. Besides these, there were two other 
sects founded respectively by Buddhavamsarnahathera and 
Mahasamimahathera otherwise known as Mahanaga. Both 
of them were preceptors of the chief queen or aggamahesi 
of Muttima, and both had received their training in 
Ceylon They thus came to belong to the Mahavihara 

Ibid., pp. 198-99. 

p. 42; Ep. Op. cit., pp, l98-99> fn. 5, p, 198, 

16- H45B 



122 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


acariya-parampara ; but when they came back to their 
native country, they began to perform their ecclesiastical 
ceremonies separately, and thus gave rise to two more sects. 
No reason of their separation is given, but presumably it 
was on certain rules of monastic conduct. This will be 
evident from the fact, noted in the Kalyani inscriptions, 
that ‘ ‘ the Ceylon clergy who were of the fraternity of 
Ananda"*' screened (themselves with a) cloth to eat (their) 
rice. When people invited (them to a) stead, they were not 
able to eat in the house, (but) returned to eat (in the) 
monastery.” And “ the Ceylon fraternity who were successors 
of the pupils of Mahathera Tamalinda were styled teachers 
of the minister of the silk-cloth screen”, which suggests 
that they used the silk-cloth as a screen. Strangely enough, it 
was on such flimsy and trivial monastic rules that dissensions 
took place and eventually gave rise to contending sects. 
Naturally, therefore, these sectarian differences on petty ques- 
tions of procedure and discipline led to the degeneration of the 
Order. Such an unfortunate state of the religion is reflected 
in the Kalyani inscriptions which relate rather candidly : 

“In all tliese sects of clergy there were none who were well-versed in 

Tipi|aka, that were wise (and) qualified to come (and) investigate (and) ascertain 
matters concerning ecclesiastical ceremonies. The clergy of the.se various 
fraternities would say, ‘ Wc, indeed, are the wise and qualified 

Each of these sects would perform their ecclesiastical 
ceremonies according to their own light, each fraternity went 
its own way and performed the ceremonies separately 

V 

THE DIMMING OF THE RELIGION 

Narapatisithu died in 1210, and was succeeded by Htilo- 
minle (1210-34), one of the five sons whom the dying king 

Ep. Birm., op cit., p. 198, fn. 7, 

IbUL, p. 199, fn. 2. 

13 Ibid., p. 199, fn. 5 and 9, 



Dimming of the religion 


123 


had enjoined to rule with mercy and justice and together in 
perfect amity and good-will- Htilominle was a devout 
Buddhist and the religion flourished in his reign, though 
not with equal brilliance as in that of his father. He was 
the builder of the Sittana pagoda and of the Mahabodhi, an 
unsuccessful imitation of the temple at Bodh-Gaya, and the 
Htilominle temples, all in Pagan. He also completed the 
unfinished temple of his father, the Gawdawpalin. 
No wonder he was hailed as a good patron of the religion. 

But his son, Kyaswa (1234-50) was even more devout 
than his father. It was perhaps the Pagan Samgha that gave 
him the significant title of “ Dhammaraja. ’’ 

He had compassion on all the people, l:>oth layman and monks, as thovigh 
they were children of his house. He read the 1 hree F^itakas nine times over, 
diverse interpretations of the Pali coininentaries and .sub-commentaries, he pondered 
on tFtern, in tFie meeting of questions there wrrs none to equal Kim, Seven times a 
day he studied willi the noble Ordei . For the .sake ol the j.>aiare ladies he comjjosed 
i\\e Paramatthavindu, that they might know ol mind and the qualities ot mind, 
matier, nirvana, forms of being and personality. He wordcl not even lend an ear 
to affair.s of the villages or kingdom. Whenever there was any enquiry to be 
made, power exercised, lie caused Fiis son Uzana, the !u.i) -apparent , to dispose 
tiiereof, ” 

According to the Pitalzatthamain, the GandhaVamaa 
and the SasanaVamsa Kyaswa was the author of another 
book, SacldaVindu,'' a treatise on grammar. Kyaswa's 
daughter seems to have been very much interested in Bud- 
dhist learning ; to her is ascribed the authorship of a book, 
Vihhattyattha, a little work on Pali Vibhaktis or case-end- 
ings.'" 

Kyaswa was indeed the last great patron and protector 
of the religion and religious scholarship in the long line of 
kings of Pagan. He was unfortunate in his successors : his 

Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 185. 

Pitah.attharT\ain , pp. 45, 70; Gondha., pp. 04, 73, Sasana., p. 76. See abo 
Dr, Bode, p. 25. 

Sasana., p. 77, Bode, p. 23. 



124 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

son Uzana (1250-54) was a pleasure-seeker while the grand- 
son Narathihapate (1254-87), the last king of the dynasty, a 
swarthy tyrant. He built the Mingalazedi pagoda in Pagan, 
and set up an inscription which, though written in self-glori- 
fication, is unwittingly of course, a sarcastic commentary 
written by himself on his life. What more could one expect 
from a pompous glutton who speaks of himself in the 
following way : 


“ King Narathihapate styled Siritribhiivanatitya-paramadhammaraja, the 
Bupreme commander of a vast army of thirty-six million soldiers^ the swallower of 
three hundred dishes of curry daily, being desirous of attaining the bliss of 
Nirvana, erected a pagoda, fn it he enshrined fifty-one gold and silver statuettes 
of kings cind queens, lords and ladies, and over those he set up an image of 
Gautama Buddlia in solid silver one cubit high, on the full moon c>f Kahson 636 
(1274 A. D.). A covered way was made from the palace to tlie pagoda, with 
bamboo matting, whereon were laid rush mats, and on these again were spread 
pieces of cloth eiich twenty cubits in length, and cit each cubit’s distance on the 
way there was a l.^anner. During the ceremony the princes, princesses and lords 
cast pearls among the .statues. ' 

How far removed in attitude and sentiment is th is from 
the Great Talaing Inscription of the Shwezigon Pagoda of 
king Kyanzittha, or the Myazedi inscription of Thambula, or 
the Shwegugyi inscription of Alaungsithu ! 

With Kyaswa’s death, therefore, the light that shone 
in splendour in Pagan for more than two centuries began to 
grow dim ; and though life in the monasteries no doubt 
went on undisturbed, monastic scholarship which depend- 
ed mainly, if not solely, on royal bounties and patronage, 
suffered a great deal, while the activities of the Sarngha, now 
without the favour and protection of the king, were perforce 
limited and curtailed. Thus, weak and emaciated, the 

Mingalazedi Pagoda Inscription, Pagan, of the year 1274, Inscriptions oj 
Pagani Pinya and Ava, 1892, p. 199, 

*' The Mingalazedi is a large stupa so common all over Burma. Its coarse 
execution seems to symbolise the exhaustion of a realm ; it was built in blood and 
Bweat. For two ceiituries Pagan had witnessed the spectacle of a whole population 
filled with a passion for covering the earth’s surface with pagodas and now she 
was perishing to the drone of prayer. Harvey, History of Burma, p. 63, 



MONASTIC SCHOLARSHIP 


1^5 


Saingha faced a new danger ; the country began to show 
signs of political unrest which meant unsettled condition of 
life, at least in the royal capital. These political disturbances 
reacted unfavourably on the religious life of the country and 
contributed their share, a large share indeed, to the ‘dimming 
of the religion, * as the chronicles put it, at this time. But 
before we proceed to deal with that phase of the religion we 
must turn back to have an idea of the monastic life and 
scholarship during this brilliant period of active patronage of 
the religion by the kings of the Pagan dynasty. 

VI 

MONASTIC SCHOLARSHIP 

Dr. Mabel Bode in her excellent work, The Pali Litera- 
ture of Burma, gives a very good and complete account of 
monastic scholarship in Burma from the reign of Anawrahta 
down to the reign of Min-don-min. But no account, it 
seems, can give us a vivid picture of the literature and 
scholastic activities of the Kynazittha Onhmin or the 
Kyaukku Onhmin or numerous other monasteries of Pagan 
and the interior regions where away from the din and bustle 
of ordinary life, the bhikkhu conforming strictly to all the 
duties of the monastic Order, strove hard to master the 
sacred texts of the religion. There in the darkness and 
solitude of the library hall of the monastery he devoted 
whatever time he could, day in and day out, in reading the 
works most suited to his line of study, and writing 
down on palm leaves the thoughts and comments of 
his own, not for any earthly fame or gain, but as 
a work of merit. The GandhaVamsa, the Sasanavarnsa and 
other chronicles give a long list of such monk-scholars and 
philosophers, and a longer list of their works, but even these 
lists must represent only a fraction of the good and continu- 
ous work that was carried on in the network of monasteries 



126 


THERA V ADA BUDDMISM IN BURMA 


spread all over ihe country. No subject was too unworthy 
for their study ; and though naturally Buddhism in all its 
various aspects and branches demanded the most serious and 
careful attention, subjects like grammar, logic, medicine, 
astrology, astronomy, polity, law, prosody, metres, and even 
war, etc., claimed their time and labour, grammar being one 
of the most important. '^ This may help to give us a rough 
idea of the busy but silent scholastic life in the monasteries 
that continued through generations of ihera-parampara. 

1 have already referrec^ to Dhammasenapati, the author of 
the Karil^d who flourished during the reign of Kyanzittha and 
worked in the monastery attached to the Ananda temple. 
But the golden period of monastic scholarship in Pagan 
began with the reign of Kyanzittha’s successors, in fact, 
from the reign of Narapatisithu.' * Narapati's tutor, Agga- 
vanasa, was a learned thera, one of the most noted who dwelt 
in the monastery on the plateau to the north above Pagan. 
Aggavamsa wrote a grammar of the 1 ipitaka called Saddaniii 
(1 1 54) which is still regarded as classic in Burma. Uttarajiva, 
when he crossed over to Ceylon on a visit to the Mahavihara, 
took with him a copy of this work which was ‘received with 
enthusiastic admiration, and declared superior to any work of 
the kind written by Sinhalese scholars.’*’^ Capata, otherwise 
known as Saddhammajotipala, the disciple of Uttarajiva, was 
also interested in grammar, besides the Vinaya and the 
Abhidhamina. He is credited by the GandhaVarnsa, the 
SdsanaVamsa and the Sasanavamsadtpa to have been the 

*8 C/. llie lisl of texts in the iiiscriplion of tlic Common Eva 804 (1442 A.Dj. 

See also texts mentioned in otheK records in Inscription of Pagan, Pinya and Aoa, 
Ed. by law Sein Ko and translated by fun Nyein, Rangoon, 1899. 

A full list of authors and their works is given in Pali iJieratui c of Burma, 
by Dr. t^ode. What 1 am attempting here is only a bare catalogue with a view to 
giving an idea of the scholarly activities oi the monks just lo give a complete 
account oi tlie religion during the period. I his catalogue is gleaned mainly from 
the Sasanavarnsa, tire Candhavorpsa and the Pitakatthamain. My indebtedness to 
Dr. Bode in this connection is obvious. 

^0 Di. Bode, p. 17; Gandha., pp. 67, 72; Fausbbll, Cat. Ind. Mss., p. 49, 



MONASTIC SCHOLARSHIP 


127 


author of the Suttaniddesa (or KaccayanasuUaniddesa) which 
was composed at Arimaddana (Pagan) at the request of his 
pupil Dhammacari. He was also the author of Sarnkhepa- 
Vannana,'~ a commentary on the Abhidhammaitha-samgha 
of Anuruddha, the Simalahk.ara or Stmalanf^drat^d, '' a 
commentary on a Ceylonese work on boundaries and sites 
for religious ceremonies, the Vinayasamutlhdnadipani,'' a 
work on monastic discipline written at the request of his 
preceptor, the V inayagulatthadipani, an exposition of the 
abstruse passages of the Vinayapitako, the Ndmacdiadipam, '’ 
the Mdtiliatthadipani, the Patthanagandnaya,” all dealing 
with Abhidhamma subjects, and the Gandhisdra or 
Ganthisdra, a condensed collection of important texts. 
Forchammer thinks, however, that the Suiianiddcsa, the 
Sarnkhepavannand and the N dmacdt ad'ipani were not the 
works of Capata, but were introduced by him from Ceylon.''* 
Of these, the N dmacdradipani, according to him, was a book 
on ethics, and not on Abhidhamma.*" According to the 
Pila\atthamain, Capata was the author of another work, the 
Visuddhimaggaganthi," a commentary on the difficult 
passages of Buddhaghosa’s great encyclopaedia.'' 


Gandha. , pp. 64, 74; Scisana., p 74; Sasanadip. , verses 1274-8; Pitakatdia- 

main, p. 66. 

'■>2 According to the (j ondha , ihi.s work Wits the only one written in Ceylon. 
I he Pifakatihamain cJas.ses this woik under Abhidhamma works, p. 50. See 
Oldenberg, Pali MSS. in the India O0icc, jPIS., 1882, p. 85; I austull. Cat. 
Mand. MSS., JPTS., 1896, p. 39. 

Ciandha. , p. 62; Sasanadip. , vv. 12*13; Pitakotthamin, pp. 43, 49. 

Gandha., pp. 64, 74. 

Pitakotthomain, p. 44. 

Gondha. , p. 74. 

/bid. 

Gandha. , p. 74. 

Forchammer, Jardtne Prize Essay, pp. 34, 35. 

60 Ibid. 

6* Pifakatthamain, p. 37. 

6^ For Capata’s Works see Dr. Bode, op. cit., pp. 17-19. 



128 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM N BURMA 


The introduction of the Sihala Samgha by Capata inten- 
sified the enthusiasm among monks for scholastic work, 
and we find monk-scholars busying themselves in writing 
treatises mostly on grammar. Saddhammasiri, a monk of 
Pagan, wrote a grammatical treatise called Saddatthabheda- 
cinta,'^^ a book based on the Pali aphorisms of Kaccayana, 
and perhaps also on Sanskrit texts on grammar. According 
to the SasanaVamsa, he was the translator of the Brhaja, 
which evidently is the BThajjdtaJza of Varahamihira, into 
Burmese, probably one of the first works in the vernacular.®^ 
Vimalabuddhi (also called Maha-Vimalabuddhi), another 
thera of Pagan, was the author of another important gramma- 
tical work known as Nydsa or Mu\hamattadipani , a commen- 
tary on the Kaccayanayoga . He also wrote a Uk.d on the 
Nydsa,'® and to him is also ascribed the Abhidhammattha- 
sangahat't\dJ''^ 

Aggapandita, a native of Burma and resident of Pagan, 
wrote a treatise named Lol^uppatti,'’’ an important book 
which is not on grammar. But treatises on grammar closely 
followed one upon another. Subhuticandana, 5janasagara 
and Uttama, all of Pagan, were the authors of Linga/fha- 
ViVarana, LingatthaviOaranappak_dsa\a and Lingatthavivarana- 
tj^d.®® Uttara also wrote a t\\d on BdldVatara, the grammar 
of Vacissara of Ceylon, while the authorship of Lingattha- 
vivaranavinicchaya, another work on grammar, is unknown.'® 
Earlier, a scholium on Nydsa entitled Nydsappadipatil^d 
was composed by a noble man whose name is not given, 
but who was a grammarian of repute. ® A very interesting 

Gandha.f pp. 62, 72; Forcliammer, List, p. xix. 

Sasana., p. 75; Pitakcitthamain, p. 68. 

Gandha., pp. 63, 73. 

Sasanadip,, v. 1223. 

Gandha., pp. 64, 67 ; Sasana., p. 74; Pitakaithamain, p. 60, 

W Gandha., pp. 63, 67, 72, 73. 

/biU, pp. 65-75. 

Sasanadtp. , V. 1240, 



monastic scholarship 


129 


but intensely human story is told about this author in the 
Sdsanavamsa,'^ which seems to indicate that he had been a 
noble man of rank when he fell violently in love with one 
of the princesses royal. Narapatisithu, the reigning king, 
agreed to give his daughter in marriage to the noble man if 
he could produce a scholarly work. The noble man then 
presumably entered the Order and took upon himself the 
responsible task of writing the work referred to above. On 
the completion of the work the king evidently gave him the 
hand of his daughter, and he returned to the layman’s life 
and was conferred the title of Rajjuggahamacca. 

Dhammadassi was another important grammarian of 
Pagan. He was a samanera when he wrote his work on 
Vaccavdcaf^a or Vdcdvdcaf^a,'^ on which Saddhammanandi 
wrote a Thera Abhaya, also of Pagan, wrote his 

Mahdii\d,^^ a commentary on the Saddatthahhedacinta of 
^Saddhammasiri, and the Sambandhacintatikd/^' a commentary 
on the Sarnbandhacinta of Sarngharakkhita, a scholar of Ceylon, 

Scholastic activities in the monasteries of Pagan continued 
unabated even after Narapatisithu *s reign. We have seen 
that Kyaswa himself was an author of repute, while his 
daughter was also the authoress of a little work in Pali 
cases called Vibhaityaitha.'^'' It is no wonder, therefore, 
that important treatises continued to be written. Sagara, 
or Gunasagara as he is called in the GandhaVarnsa, wrote 
the Mu\hamaltasara ’’ as well as a /i^a on his work, at the 

Sasana, p. 75 ; Forchammer, List, p. xxiii. 

72 Sasana, p. 75. According to the Pitakotthamairit the KaccaOaca^o was 
written by an author whose name is unknown. 

73 Cat. Mand. Mss. mention three on the Kaccauaca^a, but Saddham- 

manandi is the only author mentioned, p. 50. 

7'! Gandha, pp. 63, 73; Forchammer, List, p. xxi ; Report, p. 2. 

75 Cat. Mand. Mss. p. 50; Pitakalthamain, pp. 69. 71; Forchammer, List, 
p. xxi, 

7® Sasana, p. 77. 

77 Sasana, p. 76; Gandha, pp. 63. 73. Forchammer in hi# Litt gives th# 
name as GunasSra, p. xxiii. 

17>-.I445B 



130 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


request of the Samgharaja who was also the preceptor of the 
king. Besides grammar, Abhidhamma was also an Important 
subject of study. The Sssanaoamsa gives us a short story 
of the old monk Disapamokkha who took so seriously to the 
study of this subject that he mastered it thoroughly within 
a very short time. The other theras were astonished at this, 
and the earnestness of the old man was rewarded by the 
king who appointed him as his acariya. 

It is strange that we have practically no information of 
the state of monastic learning and scholarship in the Talaing 
country during all this time. 1 have already argued that 
there is no ground for assuming that with the taking away 
of sacred texts and many learned monks from Thaton by 
Anawrahta, Buddhism and Buddhist learning had become a 
thing of the past in the Talaing country. The reason of our 
having no information about the state of the religion or 
religious scholarship in that country after the memorable 
sack of Thaton for well-nigh one century and a half must 
be sought for elsewhere. All our sources of information 
hails from the Sinhalese school or from some other quarter 
having a great leaning towards that school, the Kalyani 
inscriptions being no exception. The Sdsanavamsa, the 
most important source in this respect, is frankly of Sinhalese 
affiliation, and it is clear that it does not take any notice 
of any scholar or scholarly work, except in a few instances, 
that does not belong to that school. The Talaing country, 
on the other hand, owed allegiance all this time to the older 
school to which belonged Shin Arahan himself. It is 
easy to imagine that this Sarngha which was known as Ari- 
yarahanta Samgha had a history of its own even after Anaw- 
rahta had robbed the Talaing capital of much of its political 
and religious glory, it may also be imagined that during 
all this time the Talaing country had not been without its 
history of monastic learning and scholarship. But all our 



MONASTIC SCHOLARSHIP 


131 


sources ignore this history altogether. When therefore, 
the veil is lifted once more and we get a glimpse of the 
Talaing country after about one hundred and fifty years, 
we find the Sinhalese school already firmly established 
there. Naturally, therefore, the first Buddhist scholar whom 
we meet with as devoting himself in furthering the cause of 
the religion in the Talaing country is Sairiputta Dhammavilasa, 
a resident of Ramannadesa, but ordained in the Sihala Sarngha 
by thera Ananda. The one-sidedness of all our main 
sources of information is nowhere so clearly brought to 
prominence than in this instance. The Sasanaoamsa and the 
Kalyani inscriptions so relate the story as to suggest that 
Dhammavilasa was the first scholar and divine of the Talaing 
country after Shin Arahan, a fact palpably absurd in a country 
where Buddhism had been a living religion for centuries 
and where a flourishing Sarngha was all the time in, existence. 
We must therefore lament that no scholar or chronicle 
belonging to the Talaing school or having at least sympathies 
with that school left for us any account of the religion 
to enable us to give a more complete history of the 
vicissitudes of the religion in Burma through the centuries. 

Sariputta Dhammavilasa is not known to have written 
any work on Vinaya or Abhidhamma or even on grammar. 
His most interesting and important work was on law ; 
in fact, his Dhammathal or '^w Code was one of the earliest 
in Burma, and was the source and model of practically 
all later Pali and Burmese law texts written in Burma. 

It is interesting to note that the monkish scholars devoted 
themselves so rigorously to the study of grammar. Readers 
may have noticed that a considerable number of works of this 


P'orchammer. Jardine Prize Essay ; also his Notes on Buddhist Law. 
Dhammavilasa's Dhammathai ran no longer be traced ; the book exista only in 
quotations of extracts in a commentary written in 1856, and in a Burmese translation 
of 1768. Essay, p. 29. Also, Furnivall, “Manu in Burma: some Burmese Dbamma- 
thats ” in JBRS. 1940, pp. 351-70. 



132 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


period, and also of later periods, are on grammar, apparently 
an uncreative subject of study for monks who are expected 
to be more concerned with deeper aspects and problems of life, 
and as such, with psychology, ethics and metaphysics. It is 
strange that so late a scholar, holding so important a position 
as that of the Samgharaja, PannasamI, the author of the 
Sasanaoamsa, interests himself in grammar almost out of 
all proportion. He cannot conceal his predilection towards 
the subject in preference to others ; indeed, he delights 
in relating the accounts of those scholars who are interested 
like himself in the subject. In one place he is almost 
enthusiastic in recording how popular was the study of 
grammar even among women of all ages, and how even 
busy mothers of families of Pagan could find time to study 
grammar ; ™ in another place he relates with pleasure 
how witty women disputed with monks on Pali accidence. 
This extraordinary interest in grammar may have been due 
to the fact that for all who were interested in the religion — 
and a very considerable section of the community un- 
doubledly was — a knowledge of the sacred texts was almost 
the first requisite, and knowledge of the texts presupposed 
a good knowledge of Pali grammar. But perhaps more than 
this, it was due to the peculiar orthodox attitude of the 
Sinhalese school, an attitude which also explains their very 
strict adherence to the triflest rule on the day to day conduct 
of life as laid down in the Vinaya. Dr. Mabel Bode has 
a very significant passage”" on this attitude; it explains fully 
the interest in grammar of the Sinhalese school : 

“To the orthodox, scriptural warrant is everything, in the settlement of religious 
difficulties. From the word of the ancient texts, expanded in the Atthakatha, 
and further explained by tikas and atthayojanas there is no appeal. So the actual 
word ’ becomes the rock on which right believing and right living rest, and 
generation after generation of teachers devote themselves passionately to the study 
of Pali grammar. T he ‘ science of words ’ is held to be vital to the cause of Truth, 
and the writing of grammatical treatises rises to the height of a religious duty.” 

Sdsana, p. 78. 

Sdsanaj Introduction, p. 56. 



DURENiDANA AND AVIDURENIDANA STORIES IN BURMA 1 33 


VII 

THE DORENIDANA AND AVIDURENIDANA STORIES IN BURMA 

In a preceding section we have incidentally referred to 
the representation of the entire repository of Jataka stories 
numbering 547, on the glazed plaques adorning the walls of 
the Ananda temple. The Jataka stories embodying, as 
they do, their moral and ethical teachings in the form of 
charming tales and fables,” says M. Duroiselle, ” were one 
of the most potent means for pressing the claims of Buddhism 
among the peoples of Indo-China ; they have left a deep 
impression wherever the religion has become established. 
This is true of all tlie jatakas, but especially of the last ten 
long ones ; and the most prized and read among these ten 
are; Sama, Mahajanaka, Mahosadha (Maha-urnmagga) and 
Vessantara ; they have been translated in prose and verse, 
and turned into theatrical plays in the case of Vessantara. 
This predilection explains the great prominence given to 
these ten stories in the plaques of the Ananda, for, while 
the lesser jMakas have only one plaque to each, these ten 
are illustrated by 389. In Burma, they form the subject of 
a voluminous literature, both in Talaing and in Burmese.””' 
Out of the total number of 547 Jatakas 537 plaques contain 
537 shorter Jataka stories and the number and the order of the 
stories are the same as we find them in the Pali recension 
preserved in Ceylon and other countries profescing Pali 
Buddhism. The last ten, the Mahanipata stories 

as we find them on the Ananda do not follow the traditional 
order. The reason is difficult to guess. Nevertheless, it is 
evident that already by about the end of the eleventh century 
the entire corpus of Jataka literature was made familiar to the 
Buddhist fraternity of Upper Burma, and it is natural to 

Ep. Birm, I, part PP- v-vi. 

Ibid, pp. iv-v. 



134 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


imagine that through these stories Buddhism made its appeal 
to the rude common people of the north and rapidly won 
their heart. 

But it is not the Ananda alone in Pagan that was embel- 
lished by pictorial representations of jatakas. The temples 
that according to tradition and epigraphic evidence seem 
to be earlier than even the Ananda, namely the two Petleik 
pagodas, were also similarly decorated with the complete 
series of representations of Jataka stories. In all editions of 
Jataka stories, the number is 547, and in all other Pagan 
temples that had their walls similarly decorated, e.g., the 
Shwesandaw built by Anawrahta, the Shwezigon finished 
by Kyanzittha, the Dhammarajika built by Narapatisithu, 
the Mingalazedi built by Tarukpyemin, etc., the number is 
the same. The traditional number in Burma is however 550, 
and It is interesting to note that the Western Petleik numbers 
its plaques up to 550 which agrees exactly with the tradition. 
The three additional Jatakas are ; 497 Velama-Jat (Jataka), 
498 Mahagovinda Jat, and 499 Sumedhapadlta Jat. The 
legends on the plaques on the two Petleik pagodas, the 
Ananda and the Shwezigon are all written in Pali giving the 
name of the Jataka followed by its number, while those 
on the plaques of the Dhammarajika, the Mingalazedi, 
the Nandawye at Myanzaine near Kyaukse (c. 1 300) and the 
Shwezigon between Mandalay and Kyaukse (c. 1300), 
the legends are both in Pali and Burmese, Pali giving 
the name of the Jataka and the Burmese the state of 
existence in which the Bodhisattva had been born in that 
particular story. A few titles differ slightly as to spelling, 
while certain other Jatakas have been given a name altogether 
different from what we find in faiisboH’s edition. For 
“ Dighltikosala Jataka, ’ for example, we have “ Kosalaraja 


M .4n.R..4.5./., 1912-13, p. 89. 
Ibid., p. 91. 



DURENIDANA AND AVIDURENIDANA STORIES IN BURMA 135 


Jataka,” for “Aggika Jataka” we have “ Aggikabharadvaja 
Jataka,” for “ Radha Jataka ” we have Potthapada Jataka, 
Potthapada being the name of the younger parrot and Radha 
that of the elder in the story.*" 

The complete series of 547 Jataka stories is also found 
painted on the interior walls of the Kubyaukkyi temple at 
Wetkyi-in, between Nyang-U and Pagan, belonging to about 
the twelfth century A. D., as well as on those of another temple 
at Nyang-U, also belonging to the same date. In the former, 
out of the entire series 2) 0 only remain. The legends are 
in Pali and Burmese which latter is followed by the serial 
number of the jatakas in each nipata, the whole collection 
being divided into 22 nipatas.”'’ 

We have seen above that the number and order of the 
Jatakas follow rigorously the Pali version of Southern 
Buddhism which had been known to the Talaings of Lower 
Burma already for several centuries. From this it is per- 
missible to assume that Pagan was admitted into this wonder- 
ful realm of edifying tales of Buddhism, as in those of .so 
many other elements of culture and civilisation, through the 
Talaings, a very large number of whose monks, artists, 
craftsmen, sculptors and architects were brought over to 
Pagan as captives by Anawrahta. 

" Eventful is that, ” says M, Duroisellc, ‘‘ the Eiurinese, viclorious in the field, 
were intellectual iy the conquered ; for it i.s from that period that tlie wonderful 
architectural and lileiary activity, which made Pagan for ;i time the Buddhist metro- 
polis of China, i,s to be dated. Nearly three centuries of Northern and North- 
Eastern Indian active influences had slowly prepared the Burmese thoroughly (o 
assimilate the Talaing civilisation introduced by King Aru\wralita's conquest ; 
from that time writing was adopted to common use by the adoption of a foreign 
alphabet to represent Burmese sounds, and inscription on .stone or brick, in I alaing 
and Burmese appeared at Pagan ; the Tipitakas are transliterated into the newly 
adop ed alphabet. Sanskrit is definitely abandoned as a veliicle of religious teach- 
ing and, with it, the form of Mahayanism then extant at the Burmese capital, anrJ 
superseded by Pali : the court and the people receive the teacliing of Hlnayanism 

/bid, p. 91. 

^6 /bid, p, 93. 



136 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

at the feet of Talaing monks, and under Indian and Talaing supervision the moat 
magnificent temples are built in rapid succession.®^ 

The earlier inscriptions belonging to the eleventh and 
greater part of the twelfth centuries are almost all in Talaing, 
not in Burmese, and a closer examination of a very large 
number of Burmese words of the labels of Jataka legends 
would show that their spelling had not yet then become 
standardised and the form of writing was just at its beginnings. 
It was not very easy to represent adequately the phonetics 
of Burmese speech through the characters of Talaing. 
That the Talaings themselves helped the Burmese 
to a very great extent in achieving this would be evident from 
a very large number of early Burmese words and sounds that 
are nothing but phonetic transcriptions of original Talaing. 

Besides those already referred to there are also other 
temples in Pagan that contain pictorial representations of 
Jatakas. Mention may be made for instance of the wall- 
paintings of the Abeyadana and Kubyaukkyi temples of Pagan 
proper. Both temples seem to belong to about the third 
quarter of the eleventh century. The large majority of the 
paintings inside the Abeyadana represent gods and goddesses 
of the Brahmanical, Mahayana and Vajrayana pantheons, 
the solitary exception being that of a Jataka story — the Maha- 
ummagga Jataka. Panels in the porch outside however 
seem all to belong to the Plinayana. All the scenes, where - 
ever the paintings are still traceable, bear each a legend in 
both Pali and Talaing. A number is also attached to each 
with the numbers of the nipata given after each series. 
The number and arrangement of the Jatakas follow very 
closely those given by Faiisboll and noticeable in so many 
other temples in Pagan. The Kubyaukkyi temple also, like 
the Abeyadana, is a repository, so far as the wall paintings 
are concerned, of Brahmanical, Mahayana, Vajrayana, 


« /bid, p. 91. 



DURENIDANA AND AVIDURENIDANA STORIES IN BURMA 137 


Tantrayana and Hinayana divinities and fully and adequately 
illustrate the eclectic religious life of the Burmese metro- 
polis which was not very much unlike what one finds in 
Bihar and Bengal from about the seventh to about the tenth 
century A.D. Here also we find on the walls paintings 
depicting scenes from the Jalakas and stories from the life 
of the Buddha as known to Pali literature. 

Like the Dorenldana or Jataka stories, the Avidurenidana 
or the life-stories of the Buddha also became very popular in 
Burma during this period and continued to be so ever since. 
Already we have seen the ruins of Old Prome yielding relief 
sculptures narrating important episodes from the life of 
the Master. We have also seen that the comp>lete cycle was 
elaborately represented on the walls of the terraces and 
corridors of the Ananda. Archaeological exploration and 
research in Pagan during the last forty years have yielded 
a large number of sculptures, terracotta tablets and 
painted panels representing important episodes of Buddha's 
life beginning from that of the request of the gods 
in the Tusita heaven, but more often from that of the 
dream interpretation, to the story of the Mahaparinibbana. 
Such sculptures and painted panels are but too numerous 
to enable us to take individual notice of them.^^ One or 
two representative examples brought to light by recent 
explorations may just be referred to ; but the most important 
repository of Avidurenidana stories in Burma is of course 
the Ananda where one finds the richest store of sculptures 
and glazed terracotta tablets representing the entire series of 
events and episodes of the Master's life beginning with the 
request of the gods in the Tusita heaven and ending with the 
Parinibbana, including the various miracles he performed in 
his last existence and also other incidents connected 
with his life and activities. Nowhere else in Burma except 

An.R.A.S.l., I9I3-14, Duroiselle, The stone sculptures in the Ananda 
Temple at Pagan, pp. 63 ft. 


I8__1445B 



138 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


in the Ananda is the AvidOrenidana cycle so elaborately re- 
presented, though from a number of temples hail reliefs that 
stylistically and iconographically may be considered more or 
less as replicas of those of the Ananda. 

But Pagan has also yielded stone slabs and terracotta 
reliefs in which several scenes are clustered together round 
a principal central scene, all co-ordinated into one relief- 
composition. Reliefs representing such scenes belong almost 
invariably to the East Indian tradition of India and the 
iconographic presentation is in most cases a veritable copy 
of similar presentation^ from Sarnath and other centres in 
Bihar and Bengal. Take, for example, two stone reliefs 
unearthed from the ruins of a temple at Thyipyitsaya, 
five miles from Pagan illustrating several scenes from the 
Buddha’s life. The central figure is of the Buddha seated 
in bhumisparsamudra in vajrasana which represents the story 
of Illumination at Bodh-gaya where he called the earth 
to witness a most important event of his life. From his right 
are arranged the following episodes in order of sequence 
from the bottom : (2) nativity or the birth of the Bodhisattva, 
(3) the hirst Sermon, (4) taming the Nalagirl elephant, 
(5) descent from the Trayalrimsa heaven, (6) the Savatthi 
miracle, (7) the presentation of honey by the monkey, and 
last of all (8) the Parinibbana which is placed on the top of 
the slab. Going round in the same order the first panel 
in the inner row represents : (9) feeding the Buddha, (10) 
the Buddha in dhyanamudra, (11) the Buddha with both his 
hands in abhayamudra, (12) Buddha standing, { I 3 ) repetition 
of No. 10, and tlie Mucalinda incident.^'' In a good 

number of such slabs, the first eight principal scenes are 
represented in almost the same order. For instance, a 
small stone slab recovered from a field close to theShwezigon 
pagoda, Pagan, represents in the centre the principal figure 

An.R.A.S.B. 1928-29. pp. 30-3), plate 111, fig. 1. 



DORENIDANA and AVIDORENIDANA stories in BURMA 139 

of Bodhisattva Gotarna seated in bhumisparasamudra under 
the Bodhl tree at Bodh-gaya and flanked by the two Bodhi- 
sattvas, Maitreya and Avalokitesvara, a common feature in 
Burma. Just above the head of Maitreya and Avalokita, in 
a vertical row will be seen Mara’s retinue which suggests 
that the Bodhisattva is just on the threshold of attaining the 
Buddhahood. It will be noticed in all such reliefs from 
Burma that the Bodhisattva is represented in princely attire 
which is explained in Burmese and Siamese tradition by the 
introduction of a story that is unknown to Indian Buddhalogy. 
The story represents Buddha Gotarna as Jambupati or a 
Rajachakkavatti whose dress he assumed when he appeared 
before a certain king who was very proud of his wealth and 
power, and it was to curb his pride that the Buddha appeared 
in a princely resplendent attire/^’ Round the principal figure 
beginning from the bottom left are represented the 

following stories: (2^ Nativity scene, (3) the First 
Sermon, (4) taming of the wild elephant Nalagiri, (5) descent 
from the 1 uslta heaven, (6) Miracle at Savatthi, and (7) above 
the principal figure, the Mahaparlnibbana. An exactly 
similar slab was unearthed from the debris of a ruined 
pagoda at Myinpagan. Here also the principal figure 
is that of the Bodhisattva Gotarna sealed under the 
Bodhi tree in bhomisparsamudra and flanked by Avalokita 
and Maitreya as well as by the army of Mara, and the 
seven other principal scenes are arranged in exactly the same 
sequence. But in this instance around the central figure 
there is a vertical row in between the principal figure and 
the outer row of seven scenes. This vertical row represents 
six other scenes which are exactly similar to those of the 
stone slab from Thyipyitsaya described above. Here too 
the Mucalinda incident is clearly indicated by a seated 
figure with cobra hoods above its head immediately on the 
90 Ibid, pp. 30 31. 

Ibid, 



HO 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


left of the standing figure of the Bodhisattva on the left side 
of the central figure. 

It would be evident from the reliefs described above that 
the eight principal scenes as we find them on these and 
similar other reliefs were very popular in Burma, Of 
the reliefs representing individual scenes, finds from 
Pagan indicate that the most popular incidents of the 
Master’s life were those of his birth, the Boclhi, the First 
Sermon, the taming of the elephant, and the stories relating 
to the Parileyyaka forest, Mucalinda, and the ogre Alavaka. 
The birth story was so very popular that in some cases the 
different stages of the story have also been represented. For 
example, on a stone relief in one of the corridors of the 
Kubyaukgale temple at Myinpagan is represented the birth of 
the Bodhisattva and the incidents that immediately followed, 
Viz,j (1) four chief Brahmanas receiving the new-born infant 
on a golden net-work, (2) four Lokapalas receiving him on a 
black antelope’s skin from the hands of the chief Brahmanas, 
(3) four men receiving him on a piece of cloth from the 
hands of the Lokapalas, and (4) the new-born infant making 
the first seven strides, flanked on his left by Brahma holding 
the white umbrella over his head and on his right by two 
devas. Such representations can also be seen with but 
slight variations at the Ananda as well as in the wall- 
paintings and stone-slabs in other temples in Pagan. An 
interesting feature of the Kubyaukgale relief is that on the 
top of the head of Mayadevi is a small figure seated 
cross-legged with the right hand placed on the right knee, 
palm downwards, and the left hand on the lap, palm 
upwards. This must represent the Bodhisattva, and the 
representation of the incidents are in accordance with Burmese 
Buddhalogy.''^ 

92 An.R A.S.I.. 1930-34, p. ISO. 

9^ An R.A.S.L. 1935-36, p. 73-75. 



DURENIDANA AND AViDURENiDANA STORIES IN BURMA 141 


Not only on stone reliefs and terracotta votive tablets 
but in wall-paintings as well we have a large number of 
representations of stories from Buddha’s life. The walls of 
a large number of temples of Pagan were originally decorated 
with paintings; but ravages of men, time and nature have 
been successful in obliterating them in most cases. Few 
that remain show that the people of Pagan had a 
very intimate knowledge of the entire cycle of stories 
pertaining to Buddha’s life. Such representations are 
often found along with those of Biahmanical, Mahayana, 
Vajrayana and 1 antrayana gods and goddesses. Examples 
may be cited from two temples, one from among the earliest 
monuments, namely, the Patotharnya, and another from 
among the latest of the Pagan period, namely, the 
Payathonzu. The Patotharnya paintings illustrating stories 
from the Buddha’s life are provided with legends in Mon in 
characters of about the eleventh century. 1 hese legends 
help us to identify the stories, one of which represents the 
prediction by the sage Kala-devala, while another shows the 
Buddha in the midst of his Sakya kinsmen exhibiting the 
Yamaka-pratiharya. ' Among the Payathonzu temple cEaw- 
ings the following scenes may easily be identiked : (1 ) descent 
from the Trayatrimsa heaven, ( 2 ) birth of the Bodhisattva, 
(3) the seven strides, (4) adoration of the relics, (5) walk- 
ing near Gandhakuh in Jelavana, (6) Buddha in the 
Parlleyyaka forest, (7) Bodhisattva proceeding to the Bcdhi 
tree, and (8) Buddha seated on the Vajrasana at Bcdh-Gaya. 

In one of the paintings on the walls of the Sayambu 
temple one notices a representation of the story of the ogre 
Alavaka-''' 


AnM.A.SJ., 1935-36, p. 139. 
An.R.AS.L, 2935-36. p. 80-81. 
Ibid. p. 81. 



142 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Vlll 

FURTHER CORROBORATIVE ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 

The story of Theravada Buddhism as related in the 
previous sections finds confirmation in the history and art 
of the hundred and one monuments that came to cover 
every available inch of ground of the torrid plains of Pagan, 
One should bear in mind all these large and small edifices 
dedicated to the glorification of the Master and his faith were 
reared up in course of about 250 years, from about the 
middle of the eleventh to about the closing of the thirteenth 
century A.D, These monuments that pierce the Pagan sky 
furnish an undying testimony to the efflorescence of 
Buddhism during those eventful two centuries and a half 
when the kings of the Anawrahta dynasty sat on the throne. 
Remains of dozens of monasteries strewn all over the metro- 
polis and its suburbs suggest that there were thousands of 
monks who went about with their begging bowl from door 
to door, brought relief and succour to those physically and 
mentally afflicted, taught the message of the Master to those 
who had been given up to heathen gods and spirits, and 
retired to their regulated and disciplined duties of daily life in 
the seclusion of their cells inside the monasteries. Inscriptions 
only in dozens testify to the donations of villages, lands, books, 
slaves, cattle and other necessities of monastic life towards 
the regular upkeep and maintenance of temples and other 
monastic establishments, and such donations were made not 
by the kings and members of the royal and noble families 
but by well-to-do members of the lay public as well. Two 
Inscriptions in Burmese, for example, recovered from the 
ruins of a temple south-east of the Nagayon, Myinpagan, 
record the dedication of lands, slave and cattle to some stupas 
and temples by an ordinary citizen. One of these inscrip- 
tions is dated in the Burmese Common Eara equivalent to 



CORROBORATIVE ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 143 

1081 A.D,^^ Another old Burmese inscription recovered from 
the ruins near the Sinbaung Temple, Thyipyitsaya, Pagan, 
records the dedication by a revenue officer and his wife, of 
lands and slaves to a pagoda and a monastery and of certain 
objects for the use of monks of that monastery. It is dated 
595 S.E.= 1233-34 A.D. The interesting point in the 
inscription is that the dedication was made in the presence of 
8 monks headed by “ Sklin Singhuim,’’ a description that pre- 
sumably stands for a Sinhalese monk.'^ These are but 
specimens of many such inscriptions brought to light by 
archaeological research and exploration at Pagan and other 
important centres in Upper Burma. If further corroborative 
evidence is needed, it is furnishecJ by the numberless stone 
and stucco images of the Buddha in different attitudes 
that adorn the niches and sanctums of hundreds of 
stOpas and temples as well as by the deluge of terracotta 
votive tablets bearing effigies of the Buddha and Buddhist 
epigraphs. Such epigraphs on tablets belong to different 
categories. One category whose number is by far the largest 
bears the name of King Anawrahta, the man responsible for 
the introduction of Tlieravada Buddhism in Upper Burma. 
The epigraph is either as follows : 

Ye dharnina hetuprabhava hetum tesam Tathagatohavadat 
tesarn ca yo nirodha evamvadi Aniruddhadeva 

in Sanskrit or Pah or in mixed Sanskrit and Pali, but in- 
variably in East- Indian characters of the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries. I his is the well-known Buddhist formula 
snatched from the lips of the Mahasamana and put into 
those of Aniruddhadeva (King Anawrahta). Or, in other 
instances, it runs as follows : 

Om deyadharmo’y^n^ saccadanapati 
Maharaja Aniruddhadevasya 

97 An R,A.SJ., 1930-34, p. 190. 

9^ Ibid, 1934-35, pp. 71-72. 



144 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


in the same East-lndian characters of the same date. 
Whether they are in Sanskrit or Pali or in mixed Pali -Sanskrit, 
doubtless they were all locally moulded to order. In 
the second category fall those that bear on them the Buddhist 
formula as such without the name of any body, either in 
Pali or Sanskrit but always in East-lndian characters of 
the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Those in 
Sanskrit may have been carried over to the metropolis 
from such centres as Sarnath, Bodhgaya, Ndanda and 
other places in Eastern India, but those in Pali were 
probably locally moulded to order. I he third category 
includes those tablets that begin with Ye dhamma hetu~ 
ppabhava and ends with “ danapati Sri Mahh)syadevi ’ or with 
the name of some other individual. There is a fourth 
category which does not quote the Buddhist formula but 
record only the name of the donor of the particular tablet 
and the fact and aim of the donation. Such legends are in 
Mon or Pall or in mixed Mon and Pali, in East-lndian 
characters of the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 
The legends are of various kinds. For example, one says 
that the image of the Jina, the Buddha, was made by an 
acariya or monk ; another contains a prayer expressing a 
hope that his work of merit (i.e., having the tablet moulded) 
might be a help to oblairi omniscience. A third of which 
the first half is in Mon means that a particular tablet was 
made by Yasa, while the other half which is in Pali means 
“ with his ov/n hands.” Still a fourth would have another 
legend in Mon which means “ made by Samben (or Minister)”, 
and a fifth which reads in Pali: “ eso bhagava Triloka- 
vatarnsaka Mahadeviya kata virnuttattham sahatlhen’evati ” 
which translated would be “This tablet was macie by 
Trilokavcitamsaka, the chief queen, with her own hands, 
with a view to attain salvation.” The last is indeed a pattern 
often found employed in votive tablets by Anawrahta and 
others, the only variation being in the names of donors; for 



CORROBORATIVE ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 


145 


example, one tablet depicting the Buddha in bhumisparsamudra 
has the following inscription; “ eso bhagava Samben 
Jesalyena kata vimuttatham sahatthen’evati.” 

In respect of Theravada Buddhism in Pagan and other 
important centres in Upper Burma during the suzerainty 
of the Anawrahta dynasty evidence has indeed been 
overwhelming, and the account narrated from traditions and 
chronicles stands fully corroborated by epigraphic documents, 
sculptures, paintings, terracotta votive tablets and not the 
least by the most splendid array of monuments that are a 
real glory to the culture and civilisation of Burma. But 
the growth of Pagan as the most important centre of religion 
in Burma and carrying over to Pagan of monks, artists, 
artisans, and sacred texts and relics of the religion from 
Thaton, did not and could not possibly extinguish the light 
that had been burning in the Talaing realm for centuries past. 

I have already drawn pointed attention to the fact that 
nothing could be further from truth, and have also tried to 
give in a preceding section an account of the religion in the 
Talaing country after the cruel fate that attended her in 
1057. It is true, the religion suffered a great set back; 
robbed of royal patronage and heavily affected by transfer- 
ence of political authority, the religious fraternity must have 
found itself in deep sea. Fortunately it turned out to be but 
a temporary eclipse, and soon we find the monks and 
monastic establishments of the country showing renewed 
signs of life and movement. This finds striking confirmation 
from archaeological finds made at Thaton and Rangoon 
and dateable from about the eleventh to about the 
thirteenth century A.D. In recent years attention h is been 
drawn to seven stone slabs, all bearing inscriptions and 
belonging at the Shwezayan pagoda, Thaton. The 
Shwezayan in its present form is a monument not older 

5*9 For references, see j4n. /t.rt.S, /., 1930-34, pf). 178-178, 188-89. 


19— I445B 



146 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


than about the fifteenth or sixteenth century, but the inscrip- 
tions, in Pali and Mon, seem to be older than the monument 
itself. They were not all inscribed at one and the same 
period, for, while, paleographically speaking, the earliest of 
them can be dated in about the eleventh century, the latest 
probably belong to about the fifteenth. They have not yet 
been deciphered and edited, but even a cursory glance at them 
would prove that their subject-matter is Buddhistic. But more 
important is the evidence afforded by the terracotta plaques 
of the Thagyapaya stupa in the very heart of the Thaton 
town. Originally there seem to have been a total of 
61 plaques, but now only a few remain. In my Brahmanical 
Gods in Burma (1932) 1 had suggested that these probably 
represented stories from the Ramayana or the Purdnas. 1 am 
now convinced that they represent Jataka stories, and among 
the very few reliefs that are still extant, the following stories 
have already been traced ; the Vessantara Jataka, the Vidhura 
Jataka (2 plaques), the Mahaummagga Jataka (2 plaques), 
the Bhuridatta Jataka (2 plaques) and the Temiya Jataka."’" 
Stylistically these terracotta reliefs can be assigned to a 
period not later than the 12th century A.D. Further, 
round the Kalyanisima, Thaton, there stands a row of 
sandstone pillars depicting stories from the Jatakas carved 
in relief. The Mahajanaka, the Sama and the Nemi 
Jatakas can at once be recognised ; the Vidhurapandita 
Jataka is illustrated on two pillars, while another pillar found 
broken in two parts seem to represent scenes from the 
Vessantara Jataka, so very popular in Burma. These 
reliefs can stylistically be dated between the 12th and 
1 3th centuries. In Rangoon also where excavation was 
undertaken for the first time in 1938-39 last, important finds 
have been made that go to prove the prevalence of Buddhism 
in that part of the Talaing country from about the eighth or 

100 An.R.A.S.I., 1930-34, pp. 196-203. 

Ibid, pp. 203-4. 



CORROBORATiVE ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 147 

ninth to about the thirteenth century A.D. The most 
important of these finds is a terracotta votive tablet, not 
unlike those from Pagan, bearing on the obverse a represent- 
ation of the Buddha seated in vajrasana inside a temple and 
on the reverse a five-line Pali inscription, deciphered and 
translated as follows : 


1 (buddha) riipa s . ... 

2 n (i) naga (1) <- iic 

3. (Sa) nsaiamuccanattha 

4 na karitan-ti 

5 thei bilah... 


“ This image of the Buddha in the Naga cave 

has been caused to be made by for the sake of 

deliverance from Sarnsara (if.e, round of rebirths) — (Signed) 
The Thera Vilasa.” Fhe inscription is in Burmese and 
may paleographically be assigned to about the twelfth 
century A.D. The remains ot a stupa and a very large 
number of terracotta votive tcxblets unearthed from the site 
which is not very far from the Fadagale railway station, 
may also be safely assigned to the same date. On a large 
number of these tablets can be seen effigies of the Buddha 
in several rows ; on others a single Buddha seated in 
vajrasana within a small temple surrounded by stupas. 
Aaoiher variety represents the Buddha seated in bhiimisparsa- 
mudra, while a fourth depicts the twin miracle of Savatthz 
or the Yarnaka praliharya.'' ’ A bronze statue of Dipankara 
Buddha in a standing position, stylistically dateable in about 
the eighth century, is also another interesting and perhaps 
the earliest find from the same site. 

IX 

RELIGIOUS ECCLECTiCISM OF PAGAN 

Theravada Buddhism, the religion of the state and a 
large majority of the people though it was during the two 


A02 1938-39, p. 5. 

103 6 , 



148 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


hundred and fifty years the Anawrahta dynasty wielded 
power in the land, was not the only religion in the metropolis 
of Pagan. All the kings of the dynasty were zealous 
Buddhists, faithful and sincerely devoted unto the cause they 
had made their own, and the people also seem to have 
responded fully and well to the lead given by the royal 
family, the court and the nobility. But it was difficult for 
the different classes of people to bid good-bye all at once to 
the old faiths they had dearly held and practised for centuries, 
namely, their age-old faith in the primitive Nat-spirits, or in 
Brahmanism, Mahayanism, and Vajrayana and Tantrayana 
Buddhism brought in by Indian traders, adventurers, 
scholars, monks and all other k;nds of people who resorted 
to the place on their respective missions and vocations. 
Anawrahta introduced Theravada Buddhism into Pagan ; 
he as well as Sawlu and Anawrahta were sincere 
Theravadins — there cannot be any doubt about it — and so 
were their descendants, but elsewhere 1 have shown’®' that 
the court-rituals were all deeply tinged with Brahmanical 
religious practices in which Narayana had a place of honour 
and gods like Brahma, Visnu and Ganesa actually found 
place, admittedly as minor deities in the orthodox Buddhist 
pantheon of Burma. In fcict, the temple built at Myinpagan 
for Manuha, the Talaing king, seem to have been one in 
which Brahma figured very prominently. Also, not only 
there was the Nat-hlaung-Kyaung, a Visnu-Dasavatara 
Temple"” in the very heart of the city, but there has also 
been unearthed or picked up a considerable number of 
images that tend to show that Brahmanism was a considerable 
factor in the religious life of Pagan and claimed at least a 
certain section of the people. This is further corroborated by 
the fact that besides Brahmanical images in stone and bronze 

104 F^ay, Brahmanical Gods in Burma. 

105 Ibid; also see An.R.A.S.J., 1930-34, pp. 191-92, 



RELIGIOUS ECCLECTICISM OF PAGAN 


149 


picked up from the ruins of Pagan and now housed in the 
Pagan Museum or found installed in the niches or at the 
corners or other places of some of the frankly Buddhist 
stupas and temples we have in the wall-paintings of temples 
like the Abeyadana and the Kubyaukkyi representations of 
Brahmanical divinities like Brahma, Siva, Visnu, Ganesa, 
Yamuna and others, and nobody can say that these two 
temples are not frankly Buddhist ones. Indeed, if tradition 
is to be believed they were both built either by Anawrahta or 
by Kyanzittha. In any case they were built between 1050 
and I 100 A.D. when Theravada Buddhism was just making 
its appearance in Pagan. Of such Brahmanical divinities, 
Brahma, Visnu or Narayana, Siva and Ganesa seem to have 
enjoyed special favour, most of all Ganesa." ' 

But if Brahmanical Hinduism claimed a certain section of 
the people besides the Hindu colonists themselves, the different 
schools of Sanskrit Buddhism, namely Mahciyana proper and 
its offshoots, Vajrayana and Buddhist Tantrayana along with 
Mantrayana and Kalacakrayana did even more. 1 have 
elsewhere gone info details to find out the extent achieved 
by these cults in Pagan"*; here it would suffice to mention 
that Mahayanism and its allied cults had been well-known in 
Pagan and claimed a considerable section of the population 
from at least one or two centuries before Theravada came to 
make its influence felt there. And even after the introduction 
of Theravada, Mahayanistic Fantrik influences continued to 
flow in from Bihar, Bengal, Tibet and Nepal yet for some 
time more. 1 he followers of frankly Tantrik-Buddhist rituals 
and practices came to be known to Burmese tradition as 
Aris or Samanakuttakas whom successive Burmese kings 
sought to suppress. Not only has there been picked up from 
the ruins of Pagan a considerable number of images in stone 

/I n.R.yt .5./, 1930-34, p. 184. 

/fef J ; also see .5. 1, , 1935-37, pp. I65-60. 

108 Ray, Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma, 1936. 



150 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

and bronze of frankly Mahayana and Vajrayana affiliation and 
dateable from about the tenth to about the twelfth centuries, 
but wall-paintings of such temples as the Patothamya, 
Abeyadana and Kubyaukkyi, represent gods and goddesses 
like Avalokitesvara, Manjusri, Tara, Maitreya, Hayagriva, 
Lokanatha, etc., and Bodhisattvas with their Saktis in 
sensuous and sometimes frankly erotic postures and positions. 
More sensuous and erotic are the representations on the 
walls of the Payathonzu and the Nandamafina temples that 
are admittedly of Tiintrik origins. Considered from the 
point of view of nature and style of the sculptures and 
paintings as well as of the monuments containing such 
representations, it appears that Mahayanism and its allied 
cults coninued to flourish in Pagan at least till the end of 
the thirteenth century A.D. 

It is thus evident that when Theravada was ' introduced 
into Pagan it found itself pressed by ancestral Nat worship 
and Brahmnical Hinduism on one side and Mahayana 
and allied cults on the other. But Theravada from the 
very beginning was fortunate in having the devoted patro- 
nage of the court backed by the resources of a kingdom, 
and we have already seen with what rapid strides it spread 
itself far and wide and won the heart of the larger section 
of the entire populace. But in doing so it could not ignore 
all the elements of the contending cults that had already 
been in existence in the metropolis. The ancestral Nats 
whom one can see still guarding the entrances and points 
at the Shwezigon came to claim their share; some of 
the Brahmanical divinities also came to be incorporated 
into the orthodox Theravada pantheon, and court rituals and 
ceremonies also came to be deeply tinged with Brahmanical 
practices. With regard to Mahayana and its allied cults 


cii, Brahmanical Gods in Burma, Chap. 



INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN: A POSTSCRIPT 151 

the attitude of Theravada was a bit otherwise. This I have 
elsewhere summarised as follows : 

“ Mahayana Buddhism and its allied cults in Pagan, when we see them in 
existence, were after all practised by only a section of the people who, we may 
infer, had a full-fledged organisation of their own, but the Theravada being the 
much more popular and powerful religion could well afford to look at its 
vanquished rival with a confident smile. The two faiths seemed to have lived 
side by .side till at last the Theravada, always wilh the support of the throne, 
was able to emerge completely triumphant and wipe out even the memory of ita 
rival. But in course of centuries of close neighbourhood, the I'heravada of 
Burma came to absorb some of the elements of its sister faith, and some of 
the gods of the Mahayana pantheon, e.g. , Avalokitesvara and Miitreya, were 
even adopted by the Theravadins. This is perhaps why Taranatha says tliat in 
the Koki countriea the “ Mahayana and the Hinayana were not always distinguish- 
able.*’ 


X 

INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN : A POSTSCRIPT 

By far the mast reliable and important documents that 
furnish a detailed and authentic picture of the state of 
religion in Upper Burma, especially in Pagan, is the long 
series of Pali, Mon and Burmese inscriptions of the kings 
of the Pagan dynasty and the countless monuments 
reared up by them or during their suzerainty, with their 
wealth of Buddhist images, narrative reliefs, and terracotta 
plaques all representing Buddhist subjecls. The long and 
unique series of epigraphic records reveal unmistakably the 
extent to which the members of the Anawrahta dynasty were 
touched and inspired b3^ the faith they had lately adopted, 
their attitude towards the religion and the motive that brought 
into being the glorious monuments of the royal citadel and 
the surrounding country. They also furnish a vivid picture 
of the social and economic life against the background of 
which the religion shone and sought to mould the new 
fabric of life of a rude and semi-barbaric people. Here 


Op. cit. Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma, p. 93, 



J52 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


in these records we read of Buddhist rites and rituals heavily 
tinged with those that were essentially Brahmanical and 
perhaps also with those of primitive Nat and Naga worship, 
of Brahmanical priests and astrologers taking part in the 
religious observances of kings who were frankly Buddhists, 
and of Brahmanas who carried purificatory water for the 
recitation of the paritta, a typically Buddhist ritualistic 
formula invoking protection. “ At sunset, godhuli being the 
lagna, the Sarikran (sarnkranti?) Brahmanas who carried 
litters’,’ so runs a passage in the Tharaba gate inscription,’" 
“ beat the foremost drum. The Brahmana astrologers went 
(and) drew water for the reciting of the paritta." In one 
and the same ceremony offerings were made to the statues 
of the Buddha along with those of Nagas, Indra, Narayana 
and other gods of the Brahmanical pantheon. It is interesting 
to note that some at any rate of the Brahmanas referred 
to came from the Mon country, just as some of the Buddhist 
monks also evidently did. Here in these records we not only 
find reference to the Three Pitakas and the Abhidharnma," ' 
but at least in one early Mon record from the Shwesandaw 
pagoda, Prome,"' we read that Kyanzittha effected a 
revision of the Buddhist canon, “ the three holy Pitakas 
which had become obscured.” The same inscription also 
refers to a 

“misi’ion to India with funds for the restoration and endowment of the 
temple at Bodhgaya, liberality to the monks, relation with other pnnces and in 
particular with a certain ‘Coli* prince whom the king claims to have converted to 
Buddhism . -Tills episode is followed in the record by details of the offerings made 
by the people of Pagan end its neighbourhood on festive occasions of a religious 
character, and stres.s is laid here (as in some of the other inscription.^) on the fact 
that the king himself delivered didiictic addresses to liis subjects who appreciated 
them highly... There is an interesting passage illustrating, as it would appear, the 
Buddhist doctrine of kindness to animals. It seems that certain bird.s were the 

Ep. Birm. III. part One, p. Iff. 

For example, in the Great Shwezigon inscription and the Tharaba gate 
inscriptioiii Ep, Birm, 1, part Two and III, part One. 

£p Birm. I, part Two, p. 158 ff. 



INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN : A POSTSCRIPT 


153 


objects of the king’s special favour and enjoyed Kis protection, while (from another 
passage) it may be inferred that animals in general were secured generous treat- 
ment and some provision of food ; a strong tinge of ethical and religious sentiment 
pervades the inscription...” 

A very strong religious and ecclesiastical flavour also 
pervades the great and well-known Shwezigon inscription"* 
which begins with a Pali exordium followed by a nissaya ; 
this is equally true of a good number of other Mon, Pali and 
Burmese records of Pagan. Indeed, the Pagan kings, 
vainglorious tyrants as they were, were sincere and ardent 
Buddhists as well and it is evident from the inscriptions 
that they strove hard not only to make Buddhism a living 
faith with themselves and their people over whom they were 
destined to rule, but a really potent social force as well in 
the country. To what extent they succeeded in their efforts 
would be evident from the fact recorded in numerous 
inscriptions that sometimes even a whole family participated 
in the foundation of a Buddhist establishment, one vying 
with the other ; sometimes they dedicated themselves or were 
done so by their masters as slaves to one or other of their 
religious foundations, and often made gifts to them of lands, 
books, clothes and all other requirements of a modest 
monastic life. Of many such examples, not unoften full of 
Buddhist sentiments and essentially Buddhist phraseology, 
here is one from an inscription found at Kyaukse and 
belonging to about the twelfth century. The inscription 
records the foundation of a baJcIhaslma at Kyaukse (Klok sa) 
that was set up by the chief monk of the locality with the 
assistance of certain other persons whom he apparently 
dedicated to that service. A grant of land made by some 
local official or officials to the founder was also transferred 
to his foundation. 

'•< Ep Birm. I, part Two, p, 80 fl 

20 - I445B 



154 THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

“I, the Chief Monk ... Lori, when I came to dwell al Klok sa, I informed the 
Chief Monk of Pagan, I informed the king there, that I was building a haddhaslma. 
These (are the persons! who together with her with myself worked (for this 
temple?): the junior monk Mahadew, his fathei, his mother, his (grand father?); 
(...?) the mother of Na Lwoy, Ya Wari, son of Na Mrik, Na Gan Da : these f dedi- 
cate to the temple, who worked together with myselt. 1 lie great {donation?) of 
(7 measures of) arable land, which the Kon Sainberi dalt ti gave to me, I also give to 
tlie temple (May ?) the, accumulation of merit (offering and worshipping) .. (con 
duct ?j for (all beings).’**^'' 

But , it is curious that nowhere in the contemporary 
inscriptions is there any evidence that may be reasonably 
interpreted to explain hov/ the new iaith was introduced 
into Pagan, and was accepted by the ruling dynasty, or how 
it fared and thrived during the two centuries and a half the 
Pagan dynasty had its overlordship recognised tliroughout 
Burma. They seem to know nothing of the very dramatic and 
eventful story of the introduction of Theravada Buddhism as 
related in the fifteenth century Kalyani inscriptions and follow- 
ing them, in the later Burmese chronicles. There is, for 
example, no mention in these records, frankly Buddhist in 
ciffiliation and sentiment, of Shin Arahan, the central figure in 
that eventful drama, nor of any other name or names of monks, 
or of evenls and episodes mentioned or narrated in the Kalyani 
inscriptions. Two monks, Tamalin and Dhammavilasa, find 
mention in the Pagan inscriptions as well, but it is difficult to 
say if the two pairs of names were identical. There is no 
warrant in the Pagan inscriptions for the story that Tamalin 
was the son of a ruler of Kamboja or had ever been to Ceylon, 
as Tamalincla is alleged by the Kalyani inscriptions to have 
been. As regards Dhammavilasa it is difficult to ascertain if he 
was the same as the Dhammavilasa of the Kalyani inscriptions. 
There is a Capata pagoda, a stupa of Sinhalese type, at 
Nyangu in Pagan, but since the date of its foundation is 
uncertain, it cannot with absolute certainty be associated 
with the monk Capata of the Kalyani inscriptions or of 


Ep. Bi'rm. Ill, part One, p. 70 ff' 



INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN : A POSTSCRIPT 


155 


the Sasanavamsa. The Kalyani inscriptions refer in some 
detail to a mission sent by Anawrahta to Ceylon; one 
would imagine, it may be arguec], that the CuUaVamsa 
which purports to be a history of the island would dilate 
on this mission, but this history merely states lhat 
Vijayabahu wrote with his own hand a letter of great 
merit to the king of Arimaddana with whom he made 
a great friendship. He is further credited with having given 
great delight to the monks that dwelt in Lanka and 
Arimaddana. From all these one may be disposed to hold 
that the ciccount of the introduction of Theravada buddhism 
to Pagan including the story of Shin Arahan and the 
subsequent history of the Buddhist church in Burma as 
narrated in the Kcilyani inscriptions are but pious fictions 
concocted not earler than tiie fifteenth century by the zealous 
Buddhist king Dhammaceti. 

But such an assumption would indeed be the height of 
scholarly scepticism. It is difficult to believe that Dhammaceti 
created a fiction out of nothing, and that the story of tiie 
introduction of the faith and the subsecjuent history of the 
Samgha with its different monkish orders were just figments 
of his imagination. Burmese tradition ascribes the story of 
Shin Arahan and the sack of I haton to 1057-58 A.D., 
and it is not a little curious that not even one of the long 
series of Pagan inscriptions can be dated earlier than the 
third cjuarter of the eleventh century from which time, 
roughly speaking, the art and momumental activity centring 
round Buddhism also seems to have taken its start. Indeed 
Burmese culture as distinguished from Pyu and Lalaing cul- 
tures dates from this period and it is significant that its earliest 
centre was Pagan. There can hardly be any doubt that 
this simultaneous bursting forth of vigorous Buddhist religious 
and all round cultural activity in the Pagan kingdom from 
about the third quarter of the eleventh century was due to 
Pagan’s coming into contact with the Pyu and Talaing cuL 



156 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


ture and civilisation of Central Burma and Suvannabhumi. 
Or, otherwise the great historical upheaval remains entirely 
unexplained, at least so far as our present knowledge goes. 
Racially, the Talaings were different from the Burmese ; 
the rude Burmese barbarians who considered the Talaings 
as their sworn and eternal enemies through centuries had 
wrested political power from the latter, and yet whatever culture 
and civilisation they came to acquire including Buddhism 
itself, were the gifts directly of the Talaings themselves. 
As not unoften happens in history, the Burmese have always 
been very careful not to admit the debt they owed to their 
enemies; indeed, even the nineteenth century chronicler 
Pannasami was not free from anti- 1 alaing feelings. There 
is more than one evidence in the history of Buddhism in 
Burma of wilful suppression of facts in respect of religious 
activities amongst the Talaings and of Talaing contribution 
to the liistory of the religion in the peninsula. It is, 
therefore, not at all unlikely that the Burmese and their early 
champions, the Pagan kings, deliberately ignored or 
suppressed whatever the Talaings had contributed towards 
the introduction and propagation of the faith in Pagan and 
upper Burma, including the activities of Shin Arahan, the 
Talaing monk who happened to be the harbinger of a new 
way and ideal of life and cuture to the uncultured Burmans 
of the northd^^’ Dhammaceti, a Mon sovereign himself, had 

II cannot be said vvitli absolule ccrlaiiUy that Shin Arahan is not at ah 
mentioned in the Pagan insrtiplions. Mon Inscription No. IX <Ep. Biini. (II, Part II 
mentions one Mahathera Arahan on several occasions along with one hundred and 
eight ‘lords of the Cliurch’ in connection with llie ceremonial for the consecration 
of the royal palace of Kyanzittha. It is most likely that this Mahathera Arahan is 
no other than Sinn Arahan. If non-mentioji in the inscriptions of Pagan can he 
pressed forward a.s a valid argument, then it would stand to reason to argue thc3 
the Ananda was not built under the patronage of king Kyanzittha since the fact 
not mentioned in the inscriptions of Pagan, nor can it be said that the two kneedi 
figures before the standing Buddha in the main sanctum of the Ananda represe 
the crowned king Kyanzittha and tlie shaven headed Buddhist monk Shi 
Arahan. Yet both tradition and all available evic^ence of a later date would ha 
u« believe otherwise. 



INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN : A POSTSCRIPT 


157 


the centre of his kingdom in the heart of the Talaing country 
amongst the Talaings themselves, and it was natural for 
him that in an account of the history of the religion in the 
peninsula he would refer, however briefly, to the great work 
of Shin Arahan and the subsequent history of the faith not 
only in the Marammamanclala but also in Suvannabhumi, 
i.e., the Talaing country. 

Moreover, not one of the inscriptions of Pagan is directly 
concerned with giving us any account of how Buddhism 
came to Pagan or how it fared and flourished during the 
two centuries and a half of the Anawrahta dynasty’s rule. 
The large majority of the inscriptions concerns themselves 
with recording of religious benefactions and foundations 
and other activities of the proud and conscious royalty and 
the nobility. Personal names of monks or references to 
monkish orders are rare in them, indeed there was not much 
scope for such mention. If, therefore, there is hardly any 
reference in the inscriptions of Pagan to the names of monks 
known from the Kalyani inscriptions, there does not certainly 
lie in a negative evidence like this an rngument for dismissal 
of the Kalyani tradition as mere fiction. As regards 
Tamalin, it may be argued that the context in which he has 
been mentioned in one of the I’agan inscriptions hardly 
calls for a reference to his parentage or to his having once 
visited Ceylon. If there is no warrant for his identification 
with Tarnallnda of the Kalyani inrcriptions, there is also 
nothing to suggest that the two were not identical. The 
same argument holds good in respect of Dhammavilasa. 
Moreover, 1 have tried to point out that Dhammavilasa thera 
of the Kalyani inscriptions may be the same as the Dhamma- 
vilasa mahathera who is mentioned as the donor of a number 
of stone images of the Buddha recovered from the ruins of 
a stupa at Thiyipyitsaya, five miles from Pagan. It is true, 
nothing definite is known about the foundation of the Capata 
pagoda, but the fact that the name of this monk, described 



158 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


in the Kalyani inscriptions as one of the “ Second 
Pilgrims of Ceylon,” came to be associated with a stupa of 
the typical Sinhalese form, is significant and points probably 
to the fact that the Kalyani epigraphs correctly recorded 
down the tradition current in Pagan in the fifteenth 
century. As regards Anawrahla’s mission to Ceylon it 
cannot be argued absolutely that the Cullavamsa should have 
dealt with it in some detail. From the author's point of 
view and for his purpose it was enough to say that Vijaya- 
vahu was in most friendly terms with the king of 
Arimaddana, that he wrote a letter with his own hands to 
the latter and that he was a great friend of the Buddhist 
monks of Ceylon and Pagan. After all, the story of 
Anawrahta s mission to Ceylon was not much of an achieve- 
ment from his side and one may not expect that the author 
would dilate on the event. 

All that is sought to be argued is that the Keilyani inscrip- 
tions furnish for the fir.st time a rational and convincing 
explanation of the introduction of the faith into Pagan and 
its subsequent history ; incidentally they also seem to offer 
a convincing explanation of the great religious and cultural 
upheaval Pagan witnessed from about the third quarter of 
the eleventh to about the end of the thirteenth century. 
The absence of any such explanation in the contemporary 
inscriptions of Pagan may have been due to the bitter racial 
and political hatred of the Burmese towards the Talaings. 
All later Burmese records, clriefly the chronicles, followed 
the Kalyani tradition and on certain points of detail even 
extended and amplified it, on what authority it is difficult 
to say. In the foregoing pages the tradition has been related 
as a whole, not because every detail of it is accepted as 
historical but because it reflects the altitude with which the 
Burmans themselves viewed the great religious upheaval 
that brought culture and civilisation to their doors. 



INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN : A POSTSCRIPT 


159 


Few records in the ancient East offer such valuable and 
complete picture of any religion as do the long series of 
Pagan inscriptions in respect of Buddhism. 1 have already 
referred to the eclectism of the religious life of not only 
Prome, the centre of Pyu culture and civilisation and other 
centres of Lower Burma, but of the capital city of the 
Anawrahta dynasty as well. Besides tribal and primitive 
faiths and practices under disguise reference is made in these 
records to the notorious Ari monks and the “jungle monas- 
teries’ ’ which they seem to have inhabited. It is difficult to 
say whether the Buddhist sima built on Ml. Turan, eight 
miles east of Pagan, by Caw Rahan, the only king before 
Anawrahta mentioned in the inscriptions, refers to a found- 
ation belonging to the religion presumably of the Ari monks or 
to Mahayanist Tantrik Buddhism that must have penetrated 
Pagan and its adjoining regions by about the ninth, 
tenth and eleventh centuries. There is no doubt that inspite 
of repeated mention of Brahmanas mainly of Visnuite persua- 
sion and of Brahmaria astrologers, of lands and mahadan 
fields being offered to them as gifts, of their great influence 
at the court, of even a Brahmana village and of presumably 
a Brahmana chief minister (minister of war ?) named 
Caturaagavijay “well-versed in the Three Pitakas and 
in Sanskrit, Vyakarana and Astrology,” the number of 
Brahmanas was not considerable and Brahmanism as such 
must have been confined to only the Indian section of 
the population. 

The Pagan inscriptions are mostly dedicatory records. 
All kinds of dedications to pious foundations and religious 
establishments were made with various objects and motives ; 
but all bears the stamp of a deep religious fervour and enthu- 
siasm that is unmistakably Bud Ihist. The spirit and language 
of the inscriptions are surprisingly simple, direct, grace- 
ful and dignified. In most cases the dedications were made 
by those who were “of boundless faith, desirous of escaping 



160 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


the misery of the round of rebirths and of attaining nirvana” ; 
in certain cases such dedications were just made as thank- 
offerings or out of gratitude ; still in certain other cases in 
commemoration of a beloved or of a happy and memorable 
event. Dedicated objects included lands and houses, gardens, 
wells, tanks, cattle like goats, buffaloes, horses, and elephants, 
rice and paddy, boats, gold, silver, ruby, iron, lead, 
copper, robes, cloth and garment, libraries with manus- 
cripts, fans and umbrellas, betel and betel-nuts, betel-boxes, 
oil lights, flowers, pots and utensils including bowls, spitoons, 
bells, trays, basins, lamp-stands, chains, etc., and the most 
important of all, slaves. All the pious foundations, remains 
of which we see even to this day in Pagan and hundreds of 
which were brought to being by anybody who could afford 
to do so, had to be maintained by thousands of slaves 
that were dedicated along with lands, fields and other 
necessities of an active monastic life. Literally, hundreds 
of names of these slaves — quite as many women as men 
amongst them — are mentioned in the inscriptions. Prof. 
Pe Maung Tin has attempted an admirable picture of the 
donor and the slave from this long series of inscriptions : 
“It is true that the picture of the donor may be one-sided, 
since we catch him in a religious mood. But since the 
religious mood is so pervading, we catch him in other 
moods also, as when he appears in a law suit over the owner- 
ship of some dedicated slaves. The picture we get of the 
slave, though faint, is fairly representative, since we read of 
dedicated slaves, who are painters, wood-carvers, turners, 
black-smiths, gold- and silver-smiths, masons, washermen, 
gardeners, cow-herds, elephant-herds, dancers, singers, musi- 
cians, scribes, weavers, cooks, etc. And we shall see that 
women played a most important part in the life of the people, 
both of donors and of slaves alike.” Not infrequently, a 

a? JBRS , 193'?, 14) 'f. Pe Mmag Tin, '* Wornen in the Inscriptions of Pagan.*' 



INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN ; A POSTSCRIPT 


161 


whole family including babes was offered as slaves ; a few 
slaves were even literates. Just as lands were dedicated ear- 
marked for the Three Pitakas, the Three Gems, or one Gem 
in particular, so the same was done for slaves as 
well. Their usual work consisted in sweeping and cleaning 
the shrine-yard and the temple and monastery, lighting 
lamps, preparing food for, and doing other services of, the 
monks. At least one inscription mentions women slaves as 
dealers in rice, curries, meat, betel-nut and statues. In 
another there is specific mention of the duties of the dedicated 
slaves : “all these slaves are offered in order that they may 
wash the feet and hands of the ariya monks and draw 
water for them to bathe and drink, that they may cook the 
rice alms, sweep the area and remove the rubbish.” Some- 
times donors offer themselves with their wives and children 
also as slaves. There is at least one instance of a woman 
figuring as a nun, religious teacher, reciting the paritia prayer 
along with others in religious ceremonies ; some of the 
women figuring in the inscriptions were women of letters 
holding responsible positions in society. There can be no 
doubt that women played a very Important part in the reli- 
gious life of Pagan ; indeed their prayers recorded in the 
inscriptions of Pagan have a flavour of their own, 
charmingly simple and humane and revealing the extent to 
which they were touched and inspired by the teachings of 
their Lord the Buddha."'* 

.A few extracts taken at random from the inscriptions 
would reveal much more of how Buddhist sentiment and 
ideology pervaded the contemporary life of Pagan than it 
would be possible to convey through a modern historian’s 


as For a detailed treatment of the subject, see Pe Maung 1'in in /BR5. . [939. 
PP. 149-159, and /BRS.. 1936, pp. 52-70; Luce, /BR5,, 1936. pp 13! '38 The 
translations of Burmese extracts that follow are all from eithei Pe Maui,!' 1 in 
or Luce. 

21 — I445B 



162 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

commentary on them. In one of the inscriptions^ a queen 
says : 

“I wish to abandon a body oppressed by countless miseries, — the misery of 
birth, the misery of old age, the misery of death, the mi.sery of living with those 
we do not love, the misery of separation from those we love, the misery of not 
getting what we want. So I have resigned my dear and precious gold, silver and 
other trea.sures, and built a monastery. And I have offered all my fields, gardens 
and slaves, excepting none^ for the happiness of monks, pupils of the Lords who 
dwell therein, pure in piety, and ever .seeking the three graces of peace, holiness, 
and wisdom. May tbe merit of our deed go first to the king, ruler of us all and 
lord of land and water. By virtue of thi.s act may he live long seeking the increase 
and happiness of all who live in tlie realm and upholding this foundtaiion. May 
the queens also, and all the ladies-in-waiting share it. May they look cit one 
another with eyes of love, v/ithout one speck of anger or doing. May those who_ 
clcvsire worldly {.nosperily get it. May tho.se who preler to do good deeds, do them. 
For myself 1 pra}' that I may never be covetous, insatiate, wrathful, bullying, 
ignorant, dull, disagreeable, mean, unfaithlui, frivoiou.s nor ungrateful. But I 
would cross sarhsara full ol tltesf* good graces • modest in my wants, easily satisfied, 
mild of temper, pitiful, wise, conscious of causes, generous, large-hearted, faithful, 
earne.st. unforgetful and consideraic, and may I win deliverance in the very 
presence of l...ord Mittarya (Maitrcya).” 

In another, ‘The tragic mother of Racasu, powerful 
Lady Acaw laments : 

** My mother and father, my grandparents .and great grandparents have all 
gone, abandcriing their inherited projretty. And now' my beloved son, my lovely one 
too lias gone abandoning his inherited property and even his own mother. Noav I 
too know that 1 likewise cannot lakt^ away with me this inherited property which 
they have left because they could not take it. And I will even dedicate it so that 
it may help my mother and rny father and my son and all my relatives to attain 
Nirvana. "1 he merit of thi.s my dedication, may my grandfa’her king Klacw'a, my 
grandmother, my lord the king my husband. His Mai'vsty my lord the kirrg my son, 
my royal mother, my father, my tw-o beloved .sons by the king, my uncle, my aunt, 
my elder sister, my three brothers, my tw'o younger sisters, all my slaves and 
.servants, all the? Ministers in the royal presence, and all the concubines and maids of 
honour get it. As far a.s heaven above, as far as hell belowg may all the endless 
universe'"! in all the four directions get it. I too, for as much as 1 have done this work 
of merit, and now' my mother, father and all my family aie dead, and I alone am 
left, I pray that it may last throughout 5000 years of Religion — when I die and pass 
from h nee, may 1 become a heavenly spirit worshipping night and day insepa- 
rately the Lord’s 1 ooth Relic, Meantime, before I reach the boon f long for, I would 
fulfil the fen Perfections which all the Bodhisaltvas must fulfil." 

A. S. Ehirma,. List of Inscriptions found in Burma, No, 31). 

Ihid., no. 384. 



INSCRlt'TiONS OF PAGAN : A POSTSCRIPT 


163 


In another *■' a married but childless lady says : ‘I have 
no son, and there is none fit to inherit my property. There- 
fore let the Exalted Buddha look after it in my stead.’ Still 
in another''" the foster mother of king Klacwa in dedicating 
her own house for the purpose of a monastery says : 


** 'I knew not my mother. My step mother nourished me so that I 
My step-mother i.s my motlier ..’so saying the King built me a hou.sc ami also gave 
me a family of slaves and fields. 1 lived in the house. I employed the slaves. 
1 ate the fields. It would be bfUter if the pious and l«-arned monks 
were to dwell in the house than I. Thus I chanced to think and 1 made a cave. 
When it was finished, 1 informed the f uture Lord saying : noble Lord ! Very 

pleasant was the house that was built for thy scrvcutl. Better (fiat >he clergy should 
dwell in it than thy servant. .So I have made a cave. 1 lie house is now a moriiis- 
lery. And thy servant ha.s dedicated ib.c family of slavers and fields which Your 
Majesty gave me,’ Wdien 1 said thus, the King said, ‘Let 1113' stepmother insta! 
such of the clergy as she thinks lit. 

Punishments for offences of various nature in the royal 
courts of Pagan were, not unoflen as everywhere in the 
middle ages, very cruel and inhuman; ihe kings set up codes 
of punishments that must be considered contrary tuid 
repugnant to the very spirit of Buddhism. It is not, therefore, 
striking that there should be at least one or two good Buddhist 
kings who would try to mitigate, to an extent, the treatment 
meted out to offenders. In a royal edict king Kyawsa is 
seen complaining that the kings of old put thieves to cieath 
‘by impaling them and in various ways’. It seems that he 
aimed at the abolition of capital punishment. His remarks 
in this connection are worth quoting : 

People in thi.s world sbould respect these words of mine, believe tliern and 
obey them strictly, inasmuch as (he.se word.s of mine are not invented with 
ingenuity, V>ut are uttered in reliance on (he omniscient word of the Lxalted Buddha. 
Kings of old put tliieves to death by impahng (hem and in vaiious ways. Not 
desiring the destruction of such creatures but thinking of all crealuies a.s myself, 1 
have spoken these words of mercy. Therefore they should be respected and 
obeyed ” 


/htd., no. I9L 

/bid., no. 289. 



164 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Works of merit were brought into existence from various 
motives, and if generally the patrons were all humility 
and devotedness in their attitude there are instances of 
those who were vain and much too self-conscious and were 
actuated by motives other than of love and devotion. Here 
is one such example : 

On ihuf-sday, moon-death, the 14th waninpf of Nadaw 604 Sakkrac, my lord 
and husband Gangasii passed away, I, lord Gaiigasu’s wife, am a lady of high 
lineage, beyond reproach for seven peneratio!i.s, bodi on my mothe.r*s and 
father’ s side. 1 am the daughter of lord Nonramkii. When lord Gangasu died, 
my beloved husband, my very life, the apple of mine eye, I suddenly felt the law 
of impermanence, and I was friglitencd, and built site.s for the Three Gems, on 
Sunday, the third waxing of Pyatho.*’ 

Sometimes the dedications conclude virith curses to those 
who dare violate them, and not infrequently the Avici and 
other seven major hells and the traditional six heavens as 
in Buddhism are enumerated. Here are a few more extracts 
from dedications ; they will incidentally give some idea of the 
character of the religion and of the transformation Buddhism 
brought about in centemporary Burmese way and ideal of 
life and society : 

“ I, Nafofimya the king, have built a .splendid temple, a lifirary and a monastery, 
and offe^red a troupe of dancers, gold and silver popcorn, olhlamps and rice-ahn.s, 
in order to cause my lords the monks to apply their minds to amity and goodwill 
(mittabhavaiia).” 

Another dedication, after the enumeration of the various 
offerings made to a cave, proceeds to explain to the dedicated 
slaves the wherefor of their dedication : 

“ It is not because I do not want to employ you and your families that I cut 
you off. It is because I wish the pagoda to be attended tothat I give you and yout 
families. ...It is because 1 wish to provide for the support of the Buddha and the 
Law that I hand over you all." 


1^3 ibid., no. 259. 
324 /bid., no. 273. 
Ibid., no, 184. 



INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN : A POSTSCRIPT 


165 


J, Gloria, have built a monastery, and on the full moon of Tabaung 560 
Sakkarac, I dedicated 3 monasteries, 3 tanks altogether, monastic robes, 6 
calabastcs, I lump of lime, a wishing tree, a cow. Wheresoever 1 1 wonder in 
Sarhsara, I want misery, I don’t want hell. I want the grace of perfection. And at 
the end of Samsara^ 1 want to reach Nirvana. May all the coolies share my merit, 

I have given oil-lamps, and i have given kothina robes; 40 sets of kjaihina 
requisites, 20 kettles of food, 4 cups, 5 almsbowls, I belt, etc. i do not want to 
know the slightest little bit ! ” 

... Ere [ reach Buddhahood I want the happiness excited by drum and 
trumpet, and the five instruments of music. Therefore 1 dedicate the following 
players on big drums and small. ..Whensoever I am born, I do not want the misery 
of hunger and thirst. Therefore 1 offer to Lord Buddha and the monks living 
in this monastery the following paddy-fields. ..1 want to rebel against the' world of 
slavery to appetite. Therefore 1 offer also a hundred slaves to serve the needs of 
the Lord Buddha and the monks.” 

But frivolous and vainglorious Queen Caw’s dedication 
breathes a different spirit altogether : — 

Meantime, before 1 reach Nirvana by virtue of iliis great work of merit 1 have 
done, may I prosper as a mnn, and be more royally happy than ail other men. 
Or as a spirit, may 1 be full of colour, dazzling brightness and victorious beauty, 
more, than any other spirit. More especially I would have a long life, freedom 
from disease, a lovely complexion, a pleasant voice, and a beautiful figure. 1 
would be the loved and lionoured darling of every man and spirit. Gold, silver, 
rubies, corals, pearls and other lifeless treasure, elephants, horses and other 
living treasure - may 1 have lots of llreni. By virtue of my power and glory I 
would be triumphant with pomp and retinue, with fame, and splendour. Wfrerever 
I am born, may I be fulfilled with noble grace.*:, charity, faith, piety, wi.sdom, etc,, 
and not know one speck of misery ; and after I liave tastcjd and enjoyed the 
happiness of men and tfie happiness of spirits, when the noble law of deliverance 
called the fruit of Sanctity blossoms, may I at last attain the peaceful bliss of 
Nirvana.” 

Temples, shrines anci monasteries were evidently built 
on large ^scale and at heavy costs, and their dedication 
and consecretion were usually an elaborate affair. An idea 
of the cost involved, the complexity of the whole affair 
including planning and construction of the shrine and 
the monasteries and the accessories of worship may be 
gathered from a number of inscriptions, notably from nos. 


Ye-ngwe Insc, Mahlaing, JBRS., 1936, p. 135. 
^27 A, S. Burma, List of Insc. no. 123. 

/bid., no. 334. 



166 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


105, 190, 235, 242 and 276 of the List of Inscriptions found 
in Burma (A. S. of Burma). Incidentally, Inscription no, 
242 refers to the representation of the 550 Jatakas in a 
certain temple built in 598 Sakkarac, and several inscriptions 
refer to the foundation of libraries with sets of the Three 
Pitakas. The full anthropomorphic worship of the Buddha 
image is elaborated in several inscriptions, notably in no. 254. 

The offerings to monks and religious foundations of 
various material objects including lands and fields and 
slaves recorded in the inscriptions show clearly that the 
members of the Samgha were well-cared for and were kept 
elaborately supplied with all their material needs and require- 
ments. Undisturbed they were left to their own religious 
and scholarly pursuits. Not only they studied the sacred 
texts of Buddhism in the libraries provided for them and 
scrupulously performed their religious observances, but there 
are inscriptions that reveal their intimate knowledge of 
the ethical and metaphysical concepts of the religion. 
Mention is made in the records of the Paticcasamuppada 
(no. 105), the Palisambhida (no. 90), the three existences of 
\ama, riipa and ariipa, the threefold division of a Buddha- 
J^hetta, namely jdti l^hetta, oisaya l^helta and ana f^heita 
(no. 105), and the five qualities of Saccam, dhammo, dhiti, 
cago and bodhicittam (no, 191), etc. The Jatakas collective- 
ly and, several important and popular Jatakas, separately 
are frequently mentioned, but most frequent is the mention 
of the Three Pitakas which were housed in libraries built 
for the purpose. 

Some rough idea of the monkish organisation of contem- 
porary Pagan can also be gleaned from the inscriptions. The 
clergy as a whole was known as the Satrigha, ariyasarngha 
or rahansarngha ; and the monks were individually referred 
to as sk.hin ariya or simply ariya. The chief monk of a 
monastery was called thera or mahadhi in Burmese, and 
special offerings in certain cases were made for him. Pe 



INSCRIPTIONS OF PAGAN : A POSTSCRIPT 


167 


Maung Tin has shown that the Burmese word Sari^ri was 
often used to designate the elder thera of a company of 
monks or lay men or lay women. The king had his own 
acariya who was known as Mahadhi Rajaguru or simply 
Rajagaru, or Mahadhi Dhammarajagum who presumably 
used to be the Primate or the Samgharaja of the realm. 
The title of Rajagura was not however always confined to 
one monk at a time.'"' Lands and fields once made 
over as gifts by or on behalf of kings to monks and monas- 
teries were held to be inalienable and nobody, not even 
the descendants of the chief monk, had any right to sell or 
dispose of it in any other way.' ' Even a king had no right 
to seize lands once dedicated to monks and religious founda- 
tions by his forefathers."' Once a certain individual named 
Zeyyaput offered in dedication to a forest monastery, in the 
name of the Buddha, Dharma and the Sarngha, 750 fields 
that he had once received as mahidan from the king. When 
the king’s son prince Klacwa ascended the throne in 597 
Sakkarac he seized all the mahadan fields in the upper 
country and the lower country, and those 750 fields were 
amongst them. The head of ihe clergy concerned with the 
gift represented the case personally to the king who forthwith 
caused an enquiry to be mads by a committee. The enquiry 
revealed that the king’s father had indeed given these fields 
to Zeyyaput and that the latter had also offered it to the 
pagoda. The king had therefore to admit the claim of the 
clergy and the fields were restored to the forest monastery."'' 

Of venerable Buddhist monks participating in grave 
matters of contemporary political life, the case of Panthagu 
the Primate has already been cited. In recent years Pe 
Maung Tin has drawn our attention to another example, 

Ui» /BR5.. 1936, pp. 59.62. 

A. S. Burma, L'sf o/ /nsc. no. 287. 

^31 Ibid., no. 230. 

132 /BR5., 1936, p.63. 



168 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


a more detailed and certainly a more interesting one, 
presented in a brilliant and colourful neurrative, in one of 
the Burmese inscriptions of Pagan. It appears that at 
the approach of the Taruks, i.e., the Mongol invaders, 
Tarukpyemin destined to be the last king of Pagan, took 
to flight to a place near Prome whence he was trying to 
find out the movements of the enemy. His generals dared 
not contact them ; in the midst of the prevailing panic 
and confusion there was at least a Buddhist elder, thera 
Disapramuk* who was not only unnerved but had the courage 
and self-confidence to lake upon himself, on request from 
the king, the task of contacting the enemy and negotiating 
terms with them. This he did at considerable risk to 
himself and with great tact and intelligence. The story 
related by Disapramuk himself is characteristic, and is 
remarkable for its simplicity and directness as well as for 
its local colour and atmosphere. 


133 A. S Burma, List of Insc. No. 376; JBRS., 1936, pp. 63-64. 

134 Disapramuk is presumably Disapamokkha of the Sdsanavamsa, and if this 
be sa, then here is one more instance of the general authenticity of Pannasimi's 
narrative. For Disapamokkha, see p. 130 of this book, 



CHAPTER THREE 

THE GREAF REFORMATION AND ITS PREAMBLE 


Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries 

I 

THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 

Narathihapate had reigned for about a quarter of a century 
when the Pagan throne came to be threatened by the Mongol 
marauders of the north. Ten years later, in 1287, the city of 
Pagan actually fell at the blow of the army of Kublai Khan. 
Almost at the same time the Talaing provinces revolted 
under the leadership of Tarabya, the Governor at Pegu, and 
overthrew the Burmese power. But it was neither the 
Mongol invasion nor the succcssiul revolt of Tarabya that 
destroyed the Pagan monarchy, ihe lartars rather tried to 
re-establish the old dynasty in if ^ place and to help the 
country to revert to its normal conditions. But this was not 
to be. The Shans, a virile race of nomadic habits from 
the north, were fast spreading south, east and west; 
they practically swept the whole of Burma, swamping 
Burmans and Talaings alike, and hardly caring anything 
for religion and culture. Both Upper and Lower Burma 
thus passed over to the Shans who at first serving 
as chiefs at Myinsaing, Mekkaya and Pinie under 
Chinese authority, established their capital at Pinya 
(F^ali : Vijayapura) and then at Ava (Pali : Ratanapura) 
in 1312. They founded another centre at Pegu in Lower 
Burma in about 1287 under the leadership of Wareru 
(1287-96), a Shan pedlar, who had wrested power from 
Tarabya, the successful rebel. All these naturally had their 
22-1445B 



170 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


repercussions on the life and activities of the Order which 
being intimately connected with the royal authority, 
could not remain uninfluenced by such changes in power. 
Monastic scholarship and activities sank down, as a result, to 
a low ebb, though the daily round of the life of a bhikkhu 
continued as usual in many a monastery. 

The Shans could not long resist the appeal the 
religion of the country made to them; indeed, within a 
generation after their first settlement in the country, one of 
their kings took initiation into Buddhism. He was Thihathu, 
one of the three Shan brothers who had come in virtual control 
of upper Burma after the Mongol conquest, admittedly under 
the formal authority of the Chinese Court. Thihathu’s elder 
brothers Athinkaya and Yazathinkaya were also probably 
Buddhists, for, according to the Hmannariy the three brothers 
are credited with having built a monastery at Myinsaing, be - 
sides building the Nandawye pagoda at the same place. ^ The 
Sasanavamsa does not speak of this monastery, but mentions 
that a good many monks belonging to the three sects 
founded by Shin Arahan, Capata and Ananda settled at 
Myinsaing, evidently at the instance of the Shan brothers, 
but that no works v/erc produced there. ' Nineteenth century 
chroniclers regard Thihathu not only as a Buddhist, 
unlike some of his successors who were nothing less than 
savages, but also as a builder of pagodas, and a devout 
follower of the religion. He had a monk as his teacher. 

Even after the tragic fate that befell Pagan in 1287, glory 
still clung to her for some time. As late as the year 1343, 
Narathihapate's daughter Mi saw U who was queen to her 


^ Hmannan, 1, 368. This may not he altogether improbable, for the three Sh?>u 
brothers, sons of a hill chief who had fled in about 1260 to Myinsaing where theic 
was already a Shan colony, were brought up and trained in NaratKihapate’s couit, 
arid thus came presumably under the great influence Buddhism exerted at that time 
in Pagan. 

- Sasana, p. 85. 



THE GREAT REFORMATION AND ITS PREAMBLE 171 


brother Kyawswo (1237-93) and afterwards to his supplanter 
Thihalhu (1312-24) pined for her early days in Pagan and 
built a monastery there. 

This realm of Pagan is so named because il is the fairest and dearest of lands. 

It is also called Arimaddaria because it.s people: are warriors who vanejuish their 
foes, and even its name is terrible. Its folk are free from pain or danger, they are 
skilled in every craft, they are wealthy, the re^venues ar^* past telling, and the 
land is full of useful things. Verily it is a hand more to be desired than fairy 
land. Il is a glorious r.:alrn and its people are famed for their spleirdour and 
power. The monastery I have built Htand.s to the east of the enjaltal,” 

Scholarly aciivities were pursued in the monasteries of 
Pagan yet for so metime, so that we hear of works written 
by monks of Pagan roughly throughout the fourteenth 
century. Sacldhammanana, ascribed to the early part of 
this ceniury, is said to have written tiie 1 ibhatyaithaf a 
book on Pali cases, but his more important works were the 
Chanclasdralthavih^asifv (called also VuttodayapafieiJ^d)^ a 
work on metres, and the ChapQCcayadxpand a book on 
prosody. I~Ic is dso said to iiave rranslate. J tlie Sanskrit 
Kaldpa V yd\ai'anii into Pah; it follows, ihereloie, ilial tuis 
learae 1 scliola. bv-s.i des toiowing Pah was also well conversant 
with Sanskrit. Not much later than Saddhammanana carnc 
Mahgala who wrote a work on grammar entitled Ciandhatthi, 
and Sirlsaddharnrnavilasa who wrote a dkd on Kaccdyaiia, 
named Saddharnmandsinid Another fourteenth century 
author who worked and flourished in Pagan was Saddhaniina- 
pda, referred to as Saddhammaguru in the SdsanaVamsa 
(p. 90) which stales that he worked at Pinya. But the 
GandhaVamsa, the earlier work, says (p. 67) that lie worked 

Inscriptions of Fagan, Pinya and Ava, 1899. p. 134. 

1 Forchammer, Essay, p. 36; Pausboll, Cat. Mand. A1SS. 30. 

5 Prta/valt/iamain, p. 74; FaUsboll. op. ci/.. pp. 31. 52: Forchammer, 
p. 86, List, p. xxiii. 

6 Forchammer, Essay, p. 36. 

7 Forchammer, Report, p. 2; List, p. xx. 

C/. Cat. Mand, MSS. p. 48, where Saddhammavilasa '* work referred o. a« 

Kaccayanasarafiko i Forchammer, Ibid, 



172 THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMa 

in Pagan, which is supported by the PitakcLtthamain (p. 71) 
and by Forchammer as well {Essays p* 36) who says that he 
worked in a monastery of the Burmese Order near the 
capital city. Saddhammapala was the author of Saddavutli 
or Saddavuttipak,a$ak.a, a work on grammar. He was 
also probably the author oi Niruttisaramanjusay a commentary 
on the Niruttiy ascribed to Kaccayana. (C/. Fausboll, Cat 
Mand. Mss. p. 49). 

Thihathu, youngest of the three Shan brothers, finds a 
place in the Sasanavamsa ' for his patronage of Buddhism 
and Buddhist scholarship. He chose Pinya as his capital 
which he founded in 1312. A new era of comparative 
peace and good government ensued, and the religion began 
to flourish in Pinya where a large number of monasteries 
had been founded and thousands of bhikkhus had settled 
down. Literary activities were also gradually revived. 
Sirisumangala or Sirimangala, according to the Pitaliattha- 
mairiy was a learned scholar and divine of this time who 
engaged himself in preparing commentaries on Buddha- 
ghosa s Samanlapasadil^a y A tthasdlim and Sammohavinodini . ‘ 
But it was during or immediately alter Ttiihathu's reign that 
the Samanakuttaka heresy which had been suppressed by the 
combined efforts of Anawrahta and Shin Arahan received a 
new lease of life." The identity of the Samanakuttakas 
with the Aris is strengthened among other arguments by the 
specific mention of the Aris (after their overthrow by 
Anawrahta) about this time (1314) in connection with 
Thihathu s son Sawyun who counted the Aris among his 
armed retainers. 

Besides the revival of the Samanakuttaka heresy, an 
ugly discord among the bhikkhus also undermined the 


^ Iri the SasanaVanXHa he i« named Sihasura, jj. 82 ff. 
Pitakotthamain, p. 40. 

pp. 82-89, 86-87. 



THE great reformation AND ITS PREAMBLE 173 

prestige of the Order at this time. The bone of discord 
was the due share of the produce of the monastery lands 
which the monks used to receive from the tillers of the soil. 
For the monks this was certainly an unseemly behaviour, 
and the SdsanaVamsa account seems to indicate that the 
quarrel was carried so far as finally to lead to the founding 
of a new sect whose members left the viharas and retired 
to the solitude of the forests. 

Thihathu’s step-son, Uzana, was also an upholder of the 
religion. He built seven great monasteries (viharas) along with 
gifts of land attached to them and gave them unto the theras, 
among whom there were a few who belonged to the sect 
founded by Ananda,.^ Uzana’s nephew Kyawswa-nge 
(1 351)“ proved himself to be a patron of monastic scholarship. 
An important officer of his court, a Caturangabalamacca, wrote 
a commentary or SamVannarid on the Ahhiclhdnapypaclipil^d of 
Moggallana.’^ He also wrote two other commentaries, one 
on the Koladdhaja and another on the Dandippakaranad ' 
Nagita, a monk of Sagu, otherwise known as Kantaka- 
khipa,'*' wrote the SaddasaraUhajdliw , a work on Pali 
gra mmar . Navavimalabuddhi , odicr v/ise known as CulLv 
vimalabuddhi,' wrote a Ijl^d on die Wjllodaya of Sarngharak- 
ivh ta (of Ceylon), and another work called Ahhidharnma 
pannarasatthanad being a commentary on some of the 
passages of the Abhidhamma. Among other monk scholars 
of this period may be mentioned the names of Vepullabuddhi 


Sdsana, pp. 83-84. 

U Sdaanavamsa nam'^s Kim KiUisiha.sura, p. 88. 

Cat. Manci. MSS., pp. 46, 51. 

Sdsana, p. 88; Candha, pp. 6K 73. 

Scisana, p. 88; Gandha, p. 74; ForcKarnmei, List. xx. 

According to Forctiammci . Rc/jot l, p. 2: List, p, xxiii. and i Ke Pitakoliha- 
rnom, p. 74, he worked in Pagan : but sec Gandha. p. 67. 

Sdsana, pp. 34, 75. 

Gandha, pp. 64, 74. 



174 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


and Cullavajirabuddhi who wrote on grammatical, exegetical 
and metaphysical subjects.^'- 

From Pinya the Shans moved their capital to Saggaing, 
and next to Ava in 1 364 when Thadominbya was the king 
(referred to in the SdsanaVarnsa blS Sativa-raja). Thadominbya 
was primitive in his instincts, and had no respect for 
Buddhism . But his successor Minky iswasawke { 1 368- 1401) 
seems to have some concern for the religion. He built 
the Shwethetlut pagoda at Thayetrnyo in 1373,"' and appoin- 
ted an Arakanese monk as his primate. It is difficult to say 
if the Shwethetlut was the same as the Ca-nah-khurn cetiya 
mentioned in the SdsanaVamsa as iicwing been built by Ma- 
na-kri“Cek, f.e., lVlinky;swasawke. The name of the 
Arakanese monk who was made the head ol the Order is 
given in the SdsanaVamsa as Khemacara. 

II 


RELIGION AND SCHOLARSHIP IN IHE lALAlNG COUNTRY 

In the l alaing couniry Warerii had already established a 
Shan principality in about 1287 with its centre first at Martaban 
(till 1363) and then at lA'gu (alter 1369). With the rise oi 
Waieru Buddhism seems to have had a new lease of life; 
the new king soon became converted to Buddhism and began 
to take interest in the schokirly work of the monks."" Follow- 
ing Dhammavilasa he compiled a code of Law, the Wareru 
Dhammathat, the earliest law-book that still survives in 
Burma. I here is no reason to suppose that this code was 


20 Pqj works ot these two scholars and the confusion reg:arcling them, 
Bode, op. cit., pp. 28-29. 

' * f un Nyciri, Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava, pp. 146, 159. 

Tl VCuli the vise of Wareru, king of Martaban, a new liad been 

given to native learning, and Buddhism again had attained to exclusive predomi' 
nance in the shores of the Gulf of Martaban." F’orchammer, Notes on the Early 
History, etc., ii, p. 8. 



RELIGION AND SCHOLARSHIP IN THE TALAING COUNTRY 175 


any original contribution by Wareru to legal literature; it 
was rather compiled from the traditional laws of the Hindus 
brought to the peninsula by colonists and emigrants where 
it survived in the writings of the Talaing monks. Wareru 
made his monks produce the collection known by his name. 
It is Hindu, but not Bralimanical, and the sacredotal element 
is ignored, marriage no longer being treated as a sacrament; 
it forms the basis of Burmese law literature.” We have 
seen in the preceding section that towards the end of the 
thirteenth or beginning of the fourteenth century two 
important Buddhist sects were founded in Martaban by two 
notable Talaing theras named Buddhavamsa and Mahanaga. 
Both of them had gone to Ceylon where they admitted them- 
selves into the fold of the Mahavihara tradition and became 
believers in the Sinhalese views of orthodoxy. 

A pilgrimage to Ceylon had become almost a regular prac - 
tice among the more imporlant theias in Burma. Indeed, both 
Bui man Burma and T alaing Burma had come to learn by this 
time to look to Ceylon (or religious guidc»nce and inspiration. 
Medharpkara was a noted monkish celebrity in the lalaing 
country of this lime ; he had also sojourned lor some time 
in Ceylon undergoing a course of study tliere and probably 
also imbibing the same Mahavihara traduion. He came to 
live afterwards at Martaban where he was appointed rchgious 
preceptor of queen Bhadda, mother of Binnya U (mentioned 
in the SdsanaVamsa as Seiibhinda), the 1 ing (1 r5 '1-83) who 
had succeeded Wareru at Martaban. Mecihamkaia was the 
author of hol^adipasdra , ‘ a collection of chapters on different 
subjects, arranged according to a cosmological scheme. ' 
The work is w^ell-known in Burma even to- day. After 
Medharpkara, the SdsanaVamsa (p, 48) names three monk- 

Harvey, Hiftory oj Burma, p. Ill; Forrhnninier, hsroy, p 37; See alr.o 
IBRS, 1940, pp. 351 ft. 

Oldenberg, Pa/i Af55. at India Office , n. 126 MerOir^rnkai a is called Nava- 
Mcdharjikara in the Gandhavamsa. 



176 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


scholars^ all residents of Hamsavati (Pegu), and perhaps 
belonging to the same period. They were Ananda thera 
who wrote the Madhurasaratthachpani, a Samvannanam on 
the Abhidhammatil^a, Dhammabuddha thera who composed 
the KaVisdrcy a treatise on Chanda, and Saddhammalankara- 
thera who wrote the * ^Paiihdnasdratthadipantm ndma pal^ara- 
nom/ 

Another important monk-scholar who probably belongs to 
the reign of Binnya U is Mahayasa, a grammarian of repute." 
He wrote the Kaccayauabheda and the Kaccdyansdra, 
the former dealing with the grammatical aspect and the latter 
being a short sketch of the great grammarian Kaccayana. ' 
He also wrote a til^d on his own work, the Kaccayanasdra. 
A book on Abhidhamma topics entitled Apheggusdra was 
written about this time in Pegu (Hamsavati) by a monk whose 
name is omitted in the SdsanaVamsa. 

Binnya U sent a* mission to Ceylon whence they brought 
a relic which was enshrined by the king in a pagoda built on 
the spot where he had defeated a hostile army from Chieng- 
mai. He also repaired the Shwedagon pagoda of Rangoon, 
raising it to a greater height. He was succeeded by his son 
Razadarit (1385-1423), referred to as Rajadhiraja in the 
SdsanaVamsa. We do not know what he did for the promo- 
tion of the religion other than erecting several pagodas, one 
of w’^hich was the famous Shw^emawdaw of Pegu built as a 
thank-offering for the repeated defeats he inflicted on the 
Burmese army. He held a seven days’ festival in course of 
which he fed a thousand monks and offered them his weight 
in gold ! 


2''” Fov tFe date of Maliayasa, see Bode. op. cit., p. 37. 

Gandho, p. 74; Sascmodip, , 1250. Forchammcr give.s the name Rasa, 
an inhaVntant of Thaton, to iKe author of these two \\'Oiks. List, pp. xx, xxi ; 
Gandhavam^a snys that Dhammananda was the author ; but the Pitak.atthamoin 
gives the name as Mahayasa. 

Sasana, p, 48; Cf. Forchammer. List, p. xviii 



THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 


177 


111 

THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 

The fifteenth century opened with king Minhkaung 
(1401-22) on the throne at Ava. The Sa^anaOamsa knows 
him as Adhikaraja who appointed his acariya as Samgharaja ; 
but it is somewhat curious that Pannasami excludes him from 
the theraparampard,'^ It was during the reign of Adhikaraja 
that Razadarit, king of Ramafina (Pegu), threatened a siege 
of his capital, but what is interesting is that the king invited 
his counsellors as well a number of bhikkhus to parley 
with his ministers as to what could be done to resist the 
impending attack. It interests us to read further that one of 
the monks convinced the king and took upon himself to meet 
the invader in his ' own camp. He did so and exhorted 
Razadarit (how, we a're not told) to return to his country 
without attempting the siege. The story is interesting 
in so far as it shows the extent of the influence the bhikkhus 
often exercised in the royal court and in political and secular 
matters. 

Adhikaraja or Minhkaung was followed by Thihathu 
(1422-26), Kalekyetaungnye (1426-27) and Mohnyintha 
(1427-40). It is probably the last king who is referred to in 
the Sdsanavamsa as Mrinnana. It was during his reign that 
two mahatheras from Ceylon came to Ava and settled there 
to advance the cause of the religion. The other theras 
of his own country belonging to the Arahantagana of Pagan 
prevailed upon the king to change the era that had so long 
been in use in Burma. 


-8 “ Tassa pana acariyo SamRliaiaja lajj'ipakkam na blnuij ti. lon'eva 

' theraparampataya esa na sami^ahitabbo. ’’ Sasana, p. 94. 

6asono, p. 95. 

f 30 Ihid. According to the Rdjavamsa, it was Saddhammaraja who changed 
the era because of an evil omen. Dr. Bode, comments on this change of era: 


23— I445B 



178 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


A next king, Narapati (1443-69), was also a good patron 
of the religion. Besides building the Thuparama (Tupayan 
pagoda) cetiya, he appointed Mahasamithera as his acariya. 
Mahasami went to Ceylon where he studied under the great 
thera Sariputta and thus came to belong to the Later Order, 
/.e., the Sihala Samgha.''^ 

All this time the country had been in a state of constant 
political turmoil ; the chroniclers have hardly anything 
to record but petty intrigues and court-squabbles, attacks and 
counter-attacks, not always without a dramatic interest. But 
the Samgha does not seem to have suffered much from this 
unsettled state of affairs which were more or less the concern 
of the capital, the court, the army, the royalty and the nobility. 
The ruling families, for acquiring merit, or as a matter of 
age-old practice, or for drawing the support of the Samgha 
which often proved to be a great source of strength, continued 
to patronise the Order and gave it whatever help they could 
in the shape of land, money, copies of sacred texts, and other 
requisites of monastic life. The example of the royal fami- 
lies was followed by the nobility and the rich. We, therefore, 
find monastic learning and scholarship in a flourishing state 
even during these turbulent times, and meet with a number 
of learned theras among whom three names, those of Ariya- 
vamsa, Silavamsa and Ratthasara, stand out prominently. 

Of the three, Ariyavarpsa was certainly the most eminent. 
A dignified character witli a magnanimity all his own, and a 
humility possessed only by the truly wise, Ariyavamsa’s 
story is told with pride and enthusiasm in the Sdsanavamsa. ' 

it is ivn intt'iestinq and an usaai inf-iitinn Cm the .Sasanauamsa) of theras actinfi: 
as astrologers (liieir advice to the king is giv'cn on the story of the Vedasattha). 
Tliere is ro hint these two were wanting in sacred knowledge, though in 

anodier passage a distit>etion is se/c. ;dy tuide be ween the higher learning and 
sc’Cu! li scienc'.” Sdnanai'afusa , liilvo., p, 30. 

Sdsana, p. 9;?. 

Sasan.a, pp. 93-98. Aiiyavamsa’s career which gives us a glimpse into the 
life of a monasvic scholar of lh^‘se days, has been summsirised by Dr. Bode in her 
Pali Liicratare of Burma, pp. 41-42, and need not be recounied here. 



THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 


179 


He was a native of Pagan and belonged to the Capata sect, 
but cams to settle in Ava in the reign of king Narapatl. He 
wrote a commentary on the Abhidharnrnalthavlhhivani 
(itself a commentary on the Ahhidhammatthasamgaha) 
called Mdnisaramanjasd, As he wrote the different chap- 
ters of his work, he read them out to the monks assembled 
on uposatha days on the courtyard of Pufifiacetiya, and 
invited their criticism. His other works were the Manidipa, 
a tiJ^d on the Atthasdlini of Buddhaghosa, the Gandha- 
bharana, a treatise on grammar, and the Jdtakctvisodhana, 
a study on the Jatakas. All these works were in Pali; but 
he wrote also in the Marammabhdsd, or Burmese, and was 
thus perhaps one of those pioneers who began to write in 
the vernacular of the country. He wrote an aUhayojand or 
interpretation of the A nailed on the Abhidhamnia, generally 
ascribed to Dhammapala. He is also said to have written, 
according to the GandhaOajpsa, another work called 
Mahduissara. boliowing a very well- practised custom of 
which the SdsanaVarnsa affords numerous examples, Narexpati 
established Ariyavarnsa in a viiiara where the learned thera- 
held his teachings. The king himself was interested and 
occasionally came to the vihara to hear him. 

Closely on the heels of Anyavaiosa came Silavamsa or 
Maha-Silavamsa, who was a native of Pabbatabbhantarana- 
gara ( Faung-dwin-gyi in Mag we district). 1 here in his 
native town he wrote at least three poetical works, the 
Sumedhak^atha, evidently based on the story of the ascetic 
Sumedna incorporated in the NiJana of the Jd[ak<is, 
the Buddhalamkarat probably on the life of the Master 
himself, and the Pabbalabbhanlarapalisamayulla, evicleuily 
on his native town. With these three books to his credit he 
came to Ava (Raianapura) at the age of thirty m the re gn of 
Sirisudhammarajadhipati (probably Mmhkaurig 11, !481- 
1502). There the king settled him m the Ratanavimana near 
the Thuparama pagoda, where he not only held regular 



180 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


teachings on the sacred texts, but also composed an 
atthayojana of the Nettipakarana, and the Parayanavatthu, 
both in the vernacular (Marammabhasaya). Besides being a 
poet, he was thus a scholar also who could deal equally 
effectively with religio-philosophical subjects. 

Born in 1468 {Kaliyuge timsadhika atthavassasate 
Izale jate) at Ratanapura, Ratthasara, like Silavamsa, 
wrote in verse, and composed poetical versions of the 
Bhuridattajataka, Hatthipalajatalza and the Samvarajataka ' 
It is interesting to note that Pafinasami does not view with 
appreciation these attempts of Silavamsa and Ratthasara — 
namely, composing works, even religious works, in verse. 
In fact, both of them receive his censure. On Pannasami’s 
authority we learn that it is for this reason that both were 
excluded from the theraparampara by the ancient chroniclers. 
According to them as well as to Pafinasami, composing or 
reciting poems was a transgression of Vinaya rules, and as 
such, was a matter of discipline which they expected all 
monks strictly to follow. Pannasami refers his readers to the 
Vposathavinicchaya, a work on Vinaya by himself, where, 
he says, the subject has been discussed in detail. 

The Talaing country in the fifteenth century seems to 
have produced very few religious celebrities ; at least, we 
have record of only a few of them, and whomsoever we 
meet with belongs invariably to the Sinhalese tradition. 
Sevasuvannasobhana, a noted thera of Martaban, whom the 

According to Harvey, Shin 1 Imlawuntha (Silavamsa) was expelled from the 
monastery at 1 aung-dwi-gy i for his composing works in poetiy which the monks 
considered profane. He is also said to have wmtten a grammatical work, and 
‘ poems such as HsuUiuni>ganpye, laangdwinlapyOj Tadd-a-ti-maWgun, and the 
Y azawingyaw chronicle, the earliest history extant,’* Among other v'emacular 
writers may be mentioned tire names of Shin Uttamagyaw ‘who for twenty years 
lemained a monk, and then went to Ava where he was often invited to the palace 
for consultation on the scriptures’ and Shin Agyathamahdi ( 1479) who wrote 
poetic \eisions of Jatakas. History oj Burma, p, 104. 

Ratthasara tor Maharatpathefa) also composed the Keganpye and 
Kanhidcmawgttny in Burmese verse. 



THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 


181 


Sdsanavamsa places after Medhamkara thera,'^’ may probably 
be ascribed to the middle of the century. He, too, like 
Medhamkara and some of his predecessors of the Talaing 
country, went to Ceylon and there at the Mahavihara sat at 
the feet of learned theras receiving anew (puna sikk^oiT^ 
gahetoa) instructions in the sacred texts. He came back to 
Martaban, but simple and unostentatious, eager to learn and 
intelligent, he chose to live and practise the religion in the 
solitude of the forest. Suvannasobhana lived to see the 
great reformation of Dhammaceti and played the part of 
upajjhaya in the upasampada ceremony after the return of 
Dhammaceti s mission from Ceylon. We shall have, there- 
fore, occasion to refer to him later on. However, after his 
return from Ceylon he settled down at Martaban where he 
established a new sect. Medhanikara and Sevasuvannaso- 
bhana are together said to have introduced the dcariyaparam- 
pard from Ceylon for the sixth time.’’ 

Towards the end of the fifteenth century the Talaing 
country or the Ramannadesa, which, by the way, included 
Hamsavati (Pegu), Muttima (Martaban), and .Suvannabhumi 
(Thaton), was approaching a great religious awakening. 
Dhammaceti, a monk and a man of character, had by an 
accident come to the throne of Pegu in 1472. Even as a 
monk he saw the corruptions that had crept into the Saingha 
and watched with displeasure the various contending sects 
into which the Sarngha had come to be divided. He also 
saw how the various sects had tillowed themselves to drift 
from the original teachings of the Master and violated the 
rules of the Viriaya. When, therefore, he came to the throne, 
he resolved to give a dehmte lead to the disorganised 
Order to which he herd once belonged. He thus sought 
to effect a reformation of the religion at a time when it was 

^ Sasana, p. 42. 

36 Saaatia, pp. 42-43. 



182 THER4VAD\ BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

mosi needed. But a separate section must be reserved for 
an account of that very important reformation, the way how 
he affected it, and its implications and results. 

IV 

DHAMMACETl’S REFORMATION OF THE SAMGHA : 

TRIUMPH OF THE SINHALESE SCHOOL 

(1476-80) 

Dhammaceti’s is a unique career and personality in the 
whole range of Burmese history. He was one Burmese 
monarch whose fame travelled beyond the frontiers of his 
realm, not only as an able king and statesman, but also 
as one of those few heroes who by their piety and 
reforming zeal carved cmt a place for themselves in the 
history of Buddhism. He was an ordinary monk, evidently 
residing in one of the monasteries of Ava, when he together 
with another monk helped Shin Sawbu, the daughter of 
Razadarit of Pegu, to take to flight from Ava where she had 
been taken as one of the queens of .VIohnyinthado (1427-40). 
This lady, first married to I hihathu (1422 26), was later made 
over to the lord of Pagan during the upheavals that followed 
Thihathu’s death. When she was taken as the queen of 
Mohnyinthado, she had already become disgusted with this 
sort of life as well as with upper Burma, and was therefore 
thinking of getting out of the royal palace. She took the help 
of two 1 aiaing monks who had taught her letters, and 
managed to escape to Pegu. One of these monks came later 
on to be known as Dhammaceti. Shin Sawbu eventually 
became queen of Pegu (1453-72), and when she had ruled for 
several years she wanted to retire, and retire in favour of one 
of the two monks. “ In doubt as to which she should 
choose, she left it to Providence. One morning when they 
came to receive the royal rice, she secreted in one of their 
bowls a pahse (layman’s dress) together with little models 



DHAMMACETl’S REFORMATION OF THE SAMGHA 183 

of the five regalia ; then, having prayed that the lot might 
fall to the worthier, she returned the bowls, Dammaceti, to 
whom the fateful bowl fell, left the Sacied Order, received 
Shin Sarobu’s daughter in marriage, and assumed 
the government/’ Shin Sawbu went in retirement to D^lgon 
where she occupied herself with the religion. It is to her 
care and munificence that the Shwedagon became what it is 
to-day. 

Dhammaceti left the Order, but did not forget it, far 
less neglect it, once on the throne as he was. On the 
contrary, he resolved to do sorneihing for the religion which 
as a monk he had neither the courage nor the opportunity 
to do. The monkish zeal for propagation and re!:onnation of 
the religion was still fresh m h s mind. He not only built 
a number of works of merit, su; ii as the Shwegugyi and the 
Kyaikpon at Pegu, but seiil a niissicn to Boclhgaya m 1472 
to take plans of the Bodhi tiee and the (Vlahabodhi temple, 
obviously to serve as models for temples at Pegu, ’ But the 
greatest service he renciered to the religion was the reformation 
of the Sarngha. 

Away from the midst of the Sarngha of which he had 
once been a member, he could look at it from a better pers- 
pective and have a better view of real slate of affairs of the 
Sanigha and its constituents. 1 he first point which caught 
his eye must have been the varjous conU; Jidiiig sects into which 
the Sarngha had become divided, and the bitter rivalry among 
the different sects. The next point was probably the laxity 
in the rules of discipline among the monks of various sects 
which meant that the original orthodoxy was gradually 
yielding place to the growing pressure of individual tastes and 
preferences. As to the first, the only remedy lay in bringing 
all the sects together under one ecclesiastical authority through 

hiaivey, History of Burma, pp. 1 17-118, 

M .4n JR..4.S.B., 1914. p. il. 



184 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


one standard and absolute upasampada ordination. The 
remedy as to the second was to follow as a consequence. 

Hailing from one of the Ava monasteries, Dhammaceti, 
by training and perhaps by conviction as well, belonged to 
the Sihala Samgha and held fast to orthodox views. 
Moreover, numerous pilgrimages and missions of Burmese 
monks to the Mahavihara of Ceylon during the last four 
centuries had built up a tradition in Burma which held that the 
religion In its pure and unsullied form existed there alone, and 
it was only the Mahavihara of Ceylon that one might go to seek 
guidance and inspiration from. When, therefore, Dhammaceti 
thought of effecting a reformation of the Order, he had 
naturally his face turned towards that island ; and it may be 
assumed that he thought of unifying the contending sections 
by re-introducing the upasampada ordination from the 
Mahavihara of Ceylon and making it absolute, and thus 
restoring the succession of theras which he thought had been 
broken in the Ramanna country. 1 his is what he actually did. 

We have already referred in a previous section to the 
unfortunate state of the religion ; at one time in Martaban 
alone there were as many as five different sects, each one 
claiming supremacy over the other. The degeneration was 
so complete that “ in all these sects, ” the Kalyam inscriptions 
state, ” there were none who were well-versed in the 
Tripitaka.” The number of these sects gradually increased 
with increasing rivalry amongst themselves, and though 
scholarly works from monks continued to be produced 
there was dearth of real wisdom, for there was none 
“ qualified to investigate and ascertain matters regarding 
ecclesiastical ceremonies. ” The trouble arose in connection 
with the question of right consecration of a sima and valid 
conferment of the upasampada ordination. In respect to 
these two ecclesiastical ceremonies each one sect had its 
own opinion, and they performed the ceremonies in their 
own way. Dhammaceti wanted to put an end to this, for, 



DHAMMACETl'S REFORMATION OF THE SAMGHA 


185 


“The upasampada ordination is dependent on that of pabbajja, and the basis of 
the religion itself is tlie upasampada ordination, which in order to be appro- 
priate, inviolable and valid nrxust be possessed of five characteristics, namely, 
Slmasampatti, Vatthusampattif K^’aUisampatti, Parisasarnpatti and Ariuaavana- 
sampatti. Of these characteristics there exists means of attesting the validity of 
Vatthusampatti and Nattisampaiti, owing respectively to the ability of a candidate 
for the pure form of upasampada ordination to Itilhl the conditions ol the former, 
and to the accessibility of qualified acariyas, who would recite the Kammavacd 
with correct intonation." 

The king also repeatedly ‘investigated and considered the 
ruling of the Vinaya as regards the consecration of a slmd 
which would be in conformity with the intention of the 
Blessed One'. At last he personally came to a decision in 
regard to these two and other ecclesiastical ceremonies, 
evidently in accordance with Vinaya rules. But he 
was not sure if the theras of his realm would argue in the 
same manner and accept his decision. He, therefore, invited 
the leading monks and asked them to give a ruling based on 
the Vinaya in regard to the problems he set forth before 
them. Eventually it was agreed upon that the religion had 
become ‘impure and corrupt/ and that they must set them- 
selves to reform it- With this end in viev/ 

“King Rfimadhipati (RamannaclKipaii, i.c., Dhainmaceti) invited twcnty-lwo 
theras, headed by IVIoggaiuna, and addressed them thus : 'Revered Sirs, the 
upasampada ordination of the monks ol the Mon country now appears to us to be 
invalid. 1 herefoie, how can the religion, which is based on such invalid ordina- 
tion, last to the end of 5000 years ? Reverend Sirs, from the establishment of the 
religion in the island of Ceylon tip to the jirescnt day, there has been existing in 
that island an exceedingly pure sect of monks, \a ho were the spiiitiial succc'^sors of 
the monks, of the Mahavihaia, a Chapter, who are pure and free from censure and 
reproach ; receive at their hands the upasampada ordination in the Udakukkhepa- 

sTma consecrated on the Kalyani river and if you make this form of the 

upasampada ordination the seed of tlie religion, as it were, plant it (after you 
return here from that island) , and cause it to sprout forth by conferring such 
ordination on men of good family in this Mon country, who have faith and are 
desirou.s of taking orders, the religion will become pure and last till the end of 
5,000 years. Reverend Sirs, by your going to the island of Ceylon, much merit and 
great advantage M’ill accrir- l'‘ you. 

■' Lp. Birm., iii. ii., p, 2t'b 

Ep, Birm,, iii. ii., pp. 

24--1445B 



186 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


So, one day (January 9, 1476) twenty-two theras with 
their twenty-two discif>les embarked on two ships consigned 
to the care of two missionaries, Citradutan and Ramadutan. 
In Citradutan s ship went eleven theras headed by Mahasi- 
vali, while Ramadutan’s carried another eleven theras headed 
by Moggallana. A month’s voyage took Citradutan’s ship to 
the island and on February 23, 1476, Citradutan along with 
the theras handed over to Bhuvanekabahu, the king of 
Ceylon, Dhammaceti’s letter written on gold-plate and other 
valuable presents which the latter had sent for the king of 
Ceylon. The next day was handed over to the clergy of 
Ceylon the letter of Dhammaceti meant for them together 
with some other presents. Handicapped by adverse winds 
and adverse circumstances Ramadutan’s ship arrived a few 
months later (14th June, 1476). 

To cut a very long story short, the king of Ceylon 
directed the clergy of the Mahavihara to make arrangements 
for the ordination of the twenty-two monks with their twenty- 
two disciples. “In conformity with the custom foHowed by 
the Sinhalese Mahatheras of old, whenever monks from 
foreign countries were ordained, the forty-four Mon monks 
were first established in the condition of laymen, and then 
admitted to the Order as Samaneras, ’ through the act of 
Vanaratanamahathera who presented them with yellow robes, 
and accepted their profession of faith in the Three Refuges. 
It then took four days to confer the upasampada ordination 
on all the forty-four theras, the last day being given to the 
twenty-two younger monks (July, 17 to 20, 1476). On the 
first day Dhammakittimahathera and Pancaparivenavasimang- 
alamahathera were respectively the upajjhaya and acariya. 
On the second and third days Vanaratanamahathera and 
Pancaparivenavasimaiigalathera acted as the upajjhaya and 
acariya respectively, while on the last day Pancaparivenava- 
simangalathera and Siharajayuvarajacariyathera were respec- 
tively the upajjhaya and acariya. The names of the 



DHAMMACETl's REFORMATION OF THE SAMGHA 187 


twenty-two elder monks who were ordained are given in the 
Kalyani inscriptions and may be of some interest to us. 
They were Moggallana, Kumar akassapa, Mahasivali, Sari- 
putta, Nanasagara, Sumana, Kassapa, Nanda, Rdiula, 
Buddhavamsa, Sumangala, Khujjananda, Sonuttara, Guna- 
sagara, Dhammarakkhita, Cujasumahgala;, Javanapanna, 
Culakassapa, Cjlasivah, Manisara, Dharnmarajika and 
Candanasara. After the ordination the king invited them to 
a meal, presented them with niceties that could be given to 
monks, and conferred various titles on the twenty-two elder 
monks. 

In time one batch of eleven theras with their eleven 
disciples sailed back to their country (August 21, 1476), and 
Dhammaceti received them with due ceremony. The other 
batch of eleven theras with their eleven disciples suffered a 
series of misforlunes that led to the death of six theras and 
four young monks away from their country ; the rest of 
the party reached home three years later (November 
12, 1479). However, after their arrival, the king carefully 
selected a gamakhetta where a pure sima was duly conse- 
crated according to the rules of the Vinaya for the 
performance of the uposatha, pavarana, upasampada 
and other ceremonies. “Inasmuch as this sima...was 
consecrated by our lords who went to the island of Ceylon 
and received tiie upasampaoa ordination in an udakukkhe- 
pasima arranged on the Kalyani river, it was called the 
Kalyanisima.” ” The king then invited all monks of the 
realm ‘who possessed faith and desired to receive the 
upasampada ordination at the hands of the monks ordained 
in Ceylon,' to come to the Kalyani siina and receive ordina- 
tion. ‘Lei those who have not faith and do not desire 
to receive the upasampada ordination of the Sinhalese,’ 
he decreed, ‘ remain as they are ! 


Ep. Birm., in. ii, p 249 



188 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


But who was to serve as the upajjhaya of the ordination 
ceremony ? None of the monks who had just returned from 
Ceylon had yet completed ten years since their ordination 
and could not therefore serve as upajjhaya. The choice 
then fell on Suvannasobhana, ‘a worthy monk, one who 
received the upasarnpada ordination of the succession of 
Ceylon, a man who is modest, remorseful, an observer of 
the precepts, a dweller in the forest, with few desires, easily 
satisfied, eradicating his sins, and an observer of the 
dhutangas.’ The upajjhaya in his ordination in Ceylon was 
Vanaratana, while Rahulabhadda was the acariya, and 
twenty-six years had already elapsed since he had received 
the upasarnpada ordination of the Sinhalese in an 
udakukkhepastma . 

All arrangements were now complete, and what now 
began was nothing short of a mass ordination so that after 
five days the number of monks newly ordained rose to 
245, while the king himself kep twatch. 

“ Then His Majesty Ramadhipati sent worej lo al) the clergy and throughovit the 
whole extent of this Mon country. His Majesty caused tlieui to make agrccmer'ls 
and make appointments in this wi.se : ‘What is past, let it be done with ! But as 
for monks in the future, after these, let all clergy who ordain them liereafter 
that the candidates for ordination are satisfactory, and then ordain them . ..” 

He proceeded in his declaration to ban all monks who 
were without faith and devotion, who were not perfect in 
iirnbs, who practised medicine or lived by tending people’s 
diseases or by following some arts or crafts or by reciting the 
Dhamma aloud or who transgressed in any way even a trifle 
of the Vinaya rules, who possessed goods, paddy, rice, 
slaves, cattle, or any kind of material wealth, and threatened 
them all with expulsion from the Order. Upasarnpada ordi- 
nation could in no way be conferred on them. *‘If you do 
not act thus, but confer the upasarnpada privily, the mother 


f or Suvannasobhana, see anie, p. 181. 



DHAMM^CETi’s REFORMATION OF THE SAMGHA 


189 


and the father of those who receive such ordination, as well 
as their relatives, and likewise their lay supporters, will be 
visited by us with royal penalties.” 

“Thus did Hi.s Majesty Ramadhipati entirely purge and expel the iinpurify and 
corruption of religion that had arisen, and caused all the clergy who were in this 
Mon country to form one siT^tgle sect. All the clergy who dwelt in village.s or in 
the forest, wlio lived within this Mon country . ..came and tt ceived the upasam- 
pada ordination of the Sinhalese; without intermisr-ion they kepi on coming and 
receiving it** 

till the number swelled by thousands (fifteen thousand six 
hundred and sixty-six}. To cope with the increasing 
requests from monks for the new ordination, Dhainmaceti 
consecrated hundreds of simas (a list of which is given in 
the inscriptions) throughout the Mon country. 

“Such deeds as ihejie did Hi.s Majc-sly Ramadhipati do, because hfr took great 
delight in the; religion : desiring that those who rcceiAo-d the iipasampadii oadination 
should be firm and stcadfa.st. Hereafter, also, for the term of life of His Majesty, 
lor every Samancra wlio shall desire to receive the. upa.sampada o'dinalion, His 
Majesty will make preparation in like manner .....Inasmuch as that is .so, may the 
princes who are replete with faith and with wisdom, who shall wield the sove- 
reignty of the city of Haiiisavati hereafter, also imj:>att streiigtli to tiu: religion !*’ 

None of Dharnmaceti's successors took the same great 
care of nor devoted lliemselves so steadfastly to the cause of 
the religion. Through the process oi a valid upasampada 
ordination, he was able to purge the Order of all impurities 
and corruption that had crept into it and to bring all 
contending sects under one banner, to ‘ form one 
single sect , as Daarnmaceti himself puts it. Fie had 
indeed achieved a great object which for all practical 
purposes brought to a close, at least for another couple 
of centuries, the dissensions between the Mararnma Samgha 
and the Sihala Sanigha. h was a complete tnumpii for the 
latter, and as such, for the orthodox school. We have 
seen that Dhamrnaceti held Sinhalese views of orthodoxy 
and it is not surprising to find that he helped the Sihala 
Samgha become supreme, indeed, the one officially 



190 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


recognised Order, in the land. Henceforth we shall hear 
less of the Maramma Sarngha, the older school that main- 
tained the religion in the countr})^ presumably from the time 
when Sona and Uttara introduced the religion to the day 
when Capata returned from Ceylon with the message of 
the Mahavihara. 

We had occasion to point out how the Sinhalese School 
strove to adhere strictly to the rules of the Vinaya. Even 
th^ transgression of a trifle monastic rule was considered 
to be a grave offence, and hence was not to be tolerated. 
Unfortunately, the various sects into which the Sihala 
Sarngha saw itself divided were gradually drifting from 
the orthodox Mahavihara tradition, and were slowly moving 
towards what was evidently a relaxe:! interpretation of the 
Vinaya rules . What Dhammaceti attempted to do was rigidly 
to enforce the Vinaya rules according to orthodox interpreta- 
tion ; this he did by reviving the Mahavihara tradition through a 
valid upasampadci ordination. This explains why the Kalyani 
inscriptions contain repeated requests to monks to conform 
strictly to the rules of the Vinaya ; indeed, the king himself 
frequently refers to Vinaya texts and decides everything 
accordingly. It is interesting to note in this connection how 
Dhammaceti wanted all Samaneras to study the Vinaya rules 
carefully and minutely with special emphasis, it seems, on the 
Khuddakasikk^d and the Patimokl^had^ and to lead a strict 
life according to orthodox rules of discipline, with a view to 
qualify themselves for ordination. Standard authorities on 
Vinaya subjects which the king himself consulted and in 
which he caused research and investigation to be made 
by the monks are also mentioned. They were, among 
others, the Vinayapili, the Vinayatthakatha, the Vinayaiik^ 
called Si^atthadipani, the Vinayaiu^d called Vimativinodant , 


Ep. Birrn., Ill, ii, pp. 258-59, 261, 283. 



DHAMMACETl’S REFORMATION OF THE SAMGHA 


191 


the Vinayatxl^a written by Vajirabuddhithera, the Mdtil^attha- 
Jzathd called Kah\hdvitarani together with its the Vinaya- 
sahgahapa\aranay the Similah\drapal(arana, and the Sima- 
lank.arasangaha It is significant that all these treatises are 
of Sinhalese authorship. 

It is also interesting to make a note of the part played by 
Dhammaceti himself in the great reformation. The initiative 
came not from the Order of monks but from the king 
himself, and in all the acts of that great drama he was the 
one and only hero ; the monks, even the most venerable 
ones, to w’^hom nevertheless he showed throughout the most 
devoted and respectful consideration, were completely at his 
bidding. They followed him loyally and allowed themselves 
to be guided and protected by him. This gives us at once a 
glimpse into the hold the king had on the Order, as well as 
into the relations between the Samgha and the royal authority. 
We shall see later on that the nature and character of these 
relations were always more or less the same. 

No less interesting is the fact that even from the very 
introduction of the Sihala Samgha into Burma ^ the royal 
authority had always lent its support to the new Order in 
preference to the old and indigenous fraternity, and thus 
showed decided prefe^rence for the more orthodox school. But 
for Narapatisiihu s active help and support the Sihala Samgha 
within a few years after its introduction, could not have 
achieved the prestige and position which it did during his 
reign. And every king that followed on the throne 
of Pagan or elsewhere chose their acariya usually from 
among those who subscribed to the Mahavihara tradition, 
and bestowed their bounties mostly on them alone. Their 
benevolence, real and sincere, was not impartial. The last 
stage was reached when Dhammaceti openly and frcinkly 
identified himself with the Sihala Sarngha. 

Dhammacetrs reformation is an important event in the 
history of Buddhism in Burma. It reveals the whole 



192 


THER.WADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


character of the religion in Burma, not only during the 
four centuries that were left behind, but also during the 
centuries that lay ahead. indeed, that character was now 
determined once and for all. Dissensions will take place and 
controversies will in future lead to sectional feuds within 
the Order, laxity of discipline will from time to time disturb 
the fraternity, the relation between the Order and the king 
will give cause for anxiety, but everything will at last be 
decided in consonance with the na ure and character brought 
forth by the history of the religion so far pursued, i e., 
beginning from the introduction of the Sihala Sarngha to 
the reformation of Dhammaceti. The rest of the history has, 
therefore, its factual interest alone; it would only go to 
confirm what we already know of the nature and character of 
the religion. 

? 

A Monastic Library 

A very interesting glimpse into the studies in which the 
monks engaged themselves during the period under review 
is afforded by a well-known inscription recovered from the 
ruins of Pagan. The record is dated B.E. 804 (1442 A.D.) 
and is of considerable value inasmuch as it furnishes a 
picture of monastic scholarship in upper Burma in the 
fifteenth century. It commemorates a gift to a monastic estab- 
lishment of Pagan by the ruler of 1 aungdwin and his wife. 
They built for the monks, as was often the practice with the 
royalty and the rich, a monastery, and made over to them 
a garden, paddy lands, monastery slaves, and a large 
collection of texts of which a full list is given in the 
inscription.' Such gifts of texts to monkish orders were by 

Forchammer, Inscriplioyis of Pagan, Pinya and Ava. TKe list ha.s often 
been reproduced, e.g., in Bode, Pah Literature of Burma, pp, 102-09, or mentioned, 
e.g., in Pelliot, “ Deux Itineraires,” B.E.F.E.O., V, p. I83, Dr, Bede stresse^s 



A MONASTIC LIBRARY 


193 


no means unusual. The monastic libraries as much ks 
the monasteries themselves depended on the bounties of 
the rich ; and whence could the monks get their books 
for study and reference unless the laity provided the Order 
with thern.^ But it must be admitted that extant records of 
such gifts are rare ; indeed the Taungdwin record is unique 
in this respect. It gives us a clear idea of the subjects that 
were generally studied in the monasteries of upper Burma, 
and presumably also of lower Burma, in the fifteenth century. 

A careful analysis of this list shows that it is not 
without a system and a significance. It will be seen that 
at the h^ad of the list are the Vinaya books which number 
as many as twenty. This is not accidental, but just as one 
would expect to find in Burma, since Vinaya was the most 
important subject Buddhism in Burma was concerned with, 
and the Vinaya texts had already come to play a most 
important part in the life of the average Burmese monk. It 
was but natural that they should be given the place of 
honour in a monastery library. The Vinaya list is followed 
by seventeen Abhidhamrna texts' ' which also have a pirofound 
influence on Burmese Buddhists who like the Buddhists of 
Siam and Kamboj look upon the Abhidhamrna with great 
respect. But the number of Sutta texts that follow those 
of the Abhidhamrna are by far the largest. With their rich 
store of stories, legends, verses and edificatory discourses, all 
tinged with a deep human interest, the Sutta texts naturally 
commanded the widest popularity, not only among the 
members of the Order but also among those of the laity. 
Whoever has had any opportunity of coming in intimate 
contact with the Burmese people must have noticed 
what a deep influence the Sutta texts exercise on their life 

the aid afforded by the list to 'foim some notion of tfio point reached by the 
Sanskrit scholars in Buima in the fifteenth century.’ 

Some Abhidhamma texts are also rnenlioned down in the hst, Nos, 

111, 112, etc. 

25~-1445B 



194 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


and culture even to this day. The whole idea of a young 
Burman about good and bad, merit and demerit is, indeed, 
drawn from these texts. After the Suita texts, almost in a 
natural sequence, come the Jataka and Apadana texts, and 
then are listed historical chronicles, etc. Then follow texts on 
grammar, lexicography, philology, law, polity, medicine 
and pharmacology, astrology, rhetoric and prosody, logic 
and other minor texts, not always strictly according to 
subject. Texts on grammar and lexicography, and even 
philology and rhetoric were almost indispensable for a 
thorough understanding of the sacred texts, and from what 
we know of the syllabus of Buddhist monastic studies in 
India it is not surprising that Burmese monks interested 
themselves in texts on such secular subjects as Medicine 
and Pharmacology, Polity and Astrology, and even Military 
Science, etc. 

Readers will notice in this list titles of a good number of 
Sanskrit works as well. It is difficult to say if they were tran- 
slations of Sanskrit originals or the originals themselves under 
the disguise of Pali and even Burmese names. These 
works relate themselves to such subjects as Grammar and 
Rhetoric, Astrology and Medicine, Law and Polity, Lexico- 
graphy and the like. It is common knowledge today that 
Sanskrit learning though not v>ridely practised was yet quite 
familiar in Burma. 1 his learning was in the keeping of 
Brahmanical priests, court-astronomers and ministers who 
were all held in high esteem in the courts of Burmese kings 
and were persons of influence. It is not unlikely that the 
Burmese laity, following the Hindu colonists, interested 
themselves in this learning as well, specially in Hindu Polity, 
Law and Astrology and similar other subjects, perhaps to help 
themselves to secure positions of influence with the king 
and the ruling class. The Taungdwin record shows, 
however, that even Buddhist monks were interested in this 
essentially Brahmanical learning and took pains to study 



A MONASTIC LIBRARY 


195 


Sanskrit texts on secular subjects* That the monks did 
really study such Brahmanical texts along wilh their own 
sacred books is proved not only by a good number of 
Burmese translations of several Sanskrit works but also by 
the epithet ‘ Veclasatthak.oVicla ’ (expert in Vedasatthas) 
sometimes applied to certain monks. More than once the 
SdsanaVamsa refers to learned monks who were experts in 
VedasatthaSy Le., in the secular learning of the Brahrnanas/' 
Needless to say, this Brahmanical learning was not 
favoured by certain sections of the monastic Order ; in fact, if 
the SdsanaVamsa is to be believed, the Order as a whole 
frankly disapproved of them. According to Pannasami, 
these VedasQtthakpVidas were pariyaiUpaUpaiiisu manda : 
they were deficient in the knowledge and practice of the 
religion, and the old chroniclers did not consider them 
eligible to be reckoned in the iheraparampara {theraparam- 
pardya na ganenti par and). 

c g. Sdsana. pp. ^-^3, 103-109. When S<.»d<lnarina.»aj;) cluuujed the cia he \va« 
advised by two learnefl ili. ias wlio aelt d es iisU olo ' t } s and llu* ivdviee was i.'iven 
on the sticn^lh o( V cdasiiUJias. 

i l)ese i’ cda^alitun^ luid, howev^M noilnng to do with Vedic texl.s, or even 
/ rahmanical religious iiteiatuie as such, the Upanisads, Puranas, etc. brankly, 

the Burmese knew Brahmanical texts or Astronomy, and Asliology, perhaps also on 
Polity, Law, etc,, as LeJa.suIt/ios, and anybody who had prohciency in these texts 
t aine. to be known as ‘ \' cciasclihalioticla.' See. j.udine, A o/cs on Buddhist 
Law IV . Intro, by Forchammer, p. 17, b oichaiiinier , Report, pp. 5 ff. Bode, Bali 
Literature, pp. 50-51, 

Sasana, p. 105. 



CHAPTER FOUR 

CLOUDS GATHER 


Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries 

1 

MARAMMARATTHA 
• • 

Burma, after the fall of Pagan, became for more than 
two centuries and a half a victim of separatist tendencies. She 
was ruled over by contending dynasties of kings and princes 
who had their centres at different places of the country. Even 
when Diiammaceti effected the reformation of the religion, the 
country had been in the same state of political disruption. 
H.s reformation could not therefore achieve an all-Burma 
character. But it must not be supposed that its effects were 
confined within the boundaries of the Ramanna country alone 
The SasanaVamsa s express testimony is that the reformation 
went deep into the hearts of the people of Mararnmaratlha as 
well whence bhikkhus flocked to the Kalyani sima to receive 
the upasampada ordination.’ 

But clouds came hovering to enmesh the religion in 
the MarammaraUha into a dense darkness. In 1527 anew 
king sat on the throne of Ava. He was Thohanbwa 
(called Sirihanisva or Sahantva in the SdsanaVarnsa) ^ son 
of Sawlon. Thohanbwa was a downright brute and 
full-blooded savage. He considered all temples and sacred 
shrines as so many secret chambers where people concealed 
their treasures. He therefore pillaged all those that were 
within his reach and appropriated whatever he could get hold 


• Satanavarnaa. p. 47, 



MARAMMARATTHA 1 97 

of. He robbed the monasteries of sacred texts and set them 
in flames and also burnt many temples and pagodas. f he 
monks he considered as so many conspirators who whenever 
opportunity offered itself, gathered followers round them and 
instigated them to rebel against the king. At least this was 
how he viewed their activities. To him they were a band 
of men without wives and children, and were thus all the 
more dangerous. He therefore contrived to put end to 
them. At Ton-bhi-luh ( 1 aungbalu ^ near Ava he erected 
a big mandapa where he slaughtered cows, pigs, buffaloes, 
fowls, etc., for a feast lo which he invited a good number 
of monks from Pinya, Ava, Myinsing and Saggaing. 
When the monks were all inside the mandapa^ he had them 
surrounded and then effected a wKoiesale massacre. 1 he 
Sdsanavamsa says that he succeeded in kiliing three tiiousancl 
monks. Buddhism in Burma had never suffered so terrible 
and so shocking and devastating a savagery ! 

Thohanbwa met the fate he deserved. Minkyiyanaung, 
a Burman officer of the old Ava court and the right-hand 
man of Thohanbwa killed him (1543), for, Minkyiyanaung 
being a man with sincere faith in tire religion and respect 
for the Order could no more stand the atrocities of his master. 

He reveres not the I hree Gems, he regards not human 
life, he respects not other men s waves, and die tear of the 
Lord is not in him. We shall be destroyed unto the 
seventh generation/' And so Minkyiyanaung destroyed 
him, but did not w’^ani lo take his throne. He was a 
man of finer taste, religiously disposed, and of peaceful 
temperament. So, eventually he forsook the world that 
had tempted him so much with ponrp, power and position, 
and retired to a forest monastery near Mekkaya in the 
Kyaukse district, and there passed the remaining days of his 
life in the peace of monastic seclusion. Vvhere in those day.s 
when violent political convulsions, dynastic plots and court 
intrigues were the usual order, could one with finer nature 



198 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

and with faith in the religion escape than in the seclusion of 
the monasteries ? Even in such dark days monasteries were 
numerous in Ava and they always gave , asylum to those 
who sought refuge in them. It was in these monasteries 
alone that the torch of learning and culture and religion was 
kept burning, sometimes dim and pale, but never quite 
extinct. 

There was indeed no dearth of devoted rnonk-scholars. 
Two of them are known to lis, evidently from Ava ; they 
were Saddhammakitti and his pupil Tisasanadhaja, who 
somehow seem to have escaped the cruel persecution of 
Thohanbwa. But they had to seek for safety elsewhere. 
Both of them cams to Keiumati (Toungoo), the capital of an 
indepen lent kingdom where Saddnammakitti maintained 
the scholastic trad i lion and compiled the Wv^lhknown vocabu- 
lary, the El^ahikharakosa. I isasanadhaja has been styled 
Maha-sadliujjana ; though not an author lie seems to have 
been a holy man of repute. After the death of Saddharnma- 
kitti he went to Hainsavati in the reign of Anekasetibhinda 
(Bayinnaung). L.aler, lie repaired to Jeyyapuranagara 
(Saggaing' where lie made his cibode in a cave near the 
Jetavanavihara . Afterwards when Bayinnaung conquered 
Ava, lie built a vihara which he made over to Fisasanadhaja. 

The 1 ourigoo fraternity, which was in compairiiive peace, 
was at this time being disturbed by a very interesting contro- 
versy. It centred round the question of fermented drinks 
which was forbidden for the monks, according to the Vinaya. 
But the commentaries on the Vinaya seemed to suggest that 
the juice of the palm and cocoanut trees might be taken 
even by monks. As usual, opinions among the monks 
of Toungoo differed in respect of the commentarial 
interpretation on this point. The matter was then 
referred to the thera Mahaparakkama who gave a ruling 
that the juice of the palm or cocoanut trees might be taken 
just after it had been taken down from the tree, z.e., when 



MARAMMARATTHA 


199 


fermentation had not yet set in. His ruling seems to have put 
an end to the drink controversy. Mahaparakkama afterwards 
wrote a book, SuraVinicchaya, in which he discussed the 
question in detail. At this time the king of Toungoo was 
Mahasirijeyyasura (Minkyinyo, 1486-1531) who was a pro- 
tector of the religion and built cetiyas and viharas, as the 
SdsanaVamsa would have us believe. 

Pinya which seems to have survived the vandalism of 
Thohanbwa contributes to the histor 3 ^ of monastic scholarship 
of this period at least three important treatises on grammar 
by two reputed theras. One Saddhammaguru wrote 
the Saddavutli, a treatise on grammar ; and another 
Vijltavi^ wrote the Kaccdyaimvannand, a commentary 
on the Sandhi section of Kaccaj^ana’s grammar, and the 
Vacal^opadesa which 'treats the grammatical categories from 
a logical point of view/ “ 

Minkyinyo was succeeded by a young prince of worth and 
valour, Tabinshw^ehti by name (1531-50). He captured 
Pegu in I 539 by recourse to a stratagem and without even 
striking a blow, and later took Martaban and Pronie. 
The Talaing kingdom at last lay al the loot of the Burmese 
king and at the mercy of the Barmcse army. During his 
reign Ava was being ruled by a Shan prince wlio, following 
on the footsteps of one of his predecesso) .s, rhohanbvva, 
very cruelly persecuted the monks, and made the monasicries 
his target of pillage and plunder. 

Brighter days were however in store for the religion 
during the reign of king Bayinnaung D 5 31 81) of the 
Toungoo dynasty. Starting his life as a king without a 
kingdom Bayinnaung first captured Pegu and strangled 
Talaing opposition. He then set out on a career of conquest 
and within a few years brought the whole of Burma includ ng 
even the Shan Slates under his control. He bestowed liberal 

2 Cat. Mcinrl. MSS., p. 43 Sasana. dip. 1242; Forchamm- List, p. xxii, 
Oidenberi^, Pali MSS. in the India Office Lihrarip p. 104. 



200 


THKRAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


bounties on the viharasof the Talaing country where monastic 
scholarship came to receive a new impetus. We therefore 
hear of such scholars as Sacldhammalamkara, Ananda and 
Dhammabuddha, all of Hanrsavati. Ananda wrote the 
Madhurasarafihadipani, a commentary on the Abhidham- 
maiil^a, while Saddhammalarnkara wrote a pa^arana entitled 
Fatthanasaratthadipanl. They are both placed by the 
Pitakatthamain in the reign 'of Bayinnaung.* Dhamma- 
buddha wrote the Kavisara, a treatise on Chanda. 

But Bayinnaung was a zealous patron of the religion 
and he did sometiung more than mere bestowing bounties 
on the Satngha. On more than one occasion he went on 
pilgrimage to the Shvv^edagon at Rangoon, the Shwesandaw 
at Prome, and the Shwezigon at Pagan. At the Shwezigon 
he once made offering to as many monks as there 
were years in his life. There he set up a great bronze 
bell (1557) that bears an inscription in three languages, Pali, 
Burmese and Talaing. Bayinnaung's record is a long one, 
and typical of him ; every line of it breathes the pride he felt 
in his wide conquests and in the work he did for the 
religion. Like Asoka, it seems, he decreed that within his 
realm there should , be no animal sacrifices, not even 
during the Bak.r-id of the Mussalrnans or by the foreign 
settlers in the land. “ In Onbaung, Momcik and the 
rest of the Shan country when a sawhwa died, following 
heathen doctrine, men used to kill his slaves and the dear, 
horses and elephants that he rode, and bury them in the 
grave with him. His Majesty forbade such evil practices.” 
Among the people of the villages round the Popa hill there 
was a custom of sacrificing such animals as goats, pigs, 
fowls, buffaloes, etc., to the Mahagiri spirit. He also put 
an end to this custom.' 

^ Silsana, p. 48. I’he atuhor of the Madhusaratthadlf:>Gni was Mahanama. 
according to \he Pifaliatthaniain, pp. 40, 41. 

^ Hmannan, il. 312. 



MARAMMARATTHA 


201 


“Moreover, seeing that religion was not firmly estabiished. he built pagodas 
at Onbaung and Monieik, and ded cated lands to religion, and built monasteries 
of three stories with ten surrounding monasteries, each at Onbaung and Momeik, 
and invited learned monks to abide there practising religion. The sawhwas with 
all their counsellors and captains listened to the preaching of the Law four holidays 
a month, and learned virtue. His Majesty placed one half the scriptures at Onbaung 
and the other half at Momeik.’* 

Bayinnaung unified both upper and lower Burma into 
one empire, and throughout his realm, on all his subjects — 
Burman, Talaing, Shan, Muslim, Portuguese — he imposed 
the religion he himself professed. It was indeed a most 
unreal thing, but he strictly enforced at least an outward 
profession of Buddhism by all. 

Bayinnaung sought the help of the monks and dignitaries 
of his realm to prescribe an official collection of law books. 
The Wareru Dhammathat was accepted as the standard 
authority, and the monks and officials compiled the Dhamma- 
thatkyaw and Kosaurigchok^^ 

Like some of his predecessors Bayinnaung made presents 
of copies of sacred texts to monasteries, organised regular 
feeding of monks and built works of merit wherever he could 
throughout his conquered territories, even as far as Ayuthia 
(Siam).^ 

He adorned the spires of the Shwedagon and Shwemaw- 
daw pagodas with jewels of his crown — a royal custom — 
and repaired the Shwedagon, adding a new spire, after the 
earthquake of 1564. Around many an important pagoda 
he built as many monasteries as there were years in hie life. 
On many an occasion he bore the cost of the ordination 
of monks, and himself supervised niass ordination ceremonies 
at the Kalyani sima near Pegu. His chief work of merit 
was the Mahazedi pagoda at Pegu, an imposing monument, 
where he is said to have enshrined a begging bowl and a 
tooth relic sent by a Sinhalese prince. 

•'» Hrnanrian , 11 . 324 , 

6 Forchainmer, E'.ssoy, p 67. 

^ Hmannan, II. 376. 

26~I445B 



202 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


It is curious that the Sasanavarnsa is very reticent 
about him. The only important fact recorded is that 
Bayinnaung (Anekasetibhinda) appointed his eldest son 
Anuruddha the viceroy of Yonakarattha (which included the 
countries of Haribhunja,^ Kamboja, Khemavara and 
Ayuddha with the cities of Sokkataya and Kapunna),^' 
and sent him there with a large number of counsellors to 
rule as his representative. Bayinnaung also appointed a 
learned thera named Saddhammacakkasamii to accompany 
the prince to the conquered territory fox the ‘ purification of 
the religion there Saddhammacakkasami’s work seems 
to have been crowned with success ; for, soon we read of 
important treatises in Pali being written by the monks of 
that country. Two names at least are mentioned in the 
Sasanavarnsaf those of Nanavilasa who was the author of 
the Sahl^hyapakasal^a " and Sirimangala who wrote the 
Mangaladipanit a commentary, and a tihid on Nanavilasa's 
work. We have already referred to a wise thera, Tisasana- 
dhaja who flourished during Bciyinnaung’s reign. 1 isasana 
had a large number of disciples some of whom were special 
experts in Pariyatti {pariyaitil^ovidd). An interesting 
incident is recorded of his times in the Sasanavarnsa, A 
bhikkhu belonging to the Arhantagana went about with a 
headgear and used a palmyra fan coloured in variegcitecl 
hues, a practice that went against the rule of the Vinaya. 
The incident is briefly touched upon, but its significance 
cannot be lost sight of (p. 102). 

Bayinnaung’s son Nandabayin (1581 -99) was much unlike 
his father. Himself a Burman, he had a deep hatred of the 

Harihhunja is certainly Haripuf.jaya of I il^etan texts and the N'f ainamat! 
copj>et plai e of Ranavankamalla. 

Ayuddluv is modern Ayuthia in Siam. 

Sokkataya is certainly Sukhodaycx in Siam. 

Srtsona, p. 49. 

Sasana, p. 57. 

Hmannan, III. 118, 



MARAMMARATTHA 


203 


Talaings though he had his capital in the heart of 
the Talaing country, and lived surrounded by the Talaings. 
He introduced conscription and branded them on the right 
hand with their names, rank and village. Once he instituted 
a large scale massacre of them and practically brought about 
a reign of terror among them. To evade his cruel persecu- 
tion many of them fled to Arakan and Siam. Quite a good 
number took refuge in the Order, but even then Nandabayin 
would not let them escape his wrath. He had them 
hounded out and compelled them to give up their yellow 
robiis. He did not even trust the old and venerable Talaing 
monks whom he got rid of by banishing them in Ava 
and the Shan States. 

Pegu was gradually losing hei importance. Frequent 
invasions and the vandalism of her own rulers were mainly 
reiponsible for it; but the Arakanese inroads of 1599-1600 
all but: destroyed the Pegu city. The rest was the work of 
Philip di Brito, a Portuguese adventurer who successfully 
sought his way to oiFicial recognition. 1 hese were dark 
days for the Talaings and for the religion. Di Brito pleased 
himself by regularly pillaging the pagodas and monas- 
teries and appropriating the riches for himsell. He would 
take the precious stones and all the gold from the images 
and sell them.'^ To such a downright barbarian religion 
and religious establishments were no consideration, and it 
is only likely that the monks did not fare well In his hands.’ ' 

This “ sacrilegious wretch was done to death by 
Mahadhammaraja (Anaukpetiun, 1605-28) who seems to 
have been a good patron of the religion. I he king s bounty 
was responsible for the building of a good number of 

Hmannan, U). 118. 

Di Brito, iiickiiamcrl Ngrj Zinga, had taki:n an Aiakanrse wife hy w'hoin 
he had two daughters, Nai)cialdiaya and Supabijadevl. 1 he two co operated in 
building .a pagoda in the Herizada district. Perljaf/s thev winled to at'orn for the 
sins of their father! See, An. R.A.S.B,, 1915, p. 33 



204 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


monasteries which he made over to celebrated theras like 
Mahasarnghanatha. Some of them were experts in the 
knowledge of the Pariyatti, and perhaps also wrote works in 
Pali, which, however, are not unfortunately mentioned. 
Two works in Burmese written by monks residing in the 
monasteries built by him find honourable mention ; one is the 
Manil^undalaVatthu by Varabhisamghanatha, and the other, 
Sattaraja-dhammavatthu, by another monk whose name is 
not given. Mahasamghanatha was a great expert in Pariyatti 
(ativiyapariyatiivisdrado) and it was perhaps for this reason 
that Mahadhammaraja, the king, appointed him Samgharaja. 

Three or four lines of the Sdsanavamsa in connection with 
Mahadhammaraja 's reign introduces us to a very interesting 
point in the history of the religion of this tune. Two monks 
who had come from the Ramanna country gradually gained, 
we are not told how, the favour of the king for their 
knowledge and aptitude for affairs of the world (loJ^adhammesu 
chek.ataya) , For them the king built two viharas. They 
were also Vedasatthal^ovidas, l.e., experts in Brahmanical 
learning, but were weak in the knowledge of Pariyatii, and 
hence were excluded from the theraparampard. 

II 

THE BURMANS AND THE TALAINGS 

Ever since the coming into power of the Anawrahta 
dynasty holding sway also over the 1 alaing country a 
keen rivalry had grown up between the Burmans and the 
Talaings which manifested itself in courtintrigues, dynastic 
squabbles, and even in open fights and large scale massacres. 
This rivalry was the keenest when the Foungoo dynasty came 
to occupy lower Burma and choose Pegu to be their centre of 
administration. For about a century (1 539-1635) they lived in 
the heart of the Talaing country, sometimes befriending, 
but often fighting with and effecting a massacre of them, or 



Marammarattha 


205 


tteating them so cruelly as to oblige them to seek shelter in 
other lands. Like the Pagan dynasty the Toungoo 
dynasty also effected an unification of Burma, and moreover, 
it had its seat of government in the midst of the Falaings, 
but the two races could not evolve a better understanding 
between themselves. On the contrary, every succeeding 
generation witnessed the bitterness grow from more to 
more till at last the Burmans, being a more virile race owing 
to periodical infusion of new blood from the north, drove the 
Talaings to a position of least importance. Yet the 1 alaings 
were the people who had transmitted their finer and superior 
culture and civilisation to the rude Burmans of the north. 

Even the monks themselves were not free from this 
racial rivalry. It is evident from the Sdsanavamsa which 
IS written frankly from the Burmese point of view that 
Pannasami hardly cares to give a full account of the religion 
or of mo.iastic activities among the Talaings ; indeed his 
knowledge of the activities ol the lalaing Samgha is 
extremely meagre. Burmese monks had no very high regard 
for the religion or religious scholarship in the lalaing 
country ; nor had the Talaing monks any better idea of, 
or regard for, the monks of upper Burma, i.e., the land 
proper of the Burmans, A very interesting glimpse into 
this racial rivalry is afforded by a story recorded in the 
Sdsanavamsa which will presently be alluded to. 

The story refers to the reign of king Ukkamsika, other- 
wise known as Thalun (1829-48), an important figure in the 
history of the religion. He was personally interested in the 
welfare of the religion and built ci number of monasteries, 
mostly in upper Burma which he nicide over as gifts 
to learned and venerable theras of his time. Of these 
monks I ipitakalamkara, Ariyalaqikara, Tisasanalamkara, 
Aggadhammalaipkara, I ilokaguru and Jambudhaja were the 
foremost. Ukkamsika came to the throne with the blessings of 
the Order as it were, for, when the king was consecrated and 



206 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


took the title of Sirisudhammarajamahadhipati, a learned 
thera, CKpert in Sanskrit, rhetoric and poetics, Maharatana- 
kara by name, composed the Rajindarajabhidhayyadipam, ‘ 
a book of Pali verses eulogising the king. 

Both I ipitakalarnkara and Ariyalamkara must have enjoyed 
wide reputation, for, the Sasanavarnsa gives a comparatively 
more detailed account of their work and career. Of the two, 
Tipitakalamkara was undoubtedly the more versatile, and his 
career more interesting. He was originally named Badara- 
vanavasi thera, expert in the knowledge of the Pariyatti and 
belonged to the Capata sect. Born in 1578, he entered the 
Order at the age of thirteen. He then came to Prome 
and even when he was fifteen composed a poetical version 
of the Vessantara Jatal^a, the most popular of the birth 
stories in Burma. At twenty he received the upasampacia 
ordination at .^nksetra under the patronage of king Veravijaya. 
Not long alter Prome fell into the hands of iiie kings of the 
foungoo dynasty of Ratanapura (Ava), and Badaravanavasi 
was brought by the king to the royal Ccipital where on the 
banks of the Irrawciddy the younger brother of king Surakitti, 
eldest son of Bayinnaung, built for him a vihara, while the 
king himself gave him the title of Tipitakaianikara. Plerc 
r ipitakalarnkara seems to have lived for a long time ; but as 
he grew old he chose to retire to a life of peace and solitude. 
So, at the age of sixty he withdrew to the T iriyapabbata where 
in vSylvan seclusion he gave himself up to the study of the 
Vinaya and produced a book named Vinaydlaml^dra , But he 
could not long remain in his peaceful retreat. Even while 
at Prome his fame had already spread far and wide 
and now it was almost impossible for him to keep himseif 
away from active life. Two years later, therefcie, the 
king called h ni back, built for him a new vihara, this 
time at jeyyapura (Saggaing) on the Irrawaddy. ^Whiic 


Sasanaf p, 102. 



MARAMMARATTHA 


207 


residing here he engaged himself in the study of the 
Abhidhamma and brought out a commentary of the intro- 
ductory verses of the Afthasalim. He also wrote another 
work, the Yasav iddhanavalthu, at the request of the king 
who happened to be the younger brother of king Surakuti. 

White with age, I ipltakalamkara was at the height of 
wisdom and glory when Ukkamsika transferred the dynastic 
seat of administration from Pegu to Ava in Burma proper* 
Ukkamsika was not slow to recognise his merit and to 
honour him accordingly. He chose him to be one of his 
trusted advisers and always sought his good counsel. 

Of the same age and temperament was the thera 
Ariyalarnkara, also residing at Ava. But while the former 
was a versatile intellect expert in many sacred texts, the 
latter was more interested in grammar. Both of them 
however became the preceptors of king Ukkamsika. Ariya- 
iamkara had a disciple, known as the second or younger 
Ariyalarnkara, who also, evidently by his learning and 
character, made himself known and attracted the attention 
of the king who built for him a monastery. 

At this time, once while king Ukkamsika Vv^as sojourning 
at Pegu he heard the 1 alaings (Ramariuarattliavcisina) remark, 
‘‘The monks of the iVlaramma country are experls neitlier in 
the Pariyaiti (sacred texts) nor in the Vedasahhas'k 
Naturally the king, himself a MarammaraUhika, fell Iris 
racial pride hurt. He therefore sent a message to (he thera 
residing in the large vihara of his city to send to him at Fegu 
several bhikkhus between thirty and forty years of age and 
well-versed in (he sacred texts and the Vedasatfhas. 1 he 
thera accordingly seat I ipitakalanikara, 1 ilokalarnkara and 
Tisasanaiamkara Witli thirty disciples to Hainsavatinagara 
(Pegu) where they settled tliemselves in a vihara built 
for them by the king. f hen on uposatha days he invited 
the monks of the Rarnanna country to the Sudhammasaia 
to hold discussions with the theras who had come 



208 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


from the Maramma country. After several discussions the 
Talaing monks admitted that the Burmese monks were not so 
devoid of wisdom as they had considered them to have been. 
And they said, “Formerly we thought that in the Maramma 
country there were no monks learned in the sacred texts and 
in the V edasatthas ; now we find that they indeed are great 
experts in the texts and the yatthas." This was indeed a 
triumph for the Burmese monks ; but they themselves were all 
humility. Before leaving Pegu they went to see and pay their 
respects to the wise and venerable Talaing thera, Tilokaguru, 
the chief among the theras of the Ramannaratdia. Tilokaguru 
had a discussion with them and he was evidently very much 
impressed by their character and wisdom. 

At this time Ukkamsika’s younger brother died, and his 
death was followed by a dramatic episode which forms part of 
a well-laid court intrigue. As a political incident it has 
very little importance, but in the Sasanavamsa it is described 
in some detail, evidently to bring forth in prominent 
relief the very important role Buddhist monks often played 
in court and state affairs. The story is therefore of interest 
and may be recounted here. 

On the death of the king’s younger brother, the king’s 
son, the governor (bhojaka) of Uccanagara conspired to 
dethrone his father and suddenly sieged the palace. Taken 
by surprise the king fled, taking away with him some of the 
precious royal jewels and accompanied by two amatyas, 
Nandajeya and Rajayodha. When they came upon the river 
(evidently the Irrawaddy) they saw a sarnanera about to cross 
it; they therefore entreated him to take them on his boat. 
Eventually he agreed and when they had crossed the river 
they went to the four-storied vihara where they disclosed 
their identity and relating the whole story to the thera-in- 
charge sought the protection of the vihara. And the thera 
of the four-storied vihara spoke thus to the king, “O king, 
we are samanas, we are not able to prevent this calamity. 



MARAMMAR/VTTHA 


209 


But there is one way out. The thera living in the Nisinna- 
vihara is very clever and intelligent in worldly matters {gihi- 
l^ammesu ativiya chel^o). You would therefore do well to go 
to him and discuss matters with him.” So the king with 
his amatyas went there and explained to the thera the whole 
affair, on which the latter replied, “O king,^ you have no 
reason to fear” and so saying gave him shelter The thera 
did also some thing more ; he called together all the bhikkhus 
of his own vihara as well as those of another vihara close 
by, and arming them with clandas posted them on all sides of 
the vihara in such a way as to form a stout barricade. The 
king's son and his followers were not prepared for such a 
defence ; they were overawed and outwitted and went back. 
The attempted coup failed : the king went back to the 
capital and mounted again on the throne.*' As a mark of 
gratefulness and rejoicing he invited his saviours the theras to 
the palace and treated them to a feast. And more, he built a 
number of viharas and made them over to wise and venerable 
theras on some of whom he also conferred honours and titles; 
for example, he installed a bhikkhu expert in the Vcdasdtthas 
in one of his newly built viharas and conferred on him 
the title of Dliammanandarajaguru. Bui Ukkamsika s bounties 
did not end there. In fact the Sdsanavamsa devotes a 
number of pages in giving an account of his work for 
the religion and monastic scholarship during his reign. 
Nor were his bounties confined to upper Burma. He 
erected the Rajamanicula cetiya at Sirikhettanagara, on four 
sides of which he again liuilt lour viharas. One of these 
was destroyed by fire, while the three others were made over 
to three theras learned in sacred texts. The mahathera resi- 
ding in the Dakkhina vanarama expounded in Burmese a 
commentary of the Kaccayanagandha while the thera residing 
in the western monastery brought out an edition of the Nydso. 

17 The story of the coup as y:iven in the Rajovarnsa Yazaivin is .sii-HOy differ 

ent. See, Phavre, History o' Burma, pp. 135-36. 

27- H45B 



210 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Ukkamsika was also privileged to extend patronage to 
another learned thera named Jambudhaja of Kukhananagara 
(or Pukhananagara ?— Pagan) for whom the king built a 
vihara. He was introduced to Ukkatnsika by the thera dwell- 
ing in the Tiriyapabbatavihara, evidently Tipitakalamkara 
himself ; the leftter was greatly impressed, in course of a dis- 
cussion, with the learning and wisdom of Jambudhaja (named 
by the king as Jambudipadhaja). Jambudhaja was a saddhi- 
viharika of Dhammanandathera who in his turn was the 
monk-brother of Jotipunfiathera, and all of them belonged to 
the Arhanta sect. Jambudhaja is credited with having 
written a commentary in Burmese of the Vinayatthal^atha.'^ 
One of his colleagues, Maniratana fhera translated in 
Burmese, evidently for those who could not read the Pali 
texts, the Atthasalini, the Sammohavinodanl, the Kafikha- 
Vitarani, the AbhidhammaithaVibhaVani and the Sank,hepa- 
vamanad'' 

Ukkamsika’s successor Sirinandadhammaraja-pavaradhi- 
patiraja (Pindale, 1648-61) continued the work of his prede- 
cessor, and the tradition of monastic learning was kept alive 
in the viharas that the king’s bounties had reared up. He 
made over one vihara to 7 ilokalarnkara thera and another at 
Saggaing to Dathanagarajaguru thera. The latter wrote a 
iik,a called Nirutiisaramanjusa of the Nydsa. 

A clear glimpse of the primitive Na/-worship durring 
Pindale ’s reign is afforded by a passage of the Sdsanavamsa . 
The date is given as 1 0 1 2 of the Burmese era ( = 1 650) when 
the king and his people were troubled by an evil omen that 
suggested the leaving of the capital by the tutelary gods or 

He is also sairl to have heen the author of the Samvannananayadipan't, the 
Njrutiisamgaho and the Sarvajnanayadlpani. See, Ncvill, Catalogue. Another 
book ascribed to him is the Rupahhcdapakasani. haiisboll. Cat. Mand. Mss., p, 50. 

1 he first two, being Buddhaghosa’s commentary on Dharnmasangani and 
Vihhafigo, are concerned with the .Ahhidhatnma ; so are the last two which are 
later fikas on the Ahhidhatnma. d he third alone, being Buddhaghosa’s commen- 
tary on the Patimokk^a, is concerned with the Vinaya. 



211 


MARAMMARAT’^HA 

the Nat spirits of the city. Terror-stricken the people offered 
worship to the gods ; but nothing could avert the 
danger that came hovering over the political horizon of 
the country, and threatened the peaceful career of the 
religion. Chinese free-booters swarmed downwards and 
trampling all opposition reached as far as Taungbalu 
and Tada-U near Ava. They plundered the villages, 

slaughtered the men-folk, carried off women and burnt 
monasteries, while the monks fled in terror to the 
woods. For three years the Chinese continued their depre- 
dations carrying their ravages as far down as Pagan. The 
incident is only touched upon in the Sdsanavamsa and a 
lin e is added to say that as a result of these Chinese raids the 
religion was dimmed as the moon by clouds ( Tasmin ca k.ale 
Cinaranfio yodha agantva Marammaraitham dusesum. 
Sasanam ahbhapaticchanno viya cando dubhalam ahosi). 
The comment of our chronicle is brief, but it is not without 
significance. Times were really bad and troublesome, and 
not at all conducive to peaceful scholarly pursuits ; indeed, at 
times it seemed that monastic learning and activities would 
come to a standstill. It is therefore important to read in the 
Sasanavamsa itself that once the thera residing in the 
Tiriyapabbata vihara (doubtless, Tipitakalariikara), said, 
perhaps half seriously and half in jest, to Aggadhammalatn- 
kara, “After my death you will be the only scholar in the 
world well-read in sacred texts.” Tipitakalamkara perhaps 
hinted at the unfortunate state of monastic scholarship that 
he lived to witness ; he may have exaggerated in jest the real 
state of things, but it appears there was some truth in his 
utterance. Aggadhammalanikara in his humility did not 
accept the compliment so proffered, and pointed out to 
Ariyalamkara thera who alone, he thought, had a legitimate 
claim to such a compliment. 

But no calamity seems to have been so overpowering as to 
curb the zeal and ardour of the kings of Burma for their 



212 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


religion; they were good Buddhists, and never did they waver 
from their kingly duty of acting as the patron-guardian of the 
faith of the country. Moreover, whatever their numerical 
strength, the monks were the real spokesmen of the people 
and the monasteries ware the popular assemblies as it were ; 
and each king that came to the throne sought to win the 
monks over to his side* We therefore see kings building 
new viharas even in the midst of great political turmoil 
and social and economic trouble and extending generous 
bounties to the Samgha. Pindale was no exception ; it was at 
his instance that one of the viharas to the east of the royal city 
was made over to the great thera Aggadhammalarnkara. In 
the seclusion of his vihara he brought out Burmese transla- 
tions of Kaccdyana^ the Abhidhammalihasangaha, the /Vfafr/^a 
(of the Dhammasangani), the DhdtuJ^athd, the Y amakci and 
the Patthdna. It also fell to hts lot to be a chronicler, for, at 
the request ol the next king (Mahapavc^radhammaraja, 
1661-72), he wrote the Rdjavamsasankhepa, a summary oi 
the Rdjavamsa or the Chronicle of Kings. Among other 
wise and venerable theras of this time were Jinaramathera, 
Gunagandhathera, Gunasarathera, and bujatathera, the last 
having been a disciple of Gunagandhathera. 

The next king Narawcira (1672-73) styled Mahasihasura- 
dhammaraja) even within the span of about a year that he 
lived to reign built several viharas and became the patron oi 
venerable theras like Tilokaguru (or Tilogagaru), his 
comrade {SaddhivihariJ^a) Tejodipa, and of Tilokdarnkara. 
Tejodipa is said to have written a on the Paritta during 
the reign of Narawara. Perhaps it was also during his 
reign that a thera, a resident of the Pubbarama vihara of 
Mulavasagama (in the Ava district) wrote the Gulatihadipam 
and the Visuddhimaggaganthipadaltha in Pali, and translated 
the Nettipak,cLrana in Burmese. A very curious tale is told 
about him which throws some light on the strictness of 
monastic discipline in those days. The thera, contrary to 



MARAMMARATTHA 2 1 3 

Vinaya rules, used to reside within the boundaries of the 
village, and comfort himself by using a head-covering 
(sisavethana) and a palmyra fan (talapattani). Doubtless, 
other theras did not like this kind of Vinayavilomacara, and 
the thera had afterwards to give up these practices and go to 
live in the forest. The SasanaVamsa gives him a compliment 
when it says that he was nevertheless deeply learned and was 
an expert in grammar. 

Narawara’s younger brother who came to the throne was 
equally an enthusiast in the cause of the religion. 1 he kingly 
duty of building viharas was continued, and at least two wise 
theras received his good patronage. They were Sirisad- 
dhammathera and Devacakkobhasathera ; of the two, 
Devacakkobhasa endeared himself to the king more, perhaps 
for his expert knowledge of the Vedasalthas — he was 
admittedly weak in the knowledge of sacred texts. But 
whatever may have been the extent of his knowledge, 
his proficiency in the Abhidhamma and his system of 
teaching the Patthana iPaliarana) " was very much admired 
by the king. He commanded that the Patthana should be 
studied in al! the monasteries in Mararnmarattha as well as in 
Ramannarattha . 

But in spile of books being written and viharas being 
built, the religion itself was languishing : inwardly it was 
showing signs of devitalisation, owing perhaps to monks 
themselves often behaving contrary to Vinaya rules and 
kings distributing patronage indiscriminately. In fact, 
the SasanaVamsa refers to such indiscriminate distribution 
of patronage by the last few kings of the T oungoo 
dynasty. The succession of the theras no doubt conti- 
nued unbroken, but laxity in discipline and occasional 
transgression by monks of Vinaya rules were only symp- 
toms of a deeper trouble brewing up within the Order. 

The seventh book of the Abhidhamma, 

From Narawara, 1672-73 to Mahsdhammayazadipati, 1773-52. 



214 


THERAVAD^ BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


It was the old story of conflict between the orthodox school 
that always strived to conform to the spirit and letter of the 
Vinaya code of discipline and the heterodox school (acariyapa- 
veni) that drifted more and more from the original buddhava- 
canam to their own interpretation of them. The Sasana 
Vamsa frankly disapproves of this heterodox schools'"' and 
says that the moon of the religion was not very clear at this 
time ijinasdsanam abbhantare cande viya atiparisuddham 
na ahosi). 

This brings us almost to the end of the seventeenth 
century (1698), and we may now pause to review the 
main traits of our account of the religion during the 
two centuries we are leaving behind. 1 he sixteenth century 
started with the drive of a religious reformation that was 
still fresh in memory ; it was yet potent to keep the purity of 
moncistic tradition alive for a few more chcades. 1 here was 
no particular dissension within the Order, and no disturbing 
movement of any importance ; but as years rolled on the 
Sarngha began to show signs of disruption and disintegration. 
Controversies centering round questions of monastic discipline 
gave rise to factions within the church and even before the 
seventeenth century was out, the Order divided itself into two 
large contending sections that came to engage themselves in a 
long struggle. In course of the struggle the Samgha effected 
a purging of the undesirable elements that had accumulated 
during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 

The history of Burma during these two centuries is but a 
series of petty squabbles, intrigues and counter intrigues and 
wars and rebellions in which the kings always played the 
most important role ; yet it fills one with admiration to see 
that even in the midst of such unsettled state of affairs the 
kings found time and interest in the activities of the religious 
order to which they never shirked their duty, wf atevei 

Sasatiavamsa. p. 117. 



MARAMMARATTHA 2 1 5 

the motive of their rich patronage and vigilant care. Vandals 
and sacriligious wretches some of them indeed were, but 
they were not many ; and persons were not wanting to 
repair the damage done to the religion by such people. 

And, because the majority of the kings were good 
Buddhists we hear of the realm being continually studded 
with cetiyas and viharas in whose seclusion the monks 
carried on their scholarly pursuits, it is often tedious to detail 
their names and works and the foundations to which they 
belonged, but it is only in this way that we may get an 
idea of the monastic life of the times and the branches of 
learning in which they were interested. A careful analysis 
of the subjects dealt with by the monks will show that 
though grammatical treatises continued to be written interest 
in grammar which had been the main subject of study in 
the preceding centuries had comparatively thinned. The 
main interest now centred round the more abstract study 
of the Abhiddhamma, and the large majority of the works 
of this period relates to that subject. It is permissible to 
assume that not individual theras alone but collectively all 
samanas in the monasteries in upper Burma during the 
seventeenth century interested themselves more in the 
Abhidhamma than in anything else. ' 

Another point to be noticed in this connection is the 
growing number of scholars writing or translating works in 
Burmese. This may have been due, it seems, more than 
anything else to the widening circle of readers interested in 
the study of the sacred texts of the religion, and to the 
growth of the vernacular language itself which had by this 
time reached a stage so as to be able to express the most 
abstruse ideas of metaphysics. Moreover, the teachers of 
the religion perhaps thought, and rightly so, that they should 
be able to reach a wider public through a language they 


This has also been enphasised by Dr. Bode, pp, 58-59, 61. 



216 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


learnt from the cradle than through Pali which required at 
least a few years of strenuous study. Incidentally, this gives 
us an idea of the numerical strength of the Order which 
seems to have grown larger, as well as of the people who 
were outside it but no less interested in the religion. It 
was probably due to the fact that not unoften members of 
the laity joined the Order in numbers not always for the love 
of monastic life, but just to escape from the stormy and 
calamitous days in which their lot was cast. 



CHAPTER FIVE 


A GREAT CONTROVERSY 
Eighteenth Century and after 
I 

the background 

\Vith the coming to the throne of King Sirimahaslhasura- 
sudhammaraja (Sane, 1693-1714), son of his predecessor 
Myinrekyawdin, the history of Buddhism in Burma enters a 
new chapter. We have seen that the few events of impor- 
tance that turned the course of this history or enthused the 
Samgha into creative activity were all concerned with the 
preservation or resuscitation of the original disciplinary purity 
of the faith, and centred therefore round the Vinaya rules 
of monastic discipline. That history was to repeat 
itself. The dawn of the eighteenth century found the 
Satngha in Burma divided into two opposing camps, 
plunging itself into a century-long feud that came essentially 
to centre round certain Vinaya rules, and not in regard to 
any deep ethical or metaphysical question or speculation in 
respect of the religion. To men outside the Order, the rules 
whose transgression caused so much heat and controversy 
may have appeared trivial and uninteresting, but to those who 
were inside it and took sides willingly or otherwise, the con- 
troversy raised issues which appeared to be so vital that they 
could even lay down their lives and make of themselves 
martyrs to their cause ; indeed, some of them did really 
Stake their lives for their convictions. To one who reads 
8- 1445B 



2i8 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


through the whole length of the SasanaVamsa account of the 
Parupana-Ekamsika controversy, as it is conveniently called, 
the story would seem to be not only tedious but out of all 
proportion, since it carries hardly any import of real signi- 
ficance for the modern reader. But at the same time it brings 
forth at once the importance that contemporary Buddhist 
church of Burma attached to it . We must not forget that the 
SasanaVamsa account is rendered by a member of one of the 
two opposing factions of the Order, namely Pannasami who 
flourished some fifty years after the curtain had been finally 
dropped on that eventful drama. It is likely that other 
members of the Order also felt equally strongly about it. 
This will be evident from the passionate zeal with which the 
participants in the feud fought for then respective causes. To 
the Order, therefore, the struggle was as real as it was 
momentous. It is clear that Pannasami relates the whole story 
in a partisan spirit, an ardent upholder of Parupana viewthat 
he was, but nevertheless he helps us to form a correct idea 
of the struggle and its importance. 

It will further be seen that the story of this controversy 
occupies the whole canvas of the history of the religion 
for more than a century, even to the exclusion of any 
account of monastic scholarship, nothing to speak of 
political vicissitudes that affected the Samgha. This 
was evidently due to the fact that it was the only important 
event which the Samgha was all this time interested 
in, so much so that the history of the feud 
was really the history of the Samgha. Moreover, the 
Samgha was so wholly taken up with the controversy and 
politically the country was in such a state of chaos and 
anarchy that scholarly pursuits in the monasteries and other 
activities of the Order could hardly have a flourishing exis- 
tence. Mention is made of a large number of theras, but of 
their scholarly activities that can be compared with those 
of the preceding centuries there is hardly any evidence, 



A GREAT CONTROVERSY 


219 


II 

BEGINNING OF THE CONTROVERSY 

In or about the year 1 700 when Sane was on the throne 
at Ava, a thera named Gunabhilamkara, residing in the 
village of Tunna, indulged, while in his daily round in the 
village, in the luxuries of using a head-covering and a 
palmyra-fan.' Moreover, he used to, and this was a most 
objectionable practice, wear the uttardsafiga or upper robe 
in such a way as to leave his one shoulder un- 
covered. Gunabhilamk^a's indulgence in such forbidden 
luxuries emboldened some of his comrades to follow 
in his steps, and soon he gathered around him a consider- 
able number of followers who came to be known as 
Ekamsikas (Te., those who covered only one of their 
shoulders). The Ekamsikas, moreover, it is alleged in the 
SdsanaVamsaj were not strong in the sacred texts. The 
heterodox practices of the Ekarnsikas were obviously not 
liked by the orthodox sections of the Order who presumably 
constituted the majority. They, under their leaders 
Buddhankarathera, Cittathera, Sunandathera and Kalyana- 
thera, continued in their old and usual practice, /.e., they 
used to cover both their shoulders when out on their daily 
village rounds for alms, and uncovered one only when they 
met a superior, to show him respect. They thus came to be 
known as Parupanas. The Parupanas had sanction of their 
practices, so they held, in their sacred texts ; in fact, they 
clung strictly to the rules of the Vinaya. It was here that the 
Ekamsikas were at a disadvantage, for they had really no 
authoritative sanction of their practices in any of the sacred 
texts. To get over this disadvantage the Ekamsikas did some- 

• Readers will remember that an exactly similar transgression of Vinaya rules 
took place in one of the viharas of Ava during the reign of Narwara (1672 73). It 
appears that there was a definite movement among cerlajn sections of the Sarpgha 
against the more orthodox sections. 



220 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


thing that not only revealed the inherent weakness of their 
cause, but brought as well their own defeat. They asserted 
(a false assertion, no doubt) that they followed the practices 
taught by an orthodox thera named Saddhammacari who had 
once visited Ceylon ; but what was worse, they bribed a 
monk of disreputable character, one who had long left the 
Order, and had a book written by him supporting their view 
and practice. When the controversy between the Ekarnsikas 
and the Parupanas was slowly brewing up, the Samgha came 
to be disturbed further by another dispute. 

A certain thera became the leader of a group of monks 
residing in the villages, and began to persuade the monks 
residing in the solitary retreat of forests to leave their forest 
abodes and come to the village viharas. The matter took 
such a turn that the king had to issue an order asking the 
monks residing in villages not to enter the precincts of monks 
residing in forests. The Paruparia-Ekamsika controversy had 
not yet, however, been brought to a fighting point to engage 
the attention of the king. 

It was about this time — in 1709 — that Captain Alex. 
Hamilton visited Syriam. He pays a striking tribute to the 
hospitality and kindness of the Buddhist Sarngha of Burma ; 
his account also furnishes an incidental picture of the life of 
average Burmese monks : 

“ When tjhipwrecked mariners come to their Baws, they find a great deal of 
hospitality, both in food and raiment, and have letters of recommendation from the 
Prie.sts of one Convent to tho.se of another on the road they design to travel, where 
they may expect vessels to transport them to Syriam ; and if any be sick or maim’d 
the Priests, who are the Peguers’ chief physicians, keep them in their Convent , til! 
they are cured, and then furnisli them with letters, as is above observed, for they 
never enquire which way a Rtrangei worships God, but if he is human, he is the 
object of their charity,” 

The reign of the next king (Mahasihasuradhammarajadhi- 
raja (Hshinpyushin, 1714-33) introduces us to a learned 
thera, Ukkamsamala, who had been installed in a large 
monastery at Ava built by a certain high military official. 



A GREAT CONTROVERSY 


221 


Ukkatpsamala was an expert in sacred texts and in other 
books, and wrote the Vamahodhana and the Likhananaya, 
both evidently being treatises on grammar. He was a 
Parupana and the recognised leader of that party; he tried 
to prove that the Parupana practice had its sanction in ancient 
sacred texts, but the Ekamsikas opposed his claim saying that 
the Parupana practice was against their own traditions. 

The king now felt called upon to intervene. He 
appointed a committee of four theras, including among 
others, Suhatthathera and Buddhankurathera, and asked 
them to give a decision on the basis of evidence to be put 
forward by the representatives of both parties who were to be 
invited to present their case before the committee. But the 
members of the committee were not well-read enough in the 
sacred texts, and being favourites of the king wanted only to 
please him. However, the Ekamsikas could not convince the 
king of the justness of their cause, and the question remained 
unsettled. 

The year 1733 saw Mahadammayazadipati (1 733-52) on 
the throne at Ava. He was a weak personality and always 
allowed things to drift. His reign suffered severe military 
reverses from various quarters, and at last saw the final 
extinction of the dynasty to which he belonged. Nor did 
he fare better in his role as referee in the religious dispute 
that was daily growing bitter. But he seems to have been a 
good patron of the faith. The Sdsanavamsa refers to his 
religious foundations and patronage of religious teachers, one 
of whom was the wise thera Nana vara. Nanavara hailed from 
the village of jalasutta near Kukhananagara (evidently 
Pagan) whence he was brought by the king and installed as 
his acariya. Coming to the capital, he devoted himself to 
scholarly pursuits and for the benefit of his pupils he first 
wrote a ganthipadattha (a commentary on the difficult 
words) of the Abhidhammalthasamgaha-pakarana. Next 
he wrote two other books, one a glossary on the difficult 



222 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

woids or a ganthipadattha oi the Atthasalimi and another 
the SuraVinicchaya. Nanavara’s scholarship drew the 
admiration of the king, and as a good Buddhist he asked his 
acariya to bring out in Burmese a commentary on the 
AbhidhanappadipiJ^a which he did with evident pleasure ; 
he also brought out, obviously to please his patron, the Rdjd- 
dhirdjandmatthappak.dsinif a book on the naming of kings, 
an essay in royal eulogy.’"' But with all his scholarship and 
royal patronage at his back he proved himself to be an 
unsuccessful spouse of his party in the great religious 
dispute of his time. 

Nanavara was a Parupana, and as he was the royal 
acariya he naturally led the party holding Parupana views, 
while the Ekamsikas found a leader in Pasarnsathera. They 
engaged themselves in a bitter strife which was referred to by 
the king to one of his favourite theras for decision. This 
thera was thoroughly incompetent for the responsible task 
that devolved on him. He was ignorant of sacred 
texts ; the Sdsanavamsa states with bitter sarcasm that 
his knowledge did not go beyond being able to turn the 
plough’s head to the east or west (yathd pana ayam puratihi- 
madisa ayam pana pacchimadisa ti eVam adina disaVaVatlha- 
namatlam yeVa kdtam samattham nangala \otiyd samvad- 
dhanlam...) and that he had hardly the capacity to decide 
which of the two views was right (/esam dvinnam paJ^khanam 
dvisu Vadcsu ayarn bhuto ayam abhuto ii vattum na sal^f^d) 
Pannasami bitterly comments on the ignorance of the man who 
is compared by him with a buffalo that cannot distinguish 
between the music of the playing of a Vmd by a devagan- 
dhabba and the striking of a bamboo stick by a village boy 
{Seyyathd pi ndma mahimso attano samipe ihatvd devagUarn 
gdyitvd deVavinam vddentassa devagandhabbasa VelusaldliaTn 
pahdrantassa ca gdmaddraliassa saddesit Visesam na 

’ ' According to the Filakatthanlain {p, 4l) Sriradassi who tOo was a resident 
of Pagan, a contemporary of Nanavara, and wrote the DhdltikcLthdyojana. 



A GREAT CONTROVERSY 


223 


jananli). Such being the position the king had no other way 
than to issue a communique asking the bhikkhus to observe 
whatever practices they liked. This was evidently no decision 
at all, and the religious dispute stood where it did {tesam 
vivado tada na vupasami). 

When the Satngha was still thus being disturbed by 
internal strife, the political horizon became dark with over- 
hanging clouds. Ava was destroyed in 1113 Kaliyuga 
(= I 75 1 ), by whom, the 5asanaoamsa does not tell us. In 
fact, Paiinasaml relates, in about half a dozen sentences, how 
at last a certain king was able to restore peace in the second 
year (evidently of his reign) after having brought the whole 
of Burma including the Ramanna country under his rule. 
But the situation was far more serious than the Sasanavarnsa 
seems to suggest, and deserves therefore a fuller narration. 

Ill 

THE CRUSHING OF THE TALAINGS 

We have seen in a previous chapter how the Burmans 
and the Falaings fostered between themselves a deadly 
enmity against each other, and how the former persisted in 
their cruel campaigns to crush the 7 alaings. But the Talaings 
did not take them lying down; they burned with lage within 
themselves and so ight every opportunity to avenge the 
indignities wrought on them during the past centuries. Now, 
with the weakening of the Toungoo dynasty came their 
chance. Mahadammayazadipati was already being troubled 
by Manipuri invaders as well as by the Shans when the 
Talaings began to stir themselves up at Pegu under their 
leader Srnim Htaw Buddhaketi (1740-47) who had been 
elected king. They soon came to hold Prome and Toungoo 
and began an annual raid of upper Burma as far as Ava. 
In 1747 the Talaings set up as king, first a thera named 
Neko, and then, a few days later, Binnya Dala, an efficient 



224 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


and capable leader of men (1747-57). It was under his 
kingship, if not his leadership, that Ava was sacked in 
1751-52, and the Ava dynasty put an end to. But the 
Burmese themselves had not come to the end of their 
resources. From the ranks there arose a man who proved 
himself to be the saviour of the race. He was Alaungpaya 
(1752-60), hailing from Shwebo where he was born in 1714. 
Here was one who refused to do homage to the small Talaing 
detachment who was there to exact the oath of allegiance. 
He did something more ; he drove out the Talaing detachment 
and stood to resist their inroads, and thus plunged himself 
in a big offensive which he alone could lead. His people 
were roused to enthusiasm and rallied round him, hailing 
him as their king. It was only a question of days not only 
to drive away the Talaings from all their northern outposts, 
to quell the Shans and Manipuris, and to bring round the 
French finally to his aid, but also to advance as far as 
Rangoon which he besieged. Finally in 1756-57, he laid 
siege to Pegu itself, the last hold of the Talaings whose 
efforts to resist the Burman hero were in vain. At last, in 
despair, they sent out a deputation to Alaungpaya in which 
Shan, Burmese and Talaing monks figured most promi- 
nently, Alaungpaya gave them all a cordial reception 
and spoke to them nobly and with humility, as kings 
always did to monks. The monk-deputationists argued 
for peace lest the religion should be in danger and cited the 
precedent of king Razadarit who at the time of his invasion 
of upper Burma yielded to the intercession of monks. But 
Alaungpaya pointed out that Razadarit’s was no precedent, 
for the Burmans had even then been fighting on equal terms 
and Razadarit had not yet established his claims on any 
territory, while he himself had practically annexed Pegu, and 
there could be no talk of withdrawing his army. Moreover, 
the monks, he argued with them, had nothing to fear from 
him ; they did not stand to lose anything, since after all he 



A GREAT CONTROVERSY 


225 


vN^as a BudJaist king, and more, he was a divine incarnation 
and wanted to become a Buddha himself by not only being a 
patron of the religion, but himself practising the religion and 
upholding the cause of mercy, justice and truth !" No 
intercession was thus of any avail, and Alaungpaya with his 
Burmese detachments, each individual soldier crying for the 
blood of Talaing dogs as the Barmans characterised the 
Talaings burst headlong upon the city, and in their fury 
spared not women and children, nor even monks. Binaya 
Dala was killed with his sons, daughters and wives. 
And since the manks had helped the town to resist, 

he threw more than 3,000 of them to the elephants, the elephants trampled 

on them, the elephants kills 0 th:‘m. 'Fh iir velvet an 3 satin roSas, the olir.ers 'of 
Alaungpaya wore ; their cotton robes, men us^ed for pillows, rice-bags, and towels 
to wipe their feet. They were .strewn over the face of the earth, the holy robes; 
their alms bowls were turned into household pots. The monks who still lived fled 
east of the Sittang river to the towns of Sittaung, Pan, Shweyyin, Mirtaban, Labun, 
Ztinrns, Yodaya and to thi: Shan towns. The B.irm‘se soldi.'^r.s ,s::izci all the pjiople 

of the Talaing country, in and worn^n, and sold them vind made merry with 

the price. Sons could not find their mothers, nor mothers their sons, and there 
was weeping throughout the land.^ 

Thus were the Talaings crushed and the whole of 
modern Burma brought under Alaungpaya’s scepter. 
For the Burmans themselves it was a .singular triumph ; 
we are told in the Sdsanaoamsa that all in the 
Maramma country was very much pleased, so much so that 
Alaungpaya’s conquest of the Talaing country an 1 consequent 
unification of Burma are considered by Pafinasami almost as a 
religious event of importance. The people of Burma are 
reported to have shouted out in glee. ‘O, our king veritably 
is a Bodhisattwa’ ! Racial hatred dies hard, even in a Buddhist 
Samgha, even amongst men who are supposed to have 
dedicated themselves to the service of love and piety. 

^ For Alaungpaya’s career .see Alaungf^aya A ycda'i)hon, Hantbawa dy Press, 
Rangoon, 1930, and Konhaiingset YazaiOin. Mmdalay Taing Press, Mandalay, 

1905. 

3 Sayadaw Athwa 111,143. Translated in Harvey, Htsfory o/ Burma, p. 235, 

29~I445B 



226 


THERA\^ADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Panfiasam! was a wise and a learned thera, but even he clean 
managed to forget the unfortunate end of hundreds of his own 
Order ; he even hailed the man who was responsible for the 
horrible crime, no doubt because the victims happened to be 
Talalngs and he himself belonged to the race of the 
conqueror. 

But Alaungpaya was a clever man, determined to leave 
for himself a name in the history of the religion. The 
SasanaVamsa chronicler tells us that he invited to the palace 
on every uposa/ha day (four such days in every month) the 
entire bhlkkhu-samgha of the royal city and entertained them 
to feasts. At that time all amatyas and members of the royal 
household were required to observe nposatha and were given 
opportunities for study and discussion with the monks. 
Somehow, conditions were again such as to foster an atmos- 
phere for religious activities, and the time came when the 
Parupana-Ekarnsika dispute raised its head again. 

IV 

THE PEAK OF THE CONTROVERSY 

Thera A tula Yasadhamma was the king's preceptor^ at 
this time and since he was an ardent Ekamsika he fully 
exploited his position to make the Ekamsika practices popular. 
With the leading theras of the Parupana party — by far the 
larger party — this was a matter of grave concern. They 
therefore addressed a letter to the king setting forth their 
views, and requesting the king to arbitrate in the matter. 
Atula thera on behalf of the Ekamsikas retorted by saying 
that the controversy had definitely been settled during the 
previous reign and could not be re-opened. Alaungpaya 

^ Alavmt^paya had also a]) pain ted iiim as the Sam'^liaraia or Head of the Order. 
See, '‘A Preliminary Study of the Po : U: Daun^ Inscription.’* Ind. Ant., 
Vol xxii, p, 8. “Alula Sayadavy retained his odice throaTh::)at the reig^ti of Five 
kings, and was removed by Bo-do-p’aya for his schismatic doctrines.’* 



A GREAT CONTROVERSY 


227 


was, however, willing to go deeply into the whole matter, so 
we are told by Panlaasam\, but he wrote back to the contending 
parties to say that as he was just then very busy with state 
affairs that required immediate attention he was unable to do 
as requested. He, however, assured them that he would take 
the matter up after having done with state affairs. In the 
mean time he directed them to follow the views and practices 
of his own acariya, i.e., of Alula (Idani mama Vijite sabhe 
pi bhil^l^hu mama acariyassa maliTn anuvattiiva carantu ti). 

The king’s decree placed the Parupanas in an av/kward 
position. They had either to give up their views and practices 
and obey the royal command or face the inevitable fate that 
disobedience meant. The royal order was generally obt^yed, 
but there were at least a few among the Parupanas who were 
built of sterner metal. Two iheras of Sahassarodhagama 
held steadfasdy to their old practices and preached their old 
views. T his was too much for Atula who had them brought 
to the capital and tried to discredit tliem before the people, 
but was thwarted in his attempt, the Sdsanavamsa wants us 
to believe, by some supernatural power. 

Another passive resister was thera Munindaghosa of 
Nipagima near Pagan where he had a very large and inlluen' 
tial following. HiS disobediencii was brought to the notice 
of the king who sum naned him io appear in the Sudham 
masabha before the king, the royal preceptor and other 
learned theras. Undaunted, iVlunindaghosa appeared 
before the assembly and when accused of his guilt he 
told them that he was treading the right path laid down 
by his Master. When further asked who his Master was, he 
turned to the Buddha image installed in the Sudhammasabha 
and paying his respectful homage, said with folded hands, 
‘Here is my Master. So long as there is life jn me 1 shall 
serve him and shall not swerve from what 1 have 
learnt from him'. The king perhaps was not prepared for 
such exhibition of courage by a thera, and though a despot, 



228 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

dared not take his life. He decreed, however, that he should 
not be allowed to live within his kingdom, and banished him 
to a distant place in the frontiers. 

Munindaghosa’s was indeed an undaunted spirit ; in his 
banishment he devoted himself to the cause of teaching 
amongst those who clustered round him from all quarters, 
and what else could he teach than the views and practices he 
hi njelf held dear and practised with devotion. There in 
banishment he translated the Ahhidhammatthasamgaha into 
Burmese, evidently for the b:^neht of his own students, but 
even there he was not allowed to rest in peace. The king 
heard that he had gathered a following even in banishment 
and had been continuing in the defiance of his decree. He 
was again summoned before the king to answer his charge. 
Manindaghosa was sure that the king was intent to kill him ; 
nevertheless he appeared before him, and laying aside his 
monastic vows and putting off iiis monkish garb, said, ‘You 
have summoned me with the intent of slaying me, so be it. 
But if you slay me while I am still holding my monastic vows 
and putting on my monkisli garb you will be guilty of heavy 
sin. I have therefore laid aside my vows and put off my 
robes. Now, if you want to slay me, slay. But the king 
dared not. He only Hung him into prison and then marched 
on to Siam on a military call. That was his last campaign, 
for he died on his way back home. Munindaghosa also is 
heard of no more. 

Alaungpaya was succeeded by his eldest son, the crown 
prince, who became king under the name of Siripavanamaha' 
dhammaraja (Naungdawgyi, 1760-63). He had to forsake 
Ava but rebuilt Saggaing, and brought from Taungdwin a 
learned thera named Nana or analamkara-mahadhammaraja 
whom he appointed as his own acariya. Nana held Parupana 
views, and the Parupana party naturally hoped to get the 
king on their side. But Atula thera who had not yet 
lo 5 l his iniiuence frustrated their attempt saying that the 



229 


A GREAT CONTROVERSY 

matter had already been decided. The question, therefore, 
remained unsettled. Nanalamkara seems to have been a 
learned thera ; he could teach nine or ten chapters a day, and 
brought out a number of works; the Padavibhaga, evidently 
a book on grammar, and commentaries in Burmese on the 
Nyasa, the Yamaha, and the Mahapallhana amongst others 
unknown to us. 

Siripavara-sudhammamaharajindadhipati or Setibhinda 
(Hsinbyushin, 1 763-76) who succeeded Naungdawgyi, trans- 
ferred his capital to Ava. He proved himself to be a generous 
patron of learning ; he had Brahmins brought from Benares 
with whom he discussed matters of State. The Maungdaung 
Sayadaw whom the king had appointed for the purpose took 
their help to translate into Burmese a number of Sanskrit works 
on astrology, polity, law, medicine and grammar.' The 
monks played a large part in the Pali and Burmese translations 
of Hindu legal codes ascribed to Manu. The king 
appointed Candovara whom he renamed Jambudipa-Ananla- 
dhaja, as his tutor; he wrote a commentary on the Vinaya- 
Vinicchaya, We hear nothing of the Parupana-Ekarnsika 
dispute during his reign ; but reference is made in the Sdsana- 
Vamsa to a certain kind of heresy in practice which was 
severely dealt with, and the heretics were compelled to 
conform to the true faith. It is idle to speculate what was the 
kind of heresy practised or who were the people who practised 
it ; but one may be interested to read that “cibout fifty years 
ago a class of metaphysicians arose in Ava called Pararnata 
who respect only the Abhidhamma and reject the other books 
that the Buddhists consider as sacred, saying that they are 
only a compilation of fables. The founder of the sect, Kosan, 
with about fifty of his followers, was put to death by order 

^ Forchammer, Jar dine Prize Essay, p. 104. 

6 5asana, p. 128. Tassa rdnno l^alc el^accc rnanussa-diyhi-vipalldsd ahesurn; 
te pi pakkosdpcivd sammiditthim ganhdpesi) . 



230 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


of the king.”' Spence Hardy wrote these lines, first brought 
to notice by Dr. Bo3e, in or about 1830, and his remarks 
refer to the end of the eighteenth century. It is not improb- 
able that the Paramits were the heretical sect that was put 
down by Hsinbyushin. The Po : U : Daung inscription 
refers to one meritorious act of the king ; this was the crowning 
of the Shwedagon at Rangoon.*^ 

H smbyusliin was succeeded by his nineteen year old son 
Mabadharnmarajadhiraja (Singu, 1776-82). A man of 
ordinary talents Singu nevertheless interested himself in the 
cause of the religion. He built a vihara for a thera Maya- 
vattaka by name, and gave him the title of Gunamuninda- 
bhisasanadhammarajadhirajaguru. Early he came under the 
influence of another thera named Nandamala, who in the 
retreat of his vihara near Calanganagara had devoted himself 
to the teaching of the sa nanaras entrusted to his care. The 
king, through the medium of a strange dream, so we are told, 
came to know of him and had him brought to stay near him. 
He belonged to the Capata sect and even not long after he 
had taken the apasampada ordination he translated into 
Burmese such sacred texts as the old VinayaVinicchayGy the 
Suttasamgaha and the Mahaoaggalthaf^athd. He also wrote 
the Sasanasnddhidipihid, a manual regarding the purification 
of the religion, evidently a book on Vinaya. ‘ It seems from 
the works he chose to write or translate that he interested 
himself and specialised in questions of monastic discipline, 
and as such it was likely that he would have his own 
opinions on the Parupana-Ekanisika controversy. Such 
indeed was the case. Nandamala himself held Parupana 
views, and now that he was so near the king he sought to 

^ Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachisni, p. 3n, See also, Scisanavamsa, Disser- 
tation by Dr. Bode. pp. 42-43, note. 

^ t his fact is not mentioned in the Sasanavarnsc . 

^ Nandamala may have also been the author of another book, a commentary 
on the Vinayasamgaha which i.s mentioned in the Pitakk^tthamain as having been 
written by the preceptor of king Singu, at Ava, p. 43. 



A GREAT CONTROVERSY 


231 


win the latter to his views. He convinced him that Parupana 
practices ware upheld by the sacred texts while those of the 
Ekamsikas had no textual authority on their side. Success- 
fully did he try to interest the king who at last summoned the 
leaders of both parties to a discussion. In the debate that 
followed the Ekamsikas were worsted ; they were unable to 
show any textual authority on which they could reasonably 
base their views and practices, and thus lost their cause. The 
king issued a decree forbidding Ekamsika practices and 
imposing Parupana practices on all the members of the Order. 
Nandamala got his reward ; he was appointed Samgharaja or 
the supreme head of the Order. But strangely enough the 
dispute did not end here. 

When Bodawpaya (1732-1819), the fifth son of Alaung- 
paya, came to the throne, the question was again revived, 
and this time by the king himself. He held that his prede- 
cessors had not been able to decide the controversy in a 
satisfactory manner, since the discussion or debate was always 
held in the king’s assembly hall in the presence of the king 
himself which was fair to neither pcirty. In the circums- 
tance few dared speak freely according to their conviction. 
He, therefore, planned to send itinerant commissioners to the 
viharas all over the country to gather reliable first-hand 
evidence locally from the tlieras who, it was expected, would 
in that case state their views without fear of intimidation or 
prospect of favour. As he planned, so he worked; the 
commissioners over whom the king appointed a high military 
official (antoyaddhanayaka) as their leader, were sent out on 
their mission. It turnedout, strangely indeed, that the It'ader 
of the Ekamsika party deposed that their views and practices 
had no sanction of sacred texts, but were authorised by 
acariyapaVcni, i.e,, by tradition handed down from teacher 
to teacher (amhehi vuttaVacanam pali-adisu na dissaii, Atha 
l^ho pana dcariya pavenivasen eVa mayam carimhd ti anujd- 
nimsu.) The deposition of the Ekamsikas practically sealed 



232 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


the fate of their cause, and the king issued a decree enjoining 
strict conformity to Parupana practices throughout the 
kingdom. The controversy for the time being seemed 
closed for good. 

What Bodawpaya held about the decisions of those that 
had gone before him was undoubtedly true to a very great 
extent, and what he planned was also the right thing to 
do. But it IS really very strange that the Ekamsikas who 
had fought obstinately for generations for recognition of 
their views and practices would at their deposition before 
the commission so readily agree to what practically was 
an admission of defeat. This on the very face of it 
arouses suspicion that grow as one acquaints himself more 
and more with king Bodawpaya's ways and methods. 
Bodawpaya secured the throne through blood, iron 
and fire, making a clean sweep of his rivals and their 
followers, servants and children, and burning women of the 
harem alive with their babies in arms. He had no faith in 
mortal man, not even in his nearest kin or in the wisest 
monk. Nothing was too mean or cruel for him, and coercion 
and intimidation were his usual methods ; disregard of his 
will meant death, death in a manner that ensure^d maximum 
of pain. It is, therefore, hard to believe that such a king as 
Bodawpaya happened to be used no means of coercion or 
intimidation to have the Ekamsikas to depose as they did. In 
fact, Bodawpaya seems to have been won over to the Paru- 
pana side before the holding of the commission was decided 
upon ; for Nana thera, whom he had appointed his 
preceptor and given the high sounding name of Nanabhisasa- 
nadhajamahadhammarajaguru, was himself a Parupana, and 
it is only likely that he had already influenced the king’s 
opinion in the matter. 

Nana thera hailed from Sahassarodhogama, the village 
whence came the first passive resisters after Alaungpaya had 
decided in favour of the Ekamsikas. He was a great favourite 



A GREAT CONTROVERSY 


233 


of the king who built for him a monastery. Meanwhile Bodaw- 
paya had transferred his capital to Amarapura where he was 
consecrated with due ceremony. He then asked his preceptor 
to commemorate the event ; and Nana edited and corrected 
(pari^odhetva) the Rajabhisekogandha, adding a commentary 
to it in Burmese. 

Bodawpaya was a man of curious opposites. The 
number of religious foundations he reared up and maintained 
seems to have kept proportion with the amount of blood he 
shed not only in war but in atrocities perpetrated to satisfy 
his whims. Pannasami gives a long list of viharas he built 
for theras who were reputed for their piety, learning and 
wisdom, and adds that he could give a still longer list but 
refrained lest his book would grow in length ! It is noteworthy 
that in this work of merit the entire royal family and the 
nobility participated along with the king. 

A report, being the “ Observations on the present state of 
the l^ingdom of Ava and Pegu and the means of joining 
them to the British dominions in India,” drawn up by a 
Frenchman, Melchior La Beaume, dated 16th January, 1730, 
refres to the reign of Bodawpaya and throws welcome light 
on the condition of the Samgha in Burma during his reign : 

“ The clergy is very well-regulated. Every person may embrace that 
profession, but must perform a noviciate to learn theology and the sciences which 
they afterwards teach to all grades. By their ir\sl.itulion the Talpoons ( ralapoirus) 
make the vow of celibacy, poverty, mortification, humility and all other mental and 
corporal exercise. They are much respected, and by means of the alms they 
receive, they are as well fed, lodged and clothed. 7’hey quit their profession the 
moment they are disposed to do.” 


V 

RE-ORGANISATION OF THE SAMGHA : END OF THE 
CONTROVERSY 

Bodawpaya may not have had any motive in the re- 
organisation that he effected of the administrative machinery 
30-I445B 



234 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


of the Samgha. He appointed four aged and wise theras to 
each of whom he gave the title of Samgharaja, and charged 
them with the work of the purification of the religion. To 
help those who were old and weak he appointed four others 
with evidently the same status and designation. Over this 
group of eight"* was placed his preceptor f^anabhisasanadha- 
jamahadhammarajaguruthera with the title Mahasamgharaja. 
All this he did for the purification of the religion, so we are 
told; and Nana, the supreme head, did his part of the work 
well. He was an active teacher, and though placed at the 
head of the church organisation, he condescended to visit 
one by one, by rotation, all the vi haras assigned to his care 
and used to teach the inmates thereof the precepts and 
practices of the religion." He was ripe with wisdom and 
was vastly learned ; within five years of his upasampada 
ordination he had already written a Vik.a called Petalamkara 
on the NetHpak,arana. At eighteen he became Samgharaja 
and not long after wrote a Uka entitled Sadhujjanavilasiw 
on the Dighaniliaya . Among his other works were the 
AriyaVamsalamkora, a commentary on the J diakotthal^atha 
at the request of the king, the Catusdmaneravalthu, the 
RajoVadaOatthii Tigumhathomana, the Chaddantanagarajup- 
patti\athd and the Rajadhirajavilasinl,'' the last with the 
help of the materials supplied by the king himself. 

Kavindabhlsafkihammnpcivaramaliarlhfimmarajatjuru, 

T ipitakalarnkaradha ta , 

Cakkinclabliidhaja 

Parama.sirivam.sadhaja , 

Janindab^bpavara 

Makajf fina bhidbaja , 

K'an alarT/K.aTasaddbammadbaia , and 

f4ana b ! i i t;.! san a d h a i a 

He cirt rj j] p IT rnk*5 fn '^Indy of both the Vihhartgas, and himsell 
daily ' I; p.-t rre of d o ('' 'rforv) chvioiigas, ft shows flow deeply 

int€ic.^‘-;d I')C -tv; ' r \ r r* r r K* in the studies of monastic discipline, but 

also in obsei 'v ir iIm; t' ' y /r-r: 

For cc mint nls on lids woik, see Bode, pp. 79 82. 



A GREAT CONTROVERSY 


235 


Now that a new organisation of the Samgta had been 
effected, the Ekamsikas hoped to get a better hearing. 
They knew that the king s preceptor wnose views had 
hitherto been the most important factor in all religious 
disputations was a Parupana, but now that eight other theras 
were also there to influence a decision they thought they 
would rather take a chance. So long they had no scriptural 
authority ; now they found out one. Their leader Atula 
who had still some influence with the king addressed an 
epistle to the latter pointing out that the wearing of the 
upper robe with one shoulder bare and of a girdle round the 
body had been sanctioned in a text named Culaganthipctda . 
The king now summoned another assembly to which he 
invited the leaders of both parties. In the debate that 
followed Atula represented the Ekamsikas, and presented 
their case ably and well. He argued that the Culaganthtpada 
was a work of the venerable thera Moggallana who had long 
ago sanctioned the Ekamsika practices. These facts, he 
maintained, could be gathered from the Pital^atlayalaJihicina- 
gandha^ a text alleged to have been brought to Burma by 
Buddhaghosa from Ceylon. But the leader of the 1 arupana 
party pointed out that the text which Atula referred to was 
the Vinaijaganthipada and not Culaganthipada, written 
by a thera Moggallana who flourished during the reign of 
king Parakkamabahu {1 153-1 184), and not by the old and 
more famous Moggallana. Once a fraud was hinted at, 
Atula was attacked by volleys of questions to none of which 
he could give satisfactory reply. The account of the debate 
as recorded by Pannasami is long,' but it does not contain 
much that is of historical interest, though somewhat of a 
dramatic element at times enlivens the record. NVe find that 
Atula suffered three successive series of defeats in each of 
which he was put into a very tight corner. For the Parupanas 


SasonOy pp. 136-142, 



236 


THERAVADA BUDPHISM IN BURMA 


it was a decisive victory ; and the king who had always his 
sympathy with the Parupanas lost no time in issuing a decree 
imposing strict observance of Parupana practices throughout 
his realm. Thus ended a long and bitter struggle that had 
agitated the Sarngha for well nigh over a century. Scriptural 
authority was eventually upheld, orthodoxy finally emerged 
triumphant and the pristine ideal of monastic discipline was 
once more held aloft. 



CHAPTER SIX 

BURMA’S RETURN GIFTS TO CE^TON 

NINETEENTH CENTURY AND AFTER : THE ‘ ‘AMARAPURA 
SAMGHA” of CEYLON: BODAWPAYA, BAGYIDAW 
AND MINDON-MIN 

The final settlement of the Parupana-Ekamsika dispute 
was not, however, the most important religious event of 
Bodawpaya’s reign; more significant was the establishment of 
the “Arnarapura School of Buddhism in Ceylon* The 
religion in that island was under a temporary eclipse. During 
latter half of the eighteenth century the Sinhalese Samgha 
had adopted certain disciplinary measures, presumably at the 
instance of the royal authority, that were frankly contrary to 
the original teachings of Buddhism. Naturally, there were 
monks within the Order who did not like such interference 
with their code of conduct, and they sought help and 
guidance from the fraternities of monks in other realms. 
They turned first to Siam where, they presumed, the religion 
retained its purity and where persecuted Talaing monks had 
already from time to time found an asylum. But now 
they thought of sending their missions to Burma, and two 
missions came during the reign of Bodawpaya, one in 
1800, and another in about 1812. 1 he first mission was 

indeed significant. The Sinhalese king Kirti Siri Raja Simha 
(1 748-78) had issued a decree, presumably approved and 
authorised by the Samgha, that none other than belonging 
to the highest caste (mainly, the agricultural class) could 
receive the upasampadd ordination and be admitted into the 
Order. This roused considerable indignation among the 
samaneras of the lower castes, who, smarting for some time 



238 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


under the royal decree, at last thought of receiving their 
ordination elsewhere. I'his time they decided to go to 
Burma. For, there alone, they thought, the religion shone 
purest in spite of periodical attacks on its orthodoxy. They 
had also probably heard of the scholarly reputation of 
the Burmese Samgharaja Ninabhivamsa and of his deep 
knowledge of the Vinaya. They were perhaps also actuated 
by the idea that the theraparampara could only be maintained 
in an unbroken line by their receiving the consecration at 
the hands of the Burmese Samgha. So, in 1800, according to 
Pannasami, a group of bold Sinhalese novices belonging to 
lower castes and headed by a thera named Ambagahapati 
came to the Burmese capital where they were given a cordial 
and magnlhcant reception by the king himself. They were 
presented with due ceremony to Nanabhivamsa, the Sariigha- 
raja, who gave them the upisampada ordination. They 
then returned to Ceylon (1802) with a full chapter of five 
Burmese monks, a letter from Nanabhivarnsa to the Ceylonese 
Samgharaja, and a large number of Pali sacred texts. On 
their arrival they proceeded to ordain many more novices 
who sought it, and eventually came to establish what is 
known to this day in Ceylon as the ‘ ‘ Amarapura Samgha 
or “ Buramagama.” Their aim is to hold strictly to the 
pristine purity of the religion ; they allow ordination to all 
castes, high and low, and go about with both shoulders 
covered, just as the members of the Maramma Samgha do, ' 
while the members of the older Siamese school known as the 
“ Slyamagama ’ who had already adopted heterodox 
practices restrict ordination to higher castes alone, and go 
about with one shoulder uncovered. " 

^ Spence Hardy, Eastern Monachism, pp. 328-29. 

2 Sasana, Disserfation, p, 37, note 2; for the history of the inauguration of the 
“ Amarapura Samgha ” oi ‘ Buramagama ’* in Ceylon, see, Spence Hardy, Eastern 
Monachism f pp. 327-29 ; Tennent, ChrisUanity in Ceylon, pp. 224-226; Despatch 
from Governor General of li^dia to Court of Directors^ dated March 4 , 1812, 
para. 29. 



Burma’s return gifts to ceylon 


239 


The establishment of the Amarapura School’* m 
Ceylon is a significant event in the history of Buddhism in 
Burma. Six hundred and ten years ago a Burmese samanera, 
Capata, received his ordination at the hands of the fraternity 
of monks of Ceylon, returned to his native land with a full 
chapter of monks ordained in that island, and was instru- 
mental in founding what came to be known as the Sihala 
Samgha ” in Burma, For six centuries Burma maintained, 
though not always with vigour or without opposition, the purity 
and orthodoxy of the Mahavihara tradition and therewith 
the f/iera-parampara in unbroken succession. Now that the 
tradition had become weak in Ceylon itself, her sons turned 
to Burma and became instrumental in founding the “ Burama- 
gama ’ or the “ Amarapura Samgha ” in Ceylon. It was 
indeed the first return gift of Burma to Ceylon. 

Bodawpaya solicited the favour of the Samgha, as all 
kings did in Burma, but he had hardly any consideration for 
the monks, nor had he any faith in their honesty and sincerity. 
He was sure of his position as the Protector of the Order so 
long as the Samgharaja was by his side, and neither the 
Samgharaja nor the Samgha itself seem to have protested 
when the king was once seized by the idea that the clergy 
were getting more than they could really claim to. At once 
he ordered a collection of all dedicatory inscriptions through- 
out his realm, recording gifts of lands to the Samgha and 
their share of produce. ' We do not know what came out 
of the scrutiny, but we are told that certain church lands were 
confiscated ; but the Sarngha do not seem to have suffered 
much so far as their resources were concered. He was indeed 


^ In all there were not less than 1000 records collected, now deposited in the 
galleries of the Arakan Pagoda, Mandalay, and in those of the Patodawgyi Pagoda, 
Amarapura. These records were frublished in two sets : the First in two volumes 
containing those deposited in the Arakan Pagcda were published in JS97, and the 
second containing those of the Patodawgyi Pagoda in 19i3. 



240 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


jealous of the monks, for they were the people, he thought, 
that received the homage and respect of the people, not the 
king and his court, and the monasteries were the real source 
of power and prestige. He therefore sought to deprive the 
monks of some of their honours, and directed that no monk 
should use the title of ‘Phongyi’ which meant ‘Great Glory.’ 
He was not the man to share glory with monks, and wanted 
therefore to keep it entirely for himself ! On another occa- 
sion he thought that monks were too numerous in the country : 
he therefore caused an enquiry into the conduct of the 
monks majority of whom were found to spend their time 
without doing anything, not even caring to learn the sacred 
texts. We are not told if he had them turned out of the 
Samgha, but we gather that he decreed that no monk could be 
the head of a vihara unless by virtue of his personal conduct, 
character, learning and wisdom, he was a fit person to adorn 
that position. Perhaps, he was not very wrong in his 
estimation of the Burmese monks of the time, in any case 
he thought that he had reasons to impose these restrictions, 
since his own Sarpgharaja had once failed to solve some of 
the religious and metaphysical questions that were disturbing 
him. A very interesting, somewhat curious incident, is told 
of him by the European sojourners in Burma in the nineteenth 
century. Once he thought, seeing that most of the monks could 
not satisfy his queries, that Buddhism was not good enough 
a religion, and began to enquire if there was anything better. 
He was told that Islam was so strict and orthodox a religion 
that a follower of the faith would rather die than take pork. 
He felt a sort of admiration for the faith which he might well 
adopt. But before he did so he invited the maulvis of his 
capital to a dinner at his palace, and had pork served 
before them. At once the maulvis realised what the king 
was after, but to disregard his command was to court death 
which they were not prepared to do. So they ate the 
pork, and the king’s admiration for the faith vanished 



BURMA’S RETURN GIFTS TO CEYLON 


24 ] 


forthwith.' He often executed Burmese religious heretics," and 
prescribed death for those who drank intoxicants ; even selling 
of liquor was prohibited. Smoking of opium and killing of 
ox or buffalo or any large animal were also grave offences 
and were punished with death. *' 

Bodawpaya, we have seen, was a builder on a large 
scale ; he built pagodas by scores, and the largest was 
doubtless the Mingun in Saggaing district, an unfinished 
edifice that impresses only by its heaviness. When he 
was engaged in the building of the pagoda, it was revealed 
unto him one day that • he was the Bodhisattawa 
Arimittiya or the future Buddha. He seriously claimed 
to be recognised as such, but the Sarngha resolutely 
resisted the claim and refused to confer on him the 
sought-for distinction.' They must have been bold enough 
to resist such a king as Bodawpaya ; and this was 
sufficient indictment for one who, the people and even the 
clergy knew, could wring opinions from them just as he 
wished, on pain of death." 

Siritribhuvanadityapavaramandita (Bagyidaw, 1819-37) 
who succeeded Bodawpaya was a charming and dignified 
personality, exceptionally kind, and was loved and revered 

^ For the many curious eccentricities of the king that include ihcr few noted 
above, see Sangermano, A Description of the Burmese Empire^ 1885, p. 92; Cox, 
Journal of a Residence in the Burmese Empire^ 1821, p, 230; Crawfurd, Journal of 
an Embassy from the Cocernor General of India to the Court of Ava, 1834, Vol. 1, 
p. 399; Gouger, Personal Narrative of Two Years' Imprisonment in Burma^ I860, 

pp. 96-100. 

Gibson, MeilAila Settlement Report, 1900, p. 51. 

® Sangermano, op. cii,, p. 68; Gouger, op. cit., p. 278. 

^ Sangermano, op. cii,, p. 61. 

^ But Bodawpaya had some admirable qualities among which w’as his sincere 
patioriage of literature. Among the nobility of his couit there was a number of 
literaiy men who produced works, mainly in Furmcre, on history, jaw and other 
subjects. The most important from our point of view' was the translation by I win- 
thintaikwun, first the mcnk-lutor of Pedawpeya and later a high cficial of the 
State, of 66 Jatakos in Eurmete, and a very fine Eurmese prose-rendering by 
Awbatha^ a monk, of the Mahajanah.<^ Jdtaka^ 

3I-I445B 



242 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


by all. He changed the capital from Amarapura to Ava. 
The Sdsanaoamsa records a few of his religious foundations 
which were made over to venerable theras. Pannasiha was 
one of such theras ; he was made the royal preceptor, given 
the long title of Munindabhisirisaddhamnaadhajamaha- 
dhammarajadhirajaguru and appointed also as the head 
of the Order. Bagyidaw seems to have had some concern 
for the religion ; the Sdsanavarnsa devotes some space in 
recording three discussions in which the king showed his 
deep interest in the affairs of the Samgha. The last two are 
concerned with a subject that vitally affected the resources of 
the Samgha and are therefore worth recording here. We have 
seen that Bodawpaya look a stock of church lanas and made 
a scrutiny ; he was frankly jealous of the temporal possessions 
of the monks. But Bagyidaw seems to have been drawn in 
to these discussions by sheer curiosity. He enquired about 
the earliest king that made grants of lands to cetiyas and 
Vlhdras, and wanted to know how the later kings dealt with 
those land-grants made by earlier kings, in other words, what 
the respective rights of the king and the clergy were with 
regard to these lands. He was told that such grants of lands 
had been in vogue as far back as the days of Bhagavata 
Sujata, and further on the authority of the Vinaya and the 
Aithakathd, that the lands, once granted to cetiyas and 
Viharas, i.e.,to the Samgha, always belonged to the Samgha. 
The later kings could not therefore claim any land (or its 
produce) that had been once donated to the Samgha by 
earlier kings. The king also held a discussion in respect of 
his duty to the fraternity. 

Bagyidaw s la.st days were tragic. In 1824 the English 
declared war and two years later annexed Lower Burma. 
Suffering from terrible depression and melancholia, he was 
dethroned by Tharwaddy-Min (Siripavaradityalokadhipati- 
vijayamahadhamma) who succeeded him in 1837. Probably 
not long after, Tharwaddy issued a decree announcing the 



Burma’s return gifts to ceylon 


243 


appointment of his preceptor, Suriyavamsathera, as the 
supreme head of the Order, and gave him as usual a long 
title. Suriyavamsa seems to have been respected by the king 
and the people, for, when he died great funeral honours were 
heaped on him. His pupil iSleyyadhamma was then appointed 
head of the Order, and it was during his time that another 
Sinhalese mission headed by thera Pannatissa who was 
accompanied by bhikkhu Sunanda and novice Indasara visited 
Amarapura. The Samgharaja obliged the mission with his 
religious teachings and advice. Pannatissa however died a 
year after while he was yet receiving instructions from 
5jeyyadhamma at Amarapura. After the death of Pannatissa 
the task of receiving the highest teaching and transmitting 
it to his pupils fell naturally on bhikku Sunanda. 
Neyyadharma also ordained the samanera Indasara, and then 
a year after sent both Sunanda and Indasara back to Ceylon 
accompanied by an amatya of the city-mayor (nagarajetlha) 
of Bassein. Nieyyadhamma emended the text of the 
Saddhammapajjoii}ia, a commentary on the Mahaniddesa, 
and translated it into Burmese. 

Tharwaddy-Min died insane and was succeeded by 
his son Pagan-Min {Siripavaradityavijayanantayasamaha- 
dhammarajadhiraja, 1846-52) in whose reign religious 
scholarship seems to have received a fillip. Pafinajolabhidhaja, 
a disciple of Suriyavamsa, was apppinted Samgharaja. He 
wrote a commentary in Burmese of the Anguilara-nil^dya 
and its ttk,d. iQeyyadhammabhivanisa, another scholar of 
this time, brought out a Burmese translation of the 
SaddhammaVilasini, the commentary on the P atisamhhidd- 
magga. Maniyotasaddhaminalamkara and Medhavivamsa, 
two other monk scholars, wrote two commentaries in Burmese 
of the Samyuttanikdya and Dighanikdya, respectively, 
along with their idids. Reyyadhamma’s chief disciple 
Pafinasami (who later became the author of the Sdsanavamsa) 
began to come into prominence even frcm this time. Within 



244 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

five years of his ordination he translated in Burmese a 
commentary {Ganthipadatthaoannanam) of the Saddattha- 
bhsdacmta. Another five years later he brought out a 
Burmese translation of the commentary on the Abhidhanap- 
padtpifia, the text of which he had emended after having 
compared it with other existing versions. 

•We are now drawing towards the close of the mediaeval 
age in Burma as well as of the characteristically mediaeval 
outlook that has so long marked the religion in that country. 
Another quarter of a century and the old order will fade 
out of our vision and a new order will gradually emerge 
under new conditions . But before the narrative is closed 
with the passing away of the old order, one is happy to dwell 
on an era of all-round peace and progress for the religion. 
The short span of twenty-five years (1 852-77 ) that 

Mindon-Min (son of Pagan-Min) was given to rule was 
indeed a golden era for the Order that came to enjoy sincere 
and vigorous patronage of the king. He infused new life 
into the Sarngha by not only interesting himself but all 
around him in the affairs of the Sarngha. Religious studies 
were pursued with zeal and vigour and the enthusiasm 
thus aroused filtered down to the common people who began 
to take a renewed interest in matters religious and vie with 
one another in observing the precepts of the Master. It is 
no wonder, therefore, that Pafiiiasami, who later on succeeded 
his teacher Neyyadhammabhivaipsa as the royal preceptor and 
became more over the supreme head of the Order, extends 
a most sincere and dignified compliment to the kindVy 
patron of the Sarngha, not only in the Sasanaoamsa but 
also in the N dgarajuppaltd^alha which was written at the 
request of his teacher and the then Samgbaraja 5Jeyya- 
dhamma to commemorate the foundation of the new capital 
at Ratanapura [i.e., Mandalay). 

Neyyadhamma himself composed at the king’s request 
a work entitled Surdjamaggadtpam . He was an erudite 



BURMA S RETURN GIFTS TO CEYLON 


245 


teacher taking delight in expounding the commentary on the 
Majjhimanikaya (of which a Burmese translation was pre- 
pared at his instance by a pupil of his,) along with his own 
interpretation of the text. Thera Medhavivamsa wrote a 
commentary in Burmese of the Pali Jatakas. But the 
largest number of works was produced by Pannasami 
himself when he had become the supreme head of the 
Order. He wrote the Stlak.atha and the Updyal^athd at the 
request of the queen (aggamahesi), while the king’s tutor 
induced him to bring out the AWharavisodharii and the 
Apattivinicchaya. His own teacher f^eyyadhamma success- 
fully urged him to write the Vohdratthabheda and ViVadavi- 
nicchaya besides the Ndgardjuppattilf^athd. 1 wo amdtyas 
and one rnahd-amdtya were instrumental in having two 
works, the RdjaseVal^adipani and the Nirayai^athadipaJ^a 
written by him. He also wrote the U posaihavinicchaya 
at the request of an updsak.a as well as a Pali commentary 
on the Saddaniti for the benefit of those who came to attend 
his lessons {bahuhi solujanchi) . All the works of Panna- 
sami seem to liave been written in Pali, not in Burmese as 
had hitherto been the practice with the majority of monk- 
scholars. Probably he wanted to revive the tradition of 
Pali scholarship as well as the older religious tradition; and 
it is not unlikely that his patron Mindon-Min had some 
hand in it. 

indeed, Mindon-Min s religious activities lay in that 
direction. Only a year after he had transferred his capital 
to Mandalay, the last centre of Burmese monarchy, laxity 
in monastic discipline was in evidence in the Samgha. He 
saw with grave concern that the Samgha was gradually 
drifting from its age-old and vigilantly preserved ortho- 
doxy towards a way of life tliat was contrary to the 
disciplinary code of the monks. Some of the monks 
were in the habit of using gold and silver and other 
metals, some took betel (tambulam) in the afternoon (an 



246 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


unprescribed hour), some indulged in smoking and other 
intoxicants, some again entered the villages with shoes on 
and holding umbrellas, and acted in violation of other 
Vinaya rules {aoinayannlomcare caranti). The king thought 
that such contrary practices could only be put an end 
to by imposing a vow {patinfia) on the monks to be taken 
before the (image of the) Buddha {buddhassa sammukhe 
buddham sabJihirn b.atvd). But before he could translate his 
ideas into action he consulted the Samgharaja tNeyyadhamma- 
bhivamsa. The latter advised him to summon an assembly 
of mahatheras to ascertain the views of the Sarngha. So an 
assembly was convened in the vihara of the Sarngharaja ’ 
where the mahatheras were told of the idea of the king and 
were requested to give their opinion. One group of 
mahatheras headed by the Sarngharaja was of opinion that 
since the king was earnestly desirous of the reformation of 
the Satngha and was thus actuated b}' the best of motives, he 
would be justified in imposing the vow. But the opposition 
headed by Panclitabhidhaja Munindaghosa held that there was 
no use imposing such a vow on the monks, for there was 
every likelihood of the vow being broken, and a vow taken 
before the image of the Buddha, if broken, would burden the 
transgressor with a heavy sin. The reply to the opposition 
was made by Pannasami, a pupil of the Samgharaja, at the 
bidding of the latter. A very learned speech was then 
delivered by the young thera who brought to bear on his 
discourse relevant passages from the Vinaya, the Patimobdiha, 
the Parivdra and the Suttavibhafiga, along with Buddha- 
ghosha s interpretations thereof. He pointed out that newly 
ordained bhikkhus had to take vows at the instance of the 
upajjhdyas at the time of the upasampadd ordination ; the 

It is noteworthy that Minclon-Min did not convene the assembly in his own 
palace as had hllherto been the practice with the kings when summoning thera? 
to a religious disc.us.sion or debate, nor wa.*? he present when the debate took 

placej 



Burma’s return gifts no ceylon 


247 


samaneras had to take a vow to observe the precepts of the 
religion at the time of their taking the pabbajja] they had 
also to take another vow when they began their religious 
studies under their upajjhayas. Thus the taking of a vow 
was not an unusual thing in the religious life that Buddhism 
prescribed. And, what the king wanted to do was not 
anything different from prescribed vows or anything not 
approved of or authorised by the sacred texts. Panfiasami’s 
speech had the desired effect ; the mahatheras were all 
convinced, and they resolved that the king would be justified 
in imposing a vow. So the king decreed that all monks 
should take a vow before the Buddha to conform strictly to 
the rules of the Vinaya. The order was obeyed and those 
who have been acting contrary to the rules were made to 
conform to the stricter code. Monastic orthodoxy once more 
emerged triumphant. 

It will be observed, and this is of some significance, that 
the point in the debate was not so much whether the king 
had any right to impose the vow as whether the vow 
itself was necessary and was approved of by the sacred 
texts. The king’s right to impose the vow was not even 
questioned ; in fact, it looked as if it were an accepted fact 
sanctioned by long use and tradition. 

Meanwhile, the “ Arnarapura Samgha ” in Ceylon was 
being agitated by a controversy centring round an ancient stma. 
The Sima in question was situated on the bank of a certain 
river over which a bridge was built for easy passage of the 
bhikkhus to the other side of the river. This involved what 
is called sarnJ^Sradosa, i.e., confusion of boundaries of the 
Sima, which invalidated a particular sima for the upasampada 
ordination. This, as well as other religious ceremonies 
{upasampadadi Vinayak,ammani) were being performed in that 
Sima for several years past by a thera named Nanalariikara, but 
now a section of the Satngha headed by Dhirananda refused to 
perform religious ceremonies in that sirpa. Thus two parties 



248 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


came into being, one following the lead of Nanalarakara and 
another of Dhirananda. They jointly sent a deputation con- 
sisting of two bhikkhus, Dhammakkhandha and Vanaratana, 
to Mandalay to seek advice and decision on this point from 
the Samgharaja. They were very hospitably received and 
were housed in a vihara newly built for them. The 
Samgharaja after hearing both sides of the dispute and 
consulting many (sacred) texts, gave his decision. He told 
them that such a place as the simd in question was really 
invalid owing to samkaradosa. It was again a decision in 
fovour of orthodoxy ; indeed the Vinaya rules were upheld 
once more and strictest discipline was insisted upon. 
However, the two bhikkhus received instructions in the sacred 
texts for a second time from the Samgharaja, and when they 
left for Ceylon the king presented them with valuable gifts. 

A second deputation from Ceylon reached Mandalay 
almost Immediately after, this time consisting of two bhi- 
kkhus, Vimalajoti and Dhammananda, and four upasakas 
along with Ariyalamkara, a samanera. They were also very 
cordially received and housed in a vihara in the monastery 
of the Samgharaja wlio re-iterated his decision to the new 
deputation. The two bhikkhus received instructions from 
him and the samanera his upasampadd ordination, after 
which they presumably sailed back home. It was perhaps 
on their arrival that a third and larger deputation consisting 
of two bhikkhus, three sarnaneras and four upasakas, came 
to the king with valuable presents of a gold and silver casket, 
a sacred relic, an ivory image, and leaves, bark and branch 
of tile bodhi tree. They were also cordially received and 
confortably housed ; the two bhikkhus underwent instructions 
in the sacred texts, the sarnaneras received the upasampadd 
ordination, and the upasakas took the pabbajjd after due 
ceremony. 

These religious missions from Ceylon were as it were just 
what was needed to round off the history of the Buddhist 



Burma’s return gifts to ceylon 


249 


Samgha of Burma. We have seen how the founding of the 

.Amarapura School ” in Ceylon was the first return gift of 
Burma to Ceylon. These missions now afforded a chance to 
Burma to make the second return gift to that island. As 
orie reads the story of these missions and deputations and 
the reasons and circumstances that inspired them, one’s 
memory naturally travels back to those days four hundred 
years ago, when king Dharmaceti sent out his mission to 
Ceylon to bring back to his country a valid upasampada 
ordination. 

Mindon-Min’s work for the religion did not, however, 
end here. He emulated the examples of .Asoka of olden 
days, and sincerely tried to revive the ancient tradition 
of the religion. At the instance of the king a 
great assembly of all learned monks in the realm was 
summoned at the capital with a view to making a new redac- 
tion of the three Pitakas For more than three years (1868- 
71) the assembly continued to meet under the presidentship 
of the king himself when the monks read out or recited the 
sacred texts, one by one, to restore the best and the must 
correct reading. The work finished, the complete text of the 
Tipitaka was engraved, by order of the king, on 729 marble 
slabs*” which the visitor to Mandalay can see even today 
posted vertically at regular intervals over a wide green grassy 
lawn within the enclosure of the Kutho-daw pagoda. The 
Sarngha in deep gratitude conferred on him the title of 
‘ Convenor of the Fifth Council,’ a title which Mmdon-Min 
treasured the most. As a memorial of this Council Mindon- 
Mln presented a new spire, coated with gold and studded 
with jewels, to the Shwedagon pagoda. 

In 1885 the English occupied Mandalay, the city of 
Mindon-Min, and signalised the dawn of the modern age 
in Burma. 


32- I443B 


Upper Burma Gazetteer ^ \, p. 66. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 
SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 

I 

SUMMARY 

It is nothing curious that all traditions of the people of 
Burma and all their chronicles hark back to India. They 
claim to have received the first message of culture and 
civilisation through a Sakyan migration from the Madhyadesa 
or Middle Country of India; the kings of Burma are also said 
to have been ‘ originally descended from the noble Sun 
dynasty (Surya-vamsa) of the ^akyan.’ They even claim 
Gautama the Buddha, who actually did never stir out of the 
Middle Country, to have more than once visited Lekaing, a 
village of merchants in Aparanta. ^ Today we dismiss these 
claims as mere expressions of a human weakness natural in 
early colonists and converts and hence in later chroniclers of 
Burma ; their national vanity actuated them to affiliate their 
history and culture and their religion to a hoary past and a 
sacred tradition. But one thing is clearly brought out by 
these accounts. These native historians, even as late as the 
seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries when most 
of the chronicles were written and when direct relations, 
religious and cultural, with India had long been cut off, 
nevertheless recognised India as the source of their history, 
their religion and their culture and interpreted them accord- 
ingly. And so must we. For the history of Buddhism in 
Burma up till at least the end of the twelfth century, and 
even occasionally afterwards, is almost invariably connected 


^ This Aparaata, according to Burmese Geography, was in Burma. See, ante. 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 251 

with India, and later with Ceylon, and can only be 
understood in the light of these connections. 

Buddha originated Buddhism, but it was to the practical 
idealism and proselytising zeal of Asoka that the religion 
spread not only in all the countries of India but also outside, 
in Egypt, Asia Minor, Greece, and Ceylon. The tradition 
that he included Suvannabhumi as well within the orbit of 
his missionary campaigns falls quite in a line with what we 
know of his actual proselytising activities, and we have seen 
that there is nothing “ antecedently improbable ’’ in it. But, 
even then, the difficulty of the historian remains, and he 
cannot yet treat it as a fact of history though circumstantially 
the tradition seems to stand within the bounds of probability. 
Other traditions of early relations with India are often alluded 
to in the local chronicles, but none concerns itself with 
Buddhism, nor, it seems, with sober and authentic history. 
Four centuries later or thereabout we hear of the Sinhalese 
fraternity of monks converting the Kirata country to the 
faith Jo the Buddha. This country in all likelihood was 
identical, as we have tried to show, with a part of what is 
now known as Burma. Almost simultaneously we seem to 
strike on a piece of definite evidence of the existence of 
Buddhism in the country. Our source of information this 
time is Chinese which, though of a casual nature, is neverthe- 
less of considerable value inasmuch as it affords the earliest 
authentic reference to Buddhism in Burma, subject 
to the acceptance of the identification of Lin yang 
with some place in Burma. Circumstantially, the existence 
of Buddhism in Burma in the third century A.D., 
apart from the Asokan tradition of an earlier introduction of 
the religion, is not anything improbable. The religion existed 
in Fii-nan side by side with Brahmanism ‘ and perhaps also 
in Tun-hsiin which, about two centuries later, was a 


Pelliot, B,E.F .E.O, , “ Le Fou-nan, ” p. 994. 



252 


THERAVADA buddhism in BURMA 


dependency of Fii-nan. ” In Java also Buddhism appears to 
have spread remarkably between 414 and 431 A.D. 

With the fifth and subsequent centuries, however, 
we are on surer grounds ; there is no more speculation, 
no more working on suspicious traditions or uncertain 
identifications. Epigraphic records and objects of archaeolo- 
gical interest are henceforth numerous and they furnish 

more or less definite evidence of a flourishing state of 
Buddhism in the metropolis of the realm of the Pyus, 

indicating at the same time a very intimate intercourse 

of coastal Burma with Eastern India and the Andhra-Pallava 
countries of South India which are known to have been 
the home of such Buddhist celebrities as Buddhaghosa, 

Buddhagupta and others. Some form of Sanskrit Buddhism, 
evidently Sarvastivada, was not also unknown. Buddhist 
records in Sanskrit are also known and they point to a very 
close relation with the countries of Eastern India. Epigraphic 
records are supplemented by quite a good number of 
Buddhist monuments, sculptures and terracotta tablets which 
have been unearthed in course of the last 40 years or so and 
which are datable on stylistic and paleographic grounds from 
about the sixth to about the tenth and eleventh centuries. 
The discoveries of a number of Pali epigraphs in what is 
called the Kadamba- l elegu script and datable in the fifth and 
sixth centuries and of a number of Buddhist sculptures worked 
out in the artistic tradition of the Andhra-Pallava country 

^ At lun-hsuii, identified tentatively witli Teiinassenm, Brahmanism was 
however the most popular religion at tlii.s period {5th cent.), “ Idie kingdom of 
Tun-hsun depends on l ii-nari; the king is called K’un-lun, In this country there 
arc 500 families of H\i of India (probably referring to the merchants), two F'o-t’u. 
and more than a thousand brahmauas of India, The (people of) Tun.hsiin practise 
their doctrine, and do notliing Vuit read the holy book of the heavenly spirits” (he., 
Brahmanicai texts). 

“ Fo t’u means sometimes the Buddha, .sometimes Stupa; the expression might 
signify a Buddhist, hut the construction is abnoimal and the number scarcely 
admissible.” — Pclliot, B.E,F .E.O., 1903, p. 272. 

^ See B.E.F.E.O., 1904, p. 275. 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


253 


and datable in the same period, point to a sudden resurgence 
of the religion in the old kingdom of Prome in about the 
fifth and sixth centuries. Could it have been due to the 
impetus given to it by the celebrated Buddhist scholar and 
divine Buddhaghosa who is claimed to have visited Burma 
and helped the propagation of the religion in that country ? 
Independently the Buddhaghosa tradition cannot of course 
be said to stand on firm historical ground, but when viewed 
from the angle of coincidence 1 have ventured to present, 
it may not be judged to be without a foundation. 

The seventh and eighth centuries bring forth still more 
evidences of a flourishing existence of the religion in Lower 
Burma. 1 hus, 1-tsing testifies to the prevalence of 
Buddhism, probably of the Mtilasarvaslivada school, in 
Sriksetra (Old Prome) and Lang-chia-shu or Lankasu which 
has been tentatively identified with a place in Burma. Fifty 
years later, Buddhism is stated in the T’ang chronicles to 
have been the religion of not only the State but of a consider- 
able section of the people as well. .Archaeological objects of 
all description furnish materials for an understanding of 
the state of the religion during the subsequent centuries. 
In about 1000-1050 A.D. Buddhism in the realm of Pegu 
seems to have come into conflict with Brahmanical Hinduism 
which by this time had come to gain some hold on certain 
sections of the people of Lower Burma. There can be no 
doubt that from at least the third or fourth century Buddhism 
had to measure strength with Brahmanism in Prome and 
Pegu as elsewhere, but the latter not only maintained its 
ground, but continued to flourish as it really did in Thaton 
before the fateful invasion of Anawartha in 1057-58 A.D. 
The story of this invasion, as related in the local chronicles, 
really indicates a very flourishing slate of the religion in the 
city of Manuha, and we have reasons to assume that similar 
conditions prevailed in other important localities of Lower 
Burma. 



254 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

The scene of history now shifts from the peninsular 
country to the upper regions of the Irrawady, and centres 
round Pagan, the seat of the Anawrahta dynasty. It is 
onwards from this time also that local chronicles and contem- 
porary Mon, Burmese and Pali epigraphs enable us to get a 
continuous narrative of the vicissitudes of the religion through 
the subsequent centuries. Ridden with primitive heathenism 
and a very base sort of what has been identified as Maha- 
yanist Tantrikism, imported from Tibet, Bengal and Assam, 
Pagan found in the Theravada, the new religion introduced 
from the land of the Falaings, a purer and and simpler faith, 
a leligion with a more direct appeal and a fresh message of 
deliverance. With Shin Arahan at the head of the Samgha 
and the support of the throne and the state at its back, 
the new faith soon secured a solid ground and spread far 
on all sides. Even during the reign of Anawrahta the 
fame of Pagan as a centre of the Theravada faith was so 
well established that she exchanged religious gifts with 
Ceylon, and, what is more, established direct religious rela- 
tions with that island where Pali Buddhism had built up 
its new home after a long period of cruel Cola persecution 
and its eventual banishment from South India. Relations 
with Eastern India were maintained mainly through periodi- 
cal embassies deputed to worship at the Bodhgaya shrine, 
and through Buddhist monks and Brahmana priests from 
India, but it was with Ceylon that she came eventually to be 
linked up in all matters connected with Theravada 
Buddhism. This, we have already explained, was but 
inevitable. Since India had already ceased to be the home 
of Theravada Buddhism and Ceylon had now become 
the land where the religion found a congenial abode, the 
Buddhist monks of Burma came to look up to the 
brotherhood of that island as the source of all inspiration, of 
wisdom and purity and of the religion Itself in its 
pristine form and character. In fact, the Mahavihara of 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


255 


Ceylon came to be considered as their Mecca ; and this 
attitude of the Burmese brotherhood was in reality 
responsible for the introduction of the Sihala Samgha and 
the division of the Buddhist Church of Burma into two 
opposing factions, the Maramma Samgha or the older 
organisation that presumably came to being as a result of 
contact with South India, and the Sihala Samgha or the new 
organisation that owed its life and inspiration to the 
Mahavihara of Ceylon. The Sihala Samgha in course of 
time was further divided into various factions, one differing 
from the other not on any important metaphysical doctrine, 
but on subtle questions of the Vinaya. In their opposition 
to the Maramma Samgha, however, the different factions of 
the Sihala Samgha chose to offer a united front. 

The Sihala Sarngha gradually established itself in the 
Mon or Talaing country as well where too there grew up a 
number of contending factions. Such splitting up into various 
factions naturally led to the disintegration of the factions 
themselves as well as to the degeneration of the religious 
Order, an unfortunate state of things which is faithfully 
reflected in the preamble of the Kalyani inscriptions. A move 
towards unity and strength, towards infusion of new life into 
the religion was the need of the day ; and it came as if in 
response to a great social demand when Dhammaceti was 
crowned king of Pegu (1472). Again the Sinhalese brother- 
hood of the Mahavihara came to the aid of the religion in 
Burma, and the reformation of Dhammaceti practically led to 
the final triumph of the Sihala Samgha as well as to the better 
consolidation of the Sarngha in Burma. It is important here 
to note that from the very introduction of the Sinhalese 
fraternity the royal authority had always lent its support to the 
new order in preference to the old, which was not a little 
responsible for the position of supremacy the Sinhalese 
Sarngha came eventually to acquire in Burma. The triumph 
pf the Sihala Sarngha was indeed the triumph of the Maha- 



256 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


vihara tradition that stood for orthodoxy ; and this orthodoxy 
by which is meant strict comformity to the rules of the Vinaya 
according to orthodox interpretation was ever the character 
and ideal of the religion in Burma. 

We may here pause to consider the extent reached by the 
various forms of Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma. It has 
already been pointed out that Theravada was not the only 
form of Buddhism in the country. Sarvastivada, on the 
evidence of Sanskrit Buddhist epigraphs as well as on that of 
1-tsing, was a prevalent form of the religion in about the 

seventh and eighth centirries A.D. ; and, if the local 

chronicles are to be believed, some sort of Mahayanism 
and Mahayanist Tantrikism had also penetrated into Upper 
Burma, probably by the land-route by way of Tibet, Assam 
and Manipur. In fact, when Anawrahta introduced 

Theravada to Pagan there had already been in existence 

some sort of Buddhist Tantrik worship which orthodox 

Buddhism considered as heresy. Besides, there were the 
Samanakuttakas, probably the same as the Aris, who had a 
powerful following at least in and around Pagan. Their 
existence is proved by the paintings on the walls of some of 
the temples of Pagan as well as by the discoveries of sculp- 
tures, bronzes and terracotta plaques representing 
Tantrik Buddhist divinities. The prevalence of Mahayana 
and Mantrayana is also testified to by more than one 
Tibetan text. Regular and determined attempts were 
made by successive kings to exterminate the Aris, but 
they were successful not until the reformation of Dhamma- 
ceti. Somehow or other Tantrik Buddhist texts and 
Mahayanist texts on logic were made subjects of study by 
monks of Theravada affiliation ; a few such texts were 
preserved in a monastic library of Upper Burma as late as 
1442 A.D. 

The reformation of Dhammaceti bade well for the religion 
for some time at least ; but the majority of the kings of Burma 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


257 


were swarthy tyrants and relentless vandals caring but little 
for the religion. Some of them even delighted in killing 
monks and robbing monasteries of their treasures. Of course 
there were many also, not necessarily religious in any way 
or having any high spiritual ideals and aspirations, who strove 
to play the part of guardian-patrons of the religion by 
bestowing bounties on the monasteries and establishing new 
religious foundations. Not unoften the motive behind each 
benefaction was to secure the support of the religious brother- 
hood who were the only organised band capable of influencing 
social and political opinion. Thus the history of the religion 
during the sixteenth an J seventeenth centuries is the history 
of alternate inroads on and benevolent patronage of the 
Church just as it pleased the individual on the throne or in 
power. Not unoften personal or political considerations 
played their part and determined the attitude of the ruling 
authorities. However, as years rolled on towards the end of 
the seventeenth century, the Sarngha again began to show 
signs of disintegration. The only way to stop the rut 
was to activise the Sarngha by tightening up the 
disciplinary controls and by a general levelling up monastic 
standards. Factions due to difference of opinion as to 
questions of monastic discipline were already disturbing the 
Sarngha and unrest was slowly brewing up. Soon the 
contending parties came to engage themselves in a long and 
bitter struggle in course of which the Sarngha purged itself 
again of the impurities that had gathered during the last two 
centuries. 

The struggle centred round what came to be known as 
the Purupana-Ekamasika Controversy. With the dawn of 
the eighteenth century when the controversy came to the 
surface the history of the religion in Burma enters a new 
phase. Readers of the foregoing pages must have noted 
that the few events of importance that turned the course of 
this history or infused new life and enthusiasm into the 

33-1443B 



258 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


religion itself were all concerned with the preservation or 
resuscitation of the pristine purity of the faith, and were there- 
fore connected with the Vinaya rules of monastic discipline. 
That story was to repeat itself ; indeed, the whole canvas of 
the history of the religion in the next century is covered by 
questions centering round monastic discipline and consolidation. 
The Parupana-Ekamsika controversy passed through many 
vicissitudes, sometime the heterodox school won, sometime 
the orthodox, but, as was to be expected, the final 
triumph lay eventually with the orthodox school, that is, 
with those who strove to keep strictly to the word and spirit 
of the original teachings of the Master so far as monastic 
discipline and consolidation were concerned. 

The dawn of the nineteenth century saw the introduction 
of the “Amarapura School ’ or “Burama Sarngha’ (Burmese 
Order) in Ceylon, a significant event in the history of 
Buddhism in Burma, which it is possible to interpret as the 
first return gift of Burma to Ceylon. About sixty years later 
two deputations from Ceylon came to Burma with a view to 
receiving valid upasampadd ordination from the Burmese 
fraternity, and Burma was thus able to return the gift 
Ceylon had made in the fifteenth century. Before the 
curtain drops on the stage of the mediaeval period of 
Burmese history with the end of the reign of Mindon-Min 
and the British annexation of Upper Burma the history 
of the religion records another triumph for the orthodox 
school. Mindon-Min observed with regret that laxity in 
monastic discipline was in evidence in the Samgha which 
was gradually drifting from its age-old orthodoxy towards 
a way of life that was contrary to the disciplinary code of 
the monks. He therefore thought it necessary to impose a 
vow enjoining strict conformity to ’V'^inaya discipline and saw 
to it that the vow was kept in word and spirit. 

In 1885 the British occupied Mandalay and thus came 
into possession of the whole of Burma, It signalised the 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


259 


termination of the old order of things and beginning of the 
new, in fact, of the modern age in Burma. Naturally it 
meant a great deal to the religion and to its history which 
had so long followed a course that found itself incompatible 
with the new age and new order of things. 

The history of Buddhism in Burma is also the history 
of monastic scholarship ; one is complemetary to the other. 
True, for the early period of our history we have practi- 
cally no evidence of the scholarly activities of the monks ; 
but the interest in Abhidhamma treatises is evident. 
However, with the introduction of the faith into Pagan and 
better and sounder organisation of the Sarngha we get a 
glimpse of the scholarly pursuits of the monks inside the 
seclusion of the monasteries. For centuries these monasteries 
had been busy centres of scholarly activities ; there in the 
darkness and solitude of the library-hall of the monastery 
generations of monks strove hard, day in and day out, to 
master the sacred texts of their religion and other works 
most suited to their lines of study. No subject was too 
unworthy for their pursuit and attention ; and though 
naturally Buddhism in all its various aspects and 
branches demanded the most serious and careful attention, 
subjects like grammar, logic, medicine, astrology, astronomy, 
philosophy, polity, law, prosody, metres and even military 
science claimed their time and labour, grammar of course 
being one of the most important and favourite. But studies 
alone did not satisfy the scholarly craving of the monks ; 
they were authors as well and produced works, mostly 
commentarial, on Buddhist ethics and metaphysics, myths 
and legends, morals and law, on grammar and prosody, on 
logic and astrology, on medicine and astronomy and other 
arts and sciences. The Sdsanavamsa, the GandiiCVamsa, 
the Pitakatthamain and other chronicles give long lists 
of such monk-scholars and philosophers, and a longer list 
of their works, but even these lists must represent only a 



260 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

fraction of the good and continuous work that was carried 
on in the network of monasteries all over the country, A 
careful analysis of the works mentioned in the lists will 
show that a large majority of texts concerned themselves with 
the Viaaya which was the subject nearest to the heart of 
the monks of Burma ; Abhidhamma and Sutta treatises 
followed close next. 

Political intrigues and unrest, court squabbles and 
periodical acts of vandalism were often, it is true, respon- 
sible for disturbing the quiet life of the monasteries. And 
as the monasteries, not unoften, depended to a great extent 
on royal bounties, scholarly pirrsuits suffered whenever 
there was any severe political confusion in the country or 
an unsympathetic authority sat on the throne. It is on 
such occasions that one can see a lull in the scholarly 
pursuits of the monks, but seldom do we find them giving 
up their studies altogether or forsaking the life and ideal to 
which they had devoted themselves. Often the religion 
shone dim and pale, but never did the flame go out ; the 
monks carried the torch ever with unfailing zeal and earnest- 
ness till it again burnt bright after unfortunate interludes. 

II 

CHARACTER AND IDEAL OF THE RELIGION 

If one is allowed to conclude anything from the frag- 
mentary Pali inscriptions found at the old city of the Pyus, 
it may be said that the earliest phase of the Theravada 
faith in Burma was mostly concerned with the metaphysical 
aspect of the religion. But the material at our disposal is 
too scanty to enable us to form any idea as to the character 
of the religion at that early period. In fact, that character 
was not determined until some time after the introduction of 
the faith into Upper Burma. It invariably takes some time 
for a new faith to determine its own character and find out 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


261 


its ideal under given local conditions and not unoften they 
are determined by the force of socio-economic circumstances 
that mould its course of history. Indeed, the linking up of 
the career of Buddhism of Burma with the Mahavihara 
tradition of Ceylon was primarily responsible for the 
character the religion in Burma came to assume and the 
ideal it came to cherish. The Mahavihara stood for orthodoxy, 
for essential purity of life and conduct as well as for monas- 
tic consolidation; the slightest deviation from the Vinaya 
code of discipline was sternly and rigidly criticised and 
punished. To this tradition the Burmese Samgha gradually 
came to be affiliated until finally it identified itself with the 
character and ideal of the Sinhalese Church as represented 
by the Mahavihara. 

Burmese Buddhism thus came to be less concerned with 
deep metaphysical problems of the religion, and though the 
Abhidhamma continued to engage the attention of the monks 
— the seventeenth century was pre-eminently the century 
of Abhidhamma studies — Vinaya was undoubtedly their first 
love. .All along the course of hi.story the religion stresses 
more and more on a disciplined and consolidated monastic 
life; it is on Vinaya rules that Burmese Buddhism takes its 
stand. It is interesting to find that all the major movements 
for reform, all priestly or kingly acts ot importance in 
connection with religion, and all minor disturbances within 
the Sarngha were in one way or other concerned with rules 
of monastic discipline. It is curious that no deep spiritual 
or metaphysical doctrine ever moved the religious order to 
its depths. In Burma the purity of the religion has again 
and again been threatened by inroads from other religions, 
for example, Mahayanism and Mahay anist Fantrikism and 
Brahmanism, by deep-seated primitive faiths and practices, 
by individual members within the Sarngha it.self as well as 
by contending ideas and ideals. But eventually it always 
emerged triumphant from amidst all trials and struggles, 



262 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


and upheld the ideal of monastic discipline as laid down by 
the Master. There had been occasional lapses, but move- 
ments for reform were immediately set on foot to bring 
the Order back to its original ideal of purity and improve 
its moral fibre. Not for once had the orthodox cause had 
a defeat, and it is an important consideration that it had 
always the royal authority on its side. Burmese Buddhism 
therefore underwent very little transformation with the march 
of time ; it was thus practically the same in the time of 
Mindon-Min as it had been when we first catch a clear 
glimpse of it after the introduction and consolidation of the 
Sihala Samgha, or, in other words, of the orthodox Thera- 
vada School. If, therefore, anybody wants to know and 
see Buddhism as conceived and preached by the Buddha 
himself so far as Samgha life goes one can see a nearest 
approach to it in the monasteries of Burma. 

But Burma has hardly any creative contribution to 
Buddhist logic and metaphysics to her credit. Buddhism 
as an intellectual and emotional discipline certainly engaged 
their attention ; but there is hardly any evidence throughout 
the centuries of their having ever made any conscious attempt 
to expand or interpret creatively the Buddhist way and 
philosophy of life. There have been recent attempts towards 
such contribution, but on the whole Buddhism in Burma 
remained and still does remain a colonial religion. 

Ill 

WHAT BUDDHISM HAS DONE FOR BURMA 

Of all the Indianised lands of South-eastern Asia, Burma 
is indeed the only country where monastic Buddhism of the 
Theravada nikaya survives to this day in its pristine purity 
and glory. In Campa and Kamboj as well as in Java and 
Sumatra, Theravada Buddhism could hardly make any head* 
way against Brahmanical Hinduism and Mahayanism and 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


263 


its allied cults ; in Siam priestly corruption had undermined 
its purity ; but in Burma the religion survived every attack 
directed against it, and successfully swallowed all the 
religions that came to contend its claim to superiority. 
Even the heathen with powerful gods of primitive belief, 
the Nat spirits, for example, came slowly and gradually 
to merge themselves into the more pure, simple and 
direct faith that brought light into the land, and hope 
and solace into the minds of thousands. To ask what 
Burma owes to Buddhism is to be told at once that it was 
Buddhism that brought Burma into the arena of culture and 
civilisation and in one line with the other countries of the 
Indian Orient. Indeed, Buddhism was the one civilising 
factor in Burmese life society. 

Besides, Buddhism gave to the people of Burma a 
religion that replaced the gross and primitive heathenism of 
earlier centuries. In the place of rude and barbaric cults 
fostering animistic and totemistic worship they had 
received one of the simplest and purest faiths mankind 
has ever known. To speculate what Burma would have 
been without Buddhism is to imagine Burma given up to 
those barbarous images of heathen gods, the Nat spirits, 
that stand as it were with folded hands round the more 
important sacred shrines of Buddhism (e.g., the Shwezigon 
in Pagan). Anawrahta, asked why he had allowed them 
in a Buddhist shrine, said, “ Men will not come for the 
sake of the new faith. Let them come for their old gods 
and gradually they will be won over. ” And eventually, 
they were indeed won over. 

Buddhism, moreover, exercised a most sobering influence 
on the rude semi-civilised Burmans and the ruder northern 
invaders, particularly the Shans that later on came to 
occupy a large portion of Burma as their realm. It was 
through Buddhism that they came in touch with civilisation ; 
it moulded them into a new people, as it were, it gave them 



264 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


self-expression and brought out the very best that was in 
them. The spirit of the religion moved the peoples of 
Burma to such depths that a whole realm pressed itself to 
its service ; it enthused them to activities in all spheres that 
make life beautiful and worth living — in art, in literature 
and in general culture. To contemplate rude and primitive 
tribes like the Burmans and the Shans given up to the 
building of beautiful and magnificent temples and decorating 
them with sculptures and paintings, or to think how 
thousands enjoined upon themselves the strict vows of 
a monkish life in the seclusion of monasteries busying 
themselves there in enriching the store of knowledge of the 
world or in seeking deliverance for themselves and their 
fellow creatures, is to admire the wonderful magic that 
Buddhism wrought on the people of Burma. To-day all 
that is beautiful and attractive in Burmese life and society 
and manners and customs come in fact from Buddhism. 
The religion gave them deeper thoughts to contemplate 
upon, higher principles to live for and nobler ideals to aspire 
after. It gave them a new outlook on life, and influenced 
the notions and beliefs of the average Burman to a 
considerable extent. 

Buddhism has also been a great unifying factor in Burma. 
Racial jealousies and rivalries did indeed exist even within 
the Samgha, but it was Buddhism that eventually brought 
the Talaings and the Pyus, the Burmans and the Shans, the 
Thais and the Karens and numerous other smaller ethnic 
groups under one banner in the name of one common 
religion, and unified them as one whole, though racially 
they had hardly anything in common and were even hostile 
to one another. Buddha was their common teacher, 
Dharma was their one common goal and Samgha was their 
one common meeting ground. 

Buddhism gave to Burma a society based on the theory of 
equality of social standards. Discarding wealth as well 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


265 


as caste as Buddhism did, society in Burma hardly knew 
any grading based either on material possession or on 
birth. Very few countries in fact enjoy such a demo- 
cratic social life as Burma does even to-day ; and whoever 
has cared to enter into its spirit and understand the meaning 
thereof knows very well that it is one of those remarkable 
gifts Buddhism has given to Burma. Another gift of 
Buddhism to Burmese life is the very high percentage of 
literacy among the Burmese people. This is even to-day, 
as it was in olden times, the work of the Buddhist monks 
whose one duty is to initiate every boy and girl of the 
neighbourhood into the art of reading and writing so as to 
enable him or her to read and understand the most essential 
texts of the religion. Every village or a cluster ol neigh- 
bouring villages in Burma has even to this day a monastery 
school (phongyi l^yaung)^ and until recent times every boy and 
girl, within a certain specified age, of the neighbourhood had 
to spend a specified time as a novice in the monastery school 
after which he or she was at liberty to go back to a layman’s 
life or take to the life of a monk or nun as he or she chose. 
It is in these monasteries that Burmese boys and girls received 
their early training, and as the system was almost obligatory. 
Buddhism had been instrumental in carrying education and 
a particular attitude towards life and society to almost every 
home in Burma. 

Buddhism had also an indirect influence on the growth 
of Burmese language and literature. Burmese originally was 
a primitive language, poor In ideas and vocabulary and in 
phrases and idioms and unable to express the most abstruse 
and abstract thoughts of Buddhism. Pali, the language of 
Theravada Buddhism, was therefore its only guide, and 
through that sacred literature, and that of the Mens or 
Talaings, also deeply indebted to Pali, Burma found its surest 
way to intellectual development. Their lisping native tongue 
exercised itself through the language and literature of a 


34-1445B 



266 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


religion which they had accepted for -themselves, and 
gradually they learnt to express themselves in the language of 
their own. In that adapting process Burmese language and 
literature became endowed with the richness of Pali, and a 
primitive non-Indian mind raised itself to a level so as to be 
able to claim kinship with the highly developed Indian 
thought and culture. 


IV 

THE SAMGHA AND THE .SOCIETY 

It would be a sad mistake to suppose that the Buddhist 
monks of Burma lived an isolated and self-complacent 
existence. Indeed, nothing could be further from truth. 
To read the large number of inscriptions of the Pagan 
dynasty and all other kings that followed them is to know 
what intimate ties of mutual help and understading, of love 
and respect bound the Sarngha and the people together. 
In fact the Sarngha constituted an essential element — by far 
the most effective and powerful element — of the entire 
social fabric of the peoples of Burma, if those who had the 
means reared up and maintained temples, stupas and 
monasteries and whoever could afford supplied the means 
wherewith the monks not only met the daily requirements 
of their earthly existence but also fulfilled the duties demanded 
of them by their religion, or if hundreds of men and women 
offered themselves as slaves to religious establishments they 
did so because the members of the Saipgha reciprccated such 
gifts and services with commendable responsibility and 
with a good will and noble heart that no body failed to 
appreciate- No doubt the high ethical and spiritual values 
of Buddhism and the generally high moral tone of the 
Sarngha were the main inspiration that drew people to the 
services of the monks and their organisation ; but one cannot 



Summary and retrospect 267 

but recognise that the people were deeply conscious of the 
services rendered to them by the monks. 

The most important of services directly rendered was 
in the sphere of education, both secular and religious. Since 
every Burmese male over seven years of age had to spend 
a certain specified period of their young lives in the monas- 
teries where they not only learnt to read and write but also 
imbibed the teachings of Buddhism and the Buddhist 
way of life, the monasteries were rightly considered to 
be the centres whence radiated education and enlightenment. 
Indeed, until he completed his novitiate a Burmese boy was 
not considered as having reached maturity in membership 
of the society. This explains the hold the Samgha used 
to exercise on the people of Burma. 

In every generation there has been a considerable 
number of monks who were men of outstanding piety and 
learning ; their lives have been commendable examples of 
devotion and prayer, of integrity and discipline, of love 
and piety, of tolerance and forgiveness, of patience and 
unselfishness, of charity and service. Their day to day 
life, lived for the good and solicitude of others around them, 
helped the people to imbibe some of the noblest of human 
values that Buddhism sought to hold aloft. The kindness 
and hospitality that any sojourner in Burma receives from 
the common folk, the tolerance and the tenderness, the 
piety and devotion that one still notices in an average 
Burmese village-man or woman are direct contributions of 
the monks to Burmese life. ,When you see a wooden house 
by the road side, containing earthen pots full of cold drinking 
water daily replenished by one who feels for the thirsty 
traveller, or a zayat or rest-house where you can rest for 
the night without paying a single cowrie, or you find a host 
of parentless children adopted by kindly neighbours, or 
daily feeding of birds and beasts by the ordinar^^ folk, or a 
whole village well-provided by some folk wiio thinks kindly 



268 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


of his fellow-men, or when you see any one going out to 
call a monk from the nearest monastery to attend on the 
sick in his house, you will at once know what part the 
monks and the monasteries play in the life of the people. 
Not without reason the Buddhist monk in Burma is called 
“Phongyi” or “Great Glory ” which explains the great 
respect and admiration in which he is held by the people. 

Any one who has spent a whole year in Burma must 
have seen and enjoyed the gay and colourful seasonal 
festivals — notably the Thin-gyan or water-festival in early 
April, the Wa or rainy season festival in early July and 
the Thadin-gyut festival in late September or early October — 
in which men and women, rich and poor all alike take part. 
Or, he may have witnessed the festival connected with the 
cremation of a well-known Buddhist monk. Practically all 
such festivals that are today important elements of Burmese 
social life had originally nothing to do with Buddhism, 
but came down from primitive tribal worship and rituals, 
not even excluding the cremation festival which is just a 
form of primitive ancestor worship. Some of them were 
even connected with Nat worship. Today, however, they 
have all clustered round Buddhism, and the centre of all 
festivals is the pagoda-shrine where the first offerings are 
made, and not a little of the gaiety and entertainment of all 
such festivals is provided by the performances of one of the 
ten great birth-stories of the Buddha. The integration of 
some of the gay and colourful aspects of primitive life into 
the functional side of Buddhism that holds that ‘ all is 
suffering, all is transitory’ must be considered to be the 
work of Burmese monks and the Burmese people holding 
together and fostering a common understanding. 

Equally significant is the belief in and worship of spirits 
and faith in omens and magic that go hand in hand with 
Buddhism in Burma, not only amongst the people but 
inside the monasteries as well where the more learned 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


269 


and wise theras no doubt look down on them. Most of 
the indigenous peoples of Burma came down from the hills 
of Tibetan and Chinese borders and carried along with them 
their animistic faiths and practices that manifested itself 
in the worship of Nats or spirits of various forms, classes 
and descriptions. Tribal memories and traditions die hard ; 
even when the peoples of Burma accepted Buddhism 
they did not wholly give up or forget their old gods and 
faiths that are generally though not always regarded as 
malevolent. In fact, there is in every village a Nat-sin or 
shrine for the local spirits and they are regularly propitiated. 
Burmese Buddhism has no quarrel with them and it appears 
that they are gladly tolerated. This attitude of Buddhist 
monks has gone far towards drawing the people nearer to 
them and to Buddhism and building up a common ground 
from which the rational and the emotional, the intellectual and 
the primitive can equally draw their sustenance and inspiration. 
The Buddhist monks thus played the most important social 
role of civilising a primitive mind through a process of 
rational synthetisation and yet without letting it feel that it 
was being cut off from its tribal and primitive moorings. 

V 

THE SAMGHA AND THE KING: SAMGHA S POLITICAL 

ACTIVITIES 

The picture of a monk in Burma is not that of a recluse 
cut off from society, rapt in calm contemplation, and 
completely given up to meditation ; he is not the embodiment 
of spirituality detached from all and above all joys and 
sorrows. His is a simple and modest life, but he is no ideal 
of renunciation as it is generally understood. He is thus as 
good a member of the society as anybody else, taking interest 
in matters spiritual as well as temporal. He is a member of a 
brotherhood that is closely in touch with society and shares 



270 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

in its strength and weakness, in its joys and sorrows. Its 
more wise and experienced members not unoften become 
advisers to kings and ministers of state and participate in 
political discussions and struggles just as any lay man does, 
while its ordinary members take part, whenever there 
is need of them, in court-intrigues and party squabbles just 
as easily as they shut themselves up within the sequestered 
life of the monasteries. On several occasions in our hist6ry 
do the monks take active part in the political intrigues and 
turmoils of the times, sometime in support of the reigning 
monarch, sometime against. Of instances of church- 
elders becoming or playing the part of trusted ad visers of 
kings we have good many; they were often so powerful as 
to determine the major policies of the state ; on more than 
one occasion they indeed acted as peace-makers and negotia- 
tors in grave affairs of slate. In matters of disputes concern- 
ing the church the king is usually and perhaps naturally 
under the influence of his preceptor who is also the supreme 
head of the Sarngha; it is according to the latter s conviction 
and affiliation that the king forms his own opinion and 
lends his support accordingly. 

More than the political occupations of the monks or 
their authority in matters of state was the authority of the 
king in the affairs of the church. This authority seems to 
have been generally recognised and accepted hy the Sarngha 
from the very beginning. Not onl}^ that he appoints the 
Sarngharaja, but it is he who takes the initiative and provides 
the funds and other necessities in all movements for reform, 
beginning from Anawrahta*s time and terminating with 
Mindon'Min's. He plays the part of the guardian-patron 
of the church, and we have more than one instance when 
he even prescribes particular subjects and courses of religious 
study, or commands monk-teachers to go hither and thither 
in connection with the work of the church. No member of 
the Sarngha ever questioned the king's authority over such 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


271 


matters, nor considered that he was interfering in a matter 
that was outside his ordinary jurisdiction. The Samgha as 
a whole even fully recognised the king s authority to decide 
religious controversies by royal decrees ; in fact, the 
Parupana-Ekamsika dispute was actually decided in this 
way. Also, they recognised the king’s authority to impose 
vows on the monks ; the point at issue was not so much 
whether the king, Mindon-Min in this case, had any right 
to impose the vow as whether the vow Itself wa.s necessary 
and was approved of by the sacred texts, f or themselves, 
the kings sincerely held that ecclesiastical affairs were quite 
within the jurisdiction of their authority. There is nothing 
to doubt that some of them were deeply influenced by the 
pure and sublime ideal of the religion and had a real love 
for it; they considered themselves as members of the Samgha 
and did all they could to further its cause. 

The Samgha generally was loyal to the king and 
reciprocated faithfully and well the good work done by him. 
His authority seems to have not only been recognised but 
gladly acquiesced in by the monks in general. In more than 
one instance they also stood by him in his distress. “The 
Order, though enriched by the gifts of pious lay men, yet 
depends, in the last resort, upon the king. Under such 
despotic rule no man’s property or labour is his own ; the 
means of supporting the Sarngha may be withdrawn from 
any subject who is under royal displeasure. The peaceful 
easy life dear to the Burmese bhikkhu, the necessary calm 
for study or the writing of books, the land or water to be 
set apart for ecclesiastic ceremonies (a fitting place for 
which is of the highest importance), all these are only secured 
by the king's favour and protection. If this be borne in 
mind, the general loyalty of the Samgha to the head of the 
state is easy to understand.-’ ’ ’ 

5 Bode, Sasanavamsa^ Intro,, pp. 53-54, where she gives a brilliant analysis 
of the relation between the Sarngha and the state. 



272 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

But this loyalty must not be understood to be the same 
as abject surrender, it is true the Samgha had largely 
to depend on the king’s favour, but they did not surrender 
their souls for the royal mess of pottage. In fact, we have 
numerous instances of monks, high and noble souls, caring 
little for the king’s favour or disfavour, bravely challenging the 
royal will and courting imprisonment, banishment and even 
death. Once a royal preceptor and primate of the realm 
refused to abide in the kingdom of an unscrupulous king 
and went to self-banishment in disgust; again, a venerable 
monk recorded his strong disapproval of the building of a 
monastery by forced labour ; at another time members of 
the Order refused to accept gifts made by the king, gifts 
secured by coercion from the people in times of widespread 
misery and poverty. On another occasion, another monk 
steadfastly stuck to his own views in contravention of the 
royal decree, and bravely faced the angry king who threatened 
him with imprisonment and death. Still, at another time 
the Samgha stoutly anrJ successfully resisted the claim of 
another king to be recognised as the final Buddha, and not 
long after also the claims of two kings to the right of royal 
forfeiture of properties once made over as gifts to the 
Samgha. It is easy to multiply similar instances besides 
those already cited in the foregoing chapters. 

VI 

THE SAMGHA AND ITS CONSTITUTION : THE SAMGHARAJA 
THE RESOURCES OF THE SAMGHA 

Buddhism brought with it its own church organisation as 
well, and the constitution and organisation of the Samgha in 
Burma were much the same as in India. Within the 
monasteries life as in Buddhism followed its usual course 
with the chief monk at the head of the monastic household. 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


273 


Each monastery was thus under a chief thera, and each 
single monastery was an autonomous institution manag- 
ing its own internal affairs. They had to find their 
own resources and tend to the religious needs of the 
locality in which they were situated. Monasteries situated 
within a particular geographical or racial area and affiliated 
to a common Samgha often combined to form one unit 
without however losing their autonomy, but that was no 
essential element in the church organisation. All the 
monasteries of the kingdom participated in a common 
federation of which each autonomous monastery was a 
member, it being represented in the federation by its 
chief thera. This federation of monasteries subscribing 
to the creed and discipline of a particular school, the 
Sinhalese or Burmese, is what constituted the Samgha. At 
the head of the Scirngha was the Samgharaja, the king as it 
were of the church organisation, with almost the same 
supreme authority as that of the temporal king, in matters 
relating to the church. True, we do not hear of a 
Samgharaja mentioned as such before the fifteenth century, 
but all the same, we have always a supreme head of the 
Samgha from the beginning of our recorded history, /.e., 
from 1057 A.D. Shin Arahan was indeed the first 
Sarngharaja followed by Panthagu and Uttarajiva. More 
often than not the Samgharaja was no other than the king’s 
own tutor and preceptor; from the very beginning successive 
preceptors of the king were accepted as primates of the 
realm. Throughout the course of our history nobody seems to 
have ever questioned this practice and procedure. It will be 
seen that the exalted position of the Samgharaja was not 
elective which it ought to have been ; on the contrary 
he was appointed by the king. With the death, abdication 
or deposition of the king, therefore, there was almost 
invariably a replacement of the Sarnghciraja by one who 
happened to be the acariya of the new monarch. This 

33 1443B 



274 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


gives us perhaps the key to the understanding of the king’s 
authority in ecclesiastical affairs. 

It is true that the Samgharaja was the supreme head of 
the church, but his authority was not absolute. On 
occasions when there were differences of opinion or on matters 
that vitally concerned the church he invited other prominent 
elders of the organisation to a conference and took their 
opinions into consideration. The initiative almost always 
came from the king and the Samgharaja, again at the king’s 
initiative, consulted the chief theras as well. From this 
practice there gradually grew up a consultative council 
of Mahatheras consisting of four members, each desig- 
nated as Samgharaja and collectively placed at the 
head of the Samgha, under the presidentship of the 
supreme head of the Order known as the Maha- 
samgharaja. When Bodawpaya made an attempt to 
further strengthen the church organization he added four 
more members to the already existing council of four, thus 
making a total of eight members, each with the title of 
Samgharaja. The supreme head of the Order was also 
there at the head of the committee of eight ; and like him all 
the eight Satngharajas also were appointed by the king. The 
members of this consultative church council were all paid by 
the king who was the head of the church. The duties of 
this council were many and various. They had to maintain 
a regular register of all monks of the realm with particulars 
of age, locality and ordination, to administer monastic discip- 
line and punish offending monks, to manage church-lands 
and other properties of the Samgha, to prevent schism and 
arbitrate or give decisions on questions of monastic discipline 
and doctrinal differences. The council was thus the main 
instrument through which the king not only guided and 
controlled the entire network of monastic organisation through- 
out the realm but also kept himself and his administrative 
machinery in touch with the people over whom the Samgha 



SUMMARY and RETROSPECT 


215 


had considerable sway. British administration, essen- 
tially secular in aim and ideal, allowed this council to lapse 
and slowly but eventually made itself independent of any 
relation with the Samgha and its constituents, and hence to a 
very large extent isolated from the people. To this 
undoubtedly is due much of the misunderstanding and 
consequent trouble and unrest that exist to-day between the 
Government on the one hand and the large army of monks 
on the other. 

“In 1887, the primate and thirteen bishop.s met the Commandei in-Chief , Sir 
Frederick Roberts, ofFerin^i; to pic.Tch submission to the Lnglish in every village 
throughout the land, if their jurisdiction was conlirmech The staff trained by the 
Englisli in Lower Burma for two generations included Burmese Buddhi.sr extra 
Commissioners who could Inwe represented the Chief Cornini.ssioner on the 
Primate’s Board. Bui English administrators, being citizens of the modern secular- 
ist state, did not even consider the F^rimate’.s proposal ; they merely expressed politt?: 
benevolence, and the ecclesiastical commission lajjscd. I o-day schism i.s ripe, any 
charlatan can dress as a cleric and swindle (he fcuthful, and criminals often wear the 
robe and live in a monastery to elude the police. As Sir Edward Sladen, one of the 
few Englishmen wliD had seen native institutions as they really were, said, “the 
English noti-possumas was not neutrality but interference in religion. ’ (Harvey, in 
the Cambridge Hi.story of India, Vol. V.) 

The resources of the Samgha were mainly limited to 
private benefactions and royal bounties. There was 
fortunately no dearth of pious lay men, and on auspicious and 
ceremonial occasions they used to make endowments of rice- 
fields, fruit-trees, cattle, and even books and all other 
necessaries of monastic life to temples and monasteries. 
Gifts of servants and slaves were also made and we have 
numerous references to them in chronicles and inscriptions. 
The more bounteous gifts of land, of water for valid simas, 
of temples and viharas, or of libraries, were generally received 
from the king and the nobles who usually were generous 
givers. On the whole occasional depressions apart, the 
monasteries of Burma fared well, and financially they had 
hardly any long periods of stress and struggle ; we have 
indeed no instance of monasteries suffering from want of 



276 THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

material needs which however were modest and very limited. 
It is certainly an unmistakable evidence of the love and 
fostering care which the Burmese people, the court and the 
nobility bestowed on the Sarngha and its numerous establish- 
ments. Only on one occasion did a king, Bodawpaya, 
become jealous enough of the resources of the Sarngha and 
his successor Bagyidaw made inquiries if he could, according 
to law, forfeit the lands once bostowed on the Sarngha. His 
ministers pointed out, however, that he could not do so, for 
the Order could, according to the Vinaya and the Atthal^atha, 
continue to claim all rights bestowed by individuals in the 
past. 

Vli 

THE NEW CONDII'IONS 

It has already been pointed out that the British annexation 
of Burma signalised the termination of the old order of things 
and the beginning of the new, in fact, of the modern age in 
the country. Buddhism still weilds a most powerful 
influence, just as it did in the past, on the life of the people, 
and is still a great social force. British administration 
allowed the ecclesiastical council to lapse and thus lost the 
main prop on which rested the social fabric of the Burmese 
people, but could not ignore the religion that was the most 
vital factor of Burmese life, and had to frame its laws in 
accordance with the religious laws and customs of the land. 
Within the monastery the chief thera is still the supreme 
authority, and the monks pursue the daily routine in much 
the same usual way ; their literary occupations are also as 
potent, and their social and spiritual authority with the 
people as effective. 

But the Sarngha is no more in a position to exert the same 
direct influence on the social and political affairs of the 
country. .Modern conditions of life, Western science, education 



SUMMARY AND RETROSPECT 


277 


and philosophy and state policy which are now strong forces 
to be reckoned with in Burnriese life and society as elsewhere 
in the East are slowly but steadily creating new values and 
ideals of life and bringing a new society into being. The 
resources of the Samgha have also consequently suffered to 
a considerable extent. Moreover, it is being seriously 
doubted if a small country like Burma can really support 
such a large monkish population under modern conditions of 
life and society without their doing some work that is socially 
and economically creative. Various other forces have also 
combined to oblige them to withdraw themselves within the 
four walls of the monasteries where they confine their 
activities strictly to religious and literary pursuits, except for 
occasional inroads into the realm of active politics. Their 
participation in contemporary social and political activities 
and their influence on the ruling authority have generally 
been thrown into the background. Indeed, present-day 
state policy cmd administration have failed to understand the 
social implications of the Buddhist monastic organisation 
and to recognise it as a great social factor in Burmese life 
and politics. As things stand, any future administration 
to be socially responsible to the land and its people must 
be able to harness the immense potentialities that reside in 
the Buddhist Sarngha and exploit creatively its large social 
sweep. Invested with responsibility and confidence, the 
Samgha also will feel the call to rid itself of the abuses it 
suffers from at the present moment. 




SELECT BTBLTOGRAPHY 
I. Original Soiiroes : Lttkhaky 


Pali and Sanskrit 

Dipavamsa, ed. by (loigor. PTS. London. 
Mahavarnsa, „ „ ,, „ 

Cnllavamsa, „ „ ,, „ 

Sasanavarasa, „ Bode „ „ 

Gandhavamsa, ,, MinayefL JPTS. London. 
Sasana vainsadi pa. Colom bo. 

Burmese 

Yazawin Gyaw, by Shin Thilawuntha. Burma B.e- 
seai'ch Society, Rangoon. 

Hmannan Yazawin. Mandalay. 1921. Translated in 
[)art;, in English by Po Maung dan and Luce : 
Glass Palace Chronide of the kings of Burma. 
Oxford University Press. 1923. 
Mahayazawingyi, by Maung Kala. Burma Research 
Society. Rangoon. 1929. 

Slapat ragawon dataw surim rou. Biich des Ragawon, 
der konigsgoschichte. Ed. by Schmidt. V'ienna. 
1910. 

Paklat Tabling Chronicle : Thudemmawati-yaza- 
wantha Thihaya-Zadiyazawuntha. Ibiklat. 
Siam. 1910. 

Pi bakattha m ain . Rangoon . 

Chinese and Tihetayi 

Ijama Taranath’s History of Buddhism in India 
(T'il)otan). Translated into German by 
Schiefner : Geschichte des Buddhismns in 
Jndien, St. Petersberg. 1869, 



280 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Pag Sara Jon Zang. Ed. by S. C. Das. Calcutta. 

I do not know Cliineso and whatever information 
from Chinese sources J. luive been able to utilise has 
been chiefly dei’ived from : 

BEFEO, IV, pp. 131-413. Pelliot, Paul. Deux Iti- 
neraircs .... 

J BRS, XIV, ICai t 2. Luce, G. H. A study of early 
Chinese (and Greek) texts relating to Burma. 

Luce ex])loits ('In’nese sotirccs with utmost advantage 
in almost all his contributions (see below). He gives 
a complete bibliography of relevant Clnnese soui'ces 
in JBRS, XXIX, Part 3, p].. 274-76. 

Fa Hien. Travels. Ed. by Legge. Oxford. 1886. 

Hsuan Chuang (Yuan Chwang or Hiuen Tsiang). 
On Yuan Chwang’s Travels. Ed. by Watters. 
2 vols. Life of Hiuen Tsiang. Ed. by Beal. 
2 vols. London. 1911. 

I-Tsing. A Record of the Buddliist Religion. Ed. 

by Takakusu. Oxford. 1896. 

Chau Ju-Kua. 'fravels. Ed. by Hirth and Rockhill. 

European 

Pcriplus of the Erythrean Sea. Ed. and translated 
l)y Schoff. Longmans. 1912. 

Ptolemy. .Aiuicmt India. Translated by McCrindle. 

Ed. l)y S. N. Majumdar. Calcutta. 1927. 
.loui'ual of Residence in tlui Buirnan Erapii’o. By 
H. Cox. Warren and Whittaker. London. 
1821. 

Jcurnal of an Eral)assy from the Goraanor-General 
of India to the Court of Ava. 2 vols. By 
J. Crawfurd. Colburn. London. 1834. 
Personal Narrative of two years’ Imprisonment in 
Burma. By H. Gonger. Murray. London, I860. 



SELECT BIBLTOGKAPHY 


281 


A Description of the Burmese Empire. By Sanger- 
mano. Rangoon. 1885, 

A Narrative of the Mission sent by the Govoiaior- 
General of India to the Court of Ava in 1855. 
London. 1858. 

An Account of the American Baptist Mission to the 
Burman Empii'e. By Mrs. Judson. London. 
1823. 


II. Original Sources : Archaeological 
E'piqraj>}iic 

Fragments of Stone Inscriptions found at the Baw- 
bawgyi Pagoda, Hmawza. Ep. Ind., V. 
ARASB, and JA. 1924, XX 

Maunggan Gold Plates, Hmawza. ARASB, 1938-39. 

Kyundwza Gold Plates, Hiu<awza. Unedited. 

Sanskrit-Pyu Stone Inscription on the Pedestal of a 
Buddha Imag(>, Hmawza. ITnedited. 

Smaller Sanskrit, Pali and Pyu Epigraphs on funerary 
urns, terracotta taldets, stone fragments, etc., 
Hmawza, mostly noticed in the ARASl, 
ARASB and Ep. Ind. 

Smaller Sanskrit, Pali and mixed Epigraphs on terra- 
cotta tablets, etc.. Pagan, Rangoon and tdse- 
where, mostly noticed in tins ARASl and 
ARASB. 

All Mon (Talaing) Inscriptions. Ed. by Blagdon and 
Duroiselle, in the Ep. Birin. Archaeological 
Survey, Burma. 

Pali and Burmese Jataka Labels from tlie temples 
of Pagan. Ed. by Duroiselle, in t he Ep. Biim. 
Archaeological Survey, Burma. 



282 


THERA V ADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Sanskrit Stone Inscription of king AnandachaiKlra, 
Mrohaung, Arakan. Noticed in AKASB. 1920. 
Unedited. 

Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava. Rangoon. 
1892. 

Inscriptions copied from the stones collected by 

Bodawpaya. 2 vols. Rangoon, 1897. 

Inscriptions collected in Upper Burma. 2 vois. 
Rangoon. 1900 and 1903. 

Original inscriptions collected by king Bodawpaya 
in Upper Burma, now in the Patodawgyi 
Pagoda, Amafapura. Rangoon. 1913. 

Inscriptions of Burma {1131-1300 A.D.). University 
of Rangoon. Humphrey Milford. 

Rock Edicts II, V and XIII of Asoka. Ed. by 

Hultzsch. Oil. I. 

Nagarjunikonda Inscrijitions, Ed. by Vogel. Ep. Tnd. 
XX. 

Monumental 

Monuments in sitn, and Cixeavarted and preserv(M 
sites, at Hmawza, Promo, Thaton, Rangoon, 
I^cgii, Pagan, Shwebo, Ava, Amarapura, 
Saggaing, Mingun, Mandalay and other less 
important plact^s. Described mostly in A RAST, 
ARASB, and in the Amended list of Ancient 
Momiments in Burma. Rangoon. 1921. 

Sculptures in situ and stone sculptures, bronzes, 
terracotta tablets, etc^., at the above places of 
ai-chaeological itnj)ortance, and in the Museums 
at Rangoon, Hmawza, Ihvgan and Mandalay. 
Described mostly in ARASI and ARASB. 

Paintings on the walls of the temples of Pagan. 
Noticed in ARASI and ARASB, 

Anntial Albums of photogTaphs, drawings, sketches, 
etc., of the monuments of Burma, preserved 



SELECT BIBLIOGHAPHY 


283 


in the offices of the Superintendent, ASB., 
Mandalay, Director-General of Archaeology in 
India, Simla, and in the library of the Archaeo- 
logical Sedion of the Indian Museum, Cal- 
cutta, from 15)01 to 1940. London. 1882. 

Ntmiismatic 

Coins of A’^akau, Ik^gu and Burma. Edited and 
described by Artiun Phayre. London. 1882. 

111. SeCONDABY SoUKCES : GEiNERAL 

Bigandei,, Bisho|). An Outline <jf the History ef the 
Catholic Burmese Mission from tlie year 1720 
to 1887. Rangoon. 1887. 

Bird, Geo. Wanderings in Burma. 

Bowrey, T. Geogra|)hical Account of Countries I’ound 
the Bay of Bengai, 1669-79. Ed. 63 ' llidiard 
Temple. Cam bridge. 1905. 

British Burma Gaz(d:tteer. 2 vols. Rangoon. 

Burner', Coloiuvl. Translations fiom the Rajavarnsa. 
JASB, IV. 

Cambridge Histoiy of India. Cliajjs. on Burma, vols. 
Ill, IV, \a 

(.luttagong Gazetteex*. Cakaitta. 15)08. 

Cochrane, W. W. Tlxe Shans. Rangoon. 1915. 

Cordier, H. Essai d’nne bibhogi-apliic des ouvragos 
relatifs a’la prescpi’ile indo-chioinjscy I’rerxiitae 
I’artie, Birmanie et Assam, in Toung Pao, II, 
vi. 

Coedes, George. Texts d’anteurs grecs ct latins 
relatifs a roxtrernt>-orient d('|)uis le iV'e siecle 
iiv. d. C. jus(|n'ace XlVe sic(-l<‘. Lereux. 
Paris. Also laxtes and jxapcr.s i-elativ’C to tlxe 
subject in BEEEO. 



284 


THKRAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Duroiselle, Charles. A List of Inscriptions found in 
Burma. Rangoon. 1921. 

,, The Aris of Burma and Tantrik Buddliism. 
ARASI. 

„ [Stray notes and reports, mainly in ARASB, 
ARASI, JBRS and BEFEO], 

„ Notes on the Ancient Geography of Burma. 
Rangoon. 1906. 

,, Stone Sculptures in the Ananda Pagoda. 

Pagan. ARASI. 1913-14. 

,, The Ananda Tem})le. Pagan. MASI. 

„ The Alphabetical list of MSS. and books in^ 

the Bernard Free Library. Rangoon. 

Forbes. Legondaiy History of Burma and Arakan. 
Foi'cliammeiv E. Notes on tlie Early History and 
Geography of British Binnia. Rangoon. 1884. 
„ Re})ort on the Kyaukku Temple at Pagan. 

Rangoon. 1919. 

,, Arakan. Rangoon. 1891. 

Ferrand, G. Relations do voyages et do Textes geo- 
graphicpies arabes, ])ersans, (4 tures relatifs a 
rextreme orient du VIHe and XVHIe siecles. 
2 vols. Leroux. Paris. 1913. 

Farnivall, J. S. Myingyan Settlement Report. Ran- 
goon. 1913. 

,, Syrian Gazetteer. Rangoon. 1914. 

Fytche, A. Burma : Past and Present. 2 vols. 
London. 1878. 

Gait, E. A. A History of Assam. 2nd. edn, 

Gerini, G. E. Researches on Ptolemy’s Geography 
of Eastern Asia. London. 1909. 

Gazette(vr of Upper Burma and the Shan States. 

5 vols. Rangoon. 1900. 

Halliday, R. S. Tlie Talaings. Rangoon. 1917. 
Hai-vey, G. E. History of Burma. London. 1925. 



SELECT BIBLIOUHAFHY 


285 


Ko, Taw Sein. Burmese kSketclios. 2 vols. Rangoon. 
1913 and 1920. 

„ A Guide to Pagan. Rangoon. 1925. 
Lewis, C. C. Tribes of Burma. Rangoon. 1910. 
Luce, G. H. Burma witli Special Reference to her 
Relations with China. JBRS. XIV. 1935. 

,, Buiina down to the Fall of Pagan (jointly 
with Pc Maimg Tin). JBRS. XXIX. 1939. 
,, Economic Life of the Eailj’" Bunnaii. J BRS. 
XXX. 1940. 

,, Thti Ancient Pyu. JBRS. XXVMl. 1937. 

,, Burma’s Debt to Pagan. JBRS. XX 11. 1932. 
,, Names of the Pyus. JBRS. XXI 1. 1932. 

Majurndai', R. C. Ancient Indian Colonies: Champa. 
Calcutta. 

,, Ancient Indian Colonics : Suvarnadvipa. 2 
vols. Calcutta. 

Mookerji, R. K. Indian Slxipping and Maritime 
Activity. 1910. 

Parker, E. H. Burma with S})(H-ial Relcrence to Ijor 
Relations with China. Rangoon. 1893. 

Pe Maung Tin. Women in the Insci'iptions of Pagan. 
JBRS. XXV. 1935. 

Pegu Gazetteer. Ed. by J. A. Stewart. Rangoon. 
1917. 

Phayi’c, A. P. History of Burma. London. 1883-84. 
Sainson, C. Nan-tchao ye-che, traduction d’uno his- 
toire de I’ancion Yun-nan. Leroux. Paris. 
1904. 

Stewart, J. A. Kyaukse Settlement Rojxoi’t. Ran- 
goon. 1922. 

Stuart, J. M. B. Gld Burraosc Irrigation Works. 
Rangoon. 1 913. 

Scott, J. G. Burma, a, Ilandbook <jf Practical In- 
formation. London. 1900. 



28(> 


THliRAVAOA BUIJDHISM IN BURMA 


8(;ott, G. (Sliway Yoo). I’ho His Life and 

Notions. London. 1896. 

Scott, O'Conner. Mandalay and other Cities of Burma. 
London. 1907. 

Symes, M. An Account of an Embassy to the Kingdom 
of Ava. London. 1800. 

Wayland, F. A Memoir of the Life and Labours of 
the Rev. Adoniram Judson. 2 vols. London. 
1853. 

Westlake. Kyaukse Settlement Report. Rangoon. 
1892. 

Wliiteway, R. S. Tlic Rise of the Poituguese Power 
in India, 1497-1550. London. 1899. 

Yule, Henry. The Book of Sor Marco Ikdo. Revised 
l)y Henri Cordier. 2 vols. IjOndon. 1903. 

,, Cathay and the Way Thithci*. Revised by 
Henri Corditu'. 4 vols. London. 1915. 

IV^. Secondary Sources : Religious and Culturai. 

Anthology of Burmese littvratnrc'. Rangoon. 1921. 

Appleton, G. Buddhism in Burma. Longmans. Cal- 
cutta. 1943. 

Bode, Mabel Haynes ((hL). Sasanavamsa. PTS. 
London. 1897. 

,, Pali Literature of Burma. RAS. London. 
1909. 

Brown, Grant. The pre-Buddhist Religion of the 
Burmese. Folk-Lore. 1921. 

Bhattasali, N. K. Buddliist and Brahmanical Sculp- 
tures in the Dacca Museum. Dacca. 

Rliys Dav'ids. Buddhist India. London. 

Elliot. Hindui.sm and Buddhism, vol. 111. 

Forchaimw'r, 111. Tln^ Jardine Prize Essay : An essay 
on the sources and devclojunent of Burmese 
Law. Rangoon. 1885. 



SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


287 


Fausboll. Cataloguo of Mandalay MSS. in tho India 
Oliice Lii)rary. 

Finot, Lonis. Biuidhagliosa Lc^gond, irans. by 1^. C. 
Bagchi. (Jalontta Hoviow. 

Ftirnivall, J. S. Mann in Bnrtnose Oliannnatliats. 

JBPvS. XXX. 11>40. 

Gray, Niti Literal iiro of Burma. 

Hai'd^y R. S. i’avstoi n Monarchism. 

,, Mainial of Buddhism. 

Kern, H. Manual of Indian Buddhism. 

Law, IL C. Buddliaghosa. Galcutta. 

Luce, G, H. Praycirs of Aneicmt Buian.a. .JBRS. 

XXVI. io:j(). 

Pe iNIauug Fin. Bnrldhism in five Insciriplions of 
Pagan. JBRS. XXVI. Um. 

Ray, X. Bra]unani(*al Gocis in Biirina. Galcutta. 1932. 
,, Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma. Cahaitta. 1930. 

Indo-lhirmcise Art. Calcutta. i94(). 

Smith, V. A. Asoka. ].iOiuh>n. 

,, AllogrMl Asoka-Mission to I.’egu. ind. Ant. 
Thomas, IT d. d’hc Lite of the Buddha : History 
and Legend. Ijondon. 

,, Buddhist 'fhotight, London. 

'Temple, R. C. The Thirty-Seven Nats, a phase 
of sj)ij'it-worslui) i)revailing in Burma. 

London. 1 900. 

Wickrtvmsinghe. Catalogue of Sinhalesi^ .MSS. in the 
Britisli M u se u rn . 

Zoysa, Do. Report on the Inspection of 'IVunple 
Libraries in ('ey Ion. 

V. S locoN 1 ).\ R V' Sources : IhvRiooic.vLs 
( WITH abbreviations) 

Annual Report of tht^ Archaeological Sur\a-y (,f 

Burma (An RASB or ARASB). 



288 


THERA VADA BUDDHISM IH BURMA 


Annual lioporb of the Archaeological Survey of India 
(An KASI or ARASI). 

Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India 
(MASI). 

Bulletin de I’Ecole Francaise de Extreme Orient 
(BEFEO). 

Epigraphia Birminica (Ep. Birm.). 

Epigraphia Indica (Ep. Ind.). 

Indian Antiquary (Ind. Ant.). 

Journal Asiatique (JA.). 

Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art (JISOA). 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (JR AS). 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (JASB). 
Journal of the Greater India Society (JGIS). 

Journal of the Burma Research Society (JBRS). 
Journal of the Pali Text Society (JPTS). 

Pali Text Society (PTS). 

Toung Pao. 

This Bibliography does not ckiim to be exhaustive. 
Fuller references will be found in the footnotes to the text. 

Abbreviations used in the footnotes ivould be easily 
intelligible, 1 hope. Some of the abbre'viations used have 
been given above. 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL INDEX 


AbhidKamma-pannarasatthana, 1 73 
Abhidhamma-tjka, 176, 200 
Abhidhammattha samgaha, 179, 212, 228 
Abhidhammattha-samgaha-pakaiana, 22 1 
Abhidhammatthasamgaba, 41, 127 
Abliidbammatthasarngaha-Oka, 1 28 
Abbidhamma vatara, 61 
Abbidbamma-vibliavanT, 179 
Abbidbanappadipika. 173, 222, 244 
AkkbaravisodbanT, 245 
Alavingpaya Ayedawbon, 225 
Ancient Geography of India, 23 
Ancient Inscriptions of Ceylon. 99 
Annual Report of tbe A i cbacologic'd 
Survey of Burma. 36ll. 59. 106f{. 138ff. 
147, 162ff. I67ff, 183, 203 
Annual Report of tbe Arcbceological 
Survey of India. 43, 6(ff, 62. 64ff, 87, 
103, llOff, 134fr, 140ff, 143, 145ff, 

Mfifi 

Annual Report of South Indian Epi- 
graphy, 44 
Anufika, 179 
Apbeggusclra, 176 

Arcbinological Survey af Soiitb India, 44 

A r i y a V iUTt a 1 a nr ■ k a 1 a , 234 

Arl ba^iisti a, 4, 6 

Asoka (Smith). 9 

Atlhakalba, 92 

AitbasalinT. 172. 179,207.210,222 

Balavatara, 128 
Bbilsci Tope« d’be. 8 

Brabmanira] Cods in Burma (Ray), 56, 
146. 73, 148, 150 

Brbaja, 128 
Brliad^ifaka, 128 
nrba^kafhT. 6 

Prbatkatbadokasamgrexba, 5 

Brbafsambita, 5. 17 

British F^urma Gazetteer, 77 

Burb des Ragawan, des Konigsgescbicbte, 

75 

Buddbagaya (MitraL 107 
Buddbalamkaia, 179 
Buddhist Irrdia, 8 

Buddhist Records of the \V€'sl€rn World, 
48ff 

Bulletin de BEcolc Frari(,'a!se d Extreme 

Orient. 19,22.24, 47ff, 50fr, 56, 87, 
192, 252 

Burma with special reference to tbe 
relations with China, 56 
Burmese Code of Menu, 25 

Calcutta Review, 28 
Cambridge History of India, 275 

37 1445B 


Catalogue (Nevill) , 210 
Catalogue of Indian Manuscripts, 126 
Catalogue of Mandalay Maiuiscrrpts, 127, 
129, 1710. 199, 210 
Catu -sarnanera-valtbu, 234 
Cetivakatba, 94 
Cetivarnsa. 94 

C ' b a d d a n t a - n a g a r a j u p p a 1 1 i k a t b ii , 234 
Cbanda-sarattba-vikasini, 17 I 
Cbau-ju-kua, 50ff 
Cbn-paccaya dipani, 17 I 
! Cbin-t ‘ang-abu, 55 
j Cbristiairily irdCeyton, 238 
I Chronicle, Glass Palace, 78ff. 81, 94, 

111(1, 117, 123 

[ ,. Great, 26, 94. 99 

H ugapp itlaung, 94 
Middle, 26 
New. 79. 94 
New F*agan, 94 
,, Pagan. 94 

,, Paklat i alaing, 80fF 

Pegu, 94 

,, Rakbaing, 94 

,, I agaung, 94 

Talaing. 94 
,, Favov, 94 

,, d barekil far a, 94 

, . f hat on , 26 

, , Y a'za vv i n gy a w , 180 

Chronicles, 7 atig, 253 
Cula-ganibi-pada, 2 >3 

Cullavamsa, 46, 91, 99. 155, 138 
Dandippakarana, 173 

Description of the Burmese Ernpne, A 

241 

Deux Itineraires, 48, 56 

Dbamniapada, 4), 68 

Dbamrnasangan't , 29, 36, 41, 43, 21(’ 2 '2 

Dbammatbat, 131 

Dhammathat kyaw, 201 

Dbammathat . W a re t u , 20 1 

Dhatukalba, 212 

D b a tT 1 k a 1 1 1 a y o ja n a . 222 

C'Tp«ivarp.sa, 7, 13, 15, 26 

Divyavadane, 4fT 


Eastern rnonacbism. 230, 238 
Ekakkbara kosa, 198 

Epigrapbia Birminira, 3, 110, 9|, 103fF, 
IBff. 1170, 120ff. 133, l52flP. 156, 185. 


187, 190 

Epigrapbia Indica, 4, 
Essay (Forc.barnmei ) , 
Etimasamidipani, 104 


33, 42, 61 
1710, 175, 201 


Etudes Asiatiques, 4 



290 

Fti-nan chi, 21 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Ganapalha, 5 
Gandhabharana, 179 
Gandhatthi, 171 

Gandhavamsa, 91, |04, 123, l25fF, 171, 
173, 176, 179, 259 
Gandhisara, 127 
Ganlhi-padatlha-vannanam, 244 
Ganthisaia, 127 
Gulhattha-dipani, 212 

HarivarpSti. 15 

Hinduism and Buddhism, 14, 28 
History of Burma (Harvey) 48, 94ff. 100, 
124, 175, 180, 183, 225 
History of Burma (Phayre), 209 
History ol Indian and Eastern Architec- 
ture. 107 

Hmannan. 8lff, 96, 99ff. 109, 1 I2ff. 170, 
2{)0ff 

Hmannan Yazawin. 25, 94rf 
H si n - 1 ’ a n g - slv u , 55 ff 
Hsutaurnjjjanpye, 180 

Indian Antiquary . 3, 9, 25ff. 80, 91. 226 
Indian Cuhure, 28 
Inscription, Gopalpur Bricks, 42 
,, Kasia, 42 

,, Kurram casket, 42 

,, Mainainati Coppe» -plate, 202 

,, Po U-DauntT, 3. 226. 230 

Inscriptions of Papuan, Pinya and Ava, 

124. 126, 171, 174, 192 
1-ttfing’s Records of the Buddhist Relteion, 

45. 47 

1 wu chih, 20 

Jardine Prize Essay, 127, 131,229 
Jataka, 4, 6, 179 
,, Aggika, 135 
,, Aggikabharadvaja. 135 
,, Bhirridatta, 146, 180 
, , Di g'h i t i kosa In, 134 

,, Hatthipala, 180 

,, Kosa'aiaja, 134 

.. Mahapovinda. 134 
,, Mabajanaka, 4. 133. 146, 241 
,, Mahaummagga, 133, 136, 146 
,, Mahosndha, 133 
, , M i I g a j ) ak k 1 1 a , 66 

.. Neirri, 146 
,, Potthairada, 135 
.. Racilia, 135 
Sama, 133, 146 
,, Sariivaia, 180 
,. Sumedhapandita, 131 
,, .Su|)paraka, 4 

Tenriya, 146 
.1 VeUuTia, 134 
.. Vessantara, 133, 146, 206 
.. Vidhura, 146 
») Vidhurapairclita, 146 
Jatakamala, 4 
Jatakatthakatha. 41, 234 
Jataka-visodhana, 179 


j Journal Asiatique, 5, 14, 19, 33, 51, 56, 
61 

journal of the Burma Research Society, 
19ff. 48. 50,52, 54, 131, 160fF. 165. 
167ff. 175 

! Journal of an Embassy from the Governor 
i General of India to the court of Ava, 

I 241 

! Journal of Indian Archaeology, 51 
journal of the Pali Text Society, 91 
Journal of a Residence in the Burmese 
Empire, 241 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Great Britain and Ireland, 42, 54 

Kaccayana, 212 

bheda. 176 

gandha, 209 

sara, 176 

sara-Uka, 171 

siiltaniddesa, 127 

variriana, 199 

yoga, 128 

Kalapa Vyakarana, 171 
1 Kalyani inscriptions, 3, 118, 260-, 76, 80, 
j 82.' 91, 9). 113fr, 117, 11985 130ff, 1548, 
j 1578, 184, 187, 190, 255 
j Kankhavitarani, 191, 210 
I Karrka. 104, 126 
j Kavisara, 176, 210 
j Kedclah Annals, 51 
■ Keganpye, 180 
] Khuddakasikkha, 116, 190 
Koladdhaja, 173 
Konbaungset Yazawin, 225 
Kosaungchok, 201 
Kurmavibhaga, 17 

Ealittwislara, 65 
i Law Code, 131 
! Liang Shu, 19, 51 
j b.ife of tire Buddha, 8 
j Life and work of Buddhaghosa, 25, 30 
j Liklrananaya, 221 
! Lirrgatthavivarana, 128 
I Lingattlravivararrafjpakasaka, 128 
I Lii'rgatthavivaratia-tika, 128 
j Litii^althavivrtvanavinicchaya, 128 
List (Forchammer), 171, 173. 176, 199 
List cf Inscriptions found in Burma, 128ff, 
1628, I67ff 

I Lives of the Pilgruns, 49 
Lokadlpasara, 175 
Lokuppatfi, 128 

; Madhura-sarattha-dipanT, 176 
; Madhu-sarailha-dlpanr, 200 
' Mahabharata, 15 
Mahakarmavibhanga, 4, 14 
I Maha-niddesa, 243 
: Maha-nissara, 179 
Maha-palthana, 229 
: Malianipata, 133 
Mahara javamsa , 92 
Mahatika, 129 
Mahavagga, 4) 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL INDEX 


291 


Mahavaggatlha-katlia, 230 | 

Mal.avamsa."7ff, 10, 13. 15, 30,46,9), 99, i 

112 ■ I 

Mahavastu, ; 

Mahgala-dlpaiii, 202 | 

Manidipa, 179 ' 

Manikundala-valtlju, 204 ! 

Manisara -man juBH, 179 j 

Maiiorathapurani, 32 , 73 i 

Manual of BLiddhisim, 24 i 

Manual of Indian IBuddhisin, 9 I 

Matikalthadipani. 127 ■ 

Maunggan Plates, 37 , 42 ff i 

Moiktila Kanbidemawgun, 180 | 

Meiktila Settlement Rei>ort, 241 
Milindapafiha, 4 ff, 13 . 17 
Mukhamatlcidipani, 128 
Mukhainmattasara, 129 
Myazcdi Inscription, 106 , 124 

Nagarjunikoncla Inscription. 17. 43 
Nilgai ajuppatO-katlia, .,M4ff 
Nalnnda Inscription, 42 
Nainacai aclifiani , 127 
Nan chon i wu chili, 20 j4^ 

Nan hai chi kuei nai fa cirnan, 47 
Nettipakarana, 180, 212, 234 
Nidanakatha, 32, 1028 
Niddesa, 4ff 

, , Maha. 4 

Niksyn, An«utlara. 29. 32, 34(1. 40fi. /3. 

243 

Digha, 34 tT, 41 , 234 , 243 

,, Khuddaka, 41 

,, Majjhirna, 34. 40 (f, 243 

,, Sarnyutta, 40. 243 

N i ray aka t h a di r> ak a , 243 
Nirutti, 172 
Nirutti sarngaha, 210 
Niiutti-sura-manjusa, 172, 210 
Notes on the Ancient Cleography ot 
Burma, 29 

Notes on Budcllri.st Law, 131 . 17 ,.i 

Notes on Early History etc (rorchammci 

174 

Nyasa. 128, 2090. 229 

NyasapFJudipanka , I 28 

Pabhalablihaii tai apahsam; »y ui ta, 1 79 

Padavibhaga, 229 t -yrn 

Pali Eiterature of Burma, 92, 104, 123H, 
178. 192. 193 ^ 

Pali MSS. at the India Office, 12 /. L ^ 
199 

Pancatantra, 1:? 

Patajika kanda, 33 

ParainaUhavindn . 123 
Parayanavatthu, 180 

Paiilta. 212 

Patirnokkha , 1 90 . ^10, ^46 
Patisambhidamagga, 41. 243 

Patthana, 43, 212 

Patthanagananay a, l27 
Patihanapakaraiia, 213 

Pattlianasarattha-dlpani, l/o, ZUU 

Pawtugi Yazawin, 94 


PeiShih, .30 

Periplus of the Erythreaii Sea (Schott ), 

2fl , 5 

Personal Narrative of two years’ Imprison- 
ment in Burma, 241 
Pelalainkara, 234 

Pitakattaya-Iakkhana-gandha, 23.3 

Pitakattharnain, 91, 94, 123, 126ff, 17 Iff, 
176, 200. 222, 230. 259 

Puiifiabh i sanda vagg a , 3 3 
Purana, 5. 15. 17. 49. 146 

Put ana, Markandeya, 15ff 

Rajabhisekagandha, 233 
Raja d h i i a ja n ii mat 1 1 1 appa ka si ni , 22,. 
Rajadhiraja-vilasini, 234 
Rajasevaka-dipani, 245 
Rajavamsa, 92, 177 
Riijasankhepa, 212 
Rajayazawin, 209 

Rajinda-rajabliidheyya-dipani, 2t)b 

Rajovadavatthu Tigumbathomanu, 234 
Ramayana, 17, 146 
: Razadaiil Ayedawpon. 94 
! Religicux Eininenls, 47, 49, j2U 

: Report (Duroisellc) , 43 

■ Rci)orl (F'Yuchamrner) , 7L 129, 171, 173, 

I 

I fi^ock F.dicts of Asoka, 10, E 

Sacrecl Books ol iht: East, 4 
I Saddaiuti, 126, 245 
i Saddfi-saratlha- jalini, 173 
I Saddatthabheda-cinta, 244 
i Sacidavincl u , 123 

! Saddavutli, 172, 18^9 

^ .Saddapakasaka, 172 
' Saddhamiaa-nasin I, 17 I 
, .Saddappajotika, 243 
i Sadclavilasini, 243 
Saclhujiana vilusini, 234 
Sainantapasadika, 172 
' Sambandhacin'.a, 129 

I ; Samliandhacinta-tika, 12^ 

; Samkhepavanriana, 12/, ziU 
I Snniniohavinodani, 28. 17.-, 210 
: Sair.vannana-naya-d'p^^J^'' - 1 

*. Sanl; hyiipakasaka, 20^ /o \ xg 

' San-krit Buddhism in Huima (Ray), 48, 

I ' ' 33 . 69, 86, 149. 151 
I Saratthadlpani, 190 ^ 

I Sarvajrianayadipani, ^ ^ 

i Sasara.snddhi.dlpiLo 790.910. 101. 

: 1203 ; 123. 123tf, 135. 168. 

^ 7( 0 8L 193ff. 199i{. 202.2040, im, 

\ 21ol^:213ii.218fi. 221ff. 223ff, 2290, 

i 233,238,2420,239,271 

; S.i.'^anavarpsadipa, 

; Sii anavarpsadipani, 1/ >. ' . 

• Salt.i rajadhamrna vatthn, 204 

■ Sluii Ching Chu, 21 

i Shwegugyi Inscription. U)9, 124, 1.2 
' Silakalha. 243 
^ STrnalankara, 127 

■ STrnalankara -pakarana, I/I 



292 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Slmalankuia-samgaha, 191 
Slapat F^ajawan, 74 
Sui shu, 50f 
Sumedhakatha, 179 
Surajarnagga-diipaiii, 244 
Suravinicchaya, 199, 222 
Sutra, Pratityasamutpada, 42 
Sutras, Mahayana, 54 
Sutta, Ambfitlha, 35 
,, Maliaparinibbana, 35, 41 
,, Pabccasainutpada, 49 
,, Pitaka, 33 
Sutta, Samannapliala, 35 
Suttasamgaha. 230 
Suttasafiglti, 35 
Suttaniddesa, 127 
Sultaviblianga, 35, 246 

Tada~u-ti-niav;gun, 180 
7 ’ai p’ing yu ian, 20ff 
Taungdwinlapya, 180 
Textes (Coedes), 3 
TKarnaiiig, 96 

,, biop-U, 37 

,, Ke-F'lkayaina, 97 

,, Shweinadaw, 75, 97 

,, Sbwciiattaung, 97 

,, SKwe.‘'anda vv , 97 

,, Shwezigon L ijika, 67 

tf d'liaton Shwezayan Flpaya: 

97 

,, Zat- ngaya, 97 

1 'oung Pao, 50 

Udana, 34, 41 
Upayakatha, 245 


UpoaatKavinicchaya, 189, 245 
Upper Burma Gazetteer, 249 

Vacakopadesa, 199 
Vacavacaka, 129 
Vaccavacaka, 129 
Vamsadipanl, 94 
Vannabodhana, 221 
Varttika, 5 

Vibhanga, 230, 34. 37, 40, 210, 234 
Vibhatyattha, 123, 129, 171 
Viinanavatthu, 5 
Vimativinodani, 190 
Vinaya, 246 
Vinayagantliipada, 235 
Vinayagul I atUiadipani, 127 
Vinayalarnkara, 206 
Vinayapakaiana, 191 

Vinaya Pitakam, 40fF, 117, 127 
V'^inayasamgaba, 230 
Vinayasaniutihanadipani, 127 
VinayaUhakatba, 190, 210 

V i n ay a \ i 1 1 i <: c h a v a , 233 
Visnddhimagga, 25, 28, 41 

V isuddbirnaggagantbi, 1 27 
VisudclLimagga-ganthapadattha, 212 
V^ivada\ i nice bay a, 245 

Vobaral ; babfieda, 245 
Vuttodava, 173 
Vuttojjaneika, 171 

Yamakc., 212, 233 
Yasavaddbanavattbu , 207 
Yazawingyaw, 94 
Ye ngwe Inscription, 105 
Ywan-Cbwang, 54 



GENERAL INDEX 


Abcyadana, 136, ]49f 
Abhaya, 129 
Acaw, 164 
Acyutavikrt ma, 61 
Acyutaviktanla, 61 
Adhikaraja, 77 

AggadhariiiDalciiTikai a, 205, 211/1 
Aggapandila, 126 
Aggavanisa, 126 

Alaungpaya, 223, 225ff, 228, 23 Iff 
Alaungsithu, l()6lT, 109, 124 
Alavaka 140/1 
AIbciuni, 5 
Alc^xaiider, 6 
Alikatiudara, 8 
Amarapura, 233, 239, 242/1 
Amara' puia) yamgha, 238, 239, 247 
Amara School, 237, 239, 249, 258 
Arnaiavati, 44, 68, 86 
Arnba-gahf- pali, 238 
Aqilekina, 8 

Aiiatida, 64, 121/1, 170, 173, 176, 200 
Aiianda, Eider, 107, 131 
Anaiida, niahatliera, I 13, 1 16/? 

Anaiida temple, 101 If, 126, 133/1, 137/f, 
140, 156 

Anaukpellun, 203 

Anawrahla, 76/?, 80, 82/1. 85. 8711, 90. 
93. 96/?. 1 18/1. 125, 130. 134il, 142/1, 
148/?, 151, 155, 157/f. 172, 204, 253/f, 
256, 263, 970 
Anaw rahtaminsaw, 78 
Andhra, 14, 44, 59/1, 71 
Andhra-Kadamba Script, 69, 86 
Andhra-Pallava Script, 71 
Anekasetibhinda, 198, 202 
Angkor Borei, 22 
Aniruddhadeva, 143 
Annam, 47, 49, 51 
Antibolei, 15 
Antigonos, 8 
Antiochus, 8 
Anuruddha, 90, 127, 202 
Anuruddhadeva, 101 
Aparanta» 9, 250 
Aparantaka, 7, 15 
Aparantarattiia, 93 
Arabs, 3 
Arabia, 1 

Arahan, Maliatliera, 156 
Arahantagana, 177, 202, 210 
Arahanta Sarngha, 12! 

Arahantathera, 101 
Arakan, 16. 18. 26, 107, 203 
Arakan bill, 1 
Arakan Pagoda, 239 
Arakan yoma, 3 


Ari, 78, 80, 107, 140, 159 
Ariinaddaiia, 81, 93, 99, 127, 155, 1 
171 

Arimaddanapura, 8 1 , 90, 93, 105, 106 
Aiimittiya. 106 

; Aiirnitliya (Bodhib-^attva) , 241 
i Alls, 172, 256 

i Ariyalani/arn , 205/1 , 2 I i , 248 

■ Ariyar iiaiitapakkha bhikkhusarngha, 120 
At iyaiaiiaiita Sarngha, 130 

! Ari>avan»sa, 178/1 
Aryarnahasamghika nikaya, 53 
I Aryanuilasarvastivada nikaya, 53 
I Aryasarnrniti nikaya, 47, 53 
. Ary* sthavira nikaya, 53 
! Asaiiga, 54 
; AsKin Anornadassi, 26 
,, Arahan, 78 
' ,, Mahii-sobh ila. 26 

,, Mahasoinadatta, 26 
,, Sobiiaga, 26 
,, Somadatta, 26 
Siiinantissa 26 
Asia, 262 
Asia miner, 23 I 
Asitaiijaiut, 29 

Asoka, 71f, 18, 26, 45. 83, 86. 90, 93 105 
200, 249. 251 
Assam, !1, 254, 256 
Astrology, 159 
Atbinkaya, 170 
Athwa, 225 
Alula. 227ff. 235 
Alula Yasadharnma, 226 
Aupadlias, 15 
Aupamadiia, 15 

Ava, 77. 169, 174, 177. 17911. 182, 184. 
19611, 203, 2(.]611, 21 IH, 21911, 223/f, 
2280', 233, 242 
Avalokita 139 

: Avalokite svaia, 69, 139, 130, 131 
Avaramta, 14 
Avici., 164 
Aw'batha, 24 I 
Ayuddha. 202 
Ayufhia, 48, 20111 

Bad a r va 1 1 a vas i , 206 
Bagchi. P. C , 28, 42, 

Bagyidaw, 95, 14 If, 276 
' Baki-id, 200 
i Barbaras, 16 
' Barua, B. M., 28 
Bassein, I 121?, 243 
Bawbawgyi, 35, 42, 56, 58, 69, 72 
Baj/'innaung. 198/?, 206 

■ Bay of Bengal, 17 



294 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Beal, 48 

Bebe, 58, 67, 72 

Benares, 66, 229 

Bengal. 72. 113, 137f. 149, 254 

Bernard Free Library, 91 

Besyngeitaii 3 

Bbadda, 175 

BhaddasSla, 6 

Bhadradevi, 74 

Bhallika. 65 

Bbangiri. 25 

Bharatavarsa, 5, 16 

Bharukaccha, 47, 152 

Bhuvanekabahu, 186 

Bidagataik, 80 

Bihar, 72. I37ff, 149 

Bilugyan, 91 

Bmnya Dala. 94, 223. 225 
Binnya U. )75ff 
Blagden, C.O., Ilf. 60f. 91 
Bodawpaya, 231fF. 237, 239. 241f, 274, 
276 

Bode. Mabel, 91fF. 104, 123. 126ff. 132, 
174. 177ff, 192, 195, 215. 230. 234, 271 
Bodhgaya. 70. 105. 107. 123, i38f. 14 1, 
144, 152. 183, 254 
Bodhi. 139ff 
Bodhi. Elder. 107 

Bodhisattva, 54. 68ff, 71, 102. 134, 138fl. 

150, 162, 225 
Bodhi tree, 183 
Bo-dcy-p’aya, 226 
Borneo, 18 
Brahma. 148f 
Brahmadiw, 106 
Brahmapala 106 
Brahml script, 44, 62H 
Bnddhadalta, 61 
Buddhaghosa, 24/F. 440*. 84, 127, 172, 179, 
210, 235, 246. 251f 
Buddhagupla, 252 
Buddhankara, 219 
Buddhankura, 221 
Buddhavamsa, 175, 187 

Buddhavamsa-mahathera, 12! 

Biihler, 61’ 

Buramagama, 238ff, 258 
Biirmans, 264 
Burmese Order, 258 
Burmese Samgha, 261 
Burmese School, 92 
Burney, 77 

Cakkindabhidhaja, 234 
Calaiiganagara. 230 
Calcutta University, 73, 86tf 
Calukyas, 43 
Cambodia. I9ff, 27, 52 
Campa. 18, 47f. 52, 262 
Ca-nah-khum. 174 
Candanasara, 187 
Candovara, 229 
Canton, 53 

Capata. 45. 11211, 126ff. 154, 157, 170. 

179. 190. 206, 230, 239 
Calurangavijay. 159 


Caw, Queen, 165 
Caw Rahan, 159 

Ceylon. 8, 11, 17. 25ff, 30. 44ff, 53iT, 81. 
89ff, 99ff, 109ff, l]6ff. 119, I2lff, 126ff. 
133. 154ff. 157ir, 173, 175fF. 181. 184ff. 
190, 220. 235. 237ff. 243, 247ff, 251, 
23413, 258, 261 
Chakravarti, N. P. . 42 
Chaiidone, 22 
Ch’ang chun, 50 
Chaukpala. I 1 1 
Chavannes, 47 ff, 52ff 
Chen -la, 52 

Chia-mo-lang-cbia, 48f, 52 
Chia Tin, 48 
Chiengmai, 176 
Chih-ngan, 53 
Ch'ih-t’u. 50 
Childers, 47 
China. 1. 46. 54fr. 135 
I Chin-Ch'en, 20ff, 84 
i Chin-chi, 19 
! Chindwin, 3 
Chin-lin, 18ff, 84 
Chryse Chersonesus, 3 
Chryse Chora, 3 
Chu Chih. 21 
; Chu-Ii, 19f 
i Ch'u-tu-kun, 19 
! Chu ying, 19 
! Cilada, 15 

! Cilata, I4ff 17.84.86 
I Cina. 4. I4f. 17. 211 
I Cinaiattha 93 
i Cirrhadae. 15 
i Citradutari, 186 
! Citta, 73, 219 
i Coedes. 51 
j Col (i)a, 61, 105 
i Colas. 99. 254 
: Coii. 152 
j Conjeeveram, 30 
Cordier, 51 
Coromondal, 28 
Cowell. 4 
Cox . 24 1 
Culakassapa. 187 
CuiasTvali, 187 
Ciilasurnarigala, 187 
Cuilavajirabuddhi. 174 
Cullavimalabuddhi, 173 
Cunningham. 8, 22ff 

I Dagoii. 183 
’ Dakkhinavanarama. 209 
Dala, 119fi 
Damila. 14, 99 ' 

I Dammayazaka. Ill 
i Dasavatara, 148 
; Dalhanagarajaguru, 210 
Deccan, 14, 18,25,44 
Deer Park, 66 
; Devacakicobhasa, 23 
! Dhamek stupa. 72 
I Dhamrnabuddha, 176, 200 
1 Dhammacari, 127 



GENERAL INDEX 


295 


Dihammaceti, 3, 11, 28, 76 892fT, 155fi, 
l8Hf. 189(f, 196. 249, 255fr 
Dhammadassi, 129 
Dhamraakltti, 30, 186 
Dhammakkhandha, 248 
Dhammananda, 176, 210, 248 
Dhammananda rajaguru, 209 
Dhammapala, 179 
DhammarSja, 123 
Dhammarajika, 187 
Dhammarajika temple. 134 
Dhammarakkhita, 7, 187 
Dhammasenapati, 104, 126 
Dhammavilasa, 120, 131, 154, 157, 174 
Dhammavilasa-mahathera, 121 
Dhammavilasa-thera, 1 19ff 
DI»atU8ena, 99 
DhTrananda, 247f 
Dikshit, K. N. 62 
Dlpaiikara, 147 
Disapamokkha, 130, 168 
Disapramuk, 168 
Divine Land, 54 
Dosarene, 15 
Dramiias, I 12 

DuroiscIIe, 36. 43. 61. I02f. 105, 133, 135. 
137 

Dulthagamani, 9f 
Dva (ra) pati. 47 
DvaravalT, 48fF, 5 Iff 

Eastern India, 252, 254 
East Indian C'liaracters, 144 
East Zegu temple, 58fT 
Egypt, 1,251 

Ekamsika, 21 SIT, 226, 23111, 235, 237, 

257ff. 271 
Eliot, 14,28 

{Fan)*hsun, 19 
(Fan) -wan, 19 

Fausboll, 4, 41, 126ff, 134, 136, l7IfF 
Ferrand, 5, 51. 56 
Finot. L, 14, 26f. 33. 36, 61 
Forchammer. 27, 79, 12711, 131. 171fT, 192, 
195, 199. 201, 229 
Fo*t u. 24. 252 
Foulkes, 26 
Frontier of Gold, 20 
Fit-nan, 19fT, 24. 52fT,251ff 
Fergusson, 107 
Furnivall, 131 

GandKakub, 141 
Gandhara, 7f, I4f, 93 
Ganesa, I48f 
Gangasii, 164 
Ganges, 15 
Gautama, 68, 124 
Gavampati, 14 

Gawdawpalin temple, 111, 123 

Geiger, 7ff, 10 

Gibson, 241 

Gloria, 163 

Godavari, 30ff, 44 

Gotama, 64, 139 


j C onger, 24 1 
Great Black Mountain, 47 
Greece, 1 , 25 1 
Greek, 8 

Gunabhilarnkara, 219 
I Gunagandha, 2)2 

I Guna-munindabhisasanadhainmarajadhi- 
i rajaguru, 230 
I Gunasagara, 187 
i Gunasara, 129, 212 
I Gunong Jerai, 51 
I Gupta-Braliml, 60, 62, 69 
j Guptas, Later, 59 

j Hackmann, 26fr 
; Hamilton, 220 

: Hamsavatl. 14, 29, 32. 73, 76. 93. 176. 

I 18 L 189, 198. 200, 207 
I Hanthawaddy, 223 
! Hardy, 24, 2.^0, 238 
I Haiibhunja, 202 
i Haripunjaya, 202 
i Harivikrama, 600, 63 
j Harvey, 940. 100, 124, 175, 183, 225, 275 
I Hayagriva, 150 
; Henbuiy, 106 
I Henzada, 203 
I Himalayan country, 70, 13 
! Himalayas, 16 

! Hlnayana, 53lT. 69. 73. 1360, 151 
i Hinayanism, 14, 28, 135 
I Hath. 50 

; Hmawza, 23. 290, 33. 37, 42, 44. 48. 55, 

' 570. 60. 680, 710 

I Ho ling, 49. 52 
I Hsbinpyusbin, 220 
I Hsinbyuslun, 2290 
I Hsuan-Cbuang. 23, 45, 480', 550 
: Htilominle, t22f 
i Hu, 24. 232 
I Huan Chou, 47, 54 

; Lching. 44, 46tT, 84, 86 
I 1-hsuan, 53 
i Iksvaku, 14, 18. 44 
j Liang, 53 
llarlgasogam, 500 
IndasSra, 243 

India, 10, 16. 18, 24, 59. 25()ir, 254 
India Extra-Gangem, 3 
Indo-Cbina, 1,4, 12, 18, 46, 49, 52, 56, 
95. 133 

Indonesia, I 
Insulindia, 4 

hrawaddy. 3. 27, 49. 77, 82, 115,206, 
208 

I-tsing, 253 

luhiya, 8 

Jaggayyepeta, 44 
Jagudas, 15 

j Jambudhaja, 205, 210 
: Jambudipa-Anantadhaja, 229 
j Jambudipadhaja. 210 
j Jambudvipa, 80, 25 
' Jambupati- 139 



296 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Janindabhipavara, 234 
Jardine, 195 

Java, 18, 49, 5 Iff, 252, 262 
Javanapanfia, 187 
ayachandravarmai), 62ff 
esalya, 145 
Jetavaria, 141 
Jetavanavihara, 198 
Jeyyapura, 198, 206 
Jina, 144 
jin5rama, 2 12 
jotipufina, 210 

Kaccayana. 25. 128, 17lff. 176. 199 
Kadamba, 61, 71 
Kadambas, 43 

Kadamba Script, 29, 33, 43ff, 61, 64 
Kadamba-1 elegii Script, 60, 71, 232 
Kahnyaw, 91, 

Kahson, 124, 

Kakusandha, 64 
Kalacakrayana, 149 
Kaladevala, 141 
Kalagya, 109 
Kalekyetaungnye, 177 
Kaliyuga, 180, 233 
Kalyana, 219 
KalyonT, 90 

Kalynni river, 185, 187 
Kalyanlsima. 89ff, 92, 146. 187, 196,201 
Karnaianka, 48, 50, 55 
Kamariipa, 48 

Kamboj(a), 18, 113, 120ff. 154, 193,202, 
262 

Ksnada- Felegu Script, 61 
Kiificipura, 86, 1 13 
Ksncipurarn, 30ff, 44, 81, 116 
K’aiig l ai, l9, 20ff 
Kantakakhipa, 173 
Kan-wel-kbaung- kon, 72 
Kapunna, 202 
Karens, 264 
Kasab, 64 

Ka^miia. 7f, 13ff. 93 
Kassapa, 10, 41, 64, 187 
Katyayana, 5 
Kaungdwit, 26 
Kautilya, 4, 6 
Kaveri, 30ff 

KaveripatLanam, 31, 44, 81 

Kavindabhisaddbarn mapavara' 
mahadhamniarajaguru, 234 
Kedah. 51 
Kedah Peak, 51 
Kern, 9ff. 13 
Ketumat), 198 
KharoslV.i Script, 42 
Khemacara. 174 
Khemav aia, 202 
Khujjananda, 187 
Kirata, 251 
Kiratafi, 1511, 84 
Kirata country, 84, 86 
Kittislhasura, 173 
Klttisirirajasimha, 237 
Klacwa, I62ff, 167 


Klok sa, I53ff 
Koki land, 14. 151 
Konagamana, 64 
Konow, S, 42 
Kon Sambeii daleii, 154 
Kosam, 229 
Kolheiunayon, 1 1 1 
Kra, Isthmus of, 49ff 
Krom, 121 
Krom market, 120 
Krsna, 31, 44 
Kublai Khan, 169 
Kubyaukgale, 140 
Kubyaukkyi, 135ff. 149ff 
Kukhanagara, 210, 221 
Kumarakassapa, 187 
K'un-lun, 252 
Kuotala, 43f 
Kutho-daw, 249 
Kwan-chou, 47 
Kyaikpon, 183 

Kyanzittha, lOOff, 104ff, 124, 126, 134. 

149, 152, 156 
Kyanzittha Onhmin, 125 
Kyaswa, 123ff, 129, 163 
Kyaukku Onhmin, 125 
Kyaukse, 134, 153, 197 
Kyawsua, 171 
Kyawswa-rrge, 173 
Kyundawza, 42 


Labun, 225 
Lang chia, 49, 

Lang-ch ia-shu, 47lT, 84, 253 
Lang-saka, 51 
Lang-ya, 50 
Lang-ya-hsin , 50ff 
Lang-ya-hsii, 50ff 
Lang-ya-hsun, 50 
Lanka, 8, 99, 155 
Laiikasu, 47ff, 55, 84ff, 253 
Laos, 18 
Lappan, 109 
Laufer, 19 
Law. B. C. 25, 30 
Lekaing, 250 
Lemeythna, 58, 67 
I Lenkasuka, 50ff 
Letyaminnan 107 
Levi. S . 4ff. 15 
L<em- (d)iang, 21 
! Ligor, Isthmus of, 51 
I U- Hsu, 55 
i Lin-yang, 251 
I Ling ya-ssu, 50 
I Ling-yu-ssu-chia, 51 
Ling ya-ssy -chia, 51 

Lin i.' 47ff. 52 
i Jn-yang, 2 Iff, 84 
Linzin, 26 
Lobpuri, 32 
Locac, 51 
Lokanatha, 150 
Lokapala deras^ 65, 140 
Lori, 154 



GENERAL INDEX 


297 


Luce, 19f. 22f, 50, 52. 56, 94, 109, 161 

Lu Pe Win, 37 

Msdhariputa, t4 
Madhyade^a, 54, 250 
Madhyamikas, 54 
Maga, 8 

Magadha, 24, 27ff, 54 

Magas, 8 

Magwe, 179 

Mahabodhi, 123, 183 

Mabadammayazadipati, 213, 221, 223 

Mahadeva, 7 

Mahadew, 154 

Mahidhammaraja, 2030 

Mahadhammarajsdhipati, 130 

Mahadhammarakkbita, 7 

Mahsdhi Dhammarajaguiu, 167 

Mahadhi Rajaguru, 167 

Mahagiri, 200 

Mahajanaka, 4 

Mahakosali, 4 

Mahanaga, 121, 175 

Mahanama, 200 

Mnhanaman, 250 

Mahananabhidhaja, 234 

Mahaparakkama, 198f 

Mahspavaradhammaraja, 212 

MahSrakkhita, 7 

Mahaiatanakara, 206 

MaharattKa, 7, 9, 93 

Maharatthathera, 180 

Mahasadhujjana, 198 

Mahasainghanaiha, 204 

Mahasamgharaja, 234 

MahasSml, 121, 178 

Mahasamghika nikaya, 54 

Mahasiheisuradhammaraja, 212 

Mahasihasura-dhannmaiajadlniaja, 220 

MahSsilavamsa, 179 

Mahasirijeyyasura, 199 

Mahaslvall, 187 

MaKavihara. 90. 92, 114, 119, 121. 126. 

175, 181, 1840, 1900, 239, 255, 261 
Maha-Vimalabuddhi, 128 
Mahayana, 530, 86, 136, 141, 1490, 256 
Mahayanism, 14, 135, 1480, 256, 2610 
Mahayanist Tantnkism. 254, 256, 261 
Mahfiyasa, 176 
Mahfizedi, 112,201 
Mabimsakamandala, 93 
Mahinda, 8, 12. 114 
Mahisamandala. 7, 9 
Mah(i)sya devT, 144 
Mahlaing, 165 
Malitaw, 58 

Maitieya. 69. 106. 139, 1500. 162 
Majapabit, 50 
Majjhantika, 7, 10 
Majjhirna, 7. 10 
Majumdar, R. C. 3, 5f 
Maka, 8 

Malay Archipelago, 46 
Malay Peninsula, 3, 6, 190, 22, 500, 116 
Malaya, 51 
Malay adipa 1 16 

38~ 1443B 


I 


I 


Malayasia, 1, 4, 

Malay u, 64 
Ma*na-kri-cck, 174 

Mandalay, 94. 134, 225, 239, 2440, 2480, 
258 

Mangala, 171 

Manijota-Saddhammslankara, 243 
Manipur, 10, 48, 236 
Manipuri, 223f 
Maniratana, 210 
Manisara, 187 
Manjuirt, 150 
Manohar, 90 
Manohara, 104 
Manohari, 79, 90 
Mantrayana, 149, 256 
Manu, 131, 229 
Manuha, 780, 90, 148, 253 
Mara, 68, 103, 108. 139 
Marammadesa. 76, 101 
Marannmainandala, 93, 118, 157 
Marammaiattlia, 196, 207f, 210, 213, 

225 


Marammasanigha, 92, 110, 117, 121, 1890, 
238, 255 ■ 

Marco Polo, 5 1 
Marshall, John, 59 

Martaban, 20f. 23,25.93, 1180, 121, 1740 
180f, 184, 199, 225 
Martaban, Gulf of, 174 
Mattama, 118 
Maula na, 64 

Maungdaung Sayadavv, 229 
Maunggan, 33 
Maiing Kala, 94 

Maung 'l in, Pe, 94, 109, 1600, 167 
MaySdevl, 140 
Mayavattaka, 230 
Mecca, 254 
Medhamkara, 175, 181 
Medbavivamsa, 243, 245 
Mekkaya, 169. 197 
Mekong, 22 

Melchior La Beaume, 233 
Menam, 49, 52 
Middle Country, 250 
Mimalungkyaung, I 1 I 
MinayeO, 91 

Mindon-min. 92, 125, 2440. 249. 258, 


262, 2700 

Vlingalazedi, 104, 124, 134 

Vlingun, 239 

Minhkaiing. 177 

Minhkaung, H, 179 

Vlinkyinyo, 199 

Vlinkyiyannaung, 197 

Vlinshinsaw, 1090 

Mi Saw U. 170 

Mitra, Rajendralal, 107 

Vliitaya, 162 

VIoggaliputta 7, 9 

VIoggaliputta Tissa, 9, 12, 93, 106 

Moggallana. 64, 173, 1850. 235 

Mohnyintha, 177 

Mohnyinthado, 182 

Momeik, 2000 



298 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Mon, 12,26,56,81, 90flF, 113^, 118, 120. 
141. 144, 146, 151, 153, 158. 185ff, 189, 
254ff. 265 

Mon country, 12, 152 
Mon-khmer, 16 
Mongol, 168, 169, 170 
MrgadSva, 59. 66 
Mriftnana, 177 
Mucalinda, 138(r, 

MulasarvSstivada, 253 
MulasarvSstivfida nikaya, 54, 85 
Mulavasagama, 212 
Muller, 99 

Munindabhisirisaddhammadhaja- 
mahadKammarajadhirajaguru, 242 
Munindagbosa. 227ff, 246 
Muttima, 93, 118, 121, 181 
Myanzaine, 134 
Myazedi, 105 
Myingyan, 77 
Myinkabu, 79 
Myinkyiswasawke, 174 
My inpagan, 139ft, 142, 148 
Myinsaing, 169ft 
Myinsing, 197 

Nsga, 147, 152 
NaGanDa. 154 
Nagita, 173 
Nagarakrtagama, 50f 
Nagarjuna, 54 

Nagarjunikonda, 14, 18, 24, 44, 86 

Nagayon, 104, 142 

Nagarl script, 59, 70ft 

Na)agiri.-68, 102, 138ft 

Nalanda. 70, 144 

Na Lwoy, 1 54 

Na Mrik. 154 

Nanda, 187 

Nandabayin, 202ft 

Nandabbaya, 203 

Nandajeya, 208 

Nandamala, 230f 

Nandamanna, 150 

Nandawye, 134, 170 

Nanpaya, 79 

Narapali. 79, 111. 119, 126, 178ft 
Narapatisitbu, llOf, 116, 119, 122, 126, 
129, 134 

Naratbeinka, 1 10 
Naratbibapate, 124, 169ft 
Narathu, 109ft 
Narawara, 2l2ft, 219 
NarSyana, I48ff, 152 
Nat-blaung-kyaung, 148 
Natonmya, 164 
Nats. 100. 107, 148. 150, 152 
Nat-sin, 269 
Natspirits, 211, 263, 269 
Nat worship, 213, 268 
Naungdawgyi, 228ff 
Nava-medhamkara, 175 
Nava-vimalabuddbi, 173 
Ncko. 223 
Nepal, 149 
Neviil. 210 


Nga Dula, 75 
Nga Zinga, 203 
Nicobar, 49, 52 
Nipagama, 227 
NisinnavihSra. 209 
Nyang-U. 135, 154 
Nanabhivamsa, 234 
Nanagambbira, 104 
Nanalaipkara, 29, 228, 247ft 

Nanamabadbammaiaja, 228 
NanalatnkSrasaddbammadbaja. 234 
Nanasagara, 128, 187 
Nanavara, 22 Iff 
Nanavilfisa, 202 
Nana, 228, 232 
Nanabhisasanadbaja, 234 
N'anamabadbammarajaguru, 232, 234 
Neyyadbamma, 243ff 
Neyyadbammabhivamsa, 244, 246 
Noriramkri, 164 

Oldenberg, 40. 127. 175, 199 
Old Prome, 253 
Onbaung, 200ft 
Ou yang Hsin, 55 

Pabbatabbbaritaranagara , 1 79 
Padippajeyya, 1 19 
Padumottara Buddha, 32 
Pagan. 14, 55, 65, 69ff, 76ft, 881T. 93, 95. 
97ft, 101. 104ff. 107, 111, li3ft, 116ft. 
119ft, 123ff, I32ft. 140ft, 145, I47ff, 
163, 166, 168, 169ff. 177. 179. 

182, 191ff. 196, 200, 205. 210ft. 221, 
227, 254, 256, 259, 263, 266 
Pagan-Min, 243ft 
Pagan Museum, 149 
Pagan saipgha, 123 
Pakhoi, 53 
Pala sculptures, 72 
Palembang, 49ft 
Pali Buddhism, 254 
Pfili I ext Society, 35 
Pailava, 44, 59{f, 64, 71 
Paloura, 14 
Pan, 225 

Pandya country, 17 
Paniiii, 5 

Pannajotabhidhaja. 243 
Pannasami, 92. 132. 156, 168, 177ff, 195, 
205,218. 222f. 225ff. 233, 235. 238, 
243 ft 

Pannasiba, 242 
Panfiatissa, 243 
P’an-p’an, 52 

Pantbagu. 45, 107, 109. Ill, 167, 273 

Panlhagugyi, 111 
Paradas, 24 

Pal akkamababu, 1 12, 235 
Paramata, 229ft 
Paramattba order, 81 
Pargiter, 15 
Parileyya, 102 
Pfirileyyaka, I40ff 
Parker, 56 

Parupana, 2l8ff. 226ft. 235ff. 257ft, 271 



GENERAL INDEX 


299 


Pasarnsathera, 222 
Patodawgyi, 239 
Patotlmmya, 141 
Payagyi, 38, 60 
Payama, 59 
Payathonzu, 141, 150 
Pegu, II, 14, 26ff. 29, 32, 73ff, 85. 87, 
89ff, 93, 169, 174, 176ff, 181ff, 199, 
201 , 203ff. 207fr. 223ff. 233, 253, 255 
Pelliot, Prof.. 18tf, 47fF. 50ff. 56, 87, 
192 

Petleik, 104, 134 
Phayre, 48, 209 
Philip di Brito, 203 
Phonm penh, 22 
P’iao, 52, 35ff, 60. 85 
Pi-kmg, 47 
Piladai, 15 
Pindale, 210, 212 
Pinle, 169 

Pinya, 77, 169, 171ff, 174. 197, 199 
Popa hill, 200 
Potthapada, 135 

Prome, 23, 28. 31. 43. 46. 48. 52, 56ff. 
598, 628. 66. 70. 72, 848, 105. 137, 
152. 159, 168, 1998, 206. 223, 253 
Ptolemy, 28. 8, 158, 20 . 

r'ubbaramavihara, 212 
Pugama, 1 13f 
Pukam, 1 14 
Pukham, 14. 116 
Pukhanagara, 210 
Punfiacetiya, 179 
Payama, 56 
Phyogingyi-kon, 43 
Pyu, 48. 52, 55. 71. 848. 155, 159 
Pyiis, 16. 43, 56, 59, 71. 73, 868,252, 
260, 264 
Pyu script, 62 

Racasu, 162 
Radha, 135 
Rahula, 113, 116, 187 
Rahulabhadda, 188 
Rajacakkavatti, 139 
Rajadhiraja, 176 
Rajagaha, 41, 68 
Rajaguru, 167 
Rajamaniciila, 209 
Rajayodlia, 208 
Rajendracola, 508 
Rajjuggahamacca, 129 
Rakkhita, 7 
Ramadhipati, 185, 1888 
Ramadutan, 186 

Rarnanna, 25. 177, 184, 196, 204. 223 
Rfimannadesa, 3, 25, 32, 76, 80, 93, 10 1, 
131, 181 

Ramannadhipati, 89, 185 
Ramanficiraltha, 2078, 213 
Ranavaiikamalla, 202 

Rangoon, 29. 91. 94, 119, 126, 1458, 176. 

200, 2248, 230 
Rapay, 106 
Rasa, 176 

Ratanapura. 169, 1798, 206, 244 


Ratanavimana, 179 
Ratthasara, 178, 180 
Ray, N. R., 56, 69, 73. I48r 
Razadarit, 1768, 182, 224 
Red Province, 54 
Rhys Davids, 8 
Roberts, 275 
Rockhill, 8. 50 
Rogers, 24 
Rome, 1 

Sabbannu, 107 
Saddhamma-cakkasamT, 202 
Saddharnma-cari, 202 
Saddhamma-guru, 171, 199 
Saddhammajotipala. 126 
Saddhamrnakitti, 198 
Saddhammalamkara, 176, 202 

Saddhamma-nana, 171 
Saddhammanandi, 129 
Saddhammapala, 1718 
5addhammapura, 79 
Saddhammaiaja, 177, 195 
Saddhammasiri, 1288 
Saesadai, 15 
Sagara, 129 

Saggaing, 110, 174, 1978, 206, 210. 228, 
241 

Sagii, 173 
Sahantva, 196 

Sahassarodha-gama, 227, 230 
Sakka, 25 
Sakkrac, 110, 1648 
Sakmunalon, 106 
^akti. 71. 150 
isakya, 141 
^akyamuni, 80, 99 
Salween, 56 

Samanakuttaka, 798, 93, 149, 172, 256 
Saniatata, 48 
SamV^aia, 8 
Sameikshe, 70 
Samgharaja, 130, 132, 167, 177 
Sanigharakkhita, 129 
Sanighasena, 106 
Sammitinikaya 53 
! Sammitiya School, 54 
Samuli order, 81 
j Sane. 217, 219 

■ San-f'o-c’hi, 50 

i Sangermano, 241 
i Saiigharakkhita, 173 

■ i^ankrSn, 152 

Sanskrit Buddhism. 252, 256 
Saradassi, 222 
Sariputta, 1198, 178, 187 
! Sariputta Dhammavilasa, 131 
i Sarnath, 59. 70. 72, 138, 144 
' Sarvastivada, 54, 86, 252, 256 
, Sarvastivada nikaya, 47, 548 
Sativa-raja, 174 
I Savatthi, 69. 1388, 147 
i Sawlun, 196 
I Sawyun, 172 
i Sayambu, 14 1 
! Schlegel, 50 



300 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Schmidt, 75 
Schoff, 3 

Seinnyekmin, 107 
Setibhinda. 175, 229 
Seva-suvanna-sobhana, 181 
Shans, 95/ 169fF. 172, 174, 199ff, 203, 
223fF, 263fT 
Shan Yun, 26 
She-ho-po-ti, 47ff, 52 
Shih-Ii-ch-a-ta-lo, 47ff, 52, 56 
Shin Agyathamahdi, 180 
Shin Arahan, 77f=F, 80ff, 98. lOOff, 104, 
106ff, llZff, 117, I30ff. 1548, 170, 172, 
254, 273 

Shin Ariyavamsa, 1 1 1 
Shin Mahindra, 112 
Shin Sarobu, 183 
Shin Sawbu, 1828 
Shin Sona, 1 12 
Shin Thilawantha, 94 
Shin Thulawantha, 180 
Shin Uttamagyaw, 180 
Shu-Chuan, 47 
Shwebo, 224 

Shwedagon, 29. 138, 1528, 176, 183, 

200f, 230. 249 
Shwegu. 107 
Shwegugyi, 183 
Shwemawdaw, 176, 201 
Shwesandaw, 105, 134, 200 
Shwethetlut, 174 
Shweyyin, 225 
Shwezayan, 145 

Shwezigon, 79, 1008, 104, 124, 134, 150, 
153, 200, 263 

Siam, 1, 18f. 22, 32, 48. 52, 193.2018, 
228, 237, 263 
S-hala, 17, 93 
Slhaladipa, 101 

Sihalapakkhabhikkhusamgha, 1 20 
Sihala Samgha, 92, 110, il48. 1178, 121, 
128, 131, 178, 184, 1898, 239, 255 

Siharaja-yuvarajacariya-thera, 186 
Slhasura, 172 
Slhavikrama, 60, 63 
Silavamsa, 1788 
Sinbaung, 143 
Singu, 230 

Sinhalese saingha, 237 
Siriharnsva, 196 
Sirikhettanagara, 209 

Siri-mahasihasura-sudhammaraja, 218 

Siri-mangala, 172,202 

Siri-nanda-dhainmarajapavaradhipatiraja, 

210 

Siri-pavaraditya-lokadhipati-vijaya- 
mahadhamma, 242 

Siri-pavaraditya-vijayananta-yasa-rnaha- 
dhamma-rajadhiraja, 243 
Siri-pavara mahadhamrnaiaja, 228 
Siri-pavara-sudhamma-maharajindadhi- 

pati, 229 

Siri-saddhamma, 213 
Siri-saddhammavilSsa, 171 
Siri saipghabodhi, 99 
Siri'sudhamraa-rajadhipatb 179 


Siri-sudhamma raja-mahadhipati, 206 
Siri'sumangala, 172 

Siri-tfibhuvanaditya- paiamadhammaraja. 
124 

Siri-tribhuvanaditya-pavaramandita, 24 1 

Sittana, 123 

Sittang, 225 

Siva. 149 

Sivali, 1168, 121 

Sivli, 113, 116, 121 

Siyamagama, 238 

Sklin singhuim, 143 

Sladen. E. 275 

Smim, Htaw Buddhaketi, 223 
Smith, Vincent, 9f, 12f, 26 
Sokkataya, 202 
Sokkati, 26 

Sona, 78. 26, 83. 90, 106, 112, 190 
Sona-mahalhera, I 19f 
Sona-thera, 8, 12, 1 148 
Sonuttara, 98, 194 
South China Sea, 22 
South India, 252, 2548 
SrT Bhoja, 54 

Sriksetra, 478, 518, 558, 73, 84, 206, 253 

Sri Prabhudevl, 61, 63 

Sri Prabhuvarma, 61 

Sri Prabhuvarman, 61, 63 

Srlvijaya, 46, 50, 54 

Sri-vTrapurisadata, 14 

Ssu-ch’uan, 47 

Sthavira nikaya, 45, 538 

Sthavira School, 55 

Subhuticandana, 128 

Sudhamma, 117 

Sudhammanagara, 80, 100 

Sudhammapurn, 80, 101 

Sudhammasabha, 227 

Sudhammasala, 207 

Sudhammavatl, 25, 73, 76, 80 

Sudhuim, 90, 114 

Suhattha, 221 

Sujaia. 73, 212, 242 

Sukhodaya, 202 

Sulamani, 1 1 1 

Sumana, 187 

Sumangala, 187 

Sumatra, 6, 50, 54, 262 

Sumedha, 106, 179 

Sunanda, 219, 243 

Sun dynasty, 250 

Supabhadevi, 203 

Surakltti, 2068 

Suriyavamsa, 243 

Suriyavikrama, 60f, 63 

Suryavam^a, 250 

Suvannabhumi, 18, 188,26, 37, 46, 13 , 
81. ’83, 90. 93, 1568, 181 
Suvannaparanta, 3 
Suvannapura, 5 
Suvannasobhana, 181, 188 
SuvarnabhOmi, 6 
SuvarnadvTpa, 58 
Suvarnakudyaka, 6 
Suvarnapura, 6 
1 Syiiam, 220 



GENERAL INDEX 


30 1 


Xat>in8hwehli, 199 
Tada U. 211 
Tadagale, 147 
Tagaung, 95 
l akakusu. 45, 47ff, 54 
Takola, 4 

Talaing, 101, 103, 105, III, 118, 119, 
124, 136, 145, 148. 155ff. 169, 174fT. 
180, 182, 199fF. 203ff, 207ft. 223ff, 237, 
254ff, 264 

Talaings, 16, 71, 80ff, 87. 95,98. 119, 
135, 156ft 

Talaing country, 32, 76, 85, 130ft, I43ff, 
157 

Talaing Samgha, 205 
Talapoins, 233 
Talpoons, 233 
Taraalin, 154, 157 
Tamalinda, 154, 157 

Tamalinda, mahathera, 113, llOff, 
I2lff 

Timalitti, 113 
1 arnasas, 1 5 

*[ ambapamna, 14, 17ft, 84 
I arnbapamni, 14, 17f 
Taipbapanni, 8, 12 
l arnils, I 12 
7amx:>adipa, 77 
lamralipti, 4, 49, 52, I 13 
lamraparni, 17ff 
lainulinda, 1 16 
7 ’ang, 55ft, 60, 85 
Tanjore, 50 
Tan-mo-li-ti, 49 
Tantrayana, 137, 141, 148ft 
Tantrikisni, 254, 256, 261 
I ao-lin, 49, 53 
1 apussa, 65 
Tara, 150 
Tarabya, 169 
7aranatha, 14, 151 
Tartars, 169 
Taruks, 168 
Tarukpyeniin, 134, 168 
Tathagata, 143 
Taungbalu, 197, 211 
Taung-dwi-gyi, 180 
Taungdwin, 192ft, 228 
'Favoy, 52 

Taw Sein ko, 80, 91, 126 
Tejodlpa, 2i2 
T*e-mu, 22 

Tennasserim, 19, 24, 48f, 51 ft, 85, 87, 
252 

Tennent, 238 
Thadin-gynt, 268 
Thadominbya, 174 
Thaygapaya, 146 
Thais, 264 
Thalun, 205 
Thambula, 105, 124 
Tharaba, 152 
Tharekhittara, 25, 95, 100 
Tharwaddy, 242 
Tharwaddy-min, 242f 


Thaton. 21. 23ff, 27ft. 32,52. 73ft, 76ff. 
83, 85. 87ft, 93, 97ft, 100, 112ft, 118, 
130, 145ft, 155, 176, 181 
Thatpyinfiu, 107 
7'hayetino, 174 
Thazi. 70 

Theravada. 53, 55. 58, 66, 71. 83, 85ft, 
99, 149ff, 254, 256, 260 
Theravada Buddhism, 29ft, 43ft, 76ft, 
80ft. 86f. 89, 97, 103, 107, 142f, 145, 
147ft. 154ft. 262. 265 
Theravada nikaya, 262 
Theyet, 77 

Thihathu. 170ft. 177. 182 
Thin-gyan, 268 
I liinlikyaung, 26 
Thiripyissaya, 25 
1 hiyipyitsaya, 120, 138ft, 143, 157 
1 hohan bwa , 1 96ft 
i hudammawadi, 80 
Thuparama, !78ft 
Tibet, 40, 149, 254. 256 
j Tien -sun, 19 
! Tiladai, 15 

j Tilokaguru, 205, 208, 212 
! Tilokaiamkara. 207,210ft 
j 1 ilogagaru, 212 
' Tinnevelly, 18 
j l ipitakalarnkara, 205ft, 210 
I Tipilakalarpkaradhaja, 234 
Tiriyapabbata, 206, 2101 
! l isasanadhaja, 198, 202 
1 Tisasatialamkara, 205, 207 
7 issa, 74ff 
To-lo-po-ti, 48ft, 52 
Ton-bhi-luh, 197 
Tosali, 14 ‘ 

7'oungoo, 198ft. 204ft, 213, 223 
Trans-Gangetic India, 15 
Tiayastrmi^a heaven, 102, 138, 141 
Trenckner, 15 
Tu-fan, 47 
1 u-k’un, 19fl 

Tun^Hsiin. 19, 20, 24. 87. 25 If 
I'unna, 219 
Tun Nyein, 126, 174 
Tupayan, 178 
7 uraniaya, 8 

furaii, 159 

Twinthintaikwum, 24 1 


Uccanagara, 208 

Ukkala, 29 
Ukkamsainala, 220ft 

Ukkaipsika, 205, 207ft 
Uragapura, 31, 44, 6 1 , 86 
Uraiyur, 61 
Utkala. 29 

Uttama, 128 

Uttara, 7ft, 26. 83, 90. 112, 119. 190 
UttarajTva, 45, niff, 126, 273 
Uttara-mahathera. 1 I9f 
Uttara-thera, 12, 1 14f 
Uttiya, 8 
Uzana, 123ff, 173 



302 


THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 


Vacissara, 128 
Vajirabuddhi, 191 
VajrSsana, 107, Ml 
Vajrayana, 136, 141, I48/f 
Vainga, 14 

Vanaiatana, 186, 188, 248 
VanavSsa, 7, 9, 15, 93 
Vanavasi, 14 

Varabhisamghanatha, 204 
Varahamiliira, 128 
Vasubandhu, 14 
Vedasattha, 178, 207ff, 213 
Vepullabiiddhi, 173 
Veravijaya, 206 
ViVjhakti^ 123 
Vienna, 75 
Vien Tiane, 22 
Vijayabahu, 99, 155, 158 
Vijayapura, 169 
Vijitavi, 199 
Vilapa, 15 
Vilasa. 147 
Vimalabiiddhi, 128 
Vimalajoli, 248 
Visnii, 148f 
Vyakarana, 159 
Vyadhapuia, 22 


Wanchen, 20f 
Wareru, 169, 174ff 
Watters, 54fiF 
We-lei, 53 
Wetkyi-in, 135 
"Wheel of Law, Xhc, 66 


I Yahandagu, 58, 67 
j Yamaka-pratihary a, 141, 147 
! Yamuna, 149 
j Yasa, 144 
1 Yavana, 14 
j Ya-wan, 154 
; Yazakumaia, 105fT 
! Yazat Kinkaya, 170 
j Yodaya, 225 
j Yoga, 54 
Yogacara, 54 
i Yona, 7, 15 
! Yonaka-rattha, 93, 202 
i Yule, 51, 77 


I Zabaj, 5 

I Zeyathura Mingyi, liO 
i Zeyyaput, 167 



ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS 


Page Line 


For 


Read 


13 


31 


Is it possible that Suvannahhumi of the Sinhalese tradition refers 
not to Lower Burma but to Suvannagiri of Asokan inscriptions, 
somewhere in the Deccan or the Far South, where Asoka had 
one of his important viceregal seats ? 


18 

25 

12 

26 

16. 20, 23 

2 

6 . 10 . 11 

34 

10. 23 
24 
15 
2 
7 
10 

56 foot-note 1 10 


foot-note 


28 

29 

32 

33-34 

35 

36 
41 
41 

43 

44 
44 

47 

48 


57 


16 


Satnmohavinodim 

Dharnmasafigani 

Jataka 

in the two inscriptional tex 
Sutta Vibhanga, of the 
Dhammasangani 


Sommohavirtodani 

Dhammasahgani 

Jataka 

cha read ca 
Sutta vibhanga of the 
Dhammasangani 


Ahhidhammattha Sangaha 

Dhammosangani 

Aiidhra-Kuiitala 

Kaveripatlanam 

duhta 

DvarSvati 

Chia-mo lang-chia 
To lo-po-ti 


A bhidhammattba- sangaha 
Dhammasangani 
Andhra-Kuntala 
Kaveripattanam 
dhuta 
Dvaravatl 
Chia-mo-lang-chia 
To-lo-po-ti 

The Man-shu adds that the Pyu custom is “to esteem modesty and 
decency. Their disposition is peaceful and good. The^y are men 
of few words.. There are many fortune-tellers and astrologers.’* 

For a better and fuller translation of the passage, see JBRS, 1937. 
XXVIl, pp. 250-51, where (pp. 251-52) a passage taken from 
the New T ang History is also relevant and informative in this 
connection. 

Luce thinks that the P’iao capital of tlie T’ang Clironicles is to 
be identified not with Prome but further North with Halingyi, 
In about the 8th century the “Little Brahmanas” of Hu-kong 
valley and the “ l a-ch’in Brahmanas” of Manipur were under 
the domination of Nanchao. It is highly probable that these 
“Little” and “Ta-clTin” Brahmanas were none but the i^jikadvipi 
Brahmanas who had by this time migrated to Assam, Manipur 
and as far east and north as upper Burma and South China, 
It is now an admitted fact that the .‘^akadvIpT Bralimanas 
were responsible for giving a new shape and form to 
the art of astrology and fortune-telling in India, and 
thence to Assam, Manipur, Burma and furtlrer cast and 
south to the Indianised colonies. 1 his explains to a 
very great extent the numerous references to Brahmana court- 
astrologers in the inscriptions and literature of Burma. Indeed, 
they were very popular in Burmese courts, and the modern 
Fauna Brahmanas of Upper Burma seem to be the cultural and 
traditional descendants of the ^akadvipl Brahmanas of old. 


64 

10 

Konagamana 

Konagamana 

65 

12 

Trapusa 

d'apussa 

70 

20 

Nagari 

NagarT 

79 

28 

micchaditthinarn 

micchaditthmam 

91 

7 

Pitakattha-main 

Pitakattha-main 


39 

Pitakkatthamain 

Pitakattha-main 

93 

13 

KalmTra 

Kasmira 


20 

Suvannabhumi 

Suvannabhumi 



304 

Page 

Line 

THERAVADA BUDDHISM IN BURMA 

For Read 

93 

21 

Samanakuttaka 

Samanakuttaka 

98 

21 

Tripitaka 

Tipitaka 

99 

34 

Vijayavahu 

Vijayabahu 

10] 

33 

Sniapitakatteya 

anitapitakattayena 


34 

Vimarnsesi 

vimainsesi 

104 

22 

Manohara 

Manohara 

107 

29 

Sabbanna 

SabbanAu 

113 

22 

pafica-Vaggagana 

pancavaggagana 

1 15 

25 

paccagana 

pacchagana 

118 

13 

Muttima 

Muttima 

119 

18 

Kaiyani 

Kalyani 

121 

18 

Kalyani 

Kalyaiil 

122 

31 

aggamahesi 

aggamahesT 

12 

Mahathera 

Mahfithera 

127 

3 

Dbammacari 

Dhammacarl 

, , 

4 

A hhidhammatiha 

A bhidhmmaitha 


9 

Vinayagulatthadlpant 

V inayagUlhatihadlpani 

128 

9 

Matt katthadlpanl 

Matihcitthadipani 

23 

Uttara 

Uttama 

, , 

24 

Vacissara 

Vacissara 

129 

11 

R<'^iiuggah amacca 

Rajjuggahamacca 

t , 

12 

s5manera 

samanera 

,, 

13 

VacaVacaf^a 

vacavacak^a 

139 

17 

samhandhacinta 

samhandhacinta 

1 

Trayatrirnsa 

T rayastrim^a 

139 

1 

bhiimisparasamudra 

bhumisparsamudia 

141 

12 

Rajar hakkavatti 

Rajacakkavatti 

23 

Trayatrirnsa 

Trayastrim^a 

f * 

32 

2935-36 ■ 

1935-36 

144 

31 

T rilokavatainsaka 

Trilokavatarnsaka 

146 

19 

Bhuridatta 

Bhuridatta 

, , 

24 

Sama 

Sama 

149 

30 

Samanakuttakas 

Samanakuttakas 

156 

13 

Pannasami 

Pannasami 

158 

10 

Vijayavahu 

Vijayabahu 

159 

11 

sima 

sIma 

165 

6 

kalhina 

hathina 

166 

19 

Paiiccasamuppada 

Paiiccasamuppada 

, , 

20 

Patisamhhida 

Patisamhhida 

168 

19 

Disapfirnokkha 

Disapamokkkha 

172 

20 

SammohaOinodinl 

Sammohavinodanl 

, , 

24 

Samanakuttakas 

Samanakuttakas 


30 

SamanakuUakas 

Samaiiakuttakas 

, , 

32 

Slhastira 

Sihasura 

176 

5 

Saddhammalankara 

Saddhammalankara 

179 

8 

Mam d\pa 

Manidipa 

180 

9 

Bh u ri da t i aja tak,a 

Bhuridatiajataho 


36 

Maharattathera 

MaharattKathera 

183 

2 

Dammaceti 

Dhammaceti 

186 

34 

Sihara jay uvarajacariyathera 

Sihara jay uvarajacariyathera 

190 

33 

Saratthadipam 

Saratthadipam 

195 

18 

Saddharmara ja 

Saddhammaraja 

199 

15 

V aca\opadesa 

V acahppadesa 

200 

5 

M adhurasaratthadipani 

M adhurasaratthadipani 


6 

A hhidhammatih.o 

A hhidhammatiha 

2C2 

7 

Patthanasaratthad'ipanl 

Pafthanasaratihadipani 

16 

Sanhthyapak.os€iho 

Sahhhydpahosak<^ 

,, 

17 

M angaladlpam 

Mahgaladlpanl 

204 

17 

(ika 

fika 

18 

chehtataya 

chekataya 

206 

3 

Rajindarajabhidhayyadipaiii 

RajindarajahhidheyyadApant 

- 

W 

18 

20 

Badaravanavasi 

Badaravanavasi 

» » 

P » 

Surakitti 

• • 

Surakitti 



ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS 


Page 

Line 

For 

Read 

206 

22 

Tipitaka i amka ra 

TipitakalamkSra 

207 

4 

YasavaddhanaVatihu 

Y asavaddhanavaithu 


5 

Surakitti 

Surakitti 


22 

Rsmafifiaratthavasina 

RamannaratthavasinS 


24 

Vedasatihas 

V edaaaithas 


29 

> t 

gihikammeaa 


208 

2 

gihik<^mmeau 


20 

vedaaatthas 

Vedasatthas 


31 

Dakkhi^avaniirama 

Dakkhinavanarama 

2 V 0 

32 

Rupabhedapakosatu 

Rupabhedapak^sinl 


33 

Dhammasangani 

Dhammasangani 

211 

15 

Marammarattham 

Marammarattham 


15 

dusesum 

dusesum 


16 

Sasanam 

Sasanam 


16 

dtihbalam 

duhbalam 

212 

14 

A hhidhammattha 

A hhidhammattha 


15 

Dham masangan~t 

Dhammasangani 


20 

Jinaramathera 

Jinaramathera 


30 

Pubbai ama 

Pubbarama 


31 

G ulatt-hadipani 

Guiatthadipani 

2 V 3 

32 

ganthipadatlho 

ganihipadaitha 

3 

talapattani 

tabipaltani 


3 

sisavetbana 

sTsavetthana 


15 

Vedasatthas 

V edasaiihas 

214 

8 

atiparisuddhani 

atipaf isuddharn 

217 

1 

slhasura 

slhasura 

2)8 

9. 16 

F^afinasami 

Pannasami 

220 

4 

Saclcihammacari 

Saddhamrnacari 


33 

Mabasiha 

Mahasiha 

221 

34 

Abhidhammattha 

A hhidhammattha 

222 

23 

sarnattham 

sarnattham 


23 

nafigala Koiiya 

nahgalakptiya 


23. 24 

sarpvaddhantam 

aarnvadd hantam 


25 

Pak.kbanam 

Pakhhanam 


27 

PafinasamT 

PannasSmi 

*’ 

31 

samipe 

samipe 


34 

Saradassi 

Saradassi 

223 

5 

vupasami 

vupasami 


10 

PafinasaniT 

Pannasami 

225 

9 

Binaya 

Binnaya 


28 

Pannasami 

Pannasami 

227 

8 

Idani 

Idani 


9 

Carantu 

carantu 

228 

28 

Siripavana 

Siripavara 


31 

analarnkara 

f^analarnkfira 

229 

33 

rUnfio 

ronno 

231 

28 

nay aka 

nayakp 


33 

may am 

mayorn 

232 

38 

^ama 

gama 

234 

6 

f^anabliisasana 

f^ansV^hisasana 


18 

vilasinl 

viJhgsini 


22 

Tigiimbathomana 

Tigumbathomana 


23 

Rajadhirajavilasini 

RajadhirajavilasinT 


30 

MahajnanabhidKaja 

Mahananal^hidhaja 

235 

19 

Iakho^^<^ 

lakidiana 

238 

19 

Kirti ‘ 

Kitli 

24 1 

37 

Jaiak^s 

Jatako^ 

243 

1, 3. 

25 Suriya 

Suiiya 


15 

R ey y a d h a rma 

ISfeyyadhamma 


19 

Saddhammapajjotika 

S add h am m apajjoi i ha 


30 

Maniyola 

Man* jota 


80 

Medhavivamsa 

Medhavlvamsa 

245 

4 


. , 


35 

lambulam 

tambularn 


305 


39-1445B 



306 THERAVADA BUDE«HiISM IN BURMA 


Page 

Line 

p’s*. 

246 

4 

avinayalomcare 

248 

21 

SSmgHarfija 

249 

8 

Dharmaceti 

253 

30 

Anawartha 

256 

19 

Samanakuttakas 

259 

33 

Pitakatth amain 

273 

24 

Uttarajiva 

287 

8 

Monarchism 


Read 

avinaya lotn Scare 
S&m^hsirSjsL 
Dhammaceti 
Anawrahta 
Samanakuttakas 
Pitakattha-main 
Uttarajtva 
Monachism 








