t 


GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA 

DEPARTIIEKT  OF  ARCHAEOLOGY 

CENTRAL  ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY  • 


Cali. 

D.G.A,  79. 


1 


/ 


f 


A 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO 

TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 

12.578 

k 


Bv 

Bhusan  Dasgupta,  ii.A.,  ph.d,, 

Lecturer,  CalcuUa  Univeisiiy 


Ukr’ebsity  Of  Caixutta 

1930 

price  Rs.  7/^/''  only' 


I 


I 


fisit 

Ua  ^  ^ 


Frfnftfd  in  India 
PUBLiaHED  BY  StEENDHj&^N'ATH 
StTFEBlS^rEVDEKT  (OtPO.),  CaICUTTA  UsIVI^^XTY  PB£BB, 
48,  Haze  A  Road,  Baixygutnoe,  Cai^cutta  and 
Fbinteo  at  The  Modebi^  Art  PaebBp 
1/2,  Dusoa  PmjM  Lane, 

Calcutta. 


« 

fWTh 

t 

As-  - 

rt- 


A 


To 

“  The  Revered  and  Beloved 
Memory  of 

Professor  Benimadhab  Barua 


i 


%  * 


I*  * 


CONTENTS 


Preface 
A  cknowledgTn 
Abbre\^ationEi 


Paget 

vn-^x 

XI 

XII 


Ckaptes  I 
FRELIMIXARY 

(i)  Million  of  the  Tantras  in  General  and  the  Buddhist 
Tantras  iii  P Articular 

fii)  T^e  Salient  Features  of  Mahayzina  as  contrasted 
with  HtnayUriA 

(Aj  The  Final  Goal 

(B)  The  Three  Schools — ^4ra>^akayana,  Pratyeka- 

Buddhayana  and  BodKisuttvayftiiA 

(C)  The  Paramitfis 

(D)  The  Dnectic  Conception  of  the  Three  Kflyos  „ 
|E)  Prcdominaiice  of  Ptiitosophical  Thoughts 

(iiij  Philosophical  fiyatems 

(A)  tfadhyamika  PhOosophy  of  N&glrjuna 

(B)  The  Tathata^vada  of  Asvagliosa  ...  .., 

fC)  Vijfiana-N’ddft  or  Yo^fleara 

(D)  Affinity  with  Vedanta 


1— t 

4^16 

7—^ 

&— 10 
10—11 
1^—15 
IJ— 16 

10-^0 

2T 
2T— S6 
55— 


'  Chapter  II 

UiVSYSTEMATLSED  PHILOSOPHICAL  FRAGMENTS 

FOUND  IN  ran  BUDDHIST  TANTHAS  ...  41—50 


Chapter  III 

SCHOOLS  OF  TaNTBIC  BUDDHISM 

(i)  The  Evolution  of  Maiitrayina 

(ii)  Va]TAyiiiA — the  most  common  name 

(A)  KilHcakTayaDa^  etc* 

(B)  General  CharacteriiiticB  of  Vajrayjlna 


60—70 
TO— M 


711— 7n 
7B—H5 


VI 


CONTENTS 


Chapteb  IV 

THE  THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE 
TANTRtC  BUDDHISTS 

(i)  Vajra  find  Vfljrasattvfl 
(li)  Bodhicittfl 

(A)  Genenil  Conception  af  Bodhicittn 

(B)  Siinyatft  and  Karui;i4  as  Pfajfli  and  Upftya 

(C)  Cosmolo^^icd  and  Ontological  Aspects  of  PrajAa 

and  Upaya  m-.*  **r  *•* 

(D)  Prajfia  and  Upwya  as  Male  and  Female 

(E)  Prajfia  and  0paya  as  Lalana-RasanI*  Left 

and  Right,  Vowel  and  Consonniits^  etc. 

(iii)  Advaya  (Non-dnality)  and  Ynganaddha  (Ptineiple 
of  Union) 

(iv)  R&ga  (Affection)  and  Mahirfiga  (Great  Affection) 

(v)  Samarasn 

(vi)  Hahasukha  (Supreme  Bliss)  ns  the  Final  Goal! 
Nirvana  and  Mahasuhha 

(A)  NirA^&na  as  Posttixe  Slate  of  Bliss 

(B)  Nirvana  as  Mah^sukha  in  the  BnddhiJit  Tantrat 

(C)  The  CMmological  and  Ontological  Significance 

of  MahSsuJkha 

(D)  Mahasnkha  in  Relation  to  the  Esoteric  Practice 

(E)  The  Transformed  Idea  of  Rodhicitta  in  Relation 

to  the  Esoterfe  Yogie  Practice 


Fflgfj 

S6—  9B 
98—125 
gS— ]GO 
100—105 

10^118 

118—118 

118—125 

125—184 
185— 1S8 
138—141 

142—159 

142—148 

148—151 

151— 155 
158— 158 

158—159 


CHAFTKn  V 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA  ...  160—198 


{i]  Body — the  Medium  for  Realising  the  Truth 

(A)  The  Theory  of  the  Ftexua 

(B)  The  Nerve  System 


X«l— 174 
161—189 
160—174 


(ii)  Sclectiorf  of  the  Preceptor 


174—178 


(in)  The  ProducMon  of  Bodhicitta  and  iU  Regulation  178 — IQjD 


(iv)  The  Four  Mudrasr  Four  Momenta  and  the  Four 

kindi  of  Bliss  *.*  *.*  190—198 


4  Chapter  VI 

THE  .ARGUMENT  OF  THE  TANTRIC  BUDDHISTS 

IN  DEFENCE  OF  THEIR  TOGA  ...  197^217 


Bibliography 
Word  Index 


21D— 224 
— 2B5 


PREFACE 

The  present  work  embodies  substantially  the  thesis 
submitted  by  the  author^  and  approved,  for  the  Prem- 
chaiul  Eoychand  Studentship  of  the  University  of 
Calcutta  in  11307,  Due  to  the  abnormal  conditions 
prevailing  in  the  Country  during  and  after  the  World 
War  H,  the  author  could  not  arrange  to  have  his  work 
published  earlier,  it  is  being  published  after  a  lapse  of 
twelve  years — an  Indian.  Yuga.  Though  very  late,  the 
author  feels  it  a  duty  to  bring  before  the  reading  public 
the  fruits  of  his  labour  in  the  hope  that  they  may  be 
of  some  use  and  interest  to  those  who  find  pleasure  in 
making  an  academic  study  of  a  religious  subject. 

Whether  Vedic  or  Non-Vedic  in  origin,  Tantricism, 
both  Brahmanical  and  Buddliistic,  represents  a  special 
aspect  of  the  religious  and  cultural  life  of  India,  A 
thorough  study  of  Tantricism  is,  tiierefore,  indispens¬ 
able  for  a  close  aequaititance  with  the  special  quality 
of  the  Indian  mind.  For  a  long  time  it  was  cuslomary 
to  hold  that  Tantricism  is  an  off-shoot  of  Hinduism,  or 
that  it  constitutes  only  a  particular  phase  of  Hindu 
Sadhaiia  ;  but  researches  in  later  Buddhism  have  now 
brought  home  that,  so  far  as  the  extant  literature  is 
concerned,  the  stock  of  Tantric  literature  is  richer  and 
niore  varied  in  the  domain  of  Budclhism  than  in  that 
of  Hinduism,  Much  more,  it  is  hoped,  may  be 
recovered  or  reconstructed  from  the  Tibetan  and 
Chinese  sources*  Thanks  to  the  scholarly  endeavour 
of  the  Oriental  Institute,  Baroda,  wliich  has  published 
a  number  of  important  Buddhist  Tantric  texts  and 
made  them  available  to  the  scholar  and  the  general 
reader, 

Tantricism,  whether  Itiiidu  or  Buddhistic,  (ancl 
we  shall  presently  see  that  they  are  fundamentally  the 
same)  has  been  the  target  of  all  sorts  of  criticism, 


viii 


PREFACE 


charitable  and  uncharitable,  from  scholars,  both 
Oriental  and  OccideiitaL  It  has  often  been  styled  as 
a  school  of  religious  mysticism,  where  the  word  mysti¬ 
cism  is  taken,  more  often  than  not,  as  a  loose  synonym 
for  pu7,7.Ung  obscurity.  The  present  author  has,  how¬ 
ever,  tried  to  keep  his  mind  open  as  far  as  practicable 
throughout  the  wfiole  study.  His  interest  has  mainly 
been  academic  and  fultural.  He  has  studied  a  consi¬ 
derable  number  of  texts,  both  published  and  un- 
pubtislu'd,  gathered  information,  analysed  and  classi- 
hed  them  and  has  then  tried  to  give  a  correct  exposition 
on  textual  basis,  avoiding  personal  observations  and 
judgment  as  far  as  possible.  There  are  many  things 
in  the  practices  of  the  Tantrikas  which  are  undoubtedly 
unconventional  ;  the  author  has  tried  to  exhibit  tiiem 
^vtthout  offering  any  apology  or  advocacy.  If  errors 
have  crept  in,  in  the  form  of  mis-statement  or  mis¬ 
interpretation,  they  are  due  mainly  to  the  fact  that 
ancient  religious  literature,  embodying  complicated 
practices  and  subtle  realisation,  may  not  be  deciphered 
properly  by  “our  modern  spectacled  eyes.” 

The  inspiration  of  the  author  came  from  another 
source.  It  is  known  to  all  students  of  the  Modern 
Indian  Languages  that  tlie  literatiure  of  the  early 
period — ^|)articularly  in  Bengali — comprises  a  number 
of  s<»ngs  and  Do  has,  dealing  witli  the  tenets  of  the 
Tan  trie  Buddhists.  To  understand  and  appreciate 
the  meaning  of  these  songs  and  Dolt  as  the  Tan  trie 
background  must  be  clearly  understood.  The  present 
■study  was  an  attempt  towards  that  direction.  This 
study  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  author  many  new 
and  interesting  facts  w^hich  led  liim  to  pursue  his  study 
further  and  the  Hiidings  of  further  researches  in  this 
direction  have  been  incorporated  in  his  book,  Obscure 
Heligiotis  Cults  as  Background  of  Bengali  Literature 
(published  in  by  the  I'niversity  of  Calcutta). 

As  the  number  of  published  texts  on  Tantrie 


PBEFACF, 


ix 

liuddbism  is  very  scantj^  the  author  had  to  collect  his 
iitaterial^  mainly  from  tinpubtished  manuscripts.  As 
there  is  no  possibility  of  many  of  these  texts  being 
published  in  the  near  future,  tiie  author  has  deemed 
it  proper  to  quote  copiously  from  these  manuscripts  to 
illustrate  ills  points  and  to  substantiate  his  generalisa¬ 
tions,  This,  the  author  hopes,  will  give  the  reader  a 
better  opportunity  for  making  his  own  judgment  and 
also  for  testing  the  validity  of  the  statements  made 
and  conclusions  arrived  at.  Because  of  the  obscure 
nature  of  the  topics  discussed  the  author  had  to  re¬ 
introduce  some  of  them  in  different  contexts,  wfiich 
made  some  amount  of  repetition  unavoidable. 

A  few  words  sJiould  be  said  about  the  manuscripts, 
most  of  which  are  preserved  in  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society  of  Bengal,  some  in  the  Central  Library,  Boroda, 
some  ill  the  library  o.f  the  Cambridge  University,  some 
in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  Paris.  Except  the 
manuscripts  preserved  in  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of 
Bengal,  all  the  other  manuscripts  were  available  to  the 
present  wTiter  in  rotograph  through  the  courtesy  of 
,Dr.  S.  N,  Dasgupta,  M,A.,  Ph.D,  (Cat.  &  Cantab,),  D.  Lit. 
(Rome),  the  then  Principal  of  the  Sanskrit  College, 
Calcutta.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  the  manuscripts, 
scribeti  on  palm-leaves,  or  indigenous  hand-made 
paper  in  Newari  (old  Xepalese  script),  the  texts  are  full 
of  corruptions.  Further,  the  texts  were  not  composed 
in  strictly  correct  and  elegant  Sanskrit.  The  metre  is 
often  defective ;  words  are  sometimes  used  without 
proper  suffix  ;  wrong  forms  are  used  in  analogy ;  sondfei 
is  not  treated  as  essential ;  pseudo-Sanskritic  words 
have  crept  in  due  probably  to  the  influence  of  the 
V’ernaciiiars.  Because  of  all  these  the  author  has  not 
thought  it  wise  to  tamper  with  the  reading  of  the 
manuscripts  in  the  form  of  corrections.  Corrections 
have  been  made  or  suggested  only  in  cases  where  the 
mistake  or  the  corruption  has  been  palpable.  As  for 


PEEF&CE 


transcription,  the  author  has  experienced  some  typ^ 
graphical  difficulty  and  a  few  words  had  to  be  left ' 
unmarked  or  without  proper  marking*  v 

The  author  acknowledges  bis  indebtedness 
predecessors^  who  have  worked  in  the  field.  T  e 
nature  and  extent  of  such  indebtedness  have  always 
been  indicated  in  foot-notes.  Reference  of  manuscnpte 
include  the  folio  number  and  the  serial  number  m  the 
libraries  or  institutions  where  they  are  preserved. 

The  Author, 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The  author  takes  this  opportunity  of  recording  his 
deep  sense  of  gratitude  to  Professor  S,  X*  Dasgupta, 
the  great  Indian  Philosopher,  for  the  help,  advice  and 
encouragement  the  author  received  from  him.  Pro¬ 
fessor  Dasgupta  drew  the  attention  of  the  writer  to  the 
subject  of  1^  study  and  procured  for  him  many 
manuscripts  from  abroad.  Some  portions  of  this  work 
were  published  in  the  journal  Indian  Culture  in  the 
form  of  separate  articles ;  for  this  the  board  of  editors 
deserves  thanks  from  the  author.  The  author  received 
help  from  Father  Pierre  Fallon,  M,A.,  in  preparing  the 
press-copy  of  the  manuscript.  The  author  acknow¬ 
ledges  liis  indebtedness  to  Professor  K.  N.  Mitra,  M.A,, 
under  whose  a^ectionate  care  the  research  on  the 
subject  was  carried  on.  The  author  thanks  the 
Registrar  (Offg.)  of  the  Calcutta  University,  Sri  Satish- 
chandra  Ghosh,  M.A.  and  the  Superintendent  (Offg,)  of 
Press,  Sri  Sibendranath  Kanjilal,  B.Sc.,  Dip.,  Pkint, 
(Mauchester)  for  the  interest  they  took  in  the  printing 
and  publication  of  the  book. 


AsuTOSH  Building, 
January,  19S0. 


S,  B.  Dasgltta. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


B. 

C.  L.  B- 

lit  Ai-  Si 

R.  A.  S.  B. 


Bibliotbi^ue  Natioiivirp  Pori^ 
Central  Library*  Baroda 
Gaekwad*^  Oriental  Seriea 
...  jQuraal  &f  the  Htiyal  Afiatia  Snekty 
,,,  Rayai  Asiatic  Society  of  Ben^ 


CHAPTER  I 


PRELIMINARY 

(i)  Missio?t  Of  The  Tantras  In  General  Awd  T/i  e 
Tantras  In  Particular 

Tlie  priniarj'  concern  of  the  Buddhist  Tantras  is  not 
to  establish  a  definite  system  of  metaphysical  thought. 
Just  as  the  Hindu  Tantras,  taking  for  granted  the 
fundamental  tenets  of  the  Darsanas,  apply  them  to  a 
practical  effort  of  realisation,  so  the  Buddhist  Tantras, 
on  the  basis  of  the  Mahayana  principles,  dictate  practi¬ 
cal  methods  for  the  realisation  of  the  supreme  goal. 
Ideas,  current  in  other  religious  circles,  are  also  incor- 
■  porated.  These  Tantras  are  primarily  concerned  with 

i  the  Sadhana  or  the  religious  endeavour,  hut  not  with 

anv  system  of  abstract  philosophy.  The  philosophical 
'  portions  introduced  here  and  tliere  can  neither  success- 
fulh'  explain  the  various  practices  and  rituals,  nor  arc 
i  they  always  relevant  to  the  topics  with  iivhich  the  Tan¬ 
tras  are  generally  concerned.  The  main  object  of  the 
Tantra  literature  is  to  indicate  and  explain  the  practical 
method  for  realising  the  truth,  and  so,  the  abstract 
1  metaphysical  speculations  could  never  find  any  pro- 
.  minence  in  it.  The  different  metaphysical  systems  deal 
I  with  the  nature  of  the  reality  and  the  plvilosophic 
method  for  its  realisation;  whereas  the  Tantras  lay 
I  stress  on  the  esoteric  methods  for  realising  that  reality. 

7  In  short,  the  Tantra,  whether  Hindu  or  Riiddhistie,  has 

\  to  be  regarded  as  an  independent  religious  literature, 

!  which  utilised  relevant  philosophical  doctrines,  hut 
whose  origin  may  not  be  traced  to  any  system  or  sys¬ 
tems  of  philosophy ;  it  consists  essentially  of  religious 
;  metliods  and  practices  which  are  current  in  India  from 
a  very  old  lime.  The  subject-matter  of  Ihe  Tantras 
may  include  esoteric  yoga,  hymns,  rites,  rituals,  doc¬ 
trines  and  even  law,  medicine,  magic  and  so  forth. 


2 


TANTRTC  BUDDHISM 


Et3'mologicallj’^  the  ivorti  Tantra  may  be  taken  to 
mean  any  kind  of  elaboration  (if  derived  from  the  root 
ton,  to  spread),  or  to  mean  kno^v'ledge  (if  derived  from 
the  root  tawfri)*'  Taking  the  first  derivation,  Tantra 
may  be  explained  as  that  which  spreads  knowledge 
(fnni/ate,  visfaryate  jaanam  anena  iti  tan  (ram). 
There  is  thus  a  wider  connotation  of  the  word  Tantra 
to  mean  any  'expanded^  literature  which  deak  ela¬ 
borately  with  any  department  of  studj^  either  in  a 
theoretical  or  in  a  practical  manner.  Thus  some  sys¬ 
tems  of  philosophy  have  often  been  referred  to  as 
TantraSf  e.g.,  Ni/ajya-fantrcsu,  SrtThfthj/o-tantresw,  or 
Cikitsfl-fantTesn,  and  so  on.  But  it  has  also  a  limited 
connotation  inasmuch  as  the  word  Tantra  means  an 
esoteric  literature  of  a  religions  and  practical  nature. 
It  is  difficult  to  say  how  the  use  of  the  word  Tantra 
in  this  limited  sense  became  so  important  that  in  com¬ 
mon  parlance  the  word  seems  to  have  acquired  almost 
entirely  this  specialised  sense.  The  treatment  herein 
followed  is  limited  to  this  specialised  Tantra  literature 
as  a  practical  esoteric  science. 

Because  of  this  practical  nature  of  the  Tantras, 
they  have  never  been  the  subject  for  pure  academic 
discussion.  They  have  always  been  transmitted  from 
the  preceptor  to  the  disciple  in  the  most  secret  manner 
and  it  has  always  been  lield  an  unpardonable  crime  on 
the  part  of  a  Sddhaka  to  let  the  uninitiated  into  tlic 
secret  of  their  Sddhand, 

A  critical  study  of  the  nature  of  Tantric  Buddhism 
will  reveal  that  there  is  no  organic  relation  between 
Tantricism  and  Buddhism  of  any  form.  It  is  not  a 
fact  that  Buddhism,  in  the  course  of  evolution  in  any 
of  its  aspects,  developed  wdthin  its  arena  the  composite 
practices  known  us  Tantricism ;  on  the  other  hand, 
Buddhism,  in  the  later  phases  of  Mahayana,  seems  to 
have  adopted  these  practices,  whiclx  were  a  growth  of 

*  See  »n  artide  Gtrietat  Introduction  to  Tantra  Phihifophy  by 
Dr.  S,  N.  Dasgupta  in  hii  Philoeopbtcal  Essayg  (Calcutta  Uuivereity). 


3 


MISSION  OF  THE  TaNTRAS 

tlie  soil  and  as  such  a  coininon  heritage  both  of  the 
Hindus  and  the  Buddhists.  In  short,  Buddliism  did  not 
evolve  them  out  of  its  own  materials.  We  have  said 
that  as  a  reliffious  science  Taiitricism  has  its  indepeml- 
cnt  history  ;  its  association  with  Buddhism  may  histori¬ 
cally  be  explained  with  reference  to  the  spirit  of 
catholidtv  which  characterises  Mahayana  Buddiusm 
as  a  whoie.  It  will  be  more  correct  to  say  that  the 
.Tantric  theological  speculations  that  are  found  in  the 
Buddhist  Tantras  represent  the  gradual  transfonnalion 
of  later  Maliayank  ideas,  effected  through  the  associa¬ 
tion  of  the  various  Tantric  practices,  than  to  say  Iha. 
the  practices  are  there  because  of  the  theological  specu¬ 
lations. 

There  seems  to  be  no  essential  difference  between 
Tantricism  within  the  province  of  Hinduism  and  that 
within  the  province  of  Buddhism.  .4part  from  the 
multifarious  accessories,  to  judge  by  the  essentials, 
Tantricism,  both  Hindu  and  Buddhist,  lays  steess 
a  theological  principle  of  duality  in  non-dualit5\  Both 
the  schools  hold  that  the  ultimate  non-dual  reality 
possesses  tivo  aspects  in  its  fundamental  nature,  t  ^e 
negative  (niorHi)  and  the  positive  (pravrfti),  the  static 
and  the  djmainic,— and  these  two  aspects  of  Uie  reahty 
are  represented  in  Hinduism  by  and  Sakti  and  in 
Buddhism  by  Prajnd  and  f/paya  (or  ^unj/ata  and 
karuna).  It  has  again  been  held  iu  the  Hindu  Tantras 
that  the  metaphysical  principles  of  are 

manifested  in  this  material  ivorld  in  the  form_  of  the 
male  and  the  female  ;  Tantric  Buddhism  also  holds  that 
the  principles  of  Prajna  and  Vpdya  are  objectified  in 
the  female  and  the  male.  The  ultimate  goal  of  both 
the  schools  is  the  perfect  sUtc  of  union-union  between 
the  two  aspects  of  the  reality  and  the  realisation  of 
the  non-dual  nature  of  the  self  and  the  not-self.  The 
L  principle  of  Tantricism  being  funfiamentally  the  same 
everv'where,  the  superficial  differences,  whatever  these 
mav  be,  supply  only  different  tone  and  colour.  While 


4  TAICTRIC  BUDDHISM 

the  tone  and  colour  of  the  Hindu  Tanlras  are  sup^died 
by  the  philosophical  and  religious  ideas  and  practices 
of  the  Hindus,  those  of  the  Buddhist  Tantras  are  sup¬ 
plied  by  the  ideas  and  practices  of  the  Buddhists, 

If  ive  analyse  the  Buddhist  Tantrus  we  shall  find 
three  elements  in  them,  viz.,  (1)  the  unsystematised 
metaplivsieal  fragnienls  taken  from  tlte  different 
schools  of  Buddhistic  thought,  particularly  from  Mahu- 
yana  Buddhism  and  also  from  cognate  Hindu  thought ; , 
(2)  a  Tantric  theology,  which,  though  substantially  the 
Same  as  found  in  the  Hindu  Tantras,  utilised  relevant 
later  Mahayanie  ideas ;  (3)  practices.  Apart  froni  the 
fundamental  theological  position,  we  find  in  the  Hindu 
Tantras  the  ideas  of  Vedanta,  Voga,  Saiiikhya,  Nyaya- 
vaisesika,  the  Piuanas  and  even  of  the  medical  sciences 
and  the  law  bookstall  scattered  here  and  there  j  so 
also  in  the  Buddhist  Tantras  we  find  fragments  of  meta¬ 
physical  thought,  which  are  all  taken  from  the  leading 
schools  of  Mahayana  Buddhism  as  influenced  by  Upani- 
sadic  monism.  Ideas  are  often  put  side  by  side 
indiscriminately  without  knowing  their  import  and 
importance,  and  as  a  result  'tt’e  find  Sunya~vada,  Vijna- 
na-vada  and  Vedanta  ail  confusedly  jumbled  together. 
The  leading  tenets  of  early  Buddhism  also  lie  scattered 
liere  and  there  side  by  side  with  the  Mahayanie  and 
Brahminic  ideas  and  the  other  Indian  systems  like 
Satiikhya  and  Yoga  also  have  been  frequently  intro¬ 
duced  in  a  rather  distorted  form. 

For  all  practical  purposes,  let  us  first  of  all  try  to 
take  a  general  survey  of  the  philosophical  and  theolo¬ 
gical  background  of  the  Buddhist  Tauti'as  and  then 
the  three  elements,  spoken  above,  will  be  taken  into 
consideration  in  order. 


(ii)  The  Salient  Features  Of  Mahayana  As 
Contrasted  ITiMt  f/incfj/una 

Buddhism  has  been  historically  as  w-eil  as  philoso¬ 
phically  divided  into  two  great  schools,  viz.,  Jlinayana 


5 


MAHAY.4NA  AS  CONTRASTED  WITH  HINAVaNA 


and  Mahayana.  By  Ilinayana  is  generally  meant  the 
Pah  Buddhism  of  the  earlier  period  and  it  is  also  popu¬ 
larly  known  as  the  Southern  Buddhism  and  its  follow 
ers  *are  found  in  the  Southern  countries  like  Ceylon, 
Burma,  Siam,  Java,  Sumatra,  etc. ;  by  Mahayana 
Buddhism  on  the  other  hand  is  meant  the  later  Sanskrit 
Buddhism  current  in  the  Northern  countries  like  China. 
Japan,  Tibet,  Nepal,  etc.'  The  later  Buddhists 
would  style  their  school  as  the  Mahayana  or  the  great 
vehicle "  m  contrast  to  the  narrow  and  orthodox  schoo 
of  the  Buddhists  of  earlier  times,  whom  they  would 
designate  as  belonging  to  the  lUiiayana  or  the  ‘httle 
vehicle  In  the  .Wahat/anQ-siitroian/farfl  of  Asanga  the 
Hinayana  has  been  condemned  as  very  narrow  because 
cf  its  five  points  of  dUIercncc  with  the  Mahayana. 
These  are,  firstly,  the  narrow  aim  of  self-liberation  and, 
secondly,  the  narrow  teachings  to  realise  that  aim, 
thirdly,  the  nanow  method  applied  for  this  reahsation, 
fourthly,  insuliicieney  of  equipment  and,  fifthly,  the 
shortnek  of  time  within  which  final  liberation  is 
.niaranteed.^  In  fact,  the  Mahayana  school  is  always 
characterised  by  a  broadness  of  outlook,  and  deep 
sympathy  for  the  suffering  beings.  But  it  may  be 
observed  iu  tliis  connection  that  as  on  the  one  hand 
this  freedom  of  thought,  broadness  of  outlook  and  the 
spirit  of  liberalism  saved  Buddhism  from  the  walls  of 
narrow  scholastic  dogmatism  and  raised  it  from  the 
selfish  hankering  after  personal  liberation  to  the  sub¬ 
limity  of  a  religion  for  the  suffering  humanity,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  contained  also  germs  of  iudisciplme  and 
revelry  of  wild  thoughts  which  were  responsible  for  the 
incorporation  of  all  sorts  of  practices  in  Buddhism. 

The  word  Mahayana,  as  we  find  it  mentioned  in 


*  Many  jiahayana  wholars  of  recent  times,  however,  think  that 
the  MaliAyfintt  view  i.^  os  oJd  fls  the  Hinayunft. 

^  aiayasuti'  Hudt'iorytt  pniyo{J««f«i  tjirorffinioh  I  . 

H iialatya  ynt  hUid^  hinftw  II 

.Uaftoaano-sfitTafarikiiru.  Ch.  I,  terse  10. 

—  Ldvi’s  Edition. 


6 


TaN’TRIC  buddhism 


the  of  fuith  Mahayana  {Mahayana-sTad-^ 

dho-tpdda-sutra)  of  Asvaghosa,  *  meant  the  highest 
principle  or  reality,  or  the  knowledge  which  is  the  pri- 
iiiordial  soilrce  of  the  universe  as  a  whole ;  and  all  the 
objects,  animate  and  inanimate,  are  nothing  but  the 
manifestations  of  that  one  unchanging  and  immutable 
principle,  and  only  through  it  final  salvation  of  all 
beings  is  possible.  *  Hut  historically  Mahayana  refers  to 
tlie  school  of  Buddhism  which  is  styled  by  its  adherents 
to  be  the  great  way  to  salvation  because  of  the  univer¬ 
sality  and  generosity  of  its  tenets.  It  is  held  tradition¬ 
ally  that  after  the  death  of  Buddha,  tliere  arose  a 
peat  controversy  among  Ins  disciples  as  to  the  correct 
interpretation  of  the  sayings  of  the  Master  and  also 
about  the  rules  of  discipline  indispensable  for  a  monk. 
Great  councils  were  convened  to  settle  these  contro¬ 
versies.  It  Is  said  that  in  the  second  council  held  in 
Vesali  the  controversy  finaQy  ended  in  a  split  up  among 
the  Buddfiists  and  the  dissenters  convened  another 
great  assembly  {l/ahasa/ig/m)  to  have  a  separate  school 
of  their  own  and  tJiey  were  known  as  the  Mahasahglii- 
kas.  In  this  way,  as  time  was  passing  on,  the  contro¬ 
versy  between  these  radicalists  and  the  orthodox  elders 
(thera)  began  to  be  gradually  accelerated  and  it  finally 
resulted  in  the  growth  of  the  two  separate  schools  ;  the 
canonical  tenets  of  the  elders  being  styled  as  Hina- 
yana,  and  that  of  the  latter  as  Mahayana,  Without 
entering  into  the  details  of  the  historical  development 
of  the  Mahayana  doctrine,  it  will  be  sufficient  for  our 
purpose  here  to  draw  an  outline  of  the  leading  tenets 
of  the  Mahayana  school  and  its  points  of  eontroversy 
with  ITinayana. 

'  Mncjern  ailiokfa  arc,  iiowever,  loalh  to  accept  A^vaghosa  as  the 
author  of  the  work  itahaytiH(i-6Taddhi}-tpada-tmTa,  There  is  anam  a 
great  deal  of  Doutroversy  over  the  lime  of  AS^aghb^u;  but  l^taTO 
Suzuki  says,— “  Suffice  it  to  say  that  be  lived  at  the  lime  exlcndine 
from  the  luttcr  half  of  the  first  century  before  Christ  to  about  50  or 
iSu 

,  '“.lart/ccaing  of  Foith  in  Mahayiiiia,  p,  17. 

*  ibtd^f  pp.  ^ 


MAHAYAN4  AS  COXTBASTED  WITTI  HTXAVANA  7 

(A)  The  Final  Goal 

As  tor  tire  final  goal  tire  Malmyaniste  believ-c  that' 
every  man— nay.  every  being  of  the  world  is  a  1™  ™ 
Buddha;  he  has  within  him  all  the  possibilities  o 
becoming  a  .Soiltyufc-sawbliddho,  l.e,  the  P"  ^ 

lightened  one.  Consequently  the  idea  of  Arhathwa  o 
he  Hinayauists  was  replaced  by  the  idea  ol  B«l^ 
satlvahood  ot  the  Mahavaliists.  The  general  aim  oI  the 
ShinSs  was  to  attain  .Arhalliood  and  thus  through 
Sis  or  absolute  entinetion  to  be  liberated  from  the 
of  birth  and  death.  But  this  final  ex  inetion 

throQ^^h  Titru^Jia  is  not  the  ultimate  goa  - 

S  tirr  ain,  is  to  become  a  Bodhisaltva  Here 
eomes  in  the  question  of  universal  eonipassion  (moha- 
which  is  one  of  the  cardinal  principles  of 
Maliavina  Tlie  Bodhisattva  never  accepts  nirooMo 
Ihou-h  bv  meritorious  and  righteous  deeds  he 
entitled  to  it.  He  deliberately  postpones  his  own  sal¬ 
vation  until  the  whole  world  of  suffering  beings  be 
^  1  life  is  pledged  for  the  salvation  of  the 

sferU  hc"carerfor  his  own,  Even  after  being 
Entitled  to  final  liberation  the  Bodhisattva  works  tor 
the  Inlift  of  the  whole  world  and  ot  his  own  accord 
he  is  ready  to  wait  for  time  eternal  until  every  sutfer- 
Vereatuie  ot  the  world  attains  perfect 
becomes  a  Buddha  Himself.  Ordinary  people  of  little 
S  would  always  take  refuge  in  the 
ale  Bodhisattva.  To  pray  for  the  compassion  of  the 
Bodhisattva  was  deemed  as  one  of  the  host 
bTng  relieved  ot  all  suHering.'  The  patid  ex^iplc  of 

in  favour  of  suBeriag  humanity,  diseribed  the 
Knroiido-vyu'i".  will  inspi^^eeling  of  siibliiiie  reve^ 

xii-  PR  (fa^u-tiwi  ffflt  fill  nil  di'iparfo-tlflina^  |1 

Nac  c«  me  hnnna  krinm  pfin.iam  ' 

Uit  Mtvniit  Ji-afiyisyaTiit  sfWto  I  elt- 

EditioD,  pp.  100*01. 


TANTRIC  BVDDinSM 


S 

ence  for  all  time  to  eome/  TKe  whole  of  Muhayana 
.  literature  breathes  this  spirit  of  universal  eompassion, 
anil  all  the  juetaphysieal  and  religious  discourses  are 
introduced  avowedly  with  the  intention  of  rendering 
help  to  the  afflicted  in  getting  rid  of  their  ufTlictions. 
In  the  text  jBodlit-cari/a-r’atora  we  find  the  Bodhi^ 
sattva  praving  for  the  distressed  With  clasped 
hands  do  l'  pray  to  all  the  perfectly  enlightened  ones 
in  all  the  quarters, "light  the  lamp  of  religion  for  all 
that  are  fallen  in  sorrow  for  attachment.  With  claspi- 
ing  hands  do  I  beseech  all  the  self-controlled  wise,  who 
are  bent  on  attaining  the  final  extinction,  to  wait  for 
innumerable  ages, — let  not  this  world  be  dark  (without 
them).  Let  by  all  the  good  i  have  thus  attained 
through  these  (righteous)  performances  all  the  sorrows 
of  all  the  beings  be  completely  pacified.  .  .  .  All  my 
existence—all  my  happiness — all  my  good  in  the  three 
worlds  unconditionally  do  I  renounce  for  the  fulfilnient 
of  the  desire  of  all  beings.  My  mind  is  bent  on  Nirvana, 
and  everything  has  to  he  renounced  for  the  sake  of 
Ninyana,  hut  if  I  am  to  sacrifice  everything  let  all  be 
given  to  all  things.  :  .  .  Let  them  sport  with  my  body 
—let  them  laugh— and  amuse  ;  when  the  body  Is  dedi¬ 
cated  to  them  why  should  I  take  any  more  thought 
of  it?  Let  them  do  any  work  they  please  to  do  with 
this  body  of  mine  ;  my  only  prayer  is,— let  not  any  evil 
come  to  them  ivith  reference  to  me.  Let  all  that  will 


^  It  is  snid  that  whoti  Avalc^kitcsi^ara  Bodhisatt^a^  alter  ob tain- 
ini;  Nir\ai:ia,  was  about  to  nieT^^  hitoself  in  the  eternaJ  ^iinya  from 
the  summit  of  the  Sumcru  mountain  he  heurd  an  uproa?  from  a  xety 
remote  quarter  and  became  remorseful  -  He  sat  there  forthwith  in 
intense  mefiitation,  and  immediately  rcfiliscd  that  the  uproar  was 
nothing  but  the  wailitip  the  people  at  ihe  disappearance  of 
Avolokitesvaru,  the  all^sompassionate  Bodhisnttva.  In  their  utter 
helplessne^  at  the  prospect  of  losing  the  support  of  Avalokitesvara, 
who  was  tbciT  onJy  saiiiour  from  their  worldly  miseries  and  sufferliigs, 
they  renfc  the  sky  with  their  bitter  wailings.  Avalokitesvafa  was 
deeply  moved  and  when  he  came  to  know  about  t^is  he  resoived  within 
himself  not  io  accept  his  welUmcrited  eraEincipation  so  lo!i^  as  even  a 
single  indhiduul  i<n  earth  rcmairu:d  iiiiemaneipnted,^^  An  Introduc- 
thn  to  Bruidhisl  Esoterwa— by  Dr.  B*  Bliattaeharya^  p.  29,* 


116 


tIntric  buddhism 


Upaya**  In  the  ^fi-cakra-sambhiira-tantTa  we  find— 
*  Appearance,  Metliod  and  great  compassion  are  the 
male  deity  whilst  the  void,  Prajha,  tranquillity  and 
great  bliss  are  the  female  deity’.* *  In  the  Jvaiavali- 
vajramala-tantra  it  is  said  that  the  goddess  iVajna 
resides  in  all  women  and  the  Lord  remains  in  all  men.  ’ 
In  the  £lk'alia-iJira-ennda-7na/id-rosantt-taHtra  the  Lord 
Candarosana  explains  to  the  Lady  that  all  men  are  of 
the  nature  of  the  Lord  who  is  Upaya  and  all  women 
are  of  the  nature  of  the  Lady  who  is  Prajna;  and  the 
whole  world  is  of  the  nature  of  the  unity  of  Prajna  and 
Upaya.  As  the  son  of  Mayadevf  Lord  Buddha  was  the 
incarnation  of  Upaya  and  his  wife  Gopa  was  the  incar¬ 
nation  of  Prajna  or  Prajna-paramita — and  Lord 
Buddha  attained  mahamkha  (supreme  bliss)  of  the 
nature  of  Nirvana  in  union  wilii  the  Prajha  Gopa.  * 

li^the  Pflhco-A'rflmfl  of  Nagarjuna-pada  we  find 
four  grades  or  stages  in  sunyata,  of  which  the  first  is 
the  ^unyatd  and  the  second  is  atisunyaid.  ^unyatd 
has  been  described  as  Prajha  *  and  it  is  also  called  the 


‘  ytisil  tflcot  pmjM  upoyah  pvranah  sniftaAl 

—MS,  p. 

CL  also  MS.  p,  OStB).  Cj.  also  oI  DombU 

Heruka.  —MS.  (C.L.B.>  p.  82. 

Vf.  also  prajm  praVfMytt  tatfo  |i 

— DSkaniai'a^  p.  137  (Sahitya^parisat  EdLtioii), 

*Trftnsltttpd  from  Tibetan  by  Kazi  Dawasamdup.  p.  *is. 

*  sonnndTi-mui/ft’det'l  adrt?(j-prtyHWJiiy«(i  pmLfitth 

—MS.  p.  IHB). 

‘  cn’hfidi  ertdrffl-rojoncitdm  {rflffflh  l 

trawi  rva  gopa  prn/nd-pflraT/irra-twiifrd  |i 

yavantas  tv  sttiytih  narvas  fa  | 

mad-r&pt'iui  prifRdrdsas  tii  tarvfl  rtio  prafenfildA  ||^ 
dt'oycif  Mfnif  pnjjfio-payd-f Hwkrti/i  i«ga(  I 

—.MS,  (R.A.S.B.  No.  {«1SD)  p.  Ifl(B), 

C/.  also, — iforflA  vnjradhard-Jt&rSh  yo^itfih  vojfa-tjftntah  || 

—Ibid.t  MS.  p.  1S(.4). 

*  (ifal'ROj  aanyain  pmjM  ca  cittnm  ca  jHirafaNfmjbdRt 

—MS.  p.  20(A). 


theological  position  of  tee  TaSTRIC  BUDDHISTS  117 

vvonian. '  .4tt$tlf^ij/a  is  eaUed  Upaya,  ’  aad  the  sex 
firmlog>"  is  also  there. *  * 

In  some  places  Prajiia  is  described  as  the  female 
organ  and  Upaya  as  the  male  organ.  Prajha  is  called 
the  female  organ  because  it  is  the  abode  of  all  pleasure 
which  is  great  bliss  (maAdsu^4m).  *  Again  it  is  said 
that  Prajna  is  called  bkaga  as  she  breaks  or  obstructs 
all  the  afflictions. ""  It  can  also  be  inferred  that  the 
female  organ  is  called  the  Prajha  because  all  the  beings 
have  their  birth  from  here  as  all  the  beings  have  their 
origin  from  the  Prajha  or  the  Sunyata.  *  * 

It  is  said  in  the  Uevajra-tantra—*  Tlie  lord  is  of 
the  form  of  the  seed  u-hile  its  pleasure  is  called  tlie 
girl  ^  ’’  These  Prajha  and  Upaya  as  the  symbol  of  the 
female  and  the  male  are  generally  called  the  thunder 
and  the  lotus.  “  We  have  seen  before  that  Vajra  is 

*  ca  pmfcfti*  etc* 

— MS.  p. 

"  ii\j  ulctam  otmifitjum  | 

Ibid.,  MS.  ]u  20(B)* 

t'f.  ohOf^  prajfio-paifjei-mnm^ogad  tfij  vuni^fniri  pmjwd  lii 

^dV£l^|  fiti^HRpnrfi  iipdf/n  iti  s(iiFi«|/d|[f>^ 

Punca-kmma'^pppant^  IIS,  p. 

*  Vf,  mgaii  CQiva  ca  dvayor  dufn^ffl-trfiyaml 

f^vincfri^i3ir|/a  1|  ptc. 

MS,  p*  “J'2(A)* 

*  Cf.  ycnc  khia-jtiimhanyalc{  pmjM-dhmm  co  ie  kieSah  mukhijat 
pmpia  wp|/ate. 

— It^vajra-tantTa^  MS.  p,  11(A), 

(7,  alsOf— pmjfm  uixipo  b!idiid-Jcpjrfapifii>J  || 

— i^n-guhya-mmaja-fnntrat  p*  ISa. 

Cf-  kha-dhMu-vaim-safhyofiat,  etc, 

— KnTya-sarf?gmhfj*  MS.  p,  75 (A). 

^  himrijanam  bhugam  ukhiffitam  ^ 

pmjnabadhyiU  ca  U  kk^simmtiit  pmfiia  bhagocijati’^  |; 

— 1/  ifi'ti  n  t  m , 

*  jMuam  kha-miftadi  ] 

trfii7cf^^fier  jMo  hi  prajn^paija-^varitputah  |1 

— Htfun/m-fnHfrq,  MS.  p.  23(B). 

€f*  Comm,  tb*i  rfifiamio-dai^aiFi  [ 

^  bkav€t  bhagavda  tat-^iikhmh  jEndtniifil  jrffifMTii  | 

— MS-  p*  28(B),  Cf»  also 

*  £7*  prajfiOpaya-^vhmcatja-siddhij  p.  i2;  ^itri-wJni^fini  ca 
fKfdiaarrf  vajemh  puthne^ndriyam  feifhdl 

—JMna-siddhi^  Ch.  2,  %''erse  11, 


M  AHA  YANA  AS  CONTRASTED  WITlt  HTNAYANA  9 

speak  ill  of  lue — that  will  do  harm  to  me,  that  will 
laugh  at  me — ^be  entitled  to  attain  perfect  knowledge. 

This  feature  of  universal  compassion  was  one  of  the 
most  iniportant  factors  that  popularised  Buddhism  very 
much  in  the  hinds  far  and  wide  and  gave  the  religion 
a  deep  liumanitarian  tone.  It  is  by  this  emphasis  on 
compassion  and  also  on  devotion  that  Mahayana 
Buddhism  could  very  easily  attract  the  sympathy  and 
attention  of  millions  of  people  and  could  also  harmomse 
*  itself  with  the  current  religious  trend  of  India. 

(B)  The  Three  Schools— Srav ak.a-yana,_P ratyeka- 
Buddha-yana  And  Bodhtsatta'a-yana 

In  connection  vvitli  this  question  of  universal  com¬ 
passion  we  may  mention  the  general  scheme  of  classi¬ 
fying  the  Buddhists  into  the  Sravakas  the  hearers), 
the  Pratyeka-Buddhas  (i.e,,  the  individualistic  Buddhas) 
and  the*  Bodhlsattvas  tliose  who.se  very  essence 

is  knowledge).  The  Sravakas  are  those  who  always 
listen  to  the  preachings  of  the  learned  and  try 
to  follow  them  in  their  life.  They  try  to  understand 
the  four  noble  truths  (drya-satya)  and  to  attain  pari- 
niTvdna  through  a  right  comprehension  of  them.  They 
Jiave  mastery  over  the  ten  good  actions,  possess  mental 
power  (e(ffa)t  but  they  have  not  the  universal  com¬ 
passion  (niflfid-kaTMRa)  which  might  inspire  them  for 
the  well-being  of  the  suffering  world.  They  are  always 
busy  with  themselves  and  so  are  regarded  as  the  low¬ 
est  in  the  rank.  The  middle  place  is  assigned  to  the 
Pratyeka-Buddhas.  They  are  bent  on  self-control. and 
generally  lead  a  solitary  retired  life.  They  do  not  re¬ 
quire  the  instructions  of  any  teacher  to  guide  them  at 
every  step.  They  can  comprehend  the  cause  and  con¬ 
ditions  (heta-praij/ajya)  of  things,  and  through  a  right 
comprehension  of  the  nature  of  causality  attain  salva¬ 
tion  for  themselves.  They  too  do  not  pos.sess  kanind 


‘  Cli.  HI,  Verses  MJ,  Ifl  ll,  13-15. 
O.  P..105— 2 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


10 

And  so  are  ranked  below  the  Bodhisattvas.  The  Bodhb 
sattvas  are  those  who  are  more  purified,  have  full 
control  over  their  passions,  have  the  right  knowledge 
of  all  the  expedients,  have  great  resolution  ;  perfect 
enlightenment  is  their  only  support.  Tiirough  their 
upward  marcii  through  the  ten  stages  (daia-bfitinw) 
and  througii  the  constant  practice  of  the  paromitfls 
(the  best  virtues)  they  attain  Buddhahood ;  and  they 
attain  Buddhahood  never  for  their  ovm  sake,  but  for, 
saving  the  whole  world.  In  them  maha-kflnfna  has 
got  the  fullest  scope  and  so  they  are  the  best  of  men, 

(C)  The  Paramitas 

In  this  connection  we  should  also  have  a  cursory 
glance  at  the  Mahayanic  conception  of  the  six  pdrami- 
tds  or  the  best  moral  virtues  and  the  conception  of  the 
Bodhicitta  or  the  mind  as  enlightenment,  and  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  the  Bodhicitta  (boflhi'Cifto-tpfldQ)*  The 
pttTOfyiitcs  are  the  moral  virtucjs  tfirough  the  practice 
of  which  the  aspirer  crosses  the  sea  of  existence  and 
reaches  the  other  shore.*  These  arc  charity  (dona), 
good  conduct  (^lo),  forbearance  (fcsflnti)t  spiritual 
energy  iVirya),  meditation  (dhydna)  and  knowledge 
(prajiid).  After  these  virtues  are  acquired  and  the 
moral  ground  is  prepared  the  aspirer  is  to  produce  a 
strong  resolution  in  his  heart  for  the  realisation  of  his 
citta  as  perfect  enlightenment.  This  h  what  is  called 
the  production  of  the  Bodliicitta.  The  Bodliicitta  pro¬ 
per  involves  witliin  it  two  elements,  perfect 

enlightenment  of  the  nature  of  void  (^unyotd)  and 
universal  compassion  for  the  beings  ihanina) ;  these 
sttnyoid  and  koruna  combined  together  give  rise  to 
Bodhicitta.  After  its  production,  the  Bodhicitta  pro¬ 
ceeds  on  in  an  upward  march  through  ten  different 
stages  which  are  called  the  hodkisafivo-hhumis  the 
stages  of  the  Bodhisattva).  The  first  of  these  is  the 


’  Pariuxutii  literBliy  means  that  whidb  takes  one  to  the  other 


Kahayaka  as  coktrasted  with  hInayana  ll 

stage  of  Framudita  or  the  stage  of  delight  or  joy.  Here 
the  Bodhisattva  rises  from  the  eold,  seif-suffieiag  and 
tiiliilistic  conception  of  Jiirodnfl  to  a  higher  spiritual 
contemplation.  Tlic  second  is  styled  as  the  Kimala  or 
the  stage  free  from  all  detilement.  The  third  is  tlie 
PmhftaA’Ori  or  that  which  brightens ;  in  this  stage  the 
Bodhisattva  attains  a  clear  insight — an  intellectual 
light  about  the  nature  of  the  dharmas.  The  fourth 
stage  is  the  or  *  full  of  Hames  these  flames 

are  the  flames  of  Bodhi  which  burn  to  ashes  all  the 
passions  and  ignorance.  At  this  stage  the  Bodhisattva 
practises  thirty-seven  virtues  called  bodhi^paksikas 
which  mature  the  bodhi  to  perfection.  The  nest  is  the 
SuduTjayd  stage  or  the  stage  irhich  is  almost  invincible. 
This  is  a  stage  from  wliieh  no  evil  passion  or  tempta¬ 
tion  can  move  the  Bodhisattva.  The  sixth  stage  is 
called  the  where  the  Bodhisattva  is  almost 

face  to  face  with  pro/ rid  or  the  highest  knowledge.  The 
seventh  is  the  Diirangarnd  which  literally  means  ‘  going 
far  aAvay^  In  this  stage  the  Bodhisattva  attains  the 
knowledge  of  the  expedience  which  will  help  him  in 
the  attainment  of  salvation.  Though  he  himself  abides 
here  by  the  principles  of  void  and  non-siualiiy  and 
ilesirelessness,  yet  hi^  compassion  for  beings  keeps  him 
engaged  in  the  actiA’ities  for  the  well-being  of  all  the 
creatures.  The  eighth  is  the  stage  of  Acala,  whicli 
means  ‘immovable’-  The  next  is  the  SMhumnii  or 
the  ‘  good  will  ’ ;  when  the  Bodhisattva  reaches  such 
a  stage  all  the  sentient  beings  are  benefited  by  his 
attainment  of  the  higliest  perfect  knowledge.  The 
tenth  or  the  last  is  the  stage  of  Dharma-megka  (liter¬ 
ally  the  ‘clouds  of  dharma’),  where  the  Bodhisattva 
attains  perfect  knowledge,  great  compassion,  love  and 
sympathy  for  all  the  sentient  beings.  When  this  last 
stage  of  l>/ianna-mcgha  is  readied,  the  aspirer  becomes 
a  perfect  Bodhisattva/ 

*  For  n  dtftfliled  study  of  the  subject  see  Aspects  of  .Ifahflj^ana 
Uuddhifim  It$  Relation  to  by  Dr.  N.  FV. 


12 


TANTRIC  BUDDHiSal 


(D)  The  Docetic  Conception  Of  The  Three  Kayas 
Another  departure  of  the  Mahayanists  from  the 
Hinayanists  is  in  the  doeetic  conception  of  the  person¬ 
ality  of  Buddha.  The  Hinayanists  conceived  Buddha 
only  as  a  historical  personage  in  the  life  and  activities 
of  Sakyamimi,  But  with  the  ilahayanists  Buddha  is 
no  particular  historical  man, — he  is  the  ultimate  prin¬ 
ciple  as  the  totality  of  things  or  as  the  cosmic  unity* 
But  this  highest  principle  has  three  aspects  wliich  arc 
known  as  the  tlirec  kaj’as  of  the  Buddha.  These  are, — 
(i)  Dharma-kaya,  (B)  Sambhoga-kaya  and  (iii)  Nir- 
mana-kaya.  The  word  Dharma-kaya  is  often  explain¬ 
ed  as  the  body  of  the  laws  (dhtirma) ;  and  it  may  also 
be  remembered  that  Buddha  is  said  to  have  told  his 
disciples  that  his  teachings  should  be  recognised  as  his 
own  immortal  body.  But  the  word  dharma  is  generally 
used  in  the  Mahayana  texts  in  the  sense  of  *  entity  * ; 
and  the  Dharma-kaya  means  the  ‘thatness’  (fathatd- 
rupfl)  of  all  the  entities;  it  is  in  other  words  the 
dhama-d/idtu  or  the  primordial  element  underlying 
all  that  exists.  It  has  been  also  termed  as  the  Svabhava- 
kaya*,  i.c.,  the  body  of  the  ultimate  nature.  IL  is 
described  as  devoid  of  all  characters,  but  possessing 
eternal  and  innumerable  qualities.  It  is  neither  the 
mind,  nor  matter — nor  sometliing  different  from  them 
both.  The  nature  of  the  Dharma-kaya  is  described  in 
the  Avatamsaka-siitra'’  in  the  following  manner;  — 
“The  Dharmakaya,  though  manifesting  itself  in  the 
triple  world,  is  free  from  impurities  and  desires.  It 
unfolds  itself  here,  there,  and  everywhere  responding 
to  the  call  of  karma.  It  is  not  an  individual  reality, 
it  is  not  a  false  existence,  but  is  universal  and  pure. 
It  comes  from  nowhere,  it  goes  to  nowiiere  ;  it  does  not 


•  But  we  shall  see  later  on  that  Svahhava-kiya  or  Sahaja-kaya  of 
Vajru-kAya  was  another  kayo  invented  by  the  Vajiayanists  and  the 
Suhajiyas  as  the  ultimate  stage  even  after  the  Dharma.kuya.  This 
stage  has  also  been  styled  as  the  Mshlisukha-kaya. 

=■  Quoted  ill  Suiuki’s  Otdfines  of  JtahatfSaa  Uuddhism,  pp. 


mahayana  as  contrasted  with  hIxayaKa  13 

assert  itself,  nor  is  it  subjeet  to  annihilation.  It  is  for 
ever  serene  and  eternal.  It  is  the  One,  devoid  of  all 
determinations.  This  body  of  Dharina  has  no  bound¬ 
ary',  no  quarters,  but  is  embodied  in  all  bodies.  Its 
freedom  or  spontaneity  is  incomprehensible,  its  spiri¬ 
tual  presence  in  things  corporeal  is  incomprehensible. 
All  forms  of  corporeality  are  involved  therein,  it  is 
able  to  create  all  things.  Assuming  any  concrete  mate¬ 
rial  body  as  required  by  the  nature  and  couclition  of 
karma,  it  illuminates  all  creations.  Though  it  is  the 
treasure  of  intelligence,  it  is  void  of  particularity. 
There  is  no  place  in  the  universe  where  this  body  does 
not  prevail.  The  universe  becomes,  but  this  body  for 
ever  remains.  It  is  free  from  all  opposites  and  con¬ 
traries,  yet  it  is  working  in  all  things  to  lead  them 
to  Nirvana.  ” 

The  Sambhoga-kaya  is  generally  explained  as  the 
‘  body  of  bliss  ’  or  the  refulgent  body  of  the  Buddha. 
It  is  a  very  subtle  body  which  manifests  itself  in  the 
various  conditions  of  bliss  in  the  superhuman  beiJigs 
tor  preacliing  the  noble  truths  and  for  arousing  in  the 
mind  of  all  the  Sravakas,  Pratyeka-Buddhas  and  the 
lay  Bodhisattvas  joy,  delight  and  love  for  the  noble 
religion  (sad-dharma).  It  has  been  explained  in  the 
Sata-sahasrika  and  the  Pa  it  cat' inisati-suh  a  srffca  as  an 
exceedingly  refulgent  body,  from  every  pore  of  which 
streamed  forth  countless  brilliant  rays  of  light,  illumin¬ 
ating  the  lokiidbatus  as  innumerable  os  the  sands 
of  the  Ganges.  When  this  body  stretched  out  its 
tongue,  innumerable  rays  of  light  issued  forth  from  it, 
and  on  each  ray  of  light  was  found  a  lotus  of  thousand 
petals  on  which  was  seated  a  Tathagata-vigraha  (an 
image  of  the  Tathagala,  a  sort  of  Nirmana-kaya), 
preaching  to  Bodhisattvas,  Grhasthas  (householders), 
Pravrajitas  (recluses)  and  others  tlic  dharma  consist¬ 
ing  of  the  six  paramitas,  ” 

*  S«  Anriii’Ctu  Of  Bi'fudoti  1  o  flJ/ia- 

ynnc^  by  Kti.  Duttj  p-  llbp 


14 


taxtric  buddhism 


The  Xirmana-kaya  is  the  historical  personage  of 
the  Buchlha  or  the  *  Body  of  Transformation  *.  The 
historical  Buddha  is  regarded  as  an  incarnation  of  the 
eternal  Tathagata  or  the  manifestation  in  condescen¬ 
sion  of  the  Dharma-tathata.  Sakyasiihha  Buddha  is 
only  one  of  the  incarnations  of  the  Dharma-kaya  Bud¬ 
dha  and  his  life  and  teachings  are  sought  to  be  explain¬ 
ed  as  the  ‘apparent  doings  of  a  phantom  of  the 
Buddha-kaya  — ■*  a  shadow  image  created  to  follow  the 
ways  of  tJie  world  *  only  to  convince  the  ignorant 
people  of  the  world  that  it  is  not  beyond  the  capaeitv 
of  a  man  to  attain  iierfection.  It  is  generally  taken 
that  the  human  Buddhas  (Manusi  Buddha)  like  Dipan- 
kara,  Kasyapa,  Gautama  Buddha,  Maitreya  and  others 
represent  the  Nirmana-kaya  ;  themyani  Bodhisattvas 
(Vairocana,  Aksobhya  and  others)  in  their  body  of 
supreme  happiness  represent  the  Sambhoga-kaya  and 
the  Dhyani  Bud<lha  in  Xirvana  in  a  state  of  complete 
union  with  all  the  truths  for  time  eternal  represents 
the  Dlianna-kaya, 

This  Tri-kaya  tiieory  of  the  Mahayanists  deve¬ 
loped  these  cosmological  and  ontological  significance 
only  in  course  of  its  evolution*  Before  it  developed 
these  cosmological  and  ontological  meanings,  the 
theory  as  mere  Cudtlhalogy  would  be  explained  in  the 
follow^ing  manner ;  —  * 

The  nuinlessence  of  Buddha  is  Pure  Enlighten¬ 
ment  (ho  dhi)  or  perfect  Wisdom  iprajna-pdTamita),  or 
knowledge  of  the  Law  (d/ionna),  i.e.,  the  absolute  truth. 
By  attaining  this  knowledge  iiirvatiu  is  also  attained  • 
the  Dharma-kaya  BuddJia  is  the  Buddha  in  nirvana 
{Sartiddhi-Iidya).  Again,  before  lie  is  merged  into 
niruflaa  he  possesses  and  enjoys,  for  his  own  sake  and 
for  others*  welfare,  the  fruit  of  his  charitable  behaviour 
as  a  BodluHattva,  and  this  is  the  Body  of  Enjoyment  or 
the  Beatific  -Body  (Sambhoga-kaya).  Again,  Iiuman 


‘See  an  Brlide,  The  Three  Bodies  0/  q  Buddha  hv  P»nf  l« 
Valiee  Fousin  io  the  .I.R.A.S.,  JOOO,  pp.  , 


mahayana  as  contrasted  with  hTnayana  15 

being$»  known  as  the  Buddhas^  who  are  created  by  the 
magical  contrivances  represent  the  Created  Body 
( N  irniana-kay  a) , 

But  after  the  Tri-kaya  theory  acquires  an  onto¬ 
logical  and  cosmological  meaning,  Dharma-kaya  means 
the  void  and  permanent  reality  underlying  the  things 
(dharma),  or,  in  other  words,  the  uneharacterised  pure 
consciousness  (m/napti-TOatra),  Sambhoga-kaya  means 
the  Dharma-kaya  evolved  as  Being,  Bliss,  Charity, 
Radiance,  or  the  Intellect,  individualised  as  the  Bodhi- 
sattva.  Nirma^a-kaya  is  the  Transformation  Body, 
which  is  the  same  as  consciousness  defiled  and  indivi¬ 
dualised  as  *  common  people’  (prfhag-jiflna).  Later 
on,  this  Buddhalogy,  cosmology  and  ontology  were  all 
confusedly  mixed  up, — and  we  find  the  three  Kayas 
mentioned  more  often  in  their  composite  sense  than 
either  as  pure  Buddhalogy  or  as  pure  ontology, 

(F)  Predominance  or  Philosophical  Thoughts 

Another  notable  phase  of  Mahayana  Buddhism  is 
the  exuberant  growth  of  philosophical  thought  in  it. 
The  sayings  of  the  Master  were  sought  to  be  brought 
to  their  logical  and  metaphysical  conclusions,  and 
there  developed  distinct  systems  of  plulosophical 
thoughts  with  a  host  of  staunch  exponents,  Tlie  most 
remarkable  is  the  evolution  of  the  import  of  the  word 
sunyafa.  In  the  old  canonical  works  the  term 
sfinyafa  probably  implied  the  momentaiy'  or  the  tran¬ 
sitory  nature  of  all  entities;  but  the  Madhya tntkas 
built  up  a  new  system  of  uncompromising  nihilism 
through  a  different  interpretation  of  the  word 
and  the  Vijnanaviidins  again  in  their  turn  contradicted 
the  Madhyamikas  offering  another  interpretation  of 
the  word. 

But  we  should  not  lay  undue  stress  on  the  divisions 
of  schools  or  sects  thus  made.  It  has  often  been  said 
that  these  divisions  of  the  yanas  are  merely  provi¬ 
sional;  they  may  be  regarded  as  being  relative  and  as 


Jg  TaSTBIC  buddhism 

havint^  only  methodological  interest;  the  /jan^auatara 

savs,  Thay  (the  »ina«)  are  but  ^t; 

able  to  diBerent  persons  ;  when  the  mind  returns  to  it 

original  abode,  there  is  neitlier  the  path  nor 

whl  adopts  it.‘  Sravaka-yana,  Pratyeka^Bnddha- 

vana  and  Bodhisattva-yana  have  often  ^  ^ 

the  different  stages  in  the  same  school 

Sravaka  by  further  endeavour  becomes  a  Pratyeka- 

Buddha,  and  he  again  by  further 

Bodhisatlva  and  the  Bodhisattva  becomes  the  Buddha 
himself. 


<iii)  Philosophical  Sj/stems 

Now,  after  taking  this  general  survey  of 
features  of  TSIahayana  Buddhism  let  us  take  a  bud  s- 
eyc-view  of  the  philosophical  systems  of  Mahayana, 
and  as  the  metaphysical  fragments,  found  m  the  differ¬ 
ent  Tantric  literature,  are  notlung  but  indistmct 
echoes  of  these  schools  of  Mahayana  philosophy,  we 
think  it  proper  to  go  into  some  detail  of  these  systems 
of  thought.  The  Buddhist  Tantras  are  based  more  on 
the  Yogacara  school  than  on  the  §finyavada,-and  the 
monistic  tendency  of  the  Yogacara  school  has  often 
been  consciously  and  unconsciously  drawn  to  pmc 
Vedantic  thought.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  shall 
deal  with  the  Yogacara  more  cSaboratcly  and  we  shall 
also  try'  to  explain  very  briefly  the  philosophical 
affinity  of  Yogacara  with  Vedanta.  _ 

‘  eitte  Itt  vaj  par&Urtte  na  yanflffi  ^  [| 

^  L4vi*&  Edition  ^  p.  024.. 


tu  tmi  dttc  iia  ydmm  ndp*  1| 

Cf,  alsos- —  _ 

mfliJit'yn  nipfinr 
i/nrfniif  ydnunii  I 

f-frfi  cri/um  desana  || 

Ch,  lli  »CT6e  Ofl. 

The  Bibliotheca  Buddhicu  PublicatioD*  • 


PHILOSOPHICAL  SYSTEMS  17 

Hilien  Tsan"  writes  tlmt  when  he  came  to  India 
in  the  seventh  century  A.D.  there  were  four  schools  of 
Bufldhism,  viz.,  Sautrantifca,  Vaihhasika,  Madhyamika 
and  Vijnaiiavada  or  Yogacara,  The  former  two  lie- 
longed  to  Hinayana  and  the  latter  two  to  Mahayana.* 
The  Vaibhaaikas  took  their  stand  on  the 
literaHire  and  did  not  accept  the  authority  of  the 
Sutras.  They  believed  in  the  reality-  of  the  extra- 
mental  world  and  aecording  to  them  our  knowledge  of 
the  external  world  is  an  exact  copy  of  it  and  as  such 
it  is  direct  and  real.  The  Sautrantikas  based  their 
views  on  the  Sutra  literature;  they  were  also  realists 
but  like  the  ^'^ajbhas^kas  they  did  not  base  the  notion 
of  the  external  existence  on  the  evidence  of  our  direct 
perception;  it  is  but  an  inference.  The  point  of  dis¬ 
cussion  regarding  the  status  of  external  objects 
between  the  Yogacarins  and  the  Sautrantikas  may 
briefly  be  stated  thus :  the  Yogacarins  contend  that 
the  object  of  iiwarenc.ss  and  awareness  itself  are  one 
and  the  same,  i.c.,  tlie  different  contents  of  knowledge 
as  yellow',  blue  etc.  are  but  diverse  forms  or  transfor¬ 
mation  of  knowledge  itself;  the  Sautrantikas  hold  that 
it  may  he  admitted  that  the  diverse  contents  represent 
the  diverse  forms  of  knowledge,  or  rather  the  content 
may  be  regarded  as  in  some  sense  identical  with  the 
knowledge,  if  there  must  be  something  outside  know¬ 
ledge  by  the  operation  of  which  the  diversitv  of  the 
forms  of  knowledge  or  its  contents  could  be  explained 
or  inferred,’  Though  the  early  schools  of  Buddhism 
were  thus  in  a  sense  all  realists  they  did  not  believe 
in  the  substantiality  or  the  permanence  of  the  world, — 
everj-thing  being  momentary  and  as  such  ultimately 
void  (jStinyn), 

Mahayana  Buddlnsm  has  been  roughly  classed 
under  two  heads,  fiunyavada,  and  \'ijhanavada  or 


O.  P. 


18 


TANTHIC  BUDDHISM 


Yogatara.  The  distinction  between  the  two  schools  is 
not^  however,  fundamental,  and  very  often  the  one 
verges  into  the  other.  Nagarjuna  (100  A.D.)  was  the 
chief  exponent  of  Sunyavada  with  its  uncomprorafsing 
spirit  of  negation.  Another  earlier  current  was  flow¬ 
ing  on  with  a  spirit  of  eompromise  with  the  Upanisadic 
doctrine  of  monism.  Wc  find  trace  of  the  latter  in  as 
early  a  Jfahayana  text  as  the  Lankavatara-sfitra,  we 
find  it  somewhat  systematised  in  the  Tathata  doctrine 
of  Asvagliosa* *  and  it  took  a  definite  turn  of  uncom- 
promising  idealism  in  the  hands  of  the  Vijnanavadins 
like  Maitreya,  Asaiiga,  VasubhantUiu  and  others  ;  and 
we  may  add  here  that  this  trend  of  thought  attained 
fulfilment  in  the  Yedantic  monism  of  Sankara,  let  us 
iirst  of  all  understand  the  standpoint  of  the  Sfinya' 
vadins  and  then  we  slmll  try  to  trace  the  development 
of  the  other  currents  of  thought  in  -some  detail. 

(A)  HLaDHY.4SIIK.A  PHTLOSOPm'  OF  Nagarjuna 

The  Madhyamika-vrtti  of  Nagarjuna,  commented 
upon  by  Candrakirti,  begins  with -the  declaration  that 
the  Madhyamikas  have  no  thesis  to  prove,  their  busi¬ 
ness  is  to  contradict  any  and  every  thesis  that  may  be 
offered  by  any  school  of  thought.  First  of  all  is  taken 
the  principle  of  '  dependent  origination  ^  (pratifya- 
samutpada)  realised  and  preached  by  Lord  Buddha 
Iiimself.  The  phrase  pratitya-samutphda  has  been 
interpreted  in  two  different  ivays  by  former  commen¬ 
tators  ;  *  but  after  refuting  both  these  views  Candrakirti 
holds  that  the  real  signiftcam’e  of  the  theory  of 

*  It  has  been  hinted  before  that  taodun  scholars  arc  not  sure 

about  the  atilhorship  of  the  work  where 

we  find  the  TathatSvfida  expounded. 

*  It  may  either  be  explained  as  the  origination  («af nxfpdda)  of 
some  existence  (bhdvo)  getting'  hold  of  or  obtaining  (pmtlfga^pm  + 
V  i  +  lyti= getting)  some  cause  and  conditions  f  Acti/-pratrjfaf/a).  Or  it 
may  lie  explained  ns  the  origination  with  reference  to  eacli'aud  every 
destructible  individual  to  go.  to  ehojigc,  i.c.,  to  ht  destroyed). 


philosophical  systejis 


19 


pratltya-Hamutpada  is  no  law  about  the  ultimately  real 
nattii'e  of  things;  it  is  a  mere  law  about  the  relation  of 
in  ter "dependence  among  the  illusory  appearances  as 
things;  the  law  is  concerned  purely  with  the  provi¬ 
sional  reality  fsamwit-sati/al.  These  illusory  appear¬ 
ances  wliich  constitute  the  realm  of  our  experiences 
have  their  origin  in  a  law  of  inter-relation  of  depend¬ 
ence  wliich  is  responsible  for  the  world-process  as  a 
whole.  The  real  import  of  this  law  of  relativity  of  the 
Madliyanhkas  is  indeed  very  difficult  to  understand. 
Ultimately  there  is  no  origination  neither  cessation;— 
no  destructi^bility— no  permanence;  no  reality — ^no 
unreality;  no  coming— no  going;  no  subjectivity— no 
objectivity;  no  knowledgc^no  knowable — everjiihing 
is  free  from  all  the  disturbances  of  birth,  decrepitude 
and  death.  There  is  neither  real  origination  of  the 
thing  by  its  own  nature,  nor  by  otJiers— nor  by  a  com¬ 
bination  of  both, — nor  by  any  un-reason; — there  is 
origination  nowhere— at  no  time— and  of  none,  ‘ 

Things  cannot  be  self-originated;  for,  self-origina¬ 
tion  implies  the  existence  of  the  thing  before  it 
originates  itself.  If  a  thing  exists  already  by  itself, 
there  seems  to  be  no  sati.sfactory  reason,  why  it  should 
produce  itself  once  more.  Moreov^er,  if  the  existent 
again  require  self-production,  this  will  involve  the 
fallacy  of  the  vicious  infinite. ''  The  Sariikhya  school, 

But  Caudraklrti  dismj^es  bpth  the  mterpretatioas  as 

For* *  if  we  aoeept  the  latter  interpretatioiii  we  caimot  esplam  ctin- 

sistently  all  the  passa^ies  of  the  scriptures  where  the  phrase 

occurs*  An  attempt  may  be  made  to  solve  the  diflicutty 
by  explaining  the  word  ^  gettin^^  *  as  apek^A  (dependence  or 

relativity),  and  may  simply  be  taken  to  imply*— 

that  being  there,  it  happens  sati  idarh  ihatiqft);  but  here  the 

exact  meaning  of  each  of  the  component  parts,  vis.*  pmtifirq  and 
immutpadn^  ittoaios  unexplained^ 

*  na  ifoufo  napi  pamto  fia  dvd6fei/a>h  | 

urpqnRd  j&tu  vid^jQnt^  bhdv^h  kvanana  teeana  j[ 

Madkyarmku-v^tL  Edition,  p.  12. 

^  As  the^Afddhyamikas  had  tia  thesis  to  prove*  they  would  never 
lay  any  stress  on  the  iiu]K3rtance  of  fomial  logic.  It  has  been  held 


20 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


howevej,  may  say  tliat  by  causality  anti  the  identity 
of  the  cause  and  the  effect  Uiey  never  mean  that  the 
effect  is  a  new  manifestation  in  a  particulai'  form 
a  jar);  but  by  causaUty  is  meant  only  potentiality.  It 
is  said  in  reply  that  tlieir  argument  does  not  stand  to 
reason;  for  if  by  causality  is  meant  the  mere  poten¬ 
tiality  then  the  effect  is  never  produced  at  all, ' 

The  next  consideration  is  about  the  possibility  of 
the  origination  of  a  thing  by,  or  from,  anjlhing  else. 
But  this  position  is  assailed  at  once  by  the  argument 
that  the  Madhyamikas  do  not  admit  any  difference  in 
things,  and  so  there  cannot  be  any  (other¬ 

ness)  at  all*  Moreover,  the  quintessence  of  a  parti¬ 
cular  thing  cannot  remain  in  the  extraneous  cause  and 
conditions.  *  If  the  quintessence  of  an>l]ying  could  be 
found  in  anything  else,  we  might  have  expected  the 
possibility  of  darkness  from  the  nature  of  liglit,  and 
in  that  case  anj’thing  might  Irave  come  out  of  anything 
else.  Neither  can  it  be  said  that  the  things  are  pro¬ 
duced  bj’  a  combination  of  the  self  and  the  not-seU; 
for,  the  combination  of  two  things  cannot  possess 
I  he  quality  which  they  do  never  possess  separately, 
and  whatever  absurdity  and  incongruity  have  been 
pointed  out  against  them  separately  may  as  well  be 
pointed  out  against  their  combination.  Neither  is  it 
reasonable  to  hold  tliat  things  originate  without  any 
reason, — for,  if  there  be  no  reason  behind  origination, 
the  conception  of  the  world  without  having  any  suffi¬ 
cient  reason  will  seem  just  like  the  colour  and  scent 
of  a  lotus  growing  in  the  sky.  ’  Neither  any  transcen- 


by  C^ndrskirti  that  all  the  attempts  of  Bhava-viveka  (an  earlier  cdin- 
mentatar  on  KagArjunii)  to  adduce  formal  reasons  In  his  favour  only 
bespeaks  his  own  love  ol  formal  Ipgic^  but  tlie  MudhyamikaA  do  not 
require  any  fonnal  logic  at  all.  Moreover,  hod  there  been  any  reality 
in  the  data  of  our  logical  concepts,  there  might  have  been  any  ques¬ 
tion  of  formal  logic  at  atl|  but  as  all  realities  are  ahsolulely  "denied j 
there  remains  no  scope  and  possibility  of  fomm)  logic. 

*  p-  21, 

^  Ibid.,  p.  fld*  / 

^  p, 


PH  I LOSOPII  ICaL  S  YSTEAfS 


21 


denial  iieing  like  God  and  others  can  produce  the 
things, — for,  any  such  being  jnust  also  be  Lncluded 
xvithin  the  alternatives  that  have  already  been  discuss¬ 
ed.  Thus  the  final  conclusion  arrived  at  is  that  there 
IS  nothing  like  production  or  origination;  the  world 
process  is  a  mere  eternal  flu;c  of  success ional  series. 
The  references  to  causality  found  in  the  scriptures 
through  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  himself  do  not  refer  to 
the  immutable  void  nature  of  objects  which  reveals  it¬ 
self  when  the  darkness  of  ignorance  is  removed;  on  the 
contrary,  it  refers  to  the  objects  of  knowledge  of  those 
whose  vision  is  vitiated  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance.  ‘ 
The  scriptimil  texts  must  not  be  interpreted  literally 
and  rigorously,  we  must  try  to  get  at  the  hidden  mean¬ 
ing  aimed  at  by  the  master. 

The  emphasis  of  Nagarjuna  is  not  only  on  the  non- 
causality  of  things,  but  also  on  the  non-substantial 
nature  of  things.  Nothing  has  got  any  nature 
(si^a&hduo);  for,  had  it  any  nature,  that  nature  w*ould 
remain  in  it  even  in  the  absence  of  the  cause  and  condi¬ 
tions  {hetu-pratyaya),  and  that  self-sufficient  nature 
would  no  more  require  the  help  of  any  cause  and  condi¬ 
tion  for  its  production.  Neither  is  it  correct  to  say 
that  the  nature  of  a  thing  does  not  exist  before  its  pro¬ 
duction  through  the  collocation  of  cause  and  condi¬ 
tions;  for,  in  that  case  the  nature  of  a  thing  would  be 
created  by  something  else;  but  the  nature  of  a  thing 
no  more  remains  in  its  owti  nature  when  it  loses  its 
independence, — for  svabhava  implies  independence.  ’ 
It  may,  of  course,  be  argued  that  if  all  the  dlumnas 
are  without  svabhava,  words  which  are  included  in  the 
totality  of  dhannas  must  also  be  devoid  of  essence, — 
and  so  there  cannot  even  be  the  proposition  that  noth¬ 
ing  exists,  or  that  everything  is  void  by  nature.  The 
Madhyaniikas  will  reply, — ‘  Suppose  that  a  fool  wrong¬ 
ly  pcrcfeiv^es  a  mirage  as  water,  and  that  you  argue 


'  p.  it. 

’  t’h.  XV,  p.  S60, 


TAXTRIC  BUDDHISM 


22 

against  that  wrong  perception.  The  fact  (u/s,,  your 
arguing  against  the  existence  of  water  in  the  mirage) 
is  just  the  same  as  that  {viz.,  our  arguing  against  the 
essence  of  the  £i?iannas)V  But  it  may  further  be 
objected,— "  If  tliere  is  neither  the  perception  nor 
the  perceived,  and  the  perceiver  also  be  non-existent, 
then  tliere  is  neither  the  refutation,  nor  the  refuted 
and  the  refuter  also  docs  not  exist. '  *  The  reply  is, 
— ^Sujipose  that  one  man  created  by  magic  (prevents) 
another  man  created  by  magic  or  that  one  iV/ayd- 
piiru^n  (prevents)  another  Ald|/fl-pKriiSfl  (from  doing 
something).  The  relation  (lit.  the  meaning)  of  the 
refutation  and  the  refuted  is  just  like  this.’ 

The  $u7iya*d-doetrine  of  Nagarjuna  may  seem  in¬ 
compatible  with  the  doctrine  of  nfrunTirt.  If  everjdhing 
be  void  and  there  be  neither  origination  nor  destruc¬ 
tion,  then  by  the  destruction  or  arrest  of  what  should 
we  attain  inVudna?*  The  reply  of  Nagarjuna  is  that 
niTvarta  is  not  something  whieh  is  to  be  attained 
through  the  destruction  or  the  arrest  of  anything  what¬ 
soever  ;  it  is  but  the  complete  cessation  of  all  mental 
constructions.''  It  has  been  described  as  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  nothing,— the  attainment  of  nothing,— it  is 
neither  annihilation,  nor  eternally  existent  it  is 
neither  the  arrested,  nor  the  produced— this  is  the 
definition  of  nirvana. '  Nothing  is  existent,— nothing  is 
non-existent  ;  so  the  question  of  annihilation  or  sup¬ 
pression  does  not  arise  at  all.  It  is  not  the  negation  of 
any  existence, — it  is  but  the  cessation  of  all  notions 


*  of  NSgaiiuim,  translated  from  ibe  ChinHe 
and  Tibetan  Texts  by  Tticci  {G.O.S.,  Vol.  XLIX,  Verse  No.  xiii). 

^  /6id.,  Verst-  No.  xv. 

’  Ibid.,  Verse  No.  xxiii. 

*  XXV,  p.  510. 

»  /bid.,  p.  32S. 

*  npra^ljiaiR  n*flniprapt«'rt  (invcchmuom  ttiMvatam  \ 
ontniddhfim  antifpafiwdPii  cf«n  niroavam  ueifnte  ||  f 

J&id.,  p.  521, 


PHILOSOPITTCAL  SYSTEStS 


23 


of  existence  and  non-existence.  '  All  consciousneas 
vanishes  in  nfruaiin  like  a  lamp  extinguished.  Nirvana 
is  no  Ens,  neither  non-Ens,  it  is  like  a  knot  entivined 
by  the  empty  space  (afeaia)  and  untied  again  by  that 
same  empty  space.  ’ 

As  we  have  said,  the  exact  position  of  Nagarjuna 
is  verj"  difiScuIt  to  understand  j  but  it  seems  clear  that 
his  emphasis  is  more  on  negation,  whereas  the  empha¬ 
sis  of  the  Vijnanavadins  is  on  the  existence  of  some 
transc'endental  absolute  reality  in  the  form  of  the 
*thatness^  (tatfiafd)  of  all  entities  or  as  pure  con¬ 
sciousness.  The  Lankavafdm-niitru  which  is  taken  by 
scholars  to  be  one  of  the  early  texts  of  Vijnanavada 
says  that  anutpdda  (uncreate)  and  s^unya  (void)  mean 
essencelessness  of  all  that  appear ;  but  the  reality  re¬ 
mains  as  mere  consciousness  (citta-nidtra-vyavasth.d- 
nam)  transcending  all  duality  (duapa-bhat^o)  of  sub¬ 
jectivity  and  objectivity/ 

(B)  The  Tathata-vIda  Of  Asvaghosa 

The  ‘  Tatliata  ’  doctrine  of  Asvaghosa  ( ?  80  A.D.) 
begins  with  a  denial  of  the  world  of  phenomena  in 
both  its  subjective  and  objective  aspects,  but  with  an 
affirmation  of  an  ultimate  and  absolute  reality  wliich 
is  the  uncreate,  eternal  and  immutable  cosmic  principle 
underlying  the  diversity  of  the  universe  as  a  wdiote. 
Two  aspects  of  this  reality  may  be  distinguished, — the 
aspect  of  pure  '  thatness  ’  or  *  suchness  *  (bhuto-faf/iafa) 
and  the  aspect  of  the  eycle  of  birth  and  death  (sam- 
sdra)/  each  being  inseparably  connected  with  the 
other. 


‘  ntn'finoin  uejfote  || 

quoted  in  the  .Vfadfci/amfifca-vrUt,  p.  52-J. 
Arrto  mocituA  |[ 

Ibid.,  p.  540, 

’  /.(Jwfrflirufdra-SMfrfi,  Ch.  ITT. 

*  Campure  the  and  Die  St;alak^ana  nf  the  uhhfita- 

in  the  .TfadhyBnItt-TJj&Afiga,  Infra, 


34 


TA.NTEIC  BUDDHISM 


The  *  thalfiess  ’  is  *the  oneness  of 

the  totality  of  things  (fj/hnnnn'ffhotti)»  the  great  all¬ 
ineluding  whole,  the  quintessence  of  the  Doctrine  In 
the  essence  of  the  ‘  thatness  ^  there  is  nothing  to  he  ex¬ 
cluded,  nothing  to  he  added— it  has  neither  beginning 
nor  end — it  cannot  be  ex})ressed  by  words  and  expres¬ 
sions  which  are  but  the  representations  of  the 
empirical  concepts, — its  very  nature  is  unspeakable 
and  inexplicable, — ^it  can  only  be  indicated  somehow 
as  *  thatness  ^ 

The  external  world,  which  appears  under  the 
particularised  forms  of  individuation,  is  nothing  but  a 
creation  of  the  mind  with  its  inherited  categories 
(sTUft/),  which  are  the  mere  products  of  ignorance.  The 
production  of  the  objective  world  through  the  distur¬ 
bance  of  smrti*  in  the  all-conserving  mind  (fi/ayo- 
rf/udna)  *  may  be  illustrated  by  the  simile  of  the  water 
and  the  waves.  Here  the  water  can  be  said  to  be  iden¬ 
tical  (in  one  sense)  with  the  waves.  The  waves  are 
stirred  up  by  the  wind,  but  the  water  remains  the 
same.  When  the  wind  ceases,  the  motion  of  the  waves 
subsides ;  but  the  water  remains  the  same.  Likewise 
when  the  mind  of  all  creatures,  which  in  its  own  nature 
is  pure  and  clear,  is  stirred  up  by  the  wind  of  Ignor¬ 
ance  (nuidr^d),  the  waves  of  mentality  (ni/adiia)  make 
their  appearance  V  So  the  external  world,  ^vilh  all 
its  variety  and  complexity,  has  no  real  existence  and 
as  such  the  fundamental  nature  of  things  is  neither 
namable  nor  explicable.  Tilings  have  no  signs  of  dis¬ 
tinction,  they  possess  absolute  sameness  (samotd). 


'  Wblil  the  ivort]  .Smrff  stgnifles  in  this  context  is  not  exactly 
knofwn.  Suzuki  tnkes  it  to  be  the  ‘  confused  subjectivity  (See, 
Tht  .'Itcokrainf  of  Pitith  in  /ftofdPliT^rn,  p,  5(t,  f.n.  No.  l)j 

hut  Dt.  S.  N,  Diii^^pta  suggests  it  lo  be  used  In  the  sense  of 
Fdsafia  (See,  .4  Hintorti  Indian  Phitoiophy,  Vol.  T,  p.  IfMl. 
f.n.  No.  I).  This  word  however  also  remmds  us  of  the  ‘confused 
ideas*  nf  Spinoza. 

*  .\s'vaghosn’s  4mifrrning  nf  Fnilh.  Suzuki’s  trnnslAtioii,  BT-ft. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  SYSTEMS 


25 


Tliey  are  subject  neither  to  transformation,  nor  to  des¬ 
truction.  They  are  nothing  but  the  one  soul,  for  whicii 
*siichness^  is  another  designation.  But  hoiv  can  all 
beings  conform  to  and  have  an  insight  into  suchness? 
The  answer  is,- — ‘  As  soon  as  you  understand  that  when 
the  totality  of  existence  is  spoken  of,  or  thought  of, 
there  is  neither  that  which  speaks,  nor  that  whLcIi  is 
spoken  of,  tliere  is  neither  that  which  thinks  nor  that 
wliich  is  timught  of;  then  j'ou  conform  to  suchness;  and 
when  your  subjectivity  is  thus  completely  obliterated, 
it  is  said  to-  have  the  insight 

This  ‘  suchness  ’  of  things  may  be  viewed  under  two 
aspects,  negative  and  positive.  On  its  negative  side 
(suni/afa)  it  asserts  the  complete  negation  of  all  the 
attributes  of  all  tilings;  in  its  metaphysical  origin  it  has 
nothing  to  do  with  things  defiled,  which  are  conditional 
or  relative  by  nature, — ^it  is  free  from  all  signs  of  dis¬ 
tinction  existing  among  phenomenal  objects, —it  is 
independent  of  unreal,  particularising  consciousness. 
The  suchness  is  '  neither  that  which  is  existence,  nor 
that  which  is  non-existence,  nor  that  which  is  at  once 
existence  and  non-existence,  nor  that  which  is  not  at 
once  existence  and  non-existence;  it  is  neither  that 
which  is  unity,  nor  that  which  is  plurality,  nor  that 
which  is  at  once  unity  and  plurality,  nor  that  which  is 
not  at  once  unity  and  plurality.  In  a  word,  as  such¬ 
ness  cannot  l)e  comprehended  by  the  particularising 
consciousness  of  ail  beings,  we  call  it  the  negation 
The  ‘tathata'  is  suni/n  (void)  for  two 
reasons,— iirstly,  there  is  no  content  in  it,  it  being 
the  oneness  of  the  totality  of  things;  secondly, 
there  is  neitlicr  any  subject  to  comprehend  it;  so  that 
its  nature  involves  the  denial  of  both  the  subjeot  and 
tlie  object;  there  is  neither  that  which  is  negated,  nor 
that  which  negates— both  being  absorbed  in  the  nature 
of  the  ‘  tatliata  \ 


*  p.  38. 

*  pp,  30-00. 

O.P,  105—1 


26 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


But  this  ‘  tathata  *  may  also  be  viewed  as  some¬ 
thing  positive  (asunyafo)  in  the  sense  that  it  contains 
infinite  merits,  that  it  is  self-existent;  in  it  we  perceive 
the  pure  soul  manifestiiig  itself  as  eternal,  permanent, 
immutable  and  completely  comprising  ail  things  that 
are  pure.  By  the  non-void  nature  of  the  ‘tathata* 
should  never  be  meant  any  sort  of  affirmation  on  it, — • 
we  can  have  only  a  glimpse  of  the  truth  by  transcend¬ 
ing  our  subjective  categories. 

As  for  samsara,  it  evolves  forth  as  the  law  of  causa¬ 
tion  from  the  womb  of  the  tathagata  {iathagata- 
gathha).  When  the  absolute  reality  assumes  a  relative 
aspect  by  its  self-aifimmtion,  it  is  called  the  all- 
conserving  nund  or  the  receptacle  mind  (afa^a- 
vijndna).  From  the  receptacle  or  all-conserving  mind 
evolves  through  the  infltience  of  non-enlightenment  an 
ego  principle,  ‘In  the  all-conserving  mind  ignorance 
obtains;  and  from  non-enlightenment  starts  that  which 
sees,  that  which  represents,  that  which  apprehends  an 
objecti%'e  world,  and  that  which  constantly  parti¬ 
cularises/  Thus  the  phenomenal  world,  established 
only  through  ignorance  and  the  root-instincts 
uasana)  has  no  more  reality  than  the  images  in  a  mirror 
-^all  modes  of  particularisation  being  the  self-parti- 
cnlarisation  of  the  mind.  But  by  the  belief  in  the 
existence  of  the  external  world  the  mind  becomes  obli¬ 
vious  of  the  principle  of  sameness  (samafd)  that  tmder- 
lies  all  things.  The  ctuintcssence  of  all  things  is  one  and 
the  same,  perfectly  calm  and  tranquil,  and  shows  no  sign 
of  becoming;  ignorance,  however,  is  in  its  blindness  and 
delusion  oblivious  of  enlightenment  and  on  that 
account  cannot  recognise  truthfully  all  those  condi¬ 
tions,  differences  and  activltie.s  which  characterise  the 
phenomena  of  tile  universe.  The  annihilation  of 
ignorance  is,  therefore,  the  oniy  way  of  liberation  from 
the  cycle  of  birth  and  death.  But  it  should  also  be  re¬ 
membered  that  the  mere  eradication  of  ignorance  is 
not  sufficient  to  guarantee  liberation,  for, long  as 


t'HTLOSOPHlCAL  SYSTEMS 


27 


there  will  remsiin  a  n»i»d,  ignorance  may  recur  at  any 
time;  so  the  total  extinction  of  mind  is  the  safest  course 
for  attaining  eternal  liberation, 

(A)  ViJKAX.iVADA  Ofi  YoGACARA 
After  this  '  Tathata  *  doctrine  of  Asvaghosa,  the 
conception  of  the  Abhuta-pankalpa  as  found  in  the 
Madhyanta-vibhaga,  said  to  be  originally  expounded  by 
-Maitreya  and  commented  upon  by  Vasubandhu  and 
Stliiramati,  gives  a  more  positive  and  precise  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  ultimate  reality.  It  begins  with  the 
aphorism, — ^‘The  Abfiaffl-parftafpo  exists,  no  dualilj^ 
exists  in  it;  void  exists  in  it  and  it  also  exists  in  tiie 
void-'‘  Tills  apliohsm  is  a  challenge  to  both  the 
extreme  Realists  (i.e.,  the  Sarvasti-vadins)  and  to  the 
extreme  Nihilists  {i.e.,  the  Madhyamikas),  *  and  the 
thesis  of  the  AhhutO'paWA'alpa  is  something  like  a 
middle  path  between  the  two  extremes.  The  word 
Abhuta-^arikalpa  literally  means — that  which  is  devoid 
of  all  '  constructs  ’ — j,e.,  the  substratum  where  there  is 
the  mere  possibility  of  ail  subjectivity  and  objectivity, 
— but  in  which  the  duality  has  no  reality,^ 

The  aphorism  may  be  interpreted,  in  the  fii'st 
instance,  as  a  refutation  of  the  extreme  sceptic  view 
of  the  Madhyamikas.  Tliey  (i.e.,  the  Madhyamikas) 


^  athulo-ponftaJjfoVli  tfi'aj/cnn  t«lra  no  vidyate  I 
aiinyata  vidyate  fv  atra  Ustjam  upi  sa  vidyate  |, 

.VodAjfarini-cifcAiSga-fifca,  Levi’s  Eclitioa,  p.  10, 

’An  impartial  scrutiny  into  the  nature  of  the  Sunyata  of  the 
Madhynmitos  reveals  I  he  fact  that  the  dunyatft  of  the  Madhyamikas 
may  not  be  taken  in  the  extreme  nihilistic  sense  in  which  it  has  been 
taken  bv  the  Vijoanavudins  and  the  Vcdinlins;  but  as  I  he  Vijaaiia- 
vadins  have  always  taktn  this  sunyata  of  the  MMhyanukas  in  the 
extreme  luhilistic  sense,  we  shall  also  admit  this  interpretation  ouly 
to  understand  the  exact  standpoint  of  the  Vijhanavhdins. 

’  Cuntpaie  here  the  JellniUoii  of  as  found  in 

the  .l/ahdj^flna-mtT'ufaHftdra  of  Asanga,— 

ufrhnfn-knfpo  na  bfiftto  ndhhuto’  kitlpa  evn  cn| 
jjn  fcnipo  julpi  cdkatpah  soruani  /firyflin  m'rucyofe  H 

th.  XI,  Verse  31.  (Livi's  Edition). 


28  tXktbic  buddhism 

hold  that  all  the  elements  are  non-essential  or  unreal 
(nih-St-'ahJidua)  like  the  pair  of  horns  of  the  hare* 
Against  them  it  is  said  that  all  the  riharmos  are  not 
void  (six jtifn)  in  the  sense  that  nothing  exists  at  all,  but 
in  the  sense  that  in  the  ultimate  reality  as  Ablxixla- 
parifcalpa  there  is  no  duality  of  subjectivity  and  objec¬ 
tivity,  Suiiyata  is  the  absence  of  the  knower  and  the 
knowable  (frflhjfn-grd/iat'a-raliiiafa),  but  it  never  im¬ 
plies  absolute  negation  (ndsfifva).  So  sunyafa 
exists  in  the  Abkuta-])arikalpa  as  the  absence  of  the 
perceiver  and  the  perceived.  Hut  even  though  this 
non-dual  sil/fyafa  is  already  there  in  the  Ahhixfn- 
paHkalpa,  we  are  not  at  once  liberated  because  of  the 
fact  that  in  gunyata,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  perfect 
purity,  also  exists  the  Abhafa-poriA-flipa  with  the  dor¬ 
mant  seeds  of  the  subjective-objeetii^e  world. 

The  same  argument  can  also  lie  directed  against 
the  extreme  Realists  who  believe  in  the  reality  of  the 
extra-mental  objects  (dravya).  The  objects  do  not 
exist  as  extra-mental  realities,  they  are  real  in  the  form 
of  the  Abkuta-parikalpa,  which  is  a  mere  transcen¬ 
dental  existence  (bhduo-TndtTft),  We  cannot  think 
of  any  reality  which  is  outside  our  mind,  and  our  men¬ 
tation  arises  without  reference  to  any  object  as  in  the 
dream;  our  mind  (uf/ndna)  projects  itself  as  an  imiige 
o£  the  objective  reality  (arfAd-bhdsfi)  as  the  fruition 
{uipdka)  of  the  seeds  of  the  root-instincts  (udsnnd). 
But  it  may  be  argued  that  if  the  objective  world  is 
totally  denied,  there  remains  nothing  as  the  support 
of  our  purity  (i?8^adddytifanibaaii)  and,  therefore,  there 
remains  no  possibility  of  liberation.  The  reply  is  that 
jsiinyfltd  in  the  form  of  the  absence  of  all  subjectivity 
and  objectivity  remains  there  as  the  support  of  our 
final  purification.  But  like  the  purity  of  the  sky  this 
Bunyata  also  is  not  easily  realisable  because  of  its  con¬ 
nection  W'ith  the  Ahfiaffl-porifcflfpfl  whicli  contains  in 
it  the  ultiinate  seeds  of  the  illusoiy^  mental  and  material 
world  (c/,  the  klesd-vara^a  and  the  jneyd-varma). 


i 


PHILOSOPHICAL  SYSTEMS 


2§ 

Some  are  of  opinion  that  both  subjectivity  and 
objecti\nty  are  absolutely  cbimerical  as  the  possibility 
of  the  son  of  a  barren  woman.  Others,  on  the  other 
hand,  think  that  the  negation  of  the  dharnias  implies 
only  the  negation  of  a  so ul*sub stance  to  regulate  the  in¬ 
ternal  affairs  (autar-t'i/cpora-pwrMsa-raJtifflffl),  but  the 
dltarmfls  have  their  esttra-iuental  reality.  To  repudiate 
the  denial  of  the  universal  absolute  on  the  one  hand  and 
to  deny  the  substantiality  of  the  external  things  on  the 
other,  it  is  said  that  in  the  Abhuta-parikalpa  is  eon- 
tuined  the  siirtpato  in  the  sense  of  the  denial  of  all 
duality  and  the  reality  of  the  appearances.' 

The  world  of  subjectivity  and  objectivity  is  being 
produced  by  our  constructive  imagination  (uifcaipaj 
just  like  the  magically  evoked  phantom  of  beasts.* 
The  word  AbhUta  implies  that  the  images  of  tilings,  as 
they  are  constructed  by  oiir  i  magi  nation,  do  not  exist 
in  these  very  forms,  and  the  word  paTikalpa  implies 
that  they  have  not  the  reality  they  are  supposed  to 
have.*  But  tiiough  this  phenomenal  world  of  sub- 


I  From  the  moral  standpoint  the  aphorism  may  be  said  to  be 
introduced  only  to  examine  the  double  paturc  of  the  reality  as  impure, 
or  phenomenal  and  pure  absolute  (vj/ovaAluu).  The  im* 

pure  phenomenal  reality  is  a  merely  illusory  rcpresL-ntatitm  of  the 
/l&fiuta-naritfllpa,— which  may,  therefore,  be  said  to  he  a  tromM- 
dentul  illusion.  But  the  iunj/ofa  exists  in  it  as  the  absolute  punfymg 
force  counter-acting  the  corrupting  forces  of  impure  illusion;  but  this 
perfect  purity  is  to  be  sought  from  the  impure  illusory  phenomenal 
reality  itself,— there  is  no  ejUBtcntial  difference  between  the  puwty 
and  Ibe  impurity and  it  U  therefore  said, — ‘  in  her  also  exists  it  , 
.\a  the  principle  of  perfect  purity  is  there,  the  defiling  prmciple  of 
phcnomenalisatiou  is  also  there}  and  hetiM  the  necessity  for  moral 
efforts.  .l/didhyaMfa'Vib/iagu-tlfcd-  J^evi’s  Edition,  p.  l». 

*  n.  Piter  rftai/qm  niJafirfotn  I 

tatra  yatha  rifi’sfi  Jvaffam  caiuo’fwfobliyftfe  |l 

th,  XI,  Verse  25. 

*  “nbhii(a"-vacon<'HO  fu  parikalpuatt  -;Tahtta~sr<tha- 

katvena  tathS  nu'stT'fi'  pmefursaynti  I 

'<purjfaifpn”-i’ii™afno  fti  arffio  yniha  parikatpijnte  fnlhoMlm 
flu  vidpftfr  ifi  pmdsTTsaj/ati  | 

4f  a  d  by  (in  f  n-t'ib  h  3 . 


taktric  btjbdhism 


aa 

jectivity  and  objectivity  is  illusory,  the  Abhuia- 
parikalpa  is  not  also  chimerical.  As  the  rope  is  void 
(iunya)  in  the  form  of  the  snake,  but  not  as  the  rope, 
in  the  same  way  things  are  illusory  and  non-existent  in 
their  subjective  and  objective  nature,  but  not  also  in 
the  Abhuta-parikaipa  nature.  The  correct  description 
of  sunyatd  is  that  the  thing,  which  is  devoid  of  some¬ 
thing,  exists  but  the  thing,  of  which  it  is  devoid,  does 
not  exist,  Tlic  nature  of  the  iunyata  is  to  be  realised 
as  both  non-affirmation  (a/iadlii/d-ropa)  as  welt  as  non- 
negatioji  (anapatidda).  It  is  non-affirmation  in  the 
sense  of  the  denial  of  the  duality  and  non-denial  in  the 
sense  of  the  affirmation  of  the  non-dual  (aduaj/a). 

The  obj'ectless  consciousness  manifests  itself  os 
reflected  awareness  in  the  form  of  the  object  and  tlie 
subject  and  that  which  sticks  to  them;  in  absence  of  this 
(the  awareness)  those  the  images)  are  also  non¬ 
existent,  ‘  The  ^bhafc-pariAalpa  in  its  specific  nature 
($ua-ZaA^ana)  is  of  the  nature  of  awareness.  All 
mentations  arise  out  of  the  subliminal  mind  store,  or 
the  all-cojiserving  mind  under  the  influence  of  co¬ 
operating  forces  which  bring  their  germs  to  maturity 
and  the  difference  which  is  produced  in  the  subliminal 
mind  store  in  accordance  with  the  influence  of  moral, 
immoral  or  non-moral  deeds,  is  responsible  for  the 
manifold  phenomenal  individual  existences  in  all  the 
spheres  of  life.  Although  our  consciousness  does  not 
contain  a  real  plm'ality  of  different  objects,  it  has  the 
capacity  of  producing  manifold  ideas.  Each  is 
produced  from  its  own  germ  in  accordance  with  the  law 
of  our  experiential  series.* 

The  absolute  nature  of  the  dh/iufn-parit'a/pa,  how¬ 
ever,  cannot  be  known  through  the  ordinary  mind,  for 
it  involves  the  paradox  of  proving  the  fact  of  insanity 

*  artha-suttvaifna-vij^upti-pratfbbQmm  prajayaU  \ 
vijaHuofU  cfl^9yd^fihajt  tnd  ^bMvai  tad  uptja^ai  |j 

Ibid,,  p*.  16, 


=  Com,*  p.  hi. 


PHJLOSOPHrCAI*  SySTElilS 


31 


to  the  insane.  Its  nature  can  only  be  intuited  by 
transcending  all  subjectivity  and  objectivity^nd  this 
transcending  the  duality  is  perfect  extinction.  The 
law  of  Karma  is  strictly  observed  here;  and  a  future 
birth  always  results  as  the  fruition  of  the  activities  of 
the  former  life  which  remain  recorded  in  tlie  form  of 
vdsana  and  samsMra.  But  a  saint,  who  has  intuited 
the  absolute  truth,  is  not  affected  thereby  and  is  free 
from  the  projecting  rebirth.  The  realisation  of  the 
sunj/afa-nature  of  tilings  is  the  only  way  to  perfect 
purity,  and  this  reality  realised  in  tlie  is 

synonymoQs  with  the  "thatness*  (tatkata)  of  things, 
the  totality  of  things  (bkuta-kotij!^  the  uncaused 
(animitCa),  the  highest  truth  (parauiurthfttd)  and  the 
ultimate  element  of  things  (d/ianna-dhd,tu). 

The  Abhuta-parikalpa  has  often  been  described  in 
the  yiadhydnta-vibhdga-pkd  as  pure  consciousness,  but 
this  nature  of  tlie  ultimate  reality  as  pure  conscious¬ 
ness  has  not  sufficiently  been  emphasised.  This  em¬ 
phasis  is  to  be  found  in  the  Viplapti-mdtratd-siddhi  of 
Acarya  Vasubandhu,  which  begins  with  the  proposition 
that  all  the  three  elements  are  at  bottom  pure  consci¬ 
ousness — ^and  all  the  phenomena  are  as  much  unreal  as 
the  illusion  of  hair  and  moons  to  a  person  with  defective 
eyes.  But  how  then  to  explain  the  spatio-temporal 
laws,  the  law  of  the  experiential  series,  and  the  laws  of 
duties?  The  reply  is  that  all  the  laws  arc  formed  as  in 
dream.  For,  even  in  di'eain  we  perceive  something 
specific  in  some  particular  space  and  time  without  there 
being  any  real  object  of  experience.  The  universaUty 
of  experiential  series  is  also  to  be  taken  as  in  the  case 
of  the  ghosts  (pretas);  they  all  see  in  hell  rivers  full  of 
pus  though  there  is  actually  nothing  there.  The  laws 
of  duties  are  like  the  night-discharges  which  happen 
without  there  being  any  real  activity. 

The  question  here  may  be,— if  all  forms  (rapa)  and 
fields  of  experiences  (dpafana)  be  nothing  but  pure 
consciousness,  how  is  it  that  the  Lord  himself  spoke  of 


32 


TAXTRIC  BUDDHISM 


them  ?  The  reply  is  that  the  Lord  spoke  of  them  only 
to  teach  the  lay  disciples  of  low  intellectual  calibre — 
but  in  speaking  of  them  he  had  an  ultimate  intention 
(abhipraya).  In  reality  the  rbpas  and  ayataum  are 
nothing  but  the  manifestation  of  the  dormant  seeds  in 
consciousness  (nijnaptO,  These  instructions  of  the 
Lord  were  ultimately  intended  for  making  the  disciples 
realise  the  non-entity  of  the  self  (purfgafa-nairdtm'j/a) 
and  the  non-entity  also  of  the  things  (dharnux- 
nairdtmj/a).  But  by  this  non-entity  is  not  meant  any 
niliilismj  non-entity  is  spoken  only  of  the  nature  of 
things  as  the  perceiver  and  the  perceived  {grahya- 
grahakab  but  not  of  the  nature  of  things  as  intuited 
by  the  perfectly  enlightened  ones. 

As  for  our  perceptions  which  are  generally  taken 
to  be  the  best  evidence  for  the  existence  and  non¬ 
existence  of  things,  it  may  be  said  that  they  are  mental 
constructions  as  in  the  dream.  In  dream  there  is 
neither  the  real  object  nor  the  senses  to  perceive  them, 
yet  there  is  the  perception;  so  also  is  the  ease  with  all 
our  perceptions  which  we  falsely  take  to  be  the  direct 
copies  of  the  thing  itself.  It  may,  however,  be  argued 
that  our  dream-perceptions  presuppose  the  memory  of 
the  real  perception;  but  the  reply  is  that  our  memory 
itself,  instead  of  being  the  representation  of  the  per¬ 
ception  of  tJie  real  object,  may  as  well  be  a  mere  modi¬ 
fication  of  consciousness.  Again,  it  may  be  objected, 
that  if  perception  of  our  conscious  life  be  as  false  as  that 
of  our  dreams,  how  is  it  that  we  ourselves  arc  not 
conscious  of  this  illusory  nature  of  our  perceptions  in 
the  same  way  as  we  ourselves  are  conscious  of  the  falsity 
of  our  dream-perception.  Tlie  reply  is  that  as  a  man 
cannot  be  conscious  of  tiie  falsity  of  his  dream- 
experiences  unless  he  awakes  from  his  sleep,  so  also 
people,  who  are  engrossed  in  the  sleep  of  false  imagina¬ 
tions,  habits  and  the  mental  complexes  (ud»«nd),  can¬ 
not  realise  the  illusory  nature  of  their  experiences  un¬ 
less  they  open  their  eyes  in  the  flash  of  enlightenment. 


33 


PHILOSOPHICAL  SYSTEMS 

Our  ignorance  is  the  ultimate  support  of  our  uoMnas 
and  the  in  their  turn  are  responsible  for  the 

imagination  of  the  subjective  and  the  objective  world, 
—and  this  subjectivity  produces  our  moral  hindrances 
through  the  veil  of  passions  and  attachment  (klesa- 
varana),  and  objectivity  produces  the  veil  of  the  know- 
able  (jileyd^^atana)  :  by  tearing  off  this  veil  of  passion 
we  attain  omniscience  and  by  removing  the  \^il  of  the 
knowable  we  attain  liberation.  The  reality  is  both  the 
absence  of  the  notion  of  ego  (pmfgala-naiVatmj^a)  and 
of  ^  the  notion  of  all  things  (d/?orma'najratmya) — 
it  is  only  pure  consciousness  (uijiiapfi-mflfmfa).  * 

The  transformation  of  consciousness  {vijiionc- 
parinarna)  has  three  stages,  viz,,  (i)  fruition  (vipdka) 
of  the  root-instincts  (udsfina),  (ii)  mentation 
(manana)  and  (iii)  objects  of  awareness  (vijilapfi- 
yisaya).  Through  the  fruition  of  the  inherent  root- 
iBstincts  there  follow  the  waves  of  mentation  which  are 
responsible  for  the  appearance  of  the  objective  world. 
The  JJaya-vijnana,  from  whicli  follow  all  subjectivity 
and  objectivity,  is  but  a  transformation  of  the  eternal 
root-instincts  which  lie  in  the  consciousness  as  dormant 
seeds.  The  Jlaya-vijnana  literally  means  the  abode  or 
support  (alaya)  of  all  mentation  (id/iidna).  It  has 
been  explained  both  as  the  receptacle  where  everything 
is  connected  as  effect,  and  as  the  priwro  causd  in 
things,’  But  if  besides  the  world  of  our  active 

’  Some,  of  connr,  may  hold  that  if  there  he  no  soul-substance 
ns  the  iiUimafe  reality,  there  cannot  be  any  attribution  (tipirSm)  of 
quiilities.  In  reply  the  Vijnanavfidins  ar^e  that  the  view  that  the 
objective  world  is  an  attribution  of  the  soul-substance  cannot  be 
accepted  on  any  logical  ground.  ^loreover,  the  quintessence  of  any 
such  soul-substance  can  neither  be  known  nor  be  spoken  of;  and  we 
cannot  establish  the  truth  of  any  reality  which  is  neither  know, 
able  nor  spe.^kable.  _Whflt  we  know  and' speak  of  is  the  world  of 
our  constructive  ttnagination  which  has  its  origin  in  pore  eonsdousoess, 

’  ntha  vaJiifante  up/iutbadhyanti'’  srnn'n  san’o-d'Anrmflh  karr/nl 
bhaiTrtff  I 

yad  va  Hyatf,  uptitiihndhtjatc  Afurufio.hftrivino  sonWhamesv 
ity  alayak  || 

ri/tinpfi-matmta-jiffrfAi,  com,  on  the  Triifiitkd, 

'  L^vS'b  Kdttiuu.  p.  78, 

O.P,  105—5 


34 


tantric  buddhism 


consciousness  (praurtti-ui/ndna)  there  be  an  ali-con- 
serving  mind  (iJfni/rt-i'ijfidna)  il  must  have  a  form  ,  the 
reply  is  that  the  is  of  the  form  of  an 

illimitable  support  <apanccftmiidlambaitd-fcdrfl>— vve 
only  see  it  manifested  as  the  internal  categories  and  the 
external  categories;  but  nature  of  these  categories 
cannot  be  determined.  In  the  Jlaj/a-widdno  there 
remain,  in  form  of  the  root-instincts  (uasand),  the 
potencies  of  both  the  ego  with  the  internal  categories 
and  the  external  world  of  objects;  and  these  potencies 
project  themselves  as  the  fruition  of  the  rool-instincls 
as  subjectivity  and  objectivity  in  an  inherent  law  of 
deep  harmony.  But  why  should  we  admit  the  reality 
of  any  such  transcendental  support  of  the  subjective 
and  objective  world  when  we  cannot  determine  the 
nature  of  their  potencies  in  their  original  abode 
(dinya)?  Because,  all  schools  of  thought  will  agree 
that  even  when  the  subjectrie  and  objective  world  is 
not  (as  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep),  the  existence  of  the 
consciousness  cannot  be  denied.  This  ^laya-yijmna  h 
no  eternal  and  unchanging  principle — it  is  like  an  un¬ 
ceasing  flow  of  water  which  glides  on  and  on  through 
the  evolution  of  cause  and  effect. 

Thus  it  is  dear  that  anything  and  everything  that 
is  imagined  to  be  existent,  does  not  exist  by  itself  as 
any  real  entity;  cverj^hing  is  but  the  transfomiatipn 
of  consciousnes-V  and  it  is  the  original  seed  of  all,  as 
it  possesses  the  potency  of  producing  tliem  all.* *  All 
these  imaginations,  which  are  all  conditional  {pratyayo- 


C/.  Alio:— tfiTVir  dhansfl*  iatra  fjhitla-bhflt'rntt 

tftc  Cfl  fPfM  I 

Levi’s  Ltlitioii.  p-  S2. 

‘  vijtiAna-pannfttno’f^BriJ  u/llffih'"  | 

tena  fun  nn’sfi  ffreMnm  nmtifirn  fn;nuprt-rKarraIrnni  || 

Jbid.,  Verse  ir. 

*  hilrti  JWinv-bl/ain. 

JbitL,  p;  96. 


PiliLOSOPHlCAL  SYSTEMS 


35 


are  relative  in  nature  (paraiaHtrc^siJflbJiflva)} 
ill  tlie  absolute  state  (partnif^oUi)  there^is  neither  the 
subject  t^rdhaiva)  nor  the  object  {grdhyaj, — it  is  like 
the  pure  sky  above.  The  nature  of  the  dharwias  inay 
thus  be  described  in  three  ways ;  as  the  product  of 
constructive  miagiualion  (parikalpittt)i  as  relative  or 
conditional  (paratfliitro)  and  as  absolute  (pariwis- 
panno).  ‘  Now,  parikalpoHu  being  the  product  of 
imagination  cannot  constitute  the  real  nature  of 
things ;  in  jjuratantra  things  have  only  dependent 
nature,  which  cannot  be  real ;  but  in  the  absolute  nature 
things  arc  neither  ens  nor  non-ens  i  this  absolute  nature 
can  only  be  somehow  indicated  as  the  ‘  that  ness  * 
{talhatd)  of  things,  and  this  Uliatness’  of  things  is 
nothing  but  pure  consciousness.  When  our  psychosis 
ilius  gets  rid  of  subjectivity  as  well  as  objectivity  and 
remains  steady  in  pure  consciousness,  the  highest 
knowledge  is  produced  wliich  is  supra-mental,  uncog- 
iiisible  and  transcendental ;  it  is  the  involution  of  the 
Aiaya-vijndna  through  the  eradication  of  the  two  veils 
(of  passion  and  ignorance)  ;  that  is  the  immutable 
element  whicli  is  beyond  the  reach  of  all  mentation  ; — * 
it  is  all-good,  permanent,  perfect  faliss—of  the  form  of 
hberation'— it  is  the  substance  itself.  ^ 


(D)  iVrrnfiTV  With  Vedakta 

The  metaphysical  dialectics  of  the  Sunyavadin  and 
the  Vijilanavadin  Buddhists  prepared  the  ground  for 
the  monistic  conception  of  the  ultimate  reality  of  the 
Veduntins.  Tlie  task  of  destroying  the  older  doctrines 
was  undertaken  and  very  ably  done  by  the  Buddhists, 

^  Cf.  also 

Ch.  XI,  Verses  ae-U. 

’  jriu«ofli  ioltP-lloraBcp  fat  1 

turaj/ufryu  pamurKtr  ifvi4lhJi  itauftujuti-hQnitafy  H 
jru  eud’fltianitJa  rffiafai'  at'iJilyafi  dhmvah  I 

sutcho  vimukti-kayo’imu  dhafm&khyo'y(t7h  inaAanutnah  |i 

V'enura  !i!f-3e. 


36 


taNtbic  buddhism 


i 


but  the  work  of  building'  up  the  edifice  of  a  construc¬ 
tive  system  was  left  for  the  Vedantins  to  undertake. 
Nagarjuna,  as  we  have  already  seen,  frankly  confessed 
that  he  had  no  thesis  to  prove,  his  onh'  business  was 
to  contradict  others.  The  Vijnanavadins,  however, 
were  not  imcompromisiug  negativists,  but  their  posi¬ 
tive  standpoint  is  also  not  very  clear  and  firm  ;  it  was 
left  for  Acarya  Sankara  to  draw  the  logical  conclusions 
froni  the  data  supplied  by  the  Buddhists.  The  exact 
position  of  Nagarjima  is  rather  difiicult  to  understand. 
His  opponents,  viz,,  the  Vijfianavadins  and  the  Vedaiit- 
ins  have  always  criticised  his  .*§unyavada  as  pure  nihil¬ 
ism  ;  but  his  ^nyatd  also  admits  the  interpretation  of 
an  absolute  transcendeuta]  reality  always  escaping  the 
grasp  of  inteneetual  comprehension  and  verbal  exposi¬ 
tion, — arurl  in  this  way  it  may  be  said  to  have  assimil¬ 
ated  the  Brahman  of  the  Upanisads  and  anticipated  the 
Brahman  of  the  Vcdantins.  The  general  attitude  of 
Buddha  and  the  Buddliists  towards  the  ontological 
problem  does  not  seem  to  be  any  clear-cut  negation, 
—but  a  policy  of  silence  ;  and  this  attitude  of  silence 
towards  the  ontological  problem  is  no  freak  in  the 
evolution  of  Indian  religious  thought.  The  Upanisads 
and  the  Advaita  Vedanta  of  Sankara  also  took  the  same 
device  of  silence  as  to  the  nature  of  the  realisation  of 
the  Brahman.  The  same  attitude  has  often  been  taken 
by  the  European  Sceptics  and  the  Agnostics.  As  PrO’ 
fessor  Stclierbatsky  puts  it,— ‘  In  many  systems, 
ancient  and  modern,  eastern  and  western,  the  reality 
in  itself,  the  pith  of  reality  is  declared  to  be  sojnetliing 
incognisable.  It  is,  therefore,  quite  natural  to  find  in 
the  Sutra  literature,  where  the  style  popular  dis¬ 
courses  is  adopted,  the  device  of  impressing  upon  the 
audience  the  mystic  character  of  the  Absolute  bv 
silence.  The  Mahayaua-sutras  do  not  tarry  in  diarac- 
lerising  it  as  “  unspeakable ",  “undefinable”  etc.' 

^  Th€  Conci'ptivf}  cf  Buddhist  p.  22, 


philosophical  systems 


37 

Ill  the  chapter  on  the  nature  of  Nirvana  in  the 
Madhyamika-vTtti  of  Nagarjuna,  we  find  the  nature  of 
things  (d/mrmos)  deseribed  as;  — 

uvdco^naksatah  sarva-sunyafy  sunfddinimicifa/t.  ‘ 

All  the  dharm&s  are  unspeakable,  unchanging,  all- 
void,  quiescent  and  pui'e*  Nagarjuna  himself  has  else- 
wliere  admitted  that  the  reality  is  neither  void  nor  non- 
void,  hut  it  is  called  void  only  with  the  purpose  of 
indicating  it  somehow.  It  is  not  absolutely  impossible 
to  infer  '  something  ’  out  of  this  ‘  nothing  *  of  the  Siinj'a- 
vadins.  The  TatJialavada  of  Asvaghosa  also  admits 
the  Tathata-nature  of  things  to  be  something  substan- 
tial,  perniancut  and  unchanging,  it  is  also  something 
positive.  The  Yogacara-school’s  conception  of  the 
reality  as  the  or  as  pure  conscious¬ 

ness  (T?ijnaptt-mdtrfl)  di'ives  us  very  near  to  the  Vedan- 
Ue  conception  of  the  ultimate  reality  as  the  Nirgaiia 
(qualitiless)  Braimian  who  transcends  all  knowledge, 
knower  and  the  knowable.  It  has  always  been  vehe¬ 
mently  argued  by  the  Vijfianavadins  that  sunyatd  was 
never  spoken  of  by  tlie  Lord  as  pure  nothing ;  while  it 
is  the  negation  of  all  duality,  it  implies  af  the  same 
time  the  reality  of  the  Abkuta-parikalpa,  which  is  pure 
consciousness— -unciiaagiiig,  unthinkable,  all-good,  eter¬ 
nal,  all  bliss,  the  ultimate  element  of  the  nature  of 
salvation.  Again  in  the  doeetic  conception  of  the  Tri- 
kaya  in  the  Mahayana  system  the  Dharma-  kaya  or  the 
body  of  tlie  cosmic  unity,  or  the  organised  totality  of 
things,  though  not  as  a  purely  philosophical  concept,  but 
as  an  object  of  religious  consciousness,  seems  to  be  just 
the  same  as  that  of  the  idea  of  the  Nirguna  Brahman 
of  the  Upanisads. 

So  it  seems  that  as  time  was  passing  on,  Buddhist 
philosophy  began  to  come  more  and  more  in  contact 
with  the  Upanisatlic  literature  and  through  its  influence 
began  to  be  more  anti  more  positive  regarding  the  onto¬ 
logical  problem, —and  we  are  not  quite  sure  if  we 

'  Minlkyntnika-i'^ti,  Edition,  p,  sao. 


38  TAKTRIC  BXT>DinSM 

shaU  be  far  6ff  from  the  truth  if  u'e  assert  tliat  the 
Advaita-ved^ta  of  iSahkara  wth  its  colourless  Brah¬ 
man  contradicting  all  tlic  empirical  realities  is  in  its 
turn  the  <!ulmination  of  the  evolution  of  the  Upanisa- 
die  Buddhistic  thought.  Professor  Kadhakrishnan  has 
gone  so  far  as  to  say  that  *  Buddhism  is  only  a  later 
phase  of  the  general  movement  of  thought  of  which 
the  Upanisacis  were  the  earlier,  * '  He  also  quotes  the 
authority  of  Professor  Max  Muller,  who  says  that 
*  Many  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Upanisatls  are  no  doubt 
pure  Buddhism,  or  rather  Buddhism  is  on  many  points 
the  consistent  carrying  out  of  the  principle  laid  do\Tii 
in  the  Upanisads.  ’  ’  We  may  further  add  to  it  that 
the  revival  of  the  Brahminie  thought  agam  m  its  turn 
had  its  stand  -on  the  systems  of  Buddhistic  thought. 
Gaudapada  Nourished  after  the  advent  of  all  the  great 
exp<inents  of  Buddhism  and  ‘there  h  sutficlcnt  evi¬ 
dence  in  his  kan'fcd  for  thinking  that  he  was  possibly 
himself  a  Buddhist,  and  he  considered  that  tlic  teach¬ 
ings  of  the  Upanisads  tallied  with  those  of 
Buddha.  *  *  It  has  also  been  justly  pointed  out  that  at 
the  beginning  of  the  fourth  chapter  of  his  karika  on  the 
jlfdiiduJtj/o-paiw'sad  Gaudapa  adores  Buddha  with 
much  reverence,* 

Gaudapada  has  expounded  all  his  views  in  a  com¬ 
mentary  on  the  Mdndukyo-ptmisad,  He  admits  the 
ultimate  reality  to  be  a  soul-reality,  but  this  soul- 
reality  (dtmau)  in  its  last  or  the  highest  stage 
is  neillier  the  internal  cognitive  processes,  nor  the 
external  knowledge,  nor  is  it  the  knowledge  of  the 


*  /nrlkn  PhiJiJiidpiiilf,  Vol.  I,  p-  -tTD, 

»  Ibid.,  p.  +T0. 

'  A  fliiloru  of  Puhun  FftfitPSOpAy — Ijy  Df.  S.  N.  Djisguptrt, 

Vo).  1,  ji.  -123. 

TfiifUa-tihiPinCHii  lawi  bflnJe-  JuipodiSrii  vnram  h 

^  Gau^apiidu’s  Comm,  on 

Atiimd&srfttna-fiTuntliAvall  sfrie#, 

p.  146. 


philosophical  systems 


8® 


both ;  neither  is  it  awareness,  nor  the  mere  con- 
lentiess  consciousness ;  it  is  neither  conscious  nor 
unconscious.  It  is  unseen,  unrelationable,  ungraspable, 
indefinable,  unthinkable,  unspeakable,  the  essence  as 
oneness  with  the  self,  the  extinction  of  all  phenomenali- 
sation,  the  quiescent,  the  good,  it  is  the  one. '  The 
omniscient  wise  in  the  final  stage  knows  neither  himself 
nor  others, — he  knows  neither  the  real — nor  the  unreal, 
—he  knows  nothing  at  all.  *  Tl^e  phenomenal  world  is 
like  a  creation  in  dream  ;  it  never  existed  in  tlie  begin- 
will  never  exist  at  the  end, — ^it  cannot  exist  in 
the  present.  All  tiie  unreals  are  seeming  to  be  real.  The 
world  of  differences,  the  plurality  of  the  se}ve.SH-all  are 
as  much  unreal  as  the  imagination  of  the  rope  as  a 
snake  in  the  dark  night.  In  the  deepest  intuition  all 
the  differences  of  forms  and  selves  vanish  and  what 
remains  is  one  Brahman. 

From  an  impartial  examination  of  these  general 
\dews  of  Gaudapada  we  may  say  that  his  metaphysical 
position  is  not  something  essentially  different  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  Vogacarins. 

What  was  out-lined  by  Gaudapada  in  his  Karika 
attainetl  its  full  development  in  the  hand  of  his  worthy 
successor  Acarya  Sankara,  Although  in  the  coui-se  of 
his  comment arj'  on  the  B'rahT7ia-8wfras,  he  has  often 
quarrelled  with  the  Buddhists,  yet  we  may  say  that  the 
net  result  achieved  is  but  a  rehabilitation  of  the 
Upanisadic  spirit  in  and  through  the  metaphysical 
arguments  of  the  different  schools  of  Buddhism. 

The  literature  of  this  period,  breathes  in  general 
the  same  philosophical  spirit  as  is  found  in  the  Vedanta 
anft  the  Yogacara  Buddhism.  In  the  Fogaijosistfia  we 
often  find  an  echo  of  the  Buddhist  idealists  in  holding 

'  na  IwiMh-pm/iiiiiii  prajtiatn  1 

aijrdOim  avf)(ii,'<ihar!(<iin  ngrfl^yctm 

avyitpadeSya m  ek&tn»i^pratijaya'ii& raiit  f r(i|»a Hra^paSa main 
iantam  iwam  advftitarn  |] 

IN'J.,  [>■  Ml. 


=  /birf.,  p.  VcTbC  12. 


^  TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 

« 

the  external  world  of  diversity  to  be  merely  a  construe- 
tion  of  mind.'  It  has  often  been  held ’in  univocal 
language  that  the  notion  of  tlie  ego  is  purely  an 
illusion,  and  the  illusion  of  the  world  is  but  an  evolu¬ 
tion  of  the  consciousness  icid-vivarta),  and  the  original 
ca^e  of  this  illusion  and  evolution  is  ignorance  {avidyd} 
and  tile  cessation  of  it  is  the  real  liberation.  Neither  the 
ego  (aham)  nor  the  non-ego  (anaham)  is  real, — both 
of  them  are  illusioD-s  based  on  our  ignorance*  * 


i  !tf.,  Vo),  n.  VtlarArddhnm 

Ch.  VI,  p.  12. 


CHAPTER  II 


Vmystematised  Philosophical  Fragments  Found  In 

The  Buddhht  T^ntraH 


Fra^mcnfi  of  Mahayanic  philosophical  ideas  lie 
scattered  in  the  Biiddlnst  Tantras  sometimes  as  specu¬ 
lations  on  the  nature  of  the  truth  and  mainly  in  the 
context  of  the  ceremonies  and  secret  Yogic  practices. 
In  adopting  Mahayana  Buddhism  and  the  cognate 
monistic  thought  the  Buddhist  Taniras  show  little 
power  of  assimilation  and  systematisation.  The  loose 
speculations  show  a  marked  mixture  of  ideas,  and  the 
concepts  are  freely  used  more  often  in  their  traditional 
vagueness  than  in  their  precise  philosophical  connota¬ 
tion.  The  study  of  these  philosophical  fragments  has 
no  vali^  by  itself,  for,  as  we  have  said,  they  say  nothing 
new.  The  really  important  and  interesting  study  will 
be  the  study  of  the  histon^  of  the  transformation  of 
these  philosophical  ideas  into  esoteric  theology  and 
doctrines  and  their  association  with  the  esoteric  prac¬ 
tices  with  which  the  Tantras  in  genera]  abound.  Never- 
thel^s,  we  are  giving  beteiv  some  specimen  of  philo¬ 
sophical  discussions  from  some  of  the  representative 
Buddhist  Tantras  just  to  give  the  reader  an  idea  as  to 
how  they  occur  in  these  texts. 

The  TfltttJn-rflf noualt  ’  of  Pandit  Advayavajra 
(popularly  known  as  Avadhutipa)  sub-divides  the 
Vogacarins  into  (t)  the  jS^d^arauiidms  and  (ii)  the 
NhakdravadJns,  and  the  Madhyamika  school  also  is 
sulMliv’ided  into  (i)  the  Mayo-pattid-dvapa-vada  and 
(ii)  Sarua-dknnnd-pratisthdna-vdda,  It  affiliates  both 
the  Sravaka-yaiia  and  the  Pratyeka-Biiddha-vana  to  the 
Vaibhasika  school  ;  tfxe  Sautrantika,  Yogac^ra  and  the 
Madliyamika  sc-hools  are  alt  said  to  belong  to  MaJia- 


O.P.  105— e 


42 


TANTBTC  Bt^DD^tlS^r 


yaita.  The  Mahayuna  school  has  been  further  divided 
here  into  (i)  the  Pammifanat/a  (ineluding  theSauLran- 
tika,  Yogacara  and  the  Madhyainika  schools)  and  (ii) 
Mantranaya ;  the  nature  of  the  latter  is  left  unexplain¬ 
ed  because  of  its  profound  and  subtle  character.  ‘  There 
is  an  attempt  in  the  text  at  expiaining  the  character¬ 
istic  features  of  the  sub-schools  ;  but  the  whole  account 
given  here  is  extremely  confused  and  the  views  of 
Sankara  and  Bhaskara  have  been  presented  incidentally 
in  a  rather  perverted -and  confused  way. 

In  the  Tattva-prakaSa  (of  the  same  author)  we 
find  a  preference  for  the  Madhyamika  thought  to  the 
Yogacara.  Though  the  Yogacarins  hold  the  world  to 
be  as  unreal  as  the  perception  of  the  locks  of  hair  in 
space  by  a  man  with  retinal  defects,  yet  they  speak  of 
the  reality  of  Vijnana  ;  but  even  in  this  theoty^  of 
Vijn^a  there  remains  scope  for  confusion.  The 
Madhyamika  school,  on  the  other  hand,  transcends  all 
the  four  possible  logical  aUernatives  leaving  no  further 
scope  for  confusion.  * 

In  the  (of  the  same  author 

and  collected  in  the  Advaya-vajta-samifTaha)  also  there 
is  a  preference  for  the  Madhyamika  faith.  It  is  said 
that  consciousness  cannot  have  existence  for  the  past, 
present  and  the  future, — and  therefore  the  absolute 
essencelessness  even  of  consciousness  iias  been  spoken 
of  by  tlie  Lord.  “  The  origination  of  the  dharmas  is  in¬ 
comprehensible  and  therefore  it  is  called  simyata.  In  the 
y-uganaddha-praAiflia  (in  the  same  collection)  it  has 
been  said  that  anything  that  manifests  itself  should  be 
known  to  be  in  its  nature  pure  knowledge  without  anj' 
change  or  corruption,— for,  in  the  ultimate  nature 
everjiJung  is  mnya  which  is  pure  knowledge.  As  fire 
belongs  neither  to  that  against  which  anything  is  rub¬ 
bed,  nor  to  the  cliurning  rod,  nor  to  the  hands  of  the 


■  Advn^rt-vajm-mmgTaha^  TntivQ-mtniivah,  p*  ^1* 
’  Ibtd^t  pr  40,  Verse  7. 

'  Ibid^^  p,  Ver^e  0, 


t 

I 

i 


unsystematised  philosophical  ehacments  43 

operator,— but  it  is  produced  with  reference  to  all  these 
factors,  so  also  in  the  case  with  all  origination*'  Tims, 
because  of  tJiis  dependent  origination,  all  the  dharnuis 
are  non-essential  and  illusory  like  the  magic.  Because 
of  the  non-essential  character  there  is  the  non-produc¬ 
tion  of  the  dharmas  and  because  of  the  cause  and  con¬ 
ditions  there  is  also  the  iion-destructibiUty  of  the  dhar- 

was ;  so  there  is  neither  existence  nor  non-existence, _ 

existence  and  non-existence  always  appear  in  perfect 
union.  *  The  same  non-essential  nature  of  the  world 
has  been  spoken  of  in  the  Mahayana-vimsika.  * 

The  Prajnoiydya-viniscaya-siddhi  of  Anahga-vajra 
begins  like  the  Madhyanta-vibhaga-tika  with  tiie  asser¬ 
tion  that  all  existence  comes  from  the  absolute  wlierein 
there  is  no  imaginary  construction  of  existence,  '—and 
from  this  false  mental  construction  come  all  the  pangs 
of  sufferings.  False  notions  give  rise  to  the  cycle  of 
birth  and  death  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  miseries. 
So  long  as  tliere  is  Uiis  false  mental  construction  none 
can  do  any  good  either  to  himself  or  to  others.  So,  to 
attain  perfect  bliss  either  for  the  self  or  for  the  three 
^vorlds,  the  wise  must  first  of  all  do  away  with  tliis  notion 
of  existence.  But  the  author  warns  that  after  destroy- 
ing  the  notion  of  existence  one  .should  not  go  to  the 
opposite  extreme  of  adopting  the  niJulistie  view.  It  is 
better  to  have  the  imagination  of  existence  {bhuva- 
kalpana)  than  that  of  non-existence  (ahMoo-ka/pflna); 
for,  the  burning  lamp  can  be  extinguished;  but  if  It  be 
not  burning  at  all  how  can  it  be  extinguished? '  If 
there  be  the  notion  of  bhaua,  there  remains  the  possi- 
abihty  of  niVvantt,— but  if  there  be  no  notion  of  bhava  or 
^athsarOf  how  can  there  be  or  final  extiiic- 

*  p.  49,  Verses  2,  3. 

*  ibid,,  p.  iU,  Verse  T. 
ilird,,  p.  54. 

.  .  ,  s  *  No-  xm'j,  Oi,  h  v«w  a. 

Rirvuti  ji’diito  alpo  atrufliiA  got im  vfojet 

Ibid.t  Ch.  I,  Verse  J, 


44 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


Uon?  There  is  no  possibility  of  annihilating  the 
beginningless  vacuity.  *  Here  the  contention  of  the 
author  seems  to  be  that  our  moral  struggle  for  our  final 
purification  and  perfection  presupposes  a  world  of 
objectivity  and  it  is  for  tliis  reason  that  for  t!ic  final 
purification  it  is  wiiier  to  have  even  a  false  positive 
notion  about  the  objective  world  than  a  purely  nega¬ 
tive  notion  which  leaves  no  scope  for  morality.  But 
we  may  mention  here  that  this  question  did  not  escape 
the  eyes  of  the  so-called  negativists,  and  Nagarjuna  in 
his  Madhyamika-vrtti  did  answer  the  question  definite¬ 
ly  in  his  own  ivay,  ’’ 

It  is,  however,  urged  here  that  as  the  illusory  notion 
of  existence  should  be  abandoned,  so  also  shoultl  be 
abandoned  the  notion  of  non-existence.  He,  who 
abandons  the  idea  of  both  the  real  and  the  unreal, 
attains  a  state  which  is  neither  soihsara  nor  niroana, 
and  this  is  pure  knowledge  (pra/na).  In  the  chapter 
on  the  meditation  on  truth  (taitua-bhauana)  it  has 
been  said  that  he  who  realises  the  truth  atnl  meditates 
on  it  neither  sinks  deep  in  the  unfathomable  ocean  of 
samsara,  nor  does  he  remain  in  his  narrow  selfish 
nirudna.  In  realising  the  truth  one  should  meditate 
neither  on  the  void  (sunyotd)  nor  on  the  non-void 
(flsttnyaffl), — he  should  abandon  neither  the  void  nor 
the  non-void.  In  the  taking  of  either  swnyald  or 
asunt/afd  there  are  involved  innumerable  false  cons¬ 
tructions, — even  in  their  abandonment  there  is  the 
mental  function  of  determination;  so  this  taking  up  and 
giving  up  should  both  be  avoided.  When  tlie  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  egoiiood  (abamityesa  satikolpah)  does  not 
determine  itself  in  the  negative  manner  as  non-void  or 
in  the  positive  manner  as  void  it  becomes  bereft  of  all 
its  basis  of  thought:  the  wise,  therefore,  without  any 
attachment  and  desire,  absolutely  sinless,  unruffled  in 


*  Ibid,,  Ch.  I,  Verse  10. 

^  JIfliJhi/rtjPtifrd-rfffii  p*  08^  L£vi*s  Ediliun.. 


tJNSYSTEMATISED  PHILOSOPHICAL  PR,-iGMEKTS  45 

mind  and  freed  from  the  constructive  imagination  of  a 
beginning  or  an  end,  should  consider  liimself  as  pure 
vacuity, ' 

The  exact  nature  of  ironwai'fl  and  nimaafl  has  very 
nicely  been  described  in  two  verses  at  the  end  of  this 
cliapter.  jSanisdra  is  nothing  but  a  condition  of  our 
mind  (citta)  which  is  overpowered  with  tiic  darkness  of 
imiumerable  mental  constructions  and  which  is  as  fleet¬ 
ing  AS  the  fickle  flash  of  lightning  in  the  storm,  and 
which  is  besmeared  with  the  almost  ineffaceable  stains 
of  passions,  etc.  On  the  other  hand,  niix^ana  is  a  stage 
of  the  same  citta,  which  is  effulgent,  free  from  all  cons¬ 
tructions,  from  which  all  blemishes  of  passions  etc.  Iiave 
been  obliterated,  where  there  is  neither  the  perceiver 
nor  the  perceived.  * 

The  Jhana-siddhi  *  also  asserts  that  the  ultimate 
thuth  is  neither  positive  nor  negative;  for,  in  the  positive 
there  is  possibility  of  all  the  defects  (sarua-dosa- 
prasawga)  and  in  the  negative  tJiere  is  no  way  left  for 
the  relief  of  ail  sorrow.*  Pure  knowledge  is  neither 
with  any  form  {saMra)  nor  is  it  formless  (nircfcflra). 
Had  knowledge  any  form,  it  would  have  been  samsfcrfa 


» /piril.,  Ch,  IV,  V' trees  7-8.  Similar  ideas  art  found  in  many 
of  the  Tanlras  nil  of  ^which  need  got  be  quoted  here  extensively. 

rfl  jJfldi-dMt  I'BTU- Til  a/a-i  ijf  ip  (am 

hi  ut?tira  || 

pmbhilsvamJH  fcufpajmyA  vlmuftfnni 

pT(ihiufi-rwgndMs*afn-pr«ffpfl'iii  | 

^rnhiroTit  no  ca  injhafctmi  ngHUtliiQin 

tad  eva  nirvaita-varam  || 

Ch.  IV,  Verses  23-28. 


These  two  versts  and  many  other  versts  of  the  pMscdlng  chapters 
of  this  text  lire  also  found  in  the  clmptcr  on  PTtip1iO-pflya-nnflT:UFifl 
fseeond  chapter  of  ihc  second  section)  of  the  SampfifTfcd  or  the 
Sampiif^j-dhiiapa-t-a/pa-riffn.  I'irfr  MS.  No.  ■tSM;  MS, 

pp.  I'tB,  ISA,  l.'iB, 

*  JildBBsiFWfti  (puhlished  under  the  head  of  Ttfo  Vtijmyiina 
H’orfrs)  (C.O.S.),  Ch.  1,  Verses 

*  /bid.,  Ch.  KlI,  Verses  3r4. 


46 


TANTEIC  BUDDHISM 


(conditional  and  defiled)  as  all  existence  U. '  Had 
knowledge,  on  the  other  liand,  been  absolutely  form¬ 
less,  there  would  liave  remained  no  possibility  for 
becoming  omniscient,- — and  viithout  omniseiencc  iJiere 
would  be  no  possibility  of  universal  coinpassion.  ^  A 
distinction  is  drawn  here  between  ordinary^  knowledge 
(/ndna)  and  the  knowledge  of  the  highest  truth  (tati-ua- 
jhana). '  The  distinction  is  ultimately  tlie  same  as  that 
between  Prajna  (the  knowledge  of  Uie  vacuity)  and 
Bodhicilta  (the  combination  of  both  Pruind  and 
Karunn),  The  former  (i.e,,  jiiana,  prajnd)  however  is 
nirvikalpa,  i,e,,  free  from  all  the  false  coti  struct  ions  ;  but 
the  latter  tattva-fndna  should  never  be  taken  as  the 
complete  cessation  of  consciousness  for  in 

I  lie  taltva-jnana  there  is  the  existence  of  universal  com¬ 
passion  (karuad-hhaoa). 

In  the  S'nguhya-samdja-f antra *  *  it  has  been  said 
about  the  nature  of  the  dkarmas  that  the  dharmas  do 
not  belong  to  the  kdmadkdUt  (world  of  desire)  nor  to 
the  TU-padhatu  (material  world)  nor  to  the  arwpa- 
dhdtn  (supernatural  sphere  of  existence),  neither  do 


^Ibid.,  Ch.  IIL 

*  /bid.,  Ch.  IV. 

’  ibid.,  Ch.  V. 

*  This  text  is  edited  by  Dr.  B.  Bliatteeh^rya,  rb.o.,  and  is 

published  in  the  Gaekvad’s  Oriental  Series  (Vol.  LIII)  •,  it  is  taken 
by  the  editor  to  be  the  earliest  text  on  the  VajniyuiiH  Sebool  of 
Buddhism  and  ns  tuch  the  moat  important  ut  all  the  Vujrayana  texts, 
Prof.  M.  Wintemitz  in  rericwiiig  this  booh  in  the  Jnduin  /ftstertcal 
Quarlerly  (Vol.  IX.,  No.  1>  says  that  this  text  published  in  the 
Gaclcwod’s  Oriental  Series  is  not  tiie  same  ms  the  Tdfbd^itra-^ubj/o- 
»atm  quoted  and  referred  to  m  Sfintideva^  .4iIr«d-saiRiJecnj^a.  Prof. 
VVinti’mits  is  loath  to  believe  (and  he  also  adduces  reason  for  hijs 
pmsilion)  that  the  (the  text  in  question)  is  writtea  by 

AS  great  ^  and  philosopher  os  uiid  he  is  not  also 

ready  to  believe  that  the  text  belongs  to  as  early  o  period  as  the  grtl 
or  the  4tb  ecu t Ilf y  A,D^  We  hftTe  our  fcynipntby  with  Praf^  Winter- 
nit?,  so  lur  as  the  time  and  authorship  of  the  text  is  concerned;  but 
nevertheless^  we  must  add  that  in  many  of  the  BuddhUt  Tin  trie  texts 
wc  find  reference  to  and  quotations  from  this  ^rlguhya-mmftja  (or 
simply  and  these  quolatJonai  most  often  (though  not 

a] ways)  tally  with  the  text  edited  by  Dr,  Bhattaeharyu. 


UNSYSTEMATISED  PHTT^OSOPinCAL  FRAGMENT'S  47 

they  belong  to  the  four  great  eJements.  ‘  It  has  been 
sakl  about  the  illusory  nature  of  the  dharmas  that  as 
the  sky  reniains  pervading  all  space,  yet  it  is  mixed 
up  with  nothing,  neither  is  it  unmixed  ; — it  is  indescrib¬ 
able,  invisible  and  cannot  be  proved  In  any  way, — so 
is  to  be  understood  the  nature  of  ail  the  d/tarmos.  This 
void-nature  of  the  dfrarmns  belongs  to  none  of  the  three 
worlds  (kama,  rupa  and  ff-n<pa),“and  what  is  not  in 
the  three  worlds  eannot  be  produced  and  what  cannot 
be  produced  cannot  have  any  originalion.  Bodhicitta 
is  said  to  be  the  producer  of  knovcledge  in  all  the 
Tathagatas  ;  but  this  Bodhicitta  remains  neither  in  the 
body  nor  in  the  word  nor  in  the  mind  ;  and  what  is 
not  in  these  three  elements  cannot  be  produced.  The 
function  of  the  three  elements  (frfli-dhdftiA'a-kn'j/n)  is 
like  the  dream,  resembling  the  dream  and  originated 
in  the  dream.  Thus  all  the  Tathagatas,  all  the 
Buddhas  of  the  ten  quarters,  all  the  Bodhisattvas  and 
other  beings— all  are  to  he  understood  as  in  the  dream.  * 
Just  as  the  well-known  cfntainan/  (wish-yielding)  gem 
yields  gold,  silver  and  other  riches  as  soon  as  one  tliinks 
of  them,  but  these  riches  belong  neitlier  to  the  mind 
of  the  suitor,  nor  to  the  gem  itself,  yet  they  are  pro¬ 
duced  ;  same  is  the  case  with  the  origination  of  all  the 
ilhannas,’  The  Tathagatas  asked  the  Lord  Vajra- 
pani, — Where  do  remain  all  the  tatkdgaia  dkarmas 
and  whence  are  they  originated  ?  ’  The  reply  of  the 
Lord  is,—*  They  remain  in  the  body,  speech  and  mind 
of  the  Tatliagata  and  are  produced  therefrom.  *  *  But 
where  does  the  body-word-mind  remain ?  '  ‘In  the 
void  (dkflsfl)  ’  replied  the  Lord.  ‘  But  where  does  re¬ 
main  the  void  ?  *  ‘  Nowhere  ’  is  the  emphatic  reply.  * 
Aryadeva  in  his  Citta-visuddhi-prakarana,  ‘  echoes 
the  views  of  Yogacara  and  Vedanta  when  he  says  that 

'  Ch,  IX.  pp,  ST-^. 

*  ffjlrf.,  Ch.  XV,  pp,  KW,  lUl. 

*  tbid,^  p,  110;  also  set  Cb.  XVH. 

*  Ibid,,  pp.  111-112. 

»  Verses  8T-aa. 


48 


TANTKIC  BUBDHISM 


as  the  perception  ’of  silver  in  the  shell  is  effaced  only 
when  one  perceives  it  to  be  nothing  but  the  shell,  so 
all  our  ignorance  vanishes  after  the  realisation  of  the 
void  (nfliVattKya-dor^ona)  ;  as  the  perception  of  the 
snake  is  contradicted  by  the  perception  of  the  rope 
as  rope,  so  also  all  perceptions  of  phenoinenaUsation 
are  contradicted  by  sunyata  or  adamantine  knowledge 
(ufl/rfl-/ndna).  The  gem  of  mind  is  covered  wdth  the 
mud  of  beginningless  thought-constructions ;  it  shines 
forth  when  it  is  washed  with  the  water  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  void  and  the  experience  of  universal  compas¬ 
sion.  ' 

Padnia-vajra  in  his  Githya-siddhi  says  that  the 
wise  should  not  think  of  existence  j — ^but  he  should  also 
shake  off  the  idea  of  non-existence  j  in  the  conception 
of  existence  he  has  to  admit  the  permanence  of  things  ; 
and  the  conception  of  non-existence  involves  extreme 
nihilism.  The  reality  is  free  from  both  existence  and 
non-existence— it  is  the  supportless  Nirvana  purged  of 
all  blemishes :  it  is  beyond  the  comprehension  of  even 
all  the  Buddhas  who  are  endowed  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  void  nature, — in  it  there  is  neither  the  goer  nor 
the  going  nor  the  place  to  be  traversed ;  there  is  neither 
the  thinker,  nor  the  thought,  nor  the  thinkable  ;  it  is 
inexpressible,— indiscernible,— free  from  the  taker  and 
the  taken  ;  it  is  indefinable,  stainless — ^it  is  exclaimed 
to  be  the  Nirvana,'  Thus  the  ultimate  non-essential 
nature  of  the  dhamias  is  its  jViruano  nature  and  this 


^  V$r&e  117. 

*  hhaviin  na  hh^vayed  dhjmmi  nhh^vam  dfirafm  lyajct  \ 

ekti^in  idivato  Mn^ata  || 

*  *  #  * 
hhavd-hhaua-z^inirmiiktam  nhpMkam  andki^am  \ 
apmfisthiia^in'anam  mrdhfitii-iir^a'-katmnmm  |j 
tan  nifyiTLmhhava-yttktafitm  btiddhdnikm  apif  agocuram  1 
na  tatTfi  gantd  gamanadt  gainynte  rfairn  va  hvatit  || 

( ?)  pammMrthatah  | 

av^ci/atii  unituppim  ca  griihya^^rfihakn^tarjitam  || 
vitajan  cf?  fat  pra^tiaH  H 

Giihtja-Mdhi,  MS.  (C-L.B.  No.  a/ii);  pp.  12(B)— IS(A>. 


LTKSYSTEMATISED  PHILOSOPHICAL  FBAGHENTS  49 

nature  is  not  purely  nihil ;  it  is  rather  the *  *  thatness  ’  of 
the  things^ — the  cosmic  oneness ;  it  is  the  primordial 
source  of  all  the  dhormas,  it  is  the  seed  of  all  eutities.  Its 
form  is  not  known, — it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  speech, — 
it  is  beyond  all  sound,  scent  and  taste, — it  is  beyond 
even  the  mind/  This  ultimate  truth  is  the  knowledge, 
it  is  the  pure  dharma-dhatu  as  free  from  all  phenomena 
alisation.  *  As  the  non-dual  principle  of  supreme 
good  tfie  truth  is  pervading  all  the  objects — all  the 
universe/  It  is  neither  one  nor  many,  nor  is  it  one 
and  many  at  the  same  time  ;  it  is  waveless,  unmanifest¬ 
ed — all-pervading/ 

As  we  have  said,  the  philosophical  fragments  occur 
'  more  often  in  connection  with  the  rituals,  ceremonies 
and  esoteric  yogic  practices  than  independently.  Medi¬ 
tation  on  the  truth  generally  precedes  all  the  ceremon¬ 
ies,  rituals  and  yogtc  practices.  All  cereinonles  and 
practices  are  absolutely  useless  until  one  attains  a  true 
perspective  about  the  nature  of  all  dhormns  through 
meditation  on  the  truth.  In  the  Sadh  ana-maid,  which 
is  a  big  collection  of  the  ^ddhana  of  various  Tantric 
Buddhist  gods  and  goddesses  with  all  the  parapher¬ 
nalia  of  rituals  and  ceremonies,  the  principles  of  both 


’  Ibid,,  MS.  p. 

*  «in?ii-prapflfica'nir)nii^(ani  mpani  jfot  partnniirn  nLunt  I 

jfi&nath  tad  lAn  klr^ilam  |l 

Ibid,,  MS.  p,  ia(A). 

*  yat  tativnm  m rco- bkri fiiii t( m  ?)  grahakcr-i'arpltnn  | 

Cf/apdFitva  sfAitarit  divyam  sarvagam  pamman,  Sivom  || 

/kiJ.,  MS.  p.  37(A). 

*  nu  (u(J  fkein  nit  da*n«kiim  clta-nekaii  ca  ndiva  ^at  | 

niffanirigam  jiafwfAtfo  iSTrato-mukkarB  |t 

/ftirf.,  MS.  p.  ir(B). 

In  the  same  atrwn  Kuddaia-pada  says  in  his 
tmma-padem  (also  fan  own  as  the  Bhddm-pdda-knima  according  to 
the  nami:  of  Bhadro-padn,  the  preceptor  of  KuddfiLa-pada,  MS.  C.L.B., 
No.  I313>^)  that  meditative  contemplatioii  is  nothing  but  viewing  ail 
things  as  ‘  unconstruet  That  which  has  neither  any  native,  nor 
any  odginatioi),  nor  any  destruction,  is  the  non-dual  truth— it  is 
peHect  knowledge.  Thought-construct  ton  is  the  outward  world, — 
uncnnstruct  is  the  adamantine  truth  of  the  nature  of  supreme  bliss. 

O.P.  105—7 


50 


TANTKIC  BUBDHISM 


iSrtiiyatJflrfa  anil  FtjilaTiinJodfl  are  mentioned  cursorily 
in  connection  with  the  various  parts  of  the  sadhawa. *  * 

In  the  Vaira-tam-sadhanam  it  is  prescribed  that 
one  should  ponder  over  tlie  nature  of  the  dharnias, 
whose  ultimate  nature  is  the  citta ;  the  citta  itself 
takes  the  illusory  appearances  of  the  varieties  of  the 
dhai-tnas.  As  in  dream  there  is  no  know'able  outside 
the  mind,  and  yet  the  mind  perceives  things,— so  also 
is  the  case  with  the  lifeHexperiences.  So,  all  the 
d/mrnias  are  made  up  of  tlie  substance  of  conscious¬ 
ness,  ami  the  absolute  negation  of  the  perceiver  and 
the  perceived  is  the  ultimate  reality,  *  With  tliis  firm 
conviction  the  Sadhaka  should  do  away  with  the  illu¬ 
sory  appearances  of  things  and  perceive  their  ultimate 
nature  as  infinite  non-dual  pure  consciousness,  which 
is  briglit  as  pure  crystal, — or  the  cloudless  noon-day 
sky  of  the  autumn.  This  is  the  transcendental  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  void, — free  from  phenomenalisatioii  and 
all  Ihought-nconstructions. ' 

The  Buddhist  Tantras  abound  with  wjonf  ros ;  and 
these  viantras  are  often  nothing  but  some  cardinal 
truths  representing  Mahayanic  faith  and  philosopliy. 
These  mantras  are  to  be  chanted  in  the  rites,  eere- 
nionics,  meditations  and  also  in  connection  with  various 
Yogie  practices. 


*  See  ^adhuna^Vidlii  (G-O^S-  No.  XXV1)+  VoU  pp* 

(ind  liG;  Jbid.f  VoL  Up  p+ 

"  Ibid.,  p, 

*  Jfrfil.*  p.  226. 

ThU  do^lriiiC!  of  VijoAiiavadd  b  also  found  m  tbe 
RddhunuNi  (p,  $0),  EJ££z-j|iif6-jfddAanuiji  fp.  254)  and  here  and  thtre  in 
some  other  places  also.  In  the  S^ndiikmrhlohciimru-^mdhanGm  we  find 
that  the  three  elements  sbonld  b*  realised  as  of  tho  form  as  well  as 
of  the  nature  of  magic  illusion ;  all  our  dsixnl  and  tactual  perCN^ptions 
are  in  the  dr^nm,  us  k  were,  {/feid.,  p*  20;  aUn  pp,  105|  2T1).  In 
pnoLlicr  place  it  has  been  advised  to  think  of  the  whole  world  as  a 
magie— as  a  mirage— as  a  moon  reflected  in  water.  {Ibid^i  p.  ISS). 
AD  exijtence  U  to  be  thought  of  os  void;  for,  there  eannot  be  any 
definition  of  its  nature;  and  as  we  cannot  find  qxit  sufficient  reason 
behind  all  existenoe  it  shnuld  be  thought  of  os  un caused;  the  nature 
of  existence  always  escapes  intellectual  eorapreheasion,  {Ibid.j  p/l70). 


UN’SYSTEMATISED  PHILOSOPHICAL  PRAGMENTS  51 

In  the  Panca-karma  of  Nagarjuna-padfl  we  find 
four  gradations  in  the  Sunyata  doetrine.  The  first  is 
Sunya,  the  second  Ati-sunya,  the  third  Maha-sunya, 
and  the  fourth  or  the  final  is  the  Snrv'a-sunya, — and 
these  arc  all  diHerent  according  to  their  cause  and 
effect. '  The  first  stage  Sunya  has  been  explained  as 
light  (alo/i:a) ' ;  it  is  knowledge  (prajnu),  and  the  mind 
remains  active  in  it,— it  is  relative  (paratantra)  by 
nature/  In  this  stage  mind  has  got  as  many  as  tbirty- 
three  impure  states  (dosa)  associated  with  it.  These 
arc  sorrow,  fear,  hunger,  thirst,  feeling  (oedaiid),  sym¬ 
pathy  (&ama-i>cdand),  self-analysis  (prat^aceksd), 
kindness  (/fdrunj/a),  affectionateness  (sucha-taafra/mb 
fickleness  (caHfa),  doubt  (saniiaya),  jealousy  (wmt- 
sarya),  etc.  *  This  mental  stage  sSunya  has  been  called 
the  woman  (sfn),  and  it  has  been  said  that  of  all  illu¬ 
sions  the  illusion  of  the  woman  is  the  greatest.  *  It  is  also 
called  the  left  (wma)  and  the  lotus  in  the  lunar  circle  ; 
it  is  said  to  be  the  first  vowel  to  indicate  its  adaman¬ 
tine  nature.* 

The  second  stage,  viz.,  Ati'^nnya  is  said  to  be  the 
manifestation  of  light  (dloA'dbhdsa),  it  shines  like 
moon-rays  and  it  proceeds  from  the  former  (dloAa- 
/ndna),  and  while  .*>unya  is  said  to  be  Pi'ujM,  Ati-sfmya 
Is  said  to  be  the  Upuya,  or  the  means.  It  is  also  said 

‘  jiiTT^an  Cfl  ca  lrri|^nlra»i  ] 

taifiTihaHi  ca  [[ 

Pfl/lcn-fcraPTi«-  MS.  (B,N,  No.  65)  p.  2tV(A}* 

^  C7*  pi^fna^tponm  ahkah 

(Ed.  by  Dr.  S*  Lfrfmam),  pp*  417-18^ 

^  projild  ca  cit  | 

MS-  p-  St). 

In  th&  commeiiltiry  also  .iftni/ii-prfljpa  is  ^xpbini^ci  as  light — 
jjfmr/a-prd/iji'j  iti  yavat.  MS.  (B.N-  No.  Od)  p.  4S(B). 

-  Ibid.,  MS.  p.  W(B). 

^  Rtn-saihjM  ca  tatha  proktd  manda-kma^  tathaiva  cfj] 

Ibid.,  MS.  p.  20(B). 

/bid.,  MS.  p.  21(A). 

•  {m^  mc^)  piiRoi  cart'd  canilm~mandah-pankajlam\ 

dT4b~ikaTa^a^hetutvat  m  bmdrib  j^rt^arab  \\ 

Ibid.,  MS-  p.  ■2^^(B)- 


TANTBIC  BUDDHISM 


to  be  of  the  nature  of  construeii%'e  Lmagination  (pan- 
kalpita)  and  it  belongs  to  the  mind  as  its  (mind’s) 
states  (caitflsifra).  ‘  It  is  also  said  to  be  the  right 
idaksina}^  the  solar  eirefe  and  the 

thunderbolt  (ua/ra), '  There  are  forty  momentary 
mental  states  of  defilement,  associated  with  it. "  These 
are  passion,  contentment,  joy,  pleasure,  wonder, 
patience,  valour,  pride,  energy',  courage,  greed,  shame¬ 
lessness,  cunning,  wickedness,  crooked  ness,  etc.  *  The 
third  stage,  viz.,  Maha-sunya  proceeds  from  the  union 
of  Prujha  and  Upaya  or  aloha  and  aloirdh/tasa,  or 
Sunya  and  Ati-sOnya,  and  it  Is  called  the  intuition  of 
light  (dlofcopaJabdliT)  and  is  of  the  absolute  nature 
(parinispanua), — yet  it  is  called  ignorance  (anidpa).  ‘ 
It  has  also  been  said  to  be  the  Svadlusthditfl-citfa.  * 
There  are  seven  impure  mental  states  of  defilement 
(prafrrti-dosa)  associated  with  it, — these  are  forgetful^ 
ness  (uisTTirtf),  illusion  (hhraiiti),  stupor,  laziness,  etc. 
Thus  dlo^'u,  dlokfibhasa  and  dloko-palabdki — these  are 
the  three  stages  of  the  citf  a  and  frotn  them  there  follow 
the  principles  of  impurities  which  number  hundred 
and  sixty  in  all  (eighty  in  total,  but  doubled  in  day 
and  night),  and  they  function  throughout  the  wfiole 
day  and  night  ivith  the  flow  of  the  vital  wind  ivdyu) 

*  {Uoka-jMtm-Ratnbhatai^  l 

ahka-bh^imm  htf  i^ktam  npayakam  || 

fatfiii  proktam  proktam  coitimkam 
Ibid.,  MS.  p.  20<B). 

*  Ibid.,  m.  21(A), 

Ibid.,  MS;  p.,  21(A>* 

"  Ibid,,  MS.  p.  2H[A)v 

*  Uithawa  m\ 

parirtuipaniiakun  cdiufT  ndziifituh  |i 

Ibid.,  MS.  p.  21(A); 

■  See  commentary  on  Songs  Nos.  12  and  t  k 

fiauddAn-gdna-o-do/id}  edited  by  MM-  H.  P*  SiEtTl, 
pp.  2B  and 

€f,  0  ba !  — if rii* t^rd^rf f  hUn  tim  hdtm  in  /  pra; fi  o^p^ya-i  rnakn- 

vijTiitno-JOTiihnftm  iiy 

Fniicfjkrania-iippatti,  MS*  p* 


UNSYSTEaiATISED  PHILOSOPHICAL  FRAOIEKTS  53 

which  ha-s  been  said  to  be  the  vehicle  (vahana)  llirough 
which  these  impurities  of  nature  (praffrti-dosa)  func¬ 
tion.  '  It  has  been  said,  wherever  there  is  the  (function 
of  the  )  bio-motor  force  or  the  vital  wind,  nature  (pra- 
fcrti)  with  all  her  impurities  is  also  brought  along  with 
it ;  and  so  long  as  there  is  the  function  of  this  bio-motor 
force  or  the  \dtal  wind,  the  principles  of  impurity  will 
not  cease  to  function.  *  As  the  function  of  this  vital 
wind  goes  on  day  and  night,  the  principles  of  impuri¬ 
ties  also  function  always.  In  the  Sunya  stage  the 
vayti  remains  mixerl  up  with  thought;  in  the  next 
stage  thought  predominates  over  this  vai/u  and  the 
tliird  stage  is  a  mixture  of  both  the  previous  stages. 
Though  knowledge  is  pure  consciousness  and  is  of  in¬ 
determinate  nature  like  that  of  the  sky,  yet  there  are 
difference.^  in  knowdedge  as  there  arc  differences  in  the 
sky  in  twilight,  night  and  day.  * 

The  fourth  stage,  viz.,  Sarva-sunya  (all-void  or  per¬ 
fect  void)  is  free  from  all  the  three-fold  impurities  and 
is  self-illurainant.  It  is  called  perfect-void  because  of 
its  absolute  purity  obtained  by  transcending  these  prin¬ 
ciples  of  detileracnt.  It  is  the  purified  knowledge — 
the  ultimate  truth— it  is  the  supreme  omniscience.  It 
is  without  cliange — without  appearance,  without  dual¬ 
ity — it  is  the  supreme  good.  \Vhether  it  is  any  state 
of  existence  or  noii-cxisteiice  cannot  be  known ;  it  is 
beyond  the  scope  of  verbal  expression.  From  this  self- 
luminous  purity,  which  results  from  the  three  preced¬ 
ing  stage.s,  proceeds  the  Omniscient  (Buddha)  endow¬ 
ed  with  all  possible  merits,  all  the  thirty-lw'o  signs  of 


’  rfilA  pmA'rtnj/aA  »ic.)kxmnh  iiittuh  diuAl 

raiTmi  CHpi  pwivflrfcnfc  (((tFc.  mc.)  vayu-i’dftnnrt-ftt’ftiHii  1| 
tbiih,  MS.  pp.  21  < A), 

^  yafro  i/flim  taw’i  #fjm  pmfrrh'ni  iidr'aftff  I 

yilCfU  sftrHtrana-fpatfo  (Ait.  «c.)  tjfl6A«so  flwcafo  |, 

Ibid.,  MR,  p.  21  (B>. 

■  (tfjtfufffd-iHWliwAfljrt  akMavad  nialtjanairt  I 

AfnOi  itif-tfti  pmbhedo*»ti  ssrtrfftya-nUTi-rfjVC-imGiid  || 
fhiffhi  MS*  21(B). 


54 


taxtric  buddhism 


greatness  and  also  the  eighty  consonants,  *  In  the 
,4i>hisamhod/ii-^’rfl?na  of  Paiica-krama  it  lias  been  said, 
‘Perfect  void  may  be  said  to  be  without  beginning  or 
with  beginning,  without  middle  or  with  middle, — 
without  end  or  with  end:  this  is  w’hat  the  wise  say.*** 
Here  there  is  neither  going  nor  not-going,  neither 
decrease  nor  increase,  neither  existence  nor  non-exist¬ 
ence.  It  is  free  from  the  categories  oE  either  being  or 
non-being, — it  is  neither  of  the  nature  of  merit  nor  of 
the  nature  of  demerit, — ^nor  is  it  a  combination  of  both.  * 
We  Jiave  seen  above  how  the  Sunyata-tioc trine  of 
the  Mahayanic  philosophers  was  adopted  by  the  eso¬ 
teric  Buddhists  ;  but  the  emphasis  of  llahayana  is  not 
only  on  Sunyata ;  as  a  religion  it  is  characterised  by 
its  stress  on  universal  compassion.  This  lilahayana 
doctrine  of  compassion  was  also  adopted  by  these 
Tantric  Buddhists  in  toto.  .\I1  the  preachings,  all  the 
rites  and  ceremonies,  all  the  mystic  practices  have  the 
stamp  of  Karuna  on  them,  i.e.,  everytiiing  is  said  to  be 
undertaken  only  with  the  view  to  saving  the  world 
from  all  miseries.  Wc  have  seen  In  the  Bodlii-carya- 
valara  how  the  devout  Bodhisattva  was  earnestly 
praying  to  all  the  enlightened  ones,  bent  on  entering 


‘  mnya^tTaija^visuddhir  tfQ  iho’eyate  J| 

tarvn-iunya-padaiit  tac  ca  jMna^ttaya-visufldhttafy  I 

fottvam  iraruiv/hcifraifi  aniUtaram  | 
rtiTViA'drtrifi  jiirdvandvmh  jHimmam  Arpm  | 

nfl  ca  na’utVti  »ia  ca  tad  vakya-goctirMni  || 
atoh  prabhdsvar&t  iuddhat  jtifinn-ttnya-mmudbhaiiahl 
dia-trimM-iakmttta-dtiaro  hy  <ijSf li-i; o r7 jti nd-ii ifj h  | 
Mirva-kHm-varo-jif  la^  mtvttjUo  jayatt  tatafy  jl 
/iy.,  SIS.  pp,  22{By,  :t3(A). 

■  tv  uthavtVdi-bbiitam  tiiimdhya-bhiitam  athn 

madhya-bhiitaMi  | 

ar<rrnr<i-liAfffafit  tv  athav(i»t(t^bhutam  mrva-^UHUtim  itravadauti 

II 

1  bid,,' M5,  p.  30(A). 

ijxx  niifiHa.rflnflrH  tia  ca 

""  ""''fflcjs-ri  pm-.. 

Ibid.,  SIS.  p.  30(A). 


tncSYSTEMATISED  PHILOSOPHICAL  PRAGMEXTS  55 

nirvana,  not  to  accept  niTvat},u  until  the  suffering  world 
be  saved  from  the  miseries  of  life  and  every  one  tie 
helped  in  realising  perfect  wisdom.  We  find  a  very 
beautiful  echo  of  it  in  the  Inana-mldhi  wdierc  all  the 
from  pass  lunate  Buddhas  are  solicited  not  to  accept  their 
own  nirvana,  but  to  wait  on  and  on  until  all  the  crea¬ 
tures  attain  perfect  Buddliahood.  ‘  In  the  Sadhana- 
maid  we  find  it  an  essential  part  of  many  of  the  sadha- 
ntt$  to  pray  to  the  Bud d lias  and  the  Bodliisattvast  bent 
on  attaining  nirudna,  to  wait  for  time  eternal  for  tlie 
benefit  of  all  beings.  The  Buddhas,  who  are  the 
fathers  of  the  afllicted  helpless  beings,  are  requested 
to  postpone  their  niruartn  and  to  preach  the  true 
religion  among  all  the  beings  until  they  are  enabled 
to  cross  the  sea  of  sanisdra  and  attain  perfect  bliss. 
The  aspirer  is  found  not  only  to  pray  to  the  Buddhas 
and  the  Bodhisnttvas  to  renounce  their  ftfrufliia, — but 
he  himself  also  renounces  his  own  nirudna  and  pledges 
his  life  for  the  benefit  of  all  beings.  It  is  said — “  I 
have  deceived  all  the  beings — ^liow  shall  I  save  tliem 
(who  arc  pitiable  alas!)  from  tliis  unfathomable  sea  of 
existence?  Thus  being  filled  with  compassion  for  the 
being.s,  the  aspirer  should  reject  the  suiiyata  which 
makes  a  man  altogether  static, — ^and  through  the  effort 
of  the  mind  he  should  produce  a  citta  w'hich  is  full  of 
the  dharma-dhatu.  *  It  is  said  in.  the  Cifta-msaddhi- 
prakarana  of  Aryadeva  that  great  beings  \vith  sound 
wisdom  and  alert  mind  should  win  the  fierce  battle  of 
life  and  then  save  Others  also.  A  beast  also  courts 
affliction  for  his  own  interest ;  but  rare  and  l>le*sscd 
arc  those  master  minds  who  court  affliction  for  the 
sake  of  the  world.  The  wretched  seirish  creatures  also 
bear  the  pains  of  cold  and  blast  for  their  own  sake, — 
but  why  should  they  not  do  the  same  for  the  interest 
of  the  whole  world  ?  '  It  is  often  seen,  when  a  Sadhaka 

'Ch.  vm.  ~  " 

*  Vol.  11,  p.  Si'L 

’  inaha-SBtlvo  luaha-pfiyah  slhira-biiddbir  ufitnfrilA^  | 

;jlVO  tarayed  ppi  || 


56  TANTKIC  EUDDHISSI 

is  going  to  worship  any  god  or  goddess  with  all  the 
paraphernalia  of  rituals  and  ceremonies,  he  takes,  at 
the  outset,  the  resolution  that  he  u’ill  deliver  all  the 
beings  and  enable  them  to  attain  complete  nirvana." 

Even  in  the  description  of  the  gods  and  goddesses 
we  see  that  compassion  is  almost  everywhere  an  attri¬ 
bute  of  them.*  We  may,  for  instance,  compare  the 
descrij>tioii  of  the  goddess  'S'arahi  as  found  in  her  rnedi* 
tation  in  the  Abhidhano-ttara,  where  she  is  described 
as  having  a  heart  melted  with  compassion  for  beings, — 
as  engrossed  in  the  emotion  of  universal  compassion, 
bent  on  doing  good  to  all  beings.  ’ 

It  may  also  be  noticed  that  almost  all  the  Tantras 
are  introduced  with  an  apology  of  doing  good  to  all 
the  beings  by  the  teachings  of  the  true  religion.  The 
Arya-manjuiri^vifda-kalpa-fantra  introduces  all  tlie 
ceremonials  and  ritualistic  practices — ^all  the  manfras 
and  tantras  as  being  instructed  by  the  Lord  Buddha 
himself  only  for  the  good  of  all  beings.*  The  Prajno-- 


paiavo^pi  hi  au3it^o-Tn4lm-piiirayowfli|i  [ 

jugad-€fthii-i}idhMiaro  dhanyat  (if  vimia  jnnuh 

suluinte  ^rdrtho-^airTipofb^  | 
jagad^rihd-pravrttdste  Wfi  ^nhanU  kutham  mt  te  |j 
t  It  ia^vihtdd hi^pm  kn  ra  na  ^  Verses  54-521. 

*  III  the  Sftd-ak^an-IoktriviiTii-^^dhiinam  of  the  we 

pee  that  the  ta-king  the  vow  of  enabiidg  a]l  the  beiogs— 

whatever  be  their  origiq,  and  be  they  endowed  with  form  or  be  they 
without  form, — be  they  conscious  or  UDOoneious^ — to  ettain  the 
anupadhi-^^esa-mnmdhl  fi.e.p  Blruonii  without  any  residuum'  c/-  the 
mrapadhi-sesa-^aiijcdhi  of  the  Nirvann-praka^^ 

C/.  aJso  the  Abhi^eka-fmiata  of  the  f/i 

"  In  the  Lord  Mafljuin  is  depicted  ut  com^ 

passionate  to  the  whole  world  and  bent  on  doing  good  to  all  hc^inn 
(Ch.  XVII,  p.  I4fl,  G.O.S.)  ^  ^ 

^aniriVi-rdren^r-crfflJS  || 

gangand-bht^ga-s&mbhogd  mahd^knni^^-TUBo-tsifk^  f 

( ?)  ^iivu-rtha-kjtfi^tQtpiim  I! 
PUiii^fiM"/fidfi<i-paTii55Sfu  mrvik&lpa  mraSayi^  \ 
mh^ViibhwfJ-pf^r&  vindxi-nadn-vivQrjit^  || 

through  this,  let  all  people  be  made  bent  on  attaining  the  Bod  hi' 
(ciupted  m  the  Advaya-vajTa^gatiigraka),  At  the  end  of  the  Jtfrpsor. 


UXSYSTEMATISF.B  PHILOSOPHICAL  FBAGMENTS  57 


jwya-u/iMSCoi^n-siJrf/u  also  says  tliat  all  truth  was 
preached  and  explained  by  the  great  sages  only  with 
the  purpose  of  rendering  some  lieljj  to  the  suffering 
world. ' 

In  initiating  a  disciple  to  the  mystic  cult  for  the 
attainment  of  the  Bodhicitta  the  preceptor  should  first 
of  all  see  that  the  ciiseiplc  has  a  bencA'olent  mind,  *  and 
the  Guru  instructs  the  disciple  to  perform  all  the  prac¬ 
tices  only  for  the  benefit  of  the  beings. '  To  bear  with 

of  the  the  Sndhaka  proclBim^y — *By 

vbfltfiver  merih  is  ncquired  by  me  by  perfonniwg  this  t^ffAarra  of  tbe 
lord  of  the  vrorM,^ — let  the  world  attiiiii  the  (ultimate)  status*^ 
Sinular  verses  oecuf  after  the  performaTice  of  memy  of  the  s^dhanm* 
(See  Satlhnifa-mnlflr  pp^  48^  75^  ITT,  *200).  Eveo  the  mystic  circle 
is  to  be  deseribeiJ  for  the  welfare  of  the  beinp.s,  f Kriwd'JfCfHUrafca’. 
MS.  p.  r4(E>J. 

^  In  the  Sanskrit  portion  of  the  P«Ji/irrnii.a  (edited  by 
H.  P*  Sa^trO  the  goddess  Variihi  cd  treats  the  lord  Mahavirclvara  to 
reinoTe  all  her  doubts  and  to  explain  to  her  all  the  secrets  of  Yoga 
for  ^c  good  of  the  beings  (kathatjantu  mama  jiaffvdnniu 

ujmhimkam}i  to  this  the  lord  replies.— *  Prop!  ii  Bled  am  I,  O  goddess! 
I  shall  explain  in  detail  all  that  will  bring  about  the  gocKi  of  all 
beingSj  harken  all  with  B  coneeutroted  mind/  (P,  Sahitya- 

parisat  edition).  In  tbe  production  of  I  he  Bodhicitta^  in  the  prae- 
tices^  rites  and  ceremonies,  even  in  the  sexo-yogic  practice  it  has 
II I  ways  been  proclaimed  that  everything  ts  done  only  for  the  giKwJ 
of  all  beings.  Thus  it  is^  said  in  Lbe  A'l/deMfi-rJir^hotcrnaiu  of  the 

*T  shall  produce  the  great  Bodhicitta  and 
shall  lead  and  guide  all  the  beings  lo  the  right  |Kith;  I  shall  undergo 
all  the  practiees  for  the  attainment  of  Eodhi — and  shall  be  the 
Buddha  for  the  good  of  the  world/  (Pp.  5-6;  also  see  S^dhana-nidla, 
PPp  3i  20)*  In  the  (in  the  chapter  on  the  ptoduetioTi 

of  the  Bodhicitta)  it  is  said^ — *By  this  taerilorious  work  (iMicffT-ftorTiro) 
soon  shall  I  be  a  Buddha  and  T  shall  preach  the  truth  for  the  good 
of  the  World  and  deliver  the  beings  oppressed  with  miaeries+^ 
aambaram  krtmam  saTi'a-ibBtiv&~rtha-kdramt  \ 
utfrnau  tivuiktfm  mttcfrydmif  oham  |* 

MS.  No.  iil)  p.  36(B). 

Pfiena  cAhmi  A'cnria^a 

bhBveyfi  buddho  na  emm  hkr  \ 
dmgfi  dhnrttunh  jugato  hhnya 

moeei^a  to  fir  da  bahn-diif^ha-plditiin  || 

MS*  (B.N.  No*  31)  p.  3n(B>,  Also  sec  Advn^a^vajm- 
mmfimha,  p,  0, 

^  Cfw  rlrnoddhaiunu-riff/i^a  pmdrtfath  divi^n^rndhanam  j| 

J  i*Alin^uli~v(tjm-mula-tnn  (ta*  MS, 

MS."(K.A.S.B,  No.  tS5l)  p,  13(B). 

O.P*  105— S 


58 


tXntric  buddhism 


a  calm  unruffled  spirit  all  sorts  of  mental  and  physical 
torture  for  the  sake  of  the  world  was  deemed  to  be  a 
great  virtue  in  Buddhism ;  as  a  result,  we  see  that  in 
the  Tajjtras,  as  in  Buddhism  in  general,  it  became  a 
religious  practice  to  inflict  torture  on  the  body,  ‘  It 
was  also  anothcT  practice  to  try  to  become  one  with 
the  whole  universe  through  repeated  and  deeply  con' 
centrated  meditation  and  to  perform  the  religious 
practices  or  the  Yoga  after  one  had  realised  oneself 
completely  identical  with  the  universe,  so  that  after 
this  identification  of  the  self  with  the  universe  any 
merit  acquired  by  the  Sadhaka  would  be  a  merit 
acquired  by  the  whole  universe  and  the  liberation  of  the 
self  Avill  be  the  liberation  of  the  wdiole  universe.  . 
Through  meditation  first  the  universe  must  be  identi’ 
fied  with  the  self,  so  that  there  may  be  complete 
oneness  of  the  self  and  the  universe.  * 

In  the  songs  and  the  Dokds  of  the  Siddhacaryas 
we  find  this  spirit  of  universal  compassion  expressed 
often  in  a  very  nice  way.  In  the  |Jafcor«aua  the 
Sadhaka  is  requested  first  to  realise  the  pain  of  bond' 
age  in  the  world  and  to  meditate  on  the  compassion 
for  beings.  ’  It  ha^  been  very  nicely  said  by  Saraha- 
pada  in  his  Dohas, — Whoever  thinks  this  to  be  the 
self — ^this  to  be  the  other — ^perverts  himself  even  in  the 
absence  of  bondage  and  even  though  lie  is  liberated. 

*  Tiife  Ch*  VTTI*  Al&u  Sadkitna-malnf 

pp,  Ij  57  (G.0A>. 

^  pmiuto  VQpi  yavM  dhrd/t^am  | 

vfiiFf  yxigJ  pittda-gmha  ift  srB|t«A  IJ 
jangamam  raivn  piiTvam  kftvd  pmbhMviiram  ] 
paJicdt  kury&t  taika-imnnnm  (infibhedu-krittno^hpayQjn  || 
yath^*darie  layam  gacirhafi  fiairfitaA  | 
latM  yogi  pmvwVe  to  riiiiAriri^iuhui^ 
gacchams  tiMihan  ivayarii  (  r)  nirm^m  1 

antTia  sada  fotfuamt  H 

Panca-kr(nna^  MS.  p, 

Cj^  Sri-caA:rn-5iimJ!iAiJp<'M(j«fra— Ed.  by  Arthur  Ay^IoHj^  72* 

Also  see  SMhnna-nifillt^  p,  501  (G*OJS.). 

*  lanflrt  ftanyfifi  bhurnhu  Mj  rii mu  / #u£du  buddhahu 

jimnia  j| 

Qiikiltnavii—Ed.  hy  Dr.  N\  N.  Cliaudhnry,  p*  Itl. 


unsystematised  philosophical  fkagments  59 

Don^t  make  the  mistake  of  the  self  and  the  not-self ; 
everything  is  of  the  nature  of  perfect  enlightenment 
from  time  eternal, — tliis  great  lord  of  unbleniislied 
citta  is  pure  by  nature.  *  “  The  great  tree  of  non- 

dual  mind  spreads  throughout  the  three  worlds  in  its 
vastness  ;  it  contains  flowers  and  fruits  of  eompassion, 
— tliere  is  nothing  beyond  it*  ”  *  Saraha-pada  con¬ 
cludes  with  the  verse,—"  If  no  good  to  others  is  done,— 
no  gift  is  given  at  all, — what  is  the  need  of  living  this 
life  in  the  world  at  all?  It  is  better  to  do  away  witli 
it.  ^  This  stress  on  Karuna  in  various  ways  is  a  charac¬ 
teristic  feature  also  of  the  Carya-padas,  * 


*  DohtiJca^ — Ed,  by  Dr^  P*  Bagchi,  p*  (Msay  of  thes« 
dohaA  ate  aseribed  also  to  Tillopjlda,  Ibid.^  p,  2)» 

^  cr^ta-fa  naira /id  gad  viftFiara| 

pAuIfT-pAa/a  dhatai  iiaii  parafta  iidm  ]| 

Ibid.,  p.  28. 

*  para  iiata  7ia  ktau  atibi  na  didii  ddna[ 

ehu  mmAdre  pbd/u  varu  chuddaku  appuna  |[ 

Jbid.,  23. 

^  It  is  said  by  Ktimbdlilnibdta-padd  tn  a  song  that  kis  boat  of 
^afuiid  IS  MIed  with  the  gold  of  vacuity.  (Song  No.  S).  lu  andther 
song  where  Ka^u-pada  explains  the  esoteric  doctrine  by  the  meta¬ 
phor  of  the  chess-game,  compassion  has  been  made  the  play-board- 
(Song  No-  12).  Again  in  explaining  the  ultunate  stage  ICa^hu-pida 
says  that  he  secs  his  body  in  compas^bn  and  vacuity.  (Soog  No.  13). 
Id  the  commentary  of  the  Coryas  the  Siddhac&ryos  are  said  to  have 
composed  these  fiongs  through  deep  compassioD  for  the  beings,  (See 
Comm,  on  Songs  Nos.  1,  7^  8), 


CHAPTER  III 

SCHOOLS  or  TaXTUIC  buddihsm 

In  tiescribing  the  schools  of  esoteric  Budtlliisin  the 
best  thing  would  have  been  to  trace  htstorkally  the 
origin  and  development  ot  the  various  schools  with 
their  particular  faiths,  doctrines  and  practices ;  but 
the  data  for  such  a  historical  survey  is  so  scanty  and 
confused  that  we  do  not  venture  to  make  such  an 
attempt.  Dr.  Benayatosh  Bhattaearya  in  his  /id  roihic- 
fion  to  Buddhist  Esoterism  has  of  course  made  an 
attempt  at  constructing  some  sort  ot  a  liistoiy  of  the  . 
Vajrayanist  and  the  Sahajiya  preachers ;  hut  so  vast 
and  confused  is  the  field  anil  so  scanty  and  doubtful 
are  the  materials  that  the  structure  does  not  seem  to 
be  very  well  built.  The  same  remark  liolds  good  for 
the  attempt  made  by  Dr.  Shahidullah  in  tracing  the 
history  of  the  Sahajiya  Buddhist  School  in  his  work 
Les  Chants  Mystiques  de  Kanba  et  de  Saraha. 

(i)  The  Evatution  Of  Mantra-ydna 

In  the  Tflttva-ra tndt'ali  (collected  in  the  Advaya- 
vajra-samgraha)  we  find  Mahayana  suh-divUled  into 
two  selmols,  wk.,  P^amita-naya  and  Muntra-naya.  The 
principles  of  Mantra-naya  are  said  to  be  very  deep 
and  subtle  and  inaccessible  to  ordinary  men ;  aiul 
though  the  ultimate  purpose  of  the  Mantra-sLstra  is 
the  same  as  that  of  others,  it  is  distinctly  superior  to 
the  other  Sastras,  which  prescribe  many  easier 
methods  ;  the  reason  is  that  it  (i.e.,  Muntra-sustra)  is 
free  from  delusions  and  it  is  accessible  only  to  people 
of  higher  intellectual  calibre.  ‘  This  Mantra-naya  or 
Mantra-jmna  school  of  Mahayana  seems  to  be  the 
*  introductory  stage  of  Taiitrie  Buddhism  from  which  all 

^  py  oAiunmohM  bfihup^i^iid  | 

tlkmi'HiiriyH-dhik^mc  ca  |[ 

Tatk-d-rafnSvali  in  Advaya-vQjm-isamgtah^t  p.  21* 


SCHOOLi)  OF  tantric  uuddutsm  61 

/the  other  offshoots  of  Vajra-yana,  Kalacakra-yana, 
Sahaja-yana,  etc.,  arose  in  later  times.  In  the 
Laghu-tca  la-cakra-t  ant  r«  ra }  a~tJhd ,  e  nti  1 1  ed  Vi  ni  ai  a- 

prabhd^  we  find  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Paramita- 
naya  are  written  wljolly  in  Sanskrit,  while  lliose  of  tlie 
Mantra-naya  are  explained  in  Sanskrit,  Prakrit,  Apa- 
bhraiiij^a  and  even  in  the  non-Sanskritic  languages 
like  those  of  the  Savaras  and  others.  ’ 

Early  Buddhism  was  a  religion  of  rigorous  moral 
discipline,  practices  and  contemplation.  But  such  a 
religion  of  purely  ethical  codes  and  deep  meditation 
could  not  appeal  to  the  masses  and  the  systems  of 
moral  discipline  and  the  methods  of  the  /hanas  were 
not  acceptable  to  them.  To  the  ordinary  mind  religion 
is  sometlung  full  of  rites  and  eeremonies  or  other  jiara- 
phernalia  of  esoteric  practices.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  for  the  sake  of  the  common  run  of  people  the 
Mantras,  the  Mudras  and  the  Mandalas  (mystic  circles) 
were  introduced  in  Buddhism  in  course  of  time.  These 
Mantra,  Mudra  and  Mandala,  etc.,  introduced  for  the 
realisation  of  tlie  ultimate  truth,  gradually  brought 
with  them  various  other  practices  and  tlius  Buddhism 
began  to  put  on  a  ditferent  air,  which  is  generally 
known  as  Tantricism.  We  may  recall  in  tliis  connection 
the  later  Mahayanic  idea  of  Tmilokya-uf/ai/a  or  the 
leligious  coiiQuest  of  the  three  worlds.  The  idea  be* 
liind  the  whole  drive  was  the  idea  of  bringing  people 
of  all  calibre  within  the  Buddhistic  faith  by  making 
Buddhism  acceptable  to  all  classes  of  people.  Witli  this 
end  in  view  the  Mahayanic  apostles  had  to  incorporate 
all  sorts  of  popular  ceremonies  and  practices  in  their 


prykriti- 

cha-bMfayQ  \ 

highu-kriiticakrii-Uwtrn-m}a-til:ii  tMS,  R.A.S.B.  -ITifJ),  p.  SOtA), 


62  TaNTRIC  BlfDDHISM 

religion,  and  as  a  result  the  ethieo-religious  nature  of 
Buddliisni  began  to  change  rapidly* ' 

Tradition  holds  Asahga,  the  great  exponent  o£  the 
Yogaeara  school,  to  be  responsible  for  the  introduction 
of  Tantrisni  in  Buddhism  ;  he  again,  in  his  turn,  is 
believed  tfj  have  been  initiated  into  this  mystic  cult  by 
Maitreya  in  the  Tusitadieaven.  Others  on  the  other 
hand  hold  that  Nagarjiina,  the  renowned  exponent  of 
the  Madliyainika  school,  was  the  real  founder  of  the 
esoteric  school,  and  he  received  the  doctrines  from  Llic 
Celestial  BuddJia  V^airocana  through  the  divine  Bodhi- 
sattva  Vajrasattva  at  ‘the  iron  tower’  in  South  India. 

But  apart  from  these  traditions,  some  seholars  are 
disposed  to  think  that  in  the  Mufidydna-sutrdluhkdra 
of  Asahga  there  are  clear  references  to  the  sexo-yogic 
practice  of  tlte  Tantrjc  Buddhists.  As  the  point  has 
been  discussed  by  the  present  writer  elsewhere,  he  need 
not  repeat  it  here."  Dr.  Bcnayatosh  Bhattacarya  is 
of  the  opinion  that  the  esoteric  eiemeiits  were  intro¬ 
duced  into  Buddhism  by  Lord  Buddha  himself  as  a 
provision  for  the  lay  people  whose  intellectual  calibre 
would  not  allow  them  to  follow  the  path  chalked  out 
by  him.  We  on  the  whole  are  rather  loath  to  believe 
that  Buddha  whose  life  and  teachings  were  a  direct 
revolution  against  the  prevalent  religious  svstem  of 
ceremonies  and  rituals  should  have  himself  made  any 
provision  for  Tan  trie  practices  of  any  kind  in  his 
religion  only  to  popularise  his  religion  among  the 
unetil lured  and  uneducated  mass.  * 


‘  ttU  Imcriitlittm  by  Dr.  B,  M.  Bjtruii,  Pari  1 

pp.  SS3,  313;  hIed  n  Jecturi?  by  Dr,  Biirua,  named,  Role  of  Buddlrbrn 
in  /iiJwH  Li/f  dnrf  Thought,  ddivefed  at  a  avmpusium  of  ihe  Indian 
I  philosophical  Congress,  21st  Sc$siQn,  Delhi. 

f  Cutt*  .Ie  Haek^roum!  of 

Lttemiurf  (C.U.,  lB4tj^  by  Ihc  present  writer.  ” 

T  .  Introdtietion  to  linilHkint  Eitotcmm,  p.  «t,  Sre  also  The 

In  trod  uet  ion  to  the  Sudhamt-ntutH,  Vol.  II,  pp.  xvj-xvn. 

*  Ttflr  Obteure  Religiuu*  CtiH»,  etc.,  pp,  ifr-se. 


SCHOOLS  OF  TANTRIC  BUDDHISM  63 

^V^len  anr!  by  whom  the  Mantra  element  was  ititro- 
duceci  in  Buddhism  we  do  not  know  exactly;  but 
it  seems  that  with  the  rise  of  Mahayana  with  its  pledge 
for  tleliverinj^  all  the  beings  higher  or  lower,  meritorious 
or  vicious,  the  Mantra,  Mudra,  Mandala  and  such 
other  popular  religious  practices  began  to  jimke  their 
way  into  Buddhism.  The  l^Iahayanust  preachers,  with 
their  pledge  of  universal  redemption,  could  not  do 
without  these  ordinary  masses  and  for  them  they  had 
to  condescend  from  the  prescription  of  strict  ethico- 
religious  practices  to  the  sanction  of  tlie  Mantra, 
Mudra,  etc.  The  innumerable  Dharams  seem  to  he  the 
original  form  in  which  the  Mantra  element  first  found 
its  Tvay  in  Maliayana.  The  word  Dharani  literally 
means  that  by  which  something  is  sustained  or  kept 
up  idharuate  anaya  iti),  i.e.,  tire  mystic  syllables  that 
have  got  the  capacity  of  keeping  up  the  religious  life 
of  a  man.  In  the  evolution  of  some  of  the  Mantras  in 
the  Dliaranis  there  seems  to  be  some  sort  of  a  history. 
It  seems  that  the  ordinary  followers  of  Buddhism  could 
not  follow  the  original  apiiorism  of  BuddJnsm  ;  for 
them  it  was  necessary  to  shorten  the  $utTas  into  the 
Dharunis  ami  the  ordinary  followers  were  enjoined  to 
commit  to  memory  and  regularly  recite  these  Dharanis 
with  implicit  faith,  and  it  was  assured  by  the  Bodtu- 
sattvas  that  the  recital  of  these  Dharanis  was  capable 
of  producing  infinite  merit  in  the  reciters  and  of  con¬ 
ferring  immense  benefit  on  them.  Dr.  B.  Bhattacharya 
has  traced  some  sort  of  a  history  of  the  bi/a-niantra 
pra?ii  which  symbolises  Prajna-paramita.  The  Jsto- 
sahanrika-pralna-pammiia,  a  Mahayana  work  of 
stupendous  volume,  coiikl  hardly  be  expected  to  be 
read  and  mastered  by  any  ordinary  follower ;  it  was 
therefore  absolutely  necessary  to  abridge  tliese  S,000 
stanzas  into  a  few  stanzas,  which  became  known  as  the 
Pmjnd-paTamUa-hrdaya-sutra,  which  again  was  further 
reduced  to  the  Prtijnd-pdramifa^dharanl.  From  this 
Prajnd-pdramHd-dkdrani  again  evolved  the  Prajm- 


TAiVrRlC  BUDDHISM 


pdrafil/fa-fnottfrri,  from  which  again  evolved  tlie  bija- 
jnantra  in  one  syllable  as  and  it  was  believed 

that  in  response  to  the  muttering  of  this  btja-tnantra 
pram  sfmyata  would  transform  herself  into  the  goddess 
Piajna^paramitik,  who  is  a  ^  veritable  metamorphosis 
of  the  Prajua-piiramita  literature.  *  *  These  hi/a-ma?i  tras 
arc  mono-syllablic  Mantras  symbolising  some  parti¬ 
cular  god  or  goddess.  Thus  ‘a»  represents  Vairo- 
cana,  ‘ya’  Aksobhya,  Ralnasambhava,  ‘ba’ 

Amitabha  and  ‘  la  ’  Amoghasiddhi,  *  Hum  ’  is  the  bfja 
of  Vajra-saltva.  *  The  voivel  *  a  *  being  the  first  and 
the  most  independent  sound,  has  been  taken  to  repre¬ 
sent  Sunyata  or  Ptajna. ' 

This  system  of  bija-tnantra  is  very'  conmioii  in  the 
Hindu  Tantras  also,  and  they  are  even  now  prevalent 
in  all  the  Hindu  systems  including  iSaktaisni,  Saivisni, 
^  aisnavism,  etc.  It  has  often  been  assured  in  the 
Buddhist  Tantras  that  in  response  to  the  muttering  of 
these  bya-mantras  the  ultimate  void  (sunyata)  will 
transform  herself  into  the  particular  form  of  god  or 
goddess  and  confer  infinite  benefit  on  the  reciter.  The 
same  belief  is  found  in  Ifie  Hindu  Tantras.*  In  the 

Mahastikha-pralcasa  of  the  Advaya-vajra^saiitgraha  it 
has  been  said  that  the  bija  proceeds  from  tiie  suiu'ata- 
.  knowledge,  and  from  the  blja  proceeds  the  reflection 
or  the  form  (of  particular  gods  and  goddesses).  *  This 


'  r»h-  ;ln  IntTothtcfion  to  Eroteric  Buddhifin,  by  B  Bh&tta* 
oharya,  p,  wntn-Lu 

*  About  the  allotment  of  the  bijos  to  the  diaerciit  gods  and 
eodd«scs  there  is  no  slnct  agreement  nmiing  the  Tantras,  Thus  in 

nf  Wantfunatha  and  ‘hi’ 

of  Ka^anatha.  (MS,  B.N,  Sans,  Xoa.  <5S,  06,  p.  4(B)1. 

In  the  y/infp^putold  of  the  f/nra/Vd-tantra  we  find  that  the 
of  the  Tatblgata  is  (j,h  ah  hum  pkaf  tvahs-.  that  ot  he 
^de,s«  k»im  am  jvit  kham  fto.V,^and  that  of  Heruiai  it 

£r(ivA.sX  Nr  iTSlvlT 

Texts  Md  sIS™)!”*'"'  ‘■''""“-''"■raf.  (K„l,™i,  s,™,  of 

’  ftp/nrii  b'ljail  himbttih  prajliyatv\ 

Advntja-vfijm-naiiigrahnf  p.  50  1G,0.S.). 


SCHOOLS  OP  TaNTKIC  BUDDHISM  65 

kind  of  belief  in  a  syllable  representing  a  god  or  god¬ 
dess  is  a  very  old  belief  current  from  tbe  time  of  the 
Aranyakas  and  tlie  LJpanisads.  In  the  Upanisads  we 
often  find  that  Brahman  is  to  be  meditated  in  the  form 
of  the  syllable  ^  om  ’ ;  this  *  oni '  is  taken  to  he  the 
representative  of  the  Brahman,  Even  Patanjali  in  his 
Yoga  philosophy  accepts  the  prttnuva  (i.e.,  *oni  *)  to  be 
the  representative  of  Isvara. 

It  must,  however,  be  adniitted  that  of  these 
Mantras  (which  are  many  in  kinds,  such  as  Bi/a, 
Hjdaya,  Upahrdaya,  RaksUt  etc.)  only  very  few  can  be 
historically  traced  back  to  some  significant  origin  tike 
the  bija-mantra  pram.  A  noticeable  thing  in  this 
■  Mantra  element  is  the  infusion  of  some  particular 
significance  into  some  sound  or  syllable,  wliich  now 
seems  to  us  to  be  purely  arbitrary'  ;  and  often  purely 
Sanskritie  words  have  also  been  explained  in  that 
technical  way.  Thus,  in  the  Manual  of  a  Mystic  we  find, 
— “  In  the  word  Arahaii  the  first  letter  '  A  *  means  the 
Treasure  of  the  Law  (Dharma)  ;  the  second  ‘Ka'  the 
Treasure  wljo  is  the  Buddha  and  the  third  '  Uaii '  the 
Treasure  of  the  brotherhood  (Sahgha) ’  In  the 
Hevajra-tantra  Sri-Hcruka  has  been  explained  in  the 
following  manner,—*  Sri  ’  means  the  noiwiual  know¬ 
ledge,  *he’  means  the  non-causality.  *rii''  means  the 
nature  as  uncompouiided  and  *  kn  ’  means  ‘  not  abid¬ 
ing  anywhere  ^  *  In  the  Srl-cakra-sambhdra-tantra  we 
find, — Let  him  imagine  in  the  centre  of  his  own  heart 
the  letter  *  A  ’  evolved  fi-oin  the  experience  which 
knows  that  forms  are  unreal.  Or  let  him  think  of  the 
clear  lunar  disc  which  symbolises  world  experience, 
and  upon  that  Mant^'a  ‘  Hum  *  which  symbolises 
mind  devoid  of  objective  content.  Of  this  ‘Hum’  the 

^Manual  of  a  Myatit:  (being  the  Transktion  trom  the  Pali  and 
Sinhalese  work  entitled  the  .Uaniifil)  by  F.  L.  Wood- 

wiinl,  M.A.  (CKntafa),  p.  *2. 

*  jiU-ifaram  /anrinm  | 

hyuhatii  leakHti-  no  tuaril  P 

//evd/ra-fanlra.  MS.  (RASB.  No.  11*17)  p.  1®(A), 

O.P.  ]«5  -y 


TaXTHIC  buddhism 


ee 

letter  *  u  *  stands  for  the  knowledge  wdiich  accom¬ 
plishes  all  works  ;  the  body  of  the  letter  ‘  H '  for  that 
knowledge  which  distinguishes,  the  top  of  the  letter 
‘  H  ’  for  the  equalising  knowledge,  the  crescent  (ccmdra) 
for  the  mlrror-like  knowledge  ;  and  the  *  Bindu  ’  above 
that  for  the  changeless  knowledge,  ”  '  This  kind  of  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  Mantras  is  frequently  met  with  in 
the  Tantra  literature  in  general,* 

On  the  whole  it  seems  that  most  of  the  Mantras 
and  Dharanis  are  composed  of  a  string  of  syllables 
which  have  lost  their  etymological  meaning  or  which 
had  never  an  etymological  meaning,  Vasubandhii 
says  in  Jiis  Bodhisattim-bkHmi  that  tins  absolute  mean¬ 
inglessness  is  the  real  significance  of  tlie  Mantras,  A  ‘ 
Sadhaka  is  to  meditate  on  these  Mantras  as  something 
absolutely  meaningless  and  this  constant  meditation 
on  the  meaninglessness  of  the  Mantras  will  gradually 
lead  to  a  .state  of  mind  where  it  will  be  very  easy  for 
him  to  meditate  on  the  ultimate  nature  of  the  dhamas 
as  absolutely  meaningless  ;  this  meaninglessness  is  the 
void  nature  of  the  dfiarmas  and  thus  the  meditation 
on  the  Mantras  will  gradually  lead  a  Sadhaka  to  the 
realisation  of  the  void  nature  of  the  dhannas.  * 


^  transloted  Iiom  Tibttan  fay  Kar.i 

Dnwasamdup^  5-0. 

*  fiytrns  iah-ctikranthn  v'^whl  Hit  vidhfynfe\ 
rfphas  tafnk  mjnudhhuto  yfl  rthhS  hahni-ruphyi  || 
vfivwrffiill’iti  ^firva-dh/trma-x^tkh{i7h  «ri  ] 

rekha  hahnimn^  rekM,  jfifjmrfdNiano  c<3n7u  ( })  ][ 

iitraptjfiHw  dnifftavi^oh  prnbha^vnra-isukhakpi  | 
dvayoh  teii  bhavtl  [| 

hakattih  mikha-calirmthB  lehhayfdUigfitim  (?) 
tuiah  mmpifivaifm  rJeufm  ihlm  vindtiTuctjQtt  || 

til  l&kottaM  kvucit  hkottara-mkha~prad^  | 

^ieyam  ikara-rftphf*  |[ 

etan'i  sapfafcflfjTf??!  ficris  |  etc. 

Manfiakfllfkfi-laritni.  MS,  (B*N.  N&.  _ 

B(A>. 

“  Vkh  Bodhi^iiih-tt-hhSinH—Ed,  bv  Unari  Wo-nhara  (Tokyo) 

pp.  *27^-74.  " 

Sw*  also  Olwiirr  CuU^,  rlc.  bv  the  present  author, 

pp.  21-22, 


SCHOOLS  OF  TAJSTRIC  BUDDHISM  67 

Tlius  accorfliiig  to  VasubaiKlhit  in  this  absolute 
iin meaningness  of  the  Mantra  lies  its  real  power  winch 
helps  the  Sadhaka  in  realising  the  nature  of  the  uni’ 
verse  as  absolute  void.  The  Mantras  are  thus  taken 
onl5'‘  as  a  help  for  tlie  realisation  of  the  absolute  void- 
nature  of  the  universe.  So  in  the  liands  of  ^'asubamlhu 
the  Mantras  obtain  a  deeper  significance  than  the  mere 
invokation  c>f  any  particular  god  or  goddess  who  might 
eonfer  mundane  benefit  on  us  or  fulfil  some  of  our 
selfish  desires. 

Qesules  tlic.se  unmeaning  mystic  syllables  we  find 
in  later  Buddhist  Tantras  tiial  the  letters  (including 
all  the  vowels  and  the  consonants)  were  transformed 
•into  Mantras.  In  this  matter  the  Buddhist  Tantras 
agree  fully  with  the  Hindu  Tantras.  It  is  a  general 
custom  with  the  Tantras  to  place  these  Mantras  in  the 
form  of  the  letters  in  different  parts  of  t!ie  body  far 
the  purification  of  the  body,  and  there  are  often  ela¬ 
borate  systems  of  the  arrangement  of  the  Letters  on 
the  different  plexus  {cakras)  situated  within  the  body 
along  the  spinal  ciiord, '  The  two  sets  of  letters,  viz,, 
dti  (the  vowels  beginning  with  the  vowel  ‘  a  ’)  and  fcdit 
(the  consonants  beginning  with  the  letter  ‘ka’)  are 
often  spoken  of  variously  in  both  the  Hindu  and 
Buddhist  Tanlric  practices.  It  Is  therefore  necessary 
here  to  say  a  few  explanatory  words  about  these 
Mantras  as  letters  (earn a). 

In  this  transformation  of  the  letters  into  the 
Mantras,  as  Prof,  S.  N.  Dusgii]>ta  explains  in  an 
article,*  the  Tan  Iras  seem  to  have  adopted  the 
Mimariisa  theory  of  iuhda  or  sound.  The  Mitnamsakus 
hold  that  sound  is  eternal  and  is  always  in  tlie  form 


^  uf  the  P«Tlca-fcr*ifiid* 

MS.  (B.N.  Sfins.  Nci.  (iS)  pp. 

A I  so*  if  mi  kit~i  a  n  tra  ^  Bod  hkitta-i^fvn  k  m  iri  u  wfi-pti  /isi . 

MS.  (H.A.S.B*  Xo,  mm  pp.  7KA)— 

^  GrrirrfjJ  int  rod  art  ion  to  Taiytm  Philosophy  t  by  S* 

caQccled  in  his 


G8 


TA>rrEIC  BUDDHISM 


of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  a  word  is  also  nothing 
more  tlian  the  letters  that  eotnpose  it.  The  meaning 
.  of  a  word  is  absoUitely  independent  of  any  human 
agency  and  belongs  to  the  word  by  virtue  of  Us  very 
nature  anc]  some  peculiar  power  is  required  for  the 
realisation  of  this  hilicrent  meaning.  The  w'ords  them¬ 
selves  are  also  eternal,  but  they  require  the  auxiliary 
agency  of  pronunciation  to  be  cognisable  to  our  con¬ 
sciousness.  The  Tantras  accept  tills  view  of  the  eternal 
nature  of  the  iabdas  and  further  hold  that  the 
movement  that  produced  the  world  shows  itself,  or, 
is  represented  in  us  in  miniature,  in  the  production  of 
the  sound.  The  process  of  the  production  of  the  sound 
is  the  epitome  of  the  notion  as  it  were,  of  the  cosmic  • 
process  of  creation.  ”  This  creative  power,  which  is 
view'ed  as  the  mother  of  tlie  universe  in  its  aspect  as 
identified  witti  the  voriies  is  called  the  mdtrkd.  Now 
sabda  being  of  the  nature  of  I'anio,  the  fifty  varnas 
from  *  a '  to  *  h '  are  taken  to  be  the  totality  of  the 
presiding  force  over  the  sabda.  The  different  vornas 
therefore  represent  the  different  functions  of  the 
mdtrkds  and  these  mofrAds  being  parts  of  the  creative 
forces  are  associated  wdth  particular  conative,  cogni¬ 
tive  and  emotional  tendencies  and  are  also  naturally 
connected  with  corresponding  physiological  centres, 
which  form  the  physiological  data  of  these  psycho¬ 
logical  functions.  Tliis  seehis  to  be  the  metaphysical 
ground  on  whicli  this  Mantra  theory  as  the  uar^os  is 
based.  In  the  -Srisfliupuf/A-d  we  find  that  whatever 
word  proceeds  from  the  mouth  of  man  should  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  Mantra,  the  sound  (ndda)  is  the  Mantra** 
In  the  Vyakta-bhdvdmtgata-tattva-siddhi  it  has  been 
said  that  whatever  pure  movements  of  Uie  limbs,  pro¬ 
ceed  forth  from  the  Bodhicitta,  which  is  Sahaja,  should 


'  ijnh  kaicit  pmearii  varitm  janilniith  pratipattunlel 

nndo  hf  tmntra  ilft  tikUnk  mrve^ti}  lu  inrinimu,\  etc, 
Sfi-unmputika,  MS.  (R.A.S.B,  No,  IBM)  p.  ©(fi). 


SCHOOLS  OF  TaNTRIC  BUDDHISM 


69 


t 


u]1  be  conceived  of  a.s  the  Madras,  and  whatever  words 
proceed  from  it  are  all  JIantras, ' 

Closely  associated  with  this  Mantra  element  of 
esoteric  Buddhism  is  the  Mudra  clement  which  is 
generally  taken  to  be  signs  made  by  the  particular 
position  of  the  hands  and  the  fingers.  *  This  Mudra 
element,  however,  with  tlie  Mantra  and  some  other 
esoteric  practices  has  a  deeper  signiheance  in  the  yogic 
Sadhana  of  the  Tantnkas,  and  as  the  Mantra  element 
contains  all  the  secrecy  of  the  potency  of  sound,  the 
Mndra  element  contains  the  secrecy  of  touch  as  asso¬ 
ciated  with  the  potency  of  the  pliysiological  system. 
Witli  Mantra  and  Mudra  the  element  of  Mandala  or 
describing  the  mystic  circles  was  also  introduced. 
Though  this  Mudra  element  with  the  Mantra  clement 
and  some  other  esoteric  practices  may  be  traced  back 
to  the  later  vedic  practices,  we  have  reason  to  think  ^ 
that  in  the  evolution  of  Mudra  in  esoteric  Buddhism 
the  different  postures  of  the  hands  and  fingers  of  .*5akya- 
muni  have  something  to  do,  and  some  of  these  postures 
do  allude  to  some  of  the  incidents  of  his  life.  In  the 
University  library  of  Cambridge  there  is  a  manuscript 
with  the  colophon  ^rlmac-chakyaraja-sarca-durgati- 
pariiodhana-mukhaJihyma-praihatna-adiyoga-  n  a  m  a~ 
samddhik  with  as  manv  as  lumdred  and  hf tv-eight 
folourctl  illustrations  of  the  different  kinds  of  Mudriis. 
Of  these  some  seem  to  be  purely  the  posture  of  the 

^  sva  d  ha-bod!/iicf ttfif  y t’  kh  ul  b  m  haja~vi n  mu  r I  il-pi  ^a~ 

vik^epaii  tc  f^i^rve  eva  mudra-kfimhfyf^pi  vag-vik^epfia  ttiantta- 
prak^rdh  \ 

Vyf^khi-b  ha  i  a  n  if tfi-ta  t  tva-sUldh  u  MS*  ( C X  .B*  No.  13 124 J 
p-  00(A), 

Cf,  also  tlic  Bengali  soog  pf  Sadbaka  Bilmpra^ad, — 
ydfrt  swnrt  Arurnn-prife^  it/ikdff  mftr  iiioiifm  buff, 
kfiit  pancai^tit-varmmfiifi  viirwf  ifitrnf  rtama  dhurr  *j 
“Whomever  you  bear  witb  your  ears  are  but  the  Mantras  of  the 
Mothtr;  Mother  Ku!i  ip  of  the  nature  of  these  ftfty  letters,  and  she 
bus  her  luime  m  tv  try  letter*^" 

^  This  Mudfp  should  be  carefully  distin^uJfihBd  from  the  Mudra 
or  the  Mahiiniudru  who  is  the  Prujnu  ur  the  great  woman  to  be 
adopted  in  the  Yogie  practice. 


70 


TANTHIC  BUDDHISM 


lianils  and  tn tigers  ;  some  on.  the  other  liand  illitstrate 
the  different  manners  of  holding  the  thuinlerbolt 
the  lotus  (padnm),  the  bell  (g^iarifd),  the  sword, 
the  coneh-shell  (HU7ikha\  bunch  of  flowers,  garlands, 
etc.  Others  again  illustrate  the  manner  of  offering 
flowers,  water.  Incense,  lamp  and  other  materials  of 
worship.  Some  again  illustrate  the  diiferent  manners 
of  playing  on  the  different  musical  instruments.  All 
these  are  done  with  llie  aim  of  obtaining  final  puri¬ 
fication  and  final  deliverance  from  the  miseries  of  life. 

Once  the  portals  of  Buddhism  were  flung  open  to 
let  in  some  elements  of  Tantricism  iji  the  form  of  the 
Dharani,  Mantra,  Mudra,  etc.,  all  the  traditional  beliefs 
in  Magic  and  charms  and  sorceries  with  all  their 
details  rushed  in  and  quickly  changed  the  whole  ethieo- 
religious  outlook  of  Buddhism  ;  and  wdtli  the  forms 
and  traditions  of  Buddhism  and  the  materials  of 
Tantricism  grew  up  the  elaborate  Tan  trie  Buddhist 
systems. 

V 

(ii)  Vajra-yana — The  Most  C'oninioa  Name 
Once  this  esoterism  could  (tnd  admission  into  the 
Buddhist  fold  all  sorts  of  popular  beliefs  and  practices 
began  vigorously  to  be  incorporated  in  it.  The  six 
kinds  of  Tantric  rituals  intended  lor  the  good  or  evil 
of  anybody  (generally  known  as  abhicam)  gradually 
made  their  way  in  it,  and  the  five  accessories  of  Tantric 
practices,  generally  knmvn  as  the  five  ‘M’s  (paricn- 
niakaras)  also  found  place  in  Buddhist  esoterism.*  But 
the  aim  of  these  practices  is  not  always  the  fulfilment 
of  some  or  other  mundane  desire  (though  instances  of 
them  are  not  altogether  wanting),  but  these  j>ractiees 
with  tlieir  minutest  details  are  said  to  be  undertaken 
only  for  the  attainment  of  the  Bodineitta,  Le.,  for  the 

*  Wtf  do  no\  lind  niiy  direct  metitiuii  of  those 
in  Ific  Buddhist  Toittrus;  but  we  fine]  sp^rodie  monttun  of  wine, 
lish  and  cto,,  but  niore  ofteii  we  find  montiun  of  the  panca- 

and  it  Lg  ofioit  thut  a  SildbakA  placed  in  the 

Oiiu,  without  hesitntiun,  oujoy  the  five  oh j eels  of  enjoy- 
meat  fur  Ihc  nttainment  of  perfection. 


SCHOOLS  OF  TANTRTC  BUDOmSM 


71 


realisalitm  fjf  perfect  knowledge  and  for  the  uplift  of 
all  beings. 

This  composite  system  of  Tanlrieisnv  came  lo  be 
known  by  the  general  name  of  \^ajra-yana  ‘  and  from 
Vajra-y^n  developed  the  Sahaja-yana  at  a  still  later 
time. *  * ** 


^  Tlic  ori^i  11.^1  nanta  MoiitTfl-^yana  is  Lti  a 

*jenpral  sense  Jor  the  later  Buddliist  TaDtrie  Sehook. 

7N£rnt™-w)4iftaf/a>per  fxnuv&kHijfite ,  ete^  II ^^vajm-patijiktl,  SIS. 
p»  45(B). 

Alsio, — tad  jdaili  X'^ak^i(tiU*dhund\ 

— . i Jffl i/a-rcr/ m-m p .  54. 

AJi=Pt — Comm,  on  the  Dokako&ti  of  Komliapadaf  Verse  No.  12. 

—Dr.  P.  C.  Bagehrs  edition. 

*  Kiasi  Dawasamdup  in  his  introduction  to  the  iSri-cufem-ieiPii- 
hhura-t€^tt(ra  divider  this  Vajra-yina  into  six  sect5.  He  i§ayst — 
*'The  development  or  ^fruit’  of  ths  first  three  (i.e*,  Sravaka-yana, 
PratyckR-lHjdiiha-y5na  and  Bodhisattva-y^a)  is  the  Yaira-yana  and 
MardTH-yana  which  h  di voided  into  six  parts  or  states;  (4)  Kriya- 
tantra^yoim  (Byavki-rGyud-kyi-tbe^n);  (5)  Caryil  or  Upiya-taDtra- 
yarta  (Spyod-pahi-rGyTjd-kyi-thegpa);  (0)  Yo^-tantra-yfina  (rNa!- 
hbyor-rgV  The  latter  is  again  subdivided  into  three;  (T)  Mahaypga- 
tantra-ySna  (Mahn-^yoga  or  Mri-rGyud-kyj-thegpa);  (ft)  Anuttara- 
yoga-tantTR-yana  (Anuyogm  nr  (?)  Blamed-rGyud-kyi-thegpa);  and 
^0)  x4.ti-yoga-tanlra-yana  (Ali-yoga  hi-lheg-po)/-  From  what 
Sf^urce  Kmm  Dawasamdup  des^ibiS  these  subdivisions  we  do  not 
know;  the  general  praetiee,  however^  is  to  divide  Vajra-yana  into 
four  classes, — vh,^  Knya-tantTa,  Carya-tantrat  Yoga-tan  tra  and 
.Anuttara-tajitra*  Mr.  Waddell  describes  the  first  two  divisions  as  tlsc 

**Lower  Tantra”  and  the  last  two  as  the  ^*Upper  Taatra”*  (Lamamn 
— I52)i  The  Kriya-tnntras  and  Carya-tantras  are  epneemed  with 
the  ritualsi  et-renioniesi  worship  of  and  goddesses  and  other 

practices:  but  the  Yoga-taiitra  find  the  AnTittara-tanlra  are  much 
higher  types  of  Tantras  containing  the  Yogie  processes  lor  the  realisa¬ 
tion  of  the  ultimate  truth  and  a  discussion  on  the  nature  of  the 
ultimate  truth.  As  n  matter  of  fact  if  we  go  through  the  Buddhist 
Tan  trie  texts  p  wc  shall  find  ^hat  some  of  the  texts  eon  tain  nothing 
but  the  detailed  description  of  the  gods  and  goddesses  and  elaborate 
systems  of  worship  au»J  chanting?— without  having  any  element  of 
yoga  or  philosophy  in  them,  ll  is  for  this  tcosoti  that  to  study  the 
cssentiuk  nf  the  Buddhist  Tardras  we  slu^uld  concentrate  otir  atten¬ 
tion  more  nn  the  Yoga-tantras  and  the  Anuttara^tanlras  and  our 
study  is  generally  based  on  thcin.  But  the  fact  is  that  it  is  often 
very  difficult  to  arrange  the  Buddhist  TariJras  under  the  heading  of 
these  four  cliisaeSf — for  many  of  the  Tantros  contain  a  mixture  of 
the  different  rlements. 

The  doctrines  oF  the  Kriyu-tantriis  and  the  Carya-tantras  were 
meant  for  the  beginners  for  whom  mere  rituals  und  practices  were 
prescribed;  but  the  Voga-tantra  ujid  the  Anutlaru-yoga-tantra  are 


1 


72 


TASTTRIC  BUDDHISM 


(A)  kaucakea-yaNa,  nathism,  etc. 

The  Buddliiat  Tantras  are  generally  divided  into 
three  schools,  vis.,  Vajra-yana,  Kala-cakra-yana  and 
Siihaja-yana,  We  do  not  know  on  the  authority  of 
what  texts  this  division  of  schools  have  been  made.  Of 
course,  these  names  are  often  met  with  in  the  Tantrie 
texts,  but  the  characteristics  of  the  schools  have  never 
been  sufficiently  explained,  Jiahamahopadhyaya 
Haraprasada  Sastri  in  his  introduction  to  Modern 
Buddhisjji  and  its  Followers  in  Orissa  of  N.  N.  Basu, 
speaks  of  Nathisni  as  another  school  of  Tantrie  Bud¬ 
dhism  in  addition  to  the  three  already  mentioned  above. 
This  view  of  MM.  Sastri  seems  to  be  based  on  a  popu¬ 
lar  misconception.  *  The  name  of  Kala-eakra-yana 
also  appears  to  be  perplexing.  About  it  Waddell  says 
in  his  Lamaism, — In  the  tenth  century  -4.D.,  the  Tan- 
trik  phase  developed  in  Northern  India,  Kashmir,  and 
Nepal,  into  the^ monstrous  and  poly-demonist  doctrine, 
the  Kala-cakra,  with  its  demoniacal  Buddhas,  which 
incorporated  the  Mantra-yaiia  ]>ractices,  and  called  it¬ 
self  the  Vajra-yana  or  the  '  Thunderbolt-Vehicle  and 
its  followers  w'ere  named  Vajra-carja  or  ‘followers  of 
the  Thunderbolt.  ’  ”  *  In  another  place  he  says, — The 
extreme  development  of  the  Tantrika  phase  was  reach¬ 
ed  with  the  Kala-cakra,  which,  although  unworthy  of 
being  considered  as  a  philosophy,  must  be  referred  to 
here  as  a  doctrinal  basis.  It  is  merely  a  coarse  T^- 
trik  development  of  the  .4di-Buddha  theory  combined 
’ivith  the  puerile  mysticism  of  the  Mantra-yana,  and  it 
attempts  to  explain  creation  and  the  secret  powers  of 


for  the  jidvaricfi^d  Siidhakiiji  who  wouJd  nltaui  perfection 
(aifjffhi)  through  proceswi  of  Yogs.  Prof.  La  %^aL1^e  Poussin  has 
compared  thest  divisions  of  the  Buddhist  Tantras  with  the  ftirangie- 
mcol  of  the  Vais^va-tantras  (fouBd  in  the  Piidmfi^lanf ra)  aa  the 
(1)  Jji&iia-padat  h}  Yoga-|>adti,  (3)  Kriyl-p^da  and  (4)  Carya^  padftp 
IJ.R.A.S,,  lun],  p.  fKio). 

^  See  Obsctire  CulU  ,1^  IhickiJromd  of  Efngati  Littfuinr^ 

by  the  present  i/rrlter* 

*  by  Waddeli^  p.  IS. 


I 


SCHOOLS  OF  TAXTRIC  BUDDHISSl  73 

niitiiri!,  Iiy  the  utiioii  of  the  terrible  Ivnli,  not  only  with 
the  Dhyaiii  Biiddlms,  hut  even  with  Adi-Buddha  him¬ 
self.  In  this  ivay  Atli-Buddlia,  by  meditation  evolves  a 
]>rofieative  energy  by  wliieh  tlie  awful  Sanibhara  and 
otiier  dreadful  Dak  ini  fieaidesses,  all  of  the  Kali-type, 
obtain  spouses  as  fearful  as  themselves,  yet  spouses  who 
are  regarded  us  reflexes  of  Adi-Buddha  and  tlie 
Dhyani  Buddhas,  And  these  demoniacal  *  Buddhas', 
under  the  name  of  Kakn^aki-a,  Heruka,  Aeliala,  Vajra- 
bhairava,  etc.,  are  credited  with  powers  not  inferior 
to  those  of  tlie  celestial  Buddhas  themselves,  and  with¬ 
al  ferocious  and  blood  thirsty  ;  and  only  to  be  con¬ 
ciliated  by  constant  worship  of  themselves  and  their 
.  female  energies,  with  offerings  and  sacrifices,  magic 
circles,  special  mantra-chanm,  etc.  ”  ‘ 

From  what  is  said  here  about  tbe  Kala-cakra-yana 
I  it  seems  that  it  is  also  a  phase  of  Vajra-yana  with  a 
I  p red oiiii nance  of  the  terrible  gods  and  goddesses  whom 
/  IVaddell  has  styled  as  the  ‘demoniacal  Buddhas’. 
But  we  do  not  understand  tlie  relation  of  this  terrible 
aspect  of  Tantrie  Buddhism  with  the  iianie  Kala-cakra 
1  given  to  it.  The  word  Kala-cakra  ineatis  the  wheel  of 
I  time.  Its  Tibetan  synonjmi  “*Dus-Kyi-’  K’or-lo” 
also  means  tlie  circle  of  time.  MM.  H.  P.  Sastri 
explains  the  word  in  the  following  way;— “What 
is  Kala-cakra-yana  ?  The  word  Kala  means  time, 
death  and  destruction.  Kala-cakra  is  the  wheel 
of  destruction,  and  Kala-cakra-yana  means  the  vehicle 
for  protection  against  the  wlieel  of  destruction.  ”  * 

AVe  have  at  our  disposal  a  text  of  the  title  of  5rl- 
fidla-cafcra-taiiira.  ’  As  far  as  our  knowledge  of  the 
Buddhist  Tantrie  texts  goes,  we  have  not  found  any 

\  other  text  belonging  to  this  Kala-cakra  class.  A  study 
of  the  text  does  not  confirm  the  statement  that  Kala- 
cakra-yana  is  that  school  of  Tantrie  Buddhism  which 

*  JK  131^  '  ~  '  ' 

*  -Iforfrrfi  etc*  Intm.,  p.  8, 

*  Prescrvird  lit  the  Cambridge  University  Librury  fCaiiibnd?e 
MS.  Add.  No,  iQfjj).* 

O.P,  105—10 


74 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


introduced  the  demoniacal  Buddhas  in  its  fold, — ^at  least 
it  is  not  the  main  characteristic  tlirDugh  which  the 
school  should  be  recognised.  In  the  heginning  of  the 
text  we  find  that  King  Sueandra  approached  the 
Omniscient  Lord  Buddha  with  salutation  and  asked  of 
him  the  yoga  of  the  ^ri-kata-cakra  which  is  the  wa}* *  to 
salvation  of  all  people  of  the  Kali  age,  ’  Then  the  Lord 
replied  that  this  secret  of  yoga  is  unknown  to  all,  it  is  a 
system  of  Yoga  which,  with  all  its  accessories  of  Maiidala 
(magic  circle)  and  consecration  (ahfiise/i'a),  is  explained 
within  this  very  body,  and  the  Lord  then  explained 
how  all  the  universe  with  all  its  objects  and  localities 
are  situated  in  the  body  and  hov?  time  with  all  its 
varieties  daj’,  night,  fortnight,  month,  year,  etc.)  ■ 
are  all  within  the  body  in  its  processes  of  the  vital 
wind  (pTdno-t'aj^ii).  ’  In  the  body  of  the  text  Sahaja 
has  been  fully  explained  and  the  details  of  the  sexo- 
yogic  practices  for  the  attainment  of  the  Sahaja  have 
also  been  described.  The  only  thing  that  strikes  the 
reader  is  the  stress  given  to  the  control  of  the  vital 
winds  (prdna  and  apdna)  and  to  the  results  attained 
therefrom  ;  we  find  detailed  discussions  of  how  even 
the  different  diseases  are  to  be  cured  by  the  control  of 
this  Frona  and  4pana.  This  theory  of  Kala-cakm  has 
verj'  soundly  been  discussed  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  the 
Tanfra-foka  of  Abhinava-gupla  and  a  perusal  of  tlie 
[text  w'iH  convince  the  reader  that  the  explanation  of 
KuJa-cakra  as  given  in  the  $ri-kata-cakra-tantra  is  jast 
the  same  as  described  in  the  Tantra-fota,  The  whole 
chapter  of  the  Tantra-loka  is  devoted  to  the  exposition 
of  the  doctrine  of  Kala  (time)  and  the  process  of  keep¬ 
ing  oneself  above  the  influence  of  the  whirl  of  time. 
Ilere  also  time  (kaffl)  in  alt  its  phases  (day,  night, 
fortnight,  month,  year,  etc.)  has  been  explained  W'itli 
reference  to  the  functions  of  the  vital  wind  (praiia  and 

'  MS.  {Ciirabndgc  Add.  Nti,  ISSl)  p,  1(B). 

*  dchamadhyc  iamastatti^ pyiilthyaiiiitii&ridni  i^xin'a  nnm^ 
iitaijdntfim  ca'bhisekitm  |l  *  /fti'd.,  p.  1(1)), 


^ _  SCHOOLS  OF  TAKTRIC  BUDDHISM  75 

apunei)  spread  through  the  whole  nervous  system,  and 
the  process  of  eontrollijig  time  is  to  control  tlie  vital 
>vind  in  the  nerves  througli  yogic  practices. 

The  nature  of  Lord  Sri-kala-eakra  becomes  clear 
from  the  entitled 

the  Here  he  is  saluted  as  of  the  nature 

of  fluuyaia  and  Karuna ;  in  him  there  is  the  absence 
of  tlie  origination  and  destruction  of  the  three  worlds, 
tic  is  an  unihcatiou  of  tlie  knowledge  and  the  know- 
able ;  goddess  Pnijfia,  who  is  both  with  form  and 
without  form,  is  embraced  by  hint ;  he  is  bereft  of 
origination  and  cliange, — he  is  immutable  bliss  bereft 
of  ail  lower  pleasure  ;  he  is  the  father  of  the  Buddhas, 
possessing  the  three  Kayos,  the  knower  of  the  three 
times  (i.c.,  the  past,  present  and  future),  the  Omni¬ 
scient, — the  ultimate  and  original  Buddha — the*  non¬ 
dual  Lord.  By  an  examination  of  these  descriptions . 
of  the  Sri-kala-cakra  it  will  be  found  that  there  is  no  i 
difference  between  the  conception  of  this  Lord  Sri-kala- 
eakra  and  the  Lord  \'ajra-sattva  described  hereafter.  ' 
Again  the  aim  of  the  Kaia-calira-t antra  as  professed 
here  Is  no  mundane  benefit ;  on  the  other  hand,  like 
all  other  Buddhist  Tantras  it  also  professes  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  perfect  enhghtennierit,  not  only  for  the  self  but 
for  all  the  beings,  to  be  the  final  aim. 

That  the  conception  of  Kala-caki'a  is  substantially  | 
the  same  as  the  conception  of  Vaira-sattva  and  tliat ! 
Kala-cakra-yana  is  not  a  distinct  school  of  Tantric 
Buddhism,  but  a  particular  tiamc  for  the  Vajra-yana 
school,  will  be  clear  also  from  the  text  Sekodthsu-fikaj ' 
wiiieh  Is  a  comiiicntary  on  the  Sekoddesa  section  of  the 
Kala-cakra-iantra.  There  it  is  said  that  the  ultimate 
immutable  and  uncliaugcable  one,  remaijiing  in  the  sky¬ 
like  dharma-dhatu  (the  element  underlying  all  the 
d/iarmas)  is  called  KiiUt ;  U  itself  is  the  itnmutable  know- 


'  G.O.fi. — £(I.  by  AL1H0  E.  Carelli,  Dr.  Litt. 


TANTRIC  BUDPnTSM 


t6 

ledge,  Cakra  implies  the  unity  of  the  tliree  kinds  of 
existence — the  manifestation  of  Kah,  It  (the  Ctifrre)  is 
the  body  of  the  Lord — point-Uke,  containing  the 
potency  of  the  existence  of  the  universe,  Kala-cakra, 
therefore,  implies  exactly  the  same  as  tlie  unity  of 
Prajna  and  Vpaya.  * 

Every'  syllable  of  the  word  Kala-eakra  is  said  to  be 
pregnant  with  a  meaning.  Thus,  the  syllable  ‘  ka  ’ 
means  causality  fkarana),  Ma’  means  ‘cosmic  re- 
absorption^  ffnya),  ‘ca*  means  the  unsteady  mind,  ami 
‘  kra  '  means  the  series  of  event  or  the  process.  *  KtiJ-o, 
therefore,  means  the  slate  of  absorption  in  the  original 
cause-potency',  this  is  the  state  of  Sunyata  ;  it  is  tiie 
pure  consciousness  or  the  principle  of  subjectivity,  * 
Cakra  on  the  other  hand  means  tlie  principle  of  knou- 
ability,  or  the  cy'cle  of  tlic  workl-process  (jneyd-kdram 
jagac-cakram  jneyam  traidhdtukam  ananta-bhdva- 
laksaHain  cnkraiii),  which  is  also  the  principle  of 
Updya.  Kala-eakra,  therefore,  means  the  absolutely 
unified  principle  of  Prajna  and  Updya.’'  We  shall 
presently  see  that  the  conception  of  the  Lord  Vajru- 
sattva,  the  Godhead  of  Tanlric  Buddhism,  is  also 
exactly  the  same.  Sometimes  we  find  in  tlie  'Kdla- 
cakra-tantra  salutation  to  Lord  ^rl-kala-cakra  in  the 
very  manner  in  which  Lord  \’^ajra-sattva,  the  Lord 
Supreme,  is  saluted  in  most  of  the  Buddhist  Tantras.  ‘ 
This  Krda-cakra  is  the  Bodhieittu ;  lie  is  the  ultimate 


*  Stlroddefu^ilkat  p.  6.  Cj« 

hi  Tu  il  rfi^  fr h  thv  rti^rupim  \ 

^inyntfi-caHTtim  itfj  ukhuh  kiihi~tfjkro*dx^ayu^hamh  || 

^  kiiFiinir  UiktWi!  vm  \ 

ctiktiTiic  kmkarat  krnmti-hfindhanmh  || 

lhid,j  p,  S, 

*  As  fur  tile  unification  nf  PmjM  and  Viniifii  sec  injm. 

*  mnnu^  te  kidu-aikmfjn  hfamytl 

jfiuna-hfiya  nitmo*ia  nh.)  ffitf  tr  !| 

ittm  ^ckcna  iftv  umhu  firtiMuUim  kum  xiimjinitim  |‘  etc* 


SCHOOLS  OF  TAXTHIC  BUDDHISM  T7 

imnuitable  substance  in  the  form  of  motionless  great 
bliss  (ada^i/o-ma/iasMA*/ifl). ' 

I  The  Saliujiya  school  is  an, offshoot  of  Vajra-yana, 
i  There  is  no  exclusive  literature  belonging  to  Sahaja- 
I  3*ana, — on  the  other  hand,  the  Sahajiya  poets  of  the 
I  Dohas  anil  songs  recognise  the  welt-knovvEi  texts  of 
Vajjra-yana  as  their  authority.  The  exponents  of  the 
'  Sahajiya  school  put  the  whole  emphasis  on  their  pro¬ 
test  against  the  formalities  of  life  and  religion.  Truth 
is  something  which  can  never  be  found  tfirougli  mere 
austere  practices  of  disctplitiCj  neither  can  it  he  realised 
tlirougli  much  reading  and  philosophising,  or  through 
tasting,  bathing,  constructing  images  and  worshipping 
gods  and  goddesses  and  the  innumerable  other  pura- 
I  phernalta  of  rites  and  rituals  prescribed  in  Vajra-yana  ; 

it  is  to  be  intuited  within  in  the  most  unconvenlional , 
\  way  through  the  initiation  in  the  Tattvn  and  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  yoga.  This  makes  the  position  of  the  Sahajiyas 
distinct  from  that  of  the  ^'ajra-yanists  in  general. 

The  name  Sahaja-yana  seems  to  be  doubly  sigtuh- 
cant ;  it  is  Sahaja-yana  because,  its  aim  is  to  realise  the 
ultimate  innate  nature  (sahaja)  of  the  self  as  well  as  of 
the  dbarmas,  and  it  is  Sahaja-yana  also  because  of  the 
fact  that  instead  of  suppressing  and  thereby  inflicting 
undue  strain  on  the  human  nature  it  makes  man  realise 
the  truth  in  the  most  natiu-al  way, — i,e„  by  adopting 
the  path  through  which  the  human  nature  itself  leads 
him.  What  is  natural  is  the  easiest ;  and  thus  Sahaja, 
from  its  primary  meaning  of  being  natural  acquires  the 
secondary  meaning  of  being  easy,  straight  or  plain.  As 


mlktiTfi  en  ttirnkrtir  bhd^nvut}  pmjM  | 

ksfim~stikho  hiih'ifh^iU-mukhyf}-j}hiteih 
budtih'^rifiin  iri-k^UfJ-^i^kittfk  trnikidya^tmvrdakahl 

.YfinMTjNaA  vututi:''  tinn  |l 

He^inning  id  iha-.  f^j*hu~kdia-cukm-tanirii~Til]adjk(i  (cMititkcl 
Vimnlu-pnthhd^  MS.  R.A..S«Bi.  No.  4727)^ 

As  Tor  ihe  tc  Lord  Viijra-Sdttvit  scu  Ch.  1V« 

^  B,  uhot  p. 


•rs 


tantkic  buddhism 


the  Sahajiya  school  has  been  studied  by  the  present 
writer  in  a  comprehensive  way  in  another  work,  entitled 
Obscure  Cidts  jIs  Background  Of  Bengaii 

Literature^  he  does  not  propose  to  deal  with  it  into 
further  detail  here. 

(B)  General  Characteristics  Of  Vajra-yana 

Vajra-yana  or  the  '  Adamantine  way *  *  is  really  the 
way  or  means  for  tlie  realisation  of  the  Vaji'a-nature 
or  the  immutable  and  impenetrable  void-nature  of  the 
self  as  well  as  of  the  dharoias.  ’  But  the  scope  and 
characteristics  of  ^^ajra-yana  have  not  been  satisfac- 
loril}’  explained  in  any  of  the  Taiitric  texts.  The  ^ri- 
samd;a,  wdiieh  is  credited  by  some  to  be  the  earliest 
authoritative  text  on  Vajra-yana,  explains  Vajra-yana 
as  the  means  which  has  recourse  to  the  five  families 
{hulas)  of  the  Bodinsattvas,  viz.,  Moha  (presided  over 
by  Vairociina  with  his  Sakti  Vajradhatvisvari),  Dvesa 
(presided  over  by  Aksobhya  with  his  Sakti  Locana), 
Kdga  (presided  over  by  Ainitabha  with  his  Sakti 
Pamlara),  etc. ;  but  these  kulas  have  alwa^'s  their 
foundation  on  the  Vajra  or  the  sdnyatd,  ’  Thus,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  5n-saiMd/«,  the  school  that  grew  with  the 
system  of  the  five  families,  the  Kulas,  of  the  Bodhi- 
vSattvas  is  the  Vajra-yana  school.  In  the  Sadhana- 
mala  we  find  some  characteristics  of  Vajra-yana  ex¬ 
plained  -in  connection  with  the  Sadkana  of  Vajra- 
tard.  Here  the  Sadhaka  takes  the  resolution  before  the 
Cakra  of  the  goddess  that  he  will  remove  all  the  evils 
(papa)  in  him — will  hold  in  high  regard  all  the  merits 
(ku^ala)  of  all  the  Buddhas,  Bodhisattvas,  Aryas  (tlic 
reverend)  and  of  all  the  Prthag-janas  (ordinary  men) — 
will  develop  all  his  merits  which  will  lead  him  to 
Irujiscendental  (crtuffara)  perfect  enlightenment  (sam- 


'  T;*  infra,  Cll.  IV. 

*  ifmho  iJvriffJt  tilikii  mdtt  vajre  rntth  | 


SCHOOLS  OF  TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


79 


bodhi)  ;  he  will  take  refuge  tn  Buddha,  the  supreme 
one  of  all  men, — to  Dkarma  including  the  whole 
Mahayana,  to  the  Sahgha, — ^the  assembly  of  the  immu¬ 
table  Bodhisattvas  i  he  will  attain  transcendental  per¬ 
fect  enlightenment  for  all  the  beings — for  their  goofl, — 
for  their  itappiness, —  for  establishing  them  in  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  nfruena  and  in  the  wisdom  of  the  Buddhas, — * 
and  for  all  these  lie  is  going  to  adopt  the  path  of  trans¬ 
cendental  perfect  enlightenment, — and  that  path  is  the 
Vajra“3^ana,  ^  In  another  place  also,  the  attainment  of 
Bodhi  through  all  the  seemingly  unmeaning  practices, 
rites,  ceremonies,  mantras  and  meditation  is  professed 
to  be  the  aim  of  Vajra-yana.  ’  In  the  J nana-siddhi  of 
Indrabhuti  it  has  been  said  that  the  Vajra-yana  has 
been  explained  in  innumerable  j/oga-tanfras,  those 
fools  who  do  not  know  of  it  whirl  in  tlic  sea  of  exist¬ 
ence.  ^  Vajra-yana  is  compared  to  the  raft  by  wliich 
one  is  to  cross  the  ocean  of  existence,  which  is  full 
of  the  snares  of  false  subjectivity.  *  In  the  Guhya- 
siddhi  of  Padmavajra  Vajra-yana  is  characterised  as 
the  transcendental  path  which  is  the  unity  of  all  the 
religions,  tiie  docLrines  of  \'ajra-yana  arc  the  most 
secret ; — is  a  religion  of  non-substanliulily  aufl 
purity,— it  has  got  no  parallel.  ‘ 

But  all  these  are  mere  cursorj’  descriptions  iicme 
of  which  suggests  any  correct  definition  of  Vaira-yauu. 
In  fact,  Vajra-yana  cannot  be  defined  ;  for  it  incorpor¬ 
ated  within  it  so  many  heterogeneous  elements  and 

rij/Tfl-yArKim  [ 

>9r1r/hnnil-v}ia?3,  Voh  1,  p.  225. 

^  SAdAnna-ninfa,  Vol.  II,  }i.  I21. 

*  Kfljrn-yarfJ  IFofAfS,  p.  31  (6,0,S.I.  * 

fajra-ynnrin’}  sttriiiiriiliya  ko  I'B  parti  if  i  || 

i&iil.,  p.  4)8. 

*  . . flniJltantfpnl 

ifnmi-rfAtiTWid-.iiirfifiSrafrai/j  yat  tvaya  bhasitath  prttbhir  j| 

fill  tf(f  A  Aliya  i.'r<lifn4e  yosya  no'pumS  j| 
{juAiya-inJJAi,  MS.  p. 


80 


TAXTRIC  BUDDUISM 


practices  that  nii3’^  attempt  at  strict  defjiutiotv  must  be 
futile.  We  oceasiuiuvlly  find  itul  all  (he  six  Tantrie  prac¬ 
tices  techiiically  known  as  abhicara,  vix.,  inarnwfl  (i.e., 
killing),  mohnna  (enchuntiiig),  stcimb/iana  (paralysing), 
tfiducsana  (rendering  harm  through  animosity),  ucca- 
tana  (removing  or  driving  away)  and  vasl-harana  (sub- 
duing),  carried  on  with  the  purpose  of  fulfilling  the  sel¬ 
fish  desires.  Again,  there  arc  the  elaborate  methods  of 
worshipping  the  gods  and  goddesses,  making  their 
images  or  paintings,  clianting  of  the  gathas  (verses) 
and  the  Mantras,  the  culture  of  the  poramitris,  the 
application  of  the  Madras,  and  drawing  the  mystic 
circles,  the  practices  of  Hatha-yoga  as  well  as  of  the 
contemplative  yoga-system  found  in  the  canonical 
texts  like  the  Visnddhi-magga,  etc,,  and  last  hut  not 
the  least,  the  sexo-yogic  Tantrie  practices,'  We  need 
not  here  enter  into  the  detail  of  these  heterogeneous 
practices,  the  mere  enumeration  and  illustration  of 
which  are  not  likely  to  throw  any  light  of  any  kind. 
Let  us  onl5"  notice  here  how  these  innumerable  practices 
have  been  given  a  Buddliistic  colouring. 

In  spite  of  this  heterogeneity  of  elements  the  most 
striking  feature  of  Vajra-yana,  wliidi  justifies  the 
general  name  given  to  it,  is  the  use  and  function  of  the 
idea  of  Vajra.  Vajra,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  is  the 

*  Oftet]  we  Hnd  mention  of  the  rules  of  strict  discipline,  Sc 

devclopmctit  of  the  pomwiffijf,  but  ofleii  the  Vajra-yanisls  declare  that 
there  cannot  be  anything  evil  for  the  Vajra-yanist,— no  work  not  to  be 
done,— no  food  not  to  be  taken,  no  woman  not  to  be  enjov^.  Often 
It  IS  rather  commended  that  a  Vnjra-yanift  Bhoiild  steal  the  nro- 
periies  of  others,  always  tell  the  lie,  kill  all  the  beings,  cat  everythine 
should  enjoy  nil  women,  whatever  relation  she  mav  be. 
pHTti-sva-haTanam  ktiryiit  \ 

valctavyaih  ca  rnrsa-vfthinm  •tirva-buimutt  c«  ghataij^-l  |/ 


tu  hkatc»fii.hhah>iaD  tolhmVn  euf 
pitfa-neyatn  tathQ  taunt r1  kunpin  vatvtt  tinmabitnh  fl 
MS,  fC.L.B,  No,  131®4)  p.  SOfAl 
tf.  also  Srignfti/o.mmil/o.fonUfl,  p.  ISs,  p.  pg,  p,  gO  elc, 

(G  O  S  I 

*t  p”  of  Saiis-Buddhist  SlSS.  i,I  R.a.sJ!,' 


SCHOOLS  OF  TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


81 


void  — and  in  Vajra-yana  everything  is 

^  ajra^ — t.e.,  pei'fect  void.  In  worshipping  a  god,  the  god 
is  thought  of  as  of  the  Vajra-nature,  his  image  is  Vajra, 
— ^tlie  worshipper  is  V^ajra,  the  materials  of  worsliip  are 
Vajra,  the  maiitras  arc  Vajra, — the  processes 'are  Vajra 
and  everything  is  I'ajra.  Tliis  Vajra,  as  we  have 
already  said,  often  serves  as  the  stamp  of  the  Vajra- 
yana.  In  the  Kriyd-samgTaha-na7na~  paiijika  the  names 
of  the  goddesses  are  generally  Vajra-rilpim,  Vajra- 
bhdskari,  Vajra-humkafi,  Vajra-vildsinl,  Vajra-mohmlj 
Vajra-khecan,  Vafrasani,  Vajra-ra$am,  Vajra-trdsanit 
Vajra-sparsim,  Vafra-cetanl,  Vajra-virdsini,  Vajra- 
vika^im,  etc.  ’  It  should  also  be  noticed  that  the 
supreme  goddess  is  also  called  Vajr^svafi,  or  Vajra- 
d/iafuisvori  or  Vajra-vdrdhi.  In  the  rites  and  worships 
we  find  mention  of  the  articles  incense,  lamp,  conch- 
shell,  bell,  perfumes,  flowers,  garlands,  sisaniuin  (tda), 
grains  (yaba),  seat  (asana),  flag,  jar,  clotli,  ornaments, 
fried  paddy  (iaja),  unboiled  rice  (a/esata),  offerings 
(arghya  and  un/ah),  the  five  preparations  from  cow- 
milk  (panca-gav^/a),  the  five  sweets  (panea-nirtc),  etc., 
but  all  of  them  invariably  bear  the  stamp  of  Vajra, *  * 
There  is  laughing  (hdsya),  artistic  gesture  and  move¬ 
ment  music,  dancing,  playing  on  musical  in¬ 

struments — everything  of  which  is  Vajra.  IVe  neetl  not 
multiply  the  Instances.  If  we  examine  the  Kriya- 
tamgraha  we  shall  find  nothing  there  which  has  not 
the  determinant  Vajra  before  it.  Almost  same  is  the 
case  with  the  Sadhanas  of  the  Sndhana-mdid.  It  was 
the  peculiar  idea  of  the  Vajra-yanists  that  anything 
that  bears  the  epithet  vajra  before  it,  necessarily  leads 
one  to  the  realisation  of  the  void-nature  of  the  self 
and  the  dharmas.  We  have  seen  that  even  the  woman 
to  be  adoptefl  for  the  yogic  practices  was  called  the 
vajra-kanyd  or  the  *  tliunder  or,  void  girl, '  and  so  it 

*Ch.  111.  MS.  pp.  20-21. 

*  Vide  Ibid.,  pp.  3S-'lrl),  40,  plc, 

Cf.  uljw  Hiiithnna-mtita,  pp.  tS-IS),  321-22. 

O.P.  103-  U 


82 


TANTKIC  BUDDHISM 


is  in  the  ftlness  of  things  that  the  vehicle  (yana)  itself 
should  be  called  the  Vaira-yana. 

It  is  very  interesting  to  note  how  in  tlie  popular 
practices  and  worship  of  gods,  goddesses  and  even  of 
ghosts  and  spirits  the  ideas  of  Mahayana  Buddhism 
lie  interspersed*  Thus  in  the  selection  of  the  ground 
for  a  monastery,  forty  gods  and  goddesses  are  to  be 
meditated  on  and  worshipped  in  the  four  quarters. 
These  are, — Pramudita,  Viniala,  Prabhakan,  /Ircismati, 
Sudurjaya,  Abhimukhl,  Durangitmd,  Acala,  Sdd/rtituafl 
and  Dharmaviegha  (i.e.,  the  ten  Bodhisattuu-bhiimis) 
in  the  east  facing  th  ewest ;  again  the  ten  gods  of  the 
nature  of  the  ten  paramitdSt  vix-t  Dana  (charity),  ifi/n 
(good-conduct),  Ksanti  (forbearance),  Virya  (energy)t 
Dhya7ia  (meditation),  Prajnd  (wisdom),  Updya 
(means),  Pranidki  (concentration),  Bafa  (strength)  and 
Ja&iia  (knowledge)  in  the  south  ;  again  ten  in  the  west 
facing  the  east,  viz.,  Aynk  (life),  Ciffo  (mind),  Pan»- 
Mra  (cleanliness),  Karma  (deed),  Upapatti  (birth), 
Siddhi  (perfection),  Abhhnukti  (that  which  is  facing 
perfection),  Pranidhano  (concentration),  JMna  (know¬ 
ledge),  and  Dhamta-‘Va§itd  (control  of  the  dftarmas)  ; 
and  ten  goddesses  in  the  North  facing  the  South  of 
the  nature  of  the  ten  Dhdranis, — viz.,  Fasamati, 
Ratnaslkd,  Vsnim-vijayd,  Mdrici,  Parna-mvarl,  Aneka- 
mukhi,  JdngHli,  Cundd  and  Prajnd-vardhinl,  Sarva- 
buddha-krosath  ^  In  the  description  of  gods  and  god¬ 
desses  we  find  that  as  they  hold  Vafra  (thunder), 
Khadga  (sword),  Pdsa  (noose),  Padma  (lotus),  etc.,  so 
also  they  hold  Pru/fia-pwstflka  (tlie  book  of  knowledge), 
Bodhi-vrksa  (the  tree  under  which  knowledge  was 
obtained),  etc.  In  connection  with  making  the  bricks 
for  constructing  the  house  it  lias  been  said  that  Uie 
brick  must  be  tliought  of  as  a  mass  of  nectar  and  then 
it  should  be  sprinkled  w'ith  the  auspicious  water  of  the 
jar  and  worshipped  with  the  five  presents  (panco- 


*  K rtyu-ati  iit^raha-fH  tna-pa  HjihA . 
MS,  pp,  y-7. 


SCHOOLS  OF  TaXTRIC  BUDDHISM  83 

pahara)  and  thus  it  should  be  purified  ;  and  then  they 
should  be  meditated  on  as  follows : — This  whole  world 
is  of  the  nature  of  the  Tathagatas  ;  the  Tathagatas  are 
of  the  nature  of  essencelessness — ^and  therefore,  the 
whole  world  is  also  of  the  nature  of  essencelessness.  ” ' 

In  the  Sad/ianas  of  the  Krit/d-$amgraha  in  the  form 
of  worship  and  the  muttering  of  various  Mantras  the 
fundamental  aim  of  producing  the  Bodhieitta  and  of 
relieving  the  whole  world  is  not  lost  sight  of.  Here 
also  we  find  that  through  all  the  Mantras,  Mudra  and 
Mandula  and  all  other  rites  and  ceremonies  the 
Sddfiaka  is  bent  on  realising  Llie  nature  of  his  citta  as 
luminous  by  nature  (prafcrfi-prahhosuorfl),  as  the  im¬ 
mutable  v'oid  (un/ra)  ;  after  the  realisation  of  the  self 
as  the  void,  he  identities  himself  with  all  the  objects 
of  the  world  and  becomes  one  with  all.'  Even  in 
constructing  tlie  image  of  a  god  and  in  establishing  it 
with  religious  ceremony  and  in  worshipping  it  wdth  all 
the  elaborate  parapliernalia  the  aim  is  professed  to  be 
the  attainment  of  the  Bodhieitta. 

If  we  analyse  the  Sodhanas  of  the  Sddhetna- 
7nald,  we  shall  see  that  the  ideas  of  Buddhism  are  inters 
spersed  with  polytheistic  idolatrj'.  Let  us,  for  instance, 
examine  the  Ka/rd-sana-sddhanmn.  Here,  first,  tlie 
Lord  Supreme  should  be  tliought  of  with  the  five 
Tathagatas,  and  then  dowers  are  to  be  offered.  Then 
the  dve  Tathagatas  and  their  $aktis  are  to  be  saluted 
and  flowers,  incense,  lamp,  and  other  offerings  are  to  be 
presented  to  them.  Then  the  Sadhaka  is  to  meditate 
on  the  four  Bmli  ma-ui7tdras,  e.g.,  universal  friendship 
(marfrJ),  universal  compassion  (karund),  self-content- 
merit  (niiidifd)  and  absolute  indlfferenee  (upe/csd). 
Then  he  should  think  in  his  heart  the  lunar  disc  trans¬ 
formed  into  the  letter  ‘  a '  and  on  that  the  syllable 


'  ttithagala  yal-ntabfidvag  tiit-mnbfmvtim  i/iirtft  jagat] 
hitlifigato  iii/i~>vitbhiivairi  ifittpj)  ftigiit  y 

ftifd.,'  JUS.  p.  21. 

^  fbifi.i  pp«  45^30m 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


at 

‘  Jiurii  *  of  the  colour  of  gold  and  then  think  of  the 
Guru,  Buddhas  and  the  Bodhiisatlvas  enmnating  from 
the  rays  of  that  *  hum  These  Guru,  Buddha  and 
Bodhisattvas  should  then  he  worshipped  ;  then  follow 
the  confession  of  sins  anti  tlie  acceptance  of  the  merits  ; 
then  follow  the  taking  shelter  to  the  three  jewels,  e.g,, 
Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sahgha,  and  the  adoption  of  the 
path  followed  by  the  Jinas  (the  self-conquered)  and 
then  the  production  of  the  Bodhicittu.  Then  follows 
tlie  meditation  on  the  void  (sitni^ata),  and  tlien  the 
realization  of  the  nature  of  all  the  dharmas  as  essence- 
less  and  the  realization  of  the  self  as  luminous,  of  the 
form  of  the  iiiiniulable  Bo<ihicitta  ;  for  the  stabiUzation 
of  this  state  the  following  Mantra  should  be  chanted,— ^ 
“  Naturally  pure  are  all  the  dhartnas,  and  by  nature 
pure  am  I  I  *’  After  Lins  follow  the  other  details  of  the 
Sadhana^  *  This  in  general  is  the  nature  of  many  of  the 
iSadhanas  that  are  collected  in  the  Sadhana-miild,  It 


*  SuJhdiia'iNQfd,  Vcl.  I  fd.O.S.Ji  IS-lBi  In  the 

wc  find  that  first  of  fill  Lo^  Khasarpaiin,  shouW  he  saluted 
and  -trorrliipped;  llien  the  Sitdhaka  should  confess  his  $Ld  before  the 
Lord  and  tcike  the  vow  thnt  tic  wilt  follow  the  merits  of  the  Buddhas, 
the  son  of  the  Buddhas  (i.c.,  the  Bodhisattvas),  the  reverend  ones 
and  others  and  develop  them  to  perfect  cnlightcaincDt;  then  as  usual 
he  takes  refuge  in  the  three  jewels  of  Buddha,  DhoTHin  and  Sahgha, 
Then  he  takes  the  reBctntion  of  producing  the  BexJhicitta  lor  the 
well-being  and  deliverance  of  aU,  and  adopts  the  path  followed  by  the 
Sugfitas  and  their  followers.  Then  lie  should  think  of  the  world  of 
static  and  dynamic  as  all  void  and  place  himself  in  the  void  with  the 
Mantra,  *oni  1  am  of  the  nature  of  the  immutable  knowledge  of  the 
\oid,'  Then  be  should  realise  that  all  the  dhanmt  nre  pure  by 
nature  nod  he  tcio  is  pure  by  nature  and  then  he  should  read, 
♦Naturally  pure  are  all  the  dftannas,  pure  am  t  by  nature— «»»cn  1’ 
Then  the  Sddhttka  should  realise  himself  os  pure  consciousness 
(r'ljjjdmi-Tnufni-fmni-ft)  and  then  think  ol  a  iatiis  of  the  colour  of  the 
uni  vers*  (in'^rn-ria/mz-frunialn)  transformed  as  the  syllable  spain' 
and  OP  that  a  clear  lunar  disc  emonuting  from  the  letter  *a'  aud 
on  that  the  syllable  *hTlh'  whiclt  is  rodiating  rays  which  cover  the 
sky;  and  then  see  all  these  terms  formed  into  a  full-blown,  variously 
decorated  lulus  with  its  seed  within.  Then  the  self  should  be  medi¬ 
tated  on  as  the  transformation  of  all  these  and  as  the  Lord  himself; 
and  then  follows  the  list  of  the  gods  and  goddesses  with  the  detail 
of  their  descriptions  and  the  order  in  which  they  should  be  meditated 
mi  by  the  either  side  of  the  Lord  with  their  bf/os  and  Mantras,  etc. 


SCHOOLS  OF  TANTBIC  BUDDHISM 


85 


is  remarkable  that  many  of  the  Mantras  here  are 
nothing  but  the  weU-knoivn  doctrines  of  Afahdjfdna 
Buddhism  with  tlie  addition  of  an  ‘  orii  ’  or  ‘  phat  *  or 
*  svaha  \  etc.,  ’  with  them.  Another  reniarkabte  feature 
of  these  Sadhanas  is  the  construction  of  the  mental 
images  of  the  lunar  and  the  solar  discs  with  the 
scheme  of  the  colours  and  the  various  lotuses  often 
with  full  decorations  forming  the  canvas,  as  it  were, 
for  the  objects  of  meditation  ;  this  seems  to  be  signi- 
hcant  from  the  yoga  point  of  view. 


*  The  most  gtnerai  Mantras,  as  we  have  abeady  noticed,  are; — 

(i)  om 

(ii)  oift  svobJidi'fi-rfuddhSfi  sorva-d/uirjHfilt  nrabhaun-iuddho'liani  | 
In  addition  other  Mantras  like — 

(i)  ojii  iiaTVa-tat}uigat&-tVfttko’ham  \ 

(ill  oni  dAonna-d/iatU'S'L'abMi'f-fn'rakn’ftomI  etc. 
are  also  found. 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE 
TANTEIC  BXTDDHISTS 

We  have  said  in  a  previous  chapter  Liiat  the  most 
important  and  the  most  interesting  study  in  the  Bud- 
dliist  Tantras  is  that  of  the  gradual  transformation  of 
Mahayanic  ideas  into  an  esoteric  theology  and  the 
association  of  liie  esoteric  Yogie  practices  with  them. 
We  repeat  here  that  it  may  not  he  a  fact  that  the  prac¬ 
tices  are  there  solely  because  of  this  theology  ;  on  the 
contrary  we  are  inelijied  to  postulate  great  influence 
of  these  practices  in  evolving  the  doctrinal  theology 
through  the  gradual  transformation  of  the  ^lahayanic 
ideas.  Let  us  now  have  some  idea  about  the  transform¬ 
ation  of  some  of  the  main  Mabayanic  thoughts  into 
Tantric  esoterisni. 

(1)  Vajra  And  Vajrasattva. 

In  the  transformation  of  the  ideology  of  Maha- 
yana  into  Vajra-yana  the  first  thing  to  note  is  tlie  trans¬ 
formation  of  the  idea  of  ^Dnyata  into  the  idea  of  Vajra. 
The  word  Vajra,  commonly  rendered  as  the  thunderbolt, 
is  taken  here  to  connote  the  immutable  adamant¬ 
ine  nature  of  the  dharums.  It  has  been  said, — 
“  Sunyata,  which  is  firm,  substantial,  indivisible  and 
impenetrable,  incaj>al}le  of  being  burnt  and  imperish¬ 
able,  is  culled  Vajra,  ”  ‘  To  realise  the  ^*ajra  nature 
of  things  is,  therefore,  to  realise  the  ultimate  void 
nature  of  things.  Some  of  the  most  important  Man¬ 
tras  of  tlie  V'ajra-yanisls  arc, — “  I  am  of  the  adaman¬ 
tine  nature,  xvhich  is  Sunyata-knowledge.  ”  *  “  All  the 

'  dplham  [ 

ndiihi  aviticlii  ca  ifinyatS  vajram  iicynte  -j 

p,  87  (G^O.S.), 

C/.  (ibfi^dyirrri  vajrara  MS.  p.  2(A). 

Cf.  Vajrnrti  fly  unlaid,  J  vStii  uri  mfl 

tflnfm-  MS.,  U.Sf.,  No.  47,  p.  1(B). 


theological  POSITIOX  OF  THE  TANTElC  BUDDHISTS  87 

dkarmos  are  of  the  adainantine  nature,  I  am  also  of 
tlie  adamantine  nature,  ”  ' 

We  liave  seen  before  tliat  the  word  \'ajra-yana, 
which  is  the  name  for  Tatitrie  Buddhism  in  general, 
really  means  the  Sunyata-yana—the  path  of  void 
which  is  the  adamantine  path.  We  have  also  seen  that 
this  Vajra  served  as  the  stamp,  as  it  were,  of  the 
Tan trie  Buddhists,  showing  thereby  that  the  aim  of  the 
Vaira-yanists  in  and  through  aU  the  paraphernalia  of 
Mantras  and  Tantras  was  nothing  but  the  realisatjon 
of  the  adamantine  void-nature  of  the  self  and  the  not- 
self. 

Who  is  then  the  Vajra-sattva?  Ue  is  the  Being 
of  adamantine  substance— the  ultimate  principle  as  the 
unity  of  the  universe.  It  has  been  said,— “  By  vajra 
is  meant  Sunyat^  and  by  aattua  is  implied  pure  con¬ 
sciousness  ;  the  identity  of  the  two  follows  Eroin  the 
nature  of  Vajra-sattva.’'*  Here  it  seems  that  the 
ultimate  principle  of  the  Vijiianavadins  as  pure  con¬ 
sciousness  (utplapti-mafratfl),  which  is  pure  know¬ 
ledge  and  as  such  identical  with  Sfuiyata  in  the  form 
of  the  absence  of  subjectivity  and  objectivity,  is  the 
Vajra-sattva.  It  has  again  been  said,  “  Sunyatl  is  said 
to  be  Vajra,  asid  all  manifestation  in  form  is  said  to 
be  sattva ;  Vajra-sattva  implies  tlie  unity  and  the 
identity  of  the  two.  In  other  words  Llie  Vajra-sattva 
is  the  AbAnfa-panfcaipa  of  the  Vijiianavadins,  where 
both  Siinyata  and  the  world-manifestation  remain  un¬ 
recognisably  unified.  But  the  fundamental  departure 
of  the  Tan’tric  Buddhists  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
VijMnavailin  Buddhists  is  that  the  ultimate  principle 

*  vajTA-tmnKa^  vajTU-UnakG^haml 

*  vdjrfiift  snttviina 

finayQh  mddh^ith  ]| 

^  jra^ViUTii  adffi'am 

iHdafuttjmf*  flfiiiyor  flifcyaTji  lii  il 

MSi  SaaSi  No»  4^^ 

p.  1(B). 


88 


TAXTRIC  BUDDHISM 


of  the  Vajra-yanbts,  Jinwevei*  negativety  it  might  have 
sometimes  been  deserihed,  vvas  tacitly  conceived  and 
more  often  frankly  described  as  a  Being— sometimes  as 
the  personal  God,  the  Lord  Supreme,  Tliougli  the 
A'ajra-sattva  is  free  from  all  existence  and  non- 
existence,  he,  nevertheless,  is  endowed  with  the  potency 
of  all  form  and  existences  and  is  himself  the  embodi¬ 
ment  of  loveliness.  ‘ 

This  Vajra-sattva,  as  the  Lord  Supreme  of  the 
Tan  trie  Buddhists,  representing  a  monotheistic  con¬ 
ception  of  ttie  Godhead,  has  variously  been  described 
in  the  Buddhist  Tantras  with  all  sorts  of  positive  and 
negative  attributes.  He  is  the  Bbagavan  as  lie  possesses 
all  the  six  excellences;  or  he  is  called  the  Bhagavan  as  he 
possesses  bhaga  which  means  that  which  breaks  or  re¬ 
moves;  Sunyata  or  Prajna  removes  all  afflictions  and 
drives  away  the  jVdra  and  so  sunyata  is  called  the  bha¬ 
ga.  *  He  is  saluted  as  the  Sunyata-essence,  transcending 
all  imagination,  omniscient,  embodiment  of  pure  wis¬ 
dom.  ’  He  is  the  abode  of  all  merits  and  is  of  the  nature 
of  all  the  beings.  *  He  is  the  Being  w'ithoul  origination 
and  destruction,  the  all-good,  the  soul-substance  of  all, 
the  enlightened  oni^— including  in  him  ail  the  static  and 
the  dynamic.  *  Perfect  knowledge  is  his  only  eye,  he 
is  the  stainless  embodiment  of  knowledge,  pure,  all- 
pervading,  the  subtle  seed  (of  all  creation),  the 
immutabie.  *  He  eternally  belongs  to  all  the  elements, 
to  all  tlie  beings — he  remains  pervading  all  the  borltes 
in  the  form  of  the  flow  of  consciousness  (c/t#fl-d#iara)  ; 

*  Viijr^-sativah  maintitah  |[ 

Piium-hraTna^  MS,  27(A>. 

^  bhanjnfmm  bhagam  ftkhy/^tnm  klF»ii^ttuim^di-bhfinjnndt\ 
pruju&rbttdhyfii  ca  Uklems  immai  prajM  bhago^^yutr  || 
li  f v*i  jra-t  ant  rat 

*  Pmjno-pijyu-vtniscaya-iiiddhi,  Ch.  Ill,  Verse  U. 

^  Ibid.,  Ch.  y,  Vi^rae  45. 

^  p. 

*  jHoTiaika-eaksur  nmato  jndnn^imirth  tathagat^Jih\ 
niiikahh  tarvago  vytipt  snhmm-v\jnm  finfiiravafy  || 

Quoted  hi  ihc  Ch*  XW 


THEOLOGICAL  POSIT lOX  OF  THE  TANTTtlC  BUDDHISTS  89 


he  is  Lmniistabk^  uiithinkabie,  pure,  passioulcssi  perfect 
void  like  tlie  sky,  free  from  existence  and  non¬ 
existence.  *  He  is  sonietirncs  spoken  of  as  of  the 
nature  of  infinite  I>liss  {mahasukha)  ;  this,  we  shall  see 
later  on,  is  a  great  innovation  which  moulded  the 
whole  Tantric  system  in  a  dilTerent  form.  * 

The  idea  of  the  Dharnm-kaya  Buddha,  discussed 
before,  may  be  reealled  in  eonriection  with  this  idea 
of  the  V^ajra-^sattva.  The  Dharnia-kaya  of  tiie  Maha- 
yanists  seenis  to  have  been  replaced  by  this  Vajra-sattva 
or  the  Vajra-kaya  of  the  \-ajia-yanists.  The  Vajra- 
kaya  has  often  been  identified  w^ith  the  Dharma-kaya, 

^  quot^  in  the  JflfliKi-jridpJhi,  p. 

Descriptions  of  I  his  type  abound  in  the  BitddhLt  Tfltitras.  In  the 

the  Lord  Vaji-a-sattv^i  is  saluted  as 
the  Lord  Ip  be  realised  by  the  uidi\idiia1  soul,  the  Lord  without 
parallel.  alUmovidg,  alLpm'adiiig,  the  only  doer*  the  only  destroyer* 
the  Lopd  Supreme  over  the  world,  the  revealer  of  potentialitiesi — 

sarufi^ftA  ^{iTVU-iiiapi  ca  htTla  Aarfu  [| 

^rhmdn  vyakta-bhuva-prak^iihah] 

MS.,  C.L.B.,  p.  aifA). 

Elsewhere  he  is  saluted  iis  the  Siuiyata-cssencc*  free  from  all  con¬ 
structive  imagi nation,  producing  right  knowledge  i  he  is  perfect  wisdom 
personified,  he  Is  Ihe  remover  of  iilusion,  the  peacher  nf  the  pure 
Iruth,  bc^m  of  the  ttou-essenrial  nature  of  the  dhnrmnis;  he  l§  Bodhi- 
eiUa.  from  him  come  all  the  perfectly  enlightened  ones,  all  the 
Bodhisaitvaji,  all  truth  and  all  the  highest  moral  %irtues.  He  repTC>- 
sents  the  three  jew^cfsi  the  great  way  tg  salvatiqn,  the  reality  in  all 
the  static  and  the  dynamic,  he  ia  nil  thnt  are  I  he  transforiuatigns  of 
the  three  elements*— 

tramaif  ^unifiitu-garbha  Burvo~mHkalpii~\-ur}ita\ 

/liana-jnfirfr  tii  te  H 

ja^itd-ajfiana-vhchefJA  iuddha-t<ittvo-ftha-di^dfikah  | 
dhnT^r^a^nriir^7f/ui/a^Ku^MhAfi{fi  Visjra^Miiiva  riama^  iu  fc  [| 
rafiia-fruyuih  pnaAdt^Aiitiwj  tatti:a-sthfivam-]anfiQmiim[ 
tmi-dhatjihim  idmh  mrvadi  pugnd-riffl  naniru  fu  fe  L 
pSfunpurikfj,  MS.  (R.A.S^B.  No,  ■tSS4),»  p.  12(B)* 

vajru-itattvn  iti  khtjatmU  pftmm  ifttkhmn  udilhrtam  || 
»vaynmbhu-nqmm  ctat  in  dAoniur-^'ui/n-^tigrilpaAgni  | 
tOAijiuiLiU  prnjw  si  hit  H  Uid^dta-rHpiiif  [| 

tbid,^  MS*  p*  4S{B). 

^  ad  etihm  surt'fidd 

unddi-nidAunuh  aoliro  vairu-suttvah  idiram  mikhovi  || 

Quoted  in  the  Ch*  XV^ 

C}\  also, — .id irfl  yU'Srt  p«n  P/fl  ^ 

0*P*  105—12 


90 


TANTBIC  BUDDHISM 


but  often  this  Vajra-kaya  has  been  conceived  as  a 
fourth  body  added  to  the  three  kayas  of  the  Maha- 
yanists  ;  in  the  Sahajiya  sect,  or  the  Sahaja-yana,  which 
is  a  mere  offshoot  of  the  Vajra-yana,  the  Vajra-sattva 
or  the  Vajra-kaya  has  been  transformed  into  the 
Saliaja-kaya,  whicli  is  decidedly  a  fourth  body  con¬ 
ceived  above  the  Dharma-kaya. 

A  little  thought  over  the  nature  of  the  Vajra-sattva 
discussed  above  will  reveal  that  the  conception  of  this 
Vajra-sattva  is  almost  the  same  as  the  monistic  con¬ 
ception  of  the  godhead  variously  conceived  in  Hindu¬ 
ism.  It  is  a  welt-known  fact  that  Mahayana  Buddhism 
was  gradually  coming  closer  and  closer  to  the  Upanisad- 
ic  ideas  and  that  many  Vedantic  ideas  were  tacitly 
implied  in  the  Sunyavada  and  Vijhanavada  doctrines. 
Wc  Lave  also  hinted  before  how  the  Mahayanic  idea 
of  the  Dharma-kaya  came  nearer  to  the  Idea  of  a  mono¬ 
theistic  godhead  In  popular  faith.  But  w’bat  was 
tacitly  implied  in  Maiiayana  was  fully  developed, 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  by  tlic  Vajra-yattists. 
Ttie  monistic  conception  of  the  Brahman  is  already 
there  in  the  conception  of  the  Dharma-kiiya  Buddha, 
and  this  conception  finds  its  full  expression  in  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  Vajra-sattva,  who  is  pui'e  consciousness 
purged  off  of  all  the  impurities  of  subjectivity  and 
objectivity  ;  he  is  pervading  the  whole  universe — the 
inner  principle  of  all  dharmas — the  unity  in  diversity  ; 
he  is  a  Being  of  infinite  wisdom  and  merit,  possessing 
universal  compassion — he  is  the  Lord  Buddha. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  Vajra-sattva  is  generallv 
taken  in  the  Buddhist  Tantias  as  the  Supreme  Being 
and  many  of  the  Tantras  begin  with  salutations  to  this 
Lord  Supreme  in  terms  which  are  equally  applicable 
to  the  Brahman  also,*  It  is  also  interesting  to  note 

»  Cf.  Iht  sulutatioQ  at  the  begin ninf;  of  the  Prtjtfa-frrauin:  — 
tTirrf r ^ 'ci-rFt H frlwn  a -^samaftnl tim  nfirva-bhai'a- 

dnrvic^rmti  sva-fmm-hitiitammh  vyUpinuth  nh- 

ninHtfam] 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TANTRIC  BUDDHTSTS  91 

tliat  all  the  Btitidhtst  Tatitras  of  the  Sahgftt-type  *  open 
with  a  galaxy  of  the  Buddhas,  Bodliisattvas  aiul  in¬ 
numerable  other  heavenly,  terrestrial  as  well  as  ghostly 
beings  assembled  to  listen  to  the  words  of  the  Lord 
Supreme,  who  is  none  but  the  Vajra-sattva. ' 

The  most  striking  feature  of  Vajra'-yana  associated 
witli  tlie  conception  of  the  \^ajra-sattva  is  the  import¬ 
ance  attached  to  the  self.  According  to  the  Upanisads, 
tlic  Brahman,  who  is  both  immanent  and  transcendent, 
is  to  be  realised  within  as  tiie  self.  Braiuna-realisation 
really  means  the  realisation  of  the  self  as  tiie  Brahman, 
The  Buddhist  Tantras  also  say  that  the  Sadhaka,  who 
realises  the  Vajra-suttva,  himself  becomes  the  Vajm- 
'sattva.  To  realise  the  ’^’'ajra-sattva  is  to  realise  that 
all  existence  is  nothing  hut  Sunyata  in  its  pure  nature  ; 
but  once  the  SMhaka  becomes  endowed  with  this 
wisdom  tlirough  his  realisation,  he  becomes  the  Vajra- 


tSuddham  idntath  viviktam  paTa}»a~iicaniaifam  yogmilm  fvtt 

gamyam,  «tc. 

I’f,  Also, — numo  vttjra-sattvaya} 
pmiiipntyn  jagttn^n&tbtnh  sarv/t-jinavarit-rcitam  \ 
xurvadniddhattiaiiam  Mddhi^'L'yAphMtR  gAgafio-paniani  || 
ran'attmri  HnriMijnam  I'nravdfriqdni  | 

hhaktya'hani  sansa-hftavnm  vah^yy  tut-tddhanaiit  param  |j 
J iiSTia-siddhif  Ch.  I,  Verses  1-2. 

Cj.  ilfso,— the  snlutatiurifi  at  the  begtbiii.n^  of  Advaya-siddhi 
(MS.  C.L.B,  No,  13124),  Tativn-fiddhi  (MS,  C.L.B,  No.  13124), 

{MS.  C.L.B,  13124),  C(i(ur-mu«/rd  (MS. 
C.L.B.  13124),  P^Tfrol^dl)lt-Ar^<'ihoT^a-w^dnr  (MS.  B.A.S.B,  No.  4937), 
<S'o4f(jaR-n]MfioaT-hftoi'»-eot''ni  (MS,  K.A.S.B,  No.  1074 IB),  etc. 

'  The  h  the  tj^)*  of  Buddhist  literature  which  invariably 

oju-ns  with  an  assembly  of  the  faithful  devotees  to  whom  Lord  Buddha 
would  preach  all  truth,  and  this  type  of  Uterature  also  invariably 
opens  With  a  ssentcnce  like  this: — ev«m  may&  ^mtatii  ekajuntn  ;9(irniijfe. 
etc.  (t'/.  Pali  Text-book  Society.)  These  Buddhist 

Tantraa  are  called  the  Ituddba-varanm  (or  tlie  sayings  of  the  Buddha) 
and  til  Tibetan  translations  they  form  an  important  port  of  the 
Kaijgyur  eoliection  while  tlie  translations  of  tlie  texts,  which  are 
composed  by  the  Buddhist  .Veiu-yas  themselves,  farm  part  of  the 
Tangyur  collection.  < 

*  Vf,  sania  mrva-buddha^bodhiiiutiianAtn  mn'ii-tiUkilgatinath  ca 
sd  rra  bhagatiin  mahy-vuira-dharah  farva-buddhu-iSiinQ-dhipalir  itj| 

Sri-guhifasain&jQ,  Ch.  XVH. 


92  taktbic  buddhism 

satLva.  He  is  also  called  the  Muha-sattva  as  he  is  full 
of  the  bliss  of  infinite  knowledge ;  and  as  he  is  always 
engaged  in  the  right  method  of  religious  observances 
(samnyei),  he  is  called  the  Samaya-sattva  ;  as  he  is 
eternally  a.^ociated  with  the  disciphnary  practices  for 
the  attainment  of  wisdom,  he  is  called  the  Bodhi- 
sattva,  and  as  associated  with  perfect  wisdom,  he  is 
called  the  Jnana-sattva.'  It  is  emphaticaUy  said  in 
the  Jnana-siddhi  that  our  Bod/i?'-mind,  which  is  of  the 
nature  of  the  Vajra,  is  itself  the  Buddhaliood ;  so 
Buddhahood  should  be  realised  tlirough  conceiving  all 
things  as  the  self  ’  In  such  a  stage  a  man  realises  him¬ 
self  in  all  things,  everywhere,  in  all  aspects,  by  all 
means  and  for  all  time,  and  he  realises  the  miivc^alised 
self  as  the  universal  perfectly  enlightened  one.’  This 
leaUsalion  of  the  self  as  the  highest  being  is  the  reali¬ 
sation  of  the  self  as  God  (devata)  and  the  process  is 
lechnicallv  called  the  suadfii-ffaivata-j^oja^.*  It  is  fre¬ 
quently  prescribed  that  the  self  should  be  realised  as 
God  and  then  it  should  be  worshipped  with  all  the  usual 
rites  and  rituals/  In  the  l*rajnopayQ-viniscaya-siddhi 
it  is  said  that  the  Lord  is  of  the  nature  of  all  existence 
in  the  form  of  the  Bodhicitta  ;  he  is  the  Lord,  the  holder 


‘  wfrftfdifflifi  uujrmii  rlj/  safluaTit  1 

nilpujii  1| 

frorfhi-wiHv«in  jpfjJsrfyrttf  | 

orHinii'jiiAnjf-JiwiDoiidifnf  jfiflttfi-MrtUv’oji  InfftfigHfu/j  || 

^  MS,  (R,A.S.B.  No.  11317)  p.  a(A>. 

*  horfhfcpUrtW  irfmii  rn/niin  AlriatPiditi:  t 

iitffTnlrHrt-j/Ojlfnn  appnitc  li 

Ch,  XV. 

*  Alin’d Im  fftn-idJiih  san’mfi  wimiffcA  sarv’nrfrt  ni'uydiHl 

{idrtvj-bNrf^IhflmovftpH  niddham  prapoifyafp  ji 

ibid.,  Ch.  XV,  V«K  S2. 

*  Cf.  ^rfnlh^daivaUl.yoge^»^  pparonm  rfruirt  I'ikflfpMifcf. 

46)pfrfha«o-narrt.  MS.  (R.A.S.B.  Nn.  1078(1)  p.  7{A). 

^  .fP'UP/rinidPPdii'  j^oliy^pib'hrfPti  | 

(Vflrfhp-iliiiuflld-yogc'ippt  nvp/wi  dOdaDdfii  pttipujatfft  H 

Ch.  XV,  Vpsrse  5*. 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TANTBIC  BUDDHISTS  93 

of  Die  lliuiiUer,  and  ihis  self  verily  U  God,’  It  is  found 
in  most  of  these  Siitlhana-s  that  gods  and  goddesses  me 
first  of  all  to  be  IhouglU  of  oft  the  solar  or  the  lunar 
disc  or  on  the  lotus,  but  the  whole  group  is  then  to  be 
meditated  on  within  as  ideiUieal  with  the  self.  The 

of  the  Panca-fcrmmn  gives  a  very 
elear  exposition  of  this  theory  of  self^worship.  The 
Yogin  is  first  of  all  to  meditate  on  the  nature  of  the 
world,  and  through  deep  concentration  of  the  mind  to 
realise  the  nature  of  tlie  phenomenal  world  as  purely 
illusory  ;  then  he  is  to  realise  the  Vajia-sattva  who  is 
free  from  all  the  categories  of  existence  and  non¬ 
existence,  who  is  endowed  with  all  the  forms,  yet  of 
whom  no  form  can  be  conceived,  and  then  it  is  added 
that  to  realise  the  self  is  to  realise  this  \  ajra-sattva. 
The  self  is  described  here  as  the  all-powerful,  the  uni¬ 
versal  Butldhahood,  and,  therefore,  it  has  been  pres¬ 
cribed  that  with  all  care  the  self  should  always  be 
worslupped,*  All  the  Mantras  and  Mudras  and 
Mandalas— everything  should  be  applied  to  the 
worship  of  the  self.  The  chapter  concludes  with  the 
injunction  that  everything  shoidd  first  of  all  be  realised 
in  its  ^MYiytt/d-nature  and  then  should  be  thought  of 
as  the  self.*  This  realisation  of  the  self  in  all  as  of  the 
immutable  and  all-pervading  nature  is  the  sitadJnsfftnuu 
(aflirmation  of  the  seif)  and  this  svad/iwffttJnn  is  the 
secret  of  all  Yogas/ 

With  the  evolution  of  the  idea  of  the  Vajra-sattva 
as  tlie  Lord  Supreme  there  evolved  a  new  pantheon  in 
.  Vajra-yana.  The  Vajra-sattva  is  the  Primal  Enlight- 

'  wj  irn-t  Iiii  b  ha  Jffl »»  frn J  h  »CJt  la-ina  nl  (a  h  I 

an  ifi'o  bhoUBVfiw  vnjri  fa/rwifliJ  fiOHafi’a  rffualn  |j 

Ch.  V.  Vefsc  33. 

tnsmat  mn'tt-prnmtiti'fia  hy  rTfmiiwinn  pii/ayt'f  snda  || 

as.  p.  tJtlBl. 

hahujiatni  kiu>  ukitnti  royro-yfigt  fri  fdUviTfrthl 

wnrf  Tijiil  fWanibnip'd  uagl  tai  fllHUnva  Ifii/pflyt*  || 

■'  .1  J  e  ^  jjg  p 

*  MS.  p.  as(B). 


u 


TaNTRIC  BUDDnrSTkl 


eiietl  One — the  Adi-Bn(5dlja.  This  Lord  Supreme 
possesses  five  kinds  of  knowledge  wijieh  are  like  five 
attributes  of  the  Lord.  From  these  five  attributes 
proceed  five  kinds  of  meditation  {dbyana}  and  from 
these  five  kinds  of  Dkyana  emanate  five  deities  who 
are  known  as  the  five  Dliyani  Buddhas.  These  Dhyam 
Buddhas  are  the  five  presiding  deities  over  the  five 
skandhas,  viz.,  riipn  {material  element),  vedana  (feel¬ 
ing),  sayiijna  (conceptual  knowledge), 

(synthetic  compound  mental  states),  and  vijiiami 
(consciousness).'  The  deities  are  (1)  Vairocana,  (2) 
llatna-sambhava  or  Rntna-ketu  (vide, 
ita7naja,  p,  12),  or  Batna-natha  (uide,  Pancfl-Aframa, 
Cli.  1),  (3)  Amitabha,  or  Amitayus  (vide,  Sn-giihya- 
»amdja,  p.  12),  (i)  Amogha-skldhi,  or  Karma-natlia 
{vide,  Panea-kramn)  and  (5)  Aksobhya  respectively.' 

This  pantheon  of  the  live  Dhyani  Buddhas  seems 
to  have  evolved  in  later  Buddhism  with  some  influence 
from  the  Sankhya  philosophy.  The  five  skandiias  of 
the  Buddhists  were  confusedly  mixed  up  with  the 
panca-hhutas  (five  material  elements)  of  the  Sankhya, 
viz.,  earth  {keiti),  water  (op),  fire  (#e/as),  air  (maruf) 
anti  ether  (opoma).  These  five  material  elements, 
together  with  the  five  sense-organs,  proceed,  according 
to  the  Sankhya,  from  the  five  Tan-mdtras  or  potential 
elements  or  generic  essences  of  sound,  touch,  colour, 
taste  and  smell.  The  word  Tan-nidfra  may  broadly  be 
explained  as  that  in  and  through  which  the  unmaaj- 
fested  and  un-speeified  reality  (/at)  is  measured,  i.e,, 
manifested  and  specified.  In  this  sense  the  five  Tan- 

*  In  the  &Ti-€nkrtt-34nnbhaTa-tfintm  these  five  deities  are  explained 
as  the  five  a&peetst  of  wisdom  coming  from  the  it&obhlructed  nund» 
thev  tire  the  Dhyhnl  Bnddhas,  whereaa  the  presiding  deities  aver 
the  five  fkfmdhm  *re  Vaisfocana  (rMjjn),  Vajra-suryn  (i?ediind), 
rAdmanortcsvarii  llaia-vojra  {mth^kara)  and  Buddha 

V^ajra-^ttva  (vijttfina}-  th.  on  'The  good  wishcg^ 

Itiifiea-btiddha-nviibhiiviitt  ttt  ifhindho-tpritti-vinMfritQin  || 

MS,  E-A.S.B,.  Nol,  naaS 

p.  10(A).'  ' 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITIOX  OF  THE  TA>TRIC  BUDDHISTS  95 

w«trcs  nittv  remind  us  of  the  five  kinds  of  knowledge 
•  " 

of  the  Primal  Lord  which  arc  popularly  conceived  as 
the  five  attributes  of  llie  Lord,  and  from  these  five 
attributes  of  knowledge  follow  the  five  kinds  of  Dhya- 
iias,  from  which  again  proceed  the  five  Dhyani  Buddlias, 
w’ho  are  again  tlie  presiding  deities  over  the  five  aggre¬ 
gates  {skandkas).  The  nature  of  these  five  kinds  of 
/ftrina  is  not  explained  anywhere  ;  but  tliey  seem  to  be 
five  kinds  of  creative  potencies  in  the  ultimate  nature 
of  the  Lord,  which  is  pure  consciousness. '  Wc  have 
seen  before  that  in  Vijuanavada  Buddhism  the  ultimate 
reality  as  the  Abliuta^parikalpa,  though  bereft  of  all 
subjectivity  and  objectivity,  possesses  in  it  the  potency 
of  world  creation.  The  nature  of  this  creative  potency 
is  also  knowledge  and  from  five  kinds  of  such  know'-* 
ledge  there  proceed  five  kinds  of  specification  in  the 
pure  consciousness  of  the  Lord  and  these  five  kinds  of 
specilicatioii  of  consciousness  are  the  five  kinds  of 
Dliyanas  which  are  again  the  generic  essences  of  the 
five  skandkas. 

Ill  the  Tantrle  literature  these  five  Dhyani  Buddhas 
are  described  with  their  Saktis  or  divine  consorts. 
Each  Dhyani  Buddha  lias  got  a  particular  consort,  a 
particular  colour,  crest,  iV/udra  (posture)  and  Fohono  ; 
each  again  has  a  particular  Bodliisattva,  a  human 
Buddha,  a  bl/fl-maiifrii,  a  location,  and  each  is  again 
associated  with  a  particular  Kula  or  family ;  they  are 
again  associated  ivith  the  paiica-bhutas,  and  the  five 
sense-organs  of  siglit,  sound,  touch,  taste  and  smell. 
They  arc  again  placed  in  different  parts  of  the  human 
body.  The  whole  thing  may  he  illustrated  with  the 


'  The  live  kinds  of  uqcorditig  lo  llie 

saiMSrrdin,  (i)  jrwv«fKddftii-cfff«rw«-<fhflfH-;iS<!Mt!  prodocing  ( ?) 

VairocanH,  (iii  adarm-jMKa,  producing  Aksohhya.  (Lii)  prafyn- 
vr^pinri-innnit  producinjj  Amitubtta.  (iv)  janwiln-pinpiii,  producing 
Ratnu-sunibhuvii.  ond  (v)  trrydiiii$fhdi;n-;ndnn,  ]>rodiicmg  Aidogha- 
siddhi.  The  'lAynon  for  creation  in  general  b  known  as 
mmnarjana* 


96 


tantbic  buddhism 


lielp  of  the  table  given  in  the  next  page  (the  contro¬ 
versies  being  ignored),  ’ 

These  five  Dhyani  Buddhas  are  also  called  tlie  five 
Tathagatas  and  in  t!ie  hierarcliy  of  the  Pauca-tatha- 
gatas  Aksobhya,  the  presiding  deity  ovcTvijnana  is,  often 
given  the  highest  plaee  and  the  first  four  Tathagatas  are 
generally  marked  by  the  miniature  of  the  fifth  Tatlia- 
gata  Aksobhya,  and  the  latter  again  in  his  turn  is  mark¬ 
ed  by  the  miniature  of  the  Vajra-sattva,  The  marking  of 
the  first  four  Tathagatas  by  the  miniature  of  Aksobhya 
implies  that  the  first  four  skandhas  are  nothing  hut 
modes  and  modifications  of  consciousness, “  they  are 
the  constructions  from  the  consciousness.  But  the 
vijfidna,  as  one  of  the  aggregates^  is  not  lim  ultimate 
reality,  pure  cotiseiousness  which  is  absolutely  free  from 
the  notions  of  tlie  grdhya  and  the  grdhaka  is  the  ulti¬ 
mate  reality,  and  this  ultimate  principle  of  void  is  the 
^'ai^a-sattva,  and,  therefore,  even  Aksobhya  is  marked 
hy  the  miniature  figure  of  ^'aj^a-sattva. 

This  Vajra-sattva  is  not  merely  of  the  nature  of 
^unyata,  it  is  a  non-dual  stale  of  Sunyata  and 
Karuna;  to  imply  that  the  \''oid-consciousness  is 
also  of  the  nature  of  an  identity  of  both  Sunyata 
and  Karima,  Aksobhya  is  marked  by  the  Vaira-sattva,' 
Thus  the  Vajra-sattva  is  identified  with  the  Bodhicitta, 
It  is  said  that  when  Prajna  or  the  Sunyata-knowledge 

Yot  this,  setj  .1  (Chs. 

nn  iind  llevajm- 

Ch*  IX,  S£ii7ij>ti|rM^  Ch*  I*  Ch.  t,  T/tt:  Guda  0/ 

Sorthrrn  Buddhmn  by  A.  Getty,  Icouogmph^  by  Dr.  B. 

BhaitucburyUp  pp*  and  An  IntrodvcGon  to  Buddhist  Emtemm 
by  Dr»  fi-  Bhallachuryaj  Ch-  XIII- 

-  Po nca- itithu gttta-mudrd-vivaTa rid  in  A dvaya-vafra-samgru h 
f 7,  nf  so,— nl jiU-  vedfi  M-sam  f «  a-> w  ra-ffkan  dh  a-f  mu  kO.  vmro- 

cuno-ruinfi-mwihhavd-ttnfabhii^moiihosdddhiiyo  vijnfinu-mntTfita  ifi 
pmtipddttnAya  mudnionti  f^i| 

Panenhom^  Adudprt-tfl/ra-sniiigrRAfl,  42- 
VijMno  here  scem^  to  be  tsiken  in  tlie  sense  of  *awsrcness\ 
vdjM7ta»yii  naihsvabhfivya^ya  ^unyaia-kortinayoit  tMMmitka- 
(arorn)  €fi  frntipddoyirnm  akAttbhya*pi  vajm-mttvrfm  mudryoU, 
/i>irL,  p.  42. 


i1 

iJ'S 

c 

flf  5-3 
52^ 

1 

p:: 

t; 

Cr 

V 

a: 

-*j  'fc 

a 

if -5 

“T 

'HK 

fl 

A  d 

gii 

-1 

II 

11 

g5 

'  S'  *  e 

E  Si 

S  ElaS 

'*4  .fH 

1“ 

O  ^  k, 

J^Q 

^  3J| 

S  1 

£ 

jII 

■w*  ^  C^ 

|S 


ti 

3  2 


■^1 

23  a 

l:s 

a  a 

as 


^s 


■a 

-a 


3 

e3 


u 

P’.5 


& 

*> 

C 

i!£ 


i2 


s 

s 


11  II 


t  W  I 

.■?  E  J 


*‘ll" 

or 

“<iei" 

.  '£ 

Id 

j:  > 

p-  i-en 
;  Ox 

X  .td 

:  E^ 

1 

et 

E 

e 

d 

-g 

C 

>h  p 

d  Id  d 

!;  ^ 

'51 

S 

1.- 

j:}  P'  1- 

^  E 

S, 

d 

> 

d  f 

ja  B 

<?i»-  ^ 

a 

il 

§ 

& 

e 

u 

« 

(S 

d 

"& 

E 

e 

O 

d 

c; 

3 

E 

1 

6  I 

s 

A 

E 

r5 

,  d 

1 

, 

hM  S 

Ej:; 

=  1 
d  e 

^  E 

1 
“«  e 
^  2X- 

3  1 

C5 

.ji5l 

d  E 

i  2 

e 

’i,S 

1 

d 

li 

s 

tin 

s 

fl. 

d 

3- 

? 

rJjJS  O  ip 

.  a  £ 

A  £ 

c 

** 

□ 

s  J  V  4 

;25g.s 

d 

I 

■d 

E 

C1.-S 

i-l 

ii 

J 

T 

“C 

b 

a 

> 

0 


■  « 

Ji-Jd 

o 

M 

i  l4 

V 

‘E 

d 

*£  k 

fl  < 

{/l-O 

>:S 

> 

!W 

(AJd 

!^  d 

a= 

^-3 

fl 

s 

u 

e 

'3 

« 

>1 

1 

5 

d  J 
c-a 

«I 

d 

■d 

'*r' 

- 

a 

d 

el 

> 

< 

a  s 

< 

<•« 

O.P.  105—18 


m 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


commingles  with  universal  compassion,  there  remains 
no  thinker,  no  tliinkable^  no  thought :  this  is  the  slate 
of  non-duality,  this  is  called  the  Bodhicitla — this  is  tlie 
adamantine  truth— this  is  the  Vajra-sattva — the  per¬ 
fectly  enlightened  one  (samhiiddha),  this  is  perfect 
wisdom.’  This  \'ajra-sattva  for  Vajra-dhara,  as  he  is 
sometimes  called)  is  also  described  in  the  Tatitras  Vi'ith 
his  consort  variously  called  as  Vajra-sattvatmika, 
Vajra-varahi,  Prajna,  Prajna-paramita,  etc,  and  his 
blja-mantra  is  hum,* *  This  Vajra-sattva,  the  Lord 
Supreme  of  the  Tantrie  Buddhists,  is  found  in  the  Bud¬ 
dhist  Tantras  bearing  many  other  names  of  which  the 
most  important  are  Hevajra  and  Hcnika. 

(ii)  Bod/itcitta  Y, 

(A)  General  Conception  of  Bodhicttta 

In  the  previous  discussion  we  have  seen  that  the 
self  as  the  Vajra-sattva  has  often  been  said  to  be  the 
Bodhicitta.  The  original  meaning  of  the  word  Bodhi- 
citta  is  citta  or  consciousness  as  bodfif  or  perfect 
wisdom.  Now,  in  earlier  Buddhism  wisdom  meant 
sunyata-jnana — the  realisation  of  the  nothingness  of 
the  world ;  but  we  have  seen,  in  Mahayana  wisdom 
means  ifmyat^jndna  complemented  by  Karuna  or 
universal  compassion.  Bodhicitta  in  Mahayana  then 
implies  the  state  of  the  citfo  where  a  perfect 
coQiniing  of  Sunyata  and  Karuna  becomes  the 
very  essence  of  our  consciousness.  In  the  Buddliist 
Tantras  the  word  Bodliicitta,  though  sometimes 
used  in  its  older  sense  of  sunyatd-jMna*  generally 
implies  the  Mahayanic  sense  of  the  unification 

'  ftad  adi:Anam  ittj  uktaiii  bodhicittam  idam  pflmml 
rnfTfim  iri-j-jifm-fiittvath  ca  vnmbitddbo  bw/Air  eva  ca  [I 
t*ta}fto~p<ttj‘t-vhii3caya-siddhif  Ch.  TV,  Verso  IT. 

*  Cf.  tan-madhttf  Ut  hmhkHrtim  VHjrfi-naltva^-Dvoriipakitin,  etc. 

R  A.S.B.,  No.  IISTO,  p.  3«(A). 

In  tno  wo  hftve  a  d<^t&ilcd  discussion  on  the 

inoaninp  of  the  word  Botlhicitta  and  though  at  the  cud  of  the  discus¬ 
sion  Bodhicitta  is  dcfwrihed  us  the  unity  of  flunyalo  and  Karujju  the 
earlier  discussiipn  is  dominaled  hy  the  older  sense  of  the  word  ns  the 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITIOX  OF  THE  TANTRlC  BUDDHISTS  99 


of  the  two  elements  of  Sunyata  and  Karuna. 
Breathing  the  general  spirit  of  l!klahayanaf  Saraha-pada 
says  in  one  of  Ms  Doli^,  u^ho  discards  Kaiuna 

and  sticks  to  SCinyata  alone  never  have  access  to  the 
right  path ;  he,  again,  who  meditates  only  on  Karuna, 
is  not  liberated  even  in  thousands  of  birth  ;  he  on  the 
other  handt  who  can  mingle  Shnyata  with  Karuijia, 
remains  neither  in  bimua  (existence)  nor  in  nirvana 

Tealis-atiQn  of  the  esseiiftftiesiiness  of  the  tlhantnis*  Here  the  Lord 
IS  approached  by  the  Tathagalua  of  I  he  assembly  to  explaio  to  them 
the  nature  of  the  Boclfaicitta.  The  Lcird  docs  not  make  any  direct 
rcplyj  but  asks  them  first  to  realise  the  oneness  pervading  the  body^ 
speech  and  mind.  Through  the  realisation  of  the  homogeneity  imder- 
lying  the  body,  speech  and  mind  the  rnthagatn^  realise  that  all 
origination  is  taLk<^  ol  about  what  is  esssenti^y  tin  produced  ♦  The 
Lord  then  l^ecomes  absorbed  Lu  a  special  kind  of  nieditation  and 

b/invafi fi  naira 

ill  $m  hhfnmh  ayfid  | 

The  mcanmg  of  the  verse^  as  explained  in  the  iSck&dddtt^tJkA  (GiO^Sn 
p,  41),  IS  that  when  cxisteuce  is  viewed  from  the  perspective  of  the 
void  tatftSvaJj  nq  thought-construction  remains  a  positive  thought- 
con  struc  lion*  hnd  existence  aUo  ceases  to  be  existence. 

After  this,  Vairoenna  Ttithagsta  exclaims  in  his  meditatiofi  on 
the  nature  of  Bodhicitta^ — *M.y  cifta  i$  devoid  of  all  (notions  of) 
existence,  it  is  unassoeiated  with  any  skaiadha,  dgntana, — or 

with  subjeetivlly  and  object ivityi^it  is  without  origiriation  and  is  of 
the  nature  of  void  as  are  ail  the  dhcirtuos  by  iiaturc\ 
exclaims  in  hjs  own  tam^ — *AU.  existonce  is  without  originatian; 
there  is  no  dhanj'inf  neitiier  ony  essence  of  the  dharmm;  all  this 
ig  csscncclcss  like  the  sky,— this  is  the  immutable  hod  hi  ^  We  find 
on  echo  of  the  game  truth  in  the  exclamation  of  j?(ifT] (or 
who  says, — *  Unreal  ore  all  the  dbannuK, — for  they 
(dhnriims)  have  no  definition  (iakxnfja);  everything  onginatCB  from 
the  esscncclessacss  of  the  dharmas  {dbar?na-aatrAfiii^ah  and  this  is 
called  the  unmti table  (.-Imitd&ha)  in  bis  turn  gives 

another  description  of  the  /JodhrVkfo;  he  says,— *Ali  the  dharmax 
being  witliout  origination  there  is  neither  any  existence  nor  any 
i:otion  of  existence:  existence  of  things  ig  spoken  of  iu  cxoclly  the 
same  way  os  the  existence  of  the  sky.*  Then  comes  the  turn  of 
Amoghamldhif  who  exclaims  in  his  deep  meditation  that  all  the 
i/^mrnios  are  effulgent  by  nature,  they  arc  perfectly  pure  like  the 
sky.  Ihcn  they  all  join  in  reciting  the  gdfha  in  praise  of  the 
JiofflircitlYi  which  is  described  here  as  qf  the  nature  of  pure  truth, 
pure  entity  (liirfdftw-rthn),  originating  from  the  non-eggentlal  nature 
of  things,  filling  ihe  Buddhas  with  pure  knowledge  (hodhi),  without 
thoUght-c?qnJitruction,  wiitiout  any  support »  good  all  round,  bene¬ 
volent,  the  ini^pircr  of  ihe  bodli^mind,— rmhorliincnt  of  the  pructicea 
for  the  immutable  by  nature. 


100 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


(exljnt'tioii)  ’  The  BocUik-itta  state  of  tlie  self  is 
thus  a  transcendental  state— it  is  a  state  of  supreme 
realisation  transcending  both  bhava  and  ninJdan.  The 
self  in  this  state  of  Bodhicitta  is  tile  supreme  reality — 
it  is  the  Vajra-sattva.  It  is  “  without  a  beginning,  with¬ 
out  an  end,  quiescent,  it  is  immutable  in  existence  as 
well  as  in  non-existence,  it  is  the  non-duality  of  .^unyata 
and  Karunfi.  ”  *  It  is  eternal  resplendent,  pure,  the 
abode  of  all  the  Jinas,  it  includes  all  the  dharmas  with¬ 
in  it,  it  is  divine — the  cause  of  tlic  whole  universe.’” 

(B)  SlINYATA  AKD  KaRUNA  AS  PBAJMA  AKD  UpaYA 

Sunyata  and  Eartina  are  widely  termed  as  Prajna 
and  Upaya  respectively  in  Tantric  Buddhism.  :%unyata 
is  called  Prajha  simply  because  it  represents  perfect 
knowledge.  So  far  as  an  individual  Sadhaka  is  concern¬ 
ed,  this  perfect  knowledge  is  rather  a  static  or  negative 
state  of  mind  w  hich  separates  the  individual  from  tlie 
world  of  suffering  beings ;  Karuna,  on  the  other  hand, 
acts  in  his  mind  like  a  dynamic  force — the  moral  inspi- 


*  A'ammi  chQif4*  h  | 

R<ii(  so  titU’Or  loocgu  {| 

ahava  KuruHa  bMral  | 

jammn^f,aha^r\ahi  makkhit  na  jmrm  \ 
mnna^kamiiil  jul  jounu  srxMaJ  I 
Bflfi  frJifttre  nafi  thakkai  || 

— Dr.  P*  C*  Ba^chj’is  Editiai^  p. 

^  s&ni^ni  hh6va-bhava~k^u^ni  | 

*'5ri-^i'Aiffl-saiiniyu,  Cb.  XVIII. 

This  definitioii  of  ftodhirtito  has  be«n  cooimented  upon  in  the 
sphere  it  is  said  that  by  the  epithet  ^without  begiattiug 
and  end*  is  implied  tlie  absence  of  origination  nnd  destruction,  and  by 
that  again  is  implied  the  njl-pervading,  unchanging  and  eternal  nature 
of  the  /Wbinftd,  It  is  quiescent  because  all  the  Ictrws  (offlictinns) 
end  here;  it  is  the  lord,  because  it  pcrfcmis  all  the  mundane  as 
well  ns  supm-mundane  duties-  It  is  because  of  the  essenee- 

lessness  of  all  the  dharmas, — and  it  is  because  of  the  resolu- 

tion  in  it  of  elevating  all  the  beings  to  the  state  of  perfect  visdam, 
and  helping  them  in  attaining  perfect  peace.  (G-O.S.)  pp,  72-73, 

*  nitgath  pwifrMsrnrnm  iuddhaih  bodhieititith  jiutUaitain  \ 
mti'a-dharmattinyatu  divyam  vikhitli-tjtada-karanam  j| 

— J'rf(/no-/Kiyn-imijcrt^a-siddhi,  Ch,  II,  Verse  sa. 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITiOX  OF  THE  TANTBIC  BUDDHISTS  101 

ration  that  prompts  one  to  hnd  oneseif  universalized 
in  an  emotion  of  deep  compazzion.  This  moral  inspira¬ 
tion  as  purified  liy  perfect  knowledge  induces  a  man  to 
moral  activities,  which  never  bind  the  man,  but  liber¬ 
ates  him  m  well  as  others.  Prajha  is  passive  by  nature, 
the  religious  inspiration  is  tlerived  from  the  active 
emotion  €>f  compassion,  which  serves  like  the  means  or 
the  expedience  {upaya)  for  the  realisation  of  the  high¬ 
est  goal.  Prajha  is  the  one  universal  principle,  the 
oneness  as  the  ‘sucliness*  (tatftata)  underlying  the 
diversity  of  the  ]ihenomenal  world,  while  the  Upaya  is 
the  principle  that  brings  dowm  our  mind  again  to  the 
world  of  particulars.  Through  Prajha  one  is  purified, 
while  Upaya  draws  one’s  perfectly  purified  mind  do%vn 
to  the  world  of  particulars  where  the  helpless  beings 
are  found  suffering  the  miseries  of  life.  This  Upaya 
prom  [its  man  to  benevolent  activities  for  the  removal 
of  sorrow',  but  as  already  hinted,  these  moral  activities 
are  always  associated  with  and  guided  by'  Prajfia, 
W'hich  is  the  ultimate  principle  of  purification,  and  thus 
they  cannot  leave  any  good  or  bad  impression  as 
aamskara  on  the  mind  of  a  man,  so  that  by  these  acti¬ 
vities  he  is  never  again  bound  in  the  snare  of  uasaua 
and  saihska^ra  anil  consequently  in  the  cycle  of  birth 
ani.t  death.  Further  w^  ha%^e  seen,  Prajha  or  Shnyata 
makes  one  view  the  whole  of  existence  from  the  paro- 
indrLhika  point  of  view  where  there  is  neither  suffer¬ 
ing  nor  happiness  and  consequently  no  scope  left  for 
Llie  spirit  of  benevolence  ;  it  is  Upaya  that  draws  our 
attention  to  tlie  world  of  suffering  and  inspires  one 
to  sacrifice  one’s  salvation  for  the  removal  of  the 
miseries  of  the  suffering  world. 

The  use  of  the  term  Prajha  for  i^rinyaLa  is  ivell 
known  in  Buddhist  philosophy  and  literature,  they  are 
often  treated  as  synonyms ;  but  the  use  of  the  term 
Ujiaya  for  Kanina  seems  to  be  somewhat  technical. 
On  the  authority  of  Suzuki  we  find  that  these  concep¬ 
tions  of  Prajha  and  Upaya  are  already  there  from  the 


m 


tXntric  buddhism 


time  of  Asvaghosa.  It  U  said  in  his  Atvakening  of  Faith 
in  Mahaydnu  {Mahdyiina-sraddhotpada-siltra}  that 
Enligliteniiient  a  priori  has  two  attributes,  viz., 
(i)  Pure  wisdom  {PrafAd)  and  (ii)  Ineompreheiisible 
activity  {Vpdya}  Karuna).* *  Later  on  the  word 
Upaya  is  found  widely  used  in  !ilahayana  texts  for 
Kartma.  ^  In  standard  Mahayana  texts  Upaya  has 
generally  been  used  to  indicate  missionary  activities 
mainly  In  the  form  of  preaching  the  truth  among  lay 
people  to  remove  their  veil  of  ignorance  and  to  enable 
them  to  realise  the  truth.  ’ 

What  is  said  above  about  Prajiia  anil  Upaya  and 
their  union  has  variously  been  expounded  in  the  Bud¬ 
dhist  Tantras  under  various  imageries.  In  the  jEfeua/r«- 
/n«tra  Upaya  and  Prajha  have  been  described  under  the 
imagery  of  tlie  Yogin  and  the  Mudra  (the  great  woman 
to  be  adopted  in  Yoga-sadhanii),  and  tlie  Bodhicittu  is 
tlie  perfect  union  of  this  Yogin  and  the  Mudra  who 
stand  for  Karuna  and  Sunyata  respectively.  *  In  all 
classes  of  Buddhist  Tantras  the  most  in’iportant  thing 
is  the  stress  on  this  union  of  Prajna  and  Upaya,  either 

'  P.  fie.  Also  c/.,  p.  99. 

^  Mag4ir]tiDa  used  the  word  Upfiya  for  Kurunii  (I'jde,  jUudhf/ntRttru- 
irffd,  Levi's  edition,  p.  2). 

"  ride,  Saddharm(t-^inntdtirika-3mtr«,  Ch.  11,  pp.  23-58,  Bibliothccn 
Buddhica  publication. 

Ill  the  of  the  Bi'idhliHiftva-bhu?i)l  this 

is  said  to  be  of  twelve  kinds  in  all;  bix  from  the 
internal  side  eoneeniin^  the  adoption  of  the  reli^on  preached  by 
Buddha,  and  six  froni  the  external  side  conceriiing  the  fruition 
of  the  essence.  fEdited  by  Uiirai  Wogihora,  p.  2C.)  For  a  detailed 
discussion  on  the  divisions  pf  upityn~kan<aia  see  BfRlhisulfira-Miuij'Ji 
(which  ta  hut  the  liftcenth  section  of  the  yofiocdrji-tfmmf  of  Vnsu^ 
haiidhu),  pp.  292-72. 

*  krpti-piitjfi  hhaved  yogi  RULirti  | 

™nyfi(a  Arrtruiut'fihmnmii  bodhtcttloin  jti  sjurtajn  j 

—Palais  X,  MS,  p,  Sii(A), 

The  commentary  says  that  the  state  of  mind  that  feels  the 
self-same  ness  in  all  the  beingB  is  compcLssioii,  and  it  is  the  ‘great 
means'  (wpdyo)  as  it  is  the  means  for  attniniiig  perfect  enlightenment; 
—and  that  IS  also  the  Yogin.— for,  that  is  the  oaidinal  principle  of 
«  Yogiii.  The  mudra  is  the  /trapM,  for  she  is  the  jfilfiaotii  in  the 
sense  of  the  non-pToductior.  of  all  the  Jhapmos,— and  she  u  the 


THEOLOGICAL  POSiTICHS’  OF  THE  TAKTHIC  RUDDHTSTS  103 

in  the  philosophical  sense  or  tlie  esoteric  yogic  sense. 

The  authority  of  renowned  Buddhist  Acfirvas  like 

Arya-vimala-kfrti  and  others  have  often  been  quoted, 

who  are  said  to  have  stressed  the  truth  that  IJpaya  is 

bondage  when  unassociated  wnth  Prajna,  and  even 

Prajna  is  also  bondage  when  unassoeiateil  with  Upaya  ; 

both  of  them  again  become  liberation  when  the  one  is 

associated  witli  U>e  other.  Their  commingling  through 

the  instructions  of  the  competent  teacher,  like  the 

inseparable  co-existence  of  the  lamp  and  the  light,  will 

conduce  to  success  in  realising  the  real  nature  of  the 

self  and  the  dkarmas.  Whatever  practices  there  are, 

they  should,  therefore,  be  preceded  by  a  knowledge  or 

rather  the  realisation  of  the  true  purport  of  the  union 

of  Prajna  and  Upaya.  *  The  cardinal  principle  of 

Buddha,  Dhanna  and  Satigha,  says  the  IJakfiii-ofl/ro- 

pafijara,  points  to  the  state  of  citfa  shining  in  the 

unity  of  Sunyata  and  Kanina,  * 

_  ■ 

Upaya  has  again  very  nicely  !>een  compared  to  a 

boat  in  the  Prajnopdya-vimscaya-siddhi.  There  it  is  said 

that  compassion  is  called  raga  (affection)  as  it  affects 

or  causes  happiness  to  all  the  beings  who  are  distressed 

with  infinite  sufferings.  This  compassion  is  like  a  boat 

which  brings  all  beings  to  the  favourable  shore,  and  it 

is  for  this  reason  that  it  is  called  the  Upaya.  The  com- 


non-pToductioii  pf  bein|;s  nothing  iran  private  either  from 

the  self  or  from  others  or  from  the  combltiatldii  of  both  or  from 
Bomethio^  other  than  their  combmation^ 

krpv*ttf  iidifisan'a-sattve^u  ditma-^satnata-citiaih  kfpd  mha  porantp- 
/  Kfl  mpak-iiQf}7boffhi~prasddhano-pd^atvnt  f  nu  cu  yogi  /  y&ginAm 
pradhdnd^hamutH'dtfmudTd  prajnd  kdfidv  ity  AhafiumjatA  mryti 
Hhnrmdndm  {tnutptid^hf  kathath  QnutpAdah  MntjfUdldhafh€iu  n'yo- 
pifirafa  irmiff- 

patteh  I &nutpfida-^okmf}d  HinynM  f mwti  pnmmd  pmjfrn — Ileimfm- 
ponjikd.  p.  4l<Bj. 

’  Quoted  in  the  of  the  Advatfu-vajTn^ 

p.  2;  also  p.  55. 

^  ^Hnyafa-karurjiA-bhinHam  yaira  ciitam  prabkdvytifel 
MO  hi  btuldhuHpn  dhatumsjfa  sanghn^yit'id  hi  drMnu  |[ 

— Qnot^  in  the  p, 


104 


TAXTBIC  BUUDinSM 


mingling  of  this  Prajfta  and  Upava  like  the  mixture  of 
water  and  milk  in  a  state  of  non-duality  is  called  the 
prQ}no~pdyQ,'  It  is  an  absolutely  pure  state  free  from 
subjectivity  and  objectivity,  free  from  the  mud  of 
reality  and  unreality — from  tlie  dchnitiou  and  the 
defined  ;  it  is  neither  duality,  nor  non-duality— it  is 
quiescent — all  good— all  pervading,  imniulable  and 
only  to  be  intuited  within;  il  itself  is  the  wonderful 
abode  of  all  tlie  Buddhas— the  divine  D/inrmo-d/mtu — 
from  it  emanate  all  the  three  fcai/as,  the  three  ganas, 
innumerable  ^wantrfls,  inudra,  mQitdaJa,  cakra — all 
gods,  demons,  ghosts,  men  and  everything  else  ;  it  is 
like  the  wish->delding  gem  (cinfoumt.d)— a  combination 
of  both  enjoyment  and  liberation  {bhukti-jnukti- 
padum).  In  the  chapter  on  the  meditation  on  the  ulti¬ 
mate  truth  (trtttva-hhnuaaa)  of  the 
c'0|/a-siddhi  it  has  been  said  Lliat  the  truth  is  both 
Prajna  ami  Upaya  combined  together ;  for,  it  is  Prajna 
as  it  is  the  absence  of  all  phenomenalizatlon  (nispra- 
paAca-soariipafuat),  and  it  is  compassion,  because 
like  the  wish-yielding  gem  it  does  every’thing  for  the 
good  of  the  beings.  Supportless  is  Prajna,  and  support¬ 
less  is  the  great  compassion  ;  they  should  be  united 
like  the  union  of  the  sky  with  the  sky.  In  that  stage 
there  is  no  thinker — no  thought — nothing  to  be  thought 
of ;  there  all  seeing  of  sights,  hearing  of  soumls, — 


ifatus  krpa  rngaf^ 

lijiaimrjaty  abhimatnm  tfan  \\ 

iindfi^ntikulA-fjog^nti  pmkiriitAh 

mdattam  yac  Cfi  mHla-kMmynr  iviij 

%it  ucynU  || 

For  the  Wraf  line*  viz*i  rfmjntrj  «tc*  MM.  Vidhusekhara 

^»txj  fuggcsls  the  following  cflirecl  rradm^  {with  the  help  of  the 
Tibetan  i>anfiJation)i— 

Tttkmitj  iihsA-duhkhaughad  mgena  duhkhfi-hi^tutiih\ 

And  for  ya¥inaAkt  vn*nukulatnh  ]\^  ~%uggem  ynUAkdbhhmiam  phnlarn, 
— Fidr  5lwdrrii  Review t  1980. 


theological  POSlTJOK  OF  TKE  TTnTRIC  BUDDHISTS  105 


muttering,  laughing" — enjoyment — doing  t>f  all  dwds,— 
all  become  yoga  for  a  mam  ' 

It  is  said  in  the  Citta-viiuddki-prakarana  that  hs 
by  the  rubbing  of  two  logs  of  wood  fire  is  produced 
which  is  pure  in  the  beginning,  in  the  middle  as  well 
as  at  the  end,  and  which  show^s  everything  by  its  illu¬ 
mination,  so  also  by  the  union  of  Prajim  and  Upaya 
the  pure  and  luminous  wisdom  of  the  Yogin  is  pro- 
-  duced.  The  absolutely  pure  dharma-dhatu,  that  is 
obtained  by  properly  churning  the  milk  of  Prajha  and 
Upaya,  is  the  destroyer  of  holh  pleasure  and  pain*  * 


*  Pnjno-pnya-vmiScaifn^iftdM.  Ch.  IV,  V#rs*s  1(H«,  SimiUr 
dis«ui»iion!i  on  the  natufe  of  Pt.ijAa  and  UpAya  are  found  in  many  of 
TftntiTMi  In  the  vff*  find  jj  discussion  as  to 

whether  Buddhahood  b  to  be  attained  only  thiouah  Prajnn  or  only 
through  Upflya.  The  answer  i$  that  Buddhahood  is  to  be 
Tteitlier  through  Pra^ni  alone  nor  tljTOiiph  Upaya;  but  Lf  the  essence 
of  both  PrajM  and  Upiya  becomes  of  the  same  natiire— if  the  two 
become  inseparably  cotmected— become  united  into  one,  then  and  then 
only  a  Sadhnfca  becomes  entitled  to  the  highest  reality  which  is  at 
oiice  enjoyment  and  bberation. 

(rfdnJrh  uicdr^rtfcl  prajnayci  knahnA  Ithh  biMhatvam  na 

\iro^  rftc.)  rfrf  J 

wcijfate  na  ki^valath  prajiia-nmtTena  buclcf An fufjfii 

kintu  t^adi  p^mtih  pTajiio~p§ya4ak^anaii  savfuil^- 
bhfivtiiah  etan  dvmfa-bhimn^rftjmn  bhaiatuh  ek&Hmu 
MAvnUih  tadii  bhukti-mukti  jfr.— Bendall^s  Edition,  p. 

It  is  further  said  that  th<;  dtta  |Le.,  the  BodhkfttaY^  neither 
affected,  pleased  impjaU)  by  affection  (ragfij  or  ootnpassiDn  or 
the  Upaya  (pa^  =  |fa m on- Hjwjfrt).  hot  is  it  displeased  by  indjlfereDce 
(t‘traga3K#unr/a(a,  or  pm/flfl);  suiioess  is  attainable  onlv  through  the 
equ^ization  of  both  Tn#J«  and  virago,  ft  (dtfu)  is  of  the  nature 
of  wm  Prujnd  and  Upfiya,  and  in  the  nature  of  I  he  eonibination  of 
Ptajna  and  Upaya  it  attains  the  highest  realization. 

««  tageoa  rapjntf  rr/tom  na  viragena  tfiro/joff  | 
raffa-rTigam  trajunw  ftrtvd  mnrfnJ-ftiddhjs  fa  jSi/nfe  || 
ciffflni  proifia-iit-fflrfippafl  Utthtitva'p&tfa^rHpnkftm] 
praii(4t~paya-,)fvnrHpenfi  famhilti  pfajaifate  |; 

_  — '?Hblia4iihj-s(i»figrnha. 

iv  L*-’*  “  ***  .'5rr-/fdlo-rnff™4(iBfrti  that  the  Sahaja-body 

(babo/a-fanij)  or  the  dhnrmu-fcaya  is  neither  PTrainij  nor  Upava,— 
It  is  of  the  nature  of  them  both. 

aw  pnij^a  ^»'ptj  «pAyab  sahu}n-tnnnr  iyarii  dhartna-k6yo  babhuvit 
l>ra}fio-pSya->vampnh  khalu  vigata-tamo-jMnu-vtjnana-vedat  ( 

— .Sri-Jf(ifii-fafrfyj*faafra,  MS.  (Cambridge,  Add.  ISeil 


’  Verses  ttS,  or. 


p. 


O.P.  Ins'"!! 


106 


TlNTRlC  BUDDmSM 


(C)  Cosmological  and  Ontological  Aspects 
OF  PrajnX  and  Upaya 

We  have  hinted  before  that  the  conceptions  of 
Prajua  and  Upaya  acquired  a  cosmolog'ical  and  onto¬ 
logical  significance  in  course  of  time.  Prajiia  is  the 
passive  principle  as  the  dharma-kdifa  or  the  ‘  thatness ' 
{tathata^)  with  perfect  purity  and  perfect  knowledge  in 
her  ;  but  the  whole  world  the  sambhoga-kdya  and 
the  mmiana-kaya)  is  a  display  of  the  Upaya,  and  the 
w'orld-process  itself  in  the  form  of  the  samhhoga-  and 
nirmdna~kaya  is  a  means  to  lead  all  the  sentient  beings 
to  the  ultimate  goal  of  perfect  purification ;  this 
principle  of  passivity  and  the  principle  of  activity  arc 
then  the  two  aspects  of  the  one  absolute  reality. 

We  have  seen  that  the  difference  between  ^un|/ato 
and  krpa  is  just  like  the  difference  between  the  lamp 
and  the  light  and  the  unity  of  and  krpa  is  also 

just  like  the  unity  of  the  lamp  and  the  light.  The 
import  is  that  as  light  cannot  e3:ist  without  the  lamp, 
so  the  lamp  also  is  meaningless  without  light ;  exactly 
same  is  the  case  with  iiinj/afa  and  framna ;  fcariina 
which  is  existence  cannot  be  there  without  the  void  or 
the  reality ;  but  the  Bunyatd  also  loses  her  meaning 
without  there  being  the  world  of  existence, — and  so 
there  is  an  inseparable  connection  between  the  two  like 
the  relation  of  any  illusory  effect  with  eternity. '  The 
world-appearance  as  a  result  of  dependent  origina¬ 
tion  is  the  grand  bridegrooni  ;  had  he  not  been  there 
the  hride  mtnyafd  would  have  been  dead  as  it  were. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  had  this  beautiful  bride  of 
iunyata  been  separated  for  any  time  from  the  bride¬ 
groom,  he  would  remain  eternally  under  bondage.  So 
the  relation  between  svnyatd  and  kamna  is  like  the 
relation  of  inseparable  conjugal  love  ;  the  love  between 


*  hftflvrMtynh  nci'ni/A  rto  ca  tSf/i  tinej 


theological  position  of  the  TaNTEIC  BUDDHISTS  iCff 

them  is  the  most  natural  love  {sahajam  prema)  and  so 
it  is  inseparable.  ' 

Goddess  ^^arahi  who  represents  Prajna  is  spoken 
ol  as  of  tlie  nature  of  knowledge,  whereas  god  Heruka 
representing  Upaya  is  spoken  of  as  the  knowable,  and 
the  Avadhutl-niaiji,dttla  (the  circle  of  perfect  puri¬ 
fication)  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  both  of  this 
knowledge  and  the  knowable.*  From  all  these  it  is 
evident  that  Prajna  is  conceived  as  the  absolute  know¬ 
ledge  which  is  negative  and  passive,  whereas  Upaya  is 
the  positive  and  active  principle.  Prajna  is  conceived 
as  the  female  element  while  Upaya  is  conceived  as  the 
male  element. 

These  conceptions  of  Praj'na  and  Upaya  have 
important  ontological  and  cosmological  bearing  on  the 
four  philosopliical  systems  of  Xepalese  Buddhism.' 
The  Svabhavika  school  holds  that  there  is  no  imma¬ 
terial  ultimate  truth  in  the  form  of  the  soul  substance  ; 
matter  is  the  primordial  substance  from  which  the 
world  proceeds.  This  matter  as  the  ultimate  sub¬ 
stance  has  two  modes  which  are  called  pravrtti  and 
nivrtti,  action  and  rest,  dynamic  and  static,  concrete 
and  abstract.  Matter  is  eternal  as  a  crude  mass  (how- 


'  Ibid^,  Pfima-pancaka  (I'S).  In  the  also 

wc  find  that  the  nntiue  of  Fraj5a  is  npn^xistcntc,  wherens  the  nature 
of  Upilya  is  existence;  css€noelessne&if  is  FrajM  nnd  of  positive 
nature  is  Upoya.  So  the  whole  truth  will  be  the  unity  of  both 
these  positive  end  negative  aspects* 

atm  evabhUi'a-lakmnapfai^ii  bk^va-tak^fina  uptiya  tfi] 
fofhd  nihsvabhhvQ-jQhmna  pVa/54 

upaya  iti  format  prai^&-paya-vidhkmm  cofififah I— pp*  ai^li 

(Bendairs  Edition)*  ,  ^ 

lu  another  place  it  h  seid  that  Ft^jM  is  of  the  uattiire  of  essence- 
lessnep  while  Upaya  is  the  came  of  oil  cxi&teuee. 

fu  ££iin5thifah  | 

opdtjfo  bh^va-jiinako  bhadmpaftena  |j  — Ihtdl,  p*  TO- 

In  the  Sanskrit  portion  of  the  I)ulcamava  (edited  by  MM* 
IL  P.  Sistri)  Upaya  and  Prajiih  have  been  spoken  of  os  existence 
and  extinction  (p.  I5i&). 

*  QaMrmva  (Sistrt'i  Edition),  p.  15T. 

*The  systems  are:  (i)  SvSbbavika,  (ii)  Aisvarika,  (iii)  Earnuka, 
and  (iv)  Yatiuka. 


JOg  TaNTRIC  buddhism 

ever  infituteSy  attenuated  in  and  so  are  the 

powers  of  matter.  These  powers  arc  not  oidy  active 
but  also  intelligent.  The  proper  state  of  existence  of 
these  powers  is  the  state  of  nivrtti  or  rest  as  the  abstrac¬ 
tion  froni  all  plienomena.  When  these  powers  pass 
from  the  state  of  rest  into  their  causal  and  transitory 
state  of  activity  tlie  phenomenal  world  comes  into 
existence  and  it  again  ceases  to  exist  when  the  powers 
repa-ss  from  pravrffi  to  nivfttL  This  ninfffi  is  the 
Frajfia  ’  mid  the  praurtti  is  said  to  be  the  Upaya. 
Prajha  is  said  to  be  the  abstraction  from  all  effects 
wbilc  Upaya  is  the  concretion  of  all  effects  or  activities.  * 
In  the  Aisvarika  school  these  Prajna  and  Upaya  are 
deified  as  Adi-Prajfia  and  Adi-Buddha  and  the  visible 
world  is  said  to  be  created  from  the  union  of  the  two. 
According  to  the  Prajiiikas  ’  Buddha  as  the  principle 
of  active  ]Jower  first  proceeds  from  nivrtfi  or  Adi- 
Prajna  and  then  associates  with  her  and  from  their 
union  proceeds  the  actual  visible  world.  The  prin¬ 
ciple  is  symbolized  as  Prajna  being  first  the  mother 
and  then*  the  wife  of  the  Buddha,  ‘  The  well-known 
triad  of  Buddha,  Dliarma  and  Sangha  has  often  been 
explained  as  Prajna  (Dharma),  Upaya  (Buddha)  and 
the  world  (Sangha)  produced  by  their  union.  *  Bud¬ 
dha  ’  generally  symbolizes  the  generative  power. 

*  of  the  IJtrnitufir,  €?tc.— Hodgson*  p.  Uft, 

-  Ibid.,  pftg«  .  t  LI 

’  A  sub-division  of  iht  SvubhSivika 

*  Here  it  is  uiteTesling  to  compare  with  it  the  £akt4%  gosmological 
tradition  of  thr  Adi-Sakli,  who  is  Ihii  motheT  of  5iva  and  again  tii« 
wife  of  iiva  in  crefiting  the  world.  The  above  principle  has  often 
been  explained  also  by  the  aiiEiLog^'  of  the  1  otiIp  It  is  said,  “That 
Yoni*  from  which  the  world  was  made  miuiifest  is  the  trif-koitakoni- 
(jontra.  Tti  the  midst  of  the  yantra  or  frl^fcowo  is  a  bindui  from  the 
jiirtffw  .Irii-PraffM  revealed  herself  by  her  own  will.  From  one  aide 
of  the  tri angle  Jdi-Pra/nd  produced  Buddha  and  from  another  side 
Dha™n  and  from  the  third  side  5owgftn.*  iQuotcd  by  Hodgson* 
page  12^).  It  is  also  very  interesting  here  to  compare  with  it  the 
well-known  ioangidur  ymtm  of  the  HincJii  Tantras.  Cf*  also: 
trikondk^m-mjnbhfitG  dhtmtwihya  ill  sipiftah— and  Iroin  it  originated 
the  whole  universe  and  all  the  gods  and  goddesses. — See 

M&+  (C-L.B.  No.  181 24-)  p.  118(A). 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITIOK  OF  THE  TANTHIC  BUDDHISTS  109 

*  Dharaia  '  (or  Prajna)  live  productive  power  and  their 
union  produces  Sahgha.' 

This  conception  of  the  tw’o  counterparts  of  the 
ultimate  reality  has  its  correspondence  in  the  concep¬ 
tions  of  the  Garbha-dhofu  and  the  Fa/ra-dlifliu  of 
Northern  Buddhism  in  general.  The  Vajra-dhatu  or 
the  ‘  thunder-element  *  is  the  immutable  nature — it  is, 
in  other  words,  the  fathotd  element;  while  the  Garhha- 
dhatu  is  the  ‘matrix  element*  or  the  phenomenal 
w'orld  corresponding  to  the  faf/tagata-gflfhhfl.  They 
are  the  two  parts  of  the  Mandala.*  Their  union  is 
symbolized  in  Nepal  by  the  flame  arising  from  the  lotus 
or  the  moon-crescent  (the  flame  symbolizing  the  male 
element  and  the  lotus  or  the  moon-crescent  symbo¬ 
lizing  the  female  element)  or  by  the  flame  arising  from 
the  kala^a  (jar);  in  Tibet  the  union  is  symbolised  by 
the  .4sofefl  branch  in  the  ambrosia  vase,  aud  in  botii 
Chinese  and  Nepalese  Buddhism  by  Yin-yang  (the 
female  and  the  male)/  There  Yoga  consists  in  the 
mystic  union  of  this  immutable  element,  or  we  may 
say,  the  ‘thatness’  of  the  dharmas  with  the  active 
element  as  the  material  world.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  the  theory  of  Yabyum  (the  male  and  the  female) 
could  find  so  much  prominence  in  Northern  Buddhism, 
particularly  in  Nepal  and  Tibet  where  almost  all  the 
dignities  are  accompanied  by  their  female  counter¬ 
parts  in  a  state  of  close  union. 

Getty  interprets  the  Mudra  (the  posture,  generally 
of  the  hands)  of  Vairocana  (the  Lord  Supreme  of  the 
Shingon  Sect)  as  indicative  of  this  mystic  union.  As 
Dhvani  Buddha  he  has  the  D/iarma-cafcra-mndrd, 


*  Cy.  ‘From  ihe  union  of  the  essences  of  i'prti/o  and  Pfafnd 

proceeds  the  world  which  is  Songho'.  {Pnjh  Khuiri^ii)  hy 

Hodgson,  p.  I'J*'.  Also  f/.  Tfir  Gorfit  o/  .Vorffiffn  Bitddhi^oi,  by 

A.  Getty,  p.  ll.  ... 

*  litre  the  Mandiiltt  is  the  circle  with  Buddha  M«hiivdirDcana  m 
the  ceniKS  and  with  numberless  tnaoifestations  of  his  Wy,  such 
as  Buddhas,  Bodhisattvas  and  others,  gathered  round  him. 

^  See  The  Gods  0/  .Vorfhern  Boddhtin),  by  A.  Getty. 


no 


tSktbic  buddhism 


which  the  Tibetans  call  Thabdoti''-shesrab,  or  the 
union  of  wis^ioni  with  matter,  ”  ' 

Tills  two-fold  division  of  the  ultimate  reality  is 
also  found  in  the  Taoism  of  Cliina,  Tliere  also  Tao 
means  ^Tlie  &reat’  (c/.  Skt.  Brahman)  and  Tei  is  the 
power,  or  activity  or  the  Sakti  of  ‘  the  great  *.  They 
are  the  negative  and  positive  aspects  of  the  one  truth. 
Creation  proceeds  through  their  union — through  Vinn 
and  Yang  (the  female  and  the  male). 

With  this  conception  of  Prajha  and  Upaya  as 
.Viurlti  and  Provrfti  or  as  Adt-prajha  and  Adi-Bu(Uiha 
we  may  compare  the  conception  of  j§iva  and  $akti  and 
the  aham  or  the  '  1-ness '  produced  by  tiieir  union 
(m’a-^a/rti-mit/iu7tapmda).  According  to  the  Hindu 
Tantras  the  ultimate  truth  is  the  union  of  Siva  and 
^akti.  Siva  represents  pure  consciousness  ^vhich  is  in¬ 
active — the  static  aspect  of  the  idtimate  reality;  while 
i^akti  represents  the  world  force — ^the  kinetic  energj'  of 
the  ultimate  truth.  Siva  is  Nivrtti  and  ,^akti  is 
Pravftti  and  in  the  ultimate  state  they  remain  in  a 
union  of  oneness.*  From  tlie  cosmological  standpoint 

’  “As  f^di-Buddha  he  has  the  mudra  of  the  Six-elements,  which 
also  indicates  the  same  principle,  and  although  rare  in  Tibet,  is 
often  found  in  Japan-  The  index  finger  of  the  left  hand  is  clasped 
hy  the  five  fingers  of  the  right.  The  six  fingf^  represent  the  Six- 
elements  which  when  united,  produce  the  six-fuld  bodLly  and  mental 
happiness''.  He  further  exphiitkif:  ’’'The  five  lingers  of  the  right 
i.and  repreaenl  the  five  material  elements  of  which  man  is  composed: 
earth  (little  finger),  water  (ring  finger),  fire  {middle  finger),  air  {index 
finger)  and  ether  (the  thumb).  The  index  finger  of  the  left  hand 
represents  the  same  symbol  of  Adi-Buddha;  for  the  sLxth  element, 
the  mind  (mnnas)  is  u  ]»artic]«  of  his  eg.sencc. 

The  two  hands,  thus  representing  the  union  of  the  Spiritual  with 
the  Material,  correspond  to  the  Vafra^hulu  and  Uar&hn-ditarn  of  the 
Mundala  of  the  two  ports.  The  rn/ra-iihatH,  represented  by  the 
index  finger,  is  the  ‘diamond'  cknieat  correspunding  to  the  spiritual 
world.  The  Gnrbhu-dhatH,  indicated  by  the  five  fingers,  is  the 
‘matrix'  element,  coTTesponding  to  the  material  world."  Ibid.,  p.  ao. 

=  C/.  the  Elindu  Tantric  prineiple  of  deaigridting  the  Sahasmra 
(situated  in  the  ecrebriun  region)  to  be  the  abode  of  Siva  and  the 
lowest  to  be  the  seat  of  Sakti  in  the  Jona  of  on 

electrie  force,  generally  known  as  the  Kiilakun^aihii-iiikti  -  this  lower 
region  ivherc  Spkti  resides  is  generally  known  as  the  region  of 
rravrtti  while  the  highci  region  or  the  region  of  pure  mteUectiou  ^  , 


i 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITTOX  OF  THE  fiJCTBIC  BUDDHISTS  111 

Siva  is  said  to  be  the  Bmdu  (of  white  colour  to  suggest 
the  comparison  with  seed  or  semen)  and  Sakti  is  Rakta 
(of  red  colour  to  suggest  the  compariso!!  with  ovum) 
and  this  Bindu  and  Rakta  unite  together  to  produce 
the  principle  of  I-ness  or  egoism. 

But  we  should  notice  here  a  verj*  important  point 
of  diRcrence  between  the  Buddhist  eonception  of  the 
two  aspects  of  the  truth  and  that  of  the  Saktas,  Saivas 
as  well  as  of  the  Taoists.  In  ^akta-tantra,  Saiva- 
t antra  as  well  as  in  Taoism  the  passive  subjective 
aspect  of  the  ultimate  reality  is  conceived  as  the  male, 
Tvhereas  the  active  counterpart  has  always  been  con¬ 
ceived  as  the  female,  and  this  conception  of  passivity 
as  the  male  and  the  active  counterpart  as  the  female 
is  found  in  many  of  the  systems  of  Indian  philosophy 
as  represented  in  the  Tantras.  The  Purusa  of  the 
Samkhva-system  is  absolutely  qualitilcss  and  inactive, 
wiiile  all  the  gunas  with  all  their  active  functions 
belong  to  Prakrti  who  is  generally  conceived  as  the 
female*  In  the  Vedanta  the  Brahman  is  qualitiless 
and  indeterminate,  while  the  world-illusion  is  ascribed 
wholly  to  the  activity  of  nmt/a,  and  this  nmyd  in  the 
popular  Vedantic  literature  bears  an  air  of  femininity. 
But  here,  in  Buddhism,  we  find  the  conception  re- 
i^ersed;  !§unyata  or  Prajna  which  is  qualitiless  and 
unchangeable  is  conceived  as  the  female,  while  Kantua 
or  Upaya  mth  the  active  inspiration  is  conceived  as 
the  male.  It  may,  however,  be  noted  here  that  the 
conception  of  the  female  as  the  passive  and  the  male 
as  the  active  is  not  also  quite  unknown  in  the  history 
of  Indian  thought. 

In  the  Buddhist  Tantras  Prajna  and  Upaya  have 
sometimes  been  expressly  identified  with  Sakti  and 
Siva.  Sakti  is  the  Hnifata-perception  contradicting 


is  called  the  re/pon  of  KhftU — and  the  Sidhoxia  canststj  in  rtniaijig 
the  Sakti^  residing  in  the  region  of  to  unite  wUh  the  Si’t'a 

Tesiding  in  the  regton  of  the  bliss  proceeding  from  the  union 

of  Siva  Sakti  is  the  highest  religious  realization. 


H2 


ttSTRIC  BtTDDHlSUr 


all  affirmatian  about  things.'  Perfect  bliss  is  obtained 
from  the  union  of  Siva  and  Sakti  and  this  bliss  is  the 
highest  non-duality;  but  in  the  ultimate  reality  there 
is  neither  the  Si^i^a  nor  the  Sakti.  * 


In  some  places,  however,  the  Bodhi-mind  in  its 
active  state  is  spoken  of  as  the  IT  pay  a  while  the  god¬ 
dess  or  or  the  void-knowledge  as 

the  Frajna.  In  the  ffwJiya-siddkf  we  find  that  the 
presiding  deity  over  the  mind  is  the  Lord  Supreme 
(Bhogandn)  and  Prajna  is  the  adamantine  woman/  and 
the  Lord  was  amorously  sporting  with  this  adamantine 
woman  in  the  form  of  Maha&ukha.  When  the  Bodhi- 
mind  in  its  upward  march  reaches  the  ultimate  state, 
it  merges  itself  wholly  in  Nairatma  or  ^ilnyafa  or  the 
Sahaja-bliss — and  this  merging  of  the  Bodhi-mind  in 
goddess  iVajTdfnid,  or  perfect  vacuity  of  the  nature  of 
intense  bliss,  is  called  the  union  of  the  Lord  Mind  and 
the  Lady  Vacuity.  Thus  Kukkuripada  sang  in  a 
song,  *  Desireless  am  I  (the  goddess  Nairdf  md),  and 
the  void-mind  is  my  husband  *  Tillopada  say.s  in  his 
Dobas,  '  Where  the  mind  and  the  vacuity  enter  into  the 
bliss  arising  out  of  this  communion,  the  objects  of  the 
senses  are  not  perceived  at  all  *  *  The  mind  is  the 
Lord  and  the  Vacuity  is  the  Lady;  they  should  al WES's 
be  kept  united  in  the  Sahaja  ^  *  In  a  Doha  of  Kanhu- 


*■  hk^ia-lak^na-riimiuktam  viifi-uitiihilra.-viiTjitam  | 

TIR  Mtili'  IdUrafR  ^R^rirflppnn  | 

tt!  sun)e-nipa-i.'rFJ^,Krn1  |l 

— .Vrranrfa-lfliiJra,  quoted  in  the 

(G.O,S.),.p.  28. 

nfl  iii^o  iiapi  ^aktii  cr  nifftR-tUiir^la-jjRrRJfr^ifciin  f| 

— I'CfftHjjna-fRnfra  quoted  in  the  .Idt’ijyo-vH/ffl-af/iBgmJiR. 

*  bARdavirnrt)  nirdiftciRi  nttRjij/iVdftipRh'A  pr«bhw^| 

Cfl/rR-yofrif  (ttuftS  prajM  yS  Hfii  !<avajn^n-tti»k«  ]( 

*  hdmu  ntrSitT  ffhR-mRnir-bA/itSH  |  Song  Ko,  20, 

“  citta  t’ftafRin'R  fahi  sRiiiRAiffiR  patafthai  \ 

(inttia^vimu  tohl  mnlM)  hr  dtsflf  || 

—Do)m  No.  S,  (Dr,  P.  C.  Bagciii’*  Ed.) 

TJtRNRRR  ((,iArrI.ir)  fr/iRKifn'n  bhCRCRtl 

(dri'dJiRlti  jKiha;^  rahmi)  |[ 

—PohS  No,  IT.  (Dr.  P.  C.  Bagehi's  Ed.) 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TSNTRIC  BUDDHISTS  113 

pada  it  lias  been  said  that  the  Lord-muid  merges  him¬ 
self  in  his  wife  vacuity  and  becomes  one  with  her  as 
salt  dissolves  in  water.  '  tn  some  places  again  intense 
bliss  (tnohflsiifcha)  as  tire  ultimate  nature  and  as  per¬ 
fect  knowledge  has  been  spoken  of  as  the  Yogini, 
and  the  Bodhi-mind  ns  the  Yogin.  This  Yogin!  is 
variously  called  as  the  Jrtdna-mwdra  (the  woman  of 
knowledge)  or  the  Maka-mudrd  (the  great  woman) — 
she  is  the  Saha/a-da nisei,  witli  whom  the  Yogin  remains 
united  day  and  night.  The  Yogin  often  says,  he  would 
not  live  without  her  kiss  and  embrace — he  passes  his 
dark  night  (of  ignorance)  in  miioii  with  that  great 
woman.  In  the  Caryapadas  of  the  Siddhacaryas  we 
find  many  songs  about  this  transcendental  love  and 
union  of  the  Yogin  and  Yogini  often  garbed  in  the 
metaphors  of  ordinary  love  and  sex-union  of  man  and 
woman. 

(D)  Peajna  and  IIpaYa  as  Male  and  Female 

The  fundamental  theological  position  of  tlie  Bud¬ 
dhist  Tantras  and  that  of  the  Hindu  Tantras  thus 
become  the  same.  As  there  is  tlie  belief  in  the  Hindu 
Tantras  that  the  two  aspects  of  the  reality  are  revealed 
in  the  world  in  the  form  of  male  and  female  in  general, 
so  there  is  the  belief  in  the  Buddhist  Tantras  that  all 
men  and  women  are  nothing  but  the  manifestation  of 
Upaya  and  Prajna  rcspectlA^ely;  or  in  other  words  all 
men  and  women  arc  Upaya  and  Prajna  in  their 
ultimate  nature. 

In  the  Buddhist  Tantras  Prajha  has  generally 
been  designated  either  as  the  goddess  (bhagauafi)  or 
as  the  ilfudrti  (which  technically  refers  to  the  woman 
to  be  adopted  for  the  Sadhana),  nr  the  jlfahu-an/dra, 
or  the  Vajm-kanyd,  or  as  the  young  woman  {yuvatl)^ 


*  jiuin  lanfi  cfhijf/J  jMiiichi  fima  Idi  | 

j4niiir<irYiJ!it  jAi  fci  f<'  jFnmn  tirnn 

—Doha  No.  S2. 


O.P,  lIJS-lS 


114 


tIntbic  buddhism 


or  often  as  the  female  organ. '  In  the  Hevajra- 
tajitra  Prajha  is  called  the  mother  (/anowi),  the 
sister  (bhagint),  the  washer-woman  (ra/aH),  the 
dancing-girl  the  daughter  (tfahi'to),  the 

poma-girl  {domhi),  etc.  These  names  are  sometimes 
explained  very  arbitrarily.  It  is  said  that  Prajna  is 
called  janani  because  she  gives  birth  to  all  the  beings 
of  the  world;  she  is  bhagml  as  she  shows  all  tbe  differ¬ 
ences  (aibhdga);  she  is  rajfaJn  because  she  pleases  all 
the  beings  (ranjandt)!  ^Jbe  is  duhila  as  she  accumulates 
all  the  qualities  fdahaadi);  she  is  aartuM  because  of 
her  changing  character;  she  is  dombi  (a  woman  of  a 
very  low  untouchable  class)  because  she  cannot 
be  touched.*  In  the  commentary  of  Krsnacarya 
(Hevajra-panjikd  or  yoga-ratnamald)  it  has  been 
explained  that  Prajha  is  ;a«a«T  because  in  the  form  of 
"great-bliss*  (wahasufrha)  she  gives  birth  to  the 
world.*  Again  as  the  beginners  cannot  grasp  her 
steadily,  she  is  called  narfaH.*  She  is  asparia  as  she 
cannot  be  grasped  by  the  senses/ 

^  Ill  the  nil'll  of  th^r  we  find 

Prajfia  styled  as  the  goddess  (praiMih  bhaguvnthh^  cte.^  p*  S20)»  In 
the  Kanakti^vMrnQ^pmjM-pQrumit^-s^dhitnQin  also  Fnafiia’ppammitS  is 
said  to  be  the  Bhu^avati  (p.  8^1).  In  the  erhapter  Qti  *lwanasiikflfd- 
dh^m  of  the  .Idvdi/fi-fojrtt-jningffiho  we  find  described  na 

the  Bhflgrtuafi  PmjfiQ  (p-  0*2].  Id  the  /Idrayn-frfrfdfti  PrajiiA  is  styled 
Its  the  goddess  (MS»  CX^B^t  p-  Sb), 

^  janniTi  bhanyuU  praffm  jaiia^oH  ya^mM  jagtipjanaml 
hhasinPti  t(ttM  pmpM  vibhagnj'n  duTMdijit  \ 

duhitil  Cfl  nnrfaA^  ca  proifffhifa^e  | 
rDnj^inal  Sfirt'd-ft'ittifdiidfn  tathu  ^mjta  ]j 

duhiin^t  pTnfSii  diihtlO  cii  I 

nurtaM  bhmiyatv  pmjM  cunmlfitvut 

asparM  bbavnt^  fjasmul  doifibl  prakulhyntt  |' 

— /icrc/ra-frtfifraj  MS.  No.  llnlT)  p.  13(B). 

These  lines  also  occur  in  the  SnnipHfiTcfl.  Hf,  MS. 

No.  mm  p.  4(A). 

^  viivwfya  ji^nafidt  /flunnll 

—MS.  (Cambridge  Add.  No.  p*  ;iO(A>- 

^  udi-ilrDrTfiikijr-iMi til'd ih  Jrlhirr-borlifiii 

MS.  p,  20(Ali. 

~  indripundiii  ngoc4irort‘'df  | 

— Ibid.^  MS.  p.  20(A), 

Here  of  course  the  designation^  of  PrajEih  aa  mother^  sisterp 


theological  POSITION  OF  THE  TANTHIC  BUDDHISTS  116 

In  tlie  Sngnkua-samaja-taiitra  a  beautiful  girl  of 
idxteen  to  be  adopted  in  the  practice  is  said  to  be  the 
Prajna.  ‘  Saralia-pada  in  one  place  salutes  all  young 
women,  who  are  described  as  the  embodiment  of 
Prajna— who  are  like  the  wish-yielding  creepers  per¬ 
sonified — who  destroy  all  the  sufferings  (kle&a)  of  the 
three  worlds,*  In  the  Hevajra-tanlra  also  the  female 
is  called  the  Prajna  wliereas  the  male  is  called  the 


(laugh Icr.  ete.  have  got  some  sorl  of  metaphysical  sigaiflcance ;  but 
in  other  plaw-R  the  plain  implication  is  that  the  mother,  sister, 
daughter,  or  anv  woman  of  any  caste,  however  low  it  may  be,  caa 
b'*  adopted  as  the  Piajiia  (or  the  wamanl  in  the  mystie  practice- 

(NAtarapfi  bAdiSiMincaii'a  dtihitani  biiadburinfi/ffto 
brahmantifi  kmtTinliieaiva  vaiuiydift 
aoiiiii  ro/flirfiii  c«  ifomblni  ca  cajidSUahh  lathU  1 
praplopatfo-L'idlutfieini  pfijoyef  lalfu«i.’fltsalnb  ||. 

— SampuiJ^a,  MS,  pp.  a(A),  *(B)- 

See  also.  Pra/fio-J>djfa-t!fnwccjfC-s<<irf^fi  Ch,  V,  /feca/|f-fanfm, 
MS.  p.  12(A},  G0(B);  fiifo/fn-mrd-cnndd-moha-riwono-tajitra,  MS. 
p.  8(B). 

In  justifleation  oi  this  action  it  is  said,  Prajna  is  devoid  of  all 
thought-conslnictlons  and  consequently  she  is  above  all  the  notions 
of  differences ;  that  being  the  eaee,  for  a  Yogin  there  should  not 
be  any  notion  of  difference  among  the  mother,  the  sister,  the  daughter 
and  any  other  girl  even  of  the  lowest  caste.  If  there  be  nny  notion 
of  distinction  nt  ail  it  is  to  be  uiiderstond  that  the  Yogin  is  not 
yet  fuJly  Tit  for  the  I’oifo,  for  he  has  not  obtained  the  mBsrafd- 
knowledge  which  effaeea  ail  such  notions  of  distinction.  It  is  there¬ 
fore  warned  that  the  Prajha  should  be  carefully  worshipped  so  that 
no  notion  of  difference  may  arise  at  nil — prfijfatficjifl  gntna 
bhedo  na  iayofe,  .Sompufild,  MS.  p.  8(B);  |/en«jVa-fnntr«,  MS. 
p.  12(A);  c/.  also  f/^irnfm-padjiffd,  MS.  pp.  17(B)— 18(A);  tiffa- 
risKddfn'-pmitnropn,  Verses  lOl-lUB.  (C/.  .Sri-giihtfa-sofiwju,  Ch.  \ ,) 

*  sodastt-bdihutii  snmprapyo  yofiffiin  hdrtff-stipmbhniul 

gmidfta-pnspdA'uffltfi  krtvii  tosifO  mmfhi/e  fu  IfUTunyel  |l 
(idhit'csfi/o  cn  fdifi  prajilnm . etc. 

— Pafufu  IV.  p.  10  (C.G.S.). 

r/.  also,  ,  ydn?  fra  Seif  suflbfrn-tvn  ?)piUfnd-rfipcrta  sarca- 

fanfrrfn-gflfm-frii'niT-inrajV^fl-bftahgdhhiramii.  .....  etc. 

—Quoted  in  the  SHWiusita-iHifu£rflho, 

*  i/asdijt  Sfcrfir  opmpflnefl-uiniflia-projnnninyf  surragdl 
^rtfrsat  fralpa-infnivo  tTi-Mmimne  jffih  frfesa-judfa-cchiddh 
irf-rrmd-t'a/nJ-prtdd-Sfrifd  ^uvaltiifiia  tdbh^O  iiatiiah  soirnfah  J 

— Quoted  in  the  .^Hfrfrdyjfci-stiibjrfliio. 


118 


TANTRIC  BUDBinSM 


iunyatdi  it  has  also  beeu  extensively  used  as  the 
synonym  for  the  male  organ.  The  use  of  the  lotus  as 
ti)e  symbol  of  the  generating  organ  is  rather  well 
known,  but  the  use  of  the  Vajra  for  the  male  organ  is 
rather  technical.  They  are  also  technieally  called  bola 
or  and  kakkola  or  kakkoluku.  * 

(E)  Prajxa-Upava  as  Laiasa-R\sana,  Left  \xd 
Right,  Vowel  and  Consonant,  etc. 

Prajha  and  Upaya  are  also  called  Lalund  and 
Ramnd  which  are  the  names  for  the  two  nerves  Ida 
ami  Fingalu  well  known  in  the  Hindu  Tantric  nerve- 
system.  The  neri’^e  wliere  the  two  nerves  commingle 
is  called  the  which  is  again  the  middle  nerve 

corresponding  to  the  Susumna  nerve  of  the  Hindu 
Tantras;  and  this  ner\’e  is  regarded  as  the  way  to 
nircfina.  It  has  been  said,  ‘Lalonc  is  of  the  nature  of 
Prajna,  and  Rosand  remains  as  lljiaya,  and  Avadhuti 
remains  in  the  middle  as  the  aboile  of  Mahdsukkay 
We  may  note  here  that  in  the  Hindu  Tantras  the  nerve 


C/*  Comni.  on 

of  KMiha. 

cy.  alsOf — Sahtija-^^hidM  of  pombi-pado,  quoted  in  the 

p.  quoted  in  the  Sei&?ui- 

p.  7^;  MS*  p.  iil(B).  (ihn-dAnfflvifi 

Wrtfrtrmara  (Ed.  by  Dr.  N.  Ctmudhunb  P*  Kriija- 
siimgmhut  MS.  pp.  75(B),  7G(A)t  pp.  25, 

Comm,  on  MS.  (B.K.  Suns.  No,  SS) 

p.  15(B). 

€f.  ako  kuJivit  imjhc  hhnh  mmh  [cj.  pmjnit-j}ntja- 

etc.  Comm.)^  No-  ^7* 

yiijfo  ndm  pcfdr  p«ifd  khRhvuhiu\  Cttrya  No.  49^ 

(C/.  pro/iia-raviiidii-AuAom-^rrrtdf  prrtre-^ 

jftffYiOt  Comm.) 

^  lajfum  votakfim  khjffiUin*  podmitm  wifffaiEj* 

— Ihvisjm-tfinfpit  MS  p. 

*  Sfldhana-mnia,  p.  448. 

Cf,  mIeo  Mana  pmjM-tvarupem  ramm-payit-^aih£ihilii\ 

tayoT  ytmdhif£  ^nia^h  devt  arii^'nrfTpi^  f  |[ 

— Uemka^tQntrat  MS.  p.  74(B). 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITIOX  OF  THE  tXKTBIC  BUDDHTSTS  110 

Ida  wliich  corresponds  to  the  Laiand  and  which  is  of 
the  nature  of  the  moon  is  said  to  be  the  Sakti  and 
Pingald,  corresponding  to  the  Jiasona  and  of  the  nature 
of  the  sun,  is  spoken  of  as  the  Purusa  (the  male  prin¬ 
ciple).  '  Again  these  Leiano  and  JZasftnfi  are  said  to 
carry  seed  and  ovum  respectively* *’  We  may  also 
notice  that  Prajua  has  been  called  (left)  iu  the 

Panca-kramti^  and  Upaya  has  been  named  daksma 
(right)/  and  this  La/ana  is  also  the  nen-^e  iu 
the  left  side  and  Rasand  in  the  right  side.  Again 
Prajha  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  vowel  or  the 

C/.  also  f/raiiia-*n:abftoi.viiiB  i-aiioiiiHpilaa-Mitwthfta  i 

ai’fKihOti  madhya-deic  tu  II 

— fajw-raraJii-frBffwi-JiJiifciT-rflfi'fni,  MS.  p.  ii7(A). 

f/fuaira-fantm,  MS.  p.  3(fl).  /InrtJfeB-tanfra,  MS. 

p.  ia(A), 

fu/dfia  rasano  riarfi  ea  iMclnttfh  || 

— /MJtfdrnoco  (Ed-  IVBI-  H.  P.  Sistri),  p.  158- 

'  I'fliTwSfl  yA  idb  nfidff  i«Jf/o-dOrtdm-Jitia™pfnlt 

Aiitfi-nipil  hj  w  amrfff-i-'ifirah*  U 

daktr  fii  pirt^nW  pNduiah  suryu-vignofinVI 

— Sowiwohnnn-fnTifi'rt  <]uotc<l  in  tht  SBfcflJff'o-niriipoJinJii. 
Ed.  by  A.  Avalon, 

*  ff.  a}so,-Hjit?o6h|irft*t’aA5  Julanij  rtimn&  mfetfl-pTOv6lii»T[ 

nvadhfittf  | 

— ^Sd jftana-iMdld,  p.  4-tS  (G.O.S.) 

/(iJirno  mmtm 

fnfftd  prajna  nendhun  w  prnfeirttfd  If 

—Ilcvajra-taiitnii  MS.  p.  a(A). 

nuidhye  »thita  nflf/l  /wfriTid  tffiifra-yflhiiil! 
dtiksttne  rflfwjna  rafcfu-(pro)VflM«i  |] 

— MS.  p. 

Cf,  MS,  (R.A.S,B,  No.  IISRS) 

p.  ‘2D{B).  This  MS,,  pifcservect  in  the  R.A.S.B.,  s«uns  to  be  sub¬ 
stantially  the  same  as  tbe  Ati-DakMTn^Me 

published  with  the  ApabAmmsd  Boha*  alonp  with  the  Ciin/ilpadn^ 
by  MM.  H.  P.  Sfistri;  but  there  are  important  udditians  and  alteia- 

tions.  ,  I  .  ■  -1 

We  should  note  one  important  caufusiou  here,  I^rHUTia  is  saiu 

tu  be  PraifiA  but  it  is  said  to  carry  seed,  whereas  Ratann  which 
is  said  to  be  Upaya  i<  said  to  carry  ovum;  but  the  statement 
ou^ht  to  bas'c  been  reversed  to  be  consistent  with  the  analogy  oI 
the  Tantric  Buddhists. 

^  i'(5»n(j-suiji/)TdFri  pitna^aivit,  etc.,  MS.  p.  iSOlB), 

*  du'K  pwrifftf-wiHi/itd  ca  si'oro-fciirfiJico  rfafc'piioA,  MS.  p.  21(A). 


120 


iXntric  buddhism 


vowel  'a',  or  the  series  of  letters  begitming  with 

*  a  ’  (ah’)  j  and  Upaya,  in  contrast,  is  spoken  of  as 
representing  the  consonants,  or  the  letter  ‘  A*a  or  the 
series  beginning  with  the  letter  *ka^  (kdh).  In  the 
chapter  on  jlmanasifeara  of  the  Adoflya-na/ra-safhgra/ia 
we  find  that  the  letter  *  a  *  in  the  beginning  of  the  word 

*  a-nianttsiA‘dra '  implies  the  non-organization  of  all  that 

is  imagined  to  be  produced.’  In  justification  of  this 
interpretation  it  is  cited  from  the  Manfra-patala 
(second  chapter  of  the  first  kalpa)  of  the  Heuajfra- 
f antra  that  as  the  letter  'o'  is  without  beginning  or 
origination,  so  also  are  all  the  dh annas — so  the  U!i- 
create  nature  of  the  dhamias  as  the  sunj^nta  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  ‘  a  Frajna  who  is  san  jfata  is,  therefore,  ‘  a  \ 
About  the  nature  of  *  a  *  it  has  been  said  in  the  iVama- 
sangiff  that '  a  *  is  the  first  of  all  the  letters,  it  is  full  of 
deep  significance,  it  is  absolutely  immutable — ^it  is  long 
— uncreate  and  free  from  all  vocal  modulations.’  *  A  * 
is  said  to  be  the  first  and  the  most  important  of  all  the 
letters  and  all  other  letters  are  said  to  have  evolved 
from  this  first  letter  In  the  Ekalla-vlra~ca7ida- 

maharosana-laiitra  w'e  find  that  the  vowel  *a*  means 
the  non-artificial  innate  nature,  and,  therefore,  ‘  a  ’  re¬ 
presents  Prajna  and  *va^  represents  the  Upaya.*  In 
the  Hindu  texts  we  often  find  that  represents 
Brahma  or  the  creator  of  the  universe. '  In  the  Gifd 

*  P.  01  (C.O.S.). 

*  isaniiahuflfina^ro  Hiahd-rf  hah  pfj min raft  | 

maha-pjvno  hi/  amitpado  vag-udfih^m-vnrjiinh  |i 

— Quotfd  in  the  jldrfif/a-i^f/^'rn-iSfiifi^niha,  p.  62. 

Cf,  ftlsot — ofrflm  jniihham  ^rtia-ifharnuiiifmi 
—Kmia^yamilTi^tantra  quoted  iji  the  a}  Sann. 

Buddhht  MSS,».  K.A.S.B.,  YoL  1*  p. 

Ag^m,  adifvam-st*abhfivn  m  hni  ftixdiihaift  | 

sairfi  hhflj^atrafF  pra;dd  Htpanna-kTnnm^yagatah  j] 

MS.  p,  49(Aj* 

■  uahii}a-9Vitbhilvani  uAifairi 

akisrameyatr  pm/ffd  vakdrena  hi/ iipai/tiiciiEF/i  | 
p  rnffio-ptlyn  ka-y  nn  lakdta-sH  h  h  adnkmna  || 

—MS.  (R.A.S.B.  No.  \u  23(3). 

*  fikarjp  ilijafe  hmhmd  t/tflrr  fif/fitf  harih  | 

mnkare  tiijaff  rndTiib  pjvmve  hi  piiraft  ^mrtahi  || 


I 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TANTBIC  BUDDHISTS  121 

Lord  Krsiia  says  that  among  the  letters  he  is  ‘  a  *.  So 
the  fact* of  the  letter  'a'  being  the  representative  of 
.iiinyata  is  significant.  Often  it  is  seen  that  Prajfia  or 
is  represented  not  merely  by  *  a  ^  but  hy  the 
vowels  in  general/  and  is  indicated  by  the  general  name 
oli  the  vowel  series  beginmng  with  ‘  a  V  I" 

contrast  with  dli,  representing  PrajM,  or  the  con¬ 
sonantal  series  represents  Upaya.  This  Prajna  and 
TJpaya  or  ali  and  kali  are  tlien  associated  with  the  moon 
and  the  sun,  or  the  night  and  the  day  respectively,  ’  In 
the  AituTcya-Ayanyaka  it  has  been  said  that  the  night 
is  obtained  through  the  consonants  and  the  day  through 
the  vowels.  *  Here  in  the  Buddhist  texts  there  is  an  iii- 
version  of  the  notion.  But  tliis  in  general  may  explain 
the  association  of  ali  with  the  moon  or  the  night  and  of 
kali  with  the  sun  or  the  day.  Lalana  and  fiasand  have 
also  been  associated  with  the  moon  and  the  sun,  and 
they  are  .said  to  be  the  two  nerves  tiowing  from  the 
left  and  right  of  the  nasal  cavity.  * _ _ 

*  C'/,  pp.  476,  3S7. 

fiStij  up6ycti.~-ltcvaira-lanlraf  MS.,  p.  SBIA). 

Also  f^aitani  wdir  iaidih  frajiA,  ttk&rah  Sdir  yasgasaa 

^  ’yianna-kalikii-itifitfo^  MS,  (li.N.  Siins.  No*  fid)* 

pp.  fl(.4)  aud  6(B)* 

&li  ak«Ta-di-iiodaia^viiTun  tatha  tftiaiva  krametfa  knli  kakar^ 

p,  S«{AK  Asain,  flfcara-dir  aiI^l  fcafcoro* 

df}t  Ht'L’fi/«i-par1/ifra,  MS.,  p.  a(A). 

’  athita-lif:  ctindra-mpciia  kUti-tupena  !»Jiiastiirah  | 
Ciitirfm-sfiryawIvnyDr-mf/n  te  pralfirhlnh  || 

umiiid-Ii  kalu  (fiJtiiit’li  catttirfi-rfrflfyn  prafrftccfpnfflt  I 

— (/(fuq/rfl-taHlrB,  MS.,  p.  j!)0{A)i. 

praplo-uajrti-pTOaogfltahl 
TjfBne  udL’Of/r  jMne  JuiddAalt’om  || 

— Rioted  iti  the  Sath«*i7H-»flrif|»raho,  p.  70, 

*  vyaRjanitifeva  rdtrir  Qpnwi’flHt*  ^tomfr  ohdurj 

— Aifortpq-Ardrtjffffrn  (II  9,  4). 

Quoted  by  Dr.  P,  C.  Dagdvi  in  his  Studks  in  tftjf  Toniras,  p.  78. 

*  Cf,  Jaland  rosond  raci-iBW  fjidin  wijwo  i)i  pose) 

— Dwlwto?(i  of  K^hwpada,  verso  No.  S, 

C/,  also  llie  comm.  pfo/fid-cafidfii)  uidhttfafel 

rflwin-wdsHpKfo-st'otfidvnfl  temf  pruntt-prfliJdhipTfoitmd  otfiital 
rastina-sabdcna  Irdf»*n7p8  ,  .  ,  .  ,  etc. 

—MS,,  B.N.  Sans.  No.  47,  p.  46(B). 

O.P.  103—16 


122 


TANTRIC  BDDDHISM 


Again  Prajaa  has  been  said  to  be  the  syllable  *  e  * 
and  Upaya  the  syllable  '  va  \  In  the  Sddhana- 
mdld  we  find  that  Prajha  should  be  meditated  on  as 
the  syllable  ‘  e*.‘  It  is  said  in  the  SamputiA'a,  “  Prajfia 
is  said  to  be  ‘  e  ^  wliilc  Upaya  is  the  syllabic  *  ua  * ;  and 
this  *  e '  shines  only  when  it  is  aborned  with  *  va  In 
the  Heuajra-tantra  and  in  many  other  Tantras  it  is 
said,  “That  divine  'e'  wliicb  is  adorned  in  the  middle 


with  the  uajra  is  the  abode  of  all  bliss  or  happiness — it 
is  the  abode  of  all  the  genas  of  the  Buddhas  j  all  joy, 
qualified  by  the  moments,  is  produced  there  ;  when  one 
is  established  in  this  e-uam-fearet  one  realizes  bliss 
through  the  knowledge  of  the  moments.'"’  In  the 
Dohdkosa  of  Kanhu-pada  it  has  been  said,  ‘  He  who  has 
understood  e-vam-kdra  has  understood  everything 
completely.**  This  *  e*  has  again  been  called  the 
mother  and  the  ‘  t'o '  the  father  and  the  hiadw  is  pro¬ 
duced  by  their  imion.  Again,  ‘e'  is  the  Prajha  and 
*  '  is  the  Lord  in  sex-intercoursc,  and  the  bindu  is 

the  immutable  knowledge  proceeding  from  their 
union.  This  e  and  vajii  *  have  also  been  associated 
with  the  moon  and  the  sun.  But  in  explaining  the 
well-known  introductory  line  of  the  Sangiti  literature, 

*  ctntYii/rl  dbltnAii  prajn&in  ]> _ P.  4.14. 

‘ffcarfnn  nnrta  pra/wfl  vanhYimv  c(S*p!/  ii/wiyafcairt  j 

adha-rddhva-fuimSpattiia  prafUo  pGi/ii^svabhavatah  || 

.  .  —MS.,  p.  ie(A), 

’  pflff  dil'iyffni  wwirffrye  VYipfcai'fl^&Afiajtawt} 

aiatfoih  Mfva-naukky&itdm  buddha-ratnn^karandakam  II 
fiaandas  tatra  jSpante  kmtfa-bkedefta-bheditdh] 
k^am^jnSnat  mikha-jnan/tin  evankArg  prati^thiiam  N 

-Neoajra-tanira,  MS.,  pp,  S9(A). 

evntnftani  fc  biijjbta  te  tmjjhia  saalu  njft;Kn[ — Doha  **1 

*  IH  Wflrr(r)  mdlS  vakams  O/  pitd  »NtrrYiJ^{ 

tii  bkfwrt  pm}M  vokanih  ituralS-dhipoh]  ‘ 

— Z)«VF»rf™-pflrjprerfea-#(i«iw,  colkeled  m  the 

wmiruho.  iBcttdaU's  Edition),  p, 


THEOLOGTC.iL  POSITION  OF  THE  T.iNTRlC  BL’DDHISTS  123 

uiS!,,  evaih  maya  irutam,  etc,,  the  Samputikd  explains 
evaih  rather  in  a  different  way.  It  is  said  there  that 
by  *  e '  is  to  be  under.'itood  the  earth  which  is  Karma- 
mud  r  a,  also  known  as  Locand ;  she  is  of  the  nature  of 
^reat  compassion  and  great  expedience's  he  is  of  the 
form  of  the  'whole  universe  and  is  known  to  the  whole 
universe  ;  she  resides  in  the  NtnnAnn-c&kra  in  the  lotus 
in  tile  nave.  Fam  implies  water  representing  the 
DhflnTMi-mwdTd  or  the  goddess  Mcniaki ;  she  is  of  the 
nature  of  universal  love  and  concentration  and  resides 
in  the  Dhonna-cokra  in  the  heart  in  a  lotus  ol  eight 
petals.  ^  We  find  this  interpretation  also  in  tJie 
Hevajrc-paiijikd  of  Kr.snaearya.*  But  in  offering  an¬ 
other  alternative  meaning  of  the  line  evani  mayd 
^rtitarh,  etc.,  the  Hevaira-panjika  says  that  by  ‘e '  is 
meant  the  female  organ  ivhile  by  *va'  is  meant  Uie 

•  Again  ma  (ol  matfa)  is  fire,  •WnAa-mtiifra,  Piindam  is  the 
Sambkosa-cakw  in  the  throat;  yd  means  air,  aamnyo-Timdra, 
goddess  Kammlftiid  in  the  .WahatftiJthiurBftra,  etc. 

Cf.  rfedrorh  pfthivi  jfifyd  frornw-mtidTa  tii  locnndf 
vtahdkrpa  niaAopayfl  i-irfvd-riijta  irisiw-gocfl™  I 

ftAiW  mmt&na’cakre  t'o»  noblinH  insno-pfiiiMf  H 

nofrt-fcfirnm  f«  joJani  jfifydffl  (llmma'mHrfrB  in  inanKffttl 
T«flitrf-prflnKlhi-nJjw  tw  ilevT  MfTO-muftfcc  #tM(a| 
ilhoma-cnbre  tn  hfdtiye  aafa-dtfMmhM/t  || 

vnhnff  ut  lisfo  malmntiidrfp  ti*  plnaardl 
muditd-hiifa-yogfna  d(N:?i  ptidmo-IftiJndhliavifll 
athtta  snmbhoga*cafc«  (n  katyfhe  dvtf-tista^ai&-mbu}f  [| 
ufi-lfednirh  vuyw-rupflsfw  sartfa-iWo-prablMiwialkoh  I 
tnaha-tamaya-mudra  nai  drvi  ftarma-fcw/fi  miilffiyfil 
iipch^  jHdJia-tfogfflo  tarfl  sarnwiro-tAKni  [] 

— 5amputr/r6,  MS,,  p-  10(A). 

*  chdrah  pil^iul  jncyd  fcaniio-Hiiid™  tu  focana  | 

catwAsastiWnli  ftdbAsu  *thitd  ftirrtidt}a^akmke\ 
vam-kd'riistu  jaloth  jnf^yttm  dharnia-Hii«lTn  (ii  rHUinaMI 
adfriflhita  iw  dhanna-cofere  11 

irutarlt  .mliajani  ityiiittafji  dnirfh'Lhferdena  bhedilain  | 
jiRthVTtati)  dev  fit  d-nfcflf'd  Hi  u/paUi-AraHifl'pafc^atiilil 

uiirrtf  eva-Ji’arifpBrt^fii  rtifjxiflBii*ki*<tiaa-paft5at«hl 
wtya-tlvayai/t  gflifiasrilya  hiidfUiiinfirh  j| 

— fltfVfijm-tnnfi'a,*  See  f/<v«jr8-patf/ifc«,  MS.,  p.  S(B). 

But  e/.  also: —  ^  , 

ekdreita  locand  devi  i'a»ijSf«rrna  maiiiakl  ^rtu| 
rnai^firrna  jwBdara  cn  yfifcnreTia  ca  timiBl  i' 

.^[/{•t'Of'ru-fualra,  MS,,  p.  4(A). 


124 


TSSTTB-TC  8ITDDHISM 


male  organ  ;  by  is  meant  the  sex-activity  and  by 

srutam  is  impliect  the  double  nature  of  the  sddhana 
(uis.,  SflTiiurio  and  The  commentator  further  ex¬ 

plains  that  the  male  is  of  the  nature  of  tile  seed,  while 
the  pleasure  is  the  female — thej*  represent  the  D/iarma- 
kaya  and  Sambkoga-kaya  and  botli  of  them  are  com¬ 
bined  in  the  nature  of  the  Lord  (uo/rtt-dfcara).  Thus 
*  e '  and  *  vo  *  are  the  two  aspects  of  the  Lord  ;  they  are 
also  called  samurfa  and  viuria  which  again  correspond 
to  the  &unyaid  and  ^'ararid  or  Prajiia  and  Upaya.  ^ 

It  is  needless  to  say  tliat  many  of  these  derivations 
and  interpretations  are  merely  arbitrary  and  they  are 
introduced  to  demonstrate  some  purely  sectarian  view* 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  in  the  ^far^nafcah'fed-^antra 
and  in  the  JEfeuajVa-panjifca  ail  the  alternative  inter¬ 
pretations  are  called  ‘  sectarian  interpret ations  *  (sam- 
praddya-vydkhyd).  Thus  the  verse — 

eaaddli  jvalitd  ndbhau  dahati  panca-tathdgatdn\ 
dahati  ca_locanadindm  dagdhe  hnvi  sraitate  sasijp 
has  got  as  many  as  five  interpretations.  In  the  first 
interpretation  dli  has  been  explained  as  the  wind  blow¬ 
ing  tlirough  the  left  nasal  passage  and  kali  as  the  wind 
blowing  through  the  right.’  Again  canda  means 
Prajiia  as  she  is  very^  terrible  (caadd)  in  destroying 
all  sorts  of  afflictions;  and  dli  here  means  Fa/ra-sotfua.  * 

’  /iiitiSnm  tmftam  \ 

mayeti  calanam  proktam  imtam  i/at  tad  dvtdbainatam  11 
ca 

iukti-k&TO  tAngflvfln  »r}i^am| 

^Ajirma-santbft(i^a-n(pan>{irn  || 

tolfia  cfl 

saiiYurtowt  ufuitaifi  fu^ha-rfip/nwN  i 

%  anwa  hi  vBkycm  tuttytttS-kant^ii-smbk&vam  pTajiio-paya- 
svabbavam  dharma-aambhoga-kaya-avabh&vaml 

,  „  .  MS.,  p.  2{A). 

* — MS.,  p.  4(B). 

vmjuhf  iadafotah 

*  1,1  /  —ll/vajra-paftjika,  MS,,  p;  0(B). 

caada  pTay»a  kh4o^p(,kleSa.«isknTantanc  ( ?)  eaniia-«ia6Jifluofvdt 
4fir  vajni-jorftah  | 

— MS.,  p.  0(B), 


THEOLOGICAL  POSmON  OF  THE  TANTKIC  BUDDHISTS  125 

Agtiin  catitdd  is  Prajfia  who  is  o  w ;  and  ali  is  Vajra- 
sattva  wlio  is  fcram. '  Again  candd  is  Prajhi.  which  is 
the  left  nerve,  while  ali  is  Upaya  or  the  right  nerve.  * 
Again  canda,  is  Prajha  which  is  discriininative  know’- 
ledge  about  the  transcendental  nature  of  origination 
and  the  originated  ;  while  ah*  is  the  mind  full  of  univer¬ 
sal  compassion.*  Here  in  these  interpretations  it  is 
very  easy  to  notice  that  dii  has  been  explained  as 
Upaya  wiiich  contradicts  the  interpretation  of  all  tlie 
Tantras  including  the  Hevajra-tantra  (of  which  the 
nevajra-paiijikd  is  the  commentary)  ;  d/i  has  also  been 
said  to  be  kraiii  (while  caiirfd  is  am),  wliieh  also  is  ab¬ 
surd  and  self- contradictory. 

(iii)  Aduaj/a  (nott-dwafify)  and  riiganadd/ia 
(Prmctple  of  Union) 

A  study  of  the  above  speculations  on  the  nature  of 
the  Bodhicitta  will  bring  it  home  to  us  that  the  central 
point  of  all  the  Sddhand  of  the  Tantric  Buddhists  was 
a  principle  of  union.  The  synthesis  or  rather  the  uni¬ 
fication  of  all  duality  in  an  absolute  unity  is  the  real 
principle  of  union,  which  has  been  termed  as  Fiiganod- 
dha.  This  principle  of  rHganaddha  is  clearly  explain¬ 
ed  in  the  fifth  chapter  (Tngonaddha-fcramo)  of  the 
Paiica-krama,  There  it  is  said  that  wiien  a  state  of 
unity  is  reached  through  the  purging  of  the  two 
notions  of  the  creative  process  (samsafc)  and  absolute 
cessation  (wirurttOj  it  is  called  Yuganadd/io.  When 
the  transcendental  nature  of  botli  phenomenal  (sarii- 
kleia)  and  the  absolutely  purified  (ui/auadano)  realities 
is  realized  and  the  two  become  unified  into  one,  it  is 
called  the  Yaganndd/io.  Again,  when  the  Yogin  is 

^  pminn  aihMrahf  filir  ! 

—Ibid.,  MS-,  p.  10(A>. 

®  pra/flu  vmnd  ttiunf  [ 

—Ibid,,  MS.,  p._  10(A). 

"  call#  prajM  ujcfirn/i  j 

miika-ki^rufidmayu-dttam  1 

— Ibid,.,  MS-,  10(B). 


126 


TlNTElC  BUDDHISM 


able  to  synthesize  the  thoufjht-constructions  of  all  coi> 
poreal  existence  with  the  notion  of  the  fornilessnesSi 
he  can  be  said  to  have  known  the  principle  of  1  uganad- 
dha.  Thus  the  text  goes  on  explaining  that  the  real 
principle  of  Yitganaddha  is  the  absence  of  the  notion 
of  duality  as  the  perceivable  (grd/ij/a)  and  the  per- 
cciver  and  their  perfect  synthesis  in  an 

unity ;  it  is  the  absence  of  the  notions  of  eternity  and 
limitation  and  is  their  synthesis  in  an  unity,— the  unity 
of  Prajna  and  Karuiia, — ^the  state  of  all- void  (sarva- 
through  the  union  of  Prajna  and  Upaya. 
Where  there  is  no  notion  of  extinction  with  some  residu¬ 
al  substratum  (sopadhi-iesah)  or  extinction  without  any 
residuum  (aaiipddhi-iesal{t),  i.e.,  no  notion  of  the  non- 
essentialness  of  the  d  harm  as  (dftarma-tiaircf  m  pa)  or 
of  the  self  (pudgafa-noirdfmya) — ^that  is  what  is  called 
the  Fuganadd/ia; — ^for,  the  very  nature  of  Yuganaddha 
involves  its  freedom  from  all  kinds  of  thought- 
constructions.  To  realize  through  constant  practice 
tlie  truth  of  both  svadkisthdna  (wdiich  is  the  third 
mnyatd  as  self-establishment  or  the  universalization 
of  the  self)  and  the  resplendent  fprahhasiTora,  which  is 
the  fourth  or  the  final  stage  as  sama-sunpa)  and  then 
to  unite  them — this  is  Yuganaddha.  To  enter  into  the 
final  abode  of  *  thatness '  in  body,  word  and  mind  and 
thence  again  to  rise  up  and  turn  to  the  world  of 
miseries — that  is  what  is  called  Yugonaddha.  To 
know  the  nature  of  samurti  (the  provisional  truth) 
and  the  paravidrtha  (the  ultimate  truth)  and  then  to 
unite  them  together  is  real  Yuganaddha.  Where  the 
mind  does  neither  lose  itself  in  the  absolute  *  thatness 
nor  does  it  rise  up  in  the  world  (of  activity)— that 
immutable  state  of  the  Yogin  is  called  the  state  of 
Ywganndd/ia.  Here  there  is  neither  affirmation  nor 
denial,  neither  existence  nor  non-existence,  neither 
non-remembering  (osmrfi  =  non-subjectivity  through 
the  absence  of  the  u asanas)  nor  remembering  (smrfi), 
neither  affection  (rago)  nor  non-affection  (araga). 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITt  ON  OF  THE  TANTRIC  BLTJDHISTS  127 

neither  the  cause  nor  the  effect,  neither  the  production 
(ufpatti)  nor  the  produced  (utpanna),  neitlier  purity 
nor  impurity,  neither  anything  with  form,  nor  anything 
without  form;  it  is  but  a  synthesis  of  all  these  dualities 
“that  is  what  is  meant  by  the  principle  of 
naddha.  A  Yogin  thus  placed  in  yiig««cdd/ta  is  called 
the  omniscient,  the  seer  of  the  truth,  the  support  of  the 
universe; — he  has  escaped  the  snare  of  illusion  by 
attaining  perfect  enligiitenment, — ^lie  has  crossed  the 
sea  of  birth  and  death, — he  has  attained  non-dual 
knowledge  and  eternal  tranquillity.  This  in  fact  is 
perfect  enlightenment  (huddhatua), — this  is  what  is 
meant  by  becoming  a  Vajra-sattvat — ^this  is  the  w'ay  to 
attain  all  power  and  wealth.  This  stage  is  called  the 
absorption  in  the  Vajropama  (or  thunder-like)  medi¬ 
tation, — the  ntspanna  krama  or  the  absolute  state,  or 
the  absorption  in  the  Mdyopama  (tllusion-like)  medita¬ 
tion,  or  it  is  called  the  non-duaJ  truth  (advaya^tattva). 
Words  like  *  unereate  *  non-dual  ”,  etc,,  all  refer  to 
this.  In  this  way  the  Buddhas,  whose  number  is  in¬ 
numerable  like  the  sand  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges, 
attained  perfection,  a  stage  neither  real  nor  uareaL 
This  principle  of  Yitganaddha  should  be  meditated  as 
well  as  practised,  and  In  such  a  stage,  the  mind  being 
absolutely  free  from  the  notion  of  all  sorts  of  duality, 
there  remains  no  distinction  between  the  self  and  the 
enemy,  no  distinction  of  caste  or  relation;  Uiere  is  no 
distinction  in  his  mind  between  cloth  and  skin,  gem 
and  husk, — the  scent  of  camphor  or  any  other  bad 
scent,  praise  and  calumny,  day  and  night,  dream  and 
perception,  the  ruined  or  the  surviving,  pleasure  and 
pain,  evil  and  good,  hell  and  heaven,  merit  and  de¬ 
merit*’ 

^  mm  sil  ra  -ni  nrf t  f  i  kalpa  nd-J  vaya-varja  ii  fli  | 

irkUbhilvi>  yntm  ifugaiuiddhum  tcid  uttfuie  || 

vynvadanancu  jmtvfl  Sfi  param^rihnt^h  \ 
ekl-bhflvam  tu  vetti  m  vtih  i^iganaddhakfim  \ 
h^kdra-bkava-mmkaipam  mrdkdrfttva-kalpanAm  ] 
yogi  ftr  tctii  || 


12S 


TANTRIC  BUDDH1S51 


In  the  yMg«Maiidrf/ifl-priifr(ala  of  the  Advaya-vajra- 
samgraha  it  has  been  said  about  tiie  principle  of  union 
that  tlie  nature  of  the  union  of  ^tinyata  and  karuiia  is 
inconipreiiensiblc;  void  and  m a ni testation  always  re¬ 
main  in  union  by  nature.  In  the  Prevta-pancaka  of 
the  Advaychvajra-samgraha,  gtmyatd  has  been  spoken 
of  as  the  wife  and  the  manifestation  of  $unyatd  as  the 
husband, — and  the  relation  between  them  is  that  of  con¬ 
jugal  love  which  is  very  natural  {sakajam  prema) ;  and 
so  inseparable  are  they  in  their  deep  love  that  siinpata 
without  the  husband  of  manifestation  would  have  been 
dead  and  the  husband  of  manifestation  without 
sunyatd  would  Jiave  alw^ays  suffered  bondage.  In  the 
Sddhana-indld  it  is  said  that  the  one  body  of  the 
ultimate  nature  as  the  unity  of  both  i'ti nj/otd  and 
J^aruna  is  called  the  neuter  or  often  as  the  ¥^^ga- 
naddka.'  This  Yugaiiaddha  is  called  it  is  the 

Bodhiettta*,  it  is  the  Dharma-kaya.* 

The  conception  of  maithuna  (conjugal  intercourse) 
or  kdma~kald  (us  it  is  called  in  t!ie  Kd^na-kaldoildsa) 
of  the  Saiva  hr  Sakta  Tanttas  refers  to  the  same  prin¬ 
ciple,  In  the  Kdma-kald-vildsa  we  find  the  principle 

M  grdhakml  dvidh^^buddhir  na  vidyatc] 

^bhinnaia  tad^ha  yuganaddhnktim  [| 

^74gAii£r(JfIAa-itinciiiid-^At/c£ni  vai  t^itvam  tiflli  ^  pandit afy  [| 
praj fm-ka r  n ikyaiu  jjia{na ni )  i/n t m  pru i^fi riaf f  [ 

Hi  khijfUah  kran\o*if&7h  || 

prfijno-pftya^sfamipnitfjnu  jmtvit  sarvam  ^cimd^d^etA  j 

yutra  xthito  mahayogl  tad  bJmvut  y%fganaddhakam  j 
i>f/  Anifpcriiff  na-jiti  tat  tnddhi  yugaffaddhakam  ]| 
yatra  jriidgatn-nair^trntfa[m}  dhanna^nmtrdhayam  itfj  api\ 
hitpanayfi  vwikiatvaih  yuganaddha^ya  lok^anam  || 
jnnivd  knrmrf}a  tattvajiiah^vadhi^thanii-pTabh^vaf^Tn  \ 
tayof  L'LVf  mmdjath  i^iiJ  yuganaddhu-kramo  hy  ayam  1'  etc^ 

Vrd^  Pama-kratna. 

^  ekah  hvahhavikah  kuyah  iunyutd-kamna-dvayahl 
ilt  ytiganaddha  ift  kvacit  |[ 

VoL  II,  pp,  5,  505* 

^  (iclidr^am  ifAtdiA  bddAtctifdfii  itfam  purlin  | 

p.  17- 

*  Sekodd£ia~tlkd  {G,0-S.)  p-  57* 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TAXTRJC  BUDDHISTS  129 

very  cleiiriy  explained,  Siva  or  Mahesa  is  pure  illuDiiiia- 
Lion  {prakasa-matra-tanu)  or  the  abstract  self-shiH’ 
tug  though!  with  all  the  principles  of  activity  con¬ 
tracted  within  hiui  Sakti  is  the 

principle  of  activity  or  the  inherent  activity  of  thought 
(uiwiari'o  or  hriyd-sakti)  amt  she  contains  the  seed  of 
the  future  worlds  (h/fdui-curo-cnru-bi/titn).  Siva,  how'- 
cver,  realizes  liiniself  through  tiie  §akti,  and  therefore 
it  is  said  that  Siva  is  tile  form  or  beauty  wliich  is  to  be 
reflected  in  the  clear-looking  glass  of  vimaria.  ‘  The 
philosophical  implication  seems  to  be  that  pure 
abstract  thought  cannot  realize  its  own  nature  unless 
it  comes  back  to  itself  through  its  own  activity,  and 
when  it  thus  turns  back  to  itself  through  vimaria  it 
becomes  the  ‘Egobood",  Thus  at  first  there  is  pure 
thought-illumination  (prakasa),  then  the  activity 
(ufinursa)  and  by  their  union  is  produced  ahainkara  or 
the  ‘Egoliood  Tins  principle  of  ‘Egohood  ’  is  called 
the  ‘mass  produced  through  the  union  of  ^iva  and 
Sakti’  (fwa-sakti-mithunit-pinda),^  We  have  already 
indicated  that  this  Siva  is  thought  of  as  the  white 
matter  (sifa-bmdiO  and  the  Sakti  as  the  red-matter 
(soira-hiiidi/),  anti  if  we  are  to  expand  the  analogj”,  it 
comes  to  this,  Lliat  just  as  all  production  is  through  the 
commingling  of  the  seed  and  the  ovum,  through  the 
union  of  the  male  and  the  female,  so  this  ‘  Egohood  ’  is 
the  son,  as  it  were,  produced  through  the  union  of  the 
Siva  and  Sakti,  ’  This  Siva  is  the  Kama  (he  who  is 
desirable)  and  the  iSakti  is  the  Kald *  *  and  tlieii*  union  is 
the  Kdma~kald. 

The  principle  of  union  is  often  illustrated  in  Llie 
Buddliist  Pantheon  by  the  representation  of  many  of 
the  gods  embracing  their  consorts  or  female  counter- 

K&shinira  Series  of  Texts  and  Studies,  No,  XII, 

*  /tff/.,  Vt:rse  -5. 

*  KiUma-kattUviBiffif  Comm,  on  Vctbc  7* 

*  Ibt(Li  Cumin,  on  Vme  7, 

0*P*  10^17 


130  TAKTRIC  BUDDHlSiM 

parts.  The  Lord  Supreme  as  the  Vajra-sattva  or  the 
Vajra-^hara  is  often  represented  as  embracing  his  con¬ 
sort  variously  called  as  the  rajra-d/iafuisvan  or  Vajra- 
varakl  or  Frajn^  or  Prajnd-paTamita  or  Nairiitjnd. 
Lord  Heruka  in  the  Heruka-tantra  is  represented  as 
filled  with  erotic  emotion  (spigara-rnsa-sowanuitatn) 
and  deeply  embracing  his  consort  Vajrn-vairocani  in 
great  joy  of  compassion  (frarHim-Tiiahofsavo),  ‘  In  the 
^r^-ca/l■rtt-Sfln^^^hara-fa«tra  the  Lord  is  depicted  as  em¬ 
bracing  A’ajra-varahi  who  clings  to  him  (in  sexual 
union)  and  who  is  red  in  colour  (red  colour  of  love). 
To  illustrate  tlie  principle  of  union  they  are  dcpieled  as 
in  sexual  union  touching  at  all  points  of  contact.  ’  In 
the  (Sadfiana'^na^u  we  find  that  Heruka,  as  embraced 
by  his  Prajhfi^  represents  the  knowledge  of  the  non-dual 
union. *  *  Lord  Adi-Buddha  embraced  by  his  Prajna  is 
said  to  be  the  non-dual  (adL'ayn)  truth.*  In  many  of 
ttie  iSfld/iaiias  ^ve  find  that  the  god  to  be  worshipped  is 
to  be  meditated  on  as  in  union  with  or  dee]dy  embraced 
by  his  female  consort  aiul  as  enjoying  great  bliss,  *  We  ' 
have  seen  that  the  five  Tathagatas  or  the  Dhyani 
Buddhas,  viz,,  Vairocana,  Aksobhya,  .4niilabha,  Ratna- 
sambhava  and  Amogha-siddhi,  have  their  female  con¬ 
sorts  Vajradhatvisvari,  Locatm,  Mainakt,  Pandara  and 
Aryalara,  and  these  Dhyani  Buddhas  or  Tathagatas  are 
generally  described  with  their  own  consorts  or  i^aktis. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  many  of  the  Buddhist  gods 
of  Nepal  ani^  Tibet  arc  depicted  in  i/ab-j/iun  or  in 
union.  Often  the  god  holds  the  (the  female)  on 
his  knee  in  the  archaic  manner  of  Siva  hobling  PiirvaLI 
or  Uma.  Thus  ,4valokitesvara  is  often  depicted  as 
holding  his  Sakli  on  the  knee. 

Most  of  the  Buddhist  Tantras  are  SangUt  in  type 

'■  Ihrukit-tmirOf  5LSp  No.  p.  ai, 

*  pp*  27^  2!)* 

VoL  ri  (G.O.S.),  p-  50a. 

^  p.  ^^05. 

*  Ibid^t  pp.  401|  500,  502,  520,  5S2,  5aT,  530,  etc. 


N 


theological  POSITTOK  OF  THE  TaKTRIC  BUDOHTSTS  131 

and  the  Lord  Supreme  as  the  Bhagavan  Buddha 

Lord  Vaira-sattva  or  Vajra-dhara  is  depicted  as  P^e  ^  - 

ing  these  principles  of  Sod/iana  m  an  assembly  of  th^ 

Buddhas,  Bodhisattvas,  Tathagatas  and  others,  but 

sometimes  we  see  that  the  T.ord  Supreme  is  not  preac  - 

in-  in  the  a^ssembly,  but  is  depicted  as  exp  laming  the 

principles  of  esoteric  practices  by  way  of  answering  the 

questions  of  goddess  Nairatma  or  )  ^ 

riniplv  Varahi.  who,  out  of  compassion  for  tlie 

beings,  puts  all  sorts  of  questions  as  to  the  secrets  of  the 

pracLes  through  which  all  beings  may 

tion.  In  tftc  Heuora-fflatra  we 

Nairatma,  dceplv  moved  by  the  miseries  of  the 

is  entreating  the  Lord  to  explain  all  the 

which  the  suffering  world  may  be  cteltvcred.  The  Lord 

is  moved  by  her  request;  he  kisses  her 

coaxes  her  in  deep  embrace  and  explains  to  her  al 

s^cTets  of  Yoga  through  which  all  beings  may  be 

liberated/  In  one  place,  however,  goddess 

asks  the  Lord  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  their  CaUa. 

The  Lord  replies  that  it  is  a  place  with  four 

four  doors  decked  with  V  a;  r  a -threads;  within  it  le- 

mains  the  Lord  with  the  Lady  in  deep  passion  of 

the  nature  of  Sahaja-bliss ;  and  from  their 

ceed  all  the  goddesses  in  all  the  quarters.  The  I  ajm 

ndrdld-LlpamaM-tentra,^  the  Ekalla^na^an^ 

^roMntra\  etc,  are  written  entirely  as  <ha- 

logues  between  the  Lord  and  the  Lady  in  exactly  the 

■’  HevafTa-tantrit,  MS.  p.  5S(U). 

j,rcehati  tutra  ^  ,, 

Um-ra  mrio  p"tSl4 

Cf.  olfio  PP-  eHBK  00(A).  60(B>. 

»  MS.  pp.  S* *S(B)'50(A). 

=  R.A.S.B.,  MS.  No.  nSSS. 

*  R.A.R.B,,  MS.  No.  OOfiB. 


132 


TAKTBTC  BUDDHISM 


same  manner  as  described  above.  In  the  E^aHc-uira- 
canda-maha-rosatia-t antra  tlie  Lord  says  that  in  the 
form  of  the  unity  of  ilie  four  kinds  of  bliss,  free  from  all 
notions  of  existence  and  non-existenoe — ^as  the  prjnciple 
of  non-pltenomenalisni,  lie  resides  in  all  men  ;  while  the 
Lady  rejilies  that  site  also,  in  the  form  of  the  unity  of 
iiinyata  and  karuna,  as  the  ‘  non-eonstruct  ’  bliss, 
resides  in  all  women,  ‘  It  may  be  noted  that  the 
Hindu  Tantrns  are  also  generally  introduced  by  way 
of  a  dialogue  between  Lord  Siva  and  his  Sakti  Parvati  ; 
there  also,  Parvati  (who  is  the  mother  of  the  world  as 
Prajria  also  is),  out  of  deep  compassion  foV  tlie  heings, 
asks  the  T^^ird  ahoid  the  path  through  which  the 
beings  may  be  liberated,  and  in  way  of  replying  to  the 
questions  of  Parvati  Lord  Siva  explains  to  her"  all  the 
secrets  of  \  oga.  It  is  indeed  very  hazardous  to  postu~ 
late  on  the  basis  of  this  similarity  of  form  in  the 
Buddhist  and  the  Hindu  Tantras  any  theorv  concern” 
ing  the  priority  of  the  one  to  the  other ;  it  is,  never¬ 
theless,  to  be  admitted  that  the  resemblance  is  striking, 
and  in  later  time  witli  the  gradual  decay  of  Buddhism 
and  the  revival  of  Hinduism  the  Buddhist  I^rd 
Supreme  with  his  female  counter-part  could  very 
easily  conceal  himself  behind  the  Hindu  god  Siva  with 
his  Sakti  Parvati  or  Gaurf  or  Durga,  This  cemfusion 
betiveen  the  two  pairs  of  the  Hindu  and  Buddhist 
(livinities  is  palpable  in  the  Hindu-Buddhist  vernacular 
literature  of  India. 


iiirljM  najiinsti  tjr  7»Mhaf^  sarva  paiii-vapmi 

filiflni  hilB-rrASj/a  pB>ica-/rur(na  sanisfSifBh  || 

&pady,*dam  udnjah^ra,- 
ivnyat&~kaTvya-bhmTia  dn'ga-kama-iiukha-sthita] 

Harva-kaipa-vmua^hnm  nrfpmpn»<ra  iiiriiltuld  J| 

imrn  na  jnna^ti  ye  nttn/ah  sorva-Hrt-deha-samithitiim  I 

pfinai^kar^mi  mimthiiUjul 

bhftfSavatUdvcmviijnm 

fumbayitva  mmahiigya  cahnantrayatK  whh|  ^ 

devi  devl  mithfi-mmyajh  rnhasyath  ca*l{.dudttbha>rt\  etc. 

MS.  (R.A,S.B,,  No.  0080)  pp.  i(D).2(A). 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OP  THE  TANTRIC  BUDDHISTS  188 

The  Buddhist  Tantric  literature  of  the  Satigiti 
class  (t.e.,  where  Lord'  Buddha  liimsclf  is  depicted  as 
the  preacher  of  the  truth  contained  in  the  body  of  the 
book)  invariably  begins  with  the  sentence— coani 
maya  s^rutRm  eka&niin  samaye  bhogavan  sarva-tatha- 
gata-kaya-vak-citta-k  rdaya-vaj  ra-yo»it~bhagesu  vija- 

hara.  The  general  meaning  of  the  sentence  is — ‘It  is 
heard  by  me  that  once  upon  a  tin^e,  the  Lord  sported 
in  the  heart  of  super-human  knowledge  arising  out  of 
the  body,  speech  and  mind  of  all  the  Tathagatas*. 
But  the  line  has  been  exjdained  tn  \'^arious  ways  in 
various  Tantras  ami  their  comnienlaries.  Of  course, 
as  pointed  out  before,  in  many  cases  the  interpretation 
is  absolutely  sectarian  and  as  such  purely  arbiti'arj% 
The  word  h/uiga  may  be  (and  has  often  been)  explained 
to  mean  the  six  super-human  qualities,  viz.,  all 
sovereignty  (aisuarifa),  energy  (ulryw),  fame  (ya«tts), 
beauty  (sri),  knowledge  (/wana)  and  detachment 
;  and  taking  this  meaning  the  above  line 
may  be  explained  in  the  following  way  :  the  lord  shone 
in  bliss  in  the  transcendental  qualities  belonging  to  the 
body,  speech  and  mind  of  the  Tathagatas.  But  the 
Gukya-s^iddki  of  Padmavajra  says — ‘  Tliere  is  renowned 
Prajfia  who  is  divine  and  who  sanctions  all  fulfilment ; 
that  which  remains  in  her  is  called  the  syllable  bhaga, 
— that  is  the  pure  truth  ;  and  1  have  worshipped  it 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  absolute, '  ^  Here  it  seems 
that  the  truth  (tattva)  that  remains  in  union  with 
Prajna  is  the  Lord  himself,  I’hus  the  aphorism  (euam 
maj/d,  etc,)  means  that  the  Lord  remains  in  union  with 
Prajna  in  the  form  of  the  tatttia.  .4gain  it  is  said,  that 
the  Lord  of  mind  is  the  bkagavdn  and  Prajna  is  the 
Vajra-yosit  (the  adamantine  woman),  and  there  (in  the 
I^'fl/ra-yosit)  sported  the  I,,ord  in  the  form  of  great 


^  mddhi^pmdn  jtrajur^li 

ijat  bJwgnm  ity  | 

ton  mayo  ^uddho-totim-hhiiQm  »evitmh  pnranmrihufoh  || 

Guhyit-^iddhi,  MS,  p>  9, 


T^fN’TRTC  BUDDHISM 


134 

bliss,  ‘  Again  it  is  said,  that  all  non^ionstr active  and 
unis^ersal  knowledge,  condensed  into  a  mass,  is  tlie  void- 
element  in  the  form  of  the  h/iaga,*  This  void-element 
or  ^tmynfd  is  the  Prajna ;  and  the  Prajna  is  depicted 
as  the  eternal  and  infinite  object  of  joy  of  the  I^rd  of 
elements  (Bkiif  a-natfta)  ;  she  is  pure  in  the  beginning, 
in  the  middle  and  in  the  end, — and  she  comes  from 
Fn/ra-knowledge  and  remains  as  Sat}ivr«i  (provisional 
or  phenomenal)  j  she  is  known  also  as  fmrnic-ntudra  ,* 
and  moved  by  her  kindness  towards  the  beings  she 
condescends  to  take  human  forms  (as  women).  * 

In  spite  of  the  above  we  may  say  that  whatever 
might  have  been  the  original  meaning  of  the  epithet 
vajra-yo^t-bhaga,  it  began  to  be  taken  in  later  times 
in  its  sense  as  the  female  organ ;  and  the  Lord  (repre¬ 
senting  Lord  Buddha),  instead  of  being  conceivetl  as 
preaching  in  the  assembly  of  the  adept,  began  to  be 
conceived  os  dallying  with  Prajna  or  his  female 
counterpart  and  this  will  be  confirmed  by  the  manner 
in  which  the  dialogues  of  the  ^akarnava  (ed.  by  MM. 
II.  P.  Sastri)  are  introduced.  * 


^  bhaguvan  iti  nirdistajii  pmbftuftl 

pmjfia  ml  ^avajri^u-tmaha  || 

vimhoTa  tatah  iyfinfm  M-mQhfisukha-v^jrinnh  || 

ftifrf.,  Pp  17, 

*  mrL^ikaJpaka^sar^mjjla-fmtm^  pindlkftnth  iu  | 

Krtrtta(vi)  If  at  ifidgnrn  ^fciirfl-rrip^’Jiii  tai  kha-dhaium  iti  twirlciflil 

p.  17, 

namnd  prujile^ti  vikhffdtd  d(Ji-fniarffcya-iiffl-ntrinal4  ] 

9thiin  sa}hvftti-TBpcnQ  fii  v(i}Ta-}Mn{^-mmbhavB\ 
kfiTifiQ-mudre^ti  vikhpdla  | 

ianam  Mrii^a  I 

p,  14. 

^  The  text  begins  witb  the  liiiti — et'nm  rnitf/S  ifT^itritn  ^kasjnm 
S(i  nwji'^  h  hiiffavdn  im^hd-vJr^-h'aTii  ( h  }  mrvn-^ta  f Aa 

Then  the  Mnhavirt^varfl  be^s  t* 

nurrfi'te  his  experiences  in  the  but  the  goddess 

’^'arahS  interferes  niid  pub  questions  to  the  Lord«  and  the  Iword  goes 
™  replying  to  her  questions  nnd  refflov^ing  all  he?  doubts. 
]}tikf{rna^ii  (Sastri)i  p.  135.. 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TAN THIC  BUDDHISTS  133 

(iv)  (J^ectfan)  uiiil  Maharaga  {Grcal 

A^ection), 

I 

Another  factor  to  be  noticed  in  esoteric  Buddhisnv 
is  the  conception  of  rti^a  which  ordinarily  means  deep 
attachment.  In  the  it  has  been  said  — 

*  Neither  attachment  (ro^a)  nor  detachment  (oiVoga), 
nor  any  intermediate  stage  is  perceived ;  here  the 
nature  of  rdgo  is  attachment  and  the  nature  ol  nirdga 
is  arrest  (mradho)  *.  *  The  word  raga  is  also  used  for 
A'arund.  In  the  I*m/nopd|/fl'Uinit%oj/fl-siddA<  it  is  said 
that  fcrpd  or  compassion  is  called  raga  because  it  makes 
happy  <ra7Vjati)  or  saves  (roAsttff)  all  the  beings  who 
are  deeply  immersed  in  the  sea  of  sorrow.  In  the  Jvala- 
vali-vajTa'indla-lufitTa  we  find  the  word  raga  used  for 
Upaya,  ’  But  gradually  the  word  began  to  acquire  the 
meaning  of  intense  and  transcendental  bliss  arising  out 
of  the  sexo-yogic  practice,  which  is  the  means  or  the 
expedient  (updpa)  for  attaining  the  Bodhieitta  or  tine 
Sahaja  which  is  of  the  nature  of  great  bliss  (mafia- 
sukha).  in  the  Knyd-sarngrafic  it  is  said  that  the 
iicctar-like  Bodhieitta  is  to  be  meditated  on  as  melt- 


Againl — 

kiiihmjaniu  si3dJiiT  \\ 

tiiMtfimy  ahfl  m  a  /id  f  £t?u-|?cfrd  m-h  r  txikam  \ 

frdf/icit^drrit  Kiammata  Hprvekdgrata-ttima  || 

Ibid.,  p«  IST. 

^  ua  TsgQ  na  ca  j 

tatra  Tuga  dsakli-tuk^^uno  vmigo  nirodhum  nia/aiitl 
MS-  p- 

See  al5«  /leru/fn-lunlm*  MS,  p.  22(BJ+ 

Cfu  alfio,— rffim-lfd/ta-fHritro  quoted  in  tlie  CaiQhgHC  0}  Suns. 
Buddhist  MSS.,  R.A.S.B.,  VoL  1,  p-  100. 

Cy.  also, — na  Tdgo  ipu  vitS^un  fu  mndb^mnd  ito^jjdfnbbj/uff  | 

rrctf/dnd»f  varfanud  soinbinlbiV  uci^ati-  ||| 

Buddha -frn/>6Jrt-^cJw(Ta-(iA'a  of  Abhayalsura  Gupta,, 
MS,  (R.A-S.B.,  No.  3S27)  p. 

■  WLtanadddu-^riuhdfd^ah  uthifo  yutra  napm/ntiAroh  1 

MS,  p,  lOlB). 


136 


TANTHlC  BUDDHISM 


ing  through  mahsmgo.'  In  the  Hevaira-tantr-  uUo 
we  find  that  the  Lord  Supreme  and  Ids  Sakti 
deep  union  iu  the  nature  of  Sahaja-bliss  through  the 
affection  of  intense  emotion.’  In  justification  of  the 
sexo-yogic  practice  in  esoteric  Buddhism  it  has  often 
been  said  that  man  is  bound  through  emotion  or  at- 
taclimenl  and  he  is  again  liberated  through  tliat  verj" 
emotion,  ’  It  is  further  discussed,  if  perfect  knowledge 
is  attainable  through  the  emotion  of  intense  attach¬ 
ment,  then  all  beings  attached  to  worldly  objects  and 
sex-emolions  miglit  have  been  delivered;  but  it  is 
warned  that  only  by  enjoying  objects  the  incessant 
bliss  arising  out  of  great  emotion  {muharaga-Hukha) 
cannot  be  realized  ;  wiahdraga-suA’/ia  can  only  be  real¬ 
ized  after  one  has  attained  perfect  knowledge  about  the 
immutable  nature  of  the  objects  which  transcends  the 
threefold  principles  of  defilement  fh/iasatrai/a).  It 


■  mrtha-Tti'Vi-n 

In  the  commentarr  of  the  rflgfl  hai  Wn 

expluLneff  as  the  mac  emotions  !«*«) 

MHHrrtiJUHi  ?ti'  rfni^!«fa-ifHnooH-rasrt-Ji(ihaa»n/  B.  N.  fauns,  No-  S3. 
U.  30(A>.  In  the  commentary  of  the  hhh  Dohn  of  iht  fyofmk^ 
of  Ksiiha-pndfl  the  word  has  been  explained  id  the  toUow- 

ine  mannw,— “The  anion  of  Prtiiiia  ^d  tpaya  is  the  union 
IhMC,  he  (the  Yo^n)  is  the  hero,  beeaa^  he  controls  ojl 
hv  the  strcniilh  of  his  incessant  and  ink-nsc  emotion  inwAAm^o). 
itUpTn)n^I>i,i,a^or  /r 

ccftinnrt-imifH'jrrt^Sa-tiifJertu  viraga’-dtilatmil  virahf  [MS.  B.  N. 

No  47  I).  41(B)1.  Ajzairt  jufff'hni  uiftanrimfci*  (m  the  MiBif  Doha) 
U Vtod  as.-‘Exp^i«.ces  undischarged  bliss  of  the  nature  of 
intent  emotion  (mrtfuirfl^a)  through  his  uj  union  SHr^n- 

omiWiflUoO  ty  arthafyf  MS. 

njfllo-rdg<i'imrtt;jertfl  fflhojfl'ncmdB-svflrJlfKifBh  | 

MS.  p.  S5(B). 

»  rii'ViiP  I’rtdhjfnfi.  lofco  riij'fHaa'u  hi  inticynkl 
utrKiritrt-h/Hlivmd  hi/  c«(i  m  jiMffl  ernddhu-JirfftiAfni^ 

Quoted  in  tlie  Comm*  of  the  Doha?  oi  Kanhu-pttdfl* 

MS.  B.  N.  Sans.  .Vo,  17..  p-  43(B).  .  „  , 

In  the  Si(bhdajtfi-J(iTiiigTO/ia  this  verse  is  □scribed  to  the  Truja- 

also,— iiaiiijofc  tUco  vahnidah&ih  ro  rpftnijia| 

MS.  <R..\.S.B.,  No. 

eoao)  p.  22(B), 


imOLOGICAL  posmos  of  the  TaNTRIC  BUDDHISTS  13t 


is  further  confirmed  by  the  authority  of  the  Jiidna- 
va}Ta-$amuccaya-mabd-yoga-tantra  where  it  is  said 
that  those,  wlio  are  attached  only  to  sex-intercourse, 
never  attain  perfect  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  intense 
emotion  (mahdraga) ;  on  the  other  hand,  he  who, 
through  the  intense  joy  arising  out  of  the  sexo-yogic 
practice,  perfectly  knows  tlie  nature  of  the  principles 
of  dchlement  (prajtrfy-dfehflsa)  can  enter  into  the  bliss 
of  intense  emotion  (iRahdrdga-SMfrho).  *  Thus  it  is 
clear  that  the  intensity  of  bliss  through  wliieh  the 
mind  attains  a  transcendental  stage  where  all  the 
l»rincipies  of  phenometialisation  and  defilement  vanish 
away,  is  the  mahdrdga.  In  the  ^Jdft’iKi-t’ojra-pnnjflra 
it  has  been  said  that  the  Yogin  of  the  nature  of  great 
emotion  and  absorbed  in  the  Samddhi  of  intense  emo¬ 
tion  should  adorn  and  adore  the  ^/ohomHclrd  through 
deep  attaehineiiL  to  great  emotion.  *  TJie  w'orld  is  pro- 
duce<.i  through  emotion  and  is  again  destroyed  through 
the  abandonment  of  it  by  mere  indulgence  in  sex- 
passions  and  dtscliarge  of  the  matter  without  knowing 
tlie  fflftca)  ;  by  the  knowledge  of  its  transcendental 
nature  miiitl  becomes  the  A'^ajra-sattva.*  Again  it  is 
said  in  the  Citta-visuddhi-prakarana  that  man  is  affect¬ 
ed  by  his  emotional  and  passionate  mind,  but  is  also 
liberated  throvigh  the  enjoyment  of  passion.  *  The  wise 
should  save  himself  from  passions  with  the  help  of  the 
passion.  * 

So,  it  is  clear  from  the  above,  that  the  word  rdga 
was  used  to  signify  inlease  bliss  of  emotion  which  is 
produced  through  the  methodical  and  weli-controlled 


‘  Com.  Ms.  B.Jf.  Suns.  No.  p.  'l'l(A)'.  See  also  pp. 

“  umhii~fdg&-nUfa^cna  mahd^m^a^Vfibhdvat^h] 
mnha-taga-sufimdhi^tho  mahil-mndT^rh  pzait^dhatjrt  {| 

*  faga-hsepat  kiQifum  gaffihj 

v4ijra-rag£t^punjMn^t  vujm-mttvo  j| 

Quoted  in  ihti 

*  mjiiaie  ragu-bhogenn  muegitte  j| 

Vctsc  35p 

*  Jin'll  [| 

Verse  67, 


O.P.  10^18 


138 


TANTRIC  BUDDHIISM 


union  of  the  Pi  ajha  and  the  Upuya  ;  it  is  tins  emotion, 
wliicli,  because  of  its  higfhest  intensity,  would  absorb 
alt  the  other  constructive  functions  of  the  mind  within 
it  and  thus  would  bring  about  the  liberation  of  the 
Yogin* 

(v)  famurasa 

Closely  associated  with  the  idea  of  ruga  or  trans¬ 
cendental  emotion  is  the  idea  of  sartiarasa  or  the  same¬ 
ness  or  oneness  of  emotion.  In  a  deeper  sense  sama- 
rasa  is  the  realisation  of  the  oneness  of  the  universe 
amidst  all  its  diversities, — ^it  is  the  realisation  of  the 
one  truth  as  the  one  emotion  or  the  all-pervading  bliss. 
The  meaning  of  sainarosa  is  >vell  explained  in  the 
Hevajra-tantra,  where  it  is  said  that,  in  the  Sahaja  or 
the  ultimate  stage,  there  is  the  cognition  of  neither  the 
Prajna  nor  the  Upaya,  Lliere  is  no  sense  of  difference 
anywhere.  In  such  a  stage  every  thing  whether  the 
lowest  or  the  middle  or  the  best— all  should  be  realised 
as  the  same/  The  self  should  lie  realised  as  neither 
something  static  nor  something  dytiainic; — through  the 
transcendental  meditation  on  the  underlying  oneness 
of  the  cosmic  j>rinciple  every  thing  should  be  view-ed 
as  of  the  same  character  and  function.'  The  w'ord 
samaraso  has  been  explained  here  thus, — mma  means 
the  *  sameness  ’  ami  rasa  belongs  to  its  cycle  (eafcra) ; 
thus  sarnurasa  means  the  oneness  of  the  nature  of  all 
that  is  there  in  the  cycle  of  existence,’  SaumruffO 
actually  means  the  realisation  of  self  in  the  whole 
universe  or  tiie  realisation  of  tlje  universe  as  the  self. 
Tlie  universe  is  said  to  have  come  out  of  ttie  self,  it  is 
pervaded  by  the  self — nothing  else  is  fomid  anywhere. 

‘  hina-maHhtf&-tkTifU'\jiy  fiu  anifom  j/rtwi  tani  ca  \ 

Ilcvofm-inaim,  MS.  p.  22(B). 

^  St hlm^ahm  jr;«Mi  »ftrve  timVti  tmivu^hnm\ 

tativti-hhlvitnaih  J| 

IbitL^  MS*  p.  22(B)~23(A). 

*  mmurn  (tiiyain  ii^j  ukiinh  rti^uh  Kin  rfrtM 

tamaratun  Ju  efai6hat'(i(i,’«f«  ffend't'tttrnn  frlitniyate  H  f^ii 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TlNTRIC  BUDDHISTS  139 

This  realisation  of  the  univ^erse  as  the  self  is  called  the 
suafanirj/am  ‘  which  is  explained  in  the  commentary  as 
the  state  of  absorption  in  the  bliss  of  self-realisation. 
All  existence,  static  and  dynamic  including  grass, 
plants  and  creepers,  etc.,  are  to  be  realised  as  the  highest 
truth  of  the  nature  of  the  self ;  amongst  them  there 
is  nothing  which  is  other  than  the  self,— for  the 
ultimate  nature  of  all  things  is  ‘great  bltss' 
subham)  which  is  to  be  first  realised  v^dthin  the  self.* 
At  that  time  the  five  elements  earth,  water,  air,  fire  and 
ether  shake  off  the  distinctive  features  of  diversity  and 
in  no  way  do  they  disturb  the  oneness  of  the  transcend¬ 
ental  emotion  ;  heaven,  earth  and  hell  become  one 
within  a  moment  and  they  can  no  more  be  recogniset! 
as  the  self  or  the  not-self, '  In  the  Abhiseka-patafa  of 
the  same  text  we  see  that  the  Guru  (or  the  Preceptor) 
should  explain  to  the  disciple  (and  also  make  him 
realise)  the  soma  rasa,  ‘  whiifli  is  nothing  but  a  know-, 
ledge  to  be  realised  within,  which  is  free  from  the 
notions  of  the  self  and  the  not-self,  which  is  sky-like, 
stainless,  void,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  both  existence 
and  non-existence  and  which  is  the  ultimate  truth ; 
it  is  a  combination  of  both  Prajiia  and  Upaya — bereft 

^  mqd'-bMuffrfr  ft  I  jagftt-mnwh  vaid-bhavom  bhuvaTta-fraifam  \ 
vy&ptam  idam  aanmm  /^gaf  '| 

matva  fw  ti/ii  jcarin^lhrtfzft  | 

m  hidkyati  na  mndeho  mmdn-ptinyo'pi  mAnavah  |j 
pHfif  fflfftw 

JirSlUFifri/fint  hi  tntn  r/i1#i  (  ?)  || 

Ibid.,  MS.  p.  !>3(A).  ^ 

^  sihira^calM  ca  ye.  f 

bhAvtjnjtie  irai  ptirarpi  lultvi^m  dtiiia-iiiQi'a-svarwpflfcflWi  H 
ic&Am  eJeam  param  [ 

bhavet  mddhih  »vu-mmveduA  hibh&vuna  || 

Ibid.,  MS.  p.  2a(B). 

^  pTthivl  Aptix  rq  icjn  dkAmm  ruq  ra  | 

tfliiTidf  .furue  ca  I'adhyattte  ^va-para’^mhvitti-vedanam  i| 

rA'a-muffij-  bhaVet  frsnnat  | 

^va-pnni'^bhuva-^^nialprfia  naiva  iahynte  || 

Ibid.j  MS.  p.  24(A). 

*  kAriiavyan  ca  tatmiva  mmammm  Ki^ya-j!iicam}n  ji 

ibid.f  MS,  p.  27(A). 


140 


TaKTRIC  BITDDHISM 


of  both  raga  and  vimga  ;  that  is  the  life  of  the  crea¬ 
tures,  the  ultimate  and  imniti table,  ail-pervading  and 
belonging  to  all  the  bodies— that  is  the  great  life  iden¬ 
tified  with  the  universe, '  Thus  samaram  in  its  philo¬ 
sophical  bearing  means  the  same  thing  as  the  advaya 
or  the  yuganaddftuJ'  In  the 

tattva-siddhi  it  Jias  been  said  that  when  one  enters  into 
the  state  of  Mahasukha,  produced  through  the  union 
of  Prajna  and  Upaya,  a  state  free  from  all  thought 
constructions,  the  whole  world  becomes  of  the  nature 
of  a  unique  emotion  in  the  form  of .  Mahamkha. 
Through  this  unique  emotion  of  bliss  the  whole  world 
as  static  and  dynamic  lakes  the  form  of  Muhasukha 
and  all  become  one.  * 


In  the  Carya-padas  and  the  Dokas  of  Saruha  and 
Kanlm  the  word  samarasa  is  used  freely  in  the  sense  of 
advaya.  It  is  said  in  a  song  of  Bhusuka-puda  tiiat  as 


bracer  iiianatU  fnm~}iara-mmv}tii-varjtUi»i  f 
vinijam  xunymU  libtlva-bbavi-tmakmh  iiamm  |- 
pra}iio-p6ya-vtjatimifrQiii  rSga-Tn^a-vhartittiml 

m  eva  pru^wam  pranaht  :id  tva  iMTattiu-kxarak  || 
evastm  tarva^^he  uj/diruirtAi'raA  | 
sa  iiHiha-pramh  sa  ci'a’sdM  jnganmay'ah  fl 

in  n.^  in  roadings  ore  olso  found 

0/.  r^hcT  the  where  it  is  mjd  thot  jtflMias.jrd  is  the 

that  satnaram  i»  the 

unifiue  knowledge  about  ah  existence, 

Trtgtfn  cQb)a  vifaguH  ta  miSnkrtaht  nnirijifarH  | 
tatha  Taga-urtigabbyum  fkah  sHimamsak  ksonahl 
samariimk  mrvn-bMt^nilm  samnyas  iv  rJtfi  iicyir^fl 
*Tn  IK,,  j,‘  .  j.  I  ,  Samptitiko,  MS.  p.  10(B). 
that  of  KuddilVpada  it  h  said 

l™!fi  tTanseendental  knowledHc  of X 

form  of  mmaraga,  they  are  aon-diml  in  nature. 

advaya-kora-itarL-aii  tu  dvaynm  etai  nil  I’tduotel 
Sflvwtn  wtnnrosd-karem  acintya.jSkmi.jambhmaL  Jj 
-  ..  (CX.B.),  p.  Ui«(B>, 


pariUjakta- 

ttpaga1a-ka. 


THE0L0GIC.4L  POSITION  OF  THE  TaNTHIC  BUDDHISTS  141 

water  mixed  vrith  water  leaves  no  difference  of  anv 
kind,  M  also  the  jewel  of  mind  enters  the  sky  of  sama- 
rasa.  In  somarasa  both  the  positive  and  negative 
aspects  of  the  mind  vanish;  it  is  pure  and  free 
from  all  existence  as  well  as  non-existence.^  Where 
the  mind  sets  m,  all  bondage  is  torn  off,— there  in 
a  non-dual  state  every  thing  becomes  same,  tlierc 
IS  neither  the  Sudra  nor  the  Bralmiana. '  Samarasa  is 
that  state  where  the  mind  enters  into  tlie  vacuitv  as 
water  enters  into  water;  it  is  tlie  receptacle  of  all  merits 
and  demerits.  *  It  is  said  by  Kanha-pada,— *  He  who 
has  made  his  mind  steady  in  samarasa  winch  is  the 
Sahaja,  becomes  at  once  perfect,  no  more  will  he  suffer 
from  disease  and  death.*  If  the  mind  is  absorbed  in 
his  (mind's)  wife  (i.e.,  siii^yata)  as  salt  is  absorbed  in 
water,  there  follows  samarasa  which  is  on  uniciue  state 
of  mind  with  a  never-failing  flow  of  oneness.  *  This 
^amorasa  or  the  samarasya  is  the  union  of  the  Praiha 
and  the  Upaya.  *  In  the  Hindu  Tantras  also  the  word 
samarasya  is  extensively  used  in  the  sense  of  the  union, 
or  rather  the  oneness  of  emotion  proceeding  from  the 
union  of  Siva  and  Sakti. 


'  jinm  jah-  jmnia  itiUn  bheda  tta  /Ira| 
finw  tiiana  (rNomnii,  Si,;.)  rafltia  (aana.  Sic.) 


gaatta  sainaa 
Var^a-padti.  Song  No.  13, 


i*!.'  jomdi'asf 


(^astTl's  Edilion), 


*  jnhi  jai  citto  iahi  xunaliu 

^  _  Dnfta  o!  Tillopoda,  No.  M,  (Dr.  Basthi^s  Edition). 
javve  mhmn&na  jUi  tuUoi  VQtitlhanal 

tavve  jariirjrtTJo  sakajr  vajjtti  (tou  mrfda  wo  voinhu-nn  || 
Doha  of  Saraha  No.  4®.  -  -  u 

‘  iaita  vi  paifai  jdaki  jitJu  tattai  «aiftarn«n  ft(„  | 

•losagwfKlflra  vatiha  parivahkha  koi  'I 

Doha  No,  7+,  ■  ii 


jr^a  hia  samtiTiisE  nfatrinnA  raa  \ 

Kiddho  jro  ;jn^u  iioa  /VdifiaMfidlin  m  bhSa  I' 

DohS  No.  10,  ■  ' 

•  /mm  hna  yiUijiti  jMtiithi  fima  g^nrini  fai  df fa  | 
sBinnriisa  jdi  tnkkhanc  jai  punu  te  sama  nitia  11 
Doha  No.  32.  ‘ 

'  iira/rlo-pajo-tiwAa-gifAj^am  Mmiirawi.ldfctffllm  (  ?)  ucuate 
Subhafttasamgraha,  p.  tJO.  '  * 


142  TlSTRlC  BUDDHISM 

(vi)  Mahdsiikha  (5upre?Jte  Biiss)  As  The  Final  Goal'. 

Niyvdna  And  il/dhasuWia 

The  next  important  thin.?  to  he  considered  is  the 
conception  of  nirca^a  as  ISIalmsukha.  The  problem  of 
making  out  the  exact  implication  of  the  conception  of 
Min?ana  is  rather  a  stumbling  block  with  the  Buddhist 
scholars  ;  the  reason  for  it  is  that^  though  it  is  the  most 
highly  spoken  of  in  many  of  the  canonical  and  philoso- 
phical  texts,  it  is,  and  by  nature  could  he,  the  least  ex¬ 
plained.  Not  that  its  nature  has  been  least  discussed, 
hut  that  out  of  all  the  controversial  discussions  it  is 
not  possible  to  form  any  definite  notion  about  it,  and 
in  general  it  is  the  unspeakable  transcendental  nature 
of  ^ifn^naa  that  has  variously  been  emphasised. 
Buddha  himself  observed  the  principle  of  significant 
silence  with  regard  to  the  problem  of  nirvana  and  it  is 
in  consonance  with  his  general  agnostic  attitude  to¬ 
wards  all  the  metaphysical  problems.  According  to 
some  scholars,  however,  the  problem  of  mVi'ano  was 
no  vital  question  with  primith-e  Buddhism  which  was 
concerned  more  with  the  four  noble  truths  (arprt- 
sotya)  than  witli  the  problem  of  the  after  world/ 

(.A)  XiBVANw  As  A  Positive  State  Of  Bliss 

Apart  from  the  controversial  views  of  the  scholars 
as  to  whether  the  conception  of  nirvaiio  in  early  Bud¬ 
dhism  was  positive  or  negative,  we  may  say  for  our¬ 
selves  that  tliough  tlie  Buddliist  conception  of  nirt'ano 
from  the  early  time  may  admit  of  negative  interpreta¬ 
tions,  the  description  of  its  positive  character  is  not 
also  wanting.  The  etymological  meaning  of  the 
word  ^  is  an  eternal  stoppage  to  a  flowj  and  in  this  sense 
we  mav  take  the  word  to  imply  the  complete  cessation 

'  r»|p‘  Tlie  PHneipifi  nj  IIitlMutiiiu  BwWfcitfJii  by  StiKuki, 

ch.  xni. 

»Tbc  void  TifTT!JS«n  is  derived  ss  in>+  {fmwd  with  the  ^  vrl 
+  ta  Tiie  prefix  nir  LmpUes  tK'gntion,  the  root  <va  mcfliiB  to  bloir 
and  the  suffix  ta  is  uddtd  in  the  impersonni  voice  bfravn- 


1 


i 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TANTBIC  BUDDH[ST5  143 

of  the  cycle  of  birth  and  death.  The  derivation  of  the 
word  also  gives  the  meaning  of  the  blowing  out  as  of  a 
lamp,  or,  the  eternal  tranquillity  resulting  from  the 
cessation  of  all  the  and  ^ams/i'dras  and  the 

consequent  escape  from  the  life  of  birth  and  death. 
From  this  idea  of  traiiquillisation  the  word  developed 
the  meaning  of  perfect  peace.  From  the  discourse  of 
Reverend  Nagasena  with  king  Milinda  in  the  ilfdinda- 
panlio,  (which  is  a  Pali  work  of  antiquity)  it  appears 
that  wliatcver  might  have  been  the  philosophical  con¬ 
cept  of  nirua^a,  it  was  something  positive  so  far  as  the 
popular  belief  vvas  concerned/  The  clement  of  nirudna 
(nibkana-dhatu)  is  said  to  be  quiescent  (saata),  bliss 
(sukha),  excellent  (panUa),  it  is  to  be  attained  througli 
perfect  knowledge  (pannd)  by  the  removal  of  the  deep- 
rooted  impressions  {sankhdra).  Just  as  a  man  burn- 


^  Nigasena  cxpluinf!  to  the  Iviog  Lhat  it  is  uqI  possible  to  speak 
of  any  d^ipite  form  (rii/Mi)  or  tiitoatioii  or  time 

or  evidence  (jHitmtm)  of  niTvana  either  tiuough  any  example 
(opaniind)  or  cauiie  or  reason  or  sy^stem  of 

iiirruiNi;  but  as  we  cannot  say  anything  about  the  denizens  of 
heaven j  yet  wc  do  believe  m  iheir  existence,  so  also  the  existence 
of  nirv6na  should  be  believed  iti^  though  we  eatmot  say  sny thing 
about  it^  Neverthelesi;*  mn-fitiu  has  got  its  qualities  It 

contains  one  gutjta  of  the  lotus^  two  gufios  ol  water^  three  of 

medicine,  four  giciids  of  the  ocean,  hve  giinm  of  eating,  ten 
of  the  sky,  three  "wans  of  the  precious  jewel,  three  gutjitiB  of  red 
sandal,  three  of  the  soppi-iatfttda  (prepara  lions  from  butter) 

and  five  jJtiniiS  of  the  pefkk  of  the  mauntain.  As  the  lotus  is  never 
wet  in  water,  so  also  nirvana  is  never  affected  by  the  afRlctions 
(j:r^esa)»  As  water  h  cold  and  quenches  thirst ,  so  also  piiri'anu  Is 
enoL  and  calm  through  the  extinction  of  the  klcias  and  it  al^o 
quenches  our  thirst  {tan  Ad)  for  all  I  he  worldly  desires.  As  medicine 
(ogada)  is  the  cure  of  a  man  uffected  with  poison,  so,  fim^ana  is 
the  cure  of  all  the  {noison  of  affi lotions  Like  medicine 

Tjindwa  removes  all  sorrows  and  is  itself  jicetar  (nmefa).  Like  fooil 
mrumia  gives  us  strength  and  tiiergy  and  it  sustains  us  throughout. 
Again  like  the  sky  nirtiaioi  is  not  prudueed,  it  does  not  produce, 
it  jjs  meomprehensible,  uncrcate,  unveiled,  inhinte  like  the  sky*  Like 
a  precious  jewel  nin.-^aa  fulLils  otir  desires;  like  red  sandal  it  is  rare 
Olid  scented;  like  the  preparation  from  butter  (isfippt-niayda)  it  has 
colour  and  qualities  fgnnu-i’opnri-jiainpannani),  scent  of  gofxi  couduet 
(^fa-gandAa-soiiipauarjriii),  and  is  tasteful  (r024a^,*faiiipaanam)f  like  the 
mountoin  peak  it  is  Inlty,  immutable,  difficult  to  be  attained,  and 
destroyer  of  the  seeds  of  aHlictions. 


I 


144 


tantric  buddhism 


ing  i)i  a  great  fire  escapes  the  fire  through  his  own  effort 
and  enters  a  hretess  place  and  enjoys  supreme  bliss 
there,  so  also,  a  man,  wlm  through  deep  reflection  on 
the  nature  of  things  gets  rid  of  the  threefold  lire  of 
r«go  (passion),  dvena  (hatred)  and  moha  (attachment), 
obtains  which  is  supreme  bliss  (parama- 

Riikhu).'  Though  in  Pali  literature  we  often  find  iiirurtuu 
described  as  something  unspeakable,  yet  in  course  of 
poetic  description  we  find  it  described  as  the  supreme 
(param),  tranquil  (sanfa),  pure  (uisudd/ja),  excellent 
(panita),  cahii  (sanii),  immutable  (akkhara),  eternal 
(d/rruoa),  true  (sacca),  infinite  ((inaNtn),  uncliaiiging 
(GCCMfa),  permanent  (sassafa),  immortal  (ariiafa),  un¬ 
born  (a/flffl),  iincreate  (asamkhala,  ahata),  eternal 
(kevalaj,  all  good  (sfoa)  and  the  safety  of  Yoga  (yoga- 
kkhema},  etc.  It  is,  as  Rhys  Eavtds  puts  it,"  “the 
harbour  of  refuge,  the  cool  cave,  tlie  island  amidst  the 
floods,  the  place  of  bliss,  emancijiation,  liberation, 
safety,  tranquil,  tlie  home  of  ease,  the  calm,  the  end  of 
suffering,  the  medicine  for  all  evil,  the  unshaken,  the 
ambrosia,  the  immaterial,  tlie  imperishable,  the  abid¬ 
ing,  the  further  shore,  the  unending,  the  bliss  of  effort, 
the  supreme  joy,  the  ineffable,  the  detachment,  the 
holy  city,  etc.  In  the  Suttn-nlpatQ  niTviiifa  is  spoken 
of  as  the  quiescent.  In  the  ^lctjjhiftui-ji.ikuya  nirvunu 
has  been  described  as  a  higher  bliss  than  the  acquisition 
of  perfect  health  j  the  eightfold  path  alone  leads  to 
perfect  peace— to  ambrosia.'  In  the  Ahguttara  it  has 
been  said  that  a  man  by'^  removing  all  his  impurities 
attains  nirvano  and  thus  is  relieved  from  all  kinds  of 


’  Kd.  by  V,  Trenckner,  pp.  326-21. 

or  gctitTttl  ilificussion  on  oiri'-tittii  in  ihe  ^filindit^ptiaho  fii?e 

pp.  316-826. 

*  .1  Dtetujunrtj  o/  PdU  Liingiiase.  See  Uie  word  riibb^tin, 

*  Kdfitr'tt  nittfrfl^arii  Anfed,  etc.  ifrrrf.,  p.  tl^a. 

*  riroggtyjHtrumiltiibhii  mbbaitaih  parunuirit 

ftr  inn^^unaj;;  frftfwitrp,i  (Ji/i«lu-carniinjih  91 
.Udj/JitiHKi,  1,508,  ef,  Dhainmapada.  Vem.  a04. 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITIO^"  OF  THE  tIxTRIC  BL'DDHISTS  143 

sorrows-*  In  the  F(H)finn’i7aff/iri  iiiruaria  is  spoken  of 
as  an  immutable  state  where  there  is  no  suffering  any 
more/  In  the  T/ieri-gaf/ia  it  is  said  that  eternal  bliss 
can  be  attained  tlirougii  the  attainineut  of 
.471^11  ftara  describes  it  as  the  supreme  safety  attained 
through  Yoga.  Sanjittta-njttQya  describes  it  as  nectar- 
like  (ainatoffl  =  immortal?),  quiescent  and  inmiulrable 
(aniatam  santim  nibbtiria-pailam  acciita»i).  Similarly 
the  Dkammapada  speaks  of  it  as  the  path  to  peace** 
as  the  supreme  bliss,’  In  the  Katha-Tfatthu  it  has 
been  said  that  the  self  or  the  soul  (piigga/a)  is  not 
permanent  (sossafa)  like  nirvarfa,*  By  a  study  of  the 
views  of  Buddhaghosa  as  expressed  in  the  Visvddhi- 
maggo  against  the  Sautrantika  view  of  tlie  negative 
conception  of  tiirvana  we  may  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  according  to  Biidditaghosa  nitx'aaa  is  some  posi¬ 
tive  state  of  mind  readied  through  the  four  kinds  of 
ihanas.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  peace  (sonfi  (rt/richayrtm) 
and  is  a  never-failing  intuitiA^e  flow  (accidi-rasaiH), 
The  well-known  lines  of  the  Itivutluka,  viz,,  aft/ti 
bhikkhave  ajdtam  abhuiam  akatam  asankhatam  (there 
is  that,  0  Bliiksus,  which  is  unborn,  unoriginated,  un¬ 
create  and  unproduced)  also  suggest  a  positive  con¬ 
ception  of  nfiaiona. 

Without  multiplying  instances  we  may  conclude 
that  in  early  Buddhism  Ave  do  not  find  any  consistent 
and  clear-cut  conception  of  nm’nwa, — it  is  sometimes 
described  negaliA^ely  (particularly  by  the  Sautran- 
iikas),  but  sometimes  positively,  and  on  tlie  ivhole  it 

*  malam  Nffc’&flnft-Aarnpcrrfaml 

miiccfih'  mhba-dtikkh^hi  -ut  holi  mbbQ-mmjmda  1 

Anguttfimi  TV*  2419  (Quoted  by  Rhys  DavLds)i^ 

^  yathti  rjfi 

rfT?i4na-r(2f(^iir,  51, 

^  nibbaim-lthflfiC  vimuttA  U  piifM  ft-  actiiarh  itiikknm\ 
Tkitl^Sathar  350- 

*  eva  bruhatjn  nibbflnftih  f(csitam\ 

Dhammapitiht^  2S5^ 

^  etttm  yuth^^bJifitam  nibbQuam  pcirfaitmiPi  | 

203*  20  L 

*  no  (p.  (Quoted  by  Bihi  Dutta). 

O.P.  105—10 


146 


TaKTHIC  BUBDHISII 


seems  that  a  conscious  or  unconscious  positive  tendency 
predominates  over  the  negative  one. 

Coming  to  the  Maliayana  we  find  that  the  iladliya- 
mikas  spoke  of  nin^ana  not  as  sonietliing  which  is  to 
be  attained  through  the  destruction  or  arrest  of  any¬ 
thing  whatsoever,  it  is  but  the  complete  cessation  of  all 
mental  constructions.  It  is  the  destruction  of  nothing, 
the  attainment  of  nothing, — it  is  neither  annihilation 
nor  externa]  existence,  it  is  neither  the  supressed  nor 
the  produced^ — this  is  what  is  meant  by  nirt’aTio,  It  is 
extremely  diflic ult  to  conceive  what  this  niiucna  may 
be;  but  with  this  transcendentalism  of  Nagarjuna  we 
may  compare  the  transcendentalism  in  the  realisation 
of  the  Brahman  as  described  in  the  Upanisads  ;  but  the 
great  difference  between  the  Upanisadic  conception  of 
the  realisation  of  tlie  highest  truth  witli  its  conception 
as  found  in  Nagarjuna  is  that,  whereas,  in  spite  of  all 
tJie  negative  descriptions,  the  Upani^ds  are  definite  on 
the  point  that  in  the  realisation  of  the  Brahman,  or,  tiie 
complete  merging  of  the  self  in  the  absolute,  there  U 
infinite  positive  bliss, — Nagarjima  will  not  allow 
niruana  to  be  determined  by  any  categorical  descrip¬ 
tion  whatsoever. 

Candrakirti  in  liis  commentary  on  the 
Madhyu^nika-vHiu  however,  quotes  tlie  view  of  a 
school  of  thinkers  according  to  whom  there  are  two 
distinct  types  of  mVoana,— viz.,  mraiiiio  with  some 
residual  substratum  (sopddhi^^esa)  and  nirooiia  with¬ 
out  any  residual  substratum  at  all  (nirapad/n-sesa). ' 
In  the  Visuddhi-magga  also  Buddhaghosa  mentioned 
these  two  types  of  nirvdita.  In  Pali  literature  we  often 
find  mention  of  savupddhi-sesa-ntbbdiin  and  ana/jadfii- 
sesa-nfhbana  corresponding  to  the  above  division.  In 
the  Advaya~vajra-samgraha  also  ive  find  these  divisions 
maintained.  Prof.  La  Vallee  Poussin,  however,  is 
inclined  to  connect  these  two  divisions  of  niruowa  with 
the  Sautrantika  division  of  prati-samkhya-nirodha  and 


•  Cb,  XXV,  LSvi's  Edition. 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  tXNTRIC  BUDDHISTS  147 

apratisam/iJiyd-nfrod^ia,  We  may>  however,  refer  here 
to  the  conceptions  of  Sa»lpr^(jfla^a  and  the  Asairi- 
nraiJidfo  Samadhi  of  the  Patafijala-yoga  system.  _ 

We  have  seen  tliat  in  the  otlier  school  of  Mahayana 
Buddhism,  viz.,  the  school  of  Vijnana-vada,  the  ulti¬ 
mate  reality  began  to  be  more  and  more  positively  de¬ 
scribed,  and  consequently  the  conception  of  nirvana 
also  became  positive.  In  the  Tathuta-doctrme  of 
Asvaghosa  it  has  been  said  that  when  through  the 
eradication  of  the  root-instincts  or  the  complexes  the 
disturbance  in  the  subjective  realm  is  destroyed,  we 
become  free  from  all  processes  of  false  idealisation  and 
can  realise  the  truth  as  the  '  thatness  ’  or  the  ‘  oneness 
underlying  all  phenomena,  and  the  complete  eraihca- 
tion  of  individuation  and  the  realisation  of  the  that- 
ness’  as  the  oneness  or  the  totality  of  the  universe  is 
what  is  meant  by  nirvana.  In  such  a  state,  there  is  no 
activitv  of  the  consciousness,  and  through  the  cessation 
of  all  conscious  processes  there  remain  only  eternal 
calmness  and  quiescence.  In  the  Saundaraiianda 
Kdvya  of  Asvaghosa  it  has  been  said  of  jwi'vflna,  As 
the  light,  when  blown  out,  goes  neither  towards  tlie 
earth  nor  towards  the  space  above— neither  towards  any 
quarter,  nor  towards  what  is  not  a  quarter,  but  attains 
nerfect  calmness  due  to  tlie  complete  exhaustion  of  oil  , 
so  also,  when  one  attains  extinction,  one  goes  '^either 
towards  the  earth  nor  towards  the  space  above,  neither 
towards  a  quarter  nor  towards  what  is  not  a  quarter, 
but  due  to  the  annihilation  of  the  afflictions  attains 

eternal  quiescence.  ‘  ...  \ 

In  the  Vijhana-vada  doctrine  of  Asanga  and  \  asu- 
bandhu  nirvana  means  the  realisation  of  the  void- 
nature  of  both  the  self  and  of  the  external  objects.  But 
^unvata  with  them  is  no  nilnl,  d  is  not  the  ab^lute 
denk)  of  any  reality ;  it  is  but  the  negation  o  subject¬ 
ivity  and  objectivity,  pure  consciousness  (vijnapti- 

published  by  the  E.A.b.B-,  Ch,  verses 


148 


I^CNTRIC  BUDDHISM 


tnatrufa)  is  the  one  ultimate  reality.  In  nirvana  these 
grdkya  and  grdhaka  are  anniliilated,  but  the  pure 
consciousness  remains.  This  pure  consciousness  is  the 
a/jorwia-^ai/o, — ^it  is  the  uiidifferenLiated  absolute  one¬ 
ness.^  But  can  it  be  said  that  tliis  dharma~kdya  is  a 
positive  state  of  absolute  bliss  ?  The  ^'ijuatia-vadins  do 
not  make  any  definite  reply  to  this  question  ;  but  in  the 
Fi/napii-matrafG-s/ddAi  H  has  been  said  about  tlie 
nature  of  the  pure  consciousness,— “  It  is  the  immut¬ 
able  element  which  is  beyond  the  reach  of  all  menta¬ 
tion ;  it  is  alt  good,  permanent,  perfect  bliss,— it  is 
hbcration— the  substance  itself According  to  the 
\Jjjutna-viidiiis  there  is  no  heterogeneity  between  saiii- 
s«ro  and  tiimcna  ;  but  the  perfect  knowledge  of  the 
sanisarn  as  the  stla|;atQ  or  as  the  pure  consciousness 
(according  to  the  V'ijnaiia-vadiiis)  is  itself  niri’ann, 

(B)  NravAis’A  As  Mahasltcha  L\  The  Buddhist 

Taotras 

From  the  above  we  may  conclude  that  from  the 
early  period  down  to  the  period  of  Vijiiana-vada  the 
conception  of  niruaim  admits  of  positive  interpreta¬ 
tions,  at  least  in  a  popular  way,  if  not  in  the  strictly 
philosophical  sense,  and  it  is  descrEbed  in  some  places 
not  only  as  positive  but  as  intense  bliss.  Tfvis  concep¬ 
tion  of  nirvaija  as  intense  bliss  was  elaborated  to  a 
great  ien^h  by  the  Vajra-yajiists,  particularly  by  the 
Sahaja-yanists  where  nirvana  is  identified  with  intense 
bliss  or  Makdsukka.  *  Witli  them  Mirt’OTia  is  the  ulti¬ 
mate  reality, — ^it  is  the  Dharnia~kdya, — and  that  is  the 
Lord  Buddha-that  is  the  Vajra-dhara  or  the  \4ira- 
sattva;— it  is  the  .Vahasukfm  — it  is  the  Botlhicitta/ 


‘  TrithSika,  Verse  80- 

*  Frrfe,  SatTWecetd-gdinfl.farifrA,  quoted  in  the  Siibhd*itn- 

natiignthn^ 

*  T'litr,  quoii^  i,, 

p+ 

*  Ch.  s™  Cm™.  „„ 

nttam/taaffn  tmjaijts-nif7hiisiikftatii  etc.  MS  ]B  N  Sapii 
No.  S3,  p.  20(BJ.  ^ 


THEOLOGICAL  POSmOK  OF  THE  TlNTRlC  BUDDHISTS  149 

“it  is  the  Sahajai — it  is  pure  consciousness,  and  the 
nature  of  pure  consciousness  is  bibs,  ^ 

In  the  Buddhist  Tantras  the  element  of  niraanfi 
(nirDdna-dhdtu)  is  described  as  incessant  bliss  (i^otata- 
sukhamaya)j *  *  it  is  the  abode  of  both  enjoyment  as  well 
as  liberation;^  it  is  called  Makasukha.  where  there  is  no 
change  or  decrease,  ■*  It  is  the  seed  of  all  substance, 
it  is  the  ultimate  stage  of  those  who  have  attained 
perfection  ;  it  is  the  highest  place  of  the  Buddhas  and 
is  called  the  Sukhdvati  (the  abode  of  bliss)/ 

But  this  bliss  (sukka)  has  often  been  repudiated 
as  a  mere  t  bough  t-constr  net  ion  (uifrafpa),  whereas 
nirvana  is  the  annihOation  of  all  sorbs  of  thought- 
construction  ;  it  is  therefore  said  hy  Nagarjuna-pada  in 
his  ApTQtisthdna-prakdsa  that  as  long  as  there  flows  in 


*  Ciiturabhamna — MS.  (R.A.S,B.*  No.  -ISOI)  p.  T(B). 

■  Ch,  IV, 

^  t\{n^^^t-hhijnm  pitrO^h 

Guhiftt-siddhip  p,  ld(A). 

*  h&aya-v^ayn-vinirmukttith  h^J-mahds7ikh^^mfnit<\m  \ 

tbid,t  MS.  p*  Ifi(A)* 

*  tad^hljath  ert  pffmin  pndam] 

bnddhiknuijh)  lat  pornw  || 

Ibid^,  MS*  p* 

In  this  Gahya-siddhi  the  traiaacendrnlDl  arrest  {divya-mm^dhi} 
is  pJso  ctiaracteri^cd  as  of  the  nntiire  of  j^cot  bliss*  fC/*  divyn- 
^nm&dhmtlslhAyn  maha^ukka-i,uhhatntnktttu — MS*  p*  5 A,  tlA),  In 
fiiiDther  quotation  in  the  it  has  be^in  eoid  that 

those  wise  men  ^^■'ho  have  htm  abla  to  realise  the  nature  of  the 
IT  hole  anivfrsc  us  Sahaja — as  free  from  all  iinaginalion^as  the 
supportless  (fTira^iTm6uir»)p  have  attmned  I  he  slate  of  the  Sugata 
whieh  is  ot  the  nature  of  pore  and  intense  blifla.  In  the 
the  Vajraj^arift  yo|rft  has  tHcren  described  as  the  nuion  of  T^ajni  and 
Upflya  anti  as  of  the  nature  of  immutable  bLUs«  (Pi  158,  Sistii^s 
E^tion),  Id  this  ocean  of  existence p  ruflled  by  huge  waves  and 
with  poisonous  wiiter  and  lull  ol  ferocious  animab  of  passions  etc., 
bliss  is  the  only  shore,  (Hudhmm-mAiAf  Vol,  II,  p.  +4^),  In  the 
AVji/^-saffi°raha  the  path  of  cooler le  Buddhism  has  been  characterised 
as  the  ^vehicle  of  great  bliss^  (MS*  p*  TSA)*  In 

the  ,Sdi-fpifddfcn-fdnrm  it  ha^  been  said  tlial  there  is  no  grealer  vice 
than  detachment  (uirii^in)  and  no  greater  merit  than  blisjH  So  the 
eft  fa  should  al  ways  be  kept  absorbed  in  the  changeless  bliss*— 
riVogrif  ina)  jmmm  p^parh  wa  puni/aui  mkhatah  param  f  aiQ  kmra-^ 
sakhe  citiam  nive^yanUt  fforfii  /  Qi,mted  m  the  Comm,  of  the 

Doh^hosii  o(  Kinhupadn,  Doha  No.  10» 


tSNTRIC  BUDDHISM 


150 

the  mind  any  sort  of  thought-eon  struct  Jon  (utTcoIpo) 
every  thing  is  to  be  left  off ;  for,  even  that  which  is  of 
the  nature  of  bliss  and  makes  the  lieart  happy  is  itself 
a  mere  mentation ;  even  the  feeling  of  detachment, — 
nay,  both  of  attachment  and  detachment,  should  be 
cast  off ;  for,  all  these  are  main  causes  of  existence 
there  is  airuanu  nowhere  except  in  tiie  transcendental 
existence  of  the  self, ' 

In  a  Doha  Saralia-patla  warns  not  to  confuse  the 
truth  that  is  only  to  be  realised  within  ;  both  positive 
and  negative  thought-constructions  bind  the  man.  In 
the  final  stage  the  individual  consciousness  or  egohood 
should  merge  in  the  all-pervading  universal  conscious¬ 
ness  like  water  merging  into  water,  *  In  the  comment¬ 
ary  it  has  been  said  that  to  identify  the  final  state  with 
*■  *  ■  .  ■  ■ 
Svkha  is  a  mere  confusion.  No  positive  conception  of 

this  final  stage  nor  any  negative  conception  or  any 
construction  of  this  type  can  conduce  to  perfect 
enlightenment.  There  is  no  difference  between  a 
golden  chain  and  an  iron  chain,  for  both  will  bind  a 
man  and  therefore  both  are  to  be  avoided.  “  It  has 
further  been  said  that  the  wise  never  enter  into  any 
thought-construction  about  the  ultimate  state ;  for 
there  is  no  fundamental  difference  between  a  thought- 
construction  that  is  bad  and  the  one  which  is  good  ;  for 
both  will  bind  a  man  in  the  world  of  suffering  ;  no 


*  kaSfid  vikolpal^  prafrftnVfl(j  mniidji  ga  aaruah 

yo*tava*ittntda-tiipah  hfftayu-fuJtka‘ltarah  so*pi  garh^atpa- 

yad  uA  vdirdiftfR-hi’tas  tad  npi  ribha^an  to  el  bAavorya’ 

grah^itih 

JiiiT'flfifiJW  na^nyad  ftsfr  frvfirirf  fljij  vim^e  mTvikalp^-tmn- 

II 

Quotii^d  \u.  the  Comm,  on  the  CuTjfa  Song  Ko*  AI$o 
€f^  Cornni,  oti  the  Doha  No.  53  of  Sfirnha-piLda* 

^  masufnvitti  tiifz  fr  dhandk^  \ 

bfindha  || 

liitt  muna  vuimhn  re  nitmr  foij 
jfrmfl  /fj/fi  jiihhi  milante  soi  !| 

Snrnha-pud^ti  Doh^  No.  3^2. 

^  See  Comm,  on  Doha  No,  32  ot  Sfliaha-^ptido. 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITIO^f  OF  THE  TANTRIC  BUDDHISTS  I5l 

difference  is  produced  in  the  burning  capacity  of  fire 
through  the  change  of  fueJ  ;  if  fire  be  made  even  with 
the  logs  of  a  sandal  tree  it  will  burn  whenever  touched.' 
But  though  here  it  has  been  strongly  warned  not  to 
confuse  nirvajia  with  sukka,  yet  in  a  general  way 
nirvana  in  esoteric  Buddhism  has  been  cleseribed  all 
along  as  Makdsukha  and  it  is  identified  with  Maka- 
SffA:7ia.  The  advocates  of  Mahamkha  will  justify  their 
own  position  by  describing  Mabasukka  as  transcend¬ 
ing  all  kinds  of  thought-constructions,  it  is  an  ab¬ 
solutely  pure  emotion  of  bliss  in  wliich  all  the  acti¬ 
vities  of  the  mind  are  absolutely  lost.  ■ 

(C)  The  Cos^iological  and  Ontological 
Significance  of  Mahasukha 

As  Mahayina  Buddhism  often  speaks  of  nirvana 
as  the  ultimate  reality' — as  the  DItanna-kdya — so  also 
the  nature  of  this  Afahasa/cha  has  variously  been 
described  in  the  Buddhist  Taiitras  as  the  ultimate 
reality  transcending,  or  rather  absorbing  within  it, 
both  existence  (h/iaua)  and  extinction  (niruana). 
Mahasukha  is  something  wfiich  has  neither  tlic  begin¬ 
ning  nor  any  middles  nor  any  end ;  it  is  neither 
existence  nor  anniiiilation ;  this  transcendjental 
supreme  bliss  is  neither  the  not-self  nor  the  self. '  In 
the  Mahdsukha-prakdsa  {collected  in  the  Advaya- 

^  paramn-rthu-iikalpr'pt  na'voilyeta 
ka  hi  bhedo  vikalpasaa  ffw&fte  tri(i5IiVpt  v&  || 

n«*dkftm-bhedat  bhi'do^sti  vahm-dUhakatam  prflfrj 
spTiydtnhno  dnhottj  evit  ea»danmr  jvdJito’py  ostiu  |J 
Quoted  in  tht  Comm,  on  Dohii  No.'ss. 

^  (7.  “All  Ihoughit-construction  is  destroyed  in  sat-stiftAa*'. — 

■Si(  fr  AnSf  J  m  ^  ra  ^  A . 

Again, — ^“Tliai  supreme  Itimsocndentai  bliss  is  i-oid  and  jMjrfectly 
ptirc,  wheie  there  is  neither  any  vice  nor  any  merit",  sun  put  njraji- 
jana  parama-mtiha^ihfi  tahi  putina  no  pdva  []— Doha  quoted  in  the 
Uevajm-tantru. 

*  si  lia  anta  nn  mnptii  *fo  ^au  hAavo  »«« 
ehuso  pfirama  mahGsuka  rni(  parti  nati  appS^a  ]| 

Quoted  in  the  ffcra/ni-fanJra,  MS.  p.  61{A). 


152 


tanteic  buddhism 

iMfiftdsufchfl  is  dsscribed  as  the  Lord 
Vajra-satlva  of  the  nature  of  the  unity  of  Prajna  and 
Upaya ;  it  is  the  norndual  quintessence  of  all  the 
entities.'  It  is  further  said  that  perfect  wisdom  is 
never  possible  without  bliss;  perfect  wisdom  itself  is 
of  the  nature  of  bliss.* *  .411  objects  are  Mah^ulcha  by 
nature;  but  due  to  our  ignorance  they  appear  as 
poison  to  us.  *  It  is  said  by  Bhadra-pada  that  every 
thing  proceeds  from  supreme  bliss;  tiic  highly  luminous 
Prajna,  which  enables  a  man  to  attain  perfect  Buddha- 
hood,  also  proceeds  from  this  supieme  hlis.s,*  The 
body  of  knowledge,  which  is  undisturbed  and  un¬ 
changing  supreme  bliss,  itself  takes  the  form  of  the 
whole  universe.  *  In  the  Sampntika  it  has  been  said 
that  perfectly  pure  knowdedge,  wliicli  in  essence  i.s  the 
goddess  herself  (Prfl|na- goddess),  is  called  the  Vajra- 
sj^ttva— it  is  also  called  the  supreme  bliss  ;  it  is  self- 
originated — of  the  nature  of  Dharma-kaya  and  to  it 
belongs  Prajna,  absorbed  in  the  nature  of  Sithaja.  * 
Tlie  llevajra-tantra  describes  elaborately  the  nature  of 
sitkka  as  the  ultimate  reality.  It  is  t!ie  Dharma-kayUf 
it  is  the  Lord  Buddha  himself,  Sukha  is  black,  it  is 
yellow,  it  is  red,  it  is  white,  it  is  green,  it  is  blue,  it  is 
the  whole  universe:  it  is  PrajM,  it  is  Upaya,  it  results 
from  the  ultimate  union  ;  it  is  existence,  it  is  non- 


Adtwja-vnjfa-mmgruhn,  p*  50  {G.O.S>), 

^  tnikk^^bhaVi^  na  todhih  ijii  pni^rha-mpfrji  ] 

/hiiipp  p.  SO* 

^  tte^pi  tvarupfitnk  mahn^ukha-rupinnhl 

kintti  nvidtjit~va^t  vkavut 

Comm^  on  thi?  M^irmn-kalikit^tantra. 

*  Subh/mta-:itimgrnha* 

*  mrvn-kkmih  prayAtif  I 

hfi-kfiUt-cakfn^  MS.  {CanibndgK?*  Add.  No* 

*  icjrLitf-Jrii-f-Jti'firiipfriraHi  I 

Ufl7rn-*wj?fvii  iti  khijtltnih  pnimh  siikhfiifii  1| 

opbftji-rCpiiwi  I 

Id^atira  auAdjd  sthita  [[ 

Sampufj^i  MS.  p*  46(B). 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TaNTBIC  BUDDHISTS  153 

existence — it  is  the  Vajra-sattva.  ’  But  the  question 
is,  if  everytliing  be  by  nature  nothin"  but  il/ahasu^ha, 
what  is  the  necessity  of  any  origination  (utpada)  at 
all?  The  reply  is  that  sukha  is  not  possible  at  all 
without  the  body,  for  without  body  none  would  even 
be  able  to  speak  of  saukhya.  The  implication  seems 
to  be  that  sukha  as  the  highest  reality  can  only  be 
realised  through  the  medium  of  the  body  and  hence  is 
the  necessity  of  the  world  of  objects  though  every 
thing  is  by  nature  nothing  but  suk/ui.  Sukha  itself 
pervades  the  whole  world  as  the  pervader  (n^dpaka) 
as  well  as  the  pervaded  ivyapya);  but  as  the  smell  of 
a  flower  cannot  he  perceived  without  the  flower,  so 
also  sukha  as  the  quintessence  of  all  that  is  originated 
can  never  be  realised  without  the  world  of  originated 
objects.*  In  the  Guhya-siddhi  it  is  said  that  through 
the  union  of  the  void-element  (k/ia-dhdfu)  and  the 
thunder  (ua/ra)*  the  great  element  is  produced  in  the 
form  of  bliss  which  yields  parauia-wanda ;  after  the 
cessation  of  paramd-nanda  is  produced  oiramd-namfa  * 
and  the  supreme  bliss  that  follows  in'ramd-nanda  is  of 
indescribable  nature ;  it  is  bereft  of  all  the  senses  (i.e., 
inaccessible  to  all  the  senses),  imdisturhed  non-dual 
and  good  ;  it  is  all-pervading  non-essential,  it  is  perfect 
wisdom — ^it  is  the  ultimate  state;  it  is  divine,  all-good, 
it  is  the  ultimate  stage  of  liberation  to  the  Sddhakas^ — - 
this  is  what  is  the  pure  transcendental  non-sub stantial 


^  iriiitltain  pUtnfi  viilrhan]  liitiiiii  | 

sitfeliaifi  xu&hani  iiilam  fulcharn  Ifrlsnuiii  cam-c(irnm  j| 

suthaTii  prajM  itdcho-poifah  takkam  kundunijaik  falh^l 
sTibhom  IihSrfl^  sMtfcn-iiftai’o  re/TO-s-alli.'dfc  suithnh  Ainrtah  | 
Hevaira-tantroy  AfS.  p.  SS(B). 

’  {Irha-IfhAuc  gauthi/ani  saulrhifam  trafcUtm  tia  «aki;al«] 

swfclieno  vydpHam  jagat  || 

yath&  gandiiam  puspti-fchjleu  tia  gaini/BU| 

lalM  uIpnfitin^ijT-tib^aveiHi  sank lif/am  noii'o'pak&fiyflfc  |[ 

Ibid.,  MS.  p.  SStA). 

*  jtka-dAaOt  ifi  sunyfitd,  it  is  the  Prajna— the  Icmaic  and  vafra 
is  the  Up&vu,  the  male.  Vide  Supra, 

*  PaniHid-nafida,  VirajHi-itnndn,  etc.  will  be  explained  later  on. 

O.P,  105—20 


15i 


tantbic  buddhism 


BodllieitU.  ’  The  bliss  that  is  produced  through  some 
cause  itseU  destroys  the  cause  of  Sainsdra ;  supreme 
bliss  is  of  the  nature  of  self-produced  knowledge  with¬ 
out  involving  any  mental  construction.’  The  nature 
of  Mahasukha  cannot  be  realised  through  the  theories 
of  the  void  ete.  and  all  other  false  constructions ; 
through  the  purifieation  of  Prajna  and  L-paya  it  is 
revealed  that  Makasukha  is  the  one  non-dual  know¬ 
ledge.’  All  the  entities,  static  or  dynamic,  remain 
ultimately  in  a  state  of  non-duality, — they  arc  by 
nature  pure  Xiom  the  beginning  and  clear  like  the  calm 
sky  above  ;  tlie  epithet  non-dual  is  also  a  mere  name  of 
this  ultimate  nature,  this  name  also  does  not  remain 
there,  and  tills  non-duality,  in  wliich  there  is  neither 
the  knowablc  nor  the  knower,  is  what  is  called  the 
iV/ahasuArha  *  When  Prajha  and  Upaya  are  combined 
together  in  oneness, — the  non-dual  knowledge  is  pro¬ 
duced  which  is  Makasuhha.  That  Mahdsakiia  of  the 

'■  liha-dkata-vajahsamyogot  sanmjmridc  ai  trmha-bhafqiii  | 
iirjA'hflm  ut{mtliiaU  yat  iat  fKirnmd'»attda~kiirakam  || 
tat-h^ijdc  ca  uiruiiidj*  lii  cifamut  tti  5ir)  pflruM| 

atM'nj£%fl^var«pu»i  lif  kim  apy  utpadyalc  tu  ya*  || 
mirct-Tidrtya-vtntrnruA'tujn  nirdeutiijcam  paravtath  isii'oritl 
iTt/a|Hifcarrt  nUfivabhiivaaca  (ad  btfdhth  pufujmtm  padam  |[ 
diVyaTh  Ba»rtnfifa-i*/ifl£lra-AAy(iiii  I'inuMW-Hle  uyava^f/iilaftt  | 
xudfiakdndiii  iMtaih  hy  etat  j| 

•  -I'  *  *  *  -t 

IfodhtctKam  nnuUamin  || 
Guhtjasiddhi,  p,  10(B). 

®  yad  idotit  a«iiiiijiji((s-jufrhani  (ad^va  niinitta-pdri- 

hinani  [ 

njaAdkttAham  /cafpand-xilnyam  || 
F|/utia-tifiai'iiT]i<^a(»-(attva-Mddhr,  MS.  (C.L.B.  Nw. 

1312)  p.  S6(A). 

*  iunyo-pii1amhha-vddt!ini  tniitiyd-vudcnw  t.'3hi'(a(i  | 

'  kiiipand-jMfi^vaRiihena  naiva  6iidJiyaNli  || 

dvf/raipo-fralpAitd  b&hyd  pTUjno^pdya-visttddbitah  \ 
iti(tkli-yog&-dviiya-jnavatu  ekam  eva  [| 

AciMtyd^V9ya-.kmtfta-padem^  MS.  (CX.H.  13134) 

p.  10D(A1. 

*  rarranstlirra-cdbi  bhava  advaycna  vyavaglkitab  \ 
svnbkavftut  vmtddhdt  fc  »an(d-Adira-srr>it'rniaftrA  ;| 
advuyam  ndma-vtairfuii  tu  tae  (Mi  fiataadi  «iu  uidyatfj 
vtfdya-vedaka-nirtakMtn  ndvayam  tu  ina/tdiukham  j| 

Ji»rd.,  MS.  p.  100(A), 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TANTRIC  BUDDHISTS  155 

nature  of  non-dual  knowledge  transcends  all  colour, 
sound  and  taste,  it  is  free  from  smell  and  toucli,  it  is  of 
the  nature  of  pure  and  supreme  knowledge  made  up 
of  the  ultimate  element  behind  the  dhorwms  (dftarmo- 
dhatw);  it  is  bereft  of  all  mentation,  free  from  the 
knower  and  the  known  ;  it  is  the  naturally  pure  abode 
as  ultimate  non-duality. '  Through  perfect  knowledge 
the  transcendental  bliss  of  the  Buddhas  is  infinite,  it  is 
all-pervading — spontaneous  flow  of  intense  bliss — it  is 
the  non-dual  trutlu^ 

We  have  already  seen  that  in  Vajra-yana  the  ulti¬ 
mate  reality  is  identified  with  the  conception  of  a  Lord 
Supreme  (B/iai<oudn)  as  the  Vajra-dhara  or  the  Vajra- 
sattva  or  simply  the  Lord.  Here  in  tiic  conception  of 
iVahosukha  also  we  see  that  when  Jl/aftdswkhft  was 
identified  with  the  ultimate  reality  it  %vas  conceived 
variously  as  the  Lord  Supreme.  We  sometimes  firul 
goddess  Varahi  (the  goddess  supreme,  the  Sunyata  or 
the  Xairatma)  deeply  embracing  the  Lord  Maha- 
sankhya,'  sometimes  we  hear  of  the  Lord  Sn~maka- 
sukha  as  of  the  form  of  infinite  bliss,  ‘  sometimes  again 
the  lord  is  saluted  as  the  Snman-mahastikka.''  The 

fajtHtin  drdi'nydrri  !| 

rupa-^dbdfhrml-itiam  ^antJhn^fipnrM-di-voTjiiam  \ 
jfjf/frfhcfNi  jfpflnairP 

2wn- i  u hift ^ tifl ft yn-ijTH ft uku^va mfQ | 

advtipnrh  pamm^rthikam  jj 
Ibid.,  MS.  p- 

^  \?tjupfikarh  sartiiJ^ynaiia-pTiiifthaiifitfift  I 

ifiJrt-Hcrftrtnrffl-TirfTrrtmii-tiiinffoiii  iidvatjatk  buddha-ftai-9uhhmn  ][ 

Ibid..  MS,  p.  USfA). 

^  C/.  Ufirfjhp-fthiiiijjtii-tJidftfj-AfifptftiffiHi. 

SMftdttrt-Tiid/d.  VoL  IT,  p.  4&1- 

*  nr\nn ta-'SU  k fta-rfl pa tod^  irhmah^su k hn~sn 7TijtiitatU  \ 

Pmjfi&^phpn-viniicnyn-siddhi,  p,  0, 

*  ^rdird^Z^ifiJrfh^-lJ-idAiiPir  ndthitm  natvA  'ki-man’-niahasukham  \ 

Pitfica-kmma,  MS,  p.  15(A)* 

Also: — 

jaifiiti  fiiAkhti-mjii  rkuh  frardpn-r/iftjfdft  mdf}-dho  |  ^ 

yaatja  ca  nii^adafta-rnmnye  vacfinu-dnifidto  mnf^jnQfy  j| 

T '  tfiikta-bhaiA-nulla  Ut- fo t  iva^iddhi,  M  S .  (C -L .  13 .  >  No. 

p.  85<A). 


156 


TaNTSIC  BtTDDHISM 


secret  of  the  ultimate  truth  is  said  to  be  explained  by 
the  Lord  Mahasukha*  as  all  the  doctrines  of  Buddtiism 
are  said  to  have  been  explained  by  Lord  Buddha  him¬ 
self.  Sometimes  it  is  said  that  Lord  ^fi-mahd&itkka 
has  created  this  world  of  differences  from  his  non-dual 
nature,*  He,  as  the  Lord  Candarosana  of  the  nature 
of  incessant  bliss,  remains  in  the  lotus/  which  is  often 
called  the  abode  of  5ufrftavatf/ 

(D)  Mahasukha  in  Relation  to  the  Esoteeic 

Practice 

The  advocates  of  Vajra-yana  and  Sahaja-yana  hold 
that  the  pleasure  that  is  realised  through  the  discharge 
of  matter  is  much  lower,  in  respect  of  degree  as  well  as 
in  quality,  than  the  bliss  that  can  be  realised  through 
the  control  of  this  matter,  i.e.,  by  checking  its  down¬ 
ward  flow  through  subtle  A'^ogic  processes  and  by 
giving  it  an  upward  floAV  so  as  to  make  it  reach  the 
lotus  situated  in  the  cerebrum  region  (ufaisa-framala, 
corresponding  to  the  sahasrdra-padma  of  the  Hindu 
Tantras)  and  to  make  it  steady  there :  the  bliss  result¬ 
ing  from  the  steadiness  of  the  matter  is  the  .■Ifaha- 
sukha.  But  in  a  popular  way  we  often  find  semen- 

pAd^na-^•C&}^cn&  guhya-mddhir  anutl^rttm  i\ 

Guk^a-siddbL  MS.  (C.L.B,)  No.  1312*^  p*  1(B). 

IbuL,  MS.  p:  H. 

C/.  flkq, — M-dftdrnia-oc/mie  | 

^iiddha-tnttvfi-khymh  totM  ficitha  [| 

/iiifl.p  MS.  p.  40. 

Also,— hash pfiffn-parfitto-pufiL^itaa  ] 

rocttah  padma-vaircna  sarva-sattvd^’nkampay^  ]| 

Also, — vijahdra  tafflh  M-iiioti  jfri-uiflhfiJHffchd-rajj-fflfiA  [1 
Guhya^tiddhu  MS.  p.  17. 

“  elcd^oJj  ruobhdo^na 

advatja^kuta-hh^du^ah  || 

MS.  (CX.B.)  p.  im{A). 

*  Ifiim  pudma  yatha  karyam  dhairya^dhairyam  (?)  pm|fogafdh| 

svayam  canda-malmny^afy  sIhUa  hy  aim  sadn^ukhah  || 

E  ka  da-mahH-rnfana-tc  nira.  MS.  (R .  .4 .  S  .B. 

OOao)  pp.  5(A>5(B). 

fbid.,  m.  p.  0(A). 


*  €f,  flho  k^eira  etc. 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TInTHIC  BUDDHISTS  157 

virile  described  as  Mahasukka,  and  it  is  the  Lord 
Buddha  himself.  Lord  Buddha  (Amitabha  Buddha) 
dwells  in  the  elysium  of  Sukhavati  (tive  abode  of  bliss). 
Here  the  female  organ  is  described  as  the  Snkkavatl 
where  the  lord  Mahasukha  dwells  iri  his  own  nature  as 
supreme  bliss.  In  the  Hevafra-tantra  we  find  that  the 
Lord  (Bhogavda)  is  explaining  his  own  nature  to  the 
Bodhisattva  Vajragarbha  where  he  says,— ‘T  am  exist¬ 
ence — I  am  not  existence,— I  am  Buddha  (perfectly 
enlightened  one)  as  I  have  perfect  knowledge  about 
things :  fools  can  never  know  anything  of  me,  I  dwell 
in  the  Siikhdvatt  of  the  vagina  of  the  good  thunder- 
woman  {sad-vajra-yosit)  w'hiclii  is  of  the  form  of  the 
letter  '  e '  ‘  and  which  is  the  abode  of  the  jewels  of  the 
Buddhas.  I  am  the  preacher,  I  am  the  religion — 
myself  am  the  audience;  I  am  the  worshipped, — the 
sovereign  of  the  world, — I  am  the  world  and  every 
thing  that  belongs  to  the  world.  I  am  of  the  nature  of 
the  Sahaja-bliss, — I  am  Pa  ra  in  a -n  and  a  as  well  as 
FiVania-nando  etc.;  I  am  the  faith,  like  a  light  in  dark¬ 
ness.  I  possess  the  thirty-two  marks  (of  greatness) — I 
am  the  lord  with  the  eighty  consonants;  T  dwell  in  the 
Sukhavati  of  the  vagina  of  the  female  in  the  name  of 
semen.”'  It  is  further  said, — 'TiVithout  him  (i,e.  semen) 
there  is  no  bliss,  and  again  without  bliss  lie  cannot  be. 
As  he  can  never  be  related,  there  is  no  other  source  of 


^  Cf.  ehUrSkrti  yitd  divyam  etc.  Supni. 

*  bi^vo’Aflin  tiiHVtt  bwdiJho'Aiiifi  vaafU'tPodftRniU  | 

mSm' na  /Anonlt  ye  niUdhSh  kaviidyo^pahatiii  ca  ye  ||  (?) 

tu  f| 

ujfdfcAyfifa'  bam  ftbam  y»U«h| 

aUdkyo’  ha7it  japutah  toifo’  hum  /flufcifco^fcam  || 

saftajS'itflrtd'ci^’abbato’bat'/i  pflrBma-rfranffi'rftlfBW  [ 
ffffbo  ca  pnifiyayaiii  puJra  pradtparat  || 

pnabhwhf 

yotrl-bbagf  juifbni’altKaiw  sHJfra-tiAriiiifl  I'yairasdijlnb  i' 
Heudim'laiilra,  MS.  pp.  S0(A)-36{B). 

These  lines  ooeur  also  in  the  MS.  (R.A.S.B.  No. 

4B54)  p,  47(A), 


15R 


'TlNTRIC  BUDDHISM 


realisitijC^  him  excepting  the  divine  esoteric  practice,”  ' 
It  is  therefore  said  that  Buddha  (in  the  form  of  semen) 
is  neither  existence  nor  non-existence;  in  spite  of  having 
a  face  and  form — he  is  formless  in  the  nature  of 
supreme  bliss.* * 

(E)  The  THAXSFOHNtED  Idea  of  Bodhicitta  in  Re¬ 
lation  To  The  Esoteric  Yogtc  Practice, 

The  identification  of  MaftasifJchn  with  niTOona  or 
the  ultimate  reality  modified  the  Mahavana  conception 
of  Bodhicitta  in  Vajra-yana,  particularlj'  in  the  Sahaja- 
yana.  The  Mahay  an  a  conception  of  the  production  of 
Bodhicitta  (bodhi-citio-tpada)  is  transformed  in  Saliaja- 
yana  into  the  production  of  a  state  of  intense  bliss 
through  the  sexo-yogjc  practice  ;  and  as  after  the  pro¬ 
duction,  the  Bodhicitta  rises  upwards  through  ten  stages 
(technically  known  as  tl»e  Bodhiiratfufl-hfiniwTs)  so  also 
Sahaja-yana  practice  involves  the  yogic  process  of 
breath-control  and  other  psycho-physical  practices 
through  which  the  disturbed  semen  should  be  checked 
in  the  Manipura  (situated  near  the  navel)  known 
generally  as  the  Ytmiana-cakra,  and  then  it  must 
march  upwards  through  the  Dharma-caltra  situated  in 
the  heart  and  the  Sambkoga-caJiTa  situated  in  tlie 
throat  and  then  reach  the  Usnisa-kamala  (i.e,,  the  lotus 

’  tiinii  tfnn  pih  bhrttffB  no 

sSpflisam  afUMiftrtbflfrflt  ilevaia-uogtttoh  mJeham  !i 
Ihid„  p.  Snmpulikd.  MS.  p,  47(A). 

C/.  also  the  Cotnnn: — MikrS-hhdve  tnfbnt'i'rfha- 

samarthyS-bhlivdt f  tlevnjra-pnfiiikii. 

*  bwWrf/ii«  nn'hftfiifHfi  itpat  tibhava^rTipo'pi  BfliVa  *tih  ] 

VhM/fl-uijr]thji-^Arrt-nl»l  fd  ariipf  ;niTiiii7?<i-s(iHJfhi/nI(ih  1] 

Ibid.,  MS,  p. 

Cj,  alsa  the  Comm:— no  Iiftwim  «ttTfl-rapii(i'nf/fatro 

{  ?)  no  bhfli'o  nrl'bbi^i'rth/  /fri'njTin-fiaflpfrfl, 

In  the  Srl-knla-rftknt  vtc  find  that  ihe  downward  flow  of  semen 
should  he  eheefeed  in  the  ^lanipura  (the  lotus  in  the  navel)  and 
then,  by  making  U  steady,  bliss  is  to  be  realised;  this  steady  hiiss, 
says  the  Killa-cfthra,  nt  onee  gives  Sahaja,  whieh  is  the  ultimate 
element  of  all  the  things  (dhomro). 

fosiiinf  »i*pftndn-*ntikhi|oiii  ftsfliinm  ffio  soAo/ftm  dbamiirdhdtui' 
dadQtij 

Hri-kaln-cdkrti-tnntra.  MS.  p.  iaa(A), 


THEOLOGICAL  POSITION  OF  THE  TANTRIC  BUDDHISTS  159 

in  the  head)  where  it  will  produce  the  Mahasukha  of  the 
nature  of  Nirvana^  The  word  llodlHcitta  sometimes  in 
\  ajra-yana  and  almost  aivvays  in  *iaha|a-yana  is 
synonymous  with  the  word  semen. 

This  Bodiiicitta  of  the  nature  of  the  Mahasukha, 
produced  Ihrougli  yog^ic  practice,  is  the  ultimate  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  nature  of  the  five  elements  (uw,,  earth, 
water,  fire,  air  and  ether).  In  a  Doha  of  Kanhu-pada 
this  Bodiiicitta  has  been  spoken  of  as  tlie  seed  of  the 
five  elements.  ‘  In  Llie  Hevajra-lantra  as  well  as  in  the 
Sampiitikd  (tJie  same  lines  occurring  in  both  the  texts) 
we  find  an  explanation  of  how  in  the  process  of  being 
produced  tlirough  yogic  practice  the  Bodiiicitta  acquires 
the  nature  of  the  live  elements,  and  we  have  already 
seen  that  the  jiresiding  deities  over  these  five  elements 
(confused  with  the  five  sA^and/ias)  are,  Vairocana, 
Aksobhya,  Amitablia,  Anioghasiddhi  and  Ratnasam- 
bhava,  and  these  live  Tathagatas  or  the  Dhyanf 
Buddhas  again  represent  tiie  five  KuJas  or  the  families 
of  the  esoteric  Buddhists.  Thus  Mahasukha  in  the 
form  of  the  Bodhieitta  is  the  one  ultimate  reality  coni’ 
prising  within  it  the  live  families  of  vaji'a-yaiia.  * 

^  panca  ttiakdbhua  via  lai  fain  \ 

pttkubi  Qva  tea  gainftha-vaha  gmufn  mftjnia  |: 

HohA  No,  T, 

* /EHMifurt'Au  liaiica  fkriilra-fi/iiifa’Si'flrifpfl/ult  | 

eka  em  iHahH-naadam  paiicnturii  ijSti  bheiianai}}  ,1 
boltt-kakk»h~pogetia  xpar^t  Mihtiiija-vaiianfi\ 
kathtnjjaxyii  motuE-dhfiTmitteat  inoho  vatrocatio  inatuh  || 

ffriivuiH  ijasimU  ilmvam  ap~dkatiikiith  toatoifil 
dve§ah  iiiixobktja-jmifnkah  j| 
fftayor  gharsaiin^saiiiyagat  icjah  imm^jayate  fadA\ 

TOiJttA  amitii-VB}fttiisijat  mgas  tfjtsui  sainbhavct  !| 
knkkataki’xv  ync  cittatii  tat  xa»timHa-Tapakatn\ 
iTya*nioshfiiiddhih  spat  amoghitt  Vayu-nambkavah  || 
n/Irjidni  m^'nm  raktiiih  raktir  | 

|auft/)urn  raktath  bhawt  cinorn  rofntrin  rnitn-^uA'Hindia 
SampafrA'uJ 

AAajfam  pisiiriorri  j 

ekam  tud  mahac  eiiiiitn  /inFica-rtl/Jt'rjiJ  | 

panca«i(  Anftrxit'  r|>antia  ijefrfl  taha/trtiita}}  || 

tojifriAtf  maAdiJKAfiaji  parama-ibieatafy  | 

pd^cafAni  ySti  bhedcaa  rdgddi  paiira  cetaid  || 
tlvtajm-tantra,  MS'  pp. 

SumpujiAA,  MS.  pp.  47(BH8(A), 


CHAPTER  V 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 

Iii  the  previous  chapter  we  have  made  an  attempt 
at  studying,  on  textual  basis,  the  theological  ideas  that 
are  associated  with  the  yogic  practice  of  the  Tantric 
Buddhists.  If  we  sum  up  the  above  we  shall  see  that 
the  fundamental  standpoint  of  the  Tantric  Buddliists  is 
more  or  less  the  same  as  that  of  the  Hindu  Tantrlkas. 
We  hear  from  the  time  of  the  Aranyakas  and  the 
Upani^ds  that  bliss  is  the  quintessence  of  Brahman, 
the  ultimate  Being.  From  bliss  proceeds  the  universe, 
it  is  sustained  in  bliss  and  it  again  dissolves  in  bliss. 

According  to  alt  schools  of  Tantra,  bliss  is  the 
nature  of  the  Absolute,  which  is  conceived  both  positive¬ 
ly  and  negatively.  The  Absolute  is  realised  by  us  when 
we  realise  our  self  as  perfect  bliss.  The  ultimate  aim 
is,  therefore,  to  attain  a  state  of  perfect  bliss.  In  all 
our  ordinary  experiences  of  pleasure  we  have  but  a 
momentary  glimpse  of  the  same  bliss  which  constitutes 
the  ultimate  natui'e  of  our  sell.  But  these  experiences 
of  pleasure,  because  of  their  extremely  limited  and 
defiled  nature,  bind  us  to  a  lower  plane  of  life,  instead 
of  contributing  to  our  advancement  towards  self- 
realisation.  Herein  comes  the  question  of  Sadhana 
which  may  transform  even  gross  sense-pleasure  into  the 
boundless  serenity  of  perfect  bliss. 

In  our  ordinary  life  we  have  the  experience  of  the 
most  intense  pleasure  in  our  sex-experienees.  Wide  is 
the  difference  between  ttiis  sex-pleasure  aiTd  perfect 
bliss  which  is  the  ultimate  nature  of  the  self  and  the 
not-self;  yet  the  distinction  can  be  wholly  removed  by 
a  total  change  of  perspective  and  process.  The  sexo- 
yogic  Sadhana  of  the  Tantrikas  is  a  Sad  h  a  nil  for  trans^ 
forming  this  sex-pleasure  into  a  realisation  of  infinite 
bliss  in  which  the  sell  and  the  world  around  are  lost  in 


TH£  ELEMli.MT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA  161 

of  the  self 

^  ‘“i*  all-pcn-ading  oneness  of  bliss  is 

jvliat  IS  coaeeiveii  as  Nirvana  by  the  Tantric  Buddhists. 

Let  us  ROW  what  practical  processes  of  Yoga  were 
IhLTnd  ^  Buddhists  for  the  realisation  of 

(i)  Bodu—The  Medium  for  RealUing  the  Truth 
(A)  The  Theory  Of  The  Plexus 

practical  side,  which  ob\’iously  is  the  funda- 

is  thp  r  ^  Tantras,  the  most  important  thing 

IS  the  stress  laid  on  the  body  as  the  medium  in  and 

realised.  The  Buddhist 
ntiifcas,  in  umsou  with  the  other  schools  of  Tantra 
lold  that  the  body  is  the  abode  of  all  truth;  it  is  the 
qntome  of  the  universe  or,  in  other  worils,  it  is  the 
microcosm  and  as  such  embodies  the  truth  of  tlic  who k 
universe  Attempt  has  actually  been  maSe  in  nmny 
Tantras  to  identify  the  universe  completely  with  the 
k  locating  the  seas,  rivers,  mountains, 

to  parts  of  tile  body.  Wiiethcr  we  are  ready 

to  accept  them  in  toto  or  not,  the  fact  remains  that  the 

lueKloT^  ^  Tantras,  as  a  science  of  reUgious 
methodology,  consists  in  its  analysis  of  the  bod/and 

the  ihscovery  of  all  in  the  nervous  system  and 

lu  the  plexus  and  thus  making  the  body,  with  the  whole 

iyantra)  for  realising  the  ultimate  truth. 

Let  us  now  see  how  the  Tantric  Buddhists  dis- 
'  diacrent  tattva,  within  this  corporal  struc- 
a  •  .  ““If  will  naturdly  lead  us  to  the 

aurjh“®’'n  ‘lotuses’ 

nd  this  wdl  also  help  us  a  good  deal  in  understandin» 

the  yogic  process  of  the  Tantric  Buddliists. 

This  analy^s  of  the  physical  system  starts  witli  the 
spinal  cord,  widely  known  as  the  Meritdu^da,  which  is 
tafcen  to  be  one  bone  from  the  bottom  of  the  back  up 

O.P.  105—21 


162 


taktric  buddhism 


to  the  medulla  oblougata.  The  name  ^Jerudaiida  is 
significant,  and  the  analogy  Involved  in  the  name  is 
clearly  brought  out  in  tlie  wliere  it  ha'^ 

been  said  that  in  tlie  form  of  the  skeleton-bone  the 
great  mountain  Sumeru  remains  in  the  body.  ^  This 
spinal  colunm,  compared  to  the  mountain,  is  said  to  be 
very  profound.  It  is  the  cave  of  the  highest  truth 
where  all  the  world  vanishes  away.  ’  The  j^ext  thing  is 
the  theory  of  the  cafcras  (plexus)  or  the  lotuses  as  they 
are  also  called.  According  to  the  BuddliisL  Tantrikas 
there  are  four  such  plexuses.  The  first  is  the  lumbar 
plexus  situated  in  the  navel  region.  The  next  is  the 
cardiac  plexus  in  the  heart.  Next  is  the  lar\tigeal  and 
pharyngeal  plexus  at  the  junction  of  the  spinal  cord 
and  the  medulla  oblongata  ;  the  last  and  tlie  most  im* 
portant  is  the  cerebral  plexus  called  the  uf^iiso-kamala 
(the  lotus  of  the  head).  In  the  Hindu  Tantras,  how¬ 
ever,  there  are  six  cakras  or  plexuses  in  addition  to  the 
jSahasrdra  or  the  highest  cerebral  plexus,  * 

^  pada-tak  bhuiravo  dhamira-krti^] 

kati-d^ie  fii  tn-Aorio-iff/Jifiraflnn  || 

hi  fWdaft  Rthiiah  ] 

CHfi^rfisra  mtimnlaiah  || 

hi  mumnir  ghimt 

*  guhha  jagu  | 

of  KiLohu-pad^p  Doha  No«  14. 

The  &t&t  is  the  MidAdkani-cakra,  or  the  saci<H30C!cygea]  plEjtus, 
situated  between  the  penis  and  the  anus  and  facing  down^  it  has 
four  petals  of  rctl  colour  with  the  four  letters  “v,  s,  s  and 
Next  is  the  Si'adAistfidiin-cnfcrci  or  Uie  sacral  pkxus^  near  the  root 
of  the  penis  with  ^ix  petals  of  the  colour  of  vermilion  with  the 
letters  bh^  m,  y,  r  and  V\  Next  is  the  A/anipiifO-c/i^drii  or 
the  lumbar  pltxiis  in  the  region  of  the  navel;  there  are  ten  petals 
of  the  colour  of  the  cloud,  with  the  letters  t,  th,  dh,  Hj 

p  and  ph"  ms  them.  After  that  is  the  cardiae  pbxm  or  the  .ipiflhafij- 
cafcni  in  the  hcaitp  with  twelve  petuls  of  the  colour  of  the 
flower  (red)  with  the  letters  **k,  kh^  gp  gh,  h,  c,  ch,  ],  jh,  h,  t 
and  th*’  on  them.  Next  is  the  laryngeal  and  pharyrigQuI  plexus 
(rwtiddha-cofrra)  at  the  junetion  of  the  spinal  cord  and  the  medulla 
oblopgata  with  sixteen  potal*i  fif_  smoky  colour  with  the  sixteen 
v'owels  on  them.  Above  it  Is  Aplrf-cnkira  between  the  eye-brows; 
it  is  the  seat  of  the  mind  or  the  centre  of  all  sense  knowledge 
and  dream  knowledge*  There  arc  only  two  petals  of  white  colour 
with  the  letters  and  on  them^  Above  all  is  the  Sahasr^ra- 
cn^ru  In  the  highest  cerebral  regions*  It  is  of  thousand  petals  of 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 


163 


Of  the  six  Cakras  described  in  the  Hindu  Tantras 
only  three  are  found  in  the  Buddlust  Tantras,  viz.,  the 
plexuses  in  the  navel  region,  in  the  heart  and  in  the 
region  just  below  the  neck  (i,e.,  Manipura-cakra, 
Andhata  and  Fii'uddha-cafrraJ.  The  fiahasrdra  of  the 
Hindu  Tantras  corresponds  to  the  l/.satsa-fcomaia  of 
the  Buddhists.  But  the  most  remarkable  thing  in  the 
Buddhists’  conception  of  the  Cakras  is  the  location  of  the 
three  kdyas^  viz.,  Nirmdna~hdya,  Samhhaga-kdya  and 
D/iarTna-)f<iya  in  these  Cokras.  Thus  the  lowest  Cakra 
in  the  navel  region  represents  the  lowest  kaya,  i.e., 
Nirmaiia-kdya  ;  the  Cakra  in  the  heart  is  identified  with 
the  Dharma-kdya  and  the  Cakra  just  below  the  neck  is 
said  to  be  the  Sa7iibhoga-Mya.  In  the  natural  order 
the  Cakra  in  the  heart  being  next  to  the  Cakra  of 
Ninndna-kdya  ouglit  to  have  been  the  Sambhogn-kat^a 
and  the  Cakra  below  the  neck  ought  to  have  been  the 
Dhamw-kdya ;  but  we  do  not  know  why  the  order  has 
slightly  been  changed.  The  Sahaja-kdya  h  located  in 
the  Vsnlsa-kamala  or  the  Sahasrara  of  the  Hindus,  It 
is  also  called  the  Mahdsukha-cakra  or  the  Mahdmtkha- 
kamala  being  the  seat  of  great  bliss. 

In  this  theory  of  the  Cakras  there  are  some  anoma¬ 
lies  os  regards  the  number,  location  and  the  other  de¬ 
scriptions.  Let  us  therefore  discuss  some  of  the  descrip¬ 
tions  of  the  Cakras  found  in  the  different  texts.  In  the 
Heruka-tantra  (thirty-first  patafa)  we  find  that  in  the 
Mahdsukka-cakra,  situated  in  tlie  head,  there  is  a  lotus 
of  four  petals  representing  the  four  noble  truths  or  tlie 
four  categories  (cafu.?kotO;  it  is  pure,  of  the  nature  of 
a  circle  of  enlightenment  (hodki-mandafa)  as  the  re- 

Tffhite  colcitir  and  is  Facing  doirnwaids.  On  the  petals  the  fifty 
I  titters  ineltiding  thft  voweb  and  the  consonants  are  placed  in  twenty 
rounds.  In  the  c<ikras  (excluding  the  Sahmram)  there  six 
presiding  f^oddes^cs,  Rflttnl,  Ldfciftlp  JCdiifiJ,  SaKfinl 

and  respectively.  In  the  there  is  the  union  of 

the  iSiva  and  ^ukti.  I"idft  Saf-cuftra.iiirupa^a  of  Purniinanda  (with 
the  conimciitnries  of  Kalicara^ja,  iSnnkarQ  and  VisvaniithQ),  edited 
by  Art  her  Avalon.  (Tan  trie  Text.  Vol.  \l),  also» — Sivo^ 

Ch.  V. 


164 


tSstric  buddhism 


ceptaele  (adhara)  and  the  seed  (blja}  of  all ;  outside  is 
a  lotus  of  thirty-two  petals,  and  inside  it  is  the  letter 
“ha^’  in  the  downward  way  which  is  of  the  nature  of 
the  Bodhicitta  and  the  fifteen  digits  of  the  moon.  In¬ 
side  is  the  Yogini  of  sixteen  kalas  or  digits  of  the  moon, 
carrying  intense  bliss  with  tier* *  By  the  tivo  sides  are 
falana  and  rasana  of  the  nature  of  d/i  and  fcdli ;  and  the 
supreme  goddess  herself  is  of  the  nature  of  Sahaja-bliss 
and  non-duality.  ’  The  description  seems  to  be  rather 
significant.  Tiie  sixteen  kalm  of  the  Bodhicitta,  doubled 
in  day  and  night  seem  to  be  represented  l>y  the  thirty- 
two  petals  of  the  lotus  in  the  head  ;  and  friland  and  ra- 
sand  by  the  two  sides  of  the  ParameHmn  (referring  to 
jiundhStiA'a)  of  the  nature  of  dli  and  kah  are  but  the 
two  nerves  (corresponding  to  the  Ida  and  Pingnld  of 
the  Hindu  texts)  by  the  two  sides  of  ^uod7(-ttfiA*Q, 
who  is  of  the  nature  of  Sahaja-bliss  and  non-duality. 
Next  in  the  neck  is  the  Sambkoga-cakra  with  sixteen 
petals  of  red  colour,  within  it  is  the  syllable  burn 
above  it  nectar  flows  down  incessantly  through  a 
tunnel.  “  In  the  heart  is  the  Dharma-cakra  with  eight 
petals ;  it  is  a  vi&va-padma  which  is  the  double  lotus, 
one  facing  upwards  and  the  other  facing  downwards  ,* 
within  it  is  the  syllable  “  hmii  ”  downwards ;  a  little 
above  there  is  a  white  lotus,  representing  the  universe 
{brahmanda-sadr^a-kdram)  ;  within  that  is  pure  con¬ 
sciousness  (uf/nanam)  which  is  ever  manifest,  all-per¬ 
vading  ;  it  is  the  receptacle  of  all,  and  the  source  of  all 

^  Hrasi  mah&m'hhti-cakft  cotur-ddtila-padmaiii  iuddham  mada~ 
jitAilTie  rGpn  lira  f/  tl/a- 

b^tvtarn/  dvH-tTimiad-data-padTrtfnh  f  Aa-^n}* 

£fAt>-?i)uAAaA  bhavatif  badhicitta-tmakajh  ce*ndii-ltota-paifC(t-daSS- 
tmahamf  mahdfuAAafri  tahen  nityam  yoginl  aodaS  fco/5||  fafana- 
TUMna  dtrat/oh  pdrft'r  JoAnjd'nnntla'avabAavnf!  cb 

parameivan  || 

ncTtika-tanm,  MS.  (R.A.S.B,  No.  11279)  pp.  T8(B)- 

74(A). 

•  C/.  jran(A«  sdTTibAojta-eflhran  fodnio-^jara-roAfafegn)/  Ja«. 
madhyft  hvih-karitm/tasyo’rddhve  ghtij}(ikd-ntndhra~margi;^a  amrlOffi 
trnvati  nmtitaram  f 

/TmiAfl-tanfra,  MS.  p.  7+(A). 


the  element  op  esoteric  yoga  165 

self-produced  knowledge  (suaycinbfeti-jndMa-dharani), 
it  is  the  great  Lord  (parameit’ara).* *  In  the  navel 
region  is  a  lotus  of  sixty-four  petals  of  blue  colour ; 
within  that  is  the  syllable  “  atii  ”  like  a  dawJing  pearl. 
Slightly  below  is  the  fra n do  which  is  the  receptacle  of 
all  the  nerves  numbering  seventy-two  thousand  in  all. 
From  this  fcanda  rise  the  nerye  laland  of  the  nature 
of  Prajha  and  rasand  of  the  nature  of  TJpaya ;  and  ill 
the  middle  is  the  Godiless  in  the  form  of  tlie  tmiversc, 
represented  by  the  syllable  *'  am  ”,  she  is  of  the  nature 
of  the  four  ‘bodies'  and  grants  all  perfection  and 
supreme  bliss.* 

.Vecording  to  the  5!cA*oddcsa-tifrd,  tlie  L’sniso-paduio 
possesses  four  petals,  the  lotus  in  the  forehead  posses¬ 
ses  sixteen  petals,  the  lotus  in  the  heart  possesses 
thirly-two  petals  and  the  lotus  in  the  navel  region 
possesses  sixty-four  petals.  * 

In  the  Srt-satnpula  we  find  that  the  four  Cakras 
are  associated  with  the  four  Mudras,  visa.,  Kanna- 
mwdra,  Dharma-mitdra,  Maha-miidrii  and  Samaya- 
mudrdt  which  are  again  associated  with  the  goddesses 
Locandj  MamaJei,  Pdi^daTa  and  Tara  respectively  who 
again  in  their  turn  are  the  presiding  goddesses  over 
the  elements  (confused  wnth  the  atkandhas,  as  we  have 
already  seen)  of  earth,  water,  fire  and  air ;  these  arc 
again  represented  by  the  syllables  **  e,  uaih,  ma  and  ” 
{Cf,  cvain  mapa  ^rutani  etc.).  Tims  the  Nirniana- 
cafrra  in  the  navel  region  stands  for  the  element  of 
earth  represented  by  the  syllable  "e”  and  presided 
over  by  tive  goddess  hocar\dt  wlio  is  associated  with  the 
Kanno-wmdra.  In  this  way  the  elements  with  their 
syllabic  symbols  and  presiding  deities  and  the  associ¬ 
ated  Madras  are  located  in  the  other  three  Cafcros,  * 

^  MS.  p>  74(A). 

^  tbid.,  pp,  74(A)-74(B>, 

’  G.O.S.  p.  27* 

*  pffhtiji  jn€^^  kanm-mudr&  tii  h^and\ 

maha-krpa  ir}ah0-p^y^  viiw-ni j5^  ]f 


166 


TiSTRIC  BUDDHISM 


It  may  be  noted  in  this  connection  that  according  to 

the  Hindu  Tantras  also  we  find  that  the  Cakras  or  the 

Padmas  are  associated  with  different  goddesses,  viz., 

Do/t’ml,  Ralcint,  Lakinlf  Kdkim,  iSaklnit  and  Hakinl, 

and  We  also  find  that  the  MuladhuTa^’Calcvo.  represents 

earth,  Svadhisthana  water,  Manipura  fire,  .dndhafa  air 

and  Visuddha  ether.  ‘  ^Again  goddess  Locana  in  the 

Nirrnai^a-cakra  represents  universal  compassion 

(kartind),  Mamaki  in  the  Sambhogd-cakra  represents 

universal  brotherhood  (rnaitn)  and  concentration 

(pranidki)^  Pmidara  represents  self-contentment 

(mudita)  and  Tara  represents  absolute  indifference 

(apefesd).  ^  These  descriptions  of  the  Cakras  are  also 

confirmed  by  tJie  Hevaira-tantra,^  and  the  HeunjVa- 

lantra  reminds  iis  in  this  connection  that  as  tlie  Cakras 

are  four  in  nuniher,  all  the  tattvas  are  four.  Thus  four 

are  the  moments/  viz.,  vkitra,  vipdka,  vimarda  and 

- ^ _  - — - — — - — - _ _ _ 

sfkiUl  '^iriniin^‘^fikrc  udi  || 

V'iiiM-idWJrij  fif  fiifmh  jneyciih  dhtiTirta-uivdTa  fri 
Tiifiifri  pranidhi-rfipu  fu  devi  va}Ta-innkhe  wlhitd  11 
dhantm-Cfikrc  hi  hfdayr  nsla-data-iitbujc  || 

7na-kaTnm  v^hwir  uddiRfo  rnnha-mudr^  iu  p^n^ara] 
intid jf iia  i?l  pu dma- fr f i f 6 Ad vn  )| 
sthitfi  mmbho^ia^ciikrt  tii  katqhe  dvif-asU^dald-mhufe  1[ 
yd-karo  utipu-rupfr^tu  ) 

tnfiha-^itmmja-mudra  vai  devJ  kurmn^.iM  rmtkhijd  ]| 
upfkm  jM}W-fioj:^Ena  ffird  mntfdra-idriHil 
mahds^fJthii-^Qkrc  tu  dvu~trffhStid-d{^ta-pnnknj:e  |[ 

&n-sa7npnfikd,  MS.  p.  10(A). 

'  pfincd-^jjy^  gmdhQ-Tfipa^TOiia-spQf^a- 

mhda-hkmrnikf  hTdayahje  toymrja  catvAra  mpa-ram-xpar^a- 

i*fwda~h^k\fiitmhi  f  kitnthdbje  trmjo  Tnisa-^paH^-iabd^^ 

mkffiydb  /  laid  fa  h  indm  Id  eft  a  u  n  dn  ^par^a-hbda-JakRanau  / 
yy^lb/c  AUrtyajfy^  ifabdii-mdtr^im  eko  ^umthf  Sck(}ddc4a^nkil 
fG.O.S*)  p*  ^Sl. 

M"frfc  od,  by  A-  Aa^bIoii* 

t/»  iWs^r^AuHfukdahf^yf  quoted  in.  the  eofninentary  of  the  verse 
Ao.  8  or  tJie  Sa(cakm-vivrii  of  Visvatiatba,  ed.  by  A.  .4valoii. 

*  See  f.n,  4  of  the  previous  page. 

^  fvfrSrriifl  locfiim  devi  vo>i-Adrrrm  7na7fiiikf  imfta\ 

4  mu-Hreria  pandarn  ca  yu-kmem  fa  lonml  || 

A'u™  doi  If /i  rdhdka  rtnamadrri-  wi  ahum  udm-mma  pAmud  rn  A  f  n  ir- 
rii5dd-<fir  hre  pod  mam  ed  i  ^  fy-^QJsti-do  m  /  dha  rtm-cakrc  a^ta~da  lavi } 
^amhhnga-cahre  ^{>d{da-dahm )  ^aahrmikht  dvatridixaddulom  \ 

*  For  the  interpretation  of  the  ^momcnt&*  see  Infra. 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTEftlC  VOGA  lti7 

vilaksana;  four  are  the  ahgas  (stages  in  the  methods 
of  the  SadhaHa)t  viz.,  sevd^  iipa-sevd,  sadhana  aud 
tnahd-sddhana,  four  are  the  noble  truths  (ar|/a-safj/a), 
u!z.,  sorrow,  its  cause,  its  suppression  aud  tfie  way  of 
suppressing  it ;  four  are  Hie  iaiivaB,  the  tattua  of 
the  seif  {utmu-tuliva)j  the  taiiva  of  the  ^lantras 
(man£ra-ta£toa),  the  tattva  of  the  gods  {devata-tattva) 
and  the  tattva  of  knowledge  (jiidna-tofiefl)  ;  four  are 
the  dnandas  (states  of  bliss),  viz,,  manda,  ptiramd- 
nanda,  virama-nanda,  aud  mhajd-nanda ;  four  arc  the 
Nikdyas,  viz.,  Sthavim-vada,  Sarvdsti-vdda,  Sariwidi- 
vdda  and  Makasdiighika ;  sixteen  (which  is  a  multiple 
of  four)  are  the  Sankrdntis,  ^  sixty-'four  (muitipie  of 
four)  are  the  dandas,  thirty-two  nerves,  four  praharas 
and  thus  ail  are  lour  (or  niultiples  of  four). '  About 
the  niLuiber  of  the  petals  of  these  Cakras  or  lotuses 
tlie  Hevajra-tanira  holds  the  sauie  view.  As  in  the 
Hindu- tantras,  here  also  there  is  tlie  scheme  of 
arranging  the  letters  on  the  petals  of  the  lotuses."  But 
in  some  texts  the  iViVutona-calfra,  instead  of  being 
located  in  the  navel  region,  is  located  in  the  region 
near  about  the  seX’Organ.  Thus  it  is  said  in  the 
Heua/ra-tawtro  (the  verses  being  found  also  in  the 
Samputikd)  that  four  are  the  kdyas,  viz,,  Dkarma, 
Sambkoga,  Nirtndria  and  Mahdmkha,  of  which  the  first 
three  are  situated  near  the  sex-organ,  the  lieart  and  the 
neck  respeetiveiy.  }^irmdna-kdya  is  the  region  whence 
all  the  animate  and  the  inanimate  originate  aiul  there¬ 
fore  it  is  located  near  tlie  sex-organ.  The  D/tanna- 
cakra  is  of  the  nature  of  the  consciousness  of  all  the 
dhartnas  and  is  located  in  the  heart.  Sambkoga  means 
enjoyment  of  the  six  rasas ;  the  Sambhoga-^kdya  is  of 
the  nature  of  all-existence  (as  pure  deliglit)  and  is 
situated  near  the  neck  ;  the  Mahdsukha-kdya  is  in  the 

‘  Set  Infra, 

’  Uevajra-latitra,  MS.  pp. 

'  Vtdfe  Hevafra'pafijika  or  V oga-ratnamula, 

MS.  (Cambridge  Add.  No.  ItiUD)  p.  8(B). 


163 


TANTKIC  BUDDHISM 


head.'  Then  it  has  been  said  that  Sihavarl  is  in  the 
Nirmana-cakra  wherefiom  all  the  static  (sthauarn) 
originate.  AVhat  is  exactly  meant  by  this  jSfhdrari  we 
are  not  sure ;  but  it  seems  from  the  context  that  it 
may  refer  to  the  old  St/tavira-vada  or  Tkera-vdda 
(the  school  of  the  elders).  The  Sarunsii-ndda  or  the 
Realistic  School  which  originated  from  a  scrutiny  into 
the  nature  of  the  dharmas  (things)  is  said  to  be  in  the 
Dharma-cakra  ;  Sajimidi-vada  is  in  the  neck,  whence 
are  all  our  perceptions  (semuerfana);  is  in 

the  Sukha-cakra,  and  Mciftasttkha  is  in  the  head.  ^  The 
Samvfdi-vdda  generally  refers  to  the  school  of 
vdda,  but  in  the  comnientary  of  the  Hevafra-tantra 
Samvidi  is  explained  as  referring  to  those  who  realise 
high  emotions  }  ^^a^tdsukha  being  the  ultimate  unity  of 
all  the  dkarmas,  Mahasiikka-cakra  is  the  Mahdsdnghf.  ^ 
Again  it  is  explained  that  the  body  (kn^a)  is  called  the 
A'lkdr^fl  which  is  explained  in  the  commentary  as  the 
assemblage  of  the  Bhiksiis  (Bkiksti-sangha),  and  the 

^  Fu  fcatfii/un'] 

tri-kSyasifa  panca-jn^nciiii  enkra/if  mah^tukkatii  [| 

dhamid-kuinb/iQga-nirnuiiitiKj  fdf/iaiVR  Crt[ 

lii  fnii/db  k/iifati  vyavastfiituk  |{ 
oirffindfn  fii  aafU'onanL  i/atro^liMtilik  prajuit/ah^l 
tatra  nirmayn-kaynh  tiirmanam  Ktharararh  ifatati 
vipiidyate  nirnii/Btc  anena  nirtniinikam  matojn  (not  found  in 
the 

fii  Id 

wimbfto^tiih  bhufl/onarn  proktar/ieannam  vni  rasa-rilphtSm  j 
van’a-ilharmt^u  driihatvitt  sorvain  aBthfvarupafcah  fnot  found 
in  the  fffiJci/nj-fcrnffrt) 

jflirtiAoflfl-fBfrrain  cn  inah/)-itid‘ham  mruni  rlhitam  || 

//evajra-tantrn,  MS.  p.  501  A};  SdwipHfifrn,  MS.  p,  46(B).  For 
tilt  loctitioD  of  the  yU'rntilria-cfikra  in  the  re^rion  of  the  sex-or^an 
■ce  also  ;!rr-i’affi'‘Co^fm-f<infr£i,  MS,  Ciimbridge,  Add.  1361)  p.  2t(A). 

*  stAaroif  ntriNdito-cairrc  tri  Nimtilnndr  stborurnm  i/atdh| 

dkanita-^akrc  ca  dfi{?min-i  «do.siini»<fh/<aro^  |i 
sami.tidr  wroliborn-cofrre  ra  kanffie  tamvedanam  yatafy  ] 
tnata^Otfighi  *ukha~cakK  eci  niatifdfrr  dtftitoipi  || 

neva/rti^tantfa.  MS,  p,  50(B)  ^  .Saip<piJti*«,  MS,  p.  40(B). 

*  tHuhdltvot  survo-dftarmafianuffliiij^bntrfit  >rKibuau|^/ia.eajtnini 

’aa/iStS/iip/ij/  nto  evani  flfttt/  (tnfl«td)A:e  «j>a«i  upari  tthitam/ 

tlevajrB-paAjika,  MS,  (Cambridge  Add.  No.  16&0) 

P.  5»(A). 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTEEIC  YOGA 


169 


udara  (literally  the  belly,  but  explained  in  the  com¬ 
mentary  as  the  womb  of  the  mother,  mdtuh  kuksik)  is 
called  the  monastery  (uthdra).  ‘  • 

(B)  The  Ner\tb  System 

After  the  discussion  on  the  Cakras  the  next  import¬ 
ant  thing  is  the  analysis  of  the  nerves.  In  general  the 
nert'es  are  said  to  be  seventy-two  thousand  in  niunber 
(excluding  the  smaller  nerves,  i.e.,  the  upa-nadiSt 
which  are  innumerable).  The  Hindu  Tantras  and  the 
Yogo-panisads  in  general  agree  with  the  Buddhist 
Tantras  as  to  the  total  number  of  the  nerves  (though 
controversies  arc  also  found).  Of  these,  again,  thirty- 
two  are  said  to  be  more  important, '  and  of  these  thirty- 
two*  again*  three  are  the  most  important, — these  are 
Lalatia,  Rasand  and  AnadhiltT  corresponding  to  Ida, 
Fihgald  and  of  the  Hindu  system.  Lalana 

is  the  neiwe  in  the  left  side  and  Rasana  in  the  right 
side.  There  are  pairs  of  names  for  them,  of  whicli  some 
of  the  more  important  are  : — Afi  and  Kali,  e  and  rani, 
Ganga  and  Faniiind,  fVintira  and  Svrtja,  Dhamanu 
and  (['ainana,  Grdhya  and  6Vo/iolfa,  Prajnd  and 
Vpdya,  eic.^  About  the  position  of  these  nerves  we 
find  in  the  Hindu  Tantras  that  inside  the  passage  of 
the  spinal  cord  (according  to  some  outside  tlie  spinal 

'  uJunrin  vtMmm  uc||al«| 

IIcvafra^tantTa,  >15.  p.  S0(B);  Samputi^ra,  MS.  p.  40(6). 

*  For  s  list  of  these  lliirty-two  priiieip&l  nerves,  see  ^rf- 
9ampvtika,  p.  8(B). 

’  II  aU  tfae^nuizies  given  to  these  two  nerves  in  the  left  and 
the  right  are  dassilied  into  two  groups,  the  two  groups  will  stand 
thus:— 

i  (right) — Tasaua,  pingala,  siitya^  ram,  ugni,  praFin, 
eamaFia,  Adlf,  bindit,  iipa^a,  i/aiuunu,  rnkta,  paUta,  tUksma,  retas, 
dhamia,  sihira,  para,  djjav,  bh^da,  citta,  ridifO,  rajas^  blwva,  pitruM, 

Hiruiantn-^dj/n  and  gm/tyu. 

ii  Viima  (left) — lulund,  idn,  (‘ciiulnj,  suitiri,  sonin,  apaau, 
dhnfuunn,  dU,  nMu,  prajM,  ganga,  iukra,  baU,  sfhuia,  rfl/os, 
fldluimia,  nstjiim,  iipara,  prlAivi,  nhAeda,  aerftn,  cLvfd^d,  tnmns, 
nhAdua,  prakHt,  iakti,  wmbhoga-kdya  and  gfnhaka. 

Firfe  SUtdies  in  the  Tunfraa— by  Dr.  P.  C.  Bagchi,  p.  GO, 

O.P.  105—23 


170 


tXnthic  buddhism 


cord)  Qows  the  nerve  Sufurnna,  wbtch  in  reality  is 
made  up  of  three  nerves^  viz,,  citrinl  of  tlie  nature  of 
Saifua-gnna  (mtelligence  stuff),  vajra  of  the  nature  of 
Rajas  (energy),  and  5ttswm»<l  of  the  nature  of  Tamas 
(inertia).  AU  the  nerves  start  from  a  seat  called  the 
Kanda  which  is  situated  about  one  inch  abov^e  the  anus 
and  one  inch  below  the  penis.  The  5MS(i;nna  seems  to 
be  a  sort  of  duct  inside  the  spinal  cord  and  encases 
within  it  the  nerve  vajra,  which  again  encases  within 
it  the  citriiii,  which  again ‘has  an  aperture  called  the 
Brahma-randhra  running  to  the  Sahasrdra.  The  Ida 
and  the  Pingala  are  outside  the  spinal  cord  and  proceed 
fi'ora  the  left  and  the  right  sides  respectively  toivards 
the  nasal  region  in  a  symmetrical  course  encircling  all 
the  Cakras,  According  to  other  views,  the  Ida  and  the 
Fingala  proceed  from  the  right  and  left  testicles  res¬ 
pectively  and  pass  on  to  the  left  and  right  of  the 
Susumnd  in  the  bent  form  of  a  bow.  The  Ida  Is  also 
called  the  moon,  of  while  colour,  and  the  Sakti  ;  the 
phigald  the  sun,  of  red  colour  and  the  purusa ; 
Susumaa  is  of  the  nature  and  of  the  colour  of  hre. 
The  tliree  are  again  said  to  be  the  rivers,  Faniund, 
Sarasvati  and  Gahgd  respectively  and  the  three  meet 
at  a  point  at  the  root  of  the  penis,  which  is  regarded 
as  the  fWuetd  ut  the  juncture  of  the  three  rivers. 
Through  these  Ida  and  Pmgald  blow  the  vita)  winds 
prana  and  apdrta. 

In  the  Budtlhisl  Tantras  we  find  that  the  nerve 
Laland  or  the  Alt  starts  from  the  neck  and  enters  the 
navel  region  from  the  left  side,  and  from  the  navel 
again  starts  the  Itasand  or  the  Kali  and  duel's  the 
neck  from  the  right.  Witliin  tliese  two  and  passing 
through  the  lotus  in  the  heart  (hrt-saroruhrt-uiodhi/a- 
go)  is  the  Auadhuti,  through  ivliich  flows  the  Bodhi- 
citta,  and  this  Avadhulikd  gives  the  Sahaja-bliss,  and  it 
itself  is  often  described  as  the  Sahnjn-bliss.  The  most 
important  tiling  is  that  tlie  nerves  in  the  left  and  the 
right  have  been  identified  with  Sunyata  and  Kariuja 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA  171 

or  Prajna  and  Upaya,  the  two  cardinal  principles  of 
Mahay  ana  Buddhism  j  and  the  Avad/iwR,  as  their 
commingling,  is  the  Bodhieitta  or  the  goddess  Nairat- 
ma  or  the  Sahaja’damsel.  ‘  We  have  discussed  at 
length  the  question  how  these  nen'es  halana  and 
iZasana  are  identified  or  associated  with  Sunyata  and 
Karun^  Prajna  and  Upaya,  dh  and  Kah',  etc.  In  the 
EHfaffa-uira-coHda-niflhd-rosfliia-fawtra  wc  find  that  the 
Lady  ^tlic  female  counter-part  of  Candarosana)  asks 
the  Lord  (Candarosana)  how  the  bliss  produced 
through  Prajna  and  Upaya  can  be  enjoyed  in  the  body. 
In  reply  the  Lord  says  that  there  is  tlie  nerve  in  the 
left,  named  Lai  on  a  which  is  of  the  nature  of  Prajna 
and  in  the  right  is  the  nerve  Eosana  of  the  nature  of 
Upaya.*  Through  tlie  commingling  of  these  two 
nerves  in  the  middle  nerve  the  bliss  of  Prajno-paya  is 
to  be  realised.  We  should  also  notice  that  these  three 
nerves  Lalana,  Rasana  and  ,4uadfiwfi  have  also  been 
identified  with  the  three  Kaj/as,  Sambboga, 

Nirmana  and  Dkarma.  Again,  we  have  seen  that  the 
Lalana  is  said  to  carry  the  seed  and  fiasawo  the  ovum 
and  Aundfiiitt  to  carry  Bodhieitta  (whicii  is  a  mixture 
of  the  seed  and  the  ovum).  Again  Prajna  and  Upaya 
mean  subjectivity  and  objectivity  or  the  graft ^^^lra  and 
the  grdhya,  and  so  these  two  nerves  are  also  called 
grahya-grdhaka,*  About  the  names  Gangd  and 
Yamuiic  we  may  also  compare  the  EUndu  Tantras 
where  Ida  is  said  to  be  the  river  Yumna,  Pmgaht  the 


'  HiPuftc-faniro,  MS.  (B.A.S.B,,  No.  11279>  p.  8{A>,  pp.  1S{B)- 

iStA). 

Cft  Viiira-vSr&hi-knUm'riiahii-tftntrai  MS.  (R.A.S.B.,  No*  11385lt 

p.  2e{B). 

*  projwo-sVabhihfrFHi  pmfrTrtitSl 

niMrifl  co’popn-ruprfld  cfrtJfsinr  soinox'ajthitA  ]| 

J5fc'aWa-uTra-r(m(fa-inoJin*roj!finii*frtnlrn,MS,  (B.A.S.B.,  No.  OflS&y 

p.  15(A). 

Cf-  Also, — /IfrrilajEioma-fmtfra,  q’uoted  in  the  SOfdif*  tn  the 
Tanfro*  of  Dr.  P.  tl.  Bogchi,  p.  39. 

*  ganga:ynmu^e*ti  sundhyaya  cQmIri-hhiiXfi-furtf&-bhSiaii  grphya- 
gTdhaknnf  Cumtn.  on  Song,  Ko.  li,  Caryit-pnda  (Sastri’s  edition). 


m 


T/CKTRTC  BUDDHISM 


river  Sarasvoti  and  SMsiirnTia  the  Ganges,  ‘  The  names 
Lalana  and  ISasana  and  D^iainono-cflmrtna  seem  to  be 
rather  technical.  * 

The  most  common  names  for  the  pair  of  the 
nerves  in  the  right  and  the  left  are  the  sun  and  the 
moon.  These  names  are  found  in  the  Buddhist  and 
the  Hindu  tantras  alike.  The  nerves  in  the  left  and 
the  right  are  called  the  Alt  and  the  .Kali  which  repre^ 
sent  the  vowels  and  the  consonants,  which  again  in 
their  turn  are  associated  with  the  night  and  the  day  ; 
the  night  and  the  day  are  again  associated  with  the 
moon  and  the  sun,— and  thus  the  nerves  in  the  left 
and  the  right  are  also  called  the  moon  and  the  sun. 
The  Htttha-^oga-pradlpikd  speaks  of  these  two  nerv^es 
as  day  and  night.*  The  SornTno/Kina’-faTitra  says  that 
the  left  neiwe  is  the  moon  because  of  its  mild  nature, 
whereas  the  nerve  in  the  right  is  called  the  sun  because 
of  its  fierce  nature  (rflurird-tmifed).  We  liave  also 
seen  that  the  left  nerve  is  said  to  carry  the  seed  and 
the  right  the  ovum  ;  the  seed  is  said  to  be  the  Siva — it 
is  the  moon, — ^^and  the  blood  is  the  ^akti, — ^it  is  the 
sun,  *  In  tile  commentary  on  tlic  Dokdkosa  of 
Kanhu-pada  we  find  that  the  moon  originates  from  the 
seed  and  the  sun  from  the  ovum.  *  These  two  ner^-es 

idayath  j/aBiunfi-JerT 

fiisiimnAtflin  udBed  fiaiigS  f3$o?Ti  yoga^  bhi^vet  || 

Comm,  on  the  first  verse^ 

Sarah  a  said  in  a  Do  ‘here  (within  the  body)  are  the  Ganges 
imd  the  Jumna% 

Saraha^s  Dtihil  No»  47« 

*  Dt.  C.  Bagchi,  however,  suggests  that  may  be 

derived  from  j/~dhma  which  indicates  a  forward  or  outward  move- 
menti  whereas  cam^no  may  be  derived  from  V  esm  which  means 
*tO  cat%  I.Fp,  taking  in* 

Fid«  SfudiVj!  in  the  p.  6^^ 

*  dit/d  na  pujiiyet  Img^m  ratTau  caiva  iifl  pii/avet| 

jraruadd  iingam  diufl-rfllnt-nirodAdtflh  | 

*  hinduh  fioo  mjah  iakiir  hindur  indti  r^fo  tavib  \ 

Gorak^-KiddhdntQ-sfirhgfaha^  ed.  by  Goplnitha  Kavi- 

raja*  p.  41. 

*  candfo  ra^tdt  £7lrT/o-?a7nifclbAai7oA  | 

Comm,  on  Dohafcofa  of  Ka^hu-pada,  MS*  pJ  SS{B). 


THE  EEiEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 


173 


are  also  said  to  carry  the  ^-ital  winds  prarta  and  opann 
and  the  prana  has  again  been  said  to  be  the  JJa/in  and 
the  apdna  to  be  the *  *fire  of  time'  (A'alagni). '  About 
the  names  M  and  Knfi  we  find  in  the  commentary  of 
the  3form(ifraiifcd-tflntra  that  JU  and  K«h'  represent  the 
vowels  and  the  consonants  wluch  are  forty-nine  in 
number  (‘ks*  being  a  mere  combination  of  the  letters 
‘k*  and  *s'  is  excluded),  and  forty-nine  are  the 
Fajftis  (winds)  and  tlius  Hi  and  Kali  denote  the  wnnds 
and  are  thus  associated  with  the  two  nerves  in  the 
right  and  the  left.  “  In  the  Vaisnava  Sahajiya  cult  of 
Bengal  we  find  Ida,  Pmgala  and  Sasunina  identified 
with  Vdyu,  Pitto  and  Kapha.  * 

In  the  Sekoddesa-fika  of  Nada  pada  we  find  men¬ 
tion  of  five  important  nerves,  presided  over  by  the  five 
Tatliagatas.  According  to  it,  the  left  nerve  in  the 
upper  region,  w’hich  is  the  moon,  the  La! ana  or  the  Ida, 
which  carries  water,  is  of  the  nature  of  the  Tathagata 
Amitabha ;  the  right  nerve,  which  is  the  sun,  the 
Ifasand,  which  carries  fire,  is  of  the  nature  of  Ratna- 
sambhava;  in  the  middle  of  the  lower  region  is  the 
nerve  (passage?)  for  stool,  carrj^ing  earth,  and  it  is  of 
the  nature  of  Vairooanii ;  the  left  nerve  (in  the  lower 
region)  is  the  nerve  for  urine  and  carries  air  and  is  of 
the  nature  of  Amogha-siddhi  ;  the  middle  ner\'e  of  the 
upper  region  is  the  nerve  Rdktt  carrjing  Sunyatd  and 
is  of  the  nature  of  Aksobhya ;  the  left  nerve  below 
it  is  the  channel  for  semen  ;  it  carries  knowledge 
(/ndna-nafifni)  and  is  of  the  nature  of  the  Vajra- 
sattva,  * 


*  prSnato  rfihu-nwpattih  npy  npanafah  l| 

JbW.,  MS.  p.  miB). 

*  MS.  B.N.  Saiis.  Na.  86,  p.  9(B). 

*  piViuttfcI,  «i(ftJn»na  find  flitJi  hoi/fl  I 

i'6»  pilfa  feali  loftc  ySte  fcayff  [|  , 

fikd,  quoted  m  the  Porf-Chattffnya 
Cull,  by  M.  M.  Bose,  k.a.,  p.  'fl- 

*  G.0.5.J  p.  61* 


174 


tJCKTRIC  BUDDHISM 


The  middle  nerve  is  generally  called  the 
The  word  has  been  explained  in  the  following  way, — 
Avadhati  is  that  which  destroys  through  its  effulgent 
nature  all  the  sins. '  In  the  commentary  of  the  Corya- 
pada  also  Avadkutl  is  described  as  that  which  washes 
away  all  the  beginning]  ess  thought-cons  traction  of 
existence.  *  It  has  also  been  said  to  be  as  it 

removes  all  the  evils  of  afflictions  very  easily.  *  It  is 
also  called,  as  we  have  already  said,  the  goddess  Prajna, 
or  the  Nuiratnia,  the  Yogini  or  the  Sahaja-damsel. 

(ii)  Selection  of  the  Preceptor 

Yogic  practice  is  always  indispensable  for  the 
attainment  of  the  Bodhicitta.  It  is  said  in  the  PaiTca- 
krama  that  the  vows  and  practices  (urata-carya- 
dUcam)  are  iiideed  useless  without  the  tattva ;  but 
perfect  euliglvtemiient  again  can  never  be  attained 
without  practice.  As  the  fire  in  the  log  of  wood  never 
manifests  itself  witliout  friction,  so  the  Bodhi  (which 
is  already  w'ithin)  will  never  he  produced  without 
proper  practice.  *  In  this  practice  great  importance 
has  been  attaclied  to  the  selection  of  the  preceptor, — 
for  it  is  neither  by  much  reading  nor  by  penances,  nor 
by  any  amount  of  labour  undertaken  in  innumerable 
practices  that  a  Sddhaka  can  get  at  the  truth ;  it  has 
been  repeated  over  and  over  again  that  tmth  can  never 
be  attained  without  the  blessings  of  the  preceptor. 
Common  sense  will  allow  us  to  understand  that  where 


^  avaih  p^p^jh  dhnvam  ( ?)  probM#tifliti-njpa(vdt 

onaye^tij  avadhullf 

Comm,  on  the  I)^hAko^{i  of  Kaohu-pida  No^  4)^ 

MS*,  No.  B.  N*  Sana.  47,  p.  89(B). 

^  iabdu-sandkyayH  iw{\di-bha7;a-^vikmpnn  cfi 

etc. 

Cumm.  otj  Sotkj^  No.  2. 

^  avah^hyt^  omlbhQgcm  khiA-di-papafh  dhnnoii  tty  avadhutll 

Conun.  on  the  Dohaho^ti  (DohA  No.  4)  of  Kanhu-pudu 

M.  by  MM.  H*  F.  Slutri)/ 

'  ya t kA ^gnir  dn ni-ga rbhm^ha  no*t ti^i  hen  7na n  t hanad  vinA  | 
tathiVhhynsnd  vmd  bodhUr}  j^yaie  nc*ha  innmani  ]\ 

MS.  p.  24(B). 


\ 

\  THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTEfllC  YOGA  175 

there  is  anything  practical  to  be  performed,  there 
naturally  comes  the  question  of  adopting  a  proper 
guide,  and  Indian  religions,  from  the  very  beginning 
in  the  \  edic  lime  down  to  the  modern  era,  invariablj^ 
involve  sonic  kind  of  practice  either  ceremonial  and 
ritualistic  or  yogte ;  hence  is  the  importance  of  the 
(JurM,  ^  The  Guru  is  very  often  regarded  higher  than 
God  himself,  for  God  is  sometliing  absolutely  fictitious 
to  a  man  unless  he  has  been  blessed  by  the  practical 
instruction  of  the  Guru  which  enables  a  man  to  realise 
what  God  or  the  ultimate  reality  is.  The  Tantras,  as 
we  have  seen,  lay  the  greatest  emphasis  on  the  practi¬ 
cal  aspect  of  religion  and  the  practices  enjoined  in  the 
Tantras  are  very  secret  and  complex, — tliere  is  the 
chance  of  physical  or  mental  aberration  at  every  step, 

on  the  one  hand,  these  praclices,  when  properly 
and  sj'stcmatically  carried  out,  will  lead  a  man  to  the 
highest  spiritual  elevation  through  the  realisation  of 
the  truth ;  on  the  other  hand,  they  may  lead  a  man  to 
the  darkest  abyss  of  hell,  it  these  are  not  very  cauti¬ 
ously  and  methodically  carried  out  with  the  directions 
of  the  experienced  Guru.  Because  of  this  difficulty  in 
out  these  practices  and  because  of  the  great 
dangers  they  may  veiy  easily  lead  to,  these  practices 
have  always  been  kept  most  secret  and  there  is  no 
other  way  to  learn  them  than  the  blessings  of  the  well- 
experienced  Guru.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  find  in 
most  of  the  Tantras  chapters  de volet i  to  the  selection 
of  a  good  preceptor  and  a  good  disciple.  Even  the 
Carjya-songs  and  the  Dohas  of  the  Siddha-caryas  refer 
to  this  importance  of  the  Guru  everj^  now  and  then. 
This  Guru-vada  in  Iiulia,  current  from  a  very  old  time 
Md  emphasised  in  the  Tantric  ages,  has  also’ flowed  on 
in  all  tlie  minor  religious  seets  of  India. 

After  securing  a  suitable  preceptor  and  also  a  suit¬ 
able  Prajtia  (woman)  the  Yogin  should  approach  the 
reverend  Guru  and  propitiate  him  by  worship,  hymns, 
etc.  Then  follows  the  ceremony  of  Abhi^eka  or  initia- 


TANTBIC  buddhism 


/ 


176 


/ 

i 


tion  into  the  cult.  This  AbhiseJta  is  a  ver>^  old  custom 
of  initiation  with  religious  rites  and  ceremonies  and  it 
is  also  found  in  early  Buddhism  in  the  initiation  to  tiie 
vow  of  pabbajjd  (praura/yo,  literally,  going  out,  i.e,, 
the  vow  of  renunciation)  and  the  initiation  to  upasflTTi- 
pada  (literally,  arrival,  the  entry  into  the  circle  of 
the  fully  accredited  members  of  the  Sahgha  or  monas¬ 
tery).  Even  now  this  ceremony  of  is  current 

in  all  schools  of  Buddhism  in  all  the  countries.  This 
is  held  to  be  indispensable  for  the  Sddhana 
in  esoteric  Buddhism.  It  is  said  that  the  Yogin  who 
wishes  to  attain  the  Yogihood  without  proper  initia¬ 
tion  only  darts  a  blow  to  the  sky  with  fists  and  drinks 
the  water  of  mirage. '  The  jlWmeka  in  the  secret  cult 
is  generally  know'n  as  the  T  In  some 

texts  we  find  Mantras  for  four  kinds  of  Abkiseka,  viz., 
Kalasd-bbkeka  (i.e.,  initiation  by  outward  purification 
by  the  water  of  the  jar,  etc.),  Guhyd-bhiseka  (initiation 
into  the  secret  cult),  Prujfid-bimeka  (initiation  to  per¬ 
fect  ivisdom)  and  i'ujrd-tpkjse^^a  (i.e.,  initiation  to  the 
adamantine  truth).*  In  the  5cfcaid-Tit'aya-sa»hgrah(i 
we  find  that  this  Kalasd-bkiseka  comprises  within  it 
six  Abhi^ekas,  viz,,  initiation  with  Vdaka  (water), 
Mttkuta  (a  crown),  Vajra  (the  thunder),  <51ioafd  (the 
bell),  Kama  (name)  and  ^edrya  (the  preceptor),  and 
these  six  Abhisekas  are  of  the  nature  of  the  six  Tathd- 
gatas.  *  Thus  the  initiation  with  water  is  of  the  nature 
of  ideal  knowledge,  and  so  of  Aksobhya';  the  initiation 
with  the  crown  is  of  the  nature  of  equalising  know- 

*  hr  yo  yogi  yogUvum  {ibhiviiuckatil 
hau^aic  lamttna^kMam  pivet  mrga-tmnk^m  [| 

Qilotcd  lit  the  KtiyU-mnigruha-ptinjik^,  MS^  p.  afAJ* 

'  For  this  Abhk€kti,  see  Pmjm-pilya-vUmcaya-s^ddhU  Ch.  \\ 
Jmna-Mddhip  Ch.  XVtl^  iirsi  pit^aia  of  the 

second  etc^ 

^  the  Ch*  on  -IbAift'A'ri  in  the  MS- 

pp.  l(A)-6(B)>  eailected  io  the 

Advnya-vajm-mmgraha  (GpO,S-),  Ih'VQjnt-iantru^ 

dala-^kTarim  *  Stkoddum-ilha  (G.O*5*h 

*  Vid^  Sn-f^tikra-mmbhara-tajitra. 

*  pp.  86-87* 


^  T3CE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA  1T7 

ledge  («a»iatd  jiiana),  and  so  is  of  the  nature  of  Ratna- 
sambhava;  initiation  with  the  thunder  is  of  the  nature 
of  discritninative  knowledge  and  represents  Amitdhha; 
the  initiation  witli  the  bell  is  of  the  nature  of  the  per¬ 
formance  of  duties  and  so  represents  Amogha-stddhi ; 
the  initiation  with  a  name  is  of  the  nature  of  the  know^ 
ledge  of  the  perfectly  pure  dharma-dhdta  and  re¬ 
presents  Vairoeana  and  the  initiation  by  the  Acarya  is 
of  the  nature  of  the  adamantine  knowledge  (najra- 
iwdna).  ‘  But  in  general  Kalasa-bkiseka  seems  to  be 
the  rite  of  initiation  by  pouring  the  water  of  the  jar. 
Next  is  the  Guhyd-bhiseka  or  the  initiation  into  the 
secret  cult.  Here  the  preceptor  explains  all  the  secret 
processes  of  the  yogic  sadkana  by  which  Bodhicitta 
should  be  produced  through  the  union  of  the  Upaya 
and  the  Prajfia,  how  its  downward  tendency  should  be 
checked,  how  it  should  be  sent  upward  to  the  tTsaisa- 
kamala  and  how  Mahd»ukha  of  the  nature  of  nirvana 
is  to  be  attained.  After  the  Cuhyd-bhiseka  the  pre¬ 
ceptor  explains  to  the  disciples  the  void  nature  of  the 
self  (pudgala)  as  welt  as  of  all  the  objects  (dharr»a), 
and  also  how  tills  yogic  process  leads  a  man  to  the 
realisation  of  that  perfect  knowledge  (prapld).  This 
part  is,  therefore,  called  the  Prajna-bhiseka  or  the 
Prajnd-jndnd-bbiseka,  But  as  Vajra  is  the  ultimate 
adamantine  reality  and  the  ultimate  principle  of  purity, 
the  initiation  ends  with  an  initiation  into  the  Vajra- 
jndna  called  the  Vajra-^indna-bhUeka. 

After  initiation  the  Yogin  with  his  ^ludra  is  led  to 
the  Mandala  or  the  mystic  circle  and  is  then  permitted 
to  perform  the  Yoga  in  company  of  the  Mudra  or  the 
Prajha,  ‘  In  some  texts,  however,  the  intiation  is 
performed  within  the  Maijdala. 

»  For  the  also  fice  Vujra-vati-nama-vmndQia-paiifik^, 

MS-  R.A.S.B.»  No,  m55,  pp.  S0(A>-S1{A>  iiiid  9S(A)— IDD(A). 

*  For  detaUe  Mcir'ojTa-tantrn  ;  ril^o  St:koddcAii^pika  (G.O-S-), 
p.  The  Frujii^  here  is  called  Mudrt  as  she  is.  instrumental  to 
the  attummcnt  of  bliss  (mtidam  sukha-vHe^am  raiim  Tnudru 

— p,  50)* * 

O.P*  105—28 


ITS 


tXNTBIC  BUDDHiSftE 


/ 

In  some  texts  again  we  find  other  preparatory 
rites  of  killing  or  driving  away  the  disturbing  ghosts 
and  spirits  and  all  other  evils  of  the  ten  quarters 
through  the  help  of  I^Iantras  and  other  practices,  and 
of  placing  the  ten  Buddhas  in  the  ten  quarters  for  safety 
in  Yoga,  We  have  already  seen  that  in  this  yoga- 
sadhana  the  Yogin  has  to  be  a  god, — he  must  realise 
himself  as  the  god  or  the  Supreme  Lord  Buddha,  and 
the  woman  to  be  united  with,  must  be  realised  to  be 
nothing  but  the  embodiment  of  Prajna  or  ^unyaia- 
knowledge.  For  this  reaUsation  the  Yogin  places  the 
five  Tathdgatas  and  their  female  counter-parts  with 
their  respective  bi/a-?iwmtras  in  the  dificrcnt  parts  of 
the  body  (both  of  himself  and  of  the  ^ludra),  and 
during  all  these  processes  lie  should  meditate  and 
recite  that  he  is  of  the  nature  of  adamantine  know¬ 
ledge.  ‘ 


(iii)  The  Productfon  of  BodhicHta  and 
Its  Regulation 

After  all  these  preparatory  rites  follows  the 
esoteric  practice,  which  is  strictly  prohibited  to  be 
taken  in  the  ordinary  sense ;  it  should  be  performed 
only  as  a  process  of  Yoga  for  the  attainment  of  the 
Bodhicitta  or  for  the  realisation  of  the  ultimate  Saha j a- 
nature  of  the  self  and  the  d/tamas. *  *  Through  the 
yogic  union  of  the  Prajna  and  the  Upaya,  the  Bodhi¬ 
citta  is  produced  within,  and  after  it  is  produced  its 
flow  must  be  checked  in  the  navel  region  which  is  the 
Manipura-cakra  or  the  Nirmana-baya-cakra*  It  is 


‘  Cf.  The  Prii^i-^roiiia  of  Pflnen-ftraTna; 
tdnfni,  MS.  pp.  l-l(A) — 14(B);  Ctfto-uisuJd/ii-prnjfardnOi  Verses 
76-78. 


*  C/., — manfAayff  kamala^mbhodhim 

JvSSi-vsU-vajTii-iu^a-tantTa,  MS.  p,  18(B). 

Thii  liDE  is  quoted  in  the  .Ifdrmatrafiicd-tanrra  as  belnnging  to 
the  fruh!/d-va/>u-uir5«iril.s(i«fhana,  MS.  (B.N,  Sans.  No.  8S)  p.  26(A). 

*  Vide  Sr^-kala-cakra-tantm^  MS.  (Cambridge,  Add.  No.  1861), 

p.  1(H(B). 

C/*  CdtxiiD.  ou  No^Si  va/ru-^tiniinaii  paidf 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 


179 


.\ 


held  that  as  long  as  the  Bodiiicitta  remains  restless,  it 
binds  us  to  the^  world  of  existence  and  non-existence; 
but  when  its  movement  is  stopped  once  for  ever  in  the 
lotus  in  the  head,  it  produces  the  state  ot  supreme  bliss 
which  is  of  the  nature  of  liberation.  Thus  this  Bodiii¬ 
citta  has  got  tw'o  aspects;  in  tlie  ordinary  restless 
aspect  it  is  called  the  samurta  and  in  the  motionless 
aspect  of  intense  bliss  it  is  called  the  uiwia  or  tlie 
paramarthika.  It  is  said  in  the  Heoajra-tantra,— 
One  should  produce  Bodhicitta  in  the  form  of  both 
vivfta  and  samurfa;  the  sariiurfa  is  like  a  Kuiida  flower 
white  in  its  physical  form),  and  the  vivrta  is  of 
the  form  of  bliss.”*  We  have  seen  that  the  Madhya- 
mikas  believe  in  two  aspects  of  the  reality,  the  samnrtt- 
satytti  i.e.,  the  phenomenal  or  the  provisional  truth  and 
the  pdramarthika-satya  which  is  the  ultimate  truth 
(corresponding  to  the  ■vydvaliarika  and  paTamoTthika 
of  the  Vedantists).  These  twofold  aspects  of  the 
Bodhicitta,  the  physical  or  the  phenomenal  aspect  (in 
the  form  of  semen  virile)  being  the  samurfa  and  the 
ultimate  aspect  (in  the  form  of  incorporeal  all-pervad¬ 
ing  Mahdsukha  as  the  ultimate  nature  of  the  dharmas) 
being  the  pdranidrthika  or  the  uiufta  seems  to  be 
drawn  in  analogy  with  the  twofold  conception  of  the 


&i>d!Atciftam  ......  vmidh^yfiti  f 

Comm,  on  Cartf^-patiti,  No.  3. 
nuni-friflr  tAhro  odi&ne  9a§&a  [|  Son^  No.  4. 
mani.T)iufn(l  fcrd'dA.vom  gottxT  gdfufi  niakdatthha-cakrt  antor* 
bhsvdtrl  Comm,  on  Song  No.  4. 
mani-mflitt-duAra'RinidAitm  kartavyam  \  Ibid, 
kacchika-jtiaiii-fimlam  gatani,  fad  fuo  bodAuriltinii  tahoja- 
nuadciia  vidArtam  vaiRtdf^driV  cotro-ddiijftia  pt’dt.^lhain  kutttj 
Comm,  on  Song  No.  13, 

See  also  Petiica-krama  of  Ghoijtapiida  quoted  in  the  Su&Aisifa- 
smhgraha  of  Bendoll,  )i.  72;  Jfni/a-iiOfitgmAn-pafffi/r.a,  MS.  p.  75(.A); 
.Vofmo-froirAo-tonfTO,  MS.  p,  4tB). 

'  hodhictffoni  ulpdifni^rt  voriirffi-^amvrtti-nipafcain  | 
xamurfarn  Aunifn^aniAnjani  vivrfoni  siiAha^rapinam  j| 
f/evnjrn-tontra,  MS.  pp.  i7(B) — 43  (A). 

C),  AI30  ff e rat'd 'tonfm,  MS.  {R..4.S.Bi,  No.  il270)  p.  74(A). 


180 


tAimilC  BUDDHISM 


/ 


truth  of  the  Madhyamikas. '  For  the  attainment  of 
the  MahdsuJcha  the  flow  of  Bodhicitta  must  be  arrested. 
It  is  said  that  as  long  as  the  Yogin  does  not  discharge 
Bodhicitta,  he  enjoys  intense  and  mn-uffled  bliss  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  joyous  sensations;  but  if  Bodhicitta,  which 
is  the  cause  of  all  perfection,  flows  down,  it  cannot  be 
made  to  rise  through  the  middle  nerve  and  no  perfec¬ 
tion  is  attained.  * 

How  then  to  check  the  downward  flow  of  the 
Bodhicitta  ?  For  this  purpose  Hatha-yoga  is  resorted 


'  Id  the  llevttjTG-'totttta  it  is  clearly  explDinet]  how  to  produce 
the  gross  Bodhicitta  through  I  he  physical  process  and  how  to  turn 
it  to  the  Viuflu  form  through  the  yogie  process.  FIcasurc  may 
also  be  rcalifed  through  the  discharge  of  the  Bodhicitta,  but  that 
has  unrcieri'cdly  been  condemned  by  all  the  Buddhist  Tantrikas; 
and  it  has  been  said  that  instead  of  delivering  a  msn  it  binds 
him  to  tte  realm  of  gross  sense-jileasuic.  It  is,  therefore,  that 
we  find  in  all  the  texts  repeated  warnings  not  to  discharge  the 
Bodhicitta;  if  it  be  discharged,  the  .l-f^fhdsuhAo  is  never  realised  and 
if  the  .Vahdsukho  be  not  realised,  the  ultimate  Sahnja-aatiire  can 
never  realised,  and  if  the  ultimate  natuie  be  not  realised,  a  man 
is  not  liberated  from  the  world  of  illusion.  MS,  pp.  48(Ay-^g(A). 

There  is  no  greater  sin  tban  discharge  and  no  greater  merit 
than  bl™  t arising  from  the  motionless  Bodhicitta).”  Again*  ‘‘Dis¬ 
charge  19  the  progenitor  of  detachment  (utragn)  and  from  detachment 
arises  sorrow,  and  from  sorrow  is  the  loss  of  the  vital  element  and 
from  the  loss  of  the  clement  comes  death**. 


no  vrrag<j(f)  paratii  pvpam  ptm)jam  na  sakhatah  pamm[ 
tatha  ca,^^otirotraga-«]mhhtitiV  vit&gad  du/tkha-samhhaoahl 
du^khdd  dhaiu-kfayam  piiriisam  kssyai  mrtyuh  prajayate  j| 

Quoted  in  the  Comm,  on  the  iVarmo-hab'kd-tiiiitfli,  MS. 

p.  S(A). 

Also  quoted  in  the  Comm,  on  the  Dohako^  of  Kknhu-pada  as 
belonging  to  the  idi-huddha,  SIS.  (B,N.  Sans.  No.  47)  p.  49(B). 

In  the  Sckpddfia  wc  find  that  the  Sahaja-form  of  the  Lord 
is  nothing  but  the  motionless  state  of  the  fluid, 

ydvan  iir.)  putnfi  prahh^ooroma^dh  ^tA-oiiii-dhord-ilravo 

neirl-padma-dulo-^arc  sainqmsf-hhiifa  jinAnain  gdMth  | 
tphurad  (sic,  spAnrijod)  vnjra~iikk&~gtatafy  karunay^ 
hhmnaiTi  jagat-kamniim 

garjjadd  hi  katnttH-balarya  sabajum  janthi  tnpam  vibkofy  |[ 

Quoted  in  the  Comm,  of  the  Coryd-pada,  Song  No.  8. 
Srf-hdfa-cRkro  definitely  declares  that  salvation  is  impoEsible 
through  the  discharge, — so  the  Yogins  should  always  shun  world  Iv 
pleasure.  ■* 

htador  nuikfe  hra  mokjo  gata-parama-atikhis  yoginith  janma^blft 
fosmdl  somrdrfl-ifluifAifom  fetandmiha  {fatiAAriji  tarvada  uaTjaniuBm  || 
MS.  Ch.  V.  O'ncna-pajidfa),  Verse  I2fl.  ” 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 


181 

to.  In  the  commentary  of  the  Marma-kalika-tantra, 
we  find  that  the  flow  of  the  Bodhicitta  is  to  be  checked 
by  the  help  of  Sadtin^a-yo^a  or  the  Yoga  with  six 
parts ;  these  are :  abstraction  {pratj/dhdra),  medita- 
tion  {dhydna),  restraint  of  the  breath  iprdndyama), 
attention  {dkdrand},  remembrance  (anasmrfi)  and  final 
absorption  {samddki). ' 

In  the  M-guhya-samaja  (Ch.  XVIII)  we  find 
detailed  description  of  these  six  parts  of  Yoga,  and 
these  descriptions  are  again  fully  commented  on  in  the 
Sekoddesa-tika  of  Nado-pada.  The  first  part  of  Yoga, 
viz,,  pTatydhdTa  means  the  restraint  of  the  ten  senses 
from  their  respective  objects  through  a  process  of 
abstraction.  Through  pratydkdra  the  Sddhaka  deve¬ 
lops  an  aversion  to  all  physical  forms  and  perception, 
and  he  further  develops  an  insight  whereby  he  can 
view  all  objects  of  tlie  world  from  the  ^unyatd  pers¬ 
pective.  The  second  part,  viz.,  dhydna  means  viewing 
the  panca-kdmas  (five  objects  of  desire)  as  of  the 
nature  of  the  five  Buddlias.  The  five  objects  of  desire 
stand  here  for  all  the  objects  of  the  world  (sarve 
bhdvdh  sthiTa-cald-tmakdli')  and  the  five  Buddhas  stand 
for  Buddha  in  general.  Dhydna  here  then  means 
meditating  on  all  existence  as  of  the  nature  of  Buddha 
in  the  ultimate  essence.  This  dhydna  is  again  of  five 
kinds,  viz.,  vitarka,  viedra,  pnti,  sukha  and  ekagrata. 
Vitarka  means  gukya-trayo-daya,  i.e,,  the  sudden  flash 
in  the  ciftfl  of  a  general  ideal  reflection  (caitya-sthuld- 
kdrena)  of  the  three  elements  of  three  times.  Viedra 
means  meditating  on  the  specific  nature  of  objects  as 
of  the  nature  of  perfect  enlightenment.  Pnti  means 
an  agreeable  state  of  mind  resulting  from  the  taking 
in  of  the  objects;  snkha  means  the  delight  resulting 

^  pratyakaros  tathfi  dhy&nam  pravi&y&ino'tha  cffrfimnAj 
rinii»nrfi7i  mmatihU  ca  yoga  ucyaie  || 

,^rI.^uhyfl.jsamajo*frti»fni  (G.O.S.h  Ch.  XVm,  p,  168. 
C/.  .Waifrfi^janiya  Upanifad  {Cottetrs  Editioji,  Ch.  VI,  p.  129)  whete 
the  .'IfigfTS  nfe  described  ss  Prtilt/Ahclrji, 

TarAa  (eelf-cxanunadonl  and  Sa'Fnddhi. 


182 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISM 


. / 

from  iiuch  meditation;  ekagrata  means  the  fixing  of 

the  mind  in  the  SOnyataj  i.e.,  the  onc-pointed  state  of 
mind  which  remains  steady  in  the  realisation  of  the 
Sunyata-nature  of  all  objects. 

The  third  part  of  Yoga  is  prdnfiyama,  which 
means  the  control  and  arrest  of  the  vital  wind  {pra'^a- 
vdyu),  TJiis  prdna-vdyii  is  of  the  nature  of  the  five 
elements  (paAca-bhuta)  as  w'ell  as  the  five  Buddhas. 
The  wdnd  that  flows  through  the  left  nostril  (which  is 
ialaiia)  represents  the  principle  of  the  five  skandhas 
(which  are  identified  with  the  paiica-hhutas)  and  the 
wind  flowing  througSt  the  right  nostril  (which  is 
rasoiia)  represents  the  principle  of  the  five  Buddhas, 
These  two  courses  of  the  vital  wind  must  be  united  and 
made  into  a  subtle  body,  as  it  were,  and  made  flow 
through  the  middle  nerve  passing  through  the  lotuses 
in  the  navel,  heart,  neck  and  the  forehead.  Then  this 
vital  wind  must  be  made  steady  in  the  lotus  between 
the  two  eye-brows.  This  is  what  is  meant  by 
prdndydvia, 

Tliis  process  of  prdndydma  is  regarded  as  very 
important  in  the  esoteric  Yoga  of  the  Buddhists  and 
is  variously  described  in  diflerent  texts.  We  have  seen 
before  that  in  the  Panca-kravia  tlie  vital  wind  has  been 
described  as  the  vehicle  (uahana)  for  our  defiled  nature 
(prakrti)  and  this  vdyu  is  described  as  the  root  of 
all  the  principles  of  defilement  and  as  such  the  root- 
cause  of  the  samsara  or  the  cycle  of  birth  and  death. 
In  the  Vajra-japa-krama  of  the  Paficn-kToma  we  find 
that  mantra-tattva  is  nothing  but  the  vdya-tattva 
(the  science  of  the  vital  wind).  This  vdj/n-tattufl  com¬ 
prises  within  it  the  five  taftuas  (whicli  when  combined 
together  constitutes  the  ultimate  truth);  these  are  the 
iattvas  of  the  five  Dliyani-Buddhas  and,  therefore,  of 
the  five  skandhas.  It  is  said  in  the  text  Vajra-^ndJd 
that  from  the  air  of  the  right  nostril  issues  forth  a 
lustre  of  red  colour;  it  is  the  circle  of  fire  and  Padma- 


183 


^  THK  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 

natha  is  the  presidingr  deity  here;  fioni  the  left  issues 
forth  the  lustre  of  deep  green  colour  in  an  aertal  circle 
and  Kurma-natka  is  the  deity  here ;  the  lustre  issuing 
forth  from  both  the  nostrils  is  of  yellow  colour  and  it 
is  said  to  be  the  circle  of  Ijidra  and  presided  over  by 
Hofna-natho.  The  steady  wind  within^  of  the  colour 
of  the  white  Kunda  flower,  or  the  moon,  is  the  circle 
of  VaruTia,  prescribed  over  by  rairo-naffta,  and  the  wind 
pervading  the  whole  physical  system  and  prompting 
all  the  active  tendencies  is  of  the  nature  of  Vairocana: 
These  five  kinds  of  lustre  of  the  nature  of  the  five 
Buddhas  are  to  be  thought  of  in  the  region  between 
the  two  brows,  i.e,,  at  the  starting  point  of  the  nose 
(ndsdgrfl)  and  they  arc  to  be  thought  of  united  into 
the  form  of  a  mustard  seed  (sarsapa);  in  this  mustard 
seed,  however,  the  whole  universe  of  the  static  and  the 
dynamic  should  be  meditated  on,— it  is  also  to  be 
thought  of  as  tlie  place  of  all  wisdom — of  all  the 
mysteries  of  knowledge.*  This  niustard  seed,  however, 
represents  the  Lord  himself  of  the  nature  of  the  five 
wisdoms.*  This  small  figure  of  the  form  of  the  mustard 
seed  representing  the  five  kinds  of  winds  of  the  nature 
of  the  five  elements  and  the  five  kinds  of  wisdom,  is 

'  daJcfinM  vinirgato  taimir  hutabhun-ma^datafi  ca  JaH 
rnkta-yar^am  idarh  vyaktmh  padrno-nalha'Im  dfiiald  if 
vdmdd  vinirgata  rahnir  vSyu-mai}daIa-mm}mtafy\ 
karil-iyarna-mnkdiak  karDta-ndthQ’tTa  |( 
dvSbhijam  vinirgato  jirtfl-farno  I 

mahendra-tnandalaii  caitad  r(iOi<i-^na)jAu*lra  devoid  i 
stabdko  tnanda-pracarat  fii  fiYa-A-mKic-tidM^nm'bftnfc! 
'inmidatBm  caitad  vajra-niitho*tra  devoid  [|  ’ 

jtaiyff.^cAa.Ri/ga  Liaifub  | 

T.'utrocananSvi7bA£vo*«ou  mftah&yiid  viniiedret  |[ 

Quoted  in  the  PancS'frniflta,  MS.  p,  10(B), 
rtdi^-gre  sanajiam  cintet  mrsape  ta-^ard-caram  \ 
hh^vaijet  jmna-podaih  ram^am  rabwj/arri  jnana-Jtutpitani  :i 
paf}ca.t.'ar9arii  niaba^triarii  sor^Rpa-jitAufa-Tnatrcij^anil 
nmika-gre  prayalneaa  bhavayed yogatah  mdd  |l 
,  .  Ibid,,  MS.'  p,  10(A). 

paiiCq.}ii0Aa7nR^arn  totfrani  (arfapa-sf Afiin.mAtrqiom  [ 
tasya  madhyc  Jtftjfo  licoo  hy  ovyakto  vyakto-rftpav&n  || 
taturdevi-paripfcckd-vydlchyd-taniTo,  quoted  in  the 
PaUca-kTanta,  MS.  p,  lO(.A). 


184  TlNTBlC  BUDDHISM  / 

meditated  on  in  the  region  of  nosogra  ancl  itself  is  called 
pra^aydma^  In  many  places  of  the  Sri-Samcja  we 
find  mention  of  this  theory  of  the  five  kinds  of  winds  of 
the  nature  of  the  five  elements  and  the  five  jMnas, 
which  are  to  be  meditated  on  in  the  region  between  the 
brows  in  the  form  of  the  mustard  seed.’  Xt  may  be 
noted  in  this  connection  tliat  in  the  Hindu  texts  also 
we  find  five  kinds  of  vital  wind,  viz.,  prona,  npaan. 
samdna,  u|/ona  and  addna  and  in  the  Maitrdj/oai 
Vpanisad  we  find  that  before  the  world  of  the  animate 
was  created  Prajapati  (the  creator  of  all  beings)  looked 
on  his  creation  and  found  al!  around  that  his  objects  of 
creation  were  stones,  mindless,  lifeless,  stark  as  stocks; 
he  then  reflected, — ^"I  will  enter  within”,  but  as  one,  he 
could  not  animate  them  and,  therefore,  divided  himself 
in  five  and  hence  he  is  named  fay  five  names,  uiz.,  prdna, 
apdna,  samdna,  nydna  and  itddna.* *  We  also  find  in 
this  connection  that  tlie  five  senses  are  but  the  five 
lustres  from  within.* 

The  japa  of  the  Mantras,  according  to  the  Fanca- 
kranta^  does  not  mean  the  mere  chanting  or  the  mutter¬ 
ing  of  the  Mantra;  it  is,  as  it  is  with  the  school  of 
Mantra-yoga,  a  yogic  process  for  controlling  the  vital 
wind  with  the  help  of  the  Jlantras.  In  JMantra-yoga 
some  Mantras  (as  for  example  *om*  containing  with¬ 
in  it  the  parts  *a’,  'u’  and  ‘m’)  are  divided  con- 
venieritly  into  three  parts,  and  these  three  parts  are 
associated  with  the  three  parts  of  the  process  of  prnna- 
ydma,  viz.,  Puraka,  Kumbhaka  and  Recaka.  Thus 
here  in  the  Panca-kraTna  the  japa-Trtontro  is  oih  ah  hum 
and  to  mutter  them  in  the  yogic  process  according  to 

‘  paBc<i-;nortOTijayam  ffiffljfltfi  po  flcfl-bfcutii-sifrtfiftauafram  | 
ntjcaTT^Q  paJfno-ndM-gff  pinda-mpena  kalpatfet  ]| 
pajJca-vamom  mdM-roJnaiij  fti  wnHaml 

nfa-monlrarh.  hrday*  dJij/oCDa  ciUaw  brndw-gutciit  nyflierf  || 

Sam&jo-ttara  quoted  in  the  Potica-trama,  MS.  p,  16(A). 

*  (G.O.S.)  pp,  15,  S5, 

*  Ch.  II,  Ed.  by  E.  B.  Cowell,  pp,  2{J-28. 

*  itid.,  pp.  84-S5. 


^  the  ELEiLENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA  185 

their  meaning  is  ealled  vajra-japa.,'  Whal  is  then  the 
meamng  of  this  Mantra  om  a/t  /tuTii?  It  is  said,  the 
*om* *  creates  all  beings,  ‘ah'  preserves  them  and  ‘huih' 
destructs  them  ;  in  Yoga,  therefore,  ‘om’  will  mean  the 
inhalation,  ‘ah’  the  suspension  and  ‘hum*  the  exhala- 
tion. '  Thus  the  vajra-jdpa  seems  to  be  nothing  but 
pranaydnia  assoeialed  with  the  Mantra  for  the  control 
of  tiie  vital  wintl  ami  the  Panca-fcrfima-tipprtMf  makes 
it  very  clear  that  the  vdjrd-j&pa  is  nothing  but  the 
process  for  controUing  the  vital  wind  and  to  control 
the  vital  wind  is  to  control  the  mind,  and  to  control 
the  mind  and  to  destroy  it  is  to  realise  the  essenceless- 
ness  of  the  dharmas.  *  In  the  commentary  of  the 
Caryd-padas  we  find  occasional  mention  of  this  ua/ra- 
japa  and  it  seems  from  the  references  that  Tja/rn-jnpa 
was  regarded  as  indispensable  for  the  Yoga  for  the 
attainment  of  the  *4iiwttara-5nwadfit  or  the  ultimate 
state  of  extinction  or  rather  absorption  in  the  Mahd- 
sukha.  Some  other  well-known  Mantras  of  Buddhism 
were  also  tlius  given  some  kind  of  yogie  interpretation. 
Of  these  an  important  Mantra  is,  om  niatiipadnie  /iuiii, 
Pfldnia  is  well-known  froni  the  Upanisadie  period  as  the 
symbol  of  the  generative  energy  and  as  such 
it  often  means  female  or  the  female  oi'gan;  want'  or 
dianvond  suggests  its  analogy  with  the  masculine  ele¬ 
ment,— and  tiius  the  Mantra  owt  manipadme  hum  may 
be  interpreted  as  symbolising  the  sexo-yogie  practice 
of  Tantric  Buddhism.  * 

In  a  song  of  BhUxSiika-pada  this  vital  wind,  com¬ 
pared  to  a  mouse,  has  itself  been  spoken  of  as  citta  and 

^  om  hum  artfm-Tm^ama-japma  | 

vk^rattnt  im^ca-buddhehhjio  m  najate  ll 

MS.  p.  17(A). 

fawiAarfl  a,^i-AaraA  sthUpoho 

prafcjirtj?  cmVei  ca  ktamena  ca| 

fdpef  mfintram  obhinnii-ng4tm  sfhitafy  |: 

Ibid.,  MS.  p.  18(A). 

=  MS.  (BN.  Satis.  Noa.  05>  66)  p-  38(A). 

*  Sec  J.R.A.S.,  1S>06.  Ste  al&o  HasHtig's  Encijchjmedm  of 

RcJtgion  anii  p.  55S. 

O.P.  105—24 


1S6 


TAXTIirC-BUDDHl  SM 


/ 

( 

i 


it  has  emphatically  been  declai'ed  that  tliis  mouse  is  the 
cause  of  all  our  existence, — the  duty  of  the  Vo»in  is  to 
kill  this  mouse  with  instructions  from  the  preceptor, ' 
In  another  son»  of  Kanhu-padu  we  find  it  put  in  an 
enigmatic  metaphor,  ‘Kanhu  has  killed  the  mother-in- 
law  and  the  sister-in-laws  of  the  house  and  killing  the 
mother  also  has  become  the  Kapali".  ’  The  mother-in- 
law  (snsa)  here  represents  the  vital  wind  of  the  nature 
of  the  mind  and  the  sister-in-law-  (nnnanda)  represents 
the  wind  that  is  responsible  for  the  sense-perceptionis 
of  sight,  etc.  Comm.) 

and^  the  mother  {man)  represents  the  world  illusion 
(mdj/a),  and  in  the  Pa/icff-/rr(ima  the  vital  wind  has 
been  spoken  of  as  the  niuyd  whicli  is  responsible  For  the 
world-illusion.  * 

In  the  Dohakosas  we  find  frequent  references  to 
this  arrest  of  the  vital  wind  and  of  the  control  of  the 
mind  therewith.  Thus  it  is  said,  ‘He  who  holds  fast 
his  vital  wind  and  does  not  allow  the  mind  to  move  a 
bit,  casts  aw'ay  the  fire  of  time  verj*  easily.  Saraha 
says,  rub  the  two  nerves,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  into 
one/  *  Again  it  is  said,-^Xeave  off  this  horse  of  the 
mind  and  the  vital  wind;  he  who  does  it  is  firmly 
established  in  the  A'a/m/a-nature.’ ‘  With  the  instruc¬ 
tion  of  the  preceptor  arrest  the  vital  wind  through  the 
constant  arrest  of  mind.  When  this  vital  wind  is  made 
steady  what  can  time  or  death  do  of  the  Yogin  ?  ' 
Kaqhu-pada  also  says  in  a  Doha,— “If  the  door  for  the 
going  in  of  the  vital  wind  be  firmly  locked  up  and  if  in 
the  abyss  of  darkness  the  Bodhi-mind  be  kept  as  the 
light,  then  the  jewel  of  Jina  touches  the  void  above  and 
attains  nirvana  through  the  enjoyment  of  life  in  the 
world,” 


’  Song  No,  21. 

*  Song  No.  11. 

\  p.  2r(Al. 

*  n  of  Sotftha  (Dr.  P.  C.  Bagchi**  Editioni. 

Dohakoxit  of  Saraha,  Do  Ad  No.  * 

*  Ibid.,  No,  60. 

Dohdkosa  of  Xanhu-pidp,  Dphd  No,  22. 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA  187 

The  fifth  part  of  the  Yoga  is  dkarand;  in  this  stage 
all  the  functions  of  the  senses  are  stopped  and  the  jewel 
of  vital  wind  is  held  fast  in  the  lotus  between  the  eye¬ 
brows.  This  dhdraiid  leads  to  the  realisation  of  five 
omens  or  signs.  The  first  sign  is  like  a  mirage,  tiie 
second  Is  like  smoke,  the  third  is  like  tlie  fire^fly,  the 
fourth  like  a  bright  light  and  the  fifth  is  elfulgetit  like 
the  cloudless  sky. ' 

The  next  part  of  Yoga,  anitsinrif,  is  tlie  remem¬ 
brance  of  the  realisation  of  the  previous  stages.  The 
next  part,  Samadlii,  is  described  as  the  accumulation 
of  and  the  meditation  on  all  tlie  existence  in  the  form 
of  a  circular  mass  (himha)  produced  through  Prajnd 
and  Vpdya  and  the  quick  attainment  of  knowledge 
through  that  meditation.  Tlirough  pratyahara  the 
Yogin  is  established  in  all  the  Mantras,  through  dhydna 
he  attains  the  fivefold  transcendental  or  super- 
Jiatural  knowledge  or  faculty  (pa?icfl-6hi/iiafoa) *  * ; 
through  prdnayama  is  attained  Bodhisattvahood, 
through  the  strength  of  dharai^a  Vajrasattvahood;  and 
tlirough  nnwsmrfi  the  Sddhaka  enters  the  circle  of 
effulgence  {prabkd-mandala}  and  tlirough  aamddhi  he 
becomes  free  from  all  the  veils  (dvenma). 

The  flow  of  Bodliicitta  is  to  be  arrested  tlirough 
some  process  of  Hatha-yoga  called  madra,  bandha  and 
flsana  and  the  prdiidyd7na  (the  process  of  breath-con¬ 
trol);  and  it  is  held  tiiat  through  the  proper  practice  of 
these  processes  the  flow  of  Bodhieitta  can  be  controlled 
by  the  Yogin  under  all  circumstances.* 

‘  For  a  deUiled  study  of  these  signs  s«  Obscure  Religious  Cults 
of  tJie  preceiit  writer. 

•  *Tli*  five  dbApZis  nie:— (1)  /ddhf-uidhd  or  Iddfci-piKib/fedfl 
{the  different  niftgicsJ  powers),  (iij  Dihba-sotam  (divine  ear), 
(lii)  Purassa  Cetopariyananfirii,  or  r(iradUu-t;r/anariaNi  (knowledge 
of  the  thoughts  of  others),  (iv)  Piih&ridudsd-rtussutmiinaui  (knowledge 
of  the  former  existences),  (v)  Di&5o-cakMu  {the  divine  eye).  A 
sixth  is  also  often  added,  uw.,  j^saua-jtkha^a-kurit-Fuiitom  (the 
knowledge  which  causes  the  destruction  of  humaji  passions). 

*  III  these  mudfas  and  6tin(Pin3  the  main  thing  seems  to  be  the 
acquisition  of  the  capacity  for  the  eontraetinn  and  expansion  of 
some  of  the  muscles  and  nerves  tissociated  with  the  root  of  the 


1S8 


TANTR  IC-BirODHI  SM 


I 

Now  after  the  BoiUiieitta  is  produced  and  its 
downward  flow  arrested,  the  Bodhicitta  mast  march 
upward  to  reach  the  final  stage  in  the  (7snrsa-/i:aruafo. 
With  tills  raising:  of  the  Bodhicitta  from  the  navel  to 
the  lotus  in  tlie  cerebrum  through  the  different  Cakras 
we  may  compare  the  Mahay  ana  conception  of  the 

peais  ^  well  m  tJie  axiiis  and  with  this  contrul  of  the  miiscLes  aod 
the  nerves  is  often  associoted  the  que:itioii  of  bfcath-contral.  Among 
these  mudrm  the  most  Important  seem  to  be  the  SaAnfoli 

end  deseribeti  m  details  m  the  ilathayoga-pmdlpikii^  Among 

the  other  the  Khecan-yrntdray  the  AJflh5-Tnwrfrdp  the  .ijrcja?- 

jtiudra^  the  Vajroni-vwdra  {Ghcrand^-somkitii t  3/i5-47),  the  Fotir- 
ijiudra^  etc.,  are  Tcry  important^  In  the  description  of  the^tc 
[ind  ^andhos  we  Jind  it  rcpcetcdly  declared  that  if  these  are 

rightly  practised,  the  flow  of  semen  can  be  checked  at  any  stage 
ander  any  condition.  The  hcitrd/iiT^  arc  also  the  contmetion  and 
tying  upj  as  it  wercp  of  many  of  the  muscles  and  nerves^  Among 
them  me  Vddi^ana-bandhaj  the  Jn/ojrdhora-hnndha,  the  .Ifufa- 
handha,  the  .tfoftn-handhn,  the  etc*  are  described  to 

be  i^ery  effective  for  the  purpose. 

But  m  this  yogic  priiciicc  of  the  arrest  of  the  downward  flow 
of  semen  and  of  giving  it  an  upward  flow  to  make  It  reach  the 
make  It  motio^css  there  the  conLroL  of  the  differ¬ 
ent  l^ds  of  the  vital  wind  is  absolutely  necessary.  There  is  a  very 
close  relation  between  the  Enotidzi  of  semcn^  the  vital  wind  and 
the  citto  and  tlie  relation  is  so  Intimate  tliat  the  arrest  of  any  one 
of  them  will  stop  the  course  ot  the  other  two.  It  has  been  said 
that  the  bin  do  will  attain  exactly  the  same  state  as  the  vital  windi 
and  both  of  them  move  and  stop  in  perfect  eotrespondence  (dwiTta- 
xiddhi)^  So,  for  the  purpose  of  arresting  the  flow  of  the  Bodhicitta 
the  ^dtal  wind  must  also  be  checked*  For  all  these  purposes  the 
two  nerves  in  the  right  and  the  left  require  to  he  purifiM.  For  this 
piirib cation  of  the  Nadf^  the  yogin  should  first  tote  in  the  vital 
breath  (priit<a)  through  the  moon  (i-ti-,  the  Ida  or  the  nen^e  in 
the  left)  and  afler  the  suspension  of  the  breath  within  for  some 
time  after  Kuiabhotu)  should  exhale  the  breath  through  the 

gun  Pihgala  or  the  nerve  in  the  right);  then  again  he  should 

inhale  the  breath  through  the  sun  and  after  A^uuibbu/fn  exhale  it 
through  the  moon;  the  nerves  are  sure  to  be  puriJied  through  this 
process.  After  this  the  yogio  should  practise  to  suspend  the  vital 
breath  within  and  instead  of  regulating  it  either  in  the  left  or  ia 
the  right  nerve  should  try  to  regulate  it  along  the  middle  nerve- 
In  the  Hfruka-tantra  we  Find  the  same  process  de^ribed  for  the 
puriheatioD  of  Ihe  nerves  as  well  as  for  the  attainment  of  full 
control  over  breath  (5fh  pnfnffl).  The  most  important  of  the  pro¬ 
cesses  for  the  arrest  of  the  flow  of  Bodhicitta  is  the 
or  the  suspension  of  the  vital  wind,  both  PrdnQ  and  Apdnu.  Prdfiia 
is  the  wind  that  moves  upward,  and  Apaim  is  the  wind  that  moves 
downward,  and  generally  the  disturbed  semen  within  the  body  is 
discharged  through  the  downward  motion  of  Ap^na^  but  if  thi? 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 


ISfl 

march  of  the  Bodhieitta  through  the  ten  stages  after 
its  production.  Again  we  find  in  the  Hindu  Tantras 
that  ttie  world-force  (kula-ktixidalim  iakti}^  residing  in 
the  lowest  Cahra,  coiled  like  a  serpent,  is  to  be  raised 
from  its  latency  and  taken  to  the  Sahasrorn  through 
the  various  Cakras  with  the  help  of  yogic  processes. 
Ill  the  Tantrie  Buddhist  school  also  there  is  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  raising  the  Sakti  in  connection  with  raising  the 
Bodhieitta.  It  is  said  that  when  the  Bodhieitta  is 
produced  in  the  navel  region  the  goddess  Candali  is 
also  awakened,  as  it  were,  in  the  Nirmdna-cakra. 
When  she  is  a'wakened  the  moon  situated  in  the  fore¬ 
head  begins  to  pour  nectar  and  this  nectar  rejuvenates 

is  nrrcifted,  the  Bodhieitta  caiifiot  go  downward^  and  if  Prdna 
u  arrasItHij  it  cimnot  go  upward  p  und^  therefore,  Vfhtn  both  ofe 
arreilcd  or  made  passive,  it  can  neither  go  upward  nor  go  down- 
word,  bat  beeoineEi  motionless  like  the  motionless  air  within. 
itha  I/O  gQmai  uha  na  |tii| 

tmu  nkcaia  ihdi  [[ 
h'iuha  mana  ki^havi  na  phnitai  \ 
ntcerafa  gliariiii  g?uiri?  ii'nfiai  |( 

DofefiAtojia  of  Kanhu-padat  No-  !■&. 

Also  the  Comm.:— arfhn  no  gacrJicifj^  apdna-vit^of  nirodhGt^ 
firddhvQin  nq  gocfhnfi  prflao-uSyor 
art/diit'u-d  hah  prana- pdmlb  hy^ik  ra  hit  a  m  pti  t/oktani 
rq^iirq  tathn-mpena  bodhicitianiiurasfja  ttsfhafrfj  || 

In  the  commentary  of  the  .IforfHa-froItta-rawtrij  we  find  that  the  flow 
of  the  Bodhieitta  must  be  cheeked  by  .ingo-rir/dso  and  lfarii-a|/usq. 
The  o?Jgo  iii  explained  as  the  Apjiio  wind  pi  23A)  and  the 

kiira  is  ex  plained  as  Ibe  Prd  no  wind  (^oni  mofiosutha-ccrfrrq-fqfi 
MrAniifrfi  kamh  pnlna-vaguh,  p.  24^4}  and  thus  Anga--nyiim  and 
Kara-nyfisfi  mean  the  Tefjulation  of  tlie  Prdm  and  the  .4pdn« 
winds.  Ill  a  i^ong  of  Kukkiiri-pada  we  find,— ‘*The  milk  of 
the  two  teats  cannot  be  (i.r.,  is  very  diffientt  to  be)  held  in  tire 
milk-pot^  the  tamarind  of  the  tree  is  eaten  up  by  the  crocodile” 
{Song  No-  2).  The  Implication  seems  to  be  that  the  novice  yoginsi 
Clin  not  arrest  the  How  of  Bodhieitta  in  the  navel  region  by  o  full 
control  over  the  two  nerves  (which  are  compared  to  the  teats  of  the 
i-OW,  and  the  jlianrpjim  in  the  navel  being  compared  to  the  milk-pot) + 
But  expert  yogms  control  Bodhieitta  (which  is  compared  to  the 
tamorineb  the  body  being  the  tree)  with  the  help  of  the  suspension 
id  the  vital  breath  or  Kumbhnkn  (which  is  said  to  be  the  Kumbhtra)^ 
Again  it  is  said^  “The  mother-in-law  has  fallen  asleep  and  the 
daughter-m-law  awakes-”  (Song  No,  2),  Here  also  the  mother- 
in-law  (sasfir^)  represents  the  vital  wind  ivdsa  and  when  she  is 
asleep*  i.r when  the  vital  wind  is  completely  suspended,  the  daughter- 
in-law  iL'ahfuh)^  reprt-senling  the  Axindhiitikd^  awakes. 


190 


tXntbic-bu  ddhism 


and  traniiubstantiates  the  body  of  the  Yogin.  This 
goddess  Cundali,  variously  fcnowu  as  Ponibl,  Yoginit 
Sakaja-sundan,  Nairdfma  (or  Naframaai)  is  variously 
described  in  various  Tantras,  Doh^  and  songs.  In  the 
process  of  rising  from  the  lovvest  Cakra  to  the  highest 
she  transforms  herself  variously,  causing  new  realisa¬ 
tions  to  the  Sddhaka.  From  all  that  is  said  about  her 
nature  it  seems  that  she  is  of  the  nature  of  a  strong 
internal  perception — something  like  a  force  of  the 
nature  of  intense  bliss  produced  through  the  esoteric 
yogic  practice.  As  tile  nature  of  this  Sakti,  as  conceiv¬ 
ed  in  the  Buddhist  Tantras,  Dohas  and  songs  has  been 
studied  in  detail  by  the  present  writer  in  another 
work,* *  he  does  not  propose  to  repeat  the  point  here. 

Another  important  point,  noticeable  in  this  cou- 
nection,  is  the  regulation  of  the  Bodlileitta  through  the 
middle  path.  We  have  seen  that  the  philosophical 
schools  within  Mahay  ana  were  all,  or  at  least  professed 
to  be,  followers  of  the  middle  path  inasmuch  as  all  of 
them  declared  that  the  hnal  state  is  neither  a  state  of 
bhava  nor  a  state  of  — but  it  transcends  or 

synthesises  both.  This  Mahayanic  principle  has  been 
adopted  by  the  Tan  trie  Buddhists  in  their  practical 
Yoga  in  regulating  the  Bodhicitta  through  the  middle 
path  (i.e,,  the  middle  nerve  Ai;(id/iut!7fd)  avoiding  the 
two  extremes  which  are  represented  by  the  two  nerves 
in  the  right  and  the  left.  This  principle  of  adopting 
the  middle  path  in  the  Sadkana  has  variously  (and 
often  very  poetically)  been  explained  in  the  Tantras, 
Dohas  and  songs  i  but  as  this  point  has  also  been  dealt 
elaborately  elsewhere,’  it  need  not  be  repeated  here. 

(iv)  The  Four  Mudrds,  Font  Moments  Atid  The 
Four  Kinds  of  Bliss. 

In  this  production  of  the  Bodhicitta  four  stages, 
associated  with  the  four  Cakras  or  lotuses,  arc  dis- 

'  Obscure  Retigwus  Cults,  Clinpter  IV. 

*  Op.  «ff. 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA  191 

tinctly  -marked,  and  on  the  basis  of  these  four  stages 
iive  find  mention  of  four  Mwdrds,  four  moments 
(Airsana)  and  four  kinds  of  bliss.  The  four  jl/udrds  are : 
K.aT}Yi(t-7iiiidTUt  OJiaTtncL-^nudTo,  Mtihu-Jtiiidra  and 
S(i)jiaya-7ttudTd;  the  four  moments  are  :  Ficffra,  Vlpaktif 
Vimarda  and  Vilaksana ;  and  the  four  kinds  of  bliss  are : 
Ananda,  Paramd-nanda,  Yiramd^anda  and  Sahajd- 
nanda,  Tiie  Mudras  here  are  practically  the  different 
stages  of  the  Sadhand,  In  the  small  text  entitled 
Catur-miidrd  we  find  that  these  four  stages  in  the 
Sadh&nd  and  the  resulting  realisations  are  metaphori¬ 
cally  described  as  the  four  ilfutirns  (or  great  women)  of 
the  Sddhuka.  Here  Karma-mudrd  is  explained  as  the 
physical  yogic  process  of  the  Sadhand  (including  the 
production  of  the  Bodhicitta,  arrest  of  the  flow  of 
Bodhicitta,  giving  it  the  upward  motion,  etc.)  ;  the 
realisation  here  is  of  sensual  pleasure  (dnanda)  and, 
therefore,  it  only  resembles  the  Sa/ia/o-bliss  very 
faintly.  The  knowledge  produced  here  is  also  not  the 
pure  knowledge,  it  only  resembles  perfect  knowledge 
very  faintly  by  analogy.  Tillo-pada  says  in  a  Doha 
that  the  Kartna-mudrd  should  never  be  depreciated, 
for  this  is  the  yogic  practice  for  the  realisation  of  the 
four  monients  and  pleasure.'  Dkarma-mudra  is  said 
to  be  of  the  nature  of  the  dkarma-dkdtu  (i.e.,  the  ulti¬ 
mate  element  of  the  dkarmas),  non-phenomenal  (mV 
prapanca),  free  from  though t^onst ructions  (  nirvi- 
kalpa),  natural  (a-krtrima),  uncreate,  of  the  nature  of 
compassion  and  it  produces  Pamnia-nanda  (great 
bliss).  It  seems  that  when  the  Bodhicitta  is  made  to 
flow  upwards  through  the  middle  nerve  .4radftiifi,  a 
knowledge,  associated  with  a  realisation  of  bliss,  of  the 
ultimate  element  underljdng  all  the  elements  of  earth, 
water,  fire,  air  and  ether  is  obtained  and  the  Sdd/tand 
of  this  stage  is  called  the  Dftarmo-mjidrd.^  When  the 
Bodhicitta  moves  still  more  upwards,  a  transcendental 


’  Doha  No.  2A, 

*  Ftde  Advaya-vajTa-aaih£raha  (G.O.S.},  pp.  aa-S4. 


192 


taotric-budditism 


knowledge  and  realisation  is  produced  and  it  is  called 
the  Jl/o/id-inwdrd,  It  is  described  as  cssenceless,  free 
from  the  v'eils  of  subjectivity  (/lieifa-varnrio)  and  the 
passions  (fc/esd-uarana)  ;  it  is  like  the  clear  mid-ilay 
sky  of  the  autumn,  the  origin  of  all  wealt1i>  the  unity 
of  bhora  and  nfrudna,  a  supportless  body  of  compass 
sion,^ — the  embodiment  of  Slahasukha.  Tlie  So  way  a- 
mudra  (the  Mudra  of  knowledge)  is  the  Mudra  per 
excellence — ^it  is  perfect  bliss,  perfect  knowledge,  Wc 
have  seen  that  in  the  fianipufi/i'd  as  well  as  in  the 
Hevajra-panjika  Karma-mitdra  has  been  placed  in  the 
A’/rmaTitt-co/fra,  D/iaruiO’^nuffrd  in  the  Dharma-cakrat 
Maha-mudra  in  the  Sawbhogo-cofcra  and  Samaya- 
mudra  in  the  Mahdsukha-cakra.'  From  this  it  appears 
that  Kanna-nmdrd  represents  the  totality  of  the  pro¬ 
cess  and  the  resulting  bliss  and  knowledge  when  the 
Bodhicitta  remains  in  the  Nirmdna-cakra,  Dharma- 
mudra  is  similarly  the  process,  resulting  bliss  and 
knowledge  when  the  Bodhicitta  is  raised  to  the  Bbormo- 
cakra,  Maha-^nudrd  similarly  refers  to  the  Bodhicitta 
in  the  Sambhoga-cakra  and  Samoya-mudrd  to  the 
Bodhicitta  in  the  Mahdsukha-cakra.* * 

Let  us  now  discuss  the  nature  of  the  four  kinds  of 
bliss,  viz.,  (1)  Ananda,  (2)  Paramd-nanda,  (3)  Viravid- 
nanda  and  (4)  Sakajd-nanda.  Ananda  is  the  bliss 
when  the  Bodhicitta  is  in  the  Nirmdya-kdya,  Paramd- 
nanda  in  the  Dharma-cakm,  Virumd-nanda  in  the 
Sambhoga-cakra  and  Sahajd-nanda  in  the  Mahdsukha- 
kdya.  About  the  nature  of  these  four  kinds  of  bliss 
the  //eua/ra-tontra  says  that  Ananda  means  ordinary- 
transient  pleasure,  Paramd-nanda  is  more  intense, 
Viramd-nanda  means  the  detachment  from  the  worldly 
pleasure  and  Sahajd-nanda  is  the  final  bliss.  Tlie  first 
involves  an  element  of  tactual  perception,  the  second 
is  a  step  towards  pure  bliss,  the  third  is  for  the  destnie- 

■  Vidr  Sarnputm,  MS.  (R.A,S.B.,  No.  I»54)  p.  10(A); 

MS,  p, 

*  Cf*  ttlao  Sekodd^m-tiM  (G*O^S.)p  p.  412  itpg. 


THE  EliEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 

tion  of  all  attachment  and  the  fourth  is  the  final. 
Again  Paramd-utLndc  is  called  bkavo.  or  existence  in 
the  world  of  birth  and  death,  and  as  I'^frajna-'aflnda  is 
said  to  be  of  the  nature  of  detachment,  it  represents 
ntrud^ia ;  and  ^ohajd-naitda  is  neither  hhavo  nor 
m'rodna,  it  transcends  both/  Again  it  is  said  that 
Ananda  is  like  a  resemblance  of  the  world,  i.e.,  here  the 
Sadhaka  gets  only  a  glimpse  of  the  world ;  Paravid- 
nanda  is  the  provisional  world,  Firanin-aancia  repre¬ 
sents  the  world,  but  Sahaja  remains  in  neither  of  these 
three.' 

In  the  Sekoddesa-tikd  we  find  that  is  the 

pleasure  of  passion  which  disturbs  the  mind;  Parama- 
nanda  is  the  realisation  of  full  bliss  when  tile  Bodhi- 
dtla  reaches  the  forehead  ;  the  next  stage  is  the  stage 
of  Ftromd-nflTida  when  nectar  oozes  from  t!ie  moon  in 
the  forehead.  Even  in  this  stage  of  Virama-nanda  the 
Sadhaka  retains  his  consciousness  of  the  egohood,  i.e., 
the  realisation  of  the  bliss  in  this  stage  is  associated 
with  some  sort  of  self-consciousness  ;  but  this  self-con- 
sciousness  is  totally  lost  in  the  state  of  iSaha/d-nanda 
where  the  know’er  and  the  knowablc  are  lost  in  the 
oneness  of  perfect  bliss.  Of  the  sixteen  digits  of  the 
moon  the  first  five  represent  Anandot  up  to  the  tenth 
is  Paronifl-nanda,  up  to  the  fifteenth  is  FtTam-fl-iionda 
and  the  sixteenth  represents  Sahajd-nanda,  Again, 


'  anandena  tttkham  kiHeit  paTania-nandam  tato*dhikam  \ 
virtffna-naTido  vimsaht  syUt  jraftafa-nnnddm  In  jfefalah  j| 
/jrafftomaTfi  sparto-fcjanlflffcfl  drilijrmfi  .^tifehn-raffcliayfl  | 
Irilyflrii  TBgn-narffJit’flc  cilftirthnm  tena  bhAvyate  ]| 
paramA-natidah  bhavam  profttofii  nfruanofi  W  t'irdi§atflh! 
madAyain^-nsndfii-fndlraM  tji  sahajam  e&fttr  oiusrjifam  |1 
HevajTa-tantra. 

Cf.  aUo  Sekodde£a-t^kA  (G.O.S.),  pp-  34-55. 

’  prdlAama-nanda-matnifi  tu  pHramo-nandojrt 
iTiUHdm  -jirdma-fehyan  ta  calurtJiain  johofoTii  ffnirtnm  || 
.*#***• 

jagaef-rupam  pardf?ifl-nanela?n 
uimma-neinfjfm  Mtuu  tip  ridj^etp  mhnjam  IristJ  jf 

Ibid.^  p.  27 {B>. 

Cf,  also  the  commentary, 

O.P*  1CI^25 


TlNTBIC-BUDDinSM 


corresponding  to  the  four  stages,  viz.t  the  state  of  wake¬ 
fulness  (jograf),  dream  {svapna),  deep  sleep 
and  the  fourth  or  the  final  state  iturlya)^  we  have  the 
fo^  elements,  viz,,  body  (A-apa),  speech  (uafe),  mind 
(citta)  and  knowledge  {jfiana) ;  we  have  four  kinds  of 
bliss  in  each  of  these  states  and  thus  the  actual  num¬ 
ber  of  the  kinds  of  bliss  becomes  sixteen  in  all.* 

Closely  associated  with  these  four  kinds  of  dnanda 
is  the  theory  of  the  four  moments  or  four  distinct  stages 
in  the  realisation  of  the  Sahaja,  These  are,  as  we  have 
seen,  VicitTn,  J^ipd/ca,  Viynardu  and 
VicitTa  is  the  moment  when  the  realisation  of  pleasure 
is  attended  with  various  kinds  of  emotions  resulting 
from  physical  union.  Vipdka  is  the  moment  when  the 
bliss  is  matured  to  knowledge  i  is  a  higher 

moment  when  the  realisation  of  the  bliss  is  attended 
with  the»consciousness  of  the  ego  as  the  realiser  of  the 
bliss ;  Vilaksana  is  the  moment  when  ttie  realisation 
transcends  all  these  three  and  the  realisation  of  the 
bliss  is  free  from  any  emotion  of  attachment  or  detach* 
ment.  In  the  moment  there  is  the  realisation 

of  ^nandfl,  in  the  Vipiilca  Paramd-nanda.  in  the  Vimarda 
Viramd-nanda  and  in  the  Vilaksat^a  Sakajd-nanda,  ‘ 

This  theory  of  moments  and  the  four  kinds  of  bliss 
is  very  important  from  the  standpoint  of  Togaj  for 
the  laj  Yogin  who  will  not  be  able  to  distinguish 
between  the  one  moment  from  the  other  and  one  kind 
of  bliss  from  the  other,  may  take  even  gross  sensuality 
to  be  ^oho/a-bliss  or  ilfa/iasiikha  ,*  but  that  is  practi- 

- - - - -  tW 

^  G.O.S.,  pp.  20-27, 

’  ficilmn  Cfl  ca  vwuirdo  vitaltfanaa  taiha  | 

eatuh  Itsarjath  taniSgamya  evam  jdnanti  t/oginn^  j| 

VicttraTfl  vwjdhmn  k/iifatttm  ^Ungajja-^umbansJikaml 
Vipakam  tad^idporynmm  sukha-jkdnaaya  bhuHianaTn  || 
vimardnm  £/{)ca»am  proArlain  sMJttftafn  frhwiioTfi  maytti  ea  \ 
vilaSdaptmt  tribhyo*nyatta  rSgd-raga-vivttrjitnm  || 

VKttfe  ptatkam&-nandah  parama^nando  vipdkake  fh| 
vtram-»ando  vimardaS  ca  sahaiS-nanda  vaakaane  11 
Hcvajra-iantm,  MS.  p,  89(A). 

But  c/.  of  (G.O.S.).  p.  28, 


THE  ELEMENT  OF  ESOTERIC  YOGA 


195 


caliy  adopting  the  path  to  hell.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  the  four  moments  and  the  four  kinds  of  bliss  must 
be  very  clearly  distinguished.  The  Hevajra-tantra 
says  that  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  bliss  follows  only 
from  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  moments,  ‘  Tillo-pada 
says  in  one  of  his  Doh^,  “He  who  knows  the  distinction 
of  the  different  moments  and  the  different  kinds  of 
bliss  becomes  a  real  Yogin  in  this  very  life”.  ’ 

To  understand  the  esoteric  Yoga  of  the  Tantric 
Buddliists  let  us  now  sum  up  the  whole  discussion.  We 
said  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  that  Mali^ukha  or 
great  bliss  is  tlie  Absolute  of  the  Tantrikas.  This  Jlaha- 
suklia  in  its  state  of  Absolute  is  motionless  and  change¬ 
less  T  it  materialises  itself  in  the  gradual  process  of 
change.  The  lowest  Cakra  of  the  body  (whether  the 
Nirmdna-cakra  of  the  Buddhists  or  i}ieMulddkara-cakra 
of  the  Hindus)  is  the  material  plane  and  Mahasukha 
remains  here  in  its  grossly  physical  form— it  is  the  sex- 
pleasure  ;  and  in  this  plane  Bodhidtta  is  the  physical 
hiTidw  (seed) ;  through  furtlier  downward  motion  the 
bindu  becomes  transformed  into  the  physical  body. 
But  as  the  bindu  marches  up  from  the  physical  plane  to 
itigher  and  higher  planes  it  casts  off  its  physical  nature 
and  approximates  its  original  nature  as  the  motionless 
and  changeless ;  this  motionless  and  changeless  Maha¬ 
sukha  in  the  highest  plexus  is  the  Absolute  in  which  the 
self  and  the  not-scif  merge.  The  hindw  in  the  ^iVmana- 
cakra  is  composed  of  earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  ether; 
but  when  the  bindu  in  its  upward  marcli  leaves  the 
Nirmav^a-cakra,  the  element  of  earth  merges  itself  in 
water,  and  in  this  way,  with  further  march  of  the  Bodiii- 
citta,  the  element  of  water  merges  itself  in  fire,  fire  in 
air  and  air  in  ciffo,  and  thus  in  the  highest  plane,  f.c., 
it  becomes  pure  effulgence.  When  this 

'■  anand^s  taira  j^yanie  kiajm-bhed^na  bAedttaAf 

stikha-jnanam  cuathkdre  pTaii&thitam  || 

MS,  p,  ao(AJ* * 

*  khana~anQnda-bk€U  jo 
t*  iho  jummahi  fai  bfumifiai  f|  (No* 


196  TANTRIC-BUDDHISM 

bindu  as  pure  effulgence  becomes  perfectly  motionless 
in  the  highest  plexus  the  Sadhaka  attains  a  transubstan¬ 
tiated  divine  body  with  divine  (immaterial)  eyes  and 
ears  i  he  thus  becomes  omniscient  and  all-pcrvading 
and  thus  becomes  the  Buddha  Himself. 


»  (G,0,s.>,  p.  7.  alio,  p.  45. 


CHAPTER  VI 


THE  ARGUMENT  OF  THE  TANTRIC  BUDDHISTS 
IN  DEFENCE  OF  THEIR  YOGA 

ii)  the  previous  chapters  we  have  tried  to  give  an 
exposition  of  the  theories  and  practices  of  the  Tantric 
Buddhists.  T)ie  Tctionale  of  the  sexo^yogic  practice  of 
the  Tantric  Buddhists  is  to  be  found  in  what  has  been 
described  and  discussed  above.  We, do  not  think  that 
any  further  argument  is  necessary  in  tiefence.  But  it 
seems  that,  because  of  the  unconventional  nature  of 
their  practicesp  these  Tantric  Buddhists  were  sometimes 
tiver-conscious  about  tlie  justifiability  of  tl^eir  practices 
and  advanced  various  arguments  in  defence  of  these 
practices.  It  w  tH,  tiierefore,  not  be  without  interest  to 
state  and  examine  tlie  main  arguments  of  these 
Tantrikas  as  we  find  them  in  the  various  Tantras. 
These  arguments,  as  is  the  case  witli  their  other  argu- 
ments,  are  not  found  in  the  texts  in  a  systematised 
form,  they  are  rather  to  be  culled  from  the  texts.  But 
two  works  are  found  mainly,  though  not  entirely, 
devoted  to  offering  sometliing  like  a  philosoplucal 
explanation  of  these  practices ;  the  first  is  the  Citta- 
ai^iiddfti-pra^mranfl  of  Aryadeva  and  the  second  is  the 
Tflttoa-siddhi  of  ganta-raksita/ 

The  main  argument,  to  start  with,  is  that  to  pass 
any  ethical  judgment  on  the  nature  of  an  action,  it 
should  always  be  remembered  that  an  action,  of  what¬ 
soever  nature  may  it  be,  is  by  itself  neither  moral  nor 
immoral  ^  in  its  non-rclatjonai  absolute  nature  it  is 
purely  colourless,  and  hence  in  itself  it  has  got  no  value, 
that  being  always  relative.  Thus  the  moral,  immoral 
and  non-moral  nature  of  an  action  is  to  be  determined 


*  MS.  (C.L.B.>,  No.  TS124. 


196 


TANTBIC-BIJ  DDHISM 


by  the  effect  it  produces  in  relation  to  the  general 
scheme  of  life.  To  be  strictly  ethical,  it  is  not  even  the 
effect  that  determines  the  nature  of  an.  action, — ^it  is 
ratlier  the  motive  behind  that  speaks  either  for  or 
against  it.  The  main  emphasis  of  the  Tantric  Bud* 
dhists  seems  to  be  on  this  vital  point  of  ethics.  If  it 
be  the  motive  behind  the  action,  and  not  the  action 
itself,  that  determines  the  nature  of  an  action,  any  and 
every  action  in  the  form  of  some  religious  practice  is 
to  be  justihed,  provided,  the  motive  behind  is  nothing 
but  the  attainment  of  some  religious  fulfilment.  The 
ultimate  goal  of  the  Tantric  Buddhists  is  the  realisation 
of  Mohasukha  iii  the  form  of  perfect  enlightenment, 
which  tantamounts  to  the  realisation  of  the  Vajra- 
nature  or  the  Sohaja-nature  of  the  self  and  the  dharmns. 
With  a  view  to  attaining  this  final  goal  they  adopted 
a  particular  sexo-ymgic  practice.  If  we  are  to  judge  this 
practice  by  the  motive  which  impels  them  to  have 
recourse  to  it— and  not  by  the  commonly  accepted 
nature  and  value  of  the  action — we  shall  have  nothing 
to  say  against  it.  If  the  motive  or  rather  the  perspec* 
live  be  not  pure,  they  will  be  like  fools  building  their 
house  on  the  sands  and  great  will  be  their  fall  in  the  dark 
abyss  of  the  cycle  of  birth  and  death.  This  path  of 
Yoga  with  sex-relation  has  frequently  been  spoken  of  as 
a  very  easy  path  for  the  attainment  of  success,  as  it  is 
the  most  natural  path,  being  in  consonance  with  our 
natural  human  tendencies  and  involving  no  unnatural 
strain  of  continual  repression.  At  the  same  time  it  has 
also  been  repeatedly  reminded  at  every  step  that  it  is 
also  a  very  dangerous  path  of  Yoga;  for,  everything 
depends  on  the  purity  of  the  dtta. 

In  the  Citta-o^t^uddhi-prakarnna  of  Aryadeva  we 
find  a  short  ethical  discussion  on  the  nature  of  sin. 
There  it  is  said  that  the  mind  is  the  real  agent  of  all 
actions — nay,  it  is  the  antecedent  factor  of  the  dhormos, 
it  is  the  most  important,  it  is  the  quickest ;  it  is  through 
the  pleasure  and  displeasure  of  the  mind  that  our  speech 


TiNTEIC  BUDDHISTS  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THEIR  YOGA  109 

and  actions  follow.  ’  It  is,  therefore,  that  the  citta  is 
solely  responsible  for  the  etliical  nature  of  an  action, ' 

Thus  the  intention  behind  an  action  gives  an  action 
a  moral  or  immoral  colouring,  and  as  this  principle  has 
got  its  sanction  in  the  Scriptures,  no  pious  man  can  have 
any  objection  to  it.*  Then  the  author  goes  on  to  say 
that  the  Yogin,  who  has  made  a  ‘  god  *  of  himself  by  the 
universalisation  of  the  self,  and  alt  of  whose  activities 
are  prompted  by  a  spirit  of  benevolence  towards  the 
world,  attains  liberation,  by  the  enjoyment  of  objectst 
and  never  is  he  bound  down  by  any  such  enjoyment. 
As  a  man  versed  in  the  science  of  poison  knows  poison 
as  poison  and  then  swallows  some  quantity  of  it  and  yet 
he  never  falls  swooning  thereby,  on  the  other  hand 
becomes  cured  of  diseases,  so  also  is  the  case  with  an 
expert  Yogin,  who  attains  liberation  through 
enjoyment.  * 

A  general  consideration  of  the  trend  of  argument  of 
the  Tantric  Buddhists  will  show  that  their  main  stress 
is  on  the  point  that  no  action  duly  performed  with 

'  tinntahpurvungttmA  dhanm  manahlrcs^hil  inanojaMh  \ 
manasa  hr  pmsannena  hhafitte  vo  kamti  ||  Vci^e  10. 

This  VCTse  is  ndthiiig  but  the  Sanskritised  form  of  the  two  opening 
Verses  of  the  PSit  text  Dhomma-paffa  which  mu  thus:  — 
manopwhbangatftil  dhamma  matioseithu 
rnanasd  ce  paiftrffhena  hhotdtf  vd  haroft  i>d| 
lato 'furni  tfuhhha^dntreti  cahlcnrh^va  vaholo  jMirfowt  |[ 
mauTpirhAdtignmo  dhomirHi  inaitonui|fa  j, 

UiQitasd  ce  patanncna  hhasdn'  I'a  karoti  odj 

tfrto’narii  sirthii»iat)veti  rhopd  ua  ^flfrpdpiiii  Hj  Verses  1-2. 

^  The  author  takes  an  instance  bete.  An  old  man  was  directed 
by  a  f lumbering  monk  to  go  quickly  to  n  place ;  because  of  the 
rapidity  of  motion  the  old  fellow  had  a  fait  .and  he  died;  now 
apparently  the  sin  of  causing  death  to  the  old  man  seems  to  devnlve^ 
on  the  slumbering  monk;  but  as  the  intention  of  the  monk  in 
ordering  the  old  man  to  hasten  to  a  particular  place  was  very  good, 
he  should  not  be  held  morally  responsible  for  the  death  of  the 
old  man  and  thus  he  commits  no  sui.  The  authority  of  the  Vfnoj/o 
is  also^  referred  to  here  which  holds  that  unintentional  caudng  of 
death  is  no  sin  on  the  part  of  a  man  possessing  no  wicked  mind. 
Verses  11-18. 

•  tasmdd  A^opn-mulA  hi  pdpa-punfya-vpnmsthiti^l 
ity  wlflam  dgame  yoamda  na’pattih  Vif&ho-crtasdin  !! 

Tbid.,  Verse  1.5. 


*  Ibid.,  Verses  12-18, 


200  taoteic-buudhism 

Praina  and  Upaya  comes  within  the  scope  of  our  pop¬ 
lar  iode  of  morality.  Prajoa,  we  have  seen,  is  perJ«t 
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  perfect  vacmty  ^out  the 
nature  of  the  self  and  the  dfcarmos  ;  and  Upaya  is  the 
"pta  oT  universal  compassion,  and  these  two  taken 
together  constitute  the  Bodllieitta.  Now,  it  can  very 
earfly  be  shown  from  the  standpoint  of  Prajna  or  per¬ 
fect  knowledge  that  there  cannot  be  any  promsion  f« 
morality,  and  similarly  it  can  also  be  shown  that  from 
the  sUndpoint  of  Upaya  or  universal  ^passion  also 
Ihere  cannot  be  any  provision  for  morality. 

We  have  seen  that  the  Tantric  Buddhists,  in 
unison  with  the  Mahayanist  Buddhists  m  genera , 
were  advocates  of  an  extreme  form  of  ideaUsra. 
With  them  the  world  has  no  objective  b^is; 
everything  that  appears  to  exist  outside,  is 
but  the  illusory  creation  of  the  subject.  It  )s, 
indeed,  extremely  difficult  to  construct  any  system  ot 

ethics  on  the  ground  of  this  extreme 
And  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  idealistic  Bttddhiste  left  no 
scope  for  morality.  It  has  been  declared  by  Nagarjuna 
in  unequivocal  terms  that  the  value  of  morality  is 
alwavs  provisional,  there  being  no  objeett^^  basis  for 
it  whatsoever.  The  whole  universe  of  good  and  bad 
right  and  wrong,  being  a  mere  creation  of  the  citta,  tq 
ivorld  of  morality  has  only  subjective  value  and  as  such 
is  alwavs  provisional.  This  extreme  form  of  subjec¬ 
tivism  has  often  been  emphasised  by  the  Tantric  Bud¬ 
dhists  in  connection  with  the  ethical  questions  pertain¬ 
ing  to  their  practices.  The  citta  or  mmd  being  the 
ailttmale  ground  of  all  creation,  the  nature  of  the  citUt 
will  determine  the  nature  of  all  appearances  in  the  form 
of  actions ;  and  so,  all  actions  done  with  a  pure  mind 
cannot  but  be  pure  even  if  sex-rdation  is  invoked  in 
them.  Tn  the  Juarta-sidtlfti  of  Indra-bhuti  we  find  an 
interesting  discussion  on  this  topic  of  virtue  and  vice. 
It  is  pointed  out  that  contradiiitory  statements  and 
injunctions  are  to  be  met  with  in  the  Tantric  texts  , 
some  actions  are  described  somewhere  as  %drtuous  and 


TiNTEIC  BUDDHISTS  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THEIE  YOGA  201 

vioious  in  other  places.  How  tlien  to  reconcile  these 
eontradictorj'  statements  ?  It  has  been  replied  that  in 
reality  there  is  nothing  virtuous  and  nothing  vicious. 
Virtue  and  vice  depend  on  the  condition  of  the  ciffa. 
There  are  three  elements  (dftafru)  which  generally  com¬ 
bine  together  for  the  performance  of  an  action  ;  these 
are  body  speech  (vafe)  and  mind  (wanas).  Of 

the  three,  body  has  no  power  to  do  anything  without 
mind  ;  speech  is  also  never  possible  without  mind  ;  so, 
It  stands  that  it  is  the  citta  that  is  doing  all  good  and 
bad  through  body  and  speech/  How  then  to  define 
virtue  and  vice?  It  is  said,  whatever  is  done  with  a 
view  to  doing  good  to  the  world  is  right  or  virtuous, 
and  whatever  is  done  with  any  other  motive  is  a  sin/ 
All  the  right  and  wrong  are  created  by  the  eiita  and  it 
is  through  tile  citta  again  that  they  are  all  destroyed. 
Charity  is  one  of  the  universally  recognised  moral 
virtues ;  but  the  mere  action  of  giving  produces  no 
virtue  unless  it  is  done  with  a  charitable  mind  ;  the 
virtue  of  the  action  of  giving  depends  solely  on  Ahe 
attitude  of  the  mind/  It  is  finally  decided  here  that 
^  there  is  no  other  criterion  of  virtue  than  the  benevolent 
spirit ;  any  action  prompted  by  such  a  spirit  is  moral, 
and  any  action  done  with  a  malicious  spirit  is  immoral/ 

It  has  been  further  argued  in  some  of  the  tejLts  that 
the  Yogin,  before  he  enters  into  the  auspicious  circle 


*  Ch.  rX,  Vttsea  6-7. 

*  Aifd-rffiam  yad  bfutvet  Anrma  s/irv/irh  sac-caritajh  bkcvtti 

viparyayat  fat  pmvadanti  /tno-ttantah  ]| 

7bi'd>,  Verse  B. 

*  Ifrftf,,  Verse  is, 

*  In  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  same  work  it  is  said  that  the 
conceptions  of  purity  and  impurity  are  mere  thought-oonstructioas. 
There  is  nothing  as  purity;  for,  the  very  existcuce  of  purity  will 
posit  its  anti'thcsia  iiopurity;  and  if  there  be  no  coneeption  of 
purity  at  all,  there  will  ngt  be  any  coaccptioit  of  impurity  also- 
Bolh  the  conceptiops  ore  relative  and  ore  mere  imagination  of  the 
common  run  of  people  fX,  0-10).  In  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the 
same  work  we  find  that  a  Yogin  is  justified  to  adopt  any  woman  for 
the  purpose  of  his  Yoga,  no  matter  in  what  relatipn  she  stands  to 
lum;  for,  all  human  relations  are  without  any  objective  truth  behind 
them;  they  ore  mere  thought-constructions  of  the  common  people, 

0,P,  105—26 


202 


tanthic-buddhism 


with  a  view  to  be  initiated  iti  the  secret  cult  o£  \oga, 
must  possess  a  trained  mind  and  perfectly  purified  body 
(or  rather  an  immortal  body)  fit  to  realise  the  ultimate 
void-nature  or  live  Sa/iaja-nature  of  the  self  and  the 
dharmas.  When  the  mind  of  a  Yogin  is  thus  ‘placed 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  vacuity  or  the  non-dual  know¬ 
ledge  lie  cannot  have  any  mental  complex  of  morality 
and  immorality  or  virtue  and  vice.  To  such  a  man  all 
the  dkarmm  appear  to  be  of  the  same  non-dual  nature.* 
In  the  Ynganaddha-kTama  of  the  Panca-krama  it  has 
been  said  that  when  the  Yogin  places  himself  in  the 
state  of  Yiiganaddho  or  unification  he  should  make  no 
distinction  between  the  self  and  the  enemy,  the  wife 
and  the  daughter,  the  mother  and  a  public  woman,  a 
pombi  and  a  lady  belonging  to  the  caste  of  the  twice- 
born  ;  to  him  a  piece  of  cloth  and  the  skin  of  a  beast, 
jewel  and  the  husk  of  corn,  urine  and  good  drink, 

MorcovcTf  in  He  bcginuiiiglcss  whirl  q|  birth  add  death  a  mother 
of  one  life  moy  become  the  daughter  ot  the  other  life/  and  she 
again  in  her  turn  muy  become  a  wife  m  the  next  birlh;  so  there 
being  no  fundamental  difference  between  a  wonmn  the  mother 
and  as  the  daughter  ami  the  wiTCj  any  one  cl  them  may  be  adopted 
for  the  purpo^  of  Yoga.  This  ocean  of  world  is  full  of  the  water 
of  thought-coPStTuetionSi  and  the  yogic  jjrocess  of  the  Vfljra-yAnfl 
U  like  a  raft  to  take  people;  nctD^  the  other  shore. 

It  has  been  said  m  the  Ekaliu-uIra-carnfe-irtahn-i'aMM-tafiiro  that 
the  Yogia  of  the  Vajra-yojia  Bhotild  nave  no  fear  either  of  beaveti 
or  of  Jicll;  for  there  js  neither  any  por  any  virtue;  aJl  vice 

and  virtue  are  spoken  of  only  for  the  satififoclion  of  the  common 
people.  As  every  thing  is  by  nature  nothing  hut  the  cHUi  and  as 
the  existcnM  of  cver^^ thing  La  but  momentary,  who  is  there  to  go 
to  bell  and  who  to  go  to  heaven  f 

Tii7  pjSpor/i  vid^ate  kifitit  na  ptinya7n  kincid  asffha  [ 
lokanoTii  eitEa-r47^7dt|ii  pajxi-^mnya-vyavn^thitify  S| 
ciifrt-mSfruTii  tjaiuh  sarvurit  kAans-mdimm 
ndrakaih  ^aceJmti  k0*s<ia  $vargam  prayMi  hi  j| 

MS.  (R,A*S.B.,  No,  OOBtl)  p.  14(A>, 

^  it  is  siild  in  the  Sftc&nih  chapter  of  the  PrnJtSo-jwya-^umwcoya' 
:tiddhi  of  Anshga-va]ra  that  Ln  the  yogie  practices  of  Va|ra-yiiia 
there  should  be  uo  deliberation  as  to  what  kind  of  a  Mudra  should 
be  adopted  and  what  not^  for,  through  the  Yoga,  which  leads  to 
the  rcalisalion  of  the  magical  nature  of  the  universe »  one  can  safely 
enjoy  et'erything,  Everyihmg  having  iia  existence  in  the  ultimate 
non-dual  substance  (dAanun-dhdfii),  nothing  can  be  harmful  to  Yoga; 
andj  therefore^  the  Yogbt  should  enjoy  everything  to  his  hearths 
content  without  the  least  fear  or  hesitttinn.  Verses  2&-6U. 


TaNTHIC  BUDDHISTS  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THElil  YOGA  208 

o^ked  food  and  waste  matter,  scented  camphor  and 
the  bad  smell  of  the  impure,  praises  and  scorns— all 
are  of  e<]ua]  value.  To  him  there  is  no  distinction 
between  the  fierce  God  (i.e.,  iSiva)  and  the  wielder  of 
the  thunder  (f.e.,  Indra),  between  day  and  night,  dream 
and  awakening,  the  past  and  the  present,  liappiness  and 
sorrow,  any  wicked  man  and  the  son,  hell  and  heaven. 
Virtue  and  vice** 

^  We  find  it  quoted  in  the  Subhdsita-samgraha  that 
whatever  easy  movements  of  the  limbs  arc  produced 
through  the  Bodhicitta,  which  is  pure  by  natuie,  are  to 
be  recognised  as  the  Madras  (yogic  MudrSs),  and  aU  the 
sound-^nbrations  are  to  be  recognised  as  the  Mantras. 
*\ot  only  that,  in  connection  with  the  Sahaja  all  the 
varieties  of  emotions,  such  as  the  erotic  emotion, 
heroism,  the  emotion  of  scorn,  anger,  laughter,  fear, 
pity,  wonder  and  quiescence, — the  emotions  of  attach¬ 
ment,  hatred,  infatuation,  pride  and  jealousy,  etc.,— all 
become  pure  by  nature  and  all  of  tliem ‘reflect  the 
know  edge  of  vacuity  ;  for,  at  basis  all  these  are  nothing 
but  the  forms  of  the  one  citta  produced  through  the 
three  element^/ 


In  the  Hevajra-tantra  the  Bodhisattva  Vajra- 

‘  tatha  ^atrau  yatha  bftarytl  tath^t-lmaja  I 

yqlfca  niatfl  totha  ve^ya  yathd  dotnbi  tatiid  dviid  N 

VHslTBtft  tarn  earma  yotfi<j  mtnanj  tfiih&  UiUm  I 

tatha  niedyam  yatha  bhaktnm  fatM  sahH 
yatha  sugandki-icaTpiiratU  tathd  gandkam  nmcdhyajaml 
yatha  stuukamth  vdkyath  taiba  vtlkuaH  jugHpsitatn  || 
j/rtjAfl  tudrais  taihd  yatha  mrii  fnJAa  diva\ 

yatM  $vamMm  tatha  dr»{atn  yatha  Tiafltnfi  ffffhfi  athifani 
yafAd  tatha  dnlikham  ytitha  duffas  tatka  «iiraA  I 

ynlAu  wet* *  tatha  svargds  talhS  puayaiit  tu  papiihim  II 
.  MS.  p.  88(.4). 

*  p.  4?,  AgjiiTt  it  has  been  said  — fooiidi 

I^ple  thinfc  of  libcrotioa  as  somethin^  entirely  different  from 

whatever"  there  I 

women  J  ‘be  Z  !he 

Subhasita^mmgmha^  p.  50, 


TaNTHJC  BUDDHISTS  IM  DEFEXCE  OF  THEIH  YOGA  208 

c^ked  food  and  waste  matter,  scented  camphor  and 
the  bad  smell  of  the  impure,  praises  and  scorns — all 
^e  of  e<jua]  value.  To  him  there  is  no  distinction 
between  the  fierce  God  (ue.,  iSiva)  and  the  wielder  of 
the  thunder  (i.e.,  Indra),  between  day  and  night,  dream 
and  awakening,  the  past  and  the  present,  tmppmess  and 
sorrow,  any  wicked  man  and  the  son,  hell  and  heaven. 
Virtue  anti  vice.' 

We  find  it  quoted  in  the  Sjibhdsita-samgraba  that 
whatever  easy  movements  of  the  limbs  are  produced 
through  the  Bodhicitta,  which  is  pure  by  natme,  are  to 
be  recognised  as  the  Madras  (yogic  Aludras),  and  aU  the 
sound-^brations  are  to  be  recognised  as  the  Miintras. 
Aot  only  that,  in  connection  with  the  Sahaja  all  the 
varieties  of  emotions,  such  as  the  erotic  emotion, 
heroism,  the  emotion  of  scorn,  anger,  laughter,  fear, 
pity,  wonder  and  quiescence, — the  emotions  of  attach¬ 
ment,  hatred,  infatuation,  pride  and  jealousy,  ete.,-^11 
become  pure  by  nature  and  all  of  then/refleet  the 
knowledge  of  vacuity  ;  for,  at  basis  ail  these  are  nothing 

but  the  forms  of  the  one  citta  produced  through  the 
three 


In  the  tfeufljra-tanfra  the  Bodhisattva  Vajra- 

‘  laffin  ifatiUM  tfatlm  bftarytl  tath^-lmaia  I 

i/otfca  mala  tatha  veSya  yfdhd  fJlombi  littiid  dviid  H 

Iiif^  c<irni<i  ijathd  Tatnam  tathU  tusnm  I 
Hiit^  iiiurmiji  totha  nifdttmh  yntha  bhaktnm  tathii  sahrt 
fial^  sugandki-kdri>vratU  taiM  gandhntn  amcdhvajtfm\ 
yatha  stitUkaratk  vdkyam  tatha  vakyan  jugiipsitam  || 
tudraif  lalA<f  yatka  tairii  tatha  divvll 

yatM  avamtam  tatha  dr?lath  yatha  naffani  fdJhu  nlkitam  , 
yafM  fdlAa  dnftkham  ytttha  duft^s  tatka  sii^aAf 

ifBWti  wfw  tatha  st>arffa$  talhS  immjaih  hi  jHlpiikam  11 
.  MS,  p.  88(.4). 

"  Subh^iiQ-itiifigraha,  p,  Agjuu  it  has  been  &ajd  — fooSiih 

^ple  think  oT  liberation  fnwXiim}  as  somethin®  entirely  different  from 
f  whatever’ there  i  sublime 

goM  aJJ  rciind,  aJ|  the  women  are  to  be  known  as  the  thimder- 

dl  mni  ™  to  b.  roooeoteed  ««  iht  o,“,  "r 

'•  “  ■» 

Suhha&ita-sQmgmhaf  p.  50, 


201 


tIntric-buddhism 


garbha  asks  the  Lord  (fj/iagauflii)  how  it  aiay  be  possi¬ 
ble  to  attain  success  in  Yoga  in  t!ie  company  of  a 
woman.  In  reply  the  Lord  says  that  in  the  Prajfia  and 
the  Upaya  there  is  neither  origination  nor  destruction  ; 
through  perfect  knowledge  of  the  world  the  Yogin  first 
of  all  should  realise  the  illusory  and  magical  nature  of 
the  world,  and  then  he  will  find  that  all  the  theses  and 
anti-tlieses  vanish  in  the  sky.  Yoga  presupposes  this 
knowledge  about  the  world  and  the  Yoga  performed 
with  this  kind  of  knowledge  is  always  above  the  range 
of  the  ordinary  codes  of  morality/ 

Tillo-pada  says  in  one  of  his  Dohas,  “  1  am  void,  the 
world  is  void, — all  the  three  worlds  are  void, — ^in  this 
pure  Sahaja  there  is  neither  sin  nor  virtue,”*  The 
ultimate  reality  is  bereft  of  both  merit  and  demerit,'* 
Now,  from  the  standpoint  of  Upaya  or 'universal 
compassion  we  see,  that  the  ordinary  standard  of 
morality  cannot  be  applied  to  a  Bodhisattva,  For,  a 
Bodhisattva  has  no  right  to  consider  the  pros  and  cons 

Cf.  also,— yds  fa  ^oruaTii  prajnaya 

S0*pi  ^nya^pada-yogaa  tapo  hy  etam  raBhatmaiaam.  || 
Sarva~deva-mmigajnfi-ia.itlTa,  quoted  in  the  SuhA^^'rir- 

aaiiigTaha,  p,  49, 

^  MS,  pp.  a5(A)— S5(B}.  Id  the  of  tbc 

I^anca-krafna  we  find  it  pteacribed  that  in  Yoga  the  Yogin  first  of  all 
should  worship  himself  as  the  n11-pervadisg  perfectly  enlightened  one; 
and  then  the  employment  of  Mantras  and  Mudras  and  the  describing 
ot  the  yogic  eircle  and  the  performunces  of  offering  and  sacrifice  should 
all  be  made  as  magic;  all  perfomniiiccs  for  peace  and  well-being, 
and  the  Ji-AicorilHi  performances  (like  subduing  or  attracting  others) 
should  all  be  made  as  If  they  are  all  like  the  rainbow  in  the  sky, 
and  all  enjoyment  like  that  of  Eex-inteieourse,  etc,,  and  songs  and 
sounds,  etc.,  should  be  made  as  if  they  arc  all  like  the  moou  lefieeted 
in  water, 

ma  RtTfi-mudTlt^pmyQganca  ma«du  ( fd)(fi-uikalpaitam  | 
bafi-hofFui'knpdih  satvaih  kvnj&t  mayo-pam&jh  sadd  || 
iantikinh  poaslikaH  cd*pi  (of Ad  i.-a^d-hhi[cdraiMi  | 
dkar?^-(ft  pat  sarvom  kury&t  indT&yudho-pajnam  \ 
iT^gArd-dij-iipBbhogaf\  ca  gif a-vadi/d,^i'Sei^nam  | 
kal^u  ca  prarifdftfl  ca  kiiryad  udaka-ctmdra^vat  || 

.  MS.  p.  2T(B). 

aahaje  na  papa  na  purmftj 

D0hd  Nd.  84^ 


■  Ddto  No.  29. 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISTS  IK  DEFEKCE  OF  THETE  YOGA  205 


of  any  action  from  his  own.  standpoint,  that  Is  to  say, 
he  has  no  right  to  judge  an  action  as  right  or  wrong 
only  because  it  produces  some  good  or  bad  effect  on 
him.  The  life  of  a  Bodhtsattva  being  pledged  for  the 
world  at  large,  he  may  be  rectuired  to  do  something 
which  pleases  others  but  may  do  him  harm. ' 

The  main  emphasis  of  the  Vajra-yanlsts  is  on  the 
point  that  all  the  other  religious  systems  arc  rather 

'  Thus  find  in  di«  — if  u  womau  fdJs  passionate- 

ly  in  Love  witLi  Hi  Bodhbotlva  and  if  she  lie  about  to  aacriHce  her 
life  for  him,  it  is  the  boundeu  duty  ot  the  Eodhisattva  to  save  her 
life  by  satisfying  hcr^  So  the  Bod^sattva  shouJd  transgress  the  law 
€VtQ  of  the  ten  kinds  of  meritorious  derd  for  the  sake  of  others* 

Hla^patah Ibodhhativ^n  dusa-kns'afdaj^  apt 
par^-fthcna  khandayiiavyamjyatk^  hadt  frdwia-rlhiuJ  kdmroJ  4((rl 
hf>dhiso  prati  prd^n  tyafet  f  fasyaht  kdnmdi^savi^cvanena 

pronfi-sonearorh  kurya^f 

TaUva-dddhlt  MS*  (C*L*B.)  p*  205. 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  it  has  been  repeatedly  said  in  many 
of  the  texts  that  there  is  tiotbiog  in  the  world,  which  a  Bodhisnttva- 

Jogtn  should  not  do  for  the  sake  of  the  beings.  {Citta-viitiddhi-pm^ 
urai^at  Verse  It  has  also  henu  repeatedly  declared  that  the 

only  eritenon  of  morality  is  a  sincere  wiLL  for  the  good  of  others. 
Anything  that  is  harmfii]  to  the  beings  immoral  by  naturep 
Perfect  enlightenment  has  been  deuied  to  the  .orthodox  monks  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  Hina-yana  told,  though  they  strietly  observe  aJl  the 
so-culled  discipline  of  morality*  It  Le  said  in  the  Guhyendu-tUakn 
and  other  Tantras  of  the  same  type, — ^ ‘There  is  nothing  not  to  be 
done  by  a  man  whose  mind  is  equipped  with  Frajhii  and  Dpdya;  he 
should  always  enjoy  the  five  objects  of  desire  most  unhesitatingly. 
**  «*  whose  Bodhicitta  is  firm  and  whose  mmd  Ls  not 

attached  to  desires,  need  not  have  any  doubt  ut  hesitation  in  this 
Yoga,  his  success  is  guaranteed”* 

anst*  frmcif  cifarfat-i/awi  praji^o-paycna  Ct?E05a| 

**##*«« 

hodhieiEtam  dTdham  ya^a  uihsangd  iiJaliY  bhsv^i  [ 
viciMtsa  fioiva  kurtnvya  ta^yedum  ddhyfite  dJiruvam  || 

Quoted  in  the  Tativa-slddhit  MS,  p.  tS5* 

It  has  been  said  in  the  Updli-ptiripjccha-sutm  that  the  passions 
of  the  BodhLsattva  proceed  out  of  deep  compassioa  for  the  heings- 
Beeause  of  the  aim  and  also  the  knowledge  which  accompany 
them  they  never  affect  the  mind  oL  the  Bodhisattva^  It  is*  there¬ 
fore,  said  that  with  the  Bodhicitta  the  Yogin  himself  becomes  a 
god,  such  a  Yogin  need  not  inflict  torture  on  him  through  hard 
penance;  let  him  be  the  perfectly  enlightened  one  through  the 
enjoy  meat  of  bliss.  Neither  purity,  nor  rules  and  reguLaiions, 
neither  penance  nor  hard  works  are  required  for  success;  success  is 
to  be  attained  through  an  easy  proceEi?  of  pleasure  and  bHss.  [Quoted 
in  the  Taitva-tiddhif  MS-  pp*  1BB-1S9.) 


206  Tantric-buddihsm 

defective  maBnmeh  as  they  prescribe  the  most  un¬ 
natural  repression  on  the  mijid  of  a  man*  Tlii-ou«h  the 
practices  of  the  difficult  vows,  fastings  and  hard  penan¬ 
ces  a  man  may  inflict  torture  upon  his  body  and  mind, 
but  tlirotigh  such  an  unnatural  process  nothing  like 
final  tranquillity  of  the  mind  ean  be  attained.  The 
principle  of  the  Tantric  Buddhists  in  introducing  the 
esoteric  yogic  practice  is  mucli  akin  to  the  principle  of 
Homceopathy,  viz.,  ^imtha  sijaih'htis  ewranfwr.  It  has 
been  found  on  investigation  that  the  element,  wliich 
causes  a  disease  under  particular  circumstances,  cures 
the  same  disease  when  applied  by  an  expert  physician 
in  a  di^erent  way,  i.e,,  in  a  very  smaller  dilution. 
The  Vajra-yanists  mil  also  say,  that  the  verj-^  action 
which  binds  a  man  down  to  the  world  of  infinite  misery 
may  help  him  to  attain  liberation,  if  taken  from  a 
different  perspective,  i.c.,  if  taken  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  Prajfia  and  the  Upaya.  This  principle  of  the 
Vajra-yanists  is  found  explained  in  many  of  the  texts 
in  the  form  of  a  set  of  analogies,  the  main  purport  of 
whicli  is,  what  binds  the  fool,  liberates  the  wise ;  that 
which  may  prove  fatal  to  ordinary  people  may  conduce 
to  health  and  happiness  in  the  ease  of  a  scientist,  that 
which  drags  tlie  uninitiated  fool  to  the  hel]  of  debau¬ 
chery  may  help  the  initiated  Yogin  to  attain  perfect 
enlightenment.^  It  has  been  said  in  the  Citta-visuddhi- 
prakarana  of  Aryadeva,  "Childish  peo[iIe  arc  pleased 
w'ith  colour  and  beauty— the  mediocre  resoit  to  renun¬ 
ciation,  the  highly  enlightened  ones,  who  know  the 
ultimate  nature  of  all  form  and  beauty  are  liberated.”’ 
What  is  real  ivith  childish  fools  is  unreal  with  the 
Vogins,— through  this  principle  the  wise  realise  the  end, 
they  are  neither  bound  down  nor  liberated  (ix.,  tliey 
realise  the  state  which  transcends  both  bondage  and 
liberation).  Only  the  ignorant  think  of  existence  and 


*  /“/S'""*'  VBmlgiynm  ^Sjiti  imdhifamah\ 

tvabhAva-}na  vmuci/anie  rapajiyo’Uaina-imiltthaifah  |i 

Verse  20. 


TANTRtC  BUDDHISTS  IN  DEFENCE  OP  THEIJl  YOGA  207 

extinction,— the  seers  of  truth  think  neitlier  of  tlie  world 
nor  of  nirvana.  In  t!us  ocean  of  the  world  our  thought- 
constructions  are  the  only  disturbing  elements ;  those 
great  saints  who  have  been  able  to  transcend  these  con¬ 
structive  imaginations  are  liberated  from  the  bondage 
of  the  world.*  Ordinary  people  are  as  much  obstnicted 
by  the  poison  of  doubt  as  the  really  poisoned  people 
are  ;  the  compassionate  must  eradicate  all  such  doubts 
and  move  freely.  As  a  transparent  gem  is  coloured  by 
the  colour  of  other  objects,  so  also  is  the  gem  of  eitta 
coloured  by  the  constructive  imaginations/  but  by 
nature  this  gem  of  citfa  is  free  from  the  colour  of 
imaginations — it  is  pure  from  the  beginning—uncreate 
— essenceless  and  stainless/  Whatever  should  not  be 
done  by  foolish  people  should  verj’  carefully  be  done 
by  the  Yogin  whose  mind  is  pure,  Wlien  women  are 
charmed  and  enjoyed  by  a  Yogin,  whose  mind  is  bent 
on  the  good,  they  conduce  to  the  fulfilment  of  desires 
and  also  to  liberation  at  the  same  time.*  By  a  metho¬ 
dical  meditation  on  the  supreme  qualities  of  the  gods 
a  Yogin  revels  through  his  passionate  mind  and  is  again 
liberated  through  the  fulfilment  of  t!ic  passions.  As  a 
man  affected  with  poison  again  gets  rid  of  it  through 
poison,  as  the  water  in  the  ear  is  removed  with  the  help 
of  water  poured  in  tlie  ear,  as  a  thorn  is  removed  with 
the  help  of  another  thorn,  in  exactly  the  same  manner 
the  great  sages  get  themselves  relieved  of  all  the  pas¬ 
sions  witli  the  help  of  the  passions.  As  the  washerman 
washes  and  cleanses  his  clothes  with  the  help  of  some 
dirty  substance,  so  should  the  wise  remove  the  filth  of 
his  mind  through  filth  (of  enjoyable  objects)/  As  a 


*  Ibid.j  Vetises  *  J&iV?.,  Verses 

'  Verse  Nq,  Verses 

yaiha  kaind  tu  |[ 

frfinja/  jcladi  juttnawa  kantokenawa  A'diifaitaiii  | 
raficiiimva  tathu  uJifhdmntr  nmnlmjtah  ]| 

rajfiko  vustraTri  i7tA/erirtri/fl  tu  ] 

kurifitif  I'ifna^  tathfiHm^nnm  fii  [ 

Ibid^^  Vctks 


208 


TANTmC-BUDDHTSM 


glass  becomes  pure  and  transparent  when  rubbed  with 
rubbish,  in  exactly  the  saine  manner  when  something 
bad  is  done  and  enjoyed  by  tlie  learned,  it  becomes 
the  destroyer  of  all  wrong.  When  a  lump  of  iron  is 
thrown  into  ivater  it  certainly  sinks  down,  but  when 
it  is  shaped  as  a  vessel  it  not  only  floats  on  water, 
but  takes  others  also  to  the  other  shore ;  exactly  in 
the  same  manner,  if  through  the  principles  of  Prajha 
and  XIpaya  the  mind  can  be  shaped  into  a  vessel,  one 
is  not  only  liberated  tb rough  the  enjoyment  €>f  objects 
but  relieves  others  also/  It  is  well  known  to  all  that 
milk  destroys  poison(  ?)  ;  but  the  very  milk  taken  by 
the  snake  is  transformed  into  strong  poison.  As  the 
swan  drinks  milk  out  of  a  mixture  of  milk  and  water, 
so  also  the  learned  enjoy  the  poisonous  objects  of 
desire,  but  avoids  bondage  and  attains  liberation/ 
Then  the  author  tries  to  show  that  no  object  of  the 
world  and  no  action  whatsoever  has  got  any  absolute 
nature  with  a  beneficial  or  a  pernicious  influence. 
The  nature  of  the  dhurmas,  depend  mainly  on  the 
collocation  of  cause  and  conditions.  A  slight  ele¬ 
mental  change,  or  a  slight  change  of  condition  may 
change  the  nature  of  an  object  altogether.  From 
this  the  author  draws  the  conclusion  that  human 
passions  and  the  actions  prompted  by  them  have  got 
no  absolute  nature  of  their  own,  and  as  snch  by  them¬ 
selves  they  are  neither  beneficial  nor  pernicious, 
neither  virtuous  nor  vicious.  As,  for  instance,  poison, 
when  taken  in  a  scientific  manner  acts  like  nectar, 
and  even  food  like  buttered  cakes,  etc,,  when  taken  in  an 
unscientific  manner  by  the  fool,  acts  like  poison,  so 
also  is  tlie  case  with  this  cztfa,  which,  w'hen  purified 
by  pure  cause  and  conditions  shines  bereft  of  all 
thought-constructions,  bereft  of  any  attachment  and  is 
pure  by  nature/  As  the  dim  ray  of  a  lamp,  when 
supplied  with  fresh  oil  and  wick,  becomes  unllickering 

*  Ibid,^  Vtrses  ■  SfMl.  *  /bid..  Verses  13-44, 

‘Ibid.,  Verses  4S-4e. 


TANTBIC  BUDDHISTS  IN*  DEFEN'CE  OF  THEltt  YOGA  21)9 


light  and  removes  aj]  darkness,  as  the  small  seed  of  the 
banian  tree  with  proper  nounsfiment  grows  in  exuber¬ 
ance  veith  roots,  branches,  leaves  and  fruits  and  becomes 
a  great  tree,  as  the  yellow  colour  in  combination  with 
lime  undergoes  a  great  change,  so  also  is  tlic  element 
of  the  dAannas  which  admits  of  great  <^hange  in  asso¬ 
ciation  with  Praiiia  and  Upaya.*  Clarified  butter 
{ghrta)f  wlien  taken  with  honey,  has  the  chemical  effect 
of  poison  ;  but  when  it  is  duly  taken,  it  has  got  a  chemi¬ 
cal  action  conducive  to  health.  As  copper,  rubbed 
with  some  chemical  substance,  becomes  pui'e  gold,  so 
the  afflictions  (fclcsa),  when  purified  with  knowledge, 
becomes  beneficial  to  men.  The  followers  of  the 
Hinayana  have  tlieir  fear  of  death  at  every  step,  but 
the  followers  of  the  Mahayana,  accepting  the  religion  of 
compassion  and  with  their  mind  bent  on  relieving  the 
whole  world  and  having  the  bow  of  Prajha  in  their 
hands,  have  no  fear  of  anything  whatsoever.*  As  the 
lotus  grows  in  mud,  but  is  never  affected  by  the  rlefects 
of  mud,  so  the  Yogtn  is  never  affected  by  the  vices  of 
imaginative  construction  and  of  the  desires, 

The  Tattva-eiddhi  of  ^anta-raksita  breathes  tJie 
same  spirit  as  the  Citta-niaaddhi-prakara^a.  Tliere 
also  ive  find  that  the  beauty*  and  objects  of  the  world, 
when  duly  enjoyed  with  the  knowledge  of  tlie  Prajna 
and  Upaj*a,  must  produce  .some  special  religious  effect 

bhavanti).  It  is  a  commonly 
accepted  truth  that  some  special  substance  has  got  the 
capacity  of  producing  some  special  effect*  as,  for 
Instance,  the  fruit  of  the  Emblic  My^robalan  (dnialaka). 


*  vak7*ih  k^o^py  tmIa-^tiaTty^r^i~mimkTtah\ 

fftpo  sfJirm-fiminz-TidifitTi/ili  |J 

vafa-hljam  yaihfi  ^ahakam-mtmnvitam\ 

^khA^jitulu-phalopetam  imh^vfksa-vidh^yakam  || 

narj^-rtfoTiaTTi  j#i 

prajfiQ^p^pa-mnmtjQgdd  faihA  f| 

VerscB  17-40, 

^  Verses  50-53. 


^  pankfi-jSt^fn  yathd  padniatfi  paiHim-dQEair  nfl  Upya1e\ 
vikalpa^vaE^na-damiff  faffta  na  Upyatc  || 

Tbid,,  Verse  115. 

0,P.  103—27 


210 


TANTHTO-BUDDHTSM 


which  grows  on  earth,  has  got  by  nature  an  astringent 
taste  ;  but  that  very  amalafea  fruit,  when  it  obtains  the 
additional  condition  of  being  run  through  a  process 
with  milk,  tastes  very  sweet.  So  it  is  found  experi*- 
mentally  that  the  same  tiling  may  have  different  effects 
when  affected  or  reformed  through  other  different  cause 
and  conditions.  If  that  be  true,  there  cannot  be  any 
doubt  about  the  fact  that  the  objects  of  the  w'Drld,  when 
properly  enjoyed  with  the  yogic  practices  can  produce 
some  special  religious  effect.  In  this  connection  it  is 
reminded  that  there  is  no  such  law  that  a  particular 
thing  will  produce  the  same  particular  effect  under  all 
the  varying  circumstances  ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  seen 
that  one  root-cause  tnay  produce  entirely  different 
effects  under  different  collocation  of  conditions.  The 
mysterious  capacity  of  the  combination  of  the  cause 
and  conditions  is  unknoTvn  and  unthinkable  even  to  the 
wise.*  That  being  the  ease,  it  is  to  be  admitted  that 
sex-passions,  which  generally  drag  a  man  down  to  the 
level  of  the  beasts,  may  also  raise  him  Lo  the  level  of 
the  gods,  if,  however,  these  passions  are  reformed  anti 
purified  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Prajna  and  Upaya. 
The  authority  of  the  is  ciuoted  here, 

where  it  has  been  said  that  as  in  the  cane-fields  or  in 
the  paddy-fields  fertilisation  of  tlie  soil  becomes  of 
muchdielp  for  the  growth  of  corn,  so  also  the  reformed 
afflictions  become  beneficial  to  the  Bodhisattva.^ 

As  the  forms  (riipa)  and  objects  (drauya)  have  no 
absolute  nature  of  their  own,  and  as  their  nature 
depends  on  the  variation  of  conditions,  and  as  associated 
with  Prajna  and  Upaya  they,  instead  of  fettering  the 
mind  of  a  man  in  the  world  of  misery,  can  conduce  to 
supreme  bliss  and  final  liberation,  so  also  is  the  case 

.  .  .  MS.  p.  W. 

,  ikfU-^ic^etTefti  iSH-hfetreiu  Mriistdro-^fa  Mp(i~ 

fcdrI*6hillo  hhavitti f evapi  eva  bndhkattvntyft  hkia  Kpdfcfiri-bfcfiro 
oAOT/afti 

Quoted  in  the  Tnttva-nddhi,  MS.  pp.  187-1A8. 


TXNTIUC  BUDDHISTS  IN  DETENCE  OF  THEIE  YOGA  211 

with  the  bliss  resulting  from  any  kind  of  tactual  sensa¬ 
tion  (sparsa-nirjafa-swfc/ifl).  As  in  association  with 
Ignorance  tliis  bliss  may  be  the  cause  of  bondage  and  of 
illusion,  in  association  with  Prajfia  and  Upaya  it  may 
again  lead  one  to  a  transcendental  state.  The  whole 
thing  depends  on  the  motive  or  the  mental  attitude  or 
the  resolution  (sanfcaipa).  If  the  mental  resolution 
(manornfha-sonfcaipfl)  be  pure,  everything  will  be  benc- 
Jicial  not  only  to  the  self,  but  ailso  to  the  whole  world. 

AgsBn  it  is  said,  this  tactual  pleasure  may,  through 
practice  and  a  strict  mental  discipline,  lead  our  mind 
to  a  transcendental  absolute  position,  where  the  tran¬ 
quillity  of  mind  becomes  a  natural  outcome  of  the 
tactual  pleasure.  As  fine  arts,  through  sights  and 
sounds,  can  gradually  lead  our  disciplined  mind  to  a 
tranquil,  supreme  and  permanent  nature  (samahita- 
parawm-sasuntfl-suahha'ua),  so  also  is  tlie  case  with  this 
tactual  bliss.  Our  deep  emotions  of  passion,  grief,  fear, 
etc.,  and  the  bliss  arising  out  of  touch,  etc.,  may  also 
have  a  supreme  transcendental  effect  on  our  mind.  The 
intensity  of  an  emotion  can  destroy  all  the  waves  of 
mentation  and  create  an  undisturbed  oneness  (samo- 
rasfl)  in  the  mind.  It  has  been  said  that  through  those 
very  emotions,  through  which  the  mind  of  a  man 
becomes  concentrated,  the  mind  of  a  man  becomes 
absorbed  in  the  thatness  just  like  the  Vih)a-rupa  jewel." 
The  whole  tiling  hinges,  us  we  have  seen,  on  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  subject.  As  when  the  Ketaki  flower  is 
eaten  by  an  elephant,  its  scent  transforms  itself  into 
musk,  and  when  eaten  by  any  one  other  than  the 
elephant,  it  has  different  transformations,  and  as  the 
Ketaki  flower  itself  is  not  responsible  for  any  of  these 


'  yi-Tid  t^^mi  hi  bMiarrm  nrn^tn| 

iena  iannuiytxi^m  yaH  viiva-TUfiff  manir  yathii  || 

Quoted  in  the  Commentary^  MS^ 

p.  A(Aj;  quoted  lU  the  ral£va-sWdfti»  MS.  p..  lOT* 

U  La  hJso  found  in  the  with  slight  in 

lending.  MS.  (R.A.S.B.,  No.  1127W)  p. 


T^NTRIC-BUDDBISM 


!il2 

transformations,  so  also  is  the  case  with  our  passions ; 
they  produce  entirely  different  effects  under  different 
eircuinstaiiees  mainly  depending  on  the  subjective 
conditions.  Again  as  milk  drunk  by  the  snake  results 
in  poison  and  has  the  effect  of  nectar  when  drunk  by 
others,  so  also  is  the  case  with  the  human  passions** 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  what  really  is  the  vrata  (vow) 
of  a  Yogin  of  tlie  Vajra-yana?  It  is  to  view  all  the 
dhamias  as  well  as  the  self  from  the  perspective  of 
perfect  vacuity.  If  that  he  the  fact,  when  a*  perfect 
Yogin  sees  some  objects  with  his  eyes,  the  objects  are 
void,  and  so  are  his  eyes;  how,  then,  can  the  void  be 
affected  by  the  void?  The  vow  of  a  Yogin  is  to  do 
everything  with  a  compassionate  mind  and  vvith  the 
knowledge  of  the  void  ;  and  if  these  conditions  are  ful- 
hlled,  the  Yogin  can  do  whatever  he  likes  without  the 
least  possible  fear  of  his  being  fettered  again  in  this 
world ;  what  is  done  with  a  compassionate,  fearless 
mind,  free  from  thought-constructions,  is  the  best  of 
all  the  vows.’  .\gam  what  is  topos  (penance).^  It  is 
5ai<l,  "  To  perform  all  works  with  a  fearless  mind— to 
observe  all  the  practices  witli  a  fearless  mind,— this  is 
the  best  kind  of  tapas  ( penances). * 

The  arguments  discussed  above  represezU  tlie 
general  trend  of  thought  found  in  the  Buddhist  Tan- 
tras  in  justification  of  the  practices  they  adopt  in  their 
yogic  jS’adkand.  The  same  arguments  are  to  be  found 
in  many  of  the  Tantras  and  Doha.%  explained  with  the 
help  of  various  kinds  of  analogies.  Thus  it  is  said  in 
the  Jndldnah-va/ra^iiidld-tantra, — “As  mad  elephants 
are  subdued  with  the  help  of  molasses  and  rice,  so  also 
should  the  highest  knowledge  be  attained  through  a 
similar  process.  As  some  medicine  is  sweet  to  taste 

*  Ibid.^  MS,  pp. 

*  pUTi^i  CQ^ktamf  1^0 fiinam  Hdnarii 

mri'a-karmani  J}i7viiankai  CQtet  iwdd  | 
hA/i^TPiit  iTuiattflni  ij 

^  ,  Tain-n^mddhu  MS.  p.  W2. 


TANTRIC  BUDDHISTS  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THEIR  YOGA  218 

uiid  at  the  same  lime  eureii  disease,  so  also  is  the  bliss 
coming  out  of  the  combination  of  the  Prajha  and  the 
Upaya,— it  destroys  the  afflictions  easily  anti  smoothly 

. Again,  what  to  one  is  a  roj>e  for  hanging  one- 

^If,  is  the  remover  of  bondage  to  the  other,  O,  the 
wonderful  power  of  the  followers  of  the  excellent  vehicle 
of  Maha5'ana !  Kama  iiere  practices  religion  by  deejily 
embracing  women.'"  The  commentary  on  the  DohdkoHU 
of  Kanhu-pada  raises  a  question  in  this  connection, 
Maka~»ukha  is  non-caiisul  (nrrnimtttti),  whereas  the  bliss 
arising  out  of  the  combination  of  the  Prapia  and  Upayw 
is  causal ;  how  then  can  the  latter  become  the  Maha- 
sukha}  The  r^ly  is  that  through  the  instructions  of 
a  good  preceptor  the  causal  bliss  itself  may  become  non- 
causaL^  The  authority  of  Saraha-pada  is  also  quoted 
here.  He  says,  “Tills  causal  bliss  becomes  non-causal 
to  the  great,  and  it  becomes  of  the  nature  of  Makd-sukha 
which  is  free  from  thought-constructions  and  is  of  the 
nature  of  self-produced  knowledge/  Again  it  may  bo 
questioned, — -if  at  the  time  of  the  everything 

of  the  ivorld  is  to  be  thought  of  as  void  in  essence  and 
illusory  or  magical  in  appearance,  then  even  the 
Mantras,  Mudras  and  all  the  other  accessories  of  Yoga 
become  illusory  and  magical ;  how  can  then  the  Yoga 

viplawiA  ca  mahddalfe  ||  ( ?) 

IfalM  i7iafMiiufi({Ai2TTi  ki6cit  tukbd-arddam  vyadhi~gk&t(ik<ifh  \ 
iffajiiopatfa-rukh.tnh  todvat  hetayu  frJcW'tifljrattdm  ]| 

#  #  -ff'*  *  m 

^kmya  gtilii-pa»ah  syad  uparasya  ^mndha-kiiftik^  i: 
aho  npAya-^marthyath  mah^-yutiii-^uyatfinaml 
k^minlth  gMham  flimgt/a  b^a/cnli  (?)  | 

MS.  (B.N.  No.  Sanscrit  i7)  p.  22(B). 
in  the  Com.  on  thfi  Marmit^kalika-ianirn,  these  vetscs  lire  quoted 
m  belonging  to  the  CTAt^it-ijajfm-ujf^^'tiJ-sadhiaTOn^  Vtdc  MS.  p*  le(xV). 

“  mah^-^ukham  co  nifnhnitiam^  tat  kathmh  tatha  D^ianjliivi^ 
€3fAo#i/ tvfi  s^ad-gutff-pftdemn  pfmiinilfflni 
vat  if 

MS.  (Cambridge  UaivtrBily  librarj"  Add.  Ifl^)  p.  11(A). 
"  y{td  idatn  jwitiftifnift'ri-JfifcAniri  tad  fim  niahatddf  nwiiif^i-pariht- 
nam^ 

MS.  p-  171, 


214 


TANTEIC'BUODHISM 


have  the  capacity  of  destroying  the  afflict  tons  of  the 
mind  ?  In  reply  it  has  been  said,  “A  snake-cimrnier 
creates  a  magical  pillar  and  then  destroys  it,  but 
though  the  pillar  is  destroyed  for  ever,  men  are  relieved 
thereby  from  poison,  etc.  So  also  is  the  case  with  all 
the  yogic  practices.”' 

in  the  Hevajra-tantra  we  find  some  verses  in  ex¬ 
planation  of  the  Bujddhist  Tantric  practices,  and  as  the 
Hevajra-thntra  is  quoted  as  authority  in  many  connec¬ 
tions  in  most  other  Tantras  and  commentaries,  these 
verses  of  the  Heuajra-taiitra  are  made  much  use  of  in 
many  of  the  texts  and  commentaries.  It  has  been  put 
into  the  mouth  of  the  laird  himself  that  men  may  attain 
liberation  through  existence  itself  ;  they  are  destroyed 
by  the  fetters  of  worldly  things,  but  are  liberated 
through  a  critical  examination  of  their  nature.*  Again 
it  is  said,  “The  very  bliss,  which  causes  death  (in  one 
case),  is  itself  called  tlie  meditation.”’  It  is  further 
said,  “  Remove  ail  your  fetters  of  bondage  through 
those  very  things  through  which  people  are  ruined. 
People  ore  deluded, — ^and  they  never  know  the  truth, 
—and  without  truth  they  can  never  attain  success.’** 
The  other  arguments  found  in  the  text  are  substantially 
the  same  as  discussed  above/ 

*  yath&  ganidika!}^  stftmbhttiii  sudhayitva  vftiflfyofil 

tafifii'n  pisdiltn  upoiiffimyaO'  [j 

Ascribed  to  Sinti-pSda,  quoted  m  tlie  iJub^tddtO' 

iftrmgTnha^  p*  OTs 

*  vmtiicyitnie  vajm-gurbhu  7nah^-krpa\ 

badhyi^nie  bhavQ-handhena  tat  || 

MS.  p. 

^  mamniiTn  |/i*iffi  tat-xiikham  dfiy^nam 

ucyaU  [| 

ibid.,  MS.  p.  14(A). 

*  yma  ytna  til  tfino  Ufia  fti  Eicndhauam  mucyatt  \ 

mti%o£t  nfi  vetii  iir^ 

tap^ye  li 

/bid.,  MS.  |K  sa(A). 

-  mail  v^si^  iii  tht  science  at  poison  cdub  ter  acts  the  eEfect 
ol  poiwn  with,  the  same  quantity  of  poison^  which  causes  deRth  to 
all  the  creatures^  Meat-diet  is  prescribed  fpr  a  patient  attacked  with 
gout^ — and  thui  gout  Ls  cured  hy  the  application  of  another  form 
of  It;  indeed  the  preseription  of  medieiue  often  seems  to  be  con^ 


TANTRIC  BVDDHISTS  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THEIR  YOGA  215 

In  the  Dohas  of  Tillo-pada,  Saraha^pada  and 
Kanhu-pada  we  meet  witli  almost  similar  verses.  Thus 
it  is  said, “as  one  engaged  in  I  he  science  of  poison 
swallows  poison  and  yet  is  not  affected  thereby,  so 

does  one  enjoy  the  world  without  being  attached  to  it/ 

■ - * — ; - — - - - - — — 

trfldictory  to  the  ordinary  experienctii  The  world  is  purified  by 
the  world  itself, — ftilsfi  im8girtatiDti5  fay  grrater  roiagiDative  eonstnlc- 
tions*  A&  the  water  in  the  car  is  removed  by  the  application  ol 
water  in  the  cars  so  also  the  imaginative  coils trtietions  ol  cjdstcnce 
arc  to  be  pariOfil  in  their  turn  fay  tfae  corporeal  forms.  The  fire- 
burnt  are  again  pacified  Ihroiagh  fire.^  so  those  who  are  burnt  by 
the  fire  of  passiomi  are  again  paeilkd  by  the  fire  of  passions*  Through 
tZic  some  dlreftil  acti^'ities,  through  which  flU  creatures  are  ruined, 
they  arc  again  liberated  From  the  letters  o(  the  world,  on  conditioa 
that  the  activities  are  M.  prompted  by  a  spirit  of  rniivcrsal  com¬ 
passion.  People  die  through  p^issions  find  are  ngaiu  liberated  through 
the  pasiiionss — this  is  an  apparently  eon  trad  ietpry  idea,— unknown  to 

the  ordinary  orthodox  BaddhtstSi'^ 

yefiaiva  vha~khond^na  tnriyiinic  ^arvadantavah  | 
fCTiflii^a  uf^n-fattiJu/no-Uiseap  sphoto^cd  visam 
yaih^  vdin-gfhltaAyd  pmdl^afel 

iipfcnu  hurxj/ufr  rdlarh  utportt  aiisadht-ko^j-jand  || 
bh^jva-iiidilhQ  hhav^naiva  ufl;oIpo?ii  pnJiuKrofp/ifdh  || 
kanie  l/□fhdl>i?|U]tl  pfufi-toyena  ferayaFcl 

tathd  bfidra-uifrafpo^pi  dfroraih  .^odhyaU  frfca/u  ]{ 
yathfi  pdva]in-dagdh&^  ca  sidhyantr  vahnind  pi/tioM 
fatho  Tag^gni-ihmdhM  ca  sidhyanfc  r^ga-imhmnS  ]\ 
j^eiia  yeas  tu  badnyanfe  fdu(auo  T-aiifini-ftarmfl;^| 
sopdyrns  fu  feiiafuu  miicynafc  hhaua-rafidhandf  |l 
mgepo  badhijatc  hko  rdg**ymua  ujmiicyafcf 
riparfta-bljSuoNfl  hyena  na  buddha-tlrthikuih.  i|| 

MS.  pp.  87(A)— «7FBb 
Sec  SumpufrT^.  MS.  p.  47fB)* 

Cf^  nbop^ — yena  cittenu  ca  nam^arr^bandhnnatk  ^atHh  | 

yogmnn  tena  ctttrna  aiigofdnsm  galtrgdtoh  ]| 
PpiTco-kramd,  MS.  p.  20(B)* 
gi4:7i£iira  mQdhii  badkyante  btiddhn  /erf  do  nil  tflir  tho! 

Vajra-ddkadaiftm^  MS.  (K*A.S.B.  No.  3825). 
yepifl  yenaiwpay^na  nmlld  gacchanty  ad/m-^atiUi  | 
tciiff  temiv^^pdyena  yogi  pm^idhyatl  1| 

Bks/fa-vTro-cnfida-ro^OTJii-njpW-fowImj.  MS* 

p.  22(A). 

Togefia  hanyute  rago  co  \ 

viaato'^pi  hany^f  upodciSa-pruyogotah  [| 

*  *  • '  -»  »  •  '  * 

iJsnro-jxiprtTa  knayarii  krtvn  vipaifitemiva  jitifAyafi'l 

Ibid.,  MS.  p.  22(B). 

*  fjuia  iiwfl  bhsfc/cftsi  nusht  pn/uffd| 

[fiHifl  bhava  hhtmwi  bkavahi  na  iriitnl 
DohAa  of  Tillo-pSida. 


216 


TaKTRIOBU  D  CHISM 


As  one  touches  the  foam  of  some  drink  and  yet  his 
hands  are  not  besmeared  with  the  drink,  so  also  the 
Yogirit  though  revelling  in  the  objects  of  pleasure^  is 
not  affected  thereby/  As  the  lotus-leaf  is  never 
affected  by  the  waves  of  water,  though'  it  is  constantly 
in  water^  so  also  b  the  mind  of  a  Yogin^  which^  though 
always  surrounded  by  objects  of  pleasure^  is  never 
affected  by  them  in  any  way/  A  Yogin,  thus  versed 
in  the  fundamental  truth,  is  never  disturbed  by  the 
objects  of  pleasure  though  he  may  indulge  in  them/ 

It  should  be  remembered  that  wherever  the  citta 
clings  to  the  objects  of  desire  t!ie  ultimate  nature  of 
the  self  is  not  to  be  found  ;  the  ultimate  nature  of  the 
self  can  be  realised  through  the  enjoyment  of  the 
w'orldly  objects  only  when  the  ultimate  nature  of  the 
world  is  realised  as  the  vacuity  through  the  instructions 
of  the  preceptor,  and  in  such  a  state  there  remains  no 

^  vkaa  rarnonta  na  m^tsa 
uam  harai  na  pdnl  cehippai  f] 

DoMi^  of  Saralm-pida, 

^  puntiT  y^tha  jafa-faTaRgmii  gthitx>d  Uit  panlywir 

nu  iipifatt  f  tadotpannd  ca  padma-pairdmbhQ^vad  iff  v^ctinAt  f 
ftbhydiifi  y9gm^  m/ 

Ccimm.  on  th^  previous  Dohd. 

=*  tnmi'  jo  uiiifii  jiuranto] 

na  uahui'  viuaa  mnuinto  Ij 
Doh^  of  Soralifl-psdni 

It  has  been  further  said  that  the  Yogin,  who,  ieven  afiw  he  ha^ 
l>eca  abb  to  purify  the  objects  of  desire  (throug^h  his  trauKeeiidmtBl 
knowledge) I  does  not  en|oy  objects  of  pteasorct  merely  Boats  in  the 
void;  and  for  him  there  is  every  pos^bility  of  returning  of  the  world 
oE  pleasure^  His  posillon  u  just  like  &  erow  in  the  oceim,  which 
leaves  the  mast  ano  hovers  mund  and  round  and  again  rctums  to  the 
ssme  mast  it  left^ 

i;iiuia-t'i{tti£fff/ie  nau  Taitmi  Jrei-a^a  funnel  carer  I 
uddi  uahia  frad  iha/i  paZiif  Jk  fa  haul  pa^Id  '| 

A^oltiy — '"Dou^t  repress  the  d^ire  for  the  objects  of  pleasure, 
says  Sarahaj  if  one  does  so,  he  will  he  destroyed  hy  these  objects 
of  desire  again,  as  is  tlie  case  with  fish,  insects,  the  elephant,  black- 
bees  and  the  deer^\  (Fish,  insects,  the  elephant,  black-bees  and  the 
deer  are  attracted  and  killed  by  their  particular  attachment  to 
ffavot^,  beauty^  tactual  pleasure,  smdl  and  sound  respectively .) 
vkodsiitH  im  h(^ndha  karu  nrs  vadha  narahe  uaffa| 
wima  poan^oma  kart  hhfimnTn  pekkhoha  jwiffn  |[  fhfd* 


TAI^TBIC  BUDDHISTS  DJ  DEFENCE  OF  THEIB  YOGA  217 

diffei'€iice  between  the  worM  and  the  vacuity  as  there 
is  no  dtHerence  between  the  water  of  a  river  and  its 
waves/  Profound  and  secret  are  the  ways  of  this  cultf 
—who  can  say  anything,  and  who  can  hear?  Who  is 
really  engaged  in  this  cult?  This  path  is  just  like  an 
underground  passage  of  a  fort.  As  it  is  very  advan¬ 
tageous  to  enter  into  a  fort  and  to  capture  it  and  destroy 
il  through  this  underground  passage,  so  also  b  this 
path, — verj’  advantageous  to  capture  the  fort  of  the 
illusory  world  and  to  destroy  it  through  the  destruction 
of  all  the  imaginary  constructions  of  the  mind ;  but 
as  there  is  the  wicked  dust  in  the  passage  which  kills 
the  inexperienced,  but  cannot  do  any  harm  to  the  expe¬ 
rienced,  so  also  there  is  in  thjs  path  a  great  risk,  which 
kills  the  uninitiate  but  can  be  overcome  only  by  the 
initiate.* *  When  water  enters  into  water,  there  is  pro¬ 
duced  the  Sflwiarasa ;  similarly  when  mind  enters  into 
the  pure  consciousness  of  vacuity,  it  reaches  the  final 
state,  where  the  virtues  and  vices  of  the  world  go 
neither  for  nor  against  the  Yogin.* 


^  jattn  tri  cltfaiii  vipphumi'  falfo  ui  ijflhn  smriial 
anija  iarimfta  fti  ntjpa  jda  bAdM-Jaroa  fthdsaTna  wrfia  j|  /bio. 
■  kiiu  kakijjat  ko  ttinai;  etiAu  kafjaim 
duff  ha  /ima  ftio-jda  hiaW  fCna  || 

*  jotto  t?i  paisfli  jalflAi  join  tal somoToao  Aei*  | 
dofa-gu^fiom  dtta  toM  vadAa  poriuaAfeAa  tio  Aoi'  j|  ibid. 
O.P.  105—28 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(by  Kuddi]ar|jada)*  49f  91rt*  109,  140n, 

154-5flii/ 

A  Dictionary  ol  PaU  Buddhiim  (by  Hbygj  DayidK)i  144 
Advaya-fiamatS-vijaya  (quoted  in  the  Jii^a-dddhi)^  14dii 
Aduoya-fiddAi^  SOn,  91  n. 

Advaya-vaira-samgraba,  16,  41-4Snj  57^  58a^  60^  fl4ft,  71,  S6|  STn, 
89nt  95n,  Mn,  lOSn,  106ri,  112ii,  120,  140,  I52n,  170ti,  Iftln 
A  History  of  Indian  Philosophy  (by  S.  K.  Dasgupta),  VoL  1^  24,  Sdii 
Aitareya  Aranyaha,  121]  121fi- 
AkuJ&gama,  171 

Amaaafiik^a  (quoted  in  Advaya-vajira-aamgraha),  120 
Amanasikfira-dblira  (quoted  in  Advaya-vajm-samgraba)  114n 
Amrta-isiddhi,  188ii 

An  IntToduetion  to  Buddhist  Esotcrism  (by  B.  Bhattacharya),  8tij  60, 
62n,  64n,  OOn 
Anguttaraj  144-43 

Apratifitblna-praJcfi^  by  Na^tjuna-pida  (quoted  in  the  Advaya-- 
-  vajra-siungraha),  42^  140* 

.Vspecis  of  MahAy&na  Buddhisni  aud  its  Relation  to  Hfnayiua  (by 
N.  Dutt),  11,  18n, 

A^ka  and  his  Inscriptions  (by  B.  M.  Barua),  62a 
Asta-£abastikA-praj£a-paramit^,  6A 
Avatainsaka-sutra,  12- 

*4 wakening  of  Faith  in  Mahayana  (of  Aivaghoja,  translated  by  SuEuki), 
6,  24n,  25]  25«,  102 
Xdibuddhaj  180n 
idibuddha-tmtTa^  I40ii 
Ananda-labarl,  166n 
Arya-mahjusil-mula-kalpa-tantra,  56 

Bauddha-gSna-o-dohA]  52 
Bhadmp^a-^rama,  49n 
Bodhi-earya-vatAra  (of  Sintideva}  S,  54 
Bodhisattva-bhumi  (of  Asanga),  66]  60n,  192^ 

Brahma-sutrai  60 

BuddAd-kopdla-faa^rci-fT^  (by  Abbayakara-gupla),  185  n 
Buddhist  Iconography  (by  B.  Bbattacharya),  9in 

Cary  a,  Carya-pada»  59,  50n,  72,  IIB,  llSfi]  ll9n,  146,  141n,  ISOin 
17 In,  174-75,  lT6n,  170fi,  185 
Ccitt4rd&hara»a,  140o 


*  A^dTTirfl  rt/  wonuimpffl  qme  ihm  irt  ifalter. 


220 


T^RIC  BUDDHISM 


Catur-dec;f-par^rcchfi-v^dfeji{fa‘-tantT^,  18S 
Catur-mudrs,  ein>  101 

CitU-visuddhi-prakflradft  (ot  Arya-deva),  47,  £5-56,  lOJJ,  11 5n,  1«7, 
Iran,  m-08,  lOSn,  205n,  306^,  207fl,  OOSn,  300,  300il 
Comm*  on  jlfama-katiha-tonlm,  I80n,  l4Sn,  I52n,  ITS,  ISOn,  189, 
21 In,  21Sn 

Comm,  on  ^at-oakra-nii^aija  (by  Kallcara^a,  Sahara  and  VUva- 
n&tZia),  16Gn 

Comm,  on  the  DohSkom  of  KSnhu-pada,  121,  122n,  l49n,  ITjn, 
lT3n,  174 

Comm,  on  tba  Doh^o^a  of  Kflnba-p9da,  ISOn,  I80n,  iSOn 

Davandra-paripfccha-tantra,  122ji 

Dbamma-pada,  I44n,  145,  145n,  lOOn 

Dofia(s)  of  K8nha-pada,  159,  159ti,  ie2fl,  ITS,  215 

I>obji(s}  of  Saraba-pada,  141n,  150,  I50n,  215,  216fi,  217,  217fi 

DohAs  of  Saiaha  and  Kd^ba,  140 

DQ!3il(s)  of  TiHopada,  uin,  191»,  105,  904,  215,  2l5n 

Doha  (quoted  in  Haoajro-taatra),  15ln 

DohikoM,  50 

Doh5ko?a  of  Kanha(u>.plda,  71.  H8a,  121-39,  leSn,  ISBa,  186n, 
180n,  218 

Dohakosn  of  Samba,  172,  186,  186a 
Dakarpa\-'a  (ed,  by  Chaudhun),  IlSn 

Dakins va  (ed.  by  Si9t?l).5r,  88,  6Sa,  1(J7a,  J16n,  110a,  184.85,  14&fi 
^5kinT-va/ra-paRjara,  187 


Bk6l!a‘Vlra.eanda-'moha~rosor>a*taaira,  llSn,  118,  190,  181-89  186n, 
isen,  in,  ITlrt,  202n,  91Sn  ' 


Gandhe-vamsa,  9in 
Ghantti-p^dfyB  Pafica-krama,  llSn 
Ghern]ida-«aiiihit&»  I8!&n 
GltA,  12a 


Goraksa-siddhSata-famgraha  (ed.  by  Goptnatb  KaraSi),  iTJa 
Gnbya-samain,  46n 

Guhya^ddki,  4«-»0,  70.  70n,  112,  188^^  uon,  1S8,  154a,  158n 
Gun^o-va7ra-vtrajfnf'-5adhn)m, 

Gubiyendu-ftfaka,  905n 

Crfcj/a-twjro-in'riiainl-tfld/iotm,  218n 


Hasting's  Encyefonfledia  of  Heligion  and  Ethics,  185n 
Hatba-yoea-pmdfnika,  172,  lesn 

Herwfefl-fanfm,  56,  67,  OSa,  117n,  llSrt,  180,  180«,  168-65,  ITln,  170n, 

231.71 

or,  7o£ffl-rafiia.m8f5  of  KrjFUficaiya-nfUla.  71  114 
n5n,  121-25,  148,  IOTa,  lesn.  192,  I02a  ^  ^  *  *  * 


BIBLI06BAPHT 


221 


Hevaira-’^tantra,  64fi,  63,  65b,  B6,  66r,  02n,  96b,  103,  114-15,  117-W. 
181,  lain,  185^,  183n,  188^,  153-53,  157-59,  166-60,  176-80, 
102-95  ,  208,  214,  215n 

Jllufitratlcmj  of  Uie  literature  of  Nepal  (by  Hodgson),  I08n 
Indian  Philosophy,  Vol.  I  (by  S.  Badbakriehaan),  88 
Itivuttaka,  145 

B,  A.  S,]  14 

Jira/avab'-ua/ramfiid-tnntfa,  37n,  86,  87n,  116,  335,  lS3n,  178,  212 
Jh&na-siddfai  (of  IndrabhuK),  45-46,  65,  79,  88,  80n,  01-02,  02n,  loOn, 
117,  14«ti,  176,  200-01 
Jilitna-vajra-gamuccaya-mah&yoga,  187 


Kanaka-vaT^a-prajhA-pfiramitft-s8dhaiiam  (in  Sfidbans-mAla),  I14n 
Katha-vatthu,  145,  145n 

ICdln-calcni-ftintm  (also  8H-&dfa-ciijli:ra-tnnfni},  T5-76 
Kiin8-kal5-%'illsa,  123,  L20n 
K8randa-vyuha,  7 

Knyo-somgraha  (also  En’tf5-anmgrafta-<n6ma-pfi6pk6),  67,  81-881,  llTfi, 
llSrt,  1S6,  186q,  I40n,  178,  ITOn 
IC?fno-ifam£ri-tatttfd,  80,  120 

Kudrsti-nirgliat&na  (collected  in  Advaya-vajea-saihgirafaB),  8Tn,  108 

Laghu-kAla  -cnfcra-fcnfra-fd/a-fTfca  (oe,  Ftmafa-probhA),  61,  ei«,  75, 
T7b 

Lalita-vistara,  51n 

Lamaism  (by  Waddell),  72n,  78 

LaPkivatsra-Butra,  16,  36b,  18,  28,  28n 

Les  Chants  Mystiques  de  Kfinha  et  de  Saraha  (by  M,  Shahidullah),  SO 

Madhyfinta-vibhfl-^a  (Madhy6nta-vibhft^-t1k&),  2an,  27-81,  84n 
Mafag-sukha-prahSiilia  {collected  in  Advnya-vajra-satfigraha),  64,  151 
Sfahayfina  •sutrftJahkara  (of  Auhga),  5,  5n,  27ti,  20n,  85n,  82 
Moh&yina-iraddbotp&da-sutia  (of  Aivagbo^),  8,  ISn,  102 
Mab&y8na-vim(tk5,  48,  56 
MaitrSyanlya  Upanisad,  181,  184 
Majjhitna-nili&ya,  144 
Manual  of  n  Mystic,  65,  63n 

.Ifamn-koltkA-tantm  (with  coomentarv)  asn,  118b,  12lii,  194,  Win, 
178it,  lT9n,  181 

5(adhyamiha-vrtti  (of  K£g4t]'uDB},  18-28,  87,  87n,  44-45,  56,  !<»,  146. 
346n 

Mfij^dolcyopanisad,  88-89,  89b 
Milindu-pahho,  148,  liflu 

Modem  Buddhism  and  its  Followers  in  Orissa  (by  N.  Bose),  72-78 


takthic  buddhism 


2212 

1^0 

^^oyj^-s^^^na-|r/cap  ITBii 
Niroftda-tantrA,  112ti 

Obscure  BeligioiiB  Cults  a&  Ba^ikgroiiDd  pf  Bcugsh  Literature  (by  Si^ 
Bi  Dasgupta),  62it,  B6n,  72 ^  78,  187n,  190n 
Outlines  c5f  Mahay  an  a  Buddhism  (by  Siiauki),  12 

Padma-tantra^  72n 

PaSra-^cramo  (of  GhanW-pSda)^  17&n 

Purlcn-Jtmma  (of  Nagwrjmia-p&da)j  51-54 ,  58rtj  04m,  87,  88m,  OOn^  93-94, 
96«,  110,  lirn,  110,  125,  127Mp  128n,  14^,  lS5n,  174,  ITSn,  182-34p 
202-04*  2l5u 

Pflifcc-ftitiind-fippurti*  52,  llTn,  185 

Pa  a ta-ta  thflgata-miidT&-vi  varaua  (  collected  in  Ad  va ya- va  jra-sam- 

greha),  00  Fi 

PuiLca-vimsati-sahasrika*  la 

PancHkaTa  (ooliecied  m  Advaya-vajrarsamgraha),  O0fi 
PhllD^phical  Essays  (by  S*  N.  Dasguptg},  2,  B7 
Post-Chaitanya  Sahajiya  Cult  (by  M.  Bose)*  178» 

Praina-paranita  dhftranl*  6B 
Prajna-p&ramita-hrdaya-djtra*  68 

Prajno-paya-vini^rtyn-siddlu,  48,  56-57,  &8,  92,  OSmj  100-05*  ll5n, 
135,  155m,  ITeiit  202 

Preroa-puncaku  (collected  in  Advityrt-vajTa-^ainMrahft)*  107m*  128 
POja-kha^dft*  IOPm 

Haiu-kuta-butra  (quoted  in  TMtIiia-srddhi),  210 
BatnOvaU  (quoted  in  Madhyamika-i^tti),  28 

^'nddhdrfFi4^piiinfcm^o,  16*  102  a 

.^aha/a-aiddhj*  116u,  118u 

Sauid/oftdra  (quoted  in  Poucn-kmina)*  lS4n 

(8rf-«imputikd,  SamputodbAdva-ka/pu-r^/d),  45*  68,  68m* 
&9m,  W6«,  I14rt,  U5n,  12S-2s/lS5*  1S5m,  140m*  152*  152n*  lS7n, 
158m*  150*  150m*  102,  165^09*  176m,  102,  Ifi^rt,  215it 
SamTUobana-tfintrn*  llO.  172 
Sanjutta-nikaya*  145 
Sarvu-devfltagnma-tnntrat  l4Sri 
SaundarAnanda  Ea\*ya,  147,  14Tm 

Sadhana-Tnala,  49,  50»*  55-58*. 62ji*  78,  79m*  81,  81m,  83-84*  84ri*  U4n* 
118iJ*  110m*  12!n,  122,  128*  128m*  180*  ISOpi*  149m,  iSsn 
Seha-nir^aya  (collected  in  Advaya-vajia-samgraba)*  194m 
Sckatanvaya-^iungraba  (collected  in  Advaya-Yajrn-saibgrpJiaL  176, 
176m 

Sekoddetfa-yka,  75-76*  77m*  09m*  128,  165,  160ii.  178.  170m,  ITTm*  180m. 
181*  192f**  108,  T08n,  tOdM 


BIBUOGH.\PHY 


2-23 


Studio  in  the  Tantras,  121n,  le^n,  173n,  172» 

Subha^ita-samgraha,  105,  107b,  115h,  118»,  ISlii,  187, 

141b,  148ii.  14011,  Win,  iTOn,  208,  208n,  ‘*C>4N,  214^^ 
Sutta-nipatH,  14-L 
Sato-sabasrik£,  18 
.^flstra-dlpikd,  17 

iUk^-samuccaya  (of  l^anti-dn-a),  7,  M5n 
Si%'a-samhit§j  lOBn 

Sri-eakra-sambbara-Untra,  U5,  06«,  71m,  fl4«,  116,  180,  180h,  170m 
Sri-dAkSr^Dve  HabSyoginUfantra-raja,  llOri 

Srl-gutiya-samgla-tontra  (Srf-guhya-aaniAja,  Srf-s&iha|a),  40,  40h,  47, 
4Sh,  50,  78,  7fi«,  soil,  Bin,  W,  OSn,  flSn,  lOOit,  115,  llSrt,  llTn, 
llfin,  ISl,  ISlM,  184,  184n 

^rT-kOJa-cdkm-taitfra,  78,  78ji,  105,  158,  16Sh.  178b,  ISOb 
i  ritaac-c  h&)i  yar&jasa  rva-du  rga  tUpa  tisadha  tta-  mi  ukhdkhj/iinM-pni  f  ha  ihh- 
adiyoga-nAma  tomAdhihj  60 
Sn-vajra-ma^dAlh-lahkdra  (quoted  in  JMiia'^iddhi^, 
Sat-cakra-nirupaoa  (by  Puni^&DaDda),  llOn,  lfl8fi,  IflOn,  172 
^al-^akra-ninipana  (by  Viiva-nAtha),  lOOn 
.S‘o  daia-itiQnaaU  b  hatia-cnilc  m ,  0 1  :i 

Tantiaioka  (of  Abhina%'a-gupta),  04  m,  74 
Tatbigata-g^ya-suua,  46 

Tattra-pfakaiikS  (collected  in  Advaya*va^a~saiiigraba),  42 
Tattva-ratnavali  (collected  in  Advay'a-vajra-samgntha),  41,  on,  uOm 
rattL-a-aiddhi  (of  Sinta-rak^ita),  Olu,  107,  205n,SO0-13 
The  Conception  of  Buddhist  Xinajja  (by  Stcherbatsky),  8fiM 
The  Gods  of  Northern  Buddhi.«m  (by  Getty),  90n,  lOOn 
The  good  wishes,  94a 

The  Principles  of  Mah&yilnn  Buddhism  (by  Suzuki),  342h 
Thcrbgathi,  145,  145» 

Triiiiliki,  88n,  l4Sn 

Two  VajrayaiSB  Works,  45,  70 

L'cchu^ma-tanlftt,  112« 

f/;>5fi-poriprc(?hd-f«Mfrn  (quoted  in  TaflLa-siddhi),  205m 

ra/ra-da^a-fuiiinj,  385,  21Sri 
Vajra-mhla,  1S2 

Ts)  m-i'afl-naMta-Mta  siduf u-pa  iij  i jtn,  3  77 

I'a/ra-uAfdA^kalpa-niaAfifaafra,  04n,  llOa,  181,  lain 

Vigraha-vyavartanl,  22 

ra)ru> jiano-sddhaadn  gu  n  i,  9 1  n 

VijAapti-niitnti-siddhj,  S],  88n,  S5n,  148 

Vijilana-bhairava,  64n 

Vimata-prabhA,  61,  75,  77fi 

Vimiina-vatthu,  145,  I45a 

Visuddhi-maggo,  80,  145-46 


tahteic  buddhism 


224  . 

6S,  (»•»•  8»i»,  140,  140n,  Ifli", 

lUn,  218A 


40,  40n 

YogaciTA-bhuBU  (of  Voaubaodbii),  lOSn 

Yug«laddha.prflka^#  (collected  in  Advaya-vajr«r»mgr*lia),  4S,12S^ 


INBEX 

|Tbe  wQrdft  arc  arraugi^d  in  ard^r  cl  ibe  Bn^lutfa  nlpbabeti.  Fjif  liaK 
Wd^iU  are  given  in  Roman  witti  n  cnpitaJ.  Non-English  getieral  namea  end 
^  words  ue  given  in  Roman  ’with  m  eepital  *ad  dUtriticnl  mark#.  TeekaiouLl 
non-BtigEih  temu  are  In  nnall  itolio  with  diacntlca]  marks.] 


Ahhaya-mndri^  97 
ahhcda  {nerve)  18^ 
ah^iedrOj  70^  3P 
nhAtdAnrraap.  17 
obhimulCtAi,  ll,  S2 

adkifeka,  74,  175-77,  lTe«-77n 
Abode  of  btisi^  140 
Absolute,  160,  103  ; 
oneneift  148  ; 
rtate,  i£Ti 
imity,  1S3 

dbhdvn  (nerveh  I69n 
abAdva^jtcz/poiid>  43 
obhil^a-paiiAdpo,  ZT-ai,  a7i  05 
acala,  lip  gs 
Acbala,  Tg 
dctfCn  (nerve),  l^On 
Aetive  eonielousocss  (pranfftt^ 
tjtjiianajf 

Adamantice  knowledge,  177-7fi  ; 
nature,  51,  &7  ; 
path,  57  S 
reality*  177  ; 
truth,  40^  08  ; 
way*  78  ; 
woman,  11£ 
adkonnn  (nerve),  leOn 
Advaita  Vedanin,  S8 
adveya,  80,  1^3,  128,  190,  140 
AfQictinna,  210,  218^14 
dgni  (nerve)*  leSn 
jlgnotticr  attitude*  1^^ 

Aisvarika  (seboot)*  l07fi-  Kfcft 
Aibi-cakra,  I02n 

Akfobhya.  14,  (^,  frin,  TH,  ytsii, 

57,  Wn*  lao,  130,  178,  lT6 
Ail-conscndng  mind,  24,  26,  84 

All-pen’ading  bUia,  158 
.All^pervading  0Dane§j*  101 
All-pervadmg  universe]  eiinBi!iaitJi- 
neif,  130 
Albvaid,  3B,  196 
Amarolf,  isgtt 

0,R  lOfl— 20 


^  AmitAbha,  84,  fl4n,  7S,  &4,  95n,  07, 
100,  157,  150^  178,  ITT 
Amltiyujj,  Olj  09n 

Amoghaiiddhi*  64,  D4j,  95n,  07,  S&n, 
180*  130*  178,  ITT 

anupuefAt-seaa-ni&bdtuit  146 
diinp3dAt-4e|ii-iaTnddki*  04 
fluuanifli^  181,  IST 
imutpMa,  ^ 
onuUnm-jnmddAi,  185 
Anutiara-tantre,  Tin 
Anuttara-ydga-tantn-ylna^  Tin 
AnihaU-eakra*  lG2n,  168,  160 
aiiga^agdra.  ISO 
npara  (nerve),  160n 
apdiiu*  T4t  73*  166n,  178*  184:*  lAan, 
18$a 

iipr&tisQmkhya-mrcdhat  14T 
Arabant  bS 
arnga,  196 
arciamstT,  11*  82 
Arhathood*  7 
arth^hhatc^  28 
urOpdf  47 
ariijKiwJhdln*  46 
mamprai^ta^iamadhi^  14T 
Asadga,  18^  02,  14T 
cxmiHt  136 
atbim  (nerve),  160rt 
□ninp^atd,  26*  44 

Aavagho^ja,  so,  34*  27*  87,  IDS.  147 
.44vtnI-Maf!m*  ISSn 
ati-mtiua^  51,  52,  117 
ofi-lnii£/afd*  116 
Atiyoga-tantra-yiJia,  Tin 
AvndhOtJ*  (-tiki),  l]6p  164,  160, 

170-71,  174,  ISOa*  ISO,  101 
AvadbuU-mand^lnh  16^ 

Avadhiitl-pi*  41 
.4va1okjtc4vaea*  7*  8,  07*  130 
24 

ntfulifd  (nerve),  IfiOn 
dhhic^nka  (performanca),  304tt 


226 


TANTKIC  BUDDHISM 


17^77 

Maria-jA^na^  9in 

Adi^Buddba^  73-711,  M,  lOS,  IIQ* 

non,  ISO 

Adl-prajba,  108,  110 

Adi-'iakti,  108 

^Qya-vijjtdna,  34,  36,  88-06 
aii,  07,  130-31,  134-35,  ioi,  169,  imrt, 
170-73 

51-83 

ala^a-inaiqa,  51 
aioAropoia&dkir  53 
Ofok^hua,  51-52 
dnnnda,  167,  131-63 
ArmpyAkma,  65,  160 
Ai^'a-devA,  55 
drya-MUtya,  8,  143,  167 
ATyB-tIr5,  07,  lOQ 
AryA-viidAlA-kirtir  108 
fifund;^  167 
fltiiia-tatlva,  167 
5^a£atid,  63>  09fi 
5udraiidj 

fcfllt,  100b 

187,  ISTfij  188n 
Body,  14 

Bb^dra-pidar  40,  153 
bhagfit  8Bi  117,  185-54 
bhngavailt  118,  114n 

(proilia  oi),  114 
bAona,  09,  100,  100,  192-03 
bbpJ0-fra|far  186 
bA6t^a>  48 

bAdua  (n«rT«),  IGOn 
bAwa-lfaipanap  43 
Bb&vfl-viTcka,  30 
bA«da  (nErve)^  169n 
BtDspflrja-mudrB^  07 
BLtuukB-pada,  140,  1B5 
BhatA-nitliB^  134 
bAilla-tar^l8p  33-34 
hindu,  ea.  III,  13S,  loan,  leon. 
138n,  196 

|n/d(«),  61,  64n,  65,  34,  164 
biia-7Fidn(ra,  68-65,  05,  05,  ITS 
bodhi,  11,  14,  M,  5Tn,  OOu,  174 
Bodbicitta,  ID,  46-4T,  57,  liTfi^  m, 
70,  76,  ffl.84,  M,  M,  OS. 

100,  lOOn,  103,  I05n,  135,  IS8,  155, 
146,  334,  153-50,  164,  170-71,  174, 
m-31,  137-05,  200*  308*  304fi 
10 


I  B^xiiu-nund,  93,  69n,  112-10,  108 
I  Bfidhuattva{s),  7hS,  16-11,  13,  15-16^ 
47,  54,  70-79,  04,  SOis*  03,  05,  07, 
‘  160,  101,  £04^05,  365n.  210 

"  Bodbbattva-bh&mi,  10,  83*  15S 
,  Bodb^attvabcMK]*  33T 
I  Bodbisattva  VairagB^bhii,  i57 
BodiuHitt^a  VojrJUattvaj  63,  308-^ 
BadbUattva-ytiifi,  9,  16,  71* 
Bodbi-vck^a*  63 

Body  (lu  th«  epitome  cf  the 
amiTcr&e),  161 

I  Body  (oi  tAe  mediuin),  161' 

Body  of  bllsa,  18 
:  Body  of  enjoyment,  14 
Body  of  the  Jawa,  12 
Etody  of  transforaBtlQQ*  14 
bofe,  or  holak^^  113 
BralimaiL,  160 
braTima-randAiia,  170 
Emimia-reBlivatio*,  91 
Brobma-vihare,  83 
Breath  coaUoJ,  156*  168n 
Bnddba-gbo^B,  145-'46 
Baddhabood,  10,  65,  92-00,  105,  153 
Buddbfi-baya,  14 
Buddbalosy ,  14-15  ^ 

Buddha  Mah&valrocana,  lOOn 
Buddha  Yijraialtvap  04ii 

cet^T^  (plexus),  78,  70^  97^  104,  162- 
68,  163*,  165-67*  169-70,  156-90* 

105  * 

;  (circle)*  ISl  ! 

[  (eytU)*  135 

i  (^Akra-pAtij,  97 

j  camana,  169,  169**  172,  172* 

I  eandrd,  160,  169* 

I  C*iidni-kirti,  19*,  20**  14S 
Ca^^oro^^aj  171 
CoHiac  plexus*  162,  162* 

Carya  or  Upiya-tantTM-yino,  71* 
Caxy^ft-tantitk,  71* 
cafKfAo^i*  160 
Cause  s.nd  conditlona,  43 
CeieBtiai  BuddJui  Ithhcamn,  62 
CetE^brai  plexus*  162 
CbantuiifSt  71* 

Charm,  70 
Cikitsh-Lantra,  3 
cinfaiaapt  kii|a,  97 
!  Circle  af  effuifeace, 

Cirde  of  timej  78 


% 


INDEX  227 


170 

citux.  leSn^  lOlp  m-29f  201, 
^02jit  307? 

(iterrrf^  lOOn 

dtta^hSird,  di 
^ConsoaonEs^  121^  173^-70 
CozutructiTe  funttldD^p  10& 
Constructive  imftgiiifttioAi  SO,  03^ 

£<!rT 

Cosmic  cnenessp  40  j 
priuciple^  1S8  ; 
onit^T  IS 
Created  Body^  L5 
C^itive  potencies^  ^ 

CuudOp  fiS 

dc^ftiiu  (nerve)* 
ifci(i-6hunii.  10 
DcJilecl  nettirCp  10S 
l>emDiii£iC[i|  Buddii&i,  TS-74 
Dependent  aristumtionp  15j  4A 
dtvai&-taitvii,  ICT 
dhamanaf  160Up  172j  172ti 

{/^urmo-cnb'a*  123  p  ioSt  l&i,  1C7-0S. 
IPS 

DharmB-cakra-murlra*  07f  100 
dAormo-d/taiUp  is,  34^  aij  49,  55, 
75.  101-05,  liSSp  177,  101,  £02rt 
DhftnuA-kaya^  isiSp  sr.  m,  Top 
105n.  100,  124,  1S8,  14S*  151-53, 
163p  167;  171 
dharma-megha,  11,  flS 
DhftrmH-mucIrdp  123^  t65t  lBl-92 
dhtirmn-3tait^imuc f  33-33,^  oun,  l£0 
dkarma~taihal3.t  14 
(//ionna-DasiVot  02 
dh^ta^a,  101  p  ISln,  137 
dh^dra^Kr),  68p  60,  70*  $2 
d^atup  BO 

dhyann,  7$,  W,  OSu,  101,  ISlfi,  187 
Dbyiul  Buddha  (9),  14,  70*  94-07, 
100,  130,  150,  ZB3 
Dbyanr  Bodbiuttva*  14 
rHsmond  element.  Ilrfi 
Diaturbins  element >  207 
diirpu-jnmad/ii,  14Bn 
Dlpoj&kafa*  14 
Ddcetic  conceptioQt 
Dobi(s)p  SS-59p  OBt  l«Ni,  Hi,  ll2n, 
llBn,  llOn,  IdGn,  ]75,  ISil,  191,  212 
Dormant  seedsp  92,  33 
Double  lotus,  164 


Dualltr,  3,  23,  27-S9,  BT,  104,  123, 
127 

Jukttd  (Pmjna  m)*  114 
dumflg'umdp  11,  93 
duefd  kttla,  79*  pT 
(nerve)*  169n 
Plkinlp  75p  lOSn,  160 
DombTp  lOOp  202 
Dombi  (Projul  os)*  114 

€,  160,  160n 
ESuJgcnt  natuiep  174 
EgohMd,  120,  103 
EBO-priadpIc^  2fl 
ekagmtd,  191-32 
Eba-jatA-sAdhananij  50 
Eiezuent  of  Nirvana*  14B 
EnSp  25 

Esotenc  Buddhism,  175 
Esoteric  metbod,  X 
Esote  ric  practice  (a),  41,  31,  39,  156, 
175 

Esoteric  scboolf  62 
Esoteric  theology*  41 
Esoteric  yoga,  103 
Esoteric  yogic  practLces*  36*  190 
Eosenceltianeae,  23 
Etern&l  Oux,  21 
I  ei^ath,  122^^ 

'  rva^kSm,  122 

Evolulian  of  the  eoiUQOUsiieaa 
I  (etd-otonrts)*  40 

EspedieBce  f-ient},  11,  101,  128,  135 
I  Experiential  seriefi*  80-51 
I  External  categories,  54 
J  Exticuie  nibilists,  27  ? 
realisUt  S7'SS 

L  False  ideDlisaticn*  147 

Female  ccunter^part,  16$,  |34^  LTt. 

] 

1  Filtceu  rirgiti  of  the  mooUi  164 
Final  hli»*  1B9 
,  Final  stage,  150 
Final  state,  190 
Fire  of  time,  173 
Five  Abhijoas,  I07ii 
Five  Buddhas*  181-85 
Five  dhpiooi,  B5 
Five  jMnot*  134 

Five  kmda  of  hnowlcdge*  M*  S3ft 
Five  kinds  of  lustre*  X95-S4 
Five  kinds  of  194 


228 


TANTBIC  BUDDHISM 


kinda  iif  wfidotn^  ifia 
Five  finuLies  tSU 

FiT« 

Five  130,  U9.  173, 

lift 

Ftow  b|  couftcioiuneur  ^ 

FckUr  nAfdJ  (st^fu  in  the 

l«7 

Fpi]]'  C4tjei^dti£^&,  163 
Four  kin^s  of  bllsa,  IBS^  leo-Qs 
Four  kmda  of  /ASnnrp  143 
Fottr  fflomcDUp  100-^ 

Foot  ]^fiidr^>  3^10^91 

Fpui-  noble  tmtba,  163,  107 

iiJkhgk^  160-71 
ifarbAo-dAdtUp  lOO^  llOn 
Gau^ft-pfida^  SS-aO 
Gautama  (fitiddba),  14,  07 
Gath  A  («)^  3D,  Ofin 
Geocrative  ener^^  135 
GtMldtu  189-00 

gr^haka,  S3,  33,  a5p  96,  2^,  14$,  109, 
leOtt,  171 

gtahtfa,  3Wp  32,  55,  OS,  lg0,  14S,  1^. 
l»a,  ITl 

Great  bliJH,  114,  las,  lift,  I40n.  160> 
191,  195 

Great  vehicle,  s 
Great  woman,  09 
guh^/ahhi^ehUf  170-77"^ 

Guru,  139,  1T5 
Gnru-voda,  175 

Hatba-yoffa,  flO,  ]60 
HAkiui,  I09n 

Ueruktt,  S4a.  73,  OS,  107,  ifffl 
hetv-jrratyayat  0^  tSa,  21 
Bevajrap  03 

HmdU' Buddhist  veruaciUar  liteia- 
ture,  102 

HluayaDa,  17, 

Hlnayanists,  T,  13 

^fd^i/ctp  05 
Itnman  Biiddba,  07 

Ideal  reEcertian^  131 
i‘<m.  llS-lOp  104.  160.  169a.  170,  175, 
mn 

TiQiBinatioD  cf  exiateuce,  45 
Tma^nativc  eointructipni,  ^13 


Ltumutable  btisa,  l40n  | 
vMimc  pnndpla^  £3  ; 
vuidp  OR 

Impure  states  (af  mind),  51 
Tnreaaant  him,  149 

ludividml  conaclgnsne^ij  t50 

IndrobbuG,  79 
I-ness,  llO-ll 
Luhnite  hlbs^  155»  169 
Initiap^an^  175-TT 

fatanse  btim^  112-13,  143-ta,  I40n, 

155,  164,  179-4i0 
tiiterdn]  eatejrnriei,  34 

itsndaT  {FrajltA  as),  114 
iapa,  LS4 
jupd-uuialiici,  134 
/dgrut,  104 

jidldiulhdra-haad^ji^  l5Sn 
Jinipili,  82 
/hdnas,  81 
Jiua,  04 

ISp.  33,  1112 
idduu-mudrA,  113 
-TuAna-pAda,  T3n 
inana-sattva,  93 
fadna-Cdtii?a,  187 

118 

t^ldsdhhtfelmj  173-77 
ifambalRmb&ra^pIda^  50«i 
Kanaha-muuip  97 
kapha  (nerve),  175 
karf^npdin,  169n 
Kamu-kulip  123n 
fcnrmd-mJtdrfl,  123,  154,  105,  191^92 
Ksirna-nAtba,  04ft,  133 

kamu^^  Op  10,  40,  54,  59,  50it^  75, 
03,  96,  03-195,  111,  124^  126,  128, 
I32p  135,  Xmt  lTO-71 
Kaiyapa,  14 
Kakiul,  l^a,  168 
kdfa<akro>  72-75 
KAla-eakrA-ylna,  81,  72-75 
kAlilgar,  173 

mi,  87,  120^21“,  124,  104,  m,  l»Fip 
170^75 
kdmn,  47 
^dma-dhiltUp  46 
Mmq-kold,  l^S-SO 
KapiJi,  195 

Karmlka  ichooi,  lOTu  ‘ 

Kliyapa,  9? 


ISDEX 


229 


5®»,  ua-^U,  M, 

liS6 

kha^Qtu,  l£Qn 
Kh4abx7ia^A-s£iibaDaT  tSQ 
khtcan  miiidrii.  igSa 
iqon^  llS 

kleiAvarai}a,  23^  S8,  1»2 
KriJeiuxhAikda^  ST 
Kriya-pAdip  TJ 

KriyA-tacitra,  71  n 
Kriyl-tantra-yin.!^  Tin 
^f£pfii|]i|^^pdnE!-;n2aa^  33h 
Kr^Sc&rya,  iw.  12S 
Kudddla-pfidfip 
Kulkurl-pada,  lls,  l^ip 
■tuffl  (famiJy)^  78,  fts»  97 
^iifci4(ii^aJiRi^;(afrh''p  UOn,  im 
kutuhhaka.  1^,  ISSn,  imn 

Lady  racuity^  Ll2 
inland,  118-19.  Ul;  169-78 

Larynj^al  and  pba^iiaval  picxua, 

162,  1.6Sn 

Law  of  knrma,  81: 

Likiiif,  163n»  16G 
Left  nerre,  12S 

Liberatioa.  26^28,  88.  S8,  40^  Sfi. 
lOS  5.  181,  ISS,  148-49.  1T&. 

19&.  SOa,  21fl*  214 

Littia  vehif^e,  5 

Looaiii,  78,  07^  123.  IRO.  I8fl-GG 
ffrko-dAdtir.  18 
/ckdi-ronifdrjian^,  95a 
Lord  Ca^darofn^a,  116,  l!Se 
Lord  MabSsaukiiyAp  ihs 
Lord  MihftAiLkliA.  166 
Lord  Mind,  113-16 
Lord  Supreme,  88,  88n.  08-94,  Wr 
too.  113,  180-82,  136,  155 

Irfjrd  VigrAJBttva^  76,  TTn^  89ji 

Lord  fin-kiln-ulLrAf  75-76 

Lord  firi-raabJjulcLai  lU-^ 

Lohii,  158,  161,  167*  182,  ltP7 
Lotui  in  tbe  eerebnini,  158 
Lota*  ID  the  beiH^  162,  179 
Lotiu  in  the  beut,  170 
Lower  T*nta-a.  71a 
Lumber  plexut^  162.  162ft 


'fjMlic,  70 


^  ^fasie  circle,  T9-74 

Ma^iral  naturtf  of  the  UniTerve, 
2CUn 

KfntciNiL  nature  of  the  worM,  2D4 
Tnahd-bond^a,  iBSq 
Tnftftd-hedhop  18Sfl 
ntobd-kompS,  T-lO 
maha^mudra,  fiOn,  IIB.  12Hn,  157, 
165,  I88n,  191.92 
I  mah&-rasa^  186-87 
moAdrS^n-fUi^kap  187 
mahA-itikhat  77.  Sa„  112-18,  155  p 
189-10,  142,  148-^,  168.  177,  179- 
86,  153,  192,  10V96,  219 

I  Mfthl-eukliii-eakra,  120,  166,  168,  199 
Mahl-siikba-liftniftla,  |68 
Mah^-atikha-hlya,  12,  167,  192 
Mfthl-aiikha-JMiiiiftdlii,  IMn 
^faii£-siikha-y&Da.  140n 
niaAS-^d^ono,  167 
51  fth5-aattva,  93 
Mah8-eanRbii,  6 

5fjthiUM^lka,  (sLd^hf),  6p  le7-€6 
rfto^  d-lunifii ,  31-52,  126 
5fab5vtreavara*  67,  lS4ii 
MaLajana,  1-0,  IS,  15-18,  87, 

S4.  GO.  63,  79,  $2,  55,  00,  98^99. 
148^7,  15L  m,  I71t  188,  IBO,  299, 
218 

5fah&ydJia^A9tro4»  86 
aioJiiyiiiie,  41.  6L  100 
Mnhaydiuatt,  7*  13,  14,  S4I*  2iKt 
j  ^rahAyo^fa-taotra'-yinm,  71ft 

I  matthunay  128 

^  Maitreya,  14^  16,  27,  62.  07 

moitfl.  50,"  166 

MiuilraCs),  50,  56.  61^  65,  63-70,  7^ 
67,  93,  104,  m,  i54r85.  167,  203. 

201P1 

Mftfttra'Cliarizia^  78 
Mantra-nay  a,  42j  60 
Mantra-ldatxft,  60 
Mantrq-Utlra*  167 
Moutra-yenft,  60-fil^  7Jii|,  72 
BIftittfn-yo6ai  184 
Mftijuiri,  36 

61-B2,  e®,  T4^  BS,  M,  IW, 
103,  lODn,  JlOm,  177 
SiU^ipiin  (i^fa),  1S8,  is6n,  leSn, 
lOa.  1«S,  ITS.  ISSii 
Mass  produced  t^inaufh  t]i«  miirm  of 
Sivk  and  daVti,  129 
J  Matrix  cleinetit,  109.  llOn 


230 


TEflnilC  BinjDHTSM 


Miai]yikiiiika(<h  97,  *l-a,  «2, 
146,  176-80 

ktunkkr,  67,  m,  190,  163-66 
Buddbft,  14 
?norii^a»  SO 
SS 

may^.  111,  ISO 

mlropAma  meditatiaHi  1^ 

41 

Bfcnlal  ccDstTUctiati^i  14S 
AI«4itaL  complexes,  97 
Tn^rutfaf^a^  101-63 
MiarocoaziiT  IGl 
Middle  nerve,  174 
Middle  path,  27.  TOO 
Mimimsl  tbediy  of  &7 

ModifiemtioD  nf  eci»$daii«tieu<  62 
moha  huh,,  T8»  ST 
mohena,  SO 

MtimenLa,  122.  166.  166ii 
Moon,  121^22,  176,  173-7B,  166,  LSSrt, 
ISO 

Moon  In  tbe  forcbeed,  ISO 
Moral  virtues^  201 
mudtid.  83,  166 

Miidrl(!i),  61,  63,  69.  mn,  TO,  80, 

03,  06,  07,  102.  Ifyin,  104.  100. 
llOa.  118,  168.  177.  ITTn.  178.  W* 
ISTit,  ISSn,  205,  aOln 
mufa-bandita,  183n 
MalAdbira-cakra,  llOn,  I62n.  16$, 
103 

Mystic  circles,  57,  61-62,  60,  177  ; 
practices,  ll^n  ; 
lyllahlest  ^  ! 
imian,  IDO 

N^airltinft,  112,  18Q'81,  155,  171,  174. 
190 

Hortakl  (Praiol  ni>,  114 
Natural  path,  lOS 
Navel  leg'ioii,  183,  1^ 
ndde,  68.  ISOn 
Ni^is^  16Sn 

Nufftrjiina,  18,  20-28,  86,  44.  62,  102, 

148,  200 

Nl^ariiina-pbdi,  51,  116,  140 
KlthiaEn^  72 
Ke^ativisti,  44 
Ncpale»  Bitddhiuu,  107,  109 
Nerve  syvtem.  3.83 


^  Nihij«  40 
'  Nihilinn,  82,  66 
Nihilistic^  43 
ui^iira&kGua,  28 
Nlkay«((>.  167-68 
Nir^ua-vldlns,  41 
fiirin^lKn-CjiikrO ,  128.  156.  165-86, 

16S».  m,  192,  195 
nirifid^u-kdpa#  13-15.  106.  163,  107# 
ifism,  m 

uiriipddA  i-le^ ,  126j  148 
Kfrupddbt-ie^d  saiuddhi,  56 
nirvana,  7-8.  11-14,  $2  23.  87.  46^1^. 
4B.  53^56,  Mft,  79,  99-100.  102,  116. 
118,  142-51,  158-59*  161.  177,  186. 
190,  192-08,  SOT  j 
>  dhatu,  148,  143  i 

'  without  any  rciidual  subatra- 

tiua#  146  s 

with  aaEue  residual  fub«tratum, 
146 

Inifprupemcd^  lOl 

muftti,  3.  lOT-S.  im.  llln,  125 
Ncu-alSrinstlcin  (udhiidrtiiKi)*  30 
Nou^cauaality.  21 

Non-duaJ,  8,  38,  PO,  43-50,  130,  14011, 

m ; 

knnwled^,  154-55.  202  | 

'  nature,  156*  203  ; 

quintessence,  153  ; 
aubstauee,  202^  ; 
truth,  155  ; 

I  union*  180  i 

Non-duality,  8,  ll.  98.  100,  104,  112. 
127,  154-55*  164 
!  Non-enli^htenraent,  26 
^  Nan-eni*  35 

Non -negation  {druipooijlo)*  80 
Non-phenomenook  191 
'  Non^ubjeciivity,  126 

Nun-aiibstaiitLal  nature,  21 
Nou-void,  26*  44 
Nyayo-lantra,  2 
Nyiya-vai4e|Uu*  * 

I  ^ 

ObjectintT,  73.  37-35.  44,  67,  09, 
Wn.  VM,  m 

Objeetle^  con^iouaqeES*  80 
Ouenesi  of  the  transetndentid  etuo- 
tion^  169 

Oneness  of  the  universe,  188 
Oneness  underlyin#  phenomEna,  147 
Ovum,  123 


EODES 


231 


pobSa/ya,  174i 
PndmAp  TO,  IGSp  ISS 
P»dma-n&ft«^vanip 
Fadma-nfitlia,  ]S& 

P^mA-p&^J,  fr 

pAdrojt-vnirA  TO,  {ftiitltor>p  18& 

Pali  BuddhiflMp  9 

imn 

Pfludlt  Advaya-vojra^  41 
paKCabhijndtvaf  IBT 
paRca^hhuta,  M-QtS 
lai 

pan£n]-&dni(].|ut^a,  70 
paiica-tTiaAraTOp  70,  TOn 
po^a^enrAa^afa,  9fi 
jHira  (nerrelp  160rt 
parafcAdvd,  30 

paramA-iianda,  1«,  l«8ii*  IffTp  l&T, 
lGl-08 

jHiromdriheip  IS 
parain«ivari,  104 
paratofllim,  95,  51 
paraiantra-wvubhRva,  S5 
par/lcdlpildp  85,  53 
parratWd^,  0 
partniipartaa,  SSp  53 
porirntpaiti^  85 
Pjuf^a-iavarl,  82 
PatA^idi,  65 

PAndarikp  78,  »T,  12Srtp  W»p  165^68 
p5r<tniarthiAa,  lOl,  17!^ 
pdtamiid,  lOp  18,  BO*  SOn,  82 
P87Bsut&-nAyftp  43,  W-61 
PATvati,  ISO,  153 
PstaojaEa-yora^  147 
Perfect  bli«a,  148,  l€Op  102-66 
Perfect  ejxtifhteniuetit,  lO,  78-76, 
127.  150,  174.  ifll.  m,  205n  ; 
kaowjedsep  0,  T|,  ISO.  155,  177, 
103,  200p  204  £ 
meditim.  1$|  f 
imion.  4$  \ 
vmcuityp  U2,  212  ^ 
void,  M.Mp  88  ; 
wisdam.  55,  02,  08.  152^53 
Perfectly  eoligbteaed  one,  Bfl.  1JS7,^ 
204r 

Perfectly  motiooleEfl,  106 
PbyaJolujncal  analysis.  161 

118^18,  164,  169,  196a,  170 
175,  168a 
pitta,  178 

PlclCui,  or*  181-88,  195-OS 


iDrabfcdAarf,.  U*  82 

IVajBd,  B.  11,  44,  48,  51-52.  84,  69ft, 
75-7$,  76a,  $2,  88,  0$,  88.  lOO-28« 
180-41.  14S?ip  152.  mn,  154,  105. 
IGO,  l$9fj,  ITI,  178,  177-78.  167. 
aOOp  KH,  204rt.  205-11.  SIS 
pTQjM-hhi^eka,  IT6-77 
proinA-jnand-bhifd^a,  177 
Praja^-piramitAp  14.  68-64,  9S.  114. 
116.  ISO 

Prajol-paranuti-iaaBtra,  64 
yraT^S-puMtaka,  62 
PraiM-TardMai,  82 
prajRc-pdya,  70.  104.  in 
prdA£JdhiAatni-lanii,  130 
prakrti  {nerve).  I69n 
I  prakrti-do^a,  52-5® 
praktii-prathAsvQTat  89 
I  pramudiCg.  ll,  S2 

I  166 

I  prnti-imtibAvd  aiVadAa*  146 
prafiftra-B'aiiiu^jjuafa.  18-19 
.  54-85 

I  pratuavek^apa-jMna,  05n 
pratyaharn,  m,  lain*  1B7 
Pratyeka-Btiddlia.  B,  1®,  16 
,  Pratyeka-Bnddbfl-yacm.  9.  18.  *1. 

1  Tin 

I  prdvfiti,  a,  107-11 

Prajaiku,  108 

prd^,  74.  169n,  178,  184.  ISSn,  leOn 
prapa-vaytt^J^,  162 
jn^ndvama,  ISl-ST 
I  Presiding  deities,  150,  165 
Pre^idiaf  goddm.  163n.  165 
Prinaal  Enlightenment,  93 
1  PrmiaJ  Lord.  03 

Primitive  Buddbism.  142 
(  Primordial  sub«tazic«,  lOT 
:  Principle  ol  defilement.  186-87.  Il2 
Principle  of  impnritiei^  5® 

Principle  at  parity,  m 
Principle  of  miioti.  m.  138-38 
pfiti  (dAydftd).  181 
Provi&lonal  truth  {tomuT-ti-sati^n), 
18,  126 

PrUiag-yana,  78 
PTfhivi  (nerve),  losn 
Paycho-pbyaied  practical.  lJ|a 
pudgalii  (puggn;a},  145,  177 
pudgafa-nairdtTnvo,  8S^,  126 


TAXTHJC  BUDDHISM 


23*i 

Pwtt  tODIflQUADWj  S3r  6^.  97i  I 
16,  SiS,  147-41^.  164  : 
dlhilfeuccj  IM  ; 
irnmulyj  4S  r 
wiidcira»  10^ 

Purufs*  170  I  (nerr*),  I60n 
IM 

rojakx  (FrKj&K  u)»  1X4 
rdioj,  ie9n,  170 
ttrXffSp  65 
l•akca,  lUp  l^n 

famna,  llS-10,  IW.  16W5.  160“7a 
BmtUA-ketii,  Offn 
Ratpa-CAtliA,  64n,  S2p  04,  ISO 
RAtOO-^fB^CUi  97 

RAtna^uinlaliar A  p  64^  04,  85n.  tf7i 
OOn,  ISO*  m,  iTHp  |?7 
ravi.  16071 

T^ga,  206,  203,  1S5-10 

7S,  Wi 

Hihu,  ITS 
Eaja-7ajrAp  OIn 
tdJ^fiEp  163n,  1S6 

l^oliAatioii  cl  il1>^  fi'rad  (ndiratmiri^ 

4fi 

1S4 

RecepUidp  minil,  ^£6 
Red  matler* 

Rtflecfced  mwareiaeafp  ao 
Refulgent  bcd^r^  2i 
reffii  (□Ervc)p  lOOn 
Right  Dtrire^  ISS 
Rpot-ifiKtineti,  126,  SS^  SSr94,  247 
Sa,  47p  04^  P4fl  ,  07 
rupp-dhpfttf  46 

Satril  plexus,  IBa 

SierD-c<^ce7geal  Jpilexii^ 

»ad-d/iarm4iF  10 

SiLhpjft,  63,  74p  77*  IBS,  IBS*  Uh 

153.  10S-S4p  2(m^  \  “hJjss. 
Its,  tSi,  130p  157j  264,  170,  101, 
m  i  —dmoisel,  U6,  i71p  174  ^ 

— form.  ISOrt?  — kl^Bp  IS,  00,  16B; 

— nature,  173.  ISOn.  iSe,  IBS*  SOM  : 

— prema,.  107 ;  — tundnri,  IflO  y 
— tonUp  lO&n  ;  — yiJia#  61^  71,  77, 
DO,  153-SO  ;  — yliiijitB,  143 
SnhajAiuLndAp  107p  101-90 
Sxbniiyi*  60*  77  |  Buddhist  «cbwL 
00  -f  »ecti  !H>  1  fcbool*  TT-TS 
ioAoioR,  28Si« 


ipboirdm  (-padiad),  llOn,  156,  |6a^ 
60,  170p  ISO 
laRp^a^a*  SO 
SamAntA'bhadTmp  97 
tamnriM^  133^1^  Slip  917 
■dittatO-/SOnap  OSn*  177 
ApmogEi,  SS  j  — fetila,  97  ; 

— miidrS.^  I28n»  165,  lOl  ;  « 

—9attvQ,  92 

S&mndbi,  107,  131*  mn.  167  i 
— klyn,  14 ; 

— fcudrft,  97 
earndna,  134 

tambPtPga-co^ra*  190,  158,  164,  ISO* 
lOa  ;  — lEdpa,  lX-13,  106,  124,  190. 
167p  leOn,  171 
idniZwdAi,  70 
patnbuddliap  9B 
Safflctiw  {fPiMotflh  Si4,  SO 
jrpnzjirajRafa-#dmOdbtj  147 
jgmJ/dk  w0mhuddhfit.  7 
tsmjna,  &*,  &4fi*  97 
urnlc/ciu*  29 

iamfdrn,  1^,  26,  40^,  55,  l±5,  143, 
154 

tSHukarU^  SI,  34^  9411^  07,  101,  143 
tamtfidlf  loS  *  — ^ddpj  167^^ 

124,  170 

lamtfrti  ISflp  1S4e  — ffltyp,  ITO 

Siinikrik  Buddhixm,  3 

01,  Oln,  122,  ISO,  103 
ipnbmnft,  167 

Siurxba-pada,  89,  09,  115*  2)9 
samA^dtE^  170 
^E^r^'n-huddha-krofAtf^  32 
jrarL'd-d5qrfnd-][^a^i|tibdJia-vadpp  4i  ^ 
flqrva-fliftya,  51,  53^  liA 
Sarvidtl,  172  ;  — rada,  ie7'63  ; 

— %'idiHi*  37 

170 

SautriintjkRfi),  17^  41-42,  145-46 
vayupdd)E^«£ja-nibfidfia*  146 
ipdAnna  f-iifli,  ^k6>,  l-X,  49-50,  55, 
5rnp  60*  7g*  81.  88^35.  Ill*  US. 
124-25,  130-ai,  T60,  167.  176-77, 
immt  212-lS 
hddlivmati,  Itp  82 
Sikilri-vldmi,  41 
^amaroMya,  141 

Siihlibyap  4p.  ID,  04,  111  t  — txntrm*  2 
Seed*  120 

Self'  parti  ii^xrisxti  on*  26 
Selr-pri>du«d  knowMgr,  10fl 


4 


rXBEX 


ScIf^reftliutioTip 
Self-sufficient  uturf, 

Mtv&t  1<*7 

Sexo-yogic  preotice  (i),  ^Up  14^ 
1S5-A?,  lAdp  i&b,  iM, 

Shingon  sectp  tm 
Siddli&ciryas,  59n^  11.0^  175 
sctd  1^ 

Six  p&ris  of  yogu,  ISI+  lain 
Six  T&thfigntju,  ^76 
Sixteen  digits  oI  the  mnon,  164,  IflS) 
j^WfioW*  WnW,  Whi.  IfHp  165 
•mrti,  S4p  56,  156 
iiPWMi  (nerve),  leSn 
■Djiddhifefe.  t?6,  146 
SurcencXp  70 
Sound  vibratioiip  503 
Southern  Buddhlain,  3 
Spinal  cord,  16t-65,  170 
stamh^nnA,  60 
State  of  blusp  167 
State  of  imiDn,  0,  14 
Sthavira-vadA^  167-66 
Sth&varlf  im 
tthira  (ttcrve),  lOOn 
Sthiracnutik  27 
tfAufd  (pcrve)t  16&n 
Subjectivity,  SSp  25^  57-a5,  70,  TO, 
37,  66,  mn.  104,  ITI 
Subllminial  mind-stare^  ao 
Succesaioaal  serieip  31 
Suehn«St  56^  S^p  10| 
radu^ai/ap  11,  82 
rukha,  132^53,  181 
168 

Sukhatatr,  143.  156-67 
Sim,  131-52,  170.  172,  186,  leSn 
Supemataral  knowledge,  187 
Supreme 

Supreme  hWsa,  40.  116,  14-h  151 

les,  m 

Supreme  realisation ,  lOO 
rufumnu.  118.  100-73 
tu^upta,  194 

jicDihcdd^-dAdmiA-dlidfu-yndiiii,  Odn 

ifikfmu  (nervclp  160n 

i^rt^ap  t60p  169n 

SOtmCt)^  I7p  68 

audblintTo,  21 

Svabhava-klya^  IS 

tUffZakfu^.  59p  80 

Svnbliavika,  107 

O.P.  105^0 


233 

SvIbhAvika  aebnui,  lDT~fi 
«^ddbt-di3iyatu-90ga«  92 
Sr&dhiftbBJiap  03,  15B 
fuddAif^^Saa-cakra.  lOSn,  166 
ivadAifthdna-cicu,  32 
jx^faafrird.  139 
iabdai^  68 
Suiva  Tantrasp  13S 
gjlktiWp  3.  7B,  B5,  IlfUSi  119,  l£fl‘ 
02,  186,  141,  t^n.  160u,  170^  172, 
180-90 

iaiin  (nert‘e)p  lOOn 
Savara,  6l 

I63n,  166 

jlakta  Tantra.  128 
SAkyamunti  69 
Sakyasimbn  Buddha^  14 
SauU^pudHk  2l4ii 

Siva,  8>  m.' 110-12,  120-30,  132,  l4l 
lean,  IGOn,  172 
Icnn-biWup  ISO 

^ravaka,  9,  10,  16  ;  ^yana,  9.  13* 

41,  71a 

in  llenika,  lis 
iri-klla-eakra,  54,  153n 
itutm£i-iEnnl]a£|iJiiiBp  155 
lukra.  iGBrt 

Siinyata,  5,  10.  15.  23,  2S-51,  S6-ST* 

42,  44,  48,  64,  75-76,  78,  86-88,  01, 
96,  98-106,  111-12,  116-21,  154,  12S, 
102-34.  141,  147-48,  ISOn,  ISiSj  170- 
ri,  170,  178,  182  i  "doetfinc,  22. 
Si,  H  s  — aiaeiiee,  8S  i  — ^Ihana. 
08  i  '-knowl^ge,  96^  llSn  : 
— nature.  51,  0®.  182  ;  “percep- 
IioHh  111  z  — penpective.  181  ; 
— y&na,  87 

iflnyavndBf  4,  I&IS,  58,  50 
iOnyaVAiiins,  13*  35,  87 
SadakfATf-lakeivarT-BiEltianain,  M,  56 
181 


iamoM,  lOOu^  Ito 
tuuffidtm.  04-05 

Tao,  ISO  ;  — Um,  110-11  ;  — wU,  111 
tarkn.  Siln 

TatbfigBta(ft),  IB^  47,  «4*i,  8B,  99n, 
131,  J83  I  —  vigtaha,  IS 
tathata,  IB,  23-  25-27,  SI,  OS,  101, 
106,  100  ;  — doctrine*  147  X 

too  I  — nntuTe,  07  i 
— riipd.  12  ;  — vSdu,  IBn,  20.  S7 


TA  X  f  R  i  c  B  UDDU  ISM 


’i*,  laa,  nil,  m\  iitJ, 
174;  —  bfroTT^ffla.  44,  Jft4;  — /niliiy* 

4^ 

Tlotric  :  —  prfltiiw. 

W  t  — 7U  ;  4 

TlHtricump  4,  a,  ai»  70,  71 
T&ri. 

Telp  110 

Tcp  Baddhfth,,  ItS 
Thstima«  12^  S£a,  S4,  ai,  lofi,  iot>, 
las,  U7 

Tiierd,  &  5  — HKfldnp  I6S 

Three  elez|]|-iit>^,  IWI 

Three  kiym>  li,  14-15. 

or,  73.  t*0,  104,  Iffli,  ni 
Thought-cunilrtictinn^  (8-50,  D&Jt, 
140,  119-51,  174,  101,  '202.1, 

^1:1 

ThuiwJer-eJenu^iit.  ItftJ  “ 

Thuntler  or  vi>id  ifirL  81 
Tliuoder  warn  no,  157,  ^jflu 
ThikoderlHilt  ve];iJeb,  7“ 

Tilli>-pada.  StNi,  T&l 
TiiUlity  of  the  iwiverw,  14. 
Totality  of  tHiijnp  31 

Ir^iit^kpa^vifnifa^  G1 

Traoacendeoto)  hiw,  156  j  e^bUriEi-e 
28  ;  211 
TrajHiforznidon  fto^Jyi  15 
TraiuliormDttim  of  ecnwioui^Tiiei^h 

Tri4ufbntiltkir  the  4«x-plrn!iure.  I<]4> 
TraBtuhfttnhltnteT  LOO 
Traji^iibf^lmolinleif  ili^jnf  hotly,  im 
tri-cfhdiu.  201 

lOSn 

(ri-Vr^l,  170 
rMn>a.  IM 
TttbiLa  ht-AveOp  OH 
IVil  veiU,  03 

irrcflfujttiil,  m 
liclana,  lHr4 

l-kuoatc  elemrnl,  155  ;  — inlrotJiPij 
iahhipnfifa]^  32  ?  151, 

170*  nton,  21 C  j  — reniity,  173; 
— ^tHte,  15a  ;  ^iuLnil iuiee m  lLi7i 

1^  ;  — inilb.  \m,  150.  ast 
Uireiiiniirdmijdoir  fte^MLkL!itjH»  ad 
[ToeutnpiroiniiiiBjr  mhiliMm,  13 
Underfylno  onruess.  im 
UndbtiirL^eti  om-rkcsa,  211 


1  Union  uf  witMluni  wllli  matttTp  tlo 
t  -oiveriBl  eomtiiMifiiotl,  T-11p  4t&p  51, 

I  3ft.  «3,  08,  m,  \m,  aw,  «f>4 

1  tTniv^ialiaiidim  al  l3>e  wlf,  IfMI 

I  63 

I  160 

UFMiiii^ddap  no-Hi,  05*  IW.  160  ; 

~^dic.  flo  * 

Upaniiadve  oiniti^iiii,  4,  la 
82 

«|Mii!(iPiaiOddii,  178 

iikpdnbst'il^  167 

np&Uo^  Sp  51-5Ci,  70.  1H3- 

41.  l4tHi,  152*  15an,  l:fl,  185,  liiOp 
JK0»*  171,  177-78.  187.  2Wlt  201, 

204^1!*  200.  2UU^  200-13 
ujutMO'^iindd^Up  102h 

i  K/irM.  «wi.  Joe 

Ulijirr  Tfljit™.  71  ft 
Uf^l^a-hamnh^  ]38p  156,  li32-oap  1(43, 
ITT,  188,  m 

j  t^^iifa-vijoyA,  82 

I  A’ni^tdly,  44,  4li.  112,  IIBp  SSfJ.  216  IT 

'  t'aibl]  a^Llta,  17,  tl 

VBirfteBftO,  14.  ti4i  rt4fl,  78,  S4,  £h|ii, 
l^ft,  B7p  S»0.  100,  im.  150,  ITU.  1 77 
Val^avB  Sahajiyi^  178 
TiLQlm.  r2n 

I  V  fiijrrt,  52.  70,  78.  »«  8r,  K!, 

j  U7-18.  lar,  130.  laofl.  ijr ; 
j  —  bhaiTBVa,  78  ;  — bhiskjLri.  81  ; 
— eeUnJ,  81  ;  —  OS,  124, 

ia>^L*  148,  155:  — dliitu,  100, 
llOPi;  — dlial\‘ilvBn,p  78,  81,  07, 
180 ;  — hnihhati,  81  ;  — jfi4iia*  48, 
177:  — japa*  lfl5  ;  — kanyi,  81, 
113  ;  — koyit,  12^  80-00  :  ^icfaemri 
Si  :  — knowled^r,  in^l  |  — mahiiil. 
Hi  X  — Bftture,  7ft,  81,  Itw  * 

— niri.  203ft  :  —  nmtha,  iSfl  ; 

— piini*  47,  07  ;  — niMiHl,  81  i 

— rripiftl,  8J  ;  —sarAAvatT'i^fitll^a- 
I  nanip  li^H  ;  — itatti^a,  O-l,  75-76, 

I  ftlS-Dl,  rei,  m,  Oi,  IIW,  124-2S,  127, 

!  150.51,  137,  l  l@p  l.-S^-SS,  155,  173  ; 

— Mtlvahwcl,  187;  — «ftUv£Tmik5. 

I  m  ;  — ^stpiirsini,  81  ;  — ^virya,  Olrt  j 
—t5.fi,  78  I  ^tifi-siitlhiinain*  SO  ; 
— Lrlasitii.  81  ;  — tlirpadi,  131  ; 

— ^'Birotafla,  m  ;  —  tarilil.  81, 

^  (i8.  uwyftl  ;  vikii^til,  04  ;  ^ill- 

■  aini  ;  SI  j  — yina,  «l. 


J>'DEX 


235 


i 


«1,  tU-73,  77^,  tt*  51,  flCI, 

H0H,  IJW-a?.  L^i;;  ; 

— yinLiU*  oo.  s®.  r4«, 

tiftS  06  ;  — yufit,  IWi,  157 
VnjrA,  ITO 
Viijrnlih4clt4.p  17i^ 

V»jrlciryji,  Ti 
VajTij;^im^|fHjinftr  S3 
Vajjij^ia,  61 
V^ireivaTf,  HI 
r^/'raKp  lOSn 
vairo^i-mudrar  IftSii 
rdjrojNiimf'inrflitaLion,  la? 
iruHlp  169,  lOOn 
i^itroe/a  07 

var^m^  ^-66 

Va^ubandhu^  la,  27,  SK  ij(i.  tfr,  H7 
V&sinnatL  ^ 

SlJ 

vffhdna,  Q5>  97 j  IS2 
r4md,  aOp  l*?thi 

Viribi^  56^K,  IDT,  ISl,  JHin.  JSd 
v5«dH6p  2K  215*  5i!l.  Sl-»i,  101,  iLHt. 

vfitfUi  S2-5ilp  173,  is^  •  -Iflf  lvii*  162 
reifandp  04,  046.  97  * 

Vrdiata,  4,  35-36,  30.  Hi  ; 

£7Jip  55-M  ;  170  ;  -tip,  |U. 

fai,  la  \  ^tic  mptiLim,  16 
VebLck  of  jfTtmt  bliw^  I4iln 

Vcili  6f  gubj«cdvft>-p  lllj! 
vicSrn,  ISl 
tfcrfro,  166t  191.  IBH 
vidvefd^a*  no 
VilitrAp  JfiO 
Jia 

vifhapti-mairutd^  IB,  ffij,  ff7* 
uiTfidnap  24,  23,  43.  91*  &*n*  Oti^OT  ; 
'IMn'wamii,  33  ;  4,  17,  23. 

27,  aw*  05,  147-16-  1<J6  ;  | 

rSiJtna,  15,  |3,  23.  27ii,  35,  35. 

ST,  ST,  fKI*  m 

1(17,  101,  ID* 
tTHfd/dp  11,  Jfif 

rimunJff,  lOB,  10|,  rfit 
utmur«a,  129 

166,  101,  m 

tirumQHQndo,  1,13,  imt,  lai.  tii7* 

391  Ml 

tinaftt,  loan,  ISA.  IIU,  IWirt.  IKOh 

VftfyffrfAd'^in^mp  J(!3£b,  Iqs,  1«4(^  I 


1 64 

Vi«a-|xigi,  07 
VUva-tUsa.  icii;eJ*  211 
ViAva-Tajm-ittijcIrn,  07 
DrJxia-wianmi-fcuipia^a,  84it 
Mini  wind,  {65-68 
181 

vivria,  124,  ITO.  lOOn 
I6drt 

Toid  1  iDp  13,  15,  37,  23. 

25,  27-2St  W.  42.  48p  51-33,  61,  Sip 
84,  STp  OOn,  126,  130,  154,  136,  304, 
2{12-^13t  ~C0D4eiousiii:^,  06;  ^-clt- 
mejit,  134.  133  ;  — mtiiclp  ll2  ; 

— imtwrjp,  66,  147.  3W 
\W  of  rvaimi!^ti60,  1*6 
Ti'owdg,  121,  172-73 
I  WaWond,  2n 
v^dnop  164 
iKD^t^ahdriicap  ITfl 

Whwl  [if  tiJiie,*T3 
Whirl  of  time,  74 
White  lUAtter,  laj 
Wdtnb  of  the  Tilth  iifnti 
darbAct)!,  26 
W'orJd  force,  189 
World  illufiinrti  tS6 


Dubwam,  109,  iSfl 
WO/Htanar  160-71 
WaiHtnr.  lOBii,  mt 
YdnAfa),  15-16,  32,  Iw4 
Vitnika  school,  lOTn 
ino-lu 

Yo^a,  II  ;  — 'philoKjptiy,  ti5p  72  ; 
-sajJhqitn.  178  t  -tintCAp  7tn,  70 1 
-tantrji-yiuA»  71a 
Tftfipa  with  nuc  parts,  181 
Y'o^lcflra,  16-1 S,  27*  ST,  41-42,  62 
Yo|f6irariTi(Sp  39*  41^ 

Yofic  cLrele,  3to3tt,  294ii:  — prnciict-s, 
41*  40  39.  6lhi,  61,  136,  J3S,  174^73, 
177,  ISOfl*  I84p  101,  202a  ;  —pri^ 
resjc«,  ISO,  TO^m  j  —onion,  17M 

Yiipial,  lia,  1T4 

^\iHopoz]j$Afis,  160 
jvaai-modrc^  l8Sa 
WDifunodflbup  1%^3K,  149,  202 
uoi^atli  US 


j 


of  Koiura 


■W’*. 


1^ 


Central  ArchaeologfcaJ  Library, 

new  DELHI. 


GalJ  No. 


Autljor- 


TitJe—  fei 

- — T  Q*v‘tfeL>  c,  £<.^£/jdtkA4(W'  1 


Bo;n=w„N,,  Di>te.»fr„a, 

Wvi 

'M  book  (bat  I>  ^A^^^  ithtia  block*^ 


f^' 


C^tAEOLOo. 


% 

GOVT.  OF  INDIA 
Departmuit  of  Aixhaeolofiy 
NEW  DELHI. 


"  j,,  - 1^;4"!#*****'^ 

Please'  help  us  to  keep  the  book 
ol^n  End  nioviiig, 

f » 1.*  M  lAi«  DllMI* 


I  *  iS  '  ^^2 


