LONDON ORIENTAL SEKTES VOLUME 6 


HEVAJRA 
TANIRA 


A Critical Study 


D a CEN 


y 


3 PART I | 
j T. E ° ie Å 3 
| - Introduction and Translation | 


AE rem 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


.CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundati 
SCHOOL OF 


London Oriental Series 
Volume 6, Part I 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


z 
E 
2 
3 
o 


DÅ 


Mandala of Hevajra 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
LONDON ORIENTAL SERIES - VOLUME 6 


THE 


HEVAJRA TANTRA 


A CRITICAL STUDY 


BY 
D. L. SNELLGROVE 


Lecturer in Tibetan, 
School of Oriental and African Studies 


PART I 
INTRODUCTION AND 
TRANSLATION 


NE 
DES GENE 

te ==, 
pou 'uscum, e = 


| l 
å VE 
v 3 
` 
er 


LONDON 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
NEW YORK TORONTO 


1959 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


Oxford University Press, Amen House, London E.C.4 


GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON 
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI KUALA LUMPUR 
CAPE TOWN IBADAN NAIROBI ACCRA 


O D. L. Snellgrove 1959 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


CONTENTS 

PREFACE ii 

BIBLIOGRAPHY xiii 

INTRODUCTION 

I. Apologetic I 

II. Origins II 
III. Subject-matter 19 
IV. Observations 39 

TRANSLATION 

PART I 
Chapter i. The Body of Hevajra 47 
Chapter ii. Mantras 50 
Chapter iu. Hevajra and his Troupe 56 
Chapter iv. Self-consecration 59 
Chapter v. Reality 60 
Chapter vi. The Performance 63 
Chapter vii. Secret Signs 66 
Chapter viii. The Troupe of Yoginis 73 
Chapter ix. The Spheres of Purification 78 
Chapter x. Consecration 81 
Chapter xi. The Four Gazes 84 

PART II 
Chapter i. Consecrations and Oblations 88 
Chapter ii. The Certainty of Success 89 
Chapter iii. The Basis of all Tantras 94 
Chapter iv. Answers to Various Questions 100 
Chapter v. The Manifestation of Hevajra 109 
Chapter vi. The Making of a Painting 114 
Chapter vii. Books and Feasting 115 
Chapter viii. Subjugating 116 
Chapter ix. Mantras 116 


CONTENTS 


ChaptePS0- GHHMRisertinigita/faneevation Foundation, Chandigarh 118 
Chapter xi. The Five Families 118 
Chapter xii. The Four Consecrations 119 
RÉSUMÉ OF CONTENTS 121 
DIAGRAMS 126 
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS 131 
INDEX 143 
PLATES 
Mandala of Hevajra Frontispiece 


(Reproduced—with kind permission—from Giuseppe Tucci's Tibetan Painted 
Scrolls, plate 215.) 
For the names of the divinities see Diagram III, p. 126. 


Hevajra and Nairatmya Facing page 110 


Fresco in the Sa-skya-pa Monastery, gYas-mtsher dGon-pa of Dolpo in 
West Nepal. For a description of Hevajra see pp. 110 and 111. For å 
description of gYas-mtsher dGon-pa see my Himalayan Pilgrimage, Cassirer, 
Oxford, 1959, pp. 85-92. 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


PREFACE 


THE core of this work is an edition of the Hevajra-tantra, based upon a 
Nepalese manuscript, which was kindly lent me by Professor Giuseppe 
Tucci. This text has been translated with the help of the Tibetan transla- 
tion and its most important Indian commentaries. Of these one which is 
preserved in Sanskrit, the Yogaratnamala by a certain Kanha, has also been 
edited, based upon an old Bengali manuscript belonging to Cambridge 
University Library. It has seemed sufficient to make quotations from the 
other commentaries, which are all preserved in Tibetan, and to attach 
these in the form of notes to the translation of the main text. 

The intention of the introduction is to provide some historical religious 
setting for the text, and to interpret to the reader the essential meaning of 
the tantra, as it is understood by the commentators. This part of the work 
is of a more general nature, and I must acknowledge my great indebtedness 
to Professor Tucci, whose monumental works on the art of Tibet with the 
many references they contain, have proved a constant support, and also 
to Louis de la Vallée Poussin and to Paul Mus, whose theories of the 
development of Buddhism I have learned to accept as fundamentally 
sound. In the case of de la Vallée Poussin I have in mind particularly his 
Bouddhisme, Études et Matériaux, published in 1898. It was this work that 
first drew my attention to the essential continuity underlying the develop- 
ment of Buddhism, a continuity achieved by devotion to a single ideal, 
which was ever seeking better means of realization and expression. This 
short work, produced now more than fifty years ago, is still rich in un- 
realized implications. More recently I have come upon the work, still 
unfinished, of Paul Mus, Borobudur, Esquisse d'une Histoire du Bouddhisme 
fondée sur la critique archéologique des textes. This method appears as 
entirely satisfactory; the bringing of a text into relationship with archaeo- 
logical evidence has the effect of uncovering for us the intention of the 
practisers, so that it begins to become possible to conceive of their doctrine 
as they conceived of it, a refreshing change indeed from the modern spate 
of literature on Buddhism, which often tells little more than how certain 
Europeans or modern Indians conceive of some of the formulated Buddhist 
doctrines which please them. 

To attempt an interpretation of a Buddhist tantra is to move into un- 
mapped territory; certain landmarks are clear, a few tracks here and there, 
and that is all. Very few texts of this kind have so far been published, and 
none has been analysed in any detail. As early as 1896 de la Vallée Poussin, 
introducing his edition of the Paficakrama, wrote: ‘Il y a beaucoup de 


vii 


PREFACE 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
choses dans les livres tantriques—et notamment dans le Paficakrama—qui 


se trouve au confluent d'un courant d'idées métaphysiques et d'un courant 
d'idées religieuses: tout ce que la philosophie Madhyamika a de plus 
subtil s'y méle harmoniquement å des conceptions d'ordre pratique savam- 
ment élaborées.’ Yet fifty years later these possibilities are still largely 
unexplored, and the Buddhism of India from the eighth to the thirteenth 
century remains relatively unknown. On the other hand, expressions of 
opinion have not been so slow in forthcoming. These have either been 
based on the first impressions given by the few texts that have become 
available, or upon Sir John Woodroffe's series of non-Buddhist tantras. 
This has led to the all too rapid assumption that the Buddhist tantras 
are in all things identifiable with the såkta tantras, a conclusion which, if 
indeed justified, should have followed from an examination of the texts 
and traditions on both sides. The wide divergence that separates them 
becomes apparent when we consider the later development of tantric 
Buddhism, particularly in Tibet. It is here that the works of Giuseppe 
Tucci are of such inestimable value, particularly the four volumes of Indo- 
Tibetica, which suggest with remarkable vividness the condition of the 
Buddhism of those centuries, when it was being methodically transferred 
into Tibet. ‘Il compito doveva apparire sempre pit vasto e difficile, perché 
di fatto si doveva creare non solo una letteratura ma una nuova cultura, 
o meglio, si doveva dare al Tibet una cultura che non aveva mai posseduta. 
Ció poteva solo avvenire attraverso l'introduzione della nuova religione, 
che a poco a poco, permeava le coscienze e ne informava tutta quanta la 
vita e, penetrata da circa tre secoli, aveva già avuto le sue glorie, le sue 
sconfitte, i suoi martiri (I-T ii, p. 9). 

It seems sufficiently evident that far more was involved in tantric 
Buddhism than a first glance at the text of the Guhyasamåja-tantra might 
suggest. ''his important work, usefully edited by Benoytosh Bhattacharya, 
still awaits a thorough investigation in the light of its commentaries, which 
alone will place it rightly in its Buddhist setting. There seems to be nothing 
essentially difficult about these texts if studied in this manner, but one 
can go hopelessly astray if one attempts to make deductions oneself from 
literal interpretations of the tantras. Such a procedure may throw light 
upon their origins, but by no means does it explain their significance for 
Buddhist tradition. 

There has also appeared recently a work by S. B. Dasgupta, An Intro- 
duction to Tantric Buddhism, Calcutta, 1950. This is a thoroughly com- 
mendable book for its discussion of many of the terms fundamental to the 
subject, and for its many quotations drawn largely from manuscripts, not 
a few of them indeed from the Hevajra-tantra itself, of which a copy 15 
held by the Asiatic Society of Bengal. One needs, however, to beware of 


viii 


CC-0. Agamnigam BRIBES ation Foundation, Chandigarh 


the general manner of discussion, which is far too naive in its approach, 
and seems to suggest too ready an acceptance of certain modern prejudices. 
The cause for this is always the same, that we are attempting to generalize 
on a vast subject, in which there is no lack of material, by short-cutting 
the longer task of examining these texts in detail and in their own context. 

It is this therefore that I have attempted to do in the case of the Hevajra- 
tantra. Difficulties still remain, but that is at present inevitable; nor let 
it be thought that I am claiming immunity from error in the case of my 
own observations. It has, however, been my aim to base them upon as 
large a context as is possible to me at present. This is the only safe manner 
of proceeding; as our context becomes gradually enlarged, so will our 
observations become increasingly reliable. 

I acknowledge my gratitude to Professor H. W. Bailey, who set me 
forth on the path of Indian studies and who is still always ready with 
advice and assistance; to Professor Giuseppe Tucci for the kindly 
interest that he has taken in my studies and for the generous manner in 
which he placed his private library at my disposal during my long stay 
with him in Rome; and to Professor Walter Simon who continues to give 
me such friendly guidance in London. 

I would acknowledge my great debt of gratitude to the School of 
Oriental and African Studies in the University of London, where this 
present work has been completed, and by whose very generous subvention 
its publication has been made possible. At this School thanks are especially 
due to the Librarian and his staff for the unfailing assistance they have 
given me in gaining access to manuscripts and texts. 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


NOTE 


Fr vz years have passed since I completed the editing and trans- 
lating of these texts. Delay in printing has been caused mainly 
by my absence from this country on travels in the Himalayan 
regions of India and Nepal. Now that this work is at last appear- 
ing in print, I myself am inevitably the first and most critical of 
readers. Five years ago the scope of the book was still limited by 
the actual material available to me. Now another volume might 
be added, compiled from other commentaries—and perhaps pre- 
sented with maturer observations. 


Berkhamsted 
28 Fuly 1958 
o D. L. SNELLGROVE 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


MANUSCRIPTS AND BLOCK-PRINTS EMPLOYED, 
PRECEDED BY ABBREVIATION 


Dvåtrims$atkalpoddhrtah kalpadvayåtmako $rihevajradåkinijålasamvaramahåtantra- 


raja. 


> 


MS. belonging to Giuseppe Tucci, Rome. 
MS. belonging to Cambridge University Library, Add. 1340. 
MS. belonging to the Asiatic Society of Bengal, no. 11317. 


Tibetan translation: br Tags pa sum cu rtsa gñis las phyun ba brtags ba gñis 
kyi bdag tid Kyehi rDorje mkhah hgro ma dra bahi sdom pa rgyud kyi rgyal 
po chen po—Narthang Kanjur, rGyud, i. 3065-3515. 


Chinese translation: Taisho no. 892. 


COMMENTARIES 


Yogaratnamålå by Kanha. MS. belonging to Cambridge University 
Library, Add. 1699. 


: Rin po chehi phren ba (Tibetan version of above)—Narthang Tenjur, rGyud, 


xvi. 1—73a. 

Srihevajravyåkhyåvivarana—dPal dGyes pahi rDorjehi rnam bíad rnam par 
hgrel pa, by Bha-ta-Zabs (Bhadrapada), id. xv. 1945—309a. 
Netravibhanga—sPyan hByed, by Dharmakirti, id. xvii. 336a—423a. 
Smrtinispatti(?)—Dran pahi hbyun gnas, by Nag-po (Kanha), id. xvii. 
168a—219b. 

Vajrapadasarasamgraha—r Dorjehi tshig gi sñiñ po bsdus pa, by Naro, id. 
xvii. 685-1675. 

Muktikavali—Mu-tig phren-ba, by Ratnåkara$ånti, id. xvii. 2502-3355. 
Padmini—Padma can, by Saroruha, id. xv. 142a-194b. 


: Suvisuddhasamputa—Khasbyor sin tu dri ma med pa, by Tankadasa, id. 


xvi. 73a—-346a. 
Hevajrapindarthatika—Kyehi rDorje bsdus pahi don gyi rgya cher hgrel pa, 
by the Bodhisattva Vajragarbha, id. xv. 1-1415. š 


OTHER EDITED BUDDHIST TANTRIC TEXTS 


Hevajrasekaprakriyå: ‘Manuscrits Sanskrit de Sådhana's retrouvés en Chine’, 


GS: 
PK: 


Louis Finot, Journal Asiatique, July-Sept. 1934. 
Guhyasamåja-tantra, ed. Bhattacharya, G.O.S. Hü. 
Paficakrama, ed. de la Vallée Poussin, Louvain, 1896. 


Sådhanamålå: ed. Bhattacharya, G.O.S. xxvi and xli. 
Shahidullah: Chants Mystiques, Paris, 1928. 

Bagchi: Dohåkosa, Calcutta Sanskrit Series 25c. 
Advayavajrasamgraha: G.O.S. xc. 


xiii 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digita Pr BEEN Batata, Chandigarh 


3fiánasiddhi: Two Vajrayana Works, G.O.S. xliv. 

Sekoddesatikå: G.O.S. xc. 

Subhåsitasamgraha: ed. Bendall, Muséon, new series iv-v. 

Maiijusrimiilakalpa, ed. Ganapati Sastri, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, lxx, Ixxvi 
Ixxxiv. k 

Dåkårnavatantra (apabhraméa text), ed. by N. N. Chaudhuri, Calcutta, 1935. 

Cittavisuddhiprakarana, ed. Haraprasäd Shāstri, J.A.S.B., vol. lxvii, part I, 
pp. 175-85. 

Sricakrasamvaratantra, ed. Kazi Dawa-Samdup, Luzac, London, 1919. 

Étude sur le Mahåvairocanasiitra by Ryüjun Tagima, Paris, 1937. 


HISTORICAL REFERENCES 


Obermiller: History of Buddhism by Bu-sTon. 

'Tåranåtha: History of Buddhism, ed. Schiefner. 

Schiefner: German translation of above. 

EM: Edelsteinmine of Tåranåtha, translation by Griinwedel, Petrograd, 1914. 


VZ: Die vierundzwanzig Zauberer, translation by Griinwedel of the Grub thob 
brgyad cu rtsa b£ihi lo rgyus (Narthang Tenjur, Ixxxvi. 1). Baessler-Archiv, 
v. 1916. 


Tucci, Animadversiones Indicae, ASB. xxvi, pp. 128-58. 

S. Lévi, Un nouveau document sur le bouddhisme de basse époque dans l'Inde, BSOAS. 
6, pp. 417-29. 

Sånkrtyåyana, “Recherches Bouddhiques, L'Origine du Vajrayana des 84 siddhas' 
FA. 225 (1934), pp. 209-30. 

Ray, The Dynastic History of Northern India, Calcutta, 1931. 

Sarkar, The History of Bengal, Dacca, 1948. 


REFERENCES RELEVANT TO RITUAL AND YOGA 
TPS: Tucci, Tibetan Painted Scrolls, vols. i-iii. 
I-T: Tucci, Indo- Tibetica, vols. i-iv. 
Tucci, Teoria e Pratica del Mandala, Roma Astrolabio, 1949. 
BEM: de la Vallée Poussin, Bouddhisme, Etudes et Matériaux, Luzac, 1898. 


Mus: Paul Mus, Borobudur, Esquisse d’une histoire du Bouddhisme fondée sur la 
critique archéologique des textes, Hanoi, 1935. 


Glasenapp, "Tantrismus und Saktismus’, Ostasiatische Zeitschrift, 1936, pp- 120-33: 

Dasgupta, S. B., An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism, Calcutta, 1950- 

Eliade, Le Yoga, Immortalité et Liberté, Paris, 1954. 

Maspero, ‘Les Procédés de *Nourrir le Principe Vitale" dans la religion Taoiste 
ancienne’, JA. 229 (1937), pp. 177-252 and 353-430. 

Evans-Wentz, Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines, London, 1935. 

Woodroffe, The Serpent Power, 4th ed., Madras, 1950. 

Heiler, Die buddhistische Versenkung, München, 1922. 


xiv 


CC-0. Agamnigeg Digital Rressyptjon Foundation, Chandigarh 


Ginther, Das Seelenproblem im ålteren Buddhismus, Kurt Weller Verlag, Kon- 
stanz, 1949. 


Snellgrove, Buddhist Himålaya, Cassirer, Oxford, 1957. 


Other incidental references appear in the notes. 


OTHER ABBREVIATIONS 
BEFEO: Bulletin de l'École Française de P Extréme Orient, Hanoi. 
BSOAS: Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 
GOS: Gaekwad’s Oriental Series. 
JA: Journal Asiatique, Paris. 
FASB: Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta. 
JRAS: Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
MCB: Mélanges Chinois et Bouddhiques, Brussels. 
MMK: Milamadhyamakakårikås, ed. de la Vallée Poussin. 
Mop: Mahåvyutpatti, ed. R. Sakaki. 
ZDMG: Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Gesellschaft, Berlin. 


Other references are given in full. 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


INTRODUCTION 


I. APOLOGETIC 


BUDDHISM endured in the land of its origin for some 1,600 years, from 
the preaching of the first sermon in the Deer Park at Banaras 500 years 
before the beginning of the Christian era, until the final onslaughts of 
Islam laid waste the great monastic establishments of the Ganges Valley 
and Bengal. The ruthlessness of this attack is in itself sufficient to explain 
the disappearance of Buddhism from India. Its strength had consisted for 
a long time in its monastic establishments and these in turn depended 
largely upon royal support—of A$oka, who enabled a small community of 
religious mendicants to propagate itself from the north-west frontier to 
Ceylon—of the Andhran and Kushan kings, under whose auspices their 
doctrines commenced to develop and enrich themselves so that they 
became suitable as a religion for the greater part of Asia—of the Guptas 
and especially of Harsha!—then finally of the Pala kings of Bengal who 
continued their support up to the last days.? In these last four and a half 
centuries there is no evidence of decline; the monasteries of Sarnath and 
Nalanda, of Vikramagila and Vajrasana (Budhgaya) were all flourishing 
concerns, housing many hundreds of monks and comparable only with the 
similar institutions that continue in Tibet to this day. Moreover it was 
precisely in this period that the Tibetans themselves were engaged in trans- 
ferring into their own country all that they could find of Buddhist teaching, 
and the contents of their canon, as it now exists, presents in itself a com- 
plete summary of the Buddhism of those centuries. In their case it was 
not a matter of finding texts long disused, which they might edit and 
translate to the best of their ability, but of finding living masters, who 
would instruct them in the meaning of the actual doctrines and col- 
laborate with them in the extremely difficult work of transferring them into 
another language, which till that time had not even possessed the necessary 
religious and philosophical terms for the task. It was truly an extraordinary 
feat, the magnitude of which is not always sufficiently appreciated, and 
still less the existence of such zeal and knowledge as that to which it bears 


I For invaluable accounts of Buddhism in India in the seventh century one may see the 


accounts of Hsüan Tsang and I Tsing, the former translated by Beal, Records of the 


Western Kingdoms, 1884, by Julien, Mémoires sur les contrées occidentales, 1858, and by 
Ge EE the latter by Takakusu, 


Thomas Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels, London, 1904-5; 


A Record of the Buddhist Religion, 1896. : 
2 Ces these kings see H. C. Ray, Dynastic History of Northern India, Calcutta, 


1931, vol. i, ch. 6, Dynastic History of Bengal and Bihar, where there are many details of 
royal interest in Buddhist foundations, e.g. PP- 288, 293-5, 303, 313714, 317, 321-2, 
326. 


B 6309 I B 


INTRODUCTION 
CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


witness.! Perhaps the Tibetans themselves are somewhat to blame in this 
respect, for they seem to have symbolized the introduction of the doctrine 
in the person of Padmasambhava, so lending strength to the view which is 
still current, that the Buddhism introduced into the country was of a 
debased and popular kind.* But whereas the historicity of the exploits 
attributed to this person are thoroughly questionable, the genuineness of 
the real knowledge and labour involved in the introducing of Buddhism is 
attested by the volumes of block-prints that repose in our libraries. A truer 
appreciation of the nature of their religion becomes all the more just, when 
it is upon their translations that we must chiefly rely for our understanding 
of the doctrines concerned. 

Indian Buddhism was slowly and laboriously transferred to Tibetan soil, 
and every effort was made to copy as exactly as possible not only the texts 
themselves but the very conditions under which they were studied and 
transmitted. Monasteries developed and became, as in India, the main 
centres of learning; hermits and ascetics, in direct succession from Indian 
masters, were surrounded by their chosen pupils, to whom they trans- 
mitted the secrets of those special means towards enlightenment, such as 
the subject-matter of our text; the arts of imagery and painting were intro- 
duced following Indian models, all to serve the purpose of the new 
religion. The more useful kind of rites, such as the bringing or stopping of 
rain, the removal of unwanted neighbours, the quelling of troublesome 
sprites, merely supplanted, or sometimes reinforced, similar practices that 
already existed in the country. Such opposition as there was to this great 
invasion seems to have had its basis solely in court intrigue and fear of 
personal loss on the part of the old practitioners, and as has often been the 
case in the history of other countries, one or other faction found it con- 
venient to associate itself with the new religion or the old.3 But any really 
effective opposition, such as an already existing religious culture would 
have presented, was lacking, and the poverty of bon as an organized religion 
is shown by the eagerness with which it has hastened to adorn itself in 
Buddhist garb. 

For us who are interested in this period these Indo-Tibetan relations 
have a double importance. On the one hand we can make small progress 
with the study of the original Indian texts without the help of Tibetan ver- 
sions, and on the other hand much that is found in Tibetan texts remains 
incomprehensible until it can be associated with some Indian original. Tt is 
with both these aspects in view that the present work is undertaken, to 


clarify one particular type of Buddhist practice which was pursued in 
I See, however, Tucci, Indo- Tibetica, ii, p. 9. The four volumes of this eu 
the 2 


1932, 1933, 1935, and 1941, all serve as an admirable illustration of how great was 
2 See my references to Padmasambhava in Buddhist Himålaya, pp. 159 ff. 
3 See TPS i, pp. 2 ff. 


CC-0. Agamnigarp Bigite) &reseyetion Foundation, Chandigarh 


India, thereby assisting towards a complete study of this religion in the 
land of its origin, and at the same time to lay the foundation for a better 
understanding of the Tibetan sects themselves, which were the direct suc- 
cessors of these traditions. 

"The Tibetan Canon, itself representative of Indian Buddhism, consists of 
two parts. The first is the Kanjur (bKah-hgyur), "Translation of the Word’. 
It comprises thirteen volumes of rules of monastic discipline (vinaya) 
and associated material; twenty-one volumes of supposedly revealed teach- 
ings concerning the doctrine of the "Perfection of Wisdom” (prajfiaparamita) 
which seems to provide the whole basis of later Buddhist practice and to 
the subject of which we shall return below; forty-four volumes of mahayana- 
sutras, which extol the endless merits of the many buddhas and bodhisattvas, 
telling of the benefits that accrue from devotion paid them, commending 
the career of the self-sacrificing bodhisattva as open to all men, listing his 
attributes and the stages of his advance; they touch upon points of doctrine, 
the three bodies of a buddha, the theory of the absolute as a ‘store-con- 
sciousness’ (Zlayavijfiana), the theory of the three aspects (parinispanna, 
paratantra, and vikalpita), and so on;! then lastly twenty-two volumes of 
tantras, works concerned with ritual and meditation of a special nature. It 
is part of the contents of some of these last works that have earned for late 
Indian and early Tibetan Buddhism its reputation as degenerate and 
depraved, a charge which while in some respects justifiable, as we shall see, 
remains essentially unfair for two reasons, viz. that it has been made 
on first appearances, and that even in so far as it is applicable, it can apply 
to no more than a part of the Buddhist practice of the period. 

The second part of the canon is known as the Tenjur (bsTan-hgyur), 
“Translation of Treatises’, and comprises works by individual Indian 
masters. It is therefore not ‘Buddha-Word’ (buddhavacana). It is grouped 
into two great sections, Commentaries on the Satras (mDo-hgrel) and Com- 
mentaries on the Tantras (rGyud-hgrel).? The first group includes all works, 
not necessarily commentaries, which seek their authority in the teachings 
of the prajfiaparamita-literature, of the mahayana-sütras, or of still older 
traditions, while the second group is concerned with the new theories and 


1 This group includes the Phal-chen, dKon-br Tsegs, mDo-sDe, and Myari-hdas sections 
of the Kanjur. The totals given are those of the Narthang Kanjur edition. Those of the 
Derge are slightly different: 13, 21, 46, and 20. 

? Such is the arrangement in the Narthang Tenjur. The Derge edition, however, 
divides it into seventeen parts: commentaries on the tantras (78 vols.), on prajhåpåramitå 
(16), mådhyamika works (17), commentaries on siitras (ro), vijnånamåtratå works (16), 
abhidharma (11), vinaya (18), jåtaka (5), epistles (2), logic (20), philology (4), technical 
works (5), medicine (1), general matters (included in preceding volume), miscellaneous (9), 
eulogies (1), origins of the doctrine (1). All this material, with the exception of the tantra- 
commentaries and eulogies, is included in the one section of the Narthang edition, and as 
we are only concerned here with the proportion of works on the tantras to other works, 
such general grouping serves the immediate purpose. 


3 


: ea INTRODUCTION 
CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


practices. There are 137 volumes in the first group as against 86 in the 
second, and it may be observed that the proportion of works dealing with 
the tantras, which comprised only 22 volumes out of a total of roo in the 
‘revealed’ part of the canon, far exceeds that of all other ‘non-revealeq’ 
works. This outweighing proportion becomes even the more impressive, 
when we recall that whereas the works included in the mDo-hgrel are the 
fruit of the whole period of mahåyåna development, works produced for 
the most part between the second and the eighth centuries A.D., those of 
the rGyud-hgrel belong precisely to the period in which we are interested, 
namely from the seventh to the twelfth centuries, the bulk of the works 
produced probably being concentrated towards the middle of this period, 
This at least indicates that while the earlier works were in no wise neglected 
(otherwise they would have found no place at all in the Tibetan Canon), 
actual creative activity was to be found almost exclusively concerned with 
the tantras. Nor is it just to compare unfavourably the work of these later 
writers with that of the earlier ones. The two periods, if we may refer to 
them as such, are in many ways analogous, first the appearance of the 
authoritative texts (buddhavacana), the late appearance of which is ex- 
plained away in the same manner—they had been hidden away, entrusted 
to the nágas and so on because mankind was not yet prepared to receive 
them—followed by the works of individual writers, who comment upon 
these basic texts, systematize them, and produce treatises of their own 
dealing with the same themes in well-ordered forms. As literature too the 
sütras and tantras present exactly the same type. They exist in the form of 
discourses which the Lord Buddha in one of his manifestations is supposed 
to give to a company of followers, either bodhisattvas or divinities, who ask 
questions and are often astounded at some new pronouncement that is 
made, new in that it departs in some measure from existing ideas. It is 
interesting that our anonymous redactors are often aware of the novelties 
they are introducing, and the consternation of their imaginary hearers in 
all probability represents the real consternation of some hearers of flesh 


I Such a distinction corresponds with the ‘two modes’ (lugs gñis) of Tibetan Buddhism, 
the mode of the sütras (mdo lugs) and the mode of the mantras (snags lugs). The first group 
includes all those who are not followers of the tantras. "There are different ways of distin- 
guishing the various phases of Buddhism, depending upon that aspect of it which one wishes 
to stress. So far as practice is concerned, it would be difficult to distinguish clearly more 
than these two periods, since the early schools ($råvakas) and the early followers of the 
maháyána pursue much the same methods, the practice of recognized Buddhist morality 
and the set performance of meditation. (Concerning this see Mircea Éliade, Yoga, Paris, 
1954, ch. 6.) The tantras naturally form a separate period as we shall see. Such a division 
clearly cuts across the distinction (made according to philosophical development) of the 
*three swingings of the wheel”, concerning which see Stcherbatsky, 'Die drei Richtungen 
in der Philosophie des Buddhismus’, Rocznik Orientalistyczny, vol. x, pp- I ff. This 15 
however, a tendentious article, written in reply to Schayer's introduction to his Aus- 
gewåhlte Kapitel aus der Prasannapadå, 1931, and well illustrates the relative nature 0 
these divisions. 


CC-0. AgamnigampmigjtahRsasgvatton Foundation, Chandigarh 


and blood." 'The discourses themselves are disordered and rambling, new 
ideas are just stated authoritatively with no consciousness of any necessity 
for showing their truth; there are sudden interruptions and long digres- 
sions. The language is usually inferior Sanskrit, sometimes betraying its 
dependence upon an earlier version in the vernacular. It is never possible 
to date. these works with any precision just because they usually have no 
date, but have developed gradually through several generations of followers 
within one particular group, for whom they first become authoritative, 
authoritative in the sense that the pupil learns them from the mouth of his 
master, and in this way they become the buddha-word—in a very real 
sense in such a setting, where the word of the master is endowed with so 
much sanctity. They only assume a fixed form and wider popularity when 
some master of unusual literary ability and greater scholarship sets about 
the writing of a commentary, and the work, thereby brought to the notice 
of masters of equal ability in other schools, begins to extend its influence. 
When one is thus attempting to recapture the actual setting in which these 
works were produced, one needs to remember that many more pupils and 
masters were engaged in making use of these works than the comparative 
few whose names may be found in the indexes to the Tibetan Canon, and 
that many more works of an ‘authoritative’ nature were produced in the 
schools than those which gained sufficient popularity to permit their in- 
clusion in this great collection.? 

Of these two great periods of development, that of the sutras and that of 
the tantras, the first is now comparatively well known in the general course 
of its progress and in the more detailed aspect of several of its important 
works, of which a representative selection, sitras, commentaries, and philo- 
sophic treatises with their commentaries, has by now appeared in print. 
There has resulted from this labour a more just appreciation of the Buddhism 
of this period, which no one would now regard as a mere corruption of the 
earlier and ipso facto ‘genuine’ Buddhism of the Pali texts. We find that 
Buddhism of all periods may be brought into parallel relationship, both as 
regards theory and practice, with the other religious and philosophical 

1 See, e.g., Hevajra-tantra, I. x. 14 and II. iv. 66. 

2 There seem to be certain false conceptions on this subject of ‘popularity’ and ‘popu- 
larizing’. See, e.g., S. B. Dasgupta, pp. 61-63. It was apparently ‘for the sake of the 
common run of people the mantras, the mudrås, and the mandalas were introduced into 
Buddhism in the course of time’. This seems to suggest the existence of a ‘pure Buddhism’ 
consisting of bare philosophical notions and untramelled virtuous conduct, which at best 
is nothing more than a European creation of the nineteenth to twentieth centuries. 
Ninety-nine per cent. of all Buddhists were the ‘common run of people’ who had made use 
of invocations and gestures and circumambulations, at least from the time the first stupa 
was built. There was never any need to introduce them, and as for the tantras, these 
represent a prescribed and special form, by no means popular, based largely upon prac- 
tices that were already Buddhist. The rite of maithuna seems to be an exception, but even 


this served to give expression to an existing Buddhist aspiration, namely unity with prajña, 
and this particular practice seems eventually to have reverted to pure idea. 


5 


INTRODUCTION 
CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


schools of thought which existed at any one time. Their mutual dependence 
and interrelationship render the whole study extremely complex; it is as 
yet little worked.! Nevertheless there is nothing surprising in this realiza. 
tion, nor in the manner in which it would seem to have proceeded. Men 
develop ideas with regard to the technique of meditation, with regard to 
the nature of man and of phenomenal existence as a whole; these ideas 
receive concrete expression within definite schools; an acknowledged leader 
arises and through his personal example and influence, his following in- 
creases and becomes renowned. During his lifetime his teachings can only 
be in terms of the concepts then prevalent, although they may be stated 
with greater authority from a personal realization of their truth or non- 
truth as the case may be. After his death the teachings still continue 
logically in his name, developing as ideas develop and absorbing that which 
can be absorbed without too great a conflict with the body of existing 
tradition. From some quarters there would always be opposition to new 
ideas, but the test of whether they were eventually Buddhist or not always 
consists in their receiving or not receiving sufficient acceptance for their 
absorption within the body of teaching and practice of any group who 
called themselves Buddhists. There would always be some who would con- 
tinue to deny their validity, but they would never be able to produce any 
cogent authority for their denial, for the axiom would always be: Yat kim 
cin Maitreya subhasitam tad buddhavacanam,? and it must remain for the 
masters of each school to decide what within the context of their tradition 
might be considered well said or not. 

This whole conception of development, while now generally accepted 
for the earlier mahåyåna, namely that which has its authority in the sitras, 
has not yet been logically and fairly applied to the later period, namely that 
of the tantras. There is still a tendency to regard them as something cor- 
rupt,? as belonging to the twilight of Buddhism.* They are regarded in fact 

1 An important, if not conclusive, study of the relationship of early Buddhism to the 
Upanishads, is one by Marya Falk: I! Mito Psicologico nell” India Antica (Memoria della 
Reale Accademia Naz. dei Lincei, vol. 336, Rome, 1939, Scienze Morali). See also Ginther, 
Das Seelenproblem im ålteren Buddhismus, Kurt Veller Verlag, Konstanz, 1949. Also 
Przyluski, ‘Bouddhisme et Upanisad’, BEFEO, xxxii, pp. 141 ff.; de la Vallée Poussin, ‘Le 
Bouddhisme et le Yoga de Patafijali”, MCB s, pp. 223 ff. (bibliography given); de la Vallée 
Poussin, ‘Vedanta and Buddhism’, FRAS 1910/11, pp. 129 ff.; Stcherbatsky, "Rapports 
entre la théorie bouddhique de la connaissance et l'enseignement des autres écoles philo- 
sophiques de l'Inde', Muséon, 1904, pp. 129 ff. 

2 Quotation from the Adhyåsayasamcodanasiitra. See BSOAS xxi[3, pp. 620-3. 

? As typical of this view see Kern, Indian Buddhism, p. 133. 

+ See also Sylvain Lévi: ‘Le Bouddhisme, encore enrichi de donations fréquentes 
jusqu'au VIIIe siècle, comme en témoignent les inscriptions, n'est plus, dés le siècle 
suivant qu'un accident sur le sol de Inde”, Grande Encyclopédie, vol. xx, p. 698. Such å 
view seems now to be pure supposition. For its now manifest historical inaccuracy sec 
ref. p. 1, fn. 2. Is the Tibetan canon, one of the lasting works of this period, but ‘un acct- 


dent’? Notonly Tibet, but S. E. Asia attests in its archaeological remains the active infiuence 
of tantric Buddhism. See, e.g., Krom, The Buddhism of Borobudur, vol. ii, pp. 327 ff. 


6 


CC-0. AgamnigalmiitaDR?d$8vBGbn Foundation, Chandigarh 


much as the whole of the mahayana used to be regarded from the stand- 
point of the Pali texts." The reasons for this restricted view are in both cases 
the same, namely just as the mahåyåna-sitras and the commentaries and 
treatises associated with them were little known at the end of the last cen- 
tury, so now the tantras and their associated works are themselves little 
known. But on the basis of such small knowledge with regard to them as 
often exists, they are found to be one of the main causes of the downfall 
of Buddhism in India, because they either undermined its morale, or 
removed those distinguishing features by which Buddhism could continue 
to function as an independent religion. Yet it would seem that as good 
literature the sitras scarcely excel the tantras, nor are their credentials 
much better. Such commentaries and works of exegesis as I have so far had 
occasion to refer to are works that show considerable knowledge of their 
subject, well written and entirely serious in their intention. In no sense are 
they degenerate or even inferior to the works of earlier commentators on 
other Buddhist texts. Some are of higher quality than others, but this 
applies at all times. Nor of course does this period of Buddhism end with 
the effacement of Buddhism in India, which was probably brought about 
by physical causes, the destruction of the centres of learning and the 
absence of royal support; it is simply transferred to Tibet, and after some 
delay, for the Tibetans had all to learn, it continued afresh in their schools, 
and although very little indeed of their vast labours has yet been made avail- 
able to outsiders, such little as there is attests their extraordinary ability. 
As for the charge that Buddhism ceases to be distinguishable from certain 
other types of Indian religious practice at this time, this was now no more 
true than it had ever been. It is indeed true that Buddhist and non- 
Buddhist tantras are based upon similar ideas and often contain similar 
material, and that many parallels may be obvious, but one may well ask at 
what previous stage of the doctrine was this not true. The Buddhists now 
as much as before garbed similar ideas in a distinctive terminology, nor 
even can we be sure that they were following a lead in introducing these 
new notions and practices. The followers of the non-Buddhist tantras may 
well have been as dependent upon those who called themselves Buddhists, 
as the vedåntists were probably dependent upon the mådhyamikas. These 
are questions which can only gradually be resolved as these works become 
better known. Nevertheless it will be seen already in the work here edited 
that there are notions that are not Buddhist, in the sense that they are not 
properly assimilated, and so seem to exist in contradiction with the wider 
context. These will be referred to in due course, and are mentioned now 
only lest one should be tempted to point to them as showing the non- 
Buddhist character of the whole. De la Vallée Poussin has well said: ‘On 


1 In protest against this earlier limited view, see de la Vallée Poussin, BEM, pp. 1-3. 


7 


INTRODUCTION 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
regarde d'habitude le Tantrisme idolåtre et superstitieux comme "n'étant 


plus du Bouddhisme"; on oublie que le Bouddhisme n'est pas séparable 
des bouddhistes, et que les Hindous bouddhistes étaient volontiers idolatres, 
superstitieux ou métaphysiciens."! 

But if the tantras have been neglected it has not been without reason, for 
it must be conceded that they refer to unpleasant practices on occasions, 
and sometimes dwell unnecessarily, or at least so it may seem to the modern 
reader, upon matters that might be touched upon more tactfully. It must 
further be admitted that even the present translation expunges short 
passages here and there, in which nothing of value is lost. It would not be 
fair to expect such sensitiveness on this score from our commentators, and 
in attempting to interpret these texts one can do no better than follow their 
lead, for they are the Buddhists who presumably practised these precepts, 
and it is their Buddhism we are attempting to understand. One may be 
confident that they deal with them in all seriousness. In the particular yoga 
practised, physical forces, whether of the seminal power or of the breath, 
need to be brought under control, and it may be to this process that some 
of these passages refer. There may be others that permit of a symbolical 
interpretation, and there are few religions that have not made use of 
analogous symbolism. Lastly there are the practices used by ‘fools’, a useful 
category that disposes of all malpractice.? Let it not be thought, however, 
that one is thereby deliberately explaining away a portion of these works in 
order to render the rest palatable. We are explaining these works as they 
were traditionally interpreted and understood. It was the realization of 
enlightenment that was the goal, and if these means proved efficacious, 
they might be confidently employed. In this we are aware of a discre- 
pancy existing between the tantras themselves and the exegetical works 
of those who later adopt them, for while the latter never lose sight of the 
goal which is self-realization, the tantras often treat of rites in such a 
naive manner as to belie any esoteric intention. In the commentaries one 
is dealing always with the internal process, or with the internal process as 
the end envisaged. In the tantra itself one is concerned with actual prac- 
tices in the world without. There are certain very clear examples of this in 

t Id., p. 6. 

> Thus V commenting upon I. x. 6: "Then in order to teach fools the way of passion, 
one should cause to enter in the mandala this girl. (77 b 1). Again commenting on II. vil. 
5 ff.: “This is for the understanding of fools who are in the power of passion’ (125 b 2): 
Again commenting on II. v. 58 ff.: "The siddhi of passion is not to be obtained by eating 
flesh and drinking wine and practising sexual union at these external meeting-places (see 
also p. 69, note 2). For those who think thus, their stock of dharma (chos kyi phun po) even 
though it be 84,000-fold will be rendered ineffective and their effort in yoga, though it be 
of the best, will come to nought. Sowhen the text says that one gains the siddhi of passion 
by celebrating this gathering with eating and drinking and so on, this can only be for the 


sake of attracting simple fools’ (129 a 5—7). See my observation below, which is based on 
such passages as these—lntroduction, p. 17. 


8 


APOLOGETIC 
CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


the Hevajra-tantra. Chapter 7 of Part I refers in clear terms to the gather- 
ings that come together at the meeting-places (melaka) and one is left in 
little doubt concerning the actuality of the rites performed there. Yet the 
commentators will have none of this, and for them there are no places of 
pilgrimage like those within one’s own body. A similar example is to be 
found in the song of the yoginis at the beginning of Chapter 4 of Part II, 
for what is this if not a description of such a gathering? Taranatha even 
recounts of Kanha, who was perhaps the author of the commentary in- 
cluded in this edition, that “he was when practising the Samvara-tantra 
close to Nalanda, a dåkini instructed him saying: “At the place of the 
goddesses called Kamaru there will be siddhi by means of exterior practice, 
so go and receive it.” He went there and found a basket, and when he 
opened it, there appeared a drum provided with criss-cross cords. As soon 
as he took it in his hands, his feet ceased to touch the ground, and as he 
beat upon it violently, yogins and yoginis, 500 in number, came from all 
directions and escorted him’ (Taranatha, tib. text, p. 161, ll. 20 ff.). Yet 
Kanha, whose interpretation of this song is translated below (pp. 101-2), 
is as much concerned as the other commentators to find in it a description 
of the inner process of reintegration. Likewise there are several references 
to the eating of some kinds of human flesh. This we have to understand, it 
seems, as the consuming of the notion of a self, but the tantra itself by no 
means implies this. Here one eats this flesh in order to transform one’s own 
body, so that it may become endowed with the powers of an aerial being. 
One is often aware that siddhi means not so much enlightenment, as per- 
fection in magical powers which here receive first place. 

No one can reasonably dispute the fact that the basic texts of the tantras 
have this murky and macabre appearance, and it is no excuse to say that 
‘it is open to any one to sit down and write a tantra! for while no doubt all 
too true, one still must explain why these very same works should become 
endowed with such esteem.? In the solution of this problem real interest 
should begin, for while the defects of some of these texts are so apparent, 
still more apparent is the glorious blossoming of human genius which they 
certainly nourished. Scholars, saints, and artists of first rank appear through- 
out the succeeding centuries and their works bear testimony to them to this 
day. In many ways the civilization developed in Tibet is analogous to that 
of our Middle Ages in the west, and just as here Christianity provided the 
inspiration and Greece and Rome the model, so there Buddhism was the 
inspiration and the arts and sciences of India their model. It may indeed 


* Woodroofe, Shakti and Shakta, p. 577- 

2 Numerous quotations from the Hevajra- 
tantric authors which are so far easily available. d 
P. 26, ll. 7, 24; 27, 95 32, 10; 33, 13-145 34, 7-8; 35» 16-19. Bagchi, 
67, 68, 69, 103, ISI, 152, 154, 157- Sekoddesatikå, pp. 63, 71. 


9 


tantra are to be found in the few works by 
See, e.g., the Advayavajrasamgraha, 
Dohåkosa, pp. 65, 


CC-0. Agamnigam Dig RQR EAA, Chandigarh 


appear strange that this Buddhism should be of the kind that bears such 
close affinities with these often reprehensible texts, but it would be absurd 
to deny the value of those later developments just because we dislike their 
origins. Manure nourishes the fairest rose, and we know far too little of the 
nature of man and of the growth and decline of his civilization, to ignore 
these particular studies because of personal distaste. 

This present edition presents one of these strange works of ritual, that 
which circles-around the divinity Hevajra and his consort Nairatmya.' It 
was one of the most renowned of Buddhist tantras in India itself, was 
adopted in Tibet by the Ka-gyü-pas (bKah-rgyud-pa) (to which the bio- 
graphy of Rechung bears witness)* and the Sa-kya-pas (Sa-skya-pa), for 
whom it became a fundamental treatise to which they devoted much work 
of exegesis. It was in this rite that the young Khubilai, later to be khan of 
all the Mongols, was initiated by one of their abbots, hGro-dGon hPhags-pa. 

Yet as will be seen, this work has all the defects of its class. Little attention 
is paid to grammar and even less to scansion. The style is often crude and 
disjointed, and the whole work shows no logical construction. It would 
have considerably assisted comprehensibility to have rearranged the material 
in the translation, but this would have given an entirely false impression of 
the nature of the work, which already benefits considerably from its trans- 
ference into English, a claim that may be safely made in this case without 
any undue sense of personal achievement. It has seemed better therefore 
to add a bare résumé of the contents (pp. 121-5) and it is hoped that, on 
the basis of this, the various disjointed parts of the work will fall into place. 
The translation follows the text faithfully unless indicated in the notes, but 
no attempt has been made to translate a Sanskrit term with the same word 
regardless of context. Moreover in some cases it has seemed better to 
introduce the Sanskrit term itself, which elsewhere may appear translated. 
To compensate for such freedom, which no readable translation could 
renounce, the important terms have been separately discussed in the Glos- 
sary and an attempt made to fix their meaning (pp. 131-41). Sanskrit 

M The name Hevajra is itself merely an invocation of the final truth (vajra): He Vajra = 
Tibetan: Kyehi 7 Dorje; see Buddhist Himálaya, p. 73. It sometimes is spelt, however, 
with the phonetically similar form: dGyes pahi rDorje (Harsavajra, "Rejoicing Vajra’). 
This occurs among the 108 names of Vajradhara as listed in the Tattvasamgrahatantra 
(Narthang Kanjur, rgyud vii, f. 249 b 3). The Chinese extends the name into "Great Vajra 
of Compassion and Voidness’, ta pei kung chin kang. Concerning these two primary 
principles, compassion (karunå = upaya) and voidness (funyatà = prajfid) see below, 
Introduction, pp. 23-24. Nairåtmyå is self-explanatory; see p. 24. 

zm 'This was the first cause of my own interest in the work. Ras-chung made several 
visits to Nepal in the early twelfth century, where he seems to have met Maitrpa (alias 
Advayavajra) or a manifestation of him, pp. 23-24, and brought back several works 
connected with the Hevajra-tantra. This account accords with Maitrpa's known pre- 
dilection for this tantra (see p. 9, note 2). I questioned Professor Tucci, under whose 


guidance I was then working, concerning this connexion, who gave the best possible 
answer by placing his manuscript of the tantra in my hands. 


IO 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Pyesevatjon Foundation, Chandigarh 


words used in Part I and their translations will be found in the Index. The 
notes accompanying my English rendering are intended to justify and 


elucidate the translation by appeal to commentaries, from which extracts 
are made, or by reference to other parts of the work. 


II. ORIGINS 


There has been occasion already to refer to the realistic nature of parts 
of the Hevajra-tantra, the gatherings at the recognized meeting-places and 
the rites performed there. With the translation before us, itself sufficiently 
eloquent, there is little need to draw further attention to them, as it is this 
aspect of the work which will impress itself all too readily upon the reader. 
Well may one question the right of these yogins to call themselves Buddhists, 
who experience the consummation of enlightenment in the embrace of a 
yogini. It is this very act which is regarded as serving the universal good 
of living-beings. Thereafter the pupil is free to pursue the practice of 
strenuous meditation and physical self-control, and after five years or more 
he will perhaps succeed.” He receives the five symbolic adornments, crown, 
ear-rings, necklace, bracelets, girdle, signs of his success.* These he wears 
on those set occasions, the eighth or fifteenth day of the dark-fortnight, 
when perfected yogins and yoginis come together, to consume the flesh and 
wine, to sing and dance, and realize their consummation of bliss.* He is 
free from all conventions and wanders as he pleases, knowing no distinc- 
tion between friend or foe, clean or unclean, good or evil.5 

Such is the circle in which our tantra has its origin, amidst outcasts and 
voluntary outcasts, who reassert their position by means of the powers with 
which they become credited, and it is by their success that they are 
vindicated. ‘Because in the early stages these men were very careful and 
guarded the secret, no one knew that they were practising the secret 
mantras, until they actually became possessed of magical powers (vidya- 
dhara). But when they had these powers, travelling in the sky or becoming 
invisible, then it was known conclusively that they were practisers of 
mantras. On account of this (secrecy) there was but very little handing 
down of traditional teachings from master to pupil (that can be traced), and 


15 ii iii. b. : s 
= See iit i ds i of five years is suggested by some of the biographies of the 
eighty-four siddhas. In every case several years of practice were required from the p 
consecration was received from a master. Thus Tankadasa required three yc (EM, 
P- 99), Saroruha 12 (EM, p. 46), Kampala 12 (VZ, p- 176). S d 
succeeded in one year (EM, p. 43) and Jalandhari instantaneously (E 5 P- 39) rs 
generally agreed that years of strenuous practice were required. One pe also comp: 
this respect the biography of Mi-la Ras-pa. : Dee G 
+ See I. vii, II. iv. a, II. vii. b. 5 See I. vi. b, II. iii. h. 


II 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digit PRR ZW ES UNbetidh, Chandigarh 


although there had been much study devoted to the kriya- and caryåtantras 
from the time when the mahåyåna began to spread, as they were practised 
very much in secret, no one knew who was studying them except for those 
actually engaged in these secret mantras’ (Taranatha, tib. text, p. 82, ll. 15 ff.). 

“Many anuttarayogatantras of profound import were brought to light by 
individual masters—the Hevajra by Kampala and Saroruha’ (id., p. 209, 
ll. 15 and 18). They were considered to be of profound import because 
they had developed certain powerful means of mental and physical control, 
which if practised rightly, seemed to lead with certainty to that state of 
spiritual equipoise which had always been the chief goal of Indian religious 
endeavour. These ‘individual masters’, the first sponsors of these works, are 
known collectively in both Indian and Tibetan tradition as the eighty-four 
Perfected Ones (siddhas), and it is therefore in their biographies that one 
must seek knowledge of the first transmissions. There are two complete 
collections of these biographies preserved in Tibetan, one in the canon 
itself and the other in the works of Taranatha.! Separate biographies also 
appear in the histories of Indian and Tibetan Buddhism by Bu-sTon, 
gZon-nu-dPal, Padma dKar-po, and Taranatha. There is then no shortage 
of such material, and in portraying the lives of these men, or the lives they 
were believed to lead (which for the study of the nature of a religion is just 
as important) it is of considerable assistance. But when one seeks to bring 
them into an historical framework, one is presented with the great difficulty 
of one master often possessing more than one name, and of several masters 
possessing the same name. This is all the more unfortunate in that it affects 
chiefly the more important names, just because of the renown that attached 
to them. 

Thus SARORUHA, who is credited with bringing our tantra to light, and 
whose interest in it is proved by his writing of the commentary which is 
often quoted below, and of several short works (sadhana, vidhi, stotra)* con- 
cerned with the Hevajra cycle, has also the name of Padmavajra, and there 
were many with this name, as Taranatha himself informs us.? Both he and 
Kampala, who although also credited with the finding of this tantra, has 
only one short work to his name on the theme,* appear as contemporaries 
of King Indrabhiti, but there are three Indrabhötis. One is certainly led to 
mistrust such a multiplying of some of these names, but it is impossible to 


1 These are the Grub thob brgyad cu rtsa b£ihi lo rgyus, the first work in vol. 86 of the 
Narthang Tenjur, translated by Griinwedel as ‘Die vierundachtzig Zauberer’ in Baessler 
Archiv, vol. 5, and the bKah babs bdun Idan of Taranatha, edited by Sarat Candra Das 
(Bengal Secretariat Press, 1901) and translated by Grünwedel as Tåranåtha's Edelstein- 
mine, Petrograd, 1914. For a general discussion of these siddhas and a comparison of their 
various name-lists see Tucci, TPS, pp. 226-32. Of the histories Taranatha’s (Schiefner's 
edition, Petrograd, 1868) is the most useful. 

? These are to be found in the Narthang Tenjur, vol. xxi. 

3 See Schiefner, p. 188. 4 See vol. II, pp. vii-viii. 


12 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digifefrgseretion Foundation, Chandigarh 


discriminate against them until their works become better known, and one 
may then be able to reject some as barren. In the meantime ren 
of facts from this material is to some extent arbitrary and certainly subject 
to later correction. ` 

Now Taranatha gives a succession of names that would fit quite well, and 
also provides the connecting link that is needed with a second succession.! 


INDRABHUTI I ASVAPADA 
MAHAPADMAVAJRA VILASYAVAJRÄ 
ANANGAVAJRA VAJRAGHANTA 
Saroruha Kampala, 
INDRABHUTI IT = INDRABHÜTI II 


Indrabhüti II receives instruction from both Saroruha and Kampala, which 
brings them together both in time and place. There is also another connect- 
ing link. Elsewhere in his history, Taranatha refers to Dombi-heruka both 
as preceding Saroruha and Kampala and as having taken an initial interest 
in the Hevajra-tantra of which he receives the quintessence (sara) ;? further- 
more his association with this cycle is confirmed by the existence of an 
invocation of Nairatmya and her troupe written in his name and drawn 
from our tantra (Sådhanamåla 228). His seniority to Saroruha and Kam- 
pala, Taranatha confirms quite incidentally in the biographies, when he 
makes him a contemporary of Vilasyavajra.3 

From Indrabhöti II the succession continues through Jalandhari to 
KRSNA (or KANHA), author of the Yogaratnamála, one of the few commentaries 
on the Hevajra-tantra which is all but complete in Sanskrit and the full 
text of which it has seemed useful to give in this edition.4 


1 EM, pp. 40-49 and 49-58. 2 See Schiefner, p. 192. x See EM, p. 50. 

4 See EM, p. 43. To identify this particular Krsna with any certainty at the present 
stage of our knowledge seems impossible. An attempt has already been made by Shahi- 
dullah (Chants Mystiques, pp. 24-29). Jalandhari is referred to with respect in one of the 
songs (no. 9, p. 115), and 'Shahidullah, assured of this connexion, associates this Krsna 
with the one referred to by Tåranåtha, Schiefner, p. 195, where Jalandhari and Krsna 
appear as contemporaries of a certain king Govicandra, who, again according to Taranatha, 
was a contemporary of Dharmakirti. On the basis of this and still less certain evidence 
(q.v.) he places Krsna about A.D. 700. Such a Krsna, a name all too common, may well 
Jearly conflict, unless we also assume the existence 


have lived at this time, but our accounts c n ; h 
of at least two Jålandharis, one the master of Shahidullah's Krsna, and the other tl he master 
d was experienced in 


of the Krsna who lived under King Devapala (Schiefner, p. 21 1) an | l 
the Hevajra-tantra, &c. He was certainly a pupil of Jalandhari (also adept in the Hea 
tantra) and their succession is given (EM, p. 43) in a manner which accords completely 


with my present requirements. The master of Jalandhariis Indrabhüti II, not Tags I, 
a distinction Shahidullah fails to make when he refers to this passage. It would upset his 
d the various persons who 


calculations by at least 100 years. Krsna was a common name and the Ç 
bore it are not distinguished. “There may well have been one who lived about 700, and it 


i be confused 
may be he who is mentioned at EM, p. 49: At Schiefner, p. 195 he seems to : 
with someone else (Schiefner, p. 244) who lived much later under King Goviean dre: S 
Tåranåtha informs us (Schiefner, p- 197) preceded Lalitacandra who was the last of 


13 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digit Ere S ES Maz REL, Chandigarh 


Now as for dates we have two points d'appui. Mahapadmavajra may be 
identified with Padmasambhava, adopted son of Indrabhüti, who goes to 
Tibet in the second half of the eighth century, while Kanha at this end of 
the series is stated by Tåranåtha to have been a contemporary of King 
Devapala, who ruled in the first half of the ninth century. We thus have 
the Hevajra-tantra existing in its present form towards the end of the 
eighth century. This may yet be confirmed by the short passages of 
apabhramsa which are to be found in it, when more work has been done 
upon this dialect. 

With Taranatha we may follow the succession through KANHA to BHADRA- 
PADA, the author of yet another commentary on the Hevajra-tantra, which 
we shall frequently have occasion to quote." He in turn gave instruction 


Candra dynasty. The last two kings of the Candra dynasty were Govindacandra and 
Layahacandra and are assigned to the first half of the eleventh century (Dynastic History 
of Northern India, vol. i, p. 385). This dating still further demolishes the evidence which 
Shahidullah adduces to substantiate the existence of his Krsna in A.D. 700. Under Devapäla 
(first half of ninth century) there is another Krsna, for whom in accordance with EM, p. 43 
(and since Shahidullah has now no claim) I accept Jålandhari as master. This Krsna, expert 
in the Hevajratantra (Schiefner, p. 211), may be presumed to be the author of one of the 
commentaries on the Hevajratantra written in this name. There are two such com- 
mentaries, one the Yogaratnamålå, preserved in Sanskrit and included in this edition, 
and the other the Smrtinispatti, a shorter work existing in Tibetan translation. A certain 
Krsna Pandita co-operated in the task of translating the Yogaratnamålå into Tibetan, and 
if he were also author of the other text, one might presume that the Yogaratnamålå was 
the ninth-century work, but there is no internal evidence to support this. The Tibetan 
lotsava, mGos-lha-btsas, who translated the commentary of Ratnåkarasånti (c. 1100) also 
translated the Smrtinispatti, which could suggest a comparably late date for this com- 
mentary also. This almost negligible evidence would favour the Yogaratnamålå as the 
work of the Krsna of the early ninth century, which I accept as a convenient but merely 
provisional identification. I referred above to theunsatisfactory nature of these biographies, 
and it has seemed best to place all this doubtful discussion in a note, leaving a simple and 
plausible scheme in the Introduction itself. It is certainly satisfactory to find that the dating 
of all the siddhas I am interested in accords with the genealogical table laboriously worked 
out by Sårnkrtyåyana in his article on the eighty-four siddhas (J.A 225, 1934, pp. 218 ff.). 
He gives only one Krsna, a pupil of Jalandhari, and assigned to the early ninth century. 
According to Taranatha (EM, p. 69) the Jalandhari who was a contemporary of King 
Govicandra (the corner-stone of Shahidullah's construction—Schiefner, p. 195) was a 
fourth incarnation of this siddha, so there would be little difficulty in assigning him to the 
eleventh century. In fairness to Shahidullah it must be said that Tåranåtha makes no 
mention of this in his history and records the event there as though it preceded the whole 
Pala dynasty, and actually makes this king contemporary with Dharmakirti. The confusion 
therefore exists in the sources at our disposal, where the same name can continually 
reappear. See also Tucci, A Sanskrit Biography of the Siddhas and some questions con- 
nected with Nàgárjuna (J R AS B xxvi, pp. 138-58), where this same problem is discussed. 
It seems, however, that Shahidullah may well be wrong in the dates he ascribes to the 
Chants Mystiques. The songs in early Bengali may perhaps belong to the eleventh century 
while the dohás in apabhramsa are likely to be earlier. The language appears to be at the 
same stage as the few verses that appear in the Hevajra-tantra, and there is no reason for 
assuming that the old Bengali verses and the dohås are by the same Krsna. 

1 EM, p. 71. This is a plausible connexion. I assume that the author of the Srihevajra- 
vyákhyavivarana, given as Bhata Zabs in the colophon of the Narthang edition, is the 
Bhadrapada, alias Guhya, here referred to. The Ui catalogue (Derge canon) attributes this 
same work to Bhavabhadra. A certain Bhavabhadra was abbot of Vikramagila, fourth in 
succession from Buddhajfiånapåda, who was contemporary with King Dharmapala. It 
would be possible to identify him with the author of our commentary. 


14 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Fresevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


to Tillopa, who, as is well known, was the master of NÄROPA, the author of 
yet another commentary, and the connecting link with the Tibetan line 
of the Ka-gyü-pas.! Naropa lived in the last quarter of the tenth century and 
the first quarter of the eleventh. To this same period belong TANKADASA,? 
a monk of Nalanda, and RATNAKARASANT?? of Vikramaéila, both also writers 
of commentaries on this tantra. 

Of the commentators there remain two of importance who are not listed 
amongst the 84 Siddhas, DHARMAKIRTI and VAJRAGARBHA. In his history 
Taranatha writes of Dharmakirti, the logician, whom he regards, however, 
as a follower of the tantras, naming Vajraghanta or Darika or Tengi as his 
vajracarya.* All these three are in any case contemporaries, belonging to 
the latter half of the eighth century. It is therefore not unreasonable to 
deduce the existence of a second Dharmakirti, author of the commentary 
on the Hevajra-tantra that exists in his name, presuming this to have 
been written early in the ninth century. 

VAJRAGARBHA presents a more difficult problem. His commentary is 
the longest and by far the most useful, for there is little he leaves un- 
explained. He gives not only the figurative ‘internal’ meaning of the 
practices mentioned, in which the other commentators are usually alone 
interested, but uncovers also the actual rite involved. At the same time he 
does not fail to note the futility of such performances.5 This commen- 
tary is admirably presented, each chapter being introduced by a separate 
verse, while the whole is preceded by a long introduction in verse, in 
which he laments the existence of those evil masters, who seek only wealth 
and enjoyment under cover of the doctrine, and impose upon their trusting 
pupils. He assumes himself and is given in the colophon the title of the 
Bodhisattva Vajragarbha, a religious name presumably adopted from the 
tantra itself, where Vajragarbha is the chief interlocutor. He therefore 
remains completely anonymous. The colophon in the Tenjur states that 
this commentary, ‘hard to get’, was obtained in Nepal from Maitrpa by 
the monk-translator Prajfiakirti of hBro (Lotsaba hBro dGe-slon Ses-rab 
Grags-pa). Maitrpa lived in the eleventh century. 

In his introduction Vajragarbha states that our version of the Hevajra- 
tantra, which consists of two parts (kalpa) and 750 $lokas, is but the shorter 
version of the original work which had thirty-two parts and 500,000 Slokas. 
The Chinese translation repeats a similar tradition, explaining the work as 


two sections from an original thirty-one. Bu-sTon also lists among the lost 


I 
2 5 P- do. Tankadäsa (Kayasthavrddha) lived in the reign of Mahipila q 
and taught Durhari who taught Mahāvajrāsana, a contemporary of Atisa (9 2 as 2 E 
3 For the life of Ratnåkara$inti see EM, pp. 105-9- He was a pupil or ; PI 
^ Schiefner, p. 177. Vajraghanta and Darika appear as contempora an p 2 
Dårika and Tengi appear together, Schiefner, p. 127: ee p. 8, . 


15 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digita} Rrasevetioncy eumdation, Chandigarh 


parts of the canon a version of this tantra in 100,000 slokas.! Each tantra, 
he says, consists of a great number of fundamental and explanatory tantras, 
This of course is likely and it was presumably on the basis of a large 
amount of such floating material that an authorized text would become 
established. The fact that one and the same version appears in all the com- 
mentaries and in the Tibetan and Chinese translations certainly bears wit- 
ness to the strength of the tradition when once this had come about. There 
are no means of checking nor indeed grounds for disputing Taranatha’s 
assertion (quoted above) that Kampala and Saroruha brought the work to 
light (spyan-draiis), which certainly involved fixing its present form as 
Saroruha’s commentary proves. At the same time the existence of other 
versions, at least of parts of the text, is attested by some of the short works 
in the Sådhanamålå. One may see, for example, no. 228 (already referred 
to above on p. 13) which is said to come from the Hevajra-tantra, and bears 
close affinities with Chapters 3 and 8 in Part I of our version, some of the 
verses being identical. It is of interest to observe that Dombi-heruka, to 
whom it is attributed, precedes Saroruha, and so writes perhaps before the 
fixing of the text, as also does Anangavajra, author of another short sadhana 
preserved in the Tenjur (rGyud, xxi. 246-7). All the sådhanas of Nairatmya 
preserved in the Sådhanamålå are by their very nature related. The two 
opening slokas of no. 229 correspond exactly with our text IL. viii. 6-7. One 
is here on the edge of a very large problem, for there are remnants of 
the basic material of not only the Hevajra-tantra but of several tantras, 
material which must have been sufficiently extensive to give rise to the 
notion of original works of the fantastic length of 500,000 slokas. Nor, 
knowing the Indian genius for the producing of works which at least begin 
to approximate to these proportions, can one discount altogether the possi- 
bility of the existence of other and longer versions. This is borne out by a 
reference in our text itself (I. xi. 12), where we are told that the full sadhana 
of Kurukullå is given in twelve parts, which the commentators refer to the 
long version (vistirnahevajratantra). There are a large number of sådhanas 
of this goddess in the Sådhanamåla, which are by no means the special 
preserve of the Hevajra-tantra, where her only reason for intrusion is her 
association with the rite of vasya, ‘subduing’, in which she is specially 
proficient. Nevertheless the reference to the existence of this longer version 
stands, and for the present must remain unexplained. It is only strange 
that if such a longer version existed, the commentators should not have 
made some use of it. 

Yet there is another version, which Vajragarbha constantly and Naropa 
occasionally quotes. In his introduction Vajragarbha announces his inten- 
tion of explaining the short version of 750 slokas which comes out of the 


1 Obermiller, p. 170. 
16 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digifak Crgsgvation Foundation, Chandigarh 


long version of 500,000 slokas ‘in conformity with the basic tantra (mala- 
tantra), the fundamental text of 6,000 slokas”. He confuses the matter by 
sometimes referring to this work as the ‘basic tantra of 500,000 slokas’, a 
confusion which probably arises from vagueness concerning this long ver- 
sion the existence of which tradition maintained. The actual passages that 
he quotes, come from no normal tantra; they are always explanatory and 
doctrinal, and it is to this work that he frequently refers when he is seeking 
the figurative meaning of a passage. As a typical example one may refer to 
the matter of the corpse (p. 71). Again the tree and cemetery mentioned in 
I. vi. 6 are explained in a quotation as referring to the human body when 
the breath no longer roams about. Still more clearly, in introducing his 
discussion of Chapter 7 he says: ‘From this short version just as it is 
taught one learns the obvious meaning (neyårtha); the real meaning 
(nitartha) is to be learned from the Malatantra,’ 

Now this is a statement of considerable general significance, for while 
the tantra itself was intended to be understood in its obvious (and be it 
added in its often reprehensible) sense, the leaders of this new period per- 
sist in regarding it in a figurative sense, for which it provided means of 
expression, such as had never been fully realized at any previous stage in 
the development of Buddhism. It is misleading to pretend that the doctrine 
was now suddenly invaded and swamped with popular and superstitious 
practices. This tendency existed at all times, for the Buddhists were Hindus, 
as there has been occasion to observe above. It is true that new ideas, some 
of a quite revolutionary character, now gradually enter and transform the 
whole doctrine, but in no sense were these new practices popular. They are 
based upon schemes of extreme complexity and circumscribed with all the 
authority of fixed traditions. The names of divinities employed may be 
of popular origin, but here they are endowed for the initiated with a far 
more profound significance, and this has the far-reaching effect of uniting 
in a common symbolism the aspirations of the enlightened and the simple- 
minded, which in any organized religion is a matter of strength and not 
of decrepitude. This was not a conscious intention on the part of the 
innovators, who were primarily concerned with their own means of release. 
Moreover the names that give substance to the symbolic patterns of the 
Hevajra-tantra are for the most part not even popular divinities, but 
the names of some of the lowest of Indian castes, and they appear there 
because women of these castes had been employed and presumably still 
were employed whenever ‘fools’ actually performed these rites. They per- 
sist as part of the figurative interpretation, simply because they were 
already there, and any set of names would serve the purpose, when once 


given the authority of a tradition. : i 
As this malatantra in common with other works of exegesis concentrates 


C 
B. 6309 17 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digit PIRE Foten, Chandigarh 


on the figurative sense, it is probably the work of some recognized master, 
and not impossibly of that writer himself who goes by the name of 
Vajragarbha. On my observation Näropa, the only other commentator to 
quote it,’ quotes nothing that does not already appear in Vajragarbha’s 
text, and from which he may well have extracted it. The connexion between 
Naropa and Maitrpa? in whose hands the work reposed was very close. 
I remain persuaded that this particular "basic text’ is in any case later than 
the tantra itself and the early commentators, SARORUHA, KANHA, BHADRA- 
PADA, and DHARMAKIRTI and unknown to TANKADÄSA and RATNÄKARASÄNTI. 

The fact that there is only one known version of the tantra, apart from 
the fragments of similar material referred to above (p. 16) increases the 
likelihood of Saroruha's merely having given circulation to an already 
existing text, to the age of which it becomes difficult to set a term until 
more tantras have been individually studied. The work was probably in 
dialect; hence the serious defects in scansion, when it was roughly sans- 
kritized. The passages that remain in dialect may therefore reflect in their 
linguistic forms the period in which the sanskritized version was produced, 
and not the date of the work itself. Tibetan tradition would in general 
consider the tantras as old as the sätras, explaining their relatively late 
appearance by the secrecy with which they were transmitted. This, how- 
ever, is unconvincing, for these texts only began to have importance for 
Buddhism when they were brought into the open, and one may err as much 
by laying stress on their secrecy as their supposed popularity. The rites 
and practices prescribed in them probably derive from considerably earlier 
times. All that is new is their adoption of a Buddhist garb, and this with 
complete disregard of the contradictions that exist. It is this stage that the 
tantra itself represents, but nothing will be gained by hazarding a guess of 
the date of this process. The amount of material still awaiting exploration 
is vast, and much will be gained from a comparison of a few of the funda- 
mental texts. We know, for example, from the Hevajra-tantra itself that it 
was written after the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha.* Not only does our 
text refer specifically (II. v. 57) to this work, but from internal evidence 
there is no doubt that it is earlier. 

What is of interest to us now is the manner in which these texts were 
accepted as part of the established order of Buddhism. They are trans 
ferred from their weird and seemingly unhealthy setting to the schools and 
monasteries. They no longer describe those orgiastic gatherings of yogins 
and yoginis, but the inner process of self-integration of a man in meditation, 


I It is also quoted frequently in the Sekoddesatika, a work also attributable to Nárop?- 
2 Concerning Maitrpa see TPS i, p. 232. 
3 To be found in the Narthang Kanjur rGyud, vii, fols. 213 ff. An early Skr. MS. of 


this work has recently been discovered by Prof. J. Brough and myself in Nepal. It will 
be published in due course. 


18 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
ORIGINS 


and the enemy against whom the fierce rite of slaying is directed is the 
notion of his own substantiality. 


III. SUBJECT-MATTER 
The Philosophical Basis 


Any form of mysticism, unless restrained by reason, is liable to find 
philosophical expression in a theory of absolute unity. Convinced of the 
essential reality of the mystical experience itself, a man may deny reality to 
rational and sensual experience, which can only realize itself in diversity. 
Philosophically this denial can be expressed in various and apparently con- 
tradictory ways; they are only apparently contradictory because the essential 
idea remains unchanged, namely that the one goal of all endeavour is to be 
found in mystical experience. It may also be asserted (as is done by the 
Madhyamikas) that any attempt at philosophical expression is necessarily 
contradictory, because of its nature philosophical disquisition belongs to 
the sphere of diversity, and is therefore at best only relative to particular 
needs. While therefore one may reasonably speak of the development of 
Buddhist thought in an historical context, one remains aware that the 
practical end which they are seeking to define, or of which they deny any 
possible definition, as the case may be, is necessarily the same, for all their 
schools are essentially mystical. Philosophical as much as theological means 
of expression will affect the type of practice and therefore the type of 
mystical experience until it reaches the summit of achievement, the ‘point’ 
(bindu), which can know of no diversity. 

The theory of the one goal is itself, however, a philosophical develop- 
ment, finding expression in Buddhism in the doctrine of the ‘One Way’ 
(ekayåna), as also is the theory of relativity, of the essential non-sub- 
stantiality (nzhsvabhava) or voidness ($anyatå) of things. Both these theories 
could have had serious consequences for the later development of Buddhism, 
for if there is but one way, this may be understood as all ways being equally 
good, and if all doctrine is thus relative, then the choice between this doc- 
trine and that, Buddhist or non-Buddhist, is a matter of expediency, of 
finding the most effective means towards the end that is sought. But in 
actual fact the consequences were by no means so devastating, for the 
Madhyamikas were not the only philosophers, and it is in this period that 
the final great synthesis of Buddhist teaching was evolved, and the concepts 
of the earlier period (abhidharma) brought into relationship with the new 
philosophical theory of absolute unity, which was now in vogue in all 
schools, The teachings, which in theory at least were threatened by the 
Mådhyamikas, were established on a new and sure foundation by the 
Yogacaras. Both are equally convinced of the reality of the mystical 


19 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digita ere Re QAR RIE, Chandigarh 


experience, but whereas the one asserts the non-substantiality of all experi- 
ence and the indeterminability of any absolute itself, the other asserts the 
absolute existence of the one unity which contains potentially the twofold 
division into this and that, into subject (gråhaka) and object (gråhya), and so 
on into ever greater diversity. 

This absolute is defined as thought in its pure condition, as “just thought 
(cittamåtra), freed from all accidental (agantuka) defiling processes. These 
defiling processes, the notion of self and other and of all sensual and 
rational experience, are in themselves as non-existent as the Mådhyamikas 
conceived of them, but for the Yogåcåras they repose upon a basis, for 
they are reflections of pure thought, possessing such reality as the reflection 
of things in a mirror, in manifestation unreal but essentially real. 

But the Madhyamikas cannot admit this distinction. For them essence 
(svabhåva) and manifestation (utpåda) are equally unreal, or in terms of 
actual experience: "Between nirvana and samsåra there is not the slightest 
shade of difference.” 

Now the basic philosophical position of the tantras is Mådhyamika. It 
asserts the fundamental unity of nirvåna and samsåra, of mystical and sen- 
sual experience, and it regards all means as relative to the needs of the 
practiser. It is in fact in the tantras that are realized to some extent the serious 
consequences referred to above, but only to some extent, for the process is 
checked by the conservative tendencies represented by the Yogåcåras, and 
the whole movement remains essentially Buddhist after all, as subsequent 
developments show. 

In the Hevajra-tantra the basic philosophic conceptions are assumed. 
Chapter 5 of Part I which has the title of ‘Reality’ (tattva) devotes only two 
ślokas to the subject: 


In reality there is neither form nor seer, 
neither sound nor hearer, 

Neither smell nor one who smells, 
neither taste nor taster, 

Neither touch nor one who touches, 
neither thought nor thinker. 


In elaboration of what has been said above it may be of help to quote in 
full Kanha’s comments on this verse.” ‘Form refers to blue and all other 
attributes. It is all this that does not exist. Yet how does it not exist, for one 
certainly sees it? It does not exist in its essential nature. An essential nature 
should be uncreate, transcendent, non-contingent, self-comprising, and in 
this capacity it does not exist, because it arises from dependent causation. 
And then what is this arising in dependent causation? It is in fact the non- 


* Stcherbatsky, Nirvana, p. 77. Mulamadhyamakakårikås, p. 535: 
2 Vol. II, p. 116. 


20 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


arising of things. For if the essential nature of a thing existed before its 
appearance, then it would be independent of any other cause in its assump- 
tion of substantiality (and therefore there would be no arising). But if it is 
dependent on another cause, then the non-substantiality of a thing is proved. 
So Nagarjuna has said: "Essential nature is uncreate and independent of 
anything else, and if phenomenal things have no such essential nature, then 
essentially they are non-existent."! 

But how then do forms in all their variety appear? For foolish people 
they do indeed appear to exist, but their essential nature is not proved by 
their mere appearance. 'T'o people who have defective sight do not things 
such as hairs or a double moon, or marks like that on a peacock’s tail or 


bees appear in the vision? If they perceive these things because of their ` 


defective sight, then others in just the same way, the eyes of their mind 
affected with the myopia of ignorance, see everything which is essentially 
non-existent, as though it actually existed before them, just as the man of 
defective sight perceives the hairs. But not so the noble ones, for the eyes 
of their minds see beyond the defects of ignorance. And so the Bodhisattva 
Sarvavivaranaviskambhin praised the Lord Buddha, saying: “O Lord, when 
you turn the wheel of the doctrine, the elements assume their absolute 
state, calm from all time, from all time non-arisen, extinguished in their 
own nature."? 

Thus it is established that form and the rest are essentially non-existent. 
Then it is said: "there is no seer”. This refers to the perceiver of form, to 
the eye and the consciousness associated with it. Neither do these exist, 
since there is no arising of anything whatsoever, and it is the same with 
sound and the rest. 

Then it is said: "there is no thought”. Thought (citta) refers to conscious- 
ness in an absolute condition (parinispanna) and thoughts (caittika) refer to 
it as contingent (paratantra) and imagined (vikalpita). These three aspects 
of thought are also non-existent from the standpoint of absolute truth. 
But how are they non-existent, and how about those words pronounced by 
the Lord: “The whole threefold world, O Sons of the Conquerors, consists 
in nothing but thought” ?3 True enough, but this is spoken in order to turn 
those who are to be converted away from their attachment to form and 
so on. In this respect Nagarjuna has said: "The teaching of the Sage 
which says: ‘All this is but Thought’, is spoken to remove the fears of the 


1 MMK, p. 262. 

2 Quoted from Ratnameghasiitra (Narthang Kanjur mDo, xviii, 1-175). See MMK, 

32257 
Z 3 Gr at the opening of Vasubandhu’s Vimíatika, ed. Sylvain Lévi, Vijfiapti- 
måtratåsiddhi, Paris, 1925. For the origin of the quotation, see Sylvain Lévi, Matériaux 
pour l'étude du système vijfiaptimátra, p. 43. Also quoted in Subhdsita-samgraha, p. 19 and 
Advayavajrasamgraha, p. 18, ll. 1-2. 


2I 


CC-0. Agamnigam DigitåPÆRGIDUKSUNENIDÅ, Chandigarh 


simple-minded, but in reality it is not so.” So neither does thought exist 
from the standpoint of absolute truth.’ 

Thus the mystic realization, which is the highest goal (para) and the one 
reality (tattva) is expressed philosophically in negative terms. "The yogin 
gains fulfilment (siddhi) in that which is no fulfilment, for its characteristic 
is the very absence of any characteristic.’ But this same nature, which 
consists in absence of characteristics (alaksana) and absence of essential 
substantiality (mihsvabhåva) is also the nature of phenomenal existence 
(bhava), which was indicated above when it was said: 'there is no form, 
&c. In this sense it has been said that the mystic realization (= nirvåna) is 
the same as the world of everyday experience (= samsåra) which is there- 
fore in truth already enlightened (buddhamaya). ‘Such as is nirvana, such 
is samsåra. There is no nirvana other than samsåra, we say. Samsåra con- 
sists in form and sound and so on, in feeling and the other constituents 
of personality, in the faculties of sense, in wrath, delusion and the rest. 
But all these elements are really nirvåna, and only from delusion (moha) do 
they appear as samsåra.”? But if samsåra is really nirvåna, then all men are 
already buddhas. ‘All beings are buddhas, but this is obscured by accidental 
defilement (agantukamala). When this is removed, they are buddhas at once, 
of this there is no doubt.’* 


The Theory of ‘Two-in-One’ 


The purpose of the practice therefore is to remove these apparent defile- 
ments, which arise from nothing more than a false view of existence as it 
already is. The whole training consists in learning to conceive of existence 
in knowledge of its non-existence, and one will then automatically realize 
its true nature which is innate (sahaja) and a matter for self-experience 
(svasamvedya). But this can only be done by using existence itself as the 
means (upåya) for there is no other possible. One creates mentally (bhava- 
yati) an idealized representation of the process of emanation of existence 
(utpattikrama) which is the samsara, and by realizing the dream-like nature 
of its apparent diversity, one realizes its unity in this process of realization 
(sampannakrama), which is nirvana.® 

Such, briefly, is the theory, and it is clear that by its very nature it does 
not lend itself to rational investigation, in terms of which it may appear 2s 
just nonsense, a charge it would not attempt to refute, for in reply it is 
content to make nonsense of rational investigation itself.” Any discussion 
of its practices is also subject to limitation, for distinctions are made, only 


r Also quoted in Subhdsita-samgraha, p. 20. Otherwise untraced. 


2 See I. x. 20. 3 See II. iv. 32-34. 
4 See II. iv. 69; also 61-64 and 73-75. 
5 See II. ii. 46-51. $ See II. ii. 29. 


7 See K's quotation, vol. II, p. 104, fn., taken from MMV, p. 127. 


22 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


so that they may be later denied, and therefore the schemes in which one 
may attempt to arrange the various categories for a better understanding of 
them, may at any place appear contradictory, for the ideas which one 
thought one had reduced to some order by placing them in some opposing 
relationship, now suddenly appear as identical. If one assumes this identity 
from the start, then no distinction of the terms is possible and likewise no 
discussion. I must therefore beg much goodwill and patience of my reader, 
if he is to follow me through this attempted explanation. 

The yogin who sets out on this course, begins in an apparent duality. 
He desires, and may to some extent already have tasted, the mystical ex- 
perience (= nirvana), but at the same time he lives normally in a world of 
sensual practical experience (samsdra). In so far as the early Buddhists 
(sravakas) had sought mrvana in a deliberate stopping of the process of 
samsåra, such mystical experience as they achieved was limited and imper- 
fect. It was not the end as they had thought, but merely a stage. Moreover 
it was limited because it was personal and therefore selfish. To bring about 
a cessation (mirodha) of phenomenal existence (= duhkha) for oneself 
amounted to disregard of the sorry plight of others. Now the early mahayana 
had already redressed this balance in its theory of the course of the 
bodhisattva. Such a one aspired to perfect enlightenment (samyaksambodhi) 
and this end depended as much upon the accumulation of merit (punya- 
sambhara) as upon that of knowledge (jñanasambhara). This last might be 
achieved by the practice of meditation, but the first depended upon prac- 
tical effort. Thus while the sphere of knowledge might seem to be mrvana, 
the sphere of effort exists in samsåra. The motive force of the one is wisdom 
(prajna@) and of the other compassion (karna). Hence of all the perfections 
(påramitå) of a bodhisattva, those of wisdom and self-sacrifice (dana) are 
the two most extolled. Now among these perfections there is one of skill in 
means (upåyakausalya), referring to those means by which a bodhisattva 
should exercise his compassion. In the total list of perfections where it 
appears as the seventh it receives no special significance. In the tantras, 
however, the ‘perfections’ generally belong to an inferior practice that has 
been transcended, but two of them remain, endowed now with a deepened 
significance. One of these is Wisdom which is identified explicitly with 
nirvana and the other is Means (or Compassion) which is identified with 
samsara. The highest truth is therefore frequently referred to as a mingling 
of Wisdom and Means, in that it is a realization of the essential sameness 
of nirvana and samsara. To call anything the essence of Wisdomand Means, 
as the Hevajra-tantra is called on its first page, is to claim for it the nature 
of supreme truth, and to resolve Hevajra’s name into two parts, HE meaning 
compassion and VAJRA meaning wisdom, is to identify him with supreme 
being. One must be aware that these are arbitrary identifications to suit the 


23 


CC-0. Agamnigam pigid FERABUY SARS, Chandigarh 


particular case, and that whereas Vajra here, and frequently elsewhere, 
symbolizes one of the coefficients of truth, it may also stand for the Whole 
truth itself. The constant and deliberate identifying of a part with the whole 
is one of the chief difficulties in clear exposition. Wisdom is represented by 
the lotus (padma) or the bell (ghantå). The two ritual objects of vajra and 
bell with their known significance continue in use in Tibet to this day, 

In this union Wisdom, although unrealizable apart from Means, yet 
predominates. It has behind it the whole tradition of the Perfection of 
Wisdom, already actually symbolized in a feminine divinity, the Goddess 
Prajfiaparamità. She is therefore herself the supreme truth of the Void 
(fünyatà) which is the Perfection of Wisdom; in the Hevajra-tantra she is 
Nairatmya, ‘absence of the notion of selfhood', and it is in her that the 
yogin, as Means, is consubstantiated.' 

At the same time this final and indestructible truth, which is also sym- 
bolized by the vajra, may appear under a masculine aspect, a form no 
doubt more congenial to monastic Buddhism, for it was the male figure of 
a buddha which first received iconographic form. Then, as now, the pur- 
pose of these figures was that they should serve as means towards identifica- 
tion with the idea expressed.? Therefore the male divinity, whichever 
iconographic type be chosen, Vairocana, Aksobhya, or as in our tantra, 
Hevajra, comprehends the whole truth, as much as does the Goddess 
Prajfiaparamita. In order to emphasize the essential identity of the idea the 
female form is made to transmute into the male,? and the two which are 
thus identified are nirvana and samsara. 

Itis this dominating notion of ‘two-in-one’ (Tibetan: zuri-hjug) upon which 
the whole complicated structure of the tantras is reared, and this applies to 
its philosophy, its theology (if we may grace it with the name), and its prac- 
tice of yoga. If one is therefore prepared to understand it, one must expect 
to meet with sexual symbolism at every turn, and this can only cease to be 
burdensome if one is able to see beyond the symbols to the ideas. The 
power and (in a sense) the profundity of these symbols is very great, for 
while on the one hand they refer intimately to the realm of sensual experi- 
ence (samsara), they also indicate the two coefficients of mystical experience 
(nirvana). In fact these symbols indicate the identity of the one with the 
other, in a way in which no other symbols can possibly do. Vajra and lotus 
derive their whole significance from their masculine and feminine connota- 
tions. The terms, Wisdom and Compassion (which, be it noted, is DOW 
equated with Passion), belong to the earlier phase of Buddhism, 2 fact 
which tends to obscure the new meanings with which they are endowed: 
the other terms employed, such as Sun and Moon, ALI (vowel series) and 


! See II. iv. 40-47. 
* See Mus, ii. 1, pp. 663-4. 3 See II. ii. 24-27» 


24 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


KALI (consonant series) conceal the meaning like a code. These will be 
discussed below. 


The ‘Thought of Enlightenment’ 


The symbolism does not end with these pairs, in which one may con- 
ceive of either member as comprehending the other. There is a third 
member, the seed which results of their union, sometimes referred to in all 
clarity as $ukra, but more generally as bodhicitta, the ‘thought of enlighten- 
ment’, or even as citta, ‘thought’. It has a relative (samvrti) and an absolute 
(vivrti) aspect. As the former, it is the life-force, the essence of samsara, 
and therefore manifest under the twofold aspect of the masculine and the 
feminine. Or it may represent (more logically) the masculine aspect only, 
when it is counterbalanced by rakta, ‘blood’, the feminine coefficient. 
(This fluctuation corresponds with the manner in which Hevajra alone or 
Hevajra embracing Nairatmya may symbolize the whole samsåra and by 
implication mirvåna.) In its absolute aspect the bodhicitta is the supreme 
mystical experience and may be called by any of its attributes, the great 
bliss (mahåsukha), the self-experiencing (svasamvedya), the Innate (sahaja). 
All these distinctions are avowedly no distinctions, and perhaps this attempt 
to define these relative and absolute aspects of bodhicitta, for which there is 
authority in the text, illustrates how little the whole subject lends itself to 
logical discussion. Every term deliberately has these emphases of meaning, 
everything overlaps as it were, just so that the distinctions may be blurred. 
Two other important synonyms of bodhicitta remain: it is the moon (candra, 
Sasin), regarded as absolute when it is the one only, or as relative, when it 
pairs with ‘sun’; it is also Aksobhya, for Aksobhya is ‘thought’? (citta) and 
thought, as was mentioned above, is essentially the ‘thought of enlighten- 
ment’ (bodhicitta). Lastly in terms of secret language (sandhyabhasa) $ukra 
and rakta are known as karpüra (camphor) and sihlaka (frankincense). 

Thus although the two conceptions are essentially the same, one may 
regard the bodhicitta under two aspects: (1) as the consummation of vajra 
and lotus, when it is envisaged in the mystic state as the Moon which melts 
in the thousand-petalled lotus at the summit of the head, and flows through 


1 See I. viii. 28-29 and II. iv. 29-30. 

2 See diagram VII (p. 128) and diagrams on pages 27 and 28. . 

3 See Il. iii. so. The list given by Shahidullah (p. 9) and quoted by Éliade (pp. 254-5) 
consists chiefly of terms not properly sandhyabhasa. Terms such as lalanå, rasanå, padma, 
vajra, &c. are by no means ‘hidden’, They may well have more than one interpretation, 
but that is another matter. Of that Eliade has well written (pp. 2 53-4): ‘On se trouve dans 
un univers d’analogies, d’homologies et de double sens. Tout phénomène érotique p 
exprimer, dans ce langage "intentionnel”, un exercice hathayogique ou une étape e la 
méditation de méme que n'importe quel symbole, n'importe quel ““état de sainteté E 
être affecté d'un sens érotique. On arrive à ce résultat, qu'un texte tantrique peut étre lu 
avec plusieurs clés: liturgiques, yogiques, tantriques, etc. 


25 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital NrésB fada FeuhdáadN, Chandigarh 


the whole body, pervading it with bliss,’ or (2) as the seed, the source of 
existence (samsåra), and therefore the starting-point (bindu) of the mandala, 
which is the idealized representation of samsåra. Now envisaged as seed, it 
is intimately associated with another conception, namely that of sound. 
We referred above to ALI (vowel series) and KALI (consonant series) as 
apparently arbitrary terms for the basic pair (lotus/vajra), but their usage is 
not without its significance. Just as these have the seed as their consumma- 
tion, so the vowel and the consonant together produce the syllable, and 
this syllable indicates the mystic sound of the potential being comprehended 
in the seed (bijasamgraha).? These seed-syllables may, however, be a pure 
vowel, when they are essentially unmanifest, even as the primal sound a is 
the seed-syllable of Nairatmya, whose name indicates her true nature. Of 
a divinity which becomes manifest the seed-syllable consists of initial con- 
sonant (or consonantal group), a vowel and final M (anusvåra). The anusvåra 
is itself, however, the symbol of the seed, the bindu (point of emergence or 
disappearance) and is indeed written as a dot over the syllable. Every com- 
plete seed-syllable is therefore in itself a representation of the essential idea 
of vajra (kali), lotus (ai), and consummation (bindu), but at the same time 
it possesses an individual character in that it consists of a particular vowel 
and a particular consonant.? Thus the divinity, while being a particular 
manifestation, is essentially the same as any other manifestation, for they 
all sink into one. When Hevajra becomes manifest he springs from the 
seed-syllable HUM; as unmanifest he would be represented by the sound 
HA, and as bodhicitta or *moon' he is known in another context as HAM. It 
is as this that he is able to combine with Nairatmya as AHAM—'T', which 
represents the reintegrated yogin. The identifications may be arbitrary and 
even contradictory, as one will see if one begins to apply the theory beyond 
the given examples of our tantra. They are essentially means, designed to 
train and concentrate the thought in one direction, and with this end in 
view one makes the requisite assertions, theorizes so far, and leaves it at that. 
'The contradictions arise, however, not because the theory is necessarily 
defective, but because those who formulate it are fitting into a scheme 
material which already exists in a fixed or traditional form. Aham already. 
means ‘I’ and it conveniently consists of two parts, and so is identified in 
accordance with the theory, regardless of other associations. A still more 
obvious discordance of this kind exists with regard to the next set which we 
have to consider. Just as vajra and lotus have bodhicitta as their consumma- 
tion and consonants and vowels have the syllable (aksara), so Moon (night) 
and Sun (day) are consumed in Fire. This like all the other elements has a 
general (macrocosmic) and individual (microcosmic) significance. As the 


! See pp. 36-37. ? See I. iii. 2 and 11. 
See II. v. 28 where the eight yoginis become manifest from their seed-syllables. 


26 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


former it is the cosmic fire which consumes existence and out of which the 
new existence arises. For this reason RAM which is the seed-syllable of fire 
is employed to initiate the whole envisaged process of emanation. For the 
meditating yogin it signifies the fusing in his own person of the two co- 
efficients represented by the breath which passes up and down the left and 
right sides of the body, hence the consummation of his existence. As such 
it is Candali, the goddess of fire, who burns at the navel." Thus being the 
union of the two coefficients, she is essentially Wisdom (prajñā) and Means 
(upaya), and her name is arbitrarily explained in this way. Candå is prajna, 
we are told, and åli is upaya, and this in spite of the general theory that ali 
is feminine and corresponds with prajñā. One has to accept such facile 
equations as merely emphasizing a particular meaning, and pass them by. 


The Yogin’s Body 


The last set of three we have to consider are the three psychic channels 
which are envisaged as sustaining the yogin’s body. They are suggested by 
the threefold scheme found in other spheres and the necessity of asserting 
a general concordance between macrocosm and microcosm which funda- 
mental theory already regards as one, and by the existence of the two sides 
of the human body and the two nostrils where these veins are supposed to 
begin. We must return to them below, and here it is sufficient to state that 
to the left is Lalanå, feminine and corresponding with prajñā, to the right 
is Rasand, masculine and corresponding with upaya, while in the centre 
where they unite is Avadhiiti, the channel through which the means of 
reintegration, envisaged either as Candali (union of Sun and Moon, hence 
of breath to left and right) or as the bodhicitta (union of rakta and sukra, 
hence also of breath to left and right) reaches the Moon in the thousand- 
petalled lotus of the head. 

It may be of help to resume these sets of three, referring them to their 
special spheres of application. 


Doctrinal Cosmical Sexual Bio- Vocal Philo- Veins 
logical sophical 
masc. upaya moon vajra $ukra käli (gråhaka) Rasana 
fem. prajna sun lotus rakta ali (grahya) Lalana x 
union bodhicitta fire $ukra bija aksara citta Avadhiiti 
(sattva) 


As has been insisted upon above, this list does not indicate absolute distinc- 
tions, because several of the terms are interchangeable, such as bodhicitta, 
moon and sukra. Praja and vajra are both terms that may indicate the 
final truth, and in this sense cease to be mere coefficients. Gråhaka (sub- 
ject) and grahya (object) are included by implication, but are bracketed 
r consume and consummate as practical synonyms, 


t! See I. i. 31 and pp. 36-37. Fo 
see p. 138. 


27 


CC-0. Agamnigam pigid PER OUT AQ, Chandigarh 


because to my knowledge they are not commonly used as synonyms for any 
other term in the same horizontal row. (See however I. i. 14.) Sattva is 
also bracketed because it occupies a special position. It is the bija envisaged 
as ‘being in its ideal form’, namely Vajrasattva, ‘adamantine being’, who is 
identical with Hevajra or any other zstadevata. 


The ‘Unity of Three’ 


Such then is the complex mystery at the heart of nirvàna and samsåra. 
It is this that is referred to as the Body, Speech, and Mind of all the 
Buddhas, as the Three Adamantine Ones (trayo vajrinah), as the unity of 
three states of being (tribhavasyaikata), and may be indicated by any agreed 
name.' It pervades all things for there is nothing other than it, and yet 
transcends all things for it is not involved in their accidental and purely 
unreal defilement. It can be experienced only by learning to associate oneself 
with its true nature, which is identical with one's own true nature, and so 
on. The identity of this with all other åtman theories, and particularly with 
later Vedanta, is apparent. But it represents too the essence of Madhyamika 
theory, with which it maintains a far closer association by the using of their 
philosophical terms. For the commentators, as has already been indicated 
by the quotation from Kanha, there is no doubt that this is the true position. 

Apart from the threefold formula of personality (Body, Speech, and 
Mind), and the three root-evils (Delusion, Desire, and Wrath) there are 
the three aspects of existence, absolute, contingent, imagined, and the 
theory of the three bodies of a buddha. Now these last suggest not a unity 
of three integrated principles, but a graduation of states of existence, which 
one may associate with the cosmological conception of the three worlds, 
kåmadhåtu, rüpadhàtu, and arüpadhátu.? It is in fact as these three that 
Dharmakirti (alone of the commentators) interprets this phrase ‘unity of 
three states of being', and it is as a vertical series that the text envisages 
them, associating them also with certain places in the human body, an 
aspect of the matter to be considered more fully below, and added only 
now that this may serve as a future connecting link.3 


Position — Formula Yogini Buddha Root-evils Position Buddhakåya 
in space of personality in body 

Zenith Speech Khecari AMITABHA raga throat — sambhoga 
Centre Mind Nairåtmyå AKSOBHYA dvesa heart dharma 
Nadir Body Bhücari VAIROCANA moha navel nirmåna 


1 See I. x. 8-12. 

7 Attention has been drawn several times to the associations that exist between the 
different stages of spiritual advance (see also below, p. 35) and the external spheres of 
existence. See Przyluski, ‘Bouddhisme et Upanisad? BEFEO xxxii, pp. 141 ff. Also 
Günther, Seelenproblem, pp. 135 ff. and diagram P. 157. Also Masuda, “Origin and 
Doctrines of Early Indian Buddhist Schools”, Asia Major, ii, pp. 43-44. 

3 See p. 38. 


28 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


Now this diagram represents the vertical core of the mandala, which must 
next be considered. It is clear that the stages are not ascending, for it is the 
centre that is in every case of prime importance. Mind (citta) corresponds 
with consciousness (vijizna), considered as the chief of the five skandhas, 
the other four being envisaged horizontally at the four points of the com- 
pass (diagram IV p. 127). Its association with bodhicitta, which is the bindu 
(point), has already been mentioned above. Of Nairatmyå too, as the Per- 
fection of Wisdom (prajiaparamita), the final truth of the Void (Sänyata), 
we have spoken. Aksobhya is the hypostasis of Hevajra, who is frequently 
referred to in the text as the one whose nature is wrath (dvesätman). The 
buddhas Amitabha and Vairocana with their corresponding passions all 
belong to the more usual fivefold scheme, when they are shown on the 
horizontal plane (diagrams V and VIII). We note that the dharmakaya, 
the chief member of this set of three, is where one would expect it in this 
scheme, at the centre, corresponding with the heart. 


The Mandala 


The whole horizontal mandala is an idealized representation of the 
identity of nirvana and samsåra. Hence on it there appear in stylized form 
the various aspects of absolute being under the names of different divinities 
and also certain set categories of phenomenal existence. It is the process of 
identification of the latter with the former which is referred to as the process 
of purification (visuddhi). In the identification, for example, of wrath with 
Aksobhya, the aspect of phenomenal existence is seen to be none other than 
an aspect of absolute existence. To symbolize and to purify (in this sense) 
is essentially the same thing. The simplest form of mandala is that shown 
on diagram VIII, where the five Buddhas, who embody the five tran- 
scendent wisdoms, are equated with the five evils that lie at the root of 
phenomenal existence. This simple scheme is of great interest in that it 
illustrates so well the fantastic conclusions that extreme monism of this 
kind must arrive at, when its sole measure of what is real (tattva) is the 
mystic state. One identifies in fact those states, human passions and feelings 
and so on, which are now no longer experienced directly, with the blissful 
state of unity which is being experienced, and then when one emerges from 
this state, one envisages those passions and so on, now actually experienced, 
as so many aspects of the one mystic unity. One thereby transforms 
idealistically the whole of phenomenal existence into a mystic absolute, and 
in this vision of reality all forms are recognized as symbolic reflections at 
various stages of remove from the unity of the centre. Meanwhile in his 
delusion the ordinary man persists in regarding them as separate entities. 


jii Mahdyanasitra- 
1 See p. 129 and I. viii. 6-7, where the terms are translated. See also 
lamkära, ed. S. Lévi, ix. 67-76. For other references see La Siddhi de Hiuan-tsang coat 
by de la Vallée Poussin, Paris 1928-9), p. 681. The full five are listed in Mvp, p. 8. 


29 


CC-0. Agamnigam pank PER OR ADN, Chandigarh 


Nevertheless the power of this idea for one who seeks the mystic state as 
the one true goal remains unimpaired. The actual pattern of the mandala 
employed and the sets of divinities are always a conventional expression of 
the idea and so varied from school to school. In conformity with the five- 
fold notion, men are envisaged as belonging by nature to one of five 
families, each represented by one of the Five Buddhas, and the mandala 
suitable for such a man would have the Buddha of his family at the centre. 
This would correspond with a predominance in the man's nature of delusion, 
wrath, passion, envy, or malignity. This seems in the main a mere theoretical 
elaboration of the master's responsibility to find the right means for his 
pupil. I would have no doubt that behind the traditional formulas there lay 
much sound practical psychology. The great masters often had many 
tantras at their disposal, and "it was the rule for them to teach those they 
were training in accordance with their propensities’. Hence there arises 
the need to find the right master, and his great importance when once he 
has been found, for only he can indicate the way. All this is quite reason- 
able within its setting, and serves once more to emphasize the seriousness 
of the intention, were one still inclined to doubt it. The Indian's delight in 
the elaboration of schemes can often give an appearance of artificiality and 
improbability to an idea that is in itself quite genuine. Such is the case with 
these five families, which are listed with all their associations in diagram V. 
The Hevajra-tantra belongs to the Vajra-family, of which Aksobhya or one 
of his wrathful manifestations, Hevajra, Heruka, or Samvara is the head. 
Wrath is therefore at the centre and the aspect of the divinities is wrathful. 
At the same time this work is called a Yogini-tantra,3 in that its circles are 
peopled entirely with feminine divinities, even at the centre, where instead 
of Hevajra we sometimes find his consort, Nairatmya, alone, albeit in a 
wrathful manifestation, for he and she are essentially one as was shown 
above. One would suspect a superimposition of one distinct cycle upon 
another, for whereas Hevajra appears with a troupe of eight goddesses 
(diagram II), Nairåtmyå appears with a troupe of fourteen (diagram III). 
This distinction is maintained in the few relevant sådhanas to be found in 
the Sådhanamålå (nos. 228, 229, 230, 231, and 247). The redactor of our 
tantra is also aware of the distinction, for he makes Nairåtmya say: “You 
have spoken of our circle with its troupe of fifteen. But what is your own 
mandala like, O Lord? Of this I have so far known nothing?’ One may 
observe that this last comment is untrue for the work as it now exists, for 
Hevajra’s cycle has already been given in Chapter 3 of Part I, where he 
appears in a two-armed form with his troupe of eight. Here in Chapter 5 
of Part II the number of attendants is not increased, but he appears in full 


I Concerning these families see Buddhist Himalaya, pp. 64-67, 74—75- 8 
2 Taranatha, tib. text, p. 147, ll. 14-15. 3 See Glossary, pp. 132 & 139: 


30 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
S SUBJECT-MATTER 


manifestation with sixteen arms and also embracin 
however, the two cycles were in fact completely combined is shown by the 
thanka reproduced as our frontispiece, where he appears in the full com- 
pany of sixteen. But Nairatmya’s company is probably equally composite in 
nature, although in the text it already appears fully conventionalized. The 
eight yoginis of the outer circle belong specifically to Hevajra, and it is 
possible that her company consists of an original five as in diagram VIII. 
That two such sets of five and eight were employed separately in actual 
ritual is indicated in the text itself, I. x. 5, where five is the given number, 
and IL. v. 58, where eight is the number required. (The separate nature of 
the remaining two, Khecari and Bhücari, has been shown above on p. 28.) 
The names appertaining to the two sets are also distinct: the inner five are 
goddesses proper, while the outer eight are the names of women of low 
caste or of eight feminine relatives. Nor would Gauri have been duplicated 
if the set had been originally composite. 

The essential feature of a mandala is its regularity towards the various 
directions, for the first thing it must express is emanation from a centre 
into space. As the divinities in whose forms the process of emanation 
(utpattikrama) is expressed, have the value of pure symbol, their forms and 
their number are relevant only to the categories in terms of which the 
meditator conceives of his own personality, for it is these two things, the 
divine forms (nirvana) and the components of his own self (samsara), which 
are to be identified. The simplest set is the set already referred to, in which 
the five skandhas are symbolized and purified. Or the number may be 
increased to nine, when the five skandhas and four elements are symbolized. 
The normal representation of these comprises the Five Buddhas and the 
four goddesses, Locana (earth), Mamaki (water), Pandara (fire), and Tara 
(air), as shown in the diagram on page 50. The fifth element, space, 
coalesces with consciousness (ozñana) at the centre. 

The set of fifteen permits the inclusion of the six spheres of sense as is 
seen in diagram IV. Vajragarbha is also concerned to include the six 
faculties of sense (II. iii. 50), but this can logically be done only by increasing 
the size of the troupe. The names he is given in reply, however, suggest 
merely a duplicating of places, for the number fifteen in this tantra is 
inviolate. It is envisaged as corresponding with the fifteen vowels and 
the fifteen phases of the moon, and Hevajra as bodhicitta with the moon 
itself. 

So the whole mandala like the symbol of the vajra or of any divine form 
is still but an expression of the one same idea, more complex in manifesta- 
tion but in essence identical. "The mandala is the full and efficacious expres- 
sion of the great bliss, for nowhere else does this have its origin.'? 


g Nairatmya. That, 


1 See II. iv. 26 and p. 25. 2 See II. ii. 21. 


31 


: INTRODUCTION 
CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


The Practice of Concentration 


The purpose of all these imagined forms, seed-syllables, symbols, divini- 
ties, and mystic circles, should by now be clear. They represent in eve 
case the essential identity of nirväna and samsåra, with which it is the aim 
of the meditator to identify himself. At one time he may select as means the 
form of his chosen divinity (istadevatå) and concentrate upon it one- 
pointedly. ‘O Wise One, you should conceive of existence in knowledge of 
its non-existence, and likewise you should conceive of Heruka in knowledge 
of his non-existence." And again: "The samsåra is Heruka’s phenomenal 
aspect, and he is the Lord, the saviour of the world.’? At set times one 
should therefore practise concentrated meditation (samåhitayoga) upon him, 
and at all other times in whatever activities one may be engaged, one should 
seek to be mindful of union with him (mirantarayoga).3 The whole process 
of concentrated meditation is fully described in Part I, Chapter 3. After the 
preliminaries, the purification of the site and of one’s own person, the 
evocation is begun. This may proceed in various ways in accordance with 
the meanings of the symbols suggested above. One may first envisage the 
syllable RAM which is the primeval fire. In this one envisages a crossed- 
vajra, symbol of the absolute centre, and then at the heart of this the 
syllable Him which is the essence of Heruka or Hevajra. One may com- 
plicate the process by envisaging this vajra, the adamantine essence, as 
first transforming itself into a protected palace, at the centre of which 
Hevajra is enthroned.* Or one may commence the whole process with the 
lotus in the stylized form of the triangle of origination (see I. viii. 3). 
From this the elements in due order are envisaged as arising, each repre- 
sented by their particular syllable, YAM RAM VAM LAM. Or one may envisage 
Sun and Moon and then the seed (bija) which is their union. They are all 
merely expedients for concentrating the mind along a due succession of 
events which represents the emanation of existence (utpattikrama) and 
therefore they may be combined in any logical order, for it is the effect 
produced that is alone important. One may envisage the final stage of 


I See I. i. rr. 2 See II. ix. 10. 3 See p. 89 fn. Š 

4 See Tucci, Teoria e Pratica del Mandala, p. 31: ‘Questa (la montagna Sumeru, Vaxis 
mundi) & una concezione panasiatica cui hanno contribuito a dare chiarezza e precisione le 
idee cosmografiche espresse nello zikurrat assiro-babilonese, poi riflesse nello schema 
della cittå imperiale dei re iranici e quindi nell” immagine ideale della reggia del cakravartin, 
il monarca universale delle tradizioni indiane.” See also J. Przyluski: “La Ville du Cakra- 
vartin’, Rocznik Orientalistyczny, v, pp. 165 ff. The mandala, the primary function of 
which is to express the truth of emanation and return (samsåra and nirvåna), is the centre 
of the universe. Hence it involves all previous tradition associated with this idea. Its core 
is Mt. Meru; it is the palace of the universal monarch, it is the royal stupa; it is even the 
fire-altar where one makes the sacrifice of oneself. This last idea finds expression 17 
the figurative interpretation given to the rite of slaying (mårana). It seems that all these 
notions were perhaps involved in the Buddhist stiipa itself (see Mus, Borobudur, å, PP: 
233-53); it is as a stupa that the mandala is primarily envisaged (see I. x. c. and II. v. C:): 


32 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


emanation as the mandala of sixteen divinities, or one may envisage it as 
countless forms of Hevajra filling space in a regularized order in every 
direction: Then one must realize the identity of oneself with the whole 
Process by associating one’s personality with the emanation, which is 
achieved by a strenuous act of belief: OM HERUK A-svabhåvåtmako 
"HAM—T am of the essence of Heruka’. The imagined forms are con- 
ceived as sinking into one’s own heart, and from here the process may be 
repeated, so that one becomes oneself the twofold process of emanation 
and absorption, of samsara and nirvana. This is the unity of Wisdom and 
Means which remains unharmed by this twofold process of origination 
and dissolution, for Means is the origination and Wisdom the dissolution. 
One need not doubt the effectiveness of such concentration, if practised 
regularly over a period of time. “Try it’, says our text persuasively, ‘try it 
one fortnight with zeal, making final realization your goal, abandoning all 
discursive thought, your mind set on the form of the divinity.’2 


The Ritual of Union 


It is only after such practice and more of which our text tells nothing, 
that the pupil comes before his master with his yogini.3 Of the actuality of 


1 See II. ii. 27. 2 II. ii. 8-9. 

3 Of the actual method of controlling the physical functions the text tells nothing 
directly. They are, however, clearly implied in the more general statements (II. iv. e). 
The Taoists, treating of similar practices, are certainly more explicit. See the article by 
Henri Maspero, Les Procédés de ‘Nourrir le principe vital’, JA 229 (1937), pp. 177-252 and 
353-430. The various processes are here described explicitly, whereas in the Indian texts 
one is presented primarily with schemes and patterns. Nor is any distinction made between 
an imagined and an actual physical process, because no such distinction is recognized, 
One surmises that the real process was elaborated to conform with a theoretical scheme, 
just as the master’s responsibility towards his pupil is elaborated into the theory of 
the five families (see above, p. 30). This has the effect of concealing what is actually 
involved, and I doubt whether this particular problem is soluble. To ask what may appear 
to us an all-important question: ‘Are the cakras within the body conceived of as real 
psychic centres, or are they an imagined device like the external mandala?’ is to bring 
contradiction into the whole basic theory from the standpoint of the texts. For them the 
whole process, internal and external, is bhdvand (mental production), and the mandala, 
although imagined (bhåvita) exists on a higher plane of reality than the phenomenal world 
it represents. Likewise the idealized representation of the body, consisting of the veins and 
cakras, exists on a higher plane than the normal physical structure of the body. Then, 
finally, these higher stages themselves are dissolved. The same applies to the divine forms. 
They are not pure symbol as we might interpret them. We regard them as unreal in the 
beginning. The Buddhists, however, regard them as real in the beginning, more real than 
flesh and blood. Hence arises the need of insisting that the divine form too consists of just 
something that comes into existence (II. ii. 45). In fact the very power of these gogh as 
means of purification (visuddhi) resides in the initial belief that they instilled. They are the 
essence of samsåra, and one must learn to conceive of them in terms of their non-existence. 
To call such use symbolic is not adequate, for as pure symbol they would be powerless. 
Nor is any real distinction to be made between an esoteric and exoteric nere 
between the few who know all these things are symbols, and the many who place faithfu 
trust in them. They all, siddhas and prthagjanas alike, believe in these gods. The Je 
have, however, trained themselves to regard them as though they were mora a i 
clearly only becomes possible to understand these texts thoroughly by accepting the 


D 
B 6309 33 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digiti re ae, OM CURRO Chandigarh 


this following ritual the text amply testifies. It is, however, one of severa] 
means, and whether it was employed or not, depended upon the predisposi- 
tion of the pupil. If one is to judge it rightly, one must see it as part of 
the whole context. The realization in oneself of samsåra and nirvåna is the 
serious and avowed intention. One may regard this as no true end for the 
best of human endeavour and as founded upon an incomplete conception 
of the nature of existence, but one must still in all fairness view its practices 
in the light of its intention, and not censure these as though they were 
wanton acts of foolishness. After such preliminary training as they both 
received, it is to be expected that the yogin and the yogini should experience 
their union as the union of Wisdom and Means in the avowed sense. The 
retention of the bodhicitta may well have produced from natural causes an 
intensified sensation of potential bliss, which under the influence of all 
preceding mental training and the impressiveness of the actual ceremony 
would be experienced as something more than natural, as the Bliss Innate 
that transcended any local manifestation. Nor would this interpretation 
conflict with the views of those practisers themselves, for whom the whole 
process is a mental production (bhåvanå) and for whom every form and 
ritual is a mere support. 

"This particular rite is envisaged as proceeding by four stages, which are 
marked by four consecrations given by the master, and are experienced as 
four successive ‘joys’, known at four successive ‘moments’. 


Consecrations Joys Moments 
1. åcårya ånanda vicitra 
2. guhya paramånanda vipåka 
3. prajhajhåna viramånanda vimarda 
4. caturtha sahajananda vilaksana 


[For the translation and discussion of these terms see abhiseka, ananda and hsana in the 
Glossary (pp. 131-3, 134, 136); also the text pp. 94—-96.] 


Weltanschauung complete, and this is probably an impossibility for a modern European. 
To think one has done so is not sufficient. One is then placed in the predicament of explain- 
ing away much that is unacceptable, and one manner of doing this is an appeal to symbolism 
and esoteric interpretation; but these are notions that have no meaning in a genuine 
tradition. A distinction is made, it is true, between an inner (adhydtmika) and outer (bahya) 
interpretation with regard to the actual rites, but they remain rites none the less, and the 
distinction arises from no embarrassment with regard to them, or desire to explain them 
away. On the contrary the outer sense is usually commended as necessary to lead men to 
the inner, which is precisely their use. The position is completely reversed by certain 
European and modern Indian exponents of these doctrines, who commend them to us for 
their esoteric significance, as though one could dispense with all else. Such an interpreta- 
tion is historically inaccurate. Those Buddhists believed, and it was necessary for their 
whole scheme of ‘release’ that they should believe, in those gods and magical practices for 
their own sakes, before they began to use them as means. There was no short-cutting © 
this way, or the means would have been completely ineffective; nor indeed were they 
inclined to believe otherwise. The task now of trying to understand becomes very muc 

more difficult, and can only be attempted when one has amassed sufficient knowledge of 
the historical and religious setting of the times to permit one to see certain practices 1n 2 
sufficient context. Such a view can scarcely be perfect, but it is the only possible approxima- 
tion, and that one can draw very close, is shown by the work of Paul Mus. 


34 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


Their mere enumeration is sufficient to suggest an analogy with other four- 
fold schemes by which the stages of spiritual ascent were indicated. There 
were four stages towards arhatship (srota-apanna, sakrdagamin, anågamin, 
arhattva-pratipanna), four stages of dhyana, and still more obviously the 
four stages, analogous with sleep, jagrat, svapna, susupti, turiya, where the 
last stage is likewise known as the ‘fourth’. It is therefore in accordance with 
Precedent that our stages are now fixed as four. Nevertheless there is some 
disagreement with regard to the ordering of the four Joys and the four 
Moments. Whenever it lists them, the Hevajra-tantra gives them in what 
would appear to be the normal order, yet it twice defines the Joy Innate as 
preceding the Joy of Cessation (I. x. 18 and II. ii. 40) in contradiction even 
with a definition elsewhere (I. viii. 24) where it is regularly called the End of 
Cessation. That two traditions existed with regard to the ordering of these 
Joys is confirmed by Dharmakirti. ‘Some people say’, he says, ‘that Cessa- 
tion is last and the Innate is third’ (xvii. 4185 4). Maitrpa clearly supported 
this view." That both traditions should appear in the Hevajra-tantra may 
be a sign of mixed origins. 

The transcendental nature of this Joy Innate is emphasized as far as 
words permit. The other three joys are of this world, but the Innate exists 
not in these three.’ It is not passion (raga = paramånanda) nor the absence 
of passion (ardga = viramånanda), nor yet a middle state (ånanda).3 It is 
both void (sänya) and non-void (asznya) which is the nature of Heruka.* 
One suspects that the placing of the Joy Innate as third is, however, in 
direct analogy with the ritualistic embrace and actual experience. As third, 
it is followed by the Joy called Cessation, which is a return to normal 
experience. The corresponding moments are that which has no charac- 
teristics (vilaksana) and that which consists of the ‘reflection’ (vimarda): ‘I 
have enjoyed this bliss.’ This is Maitrpa’s contention in supporting this 
order. ‘If vimarda is such reflection, how can it be understood as third?’ 
Such discussion serves to indicate the very transitory nature of the experi- 
ence and the very delicate distinction that must always have existed between 
the two orders of enjoyment. It was indeed a razor’s edge. 


The Union within the Yogin's Body 


But all this may at another stage merely figure an internal process of 
reintegration. This was assisted by imagining some of the schemes which 
have been resumed above, as existing actually within the body. To the 


2 
1! Advayavajrasamgraha, p. 28, 2-6. I. x. 15. 
SEIS 1. : å : * II. v. 70. 


35 


T 
CC-0. Agamnigam Digit Diese ation PURA. Chandigarh 


left and right are the two 'veins' Lalanå and Rasanå, corresponding with 
Wisdom and Means in their separate condition, which is the state of sam. 
såra. Up and down these channels passes the breath, conceived of as vital 
force and having the nature of rakta to the left and sukra to the right. So 
long as breath continues in this manner, so thought continues to wander 
uncontrolled. The initial part of the process consists therefore in harnessing 
thought to the breath, achieved by concentrating the thought upon the 
breathing process. One manner of doing this is to imagine the vowel series 
(ALI) as passing in and out with the breathing to the left and the consonant 
series (KALI) passing in and out to the right. By concentrating upon this 
both breath and thought become controlled. Running up the centre of the 
body a third vein is imagined. This is known as Avadhiti and represents 
the union of Wisdom and Means. Meeting it at cross section, at the navel, 
the heart, the throat, and the head, there are imagined four lotuses of 
varying numbers of petals, representing minor veins. These four lotuses or 
radiating circles(cakras) correspond with the four stages of spiritual advance, 
viz. the four Joys which we have discussed above. As is usual there is 
some contradiction in the actual arrangement, for the first Joy may be 
envisaged at the navel and the Joy Innate in the head, or vice versa. There 
seems to be some reason for both these schemes as we shall see below. 

At the base of the genitals where all three channels come together, 
Lalanå descending from the left, Rasanå descending from the right and 
Avadhiiti ascending at the centre, there resides the bodhicitta in its relative 
condition (= sukra) and quiescent. At the summit of the head (brahma- 
randhra) there resides the bodhicitta in its absolute condition (— mahåsukha) 
also quiescent and known as Moon. 

Such in the simplest terms is the imagined structure of the body. Now 
the breath to which thought is harnessed is first made to pass regularly up 
and down the two outer channels, which thereby enact under strict control 
the process of samsåra. The breath becomes quiescent and the two psychic 
streams thus controlled are held and forced, as other escape is denied them, 
to enter the base of the central channel. At their meeting they arouse the 
bodhicitta which resides there. Their contact, which is the contact of Wis- 
dom and Means, of Sun and Moon, is envisaged as Fire which is Candåli, 
and so Candåli burns.t As seed-syllable she is the syllable a, and as a blazing 
A it may be imagined. She is therefore also Nairatmya and may be known 
under any name that signifies the bliss of this union, as Avadhiti, the name 


1 Candali is gTum-mo in Tibetan, a name well known from accounts of the warmth- 
producing exploits of the Tibetan ‘cotton-clad ones’ (ras-pa). This Tibetan practice seems 
to be a turning to practical purposes of yoga which was intended primarily as a means to 
the supreme goal. See Evans-Wentz, Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines, pp: 171-210 
where the actual producing of bodily warmth is seen to be entirely incidental to the main 
intention. 


36 


iE cou 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


of the central vein itself, or as Dombi. She is now envisaged as moving 
upwards, consuming as she goes, from the navel to the heart and thence to 
the throat and the head. Then she reaches the bodhicitta in the head, the 
Moon, here envisaged as the syllable HAM. This melts at the contact and 
flows downwards through the central vein, pervading the whole body 
through the various cakras as it goes. It reaches the lowest cakra and A and 
HAM become AHAM (= ‘1’, the reintegrated self) in the Joy Innate. 

This is the process portrayed in the texts, the final consummation, 
towards which the practice with mandalas and mudras and dhyana and japa 
lends its aid, and in the realization of which they are all transcended. This 
is the process of which the dohå-verses sing: 

When the mind goes to rest, 

The bonds of the body are destroyed, 

And when the one flavour of the Innate pours forth, 

There is neither outcast nor brahmin. 


Here is the sacred Jumna and here the River Ganges, 

Here are Prayaga and Benares, here are Sun and Moon. 

Here I have visited in my wanderings shrines and such places of pilgrimage, 
For I have not seen another shrine blissful like my own body.' 


The absence of any rationality is sufficient in itself to account for inevitable 
contradictions and duplications, of precisely the kind which we have referred 
to above. Thus the sound a at the navel is both the bodhicitta (masculine in 
association) and Nairatmya (feminine in association) who unites with the 
bodhicitta in the head. Bodhicitta is in one sense itself sukra and yet it 
results from a union of Wisdom and Means, which themselves may be 
called rakta and sukra. The reason for all these cross-identifications we 
have given above. Also the twofold movement upward and downward in 
the process of reintegration may well account for the Joy Innate being 
conceived in the head and in the navel. It is with fundamental variations of 
this kind in mind that one hesitates to commit oneself to any one particular 
scheme, as they clearly varied from one school or one master to another, 
much as the external mandala might be varied. Nevertheless they always 
represent the same intention, namely to emphasize the identity of micro- 
cosm with macrocosm by locating the various orders of existence within 
the body at the level of the various cakras. The Hevajra-tantra itself is 
consistent in its allusions (I. i. c and II. iv. h) to this theory. The basis is 
provided by the three bodies (kaya) of a buddha, increased by addition of 
the fourth, known as the ‘Self-Existent Body’ (svabhåvikakåya), the ‘Innate 
Body’ (sahajakåya) or the ‘Body of Great Bliss’ (mahasukhakaya). The 
three first are located in accordance with the diagram on page 28 above. 


* Quoted from Saraha’s Dohakosa. See Buddhist Texts (Cassirer, 1954), pp. 230-1. 


37 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Res Stian ELARA Chandigarh 


So when they are extended to this fourfold scheme, in which the Place of 
importance is at the top, namely in the head, these three bodies of the 
buddha appear out of their traditional order.! 


Body Joy Syllable 
Head svabhåvikakåya sahajånanda HAM 
Throat sambhogakaya viramananda om 
Heart dharmakaya paramånanda HÖM 
Navel nirmänakäya änanda A 


Within this fourfold scheme are fitted all possible terms of reference, and 
primarily the 4 Joys, the 4 Moments, and the 4 Consecrations (see p. 34). 
Also we may insert the four truths, duhkha, samudaya, nirodha, and mårga, 
as indicating that the whole doctrine is comprehended within the body. 
Or likewise the four schools, Sthåvara, Sarvastivada, Sammitiya, and 
Mahåsarighika, as symbolizing the presence of the whole sarigha within the 
body, or likewise the four elements, earth, water, fire, air, or the four rites 
of prospering (pusti), pacifying (Santi), overpowering (vasya), and destroying 
(mårana), as symbolizing the existence of all power within the body. This 
last set lends itself badly to such allocation, as there are far more than four 
such rites. In this context the only one of importance amongst them is the 
rite of slaying (mårana) which with the interpretation of the ‘slaying of the 
notion of a self’ is equated with the Joy Innate and is used as a synonym 
for it. Nor is it practicable to insert the Five Buddhas in a vertical order 
because of their number.? They may, however, be envisaged as there at 


1 See Dasgupta, Introduction to Tantric Buddhism, p. 163. There is no doubt that this 
is the traditional arrangement. For its application to Tibetan ritual, see Buddhist Himålaya, 
pp. 233-4. Nevertheless Vajragarbha reverses the positions of the four bodies and the 
four joys (folio 185): 


Head nirmånakåya ånanda 
Throat sambhogakåya paramånanda 
Heart dharmakåya viramånanda 
Navel sahajakåya sahajånanda 


The dharmakaya is still positioned at the heart, but the four bodies now appear more 
typically as a graduation of states of existence. 
2 This is, however, attempted, although the allocations vary. Thus V (26a 7-5 1): 


Head BUM Vairocana 

Throat JRIM Amitåbha 

Heart HUM Aksobhya 

Navel AM Ratneśa 

Genitals KHAM Amoghasiddhi 

Elsewhere V (1385 4-5) and D (371a 2-3) locate the full set of six Buddhas within: 
V D 

Top of head Aksobhya White (= Vairocana) 
Forehead Vairocana Yellow (= Ratnesa) 
Throat Amitabha Red (= Amitabha) 
Heart Amoghasiddhi Black (= Aksobhya)  . 
Navel Ratnasambhava Green (= Amoghasiddhi) 
Genitals Vajrasattva Blue (= Vajrasattva) 


This is achieved by making temporary use of the full set of six cakras, as employed in 
the non-Buddhist tantras (see Woodroffe, The Serpent Power, 4th ed., Madras, 195° 


38 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SUBJECT-MATTER 


the heart-cakra, of which Hevajra (= Aksobhya) holds the centre in the 
form of the syllable HUM with the other four in their normal positions on 
the horizontal plane. The whole scheme is flexible and allows of elaboration 
and variation within different traditions. Moreover the different cakras are 
envisaged as no more or less real than the circles of the external mandala. 
In the condition of the Joy Innate their distinctions, which were mere 
means, are all absorbed. It is in this sense that of the pair Wisdom/Means 
Wisdom remains supreme, for although without Means she is unrealizable, 
it is she that absorbs her partner, and never the reverse. She is the eternally 
quiescent one, and it is from her that he emerges, and then from their 
union springs all manifested form, envisaged as the circle of divinities. It 
is he who weaves the web of måyå and by means of him, who is the Means, 
that one returns to her. So the yogin must himself become Hevajra for 
Hevajra is the Means, 


IV. OBSERVATIONS 


Such then is the serious intention of this tantra, with which we can find 
no fault that might not also be found in earlier stages of Buddhism. There 
is no Buddhism known that does not set chief store by meditation, and this 
is but a special means of meditation. It uses mystic syllables, but these were 
in use long before Saroruha produced this text. It uses mystic circles and 
divine forms as aids to concentration, but forms of the buddhas worked in 
stone had now been long in use, and it is in terms of the traditional stzpa 
that the mandala is conceived in the Hevajra-tantra. It consists of an 
inner circle, surrounded by four walls with four entrances and four portals 
(torana). It has eight columns (two at each entrance), and is decorated with 
chains and garlands. As for the actual yoga-practice, there was nothing new 
in the breath-control which still plays the predominant role in a developed 
technique. Nor is this developed technique, it seems, anything new in 
principle, for at most it involved increased control of the physical processes 
of the body, which in some measure had always been recognized as neces- 
sary. If control of the breath was already recognized as a means towards the 
achieving of a desired mental condition, then to control also the seminal 
fluid and thereby gain even better results, is but an advance along the same 
path. The deliberate eating and drinking of things abhorrent differs nothing 
in kind from the deliberate meditation upon unpleasant things, such as the 
gross nature of the human body or the manner of disintegration of a corpse, 
practices which had previously been found helpful in overcoming natural 
pp. 115-27). There is clearly great variety in these lists, and contradictions can easily be 
shown even within a single tradition, if one checks the lists for cross-references. They 


seem to have no significance, apart from purely local modes of meditation, and more often 
they seem to merely represent ill-conceived attempts at needless systematization. 


39 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digiti Dresden EE. Chandigarh 

aversion and instilling the virtue of indifference (upekså). One conceives 
too easily perhaps of Buddhism in terms of the abstract theories of a few 
famous philosophers, and so when in the tantras one is brought face to face 
with actual practices, the like of which had long been practised, one may 
exclaim too readily that these cannot be Buddhist.! That new elements are 
introduced, the effect of which is far-reaching, there is no denying, but 
there is no essential break in the development of the doctrine. One might 
even claim that these new elements far from issuing in a degeneration, 
brought about a rejuvenation, nourished in the hidden well-springs of 
Indian religious life. For it is not the philosopher who gives life toa religion, 
but the man who succeeds in practising it, and in India the practiser par 
excellence has always been the yogin. One may well, by present standards, 
dislike the actual practices of certain yogins, and may thus far refer to them 
as a degeneration, but this term is relevant only to our judgement, and its 
use does not mean that Buddhism necessarily suffered from contact with 
them. This seems to be but a European fable, given substance only by the 
cataclasmic disappearance of the doctrine from India at the time when the 
tantras were in vogue. To Islam Sakyamuni was as much a demon as Hevajra. 
The later Buddhists themselves conceived of their type of Buddhism as the 
best and most effective, and since they are not profligates who commend it 
for the licence it permits them, but serious practisers and scholars, their 
words are not without importance when we attempt to appreciate this 
phase of the doctrine. To any who conceive of Buddhism as just philosophy, 
this preoccupation with ritual and techniques of yoga may well appear a 
riot of degeneration, but to a Buddhist who conceived of his religion 
primarily as an art of yoga and who had never neglected the use of ritual, 
it might very reasonably have appeared as the most effective teaching ever 
sponsored under the name of Buddha. "Because it is free from doubt as to 
the oneness of its purpose, because of its absence of difficulty, because of 
its many methods, and because it is adapted to keen senses, this mantra- 
teaching is the best.’2 

When we examine too what new things this period introduced into the 
Buddhist stream, we find they are a cause of strength rather than of weak- 
ness. The new notion that was perhaps most radical in its effect is that of 
buddhahood to be achieved in one lifetime. This hope of rapid success 
brings an actuality into the religious biographies of this period, however 
fantastic they still remain in many details, and the religious ideal of the 
mahåsiddha coincides with the historical examples. Whereas who can point 


to the bodhisattva, the great being, who pursues his career through aeons 
1 Mus, p. 594: ‘L’élément culturel, capital pour l'étude du bouddhisme indien en sa 
riche substance, est trop souvent sacrifié à l'étude des dissentiments d'école, plus com- 


modes d'acces que les faits rituel." z o) 
2 Quoted by Maitrpa (Advayavajrasamgraha, p. 21) and Bu-sTon (Obermiller, p. 49/- 


40 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
OBSERVATIONS 


of time? He remains primarily a great ideal, a subject rather for theoretical 
elaboration than for actual practice. The stories that tell of his virtues are 
fantastic in their whole purport and the very stages of his advance are 
acknowledged as unreal in their true nature. Now it is at least under- 
standable for a man to train himself to regard all phenomenal things as 
essentially unreal, if he can hope to experience the final bliss associated 
with that experience in or at the end of his present life. There is some 
motive for self-sacrifice and arduous self-training if the goal is within his 
grasp. But what incentive is there to pursue an ideal realizable after aeons 
of time, when every stage of progress is unreal and imagined? In actual 
fact the ideal remained far more modest, as represented perhaps by such 
men of learning and sanctity as Hstian-Tsang met in his travels, or by 
yogins and ascetics possessed of special powers, in the existence of 
which the followers of the Buddha had always believed. The tantras seem 
then to mark a new recognition of the actuality of the religious life as con- 
ceived in those days. They descend from superb flights of fancy to a 
realizable ideal; one may dislike this ideal and its means of realization, 
but it was at least practicable and apparently successful. For there seems no 
reason to doubt the efficacy of the psychological training and the theory of 
evocation on which it is chiefly based. This was a matter of self-knowledge 
in the full sense of the term, for it was necessary to exteriorize all hidden 
innate tendencies that they might be known and transmuted. The mandala 
served but as a support for this process, and the intricate forms it often 
assumed indicate the complexity of the task. That the divinities should be 
manifest in fierce forms, a stumbling-block to some Europeans who take 
interest in Indian art, would also be in accordance with the theory, for the 
hidden tendencies are fierce and destructive in their nature. Neither India 
nor Tibet has become impervious to the notion of ‘religious dread’ (my- 
sterium tremendum), and this has found expression in fierce divine forms. 
By the simple worshipper these are placated in the world without, but by 
the meditator they are transmuted in the world within. The realization of 
the essential identity of man with the universal being was one of the first 
fruits of Indian reflective thought, and it remains fundamental to all prac- 
tice of yoga and to most philosophical exposition. To reintegrate the one 
was therefore automatically to reintegrate the other, and thus to save one- 
self might be identified with saving all beings. “There are no other means 
in the samsara for achieving the weal of yourself and others.’ The fierce 
tendencies must be evoked and transformed, for it is they that produce the 
appearance of misery (duhkha). In this whole process of self-help nothing 


! Concerning the notion of mysterium tremendum see Rudolf Otto, The Idea of the Holy 
translated by J. W. Harvey, Oxford, 1928. See, e.g., pp. 25730, 129-33. 
IE TO, 


41 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presdvstion Foundation Chandigarh 


final is to be gained by calling upon imagined beings who express benignity 
gentleness, and compassion. This may well be done by simple folk a 
conceive of these imagined beings as other than themselves, and the 
meditator may well himself make use of such devotional practices as a 
psychological preparation, but they are essentially useless in the final Stages, 
where it is the fierce aspect of the self that must be transmuted. If they are 
found ever to be morbid and pathological, it suggests that precisely these 
tendencies were to be overcome. One might well generalize and contend 
that it is the function of all religious practice to restore to its rightful con- 
dition that which is conceived as defective. Such is certainly the avowed 
intention of the practices which we have been discussing, and it was in their 
very power of giving expression to those things that we naturally find un- 
pleasant that their effectiveness consisted. To dislike the tantras, is but to 
dislike the worst tendencies in man, and of the terrible existence of these 
tendencies we have ample experience in every generation. The tantras 
claimed to remove like by like, and so of what else should they tell? With 
all their excesses and defects of presentation they may well contain much 
that is relevant to modern thought, for they present a genuine stratum of 
human experience. The texts themselves of course are merely suggestive 
and complete evaluation is only possible in a living tradition. There is 
nothing superstitious in the idea of a necessary succession from master 
to pupil, nor in the idea of the essential secret being lost, if no succession 
took place. Other techniques lost in such a way are by no means unknown 
in the history of man. 

In this whole setting the rite of maithuna ceases to be a matter of con- 
cern, and it would be absurd to defend it by pretending that the intention 
was solely symbolical. Whether performed or not, it is the idea that counts, 
and this idea is certainly central in the whole conception of this new 
reintegration.! And necessarily so, for it represents a most powerful tendency 

1 The whole conception of two-in-one is fundamental to Tantric Buddhism, viz. that 
Buddhism which seeks its authority in the tantras, conceived as Buddha-word. But sexual 
symbolism was not necessarily involved and seems to have been a secondary development. 
See in this respect an excellent article by Glasenapp, "Tantrismus und Saktismus’, Ost- 
asiatische Zeitschrift, 1936, pp. 120-33. The term Saktismus itself is, however, not properly 
applicable to Buddhist developments (see below, p. 44) as Glasenapp is aware, but he 
omits to draw the full conclusions. ‘Die Vereinigung des Buddha mit seiner Sakti im 
Körper der groBen Lust (mahåsukha-kåya) ist das Symbol des Verschmelzens des Be 
wuBtseins (vijfíana) in der Leere (sänyatä), die selige Aufhebung aller Zweiheit. Wenn nis) 
der Upaya (d. h. die Methode der aktiven Heilspropaganda) und die Prajfia (die Erkenntnis. 


miteinander vereinen, dann ist damit der hóchste geistige Schópfungsakt zur Tatsache 
geworden. Die Sakti ist hier also dem männlichen Prinzip im günstigen Falle nur koar 
diniert, meistens aber ist sie ihm untergeordnet, wie ja auch bei den tibetischen y 
Yum-Darstellungen die Sakti meist kleiner erscheint als ihr männlicher Partner (p. 12! » 
Never, however, does this coupling mean anything other than the absorbing of up S 
into prajña, and in this sense Wisdom (prajää) always predominates. The fact that iod 
graphically the prajfd is shown as the smaller of the two figures indicates nothing ot = 
than the continuance of an iconographic tradition, in which the male figure (icon 


42 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
OBSERVATIONS 


innate in all living things. It is therefore the chief thing to be symbolized, 
and to symbolize, one must remember, is to transmute. This is therefore no 
degrading of religion, but just the reverse, an ennobling of the natural con- 
dition, or rather a realization of the essential purity (visuddhi) of the natural 
condition. It is samsara that is to be realized as nirvana. We have referred 
above to the dangerous nature of this whole theory of identification, and 
drawn attention to the false assumption that seems to underlie it, but in 
this instance the followers of the tantras seem to be specially secure from 
criticism, for this bond was a sanction of the highest order which Indian 
religion recognized, namely the obtaining of supreme enlightenment (sam- 
yaksambodhi). If misused it became automatically, as should any intended 
sacrament, the means of certain misery (duhkha), which for them is sam- 
sara, unrecognized for what it really is, involving wretched conditions in 
future lives. Those who behaved thus were the fools, to whom reference is 
made, for the followers of the tantras were themselves well aware of these 
dangers. It is only unfortunate that at times the canonical texts themselves 
seem to succumb to the danger.! The wording often seems so precise that 
it can be only the obviously literal interpretation that was intended. Vajra- 
garbha even says that this was so.* In those circles where the Hevajra- 
tantra had its origin, there can be little doubt that it was believed that the 
body would be nourished and so become endowed with special powers, if 
certain sacraments (samaya), consisting of various kinds of human flesh or 
more repulsive articles, were consumed.3 To consume these in the accepted 
Buddhist sense, means to consume the Five Buddhas and thus to purify 
(visudh) the Five Evils. If in the beginning this had been the intended 
sense, it would have seemed unnecessary to enumerate the articles with 
such precision. Yet in the main a clear Buddhist connotation is implied. 
The whole text seems to require different stages of interpretation, if one is 
in every case to understand it as the actual authors intended it. But it has 
seemed to me enough to attempt to understand it in its acceptable Buddhist 
sense, as interpreted in fact by its commentators. 

At the same time there is no absolute distinction to be drawn between 
any of the ritual and its figurative meaning, since the final purpose of the 
ritual is nothing other than that meaning, and at any stage it might still be 
employed without necessarily belying the higher intention. The fool was 
not he who did these things, but he who did them ignorant of their true 
import. This applies particularly to the important rite of maithuna. In its 
symbolic interpretation it may be associated with the idea of mystic absorp- 
tion into the great prajñaparamita, an idea which is never dissociated from 


graphically) predominated. The old forms receive now new significance, and it would be 


absurd to deny the new significance because of the old forms. ; 
1 See II. xi. 11-15. ? See p. 17. 3 See I. vii. d, I. xi. b, and II. x. b. 


43 


CC-0. Agamnigam pank PAR ARTOA NA, Chandigarh 


it. This idea precedes the tantras themselves; they seem to give it actual 
substance for a period, and then it returns again to the sphere of pure idea, 
It is in the actual interpretation of this rite that the Buddhist tantras differ 
chiefly from the non-Buddhist, and it is unfortunate that the relative 
ignorance concerning Buddhist tantras should have permitted reference to 
them with terminology which is just not properly applicable. In recent 
European and Indian works the feminine element is now regularly referred 
to as the sakti, but yet she is no Sakti (active power). She is here prajfia, the 
eternally quiescent one, and it is by means of her partner (upåya) that 
phenomenal existence comes about. The whole idea of power is essentially 
absent where she is concerned, and to refer to Hevajra and his Sakti, or 
any other Buddhist male divinity ‘and sakti’, already now the practice in 
our museums, reveals a misunderstanding of the whole Buddhist concep- 
tion. If we must use a Sanskrit term, the correct term is prajiå, as our text 
here will amply demonstrate. If we use English, the term ‘partner’ will 
serve. The term sakti is not used in Buddhist tantras.' Elaboration of this 
theme is not here necessary, for this has been the whole subject of this 
introduction. The yogin as Means (upaya) is absorbed into Wisdom(prajia), 
and the Great Bliss (mahdsukha) is achieved. 

While on the one hand we should recognize in all fairness the essential 
purity in intention of any ritual rightly performed, in that it consists in an 
identifying of samsåra with nirvana, in a transmuting of a lower form into 
a higher, of that which is imperfect into that which is perfect, we must on 
the other hand be aware of the opposite effect that results, namely the 
identifying of nirvana in samsåra. While the first is essentially blameless, 
the second is clearly liable to either proper or improper use. Its use is proper 
only when the intention is right. To produce a mandala with its various 
parts, to envisage it as a representation of existence as it appears to be, and 
then to identify it in a higher principle, is a satisfactory proceeding perhaps, 
so long as one continues to embody that higher principle. One could then 
say convincingly: 'OM HERUKA-svabhåvåtmako 'HAM'. As a means towards 
this stage one had provisionally identified that which was imperfect with 
that which is perfect, and this was justified in so far as perfection was 
achieved. But it ceases altogether to be justified when this ideal is no longer 
realized, or in the case of its non-realizability. It is with this measure that 
one may in fairness attempt to estimate the value of the later Buddhist 
developments. 

There was nothing new in the theory that in order to restore that which 
was imperfect (= duhkha) into that which was perfect, that which was 


I It occurs nowhere in the Hevajra-tantra. In Bhattacharya's edition of the Guhya- 
samájatantra it is printed in error for the correct reading which is given in a footnote 
(p. 28, note 6). It may be noted that it is liable to occur only in isolated mantras, €.8- Sa 
tathågatatattvasamgraha, Narthang Kanjur rGyud, vii. 346b 1. 


44 


TUG- 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
OBSERVATIONS 


perfect must provisionally manifest itself as imperfect, that is to say in a 
form that would be recognizable to imperfect beings, and so might serve as 
means towards their transformation. À docetic theory of Sakyamuni Buddha, 
which involves precisely this idea, is present in the Lalitavistara, and finds 
still fuller development in the Saddharmapundarika. It was this same idea 
that transformed the significance of the stupa, so that from being a reliquary 
to which honour was due, it became a symbol of the dharmakaya from 
which power might be derived. This same change affects the stone figures. 
The quasi-historical representations of Gandhara sculpture become the 
stereotyped and idealized buddhas of later Buddhist times. The intention 
of the onlooker changes from that of devotion to an historical person, and 
becomes one of desire for self-identification with a transcendent ideal. It is 
this change which is the very essence of the mahayana, and init are involved 
all future developments. 

What is new in the tantras is the manner in which they draw certain 
conclusions from those premisses, conclusions that could logically be drawn, 
but nevertheless involved a certain contradiction with the original intention. 
Their whole theory of symbols is based on this same idea of perfection 
existing in an imperfect form, by means of which one gains the otherwise 
unattainable perfection. But they advance from this position in that, instead 
of symbols, they adopt ritual acts, where previously a symbol would have 
served. Now the act, rightly performed, may well be more effective than a 
mere idea represented by the symbol, but there is clearly the danger of the 
act becoming detached from its intended significance or of its use by those 
who are unable to comprehend that significance. For these may still claim 
in accordance with basic theory that samsåra is identical with nirvana. It is 
here that one sees the fallacy of the whole theory of identification, already 
referred to above (p. 29). It may be all very well to say that samsara is 
nirvana if one remains in nirvåna (= mystic realization), but the theory, to 
say the least, lends itself to considerable misunderstanding, if one remains 
in samsåra (= normal phenomenal existence) and still maintains that all is 
nirvana. From this misunderstanding arises the notion that those who have 
once experienced the ‘Great Bliss’ can do as they please, that whatever their 
acts, they themselves are free from their consequences, for they are beyond 
the notions of what is suitable and unsuitable, what is right and wrong. 

This same desire to see nirvana as samsara in every possible manner had 
yet another effect, which certainly strengthened the claim of Buddhism to 
be a universal religion, and not merely a special technique for ‘those of 
keen senses’. In this respect it is difficult to regard the tantras as issuing in 
a degeneracy. Their elaboration of the use of symbol provides those external 
forms which are essential to the existence of a religion that is to enter 
into the life of a people and form the backbone of its culture. We can but 


45 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital PER STAND), Chandigarh 


surmise from their Nepalese and Tibetan versions the wonder that those 
great Indian stiipas excited and the devotion they instilled; how wonderful 
too must have been those murals that adorned the walls of the monasteries 
and the images and banners that filled the temples, the throngs of monks 
that passed in succession to their regular offices, or assembled for bouts of 
philosophical disputation. It is of this whole setting that the tantras form 
part. It is this which they have strangely helped to enrich. Those same texts 
that may well distress us with the barbarity of their language and the crudity 
of their expression, were for them sacred symbols, for the Tantra of Hevajra 
is the verbal expression of Hevajra, even as the image represents his physical 
form. Probably very few were concerned to know the actual meaning of the 
words which formed this verbal expression. It was learned and recited 
ritually as one of the means of consubstantiation with the divinity which it 
expressed, and when it is commented upon by those few who were skilled in 
the meaning of its parts, they themselves would conceive of it in no other 
way than as a means to this same self-experience. The literal interpretations, 
so useful to us, that they sometimes provide, are merely incidental to the 
main intention, and are therefore seldom plainly stated, but must more often 
be deduced. They wrote their commentaries neither for those who wished 
to eat repulsive sacraments, nor for those who desired to study critically 
such strange practices, but for those who wished to consume the notion of 
their own selfhood. This is so apparent in the manner of their writing, so 
completely taken for granted, that it is oneself who becomes the fool, 
when one sets about a literal interpretation of the text. For them the text, 
like the image, is but an expression of the essentially inexpressible. It is 
itself the convention, the samaya. 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


PART I 


CHAPTER i. THE BODY OF HEVAJRA! 


a. (1) Thus have I heard—at one time the Lord dwelt in bliss with the 
Vajrayogini who is the Body, Speech, and Mind of all the Buddhas. 
(2) There the Lord pronounced these words: ‘Greatly to be revered is this 
most secret of all secret things, this essence which is the Body, Speech, and 
Mind of all the Buddhas. O Vajragarbha, good, good indeed, thou Great 
Bodhisattva of great compassion. Do thou listen to this which is named 
Hevajra, the essence of Vajrasattva, Mahasattva, and Mahasamayasattva.’ 
(3) Vajragarbha replied: "Why Vajrasattva, how so Mahasattva and 
wherefore Samayasattva? May the Lord please explain.” (4) The Lord 
replied: 
“It is indivisible and so known as Vajra. 
A Being which is unity of three;? 
Because of this device? he’s known as Vajrasattva (Adamantine 
Being). 
(5) He is full of the flavours of great knowledge, and so he is called 
Mahasattva (Great Being); 
From his continual creation of conventional forms, as Samayasattva 
(Convention Being) he’s named.’ 


b. (6) Vajragarbha said: ‘What is meant by this composite name of 
HEVAJRA? What is proclaimed by the sound HE, and likewise what by 
VAJRA ? 

(7) The Lord replied: 

‘By HE is proclaimed great compassion, and wisdom by vajra. Do thou 


1 The English chapter-titles are not intended in every case as a translation of the 
Sanskrit. They merely represent an attempt to characterize the subject-matter as concisely 
as possible. 

2 The unity of three is the unity of Body, Speech, and Mind, and with this interpreta- 
tion the commentators are generally in agreement. Dharmakirti, however, understands it 
as the unity of the three worlds, kamadhatu, rüpadhátu, and ariipadhåtu, which is achieved 
in the condition of voidness—ston pa fid du chos thams cad dbyer mi phyed paho | 
srid pa gsum ste hdod khams gzugs khams gzugs med pahi khams gsum ston par gcig paho | 
(xvii. 343a 4). See p. 28. 

3 The interpretation of anayå prajñaya yuktyá presents some difficulty. The Tibetan 
versions generally confirm our text with their: ses rab rigs ba hdi yis na, which, being å 
literal translation, does not help in clarifying the meaning. K, having quoted the text cor- 
rectly, then interprets as though it were: anayå prajnayuktya (vol. II, p. ros, ll. 6-7). Bh, 
however, says: ‘prajñayā yuktya’ ‘that is to say, here in this application is the authority 
of logical inference’—ses rab rig på Zes gsun ste | rigs pa na hdir rjes su dpag pahi tshad ma 
ste | (xv. 199b 5). The phrase reoccurs in a similar context at I, v. 8. In both places the 
easiest way of satisfying demands of syntax is to translate: ‘by this wise device’. prajfid 
can itself, however, mean “device”, and I prefer to accept it as simply a synonym in apposi- 
tion, as does also Bh (quoted above). 


47 


L CC-0. Agamnigam bb HRA hd GA DAB TOR Ahdigarh 


listen to this tantra, the essence of Wisdom and Means, which now is pro- 
claimed by me. (8) Its proficiency is known to be manifold; it teaches the 
gazes,' how to conjure forth and the language of secret signs, how to 
petrify, how to drive away, how to bewitch an army into rigidity. (9) It is 
the means of producing and maintaining the yoginis in accordance with 
right method; it is proficient in knowledge, both absolute and relative? ; 


in 
the matter of the due order of appearance of the divinities. (10) But in the 


first place it is the one means of producing Heruka, and it is by such pro- 
duction? that men are released, O Vajragarbha of great compassion, 
(11) They are bound by the bonds of existence and released by knowledge 
of them. O wise one, you should conceive of existence in knowledge of its 
non-existence, and likewise you should conceive of Heruka in knowledge 
of his non-existence. (12) Great knowledge abides in the body, free of all 
falsification, but although it pervades all things and exists in the body, it is 
not in the body that it arises.’ 


c. (13) Then Vajragarbha said: ‘How many veins are there, Lord, in the 


! Concerning ‘gazes’ see Part I, ch. xi a. 
2 ‘knowledge absolute and relative’-—jndnavijfidna. K, however, explains ñana as 
astrology, &c.' and vij/iána as ‘attendance on one’s master’ (p. ros, 1. 28).* R likewise: 
ye Ses ni skar mahi rtsis la sogs paho | rnam Ses ni slob dpon gyi las thams cad la mkhas paho | 
(xvii. 255a 7). Bh interprets jana as the knowledge that produces perfection (siddhi) and 
vijfiána as knowledge of the fivefold enlightenment (see Introduction p. 29) ye ses ni drios 
grub gtan la dbab pahi ye Ses so | rnam Ses ni mnon par byar chub pa rnam pa lnahi ye ses so | 
(xv. 2015 4-5). S has the most satisfactory solution: ye ses ni de kho na ñid | rnam par ses 
pa ni rDo rje ma la sogs paho | 'jfíána means the absolute; vijiíana means Vajrå and her 

companions’ (xv. 143b 1) made clear by V: 


de las dnos po skye ba ni | 
gzun dan hdzin pahi dbye ba las] 
yul dan dban pohi sbyor ba yis | 
rnam Ses rnams kyi so soho | 
dnos pohi hchin bas hchin bar hgyur | 
door pohi hchin ba de yis rnam par ses pa rnams dan mig la sogs pa rnams hchin bar byed dol 
de yons su Ses pas grol bar byed | 2 
yul dan dban po rnams hgog pas de yons su ses pas ses paho | ‘From that (the sound HUM) 
phenomenal existence arises from the distinction between subject and object (grahyagra- 
haka), and from the association of the sense organs and their spheres each different kind 
of consciousness (vijfidna) arises, and one is bound by the bond of phenomenal existence. 
That bond of phenomenal existence binds the different types of consciousness and the 
eye and the rest. By the knowing of this release is achieved. When spheres and senses 
cease to function, and one experiences it, that is absolute knowledge ( jfanay (xv. 
12a 5-6). E 
The 2m terms refer here (Slokas 9 and ro) to the twofold process, whereby the divinities 
are produced in due order (utpattikrama) and then reabsorbed (sampannakrama). Vijnäna 
refers to the process of emanation, and therefore S (quoted above) refers it to Vajrä "G 
the other divinities. See W. Kirfel, Die buddhistischen Termini jñana und vijfíana, ZDM! 
2, 1928, pp. 494-8. L S 
å 3 T “production”, for the producing of Heruka or Hevajra and Då 
cycle represents existence (bhåva), which is conceived of as being produced just in 
same way. 


* Since all such references to the text of K can apply only to vol. II, this volume 


reference will from now on be omitted. 


48 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
THE BODY OF HEVAJRA Li 


vajra-body? "There are thirty-two veins’, he replied, ‘thirty-two that bear 
bodhicitta, and flow into the place of great bliss. Among these three veins 
are the chief, Lalana, Rasana, and Avadhüti. (14) Lalanå has the nature of 
Wisdom and Rasand consists in the Means, and Avadhati is in the middle, 
free from the notions of subject and object. 

(15) Lalanå is the bearer of Aksobhya and Rasanå the bearer of blood, 
and she who is known as the bearer of both! is famed as Avadhati.” 

(16-19) Their names are: Indivisible, Subtly-formed, Divine, Left- 
handed, Dwarfish, Tortoise-born, Anchoress, Consecration, Fault, 
Pervader, Mother, Savage, Freshener, Heat, Lalana, Avadhüti, Rasana, 
Bent, Black, Beautiful, Common, Producer of the Cause, Unattached, 
Affectionate, Perfected, Purifying, High-minded, Threefold, Lustful, 
Homely, Impetuous, Daughter of Death. 

(19) Vajragarbha again asked: "Of what kind, Lord, are these thirty-two 
veins?’ (20) The Lord replied: “They are all a permutation of the triple 
nature and essentially free of the notions of subject and object, but on the 
other hand when they are used as means, they are conceived as possessing 
the characteristics of phenomenal things.' (21) Now are listed the com- 
ponents of the internal mandala:? 

ÄLI—sun—wisdom (which represent the left vein); 

KALI—moon—means (which represent the right vein); 


Navel Heart Throat Head 
(22) E VAM MA YA 
Locana Måmaki Pånduradevi Tara 4 goddesses 
(23) nirmåna dharma sambhoga mahåsukha 4 cakras 
(body) (mind) (speech) (unity of body, speech, 
and mind) 
lotus of: 
64 petals 8 petals 16 petals 32 petals 
(24) variety development consummation blank 4 moments 
(25) worship adoration propitiation fulfilment 4 requisites 
(26) sorrow its origination its cessation the way 4 truths 
(27) self spell divinity knowledge 4 realities 
(28) joy perfect joy joy of cessation innate joy 4 joys 
(29) sthavira sarvāstivāda —samvidi mahásangika 4 schools 


(30) Then there are ALI, KALI, sun, and moon? the 16 phases, the 64 periods, 
the 32 hours and the 4 watches. So everything goes in fours. 


I According to the text “bearer of Wisdom and Moon', but these terms have the same 
significance as blood and aksobhya, and I avoid the confusion of too many synonymous 
terms. Aksobhya — bodhicitta (see p. 25). 

2 “internal mandala’ = samvara. See pp. 35-39 and Glossary p. 138. E 

3 These four, ALI, &c. are listed for the second time, for they not only form sets of pairs 
with lalanå | rasanå, prajfiå | upaya, but can also be arranged to fit into the four circles. 
So V arranges them: dpral bar ALIho | mgrin par KÄLIho | shin khar $es rab bo | lte bar 
thabs so | (xv. 18b 3). 


B 6309 49 E 


Li CC-0. Agamnigant Dila BESS Foundation, Chandigarh 


(31) Candali blazes up at the navel. 
She burns the Five Buddhas. 
She burns Locanå and the others. 
HAM is burnt and the Moon melts.! 


HAM 


Tara Locanå 


Amitåbha Cangåli Vairocana 
AKSOBHYA 


Påndurå Mamaki 
Ratnasambhava 


CHAPTER il. MANTRAS 


a. We shall expound the chapter on mantras. 


(1) the mantra that accompanies offerings to all the spirits: 
om A—origin of all things for they are essentially non-arisen—oM AH 
HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
(2) the seed of the buddhas: 
BUM AM JRIM KHAM HUM.’ 
(3) the heart of Hevajra: 
OM DEVA PICU VAJRA HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
(4) the basis of all mantras: 
they have om at the beginning, svAHA at the end and are adorned with 
HUM PHAT. 
(5) the mantra for causing a city to tremble. 
OM A KA CA TA TA PA YA SA SVAHA. 
(6) the seed of the yoginis: 
AAIIUÜUÜRRLILE AIO AU AM AH. 
I K deals with this verse very fully (p. 110). See the Introduction, pp. 36-37- 
2 The correct reading of this set of syllables is confirmed by V who quotes the 
BUM AM JRIM KHAM HÜM (xv. 26a 7). "They also reappear in the text below (12) to (16) 


and on p. 55 fn. (quotation from K). The readings of all the other mantras in this chapter 
are confirmed by chapter 9 of Part II, where they are all spelled letter by letter. 


m as 


50 


TE EE 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
MANTRAS I. ii 


(7) the mantra of the two-armed form: 
OM TRAILOKYAKSEPA HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
(8) of the four-armed form: 
OM JVALAJVALABHYO HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
(9) of the six-armed form: 
OM KITI KITI VAJRA HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
(10) the mantra for the empowering of body, speech, and mind: 
OM AH HUM 
(11) the mantra for purifying the site: 
OM RAKSA RAKSA HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
(12) Petrifying: OM HUM SVAHA. 
(13) Subduing: OM AM SVAHA. 
(14) Driving away: OM KHAM SVAHA. 
(15) Causing hatred: OM JRIM SVAHA. 
(16) Bewitching: OM BUM SVAHA. 
(17) Conjuring forth: OM HUM SVAHA. 
(18) Slaying: OM GHUH SVAHA. 
(19) OM KURU KULLE HRI SVAHA.! 


(20) Rain-producing ritual: OM AH PHUH. Intoning these syllables, make 
an image of a snake, wash it with the five ambrosias,* honour it with blue 
lotuses,3 smear it with n@ga-subduing juice,* smear its head with ichor, and 
having made a pot by placing two dishes together, lay the snake inside. 
Then fill the pot with milk from a black cow and wrap it in a woven cloth 
that has been cut by a dark-skinned girl. Then in the north-west make a 
small pool, and place the snake in it. At its edge lay out the mandala. 
Black colouring is obtained from charcoal of the cemetery, white from 
ground human bones, yellow from green lac, red from cemetery-bricks, 
green from caurya leaves and ground human bones, and dark blue from 
ground human bones and cemetery charcoal. With these colours lay out 
the mandala, measuring it with a cemetery threads three cubits, three 
inches in size. In the centre draw Hevajra in the act of trampling on a 
snake; he has eight faces, four feet, sixteen arms, and twenty-four eyes. 


I This is the mantra of the goddess Kurukulla. See I. xi, c. 

2 The five ambrosias are the five products of the cow, K (p. 111, I. 18); according to 
V (xv. 35b 2) milk, curds, butter, sugar, honey. 

3 So explained by V: utpala sion pa (xv. 355 2). ; s E a : 

+ Någa-subduing juice is unexplained by the commentaries. Tib assists only in defining 
ndga as snake, which is in any case to be expected in the context. E 

5 According to V: a thread made from the guts of a corpse: dur khrod kyi sran bus fes 
pa rohi rgyus pa rnams kyis byas pahi sran bus—(xv. 35b 6). 


51 


I. ii CC-0. Agamnigam DE) Hrigsd aibi FourdåtldnI GhAndigarh 


Then the master, his mind resolved in inmost wrath, should utter this 
mantra in that lonely spot: 


OM GHURU GHURU GHUDU GHUDU GHATA GHATA GHOTAYA GHOTAYA! 
O Lord of the någas who causes the snakes to tremble, He-he Ru-ry 
Ka—those någas who have gone to the seven lower realms, drag them 
forth, drag them forth, rain, rain, thunder, thunder—PHUH PHUH 
PHUH PHUH PHUH PHUH PHUH PHUH HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVÄHA, 


Jf it does not rain now, one should recite this mantra backwards. If then 
they do not produce rain, their heads will burst like bunches of bread-fruit. 


(21) The cloud-rending ritual: 


"Taking one's seat on a cemetery-shroud, one rends them by reciting this 
mantra: 


oM noble one to whom the cemetery is dear—HÜM HUM HOM PHAT 
SVAHA. 

(22) The ritual of the vajra-knife: 

I tell of the chalk-ritual for destroying an enemy army. Having pounded 


the chalk, mix it with the five ambrosias and kuthårachinna* and make a 
small ball. The mantra is: 
OM vajra-knife—o Hevajra HUM HUM HUM PHAT. 

For the gaining of siddhi he should recite it ten million times, and for the 
above-mentioned practice a hundred thousand times. He should then 
wrap round the neck of the jar upon which the ritual is being practised, 
and having wrapped it round, he should break it off. All the enemies will 
become headless.5 


I The whole of this mantra is translatable, although of course at the expense of the 
sonorous effect, whence their power was derived: ghur = roar, ghud = defend, ghat = 
strive, ghut = strike. T 

2 S asserts that the heads of the någas will burst (xv. 1455 7)—not that of the officiant 
in the event of his failure! V implies so (xv. 365 6). Ch clearly states so: "Then if it does 
not rain, it will cause the heads of those någa-kings to burst into seven pieces like a bunch 
of arjaka’ (589a 27). ‘Arjaka’ is explained by K (p. 111, 1. 20) and by Bh (xv. 2094 7) 
as ‘bread-fruit’ (panasa). According to V. it is like black mallika, has a white stalk, and 
bursts at the light of the sun—ardzaka zes pa dbyug pa dkar po can mallika nag po hdra 
ba ste—fi mahi hod kyis hgas pa (xv. 36b 6). S says likewise that it has a white stalk and 
that its ears burst at the contact of the sun—ardzaka es pa ni sdon bu dkar po ste deli she 
ma ji lta bar es pa de la sii mas reg pas skad cig gis rnam pa du mar hgas par hgyur ba de 
bzin du klu rnams kyi mgo bo hgas so (xv. 1450 7). 

3 V gives a fuller account which gives some more point to this particular rite. When the 
rain becomes excessive, he says, place the snake in a pot which has been filled with s 
from the cemetery, and seated on a shroud, &c.—gari gi tshe char ches par gyur na deli m 
mthah yas de dur khrod kyi thal bas kham phor bkan bar bzag par bya ste | snags pas 
khrod kyi ras la ñe bar hdug nas, &c. (xv. 37a 2). 

The invocation itself seems to be clearly addressed to Siva. ass 

4 Tibetan versions either transliterate kuthårachinna or translate without On ae 
sta res gcod pa ‘cut withan axe’. Ch glosses with ts’ao ‘grass’ (589c 3). The sense of the 25) 
remains uncertain; perhaps the flesh of someone slain by an axe (cf. $astrahata, 1. vil: 


Š ÆSER and 
5 This ‘knife’ ritual is confusedly explained. A more logical account 1s given by 


52 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
MANTRAS I. ii 


(23) The ritual for the destruction of gods: 


One who wishes to destroy the gods must perform the ritual upon an 
axe-shaped mark (tzlaka). A palåsa seed,” plucked under Pusya? and mixed 
with Rutharachinna, he should pound together with sukra under a solar 
eclipse. Having pounded it, he should form it into an axe. Trampling it 
beneath the feet he should recite the mantra: 


OM vajra-axe—cleave cleave HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
Reciting it ten million times, he should make homage to the tilaka, and the 
one to whom it clings will burst.+ 


(24) The burning ritual: 


One should write the name of an enemy on an arka-leaf with the juice 
of poisonous mustard and burning citraka, and throwing it in a fire chaff, 
recite this mantra ten thousand times: 


om Hevajra—burn burn this enemy BHRUM HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
By reciting it ten thousand times one succeeds. 


(25) The vomiting ritual: 


If one wishes to cause the vomiting forth of intoxicants, one should 
imagine the syllable MAM on the navel of the patient. One imagines the 
syllable MAM becoming a belly full of wine. He is seen as vomiting, and he 
vomits the wine. 


S. Two uses of this mantra are given, firstly for converting living beings who are hard to 
convert. For this ten million recitations are required accompanied by a million offerings 
(xv. 37a 3-4). Secondly it is used for this enemy-destroying rite, when a hundred thousands 
suffice. S's account of this follows: 

Grind the chalk together with the five nectars and with kuthårachinna make it into a 
pellet the size of an eye. Then place it in Heruka's mouth and recite the mantra until the 
image ejects it from its mouth and gives it back to the officiant; if in one session he makes 
a hundred thousand recitations, the rite will succeed. If he then makes a mark with the 
chalk on the neck of a spherical vessel, that very thing will appear on the necks of the 
victim and his followers. "He then exercises faith so that these are severed—bdud rtsi Ina 
dan rdo rgyus btags te | sta res gcod pa dan lhan cig tu mig tsam gyi ri lu byas te Herukahi 
khar beug ste snags bzlas nas ji srid du sku gzugs ran gi kha nas ran byun ste sgrub pa po la 
ma btad pa de srid du sten gcig la hbum bzlas pas grub par hgyur te | rdo rgyus de" ril pa 
spyi blugs kyi mgrin pa la ri mo bris na bsgrub bya hkhor dan bcas pahi mgrin pa la de hid 
snan bar hgyur te | hdi ni hphral du yid ches par byed paho | 

1 The gods are the gods of the tirthikas (xv. 37a 7). 

? brahmabija is explained as paläsa by most of the commentators (R. xvii. 2675 7 
S. xv. 146a 5, V. xv. 37b 1); palåsa according to Apte is Butea Frondosa. 

3 ‘plucked under Pusya’, so interpreted by R rgyal la blaris pa (xvii. 268a 1). 

+ The manuscripts are in agreement, but do not make for coherent translation. T, how- 
ever: bye la bzlas la thig le byas te gan la phyag byas la de hgas so = kotim japya tilakam 
kuryád yam ca vandate sa sphutati. V and S confirm this. According to V, ‘having pul- 
verised (the mixture), he must make a tilaka of the form of an axe, and by doing that, the 
god to whom the officiant bows, will burst'—de bdar bas dgra stahi rnam pahi thig le byaho | 
byas pa des Iha gan la sgrub pa pos phyag htshal ba de[s] hgas par byed paho. 


+ It would be preferable to read here: rdo rgyus des. 


53 


I. ii CC-0. Agamnigam Digits) RiesáydtipiRzouridatisrTObandigarh 


(26) The ritual for gaining mastery of a young woman: 

One who wishes to quell a young woman should go on the eighth day of 
asoka to the foot of an asoka-tree, and donning a red garment, he should 
cat madana-fruit. Then making a tilaka with kåmåcika-juice, he should 
recite this mantra: 


OM HRI may she come into my power SVÄHA.! 
By reciting it ten thousand times one gets her to come. 


(27) The ritual for holding sun and moon: 


One who wishes to have power over sun and moon, should make a sun 
and moon of ground-rice, throw them into vajra-water, and recite this 
mantra: 


OM sun and moon, move not, move not; stay, stay—o Hevajra HUM 
HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA. 
One should recite it seventy million times and they will stand still so that 
sun and moon will be indistinguishable day and night. 


(28) The ritual for seeking a thing which is lost: 


In order to gain success in this one should enchant at night time the eye 
of a maiden with this formula, repeating it 108 times: 


OM NAGRA NAGRA, 

honouring her with the five kinds of offerings, flowers, incense, lamps and 
so on. Then at night on the eighth or fourteenth day having put ready jars 
containing sesame oil and lac,” one should enchant them with this formula 
repeated 108 times. Next smearing his big toe with the enchanted lac, and 
washing it with the sesame oil, he should show it to the girl, saying: 
Speak! Who has removed this thing of mine?’ Then she will reply: ‘Such 
or such a one.’ This is Vajra-astrology. 


(29) om VEDUYA VEDUYA— pronounce this and an elephant flees. 

(30) OM MARMMÄ MARMMA—pronounce this and a tiger flees. 

(31) OM TELIYÄ TELIYÄ—pronounce this and a rhinoceros flees. 

(32) ILI MILI PHUH PHUH—pronounce this and a serpent flees. 

(33) Show your hand with a gesture which indicates protection of wealth 
and power of subduing, and a dog will flee. 


b. (34) It is in association with Vajra, Gauri, Vari, Vajradakini, Nairatmika, 


I This is the mantra of Kurukulla as given at I. i. 19, with the words amuki me 
vatibhavatu added. It is correctly quoted by V: OM KURUKULLE HRIH amukam me vasibha- 
vatu SVAHA (xv. 38a 2). Our text distorts the word-order. 

2 Translated freely, but on the basis of V : ‘on the eighth or fourteenth 
morning having put down the jars, place on them branches of a sappy tree (?), putte 
the sesame oil in the copper jar and the lac in the other’—beu bši paham brøyad på la P: : 
drohi dus su bum pa bšag nas dehi sten du | ho ma can gyi sin gi yal ga bkod cin hbru mar za 
mahi snod du béag ste | rgya skyegs kyi khu ba snod gšan duho | (xv. 38a 7). 


day in the early 


54 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
MANTRAS I. ñ 


Bhücari, and Khecari, that the yogin practises the rites of petrifying and 
so on. 


E These rites and their mantras have been listed above in this chapter. The following 
quotation is from K (pp. 111-13): "This refers to the practice of mantras. (i) One should 
mentally produce Vajrå, who becoming manifest from the syllable AM, is white in colour, 
treads upon a corpse and holds knife, skull, and khatvårga. One should worship her as 
prescribed, repeating the mantra: OM HUM SVAHA one hundred thousand times. Then one 
should write in chalk the syllable mam on a dish of unbaked (clay). In the middle of it one 
should put the mantra: om HUM Make Devadatta stay HUM SVAHA. Then one must fill it 
with ashes from a funeral pyre, place another unbaked dish on top to serve as a cover, and 
on the top of this draw the square mandala of Mahendra. Then place it on the ground, 
put your foot on it and repeat the ‘staying-still’ mantra 108 or one thousand times: oM 
HUM Make Devadatta stay HUM SVAHA. Then he will be made to stay. 

(ii) One should mentally produce yellow Gauri, who is of a saffron-reddish colour and 
holds a noose and a hook. Then meditating upon the syllable am of colour like unto a 
bandhiika-flower (as situated) in your own heart, one should worship her as prescribed, 
repeating the mantra: OM AM SVAHA. Then you should imagine the woman who is to be 
subdued, in front of you, red in colour, naked and with dishevelled hair, and with the 
syllable am at her pudenda. If it is a man, it will be at his heart. The syllable Am is like 
fire and one must imagine it blazing. Then repeating the mantra: oM AM GAURI Lead her 
into my power AM SVAHA, one must imagine her bound with the noose round the neck and 
pierced at the heart with the hook, and drawn near, and thrown at your feet. Then she 
will be certainly subdued. 

(iii) One should mentally produce Variyogini, who becoming manifest from the syllable 1, 
is dark blue in colour, holds a mirror and is pointing. Then one must imagine the syllable 
KHAM on a solar disk at the heart, and worship her as prescribed, repeating the mantra: 
OM KHAM SVAHA. Then one must imagine the fellow against whom the rite is to be prac- 
tised, as naked and with dishevelled hair, dark blue in colour and mounted on a wild boar. 
He is facing right and in the act of fleeing while being beaten with the cruel blows of 
clubs. For a week one must repeat the mantra: OM KHAM VARIYOGINI Chase away this 
fellow KHAM HUM HUM HUM PHAT, and he will certainly be chased away. 

(iv) One should meditate on Vajrayogini with the syllable u and imagine the syllable 
JRIM dark blue in colour on a solar disk at the heart. One should worship her as prescribed, 
repeating the mantra: OM JRIM SVAHA one hundred thousand times. Then one must 
imagine the two against whom the rite is to be practised, as mounted on a horse and a 
buffalo and as fighting together. One repeats the mantra: OM JRIM VAJRADAKINI Cause 
Devadatta and Jfiánadatta to hate one another JRIM HUM HUM HUM PHAT, and it will cer- 
tainly cause them to hate one another. 

(v) One must imagine Nairåtmyå, who becomes manifest from the syllable AM. Her 
appearance is fearful and she holds the skull, khatvåriga and knife. On a solar disk at the 
heart one sees the syllable BUM, dark blue in colour, and having performed the prescribed 
worship, one should draw a six-sided mandalaina brahma-skull with a mixture of poisonous 
mustard and blood. In the six corners one must inscribe the syllable HUM and in the centre 
om BUM Burn him Hom. For any intended misfortunes one should write his name and 
burn it in a chaff-fire (passage corrupt). In fierce rites one should always end the ziantra 
with: HÜM HUM HÜM PHAT. 5 

(vi) One should mentally produce Khecari, who becomes manifest from her own seed- 
syllable and is standing on a corpse. Then one should imagine the victim blazing on the 
air and fire-mandalas. One draws forth from one’s heart a red ray of light, which one must 
cause to enter the victim by way of the right nostril, and having pierced her heart, one 
must extract the ray by way of the left nostril. Then drawing it with the breath into one’s 
own heart, one recites the mantra. She will certainly be drawn to one’s presence. 

(vii) One should meditate on Bhücari, who becomes manifest from her seed-syllable and 
is dark-blue in colour. Then having performed worship as before, one should imagine a 
burning vajra, which becomes manifest from the syllable GHUH and is entering the rear of 
the victim who is face-downwards. One should recite the mantra: OM GHUH BHÜCARI 
Slay him nüw HOM HUM PHAT and he will certainly die. See also notes to text 


of K, p. 112. 
55 


I. iii CC-0. Agamnigam Digital PESSAR Aouad abort Bråndigarh 


CHAPTER iii. HEVAJRA AND HIS TROUPE 


(1) We shall expound the chapter on the divinities. First! one should 
produce thought of love, secondly that of compassion, thirdly that of joy, 
and last of all that of impassibility. 

(2) Then again: first the realization of the void, secondly the seed in 
which all is concentrated, thirdly the physical manifestation, and fourthly 
one should implant the syllable.” 


I ‘First’ in the sense of first of this set of four, for ‘first of all, having settled in a pleasant 
place and adopted a comfortable posture, one should pronounce three times: om RAKSA 
RAKSA HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA in order to protect the site, oneself, and the performance, 
Then one should worship Bhagavan whose form should be present on a picture or some 
other representation, with one’s own mantra, and having intoned the dedication, one 
should make a confession of wrong done, an act of gladness at merit gained, and perform 
the triple-refuge. Then having produced the thought of enlightenment, after that one 
should first practise the meditation of love’ (K: p. 113, ll. 14-19). These preliminaries are 
given in a similar form by most of the other commentators. Bh adds: ‘after the taking of 
the triple-refuge, one should make an offering of oneself, which will be mentioned below 
(see I, vi. 19); having made a gift of one’s own self, one should make the vow which is 
the thought of enlightenment: ‘May I, having become Heruka, make all beings without 
exception into Heruka too.’ This also is mentioned later: 'Heruka is a transformation of 
samsåra, the foremost of the saviours of the world’; then again later: ‘I will save the 
world’—gsum la skyabs su hdro bahi rjes la bdag ñid dbul bar byaho | žes paho | de ñid 
Ryan hchad par hgyur te | lus kyi sbyin pa byin nas su | žes paho | de nas smon pa byan chub 
kyi sems bskyed par bya ste | bdag ñid dpal Herukar gyur nas hgro ba ma lus pa rnams kyaù 
dpal Herukar byaho | žes paho | de fiid kyan hchad par hgyur te | hkhor bahi rnam pa 
Heruka | hgro ba sgrol bahi gtso bo mid ces paho | des na bdag gis hgro ba sgrol bar byaho | 
Zes pa dan—(xv. 210a 2-4). 

I have quoted here at some length in order to show how the intention of the ritual that 
follows, remains that of the traditional bodhisattva. The intention is the same; the tech- 
nique has changed or developed. ‘Thought of enlightenment’ remains in its traditional 
sense. The four brahma-vihåra are very old property of Indian Yoga and probably belong 
to the earliest Buddhist practice (Fr. Heiler, Buddhistische Versenkung, p. 47 and notes 
294 and 295). They lose nothing of their moral force in their present setting. See K: 
P. 113, 1. 19; or N, who emphasizes still more their benevolent character: ‘Love is the 
directing of the thoughts, so that one's relatives and friends, the meanest of them, one's 
enemies and those who are strangers shall gain happiness and those things that are good 
for them ; compassion is the will to extricate all beings, even at the cost of one's own life, 
from suffering and the cause of suffering; joy is rejoicing at that which is of benefit to 
others; impassibility is indifference to the harm caused one by others’—gien bses tha mal 
pa dan døra bo rnams la pha rol po la dan bde ba fie bar sgrub par sems pa ni byams paho | 
gfüs pa shin rje Zes pa la sdug bsnal dan | sdug bsnal gyi rgyu las sems can rnams thams ca. 
ran gi lus dan srog gis kyan hdon par hdod pa ni sñiñ rjeho | . . . gáan la phan på la rans 
pa ni dgah baho | . . . gáan gyi skyon la btan sñoms pa ni kun gyi lhag mar btan sfioms so 265 
paho (xvii. 92a 7-b 2). One should note, however, that this whole process isa meditative 
exercise, forming part of the yogin’s own purificatory ritual, and subjective in its application: 
R gives the reasons for its use: ‘for the purpose of rendering firm the thought of enlighten- 
ment and all the other roots of virtue, in order to allow no occasion for harmful thoughts 
or tormentings and in order to protect oneself from the sufferings of an evil future, from 
Mara and from the Hinayåna; they are the first branch (of training) for yogins and are 
common to all yogins’—byan chub kyi sems la sogs pahi dge bahi rtsa ba thams cad brtan P 
bya bahi don dan | gnod sems dan rnam par htshe ba la sogs pahi skabs mi dbye bahi phyir aa ] 
nan hgrohi sdug bsnal dan bdud dan theg pa dman pa las bdag fid bsrun bahi don du hdi [ S 
dag ni rnal hbyor ba rnams kyi dan pohi yan lag te rnal hbyor pa thams cad kyi thun mon 11 
(xvii. 268b 4-5). se 

2 This set of four form the body of primary yoga, and are called the fourfold I is 
rnal hbyor dan pohi lus ni rdo rje b£i ste (R: xvii. 268b 5). See also GS p. 163 where 


56 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
HEVAJRA AND HIS TROUPE I. in 


(3) One should imagine before one a solar disk arising from the syllable 
RAM and at its centre a crossed-vajra which has emerged from the syllable 
HÖM. As produced from this vajra one should imagine a balustrade and 
canopy.! 

(4) (Then within the balustrade) one should first imagine a corpse which 
represents the whole of existence, and the yogin, seated thereupon, should 
conceive himself of the nature of Heruka (5). In his own heart he imagines 
the syllable ram and a solar disk arising from it, and then upon that the 
syllable Höm, the nature of which is Wisdom and Means. (6) It is dark in 
colour and exceedingly fearful this syllable nO which has emerged from 
a vajra, and one should conceive of the essence of this HUM as abiding in 
the heart of the vajra. (7) Then he should envisage the syllable HUM as 
transformed into (Heruka) whose nature is wrath. This Vajra-Born is 


sloka: prathamam sünyatábodhim, &c. appears in almost identical form, and is referred to 
as the vajracatuska. As for the interpretation of these four stages, the commentaries are in 
complete agreement on the meaning of the first three. A variation of interpretation for 
the fourth is given by Bh and K2, both, however, fanciful and without direct relevance to 
the preceding three. We follow K’s commentary : “What is this realization of the Void, you 
ask. As all things have the mind for their support, everything is just thought, and with 
external things thus non-existent, it reflects sense-objects through error. It is like a 
dream, they say. Furthermore, as mind consists of this reflective quality, its nature is 
neither one nor many. It should be conceived of as free from false appearances and as 
consisting of pure brilliance. Now in that brilliance one duly envisages upon a solar disk 
and so on the divine seed encircled with rays; from that seed by the endless creation of the 
families of the yoginis the cause of the world is prospered, so in that seed it is concentrated. 
By means of that seed there comes about the physical manifestation of the god in the semi- 
paryaiika position or in a dancing posture, mounted upon a corpse upon a solar disk which 
rests upon the pericarp of a many-petalled lotus. This is the physical manifestation. 
Fourthly the implanting of the syllable. In one’s own heart one should imagine the seed- 
syllable set on a mandala.’ (IX: p. 113, ll. 114 ff). R says exactly the same in substance. For 
the second stage he says: ‘from that seed Vajra, Gauri, and their companions pour forth 
endlessly, and because they are concentrated in that seed, it is called seed-concentration 
and that one should meditate upon’ (xvii. 269a 3); and for the fourth: ‘in one’s heart one 
should imagine a solar disk, and upon that is placed the syllable of the seed. One should 
concentrate upon one’s own thought as perfected in the nature of that thought which is 
expressed in the form of one’s own divinity who arises from the syllable of that seed resting 
on the solar disk in the heart’ —rañ gi sfiin gar ñi mahi dkyil hkhor dmigs te | dehi sten du 
sa bon gyi yi ge bkod la | shin gahi ñi ma la gnas pahi sa bon gyi yi ge las ran gi Ihahi rnam 
pahi sems kyi ran båin gyis rdzogs pa ran gi sems bsgom par bya (xvii. 269a 4-5). The four 
stages are clear: first the concept of the void, then the seed, then the whole phenomenal 
process, idealized in the circle of divinities, and lastly this whole process envisaged with- 
in one’s own heart, so that oneself becomes the centre and is consubstantiated with the 
whole. 

As for the grammatical structure of this last phrase, nyåsam may be interpreted as 
nyasyet. There are other examples of the verbal noun with dependent accusative. 
See I. vi. 4. Tib has dgod, a future root, and this usually represents a Sanskrit 
optative. 

I For a fuller account of these preliminary protective arrangements see K (p. 114, 
ll. 8-12). ‘One conceives of a solar disk sprung from the syllable RAM which is red like 
fire, and upon it a crossed-vajra which has emerged from a dark-blue HUM. Ona horizontal 
plane in relation to these one should imagine a vajra-balustrade, above them a vajra- 
canopy, and below them a floor of this adamantine material. Outside there should be a 
blazing vajra-fire. This is the meaning of the sloka. Then he should empower it by 


reciting the mantra: OM RAKSA RAKSA HUM HUM HUM PHAT SVAHA.” 


57 


I. iii CC-0. Agamnigam BiA PRAAN KiRahdigarh 


exceedingly dark like a blue lotus in colour, or one may conceive of him a 
dark blue and red—as one pleases.! Å 


(8) Envisaging in the sky that Lord, who is vajra-born and of great com- 
passion, one should worship him in the company of eight goddesses who 
are wearing all their adornments. (9) Gauri holds the moon, Cauri the sun- 
vessel, Vetali holds water, Ghasmari medicament, (ro) Pukkasi holds a 
vajra, Savari the ambrosia, and Candali sounds a drum. By these the Lord 
is worshipped, with Dombi clinging to his neck and impassioned by great 
passion. 

(11) There is Moon and Sun and betwixt them the Seed. This last is 
that Being, ’tis taught, whose nature is Joy Supreme. (12) Forms like to 
his in brilliance shoot forth and cover the expanse of the sky. Drawing 
them together he induces them into his own heart, and the yogin becomes 
the Wrathful One himself.” 

(13) Dark blue and like the sun in colour with reddened and extended 
eyes, his yellow hair twisted upwards, and adorned with the five symbolic 
adornments, (14) the circlet, the ear-rings and necklace, the bracelets and 
belt. These five symbols are well known for the purificatory power‘ of 
the Five Buddhas. (15) He has the form of a sixteen-year-old youth and is 


1 ‘In accordance with one’s own power of perception, whichever colour is agreeable, as 
such one should conceive him.’ (K: p. 114, 1.23). Presumably the idea of aruna is derived 
from the solar disk, but it is difficult to conceive of the two colours at once, which is cer- 
tainly intended. So B: ‘the body which is the essence of Heruka is the colour of the dawn 
mixed with dark-blue'—szo ba dan hdres pa skya rens kyi mdans can gi Herukahi bdag ñd 
kyi sku ni | sno dan ñi mahi mdog ces pa (xv. 213a 7). When nilårunåbha recurs in verse 13, 
he says: ‘as for this colour which is blue and like that of the sun, mortals (mthah can) 
are not able to distinguish them. So he is blue and he is the colour of the sun, and there- 
fore it is said he is blue and of colour like the sun’—svio dan ñi ma mtshuns pahi mdog nt 
mthah can gyis rnam par dbye ba(r) med paho | des ni sho ba yan yin la ñi ma yan yin pas na 
sno dan ñi ma mtshurs pahi mdog go (xv. 214b1). See I-T iii, part 2, frontispiece. 

2 The process here described is again ‘the Body of Yoga’ (yogasarira), which we discussed 
above in the note on pp. 56-7. In this second case, however, there is a fivefold 
distinction, each of the five stages being equated with one of the five wisdoms. Thus R 
(xvii. 270b 1 ff.), D (xvii. 254b 6 ff.) and K (p. 114, ll. 32 ff.) all interpret. K quotes the text 
I. viii. 6-7 q.v. The only difficulty consists in candralikalimarttanda. There are listed two 
pairs of synonyms, åli/kåli and sun/moon(see Introduction, pp. 26-7), the masculine element 
of one pair united with the feminine of the other: moon (m) and ali (f), kali (m), and sun (f). 
The context requires no other significance in the repetition than that achieved in any other 
language by similar use of repetition, and the efforts of the commentators, K amongst 
them, to explain moon as a transformation of ali, and kali as transformed into sun, are 
really superfluous. Compare however I. viii. 5-6. Sattva is defined as Vajrasattva by 
S(xv. 148 5) and as Vajradhara by K. He is the supreme being under any of his Dames 
and both commentators go on to define svadehåbhå as shining manifestations ac : åbhåh, 5: 
hod zer—light rays) like Hevajra in form. Of the process whereby manifestations of this 
kind fill all the points of the compass we have already spoken (see Introduction, P- 33): 

3 *Eyes red and extended like a bandu, such are red bandu-eyes; eyes round, red chi 
extended, this is the meaning’—bandu ltar rgyas sin dmar bahi spyan ni bandu dmar 
spyan de füd de | zlum din dmar la rgyas pahi spyan es pahi don to (xv. 214b 4-5) Ch: ni 
eyes are red bandhuka (-flowers)'—590b 6. 

* See reference to visuddhi, p. 29. Also I. vi. 11-12. 


58 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
HEVAJRA AND HIS TROUPE I. Hi 


clad in a tiger-skin. His gaze is wrathful. In his left hand he holds a vajra- 
skull, and a khatvåriga likewise in his left, while in his right is a vajra of 
dark hue. In his essence he is the enunciation of the sound HUM. 

(16) This Lord plays in the cemetery surrounded by his eight yoginis. 
‘In the cemetery’, we say, because here we have a play on words, for 
$vasiti means ‘he breathes’ and savavasati means ‘resting-place of 
corpses’. 

(17) The four-armed form symbolizes the destruction of the four Maras. 
He is born of the syllable HUM and his form and colour are as previously 
described. In the first left-hand he holds a human skull filled with the blood 
of gods and titans; in the first right hand he holds a vajra; with the remain- 
ing two hands he embraces Prajfid. She is Vajravarahi and is similar in 
form to her lord. 

(18) The six-armed form has three faces, the left red, the right the colour 
of the rising moon, and the foremost one dark blue. The six arms symbolize 
the six Perfections; in the first left hand he holds a trident, in the first right 
hand a vajra, in the second left hand a bell and in the second right hand 
a knife. With his remaining two hands he clasps Vajrasrnkhala. She too is 
like her lord. In her right and left hands she holds knife and skull. 

He treads upon a corpse who represents the threefold world. 


CHAPTER iv. SELF-CONSECRATION 


(1) We shall expound the chapter on divine consecration. Imagine that 
from the seed! in your own heart you lead forth a ray, which is shining 
black in colour and of the form of a hook, and by means of this you draw in 
the buddhas who are stationed throughout the threefold world. Having 
worshipped them with the eight goddesses,” you should beseech them 
saying: ‘om may all the buddhas consecrate me’. 

(2) Then you will be consecrated by those buddhas who have all assumed 
the form of Heruka, with the five vessels which symbolize the Five Tatha- 
gatas and which contain the five ambrosias.3 At the time of consecration 
there will be a shower of flowers and one of saffron; drums will sound; 
(3) you will be worshipped by Rüpavajra and her companions* and Locana 


I The seed is HUM (S: xv. 1490 1). å 

2 Literally: the eight mothers and referring to Gauri and her seven companions. 

3 Bh interprets the five ambrosias as the Five Wisdoms—bdud rtsi Ina žes bya ba ni me 
lon lta buhi ye ges la sogs pa ye Ses la po de dag ñid bdud rtsi ste de dag gis hdzin paho 
(xv. 216b 3). 

* 'The complete company are: 

Rüpavajrá who is white and holds a mirror; 

Sabdavajrá who is black and holds a lute; x 

Gandhavajrå who is yellow and holds a shell with scents; 

Rasavajrá who is red and holds a begging-bowl filled with fine savours; 

Sparsavajrå who is green and holds garments of various hues; 


59 


[footnote cont. overleaf. 


Liv CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Pide AuR Foundatn Shåndigarh 


and the others! will sing vajra-songs.2 When you have been thus con- 
secrated, the Lord of your Family? will appear on your head, and Heruka 
will be revealed in you. 

Performing morning, noon and night this meditation which bestows 
such power, you should arise, and at all times remain consubstantiated with 
the divinity.* 


CHAPTER V. REALITY 


(1) Now we shall expound the chapter on reality. 


In reality there is neither form nor seer, 
neither sound nor hearer, 
There is neither smell nor one who smells, neither taste nor taster, 
Neither touch nor one who touches, neither thought nor thinker.s 
(2) He who is well versed in this yoga gives honour always to the Mother 

and the Sister. Likewise he to whom this truth is dear, pays honour to 
Narti, Rajaki, and Dombi,6 to Candali and to Bråhmani, combining Means 
and Wisdom in the rite.7 


Dharmadhåtuvajrå who is yellow and red and holds the triangle of origination (dharmo- 
daya—see K (p. 123, l. 24). 

Such is the list given by Bh (216b 5); it shows, however, some discrepancy in the matter 
of colours with that given in I-T iii. 2, pp. 183-4. 

1 Locanå, Måmaki, Påndaravåsini, and Tara have already been referred to in the 
Introduction, p. 31. 

2 As an example of vajra-songs S and Bh both quote: Kollairetthi, &c. For this see 
beginning of Chapter 4, Part II. 

3 The Lord of the Family is Aksobhya, for it is he who is the hypostasis of Heruka or 
Hevajra. Bh: ran gi rigs ses pa ni Mi bskyod paho (xv. 217a 3). 

4 Bh: * "At the three set times practising the meditation of the bestowal of power, one 
arises” so it is said. The bestowal of power (adhisthåna) refers to the disposition of the 
divine forms (? devatåvinyåsa); the practice is meditation upon them, and this is the rite; 
“arising” implies remaining in union (with them). Then it refers to activity outside these 
set times and meditations with the words "being consubstantiated with the divinity" ; this 
means the assurance of unity of enjoyment in the divine form with regard to all spheres 
of activity through possession of divine self-confidence in the acts of sitting, sleeping, 
eating and all the rest —thun gsum du byin gyis brlabs pahi sgom pa rnam par bsgoms nas lans 
te Zes bya ba la thun gsum du ste | byin gyis brlabs pa ni lha rnams su rnam par dgod paho | 
de rnams kyi sgom pa ni goms paho | dehi sgom pa ni cho gaho | lans pa ni rnal hbyor gyts 
gnas paho | thun dan bsgom pahi phyi rol gyi bya ba gsuns pa | Ihahi Zes bya ba la sogs pa la | 
lhahi gzugs ni hdug pa dan | za ba dan | fal ba la sogs pa rnams su lhahi na rgyal gyis yul 
rnams la lhahi gzugs su ñe bar loñs spyod pahi rnal hbyor gyi nes pa iid do žes dgons so 
(xv. 217a 5-7). 

5 For a translation of K’s commentary on these verses see the Introduction, pp. 20-21: 

6 The text actually has Vajri, but see sloka 6 below. * 

7 "These seven names fall into two groups. The first two belong to a larger set of eight 
feminine relatives, which will be found in full at II. v. 53. Their significance here 1s 
made clear below (I. v. 16-17). This is made more explicit by R who says that the Mother 
is one who always wishes you prosperity, that the Sister is one who is constant 1n her 
affection, and that they both bring prosperity to the Family of Vajrasattva—Ma žes pam 
phan par hdod pa can no | srin mo žes pa ni byams pa brtan paho | de gñis ni r Do rje set 
dpahi rigs la phan par byed paho (xvii. 274a 5-6). The families of the other five buddia m 
accounted for by Narti and her companions (see diagram V). These are interprete 
representing the five senses with their objects. See K: p. 117, ll, 10-12. 


6o 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
REALITY I.v 


(3) They must be served with circumspection that no disclosure come 


about. Through lack of secrecy misfortune will befall you, from snake or 
thief or fire or sprite.! 


(4) In order that one may gain release, these Mudra are identified with 
the Five Families. She is called Mudra or Sign, because she is signed with 
the Vajra. 

(5) Vajra, Padma, Karma, Tathagata, Ratna; these are known as the 
Five Families supreme, O thou of great compassion. (6 and 7) These then 
are their five Mudrå: Dombi for Vajra, Narti for Padma, Rajaki for Karma, 
Brahmani for Tathagata, and Candalini for Ratna. For shortness they are 
called the families of the tathagatas. (8) He enters supreme reality, he the 
Blessed One, and comes just as he went, and so on account of this play on 
words, it’s as Tathagata he’s known. 

(9) These families are of six kinds, it ’s taught, but abbreviated they are 
five. Then they may become three with the distinction of Body, Speech, 
and Mind.? . 

(10) These families correspond with the five elements and are identified 
with the five skandhas.3 It is because they can be reckoned (kul) or counted 
that they are therefore known as kula. 

(11) There is neither meditator, nor whatso'er to meditate; there is 
neither god nor mantra. 

It is as (aspects of) the undifferentiated unity that god and mantra have 
their existence. 

(12) This unity is known as Vairocana, Aksobhya, Amogha, Ratna, 
Arolika and Satvika, as Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Sarva, Vibuddha, and 
"Tattva.5 


I These lines are interpreted differently by K: "They (the senses that these goddesses 
symbolize) must be used with extreme care, so that no distinction, that is to say, so that no 
threefold dependence of sound, ear, hearing-consciousness, &c. shall come about’ 
(p. 117, ll. 16-18). This seems scarcely the primary meaning, as the threats that follow the 
non-observance would not be suitable in this case. K shows his consciousness of this by 
inserting samsdrikair duhkhaih. 

2 Interesting are the names given by K to the six buddhas: Citta (Aksobhya), Såsvata 
(Vairocana), Ratnesa (Ratnasambhava), Vågisa (Amitabha), Amogha (Amoghasiddhi), and 
Såtvika (Vajrasattva). They become five by the omission of Vajrasattva, and three by 
the absorption of Amoghasiddhi into Vairocana, and Ratnasambhava into Amitåbha. 
This leaves Aksobhya (citta), Amitabha (våg), and Vairocana (kaya) (Td xvi. 128a). This 
order of elimination corresponds with the historical seniority of the group. Vajrasattva 
was the last-comer; Amoghasiddhi and Ratnasambhava are less substantial figures than 
the three first great ones who still hold their sway in China, Japan, and Tibet. Hevajra as 
was mentioned above (p. 60, fn. 3), isa manifestation of Aksobhya, to whose family ourwhole 
tantra belongs. For an interesting and well-reasoned discussion of the origin of the five 
buddhas, see Paul Mus, Borobudur, ii. 1, part 6, ch. 1 ‘L’ Origine des Cinq Jina’. : 

3 For a discussion of these correspondences see the Introduction, pp. 29-31. This 
passage is corrupted in the manuscripts, but well vouched for by the Tibetan versions. 

4 Årolika—a curious name for Amitåtha. It belongs to a set of names of invocation 
with Jinajik, Ratnadhrk (see PK p. 8). See also GS p. 6 and Tucci, Some Glosses upon the 


Guhyasamåja, MCB iii, pp. 339-53: KT translates the term as hehe dos T 


DL 


Lv CC-0. Agamnigam Dili ELS NAL Åoukdåtynt Shåndigarh 


(13) He is called Brahma because he has gained nirvåna and enlighten 
ment. Visnu because he is all-pervading, Siva because he is Propitious 
Sarva because he abides in all things, (14) Tattva because he experiences 
real bliss, and Vibuddha because he is aware of this happiness. 

He becomes manifest in the body (deha) and he is therefore called the 
divinity (devata). (15) Because he, as Buddha, possesses many blessings 
(bhaga), he is called most blessed (bhagavat). These blessings are six: 
lordliness, beauty, fame, wealth, wisdom, and great energy.! Or he may 
be called Bhagavat because he destroys(bhaiijanåt) Klesamåra and the others. 

(16) Prajñā is called the Mother, because she gives birth to the world: 

. . - . 3, 
and likewise the Sister (bhagini) because she shows the apportionment 
(vibhaga). (17) She is called Washerwoman or Daughter or Dancer: 
Washerwoman (rajaki)3 because she tinges all beings (rañjanat); Daughter 
(duhitå) because she yields good qualities (duhanåt); (18) Dancer because 
of her tremulous nature. She is called Dombi (outcast) because she is 
untouchable. 

(19) Our speech is called uttering (japa) because it is the enunciation 
(prajalpana) of ali and kåli.* 
nirvana). S says rolika means dispute, and that he is called Arolika because in the condition 
of great passion, the nature of which is Joy and Supreme Joy, this does not exist—rolika 
ni rtsod paho | de yan mchog tu dgah dgah bahi ran bin hdod chags chen po la yod pa ma 
yin pas Arolika go | (xv. 350b 6—7). And later: because this undifferentiated unity is free of 
a disputing nature, it is called Arolika (1515 3). This must be the correct interpretation. 
Rola ‘dissension’ occurs below (II. iii. 6). Avolika is thus a vrddhi form of arola *unrowdy'. 


5 S equates the buddhas with their six Brahmanical counterparts, associating the five 
with the five wisdoms: 


Vairocana Brahmå adaršajñana 

Amoghasiddhi Siva krtyånusthånajnåna 

Aksobhya Visnu suvisuddhadharmadhåtujfiåna 
Ratnasambhava Sarva samatajñana 

Amitabha Tattoa pratyaveksanajnana 
Vajrasattva Vibuddha sahajånandamahåsukhapratiti* 


He defines vibuddha as special and noble buddha—khyad par du hphags pahi sans rgyas 
ni rnam par sans rgyas so | 
I R quotes these six in the following verses: 
dban phyug dan ni gzugs bzan dan | 
dpal dan grags dan ye $es dan | 
brtson hgrus phun sum tshogs ldan pa | 
drug po hdi la bcom žes bsad | (xvii. 276a 5) 
2 K explains the apportionment as the apportionment of relative and absolute truth 
(samvrtiparamårthayor vibhåga). 
3 One might equally well translate: she is called ravisher (rajaki) because she rav 
(rafijanát) all beings. š 
4 It was said above that there is no mantra (I. v. 11), and this is now explained n 
full. Mantra is speech, and this consists in essence of vowels (ali) and consonants (kåli), 
therefore mantra, like ålilkåli, is tattva and nairåtmya, and exists only as the undiffer- 
entiated unity. So B and S interpret. K refers to the yoga-practice in which the vowels = 
consonants are imagined as passing through the nostrils. See Evans-Wentz, Tibetan Yog 
and Secret Doctrines, pp. 180-1. 


ishes 


(+ dgah ba ni lhan cig skyes pahi bde ba chen po de rtogs pa) (xv. 1514 1-5) 
62 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
REALITY I. v 


A mandala is a foot-mark, and it is called mandala because it arises from 
pressure (malanåt).* 


(20) A gesture (mudrå) is an opening of the hand and the pressure of one 
finger upon another. 


Our thought is our meditation, since meditation consists in thought.? 
(21) The bliss that is found in the Father,’ that bliss is enjoyed of one- 


self, and that bliss by which occurs the Slaying,* such bliss is said to be 
dhyana. 


CHAPTER vi. THE PERFORMANCE 


a. (1) Now we shall further tell of the practice so excellent and supreme, the 
cause of perfection by means of which one gains the finality of this per- 
fection in Hevajra. 

(2-3) The yogin must wear the sacred ear-rings, and the circlet on his 
head; on his wrists the bracelets, and the girdle round his waist, rings 
around his ankles, bangles round his arms; he wears the bone-necklace 
(4) and for his dress a tiger-skin, and his food must be the five ambrosias. 
He who practises the yoga of Heruka should frequent the five classes. 
(5) These five classes that are associated together, he conceives of as one, 
for by him no distinction is made as between one class or many. 

(6) Meditation is good if performed at night beneath a lonely tree or in 
a cemetery, or in the mother's house,® or in some unfrequented spot. 


I This verse scarcely helps in defining a mandala and the commentators find difficulty 
in explaining its association with a footprint. K suggests that if one contracts the big 
toes one can make circles with the ball of one’s feet—an irrelevant notion. Bh just says: 
pada = jfidna (xv. 224b 7). R says that a mandala may be briefly described as the pattern 
of a footprint which is made with dust and mud and water (xvii. 226b 2)—rkan pas bris pa 
ges pa ni rdul dan hdam dan chu la sogs pa la rkan rjes kyi ri mo ni dkyil hkhor Zes pa sin 
tu mdor sdud paho | But see following note. 

2 S says cintana is ordinary thought, that vicintana refers to thought in terms of its 
absolute nature, and that this is dhyåna—sems par byed pas bsams pa ste | de kho na tid kyi 
tshul du rnam par sems par byed pa ste | de iid bsam gtan no | (xv. 152b 7). 

These four, japa, mandala, mudrå, and dhyåna are the substance of the yogin’s technique 
for the gaining of that intuitive and indefinable realization which is his goal. As methods 
they have only a conventional (saznvrti) value, and their real existence is submerged in the 
final undifferentiated unity, which is the chief theme of this chapter. But there is another 
aspect of these four techniques which the commentators have missed, namely that for the 
perfected yogin (siddlia), for whom all things are possible and for whom all things are in all, 
all speech is mantra, even a footprint is a mandala, any gesture is a mudrå, and all thought 
is dhyåna. This interpretation is supported by I. vii. 26: "Whatever movement of the 
limbs, whatever words flow forth, these are mantra and mudrå for him who occupies the 
place of Sri-Heruka'. 3 The Father is Vajradhara (K : p. 118, 1. 36). 

^ Death is release; it is death because it is the end of those marks of ignorance which 
are mind and the product of mind (K: p. 119, ll. 4-5). See Introduction, p. 38. 

5 These are the five families referred to above, as represented by Narti and the rest. 

$ According to S, the dwelling of Vaisnavi and so on—khyab hjug ma la sogs pahi ma 
mohi gnas (xv. 154a 4); Bh is more precise: “the house of a Mother is the place where there 
are statues of the seven mother-goddesses, Bråhmi, Siva and so on'—ma mohi khyim Zes 
bya ba ni tshans ma dan | drag mo la sogs på ma mo bdun po de rnams kyi gzugs brfian de dag 
gan du gnas pa de ni ma mohi khyim mo |. 


63 


Ivi CC-0. Agamnigam Dita T aad ELAN HEUS 

(7) When some heat has been developed,! if one wishes to perform thi 
practice and to gain perfection, then upon this course one should pM 5 
(8-9) Take a girl of the Vajra-family, fair-featured and large-eyed ad 
endowed with youth and beauty, who has been consecrated by oneself2 and 
is possessed of a compassionate disposition, and with her the Practice 
should be performed. In the absence of one from the Vajra-family, it 
should be performed with a girl from the family of one’s special divinity 
or (if this fails) from some other. Take her then who is now consecrated 
with the depositing of the seed of enlightenment. 

(zo) If in joy songs are sung, then let them be the excellent Vajra-songs,3 
and if one dances when joy has arisen, let it be done with release as its 
object. Then the yogin, self-collected, performs the dance in the place of 
Hevajra.* 

(11) Aksobhya is symbolized by the circlet, Amitabha by the ear-rings, 
Ratnega by the necklace, and Vairocana (by the rings) upon the wrists, 
(12) Amogha is symbolized by the girdle, Wisdom by the khatvårga and 
Means by the drum, while the yogin represents the Wrathful One himself. 
(13) Song symbolizes mantra, dance symbolizes meditation, and so singing 
and dancing the yogin always acts. (14) He should always eat herbs and 
drink water, then old age and death will not harm him and he will always 
be protected. 

(15) Now he, whose nature is HUM (viz. Hevajra), should arrange his 


I *Heat'—generally interpreted as power(prabhåva—mthu or nus pa), gained from medita- 
tion and incantation. So K (p. 119, 1. 27), S (xv. 154b 1), Bh (xv. 227a 7) and R (xvii. 
278a 3). According to V it is a first stage, presumably of trance, associated with the 
appearance of things as smoke and as mirage—gal te spyod pa byed hdod pa | yan lag drug 
sbyor gan yin te | du ba smig rgyu la sogs pahi | drod ni dan por bskyed par bya | (quoted from 
the Mülatantra xv. 56b 6). In this respect see Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines, p. 195. 
It is also possible that the use of this term is to be associated with the first of the four 
states leading to Enlightenment: usmagata, miirdha, ksanti, and laukikagradharma, which 
are known from Yogåcåra works. For references see Obermiller, Analysis of the Abhisa- 
mayålamkåra, fasc. 1, p. 58. 

2 ‘Consecrated by oneself’. According to Bh she is to be given instruction about all her 
own dharmas—ran fiid kyi chos thams cad kyi man nag de la sbyin la byaho—or as she is of 
the same nature as the yogin, he embraces her and she becomes the recipient of that con- 
secration that is purificatory in its effect—sgrub pa pohi ran gi bdag id du gyur bas hkhyud 
cin dban bskur ba ni khrus byed pa dan ldan paho (xv.227b 5). The compassionate disposition 
of which she is possessed, he defines as the basis for the producing of siddhi. If this ol 
passion is feeble, it will not be produced—sfüz je de ni dios grub tu hgyur bahi rtsa baho 
. . . de yan shin rje dman na hgrub mi hgyur es pa hdi nid kyi nag las so JI (id. b 6) . hi 

3 S: ‘songs should be sung with vajra-words, not the songs of ordinary folk —rdo be 
tshig dan Idan pa fd kyis glu blan bar bya ste | gron gi glus bya ba yan ma yin no | (xv. 154 m 
So also Bh, who adds that the yogin should not have a liking for the dances of simple DELER 
the fixed intention of which is to captivate and so on, for his dancing has release En 
object—so sohi skye bohi gar rnams ni gzun ba la sogs pahi mnon par den pa de rnams E 
hbyor pas ni de la mñon Zen pa med pa ste | de bas na gar gyi bya ba ni thar pahi rgyur £. 
pa yin no (xv. 228a 7-b 1). E zs 

* Vajrapada is elaborated by K and other commentators to refer to the Sa på i 
associated with Hevajra, and which the yogin, now identified with him, may be 
assume. 


tures 


64 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
THE PERFORMANCE I. vi 


piled-up hair! as a crest and for the performance of the yoga he should 
wear the skull-tiara, representing the five buddhas.? (16) Making pieces 
of skull five inches long, he should secure them to the crest. He should 
wear the two-stranded cord of hair, that symbolizes Wisdom and Means, 
the ashes and the sacred thread of hair; (17) the sound of the drum is his 
invocation, and the khatvanga of Wisdom is his meditation.? It is this that 
is intoned and meditated in the practice of Vajra and Skull. 


b. (18) He should abandon desire and folly, fear and anger, and any sense 
of shame. He should forgo sleep and uproot the notion of a self, and then 
the practice may be performed, there is no doubt. (19) Only when he has 
made an offering of his own body,* should he commence the practice. Nor 
should he make this gift with the consideration of who is worthy and who is 
not. (20-21) Enjoying food and drink he should take it as it comes, making 
no distinction between that which is liked or disliked, eatable or uneatable, 
drinkable or undrinkable. Nor should he ever wonder whether a thing is 
suitable or unsuitable. 


(22) Even when he has attained to siddhi and is resplendent in his perfect 


knowledge, a disciple respectfully greets his master, if he wishes to avoid 
the Avici Hell. 

(23) Free from learning and ceremony and any cause of shame, the 
yogin wanders, filled with great compassion in his possession of a nature 
that is common to all beings. (24) He has passed beyond oblations, re- 
nunciation, and austerities, and is freed from mantra and meditation. 
Released from all the conventions of meditation,’ the yogin performs the 
practice. 


I This is certainly the intended meaning (i.e. caudakesa) and is thus interpreted by K. 
Nevertheless the only reading both in manuscripts and in the Tibetan versions is caurya, 
of which no one gives an intelligible account. V says it is a coronet made into a symbol from 
grass—rkun mali skra ces bya bahi rtsa las cod pan du brdah bya ba (xv. 58a 1). 

? Concerning these tiaras, sce I-T iii. 1, pp. 79-80, although there is here no reference 
to their being made of skull. 

3 According to V, the double-stranded girdle of human hair is for subduing the self- 
confident gods of this world (laukikadevatå); his body is smeared with ashes because of 
the vow of Siva; the Brahmanic thread of human hair is for the sake of the Brahmanic 
vow; he holds the drum because of the acme of divine joy; he holds the khatvåriga because 
it is the sign of victory (dhvaja) of Siva, and with the skull-pieces he holds the vajra-skull 
because of the vow—hjig rten pahi lha ña rgyal can rnams gdul bar bya bahi don du | mi rohi 
skrahi ske rags gitis bskor dan | dban phyug chen pohi brtul sugs kyi ched du thal bas lus la 
byugs pa dan | tshans pahi brtul zugs kyi ched du mi rohi skrahi tshan skud dan | lha rnams 
kyi dgah bahi rtse mohi ched du can tehu gzun ba dan | dban phyug chen pohi rgyal mtshan 
gyi ched du ken rus gzun ba dan | thod pahi dum bus brtul ugs kyi ched du rdo rjehi thod pa 
bzun bar bya ba ste | (xv. 58a 4-5). The interpretation of vajra-skull is unsatisfactory. 
S equates it with Hevajra, and says it is his practice—rdo rje thod pa ni Kyehi rdo rje ste 
dehi spyod pas so (xv. 150a 3). This is the required sense. The two terms refer to the two 
basic principles, Prajña] Upaya, alilkalt, &c. So here Kapala] Vajra. 

4 See p. 56, fn. 1. VON 

5 Samaya refers to externalized conventional usages, the mandala with its divinities, 
and their symbols and syllables, and samvara to the conventional forms envisaged within 
the body; see these terms in the Glossary. 


B 6309 65 5 


I. vi CC-0. Agamnigam Digi FPES Rébadafo EIR tigarh 


(25) Whatever demon should appear before him, even though it be th 
peer of Indra, he would have no fear, for he wanders like a lion. š 
(26) For the good of all beings, his drink is always compassion, for the 
Ds who delights in the drink of yoga, becomes drunk with no other 
rink. 


CHAPTER Vii. SECRET SIGNS 


a. (1) Now we shall expound the chapter on secret signs," by which the 
(right) yogin and yogini may be recognized with certainty. 
(2) Whoever shows one finger, implies: Am I welcome ?2 


1 Secret signs—chomd (tib.: brda—sign), glossed by K as milicchd (tib. : kla klo gyi shaq 
—barbarian language). These terms serve but to emphasize the non-brahmanical origin 
of these practices. According to V: “These signs are to be known as being of two kinds, 
even as it is said in the Mulatantra: The practiser of Heruka-yoga learns the bodily signs 
and the verbal signs, for if he does not express himself with these bodily and verbal signs, 
he will come to grief even though he be a buddha. (Compare II. v. 65-67, where this 
warning is given after the list of verbal signs.) So the yogins and yoginis who practise 
the Hevajra-yoga must make effort to remember these signs of body and speech, so that 
in the company of malicious outsiders and male and female messengers from other 
families (other than the Vajrakula) one need not converse in the terms of ordinary speech, 
but we shall speak of the great mystery by means of signs and these malicious outsiders 
and wanderers will be bewildered. In this chapter only bodily signs are explained, and 
the verbal signs in another (see p. 99)’. brdah ni rnam pa gñis su go ba bya ste | de yan ji 
skad du | rtsahi rgyud las Heruka ldan rnal hbyor gyis | lus dan nag gi brdah la bslab | lus 
nag brdah yis mi smra na | sans rgyas kyan ni nes par hjig | ces gsuns te | de bas na dehi 
phyir | Kyehi rDorjehi rnal hbyor la gnas pahi rnal hbyor pa dan rnal hbyor ma rnams kyi(s) 
lus nag gi brdahi man nag hbad pas yid la gzun ste | phyi rol gyi skye bo mi srun pa rnams 
dan rigs géan gyi pho ña dan pho ña ma rnams tshogs pahi naù du tha mal pahi tha stiad kyis 
brjod par mi byahi | bdag cag rnams kyis gsan chen gan yin pa de brdas brjod pa na skye bo 
ma runs pa dan phyi rol gyi pho fia dan pho ña ma rnams rmons par hgyur ro | . . . lehu hdir 
ni lus kyi brda hbah dig ston la nag gi brda ni lehu géan nas ston par hgyur ro | (xv. 59b 37). 
Bh adds to this information by telling us that: Practising yogins who wander about among 
the pitha and ksetra (see below) looking for proficient yoginis, should give these signs so 
that they may know which among the yoginis are in possession of the necessary tenets 
which accord with their own, and so that they may arouse in these a condition of mutual 
responsiveness—Da ni spyod pahi rnal hbyor pa rnams kyi(s) hgrub pahi rnal hbyor ma 
rnams blta bahi don du | gnas dan in la sogs pa rnams su bgrod cin | de rnams las mnon par 
hdod pahi grub pahi mthah bdag dan hbrel ba [las] rtogs pahi phyir dan | de rnams dan bdag 
mfiam $in hdra bar bskyed pahi don du de dag brda ster bar rigs so (xv. 231b 475). 

2 K, V, and D attempt a detailed interpretation of these signs, but there is absence of 
agreement. K does not even trouble to preserve the questions and answers which S 
essential to their nature and interprets as though it were an account of the granting 0 
initiations by master to pupil. I quote V’s account as being the best of the three, but it 5 
probably as arbitrary as the others: Now ‘whoever shows one finger’, that is to say, if A 
man or woman suddenly appears before one and shows one finger, it is to be under 
as meaning: Am I welcome?” Likewise, ‘by two you are welcome’, means that by SEE ft 
ing forth two fingers in reply, such a one is welcome. Further, "by pressure from the ae 
thumb one should know the sign for well-being’, that is to say, you should know S E 
for asking someone about his well-being: "Are you happy in body, speech and min dd 

*Whoever shows the fourth finger'—this is the part of Upaya (the yogin), to på One 
should present the little finger—this is the part of Prajiia (the yogini), and by this 
should know Air and Fire as distinguished above and below. 

‘Whoever shows the middle finger, to him one should present t 
by this likewise one should know Water and Earth with the distinction of 

So these are signs of Void and Compassion, conceived as external an 


66 


he second finger’, and 


above and below: 
d internal. Thus 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SECRET SIGNS I. vii 


The showing of two implies he is welcome. 


The sign of well-being may be known from pressure with the left 
thumb. 


(3) If he presents the fourth finger, he should be shown the little finger. 
If he presents the middle finger, he should be shown the second finger. 

(4) If he shows the fourth finger, one should indicate to him the neck. 
If he shows a painting, one should show him a trident. 

(5) If he indicates the breasts, one should indicate the parting of the hair. 
If he indicates the earth, one should indicate the mouth. 


(6) If he indicates the eyebrow, one should indicate the loosening of one’s 
crest of hair. 


If he indicates the forehead, one should indicate the back. 
(7) If he indicates the sole of the foot, one should dance with joy. 


in the Adibuddhatantra it is said: ‘To east and west are Earth and Air, which mutually are 
Means and Wisdom; to south and north are Fire and Water, which mutually are Means 
and Wisdom.’ 

“Whoever shows the fourth finger, to him one should indicate the neck’, and this asks 
the question: "Do you know the truth (dharma) which is like the expanse of the sky ?”, and 
in reply one indicates the neck, for the circle of the throat is the place where are tasted the 
six savours, and by means of these the veins develop, and so by this one indicates the 
truth that is like the sky. 

“Whoever shows the canvas, to him one should show the trident—to the question: ‘Do 
you know the characteristics of the guardian divinity ?”, there is the answer: ‘Yes, I know; 
I know the essence of the three veins which have the nature of Body, Speech, and Mind.’ 

‘Whoever indicates the breasts, to him one should indicate the parting’, which means: 
"If we obtained a treatise on dancing, would you know it?’, to which there is the answer: 
“I know it, and I know the bliss that arises from the action of the two indriyas.” 

“Whoever points to the earth, to him one should indicate the mouth’, and this implies 
the question: ‘Do you know the essence of Wisdom?’, to which is the answer: ‘Yes I know 
it; it is possessed of Wisdom and Means.’ 

‘Whoever shows the eyebrow, to him one should indicate the loosening of one’s crest 
of hair’, and this means: ‘Very well, you and I shall perform the parts of Means and 
Wisdom’, to which there is the reply: ‘There is no fear, we shall so perform.’ 

‘Whoever shows the forehead, to him one should show the back’, which means: ‘Do 
you know that place of the Dakinis, the foremost one of the body, which is in the head?’, 
and to this there is the answer: "Yes, I know it; but apart from the head, there are places 
of the Dakinis in the rest of the body as well, in the back and so on.’ (These places will be 
mentioned below.) 

“Whoever shows the sole of the foot (in reply) one dances with joy.’ This asks the ques- 
tion: ‘How shall we go to those places?’, to which there is the reply: ‘First the treatise on 
dancing, and then by entering into complete tranquillity with one’s mind possessed of 
attachment, in this way we will go to those places.’ 

This translation is literal, but in spite of a certain obscurity, most of which will become 
clear below, it provides a satisfactory interpretation of these signs, marking clearly the 
stages from the first meeting to the decision to unite in the ritual. My translation presumes 
that the yogin poses the question in every case. This is clearly stated to be so by Vin the 
case of the third question, and implied generally by the fact that it is the yogin who is 
looking for a suitable yogini, and not the reverse. Nevertheless MS. A in several cases 
implies otherwise by reading tasyåh instead of tasya, ‘to her’ instead of ‘to him’. (The 
Tibetan versions have everywhere de yi, which could mean either.) But since no com- 
mentary provides an interpretation that takes this distinction into account, and since Bh 
and K read tasya in all cases, I have adhered to this reading. ae 

De la gan Zig sor mo gcig ston pa žes bya ba ni skyes pa ham bud med gan ig gis blo bur 
du mdun du hon pa la sor mo gcig ston pa dehi tshe | legs par horis sam zes dri bahi don du 


67 


I. vii CC-0. Agamnigam DigHakPiase Vattonik dundation, Chandigarh 


So one explains things conventionally by means of sign and Counter 
sign. 
(8) Then the yoginis say: "Well done, O Son, thou of great compassion’ 
If they show wreaths in their hands, they are signifying that you should 
come together in that place; (9) motioning forward with their wreaths 
(they mean to say) 'O True One, stay at this ceremony and take part’, So 
there at that meeting-place, abiding within that sacred orbit, he should do 
whatever the yoginis say. 


b. (10) Vajragarbha said: "What, O Lord, are these places of meeting? 
The Lord replied: "They are the pitha and the upapitha, the ksetra and 
the upaksetra, the chandoha and the upachandoha, the melåpaka and the 
upamelåpaka, the pilava and the upapilava, the smasäna and the upasma- 
såna.! (11) These correspond with the twelve stages of a Bodhisattva. It 


rtogs par byaho | de bin du giiis kyis legs par hons pa yin es pa ni lan du sor mo gis brkyan 
bas bde bar yoris so Zes bstan par byaho | gåan yan g’yon gyi mthe bon beans pas ni | bsñun gyi 
phyag rgyar rnam par Ses | Ses bya ste gan zig la bsñun hdri bahi brdar ses par bya ste | lus 
nag yid gsum bde ham ges bya bahi don to | gan žig srin lag ster ba la žes pa ni thabs kyi cha 
yin la | de yi mthe chun rnam par sbyin žes bya ba ni ses rab kyi cha ste sten hog gi bye brag 
gis rlun dan me ru rtogs par byaho | gan zig gun mo ston pa la | de yi hdzub mo rnam par 
sbyin des pa ni de báin du sten hog gi cha chu dan sa rtogs par byed pa yin la | de bas de dag 
rnams kyan phyi dan nan gi stor pa dan shin rjehi brda ñid yin no | gan de ni dpal mchog di 
dan pohi sans rgyas kyi rgyud ces bya ba las kyan ji skad du | 
far dan nub tu sa dan rlun | phan tshun thabs dan ses rab yin | 
lho dan byan du me dan chu | phan tshun thabs dan Ses rab yin I 

žes . . . gsuns so | gan Zig min med ston pa la | de yi mgrin pa rab tu bstan | žes pa ni nam 
mkhah lta buhi chos ses sam es hdri ba la | dehi lan du mgrin pa bstan par bya ba ni ro drug 
la loñs spyod pahi lam mgrin pahi hkhor lo yin te | dehi stobs kyis rtsa rnams rgyas par hgyur 
la | des nam mkhah lta buhi chos ston par hgyur žes bya bahi don bstan to | gan žig gos ni 
ston pa la | de yi rtse gsum rab tu bstan žes bya ba ni | skyob pa mtshan ñid ses sam žes hdri 
ba la | lan du na yis $es te lus nag yid gsum gyi bdag ñid rtsa gsum gyi ran båin ses naho žes 
bya bahi don no | gan Zig nu ma ston pa la de yi mtshams ni rab tu bstan žes bya ba ni | de 
ñid gar gyi bstan bcos kyis* thob pa yin na | de ses sam ges hdri ba la | lan du na yis Ses te 
dban po gitis sprad pahi bde ba rtogs Zes bya bahi don to | gan žig so ni ston pala | de yi kha 
ni rab tu bstan | Zes bya ba ni Ses rab kyi ran bin Ses sam žes hdri ba la | lan du ña yis Ses te 
thabs dan fes rab Idan naho žes pahi don to | gan ig khro gfier ston pa la | gtsug pud dgrol pa 
bstan par bya | žes pa ni | ho na khyod dan na gris thabs dan fes rab kyi ran bšün la rtsod dot 
ges zer ba la | lan du hjigs pa med de brtsad par byaho žes bya bahi don to | gan žig dpral ba 
ston pa la | de yi rgyab ni rab tu bstan | žes bya ba ni | gan mkhah hgro ma rnams kyi gnas lus 
kyi mchog mgo la yod na de khyod kyis ses sam Zes hdri ba la | lan du ña yis Ses te mgo bo las 
gáan rgyab la sogs pa lus gáan la yan mkhah hgro mahi gnas yod ces bya bahi don to | gan gis 
rkan mthil ston pa la | lto yis rnam par rtse bar bya | žes pa ni | ho na gnas de dag tu 7! ltar 
bgrod par bya es hdri ba la | lan du gar gyi bstan bcos sñon du hgro bas chags pa dan ldan 
pahi sems kyis sñoms par Zugs nas gnas de rnams su phyin par hgyur Zes pahi don to | (zv. 
6oa 2—b 7). ; O 

I These are the different kinds of places of pilgrimage, some of which are known E: 
‘seats’ (pitha), some as ‘fields’ (ksetra), some as *meeting-places' (melåpaka), and SE 
cemeteries ($masåna). As for chandoha and pilava, I have no ready translation d 
Tibetan transliterates the former and translates the latter as hthun-gcod ‘drink P on 
as though pilava were derived from pi ‘drink’ and lava *cutting). See The Blue Anna 


- ae a aps 
* kyis makes the phrase unintelligible unless there is a pronoun missing before it, perhap 


khyod kyis. : 
+ rtsod with secondary root brtsad normally means “to contend". It here ha 
of rtsed ‘to play’, with which word I presume it to be cognate. 


68 


s the meaning 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SECRET SIGNS I. vii 


is because of these that he receives the title of Lord of the Ten Stages and 
as Guardian Lord.” 


(12) Vajragarbha said: “What are these pithas and the rest?” 


Roerich, pp. 980 and 983, for an attempt to make some forced sense of an absurd transla- 
tion. Itis rare indeed that the Tibetans err in this manner. D gives an attempted explana- 
tion of these terms: 


It is called ‘seat’ because one always stays there and performs the practice, also because 

the yogins stay there. 

Because it is near to that place, it is called ‘near-by seat’ (upapitha). 

It is called ‘field’, because it produces good qualities, also because the mother-goddesses 

stay there. 

Because it is near to there, it is called ‘near-by field’. 

Because one desires and yearns, it is called Chando. 

Because it is near to there, it is called ‘near-by Chando’. 

It is called ‘meeting-place’, because it is the site of a place, Magadha and Angamagadha. 

It is called ‘near-by meeting-place’ because it is near there. 

It is called pilava, because there are no obstructions. 

It is called ‘near-by pilava’ because it is near to there. 

It is called ‘cemetery’ because no discriminating thought (vikalpa) arises and because 

there are many corpses. 

It is called ‘near-by cemetery’, because it is near to there. 

rtag tu gnas Sin spyod pas na gnas ses byaho | yan rnal hbyor pa bugs pas na yan gnas ses 
byaho | de dan ñe bas ñe bahi gnas Ses byaho | yon tan skyed par byed pas na zin yan ma rnams 
gnas pas na zin žes byaho | de dan ñe bas fie bahi zin no | hdod cin hdun pas na tshando | de 
dan ñe bas na fie bahi tshando | magadha dan angamagadha ni gnas kyi gåi po yin te hdu ba 
ges byaho | de dan fie bas ñe bahi hdu baho | . . . bar chad med pas na hthur gcod | de dan fie 
ba ni fie bahi hthun gcod | rnam par rtog pa mi hbyur ba dan ro man po gnas pas dur khrod do | 
de dan fie ba ñe bahi dur khrod do | (xvii. 365b 2-5). 

1 These twelve kinds of place are said to correspond with the twelve bns, which are 
here listed in all the commentaries. But it is from the bhimis, not from the pithas, &c., 
that the bodhisattva gets his name of Lord of the Ten Bhümis. I would prefer to translate: 
‘It is from these that the Protector is known as Lord of the Ten Bhiimis’, but all the com- 
mentators, aware of the discrepancy between the twelve bhtimis just listed, and the ten 
referred to in the title, separate the two names, applying the ten to the Bodhisattva, and 
the remainder to the Protector, the Buddha. They even add a thirteenth, the Vajra- 
dharabhümi, which the ordinary Mahåyånists (pha rol tu phyin pa ba) do not reach 
(D: xvii. 366a 4). 

2 According to S and D there should be thirty-two places here listed, but none of the 
commentators helps in arranging a satisfactory list. K (p. 122, 1. 17) and R (xvii. 
280a 2-3) define the ‘city’ as Påtaliputra, but give no other helpful information. Their 
explanation of tatsannivesam would be meaningless without the full quotation from D, 
given just above. But the list is clearly unsatisfactory, since from here onwards no 
further names are given, except perhaps for pretasamhåta, which may be intended for 
Pretapuri. They are not interested in these places in the world without. "These places, 
Jålandhara and so on, are mentioned for the benefit of simple fools who wander about the 
country’ (N. xvii. 11152). They are therefore interpreted as symbols for the places within 
the body, that is to say, they are the external equivalent of that which exists within. 
According to V, ‘externally these are places in the world without, where dwell those 
goddesses who run after flesh and blood and so keep to the towns, but internally these 
places exist in the body in the form of veins and there is no need to look elsewhere for 
them’—phyi rol tu ni $a dan khrag la rgyug par byed pa gron la brten pahi Tha mo rnams ni 
phyi gnas de dag na gnas pa yin la | . . . | nan gi gnas ni lus la rtsahi gzugs kyis gnas par gsuns 
te de las gáan du mi bltaho | (xv. 61b 3-4). See also S: ‘As for these places Jalandhara and 
so on, they are the thirty-two places, the head and top of the head and so on; Abhedyå and 
the other (31) yoginis come together in the 12 meeting-places, viz., bhiimis.’ —gnas ni 
Dzálandharar gsuns žes bya ba la sogs pa la | gnas hdi rnams Ryan sum cu tsa gris el ne 
bo dan spyi gtsug la sogs paho | mi phyed ma la sogs pa rnal hbyor ma rnams te l å us fin 
ñe bar bsdus pas hdus pa ni sa bcu gis rnams suho | (xv. 1565 1-2). It is here that the con- 
fusion exists which explains the unsatisfactory nature of the list of places in the main text, 


69 


I. vii CC-0. Agamnigam Digit dR Aid Rød anda Tak åndigarh 


The Lord replied: 
"The pithas are Jalandhara, Oddiyana, Paurnagiri, and Kamara 

(13) The upapithas are Malava, Sindhu, and Nagara. 

The ksetras are Munmuni, Karunyapataka, Devikota, and Karmåra- 
pataka. 

(14) The upaksetras are Kulata, Arbuda, Godåvari, and Himadri. 

(15) The chandohas are Harikela, arising in the salt-ocean, Lampaka 
Karicika, and Saurastra. å 

(16) The upachandohas are Kalinga, the Isle of Gold and Kokana which is 
called upachandoha for short. 

(17) The pilavas comprise that which lies on the village boundary, and 
that belonging to the city, Caritra, Ko$ala, and Vindhyakau- 
mårapaurikå. 

The upapilava is nearby to that, O Vajragarbha of great compassion. 

(18) The smasånas are where the pretas meet and the ocean's shore. 

The upasmasanas are the garden and the shore of the lotus-pool. 


pa; 


c. (19) The day too I will tell you when the yoginis meet together, for the 
purpose of the welfare of all beings in the Yogini-tantra of Hevajra.’ 


for whereas there are 32 veins, 'Indivisible' and the others (see I. i. 16-19), the parts of 
the body, commencing head and top of the head, belong to a set of 24. D is aware of this, 
but still wishes to run them together: 'the twelve kinds of place listed above, are listed in 
full below as the 32 countries of Jambudvipa; internally these are associated with the 
24 parts of the body and with the 32 veins’—phyi ltar bsad pa ni gon gi bcu gñis po de hdzam 
buhi glin gi yul sum cu rtsa gñis su hog na rgyas par hched do | nan ltar bsad pa ni lus kyi gnas 
fii su rtsa båi la sbyar ba dan rtsa sum cu rtsa gitis su sbyar te—(xvii. 365b 7—366a 1). In fact in 
our text only 24, and not 32 places in Jambudvipa are named; the other six are made up 
by such terms as village-boundary, ocean-shore, and so on. Elsewhere only 24 places are 
known. One of the verses of Saraha runs: ‘I have visited in my wandering ksetra and 
pitha and upapitha, for I have not seen another place of pilgrimage blissful like my own 
body.' (Ksetra, &c. are here intended figuratively as our own commentators would under- 
stand them.) Advayavajra in his commentary says: ‘All these ksetra and upaksetras, &c. 
are the 24 localities’ (Bagchi, Dohåkosa, p. 113). But most important of all for this whole 
subject see Tucci, I-T iii. 2, pp. 38-45. He there quotes the complete list of 24 places with 
the 24 equivalent parts of the body. These latter correspond with the list quoted by N at 
xvii. 112a 1 (except for one omission). V's list (xv. 615 5) is more disordered but is basically 
the same. As for the place-names 19 of ours correspond with Tucci's list. The Hevajra- 
tantra presents us with an unsystematized attempt to allocate 24 places to the 12 kinds of 
place of pilgrimage, and the carelessness with which it is done enables the commentators 
to assume that there are 32 places on the analogy of the 32 veins. Nevertheless they 
remain aware of the relationship between the external places and the 24 places in the body 
and ignore the resulting contradiction. s 3 
Of the places listed in the Hevajra-tantra the 19 corresponding with those in I-T ee 
Jålandhara, Oddiyana, Paurnagiri (= Pullira Malaya), Kamarüpa, Målava, an 
Nagara, Devikota, Kulata, Arbuda, Himadri, Lampaka, Karicika, Saurastra, Kalinga, m 
Isle of Gold, Kogala, Godavari and possibly Pretasamhåta (for Pretapuri). Those t 
remain are Munmuni, Karmårapåtaka, Kårunyapåtaka, Harikela, Kokana, Caritra, NE 
Vindhyåkaumårapaurikå (if this last is not an epithet). This produces twenty-six PETE 
but of these pretasamhåta figures in the text not as a place-name (in spite of the PO 
correspondence with Pretapuri) but as a description of $masåna, while the last SPE 
rather to be an epithet as I suggest. Even Kokana has doubt cast upon it by the ns ha 
that is an alternative name for the term upacchandoha: ‘and Kokana is called upacchan 


for short”. 


70 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
SECRET SIGNS I. vii 


(20) Vajragarbha said: “Lord, which are those days?” 


The Lord replied: "The fourteenth and the eighth days in the dark 
fortnight. 


d. (21) Å man who has been hanged, a warrior killed on the field of battle, 
and a man of irreproachable conduct who has returned seven times to 
human state, of the flesh of these one should partake.! 


I V: ‘A dhvaja (banner) is the corpse of a i 
something else, and who been punished by en T geata ra S thief or 
by a sword and hung on a gallows. A 7 Tes s or ber bodyrent 

y ng gallows saptåvarta (seven times) is any man or woman who 
has transmigrated in human form throughout seven lives. Their characteristics are these: 
they appear with seven shadows, their eyes are unflinching, there are three creases on their 
foreheads, their bodies emit a pleasing odour, and so on. If you see such a one, offer him 
flowers in salutation, circumambulate him and address him thus: “O Great Lord of 
Yogins, the time has come to act for the good of such as us.” If you address him thus he 
will surrender his life. As soon as he has surrendered it, you should make of his flesh 
pellets as big as the kernel of a juniper berry (?), saying, "We all will eat these, and you shall 
apportion to all beings even as to yourself”, and he will grant the siddhi of activity throughout 
space. Then having washed and compounded the ordinary flesh, that of the hanging corpse 
and the slain-in-battle, make it into pellets and eat it, and you will make an end of wrinkles 
and white hair. The figurative meaning of this is given in the Milatantra: "This excellent 
dhvaja which is the body, cleansed from the veins which are figured by the gallows, con- 
sumes the flesh which is the bodhicitta, and the yogin gains supreme perfection.” 

As for the figurative meaning of the saptåvarta it is said: "Of all embodied beings this 
body represents seven births, for from the eating and drinking of food and drink with their 
six flavours, these are digested and nourishment increases. This is called the first birth. 
"Then blood is formed and this is the second birth. Then flesh which is the third, skin 
which is the fourth, the formation of veins which is the fifth, then bones which is the 
sixth, then fat and marrow, and this is the seventh." 

rgyal mtshan ni rgyal pos rkun po la sogs pa skyes pa ham bud med hgah zig chad pas bcad 
de lus mtshon gyis dral nas ro sin la dpyans te báag paho | lan bdun pa ni hdi na skyes pa ham 
bud med hgah dig skye ba bdun du mihi lus su brgyud pa yin la | dehi mtshan nid kyan grib ma 
bdun du hbyun ba dan | mig mi hdzums pa dan | dpral ba la gñer ma gsum yod pa dan | lus 
la dri Zim po hbyun ba la sogs pa ñid yin te de ltar mthoñ na phyag tu me tog dag phul te 
bskor ba byas la hdi skad ces rnal hbyor gyi dban phyug chen po de ni bdag cag lta buhi don 
bgyi bahi dus la bab bo ges brjod pa na dehi lus hdor bar hgyur ro | de dor nas kyan dehi $a 
la rgya sug gi tshig gu rtsam gyt ri lu byas te | bdag cag thams cad kyis bzah bar bya zin sems 
can thams cad la khyed tshad du bgo bar byaho | des ni nam mkhah la spyod pahi dnos grub 
ster ba yin no | de bain $a phal pa rgyal mtshan mtshon dan bsnun pa la sogs pahi $a ni sbyan 
ba dan spel ba la sogs pa byas la ril bur byas te zos pas kyan giier ma dan skra dkar pa sogs pa 
hjoms par nes so | hdi dag gi nes pahi don yan hbum phrag Ina pa las | ji skad du | 

risa yi sin gzugs las sbyans pahi | 

lus kyi rgyal mtshan mchog hdi yis | 

byan chub sems kyi $a zos na l 

rnal hbyor dnos grub mchog tu hgyur 
žes gsuns te | lan bdun pa yi nes pahi don ni ji skad du | 

gan yan lus can thams cad kyi | 

lus hdi skye ba bdun yin te l 

ro drug Idan pahi bzah btun dag | 

kun tu zos sin hthuris pa las | 

£u sin beud ni rgyas pa de | 

skye ba dan po de brjod do | 

de nas de las khrag hbyun ba | 

skye ba gñis pa rab tu brjod | 

de las $a byun gsum pa ste | 

pags par gyur pa bai pa dan | 

risa ru gyur pa Ina paho | 


de las rus pa drug pa ste | 

z i i ges stion du brjod do xv. 62a 7-b 7). 

žag dan rkan mar bdun paho | žes ston du brjo LE Gas p å 2 
71 


I. vii CC-0. Agamnigam Digital SA HK Ad LU Chandigarh 


e. The act of slaying! is performed, accompanied by the strenuous arousin 
of compassion. (22) Without compassion one cannot succeed, and so E 
should arouse compassion. By this best of methods the activity of evil i 
stopped.” 


f. (23) In this manner one should regard things: 
The day is the Adamantine Lord, and Prajñā is the night. 
(24) There exists nothing one may not do and nothing one may not eat, 
There is nothing one may not think or say, either pleasant or un- 
pleasant. 
(25) The Supreme Self (aham) exists in oneself just as in other beings and 
(as in other beings) so in oneself. 


Conceiving thus, the yogin should approach food and drink and other 
things. (26) Whatever movement of his limbs, whatever pouring forth of 
words, these are as mantra and mudrå for him who holds the place of Sri 
Heruka. 

(27) $RI implies monistic knowledge, 
HE the voidness of causality, 
RU the end of discriminating thought, 
KA its indeterminability. 


(28) Those beings, whose flesh is eaten by knowing yogins, are subdued to 
their power by the yoga of vajra and skull. 


K interprets figuratively : dhvaja is thought with an object for its activity, and this is cut 
down by the sword of wisdom (sastrahata), and so the yogin consumes, that is to say, 
renders free from any notion of self-existence, the body of seven births, his own person. 
These terms, dhvaja, $astrahata, and saptåvarta, all denote the samaya (B: de dag thams 
cad kyis kyan dam tshig fie bar mtshon pa, xv. 234a 5). See below, I. xi. 8-11 and II. vil. ro. 

I Concerning the act of slaying, see II. ix. 1-6. Here it is capable of a figurative 
interpretation: to slay the world is to render it free from the interdependent notions of 
subject and object. N 

2 ‘Externally it is stopped by the meditation of the wrathful kind (the rite referred to in 
Part II, Ch. 9); internally by the Great Void’—phyir ni Ze sdan rigs kyi tin ne hdzin gyis 
dgag par byas la | naù du ston pa chen pos dgag par byaho (V. xv. 63a 4). 

3 The commentators differ in their analysis of this verse. K and S understand param as 
meaning ‘other’; V and D, however, as ‘supreme’, interpreting sattve as other. This is 
also the rendering of T: 

ji ltar bdag Aid de ltar gan | 

de bin bdag fiid ña mchog fiid | m 
Bh's paraphrasing is the most satisfactory, and this serves as the basis of my translation: 
*Just as in oneself, that is, the same as in oneself, consciousness of Self likewise is 1n other 
beings; so in others, that is to say, the consciousness of Self in others should be likewise In 
oneself'—ji ltar žes bya ba la sogs pa la ji ltar bdag ni bdag dan noho | Zes ña rgyal ba de 
b£in du sems can pha rol po dag laho | gan ses bya ba ni gáan du na rgyal ba de bzin du bdag 
füd la yan bya baho | (xv. 236a 5-6). : at 

^ According to S: "Those beings whose flesh means the flesh of dhvajas and others 

meeting-places and so on. By knowing means by yogins and yoginis who are wise in Ur 
Those beings in the lives of other births come into the power of such yogins and o 
become their disciples and delight in yoga’—sems can gan dan gan rnams kyi žes Le å ör 
pa la sogs par rgyal mtshan la sogs pahi $a | mkhas pas žes pa ni rnal hbyor dan rnat d 
znams kyi ste rnal hbyor la mkhas pa ni mkhas paho | sems can de Zes på n: skye ba 824 


72 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
THE TROUPE OF YOGINIS I. viii 


CHAPTER viii. THE TROUPE OF YOGINIS 


a. (1) Now I shall explain the circle of the yoginis. Concentrate upon the 
triangle of origination! in the midst of space, and then perform this medita- 
tion at its centre, first the figurative representations? of the four elements 
in their right order—in the due order of appearance of the divinities.3 

(2) First earth and water, then fire and wind, which correspond with the 
appearance of the goddesses, and with the meditator himself.+ 

(3) The mandala which now arises pure and unblemished from the 
triangle, consists of two concentric parts, one formed by the eight central 
petals of the lotus, and the other by the triangle. (4) At their centre one 
should imagine a corpse,5 which is in effect the seat of the fifteen yoginis. 
Resting on that there should be a lunar disk, upon that the seed-syllable 
and upon that a solar disk.$ (5) The conjunction of these two, lunar disk 
and solar disk, is the great bliss. ALI has become the moon, and the sun has 
resolved into KALI,’ (6) and from this mingling of sun and moon Gauri and 
her companions are proclaimed to be. 


hgro ba rnal hbyor dan rnal hbyor mahi dban du hgyur ba ste dkah (? bkah) ñan par hgyur ini 
sbyor ba la dgah bar hgyur ro | (xv. 157a 6-b 1). 

This is a hybrid interpretation, for while the ritual is accepted literally, the intention is 
idealized. It is not in order to win these beings as disciples that their flesh is eaten, but to 
gain their inherent power, the years of youth cut short in the hanged criminal and slain 
warrior, and the accumulated virtue of the person with seven human lives to his credit. 
More acceptable is the completely figurative interpretation, e.g. of K. The beings are the 
five skandhas, the flesh their self-nature; this is consumed and they are thereby freed from 
their phenomenal nature of mere appearance. 

I K: ‘One should concentrate upon the bhaga, that is a triangle, white like the moon in 
Autumn, called origin of the elements (dharmas), in space, that is to say in the space 
enclosed within the vajra-balustrade and canopy' (p. 123, ll. 23-25). 

2 These figurative representations (cakra) are as follow: 

for Earth a square envisaged as arising from LAM 

for Water a circle envisaged as arising from VAM 

for Fire a triangle envisaged as arising from RAM 

for Wind a semicircle envisaged as arising from YAM 
This list is given in accordance with K (p. 123, 11. 31 ff.) and Bh (xv. 2370 7-238a 1) The 
syllables of origination do not agree, however, with a similar list given by G. Tucci (I-T i, 
p. 49) and by Gisbert Combaz (*L'Évolution du Stüpa en Asie’, MCB 2, pp. 252-3). See 
also PK p. 2, vv. 19-22 where the syllables of origination are those listed above. The 
order of manifestation is here wind, fire, water, earth. Likewise Sadhanamála, p. 226 last 
four lines (translated by Tucci in Teoria e Pratica del Mandala, p. 41). This is the correct 
order, as K is aware (p. 123, ll. 27-29), but our text reverses them none the less. 3 

3 The divinities are the four goddesses, Locana, Mamaki, Påndarå, and Tara. See K 
(p. 104, Il. 7-14). " ^ 

i The jim He are also envisaged as being within the yogin himself, situated at the 
navel, heart, throat, and top of the head. See Introduction, p. 38. Hence the reference 
to the meditator here. I translate the 2nd line of sloka 2, reading: mahåvayur devatånåm 


bhåvakasya yathodayam ° 
5 K (p. 124,1. Re (xvi. 1694 4) assume that there are fifteen corpses, but they 


thereby anticipate the process of emanation. : 
6 T: bdud las rgyal bas mnan = covered with a solar disk. Thus all the Commentator 
take it. Td: ‘covered means that the seed is covered by a solar disk’—mnan žes pa sa bon 


de ñi mas mnan paho (xvi. 169a 7). 
7 Compare I. iii. 11. 


73 


I. viii CC-0. AgamnigamlDiditai RESLAR Abda Hg: Bitandigarh 


The Moon is Mirror-like Wisdom,! 
‘The Sun is the Wisdom of Sameness, 


(7) The seed-syllables and symbols of the chosen divinity are Discriminat- 
ing Wisdom. 
The merging of all into one is Active Wisdom, 
‘The manifestation is the Wisdom of the Pure Absolute. 


(8) The sage should conceive of phenomenal forms in terms of these five 
modes here listed. 

The meeting-place of ALI and KALI is the seat of Vajrasattva. (9) For 
the embryo that arises from the seed-syllable the sound of HÖM and PHAT 
is not required.” One should envisage the chief divinity of the mandala 
arising as a manifestation of that Being. 

(10) With features and symbolic implements as before, and brilliant as 
the magic moon-stone, so they all become manifest with the self-nature of 
Wisdom and Means. (11) From the separating of Sun and Moon, Aut and 
KÀLI, Wisdom and Means, Gauri and her companions arise each from a 
separate letter. (12) Now in the inner circle there are five yoginis, whom 
the knowing yogin always regards as representing the five skandhas. (13) In 
the east is Vajra, and Gauri to the south, Variyogini in the west, Vajra- 
dakini to the north, and Nairatmya at the centre. (14) In the outer circle 
there are Gauri II, Cauri, Vetali, Ghasmari and Pukkasi, Savari and 
Candali, and Dombini as the eighth. (15) At the zenith is Khecari and at 
the nadir Bhücari, O thou of great compassion, and these two stand to 
represent samsåra and miroana. 

(16) All these goddesses are black in colour and exceedingly fearful 
and decked with the five symbolic adornments. They have one face and 
inflamed eyes and clasp in their hands the knife and the skull. (17) The 
circlet, the ear-rings and the necklace, the bracelets and the girdle, such 
are the five symbolic adornments that symbolize the Buddhas Five. (18) 
Just as is Nairátmya, so are they all proclaimed to be. One hand holds the 
skull, in the right hand is the knife (19) and in the left hand the khatvårnga; 


I The stages of gradual manifestation are defined in terms of the Five Wisdoms. See 


p- 58, fn. 2. s tally 

2 The only obscurity here arises from the use of different terms to express essen d 
the same idea. "That Being' (sattva) is Vajrasattva, and he is also the syllable (apa T 
this case the sound A from which Nairåtmyå, chief of this mandala, arises. See I. 
*betwixt them is the seed, and this is that Being, 'tis taught”. "The violent DEE 
of HUM HUM PHAT PHAT is not required. Just as a fruit ripens, white Vajradhara and ren 
Vajråtmå dissolve into one°—HÜM HOM PHAT PHAT drag po yan mi hdod paho | (D: xvii 
htshos pa lta bur rDorje hchan dkar po rDorje bdag ma nag mo cig tu gyur to | ar 
370a 7-b r). Some of the other commentators make much difficulty of this ve re 
K's interpretation (p. 124, ll. 28-34) with the process of emanation describe sangs: 
of Part II, p. 111. There violent action has been employed in the form of rousing 

3 “as before”, as related in chapter 3. See also chapter 5 of Part II. 

4 “separate letter”, see II. v. 28. 


74 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


HE TROUPE OF YOGINĪS I. viii 


around her thighs is a tiger-skin; she stands upon a corpse and is burning 
bright, with two arms and with yellow hair. 


b. (20) The knife is there to cut off the six defects of pride and so on,! and 
the skull for bringing to an end discriminating thought which would 
regard existence and non-existence as essentially different.2 (21) From it 
one drinks the blood of the Four Māras. The khatvänga represents the 
Void and the corpse is understood as Means. (22) If he conceives of the 
troupe in this way, the yogin will very soon gain perfection. 


c. He should imagine the Innate under six aspects, first as black, secondly 
as red, (23) thirdly as yellow, fourthly as green, fifthly as indigo, and 
sixthly as white. (24) Then he conceives of it as the End of Cessation. 

There is the Process of Emanation and the Process of Realization,+ 
(25) and relying upon these two processes the Adamantine One teaches the 
doctrine. The Process of Emanation has been told, and now I will tell of 
the Process of Realization. 


d. (26) In space In the lotus’ 
is the triangle; lies knowledge; 


1 The six defects are pride, ignorance, doubt, passion, anger, and false views (S: xv. 
159a 6). 

? Literally: the lotus-vessel (is made) with a skull (to cut off) the discrimination between 
existence and non-existence. This presumes karttitum as repeated from the line above. 
'The commentators give no valid help in rendering this verse. 

3 ‘End of cessation’ (viramånta) is one of the names of the Innate, because the Joy of 
the Innate (sahajånanda) comes at the end of the Joy of Cessation (viramånanda). See the 
Introduction, p. 35. 

'These six colours represent the six spheres of existence. See also II. ii. 32. D 
observes that “they are the essence of the Six Tathågatas, and that in meditating upon 
the six-fold range of colour of the mandala as requisite to the Process of Realization, one 
avoids clinging to the divinities as gross substantial forms’—de rnams ni de b£in gsegs pa 
drug gi ño bo yan rdzogs pahi rim pa la hjug pahi yan lag tu dkyil hkhor gyi kha dog rim pa 
drug tu yan bsgom ste rags pa lhahi Zen pa spon no | (xvii. 371a 3-4). S : 

4 I<: "The process is one of meditation. Emanation refers to the manifestation of the 
forms of the divinities. The meditation in which this consists, is the Process of Emanation. 
Realization means being substantiated in the very essence itself, and the practice by which 
the yogin meditates who is intent only on this, is called the Process of Realization (K: 
p. 125, ll. 20-23). 3 

5 This is an interpretation of the first sloka of chapter 8 (p. 73). Seven words are given 
this secondary interpretation: khadhåtau, bhagam, bhåvanå, cakram, yathånyåyam, devatå, 
and vathodayam; T and the commentaries of R and D give also an interpretation for 
pürvam: * “Before” means here the flow.’ So far as the words are concerned, these mean- 
ings assigned to them are completely arbitrary. The basis for identification lies in the 
theory of the mandala without and the mandala within the body. As these are taught as 
being identical, the words describing the process of one are interpreted in terms of the 
other by analogy. How forced it is may be seen from the fact that devatd, yae doam 
and pūrvam (if included) all refer to bodhicitta, but under different names. The formula 
resolves itself to this: In the lotus is knowledge.* There is union and the bliss that arises 
from it. It is self-experiencing. Itis sukra. These terms are the subject-matter of the rest 
of this chapter, for they express the Process of Realization. 


* jfi@na here equals vajra. So K (p. 125, 1. 27), Bh and R all interpret. 


75 


ae 


I. viii CC-0. Agamnigant Didia Preeti Fo dnadh Ieñandigarh 


here meditate. here is union. 
Thence the circles Thence bliss 

(27) in right order, self-experiencing, 
and the divine forms which is bodhicitta 
appearing in due order. and is $ukra. 


Therefore twofold is the Innate, (28) for Wisdom is the woman and Means 
is the man. Thereafter these both become twofold, distinguished as ab- 
solute (vivrit) and relative (samvrit). (29) In man there is this twofold 
nature, swkra (relative) and the bliss arising from it (absolute); in woman 
too it is the same, sukra and the bliss arising from it. 


e. (30) Itis here that we have the distinction of the four kinds of Joy, since 
the Innate is fourfold in the Process of Realization.! (31) The first Joy is 
the yogin, perfect joy is the yogini, extreme joy is all-embracing unity, and 
by means of that bliss one is omniscient. 
(32) From Joy there is some bliss, from Perfect Joy yet more, 

From the Joy of Cessation comes a passionless state. 

The Joy of the Innate is finality. 

(33) The first comes by desire for contact, the second by desire for bliss, 
the third from the passing of passion, and by this means the fourth is 
realized. 

(34) Perfect Joy may be called samsåra, and nirvana the Joy of Cessa- 
tion, with plain Joy as a middle state. But the Innate is free of all three; 
(35) for there is found neither passion nor absence of passion, nor yet a 
middle state. 


f. In that realization of the perfect truth there is neither Wisdom nor 
Means. (36) By no other may it be told, and from no one may it be received. 
It is known intuitively as a result of merit and of honouring one’s guru and 
the set observances. 

(37) Small and middling and great and whatever other things there are, 
all these are regarded as equal by those who have realized the truth. 

(38) (Small means the subtle concept of a thing, and great refers to the 
thing as existing; middling is neither the one nor the other, and other 
things refers to the six faculties of sense.)? 


I This fourfold distinction of joy as existing in the Process of Realization corre 
to that which we have just read above: ‘In the lotus lies knowledge; here is union, E 
bliss.” The Omniscient One is Vajradhara (according to K) or Vajrasattva (according to E 
who is the product of the union of Sun and Moon. See above I. iii. 11 and viii. 8. Hes 
the present equation. These four joys are here factors in the Process of Realization Ad 
they are all present together, and may be regarded as the absolute aspect of the Four å 1 
next listed, which are four stages, the first three of which belong to the relative sp S o 

2 This verse which is intended as an explanation of the preceding verse, only sen FA 
obscure that which is already sufficiently clear. Madhyamam varjitam aoa asd 
stereotyped phrase and here adds nothing to the sense. S in commenting upon t RD S 
ignores it: Small means the atom and knowledge and so on; great means earth, m: 


sponds 
thence 


76 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
THE TROUPE OF YOGINIS 


I. viii 


(39) Whatever things there are, moving and motionless, all these things 
am L They are accepted as being equal and the same by those who have 
realized the truth and find everywhere the same flavour. (40) To be equal 
is to be the same, and of this the manifestation! is the flavour. There is a 
single substance of the one same flavour,? and in this sense it is said: 

(41) The whole of existence arises in me, 
In me arises the threefold world, 
By me pervaded is this all, 
Of nought else does this world consist. 

(42) Whatever yogin, thinking thus, should perform the practice in 
complete self-control, he will succeed, there is no doubt, even though he 
be a man of little merit. (43) Eating, drinking, performing ablutions, 
awake, asleep, it is thus he should think, and so seeking after the Great 
Symbol, he will gain thereby that eternal state. 

(44) One conceives of the whole of existence in that the mind does not 
conceive of it, and in this perfect knowledge, the conceiving is a non- 
conceiving.3 

(45) Whatsoever things there are, whether moving or motionless, grass 
and shrubs and creeping-plants, they are conceived of as the supreme 
essence and possessing the nature that one possesses oneself. (46) In them 
there is just one without a second, great bliss which is self-experiencing. It 
is from this self-experiencing that perfection comes, and in self-experiencing 
consists thought-creation. (47) Karma consists of this same self- 
experiencing, for karma arises when it is thwarted.* One is oneself the 
ocean and so on; middling means pot and cloth and so on’—dman pa ni rdul phra rab dan 
ye fes la sogs paho | phul du byun ba sa dan ri dan rgya mtsho la sogs paho | bar ma ni bum 
pa dan snam bu la sogs paho | (xv. 161a 5-6). ER 

I *Manifestation'—cakra, that is to say the bhavacakra, manifestation in phenomenal 
form, which is the cycle of existence. So V: ‘ “The flavour is its manifestation", from this 
ordering of the discourse we have the meaning that the circle of the bliss of pure light (the 
Innate) arises from the cycle of existence of the threefold world which arises in the 
twelvefold manner (pratityasamutpåda), and this (Innate) is not to be sought elsewhere." 
ro ni de yi hkhor lo yin | žes bya ba la | de ltar brjod pahi rim pas hjig rten gsum gyi srid pahi 
hkhor lo yan lag bcu gfüs lugs su hbyun ba hdr ñid kho na las hod gsal bahi bde bahi hkhor lo 
hbyun bas géan du mi btsal ges pahi don to | (xv. 69b 7-704 1). : 

2 ‘This primary substance which is the same and of one flavour is the threefold world, 
and no second substance apart from this is to be seen'—míiam pa dan ro gcig par bya bahi 
gái ni srid pahi hkhor lo ñid de | hdi las ma gtogs pahi don ghis pa ni hgah yan yod par ma 
mthon no | (V : xv. 704 1-2). 

3 Compare the oft quoted verse: 
conceiving is no conceiving. Thu 
about.' 


"Existence is a conceiving of the non-existent, and this 
s existence is no existence and no conceiving comes 


abhåvabhåvanå bhåvo bhåvanå naiva bhåvanå 
iti bhåvo na bhåvah syåd bhavana nopalabhyate | 2 
GS, p. 11; PK, p. 2, V. 19; Sekoddesatika, p. 41. 
v C i ition, that is to say it opposes this great bliss, which is 
RR RI A et (vikalpa) and such contention, which fails 


self-experiencing, with discriminating th osu : N 
to recognize its own true nature because of the effect of beginningless ignorance. btsod pa 


las ni las skyes te des pa ni thog ma med pahi ma rig pahi stobs kyits) ran báin yons su ma $es 


77 


L. viii CC-0. Agamnigam Digital RAS NLR FoukdåtNar Shåndigarh 


Destroyer, the Creator, the King, the Lord. (48) Passion and Wrath 
envy, delusion, and pride, none of these can prevail one sixteenth a i 
against this delightful spot." (49) It is the origin of all that ig: x 
knowledge; it is like space and it comprises Means. It is there us 
threefold world arises of the nature of Wisdom and Means. (50) The Lord 
(Means) has the form of sukra, and the Lady (Wisdom) is the bliss that 
arises fromit. He is free of the notions of unity and plurality, and she who 
is born of a moment, is the one supreme delight. (51) Self-realizing is this 
knowledge which surpasses the scope of words. It is a process of empower- 
ing, for it consists of the knowledge that pertains to the Omniscient Unes 3 

(52) Earth, water, wind, fire, and space; none may obstruct at that 
moment the knowledge that knows self and other.? (53) At that moment 
it assumes one form together with the heavens, hells and abodes of men. 
Thus obstruction becomes impossible from that thought which distin- 
guishes self and other. 

(54) Perfection is not achieved by all the vedas and siddhåntas, and by 
purification there is another birth in another existence. (55) Vain is the 
striving of him who does not know Hevajra, for without him there can be 
no perfection in this world or the next. (56) So always, all day and night, 
one should abide in union with this one essential, like the flowing of the 
river’s stream and the steadiness of the lantern’s light. 


it is 


t the 


CHAPTER ix. THE SPHERES OF PURIFICATION 


a. (1) Now I shall further expound the chapter on purification.t The 
purified condition of all things whatsoever is known as the very truth 
itself. Proceeding from this we now speak of the purificatory power of the 
divinities, taking one by one. 

(2) The six faculties of sense, their six spheres of operation; the five 


pahi rnam par rtog pa la sogs pahi rtsod pas bde ba chen po ran rig pa dan hgal lo | (xv. 162a 5). 
K read bodhanåt and interpreted accordingly (p. 128, 1. 30), but he is still forced to 
explain the word in an adverse sense as though it were vikalpa, and this is not its normal 
meaning. He says it is an acceptance of things under the form of subject and object, which 
is much the sense required by the context, but bådhanåt lends itself better to this inter- 
pretation. See also verse 52. 

1 ‘This spot —tatpada = its place, the place of the self-experiencing (K : p. 128, |. 35): 
Perhaps in the present context better understood as the seat of the Destroyer, Creator, re 
viz. Vajrasattva (see I. viii. 8). This is also the spot (bindu) at the centre of the mandala. 
Numerous are the associations. See Introduction, p. 26. 

2 In this sense therefore it is theirs to bestow. See chapter 4 of Part I. ` d 

3 S: "At the moment of the arising of the Innate, every thing assumes Its DE = 
there is none of the conflict of a twofold nature. All conflict belongs to the sphere of tw Es 
and in the absence of two who can produce it and what is the conflict ? Such is the Ke T 
lhan cig skyes pa hbyun bahi skad cig la thams cad de dan dehi ran båin nid du gyur te 2 E 
kyi(s) tshul gyis rtsod pa med paho | rtsod pa thams cad ni gitis kyi spyod yul te | gris su 
pa la su Zig gan gi rtsod par byed ces bya bahi don to | (xv. 163a 4-5)- 

4 See reference to purification (visuddhi) in the Introduction, p. 29. 

5 ‘Is known’—smrta, or as K understands it: ‘has been taught’, namely 

6 There are really twelve dyatana; I interpret here as visaya (cf. II. iii. 31, 34): 


78 


ly in I. viii. 35-47 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
THE SPHERES OF PURIFICATION I. ix 


skandhas and the five elements are pure in essence, but they are obscured 
by the molestations of ignorance. 

(3) Their purification consists in self-experience, and by no other means 
of purification may one be released. This self-experiencing, this bliss 
supreme, arises from the pure condition of the spheres of sense. (4) Form 
and so on and whatever other spheres of sense there are, for the yogin all 
these appear in their purified condition, for of Buddha-nature! is this 
world. 

(s) Vajragarbha said: “O Lord, what are these things unpurified?” 

The Lord replied: “They are form and so on. And how so? Because of 
their nature as subject and object.’ 

Vajragarbha said: “What are these subjects and objects?’ 

(6) The Lord replied: ‘Form is perceived by the eye, sound is heard by 
the ear, smell is perceived by the nose, and taste by the tongue, ’tis sure; 
(7) things are sensed by the body and feelings of pleasure and so on are 
received by the mind. These are worthy of indulgence and should be 
indulged, when once rendered innocuous by purification. 

(8) So there is Vajra for the rüpa-skandha (bodily form), 

Gauri for the vedana-skandha (feeling), 
Våriyogini for the samjfia-skandha (perception), 
Vajradåkini for the samskåra-skandha (impulses), 
(9) Nairatmya for the vijfiana-skandha (consciousness). 
Such is the inner circle, and by the purificatory power of these, yogins who 
seek this truth will always gain their end. 

(10) As for the outer circle: 

in the north-east there is Pukkasi 

in the south-east there is Savari 

in the south-west there is Candali 

in the north-west there is Dombini 
(11) in the east is Gauri II? 

in the south is Cauri 

in the west is Vetali 

in the north is Ghasmari 

at the nadir is Bhücari who represents samsåra 
(12) at the zenith is Khecari who represents mrvana. 


Such they are in the Process of Emanation. 
(13) Gauri is for form, 
Cauri is for sound, 


* Literally: ‘made of buddha’, consisting essentially in an enlightened or purified cons 


dition. e j AI 
2 Gauri II—'this is another Gauri. but her name 1s the same’ (K: p. 130, 1. 33). Also 


see p. 31. 


79 


p^ 


I. ix CC-0. Agamnigam Mila PÆRValidirFaurDatidi TOR dndigarh 


Vetali is for smell, 

Ghasmari is for taste, 
(14) Bhücari is for touch, 

Khecari is for thought. 


By the purificatory power of these, yogins who seek this truth will gain their 
end. 


b. (15) The purificatory significance of the sixteen arms is the sixteen kinds 
of voidness.! 


The four legs signify the crushing of the four Maras,? 

The faces the eight releases,’ 

The eyes the three adamantine ones, 
(16) Pukkasi is for earth, 

Savari is for water, 

Candalini is for fire, 

Dombi is for wind. 
(17) Nairatmyas is pervaded by wrath, 

Våriyogini by passion, 

Vajradakini by envy, 

The hidden Gauri® by malignity, 
(18) Vajra by delusion. 


By these the skandhas are purified in the Process of Emanation. 
(19) That by which the world is bound, by that same its bonds are 
released, but the world is deluded and knows not this truth, and he who is 


deprived of this truth will not gain perfection. 
(20) So it is said: “No smell, no sound, no form, no taste, and no 


1 The sixteen kinds of voidness are given by K (p. 131, ll. 1-5). His list corresponds 
with that of the Madhyantavibhanga, where they are fully commented upon (see Stcher- 
batsky’s translation in Bibliotheca Buddhica XXX, pp. 86-99). See also Dinnaga’s Prajhå- 
paramitapindartha, edited and translated by G. Tucci in FRAS 1947, PP- 53-75- The list 
in Mvp (934-51) is eighteen-fold as is that of the Samdhinirmocanasütra (ed. Lamotte, 

. 108). 
å 2 four Maras are: *Shandhamara who takes the form of Brahma, Klesamåra 
takes the form of a yaksa, Mrtyumára who takes the form of Yama and Devaputra: 
who takes the form of Indra’ (Bh: xv. 257b 7). 2 

3 For the eight degrees of release see Mup, 1511-18, also Soothill and Hodous, Dic- 
tionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms, pp. 39-40. 

4 The three adamantine ones are Body, Speech and Mind (K: p. 131, 1:77) NE his 

5 All versions read Vajrå (instead of Nairåtmyå), thus her name appears twice n 
set of five. Although textually unchallengeable, it is certainly Nairátmyá who is ps oo 
for she, like Aksobhya/Hevajra, is dvesatmika and occupies the centre of the manda 2 = 
the commentators only B points this out: rDo rje can Zes pa ste bdag med paho (xv. 258a dere 
* adamantine” (vajrin) means "absence of self” (nairåtmyå). One should note ma a 
is sometimes textual confusion between the forms Vajri and Vajra. Vajri is Quer E. 
masc. sing. of vajrin ‘adamantine’ as used at II. iii. x and II. v. I. Tibetan clearly 
guishes the two forms: rDo rje ma = Vajrå, rDo rje can = varm. 

6 ‘Hidden Gauri’—Gauri of the inner circle as opposed to Gauri II. 


80 


who 
mara 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


A 
THE SPHERES OF PURIFICATION I. ix 


purification of thought, no touch, no substance, for the world is essentially 
pure by a universal purification. Ah, I know the world.” 


CHAPTER X. CONSECRATION 


a. (1) Now I shall expound the ordering of the mandala, by means of which 
a pupil is consecrated, and of the rite too I shall speak. 

(2) First the yogin, himself the essence of the god, should purify the site, 
and having zealously prepared the requisite protection, he should then 
inscribe the mandala. (3) In a garden or in a lonely spot or in a bodhisattva’s 
house? or in the centre of the mandala-hall+ one should lay out the mandala 
supreme, (4) using the sacred writing-colours,5 or secondly powder made 
from the five gems, or else the grains of rice and so on. (5) With these the 
mandala should be made, in size three cubits plus three inches. The 
celestial spell who comes of the Five Families, should be placed there, 
(6) or whatsoever sixteen-year-old girl is found.6 A yogini is resorted to, so 
long as she possesses sukra. (7) One binds the face of the prajña and like- 
wise of the upåya, and the product of the service rendered one drops into 
the pupil's mouth. (8) In that very act the Flavour of Sameness should be 
placed within the pupil's range. 


b. From self-experiencing comes this knowledge, which is free from ideas 
of self and other; (9) like the sky it is pure and void, the essence supreme of 
non-existence and existence, a mingling of Wisdom and Means, a mingling 
of passion and absence of passion. (10) It is the life of living things, it is 
the Unchanging One Supreme; it is all-pervading, abiding in all embodied 
things. (11) It is the stuff the world is made of, and in it existence and non- 
existence have their origin. (12) It is all other things that there are: the 
universal consciousness, the primeval man, Isvara, åtman, jiva, sattva, 


I I know’—manye is explained as jånami (K: p. 131, 1. 20). Likewise in the rst 
person by Bh: 7ias ses pa (xv. 2594 5). Š 

2 ‘The requisite protection’—literally : having made it HOM Vajra. Seep. 56 fn. ; 

3 «Bodhisattva's house'—K:: ‘of Vajrapani and so on’ (hence in their temple); D: ‘of a 
yogin or king of compassionate disposition or in a monastery building, where there are 
books, for their essence is the bodhisattva'—byan chub sems pahi khyim ni rnal hbyor 
paham rgyal po la sogs pa shin rje dan Idan paho ! yar ps lag khan ste po ti glegs bam gnas 

aho | dehi bdag po byan chub sems dpah yin pahi phyir ° E 
Å 4 UE EHE US where e "ie el or else a temple. dkyil hkhor khan 
pa ni sgrub pahi gnas sam lha khan no (D i xvii. 378a 7-b 1). 

5 For the sacred writing-colours, see 1. 11. 20- pe 3 cor 

6 For the names and renne of these five yoginis see diagram VIII. They may be 
imagined or actually represented. V: Then in order to teach foolish wording tns zo 
of passion one should place in the mandala a girl as described below, who bears 5 c s 
of the five families, who is expert in the Secret Way and has previously received a IST 
— de nas byis pa rnams la hdod chags kyi lam bstan par bya bahi phyir hog nas sone ae 
bu mo rigs Inahi rtags can gsan bahi theg pa la mchog tu gzol ba son du legs par sbyans 
dkyil hkhor du g£ug go | (xv. 775 172). 


G 
B 0309 81 


I.x CC-0. Agamnigam Digital PrestvAtioR Rabine Rbandigarh 


kala, pudgala. It is the essential nature of all existing things and illuso 
in its forms. T 
(13) First is just Joy, 
Secondly is Joy Supreme, 
Thirdly is the Joy of Cessation, 
Fourth is the Joy Innate. 


(15) The first Joy is of this world, the second Joy is of this world, the 
third Joy is of this world, but the Innate exists not in these three.’ 

(14)! Hearing this, all the buddhas, Vajragarbha and the rest, were seized 
with the greatest astonishment and fell senseless to the ground. 

(16) Then the Lord Hevajra whose form comprises all the Buddhas 
said these words for the arousing of Vajragarbha, and which were š 
wondrous cure for their astonishment. 

(17) “Neither passion nor absence of passion is found there, nor yet a 
middle state. Because of its freedom from all three the Innate is called 
perfect enlightenment. (18) The essence of all things and yet free of all 
things, one may mark it at the beginning of Cessation,” but from those 
other three Joys it is free. (19) At first it appears as cloud, but with 
realization arisen it appears as måyå; then it suddenly appears as sleep with 
no distinction between sleep and the waking state. (20) The yogin of the 
Great Symbol gains fulfilment in that which is no fulfilment, for its 
characteristic is the very absence of any characteristic.” 


c. Then the Master spoke of the mandala, blazing (21) and brilliant, square 
with four portals, adorned with garlands and chains and variously coloured 
streamers, equipped with eight columns (22) and vajra-threads, decorated 
with flowers of different hues, with incense, lamps, and scents, and pro- 
vided with the eight vessels. (23) These last have branches in them, and 
their necks are covered with cloth and encircled with the five kinds of gem. 
To the east one should place the Vessel of Victory. (24) With a fair new 
thread, well-fastened and of right measurement, the master should bind it 
round, for it represents the chosen divinity. (25) He should repeat one 
hundred thousand times the mantra of the central divinity, and ten thousand 
times that of the other components. With the mantra quoted above he 
should purify the site, (26) but first he should present an offering accom- 
panied by the mantra: om A-kåro, &c.3 He should perform the rite of pro- 
tection just as prescribed, for as for meditation so it is here. (27) The 


I According to the order of the text, this sloka should follow (13), but it is very ve 
K explains it as inserted by the sarigitikåra (p. 133, l. r). There is no textual just! S 
for attempting to re-order the verses. The change in the translation, however, g1VeS 
of reading without distortion of the sense. : 

2 *At the beginning of the Joy of Cessation'—see the Introduction, p. 35: 

3 "This mantra is the first listed in Ch. 2 (p. 50). 


82 


e . — Y o ,. TÚ Ú — 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


CONSECRATION I.x 


consecrations which are taught, he should give correctly in his mandala 
and worship and supplication should be made as ordained. SER 

(28) He should draw the unblemished twofold circle of Gauri and her 
companions. In the east he should draw a knife! and continue likewise to 
the south and west (29) and north, to south-east, south-west, north-west, 
north-east, even as it is prescribed, and likewise to nadir and zenith. 

(30) Then the master should enter the mandala as two-armed Hevajra, 
and assuming the majestic bearing of Vajrasattva, he should adopt the 
ålidha* posture. (31) He is washed and purified and perfumed, and adorned 
with the various adornments. HUM HUM he cries majestically, HI HI he 
cries to terrify. 


d. (32) Then the essence is declared, pure and consisting in knowledge, 
where there is not the slightest difference between samsåra and nirvana. 


(33) Nothing is mentally produced in the highest bliss, and no one pro- 
duces it, 
There is no bodily form, neither object nor subject, 
Neither flesh nor blood, neither dung nor urine, 
No sickness, no delusion, no purification, 
(34) No passion, no wrath, no delusion, no envy, 
No malignity, no conceit of self, no visible object, 
Nothing mentally produced and no producer, 
No friend is there, no enemy, 
Calm is the Innate and undifferentiated. 


e. (35) Then Vajragarbha said: ‘How does bodily form consisting of the 
five elements come about, for in the beginning it is essentially pure and 
lacks any proper nature? 

(36) Then said the Adamantine Lord, rejoicer of the dåkimis: *Calm it 
is in its proper nature and abiding in all bodily form." 

(37) Vajragarbha then said: “But how, Lord, should the group of 
skandhas come about?” 

(38) The Lord replied: ‘At the union of vajra and lotus, earth arises 
there from that contact with the quality of hardness. (39) From the flow 
of sukra water arises, and fire from the friction. Wind comes from the 
motion, (40) and space corresponds to the bliss. Because it is involved 
with these five, bliss is not the final essence, for bliss consists in the 
elements. (41) The Innate is proclaimed as that which arises in spontaneity. 
The Innate is called self-nature, the single unity of all phenomenal forms. 


ds normally in the right hand: in 


1 E 7 the symbol she hol U 
Pach goddess p eni sen and so on in accordance with the 


the east Gauri by a knife, in the south Cauri by a drum, 
list given in chapter 5 of Part II (p. 111). 

2 Glidha—‘a particular attitude in shooting, 
leg retracted’ (Apte). 


the right knee being advanced and the left 


83 


Ix CC-0. Agamnigam Dldilài PEdS SVAtbR. Bou aas nr Bhåndigarh 


(42) The yogin is Means and Compassion, and the yogint Wisdom and 
Voidness for she is deprived of causation.! The thought of enlightenment 
is the undivided unity of Compassion and Voidness. 

(43) There is no recitation of mantras, no austerities, no oblations, no 
mandala, and none of its components. : 

This is the recitation of mantras, the austerities and oblations, this is the 
mandala and its components. 

This in short consists of unity of thought. 


CHAPTER Xi. THE FOUR GAZES? 


a.(1) For Overthrowing the eyes are level with the gaze directed upwards 
towards the forehead. 
For Subduing the gaze is directed towards the left and the two eyes 
towards the left. 
(2) For Conjuring forth one directs the two eyes towards the right and 
upwards. 
For Petrifying the gaze is central with the eyes looking towards the 
end of the tip of the nose.? 


I The text has only: ‘Compassion and means is the yogin, the mudrå by freedom from 
cause.” K supplies the deficiency : "The mudrå is Wisdom, and what is that? Why Voidness, 
the non-arising of all the dharmas. And how does this non-arising, this Voidness, come 
about? Because of absence of the cause” (p. 135, ll. 12-14). For full discussion of this 
theme see Stcherbatsky, Nirvāna, pp. 71 ff. 

2 For this 11th chapter we rely chiefly upon V's commentary. 

3 ‘The yogin who is striving to apply himself to the subjugating of some evil person, 
should make himself into his own chief divinity in appearance like to Aksobhya, and gazing 
with the two eyes level and directed towards the forehead, he should meditate, intone the 
mantras, and make sacrifice, and thereby the overthrowing will come about. (He looks) 
upwards because there is the bodily form of him who belongs to the family of wrath 
(Aksobhya). 

The yogin who is striving to subdue the threefold world by some means of yoga, should 
make himself like to Padmaråga, and turning his two eyes together towards the left, by 
performing the meditation and so on, he will subdue the person. This is because the 
bodily form of Padmarága is to the left. 

Likewise the yogin whois striving to conjure forth (some being in) the threefold world 
should make himself like Süryodayi*, and gazing with his eyes together slightly to n 
right and upwards, by practising the meditation and so on, he will conjure this being forth. 
This is because the bodily form of Suryodayi is to the right. id 

Likewise the yogin who is striving to reduce to rigidity someone in the threefold wor i 
should make himself like Pitarajaki*, and gazing with his eyes together over the v 
his nose, by practising the meditation and so on he will reduce the being to rigidity. + n 
is because that great subduer, whose form is yellow in colour, occupies a central POST à 

de bas na gdug pa gan sig hdul bahi sbyor ba la brtson pahi rnal hbyor pas Mi bor bli 
Ita buhi sku mdog tu ran mid lhag pahi thar bsgyur la | mig gitis dus gcig gcig tu pd EN E 
phyogs su blta báin du bsgom pa dan | bzlas pa dan sbyin sreg byas pas Thun bar m a, 
sten na Ze sdan gi rigs can kyi sku bšugs pahi phyir ro | .. - sbyor ba gan Zig AE rr " 
gsum po dban du byed pa la brtson pahi rnal hbyor pas ran ñid Padmaråga lta bur fo i: 
mig gfüs dus mñam du g' yon gyi phyogs su blta báin du bsgom pa la sogs pa byas pas I 7 
dban du hgyur te | g’yon gyi phyogs na Padmaraga lta buhi sku béugs pahi phyir ro | « 


* These names are reconstructed from the Tibetan. 


84 


| 
| 
1 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


THE FOUR GAZES I. xi 


(3) Overthrowing is accompanied by exhaling, 
Subduing by inhaling, 
Conjuring forth by holding the breath, 
and Petrifying by the tranquillized pose.! 

(4) Overthrowing must take place amidst succulent trees, 
Subduing is associated with flowers, 


Conjuring forth must take place amidst vajra-trees, 
and Petrifying in moving grass.? 


båin du hgro ba gsum po hgugs ba la brtson pahi rnal hbyor pas | ran ñid ñi ma hchar ka Ita 
buhi skur bsgyur la mig gñis dus miiam du g’yas kyi sten phyogs su cun zad blta bin du bsgom 
pa la sogs på byas pas higro ba gsum po hgugs par hgyur te | g yas phyogs na ñi ma hchar ka 
lta buhi sku båugs pahi phyir ro | . . . de bin du hjig rten gsum po rens pa la brtson pahi rnal 
hbyor pas ran ñid gSer btso ma lta buhi skur bsgyur la mig gitis dus mñam du snahi rtse mohi 
dbus su lta báin du bsgom pa la sogs pa byas pas hjig rten gsum po rens par hgyur te | dban 
chen sku gser gyi mdog lta bu dbu ma na båugs pahi phyir ro | (V: xv. 85a 4-b 3). 

1 ‘One applies oneself to the practice (of Overthrowing) while exhaling the breath, 
because by the expulsion of their breath all embodied things lose their life. One applies 
oneself to the practice (of Subduing) while inhaling the breath, because by the breath of 
life remaining within all is brought under control. One performs this practice (of Con- 
juring forth) without letting the breath escape and keeping it well inside by the pot-process, 
because one who keeps the breath inside without letting it go, conjures forth a universal 
flow of nectar like that of the moon. One performs this practice (of Petrifying) placed just 
as one is, the breath flowing in and out without deliberated inhalation, because by the 
breath of all beings becoming motionless, they become petrified.’ 

rlun phyir hbyun ba båin du sbyor ba la brison par bya ste | rlun phyir phyun nas lus can 
thams cad tshehi dus byed pahi phyir ro | . . . rlun nan du brñub båin du sbyor ba la brtson 
par bya ste | srog gi rlun nan du gnas pas thams cad dbañ du hdus pahi phyir ro | . . . rlun 
phyir ma btañ bar bum pa can gyi sbyor bas nan du legs par bkan sin bzun bas sbyor ba la 
brtson par bya ste | rlun nan du gnas sin phyir hbyun ba med pa can kun gyi bdud rtsthi rgyun 
zla ba lta bu hgugs pahi phyir ro | . . . rluñ phyi nan du spro ba dañ | brñub pa ma yin pas ji 
lta ba barn du gšag la sbyor ba la brtson par byas te | hgro ba kun gyi srog rlun g’yo ba dan 
bral bas rens par hgyur bahi phyir ro | (V : xv. 856 4-86a 1). — 

2 In order to perform these four magic rites, one carries out correctly the meditating, 
reciting, and sacrificing. So doing, one may test it on solid objects and one's practice may 
then said to be sure. Therefore in the case of practising the rite of killing, if he in the first 
instance directs the gaze that slays towards any green tree that is moist and possesses 
branches and leaves and thereby causes it to dry up, at that very time the same will apply 
towards the evil man in question. Likewise whoever with the right kind of gaze and 
breathing looks upon any flower which thereby dries up, then it will apply (elsewhere). 
Likewise whatever yogin with the right kind of gaze and breathing looks at a vajralata, 
that is a tree which is very hard and firm, and if he thereby conjures it forth 50 that the 
body of its fruit becomes quite ripe, then (the rite) will apply (elsewhere). Likewise if a 
yogin with the right kind of gaze and breathing looks upon very fine and soft grass that 
grows on the top of a high hill or mountain and is (as slender) as the hair of a horse’s tail 
and waves very much when moved by the wind, and if he thereby causes it to be unmoved 
by the wind or anything else, then (the rite) will apply (elsewhere). ig ; 

lta stans bgi po rnams bsgrub par bya bahi phyir bsgom pa dan bzlas pa dan n a a 
sogs pa cho ga b£in bsgrubs nas | re Zig bems pahi rdzas kyi dños po rnams la ñams sa pa lan | 
tin ñe hdzin brtan par gsuñs so | . . . de las khyad par du gsod pahi sbyor ba JEG Mes LOR på 
re Zig | sin ljon pa yal ga dan lo mar Idan pa rlon par hdug pa gan 218 la rnal hbyor pas riiu 
hbyun båin du bsad pahi lta bas bltas pahi tshe skam par hgyur bahi dus de tsam na ma runs 
pa la yan sbyar bar byaho | . . . de barn du lta stans dan rlun gan dag dan um Pe tog gm 
la bltas pas skam på de nas sbyar bar bya Zes bya bahi don to] . . . lta stans dan Å m gan ue 
Idan pas badzra lata ges pahi sin sin tu mkhran cin rtsub pa la rnal hbyor p 
hbras kyi sfie ma legs par smin pa ltar dgug par gyur pa na sbyar bar bya ces DAE S i : 
lta stans dan rlun gan dag dan ldan pas sgan bu mthon po dan | ri bo la sogs palt rtse mo gi 


85 


I. xi CC-0. Agamnigam Digital PF6š&ÇAtipR Bondas Qhandigarh 


(5) With six months” application to the practice one will succeed, there ; 

no doubt. Let no mistakes be made about it, unthinkable are a hi Ri 
powers. (6) Having perfected the four gazes, the yogin should bring ab R 
the salvation of all beings. Actual slaying should not be done as that sem 
be indeed a breach of the convention." (7) All things not done may her 

be done except for misleading living-beings. One does not obtain de 
perfection of the sign by simply harming living-beings. 


b. (8) For the sake of perfection in Hevajra he should consume the fivefold 
sacrament of initial NA, initial GA, initial HA, final $va and initial $va. (9) 
So five ambrosias one should consume for the sake of perfection in 
Hevajra.? 

Then one should mark out a 'seven-timer'? with the characteristics 
recounted in Hevajra. (10) In the seventh birth there comes about that 
perfection, making of no account the Joy of Cessation (which precedes it). 
He has a fair-sounding voice, beauteous eyes and a sweet-smelling body of 


dag na skyes pahi rtsa phra mo Sin tu miien pa | rtahi ria mahi ñag ma tsam la rlun gis bskyod 
na cher g yo bahi bdag iiid can la rnal hbyor pas bltas pa na rlun la sogs pas mi sgul ba na sbyar 
bar byaho | (V : xv. 86a 1-7). 

1 ‘The rites of slaying and so on which have been spoken of, are for frightening beings 
in order to subjugate them, and by means of that to put them (on the right path); if on the 
other hand one actually killed them, that would be a breaking of the convention of the Great 
Symbol and one would fall into the Avici Hell'—bsad pa la sogs pahi las gan dag gsuns pa 
de dag sems can gdul bahi phyir re žig skrag par bya ba yin la des hjug par yan hgyur te | 
gšan du ni hes par gtan du gsad na phyag rgya chen pohi dam tshig ñams te mnar med par 
hgro bar hgyur ro | (V : xv. 86b 5-6). 

2 "Those who keep to the convention of Hevajra should eat according to the external 
interpretation and be watchful according to the internal. 

As for this the first letter of the name man (nara) is NA, the first letter of the name cow 
(go) is GA, the first letter of the name elephant (hastin) is HA, the last letter of the name horse 
(asva) is $va and the first letter of the name dog (svan) is $vA. Putting these materials 
together, one should make them into pellets the size of a thumb-joint, then purify them, 
mix them together and burn them, make them into an elixir and eat them; by this means 
one gains external perfection. Likewise by saying that these are the five faculties of sense, 
the eye and so on, with the name of cow (go), &c., which are turned away from their 
spheres and kept so, there is produced the extreme state of watchfulness. Likewise the 
five ambrosias, MU (mutra), MA (måmsa), VI (vit), RA (rakta), and $u (sukra) are to be treated 
with the distinction of exoteric and esoteric significance, such is the teaching of the 
Tathagata.’ 

Kyehi rDorjehi dam tshig la gnas pa rnams kyis phyi nan gi bye brag gis phye la bzah ba 
dan bsrun ba byaho | de la skyes buhi min gi dan pohi yi ge NAho | gan gi ba lan gi m 
gi dan pohi yi ge G Aho | HA ni glan po chehi min gi dan pohi yi geho | SVA ni rtahi pikan 
mahi min gi yi geho | de bzin du SVA ni khyihi min gi dan pohi yi geho | rdzas hdi wu 
mfiam par byas la mthe bohi tshigs mdud tsam gyi ril bu byas te sbyan ba dan ! spel ba "s 
sbar ba dan bdud rtsir byas te zos pas phyihi dnos grub tu hgyur la | de bén du gan gi ds 
sogs pahi min can mig la sogs pahi dban po rnams yul las bzlog ste gnas par gsuris Ee a 
gi bsrun bar” hgyur ro | de bzin du bdud rtsi Ina ste | BI dar MU dan M. 4 dan RA S er 
rnams kyan phyi nan gis phye la spyad par bya ba de béin g$egs pahi bkah lun no | (V: 2 
87a 1-5). 

3 For the ‘seven-timer’ see p. 71 


š stan 
orrected to bsrun bar written by a Tibet 


; I. his i 
srub par on the block-print, but this is c n OR Ee CEU 


hand on a small piece of paper and stuck over the error in the 


86 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
THE FOUR GAZES 


I. xi 


great splendour, (11) and he possesses seven shadows.! When he sees such 
a one the yogin should mark him out. By the mere eating of his flesh one 
will gain at that moment the powers of an aerial being.? 


c. (12) Now I shall give the sådhana of Kurukullā, by means of which all 
beings are brought into subjection. It has been mentioned before in brief, 
and is told in full in twelve parts.3 (13) This goddess arises from the syllable 
HRIH, is red in colour with four arms, and in her hands she holds a bow, an 
arrow, a blue lotus, and a hook. (14) By merely meditating upon her one 
brings the threefold world to subjection. By 100,000 recitations of her 
mantra one reduces kings, by 10,000 the people, (15) by xo million cattle 
and yaksas, by 700,000 the titans, by 200,000 the gods, and yogins by 100. 


1 According to D: fat the time of the full-moon one should smear the cavity in the lower 
part of the leg of a vulture with vairocana (one of the five ambrosias), and look; if his seven 
shadows then appear, one will know he is a seven-timer—7iahi dus su bya rgod kyi rje nar 
gyi sbubs rnam par sna mdzad kyi byugs la | bltas na dehi grib ma bdun byun na ske bar bdun 
par ses par bya | (xvii. 387a 3-4). 

2 *Khecaratva means having the universal power of a vidyådhara, possessing that know- 
ledge which is like the sky'—mkhah la spyod pa ñid ces pa ni rig pa hdzin pahi hkhor los 
sgyur ba hdzin pa füd nam mkhah dak miiam pahi ye ses riied pa fd do | (xv. 172b 5). 

3 See Ch. 2, (19) and (26), which are the previous references to this goddess. The 
twelve parts refer to extended version of the Hevajra-tantra, concerning which see Intro- 
duction, p. 16. 


87 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


PART II 


CHAPTER i. CONSECRATIONS AND OBLATIONS 


a. (1) Then Vajragarbha said: "May the Adamantine Lord, whose form 
comprises all the Buddhas, tell us about the consecration of books and 
images and so on, just as it should be.” 

(2) The Lord replied: “Having made the correct oblation and laid out 
the mandala, at night-fall one should prepare the image, the requisite 
arrangements being made. (3) Then into its heart one should cause to 
enter the buddhas of all the directions, remaining united with one's chosen 
divinity and with full and intuitive knowledge of the mantras. 


(4) 'om Vajra-flower AH HUM SVAHA’ 
‘om Vajra-incense ee : 
‘om Vajra-lamp Peles A 
‘om Vajra-perfume RT : 
"OM Vajra-offering OE es 2 


(5) So one should present flowers and so on, produced variously from the 
syllable HÜM, offerings of water for the feet and so on, all as before in 
accordance with the way of former tantras."? 


b. The oblations:? 


(6) For Propitiation the place for the fire should be round, 
for the Bestowing of Prosperity it should be square, 
for Slaying it should be triangular, and here too one should perform 
the others. 
(7) For Propitiation it should be one cubit across and half a cubit deep, 
For the Bestowing of Prosperity two cubits across and one deep, 
(8) For Slaying twenty azgulas across and ten deep.* 

I pratisthå is the setting-up or consecrating of religious objects, books, images, tharikas, 
&c., and is so translated in full to distinguish it from abhiseka, also translated by ‘con- 
secration’. Text has literally: ‘the excellent characteristic (= nature) of consecration. 
Concerning this rite see also TPS i, pp. 308-16. 

2 According to Bh (xv. 268b 3) the former tantras are the Tattvasamgraha and so on. 


Compare II. v. 57. 
3 V associates these rites with the elements and cakras within the body thus: 


Pacifying Water Forehead 

Prospering Earth Navel 

Slaying Space Top of the head 1) 
Subduing Fire Throat (xv. 89b 7-994 1: 


This arrangement conflicts with the normal ordering of the elements within the beats 
(See Introduction, p. 38). For the identifying of ‘slaying’ with ‘bliss’ (which corresp 
with the top of the head, viz. the mahåsukhacakra) see I. v. 21. tents 
4 Literally: ‘two cubits and one cubit below and above’, and so on. The on d Ee 
give any precision is the Chinese, where we have: "broad one cubit, deep half a vs a 
broad two cubits, deep one cubit . . . broad ten inches, deep five inches G ist Himå- 
Jiwong Monastery in Shar-Khumbu, I saw such a ceremony performed (Buddhi 


laya, pp. 259-60). 
88 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


CONSECRATIONS AND OBLATIONS II. i 


For Propitiation it is white, for the Bestowing of Prosperity it is 
yellow, (9) for Slaying black, and for Subduing red. 
Conjuring forth is as for Subduing, and causing Hatred is as for Slaying. 
(10) As for the actual oblations, for Propitiation one uses sesame oil for 
Bestowing Prosperity curds, for Slaying, causing Hatred and other 
harmful rites one uses thorns, and a blue lotus for Subduing and 
Conjuring forth. 
(11) The mantra for invoking Fire: 
OM Agni of mighty energy, fulfiller of all desires, who in compassion 
serves all beings, be thou present here. 
(12) The invocation of the Earth-Goddess: 
Thou Goddess, honoured by Hevajra's wrath, 
Mother of the Earth, and bearer of many kinds of gems, 
Thou art witness here, for I, so and so, would lay out the mandala. 
(13) The mantra for gratifying Fire: 
Go thou, O Consumer of the Offering, to prosper the affairs of your- 
self and of others. At the right time you will approach. 
Grant me complete success. 
(14) Mantra of the offerings: OM JAH HUM VAM HAH KHAM RAM 
Mantra of the water for the feet: OM NI RI HUM KHAH 
Mantra of the food-offering: OM DHVAM DHVAM DHVAM 


CHAPTER il, THE CERTAINTY OF SUCCESS 


a. (1) Vajragarbha said: ‘But how should beings reach perfection by means 
of their chosen divinity, when they find themselves amidst all the elements 
of existence as extensive as space, (lost) like a goad in the ocean?’ 

(2) The Lord replied: ‘One who desires perfection should keep his inner 
self in union with Nairåtmya or Sri Heruka, and not even for a moment 
should his thought be deflected elsewhere. (3) For one who is persever- 
ing for the first time, that place is considered propitious, where single- 
minded and self-collected a yogin may gain success. (4) At night in his 
own house, confident of gaining perfection, the wise man should meditate 
upon the Yogini or upon Sri Heruka in his manifested form. (5) (Moreover 
at all times) whether washing the feet or eating, rinsing the mouth or 
chewing betel-nut, rubbing the hands with sandal-wood, or girding the 
hips with the loin-cloth, (6) going-out, making conversation, walking, 
standing, in wrath, in laughter, the wise man should honour the Lady, 
strong in his vows, he should meditate upon the Yogini.! (7) Seekers of 

å i i a (samåhitayoga) and continuous yoga 
Gene zn practice as e MI Å ES times (trisandhi) 


i i f mental control. Com- 
and elsewhen’ (B: xv. 269a 6); the other is a continuous process 0 L 
pare the end 2 Ch. 4, Part I. Bhagavati (the Lady), Yogini is in every case Nairåtmyd. 


89 


IL ii CC-0. Agamnigam Bigitat Pree Vah JE Aa 0 H aug TORandigarh 


perfection with perfection as their goal strive never for one moment 
their thought deflected elsewhere with the mind defiled by ignoran 

(8) O Vajragarbha, I call meditation the destroyer of evil. Try it one 
night with zeal, making perfection your goal, (9) abandoning all discursive 
thought, your mind set on the form of the divinity. Try it one da 

meditating uninterruptedly. (10) There are no other means in the . 
for gaining the end of yourself and others, for a spell, once acquired 
brings about immediate realization.! Å 


to have 


b. (11) By fears and passions and sorrows, by griefs and torments and such 
calamities, by passion, wrath, and delusion, the yogin is not disturbed. 
(12) Thus understanding the ripening of the fruit of good and evil acts, 
how should yogins stay one moment in the Raurava Hell? 

(13) Perpetrators of the five great evil acts and those who delight in 
taking life, also those of wretched birth, and fools who are wicked in their 
conduct, (14) and ugly brutes with distorted limbs, these gain perfection 
by the right use of thought. So certainly will he succeed who practises the 
ten virtues, is devoted to his master with his senses well controlled, (15) and 
is free from pride and wrath. 


c. Keeping continuously to the practice, perfected in the siddhi and self- 
collected, (16) for one month one should privately continue, while one 
awaits the acquiring of a mudrå. The yogin then receives instructions. He 
is instructed by the yoginis: (17) "Take such and such a Mudra, O Vaj- 
radhrk, and serve the cause of living-beings." Taking this girl, who has 
wide-open eyes and is of age? and endowed with youth and beauty, (18) he 
should consecrate her with the seed of enlightenment. Beginning with the 
ten rules of virtuous conduct, he should expound to her the Dharma, (19) 
how the mind is fixed on the divine form, on the meaning of symbolic 
forms and concerning one-pointedness of mind, and in one month she will 
be fit, of that there is no doubt. (20) And so the girl is there, now freed 
from all false notions, and received as though she were a boon. Or else he 
should produce a Mudra by conjuring her forth by his own power (21) 


I Bh ‘As for this "spell once acquired”, according to some treatises it does not bane 
about immediate realization; in the way of Prajñāpāramitā enlightenment comes š 


i 1 på " . . . n a 
after three immeasurable kalpas. But as for this destroying of evil and this realizi b 
at we read) a fortnight, 


d of half a month or ha : 
rahood in this life. 
v mnon du byed par 
m gyis byan 
gtogs 


te] tshe hdi mid la sans rgyas paham rdo rje hdzin pa thob par Kr ro | (xv. 2 
2 ‘of age’—sihlakarppurasamyuktam = ‘possessed of frankincense an pa | (XV: 
Il. iii. 59. V:Ahrag hbyun bahi dus la bab pa byan chub sems kyi bde ba la dgah al 


93b 5-6). 
90 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 

THE CERTAINTY OF SUCCESS II. ii 
from amongst the gods or titans or men, or the yaksas or kinnaras. Then 
taking her, one should perform the practice with the realization of one's 
own composure. (22) For this practice, which is called terrifying in appear- 
ance,! is not taught for the sake of enjoyment, but for the examination of 
one’s own thought, whether the mind is steady or waving.’ 


d. (23) Vajragarbha said: “By one who is joined in union with Nairatmya 
how can any distinction be made in the meaning of mudrå? And with this 
Mudra and that Mudra, with two Mudras in fact, how should the perfection 
of the Great Mudra come about ?? 

(24) The Lord replied: ‘Relinquishing her form as a woman, she would 
assume that of her Lord. Gone are her breasts, and his vajra is manifest 
with a bell on each side, where the Jotus had been. 

(25) The rest of the form of the mighty and blissful Heruka (26) easily 
assumes the masculine condition of the man who is in union with Heruka, 
and from this the perfection of the Great Symbol would come about for 
the yogin of such manifest power. (27) This identity of Wisdom and Means 
remains unharmed by the twofold process of origination and dissolution, 
for Means is the origination and Wisdom the dissolution and end of 
existence. (28) So in truth there is neither destruction nor origination. 
Having dissolved away, it has come to its end, and since there can now be 
no dissolution, neither is there destruction. (29) The yogin conceives of 
the diversity of existence as the Process of Emanation, and realizing the 
dream-like nature of this diversity, he renders it undiversified by means of 
its diversity. (30) Like a dream, like a mirage, like the “intermediate 
state”, so the mandala appears from continuous application to the practice. 
(31) The great bliss, such as one knows it in the consecrations of the Great 
Symbol, of that the mandala is the full and efficacious expression, for 
nowhere else does it have its origin. (32) This bliss is black and yellow, 
red and white, dark green, dark blue, all things moving and unmoving. 
(33) This bliss is Wisdom, this bliss is Means, and likewise it is their union. 
It is existence, it is non-existence, and it is Vajrasattva.” 

(34) Vajragarbha said: “This state of unity achieved in the Process of 

1 AGN Ux it is very bad, but he construes wrongly. 
Ha EE Ee Å form terrifying to fools’ —hjigs pali 
gzugs can Zes bya ba ni byis pa dag la rab tu hjigs pahi gzugs can gyis so | (xv. 272a 6). 

2 The question follows logically from the previous discourse concerning the divine 
Mudrå, Nairåtmyå, with whom the union is one of meditation, and the physical mudrå, 
with whom the union is physical. But the answer given implies a slightly different ques- 
tion: ‘How by union with Nairåtmyå (alone) does the condition of the (Great) Mudrå come 


about, since perfection in the (Great) Mudrå comes from two demens Mcr 
Means?” Bh and V therefore interpret the sloka in this sense, or rather attempt to ) 


for the text will not permit it. š : : m 
3 The themes of this discourse, namely the essential unity of Hevajra and Nairåtmyå, 


: : b 
of Means and Wisdom, of the evolution and reabsorption of pom and e ce a 
as the representation of this process, are discussed in the Introduction, pp- 24, T 


91 


IL. ii CC-0. Agamnigam Dial Pid& A bR. GI ATT Ghåndigarh 


Realization is deemed as Excellent Bliss, as Great Bliss, so what i 
of the Process of Emanation except for conceiving it as Realization » 


(35) The Lord replied: ‘Oho, Great Bodhisattva, by dint of faith iti 
destroyed, they say." E 


S the Use 


e. Without bodily form how should there be bliss? Of bliss one could 

E S not 
speak. The world is pervaded by bliss, which pervades and is itself per- 
vaded. (36) Just as the perfume of a flower depends upon the flower, and 
without the flower becomes impossible, likewise without form and so on 
bliss would not be perceived. (37) I am existence, I am not existence, I ad 
the Enlightened One for I am enlightened concerning what things are, 
But me they do not know, those fools, afflicted by indolence. (38) I 
dwell in Sukhavati in bliss with the Vajrayogini, in that place which is 
symbolized by the syllable £,? in that casket of buddha-gems. 

(39) I am the teacher, and I am the doctrine, I am the disciple endowed 
with good qualities. I am the goal, and I am the trainer. I am the world 
and worldly things. (40) My nature is that of Innate Joy and I come at the 
end of the Joy that is Perfect and at the beginning of the Joy of Cessation: 
So be assured, my son, it is like a lamp in darkness. 

(41) I am the Master with the thirty-two marks, the Lord with the 
eighty characteristics and I dwell in bliss in Sukhavati and my name is 
sukra. (42) Without this there would be no bliss, and without bliss this 
would not be. Since they are ineffective one without the other, bliss is 
found in union with the divinity. 

(43) So the Enlightened One is neither existence nor non-existence; he 
has a form with arms and faces and yet in highest bliss is formless. 

(44) So the whole world is the Innate, for the Innate is its essence. Its 
essence too is nirvåna when the mind is in a purified state. 

(45) The divine form consists of just something born, for it is a repository 
of arms and face and colours, and moreover arises by the normal influence 
of past actions.* 


1 B: ‘By power of faith means by the self impelled by faith. So there is no knowledge 
of the form and so on even of the tathågatas. In the first instance the mind is in a E 
condition. Then there is faith. Then there is desire(abhikanksa) and action( pravrtti) E 
pahi sugs $es pa ni dad pas bskul bahi bdag ñid pas na sugs te | de lta bu ni bcom Idan hdas 
kyi(s) kyan gzugs la sogs ses pa yod pa ma yin no star brjod pa fid do | de la dari por ni ie 
rab tu dan baho | de nas ni yid ches paho | dehi rjes la mñon par hdod cin rab tu hjug ces VR 
(xv. 274b 3-4). This line is an unidentified quotation. It is not immediately relevant to 
preceding question, nor to the answer which now follows. z 

2 See p. 94, note 2. 3 Concerning these joys see the Introduction, P- D 

4 S: ‘As for the difference between the forms of buddhas and men, where their T. 
ance with faces and hands is concerned, there is no difference; as for the five e E 
there is no difference; flesh and so on correspond with the natures of Pukkasi an = S 
If you conceive of the bodies of the buddhas as being essentially mind CE (00 
these (men) as being of the essence of earth and the other elements, then in = of the 
is a matter of not knowing; you may conceive now of all the elements as ores said: 
nature of mind and find no distinction whatsoever. But to one thinking thus, it 1 


92 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


THE CERTAINTY OF SUCCESS II. H 


f. (46) With the very poison, a little of which would kill any other being, a 
man who understands poison would dispel another poison. (47) Just as a 
man who suffers with flatulence is given beans to eat, so that wind may over- 
come wind in the way of a homæopathic cure, so existence is purified by 
existence in the countering of discursive thought by its own kind. 

(48) Just as water entered in the ear is drawn out again by water, so also 
the notion of existing things is purified by appearances. (49) Just as those 
who have been burned by fire must suffer again by fire,' so those who have 
been burned by the fire of passion must suffer the fire of passion. (50) Those 
things by which men of evil conduct are bound, others turn into means 
and gain thereby release from the bonds of existence. (51) By passion the 


world is bound, by passion too it is released, but by the heretical buddhists 
this practice of reversals is not known. 


g. (52) In the one essential unity a fivefold aspect subsists expressed in the 
set of five elements, and the Joy Supreme which is essentially one becomes 
five through their distinctions. 


(53) From the contact that comes of the union of vajra and lotus, there 
arises the effect of hardness. The nature of hardness is delusion, 
and Vairocana is deemed to be delusion. 

(54) The bodhicitta is a flow and this flow is deemed as water. The nature 
of water is wrath and this wrath is Aksobhya. 

(55) From the rubbing together of two things fire always arises. From heat 
arises passion and this passion is Amitabha. 

(56) The bodhicitta in the lotus has the nature of air. 

From air arises envy, and envy is Amoghasiddhi. 

(57) The blood is bliss and passion and the nature of bliss is space. From 

space arises malignity and malignity is Ratnasambhava.” 


(58) Thought is one but consists in this fivefold form. This develops 


“Very well, but you know because of the past influence (våsana) existing in your own nature, 
so the true nature does not become manifest because of the influence of beginningless 
ignorance” ”—sais rgyas dan mihi lus dag dbye ba ni | phyag dan zal gyi rnam pa yis re dig 
bye brag med de | phun po Ina nid du yan bye brag med de | $a la sogs pa Pukkasi la sogs pali 
tshul gyis rnam par bag pas so | gal te sans rgyas kyi sku dag rnam par $es pahi ran b£in dan | 
hdi dag sa la sogs pahi ran båin no sam na | emaho Zes ma ses på yin te | da lta fiid du P 
hdi thams cad rnam par ses pahi ran bzin du mthon ste bye brag cun zad kyan med do | dele 
na gal te ji ltar hkhor sñam pa la | gsuns pa hon kyan ran bzin bag chags kyis ses pa ste | thog 
ma med pahi ma rig pahi bag chags kyis ran bzin snan ba ma yin pas so | (xv. 180a 2-5): 

1 Bh: ‘On a place burned by fire one rubs oil, and neither too far from the fire BPs too 
near one keeps it warm and suffers. By keeping it warm and suffering in that way, bre is 
removed by fire'—mes tshig pahi gnas su snum bskus te | me la sin tu rin ba vu ma ae 7 
ba yan ma yin par bsro ini gdun baho | de ltar bsro Zin gduns pas ni mes me nid sbyon bat 
xv. 281a 3-4). ; 

: ? In s preserve a balanced order of equation in these five slokas, I have translated 
as though reading: å 

åpåm hi dvesariipatvåt in (54) 

irsyå våyusambhavå in (56) 

pisunam ca Ratnesah syåt in (57) 


93 


II. ii CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Pra&SVåtibR PoulaàasiT Ghåndigarh 


into the five families, and then there develop many thousands. (59) So thi 
is the single self-existent, it is the great bliss, perfect and eternal but E. 
becomes five by the fivefold distinction of thought as passion dnd må 
other four. (60) As numerous as the sands of ten River Ganges are a 
companies of the tathågatas in these single families. In these cons a 
there are numerous clans, and in these clans yet hundreds of clans 
(61) These many thousands of clans become many millions of clans, and Å 
these clans there are still innumerable clans. Yet they all arise from the 
one clan of perfect joy.” 


CHAPTER iil. THE BASIS OF ALL TANTRAS 


(1) Then the Adamantine Lord spoke to the yoginis of the Means, which 
are the basis of all tantras, of the Union," of consecrations and of secret 
language, of the different Joys and Moments, of feasting and the rest. 


a. (2) ‘Now the union of all buddhas consists in the sound Evam.? This 
sound EVAM, the great bliss itself, is known from the process of con- 
secration.’ 

(3) Then the yoginis said to the Lord Vajrasattva: ‘Is the sound EvAM 
then called the union of the dåkinis?? May the Lord, the Teacher, the 
Master of the World please expound the matter as it is.’ 

(4) The Lord replied: "The sacred syllable £, adorned at its centre by 
the syllable vam, is the abode of all delights, the casket of buddha-gems. 
(5) It is there that the four Joys arise, distinguished by the Moments, and 
from knowledge of these Moments the knowledge of Bliss is consummated 
in that sound Evam. (6) So yogins know that the sound EVAM is attainable 
through the four Moments: Variety, Development, Consummation, and 
Blank. (7) It is called Variety, because it involves different things, the 


1 “ynion’—samvara; see Glossary p. 138. 

2 gvAM—'thus' symbolizes the ‘two-in-one’, viz. perfect knowledge. All sütras and 
tantras begin: evam maya srutam— have heard thus’, here interpreted as ‘I have under- 
stood EVAM', the truth of this tantra, which is perfect knowledge. Thus we have E as 
prajfià (wisdom) and VAM as upåya (means). V here quotes a list of equivalents: sun/ 
moon, blood/gukra, left-hand/right-hand, linga/bhaga, means/wisdom, sorrow/bliss, 
navel/head (xv. 100b 6-7). Gå 

3 Following the Tibetan translations I have translated dakinyah as a feminine form, I 2 
they refer to beings who have the power of moving in space, not necessarily feo NE 
See K (p. 141, ll. 10-11). See also I. xi. 11. Here they are synonymous with the bu 
referred to above. For such a cycle of dakins see I-T iii. 2, p. 66. Ç ioe 

^ See Introduction, pp. 34-35. D: “The Moment f Variety is associated with the ar 
ledge of various different kinds of karund, the kiss, the embrace and so on, and Joy ER 
in the acquiring of some small part of Wisdom which cuts off entirely such d Ge 
Saying that Development is the reverse means that external discriminating no Å E d 
been abandoned, that knowledge has vanished within. (This stage) lasts unt! o cdm 
union, and the Perfect Joy consists in the complete cutting-off of the Mogens o E 
ment by a development exceeding that which precedes. Reflection 18 Jons (vipaksa 
means that the bindu or bodhicitta has entered the vajra, that all opposing 


94 


CC-0_Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


SIS OF ALL TANTRAS IL iii 


embrace, the kiss and so forth. Development is the reverse of this, for it is 


the experiencing of blissful knowledge. (8) Consummation is defined as the 
reflection that this bliss has been experienced by oneself. Blank is quite 
other than these three, and knows neither passion nor the absence of pas- 


sion. (9) The first Joy is found in Variety, Perfect Joy in Development, the 
Joy of Cessation in Consummation and the Joy of the Innate in Blank. 


(10) These four Joys are to be experienced in due order in accordance 
with the list of the four consecrations, that of the Master, that of the Secret, 
that of the Prajna and the Fourth. (x1) The first is represented bya smile, 


reflective thought is abandoned and the wisdom which is favourable(pratipaksa) is acquired. 
This is the Wisdom of Cessation which completely cuts off the Moment of Consummation. 
As for the Blank being other than these three, this means that the bodhicitta is held; there 
are no opposing factors whatsoever and only that wisdom which is favourable remains; the 
Moment of Blank has been cut off, and this complete cutting-off is the Wisdom of the 
Innate.’ 

ho dan hkhyud pa la sogs pahi karunahi bye brag sna tshogs pa la rtog pa hdres pa ni rnam 
pa sna tshogs kyi skad cig ces bya ste | dehi rnam par dpyod pa yons su gcod pa ye ses cha cun 
zad thob pa dgah baho | rnam par smin pa de las bzlog ces phyi rol gyi rtog pa spans te ses pa 
nan du thim nas kunduruhi sbyor bahi bar ni | sha ma las khyad par du smin pas rnam par 
smin pahi skad cig ma yons gcod ni mchog dgahi ye ses so | gros ni rnam par fied par brjod ces 
pa ni bolahi gnas su thig le byan chub kyi sems phyin pa la | mi hthun pahi rnam par rtog pa 
spans te | gñen po ye Ses su gyur pa ni rnam par fied pahi skad cig ma [ham] yoùs su gcod pa 
ni dgah bral gyi ye ses so | mtshan fid bral ba gsum las géan žes pa ni dehi tshe thig le byan 
chub kyi sems zin pa ni mi mthun pahi phyogs thams cad bral te | gñen po ye ses hbah zig tu 
gnas pa ni mtshan iiid bral bahi skad cig ma rnam par bead nas te | yoñs gcod ni lhan cig skyes 
pahi ye Ses so | (xvii. 399a 1-5). 

1 D: ‘The first is called the Jar-Consecration or the Master's Consecration. It is called 
a baptism because impurity is washed away, that is to say here that the impurity of the 
body is washed away. It is called the consecration (or baptism) of the jar, because it is 
characterized by (the use of) a jar, and the consecration of the Master because it is far 
removed from evil and wickedness. It is also called the consecration of knowledge 
(vidya), because it overthrows ignorance and arouses an awareness of the five spheres of 
knowledge (paficavidyájfiana). Now a consecration is a bestowing of power, and (in this 
case) it bestows power in the nirmånakåya. The place of consecration is the body, and the 
instruments are the jar, the crown and so on. 

The Secret Consecration is so called, because it is a secret from the sråvakas, pratyeka- 
buddhas and all those below them. It is a baptism because it washes away impurities of 
speech, and a consecration because it bestows power in the sambhogakaya. The place of 
consecration is the throat, and the agent of consecration is the bodhicitta, the bindu which 
has been experienced by the Master. x š ° 

The Consecration in the Knowledge of Prajiia (prajñajnana) is so called because it 
depends upon the prajña and has the effect of arousing wisdom. As a baptism it De 
away the impurities of the mind, and as a consecration it bestows power In the kg 
The place of consecration is the vajra, and the agent of consecration is the prajna with the 
lotus. The Fourth Consecration is so called because it is fourth, a word understood n 
relationship to the third; it is the precious consecration. Ås a baptism it washes away a 
tendencies towards evil of body, speech, and mind, and as a consecration 1t beon pow Z 
in the Body of Great Bliss (mahåsukhakåya). The place of consecration is the body, spår d 
and mind. As for the agent of consecration, ac n have some guru as one's SUP 
port, and with his inner power one needs no (other) agent. = Š 

dan po la bum pahi po ñam slob dpon gyi dban žes bya ba ni | arenes i JR = 
na dban ste | lus kyi dri ma hkhrud par byed | bum pas ne bar mishon pas n BEES 
bya | sdig pa mi dge ba las rin du hgro bas na slob dpon gyi dban fer I Hm D T Fog på 
cit rig pahi ye ses la bskyed pahi phyir rig pahi dban žes bya | alio te m PA pa dan | 
ni sprul pahi skuhi nus pa hjog | bskur bahi gnas nt lus la bskur la ban rdz = al gee 
dbu rgyan la sogs paho | gsan bahi dban la abhisifica ste ñan thos dan ran sans 183 } 


95 


II. iii CC-0. Agamnigaml Db Ra HEK aidh Ak eUndatiod, RAandigarh 
the second by a gaze, the third in an embrace, and the fourth in unio 
(12) This fourfold set of consecrations is for the purpose of perfecting 


living-beings. The word consecration or sprinkling is used because one 1 
sprinkled or cleansed. ; 


b. (13) The Prajia of sixteen years he clasps within his arms, and from the 
union of the vajra and bell the Master's consecration comes about. (14) She 
is fair-featured, wide-eyed, and endowed with youth and beauty. Then 
with thumb and fourth finger he drops the bindu in the pupil's mouth, 
(15) In that very act the flavour of sameness should be placed within the 
pupils range." Then having honoured and worshipped the Prajñā, he 
should consign her to the pupil, (16) saying: “O Great Being, take thou 
the Mudra who will bring you bliss", and knowing his pupil to be worthy, 
free of envy and wrath, (17) he then further commands him: "Be ye one, 
O Vajradhrk." 

Now I shall tell you of the pupil's part and how he begs for consecration, 
(18) how he pronounces words of praise and worship when he beholds his 
master with the mudrå. 


“O great tranquil Lord, intent on the vajra-practice, 
(19) Thou perfecter of the Symbol, that hast thine origin in the oneness of 
the indestructible vajra, 
As you now do for yourself, may you also do for me. 
(20) I am sunk in the thick mud of the samsåra. Save me who am without 
a helper.” 


(21) Then with pleasing food and drink, with wine and meat of good 
quality, with incense, oblations, and garlands, with bells and banners and 
ointments, with all these he should honour his lord. 

(22) When the pupil has now reached the moment of Perfect Joy which 
is free from all notions of diversity, the master should say: “O Great 
Being, hold thou to the great bliss. (23) Until the time of enlightenment, 
O Vajradhrk, serve thou the cause of beings.” Thus should speak the 
Adamantine Lord as he sees his pupil overwhelmed in compassion. 


gyi rgyud man chad la gsan bas na gsan bahi dban $es byaho | nag gi dri ma hkhru LEE ae 
žes byaho | abhiseka ste lors spyod rdzogs pahi skuhi nus på hjog paho | bskur A a in 
mgrin par bskur la | bskur bahi rdzas ni slob dpon gyis Hams su myon bahi thig F DA Er 
kyi sems so | $es rab ye Ses kyi dban ni ses rab ma la brten nas ye ses skye bar bye! T a 
rab ye Ses kyi dban žes byaho | abhisiñca ste vid kyi dri ma khru bar byed do | a oshi gnas 
chos kyi skuhi nus pa hjog par byed pas dban ges byaho | gnas gan du bskur na gsañ GE 
su bskur ro | bskur bahi rdzas ni phyag rgya mtshan dan Idan paho | dban båt pam Nar 
báin yan bái pa žes pa ni gsum pas go phye bahi tshig dban rin po che ste | aU uui mis 
yid gsum gyi bag la fal gyi dri ma hkhrud par byed do | abhiscka bde ba een På a Md 
pa hjog par byed do | bskur bahi gnas mi lus nag yid gsum char laho | bskur DE E (vii. 
dpon la la dag ni rten can du yan hdod do | bla mahi gzun gis m rdzas mi I 
399b 2-4004 1). 1 Compare I. x. 7-8. 

a See *Hevajrasekaprakriya', Journal Asiatique, July to Sept. 1934 P 
these same verses occur. 


p. 28 and 43; where 


96 


NS AG Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
BASIS OF ALL TANTRAS II. iii 
c. (24) This is the great knowledge that exists in all phenomenal forms 
dual by nature and yet free of duality, the Lord whose essence is DOE 
existence and non-existence. (25) He abides pervading all things, moving 
or motionless, for he manifests himself in these illusive formes But by 
means of the mandala and so on, he goes with certainty to his eternal con- 
dition.’ : 
d. (26) Then Vajragarbha, begging all the yoginis to have patience, addressed 
the Lord: "May the mandala be called a stronghold, which is the essence of 
all buddhas? Tell me Lord, just how things are, for doubt assails me.” 
(27) The Lord replied: "The mandala is the very essence, we say; it is 
bodhicitta and the great bliss itself. This it takes to itself,! and so in this 
sense mandala is said to be malana, "the act of taking". (28) Cakra is an 
assembly (of divinities) which purifies the spheres of sense and so on, and 
thus it is as vold as space. By the union of vajra and lotus its bliss is 
experienced.” 


e. (29) Vajragarbha said: "What usage and observance should one follow?” 
The Lord replied: "You should slay living-beings. 

You should speak lying words. 

You should take what is not given. 

You should frequent others” wives. 


(30) Now to practise singleness of thought is the taking of life, for the 
thought is the life. To vow to save all men is interpreted as lying-speech. 
That which is not given is the bliss of woman, and she is your own Nairat- 
mya who is the wife of all others.” 


f. (31) Then all the yoginis addressed the Lord: ‘What are the spheres and 
faculties of sense? What are the bases of consciousness and how many are 
the component groups of personality? What are the spheres of conscious- 


ness and what is their true nature?” 
(32) The Lord replied: “There are six spheres of sense: form, sound, 
smell, taste, touch, and thought. (33) Likewise there are six faculties of 


. 118, ll. 27-30. T has translated as: ådyåntam karoti— 
‘it makes the beginning and end’. V also interprets accordingly (xv. 1044 7). All the gne 
commentators (D gives both interpretations), however, explain as: ddanam karoti, w! = 
by comparison with the references quoted above may be accepted as correct. But De 
then all read hdus på (= milanam) in the se half of the base sequitur. Even 
does so although the explanation is already given in his own Work. 
> As for these or, the first presents no difficulty ; for the NET see me 
Vajracchedikasütra (Sanskrit text—Anec. Ox. 1881, pp. 35-36): “Thus shoul: one zaon 
who has committed himself to the way of the Bodhisattva: “I must place all beings in that 
condition of nirvåna where there is no residue”. But having placed them nere no peke 
is placed there. And why? If the concept of a being existed for a bodhisattva, he wou 
no bodhi. 2 à : : 
The pce fourth are made clear in the translation which is for this rece sey 
free. Literally it runs: ‘that which is not given is the energy of the woman, and ano 
wife is the Fair One who is (to him) as for you.’ 


! Compare I. v. 19 and K: p 


H 
B 6309 97 


IL iii  cc-0. Agamnigam Big BIE ADRFAIARSHTGaAndigarh 


a the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mind, ( ) 
rom spheres and faculties together we then have the twelve bases of co 
sciousness. The five skandhas are bodily form, feeling, impulses, E 
of perception and consciousness. (35) The eighteen spheres of consen 
ness are the six faculties and six spheres of sense together with the six kinds 
of consciousness belonging to each pair. (36) Their nature is that of the 
essentially non-arisen and is neither true nor false, for all is like the 
reflection of the moon in water. O yoginis, understand it as you will. 

(37) For just as fire suddenly arises from the two fire-sticks and the 
action of a man's hand, and cannot be located in either of the sticks nor in 
the hand's action, and although sought everywhere, is not to be found 
anywhere, and is therefore neither a true thing nor a false thing, even thus, 
O yoginis, should you conceive of all the elements.” 

g. (38) Then all the vajra-dåkinis with Nairåtmyå to the fore, took up the 
five ambrosias and the ingredients of the sacrament, and honouring the 
Lord Vajrasattva, they drank the vajra-elixir of immortality." 

(39) At that the Lord was greatly pleased and told them of effective 
power. ‘Good, good O vajra-dåkinis, that truth which I keep secret and is 
honoured by all buddhas, of that I now tell you, for I am compelled thereto 
by the power of your vajra-praise, so listen if you will.' 

(40) Then all the goddesses became very zealous, and touching the 
ground with one knee, they stretched forth their hands in worship to where 
the Lord stood, and listened to that which he said. 

h. (41) The Lord said: ‘Food and drink must be just as it comes. One 
should not avoid things, wondering whether they are suitable or unsuitable. 
One should not perform special ablutions or purifications, nor avoid the 
affairs of the town. (42) The wise man does not mutter mantras, nor 
devote himself to meditation; he does not abandon sleep, nor restrain his 
senses. (43) He should eat all meat and associate with all manner of men. 
He keeps the company of all women, his mind quite free of trepidation. (44) 
He should have no love for friend, nor hatred for any enemy. Those gods 
he should not honour, which are made of wood and stone and clay. For the 
yogin should always be consubstantiated with the form of his own divinity- 
(45) Men of all castes he may touch as readily as his own body, dombas, 
candålas, carmåras, haddikas and the rest, brahmans and ksatriyas, Vasya, 
and sadras. (46-48) Nor is there anything he may not consume,” for E 
mind conceives no distinctions. (49) His loin-cloth is many-coloured an 
he adorns himself with clay-markings of different colours. Finding 2 
flower in a cemetery he should bind it in his hair.” 


1 Compare I. iv. 2 and xi. 8-9. : 
2 The text here contains a list of the ingredients of anu 
reader need not be burdened. The svayambhukusuma 18: 


bahi khrag (V : xv. 106a 6). 


z ; "uito 
npleasant potion with du 


bud med kyi skye gnas las 


98 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


THE BASIS OF ALL TANTRAS II. iii 
- Hi 


i. (so) Then Vajragarbha said: “The unpurified faculties of sense have not 
been listed as a set of six. Of the purification of their res 


cti 
the Lord has already spoken.'! pective spheres 


(51) The Lord replied: “For the eyes is Mohavajra, 
For the ears Dvesavajra, 
For the nose Matsaryavajra, 
For the mouth Ragavajra, 
(52) For the touch is Irsyavajra, 
And for the mind Nairatmyayogini. 


By these protection is given for the purification of the faculties of sense.’ 


j- (53) Vajragarbha said: “What may be said of secret language, that great 
convention of the yoginis, which the sravakas and others cannot unriddle. 
May the Lord please tell us decisively. (54) As for the smile, the gaze, the 
embrace and the union, even by the tantras the secret language of these 
four is not mentioned.’3 


(55) The Lord replied: ‘I shall explain, O Vajragarbha, do thou listen 
with singleness of mind. This is that secret language, that great language, 
the conventional signs told in full. 


(56) madhya (wine) is madana (passion) 
måmsa (flesh) is bala (strength) 
malayaja (sandal-wood) is milana (meeting) 
kheta (hide?) is gat (going) 

Sava (corpse) is $råya (resort) 
asthyabharana (bone-ornament) is niramsuka (naked) 

(57) prenkhana (wandering) is ågati (coming) 
krpita (? belly) is damaruka (drum) 
dundura (emission) is abhavya (unworthy) 
Kålinjara (n.pr.) is bhavya (worthy) 

(58) dindima (small drum) is asparsa (untouchable) 
padmabhåjana (lotus-vessel) is kapåla (skull) 
trptikara (satisfying) is bhaksya (food) 
målatindhana (jasmine wood) is vyanjana (herbs) 

(59) catuhsama (a potion of four ingredients) is gätha (dung) 
kasturikå (musk) is miitra (urine) 

I See I. ix. 13-14. Also diagrams III and IV. 

2 For these equations see diagram V. Also K 
The allocation is unsatisfactory, however, in that Nai 
Matsarya and paisunya are synonymous. Concernin 
Vajri, see p. 80, fn. 5. 

3 Each of these stages, representing t 


four classes of tantras. See the Glossary p. 139: 
scarcely permits a sure translation. 


(p. 145, 11. 6-8) who confirms them. 
airåtmyå (= Dvesavajrå) is used twice. 
g the form Vajrå in preference to 


he four consecrations, is identified with one of the 
The confusion of grammatical endings 


99 


II. iii CC-0. Agamnigam Digital FeBevatigrEa unpatignGhapdigarh 


sthlaka (frankincense) is svayambhu (blood) 
karpüra (camphor) is sukra (semen) 

(60) sålija (rice product) is mahåmåmsa (human-flesh) 
kunduru is the union of two 
bola is vajra 
kakkola is lotus 


k. (61) Likewise the buddhas of the five families may be referred to by 
means of hidden speech: (62) Dombi for the Vajra-family, Narti for the 
Lotus-family, Candali for the Gem-family, Brahmani for the Tathågata- 
family (63) and Rajaki for the Karma-family. These are the Mudras, 
bestowers of siddhi; adamantine is their swkra, so honouring them, the 
yogin drinks it. 

(64) O Vajragarbha, thou Great Being, you must receive with respect 
all that I have told you of this wondrous secret language. 

(65) He who has been consecrated in Hevajra and does not use this 
hidden language, will lose the sacramental power, of that there is no doubt. 
(66) From calamities or thieves, demons, fevers, poisons, he will die, even 
though he be a buddha, if he does not speak with this secret language. 
(67) Having gained this knowledge of his own sacramental nature, if he 
does not use this speech, then the yoginis who spring from the four pithas' 
will show forth their wrath.’ 


CHAPTER iv. ANSWERS TO VARIOUS QUESTIONS 


(x) Then all those divine beings with Vajragarbha at their head, were filled 
with wonderment and consternation and addressed the Lord Vajrasattva 
thus: ‘O may the Lord remove our doubts. 
a. (2) (Firstly) as for what is said in the Chapter on Performance about 
singing and dancing as bestowing perfection, concerning this I have 
doubts. What is this singing and dancing? 


b. (3) (Secondly) as for what is said in the Chapter on Consecration about 
receiving the sign of the Wrathful One or of some other family-head, con- 
cerning this I have doubts. What is the sign and of whom is the sign? 


c. (4) (Thirdly) as for what is said in the Chapter on Matras about the seed- 


syllables of Nairätmya and so on, concerning this I have doubt. Which 15 


the syllable of whom? 
d. (5) (Fourthly) in the Chapter on Hevajra's Body thirty-two veins Weré 


: ; cakras 
r The four pithas are given in I. vii. 12. Bh associates them here with the four 


within the body (xv. 285a 3). 


100 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
ANSWERS TO VARIOUS QUESTIONS Il. iv 
mentioned. May the Lord please tell me their purificatory significance 
for I am confused about them.” : 


a. (6) The Lord replied (in answer to the first question): 
"The yogin stays at Kollagiri, the yogini at Mummuni. 
Loudly the drum sounds forth. Love is our business and not dissen- 
sion. 


(7) There we eat meat and drink wine in great quantity. 


Hey there, the true followers are come together, but the frauds are 
kept far away. 


We take the fourfold preparation and musk and frankincense and 
camphor, 

Herbs and special meat we eat with relish. 

(8) Going this way and that in the dance, we give no thought to what is 

chaste or unchaste, 

Adorning our limbs with bone-ornaments, we place the corpse in 
position. 

Union takes place at that meeting, for Dombi is not there rejected. 


! "The questions refer to the following passages: 
1. I. vi. 10 and 13. 
2: I iv. 3: 
3. I. n. 6: 
4a T. 1: r3220o: 
2 As for this vajra-song, the commentaries provide two kinds of interpretation, a literal 
and a figurative. But in this case even the literal is concealed beneath the jargon of their 
‘secret language’. My own translation, supposedly literal, is based chiefly upon the 
explanations of K and S. It may be so far justified in the following manner: 
Kollagiri—an individual pitha (K: p. 145, 1. 26), not however included in the list given in 
Ch. 7. 

Mummuni is however one of the ksetras. 

bola and kakkola as vajra and lotus are well established. S here explains them as yogin and 
yogini (xv. 183b 5-6). 

ghana—K : nirantaram S: rgyun mi hchad par (id. 1830 7). 

kibida—see II. iii. 57. Confirmed by K and S. 

vajjai—K : samucchalati S: brdun bar bya (id. 183b 7). 

vrj ‘send forth’, 3rd sing. pres. act. 

kiai—kr 3rd sing. pres. pass. 

rola—K : kalakala S: rtsod pa (id. 184a 1) D: hgras pa. 

balu and maanå—see II. iii. 56. š z : 

gade—K:: nirbharam S: sin tu dgah ba skyed par byed pahi—(wine) which arouses great 
joy’. 

khájjai and pijjai—taken as 3rd sing. pres. act. 

Raliñjara and dunduru—see II. iii. 57- Confirmed by S. à 

paniai (reoccurs below) K : pravesya S: bugs par bya— should be there’. 

vajjiai (reoccurs below)—3rd sing. pres. pass. 

causama, &c. see II. iii. 59. 

låiai—K : labhyante. S Abs vocab. in Shahidullah, pp. 106 and 217. S, however, lus la 
byug par bya—‘should smear (them) on the body’. 3rd sing. pres. pass. 

målaindhana and sälifija—see II. iii. 58 and 60. - 

EK nirbharam S: khyad par Då eer! . 

häiai—K : khådyante. Pass. Compare khåjjar above. nd aie 
phremkhana keine IL iii. 56, 57. S:gar la sogs pas hero ba dan hon bar byed cif 

“going and coming because of the dancing and so on’ (id. 1844 5). 


101 


II. iv CC-0. AgamniganiDlgilal PrésaVAtipR FountatNir @handigarh 


(9) Dancing as Sri Heruka! with mindful application, undistracted 
Meditating with thought impassioned,? the mind uninterru | 
concentration, 
(10) Buddhas and Masters in the Vajra-doctrine,3 goddesses and 
Sing and dance to their utmost in this song and dance. 

(11) There comes thereby protection for the troupe and protection for 
oneself. ‘Thereby the world is reduced to subjection, and all reciting of 
mantras (is perfected) by it. 

(12) Decorously one sings there; decorously one dances there. The 
leader is first appointed, and then he should note the scent, (13) first of 


pted in its 


yoginis, 


muniai—K : jfiàyete S: yid la mi byed pa (id. 184a 6). See Shahidullah, pp. 106 and 217 
niramsua—see II. iii. 56. ; 
cadabi (also cadåbiai) K: åropyate S: gdags so. 

$aråba—K : sråyo S: ro—‘corpse’. See II. iii. 56. 

tahimja—K: tatra. 

paniai—K: pravesya (as above) S: géug par bya ‘should be placed’. 

malayaja and kunduru—see II. iii. 56 and 60. 

båtai (also: båttei) ? = vartate. 

dindima—see II. iii. 58. S: Dombi. See I. v. 18. 


The figurative interpretations vary in the significance given to some of the terms. K and 
Bh differ; D gives three interpretations. The process described is, however, the same, and 
is that which we have already met with at the end of chapter r of Part I. K’s interpretation 
may serve as an example. 

HAM (bodhicitta) rests in the head, am (Candali) in the navel. (Mantras)* resound con- 
tinuously. Compassion is practised, not gross licence. One consumes the notion of a self, 
and drinks the drink of great bliss. The breath is concentrated within; passion, &c. are 
kept away. Form, feeling, power of perception and consciousness are all purified. The 
impulses (samskåra) and the Self are here consumed in this yoga, that is to say, are 
rendered non-substantial. There is the bliss-giving motion (phremkhana) of the bodhicitta, 
and again its motion (khefa).t Existence and non-existence cannot be distinguished. The 
drops are a unity (?—niramsa) because of their sameness of nature. By means of the veins 
the body is pervaded. In that yoga the non-substantiality of all the dharmas (the corpse) 
takes possession (vol. II. p. 146, ll. 4-17). 

! Defining sriherukarupena, V. refers to I. vii. 27- 

2 ‘thought impassioned'—V : ‘to be moved by great compassion by the cause of oneself 
and others, undefiled by that defect that consists in the absence of passion’—chags pa dan 
bral bahi skyon gyis mi gos par bdag gšan gyi don du shin rje chen po g'yo bar bya &es bya bali 
don to | (xv. 109a 7-5 x). 

The dancing is the meditation (I. vi. 13: "Nartanå bhåvanå smyta’). å š 

3 V: ‘vajradharma indicates their nature as Speech (våk), buddha indicates their s 
as Body (käya)'—rdo rje chos ni gsun gi ran bzin no | sans rgyas ni skuli ran båin no Å OG 
109b 1). As våk they sing, as kåya they dance. Now Speech is Amitåbha and Bo 
Vairocana (see Introduction, p. 28). Hence K’s equation (p. 146, Il. 21-22), for Pa jer 
narttefvara is of Amitabha’s family. He is red; his prajHa is Panduravásini, whose FR 
tion with Amitabha may be seen from diagram VI. See also I-T iii. 2, p. 57» whee ae (as 
Vairocana (presumably as Speech and Body) are the first emanations of Vajrasa 
Mind). For his sådhana see the Sadhanamála, nos. 30, 31, and 32. 


+ Borrowed from Bh.’s interpretation. 

+ Bh’s version is better: the flash of the am bindu (drop) goes upw 
bindu, which comes downwards. (xv. 286b 1-2). 

See also the Introduction, pp. 36-37- 


ards, melts the HAM 


102 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
ANSWERS TO VARIOUS QUESTIONS Z ILi 
21V 


garlic, next of vultures, and then of camphor and sandal-wood. Afterward: 
he should note the effective power of the song. (14) The sound of a ee 
and a bee is heard at the end of the song, and of a jackal too he er note 
the sound in the garden without.! 


b. (Answer to the second question.) 

(15) The mudrå is a sign or mark, and by this mark the particular family 
is indicated. If one practises meditation within the wrong family you will 
gain no perfection for there will be no perfection to gain. 

(These are the families:) (16-19) 


Dvesa Moha Pisuna Råga Irsya 
Nairatmya Vajra Gauri Vari Vajradakini 
Pukkasi Savari Candali Dombi 
Gauri II Cauri Vetali Ghasmari 

Bhücari Khecari 


Understand this if you will. 


c. (Answer to the third question.) (20-23) 


A Nairatmya R Savan 
A Vajra R  Candal 
I  Gaur L Dombi 
I Variyogini L  Gaurill 
U  Vajradakini E Cauri 
Ü  Pukkaesi AI  Vetali 

(0) Ghasmari 

AU  Bhiicari 

AM —Khecari 


These are the seed-syllables of the yoginis. 


1 Only V comments on this passage: ‘Whether it is a large gathering that has received 
a mandate from the king, or whether it is a gathering of simple folk, or is different from 
both of these and is the feast of a chief, first the leader of the gathering sings, and after him 
the others sing as they please. This is the sense. Now on the occasions of those festivals 
of a general gathering or a chief, the vajråcårya should note the signs of the effective power 
(adhisthåna) of the song and dance. Itis of three kinds ( ? grades): firstly there will rie a 
scent like garlic, secondly like vultures and lastly like camphor. Likewise in accor ae 
with the characteristics of the song the tone of the voice at beginning and end is to be le 
and concluded with the sound like that of a royal goose and a royal bee (respectively). 


rgyal pohi bkah thob pahi tshogs kyi hkhor lo chen po yañ run tshogs kyi hkhor lo tha mal pa 
D de dag las s pahi ipah bohi ston mohi dus Ryan run ste dan por BEA prar 
bos glu blans la dehi rjes su gáan dag gis ct bder blan žes bya bahi don to | tshogs da: pak 
bohi ston mo de dag gi dus su glu dan gar gyis byin brlabs kyis mtshan ma rnam pa gn jj 
por sgog pahi dri lta bu dan bar du bya rgod kyi dri lta bu dan | tha ma gå pur gyi ma 
bu hbyun bar hgyur te | rdo rje slob dpon gyis mtshon par byaho l n M 4 S 
flid kyis nag gi mdans thog ma dan tha ma gfiis su han pahi 7gyal po å ui a ^ m ee 
lta buhi sgras sna dran sin mthah brten to | bar du ni khyu mchog la buhi MG $ A oe 
lta bus rgyas par bya bahi don te skad cig de ñid la dkyil hkhor bahi fie hkhor du y 


de dag hbyun bar hgyur ro | (xv. 109b 4—7)- 


103 


Il. iv CC-0. Agamnigam Dig fal HEK Addit do Un datio; R Hendigarh 


d. (Answer to the fourth question.) 


(24) The thirty-two veins which are mentioned in the Chapter on Hevaira' 
Body, are equated with the yoginis, two to each, (25) except for Nia 
who is equated with three, Lalanå, Rasanå, and Avadhiiti. The last E 
of all" must be firmly rejected, for there is no sixteenth phase. (26) And 
why is that? Because it is non-productive of an effect. The moon with its 
fifteen phases represents the Thought of Enlightenment. It is the great 
bliss symbolized by the fifteen vowels and the yoginis are its phases.’ 


e. (27) Vajragarbha said: ‘So one should not eject this ‘camphor’. Itis there 
that all the yoginis have their origin, and its nature is the Joy Innate. It is 
indestructible and luscious, as pervasive as the sky.’ 

(28) The Lord replied: ‘It is even as you say.’ 

Vajragarbha asked: ‘By what means should one arouse the Thought of 
Enlightenment?” 

(29) The Lord replied: ‘By such means as that of the mandala or the 
process of the self-bestowing of power, by these one arouses the Thought 
of Enlightenment, both in its absolute and relative form. (30) As relative, 
white as white jasmine, as absolute essentially blissful, it arises in the lotus- 
paradise, which is symbolized by the word evam. (31) We call it paradise 
or land of bliss (sukhåvati) because of this bliss it is the keeper, for it is the 
home of all buddhas, bodhisattvas and vajra-holders. 


f. (32) Such as is samsåra, such is nirvana. There is no nirvana other than 
samsåra, we say. (33) Samsara consists in form and sound and so on, in 
feeling and the other four skandhas, in the faculties of sense, in wrath and 
illusion and the other three. (34) But all these elements are really sunk in 
nirvana, and it is only from delusion that they appear as samsåra. The wise 
man continues in samsåra, but this samsåra is recognized as nirvana, for 
he has brought this about by the process of purification. (35) This nirvåna, 
being the Thought of Enlightenment, is both absolute and relative in form.” 


g. (40) For Nairåtmya is the camphor and Nairatmya is the bliss. The 
realization of this bliss which is the Great Symbol itself is to be found in the 
lower cakra. (41) She is symbolized by the letter a, and it is as Wisdom 
that the enlightened conceive of her. In the Process of Realization she is 
the Lady Prajfia. (42) (No form may one apply to her) neither tall nor 


1 The last one of all is Måradårikå. See complete list at I. i. 16-19. Te oe 
sixteenth phase of the moon and there is no sixteenth yogini. Therefore the las An 
which remains over, must be arbitrarily rejected lest it spoil the scheme. Itis but an ex 

f the essential arbitrariness of many of these lists. ° ; - ga 
S 2 At this point the process whereby the bodhicitta in its relative form is JE E small 
described. It differs from the account already given in the last chapter (II. iii. TO m 
elaboration: ‘He should not receive it in his hand, neither on mother ono mai RS 
conch-shell. With his tongue he must receive the ambrosia for the incre 


strength.” 


104 


ANSWERS TO VARIOUS QUESTIONS m i 
short, neither square nor round. She transcends all taste and smell and 
flavour, and itis she who brings the Joy Innate. (43) In her the yogin is con- 
substantiated, for it is her bliss that he enjoys. With her that perfection is 
found that bestows the bliss of the Great Symbol. (44) Form and sound, 
smell, taste, touch, and sphere of thought, are all enjoyed in this Prajaa. 
(45-46) She is the Innate itself, the divine yogini of great bliss. She is the 
whole mandala and comprehends the Five Wisdoms. (47) She is the “T”, 
the Lord of the mandala. She is Nairatmyayogini, the sphere of thought in 
essence.’ 


h. (48) Vajragarbha said: “The Lord has already explained how the 
divinities arise in the process of meditating upon the mandala. May he 
please tell me about the mandala within.’ 

(49) The Lord replied: "We explain the internal mandala as being com- 
prised in the unity of the sound a which exists at the centre of the yogint’s 
body, and just as the external mandala (evolves from the seed-syllable), so 
also does the internal. (so) The bliss that the vajra experiences here is the 
Great Symbol, and as coefficient the vajra is Means. The internal mingling 
that comes about, is figured in the external union of two.” 

(51) The three kåyas are found within the body in the form of the 
cakras, and the perfect knowledge of these three kåyas is the cakra of 
Great Bliss. (52) (Therefore there are four in all:) the nirmånakåya, the 
dharmakåya, the sambhogakåya and the mahåsukhakåya. These are 
situated at the navel, at the heart, at the throat and in the head. (53) The 
nirmånakåya is in the place where the birth of all beings comes about.’ 
One is born or fashioned (nirmiyate) and therefore it is called nirmåna. 
(54) Dharma consists of thought and the dharmakåya is at the heart. 
(55) Sambhoga is enjoyment which consists in the six kinds of flavour, and 
so the sambhogakaya is at the throat. The mahasukhacakra is in the head. 

(56-57) (The Four Fruits* are situated thus:) 

The fruit which corresponds (nisyandaphala) is at the navel. 
The fruit of retribution (vipåkaphala) is at the heart. 
The fruit of manly activity is in the throat (purusakåraphala). 


: i g^ i 1 uch as the external is called samvara.’ The 
One might tarie tis Bree his and the following verse. The whole 


commentaries provide a variety of paraphrase for t J : 
thought is very ill expressed but is straightforward enough. Just as È merren ia 
formance vajra and lotus are united in the rite, so too IN the internal mar gala the Gre 
Symbol is realized by the union of A (= Wisdom or Lotus) which " re ARNE 
cakra, and of HAM (= Means or Vajra) which is situated in the head-cakra. 9€ 
tion, pp. 36-37. 3 HE 5 
2 The SE has the reverse, that the inner figures the outer, which is unreason 
able. K supports the rewording (p- 148, 1l. 18-20). 
3 The translation omits: mirmånåm sthavaram matam 
anticipates verse 59. (X UT 
+ There are normally five fruits. See Mup 227177: See also He Siddhi, pp- 464-7. 
Concerning their allocation to the cakras within the body, see p. 39- 


| It is out of place here and 


105 


IL iv CC-0. Agamnigamt Dipal PELS KaR BKandigarh 


The pure fruit is in the head (vimalaphala). 
The Lady Prajña, impelled by the winds of karma, is 
enjoyer of karma. 
(58) A corresponding fruit is that which is enjoyed in corres 
what has been done. 
A fruit of retribution is the reverse of this, where the activity is smal] 
and the fruit is great. 
A fruit of manly activity is that which is gained by effort. 
Å pure fruit is that which arises from the purificatory process of Yoga. 
(59) The Sthavara School is allocated to the nirmånacakra, since the act 
of creation (nirmåna) has continued long; 
The Sarvastivada to the dharmacakra, for it is there that the theory of 
dharma originates; 


herself the 


pondence with 


(60) The Samvidi to the sambhogacakra, for one experiences (samvid) 
(tastes) in the throat; 
The Mahasanghika to the mahåsukhacakra, for great bliss abides in 
the head. 


i. (61) The School, we say, is the body. The monastery is the womb. 
By freedom from passion one is in the womb. 
The yellow robe is the covering of the embryo. 
(62) One's preceptor is one's mother. 
The salutation is the coming head-foremost. 
The course of instruction is one's worldly experience (from former 
lives). 
The reciting of mantras is the notion of self (AHAM). 


(63) The sound a is found in the lower cakra, and the sound Ha in the 
head. So one is born as a bhiksu, reciting mantras, naked and free from hair 
on head and face. (64) By means of such effects all beings are buddhas, 
there is no doubt. The bhämis are the ten months (in the womb), so all 
beings are already lords of the ten bhimis.’ a 

(65) Then all those goddesses, led by Nairatmya, with Locana, Mamaki, 
Pandura and Tara, Bhrkuti, Cunda, Parna$avari, Ahomukhå and the rest, 
as numerous as the atoms in Mount Meru, were seized with great wonder- 
ment, (66) and hearing those words, they fell senseless and terrified to ns 
ground. Seeing them all thus afflicted, the Lord uttered these words 0 
encouragement to arouse them: . E 

(67) ‘O you who are Earth and Water and Fire and Air, O TE : 
Goddesses, do you listen, for I shall discourse to you on the truth which n 
one else knows.” E 

(68) Then hearing his words as though in a dream, they all regained their 
senses. 


106 


coe Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


SWE TO VARIOUS QUESTIONS IL iv 


(69) The Lord said: “All beings are buddhas, but this is obscured by 
accidental defilement. When this is removed, they are buddhas at once 
of this there is no doubt.’ D 


(70) The goddesses said: “It is even so, Lord, this is true and not 
false.” 


j. (71) The Lord said: “If he drinks strong poison, the simple man who does 
not understand it, falls senseless. But he who is free from delusion with 
his mind intent on the truth destroys it altogether.? 

(72) So those who know the means for release and make effort in Hevajra, 
are not held by the bonds of delusion and so on, by ignorance and the rest. 


k. (73) There is no being that is not enlightened, if it but knows its own 
true nature. The denizens of hell, the pretas and the animals, gods and 
men and titans, (74) even the worms upon the dung-heap, are eternally 
blissful in their true nature, and they do not know the transitory bliss of 
gods and titans.? 

(75) No buddha is found elsewhere in any of the spheres of existence. 
The mind itself is the perfect buddha, and no buddha is seen elsewhere. 
(76) Even Candalas* and other low-caste wretches and those whose minds 
are set on slaughter, if they will betake themselves to Hevajra, they will 
gain siddhi, there is no doubt. (77) But those fools who are obscured in 
ignorance and do not know this way, continue to transmigrate through the 
six realms of existence. (78) But when one has found Hevajra, who is the 
Means, O Vajragarbha of great compassion, one purifies the spheres of 
sense, and gains the highest state.” 


1. (79) Then Vajragarbha asked: 

‘Pukkasi is said to be Earth, so why should Aksobhya (dvesa) be her 
sign ?5 Since hardness corresponds to delusion (moha) and this is Vairocana, 
then Vairocana (moha) would be suitable as the sign of Pukkasi.’ 

(80) The Lord replied: ‘Apart from the body, there is no means of 


I Tibetan: ‘It is thus, Lord, neither true nor false’. — mE 

2 "The interpretation of this line and the Sanskrit reading is based primarily on the 
Tibetan and is supported by the commentaries. : a 

3 The EU BUE expressed. On hearing that all beings are et 
blissful, K raises the false objection: “But surely the denizens of hell do not enjoy a e ane 
happiness as the gods and so on. Certainly not, we reply, for they do not En dE = 
of gods and titans, but then enlightened beings do not regard the bliss of go s and ti 5 
as true bliss. They think of it as suffering because of its transitoriness and its impuren s 
(sásravatvát) (p. 150, ll. 23-26). 

+ After Candála, the text gives th 
Candakåra (MS. B). 

5 The basis of the objection raise 


e name of another low caste, Gendakára (MS. A) or 


j i i ily-allocations given 
d by Vajragarbha is the list of family allo 
on p. 103. Here Pukkasi belongs to the dvesa-family, viz. Aksobhya's Ce era vin 
This would conflict with Pukkasi's function as the purificatory pose for à i Bee 
at I. ix. 16, because Earth corresponds to Vairocana (moha) according to p 


described at II. ii. 53. 


107 


pay CC-0. Agamnigant Ba RAHE RoAandigarh 


activity for the mind, and therefore Vairocana becomes Mind and th 
Body (= Vairocana = Earth = Pukkasi) is marked with the sign of Mi S 
(= Aksobhya).' ind 

(81) Vajragarbha said: ‘Savari is said to be water, and Aksobhya has the 
nature of fluid. Therefore it would be suitable for Savari to be signed with 
the sign of Aksobhya.’ 

(82) The Lord replied: ‘Apart from the Mind (= Aksobhya = water = 
Savari) there would be no stability for the Body (= Vairocana = Moha), 
and so Mind becomes delusion, and Mind (= Savari as above) is marked 
with the sign of Delusion.” 

(83) Vajragarbha said: 'Candalini is said to be fire, so why is she signed 
with the Gem (Pai$unya, family of Ratnasambhava)? It would be suitable 
with the sign of Passion (råga); for Candali we want no other sign.” 

(84) The Lord replied: “Since Passion (raga = Amitabha = fire = 
Candali) is red, and Ratnasambhava is red,! therefore since fire is red, 
Passion (= Candåli as above) is signed with the sign of Envy (Ratna- 
sambhava).” 

(85) Vajragarbha said: 'Since Dombini is air, and Amoghasiddhi has 
the nature of air, it would be suitable for Dombini to be signed with the 
sign of Amogha, O Lord.’ 

(86) The Lord said: ‘Apart from Passion (raga) there would be no other 
source of origin for Envy (irsya), and therefore he who understands, signs 
Dombini with the sign of Passion. 

(87) Since form is hardness, for Gauri Vairocana would be prescribed, 
but in the manner already stated, she is signed with the Lord of Mind 
(= Aksobhya). (88) In that same manner Cauri, Vetali and Ghasmari all 
have their signs free of contradiction.’? 


m. (89) Then Nairatmya for the benefit of living beings questioned 
Hevajra concerning the offerings, (go) and he spoke about them that the 
life of beings might be protected from obstacles and troubles. 
(91) ‘om Indra, Yama, Jala, Yaksa, Bhöta, Vahni, Vayu, Raksa.* 

O Sun and Moon, O Mother Goddess of the Earth, 

O Father Brahma. O ye eight serpents of the lower realms, SVAHA. 


(92) Taste and smell these offerings. There are flowers and incense and 


1 A tradition of a red Ratnasambhava still exists in Nepal. As a member of the set of 


Five Buddhas Ratnasambhava is regularly yellow, see diagram V and II. xi. 6. ae 
2 Gauri is form. See I. ix. 13. But hereafter, with sound, smell, &c., the = 
these associations with the Five Buddhas, considered as representing the five € HET 
no longer exist. They can therefore scarcely proceed in the same manner as 
states. : 
3 Hevajra is here described as abiding in union, as resting in the lotus o 
elsewhere such preliminaries to the questions and answers will be omitte T 
4 These are invocations to the points and intermediate points of the compass. 


Here and 


108 


NEMO RE 
RRAWENG SST Sogn 


meat. May ye prosper all our affairs and remove from our limbs our 
wounds and bruises.! 


(93) OM A—the source of all things for they are unmanifest from the 
beginning. 

(94) If yogins for their welfare make this invocation together with the 
offering, then there will be for them unalloyed happiness and the gods will 
be contented, possessed of all the good things of the world. (95) Moreover 
the rites of subduing, bewitching, destroying enemy armies, driving away, 
slaying, conjuring forth, propitiating and bringing happiness and prosperity, 
all will succeed, if one always makes this offering here to the company of 
these spirits.” 

n. (96) Vajragarbha asked: “With which sign should Khecari and Bhücari 
be signed, O Lord? I have never known before.” 

(97) The Lord replied: "The threefold mystery is at the centre of the 
mandala, and differentiated as Body, Speech, and Mind. These occupy a 
middle position, situated at nadir, zenith, and centre. (98) At the nadir is 
Bhücari, the adamantine representative of Body, and she has Body (Vairo- 
cana) as her sign. At the zenith is Khecari, the adamantine representative 
of Speech, and she has Passion (Amitabha) as her sign. (99) The adaman- 
tine representative of Mind is Nairatmya, for mind is the essential nature 
of Nairatmya. Mind has the central position and so Nairatmyé arises in the 
centre. 

(100) In full the families are six, but they are also five and three. Just 
listen, Yogini. 

(101) Aksobhya Vairocana Ratnasambhava Amitabha Amoghasiddhi 
dvesa moha pisuna raga 1rsya 
Vajrasattva 
saukhya 


II. iv 


(102) They should be conceived in this order with these spheres of purifica- 
tion. By omitting Vajrasattva, We have a fivefold set of families. Then they 


become three by (retaining just) dvesa, moha, and raga. ; 
(103) But these six or five families are comprised in one, that one family 
which has mind as its Lord and consists in the wrath of Aksobhya. Such 


is the adamantine power of wrath. 


ANIFESTATION OF HEVAJRA 
a. (1) And now the Adamantine One, the mighty King and Lord Deis 
the giver of all things and the substance of all forms, discourses on the 


I This translation is based on K and R, but R alone opa MA bdag gi lus 
la rma dan sna yar sol cig— remove from our body wounds and afflictions , 


CHAPTER V. THE M 


109 


IL. v CC-0. Agamnigant Digal Pe SHR Ae Ad Fohandigarh 


mandala. (2) He reposes there in bliss as the essence of all 
Lord of the Mandala and has emanated from the seed of th 
(3) He has sixteen arms and eight faces and four legs, and is terrible in 
appearance with his garland of skulls and he wears the five symbolic adorn- 
ments. Nairatmya, clinging round the neck of this hero and god, addresseg 
him thus: 

(4) ‘You have spoken of our circle with its troupe of fifteen," But what 
is your own mandala like, O Lord? Of this I have so far known nothing,’ 

(5-6) He replied: "The circle is the same as described before, square and 
with four portals, and adorned with garlands and chains and vajra-threads, 
(7) There at its centre am I, O Fair One, together with you. The Joy 
Innate I am in essence, and impassioned with great passion. (8) I have 
eight faces, four legs, and sixteen arms, and trample the four Maras under 
foot. Fearful am I to fear itself, (9) with my necklace made of a string of 
heads, and dancing furiously on a solar disk. Black am I and terrible with 
a crossed vajra on my head, (10-11) my body smeared with ashes, and my 
mouths sending forth the sound HUM. But my inner nature is tranquil, and 
holding Nairatmya in loving embrace, I am possessed of tranquil bliss. 
My front face is black, the one to the right is like white jasmine, (12) the 
one to the left is red and fearful, and the one to the rear is distorted. The re- 
maining faces are like those of bees, and there are twenty-four eyes and soon. 

(13) In that fair citadel we play together with much delight, and thence 
Gauri emerges and takes her position at the eastern portal. (14) Next from 
our union there emerges Cauri who appears to the south as keeper of that 
portal. (15) Then Vetali, that destroyer of Mara, appears in the west, 
(16) and Ghasmari of fearful appearance, in the north. (17) Likewise there 
appear Pukkasi in the north-east, (18) Savari in the south-east, Candali in 
the south-west, and Dombini in the north-west. 

(19) Then the Adamantine Lord sinks with his Spell into the con- 
dition of bliss,? and the goddesses with the offering of various songs urge 
him to arise. 

(20) “Arise, O Lord, thou whose mind is compassion, and save me, 
Pukkasi. Embrace me in the union of great bliss, and abandon the condition 
of voidness.” : 

(21) "Without you I die. Arise, O Hevajra. Leave this condition of 
voidness, and prosper the doings of Savari.” 

(22) “O Lord of Bliss, who speak your words of power for the benefit 
of the world, why do you remain in the void? I Candali entreat you, for 
without you I cannot consume the four quarters.” 


forms, for he ig 
e Vajra of Mind. 


1 See chapters 8 and 9 of Part I. ; š EU ‘tion 
2 The term is actually more precise than ‘condition of bliss”, viz. drutabhutam condi 
of the flow’. See the Introduction, p. 37. 


IIO 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
<a ia sa meen 


TENT 
| Ë : | MR. ue sas 
a. i iE n = G i T | 


Hevajra and Nairatmya 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


TRIK PPR NARITA PRONE RS Chandigarh —- 


(23) “O Wonder-worker, arise, for I know your thought. I, Dombi, a: 
weak in mind. Do not interrupt your compassion."! å gr 

(27) Then from the sounds of am and Him the Lord arises from his 
trance, spreading his feet upon the ground, and threatening gods and titans 
(24) The skulls in his right hands contain these things in this order: a 
elephant, a horse, an ass, an ox, a camel, a man, a lion, and a cat. (25) Those 
in the left are: Earth, Water, Air, Fire, Moon, Sun, Yama, and Vaigravana. 
(26) He is possessed of the nine emotions of dancing: passion, heroism 
loathsomeness, horror, mirth, frightfulness, compassion, wonderment, on 
tranquillity. 

(28) GAM CAM VAM GHAM PAM SAM LAM DAM—thus does he produce their 
seed-syllables from HUM and am which are blazing and terrible and 
black in appearance, the seed-syllables of the Lord himself and his 
consort. 

(29) In this manner one should conceive the Lord in that fair citadel, 
that circle of goddesses, where, black in colour and exceedingly fearful, he 
bestows such bliss upon Nairatmya. 


(These are the implements of the goddesses:) 
(30) Gauri holds in her right hand a knife and in her left a fish 


Cauri 5 3 drum » » Wild boar 
(31) Vetali 5 $5 tortoise » » skull 

Ghasmari 5 5 snake 5 5 bowl 
(32) Pukkasi 5 5 lion Se axe 

Savari 5 5 monk qom. dem 


I In all the Tibetan versions these verses are translated and not transliterated. My 
translation is therefore based on these and supported by K's explanations (vol. IT, pp. I 52-3). 
In verse 22 the word ukami (A) or uumi (K), translated in my version as *consume', seems 
to have caused difficulty, for no text gives a reasonable interpretation. K translates as 
pasyåmi ‘I see”; T translates with htshal, a polite word used elsewhere in this work with. 
the sense of ‘to know’ (see vol. II, Vocabulary). R and D translate by khums, an Eten 
rare word, of which the meaning is recorded in no dictionary with any precision. It woul 
seem to be connected with hkhums “understand (?) Having interpreted in this manner, 
R adds: “without you I cannot see about me (in the directions), I shall see things just dark 


in this dimness’—khyod ma gtogs par phyogs mi khums žes pa m l 7 er 
1 I hi dios po tsam zig mthon bar | 
phyogs su mi mthon ba ste | hthams na mun pau 2 Pe tam ETT ER E 


don to | (xvii. 329a 2). D, however, explains the s : S n 
own ee med na ni phyogs mi khum des pa ste bdag gi dm a ie par apis 
paho (xvii. 413b 5-6). No other commentator offers any eple t Be T re 
that the whole difficulty arises from an early mis-reading, namely $ dc oe Sn well be 
very close graphically, and indeed in the same line of A sihlåu min en : e is 
sihlåda. 'This being so, our reading becomes dahami (. - dolere E DES 
precisely Candali's function with regard to the quarters. Seel.i.31. AER ae E) 
is explained by K as ndgarikd, *quick-witted'. 'T’s translation as w 
more likely in the context. c ; i 
2 According to the text these verses would follow immediately, ien S Lee 
fact Hevajra has become manifest again. “The elephant and eee < (Bh xv Ad 5) 
eight lokapålas, fire and water and so on repr esent the eight planets ; 


III 


LA — å 


II. v CC-0. Agamnigam DBigitåt ERV ah JR anD au ToRandigarh 


(33) Candäli holds in the right a wheel and in the left a plough. Domb; 
has in the right a vajra and with the left she points one finger." 

(34) They are all two-armed and in a dancing-stance in the sem; 
paryanka position. They have three eyes, their hair twists upwards $ E 
they wear the five symbolic adornments. TS 

(35) Gauri is black; Cauri is like the sun; Vetali is like burnished gold; 
Ghasmari is like emerald; (36) Pukkasi is like sapphire; Savari is like 
moonstone; Candali is dark like cloud and Dombini is golden. 

(37) Their seats are: Brahma, Indra, Visnu, Siva, Yama, Kubera 
Nairrti, and Vemacitrin.’ 


b. (38) Then Nairatmya asked about mantras, and the Lord replied: 

(39-41) ‘I will tell you of that mantra which is effective in subduing 
women and in threatening the wicked, which overthrows the serpents and 
destroys gods and titans, so do thou listen, O Goddess, thou giver of bliss. 
I have told none but buddhas and bodhisattvas of what is done by Vajra- 
sattva and what comes of this mantra. I am greatly afraid, O Goddess; 
for your protection it is told to you.” (43-44) By 10,000 recitations in a 
clear, pleasant and sonorous tone, one who has applied himself to practice 
in Hevajra, may draw to himself all women. By 100,000 recitations he may 
perform any rite. 

(45) om3—to the eight-faced one with yellow hair twisting upwards, 
(46) who has twenty-four eyes and sixteen arms, whose body is like a black 
thunder-cloud and bears numerous skulls and garlands, and whose mind 
is extremely ferocious and whose teeth are like half-moons: 

(47) Slay! Slay! Have done! Have done! Roar! Roar! Threaten! Threaten! 
Consume! consume the seven seas! Bind! bind the eight serpents! 


1 V. explains these symbols thus: “The eight symbols in the right hand, the knife and 
so on, are to be connected in this order: for cutting off the klegas, for causing to sound the 
sound of absolute void, for constant bliss, for always holding to Wrath and the other four 
by means of the Truth itself (i.e. always comprehending fivefold existence for what it is), 
for doing all things without hesitation, for constancy in the condition of arhat, for turning ' 
the wheel of the doctrine, and for overcoming the klesas. Likewise the eight in the left 
hand: for pleasantness to the touch, for destroying delusion, for preserving bliss, for taking 
knowledge, for cutting off the klesas at the root, for indicating bliss, for the non-existence 
of the klesas, and for indicating that spot which is immaculate." TER hd 

ñon mons pa gcod par mdzad pa dan | ston pa ñid kyi sgra sgrogs pa dan | mi g’yo bahi bde 
ba dan | £e sdan la sogs pa de kho na füd kyis rgyan (? rgyun) du beans pa dan | bya ba Hees 
cad la the tshom med par bya ba dan | dgra bcom pa brtan pa dan | chos kyi hkhor lo y wr 
ba dan | fion mons pa gźom pahi phyir | £ yas na gri gug la sogs pahi phyag mtshan brgya e 
pa ban du sbyar ro | de bšin du g'yon pahi brgyad ni | hdi ltar reg na bde ba dan | E n 
bsad par bya ba dan | bde ba bskyan ba dan | ye ses blan ba dan | fion mons pa tshar bca d 
dan | bde ba mtshon pa dañ | ñon mons pa med pa dan | dri ma med pahi gnas mtshon pa 
rim pa bin du sbyar bar byaho | (xv. 122a 3-6). s 

2 At this point the text inserts a sloka, which seems to have nothing to dow: Sar 
context. Corrupt in the Sanskrit versions, but clear in the Tibetan, it reads: feet binda 
out the mandala, terrible with its ring of flames, one should draw forth the excell 2 
for the consecration of Vajragarbha.’ This refers to the guhyabhiseka (see n MW 7 E E 

3 Instead of giving OM the text says: ‘the foremost of the Vedas, adorned w1 


moon and a dot." 


ith the present 


112 


Cit ANTE PAO CH AERE i 


Seize! seize our enemies! 
HA HA HI HI HU HU HE HAI HO HAU HAM HAH PHAT SVAHA 


c. (48) Then the Goddess asks about the mandala, (49) and the Master of 
Mighty Knowledge, blissful and self-collected, draws it there himself. 
(50) There is one circle, surrounded by flames of different hues, with four 
doors and four portals, adorned with vajra-threads and the series of five 
colours. (51) He draws then the eight vessels, all done with powder made 
from the five kinds of gem or from rice and so on, or else from cemetery 
bricks or the charcoal from the funeral pyre. (52) In the centre he draws a 
lotus with its pericarp and eight petals. At the centre of this he draws a 
skull, white and in three sections. (53) Then on the north-east petal he 
draws a lion, on the south-east a monk, on the south-west a wheel and on 
the north-west a vajra, (54) on the eastern a knife, on the southern a drum, 
on the western a tortoise, and on the northern a serpent. (55) These 
are the eight symbols of the goddesses in accordance with their different 
categories. In the centre he draws a white skull, signed with a crossed- 
vajra, (56) and (to the east) he places the sacred Vessel of Victory with 
branches in it and enwrapped with cloth, the five gems inside and filled 
with sälija.! (57) But why say more? The mandala-ritual should be per- 
formed as it is given in the Tattvasamgraha.? 

(58) Into the mandala one should cause to enter the eight blissful 
Spells, twelve or sixteen years of age, and adorned with necklaces and 
bangles. (59) They are called wife, sister, daughter, niece, maternal uncle's 
wife, maternal aunt, mother-in-law, and paternal aunt. (60) These the 
yogin should honour with deep embraces and kisses. Then he should drink 
camphor and sprinkle the mandala with it. (61) He should cause them to 
drink it and he should quickly gain siddhi. Wine is drunk and meat and 
herbs are eaten. (62) Next he removes their garments and kisses them again 
and again. They honour him in return and sing and dance to their best, 
(63) and they play there together in the union of vajra and lotus. 

Then at the second stage he should cause the pupil to enter, (64) and 
having covered his eyes with a cloth, he should afterwards display to him 
the mandala.3 Consecration is given there in that lonely place at night. 
(65) The consecrations are as ordained, distinguished as that of the Master 
and so on. Good pupils should first pronounce words of prae bs 
worship.* (66) Then he initiates him in the truth itself, whichis ee 
at the beginning of the Joy of Cessation, and at the end of the Joy Perfect. 


1 Compare the description at I. x. 21-29- ; = 
2 See Introduction, DE 18,fn. Therelevant section on laying out the mandala occurs o 


| i «Buddhist Himälaya, pp. 69 ff. ` 
o o o es ode so ritual. See Buddhist Himålaya, 


3 Our text here dismisses in a few wor rat 
loc. cit 4 See II. iii. 18-21. 


B 6309 113 


II. v CC-0. Agamnigant Digital S AG TRAR Chandigarh 


That which is concealed in all the tantras, is here finally made manifest. 


d. (67) Then the Goddess asked: "What is that moment like? Ma 
Great Lord please tell me.” (68 : ied: * ; y the 

p e. (68) The Lord replied: "There there is no 
beginning, no end, no middle; there is neither samsåra nor nirvåna. Itisthe 
great and perfect bliss, where there is neither self nor other. (69) The thumb 
of one’s own right hand and the fourth finger of the other hand, with these 
the yogin should press the two waves at the sambhogacakra (the throat), 
(70) and from this what happens, you ask. Then there arises knowledge 
blissful like that of union with a maiden or like the dream of a fool. This 
is the end of the Joy Perfect and the beginning of the Joy of Cessation 
Void and non-Void, the state of Heruka.’ 


CHAPTER Vi. THE MAKING OF A PAINTING 


a. (1-2) Then the Lord discoursed upon the five symbolic adornments.* 
(3) The crown is worn for theadoration of one’s guru and master and chosen 
divinity. 
Ear-rings are worn to indicate one’s deafness to evil words spoken 
against one’s guru and "vajra-holder”. 
(4) The necklace suggests the mantras intoned, 
the bracelets one’s renunciation of harming living-beings, 
the girdle one’s service of the Mudra. 
The body should always be signed with these signs of the Five Buddhas.’ 


b. (5-6) Then the Goddess asked Hevajra: ‘In accordance with what 
precept and what ritual should one make a painting of Hevajra? May the 
Lord of Great Bliss please tell me.’ 

(7) He replied: ‘By a painter who belongs to our tradition, by a yogin of 
our tradition, this fearful painting should be done, and it should be painted 
with the five colours reposing in a human skull and with a brush made from 


I K explains antam antam as the two first consecrations, that of the Master, and the 
Secret (p. 154, 1. 18). This would be true by implication. R similarly identifies them with 
the third consecration, adding: ‘This is hidden in all tantras, that is to say, it is not made 
clear. But in the last resort it is made clear, that is to say that here, the very limit of all 
tantras, it becomes clear'—mthah žes pa ste ses rab ye Ses so es pahi don to | de nid ni rgyud 
rnams kun tu sbas pa ste Zes pa ste | gsal por ma mdzad do zes so | mthar thug rab gsal baho 
es ni rgyud thams cad kyi mthar thug pa hdir ni rab tu gsal bar gsuris paho | (xvii. 331b 1-2): 

2 This is literally translated, and refers to the meeting of yogin and yogini. See Part 
chapter 7. Interpreted it becomes: ‘With the two (veins), Rasana and Laland, to the left- 
hand and the right, one should press the two waves of vital breath (up the central vein) to 
the sambhogacakra’. See the Introduction, p. 36-7. K's equations are Fey ROVERS 
(p. 154, ll. 35-38). The thumb is rasanå (upaya) and the fourth finger ie taloni (a P 
See K (p. 121, I. 16). Also S (xv. 191b 2): rgan po ni mthe bon ste | de yan rdo rjeho 
lag ni chos kyi hbyun gnas so | 

š No qu e is able to explain madhyam viramasya, although (Rd = 
reading cannot be challenged. It seems, however, to be a very early error for E 2 
viramasya. Compare verse 66. See also the Introduction, p. 35, where this exp 
is mentioned. 


s: oe : jagram V. 
4 For previous reference to these adornments, see I. iii. 14 and vi. 11. Also diag! 


114 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


THE MAKING OF A PAINTING II. vi 


the hair of a corpse. (8) She who is to spin the thread and weave th 

canvas should also be of our tradition and united in its s de 
(9) (It should be painted under these circumstances: in a lonely spot at 
noon on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, in a ferocious ve of 
mind from the drinking of some wine, (10) with the body naked and 
adorned with the bone accoutrements; one should eat the sacrament in its 
foul and impure form," (11) having placed one's own mudrå at one's left 
side, she who is beautiful, compassionate, well endowed with youth and 
beauty, adorned with flowers and beloved of her master.’ 


acramental power. 


CHAPTER vil. BOOKS AND FEASTING 
a. (1) Then the Goddess asked about books and he replied: 


(2) 'O listen, Goddess, greatly blessed, and I will speak on the subject 
of books. The book should be written by one of our tradition on leaves of 
birch-bark twelve azigula long, with collyrium for ink and with a human 
bone as a pen. (3) But if someone unworthy should see either book or 
painting, one will fail to gain perfection either in this world or the next. 
(4) To one of our tradition it may be shown at any time. Then on a 
journey the book should be hidden in the hair or under the arm. 


b. (5)? (6) Now listen Goddess of wide-open eyes, to the matter of feasting 
in the company-circle, where if one feasts, that siddhi is gained that fulfils 
the substance of all one’s desires. (7) One should set about this feasting in 
a cemetery or mountain-cave, in a deserted town or in some lonely place. 
(8) One should arrange seats there, reckoned as nine, in the form of corpses, 
or tiger-skins, or rags from a cemetery. (9) In the centre is he who em- 
bodies Hevajra, and with previous knowledge of their right positions one 
should place the yoginis in the eight directions. (10) Then seated upon one’s 
tiger-skin one should eat the food with eagerness, the sacramental herbs 
and the special flesh.? Having eaten and eaten again, one should worship 
the mother-goddesses there, (11) and perhaps the mother may be sister 
or niece or mother-in-law.* One should honour them to a high degree and 

1 For niramsuka as bone-ornament, see II. iii. 56. The whole passage is paraphrased 


by V: ‘the body naked and adorned with bones, he should paint while eating the sacra- 


mental articles which are foul and impure—bdag ñid kyi lus gcer bur byun din rus pas 


brgyan la hbags pa dan mi gtsan bahi dam tshig rnams za Karn du bri bar bya (xv. 128a 4-5). 


> See p. 108, fn. 3. PET i 
3 For UE as ‘herbs’ (vyafijana) see II. iii. se SID EE MEM 
and I associate rdjasali with the flesh of the dhvaja and fastrahata refere S HERO 
(p. 71). It is, however, hypothetical as no commentary give? ben skins and so 
deals with this passage with any adequacy, says simply: iseated os m s pahi sten 
on, they should be offered the eatables such sr are'—stag la sogs palt pags pat 
zah ba ci lta ba rnams dran bar byaho (xv. 1299 7)- i ini: 
+ For previous reference to these relatives, see II. v. 59. They are the OR 
circle, and in them the mother-goddesses are honoured. K, however, Ne 150 io O), 
are five and explains them away as symbols of the five faculties of sense (p. 159, I 


115 


II. vii CC-0. Agamnigam Digitat PEESSVatigreEAunriatienTORapdigarh 


gain siddhi in their company. (12) The meritorious (pupil) should prese 
to his master a sacred skull-cup in one piece which is filled with wine E 
then having made obeisance to him, he himself should drink. (13) He shoul 
hold it with his hands in the lotus-gesture and present it with his hands 
in the same position. Again and again the yogins make obeisance there,’ 


CHAPTER vili. SUBJUGATING 
a. (1) Then the yoginis asked: ‘What is the Great Symbol like in relative 
form? May thou, the giver of bliss, please tell us.” 

(2) The Lord replied: 'She is neither too tall, nor too short, neither 
quite black nor quite white, but dark like a lotus-leaf.! (3-4) Her breath 
is sweet, and her sweat has a pleasant smell like that of musk. Her pudenda 
give forth a scent from moment to moment like different kinds of lotuses? or 
like sweet aloe wood. (5) She is calm and resolute, pleasant in speech andal- 
together delightful, with beauteous hair and three wrinkles in the middle of 
her body. By vulgar men, in fact, she would be classed as first-rank. Having 
gained her, one gains that siddhi, the nature of which is the Joy Innate.’ 
b. (6) Then Nairatmya said: ‘Lord, what kind of vow should be made? 
He replied: *May I be born from birth to birth as a member of this family, 
free from mania, compassionate, devoted to my guru, abiding by our 
conventions and an expounder of Hevajra. (7) May I be born from birth 
to birth, proclaiming this doctrine profound and ringing the vajra-bell, 
concentrating in myself the essence of woman. 

c. (8) Then pleased at this the Goddess asked: "Those unworthy beings 
who are hard to tame, how are they brought to subjugation?’ 

(9) The Lord replied: First there should be the public confession 
(posadha), then they should be taught the ten rules of virtuous conduct, 
then the Vaibhåsya teachings and then the Sautråntika, (10) after that the 
Yogåcåra and then the Mådhyamika. Then when they know all mantra- 
method, they should start upon Hevajra. The pupil who lays hold with 
zeal, should succeed, there is no doubt. 


CHAPTER ix. MANTRAS 


a. (1) Now I shall speak of the splitting of the human-complex,? how by the 
mere knowledge of which the yogin gains the end he seeks, and causes bs 
victim to split open at the navel for one cubit's length. (2) When one's 
mind is resolved in inmost wrath in counterpart of Heruka, even a budde 
may be destroyed by means of meditation only. (3) Such slaying 1s P 
from compassion, after one has supplicated one's guru and master (and I 


r Bh: ‘dark like a lotus-leaf”—padmahi hdab ma Itar sio bsans so (xv. 3034 3)- 

2 The different kinds of lotuses given are: padma, indivara, and utpala. ges of 

3 K explains this as “the sundering of consciousness and body’. For P from the 
the word samputa as ‘union’ see vol. II, II. vi. 2. One gains no conclusive help 


116 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
MANTRAS 
II. ix 
directed against) those who bring harm to the doctri pe 
ctrine or injure one’s 
or other buddhas. J guru 


(4) One should imagine such a one as a victim face-downwards, vomitin 
blood and trembling with his hair unloosed. (5) One should then rer 
needle of fire as entering his rear, and the seed-syllable of fire in his heart 
By envisaging him thus, one slays him in that instant, (6) for in this ite 
there is no need of oblations or a performance of a sequence of gestures; 


this great rite succeeds just by meditation, and is brought to success by the 
recitation of formulas. 


b. (7) Now listen, fair-faced Goddess, and I will tell you the profoundest 
secret of the beauteous purifier of existence, who bestows that perfection 
that is free from all relative thought. (8) Behold, O Goddess, this great 
gem, this body in a darting ring of flames. Useless is a gem uncut, but 
once cut, it gives forth its brilliance. (9) Likewise this gem of the samsara, 
possessed of the properties of the five desires, becomes like poison in its 
unpurified state, but when purified, it becomes ambrosia. 


c. (10) The samsåra is Heruka’s phenomenal aspect, and he is the Lord, 
the saviour of the world. The form in which he becomes manifest, that I 
will tell, so now listen. (11) His eyes are red from compassion; his body is 
black to indicate his sentiments of friendliness; his four legs symbolize the 
four means of conversion," (12) his eight faces the eight releases and his 
sixteen arms the sixteen voids. The Five Buddhas are represented by the 
symbolic adornments, and he is wrathful for the subduing of the evil- 
disposed. (13) His flesh represents Pukkasi (earth), his blood Savari(water), 
his semen Candali (fire), and his fat and marrow Dombi (air), his skin the 
seven factors of enlightenment, and his bones the four truths.’ 


d.(14) The Goddess said: ‘What is that collection of mantras like, by which 
the activities of men reach a successful conclusion? May the Giver of 
Great Bliss please tell me.’ He then explained the mantras. 


commentators over this passage. Hastena translated as ‘for a cubit's length’ is a mere sup- 
position in order to avoid the obvious rendering of ‘by his hand’, which would contradict 
the whole theory of the ritual, which is done by ‘mere application of the mind o 3 

t Elsewhere his four legs are said to indicate the crushing of the four Maras GR S 
I, ix. 15). Concerning the four means of conversion (catuhsarigrahavastini) see Har ae j 
The Bodhisattva Doctrine, pp.251 ff. For the seven factors of enlightenment, ip. 149 ff. 

2 There follows now, omitted in the translation, the list of mantras as already piyan in 
chapter ii of Part I. Here, however, they are spelt letter by letter in accordance yt NE 
following scheme. The vowels are called by the names of their respective yoginis å iste oF 
P- 103. As for the consonants: ka—ria is referred to as the first series, ca—na as the s : , 
and so on as faras: pa—ma, which is the fifth; ya, ra, la, va are known as the oe pes 
$a, sa, sa, ha as the usmåni. The five consonants in each series are then num a SE 
one to five. Kais therefore the first of the first, da the third of the fourth, ra g eyes 3 
of the ‘finals’ (antasthånåm dvitiyam), &c. OM is known either as NA ere 
Letters”. M (anusvåra) is known as ‘void’ (Stinya). See Introduction, p: 26. Meer 
by-letter spellings are useful for checking the accuracy of the list given in chap 
Part I, but nothing is gained by their repetition here. 
o_O 


* ra is also known as ‘fire’ of which it is the seed-syllable. 


117 


II. x CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Prds&våtipR Bouiiu&tnr Ghandigarh 


CHAPTER X. ON RECITING MANTRAS 


a. (1) Then the Lord Vajrasattva, the one unity of all that is, explained to 
Nairåtmya the different (means used in the) reciting of mantras, 


(2) For petrifying one uses beads of crystal; 
For subduing one uses red sandal-wood; 
For bewitching one uses the wood of the soap-berry tree; 
For causing hatred one uses human bone; 
(3) For driving away one uses bone from a horse; 
For conjuring forth one uses the bone of a brahman; 
For causing rain one uses bone from an elephant; 
For slaying the bone of a buffalo. 


b. (4) Further when petrifying one drinks milk; 
When subduing one proceeds as one pleases; 
When slaying one drinks blood; 
When conjuring forth one uses dung; 
(5) When causing hatred one uses human flesh; 
When bewitching one uses urine,’ 
or one may use the flesh of horse and dog and man and cow and elephant. 


CHAPTER xi. THE FIVE FAMILIES 


a. (1) Then Nairatmya asked about the families of human beings, (2) and 
the Lord of the mandala replied: ‘O listen, thou Perfection of Wisdom, 
and I will speak of the several families of human beings? (3) Whatever 
man or woman has a nine-pointed vajra on the lower joint of the fourth 


1 These articles are listed in the code given on p. 99-100. 

2 Concerning these, see p. 86, fn. å 

3 Vis slightly more explicit than the text: "Whatever man or woman has a line (rekhå) 
on the bottom joint of the fourth finger, is established (adhisthita) in the family of Aksobhya, 
if he has one (a line) like a nine-pointed vajra. By the force of the qualities of his inherent 
nature, colour for that man consists in black. He performs the rite of slaying.’ . . . ‘Who- 
ever has a line like a white wheel with eight spokes, is initiated by Vairocana, and by the 
force of the qualities of his inherent nature, colour for that man consists in white He 
performs the rite of propitiation.’ Thus it continues, allocating the rite of conjuring ort 
to those of Amitabha’s family, the rite of petrifying to those of Ratnasambhava's, the EMI 
of exorcizing and the rest (bskrad pa la sogs pahi las grub bo) to Amoghasiddhi s, an D 
rites to Vajrasattva's.—skyes bu ham bud med gan gi srin lag gi rtsa bahi tshig 7 v ar 
gnas pa na rdo rje rtse dgu pa lta bu yod pa ni Mi bskyod pahi rigs su byin gyis ue ste E 
b£in yon tan gyi dban gis mi de la mdog Ryan nag por gnas pa ste | bsad pa hgrub o , zw . Es 
la hkhor lo dkar po rtsibs brgyad pa lta buhi re khå gnas pa ni | Nam par snan m Å Di 
byin gyis brlabs pa ste | ran bin yon tan dban gis mi dehi mdog kyan dkar por gnas 
hgrub bo | &c. (xv. 138a 3-5). 7 : 2 
HE nothing to indicate whether the mark on the finger is natural, En ur di 
to be read from the existing lines, or whether it is a man-made mark. The Ti pee 
men are supposedly members of one family or another by nature, would su e n 
But we seck precision here where no precision is forthcoming from OG co Me che Five 
The whole has the appearance of a stereotyped list. IN he colours are t ai them 
Buddhas, and the various rites are allocated in accordance with the colours allo 


at II. i. 8-9. 
118 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
THE FI 


VE FAMILIES IL xi 


finger, belongs to Aksobhya's family, which is the highest. (4) For Vai 
cana's there would be a wheel, for Amitabha's a lotus, for Rs i 
a gem and for Amoghasiddhi's a sword. : 
(5) The yogin whose colour is black has Aksobhya as his divinity, 
The yogin whose colour is white has Vairocana. 
(6) The yogin whose colour is dark green has Amoghasiddhi. 
The yogin whose colour is yellow has Ratnasambhava. 
(7) The yogin whose colour is red has Amitabha. 
The yogin whose colour is white is of Vajrasattva’s family. 


(8) Yogins who have reached perfection should have no special liking or 
contempt for people. These families of the Five Buddhas should exist 
from a relative point of view. (9) The signs for women are the same as those 
for men, for they also belong to these families under a relative aspect.’ 
b. (10) Then the Adamantine Lord bade Nairatmya be attentive and said: 
‘Listen, Goddess, how the Prajña should be honoured. (11) In a garden, 
in a lonely place, or in one's inner apartment, . . .’ (there follows an account 
similar to that already given on p. 113, embellished only by the listing of 
various postures). 


CHAPTER Xii. THE FOUR CONSECRATIONS 


(1) Then the Adamantine Lord spoke concerning the four consecrations. 
‘O thou who art already consubstantiated with the Vajra, take up the great 
vajra and the great bell, and perform even today for your pupil the bene- 
ficent act! of a vajra-guru. 
(2) Even as the bodhisattvas are consecrated by past buddhas, so in this 
Secret Consecration you are consecrated by me with the flow of bodhicitta. 
(3) O Great One, take, take to yourself this beauteous and delightful 
goddess, bestower of bliss, bestower of siddhi, and having taken her, pay 
her due honour. 
(4) This knowledge is the great bliss, the adamantine essence, and Uke 
space, bestowing salvation, pure and tranquil. You are yourself the Father. 
(5) And now the empowering mantra of vajra and lotus: | 
OM Lotus, receptacle of bliss, bestowing the bliss of great passion. d 
are the blessings of your four joys. HUM HUM HUM eye my a T 
(6) om Vajra, greatly wrathful, bestower of the four joys. Source 2 Ç 
things, of single savour, pervading space, HUM HÖM HUM , 
prosper my affairs! 
In the head om 
In the heart HOM 
Inthelotus À 


I ‘beneficent act’—samigraha—see p+ 117; fn. I. 


119 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


RESUME OF CONTENTS 


As the subject-matter is incoherently ordered, especially in Part IT 

cross-references provided in this résumé are intended to . K 1 the 
turning immediately to other parts of the work, where the cR in 
are treated. All the references to any one main subject (e.g Sr 
Consecrations, Buddha-Families, Joys, mandala, Bx or PU. 
partner, rites, samsåra, &c.) will be found in the index. : i 


Variations of subject-matter within each chapter are marked (a), (b) 
(c), &c. Thus I. vii (b) refers to Part I, Chapter vii, para. (b). , 
I. i (a) The titles of Hevajra and their meaning. 

(b) The Efficacy of this tantra. Refer to index under: Gazes, Rites, 
bhåvanå, Yoginis, Secret Language. 

(c) The vajra-body, which is the internal mandala, referred to in 
the Introduction pp. 35-36. Here are listed some of the pairs 
which correspond with the two veins Lalana and Rasana, and 
the sets of four, which are equated with the four cakras. The 
thirty-two veins are also listed. 

See I. vii, pp. 69-70 (where the veins are equated with the 
places of pilgrimage), II. iv (d) (where they are equated with 
the fifteen yoginis). These equations amount to no more thana 
dogmatic assertion of the essential identity of macrocosm and 
microcosm. The various items are therefore forced into some 
sort of correspondence. See also II. iv (h) and p. 102 fn. 
I. ii (a) A general list of mantras, which are required for the process of 
self-identification with the various divinities. They are all 
relisted at IL. ix (d). Their use is essential for any practice, 
supramundane or mundane, for the gaining of enlightenment 
or for the producing of rain: e.g. see p. 56, fn. 1, and p. 57, 
fn. 1 for the use of mantra no. 11; see II. iv(c) for the names of 
the yoginis, whose seed-syllables are given in mantra no. 6; 
mantras nos. 7, 8 and 9 are applicable in the meditations on 
Hevajra, which are described in I. iii; mantras nos. 12-18 are 
applicable to I. ii (b); see I. xi (c) for reference to Kurukulla, 
whose mantra is no. 19: Others are illustrated in the present 
chapter. See also II. v (b) for a specially potent mantra, which 
is not given in the present list. 

(b) Fierce Rites. Seealso I. xi (a), II 
TI. x. 

I. iii. Meditation upon the mandala of 
goddesses. See also II. v (a) 


121 


i (b), II. iv (m), IT. ix (a) and 


Hevajra and his troupe of eight 
where these goddesses are 


— 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digal HrEsVAt]dš Aofa on, Ritandigarh 
described in detail. 
Heruka (Hevajra). 


I. iv. The process (called self-consecration) which is preparatory to 


meditation upon one’s chosen divinity (svestadevatå). For 
this see II. ii (a). 


See II. ix (c) for an interpretation of 


I. v. Reality. 'The universe, which is essentially void, is conceived in 
a fivefold aspect, as the five buddhas, the five yoginis, the five 
skandhas, the five families, &c. See diagrams V and VIII. A 
possible sixth family, that of Vajrasattva, represents the 
essential unity of all of them, II. iv (n) and xi (a). It may be 
observed that existence is also conceived under the threefold 
aspect of Body, Speech, Mind and dvesa, moha, raga. The 
passage II. iv (n) seeks to bring the two schemes together. See 
also II. iv (b) where an attempt is made to fit the fifteen yoginis 
into the five families. This, however, involves certain con- 
tradictions, which a complicated passage elsewhere (II. iii (1)) 
attempts to resolve. One may also note how the whole pheno- 
menal world is envisaged as becoming manifest by the sexual 
act and yet as fivefold, because it consists of the five elements, 
I. x (e) and II. ii (g). See also I. viii (c) and II. ii (d). 


I. vi (a) A description of the accoutrements to be worn by the yogin and 
their significance. See also II.vi(a). For the consecrating of 
the yogzni, see II. ii (c), I. x (a), and references. 

(b) The type of yogin. See also I. vii (f), II. ii (b), II. iii (h). 
I. vii (a) Secret Signs. 
(b) Meeting-places. See II. iv (a). 
(c) Times for meeting. 
(d) Eating of sacraments. See I. xi (b), II. vii (b). Also II. iii (£), and 
II. v (c). 
(e) Slaying-rite. See p. 55, fn. 1, item vii and II. ix (a). 
(f) The type of yogin. See above I. vi (b) for references. 

I. viii (a) Meditation upon the mandala of the fifteen yoginis. See diagram 
III. For the actual producing of the mandala compare I. ii 
especially footnotes. One may note that just as the pheno- 
menal world is conceived as becoming manifest through 
the five elements (I. v above), so the mandala, which 18,27 
idealized form of being, is conceived as becoming manifest 
through the five wisdoms. See also references to mandala at 
II. ii (d), iii (d), iv (e). een 

(b) Significance of knife, skull, and khatvanga. For the identity 0 
the four Maras, see p. 80, fn. 2. 


122 


CC-0. ARTY Pr RAE Foundation, Chandigarh 


I. viii (c) The Absolute under its five 
five colours and a sixth, me ae 
represents the unity of the whole. See T. v abo VED 
See also II. xi (a), where the six colours are again list d e 
fail to correspond, however, because Vane me pe 
white (like Vairocana) or dark blue/black (like nec 
(d) The mandala is identified with the sexual rite. E 
(e) The Four Joys. See I. x (b) and II. iii (a). 
(f) = e G Joy). See I. x (b) and(d), II. ii (e), IL. iii (c), 
I.ix(a) The significance of the yoginis which were listed in the last 
chapter. See diagram IV. See II. iii (f), iii (å). 
(b) The essential deduction that: "The world is released by the very 
bonds that bind it.” See I. i (b), II. ii (d), II. ü (f), II. iv (i), 
II. ix (b). 
I. x (a) Laying out the mandala for the Master's Consecration. See 
para. (c) below. See II. iii (b), II. v (c) and II. xii. Note also 
I. vi (a) and IL. ii (c). 
(b) The Innate. For other references see I. viii (f) above. 
(c) See (a) above. 
(d) See (b) and I. viii (f) above. 
(e) The fivefold evolution. See I. v above and II. ii (8). 
I. xi (a) Fierce Rites. For other references see I. ii (b) above. 
(b) Eating of sacraments. See I. vii (d) above: 
(c) Kurukulla. See I. ii (a) above. 
II. i (a) Consecrations of books, images, &c. 
(b) Instruction for performing rites, both gentle and fierce. For 
other references to fierce rites see I. ii (b) above. 


II. ii (a) Meditation upon Nairätmya or Heruka (Hevajra). See also I. iv. 
(b) The type of yogin. See I. vi (b) above for further references. 
(c) The training of the yogini. See also I. vi (a) and I. x (a). 
(d) The unity of Wisdom and Means. See also II. iv (f) and (8). 
For parallels to the phrase: ‘renders it undiversified by means 
of its diversity’ see I. ix (b). For references to the six colours 
see I. viii (c). See also (e) below. 


(e) The Innate. For other references see I. viii (£) above. The Innate, 
which is the Fourth Joy, is by implication the essential unity 
of Wisdom and Means. — 

(£) ‘The world is bound by passion, 
See I. ix (b) for further references. 


(8) The fivefold evolution. See I. v and I. x (a) above. 


123 


and by passion it is released,’ 


mx 


CC-0. Agamnigamt ib Kal Hrs sid e n dao RAandigarh 


II. iii (a) Evam experienced through the Four Joys in the Fou 

by means of the Four Consecrations. For the Four Joys see 
I. viii (e, f) and x (b). 

(b) The Consecrations. See references given under I. x (a). 

(c) The Innate. See I. viii (f), &c. 

(d) Definition of the mandala. See I. v end. See also I. iii and 
I. viii (a) with references given there. 

(e) The Four Rules of Conduct. 

(f) The senses, spheres of sense and the bases of consciousness, 
See I. ix (a). 

(&) Eating of sacraments. See I. vii (d), &c. 

(h) The type of yogin. See I. vi (b), &c. 

(i) The symbolizing of the faculties of sense. See I. ix (a), &c. 

(j) Secret language. 

(k) The Five Families known as five yoginis. See I. v. 


r Moments 


II. iv (a) The meeting together and the eating of sacraments. See I. vii 
(a, b, c, d) and the references given there. 

(b) The fifteen yoginis arranged in the five families. See I. v. 

(c) The seed-syllables of the yoginis. See ii. 2, mantra no. 16. See 
also II. v (a), where eight of these yoginis have a separate set 
of seed-syllables. 

(d) The thirty-two veins equated with the fifteen yogints. See I. i(c). 

(e) “The Thought of Enlightenment.’ For reference to EVAM see 
II. iii (a). 

(f) The unity of samsåra and nirvåna. 

(g) The nature of Nairatmya. See I. viii (f) and II. ii (d). 

(h) Elements of the internal mandala. See I. i (c). 

(i) “All beings are buddhas.” 

(j) “Those who know how, can drink strong poison.’ See I. ix(b), &c. 

(k) ‘All beings are buddhas.’ 

(1) A forced effort to explain why the yoginis are allocated to such 
and such families. See II. iv (b). 

(m) Oblations, applicable to all rites, as in II. i (b) and I. ii (b). 

(n) Body, Speech, and Mind, symbolized by three yoginis. The five 
families are reduced to three in order to force them into corre- 
spondence. As comprised in one, they should be envisaged as 
the family of Vajrasattva, but as this is the Hevajra-tantra and 
Hevajra is Aksobhya, Aksobhya is given pre-eminence. See 
I. vand I. viii (c). 


II. v(a) Hevajra and his troupe of goddesses. See I. iii. 
(b) A special mantra of Hevajra. See I. ii (a). 


124 


CC-0. Agam: am Ae Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
RESUMÉ OF CONTENTS 


II. v (c) caus out the mandala for the Master's Consecration. See 
. X (a) and references given there. For 
ments that takes place, see I. vii (d), &c. 
(d) The perfect bliss. See II. iv (£). 
II. vi (a) Significance of the yogin's adornments. See I. vi (a). 
(b) Instructions for making a painting of Hevajra. 
II. vii (a) Instructions for writing a book of Hevajra. 
(b) Eating of sacraments. See I. vii (b) and references 
II. viii(a) The Great Symbol in her relative form. See II. ii (d IL: 
S ; (d), IL iv (£g). 
ee also I. vi (a) and I. x (a). 
(b) The yogin’s vow. 
(c) Training for those who are hard to convert. 
II. ix (a) Slaying-rite. See I. vii (e). 

(b) The gem, which is the samsåra. For reference to poison, see 
II. iv (j). 

(c) The samsåra is Heruka’s phenomenal aspect. See I. ix (b). 

(d) Mantras. See I. ii. 

II. x (a) Types of rosary to be used for the performance of different rites. 
See I. ii (b) and references. 

(b) Types of sacrament to be eaten when performing these different 
rites. For the eating of sacraments generally see I. vii (d) and 
references. 

II. xi (a) The Families. See I. viii (c) and II. iv (n). See also I. v. 

(b) Honouring the Prajñā. See I. x (a) and references. 

II. xii. The Consecrations. See I. x (a) and references. 


the eating of sacra- 


125 


CC-0. Agamniganr DigitatPrevexatinmrEownsdatenr Chandigarh 


I. Points of the Compass 


KUBERA 


våyava alf3na 


VARUNA INDRA 


nairrtya agneya 


YAMA 


III. The Troupe of the Fifteen Yoginis 
See Chapters 8 and 9 of Part I 


Khecari 
ER 
Dombini Q Š 
a Vajradakini x 
Vetali Variyogini Nairatmya Vajra Gaurl 11 
\ Gauri 
E $avari 
oe UM 
BhücarT 


126 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Bessai 
TR GRAN 


See Chapter 3 of Part I and Chapter s of Part II VE 


GhasmarT 
< m 
Vetalf HEVAJRA 
[ru SavarT 
Cauri 


IV. The Spheres of Purification of the Fifteen Yc 


thought 


taste. 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Pré te ValigrRedurBatid TOR andigarh 


V. The Five Buddhas and their Associations 


Buddha Family name Affiliated Yogini Family symbol 
Aksobhya Vajra Dombi vi$vavajra 
Vairocana 'Tathagata Brahmani cakra 
Amitåbha Padma Narti padma 
Ratnasambhava Ratna Candalini ratna 
Amoghasiddhi Karma Rajaki khadga 


For the five families, see I. v. 5—7 and II. xi. 5-7. 
For the adornments, see I. vi. 11-12. 


VI. The Elements and their Various Correspondences 


EARTH Locanà Pukkasi Vairocana 
WATER Måmaki Savari Aksobhya 

FIRE Pandara Candali Amitåbha 

AIR Tara Dombi Amoghasiddhi 
SPACE — — Ratnasambhava 


See vol. II, p. 104, ll. 7 to 14 for Locanå, &c. 
See I. ix. 16 for Pukkasi, &c. 
See II. ii. 53-57 for Vairocana, &c. 


VII. The Three Adamantine Ones and their Various Correspondences 


SPEECH Khecari Amitåbha Råga 
MIND Nairåtmyå Aksobhya Dvesa 
BODY Bhücari Vairocana Moha 


See II. iv. 97-99 and Introduction pp. 28-29. 


128 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
DIAGRAMS 


V. continued 


Symbolic 
Colour adornment Seed-syllable Type of wisdom 
black or dark blue circlet HÖM suvisuddhadharmadhätujfäna 
white bracelets BUM ådar$ajfiåna : 
red ear-rings JRIM pratyaveksanajfiana 1 
yellow necklace AM samatåjfiåna | 
dark green girdle KHAM krtyanusthanajiiana 


For the syllables, see I. ii. 2, and Vajragarbha’s commenta V. 26a 7—b 
For the five wisdoms, see I. viii. 6—7 and p. 62, fn. 5. xis IM 


VIII. The Inner Circle of Five Yoginis showing their Sphere of Purification 
and their Correspondence with the Five Buddhas 
(Amoghasiddhi) 


Vajradakini: 
Trsya 


(Amitabha) (Aksobhya) (Vairocana) 
Väriyogini Nalratmya Vajra 
raga dvesa moha 


(Ratnasambhava) 
Gauri 
paifunya 


B 6309 129 i 


= 
kd 
RED 
v 
c 
S 
fe 
o 
E 
9 
w 
© 
E 
2 
o 
HS 
= 
I 
= 
© 
3 
N 
g 
n. 
E 
jen 
a 
E 
© 
gej 
T 
E 
9 
< 
S 
0) 
o 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


| 


GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS 


abhiseka. Literally a (purificatory) sprinkling, the basic sense seems to come 
close to that of ‘baptism’. It has acquired, however, the wider sense of 
any kind of initiation rite. In the earlier tantric period (as typified by the 
Manjusrimälakalpa and the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha) it refers 
primarily to initiation into the mystic significance of the mandala. Since 
there is explicit analogy with the rite of royal consecration, for which the 
term abhiseka is also used, ‘consecration’ seems to be the most suitable 
general translation. But the idea of a purificatory sprinkling is never 
lost. ‘As externally one washes away exterior dirt with water, so one 
sprinkles water for the washing away of ignorance; it is thus called a 
sprinkling’ (Advayavajrasamgraha, p. 36). 
In accordance with the general theory of the Buddhist tantric yogins, 
for whom everything goes in fours (Hevajra-tantra, I. i. 30), there are 
four consecrations: 


. Master-Consecration. 

. Secret Consecration. 

. Consecration in Knowledge of Prajna. 
. Fourth Consecration. 


Q N m 


+ 


The first consecration may also be known as the Jar-Consecration 
(kalasabhiseka), for it consists of six subsidiary consecrations, in all of 
which the ritual jar (kalasa) is used. These six consecrations are those 
of Water, Crown, Vajra, Bell, Name, and Master.! It is presumably 
because the Master-Consecration completes the set of six, that this name 
is also given to the whole set. The main set of four, with which the 
Hevajra-tantra is primarily concerned (see Index, consecrations), 1s 
interrelated with other sets of four, especially the four Moments (ksana), 
the four Joys (ananda) and the four Mudra. Externally they are related 
with the four classes of tantras and symbolized by the smile, gaze, | 
embrace, and union (II. iii. 11 and 54). This set of four gestures is | 
presumably related with the actual meeting of yogins and yoginis at places | 
of pilgrimage (see I. vii). Concerning the internal interrelations I quote | 
K (vol. II, p. 107, 1. 24 ff.): 

* «Consecration is said to be fourfold for the benefit of living beings. 
One is sprinkled, that is to say cleansed and the consecrations are distin- 
guished as four.” Thus it is said (in our text, II. iii. 10) “the Master, 
the Secret, the Praja and then the Fourth thus”, &c. In this yogini- 


I See p. 9s fn., Hevajrasekaprakriya ( JA, July-Sept. 1934); PP: 39749, and Advayavajra- 
samgraha, p. 36. 


131 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS 


tantra the Master-Consecration is given, in order that (the initiate) may 
progress far from evil dharmas. Itis his "bond" (samvara). The essential 
nature of the Master-Consecration is a conferment by means of the 
Karmamudrå and contains in essence the four Moments and the four 
Joys. Some say that one can receive the Master-Consecration by the 
mere receiving of the non-retrogression Consecration (avaivartikabhi- 
seka!), which is common to the kriyåtantras and all the others; one is 
then worthy, they say, for exposition and initiation in the yoga-tantras, 
yogini-tantras and so on. What an idea is this? In the first place then 
one is consecrated with the Master-Consecration in the Hevajra-tantra 
or some other yogini-tantra, so that one may be worthy of the initiation, 
reflection and meditation (which follow). ‘Then in accordance with one’s 
knowledge the Master, the Secret, the Prajfia and the Fourth are charac- 
terized momentarily and so known. 

‘Tn the case of those of weak sensibility, who have received the Master- 
Consecration, when once their zealous application has been established, 
they should be given instruction in meditation with the Karmamudrå. 
Thus under the aspect of the Process of Realization (nispannakrama*) 
with the Gem (mani = tip of the vajra) set in the Secret (= lotus) they 
experience in accordance with their master’s instructions the four Joys 
which have the nature of four Moments; this experience is the Secret 
Consecration because it cannot be explained to yogins in terms of diffuse 
mental concepts. 

‘Now in the consecration of those of medium sensibility instruction 
is given in meditation (bhåvanå) on the Samayamudrå. Even thus is 
Prajña (Wisdom), for she is the highest knowledge, the knowledge that 
all the elements (dharmas) are nothing but one’s own thought (citta- 
måtra). For conferring this the consecration is the Consecration of the 
Knowledge of Prajñā. In the unity of the three veins, which represent 
the three kinds of consciousness, imaginary (kalpita), contingent (para- 
tantra) and absolute (parinispanna), one marks the four Moments by 
means of the Gem and in accordance with one’s master’s instructions. 
Because of the external mudrå (= feminine partner) it is properly known 
as the Knowledge of Prajna. 

"When this consecration has been given, instruction is given to those 
of strong sensibility in the Dharmamudrå, the mental concentration 
(samådhi) in which all appears as illusion. And so (it is said: II. iii. 10) 
“then the Fourth thus”. It is *thus-ness” (tathata), the climax of being 
(bhiitakoti), the elemental sphere (dharmadhåtu) and similar names with- 
out any difference of meaning. The consecration by which its nature is 


7 See Hevajrasekaprakriyå, p. 43; correct avaivarnika to read avaivartika, amending 
translation accordingly. 2 See Glossary below, p. 139, utpattikrama. 


132 


ABBA 95:3 BIK B FAROE, Chandigarh 


seen or realized, its "thus-ness”, is indicated by the word “thus” 
“Then” means that it is given immediately after the Consecration in he 
Knowledge of Prajña. So this perfection is experienced with the external 
mudrå and by one's master's instruction, yet by a process of yoga which 
has no object of experience (anålambanayogena); it is characterized by 
the absence of discrimination with regard to definite places of origin. 
This is the Fourth Consecration.’ 

See also D’s interpretation (translated p. 95 fn.), where the stages are 
related progressively with the four buddhakaya and with personality as 
expressed in the formula, Body, Speech, and Mind. 

The Tibetan term dbari-bskur-ba means literally ‘bestowal of power’. 


} 
` 


adhisthana. From the literal meaning of ‘position’, this word is applied 
specifically to ‘authoritative position’ and then to the ‘power’ pertaining 
to such a position. It can therefore mean the power which belongs 
naturally to divine forms and in this sense it comes near to the Christian 
conception of ‘grace’. It can also refer to the power which is experienced 
spontaneously in meditation or achieved through the recitation of 
mantras. In that it may be transmitted by a man of sanctity to his 
disciples, it may also be translated as ‘blessing’. Abhiseka is essentially 
a ritual empowerment. Adhisthana refers to innate or spontaneous 
power and always with the connotation of active expression; in the sense 
of ‘grace’ or ‘blessing’ it becomes, however, a form of empowerment. 
For its use in various contexts see ‘empowerment’ in the Index. 

The Tibetan translation is byin-rlabs, literally *power-wave'. Byin 
means ‘power’ in the special sense of its inherent splendour (i.e. majesty). 
Byin-rlabs is also used to translate Sanskrit prabhåva (power, lustre, 
splendour), which thereby becomes implicitly a synonym for adhisthana. 

Byin-rlabs is often written as byin-gyis (b)rlabs-pa, as though (byrlabs 
were the perfect root of a verb: 

rlob-pa perf. brlabs fut. brlab imp. rlobs 


In fact the imperative form byin-gyis rlobs appears quite regularly in 
ritual texts and elsewhere. This verb scarcely occurs, it seems, apart 
from byin, but it is given both as rlob-pa and with the reduplicated form 
rlob-rlob-pa, meaning ‘to billow’, in the brDa-dag min-tshig gsal-ba of 
dGe-bSes Chos-kyi Grags-pa (Ko-hsi ch'ü cha: Tsang-wén tz'ü-tien), 
Peking 1957, p. 846. | 

adhyätmika. Internal or esoteric, in contrast with bahya, external or exoteric. 
Thus the contents of the Hevajra-tantra can often be interpreted in 
two ways. E.g. the places of pilgrimage (I. vii) refer exoterically to actual 
sites, but esoterically they are identified within the body of the meditat- 
ing yogin. Thus the commentaries often give double interpretations, 


133 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS 


e.g. vol. I, pp. 71-72 fns., 86 fn., vol. II, pp. 103-4, 110, 121-2. Be- 
sides adhyåtmika and båhya, certain other terms are used: aksarartha, 
‘literal meaning’ in contrast with sampradayartha, ‘traditional meaning’ ; 
neyärtha, “expected meaning? in contrast with nitårtha “real meaning’. 
In the case of our texts neyårtha means in effect ‘literal meaning’ and 
nitartha ‘figurative meaning’, thus reversing the normal meaning of 
these two terms. See Egerton, BHS Dictionary, p. 310. 


ånanda. Joy which is fourfold: 


(Just) Joy ånanda 
Perfect Joy paramananda 
Joy of Cessation viramånanda 
Joy Innate sahajananda 


These joys are related fundamentally with sexual experience, envisaged 
as fourfold because ‘everything goes in fours’ (I. i. 30). Joy is the contact 
of lotus and vajra; perfect joy is the desire for yet more; the joy of 
cessation comes from the destruction of passion and the joy innate is a 
transcending experience sprung from the preceding joy (I. viii. 32-33 
and K’s commentary, vol. II, p. 127). 

The four joys are experienced at four successive moments (ksana, q.v.), 
with which they are in a sense identical. Their relationship with the four 
consecrations (abhiseka, q.v.) is more complex. The Master-Consecra- 
tion bestows them in anticipation; the Secret Consecration involves their 
actual experience by the master and their essence, still unrealized, is 
transferred to the pupil; in the Consecration of Knowledge of Prajna 
the pupil experiences them directly. His experience leads to the Fourth 
Consecration, which is identical with the Joy Innate. Schematically, 
however, the four joys are placed parallel with the consecrations and it 
is explicitly stated (see K, vol. II, p. 132) that the first joy is experienced 
in the first consecration, the second in the second and so on. This would 
seem to be the esoteric interpretation arising from mystic experience 


(see samvara, p. 138,). Concerning the possible variation in the order of 
the last two joys see p. 35. 


bhavana. Meaning literally ‘causing to be’, this is one of the words which 
I have translated as ‘meditation’ (compare dhyana). It means ‘meditation’ 
in the special sense of mental production or thought-creation, corres- 
ponding with the emanative process of meditation discussed below (see 
utpattikrama). One may observe that ‘being’ (bhava) and ‘meditation’ 
(bhåvanå) are in essence identical. The first, which just ‘is’, is normally 
regarded in a falsified condition by ordinary men as a result of original 
accidental defilement (agantukamala). The second is a deliberate pro- 
duction of ‘being’ in an idealized form, of which the mandala is the 


134 


GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS 1 

CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh j 
complete expression, and by means of this deliberate production the true | 
nature of ‘being’ itself is spontaneously realized. 


bindu. Meaning literally a ‘drop’ or a ‘point’, bindu refers pre-eminently to 
the point at the centre of the mandala, where all ‘thought-creation’ 
(bhāvanā) is absorbed. Hence it represents the Void (sunyatå) or the | 
Moon”, which is the bodhicitta in its absolute aspect. Through identifica- 
tion of terminology it may also mean the bodhicitta in its relative aspect; 
thus it may be known as the white bindu, being paired with ‘blood’, 
which by analogy is called the red bindu. The Tibetan term thig-le (also 
used to translate Sanskrit ti/aka) is the usual word for semen. It occurs 
glossed with bodhicitta on pp. 94 fn. and 95 fn. 


cakra. Literally ‘wheel’ or ‘circle’, cakra refers pre-eminently to the circle 
of divine forms of which the mandala consists. Hence it may mean 
‘manifested being’, viz. ‘existence’ in relation with the ‘point’ (bindu), 
where all manifestation is absorbed. Cakra is also used in a technical 
sense to refer to the ‘psychic centres’ within the yogin’s body, envisaged 
as lotuses with radiating petals (see K, vol. II, p. 107). In the literal 
sense of ‘wheel’, it is the symbol of the Buddha-Family of Vairocana. 


dakini. This curious term, of which I have so far found no adequate 
definition, refers in Buddhist tantric tradition to a type of yogini, with 
which word it is all but synonomous. It is commonly related with the 
Sanskrit verbal root di ‘to fly’, and represents that ‘perfection which acts | 
throughout the whole of space” (K, vol. II, p. 142). The Tibetan transla- 
tion mkhah-hgro-ma means ‘she who goes in the sky’. 
The dakinis par excellence are the five yoginis who are identified with 
the five Buddhas and represent the unity of existence (samvara). See 
diagram VIII, p. 130. On the other hand, the yoginis of flesh and blood, 
with whom the yogins come together at places of pilgrimage, may also be 
referred to as dakinis. However, their divine, rather mystic, aspect tends 
to predominate, especially in later Tibetan tradition. 
In Hindu tantric tradition they appear 25 the attendants of Kali, the 
Great Goddess, and their flesh-eating propensities relate them closely 
with the ritual feasts of tantric yogins(see Index, ‘feasting’). They belong 
to the lowest stratum of tantric practice, but are purified in interpretation 
and elevated as supreme symbols. 
dhyana. Derived from the root dhyai, ‘to think or ponder’, it is the general 
word for ‘meditation’. Compare the special sense of bhavana, pin The 
Tibetan translation bsam-gtan means literally ‘mind-composure - 


japa. Repetitive recitation of set formulas (mantra), which has the a 
of directing the mind one-pointedly upon the divine form, with whic 


135 


CC-0. Aqamnigam Digital Breseyption aun arap digar 


the particular formula is traditionally related. Beads are normally em- 
ployed for counting. 
ksana. Moment. There are four moments, marking the stages of the four joys: 
x Variety vicitra 
Development —vipåka 
Consummation vimarda 
Blank vilaksana 


My use of ‘consummation’ for vimarda represents an interpretation and 
not a translation. Vimarda, which actually means ‘rubbing’ is regularly 
glossed by alocana, ‘reflection’, viz. the reflection that bliss has been 
experienced oneself (see pp. 35 and 95). 

mahåmudrå. See mudrå. 


mandala. Sphere of divinity, mystic circle, idealized representation of 
existence. It may be produced mentally (see bhåvanå and utpattikrama), 
marked out temporarily on the ground, or painted in permanent form. 


mantra. Mystic formula or spell, deriving its power from traditional 
association with a particular divinity or a desired result. It is rendered 
effective by means of repetitive recitation (japa) combined with medita- 
tion (dhyana). 
mudrå. The basic meaning is seal or sign, especially a hand-sign, which is 
the literal interpretation of the Tibetan term phyag-rgya. The related 
meaning ‘symbol’, presumably reached by way of ‘symbolic gesture’, 
has led to this word being used in a variety of special meanings, which 
seem at first to take one far from the basic meaning. As everything goes 
in fours (I. i. 30), there are four Mudra: 
karmamudrå ‘Rite Symbol’ 
samayamudrå ‘Convention Symbol’ 
dharmamudra “Truth Symbol’ 
mahamudra "Great Symbol’ 


The karmamudrå refers to the feminine partner, normally known as the 
Prajna (‘Wisdom’), who plays an essential part in the second and third 
consecrations (see abhiseka). The term mudrå itself is commonly used 
as a synonym for Prajña in this special sense (see Index). 

The samayamudrå refers to the use of conventional symbolic forms in 
meditation, e.g. concentration upon Heruka. See samaya below. 

The dharmamudrå refers to realization of the Absolute itself (dhar- 
madhatu). 

The mahåmudrå is identical with the Joy Innate and is the final goal 


of the tantric yogin's practice. As such, it is one of the names given to 
their whole school, 


136 


OSSA 
Eh å NE Oi PESTA FER Mn, Chandigarh 


This set of four is not referred to explicitly in the Hevajra-tantra 
where the only terms in use are mudrå in the sense of feminine partner! 
and mahämudrä, which is used not only to refer to the final goal, but also 
in the sense of partner, for she is identified with the essel vein 
Avadhiiti, the blazing Candali who is Nairåtmya (IL. iv. 40-47). | 

In the Advayavajrasamgraha (pp. 32 ff.) there is a short work on the 
Four Mudra, of which the correct title is Caturmudråniscaya* and the 
author in fact the Mahåsiddha Nagarjuna, who was master of Advaya- 
vajra (alias Maitrpa). The mudrå are discussed there in the order: 
karmamudrå—dharmamudrå—mahåmudra—samayamudrå; the first three 
are conceived of as definite grades of realization, but the last seems to be 
added without any integral connexion with the others. In his own short 
work on the subject (Caturmudropadesa, Narthang Tenjur, vol. xlvii, pp. 
220b-224a) Maitrpa sets the four symbols side by side with the four joys: 

karmamudrå nanda 

dharmamudrå paramananda 
mahamudra sahajananda 
samayamudrå  viramananda 


Maitrpa’s argument for placing the Joy Innate third has been given 
briefly on p. 35. If this comes third, then the mahåmudrå must also be 
placed third. One suspects here an artificial scheme, for it is associated 
with no improved interpretation of them as a coherent set. 


nitartha|neyartha. See adhyåtmika. 


prajña. Wisdom, one of the two supreme coefficients of final enlighten- 
ment, of which Means (upaya, q.v.) is the other. In Buddhist tantras the 
feminine partner is properly known as prajñā, and this is the usual 
meaning of the term throughout the Hevajra-tantra. The Hindu term 
sahti is never used and would be quite inappropriate (see p. 44). Other 
terms in use are mudrå (q.v.), vidyå (q.v-) and yoginī, which however, 
has the more general meaning of any feminine practiser. 


sådhana. Evocation, viz. the envisaging and calling forth of a divinity 
normally by means of repetitive recitation (japa) of the appropriate 
formula (mantra) and by meditation (dhyana) upon his formal representa- 
tion. Thus a written sadhana of a divinity usually provides a full 
description of his form and attributes together with his special formula. 


samaya. The basic meaning is that of ‘coming together’ in the literal Sense 
; oe ; 
of ‘concurrence’. In tantric practice it refers to the “concurrence of 


I It is also used in the basic sense of ‘sign’ and in the special sense of ‘symbolic ad s 
ments”, of which a set of five symbolize the Five Buddhas. In these two senses a mascu 


form mudra or mudrana is sometimes used. See Index. S Es 
2 The Tibetan translation is in the Narthang Tenjur, vol. xlvi, pp. 800-830: 


137 


CC-0. Agamnigam Pig) Peper eas Equnpsipn, Raas 


absolute being and phenomenal forms, by means of which the practiser 
may experience that which by its very nature he would otherwise have 
no means of experiencing. The mandala and the different forms of the 
divinities are means of just such a kind. In this sense we may translate 
samaya as “conventional form”, observing that *con-vention' has also the 
literal meaning of ‘coming together’. Samaya also refers to types of 
ritual food. The meaning is still the same, but it has seemed suitable to 
use the term ‘sacrament’ in these contexts. The samaya is always the 
outward sign of an inner hidden power. The Tibetan term dam-tshig 
means primarily ‘pledge’ or ‘guarantee’, which is precisely the function 
of the ‘sacrament’. 


samvara. ‘Bond’ or ‘Union’, translated by Tibetan sdom-pa, which has the 
same meaning. It may be used in the sense of religious observation 
(I. vi. 24 and II. iii. 29), but more commonly in that of mystic union. 
Thus the Innate is described as the ‘single union of all forms’ (I. x. 41) 
and Vajrasattva, supreme buddha-being, as the ‘single union of all 
elements’ (II. x. 1). Samvara has a special technical use in the sense of 
the union within the yogin’s body, the ‘internal mandala’ (see I. i. 21 ff. 
and II. iv. 48 f£). Here it can refer to the union of macrocosm and 
microcosm as well as to the union of the two coefficients (represented by 
the two outer veins) in the central vein of the body, which is also the 
centre and union of all phenomenal forms. This unity is conceived of as 
a consuming by cosmic fire and this consuming is the consummation of 
the yogin’s practice, his reintegration with the Innate, the supreme 
buddha-being. One may note in this respect the Tibetan translation 
of Samvara (= Samvara, a form of Heruka) as ‘Supreme Bliss’ (bde- 
mchog). 


siddhi. ‘Attainment’ in the sense of ‘Perfection’ when referring to the 
highest religious striving; in the sense of ‘Success’ when referring to 
meaner objectives (see Index, rites). 


tantra. Literally the *warp' of woven fabric, the term tantra refers to a 
clearly definable type of ritual text common to both Hindu and Buddhist 
tradition, concerned with the evoking of divinities and the gaining of 
various kinds of siddhi by means of mantra, dhyåna, mudrå and mandala. 
K glosses the term with prabandha, ‘connected discourse’ and defines 
our work under three aspects: as a hetu-tantra (‘cause-tantra’), members 
of the vajra-family being the cause; as a phala-tantra (‘result-tantra’), 
the perfected form of Hevajra being the result; as an upaya-tantra 
(‘means-tantra’), the way which it teaches being the means (vol. II, 
p. 105). The Hevajra-tantra is in fact a yogini-tantra as distinguished 
from a yoga-tantra (see p. 132 above, also Buddhist Himalaya, p. 203). 


138 


GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL 
CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation FER MS Chandigarh 


According to another mode of grouping, it is classed as an anuttarayoga- 
tantra, a ‘tantra of supreme yoga’, for it is the means to the highest form 
of siddhi. Five classes of tantras are mentioned by K: kriyå, caryå 
yoga, yogottara and yoganiruttara (vol. II, p. 156), but the number was 
traditionally fixed at four (for everything goes in fours) and it was in 
four such groups that the Tibetans later arranged their impressive 
collection. As grades they are associated, probably quite artificially, with 


the four consecrations (abhiseka) and typified by the four gestures of the 
‘smile’, &c. 


kriya-tantra Master Consecration smile 
carya-tantra Secret Consecration gaze 
yoga-tantra Knowledge of Prajna embrace 


anuttarayoga-tantra Fourth Consecration union 


‘In some kriyå-tantras the smile indicates the impassioning of the Wis- 
dom and Means of the divinities, by which symbolizing (vsuddhi, q.v.) 
the Master Consecration is indicated; in some caryd-tantras the mutual 
gaze indicates their impassioning, by which symbolizing the Secret 
Consecration is indicated; in some yoga-tantras the embrace indicates 
their impassioning, by which symbolizing the Consecration in Know- 
ledge of Prajiia is indicated; in some anuttarayoga-tantras the union 
indicates their impassioning, by which symbolizing the Fourth Con- 
secration is indicated" (K, vol. II, p. 142). 

K also refers to the universally authoritative nature (sarvadhikaritvam) 
of this Hevajra-tantra which is authoritative in that it is yogini-niruttara 
in kind (loc. cit.). It is suitable for women as well as men of all three 
grades: weak, medium, and strong sensibility (vol. II, p. 126). See the 
'references to these grades under abhiseka. 


upaya. ‘Means’, one of the two supreme coefficients of final enlightenment, 
of which Wisdom (prajia, q.v.) is the other. For references to this pair, 
Wisdom and Means, see the Index. The Means par excellence is Hevajra/ 
Heruka, with whom the yogin must identify himself (see pp. 32733 
él. I. x. 30, II. iv. 78). In the rite of union the feminine partner is prajna 
and the yogin himself is upaya (I. x. 7)- 

utpattikrama and utpanna- or sampannakrama. These two terms refer 
cosmologically to the manifestation (utpada) and reabsorption (pralaya) 
of phenomenal existence, and thus to the special technique of meditation 
which imitates this twofold process, thus identifying microscosm and 
macrocosm. By thought-creation (bhavana, q.v.) the yogin produces an 
idealized form of existence, symbolized by the divinities of the mandala. 

This is the utpattikrama, Process of Emanation. He conceives of 


I It might also be called a maháyoga-tantra ; see Roerich, Blue Annals, p. 753- 


139 


CC-0. Agamnigann Digita) Fargeualendpundatjen fehvansligarh 


himself as the centre of the process, and drawing the forms into his own 
heart, realizes his essential identity with the central all-comprehending 
divinity. This is the utpannakrama, ‘Process of Realization’. For refe- 
rences see the Index. 

vajra. In early (Vedic) times the vajra was the divine weapon of Indra, 
god of the sky and lord of thunder and storm. In this context the 
obvious translation is ‘thunderbolt’. The Tibetans use the term rdo-rje, 
literally ‘lord of stones’. It symbolizes pre-eminently whatever is be- 
lieved to be indestructible; thus it also has the meaning of ‘diamond’. 
In the tantras vajra indicates the absolute nature of whatever it may be 
referred to. Thus Vajrasattva means ‘Absolute Being’, viz. supreme 
buddha-being. Vajragantha means ‘bell of the absolute’, viz. the bell 
used in the rite of supreme realization. Everything associated with this 
intention assumes vajra-nature and the word is scattered freely through- 
out the texts. As an epithet I have used ‘adamantine’. Vajradhåtu, 
‘adamantine sphere’ is the Absolute itself, personified as the Supreme 
Buddha Vajrasattva, ‘Adamantine Being’. Also in use is the adjective 
vajrin, used in our text either of Hevajra himself or by the pupil addres- 
sing his master (vajraguru or vajracarya). See vajrin in the Index. The 
concealed meaning of vajra is male organ; as such it pairs with ‘lotus’ 


(padma). 


Vajradhara and Vajradhrk. "Holder of the Vajra’. 

Vajradhrk is the name by which the master addresses the pupil during 
the rite (see Index). Vajradhara is used in the Hevajra-tantra (II. iv. 31; 
vi. 3) referring to masters, who belong to the tradition. It is already 
established in the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha as the title of supreme 
buddhahood and is in general use by the Buddhist tantric yogins 
(84 siddhas). Our commentators refer to the Supreme Buddha both as 
Vajrasattva and Vajradhara. Aksobhya, the Buddha ‘Imperturbable’, 
as head of the vajra-family, is also Vajrasattva in essence and so may be 


considered Supreme Buddha by his family, to which those of the 
tradition of Hevajra belong. 


Vajrasattva. See vajra. 


vajrin. See vajra. 


vidya. ‘Spell’ in the special sense of the formula (mantra), which is the 
verbal expression of a divinity. Like ‘speech’ (våk) it is considered as 
the feminine aspect and thus becomes one of the names for the feminine 
partner (see Buddhist Himalaya, pp. 288, 289). Itis used in the Hevajra- 


tantra exclusively in the sense of feminine partner’, i.e. as a synonym 
for prajna. 


140 


cc KR RAN aib BKRS Chandigarh 


vituddhi. Meaning literally ‘purification’, this word refers to the process 
whereby the various divinities symbolize the macrocosm and microcosm 
under their several aspects, thus identifying them with aspects of buddha- 
hood. Thus the Five Yoginis (diagram VIII, p. 129) ‘symbolize’ on one 
side the five evils and on the other the five aspects of wisdom. This 
active symbolizing (visuddhi) represents the intended effect of any 'con- 
ventional’ or ‘sacramental’ form (samaya, q.v.). For references see the 
Index, purification. 


yoga. This is the one item for which it is scarcely practicable to give index- 
references, for the whole of the Hevajra-tantra is concerned with yoga, 
both in the sense of ‘union’ and that of the schemes, rites and practices, 
which should produce realization of that union. This tantra teaches the 
supreme type of yoga (anuttarayoga), which is the final identification and 
unifying of the macrocosm in the body of the yogin. The main technical 
terms used have their equivalents in the Hathayoga tradition (see P. C. 
Bagchi, ‘Some Technical Terms of the Tantras’, Calcutta Oriental 
Journal, vol. i, no. 2, Nov. 1933, pp. 75-88). Given a more limited 
meaning, yoga refers to union with one's chosen divinity; one may note 
in this respect the terms samåhitayoga, ‘concentrated yoga’, and mrantara- 
yoga, "continuous yoga" (p. 89 fn.). This is, however, but one of the 
means which will lead to the supreme yoga. 


141 


Wm. 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 


INDEX 


References to the Hevajra-tantra itself are given by si $ 
š y slokas ($1.); elsewh 
(ep) Ne and II, PE chapter and śl. nos., refer KE D 
the tantra. ere are 
ii | Be m re a few page references to volume II and these are clearly shown. 
Bracketed śl. nos. will not be found in the English i i 
Sanskrit and Tibetan (vol. ID. E vesten (wok 1) bee om na de 
Significant references are shown in italics. 
+ indicates an entry in the Glossary. 


abhidharma, p- 19- 

+abhiseka, see consecration(s). 

absolute, see parinispanna and relative/ 
absolute. 

åcårya, see master. 

åcåryaåbhiseka (master's consecration), see 
consecration(s). 

Tadhisthána, see empowerment. 

Adhydsayasamcodanasutra, p. 6 fn. 

Adibuddhatantra, p. 67 fn. 

adornments, five symbols (fmudrå), p. 11; 
śl. I. iii. 13-14, Vi. 2-3, 11-12, viii. 16, 
17, X. 31, II. v. 3, 34 vi. 1—4, Ix. I2. 

Advayavajra (alias Maitrpa, Avadhütipa), 
pp. xi, 9 fn., 1o fn., 15, 18, 21 fn., 35; 
40 fn., 137. 

ågantuka (accidental), pp. 20, 22; $l. II. iv. 
69. 

AHAM (‘I’), pp. 26, 37; Sl. I. i. 31, vil. 25, 
viii. 39, 41, 47, LI. ii. 37-41, iv. 47, 62. 

aksara, see syllable. 

Aksobhya (‘Imperturbable’), pp. 25» 28, 29, 
60 fn., 84 fn., 128, 129, 140; $l. I. v. 12, 
vi. 11, II. ii. 54, iv. 79, 81, 101, 103, Xi. 
3, 5; = bodhicitta, p. 25, śl. I. i. 15. 

alayavijfiana (store-consciousness), p. 3- 

ALI and KALI (vowels and consonants), PP- 
26, 27, 36; śl. I. i. 21, 30, V. 19, viii. 5, 
8. 11. 

ålidha, a bodily posture, śl. I. x. 39: 

ambrosia (amrta), $l. I. ii. 20, 22, he By 
vi. 4, xi. 9, II. iii. 38, 46, iv. 39, Px. 9- 

Amitabha (‘Boundless Light’), pp. 28, 29» 
128, 129; $l. I. v. 12, Vi. 11, II. ii. 55, iv. 
101, Xi. 4, 7. 

Amoghasiddhi (‘Infallible Success’), śl. I. 
v. 12, vi. 11, II. ii. 56, iv. ror, xi. 4, 6; 
pP. 128, 129. 

amrta, see ambrosia. 

anågamin (non-returner), p. 35- 

Tànanda, see Joy(s)- 

Anangavajra (siddha), pp- 13, 16- 

apabhramsa (dialect), p. 14 fn., vol. II, p. ix; 
él. I. ix. 20, II. iv. 6-8, 67, 71, 91-92» v. 
20-23, 68. 

Arbuda (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 14. 

arhat (‘worthy’, early disciple who had 
experienced nirvåna), pp. 35, 112 fn. 


arjaka (bread-fruit), p. 52 fn. 

Arolik (= Amitåbha), $l. I. v. 12. 

arüpadhátu (formless sphere), see Threefold 
World. 

asoka, pane of a tree, day of a month, śl. I. 
ii. 26. 

A$vapada (siddha), p. 12. 

åtman (self), pp. 24, 28; sl. I. x. 12. 

Avadhiiti, see Veins. 

åyatana (basis of consciousness), śl. I. ix. 2, 
II. iii. 31, 34, IV. 50. 


Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra, pp. xi, 9 fn., 
141. 

bandhiika-flower, pp- 55 fn., 58 fn. 

bell (ghaufa), p. 24; 8l. I. iii. 18, IT. ii. 24, 
iii. 13, 21, vili. 7, xil. I. 

Bhadrapada (Bha-ta-Zabs), pp. xi, 14 and fn. 

Bhattacharya, Benoytosh, pp. vill, Xi. 

Tbhaoana (conceiving, thought-creation, 
meditation), p. 34; Śl. I. i. 10, 11, iv. 3, 
vi. 6, 13, xi. 14, II. iv. 9. 

bhiksu (monk), śl. 1I. iv. 63. 

Bhücari (‘Earth-wanderer’), pp. 28, 126, 

128; $l. I. ii. 34, viii. 15, ix. 11, 14, IL iv. 

19, 23, 96, 98. 

bhümi (stage), $l. I. vii, 12, II. iv. 64. 

bhüta (spirit), śl. IT. iv. 95- 

bija, see seed. 

+bindu (point), PP: 19) 26, 29, 95 fn., 135+ 

blood (rakta), pp: 25, 27» 36, 37; Śl. I. i. 15; 

iii. 17, viii. 21, II. iii. 59, ix. 13, X. 4- 

bodhicitta (thought of enlightenment’), PP: 

25-26, 27, 34, 36, 37, 56 fn.; śl. I. vi. 9, 

viii. 27, II. ii. 18, 54; iii. 27, 47, iV- 26, 

28-29, 35, xil. 2; see also sukra. 

bodhisattva (‘Would-be Buddha’), pp. 3 

23, 40-41, 56 fn., 97 fn.; śl. I. vii. 11, 

x. 3, II. iv. 31, V. 49, xii. 2. 

body (kaya), see buddhakåya and 'Threefold 

Formula of Personality. 

books, śl. II. vil. r—4- å 

Brahmi, él. I. v. 1213 II. iv. 91, V. 37- 

brahmabija (palåsa tree), p. 53 fn. 

Bråhmani, śl. I. v. 2, 5 II. iii. 62; p. 
128. I š 

brahma-vihåra (‘brahma-abode’, a medita- 
tional practice), 4, I. iii. r and fn. 


143 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presey 


breath, pp. 27, 36, 39, 114 fn.; śl. I. iii. 16, 
Seb Sp 

ke ulie, p. 36; śl. I. iv. 3, V. 4, 1% 
vi. 5, II. ii. 58-61, iii. 61-63, iv. 15-19, 
79-88, 100-3, vili. 6, Xi. I-9. 

buddhakaya (Buddha-bodies), pp- 28, 29, 
37-38; Sl. I. i. 23, II. iv. 51-55, 59-60. 

Buddhahood, as threefold, pp. 28, 61 fn.; 
śl. II. iv. 97-99; as fivefold, pp. 29, 31 
43, 50, 61 fn., 128-9; Sl. I. ii. 2, iii. 14, 
iv. 2, vi. 11-12, I5, Vlii. 17, II. ii. 53757; 
iv. 100-3, Vi. 4, ix. I2, Xi. 1-9; as sixfold, 
p. 61 fn.; Śl. I. v. 12, II. iv. 100-3, Xi. 5—7- 

Bu-ston, pp. Xii, 12, 15—16, 40 fn. 


+cakra, circle, mandala, figurative repre- 
sentation, śl. I. i. 23, viii. 1-3, X. 25, 28, 
IL. iii. 38, iv. 29, 97, v. 6, 29, xi. 2; 
wheel, II. v. 35, 53, Xi. 4; see also psychic 
centres. 

cakri (circlet, crown), p. 11; Śl. I. jii. 14, 
vi. 2, viii. 17, II. vi. 3; see also tiara. 

camphor, see karpiira. 

Candåli, pp. 27, 36-37, 102 fn., 126, 127, 
128; śl. I. i. 31, iii. 10, v. 2, 7, Vili. 14, ix. 
10, II. iv. 17, 83, v. 18, 22, 33, ix. 13. 

Candikå, I. i. 18. 

Caritra (n. pr.), I. vii. 17. 

caste, IL. iii. 45, iv. 76. 

caturtha (fourth), see consecration(s). 

Cauri, pp. 126, 127; Śl. I. iii. 9, viii. 14, ix. 
II, 13, II. iv. 18, 88, v. 14, 30, 35, ix. 25, 
26, 33- 

cemetery (smasana), śl. I. ii. 20, 21, iii. 16, 
vi. 6, vii. 10, 18, II. iii. 49, V. 51, vii. 7, 8. 

citta, see mind, thought. 

colours, p. 38 fn.; $l. I. ii. 20, viii. 22-23, 
x. 4, II. ii. 32, v. 51, Vi. 7, Xi. 5-7. 

Combaz, Gisbert, p. 73 fn. 

compass, points of, pp. 29, 126; śl. I. ix. 
10-12, x. 28-29, II. iv. 91, V. 14-18. 

compassion (karunå, krpå), pp. 23, 24, 102 
fn. 2; śl. I. i. 2, 7, 10, iii. 1, 8, vi. 23, vii. 
21, 22, Vill. 15, X. 42, II. v. 20, 23, vi. 11, 
ix. 3. 

consecration (pratisthå), $1. II. i. 1-5. 

consecration(s) (tabhiseka), pp. 34-35, 38, 
131-3; śl. I. iv passim, II. ii. 31, iii. 1-2, 
10-20, iv. 36-39, V. 42 fn., 64—66, xii. 
passim. 

convention, symbolic form (tsamaya), p. 
137; Śl. I. i. 5, vi. 24, xi. 6, II. ii. 19, iii. 
29, 53, 55; see also sacrament. 

corpse, $1. I. iii. 4, 16, 18, vii. 21, viii. 4, 19, 
21, II. iii. 56, iv. 8, vi. 7, vii. 8. 

crown, PP. 11, 95 fn., 131; see cakri, tiara. 

Cundå, śl. II. iv. 65. å HERE. 


Tdakini(s), pp. 9, 135; Śl. I. x. 36, II. iii. 3, 
38, 39. 


FijensFoundation, Chandigarh 


damaru, see drum. 

dance, p. 11; sl. I. vi. 10, 13, II. iv. 2, 8-12, 
v. 26, 34, 62. 

Dårika (n. pr.), p. 14. 

Dasgupta, Shashi Bhusan, pp. viii, xii, 5 fn., 
38 fn. 

Daughter, $1. I. v. 17, II. v. 59. 

day and night, p. 26; $1. I. vii. 23. 

Devikota (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 13. 

dharmadhåtu, ‘whole of existence’, śl. I. iii. 
4; ‘sphere of thought’, śl. II. iv. 44, 47. 

dharmakåya (Body of the Absolute), see 
buddhakaya. 

Dharmakirti (commentator-D), pp. xi, 
13 fn., 14 fn., 15, 28, 35, 38 fn. and fns. 
passim. 

dhåtu, sphere (of consciousness), sl. II. iii. 
35; see also dharmadhåtu. 

Tdhyána (meditation), śl. I. v. 21, vi. 24, 
II. ii. 8, iii. 42, ix. 6. 

‘dhyani-buddhas’, see buddhahood. 

dohå (mystic song), pp. xi, 14 fn., 37. 

domba (outcast), śl. II. iii. 45. 

Dombi (‘Outcast’), pp. 37, 126, 128; sl. I. 
iii. 10, v. 6, 18, viii. 14, ix. 10, 16, IL. iii. 
62, iv. 8, 18, 22, 85, 86, v. 18, 23, ix. 13. 

Dombi-heruka (siddha), pp. 13, 16. 

dream, see svapna. 

drum, śl. I. iii. ro, iv. 2, vi. 12, 17, IL. iii. 
57, 58, iv. 6, V. 30, 54. 

dvesa, see wrath. 


elements (mahåbhiita), pp. 31, 32, 38, 66 fn., 
127; él. I. v. ro, viii. 2, 52, ix. 2, 16, 
X. 35, 38-40, II. ii. 52-57, iv. 67, 79-88, 
ix. 13. 

Eliade, Mircea, pp. xii, 4 fn., 25. 

empowerment, effective power (tadhis- 
thåna, prabhåva), $l. I. ii. 10, iv. 3, 
viii. 51, II. ii. 31, iii. 39, iv. 13, 29, Vi. 8, 
xii. 5; p. 118 fn. 

EVAM, p. 94 fn. 2; śl. I. i. 22, II. ii. 38, iii. 
2-6, iv. 30, 56, (90). 

Evans-Wentz, W. Y., pp. xii, 36. 

evils, three, p. 28; śl. II. iv. 102; five, p. 29, 
129; $l. I. viii. 48, ix. 17, II. Hi. 51-52 
(goddesses), iv. 16-19, ror. 


Falk, Marya, p. 6 fn. 

Father, śl. I. v. 21, II. xii. 4. 

feasting (bhojana), śl. II. iii. 1, 21, vii. 6-13; 
see also sacraments. 

Fire, pp. 26-27, 32, 36; śl. I. iii. 3, 5, viii. 2, 
II. i. 37, iii. 37, iv. 67, ix. 5, (32). 

flesh, śl. I. vii. 21, 28, xi. 11, II. iii. 21, 56, 
60, v. 61, vii. 10, ix. 13, x. 5. 

‘fools’, pp. 8, 43, 69 fn. 2, 81 fn.; śl. II. ii. 
37, iv. 77, V. 70. 

four, sets of, pp. 35, 38; śl. I. i. 22-30. 

fruits (phala), $1. II. iv. 56-58. 


144 


: I 
CC-0. Agamnigam nH, vation Foundation, Chandigarh 


Gauri, pp. 126, 127, 129; $l. I. ii. 34, iii. 9, 
viii. 6, 13, 14, ix. 8, 11, 13, x. 28, II. iv. 
16, 18, 20, 22, 87, V. 13, 30, 34, 35, (ix. 30). 

gazes (drsti), śl. I. i. 8, xi. 1-7. 

ghanthå, see bell. 

Ghasmari, pp. 126, 127; Śl. I. iii. 9, viii. 14, 
ix. 11, 13, II. iv. 19, 23, 88, v. 16, 35, 
(ix. 28, 32). 

girl (= prajna q.v.), Sl. I. vi. 8-9, II. ii. 
17-21. 

gita, see song. 

Glasenapp, H. v., pp. xii, 42 fn. 

Godavari (n. pr.), $l. I. vii. 14. 

Goddesses (referring to goddesses proper, 
e.g. Locanå, &c. q.v., but also used as a 
title for the yoginis), pp. 30-31; Śl. I. i. 22, 
iii. 8-10, iv. r, 3, viii. 2, 10-20, ix. 8-18, 
II. iv. 15-23, 65-67, v. 13-37, xii. 3. 

mGos-lha-btsas (translator), p. 14 fn. 

gråhaka|gråhya (subject/object), pp. 20, 27, 
48 fn.; śl. I. i. 20, ix. 5, X. 33. 

Griinwedel, p. xii. 

guhyabhiseka (Secret Consecration), see con- 
secration(s). 

Guhyasamája-tantra, pp. viii, xi, 44 fn., 
56 fn., 61 fn., 77 fn. 

Günther, Herbert, pp. xiii, 6 fn., 28 fn. 

guru, see master. 


Harikela (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 15. 

heat, śl. I. vi. 7. 

Heiler, Friedrich, pp. xii, 56 fn. 

hell, p. 86 fn. 1; śl. I. vi. 22, viii. 53, II. ii. 
12! 

Heruka, pp. 30, 32, 33, 35, 53 fn., 56 fn., 
58 fn.; śl. I. i. 11, ii. 20, ili. 4, iv. 2-3, 
vi. 4, vii. 26-27, IL. il. 2, 4, 25; iv. 9, V. 
70, Ix. 2, 10. 

Hevajra, pp. 10, 23, 24, 26, 30, 31, 32, 395 
śl. I. i. 6-7, ii. 3, 20, 24, Vi. I, IO, viii. 55, 
x. 16, 30, xi. 8, 9, II. iii. 65, iv. 5, 24, 76, 
78, 89, v. 1-3, 7-12, 21, 24-26, 43, Vi. 5, 
6, vii. 9, viii. 6, 10. 

Hevajrasekaprakriyå, pp. Xi, 96 fn., 131 fn. 

Himådri (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 14- 

Hinayåna, p. 56 fn. 

homa, see oblation. 

homeopathic notions, śl. I. i. 11, 1x. 19, 
II. ii. 46-51, iv. 71-72, ix. 8-9. 

hook, p. 55 fn.; śl. I. iv. x, xi. 13- 

Hsiian-Tsang, pp. 1 fn., 29 fn., 41. 


I Tsing, p. 1 fn. 

Indra, śl. I. vi. 25, II. iv. 91, V. 37; P. 126: 

Indrabhiti (siddha), pp. 12, 13 and fn., 14. 

indriya (organ or faculty of sense), P- 67 fn.; 
see sense-faculty. 

Innate (sahaja), pp. 22, 35, 37» 38; sl. I. 
viii. 22, 27, 30, 32, 34, X. 17; 34 4%) ^^ 
ii. 44, iv. 27, 42, 45, V. 7, (Vi. 5), Vill 5; 
(= Joy Innate, see also Joys). 


B 6309 


irsya (envy), see evils. 
istadevatå (chosen divinity), see svesta- 


devata. 


jågrat (waking state), p. 35; śl. I. viii. 43, 


X. 19. 

Jalandhara (n. pr.) śl. I. vii. 12. 

Jalandhari (siddha), pp. xx fn., 13 and fn., 
14 fn. 

Tjapa (repetitive recitation), śl. I. v. 19. 

Joys (tananda), PP. 34-35, 36, 38; śl. I. i. 
28, yiii. 30-35, X. 13, I5, 17-18, xi. 10, 
II. ii. 40, 61, iii. 5, 9-10, 22, v. 66, 70. 


bKah-rgyud-pa (Ka-gyü-pa), pp. 10, 15. 

kåla (time), sl. I. x. 12. 

kalasa (jar, vessel), śl. I. ii. 28, iv. 2, x. 22, 
II. v. 51, 56. 

Kalinga (n. pr.), $l. I. vii. 16, II. iii. 57, 


iv. 7. 

kämadhatu (sphere of desire), see Threefold 
World. 

Kamaru (n. pr.), p. 9. 

Kāmarūpa (n. pr.), I. vii. 12. 

Kampala (siddha), pp. 11 fn., 12, 13, 16, 
vol. II, p. viii. 

Kañcika (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 15. 

Kånha (Krsna) (commentator-K), pp- vil, 
xi, 9, 13714 and fns., 20, and fns. passim. 

Kanha (commentator-K 2), pp- xi, 14 fn. 

Kanjur (bKah-hgyur), see Tibetan Canon. 

kapála, see skull. 

karma (action), śl. I. viii. 47, II. ii. 12, iv. 
57; buddha-family (q.v.), I. vi. 5-7. 

Karmårapåtaka (n. pr.), Śl. I. vii. 13. 

karpüra (‘camphor’), pp. 25, 99 fn., śl. II. 

ii. 18, iii. 59, iv. 7, 13, 27, (36, 38,) 49 

v. 60, (viii. 4, xi. 15). 

karty, see knife. 

karunå, see compassion. 

Karunyapátaka (n. pr-); śl. I. vii. 13. 

kåya, see buddhakåya and Threefold 
Formula of Personality. 

Kayasthavrddha (siddha), see Tankadasa. 

khatvånga (gruesome wand), p- 55 fn.; śl. 

I. iii. 15, Vi. 12, 17; viii. 19, 21. 

Khecari (‘Sky-wanderer’), pP: 28, 126, 128; 

4]. I. ii. 34, Vili. 15, Ix. 12, 14, II. iv. 19, 

23, 96, 98, (ix. 17): 

klesa (molestation), p. 112 fn. 15 Sl. I. v. 15; 


ix. 2. 2 
knife (kartrkå), $l. I. ii. 22, iii. 18, vill. 16, 
18, 20, X. 28, II. v. 30, 54: 

Kokona (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 16. 

Kollagiri (n. pr-)» gl. II. iv. 6. 

Kosala (n. pr.), Śl. I. vii. 17. 

Krom, p. 6 fn. 

Krsna, see Kanha. 

+ksana, see Moment. 

Kubera (god of wealth), śl. II. v. 37, P- 126. 
kula, see Buddha-Families. 


145 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Pres&MEI»E Koundation, Chandigarh 


Kulatå (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 14. = : 
Kurukullå, pp. 16, 54 fn.; śl. I. ii. 19, XL 
12, (II. ix. 25). 


Lalanå, see Veins. 4 

Lampåka (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 15. ay Be 

la Vallée Poussin, Louis de, pp. VH, xi, 
29 fn. 

Lévi, Sylvain, pp. xii, 6 fn., 21 fn., 29 fn. 

Locanå, &c., pp. 31, 73 fn. 3; Śl. I. i. 22, 31, 
iv. 3, II. iv. 65. E 

lotus (padma), pp. 24, 27; Śl. I. viii. 3, 26, 
x. 38, II. ii. 24, iii. 28, 60, v. 52, 63, xi. 4, 
xii. 5. 


Madhyamika, pp. viii, 3 fn., 7, 19-20, 28; 
śl. II. viii. 10. 3 

+mahåmudrå (Great Symbol), sl. I. viii. 43, 
x. 20, II. ii. 23, 26, 31, iv. 40, 43, 50, Vill. 
1-5. 

Mahåpadmavajra (siddha), pp. 11 fn., 13, 


14. 

mahäsukha (great bliss), pp. 25, 36, 37; Śl. 
I. i. 23, viii. 46, IL. ii. 34, 59, iii. 2, 22, 
iv. 26, 51, 55, 60, v. 20, 68, (vii. 5,) ix. 
14. 

mahåyåna, pp. 4, 7, 12, 23, 45. 

Mahendra, p. 55 fn. 

maithuna, pp. 5 fn., 42-43. 

Maitrpa, see Advayavajra. 

Malava (n. pr.), $l. I. vii. 13. 

Måmaki, see Locanå, &c. 

tmandala (mystic circle), pp. 26, 29-31, 
32-33, 39, 55 fn., 136; Sl. I. ii. 20, 
V. 19, viii. 1-27 passim, ix passim, x. 1-5, 
20-30, II. ii. 30-31, iii. 25-27, iv. 29, 45, 
V. 1-18, 29-37, 48-66. 

tmantra(s) (mystic formulas), p. 136; śl. I. 
ii passim, I. v. 11, 19, vi. 13, 24, vii. 26, x. 2, 
25-26, 43, Xi. 14, II. i. 3-4, 11—14, iii. 42, 
iv. 62, 63, v. 39-47, viii. 10, ix. 14 ff., 
X. 1, xii. 5, 6. 

Mara ('Evil One? of fourfold aspect), pp. 
56 fn., 80 fn. 2; śl. I. iii. 17, v. 15, viii. 
21, ix. 15, II. v. 8, 15. 

mårana, see slaying. 

Maspero, Henri, pp. xii, 33 fn. 

master (guru, åcårya, $åstr), p. 30; Sl. I. viii. 
36, X. 20, 24-31, II. iii. 3, 13, 18, 22, v. 
65, Vi. 3, vii. 12, viii. 6, ix. 3, Xil. I. 

Masuda, p. 28 fn. 

måyå (phenomenal existence regarded as an 
illusion or mirage), $1. I. x. 12, 19, II. ii. 
30, ili. 25. 

Means, pp. 8, 41; śl. I. viii. 21, II. iv. 50, 
78; see also Wisdom and Means. E 

meditation, see bhåvanå, dhyana, 

meeting-place(s), pp. 8, 11; śl. I. vii. 10-20 
IL. iii. 67. š 

melaka, see meeting-place, 

Mi-la Ras-pa, p. 11 fn. 


mind (citta), see Threefold Formula of Per. 
sonality. 

mirror, p. 55 fn. I. iii. 

moha (delusion), see evils. 

Moments (tksava), pp. 34-35, 38, 136; 
śl. I. i. 24, viii. 50, 52, 53, II. ii. 2, 7, 12, 
iii. 5-9, v. 67. 

Moon, pp. 25-26, 31, 36, 37; Sl. I. i. 31, 
II. iv. 26; see also Sun and Moon. 

Mother, sl. I. i. 16, v. 2, 16, vi. 6, II. vii. 
II. 

mother-goddesses, $l. I. iv. 1, vi. 6, II. iv. 
10, V. 29, Vli. IO. 

Tmudrá ‘symbol’, p. 136; adornments (q.v.), 
$l. I. iii. 13, viii. 17, II. v. 3, 34, vi. 2, 4; 
feminine partner (= prajiid), I. v. 4-7, 
x. 7, II. ii. 16, 17, 20, 23, iii. 16, 18, 63, 
(iv. 37,) vi. 4, 11; gesture or sign, I. v. 20, 
vii. 26, xi. 7, II. ix. 6; (see also mudrana). 

mudrana or mudra sign, symbolic adorn- 
ment (= mudrå in these meanings), śl. 
II. iv. 3, 15-19, 79-88, 96, vi. 4, ix. 12. 

Mülatantra, pp. 17, 64 fn. 1, 66 fn. 1, 71 fn. 

Munmuni, $l. I. vii. 13, II. iv. 6. 

Mus, Paul, pp. vii, xii, 24 fn., 32 fn., 40 fn. 


nådi, see Veins. 

naga (serpent), śl. I. ii. 20, II. iv. 91, v. 31, 
39, 47, 54- 

Nagara (n. pr.), $1. I. vii. 13. 

Nagarjuna, pp. 21, 137. 

Nairåtmyå, pp. 10, 24, 26, 30-31, 36, 37» 
126, 128, 129; sl. I. ii. 34, viii. 13, 18, 
II. ii. 2, 23, iii. 38, iv. 16, 20, 25, 40, 89, 
99, V. 3, 29, 38, (ix. 34,) x. I, xi. 1, 10. 

Nairrti, $l. II. v. 57. 

Nålandå, pp. 1,9, 15. 

Naropa (siddha), pp. xi, 15, 18. 

Narti (‘Dancer’), śl, I. v. 2, 6, 17, 18, II. 
iii. 62; p. 128. 

nåtya, see dance. 

nirmånakåya (body manifest in the pheno- 
menal world), see buddhakåya. 

nirvana, see samsára|nirvàna. 

tnitårtha (real meaning), pp. 17, 134. 

noose, p. 55 fn. 


oblation (homa), $1. I. vi. 24, x. 43, II. i. 2, 
6-10. 
Oddiyåna (n. pr.), $l. I. vii. 12. 
offerings (bali), &l. I. ii. x, x. 26, II. iv. 89, 
92, 94, 95; (flowers, incense, &c.) I. ii. 28, 
+1. 4-5, 14, ili. 21. 


Padmanartesvara (Lotus Lord of Dance), 
P. 102 fn. 3. 

Padmasambhava (siddha), PP: 2, 14. 

Padmavajra (siddha), p. 12. 

painting (pata), $1. II. vi. 5-11. 

Påla dynasty, pp. 1, 14 fn. 

pali, pp. 5, 7 


146 


E I 
CC-0. Agamnigam pil I E vation Foundation, Chandigarh 


paiicabuddha, see Buddhahood as fivefold. 
pañcajñana, see Wisdom as fivefold. 
Pandara, Pandura, Panduradevi or Pan- 
duravasini, see Locana, &c. 
paramånanda (perfect joy), see Joys. 
paramita (perfection), p. 23; śl. I. iii. 18. 
paratantra (contingent), pp. 3, 21, 28, 132. 
parinispanna (absolute), pp. 3, 21, 28, 132. 
Parnagavari, śl. II. iv. 65. 
partner, see girl, mudrå, prajña, Spell; also 
goddess, yogini. 
Paurnagiri (n. pr.), śl. I. vil. 12. 
pitha, &c., see meeting-place(s). 
places of pilgrimage, p. 37; śl. I. vii. 10-20. 
poison, $l. II. ii. 46, iii. (46,) 66, iv. 71, ix. 9. 
+Prajiia (Wisdom = partner), pp. 23-24, 
27, 42 fn., 44, 137; Śl. I. ili. 17, v. 16, vii. 
23, II. iii. 10, 13, 15, IV. 41, 44, 57. 
prajñajñanabhiseka (Consecration in the 
Knowledge of Prajña), see consecra- 
tion(s). 
prajnaparamita (Perfection of Wisdom), 
p. 3; śl. IL. xi. 2. 
pratityasamutpåda 
nexus), p- 77 fn. 
reta (tormented spirits), śl. II. iv. 73. 
process of emanation (tutpattikrama)| pro- 
cess of realization (utpanna- or sampan- 
nakrama), pp. 22, 31, 32-33, 48 fn., 
75 fn. 4, 139; Śl. I. vili. 24, 25, 30, 
ix. 12, 18, II. ii. 29, 34, iv. 41. 
Przyluski, Jean, pp. 6 fn., 28 fn., 32 fn. 
psychic centres (Tcakra), pp. 28, 33, 35-39 
passim, 135; $1. I. i. 23, II. iv. 40, 51-57, 
59-60, 63, v. 69; see also samvara. 
pudgala (person), sl. I. x. 12. 
Pukkasi, śl. I. iii. ro, viii. 14, iX. ro, 16, 
II. iv. 17, 21, 79, V. 17, 20, 36, ix. 13, 
(19, 27); pp. 126, 127, 128. 
pupil (sya), śl. I. x. 7-8, II. iii. 13-23, V- 
63-66, vii. 72, xil. 1-4. 
purification (+visuddhi), pp. 29, 33 fn-, 43; 
śl. I. iii. 14, vi. 13, Vili. 17, ix. I, 2, 5, 15, 
II. ii. 44, iii. 50. 
Pusya (the eighth lunar mansion), sl. I. 11. 23. 


(twelvefold causal 


Rajaki (*Washerwoman»), śl. I. v. 2, 6, 17, 
II. iii. 63; p. 128. 

rakta, see blood. 

Rasand, see Veins. 

Ras-chun, p. 10 fn. 

Ratnakaraganti, pp. xi, 14 fn., 15. 

Ratnasambhava (‘Jewel-Born’), śl. I. v. 12, 
vi. rz, II. ii. 57, iv. 84, 101, xi. 4, 6; PP: 
128, 129. 

relative/absolute (samurti|vivrti), P- 255 śl. I. 
viii. 28, II. iv. 29, 30, 35, Vili. I, Xi. 8-9. 

rites, pp. 2, 8, 38, 118 fn., vol. II, p. 112 fn.; 
śl. I. i. 8, ii passim, xi passim, II. i passim, 
iv. 95, V. 44, x passim; see subduing, slay- 
ing. 


ripa (bodily form), see skandha(s). 
riipadhåtu (sphere of form), see Threefold 


World. 


Ripavajra, &c., śl. I. iv. 3. 


sacraments (tsamaya), pp. 43, 137; sl. I. 


vii. 21, 28, xi. 8-11, IL. iii. 38, 65, 67, vi. 
10, X. 4-5; see also convention. 

tsddhana(s), pp. 12, 16, 30; śl. I. xi. 12. 

Sådhanamålå, pp. xi, 13, 16, 30, 73 fn. 

sahaja, see Innate. 

sahajånanda (‘innate joy’), see Joys. 

sakrdågamin (once-returner), p. 35. 

Sakti, pp. 42 fn., 44. 

Tsamaya, see convention and sacrament. 

sambhogakåya (Body of Reciprocal Enjoy- 
ment), see buddhakaya. 

samdhyabhdsa, see secret language. 

samjña (perception), see skandha(s). 

sampannakrama (process of realization), see 
process of emanation/process of realiza- 
tion. 

samsåra|nirvåna (phenomenal existence and 
its extinction), pp. 22, 23, 24, 29, 31, 32, 
43, 44-45; $l. I. viii. 15, 34, ix. 11-12, 
x. 32, Il. ii. 44, iv. 32-35, V. 68, ix, ro. 

samskåra (impulses), see skandha(s). 

+samvara (bond, unity), p. 138; sl. I. i. 21, 
vi. 24, x. 41, IL. iii. 1-3, 29, iv. 48, 49; 
X. I. 

Samvara, pp. 30, 138. 

samurti, see relative. 

Sånkrtyåyana, pp. xii, 14 fn. 

saptåvarta (‘seven-timer’), p. 71 fn.; Sl. I. 
xi. 9-11. 

Saroruha (commentator-S), pp. xi. 11 fn., 
12-13, 16, 18; fns. passim. 

Sarvåstivåda, $l. I. i. 29, II. iv. 59; see also 
schools. 

Sarvatathågatatattvasamgraha, pp. 18, 44 
fn.; $l. IL. v. 57. 

Sa-skya-pa (Sa-kya-pa), p. 1o. 

Savari, śl. I. iii. ro, Vili. 14, ix. 10, 16, Il. 
iv. 17, 21, 81, V- 18, 21, 32, 36, ix. 13; 

. pp. 126, 127, 128. E 

Sauråstra (n. pr.), śl. I. vil. 15. 

Sautrantika, e II. viii. 9. 

Schayer, p. 4 in. z 3 

PSI (nikåya), p. 38; sl. I. i. 29, II. iv. 

59-60, 61, vili. 9. 

secret language (samdhyåbhåsa), pp. 25; 

101—2 fn.; sl. II. iii. 54-67. F 

seed (bija), pp: 26, 27, 32, 57 fn. sl. I. ii. 6, 
iii. 2, 11, iv. 1, Vi. 9, vill. 4, 7, IL iv. 4, 

23, V. 2, 28. x 

Sekoddesatikå, pp. xii, 9 fn. c 

sense-faculties (indriya), pp- 31, 115 fn. 4; 
gl. I. viii. 38, ix. 2, 6-7, II. iii. 31-36, 

0-52. 

EE (visaya), pp. 31» 127; śl. I. 

ix. 3, + 6-7, 13714 II. iit. 31-36. 


147 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevatign Foundation, Chandigarh 


Shahidullah, pp. xi, 13-14 fn., 25. 

siddha(s) (perfect yogin), pp. Xii 
12-15, 40, 63 fn. 2. 

+siddhi (perfection, fulfilment, success), pp. 
9, 22, 71 fn., 138; śl. I. ii. 22, Vi. 1, 7, 
22, viii. 46, 54-55, 1X. 19, X. 20, II. ii. 
1—26 passim, iii. 63, iv. 2, V- 61, vii. 6, 11, 
viii. 5, xii. 3. 

signs (chomå), śl. I. vii. 1-7. = 

sihlaka (‘frankincense’), p. 255 śl. II. ii. 18, 
iii. 59, iv. 7, 36, viii. 4- 

Sindhu (n. pr.), $l. I. vii. 13. 

Sister, I. v. 2, 16, II. v. 59, vii. II. 

sixteen year old, śl. I. iii. 15, x. 6, II. v. 
58. . 

Siva, śl. I. v. 12-13, II. v. 37; P. 65 fn. 3. 

skandha(s) (Components of Personality), 
pp. 29, 31, 73 fn., 92 fn., 102 fn., 127; 
śl. I. v. ro, viii. 12, ix. 2, 8-9, 18, x. 37, 
II. iii. 34. 

skull (kapala), śl. I. iii. 15, 17, 18, vi. 15, 17, 
viii. 16, 18, 20, II. iii. 58, iv. 3, V. 24, 25, 
31, 52, 55, Vi. 7, vii. 12; p. 55 fn. x. i and 
v; (used as an explicit synonym for 
‘lotus’, II. v. 5, vi. 1). 

slaying (mårana), pp. 32, 38, 55 fn. 1. vii; 
śl. I. ii. 18, v. 21, vii. 21-22, xi. 6, II. i. 
6, 8, 9, 10, iv. 95, ix. 1-6, x. 3, 4- 

sleep, see supta, svapna. 

$masåna, see cemetery. 

smile, &c., śl. II. iii. 11, 54; p. 139. 

songs, śl. I. iv. 3, vi. 10, 13, II. iv. 2, 6-14, 
V. 19-23, 62. 

speech (våk), see Threefold Formula of 
Personality. 

Spell (Tvidyà), śl. I. x. 5, II. ii. ro, v. 19, 
58; p. 140. 

srávaka(s), pp. 4, 23; śl. II. iii. 53. 

srota-åpanna (having entered the stream), 


11 fn., 


P. 35. 

Stcherbatsky, Th., pp. 4 fn., 6 fn., 2o fn. 

stüpa, pp. 32 fn., 39, 45. 

subduing (vasya), pp. 16, 55 fn. 1. ii; $l. I. i. 
13, Vil. 28, xi. 12-15, II. v. 39, x. 2, 4; 
see also rites. 

Sukhåvati, $1. II. ii. 38, iv. 30, 31. 

Sukra (semen, energy), pp. 25, 27, 36, 37, 
135; Sl. I. vili. 27, 29, 50, x. 6, 39, II. ii. 
41, lii. 59, 63; see also bodhicitta. 

sun (solar disk), śl. I. iii. 3, 4, 9, 13; see also 
Sun and Moon. 

Sun and Moon, PP. 25, 26-27, 32, 36; śl. I. 
1. 21, 30, ii. 27, iii. 11, viii. 4-6, 11, II. 
lv. 91. 

Siinya, see void. 

susupti (deep repose), p. 35. 

sütra(s), pp. 3-7 passim. 

Suvarnadvipa (Isle of Gold), $1. I. vii. 16. 

supta (asleep), śl. I. viii. 43. 

svapna (sleep, dream), p. 35; $1. I. x. 19, II. 
li. 30. 


svestadevatå (chosen divinity), $l. I. vi. 9, 
x. 24, II. i. 3, ii. 1, iii. 44, vi. 3. 

syllable (aksara), pP- 26, 27; $l. I. iii. 2, 
viii. 9. 

symbol, see mudrå. 

symbolizing, pp. 29, 33 fn. ; see purification. 


Tanikadåsa (commentator-T), pp. xi, 11 
fn., 15. 

+tantra(s), pp. Vill, 3-10 passim, 11—12, 18, 
20, 23, 30, 138-9; $1. II. iii. 54, V. 66. 

taoists, p. 33 fn. 

Tara, Tarini, see Locanå, &c. 

"Tåranåtha, pp. xii, 12-15 passim, 30. 

tathagata, śl. I. v. 8. 

Tengi (siddha), p. 14. 

Tenjur (bsTan-hgyur), see Tibetan Canon. 

thought (citta), pp. 21, 25, 27; 8l. I. v. 20, 
x. 43, II. ii. 58. 

Thought of Enlightenment, see bodhicitta. 

'Threefold Formula of Personality (Body, 
Speech and Mind), pp. 28-29, 102 fn. 3, 
128; śl. I. i. 1, 2, ix. 15, II. iv. 97-99. 

Threefold World, p. 28; śl. I. viii. 49. 

tiara (mukuti), śl. I. vi. 15. 

Tibetan Canon, pp. r, 3-4, 5, 12 fn., 16. 

tirtha, see place of pilgrimage. 

trikåya, see Threefold Formula of Per- 
sonality. 

truths, four, śl. I. i. 25-26, II. ix. 13. 

Tucci, Giuseppe, pp. vii, viii, xi, xii, 2 fn., 
10 fn., 12 fn., 14 fn., 32 fn., 61 fn., 70 fn., 
73 fn. 


gTum-mo, p. 36 fn. 


turiya (fourth), p. 35. 
‘two-in-one’ (skr. yuganaddha, tib. zuñ- 
hjug), pp. 24, 42 fn. 


utpannakrama (process of realization), see 
process of emanation/process of realiza- 
tion. 

Tutpattikrama|sampannakrama, see process 
of emanation/process of realization. 

tupdya, see Means. 


Vaibhåsya, $1. II. viii. 9. 

Vairocana (‘Brilliant’), pp. 28-29, 128-9; 
śl. I. v. 12, vi. 11, II. ii. 53, iv. 79, 80, 
87, 101, Xi. 4, 5. 

Tvajra, pp. 23-24, 27, 32, 140; Śl. I. iii. 3, 
6, 10, 15, 17, 18, v. 5, vi. 17, vii. 28, x. 38, 
II. ii. 24, iii. 13, 18, 19, 28, 60, iv. 50, 
V- 33, 53, 55, 63, xi. 3, xii. r, 6. 

Vajra, śl. I. ii. 34, viii. 13, ix. 8, 18, II. iii. 
51, 52, iv. 16, 20, (ix. 32, 36, 37); PP- 
80 fn., 126, 129. 

vajracatuska, pp. 56-57 fn. 

Vajradåkini, śl. I. ii. 34, viii. 13, ix. 8, 17, 
II. iv. 17, 21, (ix. 20, 23, 24, 29, 33); 
pp. 126, 129. 


148 


CC-0. Agamnigam pM evation Foundation, Chandigarh 


+Vajradhara, Vajradhrk, pp. 63 fn. 3, 74 fn., 
76 fn., 140; Sl. II. ii. 17, iii. 17, 23, iv. 
31, Vi. 3- 

Vajragarbha - Hevajra’s interlocutor in 
chapters I. i, vii, x, II. ii, iii, iv. 

Vajragarbha (commentator-V), pp. xi, 
8 fn., 14-17, 18, 38 fn.; fns. passim. 

Vajraghanta (siddha), pp. 13, 15. 

Vajråsana (Budhgayå), p. 1. 

+Vajrasattva (‘Adamantine Being’), pp. 28, 
60 fn. 7, 76 fn., 140 ; Śl. I. i. 2-4, viii. 8, 
x. 30, II. ii. 33, iii. 3, 38, iv. 1, IOI, 102, 
vaar Kula XI. 7: 

Vajragrnkhala, śl. I. iii. 18. 

Vajravarahi, sl. I. iii. 17. 

Vajrayogini, $1. I. i. 1, II. ii. 38. 

+vajrin (‘Adamantine’), sl. I. vii. 23, Vill. 
25, x. 36, II. iii. 1, 23, V. 15 vajrini IL. iv. 
98. 

Våriyogini or Vari, $l. I. ii. 34, vill. 13, ix. 
8, 17, II. iv. 16, 20, (ix. 19). 

våsanå (influence of past actions), sl. II. ii. 
45; 53- 

veda, śl. I. viii. 54. 

vedaná (feeling), see skandha(s). 

Veins (nådi), pp. 27, 36-37, 114 fn.; śl. I. 
i. 13-20, II. iv. 24-25. 

Vemacitrin, $l. II. v. 37. 

vessel, see kalasa. 

Vetali, śl. I. iii. 9, viii. 14, ix. 11, 13, II. iv. 
18, 22, 88, v. 15, 35, (ix. 32); PP- 126, 
127. 

vicitra (‘variety’), see Moments. 

+vidyå, see Spell. 

vidyådhara, pp. 11, 87 fn. 

vijfíana (consciousness), see skandha(s) ; (re- 
lative knowledge) p. 48 fn. 

vikalpita (imagined), pp. 3, 21; 28, 132. 

Vikramaéila, pp. 1, 14 fn., I5. 

vilaksana (‘blank’), see Moments. 

Vilasyavajrå (siddhå), p. 13. 

vimarda (‘consummation’), see Moments. ` 

Vindhyåkaumårapaurikå (n. pr.), śl. I. vii. 
17. 

vipåka (‘development’), see Moments. 


viramånanda (joy of cessation), see Joys. 

visa, see poison. 

visaya, see sense-sphere. 

Visnu, sl. I. v. 12-13, II. v. 37. 

Toisuddhi, see purification. 

vivrti (absolute), see relative/absolute. 

void (stinya), śl. I. iii. 2, vii. 27, viii. 21, x. 
42, II. v. 70, ix. 12. 


wheel (Tcakra), śl. II. v. 33, 53, xi. 4. 

Wisdom and Means (prajnå and upåya), pp. 
23, 27, 33, 36, 37, 39, 44, 66-67 fn.; 8l. 
I. i. 7, iii. 5, V. 2, vi. 12, 16, vii. 23, Vill. 
IO, II, 21, 28, 35, 49, 50, x. 9, 42, IL. ii. 
27, 33: 

Wisdom, as fivefold (pañcajñana), pp. 29, 
7 fn., 59 fn., 129; śl. I. viii. 6-7, II. iv. 
46. 

Woodroffe, Sir John, pp. viii, xii, 9 fn., 
38 fn. 

wrath (dvesa), pp. 29, 30, 129; Śl. I. iii. 7, 
12, II. iii. 3, 16, iv. 103, ix. 12. 


yaksa(s), śl. I. xi. 15, IL. ii. 21. 

Yama, £l. II. v. 37; p. 126. 

+yoga, pp. 8, 32, 39, 102 fn.; Sl. I. iii passim, 
iv passim, v. 2, vi passim, vii. 28, xi. 1-7, 
II. ii passim, iii. 48-64, ix. 1-6; see entry 
in Glossary, p. 141. 

Yogåcåra, pp. 19-20; sl. IT. viii. 10. 

Yogaratnamålå, pp. xi, 13, 14 fn., vol. II, 


p. vii. 

yogasarira (‘body of yoga’), p. 58 fn. 

yoga-tantra, pp. 132, 138. - 

yogin(s), pp. 9, 11, 23, 49, 56 fn.; śl. I. vi 
passim, vii passim, viii. 2,22-24, 31, 42-43; 
ix. 9, 14, X. 2, 20, 42, xi. 6, 8-11, 15, 
II. ii. 1-30 passim, iii. 40-49, 63, iv. 6, 43, 
94, v. 58-64, Vi. 7, vii. 6-13, ix. I, Xi. 1-9. 

yogini(s), pp- 9, 11, 28, 33734» 57 fn. 8l. I. 
i. 9, ii. 6, iii. 16, vii. 1-20 passim, VIL: 1-19 
passim, 31, ix passim, x. 577, 42, II. ii. 4, 
6, 16, iii. 3, 31, 37, 67, iv. 6, 10, 20-235 
26, 27, 45, 49; vii. 9; see also goddesses. 

yogini-tantra, pp. 39, 132» 138; śl. I. vil. 19- 


149 


"Hu 
` 


CC-0. Agamnigam Digital Presevation Foundation, Chandigarh 1 | 
| 
| 
| 
] 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 

HE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD 
BY VIVIAN RIDLER 

PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 


AT T 


of Hi {ER OXFORD BOOKS 


rå In the same Series 


PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
By W. s. ALLEN. Number 1, 18s. net 


THE DIACRITICAL POINT AND 
THE ACCENTS IN SYRIAC 
By J. B. SEGAL. Number 2, 458. net 


THE MANICHAEAN HYMN CYCLES 
IN PARTHIAN 
By MARY BOYCE. Number 3, 358. net 


THE BACKGROUND OF THE REBELLION 
OF AN LU-SHAN 
By EDWIN G. PULLEYBLANK. Number 4, 52s. 6d. net 


SOCIAL POLICY AND SOCIAL CHANGE 
IN WESTERN INDIA 1817-1830 
. By KENNETH BALLHATCHET. Number 5, 458. net 


London Oriental Bibliographies 
Volume I 


BIBLIOGRAPHY OF OCEANIC 
LINGUISTICS 
Compiled by H. R. KLIENEBERGER. 458. Nel 


(These prices are operative in the United Kingdom only 
and are subject to alteration without notice) 


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 


