Seow s IE 


12.50 


THE 
BUDDHIST’ 
TANTRAS | 


LIGHT ON INDO-TIBETAN ESOTERICISM 


By ALEX WAYMAN 


Professor Wayman, a renowned Sanskrit 
and Tibetan scholar who is presently a fac- 
ulty member of Columbia University, has 
authored a significant work on the Buddhist 
Tantras. This book has been divided into 
four sections. Part One: The Introduction 
places the position of the Buddhist Tantras 
within Mahayana Buddhism and recalls their 
early literary history, especially the Guhyasa- 
mahatantra; the section also covers Buddhist 
Genesis and the Tantric tradition as well as 
the analogical thinking in the Buddhist Tan- 
tras. Part Two: The author discusses the 
foundations of the Buddhist Tantras—he 
considers the Tantric presentation of di- 
vinity; the preparation of disciples and the 
meaning of initiation; some Tantric ma- 
terials; symbolism of the mandala-palace; 
Tantric ritual and the symbolism of its at- 
tainments; twilight language and a Tantric 
song. Part Three: This section is devoted to 
Special Studies which are very rarely avail- 
able to the general public, such as the nine 
orifices of the body and the Tantric teachings 
of the inner Zodiac which, incidentally, will 
be of great significance to the serious as- 
trologer; female energy and symbolism in 
the Buddhist Tantras; and the fivefold ritual 
symbolism of passion. Part Four: The Bib- 
liographical Research contains an analysis 
of the Tantric section of the Kanjur exegesis 
and a selected Western Bibliography of the 
Buddhist Tantras with comments. 


А i 
~ nk 
"s 


THE BUDDHIST TANTRAS 


f 


س 
TW‏ 


"m. el 


£ 
к. 
ve 


tat 


PLATE 1. KALACAKRA DANCER. Leader of the twelve months, who guides the 
shifts until they return to the original place and the cycle is complete. 
(20 March, 1970) (Dharamsala, India) 


ISt 


The Buddh 


Tantras 


LIGHT ON 


INDO-TIBETAN 
ESOTERICISM 


by Alex Wayma 


© 1973 Alex Wayman 


ISBN 0-87728-223-4 
Library of Congress Card No. 73-79801 


SAMUEL WEISER, INC. 
734 Broadway 
New York, N. Y. 10003 


"d 3 A 
„^2 
m 
ий 
4 \\\\ 
m 5 ` 
V 2 * 
E | 
ё&., } 
х) Is 1527 
4 
av’ 
» у 
pM "n" Printed in U.S.A. by 
0; NOBLE OFFSET PRINTERS, INC. 
NEW YORK, N.Y. 10003 
= 


To Hideko 
Who has always encouraged 
my essays 


CONTENTS © 


page 
Preface xi 
l. Introductions 1 
1. Perfection of Insight: Buddhist Tantra within Mahayana 

Buddhism 3 

2. Early Literary History of the Buddhist Tantras, especially the 
Guhyasamaja-tantra 12 
3. Buddhist Genesis and the Tantric Tradition 24 
4. Analogical Thinking in the Buddhist Tantras 30 
5. The Nature of Buddhist Esotericism 36 
Il. Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 43 
6. Divinity according to the Buddhist Tantras 45 
7. Preparation of Disciples; the Meaning of Initiation 54 
8. Offering Materials and their Meanings 71 
9. Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 82 
10. Tantric Ritual and Symbolism of its Attainments 110 


11. Twilight Language and a Tantric Song 128 


vii 


viii Contents 


Ill. Special Studies 
12. The Nine Orifices of the Body 
13. Tantric Teachings about the Inner Zodiac 
14. Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 
15. The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 


16. Received Teachings of Tibet and Analysis of the Tantric 
Canon 


Index 


137 
139 
151 
164 
202 


225 


241 


TABLES 


. Tantric Paths 

. Classification in Clans 

. The Great Reality of Five Secrets 

. Stage of Generation 

. Stage of Completion 

. Nature of Divinity 

. Materials in the Flasks 

. Meditative Objects for Calming (the Mind) 

. The Five Ornaments 

. The Four Mudra-s 

. Orifices, and Emanations of the Wisdom Dakini 
. The Four Goddesses of the Heart 

. Element Winds and Transit of Inner Zodiacal Signs for Fruits 
. Basic Time and Fruitional Time Correspondences 
. The Great Time 

. “The Five-arrow Correspondences” 

. “Death” (2 Aspects) 

. “Intermediate State” (2 Aspects) 


ix 


page 
33 
34 
38 
47 
48 
50 
81 
112 
120 
127 
143 
154 
159 
180 
182 
209 
216 
221 


x 


PLATES 


1. Kalacakra dancer 

2. The Glorious Conch Shell 

3. Sri-Heruka, or Sambara 

4. Mahavajradhara 

5. Seven Pots in the Kälacakra Initiation 
6. Zor for Yama and Yama Offerings 

7. Mandala offerings for the Kälacakra 
8. Mt. Meru Mandala 

9. Mt. Meru Temple Banner 
10. Reverse side of Temple Banner 
11. Mudra of the Four Continents and Mt. Meru 


DRAWINGS 


Mandala of the Triangular Dharmodaya 

Green Tara, Showing the Six Ornaments 

Buddhadakini, Showing Khatvanga, Damaru and Kapila, 
An Astrological Representation of the Heart Cakra 


Frontispiece 
7 
10 
52 
63 
78 
80 
102 
104 
105 
106 


90 
119 
123 
153 


PREFACE 


This work is prepared from my previously published articles in the 
field of the Buddhist Tantra plus new studies especially made to round out 
the material for a reasonably integrated volume. It has particular contact 
with two previous books in the tantric field, Mkhas grub rje’s Fundamentals 
of the Buddhist Tantras, translated by F. D. Lessing and Alex Wayman 
(Mouton, 1968)—which I refer to as Mkhas grub rje’s; and my Yoga of the 
Guhyasamájatantra; the Arcane Lore of Forty Verses (the publication of 
which is going forward in Calcutta)—which I refer to as Yoga of the 
Guhyasamäjatantra. Mkhas grub rje’s is written by a Tibetan proficient in 
the Tantra on behalf of his Tibetan disciples. The Yoga of the Guhya- 
samäjatantra is a synthetic commentary on forty verses written by myself 
as a Westerner and is almost completely based on the Guhyasamäjatantra 
and commentarial literature in that lineage. In contrast, the present work 
goes further than the last one named in communicating varied aspects of 
the Buddhist Tantra to Westerners by researches based on texts sometimes 
using the Guhyasamdjatantra lineage, but with special reliance on what are 
called the lower Tantras; and in the case of the fourth or highest class of 
Tantra with frequent utilization of the Mother Tantra (Sri-Cakrasamvara, 
Hevajra, and Kälacakra); besides by more contact with the living tradition. 
That is why the present work is mainly different, both in content and in 
organization, from my two previous book engagements with the vast 
Buddhist Tantra literature. I also have under active preparation two other 
works in this field: Tibetan Miniature Paintings based on the Lessing 
manuscripts, which deals with the Buddhist Tantras principally in terms 
of individual deities; and Minor Buddhist Tantra Texts, with relatively 
brief but important texts in full translation. All those works, whether 


xi 


xii Preface 


published or in press or preparation, have a common method which is the 
subordination of personal opinion about the Tantra to authoritative 
explanations by the proficients of this cult. 

Iam pleased to express appreciation to the following journals, publishers, 
or agents for permission to reprint in whole or part certain articles of mine: 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (Poona) (Golden Jubilee Volume) 
for “Early Literary History of the Buddhist Tantras . . ." Oriens Extremus 
(Lessing Memorial issue) for “Buddhist Genesis and the Tantric Tradition." 
The Tibet Society Bulletin (Bloomington) for “Preparation of Disciples for 
Evocation of Deities." Adrien Maisonneuve, 11 rue St Sulpice Paris 
(Etudes tibétaines dédiées à la mémoire de Marcelle Lalou) for 
“Symbolism of the Mandala Palace." Institut de Civilisation Indienne, 
Université de Paris (Mélanges d'Indianisme à la mémoire de Louis Renou) 
for “Concerning samdhä-bhäsa | samdhi-bhaşa | samdhyá bhäsä.” Uni- 
versity of Chicago Press (which holds the copyright) for “Female Energy 
and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras” and portions of “‘Totemic Beliefs 
in the Buddhist Tantras" (History of Religions). Koyasan University 
(Japan) (Studies of Esoteric Buddhism and Tantrism) for “The Fivefold 
Ritual Symbolism of Passion." Lokesh Chandra, International Academy 
of Indian Culture (New Delhi) for “Outline of the Thob Yig Gsal bahi 
Me Lon...” I have made corrections according to my present knowledge 
and minor changes for mutual consistency as well as some additions. 

Itis with deep gratitude that I express my indebtedness to Mrs. Margaret 
Lessing of Berkeley, California, for making available to me the manuscripts 
of the late Professor Ferdinand D. Lessing, which have furnished some 
invaluable materials for the present book, especially the photographs and 
texts he collected for his researches in the iconography and cult of the 
Lamaist temple of Peking, the Yung-Ho-Kung. These materials account 
for all the Plates, except for 1, 5, and 11. They also furnished models after 
which the Dharmodaya, Green Tara, and Buddhadakini drawings were 
executed by Mr. Osamu Yoshida. 

The American Philosophical Society deserves thanks for its support of 
my travel to India in Spring 1970, which, while not for the express purpose 
of this book, fortuitously coincided with the Kälacakra ceremony in 
Dharmsala. My attendance at this important ritual occasion provided some 
of the living touches which secure a contemporary relevance for ancient 
texts. Plates 1, 5, and 11, are after photographs taken by my wife and 
myself during that ceremony. 

There are varied text sources for the studies herein reproduced. Since 
so much is derived from Tibetan works—the overwhelming extant corpus 
for the Buddhist Tantra—I should be explicit. There are a number of 
references here to the Derge Kanjur and Tanjur and native Tibetan works 
at the University of California, Berkeley, from studies beginning in the 


Preface xiii 


early 1950's. The Tohoku catalogs to which I refer in connection with 
notes from these sources are described in my article “Female Energy . . ." 
(note 1). There are also many references by ‘PTT’ (with volume, page, 
and page folio number) to the Japanese photographic edition of the 
Peking Tibetan Buddhist canon (Kanjur and Tanjur) and including 
Tson-kha-pa’s works. I used this edition after it was purchased by The 
University of Wisconsin, and eventually assembled a large collection of 
reproduced texts from this edition by the kind access to an excellent 
duplicating machine of the University-Industry Research Program 
Madison, Wisconsin. I still make much use of these duplicated texts with 
the added convenience of being able to make notes on the pages. Moreover, 
I use some texts of my own—preeminently for this book, Tson-kha-pa’s 
Snags rim chen mo (which I often refer to as the Snags rim) in the Peking 
popular blockprint; this is his great compendium on the Buddhist Tantras. 
Besides, it was necessary to consult some further canonical works to 
complete the present book, and I have accordingly made some use of the 
Narthang edition of the Kanjur and Tanjur, now conveniently accessible 
at Columbia University. 

For ease of combining the various published essays with further studies 
in the present form, I usually omit the original texts, Sanskrit and Tibetan, 
such as face the translation of Mkhas grub rje's and are abundant in Yoga 
of the Guhyasamdjatantra as well as in my various published articles over 
the past twelve years. These omissions not only facilitate the reading of 
this book but also allow my transition from a former transcription of 
Tibetan to the Library of Congress transcription system. In all cases, 
references are given so that persons who wish may consult the original 
texts. 

Finally, for the mechanics of issuance, I must thank Mr. Donald Weiser 
for his interest in publishing this book and the expeditious manner of his 
handling it. 


INTRODUCTIONS 


The great goddess located in the heart, 
Causing the yogin’s yoga - 

The Mother of all the Buddhas - 

Is called Queen of the Diamond Realm. 


Sarvarahasya-tantra, verse 45. 


PERFECTION OF INSIGHT: BUDDHIST 
TANTRA WITHIN MAHAYANA BUDDHISM 


“Perfection of Insight” is the translation of the term prajfíaparamita, but 
not here employed in its sense of a certain body of Buddhist literature, 
namely the Prajiiaparamita scriptures. The present discussion of 
prajiiäpäramitä will show that it is through misunderstanding the role of 
this faculty that the status of Buddhist Tantra has been falsely explained, 
as though Mahayana Buddhism and Tantra under the name of Mantrayana 
are two distinct and different things. 

This is not to deny that if one takes tantric practices historically, in the 
sense of obscure cults which probably existed in India before even the rise 
of early Buddhism, those are essentially different from Mahayana. But 
also such obscure cults are different from what we now have as Buddhist 
Tantra, in terms of Tantric literature and associated practices. That is to 
say, both the Hindu Tantras and the Buddhist Tantras have thoroughly 
integrated those obscure cults into sectarian forms. The Buddhist Tantras 
are so imbued with Buddhist terminology, mainly of Mahayana Buddhist 
variety, that it is necessary to first study Mahayana Buddhism, especially 
in its formal presentation in the Madhyamika and Yogacara schools; 
otherwise one would be trying to find some mystical tantric meaning in an 
obscure phrase which in fact is clear enough when recognized as a 
Buddhist tenet from the Abhidharma literature or from those two 
Mahayana schools. Therefore, it is completely pointless to say, as some 
critics do, that the Buddhist Tantra is based on degenerate cults but that 
in some works the monks cleaned and tidied them up to give them a 
respectable form. Since the Tantra is essentially a practice, with incantations, 


3 


4 Introductions 


breath control, and so forth, one must evaluate it by the way it is, as set 
forth in its principal “revealed” scriptures, authoritative commentaries, 
and actual practice as can still be observed (for example, among the 
Tibetans in India). 

According to passages cited by Tson-kha-pa in the introductory section 
of his work on the stages of Tantra called Snags rim chen mo, the 
Mahayana (Great Vehicle) has two divisions—the ргајйа päramitä 
method (that part of Mahàyàna which is not tantric) and the mantra 
method (the strictly tantric part of the Mahayana). In his quotation (folio 
12b-4) from the (Kalacakra work) Vimalaprabhä, these two wings of the 
Mahayana are termed “cause” and “effect”. But also the Diamond 
Vehicle (Vajrayana)—so called because the diamond is unsplittable and 
unbreakable—can be considered the Vehicle that incorporates both the 
prajhaparamita side (the “саџѕе”) and the mantra side (the “effect”). 
Therefore, the vehicle of the Bodhisattvas (who are the Mahayana saints) 
has two degrees, first the perfection of insight (prajf&iapáramita) and then 
the practice of mantras, initiation in the mandala, etc. To observe this in a 
textual way, the reader may refer to the final section of this work for the 
"Outline of the Thob Yig Gsal Bahi Me Lon," and notice how this 
compendium first gives the non-tantric background for the Tantras, and 
then the Tantras. Tson-kha-pa introduces further terminology (folio 
12b-6) with a passage from the Sekoddesa: 


Holding the form of the void is the cause; 

The fruit is the adherence to incessant compassion. 

The indissoluble union of voidness (sänyata) and compassion 
(karund) is called “mind of enlightenment” (bodhicitta). 


At 17a-1, he quotes the Tantra called Vajrapanjarä (Chap. One), as follows 
(my numbers): 


(1) If the void were the means (upäya), then there would be no 
Buddhahood, because the fruit would not be different from the 
cause. The means is not voidness. 

(2) Voidness has been taught by the Buddhas to ward off the 
adherence to a self on the part of those who have gone astray 
through views and of those who seek the view of self. : 

(3) Hence the binding as the means of ecstasy is called the 
mandala-circle. The yogin with pride of a Buddha is close to 
Buddhahood. 

(4) So he would accomplish with the means the thirty-two 
characteristics of the Teacher, along with the eighty minor 


marks of the Lord (prabhu). The means has the form of the 
Teacher. 


Perfection of Insight: Buddhist Tantra within Mahayana Buddhism 5 


Tson-kha-pa gives the key ideas of those four verses in their order: 
(1) rejecting the claim that exclusive contemplation of voidness is the 
means; (2) the requirement to teach voidness; (3) accompaniment of the 
great means which is not shared (with the Prajnäpäramitä way); (4) 
teaching reasons for requiring accomplishment with that means. The 
meaning of the mandala as the unshared means is that in the Prajfiapara- 
mita way, the means is the first five perfections, of giving, morality, 
forbearance, striving, and meditation; with the perfection of insight as the 
sixth. At folio 18b-5,6, he points out that the five perfections go with 
accomplishing enlightenment in three incalculable eons. When the 
mandala-circle (of deities) is taken as the means, with ecstasy due to 
* binding" of the male and female deities, this shows devatá-yoga (yoga of 
the deities) and produces divine pride (free from ordinary pride) which is 
the quick path to Buddhahood, that is to say, to acquirement of the two 
kinds of formal body (rijpa-kdya), the Sambhogakaya and the Nirmäna- 
kaya in the present life. Therefore, those four verses from the Vajra- 
pañjarā are important for elucidating this fundamental position of the 
Buddhist Tantra—the quick path. According to Tson-kha-pa, the same 
ideas can be garnered from other Tantras. 

But while the Mantra way differs from the Prajfiaparamita way as 
concerns the means, and therefore differs as regards fastness and slowness 
in attaining the goal of Buddhahood, Tson-kha-pa points out at folio 9a-2 
and by subsequent citation of Mahayana sutras, that there is no difference 
in terms of Prajiiaparamita (perfection of insight) itself. He says (perhaps 
referring to Tibetan polyandry): 


A mother is the shared cause of the sons. A father is the cause of 
diversifying their lineages. In the same way, the Mother Perfection 
of Insight is the shared cause of the four Sons; while the cause of 
diversifying the great and lesser lineages of their vehicles is the 
means consisting in generating the mind (of enlightenment), and 
so forth. 


That is to say, a difference in means (considered to be the father) diversifies 
the Hinayäna into the Sravakayana and the Pratyekabuddhayana; while 
another difference in means diversifies the Mahayana into Madhyamika 
and Yogäcära. But the Perfection of Insight (considered to be the mother) 
is the same for all the four Sons; and in consideration of this Mother of 
the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, such a scripture as the Saddharmapundarika 
(The Lotus of the Illustrious Law) sets forth the thesis of One Vehicle. 
This insistence that the Prajfiaparamita of the “Prajnäpäramitä vehicle” 
and of the “Mantra vehicle” is the common Mother lets us conclude that 
even when Prajfiaparamita is personified as а goddess and represented in 
tantric iconography in union with the Buddha, that in fact it is still the 


6 Introductions 


same Prajnäpäramitä as is mentioned in the Prajfaparamita scriptures 
and in the various non-tantric Mahayana scriptures. But saying this wil] 
undoubtedly not satisfy the critics—both within and without the fold of 
Buddhism—who denounce the Buddhist Tantra as a degenerate develop- 
ment within late Buddhism. They will surely retort that it is a fine thing to 
extract this from a book, but that in practice Tantras has a worship of the 
female element in its concrete form of the woman. The ready answer of 
course is that one cannot deny such practices in some lineages of the 
Tantra, and that the same Tantra, by reason of metaphorical employment 
of words, can be understood differently. But, to be practical, it is passing 
strange that anyone would bother with the Tantra to justify his 
“degenerate” practice, for who so bent among worldly persons would 
divert his energies by muttering a mantra a hundred thousand times at 
dawn, noon, sunset, and midnight, with fasting and other inhibitions, to 
engage in a "degenerate" practice, when, as we know so well, people at 
large engage in degenerate practices without bothering to mortify them- 
selves at dawn, noon, sunset, and midnight! 

As one who over a long time has seen much sexual symbolism in these 
tantric books, I must insist that the Tantras containing such symbolism 
will never be understood if the reader simply extracts one sentence and 
judges the whole work thereby. In short, to appreciate what the Tantra 
amounts to, one must take it through an extended corpus, consult 
commentaries, and so on. This means spending some time with it, but the 
usual critic is too impatient. He makes his snap judgment on the basis that 
among all subjects the Tantra is the most easy to judge. That while one 
must study any recognized human discipline, such as chemistry, for years 
to talk responsibly about it, one does not have to work at Tantra for a 
whole day to speak authoritatively about it! 

So I shall repeat what Tson-kha-pa said: that Prajiäpäramitä is the 
common Mother, and invite the reader to determine for himself if certain 
studies contained in the present work bear out this contention. And for the 
meaning of Mother, let it be understood that Prajnä is by no means а 
virgin, since from time immemorial, according to Buddhist teachings, 
mankind has been defiling this prajfid which is their own insight. Thus 
the course of prajfid is not, as in ordinary human terms, from innocence to 
loss of a pristine state, but rather from original defilement to the-pur 
goddess state. The Buddhist prajñā is not like the Hindu Sakti, the new 
power created by the gods to wreak havoc on their opponents, the Asuras; 
but the old passive faculty become powerful for helping some beings 0¥ 
the opposition to be godlike. That is to say, the Hindu Sakti has a mytho- 
logical base, whereas the Buddhist prajfia is rooted in man’s psyche as t ў 
ordinary ingredient of every-day thinking. In the Hindu theory, the gods 
have to come up with a new plan; in the Buddhist conception, man M ш 


РРР) 


е gave birth to Gautama 
Original in the Berner 


aya (sh 


picting Queen M 


de 
Historisches Museum. 


Buddha while holding the branch) surrounded by deities. 


PLATE 2. The glorious Conch Shell, 


8 Introductions 


find a new role for his capacities. In this light, the Hindu Sakti and the 
Buddhist tantric ргаўйа do have something in common, but it is not proper 
to identify them. 


The thirty-seven natures accessory to 
enlightenment as goddesses 


Perhaps there is no clearer example of the tantric goddess as accessory 
to enlightenment than the personification in the Sricakrasamvara tradition 
of the thirty-seven bodhipaksya dharmah as goddesses. This identification 
is found in Lui-pa’s Sri-Bhagavadabhisamaya-nama (Toh. 1427), and there 
could be no higher authority for this, since Lui-pa is among the most 
famous of the masters of the Mother Tantra. In utilizing his text as 
preserved in Tibetan translation in the Tanjur, it was helpful to take 
advantage of Abhayäkaragupta’s Nispannayogävali (as edited by B. 
Bhattacharyya), wherein is presented the Sambara-mandala containing all 
the Sanskrit names of the principal deities of the Sricakrasamvara-tantra. 
It is of interest that the central deity, under the name Sri-Heruka, is given 
the correspondence to “right samādhi” instead of his consort, but the 
obvious meaning is that he is here present with his female side, usually 
called Vajravärähi (the Diamond Sow). The thirty-seven natures 
accessory to enlightenment (bodhipaksya-dharma) is an important feature 


of the path both for early and later non-tantric Buddhism. The 
identifications follow: 


1. Station of mindfulness on bodies Dakini 

2. Station of mindfulness on feelings Lama 

3. Station of mindfulness on natures Khandaroha 
4. Station of mindfulness on thoughts Rüpini 

5. Base of magical power in longing Pracanda 

6. Base of magical power in striving Pracandaksa 
7. Base of magical power in analysis Prabhavati 

8. Base of magical power in thought Mahanasa 

9. Faculty of faith Viramati 
10. Faculty of striving Kharvaryi 

11. Faculty of mindfulness Lankesvaryi 
12. Faculty of samädhi Drumacchäyä 
13. Faculty of insight Airavati 

14. Power of faith Mahabhairava 
15. Power of striving Vayuvega 

16. Power of mindfulness Surabhaksi 
17. Power of samadhi Syamadevi 
18. Power of insight Subhadra 


Perfection of Insight: Buddhist Tantra within Mahayana Buddhism 9 


19. Samadhi limb of enlightenment —  Hayakarni 
20. Striving limb of enlightenment — Khaganana 
21. Joy limb of enlightenment —  Cakravegà 
22. Cathartic limb of enlightenment — Khandaroha 
23. Analysis-of-the-doctrine limb of enlightenment — Saundini 
24. Mindfulness limb of enlightenment — Cakravarmini 
25. Equanimity limb of enlightenment — Suvira 
26. Right understanding — Маһаба!а 
27. Right conception — Cakravartini 
28. Right speech — Mahavirya 
29. Right bodily action — Kakasya 
30. Right livelihood —  Ulükasya 
31. Right effort — Svanasya 
32. Right mindfulness — Sükaräsyä 
33. Right samadhi — Sri-Heruka 
34, Generation of the virtuous natures so far 

not arisen — Yamadahi 
35. Protection of the virtuous natures that 

have arisen — Yamaditi 
36. Elimination of the sinful natures that 

have arisen — Yamadanstri 
37. Avoidance of the sinful natures so far 

not arisen — Yamamathani 


That takes account of all the goddesses of the Sambara-mandala, if we 
accept that Vajravarahi is included in Sri-Heruka, which of course is the 
meaning of their mystic union. Besides, all the goddesses have parental 
Buddhas. Nos. 1-4 are the dakini-s under Ratnesa (= Ratnasambhava). 
5-12 are the Circle of Mind (citta-cakra) under Aksobhya, and they range 
in the sky. 13-20 are the Circle of Speech (vak-cakra) under Amitabha, 
and they range upon earth. 21-28 are the Circle of Body (käya-cakra) 
under $äsvata (= Vairocana), and they range beneath the earth. 29-32 and 
34-37 are the Pledge Circle (samaya-cakra) under Amoghasiddhi; and 33 
(the mandala-lord) is under Aksobhya; his Diamond Sow side is under 
Vairocana. 

Tson-kha-pa (Lhasa Collected Works, Ta, 'dod jo, 112a-4) explains 
Nos. 26-33 (the Eightfold Noble Path) in this context: 


“Right understanding”: Great devotion to the Word of the Buddha. 
“Right conception”: The errorless comprehension of its meaning, and not 


casting aside a project which is good to do. : 
“Right speech”: Having words that do not deceive the sentient beings, and 


free from lies. 


PLATE 3. Sri-Heruka, ог Sambara (Previously published in Lessing, Yung-Ho-Kung). 


10 


Perfection of Insight: Buddhist Tantra within Mahayana Buddhism 11 


“Right bodily action”: Not transgressing the ten virtues in all that is done. 

“Right livelihood” : Living in a way that does not harm the sentient beings. 

“Right effort” : Performing the virtuous acts of bowing, circumambulating, 
etc. 

“Right mindfulness”: Being mindful of the Word of the Victor. 

“Right samadhi”: With object of consciousness in the manner of Heruka. 


But we cannot leave this subject without alerting the reader to the 
multiple roles of these goddesses. For example, the Abhidhäna-uttara-tantra 
(PTT. Vol. 2, p. 66-3) identifies the last four Bodhisattva Stages, for which 
see Table 18 in the present work, with the four dakinis of the above list 
(Nos. 1-4) in respective order, which is their standard order. The same 
Tantra identifies the first six Bodhisattva Stages with other dakinis. 
Furthermore, reference to my Table 5 will show that four doorkeepers of 
the Sri-Cakrasamvara mandala, namely Nos. 29-32, constitute in this given 
order with translation of names (Käkäsyä, She the Crow-Faced; and so on) 
the first four of the six members of the Stage of Completion. Nos. 34-35 
(Yamadahi and Yamaditi) are reversed as the last two of the six members. 
Right after Table 5 there is a different explanation for the remaining two 
Yama goddesses (Nos. 36-37). But рга/йа herself appears in many roles 
and guises—the cleverness of the market place, the science of the 
laboratory, the wisdom of the sage; a sword, a fire; a nymph. 


2 


EARLY LITERARY HISTORY OF THE 
BUDDHIST TANTRAS, ESPECIALLY THE 
GUHYASAMAJA-TANTRA* 


There are several reasons for discussing literary history of the Buddhist 
Tantras in general, while taking main evidence from the Guhyasamäja 
cycle. For one thing, the texts and commentaries of Tantric nature are 
replete with remarkable matters, intriguing to any scholar with the philo- 
logical background to read them. Besides the inevitable “tantric secrets”, 
there are numerous problems of Indian textual history to be solved to the 
extent these texts can be reliably dated in terms of centuries. Such an 
investigation is undoubtedly challenging, because the cult of Tantra, 
whether Hindu or Buddhist, has something of an anti-historical tone to It, 
by the very nature of esotericism. 

When it is seen that these Buddhist Tantras are composed by taking a 
previous lore reaching back into the Vedic literature and amalgamating this 
tradition with various Buddhist tenets, it appears that one should be able to 
assign a definite period of time for such synthesizing. And then there 1s а 
problem comparable to the dating of Upanisads and Puranas, because Wê 
hear a specious argument that it is possible to write such books at any 
time! Possible, yes; but not possible to furnish the feature of authority, 25 
when the Tantra is represented as a revelation of the supreme Buddha P 
the form of Vajradhara; not possible at any arbitrary time to have a tex 


. К itules 
* This article first appeared in Annals, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institut 


Vols. XLVIII-XLIX (Poona, 1968), which may be consulted for the Tibetan ап 
Sanskrit texts omitted here, 


12 


Early Literary History of the Buddhist Tantras 13 


be the main communication of religious leaders and geniuses, part of a 
creative ebb, capable of arousing the faith, the concordant practice, and 
commentarial labor of great thinkers, as were the Upanisads in the sense 
in which we speak of the great Upanisads and the Upanisad literature. 
And while the group of Upanisads called the Yoga Upanisads! are not the 
greatest of their class, they too bear the imprint of creative thinking of 
some period, whatever it may be, only prior to the composition of the 
“revealed” Buddhist Tantras, because those particular “sectarian 
Upanisads” have many remarks about centers in the body, mystic veins, 
and other materials, in typical Upanisad disorganization, that are note- 
worthy as constituting ideas incorporated in the Buddhist Tantras in more 
organized and saästra-like form. 

But, then, why “especially the Guhyasamaja-tantra”? Any searching 
examination of this Tantric literature, mainly extant in the Tibetan 
language, leads the reader to notice a compatibility of style of writing, 
repetition of certain incantations (mantra), overlapping descriptions of 
ritual practices; although it is true that certain groups of texts display much 
more of similar matter, a fact which led to the classification of Tantras, 
eventually into the standard classes of Kriyä-, Caryä-, Yoga-, and 
Anuttarayoga-tantras, by which the Tibetan Tantric canon is arranged.2 
Now, I concern myself mainly with the Guhyasamdja-tantra simply because 
it is necessary to follow through at least one current in its various connec- 
tions to see the picture with some clarity, and I happen to have done so 
with the Guhyasamdja-tantra through my researches in writing a still 
unpublished work, The Arcane Lore of Forty Verses; A Buddhist Tantra 
Commentary on the Guhyasamäja-nidäna-karika. In a literary history 
introduction to this work I have argued that an Explanatory Tantra 
(vyakhyä-tantra) of the Guhyasamdja called Vajramala was composed in 
the fifth century A.D., and the basic tantra Guhyasamaia probably in the 
fourth century A.D. 


1. Dating of the Guhyasamaja 


It would be well to summarize here the kind of reasoning I have em- 
ployed in that manuscript to arrive at the approximate dating, as well as to 
add further considerations. First we notice that scholars are fairly well 
agreed about the dating of the named commentators on the Guhyasamaja 
cycle and the Tantra Siddhas generally. Leaving out the references, we 
observe that Saraha is a contemporary of King Dharmapala (769-809). In 


1. The Yoga Upanisads, tr. by T. R. Srinivasa Ayyangar and ed. by G. Srinivasa 


Murti, The Adyar Library, 1952. р 
2. Cf. Alex Wayman, “Analysis of the Tantric Section of the Kanjur Correlated to 


Tanjur Exegesis”. Part П of Chap. 16, below. 


14 Introductions 


the second half of the eighth century we must place both the tantric 
Nagarjuna of the “Arya School’ and Buddhasrijüäna of the “Inänapäda 
School”. In the ninth century—probably first half—comes the tantric 
Candrakirti, author of the Pradipoddyotana, as well as King Indrabhüti 
and his sister Laksminkarä, who is probably not the same person as Sti 
Laksmi, author of a beautiful commentary on Nagarjuna’s Paficakrama, 
Various tantric masters such as Sabara and Naropa lived in thetenth 
century, while Tilopa, Naropa’s guru, must be placed around the end of 
the ninth and beginning of the tenth centuries. In the second half of the 
ninth I would also place the tantric Aryadeva. Translations into Tibetan 
show that Guhyasamaja commentarial and sddhana literature continued 
to be written through the twelfth century. In short, the Tanjur 
Guhyasamaja cycle of commentarial literature is composed from eighth to 
twelfth centuries. The same inclusive dates roughly cover the commentarial 
cycles of other Buddhist Tantra literature. 

Given that general period of commentarial composition, there remains 
the problem of dating the "revealed" scripture, the müla-tantra Guhyasa- 
maja (first 17 chapters of the Sanskrit text) and its uttara-tantra (the 18th 
chapter) along with their cluster of Explanatory Tantras available only in 
Tibetan except for a few quotations of Sanskrit in Nagarjuna’s Paficakrama 
and Candrakirti's Pradipoddyotana. The Explanatory Tantras in question 
are the three cited in the Paficakrama: Caturdevipariprcchà, Samdhivyà- 
karana and Vajramälä; the one cited in Aryadeva’s Caryamelapakapradipa: 
JRaànavajrasamuccaya—all four of which are in Tibetan; and the one cited 
in the Pradipoddyotana: Devendrapariprcchä, which was not translated 
into Tibetan. The Explanatory Tantras represent further “revelations” 
which have varying authority for the subsequent commentarial traditions. 

A. The date of the Explanatory Tantra Vajramala. In that manuscript ОЛ 
the nidana-kärikä which was quoted in Candrakirti’s Pradipoddyotana 
from the Vajramäla, I arrived at a direct reason and an indirect reason for 
dating the Vajramadld. Here there is no room to provide the extensive data 
on which the following reasoning is based: (1) The direct reason: This work 
contains the ten Visnu avataras in a kind of esoteric embryology theory; 
and these ten are precisely the standard list for which there is epigraphic 
evidence (from Bengal) of the fifth century onwards. I have presumed that 
at the time this standard list became publicized it went hand-in-hand wit | 
an esoteric tradition of syncretized Vaisnavism and Buddhism. The indiree 
reason: In that manuscript on the nidana-kärikä I have set forth my ПУРО" 
thesis that the Paficakrama set of 33 female prakrtis and 40 male pr акті? 
сап be subdivided without change of order into five groups in each set, E 
first set (of female prakrtis) especially going with the five stages of 5 2 
Vaisnava path to union with the Lord Krsna. This adds more weight to 
presumed Vaisnava-Buddhist syncretism which I attribute to the 


Early Literary History of the Buddhist Tantras 15 


century A.D. However, the term “райсакғата” as in Nägärjuna’s title 
does not seem compatible with that Vaisnava path. (2) There is a further 
reason stemming from the interesting tie-ups between the Vajramälä and 
later commentary on the one hand, and the Lankävatära-sütra on the 
other hand. I refer here (a) to Yogäcära-type vocabulary, such as the 
"eight-vijfiana set"; (b) to the stress on winds, in the Vajramala as the 
esoteric doctrine of winds by the word váyu, and in the Lankävatära-sütra 
to the exoteric doctrine of winds by the word pavana; and (c) by occasional 
quotation of the Larikävatära in the Guhyasamäja commentaries, such as 
those of the tantric Aryadeva. This sūtra was first translated into Chinese 
in 443 A.D. and apparently enjoyed much popularity among Indian 
Buddhists to justify Bodhidharma’s exclusive stress on this work when he 
brought it to China in the 520’s of the Christian era. 

B. The date of the Guhyasamäja-tantra. Of course, the tentative dating of 
the Explanatory Tantra Vajramdld in the fifth century A.D. has a firm 
implication for the latest date of the Guhyasamdja, but our approach to the 
latter will be as independent as possible from the Vajramald consideration. 

There is a tradition reported from Taranatha that the Tantras were 
transmitted in utmost secrecy for 300 years before being rendered some- 
what more public by the Siddhas. This tradition was accepted by 
B. Bhattacharyya in the Introduction, xxxv, to his edition of the Guhya- 
Samäja-tantra in the Gaekwad Oriental Series. However, Bhattacharyya 
associated the Guhyasamäja with Asanga. Having studied this problem 
through the works of Asanga I concluded that while Asanga lived at the 
“right time” (circa 375-430 A.D.), he could not reasonably be credited with 
the Guhyasamäja-tantra.3 On the other hand, Japanese scholars in general, 
and Shoun Toganoo in particular, who worked with the Tantra decided 
on an historical sequence of Buddhist Tantras with approximate centuries, 
to wit: Mahävairocana (sixth century), Tattvasamgraha (seventh century), 
and Guhyasamäja, which they considered degenerate Tantra (eighth 
century). This dating forces the Guhyasamdja to be composed con- 
temporaneously with the first commentaries by named persons. To under- 
stand this position, one should note that the Japanese have been 
Pre-eminent in modern-day Buddhist scholarship in wonderfully 
encyclopedic scope. But the Japanese Buddhist scholars almost always 
prefer to work with Sanskrit or Tibetan texts that have Sino-Japanese 
translations. The Tibetan texts were only aids in comparative text study; 
and so few Japanese scholars have learned to move easily in those Tibetan 
texts which have neither Sanskrit nor Sino-Japanese parallel versions, as 1s 
the case with the bulk of the Tantric literature. Matsunaga is perhaps alone 


3. Alex Wayman, Analysis of the Sravakabhiimi Manuscript, University of California 


Publications in Classical Philology Vol. 17 (Berkeley, 1961), pp. 25-41. 


чє 


16 Introductions 


in examining one of the Guhyasamdja Explanatory Tantras, the Jiana. 
vajrasamuccaya, and deciding that Candrakirti may have had some hand 
in composing or in expanding it.4 Naturally his conclusions about the 
Jridnavajrasamuccaya carry no material implication for other Explanatory 
Tantras, each of which has to be judged by its own content. I think 
Matsunaga proved his point that the tantric Candrakirti had something 
to do with that Explanatory Tantra, but this does not mean that he had 
more to do with it than revising or filling in a text which already existed in 
more than one recension. Generally speaking, though, the late dating of 
the Guhyasamäja by Japanese scholars rests on the same tenuous, 
unexamined grounds, as did the early dating accepted uncritically by 
B. Bhattacharyya. I hold that only by the procedure of facing up to the 
content of the Guhyasamdja literature can one begin to approximate the 
historical context. 

If one does just that, he must take account of two basic commentarial 
traditions of the Guhyasamdja. One of these, “the Arya School” (of those 
adopting Madhyamika-famous names, Nagarjuna, Candrakirti, Aryadeva), 
writes its commentaries on the basic Tantra by citing the 18th chapter (the 
uttara-tantra), the various Explanatory Tantras, while incorporating what 
is presumably oral tradition. The other, the “Jnänapäda School” (headed by 
Buddhasrijfiana) cites the 18th chapter and also the other chapters of the 
basic Tantra, generally refrains from quoting the Explanatory Tantras, and 
frequently cites other Tantras, especially those of the Yoga-tantra cycle, 
while also incorporating what is presumably oral tradition. There is of 
course some overlapping of these commentarial stresses; for example, 
Aryadeva also is prone to quote other Tantras, and also non-tantric works 
such as the Prajiia-paramita Scriptures. But the approaches are probably a 
matter of temperament, and interestingly parallel to the well-known two 
traditions of Buddhist Abhidharma called the Sautrantika and the 
Vaibhasika. Here the “Jianapada School”, more literary as well as literal, 
is like the Sautrantika which takes its stand on the scriptural texts. The 
“Arya School”, less literary and more interpretative as well as pedantic, 1S 
like the Vaibhasika which takes its stand on the monumental commen- 
taries. Therefore it is difficult to use the mere difference of the two traditions 
to conclude anything about the status and history of the Explanatory 
Tantras. Also, this use of Yoga-tantra texts may well rest on the tradition 
mentioned in the Blue Annals that the Yoga-tantra is “Outer?” as compare! 
with the Anuttarayoga-tantra (including the Guhyasamdja) which 35 
"Inner".5 In fact, the Yoga-tantras such as the Tattvasamgr aha, 
Vajraśekhara, and Sri-Paramädya have much in common with what Б 


4. Yükei Matsunaga, “A Doubt to Authority of the Guhyasamaja-Akhyana-tantras » 
Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies, XIII:2 (Mar., 1964), pp. (16) to (25). ff. 
5. George N. Roerich, The Blue Annals, Part one (Calcutta, 1949), рр. 351, f 


Early Literary History of the Buddhist Tantras 17 


called the Stage of Generation or Production (utpattikrama) of the 
Anuttarayoga-tantra, especially in the terminology of three samädhis, of 
Initial Praxis (prathama-prayoga), Triumphant Mandala (vijayamandala), 
and Victory of the Rite (karma-vijaya). 

What is significant about the two commentarial traditions is precisely 
that there are two, with many differences within each of these traditions. 
Just as the Sautrantika and Vaibhasika of non-tantric Buddhism could not 
have arisen fully-grown, in the form in which we know them, in the century 
immediately following the passing of the Buddha, so also the “Arya 
School” and the “Jnänapäda School" could not have arisen in the century 
immediately following the composition of the Guhyasamdja, let alone the 
very same century! Indeed, any one who even partially surveys the 
Guhyasamäja literature as extant in Tibetan and notes the remarkable 
variance in explanation of a given passage of the basic Tantra, would 
experience at least a mild shock at the flimsy reasons given for a late dating 
of the Guhyasamäja. One example will be given to show what is meant, and 
this case is particularly chosen for a context where one would expect 
minimal variation between the commentaries because the expression to be 
explained is merely the “three kinds” of each sense object as mentioned 
without explanation in the basic tantra of Guhyasamdja, Chap. 7: 


Arya School: 

Nägärjuna’s Tantratikà on Guhyasamäja (Derge ed., Sa, f. 105b-7): 
(form, the object of sight) “has the nature of outer, inner, and 
both”. 

Candrakirti’s Pradipoddyotana on Guhyasamäja (Derge ed., Ha, f. 
49a-5): (form, the object of sight) “should be perceived and 
comprehended as inferior, intermediate, and superior”; in 
Tson-kha-pa’s Mchan-hgrel on the Pradipoddyotana (PTT, 
Vol. 158, p. 55-3), we learn that the superior kind is the 
Buddha going with that sense object, e.g. Vairocana as form; 
(p. 56-1, form is also of three kinds, pleasurable, repulsive or 
displeasing, and neutral). 

Jiidnapada School: 

Prasantajiiana’s Upadesa-niscaya on Guhyasamäja (PTT, Vol. 63, 
p. 64-5): the three kinds are superior (lust), intermediate 
(delusion), and inferior (hatred). 

Celu-pa’s Ratnavrksa-nàma-rahasya-samája-vrtti (PIT, Vol. 63, 
p. 183-5): inferior, intermediate, and superior. 

Jinadatta’s Panjika-nama оп Guhyasamaja (PTT, Vol. 63, p. 259-1): 
“Because one discerns it as having the nature of superior, and 
so on, there are three kinds; having the nature of outer, inner, 
and both, means *non-apprehension" (anupalabdhi), so one 


18 


Introductions 


should understand it by the nature of three gates to libera 
of voidness, etc." 

Ratnäkarasänti’s Kusumänjali-guhyasamäja-nibandha-nama (Vol. 
64, p. 127-1): the three kinds mean the respective offerings by 
the three kinds of yogins, the one of lust, of delusion, and of 
hatred. 

Smrtijfanakirti’s Sriguhyasamäja-tantraräja-vrtti (PTT, Vol. 66, 
p. 132-3): “The “three kinds" means that one knows (the 
object) as the three gates to liberation, the signless, etc." 

Anandagarbha's Sri-guhyasamaja-mahätantraräja-tikä (PTT, Vol. 
84, p. 127-4, 5): “The three kinds are outer, inner, and secret. 
That was explained by Arya-Jnänapäda to mean fifteen in an 
external set, fifteen in a personal set, and fifteen in a secret set. 
Having cited his words, I should here explain clearly his mean- 
ing." He goes on to take the outer as three, which multiplied 
by the five sense objects yields the number fifteen, and does the 
same for the inner or personal, and for the secret which involves 
the prajria-upàya union. In each case, the three are the Buddha, 
the Bodhisattva, and the Devi associated with that object by 
the triad of perception, sense organ and sense object, i.e. for 
form, the three are the Buddha Vairocana, the Bodhisattva 
Ksitigarbha, and the Devi Rüpavajrä. 


tion, 


There are three main sources for the various comments cited above. One is 
the Explanatory Tantra Samdhivyakarana, which is a verse paraphrase, 
with slight enlargement, of the first twelve chapters of the Guhyasamäja- 
tantra. In its treatment of Chap. 7, it states (PTT, Vol. 3, p. 240-3): 


The three kinds of form and other sense objects are the non- 


apprehension of inner, outer, and both; one should offer those to 
the gods. 


The next source is the Explanatory Tantra Vajramala, which states in what 
I call the “nidäna-kärikä”, no. 19: 


Afterwards the yogin who sees the non-duality should be dE 
upon sense objects “inferior”, “intermediate”, and "superior" DY 
seeing the triple gnosis. 


The third source is the uttara-tantra (18th chap. of the Sanskrit text, р. 158): 


The “desires” (i.e. the 5 strands of desire, paficakamaguna) “for ED 
"sound", etc.—pleasurable, painful, and neutral—continua 


Early Literary History of the Buddhist Tantras 19 


generate in the heart, (respectively), the source of “lust”, “hatred”, 
and “delusion”. 


With all that information at hand, it is easy to see that some commen- 
tators relied especially on the Vajramala, some especially on the Samdhi- 
vyakarana, some especially on the uttara-tantra; and then some commen- 
tators tried to harmonize two different terminologies of “three kinds” by 
taking it as “three times three”, i.e. three each of each three. The 
Samdhivyakarana expression “non-apprehension” suggested to some 
commentators the non-tantric doctrines of “Perfection of Insight” 
(prajîia-pûramita) with its stress on voidness (sünyatä), so they saw an 
opportunity to make contact with non-tantric Buddhism by the well- 
known set of Buddhism, the three gates to liberation (trini vimoksa- 
mukhäni), that is, the voidness ($ünyatä-), the wishless (apranihita-), and 
the signless (änimitta-) gates.6 When one takes into account that these 
commentaries vary much more in most other places, where the Guhya- 
samdja passages are not restricted by such concrete objects as the sense 
objects, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that some centuries of oral 
tradition have intervened between the basic Guhyasamdja-tantra and the 
eighth century when the “historical” writers began to appear on the scene. 
Of course, if the basic Tantra had been concocted by the first commen- 
tator, or had been composed just prior to his writing activity, there should 
not have been any question of what the “three kinds” were. Instead the 
commentators might have differed only in their metaphorical interpretation 
of the standard “three kinds". 

The above chain of reasoning shows we must set the Guhyasamäja- 
tantra sufficiently early that even the Vajramála Explanatory Tantra, if my 
fifth century date be accepted, would be one of several ways of interpreting 
that Tantra, and so the Силуаѕатаја basic Tantra must be assigned at least 
a century earlier. But I conventionally place it in the fourth century A.D., 
with possible authorship of Indrabhüti the Great, who should not be 
confused with the later King Indrabhüti. 


Il. Possible Greco-Roman concepts in the 
Buddhist Tantras 


At the annual meeting of the American Oriental Society in Chicago, 
April 1965, I first called attention to Greco-Roman attributions of func- 


6. As I explained in the article, “The Buddhist ‘Not This, Not This’,” Philosophy 
East and West, XI: 3 (Oct., 1961), pp. 99-114, the three gateways to liberation are 
understood in the Yogacara school (headed by Aryasanga) to be based on the conditioned 
(samskrta) as the five personality aggregates—the wishless gateway, on the unconditioned 
(asamskrta) as nirvana—the signless gateway; and on both (reality and unreality)—the 
Voidness gateway. 


20 Introductions 


tions to corporeal centers as closely paralleled by doctrines of the Buddhist 
Tantras. This report was incorporated in a larger study “The Five-fold 
Ritual Symbolism of Passion”, published in the anniversary Volume of 
Koyasan University,” and based especially on Tibetan sources. Later | 
noticed that the tantric Nägärjuna’s Pindikramasädhana, which was 
published by L. de la Vallée Poussin,’ contains a Sanskrit passage that 
identifies the five skandhas with five corporeal centers. To save space, | 


shall omit the Sanskrit original, and give my translation of those verses 
(Nos. 56-60) as follows: 


The knower of mantras will place on his head Vairocana’s germ 
syllable Om of white color, because it is the intrinsic nature of the 
personality aggregate of form (rüpa-skandha). 

Having contemplated in the throat Amitäbha’s red Ah, pertaining 
to the intrinsic nature of the aggregate of ideas (samjfià-skandha), 
he attains lordliness of speech. 

The mantrin should deposit in his heart Aksobhya's Hüm, shining 
like the deep blue gem, as the form of the aggregate of percep- 
tions (vijfiana-skandha). 

He should place at the navel a yellow Svà belonging to the Jewel 
Lord (=Ratnasambhava) and the cause of purifying feelings, 
because it is the form of the aggregate of feelings (vedanäskandha). 
The mantrin then deposits in both feet a Hà of green light, as the 
reality of the Karma Lord (=Amoghasiddhi), because it is the 


nature of the personality aggregate of motivations (samskdra- 
skandha). 


In that published paper I identified the five corporeal locations of the 
five personality aggregates (skandha) with the five spots constituting targets 


for five arrows as in Guhyasamäja-tantra, Chap. XVI (Bhattacharyya ed., 
p. 121): 


The “knower of mantras” should contemplate in the middle of the 
Diamond Sky (= Clear Light) an adamantine Mañjuśrī of great 
power; he should recollect his projecting point with the praxis of 
five arrows, and make them fall, in the manner of the formidable 
thunderbolt, in five spots. 


Thus, two Buddhist Tantra texts available in Sanskrit—the gu 
samäja-tantra and its associated Pindikramasädhana—refer respectively 


7. Alex Wayman, “The five-fold ritual symbolism of passion,” this work (С И 
8. Louis de la Vallée Poussin, ed., Paficakrama (Gand, 1896); (the editor has inc 
the Pindikrta-sadhana- Pindikrama-sadhana as Part I of the edition). 


Early Literary History of the Buddhist Tantras 21 


five spots in the body and to five corporeal locations of the five personality 
aggregates. 

The particular passage which first enabled me to compare with some 
Greco-Roman concepts was a Tibetan quotation or paraphrase by Tson- 
kha-pa of a work he cited as Khyad par gsal byed, which I later traced as 
the Visesadyota (Toh. 1510), a work by Tathägatavajra, with full title 
Lüyipäbhisamayavrttitikävisesadyota-nama. Y shall repeat here only the 
explanation for the placement of the “aggregate of form” (rüpa-skandha), 
because this was the foundation for making the comparison. Here the text: 
“explains that since the aggregate of forms is the basis of seeds, the chief 
place of the rüpa-skandha is the middle of the head; and explains that the 
forehead is the place of the bindu: hence one contemplates it (i.e. the aggre- 
gate of forms) there.” 9 Therefore, it was easy to see a connection with the 
Greek psyche and the Roman genius—considered to be located in the head 
which was supposed to be the source of seed. Again, Greek thought 
associates the liver with deep emotions, so also the aggregate of feelings is 
the navel. There was also a close parallel between the location of percep- 
tion (vijääna) in the heart as the wind basis of consciousness and the seat of 
breath. The locations of the two remaining personality aggregates—ideas 
(samjhä) and motivations (samskára)—in the throat and feet respectively, 
are not obviously parallel to the Greek or Roman concepts, for which I 
especially used the book by Onians.!0 

Another implication of Greek influence arose through the collaborated 
translation by the late Ferdinand D. Lessing and myself of Mkhas grub 
rjes Fundamentals of the Buddhist Tantras, Indo-Iranian Monographs 
Vol. VIII (1968). In the section on Yoga-tantra, Mkhas-grub-rje mentions 
that for each of the four seals (mudra) called “Symbolic Seal”, “Law Seal”, 
“Action Seal”, and “Great Seal”, there are four causes (T. rgyu = Skt. 
hetu). For a long time Dr. Lessing and I were at a loss as to how to translate 
the words for these four causes in the Tibetan text. The words used were 
not the standard causes well-known from Buddhist Abhidharma texts. 
Then it occurred to me that the Tibetan words reflected an attempt, 
presumably through Sanskrit words as intermediary, to render the well- 
known four Aristotelian causes, namely the efficient cause (T. hbyun bahi 
rgyu), the formal cause (ran gi no bo, S. svarupa), the material cause 
(grub pahi rgyu), and the final cause (grub pa dban du hgyur bahi rgyu). 
To illustrate the application of these terms, I shall briefly explain Mkhas- 
grub-rje’s employment of them for the “Symbolic Seal” (samaya-mudrä). 
In this case, the “efficient cause” is the thunderbolt tie (vajrabandha), the 
necessary preliminary. The “formal cause” involves therite ofexecuting the 


9. Cf. Wayman, “The five-fold ritual symbolism of passion,” reprinted herein. 
10. R. B. Onians, The Origins of European Thought about the Body, the Mind, the 
Soul, the World, Time, and Fate (Cambridge at The Univ. Press, 1954). 


22 Introductions 


“Symbolic Seal” per se, amounting to executing the symbolic sea] of a 
particular Buddha, e.g. Vairocana, while seeing that Buddha dwelling in 
front and then reaching non-duality with that Buddha. The "material 
cause" involves contemplating in the heart of the deity in front, a moon 
and on it a white five-pronged thunderbolt; dwelling upon it for a pro- 
tracted period while muttering the general and special incantations results 
in a "materialization". Thereupon, one has the “final cause” by the 
contemplation which reduces the personality aggregates and so on to void- 
ness (Siinyata). 

Of course, this is a different kind of evidence from the preceding data 
regarding corporeal placement of the five skandhas. In the present case, I 
suppose there might be some question as to whether the four Aristotelian 
causes are rightly applied. Let us, however, proceed on the supposition 
that the Aristotelian causes seem to fit in translating Mkhas-grub-rje's 
section on the Yoga-tantra. Then, the problem arises of how such Greco- 
Roman influence could be found in the Buddhist Tantras, which so often 
are dismissed as typical of the late and declining phase of Indian Buddhism 
in the latter part of the first millenium A.D., thus removed by many centuries 
from the presumed period of Greek influence. 

In assessing Greek transmissions to India, these need not be attributed 
to Greeks alone, because around the beginning of the Christian era many 
Greco-Roman ideas circulated in Central Asia and were carried by 
miscellaneous peoples. One conclusion is reasonable: that Buddhism was 
more influenced by such foreign ideas than was Hinduism. This is obvious 
in the iconographic art types, especially the form of the Buddha image in 
Gandhara. It has long been held that foreign elements have entered into the 
formation of certain Buddhist Mahayana scriptures, especially those 
centred around the Buddha Amitabha (of boundless light). It is therefore 
reasonable that Greco-Roman concepts should have entered more into the 
Buddhist Tantras than into Hindu ones, whether Saiva or Vaisnava, that 
is, if we agree further that the Buddhist Tantras came into being sufficiently 
close to the time of Greco-Roman prestige to adopt certain foreign modes 
of thinking where their usefulness was apparent and at that time perhaps 
commonplace, their origins forgotten. 

The literary history of these Tantras and their forerunning literature 
might well run this way in order to account for inclusion of any Greco" 
Roman concepts: After the old Upanisads just before and around the time 
of the Buddha, there gradually arose the type of work now called the 
sectarian Yoga Upanisad, the bulk of which is composed during m x 
“Hindu revival” after the Maurya Dynasty downfall and down to the te 
of the Gupta era. These sectarian Upanisads were being written by dis 
Hindus when many foreign ideas were circulating in North-West In ds 
from about 100 в.с. to 200 A.D., but this does not mean that such Орап!" 


Early Literary History of the Buddhist Tantras 23 


were influenced by such foreign ideas. However, profane science appears 
to have been so influenced, because during this period two systems of 
Roman astronomy were circulated in India to be later included in the 
Paiicasiddhäntikä of Varahamihira. Also there were esoteric cults borrow- 
ing freely from different sources, Buddhist, Hindu, and foreign elements. 
The eclectic character of such movements helped to bring in certain far-out 
ideas that neither orthodox Hinduism nor orthodox Buddhism could be 
expected to entertain. At that time the word “Tantra” may not yet have 
been applied to such cults. Also, at the university center of Taxila in far 
North-West India there was ample opportunity to learn various Greco- 
Roman concepts; and also, for that matter, for some typically Indian ideas 
to be transported to the West or to enter into the religious syncretisms of 
Central Asia. 


Conclusion 


In the early Gupta period there was a vast amount of collecting and 
rewriting of old legends, as well as the composition of formal treatises, 
political, philosophical, and so on—required by the new age which had 
turned to written-down religious texts beginning to compete with the 
memorized tradition. This remarkable outpouring of new works would 
make the fourth and fifth centuries the Golden Age, determining the form 
of Hinduism even up to modern times. These two centuries were also the 
creative age for the Buddhist Tantras, determining their pattern of rite and 
doctrine for subsequent centuries. Not only the Guhyasamäja but also the 
other “revealed Tantras” were composed mainly at that time, and by this 
we do not preclude the later addition of chapters as happened to the 
Maäijusri-müla-kalpa or an expanded recension as apparently occurred to 
the Jfiánavajrasamuccaya. In the eighth century tantrism entered a new 
phase with the emergence of the Siddhas or tantric masters and the 
beginning of tantric rationalization, that is, the enterprise of commentary 
by the tantric pandits, who tried to explain all sorts of obscure points in 
those "revealed texts". And despite the difficulty a few commentators 
would be eminently successful. 


3 


BUDDHIST GENESIS AND THE TANTRIC 
TRADITION* 


The Buddhist genesis story is very ancient, being found in the Pali 
scriptures besides the northern Buddhist accounts. It is mentioned in all 
three branches of Buddhist scriptures, Sütra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma. 
A Sanskrit version entitled Räjavamsa (royal lineage) exists in the Maha- 
vastu. In the Abhidharma literature the account is given in the description 
of vivarta (differentiation of the beings due to evolution of the inferior 
worlds) as contrasted with samvarta (consubstantiation of the beings due 
to dissolution of the inferior worlds). At least in later Buddhist accounts, 
the legend does not have the importance that the Biblical Genesis has ın 
the Judeo-Christian tradition. Our treatment suggests that in the earliest 
Buddhism it may well have had a much greater importance than it had 
later on. 

In any case, Tson-kha-pa (1357-1419 А.р.), founder of the Gelugpa 
school of Tibetan Buddhism signals the importance of the legend in an 
elaborate discussion utilizing both non-Tantric and Tantric sources in the 
first part of his work Dpal gsan ba hdus pahi gnad kyi don gsal ba, 
“Elucidating the meaning of the essential points of the Sri-guhyasama4 
(Tantra)” (Lhasa ed., collected works, Vol. Cha), which has the abbrevi4- 
ted reference Don gsal. Tsoh-kha-pa uses this legend as a rationale for the 


1 ed 
* This article first appeared in Oriens Extremus, 9:1 (1962), which may be consult 
for the Tibetan and Sanskrit texts omitted here. 


24 


Buddhist Genesis and the Tantric Tradition 25 


types of meditations found in the Anuttara-yoga-tantra, a literature which 
often mystifies and repels Western scholars because of its complicated 
ritualism and sexual symbolism. Here there is space for only the main 
ideas of Tson-kha-pa’s discussion. 

The non-Tantric Buddhist legend may be organized and summarized as 
follows: 

There are three efficient causes of the periodical destruction of the 
world systems, viz., fire, water, and wind. According to the Abhidharma- 
kosa (III, 100c-d, and commentary), fire brings an eon of evolution to an 
end by destroying all of the realm of desire (kama-dhátu) and the First 
Dhyana Heaven of the realm of form (rüpa-dhätu). Water destroys all that 
as well as the Second Dhyana Heaven; and wind destroys all the latter as 
well as the Third Dhyana Heaven of the realm of form. Only the Fourth 
Dhyana of this realm remains intact. The First Dhyana is also referred to 
by its divine residents, such as the Brahma retinue deities, the Second 
Dhyana by its chief deities, the Abhäsvaras, the Third Dhyana by the 
Subha deities. 

I. In the next period of evolution, while the lower receptacle worlds are 
re-evolving, the sentient beings fall to lower planes in a process usually 
described as starting from the level of the Abhasvara deity class (after the 
destruction by fire). They fall from that divine world and come “here”. 
“Here” is explained as Jambudvipa (our world continent or specifically 
India). Buddhaghosa of the southern school and Vasubandhu of the 
northern school of Buddhism agree that these “men of the first eon" pass 
through each of the intermediate worlds by a type of birth called “trans- 
formation" (upapáduka)! after each successive death. The Abhidharma- 
kosa (II, 9b-c) says that the beings with this type of birth are the hell- 
beings, the beings of the intermediate state, and the gods. Hence the “men 
of the first eon” were in a condition rather comparable to the present 
(disembodied) intermediate state (antarabhava) between death and rebirth. 
Asanga explains that these “men of the first eon" (prathamakalpa) passed 
through these worlds with actions involved with desire (kämävacara-karma) 
that are superior, chief, best (parama, agrya, Srestha), and whose fruitions 
are experienced immediately, not at another time. And these men have a 
beautiful form (rüpin) and are “made of mind” (manomaya)?. In addition, 
the Mahävastu (I, 339) says that these men are self-luminous, feed on joy, 
and go where they wish. Y 

Il. Then, on the surface of the earth which at that time was in a fluidic 


1. This is one of the four kinds of birth in Buddhism. Beings are also “born from a 
womb” (jaräyu-ja), “born from an egg" (anda-ja), “born from moist heat" (samsveda-ja). 

2. V. Bhattacharya, editor, The Yogacarabhiimi of Acárya Asanga, Part I (Calcutta, 
1957), pp. 41-42, 


26 Introductions 


state there appeared an earth essence3 which some being disposed to 
greediness tasted with his finger. It pleased him, he came to eat mouthfuls 
and other beings followed suit. Thus these beings became dependent on 
morsel food, still subtle. They lost their original qualities of feeding on 
joy, body made of mind, and so on, and their bodies became heavier and 
more substantial. The ones who least indulged, retained with pride their 
beautiful form. The sun, moon, and year became known. In the course of 
time this earth essence disappeared and a honey-like excrescence appeared 
on the surface of the earth. Asanga explains that hell beings, beings in the 
embryonic states, and the gods involved with desire (kämävacara-deva) 
have just the subtle kind of food, which does not give rise to excrement 
or urine.4 

III. Then, in place of the honey-like earth excrescences, a Tice-pap 
appeared and the beings subsisted on that coarse morsel food, described 
thus by the Mahavastu (I, 341-2): “rice, not discrete, without chaff, fragrant 
grain” (sali akano atusah surabhitandulah). At that time, the distinguishing 
characteristics of male and female appeared, and the beings had mutual 
sexual desire with associated acts. 

IV. The last phase of the legend shows the arising of the “private 
property” idea with individual rice plots, then stealing with consequent 
violence. Those beings decided to select someone to judge the disputes. 
He was called the great chosen one (mahäsammata), and the beings each 
gave him one-sixth of the rice crop for his royal services to provide security. 
Mahäsammata was the first king (cakravartin). According to the Buddhist 
sutra, he inaugurated the lineage of the Sakya clan, in which Gautama 
Buddha was born. According to the latter’s biography, Gautama was born 
with auspicious characteristics portending either a Cakravartin or a 
Buddha. In Hindu legend also, "People suffering from anarchy . . . first 
elected Manu, the Vaivasvata, to be their king; and allotted one-sixth of 
the grains grown and one-tenth of merchandise as sovereign dues".? 

The Tantric account presented by Tson-kha-pa claims to have informa- 
tion about those beings beyond what non-Tantric Buddhism teaches. Thus 
he writes, “Moreover, the men of the first eon, i.e., the beings who have 
died and transferred from the Abhasvara god class, and so on, down to 
their birth as men of Jambudvipa, agree with the merits (guna) of the 
[thirty-two] Characteristics and [eighty] Minor Marks, so they are adorned 
with the merits of a Buddha’’.6 Also, “The description ‘adorned with the 


3. Prthivirasa in the Mahäyastu (I, 339), bhümirasa in Asanga's Yogacarabhiimi, Р. у 
4. Yogacaárabhümi, pp. 99-100. 


ugs Arthasästra, translated by R. Shamasastry (Book I, Chap. хш), 
рр. 22-23. 


6. Don gsal, 19b-6. 


Buddhist Genesis and the Tantric Tradition 27 


merits of a Buddha’ does not occur in the Abhidharma or in the Vibhanga’.7 
But why did those beings become dominated subsequently by delusion, 
lust, and hatred? He says, “Thus, they had obtained possession of the 
‘knowledge body’ (jiana-deha)—the superior body like the body of a god 
of the ‘realm of form’, free from the coarse body which undergoes develop- 
ment; but then it was overcome by all the action (karma) and defilement 
(klesa) arising from their own mind, and came into the power of those 
two”.8 He goes on to explain the reason as the habit-energy (T. bag chags, 
S. vasand) handed down from beginningless time, and continues, “Although 
they had a body comparable to the Illusory Body (mdyd-deha) they did not 
know the Illusory Samadhi (mayopama-samädhi) through hearing (srutä) 
and ‘pondering’ (cinta), and could not comprehend it through ‘creative 
contemplation’ (bhavana). Hence they wander in phenomenal existence”.9 
In further additions to the standard account, Tson-kha-pa calls the earth 
essence also “ambrosia” (amrta),!? and he calls the separation into male 
and female the division of means (upäya) and insight (prajñā), 
respectively, !1 

The usual Buddhist formulations of the Path, such as the Eightfold 
Noble Path, are not obviously applicable to the legend, as classically stated. 
They aim to eliminate the domination of action and corruption. Why try to 
rebecome the first eon men? These men were pure only through lack of 
temptations, which had been removed by the dissolution of the inferior 
worlds and which would inevitably reappear with the new manifestation 
of those worlds. Yet even the old non-Tantric Buddhism can be interpreted 
with steps that inversely match the successive periods of the legend, 
especially with Tson-kha-pa’s word “amrta”. (1) A devotee renounces his 
property to become a monk. He reverses the last period, characterized by 
private ownership of rice plots. (2) The monk is supposed to regulate his 
way of life, including moderation in food and adherence to celibacy 
(brahmacarya). He reverses the eon characterized by coarse morsel food 
and the division into sexes. Also, according to the Hindu epic Mahabharata, 
the god Brahma adopted the form of a swan and said: “... I know that 
self-restraint is the door of immortality (amrta). I impart to you this 


7. Ibid., 20a-5,6. By “Abhidharma” Tson-kha-pa presumably means both the 
Abhidharma-kosa (both Kkarikas and auto-commentary by Vasubandhu) and the 
Abhidharma-samuccaya of Asahga. To this one should probably add ‚the further 
commentary оп the Vasubandhu work by Prince Yasomitra. By “Vibhanga Ton 
ра presumably means the Vinaya-vibhanga in the Tibetan Kanjur and its commentary by 
Vinitadeva. Tson-kha-pa by this remark indicates that such a teaching is not found in 
either the Abhidharma or Vinaya literature. 

8. Don gsal, 20a-6, ff. 

9. Ibid., 20b-2,3. 

10. Ibid., 30b-4,5. 

П. Ibid., 31a-6 to 31b-1. 


28 Introductions 


hallowed (brahman) secret: there is no state superior to the human".12 
(3) This man then practices yoga and various samädhis which develop 
certain inner resources and which are supposed to win a command over 
subtle elements.!3 He reverses the second period, characterized by sub- 
sistence on subtle morsel food, and comes to taste the “primeval earth”, 
the “deathless” or “ambrosia” (amrta)—while still a man of Jambudvipa, 
(4) His mind separates from the “‘deathless” and is freed or liberated. He 
feeds on joy, as did the men of the first eon, but he has arrived at this 
comparable stage together with a discipline that eliminates the pro- 
pensities of hatred, lust, and delusion. This stage is called Nirvàna by the 
Buddhists, Moksa by the Hindus. 

However, Mahayana Buddhism claims to have a higher attainment than 
this liberation, the ideal of early Buddhism. Later the aim was to become 
a Complete Buddha, with the three bodies called the Dharmakaya, 
Sambhogakaya, and Nirmänakäya, who is restricted neither to the 
quiescent realm nor to the phenomenal world. In accordance with a passage 
cited above from Tson-kha-pa, one must reach by discipline a condition 
comparable to the first eon men and have in addition the Illusory Samadhi. 
In Tson-kha-pa’s view, one must purify birth, death, and the intermediate 
state by yogas concordant with the way the men of the first eon experienced 
those three phases during the interval between when they were still “first 
eon men” and when they had the ordinary bodies of period no. 3. (Of 
course, in Indian belief the men of later periods are those very men.) He 
says, “Contemplation of the Dharmakäya is the purification of death, 
because, briefly speaking, the Dharmakaya is equivalent to the experience 
by the men of the first eon of the clear light of death”.14 Again, “con- 
templation of the Sambhogakaya is the purification of the intermediate 
state", and “contemplation of the Nirmänakäya is the purification of 
birth”.15 

Tson-kha-pa writes, “Also, the Paficakrama states, ‘The Sambhogakaya 
as well as the illusion of conventional truth—that is the Gandharva-sattva’, 
making the Sambhogakaya equivalent to the intermediate state [body]; 
hence one should have no doubt that the generation of the Primeval Lord 
(*adinatha) is an element equivalent to the intermediate state".!6 The 
Dharmakaya is also associated with death and with comparable states 
such as coitus [union of updya and prajiä] in a passage of the Mukhägama 


12. Critical Edition, Santi P., 288.20. 


13. For further information, one may refer to Mircea Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and 
Freedom (New York, 1958) 

14. Don gsal, 25a-4. 

15. Ibid., 25b-1. 


in this 
16. Ibid., 26a-1,2. To understand Tson-kha-pa’s remark one should know that in th 
erature a gandharva-sattva means a being of the intermediate state. 


lit 


Buddhist Genesis and the Tantric Tradition 29 


quoted in Tson-kha-pa’s Snags rim chen mo.11 The Nirmanakaya is 
illustrated in some Tantric ägama by the Avatars of Visnu interpreted as 
intra-uterine stages. 18 

There are two phases of the Anuttara-yoga-tantra—the Stage of Genera- 
tion (utpatti-krama) and the Stage of Completion (sampanna-krama), 
respectively the phase of the path (märga) and the phase of the fruit (phala). 
Tson-kha-pa says, “Therefore, it is a mistake not to finish during the phase 
of the first Stage (krama) the part consisting in the various elements 
concordant with the three things, birth, death, and the intermediate 
state".19 Hence, one must meditate consistently with the three bodies of 
the Buddha in the phase of the path; in the phase of the fruit one gains 
those bodies, called the “three bodies of the fruit”.20 

It would be difficult, perhaps impossible, to determine how old such 
teachings are. However, the above should indicate the profundity of that 
old Buddhist legend. 


17. Cf. Alex Wayman, “Studies in Yama and Mara," Indo-Iranian Journal (1959), 
p. 57. 

18. Ibid., pp. 70-72. 

19. Don gsal, 26a-4. 

20. Ibid., 26a-3. 


4 


ANALOGICAL THINKING IN THE BUDDHIST 
TANTRAS 


The employment of systematic analogies is frequent in the Vedic 
literature, from the Rig-Veda itself, down to the Upanisads, the oldest of 
which (such as the Chändogya and the Brhadäranyaka) precede the rise of 
Buddhism. A threefold symbolism is frequent in the Vedas, where all the 
gods were included in one or another of the three realms: heaven, atmos- 
phere, and earth. A fourfold system had also become popular, with one of 
the four representing the perfect state. For example, of the four chief 
priests for the great Srauta ceremonies, it was the Brahman or high priest 
who knew all three Vedas and protected the ceremony from hostile 
demons, while the other three priests each knew one Veda. In the case of 
the celebrated Purusa hymn of the Rig-Veda, this glorified Person is three- 
fourths outside our world and one-fourth in it. Of the four Ages, the 
Golden Age has four parts, the successive ones three, two, and one parts 
(or "fourths") and are correspondingly degenerate. In the Mändukya- 
Upanisad, the waking state is the first fourth; dream, the second fourth; 
deep sleep the third fourth, and the Self (ätman) the fourth and called “the 
fourth" (turiya). Of course, the examples of the threefold and fourfol 
systems could be multiplied at length. The fivefold system became popular 
in the Upanisads, for example, in the Taittiriya-Upanisad, where 
microcosm-macrocosm analogy is presented in terms of the fivefoldness © 
the world and of the individual. j 

Both threefold and fivefold systems of analogy are prevalent ш : p 
Buddhist Tantras; and because early Buddhism does not go in for this kin 
of thinking—even though there are many numerical categories i” 


30 


Analogical Thinking in the Buddhist Tantras 31 


Buddhism—one may say that the Buddhist Tantras in this feature of 
systematic analogies constitute a development in Buddhism akin to Vedic 
formulations, especially of the later Upanisads. The threefold correspond- 
ences in the Buddhist Tantras are especially in terms of the Body, Speech, 
and Mind—the “three mysteries” of the Buddha: 


Body — mudrä (gesture) 
Speech — mantra (incantation) 
Mind — samadhi (deep concentration) 


The fivefold correspondences go with the set of five Buddhas. For example, 
the Hevajratantra associates the five Buddhas with the five candidates for 
training in accordance with their dominant vice: 


Vairocana — Delusion 
Aksobhya — Hatred 

Amitàbha — Lust 
Ratnasambhava — Slander (paisunya) 
Amoghasiddhi — Jealousy (irsya) 


But the Buddhist Tantras do not lack the fourfold correspondences. 
They are especially used to correlate steps of training. For example, the 
Anuttarayoga Tantra has a division into the Stage of Generation (utpatti- 
krama) and Stage of Completion (sampanna-krama). Each of these has its 
own explanation of the four mudräs: karma-mudra, dharma-mudra, 
samaya-mudrä, and mahä-mudrä. Here the word “mudra” is employed in 
its more abstract significance as a “seal”. 

In the classical period, the Indian philosophical schools debated the 
extent to which analogy is a valid source of knowledge, or authoritative; 
and the Realists (followers of the Nyaya school) accepted analogy as an 
independent valid source of knowledge. In agreement with them, 
Candrakirti, the great Mádhyamika commentator of the Prasangika 
school, accepted in his Prasannapada (Chap. One) all four sources of 
knowledge (pramäna) in practical life, namely, direct perception 
(pratyaksa), inference (anumana), testimony (Sabda)—which is the lineage 
of trustworthy persons (äptägama)—and analogy (upamäna). Now, in 
Mkhas grub rje’s, the position is laid down that the philosophical view- 
point of all sections of the Tantras is the Prásaügika. This means that all 
four Tantra divisions, the Kriya, Carya, Yoga, and Anuttarayoga, have 
the Präsangika-Mädhyamika for a philosophical base. One way Mkhas 
grub rje’s statement can be understood is that the Tantras accept the 
Realist’s position of analogy as an independent source of knowledge. If 
this is a basic reason, it would still be valid even for those tantric works 


32 Introductions 


that include much Yogäcära terminology, such as the “store consciousness” 
(alayavijfiána); for in such a case this terminology from another School 
could be considered as part of the syncretic character of the Tantras. 

Those four tantric classes themselves constitute systems of analogy, 
being explained in terms of the candidates for whom those Tantras are 
expressed as well as in terms of the deities which principally represent the 
particular class of Tantra. This is the orthodox Tibetan explanation 
derived here from Tson-kha-pa’s Snags rim chen mo. There is an unortho- 
dox Tibetan explanation found in Smrti’s Vajravidarand-ndma-dharani- 
vrtti in the Tibetan Tanjur, Rgyud section, which relates the candidates in 
the four Buddhist systems of exegesis to kinds of washing. 

In an article “Totemic Beliefs in the Buddhist Tantras,"! I prepared a 
table for classification in clans, consisting of a number of such analogical 
correspondences which I selected from my reading in this literature, 
especially the Anuttarayoga Tantra, over a number of уеагѕ.2 

The rationale for the correspondences on a given line of the table is 


1. History of Religions, Vol. 1, No. 1 (Summer 1961), pp. 81, ff. ? 

2. Many such textual correspondences are presented by way of identification with 
the five winds, prana, apana, udana, samäna, and vyana, which in the given order are the 
natures of the five Buddhas, Aksobhya, and so on, of the Table. This is the order in 
which they are explained in the collected works, Klon rdol bla ma, sec. Ga (Peking ed.), 
29a-4 ff., identified with the Buddhas, elements, and bodily locations. The correspondence 
of Buddhas to knowledges is that given in the Advayavajra-Samgraha (‘‘Gaekwad 
Oriental Series,” Vol. XC), p. 36; this is consistent with Mkhas grub rje’s. I gave a 
reference for the Buddha-skandha equation in my article "Contributions Regarding the 
Thirty-two Characteristics of the Great Person," Liebenthal Festschrift, p. 245, n. 10. 
The identification with the ambrosias is cited in a later subsection, “The Five 
Ambrosias.”’ The identification of Buddhas with vortices of elements is іп a Sanskrit 
passage of the Vajramala, as quoted in the Vajrajapakrama of the Paficakrama, 
ed. de La Vallée Poussin. For the clan names cf. Snellgrove, Hevajra-tantra, Part I, 
P. 128. The correspondence with sensory domains is part of a passage in Tson-kha-pa 3 
collected works, Vol. Ca (Lhasa ed.), “Dkah gnad," 45-1 ff. While I explained the 
purity of the sensory domains as female appearances of the Buddhas, strictly speaking, 
according to the latter text, this viewpoint falls in the category “purity of insight 
(ргајла)” (Т. ses rab kyi тат dag); while this purity can be treated also as the five 
Buddhas themselves through the category “purity of means (upaya)" (T. thabs kyi rnam 
dag). In some contexts the correspondences with “Воду” (last line in Table) are [еш 5 
in the crown of the head rather than throughout the body. This is the case with E 
column "'Superintendence," where the normal order would be (1) body, (2) Se 
(3) mind, (4) acts, and (5) merits, co-ordinated with crown of the head, and so on Boe 
to privities, associated respectively with the five germ syllables Om, Ah, Нат, Svä- the 
This set of correspondences is found in a Tantra (Tohoku Catalog No. 453), e 
Advayasamatavijaya, Derge Kanjur, Rgyud Пит, Cha, 240-2 and 241a-1. While son 
of the above references are made to native Tibetan texts, there is no doubt that all the 2 
Correspondences are drawn ultimately from the Tantras and Tantric comment?" 
originally in Sanskrit and translated into Tibetan as available in the Kanjur and T ай ^ 
For example, the correspondences of Buddhas to winds and bodily locations is foun ae 
Ratnaraksita’s commentary called the Padmini (Tohoku Catalog No. 1420), Den A 
Tanjur, Rgyud, Wa, fol. 26. However, the native Tibetan works are sometimes Ше 2 
convenient sources for utilizing and understanding these materials. When Sy 
ences found in these or other tests are inconsistent with the Table, this situation freque 


Analogical Thinking in the Buddhist Tantras 33 


TABLE 1 
TANTRIC PATHS 
дд. 


Orthodox Explanation 
es Е 


TANTRA CANDIDATES DEITIES 

eee 

Kriya Those who delight mainly in external Laughing 
ritual over inner samadhi. 

Carya Those who delight in external ritual and Mutually gazing 
inner samadhi equally. 

Yoga Those who delight predominantly in inner Holding hands 
samadhi over external ritual. 

Anuttarayoga Those who delight in inner samadhi United 
completely. 


Unorthodox Explanation 


TANTRA CANDIDATES WASHING WITH VOIDNESS 
Kriya Sravakas (auditors) EU washing purifies 
ody. i : 

Carya Pratyekabuddhas (=rsis, seers) Inder washing purifies 
speech. : Е 

Yoga Yogäcärins (mind-only school) Secret washing purifies 
mind. 

Anuttarayoga Mādhyamikas Reality washing by 


diamond-like samādhi 
unifies body, speech, and 
mind. 


harder to establish. There is obviously some arbitrariness; yet there do 
seem to be parallels. For example, in the case of Aksobhya’s clan, water 
when untroubled (aksobhya) serves as a mirror, hence the mirror-like 
knowledge. Regarding the association of perception (vijfidna) or mind 
(citta) with water, these are compared with the ocean or its waves and with 
a mirror in the Lankävatära-sütra. Later we shall see that initiation 
(abhiseka) attended with “sprinkling” is performed under the auspices of the 
Buddha Aksobhya, who is also the “ambrosia” urine. As to association 
with purity of sounds, this may be due to the fact that the water disk is 
located in the heart, where, in the Hindu terminology, is found the cakra 
Anähata (the unstruck sound), that is to say, the place where sound is 
self-originated. For the corresponding candidate of hatred, this association 
is clarified in my work in press, Yoga of the Guhyasamajatantra. T his has 
to do with the uninterrupted character of the stream of consciousness, 


Ec ES I Spee re en 


results from positing a Buddha other than Vairocana for the center of me es j 
and thus according that other Buddha the “Knowledge of the Dee eee rom ons 
Анаш). Furthermore, a yogic attainment involving the moyemen: 0 а иш 
center to another naturally changes the correspondences to bodily locations. 


Ápoq no (nipippui 


-ugnoiuj (n5) -doyp) Weal , JOyeUIWINT 
sulog (рурур) әс̧ Apog jueuroxgq jeinyeu 9U} JO (vd!) wiog -[Deup, euesoleA (ewos-sny}) eyedeur 
; -BL 10 '([peu«) ene? 
[әли ш (pup) Aynp jo o1np (DADYSUIDS) «5592215 Sut[rey 
sa[qI3UEL YSIP рш soy ysay ueunH -2201d 2U) JO SUOIPAHON -UN,, "uppiseugoury (a3pa[d) eAeueg 
Jo {иоцое [EN311) 
euney] '(plo«s) е8рецу 
2 10011) (424) 9A1 (pufuips) «34311 SSO] 
S Sojse, ш SIP әп, yoseds uauaŞ -BUIWILIOSICT seop]  -punog,, eyquyiwy (snjo]) euipeq 
ә 
ES SontAnd ш (pina) (риррәл)  „S|9M2f Jo oounoS,, 
8 SIOpO SIP yeg SIW poojg Ayıyenba JO sgul[o9 d TAeyquieseugey (PA) Buel 
= 
= гәч ш (01119) (oupufia) «u0 po[qnoj 
spunog SIP 19EM ршу un әз-лолир] suondooleq  -unou[,, ®Ацдо$уу an 
Jo 3[oq1opunu) elfeA 
aaa ee aa EE N rs 
NIVWOd яѕуа SLI аму  (VNYHISIHGV) (уллу) (VNYNI) (VHANVXS) vHdanga SAYN NY'TO 
AMOSNZS INSWHT2 H8ONSGN3.L vISONHWNV яоазтмомх S1VO3HD5V 
dO ALIUNd AO ALIUNd -NIUIANS ALITVNOSYId 


ضس ا ا 


SNV1D NI NOILVOIISSYVID 
c элеу], 


34 


Analogical Thinking in the Buddhist Tantras 35 


mystically called “hatred” by hostility to cause and effect. Another inter- 
pretation is found in Buddhaguhya’s commentary (extant in Tibetan) on 
the Mahävairocana-sütra (Chap. One), which among a long list of mentali- 
ties includes the “stream mentality" (chu bo’i sems). Buddhaguhya explains 
this one as independent of the two extremes, where the two are nihilism 
and eternalism, and that this mentality takes recourse to natures which 
avoid those two extremes. In this sense, the middle path of Buddhism is a 
“hatred” toward the extremes of nihilism or eternalism, of existence or 
non-existence. But Buddhaguhya also points out that the stream flows with 
dependence on the two extremes of eternalism and nihilism (in the sense of 
two banks). Further down the list, he comments on the “water mentality” 
(chwi sems) as the one which adheres to washing off all unvirtuous thoughts. 
This water mentality is consistent with Aksobhya’s initiatory water as well 
as with the mirror-like water that reflects the moon as it is. 


5 


THE NATURE OF BUDDHIST ESOTERICISM 


Esotericism of the Buddhist Tantras begins with what are called the 
“three mysteries of the Buddha,” but these could also be translated the 
“three secrets of the Buddha”. As Padmavajra explains them in his 
Tantrarthavatara Commentary (Toh. 2502, Derge ed., 147a-2, ff.), the 
secret Body, Speech, and Mind of the Tathagatas, are these: 


Secret of Body: Whatever form is necessary to tame the living 
beings. 

Secret of Speech: Speech exactly appropriate to the lineage of the 
creature, as in the language of the yaksa-s, etc. 

Secret of Mind: Knowing all things as they really are. 


Since the candidate aims to correlate his body, speech, and mind with those 
three of the Buddha, at once Padmavajra’s simple explanation shows the 
limitation of some Western expositions of the Tantra. For examp 
S. B. Dasgupta, An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism, devotes Chap. 
(The Element of Esoteric Yoga) to the tantric theory of the body, ШШШ 
that this is the fundamental stress of the Buddhist tantrists, that they = 
to find the truth along with perfect bliss in the body, on the basıs of 
arrangement of cakra-s and so on. Then Agehananda Bharati, Ti he Т: t : 
Tradition, has his longest chapter (also No. 5) on mantra, claiming t 2 
this is "the chief instrument of tantrism.” John Blofeld, The de 
Mysticism of Tibet is on the right track with his brief section “The п ns 
play of body, speech, and mind,” where the body does prostration, 


in 
makes gestures (mudrä), etc.; speech utters mantra-s; and ШЕШ 
visualizes the deity. 


36 


The Nature of Buddhist Esotericism 37 


As to the classification “secret,” I brought forth an explanation in the 
study included in this work, “Female Energy and Symbolism in the 
Buddhist Tantras.” This is Anandagarbha’s point that a tantric teaching 
is labelled "secret" when there is a restriction on teaching it to others. 
This sense of the word is deeply impressed on those who take the tantric 
initiations, especially the Hierophant's Initiation (vajrácárya-abhiseka). 
It should be noted, as will be justified in my treatment of the meaning of 
initiation, that the mere assignment to a disciple of a single deity to medi- 
tate upon, along with praises of that deity to memorize and repeat—is not 
counted as “‘secret” in Anandagarbha’s sense. 

So far my reading in tantric texts has found no clearer light on the 
esoteric than is in the extensive commentary by that same Anandagarbha 
(a prolific commentator on the Yoga Tantra class) entitled Sri-Paramádi- 
tika on the Tantra portion called Sri-Paramädya-mantrakalpakhanda- 
nama. Whereas D. L. Snellgrove, The Hevajra Tantra, Part I, pp. 42-43, 
thinks that the Tantra he worked on is symbolizing the sexual act 
(maithuna), we shall learn—at least from Anandagarbha—that the vocabu- 
lary of the sexual act is used to symbolize the secret, which is not the same 
as physical sex. At issue is a certain verse found in the Tantra (Tibetan 
Kanjur, PTT, Vol. 5, p. 172-3), which that Tantra prefaces by saying this 
is “the Reality of the hand symbol of Sri-Paramádya." I translate the 
verse as follows: 


The great weapon of the great lord who has the supreme success 
(siddhi) that is great, is said to be the five-pronged thunderbolt 
which is the great reality of the five secrets. 


Anandagarbha’s extensive commentary on this verse (PTT. уо 73, 
р. 127-5 to р. 130), starts by explaining that the “supreme success” 1S the 
siddhi of Sri-Vajrasattva (the glorious diamond being). The “great lord 
is Mahavajradhara. The great reality of the five secrets amounts to the 
(1) bodhicitta (mind of enlightenment), (2) understanding it, (3) its realiza- 
tion, (4) its non-abandonment, and (5) the knowledge characterized by 
attainment; and these are represented by five goddesses, who are seals 
(mudra) arising from the Body, Speech, and Mind diamonds (vajra) % 
Mahävajradhara. Observe that the source is again the “three mysteries O 
the Buddha.” 


Now, the intriguing feature of this cla 
refers to as the “five secrets” (gsari ba Ina). Why not call the goddesses 


“secret”, or the subsequent commentarial explanations! But, no, it is 
precisely what non-tantric Buddhist texts would take em a topic of open 
discourse, that this commentary decides to label “‘secret”—such things = 
the mind of enlightenment, understanding it, and so on! But what do 


ssification is what the commentary 


38 Introductions 


those five have in common to justify calling them “secret” ? Only, that like 
the secret of female sex, they are inward, and so they can be repres 
five goddesses. 

Also, the commentary frequently speaks of the four goddesses, by 
leaving out Vajrasattva, who is ordinarily considered a male deity, 
However, his inclusion in the group of five can be justified by his dual 
nature of male-female, as will be shown by the explanation. I have made 
a tabulation from Anandagarbha’s data, showing the five secrets along 


with the five goddess group and initial commentarial explanations— 
which should begin to clarify this matter. 


ented by 


TABLE 3 
THE GREAT REALITY OF FIVE SECRETS 


= 2:002: ыЕ 


THE FIVE SECRETS FIVE "GODDESS" GROUP EXPLANATION 
1. Bodhicitta (mind of Vajrasattva Who has both the great pleasure 
enlightenment) (Diamond being) and the unwasted vajra 
T (diamond). : 
2. Understanding it Rägavajrä Who pleases Vajrasattva’s mind 


(Diamond of passion) so he will not swerve from the 
Thought of Enlightenment. 


3. Its realization Vajrakilikila The basic pledge to arouse 
(Diamond joyful attachment to the great pleasure 
utterance) and unwasted vajra. + 

4. Its non-abandonment Vajrasmrti She is “Diamond memory 
(Diamond memory) because unshattered by victory 

over lust, etc. 

5. The knowledge Vajrakämesvari She, the “Diamond queen of 
characterized by (Diamond queen of desires” is the sensory objects 
attainment desires) that are materialized by the lord 


Vajrasattva. 


OOOO NS ecl ouo ro pei FE 


It follows from the explanation of Vajrasattva that his inclusion in the five 
goddess group is simply because he has the “sreat pleasure" which must be 
counted as female in contrast with the “unwasted vajra” which is male. 
This is the closest this literature comes to the **passive-active" polarity. 
It is because Vajrasattva is androgyne that both men and women can 
practice the Tantras as yogins and yoginis. 

Furthermore, Anandagarbha (op. cit. p. 129-3) identifies the set of four 
goddesses with Tathägatas in the sense that each goddess confers the 
diadem initiation going with the family (or lineage) of that Tathagata. 


Ragavajra — . Aksobhya 
Kilikilà —  Ratnasambhava 
Vajrasmrti —  Amitàbha 


Vajrakämesyai — Amoghasiddhi 


The Nature of Buddhist Esotericism 39 


Subsequently Anandagarbha (op. cit., p. 130-2, 3) refers to this group of 
four as the “secret mandala” (gsan ba’i dkyil ’khor); calls this the “city of 
liberation”; and says the word “secret” in this mandala context means 
that the body of the lord dwells amidst the set of diamond goddesses. He 
means that Vajrasattva is surrounded by the four goddesses. In this case, 
the word “secret” again has a sexual meaning, now referring to the privacy 
of the queen harem. But it is not the sexual language which is secret, rather 
what it symbolizes. The real secret is that the mind of enlightenment (the 
bodhicitta) has enticed the four lovers called “understanding it,” “its 
realization,” “its non-abandonment,” and “the knowledge characterized 
by attainment.” And a further secret is that the “mind of enlightenment” 
itself contains another lover called “great pleasure.” This, then, is the 
spiritual orgy, along with the magical song and instrumental music, the 
flowers and incense (op. cit., 130-1, 2). 

The critic of the Tantras could now object, urging a uselessness of such 
sexual symbolism. He could say that it is a fine thing to have the mind of 
enlightenment, the understanding of it, and so on; but is it not a kind of 
charade to take each element of the unquestionably spiritual ascension and 
disguise it with the rich vocabulary of goddesses, offerings, and the like, 
so the commentarial discussion gets bogged down in the goddess discussion 
rather than in the more legitimate discourse on the understanding, etc. of 
the mind of enlightenment! The answer is that some Buddhist non-tantric 
books do exactly what this critic would enjoin. They treat the mind of 
enlightenment and further elements of the Bodhisattva path without any 
tantric terminology. A good example is the Dasabhümika-sütra (the 
scripture on the ten stages of the Bodhisattva). An intelligent scholar, Har 
Dayal, upon studying this kind of literature for a London doctoral thesis, 
wrote The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature. This shows 
that one can also become bogged down in non-tantric terminology, 
because in the end the learned author labelled the Bodhisattva practicea 
“Doctrine”. But the Tantras have a premise that the actual pursuance by 
the Bodhisattva of his enlightenment goal is akin to sex. That is to say, the 
understanding of the mind of enlightenment is a lover. And because this 
goddess loves Vajrasattva’s mind of enlightenment, he, enchanted by her 
love, does not swerve from this Thought of Enlightenment. | 

In my forthcoming Yoga of the Guhyasamajatantra I have ш 
explanation of Lilavajra (the teacher of Buddhaérijiiana) about three kin 5 
of "secrets": The first, the “self-existent”, is a secret element located in the 
stream of consciousness, certainly by the commentarial indications to be 
identified with the “embryo of the Tathagata”, the potentiality of Buddha- 
hood. The second is the “pregnant” (зраз pa), and this is the kind MM. 
conferred by the guru when the disciple is initiated; that is, when ua 
disciple is prepared through initiation, the tantric secrets become in 


40 Introductions 


disciple the “pregnant”. The third, the profound, is conferred by oneself. 
Here again the terminology of “secret” brings in the female element, first 
with the seed in her, next with her pregnancy, and last with the profundity 
of insight (the goddess). 

Tson-kha-pa’s Sbas don (p. 11-5 to 12-1) presents a list of seven topics 
which should not be made clear to persons who do not have lineage in this 
(tantric) vehicle. He says the list is taken from Lva-ba-pa’s commentary 
(presumably Toh. No. 1401, the Sädhananidäna-sricakrasamvara-näma- 
райјіка) and is practically the same as the list in the Samputottara (in fact, 


PTT. Vol. 2, p. 283-3,4). He slightly expands each item of the seven, 
as follows: 


1. The secret domain of reality, i.e. the domain of the ргаўйа which 
is reality. 

2. The secret circle of the Victor, i.e. the circle of deities. 

3. The secret “pregnant” truth, ie. as in the Samputottara, the 
illustrious pregnant things. 

4. The secret which is the secret lotus, i.e. the lotus in the müla-cakra 
as well as the lotus of the mudra. 

5. The secret delight by the seed, i.e. the delight engendered from 
the dripping of bodhicitta from the HAM syllable at the crown of 
the head. 

6. The secret which is combining all, i.e. combining the secrets of 
vajra and lotus, etc. 

7. The secret uninterrupted bliss, i.e. entering the single uninterrup- 
ted taste of both the objective reality and the subjective. 


This appears to be a comprehensive list of items which should not be made 
clear to immature, i.e. uninitiated persons, who do not have the vows and 
pledges going with the higher initiations. Explaining these items to such 
persons constitutes the seventh fundamental transgression among the 
fourteen (cf. Mkhas grub rje's, рр. 328-29)—the one which is called 
"mountains". 

Tson-kha-pa (Sbas don, p. 12-1) goes on to set forth what is meant by 
explaining such secrets and says that there are two ways of explaining—on® 
according to the “hinted meaning” (neyärtha, dran ba’i don), the other 
according to the "evident meaning” (nitärtha, nes pa’i don). For an example 
of how Näro-päda explains in both ways, see the later essay (chap. 10) оп 
Tantric Ritual. 5 

It should be clear from the above that a Buddhist Tantra is not just 4 
series of secrets. In fact, most of those secret topics appertain to the body 
of tantric literature called the Anuttarayoga Tantra; and even in the works 
of this class one could find many statements that do not fit—at least on the 


The Nature of Buddhist Esotericism 4] 


surface—among these “secrets”. Still, it is reasonable that the Anuttara- 
yoga Tantra should contain so much material to be labelled “secret” 
because the foregoing chapter on Analogical Thinking shows that this 
Tantra division is meant for candidates “who delight in inner samadhi 
completely,” and the “secrets” of this chapter are mainly those which are 
oriented inward and so have the secrecy, metaphorically, of the female sex. 

With this new light on the "secrets" it would be profitable for the reader 
to have an evaluation of the book, S. B. Dasgupta, An Introduction to 
Tantric Buddhism. The author had utilized a number of Sanskrit manu- 
scripts of Buddhist Tantras belonging to the Anuttarayoga class. Therefore, 
he found abundant information on such matters as the cakra-s in the body 
and what he calls the “ѕехо-уоріс practice." In fact, he generally favored 
the kind of data which reminded him of the Hindu Tantra and which he 
could therefore relate to his previous knowledge. Naturally, all his extracts 
are valid passages, even though, as the present researches show, the 
continuous line of teachers provides a somewhat different approach than 
what one can obtain by unguided random selection. His work is mistitled, 
because it is certainly not “an introduction to Tantric Buddhism.” But 
when he included much of the material of this book in his more mature 
work, Obscure Religious Cults, the material cannot be criticized that way, 
because now there is no misrepresentation of constituting an “introduc- 
tion.” 

If not those tantric “secrets” themselves, one thing should be clear: the 
sexual symbolism is not intended to dismay the unworthy, or to throw 
anyone off the track in an effort to conceal a secret. Rather, as symbolism 
should be, it is intimately related, as a kind of metaphorical extension, to 
the very facts pointed to by the symbolism. In ordinary human terms, It 1s 
no secret to anyone that he or she is a sexual being in the sense of having 
sexual attributes; a person does not have to be told this. But a woman does 
not know the secret of her mysterious processes for bringing a new life into 
the world, simply by having them. Someone has to tell her about them. 
She could be told that in India the intrauterine processes were calculated 
by ten lunar months, which appear to have been the prototype of the ten 
Bodhisattva stages. More generally, to the extent something is concealed 
because it is internal, it is not known simply by reason of its possession. 
Here again, the sexual symbolism is not the secret. The disciple does not 
know the tantric secrets, even though they are within him; and so thg guru 
is absolutely essential to guide the disciple to knowledge, the disciple’s own 
insight (prajrià). The disciple develops this in the sequence of hearing, 
pondering, and cultivating, while becoming a "fit vessel” (snod run, si 
Tibetan). Such is the meaning of coordinating his body, speech, and min 
to the “three mysteries of the Buddha.” : 

However it ehe be asked if it is not the case that the tantric tx 


42 Introductions 


themselves are secret. There is little doubt that the main texts in the 
revealed sense, now preserved in Tibetan translation in the Kanjur, were 
handed down for some centuries orally; and this sort of transmission 
ensured a restriction to an esoteric group. But the principal texts, usually in 
verse ($loka) form for memorizing purposes, were not strictly secret to the 
masses of people, but were unknown or inconsequential to them. Down the 
centuries, there would have been a relatively small number of persons who 
sought the tantric “secrets” and were turned down. These tantric texts 
were positively secret to the very persons who memorized them, if memoriz- 
ing is all they did with those texts. The reason is that the Tantra is essential- 
ly a practice, for which directions are required. A text giving such directions 
is not sufficiently detailed when written in the traditional Indian form of 
summary verses. Therefore, the guru had to add commentarial expla- 
nations. He would fill in those necessary details omitted by the basic texts, 
and fill them in for the disciples who had been conferred the necessary 
initiations and taken the vows. His explanations were thus secret in the 
sense that they could be withheld, but the basic texts had the secrecy of 
obscurity, just as any manual, on whatever topic, would be obscure if 
written in too abbreviated a form to permit anyone to follow through with 
the necessary actions. 

Of course, now certain Buddhist tantric texts have become more 
available to Westerners. The Sanskrit text of the Guhyasamäjatantra was 
edited and published. The Hevajratantra was edited and translated into 
English. In this sense they are not secret in the sense of being withheld 
from the reader. But they are still secret, if one can believe the commen- 
tators, in that reading these Tantras still conveys little of what the tantrists 
themselves are doing in the drawn-out rites, with their multitude of details, 
chanting, and so on; and little to imagine of what the best commentaries 
have to say in amplification of the individual words. In the case of a tantric 
text, it will always be a mistake for any reader to think that his proven 
intelligence (by university degrees and the like) or his proven intuition (by 
life experience and the like) will enable him to penetrate the meaning of a 
basic Buddhist Tantra text, because the meaning is in the doing of it, and 


there is no substitute for someone showing how to do it. That someone 
of course is the guru. 


FOUNDATIONS OF THE 
BUDDHIST TANTRA 


Just as the milk of lioness 

Is not to be put in a vessel of earth, 
So also the Great Yoga Tantra is 
Not to be given to unworthy vessels. 


Abhayakara’s Vajravali, Sec. 50 


6 


DIVINITY ACCORDING TO THE 
BUDDHIST TANTRAS 


For the numerous deities of the Buddhist Tantras, the best descriptive 
coverage is in Benoytosh Bhattacharyya, The Indian Buddhist Iconography. 
The luxurious growth of these cults is bewildering in complexity. Therefore, 
some general explanations of a unifying type are in order. 

Näro-päda, in his Vajrapada-sära-samgraha-panjika (PTT. Vol. 54, 
p. 11-2), inaugurates his deity chapter by two citations to explain the word 
“divinity” (devata). The (Kdlacakra work) Vimalaprabhä states: Because 
conventional ecstasy has arisen in the body’s nature of five elements, one 
speaks of “divinity.” And the Sri-Vajramrta-tantra states: Why does one 
speak of “divinity” ? In the body is located the body possessor; in order to 
comprehend, there is the “comprehender”; in order to comprehend one- 
self, there is divinity. For that reason, one speaks of “divinity”. 

Naro-pada explains divinity in terms of the one who achieved ecstasy 
in the body (the co-natal joy) and who comprehended, i.e. was enlightened. 
He implies the Buddha under the title “Tathagata”, because this is the 
source of all the Buddhist Tantric deities, or the dominion in which they 
serve. Mkhas grub rje, in his commentary on the Hevajratantra called 
briefly the Brtag 'grel (Lhasa Collected Works, Vol. Ja, folio 1042-3, ff.), 
has a useful exposition, which I shall further summarize and partially 
paraphrase as follows: д 

(a) Meaning of the expression “Tathagata”. The Tathagata has the two 
collections, of Knowledge (jfidna) and of Merit (punya). Through Knowl- 
edge, i.e. the Insight (prajfid) indissoluble from Thusness (tathata), he has 
gone into the single taste of Thusness. Through Merit, he has come 
(dgata), i.e. returned from Thusness, to the cycle of existence (samsära) 


45 


46 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


with the formal body (rüpa-käya). Accordingly, he is called “tathägata” 
(“thus-gone,” “thus-come’’). 

(b) Families (kula) of the Tathagata. All the diverse appearances of the 
Tathagata can be grouped in families, frequently spoken of as six kinds, 
namely, Vajra, Tathagata, Ratna, Padma, Karma, and Vajrasattva 
families, because whatever the Buddhist deity, it can always be counted or 
included in these families. (Here the terminology “Tathagata family” is 
differentiated from the over-all Tathagata in the manner explained in 
Mkhas grub rje’s). By incorporating the Vajrasattva into the Vajra family, 
there are five. If the Ratna family is incorporated into the Tathagata 
family, the result is the “Thunderbolt of Body" (käya-vajra). If the Karma 
family is incorporated into the Padma family, the result is the “Thunder- 
bolt of Speech” (vag-vajra). The Vajra family is separately taken as the 
“Thunderbolt of Mind” (citta-vajra). The deities are grouped into five 
families because they are the purity of the five elements of the body (cf. 
Naro-pada’s above remark) and the purity of the five personality aggre- 
gates (skandha). They are also reduced to three families because the 
practitioner’s stream of elements (samtäna) have the threefold grouping of 
body, speech, and mind, which the tantric path aims to coordinate with the 
Buddha’s three mysteries of Body, Speech, and Mind. 

(c) The progenitors of the Buddha families. The names of the Buddha 
progenitors common to the Buddhist Tantras are Vairocana, Aksobhya, 
Amoghasiddhi, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, and Vajrasattva. Furthermore, 
certain Buddhist Tantras replace those names with others. For example, 
the Hevajratantra has the appellations Brahma, etc. Mkhas grub rje 
explains the progenitors in terms of those names as follows: 


The Buddha Vairocana is called Brahma. The Tibetan saris rgyas 
translates the Sanskrit “Buddha”. Because he enters the elimination 
of defilement, he establishes the part of freedom from defilement. 
Moreover, the Tibetan tshans pa (Brahma) is equivalent to entrance 
into Nirvana; hence the name is used with the meaning of “Nirvana 
of no fixed abode” (apratisthitanirvana). 

Aksobhya is called Visnu. The reason for using this term is that 
Aksobhya establishes the “Dnarmadhätu knowledge” and by 
means of this knowledge enters the reality of the intrinsic nature 
(svabhava) which pervades all things. f 
Amoghasiddhi is named Siva, because through the nature 9 
“knowledge of the procedure of duty” (krtyanusthana-jnana) je 
continually provides all sentient beings with mundane а? 
supramundane goods. i 
The term Sarva is used for Ratnasambhava because, through n 
“equality-knowledge” (samatd-jfiana), he establishes 1P thi 
equality the full comprehension of the nature of all things- 


Divinity according to the Buddhist Tantras 47 


Amitabha is referred to by Tattva, because he establishes the part 
of “discriminative knowledge” (pratyavek sana-jniana) which ae 
prehends reality (tattva), and with sublime joy is like the sk i 
Vajrasattva is termed Vibuddha ("expanded") because le h 

expanded to the states of the "great co-natal joy" (sahajana da) 
while fully comprehending them. о 


Mkhas grub rje broadens this explanation of Vajrasattva to apply to all 
the other Buddha-progenitors as well. Of course, the term “co-natal” 
means “born in the body” (dehe sambhavati ; cf. Hevajratantra, I, v. 14) 

The meaning of the Buddhas as progenitors is further illustrated y 
placing various elements of the path under their respective dominion. 
For example, Tson-kha-pa’s Snags rim chen то (Peking blockprint 
365b-3, ff.) cites a number of works and explains the six members of the 
Stage of Generation (utpatti-krama) in the Anuttara-Yoga Tantra. In my 


summary: 
TABLE 4 
STAGE OF GENERATION 


—— ee As EP a E MUR ER 


MEMBER THROUGH WHICH 


FAMILY 


ACTIVITY 


REASON FOR THE FAMILY 


ee n OO ee TET P.) E a ШУШЫ‏ کک 


Contemplation of the 
palace which is the 
Buddhas' dwelling. 


1. Vairocana 


Passion towards the divine 
Father-Mother, after 
generating the symbolic 
circle (samaya-cakra) by 
means of the five Manifest 
Enlightenments (abhi- 
sambodhi) and then gener- 
ating the knowledge circle 
(jiäna-cakra). 

Initiation (abhiseka), con- 
ferred by the eight “wis- 
dom goddesses" (vidya) 
Enjoyment of the am- 
brosia (amrta). 


2 Vajrasattva 


3. Aksobhya 
4. Amitäbha 
5. Amoghasiddhi Offerings. 


6. Ratnasambhava Praises. 


Because he is the nature of 


the material aggregate 
(riipa-skandha) of the 
Tathägatas. 


Because that is the mean- 
ing of the lord who has 
passion in order to pro- 
duce  ''materializations" 
(nirmita) from the bodhi- 
citta of the Father-Mother 
pairs of the retinue deities. 


Because he is the essence of 
the water initiation. 


Because he is the “Thun- 
derbolt of Speech," which 
satiates. 


Because he is the progeni- 
tor of the Karma family, 
and hence has power over 
offerings to the Buddhas, 
and actions for the sake of 
the living beings. 

Because praise is the ex- 
tolling of merits; and at the 
time of arising of merits of 
Body, Speech, and Mind, 
Ratnasambhava is those 
merits. 


 Ó—— Á— —H————— ——————‏ ت 


48 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


Besides identification with male deities, as in the Hevajratantra with the 
names Brahma, etc., sometimes the Buddhas appear in the form of 
goddesses. Among these goddesses the ones (frequently in fierce form) that 
the Tibetans especially invoked for occult results (siddhi) are often called 
dakini. Among these lines, Tson-kha-pa (Sbas don, PTT ed., p. 4-3,4) cites 
the Tantra “Ocean of Dakinis” for an identification of the six stages of 
yoga of the Stage of Completion (sampanna-krama) in the Anuttarayoga 
Tantra, with six of the Dakinis among the eight doorkeepers in the 
Sri-Cakrasamvara mandala. І shall complete the table with materials 
drawn from my forthcoming Yoga of the Guhyasamäjatantra, which has 


full justification for this data, unavoidably given here in the most 
abbreviated form. 


TABLE 5 


STAGE OF COMPLETION 


MEMBER DAKINI 


NAME OF MEMBER COMMENT 
1. She the Crow-Faced pratyähära Withdrawal, i.e. interiorization 
(‘withdrawal’’) of the ten sense bases (five 
personal and five objective). 
2 She the Owl-Faced dhyana Meditation on the nature of the 
(“meditation”) five Tathägatas 
3. She the Dog-Faced pranayama Control of the winds in five 
(“control of the colors, with diamond mutter- 
winds") ing (vajrajapa). 
4. She the Boar-Faced dhäranä The five signs, mirage, etc. 
(“retention”) with purification of mind (citta- 
visuddhi) and personal blessing 
(svadhisthana). 
5. She, Yama’s anusmrti Recollection, so as to proceed 
Messenger (“recollection”) in the reverse order, WI 
Revelation-Enlightenment 
(abhisambodhi). 
6. She, Yama’s samadhi The consummation of knowl- 


Cremation Ground 


(*consummation"") 


edge, with yuganaddha, the 
pair-united. 


RI riz c e ee Ae S M PME STECKER ecd 


The passage from the “Ocean of Dakinis” continues, taking care of Ше 
last two goddesses: “She, Yama’s Tusk, achieves the wide-spread firmness; 
She, Yama’s Annihilation, engenders the entire fruit and liberates from 
samsara.” (Yama is the Lord of the dead, in Indian mythology). 


This deific identification of elements of the path is further demonstrated 


in my essay “Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace" as well as in the essay 
“Five-fold ritual symbolism of passion.” 


Divinity according to the Buddhist Tantras 49 


The guru as a divinity 


The identification with divinity is also performed in the case of the guru, 
for which the Vajrapänyabhiseka-mahätantra (as cited in Tson-kha-pa's 
Lam rim chen mo) provides the basic position: 


Master of the Secret Folk, how should a disciple look upon his 
preceptor? As though upon the Lord Buddha. The mind of him so 
disposed incessantly generates merits; he becomes a Buddha 
bringing benefit to all the worlds... One should hold to the 
preceptor's virtues, and never hold to his faults. If one holds to 
virtues, he attains success; if one holds to faults, he attains failure. 


However, this brings up the problem of what constitutes the spiritual 
teacher. For example, the brief tantric scripture, Sri-Mahäkha-tantraräja 
(Derge Kanjur, Rgyud "bum, Ga, 203a-6) states: “It is said that there are 
two kinds of gurus—that external guru himself; and the inner guru, the 
presiding deity (bdag po'i lha) The presiding deity is defined by 
Anandagarbha in his great commentary, the Sri-Paramáditikà (Toh. 2512, 
Derge Tanjur, Rgyud, I, 22a-3): *One's presiding deity is kamadeva. The 
conviction that his diamonds of body, speech, and mind are one's own— 
with a praxis that it is really so—is the meaning of yoga.” The “presiding 
deity" appears to mean the same as the “‘tutelary deity" (ista-devatä), or 
the deity which the disciple serves with daily devotions and enshrines in 
the heart. 

The inner guru is further differentiated in a suggestion of Buddha- 
&rijfianapàada's Mukti-tilaka-nama (PTT, Vol. 65, p. 24-4) in the text line, 
"the superior three speakers who teach that way." Vitapada’s commentary 
on that line in the Mukti-tilaka-nama-vyakhyana (PTT, Vol. 65, p. 135-2,3) 
explains the words *who teach that way" as meaning: who teach the 
nature of the indestructible mark (mi Sigs pa'i thig le; Skt., amata-tilaka, 
or aksata-bindu) as co-natal (sahaja) (i.e. in the heart). The commentary 
explains the inner kind as three gurus: the great basic teacher (rgyu’i slob 
dpon chen po), the conditional teacher (rkyen gyi slob dpon), and the co- 
natal teacher (Ihan cig skyes pa’i slob dpon). He quotes a work called the 
Rin chen phren ba ѓеѕ bya Баі de kho na nid in amplification of these terms: 


The one acting as the teacher purifying one’s own stream of 
consciousness in the sequence of the shared (sadharana), unshared 
(asadharana), abiding in pledges (samaya), water, etc. 1s the great 
basic teacher. 

The great goddess who purifies the field in one’s own stream of 
consciousness by sporting together with that (great basic teacher) 
and by sixteen parts—is explained to be the conditional teacher. 


50 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


One’s own mind (citta) when given permission by that (conditional 
teacher) is the co-natal teacher because of the co-natal blessing and 
because of comprehending the co-natal joy. 


The commentary goes on to explain that those are “superior” because they 
surpass other gurus. In further explanation, it appears that the first of the 
three is the tutelary deity serving as the focus for the disciple’s adherence 
to practices shared with non-tantric Buddhism and other Tantras, practices 
not so shared but special to the cult of that deity, pledges along the way, 
initiations of water and so forth. That in time this service of the first kind 
of guru awakens the great goddess who takes the disciple through various 
yoga experiences, sometimes stated with sixteen parts (cf. my essay on the 
inner zodiac). Finally, that one’s own mind is the third guru, comprising 
the union of the tutelary deity and the great goddess (often called yab-yum 
by the Tibetan term). This is a form of divine pride (devatä-garva), 
necessary for the quick path of Tantra. 


Classifications of Divinity 


Moreover, the multitude of minor deities are incorporated in the 
Buddha families by the manner of speaking that those deities are “seals” 
(mudrä) of the Buddha families. Thus, when the performer identifies 
himself with a deity, his hand gesture (mudrá) can be taken as the deity. 
In the evocation procedure, there is a developmental order of the deity 
as a syllable (aksara), then as a hand symbol (cihna), and finally as a 
deific body. More fully, Buddhaguhya in his Dhyanottara-patala-tika 
(PTT. Vol. 78, p. 75-4) sets forth three main kinds of divinity to be 


contemplated, and he further breaks them down into varieties, which we 
tabulate as follows: 


TABLE 6 
NATURE OF DIVINITY 


SSS eS er ee Б 2—5. 


CONSISTING OF FORMAL CONSISTING OF SOUND OF ABSOLUTE KIND 
BODY (rüpa-käya) (paramarthika) 


(1) Shaped with eye, etc. 
and corporeal members. 


(2) Consisting of mudra. 


(1) Consisting of letters. (1) Nature of dharmadhatu. 


(2) Consisting of enunciation. 
(2-a) Consisting of expressed 
sound of whispered, etc. recita- 
tion that is generated by palate, 
lips, etc. 

(2-b) Consisting of mental re- 
citation of general mantras. 
(2-c) Consisting of the imagi- 
nation equivalent to beings 
(sattva) from respective 
mantra letters. 


i ive 
2) Nature of nondiscursiv? 
pane with non-2p pr 
ception of meditative object- 


D I ee ad НЕЕ ыша 


Divinity according to the Buddhist Tantras 51 


The 2-b category is also referred to as “diamond words” (vajrapada), 
described as soundless (lips shut), hence mental, for example, in 
Smrtijhänakirti’s commentary on Majijusri-nadmasamgiti (PTT. Vol. 75, 
p. 55-1). 

Another type of classification, overlapping the foregoing one, is found 
in Padmavajra’s work, the Vahikatikd-nama (Derge Tanjur, Rgyud, 
Dza, 29b-1, ff.). Here the organization is in terms of the Bodies of the 
Buddha. In the oldest classification, these are the Dharmakaya and the 
Rüpakäya. Later the Rüpakäya further divides into the Sambhogakaya 
and the Nirmanakaya, which are standard in the Mahayana. Some 
Mahayana sects added a fourth one called the Mahasukhakaya. This is 
Padmavajra's statement: 


Those deities who are born by transformation have a body belong- 
ing to the Nirmanakaya, on which account, among the four bodies, 
Dharma, Sambhoga, Nirmäna, and Mahäsukha, three have 
varieties. 

Among them, the Nirmanakaya is the gods born by transformation. 
The Dharmakaya is the set of planets, asterisms (naksatra), etc. 
The Sambhogakàya is the two-footed (divinities); and the 
Nirmanakaya is like the Sambhogakaya in this respect. 

The Nirmanakaya is the gods who range in the palace. The 
Sambhogakaya is those (yogins) with samdpatti in the initial 
samadhi (prathamasamadhi). The Dharmakaya is those who have 
transcended the ecstasy. 

Besides, it is explained by the Dharmakaya: Whatever the gods 
dwelling in the wind and vijfidna (i.e. vijfidna riding on the winds), 
their non-apperception is the Dharmakaya. Moreover, those with 
samäpatti (meditational equipoise) in the three samadhis are the 
Sambhogakaya. Those who mutually gaze by reason of habit- 
energy of adhering to the idea of “mine”, are the Nirmanakaya. 
Likewise, it is explained by knowledge: The non-oozing ecstasy 
of dwelling in the Akanistha (heaven), is the Dharmakaya. Those 
with the ecstasy of frequently tasting the Dharma in introspection, 
are the Sambhogakaya. Those who are self-originated by reason of 
a former vow, but do not know it, are the Nirmänakäya. 


All these can be taken as an explanation of Buddhaguhya’s category of 
absolute deity, first kind: nature of dharmadhätu. These can also be 
discussed by the terminology of “three sattvas," for which see Mkhas grub 
rje's. 

Besides, one can expand upon the absolute divinity of Buddhaguhya S 
Variety referred to as “non-discursive knowledge.” Tson-kha-pa’s Snags 


= 


PLATE 4. Mahävajradhara. 


52 


Divinity according to the Buddhist Tantras 53 


rim chen mo at folio 37b-2 cites the commentary on the Samputa by Dpa’ 
bo rdo rje (*Süravajra) that there are three levels of non-discursive 
ecstasy. The first is based on sound (the sound of laughter), which in 
mystical experience is referred to as “hearing the Lord”. The second is 
based on sight (seeing the form of the deity) therefore “seeing the Lord”. 
The third is based on touch (as when the deity and consort hold hands or 
unite), and would be later described as "touching the Lord”. In fact, this 
section of the Snags rim chen mo thereby establishes the division of four 
Tantras in terms of the role of the divinities of the Tantra. That is to say, 
the Kriya Tantra has the deities laughing; the Carya Tantra, the deities 
mutually gazing; the Yoga Tantra, the deities holding hands; the Anuttara- 
yoga Tantra, the deities in union. 


The Adi Buddha 


Finally, there is the Primordial Buddha, or the final perfection of divinity, 
the composite of all Buddhas, called Vajradhara (Holder of the Diamond), 
and also Vajrasattva (Diamond Being), Samantabhadra (Entirely 
Auspicious—the Vow of Enlightenment), or Kälacakra (wheel of Time). 
Vajradhara is sometimes depicted in union with the Goddess, and some- 
times by himself, as in the illustration. 

. Inexplanation of Mahavajradhara, the Guhyasamdjatantra (Chap. XVII, 
‚р. 135) has the verse: Fr 


Then Vajradhara, the Teacher, who is bowed to by all the Buddhas, 
. best of the three diamonds, best of the great best, supreme lord of 


‚the three diamonds. - . - um 


^. And the Explanatory Tantra Vajramala (PTT. Vol. 3, p. 229) states: 

o Vajradhara is explained as endowed with the profound and far- 
reaching; the Diamond Being (vajrasattva), best of those with 

`` two (legs); who is master of destroying and benefitting. 


As to the Guhyasamäja verse (XVII, 39), the Pradipoddyotana (PTT. Vol. 
158, p. 154-3) states in part that the three diamonds are the diamonds of 
Body, Speech, and Mind in the case of "supreme lord of the {шее 
diamonds”. Tson-kha-pa’s Mchan-’grel explains the "lord of body : 
displays simultaneously innumerable materializations of body; lord of 
speech”: teaches the Dharma simultaneously to boundless sentient beings 
each in his own language; “lord of mind”: understands all the knowable 
which seems impossible. Hence, these are the “three mysteries" of the 
Buddha. The Vajramala verse stresses Vajradhara in human form as 
Vajrasattva, the chief hierophant. 


7 


PREPARATION OF DISCIPLES; 
THE MEANING OF INITIATION 


By “preparation of disciples” is meant their preparation to evoke 
deities—a process frequently called in Sanskrit sadhana; and this is to be 
distinguished from the initiation of disciples. Thus there are two parts to 
the present essay, exhibited textually toward the end of the present work 
with “Outline of the Thob Yig Gsal Bahi Me Lon,” because Chapter 4 
of the outlined treatise treats the lineages of permission to evoke deities, 


and its subsequent Chapter 5 treats initiation and shows that Mantrayana 
begins with initiation. 


Preparation of Disciples for Evocation of Deities 


It is well known that Tibetan monks meditate upon a wide variety of 
deities. Many of these gods and goddesses are depicted upon the temple 
banners called Tankas, of which a goodly number have found their way 
into Western museums as well as into private homes. The Sanskrit word 
for these evocations is sadhana, translated into Tibetan as sgrub thabs 
(pronounced drewp top). Westerners invariantly want to know the meaning 
of these deities and their accompanying incantations (mantra), in Tibetan 
sngags, pronounced ngok: and would be surprised to learn that they а 
not have such and such meanings in the Western sense of intellectu? 
understanding. Their meanings arise through the regular practice an 
service of the deity. Nevertheless, there are some general remarks that can 
be made about such practices. 


; : а- 
The Sanskrit books available on these subjects convey meager inform 


54 


Preparation of Disciples; the Meaning of Initiation 55 


tion. This is because the collection of sädhanas contain only the bare 
description of the deity. These tiny treatises may start out by saying that 
out of the void appears such and such a germ syllable, which changes into 
a such and such, upon which a certain deity is imagined with so many 
heads and arms, with certain symbols in the right hands and certain ones 
in the left hands, and so on. Separate books contain general instructions 
about such evocations, and of course the guru or master supplies all the 
instructions that were missing in the book. The Tibetan manuals are 
superior to the former Indian ones, in that all the literary instructions 
concerning a particular evocation are brought together into one book. 

Anessential ingredient of every evocation of a deity is that the candidate 
must get permission. Here the Sanskrit word is anujfid, Tibetan rjes gnang 
(“je nang"). The theory of “permission” is stated in Mkhas grub rje's 
Fundamentals of the Buddhist Tantras. Unavoidably, the permission to 
evoke a deity comes from the deity itself, especially in auspicious dreams. 
The master acts as an intermediary in conferring the permission. In practice, 
the way this is done is for the master to generate himself into the deity, 
and then, as the deity, to grant permission to the disciples. That is one 
reason why the disciple is supposed to look upon the guru as a Buddha, to 
never dwell upon his faults, but only on his virtues. This is not to imply 
that the guru is actually a Buddha, but only that by so regarding the guru, 
the latter is able to function in the role of conferring this all-essential 
permission and the consequent initiations. 

The first Lcang skya Hutukhtu of Peking, Ngagdbang Blo-bzang-chos- 
Idan, wrote a little treatise entitled, Spyi hgrohi rjes gnang gi bsad pa 
(“Explanation of the general permission”), meaning the mandatory pre- 
liminary attitude to be engendered. The disciples having bathed and 
approached respectfully the master, imploring him for the “permission”, 
he tells them some of the basic Buddhist teachings. For example, how 
difficult it is to attain human birth among the various destinies, good and 
bad; and then the fortunate circumstances of finding the teacher. Thus, 
with aspiration for enlightenment and liberation, they must embrace the 
Illustrious Doctrine. Then, about the two vehicles, the non-tantric and the 
tantric. Having taken those precepts to heart, the candidates are convinced 
that by relying on such and such a tutelary deity or such and such a 
protector of the religion, they (the candidates) will keep a fortunate 
condition, free from the untoward states (of being born when or where there 
is no teacher, and so on). The candidates go on to imagine that in the sky 
in front of the offerings, it is as though a vast cloud of the tutelary deity, 
the Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, protectors of the religion, fairies, and so on, 
were condensing. Before that throng, the candidates take refuge 10 the 
Three Jewels, confess their sins long accumulated, rejoice in the virtues 
accumulated by themselves and others, and, for the sake of the sentient 


56 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


beings, pray for the “permission” of such and such a tutelary deity or 
protector of the religion. The master has the candidates repeat key 
sentences after him. Then, in order to reveal the mandala and vivify the 
basis of the permission, the disciples are generated into deity. 

The way in which this “permission” is granted is especially shown in the 
Tibetan ritual of the goddess Ushnishavijaya as found in the four-volume 
collection of sadhanas called the Rin Лап. Y once studied this text in the 
East Asiatic Library, University of California. Here we find that the 
master first generates himself into the goddess Ushnishavijayà with her 
retinue of eight deities. This has the two phases of generation of self into 
deity and generation of deity in front, which are described extensively in 
Mkhas grub rje's Fundamentals of the Buddhist Tantras. The Rin Шап text 
first sets forth the “permission of body”, which concerns the bodies, small, 
large, and infinite, of the Lordess Ushnishavijaya and of her retinue. Then 
it portrays the “permission of speech”, which concerns the vow to hold 
the Lordess as the protective deity. Finally, it tells the “‘permission of 
mind,” which concerns the installation of the Lordess’s body, only the 
length of a finger, in the heart. Naturally, those three kinds of permission 
each have a well-defined ritual side too complex to go into now. 

It is clear that the process of evocation and of granting permission is 
somewhat advanced, particularly in the demands upon the imaginative 
ability of the master and the disciples. From ancient times, Buddhism 
classified candidates in terms of keen faculty, medium faculty, and 
inferior faculty. Certainly, there is a preceding training for the disciple. 
Of this, the theory of Buddhist meditation has much to say. 

For example, Mr. Norbu loaned me the first folios of a work entitled 
Rgyal bahi bstan skyong gYu Grags gnis kyi sgrub thabs dang hbrel bahi 
rjes gnang bya tshul. The title means: “Method of performing the evocation 
of the two protectors of the religion called (in short) gYu and Grags 
along with the associated permission." The title suggests that this book 
will show the procedure by which the master evokes the two deities, first 
Rdo rje gYu sgron ma (“She the diamond turquoise lamp") and next, Rdo 
rje Grags rgyal ma (“She the diamond fame victory"); and then, how he 
confers the permission of those two deities upon the disciples, somewhat 
along the lines delineated above. We find at the outset an introductory 
statement that there are three parts to the method of performing the 
evocation and associated permission. All rituals are similarly divided, into 
(a) initial praxis, or preliminaries; (b) the main part of the rite; (c) 02° 
cluding acts. The evocation and permission are counted as the main part 
of the rite. : 

Mr. Norbu called my attention to a word which occurs near the beginn- 
ing of this work. It is written tsa-ka-li, and he explains that it means шет 
certain miniature paintings, on which I am presently writing a book base 


Preparation of Disciples; the Meaning of Initiation 57 


on the manuscripts of the late Professor F. D. Lessing of Berkeley. 
Naturally, the master cannot be expected to carry around with him those 
large tankas which hang in the temples. For the purposes of permission 
and initiation of the disciple, the miniature serves handily. It must be 
carefully prepared to depict correctly the manner in which the particular 
deity is to be contemplated. Hence this kind of painting is made with 
especially fine details and with vivid coloring. In fact, the text in question 
mentions this word in connection with (a) the initial praxis. Here we find 
that on a platform in front, the performer arranges various offerings and 
adornments for the deity, including the tsa-ka-li, which, as I understand 
the sentence, is adorned with arrow and silk.! 

After Mr. Norbu pointed out that word tsa-ka-li, I soon had the luck of 
finding the expression in a text of the Tanjur (the commentarial Tibetan 
canon). Those who have read the translation, Mkhas grub rje’s Funda- 
mentals of the Buddhist Tantras, will have gained some idea of the difference 
between the four classes of Buddhist Tantra. They will know that the 
Indian writer Anandagarbha (in Tibetan, Kun-dgah-süing-po) was a 
celebrated commentator on the third class of Tantra called the Yoga- 
tantra, which itself is divided up into four sections. Of these sections, the 
one called “Purification of Evil Destiny" is especially interesting on the 
commentarial side, and Anandagarbha has written a commentary on it, in 
which I happened to find the word, though here it was transcribed into 
Tibetan letters as tsak-ka-li. 

Let me translate Anandagarbha’s key sentence: "Besides, there is a 
condition (rkyen) for generating those mantras; one both arranges them in 
the mind and arranges the tsak-ka-li of body." This shows that in order to 
effectuate the incantations, there is a simultaneous or parallel process in 
the mind and in the external world. In the mind the incantations are 
arranged, and in the external world the symbolic representations of the 
deity are arranged. It might be thought that those external representations, 
such as the miniature paintings, are serving as meditation props, helping 
the performer to visualize the particular deity or deities. This is certainly 
a valid function, but Anandagarbha intends something more than that. 
To see the point, one should ascertain how this particular meditation fits 
into the general theory of Buddhist meditation. 

Tson-kha-pa's Lam rim chen mo, section on zhi gnas “calming (of the 
mind)”, shows that various scriptures as well as Kamalasila’s Bhava- 


1. The tsak-ka-li word transcribes an original Sanskrit term cakkali, which isnot found 
in the Sanskrit dictionary. However, the Monier-Williams Sanskrit-English Dictionary 
has the word cakkala, which presumably means the same, and is inappropriately defined 
in the dictionary as presumably “circular”, being equivalent to the word cakrala. How- 
ever, here the word means an iconographic device. The painted miniatures are usually 
Square; miniature tankas are rectangular. There is no reason why the device cannot be 
circular or triangular. 


58 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


пакғата ЇЇ and Bhävanakrama III allow that one may accomplish 
samadhi by taking the body of the Tathagata (the Buddha) as a meditative 
object. This is thoroughly orthodox, because it is associated with “mind- 
fulness of the Buddha", which is said to generate an infinity of merits. 
Besides, there are the merits of not losing mindfulness of the Buddha at 
the time of death. When the body of the Buddha, as meditated upon, 
becomes vivid and firm, this is the “calming” of keen faculty. The medi- 
tator can then continue, as is indicated in the Mahayana scriptures, by 
bowing, making offerings and fervent aspirations before that contemplated 
body—all of which is included in merit accumulation; and then go on to 
confess sins and take vows before that contemplated body—all of which is 
included in purification from obscurations. The latter seems to pertain to 
“discerning (the truth)” (lhag mthong). Thus there are numerous benefits 
from holding thought on the body of the Buddha. Also, there is a well- 


defined procedure for such a contemplation. Tson-kha-pa quotes the 
Bhavanakrama YI: 


In regard to that, first the yogin fastens his mind on the formal 
body of the Tathagata as it is seen and as it is heard, and then is to 
accomplish calming. He orients his mind continuously on the form 
of the Tathagata’s body, yellow like the color of purified gold, 
adorned with the (32) characteristics and the (80) minor marks, 
dwelling within its retinue, and acting for the aim of the sentient 
beings by diverse means. Generating a desire for the merits of that 
(body), he subdues fading, excitement, and the other faults, and 
should practice meditation until such time as that (body) dwells 
in front and is seen clearly. 


In the same place, Tson-kha-pa makes a distinction between the initial 
reflected image in the mind of the external replica, such as a painting OT 
metal casting; and the advanced vivid recollection of that body as naturally 
present in the mind. The latter attainment involves what is called the “basis 
of the meditative object". He states: "Some place an icon in front, and 
viewing it with the eye, make a quick contemplation. This has been 
elegantly refuted by the teacher Ye-Ses-sde: samadhi is not accomplishe 

by what the senses are aware of; rather it is accomplished by what the 
mind is aware of.” Tson-kha-pa means that the measure of success IN thig 
kind of meditation is in the degree to which the meditative ob, ect a 
completely transferred to the mind, so that both the subtle and roug 

parts of the body appear vividly in the mind as though alive there. Such s 
"basis of meditative object” is divorced from the physical characteris” 
of the particular medium of the replica, such as the painting ingredien 

and the particular features brought in by reason of a metal casting: 


Preparation of Disciples; the Meaning of Initiation 59 


Nevertheless, in the initial stage one does well to use a good replica as a 
“meditative prop”. 

Let us return to that sentence of Anandagarbha’s. He seems to indicate 
the more advanced stage which Tson-kha-pa refers to as the “basis of 
meditative object” in the mind. This is not the phase in which one is 
looking at the tsak-ka-li (because samadhi is not accomplished by what the 
senses are aware of). Rather, the tsak-ka-li is covered or unviewed. In 
such a case, at an appropriate point in the service the tsak-ka-li can be 
uncovered to constitute a revelation. 

Mkhas-grub-rje writes: “Now if someone were made only to enter the 
mandala and not to be conferred Initiation, what would be the advantage? 
If one takes the refuge vow and beholds the mandala with faith, there is the 
advantage that he becomes purified from sins accumulated for many aeons 
and plants in his stream of consciousness (samtana) the disposition 
(vasana) of becoming in future times a receptacle fit for entering the 
profound mantra path (i.e. the Vajra-yana).” In this connection, recall the 
passage from the Lcang skya Hutukhtu: “Then, in order to reveal the 
mandala ...” Those explanations by Mkhas-grub-rje and the Lcang skya 
Hutukhtu show that there is no revelation of the mandala just by exhibiting 
it, or by the disciple’s mere seeing it. Likewise a mandala is not revealed 
when it is published in some modern book and even if thousands of persons 
buy the book and look at it. But one can take Mkhas-grub-rje’s remarks as 
meaningful by presuming that the mental ritual is directly correlated with 
the hidden external representation, which thus becomes a seat of power. 

Anandagarbha’s mention of arranging mantras in the mind has to do 
with what is called in Tibetan books the nges don (“final meaning") of the 
mantra, when it is pronounced in the mind during meditation rather than 
in outward spoken form, in which case it would be called drang don 
(“provisional meaning"). There is now a good treatment of the “medita- 
tion of dwelling in the flame and in the sound” in the English version of 
Mkhas-grub-rje’s book. In alternate words, the mantra has two main 
levels—that of its ordinary muttered expression, when it has the meaning 
of the waking state; and that of its extraordinary meditational expression, 
when it has the meaning of the dream state. One may notice as analogous 
the two stages in contemplation of the meditation object, mentioned above, 
as the initial reflected image in the mind and the advanced vivid recollec- 
tion of the object abiding naturally in the mind. 


The Meaning of Initiation 


Mkhas grub rje’s contains a wealth of information on the subject of 
initiation; and it is safe to say that not before its publication was such a 
survey of the topic available in depth. However, there is also the fine treat- 


60 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


ment of initiation according to the Kalacakra Tantra in Mario E. Carelli’s 
introduction to his Sanskrit edition of Naropa’s Sekoddesatikà (Baroda 
1941). The present essay is not intended to substitute for those expositions 
—to which the readers’ attention is invited—or to substitute for the 
specialized treatment in my forthcoming Yoga of the Guhyasamäjatantra : 
the Arcane Lore of Forty Verses. 

The word “initiation” is the translation of the Sanskrit word abhiseka, 
which is rendered into Tibetan as “conferral of power” (dban bskur). 
Among the germane issues are: (1) whether one must be initiated in order 
to meditate upon a certain deity; (2) whether the disciple is really “initia- 
ted" by going through the formal motions of initiation; (3) whether the 
procedures of initiation by the gurus are the same as what one could read 
in a text or manual on the topic (or whether the book could be so 
understood). 

(1) The preceding essay on preparation of disciples for evocation of 
deities shows that it is not necessary to be initiated in order to evoke a 
deity. The simplest example of this is of course meditation on the Buddha 
or on one of the transcendent Bodhisattvas such Avalokitesvara, as these 
meditations were practiced in countries with Mahayana Buddhism. In 
fact, such meditations as these do not even require “permission”, but the 
theory of “permission” arose with Tantric deities. Naturally, such medita- 
tions on both non-tantric and tantric deities have gone on in countless 
cases without any formal initiation ceremony of the type developed in 
tantric Buddhism. And also for tantric deities, I cited in the foregoing part 
what Mkhas grub rje said: “Now if someone were made only to enter the 
mandala and not to be conferred Initiation, what would be the 
advantage?...” By mandala is meant both the residence and residents 
(the deities). The idea here is that one does not need to be initiated in 
order to meditate on a deity, but one must get the permission (anujfi) ta 
so meditate, and with that permission comes the directions for the medi- 
tation. For example, a number of Westerners have studied with the Tibetan 
Lamas in northern India and Nepal and been given an individual deity to 
meditate upon, usually along with some verses directed toward that deity, 
e.g. Vajrasattva. This requires only a preparation of the disciple and a 
decision by the guru that such and such is the appropriate deity for that 
person to meditate upon. But, in addition, it is possible to get an initiation 
in connection with a certain deity, say Avalokite$vara; and this initiator 
gives the person so initiated the right to be instructed in the entire cult o 
that deity, and therefore in the procedures of gaining various ШШ 
(occult powers) through that cult. Besides, the higher initiations throug 
such deities as Guhyasamäja are intended to empower the candidate ip 
attempt the supreme goal of Buddhahood in the present life. f 

(2) The next point is by no means inconsequential because a number 0 


Preparation of Disciples; the Meaning of Initiation 61 


Westerners have now gone through initiation ceremonies as conducted, for 
example, in North India by the Tibetan refugees; and the present writer 
and his wife so participated in the great Kälacakra initiation conducted by 
H.H. the Dalai Lama in 1970. Some Westerners have written on these 
topics in a manner to suggest to the reader that they know something about 
the Tantra in question by virtue of “‘getting initiated.” This is far from the 
truth: in fact, initiation is meant to qualify the candidate to receive the 
teachings of the Tantra, because the seventh of the fourteen fundamental 
transgressions (cf. Mkhas grub rje's, p. 328) is “to tell the secrets to 
immature (i.e. uninitiated) persons.” 

I went into another aspect of this problem in my talk before the 
International Conference of Orientalists in Japan (1970), which was 
published in their Transactions (No. XV, 1970): 


Buddhism teaches three kinds of insight (Pali, райда; Sanskrit, 
prajna), that consisting of hearing or learning (Srutamayi prajfia) 
that consisting of meditation or pondering (cintamayi prajfia), and 
that consisting of putting into practice or cultivating in one’s life 
(bhavanamayi рғајћа). There is a revelatory example of the first 
one from my recent stay in Dharmsala, Himachal Pradesh of India. 
In March, 1970, H. H. the Dalai Lama conferred the Kalacakra 
Initiation via loudspeaker to over 10,000 Tibetans. Afterwards 
I asked a learned Lama how His Holiness could possibly initiate so 
many, when initiations were usually given to small groups of proven 
disciples. The Lama answered: filled with faith they came from 
far-off distances at considerable sacrifice; that showed their 
suitability. I could add: and they sat for hours, listening respect- 
fully and patiently, often under a hot sun without drinking 
facilities. The idea here is that the one who has faith and endures 
hardship to hear the teaching has the first level of insight in the 
Buddhist sense, the insight consisting of hearing. Naturally, few of 
these persons ever go on to the second stage, the insight consisting 
of pondering, which in conventional Buddhist theory should involve 
the laid-down procedure of Buddhist meditation. Again, still fewer, 
having heard with faith and having pondered again and again, 80 
to the third stage of being exemplars of putting that teaching into 
practice, the insight of cultivating in one’s life. 


participating in an initiation 
w before. Moreover, there are 
on and which the candidates 
he serious acceptance of 
tter that differs from 


Therefore, it is undeniable that a person 
learns more about the procedure than he kne 
various vows that are given during the initiati 
usually have to repeat three times; and of course t 
Vows and adherence to them in the future, is a ma 


62 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


person to person. We must conclude that the mere fact that a person 
underwent an initiation in the sense of being there and cooperating, does 
not prove that he is "initiated" (empowered), but neither can initiation be 
categorically denied in his case if he went through all the motions. 

(3) The final point is whether anyone, just by reading a Tantra (say the 
Guhyasamäjatantra) knows what the work is talking about, and how its 
procedures, say of initiation, are actually conducted. This is an important 
issue because most of the criticism of the Tantras as being a degenerate 
cult stems from persons reading a sentence or so ofa Tantra and assuming 
that they know, by such brief indications, what in fact the procedures are 
when, as is necessary for actual performance, the procedures are enacted 
in extension. For example, at the above-mentioned Kälacakra initiation I 
observed and photographed the candidates for initiation with their eye- 
bands made of red cloth; but whereas the texts do speak of this eye-band, 
one would have supposed it to be upon the two eyes, but in fact it was 
wound about the forehead. Then I similarly observed that the candidates, 
now presumably initiated, replaced the eye-band with the petal of the 
Champa flower pasted in the middle of the forehead (in the position of the 
third eye), and this also appears as part of the oral instructions. Among 
the offerings presented to H. H. the Dalai Lama as the officiant and 
initiator, was not a girl, as one might expect from the books, but seven pots 
graced with peach blossoms (see illustration), representing the female 
consort, here the earth goddess. But the significance of the seven pots were 
not understood by me through attendance at that initiation—as it was 
similarly not understood by the thousands of attendees—but rather 
through consulting the manuscript notes (in my possession) of the late 
F. D. Lessing who witnessed the great Kälacakra festival in 1932 when it 
was put on in Peking by the old Panchen Lama; and I was able to combine 
my observations with his. 

It is easy to give an answer to the present problem, although it may not 
satisfy the critic, whose judgment is usually obdurate: Of course, one does 
not understand the basic Tantra just by reading it. The reason is that 
understanding a Tantra is being able to do it, since the Tantra is a course 
of action, not a philosophical exposition; and the basic Tantra is not SO 
sufficiently detailed that a person reading it could just go ahead and do it 
according to the indications of the text. Therefore, in Tibetan tantric 
practice, the Guhyasamdjatantra (among Father Tantras) and the Sri- 
Cakrasamvaratantra (among Mother Tantras), and a few other Tantras, 
became the main Tantras actually engaged in with the full complement of 
cult—because such Tantras as these have the richest literature of com- 
mentaries and associated sadhanas (evocation of deity) and lineages brought 
into Tibet from India. That is to say, the practitioners of these Tantras do 
not believe they can understand the basic Tantra of the cult just by reading 


co HNO SIU} U! o[o1 30918 e цоп$ sÁejd oym uonerniur ou Jo (ош 214 ‘qIL) Ape, Suno& 
9U} sozi[oqui4s 1] *o1j pue 0j у әлош AYL (05010) 30d 1942M o31e| e цим qoeo “wnıpod 
91] 0) P99901d ` * * seure[ пәлә$,, :(ивщпәгу ш) ZEGT JoquioAON| 9 *ursjuo1T, *u271/2141/20NI 
au osisaunp[)-nospaq ƏY} Ul 901M SuissoT puvulplod 'Zc6I 199090 LT-IT ‘Buryog 
ur py Auows199 Juajeaınba oy} Surquiosaq "ipu ‘ejesueyqd “0/61 ‘€Z-07 Чор 
‘Kuowa BIXEOEIEY “(MIA WON uoppiu 10d эпо) sjod YIM seure[ пәлә$ *¢ УТД 


63 


64 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


it; even though they have a superior background for understand 
reading it, if it were possible to achieve understanding this wa 
this is not to deny that a certain Tantra, by reason of varying lineages, 
was sometimes practiced differently by its proficients, in short, that the 
basic Tantra was sometimes understood differently in the authoritative 
lineages. 

Now, I began this chapter by pointing out that Mantrayana begins 
with initiation. "Mantrayàna" is а synonym of Vajrayana (the Diamond 
Vehicle), and a natural question is: why call it “Mantrayäna”, or what is 
the meaning of “mantra” in the title Mantrayana? I have in My possession 
a Tibetan text which explains this matter as part of the preliminary ex- 
planations for the one to get the higher initiations of the Tantra; and these 
explanations follow the schools of Mitrajoki and Abhayakaragupta’s 
Vajravali.2 


Mantrayäna. That Tibetan work, which I shall refer to in short as the 
"Initiation Preliminary,” explains: 


ing it by 
y. Again 


It says in the Vajrasekhara: “The characteristic of mantras is the 
mind of all Buddhas, accomplishes the dharma-heart, possesses 
the Dharmadhatu—that is said to be the characteristic of mantras.” 
For that reason, it is said that mantra is the non-dual wisdom 
(jhäna) of bliss-void belonging to the mind of all the Buddhas; and 
it is said that mantra is the deities; and it is said that mantra is the 
calling after the characteristic of deities; and it is said that mantra 
is to be kept secret from unworthy vessels (snod ma yin pa). Besides, 
there are three kinds: gsan snags (mantra), rig stags (vidya), and 
gzun snags (dharani). = 

(1) Gsan snags. The gsan (“secret”) is as stated in the Sri-Samputa 
(Chap. One): “It is secret because outside the scope of Visnu, 
Mahe$vara, Brahma; éravakas and pratyekabuddhas.” As to 
snags (mantra), since it incorporates the meanings of the previous 
explanations, it is mantra by protecting the mind from signs (from 
sense objects) and discursive thought (vikalpa), as explained in the 
Continuation of the Sri-Guhyasamdjatantra (ie. Chap. ХУШ). 
It is as stated in the work Dban yon tan rim pa: “The meaning of 
the expression ‘mantra’ is explained as the non-duality of void and 
compassion. I have explained man- as the Great Insight (maha- 
prajfià) not separate from the character of the void, the breath of 
Vajrasattva. Tra has the meaning of protecting. The breath of the 
Tathägatas is the method of non-duality of void and compassion. 
The expression shags stands for mantra. In explanation, man- 1S 


? 7 ee: d. 
2. Mi-ta (Mitra) dan rdo rje 'phren ba'i dban chen skabs kyi sion ’gro’i chos b$a 


Preparation of Disciples; the Meaning of Initiation 65 


mind, and tra is protecting, so it means protecting the performer’s 
mind from signs and discursive thought. As to how it protects, the 
purpose of mantra is the recitation of the mantra through non-dual 
engagement of means and insight (ирауа-ргајӣа). That method of 
cultivation generates the non-dual wisdom of voidness and com- 
passion in the practitioner’s stream of consciousness; and because 
of that method, it is called “mantra”. 

(2) Rig stags. The Vajrasekhara states: “Countering avidya 
(nescience) by overcoming the darkness of passion and by over- 
coming of defilements, it is called vidya.” Hence, it is the pre- 
eminent return to destroying faults; and that is.the purpose of 
vidya (occult science). 

(3) Gzuns shags. The same work states: “The character of dhärani-s 
is to hold the Buddha-dharmas; its holding is called *holding of 
dharmas' and ‘virtue’.” Hence, it is the preeminent return to holding 
of merits; and that is dharani. 


Besides, Buddhaguhya explains in the Dhydnottarapatalatika (Toh. 
2670, Derge Tanjur, Rgyud, Thu, 4a-3): “Here a vidyd is a deity with the 
form and shape of a female, as well as the sound, gesture (mudra), etc. 
which manifests that (deity). The reverse of that (i.e. a male deity, etc.) is 
the characteristic of mantra." And the same author says (7b-3): “The 
passage means that if even Rishis cannot make a mantra successful 
when they are not in Meditation (dhyana), how much less could other 
performers (sädhaka)!” 

That is the mysterious world into which the initiate enters. And the 
Guhyasamäjatantra (Chap. XVIII, Bhattacharyya ed., p. 156.16-17) 
States: 


The pledge (samaya) and vow (samvara) said to be liberated from 
worldly conduct, when protected by all the “diamonds” (vajra), is 
pronounced “practice of mantra.” 


This passage indicates that the tantric devotee enters upon a new and 
perhaps secretive life that starts with the vows and pledges of his initiations. 
The word “vow” (Tibetan sdom pa) is a statement taken ritually and 
ordinarily uttered three times; it is in a form easily understood and must 
hold together, adhere in the disciple’s stream of consciousness. The VOWS 
are usually of a general nature, holding for the entire Tantra in which the 
candidate is initiated and for the entire time after his initiation. On the 
other hand, the “pledge” (Tibetan dam tshig) is less comprehensible and 
may require commentarial or oral expansion to get the meaning. The 
pledges are not general, but may apply to a particular element of the 


66 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


Tantra and to a special phase of the practice. Frequently they are in a 
negative form, pointing to what the disciple should avoid or not engage in. 

The vows that are taken by the disciples during initiation are sometimes 
shared between different initiations and sometimes peculiar to a certain 
initiation in which case they are termed “unshared”. Examples are one 
petition and two vows which Geshe Rabten of Dharmsala asked me to 
translate from Tibetan on behalf of the Europeans who were attending the 
Kalacakra initiation held 21-23 March, 1970. Each one of these is to be 


repeated three times by direction of the guru (who in this case was H.H. 
the Dalai Lama): 


A. (Petition): Thou my teacher with great joy art the sole savior 
from the ocean of phenomenal life attended with such dangers as 
the great water monster of birth, old age, and death. I bow to 
thee the great lord who is steadfast in the way of the great 
enlightenment. Grant me that same pledge! Grant me the 
thought of enlightenment! Grant me the three refuges of 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha! O lord, pray introduce me into 
the exalted city (=the mandala) of great liberation! 

B. (Common vow between the Bodhisattva and the Tantra path): 
I take refuge in the three jewels, confess all my sins, hold 
mentally the sympathetic joy with the virtues of (other) living 
beings, as well as with the Buddha’s enlightenment. 

C. (Unshared vow, peculiar to the Kalacakra Tantra): Having 
conferred upon me the sublime initiation of the irreversible 
wheel, O lord, pray explain the reality of the gods of the wheel, 
the wondrous action of the hierophant, the pledge of all the 
Buddhas, and the highest secret of the vow. So as to serve the 
aim of all sentient beings may I forever be a hierophant! 


The fact that these three utterances are given here in sequence is no 
indication of their actual location in the long and elaborate Kälacakra 
initiation ritual. The time of petition for initiation is when the disciples 
made the gesture (mudrä) of the universe (the four continents and 
Mt. Meru). 

The pledges are special to the different families of Tathägatas and to 
different phases of the path. For example, there is the pledge to refrain 
from the fourteen fundamental transgressions of the Anuttarayoga Tantra. 
The fourteen are given in Mkhas grub rje’s (p. 328 note) as follows: 

1. To disparage one’s master. 

2. To transgress the directives of the Buddha. 

3. To express anger toward “diamond brothers”. 
4. To abandon love of the sentient beings. 


Preparation of Disciples; the Meaning of Initiation 67 


. To abandon the Mind of Enlightenment. 


. To tell the secrets to immature persons. 


5 
6. To disparage the Doctrine of one’s own ог of another’s tenets 
7 
8 


. To abuse the five skandhas for their nature belongs to the five Buddhas. 
9. To have reservations concerning the natures intrinsically pure. 
10. To have love for the wicked. 
11. To apply discursive thought to the wordless natures. 
12. To have belittling thoughts toward the believers. 
13. To not adhere to the pledges in the way they were taken. 
14. To disparage women, who are the nature of insight. 

After Tson-kha-pa’s individual commentary on those fourteen in his 
Dios grub kyi sie ma (PTT. Vol. 160, p. 70-1,2) he groups them in this 
way (my summary including material from his individual commentary): 

A. Concerning Dharma. 


(1) 
(2) 


(3) 


Teacher of the Dharma. No. 1 “to disparage one's master" 

(асағуа). 

Associates in accomplishing the Dharma. 

(a) Good associates. No. 3 “To express anger toward 
diamond brothers” who are fellow initiates of the 
same master. No. 12 “To have belittling thoughts toward 
the believers” who are fit vessels for the path. 

(b) Bad associates. No. 10 “To have love (maitri) for the 
wicked”, especially those who damage and destroy the 
Doctrine, but one should have compassion (Karuna) for 
them. 

Dharma to take to heart. No. 2 “To transgress the directives 

of the Buddha” which are the three vows (of the Vinaya, 

the Bodhisattva, and the Mantrayana). No. 6 “To disparage 
the Doctrine of one’s own (mantrayäna) or of another’s 

(prajiäpäramitäyäna) tenets. No. 7 “To tell the secrets to 

immature (uninitiated) persons”; but Tson-kha-pa rejects 

a certain learned opinion that it is a transgression to show 

esoteric substances such as icons, the damaru drum and so 

on, because the Tantras state the fault in what is revealed 
to the ear, not in what is revealed to the eye. 


B. Concerning Path ; 
(1) Basis of Path. At the time one has generated the Mind of 


Enlightenment: No. 4 “To abandon love of the sentient 
beings” by acting waywardly toward the sentient beings. 


No. 5 “To abandon the Mind of Enlightenment” by 
abandoning the true nature of the mind. 
(2) Nature of Path. les 


(a) The Stage of Generation (utpatti-krama). No. 8 


68 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


abuse the five skandhas for their nature belongs to the 
five Buddhas”, such abuse including all injury, 
mortification, and suppression. (My forthcoming Yoga 
of the Guhyasamdjatantra will clearly show why this 
transgression applies to the Stage of Generation, 
because in this Stage there is the meditation of associat- 
ing the skandhas with the respective Buddhas). 

The Stage of Completion (sampanna-krama). No. 9 

“To have reservations concerning the natures (dharma) 

intrinsically pure”. No. 11 “To apply discursive thought 

to the wordless natures”. 

(3) Ancillaries of the Path. No. 13 “To not adhere to the pledges 
in the way they were taken” because pledges are the sub- 
stance of the path, whether of the Anuttarayoga or of the 
Yoga Tantra. No. 14 “To disparage women, who are the 
nature of insight” because women are a hindrance to the 
path. “Women” are both the mundane kind and the supra- 
mundane kind of Vajravärähi (the Diamond Sow), etc. 
“Insight” is the knowledge of great bliss (mahdsukha). One 
disparages women either by way of lusting for them or (in 
overt conduct) by reason of lusting for them. 


(b 


— 


Initiation of the Mirror 


Again, while I do not intend to compete with Mkhas grub rje’s authorita- 
tive material on initiations—those of the flask and the higher initiations of 
Anuttarayoga Tantra; nor can a written account take the place of actual 
participation in these tantric initiation rituals, it is still useful to present 
one here as found in written form. The “initiation of the mirror” is one of 
the six in the Guhyasamaja Aksobhya ritual that corresponds to the role of 
the five flask initiations as portrayed in Mkhas grub rje’s. Besides the 
intrinsic interest of this initiation, it is especially picked for its brevity, 
because initiation rituals are frequently of considerable length and detail 
whereby their presentation would require too much space for present 
purposes. This is translated from Tson-kha-pa’s work, **Dban gi don gy! 
de nid rab tu gsal ba" (Clarifying the realities belonging to the meaning S: 
initiation) (PTT, Vol. 160, p. 111-3,4). Previously (p. 109-4-6) he had liste 
the six initiations as (1) initiation of water, (2) initiation of the diadem, 
(3) initiation of the vajra, (4) initiation of the bell, (5) initiation of the 
mirror, and (6) initiation of the name. Now for the "initiation of the 
mirror." 


Preparation of Disciples; the Meaning of Initiation 69 


The placement of the mirror initiation in this phase which is the fifth 
stage, is as done by Klu byan (*Nagabodhi). In that (i.e. his method) 
there are two parts, starting with the “eye opening” (rite). 

I. The method of “eye opening” proceeds by reciting and applying (of 
ointment). (The guru) places in a gold or silver vessel the golden eye 
ointment consisting of butter and honey. While the disciple imagines on 
his eyes the syllable PRAM, (the guru) applies (the eye ointment) with a 
probe (salaka), reciting OM VAJRANETRA APAHARA PATALAM 
HRIH (“Om. Remove the film that is on the diamond eye! Hrih.”). He 
repeats the verse (of the Vairocanabhisambodhi-tantra): “Just as the King 
of Healing (bhaisajya-rdja) with his probe removed the worldly film, so 
may the Buddhas dispel your film of ignorance, my son!” While he is so 
reciting, they imagine that the knowledge eye is opened upon removal of 
the nescience film. 

II. Having had his eye opened in that manner, (the disciple) should look 
upon all dharmas as reflected images. So (the disciple) may accomplish 
that, he (the guru) shows a mirror incanted with an AH, and recites: 


All dharmas are like reflected images, 
clear and pure, without turbulence; 
ungraspable, inexpressible, truly arisen 
from cause and action (hetu and karma). 


Just like Vajrasattva in a mirror that is 
clear, pure, without turbulence; so also 
the Buddhas, universal lords, themselves 
abide in the heart of thee, my son. 


Now that you have so understood the dharmas 
as without intrinsic nature and without 
location, may you perform incomparably the 
aim of sentient beings, so they may be born 

as sons of the Protectors! 


Those verses enjoin (the disciple) to understand in general that all dharmas 
are like a reflected image, and in particular that the Vajrasattva dwelling 
in one’s heart is like a reflected image in a mirror. 


KERN 


When the third of those three verses speaks of the dharmas “as without 
intrinsic nature” and “without location” it refers respectively to the first 
and second verses. This is because when the second verse proclaims that 
“the Buddhas . . . themselves abide in the heart of thee", this is possible 
with the Mahayana position of the “Nirvana of no fixed abode 


70 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


(apratisthita-nirväna), so the Buddha natures (Buddha-dharma) can be 
understood to abide in the disciple’s heart while abiding elsewhere. 
Therefore the second verse is expressed from the standpoint of supreme 
truth (paramärtha-satya), while the first verse, stressing that the dharmas 
are “like reflected images” is expressed with conventional truth (samvrti- 
satya). Since these are crucial points for grasping Mahayana Buddhist 
thought, it is well to expand a little. 

The mirror is incanted with an AH, which suggests breath come to a stop 
on the mirror and thereby creating insubstantial shapes. The guru recites 
the first verse, “All dharmas are like reflected images . . .” to show that all 
mundane dharmas are without intrinsic nature, yet truly arisen from cause 
and action, i.e. in Dependent Origination (pratitya-samutpáda). This is the 
scope of conventional truth, or samsara. 

Then the guru recites the second verse to show that when the mind is 
smooth and clear like a mirror, i.e. when it is plunged in samadhi, it can 
reflect the form of Vajrasattva, treasured in the disciple's heart. But also 
in this case the Buddhas dwell in the heart, meaning that there is no limita- 
tion to their dwelling—whether in this person's or that person's heart, 
or elsewhere—and so this refers to the supramundane dharmas that are 
without location. This is the scope of supreme truth, or “Nirvana of no 
fixed abode,” not limited to either samsara or nirvana, but both. 

The third verse then alludes to the meaning of this initiation. First 
the disciple's knowledge eye is opened and then he is brought to a new 
understanding—about mundane and supramundane dharmas—so he can 
now perform the aim of sentient beings. This shows the meaning of 
initiation as “maturation” of the candidate, in this case, maturation 
through the “initiation of the mirror”. 


8 


OFFERING MATERIALS AND 
THEIR MEANINGS 


Among the profusion of ritual implements and other substances of the 
tantric cults, the offering materials are paramount because they are the 
most wide-spread in all the cults and of course stem from practices far 
more ancient than Buddhism itself. The usual Sanskrit word for “offering” 
is püjä; the word for “food offering" is bali; and for “burnt offering”, 
homa. Besides, the notion of an “offering” is generalized, as will be seen 
below by their classifications. 


Classification of Offerings 


In tantric commentaries one frequently notices the terminology of 
“outer” and “inner” offerings. Sometimes the category “secret” is added. 
Usually the commentators take for granted that the reader knows what is 
meant. However, some sources do give explanations, and two such will 
now be presented. 

Kukuri-pa, in his Mahämäyasädhanamandalavidhi (Toh. 1630, Derge 
Tanjur, Rgyud, Ya, 238b-4), states: 


Then he makes offering with outer offerings, from “water for the 
feet” down to “music.” The “inner offering” is the offering to the 
host (tshogs) (of deities) after one has enjoyed the ambrosia. The 
“secret offering” is the pleasure of the two organs. The “ultimate 
(anuttara) offering” is the contemplation of non-duality. 


71 


72 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


The second passage is found in the manuscript remains of the late 
Professor F. D. Lessing. Some lama, perhaps a lama-teacher of his during 
the China years, wrote out in Tibetan script a classification of Offerings 
but without indication of a textual source. Here is my translation: 


Outer offerings (phyi’i mchod pa). The diversity of Offerings as 
feasible, such as mandala, incense, flower, water for the feet, 
perfumed water, feet-cooling water, food, lamp, music. 

Inner offerings (пап gi mchod pa). Having meditatively created 
offerings by way of deities, after they have clearly arisen in one’s 
mind in the manner of largesse, one offers them individually to 
the magnanimous host of deities. 

Secret offering (gsan ba'i mchod pa). Having enjoyed great ecstasy 
(mahdsukha) as the deities dissolve in oneself, one should make 
offering in the sense of inseparability of means and insight. 

Goal offering (don gyi mchod pa). As the true-nature of all offerings 
dissolves in true nature and spontaneously appears, one offers 
them in the sense of no hindrance to one's liberation. 

Symbolic offerings (rtags kyi mchod pa). As one sees delightful 

.. things, such as flowers, clean water, grains, he makes offering 

‚ of them to the guru who is the jewel and the great compassionate- - 
one. E 

. Illustrative offerings (mtshon pa’i mchod pa). (Showing that one is) —-— 
`. free from clinging and attachment іо offering of personal sub- 
stances, to wit, the body and personality aggregates (skandha) 

one offers them: - ED. md Eo cU) E 


` It is apparent that Kukuri-pä’s four kinds match four of the six in the 
second list given by Dr. Lessing’s lama teacher. The three of the same-title- - - 
(outer, inner, and secret) easily agree; and Kukuri-pà's category of 
“ultimate offering” seems to be the “goal offering” of the other list. 
Among the two extra ones, the symbolic offerings made to the guru are 
obviously a Tibetan addition because Tibetan Buddhism added a refuge in 
the guru to the traditional three refuges in Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. 
(Notice that the same Tibetan word, rtags, is used for the substances, 
herbs, etc., inserted in the flasks; and that the usage, while seemingly 
different, may well be intimately related). The illustrative offerings are 2 
special feature of the “perfection of giving" (däna-päramitä) of the Bodhi- 
sattva path. * 

Of those various categories, the outer offerings and symbolic offerings 
are discussed in the present essay; the inner offerings are featured by ү 
“five ambrosias” in the Tantric Ritual essay; the secret offering 1S HE 


Offering Materials and their Meanings 73 


main theme of the material on Twilight Language; the ultimate offering is 
alluded to in various places of this work, particularly by the description 
“contemplation of non-duality.” 

That leaves only the category of illustrative offerings to be further dis- 
cussed here. In an article of the Indo-Iranian Journal (III, 1959, pp. 121-22) 
I cited Buddhaguhya’s commentary on the Mahävairocana, about the 
“inner burnt offering” (T. nan gi sbyin sreg) (and even though he uses the 
word for “inner” the material fits the “illustrative” category). Here I 
repeat my translation of the passage about this kind of offering: 


Moreover, one destroys the five atmaka-skandha in Voidness 
(sünyatä), and also destroys the forms of sense objects (visaya), 
such as the external “hearth” (agnikunda), in Voidness. In the same 
way one individually destroys the issuances of six-doored perception 
(vijfidna); and when they do not issue and are stopped, in the same 
way the “thought of enlightenment” (bodhicitta) which destroys and 
stops those is itself stopped by the non-issuing Insight (prajna); and 
that abiding in the non-discursive (avikalpa) samadhi is the Inner 
Burnt Offering. Hence, one stops the “‘fire of wind” (väyv-agni) by 
the non-issuing Insight, and “One makes the burnt offering to 
fire with the mind (manas).” “Stops the fire of wind” means 
“restrains the рапа and dyama.” “One makes the burnt offering 
to fire with the mind” means “one burns thought immobile 


(айіпјуа or апійјуа)” 


Here präna has the special meaning of winds (vayu), and дуйта refers to the 
mental component; together they make up the term pranayama; since 
perceptive consciousness rides on these winds, the stopping up of these 
winds (cf. my section on The Nine Orifices) is tantamount to the burnt 
offering of mind. 

Finally, while it is convenient to have this classification into six for 
discussion purposes, the fact that the texts generally mention only the 
first three (outer, inner, and secret), or even just the first two, suggests that 
the set of six can be reduced to the three, or in any case there is considerable 
overlap. 


The Four Offerings 


Buddhaguhya, who has been cited above, is among the greatest com- 
mentators in the field of the three lower Tantras (Kriya, Carya, and Yoga), 
and among his most remarkable works is the commentary on the Tantra 
Sarvadurgatiparisodhana, his Artha-vyafjana-vrttt (later I shall cite at 


74 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


length his explanation of the mandala). In this work (PTT. Vol. 76, p. 35 


he presents a personification of four offerings into goddesses of uU 
colors, by the following scheme: 
Offering Color Buddhist Meaning 
perfumed incense white morality (Sila) 
flower yellow deep concentration (samadhi) 
lamp red insight (ргаўйа) 
perfume green mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta) 


The first three Buddhist terms constitute a well-known set, called from 
early Buddhist times “the three instructions;" and the famous compendium 
of the (Hinayäna) Buddhist path by Buddhaghosa, the Visuddhimagga, is 
divided into three parts by these very headings. The “mind of enlighten- 
ment” is the foundation of the Bodhisattva path of Mahayana Buddhism. 

Perfumed incense is used to purify (fumigate) the room, and so it 
represents morality as a purifying activity of the personality, hence also 
the color white. In the case of the celebrated Mahayana Buddhist scripture 
that is translated under the title The Lotus of the True Law, the original 
word for “lotus” here is pundarika, which is really the white lotus; and 
this lotus for centuries symbolized in China purity, especially moral purity. 

For the flower with the meaning of samadhi, we may refer to the writings 
of D. T. Suzuki:! 


The legendary story of the origin of Zen in India runs as follows: 
Sakyamuni was once engaged at the Mount of the Holy Vulture in 
preaching to a congregation of his disciples. He did not resort to 
any lengthy verbal discourse to explain his point, but simply lifted 
a bouquet of flowers before the assemblage, which was presented 
to him by one of his lay-disciples. Not a word came out of his 
mouth. Nobody understood the meaning of this except the old 
venerable Mahakasyapa, who quietly smiled at the Master, as if he 
fully comprehended the purport of this silent but eloquent teaching 
on the part of the Enlightened One. The latter perceiving this opened 
his golden-tongued mouth and proclaimed solemnly, “I have the 
most precious treasure, spiritual and transcendental, which this 
moment I hand over to you, O venerable Mahakasyapa!” 
The same writer mentions the special lines that sum up the message of 
Bodhidharma, who introduced Zen into China with his arrival 1P 
A.D. 520.2 


AT: W 
1. Zen Buddhism; Selected Writings of D. T. Suzuki, ed. by William Barrett, (Ne 
York, 1956), p. 59. 
2. Ibid., p. 61. 


Offering Materials and their Meanings 75 


“A special transmission outside the scriptures; 

No dependence upon words and letters; 

Direct pointing at the soul of man; 

Seeing into one’s nature and the attainment of Buddhahood.” 


Hence, yellow—and notice the reference to “golden-tongued mouth"— 
apparently refers to the official color of Buddhism and its emphasis on 
training the mind. 

For the representation of insight by the lamp, Mkhas grub rje’s (p. 183) 
has the verse (addressed to the deity): 


Pray enjoy these lamps, 

Auspicious and triumphant over harmful elements, 
Virtuous and dispelling of darkness, 

Which I offer with devotion. 


The color red is of course that of fire, and shows that the illumination is 
from a flame. Insight (prajfda) in this role of a fire is explained in the 
Kasyapapariprcchá, as cited and expanded near the end of Tson-kha-pa's 
Lam rim chen mo: 


Käsyapa, thus, for example, when two trees are rubbed together 
by the wind, and fire arises (from the friction), (that fire) having 
arisen, burns the two trees. In the same way, Kasyapa, (when 
natures are analysed) by the most pure discrimination (pratya- 
vekgand), the faculty of noble Insight (arya-prajria) arises; and 
(that Fire) having arisen, it burns up that most pure discrimination 
itself. 


In order to get the sense of perfume colored green that stands for the 
mind of enlightenment, one can refer to Mkhas grub rje's (pp. 31-32), for 
the third Abhisambodhi when Gautama “saw directly that Samantabhadra 
of the former thought of enlightenment under the shape of an upright 
five-pronged white thunderbolt in his own heart,” for which reason 
(infra), perfumes are offered to the heart. See the note to those pages of 
Mkhas grub rje’s: Samantabhadra is the knowledge of the pledge. This 
agrees with D. T. Suzuki, Studies in the Lankävatära Sütra (pp. 230-36), 
on the Avatamsaka-siitra’s ten vows of the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra. 
In Tibet the green Samantabhadra is the Bodhisattva aspect of the 
“primordial Buddha" (ädibuddha) (for which see Tucci, Tibetan Painted 
Scrolls, Y, p. 236), and protector of the Tibetan Rüin-ma-pa sect. Here 
"primordial Buddha" means knowledge of the vow of enlightenment, or 
seed bodhicitta. The applicability of perfume is suggested by Mkhas grub 


76 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


rje's (p. 181) verse to the deity: “These auspicious perfumes . . .", because 
the word translated “auspicious” is bzan po, part of the Tibetan name 
Kun-tu-bzan-po (Samantabhadra), “entirely auspicious,” so the perfume 
conveys the auspiciousness of the “mind of enlightenment”. This seems 
also to be the meaning of the Green Tara, because of the legend that in 
one of her former lives she was a queen who vowed that in her future lives 
she would always be a woman and would eventually in the incarnation of 
a woman become a Buddha, which she did become. 


Oblations to the Deities 


Concerning the offerings to the deities to be residents and the offering 
of seats, with the oblations and others such as the “feet-cooling water", 
cf. Mkhas grub rje's, pp. 178-83. Snags rim (237b to 238a) states the places 
where they are offered: The feet-cooling water, because it washes the feet, 
is imagined as offered to the feet (of the deity). The bath, to the entire 
body (i.e. to the reflected image of the body). The oblations, in front or to 
the head. The flower, to the head. Perfumed incense and lamp, in front. 
Food for the gods, in front, to the hands, or to the face. And one imagines 
the perfume offered to the heart. Those (locations) are common to all rites. 

Mkhas grub rje’s (р. 177) has a fine summary statement of the oblations 
used for the invitation: 


The invitation must be done with an oblation (arghya), which 
therefore must be prepared beforehand. The vessel for that is of 
gold, silver, and so forth; and a copper vessel is auspicious for all 
(invitations) in common. For appeasing rites (Säntika) and their 
superior siddhi, barley and milk are required. For rites to increase 
prosperity (paustika) and their middling siddhi, sesamum and sour 
milk are needed. For dreadful rites (abhicaruka) and their inferior 
siddhi, ordinary urine together with millet, or blood, is offered up- 
Parched rice, fragrant odors, white flowers, kusa grass, and sesamum 
mixed in pure water, which are auspicious for all rites in common; 
are prepared and incensed with the odors of incense. One blesses 
the oblation by reciting seven times an appropriate one among the 
general dhdranis of the Vidyaraja and of the three Families, among 
the dhäranis of all the rites of the individual Families, or among the 
dhäranis of Invitation. 


That passage, however, does not give the complete list of oblations in the 
several cases. Sags rim (236b to 237a) sets forth two lists of seven 
oblations each. For appeasing rites, there are 1. barley, 2. milk, 3. white 
flowers, 4. kusa grass, 5. sesamum, 6. parched rice, and 7. ambrosS!2- 


Offering Materials and their Meanings 77 
For prosperity rites, there are 1. sesamum, 2. sour milk, 3. yellow flowers, 
4. kusa grass, 5. perfume, 6. yellow water, 7. ambrosia. A similar list was 
not presented for dreadful rites.? 

Perhaps the most important of all special rites in the category of 
“appeasing” is the cult of Bhaisajya-guru (the Healing Buddha). The 
elaborate layered structure for the offerings in this case is indeed impressive. 

Among the “prosperity” rites, the most eagerly pursued is the cult of 
the “three divinities of long life"—in the iconography, the Buddha 
Amitayus, with Usnisavijaya and the White Tara in the foreground. 

In the coercing service, included among the “terrible rites,” there is, 
for example, the offering made to the Lord of the Dead, Yama, and his 
retinue. A Tibetan text in my possession, the Drug bcu pa, mentions the 
food offering (bali) to be the “three sweets and three whites” (dkar gsum 
mnar gsum), which the Sarat Chandra Das Tibetan-English Dictionary 
explains to be molasses, honey, and sugar; and milk, curds, and butter. 
In the ritual, these offerings in large precious vessels are imagined to 
become a vast ocean of ambrosia. (This is perhaps also the meaning of the 
item “ambrosia” in the above two lists of seven oblations each). In this 
service, there is a large triangular construction called “zor”—in my text 
“stor zor giien po" (adversary zor for the offering)—for combating the 
evil spirits. On the pinnacle of the triangle is a skull with headdress—the 
whole giving a scare-crow appearance. The offerings are shown in more 
imaginative form in the Yama-offering tankas of Tibet, of which a sample 
is reproduced. The kinds of materials included in these coercing representa- 
tions are listed by Lessing,* for example, the animals to gratify the sight of 
the fierce deity, the eight offerings in bowls in the foreground, and so on. 
In Lessing’s manuscript remains, I notice the description of what is called 
in Tibetan the dkar rgyan, ornament of the three white things: the round 
offering; with flame-shaped ornament ending in sun, moon, and “fiery 
tongue” (the dkar rgyan); this is surmounted by the “black arrow” and a 
piece of black cloth. 

Among the miscellaneous special offerings, there is the elaborate Tibetan 
rite of what Schubert calls the “rice mandala” and Lessing® a “thanks- 
giving offering”. Lessing explains that it was first offered, according to 
legend, by Indra himself to the newly-born Sakyamuni Buddha; and that it 


3. This is the threefold grouping of rites requiring a burnt offering (лота) and is very 


ancient, going back to the Vedic period. See F. D. Lessing, Yung-Ho-Kung, pp. 139-61, for 
the third group of “terrible rites" is 


the homa rites classified as four; in the latter case, 

divided up into “controlling” and “destroying - 
4. Lessing, Yung-Ho-Kung (Stockholm, 1942), р: 104. 

D Johannes Schubert, “Das Reis-Mandala," Asiatica, 
ipzig, 1954), pp. 584-609. ivi 
6. F. D. ye “Miscellaneous Lamaist Notes, I; Notes on the Thanksgiving 


Offering," Central Asiatic Journal, 11:1 (1956), 58-71. 


Festschrift Friedrich Weller 


PLATE 6. Zor for Yama and Yama Offerings. 


78 


Offering Materials and their Meanings 79 


is coupled with a rite, on which he himself did much study,? called the 
“bath of the Buddha.” In the course of the rites associated with 
Avalokite$vara (the 11-headed variety, with an “eye-wound” in each of 
his thousand hands), this deity is invoked to slake the thirst of the starving 
ghosts (preta) in the verse:8 


May the starving spirits be satiated, 
bathed, and always cooled by the streams 
of milk flowing from the hands of 
Arya-Avalokitesvara. 


The officiant, acting the role of AvalokiteSvara, pours some water to his 
left or right, or into a small bowl placed to the right of the food vessel, 
while making the incantation, OM AH HRIH HUM OM MANI PADME 
HUM. OM JALAM IDAM SARVA-PRETEBHYAH SVAHA. “Om 
Ah Hrih Him. Om Mani Padme Hum. Om, this water to all the starving 
spirits, Svaha.” Observe that milk is one of the “three whites". 


Materials Inserted in the Flasks 


The Buddhist Tantras and their commentaries frequently mention certain 
ritual materials in sets as the five herbs, five perfumes, five essences, five 
grains, and five jewels; and sometimes the five ambrosias. The different 
works do not always itemize the members of each set the same. Tson-kha- 
pa's Snags rim chen mo, folio 193a, has a number of these lists for the 
items to be placed within the ritual flask. Of course, these materials do not 
necessarily all go into the same flask, and the Snags rim, 193b to 194a 
gives various theories. According to Mkhas grub rje's “Preparation of the 
flask" (pp. 287, ff.) there are two main kinds of flask, the victorious flask 
(vijaya-kalasa) for the time of initiation and the action flask (karma- 
kalasa) for general sprinkling purposes. The gods are generated in the 
victorious flask. А 

I found a number of itemizations of the fivefold sets in the commentaries 
on the Vajra-vidärana-dhärani. The commentary by Smrti relates these to 
the body, speech, mind, marvellous action (karma), and merits (guna) of 
the deity, as shown in the following table, along with more or less standard 
listings in each set. 


7. F. D. Lessing, “Structure and Meaning of the Rite Called the Bath of the Buddha 
According to Tibetan and Chinese Sources,” Studia Serica Bernhard Karlgren Dedicata, 


pp. 159-171. 2364 
8. My own translation of the Tibetan verse which I find reproduced by Lessing in his 


manuscript study of the “‘Hundred-fold Offerings". I do not possess the Tibetan work he 
utilized, but only the very abbreviated form of the rite in a little treatise entitled, Gror 
ma brgya rtsa Sin tu bsdus pa. 


"(ZEGI Зшҳәа) eIyesejey OY} 10} SZUNIYO vjepuryy °L ALVIg 


80 


Offering Materials and their Meanings 81 


TABLE 7 


MATERIALS IN THE FLASKS 


SUPERINTENDENCE SYMBOLIC SUBSTANCES (RTAGS) 

Body Herbs (5): brhati, kandakäri, white aparäjita, white and 
red danda flower 

Speech Perfumes (5): sandal, musk, saffron, aloe, incense 

Mind Essences (5); sesamum, salt, butter, molasses, honey 

Marvellous Action Grains (5): mustard seed, barley, fodder barley, sesame, 
peas 

Merits Jewels (5): sapphire or another precious gem, coral, gold, 


pearl, crystal 


———————————————— 


The commentary (Toh. 2687) by Jhänavajra says of the five essences, 
(1) the essence from earth is sesamum; (2) from water is salt; (3) from cream 
is butter; (4) from a tree, molasses, (5) from flowers, honey. The com- 
mentary (Toh. 2681) by Vimalamitra substitutes for (1) and (2) the 
fire-crystal and the moon-crystal (presumably as the essence of the sun and 
the moon). 

The greatest variety seems to be in the list of herbs. The list in the table 
is from the Snags rim chen mo. Jhänavajra gives instead: vyakri, senkri, 
jirikarnika, hasa, hasadeva. 

Also, the Snags rim, folio 195b-3, states that the herbs, grains, and 
jewels are explained in the Hevajra-tantra tradition as tokens (rtags) 
respectively of the mind of enlightenment, heart, and bodily color, of the 
mandala-deities. On the same folio, Tson-kha-pa quotes Kukuräja’s 
Samayogamandalavidhi (Toh. 1671), “The five herbs are the mind of 
enlightenment of the compassionate one; the grains are the self-existence 
of the gods; the five kinds of jewels are the light of their bodies; the essences 
are the heart-realm of knowledge; the perfumes are the victorious merits of 
virtue.” Of course, these correspondences in commentaries on the 
Anuttarayoga Tantra differ from those which Smrti gives in a Kriya 
Tantra commentary, and this suggests that the commentaries on the 
different Tantra divisions, Kriya, Caryä, Yoga, and Anuttarayoga, may 
have their own way of working out the correspondences to the fivefold sets. 


9 


SYMBOLISM OF THE MANDALA-PALACE* 


1. Varieties of mandala symbolism 


The Tibetan diagrams called mandala, usually in the form of square 
paintings, have aroused much interest in the West. These mandalas are 
especially depicted with an ornamented circular border which encloses a 
two-dimensional form of a four-sided palace. The present study is not 
meant to convey a thorough account of the rich symbolism involved, but to 
show what light can be cast on the subject by selected passages from 
authoritative works. For this purpose, the abbreviation PTT with volume 
number will be used for citations from the Japanese photographic edition 
of the Peking Tibetan canon. The abbreviation Sriags rim refers to Tson- 
kha-pa's Snags rim chen mo in a separate Peking blockprint. The works of 
Ratnäkarasänti (known to the Tibetans as Santi-pa) have been especially 
helpful. 


Introducing the palace 


The palace demands a proper setting. For example, in Ratnakarasanti’s 
Mahämäyäsädhana (Sadhanamälä, No. 239), we read: “Опе should con- 
template as below, a spot of earth made of diamond; across, 4 diamond 
enclosure; above, a tent; in the middle, a dreadful burning ground 

(adho vajramayim bhümim tiryag vajrapräkäram upari уајгарайјагат 


* Under the title “Contributions on the Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace,”’ UP 
first part of the present study was published in Etudes tibétaines dédiées a la ge the 
Marcelle Lalou. (Adrien Maisonneuve, Paris, 1971), which may be consulted fo 
Tibetan and Sanskrit passages here omitted. 


82 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 83 


madhye ghorasmaSänam vibhavya). The text continues: “In the midst of 
that, one sees a palace with a single courtyard and made entirely of jewels— 
with four corners, four gates, decorated with four arches, having four altars, 
and radiant with nets and so on, and with nymphs” (tanmadhye kita- 
garam ekaputam sarvaratnamayam pasyet—caturasram caturdvaram 
catustoranabhüsitam / härädyair apsarobhi$ ca bhäsvad vedicatusta- 
yam //).! 

Besides, the palace can be understood as the transformation of the body, 
in the context of which Snags rim (2342-6) cites the Explanatory Tantra of 
the Guhyasamäja, the Vajramalä: “The body becomes a palace, the 
hallowed basis of all the Buddhas” (/ lus ni gzal yas khan du gyur / /sans 
rgyas kun gyi yan dag rten/). When the body of the yogin has this trans- 
formation he is called the Diamond Being (Vajrasattva), as in this passage 
of the Sri Paramädya-tantra (PTT, Vol. 5, p. 172-2): 


... Surrounded by a diamond line, beautified with eight posts, 
decorated with four gates, arches, altars, banners and half-banners, 
and so on. How is Vajrasattva understood as the principal meaning 
there? Because he has marks born of the sky, is supreme without 
beginning or end, the great self-existence (syabhäva) of Vajrasattva 
is said to be the Glorious Supreme Primordial (sri рағатаауа).2 


Explanation of the parts of the palace 


Undoubtedly, the Tanjur (commentarial portion of the Tibetan canon) 
contains many commentaries on the basic palace terminology. Invariably, 
such elements as the four gates are identified with categories of the 
Buddhist path, thus indicating that Vajrasattva is the synthetic paragon of 
all Buddhist accomplishments. The first solution comes from the Sarvara- 
hasyanäma-tantraräja (PTT, Vol. 5, p. 58-5), verses 117-123 in my counting: 


117. Where the mandala is explained is the sublime mental mandala. 
The palace is knowledge (jana), erection of an edifice of conscious- 


ness. 
118. The four outer corners establish equality of measure. The 


mind of maitri, etc. is explained as the four lines. 
119. The recollection praxis of dharma 15 explained as the 


1. The Tibetan translation (Tohoku No. 1643, Derge Tanjur, Rgyud hgrel, Ya, 2102-7, 
f.) enables us to establish Sanskrit-Tibetan equivalences for some important terms: 
S. vajramayim bhümim, T. rdo rjehi sa gZi. S. vajrapräkära, T. rdo rjehi ra ba. S. 
küfägära, T. gal yas khan. S. puta, T. khyams. S. aéra, T. gru. S. dvàra, T. sgo. S. 
torana, T. rta babs. S. hära, Т. dra ba. S. vedi, Т. stegs bu. б . 

2. This passage introduces some more terms of which the equivalences are not in 
doubt: S. sütra, T. thig. S. stambha, T. ka ba. S. vedi, T. kha khyer. S. ardhahara, T. dra 


phyed. 


84 


Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


diamond line. The liberation from all views is ex 
knowledge line. 

120. The holy collection of morality is referred to as “ornament” 
(alamkara). The thoughts of independence, and so on, have realized 
the five hopes. 

121. The four liberations (vimoksa) are the gates. The four right 
elimination-exertions (samyak-prahdna) are the arches and involve 
posts. 

122. The four stations of mindfulness (smrtyupasthäna) are under- 
stood as the four courtyards. The four bases of magical power 
(rddhi-päda) are the four gate projections (niryüha).3 

123. The seven ancillaries of enlightenment (bodhyanga) are the 
adornment with garlands and flower bundles. The eightfold Noble 
Path is explained as the eight posts. 


plained as the 


Following are extracts from the commentary on the foregoing by Ratna- 


karasanti, his Sri-sarvarahasya-nibandha-rahasya-pradipa-näma (PTT, Vol. 
76, p. 12-1,2,3): 


“Sublime” (dam pa) because it is comprised by the Sambhoga-käya. 
“Knowledge” means insight (prajfid) ... The equality of the four 
sides in terms of external measurement, is the “four lines”; in 
reality, it is friendliness (maitri), etc., that is, friendliness, com- 
passion, sympathetic joy, and impartiality. Because they take the 
sentient beings as object, the four boundless states (apramana) of 
friendliness, etc. are called “boundless”. When they take as object 
the sentient beings involved with the realm of desire, they are called 
the “pure abodes” (brahma-vihdra)...(In the first case, see 
verse 119) the line is the reality (tattva); (in the second case,) it is 
the knowledge (jfdna)...The five hopes are the faculties of 
faith, etc. 


Turning to the Guhyasamäja-tantra cycle, there are two main commen- 


tarial traditions, that headed by Buddhajfianapada and that headed by the 
tantric Nagarjuna. Here one finds an interesting, but overly brief, explana- 
tion in Buddhajnänapäda’s Caturariga-sadhanopayika-samantabhadr®- 
nama, PTT Vol. 65, p. 19, which has been overly expanded in Samanta 4 
hadra's Caturanga-sädhana-tikä-säramanjari-näma, PTT Vol. 65, p. 1 16, i 
The following summary will present the principal details of this position: 


Е : 2 TOA Е зуд dtmako 
The officiant recites the formula Om Siinyatajfanavajrasyabhava aim 


*ham. He then imagines in the triangular dharmodaya (T. chos hbyut) 


3. Here is the equivalence, S. niryüha, T. sgo khyud. 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 85 


a lotus adorned with a visvavajra. (These words point to the mandala- 
palace). From the wheel of BHRUM syllables arise Vairocana together 
with his consort. (These words point to the divine residents of the mandala). 
The four corners show that there is no inequality of Buddhahood and Com- 
plete Buddhahood in comparison with Buddhahood and Incomplete 
Buddhahood. The four gates mean excellence by way of mindfulness 
(smrti) and faculty (indriya). The mindfulness is said to imply the four 
stations of mindfulness, the four right elimination-exertions, and the four 
bases of magical power; faculty means the set beginning with faith. 
Besides, the stations of mindfulness have three levels by way of the three 
insights, that consisting of learning, of pondering, and of cultivation. 
Preliminary to all the rest is faith ($raddha), so that is the Eastern Gate. 
The four right elimination-exertions or four strivings (virya) are the 
Southern Gate. To the Western Gate are assigned the mindfulness 
generated by analysis of the doctrine (dharma-pravicaya) as well as the 
four bases of magical power. The Northern Gate has one-pointed samadhi 
which implies the five faculties (indriya) and five powers (bala). The four 
arches are the four Dhyänas; and these are encircled by the four-part 
perimeter (nemi) of samädhis, the four called Süramgama, Gaganaganja, 
Vimala, and Simha-vijrmbhita. This part is well-ornamented with objects 
of worship. Because the nine divisions of scripture are intended to please 
and attract the sentient beings, they are represented by the fluttering 
banners of eight different colors and tinkling bells, called the ninefold 
miscellany (prakirna). “Knowledge-mirror” is expanded as net (hära), half- 
net (ardha-hära), mirror, flower-garland, and so on—representing the 
seven ancillaries of enlightenment. The eight decorated posts stand for the 
purity of the eight liberations. The diamond line stands for turning the 
wheel of the doctrine by the diamond method, which is the method of 
incantation (mantra). The буе offerings (flowers, powdered incense, lamp, 
perfume, and food for the gods) represent the Dharmadhatu. Besides, the 
palace is to be studded with as many jewels as possible.* 

In the case of Nagarjuna, there is his Pindikrta-sadhana, which fortunately 
has been edited by Louis de La Vallée Poussin in his edition of the Райса- 
krama (Gand, 1896). Verse 23 has the setting of the palace: "When one 
draws together the four mandalas, there is the mandala in a spot of diamond 
earth (vajrabhiibhaga). There one should contemplate a palace arisen from 
the syllable BARUM :—" 


24-26. With four corners, four gates, decorated with four arches, 


associated with four lines, adorned with eight posts, beautified with 
nets and half-nets, and with mani-vajras and half-moons. Studded 


4. Here we have S. nemi, T. mu khyud. 


86 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


(khacita) with vajraratnas [in all the joints of corners and] in the 
joints of the gates and gate projections. [Has a line struck for the 
outer circle]. With flasks, posts, and the Mahavajra; also birds on 


the series of heads. Adorned with bell-banners; also with camaras, 
and so on".5 


On this, Ratnakarasanti has well commented in his Pindikrta-sädhano- 
payika-vrtti-ratnavali-nama (PTT, Vol. 62, p. 74). He has employed the 
classifying terminology of “hinted meaning” (neyártha) and “evident 
meaning” (nitártha), which turns out to be here the distinction between the 


conceptualized and then externally-represented mandala on the one hand, 
and the body mandala on the other. 


A. Hinted Meaning. The spread of the rampart perimeter about the four 
corners amounts to four anguli, because it is the purity of “sameness 
knowledge” (samatd-jfiana). “Four gates" means accompanied with 
gates in each direction, because they are the purity of the four gates 
to liberation and the four stations of mindfulness. “Four arches” 
means the special structures over the four gates as a lovely decora- 
tion, because they are the purity of the four Dhyanas. Likewise, 
“associated with four lines" means with the two Brahma lines or 
with the (four) basic lines, because they are the purity of the four 
pure abodes. “Adorned with eight posts” means with their positions 
in the directions of the eastern square (kosthaka) of the cakravartin, 
etc. since they possess various jewels and are marked with vajras, 
mirrors, etc., because they are the purity of the (eight) liberations 
of meditation. Likewise, “beautified” means that the net, which 
has a lord, and the half-net, which is without a lord, are beautified 
with mani-vajras and half-moons, because they are the purity of the 
seven ancillaries of enlightenment. “All the joints of the corners” 
means joints of the four directions; likewise, the “gate projections 
are the outer parts and the “joints” are the inner parts. They are 
“studded with vajraratnas,” i.e. with vajras marked with ratnas 
that slightly stand out and emanate light, because they are the 
intrinsic nature of the five knowledges. Likewise, flasks are placed 
on both sides of each gate, that is, eight golden flasks; among them, 


5. La Vallée Poussin’s reading krayasirsas tu yaksini has been corrected to кат 
tu paksini. In the 5йарѕ rim, 188a-4,5,6, this kramasirsa is identified with the “elep 
trunks” (S. ѕйсіка, T. sar bu rnams). can be 

6. The two Brahma lines (North-South and East-West) cross each other and a sides 
counted as four segments. The basic lines are the directional lines conskhimung о bi = 
of the square. See the diagram in Ferdinand D. Lessing, “The Eighteen Wo 


mies 54), 
Crossing the Sea,” in the Sino-Swedish Expedition Publication 38 (Stockholm 19 
p. 126. 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 87 


the Jaya and Mangala are in the East; the Pratiharya and Siddhi in 
the South; Vijaya and Santi in the West; Siddha and Nirmita in the 
North—because they are the nature of the eight siddhis of Zi ba,’ etc. 
The posts are eight, since there are two each at each gate; their 
adornment is as before. “Mahävajra” stands for the eleven vajras, 
because they are the purity of the Stages.8 “Birds on the series of 
heads” means that on the summits of the arches, there are two 
peacocks (mäyüra) in the East, two swans (hamsa) in the South, 
two cakraväkas in the West, two jivamjivakas in the North, because 
they are the purification of passion (raga). Likewise, “bell-banners” 
are banners along with bells which give out peals from the tops of 
the banners, and are possessed of nets of banners and bells. Again, 
“with camaras and so on” means camaras (i.e. whisks made of yak 
tail), flower garlands. “Adorned” means adorned with those 
(bell-banners, etc.), which are the purity of the nine divisions of 
the sacred scripture. (The foregoing:) Hinted Meaning (neyartha): 


B. Evident Meaning. Among those, “Meru” is the body. "Eight 
peaks” are the eight orifices.? “Visva-vajra” and “visva-padma” 
are the two organs by division into male and female. The “palace” 
is the body itself. “Four corners” are the front, back, right, and 
left sides. “Four gates” are the mouth, the secret place (here: the 
heart), navel, and Brahmarandhra. The four arches are the two eyes 
and the two ears. The four lines are Rus sbal ma (*Kürmi), Zla ba 
ma (*Candrika), Lha sbyin ma (Devadatta), and Nor rgya ma, 10 
The eight posts are the two shoulders, both the arms and the legs 
and the two thighs. The “net” is the basic veins; the "half-net" is 
the subsidiary fibres, totalling 72,000. The half-moon is the 


7. The term Zi ba may be a slip. It is equivalent to the rite of appeasing (santika); this 
is the first of the three or four rites aimed at siddhis (occult powers or success) of various 
kinds. For the list of eight siddhis, cf. Mkhas grub rje's Fundamentals of the Buddhist 
Tantras, tr. by Е. D. Lessing and A. Wayman (The Hague, 1968), pp. 220-1. 1 

8. The Stages are of course the ten Bodhisattva Stages and the Buddha Stage, making 
a total of eleven. i $ 

9. The eight orifices are presumably the usual nine minus the Braten te = 
Tson-kha-pa’s commentary on the Six Laws of Näro-pä, the “ Yid ches gsum an А 
(РТТ Vol. 161, р. 10), where it is taught that in order to have a transit through the 
Brahmarandhra (here called the “Golden Gate"), it is necessary to inhibit the transits 
(Ratnäkarasänti would call them the oozing”) of vijana through the other eight ЕА ч 

10. Earlier in this same work by Ratnäkarasänti, PTT Vol. 62, p. 69-3, he ha ls КЕ 
mentioned this tortoise lady (kürmi) as a vein (radi) and in like fashion the Mich ч М 
(candrikä). Presumably the four ladies are equivalent to the four goddesses of the ES › 
Traivrttà, Kämini, Gehä, and Candika, who are placed in the four directions ао oE 
to the discussion in Sviags rim, 435a-6, where a fifth goddess Māradārikā is adde a x 
middle. In this theory of the heart having the initial structure which spreads to the other 
cakras of the body, the four goddesses of the heart, representing the four sensory objects, 
Seem to well correspond to the first four lines of the mandala. 


88 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


bodhicitta, which is the part of means (upäya) incorporating the 
part of insight (prajfia). The vajra is the vajra of the secret place, 
Ratna is its peak. “Corner part” is the left nostril; “joint of the gate 
projection” is the right nostril. Their “vajra” is perception 
(vijfiana). Jewel is the substance oozing therefrom, and which 
possesses it. Flask is the belly. Post is the back. Mahävajra is the 
six elements. Birds are the ten winds, because they move about. 
Bell is the tongue, because it makes sounds. Banner is the central 
channel. Camara is the hair of head. The flower garlands included 
in “and so on” are the intestines. “Deer” are the eight perceptions. 
(The foregoing:) Evident Meaning (nitärtha). 


Then there is a passage in Vajravarman’s commentary, the “Sundarälam- 
kara”, on the tantra Sarvadurgati-parisodhana, PTT Vol. 76, p. 133, which 
is worthwhile presenting to show a somewhat unorthodox way of inter- 
preting the same parts of the palace, and in particular to introduce the 
obscure Tibetan term pha-khu (=pha-gu): “The four boundless states of 
friendliness, etc., are the four gates. The four samädhis are the four arches. 
The eight liberations are the eight posts. The four noble Truths are the 
four sides (logs). The four Dhyänas are the jewelled pha-khu.!1 Finally, 
the nine samapattis are the nets and half-nets". 

Those commentaries on the parts of the palace, attributing to them the 
categories of Buddhist ascension, agree rather consistently on the basic 
parts to be so treated symbolically. In addition, the books go into further 
technicalities of construction, which are elaborately developed in the 
Snags rim, chapter on Preparatory Rite (sta gon gi cho ga), subsection 
“Explaining the meaning of the lines which are ‘struck’” (btab pahi thig 
rnams kyi don bsad paho). Besides, this subsection has valuable information 
for our present discussion. In particular, mandala paintings show two 
circular strips, the outer ring and the inner enclosure of the lotus. Already 
we have noticed in the setting of the palace that there is a diamond en- 
closure. Snags rim (178b-3) cites Kluhi Blo (*Nägabuddhi), "The arch 
(torana) has a pinnacle of diamond; beyond that is the outer wall which has 
the good light of a diamond garland". With reference to the inner en- 
closure, Snags rim (175a-2) cites the same author, “Outside the inner 
circle, one should draw the four lines completely equal". The following 
passage of Snags rim (1782-2, ff.) insists that the expression “diamon 
enclosure" (vajraprakara) means both the outer wall of the world and the 
Dharmodaya (fecund source of all the natures of the world). They pi 
So to say, the outer and inner boundaries of the world. Accordingly, 


5 ” on 

11. The Sriags rim (187a-1) defines the pha-gu as follows: “The ° pha- gu 20 Prig 
the structure up to the summit of the gate side, as the structure runs’ (/ pha y 
pabi sten nas sgo logs kyi rtse mobi bar du rtsig pa ji Itar son ba bzin yod do р). 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 89 


four equal lines according to the Snags rim are really boundless, just as 
was set forth above from the Sarvarahasya-näma-tantraraja: 


The equal measure of the “fire mountain” (S. agniparvata, T. me ri) 
in all directions has the meaning of equal measure of emitting rays, 
but it is not the case that the four small parts (segments) do not 
continue further. Hence, (he) says that one does not prepare the 
painting of powdered colors as its ceiling: it continues on without 
measure. In all the directional angles, the fire heap keeps on; 
within that, the diamond enclosure has the nature of the outer wall 
of the world (mahäcakravala) which is thick and compact. Further- 
more, this асйгуа [presumably Kluhi Blo] maintains that the mean- 
ing of its contemplation goes from the wind-mandala below to the 
Akanistha above, so it is necessary to understand likewise the 
“strips” (snam bu) of the diamond spot. The sort of vajra may be 
either five-pronged, three-pronged, or а visva-vajra (crossed 
thunderbolt); and if painted, is to be made accordingly. Our school 
holds that the circular line which encloses the vajra and the padma 
symbolizes the Dharmodaya; and if there is contemplation of the 
Dharmodaya, it is (done) that way. 


According to that position of Tson-kha-pa, although the texts frequently 
describe the dharmodaya as a triangle, one should contemplate it as an 
inner circle in the case of conceiving the mandala. 


The Triangular Dharmodaya 


The Dharmodaya as a triangle is apparently shown in a mandala in my 
possession only in photographic form (original presumably in Stockholm, 
the Hedin collection). Unfortunately, it is not sufficiently clear for further 
reproduction. ; 
Here, what I take to be the Dharmodaya triangle is within the inner 
circle which is surrounded by four petals, suggesting the mandala of the 
heart, described later in my essay on the Inner Zodiac. Previously it was 
noted that in the Caturanga-sädhana the officiant imagines a lotus adorned 
with a visvavajra (a crossed thunderbolt) in the triangular Dharmodaya 
(=dharmadhätu as source of natures). Presumably that is also what 
Sridhara refers to in his Krsnayamäri-sädhana-nama (PTT. Vol. 85, 


p. 298-5), verse 18: 


(From which) rightly arises the auspicious member— 
a white triangular Dharmodaya, 

located above like the sky, 

with a vigva-padma-vajra in the middle. 


Mandala of the Triangular Dharmodaya 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 91 


In the present case the “diamond thread” which surrounds the inner circle 
is strung with skulls; and within the triangle, instead of the visvavajra— 
which is a stiff structure—there is what seems to be a free representation 
of the svastika in its meaning (as Buddhaguhya will be cited below) of the 
union of means and insight, or of the male and female, symbolized by the 
vajra and the padma. This becomes clear when the small, diffuse, triangular 
area of the photograph is viewed under a microscope. The figure within 
the triangle seems to consist of two scarves crossing each at their mid- 
points where they are tied together, which the artist has embellished in 
wave fashion. On the facing page is a drawing of the central area only of 
this particular mandala. 


ж * x 


The figure within the drawing is such that it can be turned in any 
direction. In any case, the triangle, while drawn pointing downwards, 
need not be so construed because it is part of a two-dimensional representa- 
tion of the three-dimensional palace. In the Guhyasamdjatantra tradition, 
as in Tson-kha-pa’s annotation commentary on the Pradipoddyotana 
(PTT. Vol. 158, p. 13-3), there is a triangle called the “E-triangle” (after 
the shape of the letter “e” in an Indian alphabet) meaning the lotus of the 
vidya, and also meaning the three liberations (the voidness, wishless, and 
signless). 


Il. Symbolism of mandala ritual 


Mkhas grub rje’s Fundamentals of the Buddhist Tantras!? contains a fund 
of basic data, but scattered here and there for our present purposes. Let us 
recall the line cited from the Sarvarahasya-ndma-tantrardja, “Where the 
mandala is explained is the sublime mental mandala,” on which Ratnä- 
karaganti comments: “ ‘sublime’ because it is comprised by the Sambhoga- 
kaya”. This indicates that the mandala can be understood to represent the 
palace of the Akanistha heaven, where according to Mahayana tradition 
(say, the Lankavatára-sütra), Gautama was initiated as a Complete Buddha 
with the body called Sambhoga-kaya. This Akanistha heaven 15 considered 
to be at the top of the world at the limit of the “pure abodes” of the Realm 
of Form" (rüpa-dhätu). Mkhas grub rje’s work contains the tradition that 
this Sambhoga-käya teaches only Bodhisattvas of the Tenth Stage. The 
implication is that the mandala constitutes the re-establishment of the 
heavenly arrangement. It amounts to saying that mythologically the 
advanced Bodhisattvas ascend to the Akanistha heaven to receive the 
instruction of the Sambhoga-käya, and that in practice they construct a 


12. Op. cit., note 7, above. 


92 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


mandala. Mkhas grub rje’s work clarifies that the mandala mu 
than constructed: it must be realized. The mandala is constru 
order of steps generally employed in the Tibetan hieratic paintings. First 
there is a sketch according to the rules. In the Tantra, this is called the 
karma-line, which is white. Then, areas are given appropriate colors, In the 
Tantra, this is called the jräna-line, with lines of five colors representing 
the five Buddhas; and Mkhas grub rje explains that five sets of threads of 
five colors, making a total of twenty five, are twisted together, to con- 
stitute the jfidna-line. Lastly, the details are put in. In the Tantra, this is 
the last stage of mandala-construction, the erection of an edifice. 

Besides, that author Vajravarman (op. cit., p. 133, fol. 5) says, “There 
are two fruitional mandalas, with the method of the Dharmakaya and 
with the method of the Sambhogakaya”. He goes on to illustrate the 
“method of the Dharmakaya” as the five knowledges which are the nature 
of the five Buddhas, starting with the Dharmadhätujfiäna which is the 
basis of all supramundane knowledge and which has the nature of 
Vairocana. If one follows the terminology in the tradition of the 
Mahavairocana-tantra which leads up to the two mandalas of the Japanese 
Shingon school, the method of the Dharmakäya might be a mandala 
representing the Diamond Realm (vajradhätu) and the method of the 
Sambhogakaya might be a mandala representing the Nature Realm 
(dharmadhätu). The mandala of the Diamond Realm is inexpressible, and 
that of the Nature Realm is expressible. 13 


st be more 
cted in the 


The reflected-image mandala 


The following materials are based on six verses in a Tantra of the Yoga 
class referred to briefly as the Sarvadurgati-parisodhana (Purification of all 
evil destiny).14 While there are several extensive commentaries on this 
Tantra preserved in Tibetan translation, I shall translate here only the one 
by Buddhaguhya in his work of reconstructed title, Durgati-parisodhanärtha- 
vyarijana-vrtti. First the six verses (Sloka) of the Tantra (PTT. Vol. 5, 
p. 84-4,5) translated from the Tibetan: 


1. One should start by blessing the place with a rite of whatever 
be the sort, i.e. vihàra, upavana, stüpa, devakula, arama, etc. 
2.-3. One should draw the outer mandala in that place which has 
been blessed, to wit, possessed of four corners, four gates, 
four arches; adorned with four staircases and garland, lions, 
bulls; adorned with silk, tassels, pendant necklaces, garland, 
bells, yak tails. 
i4 un the Tantra as entered in the catalogs of the Tibetan canon 18 


kalpa 
Sarvadurgati-pari$odhana-tejorajasya tathägatasya arhate samyaksambuddhasy2 
nama. 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 93 


4. One should adorn it with the seals (mudra) of diamond, jewel 
lotus, svastika. It should possess eight lines, and be adorned 
with outer gate projections. 

5A. One should dress it in nine parts and render the gates and 
gate projections into three parts. 

5B. The casting of thread with diamond line is the casting of 
thread of the center mandala. 

6. Like the wheel of the law, it has sixteen spokes along with a 
nave. It is possessed of a triple series, and the spokes are to be 
doubled. 


Next I translate Buddhaguhya’s commentary on these verses in the 
section which he calls “the concise meaning of the mandala” (PTT, Vol. 76, 
p. 22-1 to 23-1). Because of certain illegible spots in the photographic 
edition I also consulted the Narthang Tanjur edition. I shall use superscript 
letters, starting with “a” to indicate the paragraphs of my annotation which 
follows the translation. 


ж ж Ж 


Now I shall teach about the reflected image of the conceptual basic 
mandala. Why so? Because this is said to be the external mandala. As to 
its being external, the method of constructing the reflected image mandala 
of powdered colors appears in the sensory domain of the five sense organs. 
The “manda” is the inner palace; and the “Ja” is the wheel possessed of 
spokes, and possessed of strips, gates, and corners.* The meaning expressed 
below has the pure tones from the mouth (of my guru). RA] 

1. The vihāra and the upavana. It is said that the vihära (temple) kind is 
made within the confines of a monastery. The upavana (grove) kind occurs 
variously on a spot of ground that is smooth. | 

The stüpa, devakula, arama. The stiipa kind occurs where there are relics 
of the body. The devakula (chapel) is a residence for mundane gods. The 
arama (garden) is drawn in a place where many persons congregate. 

With a rite of whatever be the sort. “ОЁ whatever be the sort” indicates of 
whatever sort of place, of whatever sort of implements, and of whatever 
sort of incantation expert, incantation assistant, and patron. The rite 
involves the place, rite of investigating, (permission) of a visible king, or of 
an invisible deity, and so forth. In this case there is the sequence: (1) the 
spot where it will be done; and the search for a good spot; (2) begging 
permission to do the stipulated activities according to the rules; (3) ШШЕ 
incantation (mantra), gesture (mudrä), and deep concentration (sama ii) 
to bless it into the mind of enlightenment which is the nature of the fiye 
knowledges; (4) examining the self-existence and characteristic of a 
(5) contemplating according to the rite; (6) beseeching to know according 


94 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


to the rite, doing the ritual methodically, and not wavering in samadhi» 
Why so? 

One should bless the place. There are four kinds of blessing: (1) blessing 
the place into the true nature of knowledge; (2) blessing the place of the 
dharma-mandala arisen from the samadhi-mind; (3) blessing the place of 
conceptual names into the dharmadhátu; (4) blessing the mandala of 
powdered colors as a place of material marks, into a dwelling place for the 
Buddha. 

2.-3. In that place which has been blessed. In the manner that a thousand 
ounces of silver are changed into gold by using gold paint, it is said that 
one blesses the defilement into purity by using the paint of samadhi- 
knowledge. 

One should draw the outer mandala. Cognition manifests. One must 
visualize the samädhi-mandala. The outer mandala is a reflected image of 
that, and since that is the required basis, one speaks of an “outer mandala”; 
and in order to symbolize that, there is the expression “outer mandala”. 

Possessed of four corners and four gates. It exhibits the four corners as 
symbols of having the four knowledges; and exhibits the four gates as 
symbols of having the four kinds of marvellous action (phrin las). 

Possessed of four arches; adorned with four staircases and garland. The 
“arches,” the terrace steps of the mandala-stand, are made of terrace steps 
in the gateways. The “staircases” are made of small stairs from the arches. 
The “garland” consists of the staircases and arches, and is beautified by 
eight intervals (or segments) which appear along with the garland. Besides, 
it is ornamented by possession of the “arches” consisting of the four 
boundless states, with the “staircases” consisting of the four means of 
conversion, and with the “garland” consisting of infinite compassion; and 
it also exhibits the eight liberations.“ 

Adorned with lions and bulls. There are “lions” since the one with great 
compassion of means is not frightened of samsära. There are “bulls” 1n 
the sense of infinite marks of right powers. | 

Adorned with silk, tassels, pendant necklaces, garland, bells, and yak tails. 
They are on the left and right of the gates. “Silk,” or райсағӣва de 
colored), has the meaning of five kinds of knowledge. “Tassels, or 

triraga (three-colored), are the pure nature of body, speech, and mind. 
“Pendant necklace” is a hanging necklace of pearls, standing for the 
Bodhisattva’s joy. “Garland” is a pearl garland surrounding the circular 
necklace; this means the set of requirements for samadhi. "Bells" are 
combined with the necklaces; because they are the purity of speech, pe 
cause the teaching of Dharma to the living beings; and made of р 
they circle the border of the mandala. “Yak tails,” Himalayan, extend or , 
free from fault, they stand for no shifting in the mind of enlightenment. 

4. One should adorn it with the seals (mudra) of diamond, jewel, lotus, 


—— = 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 95 


and svastika. The “diamond” means a round fence of diamond, i.e. an 
unconstructed fence like diamond consisting of wisdom-knowledge 
(vidya-jndna). With a garland of “jewels” there is the inner circle of the 
palace; it arises through all sorts of other merits. “Lotus” is the special 
thing with the various seats for goddesses; it means the aim of living beings 
with the great compassion of skill in the means while being unattached. 
The “svastika” is an angular cross of vajras, like the moon. It is a symbol 
of the union of means (updya) and insight (prajfd). “Adorn it" means 
ornamentation to beautify the reflected image, and ornamentation to 
clarify the apperception of inner symbols. 

It should possess eight lines and be adorned with outer gate projections. 
The “lines,” i.e. threads, mean contemplation in the manner of the mind of 
enlightenment. Having “eight” means it is decorated with four directional 
threads and four inner threads, making eight. Possessing the eight kinds 
means that the person with the eight good-luck symbols on his body, has 
the symbols of completion. “Outer gate projections" are the gate-bends 
(sgo khug pa), standing for the means of entering by samadhi compre- 
hension. *Adorned" with those kinds, means three levels (sum rim) in the 
gates, exhibited by twelve gates. This means that in order to turn the 
sentient beings of the three realms away from the twelve members of 
dependent origination, there is the Buddha in the method of the twelve acts. 
Adorning the strips (snam bu) with a quadruple series (5Zi rim) is a symbol 
of purifying the four kinds of birthplace by means of the four knowledges. 
That is the meaning of adorning it.‘ 

5A. One should dress it in nine parts and render the gates and gate 
projections in three parts. This means that because one purifies with 
compassion the three realms and the nine stages, one explains the single 
face of the mandala as having nine (parts). “One should render the gates 
and gate projections” means that one should render the gates and gate 
projections by the union of calming (the mind) and discerning (the truth); 
and because that perfects body, speech, and mind, one explains that there 
are three parts.® 

That finishes the teaching of Indra differentiation." Now to teach the 
meaning of the inner. Why so? 

5B. The casting of thread with diamond line is the casting of thread of the 
center mandala. “Diamond” is taken as the family (rigs), because it is 
blessed into mind of enlightenment. The “line” is taken as the thread which 
is the means of showing this and that. The “center” is taken E a round 
palace which is the symbol standing for the dharmadhätu. The “thread is 
the diamond thread of wisdom (vidya) and is to be taken as the pe bliss 
(mahäsukha) of the mind of enlightenment. From that “thread” with > 
magical performance (prätihärya) of blessing, emanate the rays o 
knowledge (jfidna) which exhort the illustrious hearts of the noble ones 


96 Foundations of the Buddhist Ti antra 


and bless by performing the aim of sentient bein 
thread”, i.e. the thread that is blessed and is emanating the light of 
knowledge, means casting the sky thread (gnam thig) and the earth thread 
(sa thig). By so casting the pure brahma thread, it is blessed into purity or 
brahmä.' 

6. Like the wheel of the law. Here “wheel” means that when it hasa 
nave and spokes there is capability as a wheel. Like that example, when 
one has a Teacher, retinue, place, etc., because he teaches the law, there is 
the wheel (set into motion). The one with a wheel is like an offering. 
Because right knowledge cuts off the defilement kind of suffering, it is said 
to be the wheel of the law; it is the understanding that perceives the 
meaning after cutting down the nets of intellect. “Net” is a term that takes 
as one the sixteen constructed with having spokes, and is a symbol showing 
that. The dharmadhätu is primordially pure (ye nas rnam par dag pa); the 
nave is a symbol showing that. The spokes are a symbol of the perfection 
of compassion with skill in the means; and dharma is the realm exhibited 
at the nave. The wheel is exhibited as marvellous action (phrin las), and 
the spokes are exhibited as the nature of compassion. The “net” as a 
symbol of showing, is taken as the reflected image which shows the world. 
In order to take it that way, the garland of jewels which shows knowledge 
surrounds the circle; and through the arising of desire there is the 
Sambhogakäya. One posits the example of the horse-mandala.’ What is the 
reason for that? 

It has sixteen spokes along with a nave. The “nave”, which is the circular 
palace of the center, is the Dharmakaya. *Along with" means that the 
garland of jewels surrounds the circle and through the arising of desire 
there is the Sambhogakaya. The “spokes”, i.e. the wheel, exhibit the nature 
of the sixteen sattvas who are the perfection of compassion, and are the 
Nirmänakäya.* Why so? 

It is possessed of a triple series. The ''series" is exhibited as three 
entrances within from without, and three exits from within. The exits 
from within are exhibited as the nave, the garland of jewels, and the spokes. 
Among them, the nave represents the symbol of All-kenning (kun r 2 
Vairocana, the Dharmakaya, “Series” is a term for arising of the specia 
(avenika). The garland of jewels represents the Buddhas of the four 
families as well as the Mother of the family, i.e. the Sambhogakaya m 
great bliss. The spokes of the triple series are the Nirmāņakāya, 1.8 a 
represent the Nirmänakäya as the nature of the supramundane retinue j 
sixteen sattvas, etc. After the diamond fence, the created circle (nir А 
cakra) should be understood as mundane and supramundane. The ДШ : 
series of entrances from without represent the three levels (sum rim) in id 
gate. There is the term “entrance from without" because one arouses H 
mind in the Great Vehicle in the series of performing the aim of living 


gs. Casting the “son 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 97 


beings by way of the body and speech of the Tathagata; and by installing 
the living beings that way among the Bodhisattvas.! Now to teach the aim 
of the wheel: 

The spokes are to be doubled. This means that the spokes are doubled at 
the nave of the wheel, but the pairing does not include the garland of 
jewels of the center. Moreover, it is because the garland of jewels and the 
aforementioned doubling take rise from the nave, that the spokes are to be 
doubled. It is said that there is doubling for the sake of performing the aim 
of living beings by way of the means and insight. 

The concise meaning of the mandala is finished. 


E к 


Subsequently (p. 27-1) Buddhaguhya has an explanation of mandala 
ornaments: “(The text) mentions “canopy” because this is the guru of the 
three realms; “banner” because victorious over the Maras; “adornment” 
(vibhiisana)—marvellous action of compassion; "umbrella"—mind of 
enlightenment; *yak-tail (whisk)"—marvellous action; “tassels” —com- 
passion; “food”—benefit and morality of body; sixteen golden flasks 
which show the seal (mudrá) of the dharmadhätu; five flasks that are filled 
with the water of the five families—the knowledges of the five families; 
“Jamp”—insight; “strewn food offering" (bali)—compassion; “food and 
drink"—food for the gods, diverse foods having the hundred flavors, 
offering water having the eight aspects, and so on." 


ж ж ж 


Неге аге ту comments оп the above: 

а. Buddhaguhya here defines the word mandala in terms of the con- 
tained, manda, and the container or holder, /a. For more information, 
see Mkhas grub rje's, especially pp. 270-71. Guiseppe Tucci, The Theory 
and Practice of the Mandala is recommended for a general treatment and 
mainly for the theory of “residents” of the mandala (in contrast to the 


mandala of residence"). Two French scholars have studied the mandala 


as portrayed in the Manjusrimülakalpa; first Marcelle Lalou, /conographie 
i a | i Ariane Macdonald, Le 


des étoffes peintes (1930), and more recently, 
Mandala du Maijusrimülakalpa (1962). For individual mandalas, the most 
remarkable contribution is now A New Tibeto-Mongol Pantheon, Parts 
12-15, published by Prof. Dr. Raghu Viraf and Prof. Dr. Lokesh Chandra 
(International Academy of Indian Culture, 1967), the individual parts 
containing an enormous number of mandala representations with deity 
lists. 

b. The different parts of the rite are written up mor 
Mkhas grub rje’s, pp. 279, ff. 

c. When the knowledges are given as 


e extensively in 


four, there is the correspondence 


98 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


system of the Yoga Tantra (cf. Mkhas grub rje’s, рр. 232-33); and so the 
knowledges are the Mirror-like, Equality, Discriminative, and Procedure 
of Duty, with respective Bodhisattva activity of Mind of Enlightenment, 
Perfection of Giving, Perfection of Insight, and Perfection of Striving. 

d. The four boundless states were already set forth in the section on 
parts of the palace. The four means of conversion are (1) Giving, equal to 
the Perfection of Giving, (2) Fine, pleasant speech, (3) Acts in accordance, 
(4) Oneself serving as an example. The “eight liberations” were stated 
earlier to represent the eight posts; for the ancient Buddhist theory of the 
eight, see, for example, Paravahera Vajiranàna Mahathera, Buddhist 
Meditation in Theory and Practice, pp. 484-86; and the annotated version 
in Etienne Lamotte, Le traité de la grande vertue de sagesse, Tome III 
(1970), pp. 1291-99. 

e. When five knowledges are mentioned, then the Dharmadhatu- 
knowledge is added to the other four. The set of requirements (T. tshogs) 
is variously stated in the books, but they more or less amount to the set 
Stated by Asanga (cf. A. Wayman, Analysis of the Sravakabhümi, p. 60): 
personal success, success of others, virtuous craving for the doctrine, going 
forth (to the religious life), restraint of morality, restraint of senses, knowing 
the amount in food, practice of staying awake in the former and latter parts 
of night, conduct with awareness, seclusion, elimination of hindrances, and 
right dwelling in samadhi. 

f. For the eight good-luck symbols, see the next section of this chapter. 
The twelve members of dependent origination are in English translation: 
(1) nescience, (2) motivations, (3) perception, (4) name-and-form, (5) six 
sense bases, (6) sense contact, (7) feelings, (8) craving, (9) indulgence, 
(10) gestation, (11) birth, (12) old age and death. The twelve acts of the 
Buddha are (Mkhas grub rje’s, p. 25): (1) the descent from Tusita, (2) 
entrance into the womb, (3) rebirth, (4) skill in worldly arts, (5) enjoyment 
of the harem women, (6) departure from home, (7) arduous discipline, 
(8) passage to the terrace of enlightenment, (9) defeat of the Mara host, 
(10) complete enlightenment, (11) (turning) the wheel of the law, (12) 
departure into Nirvana. The strips (pata) are shown surrounding the nn. 
palace square in the drawing of the Dharmodaya. For the four kinds oF 
birthplace, see my essay, “Buddhist Genesis and the Tantric тшш 
(note 1); but how the four knowledges can purify them certainly needs 
further explanation. : 

g. The term “nine stages” is somewhat obscure (the same en 
occurs in the Narthang edition of this text). However, as it is coupled wit 
the “three realms” the meaning should be the nine samäpatti-s (equilibrium 
attainments), for which see Buddhist Meditation in Theory and REEL 
рр. 454-68. The nine samapatti-s are the four.dhyana stages of the sas 2 
form (rapa-dhátu), the four stages of the formless (arüpya-s), and the staf 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 99 


called “cessation of ideas and feelings” (in Pali: saia-vedita-nirodha). 
Union of calming and discerning is in Sanskrit, Samatha-vipasyanä- 
yuganaddha. 

h. The use of the word “Indra” here requires explanation. Vajra- 
varman’s commentary on the same Sarvadurgatiparisodhana (PTT. Vol. 76, 
p. 121-3), mentions that there are two kinds of Indra, the one ofthe hundred 
offerings (Satakratu) and the one of a thousand eyes. Here the one of the 
hundred offerings is in point, because Buddhaguhya in his commentary 
(p. 33-3) says that Indra is the “уоп bdag" (Sanskrit, yajamäna), i.e. patron 
of the sacrifice. However, the term Mahendra (belonging to Great Indra) 
is used in the Buddhist Tantras to mean “earth”.15 So far there has been a 
differentiation of the sanctified spot of earth, so this must be the main use 
here of the word "Indra". 

i. Blessing (adhisthäna) is one of the four kinds of pratiharya according 
to Mkhas grub rje's, p. 26 (note), the other three being Initiation, 
Marvellous Action, and Deep Concentration. For the knowledge thread 
and brahmä-lines, see Mkhas grub rje's, pp. 284-87. While Mkhas-grub-rje 
does not use the terminology “sky thread" and “earth thread”, his 
explanation is immediately applicable. The meaning of course is that the 
knowledge thread is really in the sky; and so the thread on earth must be 
imaginatively lifted to the sky and imbued with the knowledge which is 
there, then brought down to earth as the *knowledge line", which 
accordingly is a “son thread,” blessed with knowledge. 

j. Concerning the wheel of the law, in non-tantric Buddhism one may 
take Vasubandhu's Arya-Aksayamatinirdesa-tika (Derge Tanjur, Toh. 
3994, 62-4, ff): “Іп the manner of a wheel’ means there is a wheel by 
reason of a nave, spokes, and rim; so also from among the Tathagata’s 
Eightfold Noble Path, right speech, right bodily action, and right livelihood 
are understood as the aggregate of morality, like the nave. The four, right 
understanding, right conception, right mindfulness, and right effort are 
understood as the aggregate of insight, like the spokes. Right samadhi 
(Le. the aggregate of samadhi) is the pacification of all prapaiica 
(expansion of sense attachment), hence like the rim." Notice that 
Buddhaguhya's number sixteen in a multiple of four, and can be taken as 


rama (ed. by de La Vallée Poussin), Vajrajäpak- 
rama, verses 19-22, which set forth the Buddha elements streaming forth from one or 
other nostril from their bases in various element cakras, here called * mandala баегу 
Verse 19 speaks of the hutabhun-mandala, і.е. the vortex of fire (hutabhuj) which is үе 
and departs from the right nostril. Verse 20 uses the expression vape таша Dr t Е 
vortex of wind which is greenish yellow and departs from the left nostril. erse L a 
the term mähendra-mandala for the earth vortex which goes forth in a golden ray from 
both nostiıls. Finally, verse 22 has the term váruma (“related to Varuna") for the m 
vortex which is the white ray also leaving through both nostrils. Here mahendra (relate 
to, belonging to, fit for Great Indra) is a name of the earth. 


15. This is clear enough in the Pa/icak 


100 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


one in the sense of a net. But when Bud 


the nature of compassion, it does not agree with Vasubandhu’s under- 
standing of them as the aggregate of insight. A further divergence is when 
Buddhaguhya takes the nave to stand for the dharma realm, while Vasy- 
bandhu puts here the aggregate of morality, and evidently counts the 
entire wheel as representing the dharma. And when Buddhaguhya takes the 
circle (hence the rim) as the knowledge garland, the disagreement is 
complete. That still does not clarify the “horse-mandala” (same reading in 
the Narthang Tanjur). But the previous use of the word “Indra” suggests 
that “horse” refers metaphorically to the “horse sacrifice” (asva-medha), 
Since in this sacrifice as portrayed at the opening of the Brhadäranyaka 
Upanisad, the horse parts sum up the world, and the mandala is also the 
world. 

k. The sixteen sattvas are certainly the set of sixteen Bodhisattvas which 
Buddhaguhya lists in his commentary, p. 24-2,3 and where he calls them 
the “Bodhisattvas of the Bhadrakalpa (fortunate eon)”. His list is not quite 
the same as in any of the mandalas of the Nispannayogävali, but the 
closest lists are in the Manjuvajramandala and Durgatiparisodhana- 
mandala, wherein the Sanskrit names are established. Here is Buddha- 
guhya’s listing together with directional meaning: 


dhaguhya explains the Spokes as 


East (who do not swerve from the true nature of mind): 
Maitreya, Mafijusri, Gandhahasti, Jnäänaketu. 
South (who have purity of view and practice): 
Bhadrapäla, Amoghadarsi, Akäsagarbha, Aksayamati. 
West (who have a host of merits): 
Pratibhänaküta, Mahästhämapräpta, Sarväpäyanjaha, 
Sarvasokatamonirghatamati. 
North (who have eliminated the two obscurations—of defilement 
and knowable): 
Jaliniprabha, Candraprabha, Amrtaprabha, Samantabhadra. 


The most notable omission is that of Avalokite$vara, but he might be 
present with the name *Amoghadarsi" (whose vision does not fail), 
especially since the Dharmadhätu-Vägisvara-mandala of the RB 
yogävali in its list of sixteen Bodhisattvas includes Avalokitesvara gE 
omits the name Amoghadarśi. Some years ago, when I was reading the lis 
in the Dharmadhätu-mandala, the Mongolian lama Dilowa Gegen 
Hutukhtu told me that those sixteen belong to the Tenth Stage (and >. 
according to Mkhas grub rje’s are in the retinue of the Sambhogakaya 
This then is what Buddhaguhya means in his next paragraph by "Supr 
mundane retinue”. E 
l. The three exits from within are: (1) the nave—Vairocana as Dharma 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 101 


käya; (2) the garland of jewels, which is the rim—the Buddhas in 
Sambhogakäya form; (3) the sixteen spokes—the sattvas as Nirmänakäya. 
The word “dvenika” may refer to the special group of eighteen attributes 
peculiar to a Buddha, called the unshared natures (ävenika-dharma); the 
most elaborate exposition of the eighteen is now in Lamotte (op. cit.), 
Chap. XLI (pp. 1625-1703). The three entrances from without are the 
special kind of body, speech, and mind. The “diamond fence” was 
previously stated to be the round, unconstructed fence consisting of 
wisdom-knowledge. Earlier in Tson-kha-pa’s passage it is called the “fire 
mountain” and the outer wall of the world. In fact, it is the hallowed 
circle, blessed into diamond, and the demonic elements are all outside: 
they cannot cross the “fire mountain”. 


The Mt. Meru Mandala 


Previously Ratnäkarasänti’s exposition of the body-mandala mentioned 
that Meru represents the body. Then Buddhaguhya's description of the 
mandala-rite spoke of a person having the eight good-luck symbols on his 
body. The meaning of these remarks relates to the temple banner of Mt. 
Meru, but we must start with the mandala of Mt. Meru, here reproduced. !6 
Meru is in the center of the four continent system of the realm of desire 
(kämadhätu). 

In a small Tibetan text!7 I noticed a description which goes with this 
mandala and therefore also helps explain the temple banner (below). In my 
translation of the passage I shall restore in part the well-attested Sanskrit 
names!8 along with numbers that agree with those on the Mt. Meru 
Mandala. 


(The Mandala:) OM VAJRABHUMI AH HUM (“Om. The diamond 
spot of earth. Ah Нат”). (There appears) the golden spot of earth which 
belongs to Great Indra (máhendra) OM VAJRAREKHE AH HUM 
(“Om. The diamond sketch. Ah Him”). (There appear):— 


16. The Meru mandala with names in Tibetan and Chinese was produced by the 
Peking Buddhist Institute among the years when the late Professor F.D. Lessing was 
there, and probably in the late 1930’s when he participated in the Hedin BL: 
Professor Lessing prepared a Sumeru diagram accordingly (see Yung-Ho-Kung, pp. 105- 
106) and his further remarks are helpful (especially p. 103). 

17. The Вуай chub lam gyi rim pa'i dmar khrid myur lam gy 
rim pa khyer bde bklag chog bskal bzan mgrin rgyan zes bya ba, 
book of minor Tibetan works with Western format. My copy, whi 
ee or place of publication, was purchased at the Tibetan press ın 

ndia) in Spring 1970. 

18, These en are given by Professor Lessing (note 16, above) and Er 
from the Mahävyutpatti, chapter on the four continents, especially Nos. ^ 
the Sakaki edition, which I have utilized. 


ji sion 'gro'i nag 'don gyi 
which was published in a 
which has no entry of 
Dharmsala, H.P. 


SR: 


rie 


ales aie SX ti Cond HX 


PLATE 8. The Mt. Meru Mandala (Tibetan-Chinese). 


102 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 103 


. Su-Meru, the King of Mountains, in the center, surrounded on the 


outside by the Cakravala of iron mountains; 


. Pirvavideha (Videha of the East), 

. Jambudvipa in the South, 

. Aparagodaniya (Godäniya of the West), 
. Uttarakuru (Kuru of the North), 

. Deha, 

. Videha, Names of continents and 
. Camara lesser continents 
. Aparacamara (the Other Camara), 

. Satha, 

. Uttaramantrina, 

. Kurava 

. Kaurava, 

. the Mountain of Gems, 

. the Wish-granting Tree, 

. the Cow of Plenty, 

. the Harvest Without Ploughing, 

. the jewel of the wheel, 

. the jewel of the gem, 

. the jewel of the woman, 

. the jewel of the minister, 

. the jewel of the elephant, 

. the jewel of the excellent horse, 

. the jewel of the general, 

. the flask of great treasure, 

. the play lady, 

. the garland lady, 

. the song lady, 

. the dance lady, 

. the flower lady, 

. the incense lady, 

. the lamp lady, 

. the perfume lady, 

. Sun, 

. Moon, 

. the Precious Umbrella, 

. the Banner Victorious over the Quarters. 


In that list the eight ladies (Nos. 26 through 33) are goddesses frequently 
depicted in Tibetan banners as holding the individual offering indicated by 
their names (play, garland, song, dance, flower, incense, lamp, perfume). 


19. See Lessing, Yung-Ho-Kung, p. 135. 


L 


H 


YS AVY VIS NN 


PLATE 9. Mt. Meru Temple Banner. 


104 


4537 978 a 
m t 355,98 
gag I яла 


OM 
Sumero 
Four Continents 
AH 


Whatever natures have arisen through causes, 
their cause the tathagata has declared and 


whatever is their cessation—speaking thus is 
the great ascetic (Мааша 
HOM 


PLATE 10. Reverse side of the Temple Banner 


105 


106 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


at. 


PLATE 11. Mudra of the four continents and Mt. Meru. Enacted by the candidates 
during petition for the Kalacakra initiation. 


The Mt. Meru Temple Banner 


All that data is immediately applicable to the Tibetan temple banner 
reproduced here and combines with Mkhas grub rje's (p. 175). The first 
two evocation stages are not visible in the temple banner: (first) “he must 
imagine an earth surface made of many jewels and strewn with gold sand; 

and second he has the diamond sketch or plan. The next (or third) 
evocation stage is visible in the banner at the bottom (Mkhas grub rje s): 
“Upon it he imagines an ocean of milk....In the middle of this, he 
imagines a four-sided Sumeru mountain, adorned on all four sides with 
rows of stairs made of gold, silver, sapphire, and amber, all over which 
spring up wish-granting trees decorated with a thousand fluttering victory 
banners." In the case of the body as Meru, Ratnäkarasänti refers to the 
sides as “front, back, right, and left”, which are respectively East, NE 
South, and North.20 On the temple banner in the manner of a retinue, ed 
three white crescent shapes are the Eastern continent Pürvavideha (midd cE 
with two minor continents Deha and Videha. The Southern continea e 
represented by a blue square—the one for Jambudvipa not yısl “a 
presumably because the meditation is taking place in this nn 
(=India); the two visible squares are the lesser Camara and Aparacamat® 


20. See the correspondence table, Yung-Ho-Kung, p. 102. 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 107 


The three red circles are the Western continent Aparagodaniya along with 
the lesser continents Satha and Uttaramantrina. The three yellow trunca- 
ted triangles are the Northern continent Uttarakuru and its two minor 
companions Kurava and Kaurava. 

The temple banner shows wish-granting trees but not the Mountain of 
Gems, the Cow of Plenty, or the Harvest Without Plowing. Then there is 
the list of the seven jewels of the World Emperor (cakravartin), and it is said 
(Sutrálamkára, Bodhipaksa chapter) that the Bodhisattva has seven jewels 
comparable to the imperial seven. The Bodhisattva jewels are the seven 
limbs of enlightenment (Nos. 19-25 of the thirty-seven natures accessory 
to enlightenment, listed in my first chapter): mindfulness is comparable to 
the jewel of wheel, joy to the jewel of gem, the cathartic to the jewel of 
woman, samadhi to the jewel of the minister (or treasurer), analysis of the 
doctrine to the jewel of the elephant, striving to the jewel of the excellent 
horse, equanimity to the jewel of the general. All seven world-emperor’s 
jewels are depicted on the temple banner on the observer’s right. From top 
down, there are the wheel and the imperial gem (=wish-granting gem, 
cintamani), the woman and the treasurer, the elephant, the general, and the 
horse. In the case of the body-mandala, the yogin naturally has the seven 
limbs of enlightenment. 

In the middle along with the Sun and Moon, there are the external 
offerings, starting with the five offerings to the senses, on observer’s left: 
mirror (the plain one), damaru drum, and auspicious (incense) flask 
(bhadrakalaga); on the right: food and conch shell (the one which is held). 
Beneath these five are a total of twelve offerings. Among these there stand 
out, on the left: lamp (candles) and flower (lotus); on the right: incense 
(incense burner) and perfume (shell with scented water). These are the 
four basic offerings discussed in my Offering Materials chapter, and are 
Shared between the list in the Mt. Meru Mandala, above, and Mkhas grub 
rje's (pp. 179-183). However, the remaining four goddess offerings in the 
Mt. Meru Mandala, namely, play, garland, song, and dance, are not 
represented in the temple banner; but the remaining four in Mkhas grub 
rje's list of eight are apparently represented: oblation, feet-cooling water, 
mirror (the other one with rays) for washing the divine body, food for 
the gods. The remaining four offerings (of the twelve) appear to be various 
Kinds of herbs. All those offerings go with Sun, Moon, and stars in the 
intermediate space. In the Divinity chapter, Padmavajra mentions one 
Meaning of the Dharmakaya as the set of planets, asterisms, etc. It is 
difficult to know if this meaning applies here. But in the section Explana- 
tion of parts of the palace” it was observed that the set of five offerings 
Tepresents the Dharmadhatu. 

The star groups depicted on the banner are 
to two famous constellations. The one associate 


each rough approximations 
d with the sun is obviously 


108 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


meant to be the circumpolar constellation U 
Bear, the Plough, Great Dipper, and by other 
stars called in Indian mythology the Seven Ris 
sons’ of Brahma. The one associated with the 


but its six stars can hardly constitute any constellation other than the 
Pleiades, because among the group of twenty-seven or twenty-eight 
asterisms (naksatra), the ancient Indian works always had the moon 
starting out in the Pleiades, called in the Indian language Krttika. The 
Indian Saivitic war-god Karttikeya owes his name and his six heads to the 
legend that he was fostered by the six wet-nurse stars of this constellation. 

In the sky (the part of the temple banner above the Sun and Moon) 
(Mkhas grub rje's, p. 175): “Above it, he is to imagine a canopy (appearing) 
in an instant. On top of that, he generates the complete characteristics of 
an eaved palace and generates within it various seats; and he may also 
generate within the palace stupas of the varieties ‘victorious’ and 
‘radiant’.” At this upper level there are the eight good-luck symbols or 
emblems that are on the yogin’s body-mandala. Buddhaguhya’s commentary 
on the Sarvadurgatiparisodhana (PTT. Vol. 76, p. 26-4) just prior to setting 
forth the eight, defines “yoga” of “yogin” by way of its Tibetan translation 
(rnal ’byor, “sticking to tranquillity”): “tranquillity” (rnal) is true nature 
(dharmata) and “sticking to” (byor) is knowing. Then Buddhaguhya says: 
“Yoga displays (itself) as the eight emblems (rtags) on the true nature of 
body. The eight emblems of good luck (asta-mangala) are: the endless knot 
(Srivatsa) which is lotus-like; the wheel (cakra) which is frightening; the 
banner (dvaja) which is victorious; the umbrella (chattra) which is digni- 
fied; the lotus (padma) which is luminous; the flask (kalasa) of acute mind ; 
the conch (Sankha) of purity; the golden fish (matsya) of auspicious mind. 
The Mt. Meru Mandala has two entries, the Precious Umbrella (No. 36) 
and the Banner Victorious over the Quarters (No. 37), which appear to be 
the same as two of the above eight emblems, namely the umbrella and the 
banner. Besides, the Mandala entry “flask of great treasure" (No. 25) ау 
very well be the emblem “flask”. As to those emblems being on the yogin 5 
body, in an early article?! I translated from a commentary of the Yoga 
Tantra a certain list of the thirty-two characteristics that included for the 
Buddha's hands (although usually the feet are credited with иа 
characteristics: the ‘‘lion’s seat" (simhäsana), “fish” (mina), Danner 
victory” (dvaja), “thunderbolt” (vajra), the “hook” (ankusa), the "uo 
(kalasa), the Nandyävartta, the Srivatsa, the “conch shell” (sarıkha), 
25 ” (padma), and the Svastika. 

a on oe the three-storied palace which rests on the cloud atop 
Mt. Meru. 


4 ‘ п,” 
21. “Contributions Regarding the Thirty-Two Characteristics of the ee deo К. 
Sino-Indian Studies; Liebenthal Festschrift (Visvabharati, Santiniketan, 1957), PP- 


tsa Major, called the Great 
names. It amounts to seven 
his, who are the “mind-born 
moon is even more deformed, 


Symbolism of the Mandala-Palace 109 


Speaking about the eaved palace on the summit of Mt. Meru, Lessing22 
states that it is Indra’s palace called Sudarsana. This continues the associa- 
tion with the name “Indra” since the golden spot of earth from which the 
evocation began is called “belonging to Great Indra”. The tiny structure 
on the top of the palace roof is more difficult. It may very well be a stylized 
part of a stüpa. It will be recalled that Mkhas grub rje's mentions two kinds 
of stüpas that can be generated in the palace. Like the standard stüpa, this 
structure—as the photograph is seen with a microscope—also has on its 
very top the crescent moon surmounted by the sun, in turn surmounted 
by a hook-like curve that should represent fire. While the usual representa- 
tion of a stüpa does not show lotuses in the superstructure, in fact two 
lotuses are mentioned in that position in the stupa description recently 
published in a Tibetan educational manual.23 These lotuses, although tiny, 
are visible in the tiny roof structure atop the three storied palace, which 
considered as a reliquary house might contain the three kinds of relics.24 
The two lotuses shown in the roof structure should be (lowest) the “lotus 
which is the throne for the flask" (bum gdan padma) and the other one 
(higher) the “lotus which supports the parasol" (gdugs 'degs padma). 

Finally, the top of the temple banner is described from Buddhaguhya's 
mandala exposition previously translated. The pendant necklace is a 
hanging necklace of pearls, standing for the Bodhisattva's joy. The silk 
(scarves)—five-colored—have the meaning of five kinds of knowledge. 


22. Yung-Ho-Kung, p. 104. f 

23. The / ’brin rim slob deb kyi kha skoù las | rig gnas don bsdu 1, Tibetan Cultural 
Printing Press, Kashmir House, Distt. Kangra, Dharmsala (H.). India, 1970. 

24. Mkhas grub rje’s, pp. 106-107, shows that the corporeal relics of the Buddha are of 
the Nirmänakäya, that the dhäranis are relics of the Dharmakaya, and so, inferentially, 
the icons are relics of the Sambhogakäya. The dhäranis do not have to be in the form of 
incantations, In fact, the most frequent one is the sentence of the law which is repeated 
On the reverse side of the Temple Banner—the sentence, "Whatever natures have arisen 
through causes . . .”’ This famous passage is among the most ancient sayings of Buddhism, 
being known from the celebrated account of the conversion of the disciples Sariputra 
and Maudgalyayana. 


10 


TANTRIC RITUAL AND SYMBOLISM 
OF ITS ATTAINMENTS 


Ritual in the Buddhist. Tantras somehow always revolves about the 
“three mysteries of the Buddha”—his Body, Speech, and Mind, and how 
the tantric performer correlates his own body, speech, and mind with 
those “mysteries” or secrets. That will be my first concern. Then I shall 
turn to various topics of the Anuttarayoga Tantra, a note on mundane 
occult attainments (siddhi), the “five ambrosias” of the Stage of Generation, 
finally the three ritual observances (vrata) and other matters of the Stage of 
Completion. The “three mysteries of the Buddha” are the life of all these 
discussions. 


Orientation toward the “Three Mysteries 


It was already pointed out that the officiant correlates his body to DE 
Body Mystery by means of gesture (mudrä), his speech to the T 
Mystery by means of incantation (mantra), and his mind to the bos 
Mystery by means of intense concentration (samädhi). I now go into = 
in reverse order, because samadhi is the part which is shared with n 
tantric Buddhism and in fact is a feature of Buddhism from its en 

According to Mkhas grub rje’s (pp. 198-201), which should be oe 
on these points, calming (the mind) (samatha) and discerning ae fhe 
(vipasyana) are the backbone of both the N а a sk 
"Mantra-yana". Mkhas grub rje points out that the specific tec a ele 
developing these two essential ingredients of samadhi—as one жок in 
about them extensively in ordinary Buddhist texts—are not menu 


110 


Tantric Ritual and Symbolism of its Attainments 111 


the Tantras for the simple reason that the contemplation, according to the 
rules, of the yoga of the deity brings the complete characteristics of calming. 
Likewise, for discerning reality, one must have the voidness contemplation, 
which is an essential element in the Buddhist Tantras even though they do 
not treat voidness in the manner of a Madhyamika treatise, with its refuta- 
tions of the opponent and the like. This voidness contemplation in tantric 
practice is illustrated in the meditation on sound (see those same pages of 
Mkhas grub rje’s) where the sound contemplation is carried out to the 
extreme limit of silence, whereupon one reaches the voidness. This is 
called “freedom at the limit of the sound,” a freedom abiding in the 
Dharmakaya. This is explained for the lower Tantras in Sri-Dipamkarab- 
hadra's Vag-dsrita-dhyana-nama (PTT, Vol. 79, p. 251 to p. 252), where 
the sound of the dharani-garland (mala) is associated with what he calls 
the “stage of generation,” and the sound of the void with the “stage of 
completion.” This author, Dipamkarabhadra, has written a work well- 
known in the Guhyasamäja tradition (the Guhyasamäjamandala-vidhi). 
He states: “There are two kinds of sound which cut off all karma of 
living beings—the sound of the void and the sound of the garland.” He 
then says that there are six kinds of sound of the void. These are his six, 
with brief citation of his further explanation: 

(1) That based on body and speech. This relies on the magical practice 
born of the body through the profound unborn true nature (dharmata), 
which is void. е 

(2) That based on sense objects (visaya). This arises іп the five gates of 
the profound true nature, while the yogin is devoid of intellectual activity 
(buddhi). 

(3) That based on mind (citta). This is based on memory. 

(4) That based on the natural disposition of a knowable entity. Here 
the yogin is entirely devoid of views, and true nature appears as an 
illusion (maya). jk 

(5) That based on time. There are three cases: (a) the time of cognition, 
When cognition is cut off while sound dissolves within (one). (b) the time 
of comprehension, when there is realization of non-self (anatman). (c) the 
time of the “year’s recitation,” when there is the harvest of true-nature. 

(6) That based on personal transformation. This is voidness of basis 
(hetu). In the case based on (a spot of) body, there is gradual decrease (of 
Phenomenal manifestation); and in the case based on mind, there 15 
transcending of samsdra. Е 

Besides, the Tantras usually have different meditative objects from the 
non-tantric Buddhist ones. Tson-kha-pa’s Lam rim chen то (Samatha 
Section) cites the author Bodhibhadra (his Samddhi-sambhara-parivarta- 
nama) for a classification of meditative objects that emphasizes tantric 
examples. Following is a tabulation of this author’s material. 


112 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


TABLE 8 


MEDITATIVE OBJECTS FOR CALMING (THE MIND) 


I. By looking inward II. By dwelling on what is seen 


outside 
A. DWELLING ON THE B. DWELLING ON WHAT A. OUTSTANDING B. ORDINARY 
BODY IS BASED ON THE BODY 
a ee 
1. As the aspect of 1. On the breath 1. Dwelling on (not listed) 
agod the body 


2. As the unpleasant 
thing of skeleton, 
etc. 


On the subtle signs 2. Dwelling on 
(süksma-nimitta) speech 
On the drop (bindu) 


2: 
3. 
3. With outstanding 4. On the member rays 
signs like khafvanga 5. On rapture (priti) 

and pleasure (sukha) 
L E REA GERNE aS LOT RE 


Passing to the second topic, it is of course the officiant’s use of mantra, 
or a string of these in the form of dharani, to correlate his speech to the 
Speech Mystery. Mkhas grub rje’s section on “The four members of 
muttering” (pp. 186, ff.) already has so much authoritative material on this 
subject that I can do little more than refer the reader to his treatment. 
However, the little that I can add is to continue Dipamkarabhadra’s 
exposition. He states that there are five kinds of sound-garland, which I 
here give with abbreviated notice of his individual explanations. 

(1) Meditation of dwelling in the sound held in accordance with the 
“stage of generation.” Here the aim is, after much recitation, to have the 
sound-garland eventually sound itself, whereupon the sound is issuing IN 
voidness, and is a reflected image of the Buddha’s realm. 

(2) Meditation on dwelling in the sound of the garland of letters. The 
officiant imagines a garland of vowel letters at the root of his nostrils 
between the eyes; eventually it should become “bright” and be associated 
with ecstasy. 

(3) Meditation of dwelling in the garland sound of the body-speech- 
circle causing a state of consciousness. The word “body” means the bodies 
of deities who are the “circle” and “speech” is their speech. Whirling ue 
garland, one becomes liberated from the garland of egoistic views, ап 
consciousness dwells in the realm of profound true nature. E 5 

(4) Meditation of dwelling іп the garland-sound of intrinsically Pes 
natures (dharma). This is a method of liberation from false appear gii 
cutting off of discursive thought, transcending the conventions of singlen 
and multiplicity, so that one arrives at the realm of the Buddha. 


3 ich 
(5) Meditation of dwelling in the sound which produces the path whi 


Tantric Ritual and Symbolism of its Attainments 113 


is the true-nature of the stage of completion. This is for the disciple of 
faith who has already become a “solitary hero” of the stage of generation 
and having donned the armor of the gods is now a beginner of the Stage of 
completion. He has gained a superior capacity to pursue the aims of 
others. Seated on a pleasant seat, he imagines on his tongue a HUM from 
which issue a myriad rays of blue diamond, the ends of which are encircled 
by a dhärani-garland of his tutelary deity which is revolving to the right. 
Outside of that is another garland composed of vowels, revolving to the 
left; and outside of the latter is another garland, composed of consonants, 
revolving to the right. The mind dwells on the set of three garlands; so 
dwelling the yogin destroys the faults of body, speech, and mind. When 
those three kinds of faults are destroyed, then dwelling on the first garland, 
he reaches the Nirmänakäya of Vajravidärana; by the second one, he 
reaches the Sambhogakaya; and by the third, the Dharmakaya. By 
dwelling on the rays of the HUM he reaches the body of Vajravidarana 
inseparable from the three bodies. As to how he dwells on them—he 
dwells on the first garland in the manner of a dream; dwells on the second 
one imagining it to be like water; dwells on the third one as though it were 
sky. Finally, he dwells on the rays of HUM as the profound realm of the 
Buddha. 

Dipamkarabhadra’s exposition is a sample of the rich material on this 
subject in the Buddhist Tantra, here part of the theory of becoming a 
Buddha through the Kriya Tantra deity Vajravidarana, who is Vajrapani. 

The third correlation is of course by way of mudrä, which means a 
“seal”. I refer to the author Buddhaguhya, commentary on Durgati- 
parisodhana (pp. 32-5), where he states that there are three kinds of 
mudrä: (1) the mudrá which is not transcended. It is not transcended by 
reflection on true nature (dharmata). (2) the illustration mudrä. The 
illustration with mudrä is, e.g. of five colors. (3) the hand-gesture mudrä. 
It is a gesture of empowering with the fingers of the hand. Furthermore, a 
mudrä is said to be “illustrious” because it pleases and because it 1s non- 
dual. That is Buddhaguhya’s brief but masterful explanation. There is 
learned information belonging to the Tibetan tradition in Mkhas gr ub rje s 
(especially pp. 228-49). One can find much material on mudrá following the 
Japanese tradition in E. Dale Saunders, Mudra; in this case, It 1S practically 
all on the third kind of mudrá, the hand gesture. Concerning the second 
kind of mudrá mentioned by Buddhaguhya, this appears to be exemplified 
later in this essay as the “six mudräs” which in fact are the six ornaments 
of the Buddhist tantric deities; that is to say, these ornaments Шизцаге ог 
Stand for the six perfections. His first kind of mudrä appears to be, for 
example, those also mentioned in this essay as the three Inner Seals and 
three Outer Seals, because these seals do not illustrate something else, but 


114 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


are themselves the true-nature experiences aimed at, hence are not tran- 
scended; likewise the final topic of four mudräs falls in this category. In 
any case, the correlation of mudrä is with the Body Mystery. 


Four Kinds of Yoga 


Tson-kha-pa frequently cites Abhayäkaragupta’s great commentary called 
the Amndya-maiijari (Man she) and in the Snags rim chen mo (402a-b) 
he refers to this work for describing three kinds of yoga, namely the yoga 
of eating, yoga of washing, yoga of lying down; and then adds a fourth one 
called yoga of getting up. I now translate all four descriptions: 


Yoga of eating. At the time of taking food, including drink and the 
like, one should be mindful of oneself as the deity; and having 
empowered the food to be like ambrosia (amrta), should enjoy it 
by thinking that it is a divine offering. 

Yoga of washing. It is to be done as in the phase of initiation. 
Yoga of lying down. Having convinced oneself that the nature of 
voidness which consists of the true form of co-natal bliss is the 
nature of the Clear Light, he should lie down with what consists of 
Insight and the Means. 

Yoga of getting up. He should get up upon being exhorted by the 
sound of the damaru drum, or by the song of the goddess. 


The “Yoga of eating” is of course involved with the section on “five 
ambrosias” as also with the “inner offering” in the classification of 
offerings in the previous chapter on Offering Materials. The “Yoga of 
washing” is evidently the sprinkling rite of initiation. The “Yoga of lying 
down" shows that the union of Insight (prajfid) and Means (upaya) takes 
place within the yogin. The “Yoga of getting ир” agrees with our later 
discussion to the effect that the yogin, or the “Means” within him, 1s 
roused, made to rise by the sound of Insight. 


External materials and mundane siddhis 


The Stage of Generation in the Anuttarayoga Tantra has in this 8 
class the most in common with the lower Tantras, especially the eet 
Tantra. One thing in common is the feature of what are called Eu г 
siddhis”, although the Stage of Generation is frequently credited wit er 
“eight great siddhis” (still mundane). The second stage in the A É 
Tantra, called Stage of Completion, is credited with the possibi ! ds y 
supramundane siddhi, or Buddhahood. Therefore, at this point pem 
call attention to Mkhas grub rje’s (p. 211): “In this Tantra it 1s se 


Tantric Ritual and Symbolism of its Attainments 115 


that by taking recourse to external materials such as the sword (khadga), 
one accomplishes the (siddhi) khadga-vidyádhara, and so forth.” This is 
simply a repetition of the remark in Srags rim chen mo, folio 92b-4, at 
which place there is no further information. Buddhaguhya slightly expands 
the list in his commentary on the Durgatiparisodhana (PTT, Vol. 76, 
p. 40-3), calling them “tokens of siddhi” (dios grub kyi rtags), and men- 
tioning the sword (ral gri), trident (rtse gsum), wheel (cakra), and adding 
"etc." (la sogs pa). With this slightly longer list to indicate typical members 
of the series, one can get further with the passage in the Aryasiddhai- 
kavirasadhanam (Sädhanamälä, No. 71, Vol. І, p. 143-44): “Then at the 
time of the moon or of the sun, he takes in his hand a sword (khadga) 
made of natural iron; and gazing at the moon he recites (the mantra) until 
such time as he is liberated and becomes a vidyadhara of the sword. In like 
fashion, having applied the domineering substances of eye ointment, foot 
ointment, mid-forehead ointment—the thunderbolt (vajra), wheel (cakra), 
trident (trisüla), arrow (Sara), mallet (mudgara), noose (pasa), hook 
(anku$a), etc. are accomplished." Furthermore, Mkhas grub rje's (p. 216, 
note) states: “Contemplating the deity and performing rosary muttering, 
while taking recourse to such substances as malachite (lig-bu-mig) and 
lamp-black (or antimony) (srod-afijana), one attains whatever he desires." 

Merit is also counted as a success (siddhi) according to what we read in 
Jüànavajra's Punyavardhani-srijiänamälä-nama (PTT. Vol. 79, p. 251-4): 


. .. Having personally invited the gods of the mandala, one confesses 
to them any sinful, unvirtuous deeds. Then, he implores them for 
the desired object. If it is accomplished, he should make a huge 
banquet for others. Then, on a day of thunder he should convey to 
a large river the materials of the burnt offering and so on. On the 
East side of the town he should make various roarings of the conch- 
shell, set up parasols and victory banners. On the South side he 
should sound various drums and set up streamers. On the West 
side he should ride on a horse or elephant, sounding the damaru 
drum along with the sounds of musical instruments and the gong. 
On the North side, he should sound the bells and cymbals and hang 
various silks. Then he should confess whatever accumulation (of 
goods) he has amassed. Having done that ritual three or seven 
times, that yogin will undoubtedly attain to all facets of merit like 
the burning of a dry tree. 


The Five Ambrosias 


e five Buddhas is with the 


One of the most striking identifications of th 
here they are explained as 


five kinds of ambrosia (amrta) in a context W 


116 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


blood, semen, human flesh, urine, and excrement. This context is the 
conclusion of yoga in the Stage of Generation (utpatti-krama) in the 
Anuttara-yoga-tantra, preliminary to the Stage of Completion (sampanna- 
krama). Tson-kha-pa (A.D. 1357-1419), founder of the Gelugpa sect in 
Tibet, sets forth this topic in his reform of the Tantras, called Sags rim 
chen mo, with the views of numerous authorities. ! Now, I wish to signal 
some of the essential ideas. 

Because the preceding main part of the yoga has wearied body and mind, 
there is this rite of enjoying the ambrosia, envigorating the body. The 
yogin imagines at the top of his head a lunar disk marked with an Om. 
From this Om ambrosia trickles down moistening the finest particles all 
the way to his feet. But that is the end result of an evocation process, 
which is variously described, and presumably connected with the cele- 
brated Hindu account of the churning of the ocean to extract the amrta, 
over which the gods (deva) and demigods (asura) fought. 

In these texts cited by Tson-kha-pa one starts with three vessels of 
authorized kind, skull bowl, and so on,—one in front containing liquid 
offering materials (Skt.=bali), such as milk, and two more on the right 
and left sides containing solid offering materials, such as meat and fish. 
However, Tson-kha-pa says that, if these materials are not available, one 
can use just water. Presumably the yogin is sitting with crossed legs. He 
“generates” the offering materials in three steps or evocations, stacking up 
a wind, on that a fire, and on the latter a skull bowl, the latter itself resting 
on a trivet of skull bowls. In that skull bowl, level with his own head (or 
is it his own head?), he generates from ten germ syllables, starting with 
Hum, the five ambrosias and the five kinds of flesh. Here there is the flesh 
of cow in the east, of dog in the south, of elephant in the west, of horse in 
the north, and of man in the middle. In the intermediate directions and 
center there are the five ambrosias, and Tson-kha-pa quotes from the 
Mahamudratilaka: 


Ratnasambhava is blood, Amitabha is semen; 
Amoghasiddhi is human flesh, Aksobhya is urine; een 
Vairocana is excrement. These are the five best ambrosias. 


The yogin stacks the three germ syllables, Om, Ah, Him, in that e 
apparently at the level of the crown of the head, level of the eyebrows, v 
level of the little tongue, uvula. These syllables irradiate, and cp : 
ambrosia of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of the ten directions, as well 4 
the ambrosia in the oceans. 


= E . m 23 f the 
The upward evocation can be interpreted in terms of “centers © 


З є ; пеп то, 
1. The section herein treated occupies almost four folios of the Sriags rim ch 


beginning 3945-4. 
2. Snags rim chen mo, 395b-5. 


Tantric Ritual and Symbolism of its Attainments 117 
body by reference to the Table of the Preceding section. There the wind 
disk is in the navel and the fire disk in the throat. The third evocation, 
that of the skull bowl, would thus correspond to one’s own head. This 
upward “generation” naturally reminds one of Visnu’s Three Steps. In 
fact, in the Hindu legend of the churning of the ocean of milk, Visnu 
himself is seated on the mountain Mandära, which constitutes the churn- 
ing stick. This scene is beautifully depicted in Plate 5, M. S. Randhawa’s 
Basohli Painting (Government of India, 1959). Among the objects which 
arose from the churning process were the divine cow Surabhi, the seven- 
headed steed, and the white elephant Airävata. These three may account 
for three kinds of flesh generated in the skull bowl. Flesh of man in the 
middle may derive from Visnu’s central position. Alone flesh of dog is not 
accounted for in the Hindu legend. Hence this remarkable yogic evocation 
described in the Buddhist Tantras seems intimately related to certain 
legends about Visnu. 

In evaluating this curious description of the five ambrosias, which in this 
literature are said to purify the offering materials, it is well to observe that 
Tson-kha-pa in the Bodhisattva section of his Steps of the Path to En- 
lightenment, the Lam rim chen mo, speaks of the impropriety of certain 
gifts. For example, the Bodhisattva must not give food and drink polluted 
with excrement and urine, spittle, vomit, pus and blood; or give forbidden 
flesh.3 It is my opinion that Tson-kha-pa bothers to mention this in the 
light of the Tantric doctrine of the five ambrosias. 


The Three Ritual Observances (vrata) 


The word vrata for a ritual observance is of ancient usage in India. The 
standard Tibetan equivalent is brtul Zugs, and the present materials happen 
to be mainly based on the Tibetan passages using this term. As the attain- 
ments are discussed in the Mother Tantra of the Anuttarayoga Tantra, 
they usually come in the order of first the ornaments of the deities and 
next the symbolization of the ecstatic song and dance by the magic wand 
(khatvanga), the drum (damaru); and the skull bowl (kapäla). be 

During Tson-kha-pa’s explanation of the three higher initiations (the 
Secret one, the Insight-knowledge, and the Fourth) in the Sriags rim chen 
mo, he brings in (fol. 310b to 311a) the terminology of the three kinds of 
vrata (ritual observance). б. 
А For the first опе, called “yidya-vrata” (ritual observance of the vidya), 

€ says: 


Because the prajiia herself is the concrete means for perfection of 


| ibition i t the impropriety of giving, 
3. This prohibition is part of a lengthy statement аро ре mp nen 


0 1 е = C M у 
<urring in the Tashilunpo edition of the Zam rim Chen IE particular 


Tsoh-kha-pa mentions Asanga's Bodhisattvabhümi as 
materia], 


118 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


the illustrious non-oozing bliss, the “ritual observance of the goddess 
consort (vidyd)” is the understanding by the beginners and so on 


“I must not omit the condensed reflection (bsdus rtogs pa) in 
any period.” 


The phrase “in any period” can be understood by materials in my forth- 
coming Yoga of the Guhyasamdjatantra that the vidya-vrata is the contact 
with the goddesses at the junctures, i.e. morning, noon, sunset, and mid- 
night. The “condensed reflection” is presumably the co-natal knowledge 
(sahaja-jfiana) which Tson-kha-pa in that context says is explained in the 
phase of the third Initiation, i.e. the prajia-jnana (Insight-K nowledge). 
This agrees with Mkhas grub rje’s (pp. 318-19, note), that this initiation 
takes place in the “wombs” (bhaga), i.e. in the four cakras of the body 
belonging to the goddesses Locanä, etc. 

Then he explains the one called “vajra-vrata” (ritual observance of the 
diamond). This “diamond” turns out to be the inner diamond which is the 
one mind of enlightenment as the intrinsic nature of the five knowledges. 
One has ritual observance of this diamond when he practices all the rites 
while free from discursive thought. 

The third one is called “caryä-vrata” (ritual observance of the engage- 
ment). There are three forms: (1) The first engagement is to apply oneself 
to accomplishing the three inner “seals” (mudrä), which are (a) one’s own 
body as a divine body; (b) the indestructible sound of the "heat"; 
(c) the samvrti mind of enlightenment which is the basis for enjoying the 
great bliss (the three symbolized by the khatvanga, etc.). One can also 
understand the three as external “seals” by taking the first one as the 
Father (yab), the second as the Prajnä, and the third as the mantra being 
recited. (2) The second engagement is the ritual observance of engagement 
together with the yogini who wears the five ornaments; by having this 
observance, one applies himself to generating the five kinds of knowledge, 
which are the pure Dharmadhatu knowledge, and so forth. G) The third 
engagement is the application to arousing the mind of enlightenment 
which has the indivisibility of void and compassion, that is to say, if = 
has achieved the capacity of the four divine stances, the supernormal 
faculties, etc.—applying them to accomplish the aim of sentient pe 
and if yogins and yoginis go outside (the fold) through worldly occupatio 
—applying the power of all one's own inner ornaments for their aim. 


Ornaments of the Deities 


There are six ornaments called mudrds (seals) worn by the deities an 
said to represent the six perfections (paramita) of the pO 
ing to the final verse in Durjayacandra's Saptaksarasadhana (NO. 

in the Sadhanamala). 


aments. 


The Green Tara, showing the six orn 


119 


120 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


Besides, five of the six are made to represent the five Buddhas 
Hevajratantra (I, vi, 11) and, consistently, according to the Explanatory 
Tantra, the Samputa (PTT. Vol. 2, p. 260-3). Naro-pada’s explanation of 
the ornaments in his Vajrapada-sära-samgraha-panjikä (PTT. Vol. 54 
p. 36-1,2,3,4) accordingly concerns itself with the set of five. Hence 2 
sixth ornament (the sacred thread) is left over; and besides there are some 
variants in stating certain ornaments, for example, as found in Tson-kha- 
pa’s Sbas don commentary on the Sri-Cakrasamvara (PTT. Vol. 157, 
p. 90-2). I only found the actual itemization of the ornaments with 
correspondences to both the perfections and the Buddhas, in Klon-rdol 
bla-ma’s collected works, Vol. Ga (p. 74-5 in Dalama’s edition, Vol. I), 
for which a sixth Buddha (Mahävajradhara) has to be allotted. Never- 
theless, the fact that the various contexts in which I find the list of these 
ornaments do not correlate them explicitly and respectively with the six 
perfections; and, furthermore, that the indications already given connect 
them with the five kinds of knowledge, shows that it is more practical to 
set up the intended correspondences with this in mind (n.b., in the order 
of the Hevajratantra list): 


according to 


TABLE 9 


THE FIVE ORNAMENTS 


ORNAMENT MANIFESTED BY WHICH BUDDHA FOR WHICH KNOWLEDGE 
Re et ee ES GSES o E 
1. Head ornament (mukuta)=mani Aksobhya Mirror-like 
of head, or cakra of head 
2. Ear-ring (kundalam) Amitabha Discriminative 
3. Necklace (kanthika) Ratnasambhava Equality 
4. Bracelet (arms and legs) (rucakam) Vairocana Dharmadhatu 
5. Belt (mekhalä or kayabandhanam) Amoghasiddhi Procedure-of-duty 


or sacred ash (mahabhasman) 
E LEE S eu ER ОЬ SD OE MEE 


According to Snags rim, 302a-1, ff., when one has already entered pes 
the vidyd-vrata, which is the regular contact with the divinity at t i 
sandhis (dawn, etc.), he then is to enter into the caryd-vrata. Toone 
makes a distinction as to whether it is a woman or a man that enters a 
caryá-vrata. A woman generates herself into the form of Vajrayarahi l 
Diamond Sow), Nairātmyā (She who is Selfless), or the goddess On 
family indicated by the thrown flower (in the flower initiation, cf. си 
grub rje’s, р. 315). А man generates himself into Hevajra, etc. In a in 
case, the person must then attract, by means of the rays from the ae Ў 
his heart, the knowledge being and then make it enter, whereupo 


Tantric Ritual and Symbolism of its Attainments 121 


should convince himself that from the transformation of Aksobhya, etc 
the respective ornaments appear on his person. That is why the Ornamente 
are called “mudras” (seals). For each ornament a respective mantra is set 
forth to be cited thrice. Tson-kha-pa states that those mantras are taken 
from the Vajrapanjard, Chap. Nine. In short, the yogin and the yogini try 
to gain the five ornaments, “avoiding the ‘sacred thread' " (precept of the 
Sri-Cakrasamvaratantra, Chap. 27), at least in this phase. 

Now to Näro-päda’s explanations of the five ornaments: He goes 
through the explanations twice, first for the ‘hinted meaning’ (neyartha) 
and next for the "evident meaning” (nitärtha): 


neyärtha: One wears the cakra so as to bow to the guru, äcärya, 
kämadeva. 
One wears the ear-rings on the ears so as to not hear any 
harsh words directed toward the guru, holder of the 
vajra. 
The necklace for reciting with mantra; the bracelets for 
avoiding any killing of living beings; the belt for recourse 
to mudra. 

nitärtha: One wears the cakra so as to honor and have a transit of 
the “drop” (bindu) of the bodhicitta (mind of enlighten- 
ment) which is called “риги, äcärya, kamadeva". One 
wears the ear-rings on the ears so as to destroy the harsh 
words and to preserve the words of agreement. One ties 
on the necklace for the purpose of cessation through 
reciting the mantra, since it “protects the mind" (man-tra). 
The bracelets to avoid any killing of living beings, where 
“living being" means the mind, and one should not kill 
it. The belt so as to take recourse to a mudrä, i.e. the 


karma-mudrä. 


Those explanations of the ornaments turn out rather close to the 
Correspondences of “perfections” as given by Klon-rdol bla-ma, because 
the assignment of prajfid-paramita is consistent with the explanation of 
Mmudrä, especially karma-mudrä (the visible consort) since the word рга/йа 
is often used for the consort in this tantric material. In the standard order 
of the perfections, these run: 1. Giving—necklace; 2. Morality—bracelets ; 
3. Forbearance—Ear-ring; 4. Striving—head ornament; 5. Meditation— 
Sacred thread: 6. Insight (prajfia)—belt (or sacred ash)—which happens 
to be the order of the six ornaments in the Sri-Cakrasamvaratantra, 
Chap. 27. Notice that this introduces the extra ornament, the ‘sacred 
thread" (brahmasütra, or yaj&opavitam), which is identified with the 


122 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


Buddha Mahävajradhara who, in the Gelu 
pa, is the Adibuddha. 

The lord and the Buddhist tantric deities represented iconographically 
have all six ornaments. Reference to B. Bhattacharyya’s The Indian 
Buddhist Iconography shows that the sacred thread can be formed of a 
number of materials. Sometimes it consists of a snake, sometimes of bone 
ornaments, and frequently the material is not specified. It is of course 
always indicated when the iconographical description specifies six mudras 
(sanmudrä), because this means the five as have been discussed above plus a 
further one which is the “sacred thread". It is noteworthy that this one is 
associated with the perfection “meditation”; this is perhaps a recognition 
that all the principal deities of the Buddhist tantric pantheon are contacted 
through meditation. But this does not justify the misnomer “Dhyani 
Buddhas” (the texts speak only of Buddhas, Tathagatas, or Jinas). 


gpa sect founded by Tson-kha- 


The khatvanga, damaru, and kapala 


Pictures of the legendary Padmasambhava (8th century magician in 
Tibet) have frequently appeared in the West in books on Tibet; and many 
persons have noticed the peculiar wand held with his left arm that is called 
the khatvanga. Former travellers in Tibet have spoken about the mysterious 
rite called Chéd, and the drum called damaru (large sized variety) used 
in that mysterious cult. (Note that the spelling damaru is standard, but 
when transcribed into Tibetan the word is generally written damaru). 
Tibetan iconography frequently depicts the skull-bowl (kapäla), full of 
blood, held by some fierce figure. Those three are the attributes or hand 
symbols of the däkinis, typified by Buddhadakini (sans rgyas mkha’ 'gro) 
as depicted in the Rin ’byun collection (Lokesh Chandra, A New Tibeto- 
Mongol Pantheon, Part 9, Rin ’byun 141). On the facing page the three 
attributes are made more salient: , 

All three are also taken together in a passage which Tson-kha-pa cites 
in the Snags rim chen mo (311a-4), running as follows: “It is said in = 
Kun spyod (evidently the Yoginisamcärya), ‘The khatvänga is the body Я | 
god; the damaru is insight (prajfià); and ‘Mantra is the drinking E 
(kapala).’” In the foregoing treatment of the three ritual observances, T. 
place in the Snags rim chen mo was alluded to in exposition of the cary: 
vrata. In summary: 


Symbol Inner Seal Outer Seal 

khatvanga ^ one’s own body as a Father (yab) 
divine body - 

damaru indestructible sound Prajna (the Insight 
of the “heat” consort) 


Е "ed 
kapäla basis for enjoying bliss Mantra being recite 


and kapala. 


Buddhadäkini, showing the K/iafvariga, damaru, 


123 


124 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


Because the Father (yab) and Prajíià as the Mother (yum) can be com 
bined as Father-Mother (yab-yum), the khatvänga and the damaru he 
frequently mentioned together, for example, Sbas don (p. 57-2) D 
with the khatvanga with skulls marked with a vajra, and the beating of the 
damaru with the sound of HUM...” The particular correspondence 
system which Tson-kha-pa uses in the above part of the Stags rim chen mo 
is consistent with his citation in the same work (4262-5) of a passage from 
the celebrated master of the Mother Tantra named Lui-pa, including: “The 
khatvanga is the divine body; Prajiia is the sound of the damaru. The lord 
who has the vajra is day; the yogini is night.” A passage in the Hevajra- 
tantra seems to contradict the above, if we are to accept Snellgrove’s 
translation (Part I: I, vi, 11): Wisdom (is symbolized) by the khatvanga 


and means by the drum. But note his own edited Sanskrit (confirmed by 
the Tibetan): 


- . along 


... ргајпа khatvangarüpini 
damarüpäyarüpena... 


It seems possible to translate this in a manner consistent with Lui-pa: 


Prajnä is embodied for (or has the body belonging to) the kKhatvanga 
i.e. is the damaru, by embodiment for the means. 


My interpretation appears supported by the somewhat obscure line of the 
Sri-Cakrasamvaratantra (Chap. 35): “For cheating untimely death, a 
body is applied to the khatvanga.” 

Tson-kha-pa was undoubtedly aware of the seeming discrepancy between 
the tradition he is following and the Hevajratantra (in common with the 
Samputa), and in his Sbas don commentary on the Sri-Cakrasamvara- 
tantra, p. 90-2, he treats the topic along with analysis of the expression 
“khatvanga’. Notice that khatva means a “cot” or “couch”; so khafvanga 
(with апга in the meaning of *body"): “the body on the cot”. Tson-kha-p4 
writes: 


The reality of the “prajia body” (Ses rab yan lag) is explained as the 
khatvänga or the embrace by the body of the prajrid lady. Nag-po-P? 
states in his Mandala-vidhi: “The prajfia body is on the cot; this 
means that the prajna lady is to be taken as the cot. 
That is to say, if ‘‘prajfid body" is the khatva body, then рғајћа 15 m 
khatvä or cot. Hence, that Hevajratantra line (I, vi, 11), “Prajñā a a 
body belonging to the khatvanga,’ or “Prajňā has the form o ‘fie 
khatvanga,” again possibly to be construed as meaning that Prajna 15 


Tantric Ritual and Symbolism of its Attainments 125 
khatvä, the cot. While “embraced by prajñā” refers to the divine body on 
the prajna Cot. In the Lam rim chen mo (Bodhisattva section), in the course 
of explaining the “perfection of insight” (prajfia-paramita), Tson-kha-pa 
cites a work by Nagarjuna: “Insight is the root of all this visible and 
invisible merit; hence, to accomplish both, one must hold on to Insight. 
It is the great science—the source of (present) nature, (future) purpose, 
and liberation; hence, with devotion from the outset, one must hold on to 
Insight, the Great Mother.” This requirement to hold on to prajna is of 
course the rationale for the tantric iconography that shows the Buddha in 
the tantric form of Mahävajradhara embraced by Prajiia or by a goddess 
representing prajfid, while he holds on to her. This role of prajfid—and she 
is called Mother of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas" in the Mahayana 
scriptures—will be clearer as we proceed. 

Those observations are further certified by the Hevajratantra itself 
(I, vi, 17), and here Snellgrove wrongly adopted a reading prajfiákhatvango 
against the evidence of “All MSS. khatvänga.” The manuscript readings 
require a syntactical reevaluation; and thus correcting the passage, it can 
be retranslated: “The sound of the damaru is the recitation; prajnd is the 
contemplation of the khatvdriga. This is to be recited and to be con- 
templated by the engagement of the diamond-skull.” Previously we 
observed that Prajiia is associated with the sound of the damaru, and is the 
khatvà. How is this possible? Compare with К. Kunjunni Raja, Indian 
Theories of Meaning, chapter on Metaphor, giving from Gautama’s 
Nyäyasütra-s a list of possible metaphorical transfer of meaning, including 
(p. 234), “Location”, “e.g. mancäah krosanti (The cots cry). Here the term 
тайса (cot) is used to refer to ‘the children on the cot’.” Then giving from 
Patanjali’s Mahabhasya the famous grammarian's relations involving 
transference of meaning, and as the first category, “Location”, “e.g. 
mancä hasanti (The cots laugh), girir dahyate (The hill is burning). Here 
the term ‘cots’ stands for ‘the children in the cots’ and the term ‘hill’ 
stands for ‘the trees on the hill.” In the present case, we can understand 
the word “cot” (khatva) to have a metaphorical transfer. The KAiatva—the 
Stretched out canvas of a cot—is the damaru’s recitation; and—as a 
Student at Columbia University Mr. Lex Hixon, suggested to me—perhaps 
because a drum is stretched material analogous to a cot. As to the kind of 
Suggestion involved, see Raja (op. cit., pp. 302-03) where we find that 
Poetical suggestion (dhvani) is of two sorts: avivaksita-vacya (an implicit 
expression that is not intended to be told) based on the metaphorical 
transfer (Jaksanä); and vivaksita-väcya (an implicit expression that ся 
intended to be told) based on the literal meaning (abhidha). In the presen 
Case, we obviously have an example of metaphorical usage whose message 
Was not intended to be told, because part of the secrecy code of the Tantra. 
Still Iam here telling it, through the fortunate confluence of explanations 


126 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


from diverse sources, and also because, if it is proper for Westerners to tell 
many wrong things about the Buddhist Tantras, it is surely proper for 
someone to tell some right things that have come to his notice. 

But we are far from exhausting the subject! What does the Hevajratantra 
mean by the “engagement of the diamond-skull" ? We have already noticed 
that “diamond” in this context is the mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta). 
Hence, *diamond-skull" means skull containing the conventional mind of 
enlightenment. But the skull is explained as the mantra being recited. So 
drinking from the skull is the yogin's recitation of the mantra; and he is no 
longer reciting it: the recitation is done by prajria—the cot conveying him 
through those three severed heads on the khatvanga pole. 

As to the skull bowl, the Sri-Cakrasamvaratantra (Chap. 31) says: 
“Who would revile the skull of the embodiment of the Dharmakaya, 
arisen from the three sources—conch-shell (sarıkha), mother-of-pearl 
(Sukti), or pearl (muktä)!” Tson-kha-pa’s commentary (Sbas don, 
p. 63-2,3,4) holds that the skull here refers to the skull of man. The reason 
the body of man is the best, is that it is the distinguished basis for accom- 
plishing the Dharmakaya liberation and the knowledge of great bliss 
(mahdasukhajriana). Those three, conch-shell, etc. are used to construct the 
skull in five sections (representing the five goddesses), as attached to the 
head-dress. 

Shedding further light on the damaru, Indrabhiti, in his commentary 
on the Sri-Cakrasamvaratantra, the “ Sambarasamuccaya-nama-vr tti” 
(Toh. 1413, Derge Tanjur, Rgyud, Tsa, f. 75b-2) writes: 


The words, “Now through himself emerging,” mean that the yogin 
emerges from the realm of the heart, through exhortation of the 
sound of the damaru drum, in the manner of deep sleep as the 
Dharmakaya of the Clear Light, dream like the Sambhogakaya, and 
waking state as the Nirmanakaya. 


2 : p of 
Therefore, when, as in Lui-pa's precepts, we take prajna as the so 
the damaru, it turns out that she, contemplating the yogin—the di 
body on the couch—exhorts him to rise. 


The Four Mudra-s 


There is a great deal of information about this topic in Mkhas gr ub de 
and the extensive definitions by Padmavajra cited in the notes to that ns 
pp. 228-29, show the situation prevalent in the three lower Jed d 
I wish to present some further material from the Anuttarayoga Tan es 
happens to be consistent with the present chapter. The Ѕут-Сакгаѕату 


А Е : n-kha-pa 
tantra concerns itself with this topic in Chap. 36; and Tson kh 


Tantric Ritual and Symbolism of its Attainments 127 
Sbas don commentary (p. 71-1) presents the explanation of the four 
mudrä-s in accordance with Abhayakaragupta’s Amnäyamanjari. Here the 
four mudrä-s are twice explained, that is, for the phase of the PAM 
Stage of Generation and in the Stage of Completion, and finally EE 
is established in terms of the four Buddha bodies. 


TABLE 10 
THE Four MUDRÄ-s 


Lc NUR EE EE IL. 


MUDRA STAGE OF GENERATION STAGE OF COMPLETION FRUIT 
س‎ sss 
Karmamudra Contemplation of an ex- The external prajnä, Nirmänakäya 
ternal prajnà only in the because she confers 
form of Kämadevi pleasure through the 
(goddess of love). acts of embracing, etc. 
Dharmamudrä The HUM and other The inner prajüä, the Dharmakäya 
syllables contemplated in | avadhüti (central 
the body. channel). 


Samayamudrà Emanating and recollect- The materialization of Mahäsukhakäya 
ing the mandala circle (of diverse forms of the 


deities) accomplished gods 
from the seed syllables, 
etc. 
Mahämudrä Contemplating oneself as The bodhicitta with Sambhogakaya 
the body of the principal great bliss, which is the 
deity. fruit of those mudras. 


n eee сы Pee ИР ee A ______ 


In that explanation, the Mahäsukhakäya is expanded as the bodhicitta of 
bliss-void. 


11 


TWILIGHT LANGUAGE AND A 
TANTRIC SONG 


In my paper published in the Louis Renou memorial volume* I began, 
“Certainly the Vajrayana is not now as obscure as when Prabodh Chandra 
Bagchi wrote his still valuable Studies in the Tantras (University of 
Calcutta, 1939). Nevertheless, both the form, the meaning, and illustrations 
of the expression samdhä-bhäsa deserve a fresh approach based on primary 
sources." In the first section of the paper I concluded “that the correct 
forms are samdhä-bhäsa, samdhi-bhäsa, or samdhya bhäsa, and that they 
all intend ’bhdsd in the manner of samdhi (=samdhä)’.” To continue:— 


The Meaning of the Expression 


Bagchi, in the same place (p. 27) writes, “Prof. Vidhusekhar Sastri in the 
Indian Historical Quarterly (1928, pp. 287 ff.) has tried to determine the 
exact meaning of the expression Sandhäbhäsa. He has collected a large 
number of facts which justifies us in rejecting the old interpretation 
suggested by Mahamahopadhyaya Н. P. Sastri as ‘the twilight language 
(aloándhàri bhäsä).... The large number of texts quoted by Prof. 
Vidhusekhar Sastri has enabled him to interpret it as abhiprayika ү 
or neyártha vacana, i.e. ‘intentional speech’... (V. S. Sastri) “intende 

to imply or suggest something different from what is expressed by the 


* “Concerning samdha-bhäsä | samdhi-bhasa | samdhya bhasa,” Mélanges MEL 
a la mémoire de Louis Renou (Éditions E. de Boccard, Paris, 1968), 789-796. s 
original article may be consulted for the full first section indicated in my summary 
well as for the Tibetan and Sanskrit passages omitted here. 


128 


Twilight Language and a Tantric Song 129 


words.” This interpretation is general among modern discussions of the 
Buddhist Tantras; but Edgerton (Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary), 
takes samdhä as “esoteric meaning" whence samdhä-bhäsita “expressed 
with esoteric meaning”. 

Candrakirti’s definition of sandhya bhäsa is extant in the Bihar manu- 
script of the Pradipoddyotana (Plate I, 2d folio) and I transcribe the 
passage exactly as it occurs: / visistaruci-sattvanam dharmatattvapraka- 
Sanam | viruddhälapayogena yat tat sandhyayabhäsitam | “Whichever one 
reveals a truth of nature for sentient beings having superior zeal, and by 
the method of ambiguous discourse (viruddhalapa)—that one is expressed 
in the manner of samdhi”. (Here I assume a scribal corruption in the form 
sandhyayabhäsitam; it should read sandhyabhasitam but theoretically 
could be sandhäyabhäsitam). Unfortunately definition of the negative 
alternative, na sandhyabhasitam is missing from the manuscript. It is 
easily translated from Tibetan: “Whichever one teaches with certainty a 
truth for the comprehension of sentient beings having dull senses and in a 
very clear way—that one is not expressed in the manner of samdhi.” 

There is an extended discussion of the “six alternatives" in Tson-kha-pa’s 
commentary on the Jääna-vajrasamuccaya, which is an Explanatory 
Tantra of the Guhyasamdja, as is also the Samdhivyäkarana referred to 
above. This discussion in Japanese Photo. edition is in Vol. 160, p. 164, ff. 
A significant remark occurs p. 165-2: “The learned men of Tibet say that 
the neya and the nita are based on alternatives (kofi) of meaning (artha); 
the samdhyd, on alternatives of word (sabda); the yatharuta and na 
yathäruta, on alternatives of both word and meaning”. According to this 
remark, Edgerton’s “esoteric meaning" for samdhä is incorrect, since his 
rendition attributes a given meaning, which is the province of either neya 
and nita. Tson-kha-pa explains, p. 165-4, that the samdhyä bhasa is 
intended for candidates with keen senses and zeal for the highest siddhi 
(success) but the words for that goal are stated in ambiguous discourse: 
Since the chief goal is the “Clear Light” (prabhäsvara) and “the pair 
united” (yuganaddha), and samdha refers to that goal, mentioned by 
Candrakirti as dharmatattva—there is no certainty in the goal. Tson-kha-pa 
quotes the commentary (Candrakirti’s?) оп Guhyasamäja, Chap. 1: “If 
even the Tathagatas do not know the goal of the samdja, how much less do 
the Bodhisattvas know it!” This indicates that the current rendition of 
samdhä-bhäsä as “intentional language” is incorrect, as is also Snellgrove’s 
translation in that Hevajratantra passage, “secret language . 

Of course, the words samdhi, samdhä, and samdhya can all be used for 
"twilight". While the word samdhya is especially used in this Т it is 
invalid to reject it in “samdhä-bhäsa” arguing that samdhi or sam ү аге 
the forms rather than samdhya. There is little doubt from сарн 5 
and Tson-kha-pa’s remarks that Mahämahopadhyäya H Ee Sastri was 


130 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


right in translating the term as “twilight language”. 
samdhyà bhdasa is rendered literally 
twilight”. 

The term samdhä-bhäsä ("twilight language” 
ambiguity, contradiction, or paradox of the moment between darkness and 
light. In ancient India, these were “climactics”, as represented in my article 
“Climactic Times in Indian Mythology and Religion.” History of Religions 
4:2 (Winter, 1965). It is only in recent times that Hindus have ceased to 
respond to the dawn and dusk (morning and evening twilights). The ancient 
Hindu well appreciated the paradoxical nature of Ushas, goddess of Dawn, 
whose ever-youthful appearance heralded another day of life, bringing 
men that much closer to death. When evening descended a host of spirits 
emerged: it was the time that the Mara host appeared to the meditating 
Gautama under the bodhi-tree. The twilights symbolized the sensitive 
points in the temporal flow when spiritual victory was possible. A special 
vocabulary was created to refer to these critical points and called in the 
Buddhist Tantras “twilight language”. This should have been obvious 
from the outset of Western research in the Tantras. But the scholars’ 
understanding was blinded by their preference to regard the Tantras as a 
repulsive literature, depicting degraded cults. Hence they concluded that 
the samdhä-bhäsa was a kind of literary “cover-up” for dissolute practices. 
Of course, if the terms are understood in the latter sense, they are indeed 
understandable and positively not ambiguous, so the obvious rendition 
“twilight language” had to be rejected by early Western investigators of 
the Tantras. 

There was surely a time in India when every learned Buddhist monk 
could understand the terminology samdháya...bhásitam found in 
verses Säriputra is made to say in the Saddharmapundarika, Chap. Ш 
(Edgerton’s Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Reader, p. 55): 


h —The expression 
language in the Manner of 


) aptly refers to the 


Days and nights I spent, O Lord, 
mostly thinking just that; now, I shall 
ask the Lord whether I have failed or not. 


And as I so reflected, O Jinendra, 
the days and nights continually passed on. 
And noticing many other bodhisattvas being praised 
by the Preceptor of the world, 


And having heard this buddhadharma, I thought 
“Indeed, this is expressed in the manner of twilight; at 
the tree of enlightenment the Jina reveals the know- 
ledge that is inaccessible to logic, subtle, and 
immaculate.” 


Twilight Language and a Tantric Song 


131 


Illustrations of Samdhya bhäsä 


The Samdhibhasa-tika is written by Nagarjuna, presumably the same 
tantric who authored the Paficakrama of the Guhyasamäja system. In the 
Japanese Photo. edition, it is in Vol. 56, pp. 67-69. He lists his explanations 
of the “twilight” expressions in seven groups or rounds. It should be of 
interest to compare his explanations with those in the Hevajratantra 
accepting the work of Snellgrove in most cases. 


Hevajratantra 


madhya (wine) is madana 


(intoxication) 
mamsa (flesh) is bala (strength) 


malayaja (sandlewood) is milana 
(meeting) 


kheta (phlegm) is gati (going) 


Sava (corpse) is sráya (resort) 


asthyäbharana (bone ornament) is 
niramsuka (naked) 


prenkhana (wandering) is dgati 
(coming) 


krpita (wood) is damaruka (drum) 


dundura (emission) is abhavya 
(non-potential) 

Kalifijara (N. of a mountain) is 
bhavya (potential) ` 


Samdhibhäsa-tikä (1st round) 


is the ambrosia (amrta) of 
heaven, to be drunk continuously. 


is wind, is food, to be controlled. 


the coming together of external 
States, sense organs, and percep- 
tidns (based thereon)—which is so 
to be contemplated; also the con- 
substantial joy (sahajananda). 


the passage of the wind; also, when 
one has the four yogas, he con- 
templates without holding it, i.e. 
lets it go. 

is the yantra of body, having infinite 
light (amitabha), and one should 
resort to that group. 

One should be convinced, “these 
very bones of mine are my orna- 
ments." 

is inhalation; and one should stop it 
from its violent acts. 

the undefeated sound; also, by con- 
trolling the präna and ayama, one 
beats it (the drum) and makes it 
even. 

is vikalpa (mental emission) and 
should not be elsewhere. 

has avikalpa nature; also, while the 
wind is being inhaled there is no 
recitation. 


132 


padmabhdjana (lotus vessel) is 
kapäla (skull) 


trptikara (satisfying) is bhaksya 
(food) 


mälatindhana (jasmine wood) is 
vyanjana (herbs) 


catuhsama (a potion of four in- 
gredients) is gütha (dung) 
kasturikà (musk) is mütra (urine) 


sihlaka (frankincense) is svayambhu 
(blood) 


karpüra (camphor) is sukra 
(semen) 


sälija (rice product) is mahamamsa 
(human-flesh) 


kunduru (resin) is the union of the 
two 


vola (gum myrrh) is vajra (thunder- 
bolt) 


kakkola (perfume) is lotus 


Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


is the four wheels (cakra [of the 
body] [one of which] is either the 
wheel at the head or the wheel at the 
navel; or it is the kakkola of the 
karmamudra. . . . the four wheels 
аге the padmabhäjana . . . 


is the meditation to be eaten by the 
yogins. 


that scrutiny scraping the element 
is to be eaten. 


is Vairocana, hence is present 
through anointment of the body. 
is Aksobhya, ditto. 


is Ratnasambhava, ditto. 


is Amitabha, hence 
through anointment. 


is present 


is Amoghasiddhi, hence is present 
the same way. 


is the union of sense organ and 
perception. 


is vijfidna (perception), or the 
external vajra. 


is the secret lotus, or else the 
external secret prajfa; by means of 
these, one acts in yoga. 


That ends the first round of seven in Nagarjuna’s commentary and 
accounts for each item in the Hevajratantra list except for “‘dindima Өш 
drum) is asparsa (untouchable)," omitted in Nagarjuna's list, or ome 
in manuscript copying. In the subsequent rounds Nagarjuna treats t i 
very same expressions with different comments, and dindima does appe4 


in the third round. 


Nagarjuna’s commentary suggests that the Hevajratantra has given ш 
basic list of “twilight language”. These are expressions for nee 
yoga states, while “non-twilight language" refers to states of yoga tha th 
not ambiguous. Both these alternatives should be distinguished from 


Twilight Language and a Tantric Song 133 


other sets, neyártha, nitartha; yatharuta, na-yatháruta; and while a similarly 
extended discussion of the latter terms would take us afield from our main 
topic, some brief explanations, following Candrakirti's Pradipoddyotana, 
аге in order. In tantric usage, neyartha and nitärtha are alternative ex- 
planations for a given term, usually referring to a momentous or precious 
element of the body. For example, in the case of the expression “great 
blood”, the neyartha is ordinary human blood, the nitärtha is menstrual 
blood. The set yatharuta and na-yathäruta refer to the terms employed for 
given objective entities. When the term employed is standard, it is 
yathäruta. When the term is coined, apparently to enable the insiders of 
the cult to preserve secrecy even if the text falls into unworthy hands, it is 
na-yathäruta. In contrast, “twilight expression” does not refer to a definite 
given entity, and it is not a meaning (artha). 


The Diamond Song 


Immediately after the section on “twilight language” in the Hevajra- 
tantra, there is a tantric song in the type of language called Apabhraméa 
(sometimes identified with old Bengali), which is generally used for the 
mystic songs called Doha. The Siddhas (tantric masters), such as Saraha 
and Kanha, have left a remarkable group of these songs, the collections 
of which are variously called Dohä-kosa, Caryägiti-kosa, and Caryapadas. 

Of course, the various commentators on the Hevajratantra have each 
had to explain to some extent this tantric song, and Snellgrove, who edited 
and translated the Hevajratantra naturally used some of these materials for 
his version. Fortunately, the great tantric master Naropa has reproduced 
the text of the song along with his explanations in his commentary on 
particular expressions of the Hevajratantra in the Vajrapada-sära- 
samgraha-paiijikà, extant in Tibetan (PTT, Vol. 54, pp. 1 to 41), where his 
commentary on this portion occurs, p. 32-2, ff. This is a song of the engage- 
ment (caryá), and our foregoing section on tantric ritual shows that there 
are three kinds of caryd, more fully “carya-vrata” (ritual observance of the 
engagement), symbolized by the khatvdriga, etc. There is a considerable 
amount of information on this topic, pertaining to the “Stage of Com- 
pletion” (sampanna-krama), in my forthcoming Yoga of the Guhyasamä- 
Jatantra. As to the song itself, Näropä’s commentary provides an under- 
standing of it that is hardly possible from reading Snellgrove's translation 
and notes. This is not to deny the value of the Hevajra context and Snell- 
grove’s labors; in fact, his information that the bodhicitta (mind of en- 
lightenment) is here in the head—where inferentially is Kollagiri—is a 
helpful addition, as are his notes generally. But that is also the meaning of 
“diamond-skull’, as explained in my section on “ritual observances”. One 


134 Foundations of the Buddhist Tantra 


should observe that the song takes for granted the basic list of “twilight 
language” expressions. Notice also that the song serves as an expansion of 
the celebrated mantra OM MANI PADME HUM, On, the 


2 | gem in the 
lotus, Him. Snellgrove’s text is adopted with a few modifications, 


* ж * 


KOLLAIRE ТТНІА VOLA MUMMUNIRE KAKKOLA 
Vola (the diamond mind of enlightenment) dwells at Kolla 
bliss); Kakkola (the lotus) at Mummuni (the navel disk). 
GHANA KIPITTA HO VAJJAI KARUNE KIAINA ROLA 

The diamond exhortation is uninterrupted. The diamond of all thoughts of 
enlightenment holds the intrinsic nature of the three worlds in melted form. 
The two organs congregate with friction. 

TIHAM BALU KHUJJAI GHADE MAANA PIJJAI 

Having united the vola and the kakkola, one should eat meat (=the five 
personality aggregates which are the nature of the five Tathägatas, and 
which thereby lose self-existence, melting into the self-existence of the mind 
of enlightenment possessing the five knowledges, mirror-like, etc.); and 
having united those two, one should drink wine (i.e. ambrosia). 

HALE KALINJARA PANIAI DUNDURU TAHIM VARJJIAI 
Hail! The fortunate mind of enlightenment (Kälinjara) should enter the 
antlers of the lotus. The unfortunate sense bases of eye, etc. (dunduru) 
should be avoided. 

CAUSAMA KACCHURI SIHLA KAPPURA LAIAI 

He (the Lord) takes the fourfold potion (Vairocana), musk (Aksobhya), 
frankincense (Ratnasambhava), and camphor (Amitäbha) (because he is 
inseparable from them). 2 
MALAINDHANA SALIJA TAHIM BHARU KHAIAI 

One should especially eat vegetables (màlaindhana) (—five aggregates) 
along with rice (Salija) (=the knowledge of the Tathagata). 
PREMKHANA KHETA KARANTE SUDDHA NA MUNIAI 
Coming and going, one cannot comprehend the pure and the impure. 
NIRAMSUA AMGHA CADABIAI TAHIM JA SARABA PANI я 
He pays по attention to the bone ornaments on his naked body (=the 
diamond of the mind of enlightenment, the nature of the five knowledges} 
The corpse (śarāba), i.e. the mind of enlightenment which is selfless, ! 
ituated at the tip of the nostril of the lotus. 

MALAYAIA KUNDURU BATTAI DINDIMA TIHAM NA 
VAJJAAI Э 

At the meeting (malayaja) of the diamond mind of enlightenment with f 
prajfia, there is union of the two organs. One does not touch the 


giri (seizing 


Twilight Language and a Tantric Song 135 


drum (dindima) (in any event, because it is “untouchable”—Hevajra’s 
“Dombi”; and ultimately, because everything has become unified). 


* x о ж 


Concerning the “coming and going” of that song, the Samdhibhäsä-tikä, 
as previously cited, has the explanation that it is inhalation (and exhala- 
tion). Such remarks point to the yoga practice of the “pot” (kumbhaka), 
which is treated in my subsequent section on Nine Orifices. 


11 
SPECIAL STUDIES 


Both the one who is ignorant of the yoga of wind 
And the one who knowing it does not practice it, 
Are samsara’s worm, 

Afflicted by all sorts of suffering. 


Samvarodaya-tantra 


err —-——— — 


12 


THE NINE ORIFICES OF THE BODY 


It is a well-known feature of Buddhist canonical literature that one of 
the chief early disciples of the Buddha, Maudgalyayana (Pali: Moggallana) 
was credited with special magical powers (iddhi in Pali, rddhi in Sanskrit) 
with which he often visited various other realms of the world than ours, 
such as the hells and heavens. The Mahävastu (Vol. I) soon takes up an 
account of this disciple’s visits to the eight great hells and other realms. 
These stories do not explain how he managed to accomplish the feat. It is 
only much later—as far as I know—in the Buddhist Tantra literature, that 
one can find an explanation of how a yogin can contact the subdivisions of 
the three worlds, according to the traditional Buddhist classification, that 
is to say, the realm of desire, realm of form, and formless realm. The 
realm of desire is said to include the six passion deity families, as well as 
men, animals, hungry ghosts (preta), and hell beings. The realm of form 
is called, for meditative purposes, the four dhyanas, and has further divi- 
sions. The formless realm also has its divisions of the bases of infinite space, 
infinite perception, and so on. These divisions are known from early 
Buddhist literature and are discussed acutely in the branch of literature 
called Abhidharma. According to the tantric literature as will be cited 
below, the way a yogin like Maudgalyayana can gain entrance to those 
worlds is analogous to how a person might go there after death by reason 
of destiny. In short, the yogin concentrates in a special way on various 
body orifices that are deemed to be correlated with the beings of various 
realms, while the person who dies with his stream of consciousness passing 
through one orifice or another, goes to the appropriate realm of the inter- 
mediate state (antarabhava). The orifices themselves are made salient in 
ancient Indian literature. The rest may well have been strictly oral for 


139 


140 Special Studies 


centuries; but there are suggestions of the rather curious t 
unfolded in the wide-spread injunction to think of a deity i 
death so as to go to the realm of that deity. Such a teaching i 
Hindu classic, the Bhagavadgitä, and the famous Americ 
Franklin Edgerton once collected many materials on this 
article in Annals of the Bhandarkar Institute (1927). 

The nine orifices are referred to in the Svetasvatara Up 
this well-known verse (III, 18): 


heory herein 
n the hour of 
s found in the 
an Sanskritist 
subject for an 


anisad, which has 


The embodied swan moves to and fro, in the city of 
nine gates and outside, the controller of the whole 
world, of the stationary and the moving. 


This tradition of nine is maintained in the Bhagavadgita (V, 13), where the 
mention of nine gates is commented upon as the two eyes, the two ears, the 
two nostrils, the mouth, and the two organs (male) of excretion and 
generation. However, the Katha Upanisad (II, 2, 1) refers to the city of 
eleven gates, and the commentary adds the navel and the opening at the 
top of the skull to the list of nine. 

In a native Tibetan work of astrology, the Dge ldan rtsis . . . (Sec. Ja) 
by Mi-pham tshans-sras dgyes-pa’i-rdo-rje, there is a correspondence of 
orifices and planets which is of interest to mention here simply because 
the nine differ by inclusion of the navel and omission of the mouth, which 
at least shows a lack of unanimity on what the nine orifices are when 
spelled out: 


two eyes — Sun (right eye) and Moon (left eye) 

two ears — Mars and Mercury 

two nostrils — Jupiter and Venus 

navel — Saturn 

s Rahu and Ketu (head and tail of the dragon) 
anus 


When we pass to the Buddhist Tantras, we find in the Budähojfiäneran 
wing of the Guhyasamäjatantra tradition, in the work of the ıa (PTT, 
Buddhasrijnänapäda, his Dvikrama-tattvabhavand-ndma-mukhagen ког 
Vol. 65, р. 8-5 to р. 9-1), this list of nine orifices in Spice i or other 
or transit (samkranti) by a yogin or through death by way o E crown 0 
orifice to an associated external realm: 1. forehead, 2. Bas. dd This 
head, 4. eyes, 5. ears, 6. nostrils, 7. mouth, 8. urethra, and ber by count- 
list includes the eleven ofthe Katha Upanisad, reduced in num the forehead 
ing the eyes, ears, and nostrils, as one each; and then adds 


center. The work continues in this manner: 


The Nine Orifices of the Body 141 
One should understand the forehead as the prognostic of the realm 
of form (rüpadhätu) and birth (there). The navel is the prognostic 
place of the gods of the realm of desire (kämadhätu) and certainty 
of birth among them. The crown of head is the prognostic source 
of the formless realms (arüpyas) and birth therein. If there is 
transfer of knowledge in the two nostrils, the person is born in the 
abode of the yaksas. The two ears are the certain passage to the 
abode of vidyädharas. The two eyes are the prognostics for birth as 
a king of men. In the case of tränsit of knowledge through the 
mouth, one may understand it as the prognostic of pretas (hungry 
ghosts). One should take the urethra as the prognostic for prog- 
nostics of animals. One should understand the going of knowledge 
through the anus as the prognostic of the hell beings. Having thus 
understood the individual aspects for transfer of knowledge, one 
should do (mantra) placement in the seven upper orifices by means 
of the syllable of five soundings (nddita). One should place SUM in 
the urethra and KSUM in the anus. Having thus stopped up the 
seven orifices, when one searches the place through the following 
sequence with one’s own mind, he will certainly go to that very 
realm. 


Before going further, let me summarize that passage: 


Orifice Prognostic of what place or beings 
forehead realm of form 

navel passion gods in realm of desire 
crown of head formless realms 

nostrils abode of yaksas 

ears abode of vidyadharas 

eyes a king of men 

mouth hungry ghosts 

urethra animals 

anus hell beings 


Vitapada’s commentary on that work, the Mukhagamavrtti (PTT., Vol. 
65, p. 65-1,2) explains: The six orifices, forehead, etc. are good. The three 
orifices, urethra, etc. are bad. Therefore, one should understand the 
Prognostic for birth therein by the coming and going of one’s own 
knowledge ( јйапа) in either the good or bad orifices. (His Subssquegt 
comments show that **knowledge" means the yogin's knowledge; hence 
that the yogin can establish a correlation with a certain realm by pec 
his knowledge or know-how, in a certain orifice). In the case of the yaksas, 
this means birth as Vaigravana and other yaksas on Mt. Meru. Vidyädhara 


142 Special Studies 


(holding the occult science) means becoming a yogin who h 
the eight siddhis of “eye ointment”, etc. The five sounding 
because this is the sounding of the five Buddhas. In the case 
the urethra, this is white. KSUM for the anus is yellow. Havin 
(or plugged) the orifices, one goes to one’s own realm o 
One “searches” by the eight methods of recitation, etc. 

In agreement with a portion of these statements, Bhavabhadra states in 


the Srivajradäka-nama-mahätantraräjavivrti (Derge Tanjur, Rgyud, Tsha 
1372-2): | 


as vidya and 
$ are HUM, 
of SUM for 
& stopped up 
f mind (cittadhatu), 


The text, “From the navel, the gods of the desire realm,” means 
that any perceptual stream (vijfidna) that goes forth from the navel 
orifice, is born among the gods of the desire realm. The text, “With 
the form of the bindu, heaven,” means that any such one that goes 
forth from the orifice in the middle of the forehead is born among 
the gods of the realm of form. The text, “proceeding upwards,” 
means going forth through the golden door (the Brahmarandhra). 


This author, Bhavabhadra, has written a commentary on the Tantra 
Arya-Catuspitha, which is also an authority for what are known as the 
"gates to the intermediate state (antarabhava).” 

Notice, in short, that the three bad destinies of hungry ghosts, animals 
and hell beings, are correlated respectively with the mouth, urethra, and 
anus, which accordingly are the three “bad” orifices; while the two good 
destinies of men and gods are correlated with the other six, which are the 
"good" orifices. But notice also that the mouth is included among the 
seven upper orifices in terms of methods for blocking the orifices. 
Apparently, the praxis of the yogin to stop or inhibit the passage through 
the orifices is accomplished by imagining a mantra syllable at each of the 
orifices. 

I also noticed what at first seemed to be a peculiar theory in the Sampufa- 
tantra about nine orifices, and did not feel confident about including 1t 
without consulting the commentaries. Upon referring to the three О 
mentaries in the Tanjur (using the Narthang edition), I did not сш Я 
the place in Indrabhiti’s commentary (Toh. 1197, the SH 
sanäloka), so turned to the explanations—which I quickly NA 
Abhayakaragupta’s Amndyamafjari (Toh. 1198) and in bee 2. d 
Ratnamala (Toh, 1199). Abhayäkaragupta (Narthang Tanjur, ud 
Dza, 19b-1, ff.) states that the practice belongs to the Stage of Comp Ex 
The use of seed-syllables or of evoked goddesses here seems also to 220] 
plugging or gaining control over respective orifices by differt 
syllables and goddesses in those places. This tradition emp S eni «his 
syllables than the preceding system, which suggests that the impo 


BELLNM a C OR ELMMUOABA RE oet 


The Nine Orifices of the Body 143 


is not the particular syllables employed but rather a consistency or sticking 
to the same system throughout all the practice. In the Samputa-tantra 
tradition, the seed-syllables belong to the eight forms of the goddess 
Jnänadäkini (the Wisdom Dakini), for which reason the nostrils and ears 
are counted as one orifice in the correspondence system of eight terms, and 
are counted as two in order to get the total of nine orifices. Combining the 
data from the two commentaries, and helped by the mandala No. 4 in the 
Nispannayogavali (edited by B. Bhattacharyya), the following summary is 
possible (unfortunately, some of the seed syllables are still questionable): 


TABLE 11 


ORIFICES, AND EMANATIONS OF THE WISDOM DAKINi! 


ORIFICE SEED-SYLLABLE (bija) GODDESS 

crown of head of fire—KSUM Vajradakini 

eyes of earth—HOM Ghoradakini 

nostrils and ears of wind—YUM Candali 

tongue of ambrosial water—SUM Vetali 

neck purifying delusion—STUM Simhini, the Lion-faced 
arms (armpits ?) purifying pain—HAM Vyäghri, the Tiger-faced 
heart purifying vibration—SMAM Jambuki, the Jackal-faced 
navel of lord of animals Ulüki, the Owl-faced 


(pasupati)—-DHUM 


There are some intriguing features to that table. For one thing, the four 
elements which the seed-syllables represent are stated in the standard 
astrological order, because Aries is a fire sign, Taurus earth, Gemini wind, 
and Cancer water; with the same order repeated for the rest of the 
zodiacal signs. Reference to the materials in my essay “Female Energy 
and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras” will show that ordinarily the four 
elements are made to correspond to the element cakras navel, throat 
(=neck), heart, and privities. The present table does not have an entry for 
“privities” and so there is an implication that “arms” is the replacement 
for “legs”. Because the four elements are not here in the usual location, 
they must be understood in an extraordinary way, as explicitly stated for 
water, i.e. “ambrosial water”. Again, when the Sampufa-tantra (PTT. 


ae i ion-faced one. 
1. Oft i i äkini, the most famous is the Lion faced one, 
hose eight forms of the Wisdom D his particular form in evocation 


and frequently the Wisdom Dakini is identified with t © 2 

(sadhana) a According Ts Nispannayogävali, her “heart” mantra 15 SH ШОП 
SVÄHA. This text also singles out the dakini Vetäli for a mantra, OM VET. ükini and 
SVAHA, that is said to be “all-active” (sarvakarmika). The ШИИ Mla ayes te 
Presumably the following three are to be identified with the dakinis үсү on 
Collection called Rim *bhyun (see Lokesh Chandra, A New a ana: a 
Part 9, Rin 'byun 141). The general type of the dakini posture is dep [ced bytie Con 


"Buddhadakini" in my chapter on Tantric Ritual. 


144 Special Studies 


Vol. 2, p. 246-3-3,4) assigned the “delusion” syllable to the neck, 
have theorized that it would start the usual Buddhist set of “thre 
(lust, hatred, delusion). When it continued with an assignment 
“klesa” (the Sanskrit original for the Tibetan ñon mons) the 
"defilement" (which is the usual Buddhist rendi 
able; evidently klesa has here its more literal 
conclusion is further certified by the next assignment—that of "swinging" 
(cala; Tibetan g Yo ba) to the heart orifice, so here I adopted the more 
generalized rendition of “vibration”. The “lord of animals" syllable, 
associated with the navel, recalls the Hindu legend of Visnu, that when he 
was sleeping upon the cosmic waters a lotus grew from his navel, and on 
the lotus there arose the creator Brahma. Dowson, A Classical Dictionary 
of Hindu Mythology and Religion, p. 360, also mentions the epic legend 
that the destroyer Siva (or Rudra) sprang from Visnu’s forehead. In the 
present table, this could only concern the crown of the head, associated 
with fire. 

Specialists in Buddhism would probably wish the present writer to 
comment on the relation with the preceding of the well-known character- 
istics attributed to the Buddha—and consistently represented icono- 
graphically—of the usnisa at the crown of the head and the ürna-kosa in the 
middle of the forehead. For one thing, the usnisa protuberance is frequently 
personified as a goddess, especially Usnisavijayä (She, the Victory of the 
usnisa); and through the secondary mark, “head umbrella зн 
(chatträkarottamänga), Usnisa-Sitätapaträ (the White Umbrella Lady o 
the usnisa) (see the Frontispiece, George Roerich, Tibetan Paintings). In my 
article on the characteristics in the Leibenthal Festschrift (Santiniketan, 
1957), I cited Rgyal-tshab-rje’s subcommentary on Hen 
Sphutarthd, “His face is adorned with a ‘treasure of hair CE ae 
It is between the eye-brows in the location of the ‘drop’ (tilaka) с in ae 
the appearance of a silver lump the size of a seed of ешр унн 

The foregoing materials also associate the crown of head with a В 5 = 
in this case Vajradäkini (see the picture in Evans-Wentz, Tibetan 
Secret Doctrines), and that place is associated with the {шс m 
The forehead—the location of the ürna-kosa—is associated и t 545-2) 
of form. Abhayäkaragupta in his Атпауа-тайјағ і (РТТ. Vol. He 5x with 
states: “Likewise, the Tathagata sees with the usnisa; likewise, ests those 
the ürna-kosa; so also with each characteristic. This d E 
characteristics, especially those two main ones mentioned P a 
the functions already described as correlated to external геа 2 oui 
of a yogin's knowledge; in short, that they function as Mis matdlatt- 
those realms. That same author, Abhayakaragupta, in nd giving the 
kara (PTT. Vol. 101, p. 259-2) cites some Scripture, Im 4 enlightenment 
title: “The enlightenment of the Sravakas is in his face; t 


one might 
€ Poisons” 
of the word 

translation 
tion) would be inapplic- 
meaning of “pain”, This 


The Nine Orifices of the Body 145 


of the pratyekabuddhas is in the mid-forehead; the Incomparable, Right- 
completed Enlightenment is in the usnisa.” The word $rävaka means 
"hearer"—hence in the iconography, the long ears of the Buddha; and 
since the Sravaka must practice meditation—also the half-closed eyes and 
nose for “counting the breaths” and like exercises; such must be the mean- 
ing of his enlightenment shown in the face. 

Another aspect to the orifices is how they function as entrances; and 
this topic in the form of entrances to the future parents by a being of the 
Intermediate State (antarabhava), which are the three possible entrances 
by a gandharva, is discussed in my essay “The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism 
of Passion,” later in the present work. There is also the entrance of divinity 
in the form of the “knowledge being” ( jiiana-sattva). 

A further technique, even more mysterious, is the reputed art of re- 
animating a fresh corpse. This is called in Tibetan gron "jug (entering the 
city). It is one of the most esoteric teachings of the Marpa-Milarepa 
lineage, descended from Näro-pä. Е 

Turning to the topic of passage through the orifices, по matter how much 
a single researcher collects materials on these topics from various books 
in the Tibetan canon or elsewhere, he cannot bring together the strands 
to form a unified picture such as one finds in one of the great Tibetan 
manuals that have integrated the canonical descriptions with the oral 
instructions of the gurus. Tson-kha-pa’s commentary on the Six Laws of 
Näro-pä (the **Yid-ches gsum Idan”) is precisely such an integrated work, 
and fortunately my readings in other works of this author over the years 
enables me to read his text at this point also, namely his passage explaining 
the transit (‘pho ba; Sanskrit, samkranti). Just prior to the passage I shall 
translate (PTT, Vol. 161, p. 10-4-8 to p. 11-2-2)? he mentions that a 
person who is sick, suffering, or old, should not engage in this practice; 
and after the passage he alludes to some deviate views about it. 


ж ж * 


There аге two basic counsels about transit. Of these two, [first] the 
purification (sbyan ba) is as follows: The Vajradaka (i.e. the 
Srivajradaka-nàma-mahátantra) states: "The alternations (mtha’) 
of the place are to be purified. After their purification one should 
perform transit of the state of being. Otherwise it would be purpose- 
less.” That refers to the alternations, pleasure and pain, of the place, 
ie. the body. That is, Bhavabhadra explains that if one transits 
without having first purified by cultivation of the heat—the nal ba 
(yogin’s rest) is purposeless. Thus, the prior cultivation of the heat 
is a distinguished basis for accomplishing the transit. Furthermore, 


2. Compare with the rendition of this part of Tson-kha-pa’s text in C. A. ee 


editor, Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra (Falcon's Wing Press, 1961), pp. 25 


146 


Special Studies 


the Vajradäka states: “Upon binding the orifice 
‘pot (kumbhaka), the orifice holes become 
Catuspitha and the Samputa are consistent with t 
express the necessity to cultivate the kumbhak 
capacity to compress within the wind that enters the sense organs 
and other orifices. Now, kumbhaka was previously explained to 
have the three degrees of highest, middling, and lowest; and those 
many persons who assert that it suffices to have the lowest degree, 
speak as though they do not understand the meaning of the Tantra. 
Hence, when one stops the transit of vijfiana through the eight 
orifices, not including the golden gate at the crown of the head, it 
transits through the golden gate at the crown of the head. And that 
transit of attainment is the chief basis for the vidyadhara (wisdom 
holder) who practices mantras. Such statements of the Tantras are 
essential; and even though there are (various) visualizations of 
vijnana (the perceptual stream) departing from the body, it is 
necessary to complete the characteristic of visualizing it as explained 
according to those Tantras. There is both brief and expanded 
subject matter of visualization of the transit according to the fourth 
Gdams nag Seg dril and of the transit according to the counsels of 
the Rnog school. Here I shall speak briefly using as sources the 
precepts of the gurus who put uppermost the precepts of this school 
(i.e. that of Rnog). In this case one may wonder which deity should 
be contemplated as the basis for purifying the transit. The gurus 
maintain that one should contemplate whatever is one's own 
tutelary deity. Since the Samputa and the Catuspitha have stated a 
method of contemplating the deity especially in this case, that isa 
reason—if one would succeed—to do it accordingly. As it would 
take too much space, I shall not go into that matter here. = 
[Second:] The “brightness” of oneself as deity and uniting of the 
winds. Starting with the realm of contemplating the secret place, x 
the navel, one imagines a red A at the navel, a black HUM att 
heart, a white KSA at the brahmarandhra (the golden gate). T 
one vehemently draws up the lower wind, and imagines it ups M: 
the A-syllable of the navel; and having arrived, pushed to eo КШ 
and having arrived at the HUM, pushed to the Ko 
he imagines it re-descending to the place of the HUM in t tai = 
and to the place of the A in the navel. Now some Fat 
that one should contemplate it dissolving in the A and 2 is 
doing it the former way (i.e. simply arriving, not disso e Se dS 
better. One should work at it that way as long as the ge 
(rtags) have not arisen. The prognostics are an on to 
throbbing, etc. at the crown of the head. Then the арр 


S by means of the 
Pure.” Both the 
hat, because they 
a of wind with a 


The Nine Orifices of the Body 147 


the rite is as follows. One should put the main part of the body in 
sitting up Position, and clasp his two knees with his two hands. One 
should start with taking refuge and generating the mind of en- 
lightenment. Then from the realm of the “bright” where oneself is 
the tutelary deity, one visualizes in the space straight up in front 
of one’s head, at a distance from 1-1 /2 to six feet at a comfortable 
level, the guru and tutelary deity in inseparable manner. Deeply 
moved with devotion and faith, one fervently beseeches him. Then, 
having brightly posited the A of the navel, the HUM of the heart, 
and the KSA of the crown of the head; vehemently drawing the 
lower wind one contemplates that the A itself is within the central 
vein and while (moving) upward pronounces a group deer-like 
sound (khyu ru ru byun nas) and dissolves in the HUM of the heart; 
and one recites A-HIK for as many times as necessary. Further- 
more, the HUM itself pronounces (while moving) upward, and one 
recites A-HIK up to twenty times and contemplates that it (the 
HUM) is pronouncing in the throat. Then one should contemplate 
the bright KSA-syllable at the brahmarandhra, and that it is pure 
white, as though the brahmarandhra constituted the starry realm; 
and reciting A-HIK vehemently five times one sees that HUM 
proceed hastily through the brahmarandhra and dissolve in the 
heart of the inseparable guru and tutelary deity. Controlling 
consciousness that way, he settles it in the realm without dis- 
cursive thought. That shows in abbreviated form the transit 
according to the sayings of the gurus and the Catuspitha. 


ж ж ж 


Tson-kha-pa’s passage establishes rather clearly that some of the varying 
descriptions—for example, some of those already brought forward in this 
essay—have to do with two separate phases of the praxis. That is to say, 
the description may concern the phase of purifying the orifices, and this is 
associated with containing the winds in kumbhaka, which is referred to as 
the “heat”,3 or the description may concern the phase of transit of the 
perceptual principle (vijfdna) through the gate at the crown of the head. 

Tson-kha-pa referred to three degrees of kumbhaka, which he treated 
earlier in the same work. He may well intend the three mentioned in the 
Sambarodaya-tantra (PTT, Vol. 2, p. 205-2-7,8): “The lowest amounts to 
thirty-six; the doubling of that is the medium; the tripling is the great. 
The text seems to mean the number of times one performs the kumbhaka, 
thereby lengthening it. The “great” kind thus amounts to 108 times. 


York, 1958), pp. 246-47, 


3. Mircea Eliade, Yoga; Immortality and Freedom (New die ess of kandan 


Shows the relation between the kumbhaka yoga, the heat, an 
Power (to use the Hindu terminology). 


148 Special Studies 


That brings us to the question of what is meant by the “ 
This involves establishing the usual condition of issu 
orifices and the contrasting abnormal or yoga condition of that issuance 

Concerning what is usually issuing forth from the various orifices, 
Buddhaguhya states in the Dhyänottara-tikä (Derge Tanjur, Rgyud, Thu, 


pot" (kumbhaka). 
ance through the 


. 


14b-2,3): “Prana is the vital air characterized as issuing from, and entering 
the eyes, ears, nostrils, mouth, navel, male and female sex organs, the 
unclean orifice, the pores of head hair and body hair.” Buddhaguhya is 
also the author of the Tanträrthävatära (Toh, 2501), upon which 
Padmavajra's Tanträrthävatäravyakhyana (Toh. 2502) comments (Derge 
Tanjur, Rgyud, Hi, 169b-5, ff.): 


Moreover, we must explain the orifices through which the vital airs 
of breath issue and how they do so, how to inhibit them, the time of 
inhibiting them, and illustrations. Among them, through what 
orifices do they issue? They issue without and within all the (nine) 
orifices of the body, i.e. mouth, nose, (sex) organs, (etc.) and all 
the pores. How do they issue? When thought (citta) is excited or 
relaxed, they issue a long ways; and when it is bound fast, they 
issue a short ways, and subsequently, whatever be their gathering 
place, enter in a direction straight above the navel. As to how one 
inhibits them, one gathers them within the “member” (апга, i.e. 
body) of tortoise (i.e. holds the breath in, kumbhaka), one gathers 
them within the *member"—seizing in the manner of the tongue's 
drinking water; and without breathing in, with the small tongue 
(the uvula) like a calm(?) stream and without straining. Relaxed as 
though breathing in sleep, one holds and equalizes them. As to the 
extent of time for restraint: At the outset, when fastening oneself m 
samadhi, one restrains gradually, and does it as long as the samadhi 
and muttering are not finished. The fault of not doing it that way 15 
as follows: the wind whirls, whereupon the heart gets diseased, the 
body heavy; one is panic-stricken and one’s thoughts poo 
tumultuous (i.e. they race) Moreover, if one holds the brea 
fiercely, a fault occurs in this case: it is taught that upon eins 
from that, the samádhi is spoiled. When, like an animal, the V т 
air is not controlled, it is said, “There is no accomplishment 0 
samadhi.” ... 


One striking fact emerges: In Buddhaguhya’s tradition the pre 
kumbhaka, or holding the breath in the body as though it were à PO > Sing 
not involve mantra placement as we have noticed in some of the eur А 
materials. Another thing: kumbhaka here is not the ordinary met о 
taking а deep breath and trying to hold one’s breath, but a gradual т 


The Nine Orifices of the Body 149 
of drawing in the breath by imperceptible degrees, with the tongue lapping 
it up as though it were water drops.4 Also, implicit to all these discussions 
is the theory of winds in the body operating in their individual cycles with 
individual colors and the like, with which the yogin must be familiar. 

Tson-kha-pa’s Anuttarayoga treatment involves the central vein of the 
body, hence the system of three chief veins (in the position of the spine) 
and implies the system of cakras. In this connection, there is the termin- 
ology “upper orifice" and “lower orifice". Thus the tantric writer 
Bhavyakirti mentions in his Prakasika commentary on the Pradipoddyotana 
(PTT, Vol. 61, р. 1-5): ““Агіѕеѕ via the upper orifice’ means, via the path 
of the two nostrils of the face,” but the upper orifice is also treated as the 
neck. The “lower orifice” is at the position of the Hindu Muladhara, the 
perineum triangle, which in the male is at the root of the penis, the juncture 
of the three veins. The Snags rim chen mo (437a-1) cites the Samputa- 
tantra: 


The left nadî (і.е. Jaland) starting at the neck 

is She with the Sambhogakaya (i.e. the “sister”), 
who rests at the navel, and drips intoxication into 
the lower orifice. 


The nadî (rasand) going upward from the navel is (She) 
likewise dripping in the upper orifice, who rests at the 
neck and is known to drip blood (i.e. She with the 
Nirmänakäya, the “daughter”). 

The intoxication is explained as moon. 

The blood is said to be sun. 


That is rather obscure, but is presented here to contact mystically with 
some of the foregoing materials and also to add an aspect to the orifices 
that ties in with subsequent tantric studies in this work. ' 

There are some unanswered questions. For example, what is meant by 
“the yogin’s knowledge” for concentrating in a certain orifice? Here, a 
Curious personal experience may be mentioned. In the year 1946, soon upon 
returning to Los Angeles after I was discharged from the U.S. Army, an 
older friend of mine took me along with another friend who had just been 
discharged from the U.S. Navy to a free public demonstration by an 
Occult-type organization that expected thereby to encourage some of the 
attendees to enroll for private instruction for which charges were made. 


London, 1949), especially 


4. See Alain Danielou, Yoga; The Method of еей ооп ох аа the 


PP. 58-60, for some Hindu theories of kumbhaka practice. ; 
“chalice”, I use the word “pot” because the idea is to succeed by degrees of attainment 


to draw in the breath so slowly that the body can be considered a pot ШШ is being filled 
by water drop by drop, where the “water” is of course the droplets of air. 


150 Special Studies 


In this good-sized hall which could easily seat a hundred or more 
the guide instructed us to meditate on our heart while breathing j 
with the measured sound-beat made by 
Presumably was set to agree with heart-beat time). In a very short while 
I experienced a strange shift of consciousness: I was in some mysterious 
place with a fierce rushing back and forth, and became terrified. Promptly 
I quit the measured breathing and bounced back to normal consciousness 
sitting through the rest of the session without cooperating. At the cone 
clusion of the demonstration I asked the other two friends what they had 
experienced. Each replied that he had followed the directions but nothing 
in particular happened. This example shows that by concentrating on a 
spot of the body in a certain way, controlling the breathing and so on, it is 
possible to “go there” and it is possible to go to an orifice, and perhaps 
“through the orifice”. Obviously, the person doing this must be prepared 
for it with a knowledge of how to do it and what to expect, the standard 
of success and what to do if he is successful. That is the "yogin's 
knowledge”. 

Another observation is that the texts cited make no distinction between 
the male and the female as regards the orifices, although it might bethought 
that the female has one more than the male. Surely these works are not 
written with solely the male in mind, and so there must be an explanation 
for this uniformity. I found a passage that may solve this problem. It is in 
the Mani-mala commentary on the tantric Nägärjuna’s Paficakrama (PTT. 
Vol. 62, p. 154-2): “Some (sentient beings) fall fearfully into a woman’s 
watery orifice organ and every day are born and die.” Hence the text counts 
the birth channel as the urinary orifice, comparable to the male’s urinary 
passage also used for issuance of semen. Accordingly, the woman’s orifices 
are also nine. 

However, in a Hindu tantric text, as discussed by Shashibhusan Dasgupta, 
Obscure Religious Cults, pp. 239-40, the terminology "tenth доог 15 
applied to the mouth of the Sankhini, a curved duct in the head that m 
from the moon in the thousand-petalled lotus at the crown of the hea ; 
Through this Sankhini vein passes the ambrosia (amrta) (cf. our previou 
section on the “Five Ambrosias") which is discharged out of the lower end, 
called the “tenth door.” В ded on 

Finally, there is no conclusion on whether Maudgalyàyana depen hells 
such orifices for his legendary exploits of visiting the heavens and th 
The fact that the nine gates are mentioned in such ancient works Ee 
Svetäsvatara Upanisad, which has a section on yoga, suggests that the i: A 
experimentation with these orifices is of great antiquity. But ne 
proof that around the time of Gautama Buddha there was any d man- 
correlation of these orifices with external realms in the well-develope 
ner of the tantric texts cited herein. 


Persons, 


Ank n unison 
a metronomic instrument (which 


13 


TANTRIC TEACHINGS ABOUT THE 
INNER ZODIAC 


Ever since persons have come to believe in personal horoscopy, they 
have wondered why it should work. Doubtless the same question occurred 
in India because belief in astrology has been deep seated there for many 
centuries. The Buddhist Tantras of the Mother Tantra variety in the 
Anuttarayoga tradition have some theories of an inner zodiac, in all 
likelihood worked out in conjunction with northern Saivism, probably 
Kashmir Saivism. While these theories, insofar as I have come across them, 
are not sufficiently elaborated to show a determined rationalization to find 
an inner equivalent for the outer disposition of planets, etc. of a horoscope, 
it should be of interest to present these theories as I have found them. 

In any case, the theories do not speak of any zodiacal circle hidden in 
the body, with the sun and other planets circling accordingly. Besides, 
while traditional astrology classifies the signs into four groups by the 
elements of fire, earth, wind, water, and has seven planetary rulers, the 
tantric theories of an inner zodiac use the fifth element “space” (akasa) 
Which is sometimes translated “ether” and add Rahu and Ketu (head and 
fail of the dragon that causes eclipses, i.e. the ascending and descending 
M) as planetary rulers. Furthermore, some theories might be in- 
Consistent: or. perhaps it is better to say that it has not been an easy task 
5 reconcile them. However, all the theories take for granted the tantric 

COry of three central veins (nädi) in the position of the spinal column 
ер: to be located in a so-called “subtle body” rather than in the 
ee body) referred to as right, left, and middle, with their names 

“ting in the Hindu and Buddhist Tantras: 


151 


152 Special Studies 
Right Middle Left 
Hindu Pingalä Susumnä Idä 
Buddhist Rasanä Avadhüti Lalanä 


Besides, these systems Tange centers or critical vortexes at various places 
along this triadic central system. These are usually called “cakras” or 
“lotuses” (padma). The Hindu explanations are well known through the 
voluminous writings of Arthur Avalon. The Buddhist tantric explanation is 
available, for example, in S. B. Dasgupta, An Introduction to Tantric 
Buddhism (pp. 160-174). One can also refer to Mircea Eliade, Yoga: 
Immortality and Freedom (pp. 236-45) on these same matters; and there is 


considerable information in my forthcoming Yoga of the Guhyasama- 
Jatantra. 


The Heart Cakra 


The tantric theory of the heart cakra can be elucidated by an interesting 
treatment of the inner zodiac found in Padmavajra’s work in the field of 
Mother Tantra entitled, Sri-Däkärnavamahäyoginitantraräja-vähikatikä- 
nama (Töhoku No. 1419; Derge Tanjur, Rgyud, Dza, 286b-3, ff.). On 
folio 289a, he assigns the zodiacal signs to petals of the heart cakra. Here 
I replace the Sanskrit and Tibetan terms with the standard Western 
equivalents. A minor correction was made of an obvious text corruption 
(interchange of Cancer and Aquarius positions), since Aquarius belongs to 
the Wind Corner; and also because the famous work of Indian astrology, 
Varahamihira’s Brhat-jätaka, states in Chap. I, verse 11, that Aries, 
Taurus, Gemini, and Cancer with their triangular signs (their element 
families) represent the four quarters commencing from the East. On ie 
facing page is Padmavajra’s solution (Observe the clockwise orientation’): 

In accordance with Varahamihira’s hint (perhaps he had in mind 08 
inner zodiac), one can take the cardinal direction sign along with D 
intermediate direction pair to make an individual set (the zodiacal кї 
e.g. Aries in the East along with Leo and Sagittarius (S.E.) as the d 
set. This reduction to four quarters would have to be accepted as o 
primitive formulation representing the early development of the wo 
cakra. 'This is only partially consistent with the explanation 1n be. oe 
pa's Snags rim chen mo (Peking blockprint, 434b-5, ff.), where five P e heart 
are shown to be the personifications of four directional veins of t dues 
as the essence of the elements and of sense objects, with a fifth er ES 
in the middle (the central vein, the Avadhüti). The group of four ВЕ Orden, 
(their Sanskrit names in the Hevajratantra, I, i, 18) are, in the e middle. 
Traivrttà, Kamini, Gehà, and Candika; while Maradarika is in the a does 
The passages which Tson-kha-pa cites do not state completely—n 


EIj*) JIESH 2U} Jo uoNEjuasaiday Te:i30[orsy uy 


(S314) 
13 


(539514 3 0199095) 
(ЗІМ) 


(SNIUVLLIIVS 3 031) 
U3NH0) dIHSUILSVN 3N 


YS YINY0I 3913 


(039NV9) 


(ПУП) 
HLYON 


HLNOS 


(NAOJIUdYI 3 ОША) 


(HLAY3=) 
MS YINY09 М0111108510 


(ЅПІЗУПОУ 3 vugr 
YINY0I ONIM MN 


153№ 
(INIW39) 


153 


154 Special Studies 


his own commentary—the respective correspondences to 
One passage does say, “earth, etc.” But they do state the relation to sense 
objects; and since the identification with elements of the four Main 
goddesses in the Guhyasamäjatantra (Chap. XVII) also starts with earth 
(the goddess Locanä), we are Justified in setting up the following corres- 
pondences, where the successive rows indicate clockwise order: 


the four elements, 


TABLE 12 
THE FOUR GODDESSES OF THE HEART 


re 


GODDESS GODDESS 


ELEMENT SENSE DOMAIN 
(Hevajratantra) (Guhyasamäjatantra) 
> a es See ша 
Traivrtta Locana Earth Form (rüpa) 
Kamini Mämaki Water Sound (Sabda) 
Gehä Pändarä Fire Odor (gandha) 
Candikä Tara Wind Taste (rasa) 


N _ 


It is plain that the order of elements cannot be interpreted in terms of 
external astrology, where discordant elements alternate, i.e. Aries (fire), 
Taurus (earth), Gemini (wind), and Cancer (water). But in my subsequent 
discussion of transits there is a possible reconciliation in terms of element 
wind correspondences to the zodiacal signs. Moreover, the correspondences 
in the above table between elements and sense domains are mostly 
inconsistent with the correspondences in Table 2 in the chapter on 
Analogical Thinking. 

Now the same context in the Sriags rim chen mo mentions that the iR 
goddess Māradārikā (daughter of Māra) represents the sense domain o 
dharma, and so also the element of space (akasa), and since this goddess 1S 
located in the central channel, she is between the left and the right. 
According to the Samputa citation in Snags rim, 437a-6: 


The two “veins”, i.e. the left and the right, 

and the birthplace in the middle:— 

One should know that semen is on the left and 
blood (=menstrual blood) on the right. Their 
mutual admixture is the mixture Dharmadhatu. 


: d 
(This language is related to the Indian theory that the embryo 1S create 
from the man's semen and the woman's menstrual blood). : ‘valent to 
The usage of the term “dharmadhätu” in this context is equiva In this 
another word of this literature, **dharmodaya" (source of dharmas). 


Tantric Teachings about the Inner Zodiac 155 


tantric context, dharmadhätu means a birthplace, but in non-tantric 
Buddhism, it appears to be described by negatives. ! 

Besides, the Snags rim (435a-2, ff.) differentiates the middle into three 
veins (right, left, and middle), to make a total of eight heart veins in this 
system (five goddesses, and three central veins). Tson-kha-pa, in the same 
place, shows that in the conditions of womb the three main veins (called 
the “three queens’’) are the basis of all. However, the set of five, represent- 
ing the five elements as well as the five sense objects, begin operations during 
the phases of the womb and continue them during life, while the three main 
veins apparently begin a new function upon the start of a living birth, so 
they would perhaps be responsible for the astrological true time of birth. 


Transits 


It should be mentioned that Padmavajra (in the previously cited 
Vahikatika-nama, 286b-3, ff.), besides the solution already mentioned, also 
makes the division of the twelve signs into "right" and “left”, associating 
them with “rise of breath". Here the six right (odd-numbered) ones begin 
with Aquarius, and the six left (even-numbered) ones begin with Capricorn. 
In Tson-kha-pa’s collected works (Lhasa ed., Vol. Da, “Dus "khor Май le” 
—perhaps should read Khams le, 22b-1, ff.) we read: “In the same way 
that outside the sun transits the twelve signs, so inside, the wind trans- 
migrates with twelve transits the lotus veins.” In the same work, 36b-4, ff. 
he mentions that the wind transits the six right petals and the six left petals. 

Presumably it is with reference to the Hindu system, interpreted as the 
solar year, that in Kashmirian Saivism, Abhinavagupta’s Tantraloka 
(Vol. IV, p. 97) states: 


Arising from the heart in Capricorn, etc., which 
are the six and six intervals, the sun would enact the 
six months of Magha, etc., and the progress to the North. 


Compare with the popular Saiva classic Sivasvarodaya, verses 73-74: 


There are twelve transits (samkrama) within the day 

and night. Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn, 
Pisces, are in the “moon” (i.e. the breath rises in 

the left radi). During Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, ў 
Sagittarius, and Aquarius, one ascertains good or bad in the 
rise (of breath) in the right (nädi). 


1. See D. Seyfort Rue gg, “Le Dharmadhätustava de Nagarjuna,” Etudes tibétaines 
(Paris, 1971), especially, p. 466. 


156 Special Studies 


Notice the difference in statement: In the case of six and Six intervals of 
the sun (as in Tson-kha-pa’s Kälacakra passage and Abhinavagupta’s 
verse), the signs are divided into two groups, with consecutive signs in each 
group (say from Capricorn to Gemini; and from Cancer to Sagittarius) 
But in the other arrangement (Padmavajra’s “right” and “left”, and the 
Sivasvarodaya) the signs are divided into two groups on the basis of their 
being “right” or “left” oriented. 

The allotment of twelve signs to a single cakra might be intended by the 
Hindu Anähata-cakra, which is a red lotus of twelve petals, situated just 
below the eight-petalled heart-lotus that faces upward. In the standard 
representation of this cakra (see, for example, Arthur Avalon, The Serpent 
Power), the twelve petals of this heart lotus are arranged in a circle. It is 
difficult to imagine—if this be the intention—how the same twelve- 
petalled lotus could function both for two sets of six signs transitted 
consecutively and for two sets of six signs functioning according to “left” 
and “right”. But the four passages might all be consistent by virtue of the 
following materials. 

A native Tibetan work on astrology in my possession? divides the inner 
signs into two groups by northern and southern progress, in consecutive 
transits, with the northern group termed “auspicious” and the southern 
group “inauspicious”. This has to do with “element winds”, and is 
undoubtedly the esoteric side of Indian lore that goes with, whether or not it 
explains, the celebrated passage of the Bhagavadgita (VII, 24-25): 


Fire, light, day, the increasing phases (of the Moon), 
the six months of the northern path (of the Sun), 

then going forth the men who know the Absolute go to 
the Absolute. 


Smoke, night, so also the decreasing phases (of the Moon), 
the six months of the southern progress (of the Sun), 

in them the yogin obtains the lunar light and returns 

(to earth). 


That Tibetan work is in fact a commentary on an astrological treatise ae 
Tanjur, i.e. translated from the Sanskrit, that is probably in ee T 
of Kashmir Saivism. I consulted this Tanjur work (Toh. Ceu 
Yuddhajaya-näma-tantraräja-svarodaya-näma) in the Narthang ee tus 
get some idea of how much was being added by the Tibetan vus T rite 
in the work which I now cite (6a-6b); and can say at the outse 


Am i bkod pa 
2. The Dpal gYul las rnam par rgyal ba'i rgyud don rab tu gsal ba'i nag 8 


kun gzigs dbyans 'char chen po Sel gyi me lon Zes bya ba. 


—m 
м 


Tantric Teachings about the Inner Zodiac 


157 


native work is most helpful and shows deep study of the subject from 
different angles, including the Kalacakratantra tradition. 


The two paths of sun and moon are explained as the southern and 
northern progress. 


According to the sequence at the time of the left movement, the 
аКа$а wind descends by the middle (channel). That is the sign 
of Aries. 


The passage of the fire wind from above, is the sign of Taurus; 
the water wind from below, is Pisces. 


The earth wind moving through the post (ka ba) (both nostrils), 
is Aquarius. 


The wind moving through the corner (ie. the side—left nostril) 
is Gemini. 

The five moving on the left, upon being fixed, are the Capricorn 
sign. 


The ones moving on the left are auspicious. Space works for Umà 
(the consort of Siva). Fire operates for accomplishment; water 
achieves ambrosia; earth works for success; wind works for 
perfection. 


Their planetary rulers in sequence are: Rahu (head of the dragon), 
Venus, Moon, Mercury, Jupiter. The Tantra did not tell the 
planetary ruler of dkdga... 


Then, at the time of moving on the right—the space (аказа), fire, 
water, earth, and wind (winds), moving by reliance on the middle, 
above, below, post, and corner, are respectively, Libra, Scorpio, 
Virgo, Leo, Sagittarius; and all five upon being fixed are Cancer. 


The movements on the right are inauspicious. Space works jd 
terror. Fire operates for death. Water achieves ignorance. Eart 


yields conflagration. Wind operates for suffering. 


Their rulers are, in sequence, Mercury—for space; and Mars, 
Saturn, Sun, and Ketu (tail of the dragon). 


There are a few difficulties or drawbacks with the above native ER 
Verse solution of the Tanjur work (which is also in verse). pis E 
since it admits that the Tanjur work did not assign a ruler to sp 2 
the fifth element that was added to the classical four—fire, air, water, 


158 Special Studies 


Rahu, so this agrees. But then, on passing to the right series, the author 
assigns Mercury to the “space” element wind; 

and I must correct it to, Ketu; since Rähu and 
of the dragon, and so Ketu also corresponds to 


“space”. Besides, to take the planetary rulers “in sequence” by the given 


he Tanjur text— just does 
et was necessary to govern 


the basic Tanjur text was 
intending those other named planets by way of the elements which they 


govern. Now it is well known in exoteric astrology that the Sun rules a 
fire sign (Leo) and the Moon a water sign (Cancer) and that the other five 
classical planets each rule two signs of different elements. Taking this into 
consideration, it is plain that there is only one solution for both the left 
series and the right series that allots rulers to the inner zodiacal signs on 
the basis of elements which those planets govern by reason of a sign in the 
usual system. This is my summary of the exoteric zodiacal signs contribut- 
ing the element to the system of inner zodiac: 


Left Series Right Series 
Venus’ earth= Taurus (No. 2) Saturn’s earth=Capricorn (No. 10) 
Moon’s water — Cancer (No. 4) Mars’ water = Scorpio (No. 8) 


Jupiter's fire = Sagittarius (No.9) Sun’s fire=Leo (No. 5) - 
Mercury's wind = Gemini (No. 3) Mercury's wind = Gemini (No. 3) 


In summary, this would use up from among the twelve traditional signs, 
Nos. 2,3,4,5; 8,9,10. This suggests a theory of this tradition that the 
classical seven planets have each their chief rulership in a given sign from 
among those seven of the summary. In fact, this agrees with the Mer 
astrologers who now assign newly discovered planets to other к 3 
i.e. Uranus to Aquarius (No. 11), Neptune to Pisces (No. 12). Then, T 
consideration that Indian astrology adds the head and tail of the edis A 
planets, but preserves the planetary rulership according to 2% a 
system, it would follow that only by these features of esoteric astr x 
could we continue this assignment to the remaining signs, with Rahu ae 6) 
with Aries (No. 1) and Ketu with Libra (No. 7). Then only Virgo (No: 

is left over. But enough of speculation! ; 5 

к cna no matter ы the planets are assigned to the signs of pee 
zodiac, the chief elements of those astrological verses can be tabula 
follows: 


Tantric Teachings about the Inner Zodiac 


159 
TABLE 13 

ELEMENT WINDS AND TRANSIT OF INNER ZODIACAL SIGNS FOR Fruits 

ELEMENT WIND NORTHERN PROGRESS SOUTHERN PROGRESS 
(left movement) (right movement) 

(All five fixed = Solstice) Capricorn Cancer 
Earth Aquarius (success) Leo (conflagration) 
Water У Pisces (ambrosia) Virgo (ignorance) 
(Middle space = Equinox) Aries (Uma, the goddess) Libra (terror) 
Fire Taurus (accomplishment) Scorpio (death) 
Wind Gemini (perfection) Sagittarius (suffering) 


By “all five fixed” is meant of course, all five element winds, which are 
fixed at the time of “solstice”. Presumably on these grounds Capricorn 
works for a blend of the other five fruits (success, etc.), while Cancer works 
for a blend of the other five (conflagration, etc.). 

Furthermore, the meaning of left and right is clarified by the Sriags rim 
(437b-4) with citation of the Samvarodaya: 


Having entered by the left, 
the right is its path of leaving. 


Tson-kha-pa quotes the commentary: “Because the vijiána which ‘has 
entered.’ departs by way of the right and takes a sensory domain, there- 
upon, riding on the wind, enters by way of the /а/апа (left vein).” This 
shows the meaning of left as auspicious because there is entrance of breath, 
and right as inauspicious because there is exit (expiration) of breath, as 
will be mentioned later by citation of Tson-kha-pa's Sbas don. Naturally, 
vijfiána will enter or leave in some zodiacal sign or other, in the preceding 
sense of the inner zodiac. 

The Tanjur work, the Yuddhajaya...(Narthang, Vol. Go, 45b-5) 
States that the northern and southern progression is a movement in five 
mandalas. The context shows that the five mean the four element mandalas, 
plus the element “space” counted as a “mandala” even though it represents 
the “central channel” (Susumna or Avadhiti). Materials in my subsequent 
essay “Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras show that 
the earth vortex (mandala) is in the privities; the water vortex Іп the heart; 
the fire vortex in the throat; and the wind vortex at the navel. The ipt 
tended treatment in the Sriags rim chen mo shows that the initial activity o 
the elements in the heart “vein” spreads out to the other centers. It pea 
that there is a “left” and a “right” for each cakra of the fourfold um ш 
elements, while “space” (äkäsa) in the central channel has instea 
downward and upward movement. 


160 Special Studies 


The Sixteen Digits of the Moon 


Returning to the directional orientation with Aries in the East, this is 
consistent with Padmavajra’s exposition (again the Vahikatika-nama, 
309a-1 to 309b-4) about the sixteen digits (kala) of the Moon as yoga 


experiences. His remarkable passage is now translated in full: 


Accordingly, he increases his own ocean of knowledge, as do the 
digits of the moon, because he cultivates the praxis. The cultivation 
of praxis will be explained here. By contemplating the letters of 
glorious He-ru-ka in the cakras belonging to the moon, i.e. the 
mind (manas), they arise as the sixteen joys. Their establishment by 
digits of the Moon will be here set forth as they are. The text says, 
“first of all,” and so on; the transits (‘pho ba) number sixteen; 
first of all arises joy. As to "knowledge" (jfidna), it belongs to the 
yogins who apprehend the Aries transit; this is to be known; when 
one is truly aware of it, there is knowledge. By entering the second 
one, the Taurus transit, he has a body which proceeds in the sky, 
that is, he rightly proceeds with a body made of wind. By the third 
one, Gemini, he arises in the form of that mind, like the shaft of an 
arrow, as though incorporeal. In the fourth, Cancer “image of the 
target,” he penetrates the mind, that is, he opens up all entities. In 
the fifth one, the Leo transit, he with the nature of the five peaks, 
that is, with the nature of cittavajra pleasure, penetrates the five 
aspects, to wit, recollects the five strands of desire, form, sound, 
etc. In the sixth, Virgo, called “origination of the six elements, 
with the mind of enlightenment he arouses the joy of the Great 
Person. In the seventh, Libra, he is said to have the form of the 
ocean; this means those in the middle of the ocean, who have the 
ocean of knowledge, as previously explained in the chapter mm 
characteristics of (the goddess) Lama. In the eighth ne 
Scorpio transit, named “Lotus,” he has the form of joy (o this 
very eight spaces of the heart lotus, and arises together Marty 1 
moving and non-moving (worlds). In the ninth, Заан тид 
“elixir (rasdyana),” because he refrains from laboring ns body d 
veins (probably the nine orifices), all the elements of tl су САГ 
the elixir along with ecstasy. In the tenth one, ps ie " "ie ted 
“desire of the Capricorn Moon,” he has the nature о uu des 
(ntra-uterine) states, superior to them with the ge яд? 
(sahaja-deha). In the eleventh, Aquarius, called Ro ез 
he has the distinguished joy of arising in the form er twelfth, 
transcending the fourth (i.e. as Siva). Having Kex on 
the Pisces transit, called “form of the wheel,” his mind has 


Tantric Teachings about the Inner Zodiac 161 
of the Visnu lineage, which means the seed of enlightenment from 
the enduring form of all joys. In the thirteenth, he is in the food of 
the rising Sun (the solar vein). In the fourteenth, he is in the food of 
the rising Moon (the lunar vein). In the fifteenth, by praxis of Rahu 
(the eclipse planet) all the quarters melt into the Avadhüti. The 
sixteenth is called “bindu-näma” for which Treason it is said to be 
“free from time,” and so it is called “introspection,” and so on. 
One should understand all those characteristics. 


It is not possible here to fully explain all that is meant by that passage, 
which seems to intend all possible yoga experience in terms of these sixteen 
transits. However, a few indications of the meaning can be drawn out ina 
way that shows how the author builds up the theory by allowing to each 
zodiacal sign its numerical value. 

The first transit suggests the “sameness knowledge” of Buddhism, 
because the transit into Aries is the Equinox. The second transit, in Taurus, 
involving a body made of wind, in fact requires both “wind” and “mind- 
only”—as will be shown in my Yoga of the Guhyasamäjatantra—hence 
two things. The third transit, in Gemini, shows the hypostasis of the divine 
into the human by the three elements—the divine mind, its ray (like an 
arrow shaft), and the yogin brought into conformity. 

The fourth transit, in Cancer, covers what in non-tantric Buddhism is 
called the four states of penetration (nirvedha-bhägiya), which are 
“warmth,” “summits,” “forbearances,” and “supreme mundane natures.” 
This is an ancient category going back to early Buddhism. In Tantra (see 
Mkhas grub rje's, pp. 28-31), there is the mantra, CITTAPRATIVEDHAM 
KAROMI (“I perform mind penetration.”). i 

In further explanation of the fifth, sixth and seventh yoga transits 
(in Leo, Virgo, and Libra), we may cite Indrabhüti (Derge Tanjur, Rgyud, 
Ca, 134b-7, ff.), commenting on the Sampufatilaka, Ist kalpa, 2d chap.: 


Now there are the thirty-seven natures ancillary to enlightenment. 
Here, the natures of enlightenment are the five personality aggre- 
gates (skandha), the five elements (dhatu), the five sense се 
(indriya), the five sense objects (visaya); likewise the five organs 2 
action (karmendriya) and their five actions (karma). In this case, t ^ 
sixth is the aggregate of knowledge (Jana), the element of u - 
edge, the organ of knowledge, the knowledge object; Шы : 
knowledge organ of action and its action. The E aue one 
pervades those (thirty-six); this means the knowledge en : 
dharmin (possessor of the natures). Accordingly there are Н y 
seven natures—those natures as ancillary, explained as m ers 
(anga); those members are of three kinds and of many kinds. 


162 Special Studies 


That passage shows that in this system of Mother Tan 
groupings, a sixth element of knowledge is added (Padmavajr. 
mind of enlightenment”), and finally a seventh, the possessor knowledge 
realm (Padmavajra: “who have the ocean of knowledge”). 


verses 25-27), as translated with further explanations in my Yo 
Guhyasamäjatantra (forthcoming): 


The disciple who has secured the precepts then applies himself 
unremittingly to yoga of two sorts: by the sequence of "contrac- 
tion" as well as by "expansion". 

Drawing (the winds) from head down, and from feet up, into the 
heart, the yogin enters bhütakoti (the true limit): this is called 
"contraction". 

Having first rendered the stationary and the moving life into the 
Clear Light, he then renders that into himself: this is the stage of 
"expansion". 


Since this is the mystical experience of “death” it agrees with Scorpio's 
fruit (death) as shown in the Table. 

There is no point in dilating upon the ninth transit, because I have 
devoted a whole essay to the theory of nine orifices. Skipping to the 
eleventh and twelfth transits, the same Tibetan astrological work cited in 
my Nine Orifices essay (the Dge Idan rtsis), presents in the section called 
Rtsis ’grel the series of numerical correspondences; the elevenfold are the 
names of forms of Siva, and the twelvefold the names or forms of Visnu. 
In the case of Siva, he is said to have transcended the fourth, meaning that 
he is beyond the four states of consciousness, waking, dreaming, ааш 
sleep, and the fourth. In the case of Visnu, it is his wheel ur nie 
spokes that is emphasized, because Pisces as the last month completes 

Ive spokes. j i 
us bc fourteenth, and fifteenth transits are respectively ee 
right channel (of the Sun), the left channel (of the Moon), and "s mi 
channel (of Rähu). There is this verse in the Sivasvarodaya (v. 100): 


: : 7 t of 
During the flow of the Moon, poison is destroyed; donee: p es 
the Sun, there is control over the powerful. During Sus 
liberation is obtained. One deva stands in three forms. 


2 2 е are this 
Reverting to the tenth transit, in Capricorn, it is useful ч Sa is 
with the sixteenth, “free from time.” The yogin in the ten 


Tantric Teachings about the Inner Zodiac 


163 


proceeding through the intra-uterine states (the ten lunar months) but in 
extranormal fashion with the co-natal body (sahaja-deha); however this 
yogin is not “free from time.” Rather, his time is called “inconceivable Р 
as is clear from Tson-kha-pa’s commentary (the Sbas don) on the 
Cakrasamvara-tantra (PTT. Vol. 157, p. 15-1), where he cites a commentary 
to the effect that there are three kinds of time—good time, bad time, and 
inconceivable time. When the breath comes in the nostril, that is good 
time; when it goes out the nostril, that is bad time. When those two are 
unified (either as holding or withholding the breath), that is the in- 
conceivable time. (Since the embryo does not inhale and exhale, the ten 
states have inconceivable time). Besides, good time (“coming”) is the time 
of the three joys (dnanda, paramananda, and viramänanda; cf. Hevajra- 
tantra). Bad time (“роіпр,” i.e. emission) is when the mystic drop (bindu) 
is emitted. Avoiding the two times (good and bad), one has the inconceiv- 
able time, with the co-natal joy (sahajananda). All that is an explanation of 
certain initial words of the Tantra, to wit, ekasmin samaye (“on a certain 
occasion"), now to be understood as the inconceivable time. Tson-kha-pa 
gives a further explanation, which in our present context means avoiding 
the thirteenth and fourteenth transits (the channels of the Sun and Moon), 
and using only the central channel, hence the fifteenth transit (Rahu’s 
channel), with cultivation of the mystic heat; hence also the inconceivable 
time. Thus, only the sixteenth transit can be characterized as “free from 
time.” 
I close with the Tibetan expression of good wishes, 


/ Om bde legs su gyur cig / 
Om. May there be happiness and good fortune! 


14 


FEMALE ENERGY AND SYMBOLISM 
IN THE BUDDHIST TANTRAS 


Introductory Considerations 


The worship of divinity under sexual emblems is very ancient ir "ndia, 
presumably as old as the Mohenjo-daro civilization, which is usually held 
to be pre-Aryan. The Buddhist Tantras have numerous references to male 
and female dieties; and the latest class of that literature, called the 
Anuttara-yoga-tantra is pervaded with sexual symbolism. This is true both 
of the traditional scripture (agama) and the later commentaries. We should 
know that these works and the associated practices were evolved among 
peoples who took the spirit world for granted, believed that human beings 
could develop supernormal powers granted by deities, and assumed that in 
certain esoteric groups the appropriate procedures for such ends has been 
handed down from time immemorial. 

Since the Tantric literature, Hindu as well as Buddhist, is often abruptly 
dismissed as unworthy of serious attention, we should consider йв posue 
worthiness as a topic of study.! There are two preeminent fields in whic 


a feu? e 

1. In each case I shall give (preceded by “Toh.” for “Tohoku Une me 
catalogue numbers as found in the two catalogues published by Tohoku Uo and 
one on the translated canon (Hakuju Ui, Menetada Suzuki, Yenshö Kana [Sen dai, 
Tókan Tada [eds.], 4 Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Garm (Yens 
Japan, 1934]) having numbers from 1 to 4569; the one on native Tibetan уй we of the 
Kanakura, Ryujo Yamada, Tökan Tada, and Hakuyu Hadano [eds., A Cata 28 
Tohoku University Collection of Tibetan Works on Buddhism [Sendai, n number 
having numbers from 5001 to 7083. Unless otherwise mentioned, all setter refer to 
references to the former refer to the Derge edition ; and references to the la 
Lhasa editions. 


164 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 165 


intelligence may be focused: the open or public, and the closed or private. 
This division involves no necessary value judgment. For example, the form 
of man and the form of woman are two superficial commonplace aspects 
that according to the Tantras conceal two mysteries of heightened con- 
sciousness. These two forms are not less worthy than their two mysteries 
and to the extent that a society realizes this worthiness, indeed sacredness, 
that society is civilized, removed from the brutes. In the same sense, the 
Buddhist Tantric literature is neither more nor less worthy of study than 
non-Tantric Buddhism. It should be recognized that Tantrism falls in the 
domain of the esoteric. 

The esoteric is also of two kinds: natural and intentional. In illustration 
of the first kind, a man may have a great talent which to his distress is 
unnoticed by the world: it remains hidden, perhaps through what the 
Chinese philosophers called Li, the principle of things. Also the Buddhists 
claimed that the twelvefold formula of Dependent Origination is profound 
and therefore not easily understood: it eludes solution by its intrinsic 
difficulty. In illustration of the second kind, there are those numerous 
government documents stamped “confidential” and “secret.” And there 
are the secrets of the Tantras. In his great commentary on the fundamental 
Yoga-tantra called Tattvasamgraha, Anandagarbha writes: “‘This secret’ 
means dwelling іп [or upon] the disk of the full moon; . . . that is secret 
because it is not proper to be taught to all persons."? In addition, some 
Tantric materials are naturally esoteric. 

The present article consults the small number of Buddhist Tantric texts 
that have been edited in the original Sanskrit. Among the commentaries, 
originally in Sanskrit, some important passages have been taken from the 
Tantric authors Saraha, Indrabhüti, Candrakirti, and Nagarjuna, as 
found in the Tibetan translations of their chief works. Moreover, the native 
Tibetan works are often of superlative value, especially because they inte- 
grate the former written traditions (translated canon) with the oral precepts 
of the line of teachers (guru). Among these, I employ the works of Tson- 
kha-pa (1357-1419 A.p.), founder of the Gelugpa school, and of his disciple 
Mkhas grub rje.3 

The Prajna 


Modern scholars have been somewhat confused on this subject by 
Wholesale use of the term sakti (“power”) in reference to Syd 
goddesses. This term, general in Hindu Tantras, seldom occurs ш ыз 
Buddhist Tantras, which actually employ the following generic wor 5 
the goddesses or females: рга/йй (“insight”), yogini ( female ИД", 
vidya (“occult science” or “know-how”—"wisdom” in its historic me 


2. Toh. 2510, the Tattvalokakari, Tanjur, Li, 228a-3. 
3. See n. 1. 


166 Special Studies 


ing including all academic learning), devi (“goddess” ог “queen”), mätr 
< 3 = = [73 ” [73 э =j» 2 iJ 
(“mother”), mätrkä (“mother” or letters”), däkini ("fairy"), dūtī 
oe э” r = (66 = ” = 2 
(“female messenger”), suri (“heroine”), and mudrä (“seal” ог “gesture”) 


The word prajüà is especially important because in both Tantri 


: ; : ic 
Buddhism and in non-Tantric Mahayana Buddhism it contrasts with the 


term upaya (“теапѕ,” “approach”). A certain Tantric tradition holds that 
after the fall from Paradise the phase involving division into male and 
female constituted a separation of “means” from “insight”: henceforth 
men were a source of means and women of insight.4 But the means are 
various and insight is one: so in non-Tantric Buddhism Prajiiaparamita 
(“the Perfection of Insight”) is called “mother of the disciples ($rävaka), 
self-enlightened ones (pratyekabuddha), and Buddhas,” who have diverse 
fathers or approaches (updya).5 This is a sort of mystical polyandry that 
curiously parallels the well-known Jungian thesis about the man’s shadowy 
anima (his unconscious female) and the woman’s shadowy animus (her 
unconscious males), because Jung states: “A passionate exclusiveness 
therefore attaches to the man’s anima, and an indefinite variety to the 
woman's animus.” 6 

According to Buddhist metaphysical treatises, an element of prajñā 
occurs as one of the momentary ingredients in every idea we have.? But 
as long as human beings (whether male or female) are enveloped in lust, 
hatred, and delusion, this prajfid element can be called “impure.”® Such 
is the historically foisted condition of prajfid. But some persons become 
monks, restrict their worldly activities, withdraw their grasp upon the 
world. Becoming in a sense more like women, they alter the environment of 
prajna and specialize it out, so to say, ultimately gaining its perfection 
(prajnaparamita). What is at issue here is not the obvious, but the uaa 
those potentialities of human beings that in the manner of seeds hide their 

atures until nurtured. з 

Й These natures—whether of men ог women—are fostered like plants 
raised in hothouses when the person withdraws from society. In Jungs 


Ы e 1 i d the 
4. A Tibetan account of this view is presented in my “Buddhist саса a 
Tantric Tradition," in Oriens Extremus, Vol. 9, No. 1 (1962), one o 
orial of the late F. D. Lessing, reprinted herein. f TAN häyäna 
Hr my chapter “Perfection of Insight: Buddhist Tantra Within Mahay: 
ddhism.”’ . Modern 
s The Basic Writings of C. G. Jung, ed. Violet S. de Laszlo (ей ҮШ 
Library, 1959), р. 180 (from: The Relations between the Ego and the D s: cf. Louis de 
7 Technically, prajna in this context is one of the ten o, cas: es Chapitres 
la Vallée Poussin, L’Abhidharmakosa de Vasubandhu, Premier et Det 9 
: vain, 1923), pp. 153-56. { À А «corrupte 
E entry hchal bahi Ses rab, glossed as Ses rab ñon Ш pa (Chines e eds 
insight,” in the native Tibetan dictionary by Dge-bses-chos-kyi-graß 
1957), p. 283. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 167 


language: "Isolation by a secret [? alchemy] results as a rule in an anima- 
tion of the psychic atmosphere as compensation for loss of contact with 
other people. It causes an activation of the unconscious, and this produces 
something similar to the illusions and hallucinations that beset lonely 
wanderers in the desert, seafarers, and saints.”9 The extreme limit of such 
isolation is illustrated by the experience of Gautama Buddha beneath the 
Tree of Enlightenment. In traditional accounts of Mara’s onslaught, we 
find the future Buddha beset by hosts of demonic beings and tempted by 
the three daughters of Mära.10 Somewhat as a tormented liver motivates a 
snake dream, the besieged foundation of human nature objectifies a 
malicious panorama. Gautama is unmoved by this vivid display: he knows 
it is all an illusion. Then the Earth Goddess, Mother of the World, moves: 
shaking [literally: earth-quaking] in six different ways she disperses the 
hosts of Mara. 

This celebrated encounter suggests a number of considerations: 

l. Indian symbolism does not necessarily assign to male the active, 
to female the passive role. 

2. The proposition “All mental objects (dharmäh) are an illusion" 
has one meaning for the ascetic, another for the metaphysician. For the 
yogin who has developed the intense visualizing power called eidetic 
imagery—natural to many children in certain years prior to puberty—the 
proposition is the rule of mental health. For the metaphysician, unliberated 
from discursive thinking, the proposition is the basis of an impractical 
world denial. 

3. It is one matter to recognize something as an illusion, another matter 
to get rid of that thing. This contrast is the topic of a simile in the Kasyapa- 
Parivarta-sütra, as quoted in Tson-kha-pa’s Lam rim chen mo: “KäSyapa, 
thus for example, when two trees are rubbed together by the wind, and fire 
arises [from the friction], [that fire] having arisen burns up the two trees. 
In the same way, Käsyapa, by reason of the most pure discrimination 
[analyzing mental objects], the power of noble insight (Grya-prajnia) is 
born; and [that Fire] having been born, burns up that most pure dis- 
crimination."!! Elsewhere in the Lam rim chen mo, this “discrimination 
(pratyaveksana) is treated as a form of prajiia. It is рғајћа on the intellectual 
level; the prajfia born from it is of a mystical nature and eliminates both 
discrimination and its object, which by “rubbing together” during intense 
concentration, have given birth to that prajñā. Hence Dayal is not quite 


9. C. С. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, trans. К. Е. C. Hull (“Bollingen Series, 
Vol. XX [New York, 1953]), p. 49. А d 

10. For some data on the three daughters, including their an КЕ. Н. Johnston, 
The Buddhacarita, or Acts of the Buddha (Calcutta, 1936), Part II, p. . Stael Holstein's 

11. Toh. 5392, Tashilunpo ed., 476a-4. The Sanskrit is not extant in Stae 
edition of the Kasyapa-Parivarta Sütra. 


168 Special Studies 


right in saying: “The two great Mahäyänist schools of Buddhist philo- 
sophy do not agree in their interpretation of рғајћа. The Vijfiána-vàdins 
( Yogacaras) explain prajüà in a positive manner... . The Madhyamika 
philosophers have interpreted prajfid in a negative sense."12 The latter 
prajna is the one sometimes called the “eye of prajfia," which sees nothing 
(the void),13 but as it springs from the intellectual prajñā (“knowing things 
as they really are") stressed by the Vijiiana-vadins there is no essential 
disagreement in the alternate explanations of the term. The real difference 
is in the emphasis, and there is no denying the importance of this factor. 
However, the feature of ascending levels of prajfid is a doctrine of Buddhism 
prior to the rise of Mahayana: there is the insight consisting of hearing or 
learning (sruta), the insight consisting of pondering (cinta), and the insight 
consisting of cultivation [in one's own life] (bhdvand). In the third case, one 
no longer hears or ponders: one is that thing formerly heard and pondered 
and hence no longer “sees” it. 

4. In the myth, the illusion-destroying power is a Woman, the Earth 
Goddess; in non-mythic language this power is drya-prajid. In the myth, 
this Woman is external to the future Buddha; in non-mythic language it is 
a power produced in himself. In the myth, the future Buddha is seated 
beneath the Tree of Enlightenment touching Earth with his right hand, and 
Earth (the World Mother) shakes. In the Order (samgha) founded by 
Gautama Buddha the monk is not allowed to touch a woman. Besides, the 
Indian Buddhist reformer Atisa (eleventh cent.) writes that in final meaning 
(nitártha) one does not need to go to the Bodhi tree considered as an ex- 
ternal tree in order to achieve Enlightenment (bodhi).14 

5. But why is the Earth Goddess represented mythically as an Other 
when in more prosaic terms "she" is an interior power? The question 
confronts us with the mystery of all mythic composition. On this point, 
Eliade properly emphasizes that the myth is detached from profane time; 
it provides an entry into the “Great Time, the sacred time.”13 The non- 
mythic Buddhist description of impending Enlightenment provides the 
intellect with technical terms. The scholar can “grasp” it; he may think he 
understands it. Still, the description is profane and likewise the under- 
standing. 


London, 


55), 


12. Har Dayal, The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature ( 
1932), pp. 236-37. 1 ) 19 
13. Edward Conze, Selected Sayings from the Perfection of Wisdom (London, 

p. 80. б thor's 

14. Toh. 3948, the Bodhimärgapradipapahjikä-näma (catalogued a the menting 

alternate name, Dipamkarasrijnäna), Tanjur, Оби ma, Vol. Khi. c 1 

on verses (8b.-9, in my numbering) of his Bodhipathapradipa (Toh. 39 ER (London, 
15. Mircea Eliade, Myths, Dreams and Mysteries, trans. Philip Mai 

1960), p. 23. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 169 


Reverting io hal Tantric tradition about the separation of “means” 
and “insight,” it, of course, constitutes a rationale for (re)uniting those 
two along with the merit and knowledge collected since the Original fall. 
Both the Tantric and non-Tantric Buddhist Purposes are colored by the 
“nostalgia for Paradise” discussed by Eliade in consideration of both 
archaic societies and Christianity.!6 In the non-Tantric tradition the 
“means” are usually explained as these five Bodhisattva perfections 
(päramitä): giving, morality, forbearance, striving, and meditation. In the 
Tantras, the “means” may also be explained as the mandala or consecrated 
circle in which initiation takes place.!7 This mandala may be the initiate’s 
body. But while the “means” is associated with men, and “Insight” with 
women, this by no means implies that ordinary human marriage unites the 
“means” and “insight” in either the non-Tantric or Tantric sense. Indeed, 
that type of marriage generally confirms the loss of Paradise. 

This is not to deny the legitimacy of the literal interpretation sometimes 
made by the Tantras, to wit, that they teach salvation through sexual 
union. But this symbolism by its very nature is capable of multiple inter- 
pretations, and thus separates the mahdtmans (“great-souled ones”) from 
the alpdtmans (“small-souled ones”) as well as from those in between. 
This view of ours is borne out by Eliade’s remark while considering Hindu 
and Buddhist sexual Tantric statements: *We have already noted that the 
tantrics are divided into two classes: the samayins, who believe in the 
identity of Siva and Sakti and attempt to awaken the kundalini by spiritual 
exercises, and the kaulds, who venerate the Kaulini (=kundalini) and 
employ concrete rituals."!8 Of course the classical commentators could 
not avoid this issue and used expressions preserved in Tibetan translation 
as sgra ji bZin pa and sgra ji bzin та yin, the Sanskrit originals for which 
were yathäruta and na-yathäruta. The former means “standard termin- 
ology”, the latter “non-standard terminology." Thus, Jiänäkara discusses 
these terms and mentions that in the standard terminology the “sixteen- 
year old girl” (prajríà aged sixteen) refers to the concrete sixteen-year-old 
girl, while in the non-standard terminology that aged girl refers to the 
sixteen voids.19 Again, using the generic term mudra, the two kinds are 
called the karmamudra (“seal of action”) and jîanamudra (“seal of knowl- 


16. Ibid., pp. 59-72. 1 rN 

17. Atiga ыан that in the Tantras the “means” is the mandala; ПД, 
Bodhimärgapradipapanjikä-näma (n. 14, above), while commenting a all the 
numbering) of his Bodhipathapradipa, which states: “Hence, in order to е val е 
obscuration of defilement and the knowable, the yogin should continually 
Prajnaparamita together with the means.” Я «ре 

18. Eliade, Vere Immortality and Freedom, trans. Willard R. Trask (‘Bollingen 
Series,” Vol. LVI [New York, 1958]), p. 262. b 

19. Toh. 3719, the Mantravataravrtti, Tanjur, Rgyud, Tsu, 204a-b. 


170 Special Studies 


edge"): “The karmamudrá has breasts and hair, is the basis of pleasure in 
the realm of desire (kämadhätu) . . . involves transient pleasure (ksara- 
sukha). . z The jrianamudrà is imagined by one's тіпа... is the basis of 
pleasure in the realm of form (rüpadhatu) . . . involves contact pleasure 
(sparsasukha).20 

The problem is whether the syncretism of Buddhism with Tantric lore 
giving rise to the Buddhist Tantras is consistent with non-Tantric Buddhist 
traditions. My own solution involves an interpretation of the “dissolute- 
ness" of the prajfid or “woman” frequently mentioned in certain Tantric 
texts. Thus, with reference to the Tantric consort called the outcast 
(dombi), Eliade cites Kanha’s line, “О dombi! no woman is more dissolute 
than thou!’’2! We аге not denying that some of the Tantric authors may 
denote a concrete woman by their dombi when we hold that there scarcely 
could have been a more appropriate symbol for the inner faculty of 
ргаўпа than the dissolute outcast. 

This “woman” is the initiatress of the yogin, and for this function had 
best be “dissolute.” For in the world we know the man is initiated sexually 
by a woman who is temporarily dissolute—however moral she may be at 
other times. Besides, woman is the initiator par excellence: she obviously 
ushers one into life and, obscurely, into death. Indian mythology reminds 
us of this with the stark figure of Kali, the World Mother as destroyer. 
Hence also, that dombi as “insight” initiates one into knowledge, whether 
mundane or divine, commonplace or awesome. 

This prajna is found in all circumstances, foul and pure, as an ingredient 
of every idea. We do not have the introspective power to trace the ordinary 
prajna to the glorious state free from the three psychological poisons, 
because just as that point is reached our discrimination, itself a form of 
prajna, would vanish according to the sitra citation. We only assume It 1S 
the same prajfid (or is it an alter ego?) that is the Perfection of Insight as 
dissolute as ever, for she consorts as freely with giving, morality, forbear- 
ance, striving, and meditation, as her wicked elder sister does with lust, 
hatred, and delusion. And she discloses the same ultimate truth to all the 
spiritual heroes. 

So we can present our solution of the problem: if that dissolute ue 
the Tantras talk about is really an interior power and is терке 
externally as an Other in purely mythical language, this may well : 
consistent with non-Tantric Buddhism, for that woman may be no оа 
than the Earth Goddess who shook in six ways (whether or not u 
rising through six cakras of the body). And if that woman IS the kin 


> ‚ 56. 
20. Mario E. Carelli (ed.), Sekoddesasika of Nadapäda (Naropa) (Baroda, 1941)P 
21. Eliade, Yoga, p. 261. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 171 
would call a woman in profane time, when time is added to a place, such 
Tantric interpretations have little in common with the teaching of 
Gautama Buddha. 


The Three Meanings of "E-vam" 


The remarks in the preceding section about prajna and upäya suggest 
that the Tantras do not bring up in isolation the subject matter involving 
female symbolism. Usually male symbolism occurs side by side, especially 
in the discussion of evam, the word which begins both the non-Tantric 
sermons called Sütras and the esoteric literature called Tantras. The 
opening lines, setting the occasion for the work, are called the nidäna, a 
word which means “fundamental cause," “theme of the discourse," 
"jntroduction," "introductory chapter," and so on. The numerous 
commentaries on Buddhist Sütras and Tantras naturally afforded no end 
of opportunity for the learned commentators to expand on the meaning 
of the nidana according to their respective schools. No matter how the 
nidäna would subsequently diverge in the various works, its standard form 
for the first sentence was: evam mayd srutam ekasmin samaye, which 
interpreted as words in an ordinary sentence means “Thus by me it was 
heard on an occasion.” Brough challenges the modern punctuation 
established by the Pali school, which interprets the adverbial phrase 
ekasmin samaye with the meaning “on one occasion” as inaugurating the 
second sentence to add a time to the place where the Bhagavat dwelt 
(vijahära).22 When the adverbial phrase goes with the first sentence it adds 
a time to the “hearing,” which might have occurred “all at once” in Great 
Time. Insofar as the present writer has inspected several Mahayana com- 
mentaries, they agree with Brough’s indications; and one may refer to the 
Maháprajfiápàramitasástra for confirmation.23 ; 
The Tantric commentaries also employ an interpretation not found in 
non-Tantric works: they comment on the nidana as composed of individual 
Syllables. The Tantric commentary summarizes the teaching of the whole 
Work as will be shown extensively in the rest of its commentary by arbi- 
trarily assigning meanings to the syllables of the nidäna, interpreted as the 
“theme of the discourse,” starting with the initial e of evam down through 
the ra of vijahdra (“dwelt”). For example, the work Hevajrapindärthaf ka 
identifies the first six syllables with six goddesses, in order, Locanā, 
Mamaki, Pandara, Tara, Vajradhätvisvari, and Prajnaparamita. The next 
Six syllables are the six Buddhas, the usual five and Vajrasattva, who e 
represent the six personality aggregates (skandha), the usual five and a sixt 


7 ‚ 416-26. 
22. John Brough, “Thus have I heard . . . ,” BSOAS, XIII, No. 2 d. sch 


23. Lamotte (trans.), Le Traité de la grande vertu de sagesse (Louvain, 


172 Special Studies 


not specified here but probably jridna-skandha (the aggregate of knowl- 
edge).24 This particular syllabic commentary on the nidäna continues 
down through vijahara and thus announces the main deities as well as 
indicates the sixfold nature of the correspondence system. 

In effect, the Tantric commentaries on the Anuttara-yoga-tantra 
literature interpret the language of the basic Tantra in two ways: as 
words having the meanings that they seem to have; and as words having 
arbitrarily assigned meanings, especially when the words are decomposed 
into syllables. In illustration, evam has its ordinary meaning of “thus,” 
and has two syllables each with their arbitrary meanings as assigned in a 
particular Tantric tradition. 

Perhaps the appearance of the letters e and va in certain Indian alphabets 
suggested their use for symbolizing the female and male principles, as is 
done in the Guhyasamäja-tantra cycle. Following this tradition, Tson-kha- 
pa writes: “states three meanings of E-vam: (1) the E-vam of the fruit to 
be attained; (2) the E-vam of the path of attainment; (3) the E-vam as 
“signs” guiding that [path]."25 He goes on to illustrate the three meanings: 

1. E is the secret place for teaching the doctrine (dharma), such as the 
sky, the bhaga (“female organ,” metaphorical), the dharmodaya (“source 
of natures"), the lotus, and the lion’s seat. Vam is whoever the Tantra sets 
forth as the Teacher, be he Vajradhara, Heruka, and so on, who dwells in 
the bhaga, lion’s seat, and so on. (These deities symbolize the inseparable 
union of the void and compassion.) 

2. E is "insight" (prajfid), “‘voidness” (Sanyata). Уат is “means” 
(upäya), “great compassion” (mahäkarunä). Together they constitute the 
bindu (T. thig le). 4 

3. Е is the mother's bhaga place (adhára) (yum gyi bha-ga rten). Vam 15 
the father’s vajra (*male organ," metaphorical) placed (adheya) therein 


24. Toh. 1180, Hevajrapindarthatika, Tanjur, Rgyud, Ka, 7a-5 ff. The author, 
*Vajragarbha (T. Rdo rje süin po), gives six goddesses, representing elements, pr 
the syllables of evam mayā śrutam; six Buddhas, representing skandhas, for those О 
ekasmin samaye; six goddesses, representing sensory objects (visaya), for those © 
bhagavän sarvata- and six bodhisattvas, representing sense organs (indriya), for ino 
of -thagatakayavak-, these two groups of six constituting the twelve sense base 
(ayatana); six fierce goddesses and six fierce gods, ordinarily located in twelve spots o 
the body, such as the limbs, for the syllables of -cittavajrayosidbhagesu vijaha-; EE 
finally Vajrasattva, the chief one, thirty-seventh, who is prajia and upaya, for 15 
syllable -ra. For purposes of this arbitrary interpretation of the syllables, amoun i a 
the cast for the Hevajra drama, the author has not hesitated to omit the word Ar pis 
which appears among the opening words in the Sanskrit text of the Hevajra-tantra. 
repetition of Vajrasattva is quite normal; this deity is playing two roles, one as à Bu 
and another as the central deity. In the Mother Tantras, such as the Hevajro» ent 
correspondence systems generally go by sixes. The usual way of increasing the сете 
ao the skandhas to six is to add “knowledge” (jana), i.e., jnana-dhätu and jn 
skandha. 


25. Toh. 5284, Collected Works, Vol. Ca, Mthah gcod, 64b-3. 


the 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 173 
(de la brten pahi yab kyi rdo rje). This again is of two kinds: (a) the external 
E-vam as “signs, the union with the “seal” (mudrd); (b) the internal 
E-vam as "signs," the guiding agent for the path of piercing the vital 
centers of the cakras (the “wheels” imagined along the spinal column). 
“Here, ‘signs’ means signs of the genitals in the sense of shape."26 These 
shapes associated with the cakras are the triangle and the circle. 

Tson-kha-pa’s treatment enables us to add some information to each 
of the three. 

1. The first meaning of e-vam is the literal meaning of the nidana of 
the Tantra. Both the Guhyasamdja-tantra and the Hevajra-tantra, as 
edited in Sanskrit, begin with two sentences that can be rendered as 
follows: “Thus by me it was heard on an occasion. The Bhagavat dwelt 
in the bhagas of the diamond ladies who are the essence of the Body, 
Speech, and Mind of all the Tathägatas.” These bhagas belong to the four 
goddesses Locanä, Mamaki, Pändurä, and Tara, who are respectively 
associated, in this stage, with the cakras of navel, heart, neck, and head.27 

2. The second meaning of e-vam is the union of “insight” and “means,” 
or in alternate terminology, the union of “void” and “compassion.” As 
discussed in our preceding section, this union involves aspects of the male 
and of the female but is not the union of ordinary marriage. The union, 
as mentioned above, constitutes the bindu. This is the mystical andro- 
gynous element composed of the white (male) and red (female) elements, 
whose ordinary function is to rise and descend in the central channel of the 
body (imagined to be in the spinal column), causing, as we shall soon point 
out, the states of consciousness. Tson-kha-pa in his Guhyasamaja com- 
mentaries often refers to the bindu as composed of the winds and mind- 
only (vàyu and cittamätra); and instead of *mind-only" the word 
"perception" (vijfiana) is sometimes used. In this terminology apparently 
the winds are in the “means” category and the mind-only or perception ın 
the “insight” category. The bindu is also called bodhicitta (“mind of en- 
lightenment”). The second meaning of e-vam concerned with the path, as 
well as the third meaning concerned with the signs along the path, is 
made explicit by the arbitrary commentarial explanations of the syllables 
of the nidana. 


3. The external E-vam as "signs" may mean the symbolic N 
Mother (yab-yum) unions of a god and goddess frequently depicted In 
Tibetan art. The internal E-vam as "signs" is explained by To En 
in this passage: “Thus that work [the Sampufa] explains the ee. 
the E-vam with locus in the shape of the cakras of head and navel—the 


Shape of the E-triangle; as well as in the shape of the cakras of heart and 


26. Ibid., 66a. aja-tantra. 
27. That initial passage is elaborately explained in my Yoga of the Guhyasamaja-tan 


174 Special Studies 


neck—the shape of the Vam-circle.”28 When Mkhas grub rje describes 
these cakras in his commentary on the Hevajra-tantra he especially 


clarifies the emphasis on four cakras for the Tantric manipulation of the 
"winds": 


The cakra of the navel with triangular shape faces upward; the 
cakra of the heart with circular shape faces downward; and the 
former has 64 petals (or **veins"), the latter 8. The cakra of the neck 
with circular shape has 16 petals and faces upward; the cakra of the 
head with triangular shape has 32 petals and faces downward. The 
total of those “vein” petals of the four cakras is 120; and since they 


form the support for the winds and perception, they are explained 
to be the 120 chief **veins."29 


We can appreciate these symbols somewhat better by noticing what 
Tson-kha-pa says in a different work: "Among those, the cakras of 
navel and neck are prajfid with the shape of the E-triangle; and the cakras 
of heart and head are upäya with the Shape of the Vam-circle."30 The neck 
and head cakras are now assigned shapes differently than in the two fore- 
going citations. However, Tson-kha-pa is here following the Guhyasamäja 
(Father Tantra) tradition, whereas the Samputa and the Hevajra are in the 
Mother Tantra tradition. It follows that these tantrics do not believe that 
there are triangles and circles in the respective places. Those signs are 
meditative props imagined at those centers to facilitate concentration; and 
it is only important that the symbolism be consistent in a particular Tantric 
tradition. In agreement with this conclusion, Indrabhüti writes: “For the 
reason that the consonants are upäya and the vowels are prajnia, there are 
four cakras. There is the combination of upäya with ргаўйа, the combina- 
tion of updya with upäya, the combination of prajfià with prajfid, and the 
combination of prajfid with upäya. Hence four kinds are stated.”’3! 
When these Buddhist Tantras deal with seven cakras, one is added at 
crown of head in the position of the usnisa with four petals; and two 
below, one at the sacral place (gsari ba) with thirty-two petals and another, 
the lowest of all, at the “tip of the jewel” (nor buhi rtse) with eight petals. 3? 
This system of seven cakras is obviously parallel to the Hindu Tantra 
series named, in order from top to bottom, Sahasrara, Ajfia, Visuddha, 
Anähata, Manipüra, Svädhisthäna, and Mülädhära. The fundamental 


28. Mthah gcod (op. cit.), 66a. 

29. Toh. 5483, Collected Works, Vol. Ja, Brtag hgrel, 68b-6. 

30. Toh. 5292, Collected Works, Vol. Cha, Rdor bzlas, 21b-1. f 

31. Toh. 2472, the Ratnacakräbhisekopadesakrama, Tanjur, Rgyud, Zi, 151a. d ex- 

32. According to Abhayākara’s Amnaya-mafijari (Toh. 1198,) as quoted ап 
plained in the Sriags rim, 436b. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 175 
group of four cakras of the Buddhist Tantras therefore corresponds to the 
Апа, Visuddha, Anähata, and Manipüra cakras of the Hindu systems 
although there are some differences in the respective descriptions. The 
cakra of the head, sometimes called the Mahäsukha-cakra, thus cor- 
responds to the Hindu Ајда cakra in the head between the eyebrows 
hence in the position of the ürnd-kosa, one of the main characteristics of 
the Buddha. It is of interest to observe that in the Hindu Tantras much is 
said about the goddess Kundalini, who lies sleeping in the lowest cakra, 
the Mülädhära; whereas the equivalent goddess in the Buddhist Tantra 
system, called Candäli or Nairätmyä, is at the navel cakra. 

It may be noted that while the Hevajrapindarthatikd, above cited, sets 
forth six basic goddesses for the first six syllables (evam maya srutam), the 
basic Tantra of the Hevajra gives only the first four goddesses, Locana 
and so on (evam maya).3? This is consistent with the Guhyasamdja-tantra 
cycle, which has an Explanatory Tantra entitled Caturdevipariprecha 
(“Questions of the Four Goddesses”); and in Tson-kha-pa’s commentary 
on this work we learn that a chapter is devoted to the questions of each ` 
goddess, Locana, and so on, with the same names and same order as 
above. 34 

The primacy in this system of four cakras for physiological manipulation 
in ascetic practices may well go back to the old Upanisadic theories of the 
four states of consciousness. The Brahmopanisad, one of the Samnyasa 
Upanisads, later than the early Upanisads but preceding the Tantric 
literature as we now have it, teaches that the Purusa has those four states 
when dwelling in the four places, namely, waking state in the navel, sleep 
(i.e., dream) in the neck, dreamless sleep in the heart, and the fourth, 
Turiya, in the head.35 In agreement, Тѕой-Кһа-ра writes: 


When one has gone to sleep, there is both dream and absence j 
dream. At the time of deep sleep without dream the white and Ie 
elements of the bodhicitta, which is the basis of mind, stay In the 
heart, so mind is held in the heart. At the time of пеша ас 
two elements stay in the neck, so mind is held in the neck. А d is 
time when one is not sleeping, they stay at the navel, so min d 
held there. When the male and female unite, those two stay 1 
the head.36 


ў ; i coitus 
This Passage shows a belief that the orgasm or climax of ordinary 


33. Snellgrove (ed.), op. cit., I, 49, or 1,4. — 
5 тош 5285, Collected Works, Vol. Ca, Bzis zus. 
. Eliade, Yoga, p. 128. 
36. Toh, 5301, Collected Works, Vol. Cha, Yig chui, 658-5 fl 


176 Special Studies 


yields a fleeting experience of a fourth state. At least the Anuttarayoga- 
tantras seek to bring about this pleasure-void (sukha-Siinya) experience in a 
non-fleeting form (aksara), whereupon it is called “great pleasure” 
(mahäsukha), hence the name of the forehead cakra. It is the sexual union 
not of a man and woman but of a god and goddess. It is more prolonged 
in certain states of religious exaltation, mystical climax, and heightened 
consciousness in general, than it is in human orgasm. Moreover, if this 
fourth state be understood as all three of the waking, dreaming, and 
dreamless sleep states taken together, it becomes comprehensible that one 
could be in this fourth state and at the same time be emphasizing one or 
other of those ordinary three states. Another way of stating this proposi- 
tion is that, once the mind has attained the fourth state, it could then evolve 
from this state in a more or less prolonged experience of an extraordinary 
type of waking, dream, or dreamless sleep. Along these lines, the Tantras 
speak of three light or void stages that evolve from the fourth, the Clear 
Light. According to our next section, “The Female, Male, and Androgyne,” 
the form of woman is a symbol of the heightened state of consciousness that 
emphasizes the waking state, the form of man is a symbol of such a state 
that emphasizes the dreaming state, while the theoretical form of androgyne 
is a symbol of such a state that emphasizes the dreamless sleep state. 
Moreover, employing the terminology of “‘pleasure-void” (sukha-sünya), 
Tson-kha-pa says: “Among them, ‘means’ is Spread of Light: ‘insight’ is 
Light; neutral (or androgyne), the merger of those two, is Culmination of 
Light. Among pleasure and void, Light is predominantly the cognition of 
void; Spread of Light is the reverse of that; and Culmination of Light has 
the two in equal proportion.’’37 This statement implies that the secret state 
of mind during a woman’s climax and other exalted states of consciousness 
of the same nature, however achieved, are predominantly the cognition of 
voidness among the two factors of pleasure and void. There are similar 
implications for the secret states of mind typically male and androgyne. 
Another late Hindu text, the Rgvidhana, speaks of the yogin’s attempt 
to raise manas (the mind) from the navel to the heart, then to the neck, to 
the place between the eyes, and finally to the skull, whereupon to make the 
manas revert to the navel.38 The last state in the ascension is the one usually 
referred to as “beyond the fourth” (turydtita); and іп the Hindu system 
the Sahasrara cakra is beyond the body comparable to the usnisa, which 15 
depicted in Buddhist art as emerging from the top of the head. Some 
Buddhist Tantras also speak of this final state as corresponding to а fifth 
body. Thus in the commentary on the Manjusri-näma-samgiti by Ni-mahl 
dpal-ye-Ses (*Süryaérijiàna) we read: “He has the nature of the five 


37. Mthah gcod (op. cit.), 49b-2. 
38. Eliade, Yoga, p. 137. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 177 
bodies by reason of waking, dream, dreamless sleep, the fourth, and beyond 
the fourth.” 3? The text goes on to explain this person as the Pervading 
Lord (vibhu, T. khyab bdag) who possesses the five knowledges. Later on, 
the same text mentions that the symbol of five tufts of hair on the head 
(pancasikha) stands for the five states.40 The Buddhist usnisa may be a 
variant of this symbol; and In any case, the corresponding state in 
Buddhism is Complete Enlightenment, according to Tantrism when the 
Goddess Candäli ascends to the crown of the head. If this Pervading Lord 
or Complete Buddha then descends to teach, he as the union of “insight” 
and “means,” the second meaning of E-vam, is the Vam and wherever he 
teaches is the E of the first meaning of E-vam. In this section the female 
symbolism is portrayed within sets of threefold correspondences, especially 
involved with the three syllables Om, Ah, Hum. This treatment is expected 
to lead to some important considerations concerning a table, “The Great 
Time.” but first we must lay the groundwork by citation of a number of 
passages of threefold correspondences. Indeed, the analogical way of 
thinking is basic to the Tantras. 

Among the correspondences to the triad of male, female, and andro- 
gyne, there is the set of body, speech, and mind, as well as the set of three 
gunas, sattva, rajas, and tamas; but inconsistencies appear in the respective 
correspondences. For example, Mkhas grub rje in his commentary on the 
Hevajra-tantra quotes from the Samputa that sattva is the intrinsic nature 
of body, rajas that of speech, and tamas that of mind;#! while Tson-kha-pa 
in his commentary on the Caturdevipariprcchá says: “Tamas is the thunder- 
bolt of body (käyavajra); rajas is the thunderbolt of speech (vagvajra); 
sattva is the heart, the intrinsic nature of mind (or the cittavajra). 2 
These inconsistencies can be resolved for the most part by placing the 
textual passages containing the correspondences in two groups labeled the 
basic time (gZi dus) and the fruitional time (libras dus), or profane time and 
Great Time. The Tibetan terminology of the two times is mentioned this 
way in Tson-kha-pa’s discussion of the Kälacakra-tantra: The twelve 
members of the basic time are the twelve [members of Dependent ОШ 
tion, viz.] unwisdom (avidya) and so on, and the twelve transits of the ds ; 
The twelve members of the fruitional time are [stoppage of mete of 
Origination, viz.] stoppage of unwisdom, and so on, and the stoppage 
the twelve transits."43 


he 
The tantric Nagarjuna presents many of the threefold sets near t 


PE А 1 ud, 
39. Toh. 1395, the Amrtakanika-näma àryanamasamgiti-[ppat ou 
Pha,60b2.  ' i 

40. Ibid., Pha, 73a-3. 

4l. Br tag hgrel, op. cit., 672-5, 6. 

42. Bzis Zus, op. cit., 32b-2. " i. 49b-5 

43. Toh., 5381, Collected Works, Vol. Na, Brjed byati, #70. 


178 Special Studies 


beginning of his commentary on the Guhyasamdja-tantra. But at least 
there he does not speak of a division into two groups, and he does not 
clarify the respective order in which a number of the sets of three things 
correspond to each other. Fortunately, the writings of Tson-kha-pa on 
the Guhyasamdja cycle provide the necessary further information, but for 
every topic it proves best to compare with what he says in another one or 
more of his works.44 
Nagarjuna writes concerning the three syllables Om, Ah, Him: “By 
reason of the nature of the three syllables, the yogin should dispose them 
in the head, the neck, and the heart, and then mutter them in the thunder- 
bolt manner.’’45 He mentions that the vowels have the nature of prajna, 
the consonants the nature of updya, and the semi-vowels, ya, etc., the 
nature of both. “For that very reason, they are the nature of female, male, 
and androgyne. Hence Ah, which condenses the vowels, is the intrinsic 
nature of ргаўйа. Hiim, which condenses the consonants, is the intrinsic 
nature of updya. Om, which condenses ya, ra, la, va, is the intrinsic 
nature of the androgyne."46 Nagarjuna continues with further identifica- 
tions: “Those three syllables are also the three elements; the nature of 
body, speech, and mind; the nature of moon, sun, and fire; the intrinsic 
nature of inspiration and so on; and the intrinsic nature of the three 
transitional experiences, death and so on.’’47 
By "inspiration" Nagarjuna means inspiration of the breath. Tson-kha- 
pa explains these correspondences as follows: “Here one should recite in 
the sequence of drawing in the wind with an Om, holding the wind inside 
with an Ah, and exhaling with a Ham; and recite in a manner that does not 
violate the ancillaries of dhärani (incantation) muttering."48 The dis- 
position in head, neck, and heart concerns the movement of the four lord 
(паша) winds that are updya (thabs mgon po bihi rlun) along with their 
four [fractional] queen (devi) winds that are prajfia (ses rab lha mo bzihi 
rlun) from their ordinary locations during basic or profane time in extra- 
ordinary combinations within those three centers during fruitional OT 
Great Time. Tson-kha-pa explains these mixtures of winds this way (in ту 
summation): Om, the präna wind of the heart cakra, the udäna wind of the 
neck cakra, and the bindu in the position of the usnisa, is the thunderbolt 
of body at the Mahäsukha-cakra of the forehead. Ah, the initial präna of 
the heart cakra, the apäna wind of the sacral center, along with the udana 
of the neck center, is the thunderbolt of speech at the neck cakra. Hum, 


44. These correspondences are presented elaborately in Giuseppe Tucci, Tibetan 
Painted Scrolls (Rome, 1959), pp. 240-41. 8а-4. 

45. Toh. 1784, Sriguhyasamäjatantrasya tantrafika-nama, Tanjur, Rgyud, Sa, 

46. Ibid., 9b. 

47. Ibid., 9b. 

48. Rdor bzlas, op. cit., 63a-2, 3. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 179 
the apana wind of the sacral center, the udana wind of the neck center, and 
the pervasive präna normally in the forehead, is the thunderbolt of mind at 
the nave of the heart lotus. And the winds mixed that way dissolve the 
knots (mdud) of those centers.49 Moreover, Tson-kha-pa writes: “Thus, the 
three syllables are made into body, speech, and mind as follows: Om is 
made into body, Ah into speech, Him into mind. They are made into the 
three bodies in the same order as follows: posited as the Nirmäna-käya, 
the Sambhoga-käya, and the Dharma-käya.”50 By the three transitional 
experiences, Nägärjuna means death, birth, and the intermediate state. 
Tson-kha-pa associates death with the Dharma-käya, the intermediate 
state with the Sambhoga-käya, and birth with the Nirmana-kaya.5! Again, 
he explains that Om is the secret “heart” (hrdaya) incantation of Vairocana, 
the Body of all the Tathagatas; Ah likewise of Amitäbha, the Speech of all 
the Tathägatas; and Hum likewise of Aksobhya, the Mind of all the 
Tathagatas.52 The three elements are the red, the white, and the 
bodhicitta; and Tson-kha-pa gives the correspondences for these as well as 
for a number of other sets of three.53 Without further citation of these 
passages, I shall present my solution of the two groups of correspondences. 

The first group (basic time) has correspondences to the right, left, and 
middle “veins” of the body; the second group (fruitional time), to 
sequences of lights or voids. The first group involves the usual rhythm of 
breaths or winds in the various cakras. The second group involves a 
Tantric manipulation of those winds in a succession of wind mixtures to 
engender a controlled sequence of photism experiences. In both groups, 
and customarily in other contexts of the Tantras, the sequence of imagining 
and muttering the three syllables is От, Ah, Him. The contrast between 
the two groups will be clearer by placing some essential elements in brief 
tabular form (Table 14). 

The basic or profane time correspondences are more fully state 
follows: Androgyne, the semi-vowels, mind, bodhicitta or bindu, [in Sr 
texts: Rähu,] or tamas among the gunas, is in the central “vein,” called tl e 
Avadhiti. Prajiia, the vowels, speech, the red element, the sun, or oe 
among the three gunas, is in the left “vein,” called the Lalana. Upaya, tis 
Consonants, body, the white element, the moon, or sattva Re ike 
gunas, is in the right “vein,” called the Rasana. The meaning о 


d as 


49. Ibid., folios 70-71. z 

50. Toh. 5316, Collected Works, Vol. Ña, Sbas don, 1 
„31. Toh. 5290, Collected Works, Vol. Cha, Don gsa i 

he Genesis and the Tantric Tradition,” reprinted herein. 
- Rdor bzlas, op. cit., 51b. dences 

53. E.g, in Stags d 4372-3 ff.; in Bzis Zus, 32b-2 ff. ar dXX, "No. 4 (October- 
аге already in my “Notes on the Sanskrit Term Jaana, О 1 decisive step toward my 
December, 1955), 258 ff. My studies in that article constitute a 
Present understanding. 


522-3. : , 
1, folio 25a-b, as cited іп my 


180 Special Studies 


TABLE 14 


Basic TIME CORRESPONDENCES 


MIDDLE VEIN LEFT VEIN 


RIGHT VEIN 

Om Ah Him 

Mind Speech Body 

Androgyne Prajna Upaya 

Tamas Rajas Sattva 

———————— ee en 
FRUITIONAL TIME CORRESPONDENCES 

————————————————————————— _ 

LEFT RIGHT MIDDLE 

Om Ah Ham 

Body Speech Mind 

Prajna, form of woman Upaya, form of man Form of Androgyne 

Tamas Rajas Sattva 


sequence Om, Ah, Hum (Androgyne, Ргајћа, and Upäya) is shown in part 
in Mkhas grub rje’s great commentary (Tik chen) on the Kälacakra-tantra: 


During the first five (lunar) months of the womb, developing the 
five personality aggregates and the five elements, under the power of 
tamas, in the state of dreamless sleep which has no manifestation 
of discursive thought (vikalpa), there is the bodhicitta of the Jina 
(i.e., the Bhagavat) which is the diamond (vajra) Dharmakaya. 
During the sixth and seventh, under the power of rajas, experiencing 
“objects” (visaya) like a dream, in the state of dream, there is the 
Sambhoga-kaya. Then, from the beginning of the eighth month 
up to birth, under the power of sattva, in the waking state, there 1s 
the Nirmana-kaya.54 


Now, various Buddhist Tantric texts identify the four basic cakras (cf. 
our preceding section) with the Buddha bodies, that is, the nirmäna-cakra 
is at the navel, the dharma-cakra at the heart, the sambhoga-cakra at the 
neck, and the mahäsukha-cakra at the head.55 Combining this information 
with the data in Mkhas grub rje's passage, we see that the heart cakra with 
eight “veins” develops first, the neck cakra with sixteen “veins” develops 
second, inferentially the forehead cakra with thirty-two “veins” and the 
navel cakra with sixty-four “veins” develop last. The inference requires the 


54. Toh. 5463, Collected Works, Vol. Ga, Tik chen, Nan le, 18a-6 ff. For some Кы: 
information on what develops during those ten months, see my “Studies in Yama 
Māra,” Indo-Iranian Journal, ПІ (1959), 70-72. 

55. For example, Snellgrove (ed.), op. cit., I, 49. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 181 
Nirmana-kaya to be associated with the head and navel. As a matter of 
fact, when Mkhas grub rje in the same Kalacakra-tantra commentary 
mentions the positional correspondences of the Buddha bodies he 
associates the Dharmakaya with the heart and the Sambhoga-kàya with 
the neck, but places the bindu generating the waking state, and accordingly 
also the Nirmana-kaya, at the level of the forehead (арға! Ба).56 The 
correspondences of basic time associate the Nirmäna-käya with the navel, 
but the correlation with the forehead cakra in fruitional time is referred to 
when Dasgupta writes: “It is said that when the Bodhicitta is produced in 
the navel region the goddess Candäli is also awakened, as it were, in the 
Nirmána-cakra. When she is awakened the moon situated in the 
forehead begins to pour nectar and this nectar rejuvenates and tran- 
substantiates the body of the Yogin.”57 We may assume that upon birth 
as an ordinary male or female, the World Mother goes to sleep by the 
navel, which is then the nirmdna-cakra in place of the forehead cakra, 
hence given a different name, mahäsukha-cakra. One of the chief aims of 
the tantrics is to reawaken the forehead cakra as the nirmäna-cakra. We 
shall touch upon more matters related to the basic time in our next section, 
“The Groups of Four and Five.” 

Passing now to fruitional time correspondences, this sequence is 
initiated by the Om at the forehead, where the moon is said to melt when 
Candäli at the navel blazes, with the dissolution of the four elements, 
which are Locanä and so on, and the dissolution of the five personality 
aggregates, which are the five Tathägatas or Buddhas.5 This event signals 
the end of profane or basic time. The dissolution of the elements is 
associated with certain signs or appearances. According to a Tson-kha-pa 
commentary on the Guhyasamäja cycle, the dissolution of the earth element 
into water yields an appearance like a mirage (marici), of water into fire an 
appearance like smoke (dhiima), of fire into wind an appearance like fire- 
flies (khadyota), of wind into the three Lights an appearance like rd 
(pradipa), and of the Lights into ultimate nature an appearance i As 
cloudless sky (nirabhragagana).59 However, the three en 
distinguished as being like moonlight, sunlight, junction of day and night, 


56. Tik chen, Nan le, 30a-b. s 
2n S. B. Dasgupta, Zi Introduction to Tantric Buddhism (Calcutta, 1950), pp. 189-9 
- Snellgrove (ed, . cit., I, 50. TE e is 
S Mohs Dane COLE Works, Vol. Ca, Ye rdor, 15a-2. Ton m m en 
following the Sgron gsal (Candrakirti’s Pradipoddyotana, Toh. 1 i е can 
‘rms come from the Sekoddesatika, text 39.28, in comparison een 
translation, Toh. 1351, Tanjur Rgyud, Vol. Na, 252b-7 ff. The Seto 
B: Order of the first two appearances, taking smoke as t 
Vetà$vatarg Upanisad (1I, 11). 5 : oem Hee 
- Cf. my “Notes on the Sanskrit Term Jiäna, ' ор. cit., ae ч en? 
le Tson-kha-pa says that the moonlight is white, the sunli 
Ted (542-4 ff.) 


182 Special Studies 

SO now we can understand better Nagarjuna’s set of moon, sun, and fire 
In fact, the Om corresponds to the first of the three Lights and hence 
assumes the preceding appearances of mirage, smoke, and fireflies.61 Let 


us proceed to the table of fruitional time correspondences (Table 15), of 
which several lines were already given. 


TABLE 15 
THE GREAT TIME 


OM AH HUM 
E Eee 


Ргајћа, the form of woman Upäya, the form of man Androgyne 


8-petalled lotus 5-pronged thunderbolt 

Moonlight Sunlight Fire 

Night Day Juncture of day and night 
Left Right Middle 

Waking Dream Dreamless sleep 
Void Further Void Great Void 

Light Spread of Light Culmination of light 
Body Speech Mind 

Vairocana Amitabha Aksobhya 

Birth Intermediate State Death 

Nirmanakaya Sambhogakaya Dharmakaya 

Tamas Rajas Sattva 

Head Neck Heart 

Inspiration Retention Expiration 


However, the Fire listed under Him probably means here “the fire of 
time" (kalagni), that is, the fire superior to time, because it puts an end to 
the cosmic eon and hence brings even Great Time to an end, ushering in 
the Clear Light, the Fourth Void, from which the other three evolve; 
whereas the dragon Rahu in basic time only temporarily eclipses the sun 
and moon. It is of interest that the set of moon, sun, and fire is also found 
in the Hindu Tantras.62 р 

Our chief intention is to expose the female symbolism, but it is possible 
to do this only within a larger framework of symbolism. In basic time, 
Speech is female—a bit of symbolism prominent in Indo-European myth- 
ology; and in fruitional time, Speech is male. In the former time, Body IS 
male; in the latter time, Body is female. In both times, Mind is androgyn® 
or neutral. The correspondences in basic time exactly agree with the 
genders of the Sanskrit nouns: väc, feminine (speech); kaya, masculine 
(body); and citta, neuter (mind). An alternate word for mind, manas, 15 
also neuter. We note that the correspondences of sun and moon to prajna 


61. Mthah gcod, op. cit., 51a. 
62. Eliade, Yoga, 238. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 183 
and upaya are also reversed when passing from the former to the latter 
time. This shift seems to coincide beautifully with the contentions about a 
recessive male in the human female and a recessive female in the human 
male, or the animus and the anima of Jung’s system. That is to say, when 
the yogin attains the Great Time his recessive female becomes actualized 1 
when the yogini attains this time her recessive males become actualized. 
This casts a flood of light on the sexual symbolism of mystical visions. 
Almost all of the Buddhist scriptures were composed by men, as far as is 
known. Hence these works speak so much about attaining ргаўйа, the 
void, the state of waking, and light. Hence that large body of scriptures 
entitled Prajnaparamita ("The perfection of insight"), and the personifica- 
tion of Prajiaparamitä as the “Mother of the Buddhas.” These men were 
seeking to externalize or objectify what is referred to by our first column 
of the Great Time under Om. When successful, they achieved a more or 
less prolonged state of mystic consciousness, without reliance on a sexual 
partner, that is the birthright of all earthly women, who achieve a transitory 
experience of this secret state of thought in a climax with the aid of a sexual 
partner. But women are always representing this state by means of body. 
Hence the correspondence to body in fruitional time. Those conclusions 
imply that if women had been writing the books, the titles and contents 
would have diverged considerably. If they renounce earthly men and seek 
fulfilment in an exalted mystical consciousness, when successful they realize 
what is suggested by the Af column in the Great Time, as Briffault 
describes it: “The primal function of the primitive religious magic of 
generation is re-echoed throughout the long line of female votaries of the 
Divine Bridegroom, in the lascivious ecstasies of a St. Theresa, of a 
St. Catherine, of a Madame Guyon.”63 But Briffault evinces no evidence 
in his essay that he understands the true state of affairs: men ordinarily 
attain transitory experiences of this consciousness of predominant Ped 
(sukha) and negligible void (Sanya) through their sexual Quac ns 
generally men represent this state by means of speech. Anyway, suc ee: 
outcome of the table; the reader may judge for himself or herself whe | 
the above statements are true in fact or simply a forcing of issues Е ЕЕ 
the columns “соте out right.” The Tantric procedure is to Sn s P 
techniques of passing through the three Lights to the AE. ЧА: 
Clear Light, to thus carry away the three bodies of a Comple KARER 
and Tsoñ-kha-pa teaches that if one does not know how to i Te 
Skill he simply has momentary experiences of all these states Ww 

Passing through the intermediate state, and being reborn. 

gion," in A. M. Krich (ed.), The 


63. Robert Briffault's “From Sex to Love in Reli 
Anatomy of Love (Laurel Edition [New York, 1960)), P- 45. 


64. E.g., in his Ye rdor, op. cit., 176-4 ff. 


184 Special Studies 


The Groups of Four and Five 


A fine summary statement of the goddesses considered as consorts in 
the Anuttara-yoga-tantra is given by the Tibetan author Klon-rdol bla-ma: 


The “means path” of another’s body is the four families of “seals” 
(mudra), namely: Padmini, Sankhini, Hastinî, and Mrgi. Moreover, 
each of those has the three varieties “together-born female” 
(sahaja), “‘field-born female” (kserrajä), and “incantation-born 
female" (dhdranija). The “together-born female" enables one to 
attain the illusory body and the Goal Clear-light. The “field-born 
female” enables one to attain the Symbolic Clear-light with the 
arcane state of body, of speech, and of mind. The “‘incantation- 
born female” is the yogini at the final limit of the “stages of produc- 
tion” (utpatti-krama). The families (kula) are explained as follows: 
the butcher maiden belongs to Aksobhya’s family; the washerman 
maiden to Vairocana’s; the necklace-stringer maiden to Ratna- 
sambhava’s; the dancer maiden to Amitabha’s; the artisan maiden 
to Amoghasiddhi’s.65 


The four terms, Padmini and so on, derive from the Hindu kämasästra 
literature. They represent a classification of women. However, the 
explanation in Kämasütra (chap. ii) of the three terms Mrgi, Vadava, and 
Hastini, is not applicable here. The set of four terms have explanations 
according to Apte’s dictionary66 somewhat along the lines of the “сһагас- 
teristics of maidens” (kanyälaksanam) in Varahamihira’s work on omens, 
although the latter author does not use such terms as Padmini.67 These 
expressions (sometimes with citrini in place of mrgi) have been adopted by 
the Buddhist Tantric authors, and not necessarily with the same meanings 
as in the former literature. Lva-va-pa says: “Padmini belongs to the Deva 
family: Hastini has the lineage of Yaksas; Sankhini is known among the 
humans; Citrini is in the Preta family."68 This passage could be interpreted 
to mean that all four have human form, while Sankhini is really human. 
Another interpretation is that none are human, while Sankhini is a fairy 
that has assumed a human form. And perhaps Lva-va-pa has something 
else in mind. However, Tson-kha-pa writes: 


65. Toh. 6534, Collected Works, Peking ed., Vol. Ga, 31a-7. Bombay; 
66. Vaman Shivram Apte, The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary ( 

1924). The definition of Padmini on р. 585 is from the Ratimanjari. ity, 1947), 
67. V. Subrahmanya Sastri, Varahamihira’s Brihat Samhita (Bangalore City, 

II, 578-84. А ud, Ва, 

Es Toh. 1401, Sadhananidana-sricakrasamvara-nama-pafijika, Tanjur, REYU®: 
a-6. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 185 
The object to be summoned is (a) the god maiden (surakanya) 
(b) the demi-god maiden (daityakanyä), (c) the four kinds of er 
maidens—Padmini, Sankhani, Hastini, and Mrgi. They on all 
circles (mandala) of earth, are summoned from everywhere. The 
first is summoned from above the earth; the Second, from beneath 
the earth; the third, from upon the earth.69 


Tson-kha-pa is following a tradition more consistent, literally speaking, 
than Lva-va-pa's with the Hindu meaning of the four terms. Indrabhüti 
also places the gods above earth, men on earth, and the demi-gods (asura 
or dait ya) beneath earth.7° 

Whatever the meaning of this classification into Padmini and so on, the 
fourfold group leads immediately to the fivefold group, or vice versa. This 
is because four entities are naturally arranged in a square, implying a 
“center” of a “squared circle" (mandala) with the implied or given fifth 
entity in the middle. This is not to say that the group headed by Padmini 
is to be equated with the fivefold group headed by the butcher maiden. If 
all nine were included in one “squared circle," the group of five would be 
in the cardinal directions and the center, the group of four in the inter- 
mediate directions. 

The one in the center depends on the correspondence system. Thus, the 
correlation to “space” (akása) among elements or to *Knowledge of the 
Natural Realm" (dharmadhatujfidna) among divine knowledges determine 
the center.7! When the system takes Vairocana as the chief Buddha, then 
the washerman maiden (rajaki) in this set of correspondences is regarded 
as an embodiment of the central goddess. u 

The fourfold group usually represents the situation of basic time, as 
Portrayed in the preceding section, while the fifth entity either involves 
fruitional time or suggests it. We should also recall that varıous important 
non-Tantric five-termed sets divide into a four and a one. The five person- 
ality aggregates (skandha) include four on the side of “name” (nama) ant 
One on the side of “form” (rüpa). The “form” aggregate in turn consists 0 
the four elements and their evolutes. While Buddhism, consistent with 
Hindu systems, includes the five elements of wind, and so on, in one group, 
calling them “realm” (dhätu), Buddhist metaphysics does not include the 
fifth element, space, among the “great factors of becoming" Gal: 
ш treatise of this category explains that wind, fire, es , МЎ hi 2 

great” (maha), that is, pervasive, and “factor of becoming 


69. Biis Zus, о 1 j 
‚op. cit., 41b-1. Zma-vrtti, Tanjur, 
00 Toh, 1413, Sricakrasamvaratantrardjasambarasamuccaya-nama yrtti, Jj 
Byud, Tsa, 30а-7. 1 2 d discussion, note. 
· Cf. my “Totemic Beliefs in the Buddhist Tantras,” Table 2, an 


186 Special Studies 


Space is just maha in the pervasive sense, and the пата personality aggre- 
gates are just bhita.72 

The four-and-one symbolism is used for the eaved palace (kütagara) 
described as having a single courtyard (ekaputa) and as follows in a verse: 
“Having four corners, four entrances that are ornamented with four 
portals, as well as four balconies that are resplendent with nymphs 
(apsaras) and with garlands and other decorations."73 

Already in the biography of the Buddha called the Lalitavistara one 
finds this verse about the Tree of Enlightenment: “The ornamented 
‘essence of Enlightenment’ (bodhimanda) is therefore distinguished by four 
‘divinities of enlightenment’ (bodhidevata) like the paradise tree (pärijäta 
in heaven."7* The Tibetan translation interprets bodhidevata as 
“goddesses of the Tree of Enlightenment."75 According to Dowson in 
A Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology, the Pärijäta kept in Indra’s 
heaven is the delight of the nymphs of heaven. Also, the four daughters of 
Sakka (Indra) seem to be connected with this tree.76 In these cases four 
goddesses make up the fourfold group. The word manda (“core,” “essential 
part”) substituting for “tree” (vrksa) especially shows that the tree 
represents the central or fifth entity. 

To illustrate the case of goddesses in both cardinal and intermediate 
directions, we may refer to the “Mandala of the Diamond Realm” 
(vajradhätu-mandala). The Indo-Tibetan form of this mandala is interpreted 
in the Yoga-tantra literature class, and the Sino-Japanese Tantric school 
elaborates it into a highly complex mandala that is one of the two main 
ones of the Shingon sect of Japanese Buddhism.77 There are four female 
deities belonging to the inner sanctum (garbhakütägära) who are located 
in the four intermediate directions (south-east, southwest, northwest, 
northeast) and called, respectively, Wanton Movement (Lasya), Garland 
(Mala), Song (Gita), and Dance (Nrtya). A commentary of the Yoga-tantra 
class, while discussing this very mandala, calls these four the secret 
goddesses (gsan bahi Iha mo rnams).78 According to the mandala text, they 


72. Toh. 4365, Arthaviniscayafikä (no author catalogued), Tanjur, Sna-Tshogs, 
No, 13a-6, 7. 

73. Sadhana-malà, No. 239, text 459.11. 

74. Lefmann edition, p. 281. " 

75. Toh. 95, Arya-Lalitavistara-nàma-mahayanasütra, Kanjur, Mdo-sde, Vol. Kha, 
138b-7. 

76. Odette Viennot, Le culte de l'arbre dans l'Inde ancienne (Paris, 1954), 19480 
Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, Il, 964, for their патеѕ—Аѕа, Saddh?, 
Hiri and Siri. These names signify, in the respective order, “hope,” “faith”, “shame, 
and “‘splendor’’). А 

77. Benoytosh Bhattacharyya (ed.), Nispannayogavali of Mahapandita Abhayaka 
gupta (Baroda, 1949), introductory section, pp. 54-56. ; 1. Hi 

78. Padmavajra's Tantrarthavataravyakhyana (Toh. 2502), Tanjur, Rgyud, Vol. Kl 
2252-5. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 187 
belong, respectively, to the Buddha families, Aksobhya 
Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi. Of a different ae a үл 
on petals of the first circle of the same mandala, who are located in the 
cardinal directions starting with east: Sattvavajri (“Diamond of Sentient 
Being"), Ratnavajri (“Diamond of Jewels”), Dharmavajri (“Diamond of 
the Law"), Karmavajri (“Diamond of Ritual Acts”). The text states that 
they belong respectively to the same four Buddha families as do the other 
fourfold group. In the present case, however, three of the names directly 
show this relationship. Ratna is a standard name of the Ratnasambhava 
family, and Karma of the Amoghasiddhi family. Dharma in the sense of 
enunciation of the doctrinal syllables is usually correlated with Amitabha 
in this literature. Hence, these four represent a definite female essence of 
family, and their names could not have been formulated until after the 
theory of the five Buddhas (the four now in point and Vairocana) had 
arisen. 

Since the text already relates the two fourfold groups by means of four 
Buddha families, it is feasible to relate the individual entities under headings 
as follows: 


BUDDHA FAMILY ABSTRACT GODDESS SENSUOUS GODDESS 
Aksobhya Diamond of Sentient Being Wanton Movement 
Ratnasambhava Diamond of Jewels Garland 
Amitabha Diamond of the Law Song 


Amoghasiddhi Diamond of Ritual Acts Dance 


In the Anuttara-tantra terminology, since the fourfold group beginning 
with Padmini and the fivefold group beginning with the butcher maiden 
seem both to refer to types of concrete women, we may theorize, for want of 
noticing in the texts an explanation which may be restricted to oral pre- 
Cepts, that the former group refers to the concrete “femaleness ‚going with 
four of the latter group, all five of which are identified with the Mothers 
Or the prajfids of the five Buddha families. This would involve an Шире 
tation of this literature which the present writer feels is consistent bot 
with Hindu kamasästra usage and the general tenor of the с 
tantras, namely, that what the world considers to be the signs and © 28 ii 
teristics of femaleness is in fact the phenomenalization of the “Mothers 
of the Tantric families and hence falls into distinct types. Of course, 
similar statements could be made for the signs of maleness. Such die г 
Consistent with the world outlook prevalent in the old Vedic E y A 
different deities were in charge of the departments of nature, ees if c 
later Indian astrological texts which identify the various А К 
With the twelve zodiacal signs or with the nine planets. 


2 : ДАЛ er one or 
ormulations simply carry out the identification by classifying und 


188 Special Studies 


another of the Buddha families: all things are invested with the Sacredness 
of Buddha nature, and this may be a mental preparation for initiation into 
the Great Time. 

The four “great factors of becoming” are identified with goddesses who 
are the “Mothers” of the families: “Госапа is said to be earth, Mämaki 
held to be the realm of water, Pändarä known as fire, Tärä proclaimed 
wind."79 Here elements do not mean the gross ones with which we are 
ordinarily familiar, but pure forms of the elements. Johnston shows that 
these elements are already regarded as divine forces in Upanisadic litera- 
ture.80 The four in the standard order of wind, fire, water, earth, are 
symbolized this way: “He should see the mandalas of the four ‘great factors 
of becoming’ each next one upon the preceding one; blue, red, white, 
yellow; a bow (i.e., a semi-circle), a triangle, a circle, a square; the trans- 
formations of the syllables Yam, Ram, Lam, Vam.”8! In the same order 
the elements are associated with navel, throat, heart, and privities; and, 
if the correspondences are mutually consistent, Tara, Pandara, Mamaki, 
and Locana would be the consorts, respectively, of the Buddhas Amo- 
ghasiddhi, Amitabha, Aksobhya, and Ratnasambhava. This is the logical 
consequence of the identification of Amoghasiddhi and so on with the 
various winds having their bases in certain centers of the body.82 These 
particular correspondences are the ones in this Tantric passage on the 
four bases of magical power (rddhi-pada): 


The certainty regarding the four bases of magical power:— 
(1) Rightly situated as the heart-based [wind, i.e., präna] with ш 
magical power of Mamaki, belonging to the water-wind Vajra 
Lord (i.e., Aksobhya); (2) Said to be in the neck as udäna with the 
magical power of Pandara belonging to the fire-wind Padma Lord 
(i.e., Amitäbha); (3) mentioned to be in the sacral region (01 
privities) as apäna with the magical power of Buddhalocan? 
belonging to the earth-wind Ratna Lord (i.e., Ratnasambhava); 
(4) in the navel as the wind-mandala, the samäna along with the 5 
[of the sleeping goddess Candäli], with the magical power of s 
Tara belonging to the family of the Karma Lord (i.e., Amo E 
dhi). Each one of the four goddesses belonging to each [family E 
is mentioned with the force of magical power along the channe 


79. Guhyasamäjatantra, chap. xii, p. 137. 
80. E. H. Johnston, Early Samkhya (London, 1937), p. 20. ocation 
81. Sadhana-málà, No. 251, text pp. 490-91. This is the usual three-staged a deity 
after attaining the void: (1) germ syllable (bija), (2) emblem (cihna), (3) body d 


(kaya). Hence, the Yam is transformed into a bow, the latter into a blue W! 
likewise with the others, 


82. Cf. Table 2, and note thereto, this work. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 189 
the body] equipped with the four mandalas [of the “factors of 
becoming’’].83 
However, aS was pointed out in the section “The Three Meanings of 
E-vam.” the order, Locana, Mamaki, Pändurä, and Tara (evam maya) 
represents an association with the cakras of navel, heart, neck, and head. 
As compared with the preceding correspondences, this moves up Locana 
from the sacral region to the navel and Tara from the navel to the head. 
The section “The Female, Male, and Androgyne” touches upon the 
mysterious communication between the navel and the head which may 
explain this shift of Tärä’s position. 

Moreover, one finds some difference in relating these “Mothers” to 
Buddha families in the Arya school of the Guhyasamäja, the Kälacakra- 
tantra, and in the Hevajra-tantra.84 The association of the green Tara, also 
called Samayatärä, with Amoghasiddhi is standard. The next most 
frequent agreement is that Pändarä, or the white-dressed red Tärä, goes 
with Amitäbha. However, the Mämaki and Locanä associations differ 
considerably. The reason is that the correspondence of four goddesses to 
five Buddhas always leaves out one Buddha. This is the chief Buddha of the 
particular Tantra, and this Buddha is placed in the center when one has a 
“squared circle.” The corresponding realm is space or ether (dkdsa), 
which Lva-va-pa equates with the “Diamond Sow” (Vajravarahi),85 who 
is also called “Queen of the Diamond Realm” (Vajradhätvisvari) and 
“Fairy of Divine Knowledge" (Jiianadakini).86 In mandala representation 
of the Buddha pentad the central Buddha is usually Vairocana or 
Aksobhya, and this particular emphasis causes one or more of the 
“Mothers” to be assigned an association apparently inconsistent with 
other Tantras. А 

The goddesses as “great factors of becoming” аге regarded as multiply- 
ing factors of the Lord winds, the male aspects of the elements. Thus 
Tson-kha-pa writes: “Regarding ‘Pandara and so on,’ the wind of the 
Lotus Lord (i.e., Amitäbha) is dominated by 225 winds each of fiery 
Pändarä of fire, windy Tärä of fire, earthy Locanä of fire, and watery 


Vol. Cha, 148a-5. For our 
dali, cf. Toh. 2330, Tilli-pa s 
-lī yi me / “at 


dnp 453, the Advayasamatavijaya, Kanjur, Rgyud, 
Sad, nication of the navel fire with the sleeping goddess Can er 
ад dharmopadesa-nama, Tanjur, Rgyud, Vol. Zi, 270b-1: / Ite bar tsa-n 
© navel the fire of Candäli.” 
comn For the Guhyasamaja Arya school the correspo 
Cake. (already cited, nn. 45-47 above), 26b and fol 
I 128 Bhattacharyya (ed.), op. cit., p. 77. For the Hevajra, 


3 


: qud 
ndences are in Nagarjuna 
lowing folios. For the Kala- 
cf, Snellgrove (ed.), op. cit., 


e Шш his pañjikā, ор. cit., Ba, folio 43. 
hattacharyy a (ed.), op. cit., Sanskrit text, p. 79. 


190 Special Studies 


Mamaki of fire; and the same goes for the other three 
amounts to twenty-four divisions of ‘watches’ accordi 
manyjari.”87 Hence there is the fiery Pändarä of fire, of 
of earth. As each of the four goddesses regularly rotate as consorts of each 
of the Buddhas in the aspects of the winds or purity of elements, it seems 
a matter of convention for a certain Tantra to associate one of these god- 
desses with a certain Buddha as though it were always the case. Never- 
theless, in the phase when a goddess is involved with the particular Buddha 
of her own element, when, for example, Pandara goes with Amitabha, this 
appears to be a special case of juncture. 


[Lord winds]. This 
ng to the Amnäya- 
wind, of Water, and 


The Three Grades 


The cited passage of the Klon-rdol bla-ma mentions three varieties for 
each of those four kinds of females, Padmini and so on. This type of 
language is found in the “Mother Tantras,” of which the most important is 
the Sricakrasamvara-tantra and associated literature. When that passage 
speaks of the illusory body as well as the Goal and Symbolic Clear Lights, 
it is employing terminology found especially in the “Father Tantras,” of 
which the most important is the Guhyasamdja-tantra and associated 
literature. Because the passage incorporates materials derived from those 
two major classes, it becomes possible to clarify the meaning somewhat 
by using both commentarial traditions. It will perhaps be a modest step 
toward this understanding to demonstrate the following equivalences in 


alternate terminology of the two great divisions of the Anuttara-yoga- 
tantra: 


FATHER TANTRA 


GRADE MOTHER TANTRA LANGUAGE LANGUAGE 
Highest Together-born female Mother 
Intermediate Field-born female Sister 
Lowest Incantation-born female Daughter 


Thus Indrabhüti is following “Mother Tantra” tradition when he 
writes: “The location is the circle of ‘women,’ namely together-borm, 
field-born, incantation-born; and the butcher maiden, she of great power 
the dancer maiden, the washerman maiden and so оп.”88 In his ae 
mentary on the third chapter of the Samputa he says: “In regard to E 
passage, ‘All women . . .,’ ‘all women’ means all the goddesses. They 
the illusory goddesses field-born, incantation-born, and together-bo , 


87. Süags rim, 4422-3, 4. 
88. The Ratnacakrabhisekopadesakrama, op. cit., Zi, 147b-1. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 191 


the yoginis located in the locations and secondary locations."89 Tson-kha- 
pa quotes Lva-va-pa: "Highest is the together-born female; middling is 
the field-born female; lowest is the incantation-born female."90 Accord- 
ingly, Tson-kha-pa writes: “Then, having taken recourse to the power of 
the incantation-born, one moreover achieves the assembling of the field- 
born [ones]; taking recourse to the latter, one is able to exhort the together- 
born and make the latter the consort.’’91 

Furthermore, these goddesses called “messengers” (düti) are held to 
grant occult powers, as the same writer comments: “The passage ‘Occult 
power (siddhi) is speedily produced’ means that the speedy production of 
the occult power is attained by taking recourse to the ‘messenger.’ "92 
Tson-kha-pa goes on to compare the female messenger with the sharp edge 
of a sword. To take proper recourse to either object one must be fearless. 
In the case of the düti one would then achieve the siddhi. However, “If 
there is a fault in the recourse, one achieves not the benefit but rather no 
end of great troubles."93 

Now let us turn to the “Father Tantra" Guhyasamaja: 


The adept who carnally loves the “mother,” “sister,” 
and “‘daughter”— 

Achieves the extensive siddhi at the true nature of 
the Mahayana summit.94 


The tantric Candrakirti comments on this by citing an unnamed agama, 
in fact an Explanatory Tantra of the Guhyasamäja cycle, which relates 
these three grades of women to the graded Buddha bodies: 


He should love by the non-dual yoga of thusness the Prajnä-woman, 
who is the Perfection of Insight called “devoid of intrinsic nature , 


the “Mother” identical to the Dharmakaya. »3 — 7003 
He, equipped with the yoga of his own presiding ask er 
love just that one referred to as “sister”, engendered equa = ; 
Sambhogakäya. But, by (his) incantation body, the per Mni 
should contemplate that “daughter” with the form o 
Nirmäna (kaya). RR у 
The en en kind, loving the “mother,” “sister, daughter, 


89. Toh. 1197, Srisamput atilaka-näma-yoginitantraräja-tikäsmrtisamdarsanäloka- 
xama; Tanjur, Rgyud, Ca, 152b-2. 
0. Sbas don, op. cit., 145b-1. B 
91. Toh. 5320, Collected Works, Vol. Ta, Hdod hjo, 1322-6. 
92. Sbas don, op. cit., 136b-4. 
93. Ibid. 
94. Chap. v, p. 20. 


192 Special Studies 


attains the extensive siddhi, i.e. the supreme dharma-nature of 
Mahàyàna.95 


While Klon-rdol bla-ma's passage provides the basic data for cor- 
of his remarks only by correlating the Tantric theor 
(abhiseka) attainments. Tson-kha-pa writes: “The initiation of the flask 
accomplishes the Nirmänakäya, the secret initiation the Sambhogakaya, 
the insight-knowledge initiation the Dharmakaya; the Sambhogakaya here 
mentioned is also explained as the illusory body.”96 Mkhas grub rje states 
that the initiations of the flask (kalasa-abhiseka) are conferred in the initia- 
tion phase of the "stages of production" (utpatti-krama).97 The secret 
initiation (guhya-abhiseka) involves the three arcane states of body, speech, 
and mind, the insight-knowledge initiation (prajfiäjfiäna-abhiseka) is 
associated with together-born Joy, and both these initiations are conferred 
during the “stages of completion" (sampanna-krama).98 Except for the 
apparent disagreement regarding the placement of the illusory body, it 
follows immediately that the "daughter" is the incantation-born female, 
the "sister" the field-born female, and the “mother” the together-born 
female. However, this "solution" has perhaps brought up more difficult 
points than it has solved. 

According to Tson-kha-pa, the yogin’s body developed in the “stages of 
production” is the incantation body (*mantra-deha); while the one de- 
veloped in the “stages of completion” is the knowledge body (*jfiana-deha), 
which is of two kinds: the impure illusory body and the latter body 
purified in the Clear Light.99 The illusory body (mdyd-deha) is the one 
formed of the winds and mind only (rlun sems tsam) and said to be the 
body of Vajrasattva,100 According to Nagarjuna’s Paficakrama, it appears 
like an image in a mirror, and may well be the "body made of mind" 
(manomaya-käya) of non-Tantric Buddhism.101 Reference to Table 2 will 
clarify somewhat the Vajrajapa-krama of the Paficakrama. Recitation of 
the Om, Ah, Ham is called “thunderbolt muttering” (vajrajapa), or arcane 
speech, and involves visualization of the mantras (mantranidhyapti). Along 
with this muttering there is Tantric manipulation of the winds. On this 


95. Toh. 1785, Pradipoddyotana-nama-tika, Tanjur, Rgyud, Ha, 36b-2 ff. The 
translation follows my Yoga of the Guhyasamäja-tantra (forthcoming). 

96. Snags rim, 314b-5, ith six 

97. The initiation phase is made explicit in the formulation of these stages WI 
members; cf. my “Totemic Beliefs in the Buddhist Tantras,” op. cit., p. 90, note. x 

98. Toh. 5489, Mkhas grub rje's Collected Works, Vol. Na, Rgyud sde spyi ED. 
Now published as Mkhas grub rje’s Fundamentals of the Buddhist Tantras, tr. by F. D. 
Lessing and Alex Wayman (1968). 

99. Srags rim, 410b. 

100. Ibid., 406b. 

101. As discussed in my “Studies in Yama and Mara,” op. cit., p. 120. 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 193 
foundation, one proceeds to the Cittavisuddhi-krama, namely to visualiza- 
tion of the mental substance (cittanidhyapti) as the three light sta 
7 : Bes or 

three voids, the arcane mind. The arcane body or illusory body consistin 
of the winds and that mental substance is the topic of the Svädhisthäna- 
krama (stage of personal blessing). Stationed in the illusory-like samadhi 
(mayopama-samadhi), one enters the Clear Light with the illusory body by 
means of the two simultaneous meditations called “contraction” (pinda- 
graha) and “expansion” (anubheda), described in the Abhisambodhi-krama. 
The Yuganaddha-krama then describes the non-dual knowledge of a 
Manifest Complete Buddha who proceeds downward through the three 
light stages in a manner that carries off the three bodies.102 For this the 
Tantras speak of a Fourth Initiation, yielding the maturation for the 
fruitional attainment of the three bodies, while the previous three initia- 
tions make this possible for those bodies. Hence we can add further 
correspondences to Table 2 by placing under Om the initiations of the 
flask as well as the “daughter,” under Ah the secret initiation as well as the 
“sister,” under Hüm the insight-knowledge initiation as well as the 
"mother." But what is the meaning of the “carnal love” for those three 
classes of “women”? They must be separately discussed. 

1. The incantation-born female.—She is called a vidya and is evoked by 
a vidyà-dhárani. The male deity can be called a mantra and the incantation 
evoking him is called a mantra-dhárani.103 Lva-va-pa, when speaking of the 
five initiations of the flask, says: 


Those five initiations which have the nature of the five Tathägatas 
(i.e., Buddhas) are also referred to by the expression “wisdom 
initiation” (vidyd-abhiseka)—because they accomplish the five 
“wisdom knowledges” (vidya-jiana) whose natures are the trans- 
mutation of the five unwisdoms (avidyá), and because in every case 
the initiation is conferred by the vidya goddess, Buddhalocana 


and so оп.104 


The meaning of this last remark is clarified in Mkhas grub rje's en 
of the initiations of the flask. He states that when the Ш ААА 
(vajracarya) sprinkles the disciple with the “diamond water u the 
of the Victorious Flask (vijaya-kalasa) it is imagined that in rea Jd 105 
vidyas, Locanà and so on, hold the flask and pour the initiatory water. 


he sampanna-krama section of 


102, This summary of the Pafcakrama is based on E Сунак te 


pot kha-pa’s Snags rim, esp. 405a, where he quotes an 
Vajrajäpa-krama (4-6). 

103. This is shown in my previous treatment (Cha 

104. Toh. 1444, Sricakrasambaramandalavidh 
Квуца, Wa, in а passage beginning 365-3. 

105. In Mkhas grub rje’s; see n. 98 above. 


= ing of Initiation.” 
p.7)on The Meaning aon 


iratnapradipoddyota-náma, 


194 Special Studies 


Furthermore, these vidyäs such as Locana can be identified with the 
maidens mentioned in the Klon-rdol bla-ma’s passage, using the same or 
other names. Thus Saraha writes: “Locanä is the brahmin maid (Brahma- 
ni); Mamaki is the outcast (Dombi); Pändarä is the dancing girl (Narti); 
Tärä is the washerwoman (Rajaki).” 106 Of course, when incantation-born, 
they are not concrete. 

2. The field-born female.—The expression *'field-born" refers first of all 
to those located in fields and secondary fields (ksetra and upaksetra) 
which are eight in number, as Indrabhüti states: “Now, so as to teach the 
families of the eight field-born yoginis...."107 The intention of the 
number eight is to describe the fields rather than the yoginis. Besides, the 
expression “‘field-born” indicates a larger group of yoginis who are headed 
in lists by the eight field-born groups. These yoginis are usually placed in 
locations (geographical or in the body itself) numbering twelve, twenty- 
four, or thirty-two. Various Anuttara-yoga-tantras belonging to the 
"Mother Tantra" category and the commentarial literature describe the 
characteristics of these yoginis, place them in locations, and group them 
under families of Buddhas, whether five, six, or seven.108 From a Sanskrit 
manuscript of one of these works, the Abhidhänottara, Bagchi cites “They 
are faithful to their true religion and brave sisters (saddharmaratä nityam 
virabhoginyah).” 109 This is said in reference to one kind of the goddesses 
named /ama, but the appellation “sister” is of interest as being consistent 
with our previous identification of the “field-born” with the “sister.” 
These yoginis are of course non-human. This is not only shown by some 
of the descriptions, but also follows from the fact that they can coalesce 
with the yogin’s body in the sense of becoming located in different spots. 
The descriptions indeed amount to a classification of the fairy world. The 
implication is that the yogin, upon developing the illusory body, becomes 
aware of a world whose nature is compatible with that body. Nagarjuna 
writes in his Paficakrama (Cittavisuddhi-krama, vs. 36): 


Of all illusions, the illusion of woman is supreme. 2m 
Just here, the variety of three knowledges is clearly marked. 


106. Toh. 1652, Sri-Buddhakapalatantrapanjika-jRünavati, nama, Tanjur, REY ud, 
Ra, 137a-2. 
107. The Smrtisamdarsanäloka, op. cit., Ca, 123a-6-7. f the basic 
108. Among these works of great importance is a Continuation Tantra o one 
Cakrasamvara Tantra (Toh. 368) entitled Abhidhäna-uttaratantra (Toh. 369). at deal 
the Tanjur texts there is, €.g., Indrabhüti’s work, just referred to. There is a EIAS. 
of information in Tson-kha-pa's Hdod hjo, op. cit., n. 91. See Snellgrove, The 
tantra, Y, 66-70, and his annotations. 59 
109. Prabodh Chandra Bagchi, Studies in the Tantras (Calcutta, 1939), p. disc ussion 
110. This verse is quoted in the Snags rim, 313b-2, during Tson-kha-pa's th) 
of the three Higher Initiations (the secret one, insight-knowledge, and the fourth). 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 195 
The expression “three knowledges” means the three lights, Light, Spread 
of Light, and Culmination of Light, constituting the arcane mind. 

3. The together-born female.—Candrakirti in his commentary on the 
Сиһуаѕатаја cites this verse about her: 


The great goddess located in the heart, 
Causing the yogin’s yoga— 
The Mother of all the Buddhas— 
Is called Vajradhatvisvari (Queen 
of the Diamond Realm).111 


As the incantation-born female yielded a predominance of void, the field- 
born female a predominance of pleasure, so now the together-born female 
yields the experience of pleasure-void (sukha-Siinya) in equal measure. 
This pleasure-void involves a sequence of four joys (änanda), produced by 
the melted white element in the central channel of the body. 

The “carnal love" for these respective females who initiate the male 
called the yogin takes four forms in accordance with the initiation, as 
Snellgrove translates: “The first is represented by a smile, the second by a 
gaze, the third in an embrace, and the fourth in union."!12 The yogin 
smiles at the “daughter,” gazes at the "sister," embraces the “mother,” 
unites with the latter in the Clear Light, and must stay united upon emerg- 
ing from the Clear Light and proceeding through the three light stages in 
the reverse order so as to hold onto the three bodies of the Buddha associa- 
ted with those three stages. The wife was a daughter, a sister, and a mother. 


Their Ages 


The many textual references to these goddesses in terms of their ages are 
Not particularly calculated to give assurance regarding their true n a 
Especially is this the case with the most complete list of ages pu Er 
the present writer. Saraha associates five ambrosias (amrta) wit u 
of five different ages. The first kind issues from the eye of the sn = 
Kumäri. The second, from the hollow vein (rsa khon ston) oe id 
year-old Salika. The third, from the union with the и 
Who flowers (puspavati, woman with menses), called Siddha. for the first 
from the union with the twenty-year-old one who has menses cd 
time, called *Balika. The fifth is the (menses (kha ba, ee aoe er 
of khrag, **blood") of prajfia, the semen of upäya, or the 


3 Yoga of the 
111. Pradipoddyotana, op. cit., Ha, 36a-7. The translation follows my Yoga of 
uhyasamäja-tantra. 

112. Snellgrove, op. cit., I, 95-96. 


196 Special Studies 


Prajna, whichever be the case, of the twenty- 
*Bhadrakapalini (thod bzans can ma).113 
Besides the maiden, these texts also speak of a lad. Thus the Guhya- 


samäja has a verse about the maiden aged twelve and the lad aged twelve.114 
The same work has a verse: 


five-year-old One, named 


When he sees the delightful daughter of the gods replete 
with all ornaments, the lad, [or] the maiden, 
He gains the occult power (siddhi).115 


Candrakirti explains that he, the yogin, attains the mundane occult powers 
(laukika-siddhi),116 usually eight in number. This is indeed a “fairy tale.” 
Jung might have explained that masculine consciousness has come “face 
to face with its feminine counterpart, the anima."!!7 The material of our 
preceding section suggests that the yogin now sees a “sister” or “brother.” 

It will help our control of the data to organize it into classes of meaning, 
whether concrete or figurative, already illustrated in an earlier section by 
the interpretation of the sixteen-year-old girl as the sixteen voids. But it is 
doubtful that such organization of textual data can yield a native under- 
standing that one has through having been born and reared in a country 
Whose usages are commonplace and subconsciously noticed, while 
startling to the foreigner. The usual way to be a native in this case is to 
have gone through it all. 


A. Ages of the Yoginis belonging to Buddha families 


Bhavyakirti writes: "Among them, the butcher maiden, aged twelve, is the 
mudrä belonging to the yogin of Aksobhya’s family. The washerman 
maiden, aged twenty, is the mudrä belonging to the yogin of Vairocana's 
family. The dancer maiden, aged sixteen, is the mudrä belonging to the 
yogin of Amitàbha's family."118 The passage by the Klon-rdol bla-ma 
earlier cited contains such expressions as "butcher maiden." We may 
assume that either the necklace-stringer maiden or the artisan maiden, 


113. The Jñānavati, op. cit., n. 106, Ra, 129a-1 ff. In this passage the name of m 
twelve-yeared female is written sa-ri-ka. In Toh. 1654, Abhayakaragupta 5 is 
Buddhakapalamahdatantrarajatika-abhayapaddhati-nama, Ra, 190a-5, the name 
transcribed sa-li-ka; and Ra, 193a-6, transcribed sa-/i-ka. 

114. Chap. xv, pp. 100-101. 

115. Chap. xv, p. 108. 

116. Pradipoddyotana, op. cit., Ha, 154a-2-3. 23 

117. Violet S. de Laszlo (ed.), Psyche and Symbol: A Selection from the Writings of 
C. G. Jung (Anchor Original [New York, 1958]), p. 96; in Jung's essay, “The Pheno 
ology of the Spirit in Fairy Tales.” ka. Tanjur 

118. Toh. 1793, Pradipodyotanäbhisamdhiprakäsikä-näma-vyakhyätikä, 

Rgyud, Khi, 41b-6, 7. 


Female Energy and S ymbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 197 


or both, is more than twenty years old. § 
eight and a higher one of twenty-five. 

However, Candrakirti’s commentar 
followed by Tson-kha-pa does not entirely agree with Bh 
Candrakirti comments on a verse of the Guh 
about the sixteen-year-old maiden, he Says: “The practice to be practiced 
by the yogin of Vairocana’s family is together with the mudrä aged sixteen 
years.” 119 Here the mudrd is the goddess Locanä. Candrakirti agrees that 
the butcher maiden is aged twelve; but when he comments on a Guhya- 
samaja verse (chap. xv, p. 94) about the dancer maiden, he does not 
mention the latter’s age.120 Candrakirti’s Position, insofar as he did give 
ages, and Tson-kha-pa’s as well, is consistent with the sizes of mandalas 
in the Guhyasamdja-tantra. According to Tson-kha-pa, “The Guhya- 
samäja states that the mandalas of mind, body, and speech in that order 
have 12 hastas, 16 hastas, and 20 hastas.?121 This data is not all in one 
place in that Tantra. Thus, chapter iv (p. 18) shows that the mandala of 
mind (citta), which normally is associated with Aksobhya, has twelve 
hastas. Chapter xvi (pp. 1 13-14) show that the mandala of body, associated 
with Vairocana, has sixteen hastas, and that the mandala of speech, 
associated with Amitayus (= Amitäbha), has twenty hastas. Unfortunately, 
no mandala sizes are set forth for the categories of merits (guna) or acts 
(karma), the superintendence going with Ratnasambhava and Amogha- 
siddhi, respectively, 122 


araha’s list has a lower age of 


B. The number of years to the magical power (“Siddhi”) 


According to Mkhas grub rje, “Certain scholars say that if the bindu oozes 
at the end of sixteen years, the together-born joy occurs directly, and that 
it (i.e., the bindu) is called the together-born body (sahaja-kaya).” x This 
interpretation of “age” agrees with these remarks by Indrabhüti: One's 
own pleasure generated at the end of the death obtained from the father 
Precisely the pleasure experienced in the phase of the oozing. At the end ш 
Sixteen years a man practices by himself. At the end of twelve jo 
Woman practices by herself.” 124 This “oozing” refers to the melted wW à : 
element in the central channel of the body. The white element is the er а 
element; and the phase of oozing corresponds to dreamless sleep an 
death in the correspondences in Table 15. 


А D Pradipoddyotana, op. cit., Ha, 173b-4. 
D, Ibid., Ha, 1362-5 and Ha, 1372-6. 
* Nags rim, 1603-2. 
vA ot Table 2, this work. 
8. Ik chen, Nan le, op. cit., 30a-1. 
» The Smrtisamdarsanäloka, op. cit., Ca, 134b-l. 


198 Special Studies 


In partial agreement, Candrakirti quotes this verse, from an Explanatory 
Tantra of the Guhyasamdja cycle: 
The peace abiding in the unborn, whose name would be 16 
by differentiation of time starting with a moment, is deter 
the “lady” (yosit).125 


-yeared 
mined as 


During his exposition of the secret initiation, Tson-kha-pa cites this from 
the Mahamudrátilaka: 


If one does not obtain a twelve-yeared, or sixteen-yeared female, 
adorned with good features, long eyes, attractive figure and youth, 
then a twenty yeared one is proper. 

Other “seals” (mudrä) above twenty put the occult power far off. 
One should offer his sister, daughter, or wife to the “master” 
(guru).126 


Tson-kha-pa is concerned in this context with the method of the secret 
initiation and does not stop to explain the symbolism of the ages. Since 
the symbol is multi-valued, the present writer may be spoiling it by present- 
ing a one-valued interpretation, namely, that it means the number of 
years elapsed when siddhi is attained since someone turned his back on 
worldly affairs to practice yoga—an event as memorable to him as is the 
marriage contract to worldly persons. But the fact that *'seals"" over twenty 
put the siddhi far off does lend weight to our interpretation. Concerning 
the “master,” there are both inner and outer kinds.127 A 
The problem still remains of why the numbers increase by fours, starting 
from age eight in Saraha’s list, and so continuing to age twenty, then 
jumping over twenty-four to twenty-five. There seems to be involved an 
idea that the yogin can attain the goal in certain definite numbers of years. 


C. The vowels and voidnesses 


Previously we have referred to Jnänäkara’s interpretation of the ae 
year-old girl as the sixteen voids. The sixteen Sanskrit vowels are identi 
with the sixteen voidnesses in the Sri-Rdgardja-tantraraja: 


: А Г m 2 idness 
A is the voidness of inner and outer, A is the voidness of e 
I is great voidness, I is the voidness of ultimate reality, ES T 
voidness of constructed things, U is the voidness of the 


the 
125. Pradipoddyotana, op. cit., Ha, 34a-2. The translation follows my Yoga of 


Guhyasamäja-tantra, where the original Sanskrit is given. 
126. Snags rim, 281a-1. 


127. See my chapter “Divinity according to the Buddhist Tantras.” 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 199 
constructed, R is the voidness of the limitles 
the beginningless and endless, L is the void 
L is the voidness of ultimate nature, E is the voidness of all natures 
AI is the voidness of individual characteristics, O is the Voidness of 
the unobserved, AU is the voidness of the non-existent, AM is the 
voidness of intrinsic nature, AH is the voidness of the intrinsic 
nature of the non-existent.128 


5, Ё is the voidness of 
ness of the undeniable, 


This Tantra continues: “The seed syllable (hrdaya) of the Sambhoga- 
kaya at the neck is Om; the prajid is the sixteen void ‘veins. "129 Also, 
Ghandha(?) writes: “At the left side of the yogin is the prajna vowelled 
sixteen." 130 

Tson-kha-pa cites an unnamed dgama as it was quoted in a Tantric 
commentary which mentions the sixteen spots of the body where one 
contemplates the sixteen vowel letters, beginning with A at the base of the 
thumb.!3! In the same context he shows that one disposes the sixteen 
letters on the right side of the body for «paya, and again on the left side for 
prajna, the total of thirty-two yielding the thirty-two characteristics 
(laksana) of the great person (mahdpurusa). The idea here is that the sixteen 
vowels are the sixteen parts of the bodhicitta which is the union of prajiia 
and updya as the red and white elements, hence a total of thirty-two 
sub-parts, 132 [ 

The Tantric texts have comparable remarks for the twelve-year-old girl. 
Thus, Saraha says: "Those yoginis, adorned with various ornaments, 
having the form of youth, aged twelve, are accomplished from the ye 
Vowel letters and in this Tantra are called ‘the prajñā aged twelve. "1? 
In the Catuspithatantra, according to Bhavabhadra’s commentary, one 
arrives at the twelve vowels by leaving out "the two neuters” (ma nin 
gñis), explained to be В, В, L, апа L.134 Á 

The Deni writer ue moe noticed in these texts the method of apply СЕ 
the vowels to prajhäs aged eight, twenty, or twenty-five. Presumably on 
could leave out further vowels for the lesser age or could repeat on e 
vowels for the two greater ages. For the twenty-year-old maiden, one mig 
apply the standard list of twenty voidnesses. 

: ntral 
ii; 0h. 405, Kanjur, Rgyud, Ga, 241-4 ff. Cf. Т. ADR а ie 


Philosophy of Buddhism (London, 1955), pp. 350-51, for the 5 of sixteen voidnesses. 


Which minus Nos. 1, 2. 1 he present 
: - 1, 2, 17, and 20, amounts to the p s. 17 and 20. 
st Points out that the standard list of eighteen voidnesses leaves out No 
: 5ri- Ragaràja-tantraràja, ibid. ; . 
ro: Toh. 2404, Alikälimantrajiana-nama, Tanjur, Reyud, Zi, 
1, Stiags rim, 380b-6. 
132. Ibid., 3812-5. 
1 = he Јлапауаії, op. cit., Ra, 121b-2, 3. _ 
Ha, 1 Toh. 1607, Sricaturpithatantrarajasmrtin 


28b-7. 


z R d, 
ibandha-nama-tika, Tanjur, Reyu 


200 Special Studies 


D. The transits of body winds 


Indrabhiti states: 


The females aged sixteen and so on, 

The “sixteen-yeared female” — 

This has a purport explained otherwise, 
Expressed as the sixteen transits. 

Thereby the yogini wanders— 

As to place, namely—onto sixteen places, 
Onto the wheel’s spokes numbering sixteen, 
Onto all of them, the vital winds wander.135 


Ratnaraksita says, “The wind has sixteen member transits in a single 
day.”’136 One may arrive at this figure by the winds in eight watches along 
the right and left channels. It is of interest that sometimes the age of 
sixteen is expressed as twice eight, as in the case of the goddess Kurukulle, 
who is colored red and is twice-eight years. 137 

Padmavajra's detailed explanation of the sixteen transits as the 
sixteen digits (kala) of the moon is too long to translate here. In short, the 
first twelve transits are of the twelve interior zodiacal signs, starting with 
Aries (S. mesa, T. Jug). The thirteenth through the fifteenth concern the 
right and left channels in whatever order (not specifically mentioned) as 
well as the middle channel (specifically mentioned), symbolized respectively 
as the “food of solar manifestation,” the “food of lunar manifestation,’ 
and the demon Rahu (who causes eclipses). The sixteenth has the name 
bindu (“the drop’’).138 Obviously, one can arrive at the number twelve here 
by leaving out the last four transits. This gives the number of transits 10 
Tson-kha-pa’s passage, cited in the section on “Тһе Female, Male, and 
Androgyne,” which in fact also refers to transits through the twelve interior 
zodiacal signs. 


Concluding considerations 


Е 5 BR or 
Since the Tantras were traditionally handed down in esoteric Hon F 
many centuries they were read only by persons who had a genuine in 


: c à : n 
in understanding the subject and would spend the necessary time à 


135. The Smrtisamdarsanaloka, op. cit., Ca. 169b-6. E 

136. Toh. 1420, Srisamvarodayamahätantraräja-padmini-näma-pahjikä, 
Rgyud, Wa, 24a-2. 

137. Sädhana-mälä, No. 183, Sanskrit text p. 381. : d, 

138. Toh. 1419, Sri- Dakürnavamahayoginitantrarájavàhikafikd-náma, Tanjur, RE ic 
Dza, 309a-1 to 309b-4. (This passage is translated in its entirety in MY essay 
Teachings about the Inner Zodiac.’’) 


Тапјш, 


Female Energy and Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras 201 


endeavor under a guru’s direction to achieve maturity. The candidates had 
to adhere to various vows and pledges. If this symbolism is drawn out of 
context and presented to the general publicina mutilated, ignorant fashion, 
these works reap much scorn and condemnation. Even so, the Tantric 
adepts like Saraha would probably not regret the aversion of the “moral” 
person. The morality prerequisite for the Tantras in the reform of Atisa 
(the Indian pandit who came to Tibet around A.D. 1040), a reform revived 
by Tson-kha-pa three centuries later, is far too lofty for most persons. This 
reform requires the Bodhisattva vow to precede the vows and pledges of the 
Tantras, referred to in brief as the mantra vow." And the reform requires 
the morality of the Pratimoksa (non-Tantric Buddhist morality) to precede 
the Bodhisattva vow. 

Our study shows that much of the female symbolism of the Anuttara- 
yoga-tantra is derived from the human experience of sexual union— 
meaning both the physical and the mental state. Just as the morality or 
immorality of this union is independent of the act itself but is derived from 
the circumstances in which it is conducted, so also the symbolism based 
thereon is per se amoral but properly or improperly assessed by persons 
according to their mental orientation. 

Finally, one may wonder about the truth of certain strange ideas of this 
literature, but the Tantras have been scarcely touched by modern scholar- 
ship. It is premature to dismiss the Tantras as sheer superstition, as some 
have done, content to begin with certainty and spared the sleepless night 
of deepening insight. 


15 


THE FIVE-FOLD RITUAL SYMBOLISM 
OF PASSION* 


Introduction 


A preeminate sadhana (“evocation of deity”) sequence in the Buddhist 
Tantras, occurring innumerable times in the Sddhana-mala and similar 
literature, is the order (1) realization of the void (sünyatäbodhi); (2) 
imagining there a germ syllable (bija); (3) from that generating a hand 
symbol (cina) —the emblem of the deity; and (4) from that accomplishing 
the body of the deity. 

The present paper treats this sädhana formula in a more generalized 
form, together with its symbolic values, and signals the non-tantric 
Buddhist progression which the Tantras claim to quicken. Our exposition 
embodies some surprises, showing in Part I a comparison of Mafijusri 5 
arrows with Kamadeva’s arrow attack on Siva, leading to a comparison 0 
the Greco-Roman tradition with the skandha-centers of the body; and then 
in Part II, introducing the relation with the famous “Heart Sutra 
(Prajfiaparamitahrdaya-sütra) ; the bodhisattva preparation, path, and fruit; 
the Abhidharma theory of basic and conditional causes and of rebirth after 
death and the intermediate state; and the Buddha Bodies. ict 

Indeed, the.‘voidness’ referred to in the first step of the usual Buddhis 
Tantric sadhana means the standard non-tantric meditations known 25 
“selflessness of personality” (pudgala-nairátmya) and ‘“‘selflessness Q 


es ; ited bY 
* This article first appeared in Studies of Esoteric Buddhism and Tantrism, «ш din 

Koyasan University, 1965, which may be consulted for Tibetan passages om 

this reprint. 


202 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 203 
natures" (dharma-nairatmya). So, into the void personality aggregates 
(skandha) the officiant plants germ syllables, and does the same in the void 
dharmadhatu or dharmodaya triangle. 

The writer wishes to emphasize that the expression “passion” (anuräga) 
is not to be construed as implying that this paper is preoccupied with 
sexual topics extracted from the Buddhist Tantras. It is true that some of 
these Tantras employ sexual symbolism; and we regard a symbol as a 
semantic unit capable of multiple interpretations. When a sexual symbol 
is employed, a gross person will understand it one way, a refined person in 
another way. And perhaps the original writer has something else in mind! 
Such is the case as well with the Siva /inga. The Hevajra-tantra (Snellgrove 
edition) states (I, ix, 19A): “By whatever thing the world is bound, by 
that the bond is unfastened." The Dakini-vajrapaiijara, as is cited in 
Subhasita-samgraha (Bendall edition), states: “By passion the world 
arises; down-cast by passion, it goes to its end. By thorough knowledge 
of the diamond passion, the mind becomes vajrasattva.” (rdgenotpadyate 
loka ragaksepat ksayam gatah | vajrarägaparijiänäd vajrasattvo bhaven 
manah). It is easily understood that much that is worthwhile in the world 
has been achieved by passion. The incredible mastery of self attained by 
Gautama Buddha was hardly possible without an abundant amount direc- 
ted toward the goal of Enlightenment. It might be objected that his passion 
was not the kind which leads men to vulgar deeds. But the Tantras claim 
that the difference is not in the passion, but in the part of the body which 
preempts its power. This is because the Tantras inherit the viewpoint that 
man is a microcosm corresponding to the macrocosm. From this stand- 
point, the head is the highest and best member; and the passion located 
there or in other upper centers such as the heart works “higher”, i.e. to a 
superior end, than the passion below the navel. Im 

Another reason for the Tantric use of the expression “passion” stems 
from the old Buddhist term paficakamaguna (the five strands of desire), 
which stands for the five sensory objects constituting the knowables 
(jfieya) that unexamined for what they are, also constitute the obscuration 
of the knowable” (jiieya-dvarana), the last impediment to Enlightenment 
So in native Tibetan literature there occurs the abbreviated ee 
Spans-rtogs. Spans-pa means “elimination” (of defilements, EE 
as lust, hatred, delusion); rtogs-pa means “realization (of er p 
such as forms). They respectively eliminate the obscurations o! SL AS 
and the knowable. After purifying the defilements from ae em 
is still necessary before Enlightenment to face the “five ne d Tem 
That is the significance of the Mara vision by Gautama unde 
Tree. ounder 

We cite a number of works by Tson-kha-pa o dom used 
of the Gelugpa school of Tibetan Buddhism. Materia 


204 Special Studies 


in Part I comes from his Mchan-bu commentary on the Pradipoddyotana 
in the Japanese Photo. edition, Vol. 148. Our main textual source for 
Part II is his Snags rim chen mo. This work which we employ in a separate 
Peking blockprint (references by “S” plus folio number) contains an 
elaborate discussion of both the Stage of Generation and the Stage of 
Completion of the Anuttara-yoga-tantra, stipulated as necessary and in 
that order. The Snags rim chen mo shows that both Stages may be expressed 
with six members (sadanga). These two sets of six members are exposed 
above, Tables 4 and 5. 

While five-fold symbolism is ubiquitous in the Buddhist Tantras, we are 
concerned now with this symbolism in the 2nd member of the Stage of 
Generation, that of “passion” through Vajrasattva. Furthermore, even 
here there are two ways of setting forth the five-fold symbolism, namely 
(a) as a five-part rite (vidhana, cho ga); and (b) as a five-membered evoca- 
tion in terms of germ syllables and hand symbols. The latter is set forth in 
Part I of this paper, together with a sketch of literary history and doctrine. 
The former is set forth in Part II, especially following Tson-kha-pa's 
exposition of the “passion” member (S 365b-6 to S 366a-6; S 379b-6 to 
S 3882-2) along with those important doctrinal parallels suggested by his 
wide treatment beginning S 379b-6 (rten pa lha bskyed pa, “generation of 
the deities as residents"). 


1. The five arrows of Kämadeva, the five arrows 
of Manjusri, and the five skandhas 


The Hindi work Vaidik Kos! mentions the Atharva Veda (3. 25. 1) as the 
early occurrence of love's (käma’s) arrow (isu): “Тһе arrow of love which 
is terrible—with that I pierce you in the heart."2 That reference work cites 
ancient Vedic synonyms of isu (“arrow”): Saru, Sarya, Sari, bana. When 
classical treatises of astronomy and other subjects began to employ ordinary 
words to signify numbers, the word “arrow” was regularly employed for 
the number “5”. Sirkar3 cites for this purpose the synonyms bana, sara, 
säyaka, isu, visikha, kalamba, märgana. In the Mahabharata kama 15 
personified as a deity (Kämadeva) represented as releasing flowery arrows 
from his bow.4 The Amarakosa includes paficasarah “five-arrowed” as 2 
name of Kamadeva. 


1. Süryakänta, Vaidik Kos (Banaras Hindu University, 1963), p. 90. 

2. isuh kamasya ya bhimä taya vidhyami гуа hrdi. 1 

3. D. C. Sirkar, Indian Epigraphy (Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1965), р. 231. ity of 

4. cf. Ram Karan Sharma, Elements of Poetry in the Mahabharata, Univers 
California published in Classical Philology, Vol. 20 (Berkeley, 1964), p. 25. 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 205 

A Hindi work Bharatiya Pratik Vidyas mentions four metaphorical 
kinds of “five arrows". It quotes what it calls the sthüla-rüpa (gross form) 
of the five arrows (paficabàna) from the Käliviläsatantra, namely Käma 
Manmatha, Kandarpa, Makaradhvaja, and 


Minaketu, which are i 
Ä a, 1 nd N 5 precisel 
chief traditional epithets of Kamadeva in his marti or embodied Dee 


According to Indian mythology, after Kamadeva’s body was burnt up by 
the fire from Siva’s third eye, Kamadeva was revived with the epithets 
Ananga (bodiless) and Smara (mindfulness or memory). That Hindi work 
continues with the suksma-rüpa (subtle form) of the five arrows as cited 
from the Tripuratapiny-upanisat, namely, hri, kli, ai, blü, and strau, which 
are evidently mantras; and this interpretation is certain by the discussion 
of süksma-rüpa in the Tripura section of the same work.? 

This work cites only the Amarakosa for the list of five flowers of which 
the arrows are composed, called bahyaprakrtimaya (made of external 
substance), and for the list of five arrows by their results, called bhavana- 
maya (produced by imagination). The five flowers are: aravinda, the white 
lotus; the Asoka flower; cüta, the Mango flower; navamallikä, jasmine; 
and nilotpala, the blue lotus. The five arrows by their results, in fact the 
usual arrow names, are: unmädana, täpana, Sosana, stambhana, and 
sammohana. However, the two Amarakosa verses in point are inter- 
polations in the original text and are not found, for example, in the 
Bibliotheca Indica Sanskrit-Tibetan edition of the Amarakoga.? 

Kälidäsa’s Kumarasambhava treatment of the Kamadeva arrow attack 
on Siva’s mind to arouse love for Gauri or Uma mentions only the one 
unfailing (amogha) arrow called Sammohana. This account may be based 
on the Matsya Purana (Anandàérama ed., 154. 245)—or an equivalent 
portrayal in some other Puräna—where the great arrow (mahäsara) 
released by Makaradhvaja (i.e., Kamadeva) is called mohana and аы 
the heart of Siva, followed by Siva’s burning up of Kamadeva. The pe 
translation into Tibetan of Subhüti Candra’s Amaratikä-kämadhenu 
Contains a commentary on the Kämadeva verses of the Amarakosa. Bas 
tradition is followed that Kamadeva shot in sequence five arrows а P. 
Of Which the first two missed his thoughts, the second two did no uM 
enter his mind, and the fifth struck the target and upset Siva В t za 
The Tibetan terms for the five arrows match the five Sanskrit terms, 


5. Janàrdana Misra, Bharatiya Pratik Vidya (Patna, 1959), р. ү: (EE ania 
' S. Sorensen, An Index to the Names in the Mahäbhärate Rer Kandarpa, 
Maursidass), р. 378 furnishes these synonyms of Kama: Апайва, Ja8 
j radhvaja, Manmatha, Manobhava, Samkalpaja, Smara. m 
` Satia ор. cit. -19. Е 4 (Calcu 
8. Satis Gaede nes ed., Amarakosa, Bibl. Ind., nen DE Tp 
i » P. 8. The two verses are included, for example, in the 
“шол of the Amarakoşa with brief commentary, 1950 edition р. 6. 


206 Special Studies 


given in the order unmadana (myos byed), tapana (sreg byed), sammohana 
(yan dag rmon(s) byed), $osana (skyem byed), and stambhana (hchi byed).9 
This commentary does not specifically name the fifth or suc 

“Five arrows" are also mentioned in the Buddhist Guhya 
Chap. XVI, p. 121: 


cessful arrow, 
samája-tantra, 


The “knower of mantras" should contemplate in the middle of the 
Diamond Sky an adamantine Майјиќгї of great power; he should 
recollect his projecting point with the praxis of five arrows, and 
make them fall, in the manner of the formidable thunderbolt, in 
five spots. 


Candrakirti's commentary called Pradipoddyotana, as glossed in Tibetan 
by Tson-kha-pa,10 explains the term “five arrows" with expressions that 
diverge from the standard list in this order with interpretations as follows: 
(1) madana, sexual frenzy; (2) mohana, dazzle; (3) *nihsmarana, bewitch- 
ment; (4) mürcchana, swoon; (5) niscestikarana, unconscious rigidity. 
Tson-kha-pa’s annotation (mchan bu) explains that the five arrows belong 
to the ruler of the Paranirmitavasavartin gods of the Kämadhätu— 
therefore the Buddhist equivalent of Kamadeva.!1 The Pradipoddyotana 
states that the officiant—the “knower of mantras"—should contemplate 
in the Clear Light (= Diamond Sky, khavajra) an adamantine Майјибгі of 
great power. The annotation explains that one contemplates in the realm 
of the void a red Manjusri whose dress and all ornaments are red; holding 
in his right hand a red lotus the opening bud of which has the five arrow 
shafts; and holding in his left hand a bow. According to the Pradipoddyo- 
tana, the prayoga (yoga practice) of the five arrows means that one exhorts 
the arrows or furnishes targets to them by means of mantra-nyäsa (place- 
ment of mantra letters) in five spots of the body, namely, in the heart, the 
head (i.e. forehead), the navel, the secret place (standing for the neck), and 
the feet. The annotation mentions the respective mantra to be deposited 
in the five spots intended to attract the respective arrows. 4 
Given the preceding data, it follows that a popular symbol—Love 5 
arrow—continued to be employed in Indian literature starting with the 


9. Satis Chandra Vidyabhisana, ed., Amara-tika-kamadhenuh, Bibl. Ind., N. S. 1348 
(Calcutta, 1912), p. 23. ae n-kha 

10. Tokyo-Kyoto photo reprint of the Tibetan Tripitaka, Peking edition; TO is 
pa Bkah-hbum, Pa, extra Vol. No. 158, p. 144. Since the Pradipoddyotana Bihar N, 
here utilized the five arrow names are definite, except for the tentative form АШУ 1, 

11. cf. Etienne Lamotte, Le traite de la grande vertu de sagesse (Louvain, dis the 
p. 25, (note), where we learn that the ruler of those gods is called Vasavartin an flower- 
Buddhist Mara (the tempter). Also in the Buddhacarita, XIII, 2 ff. Mara is Káma's 
arrowed, has 5 world-deluding arrows; and Asvaghosa knows the legend of 
arrow attack on Siva. 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 207 
Atharvaveda, down into the Epic, Puränic, Tantric, lexical, and scientific 
works. In classical times, the arrow became fivefold. The ramification 
might be related to an idea expressed by the old Buddhist term райсаКа- 
maguna (the five strands of desire), referring to the five sensory objects 
The adoption of the symbol in the Buddhist Tantras, where iconography of 
Manjusri frequently depicts him with an arrow in his right hand, a bow in 
his left, especially in the case where he has four or more hands,12 shows 
again the syncretic character of the Tantras!3—as an example of their 
wholesale borrowing of symbols, which are turned to purposes of the 
particular Tantras. In the early Saivitic account, the yogin seeks to ward 
off the arrows of Kama, or not present himself as a target, while in this 
Buddhist Tantra context, the officiant seeks to attract five arrows. It is 
reasonable to take this Tantric employment of the symbol as another 
borrowing of Saivitic terminology—this borrowing being more obvious in 
the Avalokitesvara-Amoghapäsa cult.!4 The appeal of the symbol to the 
authors of the Buddhist Tantras probably derives from the preference for 
five-fold terminology and symbolism in Buddhism. Thus, the Ta Chih Tu 
Lun (Mahäprajiiäpäramitäsästra) according to Lamotte’s translation 
raises the question of why the Buddha preferred to reside at Rajagrha. An 
answer is given that Räjagrha has five Vihära—at the spots Venuvana, 
Vaibhäravana, Saptaparnaguhä, Indrasailaguhä, and Sarpasundikaprag- 
bhära.15 It is noteworthy that the bodhisattva Mafjusri was popularly 
held to have his favorite haunt in China at the mountain Wu-tai-shan, the 
mountain of five peaks; and that Mafijusri has the epithets paficasikha and 
pancacira.16 Р LAE 
So far, we can see why the Guhyasamaja-tantra would associate Maiiju$ri 
in particular (by the expression maijuvajra) with five arrows aimed at ae 
spots (paficasthdna) in the officiant’s body. The problem remains of ma 
the Buddhist Tantra is doing this at all: that is, we wonder what this 
Tantra intends to achieve by this imagination that a deity Mp in the x bv 
shooting arrows into five spots of the body. The answer is pm. E 
the Guhyasamdja-tantra, Chap. XVII, p. 137: pauca dla are 
paficabuddhah prakirtitah / “The five personality aggregates (5 i и 
in short, the five Buddhas.” The process of effectuating these ident 
(Firma K. L. 


; ist Iconography 
12. cf. Benoytosh Bhattacharyya, The Indian ald NEE 


Mukhopadhyay, Calcutta, 1958), Chap. III, Bodhisattva i , 1, 423 ff. 
13. cf. Louis. а et Jean Dior L'Inde classique (Pay St En Buddhist 
14. This borrowing is evident through much of the “Lotus cf, A. Wayman, “The 

Tantra, especially for Amitabha, Avalokitesvara, and ae aise’, Journal of the 

Twenty-One Praises of Tara, A Syncretism of Saivism an 

Bihar Research Society, 45: 1-4, 1959, pp. 36-43. 
15. Lamotte, op. cit., I, pp. 179-181. 


кш ‚ 315. 
16. Franklin Edgerton, Buddhist Н, ybrid Sanskrit Dictionary, P. 


208 Special Studies 


called anurdga, attraction of deific essence.17 That the skandhas are being 
aimed at is indicated by the Pradipoddyatana context and Tson- 
annotation, because the five mantras deposited in body spots are standard 
germ syllables (bija) of the five Buddhas, and because those five spots are 
allocated respectively to the five skandhas in another passage by Tson-kha- 
pa in his Hdod hjo (“Wishing cow") commentary on the Sricakrasamvara- 
tantra, a passage which I translate from Tibetan as follows: 


kha-pa's 


The Visesadyota (Toh. 1510) explains that since the aggregate of 
forms (rüpa-skandha) is the basis of seeds, the chief place of the 
rüpa-skandha is the middle of the head; and explains that the 
forehead is the place of the bindu: hence one contemplates it (i.e. 
the skandha of forms) there. Because the aggregate of feelings 
(vedanaskandha) depends on warmth, its chief place is the navel. 
Because ideas (samjñä) arise concomitantly with the six perceptions 
(vijfíana) based on the eye, etc. (i.e. based on the five outer senses 
and the mind) and because the neck is the central place for the 
senses, the place of samjfid is the neck. Since the aggregate of 
motivations (samskära-skandha) is the wind-basis of mülaklésa 
and upaklesa-caitasika-s, its place is both feet beneath the ankle 
bone. Because the aggregate of perceptions (vijfiana-skandha) is the 
prana-wind-basis of consciousness (citta) and located in the heart, 
the place of the vijnäna-skandha is explained as the heart.18 


This passage taken together with the Pradipoddyotana commentary, as well 
as the standard correlation between the five germ syllables, five Buddhas, 
and five skandhas enables us to set up the five-fold anuraga process Іп 
tabular form (Table 16).19 

This location of skandhas in body spots invites a comparison with Greco- 
Roman concepts. According to Onians, the Greek yvy7, the life spirit 
active in procreation, was believed to be in the head; the Romans had as 
analog the genius, for which the forehead was considered sacred, and 
believed that the head was the source of seed and concerned in procrea- 
tion.20 Note that the rijpa-skandha is placed in the head for the same 
reason. Again, in Greek thought the liver was the inmost spring of deeper 


17. The anuraga phase is part of the Stage of Generation, as set forth extensively’ n 
Tson-kha-pa’s Sriags rim chen mo. This is of utmost importance in determining 
difference between the Stage of Generation and the Stage of Completion. 

18. Tson-kha-pa, Bkah-hbum, Lhasa ed., Vol. Ta, “Hdod hjo", f. 27 a-b, ff. duction 

19. cf. the correspondences presented by Shashi Bhusan Dasgupta, An Introdu 
to Tantric Buddhism (Univ. of Calcutta, 1950), p. 97. ind, the 

20. R. B. Onians, The Origins of European Thought about the Body, the Mina, 
Soul, the World, Time, and Fate, p. 129. 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 209 


TABLE 16 


“THE FIVE-ARROW CORRESPONDENCES” 


ARROW NAMES d SKANDHA THERE BUDDHA 
(anuräga process) MANTRA-NYASA LOCATED EXHORTED 
m aaa 
(germ syllable 
and where de- 


posited) 
لے‎ = 
1. sexual frenzy Нат in heart — vijüàna (perceptions) Aksobhya 
у “Unmoved one" 
2. dazzle Om in head rüpa (forms) Waiters ) 
| (“The Sun”) 
3. bewitchment Sva in navel vedana (feelings) Ratnasambhava 
IRE ("Source of Jewels”) 
4. swoon Ah in neck samjnà (ideas) Amitàbha (“Іт- 
measurable Light’’) 
5. unconscious rigid- На in feet samskära (motiva- Amoghasiddhi 
ity tions) (“Unfailing Success") 


emotions.2! This agrees with locating the aggregate of feelings (vedand- 
skandha) at the navel. For the Greeks and Romans, the heart—more 
generally the chest—was the seat of consciousness and the seat of breath; 
and consciousness was naturally identified with the breath.?? This concept 
agrees perfectly with the Tantric location of vijfiana in the heart as the wind 
basis of object consciousness. It is remarkable that three of the Buddhist 
skandhas can be so closely identified with Greco-Roman attributions of 
functions to corporeal centers. The Tantric location of samjña in the neck 
and samskära in the feet has no obvious Greco-Roman parallel, although 
Onians does discuss the role of the feet.23 Samjfid is placed in the neck 
probably because, as Johnston has pointed out, samyna 15 the ene 
function;24 and so associated with the neck as the seat of speech. dine 
ing the placement of samskdra-skandha—as a center of PED e 
afflictions (klesa)—in the feet, this agrees with the Hindu corre que аги 
lower part of the body with the underworlds (patala); and the у Енея 
Гата Dilowa Gegen Hutukhtu once told me that the feet are the 
of Yama, the Lord of Death, and his sister Yam. ccs 
It is noteworthy that Indian thought consistently place 5 aene 
function of perception. Hence, the arrow of love was s hrdaye in the 
and said to pierce “in the heart” (hrdi in the A, five spots” 
Matsya-Puräna); and the five arrows were made to mi “in the heart”. 
(Paficasthanesu in the Guhyasamaja-tantra) beginning WI 


21. Ibid., p. 85. 
= Ibid., pp. 40 ff. and p. 49. 
2 ef. his appendix, pp. 524 ff. 


‚21. 
- E. Н. Johnston, Early Samkhya (London, 1937), P 


210 Special Studies 


I use the word “perception” advisedly. The plan of Kam 
make Siva perceive Uma or Gauri, make Siva conscious of her as a 
object, aware of her as the paragon of female sensuous ap N 
Therefore, the arrow was aimed at the heart, where Buddhism places 
vijnana; and therefore I regularly translate vijriana 
of perceptions”’.25 

The above considerations support what is already well known, namely 
that religious practices of India in classical times take for granted the 
Vedic corpus. In addition, there is a suggestion of Greco-Roman tie-ups 
with the Buddhist Tantras, which merits further investigation. 


adeva was to 


-skandha as "aggregate 


ll. The five-fold rite 


In his annotation to the Pradipoddyotana passage about the five arrows, 
Tson-kha-pa (Photo ed., Vol. 158, Pa, 355 a-b) rejects the position of some 
lamas that this evocation occurs in the yuganaddha phase of the Sampanna- 
krama. He concludes that it represents a high capability of service in the 
Utpatti-krama and is meant for a person of sharp senses who can achieve 
success (siddhi) in seven days. 

Since the procedure of arrow imagination must pertain to the 2d айда 
of Utpatti-krama, it is of interest that Tson-kha-pa does indeed mention 
five syllables (yi ge Ina, S 387 a-5) without listing them, but (S 385a-3) also 
mentions the náda which comprises the three syllables, again not listing 
these, which are usually Om, Ah, Him. Moreover, he brings up (S380b- 
6ff.)—but in a different connection—the standard terminology of sixteen 
Sanskrit vowels deposited in different parts of the body, and of thirty-four 
Sanskrit consonants coordinated with the five elements. Furthermore, 
some of Tson-kha-pa’s materials on the 2d member apply more easily to 
the five-syllable evocation than to the restriction to three syllables 2 = 
пайа. This is certainly the case when explaining (S 385a-1, 2) ће uy 1s 
of the five-pronged thunderbolt as representing the five limbs (two "n 
two arms, and head from neck up), the five fingers and toes on jue oe 
hands and feet, or the five senses in the head. For it is easy to see ee 
five arrow shafts held by Manjusri as Vajrasattva correspond to t x ДЕ 
pronged thunderbolt. Therefore, “three syllables" may be ss Em 
abbreviated reference to the five syllables, and the distinction 


y Th. StcherbatskY» 
1961), РР: >" 
Buddhist literature 


e. VU 
or “general consciousness" and rupa as **matter"', both correct but too TE уйпа ther 
like the other näma-skandhas—is indeed consciousness, for In i ed matter, ut th? 
is consciousness of an object, in a word: "perception". Rupa 15 п С тоге appropriate: 
matter which is perceived, so the literal sense of rupa as form" 1 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 211 
nada, the three syllables, and the five syllables may involve the en 
between ordinary and superior candidates, as suggested by Ts ОШ ра 

There are two dgama passages cited for the five-fold rite. The first. 
quoted (S 365b-6) from Gur (S. Pafijara),?6 shows the method o qM. 
deitygessexhortation with mystic song (Zu ba glus bskul nas skyed tshul 
discussed S 382b-3, ff.) : ; 


One should contemplate the five aspects :— 

(1) First imagining a man; 

(2) Then the emanation of the fairy circle (dakini-cakra); 

(3) The entrance of the gandharva exhorted by the directional 
goddesses mindful to petition (it) (by mystic song) to descend; 

(4) After exhortation the guidance by that circle as follows: 
depositing the three vajras of moha, etc., in three spots, the eye, 
etc.; 

(5) Then the vajra “passion” causing the /ӯапа element to enter. 


The second, quoted (S 380a-1) from the third brtag-pa of Kha-sbyor 
(S. Samputa),?? shows the method of generating deity by means of the five 
Abhisambodhi (топ byan Inas skyed tshul, discussed S 379 b-6, ff.): 


(1) The moon, having the “mirror-like” knowledge; 

(2) Likewise (—the 2d moon), having the "equality" knowledge; 

(3) The germ syllable (Буа) and (4) the hand symbol (cihna) of 
one’s god, called “discriminative” (knowledge), and all those 
into one, (called) ‘‘procedure-of duty" (knowledge); э 

(5) The pure and perfect image (bimba) (having dharmadhatu 
knowledge). 


According to Tson-kha-pa (S 386b-2) in order to understand either of 
these two formulations of the rite, one must associate them with the three 
States of birth, death, and the intermediate state (skye lichi bar do gsum). 
Indeed (S 383b-4, 5) the very name Utpatti-krama (“stage of generation) 
IS used because it is analogical to the life cycle of being born froma hour 
amassing karma, dying, being an intermediate state being In aom e 
then taking birth again, thus becoming a son or daughter. 

The rationale for applying this terminology to J083 experi 
Well-known Buddhist meditation to negate the ordinary view 


perience is the 
of the 


= - apaijaramana- 
= Cur abbreviates the Tibetan title equivalent to Arya- Dakinivajrapa) 
- Kh ишк ш i Samputa-ndma-mahatant 
- A/Ia-Sbyor abbreviates the Tibetan title equivalent to eprint fall, 


(Tohoku N $ i Tokyo 
о. 381). x king edition, 
P. 254, 5th folio. ). The passage occurs in the Pe 


ta 


212 Special Studies 


personality aggregates (skandha). In early Buddhism, the skandhas were 
seen by similes such as “forms (rapa) are like a lump of foam." In the 
Prajfiaparamitahrdayasütra, the skandhas are each identified with voidness, 
If these aggregates are to be so profoundly affected and transmuted, such a 
successful meditation must be comparable to death, because Buddhism 
teaches that such a drastic nullification of the skandhas occurs at death. 
So Tson-kha-pa writes (S 384 a-3,4): “Then the contemplation of voidness 
is comparable to death; because, by deciding the skandhas which are the 
foundation for adhering to "I" and “mine” to be devoid of intrinsic 
nature, and nullifying their manifestation—is comparable to abandoning 
the wornout skandhas." When the skandhas are seen as void, and this is to 
be regarded as a Symbolic Death, it follows that there is for the yogin also 
a Symbolic Intermediate State and a Symbolic Rebirth. 

Therefore, both agama passages are to be understood as a sadhana rite 
of Symbolic Death, Intermediate State, and Rebirth. But, admittedly, the 
two passages cannot, obviously, be so construed. In the case of the five 
Abhisambodhi, the first two (cf. S 386a-4, ff.), namely the moon and the 
second or red moon (=sun), constitute the /ietu-vajradhara, while the last, 
the perfect image, is the phala-vajradhara. Now, the phala-vajradhara, 
being the fruitional spiritual rebirth, must, according to Buddhist dog- 
matics, be the result of the being which died, and so the hetu-vajradhara is 
the Symbolic Death. That leaves the intermediate two Abhisambodhis— 
the germ syllables and hand symbols—to represent the Intermediate State 
and this is the way they are treated. So (S 384b-2); Having entered the 
syllables of the Intermediate State...” (bar srid kyi yi ge Zugs паѕ.. .); 
(cf. S 3846-4) that is why (3) germ syllable and (4) hand syllable are taken 
together in the dgama passage; and so (S 385a-1) “the five pronged 
thunderbolt generated as the hand symbol from the germ syllable”. That 
the 3rd and 4th aspects in the rite represent the Intermediate State as the 
sojourn in the womb is partly born out immediately by the formulation 
in the former dgama passage involving mystic song. There the 3rd aspect 
involves the entrance of the gandharva. Wijesekera points out on the basis 
of Pali Buddhism that in the Mahätanhäsankhaya Sutta the presence of 
the gandhabba (Skt. gandharva) is required in order that coitus of parents 
may lead to a conception; and that Buddhaghosa explains the term 
“gandhabba” in this case as “the being about to enter the womb . . . being 
driven on by the mechanism of Kamma / =karma /.” Wijesekera a 
notices that in the Amarakosa the term gandharva is explained as а 
taräbhavasattva”—which of course is the Sanskrit for “Intermediate ӨГ 
Being”.28 Again, the two agama passages agree on the fourth aspee 
because the “three vajras of moha, etc.” are hand symbols, the vajra being 


: = 2 m," 
28. О. Н. de A. Wijesekera, “The Concept of Vijfana in Theravada Buddhis 
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 84: 3 (July-Sept. 1964), p. 256. 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 213 
the thunderbolt symbol, and “тола, etc.” stand for the t 
Vairocana, Aksobhya, and Amitabha, heading the Moha, Dvesa, and 
Raga families—who are generated from the three germ syllables. 

Depositing three thunderbolts is comparable to introducing five arrows 
as in the MafijuSri episode, by exhortation of five germ syllables. 

The relation to non-tantric Buddhism is further shown by introduction 
of the terminology of the bodhisattva’s five paths.29 For these correlations 
Tson-kha-pa cites the Man йе (S. Mañjari)30 starting at S383b-6. The 
bodhisattva’s Path of Accumulating Merit (sambhära-märga) took place 
prior to the experience of Symbolic Death: it is in the phase of pürvakä- 
labhava (hdas pahi srid pa), defined by Abhidharma-kosa Ш 13c-d as 
“subsequent to the moment of birth and prior to the moment of death” 
(sa punar maranat pürva upapattiksanat parah). Furthermore, according 
to the Pitäputrasamagama—as quoted in Siksasamuccaya, “And im- 
mediately after the cessation of that 'first perception' (prathama- 
vijfidna) pertaining to birth, a contiguous matching ‘stream of conscious- 
ness’ proceeds. Among those, the cessation of the ‘last perception’ 
(carama-vijfiána) is counted as ‘death’ (cyuti) in this case; the emergence 
of the ‘first perception’ is counted as ‘birth’ (upapatti) in this case. 31 


hree Buddhas, 


Symbolic Death 


“Death” is here explained (S 384a-4,5) as starting from initial negation 
of the personality aggregates and lasting up to entrance into the syllables 
of the Intermediate State. It is associated with the Path of Training 
(prayoga-márga)—according to Man sfie, the Stage of Action in Faith 
(adhimukti-caryä-bhümi) and the Training in Decision about Reality 


(tattvanirvedha-prayoga). In the Prajfiaparamita doctrine, it has four 


d > 1 he Climax (mürdhagata), Forbearance 
egrees: those of Heat (üsmagata), the DU rs 


(ksanti), and Highest Mundane Natures (laukika-agra- He cina 
four easily divide into two groups of two, be ee and 
apply to “non-self of personality”, while Forbearance [Б ; 4 ТЕП 
Highest Mundane Natures apply to “non-self of natures - х i an the 
that the “Heart Sütra” (Prajfiáparamitahrdaya) is easily Шш SR Scie 
Same way. According to the present writer’s translation 


7/1 1 Abhisamaya- 
29. E. Obermiller, The Doctrine of Prajna-paramita as Өрө m as E 
lamkara of Maitreya, Reprint from Acta Orientalia, Vol. X d. Sd Ка, and asaiksa- 
Paths are sambhara-marga, prayoga-marga, darsana-margdy bhava 
Marga, 
30. Man йе abbreviates the Tibetan title © 
mnäya-manjari-näma, (Tohoku No. 1198), 
(*Abhayäkara-päda). 
31. Edition of Mithila Institute, p. 135. 15-16. e 
33 ЦЕ Ona: re oN t this, not this’,” Philosophy East and West, 
$ ayman, “The Buddhist ‘No , , 
ХІ: 3 (Oct, 1961), especially pages 109-113. 


‚Srisampufatantraräjafi- 


quivalent to ати паз sras-pa 


by Hj igs-med 


214 Special Studies 


presents three meditations—the first on “non-self of personality”, th 
Е , е 
second and third on “non-self of natures". 

Since what is called “generating the mind of Enlightenment" (bodhicit. 
totpäda) precedes the bodhisattva path, it must be placed in the Path of 
Training. In his Lam rim chen mo, bodhisattva section, Tson-kha-pa 
thoroughly discusses the two stages called “aspiration mind” (pranidhi- 
citta, smon sems) and “progressing mind” (prasthanacitta, hjug sems). The 
"aspiration mind” is coloured with compassion (Karuna), while the “pro- 
gressing mind” involves taking the bodhisattva vow (samvara). This vow 
is associated with the second abhisambodhi by Mkhas-grub-rje in his 
Fundamentals of the Buddhist Tantras, Chap. I, through the mantra, “Om 
bodhicittam utpädayami.” In that former section, Tson-kha-pa quotes 
Säntideva’s Bodhicaryavatara VIII, 158: “Therefore, just as you employed 
your ego (ahamkara) in others’ bindu-s (formed) of semen and menstrual 
blood, so also devote it to others’ (tasmàd yathanyadiyesu $Sukrasonita- 
bindusu / cakartha tvam ahamkäram tathanyesv api bhävaya). The 
"aspiration mind" is parallel with the first aspect (first abhisambodhi) and 
the “progressing mind" is parallel with the second one, as will become 
clearer by our subsequent observations. 

Since the “death” phase is the cause of “birth,” the Pitdputrasamagama- 
sütra may again be cited: “So, great King, a ‘first perception’ arises having 
two conditions pertaining to ‘birth’—by reason of the ‘last perception’ as 
predominant condition (adhipati-pratyaya) and by reason of 'karma' as 
support condition (drambana-pratyaya)."34 Otherwise stated, “death” is 
divided into “Expiration” and “Death vision"35—the former being the 
“last perception" and the latter the “karma”. In Abhidharma Buddhism, 
two causes are necessary for a thing to arise—the hetu, basic or seed cause; 
and pratyaya, the conditional cause. The phase of “death” covers the first 
two aspects in both dgama passages, the first aspect being the hetu—in this 
case, the predominant condition; the second aspect, the pratyaya—in this 
case, the support condition. In short, both formulations of the five-fold 
rite begin with symbolic equivalences to death, and this is consistent with 
the old Upanisadic passage, “There was nothing whatsoever here !n the 
beginning. By death indeed was this covered, or by hunger, for hunger 
is death.”’36 

The preceding is more easily related to the 2d agama passage than 2 
the Ist one. In the case of the first two abhisambodhis, the “moon E 
plained (S 3812-5) as the sixteen parts of the bodhicitta (hence the sixte 


34. Op. cit., 135. 12-13. osa» History Of 
35. A. Wayman, “Climactic Times in Indian Mythology and Religion, Histo 
Religions, 4: 2 (Winter 1965), p. 296. 


zran aka 
36. S. Radhakrishnan, The Principal Upanisads (New York, 1953), Br hadarany 
Upanisad, p. 151. 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 


215 
vowels =the sixteen voidnesses) is the леги, in the sense of attaining the 
realm of the void—the first step in the standard Buddhist Tantric sadhana 


The red moon (the sun), explained as the thirty-four consonants represent- 
ing the five elements (Флаги: earth, water, fire, wind, Space), is the pratyaya, 
in the sense that. they are the five goddesses who constitute the objective 
plenitude. But since the two are the /ietu-vajradhara, the cause for the 
phala-vajradhara, the comparison is made to father, mother, and son (cf. 
S 384b-5), to wit: the father releases semen (=bodhi=the moon), the 
mother's menstrual blood wells up with her (is withheld), the two under- 
stood in old Indian belief to contribute to the formation of the embryo. 
Therefore, the “moon” is taken as the “father,” the “red moon" as the 
“mother”; and since these two are the physical condition for the birth, 
they (i.e., the father emitting semen and the mother holding that “white 
element" together with her “red element") are—on this symbolic level— 
also “death.” 37 

The Ist dgama passage conveys exhortation by mystic song, and is im- 
mediately related if we consider another Tantric passage:38 “Because one 
experiences the Dharmakäya, joyful, equal to the sky, for only an instant 
at the time of (1) death, (2) faint, (3) going to sleep, (4) yawning, and 
(5) coitus.” Here, “death” is correlated to the Dharmakaya of the Buddha; 
and, since (S 387a-6 to 387b-1) there would be no Mahayana if the Buddha 
had remained in the Dharmakaya and had not appeared in the Body of 
Form (rüpa-käya)—this five-fold rite represents the exhortation for the 
Buddha as hetu-vajradhara to phenomenalize a Nirmanakaya for the benefit 
of sentient beings. In this process (S 383a-4), the first aspect “imagining a 
man" means the /ietuvajradhara in union with the consort (=Prajfia- 
päramitä) producing, as the second aspect, the group of eight goddesses. 
This is still Symbolical Death, because as yet there is no Sambhoga-kaya 
coordinated with the Intermediate State or Nirmana-kaya coordinated p, 
Birth. Among the group of eight goddesses?? are the four (S ER d О 
аге the four elements that enable a phenomenal body to be formed, Е 
аге a sort of demiurge, secondary creative deities, who by their mystic 


; i thology: 
37. This involves an archaic symbolism prevalent 2 erimus ne 
Erishkigal, Sumerian goddess of death and gloom is in the ! "le Ancient World, A 
giving mother"; cf. Samuel Noah Kramer, ed., M) a T lies the world- 
Doubleday Anchor Original (New York, 1961), рр. IT mysteries”, that is, menstrual 
wide contribution to primitive religion of woman 5 bloo Р blood into mother’s milk. 
blood, formation of the embryo by blood, and conversion 9 111: 1 (1959), р. 57. 
38. A Wayman, “Studies in Yama and Мага,” cg pod odi (ed. and tr. by 
39. The names of the eight goddesses according to шег өтүп Pukkasi, Savari, 
D. Snellgrove) are (his Vol. I, p. 74): Gauri, Gauri, I “е only as “Locanä 
Candali, and Dombini. However, Tson-kha-pa alludes al terminology, where Locana, 
and so on,” obviously employing Guhyasamaja (чол identified respectively with the 
Mamaki, Pandara, and Tara are the four chief goddesses, Iden 


elements earth, water, fire, and wind. 


Special Studies 


216 


rump) 


«puiu soinjeu Sassoppos 34312 (5\цәшә[үә (poo[q jennsusu (ewe) 9sngo [Jeuonıp 
3015521801а,, JO J[9s-uou,, Jo onumno1 әц} ç 91] —) uns Joy sp[ou) ous UOISIA YA -U09 'ekekjeld  'Z 
«(01098 vyuried-eufeiq 
«puiu -pnd) uos1od Чил uoiun ut (D111211/p0q jo (uouros (uondoo1od osneo 
uorjeridse,, JO J[9s-uou,, *"r1egpelfeA-njoH sued 9[ =) uoow Sos?o[ol) OU 56р) uoneJidxq Arewnd пән  'I 
юпәщроф AHL ONINIVUL (а) зэмэгчэзаха (v) зомэгызахя ,,HINIS JO 
ONILVUANAD JO HLYd VAVA-VWAYVHA VAVHAVALVA-NIIH NV 3U3HMAWOS МУ 3UIHMIWOS Э5ПУ2,, SV 


(SLOadSV Z) ,,H1V3Q,, 
LI ATaVL 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 217 


song call forth the “world”—in this case the phenomenal body of the 
Buddha. See Table 17. 


Symbolic Intermediate State 


A suggestive example of an "intermediate" statement is when the Prajna- 
päramitährdayasütra remarks: “Taking recourse to the bodhisattva’s 
perfection of insight, one dwells with obscuration of the mental substance 
(cittävarana). By reason of no obscuration of the mental substance, he is 
fearless, beyond delusion, with supreme nirväna.”40 That is to say, the 
above statement follows after the mention of meditations on “non-self of 
personality” and “non-self of natures" and precedes the mention of the 
Incomparable Enlightenment of the buddhas. The order is consistent with 
what has been set forth previously, namely that the voidness meditation is 
the preliminary training for the bodhisattva path. Therefore, the “Heart 
Sütra" is now alluding to the bodhisattva path and its culmination, but 
leaves open the problem of describing this path, as say, with six “perfec- 
tions” (päramitä) or with ten “stages” (bhümi). Any definite portrayal of 
the bodhisattva path is therefore consistent with the “Heart Sūtra” 
although not necessarily reflecting the viewpoint of this essence of the 
Prajfiaparamita literature. Such is the case with the correspondence now 
made (S 384b-2,3 quotation from Man site) of the ten bodhisattva stages 
to the ten lunar-month states (avast) in the womb, for the given reason 
that all these stages are attended with obscuration (sa hdi rnams sgrib pa 
dan bcas pa ñid kyi phyir). In non-tantric Buddhism there is the same 
teaching, for Vasubandhu says it,4! and the Äryasamdhinirmocanasütrasya 
“The passage, ‘so as to perfect those limbs of 
his, he perfects all the limbs’ means: because those ten bodhisattva stages 
are attended with obscuration, they are comparable to the ten periods of 
the body dwelling in a womb.” 42 It appears the correlation was originally 
made because the bodhisattva path, like the intra-uterine months, divide 


into groups of seven and three; that is, after the seventh stage, the bodhi- 
ika), and it was noticed that after the 


sattva is “irreversible” (avaivarti. ; 
seventh lunar month of pregnancy, an infant can be born alive. However, 
t into seven and three, 


the tantric division, as will soon be apparent, is no id t 
but into two groups of five. Of course the bodhisattva gradually eliminates 


vyakhyäna also comments: 


40. “The Buddhist ‘Not this, not this," p. 113, translation based on the scholarly 


edition of this sutra by F. Max Müller and Bunjiu Nanjio. —— 
41. Vasubandhu's commentary (Toh. 3993) on the Dasabhumika-sutra, Derge Tanjur, 
Mdo-hgrel, Ni, 112b-1, f. 
42. Japanese photo reprint of Ka 
5848, commentary on Lehu dgu-p 
illustration). 


njur-Tanjur, Vol. 114, p. 314-2-3, ff. (Tohoku No. 
a). (The passage continues with a reason and 


218 Special Studies 


the “obscuration”, so that on the final stages only the most subtle 
“obscuration” remains.43 

Accordingly (S 384a-6, ff.), the third path, Path of Vision (darsana- 
marga), which coincides with the first of the ten bodhisattva stages, named 
Pramuditä, is equivalent to the first avasthd in the womb; while the Path 
of Concentrated Contemplation (bhavana-märga), associated with the 
remaining nine bodhisattva stages, is prevalent during the last nine 
avasthas. 

Now, the term “Intermediate State" (antardbhava) was the topic of 
lively disagreement by ancient Buddhist schools, some denying that there 
is such a state.44 Part of the quarrel may have rested on a different use of 
the term, because “period between death and rebirth” involves interpre- 
tation of “death” and of “rebirth”. Sometimes a period of forty-nine days 
was ascribed to the Intermediate State. As the term is employed in this 
tantric context, it seems to mean the state that begins when a gandharva is 
headed toward a particular womb—as well as the sojourn in that womb. 
It follows the second moment of death, which amounts to automatic 
visions; and precedes the first moment of rebirth occurring with departure 
from the womb. The bodhisattva path of vision may cover this initial 
movement as well as the first avasthd. 

As was mentioned previously, “entrance of the gandharva" means 
entrance into the womb. At S 385a-5 Tson-kha-pa quotes the Man sie 
for three ways of entrance and supplies further information: (1) “Through 
the golden portal," also called the Vairocana portal; (2) "Through the 
mouth" of the mother or of the father and by him transmitted to the 
mother; (3) *In another way," namely, through the portal of the womb. 
The third way is asserted (S 385b-1,2) for the ordinary gandharva with 
passion toward either the male or the female. Tson-kha-pa explains the 
first way in his Don-gsal commentary on the Guhyasamaja: 


Moreover, like a man riding а horse—that ““perception-master” 
(vijfidna-pati), the “diamond of mind” (cittavajra), the Intermediate 
State Consciousness (antaräbhava-citta)—along with a very subtle 
body (*atisuksma-deha), rightly straddling that mount of wind, 
proceeds with great rapidity, and having reached that place in an 
instant (Капа), a twinkling (lava), or a moment (muhurta) enters 


43. Cf. Obermiller (op. cit.), p. 57: “Of these ten Stages the first seven are called te 
‘impure’ and the last three—‘the pure’ Stages. The reason for such a classificatio 


. з х ег 
that оп the former the different defiling elements аге still existing, whereas оп the latt 


the Bodhisattva has to remove only the most subtle forms of the Obscuration © 
Ignorance, consisting in the differentiation of subject and object, and of Samsara 
Nirvana as two separate entities." 283, 

44. André Bareau, Les Sectes bouddhiques du Petit Véhicule (Saigon, 1955), Р: 
thesis “Il y a une existence intermédiaire”. 


ا 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 219 
that Vairocana portal. Now, some former lamas, appealing to the 
passage [in the Mahamudratilaka] that Vairocana is ordure 
explained the anus as the Vairocana portal. This is not tenable for 
the citation "in the same way as the Knowledge Being Gite 
sattva)” shows it to be the portal through which the Knowledge 
Being enters the Symbolic Being (samaya-sattva). Hence, in the 
same way as the Knowledge Being enters through the crown of the 
head, that [“perception-master”] enters through the crown of the 
head where is disposed the “diamond of body” (käya-vajra) of 
Vairocana.45 


The three ways seems to be ordered as superior, middling, and inferior. 
The superior way through the golden portal seems indicated for the 
gandharva of the first agama passage. In its explanation (S 383a-2,3) the 
gandharva takes abode in the bindu-rüpa (thig lehi gzugs). This is formed 
from the passionate embrace of the ““Father-Mother” (yab yum) [aspect 
No. 1]. Now exhorted by the mystic songs of Locana and the other 
goddesses [aspect No. 2], from the bindu [into which the gandharva has 
descended] there arise the germ syllables [aspect No. 3) and hand symbols 
[aspect No. 4], and from these completion as a deity [aspect No. 5]. The 
last three are the standard three-fold rite (cho ga gsum). 

Therefore, in both dgama passages, the third and fourth aspects consti- 
tute the Symbolic Intermediate Stage. Tson-kha-pa explains that the 
goddesses exhort the Dharmakaya [of Symbolic Death] to issue the Body 
of Form for the sake of the candidates. The Dharmakaya, and accordingly 
any officiant performing this as a rite, is held to think, “Hence, so as to 
attain that very Samantabhadra, I shall enter this very place,” and having 
made his mind steadfast in that form of the five syllables of the Intermediate 
State, like a flame he enters the secret lotus of the Prajiia.46 The next aspect, 
as mentioned previously form S 3852-1, is the five-pronged thunderbolt. 
The five syllables are clearly the five as in the Mafijusri sadhana of our 
Part I, there imagined to be planted in the five skandhas, the latter dee 
where held to arise sequentially in the first five avasthas of the womb. 
Then the five arrows of Mafijusri depositing the five knowledges are 
symbolized here by the five-pronged thunderbolt, and so correspond to 5s 
second five avasthd-s, held to perfect the five sensory ILES In the case P 
the Mañjuśrī sadhana, this is a case of evocation without nn 
song. The solution of applying the five arrow names to ү m 
objects is possible through Tson-kha-pa's Mchan-hgrel on Prac wr » haka 
7th Chapter, Photo ed., Vol. 158, p- 56-1,2. Here we learn that the s4 


45. Lhasa Gsuñ-hbum, Cha, en QI 32-3, ff. 
46. Snags rim chen mo, S 387a-4, 2, O. 
47 “Studies in Yama and Mara,” (op. cit.), P. 72, note 155. 


220 Special Studies 


(one realizing the sadhana), when reaching “forms” by way of the eye 
offers the lady Rüpavajrä to the tathdgata Vairocana; similarly with the 
other objects and senses: Sabdavajrà to Ratnasambhava, Gandhavajrà to 
Amitäbha, Rasavajra to Amoghasiddhi, Ѕрагѕа-уајга to Aksobhya. This is 
consistent with the Pradipoddyotana (Mchan-hgrel edition), Ibid., p. 55, 
identification of sense objects with the tathdgata-s. Then the correspond- 
ences in Table 16 enable us to quickly assign the arrow names accordingly. 
The only change in order is Aksobhya's “sexual frenzy" moved from first 
in the skandha series to fifth in the sense-object series, with the others moved 
up in the same order. But the present order of the arrows is consistent with 
the story in the Amarakosa commentary that the fifth arrow (unnamed), 
here the one named madana, succeeded in arousing Siva sexually, whereas 
the unfailing arrow in the Kumärasambhava version is sammohana. 

Elsewhere, Tson-kha-pa coordinates the Sambhoga-kaya with the Inter- 
mediate State, and the latter with the ten avatàras of Visnu.48 See Table 18, 
where the data of this section is summarized. Of course, the five arrows 
(in terms of their names) can be replaced by the five-pronged thunderbolt, 
also emblematic of the five tathagatas. 


Symbolic Rebirth 


Tsoh-kha-pa explains at S 386a-3,4 that upon being born as a “son” 
after the ten stages, there is the Fruitional (phala-) Vajradhara, namely the 
state of manifesting a deity, the Nirmäna-käya. And this is the fifth 
bodhisattva path, called “Stage Beyond Training" (asaiksa-bhümi). It is 
the fifth aspect in both dgama passages. 

In the case of the first ägama passage, the “rebirth” can be interpreted 
(a) from upwards down, as a passionate emanation of the knowledge of 
the Dharmakaya, or as an overshadowing of an individual by the tathagata 
of his family (kula); (b) from downwards up, as a deification of the 
candidate, or as the human bodhisattva emerging from the tenth or 
Dharmameghä stage into the Buddhabhümi. The second agama passage 
stresses the method of generating the gods of the mandala. In the fifth 
aspect, the god assumes a concrete attitude, reflecting the repose of the 
Dharmadhatu, or merges with the external icon. : 

According to the Siddhànta Commentary by Hjam-dbyans bZad-pahi- 
rdo-rje, there are three kinds of Nirmana-kaya: (1) “artisan”, (2) of 
birth", and (3) “of Enlightenment" (bzo dan skye ba byan chub spr ul sku 
gsum). Citing references, this author explains the “artisan” kind as 
fashioning for the sake of sentient beings; that “of birth” as the births 


- and 
48. Cf. Ibid., 70-72, for correspondence of Visnu avatars with Stages of CUP Le 
for correspondence of Sambhoga-kaya to Intermediate State being, cf. A. Way 
“Buddhist Genesis and the Tantric Tradition," above. 


221 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 


T RECON oe ee Еа 
So[qi3uej (us) 0510} 


теу (еЧЗәшештецр) эшцооаӣ Jo pno Kzuo1J үепхә$ OI 
eyppng (пешпцреѕ) шорѕід\ 329j19d Ayıpızıı snorosuooun SISE} enauoj 6 
eüsiy (efese) 55әјиоцоуу UOOMS sIopo 9sou 8 
EUEY pz UL (euıedUıeInp) Surqogo1-Ie d yuswysymagq spunos sıes L 
wuiey-nseleg (1yynumyge) Busey o[zzep suo} sake 9 
ИШЕ EP E а г. 
SaWVN. (vd s3014) 
MOUUAY ЯО 3SVO NI Gazrivad 3H азіоззмза 
JOSWAS QNVH '& OL S31HVAAONDI ‘8 VATHGNI '& 
_————Є 
лема (eAefinpns) spgeisnbuosun WO AIUM uoisn[op еді [s 
uorT-ue]A (neuisio1e) Suize[q Чу poi asni eufllies v 
Jeog (uexeuqe1d) Surjeurun[r еН 15913 KAU BIEYXSUES £ 
ƏSIOJIOL (gjeurtA) oye[nogurur BAS мо[әќ spud VULPA T 
Ч514 (еурпшела) Aof шаң жэ poneu *ueuftA I 
ИЕ MM M ee eee 
(va sNvas) 
SVUVLVAV SIOVLS чолоо аму GZLYNIWITA 34 Galodiudd SNO NI 
VALLVSIHGO8 318VTIAS WUD ‘У OL SINIWII1IIA ‘ү VHGNV3S'V — VHISVAV 


NNSIA 
ا ا ا ااا اا‎ Ца —__=_ 


(s1934SV 7) «ALVIS ILYIQIWYIIN]J,, 
8I ЧОПЧУ. 


222 Special Studies 


depicted in Jätaka stories; and that “of Enlightenment" as the Nirmäna- 
kaya of the Buddha demonstrating, among Twelve Acts, Complete 
Enlightenment.49 

The first kind, in further explanation, seems equivalent to hypostasis in 
chosen individuals, that is, magically manifesting in multiform ways as 
srävaka-s, pratyekabuddha-s, Indra, Brahma, etc. So the first of the three 
kinds is especially applicable to Symbolic Rebirth as the fifth aspect of 
the rite. 

Since the Symbolic Death has been explained above as the cause of 
Symbolic Birth, it is well to point out a corroboration of this in terms of 
the “moon (= 16 parts of bodhicitta)” of Table 17. Ye-Ses-rgyal-mtshan, the 
Yons-hdzin for the Dalai Lama Hjam-dpal rgya-mtsho, contains in his 
Collected Works, Lhasa ed., Vol. Tha (Toh. No. 6016), a commentary on 
the sixteen Sthaviras, in the course of which (passage beg., f. 160a-3) he 
refers to various Nirmana-kaya(s) (sprul sku) and mentions the Bkah 
gdams thig le bcu drug gi sgrub dkyil (“Sadhana and mandala of the 
Bkah-gdams school rite ‘sixteen parts of the bindu’’’). Earlier he states: 


In “final meaning” (nitärtha), these sixteen Sthaviras are as said: 
“The sixteen Sthaviras—concretely the Three Jewels—who are the 
Arya host of Arhat nirmita-s of the Buddha, protecting the Teach- 
ing for the sake of the world—provide the grace (adhisthäna) so that 
the Teaching may long endure.” Just as the Buddha was said to 
have gone to the ultimate of “elimination” (of defilement) and 
“realization” (of the knowable) so all sixteen Sthaviras have gone 
to the ultimate of “elimination” and ‘“‘realization’’.5° 


Or, as said in the “Heart Sütra,"—There is Enlightenment. Hail! 
Conclusion 


It has been a special pleasure for the writer to weave together the above 
materials, casting some light on Tantric sadhana, indicating also some of 
the non-tantric background of Buddhist tantric ideas—and generally 
certifying Tson-kha-pa’s tantric reform that requires non-tantric Buddhism 
as the indispensable preparation for the Tantras. Е 
An incidental conclusion is that the principal message of the Prajnapat@- 
mitä literature is the “Path of Training” of the bodhisattva, that is, espe 
ally to drill the point that both pudgala and dharma are nairätmya, 2^ 
then, in the space thus vacated of false views, to arouse the Mind © 
Enlightenment—consistent with Kamalagila’s commentary ОП the 


49. The Grub mthah hgrel pa called Re ba kun skon, published at Moussorie (ndia) 
under the direction of the Tā bla-ma, Sec. Cha, 50b-51a. 
50. Ye-śes-rgyal-mtshan, Vol. Tha, 52b-6, ff. 


The Five-fold Ritual Symbolism of Passion 223 
Vajracchedika Gonos. No; 3817), wherein he explains the “Eye of Insight” 
(prajfiacaksus) as "seeing" pudgala-nairātmya and dl n Шар 
Tantric sadhana also begins with this “Symboli 5 аат) а: 
“realization of the void". ic Death”, referred to as 
The reasonable speculation in Part I that the five arrows may have b 
based on the paficakamaguna is somewhat borne out by Tab ms 
Part II. Much later the arrows were associated wi Mime З 
: S with the five skandhas, as in 
Table 16, in connection with the sadhana equating these five Wn dl 
with the five tathagatas, a feature of the Anuttara-yoga-tantra. te, 
But the writer gos not wish to leave this subject, giving the impression 
that everything "works out” consistently—that the corpus of ancient 
Buddhism, Prajnäpäramitä and tantric literature—and even non-Buddhist 
literature—can be “harmonized” by such underlying threads as have been 
drawn out above. That diverse traditions are involved is an obvious 
feature, e.g. dividing the ten avasthä-s into groups of seven and three, or 
into two groups of five. Also, the suggestion by E. H. Johnston, T/ie 
Buddhacarita, Part II (Calcutta, 1936), p. 191, n. 16, that ASvaghosa and 
Kalidasa (Kumarasambhava) have two different traditions about Kama’s 
attack on Siva—seems verified by our findings. We may postulate, on the 
one hand, a tradition of five-fold symbolism, Upanisadic (early and later 
sectarian), Saivitic, that of Asvaghosa regarding five flowery arrows of 
Mara=Kamadeva, followed in the Amarakosa, and continued in the 
Buddhist Tantras; and, on the other hand, the single arrow which is a topic 
in the earliest source, the Atharva-veda, continued in Saivitic Purana 
literature and adopted by Kalidasa. It is of interest that, according to 
Buddhacarita, xiii, 12, when Mara discharged an arrow at the son of Ida, 
grandson of the moon, he “became vicitta”, translated by Johnston that he 
“fell into a frenzy”. Johnston apparently interprets the vi- as intensive 
rather than deprivative. This interpretation is certified by Ibid. xiii, 16, 
which depicts Mara as wondering, when his arrow had no effect on the 
future Buddha, whether the latter was acitta or the arrow he had used was 
not the one which had agitated Sambhu (Siva). The point is that if Gauta- 
ma is acitta “devoid of thought”, his thoughts cannot become enhanced, 
frenzied, as signified by vicitta. And if we associate citta with the Dg eg 
Table 16 suggests that Mara’s arrow was the one later called madana 
(“sexual frenzy”). 


i i -tantri ism 
This forces us to consider the issue of why in non-tantric Buddhi 


Gautama is unaffected by Mara’s arrow while in the Ce ie 
the officiant exhorts Mañjuśrī to pierce five spots of the body y ui 
arrows we have described. It is indeed difficult to imagine, on р. id 
of our Table 18, the effect on a person who has eliminated hatred, PI» 


i “dazzle” 
i i ierced by the arrows С 
envy, lust, and delusion, of Mee E une en faf 


“bewitchment”, “swoon”, “unconscl 


224 Special Studies 


Perhaps these terms have a special meaning gained through “realization” 
(rtogs pa) of the “knowable”. 

An attempt can be made to suggest the meaning by considering the 
whole last line in Table 18. Here the 10th avasthā in the womb is said to 
perfect the skin which senses the tangible or touchables; and it is the 10th 
Bodhisattva stage called “Cloud of Doctrine” where bodhisattva is a 
future buddha, just as Kalki is the future avatära of Visnu. What is the 
meaning of “sexual frenzy" here as applied to bodhisattvas of the 10th 
stage, Maiijusri, etc. ? Here a pictorial representation may help convey the 
point. See the plate 189 of Mañjuśrī the Vajrasattva as Ekavira (“The 
Solitary Hero") in Giuseppe Tucci, Tibetan Painted Scrolls (Rome, 1949), 
discussed II, 583, where the phallus is up but hidden. Compare it with 
““Hermes.—Greek vase painting in the Hamilton Collection,” reproduced 
in C. G. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, Bollingen Series XX (New York, 
1953), p. 126, where Hermes is represented only by a head and an erect 
phallus, both attached to a symbolic post. Then, what is the meaning here 
of the passion suggested by the Saivitic ürdhva-linga? Starting with the 
Atharvaveda the main spot pierced by love’s arrow has been in the heart. 
So, just as in the “Twenty-one Praises of Tara,” the “upward linga” is 
the “thumb” in the heart, marked with the Three Jewels, as seen in the 
Stüpa-stambha of Amarävati (Bhäratiya Pratik Vidyd, picture No. 140). 
In the Mahävastu, the 10th Bodhisattva stage is called Abhiseka (corona- 
tion or initiation), so called in Sanskrit because attended with sprinkling, 
symbolizing lustration. This is the “heart” meaning of the sprinkled 
ürdhva-linga: the Stüpa-stambha in the heart. Therefore, when Mära’s 
arrow is unsuccessful against the meditating Gautama, it means that a 
“lower” passion could not be aroused. The ecstatic bliss (sukha) associated 
with lofty samadhi attainment could still be present, as suggested by the 
“firm thunderbolt” (drdha-vajra) in the heart, according to the terminology 


in Mkhas-grub-rje’s, Chapter I; and this also suggests a heart location for 
the “sexual frenzy". 


16 


RECEIVED TEACHINGS OF TIBET AND 
ANALYSIS OF THE TANTRIC CANON 


1. Outline of the thob yig 
gsal bahi me lon 


A thob yig (“manual of what was received”) is a work in which the author 
sets forth the lineages of the various doctrines and practices in which he has 
become learned or skilled. The East Asiatic Library, University of 
California, Berkeley, California, possesses a four-volume thob yig by the 
Dzaya-pandita Blo bzan hphrin las,! entitled Zab pa дай rgya che bahi 
dam pahi chos kyi thob yig gsal bahi me lon, “The ‘Bright-mirror’ thob yig 
of the profound and far-reaching illustrious Law”. This is a well-printed 
Peking block-print. The same library also has this author's Nag rnams 
phyogs su bsgrigs pa—his minor essays. The latter were quite popular 
among the Lamas, especially the essay Ma-nihi phan yon sogs ston 
pahilbyin rlabs myur hjug ces bya, on the celebrated formula Om mani 
padme hüm, and hence were sometimes separately printed. These are in two 
volumes in a Peking block-print which has been run off from blocks 
damaged in part. Both sets were brought to that University by popar 
F. D. Lessing. Using the colophon of the thob yig and his autobiography 


i esh 
1. In the original printing Indo-Asian Studies, Part 1 (1962), me ыш ас 
Chandra, supplied this note: “For а general idea about thob yig Т b yls also exists 
Tibetan Painted Scrolls, p. 124. It may be noted that a copy of ed in the Satapitaka 
in the collection of Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira. This work will be A hphrin las and a 
Series in the near future. A short biography of Jayapandita | aths of Mongolia, 
list of his works is given in Lokesh Chandra, Eminent Tibetan Polym 
Introd, p. 18, text p. 10.” 


225 


226 Special Studies 


among the лае phyogs, I have already pointed out that he was born 
chu pho rta (1642 A.D.) and was 61 years old when the Sixth Dalai Lama 
was 19 years old (i.e. in A.D. 1702) and that he may have been the teacher 
of the Sixth Dalai Lama.2 

The following outline of the contents of his thob yig will serve to illustrate 
the structure and type of material in such a work. In almost all cases, the 
biographies have been severely condensed and are replete with religious 
terms; but as the sources of the author are themselves for the most part 
unobtainable in Western libraries, it appears desirable to suggest the 
research possibilities of this compendium. The folio numbers follow the 
Peking edition; volumes Ka, Kha, Ga, and Na are represented respectively 
by I, П, III and IV. 

The work begins with the usual stanzas of bowing to the great Indian and 
Tibetan teachers, and acknowledgments to his own teachers. 


Chapter (sarga) 1, ending I.60a6: Dge bahi b$es giien bsten nas thos pa 
htshol tshul dan/ran nid bstan par Zugs nas rab byun bsfien rdzogs thob 
pahi tshul bsad pa, “Exposition of the method of hearing and search 
through reliance on a friendly guide (kalyänamitra); and exposition of the 
personal method of entering the religious life and receiving ordination 
through entrance in the teaching”. 

The chapter title well exemplifies the contents. We may mention also 
that there is included (f. Sal, ff.) a general discussion of the Law (dharma) 
and its division into two categories, scripture (T. Jun, S. ägama), and 
higher cognition (T. rtogs, S. adhigama). Numerous authorities are quoted 
for this distinction, which in practice is the lineage of promulgation (bkah) 
contrasted with authoritative commentary (dgons hgrel). 


Chapter (sarga) 2, ending I.122b1: Thun mon bahi rig gnas rnams la thos 
bsam gyi bag chags cun zad bZag pa, “A sketch of the traces of hearing 
($rutä) and pondering (cinta) of the common sciences." 2 
The author explains that after one has entered the teaching (as In 
Chapter 1) he studies sciences (vidyasthäna) of two kinds, common sciences 
(thun mon bahi rig pahi gnas, S. sädhärana-vidyasthäna) and uncommon 
science (thun mon ma yin pahi rig pahi gnas, S. asädhärana-vidyästhäna). 
The first kind is the subject of this chapter. Many legends are given to 
account for the origin of the sciences. The ones in this chapter are for the 
most part accessible in Western sources (through the translations of 
Taranatha’s and of Bu-ston's History of Buddhism). Lists of teachers are 
given in each case. The common sciences are grammar, logic, arts, ап 3 
medicine. The folio numbers will show where the individual sections begt": 
1.60b2. Sgra (S Sabda, grammar"). Sgra has the five appendages or 


2. “Studies in Yama and Māra,” Indo-Iranian Journal, Vol. III (1959), p. 125, note 
Beginning this page, I translated his explanations of the three kinds of Yama. 


Received Teachings of Tibet and Analysis of the Tantric Canon 227 
subsidiary topics (Zar byun) of sfian dnags (S. kävya, “poetic art"), mn 
p Se, al) sdeb sbyor СООЛ metrics") 
zlos gar (S. natana, **drama"), Я оа » Ң 
ae e uec ), and dkar rtsis (S. Jyotis, "astrology", and 
1.7024. Gtan tshigs (S. hetu-vidyà, “logic’’). 
1.7622. Bzo ba (S. Silpa, “the arts”). 
L77b2. Со ba (S. cikitsä, ““medicine”). The inordinate space devoted 
to this heading is due to the inclusion of tantric rites concerned with 
medicine. 
1.108b6. Sron btsan sgam po. Story of the introduction of the precepts 
into Tibet during his reign. 


Chapter (sarga) 3, ending I.174b2: Rgyu mtshan iiid kyi theg pahi dam pahi 
chos la thos bsam gyi bag chags cun zad bZag pa dan gZun mahi lun dan 
hkhrid thob pahi tshul b$ad pa, “A sketch of the traces of hearing and 
pondering of the illustrious Law consisting in the causal, or exoteric, 
vehicle; and exposition of how the textual scriptures and guidance 
[through them] was obtained.” 

In beginning his treatment of uncommon science, the author subdivides 
this into the causal (rgyu, S. hetu) or exoteric (mtshan nid, S. laksana),? 
vehicle (theg pa. S. yana); and the resultative (/ibras bu, S. phala), esoteric 
(snags, S. mantra), vehicle (theg pa). Both are called “inner science" (nar 
rig, S. ädhyätmika-vidyä); and fundamental (rtsa bar gyur pa, S. müla- 
bhüta) to both is the translated Word (Bkah hgyur or Kanjur) of the great 
muni (thub pa chen po). As can be seen by the chapter title, we are here 
concerned with only the causal, exoteric, vehicle. The resultative, esoteric, 
vehicle is treated in chapters 4 through 9. The translated Word is treated 
in chapters 10 and 11. Our present chapter in turn divides the treatment 
of lun (S. agama, "scripture"), beginning 1.1223; and of hkhrid (S. 
nayana, "guidance"), meaning а guided tour through the A AME 
beginning I.171b4. The first subdivision occupies most of the ee an 
is devoted chiefly to biographies, which also mention works and lineages. 


L123a2. Biography of Maitreya-nätha. 


I.125b4. А Asanga. 
1.13023. 5 Vasubandhu. 
1.13423. 5; Gunaprabha. 
1.136b3. 2 Nagarjuna. 
I.138b1. S Aryadeva. 


‘vehi istic(s)". Here 
3. The expression laksanayäna is literally “vehicle ов ишле ч A E 
“characteristics” may well mean “characteristics of gudal ix ee 
from Asanga’s Yogäcarabhümi, as I suggested in Tue d QUUM ES 
Asanga," Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 1 An Men ihe ае 
The Tibetans may also have adopted this term with the imp. 


vehicle is “without characteristics.” 


228 Special Studies 


L141b2. Biography of Haribhadra. 


1.144al. = Dinnaga. 
1.145b2. 55 Dharmakirti. 
1.14823. ДА Candragomin. 
I.151al. N Sakyaprabha. 
1.151b2. т Dharmaraksita. 


L152b5. History of the six texts of the Bkah gdams pa school, i.e. the 
Mahäyänasüträlamkära, the Bodhisattvabhümi, the Siksäsamuccaya, the 
Bodhisattvacaryävatära, the Jatakamala, and the Udänavarga. In the 
course of this he gives the biography of Säntideva. 

1.1623. The chos chun brgya rtsa (a centenary of minor works) 
concerned with the teaching of Atisa. 103 commentaries listed with 
translators. This is the collection called Jo-bohi chos chun (Tohoku Kanjur- 
Tanjur Catalog nos. 4465-4567). 

The six texts of the Bkah gdams pa, and the chos chun brgya rtsa, are the 
exoteric agama introduced by the reformer Айа, who arrived in Tibet in 
the year 1042. 

1.169a5. Biography of Säkyasri, who arrived in Tibet in the year 1204 
(Sin pho byi). 

1.171b4. The second subdivision of the chapter, devoted to hkhrid, or 
guidance. Here we learn that the exoteric guidance is comprehensively 
given in two works by Tson kha pa, his Lam rim chen mo and Lam rim 
chun nu—respectively, the stages of the path (full version), and the same 
(compressed version). These, in turn, each incorporate two guidance 
lineages called rgya chen spyod (ample practice), headed by the Bodhisattva 
Maitreya; and zab mo Ita (profound doctrine), headed by the Bodhisattva 
Manjughosa. 


Chapter (sarga) 4, ending 1.297а5 (and concluding Volume 1): Zur bkahi 
rjes gnan gi skor thob pahi tshul bśad pa, “Exposition of how the cycle of 
‘permission’ (апиўйа) in the specialized promulgations was obtained.” 
In the resultative, esoteric vehicle which now begins, there is a division 
into specialized promulgations (zur bkah), general promulgation (spy! 
bkah), and the abstruse cycle of associated collected works of Lamas, 
analyzing the concepts of sitra and tantra (Zar byun bla mahi gsun hbum 
sogs mdo snags tha sfiad so sor Буе dkah bahi skor). The present chapter 1S 
concerned with the first category, namely specialized promulgations; an 
is devoted only to the subsection of the anujfid (“регтіѕѕіоп” to invoke the 
deity), which it sets forth in the order in which it was introduced into Tibet 
These are further subdivided with an over-all grouping into “permission 
in the Kriya-Tantra, and “permission” in the Anuttara-Yoga-Tantr?- 
The former begins I.174b4; the latter 1.249а4. The contents are rich 1n 
legends of the main deities worshipped in Tibet, and give the lineage © 


Received Teachings of Tibet and Analysis of the Tantric Canon 229 


teachers; or perhaps more appropriately here, “ А 
" roficie э 
These are a few of the items: В nts” o 


1.175b4 to 195a6. The 16 Sthaviras, brief biographi 
1.221а4 to 231b6. Legend of Tara. ater pies шанаа 


1.2722 to 276a3. Legend of the three Yama, called phyi, пай, and зай. 


т “adepts”, 


Chapter (sarga) 5, ending П.130а5: Zur bkah dban du ma thob pahi tshul 
bśad pa, Exposition of how numerous initiations (abhiseka) in specialized 
promulgations were obtained.” 

This chapter continued the treatment of specialized promulgations, in 
the subsection of abhiseka (dban bskur). This is further divided into a. snags 
Ја hjug tshul spyir b$ad pa, “General exposition of the methods of entering 
the mantra (vehicle),” that is to say, a general introduction to the concepts 
of the tantras—from beginning of Vol. II to П.14а4; and b. bye brag tu 
rgyud sde so sohi бай thob pahi tshul b$ad pa, “Exposition in categories 
of how the abhisekas in the various tantra divisions were obtained.” That 
is to say, the major divisions of the section are into Kriya-Tantra, Carya- 
Tantra, Yoga-Tantra, and Anuttara-Yoga-Tantra. Under these, there are 
divisions into different families (kula). A few of the topics are as follows: 
In the Kriyä-Tantra, П.16а3 to 23a5, legend of Amitayus; 25a5 to 37b3, 
legend of Avalokite$vara and his appearance in Tibet; 37b3 to 45b3, 
legend of Avalokite$vara in connection with the rite of fasting (smyun 
gnas) in the Kriya-Tantra. Carya-Tantra begins 62b5 (only a brief discus- 
sion). Yoga-Tantra begins 63a5. Contains the legend of how the Buddha 
obtained the five abhisambodhis, and preached the Yoga Tantras. 
Anuttara-Yoga-Tantra begins 68a4. General discussion of this branch of 
the tantras, from 68а4 to 74al. The Anuttara-Yoga-Tantra 15 divided into 
Father Tantras and Mother Tantras; the former is treated Tal to 98a3, 
and includes the legends of Vajrapani and Mafijughosa in his ШП п: 
tion as Yamäri. The latter (Mother Tantras) is treated 9823, ff., and inc T es 
f. 98b3 to 11023, a general discussion of the Sri-cakrasamvaratan ra. 

; : - ith a discussion of the Kalacakra 
This section, and the chapter, concludes with a 


doctrine (115a3 to 128b6). 


i bkahi dban rnams thob pahi 


Chapter (sarga) 6, ending II.151a5: Spy iseka) of the general 


tshul b$ad pa, “Exposition of how the initiations (abh 


romulgation were obtained.” : Heit 
Р This pn beginning the major subsection of general promulgati 
contains a biography of Abhyakaragupta, to тне 
Rdo rje [йге M of the skor gsum (three cycles), that is to say 


i ў avali 
being the Nispannayogava: 
с en E au aa) There is also a 


(Tohoku 3141), and the Jyotirmanjar! | 2 ork, the Rdo rie 
Шокар of "à Mahasiddha Mitra [joki], and list of his wor 


and discussion of his work, the 


230 Special Studies 


hphren (Vajravali), comprising the dkyil hkhor drug cu re drug gi dban, 
"abhisekas of the sixty-six mandalas." 


Chapter (sarga) 7, ending II.259a3: Spyi bkahi rjes gnan gi skor thob pahi 
tshul bśad pa, “Exposition of how the cycle of ‘permission’ (anujfià) of the 
general promulgation was obtained.” 

Here we may especially point out, II.152a6 to 171b2, discussion of the 
sadhana collections in relation to anujfd “permission”; II.179a4 to 183a3, 
description of the Sambhoga-kaya in terms of the ves pa Ina “the five 
certainties”; II.183a6 to 251a6, biographies of the 84 Mahä-siddhas 
(which are numbered in the text). From 11.215a6, ff, the author explains 
that he has summarized the (84) biographies as set forth in the yig cha 
(manual) by the Юре slon Sman grub Ses rab; and, without detail, lists 
several other versions; then, he discusses the text in general, and in 
connection with anujfid “permission”. 

Concluding the chapter is a brief discussion (f. 257a4, ff.) of guidance 
(hkhrid) in the general promulgation. 


Chapter (sarga) 8, completing Vol. II, and ending III.43a4: Rgya bod 
kyi mkhas grub sion byun bkah gdams pa man pohi rnam thar dan de 
dag gi gsun hbum las lun ji Itar thob pahi tshul b$ad pa, “Exposition of 
numerous biographies of the early learned men of India and Tibet, and of 
[leading figures of] the Bkah gdams pa; as well as of how the scripture 
(dgama) was obtained from their collected works.” 

The third division of the resultative, esoteric vehicle, namely, the associa- 
ted works of Lamas, now begins, and covers chapters 8 and 9. The present 
chapter covers teachers up to, but not including, Tson-kha-pa (A.D. 1357- 
1419). There are lineage lists in almost every case. 

11.259a5 to 264bl. Biography of Santiraksita, the 8th century Indian 
pandit who played a paramount role in early Tibetan Buddhist history, 
and through whose advice Padmasambhava was invited to Tibet. 

II.265b1 to 270b1. Biography of Atisa, and literature of the Bkah gdams 
pa school. Atisa, 11th century Indian pandit, is the most important one 
of the Indian Buddhist scholars for the later diffusion of Buddhism In 
Tibet. The Bkah gdams pa school was founded by his chief student 
(Hbrom ston) to hand down Ati$a’s oral precepts (bkalı gdams). 

There follow the biographies of Mkhas grub khyu po (11.272b4, ff.), 
Nag tsho Lotsava (II.274b1, ff.), and Lha bla ma Byan chub hod 
(11.277b5, ff.), outstanding personages of the 11th century. Then, 11.278bl 
to 283b5, discussion of the kalyánamitras (friendly guides) of the Bkah 
gdams pa school. Individual biographies of the outstanding ones of this 
group follow from 11.283b5 to 308a6. П.308а6 to 314b2, biography of 
Sa skya pandita (А.р. 1182-1251), who was primarily responsible or 


Received Teachings of Tibet and Analysis of the Tantric Canon 231 
converting the Mongols to Buddhism. - Е 

immediate predecessors and teachers ot ee of 
rin po che, redactor of the Kanjur and Tanjur (from beginning 0 Vol T 
Thogs med dpal bzan po (Ш.14а6, ff.), Sems dpah chen po Dpal Idan | 
Ses (III.26b1, ff), Lho brag Nam mkhah rgyal mtshan dpal bzan ds 
(III.26b5, ff), and Red mdah pa (III.39b2 to 42b5). Е 


Chapter (sarga) 9, completing Vol. III, and ending IV.174b4: Rgyal ba 
Tson-kha-pa chen po yab sras kyi rtogs brjod dan de rnams kyi gsun hbum 
las lun ji sfied pa thob pahi tshul b$ad pa, “Exposition of the instructive 
lives (avadäna) of the victorious one, the great Tson-kha-pa, and of his 
spiritual sons; as well as of how the scripture was obtained from their 
collected works.” 

Chapter 9 is, in effect, a history of the Gelugpa school, founded by 
Tson-kha-pa (1357-1419 A.D.), in terms of the lives of its principal figures. 
The colophon mention of the Sixth Dalai Lama’s age as 19 shows that the 
author finished the work soon after the beginning of the 18th century. 
Theoretically, the author should include only those teachers in whose 
lineage he stands. However, apparently by encyclopedic knowledge, he 
manages to have learned something from almost everyone of importance 
(at least in the Gelugpa school), and this gives him the opportunity to 
write up their biographies, even though in many cases it is extremely brief. 
We shall not itemize the many personages he treats, but restrict ourselves 
to a few remarks. He treats with greatest amplitude the Dalai Lamas, the 
Pan chen Lamas, and the chief ones among the yons hdzin, religious teachers 
of the highly-placed Lamas, has an especially ample treatment of the 
Ist Pan chen Lama Blo bzan chos kyi rgyal mtshan dpal бай po, Ш.190Ы1 
to 232a2; and coming up to his own times, gives increasingly greater 
information in the biographies. Hence, the 17th century, with E ee 
most familiar, is especially well treated, and he naturally ir = 
greatest authority on this period. Understandably, his chief emp 


religous. 
gyu phar phyin pahi chos gtso 


ahi tshul bsad, “Exposition of 
principally the 


Chapter (sarga) 10, ending 1V.242b2: К 
bor ston pahi mdohi skor gyi lun thob p ня 
how the scriptures of the cycle of sutras whic 


А Е cos + d.” 
teaching of the causal päramita were obtained.” ce oro 
This nd chapter 11 are devoted to the Kanjur (the approximate p 


; : t of chapter 
nunciation of bkah hgyur). Recalling the discussion gos Bet the ШТ 
3 concerning the two vehicles, causal and sue шр ere tolto 
has maintained this distinction to the last, now dIV 


E e ш. p en with the following sections: 
He leads up to the main subject m 


232 Special Studies 


IV.175a3 to 187a4, biography of Sakyamuni in terms of the 12 Acts 
(mdzad pa bcu giiis); YV.187a4 to 190a4, how the great Sravakas compiled 
the Word (Hinaydna tradition); IV.190a4 to 190a5, compilation of the 
Word (Mahayana tradition); 1V.190a6 to 190b3, duration of the Teaching; 
IV.190b5 to 194b3, important teachers in India and their commentaries; 
IV. 194b3 to 197a2, diffusion of the Teaching in Tibet. 

The sütras which show principally the causal päramitä vehicle fall into 
four groups: 

(1) IV.197a4, ff.: Bkah dan po bden bzihi chos hkhor las byun ba hdul 
ba lun, “The Vinaya-vastu arising from the first promulgation (bkah) 
which was the Wheel of the Law concerning the Four Truths”. In the 
Tohoku Catalog, nos 1-7. 

(2) ІУ.201а1. ff.: Bar pa mtshan nid med pahi chos hkhor las byun ba 
Ser phyogs, “The Prajiid-paramita side arising from the intermediate 
(promulgation) which was the Wheel of Law concerning lack of character- 
istics (i.e. the Void, S. sünyatä).” In the Tohoku Catalog, nos. 8-30. 

(3) IV.209a2, ff.: Tha ma legs par rnam par phye bahi chos hkhor las 
byun ba акоп brtsegs дай phal chen, “The Ratnaküta and Avatamsaka 
arising from the last (promulgation) which was the Wheel of the Law 
concerning perfect discrimination (i.e. Yoga experience).” In the Tohoku 
Catalog, nos. 44 (Avatamsaka) and 45-93 (Ratnaküta). 

(4) IV.217b3, ff.: Hkhor lo gsum pa ci rigs par gtogs pa sde tshan phyogs 
gcig tu bsgrigs pahi mdo man, “The numerous sutras which pertain in 
some measure to all three Wheels (of the Law), arranged in a single major 
class.” In the Tohoku Catalog, nos. 94-359. 

All the works are listed individually with notice of the translators, and 
listing of the chief names of the lineage going with the particular work. 
The Kanjur used by the author has few differences with the Derge edition, 
but the works are not always in the same order. Furthermore, the works 
with nos. 31-43 in the Tohoku Catalog found in the Derge Kanjur are 
apparently all translations from Pali not included in the original plan of 
the Kanjur and are not discussed by the author. 


Chapter (sarga) 11, ending IV.289b6: Hbras bu rdo rje theg pa gtso bor 
ston pahi rgyud kyi skor gyi lua thob pahi tshul b$ad pa, “Exposition of 
how the scriptures of the cycle of tantras which show principally the 
resultative Vajrayana were obtained.” a: 
First (IV.242b4) the author mentions that he will not describe the Rain 
Rgyud (“The Old Tantras”). Tohoku Catalog nos. 828-844, because lun 
ma thob (“their agama was not obtained”), that is to say, he is not the 
recipient of instruction concerning them handed down from master (0 
disciple. In other words, the mere fact that works have been translate 
into the Tibetan language gives no one a particular right to expound them 


Received Teachings of Tibet and Analysis of the Tantric Canon 233 


or presume to say he understands them. Eve 
write authoritatively only in those fields in 
the link in the chain of teachers. This acco 
the lineage of teachers for the various texts, 
study only certain works, completely disre 
translated canon. 

His treatment of the remaining tantras undoubtedly follows Bu-ston 
who fixed the arrangement in the 14th century, except for a few details. such 
as the interpolation of one or more later-translated texts. Just as for the 
sütras, he lists the translators and the lineage. These are the most major 
categories: 

IV.242b6, ff.: Anuttara-Yoga-Tantra (rnal hbyor bla med kyi rgyud), 
Tohoku Catalog nos. 360-478. 

IV.259a3, ff.: Yoga-Tqntra (rnal hbyor rgyud), Tohoku nos. 479-493. 

IV.262b2, ff.: Carya-Tantra (spyod pahi rgyud), Tohoku nos. 494-501. 

IV.264b1, ff.: Kriya-Tantra (bya bahi rgyud), Tohoku nos. 502-827. 
There are a few works in the Derge Kanjur not listed by the author. 

The whole work concludes with a long colophon, IV.289b2 to 303a. 


* ko 


n the most prominent authors 
Which they can show they are 
unts for the care taken to list 
as well as for the tendency to 
garding large sections of the 


Il. Analysis of the Tantric section of the 
Kanjur correlated to Tanjur exegesis 


The present analysis of the Kanjur Rgyud hbum is based on the Thob yig 
gsal bahi me lon by the Dzaya-pandita Blo bzan hphrin las.* The correla- 
tion to the Tanjur exegesis is made with the help of Palmyr Corre 
Catalogue du Fonds Tibétain de la Bibliothèque Nationale, Vols. II and m 
(Paris, 1949 and 1915), along with his Lehu numbers.’ All сү о 
works are references to A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan fe hist 
Canons (published by the Tohoku Imperial University, ee 
1934). The latter is a catalog of the Derge edition of the КШ = 
Tanjur, but presumably every library which possesses а j 


4. CE di i me lon." Prof. S: mr 
. . ї ste , 
Шеш Painted Scroll (Rome; 1943); PP: EU metuis study was 
but the Blo bzan hphrin las work was more commen typescript from which the present 


a the First World War prevented his completion 
alphabetical i . This part was : num : 
T RO REA P. Cordier (Paris, 1933). Ву аша that my correlation 
data in Cordier's Vol. III, pp. 537-550. It should also be me icularly in Cordier's 
to the Tanjur does not exhaust all the Tanjur Tau ection of the Derge 
catalog, but fairly well accounts for the number ш 
Tanjur, as catalogued at the Tohoku University. 


234 Special Studies 


Tanjur of whatever edition would have this catalog because it is the only 
one so far for both a Kanjur and Tanjur. 

The Kanjur classification of the Rgyud hbum was finally set by Bu-ston 
(1290-1364 A.D.) in four groups—Anuttara-Yoga-Tantra, Yoga-Tantra, 
Carya Tantra, and Kriya-Tantra. A separate group called the Rain 
rgyud (Tohoku catalog nos. 828-844) comprises the old Tantras considered 
genuine but whose agama (descent through master and disciple) had been 
broken or at least was not available to Bu-ston. 


Derge Kanjur Derge Tanjur 


(Toh. Cat. nos.) (Toh. Cat. nos). 
A. Anuttara-Yoga-Tantra 


1. Neither Father nor Mother.® 


Maüjusri-nama-sangiti? (Cordier, Lehu 12)8 360 1395-1400, 
2090-2121 
Kälacakra (Cordier, Lehu)? 361-365 1346-1394 


2. Mother Tantras, under seven groupings, 
a. Ston pa, through g. Vajradhära.10 
a. Ston pa (*desaka). 
Sarvabuddhasamayoga (Cordier, Lehu 8) 366-367 1659-1682 
b. Heruka (i.e. Aksobhya), in 
five classes. 


(1) Samvara (Cordier, Lehu 2) 368-415 1401-16061! 
(2) Hevajra (Cordier, Lehu 3) 417-423 1180-134512 


6. Tson-kha-pa did not admit this category; for him, the Kalacakra is a Mother 
Tantra. His views are summarized by his disciple Mkhas grub rje in the Rgyud sde spyi 
rnam, which Prof. F. D. Lessing and I have translated. It was my work on Mkhas grub 
rje’s text that originally inspired the research embodied in the present article. 

7. This work is in a class by itself, because it has a set of commentaries as an Anuttara- 
er and another set as a Yoga-Tantra (therefore see also the Yoga-Tantra 
section). 

8. Cordier's Lehu 12 covers only the numbers 2090-2121, which are located immedi- 
ately after the Father Vairocana Yamari Tantric exegesis and are followed by the 
Father Padma-kula Bhagavadekajafa Tantric exegesis. It can be assumed that nos. 
2090-2121 are commentaries іп the Father Vairocana Tantric tradition. On the other 
hand, nos. 1395-1400 are included in Cordier's Lebu 1 as Kalacakra commentaries. 

9. Cordier's Lehu 1 also includes nos. 1395-1400, as pointed in note 5. Е 

10. The intention is to list the Tantras under the Buddha (Tathagata, Jina) being 
emphasized. The first category (Ston pa) deals with all the Buddhas equally, and 50 
strictly speaking does not constitute an individual Tantric family. The remaining S!* 
groups then correspond, and in the same order, to the six of the Father Tantras. ur 
sixfold group can be increased to seven by dividing the Vajradhara family into caus@ 
(hetu-) and fruitional (phala-) Vajradhara. In such a case, the causal Vajradhara 5 
called Vajrasattva. ee 

11. The numbers 1401-1540 and 1541-1606 roughly correspond to Cordier’s division 
into Yab skor and Yum skor, respectively. 0: 

12. Yab skor, nos. 1180-1304; Yum skor, nos. 1305-1320; Gur skor, 1321-1330; 

Thig skor, 1331-1345. 


Received Teachings of Tibet and Analysis of the Tantric Can 
on 235 


Derge Kanjur Derge Tanjur 


(Toh. Cat. nos. 
(3) Buddhakapala (Cordier, Lehu 7) 2 nos.) et nos.) 


(4) Mahämäyä (Cordier, Lehu 5) 425 1622-1648 
(5) Arali (Cordier, Lehu 7, last item) 426-427 1658 
c. Vairocana. 


Catuhpitha (Cordier, Lehu 4) 428-430 1607-1621 
Candamahárosana, Krodharäja, Acala (in 
Cordier, Lehu 24) 431-434 1782-1783 
d. Као rje йі ma (Vajraprabhä, i.e. 
Ratnasambhava). 
Vajramrta (Cordier, Lehu 6) 435 1649-1651 


e. Padma gar dban (Padmanartesvara, 
i.e. Amitabha). (In Cordier, Lehu 9). 
Lokanatha 436 1750-1751 
Tara-Kurukulla 437 — 
f. Rta mchog (Paramasva, i.e. 
Amoghasiddhi). (In Cordier, Lehu 9). 


Namastäre ekavimsati!3 438 1683-174414 

Vajrakilaya 439 = 

Mahakala 44015 1752-1781 
g. Vajradhara. 

Yathálabdhakhasama 441 == 


3. Father Tantras, under six groupings, 

a. Aksobhya, through f. Vajradhara. 

a. Aksobhya. 
Guhyasamäja (Cordier, Lehu 10). 
Vajrapäni (Cordier, Lehu 14) 

b. Vairocana 
Yamäri (Cordier, Lehu 11) 

c. Ratna-kula (lacking). 

d. Padma-kula. 


442-45116 1784-1917 
454-46417 2147-2216 


467-475, 478 1918-2089 


riya-Tantras. 


т K 
6, 3rd chapter, listed among the а Баага 


mong the Тапігаѕ of the Mother o 
ātrtārāvišvakarmabhava-tantrā; 


13. This is an extract from no. 72 
That work is the most important one a 


itis possible that some of the number SL. nos, 1745-1749 may M 
as generalities per 


Works, 
15. And possibly also no. 416. 
16. And possibly also nos. 452-453. 
17. And possibly also no. 465. 


236 Special Studies 


Derge Kanjur Derge T. anjur 


(Toh. Cat. nos.) (Toh. Cat. Nos.) 
Bhagavadekajata (Cordier, Lehu 13). 476 2122-2146 
e. Karma-kula (lacking). 
f. Vajradhara. 
Candraguhyatilaka 477 — 
The Tanjur has moreover a section on 

generalities of the Anuttary-yoga-tantra, 
including the mystic songs of the Mahäsiddhas 
(Cordier, Lehu 15). 2217-2500 
B. Yoga-Tantra 

1. The müla-tantra. 
Tattvasamgraha, in four sections (dum bu).18 479 

2. Explanatory (akhya) Tantras. 
Vajrasekhara, chiefly thabs (upaya). 480 
Paramádya, chiefly ses rab (prajfia). 487-488 
Others, chiefly ses rab: 
Vajramandalalamkara, Guhyalamkáravyüha 

and Guhyamanitilaka. 490, 492-493 
Мауаја1а19 466 

Commentaries on the mila and 
explanatory Tantras (Cordier, Lehu 17) 2501-2531 
Manjusri-näma-samgiti, as an explanatory 

Tantra (Cordier, Lehu 17) 360 2532-2622 


3. Cha mthun Tantras.20 
Sarvarahasya, explanatory (thabs) of 1st 


section (Tathagata-kula) 481 
Trailokyavijaya, explanatory (thabs) of 2nd 
section (Vajra-kula) 482 


Others, explanatory from thabs standpoint 483-486 

Prajnäpäramitänayasatapancasatikä, and 
Paricavimsatikaprajfiaparamitamukha, 
explanatory from ses rab standpoint?! 489, 491 


18. The four sections represent five Buddha families compressed into four groups. 
This Tantra is also first of the ones showing chiefly thabs (upaya). but 
19. The Mayajala was not included by the Dzaya-pandita under the Yoga-Tantra, 
its commentaries (nos. 2513-2514) are among the commentaries on the mila Ar 
explanatory Tantras. The work itself is located among the Anuttara-yoga-Tantras as 
the Derge Kanjur, suggesting that its status was a matter of dispute among the Lam e 
20. A Cha mthun Tantra is one with materials arranged to go specifically with ОЛЕ р 
more sections of the basic Tantra. Explanatory Tantras that are not Cha mthun deve 


various topics of the basic Tantra without regard to the sectional divisions. 
21. In particular, no. 491 goes with no. 490, 


Received Teachings of Tibet and Analysis of the Tantric Canon 237 


N 


Derge Kanjur Derge Tanjur 


(Toh. Cat. nos. 
Moreover, no. 488, above, can also be nos) (Toh. Cat, nos.) 


considered a Cha mthun Tantra for 
no. 487; and no. 487 can be con- 
sidered a Cha mthun Tantra for 
the mülatantra, no. 479. 
Commentaries on the Cha mthun or 
Hphros pa Tantras (Cordier, Lehu 18) 2623-2661 


C. Carya-Tantra 
1. Tathagata-kula. 


Mahävairocana?? 494 
Acala-kalpa 495 
Commentaries on the Tathägata-kula 
Tantras (Cordier, Lehu 19) 2662-2669 


2. Padma-kula (lacking). 
3. Vajra-kula. 


Vajrapäny-abhiseka 496 2 
Astadevi-dharani 497 es 
Others: 498-501 253 
D. Kriyä-Tantra23 (Cordier, Lehu 20) (2670-3139) 


1. Tathagata-kula. 


a. Tantras of the Lord (gtso bo) 502-542 2694-2697, 


3130-3139 


b. Tantras of the Master (bdag po) 543-552 2674, 2701-2719 


c. Tantras of the Mother (yum): 
Prajhäpäramitä (the Astasataka and 


Kausika) pr Ж 
Suvarnaprabhasottama Д 2690-2693, 
Райсағакѕӣ P 3117-3129 
Marici P al 

567-589 FR 
Others: 88-2689 
: -603 26 , 
d. Tantras of the Usnisa 290 3068-3116 


ra tantra (phyi ma rgyud). 


families, Tathàgata, Padma, and 


s taken as an Utta г 
ka, and Laukika. 


22. Apparently the last chapter i 

23, Asin the Caryä-Tantra there are three miles, Mani, Pafica 805-808) 
Vajra, In addition there are three gr of a general Бася (nos. 
Included among the Kriya-Tantra are the higher Tantras ( 
Which give basic material thet can be швей other works, of Parinama an 


Finally, there is a division, often ext 


d Prapidhána. 


238 Special Studies 


Derge Kanjur Derge Tanjur 
(Toh. Cat. nos.) (Toh. Cat. Nos.) 
e. Tantras of Wrathful Deities (khro bo): 
Tantras of Male Wrathful Deities (khro bo) 604-611 (?) 3052 
Tantras of Female Wrathful Deities 
(khro mo) 612-613 — 
f. Tantras of Messengers (pho ña) 614-630 
Tantras of Male and Female Obedient 
Ones (bkah йап pho mo) auxiliary to the 


Messengers 631-633 3059-3065 
g. Bodhisattvas belonging to the 
family 634-644 — 


h. Gods, etc. of the Pure Abode 645-673 — 
2. Padma-kula. 


a. Tantras of the Lord 674-680 2698-2700 
b. Tantras of the Master 681-723 2720-2864 
c. Tantras of the Mother 724-732 d 
d. Tantras of the Wrathful Deities, 
Male and Female 733-736 3053-3058 
e. Tantras of Obedient Ones, 
Male and Female 737-742 = 
3. Vajra-kula. 
a. Tantras of the Lord 743 = 
b. Tantras of the Master 744, 756 2675-2687, 
746-751 2865-3049 
c. Tantras of the Mother 752 = 
d. Tantras of Wrathful Deities, 
Male and Female 753-755 = 
e. Tantras of Male and Female 
Messengers and Obedient Ones 757-763 3050-3051 
4. Worldly Families. 
a. Nor can (Mani) 7164-77125 == 
b. Lnas rtsen (Paricaka) 772 EY 
c. Hjig rten pa (Laukika) 773-804 = 
5. General Kriyä-Tantra. 
Subahupariprcchà 805 2671-2673 
Sämänyavidhinäm guh ya-tantra 806 === 
Susiddhi 807 3066 


commentaries (nos, 3666-3696) which are 
part. Certainly the ones by Candragomin 


25. However, nos. 766-767 are really one work in two brtag ра called зла and phyi. 


Received Teachings of Tibet and Analysis of the Tantric Canon 239 


Derge Kanjur Derge Tanjur 
(Toh. Cat. nos.) (Toh. Cat. nos.) 


Dhyanottarapatalakrama 808 2670 
6. Yons su bsno and Smon lam. 
a. Yons su bsno (parinama). 809-810 — 
b. Smon lam (pranidhäna) 811-827 — 


The above ends the analysis of the Kanjur Rgyud hbum correlated to 
Tanjur exegesis. In addition the Tanjur has a section of generalities 
pertaining to all four Tantras. 


Cordier, Lehu 21: 
1. General on all four Tantras. Derge Tanjur 
The Vajravali, Nispannayogavali, and (Toh. Cat. nos.) 
Jyotirmanjari, by Abhayakaragupta 3140-3142 
2. Sädhana collections. 
a. Pa-tshab sgrub thabs brgya rtsa 3143-3304 
b. Ba-ri sgrub thabs brgya rtsa 3306-3399 
c. Sgrub thabs rgya mtsho 3400-3644 
d. Lha so so sna tshogs kyi sgrub thabs 3645-3704 
3. Preparation of mandala. 3705-3706 
Cordier, Lehu 22: 
1. Distinctions among the 3 Yänas and 4 Tantras 3707-3720 
2. Samaya and samvara (pledges and vows) 3721-3729 
3. Cycle of Dharmapala, Vasudeva, etc. 3730-3755 
Cordier, Lehu 23: 
Miscellaneous, cho ga, etc. 3756-3785 
Cordier, Lehu 24: dans 


Later translations.26 In Derge Tanjur: 


uded in the Derge Kanjur. When they are, 
xcept for the one work now mentioned, 
n the Pa-tshab and Ba-ri sadhana 


26. Most of these translations are not incl 
they have been incorporated in earlier саш с z 
no. 3305, which the Derge edition places betwee ee 
collections. The title, Vajracaryakriyasamuccaya, gives no ehe gene ре кү 
large work devoted, according to the title, to the duties o 


(vajrácárya) who explains the Tantras, initiates others, and so on. 


= К, Weer) 


INDEX* 


Abhayakaragupta, 8, 44, 64, 114, 127, 142 
144, 174, 196, 229 

Abhidhänottara-tantra, 11, 194 

Abhidharmakosa, 25, 213 

Abhinavagupta, 155 

Advayasamatävijaya, 32, 189 

Advayavajrasamgraha, 32 

ambrosia (amrta), 27, 28, 32, 33, 47, 71, 
72, 76, 77, 79, 114-117, 131, 134, 143, 
150, 157, 159, 195 

Amnaya-maiijari, 114, 127, 142, 144, 174, 
190, 213 

Anähata, 33, 156, 174 

Anandagarbha, 18, 37, 49, 57, 59, 165 

arrow(s), 20, 57, 77, 115, 160, 161, 202-207, 
209, 219-221, 223 

Arya-Aksayamatinirdesa comm., 99 

Aryadeva (tantric), 14-16 

Arya school, 14, 16 

Asanga, 15, 20, 25-27, 117 

Atisa, 168, 201, 230 

Avalokitegvara, 79, 100, 207, 229 

Avalon, A., 156 


Bagchi, P. C., 128, 194 

bali, 71, 77, 97, 116 

Bhagavadgita, 40, 156 

Bhattacharyya. B., 8, 16, 45, 122, 143, 186, 
189, 207 


ж For convenience of u 
sources and terms, this index 
Western names are given only if 
materials or are cited more than once. 
“& comm.” means, along wi 
“also Y? means, see Y for separa 


se and relevance to this w 
features the same, WI 


persons have con't) 
Commentaries are grouped W 


th commentaries; 
te listing. 


Bhavabhadra, 142, 145, 199 

Bhavanakrama П & ПІ, 58 

Bhavyakirti, 149, 196 

bindu, 21, 49, 112, 121, 142, 161, 172, 173, 
178, 181, 197, 200, 208, 219, 222 

Blofeld, J. 36 

wr 34, 76, 116, 117, 133, 149, 154, 214- 

6 

Bodhibhadra, 111 

bodhicitta, 4, 31-40, 47, 66, 67, 73, 74, 121, 
126, 127, 133, 134, 173, 175, 179 

bodhipaksya-dharma, 8 

bodhisattva, 41, 55, 94, 97, 98, 117, 125, 
130, 172, 201, 202, 214, 217, 221, 222 

body, 27-29, 31, 32, 34, 36, 46, 50, 51, 53, 
56-58, 76, 81, 83, 111, 112, 114, 127, 
131, 148, 151, 160, 172, 178, 182, 184, 
191-195, 208, 209, 217, 219, 223 

Buddhaghosa, 74 

Buddhaguhya, 35, 50, 51, 73, 91-93, 97, 
99-101, 108, 109, 113, 115, 148 

Buddha pentad. all: 9, 20, 31, 34, 46, 47, 
116, 120, 132, 134, 184, 189, 197, 220; 
all except Vairocana: 38, 187, 188; all 
except Amoghasiddhi: 134; Aksobhya: 
33, 35, 68, 121, 179, 196; Amitàbha: 22, 
179, 196; Vairocana: 17, 18, 32, 85, 92, 
100, 179, 185, 196, 218, 219. T 

Buddhaárijnána (=Buddhajianapada, 


h is mainly based on original 
itles and articles omitted. 
ese Buddhist tantra 
hen possible: 


“incl, X" means, including entries for X: 


243 


244 


Arya-Jnänapäda), 14, 15, 18, 39, 49, 84, 
140 


cakra(s), 9, 36, 40, 41, 87, 99, 118, 120, 121, 
132, 143, 149, 152, 159, 170, 173-176, 
180, 181 

Candali, 177, 181, 188, 189 

candidates, 41, 55, 70 

Candrakirti (non-tantric), 31 

Candrakirti (tantric), 14, 16, 17, 129, 133, 
191, 195-198, 206 

Carelli, M. E., 60, 170 

Caryamelapakapradipa, 14 

Caturanga-sädhana, 84, 89 

Caturdevipariprccha (biis zus), 14, 175, 
177, 179, 185 

Catuspitha-tantra, 142, 146, 147, 199 

Chandra, L., 97, 122, 143, 225 

Clear Light, 20, 28, 114, 126, 129, 162, 176, 
183, 184, 192, 193, 195, 206 

colors, various, 20, 48, 74-77, 92, 99, 142, 
149, 179, 181, 188, 206, 221 

compassion, 4, 214 

co-natal, 47, 49. 50, 114, 118, 131, 160, 
163, 184, 190-192, 197 


dakini(s), 9, 11, 48, 122, 143, 211 

Dakini, 8 

damaru (drum), 67, 107, 114, 115, 117, 
122-126 

Danielou, A. 149 

Dasabhümika-sütra, 39 

Dasgupta, S. B., 36, 41, 150, 181, 208 

dawn, 6, 118, 120, 130 

Dban gi don, 68 

death, 28, 157, 159, 162, 178, 179, 182, 
197, 212-216, 222, 223 

Devendrapariprcchä, 14 

dharani, 64, 65, 76, 178 

dharma(s), 67-70, 83, 96, 100, 154, 172, 
187 


dharmadhatu, 34, 46, 50, 51, 64, 85, 89, 92, 
94—98, 100, 107, 118, 120, 154, 185, 203, 
211, 220 

Dharmakaya, 28, 51, 92, 96, 101, 107, 111, 
113, 126, 127, 179-182, 191, 192, 215, 

220 

dharmodaya, 84, 88, 89, 154, 172, 203 

Dhyanottara-pafala-[ika, 50, 148 

diamond realm (also, Clear Light, thun- 
derbolt, vajra), 2, 8, 20, 33, 34, 38, 51, 
53, 83, 88, 89, 92, 95, 118, 125, 126, 134, 
180, 187, 195 

Dilowa Gegen Hutukhtu, 100, 209 

Dipamkarabhadra, 111-113 

Dios grub kyi sie ma, 67 

’Dod’jo,9 


Index 


Don gsal, 24, 27-29, 179, 219 
dream, 30, 55, 113, 175, 182 
Durjayacandra, 118 


Edgerton, F., 129, 130, 140, 207 

Eliade, M., 147, 152, 168-170, 175 

emblems, eight, 108 

Evans-Wentz, W. Y., 144 

excrement, 26, 34, 116, 117, 219 

eye(s), 67, 69, 70, 79, 112, 115, 140, 142, 
144, 205, 223 


Father-Mother, 5, 6, 47, 118, 124, 166, 
173, 186, 190, 215, 218, 219 

fire, 11, 73, 75, 77, 81, 89, 99, 101, 151, 
154, 157, 158, 178, 181, 182, 188-190 

flowers, 39, 62, 72. 74, 76, 77, 81, 85, 87, 
94, 103, 205, 223 

food, 26, 27, 79, 85, 97, 107, 114, 117 


gandharva, 28, 29, 211, 212, 218, 219 

gates, three to liberation: 18-20, 91; four: 
82, 84-88, 92, 94, 95; orifices: 87, 140, 
146, and chapter 12 

Geshe Rabten, 66 

goddess, 49, 50, 53, 56, 114, 118, 142, 154, 
159, 160, 165, 167, 168, 173, 186, 187, 
190, 191, 193, 195, 215, 216, 235 

Guhyasamäja-tantra & comm. (also Don 
gsal; also Mtha’ gcod), 12-20, 23, 42, 53, 
62, 65, 84, 111, 129, 131, 154, 172-174, 
188, 189, 195-198, 206, 218 

Guhyasamäja, Uttaratantra, 18, 19, 64 

guru (=hierophant, master, preceptor, 
teacher), 4, 42, 49, 50, 55, 56, 66, 70, 72, 
96, 121, 147, 172 


head, 21, 40, 76, 116, 117, 120, 132, 140, 
141, 143, 144, 146, 147, 150, 173, 174, 
178, 182, 189, 203, 206, 208-210, 219 

heart, 21, 33, 34, 75, 76, 87, 89, 126, 143, 
144, 146-148, 152, 154-156, 160, 162, 
173, 174, 178, 188, 203, 206, 208-210, 
223, 224 

Heruka, 8-11 

Hevajra-tantra & comm., 31, 32, 37, 42, 
45, 47, 81, 120, 124, 131-133, 135, 152, 
154, 163, 171-174, 177, 189, 194, 203 

Н. Н. the Dalai Lama, 66 

homa, 71, 77 


Indra, 77, 95, 99, 109, 186, 222 

Indrabhiti, 14, 19, 142, 161, 174, 185, 190, 
194, 197 

initiation (abhiseka), 35, 37, 47, 61-63, 66, 
99, 117, 118, 192-194, 229 


intermediate state (antarübhava 

29, 139, 142, 145, 179, 212, E 
221 4 
Jambudvipa, 25, 26, 28, 103, 106 
Jnänäkara, 169 
Jnanapada school, 14, 16 
Jnänavajra, 81, 115 
Jüänavajrasamuccaya, 14, 16, 23, 129 


Kalacakra, Frontispiece, 53 

Kalacakra-tantra (incl. Vimalaprabhä), 4 
45, 60, 66, 155-157, 177, 181, 189, 233 

kämadeva (= guru), 49, 121 

Kamadeva, 202, 204-206 

Kamalasila, 57 

Kamasütra, 184 

Khandaroha, 8 

khatväanga, 112, 118, 122-125, 133 

Klon rdol bla ma, 32, 120, 184, 190, 192 

Kukuri-pà & Kukuräja, 71, 72, 81 


Laksminkarä, 14 

Lalitavistara, 186 

Lalou, M, 97 

Тата, 8, 160, 194 

Lamotte, E, 98, 101, 171, 206, 207 

Lam rim chen mo, 49, 57, 75, 111, 117, 125, 
167, 214, 228 

Lankävatära-sütra, 9, 15 

La Vallée Poussin, L. de, 20, 21, 32, 86, 99, 
166 

Lcang skya Hutukhtu, 55, 59 

Lessing, F. D., 10, 21, 57, 62, 72, 77, 79, 
86, 87, 101, 109, 225 

Lilavajra, 39 

Lord, 4, 9, 28, 37, 53, 130 

Lotus, 40, 74, 85, 89, 91, 94, 95, 108, 109, 
132, 134, 144, 150, 152, 155, 160, 172, 
179, 182 

Lui-pä, 8, 124, 126 

lust, hatred, delusion, 17, 19, 28, 31, 144 

Lva-va-pä, 40, 184, 185, 191, 193 


MacDonald, A., 97 

Mädhyamika, 3, 5 

Mahä-Käsyapa, 74, 75, 167 1 

Mahämäyäsädhana-mandalavidhi, 71 

Mahämudrätilaka, 116, 198 

mahasukha (great bliss), 72, 95, 118, 126, 
127, 175, 176, 178 

Mahavairocana, 15, 35, 73, 92 

Mahavastu, 24-26, 139, 224 

male-female, 26, 27, 32, 38, 91, 149, 150, 
164, 166, 173, 175-178, 180, 182, 183, 
187, 218 

mandala, 5, 17, 32, 48, 60, 66, 72, 74, 82 ff., 
115, 127, 159, 169, 188, 197 


Index 


245 


Мп 20, 100, 206, 207, 210, 213, 219, 

Maiijusri-milakalpa, 23 

Maiijusri-nama-samgiti comm., 176-177 

mantra (incantation), 3, 5, 6, 13, 20, 22, 31 
36, 50, 54, 57, 64, 65, 85, 93, 121, 122, 
148, 178, 184, 191-193, 206 i 

mantras, specified, 32, 40, 69, 70, 79, 84, 
85, 101, 105, 113, 116, 124, 127, 134, 
141-143, 146, 147, 177-180, 183, 192 
193, 209, 210 4 

Matsunaga, Y., 16 

Maudgalyayana, 139, 150 

mirror, 33, 68—70, 85, 86, 107, 192 

Mitrajoki, 64, 229 

Mkhas grub rje, 21, 45-47, 59, 165, 177, 
181, 192, 193 

Mkhas grub rje's, 31, 32, 40, 51, 57, 66, 75, 
76, 79, 87, 91, 97, 98, 100, 106-115, 120, 
126, 192, 214 

moon, 26, 35, 77, 81, 87, 107, 108, 140, 
149, 150, 155-163, 165, 178, 179, 181, 
182, 211, 212, 214, 215 

Mtha' gcod, 172, 174, 176, 182 

Mt. Meru, 66, 101-109 

mudrä, 21, 31, 36, 50, 66, 93, 94, 106, 113, 
114, 118, 121, 122, 127, 166, 196-198 

Mukhägama & comm., 140, 141 

Mukti-tilaka-nama & comm., 49 

Muni-matalamkara, 144 

mysteries, three (Body, Speech, and Mind), 
31. 36, 37, 41, 46, 110-113 


Nägabodhi, 69 

Nägabuddhi, 88 

Nagarjuna (non-tantric), 125 

Nagarjuna (tantric), 14, 16, 17, 20, 84, 85, 
131, 132, 150, 162, 178, 179, 192, 194 

Nag po pa, 124 

Naropa, 14, 40, 45, 46, 60, 87, 120, 133, 
145 

navel, 21, 87, 132, 134, 146-148, 173-175, 
181, 188, 189, 203, 206, 208, 209 

neyartha & nitartha, 40, 59, 86, 87, 121, 
133, 168 Е 

Nidana-karika, 14, 

Nirmanakaya, 5, 28, 51, 96, 113, 126, 127, 
149, 179-182, 191, 192, 215, 220, 222 

Nirvana, 69-70, 98 

Nispannayogavali, 100, 143 

noon, 6, 118 

Norbu, Thubten, J., 56, 57 


Padmavajra, 36, 51, 107, 126, 148, 152, 
155, 160, 162, 186, 200 

Райсакгата & comm., 14, 21, 28, 99, 131, 
150, 162, 192-194 


246 


path, 9, 67, 68, 84, 99 

perfections, 5, 118, 119, 121 

permission (anujfia), 55, 56, 228 

Pindikramasadhana (= Pindikrtasadhana) & 
comm., 21, 85, 86 

pledges, 65-68 

Pradipoddyotana & comm. (incl. Mchan 
"grel), 14, 17, 53, 133, 149, 192, 195-198, 
204, 206, 208, 210, 219, 220 

Prajna, 6, 8, 11, 18, 27, 32, 40, 41, 45, 61, 
73-75, 95, 114, 117, 118, 121, 122, 124- 
127, 132, 135, 166, 172, 174, 178, 180, 
182, 186, 195, 196, 199, 219 

Prajfiaparamita method, 3-6, 19, 67, 213, 
231 

Prajhäpäramitä attainment, 125, 166, 183 

pràna, 73, 131, 148 

pride, 5, 50 

Pun yyavardhani-srijfianamalà-nàma, 115 


Queen Maya, 7 


Ratnäkarasänti (Santi-pa), 18, 82, 86, 87, 
91, 101, 106 

Ratnaraksita (his Padmini ), 32, 200 

Roerich, G., 144 

Rüpini, 8 


Saddharmapundarika, 5 

Saddharmopadesa-nama, 189 

sadhana, 54, 62 

Sadhanamala, 115, 118, 188, 200, 202 

Sakti, 6, 8, 165, 169 

samadhis, 17, 27, 28, 48, 52, 73, 85, 93, 98, 
107 


Samädhi-sambhära-parivarta-näma, 111 
Samantabhadra, 53, 75, 76, 100, 219 
Samayogamandalavidhi, 8 
Sambara-mandala, 8, 9, 11, 48 
Sambhogakaya, 5, 28, 51, 91, 92, 96, 100, 
101, 113, 126, 127, 149, 179-182, 191, 
192, 199, 215, 220, 229 
Samdhibhasa-sika, 131, 135 
Samdhivyakarana, 18, 19, 129 
Sampufa & comm. (incl. Smrtisamdarsana 
aloka), 53, 64, 120, 124, 142, 143, 146, 


161, 173, 174, 177, 190, 191, 197, 200, 
211 


Samputottara, 40 

Samvarodaya-tantra & comm. (incl. Pad- 
mini), 32, 137, 147, 159, 200 

Saraha, 13, 133, 194, 195, 197-199, 201 

Sarvadurgatiparisodhana Commentaries, 
73, 88, 92, 99, 113, 115 


Sarvarahasya-tantra & comm., 2, 83, 84, 
89, 91, 108 


Sastri, Н. P., 128, 129 


Index 


Saunders, E. D., 113 
Sbas don, 40, 48, 120, 124, 126, 127, 159, 
163, 179, 191 
Schubert, J., 77 
seals (see mudra) 
secret, 33, 36-42, 61, 64, 67, 71, 72, 132, 
165 
Sekoddesa & comm., 4, 60, 181 
semen, 34, 116, 132, 150, 154, 195, 214-216 
siddhas, 13, 23, 133, 230 
siddhi, 37, 48, 76, 87, 114, 115, 129, 142, 
191, 196, 198 
Sivasvarodaya, 155, 162 
skandhas, 20, 21, 34, 46, 67, 68, 72, 134, 
171, 209, 210, 212, 223 
skull, 77, 116, 117, 122-124, 126, 132, 133, 
140 
Smrti (=Smrtijianakirti), 18, 32, 51, 81 
Stiags rim chen mo, 4, 29, 32, 47, 53, 76, 79, 
81, 82, 87-89, 114, 115, 120, 152, 154, 
155, 159, 179, 192, 193, 197-199, 204, 
208, 219, 228 
Snellgrove, D. L., 32, 37, 124, 125, 129, 
131, 175, 180, 181, 189, 194, 195, 203, 
215 
Spyi 'gro'i rjes gnan gi bsad pa, 55 
Sri-Bhagavadabhisamaya, 8 
Sricakrasamvara & comm. (also Shas don). 
8, 40, 62, 120, 121, 124, 163, 184, 185, 
_ 190, 193, 194 
Sridhara, 89 
ri-Mahäkha-tantraräja, 49 
ri-Paramadya (incl. mantrakalpa) & 
comm., 16, 37, 49, 83 
ri-Vajramrta-tantra, 45 
Stage of Generation and Completion, 17, 
31, 47, 48, 67, 68, 113, 114, 116, 127, 
133, 192, 204, 210, 211 
Stages, bodhisattva, 87, 217, 221, 224 
Subhdsita-samgraha, 203 
sun, 26, 77, 81, 107, 140, 149, 155-158, 
161, 178, 179, 182, 212, 215 
sunset, 6, 118 
üravajra, 53, 142 


Tantras, four: 13, 16, 31, 33, 53, 81, 2333 
Yoga: 22, 37, 44, 57, 68, 98; Anuttara: 
32, 40, 41, 48, 66, 68, 114, 164; three 
lower, 73; Father and Mother: 62, 151, 
162, 190 

Tantrarthavatara & comm., 36, 148 

Tara, 76, 77, 119, 171, 188, 189, 207, 224, 
229 


Täranätha, 15, 226 

Tathagata, 45, 46, 48, 58, 66, 122, 134, 179, 
193, 220 

Tathägatavajra, 21 


Index 


Tattvasamgraha (tantric work), 15, 16, 165 

thunderbolt (vajra), 22, 75, 132, 178, 182, 
210, 213, 224 

Toganoo, S., 15 

tsa(k)-ka-li, 56, 57, 59 

Tson kha pa, 4-6, 9, 17, 21, 24, 26-29, 32, 
40, 47-49, 51, 57, 58, 67, 68, 79, 81, 87, 
91, 101, 114, 116-118, 145, 147, 149, 
152, 163, 165, 167, 172-174, 177-179, 
181, 183-185, 191, 192, 197-201, 206, 
208, 213-215, 218-220, 228, 231, 233 

Tucci, G., 45, 97, 178, 224, 233 


Uma, 157, 159, 205, 210 

upaya (means), 27, 32, 72, 95, 114, 166, 
172, 174, 178, 180, 182, 195, 199 

urine, 26, 33, 34, 116, 117, 150 

Usnisavijaya, 56, 77, 144 

uvula, 116 


Vag-asrita-dhyana-nàma, 111 

Vahikatika-nama, 51, 152, 155, 160, 200 

vajra, 37, 38, 40, 46, 65, 68, 86, 91, 95, 115, 
132, 172, 211-213 

Vajradäka, 142, 145, 146 

Vajradhara, 12, 37, 52, 53, 120, 122, 172, 
215, 216, 220, 234 

Vajragarbha, 172 

Vajramala, 13-15, 18, 19, 32, 53 

Vajrapada-sara-samgraha-paiijika, 120, 133 

Vajrapaiijarä, 4, 5, 121, 203, 211 

Vajrapanyabhiseka-mahatantra, 49 

Vajrasattva, 37—39, 46, 47, 53, 69, 83, 171, 
172, 192, 203, 204, 210, 224, 234 

Vajrasekhara, 16, 64 

Vajravali, 44, 64 


247 


Vajravarahi (the Diamond 
120 19 ( Sow), 8, 9, 68, 

Vajravarman, 88, 92 

Vajravidärana-näma-dhärani commentar- 
ies, 32, 79 

Vajrayana, 4, 59, 64 

Varähamihira, 23, 152, 184 

Vasubandhu, 99, 217 

vidya (rig ma), 63-65, 91, 118, 142, 193 

Visesadyota, 21, 208 

Vitapäda, 49, 141 

voidness, 4, 22, 55, 64, 73, 111, 127, 176 
182, 183, 193, 196, 198, 199, 202, 203, 
212, 223 

vows, 65, 66 

vrata, 117, 118, 133 


Wayman, A., 14, 16, 87, 98, 207, 213-215 

winds, 15, 32. 48, 52, 73, 99, 131, 137, 146- 
148, 154-163, 173, 177, 179, 188-190, 
192, 200, 208, 218 

women, 6, 38, 67, 76, 107, 120, 165, 168- 
171, 176, 183, 186, 190-198 


yaksas, 36, 141, 184 

Yama, 48, 77, 78, 209, 229 

Ye ses sde, 58 

Yid ches gsum Idan, 87, 145 

Yogäcära, 3, 5, 20 

yogin & yogini, 4, 18, 38, 51, 83, 108, 111, 
116, 118, 121, 126, 132, 139, 141, 142, 
144, 160-163, 165, 181, 183, 191, 192, 
194-200, 207 

Yoginisanıcärya, 122 

Yuddhajaya-nama-tantraraja, 156 

yuganaddha, 48, 99, 129 


= 1 - 


119 


= 


А. 


HAKIM ABU’ L-MAJD 
MAJDUD SANA’i 


This book was written by Sana'i of Ghaz- 
na (1118-1152). He frequented the courts 
of kings and associated with all the intelli- 
gentsia of the time. However, early in his 
life, he rejected this association and turned 
to the philosophy of the Sufis. 


Gurdjieff was enthusiastic about this work. 
In "The Teachers of Gurdjieff by Rafael 
Lefort on page 141, is found: “I remained 
in Peshawar for a month. During that time, 
I read and reread “The Walled Garden of the 
Truth’ by Hakim Sana’i. It was a revelation. 
There it was chapter and verse, the basis of 
Gurdjieff's writings. If I had needed any 
other proof, this was it.” Do not allow 
Walled Garden to confuse you, for it was 
translated, also, as Enclosed Garden. 


Sana’i’s fame rested on this book. It is 
the best known of his works, and is the most 
esteemed in the East. Sana'i was the first to 
compose in this poetic form with religious 
intention. While he did devote a portion of 
this work to the interpretation of dreams, 
the main core of the work is the interpreta- 
tion of the Sufi philosophy regarding prayer 
and the adoration of God. 


Sana’i gives the reader a genuine taste of 
Sufi mysticism. There is great beauty in the 
over-all work. Many passages could easily 
be used as proverbs. 


THEORY AND PRACTICE OF THE MANDALA by Guiseppe Tucci , 


In this book Professor Tucci, one of the world’s leading authorities in this 
field, conducts a survey into the basic doctrines behind the theory and practice 
of the Mandala. He also shows that they have become the symbols of phases 
and forces of the individual and collective psyche. Paperback. $2.50 


THE HEART OF BUDDHIST MEDITATION by Nyanaponika Thera 


This book explains the basic Buddhist practices of meditation, 
plication. of which anyone should be able to develop a state of full mental and 
spiritual awareness. It contains also a full translation, with: explanatory notes, 
of The Greater Discourse on the Foundations -of : Mindfulness (The Maha- 
Satipatthana-Sutta). Paperback. $3.00 


FOUNDATIONS OF TIBETAN MYSTICISM by Lama Anagarika Govinda 


Lama Govinda explains the esoteric principles of Mantra and clarifies the differ- 
ences between Hindu and Tibetan yoga..A member of the Kargyutpa Order, 
he has ‘spent over twenty years of his life at the feet of. masters in Tibetan 
hermitages and monasteries. Paperback. Е $3.75 


Е | 


THE DIVAN-I-Hafiz translated by Lieut.-Col. H. Wilberforce Clarke 

In Persian literature, no work is more deserving of attention than that of 
Hafiz. Aside from its exceptionally literary beauty, this work illustrates the 
manners of a magnificent, intelligent people. In no language are there more 
sublime addresses to the Being of beings than in the Persian. 2 Volumes 


boxed. i $40.00 


THE AWARIFU-L-MA’ARIF trans. by Lieut.-Col. H. Wilberforce Clarke 
Idries Shah in his book, “The Sufis", says without reservation. that this work 
written in the 13th century is of exceptional merit. It points out the outward, 


early stages of attraction into the dervish corpus.-Clarke, himself a dervish, _ 
presents the true dervish to the Western world and -banishes once for all, 
the belief that the dervish was an insane fanat 


ic. __ $10.00 
THE ENCLOSED GARDEN OF THE TRUTH by Sana'i of Ghazna 
Sana'i (A.D. 1118-1152) was one of the great Sufi poets of Persia. This is 


the most esteemed of his works which begins with the subject on the Praise 
of God, and concludes on many subjects including the praise of the Emperor. — 


| $10.00 


SAMUEL WEISER, INC. 
734 Broadway 
New York, N. Y. 10003 


through the ap- Er 


