--- Page 1 ---
Cambridge Studies in Social Anthropology
General Editor: Jack Goody
49
THE BUDDHIST SAINTS OF THE FOREST
AND THE CULT OF AMULETS


--- Page 2 ---
For other titles in this series turn to page 415


--- Page 3 ---
The Buddhist saints of the forest
and the cult of amulets
A STUDY IN CHARISMA, HAGIOGRAPHY, SECTARIANISM,
AND MILLENNIAL BUDDHISM
STANLEY JEYARAJA TAMBIAH
Professor of Anthropology
Harvard University
The right of the
University of Cambridge
to print and sell
all manner of books
was granted by
Henry VIII in 1534.
The University has printed
and published continuously
since 1584.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge
London New York New Rochelle
Melbourne Sydney


--- Page 4 ---
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, Sao Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521259842
© Cambridge University Press 1984
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1984
Re-issued in this digitally printed version 2007
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data
Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja, 1929-
The Buddhist saints of the forest and the cult of amulets.
(Cambridge studies in social anthropology; no. 49)
Includes index.
1. Buddhism - Thailand. 2. Buddhist monks - Thailand.
3. Buddhist cults - Thailand. I. Title. II. Series.
BQ554.T347 1984 294.3'657'09593 
83-15113
ISBN 978-0-521-25984-2 hardback
ISBN 978-0-521-27787-7 paperback


--- Page 5 ---
The wealth kings get from society
Is a transitory thing.
But the ascetics of the forest
Yield us an imperishable tithe from their austerities.
Sakuntala
It is where the talk is of marrying, or of giving in marriage, that reference is made to such
things as that. For whoever, Ambattha, are in bondage to the notions of birth or of lineage,
or to the pride of social position, or of connection by marriage, they are far from the best
wisdom of righteousness. It is only by having got rid of all such bondage that one can
realize for himself that supreme perfection in wisdom and conduct.
Ambattha Sutta
Then the Blessed One spake, and said: "Know, Vasettha, that (from time to time) a
Tathagata is born into the world, a fully Enlightened One, blessed and worthy, abounding
in wisdom and goodness, happy, with knowledge of the world, unsurpassed as a guide to
erring mortals, a teacher of gods and men, a Blessed Buddha. He, by himself, thoroughly
understands, and sees, as it were, face to face this universe - the world below with all its
spirits and, the worlds above, of Mara and Brahma - and all creatures, Samanas and
Brahmans, gods and men, and he then makes his knowledge known to others. The truth
doth he proclaim both in its letter and in its spirit, lovely in its origin, lovely in its
progress, lovely in its continuation: the higher life doth he make known in all its purity and
in all its perfectness."
Tevijja Sutta


--- Page 6 ---


--- Page 7 ---
Contents
Acknowledgments 
page ix
Note on transcription 
xi
1 Introduction and manifesto 
i
Parti
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
2 The Buddhist conception of the arahant 
11
3 The Path of Purification: the ascetic practices 
28
4 The stages and rewards of Buddhist meditation 
38
5 The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia:
a historical backdrop 
53
Part II
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint:
text and context; the politics of sectarianism
6 The biography of a modern saint 
81
7 The Buddha's life as paradigm 
in
8 The ordering principles behind Buddhist saintly biography 
124
9 The disciples of the Master 
132
10 The biographer as exemplary forest-monk, meditator, and teacher 
142
11 Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation 
154
12 The Mahanikai sect's propagation of lay meditation 
168
13 The center-periphery dialectic: the Mahathat and Bovonniwet
sponsorship of meditation compared 
183
vii


--- Page 8 ---
Contents
Part III
The cult of amulets:
the objectification and transmission of charisma
14 The cult of images and amulets 
195
15 An enumeration of historic and popular amulets 
208
16 The "likeness" of the image to the original Buddha:
the case of the Sinhala Buddha 
230
17 The process of sacralizing images and amulets:
the transfer of power by monks 
243
18 Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints 
258
19 Saints on cosmic mountains 
274
Part IV
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
20 A commentary on millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma 
293
21 The sources of charismatic leadership: Max Weber revisited 
321
22 The objectification of charisma and the fetishism of objects 
335
Notes 
348
Index 
395
Vlll


--- Page 9 ---
Acknowledgments
The bulk of the material on which this book is based was collected during field
research conducted in Thailand in 1978-9. The book also contains information
collected on previous field trips, principally in 1971 and 1974.
First and foremost, I must thank the National Science Foundation of the
United States for giving me for the period 1978-81 a generous grant to carry out
a research project entitled "Concepts and Manifestations of Power, Authority,
and Causation in Urban Thailand." The objectives of this research were: to
investigate Thai cultural conceptions concerning' 'power,'' "authority,''' 'merit,''
"charisma," and "causation"; to locate the persons who are credited with these
capacities and propensities (such as monks, politicians, administrators, bus-
inessmen, physicians, healers, mediums, and athletes) and to find out how they
are alleged to have acquired them; and finally to extract the underlying pattern of
ideas in traditional fields of "knowledge" and "practice" in such areas as
medicine, meditation, ritual healing, astrology, and statecraft and to assess how
they fit in contemporary Thailand with modern (Western) ideas and practices.
A rich harvest of information, including written materials, was obtained.
Although the present book makes use of only a portion of it, it has at the same
time engaged me in textual studies and library research in the United States after
my return from Thailand. I hope in future years to report on other aspects of the
researches that have so far not been committed to writing.
I am greatly indebted to my wife, Mary Wynne, who helped me in both field
and library research, and to my field assistants in Thailand, Thanin Vijayangkura,
Somchai Shinatrakool, and Kosol Meekun. Thanin in particular was my indis-
pensable and constant companion in Bangkok on our visits to monasteries,
slums, bazaars, government offices, schools of traditional medicine, cult centers
and shrines, meditation hermitages, and the consulting rooms of astrologers.
As usual, many of my Thai friends known from past visits gave me their time
and cooperation. Let me mention just a few: Dr. Chancha Suvannathat, Director
of the Behavioral Science Research Institute at Sri Nakharinwirot University, for
ix


--- Page 10 ---
Acknowledgments
giving me office space and other facilities and help in recruiting assistants; the
late Tahwon Koedkietpong, who did some translations for me from Thai into
English; Sumitr Pitiphat, whose generosity, knowledge, hospitality, and friendship
were enjoyed by all the members of my family; Sathienpong Wannapok, an old
friend, who some years ago accompanied me to North and Northeast Thailand
and instructed me; and, finally, Sulak Srivarak, Somdet Phra Rajavaramuni, and
Dr. Akin Rabibhadana.
The analysis and writing of this book have taken some four years, and 1 am
grateful to the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation for awarding me a
fellowship that freed me from teaching duties in the spring term of 1982 and
thereby enabled me to complete this book. I thank Professor Karl Lamberg-
Karlovsky, Director of the Peabody Museum at Harvard, for bearing the costs of
photographs and figures prepared by his staff. I also thank many secretaries in the
Department of Anthropology at Harvard for patiently decoding my scrawl and
typing the manuscript, especially Carol Kouffman, Donia Carey, Beryl Noble,
and Jane Trahan.
It is with great pleasure that I acknowledge the expert editorial assistance given
by Dan Rosenberg and Alan Trevithick; the critical linguistic assistance given by
Michael Rhum, who standardized the transcription of words in Sanskrit, Pali,
and Thai; and the translation of certain pieces of writing from French into
English by Debbie Tooker.
I owe a large debt to Professor C. F Keyes, who gave a close reading to my first
draft and offered many useful suggestions for its improvement.
While admitting to the benefits I have received from these scholars, I must
also relieve them of any blame for errors of fact and interpretation contained
in this book.
I thank my family - Mary Wynne, Jonathan, and Matthew - for tolerating my
seclusions and absences while working on this book.
The Thai people regularly perform a rite called waj khru (paying respect to
one's teacher). On this occasion, I should like to acknowledge all that I owe to my
first teacher in Sri Lanka, Professor Bryce Ryan, who subsequently also taught
me at Cornell University. In the early fifties Professor Ryan introduced the
disciplines of sociology and anthropology to the University of Ceylon and taught
me (and several others) in a "deracinated" condition that the study of one's own
people and traditions in the villages of Asia is a most absorbing voyage of
discovery. I dedicate this book to him as my teacher, friend, and sponsor.


--- Page 11 ---
Note on transcription
In this book, Pali and Sanskrit terms are romanized according to the generally
accepted system. Thai terms are romanized according to a system based on the
"general system" published by the Siam Society in its Journal of July 1935
(Vol. 28, pt. 1). The main modifications are: the use of au for g (except for gi,
which is written oi, and in certain place names, such as Nakhon for Nakhaun);
the use of ue for u'; and the use of the macron to indicate long vowels. Due to the
exigencies of typesetting, long vowels written as digraphs have two macrons as
follows: du, ue, de, and de. Efforts have been made to keep spelling as consistent
as possible, but the spelling of place and personal names does not always
conform to this system due to the vagaries of the printed sources used. The
spelling of personal names, of course, follows the individual's preference wher-
ever known.
XI


--- Page 12 ---


--- Page 13 ---
Introduction and manifesto
Although it stands by itself and is an autonomous whole, this book should also be
regarded as complementary to my previous effort, World Conqueror and World
Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand against a Historical
Background.l At various points it intersects with themes and issues developed in
the earlier one: These intersections are indicated in footnotes. Together this book
and its predecessor should fuse into a larger cumulative whole.
World Conqueror and World Renouncer was essentially a discussion of the
dialectical relations between the Buddhist sahgha (order of monks) and the Thai
polity, whose apex was kingship, during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
The Thai polity was a member of the larger family of Theravada Buddhist polities
of South and Southeast Asia. These polities shared certain presuppositions and
values regarding their constitution, of which the most prominent was a symbiosis
and mutuality between the sahgha as an order of monks dedicated to the vocation
of liberation and the king as a righteous ruler whose obligation was to protect and
secure the religion of the Buddha as the special treasure of his people. The
importance of this overarching principle that characterized these Buddhist polities
prompted me to outline in the first part of World Conqueror and World Re-
nouncer, so as to serve as a doctrinal and historical backdrop, the normative
ideas developed and/or embedded in early Buddhism concerning kingship,
society, and polity, the relations between the bhikkhu (monk) and laity, and the
constitution of monastic communities and their relations to the larger socio-
political context. By ' 'early Buddhism" I did not mean Buddhism at its very
beginning or during the life of Buddha - even the experts know too little about
this time of origins - but Buddhism as it had crystallized by the time the Pali
canon - or at least most of it - had been composed.
Early Buddhism as demarcated by Max Weber was roughly the time immedi-
ately anterior to the reign of Emperor Asoka, and I am happy to accept this
periodization. My reading of the canonical texts of early Buddhism convinced
me that, although most of them have to do with the monk's vocation (as one


--- Page 14 ---
Introduction and manifesto
would expect of a literature composed by monks primarily for monks), yet they
contained seminal and fateful value statements and characterizations of ideal
Buddhist kingship, and of the relation between kingship and Dhamma (morality/
duty) and the social order, in contradistinction to the Brahmanical theory of
society and kingship; the relation between Dhamma and artha (instrumental
politico-economic action); and the relation between brahman and ksatriya ruler.
These embryonic but germinal ideas were realized in the Asokan era and came to
fruition at that time. Asoka was by no means a historical accident or the agent
who for the first time gave a political dimension to Buddhism, as was postulated
by Weber. Moreover, in the eyes of Buddhists over the centuries, ever since the
Asokan era, a certain ideological mold regarding kingship and sahgha, religion
and polity, had set and acted as a persisting and perduring influence on the Buddhist
polities of South and Southeast Asia. The theme of continuities and transfor-
mations, investigated from a classical point of reference and departure in early
Buddhism, as stated above, seemed to be a meaningful way to study the
trajectory of Southeast Asian Buddhist kingdoms, their tensions, and their
dynamics.
The patterns I established in World Conqueror and World Renouncer with
regard to the relations between sahgha and polity were incomplete in one respect.
There, I mostly dealt with the collaborations and ruptures between the king and
that part of the sahgha which we may in shorthand call the official monastic
establishment; that is, the town-and-village-dwelling monastic communities inso-
far as they became a part of a looser or tighter ecclesiastical hierarchy, whose
leaders were concentrated in the political capitals and who by and large but-
tressed and legitimated kingship. Phases of "purification" and "revival" of
religion, as well as of "decline" of the ordination "lineages" of monks, were
treated as part of the dialectical relations between king and political authority, on
the one side, and the sahgha, internally subdivided on sectarian lines, on the
other.
The incompleteness of this story consists in not highlighting or focusing on a
number of polarities: between town-and-village-dwelling monks and forest-
dwelling monks; between the vocation of scholarship and books and that of
meditation; and between a (more) ascetic and reclusive mode of life and a (more)
active laity-oriented life, which tended in various combinations to divide, if not
bifurcate, the sahgha. Throughout the history of the Buddhist polities of Sri
Lanka, Burma, and Thailand, one grand division of the sahgha - that between
monastic fraternities and/or communities labeled as forest dwellers on the one
hand and as town/village dwellers on the other hand - has persisted and has
affected the pattern and the course of the relations between polity and sahgha. In
fact, the relation between polity and sahgha could be construed as having been
triadic - one side being the dynamic relation between king and the "establish-
ment" sahgha, the second side being the relation between the king and the
"forest-dwelling" monastic communities, and the third side being the internal


--- Page 15 ---
Introduction and manifesto
dialogue between the town-dwelling and forest-dwelling emphases within the
sahgha itself, with their attendant consequences such as disputes about the
correct disciplinary rules, the espousal of ascetic practices, the degree of dedica-
tion to meditation as opposed to scholarship, and so on. The relation between
political authority and the internally segmented sahgha could thus be profitably
regarded as a center-periphery dialectic exhibiting a variety of pulsations and
oscillations.
As a social anthropologist whose main fieldwork in Thailand was focused on
contemporary Thai society, what caught my attention in the early and late
seventies, and became the starting point for the investigation that developed into
this book, was the great veneration that many Thai in Bangkok - of different
social status and educational levels, both high and low, male and female, affluent
and poor, powerful and weak - had for a certain number of famous forest monks,
recently dead or living, who were acclaimed as saints (arahants). They were
meditation masters credited with extraordinary wisdom, love, and charismatic
powers. These saints, who had lived and worked in humble circumstances on the
periphery of Thai society and territory, received the adulation and prostrations of
the urbanites of the country's capital, which was the hub of the Thai polity and
society and the central arena where power and wealth were won and lost.
Concurrently with the acclamation of the saints, I noted two other enthusiasms
that were at first sight difficult to reconcile: an increased participation by the laity
in Buddhist meditation, a pursuit traditionally relegated to monks, and an
intensification of the cult of amulets, a traditional preoccupation now reaching
the pitch of fetishistic obsession among those same fevered urbanites. The
amulets held in the highest esteem and to which were attributed the greatest
efficacy were - apart from certain famous antique and vintage rarities - those
blessed by the famous forest saints of modern times. Both the saints and the
amulets were common subjects in the popular Thai literature of magazines,
books, and newspapers.
In the course of tracing the connections between the charisma and the hagiogra-
phy of present-day saints, the increasing lay interest in meditation, and the
classification and efficacy of amulets, I have branched out in many directions. As
in my previous book, one of the paths, or rather a grand highway, on which I
travel is both doctrinal and historical. The path of the arahant, his vocation and
his discipline, his efforts and the fruits of his achievements, are the subject of
course of much canonical and commentarial literature. Buddhaghosa's Visud-
dhimagga (the path of purification), composed around the fifth century A.D.,
serves as a landmark and a beacon of illumination. Furthermore, since Sri Lanka,
Burma, and Thailand have had a long tradition of forest-monk communities, I
situate my description of present-day Thai forest monks in a broader historical
landscape. The historical portions are not so much concerned with telling a
chronological story as with discovering certain structural patterns and tendencies
that crystallize in various circumstances and social contexts.


--- Page 16 ---
Introduction and manifesto
The book is divided into four parts. Part I sketches the classical Buddhist
doctrinal concepts of the arahant, his path of purification, and his position in a
Buddhist hierarchy of beings. It also provides some idea of the known historical
accounts of the forest-monk traditions in Sri Lanka, Burma, and Thailand, and
extracts from them some ideas to guide the subsequent treatment of Thai
phenomena.
Part II, the central portion of the book, deals with the line of famous Thai
forest monks in recent times: their biographies; the hermitages they have founded;
and the pattern of relations between the meditation master and his ordained
disciples, and between the master, as saint or holy man, and the laity. These
substantive issues are approached by probing Buddhist hagiography.
One of the most famous forest saints of Thailand, Acharn Mun, is the subject
of a well-known biography by one of his disciples, Acharn Maha Boowa. I
present a summary of this biography and discuss it as a masterly exercise in
Buddhist hagiography. My exegesis of the multiple implications and facets of this
piece of hagiography is guided by the view that to do justice to the task a
simultaneous study had to be undertaken of the saint and his life as the subject of
the biography and of the biographer himself as disciple and as the author of a
work, whose shape was influenced by the larger sectarian circumstances in which
he found himself and by the propagandist objective which impelled his writing.
The analysis of the dialectic between biography and biographer is at the same
time a grappling with the relation between text and context and the weaving of
a single totality of meaning.
I have employed the notion of indexical symbol to tackle the study of text and
context, semantics and pragmatics, meaning that refers back to classical con-
structs and forward to uses in the present. The concept of indexical symbol was
first proposed by Burks, who derived it by combining two of the terms in Charles
Peirce's threefold classification of signs (symbol, icon, and index). Jakobson
labeled the same concept shifter, following Jespersen.2 The main point about
indexical symbols or shifters is that they have a duplex structure, because they
combine two roles - they are symbols that are associated with the represented
object by a conventional semantic rule, and they are simultaneously also indexes
in existential, pragmatic relation to the objects they represent. The dual meanings
point in two directions at once - in the semantic direction of cultural presupposi-
tions and conventional understandings and in the pragmatic direction of the
social and interpersonal context of action, the line-up of the participants and the
processes by which they establish or infer meanings.
Let me illustrate the way in which I have used the notion of indexical symbol
with regard to the biography of a modern saint, Acharn Mun, as a text. The
traditional accounts of the lives of Buddha himself, and of other famous Buddhist
saints, have as models to some degree influenced the actual life of our Thai saint
as well as the retrospective account of his disciple. At this level of exegesis, a


--- Page 17 ---
Introduction and manifesto
passing glance at the conventions of the Christian hagiography of medieval saints
is also informative.
The scrutiny of present-day pragmatics and indexical uses to which hagi-
ographies are put takes me into the sectarian affiliations of the biographer (and
his teacher, the saint) and into the sectarian rivalries and differences between
Thailand's two major monastic sects, the Thammayut and Mahanikai, the dis-
tinct styles of meditation they sponsored, and their patrons and political connec-
tions in the capital. In other words, this pathway of interpretation takes us into the
interplay of religion and politics within which the biography has a place.
Moreover, the scrutiny of sectarianism in its manifold aspects allows us to
see how the seemingly antithetical interests of the laity in practicing medi-
tation and in possessing amulets become reconcilable, if not actually congruent,
activities.
In sum, I have employed the notion of indexical symbol to comprehend
synbolic and semantic meanings, on the one hand, and indexical, existential, and
pragmatic meanings on the other hand, as riding on the same form and melding
into an amalgam.
Part III of the book is concerned with the cult of amulets and the objectifica-
tion and transmission of charisma. Sacralized amulets in the form of small
images of the Buddha or famous saints, or of medallions struck with the faces
and busts of the same, and amulets of other shapes and representations, are an
old phenomenon in Thailand. There are classical and medieval classifications
and systems of names for this fecund variety of sacred objects - relics, statues,
images, stupa monuments, etc. - and complex explanations of their roles and
uses. These explanations range from their pious consideration as "reminders" to
their awed treatment as sacra radiating fiery energy and protective or fertilizing
powers. In fact, one finds on pursuing this question that the beliefs and attitudes
surrounding amulets are virtually of the same kind as those surrounding famous
Buddha statues. I have therefore been tempted to devote one chapter to the myths
of origin and the travels of two famous Buddha images - the Sinhala Buddha and
the Emerald Buddha Jewel - which are credited with supranormal powers and
which have acted as the palladia of several kingdoms and principalities in
Thailand and Laos. In the course of such forays, I hope I have contributed
something to answering the puzzling question: What is the orientation of Bud-
dhists to Buddha images, relics, and other sacra? In any case, the answer has to be
more complex than the simpleminded proposition that the Buddhists "cog-
nitively'' know that the Buddha does not exist but "affectively'' feel his presence.
And, once again, treating these objects as indexical symbols and indexical
icons3 enables us to appreciate their semantic and pragmatic meanings and
values as an amalgam.
I present a certain amount of ethnography on the manufacture of amulets, the
rituals of sacralization they undergo, and the methods by which their powers are


--- Page 18 ---
Introduction and manifesto
activated. These preliminaries bring us to the role of modern Thai saints, forest
monks, and meditation masters in the sacralization of amulets and to the uses to
which the lay sponsors and possessors of these amulets put them in the life-
affirming activities of this world - in the manipulations of politics, commerce,
and love, and in the pursuit of both altruistic and selfish goals.
Part IV is devoted to conceptual and theoretical clarifications on the basis of
preceding substantive accounts. The first issue is millennial Buddhism, to which
we are led by considering the cosmographic and cultic features of the hermitages
of some contemporary meditation masters that are spectacularly lodged on the
slopes and crests of cosmic mountains and by charting the pilgrim's progress to
such a hermitage. The esoteric, cultic, and mystical features of these hermitages
composed of circles of disciples and lay devotees show unmistakable similarities
to esoteric and "messianic" associations in Burma, and they all raise the
question of the possible link between them and the militant and violent millennial
insurrections that have been recorded as sporadically exploding in Burma and
Thailand during the past couple of centuries.
The facts pertaining to the cult of the amulets, and to the role of Buddhist holy
men in the conferment of potency on them, also lead along a second path, this
time to general anthropological and sociological theory. The Weberian concep-
tion of "charisma'' as a gift of grace, as a form of authority that was spontaneous
and resistant toward discipline and regulation, does not square at all with the
supranormal powers and "charisma" of the Buddhist saints achieved without
divine intervention by the undergoing of an ascetic and contemplative regime.
This confrontation leads me to propose a typology of charisma that takes into
account the proposals of Shils and Eisenstadt.
Penetrating as was his treatment of charisma as an interpersonal phenomenon,
Weber was blind to the transfer of charisma to objects, and the sedimentation of
power in objects, which mediated social relationships. This was probably be-
cause he would have seen amulets, sacra, regalia, and relics as belonging to the
"magical religion" of the masses, a fare for which he had no stomach. The
question of objectification of charisma or the sedimentation of powers in amulets
is more rewardingly treated within the scope of the Maussian theory of the gift
and the Marxian conception of the fetishism of commodities. It is hoped that the
attempts to place the cult of amulets within the general scope of the fetishism of
objects, and the Buddhist conception of the saints' acquisition of special powers
within the general scope of theory of charisma, are examples of a fruitful traffic
between Indology and anthropology. The Indology consists in viewing these
phenomena in their particularity, clothed in their distinctive linguistic and cultural
dress, and situated in a long civilizational tradition; the anthropology consists in
taking the next step of bringing these phenomena, discerned in their own cultural
and historical terms, within the scope of a more general and comparative
sociological apperception.


--- Page 19 ---
Introduction and manifesto
The book aspires to illustrate several passages - from history to anthropology,
from text to context, and from Indology to anthropology. And the author nails to
his mast this statement on perspective: I have in my previous writings and in this
book as well been influenced by the view that to confine the study of "religion"
to the doctrinal beliefs and philosophical constructs is, as Wilfred Cantwell Smith4
has argued, an unfortunate rationalist Enlightenment legacy that both unduly
narrows and pauperizes the phenomenon. For me, Buddhism is a shorthand
expression for a total social phenomenon, civilizational in breadth and depth,
which encompasses the lives of Buddhist monks and laymen, and which cannot
be disaggregated in a facile way into its religious, political, and economic realms
as these are currently understood in the West. I am mindful and influenced in this
respect by the views of Louis Dumont on Indian society as a hierarchical totality.
I have found that those who espouse the narrow-minded view of religion, as
stated above, also frequently have a linear view of the development of Buddhism,
from a pure, pristine, philosophical, salvation-search-oriented beginning, un-
stained and unsullied by the character and concerns of the social milieu in which
it arose, to the later states of ever-widening popularization and vulgarization and
deviation from the initial purity, in which are at play all the human passions and
this-worldly concerns of the masses. This posture can be baptized as "the Pali
Text Society mentality" - although there are extraordinary individuals who be-
longed to this society who did not merit this opprobrium - which is not only
portrayed by some Western scholars of a puritanical bent but also by some Sri
Lankan scholars who have not emancipated themselves from the presuppositions
of that "reformist Buddhism" inspired and propagandized by Theosophists with
such vintage names as Olcott and Blavatsky and imbibed by the rising middle
classes of the southwestern littoral of Sri Lanka.
The proponents of the elitist thesis of the vulgarization of high religious tenets
by the masses in whom dark passions of the id surge in an anti-Buddhist rage
come in various guises - but the worst are those who propose a historical thesis
without practicing history. Unsullied Buddhist principles were formulated in
early Buddhism in India; then, after an imaginary leap in time and space, we see
distortions and deviations in popular religiosity in Burma or some such outlying
region.
In my previous writings, and again in this book, I have tried to demonstrate
that the philosophical abstractions of the canonical suttas and the elite scholar
monks are often reiterated by the patterns of ideas embedded in myths and
popular rites; that even the early Buddhism of the Pali canon and of classical
commentary cannot be fully understood unless we see it as an interwoven tapestry
of biographical, philosophical, mythological, and cosmological strands, so mas-
terfully revealed by Paul Mus and his associates; and that if there was develop-
ment in Buddhism over time it was informed by both continuities and transforma-
tions, the latter being not merely the gross handiwork of the masses but wrought


--- Page 20 ---
Introduction and manifesto
by all parties, elite monks and ordinary monks, kings and court circles, urban
merchants and traders, and peasant farmers and artisans, all responsive to their
existential conditions and aspirations.
I am in sympathy with the indictment by Peter Brown (in his recent The Cult of
the Saints)5 of what he calls the ' 'two-tiered" model of modern scholarship on
the religious and ecclesiastical history of late antiquity and the early Middle
Ages:
The views of the potentially enlightened few are thought of as being subject to continuous
upward pressure from habitual ways of thinking current among "the vulgar" . . . When
applied to the nature of religious change in late antiquity the "two-tiered" model
encourages the historian to assume that a change in the piety of late-antique men, of the
kind associated with the rise of the cult of saints, must have been the result of the
capitulation by the enlightened elites of the Christian church to modes of thought
previously current only among the "vulgar." The result has been a tendency to explain
much of the cultural and religious history of the late antiquity in terms of drastic landslips
in the relation between the elites and the masses . . . Applied in this manner, the
"two-tiered" model appears to have invented more dramatic turning points in the history
of the early church than it has ever explained.


--- Page 21 ---
PART I
THE ARAHANT AND THE PATH OF MEDITATION


--- Page 22 ---


--- Page 23 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
The arhat (Skt) or arahant (Pali) has been glossed in several ways: literally
4'able, worthy," a person who has reached the goal;1 "worthy of worship";2
"one who is entirely free from all evil desire";3 "the perfected saint";4 "saint
worthy of the respect of all";5 and so on.
It is part of the received wisdom that pristine Buddhism, possibly a Ksatriya-
sponsored protest against Brahmanical claims of superiority on the basis of
divinely ordained birth status and ritual functions, and against Brahmanical
purity preoccupations in social intercourse, declared that one is a brdhmana by
birth, and allowed open recruitment to the order of bhikkhus from all ranks and
varna status orders.
Though this pristine Buddhism repudiated the Brahmanical assignment of
differently evaluated Dhammas (moralities) and vocations for the hierarchized
status orders and proclaimed a single liberation quest for all human beings, it
nevertheless accepted an inequality of spiritual achievement among human beings
and their consequent ranking on the basis of karmic action in past lives and in the
present.
On this ladder of achievement, the perfected saints are not only placed at the
top but minutely differentiated from one another according to their merits. An apt
example is "the jewel discourse" (Ratanasuttam) of the Khuddakapdtha, a
Theravada canonical text.6 For the most part employing binary categories that are
asymmetrically evaluated, it proceeds from the inferior to the higher mode of
existence, at each level the superior category being the ground for the distinction
at the next level. The discourse takes the seven jewels or treasures (ratanam) of
the cakkavatti (universal ruler), as enumerated in the Mahdsuddassana Sutta, as a
point of departure in order to generate its own hierarchical scheme in which lay
persons and renouncers of different achievements and attributes are placed.7
The jewel, we are told, is twofold - that "with consciousness and without
consciousness." The wheel and gem jewels, gold and silver and so on, are of the
II


--- Page 24 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
second kind: "not bound up with faculties." That endowed with consciousness is
a continuum "beginning with the elephant-jewel and ending with the counsellor-
jewel." [The divide here is between animals (tiracchana) and human beings
(manussa).] Of the two, the jewel with consciousness is counted foremost,
because those without consciousness are used for the decoration of those with
consciousness.
Human beings are twofold, consisting of the woman (itthi) and the man
(purisa). And man is accounted foremost "because the woman jewel performs
service for the man jewel." The man jewel in turn divides into the house-dwelling
(agdrika) and homeless (anagdrika) types, and the homeless is accounted
foremost because "although a wheel turning monarch is the foremost of the
house-living jewels, nevertheless by his paying homage . . . to the homeless
jewel, and by his waiting on him and reverencing him he eventually reaches
heavenly and human excellence till in the end he reaches the excellence of
extinction."
The homeless jewel divides into the ordinary man (puthujjana) and the noble
one (ariya), and then later again into the initiate who is in need of further
instruction (sekkha) and the adept who does not (asekha, i.e., the arahant). An
adept is also twofold as the "bare-insight-worker" and the "one whose vehicle is
quiet." The latter also differentiates into one who has reached "the disciple's
perfection" and possesses pure insight and one who has not. Among the perfected
disciples, the "hermit enlightened one" (paccekabuddha) is accounted super-
ior, but it is "the fully enlightened Buddha" (sammdsambuddha) who is
accounted the foremost. "Thus no jewel is ever the equal of a Perfect One in
any way at all."
Another text, the Niddesa (I. Mahdniddesa and II. Cullaniddesa) provides a
list of six ranked munis: the muni who remains in the house (dgdramuni), the
muni who has left the house (andgdramuni), the muni who needs further
instruction (sekhamuni), the muni who does not (dsekhamuni), the paccekamuni,
and the munimuni. The muni who does not need further instruction is equated
with the arahant, the paccekamuni with the paccekabuddha, and the munimuni
with the sammdsambuddha}
That the Jewel Discourse's ranking was not merely academic is attested to by
the great Sinhala chronicle, the Mahdvamsa, which states that at the consecration
of the Lohapasada (the Brazen Palace) in Anuradhapura those bhikkhus who were
"simple folk" (puthujjana) stood on the first story of the building; the "Masters
of the Tipitaka" (the canon) on the second; those who attained to the first three
stages of salvation on the third, fourth, and fifth; and the arahants on the highest
story.9
The Majjhima Nikdya attributes to the Buddha a discourse in which he gives a
descending scale according to the levels of achievement along the path of
salvation and corresponding rebirth chances of several categories of monks, with
12


--- Page 25 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
a concluding allusion to the laymen's reward of being born in heaven.10 The
highest are "those monks who are perfected ones, the cankers destroyed . . .
who are freed by perfect knowledge - the track of these cannot be discerned."11
Next are "those monks in whom the five fetters binding the lower (shore) are got
rid of . . . they are attainers of utter nibbdna, not liable to return to this world."
They are followed by "those monks in whom the three fetters are got rid of, in
whom attachment, aversion and confusion are reduced, all these are once-
returners who, having come back to this world once will make an end of
anguish." The fourth category are monks "in whom the three fetters are got rid
of, all these are stream-attainers . . . " The lowest are "those monks who are
striving for the dhamma, striving for faith and bound for awakening." Finally,
" . . . all those who have enough faith in me, enough affection, are bound as
though for heaven."
The Questions of King Milinda, written in Northern India at the beginning of
the Christian Era,12 has been described by Rhys Davids as "a book of standard
authority" which "occupies a unique position, second only to the Pali Pitakas
(and perhaps also to the celebrated work of Buddhaghosa, the 'Path of Purity')."
Buddhaghosa, the doyen of Buddhist commentators, mentions the book and cites
it as an authority no less than four times in his commentaries. It is therefore
interesting that this book, whose aim is clearly didactic, whose popularity and
influence are still evident in the Buddhist countries of Southeast Asia, whose
coverage of issues is wide ranging, should have devoted a fair amount of attention
to the characteristics and achievements of the arahant.
It enumerates "seven classes of minds" to illustrate the differential achieve-
ments of those engaged in the salvation quest. In an ascending series, the first
class is composed of minds untrained in the management of the body or of
conduct or of thought. These minds are slow-witted and act slowly because of the
"intricate entanglements of wrong dispositions." Each mind is like the slow and
heavy movements of a giant bamboo with its overgrown and interlaced vegetation
and entangled branches.
The second class consists of those who have attained to right views and have
grasped the doctrine of the Master. They are known as sotdpanno, the stream-
enterers, whose thinking powers have surmounted the three lower stages and/or
fetters of delusion, self-doubt, and dependence on rites and ceremonies and
outward morality. Each mind is like the movement of a giant bamboo that has a
"clean trunk as far as the third knot, but above that has its branches intricately
entangled."
The third class is composed of the sakaddgdmins, the disciples who will return
only once to this world, and then attain arahantship before passing away. In these
disciples lust, ill-will, and delusion are reduced to a minimum; their minds are
like a giant bamboo that has a clean trunk as far as the fifth knot.
Next come the andgdmins, those who will not return again to this world but


--- Page 26 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
will attain arahantship in heaven. They have gotten rid of the five lower fetters
and their minds are brought quickly into play with regard to the ten stages; their
minds are like a giant bamboo that has a clean trunk as far as the tenth knot.
From these the fifth class is to be distinguished. It is composed of arahants
whose stains have been washed away, in whom the four great evils of lust,
becoming, delusion, and ignorance have ceased, whose craving for future lives
has been broken to pieces, who have reached the higher insight (pattapatisam-
bhidd), and whose hearts are purified. An arahanfs mind is like the movement of
a giant bamboo "which has been pruned of the branches arising out of all its
knots" and whose smooth trunk is no more encumbered "with the jungly growth
of vegetation."
The sixth class is composed of paccekabuddhas, who are Buddhas for
themselves alone, "dependent on themselves alone, wanting no teacher, dwellers
alone like the solitary horn of the rhinoceros, who so far as their own higher life
is concerned, have pure hearts free from stain." But these heroes are like crossers
of shallow brooks who stand hesitant and afraid in front of a mighty ocean, deep
and wide and ever-moving.
The immensity of the ocean is the image of the complete Buddhas (sammdsam-
buddha), whose minds are purified in every respect, whose mastery of knowledge
and insight knows no limit, and from whose well-burnished, dartlike minds
nothing is hid. And it is through reflection that the inexhaustible knowledge of
the Tathagata is exercised in relation to any task that presents itself.
It can be said that The Questions suggests that since the attainment of complete
buddhahood is exceptional, and that of paccekabuddhahood rare, it is the
arahant who is held up as the exemplary model for the Buddhist converts to
renunciation. In Part II, The Questions continues further its characterization of
the arahant, by first comparing the arahanfs condition with that of the lay
householder, and then reminding us that the saint is nevertheless human in some
of his frailties.
Although a layman, enjoying the pleasures of sense and dwelling with his
family, can reach the excellent condition of arahantship, yet it is "the recluse
who is the lord and master of the fruit of renunciation'' and who can accomplish
his aim without delay because he is "content with little, joyful in heart, detached
from the world, apart from society, earnest in zest, without a home, without a
dwelling place, righteous in conduct, in action without guide, skilled in duty and
in the achievements . . . " (pp. 57-9).
Moreover, a layman entering the condition of arahantship is subject to two
conditions: "either that very day he enters the Order, or he dies away, far beyond
that day he cannot last." When King Milinda then asks what is to become of a
layman who could not on that day find a teacher or preceptor to ordain him,
Nagasena replies in a vein which subtly declares the improbability of the
layman's achievement: Since no one can ordain himself as a member of the
sahgha, the layman must die just as nourishing food will nevertheless "through
14


--- Page 27 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
indigestion, take away the life of one whose stomach is unequal to it" (pp.
96-7).
Indeed, still later in the exposition, Nagasena states unequivocally that there is
no realization of arahantship in one single life without a previous keeping of the
bhikkhu's vows and that "only on the utmost zeal and the most devout practice of
righteousness, and with the aid of a suitable teacher, is the realization of
Arahatship attained" (p. 254).
Extraordinary and disciplined adepts they may be, yet arahants are subject to
all too human limitations and foibles. They suffer from bodily pain but not from
mental. They have no mastery over ten qualities that inhere in the body and
accompany it from existence to existence: "cold and heat, hunger and thirst, the
necessity of voiding excreta, fatigue and sleepiness, old age, disease and death."
Nevertheless, the arahant is master of mental pain: The mind of the arahant is
"well practised, tame, brought into subjection. . . . When affected with feelings
of pain, he grasps firmly the idea of the impermanence of all things," and ties his
mind "to the post of contemplation."
Again, an arahant may be guilty of offenses pertaining to disciplinary rules of
the Order - such as not fully observing the required etiquette in his dealings with
women, imagining the wrong time for the midday meal to be the right time,
forgetting to fulfill an invitation he has accepted, mistaking food that has not
been left over for leftover food, constructing his cell according to the wrong
dimensions - but the arahant does not breach "the ordinary moral law"; he does
not commit the ten modes of evil action such as "killing, theft, unchastity, lying,
slander, harsh language, frivolous talk, covetousness, malice and false doctrine."
As with the heroes of other complex religions, and perhaps precisely because
he receives such stress in Theravada Buddhism, the arahant as a perfected monk
does not present a transparently clear or consistent image. The archetypal
examples of the arahant ideal are of course the immediate disciples of the
Buddha. They exemplify the theme so strongly stressed in the canonical texts:
that their virtues are the result of a disciplined quest by men and women who
depended on their human faculties alone. But these same early texts also intimate
that the salvation quest could be practiced, and the grasp of the knowledge of
salvation could be achieved, in more than one rigidly charted way.
Tradition has it that three disciples of the Buddha had specialized in different
aspects of the doctrine and made different contributions to the codification of the
scriptures at the First Council: Ananda recited the Suttas (sermons or discourses),
Upali the Vinaya (monastic disciplinary rules), and Sariputta the Abhidhamma
(classical philosophy and commentary). But, for our purposes, a better example
is provided by two famous pupils of the Buddha who are coupled from the very
beginning, are referred to as the right-hand and left-hand disciples of the Buddha,
and are so presented in statuary, murals, and bas-reliefs standing on either side of
the Master. They were companion seekers of truth as young Brahmins, and
together approached the Buddha to solicit ordination.13 Moggallana, the left-hand
15


--- Page 28 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
disciple, became famous for his intense immersion in meditation and for perfecting
mystic powers (iddhi), which accrue from its practice. Pictures and murals of his
feats using supranormal powers for defending the Buddhist faith are frequently
found. Sariputta, the right-hand disciple, is celebrated for his wisdom and mastery
of the abhidhamma commentaries. We note that, though paired, the preferred
valuation, represented by the right hand, is accorded to the man of knowledge.
Nevertheless, it is perhaps even more significant that the right- and left-hand
traditions stemming from the same Master and divided between those two famous
disciples crystallize into two vocations open to monks in institutionalized
Buddhism: the vocation of books (ganthadhura) and the vocation of meditation
(vipassanddhum), the concentration on "learning" (pariyatti) and the concentra-
tion on "practice" (pratipatti, patipatti).
But this duality tends to evoke another celebrated differentiation between the
village dwellers (gdmavdsin) and the forest dwellers (dranhavdsiri). Forest
dwelling emphasizes living apart from society and having minimal transactions
with laity, while village/town dwelling implies regular interaction, as for instance
ensues from teaching laymen the doctrine, performing rites for them, and
providing a "field of merit" (punhakkhetta) in which laymen may cultivate
merit.14 These two tendencies are associated with two other close disciples of the
Buddha - Ananda, who is linked with a more "worldly" stance, and Revata, the
younger brother of Sariputta, who evoked admiration on account of his hermit's
existence.
But this distinction again carries further connotations whereby forest dwelling
tends to be identified with the practice of meditation and also sometimes with the
adoption of certain ascetic practices (dhutahga). Hence the coining of another
pair of labels, the ascetics (pamsukulikd) versus the preachers (dhammakathikd).
As one recent writer has put it, all the first terms in the dichotomies presented
designate "the domesticated Sangha: preachers, village-dwellers, and literary
specialists," while the latter terms tend to define "a cluster associated with
reform: disciplinary fundamentalism, living apart from society, and meditation.''15
There is, finally, another contrast that fits into this context of discussion - stress
on monastic leadership only by seniority versus stress on the claims of charisma.
This contrast is represented on the one hand by Kautanya, the first disciple
converted by the Buddha, and Mahakassapa (Maha Kasyapa) who, though
lacking in seniority, was elected patriarch of the Order at the First Council.
Ferguson perceptively concludes that: "All these opposing roles reflect real
sociological dimensions and strains within the modern monkhood, and thus the
arahats can be seen as important symbols of rival but equally orthodox paths to
Theravada Buddhist ends."16 I may add that such stresses and strains also
characterize Northern Buddhism in contrast to Southern: For example, the
Asokdvaddna makes quite clear that while the Northern branch of Kashmir and
Northwest India held Ananda, the dispenser of loving-kindness (mettd) to be
their patriarch, the Southern Indian branch upheld the claims of Kasyapa, who
16


--- Page 29 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
exemplified strict adherence to the Vinaya disciplinary rules. It is congruent
therefore that Mahayana Buddhism elaborated the ideal of bodhisattva and
Theravada the ideal of the arahant.
Kasyapa emerges as an exceptional monk who combined two salient values
and emphases that lesser monks would find difficult.17 He is pictured as both a
recluse who kept aloof from the congregations of monks and a watchdog of the
community's discipline who remonstrated with offenders. He was a forest dweller
who was elected convener of the First Council and codifier of the Dhamma after
the Buddha's death. He is honored in the Pali tradition as the foremost among
those who observed the ascetic acts of purification (dhutahga), and it is said that
he habitually vowed to observe all thirteen dhutahga concurrently. The Buddha
honored him by exchanging robes with him. He is said to have possessed the
seven physical marks of a Great Man (mahd-purusd), and he has been immortal-
ized by the mission allotted to him, of awaiting the advent of Maitreya Buddha in
order to hand over the robe of Gautama Buddha.
Now the central figure in this book is a contemporary bhikkhu who manifests
some of the problematic features in the profiles of Kasyapa and Moggallana,
features that might be seen by historical institutionalized religious interests as
difficult to manage and regulate. He is that type of bhikkhu who is a forest
dweller and distinguishes himself from the establishment sahgha by conspicuously
adhering to certain ascetic practices and single-mindedly engaging in meditation.
He is credited with mystical powers and becomes the focus of lay followings that
are spontaneous and fervent, and as such his hermitage and congregation differ in
organization and spirit from the ordinary village or town monastic complex
(wat).
But such monks in ordinary times are the target of the deprecations, suspicions,
and enmity of the established sahgha and the civil administrations - for they tend
to escape the net of bureaucratic control and supervision. In fact, the problematic
features of the reclusive and ascetic can be discerned in early Buddhism itself,
indeed in the time of Buddha himself.
It is said that since some of the early disciples who entered upon the religious
life preferred to be recluses, the Buddha permitted them to do so after they had
been ordained or had at least some instruction; but they were obliged to remain in
contact with the order by periodically participating with other monks in the
uposathals celebrations. Mahakassapa himself used this reclusive option. And
this sanctioning of forest dwelling is said to be the precursor for the founding of
the drannavdsl as a separate sect (nikdya) in Sri Lanka.
More vexed is the question of ascetic practices and mortification of the flesh
(tapas). The Buddha himself gained the knowledge of the Middle Path which
leads to insight, wisdom, and Nirvana by rejecting both the life given to sensual
pleasures, which is degrading, ignoble, and profitless, and the life given to
mortifications, which is painful, ignoble, and profitless.19 There is the famous
encounter between the naked ascetic and the Buddha which is taken as the
17


--- Page 30 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
occasion for denigrating the extant mystic lore surrounding the efficacy of
austerities. The practice of austerities is cast in a ludicrous light when this adept
of self-torture enumerates twenty-two methods of self-mortification in respect of
food and thirteen in respect of clothing from which the ascetic may make his
choice. Besides, he castigates his body in other ways - for example: by being a
"plucker-out-of-hair and beard," thereby destroying pride in mere beauty of
appearance; a "croucher-down-on-the-heels," moving about painfully by jumps;
a "bed-of-thorns-man"; or one who is "clad-in-dust" (he smears his body with
oil and, standing where dust clouds blow, lets dust and dirt stick to his body).20
Nevertheless, self-mortification is a persisting idea and practice in the religious
life of India. The individual who subjects himself to an ascetic regime has always
in Hindu and Buddhist societies attracted the admiration of the laity. Moreover,
asceticism has been always associated with the acquisition of special powers -
even those of controlling nature and of coercing the deities. Although the Buddha
is said to have rejected austere asceticism, he does not appear to have denied the
efficacy of a controlled, ascetic mode of life, if not for all his disciples, at least
for those disciples who were inclined in that direction.
The Buddha's steering of the middle course implied the acceptance of different
options and paths (within limits of course) that different bhikkhu may follow. In
fact, with regard to the ascetic practices the Vinaya has a not entirely consistent
story to tell. Typically the rules are pronounced by the Buddha occasion by
occasion when it is brought to his attention that the newly recruited monks gave
offense through their unseemly behavior. The Mahdvagga21 reports the case of a
bhikkhu who embraced the religious life for his belly's sake and for the
commodious life that seemed available to the Buddha's disciples. The Buddha
prescribed as a corrective that at the upasampadd (higher ordination ceremony)
the four "resources" or foundations of monastic life {nissaya) should be
communicated to the candidate:22
"The religious life has morsels of food given in alms for its resource: Thus you
must endeavor to live all your life." Meals given by lay patrons by invitations and
on ceremonial days are extra allowances.
"The religious life has the robe made of rags taken from a dust heap for its
resource." Linen, cotton, silk, woolen, and other garments are extra allowances.
"The religious life has dwelling at the foot of a tree for its resource." Vihdras,
storied dwellings, caves, and other habitations are extra allowances.
4 The religious life has decomposing (cow's) urine as medicine for its resource.''
Ghee, butter, oil, honey, and molasses are extra allowances.
In these sayings, we have perhaps an affirmation of the pristine ideal of the life
of a renouncer, when he was an ascetical peripatetic wanderer, and a simultaneous
acceptance of the comforts of settled monastic life in villages and towns, which
was a later development.
In the Cullavagga23 we have again a famous setting of the norm when a
contending disciple proposes to render the disciplinary rules more stringent in
18


--- Page 31 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
five points. Devadatta, the Buddha's kinsman and schismatic challenger, wishing
to stir up a division in the sahgha, accompanied by his friends, proposed to the
Buddha that he lay down the following restrictive practices as more appropriate
for the quelling of passions and as more conducive to arousing the admiration of
the lay public. He proposed that the bhikkhu should be permanent dwellers in the
woods: Whoever went to the vicinity of a village would thereby commit an
offense. They should, their lives long, beg for alms and be disallowed from
accepting invitations. They should dwell under the trees and not sleep under a
roof.24 They should, finally, abstain from eating fish.
The Buddha's evenhanded judgment was ' 'No, Devadatta. Whosoever wishes to
do so, let him dwell in the woods; whosoever wishes to do so, let him dwell in
the neighborhood of a village. Whosoever wishes to do so, let him accept
invitations from the laity. Whosoever wishes to do so, let him dress in rags;
whosoever wishes to do so, let him receive gifts of robes from laymen. Sleeping
under trees has been allowed by me, Devadatta, for eight months in the year; and
the eating of the fish that is pure in the three points - to wit, that the eater has not
seen, or heard, or suspected that it has been caught for that purpose'' (Cullavagga,
VII, 3, 15).
Although Devadatta's rebellion was defeated by Sariputta and Moggallana,
who brought the 500 dissidents back to the fold, and although Devadatta died in
rage bleeding from the mouth, yet it is relevant to note that his show of greater
austerity did win over for a time a number of (insightless) ordained bhikkhu and
lay supporters in the city of Rajagaha, which is a token of the popular admiration
for those who mortify their flesh.
Of the perfected and liberated seekers, it is clear that the paccekabuddha is the
quintessential lonely, wandering, forest-dwelling ascetic. Mahayana Buddhism
would have little to do with any enlightened being who was not able or concerned
to teach others the truth; and though Theravada has something to say about him,
he is nevertheless a puzzling being whose incompleteness is thrown into relief by
comparison with the Buddha himself. Kloppenborg cites from the Sutta-Nipata
Commentary25 these comparisons: The perfect buddha is born only into families
of khattiyas (warriors) or brahmans, while the paccekabuddha may be born in the
families of householders as well. Perfect buddhas are not born in the world period
of devolution, they are born in the world period of evolution. Paccekabuddhas are
born when no perfect buddhas are found or in the time of the birth of a buddha. It
is only in times in which no perfect buddhas are manifest that it is possible to
attain to the status of & paccekabuddha. Though possessed of the knowledge of
self-enlightenment, paccekabuddhas lack omniscience, which belongs only to a
perfected buddha. However they are possessed of supernatural powers, can reach
high levels of meditation, and can stimulate others to take up a religious life by
indirect instigation and example.
The concept of the paccekabuddha provides a context for exploring a strand in
Buddhism that may be contrapuntal to the path of learning and village dwelling
19


--- Page 32 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
that became the dominant tradition in the institutionalized sahgha and at times
solidified into scholastic dogmatism. Indeed, the regime of personal spiritual
development, crystallized as meditative exercises and mystic experiences, came
in time to be linked with one strong and marked depiction of that kind of arahant
who led the reclusive, ascetic, meditative life.
The Questions of King Milinda describes certain wondrous powers accessible
to the arahant, powers deployed for good causes and that fire popular expecta-
tions. An arahant, while still alive, may out of pity for gods and men make the
resolve that such and such wonders may take place at this cetiya (the mound
erected over his ashes). Then, by reason of his resolve, wonders happen there.26
There are the magisterial reminders by the Buddha that false claims to the
possession of mystical powers is a grave pdrdjika offense that warrants expulsion
of the monk from the order27 and that mystical powers (iddhi), which become
available to the meditator when he reaches certain levels of mental concentration,
should not seduce him from the higher aim of salvation.28 And although Buddhist
literature throughout the ages has shown an ambivalence toward the pursuit and
use of supranormal powers, yet there has never been any doubt as to the Buddha's
possession of them. A story in the Dhammapada Commentary29 illustrates these
themes. Once the Buddha was asked "Have you not laid down a precept for-
bidding the performance of miracles?" after he had accepted a challenge to a
contest of supranormal powers with some heretics. "I have not," replied the
Buddha, "laid down a precept for myself; the precept was intended only to apply
to my disciples." He then performed the famous twin feat of SravastI (to which
we shall refer later).
Indeed, that these wondrous powers are available to the arahants is affirmed in
the canonical Sammana-Phala Sutta and in the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta,30 the
quintessential sutta of the entire canon and a vital text to all Buddhist schools,
preserved for us in six different versions.31 To the bhikkhu disciples, particularly
to his beloved Ananda, the Buddha reveals that the acquisition of the mystical
power of iddhi, by which the body can perform actions superior to the ordinary
limitations of matter, is one of the fruits of meditation and mental training
supported by upright conduct. The Buddha informs Ananda that he had "devel-
oped, practised, accumulated, and ascended the very heights of the four paths of
Iddhi" and that it was within his capacity to exercise it and prolong his life for the
rest of the kalpa that had yet to run.
The same claim and promise is periodically reaffirmed in classical commen-
taries and popular exegeses. We shall take up this theme when we examine some
portions of Buddhaghosa's Visuddhimagga, but here let me cite as evidence of
the persistence of these beliefs Spence Hardy's A Manual of Buddhism, in its
Modern Development, which expresses what the Sinhalese characterization of
the arahant was in the mid-nineteenth century (1853) as gleaned from popular
Sinhalese texts. These texts eclectically synthesize Buddhist notions from several
sources and from different times. On the one hand, the arahants unmistakably
20


--- Page 33 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
partake of humanity; have bodily frailties; and have burned away their desire,
usually after a very laborious exercise of discipline; on the other hand, their
achievements afford them supranormal powers.
Saints in early Buddhism
Lamotte, in a magisterial review of sources,32 clearly shows that already in early
Buddhism a tradition of writing the "biographies" (avaddna) of famous arahants
had begun, and that together with this hagiographical tradition there developed
an embryonic cult of the saints, which is attested to as much by evidence from
Hlnayana as Mahayana branches of early Buddhism.33
It is true, says Lamotte, that the Buddha included the question of whether or
not a saint exists after death among the "reserved points" (avydkrtavastu) and
that he asserted that when the body of the saint is broken and its life gone out,
"gods and men will no longer see him." But, continues Lamotte, in a vein that is
refreshing and an object lesson to many an ahistorical and asociological idealizer
of early Buddhism, there was a gap between theory and practice. The Buddha
had presented himself as a spiritual master, "he who shows the way," and his
disciples made of him "a god superior to the gods." He had confined the
divinities to the cycle of transmigration and had reduced them to the level of
inferiors, yet his disciples remained loyal to their ancestral and class cults.
Nothing could keep the Buddhists from also having their saints, from writing
their history, and even from immortalizing a certain number of them. Nothing
could keep the communities from preserving the memory of the doctors of the
Law whose authority they had known and who had made them famous.
An enumeration of the Buddha's disciples is given in the Etadaggavagga of the
Pali canonical Ahguttaranikdya and of the Ekottardgama: The chapter lists
forty-two bhikkhu (monks), thirteen bhikkhum (nuns), ten updsaka (pious
laymen), and ten updsikd (pious lay women), and nominates Ajnata-Kaundinfya
as the first of the members of the order; Sariputta, the first of the great sages;
Maha-Moggallana, the first among those who possess supranormal powers;
Mahakassapa, the first among those who practice strict discipline; and Ananda,
the first of the scholars; etc.
Now, in the commentaries assigned to this chapter, one finds biographies,
some more detailed than others, of these disciples. It is of special interest for us
to note that the Manorathapuranl, which was compiled in the fifth century A.D.
by Buddhaghosa as a commentary on the Ahguttaranikdya, contains seventy-five
biographies.
Perhaps quite a different point emphasizing the early saints as a collectivity of
both men and women is made in the Them- and Therf-gdthd, the eighth and ninth
books of the Khuddakanikdya. These 107 poems in Pali, by anonymous com-
posers, make the ancient saints - both men and women - their mouthpiece. The
21


--- Page 34 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
saints celebrate in these poems the beauty of their ideal - the renunciation of
desire, the extinction of passions, the overcoming of suffering, and the peace of
Nibbdna.34
Another relevant text is the Apaddna, the twelfth book of the Khuddakanikdya.
It is a composition in verse in which 550 thera and 40 then tell of some of their
previous lives and of their final ascension to the state of arahant. Lamotte
remarks that "the influence of the popular and lay milieu" is evidenced by the
fact that these saints attribute their sainthood, not so much directly to their
following the path, but to their acts of piety in their previous existences when
they offered flowers, water, fruits, and fans to the previous Buddhas. The latter in
exchange "predict" their future attainment.
A composition in Sanskrit similar to, but not identical with, the Apaddna is the
Pahcasatasthavirdvaddna, "Exploits of the Five Hundred Ancients." These
saints relate the "fabric of their acts" (karmaploti) that led to sainthood, in the
presence of the Master, when he summoned 500 of them by air to the edge of
Lake Anvatapta a little while before he attained nirvana. The antiquity of this text
is suggested by the fact that this collection of avaddna was the object of a Chinese
translation executed in 303 B.C. by Dharmaraksa under the title of Fo-Wo-po-ti-
tseu-tseu-chouo-pen-k' i-king.
The rich postcanonical literature on the early disciples and saints selectively
focused on a few from among the potentially large numbers. The most celebrated
in central Asia and China more or less is the group called the "ten great
disciples," comprising in order Sariputra, Maha-Maudgalyayana, Maha-Kasyapa,
Subhuti, Purna-Maitrayamputra, Aniruddha, Maha-Katyayana, Upali, Rahula,
and Ananda. They figure as an iconographic group notably in the caves of
Touen-houang and are mentioned in Chinese texts that date from around 320 B.C.
to the twelfth century A.D.
A matter of some hagiological interest is how in early and later classical
Buddhism the "nonexistence" of arahant after their death was squared with their
perduring "presence" in the world for the benefit of humankind. The tradition
holds, says Lamotte, that many arahant inhabiting mountain peaks, streams,
springs, and ravines, having decided that they had accomplished "what they had
to do," decided after the death of Buddha to follow him into nibbdna.35 It was
with great difficulty that Maha-Kasyapa persuaded 500 arahant to remain alive
in order to participate in the Council of Rajagrha and compile the Buddha's
teachings. And these too in time passed away.
But the Sanskrit texts show how exceptions were made on behalf of those
arahant for whom nibbdna will be delayed so long as the Law remains on earth.
There was the expectation imposed on Maha-Kasyapa, as the trustee of the
Buddha's robe, that he must again put that robe on the Buddha of the future,
Maitreya. Dressed in pdmsukula, rag-robes of the Blessed, and buried in the
womb of Mount Kukkutapada, Kasyapa is immersed in meditative nirodhasamd
patti36 but he will awake with the coming of Maitreya to accomplish his mission.
22


--- Page 35 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
Another arahant, Pindola Bharadvaja, the apostle of Kausambl, equally must
remain on earth as long as the Good Law existed. In punishment for his faults,
particularly, his "greediness and his imprudent miracles," he was banished from
Jambudvlpa, but he continued to fulfill his duties in foreign lands and to readily
appear to all who called him. Two others who may be cited here are the disciple
Kundopodhanfya, who destroyed the treasures of the King Sunga Pusyamitra,
who persecuted Buddhism and massacred the religious; and Rahula, the Buddha's
son, who was especially qualified to be heir and continuator of his father.37
Thus the idea arose that some arahant, for either or both of these reasons - as
punishment for an old fault or in anticipation of a future mission - lived a
prolonged life that allowed them to engage in a specified activity that furthered
Buddhism. They were first of all considered to be the protectors of the Law (at
the side of certain deities38), and to perform this role they will stay here below
without entering into nibbdna. They will be witnesses to the faith at the time of
"false religion" and of persecutions. They will make the image or presence of
the Buddha, and of famous monks, appear; they will speak to the winds, turn
dreams into reality, and, when the Maitreya Buddha descends to this world, they
will be finally authorized to enter nibbdna.
In time, there was a proliferation of the lists of these saints - first numbered at
four, these arahant protectors of the Law were later raised to eight, sixteen, and
then eighteen.39 There were of course further elaborations. Mahayana Buddhism
would, for instance, replace the sixteen ara/z<2«f-protectors with sixteen lay
bodhisattva of Indian origin; led by Bhadrapala, they preceded the multitude of
bodhisattva coming from the Buddha's fields in foreign regions, who have at their
head Maitreya, Manjusri, Avalokitesvara, and so on. "We are here," comments
Lamotte, "at the point of intersection of the Small and Great Vehicles. One can
see how the arahant credited with prolonged lives invented by the Hinayanists
have opened the way for countless and depersonalized bodhisattvas honoured by
the Mahayana."
With regard to the hagiography of the saints in early Buddhism, we may
extract from the foregoing account some stereotyped themes that we may expect
to recur in the hagiographies composed later and pertaining to later local saints,
even in foreign lands. The saints' attainment is prefigured by a vow taken in a
previous life, and this vow is validated by a "prediction" on the part of the
Gotama Buddha or one of his predecessors. The saint is destined to a prolonged
life of activity in this world, and this long presence is featured as a retribution for
some evil karmic acts in the past. The individuality of the saint in question
emerges in some personal quirks and in the particularity of the task assigned him
in the protection of the religion. It seems to me that these notions of a saint's
intention being implemented as a long-term project extending over several lives,
his cumulative merit of good deeds before his final effort, his committing an evil
act that condemns him to a long period of life on earth, also hold a mirror to every
lay Buddhist who venerates him. For they hold for each layman as well the
23


--- Page 36 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
possibility of his ascent to arahantship at some future time if he committed
himself here and now to travel the path. Thus are saint and layman, ordained
renouncer and worldly householder - though distinctly divided here and now -
united in a Buddhist hierarchy of beings in which the lowest can ascend to the
highest over the cycle of rebirths.
The cult of the saints in modern times
Now of what relevance are these classical Buddhist saints for the life of Southeast
Asian Buddhists of our time? Charles Duroiselle, in a report he wrote in 1923 as
the superintendent of the Archaeological Survey,40 had this to say about the
popular saints in Burma. He began with the observation that while Mahayana was
par excellence the religion of bodhisattvas and saints, Theravada Buddhism,
because of its austere doctrine stressing the attainment of arahantship through
the absolution of all passions, did not encourage the saints "which was the
reason saint worship has made so little headway in Burma." However, after
making the usual derogatory noises of the purist "reform Buddhist" intellectual,
and hinting that the corruption stems from early Mahayana influence that was
anterior to the eleventh century, he concedes that saint worship exists in Burma,
usually among the less enlightened, and was characterized by rites, ceremonies,
and prayers to saints for whom shrines were constructed. The worshipers 4 'perform
all these rites for the obtention of worldly advantages and particular favours."
The saints Duroiselle lists as possessing "power, in the present, of granting to
their devotees that which they ask for on the performance of certain rites'' are
Shin Upagok (Upagutta thera), Shin Thiwali (Sivali thera), Shin Angulimala
(thera), and Shin Peindola (Pindola thera). Shin Upagok, says Duroiselle, is "the
greatest in Burma among the Buddhist saints to whom a particular cult is
rendered." The popular tradition carries back the belief in Upagutta to the time of
the great Asoka himself in the third century B.C.41 It appears that Asoka,
enthused by the extraordinary superhuman power of Upagutta, had an image in
his likeness fashioned and made offerings to it; soon after that the custom spread
over Burma. "The saint is represented sitting cross-legged with the soles of his
feet upwards; he holds his begging bowl in his left hand, while his right hand is
held as if in the act of taking the food it contains; his head is slightly raised
upwards over his right shoulder, expecting the sun to appear among the clouds."
Upagok (Upagutta) is associated in Burma and Thailand with rain making and
with protection against the ravages of Mara, and I have documented elsewhere
rites addressed to him in a village in Northeast Thailand.42
The worship of Shin Thiwali, says Duroiselle (now less burdened by his sense
of Theravada orthodoxy), "though not accompanied by so much eclat and
festivities as that of Shin Upagok, is, however, very widespread in Burma. . . .
In the time of the Buddha, the thera Sivali was among those saints who were
24


--- Page 37 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
famous each for a particular gift. The gift of Sivali, which was the result of a
good deed performed in a former existence, was that of all the monks it was he
who received the most offerings, of every conceivable kind from the laity. This
explains why now the Burmese worship him: the worship of him who received
the most offerings and gifts among the monks naturally brings on to his worshiper
no small a share of that extraordinary virtue." So it is believed that those who
repeatedly recite before his shrine some ten stanzas "receive unexpectedly many
presents from friends and relations: they enjoy perfect immunity from dangers
and disease; wherever they stay or go, they are beloved by all; in all mundane
affairs their words carry great weight; they have no dream but those that are
auspicious, bad dreams being averted from them."
"The statuettes of Shin Thlwali represent him as a monk carrying all the
requisites of his state, with fan and staff. He is most often placed in a small
shrine heavily g i l t . . . " We may add to this account the observation that Sivali is
the subject of numerous amulets that circulate in Burma and North Thailand.
Shin Thiwali, interestingly, did suffer from the results of a cruel act committed by
him and his mother in a past life:43 His mother carried him for seven years and
labored for seven days before she delivered him.
Shin Angulimala is no other than the notorious robber and murderer whose
conversion by the Buddha is told in vivid terms at many places in the canonical
and later works. Pregnant women, especially those in difficult labor, have
recourse to him. This taker of lives becoming a protector of births is attributed to
his seeing a woman in labor and his going to Buddha and telling him with
compassion and pity what he had seen. The Buddha ordered him to return to her
and make this testimony: "My dear, I do not remember from the moment I
became one of the Aryan family (i.e., the order of the monks) having willfully
deprived of life any creature." On hearing this statement, the woman was released
from her agony. (Angulimala has the same significance in Thailand, and a special
paritta chant is named after him.)
Shin Peindola was considered to be a great curer of diseases, and some of his
images show him to be holding medicinal fruit. At the time of his writing,
Duroiselle found Peindola to be of little importance in Burma and given less
veneration than the preceding three.
The question of latter-day saints
The question of whether arahants can arise in our present time is an intriguing
one on which monks and laity are likely to give divergent views. In Sri Lanka, it
is said that Maliyadeva was the last arahant; he is mentioned in the Mahdvamsa
as an arahant who lived in the time of King Dutugamunu, the Sinhala hero of the
second century A.D. Gombrich reports that monks who can be characterized as
"traditional," and who hold that Buddhism as a historical phenomenon (sdsane)
25


--- Page 38 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
will last only 5,000 years, believe that the "sdsane has already declined so far
that it is no longer possible for men to attain nirvana." This opinion was, he
reports, "very prevalent among the laity." However, others said that "there may
still be human arhats, but it is unlikely and/or undiscoverable." The general tenor
of Gombrich's reporting is that Sri Lankans today find it hard to believe that a
contemporary can or has become an arahant.44
If this information is correct,45 then the Burmese and Thai peoples seem to be
different in their receptivity to the idea of the appearance of arahants in their
midst at all times, past and present. J. P Ferguson has correctly observed that
Theravada Buddhism has overwhelmingly stressed the centrality of the arahant,
the fully perfected monk, and that "in Burma today the arahant remains a vital
symbol of the religion as found in both contemporary texts and rituals." He also
affirms that the same is true of Thailand: "The arahat ideal . . . exists as the
ultimate model for any living monk, and the more saintly the monk, the more
likely he will be assigned miraculous powers by his supporters . . . The
excitement generated by the hope that the (arahat) ideal will again be manifest in
the real is at the heart of the religion."46
A contemporary Thai monk meditation teacher and the head of a famous forest
hermitage in the Northeast has written a biography of a monk whom he, and
many Thai both monks and laity, have acclaimed as an arahant. We shall deal at
length with the biography later, but let me remark here that, in this biography, the
author, after a discussion of the concept of arahant, reports that his acclaimed
teacher had once told his disciples that "there were many arahants who had
passed away in Thailand, for example, three in the cave of Chiengdao in the
northern province of Chiengmai, two in the caves near the town of Lopburi, one
in the Khao Yai mountain in the vicinity of Nakhon Nayok in the Northeast, and
another in the monastery of Thart Luang near the Northern town of Lampang. "
Now how did our biographer explicate the arahant conception? An arahant, he
tells us, is "a wonderful and supreme person, both to himself and to the three
realities of existence. It is very difficult for one of them to appear in the world.
An arahant is next only to the Buddha in superiority."
Arahants, we are further told, can be divided into four types.47 The lowest is an
arahant who has achieved the "full-final attainment" and is subject to no more
rebirths, but he possesses none of the additional attainments. The second has
achieved the minimum requirement stated above, and also enjoys the threefold
knowledge of recollection of past lives, clairvoyance concerning the births and
deaths of other beings, and insight. The next higher type is blessed, in addition to
insight, with the sixfold psychical feats of levitation, claraudience, mind reading,
recollection of past lives, and clairvoyance. There is finally the highest type of
arahant who, in addition to the foregoing, is endowed with four kinds of
"fluency of discernment," namely the giving of explanations with regard to
causes and to results, fluency in the use of language, and in the methods and
26


--- Page 39 ---
The Buddhist conception of the arahant
techniques of application; he is not only one who has attained salvation but also
able to be a supreme teacher.
Arahants are believed to have passed away (parinibbdna), says our Thai
author, in certain distinctive ways. "Some passed away while sitting cross-
legged, others while lying on their right sides, and still others while walking or
standing. In most cases, however, they seemed to have passed away while lying
on their right sides or while sitting cross-legged. . . . " They bid farewell to the
mundane world in a serene manner "showing no suffering or restlessness, such
as can generally be seen in the cases of ordinary people."48
Such currently held notions and expectations are a crucial context for our
ensuing study of a certain number of forest monks in Thailand who have
combined ascetic practices {dhutanga) with the regimen of meditation and have
established forest hermitages themselves. In popular conception, some of them
have been or are considered to be arahants, and they are in the limelight as holy
men of charisma. They are persons of near national reputations, at least among
the Buddhists.
But my exposition has to begin with a classical paradigm formulated several
centuries ago - in a text called the Vissuddhimagga - which, as an impeccably
orthodox Theravdda exegesis of doctrine and practices, has something very
complex and more to tell us about the arahant. And what it does tell about him
has profound implications for our understanding of the popularly acclaimed
saints of contemporary Southeast Asia.


--- Page 40 ---
The Path of Purification
The ascetic practices
The Visuddhimagga, the classical Theravada treatise on meditation, states in
detail the techniques to be employed during meditation, the levels of meditative
experience that are achieved, and the pitfalls and triumphs that await the
practitioner. This classic has been a principal guide for Buddhist meditators down
the ages and constitutes a major point of reference in our study of present-day
Thai meditation masters and forest saints.
The Visuddhimagga, the work composed by Buddhaghosa in the fifth century
A.D., contains a summary and interpretation of the basic teachings of the Buddha
contained in the Pali Tipitaka rendered according to the ilabhidhamma method."
Nanamoli1 calls it "the principal non-canonical authority of the Theravada"; it is
at the same time "a detailed manual for meditation masters" and a "work of
reference." It was composed during the epoch of renascence in Pali studies after
a period of decline in literary activity in the early centuries in Ceylon and South
India. This period of decline corresponded with the ascendance of Sanskrit
composition in Indian Buddhism. By A.D. 400, the time was ripe for a Pali
recension of the Sinhalese commentaries, and Buddhaghosa, coming to Ceylon
from India, was apparently the instrument of this Pali renascence.2
The legend concerning the test imposed on Buddhaghosa by the Sinhalese
Elders and the manner in which the Visuddhimagga was composed indicate its
doctrines and teachings are genuinely pristine and have been transmitted without
corruption and that the sahgha's ordination lineage has had an unsullied continu-
ity through time. The legend reported in the ancient Sinhalese chronicle of the
Great Monastery, the Mahdvamsa,3 and in the popular Burmese novel Buddhag-
hosuppatti, probably composed in the fifteenth century,4 states that when
Buddhaghosa requested the Sinhalese Elders to give him all the texts so that he
might compose the commentaries, he was given two stanzas to comment upon so
as to test his scholarship and orthodoxy. Using those stanzas as his "text," he
summarized the Pitakas and the Sinhalese commentary in the work called
Visuddhimagga. In order to test the author's skill, the god Sakka stole the
28


--- Page 41 ---
The Path of Purification
manuscript, forcing Buddhaghosa to write another version, and he stole that
again and made Buddhaghosa rewrite a third version. Then Sakka returned the
missing two texts, and when all three were compared they were found to be
identical in every respect-there being no differences in the chapters, or the order
in which the material was arranged, or even in the phrases and syllables of the
canonical texts cited. I interpret this tale as not only attesting Buddhaghosa's
accuracy, but also, by extension, as proclaiming the unsullied clarity of the
Sinhalese religious documents, preserved and transmitted by an orthodox sahgha,
which can admit only a single unambiguous translation at the hands of an
exemplary translator. (Indeed, such an ideal is partly at least the inspiration for
the number of recensions of the Pali Tipitaka sponsored by famous kings during
periods of purification and revival of religion.) It is fitting, therefore, that after
his death Buddhaghosa was reborn in the Tusita heaven surrounded by divine
nymphs in a golden mansion seven leagues broad.
The contents of the Visuddhimagga
The Visuddhimagga as an overall composition brilliantly demonstrates the central
Buddhist tenet that knowledge and wisdom are joined with practice and that the
practice of the meditative exercises provides the experience and understanding of
the doctrinal tenets. Knowledge in the abstract cannot be divorced from and
secured apart from practice as disciplined conduct.
There is a tripartite ordering to the Visuddhimagga. There is first of all the
elucidation of how to systematically cultivate sila, usually translated as "virtue";
next follows the description of the procedures by which samadhi, concentration,
is cultivated. Finally, there are the instructions for the cultivation of prajnd (or
pafind),5 insight or understanding. There is not so much a linear as a dynamic
relationship between the three objectives.
It has to be understood from the outset that the Visuddhimagga's objective is to
show the path that leads to purity, and as such it is primarily addressed to bhikkhu
and not laymen,6 to seekers who have gone forth from home into homelessness.
Purification is to be understood as attaining to nibbdna, which is "devoid of
stains."
The Visuddhimagga begins with a verse taken from the canon:7
When the wise man, established well in Virtue (Sila),
Develops Consciousness (Samadhi) and Understanding (Pannd),
Then as a bhikkhu ardent and sagacious
He succeeds in disentangling this tangle.
Buddhaghosa's originality lay in grouping under these three labels taken from
canonical usage the eight elements that make up the Noble Eightfold Path that
was expounded as the last of the Four Noble Truths by the Buddha in his
29


--- Page 42 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
very first sermon, the Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta (Setting in motion the
wheel of truth), which he delivered after he attained enlightepment. Many would
hold that the heart of the Buddha's teaching lies in this sermon and that it is
therefore appropriate that Buddhaghosa's great work takes it as a point of
departure.8
Buddhaghosa gives a number of preliminary glosses on what the triad of
virtue, concentration, and understanding signifies. For example, we are told that
purification "from the defilement of misconduct'' is the fruit of virtue, purification
"from the defilement of craving" is the fruit of concentration, and purification
"from the defilement of false views" is the fruit of understanding. Or again,
virtue is the avoidance of "devotion to indulgence of self desires," while
concentration surmounts sense-desires, and understanding is the means for
"surmounting all becoming."
That the three types of activity stand in a hierarchical relation is clearly ex-
pressed in their correlation with ' 'the four paths'' leading to, or - better still - the
four stations or levels of achievement terminating in, enlightenment: the path of
stream entry, the path of once-return, the path of nonreturn, and the path of
arahantship. Here is the correlation: "Likewise the reason for the states of
Stream-entry and Once-return is shown by Virtue; that for the state of Non-return,
by Concentration; that for Arahantship by Understanding. For the Stream-enterer
is called Perfected in the 'kinds of virtue'; and likewise the Once-returner. But the
Non-returner is called 'Perfected in concentration'. And the Arahant is called
'Perfected in understanding.' " 9
In the rest of this chapter, we shall further elucidate the character of and
relation between slla, samddhi, and prajfid, but let it be clearly understood that
certain portions and themes of the Visuddhimagga will be selectively focused
upon because of their relevance for the present-day activities of the ascetic forest
monks of Thailand. In other words, my presentation of the classical work is
selective; at the same time, I maintain that there is nothing in it that distorts the
contents of the text.
The last line of the verse cited earlier says that the bhikkhu who has achieved
the three accomplishments "succeeds in disentangling this tangle" as a "network
of craving," which consists of an "inner tangle" that arises from one's own
craving and an "outer tangle" that arises from another person's. Buddhaghosa
recognizes both internal and external bases for consciousness and extends the
analysis by invoking the suggestive metaphor of a bamboo grove (already ex-
ploited by The Questions of King Milinda) for representing the entangling and
interfacing of the cravings of human beings. This doctrinal commentary is
premised on the recognition of an I-thou duality, of individual consciousness
being a product of the interaction of internal and external experiences, of the
human condition as an interweaving of beings, from which entanglement libera-
tion is sought. In other words, this quest of negation is not premised on an


--- Page 43 ---
The Path of Purification
atomistic view of society, nor does it imply that individual liberation is attainable
without an awareness of the larger social condition and its interconnections.
Bhikkhu Nanamoli makes a comment that intergrades with this realization.
When the Buddhist ascetic goes into seclusion and, first and foremost, practices
virtue by "restraining his sense doors," he does not leave the world; rather, "he
retreats from the clamour of society to the woods and rocks, he takes his world
with him, as though withdrawing to his laboratory, in order to better analyze it."10
And at the end of his secluded quest, the ascetic is envisaged by the
Visuddhimagga as being acclaimed by the world, indeed the cosmos, for his
victory resonates through it. The text says that four kinds of benefits accrue from
"developing understanding," namely, "removal of the various defilements, ex-
perience of the taste of the Noble Fruit, the attainment of cessation, and
achievement of the worthiness to receive gifts . . . " (p. 819). The last men-
tioned is of particular interest to those of us interested in institutionalized
Buddhism: Such a person who has developed understanding, says the Visuddhi-
magga in its concluding pages, is "fit for the gifts of the world with its deities, fit
for its reverential salutation, and an incomparable field of merit for the world"
(p. 833).
The practice of virtue (sila)
The practice of virtue implies the "restraint of the faculties," and there are
several restraints enumerated, such as restraint by the rules of the sahgha (the
Patimokkha), restraint by mindfulness (which guards the eye faculty), restraint by
energy (by which sense desires when they arise are not allowed to endure),
restraint by practicing right livelihood, and so on. Such "nontransgressions"
give meaning to virtue as coolness (sitala).
It is clear that the practice of virtue is an undertaking addressed to both laymen
and monks, though most of the admonitions are addressed to the latter's code of
conduct. Buddhaghosa tells the householder that there are five benefits deriving
from the perfecting of virtue: He comes "into a large fortune as a consequence of
diligence"; his "fair name is spread abroad"; he enters without fear or hesitation
"an assembly, whether of khattiyas (warrior nobles) or brahmans or householders
or ascetics"; he "dies unconfused," and after death he "reappears in a happy
destiny." Buddhaghosa clearly specifies the laity's practice of virtue as their
avoiding wrong livelihood and their observing the five precepts as a permanent
undertaking, the eight precepts on uposatha days, and the ten precepts whenever
possible. The benefits accruing to the bhikkhu from practicing virtue include his
being dear to his fellows "in the life of purity and loved by them" and being
"held in respect and honoured by them."11
The training precepts for bhikkhu are of course more numerous, and expect-


--- Page 44 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
ably the Visuddhimagga discourses with meticulous and forensic eloquence on
the propriety expected of the bhikkhu (and novices) in their conduct toward one
another and toward the public.The transgressions toward fellow members of the
sahgha include "jostling elder bhikkhu" while standing or sitting or when
bathing, sitting in front of them or on a high seat in their presence, walking on a
high walk while they walk on a low walk, waving arms while talking, and so on.
The controlled behavior of the bhikkhu in demeanor, dress, gestures, and
eating is beautifully discussed in this passage, which gives us some sense of the
modulated and genteel, even finicky, manners inculcated in men who are at the
same time ascetic renouncers positively contaminating themselves with the
contemplation of decay and the stench of death and appropriating the rags of the
charnel house for their patched-up robes. (Incidentally, the appearance and
manners emphasized for a bhikkhu sharply contrast with the matted hair, long
nails, and ash-encrusted, half-naked body of the stereotype sannydsi of Hin-
duism.):
Furthermore, a bhikkhu is respectful, deferential, possessed of conscience and shame,
wears his inner robe properly, wears his upper robe properly, his manner inspires confidence
whether in moving forwards or backwards, looking ahead or aside, bending or stretching,
his eyes are downcast, he has (a good) deportment, he guards the doors of his sense
faculties, knows the right measure in eating, is devoted to wakefulness, possessed of
mindfulness and full-awareness, wants little, is contented, is strenuous, is a careful
observer of good behavior, and treats the teachers with great respect. This is called
(proper) conduct.12
The bhikkhu is not taken in by externals, neither the "signs" nor the "par-
ticulars," he "apprehends only what is really there," such as the ephemeral
decaying body that dwells in a woman, laden with jewelry, perfumed and made
up, who passes by13
There are delicious exposures of the schemes by which bhikkhu, seemingly
refusing gifts from laymen on the grounds of their fewness of wishes and needs,
actually entice them into showering upon them fine robes by the cartloads. The
bhikkhu who falsely accepts "out of compassion for the donor" is remorselessly
condemned thus: "Such grimacing, grimacery, scheming, schemery, schemed-
ness, is known as the instance of scheming called rejection of requisites"(p. 26).
The Visuddhimagga relates many stories of Buddhist saints as illustrations of
bhikkhu who have fulfilled "the restraint of the faculties." A famous instance is
provided by the Elder Cittagutta. He lived in the Great Cave at Kurandaka, on
whose wall there was a marvelous painting on the theme of the renunciation of
the buddhas; but over a period of sixty years the monk had been oblivious of the
painting because he had never lifted up his eyes, nor for that matter had he seen
the great ironwood tree that grew at the entrance to his cave.
The story of the Elder Maha-mitta is about a reward that results from practic-
ing virtue, in this case in the form of an efficacious result in the mundane world.
32


--- Page 45 ---
The Path of Purification
In this story, we see a glimmering of the phenomenon that this book tries to
describe as a salient issue in Thailand today: the mystical power of the bhikkhu
who has successfully closed his sense doors and by virtue of that can shower
benefits upon those who are slaves of their senses. The Elder Maha-mitta's
mother was suffering from a poisoned tumor, and she asked her daughter who
was a nun (bhikkhuni) to seek out her brother and ask him to provide some
medicine. Maha-mitta declared that he knew of or possessed no medicine save
this: ''Since I went forth I have not broken (my virtue of restraint of) the sense
faculties by looking at the bodily form of the opposite sex with lustful mind. By
this declaration of truth may my mother get well. Go and tell the lay devotee and
rub her body." The old woman's tumor shrank away like a lump of froth (p. 40).
The ascetic practices
The Visuddhimagga devotes its second chapter to what are called dhutahga,
which can be translated as "ascetic practices."14 These practices are conven-
tionally considered optional today as far as regular bhikkhu are concerned. They
in fact smack of austerities and have become the hallmark in Thailand of
wandering monks who dwell in forests, caves, and wild places and are dedicated
to the practice of meditation in seclusion. The Thai expression "doen thudong"
conveys the sense of walking (and wandering) ascetics.
The meditating monk should undertake the ascetic practices, recommends the
Visuddhimagga, "For when his virtue is thus washed clean of stains by the
waters of such special qualities as fewness of wishes, contentment, effacement,
seclusion, dispersal, energy, and modest needs, it will become quite purified; and
his vows will succeed as well" (p. 59).
The manual enumerates thirteen kinds of ascetic practices:
1. The refuse-rag-wearer's practice: The bhikkhu collects refuse cloth for robes.
Pdmsukula means "refuse" in the sense of its being found in such a place as a street,
charnel ground, or midden, or in the sense of its being in a vile state.
2. The triple-robe-wearer's practice: The bhikkhu has the habit of wearing the triple
robe (ti-civdra), namely the cloak of patches, the upper garment, and the inner
clothing.
3. The alms-food-eater's practice: The bhikkhu's vow is to gather and eat the lumps
(pinda) of alms food offered by others. (The word bhikkhu is derived from bhikkhd,
meaning alms.)
4. The house-to-house-seeker's practice: The bhikkhu wanders from house to house
collecting food; he is a "gapless wanderer" (sapaddna-cdrin) in the sense that he
walks from house to house, to all houses, indifferently and without distinction,
begging from everyone and showing no preference.
5. The one-sessioner's practice: The bhikkhu eats only one meal a day in one uninter-
rupted session.
33


--- Page 46 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
6. The bowl-food-eater's practice: The bhikkhu receives and eats the alms mixed together
in one bowl, and he refuses other vessels.
7. The later-food-refuser's practice: The bhikkhu refuses extra food (or further helpings)
offered him after his only meal has been concluded.
8. The forest-dweller's practice: The bhikkhu adopts the habit of dwelling in the forest.
9. The tree-root-dweller's practice: The bhikkhu dwells at the root of a tree.
10. The open-air-dweller's practice.
11. The charnel-ground-dweller's practice.
12. The any-bed-user's practice: The bhikkhu sleeps on any place that is allotted to him
when he is in a community of monks, and in that sense he is an "as-distributed user."
13. The sitter's practice: The bhikkhu refuses to lie down and when resting adopts the
sitting posture. (The sitter can get up in any of the three watches of the night and walk
up and down, for lying down is the only posture disallowed.)
These are "the practices of a bhikkhu who is ascetic because he has shaken off
defilement by undertaking one or another of them" (p. 80). We thus note that the
ascetic monk need not choose to practice all of them. Of course, the recom-
mendations regarding dwellings (8-10 above) imply alternative locations that a
monk cannot adopt simultaneously but can adopt at different times in his
wanderings. Moreover, some bhikkhu may undertake these vows intermittently
whenever they wished to retire to a stricter mode of life for brief periods.
It is noteworthy that the Visuddhimagga interprets the ascetic practices in a
flexible manner, so as not only to suit individual circumstances, but also to
legitimate the practices of village- and town-dwelling monks. Thus while it is
recommended that a bhikkhu undertake these practices in the presence of the
Buddha or one of his principal disciples or, in a decreasing scale of achievements,
anyone from a "nonreturner" to an ordinary bhikkhu, yet, even in the absence of
the last, a bhikkhu might undertake the ascetic practices by himself.
Again, the major rules themselves were defined as capable of three grades of
conformity - strict, medium, and mild. Take the first rule, the ' 'refuse-rag-wearer's
practice": Here the minimum requirement is that this ascetic practice is broken if
the dhutanga bhikkhu accepts a robe directly from the hands of a householder.
But the commentary tells us that apart from the refuse cloth picked up (such as
that collected from the charnel ground and rubbish heap or that used for cleaning
childbirth stains or that gnawed by cattle), an ascetic is also permitted to take the
cloth "dropped at the door of a shop" or thrown on the street by those who seek
merit, or left at "the king's consecration place." These concessions can readily
serve as a decorum within which normal merit-making donations can take place.
Furthermore, we are told that it is permitted for a bhikkhu who has taken this vow
to receive a robe placed at his feet by another bhikkhu. The commentary
concludes with this definition of the limits: There are those kinds of refuse-rag-
wearers, "the strict, the medium, and the mild." One who takes from the charnel
ground is strict; one who picks up a robe placed in his way is medium; one who
takes a robe placed at his feet by another bhikkhu is mild (p. 64).
34


--- Page 47 ---
The Path of Purification
Again, "the alms-food-eater's practice" is capable of three gradations. The
strict practitioner will go to the door of a house to have his bowl filled or accepts
alms brought to a refectory and given there; the medium practitioner may sit at a
place and wait for his bowl to be filled; the mild one may consent beforehand to
receive food on the following two days. But note that the moral is drawn that the
latter two practitioners "miss the joy of an independent life," thereby under-
scoring the massively important fact that a wandering ascetic's independence
hinges on his not being bound to others by durable bonds. Thus the benefit for the
strict practitioner is that "he is always a stranger among families and is like the
moon; he abandons avarice about families; he is compassionate and impartial; he
avoids the dangers in being supported by a family. "
It is the same point of observing impartiality as well as avoiding the temptation
of greed and gratification of the senses that is driven home in respect of "the
house-to-house-seeker's practice." Where a monk has regularly received nothing
from a house or a street, he may go past it on his almsround, but wherever he has
received anything at all it is not allowed subsequently to go past it and leave it
out. Nor must he on his almsround miss a village or settlement that lies in his
path; but having sought alms there, and if he has not received sufficient food, he
may go to the next village in correct sequence. The "greedy alms round" is one
in which the monk goes "only to the house where good alms food is given," and
he who behaves in this manner breaks his vow.
Vows 5,6, and 7, are closely linked and are intended to curtail greed for food
and indulgence of the taste buds. The three grades of the one-sessioner's practice
(5) are defined thus: The strict observer will not accept any more helpings once
he has indicated that he wants no more by placing his hands over the bowl; the
medium allows his bowl to be replenished as long as all the food in his bowl has
not been consumed; the mild may continue to eat as long as he does not get up
from his seat. The later-food-refuser's practice (7) is simply an elaboration of
this, carrying further the niceties of curbing food intake.
The bowl-food-eater's practice (6) is of particular importance because it takes
the bhikkhu one step further in his "closing his sense doors." While a layman's
palate and culinary art consist in distinguishing dishes and elaborating recipes, an
ascetic erases these distinctions between dishes and assaults his sense of taste by
mixing different kinds of food in the same bowl and eating all at once. As the
Visuddhimagga puts it, the benefit is that the "craving for variety of tastes is
eliminated." (No wonder this ascetic practice is cause for much admiring com-
ment among Thai laity who relish their food.)
There are, however, limits to this mixing of foods. The manual allows for curry
made with cured fish to be eaten separately from rice gruel, for mixing these can
be "repulsive." But the manual is relentless in grading the modes of eating: The
"strict" eater mixes and breaks up the rice lumps, fish, meat, etc., before he
starts to eat the food, the "medium" eater is allowed to break the food only with
one hand while eating (hence he is called "hand ascetic"), while the "mild"
35


--- Page 48 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
eater (the "bowl ascetic") is allowed to break up food with his hand and his teeth
while he is eating.
Vows 8, 9, 10, and n , relating to the dwelling place of the ascetic, state
positively and dramatically the difference between a layman's and an ascetic's
mode of life. Of the places appropriate for an ascetic - the forest, tree root, open
air, and charnel ground - it is the forest that best represents the opposite or
negation of village life. The forest-dweller's vow is phrased in one of two ways,
which illustrates our point: "I refuse an abode in a village" or "I undertake the
forest-dweller's practice.''
A village is defined as any human settlement from one cottage to many; even a
caravan in continuous existence for more than four months counts as a village. A
village's precincts or boundaries are meticulously defined, thereby throwing light
on the ascetic's preoccupation with disentangling himself from the bamboo
clump of lay life: If the village is walled, its precincts cover the area encompassed
by a stone's throw from the wall; if it is not walled, its limits extend to a distance
of two successive throws from the precincts of the last border house, the precincts
of this house being established by the distance covered by a woman throwing
water from a basin standing at the door!
The Visuddhimagga gives two citations from canonical sources that suggest an
intriguing interpretation. The Vinaya is cited as declaring: "Except the village
and its precincts, all is forest," and a confirmation is provided from the Abhid-
hamma (Vibhahga), which says: "Having gone out of the boundary post, all that is
forest." We note here that the delimitation does not contrast village with forest, in
a dichotomous opposition, but says the forest is everything beyond the village,
encircling (and perhaps even encompassing) the latter, which is a bounded core.
Be that as it may, it is stipulated that a forest-dwelling ascetic visiting a village
abode must leave it "in order to meet the dawn in the forest''; if a forest-dweller's
preceptor is ill and cannot receive what he needs from the village, the preceptor
should be taken to a village abode and attended to there, but the forest dweller
should normally in these circumstances observe the dawn stipulation, unless his
preceptor's illness has worsened and requires his presence. The dawn rule is of
course not broken if a forest monk goes to a village, and "hears the Dhamma"
(e.g., listens to a sermon or participates in a uposatha rite) there, and meets the
dawn in the village.
As with the other vows discussed already, the forest-dweller's vow also has
three ranges of observance (excluding the exceptional circumstances described
above): "Herein, one who is strict must always meet the dawn in the forest. The
medium is allowed to live in a village for the four months of the Rains. And the
mild one, for the winter months too."
The vows to live by a tree root (i.e., under the shade of a tree) or to follow the
open-dweller's practice underscore their rejection of the layman's mode of
dwelling by phrasing one form of the vow as "I refuse a roof." The benefit is that
"the impediment of dwellings is severed." Once again, the permitted range in
36


--- Page 49 ---
The Path of Purification
observing this vow is defined thus: The strict ascetic makes a tent of his robe right
out in the open and lives under it; the medium is permitted to dwell near a tree,
rock, or house, so long as he does not seek shelter under them; the mild observer
is allowed to shelter under a rock overhang without a drip ledge cut in it, a hut
made of branches or cloth stiffened with paste, or a shelter left by field watchers.
Of these roofless and/or extra-village habitations, the charnel ground is cer-
tainly the site that unremittingly and remorselessly brings home to the bhikkhu
the immediacy of the body's subjection to decay and the illusion of the sense of
self as an enduring entity. The cremation ground affords the opportunity to be
mindful of death, to vanquish fear and dread, and to observe the very process of
decaying and of becoming, a true antidote to the fallacies of reification. Thus the
Visuddhimagga, with its usual attention to concrete details, tells the bhikkhu that
he should walk up and down the charnel ground looking at the pyre with half an
eye and that he should take note of all the objects he sees during the day so that
they will not assume frightening shapes for him at night. Moreover, by no means
denying the phenomenal reality of ghosts and spirits, the manual advises that the
ascetic "should not take such foods as sesame flour, pease pudding, fish, meat,
milk, oil, sugar, etc., which are liked by non-human beings" and that even if
such beings "wander about screeching, he must not hit them with anything."
Finally, in the list of ascetic practices, the last vow of the sitter's practice seems
particularly onerous: The meditating ascetic takes the vow not to lie down to
sleep, but to rest sitting up, so as not to indulge the pleasures of lying prone,
lolling, or entering a state of torpor. The relief relates to whether a backrest, cloth
band, or binding strap is allowed.15
In sum, then, the dhutahga practices project in sharp relief the differences
between the bhikkhu's ascetic regime and the lay householder's mode of life. The
rules that the ascetic observe no social distinctions between houses as "the
gapless wanderer," that he live without a roof over his head as a forest dweller,
that he possess the bare minimum of clothes and not amass possessions, tell us
not only that he is removed from lay society, but also that he can ensure his
neutrality, impartiality, and ultimately his universal compassion by avoiding
durable relations and reciprocities with the laity.
Moreover, while the bhikkhu strives for an ascetic life experience by control-
ling his senses and wishes and limiting his social intercourse and physical
movement, he at the same time erases the layman's cognitive and affective maps
by crossing the latter's boundaries of social and physical spaces, culinary
distinctions, and pure-impure categorizations. The ascetic who closes his sense
doors while the layman's are open is also a breaker of conventions, a dissolver of
man-made cultural categories by which he orders and reifies the world into a
durable reality. Thus it is a necessary corollary of his resolution not to reify that
the ascetic is a mindful observer and contemplator of process, of growth and
decay and dissolution; and what better subject is there for this than the human
body and what better viewing ground than a place of cremation?
37


--- Page 50 ---
The stages and rewards of
Buddhist meditation
The main objective of this chapter is to develop and interpret the Visuddhimaggd s
treatment of mystical or supramundane powers (iddhi) that are alleged to become
available to the adept practicing concentration (samddhi) meditation and to
suggest, on the one hand, that the detailed treatment of this subject by Buddhaghosa
is integral rather than secondary to his mapping the path of meditation and, on
the other hand, that this map of mental consciousness and mental processes
internal to the meditator parallels and is homologous with the map of the external
cosmos and its processes of degeneration and regeneration.
As Conze has aptly said: "Meditational practices constitute the very core of the
Buddhist approach to life. . . . As prayer in Christianity, so meditation is here the
very heartbeat of the religion."1
The single most important text on meditation in the Pali canon is the
Satipatthdnasutta. The chief textbook on the subject for the Theravada School,
written from the standpoint of the Mahavihara fraternity, is Buddhaghosa's
Visuddhimagga, which is without peer in any other Buddhist school; a second
work is Upatissa's Path to Liberation,2 also written in Sri Lanka but this time
from the perspective of the Abhayagirivadin sect. Lastly, we must mention The
Manual of a Mystic,3 a Sinhalese handbook of probably the sixteenth to eighteenth
centuries, which deals with the jhdna levels of absorption in samddhi concentra-
tion and may have been a product of the influence of Siamese monks.
The ultimate aim of Buddhist meditation is enlightenment, but nibbdna is a
state that cannot be positively described. So what is rewarding to enter is the path
of meditative purification itself, which serves "to promote spiritual development,
to diminish the impact of suffering, to calm the mind and to reveal the true facts
of existence. Increased gentleness and sympathy are among their by-products . . . and
a feeling that death has lost its sting."4 The poems of the early saints, both male
and female (Thera-gdthd and Therl-gdthd) are blissful, selfless affirmations of the
knowledge that there is no eternity about conditioned things.5


--- Page 51 ---
The stages and rewards of Buddhist meditation
The Path of Concentration (samddhi)6
The Visuddhimagga lists forty ''subjects of meditation" (Kammatthdna). They
consist of the following:
1. Ten devices (kasinas): four elements - earth, water, fire, and air; four colors - blue,
yellow, red, and white; and light and limited space.
2. Ten kinds of foulness of decaying corpses {asubbhas), namely the bloated, the livid,
the festering, the cut-up, the gnawed, the scattered, the hacked and scattered, the
bleeding, the worm infested, and a skeleton.
3. Ten recollections: the chief of these being the trinity - the Buddha (the Enlightened
One), the Dhamma (the Law), and the sahgha (the community) - which are followed
by the recollections of virtue, generosity, the deities, mindfulness of death, the body,
breathing, and peace.
4. Four divine abidings or stations of Brahma: loving-kindness, compassion, gladness,
and equanimity.
5. Four immaterial and formless states: the base or station of boundless space, of
boundless consciousness, of nothingness, of neither perception nor nonperception.
6. One perception of the repulsive and disgusting aspects of food.
7. One definition or analysis of the four elements.
Now the Visuddhimagga correlates the choice and efficacy of these meditation
subjects with two factors - the temperament and capacity of the meditator, and the
level of jhdna consciousness that can be attained by meditating on one subject or
another.
The Pali sources contain some interesting assertions about characterology, and,
in general, three kinds of people are distinguished according to whether they are
governed by greed, hate, or delusion. It is worth studying in detail the correlation
of subject with temperament:7 Firstly, the ten kinds of foulness, and mindfulness
of the body, make up eleven meditation subjects suitable for one of greedy
temperament. The four divine abidings and four color kasinas are eight subjects
suitable for one of deluded temperament or one of intelligent temperament. The
remaining kasinas and immaterial states are suitable for all kinds of temperament;
and "any one of the kasinas should be limited for one of speculative tempera-
ment and measureless for one of deluded temperament."
Although there is attention to breathing as a way of bringing about calm,
Buddhist meditative traditions have not elaborated or become preoccupied with
body relaxation and control over the body's physiological processes, as has
happened for instance in Hathayoga. Rather, a distinctive Buddhist way of
developing mindfulness and detachment is through the contemplation of death,
together with the cultivation of the mental states of tranquillity, calm, and
compassion.
The Visuddhimagga firmly recommends that the beginner should dedicate
himself to a teacher and live in dependence on him, for then "he is not
39


--- Page 52 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation


--- Page 53 ---
The stages and rewards of Buddhist meditation
unresponsive to correction, does not go about as he likes, is easy to speak to."8
The beginner whose resolution to meditate is sincere can solicit the teacher for a
meditation subject, for he "who has acquired the penetration of minds" can know
the pupil's temperament "by surveying his mental conduct." It is in this context
that the text develops the concept of Kalydnamitta, "the good friend," who is
the giver of the meditation subject, guides the pupil through his exercises,
comments on and interprets his experiences, and urges him on to greater effort
when the pupil too readily mistakes certain lower states of bliss for the final
liberation.
Now the forty subjects do not by themselves exhaust the entire range of
meditation. They principally cover those practices that relate to the cultivation of
"mindfulness" and "concentration." They do not apply to the subject of insight
(vipassand) meditation, which confers wisdom and understanding (pafind). Such
wisdom that leads to enlightenment in the full sense comes only after the bhikkhu
grasps the true nature of objects and the dharmic constituents of the universe,
when he comprehends the processual features of the khandhas (the five constituents
of the personality), the links of "conditioned co-production," and the four noble
truths.9
The meditative path is described as the cultivation of five cardinal virtues - faith,
vigor or energy, mindfulness, concentration, and, finally, wisdom. What is
particularly recommended is "balancing faith with understanding, and concentra-
tion with energy," a formula that is often diagramed as the mind's chariot being
pulled by four horses. Faith is the indispensable starting point and implies an
intentional and resolute act of the will to confer trust on the three jewels of the
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the sahgha. Energy is the driving force behind the
religious practice and quest. Mindfulness, or "one-pointedness" of mind, is a
necessary virtue, without which an adept cannot progress, because it purifies the
mind, defeats attachment, helps to defeat the illusion of the self as a reified
entity, and in an incipient manner affords tranquility and insight, which are the
complete fruits of the higher levels of concentration and insight meditation,
respectively.
The instructions for engaging in meditation on a kasina go something like this.
The bhikkhu should find a monastery favorable to the development of concentration;
he should avoid incompatible and hostile bhikkhw, wherever possible, he should
find "a good friend" as a teacher; he should sit down comfortably10 in a secluded
place and first review the dangers of sense desires; next arouse happiness in
recollecting the special qualities of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha;
and then apprehend the kasina signs he has chosen. If, for instance, the kasina
Figure i. A mural from Wat Bovonniwet, Bangkok. The upper half depicts the simple huts and
meditational exercises of the forest dwelling monks, while the lower half depicts the elaborate
architecture of a village/town wat and its merit making activities.


--- Page 54 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
chosen is an earthen object, he apprehends with the mind what the eye has
apprehended and in this way a counterpart sign that is purer than the object sign is
internalized.11
Now concentration is of two kinds: access concentration and absorption
concentration. In the former, the mind becomes concentrated on the plane of
access by the abandonment of hindrances; the counterpart sign arises together
with access concentration; from this threshold the mind advances to the absorp-
tion plane "by the manifestation of the jhdna factors."
The meditator with increasing skill ascends from one jhdna level of absorption
to another up to the eighth level. For instance, the first jhdna is "accompanied by
applied and sustained thought with happiness and bliss born of seclusion."12 The
whole body is pervaded by a rapturous bliss and happiness. At the second jhdna
level, these experiences are accompanied by increasing "singleness of mind"
and the disappearance from awareness of the primary object and discursive
thought; at the third level, there is an intensification of equanimity in addition to
one-pointedness of mind. The "purification" of the mind goes through several
levels at which "lower" or "grosser" mental states and perceptions associated
with "material states" are transcended and higher spiritual, formless states are
reached. From mindfulness at the beginning, the adept reaches "access," which
is the threshold of a fuller collectedness, and from there he ascends into ecstasy
and one-pointedness in which abstraction becomes complete.
The Path of Insight
From the standpoint of the Visuddhimagga, the mastery of the jhdnas - the
enjoyment of supreme bliss and the acquisition of supramundane powers - is of
secondary importance to the cultivation of "discriminating wisdom," pannd
(Pali) orprajnd (Skt). While the deeper absorption levels of samddhi are "games"
of concentration, the crux of the meditative training is the path that begins with
mindfulness, proceeds through insight (vipassand), and concludes in nibbdna.
Mindfulness is promoted by restricting attention to a bare noticing of objects
and attending to facts of perception as they arise at any of the five sense-doors or
in the mind, rather than attaching the mind to these events and abstracting from
them cognitive and perceptual patterns. [Previous training in samddhi, especially
in reaching levels of absorption (jhdna), is useful though not necessary, for the
beginner can be taught a method of "bare insight" through which mindfulness is
attained.]13
In due course, the normal illusions of continuity and rationality that sustain
cognitive and perceptual processes give way to a correct apprehension of the
random and discrete units out of which reality is continually being structured.
With the emergence of the true realization of these processes, mindfulness
matures into insight.
42


--- Page 55 ---
The stages and rewards of Buddhist meditation
Contemplating mind and its object, previously separate, are now nondualistically
conjoined, and in unbroken succession occurs a chain of insights of mind
knowing itself, culminating in the state of nibbdna.
Let me sketch in a few of these links in this chain.14 The first realization is that
the phenomena contemplated are distinct from the mind contemplating them.
They are then seen to arise as effects of their respective causes, regardless of the
meditator's own will and self as an abiding entity. This is the experience of
anattd, literally "not-self," the dissolving of the conception of' T ' as a reification:
From here, there arises the realization of anicca (impermanence); phenomena are
seen to arise and pass away in an endless chain, creating in the meditator the
sense of disenchantment that what is constantly changing cannot be the source of
lasting satisfaction. This state of detachment from one's world of experience
enables the understanding that the processes of self and world formation are the
source of dukkha (suffering).
The next level of consciousness is worth underscoring because we shall find it
referred to when we relate the reported meditational experience of some contem-
porary Thai meditation masters and "perfected saints." The adept experiences
the "knowledge of arising and passing away" in that he or she clearly sees the
beginning and end of each successive object of contemplation. This clarity of
perception gives rise to "ten signs" (nimitta), such as: the vision of a brilliant
light and other illuminations; the elation of rapturous feelings, including tremor
in the limbs and the sensation of levitation; the calm of tranquility and pliability
of mind and body; the joy of devotional feelings and faith, which on the one hand
employs the Buddhist trinity as the object of meditation and on the other
produces a confidence in the virtues of meditation that in turn generates the desire
to urge friends and relatives to practice it; and, finally, sublime feelings of
happiness suffusing the whole body, an unprecedented bliss that is sustained and
motivates the meditator to tell others of this extraordinary experience. These five
signs are accompanied by the remaining signs: by an intensified experience of
previous mental victories such as quick and clear perception, strong mindfulness,
equanimity, and finally, a subtle attachment to the illuminations and sublime
raptures mentioned above.
But this level of consciousness is a. pseudo-nirvana (a "mistaking of what is
not the Path for the Path"), and the Visuddhimagga labels the signs just described
"The Ten Corruptions of Insight." The meditator, elated by the emergence of
these signs, becomes attached to them and falsely imagines that he has attained
enlightenment and finished the task of meditation. When the meditator realizes
by himself or through advice from his teacher that these signs pertain to a station
along the way rather than his final destination, he weans himself from attachment
to them and begins a detached contemplation of them.
From this point on, the meditator ascends to the summit. His perception of
objects becomes clearer and rapid, and the world reality is seen to be in a
constant state of dissolution. The previous state of joy is followed by fear and
43


--- Page 56 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
dread which grips the mind, and all mental formations are seen to be dreadful.
The meditator wishes to escape from them, and he experiences great pain in his
body and mind, which appear as hostages to suffering.
This pain is made to cease by applying the practice of contemplation to it.
Contemplation, now quick, effortless, and indefatigable, gives instantaneous
knowledge of "not self," "impermanence," and "suffering," and the meditator
transcends both delight in, and dread of, mental objects and abandons them all.
The final leap is made to nibbdna, when all formations are seen as limited,
circumscribed, devoid of desirability, or alien. Nibbdna is the state of "signless
liberation" (animitta-vimokkha), in which there is "no occurrence and no-
information" of phenomena. Ego consciousness is abandoned for good. Nibbdna
destroys the defiling aspects of self-hatred, greed, ignorance, and in this respect
the fruit of the Path of Insight is superior to the Path of Concentration, for the
latter only succeeds in suppressing, not destroying, these defilements.
There are four levels of, or stations in, the realization of nibbdna - which we
have already alluded to in our previous discussion of arahantship. The four levels
of achievement in an ascending series are "stream enterer," "once-returner,"
"nonreturner," and a "fully realized" arahant best exemplified in the perfected
Buddha.
There is a state apart from nibbdna that is called nirodha (cessation). If in
nibbdna awareness is focused on the cessation of consciousness, in nirodha
awareness ceases altogether so long as the meditator is in that state. Nirodha is
accessible only to a nonreturner or an arahant, who has also mastered the
practice of vipassand and is able to reach the highest jhdna absorption level of
"neither-perception-nor-nonperception." The state of nirodha can last up to
seven days,15 and the meditator should set a time limit before he embarks on
meditation leading to it. In returning to normal consciousness, he traverses the
jhdnas in reverse order - progressively awareness is resumed, the body functions
normally again, and the mind reactivates discursive thought and sense perception.
The middle ranges of meditation
Although the pursuit of concentration and insight are described as two separate
paths, they nevertheless can intersect or come into conjunction at various points.
Moreover, the feelings of bliss, equanimity, and supramundane powers that arise
at the third and especially the fourth levels of concentration absorption are clearly
parallel to the ten signs of rapturous feelings and brilliant visions and experience
of body levitation that characterize in the Path of Insight the level of "knowledge
of arising and passing away. " But just as, ideally, the enjoyment of iddhi powers
in concentration have to be left behind, so must the raptures of Mst-nibbdna,
which are labeled the ten corruptions. Yet these same levels of attainment are the
44


--- Page 57 ---
The stages and rewards of Buddhist meditation
most fruitful and exciting to the world of ordinary human beings caught up in
suffering and the round of existence.
For in a live socio-religious context, while meditation masters are likely to
claim to be well on the way to the top, they are unlikely to make the ultimate and
immodest claim of having reached nibbdna itself. In any case, that master who
has made the leap into perfect arahantship is unlikely to be conscious of the
world itself and is very near to passing away (parinibbdna) from human existence.
It is the masters who have reached the middle ranges of both paths - who enjoy
rapturous bliss and feel compassion for humanity (mettd) and equanimity, who
have access to supramundane powers and also feel the compelling urge to preach
their positive message to their friends, disciples, and relatives and to use their
virtuous powers for the benefit of humanity - it is these masters and proto-saints
who are the foci of cults and lay followings. And, in due course, the most saintly
of them will also be seen to withdraw into the state of nirodha for days at a time
and then to pass away in austere majesty.
The acquisition of iddhi powers
It would be a mistake to consider the iddhi powers that become available in the
process of samddhi as a weird "magical" effect and/or a "miraculous" phenome-
non in the sense of their character being abnormal or contrary to the Buddhist
understanding of mental processes. The iddhi are not bizarre results of the
suspension of laws of mind and world process, but by-products of their mastery.
This "rational" basis of iddhi powers is part and parcel of the gloss provided by
Buddhaghosa himself, a gloss that sounds close to instrumental action - tradition-
ally defined in the West as the appropriateness of means for achieving chosen
ends.
While Bhikkhu Nanamoli, the translator of Visuddhimagga into English,
translates iddhi as "supranormal power," he provides us with this decisive
evidence. The Pali term iddhi-vidhd literally means "kinds of success." In terms
of Buddhaghosa's gloss, iddhi means success "in the sense of production, in the
sense of obtainment" (p. 414). What is produced or obtained is called successful,
and in this sense the metamorphosis of lust is a success, as is the satisfactory
practice of renunciation. We are further informed that success, by another method
of glossing, is "a term for the effectiveness of means; for effectiveness of the
means succeeds with the production of the result intended . . . "(p. 414). It is
this efficacy of means in relation to an end that is the kernel of the phenomenon
of iddhi, a feature that has been ill-understood in conventional discussions of the
subject.
The Visuddhimagga, when it discusses iddhi, is of course primarily concerned
with that kind of "success" and "efficacy" generated in the meditative process
45


--- Page 58 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
of the samddhi kind. But it is not irrelevant to note that for Buddhaghosa the
rubric iddhi includes other kinds of manifestations of success as well, which are
quite different from those generated by meditation.16 The neutral criterion of a
means-and-ends relation encompasses the same rubric of iddhi.
"HAVING BEEN ONE, HE BECOMES MANY"
Let us take the first iddhi power deriving from samddhi and grasp its mechanics.
The above heading is really the first among an inventory of successes to which
the meditator "directs his mind":
Having been one, he becomes many; having been many he becomes one. . . . He appears
and vanishes. He goes unhindered through walls, through enclosures, through mountains,
as though in open space. He dives in and out of earth as though in water. He goes on
unbroken water as though on earth. Seated cross-legged he travels in space like a winged
bird. With his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so mighty and powerful. He
wields bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma World.17
The adept does these things by first making his meditative passage through the
first four jhdnas (he traverses the plane of seclusion, through equanimity and
bliss, to the plane of neither pain nor pleasure). The first three planes are the
accessory planes in which the body becomes "light, malleable" after the adept
steeps himself in "blissful and light perception," and the fourth plane is the
natural plane for obtaining iddhi powers. "Emerging from the basic jhdna," the
adept "resolves" to accomplish the required transformation.
There is a double transformation achieved. Through the experiencing of bliss
and the attainment of equanimity, and thereafter "the perception of lightness,"
the adept is liberated from the hindrances that stand in the way of "applied
thought." This results in transforming the material body of the adept into an
ethereal body: "his physical body too becomes light as a tuft of cotton," and he
creates a path in space by means of the earth kasina and goes on foot, or by
means of the air kasina he travels by air like a tuft of cotton (p. 442). Thus the
adept achieves a mind-made transformation upon himself, and this transforma-
tion of mind and body is meant to be in line with the Buddhist theory of the
arising and dissolving of Dhamma states and formations. But the adept simulta-
neously by resolve effects a second transformation upon the outer world also:
Focusing on the appropriate kasina as the subject of meditation - for example,
earth, water, air, or fire - he changes the land into water and dives in and out of it,
or the sea to land and walks on it, or the space to earth and treads in it, and so on.
There are many fine points, hair-splitting distinctions, and ingenious mecha-
nisms of transformations in which the reader is likely to get lost. For example,
the transformation in which the adept changes his "appearance" or produces the
appearance of another object (e.g., the apparition of an elephant in the sky) is
distinguished from the process that results in a "mind-made body"; this latter is
the method by which the meditator creates from "this body another body
46


--- Page 59 ---
The stages and rewards of Buddhist meditation
possessing visible form, mind-made," like a reed being drawn from its sheath, a
sword from its scabbard, or a snake from its slough. It is this second iddhi that
enables the adept to see a visible object with a divine eye, or to hear a far-away
sound with a divine ear element, or to converse with Brahma or visit the Brahma
heavens "while remaining here." No bodily power as such is involved in these
successes, for they are mind-created.
We should finally note that, at least in the Visuddhimagga, there is no
denunciation of these supranormal powers as evil or sinful. On the contrary, it
sees them as fruits of concentration. However, they are at the same time hin-
drances to full insight and are irrelevant to the path of insight meditation that
leads to full understanding of suffering and deliverance from it. The Visuddhimagga
does say that the training of the mind to the point at which iddhi can be performed
is extremely difficult and ' 'only one in a hundred or a thousand can do it.'' But of
course the buddhas and saints do not have to subject themselves to the mental
exercises every time they wish to exercise iddhi powers.18
OTHER IDDHI FEATS
The process of effecting these feats becomes somewhat clearer, for instance, in
the description of "the divine ear element" and "the recollection of past lives,"
for the underlying principle is projection from near to far, from immediate
experience to more distant ones, from material and gross sensations to ethereal
and divine ones.
When the divine ear element is developed, the adept "hears both kinds of
sounds, the divine and the human, those that are far as well as near,"19 far off
even in another world-sphere. How is the divine ear aroused? The bhikkhu
entering the jhdna levels of consciousness first directs his attention to the gross
sounds normally within range of hearing and then gradually extends his attention
to more and more subtle sounds in all directions. These sounds become more and
more evident as the ascent is made upward to reach the absorption consciousness
of the fourth jhdna. Then arises the divine ear element whose area of hearing
extends from that of a single finger-breadth to the limit of the world-sphere and
beyond.
The technique recommended for a bhikkhu who wants to develop the faculty of
recollecting past lives is as follows. The beginner goes into solitary retreat on his
return from his almsround and his meal thereafter; he attains the fourth jhdna,
emerges, and adverts to his most recent act of sitting down, then the next
proximate act, and the next proximate and so on, in a regress backward in time
through a whole night, and a day, and then through years to his own rebirth that
began this existence of his; and he moves further backward to recall the mentality-
materiality (ndma-rupa) occurring at the moment of death in his preceding
existence, and so on through the chain of rebirths.
Logically, of course, the recollection of one's past lives leads to the recollec-
47


--- Page 60 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
tion ultimately of the many aeons and cycles of world destruction and regenera-
tion of our pulsating cosmos. Thus from the trajectory of a single person's
existence is developed the network and tangle of the cosmos both in space and
time: "He recollects his manifold past lives, that is to say, one birth, two
births, . . . a hundred births, . . . a hundred thousand births, many aeons of
world contractions and expansions . . ." (p. 451).
The Visuddhimagga documents with its usual meticulousness the differential
capacities of different adepts - other sectarians, ordinary disciples, great disciples,
paccekabuddhas, and buddhas - in remembering the number of past aeons, in
descending upon any place they choose backward and forward along the chains,
and in the intensity and vividness of remembrance of the details of past events.
The buddhas at the summit of the hierarchy of adepts can remember aeons
without limit, can descend in time "with the lion's descent wherever they want,"
and can see the past with the intensity and clarity of "the glorious Autumn sun's
dusk with its thousand rays."
The two chapters on the "direct knowledge" that produces iddhi powers are
sumptuously illustrated with examples of the feats performed by the Buddha and
his disciples. Indeed, the Buddha figures as the chief exponent of iddhi. A
famous example is the twin feat whereby the Blessed One resolved that the
citizens of Savathi should see the inhabitants of Saketa across a vast distance that
separated the two towns and whereby also "he split the earth in two and showed
Avici (Hell), and he parted the sky in two and showed the Brahma World" (p.
428).
There is again the extraordinary feat by which the Buddha lifted his feet and
placed them on the summits of Mount Sineru and Mount Yugandhara and, taking
his residence during the rainy season retreat on the Red Marble Terrace, delivered
his exposition of the Abhiddhamma to the "deities of ten thousand world
spheres" (p. 428). Then follows one of the incidents known so well by the
multitude of Buddhists past and present, and celebrated in a colorful, expectant,
and pious ritual all over Thailand: After his preaching to the gods was over, the
Blessed One informed Sakka of his intention to return to the human world, and in
response the gods built "three flights of stairs, one of gold, one of silver and one
of crystal," so that the Buddha could descend flanked by the deities.20
Among the Buddha's disciples, it is, as we have indicated earlier, Maha-
Moggallana who is credited with extraordinary iddhi powers, and the Visuddhimagga
regales us with his feats, second only to the Buddha's. Since he is a quintessential
perfected saint who through meditation acquired such powers and is a model for
emulation by many adepts, we should give an example or two of his feats.
At the time of the "twin miracle" described above, an assembly gathered
"that was twelve leagues across" and said that they would not disperse until they
had seen the Blessed One. People asked first the Elder Anuruddha to find out
where the Blessed One was, and he with his divine eye saw where the Buddha
had taken up his residence for the rains. They then asked the venerable Maha-
48


--- Page 61 ---
The stages and rewards of Buddhist meditation
Moggallana to pay homage to the Buddha and carry their message to him. "In
the midst of the assembly the Elder dived into the earth. Then, cleaving Mount
Sineru, he emerged at the Perfect One's feet. . . . " When he delivered the
message of the people of Jambudvipa, the Buddha asked Moggallana where his
"elder brother, the general of the Dhamma," Anuruddha, was. Being told that
he was at the city of Sankassa, the Buddha told Moggallana to return and inform
the people that he would descend the next day to the said city for the Mahapavarana
ceremony. This is how then the marvelous descent of the Buddha, flanked by the
gods, took place, after he had experienced the "revelation of the worlds"
(loka-vivarana) when, standing on the summit of Sineru, he surveyed the thou-
sands of world-spheres, looked right down to Avici and up to the realm of the
Highest Gods. In passing, we should note the important point that the two
disciples, Anuruddha, the "general of the Dhamma," and Moggallana, the
possessor of iddhi powers, are pointedly paired, ranked by the people and the
Buddha, and shown to act in a complementary fashion.
Perhaps the most dramatic of Maha-Moggallana's feats is his encounter with
the royal Ndga, Nandopananda. Because the ndga had no confidence in the Three
Jewels, the Buddha asked Moggallana to cure him of his wrong view. The ndga
incensed at the spectacle of "bald-headed monks" led by the Buddha proceeding
above to the divine world of the Thirty-three scattering "dirt off their feet on our
heads," "spread his hood over the realm of the Thirty-three and made everything
there invisible" (p. 436). Maha-Moggallana, proclaiming that he would tame the
ndga, himself assumed the form of a huge royal Ndga, and "surrounded
Nandopananda fourteen times with his coils and raised his hood above the other's
head, and he squeezed him against Sineru." Then followed other trials of
strength: the ndga blew a blast at the monk, but he attained the fourth jhdna and
was untouched and unharmed. Finally, the subdued ndga, assuming the form of a
young Brahman, took his refuge with the Buddha.
The meditative states and Buddhist cosmology
A feature that has been insufficiently appreciated in the commentaries on the
Visuddhimagga is that the topography of the meditative states and levels reached
by the inner consciousness of the meditator is remarkably similar to - homologous
with - the Buddhist cosmology of the various lokas (worlds) that compose the
cosmos and their pattern of interrelation. This correspondence is not merely a
matter of interpretive reading on my part. Indeed, the Visuddhimagga itself, after
having discussed the iddhi powers as manifestations of "direct knowledge" in
Chapters 13 and 14, makes the transition in the latter chapter from the capacities
of the adept to recall past lives and to see with the "divine eye" the "passing and
reappearance of things," to the description of the periodic creation and dissolu-
tion of the cosmos and its worlds in cycles of aeons of time.
49


--- Page 62 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
The hierarchy of levels on the samddhi path is first of all formulated as an
ascent from material states of consciousness to formless states of consciousness.
The material states begin at the lowest "access" state of concentration, then
proceed to the first jhdna level, and from there in succession through feelings of
bliss to the fourth jhdna level of equanimity and one-pointedness of mind and the
cessation of breathing. The formless states begin at the fifth jhdna level of
consciousness of infinite space (together with equanimity and one-pointedness),
proceed through successive levels of objectless infinite consciousness, and con-
clude with the eighth and final jhdna state of neither-perception-nor-nonperception.
In this ascent, we should note that the critical transition is from the fourth jhdna
level of materiality to the fifth jhdna state of formlessness, and it is no accident at
all that the supranormal iddhi powers are attained only after the meditator has
reached the critical fourth level.
Now what is the correspondence between this meditative scheme and map of
consciousness and the cosmology of world formations and dissolutions? Because
not every reader will have the appetite for the complex arithmetic of the cosmic
scheme, let me give the bare details necessary to make my point.21
First of all, the cosmic scheme postulates three broad levels of worlds, the
kdma loka, riipa brahma loka, and ariipa brahma loka:
(1) The kdma loka of sense and form, of bodily form and sensual feelings, is
the lowest. It is internally differentiated into n lokas thus: At the bottom is the
world of hells situated in the bowels of the earth; next come the 4 lokas inhabited
by humans, animals, and ghosts; on top of this are located 6 deva loka or
heavenly worlds. The deva loka are internally differentiated into 6 ascending
worlds, which include the abode of the four lokapdla (guardians); the next higher
Javatimsa, which is the abode on the top of Mount Meru of Sakka or Indra; and
the Tusita, where the next expected buddha, Maitreya, dwells waiting to be born.
(2) The next cosmic level is made up of the riipa brahma lokas, the worlds of
form only, in which dwell certain brahma beings. It is internally divided into 16
superimposed worlds, and what we need to keep in mind is the location therein of
certain worlds mentioned in the Visuddhimagga and that will be mentioned
shortly. The Abhassara is the sixth level, the Subhakinha is the ninth level, and
the Vehapphala is the tenth level.
(3) The third and highest level is the arupa brahma lokas, the worlds of
formlessness, the abode of the quintessential brahma beings. These are divided
into 4 ascending levels. (The breaking out of the last level implies the leaving
behind of the cosmos and entering the state of void.)
According to the cyclical theory of world formation and dissolution described
in the Visuddhimagga, there is periodic destruction of the cosmos by water, fire,
and air. There is in the instance of destruction by fire the successive appearance
of seven scorching suns, which cause drought and first burn the kdma world. The
fire rises to the summit of Mount Meru, the realm of the four lokapdla, and of the


--- Page 63 ---
The stages and rewards of Buddhist meditation
Thirty-three, ruled over by Indra, and "so it goes right on up to the plane of the
first jhdna," and "when it has burnt three lower Brahma Worlds, it stops there at
the Abhassara World."
This fire is followed by a rain, and the water level of the cosmos rises up and
then subsides, and as it sinks the lower (Brahma) world emerges first, and then
the four upper divine worlds of the sensual sphere (kdma loka) come into view.
When the water level sinks to the level of the earth, strong winds hold it
stationary. Beings are reborn first in the {arupa) Brahma world of Abhassara and
then progressively get grosser and more sinful as they descend through the
various levels to the earthly level of full materialization. This creation story has
been set out in the Agganna Suttanta and has already been a topic of comment in
my previous book.22
Now the world can also be destroyed by the action of water and by the action of
air, each agent carrying destruction to a higher jhdna level than that attained by
fire. While destruction by fire stopped at the first jhdna level, "the waters take
possession of the earth up to the place of the second jhdna" and when they have
dissolved the three Brahma worlds there, they stop at the Subhakinha world; then
when regeneration takes place "beings falling from the Subhakinha Brahma
world are reborn in the places beginning with the Abhassara World." Similarly,
the wind destroys the cosmos up to the third jhdna level and stops at the
Vehapphala Brahma world, until regeneration of life takes place again. We thus
note that the process of regeneration of life at the beginning of each cosmic cycle
is from above to below, from spirituality downward into increasing materiality.
This is the precise inverse of the meditational process, which ascends from
material states into the ethereal spiritual formless states. We may also note that
the destruction of the cosmos by fire, water, and wind stops at the limits of
material states covering jhdna levels i through 3, and does not reach up to the
fourth jhdna level, which in the topography of meditation is the critical level of
take off into equanimity, one-pointedness of mind, and the formless arupa states
of consciousness.
Again, the Visuddhimagga formulates a direct correspondence between the
occurrence of mental defilements in human beings and living creatures, such as
greed (rdga), hate (dosa), and delusion (moha), and the destruction of the world
by the elements: When greed is conspicuous, the world is destroyed by fire; when
hate by water; and when delusion by wind. And of course these same mental
defilements are the ones destroyed by the meditative discipline.
To sum up: For our purposes, to follow the logic of the Visuddhimagga''s
scheme of world formations and dissolutions and its correspondence to the levels
of human consciousness in samddhi meditation, we should appreciate that the
triad of cosmic levels reduces at a more basic level to the dyadic opposition
between material states and formless states, and that the middle level of worlds
characterized by form only (rupa brahma loka) is an intermediate zone. It is from


--- Page 64 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
this intermediate zone that in the cosmological scheme the regeneration (and
therefore materialization) of life begins after each destruction and spreads down-
ward in increasingly grosser forms. In the meditative scheme, it is from the same
zone that begins the opposite process of the meditator's leap from material levels
of consciousness into the higher formless states of transcendence.


--- Page 65 ---
The forest-monk tradition in
Southeast Asia
A historical backdrop
The classical and well-entrenched duality within the sahgha between those
monks labeled forest dwellers (drannavdsi/vanavdsi) and village or town dwell-
ers {gdmavdsilnagaravdsi) is frequently seen as corresponding (though not
always perfectly) to another division between monks devoted to the vocation of
meditation (yipassanddhura) or "practice" (patipatti) and the vocation of books
(ganthadhura) or learning (pariyatti). While these dualities or oppositions may
seem sharply defined and mutually exclusive, it is important to realize that
ideally the bhikkhu should combine both vocations and that in actuality one
vocation does not necessarily exclude the other. Moreover, the oppositions are
not necessarily homologous and need not therefore create consistent profiles; thus
in Thailand, as elsewhere, town-dwelling monks and urban monasteries have
promoted meditation, and there have been forest-monk communities that have
produced well-known scholars. Nor have forest dwellers and town dwellers, or
those dedicated to learning and those to meditation, necessarily constituted
separate sects. Burma provides us with examples of mainstream "orthodox"
sects or fraternities spawning groups or sections that hive off and dedicate
themselves to "purer" Vinaya practices or more appropriate vocational paths,
however they are defined. For Sri Lanka, a famous example is Valvita Sara-
narhkara, who initiated a reform movement within the dominant Siyam Nikaya
with the aim of learning and observing the Vinaya rules. Correspondingly, as
instantiated by the history of the Thammayut sect in Thailand, a reform-oriented
sect that begins in opposition to the establishment may itself in the course of
time develop the full spectrum of activities and orientations manifested by the
latter.
Finally, there is still another source of ambiguity that spoils any simple
dichotomization. Orthodoxy is frequently seen as conformity with the disciplin-
ary rules defined in the canonical Vinaya code. And conformity with the Vinaya
rules does not require the observance of dhutahga (ascetic) practices, which are
53


--- Page 66 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
doctrinally optional. Burma provides evidence of fraternities that rebelled against
the receipt of land gifts and other endowments and the life of "luxury" they
might afford; but these fraternities did not thereby adopt the "ascetic" {dhutahga)
practices. However, there have been pious persons, both monastic and lay, who
have deemed the dhutahga practices to be the quintessential expression of the
renouncer's code, and regarded the tapassi (hermit or ascetic) and the Pamsuku-
likas, a special case of the ascetic monks, as striving to fulfill the ideal norms of
early Buddhism. In Thailand today the hallmark of the forest monk is that he
observes a certain number of these ascetic practices.
Whatever the divergent strands and tensions in early Buddhism,1 it is certainly
the case that by and large "learning" and "practice" came to be seen by
institutionalized Buddhism as not only different vocations but also that the former
was the preferred basis of regular sahgha life. Yet, as we shall repeatedly point
out, the tradition of "practice" conflated with "forest dwelling" and "med-
itation" has frequently, if not always, been regarded in its formal status as a
legitimate branch or half of the sahgha, with the village- and town-dwelling
monks being regarded the "favored" branch enjoying official titles and regular
royal and lay support.
According to Rahula, by the first century B.C. the basis of the sdsana in Sri
Lanka (Anuradhapura) was declared to be learning and the vocation of books
rather than the vocation of practice. The writing of the tipitaka scriptures around
the first century B.C., and of the great chronicles Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa in
the subsequent centuries, was an affirmation of the direction taken.2 Similarly,
Rahula informs us that by the sixth century A.D. Sri Lankan Buddhism had
decisively rejected the ascetic hermit (tapassi) in favor of the village- and town-
dwelling monks. Concordant with these preferences was the coming down on the
side of Dhamma-dana (the monk's duty to reciprocate the layman's material gifts
with spiritual gifts) rather than on the side of mutta-muttaka (the monk's accep-
tance of gifts without any obligation to return) as the desirable relation between
monk and layman. The sahgha comes to be called a "merit field" (puhfiak-
khetta) where a layman sows seeds of merit and reaps a good harvest in the next
world.3
Medieval and modern Sri Lanka
It is possible that Rahula underrated the persisting presence and intermittent
impact of the ascetic monastic communities in the early Buddhism of Sri Lanka
and that he may have given a much too simple picture of the village-dwelling and
town-dwelling vocations as creating a bifurcation of the sahgha into two separate
sects or groups. It is quite clear that, at least for the early medieval periods - the
ninth through thirteenth centuries - the ascetic traditions figured in somewhat
complex ways in the interrelations between sahgha and polity. Let us follow the
54


--- Page 67 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
story as told by Gunawardana4 for this period which spans the last stages of the
Sinhala Kingdom centered in Anuradhapura and its subsequent shift to Polon-
naruva as the capital, whence during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries it
contributed so vitally to the religious and political developments in Burmese
Pagan and Thai Sukhothai.
It seems that the ascetic communities of the time were known by two labels
taken from two ascetic practices recommended in texts such as the Visuddhimagga
and the Vimuttimagga.5 The Pamsukulikas took their name from the tradition of
using discarded rags for their robes, whereas the Aranhikas took theirs from the
practice of contemplative life and meditation in the seclusion of the forest. To get
some glimpse of the way the monks who assumed these labels were distributed
on the ground, we must consider at least three variables. Firstly, the ascetic
groupings in question might have intersected with, or had their representation
within, the three major nikdyas (sects/fraternities) into which the Sinhala sahgha
was then alleged to have been divided. These were: the Mahavihara (Great
Monastery) Nikaya, which appears to have been both in Anuradhapura and
Polonnaruva the dominant sect for much of the time and which in any case has
left behind the vast majority of the chronicles and texts from which the history of
the times is reconstructed; the Abhayagiri Nikaya, which was a big presence as
well and which was more open to doctrinal and commentarial schools outside the
4'orthodox" Theravadin tradition espoused by the former; and the Jetavana
Nikaya, which was a breakaway group from the Abhayagiri, but which, being
smaller in size, seems to have vacillated in its alliances with the other two in the
ups and downs of factional rivalries.
Secondly, the Pamsukulika and Araiinika communities were distributed
throughout the kingdom - some living in the environs or peripheries of the
capital, the others in the interior spread over a wide area. There is also some
evidence that their architectural forms and layout might have differed from those
of the monasteries in the capital. Thirdly, as already suggested by Buddhaghosa
in his elucidation of them in the Visuddhimagga, the ascetic practices were
capable of flexible interpretation according to "strict," "moderate," or "soft"
standards. Thus a variability in the practices of different communities bearing an
ascetic label must be taken to be a normal condition.
THE PAMSUKULIKAS
Though the Pamsukulikas were known in Sri Lanka from at least the second
century B.C., they came into prominence in the seventh to the tenth centuries.
Some of the monasteries belonging to this "sect" were in the vicinity of the
capital, and others are known to have existed in the provinces and in the Matale,
Mahiyangana, Ritigala, and other regions.
The Pamsukulikas of the Abhayagiri monastery affiliation are known to have
left it to form a school or fraternity (gana) of their own in A.D. 872 during the
55


--- Page 68 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
reign of Sena II.6 But, on the other hand, the Parhsukulika grouping at the
Mahavihara remained within the fold right into the tenth century.
In due course, the Parhsukulikas by their very vocational practices attracted
royal liberality and donations of the sort one associates with the town-dwelling
monks affiliated with the capital. Several kings, including Aggabodhi V and VII
and Mahinda IV, are on record as having given them special foods, garments,
gold, and arable land together with equipment, slaves, and attendants.
The Pamsukulikas, along with the monks of many other monasteries of
Polonnaruva, left for Ruhuana in protest against the confiscation of monastic
property by Vikrama Bahu I (1111-1132) and thereafter have not appeared in
the historical records of Sri Lanka.
THE ARANNIKAS
The Sinhala chronicles do not mention the Aranfiikas before the tenth century,
and references to them in other sources are rare. They too enjoyed the patronage
of kings and queens, who not only built forest hermitages for them but also sent
them medicaments and choice foods.
A remarkable feature is that "while there are several references to the Arannika
monks of the Mahavihara nikdya, there is no such information on those affiliated
with the Abhayagiri and Jetavana nikayas."7 But, once again, although signifying
a special vocational emphasis within the predominant nikdya of the times,
Arannika establishments also show evidence of distinctive achievements that set
them apart from the usual monastic communities.
The Aranfiikas seemed to have flourished even in times when the main
establishments at the capital underwent hard times and reverses. Dimbulagala
was a famous Arannika settlement, situated some ten miles southeast of
Polonnaruva. It was known in the twelfth century to have had about 500 monks.
It attracted many pilgrims as a repository of the corporeal relics of the Buddha; it
may also well have been a center for the practice of meditation;8 and it produced
some of the leading scholars and hierarchs among the sahgha of the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries.9
By and large, the Aranfiikas seemed to have lived in the "forest," whether this
is interpreted as the peripheries of towns and villages or the deep interior, and
they devoted themselves to both philosophical contemplation and scholarly
endeavors. In fact, some of the renowned teachers and commentators of the
period belonged to them, thus demonstrating that the vocations of meditation and
learning can be combined in the best institutions.
In any case, what is of special interest to us is that their prestige was at its
climax precisely at that period of medieval history when both kingship and
sdsana were revitalized and achieved a final flowering, especially during the
reign of Parakrama Bahu I (1153), in whose time took place a historic reform
and "purification" of the sahgha.10 This reform consisted of the expulsion or
56


--- Page 69 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
punishment of "deviant" monks, the reconciliation of the eight independent
fraternities into which the sahgha had fragmented, and appointment of a
mahdsdmi as the head of the sahgha. It is remarkable that this attempt at forging
an ecclesiastical unity and hierarchy was achieved by Parakrama Bahu with the
collaboration of a monk named Mahakassapa, a scholar and master of the
Vinaya, who presided over the synod and came not from one of the main
monasteries inside the capital but from the historic forest-dwellers' (drannika)
monastery of Udumbaragiri, located some ten miles from it and probably belong-
ing to the Mahavihara Nikaya.
It is vital to note - 1 reiterate a point I have made in my book World Conqueror
andRenouncer - that both the Galvihara inscription and the Culavamsa chronicle
compare the roles of Parakrama Bahu and the Mahakassapa with those played by
Emperor Asoka and Mogalliputta Tissa in the Third Council.
We have seen, then, that the forest-dwelling monks, dedicated to a more or less
ascetic and meditative life in the forest, though removed from the day-to-day
religio-political life of the capital, could, by their very distancing - which earned
them a popular reputation and acclaim as following the ideal religious life of a
bhikkhu - periodically enter the arena at the capital to help purify and set things
in order.l x The active participation of monks of the Arannika sect in this sahgha
reform marked their significant position in the sdsana as a whole.
Now, it is of capital importance that a subsequent sahgha reform, of which the
one discussed above was the precursor - namely, that recorded in the Dambadeni
Katikavata, which was codified during the reign of Parakrama Bahu II - was
transported together with Sinhala Buddhism to the early Thai kingdoms of
Sukhodaya and Lan Na, and thereby provided the organizational structure for the
sahgha for Southeast Asian Buddhism. In this constitutional charter we find the
formal recognition of the sahgha as divided into two sections in which the forest
dwellers are one. The katikavata recognized that the sdsana was divided between
the gdmavdsins on the one hand and the drahhavdsins on the other, each section
to be headed by a mahdsthavira, a title given to a monk of twenty-five years'
standing. Both sections with their own heads were placed under the overall
headship of the mahdsdmi, the head of the sahgha. And the provision that should
the post of the mahdsdmi fall vacant, the successor should be appointed from
among the two mahdsthavira leaves us in no doubt that a monk of drannika
affiliation could at that time become the head of the sahgha hierarchy and the
entire community of monks of the island.12
It is relevant now to refer to another critical revival and unification in Sri Lanka
sponsored in the Kandyan Kingdom in the eighteenth century. It included the
elevation of the two main monasteries in the capital, namely Mai watte and
Asgiriya, to preeminent positions such that they were given jurisdiction over all
the monasteries on the island. Thus a dual reorganization was introduced, with
each division or chapter being headed by a supreme chief monk (mahd-ndyaka)
and assisted by two deputies (anu-ndyakas) and a committee of chief monks
57


--- Page 70 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
(ndyakas). Exclusive powers were given each division to admit novices to higher
ordination at the capital, and various sacred sites and monasteries and endow-
ments throughout the kingdom were assigned to the two divisions, which were
''formally" assigned the northern and southern regions. What is of interest to us
is that Asgiriya is said to have originated as a forest-dwelling (drannavdsi)
fraternity, whereas Malwatte belonged to the village-dwelling (gdmavdsi) tradition.
By the middle of the eighteenth century, this distinction had apparently lost its
original significance, most of the Asgiriya monks being in fact village dwelling.
Thus the two chapters in time became parallel structures. Nevertheless, we
should bear in mind the persisting nature of the partition of the sahgha and the
use of the two labels; I shall shortly show how the dichotomy still operates
meaningfully in the Kandyan ritual of state called the perahera.
Although in the late eighteenth century the Asgiriya and Malwatte chapters
showed no substantive differentiation in their orientations, they yet were divided
as opposed factions, Asgiriya supporting the king and his Nayakkar kinsmen (of
South Indian origins) and Malwatte, including the sahghardja, Valvita Saranam-
kara, siding with the opposition.13
There is some evidence of an interest in meditation on the part of Saranarhkara
in the mid-eighteenth century, to which we shall advert later, but let me now take
the story of the forest-monk traditions in Sri Lanka to modern times.
A rich documentation of the Sri Lankan forest monks of the nineteenth and, in
greater detail, twentieth centuries is provided by Michael Carrithers in a work
that is in press, and of whose content I can only give some brief indications.14
Carrithers develops his general principles by means of documenting detailed
biographies of eight leading forest dwellers. It transpires that Sri Lanka manifests
a spectrum of tendencies among the various monks who have followed forest-
monk practices.
In 1972, Carrithers made a count of approximately 150 forest-monk hermit-
ages in Sri Lanka, which were all "less than 100 years old, and all but a
handful . . . less than 20 years old." Most of these hermitages were founded or
inspired by a few leading figures, most of whom were still alive. This seems to
imply that the earlier ascetic and meditative tradition had declined during the
colonial times and that they were revived in recent times, thus representing a
feature of what Heinz Bechert has called "Buddhist modernism."15 Carrithers's
evidence suggests that, although there may have been an overall decline, yet the
forest-monk-cwm-meditative tradition had not disappeared; in fact, his evidence
could have prompted him to take a stronger view of continuity than he has
actually taken.
The Island Hermitage located just off the southwest coast of Sri Lanka was
founded around 1911 and has been largely occupied by European monks. These
monks have combined strict disciplinary practices with meditation and have
achieved a remarkable reputation for scholarship. The founder of the hermitage


--- Page 71 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
was Nyanatiloka, and another famous member was Nyanaponika. When Car-
rithers visited it, it had fourteen kutis individually occupied.
For us, what is more interesting is Carrithers's treatment of what he calls "folk
asceticism," from which derives many of the forest-monk hermitages founded
and populated by Sinhalese monks. Many of these local monks interestingly had
hived off from the established sects, like the Siyam Nikaya, to start stricter
fraternities in the spirit of reform. Reform itself, true to the pattern of purification
recurrently staged in Theravada Buddhist countries, takes the canonical texts and
the classical Visuddhimagga as a point of reference.16
Pannananda is identified as a mid-nineteenth-century figure who founded the
oldest continually occupied hermitages extant in Sri Lanka, namely, Batuvila and
Kirinda. He was born in 1817 in Tangalle in the South, and in his time arose the
Low Country reform movements that founded the Amarapura fraternities and
subsequently the Ramanna Nikaya, in the founding of which Pannananda actu-
ally participated.
Pannananda designated his hermitage at Kirinda as tdpasdrdma and referred to
himself and his disciples as tdpasa monks; Pannananda practiced at one time or
other all the dhutahga (ascetic) practices. Now it is clear that Pannananda's
interpretation of hermitage life was fully informed by the Vinaya texts, the
Visuddhimagga, and also that it was rooted in the Jataka tradition. And his
regime combined meditation with active preaching and teaching (rather than
scholarship). This combination of activities was not thought to be contradictory,
and in fact, as we shall see in our account of recent forest monks in Thailand, it
indicates an entrenched pattern.
Now, I want to use the example of Pannananda to make two points of more
than a parochial Sri Lankan import. Firstly, Carrithers cites a biography of the
monk, which was in turn based on an earlier biography.17 These biographies,
called appropriately caritaya, recount besides other things Pannananda's encoun-
ters with wild animals (a leopard and a snake) and with deities and report a dream
foretelling his destiny. I submit that these are "conventional" incidents reported
in many of the lives of famous Southeast Asian forest monks and that this
biographical tradition in Sri Lanka is part of a larger Theravada tradition.
Secondly, Carrithers reports that Pannananda had a number of teachers, of
whom one was a forest-dwelling monk named Sumangala, with whom he studied
meditation for a while, and whose ascetic powers are still spoken of. I submit
again that such facts suggest that there was a continuing tradition, sparse perhaps
but not exactly moribund, that cannot be attributed to that kind of Buddhist
modernism associated with the Theosophists and with Anagarika Dharmpala.
An important strand in the contemporary forest-monk phenomenon is a serious
and disciplined movement among Sinhalese monks started by Kadavadduve
Jinavamsa and his collaborator, Nanarama. Jinavamsa was born in 1907 near
Matara, and his group of hermit monks were called Sri Kalyani Yogasrama
59


--- Page 72 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
Samsthava.18 The affiliations of this movement were with the reformist Ramanfia
Nikaya. Jinavamsa was a Pali scholar and essayist who advocated a reform of
monastic practices. His associate Nanarama was the skilled meditation adept and
teacher; he can be said to have ' 'recreated" a meditation tradition out of the
principles and precepts set out in the Visuddhimagga, the heritage bequeathed by
Pannananda, and the stimulation provided by Burmese influences.
Jinavamsa was able to establish his hermitages with lay support and for the
express purpose of training pupils in meditation. That the ablest forest monk
imbued with a teaching mission and endowed with entrepreneurial skills is
capable of establishing institutional networks is attested by the fact that "The
tenth anniversary in 1961 saw the samsthava fully constituted with 100 monks
and 40 hermitages or meditation temples 
It enjoyed more internal cohesion
than any of the circumambient village Sangha" (Carrithers).19
I cannot refrain from including an incident that attests to the excitable piety of
the laity who crave for exemplary saints. In 1973, rumors spread in Colombo
that a monk from Nanarama's teaching hermitage had attained the status of
sotdpanna (stream enterer). Pious laity were getting ready for their lavish dona-
tions to the hero. From the point of view of the hero's teacher, the status in
question was a sober description of his pupil's progress in meditation and in the
understanding of Buddhist truths.
The final band in the Sri Lankan spectrum is occupied by the Tapasa Movement,
a spectacularly visible and correspondingly volatile and short-lived movement in
the early 1950s. Carrithers dubs them "folk ascetics," for their conduct was
based on more "folk ideas than on canonical commentarial versions of the
meditative life."20
The first Buddhist tapasa monk of modern times was Subodhananda, who in
1898 renounced his ordination and left a Siyam Nikaya temple near Colombo.
He subsequently took the robes again as a self-ordained ascetic, a tdpasayd. The
concept and the role are based not on the canonical texts, in which self-ordination
is not countenanced, but on Jataka tales of how the Buddha left home to ordain
himself. Though earlier in his ascetic career Subodhananda was subject to the
taunt of theyyasamvdsaka, meaning "coresident monk by theft" (a label culled
from one of the stories in the canonical Vinaya texts), by the end of his life in
1948 his movement had gained a certain respect; he left behind three well-
established temples and a couple of vocal pupils. Subodhananda actually wrote a
pamphlet in support of a new group of monks who, in the heady revivalistic
atmosphere of the years after independence in 1948 and the imminent celebra-
tion of the 2500th anniversary of Buddhism, founded forest-monk communities
within the fold of the recognized ordination traditions.
It is these slogans and precedents that stimulated certain young men in the
early fifties to self-ordain themselves as ascetics and to publicize their renuncia-
tory gestures. The best known of these was Tapasa Himi, who at the age of 18,
inspired by the example of another monk who had left the established sangha and
60


--- Page 73 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
reordained himself, shaved his head, donned a robe, and squatted in a cemetery
near his home.
Thereafter Himi and his followers - all young, innocent of formal religious
training, and responsive to the histrionics of happenings - took to residing in
cemeteries, to sitting cross-legged under trees, and to walking in single file
4'measuring their steps." They laced these with a caustic preaching style directed
at the religious establishment.
News of the young ascetics spread, and they became popular preachers. Within
two years, Himi's reputation had grown, and so had the number of lay pupils and
the scale of lay support. At the peak of their reputation, Himi and seventeen
disciples went to the old capital of Kandy and occupied a hilltop. The laity
mobbed them and showered them with gifts, and the number of hermits increased
to thirty-five within two days. They then daringly occupied the Temple of the
Tooth, and this signaled their fall; they had pushed the religious establishment too
far, and the police dislodged them. An invitation to go to Burma did not
materialize, and soon afterward the movement was subject to harassment and
abuse by the police and the public, which now turned against them. Himi escaped
to India for a year; the other tdpasayd disbanded or became regular monks.
I must record - especially as proof of the Sinhala Buddhist public's responsive-
ness to millennial hopes and the appearance of the rare arahant among them -
that, at the height of the effervescence, rumors spread that Tapasa Himi had
supranormal powers, that he could fly, that he was seen in the moon, that he could
speak ten languages. Some even assimilated him to the saints of ancient Sri
Lanka, others to the bodhisattva of the Jataka stories. He even received the
ambiguous title of Vdbada Budu (the first term being his village; the second could
refer to the Buddha himself or be simply used as an honorific).
This short-lived movement is instructive. Negatively, it demonstrates that a
movement based on self-ordination and whose members have little' 'professional''
training in monastic discipline are condemned not to take institutional root.
Positively, it demonstrates that this ascetic protest by youths and the enthusiastic,
though short-lived, lay support it enjoyed are "religious" phenomena embedded
in politico-economic issues. Apart from the reform of the sahgha attitudes of the
time, this was a period of increasing literacy of youth unaccompanied by
increasing employment opportunities; furthermore, the fact that the larger part of
the lay support was from the ranks of the lower and poorer castes21 suggests that
this was a time when the gap between egalitarian democratic ideals and the
realities of the traditional hierarchy was keenly felt.
Burma
Mendelson tells us a complex story of the Burmese forest-monks of the arahanta
tradition and the diverse contexts in which they appeared. They have acted as
61


--- Page 74 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
reformists and breakaway groups, they have formed special groupings within a
larger fraternity, and they have achieved the status of a separate sect reproducing
the spectrum of activities of the established sects. "The forest monks, much like
hermits, did not necessarily cease to belong to a mother community which might
well be of the village kind. Later in time, forest monks began to appear in forest
communities, devoting themselves no longer to meditation alone but indulging
also in cultural and educational activities, as did town and village monks; in
short, they seem to have been treated in some places as separate sects."22
Pannasami, the author of Sdsanavamsa, belonged to that branch of the sahgha
that had pro-Sinhala orientations, and he identified himself with the Upper
Burma arahanta tradition. He clearly was intolerant of "abuses" in the parent
community that stemmed from the receipt of land endowments and taxes and
favored those who left for the forest in protest.
Pannasami gave this account of an early split in the Burmese sahgha. There
was a dispute in the thirteenth century over the management of fields and lands
dedicated to seven monasteries built by King Uzana II. Three monks left for the
"forest" and took up residence in a mountain meditation monastery and cave.
"Those Elders [who left] were called those who walked alone. But the remaining
monks were called village-dwellers who walked with many. From that time
onwards there were two separate groups [of monks]: forest dwellers and village
dwellers. There was also a class of the Order known as monks who were
recipients of the taxes on fields and lands dedicated to the monastery."23
This kind of origin story is repeated by another Burmese chronicle, the
Thathana Linkara Sadan, which says that after a dispute about land arrangements
at the Campaka Monastery, two monks who were also brothers, Thatanadara and
Parakkama, left to become "lone forest dwellers." One brother went east and the
other west, and they set up two abbeys, the West Parakkama and East Parakkama.
In this account, however, the monks who departed are identified as the arahanta
line and the orthodox monks who remained as the Ananda (Sri Lanka) line.24
Mendelson rejects any simplistic identification in Burma of the "forest monks"
as the Maramma (Upper Burma) Sangha and the "village monks" as the Sihala
(Sri Lanka) Sangha.25 He proposes the alternative view - which accords with the
Sri Lanka facts that we have reviewed - that the chroniclers of the established
Sihala Sangha traced their lineages through those monks in either forest or village
communities whom they considered orthodox in behavior and criticized unortho-
dox behavior wherever it occurred, even among the forest dwellers. The forest-
monks whom Pannasami, for example, admired were those who did not accumu-
late land endowments but who meditated or rigorously observed the Vinaya rules.
"Too much materialism in the Sangha triggers both internal monastic reformers
and lay purification movements, and the forest monks Pannasami favors are more
likely to be the reformers than the reformed."26
Gifts to monasteries, sacred sites, pagodas, or famous Buddha statues com-
prised lands as well as slaves to look after and work them. Such property interests
62


--- Page 75 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
inevitably led to disputes and lawsuits between monks themselves, monks and
laity, and even monks and kings. And during Pagan times there were periodic
attempts by kings to reclaim or confiscate religious lands that had grown too large
or belonged to monasteries out of favor.27 When we add to this the sporadic
instances of far-flung, village-based autonomous monastic communities becom-
ing too lax in the observance of Vinaya rules, we see good reasons not only for
reformist monks to break away to live the pure life but also for genuinely ascetic
forest communities to be called upon periodically to help clean the stables.
There has been a continuity in the Burmese pattern of reformist thrusts from
within the sahgha. During the nineteenth century, reformist monks tended to see
themselves as "lone forest dwellers" of the arahanta tradition which was strength-
ened and vitalized by infusions of Sinhalese orthodoxy through the medium of
successive "pilgrims" sent to Sri Lanka for reordination.
It is neither in Sri Lanka nor in Thailand but in Burma that we find the best
evidence in the last 130 years of reformist and forest-monk traditions being
elaborated in the face of royal attempts at' 'purification'' as well as ' 'domestication''
of the sahgha. This is best illustrated by the creation of major sectarian move-
ments during the reign of King Mindon (1853-78). He attempted to create a
unified sahgha hierarchy as well as purify the religion by convening the Fifth
Buddhist Council in order to produce a recension of the Pali canon. The
Thudhamma, which constituted the dominant establishment, collaborated with
the king, but an impressive number of "puritanical sects" - whom Mendelson
calls the "Mindon sects" - stood aside. The main noncooperating sects were the
Shwegyin in Upper Burma and the Dwaya in Lower Burma. (The Shwegyin sect
will be subject to a close scrutiny shortly.) There were also smaller fraternities of
similar orientations, such as the Weluwun and the Pakokku. But this period of
flux - King Mindon was after all the last great Burmese king before the fall of
Upper Burma to the British - also gave rise to more radical and extremist groups
known by the label paramat. (A notable instance was the Hnyetwin, which has
continued to this day.) Finally, at the edges of this politico-religious turmoil
emerged the gaings, the volatile movements and cults that developed around the
weikzas - charismatic monks, ex-monks, and holy men, reputed to possess
supranormal powers associated with alchemy, meditation, astrology, amulets,
medicine, and other esoteric arts. This full spectrum of religious institutions, and
the fissiparousness that formed it, have continued into modern times. The gaings
focused on weikzas are a fuzzy and intriguing phenomenon best considered later
in this book in relation to millennial Buddhism after we have given a full account
of the contemporary meditation masters of North and Northeast Thailand and
when we are in a position to see in their proper perspective a variety of
holy men.
The Shwegyin sect merits an extended statement on account of the range of
dialectical tensions it manifested in its relation to the Burmese political authori-
ties28 on the eve of Burma's colonial submission. The history of the Shwegyin
63


--- Page 76 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
goes back to the reign of King Pagan (1846-53), during which the head monk
appointed by him expelled from the capital and from all important monastic
centers the Shangalegyun Sayadaw for his advocacy of a strict Vinaya discipline
based on reformist forest-monk notions. The banished monk and his sister
founded a remote forest monastery near a village south of Shwebo, and they had a
young disciple, the Shwegyin Sayadaw, who later became the founder of the sect
in question.
This was a period of crisis in Burmese history. A beleaguered kingship
threatened and shamed by the British conquest of the maritime provinces diverted
its efforts to the purification of the religion, and correspondingly the sahgha too
' 'leaned toward more self-denial, greater self-discipline, and a zeal for purification
as a counterbalance to diminished kingship."29 King Mindon in some respects
resembled his counterpart in Thailand, King Mongkut, in that he had spent some
time in the monasteries himself; and he was the agent of the Shwegyin sect's
return to royal favor. Mindon in fact backed two horses at the same time. While
supporting the officially appointed head of the sahgha (who had been his father's
favorite) and the Thudhamma Council of officially honored elder monks who
administered Buddhist disciplinary law, Mindon also deliberately honored the
forest monks, approved of their practices such as eschewing the use of sandals
and umbrellas, and asked them to draw up a new set of monastic rules to be
presented for approval by the council. Moreover, aside from the monastery he had
built in 1855 for the Shangalegyun Sayadaw, Mindon in the teeth of the opposition
of the town monks backed his protege monk's successor, the Shwegyin Sayadaw,
and built for him five monasteries near Mandalay Hill, soon after the completion
of the capital city of Mandalay in 1859.
But the collision between the head of the sahgha and the Shwegyin Sayadaw
came to an impasse, and in a historic decision Mindon not only gave royal
approval to the Shwegyin Sayadaw to leave the capital for the forest but also gave
him and his followers a separate status as a sect no longer under the authority of
the Thudhamma Council. Thereafter, in the remaining years of King Mindon's
reign the Shwegyin sect had its cake and ate it too, or, rather, managed the
extraordinary feats of keeping its independence while enjoying royal patronage
and munificence and of oscillating between administrative responsibilities and
withdrawal from them. The Shwegyin acted as a moral counselor to the king,
who faithfully supported the five Shwegyin monasteries so that their thousand or
more students were fed by royal grants and did not have to go on daily alms
rounds. Moreover, after the death of the head of the sahgha, Mindon gave the
Shwegyin Sayadaw the responsibility to act as Thathanapyu in the Alon area, up
the Chindwin River. Undismayed by the Sayadaw's refusal of an honorary title in
1871, Mindon escalated his favors and offered the Sayadaw twelve monasteries,
including the famous Mahawithudarama Taik, which became the seat of the
sect's leader. The sect developed rapidly, and the donations were redistributed
among the disciples.
64


--- Page 77 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
But if the sect seemed near domestication, its next step signaled its withdrawal
into reclusive life. When Mindon convened his famous Fifth Buddhist Council to
purify the scriptures and to unify the sahgha, the Shwegyin Sayadaw took no part
in it, retired four years later from all his official thathanapyu duties, and spent
longer and longer periods of time away from the capital at forest retreats.
Mindon's successor, King Thibaw, attempted to solve the sectarian problem by
nominating both the Shewgyin Sayadaw and the Taungdaw Sayadaw as joint
heads of the sahgha. The former refused the office but helped administer for a
time nine ecclesiastical departments in Upper Burma. During this time, the
Shwegyin sect's missionary monks were sent, with royal backing, to key centers.
Nevertheless, despite Thibaw's backing, which even exceeded that of his father,
the Shwegyin returned to forest life in 1884 in the face of his increasing
misgivings regarding the society at large. Surely enough, the next year the
Burmese monarchy came to an end.
The Shwegyin's attitudes and achievements are as intriguing as they are
impressive, and they have left an enduring mark upon his sect. At a time of
colonial intrusion, challenges from Christianity, and political turmoil, he demon-
strated that it is by a distancing from royal patronage and from the laity - while
accepting their bounty - that the forest-monks could preserve their integrity, as
well as build up their organizational network. While proud of its royalist origins,
the sect had not been overwhelmed by power, wealth, and honors. 4 At the same
time at [the Shwegyin's] death he left behind an organization held together by
respect for him, for other teachers, an acceptance of hierarchical authority, and a
countrywide network of reformist monasteries looking to Mandalay for leader-
ship."30
The twentieth-century posture of the Shwegyin sect has been a withdrawal into
its forest-monk life of discipline and scholarly contemplation combined with an
internal concern to improve its organizational structure by means of consolidation
and centralization. After some experimentation, in 1927 a reliance on aged
leaders was abandoned, and six monks were appointed to oversee day-to-day
affairs. At the same time, district-level positions, which were previously locally
determined, were brought under central control.
The years during and after World War II were a time of nationalist politics and
volatile experiments. But while the establishment Thudhamma monks joined
political organizations, the leadership of the Shwegyin sect disapproved of
participation in nationalist politics. The result was an even more emphatic
separation of its members from the attitudes and activities of the Thudhamma
majority. The sect's leader, Sankin Sayadaw, was a dedicated forest-monk, who
specialized in vipassand meditation and remained uninvolved in political
movements. And the sect as a whole has continued to maintain its traditional
profile - of involvement with meditation as a vital activity combined with an even
more pronounced emphasis upon scholarship and teaching. If it is an independent
sect within a nonunified Burmese sahgha, it is yet conservative and more
65


--- Page 78 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
comfortable with hierarchy than with loose autonomy for its member groupings.
And its greatest strength lies in Upper Burma.
Thailand
A remarkable theme in the ideology of the early Thai kingdoms established in
Sukhodaya and Chiengmai was that the carriers of the brand of Sinhala pure Pali
Buddhism that they received and treasured were monks of the forest-dwelling
tradition. The intercourse between Sri Lanka and Thailand began with King
Ramkhamhaeng inviting to Sukhodaya a high priest from Nagara Sri Dharmaraja
who was preaching the Sinhalese Theravada doctrine. It climaxed in the fifteenth
century, when a mission of monks from Lan Na (Chiengmai) went to Sri Lanka
to be reordained. On their return, they founded the Sinhala sect, sponsored the
revival of the Theravada doctrine and Pali Literature, and energetically built
temples. This fertile encounter with Sri Lanka was "objectified" in the Thai
collective consciousness in the form of a statue called the Phra Sihing (the
Sinhala Buddha/the Lion Buddha) and the mythology associated with it; this will
be the subject of a later chapter.
The nascent Sukhodayan stage of state formation was fittingly supported by the
reformist and evangelical Buddhism of the forest monks. The religious vitaliza-
tion first in Sukhodaya in North-central Thailand, and subsequently in the
northern Lan Na polities of the Chiengmai region, was closely associated with
the Sinhala sect of forest-dwelling monks (drannavdsi) under the leadership of
the monk Sumana and his associate Anomadassi.
To Ramkhamhaeng's grandson, King LIthai (Dharmaraja), is credited the
mid-fourteenth-century inscription at Wat SI Cam, which says: "When the
Somdet Phra MahasamI (Sumana the monk) came from Sihala (Sri Lanka) he
brought a body of laymen with him and, in his faith, brought also two precious
relics of the Buddha." Another inscription at the Monastery of the Mango Grove
commemorates the arrival of the monk Sumana in 1362, his installation at this
monastery, and his ordination of King LIthai himself as a monk.
Sumana, in fact, exemplifies the integral link between the forest-monk tradi-
tions of Sri Lanka, Burma, and Thailand in the fourteenth century. Sumana's
brand of forest-monk Buddhism can be linked via Martaban in Burma to the
famous Udumbaragiri forest monastery in Sri Lanka of the Polonnaruva period.
Sumana and his associate Anomadassi went to Martaban to study Sinhala
Buddhism from a monk named Anumati, who in turn had traveled to Sri Lanka to
be ordained there, and returned with eleven others to Burma in 1331 to found the
Udumbaragiri forest-dwelling order.31 In 1369, Sumana and his followers went
north to North Thailand (Lanna) to the Chiengmai region and thence began a new
chapter of the Sinhala forest monks' participation in the legitimation, crystalli-
66


--- Page 79 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
zation, and, finally, political expansion of the Thai dynasty under the rule of the
cakkavatti kings, Tilokaraja and his grandson Phra Mueang Kaeo (i495-1528).
The Thai dynasty was founded at Chiengmai by King Mangrai at the end of the
thirteenth century and was finally subjugated by the Burmese in 1578. In
between, there was an epoch of lively politics and proselytizing Buddhism. (A
period of 200 years had to elapse before North Thailand was again to be brought
under Thai suzerainty by King Taksin.) The Buddhism of the monks of the North
before the Thai takeover was of a Mon-Lava variety and in time came to be
identified as the order of town dwellers {nagaravdst), in contrast to Sumana's
forest dwellers. The latter were invited to come north by the seventh king of the
Thai dynasty, King Kuena (1367-88). Sumana brought with him a Buddha relic
and the Tipitaka canon, the twin symbols of popular cult and sacred learning, and
pointedly chose to live just outside the historic city of Lamphun. A chronicle,
Tamndn Mulasdsand Wat Suan Dauk, reports that Sumana informed' the king
when asked to choose a site: 'All men of wisdom, beginning with the Omniscient
Lord Buddha, whenever they came to a market town to lead the townspeople and
villagers to salvation, have been accustomed since ancient times to settle at a
measured distance of five hundred bow lengths from the gatepost of the town."32
Swearer and Premchit33 discern in the North Thai chronicles three phases in
the nexus between Buddhism and dynastic politics in Chiengmai during a 150-
year period:
1. King Kuena (1367-88) enshrines the relic brought by Sumana at Wat Suan
Dauk, which becomes the center of Sumana's forest order, confers the title of
rdjaguru on him, and even endows the order with revenue-producing lands. In
this first phase, then, Sumana and his Udumbaragiri order enable the newly
founded Thai dynasty (as new ethnic overlords) to gain eventual dominance over
the indigenous ruling elements who traced their affiliations to Adittaraja of
Haribhunjaya (Lamphun).
2. In the reign of Sam Fang Kaen (1411-42), however, sectarian religious
controversy breaks out, and the order of Sumana's successors, now the estab-
lishment, with Wat Suan Dauk as their center, is challenged by a newly arrived
Sinhala order from Ayudhya, which first establishes itself in centers like Lamphun
outside the capital, and criticizes the order of Sumana for accepting money and
owning rice lands; in addition, it espouses a Vinaya discipline different from it.34 It
would seem that this new Sinhala order is also of a forest-dwelling variety
confronting another of their kind with the usual reformist critique. The political
outcome of this rivalry is the deposition of Sam Fang Kaen and the usurpation of
the throne by his tenth son, Tilokaraja, who, it is presumed, attains to the throne
in part because of his championing of the newly arrived Sinhala order.
3. Tilokaraja's remarkable extension of the territories of his kingdom, west into
the Shan States of Upper Burma and east toward Luang Phrabang, goes hand in
hand with his sponsorship of the (new) Sinhala order, which becomes the
dominant order not only in the capital of Chiengmai but also in the major
67


--- Page 80 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
Northern towns, with monks of other affiliations reordaining themselves into it.
The two leading monks of the Sinhala order are honored with titles and residences:
The king builds for Nanagambhira a royal chapel in Chiengmai, while Mahasami
Medharhkara, appointed rdjaguru, ordains the king as a monk for a while and is
the recipient oi&prdsdd built for him at Wat Cedi Luang (Monastery of the Royal
Dagoba). Another monastery, Wat Pa Daeng (Monastery of the Red Forest),
remodeled and expanded, becomes the center of the order in the capital. Tilokaraja,
by virtue of his political and religious acts, not only assumes the title of
cakkavatti, but is also acknowledged as the reincarnated Asoka of North Thailand.
The Northern polity and Buddhist civilization of Lanna reaches its climactic
flowering during the reign of Tilokaraja's grandson, Phra Mueang Kaeo
(1495-1528). Of particular significance is the level of Pali scholarship and
literary composition reached, as attested by the historical chronicle, the Jinakdla-
mdli (1517); the great commentary, Mahgalatthadipani; and other works, such
as the Phra Buddha Sihing chronicle, which we shall cite later.
It is, however, important to remember that even during the reigns of these two
famous kings, the Sinhala order was by no means the only one. The Jinakdlamdll
tells us that at the consecration of a new uposatha hall at Wat Cedi Cet Yaut,
monks from three nikdyas from all the main towns were present, and they are
identified as the Slhala, Nagara (the pre-Thai order), and the Puppharama (the
Sumana-Suan Dauk order).
On the basis of our survey of developments in Sukhodaya and Lanna, we can
make some general statements regarding the role of the Sinhala forest-monks -
who are by no means a unitary community - in Thailand during medieval times.
The turn of events in both Thai polities shows that the Sinhala order by and large
chose to collaborate purposefully with the ruling powers, and thereby took a
stance that in many respects was markedly different from the troubled, equivocal,
and distancing stance taken by the Shwegyin forest-dwelling sect in Burma
during King Mindon's reign and after.
The Sinhala communities publicized their forest-dweller label by taking up
their monastic residence on the outskirts of the capital and other towns and
distinguished themselves by their skill in meditative absorption, strict discipline,
and knowledge of the Pali scriptures. At the same time, they forged a close
legitimating alliance with the rulers of the burgeoning Thai polities and became
the chroniclers that treated the fortunes of religion and kingship as closely
bonded themes.
By no means the sole member of the sahgha, the Sinhala order made its impact
in the classical Thai polities in contrast to the local branches of town-dwelling
monks. Prince Damrong has described the co-presence of the forest- and town-
dwelling monks in this way:
From stone inscriptions at Sukhothai [Sukhodaya] and Chiengmai, it appears that monks
oftheCeylonese sect lived in monasteries outside the towns . . . For both at Sukhothai and
68


--- Page 81 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
Chiengmai, all the big monasteries which were the landmarks of the cities, such as the
Monastery of the Great Relic and the Monastery of the Royal Dagoba, were all built in the
towns. There were also smaller monasteries built closely together about four kilometres
outside the towns. These monasteries were regarded as important for the Ceylonese
[Sinhala] sect. They included the Mango Grove Monastery where the Supreme Patriarch of
Sukhothai resided, and the Red Forest Monastery, residence of the Patriarch of Chiengmai.
This kind of monastery was built in a place far enough from the houses, but close enough
to the towns for the monks to walk to the towns to collect alms in the morning.35
The logic of newly founded political dynasties' and/or kingdoms' zealous
support of ascetic forest-monk fraternities may lie in the fact that they are an
effective counterweight to already established village- and town-dwelling monas-
teries and other localized and propertied cults and temples.36 Newly emergent
kings may wish to challenge the established cultic and/or monastic complexes
that are not their creatures by sponsoring new ordination lineages of forest
monks, whose ascetic, "pure" practices can attract lay attention and support.
The sponsorship is then part and parcel of the "purification" and "revival" of
the religion, which is a reiterated theme in the chronicles.
But it is also evident that these forest-monks labored outside established
capitals and towns. Starting as little-endowed fraternities, and locating them-
selves on forest edges on the frontiers of advancing settlements, the forest-monks
could act as elite carriers of literate civilization and could serve as foci for the
collective religious activities and moral sentiments of frontier settlements. It is an
alliance of this sort, a paired relationship between the founding kings with
cakkavatti expansionist ambitions and the ascetically vigorous forest-monks at
the moving edge of human habitation, that provides us with one plausible key for
understanding the dynamism behind the "Buddhist polity" in southeast Asia, a
dynamism that replicated the ruler-monk coalition in the expanding territories
and also domesticated the local cults and incorporated them within a Buddhist
hierarchy and cosmos.
Thai traditions relating to the role of various kinds of holy men - besides
monks, other persons in question were known by such names as ruesl (rsi),
chiphdkhdo, and khru-bd-dcdn - in the founding of new settlements in North
Thailand are both intriguing and shadowy.37 Charnvit attributes to monastic
establishments an active role in colonizing frontier regions and expanding territo-
ries of kingdoms; he explains the advantages accruing to the lay colonists serving
the monks in these terms:
Settlement in a new center of Buddhist religion or attachment to a Buddhist temple,
according to old practice of the Menam Basin, were grounds for exemption from corvee
labour. Those who became khd-phra or temple slaves were no longer eligible to be drafted
for corvee labour by any ruler. They worked only for a temple and its monks, and the
service required by the Buddhist order was considerably less strenuous than that de-
manded by kings or rulers . . . As for the ruler who authorised new settlement of this
kind, he supported it because it provided him with a way of expanding his realm and
6 9


--- Page 82 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
heightening his prestige largely by concentrating and increasing his pool of manpower . . .
Buddhist temples had become a binding force which tied a population together and this
was one of the basic concerns of rulers in the area.38
Once established, the temple with its monastic inmates and its cohort of attached
slaves could in turn attract new colonists settling on their own account and also
favored officials of the king whose servants were given corvee exemption.
About the activities of forest-monk communities in the medieval Ayudhyan
era, and especially the discipline and technique of meditation they followed, we
know little. But there is some evidence of an entrenched meditative tradition in
Thailand extending back at least to the Ayudhya period. This evidence comes via
the Manual of a Mystic,39 a Sinhalese handbook devoted to the treatment of the
jhdna levels of absorption associated with the samadhi form of concentration
meditation. Although much of the Manual's treatment of samadhi tallies with
some of the contents of the Visuddhimagga, there are portions that do not, and
that may have been incorporated from Yoga methods and/or developed in later
times from Buddhist canonical materials.40
D. B. Jayatilaka, who was instrumental in getting made a copy of the original,
surmised that the original Sinhalese text was written during the remarkable
Buddhist renaissance and revival in Sri Lanka in the middle of the eighteenth
century, to which Siamese bhikkhu contributed impressively41 Of particular
importance were the two missions sent to Siam in 1743 and 1750. A moving
spirit in the reform at that time was the Sangharaja Saranamkara42 and his
disciples, whose works contain ample evidence as to the existence of jhdna
practice in Sri Lanka in the eighteenth century. Mrs. C. A. F. Rhys Davids does
not find implausible the suggestion that the Siamese monks who came over to Sri
Lanka about, or shortly before, this period had a hand in the revival and
encouragement of samadhi meditation on that island. Such an occurrence fits into
the well-known pattern of periodic exchanges between the polities of Sri Lanka,
Rammana and Pagan (Burma), and Chiengmai and Sukhodaya (Thailand) by
which they revitalized one another's religious traditions and institutions.
The fate of the forest-monk (drannavdsi) tradition in Thailand during the last
130 years or so is not simple to recount: On the one hand, there have been
attempts from the time of Mongkut onward, since the 1840s, to encompass some
of its aspirations within the Thammayut movement. On the other hand the
bureaucratization thrust from Bangkok, especially at the turn of the twentieth
century with the objective of forming a hierarchized national sahgha, has tended
to obliterate it as a formal division of the sahgha. These two developments will
concern us in later chapters.
Although we have no detailed, reliable evidence on the place of forest monks
in the sahgha organization during Ayudhyan and early Bangkok times, it is
interesting that during King Mongkut's time there were four great divisions
(khana) of the sahgha: the northern (left) and southern (right) divisions, whose
members were the town-dwelling scholar monks (ganthadhura); the central
70


--- Page 83 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
division, which was composed of the forest-dwelling monks (vipassanddhura)\
and, lastly, the newly constituted Thammayutika group, which all through
Mongkut's reign was administered as part of the one Mahanikai order and gained
the status of an independent sect (nikdya) only in King Chulalongkorn's reign.43
The four divisions were administered by four ecclesiastical officials appointed by
the king from the heads of royal monasteries.
The Sahgha Act of 1902, passed in King Chulalongkorn's reign, seems not to
have accorded the forest-monks a formal administrative recognition. The act
changed the previous central division of the forest-monks into a central geo-
graphical division of the Mahanikai sect; thereafter, until today, the forest-monks
have not enjoyed a separate administrative recognition in either the Mahanikai or
Thammayut sects, which constitute the two major divisions of the Thai sahgha.
It is, however, interesting that right through the nineteenth century the develop-
ment and expansion of the capital city of Bangkok (and Thonburi on the other
side of the Cao Phraya River) reflected a pattern of town-dwelling monasteries in
the center of the city and of forest-monk establishments at the city's edge.
O'Connor44 has observed that in the early reigns of the Cakkri dynasty, say the
first three monarchs, the major royal wat as well as the highest-ranking monks
were located either within the city walls or on the Thonburi shore. Since by royal
policy the Chinese settled downriver outside the southeastern wall, and West-
erners chose to congregate further south along the river, it was in the area north of
the city, dotted with dispersed Thai settlements, that many of the new wat were
established. A good example is the Bangkhunphrom-Thewet area immediately
north of the city: By the fifth reign, there were nine wat there, and a new one was
added during it.
A noteworthy feature about these new wat developing on the northern edge of
the city, its frontiers so to say, was that they specialized in two complementary
activities - the conduct of cremations and mortuary rites, for by custom crema-
tions were forbidden within the city walls; and the practice of meditation.45
Because we have already seen in the Visuddhimagga that decomposing corpses
and charnel grounds were appropriate objects of and locations for certain modes
of meditation, the relation between officiating at mortuary rites and practicing
meditation could have been integral. Compared with the established royal wat
within the city walls and on the Thonburi shore, which concentrated on Pali
learning and were attuned to the monarch's political aims of unification of the
country, these new wat were more like forest hermitages, attracting wandering
meditation monks (phra thudong), who founded monastic residences, taught
meditation, distributed their charisma by blessing amulets, and then moved on.
Examples of such forest-monk institutions were Wat Mai Bangkhunphrom, Wat
In, and Wat Sangwet. A meditation teacher and forest-monk, famous for his
psychic powers and for his sacralization of images and amulets, who at the same
time was held in veneration by the Bangkok religious and royal establishments
was Somdet To, whom we shall celebrate later when we deal with the cult of
71


--- Page 84 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
amulets. The forest-order communities established at the edge of Bangkok in the
nineteenth century were recognized by and incorporated into the overall sahgha
hierarchy, but at the same time they kept their distance from the capital.
Paradigms
From our foregoing historical survey of forest-monk traditions, I wish to extract
two schematic "maps" that might serve both to orient and to interpret some of
the ethnography on Thailand that I shall present in this book.
TRIADIC RELATIONS
There is a triadic relationship between the king or ruler and the "establishment"
sahgha of primarily village- and town-dwelling monks on the one side and
forest-dwelling "ascetic" or "contemplative" monks on the other. This triad is
the result of the interplay of two variables. (See Figure 2.) On the one hand, the
sahgha has always from early or classical times manifested two modalities or
"vocations" that ideally should be "combined" but frequently in practice got
polarized. This polarization also usually had a politico-spatial expression in the
form of the location of monastic communities at the "center" (i.e., the political
capital and satellite-town centers) and at the "periphery."
The center-periphery grid divided again into two contrasts. There was firstly
the "center" defined as the limits of the capital or town. Frequently, the capital
was bounded by the city walls, within which again was the bounded space of the
palace and relic shrine (Mahadhatu) or chapel holding the palladium. The
capital's penumbra or margins consisted of "woods" or sparsely populated
RULER
SANGHA
SANGHA
Village/town dwelling monks
(sects/fraternities)
CAPITAL
Figure 2. Triadic relations
Forest dwelling monks
(sects/fraternities)
PERIPHERY
OF
(a) Capital/town
(b) Kingdom
72


--- Page 85 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
''gardens." Then, secondly, there was the center of the kingdom or mueang and
its outermost periphery of border regions, deep interior, and satellite principalities.
Now the triadic configuration is the product of the interaction of the ruler of
the kingdom at large (and in earlier times additionally the lesser rulers of the
satellite provinces and chiefdoms (mueang) and tributary principalities)46 with
the bifurcated sahgha. Because the ruler was located at the capital or town, there
was always a primary alignment between him and the town-dwelling monks. But
this established sahgha itself fragmented for various reasons into sects, which
competed for political patronage and became embroiled in notoriously volatile
palace politics. Moreover, the sects also varied in the rigor of their adherence to
the disciplinary rules. The periphery of contemplative or ascetic breakaway or
radical monastic communities were a counterweight to those tendencies and
might be periodically called upon by the political authorities and the laity to help
"purify" the sahgha. The forest communities, in turn, once they were well-
established and the recipients of lay generosity and donations, might develop a
spectrum of diversified activities and in due course take the shape of the
establishment monasteries.
Although I have presented these triadic relations as dynamically oscillating
between modalities in terms of the historical ebb and flow of politics, this
oscillation was captured and asserted as a synchronic pattern in the rituals of
various classical Buddhist polities. Let us take examples from Sri Lanka and
Sukhodaya to illustrate this coding.
1. I have earlier referred to the three large monastic fraternities (nikdya) of the
Anuradhapura period in Sri Lanka as being the Mahavihara, the Abhayagiri, and
the Jetavana, each of which had its parent monastery at or near the capital city. In
actual fact the "heterodox" rival to the "orthodox" Mahavihara was the
Abhayagiri vihara, which was formally labeled a "forest monastery." It was
placed north of the citadel (while the other two were to its south) and furthest
removed from it. Interestingly, the Abhayagiri vihara had a special relation to the
Buddha's tooth relic. Fa-Hian, who visited the island in the fifth century A.D.,
described the elaborate and popular annual festival held in honor of the tooth
relic.47 It was taken in procession from the shrine in the center of the city where it
normally resided,48 to the Abhayagiri monastery outside the capital where it
resided for three months. At the end of this period it returned to the city.
[Fa-Hian reports that the outward procession was staged in the middle of the
third month, and my guess is that this was the beginning of the vassa (rains)
season when monks go into a three-month retreat. The tooth relic thus annually
went into seclusion and returned to the city with intensified potency.] Fa-Hian
reported that as a result of the rites performed the kingdom suffered "neither
from famine, calamity nor revolution."49
2. A parallel statement is made in the tooth relic festival and the perahera
procession staged in the Kandyan Kingdom since the eighteenth century. We have
earlier mentioned that the two main fraternities or chapters of the Mahanikaya
73


--- Page 86 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
sect had their central monasteries in the environs of the capital of Kandy. The
Mai watte monastery was (and is) located to the south of the palace complex, and
the Asgiriya monastery, formally identified as a "forest hermitage," was (and is)
situated to the north (or more accurately northeast) of the palace complex on the
forest periphery or fringe of the city. The tooth relic itself was housed in the
Palace of the Tooth Relic (Daladd Mdligdva), which was part of the palace
complex itself. The custodianship of the tooth relic was vested in the king and the
chief monks of the Malwatta and Asgiriya fraternities. The daily offerings to the
relic are conducted by monks from these two monasteries on a rotational basis.
As staged today, on each night of the Asala festival,50 which occurs in the month
of July-August [that is, near the end of the traditional Buddhist rains-retreat
(vassa)], the tooth relic together with the "weapons" of the four major guardian
deities of the kingdom circumambulate the city at night and return to the Dalada
Maligava. On all these nights the chief official of this shrine, the Diyawadana
Nilame, ceremonially carries the "relic basket" (karanduva). But on the final
night of the festival take place certain sequences51 whose ritual import is discerni-
ble only in terms of the triadic structure I have postulated. After the grandest and
most spectacular circumambulation of the final night, the procession adjourns for
an hour or so, assembles all over again, and proceeds to the Asgiriya "forest"
monastery, where it arrives at about 2.00 a.m. The relic basket is conducted in
ceremony to the shrine, there called the Gedige Vihare, which architecturally
resembles the Palace of the Tooth Relic in the city center. Unlike on previous
occasions, it is now the chief monk (mahdndyaka) of the Asgiriya monastery or
his representative, rather than the Diyawadana Nilame, who carries the basket
inside, and the golden and jewelled ornaments wrapped around the relic basket
are checked against a list, the checking being witnessed by the Diyawadana Nilame
and the Asgiriya monks concurrently. Then the relic basket, now housed in the
shrine room, receives offerings of flowers and food behind closed doors. Then
the doors are opened again for a while so that the public can worship it. The relic
resides at the monastery until the early afternoon (2:00 p.m.), when it is taken on
its final "day procession" (Daval Perahera).
The reformation of the perahera for the final "day procession" takes place as
follows. Having accompanied and left the tooth relic at Asgiriya monastery, the
rest of the main procession, with the gods in attendance, proceeds to the river to
perform the "water-cutting" ceremony, which ensures rains and prosperity, and
then returns to the Asgiriya to join up with the relic for the final circumambula-
tion of the city.
3. Let us now invoke a parallel statement from the classical Sukhodaya
Kingdom. The layout of the capital clearly showed the triadic structure. In the
center of the city stood side by side the king's palace to the east and the shrine
(and monastery) where the Buddha relics were enshrined (Wat Mahadhatu). In
the city resided the nagaravdsi (town-dwelling monks), and outside it, on the
western fringe, was situated the Mango Grove where resided the Slhala forest-
74


--- Page 87 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
dwelling sect. The chronicles {Jinakdlamdll and Mulasdsana) tell the story of the
establishment of the Slhala sect in Rammanadesa (at Pan located near Martaban).
The leader of this forest-dwelling sect bore the title of Mahasami, invested upon
him by the Sinhala king. Two Thai monks, Anomadassi and Sumana, went to Pan
to be reordained by the Mahasami, and Sumana returned to Sukhodaya at the
request of King Loe Thai (1299-1346) to found the order of Slhala monks there.
It is his successor, LI Thai (1347-74), who dramatized the theme that concerns
us. He received in his capital the eminent Mahasami from Pan and settled him in
the Mango Grove on the capital's fringe; the reception was in royal style, in that
the king and his officials escorted the monk from the east gate of the city to the
west gate and out to the Mango Grove, along the principal street, the Rajamarga,
which had awnings along the whole length in order to protect the dignitary from
the sun and rugs on the path so that his feet would not touch the ground.
The king matched this event by himself, at the end of the rainy season retreat,
seeking ordination for a brief period at the hands of the mahasami. Griswold
describes the king's inscriptions relating to the event thus: "Donning the yellow
robe, he raised his hands in salute to the statue, to the copy of the Tipitaka which
was kept in the palace, and to the Mahasami Sangharaja, pronouncing his
resolution to attain Buddhahood, whereupon the earth quaked. The king was then
ordained samanera, and proceeded on foot all the way to the Mango Grove.
There . . . he received, the upasampada as a bhikkhu the next day."52 Not long
afterward, the king led a successful military campaign.
4. Although we do not see such mutualities and oscillations being staged in
the Bangkok epoch since 1782, yet we see a similar pattern in certain features of
the rituals devoted to the palladium of the kingdom, the Emerald Buddha, housed
in the shrine (Wat Phra Kaeo) standing in the grounds of the Grand Palace.53 The
Emerald Buddha was brought from Vientienne by the founder of the Cakkri
dynasty, Rama I. Following earlier traditions, the Emerald Buddha's clothes and
adornments were changed twice a year, the king himself acting as the chief
officiant. At the beginning of the rainy season, the Buddha was fitted with
monastic garb, and at the beginning of the following cool season it was decked in
full royal regalia. (This oscillation was modified in the third reign when the
image was given a third royal outfit for the dry season.) And in Bangkok the
changing of the palladium's clothes from the monastic to the royal style was a
time for the chanting of the great story (mahdchdi) of Vessantara Jdtaka which,
as is well known, portrays first the virtuous king's great acts of giving away his
rain-giving elephant and wealth and children, followed by his banishment to the
forest and his subsequent rehabilitation and return to the full splendor of kingship.
PENTADIC RELATIONS
I must now hasten to correct a "deficiency" in my sketch of the triadic relations
in Figure 2 and the spelling out of its significance. The scheme is partial in that it
75


--- Page 88 ---
The arahant and the Path of Meditation
gives no separate place to the people at large, the laity, whose dynamic and lively
relations with the sahgha, both in its town-and-village-dwelling and its forest-
dwelling manifestations, cannot be subsumed in the expression "ruler and
polity." But the historical facts we have examined so far are largely inadequate in
this respect, for the chronicles and inscriptions are records of dynastic and royal
history.
The fullest representation of the situation has to be minimally pentadic by virtue
of inclusion of the "people." It has been mapped in Figure 3, which at this stage
can only serve programmatically but will come alive in what is to follow in my
description and interpretation of recent events in Thailand. I hope to describe in
due course how the laity that is differentiated on multiple dimensions participates
in my narrative in their various capacities: as royals, nobles, and commoners; as
urban and rural dwellers; as urban officials, bankers and merchants, and laboring
folk; as people of the capital and of the provinces; and so on. If we take the
forest-monks as the point of reference, Figure 3 highlights the fact that despite
their primary impulsion to remove themselves from worldly entanglements and
preoccupations as much as possible, yet they are constantly besieged and tempted
on two sides.
The laity in general - the village and town householders (the political powers
and merchants included) - pursue them because they wish to partake of their
supranormal powers (iddhi, aphinihdn), which they are credited with on account
of their meditational exercises and ascetic lives. The cult of the amulets and
charms that these holy men are requested to bless is a major basis for the
religious followings that build around their charisma.
The rulers themselves and their political machinery have always buttressed
their legitimacy, and indeed fulfilled their role, by supporting the sahgha and
being supported in turn. In the past, there were two critical moments - one when
kingdoms were being first established, expanded, and consolidated, the other
Town and village monk communities
z\
Central political authority
and its satellite domains
(political centres)
I
\
Village and town laity
(towns/villages)
Forest monk communities
Figure 3. Pentadic relations
76


--- Page 89 ---
The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia
when they were in deep turmoil and near disintegration - when the forest-monks
appeared to have rendered invaluable services to monarchy. There is an inner
logic to what at first sight is an unlikely conjunction between the imperial ruler
and the ascetic renouncer: Each may pursue his objective with integrity and yet
buttress the other.
We have already remarked that the forest-monks were effective groundbreakers,
colonizing and civilizing the forest frontiers and attracting settlements around
them. However their better documented role historically is their acting as a
vitalizing force and as a countervailing agent to the religious establishment
during periods of religious purification and cultural renaissance. In normal times,
of course, the ruler and his political satellites, the supportive sahgha at the
capital, have both symbolized and realized the Buddhist values associated with
cakkavatti (king of kings), bodhisattva (buddha to be), the Dhamma realm in
which the religion flourished, and the exemplary center. Yet there were times
often enough when things have gone awry at this centertd-mandala, wracked,
even decimated, by dissension, wars, epidemics, droughts, rebellions, and other
misfortunes. There was all the more a need to recharge and fortify monarchical
legitimacy and creative powers by tapping the purity and charisma of the untar-
nished forest ascetics. Their very distance from everyday mundane affairs, their
disinterest in ephemeral gains, and their alleged capacity to act in detachment in
the spirit of cosmic love (metta) guaranteed their ability to replenish and revital-
ize the realm, whenever the center could not hold. But even here there is no iron
law or necessity to enter the fray and set the realm aright, as the Shwegyin sect of
Burma has demonstrated. There may be times when the only way the forest-monk
communities can preserve their integrity is to set a distance from polity and
society at large. But this again is not necessarily an enduring stance, for in the
final reckoning the Buddhist sahgha cannot exist apart from society.
77


--- Page 90 ---


--- Page 91 ---
PART II
THE HAGIOGRAPHY OF A BUDDHIST SAINT:
TEXT AND CONTEXT; THE POLITICS OF
SECTARIANISM


--- Page 92 ---


--- Page 93 ---
The biography of a modern saint
Phra Acharn Mun was born in Northeast Thailand in 1870 and died in 1949, in
his eightieth year by the Thai way of reckoning (see Figure 4). He is regarded
in Thailand today as having been not only a great meditation master and exem-
plary monk, but also a great teacher (acharn)1 who trained a number of
illustrious disciples, who were famous in the recent past or are famous today.
Indeed, Mun is regarded by numerous pious Buddhists as an arahant (perfected
saint) in the classical sense.
One of the saint's disciples, who is himself a meditation master and teacher at
a Northeastern forest hermitage, Phra Acharn Maha Boowa, wrote a long biogra-
phy of the saint.2 It was first written and published in Thai in serialized form in a
religious journal called Sd Sapdd (Glorious Week) and was subsequently pub-
lished as a book in 1971 under royal patronage. Because of the popularity and
significance of the subject matter, the biography has been recently translated into
English by Siri Buddhasukh, an ex-monk of the Thammayut sect, to which
belongs the biographer and also belonged the saint. Buddhasukh now works for
the World Federation of Buddhists, whose headquarters are in Bangkok, and also
teaches at the Mahamakut Monks' University, which too is a venture of the
Thammayut sect.
Siri's translated biography was published in 1976.3 A thousand copies were
printed and distributed free in the Thai tradition of "merit making": Distribution
of books containing religious material at cremations and commemorations is the
Thai custom, especially among the affluent.
While we shall take up later in detail the significance of this biography, I have
said here enough to intimate to the reader that the biography that I am about to
summarize is not some bizarre, unusual document chosen for its "fantastic"
qualities, but is the creation of a much respected famous monk, who enjoys
prestige within the Thammayut sect - which is powerful and has royal connec-
tions - and within the sahgha as a whole. Its publication in World Federation of
81


--- Page 94 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
Figure 4. The meditation master and saint, Acharn Mun.
Buddhists Review and its distribution by agencies connected with the sangha attest
to its acceptability to the establishment and to the exemplary role of the saint
whose story is told.
Early efforts
Mun was born on Thursday, January 20, 1870, in the commune (tambon) of
Khambong, Khongciam District, Ubon RatchathanI Province. His father was
Nai Kamduang KanKaw and his mother was Nang Chan. He had eight brothers
and sisters, only two of whom were alive when he died. "He was the eldest, of
82


--- Page 95 ---
The biography of a modern saint
small stature and fair complexion. He was, from childhood, agile and full of
vigor, intelligent and resourceful" (p.i.).
At 15 he was ordained as a novice in the village monastery of Khambong, and
although he disrobed two years later, his life there had a profound effect on him.
"Later, at the age of twenty-two, the call of the chaste life seemed irresistible,"
and his parents sponsored his ordination at Wat Liab in the provincial capital of
Ubon in 1896. After his ordination, he went to practice vipassand (insight
meditation) with Phra Acharn Sao Kantasilo of Wat Liab; Sao is the only known
teacher of the Master and we know very little about him.
The prophetic dream
In the course of his meditation practice, which was not then bearing much fruit,
he had one night a dream. He walked out of the village into a dense, almost
impenetrable jungle, but managed to go through it and to emerge "to find a
meadow stretching on before him to the horizon." He labored on and came to a
felled log {chat), which was rotting; he climbed and walked on it, contemplating
that it was no longer capable of growth. This Thai name for a particular tree
(chat) sounds the same as the Thai abbreviation chat of the Pali word jdti, which
means "birth" [biographer's footnote]. The meadow extending to the horizon in
all directions reminded the dreamer of the infinity of deaths and rebirths
"succeeding one another like a snake eating its own tail." Then a great white horse
approached him, he mounted it, and it carried him over the vast terrain. On the
way he saw a beautiful silvery-white glass case with the Pali canon - Tipitaka -
inside, and the horse disappeared after fulfilling its mission. "This spot was at
the end of the vast open land. From there could be seen a steaming, uninhabited
jungle made impassable with thorny, twisted bushes." But before opening the case
to have a look at the scriptures inside, he woke up.
This prophetic dream "gave him the assurance that he would be able to achieve
his goal within this lifetime" provided he did not slack in his efforts. From then
on, he committed himself to rigorous meditation practice (controlling every
movement with the mental recitation of buddho) and to the strict observance of
dhutahga (ascetic) practices. These were: wearing rag robes; refusing robes
directly offered him by a donor; going out for almsfood, except on the days he
decided to fast; eating only food that was put into the almsbowl during his
almsround; having only one meal a day; eating from the almsbowl only; possess-
ing only the three robes that he wore (and a bathing cloth); and dwelling in forest
areas, under trees in valleys, within caves or under cliffs (except for brief periods
when he was invited into a town). He also occasionally observed the other
remaining ascetic practices (p.3). Now, the dhutahga ascetic observances and the
vipassana meditation are represented by the biographer as "external" and


--- Page 96 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
"internal" practices by which the "defilements" are eradicated so as to make
possible the goal of Deliverance.
In due course, when Mun was firmly established in his contemplative activity,
he interpreted the full meaning of his dream as follows. The life of the house-
holder is the forest of suffering and danger, and the ascetic and meditative life
carried him through that forest into the open meadow of unobstructed view. ' 'The
great white horse, then, was the mode of rigorous practice which would take him
to Deliverance and to the intricately designed Tipitaka case. However, due to his
own imperfections he was not able to open the Tipitaka case and was therefore not
to be well-versed in the academic side of the Doctrine. . . . His accumulation of
merit (pdramt) in the past was not enough, so he said, and that was why he was
given only a chance to look at the outside of the Tipitaka case 
" Although the
Master claimed not to possess the highest scholarly fluency and discernment, yet
as the biographer points out, he was in actual fact an incomparable teacher of
meditation and instructor in Dhamma.4
At Wat Liab, it took three months of frenzied and aimless search before the
most congenial method of meditation was discovered. The young neophyte first
began his meditation sittings by contemplating the corpse and had images appear
before him of bloated and festering bodies being torn to pieces by vultures, dogs,
and crows; these were followed by quick changes of visions - of climbing and
walking on mountains and so on. But such volatile and distracting experiences
brought no peace and balance of mind. He then decided to refrain from concen-
trating on external objects and events and focused his attention on his own body.
Having spent some time in walking meditation (cahkamana), he turned to sitting
meditation using his body (its nature and its processes) as the central theme and
reached the condition of one-pointedness of mind. This introspective method of
meditation became his favored technique, which he later modified as he engaged
in more advanced practices and efforts.
The Master would later tell his disciples that at this time, toward the close of
the last century and the turn of the next, there was little interest in Thailand in the
practice of meditation and mind development, especially in the mode of life of
the dhutahga monk. Such monks apparently provoked feelings of apprehension
and fear among the rural folk, especially among women and children. Their
strictly controlled behavior and avoidance of unnecessary contact with laymen;
their wearing of yellowish-brown robes dyed with gum extracted from the wood
of the Jackfruit tree; their carrying a large umbrella (klot) slung over one
shoulder, the almsbowl over the other, and a water kettle hanging on the side; and
their custom of walking in a single file - all these features inspired awe as much as
respect. But in due course their deportment and conduct won the support of the
population of dispersed villages, near which they took up residence, and on
whose alms they depended for their food.
It is customary for dhutahga monks to wander forth at the end of the three-
month rains retreat each year, seeking secluded places in remote regions. Acharn
84


--- Page 97 ---
The biography of a modern saint
Mun made it a rule "to head for mountains and forests with a group of houses or
a small village nearby in which he might go for his alms-food. He spent more
time in the Northeastern region than in any other part of the country, since this
region abounds in mountains and forests near such towns as Nakhorn Panon,
Sakol Nakhorn, Udorn Thani, Nongkai, Loey and Lonsak" (p. 8). He also spent
much time in the Kingdom of Laos in such towns as Tha Khaek, Vientienne, and
Luang Phrabang, which too are located amid great forests and high mountains.
Because he was bent on the eradication of defilements, Mun preferred living
alone and moving constantly as a homeless seeker. On these wanderings, he
dedicated himself to incessant contemplative exercises: The body was mentally
dissected and all its movements and acts - whether they be going out on an
almsround, the sewing and dying of robes, or the eating of a meal - were subject
to continuous monitoring by mindfulness. Long sleep was an enemy, leading to
laziness and indulgence; walking meditation was a good antidote. And the
quantity of food accepted and manner of eating were exemplary for one whose
objective was Deliverance. No food was accepted after going on the almsround;
food brought back was sorted and the amount chosen for eating was mixed
together so as not to indulge the sense of taste. Before consuming it, its
repulsiveness was contemplated. "Throughout the whole process of eating, every
mouthful, every movement, was to be safeguarded by continual mindfulness of
its repulsiveness." Such a way of eating makes a bhikkhu "the rightful owner of
that food which has been obtained by others' sweat and hard labor." The only
meal of the day thus over, the inner struggle would actively begin again on the
meditation walk cleared from the jungle.
We now approach a theme that is constantly reiterated by Buddhists even in,
indeed especially in, relation to the meditative and contemplative quest. Al-
though Acharn Mun was indeed making progress, and occasionally enjoyed the
bliss resulting from his meditation, yet he also encountered problems that he
could not solve himself and that led him into blind alleys. This was because he
lacked a competent teacher, and such a lack "confirmed the truth of the impor-
tance of a kalydnamitta (a good friend or a competent teacher) to an aspirant in
mind-development... .Lack of a kalydnamitta, on the other hand, causes both
delays and dangers and is a serious drawback for all aspirants" (p. n ) . Thus in
such assertions we meet with one of the important dualities concerning the
dhutahga monk: On the one hand, he is committed to a secluded, wandering life
of loneliness; on the other hand, he is very conscious of being disciplined and
guided by a Master around whom cluster similar-minded disciples.
Although at the beginning Mun had a meditation master, Phra Acharn Sao, the
latter apparently found Mun's mind so fleeting and volatile that he confessed that
Mun should monitor his own mental experiences and solve his own problems.
Though somewhat of an adept at sitting meditation, as exemplified by his
experience of levitation (one classical index of the possession of iddhi), yet
because of his tranquil and serene nature Acharn Sao preferred not to be
85


--- Page 98 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
venturesome and experimental in his meditation exercises. Moreover, Acharn
Sao is said to have made a resolution to become a paccekabuddha (a "silent"
Buddha who pursues his own salvation), and this resolve showed that he was not
much interested in teaching others, a resolve that accorded with his not being
resourceful in the art of teaching. There was a stage when both Sao and Mun
were intimate, accompanied each other, and had common followings of monks
and lay disciples.
Acharn Mun's biographer describes in vivid terms the propensities of Mun's
volatile and restless mind, which had to be brought under control by strict,
disciplined methods, and then draws the conclusion that the Master's trial was
made onerous by the lack of a competent teacher, and that how privileged the
Master's pupils themselves were in having a supreme teacher to guide them. We
are told that in its uncontrolled moments Mun's mind experienced a panorama of
forms and shapes: "Sometimes it darted into the heaven realms, admiring the
joys and glories to be found there, for hours. At other times it plunged into the
hell realms, touring them and taking pity on the beings suffering there the fruits
of their former deeds" (p. 14).5 Acharn Mun broke the wild stallion of his mind
by cultivating mindfulness and by developing stringent training methods for
himself; this knowlege he was able to impart later to his disciples: "He often told
this to his disciples to remind them of the advantages they enjoyed through his
counsel and his company" (p. 15).
The first long pilgrimage and the adventures at the
Sarika Cave in the Great Mountains of Nakhon Nayok
From Ubon, Acharn Mun journeyed to the border town of Nakhon Phanom and
then crossed over to the forests and mountains of Tha Khaek in the Kingdom of
Laos. At this stage of the story, the biographer introduces us to a new theme,
which we shall encounter again and again in the hagiology of the forest saints. It
relates to their encounter with wild beasts and their fearless and serene taming of
them by the power of the Dhamma words and of meditation. The foremost of
these wild beasts is the tiger. And that by tradition the tiger is the wild beast par
excellence made innocuous by the dhutahga monk is evidenced for us by the
murals in the chapel at Wat Bowonniwet that were painted in the last century.
Other beasts similarly pacified are wild elephants, wild monkey troupes, poison-
ous snakes (ndga), and the like.
The Tha Khaek mountains are described as abounding with ferocious tigers,
mostly man-eaters, who attacked the local forest peoples (who are incidentally
represented as having "no more intelligence than children" and as "heartless"
and lacking in concern for others). Although the local inhabitants lived in fear of
these marauding beasts, Acharn Mun was not molested by a single tiger; "only
their tracks were to be seen or their roars heard at night." He had no fear of them
86


--- Page 99 ---
The biography of a modern saint
at all and was later to describe these dangerous trips as mere commonplace
happenings.
Having wandered through the Northeastern villages, Acharn Mun journeyed
down to the central part of Thailand and spent a rains retreat at Wat Pathoowan in
Bangkok, where he regularly went for instruction and advice from the abbot of
Wat Boromnivas, Phra Upali Gunupamacariya.6 After the rains retreat, he jour-
neyed up to the town of Lopburi and stayed at various caves in the vicinity
"developing meditation and insight." He subsequently sought out a distant place
of solitude in the Sarika Cave of the famous Khao Yai (the Great Mountains) near
the Northeastern border town of Nakhon Nayok.
His arrival at the cave began with a dramatic encounter. The villagers would
not take him up to the cave because many previous bhikkhu who visited the cave
had been stricken with disease; and some four of them had been killed by it. The
cave was possessed by a Great Demon with terrible powers and jealous of his
rights; he had successfully punished any and every bhikkhu intruder.
Acharn Mun was undaunted and looked upon his stay at the cave as a testing
ground for developing his mindfulness. On the fourth night, he was stricken with
a stomachache, which had troubled him before, but never with such seriousness.
He was unable to digest food and he passed blood. The herbal medicine given
him by the villagers did not relieve him. He therefore decided to stop taking
conventional medicine and to resort to the therapeutic effect of the Dhamma
alone, no matter what happened to his body. He told himself, "Let this body die
here in this cave if the power of the dharma cannot cure this illness. I have
progressed far enough to be fairly certain of the Path, Fruition and Nirvana." He
then began his meditation and abandoned attachment to life. "Mindfulness and
wisdom together with faith and exertion then hammered on the mind which does
not die but which is always death-stricken." The battle raged from dusk to
midnight, and the mind realized the nature of the aggregates, and their formations,
including this gripping pain, and "the illness totally disappeared and the mind
withdrew into absolute, unshakable one-pointedness."
When afterward his mind "emerged to a less profound and more responsive
level called upacara, there seemed to be a light radiating from his body," and it
revealed a tall black man about ten meters high. Acharn Mun thus was finally
confronted with the apparition of the club-wielding demon owner of the cave,
and there followed a dialogue of threats from the demon and nonviolent moral
persuasions on the part of the monk. The demon was first made to concede that
its powers were limited - that it could not match the Buddha, who had the 4 'power
beyond karma," the power of eradicating from his own mind the desire to
dominate and to harm others. Then the monk admonished the demon about the
destructiveness of its power and its acts and pointed out that his own vocation as
bhikkhu was to follow the Path of Righteousness for his own benefit as well as
that of others. The demon was spellbound and subdued; it admitted that from the
very beginning it had seen a light radiating from the monk that had paralyzed its
87


--- Page 100 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
aggressive intentions. The demon declared that it was really chief of tree spirits
and promised to act as the monk's guardian as long as he lived in the cave; it went
further and declared itself to be a lay devotee of the Triple Gem of Buddhism,
adopted the monk as its teacher, and finally brought the entire retinue of its
followers to pay homage to the monk.
During the dialogue, the monk's mind "withdrew into the unshakable state of
appana-samddhV'; entering meditation, it reached new heights of bliss and peace
and new understandings of the truth. Soon afterward, the monk's digestion
improved, and his stomach disorder disappeared for good.
Acharn Mun is said to have undergone certain special mental and spiritual
experiences while he was at the Sarika Cave. One night, for instance, he was
strongly overcome by the feeling of samvega, a mental awareness of the weariness
and illusory nature of man's present circumstances, coupled with pity and
compassion for human beings suffering from ignorance, self-delusion, and vanity.
Occasionally at night "arahant disciples of the Buddha would give him
sermons while he was sitting in meditation"; they would instruct him on the
necessity for unfluctuating mindfulness, for destroying and not accumulating
mental defilements, and for nourishing the mind, because "supreme in the world
is mind," the priceless treasure. "A recluse," the arahants instructed, "taking
delight in moral practice, meditation, mindfulness, wisdom, and exertion is sure
to become a samana in the real sense of the term, either at present or in the near
future." The venerable monk later told his own disciples that listening to the
sermons of the arahants was like listening to the instructions of the Buddha
himself. It was in this cave that he reached the path of the nonreturner
(andgdmt).7
One night, following upon many successive nights of meditative experience, he
was "strangely overcome by loving-kindness and compassion for his fellow
bhikkhusV He was now certain that he was not groping in the dark anymore and
"that the Absolute Cessation of Suffering was not far away?' Moved by compas-
sion for his disciples and wishing to have them share his experience and
attainment, he decided to leave the cave of his trials and triumph and return to the
monasteries of the Northeastern provinces. The terrestrial angels and their chief,
whom he had previously converted, sorrowfully came to say goodbye, and he
gave them moral instruction.
Let us conclude the cave episode by returning to the theme of the dhutahga
monk and wild animals. Acharn Mun related to his disciples several adventures
with them, and two themes recur in these tales. Firstly, the meditating monk
pacifies the animals, and even wins their protection, by the practice of compas-
sion (mettd), which flows from the monk and envelops the animal. Secondly, a
monk like him achieves the capacity to communicate with the animals, not
merely through being able to interpret their noises, but also because an arahant
is versed in "the language of the mind, which is supreme to all the languages in
the Three Worlds" and enables him to give extensive assistance to all beings,


--- Page 101 ---
The biography of a modern saint
visible and invisible, animal and man (p. 191).8 Thus the transcending of the
world of sense and form also enables the acquisition of a wordless higher
language that encompasses all lower tongues and media of communication.
These truths are illustrated, for instance, by the Acharn's encounter with a
monkey troop - the suspicious chattering monkey-leader was becalmed by the
monk's loving-kindness, and the monkeys roamed about near him until their
curiosity was satisfied. "It is generally seen that wherever forest bhikkhus stay,
there the forest beasts will assemble in large groups, both the large and the
small," concludes the author in a way reminding us of the life of another saint in
a different religious tradition, Saint Francis of Assisi.9
The amusing monkeys are of course a diversion compared with the fearsome
tigers. Once, in a secluded part of Laos, a large tiger visited Acharn Mun and a
companion monk, Phra Sitha, while they were meditating in nearby locations.
The tiger approached and watched Acharn Mun at a distance while he was
engaged in nightly meditation and did not threaten him. One night the tiger crept
and sat near where Phra Sitha was engaged in walking meditation, and when the
monk, feeling compassion for it, suggested to it that it could better spend its time
finding food, the tiger gave out an ear-splitting roar in objection - he preferred to
stay and guard the monk. Later, on waking up in the early hours of the morning,
the monk found that the tiger had disappeared.
I would like to suggest that the encounters between dhutahga monk and tiger,
and the preoccupation of the dhutahga monks with such beasts, has a moral
significance that emerges from their dialectical relationship. Both are in a sense
wanderers of the forest, one however by nature, and the other by a supreme moral
choice by which he leaves the lay society behind. The tiger is wild and ferocious
and an apt representation of the sensual, "ignorant," kammic dimensions of
life; the meditating monk, by comparison, controls his sensory attachments by
mental control and reflects compassion (metta). The tiger is also the wild beast
inside man steeped in desire and defilements. The critical feature of this encoun-
ter is that the monk not only subdues the tiger by the nonviolent power of his
Dhamma and mettd; he also demonstrates thereby that he has incorporated,
subordinated, and encompassed within him the powers of the wild beast.10
There is still another dimension. The Acharn considered that the wilder the
place abounding with ferocious tigers the better it was for mind development.
Because the tiger aroused fear in all its aspects in the bhikkhu, it forced him to
engage in walking meditation deep into the night. The bhikkhu1s battle was
"between fear and dharma," and the tigers helped to implant Dhamma in the
mind. The prospect of being devoured by tigers "drove the mind to dharmaV
' 'Knowing that it is helpless, such a mind will fix itself on a theme of meditation
or recitation until it is absorbed in dharma" (pp. 66-7), and thus was fear in tiger
form superseded and eradicated.
This issue of wild animals tempts me to break the story in order to indulge in a
digression. Carrithers, in his study of forest monks in Sri Lanka,11 describes the
89


--- Page 102 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
attitudes toward and encounters with wild beasts on the part of Sinhalese forest
monks but is not stimulated to integrate this information into his overall interpre-
tive scheme. This is perhaps because he tends to view such phenomena as part of
"folk asceticism," whereas their occurrence in Burma and Thailand as well
persuade one that they are an integral part of entrenched and widespread
Southeast Asian forest-monk traditions, more civilizational than parochial in
nature.
The following is an example provided by Carrithers. At Kumbirigala forest
hermitage in the south of the island, Anandasiri and his pupils spend much time
in silence alone in the forest and value their contact with wild animals. Carrithers
remarks that it is in the attitudes that Anandasiri and his disciples cultivate
toward these animals thaipannd (wisdom) - understood as both vipassand (insight)
and mettd (loving-kindness) - is more clearly manifest. Anandasiri emphasizes
that the forest with its animals is a priceless hermitage, for the animals make the
monks understand the origins and nature of fears and that in turn leads to
anticipations of dukkha (pain and suffering), and that in turn leads to stilling and
overcoming. At Kumbirigala, Carrithers continues, the expectation of meeting
an animal is ever present in the minds of the monks, and when they meet an
animal "they neither run away, nor approach but address it in kind but clear
terms."
I find that the Manual of a Mystic12 has several apt passages on the therapeutic
value of wild animals for the eradication of fear under captions such as "Insight
into what is to be feared" and "Insight and evil." "The insight into evil," says
the Manual, "is the name given to that by which a Yogi realizes the evil nature of
all conditions; to him all aggregates appear like a forest haunted by dangerous
wild beasts; like lions, tigers and so forth; like a land haunted by evil water-
sprites; like an enemy with drawn sword armed, or food with poison mixed, or
like a blazing house" (p. 131). We might recall that the Manual discovered in Sri
Lanka is believed to have been based on the teachings of Siamese monks who
visited the island in the eighteenth century.
Before I continue with Acharn Mun's remarkable career, let me pause briefly
to provide a map with which to follow the rest of the story. Acharn Mun's
peripatetic journeys from now on can be divided into three broad phases. (1) He
made one long stay in the Northeast (I shall call this his second visit), traveling to
various places; (2) he went north deep into the Chiengmai Mountains; and (3) he
finally returned again to the Northeast, where he died in 1949.
Acharn Mun's sojourn at the Sarika Cave marked his attaining to a certain level
of achievement in his meditation, and his departure from the cave marked his
wanting to convey to his disciples the lessons he had learned. In this account of
his second visit to the Northeast, the underlying pattern consists in his achieve-
ment of certain spiritual conquests accompanied by greater psychic powers.
Paralleling this progressive personal achievement is his gathering of increasing
numbers of disciples wherever he went, his concern with teaching them, and his
90


--- Page 103 ---
The biography of a modern saint
overseeing of the forest-monk communities so that they were organized appropri-
ately for the dedicated pursuit of meditation. This phase is then followed by the
Acharn's trip to Chiengmai, where in a cave of the northern mountains - in an
ordeal paralleling his first victory in Sarika Cave - he made the final progress from
nonreturner to fully enlightened arahant. From this eminence, he descended
again for his last visit to, and teaching tour in, the Northeast, where he finally
died in 1949. His mortuary rites and the extraordinary events that occurred at that
time constitute the last chapter in this saint's life.
The second visit to the Northeast
Acharn Mun's second visit to the Northeast entailed traveling to many towns,
teaching and encouraging people, both monks and laymen. He traveled back and
forth in Thailand between Nakhon Ratchasima, Slsaket, Ubon RatchathanI,
Nakhon Phanom, Sakon Nakhon, Udon, Nong Khai, Loei, Lomsak, and
Phetchabun; he also visited Laos several times, particularly Vientiane and Tha
Khaek. But of course in between these towns were deep forests and sparsely
populated villages, and much time was spent oscillating between forest life and
brief urban visits. In areas south and southwest of the town of Sakon Nakhon
"there were vast forests and great mountains, and it was here he preferred to stay
longest for the purpose of eradicating defilements" (p. 50).13
Seeing that the Master was peripatetic and his following fluid, it becomes
essential to describe the pattern of life of these fluctuating and dispersed commu-
nities of dhutahga monks and the network of relationships that linked them.
Wherever Acharn Mun stayed there was always a large gathering of followers,
both bhikkhu and novices on the one hand and lay disciples on the other, who
gathered around him. Considering the lay devotees as the outermost penumbra,
let us leave them aside at this point and focus on the ordained religious who
gathered around the Master as his immediate circle.
"There were sometimes sixty or seventy bhikkhus and samaneras in the place
where he was staying," not counting those living in separate groups some
distance away and coming to him frequently for instruction. There was no
"administrative" hierarchy set up; it was assumed that each participant was
seriously devoted to meditation and aware of the ascetic practices to be followed.
The bhikkhu and novices spent most of the time by themselves in seclusion. They
only assembled to receive instruction from the Master or at mealtimes. "Except
at these times all would be engaged day and night in walking or sitting meditation
at their respective places of retreat."
Acharn Mun apparently followed a rigorous and taxing routine of meditation,
which served as a model to all his disciples. After the morning almsround,
followed by the day's only meal, he would begin his walking meditation, which
would last until noon. After a brief rest, he would begin his sitting meditation,
91


--- Page 104 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
which would continue for one and a half hours. Then he would resume his
walking meditation. At four o'clock, he would sweep and tidy up the area around
the place he was staying (whether it be a monastic residence or a jungle
platform). Then he would bathe and practice walking meditation until about 8 or
9 o'clock in the evening, when he would resume his sitting meditation. Generally,
he went to sleep at n o'clock and rose at 3 a.m. to resume meditation until the
almsround. If sermons had to be given to celestial or other supernatural beings
late at night, he would adjust his sleeping hours to accommodate them.
One of the central events in the disciples' routine was their assembling at the
place where the Master was staying for their fortnightly recitation of the
Pdtimokkha (code of monastic discipline). This recitation was usually followed
by the Master's instruction to the assembly in the form of a sermon and his
answering questions put to him afterward.
4'During the instruction hours, only the Venerable Acharn's voice would be
heard, the other bhikkhus and samaneras assembled there, no matter how many,
sitting in complete silence." Each listener sat ''spellbound" drinking "the
nectar of his sermons," which apparently lasted several hours and were con-
sidered "practical lessons for the development of both meditation and wisdom"
(p. 49).
The actual living conditions in the jungle were spartan in the extreme. The
beds of the disciples were usually small raised platforms made of pieces of split
bamboo, two meters long and one or one and a half meters wide, raised about
fifty centimeters above the ground. Each platform would be about thirty to forty
meters away from the next one; the distance might be greater if the forest space
was vast. The trees and bushes between the platforms were left as they were, and
tracks for walking meditation were cleared by lay devotees, one track for each
bhikkhu. A track would be anywhere from ten to twenty meters long.
If no raised platforms were built, the dhutahga monks slept on the ground on
beds of leaves or straw. The monsoon rains, particularly during the months of
December and January, caused severe discomfort. If the monks had not built
makeshift shelters or found some caves, the only roof over their heads was the
umbrella {klot) with a mosquito net hung over it. The monk's outer robe was used
as the blanket or raincover. It is no surprise then that these monks, exposed to
inclement weather, rains, and cold in the higher forested altitudes, were frequently
victims of chronic and debilitating malaria. Malaria with its high fevers and
deliriums became another "suffering" to be endured on the path to liberation and
must have curiously intersected with the monks' meditation experiences and
altered states of consciousness.
These monks depended for their food on the impoverished households of the
jungle villages near which they pitched their umbrellas. They went forth every
day in single file, and their observance of the dhutahga rules in regard to having
a single meal a day, eating the food all mixed up in the almsbowl without the aid
of other containers, and refusing food subsequent to the almsround, appears to
92


--- Page 105 ---
The biography of a modern saint
have been exemplary and watchfully enforced by the Master. Believing that
staying in the wilds provided opportunities for contemplation of both external
things and inner development, the Master led his disciples and made them live
"under trees, in forests, on mountains, in caves, under precipices or in
cemeteries" - in places ordinary householders regard as wild and fearful. Be-
cause I have already in the previous section given descriptions of some of the
meditative experiences of the Master and his encounters with wild beasts and
supernatural agents, I shall merely summarize in this section other such experi-
ences so as to minimize repetition.
I should make the preliminary point that for the Master and his disciples (as
indeed for Buddhaghosa in the fifth century) the reality of beings on other planes
of existence was accepted, whether they be ghosts, demons, gods, or angels.
However, in true classical tradition, traceable to the canonical version of what the
Buddha himself said, Acharn Mun's reply to questions about the existence of
such entities is that they are irrelevant to his own pursuit and that the fear of such
spirits is a product of one's own worries and imagination. Such preoccupations
will disappear if people's minds did not reach out to grasp them.
One of the important forms of instruction adopted by the Master, outside the
formal sermon, was the discussion in the evenings (from seven onward) with
disciples about their individual meditative experiences - for it was recognized
that, because of different levels of achievement, aptitudes, and mental tendencies,
the meditative experiences and visions could differ, as could the meditative
supports and techniques chosen. A number of disciples appear to have experi-
enced visitation by gods and demons, and the journey to heavens and hells was
achieved by those who had reached the appropriate samddhi level.
At this time, a remarkable feature of the activities of the Master was the fact
that "terrestrial angels" listened to the instructions that he gave his disciples at
night; moreover, "celestial angels" would arrive late at night, circumambulate
the Master three times, "keeping him always to their right," and then seat
themselves and politely request him to instruct them on some aspect of the
Dhamma that interested them. They appreciated his sermons very much, and,
having uttered sddhu (it is well), they circumambulated him and departed.
Frequently, the celestial angels informed the Master of their coming in advance;
the Master would sit waiting for them in deep meditation and would emerge from
the third level of concentration (appand) to the second level of access concentra-
tion (upacdrd). "The dialogue between the Venerable Acharn and these beings
was carried on directly through mind, there being no language barrier as in the
society of man and animals" (p. 61). Compared with humans, the angels showed
a capacity for quicker understanding of the teachings and a greater respect for
their teacher.
We are told that at this period of time the Master brought peace and bliss
wherever he went and stayed. It is said that three times during the day he
"radiated loving-kindness" with maximum intensity - in the afternoon during his
93


--- Page 106 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
sitting meditation, before going to sleep, and after waking up. "In his comprehen-
sive radiation of loving-kindness, he would first balance his mind and radiate its
force to traverse the worlds in all planes, upward, downward, and horizontally
without any interruption. The radiance of his mind at that time was indescribably
bright, being limitless and unobstructed, and far brighter than hundreds or
thousands of suns" (p. 63).
One of the events associated with his radiation of loving-kindness was his
eradication of smallpox in a village in Laos called Ban Tham: The stricken
villagers begged him to be their refuge. He assembled them, persuaded them to
accept the Triple Gem as their refuge, and taught them certain inner practices on
their behalf. There were no more deaths after this, and the infection disappeared.
This dramatic example is one of many documented by the biographer in which
the Master is represented as a kind of missionary taking the rudiments of Buddhist
commitment and ritual to the northeastern villages, which were infested with
spirit beliefs and spirit cults. (There are in fact exaggerated claims made of
totally uprooting the old beliefs and practices and supplanting them with the
Buddhist Triple Gem; but this should not make us lose sight of the fact that these
dhutahga monks did, during the periods they took up residence among the forest
folk, teach them some Buddhist precepts and engage them in Buddhist rites of
giving alms and taking the five precepts and so on.)14 The Master and his circle
of followers are described as spending numerous rains retreats in isolated villages
and making their conversions and conquests. These villages lay on the circuitous
forest paths between the major towns of the Northeast-Ubon, Nongkhai, Sakon
Nakhon, Nakhon Phanom, and so on.
While staying on the side of a mountain, west of the historic city of Luang
Phra Bang in Laos, the Master had nightly visits from the ndga-king and his
retinue of servants who lived under the mountain; they were delighted by the
Dhamma preached to them. Another set of encounters between the Master and a
ndga-king took place when the Master spent some three years in the village of
Sarm Phong in Nakhon Phanom province: The serpent that lived somewhere on
the Songkhram River attended the Master's wan phra (sabbath) sermons to his
disciples and also came to visit him late at night during his meditation sittings.
The Master also had remarkable powers of clairvoyance by which he was able
to read the thoughts or know the acts of his disciples, a power feared by those of
his disciples who had infringed rules or engaged in mental impurities or dis-
obeyed him and who would in due course be firmly reprimanded. For all
disciples an occasion for "injurious sense impressions arousing lust" (visabhdga)
was when they went into a village for almsfood and encountered girls and women
(especially those who dressed themselves carelessly). The fear of women (with
misogynist resonances) seems to have been a common preoccupation. Human
sounds, especially the voices of females, were considered inimical to meditation
concentration, and the welfare, safety, and restraint of female devotees and
94


--- Page 107 ---
The biography of a modern saint
white-robed "nuns" (mde chi)15 in forest hermitages were considered a burden to
the meditation masters.
At this stage of his career - during the course of his second visit to the
Northeast - the Acharn had reached the intermediate level of meditation and
wisdom, which characterizes the third grade of the Noble Disciple, the non-
returner (andgdmi). He had achieved the complete mindfulness of the body, and
his mind trod the middle path between the poles of taking delight in emotions or
feeling repelled by them. A nonreturner of this stature is entitled to be reborn in
the fifth plane of the Brahma realm. This intermediate level of achievement easily
enabled the Master to communicate with beings from other planes of existence
and also to disaggregate his mind from the body and tour the celestial heavens
and unhappy hells. The Acharn had the attestation of the angel leader that the
radiance of his loving-kindness enveloped both the earth and the sky, and that
"while giving instructions to his bhikkhus and samaneras, his voice thundered in
all directions... and could be heard from a great distance" (p. 95). The compari-
son here of course is to the deafening roars of the tigers, which reverberated in
the mountains like a terrifying symphony (p. 94).16 The Acharn was also aware of
the dangers of that subtle and habit-forming effect of meditation that ensues from
reaching the "unshakable level" (appand), when the mind becomes self-satisfied
and seduced by the bliss of resting within the cocoon of seclusion and compla-
cency and does not wish to make further progress in the path of wisdom. The
Acharn told his disciples that he remained at the level of a nonreturner for a
long time, because he had no teacher to give him further counsel and because he
had to "pioneer the wilderness," undergoing painful ordeals and much effort.
The biographer writes that twice he was moved to tears while listening to how his
teacher "had courageously laboured under affliction" and that he felt "awed by
the profundity of the dharma he had realized."
At this stage, the Acharn felt that his inner development was not yet complete
because there was one more level to develop before "full-final Attainment could
be reached." He had spent some four or five years in the villages like Sarm
Phong, Huay Sai, Kham jee-ee, Nongsoong, and Khoke Klarng in the Nakhon
Phanom Province because of their mountainous terrain, and his nearness to
villagers, tigers, and celestial beings. He had also spent much time instructing
his monk and novice disciples. He knew that he had to make one more leap in his
inner development to reach complete attainment and that this could be accom-
plished by total seclusion and lonely vigil. Before he could set out on a journey to
achieve this, he had to make arrangements for the care of his mother, who had
lived with him these past six years and whom he had initiated as a "nun." He
decided to return to his home village in Ubon Province to leave her there, and
with this purpose in mind he and his pupils left for that province. On their way,
they spent the rains retreat in the village of Nong Khorn in Amnat District, where
the Master instructed the ordained and lay disciples.
95


--- Page 108 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
In the ensuing dry season, the Acharn took his mother to her home village by
slow stages. He stayed in this village a suitable amount of time, instructing his
mother,17 kinsmen, and lay devotees, "delighting them all with his sermons and
instruction." Then he took leave of his mother, and made his way alone on a true
dhutahga journey "like a lone bull wandering in the wilds" (p. 104), stopping
wherever he wished to refresh himself or meditate and to appreciate with
' 'rapturous delight'' the mountain scenery. He carried on his shoulder his umbrella
and almsbowl. Inside the bowl were stored robes that were not being worn, a water
filter, needles, thread, and other requisites. A water bottle was carried by hand.
Whenever possible, at the end of a day's journey he stopped at the edge of an
isolated village, where he would beg for alms the next morning.
He thus made his way through the Dong Phya Yen Forest to the capital city of
Bangkok to spend the rains retreat at Wat Pathoomwan and to discourse with his
friend, the titled abbot of Wat Boromnivas, Phra Upali Gunupamacariya. Together,
they left by train at the end of the retreat for the northern capital city of
Chiengmai. This leads us to the next phase in Acharn Mun's career: He was to
stay in the wilds of Chiengmai for eleven years (1929-40), during which time
he achieved full arahantship.
Before we write of the events in Chiengmai, we should record one incident that
took place during his stay in Ubol, for it attests to the Master's strict adherence to
the Renouncer's rejections of this-worldly entanglement of a certain sort, namely,
"community development" as championed by the modern missionary monk
(dhammadutd) movement, and the enlisting of famous forest monks today to
bless national undertakings.
Apparently, the Acharn one night had a dream that distressed him - he was
walking with his disciples, a number of whom were as usual "orderly and
respectful, beautiful and impressive," when suddenly some disciples passed by,
"shamelessly" overtaking him, and others carrying wooden pincers tightly
gripped his chest, making it difficult for him to breathe. The Master felt that this
incident presaged evil conduct by some of his disciples, over whom he decided to
maintain close surveillance. And the dream became a reality when one day two
monks - one of whom was a disciple living elsewhere - arrived, accompanied by
the governor of the province and other officials, and sought the Master's
cooperation in asking people to contribute money toward the construction of two
or three schools for children. The Master rejected this request because, as the
biographer says, "being involved in construction work and asking for money
from the people" were things the Master would never do, because "he was a
bhikkhu" (p. 101).
In Chiengmai for eleven years
At Chiengmai railway station, the titled monk from Bangkok, who was well
known to all the townspeople from governor to businessmen, was welcomed by a
96


--- Page 109 ---
The biography of a modern saint
number of laymen. And the Meditation Master, Acharn Mun, who was not
known to such a public, accompanied his eminence to Wat Cedl Luang, the
principal wat of the Thammayut sect in this city.
A large number of the pious assembled to listen to a sermon by the famed
Bangkok monk, Phra Upali, but he instead invited his companion to speak.
Acharn Mun gave an impressive sermon, "delighting all his listeners," and at its
conclusion retired to his hut. Then Phra Upali took the opportunity to praise the
wise words of the ascetic monk, giving the sermon the name "dawn of
deliverance" (muttodaya).ls He praised his achievements in mind development
{kammatthdna bhikkhu) and then went on to announce his belief that Acharn
Mun was a noble disciple who had attained the level of a "nonreturner"
(andgdmi).
Having stayed in Chiengmai city for a time, Acharn Mun took his leave and,
wandering alone, sought the seclusion of forests and mountains. He spent a great
deal of time in the mountain areas of Mae Rim and Chiang Dao during both rainy
and dry seasons. He had previously suspended the achievement of the supreme
victory by choosing to help others; now he was making a last intensified effort; it
was "a showdown resulting in either death or achievement." And in this effort for
the final goal his loving-kindness for other beings had to cease for the time being.
The Acharn was later to describe to his pupils the ordeals of this last struggle,
which left them "awe-struck and breathless." His body and mind were healthy
and buoyant; his mind frolicked like a large fish in the ocean and manifested the
powers of a trained but spirited horse; his mindfulness and wisdom had reached
the Dhammacakka (the Wheel of Dhamma) level, spontaneous and uninterrupted.
The last battle between Dhamma and defilements was enjoined, and his task was
to realize the truth of the conditionality of all physical, mental, and psychic
phenomena. One afternoon he sat on the top of a large, flat rock under the leafy
branches of a lone tree, by the side of a mountain "near a remote hill-tribe
village, and until late into the night he contemplated the Law of Dependent
Origination''19 both in its serial and reverse order, forward and backward, and with
the great weapons of mindfulness and wisdom, the Acharn dethroned "the
powerful and crafty monarch of the Three Realms," namely Ignorance.
Although his feelings of loving-kindness toward others were momentarily in
abeyance, the Acharn in the middle of his victory remembered with gratitude the
Buddha and that his Path was intended for all, that many other disciples of the
Buddha had realized the same truth. And he made the decision "to bring the
Buddha's message once again to those who would listen to it in earnest and with
respect." For the remainder of the night, the Master was moved to tears by the
feeling of samvega for his past ignorance, which brought him untold suffering.
He was later to describe his journey to his disciples as "The Path Through the
threshold of Death."
At dawn, he extended his thanks to the tree under which he had meditated; and
although he had no need to seek food because of his experience of bliss, yet
97


--- Page 110 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
because he felt loving-kindness for the hill-tribesmen who had given him alms
before, he went as usual to beg for food.
During that same night of vigil and deliverance, terrestrial and celestial angels
joined in a wholehearted appreciation of the Acharn's attainment, which it is said
"thundered over the realms of consciousness" and made the worlds "tremble
with awe and wonder" (but human beings steeped in their pleasures may not have
been aware of this cosmic tremor). The angels requested a sermon, but because
the Master was still engrossed in the supreme truth, he asked them to defer their
wish. On the following night they came again and praised him for the light that
penetrated and made transparent all the realms and gave bliss to all beings
enveloped by it.20
From the somewhat diffuse account in the biography, one infers that the
Acharn meditated in deep solitude, probably on or near the Chiang Dao mountain,
until he reached his deliverance, but that soon after his disciples began to collect
around him, he was now ready again to spread his message, wandering with them
and retreating into meditation whenever necessary. Among the disciples named are
Phra Thet from Nongkhai and Phra Sarn and Phra Khao from Wat Tham Klong
Plane in Udon, who are well known meditation teachers in their own right in
recent times. They were, however, directed to find their own secluded places to
meditate, meeting him for guidance. It is recorded that the Master was stringent
with his disciples of this time, urging them to show self-sacrifice and courage and
to be reconciled to death if that should become necessary as a result of their
exertions. His teaching in Chiengmai was "absolute, unbending and admitted no
leniency," especially after the profound experience of his attainment. And
because of the special psychic abilities he had developed he was able to reprimand
or console, as fit, those of his disciples who deviated from the path. There are
instances cited of his giving "the Lion's roar" in anger when disciples silently
questioned his instructions or had deviant thoughts. He would say: "Sure you are
not perfect, you are under the guidance of a teacher and need training and
development." As the biographer puts it: "The Venerable Acharn was a model of
both external practice . . . and . . . inward abilities of clairvoyance, clairaudi-
ence and telepathy," which he showed in relation to different orders of beings, as
the following examples show.
On the nights following the Acharn's attainment, there were a number of
buddhas attended by several arahant disciples - their number varying with the
achievement of each buddha - who paid him visits in appreciation of his
deliverance and instructed him on various matters. The Tathagata's Dhamma,
they said, is like a remedy for illness, but until sentient beings "whirling
helplessly in the tempestuous wind of their own sufferings" take notice of the
Dhamma and put it into practice, no one can offer them any help.
The buddhas also told the Acharn that the Tathagata he saw was "none other
than absolute purity of mind'' and that they had come to him only in the sammati
(assumed, mundane, relative) form. To which Acharn asked the critical question:
98


--- Page 111 ---
The biography of a modern saint
"I have no doubt in the Buddha and the arahant disciples, but how, after your
complete passing away without remainder (anupddisesa-nibbdna) are you still
able to come in such a form?" In reply, the Buddha said that for one who has
attained to absolute purity and is without form such a temporary assumed form is
necessary in order to make contact with someone like the Acharn who has
attained to absolute purity but who still exists in a mundane form. The absolute
deliverance is void of signs and manifestations, but in order for it to be made
known a mundane form is necessary and therefore assumed.21
The encounter with the buddhas and arahants had still another implication.
From the way that they conducted themselves - walked, sat, meditated, paid
obeisance, and conversed - the Acharn learned two things:
1. He saw what the traditional modes of dress, sitting, walking, meditating (both while
walking and sitting), and so on were in early Buddhism. Because, as we know from
sectarian disputes, such details of monastic discipline are an important preoccupation
of the sahgha in Southeast Asia, we may infer that the Acharn's sense of the continuity
and legitimacy of the present-day sahgha's customs in such matters was confirmed.
2. The Acharn wondered about this seeming lack of order among the Buddha's disciples,
4'who were renowned for their orderliness and discipline," but soon realized that the
traditional hierarchy based on the seniority of ordination was but a "relative truth,"
which was subsumed and of no importance at the higher level of achievement based on
the Dhamma of deliverance. Absolute purity implies absolute equality among those
who have been delivered, from the buddhas down to the arahants (and even to the
samaneras who had been delivered). But even among this democracy of equally
delivered, when an occasion arose for paying conventional respect, then a graduated
seating order was observed in which the buddha was seated in front and the samaneras
were seated behind the monks. And irrespective of level of attainment, seniority in
ordination was respected in this context.
The foregoing section is double-edged. On the one hand, it asserts the equality
among those monks and novices who have reached deliverance irrespective of
their statuses as observed in the worldly sahgha; on the other, the principle of
seniority of ordination, which is a classical rule observed among the theravddin
elders, is affirmed as ordering respect relationships. All in all, this affirmation by
the dhutahga monk of organizational principles that allegedly refer to early
Buddhism has leveling implications for the official sahgha hierarchy of today
with its "bureaucratic" titles and competencies, insignia and accoutrements.
Soon after his enlightenment, Acharn Mun had an encounter with his "wife
from former lives," which will evoke for the buddhologist a comparison with the
Buddha's relations over numerous former lives with his wife Yasodhara, whom he
in his final life deserted at night as she lay sleeping with the newly born prince,
Rahula. The Acharn and his wife of former lives had together made a resolution
to become buddhas in the future,22 and now he had outstripped her; she
complained that she had no one to counsel her now that he was delivered from
this ocean of suffering. In reply, the Acharn cited the example of the Buddha,
99


--- Page 112 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
who reached the goal first but, showing loving-kindness toward his wife, returned
to help her progress on the same path. He promised to do the same for his own
wife. He recommended that she take rebirth on the plane of existence appropriate
to her ''disillusionment" as well as her merits, and she took birth in the celestial
realm called Tavatifnsa and then decorously returned to his presence to listen to
his instruction. This dialogue between the Acharn and his former spouse took
place over several hours while the Acharn was in deep and continuous meditation
from 8 o'clock the previous evening until 5 o'clock the succeeding morning.
During this post-enlightenment period in the mountains of Chiengmai, the
following deeds and accomplishments are accredited to Acharn Mun:
1. He showed his ability for mind reading, his subjects being his own disciples. He was
aware, without seeing or hearing about the incident, that a monk-disciple had fallen in
love with a tribal girl and commented that however hard he might try to resist the carnal
desire, he would not be able to resist it because of the action of his karma. The
prediction was proved right, in spite of the removal of the monk to another village. A
monk, whose previous history as a boxer was unknown, joined the Acharn's circle; the
Acharn by his clairvoyance not only knew this, but also that the monk thoughtlessly
carried with his possessions some photographs of himself as a boxer.
2. The Acharn also showed he had powers of clairaudience. One of the hill-tribe
communities among whom he and a companion lived for a time suspected them of
being tigers disguised as men. The Acharn not only knew at a distance the discussions
between the headmen and the tribesmen, but also subsequently converted them to the
mindful recitation of buddho and convinced them of the wonderful results that followed
from following some basic Buddhist precepts. There are recorded other instances of the
hill tribes ''bathing in the radiance of his instruction."
3. He also gave instruction "to such invisible beings as ghosts, demons, terrestrial and
celestial angels and the higher angels called Brahma"; apparently, there were more
celestial beings inhabiting the forests of Chiengmai than those of the Northeast, and it
is claimed that at this time he gave more assistance to the angels than to any other order
of beings. Furthermore, one night, while he was staying in a village of the Muser
(Lahu) tribe, a group of angels visited him from Germany23 and requested a sermon on
the subject of Victory; they made repeated visits thereafter to pay him homage and
listen to him. Perhaps the crowning achievement in this respect was the frequent visits
made by the deity Sakka (Indra) and his angel followers - to them he gave sermons,
following their preference, on loving-kindness pitched at the "unlimited, all-embracing
and impersonal" level of appamdna brahmavihdra.
4. The Acharn recounted the many occasions on which the hungry ghosts (preta), of
whom there were countless numbers, swarmed round him to beg for his assistance;
many of them had died so long ago that there were no living relatives who could make
merit on their behalf and dedicate the fruits to them.
5. The Acharn once had a remarkable vision concerning three elephants while he was
meditating on a mountain deep in the forest. A large elephant approached him, he
mounted it, and he was followed by two other elephants on which were seated two
young bhikkhu. The Master led the procession out of the three worlds and reached a
cave, which he entered, but not the two bhikkhu. He bade them farewell, saying that
IOO


--- Page 113 ---
The biography of a modern saint
this was the last moment when his appearance in the mundane world would be
absolutely severed from rebirth and he would never again return to it.
The Acharn himself interpreted this dream as signifying that "at his passing away
there would be two young bhikkhu blessed with the same attainments as himself"
(p. 174); however, he did not identify them. At another level of interpretation, he said,
the dream stated that meditation and insight are helpful instruments to an arahant until
the last moment of his life for the subduing of suffering. A buddhologist might
speculate that this dream might be related to the sculptural and iconographic tradition
of having two disciples, Sariputta and Moggallana, flanking the seated Buddha.
Return to the Northeast
All in all, during his stay in Chiengmai there were not many dhutahga disciples
under his training, for he stayed in the wilds most of the time. In 1940, upon the
persistent urging of a titled monk, the abbot of an important wat in the
Northeastern town of Udon (Chaokhun Dhammacedi of Wat Bodhi Somphorn),
Acharn Mun agreed to return to the Northeast. He and those of his disciples
willing to accompany him to Udon left the forest, went to Wat Cedl Luang of
Chiengmai city, and were there met by a delegation from Udon. Before leaving,
the Acharn gave a memorable three-hour sermon on Vesakha Day (on which the
Buddha was born, reached enlightenment, and passed away).
The train first took the party to Bangkok - there being no direct train to Udon
from Chiengmai - where Acharn Mun took up residence at Wat Boromnivat. At
Bangkok, many people came to see and question him. Some of the pronounce-
ments he made were these: Morality has always something to do with the mind,
which is the producer of both good and evil; mind control encompasses the 227
Vinaya precepts and must come first before word control and deed control. It is
not possible "to separate the characteristics of morality from the person who
observes it, not even from the blissful results of its observance." It is because they
merge together that one cannot separate morality and its results and treat them
like commercial goods; it is because there is no attachment in morality, such as
can be found in the person who is attached to his property, that morality can
produce true bliss and security.
When asked by an Elder how did the Acharn solve doubts and find answers to
questions in the solitude of the wilds when the Elder himself, surrounded by
books and scholars in Bangkok, was frequently at his wits' end, the Acharn
replied that his mind is never dissociated from the Dhamma, which is its
preoccupation day and night; that it is in the mind that all problems and
defilements occur; and that it is with one's mind that one dissolves them, for the
Buddha has said "one is the master of oneself" (and hi attano ndtho). This is
why the Acharn said he prefers to come to grips with all problems through
self-help in the seclusion of the wilds. The Elder, greatly impressed, summed up
IOI


--- Page 114 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
by making a distinction between "the dharma in the Scriptures" (about the
authenticity of which over time one cannot be sure) and "the dharma of the
mind," these two Dhammas being "on different levels, producing different
tastes" (p. 209). However, the Acharn affirmed that just as during the time of the
Buddha the disciples went to him for instruction and clarification of doubts, he
too would not hesitate to go to the Buddha if he was alive today: His own efforts
had been difficult and long for lack of a competent teacher, but lacking one, the
only alternative is to grope oneself through steadfastness of aim and dedication of
effort.
While in Bangkok, the Acharn refused all invitations for meals in lay devotees'
homes because they would have interfered with his daily routine. From Bangkok,
he and his party traveled to Khorat, the first Northeastern town on the way to
Udon, where they stopped for a while at Wat Salavan, a forest monastery. He
declared here to a lay questioner that the Four Noble Truths were completely
within his mind, that a person's most valuable and incomparable treasure was his
mind. He also affirmed that "the mind that is dharma" was able "to bestow
peace and bliss upon others'' and that as long as there was breath in his body so
long would he serve others "for their own sakes."
On finally reaching Udon Thani, the Acharn made his first stay at Wat Bodhi
Somporn, where Choakhun Dhammacedi, who was instrumental in persuading
the Acharn to return from Chiengmai, presided. "There he was reverently
welcomed by a great number of people from the various districts of Udorn Thani
and also from the towns of Nongkhai and Sakon Nakhon."
The Acharn then chose to spend his first rains retreat at Wat Nonenivet, chosen
with Chaokhun Dhammacedi's advice and consent. While there, Dhammacedi,
his enthusiastic benefactor and admirer - for he too had some interest in
meditation - "regularly led groups of lay devotees, consisting of government
officials, businessmen and common people," to see Acharn Mun and receive
instruction from him every Wan Phra.24
There was also a constant stream of his former disciples, both monks and laity,
who came to see him after his prolonged absence and to renew their learning
from him. In fact, during this rains retreat he conducted a program of intensive
teaching and instruction, which it would be profitable for us to review. The
biographer makes a point of informing us that the timetable of instruction and
practice that the Acharn implemented at this later stage and final return to the
Northeast was different from that observed at earlier phases.
The bhikkhus and sdmanera living at Wat Nonenivet were expected to devote
all their time to inner development. Nighttime was set apart for instructing the
monk-disciples, and "he would begin his instruction with morality and then
move to meditation, wisdom and deliverance."
He often stressed the importance of the observance of morality; failure to
develop it breeds lack of shame and leads to violation of other Vinaya prohibitions;
its observance is rewarded with inner bhikkhuhood and its combination with
102


--- Page 115 ---
The biography of a modern saint
meditative exertions for the sake of insight leads to the Path of Fruition and the
purging of the mind of defilements. This is the meaning of the Thai word phra
(Pali: vara)\ it stands for a monk "excellent" in behavior, wisdom, and insight.
After the time set for instruction was over, any disciple with doubts or
problems relating to the process of his mind development could usually approach
him for individual questioning. He thus took pains to render selfless service to
others.
At this period of time, even with creeping old age and enfeeblement of body,
he still kept to a taxing schedule. He slept for four hours at the most. After
waking in the early morning, he practiced both sitting and walking meditation in
that order. Then he went out on his almsround and ate his only meal of the day.
After this, he did walking meditation until noon, rested awhile, and engaged in
sitting and walking meditation until 4p.m. Sweeping the dwelling area and a bath
came next, followed by several hours of walking meditation and recitation,
concluding with several hours of sitting meditation before going to sleep. On
special occasions, he might continue his sitting meditation throughout the night
without any sleep. During the rains retreat, of course, part of the night was
devoted to instruction, as said before.
The Acharn stayed for two rains retreats in the town of Udon (spending the
intervening dry season in the forest village of Nong Nan Khem because, in spite
of his age, he still liked to wander alone), and then on the invitation of a pious lay
disciple, Khun Mae Noom Juvanon, he went to Sakon Nakhon and took up his
residence at Wat Suddhavas. After receiving many visits from his devotees, he
moved again from the town to the forest hermitage in the village of Namone,
where he energetically directed ordained disciples. The routine observed at this
forest hermitage is as follows. The disciples were expected to practice meditation
assiduously either inside their humble individual huts or on their meditation
walks. At four o'clock in the afternoon they came together to sweep the open area
of the hermitage compound, fill the water jars, and then bathe. Even at these
times they were self-controlled, practicing mindfulness and not engaging in idle
conversation. After this joint duty, they would retire to their own places for more
exertion. The two set periods when they came together again was for their
morning meal in the hall and for their intermittent evening instruction. Mind-
fulness was observed on the almsround, and there was no chatting during the
meal.
We are told of the time when the master and disciples lived for five years at a
forest hermitage in Nong Phue (see below in this chapter). On their almsrounds,
the disciples walked to the village in a single long line. There were benches or
long seats prepared for them by the villagers, on which they would sit to recite the
anumodand passages of acknowledgment and blessing after they had received the
food. Then they returned in the same way.
The meal itself was an occasion for contemplative practice. Before eating
together in one place, the disciples were urged to contemplate the nature of the
103


--- Page 116 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
food mixed up within their almsbowls and the purpose for eating it; while eating,
self-restraint was observed, and in chewing care was taken not to make any noise
that might cause annoyance to others. 'After eating, the place was wiped and
cleaned, alms-bowls were washed and then dried for a few moments in the sun
before being returned to their proper places" (p. 225).25
The orienting conception behind such controlled practice is well expressed by
the biographer: "Mindfulness is to be developed to control every moment and
movement of exertion, until it finally becomes mahdsati (great-mindfulness)
which then produces mahdpanhd (the great wisdom)" (p. 225).
The Dhamma instruction in the evening was held every six or seven days, but
in the meantime any practitioner who faced an obstacle could approach the Master
for advice. The general picture was one of individual monks or novices applying
their utmost effort in their own dwellings or walks; on moonlit nights they could
be seen treading their tracks and on dark nights the lanterns told the same tale.
For his nightly recitation by himself, the Master usually chose from the
scriptures such long discourses as the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta26 and the
Mahdsamaya Sutta. On some occasions, however, he would translate these suttas
for his disciples, his focus being on the ''practical" implications of the words
rather than their etymological meanings. Although he had little academic training,
he had an extraordinary capacity for translating the Pali texts.
From the village of Namone, the Acharn moved on to the village of Ban Koke,
about two kilometers away. At both these places the number of disciples staying
with him was quite small, about ten or eleven in all, in accordance with the small
number of living places available. It was in Ban Koke that the biographer
himself, Acharn Maha Boowa, was first admitted as a novice-disciple.27
During the rains retreat at Ban Koke, the Master conducted his instruction
every six or seven days for about two hours or so each time, sometimes extending
it to three or four, and the listeners absorbed in his teaching "experienced no
stiffness of body or fatigue." They felt, says the biographer, reflecting his own
neophyte experience, that they were reliving the time when the Buddha taught his
disciples, that in fact the venerable Master "was delivering the dharma which
was to him the Absolute Present."
The biographer also notes that sometimes during the period of these rains
retreats the Acharn "would recall experiences of his former lives for his disciples,
whereas at other times he would tell them of the early states of his exertions in
this life, which included the phenomena and insights resulting from meditation
and contemplation," and carry the story through to "the critical moment when
achievement was about to be won and he was to leave the quagmire forever" (p.
232). (We may note here that the Master in recalling his former lives manifests
the capacity that the Buddha himself showed in the Jdtakas, and also the powers
of iddhi described in the Visuddhimagga.)
From Ban Koke, at the end of the rains retreat, the Master returned briefly to
Namone village, but then moved again to a village deep in the forest (Ban Huey
104


--- Page 117 ---
The biography of a modern saint
Khan) and from there to a deserted monastery on the hillside at Nasinuan village.
Here he stayed for several months and was stricken with fever for several days
"until he cured it, as usual, by the therapeutic effect of the dharma" (p. 231). In
1942, he went to the town of Ubol to attend the funeral rites of his meditation
teacher and co-practitioner - Acharn Sao - and then returned to Namone village
(Sakon Nakhon Province) to spend another rains retreat there.
He had thus altogether spent some three retreats in these villages of Tong
Khobe District; then he was invited by the devotees of the village of Nong Phue
to "uplift their spirit" by coming to stay with them. He accepted and set out on
foot on a journey that took some three or four nights. A few days later he was
stricken with malaria, which intermittently affected him with fever for several
months.
Despite these reverses, the forest hermitage of Nong Phue, and the wider
district in which it was located, became a center for dhutahga monks. This
happened for good reasons. The village of Nong Phue is situated in the middle of
the valley, surrounded by forests and mountains. The valley is fairly wide and
suitable for farming at various places; the surrounding numerous mountains and
vast forest offered numerous secluded places for a great number of dhutahga
monks all year round, in both the rainy and dry seasons. The forest hermitage was
on a direct but ascending path from the district town of Nong Phue that was about
20 kilometers long, and there were other longer, winding (but easier) paths to it.
Motor transport was possible between towns, and plenty of the laity, including
businessmen and government officials, and also monks from these towns,
thronged to the hermitage to see him.
Despite the distance and the dangers of malaria and physical discomfort, many
monks and novices sought out the Master to become his direct disciples. Thus
during the rains retreat the hermitage of Nong Phue itself housed some twenty to
thirty disciples; but more found accommodation in nearby villages in groups of
two to ten. On Wan Phra days, especially when the Patimokkha recitations were
done fortnightly, there would be twenty to thirty disciples from outside coming to
attend, the numbers swelling even more if other monks from nearby wat joined
them. Outside the rains retreat, if the Master stayed there, the number con-
gregating from outside could reach fifty to sixty or more.
Not only was the scale of attendance on the days of Patimokkha recitation
larger, but the mode of instruction also was intensified: It was more oratorical,
more "strong and stirring," more extensive and profound than usual.
The limelight now must be accorded to the ascetic monks dotted and dispersed
in all those forested mountains, who would come down and return in a steady
stream, traveling great distances to listen to the Master's instruction on Pati-
mokkha days and receiving advice with regard to their problems.
These ascetic meditators would stay either alone or two together in secluded
places separated from one another by six kilometers or more (even up to thirty).
They would walk the forest trails, stopping for water or food at hamlet settlements,
105


--- Page 118 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
arrive at the Master's hermitage, stay overnight, and return to their solitude and
self-dependence, replenished. Despite their physical separation and only occa-
sional meeting with him, these disciples had a strong link with their teacher who
was their radial center.
They had a powerful sense of their defilements and a fierce battle raged inside
them for their eradication. The Acharn's stirring instructions helped the monks to
extinguish the defilements or at least to make them beat a hasty retreat for a while.
This is why, although it is true that bhikkhu are expected to eradicate the
defilements mainly by themselves, yet they were substantially helped by the
Acharn's guidance and were therefore attracted to their teacher "perhaps to an
unusual extent in the eyes of the others." This is also why dhutahga monks who
stayed and practiced in remote, secluded areas walked long distances to consult
the Acharn whenever they were faced with problems they could not solve. An
Acharn comes to know each disciple's achievements and limitations and the
obstacles that block his way, and a disciple in turn also discerns the level of
development of his Acharn when he relates his inner experiences to his Acharn
for advice and explanation. There are also times when a disciple is deluded into
thinking he has reached his final attainment, and a knowing Acharn will correct
this false belief and direct him toward higher effort.
The ascetic practices verging on self-mortification practiced by the Master and
recommended to these disciples are aptly summarized thus: "There were a
variety of practices for self-discipline which they undertook and which included:
not sleeping; reducing food intake or eating no food at all for a length of time
appropriate to the endurance of the body; all night walking or sitting meditation;
sitting meditation in a dangerous place, such as the mouth of a cave where a tiger
was dwelling, on a tiger's pathway, in a cemetery where corpses are newly buried
or burnt, or even at the edge of a high precipice. In all these instances, the
purpose was the same: to tame the unruly mind by forcing it to face whatever it
was afraid of... " (p. 238), to draw it back within itself instead of allowing it to
dwell upon whatever external is feared, to convince it of its own power, and to
develop the qualities of courage, poise, and peace. "Let what you are afraid of be
your trainer and your teacher" was the advice by which he cured a pupil's fear of
tigers. In the same way, the Acharn taught the disciples who were victims of
malaria to use the therapeutic effect of dharma to cure themselves; illness faced
and survived by exercising the courage of mindfulness and wisdom makes it
possible to face not only future illness but the critical moment of death itself.
The Acharn stayed in the village of Nong Phue for five years; he was now
seventy-five, and he did not often go out to secluded places as had been his habit
before. There was not much communication with invisible beings either; his
attention was largely devoted to his disciples. The regime was the same as
documented earlier, but the biographer describing these last years writes warmly
of the informal discussions at night between pupils and the Master, when the
106


--- Page 119 ---
The biography of a modern saint
pupils from places near and far would relate and exchange the unique experiences
they had and the strange problems they had encountered, whether these were
about inner Dhamma realization or communication with invisible beings. The
variety of experiences related to the different levels of attainment of the disciples;
and the Master capped them with his own.
The fatal illness and the mortuary rites
In his seventy-ninth year,28 during the hot month of March in 1949, the Acharn
fell ill. The Acharn already knew that this was to be his last illness and
announced the fact to his disciples, telling them that there was no remedy to cure
it. From then on he showed irritation when offered medicine. The countdown had
begun, he said, and the law of flux was now proving itself on his body.
News of his final illness soon spread rapidly, and people, both lay and or-
dained, disciples and devotees, swarmed to Nong Phue, walking some 25 to 30 kil-
ometers off the highways between the towns of Udon and Sakon Nakhon to reach
the forest village. The aged were transported in bullock carts. He continued to
instruct his monks and novices, though not as regularly as before, and gave
audience to as many importunate lay devotees as he could. And in spite of his
weakening body, he kept the dhutahga practices: He regularly begged for food,
the distance he walked diminishing with the progress of the illness, from full
distance to the village, to halfway, then to the gateway of the hermitage, and
finally to the meeting hall, where the lay donors met him and filled his bowl.
When he was no longer able to walk, he still ate in his bowl and only once a day.
The monks and novices mounted night watches.
The Master's deterioration continued through the rains retreat, and when this
period was over, more and more disciples thronged from all directions eager to
pay their respects to him. He insisted that he did not want to die in this remote
village, because on his account many local animals would have to be killed to
feed the multitudes, there being no meat market nearby. It would be ironic if his
death would be the cause of death to animals to whom he had always extended
loving-kindness. He therefore directed his disciples to transport him to the town
of Sakon Nakhon. The villagers, who wanted him to die in their humble
settlement and, though poor, were keen to make and finance the arrangements for
the cremation, were disappointed but obeyed.
The Master was carried on a stretcher some 24 kilometers to Wat Bahn Poo in
the nearest district of Phanna Nikom. Hundreds of weeping, grief-stricken
disciples and devotees followed the stretcher. The journey took a whole day. The
plan was to give the dying saint a rest and then take him to the town of Sakon
Nakhon. He was placed in a small meeting hall, and hundreds of people swarmed
to see him, for it is the people's belief that one has to be blessed with merit to be
107


--- Page 120 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
able to see and recognize an arahant, and catching a glimpse of him or, better
still, paying respects to him, would give them the assurance that their lives had
not been wasted.
The Master's condition worsened, and he urged his disciples to take him to his
destination without delay. The disciples delayed ten days to give him rest but,
unable to resist the Master's words to the effect that his suffering body was a
burden and he did not want his life prolonged, they acquiesced. A close lay
disciple, Mrs. Noon Chuvanon, brought a car borrowed from the Highway
Department and personally invited him to leave for Sakon Nakhon. The car
reached Wat Suddhavas in the town at noon, and he slept till midnight and woke
up in a final flickering of life. Three lines of the religious were seated by his side
- his old friend and admirer, Chaokhun Dhammacedi of Udon, sat closest to
him at the head of the first line; the second line was composed of his past pupils
who were themselves now Teachers (Acharns); and finally his current disciples
made up the third line.
The Master lay on his right side in the Lion's posture,29 but a pupil eased him
halfway onto his back in order not to tire him; in this position, he passed away at
2:23 a.m. The biographer records that many, including himself, thought that
their Master "had attained to parinirvana" (p. 279). The next day, the senior
bhikkhu and government officials in town came to pay their last respects, and it
was decided to broadcast over the radio that the arahant's cremation ceremony
would be staged three months later in the third lunar month of B.E. 2493 (1950),
so as to give time to all disciples and devotees living in various parts of the
country to attend, if they wished to.
Throughout this long interval of three months "there were no crimes of
violence, stealing, quarrelling, or drinking bouts. Those who had lost valuables
were able to later recover them by reporting to the authorities in the monastery
area..." (p. 276).
It was estimated that some 10,000 people attended his cremation at Wat
Suddhavas. "The forested area on the outskirts of Wat Suddhavas bloomed with
the white umbrellas of the forest monks who had come"; altogether, some 2,000
monks and novices clustered inside Wat Suddhavas and nearby monasteries.
"Booths and sheds of all shapes and sizes had been erected all over the area and
food and drink were served freely to all" (p. 275). Loudspeakers blared
instructions and accounts of the ongoing enactments.
Devotees piled up a small mountain of offerings, consisting of sacks of rice
and robes numerous enough to fill a factory warehouse. Food was cooked in
gigantic pots by laymen, and dhutahga monks and novices in groups of thirty to
sixty were fed in monks' dwellings, sheds, fields, and other available sites.
The cremation ceremony itself lasted "three nights and four days." The time for
cremation had been set for midnight (of the thirteenth day of the waxing moon of
the third lunar month of Magha), and at the appointed time before the eyes of the
patiently assembled massive crowd a "miracle" happened: "The summer sky
108


--- Page 121 ---
The biography of a modern saint
was bright and clear but it suddenly became overcast by a small cloud which
hovered over only the cremation area. Just as the fire was lit and the flames leaped
towards the coffin, the area was suddenly cooled by a drizzle which lasted about
fifteen minutes before the cloud disappeared, leaving the moonlit sky as bright
and clear as before" (p. 227).
The body was consumed by the pyre of burning sandalwood (specially brought
from Laos), and the ashes collected the next morning were distributed to "the
bhikkhu delegates from the various towns who attended the ceremony so that they
could be enshrined in places to be specially built"; lay disciples from various
towns also received portions.30 As soon as the formal distribution was over,
others present rushed to the remains of the pyre and gathered all the dust and
cinders that remained. They regarded the dust and ashes as a treasure, which they
pressed t4to their bosoms with a triumphant smile." On the very place where the
cremation pyre stood was later built the convocation hall of Wat Suddhavas.
The Acharn's ashes in due course became relics. Those who had been fortunate
enough to receive the ashes had enshrined them in their homes and venerated
them there. For four years nothing extraordinary happened. Then one day a
certain pious lady, Mrs. Khamanamool, went to Wat Suddhavas, where Acharn
Mun had been cremated. After she made offerings to the monks, she received
from the abbot some ashes from a burnt bone from the upper part of the Acharn's
body. She took the ashes home in an urn and on opening it found to her
wonderment that the ashes "had all become relics" - they had turned into
"smooth and glossy grains, sandlike in appearance, resembling relics of the
Buddha and some other arahant disciples in ancient times" (p. 280). She then
rushed to the hotel she owned and opened an urn there where she had kept some
of the Acharn's ashes that she had previously received, and she found that those
ashes too had become relics. Altogether now she was the proud owner of 344
relic grains. People thronged to her house to see the holy objects and, being a
generous person, Mrs. Khamanamool distributed some of the grains to various
persons, the biographer himself being fortunate to receive grains on two
occasions.
Over the years, similar incidents were reported regarding the ashes in the
keeping of other devotees. Other wondrous events took place, too: Sometimes
two grains of the relics became three, "symbolic of the Triple Gem," and
sometimes two grains merged and became one. The Master's hair, which was
shaved once a fortnight, was also found to have been transformed into relics in
places where disciples had thought to enshrine it.
"Why do the ashes of arahants become relics?" asks the biographer. The body
of an arahant and a worldling, he goes on to explain, have the same ingredients,
with this difference: The mind of an arahant has been absolutely purified,
whereas that of the worldling contains defilements. "Body matter is then
transformed in accordance with the condition and nature of the mind." A purified
mind can therefore purify the physical body in much the same way as a defiled
109


--- Page 122 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
mind can defile the body (p. 283). The process of body purification takes a long
time; if an arahant lives long enough after his attainment, there is an opportunity
for the body to eliminate its "toxic ingredients" by virtue of the mind's regular
withdrawal into the most profound depths of concentration and hence the
likelihood of his ashes turning into relics after his death. Noble Disciples can be
divided into two groups, according to their history of attainment: The dandd-
bhinnd is one who, having reached the level of Non-Returner, takes a long time
before achieving arahantship; the khippdbhihhd is one whose attainment is
"sudden," taking little time, and he does not live long after his attainment. It is
the former whose prolonged and many meditative exercises have a chance to
purify the body, and Acharn Mun is a quintessential example of such a Noble
Disciple.
The venerable Master has passed away, but there is still a link between him and
his disciples, who are prone to have visions during their meditation. He appears
in their visions and, as he did when he was alive, gives them whatever instruction
or advice is necessary to overcome an obstacle, "much the same way as the
arahant disciples had appeared and instructed him" (p. 302). "An experience
such as this on the part of some disciples, and those [experiences] of the
Venerable Acharn himself in listening to sermons given by the Buddha and
arahant disciples may be likened to the Buddha giving sermons to his mother
Queen Maya in the Tavatimsa heaven by means of a vision" (p. 302).
Today the Master's "elder disciples, through his training and guidance, have
been firmly established in the dharma and have now become Acharns in their own
right, leading people along the Right Path. All have large numbers of disciples in
various parts of the country. And there are still other disciples who are millionaires
in the dharma, but who prefer a solitary, secluded life" (p. 303).
no


--- Page 123 ---
The Buddha's life as paradigm
Recent biographies of monks
Before we attempt a detailed interpretation of the biography of Acharn Mun, we
should explore what sort of tradition of writing biographies of monks exists in Sri
Lanka, Burma, and Thailand. This inquiry is called for because our biographer
Maha Boowa himself states in his preface that "the method of presentation here
follows that of the ancient compilers who recorded the biographies of some
Noble disciples in various texts in the hope that they may be encouraging
examples for posterity." In Sri Lanka and Thailand, as in Burma, there are
numerous popular biographies of the Buddha1 and famous arahants.2 Many
of these stories of arahants are adaptations of old stories transferred to new
subjects. But the biographies are not necessarily confined to these heroic figures
alone.
That a lively tradition of composing biographies of monks developed in Sri
Lanka, primarily in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, is attested by
Malalgoda's study, which uses to advantage this genre of local Sinhala literature.
Malalgoda cites at least ten sources that carry the word caritaya (or caritam or
cariyava) in their titles: Of these, one is an edited reprint of an eighteenth-
century work, five were published between 1901 and 1913, and the rest later.
Furthermore, biographical information on monks is also available in Sinhala
publications that describe the genealogy and history of the various sects and
fraternities that developed in Sri Lanka in the nineteenth century. An interesting
addition to this list is a biography of a monk called Miripanna Dhammaratana, a
famous Sinhala poet, published in 1868 in English.3
Although some of these biographies were about forest-monks,4 most of Malal-
goda's biographies are concerned with famous reformist or activist monks during
the years 1700-1900. I shall select two instances. One subject was Valvita
Saranamkara, the reformer and leader of the "pious ones," of whom I have
I I I


--- Page 124 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
written earlier. Another was Hikkaduve Sumangala (i826-1911), a scholar
monk of the "low country" who belonged to the Siyam Nikaya and who opened
in 1873 the Vidyodaya College in Colombo for the education of monks at a time
when the main educational establishments at Kandy were at a low ebb.
Although the vast majority of these biographies were composed and published
at the turn of the century and later, more generally as a result of the spirit of
religious revival and fervor and more specifically as a result of spreading literacy
and the introduction of printing presses (the first publications printed in Sinhalese
were done by the Christian missionaries in the nineteenth century), yet the
caritaya-typQ biographical genre goes back to earlier times. For instance, the
more recent biographical accounts of sahghardja Saranarhkara rely largely on
two accounts of his life composed in 1779 and circa 1780, the first in prose, the
second in verse.5 Thus, apart from the tradition of oral accounts of the lives of
famous monks, biography as a literary composition seems to have existed before
the nineteenth century.
In the case of Thailand - if we accept the authority of Keyes - it appears that
the written biographies of Buddhist saints and other well-known monks were
produced "after the beginning of the twentieth century, that is, after a radical
change had occurred in Thai literature, stimulated by Western influences and
especially by the introduction of printing." However, Keyes holds that oral
biographies of monks and other individuals have long existed and that "the
written biographies of 19th century monks draw upon such oral accounts."6 In
contemporary Thailand, there are to be found a multitude of printed biographies
of the lives of monks. As Keyes puts it, it is only necessary to have been an abbot
of a local monastery to merit a biography, but there are certain others who
command greater attention. "Some biographies of famous monks have been
written because the subject has gained a reputation as a high-ranking official or
even patriarch of the Thai Sangha; others are of monks who are renowned for
their 'magical' (saksit) powers; and still others are of those who have gained
fame for their theological discourses. Only a very few are of those recognized as
saints, and to this very limited class belong the biographies of Khruba Slwichai
and Acan Man."7
Kruba Slwichai, a venerated monk of Northern Thailand, is the subject of
many biographies, ranging from popular pamphlets and articles in magazines to
palm-leaf texts.8 These literary sources and their contents - which chart his life,
ascetic practices, charismatic powers, religious works, and political challenges -
are dealt with in Chapter 21. The center of attention here, however, is the life of
Acharn Mun, which, according to his biographer, Maha Boowa, was written
according to a Buddhist hagiographical style. It seems to me that to fully grasp
the implications of Acharn Mun's biography, as of other acclaimed Buddhist
saints, we might begin with the contours of the received life of the Buddha
himself.
112


--- Page 125 ---
The Buddha's life as a paradigm
The life of the Buddha
The Buddhist notion of "biography" is conveyed by words like carita, caritam,
and avaddna. The biography of the Buddha, fragmentary in the canonical Pali
literature, but elaborated and mythologized in subsequent times by all Buddhist
schools, is an integral part of the dogma and doctrine referred to as the Dhamma.
The Vinaya rules are stated in the context of events that took place during the
Buddha's itinerant teaching mission in the company of disciples. (The Skandhaka
documents these rules, which, in the Pali scriptures, are divided into Mahdvagga
and Cullavagga.)9 The Buddha's discourses in the Suttapitaka are similarly
personalized and contextualized, as indeed are the Jataka accounts of the Buddha's
former lives strung on a long chain of rebirths. In Buddhist postcanonical
literature, a quintessential "first-ever" biography in the caritam mode is the
poetic Buddhacarita, composed by Asvaghosa.10 Many versions of Asvaghosa's
text have been discovered in India, Tibet, China, and elsewhere. According to
Northern traditions, Asvaghosa was the twelfth Buddhist patriarch, and Chinese
sources say he was a contemporary of Kaniska, who ruled in Kasmlr in the early
centuries of the Christian Era. Kaniska is alleged to have carried him off from
Pataliputra when he attacked that imperial city. In the Council of Sarvastivadin
elders that Kaniska is said to have convened, Asvaghosa acted as vice-president.
The Buddhacarita is a poetical account of the Buddha's life, and some scholars
hold that Asvaghosa imitated the style of Kalidasa's Raghuvamsa, his work
showing, however, elaborations and devices of a later stage in the development of
the Sanskrit language. What is of particular interest to us is that his work relates
the story of the Buddha's early life.11 It thus starts with Suddhodana and Maya
reigning in Kapilavastu, the Buddha entering Maya's womb, his birth in Lumbini
Park, and Asita's disclosure of the career awaiting him.
The childhood of the Buddha, his sporting with the young women in the
palace, and the birth of his son Rahula are described. The centerpiece is the three
trips he made as a youth from the palace to the park outside the city and his
meeting with the three apparitions of sickness, old age, and death. Celebrated is
the description of the women of the city craning from the upper roofs of their
mansions to have a glimpse of the handsome prince as he returns from these trips.
His restlessness and aversion to palace life culminate with his departure on his
horse Kanthaka, accompanied by his horsekeeper Chandaka. Another celebrated
description is that of the sleeping palace women in careless postures and with
distorted facial expressions; it is accompanied by a reflection on the nature of
women and men's lust for them. Thus the composition elaborates on the decisive
incidents in the Buddha's life that led to his heroic renunciation, and its sensuous
poetry has moral overtones and a didactic purpose.
The original avaddnas were stories or legends of the historical Buddha (and of
previous buddhas) and of his followers, usually concerning their previous lives.
113


--- Page 126 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
(However, in time, a story of a previous life of the Buddha was given the special
label of jdtaka.) Compared with the concept of vamsa, which implied some kind
of succession of kings or teachers, the avaddna seems to have referred to "a great
action having decisive consequences,"12 or, as another gloss would have it,
"illustrious actions, heroic deeds, or a narrative of such actions and deeds."13
The Vinaya texts of many Buddhist schools incorporated avaddnas of the Buddha,
and their inclusion served a larger dogmatic purpose. Whatever avaddna was
related - whether it be a prophecy of the Buddha or some act of an arahant - it
was used to highlight a point of discipline or a moral precept. Besides the carita
or avaddna legends of heroic deeds pertaining to the Buddha and the saints,
perhaps the best-known text of this genre in Buddhist literature is the Asokd-
vaddna,14 which deals with the illustrious actions of Emperor Asoka.
Frames of analysis
In order to attempt an ample interpretation of the biography of Acharn Mun, it is
necessary to develop several different "frames of analysis," frames that are not
disjunctive or separate but cumulatively produce the amplitude we seek. Firstly,
we must have some idea of the basic design of the biography of the Buddha. To
gain an understanding of this, it will be necessary to distinguish the biography of
the Buddha in its earlier form from its later form (or forms),15 when it was
elaborated substantively and also woven into regional and local traditions. We
should also try to uncover the Buddhist "historiographic vision" that is embod-
ied in some representative chronicles like the Mahdvamsa and Jinakdlamdli,
which fuse in a single temporal schema the Buddha's life with the acts of the
sahgha and these again with the political history of kings and kingdoms.
Secondly, we have to grasp the main ordering principles behind traditional
Buddhist saintly biography, whose protagonists were the arahants, even the
buddhas. They were the exemplary disciples who followed in the Master's path.
This exploration will be enhanced by taking a sideglance at medieval Christian
hagiography to establish similarities and differences and by taking one or more
classical examples of Buddhist masterpieces of saintly lives and comparing them
with our own text concerning Acharn Mun. The latter exercise should help us in
deciding in what ways our text is "stereotyped" and follows a classical paradigm
and in what ways it is "particularized" and "individualized," thereby reflecting
many contextual circumstances concerning not only the subject but also the
author of the biography. We might then be able to evaluate in what sense and to
what degree our text might be rated a "masterpiece." A "masterpiece," it seems
to me, is a felicitous conjunction of a masterly life and a masterly biographer.
Thus, thirdly, we have to bring to life the biographer himself: As far as
possible, we should trace his own career as a disciple of the master and a witness
to his feats; trace the circumstances in which he came to compose the biography;
114


--- Page 127 ---
The Buddha's life as a paradigm
trace the "propagandist" and indoctrinating purposes that might have motivated
his writing; and trace the political, religious, and social dimensions of the events
in which he participated. As Reynolds and Capps point out, "sacred biographies''
are extraordinary documents because "they recount the process through which
a . . . religious ideal is established and, at the same time, participate in that
process."16 While the previously stated two frames are the province of the
historian, the anthropologist could make a distinct contribution to the third:
Through his firsthand study of the contemporary events, he should be able to
illuminate the context of composition, which is at best meagerly available with
regard to chronicles and texts composed in early times.
The rest of this chapter will deal with the first frame of analysis. The second
and third frames will be separately tackled in the succeeding chapters.
Earlier and later Buddhist biographical and
historiographical traditions
Various scholars have in one way or another seen the need to demarcate the
contents of an earlier Buddhist oral and literary tradition from a later more
elaborated and embellished one. Thus Warder, for instance, distinguishes be-
tween a "primary historiography" and a "secondary historiography," the first
referring to more or less a contemporary and direct record of events as exempli-
fied by the more or less circumstantial accounts of the activities of the Buddha.
Later, we have successive biographies of the Buddha such as the Mahdvastu, 
Niddnakathd,
Sdkyamunibuddhacahta, 
Lalitavistara, 
and Asvaghosa's Buddhacarita, 
in which the
narrative is more or less transformed into a legend: the events are not such as we would
expect in a circumstantial historical narrative, but fit into certain patterns. . . . In fact all
actions are supposed to be conditioned by past events according to the Buddhist doctrine
of moral causality. Just as action is related to past events, so it is pregnant with its future
consequences. This patterning naturally led secondary Buddhist historians to select,
distort and imagine events in such a way as to improve the ethical picture of history
presented.17
Although a firm distinction cannot be imposed between earlier and later
accounts - for it is clear that the canonical texts, written some time after the
Buddha's death, already show tendentious patterning and mythologizing of the
Buddha's life and teaching - yet it is clear that the Pali Tipitaka texts, particularly
the earlier sections, have a more circumstantial flavor. If we must choose an
example, we might say that Oldenberg's account of the Buddha's life18 is
accurately based on material dispersed in the canonical Pali texts of the Theravada
School. Oldenberg asserts (and other biographers like Thomas and Rhys Davids
would agree with him) that "a biography of Buddha has not come down to us
from ancient times, from the age of the Pali texts, and we can safely say, no such
biography was in existence then.''19 Nevertheless, there are of course unconnected
fragments of the Buddha's life story embedded in the sutta discourses, a par-
115


--- Page 128 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
ticularly prominent one being the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta; in the Vinaya
(especially the Mahdvagga and Cullavagga sections of the Skandhaka)', and in
other texts. A biography put together from such canonical Pali sources has, as
Oldenberg's account reveals to us, very little to say about the Buddha's family
origins, his childhood and marriage, and a great deal to say about: the events
concerning his enlightenment; his teaching career, which includes both the
philosophical truths he preached and the events connected with the founding of a
community of monks and the rules by which they were to live; and, finally, his
death and cremation rites. In fact, this is the kind of selective emphasis that rings
true and is what we ought to expect, if we accept that the centerpiece of the early
Buddhist story of its founder and saint is not his personalized early life but his
self-effacing achievement of enlightenment and the transmission of that experi-
ence to his disciples. We shall in due course compare the central differences in
the achievements of early Buddhist and early Christian saints.
Frauwallner's thesis
If we accept that the Vinaya texts contain the largest amount of details of the
Buddha's biography and extend the inquiry to the Vinaya texts of some six
schools20 presently available to us (of which the Pali version is only one), then
what might one learn about the early biographical accounts of the Buddha? This
is a question posed by Frauwallner, which he answers in a brilliant, if polemical,
manner. All the Vinayas were divided into two parts: the Vibhahga, which is a
commentary on the ancient confession rules of Prdtimoksa, and the Skandhaka,
which is an exposition of the monastic rules. It has been indicated by more than
one scholar that the Vinaya of the Pali school, which begins quite abruptly, is
closely connected with regard to its contents with the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta of
the Dighanikdya, of which it is a continuation. Frauwallner affirms as a fact
Finot's surmise that the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta and the account of the councils
originally formed one continuous narrative, "which told in the manner of a
chronicle the last days of the Buddha, his death and the beginnings of the
Buddhist Church."21 The story of the Buddha's death and the account of the two
earliest councils, according to Frauwallner's reconstruction, formed a narrative
that was a fixed component of the Vinaya placed at the end of the Skandhaka. The
Skandhaka in the Vinaya of the Pali school begins with the Buddha's illumination
and includes his first sermon delivered at Benares and the first conversions,
concluding with those of Sariputra and Maudgalyayana. The Vinaya of the
Dharmaguptakas and Mahisasaka begins earlier, and describes the Buddha's
lineage. The biography is even more complete in the Vinaya of the Mulasarva-
stivadin, in that the tale is carried still earlier to the origin of humankind. In the
face of this, Frauwallner suggests that there has been a "crumbling away" from
an earlier connected story that contained accounts of the Buddha's early career,
116


--- Page 129 ---
The Buddha's life as a paradigm
his illumination, his conversions of disciples as a teacher, his laying down the
Vinaya rules, and his death followed by the councils. Thus the core of the
Skandhaka, consisting of the exposition of the monastic rules, was enclosed by a
biography of the Buddha - on one side from his birth to the beginning of his
teaching activities, and on the other side from his death to the two councils.
This reconstruction is given greater plausibility by the fact that the Skandhaka
gives the monastic rules in the form of episodes narrating the events that gave
occasion to the laying down of individual rules. Moreover, the narrative is
interspersed with legends. This adds strength to the thesis of a great unity to the
literary work, which consciously framed the monastic rules within the imposing
plan of a biography of the Buddha. This earliest work must have been composed
in the old home of Buddhism, whose centers were Rajagrha, SravastI, and
Kausambi; it was composed after the Vaisali Council but before the schisms and
Asoka, say between ioo and 160 years after the passing away of the Buddha.
Frauwallner has an answer to the puzzling fact that a number of the biographies
of the Buddha that relate his life from his birth stop short suddenly at the
beginning of his teaching activity. The best-known examples are the Niddnakathd
- at the beginning of the Jdtaka collection of the Pali school, the Lalitavistara,
and the Mahdvastu. They have come into being, Frauwallner says, "through the
incomplete biographies of the Buddha at the beginning of the Skandhaka being
cut loose and becoming independent."22 The very fact that some Buddhist
schools possessing different Vinayas also possess these incomplete biographies
that stop suddenly is proof of their being disconnected from the beginning of the
Skandhaka. After being thus cut loose, the early biography of the Buddha was
further elaborated and embellished by various schools.23
Now, although the Finot-Frauwallner thesis has not gone uncontested,241 wish
to highlight a pattern that can be said to be noncontroversial. Whether there was
an old Skandhaka text that combined the Buddha's biography with the Vinaya, as
Frauwallner would have it, or whether the complete biographical accounts
(including that contained in the Vinaya of the Mulasarvastivadin) were a long
time in formation with cross-fertilization between the different Buddhist com-
munities (as Lamotte would have it) is not material to my theme, which focuses
on the fact that all Buddhist schools in their established state and in their
canonical and noncanonical texts (particularly of the vamsa and avaddna kinds)
have either through parallel developments or through mutual influence fashioned
a remarkable view of the "historical" unfolding of Buddhism. I write particularly
from the standpoint of Southeast Asia.
The point of origin in these accounts is a charismatic figure, the Buddha, who
by virtue of his resolve to be enlightened belongs to the line of former buddhas,
and who by virtue of descent is part of the lineage of former cakkavattis starting
with Mahasammata. This Buddha in his last life achieved illumination, taught the
doctrine to the disciples, and founded a monastic order.
After his death, the preservation and maintenance of the doctrinal knowledge
117


--- Page 130 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
and relics of the Master passed from an individual mahdpurusa (great man) to a
collective fraternity of monks, the sahgha. We thus get the transition from a
"biography" to a "monastic history." The story of the councils, of schisms, and
of codifications of disciplinary rules is the story of the early Buddhist order; if
there is a line of patriarchs of this early "church," it is relatively unimportant
compared to the Vedic line of teachers or the Christian line of apostolic successors.
With the alleged Third Council, held under the auspices of Mogalliputta Tissa
and Emperor Asoka, we reach the third phase of Buddhist historiography: the
missions of Asoka, the transplantation of Buddhism to Southeast Asia, where
now the sahgha's and the doctrine's fate is embedded within a Buddhist polity
capped by a Buddhist kingship, the dhammadlpa of Lanka providing the model
and point of reference for the kingdoms in Burma, Thailand, and so on. Thus,
"Buddhism as early monastic history" makes the passage in this third stage to
"Buddhism in polity." No doubt subsequent "periodizations" are possible in this
Buddhist account of Buddhism's history but what I wish to stress here is the
dynamism of this world view.
A "history" that begins with a great man, is transformed into an order of
monks as the continuers of the tradition, and then expands into a sahgha and
sdsana within a polity, is of course "objectively" a cooked and tendentious
account. But it is precisely because that historical vision contains a magnificent
plan of unfolding; a set of moral criteria by which to evaluate the acts of kings and
monks; and a framework for describing a succession of kings (vamsa), together
with a succession of monastic lineages and saintly theras (elders) that the
Buddhist scholar monks of Lanka, Burma, and Thailand wrote the kind of
continuous historical chronicles that are so conspicuously sparse, if not lacking,
in India. There, the priestly accounts of authenticating religious knowledge and
privilege in terms of a line of Brahman teachers had no way of leading to and
joining up with the vamsa accounts of royal dynastic succession. And the early
destruction of Buddhism and its decline in the face of a Brahmanical restoration
did not allow the emergence in India of an unfolding historical vision that
materialized in Southeast Asia.
In passing, we may note that, on the one hand, the Buddhist account of the
progression from charismatic religious leader and his cultic following, through
"church" formation, to "world religion," is remarkably close to Max Weber's
preferential (and tendentious) scheme for discussing the origin and development
of major religious movements. On the other hand, the manner in which Buddhist
historiography begins with biography, assimilates it to the acts of a monastic
community, and assimilates that in turn to the dynastic history of a national polity
is a remarkable exercise in how three "structural" types of accounts are
transformed from one into the other, thereby giving us an object lesson in
periodization, chronological sequencing, and totalization that is not surpassed by
Levi Strauss's last chapter in The Savage Mind.


--- Page 131 ---
The Buddha's life as a paradigm
The integration of the Buddha's biography
in two chronicles
Let me now advance a reason why the "biography" of the Buddha - his caritam
as an account of his acts - is an integral part not only of the Dhamma as doctrine
but also of all Buddhist "historical" chronicles, which are variously called
varhsa,25 tamndn (Thai), avaddna, and so on.
The primary answer lies in a comparison between the sources of authority in
the Vedic and Brahmanical sacred knowledge on one hand, and the Buddhist on
the other. The Vedic tree of knowledge is rooted in divine acts of creation of the
universe and in divine revelations of sacred knowledge necessary to maintain the
universe. But Vedic sacred knowledge, principally that pertaining to sacrifice and
ritual, was revealed to individual first teachers and rsis, and it is a line of such
teachers transmitting that knowledge over time who gave authority to that
knowledge. The Vedic texts do not speak for themselves; it is the propounder that
speaks for them.
But a revolutionary feature of Buddhism is that the doctrinal knowledge,
embodied in the Dhamma, stems from the Buddha, who as a human being strove
for and attained the wisdom of enlightenment by his own efforts. He is the sole
authority for the canon; in theory, subsequent teachers can comment and expand,
but they cannot reveal new knowledge. It is the sahgha that through periodic
councils collectively preserves the canon and removes from it impurities and
schismatic tendencies that have entered it. Hence the central importance of the
councils - invented and real - that punctuate the continued transmission of the
Buddhist canonical knowledge. Given the Buddhist source of scriptures and their
subsequent line of transmission, it becomes imperative that the Buddha's sermons
and precepts given in the course of a lifetime, especially during his long career as
teacher after enlightenment, be aggregated and put together as a unified biography
that is simultaneously a codified dogma. Moreover, if the chronicle histories have
as their principal theme the manner in which the sdsana (religion) has been
maintained through various vicissitudes, then they must always begin with the
career of the Buddha himself, which combined in one amalgam the Dhamma he
preached, the disciplinary rules he prescribed, and the cycle of rebirths he
underwent.
Let us take two examples, the SinhaleseMahdvamsa and the Thai Jinakdlamdli,
and see how the Buddha's biography forms a necessary prelude to their religio-
political tales.
i. The Mahdvamsa26 thus begins with Gotama, our Conqueror, resolving, on
seeing in olden times the Buddha Dipamkara, to become a buddha so that he may
release the world from evil. Indeed, Gotama offers homage in succession to
twenty-four preceding sambuddhas, and having received from them the prophecy
of his future buddhahood, he strived for and achieved the highest enlightenment
119


--- Page 132 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
and thus "delivered the world from suffering." Then follows a brief but graphic
recollection of the Buddha's sitting at the foot of a bodhi tree at Uruvela (Bodh
Gaya) in the Magadha country, his mastery of his senses and deliverance after
seven weeks of tarrying there, and his subsequent going to Benares to give his
first sermon, which set rolling the wheel of the law.
In the ninth month, the Buddha set forth for the isle of Lanka to win it for the
faith. He first visited Mahiyangana, the site of a future stupa, struck terror into the
yakkhas (autochthonous demons), and banished them to another island. (After
the Buddha's death, a disciple of the Thera Sariputta would bring the Conqueror's
collarbone and enshrine it at this stupa.)
This is followed by a listing of the Buddha's royal lineage. It begins with
Mahasammata, the great sage and first king in the Buddhist story of creation,
lists the descendants of Mahasammata, and terminates with the Buddha's parents:
4 The son of the great king Suddhodana and of Maya was our conqueror.' '27 Thus
once again we see that the Gotama's resolve to become a Buddha, which had
continued through his previous lives, is conjoined with his royal lineage, which
destined him to be a world conqueror (cakkavatti). The Buddha's antecedents
consist of two lines or vamsas, which meet in him - the line of buddhas,
preceding him at enormous intervals of time (Buddhavamsa), and the line of
kings and universal monarchs extending from Mahasammata (Rdjavamsa).
This biography of the Buddha then changes into a history of the early sahgha
and of the codification of both the Dhamma doctrines and the Vinaya rules of
discipline. Early sahgha history is formulated in terms of the Three Councils, the
first at which the codification of the tipitaka (' 'three baskets") took place; the
second, when the first schism took place; and the third, convened by Emperor
Asoka and the elder Mogalliputta Tissa, which provided the stimulus for the
sending of the Buddhist missions, one of which came to Lanka. From this point
on, the Mahdvarhsa introduces the Sinhalese colonizers of the island, and from
there is well on its way to its major theme: How Lanka was converted to
Buddhism and fulfilled the prophecy that it would be the special haven of
Buddhism, and how this sdsana maintained itself through the vicissitudes of
many a kingly reign.
2. The Jinakdlamdli, which we have already used copiously, has again to be
scrutinized in regard to this question of the treatment, firstly of the Buddha's
biography, secondly of the early history of the Buddhist sahgha, and then of the
implantation of Buddhism in Sri Lanka, as a necessary prelude to relating the
story of Buddhism in Thailand. It is no mean fact that of the 186 pages of the
English translation, 96 are devoted to this prelude, and that of these 96, 55 are
devoted to the Buddha's biography.
We want to pay some attention to the JinakdlamdlVs account of the Buddha's
biography, because it is an example of a popular Thai account that either directly
or indirectly has been a model for later Thai accounts not only of the Buddha's
life but also of the lives of arahants. To what extent Acharn Mun's biography
120


--- Page 133 ---
The Buddha's life as a paradigm
follows the tradition set in the Jinakdlamdll is a relevant consideration for us. In
terms of Thai literary traditions, the Jinakdlamdll belongs to a genre called
tamndn, which roughly means story, legend, or myth and is ' 'frequently used for
documents dealing with the history of Buddhism or of particular Buddhist
monuments."28 "The main theme of tamndn history," says Kasetsiri, confirming
what we have said of other classical Buddhist vamsa texts, "is clearly religion
and it is the Gotama Buddha who is the moving force in it. Its purpose is to
describe the development of Buddhism. Kings and kingdoms come into the
picture insofar as their actions contribute to promoting Buddhism."29 There was a
crop of tamndn-typc chronicles in the Chiengmai region of North Thailand in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the best known, besides the Jinakdlamdll,
being: Tamndn Munlasdtsand (Mulasdsand), written before the 1420s; the Niddna
Bra Buddhasihihga (the chronicle of the Sinhalese Buddha, which we have
referred to earlier), written in the early fifteenth century; and the Cdmadevivamsa,
composed in 1570. All of them were written by Buddhist monks, and all except
the Munlasdtsand were written in Pali.
Compared with the Sinhalese Mahdvamsa, the Jinakdlamdll presents a more
lengthy account of the Buddha's life and concentrates on slightly different
features of that life.30 The Jinakdla text is divided into "the epochs of the
Conqueror," which reveal "the succession of the Dispensation commencing with
the aspiration of our teacher, the Exalted One Gotama," to reach enlightenment.
In much greater detail than the Mahdvamsa, the Jinakdla relates stories of how
the aspirant to enlightenment came to make his resolve in his previous lives; this
"account of the mental resolve" is followed by "the account of the distant
antecedent," which repeats the same resolves, but this time in relation to the
names of the twenty-four immediately preceding buddhas, whose genealogy
begins with DIparhkara and concludes with Kassapa.
This prelude of numerous mental resolves made during a long chain of rebirths
is followed by the enumeration of the Buddha's kingly genealogy, beginning with
Mahasammata and concluding with Suddhodana. This once again is given in
much greater detail than in the Mahdvamsa.
The stage is now set for the biography of the historical Buddha and the events
of his last life ("the account of the intermediate antecedent"). It is announced in
Tusita heaven that the "omniscient and enlightened one" will appear in the
world. The place and clan of his birth, and his parents, are chosen. Queen
Mahamaya dreams of the "lordly white elephant" entering her right side, and ten
months later Prince Siddhattha is born with thirty-two auspicious marks upon
him. An account is given of the prince's chariot drives to the pleasure park and
his successive meetings with an old man, a sick man, a corpse, and a bhikkhu
renouncer. Then follow the prince's "great renunciation" of his householder's
life; his ascetic striving, culminating in his routing of Mara and his hosts; and his
realizing the knowledge of omniscience and the attributes of enlightenment.
Now comes "the account of the proximate antecedent." The first important
121


--- Page 134 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
event is his preaching his first discourse at Benares to his first five disciples and
his setting in motion the wheel of the Dhamma. Subsequently at Uruvela the
Buddha subdues and converts ndga-kings, entertains visits from Sakka and other
deities, and makes a visit to the island of Lanka. Then there is a listing of various
events in the Buddha's itinerant teaching career: his admission into ordination of
Mahamoggallana and Sariputta, and hundreds of other monks, who all reach
arahantship; his successive residence in the cities of Uruvela, Rajagaha, and
finally Kapilavatthu - his birthplace and his father Suddhodana's capital. He
spends the annual rains retreats in different places, such as the Bamboo Grove,
the cities of Vesali and Kosambi, and so on. He performs various miraculous
acts, which attest to his supramundane powers - for example, he subdues the two
ndga-kings Culodara and Mahodara and he enacts "the miracle of the double
manifestation" of his person: He places his feet at the summits of Yugandhara
Peak and Mount Sineru, takes three strides across the heavens, sits amid the
deities, and preaches to his mother.31 Toward the latter part of his life, he has
more or less two permanent abodes, the Jetavana Grove and the Pubbarama
Monastery, the first endowed by the rich merchant Anathapindika, and the second
by Migara.
The passing of his two chief disciples, Mahamoggallana and Sariputta, is the
prelude to the Buddha's own death. But note that, while lying on his couch of
final passing away in the sala grove in the land of the Mallas of Kusinara, the
Buddha tells Sakka, the king of the deities: "Great King, Prince Vijaya, son of
King Slhabahu, attended by the company of 700 men, has gone to the Island of
Lanka today; my Dispensation will become established there in the future; do
protect him together with his followers as well, and the Island of Lanka" (p. 51).
At the same time he makes other predictions, two notable ones being that the
great King Asoka will establish the great bodhi tree in Lanka, and that the relic of
his right collarbone will be enshrined in the Thuparama dagoba in Lanka.
The next logical topic is the distribution of the Buddha's relics after his
cremation. The relics apportioned by the Mallas of Kusinara and the various
recipients are listed. It is to be noted that the relics listed consisted not only of the
Buddha's bodily relics (bones), and his teeth, hair, and topknot, but also his staff,
robe, water jar, belt, bathing cloth, coverlet, footprint, rug used as a seat, razor,
and needle case.
This concludes the biography of the Buddha. The subsequent contents of the
Jinakdla up to the point when the chronicle begins to deal with happenings in
Thailand may be outlined. First, we have brief accounts of the Three Councils
("the epochs of the recitals"). Then we have the story of the establishment of
Buddhism in Lanka by Mahinda during the time of King Devanampiya Tissa. It is
to be noted that the establishment of the dispensation is described in terms of
the implantation of the bodhi tree and the arrival of the bodily relics of the
Buddha, that is, the acquisition of sacred objects that embody various powers and
emit the rays of the truth of enlightenment. Finally, there are accounts of a
122


--- Page 135 ---
The Buddha's life as a paradigm
succession of Sinhalese kings, including Dutthagamani (the hero of the Mahd-
vamsa chronicle), the holding of the Fourth Council, and the arrival of the tooth
relic from Kalinga. We at last come to Thailand, which receives its dispensation
in turn from Lanka: The Jinakala begins its chronicle of Thai events with the
founding of the city and kingdom of Haripunjaya, whose first ruler was the
Princess CamadevI, who came from the city of Lava (Lopburi).
123


--- Page 136 ---
8
The ordering principles behind Buddhist
saintly biography
From the time of early Buddhism to the present, biographies of famous Buddhist
monks have been written, and some of these monks have been acclaimed as
arahants. In general, three features have distinguished this genre of Buddhist
literature. Firstly, they have followed a certain stereotype and are more noted for
imitative repetition than creative innovation. Secondly, the biography served a
moral, didactic purpose - the story of a saint was told not for its own sake but to
edify and chasten the reader and listener. Thirdly, the expectations of a saint
consist not only in his living in the most exemplary and pious fashion, but also in
his performing miraculous feats, in his blessing the unfortunate and making them
prosper, in his healing the sick in mind and body, in his astrological foretelling of
the future, and in his giving varied signs and expressions of his holiness and
compassion (metta). Considered as a literary device and work of art, a hagio-
graphical work is not complete without anecdotes of supramundane and transcen-
dental powers, for without such signs of achievement a saint is not a saint, merely
a virtuous man.
Now we should not credit these features only to Buddhist hagiography. Much
the same could be said with few modifications of medieval Christian biographies
(and perhaps analogies can be found in other religious traditions as well). For
instance, biography formed an important part of the literature of medieval
England, and the biographies of the Latin saints achieved maturity in form and
expression. But it could be said that the biographies written from the time of
Bede to the time of Sir Thomas More (say between A.D. 700 and 1500) followed
fixed Latin models and therefore rarely evidenced developments or modifications
in the practice of writing. This was so because they were devotional biographies,
whose heroes were ideal figures rather than individuals and of whom certain
edifying and awe-inspiring feats were expected as signs of the divine favor they
enjoyed. These biographies reflected the corporate Christian spirit and faith of the
Middle Ages and, whatever the substantive differences between the doctrines and
124


--- Page 137 ---
Principles behind Buddhist saintly biography
dogma of Buddhism and Christianity, there were certain common impulsions
flowing from the corporate spirit of these religions that produced certain common
features in the hagiographical style. In this respect, perhaps medieval Christian
hagiography differs more from modern Western biography than it does from
traditional Buddhist hagiography.
As Stauffer1 perceptively remarks of the Western tradition:
There is one difference immediate and arresting between the medieval conception of
biography and our own. We consider the biographer not as one who generalizes, but as one
who individualizes. . . . He seeks, and has sought since Boswell, not the ideal, but the
characteristic. This eagerness for particulars would not have been easily understood by the
early biographers. During the Middle Ages the office or position, rather than the individual,
frequently attracts the biographers, so that Bede writes his Historia Abbatum, or Matthew
Paris his Vitae Viginti trium Abbatum S. Albani, or Gervase of Canterbury his Actus
Pontificum Cantuariensis Ecclesiae. The tendency towards generalized biography is most
marked in the development of saints' lives. In this particular literary type, the standard
becomes strictly formalized. In the common popular biographies the saints lose their
individual characters to merge in a single ideal figure.
Like the Buddhist notion of illustrious or heroic acts that build up a carita or
avaddna as collections of deeds, the medieval Christian biography was built up of
sacred deeds. Stauffer continues: "The figure of a saint is drawn by means of a
mosaic of small anecdotes of action. For this reason, Ada Sanctorum becomes a
fitting title for the collections. The life of a saint, to the orthodox medieval writer,
could not be described by presenting his personal appearance, his thoughts, his
peculiar bent of mind, the development of his opinions, his debt to society or his
influence upon history. The life of a saint was a collection of his deeds."2
"The saint is not individualized . . . The necessary centering upon his holiness,
which give these lives admirable unity, makes characterization impossible . . . Be-
cause of the limitations of its theme, duplication and reiteration of anecdotes is
inevitable." And just as it happens with the Buddhist hagiography, so in the early
Christian lives many incidents are transferred from the acts of the prophets, the
apostles and the Saviour. "In succeeding biographies earlier miracles are bor-
rowed wholesale, until in the collections of the twelfth, the thirteenth, and later
centuries, when conscientious hagiography was rapidly falling into decay, the
memorial to a local saint is often a perfunctory patchwork of mirabilia plagia-
rized from a dozen sources."3
There are of course creative exceptions to this stereotype, both in the medieval
Christian and Buddhist traditions. But before we outline the contours of some of
the masterpieces, it is necessary to establish a fundamental difference in the
devotional objectives of Christian and Buddhist hagiographical accounts of
saints.
The difference lies in this: The early Christian saint was a martyr, while the
Buddhist saint was a renouncer. To us today the word martyr suggests a "sufferer,"
but early Christianity understood him or her to be a "witness." Tertullian at the
125


--- Page 138 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
end of the second and the beginning of the third centuries used the term martyr
not only for those who had already given their lives for the faith but for those
who, having borne witness, were awaiting death, and even for those who, having
confessed Christ, escaped the final penalty.4
The story of the apostles is, of course, a story of martyrdoms, as is that of
many of their successors. The stories of martyrs play a large part in the work of
the first historian of the church, Eusebius Pamphili, bishop of Caesaria, whose
ten books comprising his Ecclesiastical History were written in the first quarter
of the fourth century. His favorite term for martyrs was "the athletes of religion,"
and "glorious" was his favorite adjective.
As Helen White points out, this martyrology was related to the impulsions and
needs of early Christianity, such as the persuasiveness of its extraordinary story
about Jesus, its spread, and its witnesses under persecution. At the very begin-
ning of the religion, the problem of its truth was of paramount importance, and
"the evidence of its actual witness its best solution." But in later times, espe-
cially when in the third and early fourth centuries persecutions fell upon the
Christians, the problem of truth was not so absorbing as before. The martyr, in
the face of the trauma of persecution, appeared heroic. His taking punishment
without losing faith was seen as a "miracle," wonderful to those who heard the
awesome account. "His assurance, his confidence not in himself but in his faith,
the very integrity of his resolution, are like a fresh revelation to his fellows." His
suffering was taken to be a participation in the sacrifice of Christ and as a
revelation. "It seems only logical, therefore, that one of the earliest and most
influential of hagiographic genres to develop was the address of consolation and
encouragement to the faithful in time of persecution."5 Especially moving is the
story if written by a martyr himself awaiting death, as for instance Ignatius of
Antioch (circa no); martyrdom then became the chalice of salvation and the
baptism of blood, which effected the remission of sins. As Peter Brown has
remarked, the pious independence of the martyrs who had refused to sacrifice
and conform with Roman paganism was an object lesson. "The cult of the
martyrs was the only form of popular devotion in the Early Church; and, in
Africa, the accounts of how 'these prize fighters of the Lord' had snubbed
raging governors were read from the altars on innumerable anniversaries."6
Now the Buddhist analogue of the Christian martyr is the Renouncer saint
(arahant). He too undergoes a profound suffering - both bodily and mental,
through observing ascetic practices and taxing meditative exercises and by
detaching himself from the lure of desires and attachments. His heroic act of
"renunciation" is aimed at attaining liberation, and his feat attests to the truth of
the Buddha's message and its realizability.
This difference between the two religions' saints also affects the particulars of
the popular cults that spring up to commemorate and honor them and to seek their
grace and favor in their afterlives. The quintessential Christian martyr's blood has
126


--- Page 139 ---
Principles behind Buddhist saintly biography
been shed and his body tortured and mangled with weapons or burned and
reduced to bones and ashes. The battered remnants - his bloodied clothes, pieces
of the cross, fragments of bone and ash, the murderous weapons - all these
become relics that bear direct evidence of the sacrificial death and also carry
some part of the martyr's saintly virtue. The commemorative cult and anniversary
festivals focus attention on the tomb of the martyr, and during the proceedings the
passion of his death and the legend of his life are recited. Finally, the martyr as
canonized saint becomes a patron to his clients, who plead for favors and benefits
through his intercession with God.
As Peter Brown puts it in another work, a hallmark of the Christian hagio-
graphies is that "the martyrs, precisely because they had died as human beings,
enjoyed close intimacy with God. Their intimacy with God was the sine qua non
of their ability to intercede for and so to protect their fellow mortals. The martyr
was the friend of God."7
The cult of the Buddhist saint too forms around his bodily relics, such as the
bone, hair, tooth, ashes, and "reminders" associated with him (e.g., the almsbowl
and bodhi tree), but these relics and objects are not witnesses to his bloody death
but to his asceticism and compassion. In the end, a cult emerges focused on
stupas and monuments, in which are embedded the relics, and he too is beseeched
to grant favors, not as intercessor or friend of any deity but as wielder of
supramundane powers won by his own salvation effort, unaided by a god.
Just as there is a communion of saints in the universal church of Christ, so is
there a communion of Buddhist saints who as his band of disciples have followed
the Buddha into liberation. And thus this established hagiography of the collectiv-
ity of saints becomes a basis for cavalier plagiarism precisely because of its
permanent meaningfulness and dependability.
But if Christian martyrology and Buddhist hagiography tend to take stereo-
typed forms for all the reasons I have mentioned, still we must confront the vital
masterpieces that are in their finest chapters absorbed with the individual. In the
midst of the formulaic episodes and miraculous apparitions, these books present
enough details about the particular saint as a living man or woman acting in a
place and at a time in the company of other credible persons. Such achievements
contribute to the sincerity and emotional appeal of the entire masterpiece, which
fuses memorabilia with mirabilia. It might be that these best pieces of hagiology
are created in the historical context of an expanding vital religion infused with
missionary aspirations and led by bold preachers, revered recluses, and magnificent
prelates of the established church. At such times, heroic figures and their apt
biographers appear together and illuminate the ethic and ethos of their larger
communities.
If Bede's Saint Cuthbert or Bishop Adam of Eynsham's Magna Vita Sancti
Hugonis are considered the flowers of the hagiology of the medieval English
church, then one could perhaps point to the biography of the Tibetan saint,
127


--- Page 140 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
Milarepa,8 composed in the Tibet of the eleventh or twelfth century, and the
biography of Acharn Mun, the contemporary Thai piece, as flowers of the
Buddhist hagiological tradition.
Why is the biography of Acharn Mun a masterpiece?
Acharn Maha Boowa met his teacher late in the Master's career, and he recounts
the oral accounts that he has heard from others before he records his own
experience with the Master - a framework that perhaps explains some of the
repetitions and redundant features of his biography. Acharn Mun's biography,
despite its prolixity and repetitions, is a masterpiece in that working within a
hagiographical tradition the author introduces vivid incidents and concrete details
that help to particularize and individualize the saint. The Master's peripatetic
wanderings are mapped in a way that conveys his wanderlust as an expression of
Buddhist detachment. His encounters with wild animals are dramatized such that
a traditional theme associated with the quest of the dhutahga monk is made to
convey the dialectic between spiritual conquest and animal desires. His recalling
and interpretation of meditation experiences are awe inspiring and gripping and
transform the oft-cited stages of a meditation into a mystical journey. His personal
quirks, his "fierceness" as a teacher, his piercing understanding of his pupils'
weaknesses - these give flesh and blood to the stereotyped "teacher-pupil
relationship" that inevitably crops up in studies of the sahgha.
But to be a masterpiece, the individual life and career described must also
convince us that it addresses and illuminates a collective crisis, and achieves
important societal ideals, such that the protagonist is acclaimed a hero or saint.
How does the Acharn Mun biography, or rather his hagiography, relate to a Thai
national crisis or live up to Thai expectations of a hero? Let me give brief notice
of the ideas and themes I hope to develop in succeeding chapters. For the Thai
people today - as in the past - the authenticity of a bhikkhu's life as a renouncer,
a renouncer who has transcended worldly attachments and is at the same time
capable of universal compassion - is a vital expectation. And today there is a
crisis relating to the established sahgha, the institutionalized monastic communi-
ties and centers of worship, which have long enjoyed the patronage and protec-
tion of the government and whose authenticity is in question at the same time as
the legitimacy of the political authorities is in question in the face of internal
domestic tensions and external political threats.
The forest-dwelling dhutahga monk has always been a questioner of the
institutionalized, study-and-rite-oriented, sedentary village- and city-dwelling
monk. His path is alternative to, though fraught with problems for, monastic
communities that intend to live by the Vinaya rules.
Now in the case of Acharn Mun, it is clear that he rejected the career of the
run-of-the-mill village- or town-dwelling monk and took the path of a lonely
128


--- Page 141 ---
Principles behind Buddhist saintly biography
meditating and wandering ascetic. The biography as such gives us little informa-
tion on the course of his personal crisis that led to his rejection of orthodoxy, but
one sees something of the radicalism of his gesture in his telling his disciples
later that at the time he became a dhutahga monk, the tradition, though known,
was ill-regarded by the people at large who were apprehensive about its ascetic
and peripatetic mode of life.
His career thereafter cumulatively spirals in a heroic mode. He wanders alone
without a master to teach him, and he singly struggles his way to deliverance. His
brief sojourns near jungle villages, and in remote wat, portray an interaction that
reminds one of the parfaits in the remote Pyrenees Mountains of medieval
fourteenth-century southern France, whom Ladurie has vividly described in
Montaillou.9 The "heretical" parfaits, leading simple lives, eating fish and no
meat, moving from village to village, entering into free moralistic dialogue with
the unlettered peasant, voicing the alleged Cathar heresy, stood in sharp contrast
to the remote, institutionalized, hierarchical, wealthy, grabbing Catholic church
and its priests; the parfaits were readily recognizable as authentic "saints" by
their simplicity and their exposure to the danger of the church's Inquisition. The
dhutahga monk of Acharn Mun's time was not a heretic, but he was not liked by
the established sahgha hierarchy either. Eating rough food once a day, clothed in
rags, and preaching Dhamma to the peasants forgotten by government officers
and titled monks alike, he was a virtuoso whose authenticity was transparent, and
his achievement of supranormal capacities plausible, to those among whom he
moved.
This was the starting point for Acharn Mun's acclamation by wider and wider
circles, until the reverberation was heard in the national center, which then
became a patron in turn. But this incorporation of the periphery into the central
establishment and authorities is itself related, as we shall see, to a collective
crisis, political, moral, and religious, and attempts to cope with it.
The biography of Acharn Mun rates as a masterpiece for still another authentic
reason. An earlier collection of legends composed in India as the Buddha's
biography later became both elaborated and particularized in the Tibetan, Chinese,
Sinhalese, and other societies where Buddhism diffused, took root, and was
indigenized.
Both the elaboration and particularization (or parochialization) of a core
paradigmatic source take place by means of lengthening the plots and adding
circumstantial details to the incidents, such that the double feat is achieved of
enabling both the local oral specialists and authors to exercise their creative gifts
and the local audiences to be convinced that the religious truths recounted had
become manifest among themselves, and not in faraway places. Just as the
sacred geography of Jambudvlpa was recreated in Burma or Thailand, so were
the sacred events, like the illumination of the Buddha under the bodhi tree, or his
parinibbdna with the attendant mortuary rites of a cakkavatti, made real by
grafting local ritual and custom onto the canonical versions.
129


--- Page 142 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
An enchanting and entrancing illustration of these processes and achievements
is provided by Bigandet's The Life or Legend of Gaudama, The Buddha of the
Burmese, a text that reports legends of the Buddha as "derived from the perusal
of the religious books of the Burmans, and from frequent conversations on
religion, during several years, with the best informed among the laity and the
religious . . ."10 Take Chapter 5 of Volume 1, which relates the story of the
Buddha's illumination: Two elaborations (among others) relate to the miraculous
appearance of a throne "superior in perfection to all that art could produce,"
upon which the Buddha sits to meditate in the cross-legged position. The throne
on which he sits has a double meaning: On the one hand, as his preceding five
dreams of universal sovereignty and his battle with Mara make clear, it is the seat
of the ruler of the universe; on the other hand, as the Buddha's subsequent
meditations and deeds make clear, it is this throne that he leaves behind to
become the transcending and encompassing knower and wielder of cosmic truth.
That the Buddha is first made to claim the virtues of a cakkavatti ruler before
he realizes the knowledge of the Four Great Truths that dispel ignorance and give
him the powers to recall his former existence and survey all beings now in
existence, is conveyed in this scene: Mara asked the Buddha: "How do you dare
to pretend to the possession of this throne? . . . " The Buddha replied: "My
witnesses are not like yours, men or any living beings. The earth itself will give
testimony to me. For, without alluding even to those offerings I have made during
previous existences, I will but mention the forty-seven great ones I made whilst I
lived as Prince Wethandra (Vessantara) . . ."In this Burmese version, then, the
Buddha's awesome acts of donation as a righteous ruler in his last life but one are
recalled.11
The suspense of the all-too-understandable doubts of the deities as to whether
the Buddha wishes to, and is able to, give up the throne is conveyed thus:
There he stood, his eyes fixedly riveted on the throne, without a single wink, during seven
consecutive days, given up to the most intense and undisturbed meditation. The Nats,
observing this extraordinary posture, imagined that he regretted the throne he had just
vacated, and that he wanted to repossess himself of it. They concluded that, such being the
case, Prince Theiddat had not as yet obtained the Buddhaship. When the period of seven
days was over, Buddha, who knew the innermost thoughts of the Nats, resolved to put an
end to their incredulous thinking respecting his person. . . . he raised himself high up in
the air, and, to their astonished regards, he wrought at once more than a thousand
wonders, which had the immediate effect of silencing all their doubts.12
While the above Burmese legends elaborate in no uncertain terms the cakkavatti-
Buddha relation that is more cryptically stated in the canonical suttas, the
Burmese version of the parinibbdna of the Buddha13 enriches and contemporizes
the classical story with local Burmese customs.14 And the story is elaborated far
beyond the limits of the canonical Mahaparinibbana 
Sutta to include the story of
Kassappa (the leader of the sahgha after the Buddha) persuading King Ajatasattu
to collect all the distributed relics (save the one at Ramagama destined to go to
130


--- Page 143 ---
Principles behind Buddhist saintly biography
Sri Lanka) and to bury them in eight chedi so as to await the time of the
appearance of "the great and renowned monarch under the name of Athoka
(Asoka)," who would spread the relics all over the island of Jambudvlpa. This
retrospectively invented prophecy that is woven into the life of the Buddha to
legitimate future history is presented with "realistic" - even if exaggerated -
detail culled from Burmese traditions of burying relics and treasure in their
sacred monuments.15
Similar considerations can be applied to the biography of Acharn Mun, who as
an arahant, even a Buddha, is described as having lived a life that reproduced
some of the legendary events in the Buddha's career. For obvious reasons, it is the
parinibbdna of the Buddha that is imitated most widely in describing the death
scenes and mortuary rites of the Buddhist saints. In the case of the Acharn Mun
story, we saw how precedents set by the Buddha's life and death - for example,
his foreknowledge of death, his dying lying on the right side, the falling of rain
at his cremation rite, the distribution of relics, are woven with Thai customs and
rites relating to the mortuary rites of great persons, both monks and laity
(especially royalty). Examples are the dressing and storing of the body for three
months, the festival-like assembly of large collections of monks and laity, the
burning of the corpse at the Mount Meru of a famous wat, the keeping of ashes
and relics of the dead in urns, and so on.
Another example of enriched texture through localization might be taken from
the description given in Acharn Mun's biography of the manner in which he and
his disciples implemented the dhutahga practices set out in the Visuddhimagga.
The begging for food in villages while walking in single file with eyes cast down;
the sites chosen for meditative vigils, including caves and edges of precipices on
spectacular forested mountains; the spacing of disciples' shelters and meditation
walks; the pattern of instructional relationship between master and pupils - all are
examples of the traditions developed by Thai (and Burmese) forest monks,
traditions that are an amalgam of classical precedents and parochial elaboration
that make the account authentic and ethnographic.


--- Page 144 ---
The disciples of the Master
Before I embark on the third complex frame of analysis that will complete
my interpretation of the biography, I want to again introduce the concept of
indexical symbol as a useful device for comprehending how all the layers of
meaning and significance, both "semantic" and "pragmatic," ride simulta-
neously on the same "form" (the biography) and thus constitute a single totality
of meaning.
The main point about indexical symbols, as I have already stated in Chapter I,
is that they have a duplex structure, because they combine two roles - they are
symbols that are associated with the represented object by a conventional seman-
tic rule, and they are simultaneously also indexes in existential pragmatic relation
with the objects they represent. This duality thus points in two directions at once
- toward the semantic direction of cultural presuppositions, paradigms, and
conventional understandings; and toward the pragmatic and interpersonal context
of the activity in question, the lineup of the participants and the processes by
which they establish meaning, and create, affirm, or legitimate their positions
and privileges.
Let me relate these conceptual and analytical statements to this book. The
biography of Acharn Mun is an indexieal symbol in the sense that on the one
hand the saint's life is symbolically and semantically related to the classical
conventional hagiographies of the Buddha and exemplary Buddhist saints (the
theme of the preceding two chapters), and on the other hand the composition is
indexically and pragmatically related to the purposes and objectives of the
disciple-author, the context in which he composed it, and its distribution to and
reception by the public, who are its readers and audience. This latter exegesis is
the task of this and the succeeding two chapters.
132


--- Page 145 ---
The disciples of the Master
The disciples of Acharn Mun
Our biographer, Acharn Maha Boowa, is one among a group of disciples who in
one way or another claim to be of the same "ordination lineage" as the Master,
or to have been associated with him for a length of time. These disciples are the
foremost and most prominent "forest teachers" in contemporary Thailand, and
their legitimacy and authenticity rests to an important degree on the claim of
association with the Master. One writer who made a tour of the Northeast
provinces in 1969, visiting as many meditation teachers as he could, remarked
that all those he visited and named "were disciples or close associates" of
Acharn Mun, who "during his travels across Northern and Northeastern
Thailand . . . gained many disciples, who likewise have become ahjahns [acharns]
and are best noted for their meditation practices and resultant accomplishments.''l
Again, a second source, who composed another guide to meditation wat in
Thailand, confirms this assertion: "Northeast Thailand has probably the greatest
proliferation of meditation temples in the country. Most of these forest temples
run in the tradition of the great teacher, Acharn Mun."2
The following is a list of the disciples or associates of Acharn Mun who had
established their own forest hermitages and were recognized as meditation
teachers in the mid-seventies:
Name
1. Acharn Maha Boowa (age 56 in 1978)
2. Acharn Cha (age 54 in 1978)
3. Acharn Fun3 (age 70 in 1978)
4. Acharn Pen (age 40+ in 1978)
5. Acharn Lee
6. Acharn Thet
7. Acharn Khao
8. Luang Phau Bua
9. Acharn On
10. Acharn Kamdee
11. Acharn Chawp •
12. Acharn Sing Tong4
13. Luang Pu Waen5
Forest hermitage
Wat Pa Ban Tat, Udon Province
Wat Pa Pong, Ubon Province
Wat Baan Na Huang Chang,
Sakon Nakhon Province
Wat Doi Thammachedi, Sakon Nakhon
Wat Prachanikom, Roiet Province
Wat Hinmakpeng, Nongkhai Province
Wat Tham Klongplane, Udon Province
Wat Pa Nong Saeng, Udon Province
? Udon Province
? Loei Province
? Loei Province
Wat Pan Kaeowit, Sakon Nakhon Province
? Chiengmai Province
There are three features that should be highlighted in the relation between the
Master and his disciples.
1. The first we have already remarked on is that the Master himself had no
teacher and made the pilgrim's progress through his own experiments and
endeavors, while the disciples stress their relation to the Master as their teacher in
meditation.
2. The second feature represents a distinct transformation. A striking character-
istic of the Master was that he was truly peripatetic throughout his life. His life is
a story of constant traveling, two periods of reclusive isolation followed by
peripatetic tours, especially in the Northeast. And even in the immediate years
133


--- Page 146 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
preceding his death, he "settled" in Sakon Nakhon Province only to move
restlessly from wat to wat, from settled areas deeper into the sparsely inhabited
forests and mountains. Nong Phue, set in a valley surrounded by mountains and
forest, where he finally died, was fittingly in accord with his tastes.
By comparison, all the Master's disciples, who are now teachers in turn, have
established their own hermitages, which have become their stable centers, more
or less, where their teaching is conducted. Many of them in addition have
founded certain branch monasteries or "daughter houses" in parts more remote
from their main centers, so that disciples can retreat there for more intensive and
reclusive practice of meditation. Moreover, the first generation of the Master's
disciples have by now trained their own disciples, who have themselves hived off
from their teachers and founded their own teaching hermitages. Thus the most
famous meditation masters of today have two kinds of satellite hermitages
revolving around them - the branch hermitages they have themselves founded and
those established by their disciples grown to maturity.
Thus, at first sight, there seems to be a transformation from the initial state
when a peripatetic Master perpetually traveled, halting, sojourning, and teaching
for a while at each place he chose to stop, to the more "institutionalized" second
stage portrayed by the disciples, who have tended to found and reside in stable
centers, while at the same time establishing directly or indirectly satellite
hermitages. But a close scrutiny of the Master's own travels will show that this
transformation, though real, is not a disjunctive shift. For the paradoxical
achievement of Acharn Mun was that, while being a homeless peripatetic wan-
derer virtually throughout his life, he managed to create cells of disciples at the
various nodal points of his journeys. Because his wanderings covered much
territory, these cells were many.
Let us recall certain features of his life. He was for much of the time
accompanied by a small coterie of disciples when he took up temporary residence
near some remote hamlet or settlement. During the rains retreats, he took up
residence in some rural wat and intensively trained disciples; some disciples
resided with him in these small wat, and others residing in nearby wat came to
him for instruction. Thus, although Acharn Mun cannot be said to have founded
wat or hermitages, he ennobled many of the temples he stayed at - converting the
resident monks and novices and initiating others who became newly ordained,
inspired by his teachings, to the meditative vocation. Thus all the meditation
masters we previously listed at some time or other studied with him as his
disciples, but most of them cannot be said to have studied with the Master at the
same time. There is scarcely any organized linkage between these ex-pupils
today, each of whom is now the center of his own system of satellite hermitages
and network of pupils, whose relationship in -turn to their masters becomes
tenuous and attenuated as they hive off. I shall describe this feature shortly; here
let me note the fact that the Master himself was the active creator of a sprawling
and dispersed network of wat and hermitages where resided cells of pupils he
134


--- Page 147 ---
The disciples of the Master
trained, and in this kind of network it is the relations of the pupils to a common
master, or rather the memory of their association with him and their receiving the
religious practice from him, that constitutes the central bond and the tradition
that is transmitted through time.
Let us also recall the significance of the acts and attitudes of the humble
villagers who materially supported the Master and his disciples. Even ascetic
solitary wanderers are, by virtue of the rules of the Vinaya, dependent for their
food, medicine, and robes on laymen and have always had contact with laity. But
these contacts with the rural folk are limited to soliciting alms and to occasional
preaching and moral instruction. Nevertheless, it is these same rural folk who not
only show their deep respect but also, believing in their supranormal powers and
saintly virtue, circulate and retell stories about them; the news that a saint is
among them spreads from village to village. Such stories and claims are of
course ratified and substantiated by the Master's disciples. Thus the two circles
of followers surrounding the Master - the inner circle, constituted of his ordained
disciples, and the outer circle, a penumbra of rural lay supporters - must be seen
to act dialectically and cumulatively in the recognition of a forest-monk as a saint
and in the spread of his reputation. It is through such processes that a dhutahga
teacher is first and foremost created at the grass-roots level, before he is appropri-
ated by the metropolitan center and the country as a whole.
3. The third feature of the relation between the Master and his disciples
consists in a certain differentiation, or even polarization, that occurs in their
religious specialization and which was not a notable cleavage in the Master.
It could be said that in the spectrum of activities, capacities, and reputations
associated with the Master there were two poles, the "rationalist" and the
"tantric." The "rationalist" pole was represented by the "purist virtuoso" who
is dedicated to practicing meditation, contemplating the philosophical truths of
dependent-origination, and cultivating the wisdom of nibbdnic truth. One might
say, echoing Max Weber's words, that the rationalist path portrays the extraordi-
nary metaphysical achievement of Buddhism that unites "the virtuoso-like self-
redemption by man's own effort with universal accessibility of salvation" with
"contemplation as the path to salvation with an inner-worldly vocational ethic."6
In this aspect, the virtuoso thinks of the attentions and demands of the laity as
intrusions to be escaped from, devalues the cult of images and amulets, deempha-
sizes merit-making rites, and wishes his hermitage not to be a place of social
gathering by the laity.
The "tantric" pole was represented by the same virtuoso in his mental state of
tranquility, compassion, and loving-kindness; bearing a cosmic love for people at
large, he wanted to convey to them some part of his mystic experience and
psychic conquests. To echo Max Weber again, the tantric path, representing the
cultivation of "a cosmistic brotherliness," shows one way out of the man-made
cage of estrangement and alienation from fellow men and dependence on the
inexorable power of material goods. In this aspect, the virtuoso as a man of
135


--- Page 148 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
charisma of achieved powers may wish to give all beings a taste of calm bliss and
relief from their impermanent physical and mental sufferings. Given this sympathy,
the man of illumination is under pressure from the laity to transfer his virtues
through ritual action.
Now the Master, Acharn Mun, was no crude dispenser of charms or amulets,7
no master of ceremonies but, though a purist, rationalist practitioner of meditation,
also affirmed his mystical experiences and visions, which were attested by his
disciples. He was also very much driven to be a preacher who instructed not only
his cells of disciples but also, occasionally, vast gatherings of laymen. He was
acclaimed as an arahant in his lifetime, and this reputation rested as much on his
ascetic life and orthodox practices as upon his tantric experiences and claims of
supranormal feats.
It is thus to be expected that what was a single spectrum of divergent
tendencies in the Master might become polarized orientations in the disciples. I
shall describe the orientations and hermitages of two different disciples of the
Master to illustrate this polarization.
Acharn Cha: the vocation of self-redemption by contemplation
Acharn Cha, a forest teacher of the Northeastern tradition, fifty-four years old in
1978, trod the path of the wandering ascetic that Acharn Mun did. Although of
Mahanikai affiliation, he by his own account actually spent a short but enlighten-
ing period of time with the Master.8
Acharn Cha's primary hermitage is Wat Pa Pong: Founded around 1959, it is
situated in Warrin District, Ubon Province, in a forest. The nearest village is
about a fifteen-minute walk away. There is a forbidding notice - a very unusual
thing to see in Thailand - posted at the entrance, which says: "No running or
shouting; no liquor allowed; talk quietly; if you have no business please stay out."
Let me first describe Acharn Cha's chief and branch hermitages before underscor-
ing his strict regime.
Sunno Bhikkhu9 reports that in 1978 there were some forty to eighty monks
(and novices) and forty to sixty nuns at Wat Pa Pong. We may take note of the
large number of resident nuns, a sure sign of the hermitage's fame as a place of
meditation. Another sign of Acharn Cha's reputation as a meditation master is
the number of Western pupils who seek him out; by 1979 some two dozen had
already lived and studied with him.10 Acharn Cha is described by many as running
a disciplined hermitage, which in due course became one of the best known and
most liberally supported wat in Ubon Province, attracting both urban and rural
pious laymen.
The main preaching hall and dining room are large "functional" structures.
The numerous individual monks' huts are scattered and spaced so as to be
obscured from each other's view.11
136


--- Page 149 ---
The disciples of the Master
The monks go for alms each day and eat one meal a day in their bowls,
following orthodox dhutahga practice. Outside their communal sittings and
chores, socializing and gossip among monks is not encouraged. The monks and
novices usually wake around 3 a.m., individually engage in a one-hour medita-
tion practice, and then conduct a collective morning chanting for half an hour.
Around 6 a.m., they go on their almsround to the village, and by 9 a.m. they
conclude their sole meal.
Thereafter, the inmates are left to themselves to engage in meditation or study.
They congregate in the afternoon at around 3 p.m. to do chores like sweeping the
meeting hall and refectory, cleaning the compound, and filling the water jars.
Night time is again a period of communal practice. There is a collective
meditation sitting from 6 to 7 p.m., followed by an hour's chanting12 and
reading, the Vinaya pitaka on the monks' disciplinary rules being a favorite text.
Acharn Cha may every few days give a discourse after the chanting is concluded.
In theory, any individual disciple can approach the Master to discuss his progress.
Outside of the regularized daily program, individuals can and do engage in
solitary meditation according to their preference.
Acharn Cha's success and organizational abilities are manifested in the num-
ber of branch hermitages he has founded. Sunno Bhikkhu reports that in 1978
44in and around Ubol Province, Acharn Chaa had about ten branch temples of
various sizes, each with one of his own disciples as teachers."13 One was on an
island, another in the mountains, and the rest on the edges of villages. These
branch hermitages are intended to provide the Acharn and his disciples opportuni-
ties to practice meditation away from the demands of the city and of the
numerous lay visitors. Kornfield may be reporting14 a further stage in the
establishment of an ever-widening network when he says that Acharn Cha's
disciples have started their own teaching centers and that they were "teaching in
more than thirty mountain and forest branch temples throughout northeast
Thailand." This extraordinary "institution building" by Acharn Cha induces the
surmise that it may be an accompaniment and by-product of the rationalist
meditator's devotion to establishing and inculcating a systematic meditation
technology.15 [Once again we are faced with the duality that we saw in the Master
(Acharn Mun) himself: A dedication to the meditation path necessarily involves
the teaching of the hard-won wisdom to others.]
The most famous of Acharn Cha's branch hermitages is Wat Khao-namtok-
tham-saeng-phet, which translates as the "Wat of the Mountain Water-fall and
Cave of Diamond Light." This hermitage, which normally has a small number of
assiduous meditators,15 among whom are included most of the Acharn's Western
disciples, is situated some 15 kilometers outside the district town of Arunat
Charoen in Ubon Province and, true to its fanciful name, is sited on a mountain-
side dotted with numerous caves amid lush vegetation. One should note, however,
that even this remote hermitage is by no means outside the reach of pious laymen.
Burns reports16 that, when he visited this hermitage together with Acharn Cha, in
137


--- Page 150 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
the morning "some well-to-do lay supporters" of the Acharn arrived to make an
offering of food for the meal of the day, and that subsequently he (Burns) was
given a ride in a car to a nearby town by these visitors.
Acharn Cha's orthodox, even "purist," tendencies are evident in many ways.
He has the reputation of running his hermitages in a manner that is even stricter
than that of most Thammayut wat, which proclaim themselves to be more
"orthodox" than their Mahanikai counterparts. Acharn Cha has asserted that the
Mahanikai and Thammayut sects are phenomena of Thai tradition and history
and that, as long as one observes the discipline, it is not important to which sect a
monk belongs. He has expressed anti-establishment views against the mainstream
sahgha: that Buddha images and sacralized water have no inherent power; that
ghosts and deities have existence only in our minds; that monasteries should not
be the venues of festivals, fairs, games, and idle gossip; and that meditation and
direct contemplative experience are more important than the study of books. The
Dhamma of the Buddha is not found in books.
Sunno Bhikkhu reports Acharn Cha's meditation teaching as emphasizing
"mindfulness in all postures, watching defilements in the mind and letting go of
them. Mindfulness of breathing is taught to establish enough concentration to
examine the five aggregates in the light of impermanence, suffering and voidness
of self. One is cautioned not to try to gain anything from meditation." One
recognizes here an orthodoxy consonant with the prescriptions of the Visud-
dhimagga and with that purist side of it, which urges the adept to go beyond
seeking conscious satisfactions and supranormal powers.
The compassionate illuminate and the Path of Bliss:
the hermitage of Acharn Fun
Acharn Fun died in 1978 at the age of about seventy. Older than Acharn Mun's
disciples of the generation of Acharn Cha and Acharn Maha Boowa, Acharn
Fun's age indicates that he must have trodden for some time the path of the
solitary wanderer before he met the Master. I mention this because the Northeast-
ern tradition of the dhutahga monk has always carried with it certain tantric
associations and charismatic attributes.
Acharn Fun established his hermitage some ten kilometers off a main highway
in the district of Pannanikom in Sakon Nakhon Province. The wat is reported in
1978 to have had twenty-five to forty monks and novices. In its daily routine and
in the mode of instruction followed by the Acharn, this forest hermitage was
similar to others in that: The monks went on daily almsrounds and ate from their
bowls; during the day they were left to themselves, except for the afternoon
chores; and they had group meditation sittings in the evenings, during which
frequently the Acharn gave discourses.
138


--- Page 151 ---
The disciples of the Master
The meditation system that the Acharn taught bore the stamp of Acharn Mun's
teachings. Acharn Fun emphasized concentration meditation, using a repeated
mantra and mindfulness of breathing to establish one-pointedness of mind. Then
there is a shift to the meditation of the body, which leads to the contemplation of
impermanence, suffering, anattd, and the Four Noble Truths. But within this
stereotyped format, there is a possibility for variable emphasis, and Acharn Fun
appears to have tried to lead his disciples to the experience of tranquil bliss and
happiness.
Burns witnessed the worship on a full-moon night at the hermitage attended by
the residents as well as visiting laymen. Many devotees arrived in the morning to
present food for the morning meal and then stayed on. Many others arrived in the
afternoon. The proceedings began at 8 p.m. with the arrival of the Acharn among
the assembled monks, novices, and laity. The usual routine on such an occasion
is as follows. A half-hour recitation of chants is followed by a discourse, for
example, on the doctrine of anattd (no-self), which is comprehended by examin-
ing the components of the body and mind. Then all assume the lotus position and
Acharn Fun's "insight practice" consists in an attempt to induce a state of bliss -
Burns describes the proceedings as a "hypnotic trance" - by the Acharn's
intoning of words and instructions to the following effect: "See your body from
head to toe; examine each facet with a clear mind . . . Happy, happy, and
calm . . . There is no worry or concern, just happy and calm . . . " After
effecting an entry into meditation, there is silent meditation for about twenty
minutes. Discourses alternate with meditation sittings for a couple of hours. It is
clear from this account that, while the monks may daily follow the meditative
path, the Acharn's accent when he dispenses meditation to the lay public is on
creating a calm and happy mood in line with lay interest.
When Burns left the hermitage, the Acharn gave him "a metal charm," which
bore his image and the instruction that should he have a stomach upset he should
dip the charm into a glass of water and drink the liquid. Indeed, Acharn Fun's
fame in Thailand was associated with the cult of the amulets blessed and
distributed by him, in which activity he was joined by many other forest teachers
whose mystical visions, loving-kindness (mettd) and ritual blessings, and
supranormal powers will be described in Chapters 18 and 19.
Acharn Maha Boowa: disciple and biographer of the Master
We have illustrated how a duality present in the Master could become more
sharply polarized in his pupils as the rational-contemplative and tantric-ritualistic
modalities. But of course it is still possible for a disciple to depict both sides of
the Master. It seems to me that Acharn Maha Boowa, ardent disciple and
biographer of the Master, is an apt subject for the probing of this proposition.
139


--- Page 152 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
THE BIOGRAPHER'S TEACHINGS AND WRITINGS IN A DOUBLE MODE
Some of Acharn Maha Boowa's sermons and teachings principally concerning
the meditative regime are printed in the Review of the World Federation of
Buddhists;17 another source is Kornfield,18 whose documentation of the Acharn's
teachings are probably based on his writings as well as his spoken remarks. (I
include as an appendix to Chapter 10 an oral account given me by a Western
student of Maha Boowa of his understanding of his mentor's teachings on
meditation.)
After matching Acharn Maha Boowa's formal and abstract teachings with the
contents of the hagiography of his own teacher, Mun, one cannot but come to the
conclusion that he (as indeed many other forest-monk teachers) discourses in a
4'double mode," one being abstract, philosophical, and discursive and the other
being mystical, visionary, and cosmological. On the one hand, the disciplinary
regime he imposes on himself and his disciples is, as we shall see in our
description of his hermitage, orthodox and exemplary. Also, his technical dis-
courses on meditation cannot once again be faulted in the sense that they reflect
the ' 'correct" views, as expressed for instance in the classical text, Visuddhimagga,
which we have previously analyzed. In other words, Acharn Maha Boowa is
capable of expounding, and frequently does so, in "rational" philosophical
terms the Buddha's "dependent-origination" doctrine, or the "meditative path"
as dedicated to liberation, which students of Buddhism, particularly Western
scholars (like Kornfield) can readily pick up and assimilate to their understanding
of Theravada Buddhism. But Acharn Maha Boowa is also, as we have recognized
from his biography and can infer from his addresses in the Lao-Thai dialect, a
superb propagandist and preacher and a witness to the virtues and powers of his
own Master. We have seen how with almost "tantric" ardor and abandon he
describes in a "cosmological mode" the meditation experiences of his Master
(and himself) and enumerates with unflagging enthusiasm the supranormal feats
and conquests of his Master, without the slightest doubt or skepticism regarding
his attaining arahant, nay even buddha, status. Indeed, Maha Boowa has written
the biography in a mode that many earlier hagiographers have followed in
describing the career of the Buddha and his disciple-saints, a mode that postu-
lates a correspondence between the internal experiences of the hero as micro-
cosm and the external formations of the cosmos as macrocosm, between the
hero's levels of consciousness, which he traverses up and down, and the cycles of
cosmic materialization and disintegration - in short, a mode suited to describe
and celebrate the powers of the Buddhist virtuoso as a man of charismatic
powers.
Maha Boowa's biography is thus firmly grounded in popular Thai religiosity,
which awaits the emergence of the arahant (saint) or the khrubd (respected
teacher) in their midst, and acclaims them ardently. These men have been not
simple "negators" of, or "escapers" from the world in any simple or extreme
140


--- Page 153 ---
The disciples of the Master
sense. Rather, they have led millennial or reform movements; or have as active
"missionaries" "colonized" frontier regions and helped bring them under the
king's umbrella; or have suffused their love and their piety to the people around
them, giving them an exemplary ethic around which they could consolidate and
integrate in "vicarious oblation," to borrow a phrase from Ernst Troeltsch.
141


--- Page 154 ---
10
The biographer as exemplary
forest-monk, meditator, and teacher
Our biographer, Acharn Maha Boowa, is a well-known teacher in the forest-
ascetic tradition of Northeast Thailand and is the abbot of Wat Pa Ban Tat, a
forest hermitage that stands on the edge of the village on some ioo acres of forest
land about 12 kilometers south of the town of Udon in Northeast Thailand. Jack
Kornfield describes it as an exemplary hermitage: "Much of (its) learning, as in
the other Thai-Lao forest monasteries, is through the disciplined, strict, and
extremely simple way of life. One simple meal a day, small cottages, well water
for bathing, alms round at sun-up, long periods of silence, and some isolation all
contribute to a life that requires little worldly thought. The forest monastery then,
as well as being a facility for intensive meditation, is also a very special
educational environment."1
I made a visit to Wat Pa Ban Tat in 1971, and I shall report information and
impressions gathered that will give us some idea of the organizational structure
and routine of a forest hermitage that is alleged to follow strictly in Acharn Mun's
tradition. From an extended account (supplemented by the other brief accounts of
hermitages already given), we can discern the distinctive features of a forest
hermitage and how it compares with the regular Thai wat.
Let me begin with the observation that Maha Boowa's hermitage had by the
early seventies attracted about a dozen Western disciples who had been ordained
as monks and had devoted themselves for varying periods of time to the practice of
meditation. One of my chief informants at the hermitage was Phra Pannavaddho,
such a Western convert, who was the first foreigner to be ordained in Thailand,
some sixteen years previously (calculating from October 1971, the time of my
visit). Son of a mining engineer who had worked in Mysore State in India,
Pannavaddho was born in India and lived there until he was eight. He himself had
been trained as an electrical engineer. On a visit to Thailand he had been
ordained, then returned to England. There he had met another English monk
(Kapilavathu) at Hampstead, teamed up with him, and returned to Thailand. He
142


--- Page 155 ---
Biographer as exemplary forest-monk, meditator, teacher
said that he decided to renounce lay life when he realized the pointlessness of a
life that would require him to be an engineer until his retirement, after which he
would have some five more aimless years to live. He joined the hermitage in
1962 and had resided there continuously for the past nine years.
Acharn Maha Boowa's biography
Because Maha Boowa in the biography of his Master underscores his discipleship
with him and ''lineal" descent from him, it comes as no surprise that Maha
Boowa's own life is a "reproduction" of essential features of the Master's career,
while also showing certain differences. Maha Boowa in fact was born in the
village of Ban Tat, the very village on whose edge the forest hermitage was
founded. His early career is much like his Master's in its peripatetic stage; but his
later career is unlike his Master's, in that like all other disciples he has founded a
permanent hermitage as a center for instruction. There is thus a dramatic shift in
his life from the earlier to the later phase.
Ordained novice as a young boy at Wat Bodhisamporn in Udon, Maha Boowa
resided and studied there until he was ordained a bhikkhu. He had engaged in Pali
studies and had passed a couple of the lower examinations, but he was interested
in practicing meditation. His abbot recommended he contact Acharn Mun, who
was then in Nakhon Sawan.
For some nine years Maha Boowa was closely attached to Acharn Mun - he
would receive instruction from him, spend periods of time meditating in the
forest, and return to the Master for questions and clarifications. He walked in
thudong style through several of the faraway provinces, never staying long in a
place, nor accepting long-standing pupils. After this peripatetic tour, he returned
to his village and mother. Like the Master, Maha Boowa has a special relation-
ship with his mother, and his filial attachment to her and solicitude for her is
much in evidence.
Maha Boowa pitched his umbrella and mosquito net in the forest adjoining his
natal village and went on his almsrounds. The villagers, recognizing his piety
and ascetic virtues, came to him for Dhamma instruction and invited him to
found a wat. He consented, it is said, partly to instruct his fellow villagers and
partly to take care of his mother. This happened around 1955.
Two villagers donated the land for the hermitage, and the villagers built a said
(hall) with rough boards and kuti (cubicles) with split bamboo walls and grass
roofs. Maha Boowa at the same time began to accept pupils and to visit other wat
to give instructional sermons. Maha Boowa is said to have described the change
in his life in the words "the tiger inside him has been killed," and therefore "the
villagers can now relax." In due course the buildings were improved - besides the
refurbished said, a wash house with water-storage facilities was built, and the
143


--- Page 156 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
impermanent kuti gave way to wooden structures. The villagers provided the
wood from the forest, but the monks and novices themselves built these later
structures.
Acharn Boowa's hermitage
In 1971, the hermitage was composed of the following: Besides the abbot, Maha
Boowa, who was now fifty-eight, there were eleven resident monks, seven of
whom were Thai; the remaining four were from Britain, the United States, and
Canada. Five of the Thai disciples were of Northeastern origin. (See Table IO.I
for details.)
There were in October 1971 only two resident novices, both eighteen years of
age and of Northeastern origin; two more novices were expected to take up
residence.2 The hermitage had no resident temple boys (dekwat), but some
village boys, relatives of the abbot, came in the mornings for a couple of hours -
to serve food to the monks, fetch water, and so on.
It was emphasized to me that an important feature of the monastic life in this
hermitage was that monks and novices are, outside their meditational exercises in
isolation, expected to engage in the physical labor of not only the daily cleaning
of the buildings and compound but also of constructing, repairing, and maintain-
ing the buildings. The monks are forbidden to dig the ground and cut trees - this
work the novices (and lay helpers) do. Once the trees are felled, a monk can work
on the wood. In matters of eating food and drinking beverages, once again the
disciplinary rules are observed. The novices (and visiting laity) serve these
items to the monks, who are allowed to drink only water on their own. We
note from these facts that for Wat Pa Ban Tat, unlike the mainstream village
and town wat, the novices are a minor category who are there to serve the
monks and may otherwise be trained in meditational exercises; it is the monks,
whose main occupation is meditation, who constitute the main category of
inmates.
The "nuns," more correctly the mde chi, were at this time only two in
number, one of them being the abbot's mother. It is important to appreciate the
"peripheral" position assigned these women, who at the same time continue the
traditional female role of cooks and providers of food to the monks. Since the
food that is daily collected from villagers on the alms round is usually "rough"
and sometimes insufficient in quantity, the two nuns run a kitchen and cook a pot
of meat and vegetables to supplement it. The money for this food is taken from
hermitage funds.
The physical and spatial layout of the hermitage is such that there is, first of all,
a marked separation of the kitchen area and nuns' quarters from the monastic
buildings. Next, there is a separation within the latter, of the said and wash house
(which are the "communal" structures that are easily accessible from the
144


--- Page 157 ---
Biographer as exemplary forest-monk, meditator, teacher
Table IO.I. Monks residing in hermitage
Monks in order
of seniority
i
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
I I
Nationality
Thai
Thai
Thai
Thai
Thai
British
Canadian
Thai
U.S.A.
British
Thai
Approximate
age
46
49
32
30
30
46
35
28
23
45
20
No. of lents
{phansa)
completed
25
18-20
12
8
8
9 + 7
7
4-5
3
2 - 3
Other comments
Had been married.
First nine years spent as a monk of
Mahanikai sect, and was reordained
into the Thammayut sect.
Was on a world cruise and met a
foreign monk, Khantipalo, who con-
verted him.
Unmarried; previously an account-
ant and company manager.
Recently ordained, was novice be-
fore.
gateway) from the individual kuti, which are dispersed in the forest and hidden
among trees, each having an adjoining meditation walk.
The nuns, including the abbot's mother, are ordinarily expected to keep their
physical distance from the monks' space, including the said, which serves as the
preaching hall. They, like the other laity, come to the said on wanphra and other
days of public worship.
It might be said that an administrative organization is practically nonexistent.
Organizational arrangements that one comes to associate with regular wat - such
as a wat committee (kammakdn), normally composed of the abbot, some monks,
and lay members, which handles wat finances and organizes wat fairs and
celebrations, etc. - is lacking. There is no lay accountant (waiydwatcakdun) and
no fund or foundation (munnithi). The abbot apparently turned over all donations
and money gifts to his mother for safekeeping, and she made payments as
instructed by the abbot. Thus we begin to see that the forest hermitage, although
it may impose strict disciplinary rules on the inmates and may stimulate and
provide the right conditions for a systematic "rationalized" pursuit of meditation
and contemplation, manifests little institutionalization with regard to a hierarchy
of offices or administrative committees. The hermitage actually revolves around a
single personage - the Acharn - who is the radial meeting point of multiple
dyadic and personalistic teacher-disciple and saintly monk-lay donor relations.
This feature will become clearer when we examine later the teacher-disciple
relations.
145


--- Page 158 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
First let us examine the relation of the hermitage and its inmates with the lay
householders. It is the villagers of Ban Tat who daily give food to the monks on
their almsrounds and are the original hosts for the hermitage, giving as we have
seen the land for it and putting up the first buildings. The villagers thus have a
warm relationship with the hermitage, and apart from their attendance on days of
worship they may come individually to consult the abbot. In fact, one monk
informant claimed that the villagers regard the abbot as their "informal head"
and consult him about village prospects and problems. Laymen singly or in
groups may, and do, visit individual monks and novices.
The abbot and his monks do perform rites for the laymen in the village and in
Udon town. Merit-making ceremonies at home such as house blessing are
conducted, but these are not frequent. More frequent are funerary rites, which
are conducted in as simple a manner as is possible. On the day of cremation at the
house of the deceased, during the actual cremation, and during the nights
preceding and following the cremation, the usual bangsukun and paritta chants
are recited.
The most important occasion when laity assemble in the hermitage itself is
during the fortnightly recitation of the pdtimokkha confessional, if this also
coincides with the wanphra sabbath. Lay donors arrive in the morning bringing
food. At 5 p.m. the monks recite the confessional by themselves; afterward the
abbot gives a discourse to the monks and laity. Laymen also come to the
hermitage on other wanphra, and the abbot usually addresses them. Calendrical
festivals like Makha Bucha and Visakha Bucha are not automatically celebrated,
but are staged only at the request of the local villagers. After a circumambulating
candle procession, a discourse is given by the abbot.
Reviewing these transactions, one could say that although the abbot has
certainly not isolated the hermitage from the laity, and indeed has not rejected for
himself and his disciples the performance of merit-making rites for the laity, yet if
the rites he performs are compared with those usually conducted by the regular
wat, it is clear that he has tried to keep them simple and spare. Informal
conversations with laymen are considered to be more productive than doing rites
for them. This downplaying of ritualistic chanting is in fact carried over into the
daily routine of monks and novices. Every village and town wat in the country
conducts morning and evening chants {suat mon chdo, suat mon yen) for its
ordained residents, but this forest hermitage does not have these sessions, for its
emphasis is on "living quietly and concentrating on mindfulness." It was
claimed by an informant that communal chanting brings no benefit to those living
in a meditation wat; in the urban monasteries, collective chanting does contribute
to the calm of the monks living among noises and intrusions.
Let us now review the daily routine of the disciples. They wake up around 4:30
a.m. or even earlier, and many of them meditate until about 5:30 a.m. Then,
before going on the almsround to the village, all in single file, they have to clean
their cottages and the communal hall. By 7 a.m. they will return to the hermitage
146


--- Page 159 ---
Biographer as exemplary forest-monk, meditator, teacher
and eat together their morning meal - the only meal of the day, following
dhutahga tradition. All the food received in bowls is placed in vessels, each
monk or novice retaining in his bowl the quantity of rice he wishes to eat. Sitting
on the central platform in the said they share the food and then wash the dishes
and plates. Some of the food eaten may have been cooked by the two nuns and
brought to them; alternatively, if there is much food collected a portion may be
sent to them.
After the meal the religious are left to themselves until about 12:30 p.m.,
when they might meet near the wash house to have a drink. They are then left free
until 3:30 or 4 p.m. During these intervals no meeting or gossiping is encouraged,
and all the disciples are to be found in their cottages, or on the walks, meditating
or following their own pursuits.
The inmates meet then around 4 p.m. to engage in the compulsory tasks of
sweeping all the pathways, taking water to all the kuti and the lavatories, and
once again cleaning the said. Then they all bathe. If they have worked hard at
some physical task in the afternoon, they may be given a drink of cocoa or milk in
the evening, before they retire around 9 p.m. This daily schedule emphasizes
coming together for the communal meal and communal tasks and separating for
isolation to follow the vocation of an ascetic monk. Within this ordering of daily
time, individuals may follow their particular interests. For instance, a particularly
dedicated adept, or someone following a special, intensified program, may wake
up at 2 a.m. and meditate until morning, or even meditate right through the night
and only take an afternoon nap. In the same way, some adepts may fast occasion-
ally or even for extended periods of time lasting from a week to two weeks. A
Western monk fasted through the rains retreat in five-day intervals. (A case of a
monk who fasted for 30 days and then got up and went on the regular almsround
was mentioned to me.) Phra Pannavaddho said that he practices meditation for
three or four hours a day, two hours before going to sleep, wakes at midnight to
meditate for another two hours, then sleeps until 4:30 a.m. It appeared that for all
the inmates nighttime and early morning were preferred for meditation; during
the day chores had to be done and there were other distractions.
This flexibility and voluntariness, this fashioning of one's regime within the
formal disciplinary limits and rules, is matched by the Acharn's mode of
instruction. Following his own Master's precedent, Maha Boowa does give
discourses and sermons to all his assembled disciples, but the pupils are encour-
aged to practice on their own in their own dwellings. The abbot is said to assess
the temperament and aptitude of each pupil and to relate dyadically to him,
suggesting techniques and methods suited to each (as proposed by the Visud-
dhimagga itself). He may be stern toward some and more lenient toward others.
Each pupil is encouraged to discuss his experiences and progress with the
Acharn. But these consultations, just like the Acharn's collective discourses, are
not regularized or prepared. The sermons are ex tempore and the consultations ad
hoc. Especially at the beginning of the meditative vocation, initiation and
147


--- Page 160 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
instruction by a master is necessary, because there are technical matters involved
and dangers to be avoided.3 If, during the course of a sitting, a strange or
upsetting experience is encountered, the Acharn is consulted. It is thought that
each pupil, as he becomes more and more adept in his exercises, will be able to
progressively monitor and examine his experiences and assess the levels and
stages he has reached. The fact that certain standard signs and manifestations are
associated with various levels is supposed to allow the adept to compare present
experiences with past ones. A disciple is not expected to boast to others,
especially laymen, about the level he has obtained.4
And as was the case with Acharn Mun and his disciples, disciples come and
go. About two or three monks at a time, more often the Thai monks, leave the
hermitage; their place is taken by others. Some leave to resume lay life or to
reside in a city wat, but others may take the radical step of going to a remote
mountain cave to meditate by themselves for a long stretch of time. Some are
unsuccessful and return, and some persist and launch their own peripatetic
careers. It was estimated that in the seven years preceding 1971 some fifteen to
twenty monks had thus gone away to remote places. In the Udon region two
hermitages were founded by Maha Boowa's pupils.5
One thing stands out about the disciplinary practices and interests of the
members of this hermitage. There is scarcely any emphasis on the reading of
books or the study of texts (ganthadhurd). In this entire hermitage, only two
persons have any kind of "scholarly" orientation. The Acharn himself has a
measure of competence in reading Pali texts; moreover, he writes compositions in
Thai. The other is the British monk Phra Pannavaddho, who said that he has been
learning Pali and has attempted to translate some texts into English. No one else
can read Pali.
The entire emphasis, then, is on practice (patipatti) and not study (pariyatti).6
Very definitely, it is a disciple's practice of meditation that is stressed over and
above the reading of books or the memorization of chants. Monks and disciples
of the forest hermitages do not prepare themselves for the official sahgha's
academic examinations on the Dhamma and Pali studies.
What kind of advice and orientation to the bhikkhu's path does Acharn Maha
Boowa impart to his disciples? Because Maha Boowa is an able pamphleteer and
preacher, his views are recorded in writing. Before referring to these, let me
report what some of the disciples themselves told me, because they are spontane-
ous statements laced with homespun metaphors made in the informal context of
their own hermitage:
• A disciple should be mindful of everything he does - whether he is sweeping
the floor or picking up a cup. He must keep his mind in the present and seek after
wisdom {panhd). He must comprehend the laws of karma as evidenced in
everyday acts: If you place a pot in the middle of the floor, it will get knocked
down. External circumstances have internal repercussions and correspondences.
• One should do things with effort; one should not be slack or lazy but do
148


--- Page 161 ---
Biographer as exemplary forest-monk, meditator, teacher
everything expediently and thoroughly. Such effort overcomes natural sloth and
trains one in achieving mindfulness; this is the concept of samddhi.
• One should keep one's eyes open. By this is meant seeing things not super-
ficially but right through to their true condition. One then sees dukkha (sorrow)
as the true condition of this world. One sees a slum or shanty town, one turns
away in disgust, and the citta (mind) does not hanker after the world. The same
feelings are evoked by affluent places. The jungle also evokes the same
understanding. The animals, though they possess nothing except what they have
on themselves, are discontented just like humans; they, however, are ridden by
"fear," which is not man's natural condition. Or if you observe the vegetation,
you see how it grows and decays. All these observations lead to wisdom.
• The methods of samddhi (concentration) and pahhd (insight) are interrelated.
Usually, samddhi precedes pahnd\ some persons may already possess pahnd but
must develop continuous concentration fully to use it. It is important to realize
that if one enters into samddhi, one should still retain control of one's mental
processes and be able to break the meditation at will and return to a normal state.
This is quite different from a spirit medium in a state of trance.
• As regards the starting techniques for entering the meditative state, the
Acharn recommends several - one is the repetition of a formula like "Buddho"
to develop initial calm; another is the technique of breathing in and out and fixing
one's attention on breathing (dndpdnasati); a third is the contemplation of the
body as a whole, of its thirty-two parts, and repulsive and unpleasant things. The
first two techniques derive from samddhi, but the Acharn does not mind which
techniques are adopted.
• There are four postures for meditation, such as sitting, standing, walking,
and lying down. The Acharn himself prefers the walking and sitting methods, but
he allows his disciples to choose according to their preference. Walking and
sitting are the two most frequently adopted in the hermitage.
It is quite clear from these excerpts that Acharn Maha Boowa's instructions are
quite "orthodox" and in line with the exposition given in the Visuddhimagga.
Certain of Maha Boowa's translated essays,7 and excerpts of his views as reported
in Kornfield,8 are more formal and more sophisticated statements of the wisdom
and practices he has sought to inculcate among his disciples and which he makes
it a point to associate with his own Master, Acharn Mun. I have summarized the
contents in Kornfield in an appendix to this chapter so that the reader can
appreciate both sides of the intellect of this teacher - its sure knowledge of the
classical textual formulations and its skill in expounding them with imaginative
metaphors and indigenous idioms.
Let me conclude this sociological account of the forest hermitage on a compara-
tive note. Because Phra Pannavaddho was a Westerner, born, bred, and educated
in a context inflected by Christianity, I asked him to tell me how Buddhist
contemplative monasticism differed from the monastic institutions of early
Christianity. He made these telling comments:
149


--- Page 162 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
1. A Christian monastery "has four walls and a gate"; by comparison, this
hermitage is open: people can wander in and out without formality.
2. A Christian monastery is more rigidly organized; it has more rules and
regulations. Although a Buddhist monastery also has its own disciplinary rules, it
allows more "freedom" to the individual member, who is allowed to and
expected to work out his own method and regime according to his own inclina-
tions and temperament.
3. The Christian monastery thinks of itself more as a community and a
collective unit than does a Buddhist. For a bhikkhu, the monastery is a
"convenience" rather than a primary focus of affiliation.
4. In a forest hermitage like Wat Pa Ban Tat, physical work is engaged in, not
for its own sake, but because it needs to be done. The monks here do more
physical labor than those who reside in the regular village and urban wat, because
for one thing they can do a better job than lay workers, but, more importantly,
because lay workers coming from outside disturb the tranquillity of the place.
I may round off these acute comments by reminding the reader of certain other
comparative features. An integral feature of the Benedictine Rule (A.D. 529) is
that the monk submit himself to the vow of obedience to God and to the authority
of his abbot. There is no such submission or renunciation of individual will on
the part of the Buddhist bhikkhu. A second integral feature of the Benedictine
Order was the conception of the monastery as a "separate family of renunciation,"
as a self-supporting cell, whose members devote themselves to work and prayer,
"laborare et orare" The Benedictine Rule elevated toil and signified a moral
attitude to work that was systematized as a part of the regimen of monastic life
and helped to make the monastery a self-sufficient economic unit (and later a
wealthy corporation). A correlated feature was "the rule of stability," which
Benedict said would remove from the monks the need to go abroad, a temptation
gravely harmful to their souls. The Thai monk knows little of that attachment to
the monastery where he has been first ordained - he can move from wat to wat,
teacher to teacher, in pursuit of his own vocation and path.9
Appendix
The instructions of Acham Maha Boowa
I summarize here some of the main teachings of Acharn Maha Boowa about the objectives
and techniques of meditation, the experiences that it may generate, and the dialectical
relation between concentration and wisdom for the achievement of nirvana. These teachings,
which are reported by Kornfield,10 supplement those that are already summarized by me in
the biography of Acharn Mun in Chapter 6. Here, Acharn Maha Boowa as a teacher
adopts a dogmatic and pedagogical prose; there, he wrote as an adoring disciple in the
language of extolling hagiography.
Morality (slla). Morality sets a limit to the "outgoing exuberance" in a person's
150


--- Page 163 ---
Biographer as exemplary forest-monk, meditator, teacher
activities of body and speech. The practice of morality enables a person to live in a
"cool" way with a happy and easy heart. Moral behavior can be natural to a person and
does not have to be asked for as precepts from a monk or a person in an official capacity.
Concentration. All types of meditation are for controlling the "outgoing exuberance of
the heart" (cai). The Thai consider cai to be the seat of the emotions and also an entity
that has a capacity for "attachments." Concentration, which means calmness or stability
of heart, is that which opposes the "outgoing exuberance." The heart does not want to
take the medicine of meditation, by which Dhamma is brought into the heart as its
guardian.
The Buddha enumerated forty supports of meditation, which vary with the different
temperaments of people. The three supports favored by Maha Boowa are the contempla-
tion of the thirty-two parts of the body; contemplation of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and
the sahgha; and awareness of breathing in and out. When one finds the type of meditation
that suits one's character, one should begin with a preparatory repetition of a word so that
"the sound captivates the heart."
In describing the use of the breath as the objective support of the heart, Maha Boowa
says that through it mindfulness should be established; as one feels the breath at every
moment one senses that it becomes progressively finer "until finally it becomes apparent
that the finest and most subtle breath and the heart have converged and become one."
When one has attained the most subtle level of breathing he will be bright, cool, calm,
happy, and reach a nondual state of absorption and of knowledge of the heart alone.
During the practice of a given type of meditation, the characteristics of that form of
meditation (e.g., the body parts) may appear; one should pay close attention to them and
fix them in one's heart and then contemplate their unpleasant and loathsome aspects as
rotting and decayed, as breaking down into their elements. Thus one eliminates delusion,
which gives rise to sexual craving, which is one of the "outgoing exuberances" of the
heart.
All methods of meditation lead to the same goal - peace and happiness; in other words,
to nibbdna. One should therefore not get bogged down with concern with methods other
than the one one has chosen, nor should one become preoccupied with the right order of
practicing Virtue, concentration, and wisdom; the defilements of passion, hate, and
delusion are not arranged in persons the same way, and it is of no consequence in which
order they arise in one.
Wisdom develops concentration
"The true purpose of meditation practice is to bring calm in the heart." If one cannot
attain calm by lulling the heart with a preparatory method, one must employ wisdom to
sever the root cause of distraction and to subdue it by stratagem and intimidation. There
are some persons who have to train their heart to attain concentration by using wisdom; in
this case "wisdom develops concentration"; and when concentration develops, it in turn
develops wisdom. The results that come from training in both these ways - "concentration
develops wisdom" and vice versa - are the attainment of deep calm and wisdom. Maha
Boowa gives a sophisticated explanation of how learning may interfere with the practice of
meditation:
A person who wants to train his heart to become skillful and to know what is behind
the deluding tricks of the defilements, must not be attached to study and learning in
Buddhism to such an extent that it gives rise to defilements. But also he must not
abandon study and learning; for to do this goes beyond the teaching of the Buddha.
In other words when one is practicing meditation for the purpose of developing
151


--- Page 164 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
concentration, one must not let the heart grasp at what it has learned by study, for it
will be led into thoughts of the past and future. One must instead make the heart
keep to the present, which means that one's only concern must be just that aspect of
Dharma which one is developing.
When there is some question or point of doubt in connection with one's heart
which one is unable to resolve, one may then check it by study and learning after
one has finished meditation practice. But it is wrong to check one's practice all the
time with what one has learned by study, for this will be mere intellectual knowl-
edge and not knowledge which comes from development in meditation.
Developing concentration
In this section, Acharn Maha Boowa expands the stages in developing concentration,
particularly access concentration followed by absorptive concentration.
In access concentration, sometimes an image nimitta (of oneself as a corpse or some
other corpse, etc.) may appear, and a clever disciple will take it as his "learning sign" for
developing deeper concentration. One must see in the learning signs the characteristics of
impermanence, suffering, and nonself. When one has become skilled at concentration,
"one may let the heart go out and follow the sign and find out what is taking place" - this
will be of value in understanding the events of the past and future.
There are, however, types of people for whom signs do not appear, no matter how long
the heart remains in a concentrated state. These are the types of whom one may say
"wisdom develops concentration." In any case, wisdom and concentration are a "Dharma
pair" that go together and cannot be separated. But basically it is concentration of all
types that aids and supports the development of wisdom.
There is one obstacle that concentration may engender. In practicing it, the adept may
become attached to the state of calm and happiness it evokes, and may want to remain in
its repose without advancing further to develop wisdom. "This is becoming addicted to
concentration and being unable to withdraw from it in order to go further."
Wisdom. In this final section, Maha Boowa expounds the goal of wisdom. Having
reached sufficient calm in meditation, one trains himself to investigate the parts of the
body with wisdom and to realize that delusion and attachment to beings and functions, and
separation from them - all these are about and within this body of ours. Infatuations of
love and hate are infatuations within this body; not wanting death is anxiety about this
body. Beings are inundated by defilements until they are unable to extricate themselves,
and the body is the cause of them all.
When the heart views the body in the foregoing way, with wisdom, it becomes wearied
both of one's own body and the bodies of other people and animals. The heart, in using the
spyglass of wisdom to go sightseeing in the "city of the body," can see one's own "body
city," and then that of all other people and animals, quite clearly; it sees that all
components of this city are divided into the three aspects of impermanence, suffering, and
nonself, and into the four elements of earth, water, air, and fire.
Next, Maha Boowa discusses the deep insight that arises in connection with "the
Dharma of mind" (ndma), that is, the mental constituents of the five aggregates, feelings
iyedana), perceptions (sannd), mental formations (sahkhdra), consciousness (vinndna).
"These four mental Dharmas are the activities of the heart, they come from the heart and
are its deceivers, which can hide and obscure the truth."
Investigation of the four mental Dhammas with wisdom - whether singly or together -
leads to the understanding of how they change all the time, how they appear, remain for a
time, and die away and cease. Being without a self, these impermanent things are also
152


--- Page 165 ---
Biographer as exemplary forest-monk, meditator, teacher
impersonal. "Internally, externally, everywhere throughout every realm, they proclaim
with one voice that they are impermanent . . . . that they are always independent and free,
and that whoever out of delusion becomes attached to them only meets with suffering,
depression, and sorrow . . . ."
These Dhammas in nature are in themselves entirely free from any defilements or evil
ways, but they come to be associated with them because of the heart, which is under the
power of ignorance. "Because of the power of seizing and grasping, this 'ignorant heart'
wanders through birth, old age, sickness, and death, going round and round in this way
through each and every life, regardless of whether it is higher or lower, good or evil,
through all the three realms of becoming." The heart begins to stain and color everything
in the universe in a false manner, thus altering the natural state.
As soon as ignorance has been destroyed from the heart due to the superior power of
"path knowledge" (i.e., the Noble Eightfold Path), which is the weapon of wisdom,
nibbdna will be revealed to the one who acts truly, knows truly, and sees truly. Because
now the heart is in a state of Dhamma and impartiality, one can say "that the heart and all
the Dharmas in the universe are mutually in a state of complete peace and calm by virtue
of the perfect truth."
153


--- Page 166 ---
11
Sectarianism and the sponsorship
of meditation
The royal road to Bangkok
The following criticisms and explanations of the phenomenon of forest teachers
being acclaimed as arahant (saints), of the cult of amulets associated with them,
comes from one of the best scholar monks in Thailand, who some years ago
disrobed to become a layman. His criticisms have to be understood in the context
of two considerations: He belonged to the Mahanikai sect, and his sympathies
were naturally with it with regard to its rivalry with the Thammayut sect; and he
was a scholar monk who not only was most orthodox and correct in his observance
of disciplinary rules, but also had a deep understanding of the philosophical and
doctrinal principles of the Theravada version of the Buddha's teachings.
This commentator, Mr. X, was contemptuous of the fact that a writer by the
name of Sittachetavanna had claimed that there were a number of arahant -
maybe about ioo - in Thailand today; Mr. X had written a scathing riposte to this
claim, in which he pointed out that the arahant of olden days never pluksek
(chanted powerful words) as the modern ones do. (The commentator was referring
here to the sacralization of amulets.)
Mr. X held up Acharn Cha of Ubon as an exemplary forest-monk and
meditation teacher who did not engage in the low art of saiyasdt ("magic"). I
have already given an account of Acharn Cha as a forest-monk teacher of the
Mahanikai sect and reported that he is acclaimed by many persons in Thailand as
an exemplary teacher of meditation (see Chapter 9).
Mr. X's pungent criticism, most decidedly not a majority view, provides us
with a useful point of entry for discussing the contextual features of Maha
Boowa's composition. He criticized Acharn Maha Boowa for writing an exag-
gerated biography of Acharn Mun and for calling him an arahant and crediting
him with supranormal powers. He then referred cryptically to some central
154


--- Page 167 ---
Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation
features of sahgha politics in these words, which can serve us as a starting point
for exegesis: ''Seeing the success of Phra Phimolatham's [the abbot of Wat
Mahathad] program of popularising Vipassand meditation throughout the country,
Wat Bovonniwet engaged in the counter-campaign of popularising and celebrating
the achievements of the provincial forest meditation teachers like Acharn Mun,
Acharn Fun, Luang Pu Waen, and Acharn Maha Boowa, who are all of the
Thammayut sect. When Maha Boowa, a foremost propagandist, comes to Bangkok
he resides at Wat Bovonniwet. So the King's (and the Royal Family's) showing
interest in and having dealings with such forest monks as Luang Pu Waen and
Acharn Fun in recent times has something to do with the Thammayut sect's
sponsorship of these so-called provincial 'saints' "
These remarks suggestively raise issues of sectarian rivalry within the Thai
sahgha, and of the propagation and popularization of meditation and the cult of
the saints being in some part linked with that rivalry. They further imply that the
sects and their leaders have important connections with high politics, including
the royal family, and that royal sponsorship and the attendant bringing of certain
forest-monks into national prominence have a great deal to do with the logic of
center-periphery relations in contemporary Thailand.
The biographer's Bangkok connections
The fact is well known that Acharn Maha Boowa occasionally visits Bangkok.
On these visits, he resides at the central Thammayut monastery of Wat Bovonniwet
and conducts some teaching sessions in meditation. (Although Maha Boowa
has been the most frequent visitor, other forest teachers like Acharn Fun and
Acharn Wan of Sakon Nakhon are known to have visited and preached at Wat
Bovonniwet.)
Acharn Maha Boowa's association with Wat Bovonniwet and his personal
connection with the abbot of this wat, Somdet Phra Yansangvorn (formerly Phra
Sasanosophon), are critical for understanding the support the forest-monk
hermitages in the distant peripheral provinces of the Northeast have received
from the country's ecclesiastical and political center. The abbot of Wat Bovonniwet
is himself a teacher of meditation and conducts lessons with the help of two or
three assistant monks. He has not received training in meditation as such; he has
not been to Burma; he has taught himself with the aid of books. And although an
enthusiast, he is not counted as a great meditation adept. Yet he has an important
elite following among educated Thai of royalist inclinations and among Western
neophytes. He is unique among the Thai teachers in holding meditation classes
once a week in English for both monks and laymen. Not only do many Western
monks get ordained at this prestigious wat, but they also start their tutelage under
this abbot. Moreover, by the 1970s it had become a convention that all foreign
155


--- Page 168 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
monks wishing to study meditation in Acharn Maha Boowa's forest hermitage of
Wat Paa Baan That had to spend about a year in Bangkok at Wat Bovonniwet
preparing themselves. Of course, only those ordained into the Thammayut sect
would prepare themselves in this way. Moreover, the abbot's office at Wat
Bovonniwet became a kind of central link and information center for most of the
forest hermitages in the Northeast, and foreign monks wishing to spend some
time in one of the remote and stunningly beautiful hermitages were advised to
make their arrangements through the abbot.
For some years now, Somdet Phra Yangsangvorn has been in charge of the
sahgha's missionary program abroad, which is concerned with sending Thai
monks to other countries, particularly Malaysia in Southeast Asia, and to Western
countries, to reside in the increasing number of Thai temples being established
there, and to propagate Buddhism among foreigners as well as to serve the needs
of Thais living there.
The centrality and the weight of Wat Bovonniwet can be gauged from these
indications. The headquarters of the Thammayut sect have been situated at Wat
Bovonniwet, and all meetings of the sect have been held here since the time of the
princely Supreme Patriarch Wachirayan at the turn of this century. The office is
manned by monk-officers, many of whom may reside at other Thammayut wat
and come to work here. The head of the sect (Caokhana Yai) has a council or
committee (kammakan), which consists of all the Thammayut monks of phrardt-
chakhana status and some others elected by them. This committee oversees the
work of the regional, provincial, district, etc., levels of organization of the sect.
The Mahamakuta Rajavidyalaya Foundation1 is an organization of the sect,
and it in turn sponsors and finances educational activities, of which the principal
one is the Mahamakut Monks' University, also located on the grounds of Wat
Bovonniwet. Founded in 1893 by Prince Wachirayan, this foundation receives
money from many Thammayut wat, a principal donor being Wat Bovonniwet.
Accordingly, it is fit that the abbot of Wat Bovonniwet is the president of the
foundation.
A second activity of the foundation is the running of a printing press, which
actively prints a number of books and publications in both Thai and English and
sells and distributes them through a bookshop. Once again, this enterprise harks
back to the time of Wachirayan.
Thus, although Wat Bovonniwet may not be at any one point of time the seat
of the head of the sect, or of its principal officers (for this depends on criteria of
seniority), it is considered the chief wat of the sect on account of the location of
the sect's headquarters and of the Mahamakut University there. And because
of these considerations alone, the abbot of Wat Bovonniwet is assured an impor-
tant place in the sahgha.
There is another reason of course, which we have at various places mentioned,
which has assured this wat a prominent place in the country as a whole and in the
156


--- Page 169 ---
Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation
capital in particular. It has not only since Mongkut's time had a succession of
princely abbots, but has also been the residence of reigning monarchs, crown
princes, and "celestial" (cao fa) princes when these have been temporarily
ordained as monks and novices.
Let us run through the prominent names in these two lists. Inevitably we must
begin again with Mongkut, who has fathered a line of abbots and reigning
princes.
Prince Mongkut assumed the abbotship of the wat in 1837; it had previously
been called Wat Mai and was now named Wat Pavaranivesa (Bovonniwet),
meaning "residence of Pavara," which was the title of the deputy king.2 The wat
then became at one stroke the seat of the highest-ranking prince of the realm and
the center of a new sect. When Mongkut ascended the throne in 1851, Prince
Pavaret (the son of the deputy king to Rama II), who had been groomed by
Mongkut, became abbot and had a long run until 1892, during which period he
had also served as head of the Thammayut sect and later as supreme patriarch.
The next abbot was Prince Wachirayan (Vajirananavarorasa), son of King
Mongkut and half-brother of King Chulalongkorn. He remained in office from
1892 to 1921 and also became successively head of the Thammayut sect in
1906 and supreme patriarch in 1910.
He was followed from 1921 to 1958 by Phra Vajraranavongse, son of a prince
of mdum cao status and a distant relative of King Mongkut. Expectably, he too
was elevated to the supreme patriarchship in 1945.
Here ended the royal lineage of abbots. The present abbot, Somdet Phra
Yansangvorn, a commoner and the sixth in line of succession, assumed office in
1961. Both because of the prestige of the office and because of his personal
prestige and activities, he has leap-frogged over some more senior monks to gain
the title of somdet and automatically a place in the Mahatherasamakhom (the
sahgha's Supreme Council of Elders). And he is credited with having excellent
relations with the royal household.
Now let us relate the temporary royal ordinations conducted by this line of
abbots. King Mongkut had expressed the desire after his accession to the throne
that all his sons who wished to enter the sahgha for a period of time should reside
in Wat Bovonniwet or, as second choice, in one of the Thammayut wat he had
restored or founded. In particular, he had wanted the celestial princes in line for
the throne to reside at Wat Bovonniwet. This tradition has been followed to this
day.3 Thus, Crown Prince Vajiravudh resided at the wat after his ordination in
1905; his preceptor at the ceremony was abbot Wachirayan. In 1917, Prince
Prajathipok (who ascended the throne in 1926) was ordained by the same
Wachirayan and resided at the wat afterward. The present king, Bhumipol, while
a monarch was ordained in 1956 for fifteen days, and again took up residence at
the wat.4 (The present abbot of Wat Bovonniwet acted as one of the two dcariyas
at the ordination and acted as his mentor afterward.) Finally, in November 1978,
157


--- Page 170 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
the present crown prince also followed this tradition (and once again the present
abbot of Wat Bovonniwet acted as one of his dcariyas, the other being the abbot
of Wat Cakkrawat).5
It is a matter of great pride to Wat Bovonniwet that this long royal connection
has left a permanent trace in the wat in the form of two buildings, called Tamnak
Panya and Song Prot, which are specially reserved for the occupation of the
monarchs and celestial princes after their ordinations. Tamnak Panya was initially
a residence standing in the Royal Palace. Rama III had it moved brick by brick to
Wat Bovonniwet so that it could become the residence of Mongkut, who lived in
it until he left the sahgha. It has since then served as the obligatory residence of
monarchs and celestial princes during their temporary ordinations. In 1890,
King Chulalongkorn built a more modern and comfortable residence called Song
Prot (meaning "when taking the ordination"); thereafter, the ordained royals
spent the first one or two nights in the Tamnak Panya before moving into it.6
Moreover, the grounds of Wat Bovonniwet contain other traces of royalty - such
as the umbilical cords of the four children of the present monarch, which lie
buried in groves, and the numerous trees planted by the royal family on various
occasions.
Partly because of its ' 'exclusiveness,'' and its being a place of special privilege,
Wat Bovonniwet does not compare with Wat Mahathat, the largest and most
important monastery of le Mahanikai sect, in the number of its inmates and its
openness to the public at large. In November 1978, just before the end of the
rains retreat and departure of "temporary" monks, there were in residence at
Wat Bovonniwet some 70 "regular" monks, 30 "temporary" monks, 13 novices,
and 300 temple boys. In its internal residential division into khana sections, in its
running its own ecclesiastical school, and in its management of internal affairs
through a committee of abbot and titled monks, it is not different from many
other Bangkok monasteries. But it is distinctive with regard to its elite lay
supporters, who frequently invite the monks for lunches and merit-making
ceremonies at their homes. The number of plush cars drawn up near the monastery
before the noon meal - cars bringing lay donors to the temple bearing food, or
sent to carry monks to lay homes - is a sign of the veneration as well as the
prestige enjoyed by this monastery.
Now with these background facts sketched in, let us return to our biographer. It
is no unimportant part of the association between the two men that the abbot of
Wat Bovonniwet has sponsored the translation into English and publication of
some of Maha Boowa's compositions, which were distributed free through the
Thammayut sect's press and bookshop (Mahamakut Press), and through individual
monks and laymen. Moreover, some of the Acharn Maha Boowa's expositions on
meditation have been published in English in the Review of the World Federation
of Buddhists.7
A word or two about the World Federation of Buddhists (WFB) is in order to
complete Acharn Maha Boowa's Bangkok connections. There were in 1978
158


--- Page 171 ---
Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation
some seventy-two WFB Regional Centers located throughout the world. Thailand
was the host country for the headquarters of the federation. The government of
Thailand has built a luxurious building to house the headquarters, and the
Department of Religious Affairs provides the budget for its activities. Aside from
publishing the review, the headquarters sponsors many Buddhist activities, the
most important of which is the holding of weekly meditation classes for monks
and laity alike.8
I have in an earlier work9 documented in detail the fact that the Department of
Religious Affairs is heavily staffed by educated ex-monks, most of whom were
members of the Thammayut sect. Likewise, the most important Thai lay
administrators of the WFB Center are men of similar background. Let us take as
our example Siri Buddhasukh, who was in 1978 the "Chief of the International
Section" of the center and editor of the Review. He is particularly appropriate to
consider because he is the translator into English of Acharn Maha Boowa's
biography of Acharn Mun, the text which I summarized in Chapter 6.
Siri was born in Kalasin Province. Like many other Bangkok monks, he came
to the capital as a novice (sdmanera) in his teens and took up residence in the
Thammayut monastery called Wat Boromnivas. He resided there for ten years,
during which period he attended the Mahamakut University for monks run by the
Thammayut sect and obtained the B.A. degree. He then disrobed, studied for his
B.A. again at Prasarmitr Teachers College, and then spent two years at Benares
Hindu University, where he secured an M.A. degree in sociology. At the time I
met him in 1978, he was holding two jobs, one at the WFB Center and the other
as a lecturer at the Mahamakut University. The facts I have presented enable us
fully to appreciate the connections that Acharn Maha Boowa, a Northeastern
forest monk, has established with the religious and lay authorities in Bangkok
who actively propagate "religion" (sdsana). These connections enable his
teachings and writings to get a distribution among both Thai- and English-
speaking elite circles.
The Thammayut order's strength, and the setting
for sectarian rivalries
Insofar as Maha Boowa's biography of Acharn Mun is "propagandist" in seeking
to disseminate the story of a Buddhist saint who was a member of the Thammayut
sect, we have to probe into sectarian rivalries in contemporary Thailand. The
circumstances surrounding the founding of the Thammayut sect, its distinctive
features and stamp, and its orientations and achievements in the nineteenth
century have by now been so well documented that I shall only strive to give here
a concise and "mnemonical" account of the events arranged so as to illuminate
the issues that concern us in the book.10
The Thammayut sect was founded by Mongkut when he served as an ordained
159


--- Page 172 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
prince, and it gained formal recognition and autonomy as one of the four
components of the national sahgha in the time of the King Chulalongkorn.
Mongkut's stated aim in founding the new sect was to improve upon the lax
practices of the extant sahgha, that is, the Mahanikai sect. He pointedly called
his grouping Thammayut, ''those adhering to the doctrine," in contrast to the
established Mahanikai, whom he dubbed ''those adhering to long standing
habit." In the manner of most sectarian divisions in the Theravada tradition,
Mongkut adopted certain disciplinary practices concerning the mode of wearing
the robes, the ceremony of ordination, the style of chanting, and so on, which
were allegedly closer to the pristine practices and therefore in the true lineage of
succession extending from the Buddha. In any event, these practices served as
diacritical features of the new sect.
But there were other features of his ' 'reformist' 'movement that bear intriguingly
upon our theme of forest-monks. Mongkut did formulate certain rules of conduct
for his disciples that were more "ascetic" and in line with the dhutahga
practices, which the Visuddhimagga, let us recall, enumerated only as optional
but not obligatory sila (conduct) for monks. Although Mahanikai monks ate two
meals a day, Thammayut monks were to eat one a day. Many Mahanikai monks,
especially in the towns, neglected their almsrounds, but Thammayut monks were
to eat food placed in their almsbowls. Moreover, unlike Mahanikai monks, who
accepted curries and relishes in separate dishes, the Thammayut brethren were to
accept all offerings of food in the same bowl and eat the food with all tastes and
dishes mixed.11
These ascetic practices of the drannavdsi tradition were not, however, combined
by Mongkut with an emphasis on the practice of samddhi (concentration) and the
cultivation of wisdom through insight meditation. Whereas Mongkut did stress
that the exemplary Thammayut monks should combine scholarship with some
proficiency in meditation, the latter pursuit did not become a central component
in his conception of the monk's vocation. Let us recall his early experience as a
monk, when he was faced by the unfortunate results of the sahgha's de facto
separation of pariyatti, which was construed as the study of texts (ganthadhura),
from patipatti, which was construed as the practice of meditation (vipassand-
dhura), as more or less two incompatible specializations. Ordained in 1824, he
first resided at Wat Mahathat. When the succession to the throne went to his
half-brother, he decided to continue as a monk, and moved to Wat Samorai,
which was situated at some distance from the capital and as a forest-monk
monastery was famous for the teaching of meditation and spiritual exercises
rather than for the inculcation of learning. It was because his teachers could not
provide the doctrinal and canonical explanations for the meditative practices that
he became disenchanted with them and returned to Wat Mahathat to study
canonical texts. His flair for languages and "scripturalist" orientation combined
to make him a Pali scholar in a little time. So the leader of the Thammayut
movement became an ecclesiastical examiner and set out to improve monastic
160


--- Page 173 ---
Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation
education. He turned many of his disciples into able Pali scholars and holders of
degrees. This literary explosion was furthered by Mongkut's founding a press for
printing and popularizing Pali works.
We thus see in the constitution of the early stages of the Thammayut sect a
paradoxical content: Mongkut espoused some of the ascetic practices that were
the hallmark of forest-dwelling monks, but he also championed the study of texts
and was dedicated to taking the pure religion to the people, as good town-
dwelling monks should ideally do. In this case, however, there was a coherent
relation between the two emphases: Thammayut monks would be exemplars of
disciplined conduct, and they would be the agents who would transform the
religion among monks and laity alike. Concordant with this missionizing zest
was Mongkut's exhortation that his monks preach extemporaneously and
vigorously in the vernacular rather than resort to composed sermons with Pali
words incomprehensible to most of the listeners.
Another component of the Thammayut scripturalist and reformist package was
its "rationalism" or, as some would describe it, its "demythologizing" stance.
The well-known example advanced is Mongkut's rejection of the Traiphum, the
regnant cosmological treatise with its mythological description of the cosmos and
its workings, its array of "superstitious" beliefs, and its encouragement of
"ritualistic" actions, and his desire to bring the Dhamma in conformity with the
canons of the empirical science, which he learned from Western contact.12
These dynamic and fertilizing constituents produced in King Chulalongkorn's
time the finest flower of the Thammayut sect in the person of Wachirayan, the
princely son of Mongkut, half-brother to the king, the abbot of Wat Bovonniwet,
subsequently head of the Thammayut sect, and supreme patriarch of the sahgha.
He is perhaps, as an admirer puts it, "without question the most celebrated
bhikkhu in the ecclesiastical history of Thailand." Let us briefly recall the
developments that stemmed from, on the one hand, his scholarship and his
reform of monastic education, and, on the other, his zeal for administrative
reform of the sahgha as a whole, which led him to a collaboration with the
political authority and participation in its' 'national'' and' 'centralizing'' objectives.
Wachirayan is credited with the second wave (after Mongkut) of reforming the
education of monks and novices in monastic schools; he substituted written
examinations for oral and composed a number of textbooks, many of which are
standard texts even today. He founded the university for monks, Mahamakutarajav-
idyalaya, in 1893. He was also a prolific writer in Thai and Pali - his translations,
commentaries, and sermons, together with his textbooks, found ready publication
and distribution through the press owned by the Thammayut order. Wachirayan
not only addressed himself to better educating the ordained, he also sought to
educate the lay public, and many of his compositions were directed at them.
This emphasis - that monks should enlighten people as active teachers of
Buddhism - prepared the way for King Chulalongkorn's enlisting of the princely
monk in his program to promote widespread primary education in the provinces.
161


--- Page 174 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
Wachirayan, appointed as an "organizer of religion and education of the Buddhist
population," committed his scholar monks and rural wat to the dissemination of
elementary education, a commitment that in turn led to the overhauling of the
entire sahgha's ecclesiastical administrative structure. A national educational
program, created and disseminated from the center, was sought to be implemented
through the country's numerous monasteries, which were not tightly interrelated
and also practiced local and regional traditions. Wachirayan soon saw the need to
unify and bureaucratize the national ecclesiastical sahgha to achieve its objectives;
he took as his model Prince Damrong's plan to reform the provincial administration
to create a centralized patrimonial-bureaucratic structure. He collaborated with
Prince Damrong, King Chulalongkorn's most effective agent of national integration
cum royal centralization, in transforming the Thai sahgha into a national hierarchy
more amenable than ever before to control from Bangkok. The Sahgha Act of
1902 was the end result of these developments.
Another fateful result that was a necessary corollary of this program of
national unification and centralization was the "homogenization" of Buddhism.
The Thammayut brand of central Thai Buddhism was to be the criterion of pure
Buddhism, and regional traditions of Buddhist practice, worship, and identity
were to be obliterated in favor of a Bangkok orthodoxy and of central Thai
language as against variant languages, such as the Tai Yuan of the North and its
associated script.
In the northern capital of Chiengmai, the Thammayut order was introduced by
a ranking monk sent by Wachirayan, and in fact a local princely family assisted in
changing the affiliation of the important wat of Cedi Luang to this new order. It
was at this wat that Acharn Mun, the Meditation Master, once resided briefly
during his wanderings and preached (see Chapter 6). To this day, Wat Cedi
Luang remains the center of Thammayut activities in the province, and in recent
times its deputy abbot has maintained strong links with the Thammayut wat in
Bangkok.13
Now, it is this kind of religio-political activism spearheaded by the Thammayut
sect's ablest representatives that produced in the early decades of the twentieth
century a reaction with millennial resonances from the famous Northern khru bd
("esteemed teacher") of charismatic qualities, Phra Slwichai, and his monk
disciples and lay followers. In Chapter 20,1 shall tell the story of this monk who
came out of the local Northern tradition of holy men and resisted the tentacles
spreading from Bangkok. What Phra Slwichai challenged and reacted against
was precisely the Bangkok-promoted attempt at nationalizing, centralizing,
regulating, and homogenizing the sahgha order and sdsana. The Slwichai defiance
of Bangkok was not long-lived; an accommodation was reached and the process
of unification has since then proceeded more or less unimpeded.
In the twentieth century, the main agents and devices of the Bangkok-based
central authorities in creating a unified national sahgha have been the royal
162


--- Page 175 ---
Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation
monasteries of both Thammayut and Mahanikai affiliation, the system of titled
ecclesiastical positions, the monastic schools relating their education to centrally
administered examinations, the regulation of ordination into the sahgha, and so
on. But the sahgha authorities, among whom those of Thammayut affiliation
have been dominant for many past decades, have also attempted to foster in the
Northern and Northeastern frontier provinces the forest hermitages at the same
time as they have sought to break the local bases of religious prestige and
charisma of the divisive and rebellious sort represented by Khruba Slwichai.
There is a paradoxical element in this situation, which we have to unravel.
We have already seen how Mongkut's Thammayut movement, while down-
grading the earlier forest-monk tradition, also sought to incorporate and encompass
it. While Mongkut declared that meditation and ascetic practices uninformed by
learning were of little value, he incorporated some of the ascetic (dhutahga)
practices into the code of "pure" vinaya practices he formulated.
Later, during the great era of the upgrading and spread of monastic education
under the leadership of Prince Wachirayan of the Thammayut sect, the monks of
drahhavdsi tradition in the border provinces did not participate in this system of
education, and since then have neither sat for the clerical examinations (naktham
and prayok) nor been considered eligible for scholarly or ecclesiastical adminis-
trative titles and offices. As I have mentioned before, most "forest hermitages"
have had no consecrated precincts and entitlements for the holding of higher
ordination (upasampadd) in their premises. Thus there is no doubt that they are
in an important sense placed "outside" the channels and resources of the official
sahgha. This is not to say that they are considered "illegitimate" or "deviant,"
for all the forest monks today have undergone proper ordination, and the majority
of them, as we have seen, are of Thammayut affiliation.
But there are reasons to suppose that precisely because of the benign interest
taken in them by the Thammayut sect, these forest hermitages have the probability
in due course of changing into full-scale monasteries flying the Thammayut
banner and becoming part of the establishment. Ferguson and Ramitanondh have
recently hypothesized14 that " .. .the Thammayut Sect at the provincial level is
possibly an alternative avenue of royal governmental influence over the monkhood
in addition to the channels available through the hierarchy and honorary system,"
and concluded that the forest monks of Acharn Mun are the pioneer ground
breakers who will evolve into more traditional Thammayut monasteries in a few
decades.
Kirsch has also recently remarked on the penetration of the influence of the
Thammayut monks into the Northeastern countryside,15 where "they are found in
'forest' temples located on the outskirts of provincial centers and rural villages
where they follow their ascetic regime and carry out their exemplary role distinct
from the village monks of the Mahanikai." He also noted that "in the countryside
where Thammayut monks are found, their strongest lay supporters are drawn
163


--- Page 176 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
from among the group of local leaders, school teachers, storekeepers, and a
nascent group of local traders who are also oriented to national concerns and are
the innovators and modernizers of village society?'
We hope to clarify hypotheses of this nature. From our broader perspective, we
see an understandable fallacy in Kirsch's essay. Probably because he did his
fieldwork in the Northeast and has had little direct knowledge of the Thammayut
monasteries of Bangkok, Kirsch expatiates in general terms on how today "to be
a Thammayut monk requires a conscious commitment and a higher level of
personal involvement than is necessary for the Mahanikai monk," and that
because the Thammayut monk's role is "so demanding" pious laymen feeling
unable to live up to these expectations are forced to live and achieve in the secular
world rather than become monks themselves. The truth of the matter is that the
asceticism and dedication to the path of liberation that are the hallmark of many
of the provincial forest hermitages that I have earlier described is confined to the
periphery and is not matched by the great Thammayut monastic foundations of
the capital. Aside from such discriminating features concerning the style of the
wearing robes, wearing sandals, style of chanting, and so on, the Thammayut
and Mahanikai monasteries of Bangkok show no difference in style and comfort
of life. Monks of both sects go on almsrounds optionally and rarely eat from their
bowls (let alone mix foods and tastes); monks of both sects show more concern
for learning and for officiating at rites and receiving gifts than for meditation and
reclusive contemplation. The architecture of their wat, with gilded and ornate hot
and wihdn, is similar. The list of similarities can be expanded, but the point I am
trying to make is that since the reformist and purist times of Mongkut and
Wachirayan, the Thammayut sect has developed an internal differentiation wherein
the dominating urban center has settled into the interests and style of life of
established mainstream Buddhism, whereas the periphery clings to and endeavors
to live up to the ideals of ascetic practices and meditative contemplation. As we
shall see, it is the "slackness" of the center and its increasing loss of credibility,
and the achievement at the periphery of some of the central values of monastic
Buddhism, that provides the scenario for the coming into national prominence
lately of the forest saints, and for the intensification of the cult of the amulets.
Today monks and monasteries of the Thammayut order tend to be more
committed to the orientations and demands of the ecclesiastical hierarchy than
are the majority of the Mahanikai members. But the margins of difference are not
large between the Thammayut monasteries, which are becoming increasingly
differentiated, and the Mahanikai monasteries, whose best members have been
imbued with many of the reformist orientations promoted by Wachirayan on a
national scale. Nevertheless, there exist some perceptible differences. Most
Thammayut wat do not hold festive temple fairs and kathin ceremonies, and
many deplore and ban exuberant and histrionic sermons by preaching monks
(nakthet), who draw crowds and their donations. In contrast, many Mahanikai
wat are famous for their festive, colorful rites; what they lack in elite lay support
164


--- Page 177 ---
Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation
they make up for in commoner religiosity. Many Thammayut wat, on the other
hand, have become more relaxed and worldly in other respects: Astrology
flourishes in them, and they are the wealthiest crematoriums of the capital. In Pali
scholarship, Mahanikai can pit its own learned with the best of Thammayut.
One of the lessons of the history of the Thammayut sect in Thailand is that a
reformist sect formed in reaction to the traditionalized ritual orientations and
interests of gdmavdsi mainstream monks cannot enduringly sustain its ascetic
aspirations. As it develops and expands, it manifests internal differentiation and
cleavages, which reproduce the original split. The Thammayut sect's alliance
with political authority, together with its impulsion to reform monastic and lay
Buddhist practices, embodied a tension, if not incompatibility, between ascetic
living and worldly involvements. On the other side, gdmavdsi monastic com-
munities also constantly spawn specialist groups, which pursue meditative and
ascetic traditions and may even break away to found forest fraternities. The
Mahanikai sect in Thailand, precisely because it is a diverse collection of
monastic communities, has shown these tendencies. It is because of these
processes that the division between forest-dwelling (drahhavdsi) versus village-
dwelling (gdmavdsi) which, as noted before, has been present from old times in
the sahgha of Sri Lanka, Burma, and Thailand, does not consistently represent
the substantive differences that the labels signify. There has always been in these
countries a dialectic and even a formal dichotomy with the sahgha between "the
middle way" of the gdmavdsi and the more radical ascetic, reclusive, meditative
way of the drannavdsi, but these modalities do not consistently crystallize into
groupings of monks that are exclusively one or the other.
The reasons for the leaders of the Thammayut sect's developing mainstream
orientations have a great deal to do with their political connections and weight
from the time of its founder. By 1851, when Prince Mongkut's service as a monk
concluded, he had enlisted, besides Wat Bovonniwet, his seat, five other wats in
and around the capital to serve as the centers of Thammayut teaching.16 Although
he took no punitive action against the Mahanikai and was careful not to cause
sectarian conflict while he was king, he clearly acted as the royal patron of the
sect he founded. It is not surprising that in the first years of his occupation of the
throne he founded four new Thammayut monasteries in Bangkok-Thonburi, and
appointed as their abbots and other chief functionaries his best disciples from Wat
Bovonniwet.17
The Thammayut sect's monasteries, although small in number, have had an
obvious weight by virtue of their orthodoxy and dynamic performance and the
royal support they enjoyed. Although during Mongkut's reign the Thammayut
sect was only a branch of the Central division (khana) of the sahgha, the other
two being the Southern and Northern, yet the connection of the sect with royalty
was established beyond doubt. Mongkut's appointment of the prince-abbot of
Wat Bovonniwet as the supreme patriarch began the double tradition as far as
possible of selecting members of the royal family as supreme patriarchs of the
165


--- Page 178 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
sahgha, and of reserving the patriarch's position to monks of the Thammayut
sect. And King Chulalongkorn clearly wished, though he was conscious of his
role of patron of the entire sahgha and therefore of both sects, to follow the
precedents set by his father with regard to the abbotship of Wat Bovonniwet, the
headship of the Thammayut sect, and the patriarchship of the entire sahgha.ls
In 1910, Prince Wachirayan, abbot of Wat Bovonniwet and head of the
Thammayut sect,19 was appointed supreme patriarch. He held office for twelve
years. The next and last patriarch (up to the present) with royal connections was
Phra Vajraranavongse, again abbot of Wat Bovonniwet; he was appointed in 1945.
Now there was a conspicuous advantage about the location and the overall
organization of the Thammayut monasteries that has in the past, and still does in
the present, enabled the sect to be an effective actor in sahgha politics on the
national stage. It was a sect with its principal base in the capital, a base that was
as narrow as it was influential. Unlike the loosely related and independently
founded wat of the established Mahanikai sect, the majority of the Thammayut
wat were founded either by monarchy or nobility and, in the early decades at
least, the abbots and principal monks of these new houses were selected from
among the circle of the founder's disciples. Thus the Thammayut sect has always
maintained a much tighter network than the Mahanikai sect with its decentralized
structure of numerous and autonomous wat\ it has also maintained stricter
disciplinary standards and a greater unity as a pressure group than the much
larger, looser, and discordant Mahanikai sect.
The sectarian rivalries that surfaced after the promulgation of the 1941 Sangha
Act and have continued to the present day show the strengths and weaknesses of
both sides. This act was intended to liberalize the ecclesiastical organization and
bring it in line with the country's political system, which had been democratized
after the so-called revolution of 1932. Thus under the provisions of the 1941 act,
the sahgha, in imitation of the Assembly of People's Representatives and the
cabinet system, would also be administered by an elected Ecclesiastical Assembly
and an Ecclesiastical Cabinet under the headship of the supreme patriarch
appointed by the king.
This constitution proved to be a recipe for competition between the Mahanikai
and Thammayut sects for the cabinet ministerial and deputy-ministerial posts.
The division of spoils was resolved as an equal representation of members of the
two sects on the cabinet - a formula that confirmed the political strength of the
Thammayut sect, which was (and is) in numbers a minority sect.20 And as I have
described elsewhere,21 it is in this context of rivalries and tensions that a struggle
crystallized between two ambitious monks, Phra Phimolatham, abbot of Wat
Mahathat and ecclesiastical minister of the interior, and Somdet Phrama-
hawirawong, abbot of the Wat Makut (of Thammayut affiliation) and ecclesiastical
prime minister, in which the latter emerged as the victor and subsequently
became the supreme patriarch.
The discord in the sahgha gave the opportunity for Prime Minister Sarit to
166


--- Page 179 ---
Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation
intervene, with fateful consequences. Phra Phimolatham was forcibly disrobed
and incarcerated, and the Sangha Act of 1963 was promulgated, replacing the
previous democratic constitution with an authoritarian one that concentrated
power in the office of the supreme patriarch and his advisory Council of Elders
(Mahatherasamakhom). This constitution has in turn generated protests and
dissatisfaction among the majority of younger monks particularly of the Mahanikai
sect.
Phra Phimolatham's fate at the hands of the authoritarian Prime Minister Sarit
and his military colleagues had a great deal to do with his sponsorship of a
program to disseminate and popularize meditation throughout the country among
both monks and laity. Phra Phimolatham's propagation of vipassand meditation
involved not so much the setting up of forest hermitages populated by monks who
had retreated into reclusive contemplation as the enlisting of numerous urban and
village wat to teach meditation not only to monks and nuns but also, and perhaps
more importantly, to pious laymen of all ages and occupations.22
In the next section, I shall describe the Phimolatham meditation drive in some
detail as illustrating a style of propagation stemming from the Mahanikai sect.
Let the following excerpt serve as an interpretive framework for that description:
We can now surmise why this popular program and the influence wielded by the monk
sponsoring it might have been construed as a political threat by Sarit and his military
colleagues. It is clear that the program served as a basis for marshaling the support and
loyalty of several monks and laymen. Most importantly, that political power was grounded
theoretically in a monk's spiritual excellence and religious achievement. This source and
basis of power were inaccessible to lay politicians and soldiers whose power rested on the
control of physical force. Insofar as there exist mechanisms within the sangha for
generating a collective support in society that can be claimed to be independent of and
immune to naked political power, the political authority will seek to curb them. This is
indeed why Sarit would and did try to taint Phimolatham's activities as "politically
subversive"; and this is indeed why a seemingly religious project for the revitalization of
religion could be branded as a "political" attempt to amass power dangerous to the
regime.
But when the sangha lends its religious weight to the championing of a political
program that legitimates the political authority and seeks to strengthen it further, then, of
course, the political authority is likely to appreciate and reward the sangha's spiritual
excellence.2
This has been the case with the Thammatyut program, which consisted of monks
actively participating in the promotion of community welfare and national
development. And it is now the case with the forest meditation teachers, whose
radiation of spiritual virtues can be tapped and harnessed to the legitimation of
established political power.
167


--- Page 180 ---
12
The Mahanikai sect's propagation
of lay meditation
The lay popular religiosity of the seventies as observed in Bangkok showed,
among others, two contrapuntal interests and activities. One was the general
interest, especially among the middle class and educated urban categories (and
among them, especially the elderly and the retired) in the practice of meditation.
Instruction was taken from monk, sometimes lay, teachers, and collective sittings
were held in the halls of wat at set times, especially on wanphra and Sundays.
In a general sense, this show of interest in meditation has intensified in recent
years with the spread of literacy and education, with the translation into the
local language of Pali texts, and with the accompanying realization that medi-
tational exercises are not the sole province of the monk. In a sense, then,
when increasing numbers of laymen observe the eight or ten precepts on wanphra,
and congregate at wat for meditational sittings, the layman-monk distinction as
portraying totally different regimes and styles of life is blurred. Nevertheless,
there is a striking contrast between the forest ascetic monk totally devoted to
meditation and the search for liberation on the one hand, and on the other hand
the educated informed layman practicing occasional meditation to lend him some
tranquility and detachment from the cares, stresses, and involvements of a
layman's life in the world.
At first sight, the lay interest in meditation seems to contradict the widespread
lay interest in the traffic in and possession of amulets, which are believed to
possess efficacious life-giving and life-protecting powers that have been transfer-
red to and objectified in them by the world-transcending meditation masters and
forest saints. However, this seeming contradiction is softened, once we realize
that the urge to possess the objectified charismatic powers of the forest saint
springs from the same admiration and respect that informs the lay admiration of
the saint's exemplary life. The forest acharns are in a real sense illuminates, men
who have been touched by the transcendental, men who on that account achieve a
pneumatic leadership, and, as inspired teachers, make accessible to the masses
some of the philosophical truths and efficacious practices of the Buddhist quest
168


--- Page 181 ---
Mahanikai sect's propagation of lay meditation
for liberation. This in fact becomes part of their mission: not to be the spiritual
leader of the community as a scholar-monk, the student of abhidhamma, but as
the exemplary illuminate whose social function inevitably is to make accessible
to the masses the great mystical virtues, thereby giving their mundane lives an
infusion of energy. Viewed from this perspective, the simultaneous interest of the
laity in meditational exercises and in the amulets blessed by the forest teachers is
not incongruous, though of course many more laity participate in the latter cult
than evince interest in meditation. The cult of the amulets itself is embedded in
the lay ethic of gift giving (ddna) and merit making with respect to the sahgha.
Now, I do not want to give the impression that the tradition of meditation
represented by the forest teachers of Northeastern and Northern Thailand is either
the main tradition or the oldest tradition of meditation from the point of view of
the laity and sahgha. Besides that represented by the forest teachers, there are
other traditions, the best known of which is that practiced and disseminated by
some of the famous urban monasteries of the capital city and provincial towns.
(To be counted with them are some famous village monasteries that are not in the
forest-hermitage tradition.) Although it is not an aim of this book to provide a full
picture of all the schools and traditions of meditational teaching and practice in
Thailand, yet it is necessary to give some sense of the general interest, among
sections of the sahgha and laity, in meditation, in order to explain why the forest
teachers are in the limelight today.
All the urban and village monasteries of the established sahgha are engaged in
the performance of various rites and recitations; most of them devote themselves
to "study" in the sense of preparing monks and novices for naktham examinations,
and some of them also maintain schools for the teaching of Pali. If the general
run of wat have these as their main orientations, some among them have also
shown a special interest in the practice of meditation, firstly for the ordained
monks and novices and secondarily for interested laymen.
Thus out of some 25,000 wat in Thailand in 1969,l only a small fraction
either specialize in meditation or teach it. Indeed, while the teaching of Dhamma
is a recognized activity of most wat, the teaching and practice of meditation is a
special voluntary activity of an individual monk or a small circle of monks, who
attract ordained students from their own and other wat, and also lay disciples
from the general public. All urban monasteries are divided into residential
sections (khana), each in the charge of a senior monk (caokhana), and the
meditation teacher and his disciples tend to be grouped in a section of their own.
The national monastic centers, such as Wat Mahathat (of Mahanikai affiliation)
and Wat Bovonniwet (of Thammayut affiliation), may conduct a variety of
educational and ritual activities. The propagation of meditation may be only one
of these activities and is usually associated with some famous teacher-monk like
Phra Thepsiddhimuni at Wat Mahathat (who was a pupil of and took over the
propagation of meditation from Phra Phimolatham) or the present abbot of Wat
Bovonniwet, Somdet Phrasangwan.
169


--- Page 182 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
Aside from these national centers, there are some well-known urban monaster-
ies that, while engaged in a spectrum of activities, are primarily known as centers
that have specialized in meditation: Well-known examples are Wat Paknam in
Thonburi (which was particularly famous during the time of Caokhun Mangala-
debamuni, now dead) and Wat Pleng, also in Thonburi. But because the practice
and dissemination of meditation in these urban wat is linked to particular
masters, who live and teach there, the reputation of these wat as meditation
centers wanes with their death. A case in point is Wat Rakhang, located in
Thonburi. It previously had a resident Burmese monk who had many meditation
students, including the two monks (Phra Phimolatham and Phra Thepsiddhimuni)
who would later propagate meditation from Wat Mahathat on a countrywide
scale. But after his death it began to concentrate on Abhidhamma studies, which
now became the interest of some of its resident scholar-monks.
A scrutiny of the meditational activities of Wat Paknam and Wat Pleng in the
late 1970s - and of Wat Mahathat, the largest and most influential monastery of
the Mahanikai sect - indicates that the teaching imparted by the teacher to his
disciples is not systematic or intense and that the practice of meditation by the
disciples is not particularly absorbing and time consuming.2 As a matter of fact,
as will become clear in our account of the propagation of meditation by Wat
Mahathat, some of the urban meditation teachers are much more involved with
the propagation of meditation to the laity, as part and parcel of a drive to extend
and intensify their participation in the Buddhist religion (sdsana). The participa-
tion sessions (which include sermons and chants) are an integral component of
this evangelism. Such popularization also enables the scholar-monk to gain
prestige, renown, and access to mass media like radio and television.
Wat Mahathat in the early 1970s as a center of propagation of
meditation to the public
Wat Mahathat, the largest monastery in the country, had in the early 1970s
during the rains retreat some 260 resident monks, 80 novices, and several
4'temple boys" (dekwat) who were attending the secular schools in the capital.
On its grounds is situated a monks' university - Mahaculalongkaun - which is
attended by pupils from other wat as well.3 While religious and secular teaching
constitutes the most conspicuous activity of the wat, it is also the scene of many
others, ranging from astrology to meditation.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the propagation of meditation was perhaps
the wafs most advertised task, and the enthusiast who planned and implemented
it with missionary zeal was its abbot, Phra Phimolatham, who also held the
powerful position of "minister of the interior" in the sahgha's Ecclesiastical
Cabinet (Khana Sangkhamontrl). Phra Phimolatham's dissemination program
was ambitious and countrywide: He was able to stimulate "branch" monasteries
170


--- Page 183 ---
Mahanikai sect's propagation of lay meditation
in Bangkok, the Central Plain, and then the Northern and Northeastern provinces
to propagate and popularize meditation, not only among the ordained monks and
novices but also among the laity. A central tenet in the "Burmese" system of
insight meditation he espoused was that laymen could learn and practice it after a
fairly brief, intensive period of training. This large meditation drive, which
spread like a wave, enlisting lay enthusiasm, had striking religio-political
ramifications and consequences, which were described in the preceding chapter,
and which are not unrelated to the "politics" of the contemporary highlighting
of, and enthusiasm for, the Northeastern forest meditation teachers and their
hermitages. Wat Mahathat's meditation program in the 1970s was a much-
diminished remnant of an earlier, vigorous movement and the present meditation
teacher, Phra Thepsiddhimuni, is the successor to Phra Phimolatham. Although
less illustrious in that he is neither the abbot nor a member of the Supreme
Council of Elders, he however propagates meditation in a manner that owes
something to the campaign style of his master and sponsor.
Around 1953-4, the residential section (khana) 5 at Wat Mahathat became the
center of propagation. Many meditation cubicles were built around the bot, and
a fund for financing the dissemination of meditation was started. By 1955,
the same year in which Phra Phimolatham was victimized by the political
authorities, numerous wat throughout the country had become satellite propa-
gation centers under the direction of Wat Mahathat. One informant, a high-
ranking titled monk at the same wat, estimated that more than 100 wat had
participated and that, although both monks and laity were disciples, the laity
predominated, because meditation spoke directly to their interest in "calming
their minds" to offset the pressures of daily life. My informant recalled some
ten wat as important points of propagation: Wat Vivekasrama in the town
of Chonburi, south of Bangkok; Wat Jalapradana, just outside Bangkok in
Nonthaburi Province; Wat Mueang Man in the Northern capital of Chiengmai;
Wat Phrabattakpha in the Northern town of Lamphun; Wat Naubauluang in
Sanpataung, also in the North; Wat Thawkot in the Southern capital of Nagara
Sri Dharmaraja; and Wat Pa in Ubon and Wat Phra Naraimaharat in Khorat,
both located in the Northeast. Within Bangkok city itself a number of wat
were enlisted, particularly Wat Parinayok and Wat Thungsathit. It is noteworthy
that this incomplete list nevertheless mentions wat located in the major regions
of the country as well as in the capital city.
In the 1970s, some twenty years after the fall of Phra Phimolatham, a tew 01
these monasteries remained as part of the meditation program propagated from
Wat Mahathat under the direction of Phra Thepsiddhimuni. Outside Bangkok,
three formerly important centers were still conducting meditation teaching for
monks, nuns, and the laity - Wat Vivekasrama, Wat Jalapradana, and Wat
Mueang Man.4 Before dealing with Phra Thepsiddhimuni's activities in Bangkok,
let me describe the activities of Wat Mueang Man as a case illustration of the
meditative tradition popularized by Phra Phimolatham.
171


--- Page 184 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
An urban meditation wat in the Phra Phimolatham tradition
Wat Mueang Man, situated in the city of Chiengmai, was considered to be one
of the best-known centers of meditation instruction established under Phra
Phimolatham's inspiration. In October 1971 when I visited it, it was still actively
engaged in this activity, and I shall describe the abbot, his teaching techniques,
and the organization he had established in some detail to illustrate the pattern of
instruction and the foci of interest that were associated with the Phra Phimolatham
movement. The sketch should be compared with that given of Acharn Maha
Boowa's forest hermitage.
Phrakhru Phiphat Ganavipala, the abbot and meditation teacher, was born in
Haut District in Chiengmai Province in 1923 and ordained novice at twelve years
of age and monk at twenty-one. As a novice, he was sent to Wat Chaiphraklat in
Chiengmai city. He passed the lowest grade of the Dhamma examination (Naktham
tri) and failed the first Pali examination. He is thus no scholar.
After serving as a monk for two lent seasons, he was recalled to his village wat
to replace the abbot, who had died, leaving no successor. (At this time, the
present regulation that a monk can become abbot only after five years of service
had not been passed.) He was the only monk in the wat, but there were two
novices, and he decided that as soon as the first novice was ordained monk, he
would leave him in charge and go into the forest to meditate. He had read some
books on meditation, but he had no teacher. And he was in due course able to
fulfill his desire: He did go by himself to a cave in Thamthaung forest - a historic
cave that had been previously occupied by forest monks and had portions of
scriptures written in Tai Yuan on the walls - and meditated during one rains
retreat.
However, word was sent to him from Wat Mueang Man in the big city, offering
him the abbotship. At the same time as he became abbot, he heard about Phra
Phimolatham's effort to set up meditation centers throughout the country and that
interested monks from various provinces were visiting Wat Mahathat to undergo
training. So in 1953 he went down to Bangkok for a lent season; on his return to
Chiengmai he set up a meditation center, Wat Mueang Man, which was officially
opened by Phra Phimolatham.
Phrakhru Phiphat then decided to go to Burma for further training in meditation.
The connection with Burma had already been made by Phra Phimolatham, who
had already invited two Burmese monks (Asapha and Sathimmajotika) to teach
meditation in Bangkok. Phrakhru Phiphat spent two years and seven months in
Rangoon studying vipassand meditation with Mahasi Sayadaw and Dhamma
(pariyatti) with U-achariya.
On his return to Chiengmai, his meditation program got under way with an
increased number of disciples. In two successive years (1963-4) he built a new
wing in his wat with sixteen rooms for resident meditators; the money was given
by lay donors. In late October 1971, the inmates of Wat Mueang Man consisted
172


--- Page 185 ---
Mahanikai sect's propagation of lay meditation
of 16 regular monks, 6 "temporary" monks,5 43 novices, 11 nuns (mde chi),
and 19 temple boys. All persons who sought to be ordained in the wat as monks
or novices were subject to a seven-day meditation course; thereafter, each initiate
could decide whether he wanted to continue with meditational training or devote
himself to religious studies (pariyattitham).
All 8 candidates who presented themselves for ordination before lent and
intended to be "temporary monks" were given during the three-month rains
retreat one month's intensive training in meditation together with their religious
studies. Of the 16 regular monks in the wat, 10 were engaged in practicing
vipassand, whereas the remaining 6 were pariyatti scholars. Only 3 of the 43
novices chose the path of meditation. The rest were students in the monastic
school.
There were 11 resident nuns, of whom 2 were engaged in meditation practice.
Phrakhru Phiphat attracted some foreign nuns, who had first to undergo training
in meditation before being initiated as nuns. Thai women were also allowed to be
initiated. Because "nuns" are a "peripheral" category of wat inmates6 - in that
they are normally allocated their living quarters away from the monks' residences
in space that is technically associated with the laity (khardwdt) and not the
religious and that is also where the monastic kitchen is situated - and yet are,
wherever they are found, some of the most assiduous practitioners of meditation,
it is appropriate to say a word or two about their "initiation." Before nuns are
allowed to reside in a wat, they must get the permission of their parents or
husbands. The initiation rite (buat chi) consists of the candidate first having her
head shaved and presenting herself before the abbot dressed in colored lay
clothes. She asks to be accepted by reciting a Pali passage, the abbot chants "the
three refuges" with the candidate repeating after him, and then he gives her "the
eight precepts" that she will always observe. At the conclusion of the rite, she
changes into white clothes,7 which together with her shorn head mark her as a
nun.
The abbot claimed that over the years he has had many foreign disciples, from
other Asian countries like Sri Lanka and from Australia and England. He also
allows monks from other wat, and lay disciples, to come to his wat for short
periods of time. He estimated that in the previous year he had permitted about
fifty such persons.
The abbot said that he teaches the Burmese system of meditation: One form
consists of "the rising and falling of breathing in a sitting posture" (which of
course is a variation on the classical dndpdnasati); the other is the walking
technique, which he described as consisting of six stages.
At the beginning of the training, the abbot gives his pupils collective instruc-
tion on the sitting postures, walking technique, etc. After this, every pupil
practices by himself or herself in his or her room. The monks and nuns are
housed in separate wings. Each room has a bed, space along one end for use as a
meditation walk, and a toilet. Each pupil is expected to report daily, except on
173


--- Page 186 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
wanphra, to the abbot and talk about his or her progress: The abbot himself visits
each pupil's room for the dialogue. There is only one other occasion when the
abbot addresses his pupils as a collectivity. This is on the day of shaving the head
before wanphra, when the abbot talks on general matters and gives them
admonitions. It seems such talks do not exceed an hour and could be shorter. The
abbot expects his resident pupils to practice meditation both in the morning and
in the evening, preferably soon after rising in the morning and completing
ablutions and before going to bed at night.
During the early stages of their practice, the abbot allows his monk-pupils to
go on almsrounds. But once they reach higher stages of concentration, he
discourages them from going outside for almsrounds, for conducting ritual, or to
the market. The advanced pupil may stretch his legs inside the wat compound and
is fed daily from food cooked in the wat kitchen - a special fund for this purpose
exists - or from food brought by the laity as offerings on every wanphra, on
festive days, and when cremation rites are performed in the wat.
But when a pupil has been judged by the abbot to have reached the eleventh
stage and upward he is allowed to go outside the wat freely, for now he is not
easily distracted by things and events of the world. This system of regulating the
physical movements and social contacts of the disciple according to his progress
was, the abbot said, a distinctive feature of the Burmese system of meditation,
which was adopted by Phra Phimolatham at Wat Mahathat.
When asked whether he permitted his pupils to read books, the abbot said that
he permitted no books, not even books on the subject of meditation. Books
provide "theoretical knowledge" and consulting them interferes with practice.
Like a patient, the pupil should take the medicine that is given him, and there is
no need to teach him how to make the medicine or trace the symptoms and course
of a disease. The abbot, on further probing on my part, held that a bhikkhu who is
dedicated to reaching his own salvation and is practicing in solitude does not
require the theoretical knowledge of books. But pariyatti learning has its uses for
monks who want to teach Dhamma to other people; it is also useful for the
intellectual conceptualization of experience, even meditative experience. He
concluded that for a bhikkhu dedicated to the practice of vipassand, practice
(patipatti) is more valuable than study (pariyatti); the former is gold and the
latter silver. For instance, said the abbot, Khruba Siwichai, Northern Thailand's
heroic monk in the early decades of this century, who built the road to Doi Sutep,
had no learning but he was an adept at meditation.8 Ideally, of course, the abbot
concluded, it is good for a bhikkhu to be accomplished in both pursuits.
Although Wat Mueang Man pursues the traditional activities of a city wat, the
abbot's special interest in teaching meditation has colored them. I have already
referred to the abbot's discouraging of monks immersed in meditation from
officiating at merit-making ceremonies in lay homes. Northern Thai wat tradition-
ally participated in the Bauk Fai festivals, at which balloons were sent up and a
174


--- Page 187 ---
Mahanikai sect's propagation of lay meditation
fireworks competition was held by firing rockets with tails. Many monks partici-
pated in the making of the rockets, and the launching pads were often made at the
edge of wat compounds adjoining fields. Abbot Phiphat said that he did not
permit monks in his wat to participate in bank fai at New Year and other
festivities.9
The abbot has not himself founded other meditation centers, but he claimed
that some of his disciples have done so. He cited Wat Tamuangon in Sankampaeng
District and Wat Thamthaung in Caumthaung District in Chiengmai Province as
examples.
In the light of this sketch, we can highlight some of the similarities and
differences between the regular and established village and urban wat, which
under the inspiration of the Phra Phimolatham drive became centers for medita-
tion instruction,10 and the forest hermitages, which have been established accord-
ing to the dhutahga tradition of Acharn Mun. Wat Mueang Man, described here,
and Wat Pa Ban lat will serve as our main case studies, one exemplifying the city
wat and the other the forest hermitage.
The city wat has the usual distribution of monks, novices, and nuns; only a
minority of the novices and some of the monks will be participants in the
meditative vocation, whereas the rest will be oriented toward study and the
conduct of merit-making rites. The forest hermitage is likely to have more monks
than novices, and all the inmates are expected to devote themselves to meditation.
The city wat has short-term disciples, and is likely to be host to nuns and elderly
laymen wishing to subject themselves to brief periods of meditative contempla-
tion; the forest hermitage sees itself more as a community of professionals, which
is willing to include the laity in devotional and meditational sittings only on
wanphra or special festive days. The city wat is more interested than the forest
hermitage in directly disseminating meditation to the laity as part of the laity's
everyday morality and practice, and to make an impact on it as its teacher: The
forest hermitage's famous meditation adepts and teachers are likely to be treated
by pious laity as exemplary illuminates radiating mystical virtues, although they
too become famous for their teachings.
As regards the theory and technology of meditation, although the protagonists
and actors themselves assert they are following the "Burmese system" (of
Mahasi Sayadaw) and/or the "dhutahga tradition" (of Acharn Mun), it is not a
distortion to say that these variant traditions recognizably stem from classical
Theravada precedents like the Satipatthdna Sutta and the Visuddhimagga. It is,
however, interesting to note that the Burmese tradition - focused on urban
monasteries constrained by the noise, temptations, and turmoil of city life - has
sought to confine and regulate the physical movement of its disciples, whereas
the forest-monks, keeping social contacts to a minimum, are free to disperse
themselves in the surrounding forest. Whereas most inmates of both city wat and
forest hermitage seem to be conscious of a distinction, and even an incompatibility,
175


--- Page 188 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
between study (interpreted as the study of Dhamma and Pali) and practice
(interpreted as meditational exercises), it is the city wat that experiences this
contrast more directly and acutely as a split in the interest and activity of its
ordained inmates.
Phra Thepsiddhimuni's activities
We have seen that Phra Thepsiddhimuni took over from Phra Phimolatham at Wat
Mahathat. Within Bangkok itself, Wat Parinayok and Wat Thungsathit, important
units in the old network, were now parts of Thepsiddhimuni's network, in that he
visited them periodically to teach monks and the laity.
Phra Thepsiddhimuni's organization at Wat Mahathat for the propagation of
meditation was quite modest in 1971. Khana 5 continued as the propagation
center, of which he was head. There were two assistant teachers of meditation,
one an elderly monk 71 years old, and the other 36 years old, both of North Thai
origin. They had both studied under Thepsiddhimuni. There were in the khana
five other monks and four novices (sdmanera): The latter especially acted as
receptionists and ushers for visitors to the meditation center, each serving for two
months according to a roster. The reception room had pamphlets in English and
Thai on meditation, and two rooms were set apart for meditation practice for the
khana residents and other individual pupils, both lay and ordained. The novices
in Khana 5 went on almsrounds each morning; but the big meal of the day before
noon was provided daily by pious laymen for all the section members. The
novices whom I talked to informed me that their khana was considered well-off:
Their teacher was famous, and he received ample gifts in kind and money, part of
which he dispensed to his proteges. One final point to note is that, although Phra
Thepsiddhimuni's organization at Wat Mahathat was modest, there were similar
modest dissemination units established in the "branch" monasteries. It is this
network of centers that helped implement a coordinated program and scheduled
the teacher's visits.
A twenty-year-old monk who was a member of Phra Thepsiddhimuni's center
at Wat Mahathat claimed that the teacher had in all about 300 monks, 50
novices, and 650 laymen (of whom 450 were estimated to be females) as his
disciples in the various participating wat. Three features should be noted about
Wat Mahathat's network for the propagation of meditation. Firstly, what I have
called "branch" monasteries were not founded by the "missionary" teachers
Phimolatham and his successor. They were already in existence and became
"associates" in the program under the persuasion of Phimolatham, who was an
eminent, prestigious, titled monk. (By comparison, the "branch" monasteries of
the forest acharns are their own or their disciples' foundations.) Secondly, all
these centers of propagation were the regular type of urban monasteries, so
176


--- Page 189 ---
Mahanikai sect's propagation of lay meditation
different in architecture, numbers of residents, activities, and orientation from
the forest hermitages of the Northeastern acharns. Thirdly, the member units of
the Mahathat network all belonged and belong to the Mahanikai sect, whereas the
majority of the forest institutions we are studying are of Thammayut affiliation.
These differences receive an interesting twist from the fact that Phra Phimolatham
is himself a Northeasterner from Khon Kaen, and so is his successor, Phra
Thepsiddhimuni. I have elsewhere discussed the weighty representation of North-
easterners in the sahgha and the significance of their presence in the country's
capital.11 Phra Phimolatham learned his system of insight meditation first from a
Burmese monk who resided at Wat Rakhang and subsequently from the famous
Burmese teacher, Mahasi Sayadaw; he sponsored Phra Thepsiddhimuni's learn-
ing of meditation at Wat Rakhang and his subsequent journey to Burma. One of
Thepsiddhimuni's teachers in Burma, Asaphathera, was now residing in Thai-
land at Wat Vivekasrama in Chonburi. Thepsiddhimuni's status as a celebrity was
realized when he went to London to establish the BuddhapadTpa monastery there
and installed his student, Phra Sobhuna, as a teacher of meditation.12
Phra Thepsiddhimuni is a very busy and active propagandist, but, paradoxically,
this show of energy makes it difficult to assess the ' 'effectiveness" of his
program. The difficulty arises from the fact that his constituency is both clerical
and lay without preference. Moreover, he visits many associate monasteries,
delivering sermons and leading meditation sittings for both monks and the laity,
and, on top of this, actively broadcasts over the radio and appears in television
programs. Such dissipation of his energies may not be conducive to cultivating a
systematic meditation regime of the type the forest meditation teachers are able to
do in their hermitages. But, on the other hand, his traveling-salesman style may
be appropriate for spreading meditation to the laity at large in the fashion of a
4'popular mysticism," so to say.
Some suggestion of the busy life Thepsiddhimuni leads is conveyed in this
schedule of activities that he was reported to be following on a particular
wanphra by one of his novice assistants. "The caokhun (monks who have titles
of phra rdtchakhana status and above are addressed and referred to by this
honorific) will be out all day preaching, lecturing, and teaching meditation. He
starts with a radio broadcast in the morning, then teaches meditation at the
Thammawicai center at Wat Mahathat. After lunch, at which he will meet some
lay donors, he will again give a sermon and lead a meditation sitting at Wat
Chanasongkhram. From there, he will in succession visit these other wat in the
city doing the same - Wat Makkasan first, then Wat Parinayok (a branch wat
where he will also hold dialogues with the resident practitioners and check on
their progress), then Wat Prachalabentham. His last stop is at Wat Chansamosaun
at Banglamphu from 8 to 9 p.m. Then he will return here to sleep. He pursues an
active program on Sundays, too: He makes the morning broadcast, which is
followed by collective meditation sitting at Wat Mahathat."
177


--- Page 190 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
Let me now reproduce from my field notes some features of two such sessions
conducted principally for the laity - one witnessed in 1971 and the other in
1978.
1. On the morning of Sunday, December 12, 1971,1 arrived at the Meditation
Hall of Wat Mahathat. The day's program of meditation sittings and lectures was
posted outside: Phra Thepsiddhimuni would teach the practice of vipassand
meditation from 9 to 11 a.m. and 1 to 2 p.m.; from 2 to 5 p.m. there were to
follow three lectures by other monks, one being on "the wisdom deriving from
vipassand meditation," another on "Thammathut (missionary) work in England,"
and so on.
I attended part of the meditation sitting. The room was large and had comfort-
able armchairs; already by 9:15 a.m. there were some 78 persons practicing
meditation in the sitting posture. Virtually all of them were elderly (there were a
few young women in attendance), and the women predominated, amounting to
59 of the sitters. All the meditators, both men and women, were in Western
clothes; they looked like "retired" educated, middle-class folk. In another
quarter-hour, the sitters had increased to about 100, with the women conspicu-
ously in the majority.
Then Phra Thepsiddhimuni appeared on the stage. He lit the candles at the
Buddha altar and led the congregation in reciting some chants. The sermon
followed: It was an impressive performance; it was delivered with a low-voiced,
soothing fluency. At its conclusion, the congregation resumed its meditation
sitting.
In this example, I want to underscore the fact that the meditation teaching was
addressed solely to a lay audience, which was orderly, urban, educated, and of
middle-class status, and that this same retired laity of women and men usually
comprised most of the worshipers at Wat Mahathat during the sabbath (wanphra)
rites. Many of them could be identified as updsaka and updsikd who during
sabbath days and during the monks' rains retreat (vassa) frequently observed the
eight or ten precepts. Lastly, such pious lay practices also fitted in well with the
ethic of meritorious gift giving (ddna), as illustrated by the facts that inside this
same meditation hall was a large blackboard on which were written 282 names of
persons who had contributed over 5,000 baht ($250) each to the Mahaculalong-
kaun Monks' University Fund (munnithi) and that outside it stood another
prominent board with the names of 225 donors of over 1,000 baht each.
2. When I visited Wat Mahathat on a wanphra in August 1978, I found that
Phra Thepsiddhimuni's collective meditation sittings for the laity were now held
in the new auditorium of the wafs monastic school. (This school normally gives
instruction in Pali studies to monks and novices, and part of its regular syllabus
was instruction in meditation every afternoon by Phra Thepsiddhimuni and his
assistants.)
On every wanphra and every Sunday afternoon, Phra Thepsiddhimuni and his
178


--- Page 191 ---
Mahanikai sect's propagation of lay meditation
assistants instruct the laity in meditation practice. On this particular day, at about
2 p.m. there were about 120 persons immersed in the sitting position, of whom
some 80 were women. The elderly predominated among men and women. Phra
Thepsiddhimuni had already given them a discourse before lunch, and now from
1 to 3 p.m. his chief assistant, Phrakhru Palatphanom, was leading the congrega-
tion in meditation practice, assisted by another monk (who was given the
designation of lekhd, scribe), and two novices, all members of Phra Thepsid-
dhimuni's section. While the laity meditated in the hall, the monks gave instruc-
tions over the microphone from an office on the side.
I engaged the lekhd in conversation. He had reached Prayok 5 in his Pali
studies.13 I asked him why laymen studied and practiced meditation, and he said
that they wished to attain to nibbdna; it was not necessary to don the monk's robe
to seek this goal. To the question of what powers derive from meditation, he said
that it conferred powers such as invisibility and the assumption of multiple forms
at will. These powers had both good and bad implications: If experienced, they
are good because they confirm what the Buddha said as being true and thereby
stimulate faith, but the bad aspect is that meditators who do not experience them
will lose faith and be disheartened.
Because I had recently investigated a cult of healing through meditation (in
which the meditation master, a layman, sought to heal patients in collective
meditation sittings),14 I asked the lekhd whether illnesses can be cured through
meditation. He replied that an adept who has reached arahant status can obvi-
ously effect cures, but he will not want to do so, because he is on the path to
nibbdna. A genuine arahant would attempt to achieve purity of heart and
tranquility. If an arahant engages in the show of supranormal powers, it would be
only in order to promote the religion. When I asked him about the plausibility of
the cult master's claims to heal through meditation, he replied that this cult leader
in question practices samddhi (concentration), which enables the achievement of
peace of mind (cai sangop) and that samddhi could possibly cure disease by
suggestion and hypnosis. Samddhi, he said, is a "lower" activity and practice
than samathd, whereas vipassand is quite different and is concerned with breath-
ing techniques and the control of mental formations.15
These remarks help us to appreciate how and why many laymen see in
meditational exercises - however imperfectly understood and practiced - some
kind of therapeutic virtue, some relief from their personal problems, and even a
meaningful channel for their efforts. The following examples of teacher-pupil
intercourse might help us to see how the laity, in this case young persons, come to
engage in meditation.
Whereas collective meditation sittings and worship are conducted in the large
meditation hall, small groups of disciples may come to Thepsiddhimuni's residen-
tial section (Khana 5) for lessons and sittings with one of his teaching assistants.
On November 19, 1971, I visited Khana 5 at around 9:20 a.m. to find three
179


--- Page 192 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
young women in conversation with a monk. They were his disciples, and, as their
teacher, he would not only instruct them but also "examine" them about their
meditation experiences and progress.
At the time of my arrival, he was examining them. One woman said that she
was fearful of practicing meditation because she was afraid of seeing ghosts
(phi). To which the teacher replied that the equivalent of phi in the Pali language
was phaya (bhaya), which meant "fear"; so ghosts are really one's own mental
images of fear. The second disciple confessed that she was able to practice and
concentrate for only ten minutes at a time; she was advised to increase the length
of her sittings. The third disciple testified that she could now sit for half an hour
at a time: Although she felt pain in her legs at first, it soon passed away and she
attained to a mental well-being and peace of mind (cit sangop).
Then the teacher led them in a brief meditation practice, which lasted about
thirty minutes. They all closed their eyes and crossed their legs in the appropriate
sitting posture. The teacher told them to breathe in and out, in and out, and when
bodily pain was felt, they should mentally say "I am feeling pain" and con-
sciously observe it. . . . The teacher was clearly instructing his pupils in the
elementary exercises of meditation.
After the sitting was over, I gathered this information from the three pupils:
1. One was twenty years old, the daughter of a cloth merchant in Bangkok, and a
second-year student of English literature at Thammasat University (which was located
only a few hundred yards from Wat Mahathat). This was her third meditation class, and
now that the university was in vacation she hoped to come regularly, perhaps every
afternoon. When asked how she became interested in meditation, she replied that her
grandmother used to study meditation in a hermitage near Khorat and that she herself
was a member of her university's philosophical society, which had visited Wat
Mahathat's meditation center. This visit had stirred her interest.
2. The second disciple was a fourth-year student of English Literature at Thammasat
University. Her father was a police colonel; he was a Buddhist, but her mother was a
Protestant Christian. Her two brothers were Buddhist, whereas she and her sister were
Christian. This was her third lesson in meditation. She took a course on the philosophy
of India this first semester, in which she was introduced to Buddhist philosophy and
meditation. She hoped to attend regularly on a long-term basis. She had practiced
meditation for an hour the previous day in her dormitory, and she thought she had seen
some ghosts; she felt somewhat afraid because she lived in an old palace that had been
converted into a dormitory.
3. The third disciple said she was a story writer. She was twenty-two years old and said
that she felt mentally confused and had a poor memory. So her mother, who was
connected with the wat, especially its Abhidhamma Foundation, had advised her to
engage in meditation practice. She had so far come daily for the past week; this was,
however, her last lesson; she felt that from now on she could practice by herself at
home.
Soon after the three young women had concluded their class, a young monk
and a novice arrived for instruction. Their biographical details are interesting, for
180


--- Page 193 ---
Mahanikai sect's propagation of lay meditation
they were only temporary initiates who will revert to lay status soon - and will
therefore carry their meditative experience and interest into lay life.
The monk had been ordained only the previous day. He was twenty-eight years
old, had received his M.A. degree in agriculture from a university in the
Philippines, and had returned to Thailand eighteen days ago. Before starting to
work for Esso, he wanted to make merit for his parents by serving as a monk for
fifteen days. His father was a colonel in the Thai army, and his parents already
knew Phra Thepsiddhimuni. He therefore wanted to be initiated into meditation.
He had had his first lesson in meditation last night, and today's was the second.
At the end of his lesson before noon, an attractive female "cousin" of his arrived
bearing food for his lunch. She too was a graduate of a Philippines university
The novice was eighteen years old. He was a high school graduate of Saint
John's College, Bangkok, and he had been ordained some six days previously.
His parents, who are Buddhists, as well as he himself, wished for his ordination.
His father was a merchant, a supporter of the wat, and had recommended that he
take meditation lessons. He did not know whether he wanted to be ordained a
monk later on.
The hierarchy of lay achievements
I have thus far attempted to convey what the practice of meditation might mean to
the contemporary urban Thai laity. Lay persons, according to age, education,
capacity, and effort reap different rewards and attain different levels of achieve-
ment. Doctrinal Buddhism, while imbuing all human actors with intentionality,
and while making humans the centerpiece of the cosmological scheme by
allowing them the capacity for the complete transcendence of substantiality, also
asserts as a fundamental principle that humans are born unequal because their
present lives reflect the sum of virtues and demerits of past lives. Nevertheless,
they are also given the freedom in their present lives to act positively and uplift
themselves.
It is fitting that I now call upon Phra Phimolatham, one of Thailand's most
famous propagators of meditation to the laity, to expound the implications of the
differential capacities and efforts of human beings. These remarks were made to
me in the course of an interview:
The practice of meditation should have meaning and significance for monk and layman
alike. The layman can find the time to meditate during weekends and holidays. But like
sharpening a knife - it is easier to sharpen it in one intensive effort than by sharpening it
for a few moments a day - a layman should achieve a level of meditational experience by
an initial intensive effort. Once he has achieved this he can be mindful in anything he does
- while writing, or working, or even scolding another person. There are five kinds of
energy that must be harnessed in a balanced way Sati (consciousness) is the driver of the
carriage; the more of it he has the better. The carriage is pulled by two pairs of horses:
Viriya (effort), the active principle, is balanced by samddhi (concentration), which is
181


--- Page 194 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
passive. Saddhd (faith) is paired with pannd (wisdom). Too much of the wrong kind of
learning or wisdom leads to student revolts, and too much faith leads to ignorance.
Vipassana means the same thing as wisdom (pannd), that is, seeing things as they are.
For a layman, this wisdom has many uses. One who practices meditation will not be led
into corruption while doing his job; he will be aware of his true responsibilities and act
accordingly. A road will be built in the cause of national economic development because it
is useful for traveling, not because it affords an opportunity to line one's pockets.
A layman who is married and practices meditation sees his wife as a wife, a mother as a
mother, not confusing them with divine angels (thewadd). . . .
There are three kinds of eyes - human eyes (mamsacakkhu); eyes of deities (dib-
bacakkhu), which see things far away and in darkness; and the wisdom eye (panndcakkhu).
The last is the vision of vipassana.
One needs merit (bun) to be able to practice vipassana. If a man's store of bun is great,
he can become an adept in seven days; if he has less, then it takes seven months. Some
men don't make it at all for lack of merit.
There are different kinds of humans, or, as the Buddha said, four kinds of horses
harnessed to a carriage: The horse that knows where to go by the horseman simply pulling
at the reins; the horse at which the horseman points the switch and threatens to prod it to
make it go; the horse that actually has to be prodded and punished to make it go; and
finally the horse that cannot be made to move at all. It is the human of this last kind who
cannot be taught vipassana, and such humans constitute the majority of mankind.
However, in society an equilibrium is reached because the minority with wisdom can
guide and control the majority. There is the saying that the wise are in number like the
horns of a buffalo and the ignorant like its hairs.
Or, to put it differently, it is said that there are three groups of human beings: The
uparimakdya group are the upper part, the neck and head of the body; the majjhimakdya
are the middle, from neck to waist; and the hetthimakdya are the lower, from waist to legs.
The three groups must be educated accordingly. All three are necessary. But if we educate
them all to be heads, the body will not be able to walk.
Phra Phimolatham's pithy comments echo the assertion of the classical texts
with which I began this book (Chapter 2) - that there is a hierarchy of human
beings according to their capacities and intentional efforts. The path of purification
through meditation, he asserts, however, is not open only to the bhikkhu; but it
may not be appropriate or suitable for all the laity either. But for those of the laity
who find a measure of success in practicing it, the fruits of meditation can elevate
and make altruistic their conduct in this world.
182


--- Page 195 ---
13
The center-periphery dialectic
The Mahathat and Bovonniwet sponsorship of meditation
compared
The mid-fifties were the climactic years of the countrywide sponsorship of
meditation by Wat Mahathat. It represented an impulsion generated from the
capital, which, as the radial center of the country, attempted to spread a religious
renewal to the periphery, to the various provinces that were thought to need a
revitalization. We have seen that the monk who was at the center of this
missionary drive, Phra Phimolatham, was the abbot of the country's largest wat.
He was a titled monk holding a high position in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, and
he incarnated the prestige of the established sahgha in its self-assured authority
and superiority over the wat distributed throughout the country. Phra Phimolatham
was up to a point a scholar-monk, but not eminently or exclusively; he was an
adept teacher and propagator of meditation without being a great meditation
"master" or a dedicated ascetic and recluse on the path to arahantship. He was
rather the urbane, eloquent, powerful cleric of the establishment, especially of
the Mahanikai sect - the largest in the country, the sect with which the great body
of the nonaristocratic commoner population was affiliated, a sect of varied
achievements and worldly attachments.
It is very much in line with this orientation that Phra Phimolatham's medita-
tion drive was (and still is, under the leadership of Phra Thepsiddhimuni)
addressed to both monks and the laity alike; in some respects, the latter has been
the more important constituency. And it was for this reason that Prime Minister
Sarit, aided and abetted by certain Thammayut-sect authorities, could construe it
as more than simply "religious," as threateningly "political," in significance.
The efficacy of Phra Phimolatham's drive derived to an important degree from
the fact that it is the rural peasant population of the provinces, of which the
Northeastern provinces are prominent, that supply the vast majority of the
country's monks, including those in the cities. It is also from the ranks of these
monks that virtually all titled monks of the sahgha are recruited today. (In Phra
Thepsiddhimuni's hands, the Wat Mahathat propagation of meditation today is
183


--- Page 196 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
both more circumspect in the care taken to dissociate it from politics and more
limited in its spread among the public.)
It is worthwhile, before remarking on and appreciating the contrasting features
of the Wat Bovonniwet patronage of the meditation teaching of the forest-monks,
to allude to the missionary movements of the sixties and seventies, which
immediately succeeded and replaced the Phimolatham effort. I refer here to the
Thammathut program of the sahgha, in which educated monks from the capital
were sent to the provinces to spread the Dhamma and at the same time to
legitimate and stimulate national and community development; and to the
Thammacdrik program, organized by the Department of Public Welfare and
implemented among the hill tribes with the help of the monks. These programs
have been already analyzed in detail.1 Here let me allude to the fact that this
program, whose initiator was the director of the Department of Religious Affairs,
received the approval and legitimating stamp of the elders of the sahgha, of
whom the most prominent ones were of the Mahanikai sect; moreover, the
Mahaculalongkaun University, run by the Mahanikai sect and located at Wat
Mahathat, became the architect of special projects in which its graduate monks
participated. The Thammathut movement had reached a low ebb by the beginning
of the 1980s; some of the reasons for this relate to sectarian rivalries and also to
fears among lay politicians about the "political role" of monks.
In contrast to Phimolatham's dissemination of meditation from the capital city
and the chief urban seat of the Mahanikai sect, the movement that has gradually
formed around the Northeastern forest meditation teachers has spread from the
periphery of the country to the center. What the center has done through the
agency of Wat Bovinniwet - the most prestigious wat of the Thammayut sect, a
wat of royalist connections, that enjoys the confidence of the generals in power -
is to recognize, publicize, and incorporate the exemplary achievements and
charisma of the forest teachers in their dispersed hermitages, originally held
together by their recognition of a discipleship to the sanctified Master, Mun.
What enabled this movement from periphery to center is the link between an able
propagandist, hagiographer, and forest teacher, Acharn Maha Boowa, and a
titled, prestigious monk located in the capital, who enjoys connections with
secular authority and power but is genuinely enthusiastic about the dissemination
of meditation to an elite congregation, Somdet Phra Yansangvorn.
Compared with Phra Phimolatham's active propagation of a movement from
the center outward, Phra Yansangvorn's role is a more passive one of collaborat-
ing in the incorporation and legitimation by the center of achievements that had
already been realized in the country's faraway provinces. And it is important to
note about the forest meditation masters that their primary effort and objective has
been to practice meditation as ascetic recluses, that their teaching mission has
been first and foremost to their ordained disciples, and that the circles of lay
donors and enthusiasts that formed around them were penumbral. Their function-
184


--- Page 197 ---
The center-periphery dialectic
ing as fields of merit for lay donorship, their conducting meditation sessions for
lay congregations on sabbath days and festivals, their participation in the cult of
the amulets - these are not at the core of the orientations of the forest teachers,
but have become by the cumulative logic of popular religiosity the main foci of
lay worship. Neither the founding of the network of hermitages by the forest-
monks nor the cults of the amulets that have formed around them have been
construed by the central political and ecclesiastical authorities of contemporary
Thailand as politically problematic or a challenge to their authority; rather, as I
shall demonstrate in later chapters, the cult of the amulets consists of the tapping
of the charisma of the forest saints by the already established political and
financial elites and interest groups for the advancement of their own worldly
purposes.
A few words now on the circumstances surrounding the decline of the
Thammathut movement.2 I have already commented on the problematic features
of this program when it was functioning at full strength in the early seventies.3 It
seemed then that a result of the monks' engagement in development work would
be to draw the sahgha, especially its ecclesiastical hierarchy, into closer relations
with the government hierarchy and officials, both at the central and regional
levels. Leaving aside the ill-conceived and ill-fitting nature of Thai monks'
"civilizing" role among the hill tribes, it seemed, on the one hand, that precisely
because the vast majority of Bangkok monks were of rural origin, the plan to
send educated energetic young monks on Thammathut work back to their prov-
inces of origin seemed feasible, despite the probable lack of fit between the
village and metropolitan perspectives. But, on the other hand, while monks could
effectively perform educational and counseling roles as part of their teaching the
Dhamma, it was questionable whether they were equipped and appropriate to
lead and sponsor community-development projects. I cautioned that one should
be realistic about the degree to which monks, whose basic preoccupation is the
task of ethical study and practice, had the organization and capacity to shoulder
countrywide development plans, and I drew attention to a historical precedent,
namely the princely sahghardja Wachirayan's cooperation in the 1890s with the
political authorities in using the provincial wat and monks for the extension of
secular elementary education in the provinces. He subsequently withdrew from
this collaboration because he realized that the sahgha was becoming overbureau-
cratized and involved with government administrative machinery, the load was
too heavy for the monastic system to carry, and the monks were not in the long
run the most effective transmitters of secular knowledge. (Suksamran, writing
after me, was explicitly vocal about his misgivings about the Thai monks'
participation in Thammathut and other missionary programs.)4
By 1980, the Thammathut effort in its original form - that is, conceived by the
authorities, both ecclesiastical and secular, and using educated young monks
from the capital's religious universities5 - was a spent force. Certain persons
185


--- Page 198 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
were hopeful that provincial monks, themselves conceiving and implementing
their own thammathut programs, might continue the work with greater chances
of success.
Be that as it may, the decline of the Thammathut project was attributed by some
informants to the death of Colonel Pin Mutukan, the director general of the
Department of Religious Affairs, and its chief architect and governmental sponsor.
He had been the chief fund raiser for the project and had pulled all the relevant
strings. After his death, the government made a series of some three or four
short-term appointments of officials from other ministries to Colonel Pin's post -
officials who had no familiarity with the religious affairs department's previous
policies and programs, and who by virtue of the turnover could not give continu-
ity and direction to its activities.6 This period of confusion coincided with the
drying up of funds from two foundations - one German and the other American -
that had previously financed the projects, especially those initiated by the monks'
universities.
Moreover, it appears that sectarian divisiveness has further weakened the
Thammathut program. By 1978, the abbot of Wat Cakkrawat, a high-ranking,
titled monk of Mahanikai affiliation, was put in charge of the training of all
missionary monks in the country; but the abbot of Wat Bovonniwet, who is of the
Thammayut sect, was put in charge of sending missionary monks to foreign
countries, a task in which this wat has always played a key role. This division of
powers on sectarian lines has contributed to the standstill.
These immediate and proximate causes and effects are linked with wider
contextual developments. On the one hand, young intellectuals, including those
from university circles - circles not unconnected with the left-wing politics
manifested in the students' insurrection of 1973 - had commented adversely on
what they considered the authoritarian military government's manipulation and
exploitation of the sahgha for its own purposes. In particular, the senior titled
monks were criticized for collaboration in national development projects that
compromised the purity of the sahgha.
In any event, it was not this criticism, but a governmental backlash against the
"political" activism of the educated young monks themselves, that has intensified
sectarianism. A Young Monks' Movement (Yuwa Song) came into being. It was
formed primarily by monks of Mahanikai affiliation attending Mahaculalongkaun
University located on Wat Mahathat grounds. These young monks published a
journal and some pamphlets criticizing the effeteness and conservatism of the
sahgha1s Council of Elders (Mahdtherasamdkhom). They wanted a return to the
sahgha's democratic constitution, as outlined in the Sangria Act of 1941, and the
abandonment of the 1963 Sangha Act, which created the present authoritarian
rule of ossified elders. Moreover, these monks of Mahanikai affiliation joined the
issue of a more democratic organization of the sahgha with the issue of the
complete rehabilitation, including the restoration of his titles, of Phra Phi-
molatham, who had been defrocked by Prime Minister Sarit in 1963. This
186


--- Page 199 ---
The center-periphery dialectic
clearly reopened old sectarian wounds. Political activism among monks -
reminiscent of the late 1930s and early 1940s, after the civilian revolution
of 1932 - was manifesting itself, and the secular and ecclesiastical author-
ities' fears were intensified by the sympathy shown by some young monks for
the students' insurrectionary cause7 and by the participation of some young
provincial monks in the protests made at the capital by farmers for the rem-
edy of agrarian grievances.8 There was thus a conjunction of student revolt,
agrarian grievances, labor protests, and political activism among a section
of the sahgha.
The growing demands by the younger generations of monks for the reform of
the sahgha's ecclesiastical organization in a more democratic and representative
direction was not, it was claimed by certain leaders of the young monks, popular
with the Thammayut sect. According to the Sangha Act of 1962, the member-
ship of the Mahatherasamakhom (the Council of Elders) was equally divided
between the two sects, despite the much larger membership of the Mahanikai. A
return to the 1941 act would imply that in the elected Ecclesiastical Assembly at
least the Mahanikai will have a larger representation and a bigger voice (though
the competition between the two sects has previously resulted in an equal division
of cabinet positions), a prospect not favored by Thammayut monks. It is for this
reason that, according to the same leaders, the Thammayut monks hold that it is
improper for monks to discuss and debate issues in the manner of parliamentary
politicians. This is a tendentious view because the Vinaya recommends that
monks meet and conduct their affairs in assembly, in which even a junior monk
can accuse a senior monk of a violation of disciplinary rules.
The resurgence of sectarian rivalries
Although the young monks' action was more a plea for greater democracy and a
revitalization of sahgha leadership than a deliberate revival of sectarian rivalry or
an attack on the privileged position of the Thammayut sect, yet we must be
attuned to certain resonances and reverberations that disclose sectarian tensions.
These tensions are germane to our grasping the logic of the Thammayut sect's
promotion of the cult of forest saints.
In a certain sense, it is correct to say that the Mahanikai sect, to which belong
the vast majority of wat in the country, and which commands the support of the
commoner population, is too fragmented and tolerant of variety to project a sharp
image. In comparison, the Thammayut is a smaller, more tightly knit, more
tightly organized sect, as witnessed by the manner in which its central committee
(Khana Kammakan Khana Thammayut) runs its affairs under the direction of the
sect's head (caokhana yai). It is also, as we have seen, royalist and has cultivated
royalist and aristocratic support; hence it readily lends itself to being seen as
conservative, elitist, and hierarchically minded. The Thammayut monks are
187


--- Page 200 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
referred to by critics as "the palace monks." In any case, ever since their
founding and the founder's preoccupations with following the "pure" disciplin-
ary customs, the Thammayut sect has sought to instill in its monks a sense of
"refinement" in demeanor and conduct, which, combined with its insistence on
4 'separateness'' from the Mahanikai sect on account of its following the purer and
more refined customs, can give rise to resentments against its "snobbery." As
one wit remarked to me, "Thammayut is like Chulalongkorn University,9 while
Mahanikai is like Thammasat University" - a remark that those who know the
character of these prestigious secular universities will savor. In a subtle way, it
has come about that the core strength of the Thammayut sect lies in the Central
Plain surrounding the capital; although there are a certain number of Thammayut
wat established in the Northeast, yet their weight in the sect's affairs has not been
prominent. In contrast, whereas the Mahanikai is more evenhandedly represented,
monks of Northeastern origin have played an influential role in its affairs because
the Northeast contributes a major portion of the sahgha's monks.
One informant, who I have strong reasons for not doubting, went so far as to
claim that by preference most of the Thammayut monks are recruited from the
Central Plain provinces, such as Suphanburi, Ratburi, and Phetburi, and that
some of the best-known Thammayut wat in Bangkok, such as Wat Rajabopit,
are under pressure from their aristocratic lay supporters, a number of whom are
of royal origin and have titles of Maum Cao, Maum Ratchawong, and Maum
Luang, to recruit monks from the said provinces, where their own strength lies.
He went so far as to claim that the aristocrats' preferences for monks according to
their origins was in this descending order: Central Plain, the South, the North,
and, last, the Northeast. Although there are monasteries in the capital that have
primarily Northeasterners, such as Wat Noronat and Wat Boromnivas, or primar-
ily Southerners, such as Wat Rajapathigaram and Wat Rajathiwas, yet their lay
supporters in Bangkok are commoners from those same regions now residing in
the capital, the most prominent among them being merchants.
A conspicuous difference between the small coterie of Thammayut wat and the
large collection of Mahanikai wat concerns their wealth. One of the most
important sources from which urban monasteries derive money with which to
support their activities is the staging of cremation rites.10 By virtue of their
royalist, aristocratic, governmental connections - which are therefore attractive
to the nouveaux riches and socially mobile - certain Thammayut wat in Bangkok
enjoy a lucrative patronage. They are accused by the other side of building
monumental phra meru (crematoria) and gilded halls in order to act as the
funerary priests of high-ranking and affluent persons. The facts speak for
themselves: Wat Thepsirin is traditionally the cremation site for royals and
aristocrats; Wat Somanath, the top brass of the army; Wat Phra Slmahathat, the
air force; Wat Kreuawan, the navy; Wat Trisothathep, the police; and Wat That
Thaung, affluent and/or high-ranking civilians. They are all Thammayut wat, and
188


--- Page 201 ---
The center-periphery dialectic
much of their money is tended by the sect's opulent Mahamakuta Rajavidyalaya
Foundation.
The Thammayut sect's finances were further enhanced by its ownership of the
Mahamakut Press, which prints most of the textbooks used in monastic pariyatti
schools. Because of its publications, it is sometimes accused of controlling the
knowledge imparted to the monks and novices.
There are diverse charges which, whether true or false, fuel the sectarian
tensions. It is claimed by some that because of the influence wielded by the
Thammayut in the membership of the sahgha's Council of Elders (Mahatherasa-
makhom) and because of its connections with the palace - the king after all is the
secular head of the sahgha, and high sahgha appointments are given the seal of
approval by him - senior monks of Northeastern origin are in noticeable ways
discriminated against in the granting of titles and thereby in appointments to the
highest positions in the ecclesiastical hierarchy.11
Now we come to the interesting question of how, given this alleged Thammayut
distaste for Northeastern representation in its highest ranks, the forest meditation
teachers of the Northeast are much in vogue and supported and lauded by the
highest circles, both royal and clerical. Seemingly discordant facts must be put
together. It is a matter much emphasized in Acharn Maha Boowa's biography of
Acharn Mun that he was ordained into the Thammayut sect and that the majority
of the forest meditation teachers are of the same tradition. It is emphasized that
Acharn Mun, despite one or two exceptions, insisted that his disciples be
ordained in the Thammayut way.
It seems to be the case that the Thammayut sect is increasingly represented in
the Northeast by the forest meditation hermitages, a pattern reinforced by the
connections built between Acharn Maha Boowa and the abbot of Wat Bovonniwet
in Bangkok in sending candidates to the hermitages from Bangkok, distributing
publications, and so on. The monarchy's own dealings with some of the forest
saints, most recently the sponsorship of amulets to be blessed by Luang Pu Waen
in the North, gives the final seal of patronage and legitimation. Thus we see how
the Northeastern monasteries of the forest meditative tradition have moved into
the center of Thammayut religious claims, an incorporation that at the same time
does not challenge the sect's authority structure and ecclesiastical offices, be-
cause the forest monks (drannavdsi) by tradition are excluded from the sahgha's
system of titles and offices and are outside the sahgha's system of examinations.
Now the Northeast is the stronghold of many important titled monks of the
Mahanikai sect. Indeed, as we have seen, Phra Phimolatham's strength and
popularity even to this day are evident in that region, and many of the young
monks are of the same origin. Moreover, the Mahanikai support is most power-
fully felt in the traditional urban and village monasteries, not in the forest
hermitages. In recent times, the rivalries and tensions between the two sects have
found expression in the Northeastern provinces of Khon Kaen and Loei; it is
189


--- Page 202 ---
The hagiography of a Buddhist saint
commonly known that the provincial ecclesiastical governor of Loei is antipa-
thetic to the Thammayut. I was given this example of the dramatization of the
rivalry between the sects when they have wat in the same village. In a certain
village in Tambon Renu of the province of Nakhon Phanom, the Mahanikai wat
stages fairs and collects money for the purpose of constructing more imposing
buildings (this is the traditional orientation of established village and urban wat),
whereas the Thammayut wat accents its forest traditions and does not concern
itself with the conduct of Sunday schools for village children or even lay
education in general, which too are traditional orientations of mainstream wat.
The different monastic orientations are also reflected among the lay supporters,
who, as the rivalry takes on schismatic proportions, find themselves pushed into
being exclusive supporters of one or the other wat. In these developments it is not
the case that the thudong meditative monks who are truly dedicated to their
vocation are embroiling themselves in ''politics"; but once government officials
and laity of royalist or other preferences take on the role of supporters and
sponsors, then the forest-monks, just like the traditional gdmavdsl monks, are
open to political manipulation and uses that are extraneous to their interests. And
when brokers and mediators between the periphery and center appear within their
own ranks, the doors are opened to the inflection by, and intrusion of, the
interests of the larger context in which the sahgha is embedded.
By the end of 1976, both Mahanikai and Thammayut were in a position to
accuse each other of soiling their hands and to wash their dirty linen in public.
On the one hand, there was the "scandal" associated with Phra Kittivuddho, a
titled monk who came out of the Wat Mahathat stable, preached a "muscular"
Buddhism, and saw no demerit in killing communists (who were branded as
enemies of country, religion, and king; "incomplete persons"; and more bestial
than human). He trained novices and monks to be activists in a special institution
founded by him.12 On the other hand, ex-Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn,
who after mishandling the student revolution was deposed from the country with
two other ruling military figures, had sneaked back into the country in September
1976 and sought sanctuary in Wat Bovonniwet, whose abbot had agreed to
ordain him as a monk - an act that, it was whispered, must of necessity have
received royal assent. Events such as these, and the attitudes and sentiments they
evoke, volatile and multivalent, tell us that they have a great deal to do with the
boundaries that separate sahgha from polity, bhikkhu from layman (including the
king), and the complementary exchanges between them.
In concluding this part of the book, let me underscore these points. The
exegesis of the biography of Acharn Mun as an "indexical symbol" has traversed
a long distance, beginning with Buddhist hagiographical conventions and con-
cluding with contemporary sectarian politics. The biography has served us as a
vehicle for unveiling important aspects of religion as "a form of life," to use
Wittgenstein's phrase, in contemporary Thailand. The interpretive task required a
190


--- Page 203 ---
The center-periphery dialectic
full account of the interplay of religion and politics within which the biography,
together with the subject of the biography and its author, has a place.
I have also tried to demonstrate that the separate vocations of meditation and
"practice" and of books and "learning" are not in the recent history of Thailand
- as in the classical past of Sri Lanka, Burma, and Thailand - clear-cut labels, do
not produce consistent profiles, and do not always constitute separate sects. The
processes of internal differentiation within the Mahanikai and Thammayut sects,
and within the sahgha as a whole, have interacted with many features to create a
complex story that we have attempted to unravel. These features are: the
center-periphery relations between the capital (and the central region of Thailand)
and the distant provinces with their ethnic, linguistic, and regional differentiations;
and the aspirations and interests of a lay populace, divided into segments such as
governing urban elites, urban middle-class and mercantile interests, rural folk,
and the like.
In this complex story, the modern-day saints and their followings have served
as our focal point. In the next part of the book, I begin describing other
dimensions of their activities and the further significances these activities have
for Thai society and polity.
191


--- Page 204 ---


--- Page 205 ---
PART III
THE CULT OF AMULETS:
THE OBJECTIFICATION AND TRANSMISSION
OF CHARISMA


--- Page 206 ---


--- Page 207 ---
14
The cult of images and amulets
The popularity of amulets in Thailand today
4The tourist," Griswold has remarked in an essay on the Buddha image, "who
comes to Bangkok and visits the monasteries . . . will see in every vihdra and
ordination-hall a Buddha image, nearly always larger than life-size and often
colossal, occupying the place of honor; and he will see an indefinite number of
lesser ones distributed in halls and galleries - often several hundred of them, and
in certain monasteries more than a thousand. Frequently he will see people
prostrating themselves before an image, offering flowers and incense, and display-
ing every sign of fervent devotion. If he goes into the National Museum, he will
find that there are more Buddha images than works of any other kind on display.
If he goes into a private house, he may find a special room set aside for Buddha
images . . . (and) . . . they will receive, from time to time, the same sort of
homage as in the monasteries."1 Griswold might have added that the sense of
overwhelming ubiquity of Buddha images in Bangkok is further heightened by
their presence by the thousands in shops, particularly the "antique shops," that
have mushroomed in recent times, in response to the tourist trade. These shops
are stacked with Buddhas in stone, wood, and metal; gilded to heighten their
luster or broken to lengthen their age; many genuinely old and probably lifted
from sacred historic sites, and as many modern and faked to look like the
classical rarities. This onrush of images into the shops is not disassociated from
the recent pillage in Cambodia and the massive smuggling out of northern
Burma. They too are refugees and hostages, just like many men, women, and
children, affected by the recent wars in the region.
This remarkable profusion of Buddha images is not the end of the matter.
Griswold continues: "Quantities of votive tablets, of metal or terra cotta, stamped
with tiny figures of the Buddha in tens, hundreds, or even more, can be seen in
museums and private collections. They are often objects of great beauty; yet in
most cases they were made not to be seen at all, but in order to be buried away
195


--- Page 208 ---
The cult of amulets
inside a monument, or perhaps inside the arm or body of some colossal statues.
The same may even be true, though less often, of bronze images of considerable
size, up to almost a metre in height: a few years ago the left arm of the huge
Mangalapabitra image at Ayudhya was found to contain a quantity of such
bronzes, apparently many of them made for this particular purpose. . . . "
There is still another use of votive tablets: as amulets - not discussed by
Griswold - but which must be regarded as a conspicuous feature of popular
religion. These amulets, little represented in museums and antique shops for
Western tourists, are displayed in heaps in the open bazaars and traditional
markets of Bangkok and all provincial cities. Being objects of small dimension,
representing in miniature figures or busts of the Buddha, or famous monks, or
even famous kings and princes, they are attached to necklaces and chains and
worn around the neck by men and women, or carried on their persons, or
carefully kept at home.
The Thai term for what I call amulet is khrueang rang khdung khlang, khdung
khlang meaning an object having sacred or supranormal power; khrueang rang
meaning amulet. Frequently, the phrase is abbreviated to khrueang rang. Such
sacralized objects can be of many sorts: Buddha images, medallions or coins
(nan) of persons and emblems with imprints, clay tablets with similar imprints,
animal and bird shapes, and so on.2
These images, votive tablets, and amulets are treated with respect by Buddhists,
who often ' 'worship" them with palms pressed together (wai) and say apologetic
words before touching, moving, or wearing them as the case may be; they also
frequently propitiate these objects with offerings or purify them by sprinkling
sacralized water. The language appropriate to them is the "royal vocabulary"
(rdjdsabda), which is spiced with a lexicon of Sanskrit and Khmer words.
Amulets are usually strung on a necklace and worn around the neck. It is a rare
Thai who wears a single amulet: Most wear several, not exposed but secreted
inside the shirt or blouse. It is also not unusual for people to carry some on their
person in some other way and also to keep a number in their homes to be
cherished, looked at, and asked for protection or good fortune according to need.
Many amulet wearers would usually, when they put the necklace on in the
morning or before leaving the house, say a sacred formula (gdthd) to the amulet
and then using both hands transfer its virtue and power to their own heads.
Moreover, in order to replenish the potency of the amulets, wearers would present
them for further sacralization by famous monks or holy men, who would touch
them with their hands, say words, and sprinkle them with holy water (tham hai
saksit, meaning to render powerful).
Practically every Thai, whether of Thai, Chinese, Laotian or some other
origin, whether of the Buddhist, Moslem, or some other religious affiliation
(except perhaps Christian), would like to own an amulet or wear one. Because
the most important type of these amulets bears the image of a Buddha or a
196


--- Page 209 ---
The cult of images and amulets
famous bhikkhu, it is primarily a Thai Buddhist and Chinese clientele that is
especially interested in it.
There is a roaring trade in amulets. There is also a vast popular literature -
brochures, cheap magazines, glossy illustrated editions for collectors, and weighty
books for connoisseurs on how to recognize the genuine article and detect the
fake (see Figure 5). Moreover, amulets are an inexhaustible subject for newspa-
per articles and daily gossip, in which stories of windfall fortunes and miraculous
escapes from danger attributed to amulets are told with awe.
The cult of amulets is no mere "superstition" or "idolatry" of the poor or
unlettered. If you confronted a prosperous man in the streets of Bangkok - well
dressed in suit and tie, or imposing in military uniform - and asked him to open
his shirt collar, you would see a number of amulets encased in gold, silver, or
bronze hanging on his gold necklace. (In the United States, an analogue might be
that if you asked an affluent person to empty his pockets or her purse, you would
find a variety and a superfluity of credit cards encased in plastic jackets.)
Businessmen, military men, ordinary folk, the man or woman on the street -
all openly talk of their interest in these amulets and readily show them to you,
explicating their virtues and history. The scholars, university students, and
teachers are more discreet, though no less credulous. Even the most "liberal" or
"progressive" of them, espousing "modern science" and holding against
superstitions, and even proclaiming left-wing or at least antimilitary sentiments,
wear them or keep them at home; some of them may not wear them regularly, but
only on those occasions when they feel in need of special protection.
Let me describe the modest necklace of three amulets that was worn in 1979
by a doctoral student in education at Sri Nakharinwirot University under the
collar of his shirt. Somchai was in his early thirties, had taught in a secondary
school for a few years, and had qualified to enter the graduate program at the
university.
1. A copper amulet in the shape of a coin (rlan) made to commemorate a birthday of Phra
Acharn Fun, a famous forest ascetic monk who resided in Sakon Nakhon Province.
The medallion had the bust of a monk on one side and a monk's bowl and pot on the
reverse side with the following words: "75 years old on August 20, Wat Udom-
somphaun, Amphoe Mueang, Sakon Nakhon Province, 2517" (i.e., 1974). This
arahant monk became so famous for his piety and ascetic life that the King and Queen
traveled to the Northeast to attend his mortuary rites. A friend of Somchai's who lives
in Udon Province personally received it from the hands of the venerable monk and
gave it to Somchai as a present.
2. An antique clay amulet dug up during an excavation in a wat in Kamphaengphet
Province. It was called Phra SIthit (four directions) Ngopnamoi (round shaped oval
piece of sugarcane). The amulet showed the Buddha placed in four directions. Somchai
received it as a gift from the father of a fellow student who was the education officer of
the province.
3. Phra rdut (freed), a Buddha amulet made of metal that comes from Lamphun in North
197


--- Page 210 ---
The cult of amulets
Figure 5. The front and back views of two amulets from a Thai book on amulets called Kittikhum
Phra Them Phra Khdddn by Thanakann Khongsat.
Thailand. It grants freedom and protection from bad things. An old man of Somchai's
acquaintance in his hometown of Chonburl in the Central Province gave it to him.
During the course of my stay in Thailand in 1978, Somchai was to add to this
necklace another amulet that he himself purchased when he visited a forest
hermitage in Khonkaen Province (Northeast Thailand); the amulet contains the
image of another saintly monk credited with virtue and power, Luang Pu Pang; it
was sacralized by him. Many such amulets are sold today at the hermitage.
This example can be replicated many times, but it is sufficient to make two
198


--- Page 211 ---
The cult of images and amulets
points. Our subject, born and bred in the Central Province, was wearing amulets
that came from spots and sources located in the distant provinces of Thailand (in
the Northeast and North in this instance). He was also wearing amulets that have
a historical dimension: old amulets dug up at historic temple sites, amulets
sacralized by famous monks both dead and living. We can thus visualize the
people of Thailand physically located in different parts and following different
pursuits carrying on their body or holding in possession amulets that embody the
associations and "vital energy" of the past and present (historical heritage) and
of diverse persons and places within the kingdom (geographical spread). The
amulets are an example of how many contemporary Thai of diverse social and
regional origins carry on their persons material signs and mental images of
national identity and history.
The questions of what beliefs the wearers and possessors of amulets hold about
them, what virtues and powers they attribute to them, and, moreover, how these
notions relate to "orthodox" Buddhist doctrine, are complex for the reason - not
unfamiliar to students of complex societies - that there are many levels of
meaning that attach to the words and acts of persons differentiated by status,
context, and circumstance, and that the doctrines of Buddhism - whether early or
late, written or oral, canonical or noncanonical - carry ambiguities and multiple
implications. Let me make a start by reporting the views on the matter expressed
to me by a layman and a monk in 1978.
1. I asked a successful businessman, who said that amulets had power to
confer protection and prosperity, as to how they rendered this aid. He remarked
that to be successful in business, first of all one has to be honest, diligent, and
practice "morality." What the amulets do is to reinforce these virtues, give
confidence to the honest man, and lend certainty to his normative commitments.
"\fou have to practice the moral precepts (sila tham) beforehand, if the amulets
are to benefit you. If persons are immoral, the amulets will not help them. And
the monk who sacralizes them does not want the amulets to get into the wrong
hands. The sacralization of amulets" he continued, "employs Dhamma, and this
procedure is not to be equated with saiyasdt, the 'magical art,' which employs
mantra (mon) that may be used for good as well as evil purposes."
2. The acting abbot of Wat That Thaung, an affluent Bangkok wat of
Thammayut affiliation where the rich hold their cremation rites, had this to say
about the efficacy of amulets: "Originally the Buddha's image was made in
remembrance of the Buddha and to remind oneself of his virtues and not to do
evil. But at present those who wear the images as amulets believe that they will
give them body protection (paungkan tua), and that they will ensure that good
action will yield good returns."
When I asked him about the significance of chanting sacred words (sek khdthd)
over the amulets, he replied: "Today all Buddha images have undergone chanting
(pluk sek), and the layman who possesses an image thereby has his belief in its
'goodness' (khwdm di) confirmed and strengthened. The 'goodness' or virtue of
199


--- Page 212 ---
The cult of amulets
the monk who chants is transferred to the image by the action of 'mind waves' so
to say."3
4'The crux of the matter then is that the possessor of the image believes in the
virtue and goodness in the luang phdu ["the respected father," a title given to
respected elderly monks]. The virtuous monk transfers his goodness to the
amulet, which is received by the layman who believes in the monk's attainments.
"Also when a luang phdu dies, amulets bearing his facial image may be
minted, and a ceremony held for saying sacred words over them in which nine (or
more) monks will do the recitation. This ceremony is called phithlpluk sekphra.
"Such chanting over images and sanctifying them is done only to images of the
Buddha and of famous monks, with one exception.4 The king's image may be
sanctified by monks in this way, and on such an occasion, the king will select the
monks whom he wishes to officiate."5
The views of these two informants advert to many matters and issues: to the
importance of intentionality and ethical behavior on the part of an amulet
possessor, to the amulet being a "reminder" of the Buddha's person and virtues,
to the rite of sacralization of the amulet by an elderly and virtuous monk, and so
on. Because these views were held by the informants as being concordant with
the "Buddha sdsana" (Buddhist religion), let us see what earlier texts and
formulations have to say about the worship of the Buddha's relics and images and
other sacred objects associated with him.
Relics and images: canonical and noncanonical views
Buddhists everywhere today venerate the Buddha's relics and images. How do
their orientations compare with the doctrinal position stressed in many places in
the Theravada canon that the Buddha has reached extinction in the void of
nibbdna and does not exist anymore? There is no simple clear-cut answer possible
because the interpretive positions taken by different commentators, monk and
layman alike, are characterized by linguistic stretching, ambiguities, and
equivocations.
The Mahdparinibbdna Sutta, probably the most quintessential sutta in the
entire Buddhist canon,6 presents in quick episodic succession the multiple strands
of early Buddhism as a simultaneous totality - the norms the community of
bhikkhu should observe; the fruits accruing to the meditator; the entrusting to
monks of the Dhamma as their guide and to laymen of the Buddha's relics, which
are enshrined in ddgaba\ the sanctioning of merit-making pilgrimages to these
reliquary monuments; and so on. Furthermore, this canonical text (as do many
others) employs royal metaphors for characterizing attributes and powers of the
Buddha's doctrine and his relics as they bear on this world. The ddgaba, monu-
ments enshrining relics, have become over time "fields of merit," in which the
devotee can reap certain harvests.
200


--- Page 213 ---
The cult of images and amulets
Thus to the hoary and vexing question of how, if the Buddha is extinct, pious
Buddhists can make offerings to him and seek aid from him, Nagasena, at the
beginning of the Christian era, gave the answer in The Questions of King Milinda
that the Blessed One is set entirely free and therefore accepts no gift; nevertheless,
acts done to him, notwithstanding his having passed away and not accepting
them, are of value and bear fruit. An orthodox answer then was that the Buddha's
attainment is symbolized in his images and by his relics, and when men pay
homage to them goodness is caused to arise within them because the relics and im-
ages act as a field of merit in which men can plough, plant, and produce fruits.7
An orthodox gloss on the role of sacred objects is that they act as "reminders"
of the Buddha's victories over desire and ignorance and cause inspiration and
gladness to arise from such recollection. The Pali word cetiya (cedl in Thai)
comes from the Sanskrit root ci, "to heap up," "to arrange in order," and in this
sense is aptly applied to a stiipa as a monument. But it also connotes cit, "to fix
the mind upon something," "to remind," to "instruct," and in this sense is
similar to the English word "monument" (from the Latin monere, "to advise,"
i.e., to remind).
In early Indian art, say before the first century A.D., the Buddha was never
represented in human forms but only by symbols (although this convention or
interdiction did not apply to human beings in attendance). It is surmised by
scholars that the Vedic deities too were not anthropomorphically represented in
the Vedic period. In any case, the use of the symbols (Coomaraswamy calls it an
"aniconic" method) was so elaborate that it constituted by itself "a complete
artistic vocabulary and an iconography without icons."8
In this early Buddhist art, the Buddha was represented by substitute symbols,
which were reminders of the great events in his career: The bodhi tree represented
his attaining enlightenment under a tree, protected by the serpent Muchalinda;
the wheel (cakra) his preaching the first sermon, which "set the wheel of the
Doctrine" in motion; the stiipa his cremation and the enshrining of his relics; the
footprints (pdduka) his sojourn in the wilderness; and so on. Some of the
symbols taken as a set designated the Four Great Events (afterward eight) of the
Buddha's life.
The Kalihgabodhi Jdtaka (J., IV, 228), while giving an early Buddhist view
against the representation of the Buddha in human form, also provides a discrimi-
nating classification of cetiya (as cult objects, sacred symbols, reminders). In the
introductory part of the story, Ananda desires to set up in the Jetavana a substitute
for the Buddha, so that people may be able to make their offerings of flowers, not
only when the Buddha is in residence, but also when he is away preaching
elsewhere. To the Buddha's question as to how many kinds of cetiya there are,
Ananda replies that there are three - those of the body (sdririka), those of
association (paribhogika), and those prescribed (uddesika). The Buddha rejects
the bodily relics on the grounds that they can be venerated only after his passing
away, and he rejects the "personalized" symbols because such are "groundless
201


--- Page 214 ---
The cult of amulets
and merely fanciful," that is, they are only artificially, arbitrarily, and by conven-
tion referable to the absent being. So he concludes that only a great wisdom tree
that has been 4'associated" with a Buddha is fit to be a cetiya, whether the
Buddha is still living or is extinguished. Thus, according to this precedent, the
associated symbols, such as the bodhi tree, the wheel (cakra), the footprints, and
such entities are declared the most appropriate.
The Kalihgabodhi Jdtaka, or some variant formulation, may well serve as the
precedent for a transformed valuation of "reminders" given by a Thai monk,
probably Bodhiransi. He wrote around A.D. 1417 a chronicle about the origins
and travels of a famous Buddha image, called the Buddha Sihing,9 which served
as a palladium of Thai kingdoms and principalities, particularly in the fourteenth
century. The chronicle was written to celebrate the powers of the image and the
eminence of its royal possessors, especially the kings of Lan Na, in whose
possession it was at the time the monk wrote the chronicle.
The chronicle, which we shall cite again in the next chapter, begins with the
following myth of origin of the statue. When three kings of the island of SIhala
(Sri Lanka) wanted an image cast in the authentic likeness of the Buddha, they
consulted some twenty holy men, and a ndga claiming to have seen the historical
Buddha transformed himself into an apparition of the Buddha. The kings then
determined to have the statue cast, depending on the memory of the holy men
who had seen the apparition to provide the model. At this point, the chronicle
says that the holy men, endowed with the supernatural powers of knowing the
past, recalled that the Buddha himself had validated the casting of an image as a
meritorious act. He had once told Ananda, his favorite disciple, that there were
three kinds of cetiya (reminders), namely paribhogacetiya, udisacetiya, and
sdrlrikacetiya. (Notton glosses the first as all that had been used by the Buddha,
the second as "all that which has been determined by him," and the third as all
that has been left by him.) The Buddha image would be a merit included in the
category udisacetiya.
The foregoing serves as a useful introduction for understanding a classification
of "reminders" into four types given by a modern scholar of Thai art forms:10 (1)
sariradhdtu or dhdtucetiya (bodily relics), (2) dhammacetiya, doctrinal reminders,
as contained in the canon, originally referring to the Dhamma transmitted orally
and later including the written canonical texts as well; (3) paribhogacetiya,
reminders by association, which include objects with which the Buddha has had
physical contact, such as his almsbowl and robes, the footprints he has left, the
bodhi tree under which he reached enlightenment, and, more generally, all the
sites associated with his peripatetic career; and (4) uddesikacetiya, indicative
reminders, which Griswold glosses as "reminders by convention," that is,
man-made substitutes, replicas, or icons of paribhogacetiya. They are all copies
of originals, so to say. Examples are: trees grown from the seeds or cuttings taken
from the original bodhi tree; replicas of stupas containing the Buddha's bodily
202


--- Page 215 ---
The cult of images and amulets
relics or footprints; representations of historic sites or of great events associated
with the Buddha in painting, sculpture, and architecture; and so on.
We know that from early times these objects were not merely regarded as
reminders and fields of merit, but also as repositories of "power." This "power"
on close scrutiny is seen to stem from many bases - such as, first of all, the
powers possessed and radiated by the Buddha himself by his ' 'presence''; then the
powers of the makers and sacralizers of these objects, who had either been in
contact with him or had attained heroic proportions themselves as heirs of his
doctrine; then the efficacy attributed to the rituals of sacralization themselves;
and, lastly, the power of the substance - the metal, gem, wood, or stone - out of
which the object was created. In other words, the answers to the following
questions - Why are there so many Buddha images in Thailand? Why are small
images and tablets of exquisite craftsmanship made if only to bury them inside
larger statues? Why do fervent Buddhists perform complex rituals of devotion
and propitiation? - call for further amplification.11
In actual fact, in both Mahdydna and Theravdda traditions, the Buddha image
has come to be credited with ' 'radiance'' and a "fiery energy'' It has also become
the focus of an elaborate iconography, such that its sacredness and potency were
intensified.
The attribution of "radiance" and "fiery energy" ultimately goes back to the
experience of the "enlightenment" of the Buddha, which was climaxed by his
realization of the Four Noble Truths. For instance, the account given in the
canonical Vinaya Pitaka12 speaks of the Gotama's mounting of the four jhanic
meditative trances, which successively gave him the capacities to detach himself
from sense objects and passions and to reach "one-pointedness" of mind,
calmful bliss, and even-mindedness. The trances led again to the three pure
cognitions achieved in three successive watches: "the knowledge of the memory
of former becomings," of the qualitative births and rebirths of beings everywhere
("the arising and passing hence of beings"), and, finally, "the destruction of the
cankers."
In sculpture, the styles of the seated Buddha in five positions13 capture the
stillness and luminosity of the meditative enlightenment experience, and thereby
his cosmic presence. The Buddha images (in the different seated, standing,
walking, and lying positions) are overlaid with rich iconographic "reminders,"
such as the Tree of Life (Vrksa), the Earth-Lotus, the Wheel of Law (Dharma
Cakra), etc., from which also emanate fiery energy (tejas), creative life, and the
very movements (samsdra) of the universe itself. In sum, then, the Buddha
statue, seen both as symbolizing those powers as well as radiating them, could
become a much valued and sought after treasure.
Griswold points out that besides the efficacy of the sacred objects - such as
images - as reminders of the doctrine (which can start a mental process that will
end by dispelling the fear of demons), we must accept this primary fact: "In the
203


--- Page 216 ---
The cult of amulets
traditional belief, moreover, every Buddha image inherits some fraction of the
teja, 'fiery energy,' which the Buddha himself possessed in incalculable
abundance, and which is conventionally represented by a fiery halo, a flame
springing from the top of the head, the gilded surfaces of bronze or stone, and so
on."14 Similarly, the belief that miniatures worn around the neck confer invulnera-
bility can be explained in more than one way. "Some people would say that the
teja inherent in the image transmits itself to the wearer and makes him immune
from harm; others might argue that by reminding the wearer of the Doctrine, and
particularly that part of it that counsels constant alertness, it enables him to keep
out of harm's way."15
Griswold then delivers a striking answer as to why Thai (and other) Buddhists
made miniatures in huge quantities to be buried inside stupas and colossal
images: "They were a sort of electric charge, suffusing the stupa or the statue
with teja: even if most of them proved to be inert, or nearly so, on the basis of
probability at least a few of them would turn out to be particularly effective.
Looked at in another way, they were intended to assure the durability, the
invulnerability, of the Reminder that contained them: and even if they failed in
that, and the Reminder were ever broken open, they would pour forth in an
explosion of fiery energy, teja, conferring their benefits as reminders and protec-
tors far and wide upon future generations."16
As part of the evidence relating to recent and/or present-day Thai formulations
concerning the character of the Buddha's presence in this world, let me cite the
case of Thailand's famous meditation master, Acharn Mun, who, in the course of
his meditational experiences, saw and spoke to the Buddha and his long-dead
arahant disciples. Acharn Mun was moved to ask the crucial question: If the
Buddha and the arahants had completely passed away, how is it that they can
manifest themselves in this manner? To which the Buddha is alleged to have said
that because Acharn Mun was still in human form, the Buddha, who has attained
absolute purity, had to assume a temporary form to make contact with him. "The
absolute deliverance," he was told by the Buddha, "is void of signs and
manifestations, but in order for it to be made known a mundane form is necessary
and therefore assumed." The Buddha's words, said long ago, are partially
captured and clothed in the Dhamma texts and are vehicles of instruction and
remembrance; the Buddha's presence manifest long ago is "indexically" present
(to use Charles Peirce's concept) in images and relics and other icons and indices,
but they too are vehicles that aid human understanding.
A short step taken from such interpretations could easily lead to a cosmologi-
cal "doctrine of presence," which has reached its fullest development in the
Mahdydna schools of thought and practice, though Theravdda exegetics has not
ignored the issue. This doctrine would hold that the Buddhahood as absolute
purity of mind has no form and sense, having transcended the three realms of
kdma, rupa, and ariipa lokas; but to make its presence felt, Buddhahood has to
assume the mundane forms of the cosmos so that beings in it can apprehend the
204


--- Page 217 ---
The cult of images and amulets
truth. Such a notion of cosmic presence actualized of course illuminates the
conceptions behind the architecture of stupas and of monumental edifices such as
Borabudur and Angkor Vat, as Paul Mus (1935)17 has so brilliantly revealed to
us. It would seem that when we fully understand the symbolism of Buddhist
architecture, myths, rites, and texts as they obtained in the past and obtain today
in Southeast Asia, the classic Mahayana-Theravada distinctions become some-
times, if not always, difficult or irrelevant to impose on the complex reality
and varying circumstances - either because both traditions have interacted at
various times or because they have elaborated similar conceptions.
The bodies of the Buddha
This issue of the several "bodies" of the Buddha, both in Theravada and
Mahayana traditions, is relevant to our understanding of how Buddhists see the
Buddha's differentiated "presence" in the cosmos. The Theravada traditions on
this matter are of course not as elaborated and systematized as the Mahayana
traditions, but are important nevertheless.
The Mahayana conceptions of the three bodies of the Buddha (trikdya) are well
known.18 (1) The Dhamma-Kdya, Body of Law, is the Buddha in nibbdna or
nibbdna-like, rapture. The very nature of the Buddha is his enlightenment, his
perfect wisdom, and his knowledge of the Law, the absolute Truth. (2) The
Sambhoga-Kdya is the Buddha's second body, the "body of enjoyment or beatific
body." The Buddha, as long as he has not attained nibbdna, possesses and
enjoys, for his own bliss and for others' welfare, the fruit of his charity as a
bodhisattva. (3) Nirmdna-Kdya are buddhas in their aspect as human beings,
who are contrivances or phantoms created at random by the real buddhas (see 2
above), who are possessed of beatific bodies and are sovereigns of the celestial
worlds, Tusita heavens, or Paradises (Sukhdvatis). Nirmdna-Kdya is usefully
translated as "transformation body," in the sense that the Buddha transforms
himself into multiforms according to the dispositions of the creatures to be saved.
This comes close to the notions of avatars and rupas of Hindu deities.
Another formulation has it that the multiple conceptions of buddhahood, as for
instance widely prevalent in Tibetan Buddhism, derive from the power of the
Buddha to manifest himself at various levels of existence to visit the needs and
capacities of different religious practitioners: "Parallel with the three stages of
the threefold world, the world of desire, the world of form and the formless
world, buddhahood is conceived of conventionally as possessing Three Bodies,
an Absolute Body which corresponds to the formless world, a Glorious Body
which is manifest in the heavens to meditating sages, and a Physical Body which
appears on earth usually as a human teacher."19 These Three Bodies may be
represented by Buddhas of different names, such as Boundless Light, Powerbolt-
Being, and Lotus Born, each typical of the three bodies listed above.
205


--- Page 218 ---
The cult of amulets
The Theravada formulation of the Buddha's bodies20 implicitly begins as we
have seen before in the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta's assignment of the custodian-
ship of the Dhamma as Law to the sahgha, and the bodily relics and ashes to the
laymen. Although, as we have also said before, the notion of Dhamma-Kdya as
the Body of Law is canonical,21 the elaboration of the notion of rupakdya
(especially identified with the Physical Body, marked with the auspicious signs of
the mahdpurisa, the great beings destined to be either a buddha or a cakkavatti),
corresponds to the development of the anthropomorphic images of the Buddha
that increasingly supplement, and even on occasion supplant, the relic stupas.
Reynolds draws our attention to the notion of "mind-made body" (mano-
mayakdya) as it appears in Buddhaghosa's Visuddhimagga in connection with
ascending from grosser mental and physical states to certain jhdnic states of mind
in samddhi meditation.22 He describes how in certain later Theravada traditions,23
perhaps influenced by both Yogic and Mahayana ideas, attempts were made, on
the one hand, to identify Dhamma-Kdya with the following of the Path per se (by
the practice of morality and meditation), culminating in the realization of nibbdna
and, on the other, to specify the Buddha's personalized attainments and glory in
terms of his various bodies extending from the physical body to bodies associated
with stages on the Path, culminating in the Emptiness Body.
I am not proposing that the Mahayana and Theravada formulations in their
"orthodox" aspects are similar. There are notable differences. The Mahayana
tendency, first of all, is to fuse a distinction to which Theravada holds fast: the
distinction between the Dhamma-Kdya as the body of the Dhamma as scriptural
teaching, and the multiform body of the Buddha embodying his soteriological
attainments. Again, the Mahayana thrust has been to postulate the Sambhoga-
Kdya as the enduring real Buddha, while the human Buddhas are merely random
incarnations; in contrast, the Theravada orthodoxy's starting point is the histori-
cal Buddha, human but also mahdpurisa, from whom emanated the Dhamma,
although Buddhahood itself, as a state of enlightenment, is given a supranormal
ontological status. This however opens up a small space for partial rapprochement.
As de La Valee Poussin points out, no one would say that an arahant is not a
human, although he is considered to be living his last existence, but according to
the earliest Pali canonical records, Gotama categorically declared that an arahant
could be a deva, or a gandharva, or a Yaks a, or a man: "I am not a man . . .
Know, O Brahman, that I am a Buddha." Poussin concludes that the nonsup-
pression of such declarations by the Pali scriptures attests to the antiquity of the
schools that held the Buddha to be a hyperphysical or supramundane being
(lokottara). Moreover, the Sinhalese account of the Third Council under Asoka,
provided it is reliable, in stating the Thera opposition to the Vetulyavada docetic
theory that the Buddha remained in the Tusita heaven, and only sent a phantom of
himself to the world, corroborates this argument.
If one stands back from the particularities of the formulations concerning the
various "bodies" of the Buddha, and from the ontological and cosmological
206


--- Page 219 ---
The cult of images and amulets
systems of diverging Buddhist schools, can one meaningfully propose that there
are generalities, from the point of view of a semiotic theory of signs and
reminders? It is to be expected, given a Buddhist perspective, that the various
levels or stations on the salvation Path will in due course be "reified" or
crystallized as different "bodies" or "deities." This crystallization can be seen
as taking shape, either as a vertical gradient or as a mandala, starting from the
"signless state" (as the Visuddhimagga called it) at the top or the center, and
extending to positions imbued with most form and sense (and therefore most
grossness and impurity) at the bottom or the periphery. There are "evolutionary"
and "devolutionary" implications to this gradient. In an "evolutionary" or
unifying sense, each successive upward or centripetal thrust from gross material-
ity through spirituality to the state of void both transcends and encompasses the
lower or outer state from which the leap is made. Thus the highest or central state
of enlightenment is a presence that encompasses all lower states and has the
potentiality to affect and transform them. The "devolutionary," descending, or
distributive vision starts from the still point of unity; each level of unfolding is
also a production of multiple and differentiated forms, whose grossness and
impurity increase at the same time as their purity and radiance weaken as they
recede from the center.
207


--- Page 220 ---
15
An enumeration of historic and
popular amulets
There are, as I have said before, many kinds of amulets and sacralized objects
that are the focus of devout attention. There are small Buddha images; there are
medallions or coins (nan) with imprints of the seated Buddha, of the figures of
famous monks, and of famous kings and deities. There are clay tablets with
similar imprints. Finally, there are images of birds, animals, and special human
beings (other than those mentioned above).
These amulets comprise a highly diverse congeries in their age and time of
making, their markings, the circumstances of their manufacture, and their spatial
distribution throughout the country. If there is a single attribute that applies to
them all, it is that they are "sedimentations of power," but this scarcely
aggregates them into a closed set capable of systematic classification. The Thai
do not have a single system of categories that exhaustively label and classify
amulets, but they have names for each individual amulet, and some named
amulets fall into larger classes.
In this book we are primarily concerned with the amulets that are currently
being sacralized by famous forest saints and meditation masters. But because
these amulets belong to a larger tradition and universe of amulets, it is necessary
to have a fair idea of the major classes or types of amulets that circulate in
Thailand, even if this enumeration is incomplete and the classes in part a
construct of the author.
I would differentiate four classes of amulets:
1. Amulet representations of famous and historic Buddha images, which have played the
roles of palladia of the Thai kingdoms.
2. Amulets that owe their fame to the reputation of famous Buddhist monks, especially of
the nineteenth century, who sponsored their making and sacralized them. The most
famous of them are called phra somdet and phra kling.
3. Miscellaneous amulets, a large residual class of representations of gods, humans,
animals, birds, and anomalous beings, sacralized by monks and lay experts skilled in
saiyasdt ("base arts").
208


--- Page 221 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
4. The contemporary amulets being blessed by the forest-dwelling meditation masters,
some of whom are acclaimed as " saints" (arahants).
In this chapter, I shall discuss the first three classes, and this discussion will
serve as a backdrop to the contemporary amulet cult focused on the forest saints.
Some important Buddha images and their amulet representation
Several historic wat in Thailand, both in Bangkok and in the provinces, contain
Buddha statues that are famous not only for their sculptural excellence but also
for the benefits they confer on the worshipers. And, naturally, some of the amulets
most in demand by the public are minuscule representations of these national
treasures. There are several Thai books and catalogs freely sold in the bazaars
that describe these statues and amulets and praise their virtues. I shall use one
such book purchased at one of the markets (taldt) of Bangkok to convey the
character of these popular attributions; the book also contains photographs of the
statues and describes amulets and the names of the monks who sacralized them.1
The book enumerates the following "magnificent" Buddha statues as having
special powers (saksiti'anuphdp), energy (bdrami),2 and protective virtue. They
give mental refuge to people, inspire them to have faith, and help them to bring
their projects to successful conclusions. To quote the text: "One who regularly
worships these important Buddha statues will acquire 'dignity' (sangdsi), live
well and happily (yu di ml suk), be free of suffering (phon thuk), and enjoy
prosperity (carden rung riieang) both in the present and future, for all time."
The following Buddha statues are mentioned:3
1. Phra Buddha Jinaslha (Buddha, the Victorious Lion) of Wat Bovonniwet, Bangkok
2. Phra Buddha Jinaraja (Buddha, the Victorious King) of Wat Phra Sriratnamahadhatu,
Phitsanulok, North Thailand
3. Phra Kaeo Morakot (the Emerald Buddha) in the Chapel of the Grand Palace, Bangkok
4. Phra Buddha Trairatnanayaka of Wat Pananchoeng, Ayudhya (the old capital)
5. Phra Buddha Sothorn of Wat Sothornwararam, Chachoengsao, Central Thailand
6. Phra Buddha Benlaem of Wat Phetsamutworawihan, Samutsongkhram, Central
Thailand
7. Phra Buddha Khaotakran of Wat Khaotakran, Phetburi, Central Thailand
8. Phra Buddha Raikhing of Wat Raikhing, Nakhon Pathom, Central Thailand
There are three Buddha images that were found together in Phitsanulok, an
ancient city of the Northern Thai kingdoms. Around them have been woven great
legends, and two of them have now found their way to Bangkok. The three
images are Buddha Jinaslha and Phra Sri Sasta (the Great Teacher), which are
now installed in Bangkok; and Buddha Jinaraja, which still remains in its original
location in Phitsanulok (although an exact replica was made by the order of King
Rama V and placed in the hot of Wat Bencamabophit in Bangkok widely known
as the Marble Temple).
209


--- Page 222 ---
The cult of amulets
One of the distinguishing marks of all three images is that the four fingers of
the hand, apart from the thumb, are made of equal length.4 The robes are draped
in the Sinhala fashion, hence some argue that they were made sometime after the
Sinhala-type images had come to Thailand, the probable date of making being
the mid-fourteenth century. (I shall refer to this question shortly.)
Thai Buddhists hold in great veneration the Jinasiha and Jinaraja images
together with the Emerald Buddha (which is a palladium of the country and
intimately associated with kingship) and attribute to them great virtues and
powers. The legends they have inspired give us valuable insights into Thai
ideology fed by religious, political, aesthetic, and nationalist sentiments. They
also highlight the proclivity of past kings to capture and transfer to their own
capitals the palladia and regalia of other kingdoms to buttress their own legiti-
macy and to aggregate in their own capitals the powers and potencies embodied
in the sacred objects. This by the way gives us one clue as to why Buddhist kings
plundered each other's Buddhist temples in seeming violation of the fact that they
shared a common religion.
Buddha Jinaraja and Buddha Jinasiha:
two historic Northern images
There is a marvelous legend about the casting of the statues, which apparently
was committed to writing by King Mongkut himself. It runs as follows:
Somdet Phra Sitham Traipidok, the ruler of the kingdom of Chiang Saen in the
North, wrote to the ruler of Sri Sajjanalaya and Svargaloka, from where his own
wife had come, asking him for the loan of ''Brahmin craftsmen" to help him to
have some statues cast. The craftsmen of Sri Sajjanalaya were famous for their
skills. Five craftsmen were accordingly sent.5 King Traipidok merged them with
the other craftsmen he had collected from his own kingdom and from Haripunjaya
(Lamphun), and together they made clay models for three statues. On the
auspicious day of "the pouring of the gold," King Traipidok invited monks who
lived in the city as well as monks who lived in the forest to come together and
chant parit in order to ask for the help of the deities. Brahmanical rites were also
performed, after which the molten base metal, mixed with gold, was poured into
the molds. On breaking the molds it was discovered that Buddha Jinasiha and
Phra Sri Sasta had turned out well, whereas Buddha Jinaraja was flawed. Several
other attempts to cast it failed. Much grieved, King Traipidok and his queen
prayed for success, invoking the power of their merit {bun bdramt) to come to
their aid. Then a man wearing white clothes appeared on the scene and helped to
make the mold. He worked industriously and did not speak a word. He worked
all day and night without resting, and when the mold was finished the auspi-
cious day was set for pouring the gold. When the metal was poured into the
mold, the man in white departed, leaving the city by its northern gate. He
210


--- Page 223 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
disappeared at the settlement called Taphdkhdo (literally "maternal grandfather
in white robes"). When the mould was broken open, the statue was found to be
flawless and beautiful. King Traipidok is then alleged to have founded a new city
of Phitsanulok, built Wat Sri Ratnamahadhatu there, and installed the statues in
the vihdra.
The three statues, thus, continues our source, are beautiful, dignified, and
excellent. They are guarded by divine angels (thewadd) and protected by a sky
deity {cao fa). They all have been much respected and worshiped since ancient
times.
As a marginal comment to this legendary account, one should point out that
there are several versions of the story of origin of the statues and that in the
opinion of experts they were cast sometime between 1257 and 1377 during the
Sukhodaya Period, probably during the reigns of either the fifth or sixth kings.
The fifth king, Lithai (Maha Dhammaraja I), is considered by some as the best
candidate in relation to the legend concerning the casting. "The legend says that
a King came down from the north to attack the city of Sri Sachanalai (Sri
Sajjanalaya), and built a town called Phitsanuloke where he ordered the casting
of three Buddharupas of miraculous beauty, probably assisted in the task by a
deva who came to earth."6 Lithai is also a popular candidate because of his
reputation for devotion to the religion and his sponsorship of monuments.7 But
definite attribution remains uncertain, although the time of their casting is
roughly known and should tally with the period when Sinhalese monks arrived in
North Thailand.
To return lo our popular account: Citing "the royal annals" as its source, it
proudly asserts that many Thai kings of the subsequent Ayudhya Period made
official visits to the city of Phitsanulok in the course of their royal tours of their
kingdom and revered the Jinaslha and Jinaraja images. A veritable parade of
illustrious Ayudhyan kings is presented for us.
King Ramesuan, while on his way north to attack the kingdom of Chiengmai
in 1384, is alleged to have stopped at the historic site to divest himself of his
royal clothes and regalia to pay homage to the statues. He sponsored a seven-day
celebration.
King Narai, the great, is said to have paid homage to the statues in 1660 and to
have staged a celebration lasting three days. This example was followed by King
Boromkot in 1740, who also staged a three-day entertainment.
We are then given a list of kings and viceroys who had longer connections with
the city of Phitsanulok: King Borom Trailokanat, who built a vihdra at Wat
CulamanI in Phitsanulok in 1449 and was ordained there as monk for eight
months; Somdet Phra Boromratchamappakun, who in the capacity of great
viceroy (maha upardif administered Phitsanulok as a governor from 1505-8;
Somdet Phra Maha Dhammaraja, who again as viceroy ruled over Phitsanulok
from 1429-54; finally, the great king, Naresuan, who too when he was viceroy
ruled Phitsanulok Province from 1558-66 before he ascended the throne.
211


--- Page 224 ---
The cult of amulets
King Ramesuan's act of piety on the way to war was subsequently repeated in
the eighteenth century at another historic moment, when King Taksin advanced
north to stem Phra Cao Fang's attempt to secede and set up his own kingdom;
Taksin made a stop at Phitsanulok, took off the sash worn across his chest, and
offered it to Buddha Jinaraja. On his successful return south, he stopped again,
this time to conduct a three-day victory celebration on behalf of the Buddha who
had helped him and his army.
Certain events that took place in the Bangkok period under the Cakkri kings -
particularly in the reigns of Rama III and Rama IV (Mongkut) - beautifully
illustrate the vital powers attributed to these Buddha statues and the importance
of the placement of two of them in Bangkok, the capital city founded by a new
dynasty.
The upardt (deputy king) during Rama Ill's reign, who built Wat Mai (which
later came to be called Wat Bovonniwet) in Bangkok, took a particular liking to
the Buddha Jinasiha and had it moved down to Bangkok around 1828-9. The
bronze image was placed on a specially built raft and floated down the rivers. It
was installed in the hot of Wat Mai in the southern wing at the back of the
already-existing main image, but in 1838 the princely abbot Mongkut, apprecia-
tive of its beauty and history, obtained permission from King Rama III to move it
into the main hall and to make it the presiding image in front of the original one.9
The final act in this story is the placing in front of the Buddha Jinasiha of three
life-sized figures of the three distinguished abbot princes of Wat Bovonniwet:
Krom Luang Vajirananavansa; Krom Phraya Pavares Variyalankarna; and the
most illustrious of them, Krom Phraya Vajirananavarorasa (Prince Wachirayan).
The last two figures were ordered cast by King Vajiravudh (King Rama VI) in
1916 and 1919 respectively, whereas the first was recently cast at the express
wish of the present monarch.10
The Phra Sri Sasta image arrived in Bangkok even earlier, either in the reign of
Rama II or in the early part of the reign of Rama III. Its small size facilitated this
earlier move by an abbot of a wat in Thonburi; subsequently, after it was moved
around without a final destination, King Mongkut had it moved to Wat Bovinniwet
and placed in a special vihdra built for it in 1863. It is this same vihdra that has
the murals of the thirteen ascetic (dhutahga) practices described in the Visud-
dhimagga, and which are emblematic of the forest monks' way of life.
The Buddha Jinaraja, however, still stands in its original vihdra in Phitsanulok,
thereby lending sanctity and potency to the territory that was the heart of the
Sukhodaya Kingdom, which contemporary Thai regard as representing the quin-
tessence of Thai civilization. This particular view of the continuity of Thai
civilization, and of the central place of Sukhodaya in it, is probably a special
viewpoint advanced since the mid-nineteenth century, first by King Mongkut and
subsequently by King Chulalongkorn and his able ministers, of whom Prince
Damrong was the ablest ideologist and propagandist.11
212


--- Page 225 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
Be that as it may, King Rama V had an exact replica of the Buddha Jinaraja
statue made to be placed in the hot of Wat Bencamabophit (the Marble Temple) in
Bangkok, which was built by him, and which even today houses predominantly
monks of Northern origin. Thus, in a sense, all three of the great Sukhodaya-
style images now reside in Bangkok in wat with which the Cakkri kings have had
and still have close connection.
We now come to the topic that is of special interest to us, namely, the amulets
that have been made bearing representations of the Buddhas Jinaraja and
Jinasiha. Naturally, since Buddha Jinasiha has been installed in Bangkok since
the last century it has been a particularly favored subject for medallions. A batch
of medallions representing this Buddha was made in 1897 and is popularly
regarded as "the grandfather of medallions" (pu rlari). The medallions have the
shape of a leaf of the bodhi tree under which the Buddha attained enlightenment.
This batch of medallions was cast to commemorate the return of King Chula-
longkorn to Thailand after a tour of Europe. He distributed them to courtiers and
officials when he conducted a merit-making ceremony in the palace, at which
monks from the royal wat chanted and received gifts.12 More recently, in 1942
Phra Sasanasobhana (Phra Cham) of Wat Makutkasat (a famous Thammayut
royal wat in Bangkok built by King Mongkut) sponsored the making and
sacralizing of a batch of medallions containing the figures of both Buddha
Jinasiha and Buddha Jinaraja.
But of course it is Buddha Jinaraja still sitting in splendor in the historic
northern town of Phitsanulok that has been most frequently copied by amulet
makers. There are many such medallions that were made and are avidly searched
for even today by amulet hunters. Some examples are:
1. The batch made and sacralized at Wat Bodharama, Nakhon Sawan, Central Thailand, in
1918. Many important senior monks from outside this city, from Bangkok in particular,
were invited to participate in the sacralization.13
2. Phrakhru Mo, the abbot of Wat Sam On in Bangkok, sponsored the making of a batch
of Buddha Jinaraja amulets; the amulet is popularly referred to as Phra Chin after the
black lead (chin) that was used to make it.
3. Phra Putlawithinayok (Bun) of Wat Bangklangkeo of Nakhon Pathom, the historic
Buddhist center in Central Thailand, sponsored the making of another batch.
4. Finally, Buddha Jinaraja medallions were made at Wat Ban Kai in Rayong Province,
Central Thailand, under the leadership of its abbot, Phrakhru Wichittammamuwat
(Wong).
It is significant to note from this list that all the sponsors of the Jinaraja amulets
were monks, that these monks were members of the "established" sahgha, that
the casting of the amulets and their sacralization took place in wat, and that these
wat were located in various parts of Central Thailand, only one of the locations
being the capital city of Bangkok itself.
213


--- Page 226 ---
The cult of amulets
The Emerald Buddha jewel
The Emerald Buddha is Thailand's best known and most revered Buddha image.
It enjoys this primacy because it is the palladium of the kingdom of Thailand. It
became this when the founder of the CakkrI dynasty, Rama I, placed it in his own
chapel royal standing within the compound of the grand palace in Bangkok,
where it has been venerated ever since as the patron and guardian, at one and the
same time, of the CakkrI dynasty and the country over which it rules.
The Buddha's tooth relic in Sri Lanka and the Emerald Buddha jewel in
Thailand express the conviction that political sovereignty in these countries was
incapable of being conceived apart from its affiliation with Buddhism, its
sponsorship and protection. I have stated elsewhere that at the highest level the
fusion of kingship with bodhisattvaship makes the king himself, in certain
contexts, a ritual officiant of central importance. The most telling evidence for
this is that just as in Sri Lanka the temple where the tooth relic was housed was
part of the palace complex, so in Thailand is the Wat Phra Kaeo (which houses
the Emerald Buddha) part of the grand-palace complex. Furthermore, the chang-
ing of the ornaments and clothes of the Emerald Buddha three times a year is
performed by the king in person, just as the Sinhalese kings of old officiated at
daily offerings and at festivals.14 The parallel is even stronger when we realize that
both palladia were associated with rain making and fertility and that, especially
in the Thai case, the clothing of the statue in a sparse monk's robe in the wet
season (the period of the rains retreat of the monks) and in full regal costume in
the succeeding cool season15 was an apt representation of the oscillatory and
complementary relation between the Buddha as renouncer and the cakkavatti as
world ruler,16 between the season of rain (and the planting of crops) and the
season of harvest and plenty, between the phases of intensified piety in lay life
and the phase of life-affirming activities.17
These few indications of the current status of the Emerald Buddha in contempo-
rary Thailand would be sufficient for understanding why this image is produced
by the hundreds in miniatures to be placed in domestic and other shrines and why
it is also a popular subject for amulets that are worn or carried by numerous Thai.
In fact, we have barely scratched the surface of its meaning and potency. There
are more Thai and Laotian chronicles written about this sacred object than any
other, the three main being: the Ratanabimbavamsa, reckoned to have been
written in Sukhodaya some time after 1450; the Jinakalamall,18 a text we have
already used, written in Chiengmai in the early sixteenth century, which devotes a
section to it; and the Amarakatabuddharupaniddna,19 which appears to have been
composed in Vientienne, later than the preceding chronicle, but in the same
century.20
The two chronicles, the Amarakata and the Jinakalamall, more or less agree in
their accounts. The Jinakalamall focuses particularly on the circumstances that
allowed King Tilokaraja of Chiengmai to get possession of it, and the Amarakata
214


--- Page 227 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
continues the story until the Emerald jewel became the possession of the king-
dom of Vientienne together with the historic Sinhala Buddha image (Phra
Sihinga)}1
The Amarakata is written in three parts. The "first epoch" describes the origin
of the emerald jewel, in which the monk Nagasena features as the instigator; the
"second epoch" describes the passage of the jewel from the Pataliputta in India
to Sri Lanka, and from there to Pagan, whose King Anuruddha is given a central
role. The further travels of the jewel are plotted until the jewel reaches Chiengmai.
The "third epoch" describes the events that led to the jewel leaving Chiengmai
and going to Lanchang in Laos and from there to Vientienne. (It remained in
Vientienne for 200 years until in 1778 a Thai general, who later replaced King
Taksin to become the first Cakkri king, having defeated this Laotian principality,
sent back to the Thai capital of Thonburi the Emerald Buddha and the Phra
Sihinga.)
THE POWERS OF THE GEM TREASURE
Both the Amarakata and the Jinakdlamdll provide myths of origin that bring into
prominence, as do no other chronicles, the special potency of the image as
attributable in large part to the substance from which it is made, in this case a
"precious" stone. The year was the five-hundredth after the Buddha's passing
away. Nagasena, residing in the Tavatimsa heaven, had been born in this world,
and had been King Milinda's adviser and agent of his conversion to Buddhism.
This Nagasena, upon the death of his guru, Dhammarakkhita, decides that an
image of the Buddha would make his religion "extremely flourishing" and
"very prosperous" in this world and, rejecting gold and silver as substances that
would put the statue in jeopardy among wicked people, he reflects thus: "The
Buddha, the Doctrine and the Church each represents a gem, so I have to get a
precious stone with a very great power in it to make the statue of the Lord."
Lord Indra, in the company of the celestial architect and artificer, Visukamma,
descends from heaven, and volunteers to assist Nagasena in the search. The first
choice is the precious stone, the Mamjoti (the resplendent jewel) on Mount
Vipulla under the protection of genii Kumbhanda. But this stone is not available
because it has already been reserved for the enjoyment of a future cakkavatti
(universal monarch). It is thus suggested that Indra take instead another
magnificent gem that is in the center of a ring, with 650 precious stones as its
retinue; this cluster lies adjacent to the cluster of the Mamjoti jewel, which is
surrounded by 1,000 gems.22 This proffered gem is the Amarakata emerald
jewel, which Indra accepts.
How are we to figure out the significance of this sequence in which the greater
gem is reserved for the cakkavatti and the lesser is offered for the Buddha
image?23 The seeming slight can be explained adequately only if we accept that
the emerald gem (that is to be shaped as a Buddha) takes its value from its future
215


--- Page 228 ---
The cult of amulets
use. It is destined to be associated with and to be possessed by actual kings, who
are lesser representations of the exemplary, absolute, and millennial mahdpurisa
(great man) of the canonical scriptures.24 Hence the full force of the fact that the
emerald gem, by spatial contiguity with the universal monarch's jewel, partakes
of its virtues and potency.
In the classic Mahdsuddassana Sutta, it is said that the cakkavattVs gem
treasure when raised aloft casts light and enables his fourfold army to "march out
of the gloom and darkness of the night." So the emerald gem, too, must possess a
similar radiance and illumination. Indeed the stone qua emerald has other rich
associations.25 As a possession of the goddess Mani Mekhala, it produces
lightning and induces the monsoon rains. Its close association with Indra brings
to mind the fact that Indra's own coloration in Thai tradition is emerald green and
that in Northern Thailand there flourished the cult of Indrakhila under Buddhist
aegis, which guaranteed fertility and prosperity to the kingdom. The cult of the
Emerald jewel, showing remarkable similarities in mythology and physical form
with the Indrakhila, replaced the latter, and especially in the reign of King Tilok
(Tilokaraja) of Chiengmai, the Emerald jewel received the same kind of Buddhist
paritta recitations by monks that the Indrakhila did.
FROM GEM TO IMAGE
Returning to the Amarakata chronicle, let us take up the story of the fashioning of
the image. Indra assigns the task of carving the image to Visukamma, and he
takes seven days and nights to fashion Buddha's likeness. Upon completion,
Indra and Visukamma bring the image down from heaven to a waiting assembly
presided over by Nagasena for the purpose of consecrating it. Placed in a golden
palace given by Indra, serenaded by celestial and human music produced by
gongs, drums, cymbals, and trumpets, whose tumultuous sounds fusing into a
single sound ascend to the Brahma heaven, surrounded and acclaimed by a vast
gathering of monks and men, the image is given its name. Then Nagasena takes a
golden vessel containing a crystal casket, in which are enclosed "seven relics of
the Omniscient Lord," and recites this invocation: "May these relics go into this
Buddha if for the blessing of all men and angels, his image is to last as long as
five thousand years."26 And then into the forehead goes one relic, into the head
of the right humerus another one, into the head of the left humerus a third one,
two inside the knees, and the last one into the breast.
These details describe a ceremony of consecration of the image, an important
aspect of our study of images and amulets. Although the subject is the Buddha
himself, it is, however, deities and men who have fashioned the image, given it a
name, and embedded relics in it to the accompaniment of recitations and music.
The procedures and events we have reviewed so far suggest that the Emerald
Buddha has a triple potency stemming from its gemlike nature (its "natural
properties" being of course given cultural valuations associated with the
216


--- Page 229 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
cakkavatti, with Indra, and so on), its "likeness" to the physical presence of the
Buddha, and its incorporation of the Buddha's relics.
We must next indicate an implication already discernible in the consecration
ceremony. Nagasena, the monk, billed as the initiator of the making of the statue
and as presiding over the consecration, this Nagasena who had already been the
mentor of King Milinda, is now paired with the king of Pataliputta, who at the
head of the population of the kingdom is present at the image's sanctification and
to whose care the image is first given. This is the image's first political connec-
tion among a series that are to follow, which constitute the central subject matter
of all the chronicles.
THE TRAVELS OF THE EMERALD BUDDHA
By far the most remarkable feature of the Emerald Buddha is its travels from one
principality to another, from one king to another, being a pawn among Buddhist
kings as well as a moral gauge of their virtuous conduct. Thus, two actions are
attributed to it: Wherever it is venerated (and veneration goes with virtuous
conduct), there prosperity reigns; but wherever there is kingly misrule and civil
turmoil, it abandons that place and moves to a more worthy capital. The chronicle
attributes to the monk Nagasena a prediction at the time of its consecration that
made out as if the statue was destined to traverse five Buddhist lands of Southeast
Asia - Lankadvlpa, Ramalakka, Dvaravatl, Chiengmai, and Lan Chang (which
cover territories in present-day Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, and Laos) - bril-
liantly illuminating their religion.
But the circumstances that made it change its residence, as later told in the
chronicle, are varied: political misrule; defeat and conquest in warfare; pious
revival of religion; transfer through dynastic marriage; theft and secret transfer.
Thus, after 300 years of existence under the protection of the king of Pataliputta,
it is transferred to secure its safety during a civil war to the southern land of Sri
Lanka. After 200 years there, it is solicited together with the Pali scriptures by
King Anuruddha of Pagan, but by misadventure it arrives in the Khmer capital of
Angkor. Thence, owing to the misdeed of a Khmer king, it is spirited away by a
monk to the Thai kingdom of Ayudhya, from where it moves to the lord of
Kamphaengphet. The lord of ChlangRai carries it off next and a prince of
Chiengmai sends him offerings, begging for it. From Chiengmai, the image
moves to Laos in the last phase of the chronicle. In this story of restless travel, a
legendary story not entirely lacking in historical veracity, there are some climac-
tic sequences that are understandable once the plot is known.
The first climactic sequence relates to the Pagan king Anuruddha, in whose
time the Pali scriptures were taken from Sri Lanka to Pagan. Historically it is
probably true that around this time something of this sort happened, and that the
Burmese kingship, championing a religious revival, saw its paragon in the
Sinhalese form of Buddhism, partly on account of its alleged purity based on its
217


--- Page 230 ---
The cult of amulets
authorship of the Pali canon and partly because it could provide a distinctive
legitimation of a new, expanding polity. And we know that the Thai kingdom of
Sukhodaya, and subsequently the Lanna kingdoms like Chiengmai, themselves
became sponsors of Sinhalese Buddhism and had access to it in part via Pagan
(see Chapter 5).
According to the chronicles, King Anuruddha, finding the Pagan canonical
and commentarial texts deficient, goes to Sri Lanka (riding through the air on his
steed) to acquire new copies of the texts. At that time, the Emerald Buddha also
was located in Sri Lanka. Anuruddha returns from Sri Lanka to Pagan on his
flying steed; one set of the manuscripts is loaded on one boat, another copy of the
same set together with the Emerald Buddha are loaded on another. The second
boat loses its way on the high seas and drifts to Angkor, where the king gets
possession of the two treasures. And, most surprisingly, Anuruddha, flying to
Angkor, frightens the Angkor king into parting with the texts by impressive
supernatural feats, but forgets to take along with him the Emerald statue!
It looks as if the legend by this fiction is contriving to do two things: to (1)
draw into its confines a sacred object located in Angkor and the focus of great
veneration27 and (2) at the same time to identify this object and cult with the
practice of Buddhism as sponsored in North Thailand. This contrivance is
tendentious, and this tendentiousness can best be understood in terms of the next
climactic phase of the story, which takes place in the kingdom of Chiengmai. It is
there that Sinhalese "pure" Pali Buddhism and Angkor's guardian cult meet in
actuality; or, in the terms of the legend, it is there that the scriptures and image,
previously separated, come together again.
From the point of view of monk Ratanapaiina, the author of Jinakdlamdll, the
raison d'etre of the story of the Emerald jewel is that it was the kingdom of
Chiengmai that became heir to the Pali scriptures and the image. There are two
implications to this reuniting. Whatever the true facts, the author is suggesting
that the Chiengmai polity is the meeting point and coalescence of the two
socio-religious traditions of Pagan and Angkor;28 and it is the destiny of this Thai
polity to become the bearer and protector of the pure and complete religion
previously splintered and sundered. The hero of this unification and flowering is
King Tilok, who installed the image in his capital, making it the object of great
veneration, and also sponsored the revision of the Pali canon so as to arrive at its
authentic form. King Tilok, we may recall, is alleged to have also sent a mission
to Bodhgaya and was a patron of Buddhist art, a high point in Lan Na sculpture of
the lion-style Buddha with cakkavatti nuances being attained in his time.
The last phase of the Emerald Buddha, as chronicled in Amarakata, illustrates
another side of the image's fortunes; if under King Tilok's parasol of dominion,
religion and society prosper and the image is the center of an established cult, the
subsequent travels of the image in Laos reveal the imperative need among
contenders in civil war to carry it in their baggage. We are told that the Sinhala
Buddha accompanies a princess of Chiengmai from Lan Na to Laos, where she
218


--- Page 231 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
marries King Bodhisara, the ruler of Lan Chang. But all hell breaks loose after
Bodhisara dies. His two half-brothers divide up the Laotian kingdom and prepare
to fight each other, and his son Jethadhiraja, who succeeds him in Chiengmai,
leaves for Laos to restore order, taking good care to transport the Emerald
Buddha with him. In Lan Chang he places the Emerald Buddha side by side with
the Sinhala Buddha, which is already there, thus pairing the two historic palladia.
But Jethadhiraja's daily devotion to both images does not assure him the empire
he wants. He eventually, somewhat dispirited, makes his way to Vientienne.
There he aggregates the images in his Laotian capital, and under their guardian-
ship his kingdom experiences some stability and peace.29
Amulets blessed by famous monks of the past
There are, according to one informant, a political scientist at a Bangkok university,
four criteria that determine the power (saksit) of amulets. The first is the age of
the amulet - the older the better. The second is the name and fame of the monk -
the luangphdu or luangpu ("respected father''/"grandfather") - who sacralized
it. The third is the proof it has given of its efficacy to owners. The last is the sum
of money that was paid to purchase it. The heart of the matter is that the most
famous amulets in Thailand today are the Buddha amulets made in batches and
sacralized on certain historic occasions by famous monks credited with virtue and
loving-kindness (mettd), frequently enjoying royal patronage and public respect.
The best-known amulets of the past and those made currently have distinctive
shapes and markings. Each type or batch is alleged to have a special identification
mark (tham ni), usually a distinctive "imperfection," which ensures against
fakes. For like any antique market, the market for amulets is literally flooded with
fakes. Many experts intently peering through magnifying glasses, and many
authoritative books giving pictures and descriptions of amulets, abound in the
bazaars of Bangkok and elsewhere.
THE PHRA SOMDET AMULETS
A famous category of amulets in Thailand are called phra somdet amulets. They
are small tablets, usually made of white or yellow clay, with a figure of a Buddha
sitting in samddhi meditation style embossed on them. The pedestal on which he
sits may have three, seven, or nine layers, three and nine being the more popular.
Historically, perhaps the most famous amulet maker and sacralizer, as judged
by present-day Thai assertions and beliefs, was Luang Phau To, a forest monk
who lived in the period of the fourth and fifth reigns (King Mongkut and King
Chulalongkorn) in the latter half of the last century.30 King Chula in particular is
said to have had much belief in his sanctity and to have patronized him. He is said to
have taken up residence in many different wat in Bangkok, especially during the
219


--- Page 232 ---
The cult of amulets
rains retreat, and to have sacralized these phra somdet amulets. The most famous
amulets are associated with four Bangkok wat:
1. The tablets made at Wat Rakhang show the Buddha seated on a three-layered pedestal
( -=- ). A variant made at Wat Suthat, also with a three-layered pedestal ( -=-1), has
more yellow in the clay as a result of adding more dried jasmine to it.
2. Amulets made at Wat Ketchaiyo have the Buddha seated on a nine-layered pedestal.
The Buddha is also distinguished by his long ears and by an incision on his chest.
3. Another location was Wat Plap; the amulets made there were small and oval shaped; the
pedestal has three layers and the lowest in particular is in strong relief.
4. Amulets with seven-layered pedestals were made for Wat Bangkhunphrom.
The problem of the authenticity of the phra somdet amulets is complicated by
the fact that more than one batch of the same style tablet may have been made at
different times in the same wat and sacralized by Luang Phau To or other monks.
(A still further complication is presented by fakes made widely by amulet sellers
and hawked as the genuine thing.) Anyway, the phra somdet amulet of the first
batch (run), personally sacralized by Luang Phau To, is deemed to be an envied
collector's piece. It is popular knowledge in Bangkok that a big businessman and
millionaire by the name of Pomphan paid 700,000 baht (US $35,000) for a
single tablet of the first batch. There are annual contests held in Bangkok for
judging these Buddha-image amulets (prakuatphra), and Pomphan's piece is the
uncontested winner in its class. It is rumored that another millionaire offered
Pomphan 800,000 baht for the amulet but was, not unexpectedly, refused.
THE PHRA KRING AMULETS
The phra kring amulets are another famous category. The phra kring are small
Buddha images with a hollow inside them containing a small piece of metal so
that when they are shaken a tiny ringing sound is created; "kring" is the
onomatopoeic word that describes the sound. The most famous batch of these
phra kring amulets was made at Wat Bovonniwet, the central wat of the
Thammayut sect, with royal connections under its famous princely abbot Pavares.
He was made supreme patriarch of the Thai sahgha and died in 1892 at the age
of eighty-four after a long period in office. This abbot is famous for two things:
for being the preceptor (upajjhdya) to a king and several princes during their
ordinations as monks (for brief periods), and even more importantly for the
public at large, as the monk who cast and sacralized the amulets that have come
to be called after him Phra Kring Pavares. The official history of the wat reports
as follows: "Only a small number of about thirty were recorded as being made,
and with their rare beauty and perfection including the high supernatural power
which they are believed by later generations to have acquired, these images have
turned into priceless objects sought after by collectors all over the country. Wat
Bovoranives itself possesses only one perfect specimen of this image in its
220


--- Page 233 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
museum . . ."31 Hence it is understandable that there are a number of fakes in the
country being hawked as the genuine article.
Another famous batch of the kring amulets was cast by Wat Suthat, a royal wat
of the Mahanikai sect, and thus named Phra Kring Wat Suthat. Apparently when
first made they were distributed primarily to the nobility. They are much sought
after today.
There is one important fact to be noted about these phra somdet and phra kring
amulets. They were made in the last century by charismatic monks whose careers
were fulfilled at the capital city, usually as abbot of a wat of royal status and as a
titled ecclesiastical official; or at its periphery, as a famous meditation teacher in a
wat belonging to the forest-dwelling tradition. Thus, in a way in the nineteenth
century, both the highest-ranking monks within the city walls of Bangkok and on
the Thonburi shore, and the monks specializing in meditation and ascetic tradi-
tions in wat located on the northern edge of the city, were related to the capital
city and its centralized monarchy in a center-periphery specialization. One
should not underrate the historical processes by which, especially during the
reigns of Mongkut and Chulalongkorn, "sanctity" became aggregated in the
capital. Within the sahgha itself, the new reformist orthodoxy of Pali learning
and adherence to Vinaya discipline sponsored by the Thammayut sect radiated
outward from Bangkok to suffuse and influence the rest of the country.
Let us briefly compare the two monks Prince Pavares and Luang Phau To, both
memorable amulet sacralizers. Prince Pavares derived his charisma from royal
antecedents and royal patronage; moreover, he was the abbot of a wat made
prominent by Mongkut, which since then has acted as the center of the
Thammayut sect. In fact Pavares succeeded Mongkut as the second abbot of Wat
Bovonniwet in the very year (1851) that Mongkut left the sahgha to ascend the
throne.
Luang Phau To32 is particularly intriguing to us because, while following the
path of a peripatetic forest-dwelling monk whose special powers rested on
meditative exercises and slla practices, he also enjoyed good relations with the
ecclesiastical and political authorities of the center. Luang Phau To was a highly
revered monk in the fourth and fifth reigns, excelling both as a forest monk and a
titled monk. On the one hand he rose to the highest reaches of the Thai sahgha,
as signified by the somdet title conferred upon him; yet he centered his activities
on monasteries at the northern edge of the city - Wat In and Wat Mai
Bangkhunphrom - that specialized in meditation, teaching, and practice.33
At both these wat, Luang Phau To built monuments in which he embedded
numerous small images (phrakhrueang), which he blessed and charged with
mystical powers (aphinihdn) traditionally associated with meditating forest-
monks. In King Chulalongkorn's reign, a disciple of Luang Phau To, Luangpu
Phu, became the abbot of Wat In, and he too attained fame for his supernatural
powers emanating from meditative practices.
221


--- Page 234 ---
The cult of amulets
As we have noted with regard to the career of Acharn Mun, the exemplary
Meditation Master, the hardy Thudong monk may found monastic residences and
form cells of disciples, but he is a compulsive wanderer. It therefore comes as no
surprise that Luangpu Phu and Somdet To would periodically leave Bangkok to
wander in the forest.
To this day, Wat In bears evidence of the prestige and special powers of Somdet
To, who, among other exploits, built a giant outdoor standing Buddha. This
statue, principally because of its association with Somdet To, and the radiant
small images he filled it with, receives from the laity both offerings and requests
for protection throughout the year. This continuing popularity of the wat comes
each year to a climax in its week-long fair, at which generous piety and robust fun
mix in agreeable fashion.
Special attention is being drawn to these facts because, while in the nineteenth
century - especially in the reigns of King Mongkut and King Chulalongkorn -
the capital was not only the political center but also the religious hub, and from
these centralities stemmed power and charisma of various sorts that was distri-
buted outward to the society and country at large, the most famous forest-monk
monasteries specializing in meditation and ascetic practices were on the periphery
of Bangkok. Today, as we shall see, the capital has to go to the periphery of the
country, to its faraway provinces, to find "saintly" monks and receive special
blessings from their hands. This reversal is a reflection of the crisis in political
and moral confidence in Bangkok (1978).
The power of historic sites and centers of political and religious authority to
fecundate the present is represented by the scramble for relics, amulets, and
antique objects when they surface from archaeological excavations sponsored by
the government or from illegal digs. The latter piracy is quite common, and the
well-stocked antique shops in Bangkok bear witness to the profitability of the
activity. Let me cite one example of how ancient capital cities and historic sites
have yielded objects vibrating with living power:
In 1957 in the course of excavation valuable antiques were discovered in the
crypt of Wat Ratburana, a historic wat in the old capital of Ayudhya. This wat was
built in the fifteenth century by King Paramaraja II (Cao Sam Phraya) in memory
of his two older brothers (Ai and Yi), who died righting each other in a succession
conflict. The double killing occurred in classical heroic style when the two
combatants exchanged blows seated on charging elephants. The surviving brother
built the wat as an expiation for their bloody acts and in memory of his fallen
brothers. Among the valuables found were royal regalia made of gold and
precious stones, jewelry, golden images of the Buddha, and some 84,000 small
images of the Buddha in different styles. It is the last item that concerns us here,
for they are clay amulets, which are much in demand today. I was informed that
the government sold a vast number of these amulets to the public and that the
proceeds collected helped to finance the building of the Cao Sam Phraya National
Museum in Ayudhya, which houses the antiques found.
222


--- Page 235 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
Another category of Buddha amulets that owe their popularity to their connec-
tion with a historical center are the Phra Ruang amulets. Phra Ruang is alleged to
have been the name (or title) of the first king of Sukhodaya; the same name has
been conferred upon his dynastic successors. These amulets reproduce the form
of the Sukhodaya-style Buddha and divide into some three kinds: the Phra Ruang
Poet Lok, which "opens the world"; the Phra Ruang Nang Puen, which has a
bullet impression in the back; and the Phra Ruang Song Puen, on which is
imprinted a bow and arrow. All these amulets confer invulnerability to injury
from bullets and weapons.
Other amulets
The third class of amulets is residual and is composed of a vast number of highly
miscellaneous objects - representations of gods, humans, animals, birds, and
anomalous beings who are credited with varied potencies defying exhaustive
listing: sexual prowess, success in business, personal charms, sweet talk, physi-
cal strength, and so on (see Figure 6). In theory, these objects have been
sacralized by the potent words of monks or lay cult masters claiming special
powers; in fact, there is no way of knowing who made them and who sacralized
them. They are fetishes that cost little and in some cases may be taken to
specialists for a new sacralization with chanted words and holy water sprinkling.
But as we shall see from the individual descriptions below, apart from the
specialist's ritual input many of these objects are representations of animals,
birds, or other things whose "natural" properties are metaphorically and met-
onymically transferred to the owner of the amulet.
For the purpose of description, I shall divide these variegated amulets into two
classes: human beings and deities; and animals and birds.
HUMAN BEINGS AND DEITIES
I. Rak yom.34 These are two small figures of two brothers carved of wood and put into a
bottle containing sandalwood oil. Rak means black; rak is the older brother carved from
a black wood; yom is the younger brother made of white wood. The perfumed oil is said
to be the food of this pair of brothers, who are alleged to give protection to the person
carrying them. Before an owner goes on a trip, he (or she) tells the amulet words to this
effect: liRak yom my sons, go with me who am your father (or mother) and protect me
from danger.'' It is also claimed that if a man were to daub some of the oil on a woman,
she would fall crazily in love with him.
We may note that the pair of black and white brothers are boys who are
supposed to be at the service of the owner. The owner of the amulet seeks to
control and employ for his use the strength, energy, compliance, and dependence
of immature boys.
223


--- Page 236 ---
Figure 6. An assortment of amulets purchased by the author in Bangkok. Three of them are described in the text:
pit td hd lap ("cover eyes and find fortune"), wuakrathing (the gaur, a ferocious wild buffalo), and palat khik (penis).


--- Page 237 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
2. Kumdn thdung. This is also the figure of a small child. If made of wood, he too is kept
in a bottle of sandal wood oil; if made of metal, he is worn or carried in the usual way.
What is distinctive about Kumdn thdung is that he has only one testicle, and in Thai
belief such an anomalous person has much strength, power (saksif), and sexual
prowess. A one-testicled man does not have to be fortified by amulets - for he is a
superior athlete. In fact, the Thai expression for such a person is that he has "copper
testicle" (kabdn thdung ddeng), copper here signifying the burnished strength of the
metal. Before an owner of Kumdn thdung - as indeed of rak yom - eats a meal, he as
their "father" and provider should invite them to partake of it.
Incidentally, it is relevant to note that in the popular Thai classic novel Khun
Chang Khun Phden, Khun Phaen is described as killing his pregnant wife,
extracting the foetus, saying sacred words (sek khdthd) over it, and then using the
ghost baby as a Kumdn thdung. An amulet seller had this to say of Kumdn
thdung: "He is the ghost of a dead male child. You can ask him to do things for
you. He will take care of your house and he will hit on the head of anyone who
enters without permission. You can command him to go and tell a woman that
you love her."
3. Ndng Kwak means the beckoning woman; the amulet made of metal or clay shows a
kneeling woman beckoning with one hand, which is said to represent her calling clients
and buyers to shops. It is thus a popular amulet among male and female traders, shop-
keepers and peddlers (phdu khd mde khd).
An alternative embodiment is a plant, actually called ndng kwak, which is grown
in front of shops by merchants. It is a plant of the sedge variety and has a lush
growth of leaves, an apt representation of plenty. It is fast growing and spreads
with ease.
4. Pit td hd lap, literally meaning "cover eyes and find fortune," consists of a sitting
figure who has closed his eyes with his hands. The amulet enables the carrier to attract
other persons who will love you and give you gifts. The following story was told me by
an amulet seller: There was once a handsome young monk, and people fell in love with
him and wanted to offer food and gifts to him. To escape this importunate plenitude, he
closed his eyes so that the lay admirers could no more see his face. In spite of this they
continued to come and see him and to love him.
5. Pit td mahd ut is a sitting figure who has closed all his orifices - eyes, ears, genitals,
and anus - with his hands and feet. This figure who is thus closed up from external
intrusion protects the possessor from outside harm. By the same token, its efficacy is
double-edged, for if left at home it may close the doors to good fortune entering the
house, or if carried by a pregnant woman it may block childbirth. The principle behind
the ambivalence may be stated as follows: The closing of the body's orifices results in
the conservation of the insides and the prevention of intrusion from outside. According
to context, either of these features may be an advantage or a disadvantage.
6. Phra Ngang is a metal image of a deity that has a curved phallic-looking horn
projection on its head; it is believed to enhance the possessor's sexual powers. The
amulet is alleged to come from Cambodia.
7. Phra Siwali is a representation of a wandering ascetic (doen Thudong), an old monk,
225


--- Page 238 ---
The cult of amulets
carrying umbrella and stick. It is said that a person who possesses and respects it will
never starve, because the ascetic traveling alone in the forest was able to subsist by
himself.
8. Jujaka is the greedy old brahman, who in the well-known Vessantara Jdtaka (which
describes the Buddha's acts of selfless giving in his life previous to his last one),
prodded by his young wife, asks Vessantara for the gift of his two sons. An amulet
seller explained that one who carries the Jujaka image will have servants and youth to
serve him, but since the old brahman was an evil person, monks will never sacralize his
amulet by chanting. This is left to a lay expert.
9. Kanhdjdli are the figures of the two sons of Prince Vessantara (Kanhajina and Jali); they
are joined together and are shown in a kneeling position showing obedience to their
father. The implication is that the amulet owner will have control over servants and
young subordinates.
ANIMALS AND BIRDS
Let us now describe the animal and bird amulets.
1. Sdlikd khu are a pair of mynah birds that face each other. This amulet will make
people show mettd toward you; they will feel close toward you in the fashion of the
two birds exchanging mutual looks and amity. The mynah bird is noted for its pleasant
sounds, and a popular love charm is called Sdlikd linthdung (golden tongue) and
enables the possessor to talk sweetly.
2. Pld ngden pld thdung means "silver fish, gold fish" and is popular once again with
traders and shopkeepers because they are believed to facilitate the sale of goods and
confer prosperity. The most usual form of the amulet is a pair of fish, colored gold and
silver, which are hung like a mobile over the doorways to shops under which
customers must pass.
3. Sai is a bamboo fish trap that again is hung in shops (sometimes even taxi drivers have
small sai dangling above the dashboards of their taxis) and is believed to bring money
on the analogy of fish being caught in a trap. (Although it is an inanimate device, it is
conveniently included in this section.)
4. Siphueng. This is a set of four amulets placed in a circular plastic box. On a base of
beeswax are placed images of a mynah (sdlikd) bird, of a pair of silver and gold fish,
of the beckoning woman (these three have already been described), and a miniature
waistband. All these amulets combine to produce good fortune and the ability to
charm others through a show of kindness (mettd).
The sdlikd sings mellifluously, and the amulet enables one to become a
silver-tongued enticer. This personal charm enables one to persuade others, and
persuasion here is not limited to romantic conquests. A trader needs charm to win
his buyer with compliant words and deeds and a client needs it to win favors from
his patron. The silver and gold fish and the beckoning woman help achieve the
same results, especially in commerce.
The beeswax has a similar role to play. It is believed that if you approach a
woman or a superior (phuyai) with beeswax daubed on your lips, you will be able
226


--- Page 239 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
to persuade them to show kindness toward you. The English phrase ''honeyed
talk" conveys the idea perfectly.
5. Singtd is the representation of a mythical lion, which is very popular in the country. It
is not irrelevant that it is the emblem of the Ministry of Interior, the most powerful
ministry in the government, which controls local administration, the police force,
primary education, and so on. It is also interesting that the two major universities,
Thammasat and Chulalongkorn, sport the lion emblem, in different colors, on their
crest. The Thammasat students refer to themselves as the "red lions" and the Chula
students as "black lions."
6. Sing is the lion as it is known in its natural form in the forest. The sing amulet gives
the wearer protection from fanged and dangerous animals.
7. Suea, the tiger, has the same potency. The popular notion is that when one wears this
amulet one "feels hot" {rauri) and energized, and thus one is aroused to go out and
fight other people. Generally in Thai usage the state of feeling hot in this sense
signifies animation and a capacity to do things both physically and intellectually; thus
rdun wichd means the capacity to talk impressively with others rendered by acquiring
knowledge of a subject.
8. Wuakrathing, the gaur, a ferocious and strong beast of the wild-buffalo variety, again
is a potent symbol for reasons easily perceived. There has in recent years grown up in
Thailand a rightist, anticommunist, illiberal, and "neofascist" youth movement that
specializes in violence and calls itself the "red gaurs."
9. Nok Khum is a bird that traditionally is associated with the protection of houses and
buildings against fire and theft.
10. Khiao mu thuean is the boar's tusk used as an amulet. The much sought after but rare
tusk is solid right through, not hollow. The boar's tusk is frequently used in exorcism
ceremonies; the body of the patient possessed by a spirit (phi) is stabbed and scored
with the tusk and the spirit is thus forced to leave (khap lai phi).35 The tusk is also
seen as granting protection from attack and penetration by spirits.
It is clear that many of these human, deity, animal, and bird amulets are used
for the control and manipulation of other persons; a few are used for distinctly
nefarious purposes. Although these amulets can be made and sacralized by lay
specialists, still some of the most famous makers are said to be certain liiang
phdu (respected father) monks. In such cases, we are definitely dealing with,
from the viewpoint of doctrinal purity, the "degenerate" end of the monk
spectrum: If the famous forest-monks at the top are regarded as saints conferring
their mettd in laudable ways, these other monks at the bottom are definitely
looked upon as dabbling in "magical" arts (saiyasdt) and laying claim to
mystical skills that have little to do with the path of purification and nirvana
liberation. These are the higher and lower paths within the community of monks.
Some names of elderly monks famous for making certain potent amulets were
reported to me. Luang Phau Plae of Wat Pikunthong in Bangkok had a reputation
for sacralizing amulets of the beckoning woman, the silver and gold fish, and the
one-testicled boy; he made golden-tongued mynah bird amulets for evoking love;
227


--- Page 240 ---
The cult of amulets
animal amulets of lions, tigers, and gaurs to give protection from wild animals,
including snake bites; and fire-protection amulets. Luang Phau Khane, who
resides in Pracinburi Province, was famous for making the pair of black and
white brothers (rak yom); Luang Phau I, for making the penis amulets (palat
khik). Luang Phau Seng of Wat Kalyanamit (Bangkok) has a wide reputation as a
master tattooer, an art that is concerned with imparting protection and good
fortune by means of designs and figures painted or tattooed on the body.
Street machismo and the amulet craze
In the course of my fieldwork in Bangkok in 1978 (as well as during my previous
work in the city in 1971 and 1973), I traveled in taxis and buses. I felt that the
traffic was so dangerous and the chances of accident and theft so imminent that it
was the counsel of caution not to drive a car myself. I daily saw a frightening
show of aggressiveness and machismo, especially on the part of taxi drivers, who
virtually terrorized other drivers by speeding, weaving in and out, making sudden
stops, and violating traffic rules - though not an insignificant number of civilian
drivers also participated in this free-for-all. The taxi drivers were by no means the
exception; they were the focal examples. It seemed to me that the city's roads
were an extraordinary site wherein the ordinary man, the lowly commoner, and
recent rural immigrant, sitting in control of an engine on wheels, felt free to show
no respect for the status of other motorists and to muscle his way through. Thai
society, as we well know, is hidebound by etiquette, respect norms, and krengcai
modesty; it is patterned on asymmetrical relations between patrons and clients,
superiors and inferiors (phuyai and phunoi), in the office, factory, home, and
army. The streets of Bangkok are one location where anonymity reigns, and
status holds no sway (except where the police or royalty are concerned). The Thai
can be as aggressive as hell on the roads, and they combine this with a
preoccupation with protection from danger and with physical safety. With the
gun, a soldier or a thug carries amulets and symbols of good fortune. The show
of power by laymen is accompanied by a cannibalizing search for the men of
piety and charisma who can confer blessings and immunities upon them.
By 1978, there were other manifestations in the society at large, which were
of one piece with this traffic behavior. The urban crime rate was soaring,
including rape and violence. Of another order were the student insurrections,
which were met with a show of ruthless strength by the armed forces; the
mounting insurgency movements in the provinces; and the farmers' demonstra-
tions and labor strikes: All these also signify an unleashing of aggression in the
society at large and a questioning of a constituted and conservative authority
whose legitimacy is at stake.
The juxtaposition in the same society of contexts of status-bound propriety and
self-effacing obedience to authority, on the one hand, with, on the other, spas-
228


--- Page 241 ---
An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
modic bursts of violence, retaliation, and rebellion, is gaining increasing salience
and is truly coming to a head in the metropolis of Bangkok.
One derives an oblique understanding of the juxtaposition by carefully studying
the stylistic aspects and the presentational idiom of traditional Thai murals and
paintings, where the highborn and high-ranked heroes and heroines wear
stereotyped, frozen, masklike expressions - static, elegant, formal - and express
their internal power with minimal, controlled movements, while the lowborn
commoners and rambunctious individuals portray dynamic face and limb move-
ments and even excesses of conduct.36
There is today a certain transformation in this "feudalistic" concept of the
different behavioral styles of the high- and low-status orders. Increasingly, the
traditional vertical alignment is being eroded by competition between diverse
groups in which persons irrespective of rank or status, soldier and man in the
street, official and student, worker and farmer, are expressing both styles of
behavior - stylized etiquette and unbuttoned aggression - in different social and
political contexts and in their separate ways.
In a sense, then, the Thai craze for and insatiable collection of protective
amulets and other fetishes should be viewed in relation to their propensities and
preoccupations with the exercise of power, in which violence shows its dark face.
That it is men rather than women who obsessively collect amulets is in accord
with the fact that it is they who predominantly participate in violent competition
for coercive power.
But this is only one facet of contemporary Thai society. Its obsession with
amulets, its lavish ''merit making," and its insatiable consultation of astrologers
and diviners - women are even more avid participants than men in the latter two
activities - are a function as much of hopeful aspirations for social mobility; for
making money in an expanding, though stilted, urban economy; and for achiev-
ing career success through education as they are of authoritarian domination, vast
disparities of wealth and power, and uncertainties of international politics.
229


--- Page 242 ---
16
The ' 'likeness" of the image
to the original Buddha
The case of the Sinhala Buddha
The Buddha images, and other objects that imitate them, are created with power
and energy because they have undergone a "life-giving process" that "animates"
them. The "life-giving process" is the subject of this and the next chapter; it has
two "circuits" linked up in the rites that sacralize the images and transfer
potency to them. Griswold has succinctly stated the essence of the whole phenome-
non of sacralization as practiced in Thailand:
Usually life and miraculous powers are transfused into new images from an older one - the
chief cult image of a monastery which in turn has received them from a still older one, and
so on back to one of the original likenesses. To transmit the succession to the images that
are about to be cast, a long "sacred cord" is formed into a circuit: attached at its
beginning to the cult image, it passes along a line of monks, each one holding it between
his fingers; continuing its way, it encircles each of the moulds prepared for the new images;
finally it returns to the cult image so as to complete the circuit. One or more of the monks
go into meditative trance, producing an invisible charge in the circuit which transmits the
life and supernatural qualities of the cult image to the new ones as the metal is poured.1
The first circuit consists of joining a newly cast image to an existing sacralized,
and probably historic and famous, image by a cord such that the latter's energies
and virtues can be transmitted to the former. The underlying logic of this is that
there is a line of authenticated images or statues, which represent a line of
likeness or similitude leading back ultimately to the original (historical) Buddha
himself.
The second circuit relates to the fact that the rite of charging with life is
conducted principally by monk-officiants, through whose hands too the sacred
cord of transmission passes, and who by chanting and through meditation
energize the image. To cite Griswold again: "Important castings, which take
place in monastery precincts at an auspicious moment chosen by astrologers, are
accompanied by a life-giving rite. The purchasers of routine images, cast without
ceremony in the craftman's shop, arrange for them to share in such a rite in a
monastery at the first opportunity."2
230


--- Page 243 ---
"Likeness" of the image to the original Buddha
We have developed in the preceding chapter some of the implications of the
"orthodox" Theravada doctrinal position - that the Buddha image made in the
"likeness" of the historical Buddha is a "reminder" of his teachings and virtues,
of his victories over desire and ignorance. We also noted that, in due course, in
both Mahayana and Theravada traditions the Buddha image came to be credited
with "radiance" and "fiery energy," an attribution that goes back to the Buddha's
experience of "enlightenment."
In Buddhist societies, it is held that in order to inherit some fraction of the
infinite virtue and power the Buddha possessed, an image must trace its lineage
back to one made in the "authentic" likeness of the Master himself. But how can
the patron, the one who commissions an image, be certain that the statue he
chooses as a model is really in an authentic line of succession? The safest course
is to choose as a model a statue that has already proved itself by its unusual,
supranormal powers. Because such a proven statue will have already become
illustrious, there is every reason to copy a famous one, none at all to copy an
obscure one.
An investigation of the ramifications surrounding the pedigree of Buddha
statues, and how their authenticity relates to their alleged virtues and powers, has
to grapple with issues of these kinds:
1. How is the "likeness" of the image to the original living Buddha reckoned?
2. If successor images are replications of "originals," how does one account for changes
in iconography and style?
3. If replications and copies of "originals" can be made, how much of the virtue and
powers of the originals do they embody?
4. In turn, if copies of "originals" are possible, then copies (or fakes) can be passed off or
substituted for "originals"; what are the circumstances under which such switches
become possible, even advantageous, for the owners or sponsors?
5. What is the place of the sponsor and the maker of an image, and its sacralizer, in the
assessment of its virtues?
6. What is the weight given to the material of which the image is made (e.g., bronze,
stone) and with which it is decorated or overlaid (e.g., gold leaf and jewels) in the
reckoning of its virtues?
It is of course not possible to address all the issues here, but let me hang some
of them on the peg of the authenticity of the Buddha statue and treat the question
of authenticity in relation to a famous Buddha statue, the Phra Sihing or Sinhala
Buddha, which was believed to possess supranormal powers, and which con-
ferred legitimacy and powers upon many kings and rulers in Thailand and Laos in
the role of palladium of their polities (see Figure 7). I shall first plot the travels
of the Sinhala Buddha because they provide the religio-political context for
understanding the dialectically related issues of an image's authentic likeness to
the Buddha himself and the inevitability of reproductions and copies of'' originals.''
Two principal sources will be used to discuss the career of the Sinhala Buddha.
The first, the Jinakdlamdll chronicle,3 was allegedly composed by a monk
231


--- Page 244 ---
The cult of amulets
Figure 7. The Sifthala Buddha in the National Museum, Bangkok.
around the second decade of the sixteenth century (1515-16) during the reign of
King Tilakapanattu of Chiengmai. It is an unadulterated panegyric that seeks to
establish the pure lineage of Northern Thai Buddhism and to represent the
Northern kingdoms as Buddhist polities in which kingship and sahgha are
closely interwoven and mutually supportive. The centerpieces of the chronicle
are King Tilokaraja, who ascended the throne in A.D. 1441, and his grandson,
King Tilakapanattu, who began his reign in 1495, during which the chronicle
was composed.
The second and earlier source is the Phra Buddha Sihing chronicle,4 whose
author was, if the accounts given of the history of Chiengmai are trustworthy, a
monk named Bodhiransi, who is also said to have written the famous work
Cdmadevivamsa. The Phra Buddha Sihing was composed in Pali around A.D.
1417.
The travels of the Sinhala Buddha were truly remarkable as described in the
chronicles and as popularly believed in Thailand. Prince Damrong, the great
administrator and writer in the reign of King Chulalongkom in the latter part of
the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth, placed the first landing
232


--- Page 245 ---
"Likeness" of the image to the original Buddha
of the statue at Nagara Sri Dharmaraja, and its subsequent removal to Sukhodaya
by King Ramkhamhaeng, between 1277 and 1317. From there it traveled to
these kingdoms and principalities: Ayudhya in 1378; Kamphaengphet in 1382;
Chiangrai in 1388; Chiengmai in 1407, after the Burmese had taken Ayudhya;
and finally Bangkok in 1795, when Chiengmai came under Siamese (Central
Thai) control.
The Sinhala Buddha has a momentous significance in Thailand, because it
(like the Emerald Buddha) is associated in Thai traditions with the first coming of
the "pure" Pali Buddhism from Polonnaruva in Sri Lanka to Sukhodaya in
Thailand (and Pagan in Burma) in the thirteenth century. In the Thai collective
consciousness, the coming of this pure Buddhism and the founding of the first
Thai kingdoms are cotemporal and interwoven.
We have already mentioned in Chapter 5 that the religious vitalization first in
Sukhodaya in North-central Thailand, and subsequently in the Northern Lan Na
polities in the Chiengmai region, was closely associated with the Sinhala sect of
forest-dwelling monks (drannavdsi), especially under the leadership of the monk
Sumana. It should come as no surprise, then, that the authors of the Jinakdlamdli
and Phra Buddha Sihing chronicles were members of the Sinhala fraternity of
monks who forged a close legitimating alliance with the burgeoning Thai rulers
and their polities. The Sinhala Buddha itself is in large part an "objective
correlative'' in Thai consciousness of the historic Northern Thai interaction with
the Sinhala sect of forest dwellers.
The travels of the Sinhala Buddha
The Sinhala Buddha was alleged to have been made in Sri Lanka about 700 years
after the passing away of the Buddha. But some 1,800 years ago, it traveled to
Thailand. According to the Jinakdlamdli, the Sinhalese king allowed the image
to be dispatched to Thailand upon receiving a request from King Ramkhamhaeng
of Sukhodaya, who had been informed of the wondrous nature of the Sinhala
image by the king of Nagara Sri Dharmaraja.
Driven by a severe gale, the ship that carried the image hit a rock and was
wrecked. "But the Sinhalese image remained (afloat) on a single plank. The
plank drifted along for three days and reached, by the power of the Naga kings,
the vicinity of the city of Siridhamma."5 Guided by a dream, the king of Nagara
Sri Dharmaraja went in a ship looking for it, and rescued the image. He then sent
word to Ramkhamhaeng, who personally came to the city of Nagara Sri
Dharmaraja and conducted the image to Sukhodaya. King Ramkhamhaeng built
a magnificent thupa (stw/ra/reliquary monument) at Sajjanalaya, together with an
image house resembling a celestial abode, and he dedicated them in the presence
of assembled multitudes from the cities of Sajjanalaya, Kamphaengphet, Suk-
hodaya, and Chainat.
233


--- Page 246 ---
SHAN STATES
JiariR
ivari Brah
Pan
g Phrabing
LAN J_AN
(LANCHANGI
1 \V 
.„
Nagara Svarga (Nakhyn &Tw
Labapur
Ayudhya
uiihaya)
(Naklipn Pathom)
RajapurT{RatcliaburT)
f
(BejrapurT
• 
) 
(PhcichaburT
Angkor^
Tante Sap 
{Lakejt^
CAMB6DIA\
Jaberj
The travels of the SiAhala Buddha, beginning from Sukhodaya. The arrows indicate the direction of
the journeys and the numbers next to the arrows their sequence.


--- Page 247 ---
"Likeness" of the image to the original Buddha
What do we make of this arrival story? We know that Nagara Sri Dharmaraja,
situated in South Thailand, is one of the oldest centers of Buddhism; we are
aware that the "upstart" kingdom of Sukhodaya stands to gain by having among
its credentials amicable contact with this historical city, which in fact is tradition-
ally viewed as having contact with Sinhala Buddhism and as being a source for
the transmission of that Buddhism to Sukhodaya. Thus, in the legend Nagara Sri
Dharmaraja is the mediator between Sinhala Buddhism and Sukhodayan religion.
The Jinakdlamdli next gives this account of the image's fortunes and travels
(see map). King Ramkhamhaeng's successors honored and venerated it, and
certain events took place in the reign of King Lideya (LIthai/Luthai), who was
widely known as Dhammaraja, "the Righteous Monarch." Ramadhipati, para-
mount lord of Kamboja kingdom, whose capital was the city of Ayudhya,
captured the city of Chainat, but subsequently consented to return it to LIthai
Dhammaraja, who then conducted the Sinhala image to the city of Chainat and
honored it there.
After LIthai's death, the usurper Vattiteja, who had seized the city of Ayudhya
(and the kingdom of Kamboja), succeeded in capturing the city of Chainat, and
took the image away to Ayudhya and honored it there. The king of Kamphaengphet,
desiring to possess this fabulous image, sent his mother to seduce Ramadhipati
with pleasant words, and she managed to get hold of the image and to dispatch it
with haste to her son.
Our story then takes us to Mahabrahma, the ruler of Chiangrai and Chiengmai.
(The P' ra Buddha Sihing chronicle,6 taking the ruler of Chiangrai7 as the point
of reference, relates a myth of origin of the image that I shall reproduce in the
next section. At this point, let us stay with the Jinakdlamdli text.) Mahabrahma
heard about the wondrous Sinhala image from a monk who had come from the
South and who whetted his desire for the image by showing a wax model of it that
he had made. Equipping an army, Mahabrahma marched to Kamphaengphet
to capture the image from King Tipanna, the current possessor of it. In due
course, a reconciliation between Tipanna and Mahabrahma was arranged; gifts
were exchanged, and Mahabrahma succeeded in persuading Tipanna to part with
the image.
King Mahabrahma, "who felt as though annointed with nectar, in due course
arrived at the city of Nabbisi (Chiengmai) carrying the Sihala-image in a golden
palanquin and placed the Sihala-image in the Great Monastery inside the inner
city." Soon, however, Mahabrahma moved the image "to the city of Jarhraya
(Chiangrai) for the purpose of making another image of bronze, its exact
replica," and he consecrated this replica at Pallankandlpaka in Chlangsaen.
Bringing the Sinhala image back to Jamraya, he kept it for a while at the
monastery of Mahabuddharupa and had still another replica, resembling the
original in dimensions and appearance, "cast from an alloy of bronze, lead, gold
and silver and held a great ceremony in honour of the dedication of the Buddha
statue."8
235


--- Page 248 ---
The cult of amulets
In this account of the travels of the Sinhala Buddha, travels so intimately
connected with the imperatives of kingship and kingdom making, a couple of
points that emerge at the end should be underscored. We are clearly told that
Mahabrahma placed the image in a wat situated in the inner city. Because the
most important complex in the inner city is, of course, the king's palace, the
implication is that the image is housed in a shrine on the palace grounds. In other
words, it is a royal palladium. We are also privy to the remarkable fact that
Mahabrahma had two replicas of the Sinhala image cast, which he planted in two
major cities in his kingdom; the original itself being in his capital. We see in this
act the process of distributing the charisma of the image at different points in the
kingdom; but this same act has also resulted in the making of three Sinhala
Buddhas, whose existence would in later times raise the question of authenticity
among contesting rivals, all claiming to be the real thing. In fact, some scholars
have pointed out that Mahabrahma's casting of the replicas accounts for the
presence of at least three present-day images, all claiming to be Sihingbuddharupa:
one at Bangkok, another at Wat Phra Sing at Chiengmai, and a third at Nagara
Sri Dharmaraja. There are in fact more pretenders in existence, a matter that may
be the despair of art historians but a joy to the social scientist investigating the
phenomena of charisma and sovereignty and their fragmentation and aggregation.
We shall return to this matter in the section below entitled "Fact and Fiction."
The origin myth of the Sinhala Buddha
With the record of the travels of the Sinhala image behind us, let us now
scrutinize its origin myth, of which we shall refer here to two versions, the
second of which is more important for us.
i. The Jinakdlamdll gives this account.9 Seven-hundred years after the passing
away of the Buddha, there lived "twenty canker-waned Arahants" on the island
of Lanka. The Sinhalese king, wishing to see a likeness of the Buddha, visited
the elder of the monastic order and, referring to the tradition that the Buddha had
visited the island three times, inquired whether anyone who had seen him then
was alive. "At that very instant, on account of the canker-waned Arahants, the
king of the Nagas appeared before him in the guise of a youth and created a
likeness of the Buddha in order to dispel the doubt of the king of the SIhalas. For
seven days and nights the king paid homage to the image of the Buddha." He then
summoned sculptors, had a beeswax model made in the likeness of the apparition,
and had an "alloy of molten tin, gold and silver poured within." When the
shaping was finished, the image "became dazzling and resplendent like the
living Buddha himself." The king venerated the image, and "his sons, grandsons
and greatgrandsons too, in lineal descent, paid homage to the SIhala-image."
Let me make a preliminary comment or two before we pass on to the second
version of the myth. We note that the canker-waned arahants are the intermediar-
236


--- Page 249 ---
"Likeness" of the image to the original Buddha
ies between king and ndga - their spiritual merit enables the unusual manifesta-
tion. Secondly, the constant references to seven days and nights in the myths and
legends - seven days and nights for which the apparition of the Buddha lasts, the
same period of time for which kings pay homage to images, and so on - seem to
recall the great "awakening" of the Buddha's enlightenment, when for seven
days and seven nights he remained in abstracted bliss. Might one suggest then,
especially in respect of the reiterated pious ambition of reproducing in images the
Buddha's "likeness," that just as a watch or trance of seven days and nights
concluded for Gotama the attainment of Buddhahood, so the same period com-
pletes for the devotee the contemplation of the Buddha image or the paying of
homage to it? As we shall see, the gap between the ambition to realize the
Buddha's likeness and the impossibility of realizing it in actual fact constitutes a
rich theme for generating events in mytho-history.
2. The second version of the myth - contained in the Fra Buddha Sihinga
chronicle - is not only richer and more complex, but also its first recitation is
described as taking place in a context that allows us to infer the myth's performa-
tive significance. The context is that of the enthusiastic espousal of the Buddhism
of the Sinhala sect of forest-dwelling monks, and, even more significantly
perhaps, of the integral role that the newly arrived technology of the casting and
worship of images played in the propagation of the religion.
The background for the recitation of the myth of the Pra Sihing is as follows.
The image had exhibited its miraculous powers in its first place of residence in
Sukhodaya. King Kuena of the Lan Na, desiring to introduce in his kingdom the
forest-dwelling monks who had vitalized religion so much in Sukhodaya, invited
their leader Sumana to come to his kingdom and settled him in Lamphun.
Sumana requested that the king of Lan Na have four standing images of the
Buddha cast as an aid to his propagation of religion. This is one of the first
references to the casting of bronze images in Northern Thailand.
As this point of time the Prince of Chlangrai, the ruler of a nearby principality,
was visited by a monk who showed the prince a wax replica of a very famous
image known as the Sinhala Buddha, which belonged to the ruler of Kam-
phaengphet. After relating the many wonders it had performed, the monk told its
antecedents:
Some seven centuries after the Buddha's passing away, three princes of Sri
Lanka wanted an image made in his authentic likeness. While they were consult-
ing some holy men, a benign dragon {ndga) appeared, and, saying that he had
known the Sage well, offered to provide a model. He transformed himself into an
apparition of the Buddha, resplendent with the bodily markings of the mahdpurisa
(great man) and seated in the attitude of meditation. He had warned the holy men
not to worship the apparition, as that would involve demerit. After allowing them
seven days to study his apparition, he resumed his normal form and went
away. Artists were summoned to make a wax mould from the holy men's
description. Gold, silver, and tin, amounting to sixteen coconut-shell measures,
237


--- Page 250 ---
The cult of amulets
were collected, and while the molten metal was being poured into the mould, a
prince struck in anger an incompetent workman with his stick. This evil deed
caused a defect in the casting of the statue's hand. The soothsayers advised that
the defect should be left as it was because a later owner would repair it. The
monk then related the subsequent career of the image, the details of which we
have already considered. Note in this story that once again it is royal persons who
yearn for an authentic likeness of the Buddha and holy men (arahants) who
provide the proper ambience for the miraculous manifestation.10.
The second version tells us that the image, constituted of precious metals and
cast with elaborate preparation, is flawed in the outcome because of an evil deed
committed by one of the princes: To my mind this flaw, as a mythic device,
creates a tension and a contradiction that impel an unfolding of events. The flaw
makes the image an incomplete likeness at a third remove (an incompleteness
already implied in its being a recollection of an apparition of the real Buddha);
but the flaw has a positive function. It also creates the possibility of a more
virtuous king of the future owning the image and making it complete and perfect;
however, until that time arrives (this virtuous king will of course always be that
royal person currently aspiring to capture it from another), the image will pass
from hand to hand, a pawn in a war of unsavory stratagems between rival kings.
Indeed, the monk's recitation of the famous image's story incited the prince of
Chiangrai to wage a war with the ruler of Kamphaengphet to gain the prize by
force and induced the besieged ruler to part with an image. Delighted with the
miracles it performed, he took it home and had a copy of it made in bronze.
Fact and fiction
Keeping in mind the career of the Sinhala Buddha as related in the chronicles, let
us finally ask "what are the 'facts' of the case as may be seen by an archaeolo-
gist-art historian?" According to Griswold, the original Buddha image that is
claimed to have come from Sri Lanka cannot be identified today, nor for that
matter the image the prince of Chiangrai got from Kamphaengphet. Currently in
Thailand, there are five or six images that are located in different towns, which
popular opinion identifies with the original; five of these are in the Lan Na style
of the golden age, while the sixth, located in the southern town of Nagara Sri
Dharmaraja, shows features of the Ayudhyan style. None of them could have
been made in Sri Lanka, the mythic place of origin. The connoisseurs of
Bangkok claim to have the authentic image in their capital, but such claims do
not go uncontested by the inhabitants of the historic cities Chiengmai and Nagara
Sri Dharmaraja.
In any case, the tradition of the Sinhala Buddha belongs to the era that
coincides with the beginning of a school of bronze sculpture in Lan Na and a
238


--- Page 251 ---
"Likeness" of the image to the original Buddha
revitalization of Buddhism inspired by, and based on, the Sukhodaya tradition.
Hence, Griswold has dubbed the Tai Yuan imitations of Sukhodaya statues as
"the style of Sumana," a style that preceded the style of the "Lion" type
associated with the renowned reign of King Tilok.
We must conclude this story with the Pra Sihing image, which now resides in
the National Museum of Bangkok. It is seated in the attitude of meditation, and
Griswold deems it a fine example of the Mixed type of the Lan Na golden age - a
style that was concurrent with the Lion type of Lan Na. It is likely that it was the
"Sinhala" Buddha the people of Chiengmai were worshiping in the latter part of
King Tilok's reign.
How then are we to fit this fact of a later dating of the museum's exhibit, and
the hypothesis that the Sinhala Buddha came into prominence at an earlier
period, the period of "the style of Sumana"? The unraveling might start with the
proposition that the "original" Sinhala Buddha, referred to in the chronicle of
that name, was a Sukhodaya copy of a Sinhalese original or else was the copy, at a
further remove, made by the prince of Chlangrai. The chronicle closes with the
installation of the image in 1389, but adds a prophecy that it would be taken back
to Ceylon in 1457. This prophecy of departure is also a prophecy of the image's
return to Chiengmai - in other words, the "reappearance" (as an event in the
legend) should imply the creation of a copy at yet one more remove, a figure of
the Lan Na Mixed type, incorporating the iconography of its predecessors in
important respects. This creation is probably the National Museum's present
exhibit (Figure 7).
The Sinhala Buddha's fortunes have declined in the past few centuries. It
appears that in 1548 the Sinhala Buddha was taken away to the neighboring
kingdom of Lan Chang. Although a few years later it returned to Chiengmai, the
image did not recover its previous prestige - either because another had been
substituted at Chiengmai as the palladium or because its capture signified the
unpalatable shame that an object so closely associated with Chiengmai's political
sovereignty could have been spirited away by a rival. At any rate, when the king
of Ayudhya seized it in 1662, he was informed that its magical powers were
exhausted. It returned to Chiengmai in 1767 and was brought to Bangkok in
1795 by the founder of the current ruling Cakkri Dynasty (Rama 1), where it has
remained since. Popular belief in it as a source of miraculous powers was revived
in recent years; however, it is in one among many historic images aggregated in
Bangkok. There are some that outshine it, particularly the Emerald Buddha
jewel, which is the palladium of the kingdom of Thailand today.
But an unexpected change in the fortunes of the Sinhala Buddha took place in
April 1982 during the Rattanakosin bicentennial celebrations. As part of these
celebrations, the present king, Rama IX, conferred the title of Maha (Great) upon
his ancestor and founder of the dynasty. The most spectacular event was the royal
barge procession down the Cao Phraya River: On April 5, the king and the crown
239


--- Page 252 ---
The cult of amulets
prince sailed in the principal barges; a week later, on April 12, the Phra Buddha
Sihing (Sinhala Buddha) - or rather that version of it now in the capital - sailed
in the king's barge in a similar procession, substituting for the king's person.
Continuity through replication
It should be quite evident by now that the chronicle tradition in reporting the
legendary histories of famous images loosely interweaves two antithetical themes.
But the looseness of the weaving makes it quite evident again that there is little,
at best only a halfhearted, effort to efface the contradiction, for what the chronicle
conveys, and what matters most to the pious Buddhist, is the continued mainte-
nance of Buddhist religion and civilization, even though the continuity is achieved
through the replication and renewal of earlier forms. It is in this sense that we
have to evaluate the fact that there are several representations in Thailand of the
Sinhala Buddha, rendered in different styles and at different periods, which all
claim to be the original, the original itself enveloped in the mists of myth.
The Jinakdlamdll itself leads us to the right solution. While reporting the
events of the coming of the Sinhala religious dispensation to North Thailand, it
records how a king of Chiengmai, Lakkhapuragama, marched to Chlangrai,
seized the Sinhala image from Mahabrahma, took it back to Chiengmai, placed it
in the Cedi Luang (Great Cetiya), and honored it reverently. Then follow these
two verses:
In Lanka, in the city named Siridhamma, in (the city) called Sukhodaya, in
Jayanada and Ayojjha and in (the city) named Vajirapakara.
In Nabbisi and Jamraya, similarly in the islet of Pallankadlpa, was the noble
SIhala-image honored by kings and commoners.11
What is being disingenuously reported is that the Sinhala Buddha representations
are in nine locations: one in the parent country of Sri Lanka, the rest in Thailand.
Rather than raising the question of authenticity, we are called upon to reflect on
the (necessary) multiple incarnations and residences of the "likeness" of the true
Buddha, all of them being sacrosanct by virtue of the generations of people who
have venerated them.
The implications for political legitimacy
The mobility of the Sinhala Buddha is a pointer to many features of the
traditional polities in question. The polities were what I have elsewhere called
"galactic" in organization:12 that is, a loose formation composed of a central
domain surrounded by vassal states and, at the outer rim, by tributary states,
which are all reproductions on a smaller scale of the dominant center: These
240


--- Page 253 ---
"Likeness" of the image to the original Buddha
galactic polities were fluid formations, and the center-satellite relations and
patterns changed constantly. One corollary of such instability is that there were
no stable dynasties of rulers who succeeded one another according to defined and
predictable rules of heirship. If there were "divine" kings, they were continually
dethroned by palace rebellions and wars of secession. The ''divinity,'' or claims to
righteous or universal kingship, were based on "personal charisma" rather than
on institutionalized rules pertaining to the tenure of an "office." Dynasties when
formed were shortlived. Factional coalitions and oppositions, rather than constitu-
tional blueprints and strict considerations of division of labor, dictated the
galactic distribution of power and administrative organization in terms of
replication, duplication, and parallelism.
Individual kings of personal charisma who assumed kingship found, among
other things, two more or less enduring bases for claiming "legitimacy" and
through it stability of power. One was the claim to being a cakkavatti or a
dharmardja on the basis of personal achievement and commitment to Buddhist
norms of kingship. These positions, according to Buddhist norms, are not so
much inherited as proven by individual karma and meritorious conduct. Though
these positions cannot be inherited, those attaining them can claim to be
incarnations and avatdras of archetypal heroes.
A second basis, linked with the foregoing, is the possession of palladia and
regalia, which are enduring sedimentations or objedifications of power and
virtue. Possession of them is a guarantee of legitimacy. But these sedimentations
of virtue and power will remain with the possessor for as long as he is virtuous
and deserving. They cannot be removed from their locations against their consent;
and their travels are evidence of their changing hands and their passage from one
deserving ruler to another.
For us, anthropologists and historians, the travels of a Buddha statue, such
as those of the Sifihala Buddha (or the Emerald Buddha Jewel), provide us with a
chain or "genealogy" of kingdoms and polities that these statues have legiti-
mated and also with a map of a vast political arena in Southeast Asia, made up of
a number of principalities - pulsating, changing boundaries and affiliations, and
possessing an identity by virtue of commitment to a religio-political ideology on
the one hand and by virtue of sharing similar economic, demographic, logistical
features on the other.
The sacra themselves, in their turn, are seen to derive their powers to affect
and transform the world by virtue of their "authenticity," their "likeness" to the
original, and their "pedigree" - all of which in the last resort are values
generated and conferred upon the objects by the human actors themselves. Thus
we are confronted with a dialectic: The Buddha statue as a palladium is a product
of the circumstances of its making and the authenticity given it by its makers,
sponsors, and patrons. In this sense, history is embedded and objectified in it. It
is this very sedimented presence in it that in turn radiates upon and influences
241


--- Page 254 ---
The cult of amulets
human actors and events. This unfolding of events in turn is registered in the
object. There are exchanges between sources, agents, and beneficiaries of power.
What we have witnessed in the case of Thai kings, monks, and Buddha statues is
a dialectic of human actors' relations vis-a-vis one another with the artifacts they
make and in which they embody their past.
242


--- Page 255 ---
17
The process of sacralizing images
and amulets
The transfer of power by monks
We now come to the rituals of sacralization of amulets and the process by which
potency and efficacy are transferred by the monks to the amulets. The actual
sequence may vary from ceremony to ceremony, as we shall see in the illustrations
below, but the underlying mechanisms are the same, in that there is a chanting of
sacred words (sek khdthd), the transferring of potency by sitting in meditation
(nang prok), and the like. Moreover, the sacralization of amulets is essentially
similar to the chanting and transference procedures by which Buddha statues are
ceremonially installed and "animated" by the "opening of the eyes" (boekphra
net). As a matter of fact, it is a common practice that, when a Buddha statue is
being sacralized at a wat, the laity (and monks) will bring small statues newly
purchased or cast, and their favorite amulets, so that they too can undergo the
rite. The ritual procedures highlight an important fact about consecrations and
installations. The Buddha cannot become immanent in a statue until his
"presence" has been activated by monks by their recitations of the Dhamma and
by the transfer of their spiritual virtues and energies as followers of the Path.
Similarly, although amulets in the shape of an animal, bird, human, or deity have
certain virtues related to their form and intrinsic nature, it is the monk and lay
specialist who importantly charge them with efficacy. This double aspect of
installation has to be kept in view. The gods and other suprahuman agents are
nonentities without their worshipers and officiants, just as the latter have no
identities without their gods and collective representations.
I shall now give a number of descriptions of the sacralization procedures
enacted at various stages of the making and installation of Buddha statues and
amulets and highlight their salient features.
243


--- Page 256 ---
The cult of amulets
The making and sacralization of amulets at the shrine of the pillar
of the city of Bangkok
The lak mueang is the "pillar of the city" of Bangkok; because it is the
foundation pillar of the country's capital city, it is a focal point for the country as
a whole. The Bangkok pillar was installed in 1792 at the very beginning of the
Cakkri dynasty. The pillar is placed in the center of a shrine, where also reside
the guardian deities of the capital.1 Hundreds of people flock to the shrine every
day to ask for favors from the pillar and the deities and propitiate them with
flowers, candlesticks, joss sticks, silk scarves, gold leaf, and food and drink for
favors granted. The pillar is personified and referred to as Cao Phau, which,
literally meaning honored father, is the usual reference and address term for a
guardian deity. The shrine is administered by the War Veterans Organization (of
the Thai armed forces) and the income is used to support veteran soldiers.
The decision was taken in 1975 to make amulets of the pillar and the deities of
the shrine and to sell them to the public to raise money, mainly to make welfare
payments to soldiers (and their families) who had suffered injury in fighting "for
the security of the country." This phrase refers to the participation by Thai
soldiers in the Laotian and Vietnam wars and in action against alleged communist
insurgency elements and rebels. This phenomenon being described is yet one
more reminder that in Thailand today various kinds of "religious" and "ritual"
activities and cults ramify throughout the country's governmental and military,
that is,"political," establishment in a supportive manner.
Five medallions of the five guardian deities2 and one medallion of the pillar
itself were made in two colors, gold-dipped and smoky metal (rom dom). The
gold-dipped were sold for 30 baht ($1.50) each and the other for 20 baht each.
In addition, a silver model of the pillar standing some nine inches high was made
and sold for 999 baht ($50).
The making and sacralizing of the amulets went through three phases: (1)
First, small metal sheets of gold, silver, and red-gold were sent from Bangkok to
108 (an auspicious number) venerable and famous monks throughout the country
for each of them to write sacred letters on the sheets (khlan akkhara) and to chant
sacred words {pluk sek) while writing. We see here how the virtue and potency of
the religious virtuosi dispersed and distributed throughout the country are
aggregated at the center. (2) Next, the metal sheets were collected, melted,
and cast into the medallions and the miniature pillars. (3) Then was staged the
final sacralization ceremony3 This ceremony was attended by the Phra Sankhardt
(the supreme patriarch of the sahgha)\ the government was represented by the
deputy prime minister and the minister of defense.
Offerings of meat, crabs, eggs, sweets, and fruits were made to the shrine
deities, with the chief court brahman presiding.4 Thereafter, the most important
sequence was staged. While 4 monks at a time, sitting on the side, chanted
paritta chants (suat parit) continuously, 72 senior monks, divided into three
244


--- Page 257 ---
The process of sacralizing images and amulets
batches of 24, sat for four hours at a time meditating silently and transferring
virtue to the pile of amulets by means of a cord (sdi sin) that passed through their
hands and was attached to the pile. Colloquially, this meditation is called nang
prok: The monks sit cross-legged, close their eyes, practice concentration
(samddhi), and say words mentally and silently. The monks are said to achieve
the state of "internal sitting" (nang thdng nai), which enables them to achieve
states of supranormal mystical power, which we have already discussed under the
aspect of iddhi. The general belief is that by reciting gdthds and then sitting in
meditation, the monks are able to concentrate power (saksit) and transfer it to the
amulets. The technique of sacralizing Buddha statues and images is the same:
The statue is activated - its eyes are opened - by nine or more monks chanting
paritta verses and other monks sitting in concentrated meditation and charging
the statue.
The consecration of a Buddha statue (Phithikamphutthdphisek)5
The following account of the procedures for making a metal Buddha statue and
sacralizing it was given to me by a monk bearing the phrakhru title. He resided at
the central Thammayut sect wat in Bangkok, Wat Bovonniwet.
PHASE I! POURING THE METAL TO CAST THE STATUE
A site has to be selected; it may be a said (hall) or hot (ordination chapel) in a
wat, or it may be a central room in a private house. It is enclosed and bounded
with a sacred cord (sdi sin), which the monks will hold while they chant. An
already consecrated Buddha statue should be the presiding entity, and the requisite
ritual articles (khriieang sakkdra) must be assembled. They are: flowers; joss
sticks and candles (ddukmai thupthian); puffed rice; a candle called thlan chai,
which is as tall as the circumference of the head of the sponsor; another two
candles called phra wipatsl, each of which has a wick made of 28 threads twisted
together; and finally "a candle of the consecration chant" (thlan suat phutthd-
phisek), which is a special candle together with four joss sticks.
On a platform, seats are arranged for four monks who will do the chanting in
alternation. In front of them and arranged in rows are lit candles, joss sticks,
flowers, and puffed rice.
Outside the bounded area of the site is installed an altar for the deities and
divine angels (thewadd); offerings are made to them (buchd loek) before the
pouring of the metal and at the end of the ceremony. The deities are integral for
ensuring the auspiciousness of the ceremony.
First of all, the thlan chai candle is lit, thus marking and highlighting the
sponsor of the statue. While it burns, the monks chant until the time of "pouring
the gold" (the thdiing); the consecration chants (suat phutthdphisek) include the
245


--- Page 258 ---
The cult of amulets
familiar victory chant called suat chayanto,6 which recapitulates the Buddha's
famous ten victories over opponents and evildoers. The thlan chai candle is put
out at an astrologically appointed, auspicious time by the presiding monk.
PHASE 2! THE CONSECRATION
When the statue has been refined, polished, and completed, preparations are
made for the consecration proper so that monks will sit in samddhi meditation
and make the statue have power {phra khlang). As described earlier for the
consecration of amulets, while one set of monks sits in silent concentration (nang
prok), another group of monks will sit at the side chanting continuously.
The consecration site must have four entrances and exits. At each corner of the
site should be planted flags, umbrellas, banana trees, and sugar cane, which give
it a festive appearance. (The same decorations are usually at the site of pouring
the metal as well.)
PHASE 3: FEASTING THE MONKS
The final sequence is the celebration on behalf of the participating monks
(chaldung phra). Together with the feasting and giving of gifts to the monks
may be staged "the opening of the eyes of the statue" (boekphra net). Sometimes
a cloth covering the eyes is removed, and sometimes some cotton wool dipped in
oil may be used to clean the eyes.7 While this is being done, the monks chant suat
thammacak.
A public casting of a Buddha statue
There are many Thai living in the United States. In the cities of their heaviest
concentration, such as New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago, they have
established their wat and have invited monks from Thailand to reside in them. In
early September 1971,1 witnessed the casting of a number of Buddha statues, of
which the foremost was a large one that was to be installed in the Los Angeles
wat. The proceedings show how politicians serve the purpose of the sahgha and
how prominent monks and prominent laity collaborate in the implementation of
conspicuous religious projects.
The casting was staged in an ample and a colorful compound of Bangkok's
largest wat, Wat Mahathat, the foremost monastery of the Mahanikai sect. Its
compound was a veritable bazaar, filled with medicine hawkers, amulet and
image sellers, food sellers, lecturers on religion, quacks, and sddhus. There was
a heavy traffic of people walking about, sitting around chatting, transacting a
hundred different deals.
The actual "pouring of the gold" into the clay moulds8 was to take place on
246


--- Page 259 ---
The process of sacralizing images and amulets
September 6, but two days earlier had begun the first step of collecting
contributions of money and metal from the laity - gold ornaments, silver plate,
and brass and copper vessels, etc. The organizer and master of ceremonies was
the ecclesiastical governor of the province of Chonburi, who previously resided
at Wat Mahathat: He was an effusive public speaker and kept up a barrage of
exhortations and appeals to the public to contribute generously. He was also a
much-traveled monk; the highlight of his visit to Europe was, he told me, an
audience with the Pope. On the afternoon of the fourth, I saw four women and
two monks taking in the contributions and giving receipts to the donors. That
same evening at about 8p.m. nine monks recited the evening chants (suad mon
yen) at the site; and thereafter, four monks began to chant paritta verses, while
four others began their meditation. The chanting and meditation terminated at
midnight. On the following day, the same solicitation of money and metal, and
the exercises of the monks, were repeated.
"The pouring of the gold" took place on the third evening. A large tent had
been put up (see Figure 8) and there was an enclosure within it where nine monks
sat. (They would be the main chanters at the rite.) At the back of the tent was an
elevated platform, on which sat dignitary monks presided over by the ecclesiastical
governor of Chonburi. At the right-hand end of the platform was an altar with a
Buddha statue. Elsewhere in the tent at ground level sat various lay dignitaries,
the foremost of whom on this occasion was the foreign minister, Thanat Khoman.
The figure also shows that in front of the tent was the site of the casting. There
was a mould of the chief statue set up; there were other smaller moulds for other
statues in a separate group; and there were crucibles with molten metal being
fired. A sacred cord (sdi sin) had been attached to the Buddha statue at the altar;
it was wound around the four extremities of the chanting monks' enclosure and
then around the four extremities of the casting shed (within which the moulds
were placed). The entire compound was filled with some three thousand people,
both men and women. Many monks watched the proceedings from the upper
stories of the monastic building.
Matters came to a head when the foreign minister, his wife, and his entourage
arrived. The minister lit candles and worshiped at the Buddha altar; the chief
officiating monk recited the "three refuges." The minister was handed a bowl of
gold coins and jewelry contributed by the faithful; he ostentatiously undid his
own golden tie pin and put it in a bowl. Then, while the full assembly of monks
chanted, he emptied the gold into a crucible of molten metal brought to him by
some six or seven craftsmen in Thai traditional dress.
Then the workmen poured two crucibles of molten metal into the mould and
thereafter poured metal into the other molds. When the chanting by the monks
stopped, all the lay people broke loose and tried to grab at pieces of the sacred
cord, which they then proceeded to tie around their wrists.
The next step would be the polishing of the statues after the moulds were
broken and the sacralization of the finished statue (abhiseka).
247


--- Page 260 ---
The cult of amulets
THE TENT
THE SITE OF CASTING
latform
OH
1 ooobooo u [Xj
Dignitary
monks
o o o
ooo o o
Chief
officiating monk
• Foreign minister
Crucibles with molten metal
Enclosure for
chanting monks
Stand for placing small moulds
m 
i i i
Mould for main 
A A A Oth<
L Buddha statue 
A A A moulds
Buddha altar
-€)
Note: The sacred cord went from the Buddha altar to the enclosure
for chanting monks, then all round the site for casting.
Figure 8. The casting site for image for Los Angeles wat
This piece of ethnography shows that, although the monks are the chief
sacralizing officiants, frequently a famous lay sponsor (or sponsors) is integrally
involved, not only as the provider of the material assets to make the statues, but
also as a ritual participant himself whose "merit" and achievements are also
transferred to the statue. This matter can be illustrated in finer detail by the
following account of an abhiseka ceremony provided me by a scholar-monk from
a Bangkok wat. This account was confirmed by a titled monk in another wat in
the same city.
The rite of consecration Buddhabhiseka
For the consecration of a Buddha statue, my informant said, a special site must
be prepared. This site is usually the bot of a wat, though this is not a requirement.
Taking the bot of a temple as his site, he described the layout as follows (see
Figure 9).
A cord unwinds from the main Buddha altar of the bot - the chief statue
on the altar is usually a historic one or a reproduction of it - and first surrounds
the central space, where well-known and famous monks, who have been specially
chosen for the occasion, will sit and chant. These monks themselves enclose the
array of statues that are being consecrated. The cord is finally attached to tables,
where there are special candles mounted; one terminus is the altar, at which four
chanting monks are positioned.
These candles have special names. One of them represents the chief lay
sponsor: Its height is the height of the lay sponsor, and its wick is made of the
same number of threads as the age of the sponsor. This candle is called Man
chai. In Bangkok's famous abhiseka rites, the chief lay sponsor present, and
248


--- Page 261 ---
The process of sacralizing images and amulets
Main altar
with presiding
Buddha statue X
Four chanting
monks
A Statues and images to be blessed
Note: (§) represents the sacred cord, leading from the presiding
Buddha statue, next encircling the famous monks and the
images to be blessed, and then leading to the altar of
candles and the altar of the four chanting monks. The
arrangement of multiple cords surrounding the monks and
images in the centre is called sawettrachat (see inset).
Figure 9. The layout for the Buddhdbhiseka rite.
represented in the thian chai, may be the king or a minister or a leading general.
This candle is lit at the appropriate time by a famous, high-ranking monk, the
most distinguished of whom is the supreme patriarch himself.
The other candles are: (1) thian buddhdbhiseka, the candles for consecrating
the statue, which are placed at a special altar in front of the four chanting monks;
(2) thian mahdmongkhon, which is a large candle used for making holy water;
and (3) thian nawaharakun, nine candles.
The main sequences in the sacralization as reported by my informants are as
follows:
1. Bucha Rattanatri: Obeisance is made, and candles and joss sticks are lit by the chief
presiding monk to the presiding Buddha statue installed at the main altar of the bot.
2. The presiding monks give the precepts to the assembled laity.
3. The monks, encircling the statues, images, and amulets, chant suat monphra partita.9
4. Buchd thewadd is performed, in which the divine angels are propitiated by the lighting
of the small candles; this propitiation is usually done by a layman or a phrdm
("brahman").
5. The presiding monk lights the thian chai, which represents the lay sponsor. (Sometimes
a lay dignitary like the king or a minister may also do this.)
6. The climactic sequence is the chanting by the four monks of the gdthd buddhdbhiseka
(verses of consecration); while they chant, the monks sitting in the center make holy
water and sprinkle it on the images awaiting sanctification.
The four monks recite a particular cycle of verses, and each recitation takes
about thirty-five minutes. They, or four others who may relieve them, will chant
these cycles in a chain until about midnight or 1 a.m. In some instances, a wat
249


--- Page 262 ---
The cult of amulets
may hold these recitations on three consecutive nights, so that people may bring
their own statues and images to be given new or renewed consecration. Recitations
held for as long as seven consecutive nights are not unknown.
According to my Bangkok monk informants, the ceremony of "opening the
eyes" of the image (boekphra net) is not part of the consecration ceremony, but a
separate and less important sequence that is enacted as follows. While some
monks chant, the presiding monk will open the eyes by removing the wax daubed
over the eyes with a sharp instrument. He will then daub the statue with gold leaf;
the back of the paper containing the gold leaf has paritta verses written on it.
Sometimes two black jewels (nin dam) or two pearls may be inserted as eyes in the
ceremony, but usually they will already have been inserted by the craftsmen and
waxed over. It seems that in North Thailand, and in Cambodia, the opening of the
eyes is considered an integral and important part of the Buddhdbhiseka ceremony.
I shall comment on this sequence at the end of this chapter.
A Northern Thai ceremony of consecration
Wells10 provides us with an informative account of the consecration ceremony, at
which the rite of opening the eyes (suat poek) preceded the Buddhdbhiseka
recitations. The night of Makha Puja is a favored time for dedicating new images
and buildings. In 1937, Wat Tha Satori of Chiengmai celebrated the rebuilding
of a vihdra and conducted rites for the consecration of Buddha images at one
grand festival and fair, which began with numerous processions formed by groups
representing temples arriving at the host temple with gifts.
After the monks' evening worship, and the Makha Puja service, a chapter of
monks and novices seated in a circle began the suat boek chants, which were
rendered in a melodic and gay form by both treble and bass mixed voices. When
the chanting ceased at midnight, the reading of the life of the Buddha began: One
monk at a time in succession read a chapter from the palm-leaf manuscript, the
orchestra punctuating the intervals between readings.
It is best if we reproduce verbatim Wells's rich account of the remaining
sequences and his commentary upon them.11
Within the vihara was an altar with about two dozen bronze images of Buddha, and behind
the altar and along the wall were four larger images made of brick and mortar covered with
gold leaf. A sincana cord has been wound about from one image to another and one end of
the string brought to the monk in the preaching chair. Most of the images were new and
many of them had been brought from private homes to be consecrated in this Suat Poek
ceremony. The eyes of the new images were sealed with wax and a cloth of white or of
yellow was placed over the head and shoulders of each figure. The worshipers, seated on
mats, extended from in front of the altar to the door of the vihara and even outside, filling
the portico in front. Here before the door was a long low table covered with offerings, each
250


--- Page 263 ---
The process of sacralizing images and amulets
tray of offerings containing a slip of paper with the name of the donor or of the deceased in
whose name the gift had been presented.
As the hours after midnight crept by many of the children in the audience fell asleep.
Smoke from the numerous candles rose about the images in a tenuous but continual cloud.
The adult auditors continued to sit upright, much of the time with palms of hands together,
but they bowed reverently to the floor from time to time to mark the intervals in the
reading. The selections were intoned rather than read, and so chosen that the final chapter,
recording the death of Buddha and his attainment of Nibbana, was completed just before
dawn. At this point a monk opened a window shutter revealing the first faint streaks of
morning light to the group within.
The monks then seated themselves facing the altar and the leader chanted the
"Presentation of Incense and Candles" (thvai dhup tien). Then followed the "Consecra-
tion of the images of Buddha," or Buddhdbhiseka ceremony. In this the Namo and the
Saranagamana were chanted, followed by the Dhammacakkappavantana Sutra. Then the
Buddha Udana Gatha was used and a portion of the Vipassanabhumi Patha. As they
chanted:
Whenever the Dharma is made manifest to a brahmana who is diligent, such a brahmana
can ward off Mara with all his attendants like the dawn drives away darkness and fills
the air with light,12
a monk arose and led a few of the laity in the task of unveiling the images and removing
the wax from their eyes. As the vihara faced east the eyes of the images were thus opened
upon the first rays of the rising sun. This Buddhabhiseka Ceremony was spoken of as an
ordination ceremony whereby the images entered the priesthood. Prior to this service the
images were considered to be simply statues, after the service the images were "phra,"
something worshipful and more than mere metal. They had become sacred and possessed
of nana or spirit of intelligence. At the conclusion of the ceremony13 the khao madhupayasa
or celestial food was placed before the newly consecrated images as the handbills had
announced. Later in the morning food was presented to the monks and the new vihara was
dedicated to the service of Buddhism. In Bangkok the Suat Poek ceremony is not used, but
at a similar service when images are consecrated the Life of Buddha is read.
A Cambodian consecration of a Buddha statue
The following is a translation of an ample account of a Cambodian consecration
ceremony as reported by Adhemard Le Clere in his Cambodge Fetes Civiles et
Religieuses.14 This account, provides us with marvelous sequences that are un-
known to my Bangkok informants. The officiant cuts off the hair and shaves the
face of the statue, as if it were a candidate for ordination into monkhood, before
opening its eyes. (We have already noted that the Northern Thai are explicit that
an image is ordained at consecration.) Little children assume the role of divine
angels (thewada) who witness the proceedings. The monks' recitation includes
the recounting of the Buddha's previous births and his victory over Mara: We may
therefore underscore the point, which was evident in the descriptions provided
251


--- Page 264 ---
The cult of amulets
earlier as well, that part of the process of animating the statue consists in reciting
and injecting into it the biography of the Buddha. As Le Clere remarks elsewhere,
"The Cambodians, the Siamese, the Laotians and perhaps other Buddhist peo-
ples recall the interior spiritual event of the Buddha's achieving bodhi in miming
the literal opening of the statue's eyes with a needle."15
The Achar repeats three times the invitation to the personification of the Earth,
the Blessed Ones (tevoda), the heavenly architect Pissanuka (Visvakarma), and
the supreme Lord (Bdrameysaur) to come to the ceremony.16 Then coconut water
is poured on the earth. The candles are lit. The stanza is recited to keep evil
spirits away from the area where the new statue of the Buddha will be consecrated.
Within the sacred area are hung images of different animals. Then monks
recite the Aphisek, which is chanted at the consecration of Buddha statues.
A small chain, called pedt-sema, made of pure untwisted cotton called dmboh,
is led around the room and around each pillar. The cord encloses a space and
prevents evil spirits from getting close to the statue.
The Achar takes another cotton thread, encircles the Buddha statue on top of
the altar, takes one end of the cord from behind this statue on top of the altar,
takes one end of the cord from behind this statue to the right and leads it to the
unconsecrated statue, circles it, then takes the end to the ground, where monks
hold the thread in their clasped hands. The other end is taken from the statue's
left side, down the altar, across the sala under the matting or even under the
platform to the little raised altar at the east of the sala called pjeah fean preah
Intrea. The second thread conducts holiness from the old to the new statue by the
power of the spoken formulas.
The abbot of the monastery consecrates the statue with lustral water sprinkled
from a small leafed branch; he is followed by the Achar and the main assistants.
This is the srdh Preah ("bathing of the saint"). The water thus used is carefully
saved and used by the assistants, whether with their hands or a piece of material,
to wash their heads, faces, chests, or shoulders. The Achar then recites three
times the stanza inviting the supreme Lord to participate in the ceremony.
Then the Achar takes scissors and mimes, three times, cutting the statue's hair.
Each time he recites a Pali stanza called pheak kantray ("face scissors"). He
takes a razor and three times mimes shaving the beard and the eyebrows, each
time repeating a Pali stanza called kombo et kor ("the razor blade").
The Achar then takes two needles hidden in three or five meali flowers, one
placed in the left hand and one in the right hand of the statue. All eyes are on him
and on the Buddha statue. He salutes the statue three times. Then, taking the
needle from the left hand, he pretends to pierce the right eye.
He takes the needle from the right hand and pretends to pierce the left eye. This
is repeated three times, and the monks repeat three times in Pali: "We have
successfully achieved opening the eyes of the saint." This is called boekphno net
Preah ("opening the saint's eyes").
252


--- Page 265 ---
The process of sacralizing images and amulets
The gong strikes three times, which signals that the statue is consecrated and
that it may now be worshiped.
Two candles are lit. The Achar invites the worshipers to say the precepts. This
is the saum soel. They first recite the five, the eight, and then the ten silas of the
Patimouk.
Then the worshipers in the chdk sake, prompted by the Achar, pray that the
benign gods will hasten there. The deities appear in the form of eight children,
who wear crowns of white cotton, four boys called neak and four little girls
called:
neah Peysakkha
neah Bonkesey
neah srey Krup-lak
neah Sobatevi
They sit on cotton-covered mats in front of the altar in two rows, boys in front,
girls behind, facing the monks. They are dressed in their best, wearing a white
scarf over the right shoulder and under the left armpit. Before them are placed
incense sticks stuck in a banana tree trunk with a base of three feet, or a whittled,
husked coconut on which are stuck four bamboo rods, one bearing four yellow
flowers, another a rolled betel leaf, another an areca nut, and the last a lit stick of
incense. This is chaul-tevoda, the gateway to the thewada, and the offerings
to them.
The monks chant mantras to acquire merit for themselves and the worshipers.
This is called sautr montr. At this point, the statue is placed on the altar. The
monks move from their customary place and sit in front of the altar, their backs to
the children representing the thewada, that is, between the altar and the children.
The sautr thor geahuh follows: It consists of the Achar's aides lighting eight
tapers on the altar, the assistants lighting many incense sticks, and monks reciting
a prayer recalling the Buddha's fight with the demon Mara.
The sautr thor Putthea dphisoek consists of lighting five more candles and
monks saying the formula for consecrating a statue, in which are described the
previous existences of the Holy One.
Five more candles are lit and the monks chant the sautr thor yok, which invites
the faithful to give alms as a means of acquiring merit.
Five more candles are lit and the monks chant the sautr thor nomomi, which is
a greeting to the twenty-eight previous Buddhas.
Five more candles are lit and the monks recite the sautr thor phchah Mara,
which describes the defeat of Mara.
The ceremony customarily ends with offerings to the monks, such as packets
of betel, screens, and even ritual clothing.
Later in his book, Le Clere gives another description of a consecration ceremony.17
The sequences of the rite are similar, except that on this occasion the king,
253


--- Page 266 ---
The cult of amulets
surrounded by the royal family and other notables, attended; and "to his right sat
the court, to his left were over iooo monks of the two Buddhist sects, arranged in
four rows." More than 2,000 people were crowded into the temple compound.
The presiding Buddha image is referred to as the "emerald Buddha."
Before the actual abhiseka, which followed the pattern previously described,
the following events took place. The Achar requested forty-one monks to chant
the invitation to the heavenly devas and "the faithful, women on the left, men on
the right, dignitaries in the middle, prayed and bowed." Next, forty-one new
monks appeared, and the Achar requested them to perform the aspersion of the
outside walls of the temple.
The only new detail in the abhiseka proper was that after the patriarch of the
sahgha had sprinkled lustral water on the statue, the king followed, and after him
"princes, ministers, greater and lesser dignitaries"; they kneeled before the
statue in turn and sprinkled it with perfumed water. This sequence was called
srdh Preah, the bathing of the saint.
The significance of the consecration rite
The consecration rite (Buddhdbhis%eka) is one of the components, a central
component at that, which cumulatively contribute to the Buddha statue's (and
other objects like amulets') possessing efficacy in the eyes of Buddhists. In
Chapters 14 through 16, we discussed in what ways the Buddha could be
considered to have an "immanent presence" in a statue: the classification of
"reminders," the "radiance" and "fiery energy" emanating from the Buddha at
the climactic point of achieving enlightenment, the doctrine of the several' 'bodies''
of the Buddha, the iconic construction of the image in the authentic "likeness"
of the historical Buddha - all these are germane to the issue.
The final component, discussed in this chapter, is the giving of "life" to the
statue through the ritual of consecration. There are many dimensions to this
ritual. One is the transmission of some portion of the virtues and powers of an
already installed historic statue or a famous statue to the newly fashioned image.
As a result, the newly consecrated image is considered to belong to the "lineage"
of the presiding image or even as a "reincarnation" of it. A second is the
recitations of paritta chants, of the Buddha's first sermon, and of the major
episodes of his biography by monks; the more famous or the more advanced in
the path of liberation these monks, the more efficacious their recitations. A third
is the transference of psychic energies to the image by monks sitting in meditation:
Here again, the more adept the monks in meditation practice, the more potent the
energy transferred. We should note, additionally, that the longer the recitations
and meditation sittings by these monks, and the larger the number of them
participating, the more efficacious the result. Finally, there is the sequence of
254


--- Page 267 ---
The process of sacralizing images and amulets
4'opening the eyes" of the image, which merits further discussion because of
certain problems it poses.
The opening of the eyes of the image
We have observed that, although the consecration rites performed in Bangkok
today do not emphasize the sequence of opening the eyes of the statue (which
may consist in the insertion of jewels, or the painting of the eyes, or the removing
of the layer of wax over the eyes), it is important in the accounts given for North
Thailand and Cambodia.
Le Clere gives a quintessentially Buddhist interpretation of this sequence: The
statue is first ordained into monkhood, and the final act of opening the eyes
signifies and calls to mind the Buddha's attainment of enlightenment and su-
preme wisdom under the bodhi tree. (His eyes of wisdom and radiant presence
are attributes that derive from this event.) It is therefore appropriate that in the
Thai and Cambodian descriptions the image's eyes are opened either by the
presiding monk - who may actually lead a procession of other monks and
eminent laity in this act - or by a ritual officiant called an dcariya or brdhm
{"brahman") - who is a lay ritual expert, of Buddhist affiliation, who performs
auspicious (mahgala) rituals of allegedly "Brahmanical" origin.
The rite of opening the eyes of Buddha images appears to be a very old one.
Buddhaghosa, writing in the fifth century A.D., attributed to the Emperor Asoka
the holding of the festival of Akkhipujd (a Pali term corresponding to the
ceremony of opening the eyes). There are references to the ceremony being
performed in Sri Lanka in the Mahavamsa and the Culavamsa chronicles, and
they may well refer to historically authentic events. The Culavamsa explicitly
states that the great King Parakrama Bahu I (1153-86) of Polonnaruva used to
insert the eyes of the Buddha images himself. Still later, there are copper-plate
edicts (sannasa) of Kandyan times in the eighteenth century showing that the
kings sponsored netra mahgalaya ceremonies and may have even actually opened
the eyes by painting them or by other means.18 It is recorded of the famous
Kandyan King Kirti Sri Rajasinha that, on the completion of the Gangarama
Vihara, "he set the eyes of the image amidst great rejoicing, and the sound of
musical instruments."19
Although the participation in and the witnessing of eminent and ordinary
monks and laity in the opening of the eyes of Buddha images present no special
interpretive problems - for after all they are re-enacting the great event of the
Buddha's enlightenment and are also animating the image by transferring their
virtues to it - the reports by Gombrich of a netra pinkama ("eye ceremony")
performed on a Buddha image in the Kandyan hill country of Sri Lanka in 1965
does pose problems. For whereas the ceremony in its other aspects, such as the
255


--- Page 268 ---
The cult of amulets
paritta recitation by monks, is similar to the ones already described for Thailand
and Cambodia (and Sri Lanka in earlier times), yet the actual sequence of
painting the eyes, entrusted to the craftsman (and his assistants) of the smith caste
(navandanno), who actually made the image, was considered dangerous to
onlookers as well as the painter. "The craftsman paints in the eyes at an
auspicious moment and is left alone in the closed temple with only his colleagues,
while everyone else stands clear even of the outer door. Moreover the craftsman
does not dare look the statue in the face, but keeps his back to it and paints
sideways or over his shoulder while looking into a mirror, which catches the gaze
of the image he is bringing to life. As soon as the painting is done the craftsman
himself has a dangerous gaze. He is led out blindfolded and the covering is only
removed from his eyes when they will first fall upon something which he then
symbolically destroys with a sword stroke." The craftsman, as ritual officiant,
after painting the eyes carried a pot, which he smashed on the horns of a bull, and
he slashed a milk-exuding tree with a sword or knife. Gombrich interprets the pot
as carrying the collected "evil influence" (of what is not stated), and the
officiant's acts as signifying that "he 'kills' the tree instead of the bull."20 In
other words, Gombrich chooses to interpret these acts, which the performers
regard as "dangerous," as participating in the malevolence associated with "the
evil eye," indeed with the "evil" encountered in Sinhalese healing rituals (which
are directed at demons) that "results from making mistakes in ritual, violating
taboos, or otherwise arousing the malevolent attention of a supernatural being
who conveys the evil by a gaze (ba'lma)?'21 This association is his, not that of the
actors. No wonder he is perplexed that a Buddha image's numinous presence
should be regarded in this malevolent way and that his interpretation goes
nowhere.
A fine point of interpretation is at stake. There is a critical difference between
the evil power emanating from the eye of a demon or an inauspicious person,
which has to be dispelled, and the great power, even omnipotence, emanating
from a supreme deity, which has to be muted or cushioned and harnessed so as to
benefit the world of lesser beings.22 These dual conceptions are hierarchical and
carry positive versus negative charges. They separate the all-powerful beneficent
deities or beings from the less-powerful evil demons and agents, whom the
former encompass, command, and dispel. Although the rite reported by Gombrich
is a Sinhala Buddhist enactment, whose integrity and coherence has to be
conceded and respected, yet I think that our understanding of its significance can
be furthered by reviewing the Hindu notion of darsan (seeing) as it relates to the
communication between gods and human beings.
In a religious context, darsan implies the "auspicious sight" of the divine,
and darsan relates not only to renowned images of gods and sacred places of
pilgrimage, but also to holy persons such as saints and renouncers. In popular
terminology, Hindus say that the deity or holy man "gives" darsan and the
worshiper "takes" darsan. "The prominence of the eyes on Hindu divine images
256


--- Page 269 ---
The process of sacralizing images and amulets
also reminds us that it is not only the worshiper who sees the deity, but the deity
sees the worshiper as well. The contact between devotee and deity is exchanged
through the eyes. . . . The eyes of Surya or Agni or Varuna are powerful and
all-seeing, and the gods were entreated to look upon men with a kindly eye. .
The gaze which falls from the newly-opened eyes of the deity is said to be so
powerful that it must first fall upon some pleasing offering, such as sweets, or
upon a mirror where it may see its own reflection."23
Stella Kramrisch includes the activation of the principal image of a Hindu
temple among the rites of consecration at the conclusion of the building of that
temple. "At the beginning, so also on the completion of the building, the rite of
auspicious germination . . . is enacted and oblations are given at night. Then at
dawn, of another day, the Sthapati, the master architect, and the Sthapaka, the
priest architect, ascend the Vimana with a golden needle, perform the rite of
opening the eyes (netra moksay 
of the image, and thereafter the Sthapaka
installs the image on its pedestal and places in it the seed (bija) of the temple. It is
obvious from this account that the opening of the eyes of a Hindu deity is no
inauspicious act.24
257


--- Page 270 ---
18
Amulets blessed by contemporary
forest saints
The phenomenon of amulets is old in Thailand - perhaps as old as religion itself
anywhere and everywhere - yet two things are distinctive about the current
situation in Thailand. One is that there is an intensification in the traditional cult
of amulets. Evidences of this are that there are many new amulets being produced
today; there is an inundation of literature about them and their sacralizers; and the
bazaar trade as well as the rituals of sacralization of amulets have multiplied. The
second feature is that the most famous sacralizers of amulets are some of the
forest monks, the meditation masters and saints (arahants) - who have been the
focus of the first part of this book. As charismatic persons, some of them are
much in the limelight today, and they virtually enjoy a national reputation.
Let me refer the reader back to Chapter 9, "The disciples of the Master,"
where I listed some thirteen meditation teachers and heads of forest hermitages,
who all claimed to be the disciples, or at least associates, of the famous
Meditation Master Mun. These derive to some extent their accreditation through
their links to the Master. Compared with him, these disciples showed two shifts.
One was that whereas the Master remained peripatetic throughout his life, the
disciples have tended to found and/or reside in a single hermitage, though at the
same time have themselves established branch hermitages or encouraged pupils
to do so. But this is not a major deviation from the Master, for he too, we noticed,
established a network of cells of disciples, especially in those monasteries he
chose for temporary residence during the rains retreat.
The second difference represents a tendency toward polarization among
disciples of that which was a coherent duality in the Master. The Master seemed
to have a "rationalist" side manifest in his abstract, philosophical, and discursive
discourses and in his viewing the meditative technology as a method for
developing insight; he also exhibited a tantric, mystical, and ritualistic disposition,
evidenced by his visionary and cosmological experiences. Understanding and
practice, interior experience and exteriorized cosmology, were dialectically
interwoven in him. However, the disciples, and other forest-dwelling, meditating
258


--- Page 271 ---
Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
monks unconnected with the Master but rooted in a local forest-monk tradition,
have tended either to emphasize the ' 'rationalist'' pole of unswerving renunciation
and liberation or the tantric, ritualist pole of pursuing trance experience and
supranormal powers. It is the latter type of ascetic forest saint, venerated for his
loving-kindness (mettd) and his willingness to transfer his blessings to humankind
while remaining uninterested in the fruits of action, who is implicated in the
contemporary cult of amulets. And most of the heads of the famous forest
hermitages of today, although themselves dedicated to the ascetic and meditative
regime, are not averse to blessing amulets or to devoting some part of their time
to blessing, instructing, and relieving the distress of an ardent laity. Moreover,
many of them are able to function at different levels and in different modes,
according to the context.
But whatever the differences of emphasis among the contemporary forest-
monks in Thailand, we have first to comprehend their present-day salience in
terms of their position within the larger sahgha as a whole. We have mentioned
before that traditionally in the Southeast Asian Buddhist societies there has been
a bifurcation of the sahgha into the village- and town-dwelling (gdmavdst) and
the forest-dwelling (drannavdsi) monks, but that since the latter part of the
nineteenth century the forest dwellers have not played a major role in Thailand, or
even been an important part of the mainstream ecclesiastical establishment. Since
Mongkut's time it is the sahgha establishment, based in and directed from
Bangkok, that has played an active shaping role, conferred legitimacy on the
political authorities, and produced exemplary scholar- and administrator-monks
who enjoyed great veneration and prestige. The forest-monks of today, only a
small component of the sahgha as a whole, do not participate in the monastic
examination system, on the basis of which scholar-titles are conferred; forest
hermitages (samnak) usually have not the requisite consecrated boundaries and
stones (simd) and the sanctified hot in which the ordination of monks can be
carried out; indeed, forest-monks, even the most famous ones, are outside the
system of administrative and other religious titles, to which the village- and
town-monks of the two sects, the Mahanikai and Thammayut, aspire.
Although situated outside the system of titles and rewards of the ecclesiastical
hierarchy, the forest-dwelling and meditating monks enjoy an unusual prominence
on the national stage today. The royal family, the ruling generals and politicians,
and the largest business and banking houses seek them out and bow down before
them, hoping to be edified and strengthened by their visits to them. A few years
ago, the king and queen flew from Bangkok to the Northeast to attend the
mortuary rites of a famous forest-monk and saint, Acharn Fun. Another famous
meditation master flew to Bangkok for the first time in his life - by plane, not
under his own propulsion1 - and camped out under his umbrella on the grounds
of the crown prince's palace to enable the crown prince to present in person his
daily food and to receive instruction from him.
The intensification since the sixties and seventies of the cult of the amulets,
259


--- Page 272 ---
The cult of amulets
and the radiant glow of charisma attributed to a group of reclusive renouncers
who are the sacralizers of the most renowned amulets of recent coinage, are
interconnected with other political and economic phenomena that at first sight
may seem to have little to do with such exotic happenings. The connection
between the seemingly esoteric and mundane can be readily grasped if we
appreciate the fact that the amulets in question are frequently the combined
efforts of two parties - the monk who is willing to be iconically represented on
one side of the amulet-medallion and is also willing to sacralize it and the lay
sponsor,2 who may have his or her insignia imprinted on the back of the same
amulet3 and who collects or contributes the funds for minting the medallions and
for staging the rites of sacralization [see Figures 10 (p. 264) and 11 (p. 275)].
The forest-monk's sacralization of amulets and his transfer of power {saksii) to
them mainly consists of two components, which I have described in the preceding
chapter: the chanting of sacred words (sek khdthd), which include the standard
paritta chants for conferring protection and prosperity; and the sitting in
meditation, in particular employing the techniques of concentration (nang prok)
and of transferring psychic energy. The sacred cord joining the monks to the
amulets is an essential part of the process of transference.
The amulets sacralized by Luang Pu Waen
The most famous of the amulets of recent vintage are those that have been
sacralized by an old monk called Luang Pu (respected grandfather) Waen, a
Northeasterner by birth, whose early peripatetic, wandering career was much like
that of the Master Mun and who in 1979 was residing in a forest hermitage in
North Thailand, near Chiengmai. I shall conclude this chapter by reporting a
popular biography of him, but let me first concentrate on the numerous batches of
amulets blessed by him, which have been sponsored by a variety of famous lay
sponsors.
A good sample of the kind of veneration in which Luang Pu Waen is held, and
the kind of political and military context in which his "objectified charisma" is
employed, is provided by the following news item culled from a Thai-language
newspaper called Matichon (August 18, 1979): "Yesterday General Kriangsak
Chomanan, Prime Minister and Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, and
General Yod Thephasadin, Deputy Army Commander and Deputy Minister of
Defence, visited the Third Army Headquarters to bid farewell on the occasion of
the former's retirement.
General Kriangsak asserted that Thailand's foremost enemy is the Communist
Party of Thailand and its supporters and fellow-travelers. 'Don't think,' he
warned, 'that communism in Thailand will be suppressed by the mere fact of our
opening diplomatic relations with the Socialist Countries.' He then distributed to
the soldiers Luang Pu Waen amulets, and white phd yan cloths [cloths imprinted
260


--- Page 273 ---
Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
with mystical yantra designs] sanctified by Luang Phau Ling Dam;4 he recom-
mended that the soldiers bind Luang Phau Ling Dam's white phd yan cloths to
the Thai National Flag, and raise them together to the top of the mast, because
they will give them protection and safety."
I shall describe two instances of amulet sacralization by Luang Pu Waen that
will enable us to see some of the implications of the coming together of saintly
monk and lay sponsor in this enterprise.
THE KING NARESUAN AMULETS
Luang Pu Waen has blessed many batches of amulets, and one such, much
publicized in the local press and popular magazines, was sponsored in 1978 by
the Fifth Police Headquarters for Special Training, located at Ban Pang-Kwang,
Amphoe Maetaeng, Chiengmai Province.5 The organizers, to whom Luang Pu
Waen gave his consent, were Police Colonel Phan Chonlasit and Police Major
Somnuek Krisanasuwan.
The proceeds from the sale of the medals to the public were to be used for
building a shrine (sdn) to King Naresuan the Great. The shrine was to be built at
the entrance to the police headquarters at Maetaeng District, and a statue of King
Naresuan was to be installed inside. It is because of this dedication that the
medals in question were called the batch (ruon) commemorating King Naresuan.
The total number of medals minted was 21,000.
The day for the ceremonial making of the medals was April 20, 1978. At
9:29 a.m. Luang Pu Waen "sat" and recited the sacred words (nang bdurikam)
and charged the medals with potency (pluk sek), while at the same time extend-
ing mercy (phde mettaf to all beings. After the recitation, holy water was
sprinkled on the medals.
The shape of the medal reproduced that of the very first batch of medals
sanctified by Luang Pu Waen: The front of the medal was ox-face shaped and had
embossed on it the bust of Luang Pu Waen with his name, "Luang Pu Waen
Sucinno," underneath. On the back of the medal was a shield (trdlo), under
which was written: "the building of the Shrine of King Naresuan, the Great."
Our source reported that it was doubtful whether another batch of medals would
be made again by Luang Pu Waen and that "the most recent medals have the
combined power of a big elephant (chdng sdn) and of King Naresuan." It is also
remarked that "the Shrine to King Naresuan and his statue were constructed in
order to give ming khwan (auspicious morale) to the Police patrols and to those
people who will pass by and pay their respects to him." The building costs were
estimated at 5 million baht (U.S. $250,000). The laying of the foundation stone
was done in late June of 1978, and was presided over by the supreme patriarch,
Somdet Phra Ariyawong Sankatayan of Wat Rajbopit.
Three types of medals were made. The first was made of metal given an
antique dark finish (loha rom) and cost 30 baht each; the second was made of
26l


--- Page 274 ---
The cult of amulets
silver and cost 200 baht each; the third was of a special "water drop" shape,
made of "new metal," and engraved at the bottom with a design of double
curves. This last type, 999 in all, cost 99 baht each.
King Naresuan (1555-1605) of Ayudhya was chosen as the subject of
representation on the other side of the amulet because he is known as a great
warrior who successfully repulsed Burmese attacks, killed a Burmese crown
prince in personal combat, made incursions into Burmese territory (particularly
Pegu and some Shan states), successfully attacked Cambodia and made it a
vassal, and controlled the northern Chiengmai Kingdom. Naresuan thus tem-
porarily held a large Thai empire. He died in 1605, having mounted the throne in
1590. As a prince, he was taken as a hostage to Burma when his father was
defeated and made a Burmese vassal.7
A commentary. These amulets, with a relief of the Luang Pu Waen (a
contemporary figure following a classical exemplary mode of life) on one side
and an inscription on the other side bearing King Naresuan's markings (a past
figure who energizes the present), may be considered to have both diachronic and
synchronic roles. They have a "double presence," so to say, which may be
elucidated by recourse to the concepts of indexical symbols and indexical icons.
Each face of the amulet has a dual presence. The Naresuan inscription relates to a
past that is a national historical tradition (the reign and acts of King Naresuan)
and it simultaneously evokes this past in a present state of national crisis and
warfare. The Luang Pu Waen figure is that of a contemporary and living saint,
who is in existential contact today with his followers and disciples, radiating to
them his saintly virtues; but what he represents and what mystical powers he
possesses derive from the following long-established classical and paradigmatic
arahant's ascetic path of meditation and liberation seeking.
Thus the amulets mediate between the past and present in many ways. Their
diachronic mission is to carry portions of objectified history into the present;
contemporary men and women have these condensed and objectified bits of the
past, which they employ for contemporary purposes, dangling from their necks
and rattling on their persons. They are also "mnemonic" devices that remind of
and invoke past persons and their actions in the present time. The amulets put the
wearers in contact with certain events in the past, which were contingent when
they occurred and which by a process of collective Thai historical interpretation
have been accorded a meaning in a semantic system called "national tradition."
And they achieve the feat of keeping alive in the present events that are dead and
gone. To adapt Levi-Strauss for our purposes, the amulets "give a physical
existence to history, for in them alone is the contradiction of a completed past and
a present in which it survives, surmounted." Amulets, like archives, "are the
embodied essence of the event."8
To carry the analysis one step further, all those amulets, made and sanctified in
different points of time, and commemorating and invoking many disparate and
often disconnected events, by surviving into and existing in the present are made
262


--- Page 275 ---
Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
to relate to one another through their relative similarities and differences, their
virtues and potencies, and the past events to which they point. Of diverse origins,
but in being juxtaposed and compared today in the shops where they are sold, or
in the catalogues and books in which they are described, or even on the same
necklace in which they are strung, they become components of a "paradigmatic"
series, in the Saussurean sense. In this manner, their comparative ratings provide
a basis for their "stock exchange" values and for their change of hands in market
transactions or through more informal transfers.
To complicate matters further, amulets in the possession of individual owners
become associated with, indeed partake of, the biographic events of their
possessors, especially those incidents of miraculous escape from danger or
windfall success in career, which the owners attribute to the efficacy of their
amulets. The more prominent the owner, the wider the circulation of the reputation
of his own collection of amulets. Thus even among amulets of the same vintage,
individual differentiations in reputations occur, though the stories of success or
failure of single members in the long run add to or diminish the reputation of the
whole class.
The amulets derive another significant synchronic significance by virtue of
their existence and circulation in a social and territorial space that is the Thai
nation and country of today. In so circulating, they help create a national identity,
in that Thai citizens are carrying on their persons pieces of past history that they
come to share as a national heritage. Thus some culture hero of the Northern
Sukhodaya Kingdom of the thirteenth century, or a warrior king of the Ayudhya
Kingdom of the sixteenth, represented on an amulet becomes the inheritance of,
and daily reminder to, a remote townsman in South Thailand; a charismatic
Bangkok monk of the mid-nineteenth century similarly becomes part of the
religious tradition of a Northeastern villager. Parochial traditions thus become
national traditions, and particular traditions are tendentiously propagated from
the capital or major centers of rule and religion to the wider peripheries in an
attempt to forge a single national identity and an experience of a single unified,
common past. The process of nationalization and homogenization of cultural and
political traditions has been aided by the better system of communications - by
road, by rail, by newspaper and printed materials, by radio and television - which
enable the propagation of information to vast numbers of people who only some
three decades ago were locked into their regional isolations.
THE CONJUNCTION OF WORLD RULER AND WORLD RENOUNCER
An even more remarkable example of collaboration between forest-monk saint
and secular patron is provided by the sponsorship of a batch of amulets by the
king of Thailand himself. These amulets had Luang Pu Waen's head imprinted on
one side and the royal crown (mongkuf) on the other (see Figure 10). The
objective was to collect some 50 million baht for the building of hospitals,
263


--- Page 276 ---
The cult of amulets
Figure 10. A Luang Pu Waen medallion sponsored by the King of Thailand. On the front side is the
bust of the monk with the caption "Luang Pu Waen, Wat Doi Maepang, Chiengmai." At the back is
the royal crown (Mongkut) with the caption "On the occasion of the Royal founding of the hospital
building, 16 March 1978."
especially in the provinces. The prime minister acted as the chairman of a
committee composed of both laymen and monks to oversee the venture. The
financial drive was successful, and by 1980 several hospitals had been built from
the proceeds and ceremoniously opened by members of the royal family.
An important aspect of this meeting of world conqueror and world renouncer
was the mobilization of high finance to secure the widest distribution and
maximum sale of the amulets. Amulets made of different metals with different
price tags were sold through all the major banks and commercial companies in
the kingdom, such as the Bangkok Bank of Commerce, Thai Phanit, etc. These
institutions displayed advertisements and made amulets available to their cus-
tomers.
This example illustrates the meeting of ruler and saint for the highest altruistic
purpose of charitable donation: Both parties engaged in unalloyed compassionate
action. The king of Thailand is not only appreciative of saintly monks, he is also
aware of the charisma that has always been traditionally attributed to kings
themselves.
Some years ago, the king himself sponsored the making of a batch of Buddha
amulets, which were called Luang Phau Cittralada (the name of the present royal
palace). Soil from sacred Buddhist sites in India and Thailand (e.g., Nakhon
Pathom, which has one of the earliest known stiipa in the country); various kinds
of metals, including gold and silver; hair from the monarch's head; and other
264


--- Page 277 ---
Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
substances were used for the casting of the images. The site at which the amulets
were cast and sacralized was Wat Raikhing, whose abbot is famous for making
amulets and sacred water and for similar good works. The abbot has a large lay
following, and it is significant that the king broke tradition and included this
commoner wat among the recipients of royal kathin presentation at the end of the
rains retreat in 1978. This royal act is especially significant because the number
of royal wat to which the king traditionally personally makes the presentation is
small and their choice is a mark of their prestige. The king's decision to honor
this wat signified, on the one hand, his intention to liberalize and broaden the
sphere of his patronage; on the other hand, his choice of this wat because of the
ritual powers of the incumbent abbot indicates the extent of the royal participation
in the current cult of amulets and the reliance of the monarchy, which was
traditionally a preeminent source of charisma, on prominent monks to receive
additional potency and legitimation.
A biography of Luang Pu Waen
It is inevitable that a popular saint like Luang Pu Waen should be the subject of a
thriving hagiology - in both oral tale and written panegyric. I set down below a
free translation of a biography of this monk I came across in a popular Thai-
language magazine.9 There are many such accounts of his life and career to be
found in literature of the same genre. The biographer in this instance is a layman
who quite unself-consciously reflects popular hagiographical trends and con-
ventions. The tale informs us that Luang Pu Waen showed quite early in his
childhood signs of his later renunciatory life - his taking to the life of a
vegetarian, meditating, and wandering recluse was foreshadowed by his childhood
preferences.
There are two features in this account that are noteworthy. One is that Luang Pu
Waen's meeting and association with the Meditation Master, Mun, is underscored
as a high point in his career. Secondly, the incidents, which describe Luang Pu
Waen's supranormal powers, are largely adduced as examples of the saint's
performance of good deeds, such as combating and exposing local demons, on
behalf of the ordinary villagers. Thus these stories of extraordinary power bring
the Thai popular accounts in line with the popular Burmese accounts of their
famous weikza; indeed they are not all that distant from the accounts of Tibetan
saints who exorcise local demons and eradicate pestilence and disease in
impressive episodes that simultaneously exploit the saint's bodhisattva compas-
sionate feelings and awesome powers deriving from tantric ritual and "magical
arts."10
Luang Pu Waen, a native of Loei Province, was born in 1888, the same year in
which momentous events were taking place in Thailand under the direction of
265


--- Page 278 ---
The cult of amulets
King Chulalongkorn. In that year Sirirat Hospital was opened, a treaty with
France was signed (involving the cession of Thai territory), and horse-drawn
tram service was begun in Bangkok (plying between Lakmueang and Bangtaem).11
Two old ladies told the biographer that Luang Pu when young bore the name of
Yan and that on ordination as a novice his name was changed to Waen, as is
customary in the Northeast, where "ordination for the purpose of studying" (kdn
buat rlari) signifies the beginning of a new life. At the age of twelve, the boy was
taken and left under the tutelage of a monk (Phra Uan), who was his father's
younger brother (a) in the hope that he would embark on his studies. The temple
where he was ordained and resided in was Wat Pho-chai Mongkhon, named thus
because in its compound stood five big bo trees, believed to be over 500 years
old. At the ordination ceremony, Phra Acharn Kammar acted as his principal
ordainer (phra upatchd), and his uncle acted as his instructor and tutor (phra phi
Hang).
As a child, Waen is said to have been well behaved but distinctly quiet, hardly
talking to others and playing by himself. It is hinted that his family life was not
happy. Waen and his younger sister Nang Beng were born to Nai Sai (father) and
Nang Kaeo (mother); however, his father took a second wife, to whom was born
Nai Sopha (who later disappeared after ordination). Waen himself was fostered
by his paternal grandmother. Waen's father was a farmer and a blacksmith, and
his house was located on the banks of Huai River. (It is now lived in by Waen's
niece and her husband.)
Not long after ordination, Waen began to show the first signs of a world
renouncer. He gave up eating meat and restricted his food intake to one meal a
day. Moreover, as a novice, he behaved with dignity, scarcely talked to anybody,
avoided noisy monks and novices, and sought the quiet of a shady bo tree or
some other spot outside the wat where he could recite his lessons. He had a
studious mien. Books were scarce in those days, and the only ones available to
him were the few samut khoi (manuscripts made of long strips of folded paper) in
the possession of his uncle. Waen was under the good care of his uncle; his
grandmother (yom yd) gave him daily almsfood and came to visit him at the wat
frequently.
FROM LOEI TO UBON
Many relatives apparently informed the biographer that before the first lent was
over Waen had completed studying the few available books at the wat. The
village of Na-Poeng was in those days quite remote from "civilization." Even in
the town of Loei itself (the capital of the province) there was not a single
monastic school that could teach Pali and the Dhamma to monks and novices.
So it was time to go elsewhere. When lent was over, Waen's uncle-monk,
having heard of a famous "monastic residence for studying" (samnak nan) in
266


--- Page 279 ---
Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
Kasemsima District of Ubon Province, decided to take his young charge there.
The principal teacher at the monastic school in question was Phra Acharn Singh
Khantayakamo; its abbot was Phra Acharn Lee. The journey was long and had to
be done on foot. On the way, a stop was made at a wat in Wansapung District of
Loei Province for a whole lent, and this time was devoted by Waen to studies.
Before they reached their final destination, the monk and novice had to traverse
hamlets, jungles, mountains, rivers, and canals, a journey that took many
months. The monk-uncle returned to Loei, having left Waen at the school in
Ubon. Waen was then about fourteen years old.
Although the monastic residence was only a samnak song,12 it had a reputation
for teaching Pali, the Dhamma (Naktham), and Thai language. There were some
fifty monks and novices who had come there from various provinces to study.
Moreover, Phra Acharn Singh was not only a knowledgeable and able teacher of
Buddhist knowledge, he had also specialized in saiyawet, which we may translate
here as "magical knowledge and practices." The Thai view this field as being a
"science" or "applied knowledge" (sdtlsdstra) systematized by "Brahmanical"
experts.
The biographer at this point makes an interesting defense of why monks and
novices should dabble in this technology. He points out that dwellings and
settlements in the forest are subject to illness and to attack by animals and evil
spirits. Thus saiyawet is useful for the alleviation of people's suffering and
for their enjoyment of happiness. Moreover, he points out that monks of this
period played important roles as teachers, doctors, and colonizers and founders
of new communities in the frontier areas; they also played a part in the lay
administration of villages and towns and acted as "the eyes and ears of the
government."13
Waen made much progress in his studies. A fellow co-resident novice, who is
now the abbot of Wat Sangtau and bears the name Phra Acharn Wan, had this to
say of Waen as novice: "He liked the life of seclusion, and he often sought
solitude from the company of others, and sometimes sat alone in the forest all
night until dawn. He was at the same time a diligent student, and helpful to
friends and villagers." Luang Pu Waen not only studied the Dhamma and the Pali
and Thai languages from Acharn Singh; he also learned saiyawet14 because he
had a thirst for knowledge and was interested in all "the arts and sciences"
(sinlapa sat).
In due course, Waen was ordained monk in the Mahanikai sect together with
his fellow novice Wan. Then his monk-uncle, Uan, came to take him back to his
home province because his kin and fellow villagers "thought of him." The newly
ordained Waen duly returned to the temple in his home village and prostrated
before the presiding Buddha image in the temple and his ordainer, the local
abbot. He then unexpectedly took up residence in the cemetery (pacha) nearby
rather than in the living quarters of the wat.
267


--- Page 280 ---
The cult of amulets
THE BEGINNING OF THUDONG (PILGRIMAGE), ZARIK 
(WANDERING),
AND SEARCH FOR DHAMMA {SAWAENG 
THAM)
This subtitle equates the physical aspect of wandering through space with the
spiritual conquest of finding the dhammic truths. After a return to his home-
village wat lasting only seven days, Waen disappeared without a trace, not even
informing his relatives about his departure.
It was many years later, when they learned about his fame from a newspaper
account, that his village folk came to know of his whereabouts. When asked by
someone why he never returned to his home village again, Luang Pu Waen was to
remark that he had no home or relatives; that his affiliation was to a wat; that his
life was dedicated to Buddhism; and that for him there is no past, present, or
future. He could freely go on pilgrimage (kdn doen thudong) because there were
no grandparents or parents left in his home village and because all family
property had been inherited by his younger sister. He therefore could go wherever
he liked to find "contentment" {khwdm sandot), to study the Dhamma, and in
particular to practice meditations {vipassand kammatthdna).
This very time when Waen decided to become a wandering monk was one
when Northeast Thailand was awakened by the "truth" {sated) and the Dhamma
being disseminated by the great forest-monk and meditation teacher, Phra Acharn
Mun and his disciples. Waen had already met some of these disciples and
traveled with them, and therefore he was all the more eager to meet the Master.
MEETING THE MASTER
It was in 1919 that Waen was first introduced to Phra Acharn Mun by one of his
friends, Phra Acharn Tue, who was a disciple of the Master. At that time Acharn
Mun was staying in the forest in Ban Phue District, Udon Province.
Waen belonged to the Mahanikai sect and the Master to the Thammayut sect -
a difference normally an obstacle to their practicing the Dhamma together. Yet
the Master greeted Waen with pleasure and allowed him to attend the sermons
and discussions. Waen benefited from this teaching and appreciated the Master's
kindness. At this encounter, Waen did not formally become a disciple {luksii) of
the Master, which strictly speaking would have entailed his undergoing a new
ordination into the Thammayut sect; but he espoused the Master's instructions
and decided to put them into practice.
After spending some time with the Master, Waen and his companion monk,
Tue, left on an extensive wandering. They crossed the Khong River into Laos and
reached "the buffalo mountain" {phukhao khwdi), which the Laotian people
considered forbidding and bespelled by jungle spirits. The two monks experienced
some difficulties in finding food and in communicating with the local people.
Then they had an astonishing encounter with the spirits {phi) of the mountain.
When the monks heard from foresters that a malevolent spirit lived up the
268


--- Page 281 ---
Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
mountain, and that the local villagers dared not ascend it to gather forest products,
they decided to investigate. High up the mountain, they came to a cave in which
they could seek shelter. Standing on a cliff, they saw around them nothing but
dense jungle. A cold wind made them tremble even inside the cave.
MEETING THE GHOST
When night fell, the two monks sat in different corners of the cave, abstained
from talking, and sat meditating (nang bhdvand). Late at night they heard a cry
that, though slight and sharp at first, gradually got louder and louder, until a tall
black shadow appeared at the mouth of the cave. It moved about in front without
entering. The monk Tue reported later that when he opened his eyes he saw a big
monkey twice the size of a human being. Suddenly there appeared two moving
green spots of light, the glaring eyes of the animal, which was probably now in a
fearsome, angry state.
When the monks saw the spots of light, they began this dialogue:
"Than Tue, have you seen it?" asked Waen.
"Yes, I have seen it," replied Tue.
"What is Thuk (dukkha = suffering)?" asked Waen.
Tue replied, repeating in Pali the words taught by his Master Mun: "Jdti pi
dukkha, jard pi dukkhd, vyddhi dukkho maranam pi dukkham."
Then Waen said slowly, clearly, and deliberately: "Being born, getting old,
becoming ill, dying, are all fraught with suffering. The Winydn [consciousness]
of a dead person, which cannot be reborn, suffers even more. One can bear
bodily pain, but insufferable is the suffering of the winydn. Only dhamma can
free one from suffering."
When the animal heard these words it uttered a sorrowful and terrifying scream
and disappeared.
At dawn, as the monks descended from the mountain, they discussed the
event. They agreed that the recitation of the Dhamma had helped the winydn they
encountered to be reborn, and thus relieved it from its suffering and destruc-
tiveness. To the villagers, the monk Tue said these words when they inquired
about the mountain ogre:
The demon will not harm you. Every one of you should practice the dhamma and practice
right livelihood. Dhamma protects those who practice dhamma. The winydn of the jungle
demon will not appear again because it has achieved rebirth.15
From that time onward the villagers lost their fear of the demon.
A SECOND ENCOUNTER WITH A WILD BEAST
After wandering about in Laos for a time, the two pilgrims decided to return to
Thailand. The waters flowed so fast and strong in the Khong River at that time
that a narrow point had to be searched for in order to cross by boat.
269


--- Page 282 ---
The cult of amulets
They entered Thailand at the border district of Mukdahan in Nakhon Phanom
Province and came to a rice-farming hamlet situated at the foot of a mountain.
Although the monks intended to stay there only a single night, they were
prevented from doing so by the entreaties of the villagers, who called upon them
to save them from a danger inflicting them. These villagers had heard about the
monks' wanderings in the mountains and believed that their survival was due to
something meritorious they possessed.
The headman complained that his hamlet was being terrorized by a phl-
kdungkoi, a demon that came at night to eat animals, and that it had also claimed
a human victim. A dead woman who was discovered with a bite on her body was
said to have been killed by the demon.
The two monks agreed to stay and help, and some strange things happened
that night. At about 8 or 9 p.m., the monks heard the sound of a monkey crying
coming from a treetop; immediately all the other animals stopped making noise,
but the birds in the trees started to shriek with fright. Suddenly something heavy
fell on the ground; it was an owl, and it quivered and died. On inspection by the
monk Tue in the firelight it was found to have a bloody wound on its neck.
Both monks then proceeded to meditate. Around 2 a.m. they heard a cry in the
distance. It grew louder as it came closer and stopped behind a big tree. Then
something jumped down and the monks saw that it was a large monkey, an
extraordinary one for it had red eyes and shining hairs. It bared its teeth, jumped
up into a tree, and disappeared as the monks looked on. Shortly afterward the
dead body of a squirrel fell down with a thud from the branches of the tree.
When the villagers came to give alms in the morning, the monks showed them
the dead owl and squirrel, which bore wounds of the same kind described earlier
by the villagers. Waen explained to the villagers that what they believed to be a
demon was in fact a monkeylike animal that killed and ate other animals.
The villagers discussed ways of catching the animal, but because the catching
and killing of animals has nothing to do with the monk's rule of life, the monks
did not proffer an opinion on how they should set about it. They however
admonished the villagers thus:
Your beliefs should have a basis in reason. Don't believe blindly. What you call phi
kdiingkoi is most likely a forest monkey. We cannot say what type of monkey it is because
we did not see it clearly. But this monkey does have unusual power (amndt praldt), so be
careful in your attempt to destroy it.
Then the monks left the hamlet and headed for Udon in search of the Master
Mun.
4'WANDERING LONELY AS A RHINOCEROS"
When the two pilgrims arrived at Udon, they parted, with Tue going north to find
his Master Mun and Waen setting out alone on a long pilgrimage that lasted a
couple of years. Waen is said to have walked to the countries of Indochina: He
270


--- Page 283 ---
Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
first traversed Laos and arrived at Hanoi. He then turned around and entered
Northern Burma, passed through Mandalay, Rangoon, and Moulmein, and then
entered North Thailand at the Maesaut border in Chlangrai Province.
THE SECOND MEETING WITH THE MASTER
Waen, now about thirty-nine years old, reached Chiengmai and met with his
former companion Tue at the historic Wat Cedi Luang situated in the equally
historic capital, where the Master, Mun, was serving as abbot. This was a
Thammayut wat, and this time Waen decided to become Mun's pupil by seeking
ordination into the Thammayut sect.
The Master soon tired of his position as abbot of Cedi Luang, because he liked
to be peripatetic and live in seclusion. He therefore moved with his disciples to the
outlying district of Maerim in the same province and took up residence at Wat Pa
Huai Namrin. Waen stayed with the Master there for ten lenten periods (i.e., 10
years). He was now fifty years old.
The Master and his disciples, including Waen, moved again. They first went to
stay at the landmark cave of Chiangdao in the district of the same name, and after
a while they made for the famous mountain (dot) called Mae Pang. At its foot lay
the long-established Wat Mae Pang; the Master and his entourage climbed higher
and stayed meditating awhile. Then he led some of his party down again, this
time southward to San Sai, with the intention of moving across to Chiangdao
again.
They arrived at the hamlet Ban Poeng in the Mae Taeng District of Chiengmai.
Appreciating its location at the foot of a small mountain, which in turn could
serve as a suitable place for meditation for monks, they decided to set up a
residence (samnak song) there. (Today this institution is called Samnak Song
Aranyawiwek.) For the next few lents, Luang Pu Waen lived here, but went back
and forth to another hermitage called Doi Mae Pang,16 whose founder and abbot
was Phra Acharn Nu Sujitto. Upon the urging of this abbot, Luang Pu Waen
finally agreed to reside at Doi Mae Pang and has been there continuously up to
the present day (1977) for fifteen years.
These two elders, Nu and Waen, form a complementary pair. They are both
Northeasterners by origin. Abbot Nu, the founder of the samnak, has a serious
appearance and hardly smiles at anybody, whereas Luang Pu Waen is cheerful
and lends warmth to the abbot's life. The abbot, in turn, takes good care of his
senior guest. Doi Mae Pang, which began as a lowly monastic residence with a
roof thatched with leaves, is today quite extensive and is famous in the North,
and indeed throughout the country, as a source of protective amulets (khrueang
rang). It therefore attracts many supplicants and tourists.
Abbot Nu, born in 1915, is now sixty-two years old (1977). He has been a
monk for forty-three years. His first wat of residence was in a Yasothon Province;
after two years there, he went to Wat Muangkhai in Sakon Nakhon Province,
271


--- Page 284 ---
The cult of amulets
from where, together with two other monks, he went on a pilgrimage to the
mountains. He finally went north and founded Doi Mae Pang.
LUANG PU WAEN'S IDDHI ENABLES HIM TO FLY
There is a popular belief that Luang Pu Waen has the classical iddhi - the power
of being airborne that is acquired by meditation adepts. In 1971, precisely at the
time that his lay disciples in the royal Thai air force were sponsoring the making
of a batch of Luang Pu Waen medallion amulets, a remarkable story was in
circulation. A pilot on a practice flight was over the Mae Pang mountain when he
saw a monk sitting in meditation upon a cloud, and he had to exercise much skill
in swerving away to avoid hitting the apparition. Having grounded the plane, the
pilot with his flight map in hand went scouting on the mountain, and there he
recognized Luang Pu Waen as the monk he had seen in the clouds. The news of
Luang Pu Waen's power of levitation and flying spread quickly - it was broadcast
on the radio and splashed in the newspapers. And the public's demand for his
medallions soared.
When the biographer questioned abbot Nu in June 1976 as to the veracity of
this story, the abbot affirmed its credibility. The abbot himself had once heard a
plane flying over the mountain; the noise stopped and started up again. The next
day, several air force personnel came to the wat in a Jeep and identified Luang Pu
as the person seen serenely sitting in the clouds. On the basis of this evidence,
the biographer concluded that Luang Pu Waen has special powers of concentration
and of telepathic communication (samdthi pen ek, krasde citpen ylam). However,
he remarks that Luang Pu Waen has himself neither confirmed nor denied the
story; in fact, the saint was himself perplexed by the event that is alleged to have
taken place.17
This is the end of the story of Luang Pu Waen. His personal property consists,
besides his yellow robes, of his spectacles, walking stick, and homemade
cigarettes - which would not exceed 500 baht (U.S. $25) in value.
This hagiographical sketch, written by a layman in a popular magazine,
printed in the "grub streets," and sold in the bazaars of Thai towns, can be read
in terms of the framework of this book as signifying two things. Firstly, it
authenticates the credentials of Luang Pu Waen to sainthood by showing that he
was a disciple of the Master Mun and, like him, wandered fearlessly through
forests subduing his impulses and at the same time subduing wild beasts that
terrorized villagers as their reified fears. Secondly, it goes further than the
Master's biography, by placing the saintly Waen squarely in the middle of the cult
of amulets and crediting him with the ability to transform his mystical virtues and
perfections into tangible good effects for the benefit of worldlings through the
techniques of saiyawet. We seem to have reached the borderline here that
separates what in Tantric Buddhism is called the altruistic "right-hand path"
from the morally dubious "left-hand path,"18 or what in Burma separates the
272


--- Page 285 ---
Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
weikza who is a "master of the upper path" {athelan hsaya) from one who is
"master of the lower path" (aulan hsaya). The Burmese weikza, as we shall see
later, is an adept in alchemy, astrology, and ritual arts, who is at the center of
gaing associations and is associated with Buddhist millennial promises.
273


--- Page 286 ---
19
Saints on cosmic mountains
Doing well by doing good
I want to describe now the remarkable circumstances by which the Thai world of
commerce, banking, and high society concentrated in the country's metropolis
organized a pilgrimage to do homage to and to make gifts to the inmates of
Acharn Cuan's hermitage on "the barren mountain." Located on the extreme
periphery of the country, the hermitage is in a region that in popular imagination
is not only wild and remote, but also infested with insurgency elements and
guerrillas threatening the Thai establishment.
Whereas previously I documented how the forest saint's charisma was tapped
by the king, the ruling ministers, and the military, a symbiosis that was consonant
with tradition, we now face a relatively new situation: Sdsana and high finance
come together in a direct partnership in which the banks do well by doing good.
Modernization theorists should contemplate this new conjunction between
religion and commerce in the context of the spread of capitalism in the Third
World.
The Bangkok Bank of Commerce, one of the prominent banks in Thailand,
with its headquarters in Bangkok and many branches throughout the country,
requested that it be allowed to make the kathin1 gift to Acharn Cuan's mountain
hermitage at the end of the rains retreat in October 1978. The prime mover in
this merit making was a Nongkhai businessman who was also supervisor of the
Bangkok bank's five branches in five Northeastern towns - Nongkhai, Udon,
Nakhon Phanom, Thabau, and Mukdahan. Let us call him Mr. Lai. He was
already a disciple (luksit) of Acharn Cuan, and he therefore proposed to the bank
as a whole" that it make its annual kathin gift to Acharn Cuan's hermitage.
Together with the collection of money and other gifts was undertaken the minting
of a large quantity of metal amulets with Acharn Cuan's head on one side and the
bank's insignia on the other (see Figure 11). This kathin presentation thus
affords us a rich opportunity to explore and weave together many themes at once:
One is the manner in which powerful, affluent, high-status persons centered in
274


--- Page 287 ---
Saints on cosmic mountains
Figure n . The Acharn Cuan medallion minted by the Bangkok Bank of Commerce. On the front is
the seated figure of the monk in a posture of meditation with his name underneath, Phra Acharn Cuan
Kulajetthi. On the back is the seal of the bank in the center with the encircling caption "Bangkok
Bank of Commerce, Ltd."; and an outer caption describing the occasion as "Kathin, 1976, Wat
Phuthaung, Cangwat Naungkhai."
the capital have their links with provincial wealthy and influential interests, and
how both together mobilize their resources to carry out a religious act, tradition-
ally laden with political and social significances as well. Closely linked to this is
of course how high finance and business, in patronizing a religious establishment,
also by that act enlarge their reputation and receive special grace. Another theme
is how, in the troubled political times of today, when the legitimacy and confidence
of the ruling elements in the metropolis are weakened, these elements go in
search of protective powers and sanctification to the extreme limits and interstices
of their country and society - to the world-renouncing forest saints, who coexist
in the same ecology with the feared insurgency forces. In this act of communica-
tion and exchange, amulets as sedimentations of power and grace play an
important role.
THE BANGKOK ELITE CONTROLLING THE BANK
The Bangkok Bank of Commerce has had certain aristocratic connections from
the time of its founding. One of the founders of the bank was the husband of the
sister of Kukrit Pramoj, who is a descendent of royalty, a newspaper owner and
journalist, and more than once a prime minister in recent times. Kukrit's sister's
275


--- Page 288 ---
The cult of amulets
husband (Phra Pinitchonakedee) was a director general of the police force. The
general manager of the bank, soon after its founding, was the husband of the
sister of Prince Chumpot of Nagara Svarga; and it is said that the prince's
surviving spouse, Princess Chumpot, is a major shareholder in the bank and a
close friend of Kukrit. (It is not unlikely that the royal family itself may have
assets in the bank.)
The network of persons controlling the bank in late 1978 was as follows: The
President was Khunying Bunrap,2 sister of Kukrit Pramoj and surviving wife of
the founder, the police general. Seni Pramoj, Kukrit's brother and himself a
former prime minister, was a vice-president. His career as a lawyer, diplomat,
and politician was as illustrious as his brother's. The general manager was Khun
Inthira, who is the stepdaughter of the president.3 Her husband, Khun Nitiphat,4
a comember with Kukrit in the Free Thai movement during World War II, was a
member of the National Assembly (1978) and a key figure in the Democratic
Party, which was headed by Seni Pramoj, under whom he once served as a deputy
minister. Anyone who has a close knowledge of Thai politics will realize the
importance of this network of persons, who were waiting in the wings to assume
a leading role in politics, should popular elections and democratic government
come into vogue again. At the time there was no doubt that Kukrit was the most
important civilian politician.
This cluster of Bangkok aristocrats, royalists, politicians, and high financiers
also had their important connections with the critical centers of Chinese high
finance and commerce in Bangkok. (There is no need to underscore here the
ruling interests of the Thai-Chinese commercial sector in Thailand's economy.)5
It is not surprising that one of the directors of the bank board was Khun
Thanitpisanbutr, a noted millionaire; he provided the connections with Chinese
high finance. Thanitpisanbutr's father, a porcelain-ware merchant in the time of
King Chulalongkorn, was given the title of Phraya Pisan by that king, and
according to a well-established tradition became an official of the king dealing
with the Chinese community. Thanit himself is married into the Wanglee family,
known as one of the richest Chinese families in Thailand, with a wide network of
banking, industrial, and commercial interests.
Let us now pick up the threads at the provincial end of Nongkhai and relate
how the local organizer of the bank's kathin presentation, Mr. Lai, came to
establish links with the bank on the one hand and the forest-monk, Acharn Cuan,
on the other. Mr. Lai is the son of a Chinese immigrant father and a Thai mother:
his father owned a tugboat and plied it on the river from Nakhon Phanom (in the
Northeast) transporting rice. Mr. Lai in due course followed him, and during his
trips downriver to Nongkhai met his future wife there. She too is of part-Chinese
origins but came from a substantial merchant family with a network of local
kinship-cwra-business connections in Nongkhai.
Mr. Lai married and settled in Nongkhai and, while continuing to operate his
tugboat, branched into other ventures. He established a couple of ice-making
276


--- Page 289 ---
Saints on cosmic mountains
factories, and after World War II he founded a successful motor-transportation
company that delivered oil by truck from Bangkok to Laos. He became the owner
of some fifty trucks and a couple of gas stations. Although he suffered some
business reverses in the past, he is a very substantial businessman today, and his
most recent advancement consisted in his connection with the Bangkok Bank of
Commerce. He was introduced to the bank's management by a business friend;6
he soon bought some shares in the bank and was first appointed as guarantor of
local credit loans. This "shroff"7 system lapsed after twelve years, and Mr. Lai
was made the regional supervisor of five bank branches. He has been receiving a
salary for his bank work for the past four years. He has in due course installed two
sons and two sons-in-law in the banking and transport business; the bank at
Nongkhai as well as his transport business were housed in his own three-story
building. A joint family of three generations together with a retinue of servants
lived in the upper stories. Although Mr. Lai, a self-made man of energy,
benevolence, and rectitude, was only educated in Thai up to the lower levels of
secondary schooling, his sons have been educated abroad in the United States and
Japan and are important links in his web of connections.
A respected personage in the Nongkhai region, Mr. Lai has himself never
entered politics as a parliamentary candidate, nor has he sought public office. But
he wields influence at a less obvious level and has indeed been consulted by
Bangkok politicians, particularly Kukrit Pramoj, about the names of local nota-
bles who might be suitable for nomination to his party as prospective candidates
for the National Assembly. In fact, Kukrit has made visits to Nongkhai, has been
a guest of Mr. Lai, and has used his facilities as a base for "politicking."
Now we come to the question of how Mr. Lai came to sponsor the kathin
ceremony on behalf of Acharn Cuan's hermitage. Mr. Lai, having heard of
Acharn Cuan's reputation as a forest-monk, went to see him and offered his
services as a prospective disciple {luksii). Acharn Cuan mentioned that he was
building a said on the fifth story of his mountain hermitage (the cosmography of
the hermitage is described in the next section), and Mr. Lai volunteered a
contribution of 200 pieces of tin sheeting for the roof. This happened some ten
years ago, and since then he has been a donor and supporter.
We next come to the matter of making amulets, which is at the heart of our
story, for an integral feature of the Bangkok Bank of Commerce's kathin sponsor-
ship was the making and sacralization of amulets bearing the Meditation Master's
image on one side and the bank's seal and insignia on the other. Mr. Lai once
again figures as the prime mover.
Mr. Lai knew that a lay disciple of Acharn Cuan, a retired tax inspector who
was a great believer in this monk's mystical powers {itthiritpatihdn), had already
made a batch of amulets and had them sacralized by the monk.8 This medallion
had the monk's face on one side and a set of the dhutahga monk's emblems -
umbrella, bowl, and kettle - on the other side. These medallions had acquired a
popular reputation for efficacy and strength (saksit).
277


--- Page 290 ---
The cult of amulets
Asked what the significance of the three emblems was, Mr. Lai gave a
remarkably interesting explanation, which opens a window onto our understand-
ing of how a set of symbols can represent one set of meanings vis-a-vis the
ascetic monk and carry another set of meanings for the layman. I have previously
mentioned that the forest-monk embraced the dhutahga ascetic practices and that
the umbrella, bowl, and kettle he carried on his journeys acted as emblems of his
vocation. These same objects signified quite another world-affirming prosperity
when stamped on the medallion and carried as an amulet by the layman. The
begging bowl signified, said our informant, that the amulet owner will acquire
material goods and property; the umbrella would afford a peaceful life and
provide shade and a cool breeze (rom yen)', the kettle meant that there will be
sufficient water to go with the food. I do not offer this exegesis as one subscribed
to generally but as an example of the sort of mundane significance laymen
attribute to amulets, thereby transforming the meanings of the amulets' symbols.
Thus it comes as no surprise that Mr. Lai ordered on behalf of the bank the
manufacture of 40,000 bronze amulets. For three months during the period of
the rains retreat Acharn Cuan is said to have daily chanted sacred words (pluk
sek) over these amulets, which were placed in his hut on the fifth story. A tenth
(about 4,000) of these amulets were given to the monk and his hermitage for
distribution: Already on the day of the kathin ceremony there were notices posted
at the hermitage that the medallions could be bought for 20 baht (U.S. $1) each.
The remaining amulets the bank had reserved for itself, for free distribution to its
clients and friends and for purposes of advertisement. (The bank may, I was told,
sell some of them at a future date for religious or charitable purposes.) This is the
first instance I have come across where "religion" (sdsana) and "commerce"
have been conjoined in the amulet cult; previously, we have seen the frequent
sponsorship of amulet making by political and military interests, a partnership
that is not unusual.
THE KATHIN PROCESSION AND PRESENTATION
The bank collected a cash sum of 175,000 baht (US. $8,750), which it pre-
sented to the hermitage in the form of a check, together with a number of material
gifts. All the cash was collected from the bank's employees and managers
working in the bank's countrywide branches. The check would of course be
deposited in an account with the bank in question, and there is every suggestion
that by spreading the banking habit in this way, banks will get access to the
money assets of rural wat.
Three buses, two of them air-conditioned, were hired by the bank, and all
employees were invited to join the kathin procession to Nongkhai. About 120
persons, some of them coming specially to Bangkok from branches in South and
North Thailand, assembled in Bangkok and traveled overnight to Nongkhai,
where they were accommodated in hotels. The high officials of the bank, such as
278


--- Page 291 ---
Saints on cosmic mountains
Figure 12. Acharn Cuan receiving kathin gifts from representatives of the Bangkok Bank or
Commerce.
the general manager and her spouse, Mr. Nithipat, arrived separately by car and
were the special guests of Mr. Lai; a director flew in for the day from Bangkok.
After breakfast at Nongkhai at Mr. Lai's residence, the motorcade of buses and
cars left for the hermitage on a three-hour journey.
At the hermitage, the donors first feasted the monks and then had lunch
themselves. They concluded with the ceremony of first presenting the kathin
robes to the abbot, then following up with the cash and other gifts (see Figure
12). Many local lay supporters (other than the bank's employees) were also
present and had brought gifts of their own.9 After the presentations, the abbot
gave an audience to his lay disciples and distributed amulets to the more
illustrious of them. During the proceedings and afterward, many persons climbed
the cosmic mountain, curious and awed by its starkness, its steep climb, and its
landmarks scattered on the way. New groups of lay devotees could be seen
arriving in their specially hired buses to make their own supplementary gifts at
the end of the rains retreat. The liberality showered on the hermitage was
impressive.
I have hitherto referred to the members of the kathin procession as "pilgrims,"
"devotees," "disciples," and so on. Now I must mention another aspect of the
orientations and propensities of Thai Buddhists participating in a merit-making
kathin presentation: their gaiety, boisterous merry making, and gratification of
279


--- Page 292 ---
The cult of amulets
pleasures both on the way to the wat and, more usually and intensely, in the hours
after the presentation on their return home.10
That night, after merit had been made and piety demonstrated, many of the
members of the bank's kathin party assembled in Udon to drink, feast, go to
nightclubs, and engage in the pleasures of the night, for which Thailand's cities
and towns are notorious. After all, the kathin festival is a holy day and a holiday.
The Meditation Master Cuan's mountain retreat
Phuthok is a "barren mountain"; it is one among several mountains standing
stark with eroded irregular profiles in a sparsely wooded region on the Northeast-
ern border between Thailand and Laos. On this mountain, the forest-monk and
meditation teacher Acharn Cuan has built a spectacular hermitage. It stands some
186 kilometers from the town of Nongkhai in Bung Khat District, Nongkhai
Province. One can reach it by car after a three-hour ride from Nongkhai town -
first along a fast highway, then the last third of the journey on a dirt road, which
eventually passes through dusty villages to the bottom of the craggy mountain.
Acharn Cuan is, like many other forest saints, a disciple of Acharn Mun. His
hermitage is therefore Thammayut in affiliation. He first established it some
thirty years ago, soon after the conclusion of World War II. At the time of my
visit there at the end of the rains retreat in October 1978, the hermitage had
seven monks and six novices devoted to meditation practice. There were ten
mdechi ("nuns"), who lived down below at the base of the mountain in quarters
attached to the kitchen.
Acharn Cuan was fifty-eight years old. Cherub-faced and looking remarkably
young, he was like many other forest-monks - taciturn, chewing incessantly a
wad of betel leaf and nut that bulged in his right cheek like a swelling.
True to the dhutahga tradition, all the monks and novices go on their begging
rounds for food to the nearest village, situated about two kilometers away; when
eating, they mix all the food in the same bowl; and they eat once a day in the
morning. The mdechi, however, cook their own food, and they as well as pious
laymen may on wanphra days and on festival occasions cook food in the
hermitage kitchen for a collective offering to the monks.
We are interested in Acharn Cuan and his hermitage for two reasons. The first
is the extraordinary cosmography of the mountain retreat, whose layout is a
physical representation of the meditative journey. The second is that this establish-
ment on the far border region of Northeast Thailand was the recipient of lavish
kathin gifts from worldly sponsors, who came all the way from the capital city of
Bangkok, several hundred miles away, to earn merit and receive efficacious grace
and mystical power (saksit).
280


--- Page 293 ---
Saints on cosmic mountains
THE COSMOGRAPHY OF WAT PHUTHOK (THE BARREN MOUNTAIN)
Acharn Cuan's genius is manifest in his choosing a mountain for a retreat and
then in erecting from its base to its summit a number of dispersed structures that
transform a strangely beautiful formation of nature into a cosmic mountain that
maps the ascent from materiality through spirituality to the infinite void of
nibbdna. The pilgrim to the hermitage starts at the dusty base. Ascending, he
progressively penetrates increasingly wooded slopes and, after a hair-raising
scramble at the top, is rewarded with the revelation of a panoramic view of the
mundane world below - a view that extends across Thailand and the brown
serpentine Mekong River to the vast piled-up mountain range on the other side
that is the beginning of Laos. On festival nights the monks, novices, nuns, and
lay devotees make the climb, finally circumambulating the summit holding
candles and tapers in their hands.
A striking feature of this mountain retreat is that all its structures - halls {said),
meditation huts, cave chambers and mountain niches, and the perpendicular
wooden ladders on the upper reaches of the mountain - were constructed by
Acharn Cuan and his ascetic disciples. Lay donors have contributed building
materials in the past but did not help build, though today they are urging upon the
hermitage installations that would require outside help.11
The mountain is a red sandstone outcrop, highly eroded at the top but with
woods in the lower reaches. It is an icon of the "path of purification" and of the
Buddhist cosmos of graded levels of existence.
At the base of the mountain, built into its rocky side, is a said, a large wooden
hall, to which the meditation monks descend and assemble in order to go on their
daily begging rounds, to receive offerings of food from lay donors on special
days, and to hold rites associated with them. There is also a kitchen attached for
cooking and assembling food. Nearby are the dwellings of the ten nuns who serve
the monks in the usual way as cooks.
From the base, there is a path leading up to the summit. This path is
punctuated by seven "levels" or "stories" (chart), which are rest stations.
Midway up the mountain, for the way is steep, wooden ladders and bridges have
been built, their slope getting steeper and steeper until level five is reached. On
either side of these ladders, dispersed in the woods, are the living huts of the
monks and novices. On the brow of the summit, at level five, is a large cave
converted into a said, with abutting roofed extensions, where monks hold their
morning and evening chants, pdtimokkha recitations, and wanphra services. The
said has the usual altar with Buddha statues and other paraphernalia: A promi-
nent item, however, is a human skeleton serving as an object of meditation on
death. Through openings in the cave one can catch glimpses of the valley below.
Now starts the most spectacular and hair-raising part of the ascent. The path
circles the mountain's brow, winding upward, and then, at the very top, when no
further ascent is possible, a crazy, dizzy bridge is built hugging the summit's
281


--- Page 294 ---
The cult of amulets
Figure 13. The "heaven-hell bridge" at the summit of Acharn Cuan's cosmic mountain.
side, so that one looks between the boards and from the bamboo sides to an
unobstructed drop several hundred yards below, and to a vertiginous expanse
extending several miles. This bridge is called the saphdn narok-sawan, the
hell-heaven bridge,'' whose name and significance will be described shortly (see
Figure 13).
At the summit, which represents the seventh and final level, as well as at points
immediately below, there are natural niches in the caves that have been converted
into meditation nooks. These are dotted on all sides at the top, so that meditators,
each in his nook, face in all directions. These nooks serve for meditation during
day and night, each meditator keeping his vigil according to his rhythm, sepa-
rated from his fellow seeker, but aware that he is part of a collective enterprise.
The seven levels or stages on the mountain's ascent are in a sense analogous to
levels of consciousness and to progressive jhdna - victories reached by the
meditator. At these stations of achievement, there are posted wooden boards on
which are written various slogans, aphorisms, and moral exhortations to the
282


--- Page 295 ---
Saints on cosmic mountains
effect that there is no knowledge greater than knowledge of one's self, the
greatest conquest is conquest of self, and so on. Let me give a few examples.
Station three displayed these admonitions:12 "Desire (tanha) is unfathomable
in depth; precepts, concentration (samddhi), merit are tangible and accessible,
but their pursuit is obstructed by self-aggrandizement. The highest achievement
of all is enlightenment."
Ascending a little higher, the pilgrim reads: "The three chains that tie people
down are children, wife, and property. Non-achievement can be attained only by
seeking release from these chains."
The message posted at level four was: "Diligent effort and friendship do not go
together; laziness is an intimate friend of poverty." And one of the slogans at level
five was: "No happiness is greater than serenity and tranquility"
Now a few words about the hell-heaven bridge. According to an article in a
popular Thai magazine, which bears the title ' Things that have manifest power''13
and describes Acharn Cuan's sacred mountain, the steep ladders were built from
1974 onward. The ladder at level four was built so that the nuns could sit and
meditate at suitable spots; the ladders leading further up to the summit were built
to enable monks and novices to meditate at the higher reaches. Naturally, the
most difficult piece of construction was the last bridge hugging the rocky
summit. According to the magazine article, it was called the heaven-hell bridge
because if a person crossed it with confidence and a sense of enjoyment he would
feel as if he was treading the airy heavens, but if he was a careless "show off,"
and did not concentrate, he would fall to hell to his death. People negotiating this
difficult pass have to mindfully chant: "Buddho, Buddho, Sugato, Sugato!'
It appears that Acharn Cuan's spectacular enterprise met with a lot of adverse
comment at the time it was undertaken; people quipped that if climbers fell to
their death the monks would have to spend most of their time reciting the
bangsukun mortuary chants. But Acharn Cuan went ahead and accomplished the
task with the help of his disciples. The glory of the cosmic mountain is seen on
festival occasions, such as: Khaophansa (entering the rains retreat); Makhabucha;
Visakhabucha (the day on which the Buddha was born, was enlightened, and
passed away); and New Year, when Acharn Cuan and his following monks,
novices, nuns, and pious lay devotees climb the mountain from story to story,
bearing candlesticks, a luminous procession weaving its way upward to the
summit of a transcendental experience.
The forest hermitage and the amulets of Luang Phau Pang
Acharn Cuan's cosmic mountain is not a freak occurrence. We have earlier
noticed at several points that the Thai forest-monks had a penchant for soaring
mountains, lush forests, and caves perched on commanding heights, and that they
savored encounters with wild animals. I have hinted before that "rationalist"
283


--- Page 296 ---
The cult of amulets
investigators rarely plumb the cosmological layers of popular Buddhism. In my
own presentation so far I have attempted to bring into focus the cosmological
dimensions of ascetic and meditative forest-monk traditions that were already
suggested by the classical Visuddhimagga, salient in the biography of Acharn
Mun, and now firmly underscored by Acharn Cuan's cosmic mountain. I shall
now present another example that helps to confirm the thesis that the cosmologi-
cal ambience is probably a widespread feature of the indigenous forest-monk
tradition.
Luang Phau Pang, a monk of the Thammayut sect and a former disciple of the
Meditation Master Acharn Mun, founded his forest hermitage in a wooded,
mountainous part of Khon Kaen Province. It is reached after several miles of
travel on a dusty and pitted dirt road.
The hermitage is built on the side of a mountain, and it too has its distinctive
cosmography. It is bounded by a canal at the base of the mountain and by a hall
(said) built at the top of the mountain. The hall is used for special rites and
collective meditation. In between are laid out the various components of the
hermitage.
Figure 14 is a schematic representation of the layout. Somewhere near the base
was being built in December 1978 a large cedi (stupa), which stood on a base of
100 square meters and is 28 meters high. The monument was almost finished.
When completed, it will have cost 2,500,000 baht (U.S. $125,000). This large
sum of money was raised from lay donations and by the sale of amulets and
charms.
The hermitage, though called Wat Udomkhongkhakhirikhet, was actually, as is
normal with forest-monk establishments, a samnak song.14 Nevertheless, it was
quite extensive in its layout. It provides us with a fair picture of how the residence
of ascetic forest-monks is linked up with popular lay religiosity through
pilgrimage, merit making, and the sale of amulets; and of how the hermitage
develops into an elaborate architectural complex with a cosmography that is quite
different from that of the usual collection of buildings that comprise the wat of
the village, town, or city.
We note that at the entrance to the hermitage stand two large stone tigers; they
commemorate the tigers Luang Phau had withstood in his vigils as an ascetic
thudong monk. The tiger symbolism, as noted earlier, is central to the hagiology
of the forest saints.
Site B, near the entrance, is a complex of buildings consisting of Luang Phau's
own residence (kuti), with a hall attached for receiving visitors. In front of this
reception hall is a cemented open space where lay devotees can sit and receive
Luang Phau's instruction and blessings. Further removed on the right is a said for
selling amulets (phra khrueang) and other religious paraphernalia.
Site A further up is historically and cosmologically more important. On it
stands the old said for receiving guests, and nearby is a small water trough with
sacred water (nammon) and the sculpture of a snake. The story is told that many
284


--- Page 297 ---
Saints on cosmic mountains
Mountain top
SITE A
SITEB
/ 
Cemented
I 
space
\
\
Sala
for
guests
Luang
Phau's
kuti
Amulet shop
Kuti
y The two tigers
Klong 
(canal)
Bridge under
construction
Figure 14. A schematic diagram of Luang Phau Pang's hermitage.
years ago Luang Phau was sitting in meditation at this place when a large snake
emerged from the ground, opened its mouth, and attempted to swallow the
monk's head. The monk sat still, unafraid, and repeated the word tdi ("dead").
The snake departed without harming him and the monk had a snake image and a
water trough installed there. In the trough is water in which Luang Phau has
washed his feet. Lay devotees wash their face with it, drink it, and sprinkle it on
themselves in the belief that it has curative powers. It is especially efficacious for
the cure of headaches.
The figure shows a flight of steps ascending to the mountaintop. On the side of
285


--- Page 298 ---
The cult of amulets
the mountain, in its upper reaches, are placed the residential and meditation huts
of the resident monks and novices; they are modest wooden structures dispersed
in the woods. At the summit is the said for recitations, for conducting the acts of
the monks as a community (sahghakamma), and for the collective rites.
This religious foundation is practically the achievement of one man. It is
therefore informative to know something of his biography.
THE BIOGRAPHY OF LUANG PHAU PANG
The biography as recorded here was told me in late 1978 by a resident monk. It
is, as is to be expected, told with a hagiographical convention that is by now
familiar to us.
Luang Phau's full name is Pang Chittakutto. He was born in Khueannai
District, Ubon Province (Northeast Thailand). He is now about eighty years old
and was ordained when he was forty-two years old. He has completed thirty-
eight rains retreats and has resided continuously in the present hermitage for over
thirty years.
He was first ordained in the Mahanikai sect at Wat Bankutkasiyan in Ubon
Province, and he traveled as an ascetic (thudong) monk in the Northeast and in
Cambodia. He then met Acharn Mun, the Meditation Master, and wanted to
become his disciple, but was refused on account of his not belonging to the
Thammayut sect. So he returned home to be ordained as a Thammayut bhikkhu,
and he joined Acharn Mun at Wat Pasalwan and studied meditation under him.
He subsequently traveled thudong in various parts of the country: He stayed
alone for some time in the Thamnamnao cave in Phetchabun Province (North
Thailand), next moved to the forested Plakchong District of Khorat Province, and
finally came to the present site, which was so wild and infested by powerful
spirits (cao thi) that no previous monk was able to stay for long. It was at this site
that once a snake attempted to swallow him and tigers came to devour him. As
described earlier, the sculptures of the snake and of the two lean and hungry
tigers at the entrance commemorate his victories.
The monk then said that Luang Phau had in fact lived out seven of his previous
lives in this same location: He had been born in the same place with different
identities as a Lao, a Khmer, and a Thai. This is his final birth. In fact, the oral
biographer claimed that Prince Vessantara had resided in this same forest.15
Luang Phau is responsible for converting the virgin forest into the present
complex of buildings. The hermitage's name, Udomkhongkhakhirikhet, literally
means "place that has plentiful water bounded by a mountain" (see Figure 14).
For many years after establishing the hermitage, Luang Phau traveled thudong
practically every year after the rains retreat. This year he could not do so on
account of his illness. But though sick he never fails to go begging for his food in
the morning, true to his ascetic vocation.
The hermitage, affiliated with the Thammayut sect, had at the end of the rains
286


--- Page 299 ---
Saints on cosmic mountains
retreat in 1978 fifteen resident monks; during the retreat there were thirty-five
monks. In addition, there were two novices and fifteen "nuns" (mde chl). All the
monks, novices, and nuns learned and practiced meditation.
The monk-hagiographer then went on to extol the supranormal powers of
Luang Phau. When lay devotees fill his bowl with food, they can gain much merit
(dai bun mdk). Luang Phau has given many proofs of his aphinihdn (supranormal
powers), such as the following:
1. As mentioned before, snakes have in vain attempted to swallow him and tigers to
devour him in his thudong wanderings.
2. When he has accidentally fallen into rivers or swamps, he has not drowned because
crocodiles on whose backs he would alight have carried him to safety.
3. He is famous for rendering people invulnerable to physical attack and harm and for
making people attractive to others by means of amulets and other articles he has blessed
and rites he has conducted.16
Thus many soldiers who were being sent to Vietnam came to him for metal
medallions (nan) and for Buddha statues, which interestingly were made of clay,
herbs, and the betel-chew leavings of Luang Phau himself. The biographer
claimed that soldiers who had these objects with them cannot be harmed by
bombs or penetrated by bullets, even those bullets fired by the modern automatic
rapid-fire guns.17
It is then no unusual development that Luang Phau has attracted a growing lay
acclaim and that he is besieged by lay religiosity. This year, for instance (1978),
the kathin presentation at the end of the rains retreat was made by a layman from
Bangkok, Khun Nai Suthee, who gave a personal gift of 50,000 baht (U.S.
$2,500); in addition, the hermitage received a large number of phdpd presenta-
tions from visiting parties of devotees.
In some ways, a high point of the saint's career is that the crown prince of
Thailand issued an invitation to him through the army to visit him at his Bangkok
palace. Luang Phau arrived by plane, pitched his umbrella on the palace grounds,
and stayed beneath it. Luang Phau consented to stay awhile because the crown
prince wanted to offer him food (saibdi) and converse with him. (Apparently this
was Luang Phau's first plane ride; he felt dizzy after his return and has not been
in good health since.)
AN AUDIENCE WITH LUANG PHAU
Two of my research assistants went as members of a kathin procession from
Bangkok to Khon Kaen Province in the Northeast; the group, two busloads
strong, was going to make a kathin presentation to the wat in the home village of
a monk now residing in a Bangkok wat. After the presentation had been made,
the Bangkok devotees made a special visit to Luang Phau's hermitage to make
more merit and acquire amulets.
My assistants gave this account of the audience they had with Luang Phau. The
287


--- Page 300 ---
The cult of amulets
group reached the hermitage at 7 a.m. and waited for Luang Phau to return from
his almsround. They all sat in the open space in front of the said for receiving
guests.
The visitors, about a hundred in number, arranged themselves in two lines, and
Luang Phau first walked through receiving the balls of sticky rice that some of
them had brought as offerings; four "nuns" walked behind Luang Phau and their
bowls were filled as well.
Luang Phau took a seat at a table placed in front of the devotees and a lay
helper emptied into Luang Phau's bowl of rice two dishes of vegetables and a
dish containing pieces of banana and orange; Luang Phau, once again following
the orthodox dhutahga practice that the taste of food is not to be relished, mixed
all these together in his bowl and began to eat. I should also note that Luang Phau
is a vegetarian and, once again following the ascetic code, eats only one meal a
day.
While Luang Phau was eating, money contributions were collected from the
visitors by some of their own ardent members. At the end of Luang Phau's meal,
because he was himself too weak to chant, another monk gave the five precepts to
the congregation, but Luang Phau gave advice and blessings. Then many of the
visitors who already had amulets hanging around their necks took them off and
put them on a tray so that Luang Phau would bless and sacralize them (pluk sek).
He advised them not to drink liquor. A little child, a boy, began to cry and Luang
Phau led him to the water trough containing the sacred water (of his feet) and
sprinkled some on the boy's head. The child immediately stopped crying, and
Luang Phau remarked that the water was a good cure for headaches. Then the
visitors paid their respects to Luang Phau by prostrating themselves before him
and trooped off to the shop where Luang Phau's amulets and charms were being
sold. Having made their purchases, they left the hermitage.
LUANG PHAU PANG'S AMULETS AND CHARMS
The articles for sale at the hermitage shop had been sacralized by Luang Phau.
The first batch (nan run rdek) of amulets were made in B.E. 2512 (1969). They
are scarce today and are expensive to purchase.
A second batch was reproduced exactly (the same moulds were used) in 1977
and is displayed for sale at the shop, costing 20 baht (U.S. $1) for the smoky
metal and 10 baht for the copper varieties. These amulets have a relief of Luang
Phau in a seated position on one side and some sacred letters on the other with the
date of manufacture.
The following is an enumeration of the articles in the shop:
1. Pieces of cloth with yantra designs (phd yan) printed on them. There were four such
cloths being sold, one being a flag, another bearing the Buddha's footprint, and two
more with yantra designs.
2. Color photographs of Luang Phau.
288


--- Page 301 ---
Saints on cosmic mountains
3. Five kinds of medallions and coins {nan):
a. Rian Luang Phdii Sue Phen is the ' 'Luang Phau medallion, leaping-tiger batch'': it
is pear-shaped; has Luang Phau's bust in front and a leaping tiger at the back; and
comes in two sizes, large and small.
b. 
Rian Rup Rakhang is a bell-shaped medallion embossed with Luang Phau's bust.
c. Rian Luang Phdii Pang run rdek: This is the reproduction of the original medallion
described earlier; it is oval-shaped.
d. Rian Luang Phau Pang run Cedi Anusdiin: A round medallion that has in relief
Luang Phau's bust in front and a cedi behind, together with the ascetic monk's
umbrella, bowl, and water-kettle. The cedi in question is of course the monument
that Luang Phau is building, and the medallion (which comes in two sizes) was
minted specially in order to collect money to finance the building.
e. 
The fifth medallion, with Luang Phau in a seated posture, is made of "red gold"
and is quite expensive, 100 baht (U.S. $5) for the smaller and 200 baht for the
larger.
4. An oval-shaped locket of Luang Phau, in two sizes, containing a photograph of him.
5. The Luang Phau Pang ring, which costs 20 baht and has a picture of him in gold with a
blue background and a circular rim of red.
6. A statuette of Luang Phau, silver colored, with a cedi representing the one that is being
built imprinted on the back.
7. Phra Kring Rup muean Luang Phdii Pang: I have earlier described the famous Buddha
amulets made in the last century by the abbot of Wat Bovonniwet (Pavares), which had
a clinking metal piece inside. Here we have such an imitation, but the statue is of
Luang Phau himself. The small image is made of copper and costs 200 baht (U.S.
$10).
8. Finally, there is a sticker for a motor vehicle that bears Luang Phau's photograph and is
in fact referred to as "Sticker rup Luang Phau Pang."
289


--- Page 302 ---


--- Page 303 ---
PART IV
CONCEPTUAL AND THEORETICAL
CLARIFICATIONS


--- Page 304 ---


--- Page 305 ---
20
A commentary on millennial Buddhism
in Thailand and Burma
The oral biography of Luang Phau Pang given during a formal conversation by
one of his monk disciples is by far more spontaneous than the written biography
of Luang Pu Waen in a popular magazine, and this again is more unself-conscious
than the classic book-length composition of Acharn Maha Boowa on the Master,
Mun. The more spontaneous accounts are less abashed about reporting the
supranormal powers of their saintly heroes and of the amulets and lustral water
they have sacralized.
Luang Phau Pang's encounters with the snake and tigers are on a superhuman
scale; the water in which his feet are washed is, like that of the famous Hindu
saints, charged with purity and potency for the worldling devotees; his rebirths at
the same location resonate with the legends of the Buddha's rebirth at Kusinara;
indeed, there is the strong suggestion that Luang Phau Pang might be a future
Buddha, perhaps one already. Such resonances, reminders, and allusions relating
the living saints with the Buddha himself, combined with the reality of the
mountain retreats of Cuan and Pang as indexical icons of the Buddhist cosmos
itself, inevitably bring to mind phenomena described for Burma under the labels
of "messianic and millennial" Buddhism, and thereby suggest a larger presence
on the Southeast Asian Buddhist landscape as a whole.
The Thai saints on cosmic mountains and in forest hermitages whom we have
dealt with, and who are referred to by their lay devotees as luang pu, liidng
phdii, arahan, and so on, are prominent members of a bewilderingly larger
array of charismatic holy men, who have appeared in the past and continue to
appear in the Burmese-Thai-Lao arena. These men of charisma and sanctity
have been called by a variety of names, other than the ones mentioned above,
such as phii mi bun, phu wiset, khrii bd, ruesl, and chiphdkhdo.
Because these holy men have been credited with sacred powers, they have
frequently been both the centers around whom cults and associations have formed
and the leaders of different kinds of actions seeking to harmonize or transform
the world. There is historical evidence to suggest that they might have been
293


--- Page 306 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
importantly implicated in the founding of kingdoms, settlements, and towns. The
authors of chronicles frequently describe them as agents in the spread and
maintenance of Buddhism. In both these roles they are seen to work on behalf of
the "civilizing" mission of state formation and the preservation of Buddhism.
But there is a third role that is perhaps even more significant. Some of these holy
men have been at the hearts of Buddhist cults and movements that have
questioned, and even attacked, the established political and religious systems and
their values while championing reformist and millenarian goals.
It is therefore necessary and theoretically important that we address the theme
of millennial Buddhism - that we figure out its core constructs and impulsions as
well as its manifestations according to the vicissitudes of social, economic, and
political circumstances. In other words, the spelling out of its phenomenological
and ideological constructs and their logical coherence will constitute its "internal
account" (internal history), and the correlating of its phases, magnitudes, and
cycles will constitute its "external account" (external history). In fact, both
internal and external features dialectically and recursively interact; I shall en-
deavor to give as complete a picture as possible.
The variety of holy men: an embarrassment of riches
Before surveying the various expressions of millennial Buddhism in Burma and
Thailand,1 it would be useful to attempt a glossary of the plethora of holy men
mentioned earlier. The different names do not designate separate types as such,
but they do accent certain characteristics rather than others. It is in this spirit that
I attempt the enumeration.
1. Phu ml bun literally means "person who has merit," and is a term
traditionally used in Thai for the great men of Buddhism. Thus the great Thai
cosmological treatise, the Traiphum, lists the Buddha, the paccekabuddhas, the
aggasdvakas (great disciples), the arahan takhlndsawas (saints), bodhisattvas
(future Buddhas), and cakravartins (universal monarchs) as phu ml bun.2
Traditionally, the king of Thailand has been recognized as the man of greatest
merit in the kingdom.
It seems, however, that the belief in phu ml bun has been a significant basis for
millennial expectations and movements,3 and therefore phu ml bun can be taken
to be more like religio-political actors and leaders in the bodhisattva vein. Thus,
in millennial movements, phu ml bun might claim to be manifestations or agents
of the coming Maitreya Buddha. Thus Ishii states that "the idea of a future king
or saviour to come, which is popular among the Buddhists in the Thai Northeast,
has found its expression in the vague concept of phu ml bun, the claim of a being
who appealed to the suffering of Thai-Lao peasants."4
2. Phu wiset may be glossed as persons capable of performing supranormal
deeds and who possess those kinds of powers denoting iddhi. It would seem that
294


--- Page 307 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
the Burmese term weikza more or less parallels the Thai phu wiset. The most
frequent candidates who have been called phu wiset have been monks or ex-
monks. Some of them have been famous curers, who have written yantra designs
on the palms or foreheads of persons afflicted with infirmities and diseases; some
have been famous alchemists; others have performed purificatory rites and lustra-
tions and distributed amulets credited with supranormal powers.
Keyes has tended to identify the phu wiset as a person typically motivated by
"personal" rather than "social" concerns,5 and as having relations with individ-
ual clients. However, under certain conditions of common threat these relations
may be transformed into a collective millennial movement led by or participated
in by the phu wiset.6 When this happens the distinction between phu wiset and
phu ml bun tends to become blurred. Alternatively, the phu wiset and phu mi bun
appear together as collaborating leaders. I shall later deal with their co-appearance
and intersection when I discuss the Thai millennial uprising of 1900-2.
3. Khru bd acharn or khru bd: Speaking of prominent types of religious men
in old Siamese society, Charnvit Kasetsiri describes the khru bd acharn as "a
teacher to a large number of people" who has undergone religious education and
might at one time have been a monk or had "an intense educational life with
monks."7 In more recent times, however, the title is conferred upon monks,
usually of advanced age, who are highly venerated for their holiness and personal
charisma.8 The most famous khrii bd of the twentieth century was a monk who
represented the indigenous Northern Thai or Lan Na Buddhist traditions; his
name was Siwichai (I shall flesh out his career later in this chapter in the section
entitled "Khru bd Siwichai: an activist charismatic monk").
4. Arahan (Pali: arahant; Sanskrit: arhat/arhant): In its canonical sense
(adumbrated in Chapter 2), an arahan is the archetypal Buddhist perfected saint,
who has traversed the path of salvation, achieved liberation, and is therefore
released from the shackles of rebirth. In Thailand this title is not necessarily
reserved solely for the ascetic, meditative, reclusive teaching monk like Acharn
Mun, for holiness and saintliness can be achieved by town-dwelling monks as
well. Examples of other Thai monks who in recent times have been acclaimed by
their followers as arahan are: the renowned Buddhist thinker, teacher, philosopher,
and head of Suan Mok (the Park of Liberation) in South Thailand, Buddhadasa
Bhikkhu;9 and Kittivuddho, a militant anticommunist monk (Phra Kittivuddho),
who is under a cloud today and whose claims to the title are more dubious.10
5. Ruesl (Thai): This personage appears in the early Thai tamndn chronicles
and in myths and legends (such as those dealing with the origin of the Sinhala
Buddha image, which has been discussed in Chapter 16), though he is not a
recognizable figure in contemporary Thailand. The rile si, it would seem, was a
hermit, who dwelt outside established communities, engaged in mystical prac-
tices, and therefore denoted the Hindu-type, "individualist" rsi, sannydsin, or
yogin. As such, he was in striking contrast to the bhikkhu, who belonged to
monastic communities and followed a Vinaya discipline, which regulated monas-
295


--- Page 308 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
tic life as well as the monks' relations with the laity. (A parallel term carrying
similar associations is yati.)11 But Burmese yathe, who are the principal members
of the gaing, are again similar to yogin; at least, they are not ordained Buddhist
monks, but their religious practices are Buddhistic.
6. Chiphdkhdo: The literal meaning of this term is "one who wears a white
garment." Kasetsiri glosses the chiphdkhdo as "usually a man who at one time
embraced a strict religious life but could not endure the religious order. However,
when he abandoned the full religious life and came out into the lay world, he still
observed some religious regulations, and therefore led a life which was different
from that of laymen and also from that of strictly religious men."12 These pious
men dressed in white, not ordained bhikkhu, appear in legend and even in some
local cults13 as supporters and guardians of Buddhism and the sahgha. It is
interesting to note that in the religious cults of Sgaw Karen - influenced by
Burmese Buddhist millennial ideas - the priests of Ywa, the high deity, who
were called bu kho, the term derived from the Mon Buddhist word pon meaning
merit, were described in 1847 by a missionary as wearing white garments.14
Another missionary reported that a leader of a cult in 1828 in a village east of
Tavoy was a man who was clad as an ascetic, taught abstention from pork and
fowl, and instituted the worship of a sacred book that in this instance turned out
to be a copy of an English prayer book.
Holy men in early Thai history
Having enumerated the kinds of holy men who have figured in traditional and
modern times, let me draw attention to the remarkable references in the early
Thai inscriptions and tamndn literature to the creative social activity of three
types of holy men, the rue si, the chiphdkhdo, and the khru bd. Kasetsiri has
asserted that "these three types of religious men were the most active leaders of
the old society."15 The evidence cited from the sources for this assertion is of this
sort. A number of ruesi are alleged to have taken a leading role in the foundation
of a new settlement at Lamphun in northern Siam, which was then ruled by a
daughter of the Lopburi king, Queen Camadevi. The restoration of the southern
city of Nagara Sri Dharmaraja in the thirteenth century, after a period of
abandonment, was stimulated by a chiphdkhdo. This city had been an important
Buddhist center and had a shrine in which reposed the Buddha's relics. He
founded a new settlement with his kin and followers, with the relic shrine as the
settlement's central focus. In the ninth century, four riiesi are credited with the
founding of a number of cities in the territory of Chiengmai. The mueang of
Sawankalok is alleged to have been founded in the eighth century by two ruesi,
who installed a khrii bd named Thammarat as the king because he was an elder
credited with special astrological knowledge.
Much later in time than that to which Kasetsiri alludes, the Buddhist monkish
296


--- Page 309 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
chronicle of the sixteenth century, the Jinakdlamdlf, also implicates an ascetic
hermit in the legend of origin of the city and kingdom of Haripunjaya in North
Thailand. The chronicle in fact begins its account of Thai events with the
following legend, in which the bhikkhu chronicler very definitely wants to
establish that an ascetic hermit is most productive when he works as an agent of
Buddhism:
The account of the founding of Haripunjaya implicates an ascetic with
supranormal powers, a universal monarch (cakkavatti), his daughter, and an
elephant of dazzling might. We are told that Vasudeva, who had once been a
Buddhist monk and had learned the scriptures, reverted to lay life and finally took
to the life of an ascetic. He had gained the powers of higher knowledge. A doe
drank Vasudeva's urine containing his semen, became pregnant, and gave birth to
two children, male and female, who married, and for whom Vasudeva built the
city of Migasangara so that they might reign there. A son of this couple turned
out to be an evil king who devastated the capital city. Vasudeva, looking for
another location, saw a place that had been visited by the Buddha. He built here
on the banks of the Mae Ping River the new city of Haripunjaya. It was then
decided that the appropriate ruler for this city would be "an offspring of the
Universal Monarch of the city of Lava." Thus it was that Princess Camadevi,
already married to the ruler of a vassal state, was chosen; she arrived in the new
city with a large retinue of 500 laymen of every class and 500 great monks
versed in the Pali canon. So great was the merit that the queen accumulated
during her rule that the deities presented her with a majestic white elephant, who
frightened away all enemies of the kingdom.
In this founding story, we pass from a first phase - in which an ascetic with
supranormal powers founds an unsuccessful, unstable, and unrighteous kingdom
with rulers who are the progeny of his union with a forest animal (nature) and
who, being brother and sister, make an incestuous marriage and in turn procreate
an evil ruler - to a second phase - in which the same ascetic founds the historic
kingdom of Hariprinjaya on the basis of impeccable Buddhist credentials: The
Buddha had originally visited the location, the first ruler is a child of a universal
monarch, she arrives with a complete array of lay subjects and elders of the
sahgha, and she is consecrated sitting on a heap of gold. In due course, she
receives one of the treasures of a world monarch - the mighty white elephant.
Such a Buddhist polity cannot but endure, prosper, and serve as a precedent for
other northern Thai kingdoms.
The foregoing discussion has established two points. The first is that the
variety of holy men (other than the Buddhist monk) that we have enumerated,
whatever their individual features and the longevity of their existence, have in
due course, as the Thai, Burmese, and Laotian societies have taken firm shape,
been treated as allies or agents of established Buddhism rather than as its
antagonists and/or the spearheads of alternative religions. In particular, the famous
medieval chronicles have "domesticated" them.
297


--- Page 310 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
Some of the holy men have figured in the literature as "pioneers" aiding state
formation by working on the frontiers of expanding polities. Whether they
antedated the arrival of Buddhism in the region or acted as parallel agents to
Buddhist monks in these colonizing activities, we see in Southeast Asia an active
collaboration between holy man and political ruler from the very beginning of
known dynastic history. Buddhism, with its monastic literary traditions, has in
due course provided the best-developed ideological and reflexive statement re-
garding the union of religion and polity.
But there is another whole dimension to the activities of these holy men, which
we can label millennial Buddhism; in its most articulated form it may be
identified with the messianic hopes surrounding the coming righteous ruler and
the coming Maitreya Buddha. In this manifestation, the millennial movements
show the holy men frequently as acting subversively against the established
political authority and holding out the prospect of a more just order. We have now
prepared the ground for the systematic study of millennial Buddhism that follows.
A Burmese messianic association (gaing)
Let us begin by recapitulating some features of "a messianic Buddhist association"
in Burma, as documented by E. M. Mendelson.16 At the outset, let us take note
of what seems to be a basic difference between Mendelson's case study and our
descriptions: The holy men who are the main actors in the Burmese gaing are
yathe, who are not like ordained monastic bhikkhu in the Theravada sense but
more like yogin or hermits. We shall therefore later face the issue as to what
difference this makes to a general discussion of millennial Buddhism.
1. The leader of the cult was the Bodaw - his full name was Mahagandare
Weikzado Apwegyoke - who was thought to be some combination of the coming
setkyamin (cakkavatti/universal king) and the coming Buddha, Metteyya. (For
example, Bo Min Guang and Bo Bo Aung were identified with the king of
Burma, who precedes the arrival of Metteyya, and the Bodaw in turn was alleged
to be a reincarnation of them.) It is not necessary to develop here the well-known
"prophecies" in Buddhism concerning the duration of the religion, and the
co-appearance of the cakkavatti and the next Buddha, but we must remember
them as a reiterative theme.
The Bodaw's career is described as compounded of a wandering and reclusive
life and the observance of ascetic practices: He is alleged to have spent fifteen
years in the legendary Himalaya mountains; subsequently he never went out of his
house and ate only rice with lime. His yogin appearance was embellished by his
long white hair done in a topknot.
2. The Bodaw presided over the Maheikdi gaing. The meaning of gaing has to
be spelled out. Mendelson begins by advancing a narrow definition of the gaing,
298


--- Page 311 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
which is "a group of people - usually a teacher and his disciples - whose
manipulation of various magical techniques associated with alchemy, mantras,
medicine, and cabbalistic signs leads them to acquire, in step-by-step hierarchical
degrees, ever more refined states of material power over animate and inanimate
nature and the supernatural."17 The object of the members was to await the
coming Buddha Arimadeya (Metteyya), and before his coming the expectation was
that the weikza Bo Min Gaung would assume the throne of Burma and ' 'clean up
the country''
One would think from the account that the gaing is an esoteric and bounded
"sect" of master and initiated disciples, but such is not the case; this inner core
is embedded in a more open, lay-dominated milieu. Mendelson tells us that the
actual membership of the gaing was hard to determine. There were first of all
some twenty resident yathes, who observed the vow of not eating meat and ' 'keep
the precepts of the usual Buddhist kind." "Sometimes, they take vows of silence
for some months." Besides these yathes, "occasionally," reports Mendelson, "a
small number of the monks will be found about," thereby implying that the
yathes are different from the regular bhikkhu.ls
On major ritual occasions staged by the gaing, Mendelson has seen 200 or
more people participating, the overwhelming number of whom were peasantry
and small artisans. But a resident gaing official, the Sayagyi, told him that at
those major occasions at which the Bodaw himself spoke, persons of middle- and
upper-class status were present. Moreover, non-Burmese people from the Shan
Hills and Kachin territory attended these occasions. Besides, the gaing con-
ducted a variety of charitable activities, "including the feeding of 350 monks
every morning."
Now let us consider this additional information: The establishment allowed
visitors and residents "to sell their own medicine, sacred objects and mediumic
[i.e., mediumistic] powers," and Sayagyi uninterruptedly sold holy water,
medicine, beads, and "gifts" from the Bodaw. The result is that the gaing with
its inner core of master and disciples and penumbra of lay devotees of varying
constancy and commitment, and with its ritual acts and sacralized objects, bears
a family resemblance to the current cults surrounding many of the forest medita-
tion masters in Thailand.
3. We are now ready to appreciate the cosmological shape of the gaing's
headquarters. Mendelson describes the spatial and architectural layout of the
gaing as occupying three levels, laid out according to the "ascensional" theme
of Buddhist cosmology. At the first level were the pagodas, the bodhi tree, and
the underground meditation caves; at the second level were the rooms set out for
the visits of Bo Bo Aung and Shin Eizagona, shrines for Bo Ming Aung, and the
private room of the Bodaw; and at the third and highest level was the enthroned
Buddha statue, surrounded by five standing Buddhas, all faced by kneeling
arahants. There was also the throne of the coming Buddha Arimadeya. The
299


--- Page 312 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
entire complex seems on the one hand to reproduce the mythical forest in which
the weikzas of old practiced their arts, and on the other hand to recreate in Burma
the sacred geography in which Arimadeya will appear.
The Karen Telakhon millennial sect
Much the same three-dimensional contours - millennial expectations centering
on the coming cakkavatti and Buddha Arimadeya, a cultic movement with an
inner core of adepts and a penumbra of lay supporters, and a spatial layout and
ritual cycle that enact religio-political cosmology and are recognizably ''Bud-
dhist" - characterize a Karen millenarian sect that is described by Theodore
Stern.19 Stern finds the major source of Karen millenarism, which was mounted
in reaction to the Burmese domination, in the features of the Buddhist kingdoms
that surrounded the Karen - such as the viewing of the ruler as a cosmocrator, the
earthly analogue of Indra in the city of the gods; and the prophesy that at the end
of 5,000 years of decline the way will be prepared for the arrival of the
cakkavatti, who will lay the foundation of the new order of the future Buddha.
In the Telakhon movement's ideology, the position of Ariya (the future Buddha)
was central. Each of the four previous Buddhas was considered an incarnation of
Ariya. Ariya had already appeared in the present era and will again become
incarnate from time to time, though perhaps in imperfect form, until he attains
his full majesty and glory at the dawn of his proper epoch. (We see how this idea
of Ariya, much like the Gotama Buddha of the Jdtaka tales, progressing through
a succession of rebirths to his own enlightenment, allows for several millennial
prophets to rise and fall and yet maintain the promise intact.)
Con Yu, the founder of the Phu Chaik ("the fruit of wisdom"), a name for
both the movement and its leader, was viewed as an incarnation of a deity who
had come down to relieve men of their sins, and also as an embodiment of Ariya.
It had also been foretold that in the time of the seventh Phu Chaik - that is, the
time of the present incumbent,20 Con Yu would return to establish his millennium;
this prediction was contingent, according to some informants, upon the faithful
maintaining the purity of conduct he had ordained.21
The organization of the Phu Chaik movement founded by Con Yu in a village,
some thirty-five miles north of Moulmein, did not take a "monastic" form as
understood in an orthodox Theravada sense, though it was recognizably "Bud-
dhist" in many of its features. Con Yu and his successors were yathe (Stern
identifies this term with the Sanskrit rsi). They were "hermit monks, clad in
yellow robes and with unshorn hair, maintaining celibacy and gaining power
through fasting and meditation. Each had a school of disciples from among
whom the incumbent chose his successor and with whom during festivals he
performed ceremonies in a ritual center, while an assistant, his head of religious
300


--- Page 313 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
affairs (bu kho in Sgaw) led lay followers through the same ceremonies at a public
festival ground.22
After Con Yu's time, the movement divided into two branches that established
themselves in Thailand, one based in the southern part of Tak Province and the
other among the Pwo of Kancanaburi Province in the valley of the Khwae Noi
extending down to the plains. The upper Khwae Noi movement apparently
became an orthodox Buddhist establishment of the Mon-Burmese style when its
yathe died without a successor in the second decade of this century. The other
branch continues under its Phu Chaik, who, while not severing ties with his natal
family, ' 'maintains himself often in retreat and cultivates his spiritual powers
through meditation and fasting."23
The Phu Chaik supports himself by farming and is assisted by his followers
during planting and harvest. Though he has special powers conferred upon him
by Ariya, he communicates informally with his subordinates. He is assisted in his
ritual duties by disciples who either volunteer as youths or are selected by village
elders for the honor; "like him, the disciples maintain celibacy until the time
when they may desire to return to secular life."24 Though the Phu Chaik's seat
was just across the border in Thailand, the majority of its members, principally
Sgaw, dwelt in Burma in the hinterlands of Moulmein.
Stern describes the administrative structure of the Phu Chaik as being
"complex," composed of a religious head (bu kho) and a secular head (kaw
kho), each assisted by boards and committees, whose members are inferior
yathes and lay elders. Together they manage the affairs of the sect; supervise the
three major festivals of the year; and oversee corporate business concerns, which
derive income principally through a house tax on members and from voluntary
gifts. The executive committees also sit as a court enforcing stringent observance
of a code controlling sexual conduct, forbidding gambling and the use of
intoxicants and narcotics, prohibiting the raising of such animals as might be
sacrificed to the spirits, and encouraging the wearing of Karen garb.
Stern's description of the Telakhon has the advantage of charting recent
transformations and shifts in the movement in the face of increasing frictions with
the Thai and Burmese government officials. He also records the sect's increas-
ingly disenchanted encounters with Christian missionaries who, for purposes of
conversion, have tried to engulf it by skillful exploitation of the Karen millennial
beliefs in the White Brother of the Golden Book.
We see before our eyes how a millennial movement, which was previously
manifest in an involuted "ritualistic" existence, moved toward militant action,
which we are tempted to call "political" action. There was a tightening of the
enforcement of rules of conduct pertaining to sex, liquor, gambling, public
entertainment, and the raising of animals suited for spirit sacrifice. More
spectacularly, the Phu Chaik, heir to a long line of celibate monks, responded to
the overtures of missionaries by taking a wife and making her pregnant. Stern
301


--- Page 314 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
thinks the move fuses the advent of the Ariya Buddha with the advent of the
cakkavatti and hastens the anticipated reunification of the Karen leading to their
political independence. Though some of the Telakhon members left because of
these changes, there was an expansion in the scale of the movement, its adherents
increasing from 3,000 to 10,000 and being drawn "alike from animists,
Buddhists, and from rival sects such as the Leke."
There has also been a new, marked phase of militancy against the Burmese that
is compounded of three factors: "an affirmation of the Phu Chaik's cakkavatti
nature, his attempt to regain the followers he has lost, and a recognition of a
common cause with the Free Karen in their struggle for Kawthulay'' Two militant
engagements with the Burmese authorities took place. In the first, Telakhon
members, protected by charms furnished by the Phu Chaik and assisted by some
ten Free Karen armed with automatic weapons, prevailed over a force of Burmese
soldiers. In the second engagement, the Burmese sent a detachment of Christian
Chin Troops, who swiftly defeated the rebel forces.25
Khru bd Siwichai: an activist charismatic monk
We now come to the celebrated case of a Northern Thai monk of recent times
who bore the popular title of khru bd (venerated teacher). He is clearly a follower
of an indigenous Northern monastic tradition and exemplifies one modality of the
saintly bhikkhu as local patriot, activist, cosmocrator, and nakbun, that is, "one
who is so endowed with merit himself that he can, through compassion toward
others, serve as a means for them also to acquire merit."26
Siwichai as a holy man, his activities, and the predominantly lay support he
depended on - all provide in some respects an instructive contrast to the current
Thai forest meditation masters, their followings, and their activities. I shall
concern myself with two questions: In what way does Siwichai intersect with
forest saints such as Acharn Mun? and In what sense can he be included in the
general framework of millennial Buddhism?
That khru bd Siwichai was a local hero is attested by the number of popular
biographies recounting his sanctity, charisma, and works.27 Apart from his
monumental building projects, Siwichai is best remembered for his opposition to
the national Thai sahgha as promoted from Bangkok and to some of the
ordinances it sought to implement in its policy of unification. Swearer reports:
"Everyone in the north, especially in the Chiang Mai valley, knows the story of
his life or at least episodes from it, and will probably be wearing a protective
amulet or medallion on their amulet chain hanging around their neck. There is a
prominent statue of Khruba Srivijaya [Siwichai] at the foot of the famous Doi
Sutep mountain overlooking the city of Chiang Mai, and I once attended an image
consecration ceremony in which a statue of the holy monk played a prominent
magical role."
302


--- Page 315 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
Khru bd was born in 1878 of poor farming parents in the commune of Ban
Pang situated in the province of Lamphun, a historic part of North Thailand that
has had a long association with Buddhism. He was ordained a novice at the age
of eighteen and for a brief period became an apprentice to a well-known
meditation teacher. Shortly after his higher ordination at twenty-one, the death of
the abbot of his home temple (Wat Ban Pang) left him and a fellow monk in
charge of this temple.
Thereafter, these two monks are reported to have gone into retreat to the forest
for another brief period. This, according to one biographer (cited by Keyes), was
the turning point in Slwichai's career: He received an omen in the form of a
dream of a full moon among the clouds, which he interpreted as a sign and
confirmation of his mission.
Returning to his village, Slwichai, with the help of lay people he magnetized
and led, energetically set about building a complex of dwellings and a meeting
hall (yihdrd) on a hilltop outside the village. This became the new monastery,
suited for the practice of meditation and consistent with forest-dwelling traditions.
He lived a simple life, ate only one meatless meal a day, and eschewed such
habits as smoking and chewing fermented tea (mlang) and betel.
Siwichai's rising reputation was to a significant degree owed to his ascetic
mode of life. Keyes reports a respected Thai monk as stating the following in his
preface to a recent biography: "He desired very little and was content with what
he had. He ordinarily had only three pieces of clothing . . . He subsisted on
vegetables and avoided all kinds of meat . . . He said that he behaved according
to the model of Maha Kassapa Thera, the monk who strictly followed the practice
of dhutahga." (Note that in the received tradition Slwichai has been assimilated
to the forest-monk tradition.)
He soon became the center of public attention and devotion: He attracted
followers and converts from tribal peoples like Karen, Meo, and Muser who
previously evinced no interest in the sahgha; parents brought their sons to be his
novice-disciples; and he was the focus of merit-seeking donations. He was
credited with the virtues and supranormal powers of a bodhisattva - such as
discerning other people's thoughts and intentions and not getting hot or wet by
exposure to sun or rain.
Khru bd Slwichai's local reputation in Lamphun and Chiengmai provinces
escalated when he opposed the growing powers of the national sahgha centered
in Bangkok. This opposition must be seen as related to the fact that the Northern
Tai Yuan people remained more or less free of Central Thai control until the end
of the nineteenth century,28 when King Chulalongkorn launched his provincial
civil, and parallel ecclesiastical, administrative reforms with the aid of Prince
Damrong and Prince Wachirayan.29 The khru bd in particular challenged the
ecclesiastical regulation that a monk had to be entitled by the national sahgha
before he could instruct and ordain novices as their upajjhdya. He was charged
with failing to comply with the orders of his ecclesiastical district supervisor and
303


--- Page 316 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
was ordered both to be instructed in the new government regulations and to
cooperate in compiling the official census of the religious. Moreover, he was
blamed for not discouraging rumors about his supranormal powers and for
encouraging schism in the sahgha', these were of course two of the major offenses
(pdrdjika) set out in the disciplinary code.
Another reason for the central government's concern with Slwichai's separa-
tion was his extensive campaign to build and restore temples and monasteries in
North Thailand. Many of these were historic centers of Northern Thai Buddhism
and were associated with the Buddha's alleged visit to the region as recorded in
local chronicles.
When called upon to defend himself before the ecclesiastical authorities, first
in his local district and later in Bangkok, khru bd Slwichai held that he was
ordaining monks according to the pristine traditions established by the Buddha.
Contra the authority of the central Thai sahgha, he appealed to the authority of
the Buddha's teaching and of his own personal experience as a follower of the
Path.
Thompson30 writes that the Bangkok authorities were fully aware of Slwichai's
popularity in Lamphun and Chiengmai. Advised by the then-viceroy, Prince
Bovaredej, against laying any criminal charges against him, they absolved him
and sent him back in honor, declaring that his confinement was sufficient
punishment. 'A crowd of ten thousand gave the hero-priest an enthusiastic
welcome, all nationalities vying with each other to do him honor. He walked on a
carpet made of the silk head-dresses of his Shan advisers, who carried him over
the muddiest passages." In 1935 he was again brought before the ecclesiastical
authorities in Bangkok, for by this time schism was in the air and a certain
number of Northern monks had severed connections with their ecclesiastical
superiors and declared Slwichai to be their leader. These monks had pronounced
against the new and expanded learning sponsored by Bangkok, and some of their
leaders were arrested when they refused to allow ecclesiastical officials to inspect
their monasteries. Once again, Slwichai was treated carefully and was allowed to
return to the North after he signed an agreement that he would abide by the
sahgha rules and regulations as defined by the central government in the Sangha
Act of 1902. Thus, schism was avoided. Slwichai thereafter directed his efforts
to raising imposing sums of money and intensifying his building projects of
bridges, roads, and temples, activities that were traditionally the quintessential
activities of kingship.
As Swearer remarks, Slwichai was not simply trying to conserve traditional
regional monastic practices or to revitalize the glories of Lan Na Thai Buddhism.
He was also attempting to restore the land to its original foundations as a
Buddhadesa (Buddha-land). In this sense, he was a "cosmocrator." In any event,
his manifestation testifies to the persistence of the tradition of the holy man
celebrated in the legends, images, and amulets of North Thailand.
Khrii bd Slwichai in actual life was, and was seen by his followers as, a man of
304


--- Page 317 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
many facets and many parts; he defies any simple typing. Keyes rightly notes
that, despite his reputation for personal asceticism, Siwichai's career was not that
of a recluse withdrawn from the world; he remained very much in the world, and
as a nakbun provided a means for others, particularly ordinary folk, to make
merit through associating with him; as we have noted, he was credited with the
virtues and powers of a bodhisattva.
Keyes sees a strong contrast between the activist khru bd Slwichai, the nakbun,
and Acharn Mun (the central character in this book), whom he sees primarily as
an arahant, a recluse who withdrew from the world and sought his own salvation.
Keyes therefore has dubbed Slwichai the "savior saint" and Mun the "mystical
saint"; he sees this contrast as echoing a long-standing contrast in the religious
traditions that developed in India between those who seek salvation through
action in the world and those who do so by rejecting the world. In Buddhist
tradition, the contrast is that between the bodhisattva, the enlightened being who
postpones the final leap to nibbdna because of his compassion for human beings,
and the arahant, who has successfully realized nibbdna for himself.
Up to a point, seeing Slwichai, the people's saint, and Mun, the monks' monk,
as "opposed" types makes sense. But I must caution against pushing the contrast
too far. For as we have seen in our detailed study of Acharn Mun's career, he was
more than a withdrawn recluse - he had a compulsive, peripatetic teaching career
and spawned a network of cells of disciples. In addition, he was the focus of
popular lay religiosity as an acclaimed saint; and we cannot ignore the cultic
beliefs and practices associated with his relics and the amulets minted in his
memory. Moreover, we should not lose sight of the general fact that the saintli-
ness of both Slwichai and Mun rested on their credentials of personal asceticism,
meditative contemplation, and detached compassion, though perhaps Mun was
the greater proven virtuoso on the first two counts.
Keyes also makes the problematic assertion that the arahant model represented
by Acharn Mun is a recent phenomenon; its reassertion, he suggests, "appears to
have begun first in Burma with the eminent meditation master, the Ledi Sayadaw
(1856-1923) and then to have occurred in Sri Lanka and Thailand";31 moreover,
it has only been in the past century, in the wake of radical political-economic
changes in societies like Thailand - he has in mind the reforms instituted by
Mongkut - that the "mystical saint" has been revived as a significant model for
monks.
There is some validity in this thesis, but we should keep in mind these caveats:
Firstly, the Thammayut reform sect initiated by Mongkut sponsored certain of the
ascetic practices reminiscent of the forest-monk tradition, together with the
vocation of Pali learning; the propagation of meditation per se was not one of its
main planks. Secondly, whatever the Burmese influence on the Thammayut
movement, yet, as I have demonstrated earlier, the Burmese influence with regard
to meditation made a great impact in the fifties upon the Mahanikai sect in
Thailand, particularly upon Phra Phimolatham. He did not so much spread the
305


--- Page 318 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
reclusive meditation regime to his fellow monks as recruit urban monasteries to
disseminate the technology and benefits of meditation, not only to their member
monks and novices, but, more importantly, also to the laity. The search for
tranquility for those in the world was the professed objective of this drive. Finally,
while not disregarding the new disciplinary "orthodoxy" in line with alleged
pristine Buddhist ideals and the rhetoric of purification of religion championed
by the Thammayut sect, we should not lose sight of the fact that the forest-monk
traditions, within which the vocation of meditation has occupied a prominent
part, have a long history in Southeast Asia; not only a long history, but also a long
experience of local or regional adaptation and elaboration into distinctive
complexes. The line of meditation masters stemming from Acharn Mun has its
roots in this earlier regional heritage, as much as it was inflected by the reformed
practices latterly initiated by Mongkut and Wachirayan and touched by the
religio-political strategies of the Thammayut sect. The latter's more recent
impulse impacting on the former worked with its grain. This meeting of streams,
this double identity and involvement, is intriguingly revealed by Acharn Mun's
biographer, Acharn Maha Boowa, who we have seen can speak with two voices
according to context and audience: He can discourse and write doctrine in an
impeccable, philosophically and rationally orthodox, manner; he can also en-
trance his audience with tales of the mystical experiences and supranormal feats
of his Master that are plainly cosmological, mystical, and "tantric" in inspira-
tion - that are clearly grounded in an entrenched, esoteric forest-monk tradition
long flowering in the forests of the Thai, Burmese, and Laotian border provinces.
Now a few words about situating khru bd Siwichai. On the one hand his
biographers try to assimilate him to forest-monk ascetic and meditational
traditions, but on the other hand they also see him as measuring up to the
requirements of a bodhisattva. The kind of bodhisattva he was seen to manifest
was integrally related to North Thailand's resistance to Bangkok's unification
drive and to the erasure of its own religious heritage. And this situation of
resistance dovetails with the restoration of the ideal Buddhist realm studded with
pagodas and monuments. Therefore we must in part at least necessarily associate
the khru bd with the phenomenon of millennial Buddhism of the kind - widely
rooted and sporadically bursting forth in this part of Asia - that looks to the
coming universal king (cakkavatti), righteous ruler (dharmardja), and coming
Buddha (Maitreya).
The mortuary rites staged after Siwichai's decease, and the interpretations put
upon the happenings at this crucial time, confirm the messianic and millennial
dimensions of his historical appearance.32 On his deathbed, the saint is alleged to
have urged his disciples and followers not to abandon "the work we have done"
and to organize further undertakings of construction for merit. The cremation
rites, held in March 1946, five years after his death, lasted fifteen days and were
staged as a festival. People from all over the North, including many followers
among the tribal people, contributed money and labor, and rarely heard or seen
306


--- Page 319 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
traditional Thai music and dancing were performed. The body was burned on a
magnificent pyre, and the traditional augury at the rites for a great man - a shower
of rain - fell, confirming the dead man as one of merit. There was a division of
relics into four parts - in due course one part was enshrined at Siwichai's village
temple at Wat Ban Pang; another two parts in historic wat at two great Northern
historic capitals, Wat CamadevI at Lamphun and Wat Suan Dauk in Chiengmai;
and the last part on the top of a mountain, Doi Ngom, which had a commanding
view of all the places in which Siwichai had constructed his monuments.
The preservation of the memory of the saint and the continued radiation of his
virtues and energies via monuments placed at strategic points, and images and
amulets distributed as sedimentations of his power, followed a pattern that is
familiar to us. Writes Keyes: "Reliquary shrines were not the only monuments
constructed to the memory of Khruba Siwichai. As is the tradition in connection
with famous monks, medallions bearing his likeness were struck shortly after his
death and have continued to be produced to the present day. A number of images
of Khruba Siwichai have also been cast, the most famous being one at the foot of
Doi Suthep and another at the reliquary shrine on top of Doi Suthep. These
images have been practically covered by gold leaf affixed by pilgrims who come
to the mountain." People even today continue to seek contact with these objects
"because they have intrinsic power that can be drawn upon for their own needs."
Let me then conclude with this statement of the differences among the bhikkhu
saints, such as khru bd Siwichai and Acharn Mun, and among the movements
that surround them. Up to a point, it is illuminating to use such dichotomies as
"savior saint" versus "mystical saint"; a "rationalistic" mode of speech acts
and religious discourse versus a "tantric" mode of mystical and cosmological
discourse; and, finally, the engagement in cultic rituals impregnated with religio-
political imagery versus the eruption into militant political rebellion. We may do
so, provided we are attuned to the complex nature of these phenomena, in which
the dichotomies may in fact coexist as strands. In one case, one strand may be
more dominant than the other. In another case, each may express itself in
different communication contexts. In all cases, each is capable of moving from
one dominant phase to the other dominant phase, according to the intensity and
salience of contextual circumstances.
The Saya San rebellion in Burma
The Saya San rebellion in Burma,33 mounted against the British colonial rulers in
the 1930s, took place roughly at the same time as Phra Siwichai was resisting in
North Thailand the encompassing power of the centralizing Thai authorities. The
Saya San rebellion enjoys a conspicuous notoriety because, more than any other
millennial protest that has occurred in Southeast Asia, it was led by monks
(pongyi) and ex-monks. I shall tailor my account to demonstrate the point that
307


--- Page 320 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
what seemed like a sudden and violent eruption did in fact portray during its
course certain critical features in the ideology and symbolism of millennialism in
the Buddhist mode.
A long-term erosion provides the setting for understanding why Buddhist
monks led an insurrection against the British in Burma. Factors in this erosion
include the "disestablishment" of the Buddhist sahgha by the colonial authority;
the severance of the traditional relation between sahgha and state; and the
withdrawal of both state patronage of the sahgha and of the guarantees of its
authority, entitlements, and property. The erosion of political support for the
monasteries also gave rise to an intensified sectarianism and an increasing
emergence of radical, militant, "political" monks who could not be disciplined
by the sahgha.34 By and large, there was a humiliation and loss of national
prestige that was keenly felt by the Buddhist monks in particular. The humiliation
was intensified by the transfer of the Burmese royal throne to a museum in
Calcutta and the British incorporation of Burma into the Indian Raj - symbolic
and administrative acts that to the Burmese denied their existence as a Buddhist
polity and a people with an identity and history. These circumstances may be
viewed as contributing features of the "long run."
The immediate circumstances that sharpened the impulse to rebellion and
determined its timing and the place of its occurrence were various economic
dislocations caused in the agrarian sphere, especially in the rice bowl in the lower
Irrawaddy Basin.35 The Sayan San insurrection that erupted in 1932 was in this
sense primarily a peasant revolt, and it began with a vengeance in the Therrawaddy
District with attacks on British authorities and the Indian Chettiyar moneylenders;
it then "swept through large portions of the north, central and east central
Irrawaddy Delta and extended as far as the Shan States in the northeast . . . Its
popular character is beyond doubt; about 9,000 rebels were arrested or captured,
3,000 killed or wounded, and 350 convicted and hanged. The official report
remarked on the number of headmen and monks who took leading roles."36 The
rising, once launched, developed into a series of local rebellions that took an
independent course of their own in Pegu and Upper Burma.
The economic circumstances that brought previous grievances and resistance
to fiscal taxes and levies to a head and caused in 1930 a massive explosion, as
sudden as it was widespread (precipitated by the integrating forces of the world
market now experienced as the Great Depression), has been well documented by
the authorities cited.37 It is relevant to note that Saya San himself had been the
past chairman of a committee sent by the General Council of Buddhist Asso-
ciations, at the urging of its nationalist faction led by the monk U Sae Thein, to
inquire into excesses in the collection of taxes. The association that he formed
had as its professed first two purposes the offering of resistance to the forcible
collection of the unpopular taxes and the oppressive forest-land ordinances that
deprived villagers of the free use of wood for domestic needs.
We can now take up the question of the millennial expression of the revolt.38
308


--- Page 321 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
The British authorities had already noted with some anxiety the appearance of
millennial prophets claiming to be setkyamin (cakkavatti) in 1906, 1910, and
1912, when a large following of 20,000 had formed, and again in 1924-6.
Furthermore, as Sarkisyanz has noted, there were many other movements in the
late nineteenth century and the twentieth century that never reached the threshold
of official notice. So the Saya San eruption, though sudden, was a major
explosion in a continuing series of smaller ones. It is of no surprise that its leader,
who was seen as striving to restore Burma's political sovereignty and its treasured
jewel of religion - indeed, as ushering in the promised Golden Age in which all
the pious will achieve salvation - should have assumed, and in turn enthusiasti-
cally be invested with, the titles of Setkyamin and Buddha Yaza (future Buddha).39
Rumors spread that he was of royal descent. In accordance with these claims, he
had the Buddha-King's City (Buddha Yaza Myo) pegged out, and erected a
palace of bamboo on the jungle mountain of Alauntaung in the Therrawaddy
District. At his coronation,40 as the rebels known as the Galon Army walked past,
Saya San is alleged to have called upon - in his capacity as Thupanna Galon Raja
undertaking his mission for the advancement of Buddha's religion - the guardian
spirits of Buddhism and the various nats and weikza to help his soldiers on to
victory and to protect them from harm.41 And the oath taken by the rebels
contained not so much fulminations against economic grievances as the rhetoric
of banding together "to drive out all unbelievers," so that the religion might be
saved from them; to gain liberty for themselves; and "to the Galon-King domin-
ion over this land."42
We need to know much more than is now provided by the standard sources in
English about the meaning and power associated with the signs, symbols, and
rituals of initiation and moral rearmament; about the actual organization of the
"secret village societies" (Sarkisyanz) or "the associations" (Scott) - the athin -
that staged the revolts; and about the manner in which the Buddhist monks'
Samgha Sametgyi Association, from which came the monk (and former monk)
leaders, intersected with and organized the athin.
The galon is of course the fabulous mythical eagle (known elsewhere as the
garuda), the intrepid enemy and destroyer of the ndga (snake). The interpretive
task is to see how the classical symbols were made acutely relevant and employed
with deadly potency in the context of the religio-political and economic crisis of
the 1930s. The rebels were the galons', Saya San, their galon king; and the
British and their collaborators, the snake to be stamped out. The galon was
tattooed on the bodies by "village magicians," was a mark of initiation into the
athin, and signified the protest against the taxes and their nonpayment. An
ex-monk named U Yazeinda from the Henzada region who was active in the
formation of many village associations "urged non-payment of the capitation tax
and said that he had the medicines which would render the villagers proof against
the assaults of Government officials. No member of our athin who has been
tattooed will have to pay the capitation tax."43 The tattoo design incised on the
309


--- Page 322 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
body by the charismatic officiant confers upon the recipient some of his mystical
powers, in the same way as the blessed amulets earlier analyzed; in this context,
the primary power conferred was invulnerability against British arms.44 A variety
of charms, medicines, and amulets also seem to have been employed. Saya San
himself was an expert tattoo artist and the author of a work on traditional
medicine. Armed with only a few guns, supplemented by crudely manufactured
firearms from pipes and bicycle tubing - but fortified with their tattoos and
amulets and spurred on by their millennial expectations - the rebels attacked
"unflinchingly against rifle and Lewis gun fire of the finest shooting regiments in
the Indian army." They "went down in tens and twenties, but still they came on,
storming over their lines of dead . . ."45 A more prosaic official British report
said "the rebels were, however, so convinced of their invulnerability that they
advanced openly against the police, shouting out that they were going to kill
them, and continued to advance in spite of being warned that the police would
open fire. This the police were compelled to do, and they continued firing for
about an hour and a half before the rebels finally retreated."46
If the valor of the rebels was visible to all reporters, the structure of the athin
that formed "the tenuous organization grid for the revolt" (Scott) has seemed
opaque to them. Besides the names of some of the organizing and teaching
monks and ex-monks, there is so little known about the pattern of mobilization
that we are forced to fall back on the suggestibility of analogy. It seems to me that
we have to turn to the organization of gaings and the activities of weikza and
other holy men in Burma, and to our fuller accounts of the cults and followings
surrounding contemporary Thai meditation masters, and the network of teacher-
pupil cells and of head and branch hermitages, to visualize the techniques and
grids that enable the mobilization of peasants at grass-roots level for participation
in militant millennial movements. The same analogizing should tell us why in the
last resort - even though the British troops were sorely tried and it took some two
years to quell the rebellion entirely - the athin associations were tenuous,
volatile, and fragile, and therefore incapable of establishing the new order. It is
also my surmise that similar processes of cell formation are effective for guerilla
action in faraway provinces against the rank and file of a solidified administration.
The millennial uprisings in Northeast Thailand (1899-1902)
Although Burma provides the best examples of millennial cults and rebellions,
Thailand has not lacked them, and the revolts at the turn of this century in
Northeast Thailand were the most recent, and also the best-documented, example
of militant and violent millennialism.47 As a shorthand expression, I shall refer to
them as the 1902 riots.
An earlier-known instance of millennial revolt occurred in 1699, when a Lao
named Bun Kwang, who styled himself aphu ml bun (person of merit), managed
310


--- Page 323 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
to establish himself the ruler of the outpost city of Khorat in the reign of King
Narai (1656-88). He is alleged to have marshaled over 4,000 men, 84 elephants,
and over 100 horses, but was overwhelmed by the Ayudhyan forces sent by the
order of King Phetracha (1688-1703).
A later occurrence, more an incident than a rebellion, happened in 1924 in
Loei Province in the Northeast. This time, four men - acclaimed together as phu
mi bun and hailing from Ban Nong Bankkeo - performed purification rites,
distributed various talismanic objects "to hundreds and thousands of Thai-Lao
who came to see them from neighboring provinces including Roi-et and
Mahasarakham," and attacked a district office. But again, after two months the
disturbance was put down by a police reinforcement."48 Since then, minor
incidents have been reported:49 In 1933, a troubadour singer claimed extraordi-
nary powers and threatened to overthrow Siamese power and establish an indepen-
dent Lao kingdom; in 1959, a phu mi bun claimant bubbled up in Khorat; in
1973, after the October revolution, Keyes knew of at least two people who
claimed to be incarnations of Ariya Maitreya and acquired followings in the
Northeastern provinces of Udon and Loei; and, at the same time, some scholars
have reported coming across pamphlets, mainly circulating in the North and
Northeast, describing alleged manifestations, or imminent arrivals, of the
messianic Maitreya.
So these sporadic occurrences should warn us against treating the 1899-1902
riots as either unique or inexplicably sudden. Explosive they were, but they
exploded out of a smoldering condition of politico-economic frustrations and a
widespread attraction to men of extraordinary claims and to millennial promise.
The available descriptions of riots enable us to supplement our preceding
account of the Burmese Saya San rebellion in certain ways. When the millennial
movement explodes into violence, there is simultaneously an intensification of
other appearances - the number of charismatic leaders claiming to be men of
special powers multiplies, their capacities are magnified, the actors are carried on
a euphoric tide, and finally there occurs a destructive and sacrificial devaluation
and negation of the present world in favor of the shining new order.
No doubt the circumstances leading up to the 1902 uprising were many and
complex. But most commentators are likely to agree with Tej Bunnag50 that the
time of its occurrence was one when the adverse effects of the territorial
integration of the Northeast into a single Thai polity began to be felt by the local
privileged sections of the people, who lost many of their traditional bases of both
power and wealth.
The Northeast had previously been a region organized as small principalities
(mueang) ruled by Lao (and Khmer) nobles (cao). In the face of colonial
expansionary threats by the French from Indo-China and the British from Burma
and Malaya, King Chulalongkorn initiated a system of patrimonial provincial
administration through the appointment of Siamese high commissioners, who
occupied an intermediate position between the Bangkok court and the Northeast-


--- Page 324 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
ern local elite. In 1892, the position of these elite was even more directly
challenged by the appointment of Siamese officials as permanent administrative
commissioners; they were invested with critical powers, such as those relating to
taxation, that had been previously exercised by the local lords.
In the meantime, there was in 1893 an outbreak of hostilities between the
French and the Siamese, and by the treaty of that same year Siam conceded to
France all the left-bank territory of the Mekong (and also virtual control of a
twenty-five-kilometer zone, which could not be entered by Thai officials or
soldiers without French permission). This spurred on Thailand to exercise tighter
control over its Northeastern territory and to appoint Prince Sanphasitiprasong as
the royal commissioner plenipotentiary of the Northeastern "circle" (Monthon
Isan). From 1894 onward, King Chulalongkorn (with the indispensable services
of Prince Damrong) established a centralized provincial administration, which
entailed a new territorial mapping of administrative units. The net result was that
only a few of the old principalities or domains (mueang) were given the status of
provinces (cangwat), while most of them were accorded the status of districts
(amphoe), not an insignificant number even having to settle for the undignified
status of the next lower administrative unit, tambon.
The outcome of this revamping was the downgrading of the local nobility and
gentry, and even those who retained their lordly status as governors discovered
that they were bereft of much power. The most conspicuous evidence of this was
the imposition of local taxes by the Siamese commissioners: In 1901-2, they
raised the amount of the poll tax. Such impositions, and new limitations on the
sale of buffaloes, cattle, and elephants, also coincided with a general deteriora-
tion of agriculture, increasingly insecure subsistence farming, and outbreaks of
banditry.
It is in these unsettled times that prophecies circulated of the imminent coming
of new leaders to alleviate suffering, and a rash of phu ml bun (men of merit) and
phu wiset (men of supranormal powers) broke out. We should note the significant
fact that, like the Saya San revolt in Burma, we are witnessing again not a
concerted unified and directed Cromwellian rebellion but a number of dispersed
mobs coalescing around charismatic men sprouting like wishing trees in various
parts of Monthon Udon and Monthon Isan.
By 1899, Keyes says, Siamese officials were reporting the appearance of phu
wiset distributing to peasants sacralized water (nam mori) and medicine (yd) and
performing various rites. Troubador singers and handwritten scripts dissem-
inated the message of the coming phu ml bun, while also making predictions of
dreadful disasters and exhorting people to take various remedial actions.51
Strange occurrences were expected to occur - wax gourds and pumpkins would
turn into elephants and horses, water buffaloes into demons (yakkhas).
The "king of righteousness" (thdo thammikardt, phu ml bun) would appear and
perform the alchemical feats of changing laterite lumps (hin hae) into gold and
312


--- Page 325 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
silver. One of these pamphlets claimed of the righteous ruler, Phraya Thammikarat,
that he had previously ruled over Ayudhya and the Laotian kingdoms of Lang
Chang and that his face was again "seen in our time.'' Here we have a remarkable
example of the thesis I have argued before: The notion of rebirth, in the context
of Buddhist conceptions of cakkavatti and the coming Buddha, enables men of
personal charisma not only to assume these statuses but also to claim that they are
reincarnations of past heroes.
Amid these prophesies, commotions, and awed expectations, there appeared
in various localities of the Northeast a number of phu wiset who performed
purificatory rites upon the panic-stricken peasants. At least some of these phu
wiset were known to be Buddhist monks. An example was Phrakhru In52 of the
Bang Nong I Tun monastery in Yasothon Province, who performed the rite of
"cutting the retributive karma" (tat kam wdng wen) on villagers and also urged
them to collect laterite lumps for conversion to precious metal. In the same
province, Siamese officials reprimanded three ranking monks for performing
rites of this nature. The phu wiset performed "miracles" such that the onlookers
came to believe that some of them were the awaited phu mi bun himself.
We will return to the question of the relation between phu wiset and phu mi bun
after giving a short sketch of the best-known rebel leader. Ong Man came from a
village in Monthon Isan (actually from the present-day province of Ubon), and he
clearly was the leader of peasants several hundred strong. He is reported to have
claimed to be Cao Prasathaung ["a divine being who had descended from heaven
to be reborn as a favor to mankind" (Keyes)] and Phraya Thammikarat Phu MI
Bun (the awaited king of righteousness). According to the report of a local
official, Man, while he was a phu wiset, had kept the Buddhist eight precepts,
had meditated in caves and in the hills, and had performed rites with sacralized
water - thereby attracting several local disaffected gentry (Keyes). According to
Ishii, with the support of a village doctor, he collected some 200 followers and
attempted to attack the town of Ubon to depose the Siamese high commissioner.
He gained on the way an initial victory over the governor of Khemarat and soon
after was joined by six phu wiset, who served as subleaders. By now the rebel
army had grown to about 1,000 men. Another successful operation against a
small squad sent by the high commissioner swelled the ranks by an additional
1,500 men. But that was their finest hour; soon afterward, Ong Man and his
following were defeated by an army of trained soldiers equipped with modern
weapons, sent by the high commissioner. Three hundred casualties were counted
and 400 prisoners were taken. This defeat sealed the fate of the uprising.
Although Ong Man's origins seem to be obscure, the evidence seems to indicate
that a number of those who claimed to be phu mi bun were local officials of
minor rank or local nobility. Thao Buncan, one of the leaders, was a disaffected
noble who came from what is today called Sisaket Province. Disappointed that he
was not made governor, he left the town and collected local gentry, who all called
313


--- Page 326 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
themselves phu mi bun. Similarly, Lek, whose place of origin was today's
Mahasarakham region, together with his followers assumed similar honorific
titles.
According to one source (Phaithun), these phu mi bun leaders avowed to
establish a separate kingdom that would be under the control of neither the
Siamese nor the French. The plan was to have four phu mi bun rule at four
capitals in Vientiane, Ubon, That Phanom, and Nong Son (Ayudhya). Such a
polycentric plan accorded with the traditional "galactic" scheme.
Now, from our foregoing discussion, it is evident that no hard and fast
distinction can be made between phu wiset and phu mi bun (Ong Man himself
was apparently both), although there are indications that thzphu wiset were more
likely to be "holy men" who claimed supranormal powers, perhaps had been
committed in some way to ascetic practices and meditation, and quite clearly
performed purificatory rites and distributed medicines and amulets. The monks,
of whom only a few seemed to have been involved, must have participated as phu
wiset,53 which accords with their professional specialization. The phu mi bun -
the title sounds in this context as if it meant "man with a righteous political
cause" - seem to have been militant rebel leaders, drawn primarily from the
ranks of the declasse nobility and local officials.
Ishii provides this scenario of the unfolding of the millennial uprisings in both
1902 and 1924, which also suggests a particular relation between phu wiset and
phu mi bun. There is first of all a prediction of an imminent catastrophe, which
creates widespread unease and agitation. Then follow prophecies of a savior's
descent from above, in the form of phu mi bun who would deliver the suffering
people and establish the new dispensation. "Phu wiset are heralds to the advent
of a messiah. Belief in the latter is generated in the minds of people by the
miraculous acts of certain phu wiset of superlative ability'' As expected, a phu mi
bun declares himself and justifies his claim by collecting larger and larger
numbers of followers by performing "miracles." Then follow the military adven-
tures with the aim of instituting a new political order. The uprising is defeated by
the superior military forces mobilized by the political authorities.
Some theoretical clarifications
In the light of all these foregoing Burmese, Thai, and Karen examples of mystical
cosmographic associations, cults, and finally violent uprisings, all infused with
messianic and millennial overtones and expectations, I am tempted to make
certain clarifications concerning the current discussion on esoteric-messianic-
millennial Buddhism in Buddhist Southeast Asia.
Certain discussions of what has been labeled "esoteric Buddhism" are too
narrow. They describe gaings as a variety of "quasi-secret sects" (the word
"quasi" is usually an escape clause resorted to in insupportable definitions),
314


--- Page 327 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
emphasize too much their devotion to occult doctrines and their closed member-
ship, and leave out as inessential the penumbra of lay devotees and supporters
who participate in their ritual activities. The result is that they unduly confine the
scale and scope of the movement in question. Spiro is given to this narrowness.54
Also, any attempt to delimit the Burmese weikza and yathe (or Thai phu wiset,
phu ml bun, or khru ba) as essentially non-Buddhist in essence or inspiration is
liable to mislead. Spiro sees esoteric Buddhism as composed of different strands.
One is the belief "in a mythical magician or weikza who, supposed to possess
enormous supernatural powers, and having overcome death, is the presiding
genius or spiritual master of the sect." Another is the belief in the future Buddha
and in a universal king, which he recognizes as Buddhist. Now, Spiro insists that
"neither weikza nor the aspiration to weikza are Buddhist in character," indeed
they are "anti-Buddhist," and that it is only when the weikza belief is combined
with the ideas of the future Buddha and cakkavatti does the configuration become
a distinctive doctrine of esoteric Buddhism.55 But only two pages later, when
Spiro catalogues some of the capacities attributed to weikza - "to fly through the
air and through the earth, to make oneself invisible, to pass from one place to
another in a moment. . ." - he tucks away in a footnote the comment that' 'these
same powers, incidentally, may be achieved by means of jhdnas, those ecstatic
states that sometimes accompany Buddhist meditation."56 It seems to me that we
have to find a more artful way of treating the issue of how the great traditions of
Buddhism have developed into particular crystallizations in different local and
regional contexts.
Spiro runs into these analytic and interpretive difficulties57 because, rather
than treat Burmese religion as a totality and configuration, he wants to sever it
into two opposed religions, Buddhism and animism. (This penchant is not much
helped by another axiom - for the most part asserted without adducing historical
evidence - that much of what is found in Burma is a deviation from, and
vulgarization or distortion of, the canonical purity of early Buddhism, which he
too narrowly conceives.) A consequence is that he not only rejects Mendelson's
thesis of Burmese religion being a syncretized amalgam of Buddhism and
animism, but also - and this is what importantly concerns us here - repudiates
Mendelson's view that esoteric Buddhism is a pervasive strand in Burma. This
repudiation is upheld by the tendentious pronouncement that "esoteric Bud-
dhism . . . is the Buddhism of the gaing" (we have already seen how he defines
the gaing as some sort of closed secret sect or quasi-sect) and therefore necessarily
confined to a minority. Both for Burma and Thailand, this would not be a fair way
of representing the attitudes, commitments, and ritual acts of large numbers of
people who subscribe in one way or another to what has been labeled esoteric
Buddhism.
Spiro breaks down Burmese esoteric Buddhism into "two major ideological
systems," eschatological Buddhism and millennial Buddhism. Eschatological
Buddhism is based on alchemical practices,58 which aim at acquiring an exten-
315


--- Page 328 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
sion of life until the appearance of the next Buddha and in order to witness his
dispensation. "Since weikzahood is a means to the attainment of nirvana,
initiation into a sect entails a commitment to the practice of Buddhist discipline.
The initiate must agree to observe the moral precepts of Buddhism and to
perform Buddhist devotions." In addition, many sect members practice Buddhist
meditation as a means of acquiring supranormal powers.59 It would seem then
that the phenomenon identified as eschatological Buddhism accents the sectlike
organization and the practice of alchemy for the personalistic aim of prolonging
life until the next coming of the Buddha.
By contrast, the system labeled "millennial Buddhism" accents the militant
political revolts inspired by the esoteric beliefs. "Millennial Buddhism represents
the conjunction of the Buddhist notions of a Universal Emperor and a Future
Buddha with the Burmese notions of a Future King, weikzahood, and occult
power."60 Thus during the British rule, many peasant revolts were inspired by a
configuration of these beliefs, and the future king transferred occult power to
followers by alchemic and other means.
In my view, this division of esoteric Buddhism into two systems, demarcated
in this manner as eschatological and millennial, obstructs more than it clarifies
our understanding. This is true for several reasons: All the actual gaing associa-
tions or movements we have observed, including the cults surrounding the forest
hermits in Thailand, are predicated on a cosmology of arahants, Buddhas or
coming Buddhas, and cakkavatti\ the palaces, cosmic mountains, etc., that
spatially and architecturally realize the cosmology are religio-political in expres-
sion', and the ritual actions and disciplinary practices engaged in by adepts and
lay followers alike, whether alchemical or meditative or talismanic, are simulta-
neously of a personal and collective import.
Therefore, the more rewarding theoretical issue is the processes by which the
gaings and cults - which are centered on weikzas, saints and men of merit, which
mushroom throughout the country, and which ordinarily conduct their religious
existence in a primarily ritualistic and contemplative mode - are transformed
into movements that engage in militant and rebellious millennial action that
seems to us more political and activist in character. What are the processes of
intensification and expansion of scale by which the small associations, enacting
through ascetic practices and in ritual terms their expectations both of the coming
universal king and Buddha and of their kingdom on earth, seek to realize those
same expectations through large-scale volatile movements, engaging in warlike
fighting and rebellious actions that seek to reorder the political order?
We may rephrase Spiro's dichotomy and say: All the forms of esoteric-
messianic-millennial Buddhism in Southeast Asia in cultic form embody a
cosmological design with religio-political resonances. However, they may move
from a principally "ritualistic" mode focused on personal, familial, and local
(community) relief of suffering and salvation concerns to a militantly activist
316


--- Page 329 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
mode focused on collective, regional, and ethnic (national) salvation under
certain conditions.
The infrastructure of millennial movements
Many scholars are tempted to seek the underlying basis or infrastructural condi-
tions that give rise to millennial and revivalist movements. One scholar (Worsley)
has said that millenarian religions appear in part because they provide integra-
tion to stateless societies. Another (Bellah) has pronounced that millenarianism
is a product of a "severe social pathology" and is therefore largely ineffective as
a vehicle of modernization. A third (Aberle) has attributed millennial movements
to conditions of experienced "relative deprivation" combined with "blockage"
of attaining relief through normal secular channels. These theses can be
multiplied,61 but such an enumeration does not serve a useful purpose here. What
is pertinent is a comment on a recent attempt to delineate a common underlying
basis for the millennial uprisings that have taken place in Thailand in the last
century, principally the uprisings in Northeast Thailand around 1900-2.62
Keyes concludes very plausibly that, while deteriorating economic conditions
at the turn of the century among the peasantry may have exacerbated the
discontent of the people of Northeast Thailand, it is the radically changed
political order instituted by a centralizing Siamese government that took away
and threatened the power of local notables (chao mueang) that was a more
important cause of the uprising. He asserts that the question is not so much that
Theravada Buddhist beliefs are susceptible to millennial interpretation (they are)
but that the millennial uprising of 1902, which was an ideological response
formulated in the cultural terms with which the population in question was most
familiar, shows a concern about power. He thus states a general proposition:
"Millennial movements emerge during a crisis centering around conceptions of
power."
At a merely substantive level, does this formula adequately cover the millen-
nial movements that have occurred in Thailand and Burma? What appears as a
plausible verdict on the Thai 1902 uprising (and even the different kind of
confrontation mounted later by khrii bd Slwichai in North Thailand in opposition
to the Bangkok-initiated policy of unification and hierarchization of the Thai
sahgha) appears not to fit at all the Saya San rebellion in Burma in the 1930s,
where the most salient discontent at the time it occurred was agrarian impoverish-
ment and unrest caused by the intrusion of a market and cash economy into the
rural areas, increasing loss of land by small holders to large absentee landlords,
the change of sharecropping agreements from variable grain payments to fixed
cash rents, and so on.63
Apart from the uncertainty of the search for an underlying condition or process
317


--- Page 330 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
that may apply to all millennial movements in Buddhist Southeast Asia, too often
a weakness of such searches lies in the cut made between infrastructure and
superstructure, ideology and practice, and the attempt thereafter to make one
level an "expression" of the other. The analytic challenge lies in showing the
dialectical and recursive and feedback relations between these levels, such that
the dynamic interaction cumulatively produces a total social phenomenon.
If we apply this prescription to the millennial movements in question, we have
first of all to begin with the positive fact that there is an internal impulse present
in popular Buddhism (not a mere minority freakishness but an endemic orien-
tation) to develop millennial expectations around the saint or holy man and to
form volatile movements of inner cores of adepts and outer circles of lay
followers surrounding the master. In the ordinary lives of villagers and townsmen
- victimized by suffering and hopeful of wealth and prosperous lives, although
living at the margin of existence - the true renouncer is a hero, extraordinary but
accessible, who continually springs from their ranks. Only a few saints are born
from the ranks of the high and mighty. Apart from the fact that such exemplars
are assimilated to the classical notions of Buddhas and cakkavatti, and the
classical cosmological blueprints, we have to give full weight to the collective
public conviction that men who undergo ascetic practices, control their sensory
impulses, and ascend to higher levels of detached contemplation are considered
not only worthy of veneration, for they do what ordinary persons cannot and do
not wish to do, but also to have access to supranormal powers with which they
can fecundate the world like showers of rain.64
There is, to borrow a phrase of Troeltsch's, a well-developed ethic of "vicarious
offerings and integrations," wherein the saint as a virtuoso offers a "vicarious
oblation" for the rest of humankind.65 He is relied on to transfer his wisdom,
purity, and supranormal energies to the laity through his discourses, his blessings,
the amulets he has charged with potency, the objects he has touched, and so on.
Troeltsch has suggested that wherever asceticism develops as a calling, this kind
of vicarious oblation tends to be associated with it. In any case, whereas in the
medieval Catholic church asceticism was only one activity (and not a dominant
one at that) in the Christian "cosmos of callings," it is at the heart of the
Buddhist cosmos of individual attainments; and unlike the Catholic priest, who
by the appointment of Christ has in his hands the sacramental impartation of
grace, the Buddhist bhikkhu (and each of the assortment of holy men we have
encountered) ideally transfers merit by virtue of the kamma of his own volitional
actions.
Given these evaluations and expectations, forest hermitages harboring or-
dained arahants (or gaings focused on weikza) and analogous occurrences should
be expected to occur in popular Buddhism. But the number and frequency of
manifestation of these small, volatile communities of lay devotees and adepts,
and their liability to intensify their search for power and well-being through
vicarious oblation, and/or to transform their ritual acts into militant marches
318


--- Page 331 ---
Millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
against established authority, armed with bullet-proof amulets, depends on chang-
ing political, economic, and social circumstances. These circumstances, acting
as a leaven, make millennial movements rise up explosively and pop all too
quickly when they confront the armed strength of authority. On the other hand, at
times when great power is wielded by centralized or centralizing political
authorities, the charisma of holy men, such as that of the forest-monks of
contemporary Thailand, may be tapped by such authorities and their elite support-
ers and used to buttress their supremacy.
What is millennial Buddhism? It is a totality of beliefs, expectations, practices,
and actions that have as their object the reconstitution of an existing social order
in terms of an ideal order, a future Utopia, which at the same time is a return to an
ideal and positive beginning.
Millennial Buddhism rests upon conceptions and prophecies concerning the
coming righteous ruler and the coming savior Buddha, the two personages
co-appearing or being fused in one. Now these very same ideas were an essential
part of the ideology of established and institutionalized Buddhist polities of
Southeast Asia, whose kings have made claim to be and aspired to be cakkavatti,
dharmardja, and bodhisattva, in different mixes. And capitals and kingdoms
have been constructed to represent and enact the cosmology of the realm in which
the Buddhist Dhamma prevailed.
But millennial Buddhism is the antinomy of the established Buddhist polity
wherever it is seen to be corrupt and debased, or to require restoration and
resurrection in the face of social decline or alien intrusion. In this sense, it is a
counterstatement, dedicated to a substitution and a future replacement, and capa-
ble of becoming rebellious. One is tempted to say that if, in the established
Dhamma realm, the sahgha and kingship are both separated and wedded in
reciprocity and mutuality, millennial Buddhism strains toward the fusion of
renouncer and ruler in its militant phase.
Now it is true that the Buddhist polities of Southeast Asia have been pulsating,
galactic polities, in which "divine kingship" was dogged by "perennial
rebellions," and that successive usurping kings have made their claims to
legitimacy by invoking the personal charisma of reincarnated and reborn righ-
teous rulers and future buddhas. To this extent, millennial claims have always
been part of the regular political process of these galactic polities.
It is, however, meaningful to reserve the term millennial Buddhism for the cults
centered on the kinds of holy men and saints who have fascinated us in this book.
It seems to be these cults' essential feature that - although they periodically,
intermittently arise and the ground that gives them birth is a continuing seedbed -
as individual formations they rarely, if ever, reach the proportions of a sustained
movement. As esoteric cults built around individual masters, they have little
staying power after the leader's death, though disciples may reproduce the cells,
associations, and networks established by the master.66 And when they boil up
into militant revolts, they are unable to long withstand the organized force
319


--- Page 332 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
deployed by the established political authority, because of their being a peculiar
compound of mystical beliefs in invulnerability to guns and bullets, of euphoric
moblike indiscipline, and of enthusiastic if fragile attraction to the saint credited
with supranormal virtues and powers. Such bubbles form and burst typically in
the territorial and social peripheries of established societies and polities, away
from the capitals of their ruling political and ecclesiastical elites. In this sense,
millennial Buddhism is the counterculture and counterstructure to organized and
domesticated Buddhism. Contra the treacherous search for an underlying socio-
logical condition that generates millennial movements, I have tried to strengthen
the line of inquiry and interpretation that sees the place and role of millennial
Buddhism, in both its quiescent and militant expressions, as part of a totality, in
which "established" Buddhism and polity constitute its dialectical, and fre-
quently paramount, counterpart.
320


--- Page 333 ---
21
The sources of charismatic leadership
Max Weber revisited
Max Weber assigned charismatic leadership and domination a significant role in
history because of his belief that charisma is the source of all creative leadership
and that no form of political order can work without an element of charisma. As
Mommsen remarks: "This is in line with Weber's own personal convictions
regarding the role of the individual in history. Weber's charismatic personalities
have much in common with Nietzsche's great individuals who set new values for
themselves and for their followers, in an attempt to elevate mankind to a high
level."1 Indeed, Weber's view that charismatic leadership was necessary in
modern "plebiscitarian democracy" was linked with his lack of conviction in the
efficacy of popular sovereignty as such. Great politicians with charismatic
quality were essential to keep democracy alive in spite of and in the face of
bureaucratic institutions. He saw the need for society to be kept open to enable
the rise and recognition of talented politicians with a sense of calling and with the
capacity to resist the omnipotence of bureaucracies.
Precisely because charismatic leadership was so important in Weber's socio-
logical theory of the modes of social action, it is both intriguing and puzzling that
his discussion of it was plagued by certain dualities and even seemingly antitheti-
cal propositions. Weber took the notion of charisma from the Bible. Charisma is
referred to in the New Testament, notably in two letters of Saint Paul, namely
Romans 12 and I Corinthians 12. The King James Bible renders the Greek word
charisma as "gift"; the "gifts" referred to in particular are those of wisdom,
knowledge, healing, prophecy, ministry, and teaching. All these are seen as gifts
of the Spirit, the Holy Spirit who speaks through Christ. "This basic simple
meaning of charisma as a gift revealed by divine election became in the course of
time the basis of ecclesiastical organization." It originally implied "leadership
based upon a transcendental call by a divine being, believed in by both the person
called and those with whom he has to deal in exercising his calling."2
Weber converted this Christian notion, which was quite precise, into a general
concept. In doing so, he was led to locate charismatic experience and inspiration
321


--- Page 334 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
as essentially "affective" (or "affectual") action in comparison with the other
modes of orientation in his typology, namely "rational" action and "traditional"
action.
Having generalized and made more abstract the original Christian notion, and
being forced to identify the charisma that was so productive in history as
essentially "affective," "nonreflective," and "irrational" in its source, Weber
felt unable to deal adequately with the problem of the sources of charisma, on the
ground that their claims were not capable of rational evaluation. Hence he
resorted to his "value-free" stance and decided to deal with charisma in terms of
its effects on the followers and the conditions for its maintenance and routini-
zation.
It is curious that Weber should have avoided the problem of the source of
charisma on the ground that the source as such cannot be "validated" and with
the disclaimer that even a pirate genius may exercise a "charismatic domination"
in the value-neutral sense he intended. For, in another context, he was able to
make a typological distinction between exemplary prophecy and emissary
prophecy, which he saw best represented in Buddhism on the one hand and in
Christianity and Judaism on the other. This dichotomy was directly relevant to the
experience of charisma claimed by the prophet and his substantive message, but
Weber used it to contrast two orientations to the world and their effects upon it,
rather than as divergent sources of charismatic powers.3 The burden of this
section is that the question of the sources of religious charisma in the Christian
and Buddhist cases could be approached in a different way from that adopted by
Weber and that the two polar types - emissary and exemplary prophets -
additionally imply certain important orientations and consequences other than
those singled out by him.
The Weberian dualities
Weber defined "charisma" as "a certain quality of an individual personality by
virtue of which he is set apart from ordinary men and treated as endowed with
supernatural, superhuman, or at least specifically exceptional powers or qual-
ities."4 What is central for Weber is that the exceptional powers or qualities found
in the charismatic figure decisively and overpoweringly shape and reorient the
dispositions and actions of his or her followers.
Now, as David Little points out, "this inward, immediate 'possession of sacred
values' is just the sort of intense emotional and unreflective 'seizure' that
exemplifies Weber's description of affectual behavior."5 The influence of charis-
matic leadership is experienced as "an uncontrolled reaction" to some "excep-
tional stimulus," and such "devotion to a personal or ideal" object illustrates
affectual action, which Weber contrasted with rational action.6
But of course Weber's typology of three modes of action is not watertight, and
322


--- Page 335 ---
The sources of charismatic leadership
there are important overlaps and interconnections between them. It is these
dynamic intersections that reveal the strengths and weaknesses of the Weberian
sociology of rationalism. But insofar as the charismatic orientation derives from
the surrender of the faithful to the extraordinary, it is alien to all laws and
regulations and indeed disrupts both rational rule and tradition alike. Such
affectual action is therefore counterrational.
But Weber also realized that all forms of rationality and tradition are ultimately
grounded in subjective values that are irrational or nonrational. It is easy to see
this is the case with the traditionalist sacralization of customs and with absolutist
rationality, which, being an "ethic of ultimate goals," cares not for pragmatic
calculations of either ends or means. But more unexpected is Weber's admission
of the same for Zweckrationalitdt as well: "The various great ways of leading a
rational and methodical life have been characterized by irrational propositions,
which have been accepted simply as 'given' and which have been incorporated
into such ways of life."7 The ends of capitalist economic action or of democratic
politics, as indeed of any kind of economic or political action, are ultimately
arbitrary, conventional, and irrational.
Charismatic action thus may be affective and counterrational; but the charis-
matic inspiration often proclaims an authoritative ethic of ultimate ends and thus
allows for an opening toward absolutist rationality and a systematization of
religious ends and means for achieving those ends. In this regard, we should
remember that Weber held "primitive religion" and "magic" to be traditionalist
and to consist of ritualized and stereotyped behavior in the form of taboos and
proscriptions. Historically, radical, charismatic religious movements have achieved
the critical breaks through the cake of tradition and have initiated the develop-
ment of more systematic ' 'rational'' religion with regard to doctrine and practice.8
Thus, from Weber's perspective, it is part of the intrinsic disposition of
charismatic religious movements, such as Christianity, Buddhism, and Islam -
founded in affectional irrationality and originally preaching an ethic of ultimate
ends - to progressively "rationalize" in the most general sense of rationality -
that is, the elaboration, systematization, and clarification of religious concepts
and religious goals and the means to achieve them. But the crux of the Weberian
comparative study of religions and of his sociology of rationalism is that only one
charismatically inspired religion, Christianity (together with its predecessor
Judaism), had the propensity to rationalize in the direction of Zweckrationalitdt,
because it alone had a unique this-worldly posture that generated an activism
integrally linked with formal, relativistic, instrumental, practical, and conse-
quentialist reasoning. We are therefore led back again to consider Weber's
division of "affectual action" and of charismatic authority into two polar types,
only one of which could lead to and result in rational this-worldly activity, the
foundation of Western capitalism, industrialization, and party politics.
Weber, in characteristic fashion, subdivided affectual charismatic action into
two types, ecstatic and communal. Ecstasy is induced by emotional seizures as
323


--- Page 336 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
the result, for example, of orgiastic practices. The ecstatic condition is asocial
and in institutionalized expressions leads the individual to lose himself in a
"euphoria of apathetic ecstasy," as illustrated by the Buddhist theme of the
extinction of the self. Buddhist doctrines of compassion, love, and tranquillity are
labeled acosmic love, that is, general, undifferentiated, and mystical. But
communal affectual action, rather than repudiating social relations, leads to
benevolent and personal attachments between members of the same group; in its
quintessential form, it constitutes an ethic of brotherly love that is the obverse of
the calculating and manipulative strategies of formal, practical rationality.
The celebrated dichotomy on the same lines is Weber's two types of charis-
matic experience - the exemplary prophecy and the emissary or ethical prophecy
- around which he was to group the decisive differences between oriental and
occidental salvation religions.9 Oriental salvation religion is primarily one of
"contemplative mysticism," whereas the occidental is primarily "ascetic" in the
sense of pursuing virtue with a preference for active conduct in the world.
The otherworldly asceticism or mysticism of retreat from the world is best
expressed by the exemplary prophets, who by their personal example demon-
strate to others the way to religious salvation, as in the case of the Buddha. The
prophet's preaching refers not to a divine mission, or an ethical duty of obedience,
but rather directs itself to the self-interest of those who crave salvation. The
exemplary leadership is oriented toward "a contemplative and apathetic-ecstatic
life."
The inner-worldly asceticism of Christianity, dedicated to a transformation of
the world, produces the ethical or emissary prophet, who regards himself as "an
instrument for the proclamation of God and his will." He preaches as "one who
has received a commission from God, he demands obedience as an ethical duty."
Whereas the Buddhist devotee seeks self-sanctification, the Christian prophet is
always an instrument and vessel of his omnipotent God and never his equal.
We may note in passing that Weber's picture of exemplary prophecy oriented
to a mystical contemplation and apathetic ecstasy does not do justice to at least
two aspects of the Buddhist bhikkhu's vocation: It underplays the highly formal-
ized and systematized technology of meditation and ascetic practices; and it
leaves out of account the finely elaborated rules of Vinaya, whose objective was
the regulation of monastic life and the promotion of "brotherly" conduct among
the members of the monastic community.
It is also possible that Weber's tendentious use of the cognitive-emotional
dichotomy leads to his arguing that the two types of charismatic experience and
message lead to two types of religious systems, the other-worldly mystical and
the this-worldly ascetic. In the course of the comparison, exemplary prophecy
(and Buddhism) becomes tagged to the emotional need for an immediate experi-
ence of deliverance from suffering, and ethical prophecy (and Christianity) to the
cognitive need for understanding the sources of suffering and the means for
implementing a practical solution. Such a unidimensional typing of an entire
324


--- Page 337 ---
The sources of charismatic leadership
religion like Buddhism once again does little justice to Buddhism's onslaught on
ignorance (avijjd); to its cognitive and intellectual emphasis on the understanding
(pannd) of the origin and causes of mental formations, attachments, and suffer-
ing in the world and its compelling logical and psychological analysis by which
their elimination is advocated; and to its ethic of intentional practices accordingly
devised to unite knowledge with practice. Buddhism has its own brand of
cognitive, emotional, and evaluative inputs; they are different from Christianity's.
Weber's value-free stance on the sources of charisma
There is another mode in which Weber treated charismatic authority and
domination, which shifts the sociological interpretation from considering the
charismatic experience of the leader per se to the attitudes and reactions of the
followers. This turn that Weber took is also related to his moving away from the
classical Christian notion of charisma and his typing it in general as emotional,
affective, unreflective, inspirational, and counterrational. By definition, then, an
emotional experience and claim cannot in Weberian terms be "rationally"
validated; hence his transposing the issue of validation to the level of follower
reaction. I shall argue that there is something we can learn by returning to the
problem of the source of charisma: We can do so by taking the Christian
formulation seriously and then contrasting it with the Buddhist formulation of
arahantship or sainthood as another type of charisma. (In doing so, I by no
means wish to belittle the illumination we derive from Weber's discussions of the
effect of charismatic leadership and message on followers, the conditions that
favor or mitigate against the continuation and success of a charismatic movement,
and the signs by which charisma is validated in the eyes of followers.) To make
this comparison coherent, I present a general definition of religious charisma10
that can compass different religious situations.
Religious charisma derives from transcendental claims to authoritative leader-
ship, claims that are made by the leader and accepted by the followers. Transcen-
dental claims are extraworldly and assert the extraworldly to be superior to the
world (hence supraworldly) - to encompass it (hence the notion of immanence),
to inform and elevate it (hence its ethical centrality), and finally to supersede it
(hence its message of salvation). The internal ordering and boundaries of what
constitutes the world system differ from religion to religion; this cosmological
mapping is an essential comparative task and often holds the answer to different
conceptions of charisma and its transmission from leader to follower.
Weber extended and made more general the Christian notion of charisma by
using it for all situations, whether they be religious, political, or criminal, and for
all heroes - whether they be sorcerers, prophets, or generals - who were seen as
having a "personal gift" or "genius." Weber's "value-neutral" stance shifted
the discussion of charisma from the claimed sources of charisma to the criterion
325


--- Page 338 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
of recognition by the leader's followers. The leader had to prove his charisma to
his followers by works and deeds; therefore charisma lay in the eyes of the
beholder, so to say. In this context of discussion, Weber was interested in showing
how personal charisma was volatile and unstable in comparison with institutional-
ized offices and bureaucracies.
There is another duality and bifurcation in Weber's treatment that emerges
from his celebrated notion of "routinization of charisma." Weber is capable of
two readings on this matter; it is perhaps more correct, though more untidy, to say
that he was simultaneously aware of both possibilities.
One is the view that charisma is essentially personal, unstable, rejects
"rational" procedures, relies on inner strength, and is an ideal type opposed to
and set apart from institutionalized authority systems, whether traditional or
rational, patrimonial or bureaucratic. Charisma's only association with the latter
is when it is routinized; but when it is routinized it is weakened and loses its
intense experience of grace and its heroic elements. As Eisenstadt comments: "It
is not only that charismatic authority is formally contrasted with 'traditional'
and 'rational' authorities. Beyond this formal distinction, pure charisma has
some inherent antinomian and anti-institutional predispositions."11 Charismatic
leadership in this manifestation can be the stimulus for rebellions, millenarian
movements, and visions of new Utopias. In this exegetical mode, Weber has
written: "Since it is extra-ordinary, charismatic authority is sharply opposed to
rational, and particularly bureaucratic, authority - and to traditional authority,
whether in its patriarchal, patrimonial, or estate variants, all of which are
everyday forms of domination. . . ."12
A second exegetical mode takes up the question of how charisma, its orienta-
tion and the bonds it sets up, is a constitutive feature of all social action, in that it
is not something abnormal but is woven into all concrete situations and is a
necessary component of all institutionalized structures. Thus transformed, it
manifests itself in structured forms like "lineage charisma," which connotes the
transference of charisma through blood ties, and "office charisma," in which
charisma becomes "part of an established societal structure" and the belief in
revelation and heroism of charismatic personalities is replaced by permanent
structures and traditions. Following this line of thought,13 Shils and Eisenstadt
have fruitfully argued that the routinization and objectification of charisma is an
aspect of all bureaucratic organizations.14 The charisma of office was necessarily
for Weber a case of the "depersonalization" of charisma; but, as embodying a
specific state of grace in a social institution, its occurrence was widespread both
in earlier and modern societies. The relation of subjects to the state and its
institutions and offices is a good example.15
The charisma of office has taken historically important forms: "First of all
charisma may be transferred through artificial, magical means, instead of through
blood relationship: The apostolic succession secured through episcopal ordination,
326


--- Page 339 ---
The sources of charismatic leadership
the indelible charismatic qualification acquired through the priest's ordination,
the king's coronation and anointment, and innumerable similar practices among
primitive and civilized peoples all derive from this mode of transmission."
Where we see the linkage of charisma with the holding of an office "we find that
peculiar transformation of charisma into an institution. As permanent structures
and traditions replace the belief in the revelation and heroism of charismatic
personalities, charisma becomes part of an established social structure."16
Weber makes the brilliant observation that "the Catholic theory of the priest's
character indelebilis with its strict distinction between the charisma of office and
the worthiness of the person constitutes the polar opposite of the Puritan rejection
of office charisma. Here we encounter the most radical form of the depersonaliza-
tion of charisma and its transfiguration into a qualification that is inherent in
everybody who has become a member of the office hierarchy through a magic
act, and that sanctifies official acts."17
I interject the complaint, however, that while the disjunction between priestly
office and personal grace - and between a (Catholic) narrow specification of
saints and a (Puritan) extension of priesthood to all true believers, who are all
"saints" - may make good sense in a Protestant-Catholic discourse, it fails to
catch the spirit of the Buddhist conception of bhikkhu. A bhikkhu, though
necessarily ordained into a status and bound by rules of abstinence, is constantly
evaluated by fellow monk and layman alike on his achieved progress on the path
of purification and on the charisma of supranormal capacities and sainthood
(arahant) that derive from individual effort and achievement.
A digression on Rudolf Sohm
Weber gave credit to Rudolf Sohm for developing "the sociological character" of
charismatic domination, but at the same time registered this objection: Since
Sohm developed "this category with regard to (only) one historically important
case - the rise of the ecclesiastical authority of the early Christian church - his
treatment was bound to be one-sided from the viewpoint of historic diversity."18
Immediately preceding this appraisal, Weber states his "value-free" sociological
stance thus: Certain forms of charisma closely associated with "manic seizure"
and "constitutional epilepsy" may not be edifying "for us," "however, sociol-
ogy is not concerned with such value judgments"; more important for the
discipline is that heroes and magicians "proved their charisma in the eyes of their
adherents."
It is not clear from Weber's own writings to what extent he actually took into
account the Protestant theological debates, particularly the vigorous views of
Sohm, in formulating his alleged "value-free" view of charismatic leadership.19
A summary of Sohm's views on charisma is useful for us, both to point to the
327


--- Page 340 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
theoretical relevance of the "source" of charisma and to prove that Weber,
despite his alleged value-free stance, did not manage to liberate himself from the
dominance of the Christian precedent.
The compatibility between the charismatic authority of the Holy Spirit on the
one hand and church law and legal authority in the church on the other hand has
been debated by Protestant theologians ever since Luther propounded his concep-
tion of the two kingdoms - one of which is the kingdom of God under Christ and
the other the kingdom of the world under civil authority. For Luther, these two
realms exist under quite different kinds of authority, the one under the love and
spirit of Christ, and under the guidance of the Holy Spirit in conjunction with the
Word and Sacrament, and the other under legal restraints and under the rule of
law of temporal government.
Much of the Protestant theological controversy apparently centered on the role
of the Holy Spirit as charismatic inspiration in the establishment of canon law
and in the legal authority of the church. A key figure in this controversy was the
eminent German jurist and church historian Rudolf Sohm (1841-1917), who
viewed "charismatic authority (in conjunction with Scripture and the sacraments)
to be altogether incompatible with any 'divine church law.' " 2 0 Sohm protested
against any constitutional legalization of the church, whether of the Roman
Catholic or Protestant kinds. The primitive Christian ecclesia, under the charis-
matic authority issued from Christ and the Gospel, necessarily excluded any
alien principle of legal direction and restraint, which belongs to the political
realm and which if admitted makes the church worldly and leads to the seculariza-
tion of the church from within. The Christian ecclesia was informed by the power
of the Holy Spirit; as the Body of Christ, it is constituted by members who are the
beneficiaries of gifts of grace {charismata), which both call and qualify the
individual Christian for different activities. "It is an organization given by God,
not a corporation emerging out of human consensus."21 The efficacy of the Spirit
is always connected with Word and Sacrament and not with the obligation to law.
Sohm's reading of church history was that, among other causes, the waning of
charismatic leadership led to the development of bureaucratic organization and
legal institutions of the Catholic church. The doctrine of apostolic succession,
the institution of church offices, the division between clergy and laity, and the
"thingification" of piety were outcomes of this process. For Sohm, true Protes-
tantism is based on faith; it constitutes an invisible church or a fellowship of Word
and Sacrament.
The Lutheran view, as advocated by Sohm, traced charismatic power to the
Holy Spirit in conjunction with Word and Sacrament. Weber not only severed
charisma and grace from a Christian divine source, but also characterized it as
personal, labile, and volatile, ignoring its necessary conjunction in Sohm's
exposition with Word and Sacrament, that is, with the discipline of received
doctrine and ritual practice. Finally, I note that Weber's "routinization" of
charisma is less unambiguous and more equivocal than Sohm's denial of the
328


--- Page 341 ---
The sources of charismatic leadership
probability of embedding it in bureaucratized institutions. Be that as it may, there
is good reason for us to return to the question of sources of "charisma" for
comparative purposes, although we need not agree with Sohm's view that
charisma as a gift of grace cannot be transmitted to, and embedded in, institu-
tionalized office.
The flaw in Weber's comparative theory
One of Weber's central theses was that charisma is a phenomenon "in radical
contrast to bureaucratic organization" - it knows "no formal and regulated
appointment or dismissal, no career, advancement or salary, no supervisory or
appeals body, no local or purely technical jurisdiction, and no permanent institu-
tions in the manner of bureaucratic agencies, which are independent of the
incumbents and their personal charisma."22 In this context, Weber was right to
emphasize charisma's "highly individual quality" and its rejection of "all
methodical rational acquisition, in fact, all rational economic conduct," when
the opponent in this contrast was the economic substructure on which bureau-
cracy depends for deriving its "continuous income" from the money economy
and tax money. Charisma is "the strongest anti-economic force, even when it is
after material possessions, as in the case of the charismatic warrior. For charisma
is by nature not a continuous institution, but in its pure type the very opposite."23
But this contrast with bureaucratic organization also impels Weber to see
charisma as ruling out all systematic procedures for reaching individual salvation,
as in Buddhism, for Weber's "pure type" clings to the Christian type of
"prophetic revelation."24 These pronouncements of Weber decidedly cannot
apply to the Buddhist arahant as perfected saint: "The specific form of charis-
matic adjudication is prophetic revelation, the oracle, or the Solomonic award of
a charismatic sage . . . genuine charismatic justice does not refer to rules; in its
pure type it is the most extreme contrast to formal and traditional prescription and
maintains its autonomy toward the sacredness of tradition as much as toward
rationalist deductions from abstract norms." All this goes against the Theravada
emphasis on Dhamma as scripture and the Vinaya rules as the prerequisite for the
renouncer's heroic liberation.
Toward a resolution and a typology
In probing the source of charisma, Edward Shils has widened the conception of
charisma from the Christian "gift of grace from God" formula to its close
association with "some very central feature of man's existence and the cosmos in
which he lives."25 "Charisma, then, is the quality which is imputed to persons,
actions, roles, institutions, symbols, and material objects because of their pre-
329


--- Page 342 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
sumed connection with 'ultimate,' 'fundamental,' 'ritual,' order-determining
powers."26 The central agents, powers, and conceptions in question could of
course vary from society to society, and it is a task of social and cultural analysis
to see how the gap between the charismatic as an extraordinary event or quality
and as a constituent element of any orderly social life is bridged. I shall exploit
this insight and posit two kinds of crystallizations of charisma, one volatile and
the other institutionalized. If we then see charismatic leadership in "relationship
to transcendental sources" and confine it to a "religious" context only, then we
have at least two major types of charisma (see Figure 15).
There is a Judaeo-Christian version of charisma as a gift of grace from God, an
elective gift. Quintessentially, this gift is given to the virtuous - the elective are
also elect - though one can imagine an extreme formulation of "predestination"
being associated with an arbitrary choice of God.
Charisma of this Judaeo-Christian sort further subdivides into two sorts - there
is the temporary, unstable, labile, volatile, even rebellious charisma of the
inspired biblical prophets and of Christ's warriors like Joan of Arc or the
crusading knights. And there is the enduring, routinized, institutionalized cha-
risma of the pope or divine king, both of whom possess, as Kantorowicz27 has
aptly informed us, "two bodies" - the eternal body of the church or state and the
mortal body of a human, the former encompassing and infusing the latter. Taking
the pope or divine king as our point of reference, we can easily see how indeed
charisma is, in some sense, objectified and routinized in every institutionalized
office.
It is abundantly clear that the arahant of early Buddhism and the forest saint of
present-day Thailand present us with a polar opposite, in which charisma is
acquired and won in an austere renunciation quest - in which charisma consists
in the attainment of detached, discriminating wisdom on the one hand and
universal compassion on the other. There are at least two important features that
characterize this Buddhist (and Hindu) notion of charisma attained through the
ascetic and meditational path.
First of all, the Buddhist orientation is to a "norm" and not a monotheistic
God. It is one of the great Buddhist stories that the dying Buddha, during the last
moments of his life, when requested to nominate a successor, refused to do so,
saying that the bhikkhu should be lamps unto themselves, be their own refuges,
and that the Dhamma that he had brought them should be the guiding norm.
At another level, it is this same orientation to a liberation goal attainable by an
ascetic path that encodes a discipline and regime that guides the ascetic forest-
monk. This discipline is, as we have seen, set down in the classical texts such as
the Visuddhimagga, from which are derived the more popular manuals. The
discipline is taught and passed on by a spiritual teacher to his disciples, and in
theory teacher and pupils can talk about the results and successes of their
exercises as objective experiences prescribed in the meditation manuals and
repeatedly experienced by the adepts.
330


--- Page 343 ---
The sources of charismatic leadership
Source of charisma:
relationship to transcendental sources
, 
JL 
,
I 
I
Judaeo-Christian: 
Buddhist:
gift of grace from God; 
achieved salvation and
elective 
supranormal powers
Temporary, unstable, 
Institutionalized 
Buddhist: 
"Institutionalized"
messianic leadership; 
through apostolic succession: ascetic saints, 
reincarnation of
biblical prophets; Joan 
pope; also divine kingship — 
arahants 
bodhisattva,
of Arc; etc. 
"king's two bodies" 
Dalai Lama, and
Buddhist kings of
Southeast Asia
Comment: This typology only deals with religious statuses. It is of course clear that in politics, for
instance, there can be charismatic-type leadership that springs from other sources. Carl J. Friedrich
("Political Leadership and the Problem of the Charismatic Power," Journal of Politics, Vol. 23, No.
1, Feb. 1961, pp. 3-24) distinguished the "ideological" leader, who is a spokesman for a political
ideology (exemplified in totalitarian leadership), from the "inspirational" leader, who shows rhetor-
ical skills and personal dynamism (democratic-demagogic leadership). Friedrich preferred these
secular forms of political leadership to be kept separate from the charismatic in the strict sense. (See
Mommsen, Age of Bureaucracy, for a critique of Friedrich.)
The typology excludes the Hindu sources of charisma, because Hinduism combines two modes
that are similar to our polar types. Thus the brahman is "divinely created" (Code of Manu) and his
superior charisma is related to his origin and his observance of a strict code of pure conduct. The
sannydsi, on the other hand, like our Buddhist arahant, is an individual who achieves moksa and
liberation.
Figure 15. A typology of charismatic sources and statuses of a religious nature.
Thus the Buddhist situation does not fully confirm the extreme comparison and
antithesis that Max Weber drew between the charisma incorporated and distri-
buted in a bureaucratic organization of offices and the quintessential expression
of charisma as a personal exuberance intransigent toward discipline. Among
other things, the charismatic movement, said Weber, knew little of "the regu-
lated and expert training of the holder of charisma or of his aides,'' and the
charismatic form of settling disputes was typically by prophetic revelation or by
Solomonic arbitration. Whatever the Judaeo-Christian expression of charisma,
the Buddhist community of monks (sahgha) has always been subject to an
elaborate Vinaya code of conduct and set of rules for arbitration of disputes and
conduct of affairs by individual residential communities; it is on this base that the
ascetic, meditative path consisting of dhutahga practices and expert training in
meditational exercises was constructed.
Weber's telling statements that "charisma knows only inner determination and
331


--- Page 344 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
inner restraint," that the holder of charisma demands obedience by virtue of his
mission, and that he is the followers' master "as long as he knows how to
maintain recognition through 'proving' himself" - these personalistic elements
are appropriate in our case only when they are superimposed on the base outlined
above. The Buddhist meditation master's personal qualifications are achieved by
relating his effort to an institutionalized and formalized vocation.
Just as in the Christian case there are two crystallizations of charisma - one of
a volatile, unstable nature in the persons of prophets and saints and their
followings and the other in the more institutionalized offices and persons of the
pope and divine kings - so in the Buddhist case there are two modal crystalli-
zations. One is exemplified in the persons and followings of the arahants and
saints, like our Thai meditation masters and forest saints,28 and the other consists
of the enduring "doctrine of presence" of the bodhisattva in this world, best
represented in the office and person of the Tibetan Dalai Lama. The "priest-
king" of Tibet, the Dalai Lama is regarded as a continuing reincarnation of
Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, a permanent objectification of the Buddhist hero's
achievements of understanding wisdom and universal compassion and loving-
kindness. To a lesser extent, the institution of Buddhist kingship in the Theravada
polities of Southeast Asia, in Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, Laos and so on,
which tried to associate the office and person of kings with the charismatic
associations of the dharmardja (righteous ruler), cakravartin (wheel-rolling uni-
versal king), and bodhisattva (Buddha-to-be) are also examples of the same
institutionalized occurrence of charisma, concordant with Buddhist notions of
rebirth, transmigration, and reincarnation.
The charismatic field of the forest saint and his following
Among these crystallizations, let me comment in detail on the Thai forest saints
and their followings, who are our chief interest. There is first of all a certain
flexibility in the way each meditation master implements the meditation manual
and the specific techniques he advocates, the rigor of the discipline, and the
pattern of the instruction he imparts to his disciples. Our previous documentation
gives us a lively sense of which of the various meditational subjects stated in the
Visuddhimagga are advocated by particular masters. It also shows that whether
samddhi concentration is taken to be a necessary preliminary to vipassand insight
meditation or whether the latter is plunged into directly are matters for individual
stress allowed within the limits set by the Visuddhimagga. How often disciples
discuss their meditation experiences with their masters, how often the master
gives formal meditational-cMra-doctrinal-instruction, and the daily timetable with
its solitary and communal phases - these again are differently conceived within
certain limits in different hermitages and meditation centers.
These flexibilities and latitudes are in accord with the social field in which the
332


--- Page 345 ---
The sources of charismatic leadership
forest saints act and that they help construct. This social field's contours are best
seen when this field is contrasted with two other institutional structures. One is
the established sahgha in Thailand with its hierarchy of royal and commoner
temples and its ecclesiastical organization of a hierarchy of titled offices, cul-
minating in that of the "king of the monastic order," the sahghardja. The other is
the established political system with the king at the apex and below him the ruling
political-army elites and the bureaucracies of graded civil officials, petering out
at the grass roots with the hamlet headmen and village schoolteachers. Both
these ecclesiastical and political establishments radiate from the swollen center
of Bangkok outward to the provinces on grids that weaken and die in the rural
peripheries. In contrast, the social fields of the forest monks spread and pulsate in
those fuzzy frontiers and inaccessible peripheries of the country's frontier
provinces.
The forest saints are typically - until they are later lionized by the public -
nonestablishment monks. We have noted that their hermitages lack the conse-
crated sima, places in which ordinations into monkhood can take place. They
have no Pali degrees and no ecclesiastical titles and formal positions; in fact,
because they are drannavdsl - forest dwellers - their membership is excluded
from the official sahgha's titular system.
But though outside the "establishment" and marginal to the ecclesiastical and
governmental centers, they are, by another mode of counting within the doctrinal
traditions of Buddhism, the greatest achievers. They have entered the arahant
path of salvation, which is precisely constituted of that very physical and social
exclusion and those austerities and renunciations of worldly power that enable the
transcending of desire and suffering, the achieving of liberation, and, seemingly
paradoxically but also quite logically, the access to supranatural powers as well.
Now the quintessential forest saint, exemplified by Acharn Mun throughout his
life, or the other saints such as Luang Pu Waen and Luang Pu Fun during the
greater part of their earlier careers, were peripatetic monks: They went into
seclusion in the deep forest accompanied by one or more select companions,
gained their moral victories, emerged and criss-crossed the country especially in
its Northeastern provinces, during the rains retreats took up temporary residences
in obscure as well as well-known urban wats, and initiated cells of disciples into
the discipline of meditation.
Thus over a period of time these recluses did travel, teach, and form highly
personalized monastic cells, whose disciple members, devoted and enthralled,
were trained by their master. These cells of disciplined meditators were not
permanently enduring entities - the disciples followed the master part of the time
and went to study with other masters at other times. If they did not derobe, they
themselves became peripatetic teachers, attracting their own coteries of disciples
as their reputation bloomed.
This propensity, then, of the peripatetic meditation master and forest saint to
spawn cells of religious disciples, who would again spawn cells, in the remote
333


--- Page 346 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
areas of the society gained a somewhat firmer structure when meditation masters
like Acharn Cha at some stage founded a more or less permanent forest hermitage
and from that center founded other branches of subsidiary centers in the vicinity
to which disciples are assigned. In this manner, a network of parent and daughter
hermitages is established. It is quite easy to see that the networks of cells that
forest saints can help establish, cells of devoted and highly motivated disciples
focused on their masters, can constitute, if systematically expanded, a formidable
system of charismatic influence and presence that is so different from the
established ecclesiastical system or the political authority with its patrimonial-
bureaucratic attributes and weaknesses. In fact, it can come to be an alternative
grid of power and mode of mobilization to the established systems.
But of course nothing so extensive has taken place in the present situation. The
networks or hermitages and cells are not vast, not coordinated, and not enduring
because they are the creations of a small number of meditation masters who
function on their own.
Nevertheless, the potentialities of the forest-monk's "routinized" monastic
networks must be recognized. They are ideal dispersed centers for guerrilla-type
activity against an established authority or for subterranean activity sponsored by
an established authority; they can form a network for mobilizing secretly and for
conveying information quietly; they are by their dispersion in rural heartlands
suitable for mobilizing the peasantry. Finally, there exists the possibility, as I have
demonstrated, that charismatic ascetic monks claiming supranormal powers
could become the rallying points for millenarian cults and movements.
In present-day Thailand, the real political significance of the meditation
masters is that, although they are themselves not political figures, they have been
taken up and assiduously visited by the country's politicians, bureaucrats, and
intelligentsia - especially from the metropolis. This is symptomatic of a near
political crisis, which will concern us in the concluding pages of this book.
334


--- Page 347 ---
22
The objectification of charisma and the
fetishism of objects
What indeed escaped Weber, who was so alive to the routinization and objec-
tification of charisma in institutional structures, was the objectification of cha-
risma in talismans, amulets, charms, regalia, palladia, and so forth - a phenome-
non as old as religion, indeed as old as all forms of leadership.
In the Thai case we have examined, people attribute virtues and energies to
persons because of their ascetic conduct; these saints are seen as capable of
transmitting their charisma to persons directly or, more usually and lastingly,
through amulets they have charged and activated. The charisma is concretized
and sedimented in objects; these objects are repositories of power.
In this fetishism there are two social loops or cycles in which saint and lay
public are implicated. One cycle is the ideologically developed and transparent
one; the other is more hidden and manipulative and rides on the former. The first
cycle is to be understood in terms of the Buddhist path of salvation: According to
its cosmography, the ascetic meditator attains progressively higher spiritual levels
of consciousness, leaving the grosser material excrescences behind, and through
the control of his sense doors and sensory states attains understanding wisdom
and universal compassion. This, then, is a state of transcendence, which also
generates supranormal powers with which to affect the phenomenal world through
detached action. The specifically Buddhist formulation, then, is that detached
action is also pragmatically the most effective action - by being removed from
the immediacy of desires and entanglements, it is all the more encompassing and
creative. Now it is a part of the first cycle that these virtuoso saints are ap-
proached by merit-making laymen, to whom the amulets are distributed as part of
the saints' dispensation of blessings. At this level of exchange, the conventional
Buddhist exegesis has some explanatory value: Amulets (like relics) act as
"reminders" of the virtues of the saint and the Buddha, and the saints act as
"fields of merit," in which laymen may plough, sow, and harvest through their
donations. Moreover, in this frame the piety of the layman's intentional action is
stressed.
335


--- Page 348 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
At the next remove, we have the cycle of transactions by which laymen
possess, accumulate, and secrete on their persons or otherwise employ these
amulets to influence, control, seduce, and exploit fellow laymen for worldly
purposes - in the corridors of politics, the stratagems of commerce, the intrigues
of love, and the sycophancy of clientage. In this arena we perceive two develop-
ments: Firstly, the iconic and indexical properties of the amulets are recognized
as pragmatically effective. The figures and emblems of the saints, the Buddha,
and other beings are indexical icons, which by existential contact with the monk
and by virtue of his impregnating them with sacred words, purifying them with
sacral water, and other similar acts of transference, embody the monk's virtue
and power. This objectification of the virtue of the saint also implies the passage
of his spiritual and transcendental powers to lower realms of materiality and the
marketplaces of human desire and gratification. They become life affirming and
destroying and act as missiles and countermissiles in the transactions of
worldlings (see Figure 16). If the ascetic, virtuous path of purification is one of
ascent from the states of materiality to the formless states and beyond, the path of
gratification is one of descent from the higher realms of spirituality and universal-
ity to the lower realms of material desires and limitations of space and time. In
simple words, the deep structure of this cosmology that articulates the relation
between saint and lay follower is that what goes up must come down.
It is inevitable in the Thai case that this process of vulgar materialization, this
law of gravity, should have further consequences. One is that the amulet moves
from a context of donation and love (metta) to a context of trade and profit: It is
converted into a highly salable good and enters the bazaar and marketplace.
When it does so, it also stimulates the production of fakes and becomes a pawn in
the usual publicity media of advertisements, catalogues, magazine articles,
books, and the mythology of miracles. A second consequence is that the more
amulets are produced, the more they are faked, and the more they are purchasable
for money, the more they deteriorate in their mystical powers (despite the
inflationary spiral of prices for the rare antiques). This means that new amulets
come into fashion and many others are condemned to be forgotten or less desired;
moreover, the propensity to accumulate amulets increases, in the simple arithmeti-
cal calculation that the more you possess, the more clout you have. Thus the
comparison of the relative virtues of amulets leads to mystical power itself, which
is both limitless and rare, being graduated, weighed in the balance, or quantified
in terms of money. Hence the common spectacle of Thai men wearing a necklace
on which are hung a number of amulets - the richer and more powerful he is,
the better and more numerous the icons protecting his person and helping him to
overcome others. To fully comprehend why there is an obsession in contemporary
Thailand with amulets possessing power (saksit) (especially among urban circles
and populations and among men rather than women), one has to bring into view
the texture of its social relations, which are woven on the loom of patron-client
336


--- Page 349 ---
Objectification of charisma, fetishism of objects
u
Figure 16. A Luang Pu Waen medallion that promises wealth. On the front side is the bust of Waen
with his name inscribed. On the back is represented the insignia of the lay sponsor; it consists of a bag
of money (with a band of the auspicious number 9 written across it) and the garuda bird; the
encircling caption says "Medallion of the rich man that [brings] eternal wealth."
relations, and the norms of bunkhun, by which leaders and men of rank and power
bind in service circles of clients and retainers.
On charisma and the gift
Wittgenstein, in some remarks he ventured on Frazer's Golden Bough,1 was
particularly suspicious of this passage from Frazer:
At a certain stage of early history the king or priest is often thought to be endowed with
supernatural powers or to be an incarnation of a deity, and consistently with this belief the
course of nature is supposed to be more or less under his control.
Wittgenstein thought neither the people nor their ruler could possibly believe
that this was the case. "Rather the notion of his [the ruler's] power," remarked
Wittgenstein, "is so adjusted that it can conform to both his and the people's
experience. That any hypocrisy plays a part in this is true only so far as it
generally does in most of what men do."
The implication of Wittgenstein's comment is to turn our attention away from
the reality of the experience of the occult per se as a crucial feature of a religious
consciousness, away from the theology of human attitudes and relations to a
transcendental or suprahuman presence, and to direct it to the "people's
337


--- Page 350 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
experience'' in their everyday social lives that makes such a theology a plausible
projection on their celestial screens.
In fact, this was precisely the kind of explanation sought by Mauss, in his own
sociological idiom, for the "primitive" human's conception of mana, that sense
of force that seemed to pervade the universe, to enter into and be radiated by both
people and objects - an "elementary" theory of "causation" of a global scope.
So how would we give an answer in Maussian terms for the Thai people's
experience that makes the mystical power (saksit) and perfections (bdrami) of the
luang phdu, the saintly ascetic monks of the forest, a plausible entity, a subjective
truth as well as an objective reality?
Mauss on Mana
Mauss,2 taking Codrington's discussion of mana in The Melanesians3 as his point
of departure, was impressed with the attributes of the conception that seemed to
override and surpass normal distinctions: Mana was a quality, a thing, an essence;
it was a contagious and transmissible force possessed by both objects and spirit
beings; it was abstract and general, yet quite concrete. Indeed mana - a
shorthand concept that included parallel conceptions like orenda (Iroquois),
kramat (Malay), manitou (Algonquin) - was "both supernatural and natural,
since it spread throughout the tangible world, where it is both heterogeneous and
ever immanent";4 it was impersonal and at the same time clothed in personal
forms; it was a power milieu.
Mauss further remarked that this was essentially the same conception embed-
ded in the Hindu notion of brahman as the metaphysical principle and power
activating the rite, prayer, and formula; moreover, it was the goal of Hindu yogic
and meditational practices.
"Brahman becomes the active, distinct and immanent principle of the whole
universe. Only brahman is real, all else is illusion. As a result, anyone who
would enter the bosom of brahman through mystical activities (yoga: union)
becomes a yogi, a yogicvara, a siddha, that is, one who has gained all magical
power (siddhi: obtaining), and in this way, it is said, has placed himself in the
position of creating worlds. Brahman is the prime, total, separate, animate and
inert spirit of the universe; it is the quintessence. It is also the triple Veda as well
as the fourth."5 It is the expression of "a fourth spatial dimension."
Although there are real differences in the Hindu and Buddhist ideas of self and
salvation, and of the character of the meditational exercises, it is possible to see
some affinity between moksa and nirvana as the final state of union with the
universal world spirit in the one case or of void and annihilation in the other, in
that both are visions of an ultimate cosmic consciousness where all illusions and
manifestations terminate as well as begin. It is this ground that enables the yogi
with his siddhi or the arahant with his iddhi to "create worlds," precisely
338


--- Page 351 ---
Objectification of charisma, fetishism of objects
because he has transcended the mundane and understands the laws of their
formations and because his wisdom and moral virtues can release a truth force
that has the power to transform the mundane.
But how does mana, or brahman, or the charisma of Buddha - to ask
Wittgenstein's question - become understandable as a social experience?
Mauss ventured that mana is "an unconscious category of understanding," a
"category of collective thinking which is the foundation of our judgements and
which imposes a classification in things, separating some, bringing together
others, establishing lines of influence or boundaries of isolation." From this
vantage point, Mauss saw the "magical value of persons or things as (resulting)
from the relative position they occupy within society or in isolation to society''
We would affirm, says Mauss, that "magic, like religion, is a game involving
'value judgements,' expressive aphorisms which attribute different qualities to
different objects entering the system"; it involves social sentiments that surround
plants, animals, occupations, sex, heavenly bodies, the elements, and physical
phenomena.6
In other words, I interpret Mauss as saying that mana and charisma are
"functions" of the social classification and cosmology of a society and that they
reflect and stem from the society's differentiated statuses and its hierarchy of
persons and objects. If mana and charisma on the one hand represent the
immanent ordering principle of the cosmos pervading its constituents, they are
also an expression of the differential potencies and power relations emanating
from a society's classified positions.
This perspective thus leads in a somewhat different direction from Weber's
focus on the charismatic leader and the special qualities attributed to his
leadership. In fact, it leads straight back to Mauss's classic, The Gift,7 which
focuses on the "power in objects, of exchange." It leads us to the process of the
objectification of power in objects - of the sedimentation of charisma in gifts,
valuables, and amulets - that become focal points and vehicles of social
exchanges.
Weberian theory leads, as we have seen, to the "routinization of charisma" in
social institutions and social positions. But Weber was blind to the symbolism of
objectification of charisma in objects and fetishes.
Mauss, on the other hand, was concerned with explaining the "productive
capacity" and animate vitality attributed to wealth objects in primitive exchange.
He saw that each of these objects was "a sign and surety of life" as well as a
"sign and surety of wealth, a magico-religious guarantee of rank and propensity."8
A conspicuous feature of Mauss's conception of the "total social fact" was the
confusion, perhaps it is better to say conflation, "of objects, values, contracts
and men which find expression" in gift exchanges; it is in fact precisely this
conflation of property and persons that Sir Henry Maine attributed to societies
dominated by "status" as opposed to "contract." In status-bound societies, he
said, persons and rights in objects are conflated, rights of persons and rules of
339


--- Page 352 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
property transmission are not kept separate; whereas the institution of contract,
distinctive of developed complex societies, made this disjunction.
In a similar vein, Mauss maintained that wealth objects were like "currency,"
but that the principles expressed in their exchange were different from the
circulation of money in modern society in which precious things are "detached"
from "groups and individuals" and made permanent and universal statements of
value measurement. Mauss's interpretation of the Maori notion of hau was that a
gift given necessarily evokes a return gift, which is really the "spirit" of the
original presentation returning to the point of origin - a "mystical" formulation9
that, as Marshall Sahlins has revealed, happily rides with a mundane notion of
incremental return or turnover that must be returned to the original holder,
because "one man's gift should not be another man's capital."10
Hau, or reciprocity, has multiple meanings. It can figure in the humiliation of
rank, as in the agonistic presentations of Kwakiutl potlatch, or it can establish the
solidarity of the exchanges, as in the kula ring. This is so because when people
exchange "things" they are exchanging social relationships, therefore exchang-
ing themselves up to a point. In this sense hau is not so much a property of the
things exchanged as an organizing principle. It does more than integrate in a
material sense; it creates meaning and makes intelligible social relationships.
Equality and rank are two possibilities of social relationships, therefore two
manifestations of reciprocity Both dimensions exist not only in a given social
moment, but also always within any social relationship and any society. As Mauss
said: "The lasting influence of the objects exchanged is a direct expression of the
manner in which sub-groups within segmentary societies of an archaic type are
constantly embroiled with and feel themselves in debt to each other.''11
Standing on Mauss's shoulders, we must chart more ideologies of exchange
than the simple binary division between primitive and modern, status and
contract. We have learned two lessons since the days of Gemeinschaft versus
Gesellschaft: Firstly, probably all societies have their versions of "fetishism" of
objects. Secondly, the manner in which objects and persons are intertwined and
evaluated differs according to each society's cosmological design and cultural
grid, in which social, divine, animal, and object hierarchies are mutually
implicated.
Marx, therefore, enters our scene importantly, for in a sense his "fetishism of
commodities" did for capitalist society what Mauss's "gift" did for primitive
societies. As demonstrated by Marshall Sahlins, their biases are inversions of
each other. Marx failed to perceive the cultural design according to which goods
are produced,12 and Mauss was partially color-blind to the margins of material
gain that greased the spirit of reciprocity. Perhaps one way to represent the
particularities of the Thai case is to sketch in a crude comparison of Marx's
description of commodities in capitalist society with the Trobriand passion for the
overseas exchange of kula valuables and with the Thai preoccupation with the
acquisition of amulets - three different examples of the "fetishism of objects,"
340


--- Page 353 ---
Objectification of charisma, fetishism of objects
three different codes in the semiotics of exchange. In such an enterprise, it is
essential to concede that " alienation" is not solely a deficiency of capitalism and
4'participation" the sole glue of archaic society. All societies - with the exception
of the paradisiacal and affluent pygmies (?) — surely have their own dialectical
versions of alienation and participation.
Three instances of the fetishism of objects
The transference from use value to exchange value, according to Marx, produced
in capitalist societies the phenomenon of commodities, whose exchange and
circulation vis-a-vis one another, comprising relations between things, obscure -
indeed stand for - exchange between social persons. The acquisition and control
of goods therefore becomes a ruling passion, to which is linked a market system
that continually disgorges goods that must be circulated and possessed, and
exclusively accumulated, and speedily consumed in a climate of obsolescence.
The possession and consumption of goods is a marked indicator of social-class
status. At the same time, the exchange of commodities serves as an ideological
screen that hides from direct perception the exploitation of labor and extraction
of surplus value upon which the system of production is predicated. In the last
resort, the distinctiveness of the capitalist system is that production is the site
upon which the fetishism of commodities is launched, commodities that are not
representative so much of pragmatic rationality as of cultural design and cultural
obsession.
The kula valuables are counters in another game of exchange. The official
ideology of kula is that a valuable goes around and around in circulation, each
possessor in the ring only keeping it temporarily and being forced to give it
away in order to keep the exchange going. Not to possess but to give away: That
is the mark of the Trobriand valuable. The grimier it is from handling, the greater
its value and historicity. The players in the game are alleged to be "individuals"
who are thought to win or lose according to their personal magnetism and renown
(butura), best represented in the tenuous and elaborate practice of beauty magic
and the seduction of male partners as if they were women (an elaborate game,
from which women are excluded but in which women furnish the imagery for the
sailors' fears of shipwreck and their hopes for overcoming their adversaries).
Ultimately, the implication of this ideology is that by seducing one's exchange
partner overseas to part with valuables by means of one's beauty, one keeps
confirming and validating one's youth and beauty, and one's power to entice, and
thereby gains possession of the immortality of youth. But of course one knows
that this cultural screen of exchange predicated on personal beauty magic and
personal dynamism also masks another form of control and "exploitation." The
winners in the kula in fact are the chiefs, guyau aristocrats and dala headmen -
men who mobilize labor to build the canoes and select the kula crews, men who
341


--- Page 354 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
receive urigubu or pokala yams as prescriptive gifts and distribute kula valuables
as personal favors, men whose own canoes lead the flotilla of canoes on the
uvalaku expeditions, and men who enjoy precedence over junior crew members
in the exchanges with overseas partners.
The possession and circulation of amulets in Thailand represents still another
semiotic code. The ascetic saint of the forest distributes his charisma as a
donation inspired by compassion and loving-kindness (mettd). He himself does
not expect a return from his gift to the worldlings at large. The amulet is
indexically or metonymically related to the ascetic monk and represents a
materialization of his virtue, achieved by means of a rite of transfer. Amulets are
made in plenty and distributed to many, for the saint's mettd is inexhaustible and
does not diminish by sharing, provided he continues to cleave to his ascetic and
meditative life and to experience the bliss of tranquil joy and detachment.13
But of course we also know that, in the Thai instance, amulets are comparable
on the basis of the differential charisma of the saints and ascetics; though donated
to the public at large, they in practice become scarce and assume a commercial
value. They become, at a second less obvious round of social relations, private
and hidden possessions of laymen who expect to use the amulets' potency to
manipulate, overpower, seduce, and control their fellow men and women in an
ongoing drama of social transactions. Thus there is a two-level discourse — the
charisma of the saint, who in transcending the world is able to shower upon it his
virtue, and the gratification of desires on the part of the laymen, for whom
prosperity and fortune approach the logic of a zero-sum game. The hidden
dimension of the Thai ideology of amulets consists in the differential power
distribution and social control vested in its lay social hierarchy - of kings,
generals and bureaucrats, urban workers and rural farmers. The more historic,
more famous, more potent amulets are in the hands of the rulers and the wealthy,
for they are the sponsors of the ascetic saint as an amulet maker; these amulets
confirm them in their power and act as sureties of wealth; in the words of Mauss,
they are a "magico-religious guarantee of rank and prosperity." They reflect and
legitimate, to put it in a Thai idiom, the hierarchy of merit.
Thai society is dramatically different from, on the one hand, a full-blown
"capitalist economy" and, on the other, the Trobriand Islands of Malinowski's
time, which produced yams and valuables for a limited circulation (see Table
22.1). Until a couple of decades ago, it would have been accurate to label
Thailand a "neo-colonial" dependent economy, which produced rice, teak and
tin, and certain other primary articles for the international capitalist-controlled
markets and which in turn was a market for capitalist-manufactured goods. Such
a country was administered by an authoritative military regime; and in such a
society politics and economics were interrelated in such a way that political and
military power enabled access to wealth and to material goods by various
channels and devices - by siphoning off income from government-run monopo-
342


--- Page 355 ---
Table 22.1. The semiotics of fetishism of objects
Commodity type and
velocity of exchange
Basis of control
Kind of fetishism
Source of charisma
Dominant value
orientation
Western capitalist:
commodity
exchange
High velocity of
exchange; high commodity
accumulation/high con-
sumption: production
according to a planned
obsolescence.
Exchange rides on
exploitation of producers
and labor.
Highly impersonal society 
Alleged spirit of entre- 
Centrality of conspicuous
where the relations
between objects stand for
relations between men and
act as indexes of social
class/wealth/power.
preneurship and capitalist
ethic; highly individualized
conception, open to all.
consumption for society at
large; the centrality of
"ethic of work" for entre-
preneurs as justification of
success.
Trobriand:
kula exchange
High velocity of circula-
tion; durable valuables:
historic objects.
Exchange ultimately rides
on exploitation of kin.
Highly personalized
society where exchange of
valuables objectifies
seduction/control over
stranger-partners.
Control of "beauty
magic"; highly individ-
ualized conception, open
to all.
Centrality of achieving
"renown" (butura):
dynamic volatile action on
high seas; quest for
"immortality."
Thailand:
amulet trade
Fairly high velocity after 
Exchange rides on differ- 
Highly personalized but 
Disinterested ascetics who 
Centrality to Buddhist monk
conversion to trade
objects; personal accumu-
lation; historic objects.
ential rank, power and 
stratified society where 
transcend society; highly 
of asceticism as path to lib-
wealth of owners/
sponsors.
objects as sedimentations
of virtue index merit
hierarchy and enable con-
trol of others.
individualized; open to all.
eration, wisdom, and com-
passionate "detached
action." Centrality of
"merit making'' for laymen,
whose power enables access
to consumption of goods
and affirms their merit.


--- Page 356 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
lies and industries, by milking local Chinese business, and by appropriating part
of the foreign aid, principally military aid, provided by the United States.
Pretty much the same principles and tendencies prevail today and affirm that
the amulets radiating various powers are really "political" prizes providing
access to and control of good things of this world.
Thailand's economic development may have been progressively changing in
recent decades to what is perhaps more accurately called "associated-dependent
development,"14 in that multinational corporations, both Western and Japanese,
have been establishing certain kinds of factories and plants to take advantage of
cheap labor and other advantages in a narrow sector of the country, principally in
the Bangkok region. These corporations and business interests make their deals
with the ruling generals and ministers in exchange for favorable contracts and
taxation terms. Thus to some extent the interests of these foreign corporations
become compatible with the internal prosperity of the dependent country. But this
same linkage enables the military rulers, even in the face of external constraints
and growing internal contradictions and tensions, to impose their own develop-
ment model on Thailand. And it also allows the stimulation of manufacturing and
other activities around Bangkok to perpetuate a stagnation in the rural provinces,
whose rice production is becoming increasingly irrelevant to Thailand's national
revenue. By and large, then, the rural provinces represent an "underdeveloped
peripheral economy." This asymmetry allows the military and bureaucratic elites
and urban merchant interests to have a conspicuous-consumption style of life
while condemning the peasants to poverty. Such a domination cannot remain
self-assured for long, and a crisis of legitimacy is besetting Thailand today.
The crisis of legitimacy and the obsession with amulets
A component of the first reading of Weber's discussion of charisma is that,
together with charisma's unstable, volatile, rebellious nature, goes its coming
into prominence "in times of psychic, physical, economic, ethical, religious,
political distress."15 This particular hypothesis of Weber's connecting the emer-
gence of charismatic movements with conditions of stress has been a central
point in many studies;16 more than one study of political processes in Third World
countries has surmised that they resort to charismatic leaders and symbols as
panaceas for the disturbed situations in which they find themselves.
As I have said many times earlier, although the tradition of amulets and votive
tablets is an ancient one in Thailand (and elsewhere in Southeast Asia), there has
been an intensification in their manufacture and in people's resorting to them in
recent years. There are two striking aspects to this intensification.
Firstly, although in the past many of the sacralizers of amulets were capital-
based, prestigious monks within the established sahgha and political personages like
royalty, in recent years the ascetic forest-monks, burrowed away at the margins of
344


--- Page 357 ---
Objectification of charisma, fetishism of objects
Thai society, have been singled out as the shining, disinterested possessors of
mystical power and as the dispensers of the loving-kindness that the country
badly needs and lacks, especially when the sahgha's ecclesiastical establishment
is itself seen as tainted or lacking vigor.17
Secondly, the most ardent pursuers and collectors of amulets sanctified by the
meditation masters and forest arahants are the urban ruling elements, the
intelligentsia, and the wielders of force, the military. The political center is losing
its self-confidence, but it has not lost its might; it searches for and latches onto
the merit of the holy men who are the center of religion but peripheral to its
established forms.
Thus a sociological answer must be given as to why the propensity to seek
contact with transcendent powers possessed by the world renouncers, and to
resort to the fetishism of amulets, has shown greater force and conspicuousness
in recent years. The answer to the intensification may lie in the internal and
external political circumstances confronting Thailand today - circumstances that
have eroded and put into question the legitimacy of the ruling elements and
privileged sectors of the society.18
Externally, the collapse of the established governments in Vietnam, Cambodia,
and Laos, in which both outside communist elements and internal dissident
insurgents played roles, have naturally placed the instituted, conservative, and
undemocratic government of Thailand in peril. The sweeping aside of the
monarchy and the Buddhist sahgha in both Cambodia and Laos has assailed
fundamental principles on which the Thai polity and society have been erected
and maintained. Perhaps even more corrosive of legitimacy and stability have
been internal crises: the student insurrections of 1973 and 1976; the fateful
involvement of the monarchy and the court in active politics, which appears to
have progressively driven them fatefully into alliance with the rightist elements;
and the determined policy of a reactionary but powerful military not to liberalize.
This drove the opposition into a greater radicalism than it had intended. With the
1976 coup, the military regained power, which they have continued to hold.
No more is it possible for the Thai rulers or Western observers to dismiss the
insurgents of the Northeast and the South as disaffected extremists, as creatures
of communist intrigue and parasites living off the local populations. For the truth
is that the traditionally quiescent, passive, nonparticipatory rural peasantry are
beginning to express their outrage at increasing landlessness and at the benign
neglect by the rulers.19 In the urban areas, equally neglected and unprotected
laborers are unionizing and engaging in sporadic strikes. It may well be that the
time when the state apparatus is weakened is the time when mass peasant protest
also builds up to produce an upheaval of "revolutionary" proportions. A princi-
pal argument in a recent book on revolutions is that certain historic and massive
revolutions have occurred when traditional relations between the state apparatus
and the underlying, largely peasant, populations were profoundly upset. Because
of both internal and international developments, the state was no longer able to
345


--- Page 358 ---
Conceptual and theoretical clarifications
exercise its own hegemony, and that of the dominant classes, in the face of revolts
from below.20 But these are reflections on the imminent and possible in Thailand,
and a wise man should eschew prophecy.
The Path of Purification and the stream of history
As a final reflection, I return to the tradition of Buddhist ascetic meditation and
place it in the stream of history.
The system of meditation in all its variants practiced by the forest saints of
today finds its legitimation in such classical texts as the Visuddhimagga, written
in the fifth century A.D. In fact, all the variant "paths" practiced are contained
within the scope of the original text. In one sense there has been a continuity in
the tradition over the centuries - continuity not necessarily as an unbroken pursuit
in time, for we know that the monastic orders periodically declined and re-formed
at different periods, but as a vocation for monks that can be periodically
reactivated because of the existence of the authoritative classical texts as points
of reference and as precedents. In this sense, the meditative quest has a
"regressive," retrospective dimension.
It is certain that ascetic forest-monks have had different positional significances
at different historical times, within then-existing religio-political fields. In the
late 1970s, the forest saints in Thailand had a prominence that can be understood
only in relation to the wider religious and political scene. In this sense, the
"progressive" or "becoming" aspects of the meditative tradition are best appre-
ciated in the context of the present political crisis and the declining legitimacy of
the established sahgha and rulers. But the classical forms - whether of medita-
tion techniques, ascetic practices, traditions of dress, or ritual procedures and
votive tablets - persist more or less intact; it is the intensity and breadth of the
public acclamation, and the participation of lay sponsors and merit-makers of elite
status, that has changed quantitatively. But from the earliest times - even going
back to the time of the Buddha - we know that the bhikkhu were peripatetic
mendicants, some of whom were espousers of the ascetic meditational path, and
all of whom, time and again, engaged with kings, merchants, and other lay
devotees.
The Buddha has for too long been exclusively interpreted in some circles as an
"individualized" world renouncer, who signified a self-absorbed withdrawal
from the world and preached a message of world rejection and world negation. I
believe that the larger truth of Buddhism can be comprehended only if other
features of it are taken integrally into account at the same time - that a saint,
prophet, or guru takes a stand vis-a-vis his society and his world, that his quest
and his message were meant to reform and transform them, and that in this sense
he has a "civilizing" mission. Early Buddhism, let alone later Buddhism, does
not make sense unless we give full weight to the fact that the Buddha founded a
346


--- Page 359 ---
Objectification of charisma, fetishism of objects
monastic community (or communities), the sahgha, and that this was a disci-
plined social order. On the one hand, the sahgha marked itself off from the lay
householders' way of life. But on the other hand, it lived symbiotically upon that
way, requiring it not for material sustenance alone, but also as a witness to an
exemplary life, to be touched by it, and to guarantee its morality.
When the saint renounces his home, wife, and children, and passes into the
world as a homeless wanderer, he does two things. He founds another social
order, which as a fraternity (or sorority) of openly recruited celibates, following
an ascetic life, is the opposite of particularized kin bonds and the mundane
involvements of the family and household life. In transcending particular bonds,
he also thereby takes humanity as a whole as his family and his community and
warms them with his cosmic compassion and wisdom. This is one of the main
lessons of our study of the Buddhist arahant. I think many religious traditions
hold that he who would be father, or she who would be mother, of us all cannot
carry out his or her ministry if he or she is the exclusive conceiver and parent of a
few.
347


--- Page 360 ---
Notes
I. Introduction and manifesto
1 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976.
2 Arthur Burks, "Icon, Index, and Symbol," Philosophy and Phenomenological Re-
search, Vol. IX, No. 4, pp. 673-89; and Roman Jakobson, Selected Writings, Vol. 2,
Word and Language, "Shifters, Verbal Categories and the Russian Verb" (The Hague:
Mouton, 1971), pp. 130-47. I have developed and used the concepts of indexical symbol
and iconic symbol in "A Performative Approach to Ritual," Radcliffe-Brown Lecture
1979, Proceedings of the British Academy, Vol. LXV, 1979 (London: Oxford University
Press, 1981).
3 Indexical icons similarly encode dual meanings: On the one hand the icon represents
the likeness of an original object or person, and on the other it transfers values to its users.
4 Wilfred Cantwell Smith, The Meaning And End of Religion: A New Approach to the
Religious Traditions of Mankind (New York: Macmillan, 1962-63).
5 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
2. The Buddhist conception of the arahant
1 T. W Rhys Davids, Buddhism (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge,
1877).
2 Padmanabh S. Jaini, The Jaina Path of Purification (Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press, 1979).
3 R. Spence Hardy, A Manual of Buddhism, In Its Modern Development (London:
Partridge and Oakey, 1853).
4 E. Conze, Buddhist Meditation (London: Unwin Books, 1972).
5 Etienne Lamotte, Histoire du Buddhisme Indien (Louvain: Publications Universitaires,
1958).
6 
See The Minor Readings (Khuddakapdtha), The First Book of the Minor Collection
(Khuddakanikdya), trans. Bhikkhu Nanamoli, Pali Text Society, Translation Series, No.
32 (London: Luzac, i960). The jewel discourse is to be found at Ch. 6, pp. 170-8.
7 Asserting that the wheel or gem jewel of the wheel-turning monarch (cakkavatti) is
348


--- Page 361 ---
Notes to pp. 12-20
never the equal of the Buddha jewel, and recapitulating the contents of the Mahdsudassana
Sutta, it glosses "jewel" (ratanam) as something "much admired," of "great value,"
"rarely seen," and so on. The Mahdsudassana Sutta lists these as the seven jewels of the
cakkavatti: the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the gem, the woman, the treasurer, and the
counselor.
8 This list is cited by Ria Kloppenborg, The Paccekabuddha, A Buddhist Ascetic: A
Study of the Concept of Paccekabuddha in Pali Canonical and Commentarial Literature
(Leiden: Brill, 1974), p. 22.
9 Cited in Wilhelm Geiger, Culture of Ceylon in Medieval Times, ed. Heinz Bechert
(Weisbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, i960), p. 17.
10 B. Horner, trans, and ed., The Middle Length Sayings (Majjhima Nikdya), 3 vols.,
Pali Text Society Translation Series, Nos. 29-31 (London: Luzac, 1954-9), Vol. I, pp.
181-2.
11 Horner glosses the expression "cannot be discerned" as their having made the
ultimate achievement of "going beyond" (parahgata).
12 The Questions of King Milinda, trans, from the Pali by T. W Rhys Davids (New York:
Dover, 1963), Parts I and II. The original text appears to have been translated into Pali at
an early date, and its Sinhalese translation, possibly made in the eighteenth century, was
published for the first time in 1877.
13 Mahdvagga I, 23-4. See T. W Rhys Davids and H. Oldenberg, trans., Vinaya Texts
(Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, repr. 1968), Part I, pp. 144-50.
14 For earlier discussions by me of these dichotomies in Buddhism, see my Buddhism
and the Spirit Cults (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976), Chs. 9, 12.
15 Michael Carrithers, "The Modern Ascetics of Sri Lanka and the Pattern of Change
in Buddhism," Man, Vol. 14, No. 2, 1979, pp. 294-310.
16 John P Ferguson, "The Arahat Ideal in Modern Burmese Buddhism," unpub. paper
delivered at the annual meeting of Association for Asian Studies, 1977.
17 Bhikkhu Teliwatte Rahula's A Critical Study of the Mahavastu (Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1978) has a long section III (pp. 120-53), m which he gives the lives of the
Buddha's early disciples, culled from many Pali and Sanskrit sources, canonical and
noncanonical.
18 On the half-days of the lunar month, i.e., full moon and no moon, monks convene
and recite the pdtimokkha, the confessional that enumerates the 227 rules.
19 See Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, Vinaya Texts, Part I, p. 94. (The original text is
Mahavagga, Ch. 1, verses 16, 17.)
20 See T. W Rhys Davids, Dialogues of the Buddha, Sacred Books of the Buddhists,
Vol. II (London: Henry Frowde, 1879), pp. 226-32.
21 Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, Vinaya Texts, Part I, pp. 172-4.
22 As we shall see, these are some of the 13 ascetic practices enumerated by the
Vissuddhimagga as those recommended, though optional, for the monk dedicated to
meditation.
23 Rhys Davids and Oldenberg, Vinaya Texts, Part III, pp. 238-63.
24 Note that dwelling under trees is expressly forbidden during the season of the rains in
Mahdvagga III, 12, 5.
25 Kloppenborg, Paccekabuddha, pp. 18-20.
26 Questions of King Milinda, pp. 174-5.
349


--- Page 362 ---
Notes to pp. 20-6
27 This rule is enshrined in the Pdtimokkha.
28 The Buddha's stricture is to be found in the Kevaddha Suttanta (see T. W Rhys
Davids, Dialogues of the Buddha, Vol. II).
29 H. C. Norman, ed., The Commentary of the Dhammapada (London: Pali Text
Society, 1912), Vol. 3, p. 204.
30 See T. W Rhys Davids, Buddhist Suttas, The Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XI
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1900).
31 See Andre Bareau, "The Superhuman Personality of the Buddha and its Symbolism
in the Mahdparinirvdnasutra of the Dharmagupta," in Myth and Symbols, ed. J. M.
Kitagawa and C. H. Long (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971).
32 
See Lamotte, Histoire du Buddhisme Indien, pp. 765-70. Also see pp. 683-6,
where he discusses the stage of the arahant. I shall only cite some of the numerous sources
he cites. My citations from Lamotte in quotation marks are somewhat free translations
from the French.
33 I shall comment later on the literary genre called avaddna.
34 Lamotte indicates that these poems in Pali had their corresponding poems in the
Buddhist Sanskrit literature; however, Sthavira-Sthaviri-gatha, which are often mentioned
in the Sanskrit Agama, have not survived.
35 Lamotte cites here J. Przyluski, he Conseil de Rdjagrha (Paris: Paul Guethner
1926-8).
36 Nirodhasamapatti apparently signifies the ability to enter the bliss of nibbdna for a
brief period, such as seven days, before returning to normal existence.
37 The Pali tradition, however, has it that he died before his father and his Master
Sariputra.
38 The Caturmaharajikadeva.
39 Lamotte here cites, among others, S. Levi and E. Chavannes, "Les Seize Arhat
Protecteurs de la Loi," Journal Asiatique, Vol. 8, 1916, pp. 5-50, 189-304.
40 Charles Duroiselle, Report of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma, for
the Year Ending 31st March 1923 (Rangoon: Superintendent, Government Printing,
1923), pp. 22-7.
41 Upagutta is said to have been the fourth patriarch of the sahgha, the preceptor of
Asoka, the chief actor in the Third Buddhist Council, and the composer of the Kathavatthu.
42 Tambiah, Buddhism and the Spirit Cults, Ch. 10. Also see Charles Duroiselle,
"Upagutta et Mara," Bulletin de VEcole Franqaise d'Extreme Orient, Vol. 4, 1904, pp.
414-28; Shway Yoe, The Burman, His Life and Notions (London: Macmillan, 1896); R.
Grant Brown, "Rain Making in Burma," Man, No. 80, 1908, pp. 145-6.
43 The story is found in the Asatarupa Jataka.
44 Richard F Gombrich, Precept and Practice (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), pp.
185-6.
45 I myself think that, in certain contexts, especially relating to ascetic forest-monks,
claims of arahantship have been made even in present times and that Gombrich ignores
this segment of popular religious attitudes. I shall later cite Carrithers's study of recent
forest-monks in Sri Lanka (see Chapter 5).
46 John P Ferguson, "The Arahat Ideal in Modern Burmese Buddhism," unpub. paper
delivered at annual meeting of Association for Asian Studies, 1977.
47 This description echoes the classification of the 7 classes of minds in Questions of
King Milinda.
350


--- Page 363 ---
Notes to pp. 27-37
48 The quotations are taken from pp. 190, 191, and 218 of Phra Acharn Maha Boowa
Nyanasampanno, The Venerable Phra Acharn Mun Bhuridatta Thera, Meditation Master,
trans. Siri Buddhasukh (Bangkok: Mahamakut Rajavidyalaya Press, 1976). See Chapter 6
of this book for details.
3. The Path of Purification: the ascetic practices
1 Bhikkhu Nanamoli, The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) (Colombo: Semage,
1956).
2 The Mahdvihdra, the "great monastery" in Anuradhapura, committed the Tipitaka to
writing in the first century B.C., and it is surmised that this writing was done at a time
when Sanskritic Buddhist literature and sectarianism were threatening the Theravada
establishment. But this early Sinhalese literary activity was apparently followed by a lean
period until the fourth century A.D.
3 Nanamoli cites as his source Mahdvamsa, Ch. 37, verses 215-47. This portion of the
text is, in translation, included in the first chapter of the Culavamsa. See: Culavamsa,
Being the More Recent Part of the Mahdvamsa, trans. Wilhelm Geiger and from the
German into English by C. M. Rickmers (Colombo: Ceylon Government, 1953), Part I,
Ch. J7, pp. 215-47.
4 Nanamoli, Path of Purification, pp. xxiv-xxvi.
5 I shall use both of these as interchangeable terms.
6 Note, however, that certain portions, such as the discussion of slla, relate to the laity
also.
7 Samyutta Nikdya, 1.13.
8 The elements in the Eightfold Path as listed in the sermon are: (1) right understanding,
(2) right thought, (3) right speech, (4) right action, (5) right livelihood, (6) right effort,
(7) right mindfulness, and (8) right concentration. There is no suggestion of hierarchy or
sequence in this enumeration. Buddhaghosa grouped in three sequential groups elements
3-5 as slla, 6-8 as samddhi, and 1-2 as pahhd.
9 Nanamoli, Path of Purification, p. 6.
10 Nanamoli, Path of Purification, p. xxxi.
11 The canonical source cited for this is Majjhima Nikdya i, 33.
12 Nanamoli, Path of Purification, p. 19. We are also told: Walking, the bhikkhu "goes
with downcast eyes, seeing the length of a plough yoke, restrained, not looking . . . at a
pedestrian, a woman, not looking up, not looking down, not staring this way and that"
(pp. 19-20).
13 It is not necessary to elaborate the point that sexuality of all kinds is disallowed. The
temptations arising from intercourse with women are the focus of special elaboration: A
bhikkhu is warned against letting women massage him, joking and amusing himself with
women, listening to the sound of women through a wall or fence, recalling jokes he had
shared or games he formerly had played with women.
14 Dhuta is glossed as "ascetic"; ascetic because he has shaken off defilement. Ahga is
glossed as "practice."
15 Predictably, this vow is infrequently taken in Thailand. A meditation master may
spend the occasional night or successive nights engaged in sitting and walking meditation,
but he cannot be expected never to sleep lying down. The vow thus seems to go with
intensified periods of meditation.
351


--- Page 364 ---
Notes to pp. 38-42
4. The states and rewards of Buddhist meditation
1 Edward Conze, Buddhist Meditation (London: Unwin, 1972), p. 1. There are many
modern expositions of Buddhist meditation as developed by the Theravada School. Good
guides, for example, are the Conze work cited here [also his Buddhism: Its Essence and
Development (Oxford: Cassirer, 1953)], and Nayanaponika Thera, The Heart of Buddhist
Meditation (New York: Citadel Press, 1969). A number of books and tracts have been
published in recent years in Thai, mainly written by monks (and translated by others into
English), which attest to the increasing interest on the part of monks, laity, and foreigners
in the practice of meditation. Examples of these works with English titles are: the
extensive writings of Buddhadasa, which are documented and discussed in Donald K.
Swearer, Towards the Truth (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1971); Phra Maha Nar-
asabho, Buddhism, a Guide to a Happy Life (Bangkok: Kurusapha Press, 1971); and S.
Dhammasuddhi, Insight Meditation (London: n.p., 1968). In addition, there are numer-
ous pamphlets on meditation written by meditation teachers such as Tepsiddhimuni
Mahathera and Phra Acharn Thate Desaransi. A final example is Acharn Maha Boowa,
whose writings will be discussed in Chapter 6.
2 See P V Bapat, Vimuttimagga, (Poona: n.p., 1937).
3 EL. Woodward, Manual of a Mystic, Being a Translation from the Pali and Sinhalese
Work Entitled The Yogavachards Manual (London: Pali Text Society, 1916).
4 Conze, Buddhist Meditation, p. 1.
5 
Caroline A. Rhys Davids, Psalms of the Brethren (London: Pali Text Society,
1909-13), and I. B. Horner, Women Under Primitive Buddhism (London: George
Routledge, 1930).
6 Samddhi means literally "collective or continual fitting together" (synthesis);
exegetically, it is explained as "right placing of consciousness on object." See Woodward,
Manual of a Mystic, p. xiii.
7 
See Bhikkhu Nanamoli, Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) (Colombo: Semage,
1956), pp. 117-18.
8 
Ibid., p. 119.
9 We shall take up later the Path of Insight, but in less detail, because the major points I
wish to discuss can be presented with respect to the methods of concentration.
10 Of course, this is not the only position recommended; meditating while standing,
walking, or reclining is permissible. Meditators usually alternate between these positions
in preferred combinations.
11 Conze suggests (Buddhist Meditation, p. 21) that the effect of gazing intently at the
chosen device is probably similar to that of hypnosis, where, entranced by the uniform
stimulus of a shining light, or suchlike, the disciple drops the objects altogether. 'As the
initial object is subjected to the influence of transic mentality, it gradually changes its
character. At its later stages, it is called the "mental image, and its transformations have
been described with great subtlety."
12 Ibid., p. 144.
13 At their highest levels, the path of samddhi and the path of pannd can meet. One who
has attained to sufficient one-pointedness of mind can steer himself to nibbdna by
contemplating his own mind, and the master of insight can choose to focus on a single
object of awareness and traverse the jhdnic levels.
352


--- Page 365 ---
Notes to pp. 43-51
14 Daniel Goldman, The Buddha on Meditation and Higher States of Consciousness
(Kandy, Sri Lanka: Buddhist Publication Society, 1973), gives a useful summary of the
Path of Insight as set out in the Visuddhimagga.
15 It is surmised that the setting of this limit may be linked to the limits of endurance of
the human body, for various physiological processes accompany the cessation of con-
sciousness: The heartbeat slows down and metabolic processes are at a residual level, and
the meditator's body cannot, it is said, be distinguished from a corpse.
16 There are 10 kinds of success referred to. "Success born by kamma result" is
exemplified by the natural capacity of birds to fly, and also of deities to do the same.
Examples of "success due to right exertion" are on the one hand the mastery of arts and
crafts such as is evidenced in trade, medicine, or learning the Vedas and on the other hand
the abandonment of defilements by following the arahant path; again, there is "success
through the sciences," which label refers to creating magical effects through spells and
charms. The other types mentioned, such as "success in mind-made body," "success by
intervention of concentration," and "success by resolve," could well be results associated
with meditation.
17 The source cited is Dlgha Nikdya i, 77.
18 "It is only in Buddhas, Pacceka Buddhas, Chief Disciples . . . who have vast
previous endeavor behind them, that this transformation by supernormal power and other
such special qualities as the Discriminations are brought to success simply with the
attainment of Arahantship and without the progressive course of development of the kind
just described" (p. 412).
19 The canonical source cited is Dlgha Nikdya i, 79.
20 The Visuddhimagga does not recount a famous incident recorded in the canon that is
relevant to this discussion. In the course of his last journey, during his stop at the Capala
shrine near the city of Vaisali, the Buddha converses with Ananda about the beauty of that
city and remarks that the man who is master of the four parts of the supranormal power
(rddhipdda) is able to prolong his life until the end of the world epoch. In spite of a
threefold repetition, Ananda does not understand the hint and remains silent. Mara, the
tempter, then intervenes and invites the Buddha to enter nibbdna, now that his teaching
mission is finished. The Buddha declares that he will enter nibbdna in three months' time. A
terrible earthquake accompanies this incident. Later, Ananda, on being told by the Buddha
the eight reasons for the occurrence of an earthquake - one of which is the moment a buddha
decides to enter parinibbdna - realizes his terrible mistake and, in vain, begs the Buddha
to prolong his life.
21 The details of the Buddhist cosmology are to be found, for example, in R. Spence
Hardy, A Manual of Buddhism in its Modern Development (London: Partridge and Oakey,
1853), especially pp. 24-6. Also see the Siamese version, as portrayed in Chulakantha-
mangala, trans. G. E. Gerini (1893) (Bangkok: Siam Society, 1976). There are of course
many other sources for the cosmology and many versions of it. A recent English trans-
lation of the Traiphum is Frank and Mani Reynolds, The Three Worlds of King Ruang,
Berkeley Buddhist Studies, Series 4 (Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press/Motilal Ban-
arsidass, 1982).
22 World Conqueror and World Renouncer, A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thai-
land against a Historical Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976),
Ch. 1.
353


--- Page 366 ---
Notes to pp. 54-7
5. The forest-monk tradition in Southeast Asia: a historical backdrop
1 K. Malalgoda, Buddhism in Sinhalese Society iy50-1900, A Study of Religious
Revival and Change (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976), identifies "practice"
as the primary goal of a bhikkhu and "learning" as a "secondary goal" for him and cites
in support the Dhammapada (1: 19-20), which says that a person of realization, even
though he has only a little learning, is superior to one who has great learning but no
realization.
2 W. Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon (Colombo: M. D. Gunasena, 1956),
p. 158.
3 Ibid., pp. 194, 214, 260. Malalgoda, Buddhism, also confirms that there was a
fundamental conflict between "practice" and "learning," and that the latter came to be
recognized as the basis of the sdsana. Out of this debate between the "ascetics"
(pamsukulikas) and the "preachers" arose the vocational differentiation between the
vocation of books and the vocation of meditation.
4 R. A. L. H. Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, Monasticism and Economic Interest in
Medieval Sri Lanka (Tucson, Ariz.: University of Arizona Press, 1979).
5 There are good reasons for thinking that the Vimuttimagga might have been a text of
the Abhayagirinikdya, whereas the Visuddhimagga was certainly the work of Buddhaghosa,
who was associated with the Mahdvihdra sect.
6 Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, p. 42, cites the Culavamsa 51.52 as his source. See
The Culavamsa, Part 1, tr. W Geiger and M. Rickmers (Colombo: Ceylon Government,
n.d.), p. 152.
7 Ibid., p. 45.
8 Ibid., p. 46.
9 This would be so if the Sinhalese name of Dimbulagala is taken to be the same as
Udumbaragiri/Udumbarapabbata (Pali); they are exact translations of each other.
10 This reform and subsequent ones such as are recorded in the Dambadeni Katikdvata
are described and discussed by N. Ratnapala, The Katikdvatas, Laws of the Buddhist
Order of Ceylon from the 12th Century to the 18th Century (Munich: Mikrokopie, 1971);
Gunawardana, Robe and Plough; Heinz Bechert, Buddhismus Staat und Gesellschaft in
den Laendern des Theravdda-Buddhismus, 3 vols. (Frankfurt am Main: Metzner,
1966-73). See also my World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and
Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1976), Ch. 9.
11 It is also interesting that most of the monk-dignitaries who took part in the synod
came from monasteries located in the provinces. Thus this historic example of "purifica-
tion" and unification of the sahgha was one which the center relied on the periphery to
achieve.
12 The first mahdsdmi appointed after the reform under Parakrama Bahu I was Sariputta,
who was a scholar and is not identified as a forest dweller. Whether or not a forest-dwelling
monk actually held the post of mahdsdmi, it is clear that dignitaries from the Dimbulagala
monasteries participated in the purifying synods. Medhankara, who as mahdsthavira of
the forest-dwelling fraternity assisted a synod held during the reign of Vijayabahu III (A.D.
1232-6), might have served as mahdsdmi during the reign of Parakrama Bahu II (see
Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, p. 332).
354


--- Page 367 ---
Notes to pp. 58-61
13 See Malalgoda, Buddhism, Ch. 1, for information on Valvita Saranamkara and his
reform fraternity, called the Silvat Ramagama. Born in 1698, Saranamkara became a
novice at 16. He spent his early years in the order living reclusively and studying Pali, and
he collected a few followers who formed the nucleus of "the fraternity of the pious." They
aspired to return to the practices set down in the Vinaya texts and to observe the ideal of
poverty. They revived the practice of mendicancy. This reform movement made a strong
impression when in Kandy the upasampadd ceremonies were no more being held and the
tradition of worldly ganindnse (not monks but laymen in white or saffron cloth who
observed the 10 precepts and maintained wives and children) had developed. Without
training or without undergoing higher ordination, the ganindnse controlled temples and
their lands and passed them on to their relatives.
Saranamkara and his pious fraternity gained royal patronage; he reestablished the higher
ordination with Siamese help in the reign of KIrti Sri Rajasinha (1747-82); the visiting
Siamese monks stayed on for some time conducting further ordinations and teaching the
Dhamma and the Vinaya.
14 Michael Carrithers, "The Forest Monks of Lanka, An Historical and Anthropologi-
cal Study," D. Phil, thesis, Oxford University, 1977. To be published by Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
15 Bechert, Buddhismus, Vol. 1.; Richard E Gombrich, Precept and Practice: Tradi-
tional Buddhism in the Rural Highlands of Ceylon (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1971), repeats Bechert's view (pp. 283-4) and opines that the "entire behavior" of Sri
Lanka's forest-dwelling monks "is intended as a revival (though to some extent it may be a
pseudo-revival) of ancient practices which have long lapsed."
16 The segmentation of the sahgha and the formation of new fraternities in Sri Lanka
throughout the nineteenth century, and thereafter, is a complex issue, resulting from
numerous factors, from internal reasons of "reform" and alleged return to the stricter
standards of early Buddhism to "contextual" factors of caste, regional particularism,
social mobility, lay pressures, and clashes of leading monks. Moreover, the discourse
framed in terms of reform is inflected by context, and the dialectic between them is
recursive and intertwined. Apart from Malalgoda, Buddhism, see Steven Kemper's infor-
mative and original essay, "Reform and Segmentation in Monastic Fraternities in Low
Country Sri Lanka," Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 40, No. 1, 1980, pp. 27-41. This
essay explores the larger social context within which reform and segmentation are
situated. The founding of forest-monk hermitages is only a small aspect of the larger issue
of monastic segmentation in the nineteenth century.
17 The biography was by Kodagoda Upasena and its title is Sri Panndnanda Mahd
Thera Caritaya (Colombo: n.p., n.d.); it was based on an earlier caritaya by Matara
Nanindasabha.
18 Samsthava means eremetical establishment.
19 Carrithers, "Forest Monks."
20 Michael Carrithers, "The Modern Ascetics of Lanka and the Pattern of Change in
Buddhism," Man, new series, Vol. 14, No. 2, 1979, pp. 294-310; for an account of the
earlier phase of the movement, see Nur Yalman, "The Ascetic Buddhist Monks of
Ceylon," Ethnology, Vol. 1, No. 3, 1962, pp. 315-28.
21 Carrithers, "Modern Ascetics," pp. 306-7, reports that the majority of lay support-
ers came from the navandanna, vahumpara, and batgama castes.
355


--- Page 368 ---
Notes to pp. 62-7
22 E. Michael Mendelson, Sangha and State in Burma: A Study of Monastic Sectarian-
ism and Leadership, ed. John P Ferguson (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1975),
p. 46. This section is primarily based on the information and interpretation contained in
this work.
23 Mendelson, Sangha and State, pp. 47-8; he quotes from U. Pannasami, The History
of the Buddhist Sangha (Sasanavamsa), trans. B. C. Law (London: Luzac, 1952).
24 In passing, I note that the alleged "lone" forest dwellers in turn founded new or
enlarged existing monasteries and that the names of the groupings that are "established"
and that are "reformist" may change from time to time and from context to context.
25 Than Tun, who embraces Luce's view on this matter, is reported as seeing the events
of the thirteenth century in these terms: The Burmese forest-monks were the Ari monks,
representing the Upper Burma arahanta traditions; they were the opponents of the Sri
Lanka components of the sangha. The Ari monks acquired great power and royal
patronage through the process of acquiring and developing land in relatively unpopulated
areas and thus helped the territorial expansion of the kingdom. Their leader was
Mahakassapa, who was the rival of the monks sent to Sri Lanka in 1237 and 1248,
perhaps for the purpose of stemming the growth of the forest-monks. See Than Tun,
"Maha Kassapa and His Tradition," Journal of the Burma Research Society, Vol. 42,
1959, PP. 99-II8.
26 Ibid., p. 50.
27 Michael Aung Thwin, "The Role of Sasana Reform in Burmese History: Economic
Dimensions of a Religious Purification," Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 38, No. 4, 1979,
pp. 671-88; and "Kingship, the Sangha, and Society in Pagan," in Explorations in Early
Southeast Asian History: The Origins of Southeast Asian Statecraft, ed. Kenneth R. Hall
and John Whitmore, Michigan Papers on South and Southeast Asia, 11 (Ann Arbor: Center
for South and Southeast Asian Studies, University of Michigan, 1976), has documented
the scale and frequency of such royal seizure of monastic lands in Pagan. It is interesting
that in medieval Sri Lanka (or later) monastic lands by and large came to enjoy immunity
from such royal intrusion, although disputes with royal officials did occur. See Gunawar-
dana, Robe and Plough, pp. 181-211.
28 A recent informative essay is my source here: John P Ferguson, "The Quest for
Legitimation by Burmese Monks and Kings: The Case of the Shwegyin Sect, I9th-2oth
Centuries," in Religion and Legitimation of Power in Thailand, Laos, and Burma, ed.
Bardwell Smith (Chambersburg, Pa.: Anima Books, 1978).
29 Ibid.
30 Ibid.
31 See Donald K. Swearer and Sommai Premchit, "The Relation between the Reli-
gious and Political Orders in Northern Thailand (I4th-i6th Centuries)" in Smith, Reli-
gion and Legitimation of Power, pp. 20-33.
32 Ibid., p. 25.
33 Ibid., pp. 22-30.
34 Swearer and Premchit, "Relation between Religious," comment that this new
Sinhala order is "presumably of the Mahavihara tradition," and, in contrast to their
rivals, they "did not cover their alms bowls with their robes, nor did they carry staffs."
But from Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, one infers that the Sumana order, because of
its Udumbaragiri links, is also of the Mahavihara parentage. That both orders could be
356


--- Page 369 ---
Notes to pp. 69-73
branches within the Mahavihara order is not contradictory, in the light of my previous
comments.
35 H.R.H. Prince Damrong Rajanubhab, A History of Buddhist Monuments in Siam
(Bangkok: Siam Society, 1962), p. 7.
36 Prince Dhani Nivat, Monarchical Protection of the Buddhist Church in Siam
(Bangkok: World Fellowship of Buddhists, 1964), pp. 5-8.
37 See Charnvit Kasetsiri, The Rise of Ayudhya, A History of Siam in the Fourteenth
and Fifteenth Centuries (Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press, 1976), for hints of the
active leadership provided by a variety of holy men in North Thailand in early times, as
could be gleaned from inscriptions and from the Tamndn chronicles (legends and myths that
were primarily concerned with the history of the spread of Buddhism in the region). We
shall return to these holy men in the next chapter, but let me note here that if they are to be
seen as separate from the bhikkhu, they nevertheless worked with the grain of Buddhism
and in the same direction as forest-monk establishments. They were agents promoting the
cause of Buddhist polities.
38 Ibid., p. 43.
39 F. L. Woodward, Manual of a Mystic, Being a Translation from the Pali and
Sinhalese Work Entitled The Yogavachara's Manual (London: Pali Text Society, 1916). T.
W Rhys Davids, who analyzed the text, which was copied from the original palm-leaf
manuscript, found both the copy and the source deficient. Nevertheless, the text is
considered important because Rhys Davids claimed that no other work in Buddhist
literature, either Pali or Sanskrit, devoted itself to the details of samddhi concentration
meditation.
40 Ibid., p. xiv.
41 Ibid., pp. v-viii.
42 
See earlier reference to him in this chapter.
43 See Craig Reynolds, "The Buddhist Monkhood in Nineteenth Century Thailand,"
Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University, 1972, for a full and informative discussion. This issue is
also treated in my World Conqueror and World Renouncer, Chs. 10 and 11.
44 Richard Allan O'Connor, "Urbanism and Religion: Community, Hierarchy, and
Sanctity in Urban Thai Buddhist Temples," Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University, 1978. See
especially pp. 141-51.
45 In Bangkok, many roya} cremations were held at Wat Ratchathirat, situated along the
river to the north of the city; Wat Sangwet, at the northern edge, was a major crematorium,
as was Wat Saket, at the eastern edge. It is not being suggested that every wat that
specialized in cremations was dedicated to the vocation of meditation.
46 I have developed at length the notion of the "galactic polity'' in Southeast Asia in my
World Conqueror and World Renouncer, and in my essay "The Galactic Polity: The
Structure of Traditional Kingdoms in Southeast Asia'' in Anthropology and the Climate of
Opinion, ed. Stanley Freed, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 293,
1977, pp. 69-97.
47 
See Samuel Beal, Travels ofFah-Hian and Sung-Yun, Buddhist Pilgrims from China
to India (400 A.D. and 518 A.D.), trans, from the Chinese (London: Trubner, 1869), p.
47; and Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, p. 228. Also: Wilhelm Geiger, Culture of
Ceylon in Medieval Timers (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, i960), pp. 213-15, documents the
history of the tooth relic and its travels in the medieval period.
357


--- Page 370 ---
Notes to pp. 73-84
48 When the tooth relic first arrived in Sri Lanka during the reign of Sirimeghavanna
(A.D. 301-28), it was placed in a shrine next to the palace. Geiger, Culture of Ceylon,
documents a number of kings who successively possessed the relic and always kept it in a
temple near the royal palace.
49 Culavamsa, trans. W Geiger and C. M. Rickmers, 2 vols. (Colombo: Government of
Ceylon, 1953), Vol. 2, Ch. 74, p. 43 (verses 239-40), speaks of the rain-inducing
powers of the relic when it was taken in procession.
50 See H. L. Seneviratne, Rituals of the Kandyan State (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1978), for an authoritative and illuminating description and interpretation of
the perahera festivities.
51 Ibid., pp. 85-7.
52 A. B. Griswold, Towards a History of Sukhodaya Art (Bangkok: Fine Arts Depart-
ment, 1967), pp. 36-7.
53 See Robert Lingat, "Le Culte du Bouddha d'Emeraude," Journal of the Siam
Society, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1934, pp. 9-38; Camille Notton, The Cult of the Emerald
Buddha (Bangkok: Bangkok Times Press, 1933); Frank Reynolds, "The Holy Emerald
Jewel; Some Aspects of Buddhist Symbolism and Political Legitimation in Thailand" in
Smith, Religion and Legitimation of Power, pp. 175-93.
6. The biography of a modern saint
1 The Thai word acharn (dean) derives from the Sanskrit word dedrya, teacher. Because
in the most important sources I cite the transcription acharn is used, I shall also use it
throughout.
2 Charles F Keyes, "Death of Two Buddhist Saints in Thailand," Journal of the
American Academy of Religion, Thematic Studies, Vol. 48, Nos. 3 and 4, pp. 149-80,
makes the plausible suggestion that Maha Boowa first related the biography in a series of
oral sermons.
3 Phra Acharn Maha Boowa Hyanasampanno, The Venerable Phra Acharn Mun
Bhuridatta Them, Meditation Master, trans. Siri Buddhasukh (Bangkok: Mahamakut
Rajavidyalaya Press, 1976).
While this work is my chief source for the summary and all page references are to this
translation, I also use on occasion information provided in this article: Paradaun
Rattanakun, "Life and Religious Practice of Luang Pu Waen," Lan Pho, Feb. 1977.
This source is a Thai-language journal. As a matter of fact, Maha Boowa's biography in
Thai has also been translated into English by Ruth-Inge Heinze, The Biography of Ahjan
Man (1871-1949), Asian Folklore and Social Life Monographs, Vol. 89 (Taipei: Chinese
Association for Folklore, 1976). This translation is both incomplete and in places
unsatisfactory.
The appropriate transliteration of the names of our modern saint and his biographer are
Man and Bua, but the published English translation by Buddasukh that is my text renders
these names as Mun and Boowa. I have therefore chosen to follow my text.
4 It is very likely that Acharn Mun was giving voice to the conventional view that the
scholarly study of books - ganthadhura - was a specialized avocation that is differently
structured from the pursuit of vipassanddhura, meditative practice, which leads to the
knowledge of liberation.
358


--- Page 371 ---
Notes to pp. 85-95
5 We are of course reminded here of the Malaya Sutta, which holds an important place
in Thai Buddhism: Phra Malai enjoyed the mystical powers by which he descended to the
hells and ascended to the heavens; in Tavatirhsa heaven he met the Buddha to come,
Metteyya.
6 We shall keep track of this most interesting fact - that the famous "wandering
ascetics" did occasionally visit the large towns, in this case the capital, where they did
have links with titled abbots who had achieved fame by climbing the orthodox sahgha
hierarchy. The implications of these periodic returns and links with the city monks and
materially supportive urban laymen need to be worked out.
7 The biographer glosses that the nonreturner is one in whom the five lower spiritual
fetters are destroyed, namely, holding the wrong idea concerning self, the subjection to
doubt or hesitation, the clinging to the efficacy of rites and rituals, subjection to sensual
desire, and irritation. If the supreme final Path of the arahant is not attained within that
lifetime, he will pass on to any one of the five subtle higher realms of Brahma heavens (p.
31). This gloss is orthodox (see Chapter 2).
8 Every Buddha and arahants of some categories have made use of this universal
language in helping others, especially invisible beings. This language is therefore a great
help in facilitating the communication between minds (p. 191).
9 The biographer says at another place: "There seems to be an inexplicable bond of
friendship between a dhutahga bhikkhu and animals . . ." (p. 41).
10 As we shall see later, in Part III (which is on the cult of amulets), the saintly monk
who peacefully subdues and communicates with wild animals and transcends fear of them
is able to transfer his powers to amulets, which enable the laity who wear them to be
protected from attack and injury by these "aggressive" beasts.
11 Michael Carrithers, "The Forest Monks of Lanka, An Historical and Anthropologi-
cal Study," D.Phil, thesis, Oxford University, 1977. To be published by Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
12 F. L. Woodward, Manual of a Mystic, Being a Translation from the Pali and
Sinhalese Work Entitled the Yogavachara's Manual (London: Pali Text Society, 1916).
13 One place where he spent a rains retreat, the village of Pone Sawang in Sawang
Dandin, is mountainous, wild, and frequented by dhutahga bhikkhu to this day.
14 It is therefore interesting and instructive to contemplate the activities of these
"natural" missionaries and to compare their style and success with those of the recent
government-sponsored Thammathut (dhammaduta, meaning emissary of the dhamma)
programs. [See S. J. Tambiah, World Conqueror and WorldRenouncer (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1976); Somboon Suksamran, Political Buddhism in Southeast
Asia, The Role of the Sangha in the Modernization of Thailand (New York: St. Martin's
Press, 1977).]
15 There are no ordained nuns in the canonical orthodox sense today in Thailand (or
Burma or Sri Lanka). However, women may shave their heads, wear white robes, take 8 or
10 precepts, and live on the "edge of the religious community, practicing meditation and
cooking food for the monks or novices."
The Acharn's attitude toward women as the feeble sex, which has to be protected and
also comprises a danger to the chastity of monks, has once again a basis in early
Buddhism. The Cullavagga has a vivid account of how the Buddha reluctantly allowed
himself to be persuaded by his foster mother, MahaprajapatI (the first nun), and his favorite
359


--- Page 372 ---
Notes to pp. 95-102
pupil, Ananda, to allow women to become nuns. The Buddha laid down rules by which
the female order would be subordinate to the male order and would depend on monks to
conduct various ceremonies. The Buddha is reported to have said with grave misgivings
that the life of the Buddhist religion would be cut in half to 500 years because of the
admission of women into the sahgha. Hermann Oldenberg [Buddha, His Life and his
Doctrine (London: Williams and Norgate, 1882), p. 165] asserts: "Women are to the
Buddhist of all the snares which the tempter has spread for men, the most dangerous; in
women are embodied all the powers of infatuation, which bind them to the world."
However, for a sympathetic discussion of early Buddhist attitudes toward women, see I. B.
Horner, Women under Primitive Buddhism: Lay Women and Almswomen (London:
Routledge, 1930).
16 One is also reminded of the "lion roar" of the Buddha.
17 It is noteworthy that not only Acharn Mun but also at least one other noted Thai forest
hermit and meditation master - the biographer himself- have this special relationship with
their mothers. Their mothers become nuns, live in the forest hermitage and receive
instruction, and in turn attend to the food needs of the monk and his disciples.
One cannot help but recall in this context that the Buddha also had a special relationship
with his mother, Maya, who died 10 days after giving him birth, and whom he visited in
Dawadueng heaven during one rains retreat to give her moral instruction. He returned in
glory from the heavens attended by deities.
18 This name, given to the sermon preached, was later to be the title of a small book
containing his biography and teachings, which was distributed at the cremation rites of
Acharn Mun.
19 This is the doctrine of the conditionality of all physical and psychical phenomena, the
cause of suffering (based upon ignorance and the A^rmfl-formations it leads to), and, in
reverse form, it reveals the mode of cessation of suffering. It encompasses the second and
fourth of the Four Noble Truths.
20 Readers of this account of Acharn Mun's reaching enlightenment will no doubt
spontaneously compare it with the description of the Buddha's contemplative break-
through under the bodhi tree and the legendary events associated with it. Also, there is a
parallel between the Buddha's compassionate decision to postpone his extinction (pari-
nibbdna) so as to teach the way to humans and Acharn Mun's similar dedication of the
rest of his life to spread the message.
21 This dialogue asserts things concerning the different bodies of the Dhamma, and the
nature of the Buddha's presence in the world, that will be discussed in Chapters 15 and
17, and the conception of nibbdna as the "signless state," as propounded by Bud-
dhaghosa, which has been discussed in Chapter 4.
22 This vow made in a previous existence to become a buddha (or an arahant) follows a
classical precedent. As we shall see, the biography of the historical Buddha himself begins
with this resolution, which is embedded in a stream of rebirths; so do the biographies of
the previous buddhas, and of the Buddha's disciples - Sariputta, Mahakasyapa, Ananda,
and so on - who attained enlightenment.
23 It is possible that Germany figures in this vision because there have been some
famous German Buddhist monks in recent times, who have lived exemplary lives in
Southeast Asia and made important scholarly contributions.
24 Wanphra, days devoted to the Buddha's commemoration, fall on full moon, half
360


--- Page 373 ---
Notes to pp. 104-12
moon, and the day before the new moon, and are somewhat analogous to the biblical
"sabbath" in that there is worship, a sermon, the taking of precepts, etc.
25 Later, the biographer documents the following under the caption "food restraint":
An aspirant who finds that his mind is unruly with regard to food and always overcome by
its taste will reduce the intake of food or sometimes go without food for a day or two if his
body is able to stand it.
If his mind is still disobedient, a dhutahga bhikkhu should do this: "When offered food
that he likes, he stops to scrutinize the condition of his mind first. If it is enslaved by desire
and shows uncontrollable delight in it, he refuses that kind of food and accepts that which
the mind refuses . . . . Some kinds of food are pleasant to taste or beneficial to the health
of the body but can be disagreeable to the health of the mind. This kind of food is also to
be avoided" (p. 240).
26 The first discourse given by the Buddha after his enlightenment to his former five
disciples.
27 This is sometime later than 1941.
28 We note that the Buddha died in his eightieth year, and that it is after a similar span
that this arahant, as well as many other Buddhist saints in Sri Lanka and elsewhere, are
alleged to have died. As far as I can see, the dates in some historically known cases are
accurate, and the classical mould is repeated in real life. See also Carrithers, "Forrest
Monks," Ch. 5, on Bhikkhu Niyonatilaka.
29 The posture in which the Buddha dies, which was also adopted by dying arahants.
30 This distribution reminds me of the distribution of ashes that took place after the
Buddha's cremation as related in the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta.
7. The Buddha's life as paradigm
1 Two well-known works in English, which are based on Burmese and Thai accounts of
the Buddha's life, are P Bigandet, The Life or Legend of Gaudama, the Buddha of the
Burmese, 2 vols., 4th ed. (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1911); Henry Alabaster,
The Wheel of the Law; Buddhism Illustrated from Siamese Sources (London: Trubner,
1871). For Sri Lanka, see R. Spence Hardy, A Manual of Buddhism in its Modern
Development (London: Partridge and Oakey, 1853).
2 John P Ferguson, in his essay "The Arahant Ideal in Modern Burmese Buddhism,"
unpublished paper delivered at annual meeting of Assoc. for Asian Studies, 1977, refers
to popular Burmese biographies of saints. The Burmese accounts affirm the special
supramundane powers of popular arahants, classical and modern. Especially impressive
are the encounters between German pilots and Burmese flying arahants in World War II.
3 I have earlier cited from the work of Carrithers biographies of forest-monks such as
Pannananda (see Chapter 5).
4 Carolis de Silva, The Life of Dhammaratana of Miripanne (Galle, Sri Lanka: n.p.,
1888).
5 The works in question are Sangharaja Sadhucariyava (1779) and Sangarajavata (ca.
1780). The former was edited and published in book form in 1947. A biography in
English, D. B. Jayatilaka's Saranankara: The Last Sangha-raja of Ceylon (Colombo: n.p.,
1934) relies heavily on these two works.
6 Charles F Keyes, "Death of Two Buddhist Saints in Thailand," Journal of the
361


--- Page 374 ---
Notes to pp. 112-17
American Academy of Religion, Thematic Studies, Vol. 48, Nos. 3 and 4, pp. 149-80.
7 Ibid., p. 151.
8 The existence of these palm-leaf texts suggests that (contra Keyes) written biographies
may well have been composed before the advent of printing as such in this century. A
search for such palm-leaf texts and their proper dating may lead to a revision of present
views.
9 
See T. W Rhys Davids and Hermann Oldenberg, trans., Vinaya Texts, parts 1, 2, 3
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1882).
10 See E. H. Johnston, ed., The Buddhacarita: Or, the Acts of the Buddha, Part 1,
Sanskrit Text, Punjab University Oriental Publications, No. 31 (Calcutta: Baptist Mission
Press, 1935-6).
11 Strictly speaking, he cannot be referred to as the Buddha until his enlightenment.
12 A. K. Warder, An Introduction to Indian Historiography (Bombay: Prakashan,
1972), p. 29.
13 Bhikkhu Telivatte Rahula, A Critical Study of the Mahavastu (Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1978), p. 3.
14 See J. Przyluski, La Legende d'Empereur (Paris: AMG, 1923).
15 Frank Reynolds [in his essay ' 'The Many Lives of the Buddha,'' in The Biographical
Process, Studies in the History of the Psychology of Religion, ed. Frank E. Reynolds and
Donald Capps (The Hague: Mouton, 1976)] provides a useful survey of writings dealing
with the Buddha's life in the works of several modern buddhologists.
16 Reynolds and Capps, Biographical Process, p. 3.
17 Warder, Introduction to Indian Historiography, p. 30. See also his Indian Buddhism
(Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1980), pp. 333-40.
18 Hermann Oldenberg, Buddha: His Life and His Doctrine, trans, from the German by
William Hoey (London: Williams and Norgate, 1882). There are other standard biogra-
phies of the Buddha: examples are E. J. Thomas, The Life of the Buddha as Legend and
History (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1927), W W Rockhill, The Life of Gotama
the Buddha (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1926). See Reynolds and Capps,
Biographical Process, for a fuller list.
19 Oldenberg, Buddha, p. 78.
20 The Vinayas of these six schools are the subject matter of Erich Frauwallner's
discussion in The Earliest Vinaya and the Beginnings of Buddhist Literature (Serie
Orientale Roma) (Rome: Instituto per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente): Sarvastivadin,
Dharmaguptaka, Mahlsasaka, the Pali school, Mulasarvastivadin, and Mahasarhghika.
21 Frauwallner, Earliest Vinaya, p. 43.
22 Ibid., p. 49.
23 The Pali and the Kasyapa schools coupled the early biography with the Jataka
collection of birth stories. The Mulasarvastivadin school apparently went its own way and
attached to the end of the Skandhaka all that it gathered concerning the biography of the
Buddha.
The Mahavastu [see Mahavastu, trans, into English from E. Senart's 3 vols. (1882-97)
by J. J. Jones (London: Luzac, 1949-56)] is interestingly considered by the Lokottara-
vadins, a branch of the Mahasarhghika school, as the first book in their Vinaya Pitaka.
Mahavastu, the "great story" or "great subject," refers to the life of the Buddha, and, as
I have mentioned before, it is a collection of all the avaddna-type legends and narratives of
heroic deeds. The contents of the Mahavastu were - as E. J. Thomas also affirms in
362


--- Page 375 ---
Notes to p. 117
support of Finot and Frauwallner - preliminary to the Vinaya proper, and consisted of the
following: (1) biographical accounts pertaining to the Buddha's career; (2) stories relating
to his former existences (jdtaka); (3) stories about his disciples and devotees (avaddna);
and (4) discourses and expositions (sutra, vydkarana).
The Mahdvastu uses the oldest forms of genuine tradition as well as exegetical elabora-
tions of later origin: "In the earlier strata of this development, the Buddha is spoken of,
and presented as, human, whereas in the successive stages of the growth of the so-called
legend the human figure of Gautama Sakyamuni is seen gradually being replaced by
mythical imagery" (Rahula, A Critical Study, pp. 181-2). The Mahdvastu does not differ
from many other sources with regard to the theme that the Buddha's career in this world
was the culmination of an earnest resolve made aeons ago and backed by numerous deeds
of virtue and piety. The Buddha's life, seen as an infinite series of births and rebirths, fits
well into the "supramundanist" view of the Lokottaravadins, that there exists an Adi-
Buddha, an eternal Buddha, who never becomes extinct and sends manifestations or
incarnations of himself whenever the world needs a Buddha (Rahula, Ibid., pp. 184-90).
One more example: The Divydvaddna [see Divydvaddna, A Collection of Early Bud-
dhist Legends, ed. E. B. Cowell and A. A. Neil (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1886)] also belongs to the avaddna class of Buddhist literature. The editors use as their
text a collection of early Buddhist legends, written in Sanskrit, which was discovered in
Nepal. The editors comment: "Many of our legends belong to the Vinaya pitaka, as they
continually bring in some reference to a point of discipline; but they do not seem to be
translated from any Pali original; we would rather regard them, like the others which relate
to Asoka's history, as coming down from an independent source. They have all suffered
from the careless ignorance which characterizes Northern as opposed to Southern
Buddhism; they are the isolated fragments which alone survive from what was once a large
literature" (p. viii).
24 Finot's thesis has, it seems, found approval with E. Obermiller, de La Vallee
Poussin, and Etienne Lamotte, but has been criticized by Paul Demieville and J. Filliozat.
Concerning Frauwallner's stimulating elaboration Lamotte in his Histoire du Bouddhisme
Indien (Louvain: Publications Universitaires, 1958) says that in the Vinayas of the Sarvas-
tivadin the account of the two councils does not form part of the original edition. He thinks
that the Vinaya of the Mulasarvastivadin, which has an ample biography of the Buddha, did
not arise in the early Buddhist community settled in Mathura, but is a much later work.
In any case, Lamotte doubts that the initial biography of the Buddha, which served as an
introduction to the Vinaya, had been the point of departure and the model for the separate
biographies of the Buddha written later. These latter volumes do not end with the
conversion of Sariputra and Maudgalyayana and are more developed than the fragments of
biography in the Vinaya. There is, for instance, no comparison between the bulky
Niddnakathd of the Jdtaka and the brief, fragmentary accounts at the beginning of the
Khandhaka of the Pali school. Furthermore, the later biographies could have drawn their
subject matter from the Sutrapitaka, which contains many detailed biographical pieces.
Lamotte also cites Demieville as indicating that the accounts of the councils may have
been attached to the Vinaya by editors who were different from the composers of the
ancient Vinaya of Upali.
Lamotte's position is that the Vinayapitaka is developed directly from the rulings made
during the very origins for the Buddhist community and that the hypothesis of an Old
363


--- Page 376 ---
Notes to pp. 119-22
Skandhaka that is distinct from the ancient Vinaya of Upali complicates further an already
complicated problem.
25 Vamsa, referring to the line or ' 'genealogy" of kings, or of patriarchs of the Buddhist
sahgha, or of an ordination "lineage" of monks, later expands into stories or historical
accounts of the Buddhist sahgha and religion, whose fortunes and changes, whose decay
and renewal, and whose maintenance of the canonically "pure" tradition and line of
succession are the central themes. Some famous examples are the Sinhalese chronicles -
Dipavamsa, Mahdvamsa, Culavamsa - and the Burmese Sdsanavamsa. The Thai word
tamndn is an equivalent concept, and a quintessential example of tamndn literature is the
Jinakdlamdli chronicle.
In the Hindu literary tradition, the labels itihdsa, purdna, kdvya, and vamsa refer to oral
and written traditions, stories, proto-histories and legends, chronicles of royal genealogies,
and divine manifestations. Concerning these concepts and their connotations, see V S.
Pathak, Ancient Historians of India, A Study of Historical Biographies (London: Asia
Publishing House, 1966); Warder, Introduction to Indian Historiography.
26 The Mahdvamsa or The Great Chronicle of Ceylon, trans. Wilhelm Geiger (Colombo:
Government of Ceylon, 1950).
27 Incidentally, we are told of the Buddha's intimate relationship with King Bimbisara
of Magadha in these terms: "Bimbisara and the prince Siddhattha were friends, and
friends likewise were the fathers of both. The Bodhisatta was five years older than
Bimbisara . . . when he had striven six years and thereafter had attained to wisdom, he
being thirty-five years old, visited Bimbisara" (p. 12).
28 Charnvit Kasetsiri, The Rise of Ayudhya (Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press,
1976), p. 1. Kasetsiri gives a useful account of "ancient Thai historiography" and
contrasts the tamndn with the genre labeled phongsdwaddn, derived from the Sanskrit
words vamsa and avatdra, meaning "history or annals of members of a line, dynasty or
kingdom," i.e., dynastic histories that portray history "from the point of view of kingship
and the state." He asserts that the latter dynastic chronicles appeared in Thailand for the
first time in the seventeenth century, whereas the tamndn tradition is older, a large number
appearing in the fifteenth century in the area of Chiengmai. He admits that there are many
Thai texts that reflect a blend of both these kinds. See David K. Wyatt and Constance M.
Wilson, "Thai Historical Materials in Bangkok," Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 25, No.
1, 1965, pp. 105-22, for a listing of Thai sources and traditional Thai historical writing.
29 Ibid., p. 3.
30 In fact, in some respects the Jinakdla's account of the Buddha's life is closer, as
regards contents and length, to what is to be found in the Sinhalese Dipavamsa (which is
older than the Mahdvamsa), especially in such matters as the story of the Buddha's
reaching enlightenment, his peripatetic teaching career (including his miraculous feats),
his royal genealogy stemming from Mahasammata, and so on. Naturally, the Dipavamsa
gives more lengthy accounts of the Buddha's visits to and sanctification of the island of
Lanka, and of Mahinda's missionary visit to and conversion of that island to Buddhism.
See Hermann Oldenberg, The Dipavamsa: An Ancient Buddhist Historical Record (London:
Williams and Norgate, 1879).
31 These and other episodes we have already read about in Chapter 4, which gives the
contents of the Visuddhimagga.
364


--- Page 377 ---
Notes to pp. 125-30
8. The ordering principles behind Buddhist saintly biography
1 Donald A. Stauffer, English Biography before 1700 (New York: Russell and Russell,
1964), p. 5.
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid., p. 7.
4 Helen C. White, Tudor Books of Saints and Martyrs (Madison: University of Wiscon-
sin Press, 1963).
5 Ibid., p. 6.
6 Peter Brown, Religion and Society in the Age of Saint Augustine (London: Faber and
Faber, 1972), p. 31.
7 Peter Brown, The Cult of the Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Christianity
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), pp. 5-6.
8 W Y. Evans-Wentz, ed., Tibet's Great Yogi - Milarepa, a Biography, from the Tibetan,
being the Jetsu'n-Kahbum (or Biographical History of Jetsum-Milarepa, according to the
late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup's English rendering) (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1969). Another well-known Tibetan masterpiece is the life and teachings of the great
Guru Padma-Sambhava; see The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation, ed. W Y. Evans-
Wentz (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1954).
9 Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, Montaillou, the Promised Land of Error, trans. Barbara
Bray (New York: Vintage Books, 1979).
10 P Bigandet, The Life or Legend ofGaudama, the Buddha of the Burmese, 2 vols., 4th
ed. (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1911). It is clear that Bigandet's chief sources
were Burmese literary compositions.
It has recently come to my notice that there is an important Thai work that can be used
effectively along the same lines. Frank Reynolds, "The Many Lives of Buddha" [in The
Biographical Process, Studies in the History of the Psychology of Religion, ed. Frank E.
Reynolds and Donald Capps (The Hague: Mouton, 1976)] informs us of a major biography
of the Buddha, titled Pathamasambodhikathd, written by H. R. H. Paramanuchitchinorot,
who served as the sanghardja of the Thai sangha in the mid-nineteenth century. This biog-
raphy, considered a classic of Thai literature, is based on the sacred biographies of the
classical Niddnakathd type, but contains other additional materials: For example, it includes
an account, drawn from the Buddhavamsa commentary, of the places where the Buddha
spent the rainy season retreats during the second half of his ministry; and an account of the
final phase of the Buddha's life, which has been preserved in the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta.
These episodes are clearly relevant to the biography of Acharn Mun, but at present I have
no way of knowing whether the Pathamasambodhikathd consciously or unconsciously
served as a model for Maha Boowa's composition. I hope to investigate this matter in
the future.
11 Earlier on, Mara flings this accusation at the Buddha, which the latter disproves:
Mara approached the meditating Buddha and said: "Thesadat Siddartha, this throne is not
made for you; vacate it forthwith; it is my property." The Buddha calmly answered: "You
have not as yet practiced the two great virtues, nor gone through the five acts of self-denial;
you have never devoted your life to help others to acquire merits; . . . This throne,
therefore, cannot be yours." This again affirms the Buddha's compassionate and meritori-
ous acts in this world (Bigandet, Life or Legend ofGaudama, Vol. 1., pp. 88-9).
365


--- Page 378 ---
Notes to pp. 130-6
12 In Bigandet, ibid., Vol. 1, pp. 99-100.
13 Ibid., Vol. 2. Chs. 3, 4.
14 Let me illustrate this: As Bigandet has perceptively recorded (ibid., Vol. 2, Ch. 3),
the Burmese conduct their cremation rites in the style of a "festival,'' with music, dancing,
feasting, and so on. In the translated text, the Malla princes are described, on hearing the
news of the passing of the Buddha, as directing one of their family "to go throughout the
city and collect all the richest and rarest perfumes, to keep in readiness the drums, harps,
flutes, and all other musical instruments, and have them carried to the place where the
remains of the Buddha were lying. Having reached the spot, the princes began to make
offerings of flowers and perfumes with the greatest profusion, in the midst of dancings,
rejoicings, and the uninterrupted sounds of all the musical instruments" (Vol. 2, p. 77). In
fact, Sariputta's mortuary rites, which took place before the Buddha's, are described as if
they were a Burmese ritual.
15 
"Adzatathat [Ajatasattu] ordered the soil to be dug very deep. With the earth bricks
were made, and eight dzedis (cetiya) were built. . . . The depth of the hole was eighty
cubits. Its bottom was lined with iron bars. To that bottom was lowered a chapel monastery
made of brass, similar in shape and proportions to the great wihara (vihara) of Ceylon. Six
gold boxes containing the precious relics were placed in this chapter monastery. Each box
was enclosed in one of silver, the latter in one adorned with precious stones; and so on,
until eight boxes were placed one within the other. There were also arrayed 550 statues,
representing Buddha in 550 preceding existences . . . and the statues of the eighty great
disciples. . . . There were also arranged 500 lamps of gold and 500 lamps of silver, filled
with the most fragrant oil, with wicks made of the richest cloth" (Bigandet, ibid., Vol 2.,
pp. 97-8).
9. The disciples of the Master
1 
Douglas M. Burns, The Ahjahns (Meditation Teachers) of Northeast Thailand
(Bangkok: Thaikasem Press, 1970). This document is a 19-page guide.
2 Sunno Bhikkhu, A Brief Guide to Meditation Temples of Thailand, World Federation
of Buddhists Book Series No. 44 (Bangkok: Chuang Printing Press, 1978).
3 Acharn Fun died in 1978.
4 Acharn Sing Tong is more accurately a disciple of Acharn Maha Boowa.
5 Luang Pu Waen is exceptional in establishing his hermitage in the North; he is,
however, Northeastern in origin.
6 From Max Weber, Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, trans, and ed. H. H. Gerth and C.
Wright Mills (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1948), p. 358.
7 It is, however, necessary to record that something of a cult has developed around
Acharn Mun's relics, medallions bearing his likeness have been made since his death and
distributed to people, and a memorial exhibit of his robes and almsbowl have been
installed at Wat Suthawat in Sakon Nakhon (Charles F Keyes, "Death of Two Buddhist
Saints in Thailand," Journal of the American Academy of Religion, Thematic Studies, Vol.
48, Nos. 3 and 4, p. 167).
8 
Jack Kornfield, Living Buddhist Masters (Santa Cruz, Calif.: Unity Press, 1977), is
confirmed by Burns, The Ahjahns, who remarks that Cha "is the only disciple of Ahjahn
Mahn I know who is of the Mahanikaya sect."
366


--- Page 379 ---
Notes to pp. 136-49
9 The numbers could have been more accurately reported by Burns: Let us suppose that
the higher totals relate to the Vassa season and the lower to the period afterward.
10 Kornfield, Living Buddhist Masters.
11 As usual, the nuns' accommodation is more crowded; they eat their meals after the
monks have finished.
12 We may note that Acharn Cha continues with the Mahanikai sect's emphasis on
morning and evening chanting.
13 Burns, The Ahjahns, reports that a decade earlier (in 1969) Acharn Cha had 8
branch monasteries. In December 1978 an official of the World Fellowship of Buddhists
in Bangkok told me that Acharn Cha was the biggest attraction among all the present-day
forest teachers and that he had established some 14 branch hermitages. Most recently, in
1981 Chaokhun Rajavaramuni, the scholar-monk, confirmed this reputation enjoyed by
Acharn Cha.
14 We shall later comment on the structural features of such networks.
15 Burns, The Ahjahns, gives the number of inmates as about 7 in 1970, while Sunno
Bhikkhu, A Brief Guide, gives the number as around 20 when he visited it in 1978. The
latter's estimates tend to be inflated.
16 Burns, The Ahjahns.
17 For example, World Federation of Buddhists Review, Vol. 15, Nos. 3, 4, 1978.
18 Kornfield, Living Buddhist Masters, Ch. 9.
10. The biographer as exemplary forest-monk, meditator, and teacher
1 Jack Kornfield, Living Buddhist Masters (Santa Cruz, Calif.: Unity Press, 1977).
2 Like most other forest hermitages, Pa Ban Tat is a "residence" (samnak) and has no
consecrated hot where ordination of monks and novices can take place. The closest
Thammayut sect wat where ordination can take place is in the town of Udon.
3 One informant gave as an example the seeing of a spot of light during meditation; the
meditator must not follow the light but must bring it inside himself. A teacher instructs the
pupil how to recognize such nimitta - internal and external - and how to control them.
4 This is of course in line with the Vinaya prescription, which makes it a pdrdjika
offense to falsely boast about one's supranormal powers (iddhi).
5 These were Acharn Singtong and Luang Phau Bua (who is illiterate and was for a
while associated with Maha Boowa).
6 As I have stated before, the path of the bhikkhu is conventionally divided into three
parts: pariyatti (study), patipatti (practice), and pativedha (realization, enlightenment).
The three parts relate to a monk's career, culminating in enlightenment. In Thailand during
the course of conversation, monks frequently refer to the first two when speaking of what a
monk concentrates upon. "Study" is usually associated with the vocation of books
(ganthadhura) and is said to be the preoccupation of most monks and novices attending
monastic schools. "Practice" comes to be associated with meditation (vipassanddhura)
and is associated with a minority who devote themselves to this difficult discipline.
7 A series of short essays titled "Manners of Practice of the Dhutanga Kammatthana
Bhikkhus in the Lineage of the Late Venerable Meditation-Master, Phra Acharn Mun
Bhuridatto" are printed in World Federation of Buddhists Review: Vesakha number, Vol.
15, No. 3, May - June 1978, supplement pp. 1-13; and Sangha number, Vol. 15, No. 4,
367


--- Page 380 ---
Notes to pp. 149-58
July-Aug. 1978, pp. 17-33. These essays report and recall the teachings of Acharn Mun,
though they do not reproduce the mystical and "tantric" episodes in the biography of the
Master.
8 
Kornfield, Living Buddhist Masters, pp. 164-83, reports Maha Boowa's views under
the caption ' 'Wisdom Develops Samadhi."
9 
For a more extended discussion of monastic networks in Christian Europe and
Thailand, see my World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity
in Thailand against a Historical Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1976), pp. 360-4.
10 Kornfield, Living Buddhist Masters.
11. Sectarianism and the sponsorship of meditation
1 The foundation is a financial institution in its own right in which member monasteries
invest their monies and earn interest. The fund is administered by a committee of laymen
and monks, whose chairman is the abbot of Wat Bovonniwet. The lay members manage
the funds' financial operations, the "manager" of the fund being a layman.
2 Rama III thus conferred the title of' 'deputy king'' (uparat) on his royal brother, whom
he had preceded to the throne and whose claims to succeed him were tacitly recognized.
3 Prince Chulalongkorn, ordained as novice in 1866, resided in the wat for 6 months.
But when he was ordained monk for 15 days just before his coronation, he resided in
a small chapel within the royal palace. However, Pavares, the abbot of Wat Bovonniwet,
presided over the ordination ceremony as his upajjhdya (preceptor).
4 I must take the opportunity of correcting a mistake I made in my World Conqueror and
World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand against a Historical
Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976), in which on p. 215 I said
that all the sons of King Mongkut were ordained at Wat Bovonniwet. Actually, all
ordinations of princes take place in the royal chapel, Wat Phra Kaeo, and the princes and
monarchs I have mentioned here resided afterward at Wat Bovonniwet. According to the
Thai-language newspaper Matichon (Nov. 6, 1978), four princely sons of Mongkut and four
sons of King Chulalongkorn, all oiCaofa or Phraongcao status, resided at Wat Bovonniwet
as ordained princes.
5 The present crown prince's ordination ceremony was performed at the royal chapel,
Wat Phra Kaeo, with monks from both sects presiding. The officiating monk of upajjhdya
status was the supreme patriarch, who happened at that time to be of the Mahanikai sect;
two achdriyas were chosen from the two sects.
But since the crown prince was later to reside at Wat Bovonniwet as a Thammayut
monk, a second ordination had to be performed. For, according to the sect's rules,
established by Mongkut himself, a valid ordination can be conducted only by Thammayut
monks according to a set procedure. So the crown prince underwent a second ordination
ceremony at Wat Bovonniwet after his official ceremony, before taking up his residence.
This of course was resented by the Mahanikai monks.
6 Thus the present king and crown prince each spent the first night in Tamnak Panya.
7 
I have already referred to his essays in World Federation of Buddhists Review. I have
also earlier stated in Chapter 6 the facts concerning the publication and free distribution of
the biography of Acharn Mun.
368


--- Page 381 ---
Notes to pp. 159-65
8 The World Federation of Buddhists Center in 1978 sponsored meditation classes both
in its own building and at Wat Bovonniwet. It was reported to me that about 20-30
regulars attended the classes held at the center. Both class instructors were monks.
9 See my World Conqueror and World Renouncer, Ch. 14.
10 Relevant sources are D. K. Wyatt, The Politics of Reform in Thailand: Education in
the Reign of King Chulalongkorn (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1969); A. L.
Moffat, Mongkut and the King ofSiam (Ithaca, N.Y: Cornell University Press, 1961); R.
Lingat, "La vie religieuse du Roi Mongkut," Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 20, pp.
129-48; C. J. Reynolds "The Buddhist Monkhood in Nineteenth Century Thailand"
Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University 1972; A. B. Griswold, "King Mongkut in Perspective,"
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 45, 1957, pp. 1-41; and V Thompson, Thailand: The
New Siam (New York: Macmillan, 1941). They have all been cited in my World Con-
queror and World Renouncer, Chs. 10-12. Two relevant essays have been recently
published: John W Butt, "Thai Kingship and Religious Reforms 18th-19th Centuries,"
and A. T. Kirsch, "Modernizing Implications of Nineteenth Century Reforms in the Thai
Sangha," both in Bardwell Smith, ed., Religion and Legitimation of Power in Thailand,
Laos, and Burma (Chambersburg, Pa: Anima Books, 1978).
11 That Mongkut was influnced by the dhutahga practices as discussed in the Visud-
dhimagga is given an enduring affirmation at Wat Bovonniwet, at which Mongkut
presided as abbot from 1837 until he became king in 1851. The Wihan Phra Sasada
houses in one of its rooms the famous Buddha image that gives the wihan its name, and on
the walls of its other rooms are beautiful murals illustrating the 13 ascetic practices.
Mongkut sponsored these murals.
12 As I have argued elsewhere, one should not overrate Mongkut's rationalist,
demythologizing stance, for as an innovator he initiated a new orthodoxy that was
allegedly grounded in the past. Mongkut introduced certain new Buddhist festivals, wrote
new paritta chants, and when he was king interpolated new Buddhist sequences into the
traditional "Brahmanical" royal rites. Kingship with its trappings, including the cosmic
rites magnifying it, were never as splendid in Thailand as in the nineteenth century.
Incidentally, the very epoch of Buddhist revival was also one in which elaborate tonsure
ceremonies were held during the reigns of King Chulalongkorn and King Mongkut before
him; these ceremonies were loaded with traditional cosmological and "Brahmanical"
symbolism.
13 The monk in question is Caokhun Rajavinayabara, who enjoys the unique privilege
of being the deputy abbot of Wat Cedi Luang in Chiengmai as well as of the prestigious
Wat Bovonniwet in Bangkok. See C. E Keyes, "Buddhism in a Secular City," in Viasakha
Puja (Bangkok: Buddhist Association of Thailand, 1976), pp. 64-5; and David L.
Gosling, "Redefining the Sangha's Role in Northern Thailand: An Investigation of
Monastic Careers of Five Chiang Mai Wats," to be published in the Southeastern Journal
of Social Science.
14 John P Ferguson and Shalardchai Ramitanondh, "Monks and Hierarchy in Northern
Thailand," Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 64, pt. 1, pp. 138-40.
15 Kirsch, "Modernizing Implications," p. 52.
16 Wat Samorai, where Mongkut once resided, became part of the Thammayut. Others
newly founded were Wat Paramanivasa, Vijaynati, Puppharama, and Khruavan - the first
by Mongkut and the others by members of the nobility who held high official positions.
369


--- Page 382 ---
Notes to pp. 165-7
17 In his first years as king, Mongkut founded four new Thammayut monasteries: Wat
Somanassa (1853), Padumavana (1857), Rajpratistha (1864), and Makutaksatriya. The
next king, Chulalongkorn, in turn founded two more Thammayut monasteries at the
beginning of his reign, namely Rajapavitra (1870) and Devacireinda (1878).
18 Once upon the throne, Mongkut chose as his first patriarch his uncle, Prince
Pramunuchit, the abbot of Wat Chetuphon and of the Mahanikai sect, as the supreme
patriarch. Pramunuchit died after two years of service, and King Mongkut appointed no
other for the rest of his reign.
King Chulalongkorn made Prince Pavaret (abbot of Wat Bovonniwet and head of the
Thammayut sect) head of the sahgha without the full status of supreme patriarch in 1874,
and gave him the full title only in 1891. On Pavaret's death the next year, another
Thammayut monk, Phra Ariyawongsakhatayan, was appointed patriarch. When he died in
1900, once again King Chulalongkorn kept the position vacant, presumably because the
candidate who would be most acceptable, Prince Wachirayan, was too junior to be
appointed yet. See Craig Reynolds, "The Buddhist Monkhood in Nineteenth-Century
Thailand," Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University, 1972, for a detailed discussion concerning
the appointments to the patriarchship from 1851-93.
19 The sahgha by the act of 1902 was divided into four parts, three of which were the
geographical divisions of the Mahanikai sect (north, south, and central regions), and the
fourth the Thammayut sect.
20 In 1937, there were only 272 Thammayut monasteries in the country with about
3,000 monks; in 1959 the numbers were 819 monasteries and 9,892 monks; in 1966,
1,023 monasteries and 8,807 monks; in 1969, 1,094 monasteries and 9,703 monks.
By comparison, in 1966 there were 23,000 monasteries and about 166,000 monks,
and in 1969 24,000 wat and 180,000 monks, of Mahanikai affiliation. (These figures
apply to residents during the rains retreat seasons.) Though throughout the years the rate
of increase of Thammayut wat and monks is greater than that of their Mahanikai
counterparts, the Thammayut still remains a distinct minority. For example, in 1969 there
were 24 times more temples and 18 times more monks belonging to the Mahanikai.
21 Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer, pp. 257-61.
22 Let me reproduce here a statement by an informant made in 1978, which can be
added to the "versions" of this clerical struggle I have already recorded in my World
Conqueror and World Renouncer. The present informant is an ex-Thammayut monk who
is now a university teacher, and he gives us some insights into the manner in which monks
and rulers strike up a symbiotic relationship:
"In the early years of the sectarian rivalry when the 1941 Act was in force, Phra
Phimolatham of Wat Mahathat seemed to be winning. He and the abbot of Wat Makut first
competed for the position in the Interior Ministry (Pokkhraung) which was in charge of
monastic education and propagation of the Dhamma. Phra Phimolatham got the post,
because he enjoyed the favors of the then Prime Minister, Phibunsongkhram. When
Phibunsongkhram emerged unscathed from the coup d'etat attempted by the Navy in
1951, a number of Mahanikai monks sent him a letter expressing their 'gladness.' The
Thammayut monks did not participate in this show of loyalty and were critical of
Mahanikai's 'political' activity. Under Phibunsongkhram the Mahanikai was in favor and
won more of the ecclesiastical cabinet posts.
"But in the subsequent regime of Prime Minister Sarit, the Thammayut engaged in more
370


--- Page 383 ---
Notes to pp. 167-75
successful politics. They were in favor with Sarit, who sacked Phimolatham, and who was
the patron of the abbot of Wat Makut. Colonel Pin Mutukan, ex-Thammayut monk,
Director General of the Religious Affairs Department, was the willing bureaucratic agent
through whom Sarit effected the so-called reform of the sahgha. Subsequently, Sarit
became in the fifties the special patron of two Thammayut wat - Wat Rajabopit and Wat
Rajapradit. The abbot of the latter (Caokhun Mettathammarot) was a famous astrologer,
and Sarit consulted him often, and used his wife's mother as his emissary. Sarit's timing of
the coup d'etat of 1957, and of his takeover in 1959, was done in consultation with the
abbot. The same abbot has been consulted on several occasions by the king and queen,
who sent their horoscopes through palace emissaries for monthly readings. In fact, the
auspicious times for the crown prince's monthly engagement and wedding ceremonies
were 'officially' computed by this abbot.
" Sarit's successor as Prime Minister, Thanom Kittikachorn, had his own favorite astrolo-
ger elsewhere. But the abbot-astrologer of Wat Rajapradit has an influential clientele that
includes Army and Navy top brass, merchants, and bureaucrats."
23 Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer, pp. 260-1.
12. The Mahdnikdi sect's propagation of lay meditation
1 As reported by the Department of Religious Affairs, Annual Report (Bangkok: Depart-
ment of Religious Affairs, 1969).
2 See Sunno Bhikkhu, A Brief Guide to Meditation Temples of Thailand (Bangkok:
Chiang Printing Press, 1978), for accounts of the meditation program at Wat Paknam and
Wat Pleng.
3 The details regarding the institution are given in my World Conqueror and World
Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976), pp. 464-72.
4 There were also said to be various other wat in the Northeast in Chainat, Chaiyaphum,
and elsewhere, which continued the old program.
5 In that year, eight new monks had been ordained before the rains retreat and two had
already disrobed by this date.
6 In the countries of Theravada Buddhism, there is no order of nuns (bhikkhuni) left, the
order having died out in Sri Lanka many centuries ago. As one can see, mde chi are pious
women who have become reclusive and taken shelter in the wat, tending to monks' needs
and devoting themselves to pious activities.
7 
Sometimes women may temporarily assume white clothes in fulfillment of a vow taken
before the Buddha (i.e., a Buddha statue), usually concerning the cure of an illness or
relief of a problem. Women in this condition may temporarily join the mde chi population
of a wat. In any case, mde chi come and go freely and visit different wat. Their special
status allows them a mobility that is not as easily available to ordinary women.
8 
See Chapter 20 for details of this monk who many Northern Thai view as having
reached arahant status.
9 When asked how the monks came to be associated with rockets (bdilkfai) and balloons
(kom loilwdo) in North Thailand, he gave me an interesting Buddhist interpretation of the
symbolism. Rockets have a hidden meaning: The rocket is made up of ingredients like
gunpowder, saltpeter, etc., and if it lacks one it cannot ascend; in the same way, the human
371


--- Page 384 ---
Notes to p. 175
body must engage in the three practices of ddna, slla, and bhdvand if it is to achieve
liberation.
There are eight conditions of the world (loka dhamma) that affect our lives: gain and loss of
gain, honor and loss of honor, praise and blame, happiness and suffering. A human being
is like a balloon. If he is praised for his conduct, he is elevated and goes up high like an
inflated balloon; but if he is not worthy of honor and praise, he is deflated and falls down.
The ascent and descent of balloons is like the arising and dissolution of mental formations
and illustrates the conditioned nature of all phenomena.
10 As usual, there are exceptions to general patterns and tendencies. That the drama
(hermitage) tradition is not foreign to the movement initiated by Phra Phimolatham is
illustrated by Wat Phrabattakpha, situated in Pasang, in Lamphun Province. It is a famous
monastery and a place of pilgrimage.
This large and well-maintained monastery is situated at the edge of a small village and
has the layout and architectural patterns associated with a hermitage, principally individ-
ual kuti dwellings dispersed among the trees and orchards. However, this monastery has -
unlike the hermitages of the dhutanga tradition but like other established wat - numerous
novices together with monks and has concentrated on study (pariyatti) just as much as on
meditation (patipatti).
In October 1971, when I visited this wat, there were 23 monks (11 "temporary"
monks ordained before lent had already left), 60 novices, 2 nuns, and 5 temple boys.
Monks and novices have to declare their interest either in "study" or in "practice" and
thereafter concentrate on one or the other. The scholars engage in Pali studies and sit the
ecclesiastical prayok examinations. I was told that practically all the novices are engaged
in "study" rather than meditation and that only 10 of the 23 monks are engaged in the
path of meditation. And just like Wat Mueang Man, here too a number of monks from
other wat have come to practice meditation for variable periods of time.
The principal meditation teacher was the abbot, Phrakhru Phrommawaksangwaun, 74
years of age, whose brother, also a monk, founded another well-known meditation center
at Wat Naubauluang in Sanpataung District. Both came to be associated with the Phra
Phimolatham movement.
Phrakhru Phrommawak was ordained a novice as a boy, subsequently as a monk in a wat
in Pasang District and, after two lents, decided to become a dhutahga monk. He walked
on foot in the forest tradition and even went to Burma. It was much later that he was enrolled
into Phra Phimolatham's program. He made a trip to Bangkok and stayed at Wat Mahathat
for three months. Thus, in this meditation teacher's case, we have an old man who was
already steeped in the Old Northeastern and Northern dhutahga tradition and later was
incorporated into the Wat Mahathat dissemination program. He has trained two assistants,
who help him in teaching the pupils.
Wat Buddhabattakpha has, like the usual Mahanikai sect's commoner wat (wat rat), a
committee to administer its affairs. A fund (miinnithi), whose money has been contributed
by lay donors, is operated by the abbot with the assistance of a lay accountant. A principal
use of this money is the running of a kitchen to feed the monks and novices. Each day, five
monks and five novices go on an almsround to the village, which is quite far and cannot
donate sufficient food. The village households, in traditional Northern fashion, are
divided into groups, each being responsible for the offerings on a day according to a
system of rotation.
372


--- Page 385 ---
Notes to pp. 177-86
11 S. J. Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer, A Study of Buddhism and
Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1970), Chs. 14 and 15.
12 Phra Sobhuna Dhammasudhi published a book, Insight Meditation (London: n.p.,
1965). He subsequently left the sahgha.
13 The Pali grades in the ecclesiastical examinations extend from prayok 3 to 9.
14 This cult is described in my essay, "The Cosmological and Performative Significance
of a Thai Cult of Healing through Meditation," Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 1,
1977, Pp. 97-132.
15 It is significant that this informant invokes hierarchical canons and considers the use
of meditation for "practical" uses to be the way of a "lower" path. He is also, however,
crudely, aware of the psychosomatic possibilities of samddhi meditation.
13. The center-periphery dialectic: the Mahdthdt and Bovonniwet sponsorship
of meditation compared
1 S. J. Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and
Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1976), Ch. 18; and Somboon Suksamran, Political Buddhism in Southeast Asia:
The Role of Modernization in Thailand (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1976).
2 Recent work by David Gosling in Northern Thailand has shown that while the
Thammathut movement promoted from Bangkok has declined, there is a vigorous effort
being launched by the provincial monks. An essay by Gosling is in press, and provides the
latest information on that subject: its title is "Redefining the Sangha's Role in Northern
Thailand" and it will appear in the Southeast Asian Journal of Social Science.
3 See World Conqueror and World Renouncer, pp. 441-50.
4 Somboon Suksamran, Political Buddhism, argues that the presupposition that the
monks are the best agents for national development and integration, with consequent
political modernization, seems unjustified. On the contrary, the use of Buddhism and the
sahgha to serve political ends may in fact bring undesirable consequences for the sahgha's
position and for Buddhism.
5 I discovered in 1978 that since 1976 Mahaculalongkaun and Mahamakut universities'
joint special Dhamma patana project to train provincial monks for missionary work had
been dropped for lack of financial support. However, graduates from the universities were
still being sent to the provinces as Dhamma teachers and "moral supervisors." The
Annual Report of the Religious Affairs Department for 1977 says that 50 such supervisors
were appointed in the previous year and about $13,000 spent on them. It also reports the
contemplation of other projects such as "The Program for Teaching Villages," which
entails sending the monks into villages to start Sunday schools, inculcate in villagers
"love of Nation, Religion, and King," loyalty to a "democratic government with the King
as head," and an "identification with Thai Culture," etc. Twenty "units" of monks
were reported as engaged in 22 provinces in this work in the previous year, and the work
was planned with the cooperation of provincial ecclesiastical governors and their assistants.
6 A perceptive government official remarked that this problem of succession to the
headship was further compounded by the poor quality of the staff of the religious affairs
department. Most of the staff are ex-monks who, though recruited as civil servants, are
373


--- Page 386 ---
Notes to pp. 187-96
considered inferior to the regular civil servants and cannot transfer to other branches and
departments of the national civil service. Moreover, the department is considered inferior
by other member departments of the Ministry of Education. On the recruitment to the
Department of Religious Affairs, see my World Conqueror and World Renouncer, pp.
303-8.
7 
On the student revolt of 1973, see Frank Reynolds, "Legitimation and Rebellion:
Thailand's Civil Religion and the Student Uprising of October, 1973," in Bardwell
Smith, ed., Religion and Legitimation of Power in Thailand, Laos, and Burma (Chambers-
burg, Pa.: Anima Books, 1978); and Narong Sinsawadi, Thailand: Student Activism and
Political Change (Bangkok: Allied Printers, 1974). Other sources are cited in notes
below.
8 Throughout 1974, villagers, particularly in North Thailand in the Chiengmai region,
expressed their agrarian and political grievances, and many thousands came in procession
to protest at the capital. In the same year was formed the Peasant Federation, which
petitioned the government for the implementation of the Land Rent Control Act, for the
formulation of land-reform legislation, for the release of villagers arrested for trespassing
on government land, for the issuance of title deeds to squatters on forest-reserve land, etc.
The federation went underground after a series of assassinations of its leaders. I am
indebted to Katherine A. Bowie for this information.
9 This secular university should not be confused with Mahaculalongkaun, which is the
monks' university.
10 Halls (said) in the wat are rented to keep the corpse for the three or seven days during
which chanting is done before cremation or before storing the corpse (for which a fee is
charged) for later cremation. Another fee is charged for the actual use of the crematorium
to burn the corpse. Many Bangkok wat have an organization of lay helpers to provide funer-
ary services, which are paid for and range from providing the coffin, flowers, and wreaths
to collecting and storing the ashes. The long cremation rites are punctuated by numerous
chantings by monks who are on each occasion given packets of personal gifts.
11 A case cited by informants is that of Somdet Mahawirong of Wat Si Mahathat, who
came from Ubon Province, and who was not confirmed in the position of Sanghardja,
although he was twice called to be acting head.
12 See C. E Keyes, "Political Crisis and Militant Buddhism in Contemporary Thailand,"
in Smith, ed., Religion and Legitimation of Power, pp. 147-64. Kittivuddho founded
Cittabhavana College to train novices and monks to play an active role in propagating the
Dhamma. His activist Buddhism took after the 1973 student insurrection a strong
anticommunist stance, and he supported an ultraright nationalist movement called
Nawaphon. He also accused the young monks of being communists. In due course,
Kittivuddho, previously acclaimed by some as a saint (arahant), was accused of behavior
improper for a monk, and since then his reputation has suffered.
14. The cult of images and amulets
1 A. B. Griswold, "What Is a Buddha Image?" Thai Culture, New Series, Fine Arts
Department, Bangkok, No. 19, B. E. 251 I (1968), p. 3.
2 There is a range of other objects and vehicles that in principle are similar to amulets
with regard to the power attributed to them. Square pieces of white cloth bearing sacred
374


--- Page 387 ---
Notes to pp. 200-4
yantra [designs that are composed of animal or human representations, geometrical
shapes, and sacred letters usually in khdum (khmer) language] are a case in point. In Thai,
they are called phd yan (cloth with yantra designs). Another related variant are body tattoo
designs. In this discussion, I shall leave these phd yan and tattoo designs out of account.
3 My research assistant invoked the example of the invisible effect of waves of electric
current to help me understand.
4 I am not sure that this is an invariant rule. There are other famous lay personages
whose images are to be seen in amulets. A good example is Komluang Chumphon, the
patron saint of the navy. I am uncertain whether monks did the pluk sek for his amulets.
5 A famous occasion, when silver medallions bearing the images of the king and queen
and of royal insignia were sacralized by a large number of famous and titled Bangkok
monks, and distributed to the public, was the return of the king and queen home after
traveling abroad on a goodwill mission. It was the then-prime minister, Sarit, a skilled
propagandist of the theme that kingship was indissolubly linked with Buddhism, national
consciousness, and anticommunism, who sponsored the making of the medallions. The
medallions were not "sold" so much as "exchanged" for donations of money, and the
sum collected was then presented to the king as a fund that he could use to sponsor a
charitable or benevolent activity (sadet phrardtcha kusori). This is a characteristic manner
in which money is collected today from the public in the name of or under the sponsorship
of royalty.
6 See Andre Bareau, "The Superhuman Personality of the Buddha and Its Symbolism
in the Mahaparinirvanasutra of the Dharmagupta," in J. M. Kitagawa and C. H. Long,
eds., Myth and Symbols (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971).
7 The Questions of King Milinda, trans, from the Pali by T. W Rhys Davids, 2 parts
(New York: Dover, 1963), Part 1, pp. 144-54.
8 Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, "The Origin of the Buddha Image," Art Bulletin,
College Art Association of America, Vol. 9, No. 4, 1927, pp. 287-329.
9 
See Camille Notton, trans., P'ra Buddha Sihinga (Bangkok: Bangkok Times Press,
1933).
10 Griswold, "What Is a Buddha Image?" p. 14.
11 Much more amplification than is provided by the simpleminded proposition that lay
Buddhists "cognitively" know the Buddha is extinct, but "affectively" or "psycho-
logically" desire and feel his presence. This dichotomy is arbitrarily imposed and
theoretically untenable, as Gregory Bateson has demonstrated [see J. R. Ruesch and G.
Bateson, Communication (New York: Norton, 1968)], and is of little help in understanding
the orientations of Buddhists toward relics and images. Richard E Gombrich [Precept and
Practice (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), p. 105] employs this dichotomy; he borrowed it
from G. Obeyesekere, "The Buddhist Pantheon in Ceylon and Its Extensions," in
Manning Nash, ed., Anthropological Studies in Theravada Buddhism (New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Southeast Asia Studies, 1966), pp. 1-26.
12 The Vinayapitaka (The book of discipline), 5 vols. (Sacred Books of the Buddhists,
vols. 10-14, 20) (London: Oxford University Press, 1879-83), Vol. 1, Ch. 7.
13 For details, see Ananda Coomaraswamy, Elements of Buddhist Iconography (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1935); also see his "Origin of the Buddha
Image."
14 Coomaraswamy, Elements of Buddhist Iconography, p. 18.
375


--- Page 388 ---
Notes to pp. 204-10
15 Ibid., p. 24.
16 Ibid.
17 Paul Mus, Barabudur (Hanoi: Imprimerie d'Extreme Orient, 1935).
18 See, e.g.: (1) Louis de la Vallee Poussin, "Studies in Buddhist Dogma: The Three
Bodies of a Buddha (Trikaya)," Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1906, pp. 943-77;
see also his "Notes sur les corps du Buddha," Le Museon, 1913, pp. 251-90. (2) Paul
Mus, "Buddha Pare," Bulletin de VEcole Francaise D'Extreme-Orient, Tome 28, Nos.
1-2, 1928, pp. 153-278. (3) Nagao Gadjin, "On the Theory of Buddha-Body," Eastern
Buddhist (n.s.), No. 1, 1973, pp. 25-53.
19 D. L. Snellgrove, Four Lamas of Dolpo, Tibetan Biographies (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1967), Vol. 1, p. 21. Snellgrove also describes another
conception of buddhahood oriented in space: one for each of the four directions; one from the
center; and a sixth, the Power bolt-Holder, being sometimes added to represent "the
supreme and essential unity of the more usual set of five" (ibid., p. 21).
20 See Frank Reynolds, "The Several Bodies of Buddha: Reflections on a Neglected
Aspect of Theravada Tradition," History of Religions, Vol. 16, No. 4 (The Mythic
Imagination), May 1977, pp. 374-406, for a most helpful discussion and documentation
of sources.
21 Samyutta Nikdya 3, 120; Majjhima Nikdya 3, 29.
22 
See Chapter 4.
23 Reynolds discusses the fifteenth-century Sinhalese compendium called Saddhar-
maratna-karaya, and a text associated with the "Yoga vacara clansmen" of Northern
Thailand and Laos [a tradition also possibly represented in Sri Lanka, as evidenced by
E L. Woodward, Manual of a Mystic, Being a Translation from the Pali and Sinhalese
Work Entitled The Yogavachara's Manual (London: Pali Text Society, 1916)].
15. An enumeration of historic and popular amulets
1 The primary source for this discussion is a Thai book: Thanakaun Khongsat, Kittikhun
Phra Them Phra Khandcdn (Bangkok: Suvanna Press, n.d.). There are literally dozens of
similar works that can be purchased in Bangkok and elsewhere.
2 Pdrdmi, in Pali, refers to the 10 virtues that a saint must develop on his way to
buddhahood.
3 It is noteworthy that in this Thai book (and in similar literature, as well as in ordinary
speech) the prefix Luang Phau (respected-honored-great father) is attached to the names
of statues. This same prefix is attached to the names of famous elderly monks who figure
as famous makers and/or sacralizers of amulets; it is also used to refer to certain guardian
deities. Thus in certain contexts Buddha statues, guardian deities, and monks credited
with sacred powers are brought together under one rubric.
4 This peculiar iconographic feature is alleged to be the result of King LIthai's misread-
ing of the scriptures in his attempt to glean from them the true likeness of the Buddha.
Some centuries later, another greater Buddhist revivalist and advocate of "pristine"
Buddhism - King Mongkut - is reported to have searched the Pali canon for the true
physical features of the Buddha and concluded that the Buddha had no hair. The Phra Sam
Buddha Banni, now to be found on the front altar of the chapel royal, was cast in
accordance with this reading.
376


--- Page 389 ---
Notes to pp. 210-14
For us, perhaps, the interesting point is that just as the Buddhists periodically search for
the most correct form of the Pali canon, so are they motivated to produce images in the
true likeness of the historical Buddha. Both searches are motivated by the underlying
belief that the most authentic likeness is the "purest" and the most efficacious, for
Theravada Buddhism's true source and fountainhead of religion is the Buddha himself. In
this the Buddhists present a striking contrast to the Hindus, whose myths and legends of
origin and creation are attributed to acts of divinities. The Hindu theory of a cosmos of
divine origin cannot logically generate a search for the true facts relating to the creator as a
historical personage.
5 Their names were Ba In, Ba Phrom, Ba Phitsanu, Ba Ratchasang, and Ba Ratchakuson.
"Ba" means teacher, as in "khru ba." See Chapter 20 for a discussion of khruba as a type
of holy man.
6 Quoted from Wat Bovoranives Vihara (Bangkok: Siva Phorn, 1972), pp. 27-8, the
"official" history of the wat published in English.
7 
See A. B. Griswold, Towards a History of Sukhodaya Art (Bangkok: Fine Arts
Department, 1967), for a discussion of this king's contributions.
8 
Upardt is variously translated as "deputy king," "second king," "viceroy," etc.
This office is part of the dual arrangement characteristic of the traditional polity, which
had queens of the right and left, minister of the north and minister of the south, front
palace and back palace, etc.
9 The former presiding image, now sitting at the back of Buddha Jinaslha, is also a
famous image called Luang Phau To (the Great Royal Father). It is large and was brought
to Bangkok from Phetchaburi Province (south of Bangkok), where it had been the principal
image of Wat Sra Tapan. It too was floated down to Bangkok, but in several small sections
on account of its size.
10 This flanking of Buddha Jinaslha by three princely abbots is paralleled by the flanking
of the Emerald Buddha, the palladium of the country, by statues of the first two kings of
the Cakkri dynasty represented as bodhisattva figures.
11 See Charnvit Kasetsiri, The Rise of Ayudhya (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1976), for a trenchant statement of this view. In any case, from my point of view, such
acts are magnificent illustrations of the appropriation of past glories by succeeding kings.
12 This precedent was followed again by the present king and queen when they returned
from a similar trip abroad. See Chapter 14.
13 Such as Somdet Phra Buddhaghosacarya (Maum Ratchawong Caroen, an aristocrat)
of Wat Rakhang of Bangkok, Phrakhru Wimon Kunakaun (Suk) of Wat Pakklong-
makkamtao, and Phrakhru Niwattammakhan (Luang Phau Doem) of Wat Nong Po.
14 S. J. Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and
Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1976), pp. 97-8.
15 Rama III, who ruled in the first half of the nineteenth century, introduced a third royal
outfit for the dry season, to be in conformity with the idea of three seasons. Because this
outfit is royal as opposed to monastic, the basic comparison still holds. On the Sinhalese
tooth relic's symbolism and powers, see H. L. Seneviratne, whose imaginative and
authoritative work [Rituals of the Kandyan State (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1978)] surveys previous writings on the relic, including Hocart's, and carries the story to
modern times.
16 The crowned Buddha in Mahayana conception is the Buddha-Cakravartin, about
377


--- Page 390 ---
Notes to pp. 214-18
whom Mus has written, especially with regard to the cult of Bodhgaya (see Paul Mus, "Le
Buddha pare," Bulletin de VEcole Francaise Extreme-Orient, Vol. 28, 1928, pp.
153-278). In a sense, then, the Emerald Buddha jewel itself oscillated in its Buddha
manifestations as renouncer and as cakkavatti. I shall refer in this chapter to King Tilok of
Chiengmai's alleged association with the Bodhgaya tradition.
The oscillation in the existence of the Emerald Buddha between renunciation and
rulership is further attested by the fact that the Vessantara Jdtaka, called in Thailand the
Mahdchdt, the great story now elaborated into 13 chapters, is recited at the end of the
rains retreat, actually at the time of changing the Emerald Buddha's clothes from a monk's
garb to the full regalia of kingship. See G. E. Gerini, The Thet Maha Chat Ceremony, 2d
ed. (orig. pub. 1892) (Bangkok: Siam Society, 1976).
17 See my Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in Northeast Thailand (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1970), Ch. 10; also see Frank Reynolds, "The Holy Emerald
Jewel," in Bardwell L. Smith, ed., Religion and Legitimation of Power in Thailand, Laos,
and Burma (Chambersburg, Pa.: Anima Books, 1978), p. 184.
18 See N. A. Jayawickrama, The Sheaf of Garlands of the Epochs of the Conqueror,
Being a Translation of Jindkalamdlipakaranam of the Ratanapanna Thera of Thailand
(London: Pali Text Society, 1968).
19 See Camille Notton, trans., The Chronicle of the Emerald Buddha (Bangkok:
Bangkok Times Press, 1933). I shall hereafter for convenience call this the Amarakata.
20 Robert Lingat's "Le Culte du Bouddha d'Emeraude," Journal of the Siam Society,
Vol. 27, No. 1, 1934, pp. 9-38, has long been a classic on the sources and "history" of
the image. Reynolds, "Holy Emerald Jewel," published recently, is the most comprehen-
sive extant essay on sources and on the symbolism associated with the image.
21 An account of the Phra Sihinga statue will follow this.
22 The Jinakdlamdli describes the emerald jewel as lying "within the same walled
enclosure where the treasured jewel of the luminant gem is, amidst over 5,000 gems of the
sevenfold varieties . . . " (Jayawickrama, Sheaf of Garlands, p. 141).
23 The gem in question is, of course, one of the 7 treasures of the cakkavatti as
described in the famous Pali canonical Mahdsudassana Sutta.
24 In this context, it is relevant to note that King Asoka was called in this same sense a
bala cakravartirdja in the Divydvaddna. The notion of lesser manifestations or incarna-
tions of a higher celestial enduring entity is, as we have noted before, with respect to the
many bodies of the Buddha, a quintessential Mahayana formulation. It is this logic that
categorizes cakkavatti into four ranked types according to the material of their wheel (gold,
silver, copper, iron), the number of the continents they rule over, and their manner of
conquest. Asoka is rated as belonging to the last type. [I owe this reference to Prof. John
Strong, whose source is L. de la Vallee Poussin, trans., LAbhidharmakoga de Vasubandhu
6 vols. (Paris: P Guethner, 1923-31), Vol. 3, pp. 197-202.] See also Thomas Watters,
On Yuan Chwang's Travels in India 629-645 A.D. (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1904):
Hiuen Tsiang reports the same fourfold classification of the wheel.
25 These other associations are documented and developed in Reynolds, "Holy Emer-
ald Jewel," pp. 181-8.
26 According to Buddhist tradition, the Buddha is alleged to have prophesied that the
religion would last for 5,000 years.
27 There is evidence of a holy jewel being venerated in Angkor as part of the devardja
378


--- Page 391 ---
Notes to pp. 218-23
cult. Lingat, "Culte," is of the view that the Angkor jewel of King Suryavarman's time in
the early eleventh century is the same as the Emerald Buddha, which was in later times
fashioned from the jewel. Reynolds, "Holy Emerald Jewel," is skeptical of this thesis; but
he says that in any case the Emerald Buddha cult took the Angkor cult as its model and
incorporated similar ideas of sacredness, guardianship, and divine kingship.
It would take us too far afield if we discussed here the character of the devardja cult in
Angkor. Some recent essays have questioned former views of "divine kingship" as
practiced in Angkor. Hermann Kulke (Devaraja Cult, Data Paper No. 108, Southeast Asia
Program, Cornell University, 1978) has argued from inscriptional evidence that it was the
God Siva, before whom the king was consecrated, who was the god king, and the
palladium of the kingdom was the movable image of the linga consecrated as devardja.
Again, I. W Mabbett ("Devaraja," Journal of Southeast Asian History, Vol. 10, No. 2,
1969, pp. 202-23) argues that the devardja cult in its earlier form was a cult for installing
the god, who then moved with the king, giving legitimacy for his rule via the rituals
performed by a Brahmanical priesthood.
28 Chiengmai and other Lanna kingdoms, as I have stated before (Chapter 5), were
chiefly influenced by the Mon-Lava and Thai traditions. Sinhala forest-monk influences
were transmitted via Sokhodaya and Ayudhya. Burmese influences became important after
the conquest in 1578. See Donald K. Swearer and Sommai Premchit, "The Relationship
between the Religious and Political Orders in Northern Thailand," in Bardwell Smith,
ed., Religion and Legitimation of Power in Thailand, Laos, and Burma (Chambersburg,
Pa.: Anima Books, 1978). Ratanapafina is of course writing in the sixteenth century.
29 In fact, the Amarakata concludes by saying that "three images of the omniscient
Lord are at the present time to be found" at Vientiane, the third being the historic
Laotian image P'ra Bang. It is interesting that although the P'ra Bang was also brought to
Bangkok by Rama I, it was sent back to its Laotian home on account of the antipathy
existing between it and the Emerald Buddha.
30 It is the same personage, Luang Phau To, who is today a central source of sacred
power in a healing cult centered at Samnak Pu Sawan ("the center of heavenly
grandfathers"). The cult center is at Thonburi, on the outskirts of the capital.
31 Wat Bovoranives (Bangkok: Siva Phorn, 1972).
32 See Richard A. O'Connor, "Urbanism and Religion: Community, Hierarchy and
Sanctity in Urban Thai Buddhist Temples," Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell University, 1978,
for a discussion of the events by which the capital became the predominant locus of
sanctity. O'Connor provides information on the differentiation between monasteries of the
center (nai mueng) and monasteries outside the city {nok mueng).
33 Wat In's concentration on the teaching and practice of meditation extends at least to
the reign of Rama I, when a meditation master, Caokhun Aranyik, served as its abbot.
(While daokhun suggests an ecclesiastical title, aranyik indicates his forest-dweller
affiliation.) In the reign of Rama II, a resident monk, Phra Acharn Duang of the Order of
Forest Monks, received a royal appointment as meditation teacher; he is also listed as
having received candles from the king in the next reign (ibid.). Somdet To was a
distinguished pupil of Caokhun Aranyik. Thus we see here that the forest order at the edge
of the city was recognized and incorporated into the overall sangha hierarchy, a pattern of
domestication and distance being characteristic of the order's relation with the capital.
34 In this expression, two meanings are fused. Rak means "love" and also is the name
379


--- Page 392 ---
Notes to pp. 227-44
of the black lac tree (ton rak); similarly, yom is the name of the lord of death, Phra Yom
(Yama) and is also the name of the Indian mahogany tree (ton yom). Thai ritual frequently
exploits the metaphorical and metonymical properties of homonyms.
35 See Tambiah, Buddhism and the Spirit Cults, Ch. 18, for a description of Thai
exorcism.
36 For confirmation of this observation, see Elizabeth Wray, Clare Rosenfeld, and
Dorothy Bailey, Ten Lives of the Buddha, Siamese Temple Paintings andJdtaka Tales (New
York and Tokyo: Weatherhill, 1972), pp. 135-7.
16. The "likeness" of the image to the original Buddha:
the case of the Sihhala Buddha
1 A. B. Griswold, Dated Buddha Images of Northern Siam, Artibus Asiae, Supple-
mentum 16, Basel, 1957, p. 47.
2 Ibid., p. 46.
3 See N. A. Jayawickrama, The Sheaf of Garlands of the Epochs of the Conqueror,
Being a Translation of Jindkalamdlipakaranam of the Ratanapanna Thera of Thailand
(London: Pali Text Society, 1968).
4 
See Camille Notton, trans., P'ra Buddha Sihinga (Bangkok: Bangkok Times Press,
1933).
5 
See Jayawickrama, Sheaf of Oar lands, p. 122.
6 Notton, P'ra Buddha Sihinga.
7 In all probability, the same Mahabrahma who, according to the Jinakdlamdli, also
controlled Chlangrai.
8 Jayawickrama, Sheaf of Garlands, p. 126.
9 
Ibid., p. 120.
10 The dragon (ndga), who transforms himself into an apparition of the Buddha in the
attitude of meditation, invites exegesis, which however I cannot undertake here. Note that
ndgas play in certain Buddhist legends a benign and protective role and that they are
associated with the watery elements. Further interpretive clues can be gleaned by consider-
ing in this context C. Duroiselle, "Upagutta et Mara," Bulletin de VEcole Francaise
d'Extreme-Orient, 1904, pp. 414-28. This essay deals with the famous legend of Mara
(Divydvaddna, ch. 36), the archenemy of the Buddha, who assumes the shape of the
Buddha in a similar incident. The Burmese text Lokapannati also reports the same story of
the encounter between Mara and Upagutta, the monk.
11 Jayawickrama, Sheaf of Garlands, p. 127. Siridhamma is Nagara Sri Dharmaraja,
Jayanada is Chainat, Ayojjha is Ayudhya, Vajirapakara is Kamphaengphet, Nabbisi is
Chiengmai, Jamraya is Chlangrai, and the islet is in Chiangsaen.
12 S. J. Tambiah, "The Galactic Polity: The Structure of Traditional Kingdoms in
Southeast Asia," in Anthropology and the Climate of Opinion, ed. Stanley Freed, Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 293, 1977.
17. The process of sacralizing images and amulets:
the transfer of power by monks
1 The lak mueang is not unique to Bangkok. Many of the provincial cities of Thailand
have city pillars and shrines associated with them. It is surmised that the pillar, which is
380


--- Page 393 ---
Notes to pp. 244-51
ideally, and usually, found in the center of each city's old city walls, was closely associated
with the political authority of the mueang (principality, satellite province), which in earlier
times, especially before King Chulalongkorn's centralization program in the late nine-
teenth century, enjoyed greater autonomy than do the provinces of today. The guardian
spirit associated with the pillar is believed to protect the locality or territory that consti-
tutes the mueang. Today the pillar shrine at Bangkok is considered to be the foremost in
the country. For further information on the cult, see B. J. Terwiel, "The Origins and
Meaning of the Thai 'City Pillar,'" Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 66, Pt. 2, July
1976, pp. 159-71.
2 The five are Phra Suea Mueang, Phra Song Mueang, Phra KanchaisI, Cao Phau
Phaukrong, and Cao Phau Cethakup. Their statues are placed on an altar behind the pillar,
and they are credited with power of protection, guardianship, and punishment.
3 It was called phithi pluksek nan phra Lak Mueang lae Phra Lak Mueang Camldung
(ceremony for sacralizing the medallions of the Lak Mueang deities and the miniature
Lak Mueang).
4 The deities are given strong foods, and the court brahman (rdjaguru) makes the
offerings, as he does at the Siva and Vishnu temples; the relation between "Brahmanical"
rites, spirit cults and Buddhist rites cannot be taken up here; however, it should be noted
that they form an interrelated set, with different values being attached to them in a single
religious field.
5 Aphisek, equals Sanskrit Abhiseka, the rite of consecration; phuthdphisek, equals
Sanskrit buddhdbhiseka.
6 This victory chant is an important component of paritta recitations, which confer
protection and blessing [see K. E. Wells, Thai Buddhism: Its Rites and Activities (Bangkok:
Police Printing Press, i960)].
7 It is interesting that in Bangkok the chief feature in the activation of the Buddha statue
is the transferring of vitality through chanting and meditation by monks, whereas in other
places the actual opening of the eyes is given more prominence. I shall comment on this
later in this chapter.
8 The casting of statues is done by the "lost wax" process, which has been long
followed in South and Southeast Asia. The metal poured into the mould is an alloy that
may include different proportions of gold, silver, bronze, brass, copper, lead, iron, etc.,
according to the affluence of the sponsors and donors.
9 The paritta chants are, as all students of Buddhism know, standardized, and their
recitation is believed to give protection and blessing. An exegesis of the main paritta
verses and the ritual employment of them has been given in my Buddhism and the Spirit
Cults in Northeast Thailand (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), Ch. 12.
Since the contents of these verses, and the efficacy attributed to them and to the chanting
itself as a performative utterance, have been dealt with in that book, and amplified in my
essay "The Cosmological and Performative Significance of Healing through Meditation,"
in Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, Vol. 1, 1977, pp. 97-132, I shall not deal with
these issues here.
10 Thai Buddhism, pp. 122-30. I shall reproduce Wells's spellings of Thai and Pali
words.
11 Ibid., pp. 126-9.
12 Buddha Udana Gatha.
13 The origin of this ceremony is found in India. There, when a man has purchased an
381


--- Page 394 ---
Notes to pp. 251-61
image, "it is his invariable practice to perform certain ceremonies called 'Pran Partishta'
or the endowment of animation, by which he believes that its nature is changed from
that of the mere materials of which it is formed and that it acquires not only life but
supernatural powers." L. S. S. O'Malley, Popular Hinduism (New York: Macmillan,
1935), p. 26.
14 Adhemard Le Clere, Cambodge Fetes Civiles et Religieuses (Paris: Imprimerie
Nationale, 1916), pp. 144-50.
15 Ibid., p. 383.
16 I reproduce Le Clere's spelling of all Khmer and Pali terms.
17 Le Clere, Cambodge Fetes, pp. 374-85.
18 The precise sources are cited in Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, Medieval Sinhalese Art,
(New York: Pantheon, 1956; orig. pub. 1908), pp. 70-5, and in Richard Gombrich,
"The Consecration of a Buddhist Image," Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 26, No. 1,
1966, pp. 23-36.
19 Coomaraswamy, Medieval Sinhalese Art, p. 73.
20 Gombrich, "Consecration of a Buddhist Image," p. 36.
21 Ibid., p. 24.
22 So the officiant in the Sinhalese rite did not' 'kill" the bull and * 'tree,'' as Gombrich
sees it, but "mute" and helped release the encompassing presence of the Buddha. The act
of cutting a tree so that its milk flows is an eminently auspicious act, signifying the flow of
plenty. The bull on whose horns the pot is smashed is also an auspicious host and insulator.
23 Diana L. Eck, Darsan: Seeing the Divine Image in India (Chambersburg, Pa.:
Anima Books, 1981), pp. 5-6.
24 
Stella Kramrisch, The Hindu Temple, 2 vols. (Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press,
1946), Vol. 2, p. 359.
18. Amulets blessed by contemporary forest saints
1 The point of the remark is made clear by this story from Burma. A German fighter pilot
cruising over Mandalay during World War II gave chase to a flying arahant, but because
his plane could not go fast enough, he lost him in the clouds. It is told in Sri Lanka that in
olden times there were so many arahants cruising about in the sky that they darkened the
sun and farmers had trouble growing their rice.
2 Sometimes a wat may sponsor the making and sacralizing of an amulet to elaborate the
reputation and achievements of one of its own monks, especially its abbot.
3 If the lay sponsor does not have his or her insignia imprinted, they may substitute the
dhutahga monks' emblems, such as the umbrella, water kettle, begging bowl, etc.
4 Luang Phau Ling Dam (Honored Father Black Monkey) is a monk who is popular
with the elite and powerful Bangkok circles today. He is an abbot of a wat outside Bangkok
in Central Thailand; he teaches meditation to laymen and acts as counselor to them. It is
rumored that the meditation rooms are connected to a loudspeaker system, over which this
monk gives homilies and advice to his disciples, and that the wat owns a fleet of
Mercedes-Benz cars, presumably donated by lay well-wishers.
5 
My main source for this account is an article in the Thai magazine Chumthang Phra
Khrueang, No. 14, June 1978, pp. 14-16. This article begins with the assertion that the
source of the confidence and decision making, indeed bravery, of a Thai Buddhist is the
protection he enjoys from sing-saksit ("power"). This power, which is a hidden force
382


--- Page 395 ---
Notes to pp. 261-72
(amndt ren-lap) brings tasks undertaken to a successful conclusion. As all Thai Buddhists
know, it is not connected with ghosts and corpses, but derives from people's taking refuge
in monks and fastening their minds to them. The amulets (nan) of Luang Pu Waen are an
example.
6 Note this double aspect of the Buddhist saints: They charge objects with mystic power
because of their iddhi; they also radiate compassion and mercy (mettd) like the Bodhisattva.
7 W A. R. Wood, A History of Siam (Bangkok: Chalermnit Bookshop, 1959).
8 Claude Levi-Strauss, The Savage Mind (London: Wiedenfeld and Nicolson, 1966), p.
242. Levi-Strauss's discussion relates to the roles of the Australian churinga and the
Archives Nationales.
9 Paradaun Rattanakun, ''The Life and Religious Career of Luang Pu Waen,'' Ldn Pho,
Bangkok, Feb. 1977.
10 I have in mind here D. L. Snellgrove, Four Lamas of Dolpo, Tibetan Biographies
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967), Vol. 1, Introduction and Transla-
tions. For instance, the Lama Merit intellect resolves in the face of a smallpox epidemic:
"I must now bring my strict seclusion to an end and do all that I can to succour these
people." He then describes the blessings he gave, the purification rites he performed, and
the "potent amulets" he distributed to the people who came for succour (pp. 115-16).
The Lama Religious Protector Glorious and Good shows his prowess at "suppressing
demons, performing oblations, hurling spells and other good methods" (p. 131).
11 Luang Pu means "great or respected grandfather" and is a prefix by which all
well-known and honored elderly monks are addressed by the public.
12 A samnak song is a monastic residence that has not the status of a wat. A wat,
properly speaking, has a hot in which ordination ceremonies can take place and which is
marked off by simd stones.
13 There are two comments that can be made about the biographer's commentary.
Firstly, it is noteworthy that he defines saiyawet as a useful and positive applied knowledge
for curing and alleviating suffering. It is not considered "magic" in the deprecatory sense
of false technology and dubious traffic with the supernatural, as it was by seventeenth-
century English orthodox theologians and rationalists [Keith Thomas, Religion and the
Decline of Magic (New York: Scribner's, 1971)]. Secondly, the writer attributes to monks
of the past positive service roles to the lay society at large. He cites as an "example" of a
colonizer a famous monk (Phrakru Khlhaum), of whom I shall write in Ch. 20.
14 The Thai word wet derives from the Sanskrit word veda.
15 I note here that the monks not only accept the phi as phenomenal reality, just as the
fifth-century text Visuddhimagga does, but also place them within the Buddhist cosmos in
terms of the concepts of karma, rebirth, and so on. The demon in question, like the
hungry ghosts (preta) who suffer from unrequited desires and limbo existence, is enabled
by the monks' volition and good offices to be reborn.
16 Doi Mae Pang is a more recently established residence (samnak song) and is not to
be confused with the older Wat Mae Pang, which is located at the foot of the mountain.
17 The mystery thus remains exquisitely ambiguous; Luang Pu Waen himself has
remained orthodox in not claiming iddhi.
18 As expounded by W Y. Evans-Wenz, The Tibetan Book of the Dead (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, i960).
383


--- Page 396 ---
Notes to pp. 274-86
ig. Saints on cosmic mountains
1 The kathin (kathina) ceremony, whose canonical authority is found in the Mahdvagga
(VII, 1), is a classical presentation of robes and other necessities by the laity to monks at
the end of the rains retreat (vassa).
2 Kukrit Pramoj is said to be close to this sister and has his home in her compound in
Bangkok. She is said to assist him financially, because his expenses incurred by various
activities have not left him a rich man.
3 Khun Inthira is a daughter of the police general by a previous marriage.
4 
Khun Nitiphat was trained as an engineer in England, where he joined the Free Thai
movement. His wife, Inthira, also studied in England.
5 
See William Skinner, Leadership and Power in the Chinese Community of Thailand
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1958); and R. J. Coughlin, Double Identity: The
Chinese in Modern Thailand (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, i960).
6 This friend was a Chinese businessman (Mr. Yip Insol) involved in tin mining near
Nakhon Phanom, and Mr. Lai transported the ore for him to Bangkok. Mr. Yip was
already an agent for the bank in South Thailand, and when the bank wanted to open
branches in the Northeast he acted as mediator between the bank and Mr. Lai.
7 
In India and Ceylon, such a local official working for British mercantile banks used to
be called a "shroff." In Mr. Lai's case, if he guaranteed loans, he received 50% of the
bank's interest profits.
8 This disciple, like a true devotee and retainer, accompanied the monk on his various
visits to other parts of Thailand and has invited the monk to go with him to India to visit
the holy sites.
9 These would be phdpd gifts, usually hung on a small tree or branch, to simulate the
pristine monks' taking shreds of cloth hanging form trees in the forest or discarded in
cemeteries to make them into robes.
10 See S. J. Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism
and Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1976), pp. 456-7, for another description and comment.
11 The hermitage's development into a famous pilgrimage site has also resulted in plans
for bringing electricity to it, and no doubt soon there will be donations of buildings of an
urban design.
12 I give free translations from the Thai language.
13 This article, whose Thai title is "Singsaksit lae Aphinihan," appeared in Khwan
Ruen, Vol. 166, No. 10, 1978, pp. 124-9. The magazine is a very popular women's
journal.
14 A monastic residence without the consecrated boundary stones (sima) and without the
bot (chapel) in which ordination rites into monkhood are held.
15 The informant is not actually claiming Luang Phau was himself in a previous
incarnation Prince Vessantara (the Buddha's incarnation before his last). But true to
Buddhist legendary traditions, the geography of sacred places in India (Jambudipa) is
transferred to the Southeast Asian Buddhist countries.
The biographer is also following an important hagiological tradition. The Buddha, for in-
stance, claimed in the Mahasudassana Sutta that he had been born seven times in succession,
the last time as Cakkavatti Mahasudassana, in the city of Kusinara. (In the Mahaparinibbdna
384


--- Page 397 ---
Notes to pp. 287-96
Sutta, the Buddha stated the wish that he be cremated at Kusinara with all the honors due a
cakkavatti, because it was at Kusinara that he had ruled as Mahasudassana.) Apart from
the Buddha's legendary career, the careers of other famous disciples and saints of course
contain similar episodes.
16 The actual Thai expressions used by our monk informant were: aphinihdn (supra-
normal power), yuyong khongkaphan (invulnerability), and metta niyom (make attractive).
17 While the monk was telling us this, an old woman who was listening interposed that
a rlan of Luang Phau had protected her from injury when she fell from a bus in Samut
Prakan, a suburb of Bangkok.
20. A commentary on millennial Buddhism in Thailand and Burma
1 I shall limit myself to these two countries because, apart from the fact that they form an
arena of shared experience, they - or rather, the writings about them - provide the ample
information I require for a sustained analysis. For millennial Buddhism in Sri Lanka, see
K. Malalgoda, "Millennialism in Relation to Buddhism," Comparative Studies in Society
and History, Vol. 12, No. 4, Oct. 1970, pp. 424-41.
2 See Yoneo Ishii, "A Note on Buddhist Millenarian Revolts in Northeastern Siam,"
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, Vol. 6, No. 2, 1975, pp. 121-6.
3 Besides Ishii above, see C. E Keyes, "Millennialism, Theravada Buddhism, and Thai
Society," Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 36, No. 2, Feb. 1977, pp. 283-302.
4 Ishii, "Note on Buddhist Millenarian Revolts," p. 126.
5 
Ibid.
6 I would not go so far as Keyes does to separate "personal" concerns, whether they
relate to individual suffering or salvation, from "social" concerns. For one thing,
individual "sufferings" are also the concerns of families, neighbors, and village communi-
ties (as attested by curing rites, mortuary rites, and collective-merit transfers). Even more
importantly, it is my central thesis that these holy men are always foci of cults, clients, and
congregations. The men of charisma are surrounded by an inner core of disciples and an
outer penumbra of lay followers for whom they conduct rites and moral discourses.
7 
Charnvit Kasetsiri, The Rise of Ayudhya, A History of Siam in the Fourteenth and
Fifteenth Centuries (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976), p. 5.
8 I take this gloss from Donald K. Swearer, "The Monk as Prophet and Priest,"
unpublished essay.
9 On Buddhadasa, see D. K. Swearer, Buddhism in Transition (Philadelphia: Westmin-
ster Press, 1970); B. Buddhadasa, Toward the Truth, ed. Donald K. Swearer (Philadelphia:
Westminster Press, 1971).
10 See C. F. Keyes, "Political Crisis and Militant Buddhism in Contemporary
Thailand," in Bardwell Smith, ed., Religion and Legitimation of Power in Thailand, Laos
and Burma (Chambersburg, Pa.: Anima Books, 1978).
11 According to W Geiger [Culture of Ceylon in Medieval Times (Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz, i960), p. 184] yati, meaning ascetic, was "an honorific name" for a
bhikkhu in medieval Sri Lanka.
12 Kasetsiri, Rise of Ayudhya, p. 5.
13 In Northeast Thailand, as for instance in a village studied by me in the early sixties,
there was a cult of cao phauphdkhdo, an "ancestor" dressed in white, who was treated as
385


--- Page 398 ---
Notes to pp. 296-302
the guardian of the wat. The cao phdu phdkhdo was said to be the spirit (phi) of a pious
man who had observed the 10 precepts of the novice and ministered to the needs of the
monks. In Buddhist terms, the white clothes are the insignia of a pious layman (updsaka).
See my Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in Northeast Thailand (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1970), Ch. 15.
14 See Theodore Stern, "Ariya and the Golden Book: A Millenarian Buddhist Sect
Among the Karen," Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 27, No. 1, Nov. 1967, pp. 297-327.
The bu kho, like some of the other holy men described earlier, seem to be no definable
unitary types. Thus Stern writes: ". . . Bu khos differ in condition: they may be single or
wedded, young or old, in solitary office or with female associate. They are limited by their
character of priesthood and by knowledge of the ancient chants; they are often described as
sorcerers as well as prophets . . . and they are often clad in ascetic garments and are set
well apart from their followers. . . . Pagodas appear repeatedly as a focus of worship,
sometimes with zayats (open buildings for the congregation) oriented to them. As early as
1832 and repeatedly in sects after i860, the name of Metteya is associated with the chief
object of worship" (p. 305).
15 Kasetsiri, Rise of Ayudhya, p. 5.
16 E. Michael Mendelson, 'A Messianic Buddhist Association in Upper Burma,"
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 24,
1961, pp. 560-80. See also his "The King of the Weaving Mountain," Royal Central
Asian Journal, Vol. 48, 1961, pp. 229-37; and "Observations on a Tour in a region of
Mount Popa, Central Burma," France-Asie, Vol. 19, No. 179, 1963, pp. 780-807.
17 Mendelson, "Messianic Buddhist Association," p. 566.
18 Ibid., p. 569.
19 Stern, "Ariya and the Golden Book," pp. 297-327. Stern principally examines two
millennial movements among the Karen of the Burma — Thailand borders: the Leke sect,
which came into being around i860; and the Telakhon sect, which formed a little later.
Both movements appeared in circumstances where the external advocates of change were
the missionaries of the American Protestant denominations, and which involved "religious
syncretism of different degrees between native Karen and Theravada Buddhist faiths"
(p. 297). The reactions of the two movements to the antagonistic Baptist missionaries were
different, one favorable, the other antagonistic. I shall only describe features of the
Telakhon sect, which Stern describes more amply than the Leke.
20 The time of Stern's research and writing the essay is the late 1960s.
21 The Telakhon fused the Buddhist Ariya with the "white brother" of the Karen myth
and maintained they were in possession of the Golden Book, which contained the
knowledge that gave power and prosperity to Europeans today.
22 Stern, "Ariya and the Golden Book," p. 314. The Karen buk kho here appears
analogous to the Sayagyi, the resident official, referred to by Mendelson earlier.
23 Ibid., p. 315.
24 Ibid.
25 Ibid., p. 325.
26 C. E Keyes, "Death of Two Buddhist Saints in Thailand," Journal of the American
Academy of Religion, Thematic Studies, Vol. 48, Nos. 3 and 4, p. 149. The Northern
Thai word nakbun for Siwichai can be glossed as "one experienced in merit," i.e., one
especially capable of performing meritorious acts. It also brings to mind the word ndbun,
386


--- Page 399 ---
Notes to pp. 302-8
"field of merit," which is of course a classical Buddhist concept, the Pali word being
punnakkhetta and the Sanskrit being punyaksetra.
27 My main source for the account of Slwichai is Swearer, "Monk as Prophet and
Priest." It is supplemented by Keyes, "Death of Two Buddhist Saints," and "Millen-
nialism"; and Virginia Thompson, Thailand and the New Siam (New York: Macmillan,
1941), pp. 642-3.
Both Swearer and Keyes refer to the biographies devoted to this saint. Keyes uses a
major biography of Slwichai published in 1956 by Sarigha Suphupa, an editor of a
religious magazine in North Thailand; another very brief biography he refers to is a 1963
pamphlet by the Northern Thai historian, folklorist, and publisher, Sanguan Chotisukharat.
Swearer has drawn attention to a biography of Slwichai by Fa Wongmaha, serialized in the
journal Than Tawan (Weekly alms) and also to at least two biographies written in Yuan
(Northern Thai). (Than Tawan usually means "royal sunshade" or "sunflower.")
28 The Northern Thai polities of Lamphun, Lampang, Chiengmai, etc., have a long
history going back to times coeval with Sukhodaya. The Burmese exercised control over
the Chiengmai region from the mid-sixteenth to the end of the eighteenth centuries as their
satellite principalities. See Chapter 5.
29 See Tej Bunnag, The Provincial Administration of Siam from 1892 to 1915: The
Ministry of the Interior under Prince Damrong Rajanubhab (London: Oxford University
Press, 1977); for the implications of extending the sahgha hierarchy, see C. E Keyes,
"Buddhism and National Integration," Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 30, No. 3, 1971,
pp. 551-68.
30 Thompson, Thailand, p. 642.
31 Keyes, "Death of Two Buddhist Saints," p. 150.
32 See ibid., pp. 169-71. Keyes compares the rites held for Slwichai to those held for
Acharn Mun, which we have described earlier (Chapter 6). Although there were discerni-
ble differences in the tones of the two sets of rites, we cannot overlook the common link
they bear to the classical Buddhist mortuary rites surrounding the deaths of both the
Buddha and the Cakkavatti, including the distribution of relics and the subsequent
production of shrines, amulets, and other "reminders."
33 For the implications of this disestablishment, see, in particular, D. E. Smith,
Religion and Politics in Burma (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1965).
34 In these circumstances, with the British forbidding local officials and headmen from
engaging in politics, the monastery that freely recruited monks provided a sanctuary from
which to attack the colonial authorities. Rural monks could lead associations that were
simultaneously "religious" and "political" in their objectives.
35 For information on, and interpretation of, the economic circumstances - such as the
break-up of the tenets of the traditional "moral economy"; and the increasing number of
absentee landlords; peasant indebtedness to Chettiyar moneylenders and foreclosures on
mortgages; the increasingly commercialized landlord-tenant relations; and the forcible
collection of capitation and thathameda taxes by the British, especially when there was a
general depression of the international paddy market - that contributed to the "subsistence
crisis" of the peasantry, see James C. Scott, The Moral Economy of the Peasant, Rebellion
and Subsistence in Southeast Asia (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1976); and
Albert D. Moscotti, British Policy and the Nationalist Movement in Burma: 1917-1937,
Asian Studies at Hawaii, No. 12 (Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1974). The
387


--- Page 400 ---
Notes to pp. 308-10
British official inquiry into grievances and the course of the rebellion is to be found in
India Office, Great Britain, Report on the Rebellion in Burma up to 3 May 1931 and
Communique Issued by the Government of Burma 19 May 1931, Cmd 3900, 1931. See
also The Origin and Causes of the Burma Rebellion 1930-1932 (Rangoon: Government
of Burma, 1934).
36 Scott, Moral Economy, p. 149.
37 Moscotti, British Policy, has interesting information on the vagaries of the pricing
policy. There was a fall in rice prices during the world depression. The British were able to
hold down the domestic price of rice by maintaining a sizable control over the processing
plants. Earlier in 1918 the government of India had established a Rice Control Board to
stabilize prices in the face of soaring world market prices. The differential between prices
paid by the millers and the money received from foreign markets went to diminish India's
floating debt and to benefit India as a whole; later, the profits were diverted to Burma to
support various projects, particularly road building. In other words, the peasant rice sector
shouldered a major part of the colonial expenditure on the country as a whole.
38 Aside from the sources already cited, see, in particular, E. Sarkisyanz, Buddhist
Backgrounds of the Burmese Revolution (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1965), and R. L.
Solomon, "Saya San and the Burmese Rebellion," Modern Asian Studies, Vol. 3, No. 3,
1969, pp. 209-23.
39 Sarkisyanz (Buddhist Backgrounds, pp. 160-1) has this to say: "Yet this Burmese
'Peasant War' was not motivated by economic grievances (confined to Lower Burma)
alone: It was also propelled by militant folk Buddhism . . . with strong ingredients of
pre-Buddhist Animist Lore. . . . It was a phenomenon of what anthropologists call
'nativistic' response against overwhelming impacts of an alien civilization that has been
dissolving traditional society up to its economic foundations and challenging the world
conception of Burmese folk Buddhism." Sarkisyanz, following through in this vein, sees
the revolt as a "desperate attempt to restore the old symbols of cosmic 'social harmony.' "
Solomon ("Saya San") remarks that to call the rebellion "nativistic" is inappropriate
because it was an authentic expression of traditional values that continued into colonial
times.
40 He donned the royal rainments prescribed by ancient usage: They included ruby
earrings ("crown of victory"), gem-studded slippers, gem encrusted "sword of victory,"
royal whisk, and the white umbrella.
41 
See Smith, Religion and Politics, p. 108; Sarkisyanz, Buddhist Backgrounds, p.
162.
42 
See Moscotti, British Policy, p. 207.
43 Cited from Origin and Causes of the Burma Rebellion by Scott, Moral Economy, p.
153.
44 Just as the garuda sign was an antidote to snake poison, so would it neutralize the
"poison" of bullets and spears (Solomon, "Saya San").
45 An eyewitness account by C. V Warren, Burmese Interlude (London: n.p., 1937),
cited by Sarkisyanz, Buddhist Backgrounds, p. 162.
46 I am indebted to Jamey Rosenfield for providing me with this excerpt from India
Office, Report on the Rebellion.
47 I rely on certain authoritative essays by authors who have done their homework and
consulted relevant sources in the Thai language. The following two essays in English cite
388


--- Page 401 ---
Notes to pp. 311-317
the relevant sources, the second being more ample: Ishii, "Note on Buddhist Millenarian
Revolts"; and Keyes, "Millennialism."
48 Both incidents are in Ishii, "Note on Buddhist Millenarian Revolts," pp. 121,
123.
49 See Keyes, "Millennialism."
50 Bunnag, Provincial Administration ofSiam.
51 For instance, in Roiet there circulated a prediction of a terrible wind that would rage
for seven days and nights; the remedial actions recommended were the burning of a certain
type of wood and the planting of lemon grass at the stairways to houses. Unmarried
women were urged to consummate their unions. Special efficacy was attributed to the
sprinkling of sacralized water by monks.
52 This is a low-level ecclesiastical title.
53 Of the 400 rebels captured at the critical engagement, which took place soon after
the attack of Khemmarat, only one of the major leaders taken was a monk. This monk,
together with the three ranking monks previously reprimanded by the Siamese officials, was
ordered to remain in monkhood for life on pain of being jailed. The official Thai sahgha,
whose highest-ranking monk in Monthon Isan was Phra Yanarakkhit, was subsequently
called upon to investigate the causes of the uprising, and submitted the finding that the
poverty of the region served to stimulate unrest among the population.
54 My comments relate to Chapter 7, "Esoteric Buddhism: A Religion of Chiliastic
Expectations," in Melford Spiro, Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and its
Burmese Vicissitudes (New York: Harper & Row, 1970).
55 Ibid., p. 164.
56 Ibid., p. 166. Also, in a preceding discussion on meditation on pp. 48-51, Spiro
refers to the five supranormal powers (abhinnd), such as clairvoyance, clairaudience,
remembrance of one's past and knowledge of one's future rebirths, the power to know the
thoughts of others, and the powers of levitation. He however declares with a certainty that
is lacking in the canonical writings - we have surveyed earlier the canonical equivocations
and disputations, and the problematic treatment in the Visuddhimagga - that the jhdna
states "are not to be cathected."
After much ado about the un-Buddhist character of the weikza, Spiro treats us to this
glorious piece of psychological reductionism (psychologists apparently have the license to
unite what anthropologists divide): Although doctrinally the state of nibbdna and
weikzahood are poles apart, yet psychologically these beliefs are all but identical, for after
all absence of desire is analogous to the instant satisfaction of all desire!
57 Once again, I am mystified by Spiro's assertion that "peasant beliefs in a monarch to
come relate more to the Burmese notion of a Future King than to the Buddhist notion of a
Universal Emperor" (p. 173). Spiro spins another quandary when he goes out of his way
to say that alchemical practices in Burma "in the first instance have no relationship to
Buddhism."
58 Ibid., pp. 169-70.
59 On Spiro's evidence, two of the total of four monks in Yeighi, the location of his
intensive fieldwork, indulged in this form of meditation, and many layman of all catego-
ries - the educated, elite, and less-educated urban and rural folk - dabbled in alchemy.
60 Ibid., p. 172.
61 Some standard treatments are the works of Norman Cohn, e.g., The Pursuit of the
389


--- Page 402 ---
Notes to pp. 317-22
Millennium (New York: Harper & Row, Torchbooks, 1961); Sylvia Thrupp, ed., Millennial
Dreams in Action, Comparative Studies in Society and History, Supplement II (The
Hague: Mouton, 1962); Bryan Wilson, "Millennialism in Comparative Perspective,"
Comparative Studies in Society and History, Vol. 6, 1963-4, pp. 94-114. The rich
literature on the cargo cults of New Guinea by Worsley, Lawrence, Burridge, and others is
well known. See Kenelm Burridge, Mambu, A Melanesian Millennium (London: Methuen,
i960); Peter Lawrence, Road Belong Cargo (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press,
1967); Peter Worsley, The Trumpet Shall Sound (London: McGibbon and Kee, 1957);
Robert N. Bellah, Beyond Belief (New York: Harper & Row, 1970), pp. 279-87; and
David Aberle, "A Note on Deprivation Theory as Applied to Millenarian and Other Cult
Movements," in Thrupp, Millennial Dreams, pp. 109-14.
62 Keyes, "Millennialism."
63 Although the notion of "power" can be stretched to all relations of dominance,
inequality, etc., I am following here Keyes's own distinction between what he considers to
be "political" and "economic."
64 I note, in passing, that the holy men of Syria in the fifth and sixth centuries also
"achieved" their saintly powers by deliberately placing themselves on the mountains,
beating out their virtues "like cold metal work, from a lifetime of asceticism," and played
their role as mediators in rural communities by virtue of their status as noncommitted
"strangers." See Peter Brown, "The Rise and Function of the Holy Man in Late
Antiquity," Journal of Roman Studies, Vol. 61, 1971, pp. 80-101.
65 See E. Troeltsch, The Social Teachings of the Christian Churches (New York: Free
Press, 1949), Vol. 1, pp. 239-40. I am indebted to liana Silber for drawing my attention
to this discussion.
66 
See Chapter 9, in which the organization features of forest hermitages and their
networks were scrutinized.
21. The sources of charismatic leadership: Max Weber revisited
1 Wolfgang J. Mommsen, The Age of Bureaucracy: Perspectives on the Political Sociol-
ogy of Max Weber (New York: Harper & Row, Torchbooks, 1974), p. 79. Of course,
Weber crucially differed from Nietzsche's excessive conviction about the historic mission
of great men irrespective of the interests of the masses.
2 Carl J. Friedrich, "Political Leadership and the Problem of the Charismatic Power,"
Journal of Politics, Vol. 23, No. 1, Feb. 1961, pp. 3-24.
3 This point comes through in this commentary by two Weberian scholars: "Ethical
prophecy applies politically transcendent standards to the powers-that-be, which thus
appear sinful and depraved and destined to ultimate destruction, while exemplary proph-
ecy endeavors to achieve its impact not by preaching but by exemplary conduct. Exem-
plary prophets try to win adherents and followers by elevating their own conduct above the
ordinary." Guenther Roth and Wolfgang Schluchter, Max Weber's Vision of History, Ethics
and Methods (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979).
4 Max Weber, Economy and Society, 3 vols., ed. Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich
(New York: Bedminster Press, 1968), Vol. 1, p. 241.
5 
David Little, "Max Weber and the Comparative Study of Religious Ethics," Journal
of Religious Ethics, Vol. 2, No. 2, 1974, pp. 5-41.
6 The Weberian typology of action orientations into rational, traditional, and affectual
390


--- Page 403 ---
Notes to pp. 323-9
modes is well known, and no detailed commentary is required here. Weber subdivided
rational action into two types: Zweckrationalitdt, usually translated "formal (or instru-
mental) rationality," is translated by Little as "this-worldly relativistic form of conse-
quentialist reasoning.'' "Wertrationalitat,'' usually translated as "substantive rationality,''
is translated by Little as "absolutist rationality." Traditional action (besides the type that is
automatic reaction to habitual stimuli) implies as normative orientation "the belief in the
everyday routine as an inviolable norm of conduct." Little, in his essay "Max Weber,"
gives a fine-grained analysis of this typology, and brings out the multiple meanings,
ambiguities, and dualities embodied in Weber's discussion.
7 
See From Max Weber, trans. H. H. Gerth and C. W Mills (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1958), p. 281.
8 "A new charismatic annunciation and promise, such as is found in the Kerygma of
Jesus or Buddha, apparently wrenches the established patterns and opens the way for the
rationalization process to take place." Little, "Max Weber," p. 24.
9 
See Weber, Economy and Society, Vol. 1, Pt. 2, Ch. 6.
10 The words "religious charisma" may sound redundant; but this wording is intended
to demarcate the phenomena under consideration from secular charisma, such as that
purported to attach to political and economic leadership and success in societies that
define politics and economics as secular activities divorced from religion.
11 Max Weber, On Charisma and Institution Building, Selected Papers, ed. with an
introduction by S. N. Eisenstadt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968). See
Eisenstadt's illuminating introduction, p. xxx.
12 Weber, Economy and Society, Vol. 1, p. 244. Elsewhere, he has stated that it is a fate
of charisma "to recede with the development of permanent institutional structures" (ibid.,
Vol. 3, p. 1133).
13 Besides sources already cited, see Max Weber, "The Sociology of Charismatic
Authority," in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, trans, and ed. H. H. Gerth and C.
Wright Mills (New York: Oxford University Press, 1946). Also see Weber, "The Social
Psychology of Religion," in From Max Weber.
14 This central insight has, however, opened itself to such objections as the one voiced
by Mommsen that Weber's "functionalist value-neutral approach" would tend to conflate
the stable maintenance of power or domination with consent and legitimation and that in
any case it could not deal with "illegitimate" domination. See Mommsen, Age of
Bureaucracy, Ch. 4, for a good critique of this value-free stance.
15 See Weber, Economy and Society, Vol. 2, pp. 1139-41, for a discussion of office
charisma.
16 See Weber, Economy and Society, Vol. 2, p. 1139.
17 Ibid., p. 1114.
18 Ibid., p. 1112.
19 In a footnote to his judgment I have reported above, Weber cites references to Sohm's
works, Kirchenrecht, I and II (1892) and Outlines of Church History (1887).
20 James Luther Adams, On Being Religiously: Selected Essays in Religion and Society
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1976); see especially Ch. 13, "Law and the Religious Spirit:
Rudolf Sohm."
21 Ibid., p. 195.
22 Weber, Economy and Society, Vol. 2, p. 1112.
391


--- Page 404 ---
Notes to pp. 329-42
23 Ibid., p. 1113.
24 The bias stemming from the Christian precedent shows unabashedly in this sentence:
"Instead of reverence for customs that are ancient and hence sacred, it (charisma) enforces
the inner subjection to the unprecedented and absolutely unique and therefore Divine"
(ibid., p. 1117).
25 Edward Shils, "Charisma," in International Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences,
Vol. 2, p. 386.
26 Shils, "Charisma, Order and Status," American Sociological Review, Vol. 30,
^65, pp. 199-213, points out that this central power has been conceived as God, the
ruling power or creator of the universe, and it might be a "fundamental principle or
principles, a law or laws governing the universe, the underlying driving force of the
universe. . ."
27 E. H. Kantorowicz, The King's Two Bodies: A Study in Medieval Political Theory
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1957).
28 What is meant by this is that the charismatic Buddhist saints come and go sporadically,
their followings dissipate after their deaths, and they are not the basis of an enduring
institutionalized cult.
22. The objedification of charisma and the fetishism of objects
1 I am referring to Ludwig Wittgenstein, "Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough," trans.
A. C. Miles and Rush Rhees, Human World, No. 3 (May 1971), pp. 28-41.
2 Marcel Mauss, A General Theory of Magic, trans. Robert Brain (London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1972).
3 R. H. Codrington, The Melanesians: Studies in their Anthropology and Folklore
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1891).
4 Mauss, General Theory, p. i n .
5 
Ibid., p. 117.
6 Ibid., pp. 120-1.
7 Marcel Mauss, The Gift (New York: Norton, 1976).
8 Ibid., p. 43.
9 The immortal formulation by the Maori of the "spirit of the thing given" is worth
repeated citation: "Now this taonga I received from him is the spirit (hau) of the taonga I
received from you and which I passed on to him. The taonga which I receive on account of
the taonga that came from you, I must return to you" (ibid., p. 9).
10 Marshall Sahlins, "The Spirit of the Gift," in his Stone Age Economics (Chicago:
Aldine, 1972), Ch. 4, pp. 149-83.
11 Ibid., p. 31.
12 Marshall Sahlins, Culture and Practical Reason (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1976). On this issue, also see Jean Baudrillard, The Mirror of Production (St.
Louis: Telos Press, 1975).
13 In Hindu theory, an ascetic who observes tapas husbands his sexual energy and
transmutes it into siddhi (supranormal spiritual powers) can dissipate the latter, for they are
ultimately constrained by the physical capacity to produce semen. Thus there is a
preoccupation with controlled use. In the Buddhist case, as elucidated in the Visud-
dhimagga, the path of meditation and purification is not predicated on such an emphatic
392


--- Page 405 ---
Notes to pp. 344-6
and obsessive chemistry of transforming sexual energy The control of the senses and
fewness of wishes, which include celibacy, allows for progress upward from gross
materiality to transcendent states. However, in Tibetan Vajrayana Buddhist meditation,
yogic ideas of seminal fluid are found. See David L. Snellgrove, Four Lamas of Dolpo,
Tibetan Biographies, Vol. 1 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967), pp.
25-7-
14 I borrow this phrase from Fernando H. Cardoso, "Associated-Dependent Develop-
ment: Theoretical and Practical Implications," in Alfred Stepan, ed., Authoritarian
Brazil, Origins, Policies and Future (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1973).
15 From Max Weber, p. 245.
16 For instance, T. W Adorno et al., The Authoritarian Personality (New York: Harper,
1950); Norman Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium, 2d ed. (New York: Harper & Row,
Torchbooks, 1961); Leon Festinger, Henry W Riecken, and Stanley Schachter, When
Prophecy Fails (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1956); and Anthony F
Wallace, "Revitalization Movements," American Anthropologist, Vol. 58, No. 2, 1956,
pp. 264-81.
17 The established sahgha of titled monks, with its seats in the historic, prosperous wat,
has long cooperated with the government; the Council of Elders (mahdtherasamdkhom)
has been moribund and inactive. The missionary programs (thammathut), by which
monks sought to participate in national development, active in the sixties and seventies,
are virtually dead today. And some monks have even discredited themselves by charges of
corruption and of associating with violence.
For relevant details, see S. Suksamran, Political Buddhism in Southeast Asia (New York:
St. Martin's Press, 1977); C. F Keyes, "Political Crisis and Militant Buddhism in
Contemporary Thailand," in Bardwell L. Smith, ed., Religion and Legitimation of Power
in Thailand, Laos and Burma (Chambersburg, Pa.: Anima Books, 1978); and S. J.
Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in
Thailand against a Historical Background (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1976).
18 The following books in English should give the reader a fair idea of the contemporary
political and economic situation in Thailand. The list is not exhaustive. David Morell and
Chai-anan Samudavanija, Political Conflict in Thailand, Reform, Reaction, and Revolution
(Cambridge, Mass.: Oelgeschlager, Gunn and Hain, 1981); E. T. Flood, The United
States and the Military Coup in Thailand: A Background Study (Washington, D.C.:
Indochina Resource Center, 1976); Norman Jacobs, Modernization Without Development:
Thailand as an Asian Case Study (New York: Praeger, 1971); Clark Neher, ed., Modern
Thai Politics: From Village to Nation (Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman, 1976); and Ross
Prizzia and Narong Sinsawasdi, Thailand: Student Activism and Political Change
(Bangkok: Allied Printers, 1974).
19 I am here referring to the farmers' federations and the protests staged in Bangkok by
disaffected farmers from the North.
20 This is a principal argument in Theda Skocpol, State and Social Revolutions, A
Comparative Analysis of France, Russia and China (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1979).
393


--- Page 406 ---


--- Page 407 ---
Index
abbots, princely, 157
Aberle, David, 317
Abhassara, 50, 51
Abhayagiri fraternity, 73
Abhayagirinikaya, 55-6, 352ns
Abhayagiri vadin sect, 38
abhidhamma, 16, 28
Abhidhamma (Vibhahga), 15, 36, 170
absorption (jhdna), 42, 44, 47, 152
abstraction, 42
access concentration (upacdra), 50, 93, 152
acharn (term), 358nl
acosmic love, 324
Adam of Eynsham, Bishop: Magna Vita Sancti
Hugonis, 127
adept(s) (asekha, i.e., arahant), 12; see also
arahant(s)
Adi-Buddha, 363^3
Adittaraja of Haribhunjaya (Lamphun), 67
affectual action, 322-4, 325
dgdramuni, 12
Aggabodhi V, 56
Aggabodhi VII, 56
Aggahha Suttanta, 51
aggasdvakas (great disciples), 294
agrarian grievances, 187; see also peasant revolts
Ajatasattu, king, 130
Ajnata-Kaundinlya, 21
Akkhipujd (festival), 255
alchemy, 63, 273, 295, 312-13, 315-16
alienation, 341
alms (bhikkhd), 33, 84
alms-food-eater's practice, 33, 34-5
almsrounds, 92-3, 103, 137
Amarakatabuddharupaniddna (chronicle), 214-
15, 216, 218
Amarapura (sect), 59
amulets, 5-6, 63, 318, 319, 335, 340; blessed
by famous monks of past, 219-23;
classification of historic, popular, 208-29;
crisis of legitimacy and obsession with,
344-6; efficacy of, 199-200, 263; fake,
219, 220, 326; iconical and indexical
properties of, 336; intensification in use of, 3,
344-5; in kathin presentation to Wat Phuthok,
274, 277-8, 279; Luang Phau Pang, 260-5;
288-9; making and sacralization of, at shrine
of the pillar, 244-5; nefarious uses of, 227,
336; popularity of, 195-200; possession and
circulation of, 168, 169, 196-7, 198, 336,
342-4; reflect and legitimate hierarchy of
merit, 342-4; role in political authorities'
search for legitimacy, 275; royal sponsorship
of, 189; sacralized by forest saints, 258-73,
293; sale of, in forest hermitages, 284; of
Slwichai, 307; and street machismo, 228-9;
trade in, 196, 197, 219, 220, 258, 263, 264,
336; transfer of power to, by monks, 335,
336, 342, 359nio; value of, 263, 342; see
also cult of amulets; sacralization
andgdmins, 13-14
andgdramuni, 12
Ananda, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, 201, 202,
353n2O, 36oni5, n22
Ananda line (monks), 62
Anandasiri (monk), 90
Anathapindika (merchant), 122
anattd (not-self), 43, 44, 139, 152
Angkor Vat, 205
Angulimala (thera), Shin, 24, 25
AAguttaranikaya, 21
anicca (impermanence), 43, 44
395


--- Page 408 ---
Index
animals (tiracchana), 12; see also wild beasts
animism, 315
Aniruddha, 22
Anomadassi (monk), 66, 75
anthropology, 6, 7
Anumati (monk), 66
anu-ndyakas (deputies), 57
Anuradhapura (Sri Lanka), 55
Anuradhapura period, 73
Anuruddha, Elder, 48-9
Anuruddha, king, 215, 217-18
any-bed-user's practice, 34, 37
Apaddna, 22
appamdna brahmavihdra, 100
appana-samddhi, 88, 93; see also concentration
(samddhi)
arahan, 295
arahan takhindsawas (saints), 294
arahant(s), 3, 4, 21-4, 44, 206, 316, 329;
Buddhist conception of, 11-27; charisma,
330, 332; civilizing mission of, 346-7; early,
poems of, 38-9; expectations of, 124; as
fields of merit, 335; "fully realized," 44;
method of passing away, 27; modern, 6,
25-7; nonexistence of, after death, 22-3;
offer vicarious offerings, 318; in saintly
biography, 114, 36in2 (see also biogra-
phy [ies] ); stories of, 32-3; supramundane
powers of, 36in2 (see also supranormal
powers [abhinna] ); term, 11, 26; types of,
26-7; see also cult of saints; forest saints
arahant ideal, 17, 22, 26; archetypal examples
of, 15-16
arahant model: recency of, 305-6
arahanta line monks, 62, 63
arahantship, 14-15, 30, 45; of Acharn Mun,
96-100; as charisma, 325, 327
drannavdsi (sect), 17
drannavdsi tradition, 160, 163
Aranhikas, 55, 56-61
Aranyik, Caokhun, 379n33
archaeological excavations, 222-3
Ari monks, 356n25
Ariya Maitreya, 300, 301, 302, 311
Ariyawongsakhatayan, Phra, 370m 8
art, Buddhist, 201
artha, 2
arupa brahma loka, 50, 51
Asala festival, 74
Asapha (monk), 172
Asaphathera (monk), 177
ascetic, self-ordained (tdpasayd), 60-1
ascetic path, 54~6i, 330, 331
ascetic practices (dhutanga), 3, 16, 17-18, 27,
33~7> 55-4> 346; of Acharn Mun, 83-4,
106, 107; formalized, 324; grades of, 34-7;
of Sri Lanka forest monks, 59; see also
dhutanga monks; dhutanga practices
asceticism, 324; in forest hermitages, 164;
personal, 305; as vocation, 318
ascetics (parhsukulikd), 16
dsekhamuni, 12
Asgiriya fraternity, 74
Asgiriya monastery, 57-8, 74
Asita, 113
Asoka, emperor, 1-2, 24, 57, 114, 117, 118,
120, 131, 206, 255; king, 122; Tilokaraja
acknowledged as reincarnated, 68; type of
cakkavatti, 378n24
Asokdvaddna, 16, 114
astrology, 63, 165, 273, 37in22
Asvaghosa: Buddhacarita, 113, 115
austerity; see ascetic practices (dhutanga);
disciplinary rules
authority, charismatic, 325, 326, 328; religious,
328
Avalokitesvara, 23, 332
Ayudhya period, 70
Ban Koke (village), 104
Ban Tat (village), 143, 146
Ban Tham (village), 94
Bangkok, 3, 71-2, 212, 228-9; "sanctity"
aggregated in, 221; shrine of the pillar,
244-5; threat to, from hierarchical national
sahgha, 70, 161-3; see also center-periphery
relations
Bangkok Bank of Commerce, 274, 275-6,
277, 278
Bateson, Gregory, 375ml
batgama caste, 355n2i
Batuvila (hermitage), 59
Bauk Fai festivals, 174-5
Bechert, Heinz, 58
Bede, St., 124, 125; Saint Cuthbert, 127
Bellah, Robert N., 316
Benares, 116, 120, 122
Benedictine Rule, 150
Bhadrapala, 23
bhikkhu(s), 1, II, 12, 17, 57, 295-6;
authenticity of life of, 128-9; Buddha's
disciples, 21; concept, 327; differences
among, 307; peripatetic mendicants, 346,
347; self-eradication of defilement, 106; three
parts to path of, 367n6; training precepts for
practice of virtue, 31-3; vocation of, 324
Bhikkhu, Buddhadasa, 295
Bhikkhu, Sunno, 136, 137, 138
bhikkhum (nuns), 21
Bhumipol, king, 157
Bible, 321
Bigandet, P., 366ni4; Life or Legend of
Gaudama, The, 130
Bimbisara, king, 364^7
396


--- Page 409 ---
Index
biographer, 114-15
biographical traditions, Buddhist, 111-12,
114-16
biographies of monks (caritaya), 59, i n , 112,
113, 114-15, 125
biographies of saints (avaddna), 21, 26,
113-14, 117, 119, 125, 132, 293; modern,
81-110; ordering principles of, 124-31;
stereotypes in, 124, 125, 127; themes,
conventions in, 59, 128
biography(ies), 4-5; Christian, 124-8;
generalized, 125, 127; oral, 112, 115;
written, 362n8
Blavatsky, Madame, 7
bliss, 42, 44, 45, 46, 50
Bodaw (cult leader), 298-9
bodhi tree (symbol), 122, 201, 202
Bodhiransi (monk), 202, 232
Bodhisara, king, 219
bodhisattva(s) (buddha to be), 17, 23, 77, 294,
306, 319, 332
bodily relics {sdrlrika; sarlradhdtu) ,201,202; see
also relics
books (ganthadhura) (vocation), 16, 53, 54,
160, 174, 191, 354n3, 358n4> 367116; see
also study (pariyatti) (vocation)
Borabudur, 205
Boromkot, king, 211
Boromratchamappakun, Somdet Phra, 211
Bovaredej, prince, 304
bowl-food-eater's practice, 33, 34
Brahma, stations of, 39
Brahma Worlds, 51
brahman (notion), 338, 339
brdhmana, 11
Brahmanical sacred knowledge, 11, 119
brahmans, 19
brotherly love, 324
Brown, Peter, 126,127; Cult of the Saints, The, 8
Bua, Luang Phau, 367ns
buddha(s): biographies of, 36on22; perfect, 19
Buddha, biographical accounts of, 4-5,
113-14, 115-18, 130, 36CH122, 362n23,
363n24, 365nio; injected into consecration
rites, 252, 254; integration of, in chronicles,
119-23; as paradigm, 111-23, 129, 131,
293; in Vinaya texts, 116-17
Buddha, Gautama, 1, 17, 19, 30, 41, 60, 93,
101, 102, 104, 119-20, 121, 203, 206,
237, 300, 365ml; appearance in temporary
form, 99; basic teachings of, in
Visuddhimagga, 28; bodies of, 205-7, 254;
cremation, 36in3o; death of, 122, 36in28,
n29; descent of, 49; enlightenment, 116,
119, 203, 205, 231, 237, 254, 255,
36on2O; and false claim to mystical powers,
20; future, 315, 319; iddhi powers of, 48,
122; immanent presence in statue, 254; as
individualized world renouncer, 346-7;
likeness, 376~7n4; lineage, pedigree, 120,
121, 241; mortuary rites, 387^2;
mythologizing of life and teachings of, 115;
perfected, 44; ranking of spiritual achieve-
ments of, 12-13; rebirths, 384m5; refused to
name successor, 330; rejected severe
asceticism, 17-18; relationship with mother,
36oni7; saint's existence after death, 21;
sanctioned forest dwelling, 17; sole authority
for Buddhist canon, 119; son of, 23; teaching
career, 122; wife of, 99-100; see also
disciples of Buddha
Buddha Arimadeya, 300
Buddha Dlparhkara, 119
Buddha images, 138, 195-6, 200-5, 206; in
amulets, 208, 210-19; "Likeness," 230-42
Buddha Jinaraja (statue), 209-13
Buddha Jinaslha (statue), 209-13
Buddha relics, 56, 67, 74, 120, 122, 200-1,
202, 296; in Emerald Buddha 217; tooth relic,
73, 74, 123, 214; veneration of, 200-5
Buddha Sihing, 202
Buddha statues, 5, 209-19, 222; authentic line
of succession, 231; consecration of, 245-6;
continuity through replication, 240, 254;
opening of the eyes, 243, 245, 246, 250,
252, 255-7; public casting of, 246-8; travels
of, 241-2; see also Buddha images
Buddha-Cakravartin, 377- 8n 16
Buddhacarita (Asvaghosa), 113, 115
Buddhaghosa, 21, 45, 93, 255, 36on2i; "Path
of Purity," 13; see also Visuddhimagga
(Buddhaghosa)
Buddhaghosacarya, Somdet Phra, 377m 3
Buddhaghosuppatti, 28
Buddhahood, 205-6, 376m9
Buddhapadlpa monastery (London), 177
Buddhasukh, Siri, 81, 159
Buddhavamsa, 120, 365nio
Buddhism, 129, 164, 323, 335; amulets in,
199-200; charisma in, 327, 329, 330, 331,
332; civilizing mission of holy men in,
346-7; distinction brand of cognitive,
emotional, and evaluative inputs, 325; early,
1-2, 7, 17, 21-4, 54, 99, 118, 200; folk
asceticism, 388^9; as historical phenomenon,
25-6; historical unfolding of, 117-18;
"homogenization" of, 162; human actor in,
181; impulse in, to develop millennial
expectations around holy men, 318-19;
institutionalized, 54, 164; "mystical saint"
and "savior saint" contrast in, 305, 307;
Northern, Southern, 16-17; prophecies in,
298, 322; "pure," 11, 233; relation with
state, king, 214, 221, 233; as total social
397


--- Page 410 ---
Index
phenomenon, 7-8; see also Mahay ana
Buddhism; millennial Buddhism; Theravada
Buddhism
Buddhist schools, 116-18
Bundan, Thao, 313-14
bunkhun, 337
Bunnag, Tej, 311
Bunrap, Khunying, 276
bureaucratic organizations, 326, 328, 329, 331
Burks, Arthur, 4
Burma, 3, 26, 118; biographies of monks in,
111-12; division of sahgha in, 165;
forest-monk tradition in, 3, 4, 61-6;
millennial Buddhism in, 6, 293-320; popular
saints in, 24-5; reform sects in, 53, 54
Burns, Douglas M., 137-8, 139
cakkavatti (king of kings; universal monarch),
11, 77, 297, 300, 302, 306, 313, 315, 316,
318,319, 387n32; four ranked types of,
378n24; lineage of, 117; seven jewels of,
349n7 see also cakravartin
cakkavatti-Buddha relationship, 130
Cakkri dynasty, 71, 75, 212, 213, 214, 215,
239, 244, 377mo
cakravartin (wheel-rolling universal king), 294,
332, see also cakkavatti
Camadevi, princess, 123, 297; queen, 296
Cdmadevlvathsa (chronicle), 121, 232
Cambodia, 345
Campaka Monastery, 62
canonical suttas, 130
canonical texts, 2, 15; relation to life of Buddha,
Cao Phau (personification of shrine of the pillar),
Cao Phau Cethakup (deity), 38in2
cao phau phdkhdo (cult), 385~6ni3
tao Phau Phaukrong (deity), 38in2
Cao Prasatthaung, king, 313
Cao Sam Phraya National Museum, 222
capital city(ies): triadic structure in, 72-5
capitalism, 340, 341
Capps, Donald, 115
Carrithers, Michael, 58, 59, 60, 89-90
Cathar heresy, 129
Catholic Church, 129, 318, 327, 328
Caturmaharajikadeva (deities), 35On38
Cedi Luang (wat), 162
celebration(s): in consecration of Buddha statue
(chaldung phra), 246; see also festivals
celibacy, 393m3
center-periphery relations, 3, 221, 222, 240-1,
333
cetiya: mound erected over ashes, 20;
(reminders), 201-3
Cha, Acharn, 136-8, 154, 334
Chandaka, 113
chants, chanting, 146, 243; at consecration of
Buddha statue, 245-6, 247, 248, 249-51,
254, 260; sacred words (sek khdthd) over
amulets, 199-200
characterology, 39
charisma, 3, 6, 27, 76, 136, 265, 335, 344;
defined, 322, 329-30; of forest saints, 77,
185, 260; and the gift, 337-8; objectification
of, 5, 335-47; routinization of, 326, 328-9,
330, 332, 339; as source of leadership, 16,
321-2 {see also charismatic leaders,
leadership); sources of, 325-7, 328,
329-30; typology of, 329-32; understanda-
ble as social experience, 338, 339
charismatic leaders, leadership, 311, 312, 313,
319, 339; sources of, 321-34
charms, 139
charnel grounds, 71
charnel-ground-dweller's practice, 34, 36, 37
Charnvit Kasetsiri, 69-70, 121, 295, 296
Chlangdao, cave, 271
Chiengmai (Lan Na), 66, 67, 70, 172, 218;
Acharn Mun in, 90, 91, 96-101
Chomanan, Gen. Kriangsak, 260-1
Chonlasit, Police Col. Phan, 261
Chotisukharat, Sanguan, 387^7
Christian missionaries, 112, 301, 386ni9
Christian monasteries, 150
Christianity, 126, 322, 323, 325, 327, 328,
332; asceticism in, 324
Chulalongkorn, king, 71, 157, 158, 160,
161-2, 166, 212, 219, 221, 222, 232, 266,
276, 303; centralization program, 381m;
distribution of amulets, 213; made Prince
Pavaret head of sahgha, 370m8; monasteries
founded by, 370m7; ordained sons of, 368n4;
ordination of, 368n3; patrimonial provincial
administration, 311-12
Chulalongkorn University, 188
Chumphon, Kromluang, 375114
Chumpot, prince, 276
Chumpot, princess, 276
Chuvanon, Mrs. Noon, 108
Cittabhavana College, 374m2
Cittagutta, elder, 32
clairaudience, 26, 100, 389^6
clairvoyance, 26, 94, 100, 389^6
Codrington, R. H.: Melanesians, The, 338
commerce and religion, 274-5, 278
commodities, fetishism of, 6, 341
communications system, 263
Communist Party, 260
communists, 190, 345
community-development projects, 96, 185
398


--- Page 411 ---
Index
comparison (mental state), 41
compassion for humanity (mettd), 45, 88, 89,
124, 324, 342; Acharn Mun, 135-6; as basis
of saintliness, 305; universal, 128, 330, 335,
347; see also cosmic love; loving-kindness
concentration (samddhi), 29, 30, 38, 41, 70,
139, 160, 179, 181-2, 332, 35in8; access
and absorption, 42; developing, 152-3; iddhi
powers deriving from, 45, 46, 47; levels of,
42, 50, 93; methods of, 149; path of, 39-42,
44; psychosomatic possibilities of, 373m 5; in
sacralization process, 245, 246, 260; wisdom
and,151-2
consciousness (sad), 181
consciousness (vihhdna), 11-12, 152; cosmic,
338; levels of, 50; map of, parallels map of
cosmos, 30-1, 38, 48, 49-52, 140
consecration rite, 254-5, 3§in5; of Buddha
statue (Buddhdbhiseka), 245-54
contemplation, 44, 136-8, 149, 151; as basis
of saintliness, 305; of death, 39-41; see also
concentration (samddhi)', meditation (vipas-
sanddhura) (vocation)
Conze, Edward, 38, 352ml
coolness (sltala), 31
Coomaraswamy, Ananda K., 201
cosmic love (mettd), 77
cosmography: Wat Phuthok, 280, 218-3
cosmology, 299-300, 316, 318, 336;
meditative states and, 49-52
cosmos: map of mental consciousness parallels,
38, 48, 49-52, 140; mythology re, 161
Council of Rajagrha, 22
Council of Sarvastivadin elders, 113
councils, 118, 119
creation stories, 51, 119, 120, 377n4
cremation, crematoriums, 71, 165
cremation rites, 131, 188-9, X99> 366ni4
crisis, collective, 128-9
Cuan, Acharn: hermitage of, 274-5, 27^,
277-83, 284,293
Ciilavamsa chronicle, 57, 255, 364^5
Cullavagga, 18-19, U3, 116, 359ni5
Culodara (ndga-king), 122
cult of amulets, 76, 139, 154, 169, 185,
195-207; forest saints in, 258-73;
intensification of, 164, 258, 259-60
cult of images, 195-207
cult of saints, 21, 24-5, 45, 126-7, J55> 187
Cult of the Saints, The (Brown), 8
cultic ritual, 307
cults, 63, 294, 296, 298-300, 310, 314, 316,
385-6ni3; centered on holy men, 319-20,
transformed into militant movements, 316-17
ddgaba, 200
Dalai Lama, 332
Dambadeni Katikavata, 57
Damrong, prince, 68-9, 162, 212, 232, 303,
312
danddbhinna, n o
darsan (seeing), 149, 256-7
"dawn of deliverance" (muttodaya), 97
"day procession" (Daval Perahera), 74
death, contemplation of, 39-41
decaying corpses (asubbhas), 39
deities, 138, 245
deliverance (goal), 84, 85, 129, absolute, 99;
of Acharn Mun, 98
delusion (moha), 51
Demieville, Paul, 363^4
Democratic Party (Thailand), 276
detached action, 335
detachment, 39-41, 43, 128
deva loka, 50
Devadatta, 19
Devanampiya Tissa, king, 122
devardja cult, 378-9^7
devices (kasinas), 39, 41-2, 46
Dhamma(s) (morality/duty), 2, 11, 41, 77, 86,
87, 89, 94, 98, 101, 102, 151, 200;
biography of Buddha integral part of, 113,
119; brought into conformity with empirical
science, 161; codification of, 120; custo-
dianship of, 206; different bodies of,
36on2i; employed in sacralization of
amulets, 199; instruction in, 104; Kasyapa
codifier of, 17; mental, 152-3; not found
in books, 138; reminders of, 202; as
scripture, 329; teaching of, 169, 185
Dhammapatana project, 373n5
Dhammacakka (Wheel of Dhamma) level, 97
Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta (setting in mo-
tion the wheel of truth), 30, 104
Dhamacedi, Chaokhun, 102, 108
Dhammacetiya, Chao Khun, 101
Dhamma-ddna, 54
dhammadipa of Lanka, 118
Dhamma-Kdya (Body of Law), 205, 206
Dhammapada Commentary, 20
Dhammarakkhita (guru), 215
Dhammaratana, Miripanna, i n
Dhammasudhi, Phra Sobhuna: Insight
Meditation, 373m 2
Dharma of mind (ndma), 152
Dharmaguptakas: Vinaya of, 116
Dharmaraksa, 22
Dharmapala, Anagarika, 59
dhutahga monks, 54, 84-5, 96, 128, 135;
as Buddhist missionaries, 94; communities
of, 91-3; Nong Phue forest hermitage
center for, 105-6; tantric association, 138;
399


--- Page 412 ---
Index
wild beasts and, 86-7, 88-90
dhutahga practices, 131, 137, 212, 331; forest
hermitages, 147, 288; Thammayut sect, 160,
161, 163; Wat Phuthok, 280
dhutahga tradition: of meditation, 175-6
Dighanikdya, 116
Dlparfikara, 121
DipavaMsa chronicle, 54, 364^5, n30
"direct knowledge," 48, 49
disciples of Buddha, 15-16, 21-2, 113, 117,
122, 36on22; hierarchy of, 99; iddhi powers
of, 48-9
disciplinary code (vinaya): offenses in, 303
disciplinary practices: personal and collective
import of, 316-17; Thammayut sect, 160,
161
disciplinary rules, 18-19, 73> 99> XI9> 150,
174-5; codification of, 118; forest hermitage
of Maha Boowa, 144, 148; Mahanikai and
Thammayut sects, 164
discipline, 3, 330; arahant and, 15
divine abidings, 39
"divine ear element," 47
Divydvaddna, 363^3
Diyawadana Nilame (the), 74
doctrinal reminders (dhammacetiya), 202, 203;
see also reminders doctrine of presence,
204-5
doen thudong, 32; see also pilgrimage (kdn
doen thudong)
Doi Mae Pang, 271, 272
domination, 39ini4; charismatic, 325, 327
Duang, Phra Acharn, 379n33
Dumont, Louis, 7
Duroiselle, Charles, 24, 25
Dutthagdmani (Dutugamunu) (king), 25, 123
Dwaya (sect), 63
dwelling (resource of monastic life), 18, 34,
36-7
Earth-Lotus, 203
ecclesiastical hierarchy, 2, 189; see also sahgha
(order of monks)
ecclesiastical positions, titled, 163
ecstasy, 323-4
education, 168, 190, 329; role of monks in
elementary, 161-2, 185 see also monastic
education
effort (viriya), 148-9, 181
eight precepts (the), 31
Eightfold Path, 35in8
Eisenstadt, S. N., 6, 326
Ekottardgama, 21
Emerald Buddha, 5, 75, 210, 214-19, 233,
377nio, 378m6; cult, 379n27; palladium
of Thailand, 214, 239; travels of, 217-19,
241
energy, vigor, 31, 41; kinds of, 181-2
enlightenment, 38, 41, 207, 367n6; Buddha's
achievement of, 116, 119, 203, 205, 231,
237, 254, 255, 36on2o; paths to, 30
equanimity, 44, 45, 46, 50, 51
eschatological Buddhism, 315-16
esoteric Buddhism, 63, 314-17
Etadaggavagga, 21
Eusebius Pamphili: Ecclesiastical History, 126
evil action: modes of, 15
evil eye, 256
exchange, 339~44
eye faculty, 31, 49
eyes, kinds of, 182
Fa-Hian, 73
faith (saddhd), 41, 182
Fan, Luang Pu, 333
Fan, Phra Acharn, 197
Fang, Phra Cao, 212
feelings (vedand), 152
Ferguson, J. P., 16, 26, 163
festivals, 146, 164, 174-5, 25°> 2$3; kathin,
279-80
fetishism, 6; of objects, 335-47
"field of merit": (ndbun, 386-7n26)
(punnakkhetta), 16, 54, 386~7n26
Fifth Buddhist Council, 63, 65
Filliozat, J., 363n24
Finot, Louis, 116, 117, 363n23, n24
First Council, 15, 16, 17
"fluency of discernment," 26-7
folk asceticism, 59, 60, 90
followers: and sources of charisma, 225-7
food (resource of monastic life), 18, 39, 92-3;
forest monks, 85, 103-4
food-restraint (practice), 104
footprints ipdduka) (symbol), 201, 202
foreign disciples, 173; see also Western
disciples
forest hermitages, 27, 185, 259, 333;
administrative organization, 145; branch,
J34> X37> 334; and cult of amulets, 258,
259; daily routine, 103-4, 137, 138,
146-8; different from urban, 175-6;
discipline in, 138; established by disciples of
Acharn Mun, 133, 134; evolving into
establishment organizations, 163-4, 165; of
Maha Boowa, 142, 143-50, 172; represent
Thammayut sect in Northeast, 189-90;
sponsored by sahgha, 163-4; supported by
Bangkok, 155; system of, 310, 334; in
tradition of Acharn Mun, 142; transformed
into militant movements, 318-19
forest saints, 164, 274-89; amulets blessed by,
258-73; charismatic field of, 332-4;
meditation system, 346-7; potential for
400


--- Page 413 ---
Index
exploitation by political authorities, 334;
transfer of power through amulets, 335, 336,
342, 359nio; see also arahant(s);
forest-dwelling monks (drannavdsin)
forest teachers, 133, 139; acclaimed as
arahant, 154-5; in periphery-center dialectic,
184-5; propagation of lay meditation,
168-82; in service of political authorities,
167; supported by highest circles, 189; see
also meditation masters
forest-dweller's monasteries, at city's edge, 71
forest-dweller's practice, 34, 36; sanctioned
by Buddha, 17
forest-dwelling monks (drannavdsin), 2-4, 6,
16, 17, 27, 57-8, 168, 278; ascetic practice
hallmark of, 33; cells of disciples, 333-4;
civilizing role of, 69-70, 77, 141, 185,
393m7; contact with sahgha hierarchy,
359n6; as countervailing agent to religious
establishment, 77; duality; meditation
path/teaching, 137, 139-41, 149, 258-9;
in hermitage of Maha Boowa, 145;
institutionalized networks created by, 60, 65,
71; lay adulation of, 3, 168-9, 344-5;
mystical power of, 338; national prominence
of, 259-60; open to political manipulation,
190; politicization of, 96, 163-4; position
relative to sahgha, 163-4, 259-60;
relationship with kings, 64, 65; relationship
with society, 77; relationship with Thai
dynastic politics, 66-9; sacralization of
amulets, 209, 221, 258; Sinhala sect, 233;
Sri Lanka, 57, 58-61; tradition developed
by, 131; triadic relation with king and
establishment sahgha, 72-5; vocation of
(drahnavdsi/vanavdst), 53, 54, 57-8, 72,
136-9, 165
forest-monk tradition, 53-77, 131, 306;
cosmological dimensions of, 284; paradigms
for, 72-7
founding stories, 297
Four Great Events, 201
Four Noble Truths, 30, 41, 102, 130, 139,
203, 360m 9
Fourth Council, 123
Francis of Assisi, St., 89
Frauwallner, Erich, 116-18, 363^3, n24
Frazer, Sir James: Golden Bough, 337
Fun, Acharn, 138-9, 155, 259
funerary rites: for laity, 145; see also cremation
rites; mortuary rites
gaing(s) (volatile movements and cults), 63,
273, 296, 314-15, 316, 318; in Burma,
298-300; organization of, 310
Galvihara inscription, 57
Ganavipala, Phrakhru Phiphat, 172-6
ganindnse, 355m 3
"gapless wanderer" (sapaddna-cdrin), 33, 37
Gedige Vihare (shrine), 74
General Council of Buddhist Associations, 308
ghosts (preta), 100, 138, 180, 269; see also
spirit world
gift, 340
gift giving (ddna), 169, 178
gifts to monasteries, 62-3
Golden Book, 301, 386n2i
Gombrich, Richard F., 25-6, 255, 256,
375ml, 382n22
Good Law, 23
Gosling, David, 373n2
gratification: path of, 336
Great Man (mahd-purusd), 17
greed (rdga), 51
Griswold, A. B., 75, 195-6, 202, 203-4,
230, 238, 239
guerilla action, 310, 334; see also insurgency
forces
Gunawardana, R. A. L. H., 55
Gunupamacariya, Phra Upali, 87, 96-7
hagiographical tradition, 21, 112, 113, 128,
140; see also biographical traditions,
Buddhist
hagiography, 3, 4, 5; Christian, 114; common
elements in, 124, 125, 127; stereotyped
themes in, 23-4, 132, 190; see also
biography
hagiological tradition, 384m5
hagiology, 265; of forest saints, 85, 86, 284
Hardy, Spence: Manual of Buddhism, A, 20
Haripufijaya (city and kingdom), 123
hate (dosa), 51
Hathayoga, 39
hau (reciprocity), 340
"having been one, he becomes many," 46-7
healing, 179, 256, 295
healing cult, 379n3O
heart (cai), 151, 153
"heaven-hell bridge" (Wat Phuthok), 282, 283
hermitages, 6; Sri Lanka, 58, 59; see also forest
hermitages; wat
Himi, Tapasa, 60-1
Hlnayana Buddhism, 21
Hindu concepts, 338-9; ascetic in, 392m3
Hindu literature, 364^5
Hindus, 377n4
historiography, Buddhist, 114, 115—16,
117-18, 119
Hnyetwin (sect), 63
holy men (chiphdkhdo; khru-bd-dcdn), 60-70,
295, 296, 302; agents of Buddhist polities,
357n37; cities, kingdoms founded by, 294,
296-8; as civilizing agents, 293-4, 297-8;
401


--- Page 414 ---
Index
cults centered on, 319-20; millennial
expectations around, 318-19; as political
insurgents, 294, 298; variety of, 294-6; see
also forest saints
homeless (anagdrika) man, 12
house-dwelling (agdrika) man, 12
house-to-house-seeker's practice, 33, 35, 37
human beings (manussa), 12; differential
capacities and efforts of, 181-2
hypnosis, 352ml
iconography, 201, 203
iddhi powers, 44, 85, 104, 245, 338-9;
acquisition of, 45-9, 50; Luang Pu Waen,
272-3; of phu wiset 294-5
Ignatius of Antioch, 126
image(s), 5, 152; line of authenticated, 230,
254
immaterial and formless states, 39
impermanence, 139, 152
In, Ba, 377n5
In, Phrakhru, 313
indexical icons, 5, 293, 336, 348n3; amulets
as, 262-3
indexical symbol, 4-5, 132; biography of
Acharn Mun as, 190-1; Buddha image as,
204
India, 7, 18, 118, 129; Rice Control Board,
3881137
indicative or prescribed reminders (uddesika;
uddesikacetiya), 201, 202-3; see also
reminders
individual: role of, in history, 321
Indology, 6, 7
Indra, 50, 51, 215, 216, 217
Indrakhila (cult), 216
initiate(s) (sekkha), 12
insight {prajhd: pannd), 12, 17, 26, 29, 30;
methods of, 149; path of, 47; see also
wisdom
insight (vipassand), 90; path of, 42-4
insight, higher (pattapatisambhidd), 14
insight (vipassand) meditation, 41, 160
"insight practice," 139
insurgency forces, 275, 345
intentionality, 181, 200
"internal sitting" (nang thdng nai), 245
Inthira, Khun, 276
Ishii, Yoneo, 294, 313, 314
Islam, 323
Island Hermitage (Sri Lanka), 58-9
Jakobson, Roman, 4
Jambudvlpa, 129, 131
Jdtaka, 104, 114; accounts, 113; collection,
Pali school, 117; tales, 60, 300, 362^3;
tradition, 59
Jayatilaka, D. B., 70
Jespersen, J. O. H., 4
Jetavana fraternity, 73
Jetavana Grove, 122
Jetavana Nikaya, 55, 56
Jethadhiraja, king, 219
jewel(s) (ratanam), 11-12; wheel or gem,
"jewel discourse" (Ratanasuttam), 11-12
jhdna concentration, 42
jhdna consciousness, 39
jhdna levels, 46, 47, 50, 51, 70, 315,
mastery of, 42; in Wat Phuthok cosmography,
281, 282-3
Jinakdlamdll (chronicle), 68, 75, 114, 119,
120-3, 214-15, 218, 231-2, 233, 235,
236-7, 240, 297, 364n25
Jinavarhsa, Kadavadduve, 59-60
Judaeo-Christian charisma (type), 330
Judaism, 322, 323
Jujaka amulets, 226
Juvanon, Khun Mae Noom, 103
Kalidasa: Raghuvamsa, 113
Kalihgabodhi Jdtaka, 201-2
Kalydnamitta ("the good friend"), 41
kdma loka, 50, 51
Kammar, Phra Acharn, 266
Kandyan Kingdom, 57, 58, 73-4
Kanhdjdli amulets, 226
Kaniska (ruler), 113
Kankaw, Nai Kamduang, 82
Kantorowicz, E. H., 330
Kapilavathu (monk), 142-3
Kapilavatthu (place), 122
Karen Telakhon millennial sect, 300-2
karma, 11, 148
Kassapa, 121, 130-1
Kasyapa school, 362n23
kathin: gift to Wat Phuthok, 274-5, 276,
277-80; merit-making presentation,
279-80; see also merit-making ceremonies
Kausambi (place), 23, 117
Kautanya, 16
Keyes, Charles F., 112, 295, 303, 305, 307,
311, 312, 313, 316, 387n32, 3901163
Khamanamool, Mrs., 109
Khambong, monastery, 83
Khandhaka, 363^4
khandhas, 41
Khane, Luang Phau, 228
Khantayakamo, Phra Acharn Singh, 267
Khao, Phra, 98
Khao Yai (Great Mountains), 87
Khaophansa (festival), 283
khattiyas (warriors), 19
Khlao mu thuean amulets, 227
402


--- Page 415 ---
Index
khippdbhihha, n o
Khoman, Thanat, 247
Khon Kaen (province), 189-90
Khuddakanikdya, 21-2
khuddakapdtha (canonical text), n
Khun Chang Khun Phden (novel), 225
' 'king of righteousness" (thdo thammikardt, phu
mi bun), 312-13
King of Thailand: sponsorship of amulets,
263-5
kings: appropriation of past glories by,
377ml; cakkavatti, 67; legitimation of,
through palladia, 210, 218, 231, 233,
236, 240-2; occult powers of, 337-8;
relation with forest monks, 64, 65; relation
with sahgha, 76-7; ritual officiants, 214;
secular head of sahgha, 189; temporarily
ordained, 68, 75, 157; triadic relationship
with establishment sahgha and forest
monks, 72-5; vamsa of, 63, 118, 211-12,
319
kingship, 1, 56, 118, 241, 332; fusion with
bodhisattvaship, 214; ideal, 2
Kirinda (hermitage), 59
Kirsch, A. T., 163-4
Klrti Sri Rajasin/ia, king, 255, 355m3
Kittikachorn, Thanom (prime minister), 190,
37in22
Kittivuddho, Phra, 190, 295
Kloppenborg, Ria, 19
"knowledge of arising and passing away," 43,
44
Kornfield, Jack, 137, 140, 142, 149, 150
Kramrisch, Stella, 257
Krisanasuwan, Police Maj. Somnuek, 261
Kuena, king, 67, 237
kula valuables, 340, 341-4
Kumdn thdung amulets, 225
Kumbhanda (genii), 215
Kumbirigala forest hermitage, 90
Kunakaun, Phrakhru Wimon, 377m 3
Kundopodhanlya, 23
Kurandaka (Great Cave at), 32
Kwang, Bun, 310-11
labor protests, 187
labor unions, 345
Ladurie, Emmanuel Le Roy: Montaillou, 129
laity (laymen), 1, 5, 13, 16, 31, 158, 191,
318; and arahantship, 14-15, 23-4; craving
for exemplary saints, 60, 61; custodianship of
Dhamma, 200, 206; education of, 161-2;
fetishism of objects, 335, 336; hierarchy of
achievements, 181-2; in millennial move-
ments, 315; pious, 178; propagation of
meditation to, 3, 167, 168-82, 183-91,
306; pure religion taken to, 161; relation with
Acharn Mun, 91, 135, 136; relation with
forest monks, 287; relation with hermitage of
Maha Boowa, 146; relation with sahgha,
76-j; in sacralizing process, 246, 248-9,
255; and Slwichai, 302, 303; sponsorship by,
6, 260, 261; and Thammayut sect, 163-4,
188; use of amulets, 278, 342
lak mueang ("pillar of the city" of Bangkok),
244-5
Lalitavistara, 115, 117
Lamotte, Etienne, 21, 22, 23, 117, 363^4
Lamphun (city), 67
Lan Na (kingdom) (Chiengmai), 57; kings of,
202
Land Rent Control Act, 374n8
Laos, 345
later-food-refuser's practice, 34, 35
Law (the), 22, 23; see also Dhamma
Law of Dependent Origination, 97
Le Clere, Adhemard, 255; Cambodge Fetes
Civiles et Religieuses, 251-4
learning (pariyatti) (vocation), 16, 19-20,
53> 54> 353nI> n3i see also study
Ledi Sayadaw, 305
Lee, Phra Acharn, 267
Lek (leader), 314
Leke sect, 386m9
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 262; Savage Mind,
The,n&
levitation, 26, 44, 85, 272, 389^6
liberation, 140, 333, 358n4; goal, 126,
127, 168, 330; path, 164
Life or Legend of Gaudama, The (Bigandet),
130
lineage charisma, 326
Lion's posture, 108
literacy, 112, 168
Lithai (Li Thai, Lideya), king (Maha Dhammaraja
I), 66, 75, 211, 235, 376n4
Little, David, 322
Loe Thai, king, 75
Loei (province), 189-90
Lohapasada (Brazen Palace, Anuradhapura), 12
lokapdla (guardians), 50
lokas (worlds), 49
Lokottaravadins, 362-3^3
loving-kindness (mettd), 16, 139, 219, 259,
342; radiated by Acharn Mun, 93-4, 95, 97
luang phau (respected father), 200, 376n3
Luang Phau Cittralada amulets, 264-5
Luang Phau To (image), 377n9
Luang PC Waen medallion, 337F
Luce, G. H., 356n25
Luther, M., 328
magic, 323, 339
magical art (saiyasdt), 154, 199, 227
403


--- Page 416 ---
Index
magical practices (saiyawet), 267, 272-3
Maha Boowa, Acharn, 4, 138, 158; Bangkok
connections, 155-9, J84, 189; biography of
Mun, 81, 104, i n , 112, 128, 143-4,
154-5, 189, 293, 365nio; as disciple and
biographer, 133, 139-41; as exemplary
forest-monk, 142-53; forest hermitage of,
142, 143-50, 172; rational/tantric strains in,
306; teaching, instruction, 147-9, 150-3
Maha Dhammaraja, Somdet Phra, 211
Mahabrahma, king, 235, 236
Mahaculalongkaun (monks' university), 170,
184, 186, 373n5
Mahaculalongkaun Monks' University Fund,
178
Mahakassapa (Maha Kasyapa), 16-17, 21, 2 2,
57, 356n25, 36on22
Maha-Katyayana, 22
Mahamakut Monks' University, 81, 156, 159,
Mahamakut Press, 158, 189
Mahamakuta Rajavidyalaya Foundation, 156,
189
Mahamakutarajavidyalaya, 161
Maha-Maudgalyayana, 22
Mahamaya, queen, 121
Maha-mitta, elder, 32-3
Mahamoggallana, 21, 48-9, 122
mahd-ndyaka (monk leader), 57
Mahanikai (Mahanikaya) sect, 5, 71, 73-4,
138, 158, 174, 183, 268, 368n5, n6;
geographical divisions of, 370m9; monaster-
ies of, 37On2o; Pramunuchit abbot of,
370m8; propagation of lay meditation by,
168-82; rivalry with Thammayut sect, 154,
160, 163, 164, 165, 166-7, 186-91;
village- and town-dwelling, 259; Wat Mahathat
foremost monastery of, 246
mahdpannd (great wisdom), 104; see also
wisdom ipahha)
Mahdparinibbdna Sutta, 20, 116, 130, 200,
206, 36in3O, 365nio, 384^15
Mahaprajapati (foster mother of Buddha),
359ni5
Mahdsamaya Sutta, 104
mahdsdmi (head of sahgha), 57
Mahasami (monk), 75
Mahasammata, 117, 120, 121
mahdsati (great-mindfulness), 104
mahd-sthavira (monk), 57
Mahdsudassana Sutta, 11, 216, 378^3,
Mahdvagga, 18, 113, 116
Mahdvamsa (chronicle), 12, 25, 28-9, 54,
114, 119-20, 121, 123, 255, 364n25, n3
Mahdvastu, 115, 117, 362^3
Mahavihara fraternity, 38, 73
Mahavihara (Great Monastery) Nikaya, 28-9,
55, 56, 57, 35^2
Mahavihara tradition, 356n34
Mahawirong, Somdet, 374ml
Mahawithudarama Taik (monastery), 64
Mahayana Buddhism, 17, 19, 21, 23, 24, 206;
Buddha image in, 203, 231; doctrine of
presence in, 204-5
Maheikdi gaing, 298-9
Mahinda, 122
Mahinda IV, 56
Mahlsasaka: Vinaya of, 116
Mahiyangana (place), 120
Mahodara (ndga-king), 122
Maine, Sir Henry, 339
Maitreya Buddha, 17, 22, 23, 50, 298, 299,
306
Majjhima Nikaya, 12-13
Makhabucha (festival), 146, 250, 283
Malai, Phra, 359n5
Malalgoda, K., 111-12
malaria, 92, 105, 106
Malaya Sutta, 359n5
Malaysia, 156
Maliyadeva, 25
Malwatta fraternity, 74
Malwatta monastery, 57-8, 74
man ipurisa), 12
Man, Acan, 112; see also Mun, Phra Acharn
Man, Ong, 313-14; see also Mun, Phra
Acharn
mana, 338-41
mandala, 207
Mandalay, 64
Mangaladebamuni, Caokhun, 170
Mangalapabitra image, 196
Mahgalatthadlpanl (commentary), 66
Mangalyayana, 363^4
Mango Grove, 74-5
Mango Grove Monastery, 66, 69
Mangrai, king, 67
Mani Mekhala (goddess), 216
Manljoti (resplendent jewel), 215
Manjusri, 23
Manorathapurani, 21
mantra, 139, 199
Manual of a Mystic, The, 38, 70, 90
Manual of Buddhism, A (Hardy), 20
Mara, 24, 130, 38onio
Maramma (Upper Burma) Sangha, 62
Martaban, 66
martyr(s), martyrology, 125-7
Marx, Karl, 6, 340-1
mass media, 170
Matichon (newspaper), 260
Maudgalyayana, 116, see also Moggallana
Mauss, Marcel, 6, 338-41; The Gift, 339
404


--- Page 417 ---
Index
Maya (mother of Buddha), 113, 120, 3601117
means/ends relationship, 45-6, 323
Medhamkara, MahasamI, 68
Medhankara (monk), 354m2
medicine (resource of monastic life), 18, 63
meditation (vipassanddhura) (vocation), 5, 16,
19, 27, 33, 63, 71, 138, 140, 367116; of
body, 139; Burmese system of, 171, 173-4,
175, I77> 305-6; combined with preaching
and teaching, 59; dissemination and popular-
ization of, 167, 168-82; in esoteric
Buddhism, 316; lay interest in, 3; middle
ranges of, 44-5; path of, 392-3ni3; postures
of, 149; sectarianism and sponsorship of,
154-67; stages and rewards of, 38-52;
stress on, in forest hermitages, 148; subjects
of, 41, 56, 332; supports of, 151; traditions
of, 99, 169; Visuddhimagga classical
Theravada treatise on, 28; vocation, 2, 3, 53,
54, 160, 191, 354n3; see also meditation
system
meditation manuals, 330, 332
meditation masters, 6, 45, 85, 134, 258, 310;
holy men contrasted with, 299, 302, 307;
regional heritage of, 306; source of charisma,
332; transfer of power to amulets in (nang
prok), 243, 245, 247, 254, 260
meditation sponsorship, 183-91
meditation system, 137, 306, 324; of Acharn
Cha, 137, 138; of Acharn Fun, 139; of
Acharn Mun, 91-2; in history, 346-7; of
Maha Boowa, 149, 150-3
meditation training, 42, 170, 173-4, 175-6,
177, 178-82, 331
meditative states, 49-52
meditator, 39
Menam Basin, 69
Mendelson, E. Michael, 61-2, 63, 298, 299,
315
mendicancy, 355m 3
mental formations (sahkhdra), 152, 179
mental image, 352ml
mentality-materiality (ndma-rupa), 47
merit (bun), 182
merit making, 38, 81, 169, 229, 284; relics
and, 200, 201
merit-making ceremonies, 146, 174; see also
kathin
messianic hopes, 298, 299, 311, 314
Mettathammarot, Caokhun, 37in22
Middle Path, 17
Migara, 122
Milarepa (saint), 128
Milinda, king, 14, 215, 217
millennial Buddhism, 6, 293-320, 326, 334;
defined, 319-20
millennialism, 162, 273
mind (citta), 149; seven classes of, 13-14
mind reading, 26
mindfulness (one-pointedness), 39-41, 42, 50,
51, 84, 104, 138, 139; Acharn Mun, 86,
87,95
mindfulness of breathing (dndpdnasati), 39,
149, 151, 179; cessation of, 50; Maha
Boowa, 146, 148, 151; restraint by, 31
"mind-made body," 206
Mindon, king, 63, 64, 65, 68
Mindon sects, 63
"miracles," 313, 314
missionaries, American Protestant, 386m9;
Christian, 112, 301, 386m9
missionary work (dhammaduta) movement, 96,
184, 373n5, 393ni7
missions, 120
Mo, Phrakhru, 213
modernism, 58, 59
Moggallana (disciple of Buddha), 15-16, 17,
19, 101
moksta, 338
Mommsen, Wolfgang J., 321, 39ini4
monasteries, 55, 138; "branch," 176-7;
center-periphery location, 72-5; location of,
67, 71; Mahanikai, 188; national educational
program disseminated through, 162; royal,
162-3; Sinhala sect, 69; Thammayut sect,
165-6, 188-9; urban, village, 169, 170,
174, 175-6, 188, 189, 190; wealth of,
188-9; see also forest hermitages; wat
Monastery of the Great Relic, 69
monastic centers, national, 169-70
monastic communities, 1, 128, 165
monastic education, 169, 367n6, 37on22;
reform of, 161, 163
monastic establishment, the, 2-3; see also
sahgha, establishment
monastic leadership: seniority vs. charisma,
16-17
monastic life: four "resources" of (nissaya),
18
monastic reform, 16, 53, 59, 60, 69, 73, 164,
306, 355ni3, ni6; Burma, 62, 63; demands
for, 187; evolves into establishment religion,
165; Sri Lanka, 56-7; Thailand, 66, 67, 70;
Thammayut sect, 160, 161
monastic rules, 117; see also disciplinary rules;
Vinaya
monastic schools, 163
monastic sects, i n
monasticism: Christian/Buddhist compared,
149-50
Mongkut, king, 64, 70, 71, 157, 158-61,
164, 210, 212, 219, 221, 222, 259, 306,
376n4; chose Pramunuchit supreme patriarch,
370m8; founder of Thammayut sect,
405


--- Page 418 ---
Index
159-60, 163, 165, 305, 368n5; monaster-
ies founded by, 370m 7; ordained sons of,
368n4; presided at Wat Bovonniwet, 369ml
monkeys, 89
monks: collaboration with government, 161-3,
184-5, J86, 190, 393m7; degenerate, 227;
education of, 112 (see also monastic
education); place of origin, 188; political
power/threat of, 167, 186-7; radical,
political, 308; ranking of spiritual achieve-
ment, 12-13; relation with laity, 37, 54;
relation with rulers, 37On22; religious
specialization, 135-9, J6o, 221, 358n4,
372nio; role in enlightening people, 161-2;
sacralization of amulets, 208, 213, 219-23;
temporary, 173, 181; traditional, 25-6;
transfer of power through sacralization,
243-57> 359nio; vocations, 16, 53-4; see
also dhutahga monks; forest-dwelling monks
(drahnavdsin); village- and town-dwelling
monks (gdmavdsllnagaravdst)
Mon-Lava tradition, 379n28
monuments, 127
moral causality (doctrine), 115
morality (slid), 101, 102-3, 124, 150-1,
More, Sir Thomas, 124
mortification of the flesh (tapas), 17-18
mortuary rites, 71, 131, 387^2
Mount Meru, 50
Mount Sineru, 48, 49
Mount Yugandhara, 48
Muchalinda (serpent), 201
mileang (principality), 381m
Mulasarvastivadin: Vinaya of, 116, 117
Mulasarvastivadin school, 362n23, 363^4
Mulasdsana (chronicle), 75
Mun, Phra Acharn, 81-110, 112, 149, 162,
163, 175, 184, 189, 222, 260, 295,
306-7; Acharn Cuan disciple of, 280;
achievement of arahantship, 96-100; biogra-
phy of, 128-31, 132, 154-5, 159, 190-1,
284, 293, 365nio; contrasted with Slwachai,
305; created cells of disciples at nodal points,
134-5, 258; cult around relics of, 366n7;
death of, 90, 91; deeds credited to, 100-1;
disciples of, 86, 88, 90-3, 94-5, 98, 100,
101, 102, 103-4, 105-8, n o , 129,
132-41, 148, 258-9; duality: meditation/
teaching, 137, 149, 258-9; fatal illness and
mortuary rites, 107-10; individual guidance
of disciples by 93, 98, 106; interpretation of
biography of, in Buddha paradigm, 114-15,
120-1, 131, 132; and Luang Phau Pang
/ discipleship, 286; Luang Pu Waen's associa-
tion with, 265, 268-9, 271, 272; Maha
Boowa as disciple and biographer, 139-41,
143; as model, 98; peripatetic wanderings,
85, 90-107, 128-9, I33~4> 258; queried
Buddha re images, 204; quintessential forest
saint, 333; relationship with mother, 95-6;
rites for, 387n32; teaching, instruction,
101-3, 104, 105, 106, 107, 128, 133
munimuni, 12
munis, 12
Mus, Paul, 7, 205, 378m6
mutta-muttaka, 54
Mutukan, Co. Pin, 186, 37in22
mystic powers (iddhi), 16, 32-3; available
through meditation, 38; available to arahants,
20-1; (saksii), 338; see also iddhi
powers; supranormal (supramundane) powers
(abhinnd)
mystical visions, 139
mysticism, 324
myths, 7
ndga-kings, 94, 122
Nagara order, 68
Nagara Sri Dharmaraja, 233, 235, 236
ndgas, 38onio
Nagasena (monk), 14-15, 201, 215, 216, 217
Nai Sai, 266
Nai Sopha, 266
Nakhon Phanom (province), 190
Namone (village), 103, 104, 105
Nanagambhlra (monk), 68
Nanamoli, Bhikkhu, 28, 31, 45
Nanarama (monk), 59-60
Nandopananda (royal Ndga), 49
Nang Beng, 266
Nang Chan, 82
Nang Kaeo, 266
Nang Kwak amulets, 225
Narai, king, 211, 311
Naresuan, king, 211; amulets, 261-3
National Museum of Bangkok, 239
nationalism, 374m2
navandanna caste, 355n2i
Nawaphon (nationalist movement), 347m2
ndyakas (chief monk), 58
"neither-perception-nor-nonperception," 44, 50
New Year (festival), 283
nibbdna, 13, 22, 23, 29, 45, 153, 206,
389^6; attaining, 42, 43, 44; goal of
meditation, 151; as signless state, 36on2i;
see also nirvana
Niddna Bra Buddhasihihga ,121
Niddnakathd, 115, 117, 363^4, 365nio
Niddesa, 12
Nietzsche, F., 321
nikdyas (sects, fraternities), 17, 55
Nirmdna-Kdya (buddhas as humans), 205
nirodha (cessation), 44, 45
406


--- Page 419 ---
Index
nirvana, 17, 26, 338; see also nibbdna
Nithipat, Mr., 279
Nitiphat, Khun, 276
Niwattammakhan, Phrakhru, 377m 3
Noble Disciples, 95, n o
Noble Eightfold Path, 29-30, 153, 351 n8
noble man (ariya), 12
NokKhum amulets, 227
NongPhue, 134
Nong Phue forest hermitage, 105, 106, 107
nonreturner (andgdmi), 44, 88, 91, 95, 97,
n o , 358n7
Notton, Camille, 202
novices, 32, 144, 372MO
nuns (bhikkhunt), 21
nuns (mde cht), 95, 136, 360m 5, 37in6;
forest hermitage of Maha Boowa, 144-5;
initiation of, 173
Nyanaponika (monk), 59
Nyanatiloka (monk), 59
Obermiller, E., 363^4
objects: fetishism of, 335-47; mediating social
relations, 6
occult, the, 316, 337-8
O'Connor, Richard Allan, 71
office charisma, 326-7, 329, 330, 332
Olcott, Col. H. S.,7
Oldenberg, Hermann, 115, 116, 360m5
omniscience, 19
"once-returner," 44
one-sessioner's practice, 33, 35
open-air-dweller's practice, 34, 36-7
ordinary man (puthujjana), 12
ordination, 259; higher (upasampadd), 12, 18,
355ni3; of images, 251, 255; of kings, 75;
regulation of, 163; seniority in, 99
ordination lineages, 69, 133
orthodoxy, 53-4, 138, 162
paccekabuddhas, 12, 14, 19-20, 294
paccekamuni, 12
Pagan, 70, 215
Pagan, king of, 55, 62, 64
pain, 15; see also suffering {dukkha)
Pakokku (sect), 63
Palace of the Tooth Relic (DaladdMdligdva), 74
palat khik amulets, 228
Palatphanom, Phrakhru, 179
Pali canon, 7, 21, 38, 63, 206; search for most
correct form of, 377n4
Pali literature, 66
Pali Pitakas, 13
Pali scholarship, 28, 68, 71, 161, 165, 221,
305
Pali school, 362^3, 363^4; Vinaya of, 116
''Pali Text Society mentality," 7
Pali texts: life of Buddha in, 113, 115, 116,
117; translation of, into local languages, 168
Pali tradition, 17
palladia, 5, 75, 335; Buddha images as, 202,
210, 214, 239; as legitimating power, 241-2;
Sinhala Buddha as, 231, 236
pdrhsukula (rag-robes of Blessed), 22, 33
Parhsukulikas, 54, 55-6
Pancasatasthavirdvaddna, 22
Pang, Luang Phau, 286-7, 293» forest hermit-
age of, 283-9
Pang, Luang Pu, 198, 287-8
Pannananda (monk), 59-60
Pannasami: Sdsanavarhsa, 62
Pannavaddho, Phra, 142-3, 147, 148, 149-50
Paradises (Sukhdvatis), 205
Parakkama (monk), 62
Parakrama Bahu I, 56, 57, 255, 354m2
Parakrama Bahu II, 57, 354m2
Paramanuchitchinorot, H. R. H.: Pathamasam-
bodhikathd, 365nio
Paramaraja II, king (Cao Sam Phraya), 222
paramat (radical groups), 63
participation, 170, 341
passing away (parinibbdna), 27, 45, 49
passing away without remainder (anupddisesa-
nibbdna), 99
Pataliputra (city), 113
"path knowledge," 153
Path of Bliss, 138-9
Path of Fruition, 103
"Path of Purity" (Buddhaghosa), 13
Path to Liberation (Upatissa), 38
Pathamasambodhikathd (Paramanuchitchinorot),
365nio
Pdtimokkha (code of monastic discipline), 92;
confessionals, 146, 349m8; recitations, 105
pativedha (realization), 367n6
Pavares, abbot, 220, 221, 368n3
Pavaret, prince, 157, 370m8
peace of mind (cai sangop), 179, 180
Peasant Federation, 374n8
peasant revolts, 308, 310, 316, 345
Peindola (Pindola thera), Shin, 24, 25
Peirce, Charles, 4, 204
pentadic relations, 75-7
perahera (ritual of state), 58, 73-4
"perception of lightness," 46
perceptions (sannd), 152
personal spiritual development, 20
personality, 41
phd yan cloths, 260-1, 375n2
phapa gifts, 384n9
phaya (bhaya) (fear), 180
Phetracha, king, 311
phi, 383m5
Phibunsongkhram (prime minister), 37On22
407


--- Page 420 ---
Index
Phimolatham, Phra, 155, 166, 167, 169,
170-1,172,174, 175, 176, 177,181-2,
183, 184, 186-7, 189, 305-6, 370-11122;
movement of, 3721110
phithlpluk sekphra (ceremony), 200
phongsdwaddn literature, 364^8
phra (term), 103
Phra Buddha Sihing chronicle, 68, 232, 233,
235, 237-8
Phra Chin (amulet), 213
Phra KanchaisT (deity), 38in2
Phra kring amulets, 208, 220-3
Phra Mueang Kaeo, king, 67, 68
Phra Ngang amulets, 225
Phra Ruang amulets, 223
Phra Sam Buddha Banni, 376n4
Phra Sihing (the Sinhala Buddha/the Lion
Buddha) (statue), 66
Phra Siwali amulets, 225-6
phra somdet, 208
phra somdet amulets, 219-20, 221
Phra Song Mueang (deity), 38in2
Phra Sri Sasta (statue), 209
Phra Suea Mueang (deity), 38in2
Phramahawirawong, Somdet, 166
Phrasangwan, Somdet, 169
Phraya Thammikarat (righteous ruler), 313
Phrom, Ba, 377ns
Phrommawaksangwaun, Phrakhru, 372nio
Phu, Luangpu, 221, 222
Phu Chaik, 300-2
phu ml bun (men of merit), 294, 295, 310,
311, 312, 313-14, 315; relation with phu
wiset, 313, 314
phu wiset, 294-5, 312, 313, 314, 315
pilgrimage (kdn doen thudong), 268, 284; see
also doen thudong
pilgrims, 62
pinda, 33
Pindola Bharadvaja, 23
Pinitchonakedee, Phra, 276
Pit td hd lap amulets, 225
Pit td mahd amulets, 225
Pitakas, 29
Pld ngoenpld thdung amulets, 226
Plae, Luang Phau, 227-8
political authorities: collectors of amulets, 345;
consecration of Buddha images, 217; propaga-
tion of religion by, 159; relation with sahgha,
3, 166-7; seek legitimacy from forest monks,
275; Thammayut sect's alliance with, 165
political legitimacy: through Buddha statues,
210, 218, 231, 233, 236, 240-2
political power/threat: of monks, 167, 183-4,
186-7
political system: contrasted with social field of
forest monks, 333, 334
politico-religious connection, 5, 161-3, 190,
214, 246, 274, 298; in cult of amulets, 244,
260; in cults, 316-17; in dissemination of
meditation to laity, 171
politics: and triadic relation of king/establishment
sahgha/fortst monks, 275
Polonnaruva (Sri Lanka), 55, 56
Polonnaruva period, 66
Pomphan (millionaire), 220
Poussin, Louis de La Valee, 206, 363^4
power: sing-saksit (sacred thing imbued with
power), 229, 382n5, 389^6, 39ini4; of
amulets, 208, 209, 219; of Buddha images,
230, 231: concerns with, in millennial
movements,317,318,319; differential distri-
bution of, 342-4; of Emerald Buddha,
215-17; invulnerability against arms, 309,
310; mana as milieu of, 338; networks of
forest hermitages as grid of, 334;
objectification of, in objects, 339-40;
through possession of palladia, 241-2; re-
minders as repositories of, 303; of Sinhala
Buddha, 239; statue with power (phrakhlang),
246; transferred by monks through sacrali-
zation, 243-57, 260, 335, 336
Powerbolt-Holder, 376m 9
P'ra Bang (image), 379n29
practice (pratipatti, patipatti) (vocation), 16,
53, 54, 354m, 113, 367n6, 372nio; empha-
sis on, as opposed to study, 148, 174; see
also vipassanddhura
Prajathipok, prince, 157
Pramoj, Kukrit, 275, 276, 277
Pramoj, Seni, 276
Pramunuchit, prince, 370m8
Pran Partishta (ceremony), 382m3
Prdtimoksa, 116; see also Pdtimokkha
preachers (dhammakathikd), 16
predestination, 330
Premchit, Sommai, 67
princes: temporarily ordained, 157, 368n4
printing press, 112, 156, 161
"Program for Teaching Villages, The," 373n5
property interests, 62-3
prophecies, 312-13, 319; exemplary/emissary,
322, 324
prophetic revelation, 329, 331
prophets: exemplary, 324; millennial, 309
Protestantism: charisma in, 327-9
pseudo-nirvana, 43, 44
Pubbarama (Puppharama) Monastery, 68, 122
publication program, 156
purification, 29, 30; through dhutahga, 17
purification, path of, 28-37, 336, 3 9 2 ^ 1 3 ;
open to laity, 182; and stream of history,
408


--- Page 421 ---
Index
346-7; Wat Phuthok as icon of, 281
puritanical sects, 63
Purna-Maitrayanlputra, 22
Putlawithinayok (Bun), Phra, 213
Questions of King Milinda, The, 13-14, 20,
30, 201
Raghuvamsa (Kalidasa), 113
Rahula, W., 54
Rahula (son of Buddha), 22, 23, 113
rain making, 24, 214
rains-retreat (vassa), 74
Rajagaha (Rajagfha), 19, 117
Rdjavaihsa, 120
Rajavaramuni, Chaokhun, 367m3
Rajavinayabara, Caokhun, 369m3
Rakyom amulets, 223, 228
Rama I, king, 75, 214, 239, 379n29, n33
Rama II, king, 157, 212, 379n33
Rama III, king, 158, 368n2, 377ni5
Rama IV (Mongkut), king, 212; see also
Mongkut, king
Rama V, king, 209, 212-13
Rama IX, king, 239-40
Ramanna Nikaya (sect), 59, 60
Ramesuan, king, 211, 212
Ramitanondh, Shalardchai, 163
Ramkhamhaeng, king, 66, 233, 235
Rammana, 70
Rammanadesa (place), 75
Ratanabimbavamsa (chronicle), 214
Ratanapanna (monk), 218
Ratchakuson, Ba, 377n5
Ratchasang, Ba, 377n5
rational action, 42, 322-5, 39in6
rationalist path, 135, 139-41, 161, 258-9,
307
rationality: formal (instrumental), 45, 39in6;
substantive (absolutist), 39in6
Rattanakosin celebrations, 239-40
rebellions: charisma as stimulus for, 326
rebirth, 26, 119, 121, 313, 384ni5
"recollection of past lives," 26, 47-8, 49
recollections: ten kinds of, 39
reflection, 14
refuse-rag-wearer's practice, 33, 34
regalia, 6, 241, 335
relic basket (karanduva), 74
relic shrine (Mahadhatu), 72
relics, 5, 6, 127, 130-1, 200-5, 3871132;
Acharn Mun's ashes, 109-10; see also
Buddha relics
religion (sdsana), 5, 7, 54, 56, 112, 118, 119;
Burmese, 315-16; cognitive-emotional di-
chotomy in, 324-5; learning as basis of,
354n3; organizational structure of, 57;
primitive, 323; propagation of, 159, 162,
170, 237
religiosity, popular, 140-1, 168-82, 185,
196, 305; and forest monks, 284, 287
religious authorities: propagation of religion by,
159
religious change, 8
religious charisma, 325-7, 330-2; see also
charisma
religious specialization, 221, 358n4; polariza-
tion in, 135-9, J6o
remembrance of past, 389n56
reminders, 231, 254, 335, 387032
reminders by association (paribhogika, pari-
bhogacetiya), 201, 202
renouncer(s), 125, 318; authenticity of, 128-9
renouncer saint (arahant), 126, 127; see also
arahant(s)
renunciation quest, 330
"reserved points" (avydkrtavastu), 21
"restraint of the faculties," 31, 32
Revata, 16
Reynolds, Frank E., 115, 206, 365nio
Rhys Davids, Mrs. C. A. F., 70
Rhys Davids, T. W., 13, 115, 357n39
right livelihood, 31
righteous ruler (dharmardja), 306, 319, 332
ritual acts, 119, 139, 273, 316, 346; trans-
formed into militancy, 318-19
ritual articles (khriieang sakkdra), 245
robe (resource of monastic life), 18
royal ordinations, 157-8, 159-60, 368n4
royal sponsorship: of monks, hermitages, 155,
157-8, 163, 184, 189, 265; of religion,
162, 165-6; of Thammayut sect, 187-8,
189
"royal vocabulary" (rdjdsabda), 196
Ruang, Phra, 223
ruest(rsj) (holy men), 69, 119, 295-6
ruler(s): brahman and ksatriya, 2; lack of stable
dynasties, 241; see also kings
riipa brahma loka, 50, 51
rupakaya, 206
Sd Sapda (Glorious Week) (journal), 81
sacralization, 203, 230; of amulets, 154, 200,
258, 260-5; process of, 243-57
sacralized water, 138, 196
sacred cord, 245, 247, 248, 260
sacred formula (gdthd), 196
sacred knowledge, 119, 129-31
sacred objects, 196, 203-4; fetishism of,
335-47
sacred words (sek khdthd), 243
sacrifice, 119
409


--- Page 422 ---
Index
Saddharmaratna-karaya (compendium), 376023
Sahlins, Marshall, 340
Sai amulets, 226
saintliness: savior/mystical traditions, 305-6,
307
saints, see arahant(s)
sakaddgdmins, 13
Sakka (Indra) (deity), 29, 50, 100, 122
Sakon Nakhon (town), 91
Sdkyamunibuddhacarita, 115
said, 144, 145
Sdlikd kha amulets, 226
salvation, 20, 27
salvation Path, 207, 335
salvation quest, 15
salvation religions, 324
Sam Fang Kaen, king, 67
Sambhoga-Kdya (beatific body), 205, 206
Samgha Sametgyi Association, 309
Sammana-Phala Sutta, 20
sammasdmbuddha (complete Buddha), 12, 14
Samnak Pu Sawan (place), 379n3O
Samnak Song Aranyawiwek, 271
safhvega, 88, 97
Sangarajavata, 361ns
sahgha (order of monks), 1, 16, 41, 99, 120,
190, 355ni6, 37oni9; administrative organi-
zation of, 57-8, 70-1, 166-7, 186-7;
Burmese, 62, 63, 64, 65; Council of Elders
(Mahdtherasamdkhom), 157, 167, 186, 187,
189, 393m7; custodian of Buddhist doctrine,
118, 119, 206; declining legitimacy of, 345,
346; disciplined social relations, 347;
"disestablishment" of by British in Burma,
308; duality of vocations in, 2-3, 53-4, 72,
73, 160, 165, 259; Ecclesiastical Assembly,
187; Ecclesiastical Cabinet (Khana Sangkha-
montri), 170; exploited by government,
186-7; internal differentiation, 191; as
"merit field" (punnakkhetta), 54; missionary
efforts by, 156, 184; national, 70, 160,
162-3; opposition to, by Slwichai, 302,
303-4; politics of, 155; predominantly
Northeastern monks, 177, 183, 188; Prince
Pavaret head of, 370m8; reform of, 161,
162 (see also monastic reform); reformist
orthodoxy radiated out from Bangkok, 221;
relation with forest monks, 163-4, 259-60;
relation with kingship, 2; relation with laity,
76-7; relation with political authority, 185;
restraint by rules of (Patimokkha), 31; royal
patronage of, 165-6; sacralization by, 344;
sectarian rivalry within, 155 (see also
sectarianism); unified, hierarchization, 317
sahgha, establishment, 17, 20; Acharn Cha and,
138; activities of, 169; contrasted with social
field of forest saint, 333-4; cooperation with
government, 393m7; crisis of, 128; triadic
relation with king and forest monks, 72-5
Sahgha Act of 1902, 71, 162
Sangha Act of 1941, 186, 187, 370n22
Sangha Act of 1963, 186, 187
sahgha hierarchy, 99, 379n33; and dhutahga
monks, 129; forest-order communities in, 71
sahghardja, 333
Sangharaja Sadhucariyava, 36in5
Sankatayan, Somdet Phra Ariyawong, 261
sannydsi, 32
Sanphasitiprasong, prince, 312
Sao, Phra Acharn, 85-6, 105
Sao Kantasilo, Phra Acharn, 83
Saranarhkara, Valvita, 53, 58, 70, 111-12
Sarika Cave, 87-90, 91
Sariputra (disciple of Buddha), 15, 16, 19, 21,
22, 101, 116, 122, 354ni2, 36on22,
363^4; mortuary rites, 366m4
Sariputta, Thera, 120
Sarit, prime minister, 166-7, 183, 187,
370-11122, 375n5
Sarkisyanz, E., 309
Sarn, Phra, 98
Sarvastivadin school, 363^4
Sasanasobhana, Phra (Phra Cham), 213
Sdsanavaihsa (Pannasami), 62, 364n25
Sasta, Phra Sri, 212
Sathimmajotika (monk), 172
Satipatthdnasutta, 38, 175
Savage Mind, The (Levi-Strauss), 118
Saya San rebellion (Burma), 307-10, 311,
312,317
Sayadaw, Mahasi, 172, 175, 177
Sayadaw, Sankin, 65
Sayadaw, Shangalegyun, 64
Sayadaw, Shwegyin, 64-5
Sayadaw, Taungdaw, 65
schisms, 117, 118, 119, 120, 304
scholar monks, scholarship (ganthadhura)
(vocation), 7,8, 70; see also study (pariyatti)
(vocation)
Scott, James C , 309, 310
sectarianism, 5, 67, 308; Burma, 63; resur-
gence of, 187-91; and sponsorship of
meditation, 154-67; weakened Thammathut
program, 186-7
sekhamuni, 12
self-mortification, 17-18
self-ordination, 60-1
Sena II, 56
Seng, Luang Phau, 228
sexual energy: transmitted into siddhi,
sexuality, 351m 3
Sgaw Karen, 296
shifter (concept), 4
410


--- Page 423 ---
Index
Shils, Edward, 6, 326, 329
Shwegyin (sect), 63-6, 68, 77
Siddhatha, prince, 121
"signless liberation" (animitta-vimokkha), 44
signless state, 207, 36on2i
signs, 4
Slhala Sangha, 62
Slhala sect, 68, 75
Sung amulets, 227
Singto amulets, 227
Singtong, Acharn, 367ns
Sinhala Buddha, 5, 121, 215, 218, 219,
230-42, 295; authenticity of, 238-40;
travels of, 233-6, 241
Sinhala Kingdom, 55
Sinhala orders: Thailand, 67-8
Sinhala sangha, 55; purification of, 56-7
Sinhala sect, 66, 233, 237
Sinhalese Buddhism, 56, 218, 235, 364^5
Sinhalese Elders, 28-9
Sinhalese healing rituals, 256
Sinhalese kings, 123
Sinhalese religious documents, 28-9
Slphueng amulets, 226
Sirirat Hospital, 266
Sitha, Phra, 89
Sittachetavanna, 154
sitter's practice, 34
Slwichai, Khruba, 112, 162, 163, 174, 295,
302-7, 317, 3871132
Siyam Nikaya (sect), 53, 59, 112
Skandhaka, 113, 117, 362^3
Skandhaka, Old, 364^4
Smith, Wilfred Cantwell, 7
Sobhuna, Phra, 177
social action: charisma as constitutive feature of,
326; modes of, 321-5
social order, 2; monks as, 347
social relations (Thailand), 336-7, 338,
339-40, 341, 342; aggression in, 228-9;
mediated by objects, 6
Sohm, Rudolf, 327-9
Somchai (student), 197-9
sorrow {dukkha), 149
sotdpanna, 13
spirit world, 93, 94, 100, 268-9, 286,
3831115, 386ni3
spiritual achievement, hierarchy of, 11-15
Spiro, Melford, 315, 316
SravastI (place), 117
Sravasti, twin feat of, 20
Sri Kalyani Yogasrama Samsthava (sect), 59-60
Sri Lanka, 2, 7, 17, 70, 118, 122; arahants in,
25, 26; biographies of monks in, m - 1 2 ;
Buddhism in, 54-61, 120, 122; division of
sangha in, 165; forest-monk tradition in, 3,
4; influence on Thai Buddhism, 66; monastic
fraternities in {nikaya), 73-4; monks voca-
tion in, 54; reform sects in, 53
Stauffer, Donald A., 125
Stern, Theodore, 300, 301-2
Sthavira-Sthavirl-gdthd, 35on34
stream enterer {sotdpanna), 44, 60
student insurrections, 186-7, 190* 228, 345,
374m 2
study {partyatti) (vocation), 2, 3, 148, 151-2,
160, 169, 174, 367n6, 372nio; see also
learning
study of texts {ganthadhura): separate vocation
from meditation, 160, 161, 171, 191
stupas, 5, 127, 201, 205, 206
Suan Mok (Park of Liberation), 295
Subhakinha, 50, 51
Subhuti, 22
"subjects of meditation" {Kammatthdna), 39;
see also meditation
Subodhananda (monk), 60
Suddhodana, 113, 120, 121, 122
Suea amulets, 227
suffering {dukkha), 43, 44, 90, 92, 126, 139,
152, 36oni9
Sujitto, Phra Acharn Nu, 271-2
Sukhodaya (kingdom), 57, 66, 70, 74-5, 212,
218, 235, 379n28
Sukhodaya Period, 211
Sukhothai, 55
Suksamran, Somboon, 185, 373n4
Sumana (monk), 66-7, 75, 233
Sumangala (monk), 59
Sumaftgala, Hikkaduve, 112
Suftga Pusyamitra, king, 23
Suphupa, Sangha, 387^7
supranormal (supramundane) powers {abhihhd),
19, 42, 44, 45, 61, 63, 315, 335, 389n56,
392ni3; Acharn Mun, 140; of arahant, 20,
179; of Buddha statues, 5, 48, 122; forbid-
den to boast about, 367n4; of forest saints,
139, 293, 333, 334; of a gaing, 299; of holy
men, 318, 320; of Luang Phau Pang, 287; of
Luang Pu Waen, 265, 272; of popular
arahants, 36in2; in saintly biographical
tradition, 124; of saints, 127; see also iddhi
powers
Suthee, Khun Nai, 287
Sutrapitaka, 363^4
sutta discourses, 115-16
Sutta-Nipata Commentary, 19
Suttapitaka, 113
Suttas, 15
Swearer, Donald K., 67, 302, 304
symbols(ism), 201, 205, 309-10
Tai Yuan, 162
Taksin, king, 67, 212, 215
411


--- Page 424 ---
Index
Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja: World Conqueror and
World Renouncer, I, 2, 57
tamndn (literary genre), 119, 121, 364^5,
n28
Tamndn chronicle, 357n37
Tamndn Mulasdnd Wat Siian Ddiik (chronicle),
67
Tamndn Munlasdtsand (Mulasdsand), 121
tantric pole (path), 135-6, 138, 139-41,
258-9, 265, 272-3, 307
Tapasa Movement, 60-1
tapassi (hermit or ascetic), 54
Tathagata, 14, 98
Tdvatimsa (celestial realm), 50, 100
teachers, 119; arahants as, 27; importance of,
in meditation, 41, 43, 85, 86, 102; see also
meditation masters
Telakhon sect, 386m9
telepathic communication, 272
temperament: and meditation, 39, 41, 151
Temple of the Tooth, 61
temple slaves (khd-phra), 69, 70
temples, 69-70, 304
"Ten Corruptions of Insight, The," 43, 44
"ten great disciples," 22
ten precepts (the), 31
"ten signs" (nimitta), 43, 44
Tertullian, 125-6
Thai civilization: continuity of, 212
Thai dynasty: forest monks participation in,
66-9
Thailand, 1, 2, 53, 118, 121; arahant ideal in,
26; biographies of monks in, 111-12; Bud-
dhism in, 120, 123; center-periphery dialec-
tic in, 155, 183-91; centralization, 381m;
crisis of legitimacy in, 128-9, 344~6;
democratization of, 166; Department of Reli-
gious Affairs, 184, 186, 373n6; division of
sahgha, 165; Emerald Buddha palladium of,
214, 239; forest-monk tradition in, 3, 4, 54,
66-77; government exploitation of sahgha,
186-7; government patronage of established
sahgha, 128; millennial Buddhism in, 6,
293-320; millennial uprisings in, 310-14;
Ministry of Education, 374n6; national
identity, 233, 263; nationalization, 162,
311-12; revolution of 1932, 162, 187, 295;
socioeconomic conditions in, 342-4
Thammacarik program, 184
Thammarat (holy man), 296
Thammasat University, 188
Thammathut programs, 184, 185-6, 359ni4
Thammayut (Thammayutika) sect, 5, 53, 70,
71, 81-2, 157, 159, 177, 221, 268, 271,
280, 368n5, 37Oni8, ni9; administrative
organization of, 156; central committee, 187;
discipline in, 138; elitist, 188; internal
differentiation, 164-6; monasteries of,
37On2o; politics of, 37O-in22; press, 158,
161, 189; promotion of cult of forest saints,
187; reform efforts, 305, 306; rivalry with
Mahanikai sect, 154, 156, 159-67, 186-7,
187-91; sponsorship of provincial "saints,"
155; village- and town-dwelling monks in,
259; Wat Bovonniwet central wat of, 220
Thamnamnao cave, 286
Thanitpisanbutr, Khun, 276
Thatanadara (monk), 62
Thathana Linkara Sadan, 62
Thein, U. Sae, 308
Theosophists, 7, 59
Thephasadin, Gen. Yod, 260
Thepsiddhimuni, Phra, 169, 170, 171,
176-81, 183-4
Thera-gdthd, 21, 22, 39
theras (elders), 118
Theravada Buddhism, 1, 2, 17, 19, 24, 26, 28,
200, 231; Buddha's bodies, 206; Buddha's
image in, 203; doctrine of presence in, 204,
205; revival of, 66
Theravada School, 38, 115
Therl-gdthd, 21, 22, 39
Thet, Phra, 98
theyyasamvdsaka, 60
Thibaw, king, 65
Third Council, 57, 118, 206
Third World, 344
Thirty-three (the), 51
Thlwali (Sivali thera), Shin, 24-5
Thomas, E. J., 115, 363^3
Thompson, Virginia, 304
Thonburi (city), 71
Three Councils (the), 120, 122
Three Jewels (the), 49; see also Triple Gem
Thudhamma (sect), 63, 65
Thudhamma Council, 64
tiger symbolism, 284
Tilakapanattu, king, 232
Tilok (Tilokaraja), king, 216, 218, 232, 238,
378ni6
Tipanna, king, 235
Tipitaka (Pali) ("three baskets"), 28, 29, 54,
67, 115; codification of, 120
Tissa, Mogalliputta, 57, 118, 120
To, Somdet, 71-2, 219-20, 221-2, 379n33
tooth relic festival, 73-4
Touen-houang, caves of, 22
tradition, 323, 346, 347
Trailokanat, King Borom, 211
Traiphum (treatise), 161, 294
Traipidok, Somdet Phra Sltham, 210-11
tranquility (mental state), 41, 324
transcendence, state of, 335
transcendental claims, 325
412


--- Page 425 ---
Index
Tree of Life (Vrksa), 203
tree-root-dweller's practice, 34, 36-7
triadic relations: king/establishment
sahgha/forest monks, 72-5
Triple Gem, 88, 94, 109
triple robe (ti-civdra), 33
triple-robe-wearer's practice, 33
Trobriand Islanders, 340, 341-4
Troeltsch, Ernst, 141, 318
Tue, Phra Acharn, 268-9, 271
Tun, Than, 356n25
Tusita heaven, 29, 50, 205
U-achariya, 172
Uan, Phra, 266-7
Udumbaragiri monastery, 57, 66
Udumbaragiri order, 67
understanding (pannd), 41; four kinds of benefits
of, 31; see also insight
Upagok (Upagutta thera), Shin, 24
Upali, 15, 22
updsaka (pious layman), 21
updsikd (pious lay woman), 21
Upatissa: Path to Liberation, 38
uposatha celebrations, 17, 31
Utopian visions, 324
Uzana II, king, 62
vahumpara caste, 355n2i
Vaisali Council, 117
Vajirananavansa, Krom Luang, 212
Vajirafianavarorasa, Krom Phraya (Prince
Wachirayan), 212
Vajiravudh, crown prince, 157
Vajiravudh, king (Rama VI), 212
Vajraranavongse, Phra, 157, 166
Vajrayana Buddhist meditation, 393m3
values, 77; subjective, 323
vaihsa (concept), 114, 117, 119, 364^5
varhsa texts, 121
Variyalankarna, Krom Phraya Pavares, 212
Vasudeva (holy man), 297
Vattiteja (usurper), 235
Vedic deities, 201
Vedic sacred knowledge, 119
Vehapphala, 50, 51
Vesakha Day, 101
Vessantara, prince, 286
Vessantara Jdtaka (Mahdchdt), 75, 378m6
vicarious oblation, 141, 318
Vidyodaya College, 112
Vientienne, 75; Emerald Buddha in, 215
Vietnam, 345
vihdras (dwellings), 18
Vijayabahu III, 354m2
Vikrama Bahu I, 56
village: defined, 36
village dwelling (path), 19-20
village- and town-dwelling monks
(gdmavdsi/nagaravdsi) (vocation), 2-3, 16,
53> 54, 57-8, 70, 72, 165, 259; ascetic
practices, 34; sacralizing amulets, 221
village-dwellers' monasteries, 71
Vimuttimagga, 55
Vinaya (monastic disciplinary rules), 15, 17,
53-4, 59> 64, 67,101,113,128, 135,
187, 295-6, 331; ascetic practices in, 18;
codification of, 120; objective of, 324; obser-
vance of, 62, 63; offenses in, 367n4; as
prerequisite for renouncer's liberation, 329;
see also disciplinary rules
Vinaya texts (Vinayapitaka), 60, 203,
362-3n23, 363-4^4; biographical accounts
of Buddha in, 116-17, 363^4; incorporated
avaddnas of Buddha, 114
vipassand, 44; vision of, 182
vipassand meditation, 155, 179, 332, 358n4;
of Mun, 83-4
vipassanddhura, 71, 358n4
Virtue (slla), 29, 30, 31-3, 41
Visakha Bucha (festival), 146, 283
Visuddhimagga (Buddhaghosa), 3, 20, 27,
28-9, 30, 32, 38, 55, 70, 71, 104, 131,
140, 147, 206, 207, 284, 346, 354n5,
392ni3; ascetic practices in, 33-7, 212,
349n22; contents of, 29-31; on iddhi powers,
45-9; jhdna states in, 389^6; meditation
subjects in, 332; meditation traditions in, 39,
175; monastic discipline in, 330; monastic
orthodoxy consonant with, 138, 149; op-
tional dhutahga practices in, 160; reform
movements take as reference, 59, 60; spirits
in, 383ni5; treatment of mystical and
supramundane powers in, 38, 41, 42, 43,
50,51
Visukamma, 215, 216
votive tablets, 195-6, 346
vow(s), 23
Wachirayan (Vajirafianavarorasa), prince, su-
preme patriarch, 156, 157, 161-2, 163, 164,
166, 185, 303, 306, 37Oni8
Waen, Luang Pu, 155, 189, 333; amulets
sacralized by, 260-5; biography of, 265-73,
293
Wan, Acharn, 155, 267
wandering meditation monks (phra thudong), 71
wanphra (days), 145, 146, 168, 175, 178
War Veterans Organization (Thailand), 244
Warder, A. K., 115
wat (village or town monastic complex), 17;
architecture of, 164; organizational arrange-
ments of, I45; royal, 265
Wat Bencamabophit (Marble Temple), 209, 213
413


--- Page 426 ---
Index
Wat Boromnivas, 87, 96, 101, 159, 188 .
Wat Bovonniwet, 155, 156-8, 161, 165, 166,
169, 189, 190, 221, 368115, 369ml, 1113;
abbot princes of, 212; comparison of medita-
tion sponsorship with Wat Mahathat, 183-91;
phra kring amulets made at, 220; Prince
Pavaret, abbot of, 370m8
Wat Cakkrawat, 158, 186
Wat Cedl Luang (Monastery of the Royal
Dagoba), 68, 69, 97, 101, 271, 369ni3
wat committee (kammakdn), 145
Wat In, 71, 221, 222
Wat Mahathat, 158, 160, 166, 169, 170, 174,
176, 177, 178, 190; as center of propagation
of meditation to laity, 170-1; comparison of
meditation sponsorship with Wat Bovonniwet,
183-91; dissemination program, 372nio;
foremost monastery of Mahanikai sect, 246,
247
Wat Mai (later Wat Bovonniwet), 212
Wat Pa Ban Tat, 142, 143-50, 175
Wat Pa Daeng (Monastery of the Red Forest),
68,69
Wat Phra Kaeo, 75, 214, 368n4, n5
Wat Phuthok, 280-3
"water-cutting" ceremony, 74
Weber, Max, 1, 2, 6, 118, 135, 321-7,
331-2, 335, 339, 344; dualities in sociology
of religion, 322-5, 326; routinization of
charisma, 328-9; value-free stance on
sources of charisma, 325-7, 328
weikza, 63, 265, 273, 295, 300, 310, 315,
318
weikzahood, 316, 389^6
Wells, K. E., 250-1
Weluwun (sect), 63
Western disciples, 136, 142-3
Western monks, 155-6
wheel (cakra) (symbol), 201, 202
"wheel of the doctrine," 201
Wheel of Law (Dharma Cakra), 120, 122, 203
White, Helen, 126
White Brother, 301
Wichittammamuwat (Wong), Phrakhru, 213
wild beasts, 100-1, 128; arahant subduing,
269-70; dhutahga monks and, 86-7, 88-90
wisdom (panna), 17, 42, 90, 148, 182, 330,
335» 347» 35 m8; custodianship of, 160;
develops concentration, 151-2; goal of,
152-3
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 190, 337, 339
woman (itthi), 12
women, 359ni5; in Buddha's life, 113; fear of,
94-5; see also nuns (mde chl)
Wongmaha, Fa, 3871127
World Conqueror and World Renouncer
(Tambiah), 1, 2, 57
World Federation of Buddhists, (WFB), 81,
158-9; Department of Religious Affairs,
159; Regional Centers, 159
World Federation of Buddhists Center, 369ns
World Federation of Buddhists Review, 82, 140,
158, 159
World War II, 65
worlds (lokas): celestial, 205; levels of, 50-2
Worsley, Peter, 317
Wuakrathing amulets, 227
Yai, Caokhana, 156
yakkhas (autochthonous demons), 120
Yanarakkhit, Phra, 389^3
Yansangvorn, Somdet Phra (formerly Phra
Sasanosophon), 155, 156, 157-8, 184-5
yantra, 375n2
yantra designs, 295
Yasodhara (wife of Buddha), 99
Yathe, 296, 298, 299, 300, 315
Yip Insol, Mr., 384n6
yogin, 296, 298
Young Monks' Movement (Yuwa Song), 186-7
Yu, Con, 300-1
414


--- Page 427 ---
CAMBRIDGE STUDIES IN SOCIAL 
ANTHROPOLOGY
Editor: Jack Goody
1. 
The Political Organisation of Unyamwezi
R. G. ABRAHAMS
2. 
Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in North-East Thailand*
S. J. TAMBIAH
3. 
Kalahari Village Politics: An African Democracy
ADAM KUPER
4. 
The Rope of Moka: Big-Men and Ceremonial Exchange in
Mount Hagen, New Guinea*
ANDREW STRATHERN
5. 
The Majangir: Ecology and Society of a Southwest Ethiopian People
JACK STAUDER
6. 
Buddhist Monk, Buddhist Layman: A Study of Urban Monastic
Organisation in Central Thailand
JANE BUNNAG
7. 
Contexts of Kinship: An Essay in the Family Sociology of the Gonja
of Northern Ghana
ESTHER N. GOODY
8. 
Marriage among a Matrilineal Elite: A Family Study of Ghanaian
Senior Civil Servants
CHRISTINE OPPONG
9. 
Elite Politics in Rural India: Political Stratification and Political
Alliances in Western Maharashtra
ANTHONY T. CARTER
10. 
Women and Property in Morocco: Their Changing Relation to the Process
of Social Stratification in the Middle Atlas
VANESSA MAHER
11. 
Rethinking Symbolism*
DAN SPERBER, translated by Alice S. Morton
12. 
Resources and Population: A Study of the Gurungs of Nepal
ALAN MACFARLANE
13. 
Mediterranean Family Structures
Edited by J. G. PERISTIANY
14. 
Spirits of Protest: Spirit-Mediums and the Articulation of Consensus
among the Zezuru of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe)
PETER FRY
15. 
World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in
Thailand against a Historical Background*
s. 
j . TAMBIAH
16. 
Outline of a Theory of Practice*
PIERRE BOURDIEU, translated by Richard Nice
17. 
Production and Reproduction: A Comparative Study of the Domestic Domain*
JACK GOODY
18. 
Perspectives in Marxist Anthropology*
MAURICE GODELIER, translated by Robert Brain
415


--- Page 428 ---
19. 
The Fate of Shechem, or the Politics of Sex: Essays in the Anthropology
of the Mediterranean
JULIAN PITT-RIVERS
20. 
People of the Zongo: The Transformation of Ethnic Identities in Ghana
ENID SCHILDKROUT
21. 
Casting out Anger: Religion among the Taita of Kenya
GRACE HARRIS
22. 
Rituals of the Kandyan State
H. L. SENEVIRATNE
23. 
Australian Kin Classification
HAROLD W. SCHEFFLER
24. 
The Palm and the Pleiades: Initiation and Cosmology in Northwest Amazonia
STEPHEN HUGH-JONES
25. 
Nomads of South Siberia: The Pastoral Economies of Tuva
s. i. VAINSHTEIN, translated by Michael Colenso
26. 
From the Milk River: Spatial and Temporal Processes in Northwest Amazonia
CHRISTINE HUGH-JONES
27. 
Day of Shining Red: An Essay on Understanding Ritual
GILBERT LEWIS
28. 
Hunters, Pastoralists and Ranchers: Reindeer Economies and their Transformations
TIM INGOLD
29. 
The Wood-Carvers of Hong Kong: Craft Production in the World Capitalist Periphery
EUGENE COOPER
30. 
Minangkabau Social Formations: Indonesian Peasants and the World Economy
JOEL S. KAHN
31. 
Patrons and Partisans: A Study of Two Southern Italian Comuni
CAROLINE WHITE
32. 
Moslem Society*
ERNEST GELLNER
33. 
Why Marry Her? Society and Symbolic Structures
LUC DE HEUSCH, translated by Janet Lloyd
34. 
Chinese Ritual and Politics
EMILY MARTIN AHERN
35. 
Parenthood and Social Reproduction: Fostering and Occupational
Roles in West Africa
ESTHER N. GOODY
36. 
Dravidian Kinship
THOMAS R. TRAUTMANN
37. 
The Anthropological Circle: Symbol, Function, History*
MARC AUGE, translated by Martin Thorn
38. 
Rural Society in Southeast India
KATHLEEN GOUGH
39. 
The Fish-People: Linguistic Exogamy and Tukanoan Identity in Northwest Amazonia
JEAN E. JACKSON
40. 
Karl Marx Collective: Economy, Society and Religion in a Siberian Collective Farm*
CAROLINE HUMPHREY
4l6


--- Page 429 ---
41. 
Ecology and Exchange in the Andes
Edited by DAVID LEHMANN
42. 
Traders without Trade: Responses to Trade in Two Dyula Communities
ROBERT LAUNAY
43. 
The Political Economy of West African Agriculture*
KEITH HART
44. 
Nomads and the Outside World
A. M. KHAZANOV, translated by Julia Crookenden
45. 
Actions, Norms and Representations: Foundations of Anthropological Inquiry*
LADISLAW HOLY and MILAN STUCHLIK
46. 
Structural Models in Anthropology*
PER HAGE and FRANK HARARY
47. 
Servants of the Goddess: The Priests of a South Indian Temple
c. J. FULLER
48. 
Oedipus and Job in West African Religion*
MEYER FORTES with an essay by Robin Horton
49. 
The Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets: A Study in Charisma,
Hagiography, Sectarianism, and Millennial Buddhism*
s. J. TAMBIAH
50. 
Kinship and Marriage: An Anthropological Perspective
ROBIN FOX
(paperback available in USA only)
Also available as a paperback
417
