# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 1998-gethin-foundations-of-buddhism.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 13:54:47
# Total Pages: 354
# File Size: 14.25 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 2115.2 chars/page, total chars: 748,795)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
Rupert Gethin

--- PAGE 2 ---


--- PAGE 3 ---
An OPUS book 
The Foundations of 
Buddhism 
Rupert Gethin is Lecturer in Indian Religions in the 
Department of Theology and Religious Studies, and 
co-director of the Centre for Buddhist Studies, at the 
University of Bristol. He is author of The Buddhist 
Path to Awakening (1992) and is a specialist in 
Theravada Buddhism.

--- PAGE 4 ---
OPUS General Editors 
Christopher Butler 
Robert Evans 
John Skorupski 
OPUS books provide concise, original, and authoritative 
introductions to a wide range of subjects in the humanities 
and social sciences. They are written by experts for tlie 
general reader as well as for students.

--- PAGE 5 ---
The Foundations of 
Buddhism 
Rupert Gethin 
Oxford New York 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

--- PAGE 6 ---
OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford oxz 6DP 
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide in 
Oxford NewYork 
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi 
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi 
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 
With offices in 
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan South Korea Poland Portugal 
Singapore Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam 
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and in certain other countries 
Rupert Gethin © 1998 
The moral rights of the author have been asserted 
Database right Oxford University Press (maker) 
First published as an Oxford University Press paperback 1998 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication· may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in ariy,fonn or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writingpf,Oxford Ul).iversity Press, 
or as expressly permitted by law, or under tenhs" agreed With the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside the scope of the above should be sent to "the Rights Department, 
Oxford University Press, at the address above 
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Data available 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Gethin, Rupert. 
The foundations of Buddhism f Rupert Gethin. 
Includes index. 
1. Buddhism. I. title. 
BQ4012.G47 1998 294.3-dc21 98-12246 
ISBN 0-19-289223-1 
11 
Typeset by Graphicraft Typesetters Ltd., Hong Kong 
Printed in Great Britain by 
Clays Ltd, St Ives pic

--- PAGE 7 ---
For my mother

--- PAGE 8 ---


--- PAGE 9 ---
Acknowledgements 
My understanding of the Buddhist tradition owes much to many. 
Some of what is owed and to whom is apparent from the notes 
and bibliography of the present volume, but some deserve spe-
cial mention. To Lance Cousins, who first introduced me to 
Buddhism, I owe a special debt. A number of people have read 
drafts of parts of this book during the course of its writing; 
to Lance Cousins, Hugh Gethin, Michael Houser, Rita Langer, 
Ken Robinson, Alexander von Rospatt, Ornan Rotem, Gregory 
Schopen, and Paul Williams I am especially grateful for their com-
ments, criticisms, and encouragement. I am also grateful to my 
students and all those others whose questions and puzzled faces 
have prompted me to try to express what I understand of Bud-
dhism more clearly. Finally a word of thanks to my editor at OUP, 
George Miller, for his patience and help. 
siddhir astu 
subham astu

--- PAGE 10 ---


--- PAGE 11 ---
Contents 
List of Tables and Figure 
xii 
List of Maps 
xiii 
A Note on Buddhist Languages 
xvii 
INTRODUCTION 
I 
I. THE BUDDHA: THE STORY OF THE AWAKENED ONE 
7 
The historical Buddha 
7 
The legend of the Buddha 
r6 
The nature of a buddha 
27 
2. THE WORD OF THE BUDDHA: BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES 
AND ScHOOLS 
35 
Dharma: texts, practice, and realization 
35 
The first recitation of scriptures 
39 
· SUtra and Abhidharma 
45 
The origin of the ancient Buddhist schools 
49 
The Mahayana sUtras 
56 
3· FouR TRUTHS: THE DISEASE, THE CAUSE, THE CuRE, 
THE MEDICINE 
59 
The orientation of the Buddha's teaching 
59 
The disease of suffering 
6o 
The origin of suffering: attachment, aversion, and delusion 
68 
The cessation of suffering: nirvaQ.a 
74 
The way leading to the cessation of suffering 
79 
4· THE BuDDHIST CoMMUNITY: MoNKS, NuNs, 
AND LAY FOLLOWERS 
85 
The Buddha's followers and the origin of the 
Buddhist order 
85

--- PAGE 12 ---
X 
Contents 
Ordination and the Buddhist monastic ideal 
87 
The underlying concerns of the Vinaya 
91 
From wandering to settled life 
95 
The spiritual life 
101 
The lay community 
107 
Spiro's schema: apotropaic, kammatic, and nibbanic 
Buddhism 
IIO 
5· THE BuDDHIST CosMos: THE THRICE-THousANDFOLD 
WORLD 
II2 
Of space and time: world-systems 
II2 
Cosmology and psychology: macrocosm and microcosm 
II9 
Cosmology, folk religion, and modern science 
!26 
6. No SELF: PERSONAL CONTINUITY AND 
DEPENDENT ARISING 
133 
The Buddhist critique of self as unchanging 
133 
The problem of personal continuity 
J40 
Ignorance, attachment, and views of the self 
146 
The elaboration of the teaching of dependent arising 
149 
Did the Buddha deny the existence of the self? 
159 
7· THE BUDDHISM PATH: THE WAY OF CALM 
AND INSIGHT 
163 
Introductory remarks 
163 
The role of faith 
165 
Good conduct 
169 
The practice of calm meditation 
174 
The stages of insight meditation 
18j 
The relationship of calm and insight 
198 
8. THE ABHIDHARMA: THE HIGHER TEACHING 
202 
Stories, legends, texts, and authors 
202 
The Abhidharma as a system of Buddhist thought 
207 
The consciousness process, karma, and rebirth 
215 
Some Abhidharma problems 
2!8

--- PAGE 13 ---
Contents 
xi 
9· THE MAHAYANA: THE GREAT VEHICLE 
224 
The beginnings of the Mahayana 
224 
The vehicle of the bodhisattva 
226 
Transcendent buddhas 
231 
Emptiness and the 'perfection of wisdom' 
234 
Nagarjuna and the 'middle' (Madhyamaka) school 
237 
'Ideas only' (vijfiapti-miitra) and the Yogacara 
244 
The Tathagatagarbha 
250 
ro. EvoLVING TRADITIONS OF BuDDHISM: SouTH, EAsT, 
NORTH, AND WEST 
253 
Theravada Buddhism in Sri Lanka and 
South-East Asia: Southern Buddhism 
253 
China, Korea, and Japan: East Asian Buddhism 
257 
Tibet and Mongolia: Northern Buddhism 
266 
A final note: Buddhism in the West 
273 
&~ 
m 
Select Bibliography 
302 
Glossary 
319 
Index 
323

--- PAGE 14 ---
List of Tables and Figure 
Tables 
1. The noble eightfold path 
81 
2. The thirty-one realms of existence according to the 
Pali sources 
u6 
3· Dependent arising 
152 
4· The forty subjects of calm meditation according to 
Buddhaghosa 
178 
5· Ascending stages of calm meditation 
182 
6. The stages of insight according to Buddhaghosa's 
Visuddhimagga 
193 
7. The scheme of the five paths and the ten 
bodhisattva stages 
196 
8. The Abhidharma Pitaka 
205 
Figure 
1. The Tibetan 'Wheel of Existence'

--- PAGE 15 ---
List of Maps 
I. The Ganges basin at the time of the Buddha 
2. The spread of Buddhism in the ancient world 
3· Buddhism in the modern world 
xiv 
XV 
xvi

--- PAGE 16 ---
Land over 1000 metres 
0 
50 
100 
150 km 
0 
50 
100 miles 
MAP 1. The Ganges basin at the time of the Buddha

--- PAGE 17 ---
0 
500 1000 1500 km 
0 
500 
1000 miles 
~ 
The extent of Buddhist influence 
MAP 2. The spread of Buddhism in the ancient world 
' 
0 
? 
JAPAN

--- PAGE 18 ---
0 
500 1000 1500 km 
0 
500 
1000 miles 
Theravada or 'southern' Buddhism 
East Asian or 'eastern' Buddhism 
[::J Tibetan or 'northern'.Buddhism 
MAP 3· Buddhism in the.modern world 
SRI LANKA 
~~ 
.i~vf!J 
.~b 
~
,' 
a 
~· 
ft-0:~!

--- PAGE 19 ---
A Note on Buddhist Languages 
The original language of Buddhist thought is problematic. It was 
not Sanskrit (Old Indo-Aryan) but a closely related Middle 
Indo-Aryan dialect similar to Pali, the canonical language of the 
Buddhism of Sri Lanka and South-East Asia. As Buddhism 
developed in ancient India it tended increasingly to speak the 
universal language of ancient Indian culture, Sanskrit. Sub-
sequently Buddhist texts were translated into Chinese _and 
Tibetan which became major Buddhist languages in their own 
right. 
The general principle I have adopted is to quote universal 
Buddhist terms in both Sanskrit and (when there is a difference) 
Pali, placed in parentheses after the English translation so: 
'aggregates' (skandha/khandha). If the term is used again in the 
body of the text I have generally preferred the Sanskrit form, 
unless the context is exclusively that of Theravada Buddhism. 
Terms that are specific or characteristic of a particular Buddhist 
tradition are quoted in the appropriate language(s), either Pali 
or Sanskrit with, where appropriate, their Chinese or Tibetan, 
or occasionally their Japanese or Korean translation. 
The transliteration of Indian languages follows the standard 
transliteration scheme (see A. L. Basham, The Wonder that Was 
India, so6~8); Chinese is quoted according to the Wade~Giles 
system, rather than Pin-Yin, Tibetan according to the Wylie 
system. Words that have become part of the English language 
(i.e. would be found in an English dictionary) are left unitalicized 
but the appropriate diacritical marks have been added, hence 
'nirval)a'.

--- PAGE 20 ---


--- PAGE 21 ---
Introduction 
The term 'Buddhism' refers to a vast and complex religious and 
philosophical tradition with a history that stretches over some 
2,500 years, taking in, at one time or another, the greater part of 
Asia, from Afghanistan and parts of Persia in the west to Japan 
in the east, from the great islands of Sumatra and Java in the 
south to Mongolia and parts of southern Russia in the north. As 
one writer reminds us, over half the world's population today 
lives in areas w:here Buddhism has at one time or another been 
the dominant religious influence.1 Living Buddhism divides into 
three broad traditions:2 
' 
I. The Theravada tradition of Sri Lanka and South-East Asia, 
also sometimes referred to as 'southern' Buddhism. Its canon-
ical scriptures are preserved in Pali, an ancient Indian language 
closely related to Sanskrit. The school exemplifies a certain con-
servatism. Relative to the other two traditions, it can be regarded 
as generally closer in doctrine and practice to ancient Buddhism 
as it existed in the early centuries BCE in India. Today it is the 
religious tradition followed by a population of over IOO million 
in Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, and Laos. 
2. The East Asian tradition of China, Korea, Japan, and Viet-
nam, also sometimes referred to as 'eastern' Buddhism. Its scrip-
tures are preserved in Chinese and its general outlook is that of 
the Mahayana or 'Great Vehicle', a movement of ancient Indian 
Buddhist thought and practice that from about the beginning of 
the Christian era dubbed those who did not adopt its overall vision 
of Buddhism-represented today by the Theravada-followers 
of the 'Lesser Vehicle' (hinayiina). East Asian Buddhism is 
extremely diverse; it has coexisted with Confucianism, Taoism,

--- PAGE 22 ---
2 
Introduction 
Shinto, and, more recently but less happily, Communism; it 
remains a significant religious tradition for a population of soo 
million to I,ooo million. 
3· The Tibetan tradition, also sometimes referred to as 'north-
ern' Buddhism. Its scriptures are preserved in Tibetan and once 
more its outlook is broadly that of the Mahayana, but its i:nore 
specific orientation is that of the 'Vehicle of the Diamond Thun-
derbolt' (vajra-yiina), also known as Tantric Buddhism, Today 
it is the religious tradition followed by IO million to 20 million, 
principally in Tibet and Mongolia, but also in parts of Nepal and 
Himalayan India. 
All three of these traditions look back to ancient Buddhism and 
the land of India, where Buddhism was born but whence it vir-
tually disappeared over five centuries ago. 
· 
The present volume was conceived as an introduction to 
Buddhist thought and practice, and is intended to be accessible 
to the reader with no previous knowledge of Buddhism. Given 
its great diversity and its long history, the task of introducing 
Buddhism is a daunting one. As is fashionable to point out these 
·days, 'Buddhism' is something of an intellectual abstraction: in 
reality there is not one Buddhism but many Buddhisms. Any writer 
of an introductory text to Buddhism is faced with the problem 
of how to do justice to the richness and diversity of ~Buddhism 
both past and present. Most of the existing introductory volumes 
to Buddhism offer their readers some kind of general survey 
of the different 'Buddhisms', and attempt to give an equal and 
balanced treatment of all that Buddhism has been and still is. 
The advantage of this approach is that, ideally if not always in 
practice, it avoids the pitfall of seeming to imply that one or other 
form of Buddhism represents a 'truer' form of Buddhism than 
others, or that one has somehow captured the real essence of 
Buddhism. Its disadvantage is that, in a volume of some 300 pages, 
one is in danger of saying very little about an awful lot, and of 
presenting the reader with what amounts to a catalogue of dates, 
people, places, doctrines, and practices; a reader may finish such 
a book, yet somehow know very little of Buddhism. For this

--- PAGE 23 ---
Introduction 
3 
reason it seems worth while trying to introduce Buddhism in a 
more explicitly focused way. 
The approach I have adopted in the present volume, then, is 
to try to identify and focus on those fundamental ideas a,nd prac-
tices that constitute something of a common heritage shared by 
the different traditions of Buddhism that exist in the world 
today. Of course, the precise nature of that common heritage is 
open to question. Nevertheless, the fact remains that the areas 
of Buddhist thought and practice outlined in the present volume 
-the story of the Buddha (Chapter 1), a textual and scriptural 
tradition (Chapter 2), the framework of the four noble truths 
(Chapter 3), the monastic and lay ways of life (Chapter 4), a cos-
mology based around karma and rebirth (Chapter 5), the teach-
ing of no self and dependent arising (Chapter 6), a progressive 
path of practice leading on from good conduct. and devotions 
through stages of meditation to a higher understanding (Chap-
ter 7), the theoretical systems of either the Abhidharma or the 
Madyamaka and Yogacara (Chapters 8 and 9), the path of the 
bodhisattva (Chapter 9)-are all, in one way or another, assumed 
by and known to all Buddhism. These are the foundations upon 
which Buddhism rests. 
Of course, I do not mean to suggest by this that a Buddhist 
layman in Tokyo and a Buddhist laywoman in Bangkok, that 
a monk in Colombo and a nun in Lhasa, would all respond to 
questions on these topics precisely along the lines set out in the 
relevant chapters below. None the less, it is not unreasonable 
nor, I think, is it to commit oneself to an essentialist view of 
Buddhism to suggest that, whatever the nature of the Buddhist 
terrain, one cannot dig much below the surface without coming 
across some trace of the patterns of thought and practice out-
lined here, even if at different times and in different places 
the constructions built on their foundations present their own 
distinctive and peculiar aspects. Moreover, the fact that those 
patterns of thought and practice are not immediately apparent 
does not of itself mean that they exert no influence. That we may 
not always be consciously aware of particular ideas and theories, 
or that we may be unable to articulate them in detail, does not

--- PAGE 24 ---
4 
Introduction 
mean that those ideas fail to affect our view of the world. The 
principles of, say, Newtonian physics, Darwinian evolutionary 
theory, and Freudian psychology contribute to a world-viewthat 
is shared by many who have never read a word of what Newton, 
Darwin, or Freud wrote and would be hard pressed to explain 
in detail any of their ideas. 
I should, however, add that I have not entirely eschewed the 
general-survey approach; Chapter 9, on specifically Mahayana 
ideas, and especially Chapter IO, an overview of the history of 
the different traditions of Buddhism in Asia, are intended to give 
some indication of what I have not covered and provide some 
form of orientation for further study. 
Apart from its simply allowing a more sustained account of 
some significant aspects of Buddhist thought and practice, there 
is a further reason why I think focusing on the common heritage 
as indicated above is appropriate at the introductory level: it affords 
a perspective on the development of Buddhist thought and prac-
tice which calls into question what might be dubbed the standard 
'textbook' view and is in fact more in tune with recent scholar-
ship. This textbook view tends to see the history of Buddhism in 
terms of a division into two major 'sects': the Theravada and the 
Mahayana. More specifically, according to this 'textbook' view, 
in origin the Mahayana was at once a popular religious protest 
against the elitist monasticism of early Buddhism and a philo-
sophical refutation of its dead-end scholasticism; moreover,this 
religious protest and philosophical refutation rapidly all but 
marginalized earlier forms of Buddhism. The research published 
in the last twenty years or so has increasingly made such a 
view of the development of Indian Buddhist thought and prac-
tice untenable. The Mahayana did not originate as a clearly 
defined 'sect' and, far from being a popular lay movement, it seems 
increasingly likely that.it began as a minority monastic move-
ment and remained such for several hundred years, down to at 
least the fifth century CE. Moreover, what is becoming clearer is 
that many elements of Buddhist thought and practice that were 
once thought to be characteristic of the emerging Mahayana 
were simply developments within what has been called by some

--- PAGE 25 ---
Introduction 
5 
'mainstream' Buddhism;3 and while the Mahayana certainly 
criticized aspects of mainstream Buddhist thought and practice, 
much more was taken as said and done, and just carried over. 
Thus, instead of seeing Mahayana as simply superseding earlier 
forms of Buddhism in India, the approach adopted in the pre-
sent volume is to try to focus on the common ground between 
the non-Mahayana and Mahayana in the formative phase of 
Indian Buddhist thought and practice, and by referring to both 
the Pali sources of Sri Lanka and the Sanskrit sources of north-
ern India to present an outline of 'mainstream' Buddhist thought 
and practice as the foundations for developments in India and 
beyond. Such an approach, then, does tend to privilege what is 
ancient, but throughout· I have attempted to give some indica-
tion of how these basic principles of Buddhist thought and prac-
tice might relate to more recent developments. 
Let me add here a few words on my specific approach to my 
material. In describing Buddhist thought and practice, my aim 
has been, in the first place, simply to act as spokesman for its 
principles, and to try to articulate those principles as Buddhist 
tradition itself has understood them. In the second place, I have 
tried to give some indication of and pass some comment on the 
critical and scholarly issues that have emerged in the modern aca-
demic study of Buddhism over the last rso years or so. 
Some might question the need for yet another introductory 
volume on Buddhism, yet as a teacher of introductory courses 
on Buddhism at a university I find myself somewhat dissatisfied 
with the available teaching materials. Certainly there are avail-
able a number of survey-type books ranging from short and 
sketchy to more moderate-sized treatments. In addition there 
are some solid introductions to various aspects of Buddhism 
-the social history of Theravada, Mahayana thought, Chinese 
Buddhism, Tibetan Buddhism-but if one looks for a volume 
giving a more focused account, reflecting recent scholarship, of 
what, for want of a better expression, one might refer to as the 
principles of 'mainstream' Buddhist thought and practice, there 
appears to be a gap. It is hoped that the present work will go 
some way to filling that gap.

--- PAGE 26 ---
6 
Introduction 
In sum, what distinguishes the present volume is that it con-
tains rather more sustained expositions of Buddhist cosmology, 
no self and dependent arising, the path of meditation, and the 
theoretical Abhidharma framework (which underlies all later 
Buddhist thought) than other introductory books. Thus there 
is material here which, although basic from a Buddhist point of 
view, is only available in specialized books and articles. I hope, 
then, that while the book is intended to be accessible to the nov-
ice, there may also be something here for the elders of Buddhist 
studies.

--- PAGE 27 ---
1 
The Buddha 
The Story of the Awakened One 
The historical Buddha 
In January 1898 an Englishman, W. C. Peppe, digging into a mound 
on his estate at Pipdihwa just the Indian side of the Indian-
Nepalese border, unearthed a soapstone vase some six inches 
in height with a brief inscription around its lid. The inscription, 
written in the Brahmi script and dating from about the second 
century BCE, was in one of the ancient Indian dialects or Prakrits 
collectively referred to as Middle Indo-Aryan. The precise inter-
pretation of the inscription remains problematic, but it appears 
to claim that the vase is 'a receptacle of relics of the Blessed Buddha 
of the Sakyas'.1 The circumstances of this find and the find itself 
actually reveal a considerable amount about the nature and long 
history of what we know today as 'Buddhism'. 
Peppe was among the early excavators of ruined Buddhist stiipas 
or monumental burial mounds. Such stupas vary considerably in 
size. The largest were made to enshrine the relics of the Buddha 
himself or of Buddhist 'saints' or arhats (Pali arahat), while 
smaller ones contained the remains of more ordinary men and 
women.2 Today countless stupas are to be found scattered across 
the Indian subcontinent (where over the past hundred years a 
few have been restored to something of their former glory) and 
also other countries where Buddhism spread. Buddhism was, 
then, in origin an Indian phenomenon. Beginning in the fifth cen-
tury BCE, its teachings and institutions continued to flourish for 
some fifteen centuries on Indian soil, inspiring and moulding 
the intellectual, religious, and cultural life of India. During this 
period Buddhism spread via the old trade routes far beyond the

--- PAGE 28 ---
8 
The Buddha 
confines of India right across Asia, from Afghanistan in the west 
to Japan in the east, affecting and touching the lives of millions 
of people. Yet by around the close of the twelfth century Bud" 
dhist institutions had all but disappeared from India proper, 
and it is in the countries and cultures that lie beyond India that 
Buddhism flourishes today. None the less all the variou~ living 
traditions of Buddhism in some way look back to and revere a 
figure who has a certain basis in history-a figure who lived and 
died in northern India several centuries before the beginning of 
the Christian era and belonged to a people known as the Sakyas 
(Pali Sakya). He is Sakya-muni, 'the sage of the Sakyas', or as 
our inscription prefers to call him buddho bhagavii-'the Blessed 
Buddha', 'the Lord Buddha'. 
So who, and indeed what, was the Lord Buddha? This is a quesc 
tion that might be answered in a number of different ways, a ques-
tion about which both the Buddhist tradition and the historian 
have something to say. The nature of the Buddha is a subject 
that the Buddhist tradition itself has expounded on at length and 
to which we will return below but, in brief, the word b_uddha 
is not a name but a title; its meaning is 'one who has woken up'. 
This title is generally applied by the Buddhist tradition to a class 
of beings who are, from the perspective of ordinary humanity, 
extremely rare and quite extraordinary. In contrast to these 
Buddhas or 'awakened ones' the mass of humanity; along with 
the other creatures and beings that constitute the world, are 
asleep-asleep in the sense that they pass through their lives never 
knowing and seeing the world 'as it is' (yathii-bhutarrt). As a con-
sequence they suffer. A buddha on the other hand awakens to 
the knowledge of the world as it truly is and in so doing finds 
release from suffering. Moreover-and this is perhaps the great-
est significance of a buddha for the rest of humanity, and indeed 
for all the beings who make up the universe-a buddha teaches. 
He teaches out of sympathy and compassion for the suffering 
of beings, for the benefit and welfare of all beings; he teaches 
in order to lead others to awaken to the understanding that 
brings final relief from suffering. An ancient formula still used 
in Buddhist devotions today puts it as follows:

--- PAGE 29 ---
The Buddha 
9 
For the following reasons he is a Blessed One: he is an Arhat, a per-
fectly and completely awakened one, perfect in his understanding and 
conduct, happy, one who understands the world, an unsurpassed trainer 
of unruly men, the teacher of both gods and men, a blessed buddha.3 
Such is a buddha in general terms, but what of the particular 
buddha with whom we started, whose relics appear to have been 
enshrined in a number of stupas across the north of India and to 
whom the Buddhist tradition looks as its particular founder-
the historical Buddha? Let us for the moment consider the ques-
tion not so much from the perspective of the Buddhist tradition 
as from the perspective of the historian. 
The Buddha and the Indian 'renouacer' tradition 
We can know very little of the historical Buddha with any degree 
of certainty. Yet within the bounds of reasonable historical 
probability we can form quite a clear picture of the kind of per-
son the Buddha was and the main events of his life. The oldest 
Buddhist sources, which provide us with a number of details con-
cerning the person and life of the Buddha, date from the fourth 
or third century BCE. Unfortunately when we tum to the non-
Buddhist sources of a similar date, namely the earliest texts of 
the Jain and brahmanical traditions, there is no explicit mention 
of the Buddha at all.4 It would be a mistake to conclude, how-
ever, that non-Buddhist sources thus provide us with no corrob-
orative evidence for the picture of the Buddha painted in early 
Buddhist texts. Essentially the latter present the Buddha as a 
sramatJa (Pali samaf}a). This term means literally 'one who 
strives' and belongs to the technical vocabulary of Indian reli-
gion, referring as it does to 'one who strives' religiously or spir-
itually. It points towards a particular tradition that in one way 
or another has been of great significance in Indian religious his-
tory, be it Buddhist, Jain, or Hindu. Any quest for the historical 
Buddha must begin with the sramatJa tradition. Collectively our 
sources may not allow us to write the early history of this move-
ment but they do enable us to say a certain amount concerning 
its character.

--- PAGE 30 ---
IO 
The Buddha 
The tradition is sometimes called the 'renouncer (sarrmyiisin) 
tradition'. What we are concerned with here is the phenomenon 
of individuals' renouncing their normal role in society as a mem-
ber of an extended 'household' in order to devote themselves to 
some form of religious or spiritual life. The 'renouncer' abandons 
conventional means of livelihood, such as farming or trade, and 
adopts instead the religious life as a means of livelihood. That 
is, he becomes a religious mendicant dependent on alms. What 
our sources make clear is that by the fifth century BCE this phenom-
enon was both widespread and varied. Thus while 'renouncers' 
had in common the fact .that they had 'gone forth from the 
household life into homelessness' (to use a phrase common in 
Buddhist sources), the kind of lifestyle they then adopted was 
not necessarily the same. This is suggested by some of the terms 
that we find in the texts: in addition to 'one who strives' and 
'renouncer', we fil).d 'wanderer' (parivriijaka/paribbiijaka), 'one 
who begs his share [of alms]' (bhik(fulbhikkhu), 'naked ascetic' 
(ace/aka), 'matted-hair ascetic' (jatila), as well as a number of 
other terms.5 Some of these wanderers and ascetics seem to have 
been loners, while others seem to have organized themselves 
into groups and lived under a teacher. Early renouncers seem 
to· have been for the most part male, although with the growth 
of Buddhism and Jainism it is certainly the case that women too 
began to be numbered among. their ranks. 
Three kinds of activity seem to have preoccupied these wan-
derers and. ascetics. First, there is the practice of austerities, 
such as going naked in all weathers, enduring all physical dis-
comforts, fasting, or undertaking the vow to live like a cow or 
. even a dog.6 Secondly, there is the cultivation of meditative and 
contemplative techniques aimed at producing what might, for 
the lack of a suitable technical term in English, be referred to as 
'altered states of consciousness'. In the technical vocabulary of 
Indian religious texts such states come to be termed 'meditations' 
(dhyiina/jhiina) or 'concentrations' (samiidhi); the attainment 
of such states of consciousness was generally regarded as bring-
ing the practitioner to some deeper knowledge and experience 
of the nature of the world. Lastly there is the development of

--- PAGE 31 ---
The Buddha 
II 
various philosophical views providing the intellectual justifica-
tion for particular practices and the theoretical expression of 
the 'knowledge' to which they led. While some groups and indi-
viduals seem to have combined all three activities, others favoured 
one at the expense of the others, and the line between th'e prac-
tice of austerities and the practice of meditation may not always 
be clear: the practice of extreme austerity will certainly alter one's 
state of mind. 
The existence of some of these different groups of ancient 
Indian wanderers and ascetics with their various practices and 
theories finds expression in Buddhist texts in a stock description 
of 'six teachers of other schools', who are each represented as 
expounding a particular teaching and practice. Another list, with 
no details of the associated teachings and practices, gives ten types 
of renouncer. In fact two other ancient Indian traditions that were 
subsequently of some importance in the religious life of India 
(the Ajivikas and the Jains) find a place in both these ancient 
Buddhist lists; the Jain tradition, of course, survives to this day.7 
But one of the most significant groups for the understanding of 
the religious milieu of the historical Buddha is omitted from these 
lists; this is the early brahmanical tradition. To explain who the 
· brahmins ( briihma1Ja) were requires a brief excursus into the early 
evolution of Indian culture and society. 
The brahmanical tradition 
It is generally thought that some time after the beginning of the 
second millennium BCE groups of a nomadic tribal people began 
to move south from ancient Iran, through the passes of the 
Hindu Kush and down into the plains of the Indus valley. These 
people spoke dialects of Old Indo-Aryan, that is, of Sanskrit 
and they are known as the Aryas. The Aryas who moved into 
India were descendants of nomadic pastoralists who had occu-
pied the grasslands of central Asia, some of whom similarly 
moved west into Europe. 
Once in India the Aryas' cultural influence gradually spread 
southwards and eastwards across the plains of northern India. 
By the time the Buddha was born, probably early in the fifth

--- PAGE 32 ---
I2 
The Buddha 
century BCE, the Aryas had been in India perhaps a thousand 
years and their cultural influence extended down the Ganges 
valley as far as Pataliputra (modern Patna). The coming of the 
Aryas into India did not bring political unity to northern India, 
but it did bring a certain ideology that constitutes one of the prin-
cipal components of Indian culture. This Aryan vision of society 
was principally developed and articulated by a hereditary group 
within Aryan society known as briihmafJas or, in the Anglo-Indian 
spelling, brahmins. The original literature of the brahrnins is known 
as the Vedas, the oldest portions of which, found in the l_?.g Veda, 
date from about rsoo BCE. By the time of the Buddha, Vedic 
literature probably already comprised several different classes: 
the four collections (saf!lhitii) of verses attributed to the ancient 
seers (r#), the ritual manuals (also known as briihmaiJas) giving 
instruction in the carrying out of the elaborate Vedic sacrificial 
ritual, and 'the forest books' (iiraiJyaka) explaining the esoteric 
meaning of this sacrificial ritual. The final class of Vedic liter-
ature, the Upani~ads, containing further esoteric explanations 
of the sacrificial ritual, was still in the process of formation. 
Two aspects of the brahmanical vision are of particular im-
portance, namely an understanding of society as reflecting a 
hierarchy of ritual 'purity', and a complex system of ritual and 
sacrifice. From the brahmanical perspective society comprises two 
groups: the Aryas and the non-Aryas. The former consists of the 
three hereditary classes (variJa) in descending order of purity: 
briihmaiJaS (whose prerogative and duty it is to teach and main-
tain the Vedic tradition), k~atriyas or rulers (whose prerogat-
ive and duty is to maintain order and where necessary inflict 
appropriate punishment), and the vaisyas (whose prerogative and 
duty is to generate wealth through farming and trade). These three 
classes are termed 'twice born' (dvija) by virtue of the fact that 
traditionally male members undergo an initiation ( upanayana) 
into a period of study of the Vedic tradition under the super-
vision of a brahmin teacher; at the end of this period of study it 
is their duty to maintain the household sacrificial fires and, with 
the help ofbrahmins, carry out various sacrificial rituals in accord-
ance with the prescriptions of Vedic tradition. The non-Aryas

--- PAGE 33 ---
The Buddha 
13 
make up the fourth class, the sildras or servants, whose basic duty 
it is to serve the three other classes. While it is important not to 
confuse these four classes ( varlJa) and the countless castes (jiiti) 
oflater Indian society, it is none the less the ideology of the relat-
ive ritual purity of the classes that underpins the medieval and 
.modern Indian 'caste system'. 
The brahmins' hereditary ritual status empowered them to carry 
out certain ritual functions that members of other classes were 
excluded from, but at the time of the Buddha not all brahmins 
were full-time 'priests'. Precisely how brahmins related to the 
various groups of wandering ascetics is not clear.8 In part we can 
see the brahmanical vision of society and that of the wandering 
ascetics as opposed to each other, in part we can see the two as 
complementing each other. To accept the brahmanical view of the 
world was to accept brahmanical authority as an aspect of the 
eternal structure of the universe and, as such, unassailable. Yet 
wandering ascetics threatened brahmanical supremacy by offer-
ing rival visions of the world and society. On the other hand, within 
brahmanical circles we find the development of certain esoteric 
theories of the nature of the sacrificial ritual and philosophical 
views about the ultimate nature of man and his relationship to 
the universe at large. These theories may to some extent have 
drawn on ideas developing amongst the groups of wandering 
ascetics; at the same time they may have substantially con-
tributed to the development of the tradition of the wanderers 
itself, since it is clear that brahmin circles were an important recruit-
ing ground for the various groups of wandering ascetics. Yet it 
seems clear that in certain respects the Buddhajs teachings were 
formulated as a response to certaih brahmanical teachings.9 
The Buddha and history 
It is in this milieu that the historian must understand the his-
torical Buddha as existing. And given this milieu, the bare 'facts' 
of the Buddha's life as presented by tradition are historically 
unproblematic and inconsequential. 
The precise dates of the Buddha's life are uncertain. A wide-
spread Buddhist tradition records that he was in his eightieth

--- PAGE 34 ---
r4 
The Buddha 
year when he died, and the dates for his life most widely quoted 
in modern published works are 566-486 BCE. These dates are 
arrived at by, first, following a tradition, recorded in the Pali sources 
of 'southern' Buddhism, that the great Mauryan king, Asoka, 
was consecrated 2r8 years after the death of the Buddha, and, 
secondly, taking 268 BCE as the year of Asoka's accession. This 
is done on the basis of the Asokan rock-edict reference to rulers 
in the wider Hellenic world who can be dated from other an-
cient sources. But both the figure 2r8 and the accession of Asoka 
in 268 BCE are problematic. In contrast to the southern 'long 
chronology', northern Buddhist Sanskrit sources. adopt a 'short 
chronology', placing Asoka's accession just roo years after the 
death of the Buddha, while recent research suggests that Asoka's 
accession may be plausibly placed anywhere between 280 and 
267 BCE.10 But such figures as 2 r8 and roo should properly be seen 
as ideal round numbers.U Moreover, as was first pointed out by 
Rhys Davids and more recently by Richard Gombrich, a time 
lapse of rather less than 2r8 years from the Buddha's death to 
Asoka's accession is suggested by the figures associated with the 
lineage of teachers found in a Pali source, namely an ancient Sri 
Lankan chronicle, the DipavaJ!lsa.12 While there is no scholarly 
consensus on the precise dates of the Buddha, a detailed exam-
ination of all the available data and arguments by scholars in recent 
years has resulted in a general tendency to bring the date of the 
Buddha considerably forward and pl&ce his death much nearer 
400 BCE than 500 BCE. 
. 
The earliest Buddhist sources state that the future Buddha was 
born Siddhartha Gautama (Pali Siddhattha Gotama), the son of 
a local chieftain-a riijan-in Kapilavastu (Pali Kapilavatthu) on 
what is now the Indian-Nepalese border. He was thus a mem-
ber of a relatively privileged and wealthy family, and enjoyed 
a comfortable upbringing. While the later Buddhist tradition, 
in recounting the story of his youth, certainly likes to dwell on 
the wealth of Siddhartha's family and the extravagance of his 
princely upbringing, there is something of a cultural misunder-
standing involved in the notion that the Buddhist tradition pre-
sents the Buddha as born a royal prince, the son of a great king.

--- PAGE 35 ---
The Buddha 
IS 
In representing the Buddha as a rajan or k$atriya the tradition 
is effectively recording little more than that he was, in European 
cultural terms, a member of a locally important aristocratic fam-
ily. At some point he became disillusioned with his comfortable 
and privileged life; he became troubled by a sense of the suf-
fering that, in the form of sickness, old age, and death, sooner 
or later awaited him and everyone else. In the face of this, the 
pleasures he enjoyed seemed empty and of little value. So he left 
home and adopted the life of a wandering ascetic, a srama!Ja, to 
embark on a religious and spiritual quest. He took instruction 
from various teachers; he practised extreme austerities as was 
the custom of some ascetics. Still he was not satisfied. Finally, 
seated in meditation beneath an asvattha tree on the banks of 
the Nairafijana in what is now the north Indian state of Bihar, 
he had an experience which affected him profoundly, convin-
cing him that he had come to the end of his quest. While the 
historian can make no judgement on the nature of this experi-
ence, the Buddhist tradition (apparently bearing witness to the 
Buddha's own understanding of his experience) calls it bodhi or 
'awakening' and characterizes it as involving the deepest under-
standing of the nature of suffering, its cause, its cessation, and 
the way leading to its cessation. The Buddha devoted the rest of . 
his life to teaching this 'way to the cessation of suffering' to groups 
of wanderers and ordinary householders. In the course of his 
wanderings across the plains that flank the banks of the Ganges 
he gathered a considerable following and by the time of his 
death at about the age of So he had established a well-organized 
mendicant community which attracted considerable support 
from the wider population. His followers cremated his body and 
divided up the relics which were enshrined in a number of stupas 
which became revered shrines. 
That the subsequent Buddhist tradition is founded upon 
and inspired by the teaching activity of a charismatic individual 
who lived some centuries before the beginning of the Christian 
era can hardly be doubted. In the words of the great Belgian 
scholar Etienne Lamotte, 'Buddhism cannot be explained unless 
we accept that it has its origin in the strong personality of its

--- PAGE 36 ---
16 
The Buddha 
founder.'13 Given this premiss, none of the bare details of the 
Buddha's life is particularly problematic for the historian-
something we should bear in mind in the face of certain modern 
scholarly discussions of the life of the Buddha, such as Andre 
Bareau's, which, in dwelling on t.he absence of corroborative 
evidence for many of the details of the traditional life of the 
Buddha, introduces a note of undue scepticism with regard to 
the whole account. 
Of course, as the Buddhist tradition tells it, the story of the 
life of the Buddha is not history nor meant to be. The whole story 
takes on a mythic and legendary character. A wealth of detail is 
brought in capable of being read metaphorically, allegorically, 
typologically, and symbolically. Much of this detail is to modern 
sensibilities of a decidedly 'miraculous' and 'supernatural' kind. 
The story of the Buddha's life becomes not an account of the 
particular and individual circumstances of a man who, some 
2,500 years ago, left home to become a wandering ascetic, but 
something universal, an archetype; it is the story of all those who 
have become buddhas in the past and all who will become bud-
dhas in the future, and, in a sense, of all who follow the Buddhist 
path. It is the story of the Buddhist path, a story that shows the 
way to a profound religious truth. Yet for all that, many of the 
details of his eady life given in the oldest sources remain evocat-
ive of some memory of events from a distant time. If we persist 
in distinguishing and holding apart myth and history, we are in 
danger of missing the story's own sense of truth. Furthermore, 
the historian must recognize that he has virtually no strictly his-
torical criteria for distinguishing between history and myth in the 
accounts of the life of the Buddha. And at that point he should 
perhaps remain silent and let the story speak for itself.14 
The legend of the Buddha 
Sources 
The centrepiece of the legend of the Buddha is the story of the 
Buddha's life from his conception to the events of his awaken-
ing and his first teaching. This narrative must be accounted one

--- PAGE 37 ---
The Buddha 
I7 
of the great stories of the world. Part of the common heritage 
of Buddhism, it is known throughout Asia wherever Buddhism 
has taken root. The core of this story and not a few of its details 
are already found in the Sutra and Vinaya collections of early 
Buddhist texts (see next chapter).15 In literary works 'and in 
sculptural reliefs that date from two or three centuries later, we 
find these details embellished and woven together to form a more 
sustained narrative. The classical literary tellings of the story 
are found in Sanskrit texts such as the Mahiivastu ('Great Story', 
first century cE), the Lalitavistara ('Graceful Description', first 
century cE), in Asvagho~a's poem the Buddhacarita ('Acts of 
the Buddha', second century cE), and in the Pali Nidiinakathii 
('Introductory Tale', second or third century CE), which forms 
an introduction to the commentary on the Jiitaka, a collection 
of stories of the Buddha's previous births.16 New narratives of 
the life of the Buddha have continued to be produced down to 
modern timesP 
Tibetan tradition structures the story of the Buddha's life 
around twelve acts performed by all buddhas, while Theravadin 
sources draw up a rather longer list of thirty features that are the 
rule (dhammatii) for the lives of all buddhas.18 The substance of 
these two lists is already found in the oldest tellings of the story. 
What follows is in effect the story of these twelve acts and (most 
of) the thirty features, told with a bias to how they are recounted 
in the early discourses of the Buddha and Pali sources, together 
with some comments aimed at providing a historical perspective 
on the development of the story. 
The legend 
The Buddhist and general Indian world-view is that all sentient 
beings are subject to rebirth: all beings are born, live, die, and 
are reborn again and again in a variety of different circum-
stances. This process knows no definite beginning and, ordinar-
ily, no definite end. The being who becomes a buddha, like any 
other being, has known countless previous lives-as a human being, 
an animal, and a god. An old tradition tells us that the life before 
the one in which the state of buddhahood is reached is always

--- PAGE 38 ---
18 
The Buddha 
spent as a 'god' (deva) in the heaven of the Contented (Tu~ita/ 
Tusita). Here the bodhisattva (Pali bodhisatta)-the being intent 
on awakening-dwells awaiting the appropriate time to take 
a human birth and become a buddha. Dwelling in the Tu~ita heaven 
is the first of the twelve acts, but how does the bodhisattva come 
to be dwelling here? The answer, in short, is that it is as a result 
of having practised 'the perfections' (piiramitii/piiraml) over 
many, many lifetimes. 
Long ago, in fact incalculable numbers of aeons ago, there lived 
an ascetic called Sumedha (or Megha by some) who encountered 
a former buddha, the Buddha DipaQlkara. This meeting affected 
Sumedha in such a way that he too aspired to becoming a bud-
dha. What impressed Sumedha was DipaQlkara's very presence 
and a sense of his infinite wisdom and compassion, such that he 
resolved that he would do whatever was necessary to cultivate 
and perfect these qualities in himself. Sumedha thus set out on 
the path of the cultivation of the ten 'perfections': generosity, 
morality, desirelessness, vigour, wisdom, patience, truthfulness, 
resolve, loving kindness, and equanimity. In undertaking the 
cultivation of these perfections Sumedha became a bodhisattva, 
a being intent on and destined for buddhahood, and it is the life 
in which he becomes the Buddha Gautama some time in the fifth 
century BCE that represents the fruition of that distant aspira-
tion. Many jiitakas-'[tales] of the [previous] births [of the Bod-
hisattva]'-recount how the Bodhisattva gradually developed 
the 'perfections'. Such stories, like the story of the Buddha's life, 
are deeply embedded in Buddhist culture and serve to emphas-
ize how, for the Buddhist, the being who dwells in Tu~ita as one 
intent on buddhahood is a being of the profoundest spiritual 
qualities. 
The appearance of such a being in the world may not be unique, 
but is nevertheless a rare and special circumstance, for a buddha 
only appears in the world when the teachings of a previous 
buddha have been lost and when beings will be receptive to his 
message. So it is said that surveying the world from Tu~ita the 
·Bodhisattva saw that the time had come for him to take a human 
birth and at last become a buddha; he saw that the 'Middle Coun-

--- PAGE 39 ---
The Buddha 
19 
try' of the great continent of Jambudvipa (India) was the place 
in which to take birth, for its inhabitants would be receptive to 
his message. The Bodhisattva was conceived on the full moon 
night of A~a<;lha (July); that night his mother, Mahamaya, dreamt 
that a white elephant carrying a white lotus in its trunk came' and 
entered her womb. The second and third acts, descent from 
Tu~ita and entering his mother's womb, had been accomplished. 
Maya carried the Bodhisattva in her womb for precisely ten 
lunar months. Then on the full moon of Vaisakha (May), pass-
ing by the Lumbini grove on her way to her home town, she was 
captivated by the beauty of the flowering siila trees and stepped 
down from her palanquin to walk amongst the trees in the grove. 
As she reached for a branch of a sala tree, which bent itself down 
to meet her hand, the pangs of birth came upon her. Thus, 'while 
other women give birth sitting or lying down', the Bodhisattva's 
mother was delivered of her child while standing and holding on 
to the branch of a sala tree. As soon as the Bodhisattva was born 
he took seven steps to the north and proclaimed, 'I am chief in 
the world, I am best in the world, I am first in the world. This is 
my last birth. There will be no further rebirth.' 
Such is the legend of the Bodhisattva's birth, the fourth act. 
By the middle of the third century BCE a site reckoned to be the 
place of his birth had become a centre of pilgrimage, and the great 
Mauryan emperor Asoka-or, as he preferred to call himself, 
Piyadassi Beloved of the Gods-whose empire extended across 
virtually the entire Indian subcontinent, had inscribed on a 
pillar at Lumbini: 
When King Piyadassi, Beloved of the Gods, had been anointed twenty 
years, he himself came and worshipped [here], because this is where the 
Buddha, sage of the Sakyas, was born.19 
The Bodhisattva was thus born among the Sakya people into 
a k~atriya family whose name was Gautama. Seven days after 
his birth his mother died and was reborn in the Tu~ita heaven. 
The child was named Siddhartha-'he whose purpose is accom-
plished'. Despite the strange and marvellous circumstances of his 
birth, as he grew up the child appears to have forgotten he was

--- PAGE 40 ---
20 
The Buddha 
the Bodhisattva: he had no memory of his dwelling in Tu~ita or 
any of his other previous births. However, certain predictions 
of his future destiny were made to his father, Suddhodana. 
Soon after his birth the infant Bodhisattva was examined by 
brahmin specialists in 'the thirty-two marks of the great man' 
(mahiipuru:ja-lak:jmJa/mahiipurisa-lakkhm;a).20 This notion may 
be of some antiquity in Indian tradition. These marks take the 
form of signs on the body that indicate that the possessor is a 
Great Man. Such marks may not be visible to the ordinary eye, 
but it is said that certain brahmins kept the knowledge that was 
capable of interpreting these marks. According to Buddhist tra-
dition two destinies are open to one who possesses these marks 
in full: either he will b~come a great 'wheel-turning' (cakra-
vartinlcakka-vattin) king ruling the four quarters of the earth in 
perfect justice, or he will become a buddha. On hearing that the 
brahmins had pronounced his son was one who possessed the 
thirty-two marks, Suddhodana determined that his son should 
become a wheel-turning king. To this end he arranged matters 
that Siddhiirtha should have no occasion to become unhappy and 
disillusioned with his life at home: he would be sheltered from 
all things unpleasant and ugly such as old age, sickness, and death; 
whatever he wanted to make him happy, that he should have. In 
this way Suddhodana hoped that he might prevent Siddhiirtha 
from renouncing his home~life for the life of a wandering ascetic 
and thus assure that he became not a buddha but a wheel-turning 
king. We are told that Siddhiirtha married a young and beauti-
ful wife, Y asodhara, and had a son, Rahula, by her. 
All this relates to the fifth of the twelve acts, the Bodhisattva's 
enjoyment of proficiency in worldly skills and sensuality. The old-
est sources say virtually nothing of the Bodhisattva's life before 
the time he left home. They indicate that he did indeed have a 
wife and son, but apart from that all we have is a stock descrip-
tion of a life of luxury enjoyed by the very wealthy and privil-
eged placed into the mouth of the Buddha himself: 
I was delicate, most delicate, supremely delicate. Lotus pools were 
made for me at my father's house solely for my use; in one blue lotuses

--- PAGE 41 ---
The Buddha 
21 
flowered, in another white, and in another red. I used no sandal wood 
that was not from Benares. My turban, tunic, lower garments and cloak 
were all of Benares cloth. A white sunshade was held over me day and 
night so that I would not be troubled by cold or heat, dust or grit or 
dew ... Yet even while I possessed such fortune and luxury, I· thought, 
'When an unthinking, ordinary person who is himself subject to ageing, 
sickness, and death, who is not beyond ageing, sickness, and death, sees 
another who is old, sick or dead, he is shocked, disturbed, and disgusted, 
forgetting his own condition. I too am subject to ageing, sickness, and 
death, not beyond ageing, sickness, and death, and that I should see an-
other who is old, sick or dead and be shocked, disturbed, and disgusted 
-this is not fitting.' As I reflected thus, the conceit of youth, health, 
and life entirely left me.21 
This brings us straight to the sixth act, disenchantment with his 
life of pleasure. In the developed account this experience of 
disenchantment with the world is related in terms of the story 
of the Bodhisattva's rides with his charioteer. As he leaves the 
confines of his luxurious apartments, he encounters for the first 
time in his life a decrepit old man, a severely ill man, and a corpse 
being carried to the funeral pyre by mourners. The experience 
is traumatic, and when he then sees a wandering ascetic with serene 
and composed features Gautama resolves that he will leave his 
home and take up the life of a wandering ascetic himself. The 
Bodhisattva's 'great going forth' (mahiipravrajyiilmahiipabbajjii), 
the seventh act, took: place on the night of the A~a<;lha full moon. 
Accompanied by his charioteer, Channa, .he went forth on his 
horse, Kanthaka. According to traditional reckoning he was then 
29 and this was the beginning of a six-year quest for awakening. 
During these six years he first spent time with and practised 
the systems of meditation taught by Ara<;Ia Kalama (Pali Mara 
Kalama) and then Udraka Ramaputra (Pali Uddaka Ramaputta). 
Although he mastered their respective systems, he felt that 
here he had not found any real answer to the problem of human 
suffering. So next, in the company of five other wandering 
ascetics, he turned to the practice of severe austerities. The old 
texts preserve a hauntingly vivid description of the results of this 
practice, the eighth act:

--- PAGE 42 ---
22 
The Buddha 
My body reached a state of extreme emaciation. Because of eating so 
little my limbs became like the jointed stems of creepers or bamboo; 
my backside became like a buffalo's hoof; my backbone, bent or straight, 
was like corded beads; my jutting and broken ribs were like the jutting 
and broken rafters of an old house; the gleam of my eyes sunk deep in 
their sockets was like the gleam of water seen deep down at the bottom 
of a deep well.22 
But by his gruelling penance he again felt he had not found what 
he was searching for. Then he recalled an experience from his 
youth. One day seated quietly beneath the shade of a rose-apple 
tree his mind had settled into a state of deep calm and peace. 
Buddhist tradition calls this state the first 'meditation' or dhyiina 
(Pali jhiina). According to the later Buddhist understanding, 
this state is the gateway to a state of perfect mental calm and 
equilibrium known as the fourth dhyiina. As he reflected, it 
came to the Bodhisattva that it was by letting the mind settle in 
this state of peace that he might come to find what he was look-
ing for. This required that he nourish his body and regain his 
strength. His five companions thought he had turned away from 
the quest and left him to his own devices. In the full legend this 
is the occasion of the young woman Sujata's (or, according to 
some, Nandabala's) offering of milk-rice to the Bodhisattva. Now 
nourished, he seated himself beneath an a§vattha or pipal tree 
(ficus religiosa), henceforth to be known as 'the tree of awaken-
ing' or Bodhi-tree. It was once more the night of the Vaisakha 
full moon and he made a final resolve: 'Let only skin, sinew and 
bone remain, let the flesh and blood dry in my body, but I will 
not give up this seat without attaining complete awakening.'23 The 
gods from many different world-systems gathered around the tree 
sensing that something momentous was about to happen. 
Again the oldest accounts describe the gaining of awakening 
in generally sober psychological terms, most often by reference 
to the successive practice of the four dhyiinas and the gaining of 
three 'knowledges', culminating in the knowledge of suffering, 
its cause, its cessation, and the way leading to its cessation-what 
come to be known as 'the four noble truths'; the awakening is 
also described in terms of gaining insight into the causal chain

--- PAGE 43 ---
The Buddha 
23 
of 'dependent arising'.24 These are classic elements of Buddhist 
thought and we shall return to them later. Perhaps because they 
do not exactly make for a good story, the later legend of the 
Buddha recounts the awakening in terms of the story of the Bod-
hisattva's encounter with Mara. This is a story rather more vivid 
and immediately accessible than the abstract technical concepts 
of Buddhist meditation theory. 
Mara is a being who in certain respects is like the Satan of 
Judaism, Islam, and Christianity. His name means 'bringer of 
death' and his most common epithet is 'the Bad One' (piip1yiif!ls/ 
piipimant). Mara is not so much a personification of evil as of 
the terrible hold which the world-in particular the world of the 
senses-can have on the mind. Mara is the power of all kinds of 
experience to seduce and ensnare the unwary mind; seduced by 
Mara one remains lost in the enchantment of the world and fails 
to find the path that leads through to the cessation of suffering. 
So as the Bodhisattva sat beneath the tree firm in his resolve, 
Mara, mounted on his great elephant, approached. He came 
accompanied by his armies: desire, aversion, hunger and thirst, 
craving, tiredness and sleepiness, fear, and doubt. His one pur-
pose was to break the Bodhisattva's resolve and shift him from 
his seat beneath the pipal tree. The gods who had gathered 
around the tree in anticipation of the Bodhisattva's awakening 
fled at the sight of Mara's approaching armies, and the Bod-
hisattva was left to face·Mara and his armies alone. 
Some relate how at this point the beautiful daughters of Mara . 
came before the Bodhisattva and tested his commitment to his 
purpose by offering themselves to him.25 But the Bodhisattva 
was unmoved. Mara then sent various storms against him. When 
this too failed, Mara approached to claim the Bodhisattva's seat 
directly. He asked him by what right he sat there beneath the 
tree. The Bodhisattva replied that it was by right of having 
practised the perfections over countless aeons. Mara replied that 
he had done likewise and, what was more, he had witnesses to 
prove it: all his armies would vouch for him, but who would vouch 
for the Bodhisattva? The Bodhisattva then lifted his right hand 
and touched the ground calling on the very earth as his witness.

--- PAGE 44 ---
24 
The Buddha 
This is the 'earth-touching gesture' (bhumi-sparsa-mudrii) de-
picted in so many statues of the Buddha through the ages. It sig-
nals the defeat of Mara and the Buddha's awakening. As the 
Buddha touched the earth Mara tumbled from his elephant and 
his armies fled in disarray. With the ninth and tenth acts, the defeat 
of Mara and the attainment of complete awakening, Siddhartha 
had accomplished his goal. 
The legend of the Buddha is dense and rich at this point and 
we must pass over many of its details. But according to tradition 
the Buddha spent as many as seven weeks seated beneath and 
in the vicinity of the Bodhi-tree enjoying the bliss of eman-
cipation. Once a great storm arose as the Buddha was seated 
in meditation and a Naga, a great serpent, came and spread its 
hood over the Buddha to protect him. Again this scene is often 
depicted, especially in images of Cambodian provenance. 
The Buddha had achieved his purpose; he had come to an under-
standing of suffering, and had realized the cessation of suffering. 
In Buddhist terms, seated beneath the tree he had a direct 
experience of 'the unconditioned', 'the transcendent', 'the death-
less', nirvai).a (Pali nibbiina); he had come to know directly the 
deep and underlying way of things that is referred to in India as . 
Dharma (Pali dhamma). It is said that at that point his mind 
inclined not to teach: 
This Dharma that I have found is profound, hard to see, hard to under-
stand; it is peaceful, sublime, beyond the sphere of mere reasoning, 
subtle, to be experienced by the wise. But this generation takes delight 
in attachment, is delighted by attachment, rejoices in attachment and 
as such it is hard for them to see this truth, namely ... nirvai).a.26 
Even the oldest tradition seems to know the story of how the 
great god, the Brahma called Sahampati, or 'mighty lord', came 
then and stood before the Buddha and requested him to teach. 
The implications of this story are various. Sometimes it is sug-
gested that it has been created as a device to show that even the 
gods already recognized at that time in India acknowledge the 
Buddha's superiority. But there are perhaps other meanings. There 
are reasons for thinking that the realm of Brahma is associated

--- PAGE 45 ---
The Buddha 
25 
with compassion in early Buddhist thought.27 There is also a strong 
Buddhist tradition that the teaching should only be given to those 
who ask and thereby show their willingness to hear receptively. 
Thus even today, in certain traditions of Buddhism, when a 
layman makes a formal request to a Buddhist monk to teach 
Dharma he consciously repeats Brahma's original request by using 
the very words of the ancient formula. 
Then the Brahma Sahampati, lord of the world, with joined palms 
requested a boon: There are beings here with but little dust in their eyes. 
Pray teach Dharma out of compassion for them.28 
In a deer park outside Benares the Buddha approached the five 
who had been his companions when he practised austerities and 
gave them instruction in the path to the cessation of suffering 
that he had discovered. In this way he performed a buddha's elev-
enth act: 'setting in motion' or 'turning the wheel of Dharma' 
( dharma-cakra-pravartana!dhamma-cakka-ppavattana ), and soon, 
we are told, there were six arhats in the world-six in the world 
who had cultivated the path to the cessation of suffering and 
realized the unconditioned. 
For the Buddha this was the beginning of a life of teaching 
that lasted some forty-five years. Many stories and legends are 
recounted of the Buddha's teaching career. Indeed, fourteen of 
the thirty features given in the Pali sources as the rule for all bud-
. dhas relate to it. To a large extent these incidents are preserved 
by the earlier tradition in no systematic order, and it is left to 
later tradition to organize them into a sequential narrative.29 Most 
of these legends must be passed over here but it is worth just 
mentioning some since they form part of the common heritage 
of Buddhism and are again and again alluded to by later tradi-
tion in literary texts and in paintings and ~tone relief. There is 
the story of how the Buddha gained his two greatest disciples, 
the monks Sariputra and Maudgalyayana; of how the monk 
Ananda came to be his attendant; of how the Buddha performed 
the extraordinary 'miracle of the pairs', causing fire and water 
to issue from every pore of his body, and then ascended to 
the heaven of the 'Thirty-Three Gods' to give his profoundest

--- PAGE 46 ---
The Buddha 
teachings to his reborn mother. There is the story of the quar, 
relling monks at Kausambi and of how the Buddha retired to the 
Parileyyaka forest where he was attended by a lone elephant who 
had grown weary of the herd, of how a monkey came to the Buddha 
and offered him honey. There is the story of the disp1,1te with his 
cousin Devadatta, who attempted to kill him by releasing a 
rogue elephant which the Buddha subdued by the strength of 
his 'loving kindness' (maitrf!mettii). 
As we shall see, it is one of the great emphases of Buddhist 
teaching that the things of the world are impermanent and unre-
liable. To the extent that the Buddha is of the world then he is 
no exception. There is a majestic and poignant account of the 
Buddha's last days preserved in the ancient canon under the title 
of 'the great discourse of the final passing' (Mahiiparinibbiina 
Sutta). According to tradition it was some time in his eighty-first 
year that the Buddha fell ill: 
I am now grown old, Ananda, and full of years; my journey is done and 
I have reached my sum of days; I am turning eighty years of age. And 
just as a worn out cart is kept going with the help of repairs, so it seems 
is the Tathagata's body kept going with repairs.30 
As the Buddha lay dying between two blossoming sala trees, it 
is related how the monk Ananda, who unlike many of his other 
disciples had not achieved the state of arhatship or perfection, 
lent against a door and wept. Then the Buddha asked for him: 
Enough, Ananda, do not sorrow, do not lament. Have I not formerly 
explained that it is the nature of things that we must be divided, sep-
arated, and parted from all that is beloved and dear? How could it be, 
Ananda, that what has been born and come into being, that what is com-
pounded and subject to decay, should not decay? It is not possible.31 
The Buddha's death constituted his 'full going out' (parinirvii!Ja/ 
parinibbiina), the twelfth and final act of all buddhas. Before his 
death the Buddha had given instructions that his remains should 
be treated like those of a wheel-turning monarch and enshrined 
in a stupa where four roads meet. After the Buddha's body had 
been cremated, various messengers arrived from districts in

--- PAGE 47 ---
The Buddha 
27 
northern India each demanding a share of his relics. The relics 
were thus divided into eight parts and eight different stupas 
were built over them. 
This is where we began this chapter. It is possible that the stupa 
excavated by Peppe represents an enlargement of an older stfipa 
-one that the Sakyas erected over their share of the -relics at 
Kapilavastu. The reliquary unearthed by Peppe appears to date 
from the second century BCE. More recent excavations at the site 
have unearthed further reliquaries-without any inscriptions-
from deeper within the stfipa. These may date from the fourth 
or fifth century BCE. In that case Peppe's reliquary would seem 
to have been deposited when the stfipa was undergoing recon-
struction some centuries after the death of the Buddha. 
The nature of a buddha 
The Buddha is presented to us as in certain respects simply a 
man: the sramat:ta or ascetic Gautama, the sage of the Sakya 
people. Yet at the same time he is presented as something much 
more than this: he was a buddha, an awakened one, the embodi-
ment at a particular time and place of 'perfection', a Tathagata, 
one who comes and goes in accordance with the profoundest way 
of things. At this point we need to begin to consider more fully . 
what it is to be a buddha. 
I have already referred to a generally accepted Indian view of 
things that sees ordinary humanity, ordinary beings, as being born, 
dying, and being reborn continually. This process is the round 
of rebirth known as sarrtsiira or 'wandering', and it is this that 
constitutes the universe. Beings wander through this vast end-
less universe attempting to find some permanent home, a place 
where they can feel at ease and secure. In the realms of the gods 
they find great joy, and in the worlds of hell great suffering, but 
their sojurn in these places is always temporary. Nowhere in this 
universe is permanently secure; sooner or later, whatever the realrri 
of rebirth, a being will die to be reborn somewhere else. So the 
search for happiness and security within the round of rebirth never 
ends. And yet, according to the teaching of the Buddha, this does

--- PAGE 48 ---
The Buddha 
not mean that the search for happiness and security is futile and 
without end, for a buddha is precisely one who finds and follows 
the path to the end of suffering. 
Now the question of what happens to a buddha when he dies 
takes us to the heart of Buddhist philosophical thinking. Here 
Buddhist thought suggests that we must be very careful indeed 
about what we say, about how we use language, lest we become 
fooled. The Buddha cannot be reborn in some new form of exist-
ence, for to exist is, by definition, to exist at some particular time 
and in some particular place and so be part of the unstable, 
shifting world of conditions. If we say that the Buddha exists, 
then the round of rebirth continues for the Buddha and the quest 
for an end to suffering has not been completed. On the other 
hand, to say that the Buddha simply does not exist is to suggest 
that the Buddhist quest for happiness amounts to nothing but the 
destruction of the individual being-something which is specific-
ally denied in the texts.32 Hence the strict doctrinal formulation 
of Buddhist texts is this: one cannot say that the Buddha exists 
after death, one cannot say that he does not exist, one cannot 
say that he both exists and does not exist, and one cannot say 
that he neither exists nor does not exist.33 One cannot say more 
here without beginning to explore certain other aspects of Bud-
dhist metaphysics and ontology, and this I shall leave for later 
chapters. The important point is that a Buddha is understood 
as a being who has in some way transcended and gone beyond 
the round of rebirth. Be is a Tathagata, one who, in accordance 
with the profoundest way of things, has come 'thus' (tathii) and 
gone 'thus'.34 
So what does this transcendence imply about the final nature 
of a buddha? If one is thinking in categories dictated and shaped 
by the theologies of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and also 
modern Western thought, there is often a strong inclination to 
suppose that such a question should be answered in terms of the 
categories of human and divine: either the Buddha was basically 
a man or he was some kind of god, perhaps even God. 35 But some-
thing of an imaginative leap is required here, for these are not 
the categories of Indian or Buddhist thought. In the first place,

--- PAGE 49 ---
The Buddha 
according to the Buddhist view of things, the nature of beings is 
not eternally or absolutely fixed. Beings that were once humans 
or animals may be reborn as gods; beings that were once gods 
may be reborn as animals or in hellish realms. Certainly, for the 
Buddhist tradition, the being who became buddha or awakened 
had been born a man, but equally that being is regarded as 
having spent many previous lives as a god. Yet in becoming a 
buddha he goes beyond such categories of being as human and 
divine. 
A story is told of how once a brahmin saw on the Buddha's 
footprints one of the thirty-two marks, wheels complete with a 
thousand spokes, with rims and hubs.36 He thought that such foot-
prints could hardly be those of a human being and followed them. 
On catching up with the Buddha, he asked him whether he was 
a god or some kind of angel or demon. The Buddha replied that 
he was none of these. The brahmin then asked if he was a human 
being. The Buddha replied that he was not. The brahmin was 
puzzled. So what was the Buddha? 
Just as a blue, red, or white lotus, born in water and grown up in water, 
having risen above the water stands unstained by water, even so do I, 
born in the world and grown up in the world, having overcome the 
world, dwell unstained by the world. Understand that I am a buddha. 
A buddha is thus a being sui generis: a buddha is just a buddha.37 
But, in principle, according to Buddhist thought, any being can 
follow the path of developing the perfections over countless 
lives, and eventually become a buddha. That is, all beings have 
the potential to become buddhas. 
Thus something has happened to Gautama the man that means 
that the categories that normally apply to beings no longer pro-
perly apply. Ordinarily a human being's behaviour will sometimes · 
be motivated by greed, hatred, and delusion and sometimes by 
such things as selflessness, friendliness, compassion, and wis-
dom. The different deeds, words, and thoughts of a being are an 
expression of these conflicting emotions and psychological forces. 
But for a buddha all this has changed. He has rooted out any 
sense of pride, attachment, or hostility. The thoughts, words, and

--- PAGE 50 ---
30 
The Buddha 
deeds of a buddha are motivated only by generosity, loving kind-
ness, and wisdom. A buddha can think, say, and do nothing that 
is not based on these. This is the effect or 'fruit' of what hap-
pened as he sat in meditation beneath the tree of awakening. 
The bodies of the Buddha 
One early Buddhist text puts it that the Buddha is 'one whose 
body is Dharma, whose body is Brahma; who has become 
Dharma, who has become Brahma'.38 Now dharma and brahma 
are two technical terms pregnant with emotional and religious 
'meaning. Among other things Dharma is 'the right way to 
behave', 'the perfect way to act'; hence it is also the teaching of 
the Buddha since by following the teaching of the Buddha one 
follows the path that ends in Dharma or perfect action. We have 
already come across the term Brahma denoting a divine being 
(p. 24), but in Buddhist texts brahma is also used to denote or 
describe the qualities of such divine beings; thus brahma. con-
veys something of the sense of the English 'divine', something 
of the sense of 'holy' and something of the sense of 'perfec-
tion'. Like the English word 'body' the Sanskrit/Pali word kiiya 
means both a physical body and figuratively a collection or 
aggregate of something-as in 'a body of opinion'. To say that the 
Buddha is dharma-kiiya means that he is at once the embodiment 
of Dharma and the collection or sum of all those qualities-
non-attachment, loving kindness, wisdom, etc.-that constitute 
Dharma. Thus the nature of a buddha does not inhere primarily 
in his visible human body-it is not that which makes him a 
buddha-but in his perfected spiritual qualities. 
Another passage of the ancient texts relates how the monk 
Vakkali was lying seriously ill on his sick-bed; when the Buddha 
arrives Vakkali explains to him that, although he has no sense 
of failure in his conduct, he is troubled by the fact that because 
of his illness he has not been able to come and visit the Buddha. 
The Buddha responds: 'Enough, Vakkali. What point is there in 
your seeing this decaying body? He who sees Dharma sees me; 
he who sees me sees Dharma.'39 
This kind of thinking gives rise in developed Buddhist 
thought to various theories of 'the bodies of the Buddha'. Such

--- PAGE 51 ---
The Buddha 
31 
theories are often presented as a distinguishing feature of later 
Mahayana Buddhism. This is misleading. Certainly, there is a rather 
sophisticated understanding of 'the three bodies' (trikiiya) of the 
Buddha worked out and expounded in the writings of the fourth-
century CE Indian Mahayanist thinker Asmiga (see Chapter 9). 
But this theory stands at the end of a process of development, 
and some conception of the bodies of the Buddha is common 
to all Buddhist thought. What is common is the distinguishing 
between the 'physical body' (rupa-kiiya) and the 'dharma-body'. 
The physical body is the body that one would see if one 
happened to meet the Buddha. Most people, most of the time, 
it seems, would see a man who looked and dressed much like 
any other Buddhist monk. However, recalling the stories of the 
brahmins who examined the Buddha's body after his birth and 
the brahmin who followed his footprints, some people some of 
the time see-or perhaps, more precisely, experience-a body 
that is eighteen cubits in height and endowed with the thirty-
two marks of the great man as described in the Lakkha!Ja Sutta, 
'the discourse on the marks of the great man'.40 This apparently 
extraordinary body appears in part to be connected with theories 
of the 'subtle body' developed in meditation. All this then is the 
physical body-the body as it appears to the senses. The Dharma-
body, as we have seen already, is the collection of perfect qual-
ities that, as it were, constitute the 'personality' or psychological 
make-up of the Buddha. 
A Buddha's physical body and Dharma-body in a sense par-
allel and in a sense contrast with the physical and psychological 
make-up of other more ordinary beings. According to a classic 
Buddhist analysis that we shall have occasion to consider more 
fully below, any individual being's physical and psychological 
make-up comprises five groups of conditions and functions: a 
physical body normally endowed with five senses; feelings that 
are pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral; ideas and concepts; various 
desires and volitions; and self-consciousness. Any being might 
be considered as consisting in the accumulation of just these 
five 'heaps' or 'aggregates' (skandha/khandha) of physical and 
psychological conditions. And in this respect a buddha is no 
different. Yet a buddha has transformed these five into an

--- PAGE 52 ---
32 
The Buddha 
expression and embodiment of Dharma. Thus rather than, or as 
well as, consisting in the accumulation of these five aggregates, 
the psychological make-up of the Buddha might be considered 
as consisting in the accumulation of another set of five 'aggreg-
ates', namely, the various qualities of perfect conduct (sllalsfla), 
meditation (samadhi), wisdom (prajflalpaflfla), freedom (vimuktil 
vimutti), and knowledge and understanding ( vimukti-jnana-darsana/ 
vimutticilii!Ja-dassana ).41 
Sravaka-buddhas, pratyeka-buddhas, and samyak-sambuddhas 
In this chapter we have seen how the Buddhist tradition regards 
a particular historical individual-Siddhartha Gautama-as an 
instance of a certain kind of rare and extraordinary being-a 
buddha. Such a being having resolved to become a buddha by 
making a vow in the presence of some previous buddha of a far 
distant age, practises the perfections for countless lives and 
finally, born as a man, attains buddhahood by finding 'the path 
to the cessation of suffering'; he then goes on to teach this path 
to the cessation of suffering to others so that they may reach the 
same realization as he has done, so that they too may become 
'awakened' or buddha. Both Gautama and those who come 
to realization by following his teachings-the arhats-may be 
referred to as 'buddhas' since both, by the rooting out of greed, 
hatred, and delusion, have come to understand suffering and 
the path to its cessation. And yet, as the tradition acknowledges, 
some difference between Gautama and the arhats must remain. 
Gautama, the Buddha, has found the path by his individual striv-
ing without the immediate help of an already awakened being 
and then gone on to show others the way.42 His followers on the 
other hand may have come to precisely the same understand-
ing and realization as Gautama but they have done so with the 
assistance of his unequalled abilities as teacher. 
We have then here two kinds of buddha: 'the perfectly, fully 
awakened one' (samyak-lsamma-sambuddha) like Gautama, and 
the arhat or 'one who has awakened as a disciple' (sravaka-1 
savaka-buddha). Thus while on the one hand wishing to stress 
that the 'awakening' of Gautama and his 'awakened' disciples is the

--- PAGE 53 ---
The Buddha 
33 
same, the Buddhist tradition has also been unable to resist the 
tendency to dwell on the superiority of Gautama's achievement. 
Apart from becoming 'awakened' as a samyaksam-buddha or 
arhat, Buddhist texts also envisage a third possibility: that one 
might become awakened by one's unaided effort without hearing 
the teaching of a buddha and yet fail to teach others the way to 
awakening. Such a one is known as a 'solitary buddha' (pratyeka-1 
pacceka-buddha ). 
The sense that the achievements of these three kinds of 'bud-
dha' are at once the same but different-the Buddha's achieve-
ment being somehow superior-is a tension that lies at the heart 
of Buddhist thought and, as we shall see, explains in part certain 
later developments of Buddhist thought known as the Mahayana. 
How does the Buddha's superiority to arhats and pratyeka-
buddhas manifest itself? In order to answer this question it is 
useful to return to a question raised earlier concerning the Bud-
dha's nature as man or god. In the context especially of early 
Buddhism and Buddhism as practised today in Sri Lanka and 
South-East Asia, once it has been established that theoretically 
the Buddha is neither a god nor a 'Saviour', there has been a 
tendency amongst observers to conclude that the Buddha ought 
then to be seen by Buddhists as simply a man-as if this was the 
only alternative. A further conclusion is then drawn that, since 
Buddhism teaches that there is no 'saviour', the only way to 'sal-
vation' must be through one's own unaided effort. 
True, the Buddha did not create the world and he cannot 
simply 'save' us-and the Buddhist would say that it is not so 
much that the Buddha lacks the power as that the world is just 
not like that: no being could do such a thing. Yet although no 
saviour, the Buddha is still 'the teacher of gods and men, the un-
surpassed trainer of unruly men'; in the Pali commentaries of 
fifth-century Sri Lanka he is often referred to as simply the 
Teacher (satthar). That is, we have here to do with a question of 
alternative religious imagery and metaphor: not the 'Father' or 
'Saviour' of Judaism or Christianity, but the Teacher. If one is 
not familiar with the Indian cultural context it is easy to under-
estimate the potency of the image here. For a Buddhist no being

--- PAGE 54 ---
34 
The Buddha 
can match the Buddha's abilities to teach and instruct in order 
to push beings gently towards the final truth of things. A buddha 
may not be able to save us-that is, he cannot simply turn us 
into awakened beings-yet, if awakening is what we are intent 
on, the presence of a buddha is still our best hope. Indeed some 
contemporary Buddhists would suggest that it is no longer pos-
sible to reach awakening since conditions are now unpropitious; 
rather it is better to aspire to be reborn at the time of the next 
buddha or in a world where a buddha is now teaching so that 
one can hear the teachings directly from a buddha. For the Bud-
dhist tradition, then, the Buddha is above all the great Teacher; 
it is his rediscovery of the path to the cessation of suffering and 
his teaching of that path that offers beings the possibility of fol-
lowing that path themselves. 
As Teacher, then, the Buddha set in motion the wheel of 
Dharma. As a result of setting in motion the wheel of Dharma 
he established a community of accomplished disciples, the Sangha. 
In the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha the Buddhist thus has 'three 
jewels' (tri-ratna/ti-ratana) to which to go for refuge. Going to 
the three jewels for refuge is realized by the formal recitation 
of a threefold formula: 'To the Buddha I go for refuge; to the 
Dharma I go for refuge; to the Sangha I go for refuge.' Going to 
these three jewels for refuge is essentially what defines an indi-
vidual as a Buddhist. Having considered the Buddha,let us now 
turn to consider his teaching and how that teaching is put into 
practice by those who take refuge in the three jewels.

--- PAGE 55 ---
2 
The Word of the Buddha 
Buddhist Scriptures and Schools 
Dharma: texts, practice, and realization 
The Buddha is author of no books or treatises. Moreover it is 
extremely unlikely that any of his immediate disciples wrote any-
thing of his teachings down. And yet we are told that the Buddha 
devoted some forty-five years of his life entirely to teaching 
and that by the end of his life he was quite satisfied that he had 
succeeded in passing on his teachings carefully and exactly, such 
that they would long be of benefit and help to the world.1 This 
state of affairs is worth reflecting on, for it reveals something of 
the nature of Buddhism. 
Buddhism cannot be reduced to a collection of theoretical writ-
ings nor a philosophical system of thought-although both these 
form an important part of its tradition. What lies at the heart of 
Buddhism, according to its own understanding of the matter, is 
dharma. Dharma is not an exclusively Buddhist concept, but 
one which is common to Indian philosophical, religious, social, 
and political thought in its entirety. According to Indian thought 
Dharma is that which is the basis of things, the underlying nature 
of things, the way things are; in short, it is the truth about things, 
the truth about the world. More than this, Dharma is the way we 
should act, for if we are to avoid bringing harm to both ourselves 
and others we should strive to act in a way that is true to the way 
things are, that accords with the underlying truth ()f things. Ulti-
mately the only true way to act is in conformity with Dharma. 
The notion of Dharma in Indian thought thus has both a 
descriptive and a prescriptive aspect: it is the way things are and 
the way to act. The various schools of Indian religious and philo-
sophical thought and practice all offer slightly different visions

--- PAGE 56 ---
36 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
( darsana) of Dharma-different visions of the way things are and 
the way to act. Of course, when we examine the teachings of the 
various schools, we find that there is often substantial common 
ground and much borrowing from each other. Yet the.Buddha's 
vision and understanding of Dharma must be reckoned to have 
had a profound influence on Indian culture and, to an extent unpar-
alleled by other visions of Dharma, on cultures beyond India. 
The Buddha regarded the Dharma he had found as 'profound, 
hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the 
sphere of mere reasoning, subtle, to be experienced by the wise'. 
Thus knowledge of Dharma is not something that is acquired 
simply by being told the necessary information or by reading 
the appropriate texts. Knowledge of Dharma is not a matter of 
scholarly and ~ntellectual study. This does mean that such study 
may not have a part to play, yet it can never be the whole story. 
In fact according to an ancient and authoritative view of the 
matter knowledge of Dharma comes about as a result of the 
interplay between three kinds of understanding (prajnii/pannii): 
that which arises from listening (sruta/suta ), that which arises from 
reflection (cintii), and that which arises from spiritual practice 
(bhiivanii).2 The aim of Buddhism is to put into practice a par-
ticular way of living the 'holy life' or 'spiritual life' (brahma-cariya) 
that involves training in ethical conduct (fila/slla) and meditative 
and contemplative techniques (samiidhi) and which culminates 
in the direct realization of the very knowledge (prajnii/paniiii) 
the B·uddha himself reached under the tree of awakening. There-
fore what the Buddha taught is often referred to in the early texts 
as a system of 'training' (sik~ii/sikkha), and his disciples may be 
referred to as being 'in training' (saik~a/sekha) or 'not in need 
of further training' (asaik~a/asekha). Thus in certain important 
respects the nature of the knowledge that the Buddha was trying 
to convey to his pupils is more akin to a skill, like knowing how 
to play a musical instrument, than a piece of information, such 
as what time the Manchester train leaves tomorrow. 
That knowledge of Dharma was conceived of in this way 
explains in part why the written word was not originally the 
medium for its communication. Practical training is difficult to

--- PAGE 57 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
37 
impart and acquire simply on the basis of theoretical manuals; 
one needs a teacher who can demonstrate the training and also 
comment on and encourage one in one's own attempts to put 
the instructions into practice.3 In fact a sense that knowledge is 
not properly communicated by the written word colours the 
traditional Indian attitude to learning in general: knowledge 
must be passed from teacher to pupil directly. This does not mean 
that at the time of the Buddha India had no literature. On the 
contrary, in the form of the 8-g Veda India has a literature that 
predates the Buddha by perhaps as much as a thousand years. 
But this literature is 'oral'. It was composed orally, memorized, 
and then passed from teacher to pupil directly by a process of 
oral recitation for centuries, without ever being committed to writ-
ing. India'~ is, of course, not the only culture to have an ancient 
oral literature; the Iliad and the Odyssey, for example, grew out 
of a tradition of oral composition, yet the oral origins of tradi-
tional Indian learning continued to inform its structure long 
after texts had begun to be committed to writing.4 
In presenting its teachings to the world, the Buddhist tradition 
would thus point towards an unbroken lineage or succession of 
teachers and pupils: just as the Buddha took care to instruct his 
pupils, so they in turn took care to instruct theirs. The visible 
and concrete manifestation of this succession is in the first place 
the Sangha, the community of ordained monks (bhikkhu) and 
nuns (bhikkhunz). Becoming a Buddhist monk or nun requires 
a particular ceremony that is legitimate only if properly carried 
out according to prescribed rules, which apparently go right 
back to the time of the Buddha himself. In particular the pre-
scriptions for the ceremony require the presence of a minimum 
of five fully ordained bhikkhus of at least ten years' standing. 
Thus when someone ordains as a Buddhist monk there is in effect 
a direct link back to the presence of the Buddha himself. Of course, 
the principle of the passing of the teachings directly from per-
son to person may also operate outside the Sangha, for members 
of the Sangha do not only teach other members of the Sangha, 
they teach lay people as well. Yet the Sangha remains the tan-
gible thread of the tradition.

--- PAGE 58 ---
38 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
So the Buddha's Dharma is mediated to us via the Satigha-
a community that ideally does not tnerely hand down some 
vague recollection of what the Buddha taught but actually lives 
the teaching. In the Pali commentaries written down in Sri 
Lanka in the fifth century CE a distinction was made between 
two kinds of monastic duty: that of books and that of practice 
(see below, pp. 104-5).5 The former is concerned with the study 
of the theory as preserved in Buddhist writings. The latter is the 
stniightforward attempt to put the Buddha's system of training 
into practice, to live the spiritual life as prescribed by the Buddha 
and his followers. Although this formal distinction is found in 
the writings of a particular Buddhist school, the point being high-
lighted holds good for Buddhism as a whole. Throughout the his-
tory of Buddhism there has existed a certain tension ~etween the 
monk who is a great scholar and theoretician and the monk who 
is a realized practitioner. Something of the same tension is in-
dicated in the sixth and seventh centuries in China with the 
arising of the Ch'an (Japanese Zen) school of Buddhism, whose 
well-known suspicion of theoretical formulations of the teach-
ing is summed up by the traditional stanza: 
A special tradition outside the scriptures; 
Not founded on words and letters; 
Pointing directly to the heart of man; 
Seeing into one's own nature and attainingBuddhahood.6 
The same kind of tension is in part reflected in a threefold 
characterization of Dharma itself as textual tradition (pariyatti), 
practice (patipatti), and realization (pafivedha) once again found 
in the Pali commentaries.7 The first refers to the sum of Buddhist 
theory as contained in Buddhist scriptures, the second to the put-
ting into practice of those teachings, while the third to the direct 
understanding acquired consequent upon the practice. The rest 
of this chapter will primarily be concerned with Dharma as 
textual tradition. 
Dharma as textual tradition goes back to the teachings heard 
directly from the Buddha. These teachings were, it seems, mem-
orized by the immediate followers of the Buddha. For several

--- PAGE 59 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
39 
generations perhaps, the teachings of the Buddha were preserved 
and handed down directly from master to pupil orally without 
ever being committed to writing. It is tempting for us in the 
modern world to be sceptical about the reliability of this method 
of transmission, but it was the norm in ancient India; the use of 
mnemonic techniques such as the numbered list and frequent 
repetition of certain portions of the material within a given text 
aided reliable transmission.8 Indeed the evidence of the trans-
mission of the Vedic texts, for example, is that oral transmission 
can be more reliable than a tradition of written texts involving 
the copying of manuscripts.9 
In the early phase of their transmission then the only access 
to Buddhist 'texts' was by hearing them directly from someone 
who had heard and learnt them from someone else, this oral trans-
mission of the 'texts being an activity that went on primarily within 
the community of monks. Even after these texts began to be com-
mitted to writing their study was primarily a monastic concern. 
Thus the ordinary lay Buddhist's access to Buddhist teachings 
was always through the Sangha: he or she learnt the Dharma by 
sitting in the presence of a monk or nun and listening to their 
exposition of the teachings. Thus, in so far as a monk or nun neces-
sarily follows a way of life defined by the prescriptions and rules 
of Buddhist monasticism, the study of Buddhist theory always 
took place in a context of practice. It is only in the twentieth 
century-with the arrival of the modern printed book in tr.adi-
tional Buddhist societies, and the demand in the West for books 
and information on Buddhism-that this state of affairs has begun 
to change. That is, for· over two millennia it was only by some 
form of contact with the living tradition of practice that there 
could be any knowledge of Buddhism. 
The first recitation of scriptures: the four Nikayas/Agamas 
and the Vinaya 
According to a generally accepted ancient tradition, the first 
attempt to agree the form of the Buddhist textual tradition, what 
was remembered as the authoritative 'word of the Buddha',

--- PAGE 60 ---
40 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
took place some three months after the Buddha's death at the 
town of Rajagrha (Pali Rajagaha) in northern India when soo 
arhats took part in a 'communal recitation' (sar[lglti). This event 
is commonly referred to in modern writings as 'the first Buddhist 
council'. Significantly the earliest Buddhist tradition attempts 
to resolve any tension between theory and practice by insisting 
that the first commmial recitation of scriptures was carried out by 
soo individuals who had each realized direct and perfect know-
ledge of Dharma. According to the accounts of this communal 
recitation, what was remembered of the Buddha's teachings fell 
into two classes: the general discourses of the Buddha, the siitra.s 
(Pali sutta ), and his prescriptions for the lifestyle of the Buddhist 
monk, the 'discipline' or vinaya. Some accounts suggest there 
was a third category, miitrkiis (Pali miitikii) or summary mne-
monic lists of significant points of the teaching. At any rate, later 
canonical collections of Buddhist writings were subsequently 
often referred to as 'the three baskets' (tri-pi{akalti-pi{aka): the 
basket of discipline, the basket of discourses, and the basket of 
'further dharma' (abhidharma/abhidhamma), whose development 
is in part related to the use of the summary mnemonic lists or 
miitrkas. 
Three principal 'canons' of Buddhist scriptures survive today 
corresponding to the three main traditions of living Bud-
dhism: the Pali or Theravada canon of the southern t.radition of 
Sri Lanka and South-East Asia, the Chinese Tripitaka of the 
eastern tradition of China, Korea, and Japan, and the Tibetan 
Kanjur (bKa' 'gyur) and Tenjur (bsTan 'gyur) of the northern tra-
dition of Tibet and Mongolia. All three of these collections are 
extensive. Modern printed editions of the Pali canon run to some 
fifty moderately sized volumes; the Taisho edition of the Chi-
nese Tripitaka comprises fifty-five volumes, each containing some 
I,ooo pages of Chinese characters; together the Tibetan Kanjur 
and Tenjur comprise 300 traditional poti volumes. When the 
contents of the three canons are compared it is apparent that, 
while significant portions of the Pali canon are paralleled in the 
Chinese collection, and there is considerable overlap between the 
Chinese Tripitaka and the Kanjur and Tenjur, Buddhism as l;l

--- PAGE 61 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
41 
whole does not possess a 'canon' of scriptures in the manner of 
the Hebrew Bible of Judaism, the Old and New Testaments of 
Christianity, or the Qu'ran of Islam. It is also apparent that the 
Chinese and Tibetan canons do not represent en bloc transla-
tions of ancient Indian canonical collections of Buddhist texts, 
but rather libraries of translations of individual Indian works. made 
over the centuries (see Chapter ro). In the case of the Chinese 
canon this process of translating Indian texts began in· the sec-
ond century cE and continued for over 8oo years; the process 
of arranging and cataloguing these texts continues down to the 
present century. In the case of Tibetan Kanjur and Tenjur the 
translation process was carried out between the seventh and 
thirteenth centuries, while the precise contents and arrangement 
of these two collections has never been fixed. 
· 
What of the Pali canon? The use of the term 'Pali' as the name 
of the language of the Theravada canon of Buddhist scriptures 
derives from the expression piili-bhiisii, 'the language of the 
[Buddhist] texts'. This language is an ancient Indian language 
closely related to Sanskrit, the language of classical Indian cul-
ture par excellence. At the time of the Buddha, Sanskrit appears 
to have been very much the language of brahmanical learning 
and religious ritual. The Buddha therefore seems to have delib-
erately and consciously eschewed Sanskrit, preferring to teach 
in the ordinary vernacular-the various Middle Indo-Aryan 
dialects, known as Prakrit, which were spoken across the north 
of India in the fifth century BCE.10 In the first century or so after 
the death of the Buddha, as Buddhism began gradually to spread 
across the Indian subcontinent, different groups of monks and 
the evolving schools of Buddhism appear to have preserved 
their own versions of the Buddha's teaching orally in their local 
dialect. However, as time passed there was a tendency for the 
language of 'the scriptures' to become frozen and increasingly 
removed from any actually spoken dialect. At the same time 
Sanskrit was becoming less an exclusively brahmanicallanguage 
and more the accepted language of Indian culture-the language 
in which to communicate learning and literature right across India. 
Thus Buddhist scriptures were subject to varying degrees of

--- PAGE 62 ---
42 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
'sanskritization' ('translation' is too strong here since the order 
of difference between Middle Indian and Sanskrit is similar 
to that between modern English and Chaucer's or Mallory's 
English). Although basically Middle Indo-Aryan, the language 
of the Pali canon is thus something of a hybrid, preserving lin-
guistic features of several dialects and showing some evidence 
of sanskritization. 
Theravada Buddhist tradition traces the Pali canon back to a 
recension of Buddhist scriptures brought from northern India 
to Sri Lanka in the third century BCE by Mahinda, a Buddhist 
monk who was the son of the emperor Asoka. Mahinda and his 
company brought no books, the texts being in their heads, but 
the tradition is that the Pali.texts were subsequently written down 
for the first time in the first century BCE. The historical value of 
this tradition is uncertain. Most scholars would be sceptical of 
the suggestion that the Pali canon existed exactly as we have it 
today already in the middle of third century BCE. We know, how-
ever, that what the commentators had before them in the fifth 
century CE in Sri Lanka corresponded fairly exactly to what we 
have now, and the original north Indian provenance and relative 
antiquity of much of the Pali canon seems to be guaranteed on 
linguistic grounds.U Significant portions of the material it con-
tains must go back to the third century BeE: 
How many other versions or recensions of the canon of Bud-
dhist scriptures existed in partially or more fully sanskritized 
Middle Indian dialects is unclear. The Pali canon is the only 
one to survive apparently complete in an Indian language. Of 
the other ancient Indian versions of the canon, we have only 
isolated fragments and portions in the original Indian languages. 
More substantial portions are, however, preserved in translation 
especially in the Chinese Tripitaka. This, along with what Bud-
dhist literature as a whole reveals about its own history, allows 
us to know something of the content of these other ancient 
Indian canons and also to identify the generally more archaic 
material-material that must be relatively close in time to the 
ancient Rajagrha recitation. This material takes the form of the 
four primary Nikayas or 'collections' of the Buddha's discourses

--- PAGE 63 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
43 
-also known as the four Agamas or books of textual 'tradition' 
-along with the Vinaya or Buddhist monastic rule. These texts 
constitute the essential common heritage of Buddhist thought, 
and from this perspective the subsequent history of Buddhism 
is a working out of their implications. This is not to imply that 
Buddhism can somehow be reduced to what is contained in 
these texts; one must understand that this 'working out' in prac-
tice constitutes much of what Buddhism has actually been and, 
today, is. Nevertheless, in the quest for an: understanding of Bud-
dhist thought these texts represent the most convenient starting 
point. 
Today we have two full versions of this Nikaya/Agama mat-
erial: a version in Pali forming part of the Pali canon and a ver-
sion in Chinese translation contained in the Chinese Tripitaka. 
It is usual scholarly practice to refer to the Pali version by the 
term 'Nikaya' and the Chinese by the term 'Agama'. Like the 
Pali canon as a whole, it is impossible to date the Pali Nikayas 
in their present form with any precision. The Chinese Agamas 
were translated into Chinese from Sanskrit or Middle Indo-
Aryan dialects around the end of the fourth century CE, but the 
texts upon which they rest must like the Nikayas date from the 
centuries before the beginning of the Christian era. Portions of 
further versions of this material also come down to us in Tibetan 
translation in the Tibetan Kanjur. 
The four Nikayas/Agamas arrange the Buddha's discourses 
in the first place according to length. The collection of long dis-
courses ( dirghiigama/digha-nikiiya) comprises some thirty siitras 
arranged in three volumes; the collection of middle-length dis-
courses (madhyamiigama/majjhima-nikiiya) comprises some 150 
siitras in the Pali version and 200 in the Chinese. Finally there 
are two collections of shorter siitras. The first of these is 'the 
grouped collection' (saf!lyuktiigama/saf!lyutta-nikiiya) which con-
sists of short siitras grouped principally according to subject 
matter and dominated by the subjects of dependent arising, the 
aggregates, the sense-spheres, and the path. The oral nature of 
early Buddhist literature resulted in the proliferation of numbered 
lists, in part as mnemonic devices, and the 'numbered collection'

--- PAGE 64 ---
44 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
(ekottarikiigama!atiguttara-nikiiya) consists of short siitras built 
around such a numbered list and grouped according to number 
rather than topic. 
In this book I generally quote from and refer to the Pali re-
cension of these texts. Using the Pali recension is in part a 
matter of convenience and not a question of thereby suggesting 
that the traditions it preserves are always the oldest and most 
authentic available to us, even if it is likely that this is generally 
the case. The Pali versions of these texts have been translated 
into English in their entirety (unlike the Chinese and Tibetan 
versions) and are readily available. That these texts have become 
widely known over the past century through their Pali form has 
sometimes led to an attitude which sees them as presenting the 
peculiar perspective of Theravada Buddhism. But, as Etienne 
Lamotte pointed out forty years ago, the doctrinal basis com-
mon to the Chinese Agamas and Pali Nikayas is remarkably uni-
form; such variations as exist affect only the mode of expression 
or the arrangement of topics.U Far from representing sectarian 
Buddhism, these texts above all constitute the common ancient 
heritage of Buddhism. 
The failure to appreciate this results in a distorted view of 
ancient Buddhism, and its subsequent development and history 
both within and outside India. From their frequent references 
to and quotations from the Nikayas/ Agamas, it is apparent that 
all subsequent Indian Buddhist thinkers and writers of whatever 
school or persuasion, including the Mahayana-and most certainly 
those thinkers such as Nagarjuna, Asaiiga, and Vasubandhu, 
who became the great Indian fathers of east Asian and Tibetan 
Buddhism-were completely familiar with this material and treated 
it as the authoritative word of the Buddha. When disagreements 
arose among Buddhists they did not concern the authority of the 
Nikaya/Agama material, but certain points of its interpretation 
and the authority of other quite different material, namely the 
Mahayana siitras, which we shall return to presently. 
Alongside the four primary Nikaya/Agama collections of siitras 
the ancient Indian canons like the Pali canon preserved a 'minor' 
( k~udrakalkhuddaka) collection of miscellaneous texts that were

--- PAGE 65 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
45 
also recognized as having the authority of the Buddha's word. 
This fifth collection included such works as the Dharmapada 
('sayings on Dharma') and the Jiitaka or stories concerning the 
previous lives of the Buddha. The four Nikayas together with a 
greater or lesser number of miscellaneous minor texts constituted 
'the basket of discourses' (Siitra/Sutta Pitaka) for the earliest 
Buddhist schools.B 
The Pali canon, Chinese Tripitaka, and Tibetan Kanjur all 
preserve versions of the ancient 'basket of monastic discipline' 
(Vinaya Pitaka ): the Pali canon and Kanjur one each, the Chinese 
Tripitaka four, plus an incomplete-fifth. All six extant versions 
of the Vinaya fall into two basic parts. The first is a detailed 
analysis of the rules which constitute the priitimok:ja (Pali 
pii{imokkha) and which govern the life of the individual monk 
or nun. The second comprises twenty 'sections' (skandhaka/ 
khandhaka) which set out the proper procedures for conducting 
the various communal acts of the Sangha, such as ordination (see 
Chapter 4).14 
Sutra and Abhidharma: the problem of textual authenticity 
The Nikayas/Agamas are collections of siitras or 'discourses' 
regarded as delivered by the Buddha. The older term for a dis-
course of the Buddha preserved in Pali is sutta. It is not clear 
what this term originally meant. When Buddhists started sans-
kritizing their texts they chose the word siitra. This is a term 
which literally means 'thread' (compare English 'suture') but in 
a literary context refers especially to authoritative brahmanical 
texts consisting of a string of terse, aphoristic verses which a 
pupil might memorize and a teacher might take as the basis for 
exposition. Buddhist siitras, however, are not in this form. As 
Richard Gombrich has pointed out, it is perhaps more likely that 
Middle Indo-Aryan sutta corresponds to Sanskrit siikta, which 
means 'something that is well said' and was early in the history 
of Indian literature used to refer to the inspired hymns of the 
Vedic seers that make up the collection of the ~g Veda. Early

--- PAGE 66 ---
46 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
Buddhists can therefore be seen as claiming a status on a par 
with the Vedas for the utterances of the Buddha.15 
Be that as it may, a Buddhist siitra always begins with the words: 
'Thus have I heard. At one time the Lord was staying at .. .'16 
The later tradition understands these as the words of Ananda, 
the Buddha's attendant, introducing each discourse of the Buddha 
at the first communal recitation. The i!lclusion of this particular 
formula at the beginning of a Buddhist text indicates that the text 
claims the status of 'the word of the Buddha' (buddha-vacana). 
It is clear that from a very early date there is a tacit understanding 
that to claim this status for a text is not exactly to claim that it 
represents only what has actually been uttered by the Buddha 
in person. Even in the Nikaya/Agama collections accepted as 
'the word of the Buddha' by all ancient schools, there are siitras. 
presented as delivered not by the Buddha but by monks and nuns 
who were his chief pupils-some of them after his death. 
As indicated above, the notion of a fixed canon of Buddhist 
scriptures is somewhat problematic. And we must be careful not 
to impose inappropriate notions of 'canon' and authenticity-
derived, say, from Christianity-on the Buddhist tradition. Even 
in the accounts of the first Buddhist council we are told of a monk 
who, on hearing of the recitation of the Buddha's teaching by 
the soo arhats, declared that he preferred to remember the 
teaching as he himself had heard .it directly from the BuddhaP 
For several centuries as Buddhism spread across the Indian 
subcontinent it is clear that, while the Buddhist community 
accepted and preserved a common core of textual material, 
this material constituted a 'canon' in only a rather loose and 
informal sense; that each and every collection of textual material 
should correspond exactly was not regarded by the early com-
munity as the critical issue. 
This state of affairs is reflected in the discussion of 'the four 
great authorities' (mahiipadesa) to which a monk might appeal 
for accepting a particular teaching as authentic Dharma: that he 
has heard it from the Buddha himself, from a community of elder 
monks, from a group of learned monks, or from one learned monk. 
In each case the Buddha is recorded as having instructed monks

--- PAGE 67 ---
The Word of Buddfta: Scriptures and Schools 
47 
to examine and consider the teaching in order to see if it con-
forms to what they already know the teaching to be.18 This is not 
quite as subjective as it sounds. The discourses of the Buddha 
as preserved in the Nikayas do not of themselves constitute a 
systematic exposition of Buddhist thought with a begiml.ing, 
middle, and end. Each discourse is rather presented as a more 
or less self-contained pi~ce on a particular theme. And yet, the 
discourses as a whole do contain quite explicit indications of how 
these various themes relate to each other and fit together to form 
an overall structure and pattern.19 The final criterion for judging 
a teaching lies in an appreciation and understanding of this 
overall structure and pattern of the teaching. Thus at times the 
question of who originally spoke the words appears irrelevant to 
the tradition: 'Whatever monk, nun, male or female layfollower, 
god or ... Brahma might teach and proclaim Dharma, it is all 
considered as taught and proclaimed by the Teacher [i.e .. the 
Buddha].'20 Nevertheless the principle that certain texts repres-
ent the primary 'word of the Buddha', while others are the sec-
ondary work of commentators and scholars, remains significant 
to the Buddhist tradition. And the question of just which texts 
are to be counted as the word of the Buddha has, at particular 
points in the history of Buddhism, been a critical one. 
The term abhidharma (Pali abhidhamma) means approxim-
ately 'higher' or 'further' Dharma. In many ways the extant works 
of 'the basket of Abhidharma', the third part of the ancient 
canon of Buddhist scriptures, can be seen as continuing the pro-
cess of systematization already evident in the Nikayas. That 
some form of commentary and interpretation formed part of 
Buddhism almost from its inception is indicated by certain of 
the sutras in the Nikayas. The Mahiivedalla Sutta, for example, 
recounts how a nun is approached and asked to comment on 
certain technical terms of the Buddha's teaching;21 in the Vinaya 
each rule of the monastic discipline is followed by 'a word ana-
lysis' which defines key terms of the rulings; and one of the later 
book~ of the Pali canon must be the Niddesa ('Exposition'), 
which takes the form of a commentary on a section of another 
work of the canon, the Suttanipiita ('Group of Discourses'). But

--- PAGE 68 ---
48 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
it is the Abhidharma par excellence that represents the earliest 
attempt to give a full and systematic statement of the Buddha's 
teaching on the basis of what is contained in his discourses. 
The traditional understanding is thus that while the sfltras rep-
resent the Buddha's teaching applied in particular circumstances 
at a particular time and place, the Abhidharma is the Buddha's 
teaching stated in bare and general terms without reference to 
any particular circumstances. 
Something of the Abhidharma method must go back to the 
lifetime of the Buddha himself. Certainly much of its outlook 
and many of its principles must be regarded as still forming part 
of the common heritage of Buddhism, alongside the Nikaya/ 
Agama sfltra collections and the monastic rule of the Vinaya. 
Yet in addition to what is common, we begin to find in the 
Abhidharma literature interpretations and understandings of the 
Sutra material that are specific to particular schools of Buddhism. 
We must be careful, however, to understand this situation in 
the light of our knowledge of just what constituted a Buddhist 
'school' in ancient India, and avoid the trap of thinking that 
Buddhist 'schools' evolved and defined themselves in the same 
way as, say, Christian 'sects' or 'denominations'. 
We have substantial knowledge of the Abhidharma liter-
ature and systems of only two ancient Buddhist schools: the 
Sarvastivadins and the Theravadins. The only obvious similarity 
between their respective Abhidharma Pitaka collections, how-
ever, is that they both contain just seven works (see Chapter 7). 
Despite the great status and authority attributed to the Abhid-
harma and the claim that it is 'the word of the Buddha', both 
these schools explicitly acknowledge the work of the Buddha's 
chief disciples in arranging and transmitting the Abhidharma. 
From this point of view, the Abhidharma has for the tradition 
the status of a sfltra or set of headings expanded by one of the 
Buddha's disciples and then subsequently endorsed by the Bud-
dha.22 Even so, some ancient Buddhists, such as the Sautrantikas 
or 'those who follow the Sutra', came to resist the notion that the 
Abhidharma had the full status of 'the word of the Buddha'. Yet 
while such a group may have wished to deny the Abhidharma

--- PAGE 69 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
49 
the status of the Buddha's word, it is clear that they did not seek 
to question the method and principles of Abhidharma in their 
entirety; what they were concerned to question were particu-
lar interpretations and understandings current amongst, certain 
exponents of Abhidharma. 
To sum up, a typical ancient Indian 'canon' of Buddhist texts 
consisted of 'three baskets' (tripitaka): the Sfltra Pitaka or 'bas-
ket of discourses' (comprising four main collections of the dis-
courses of the Buddha, often with a supplementary collection of 
miscellaneous texts), the Vinaya Pitaka or 'basket of monastic 
discipline', and the Abhidharma Pitaka or 'basket of further 
Dharma'. Only one such ancient Tripitaka survives complete 
in an ancient Indian language, the Pali canon of the Theravadin 
tradition of Sri Lanka and South-East Asia. How many other recen-
sions of this ancient Tripi taka existed is unclear, but the contents 
and arrangement of others may be partially reconstructed on 
the basis of the surviving fragments in Indian languages and 
Chinese and Tibetan translations; in this respect we have the fullest 
knowledge of the canon of the Sarvastivadins. 
The origin of the ancient Buddhist schools and their 
exegetical literatures 
In turning to the complex problem of the origin of the ancient 
Indian Buddhist schools, we must at the outset register that we 
are speaking primarily of divisions and groupings within the 
community of monks and nuns or Sangha. In most cases the basis 
of such divisions would have been of little or no concern to the 
ordinary lay Buddhist in ancient India. In other words, we are 
not dealing with great schisms of the kind associated with the 
Reformation in the history of Christianity, or with one Buddhist 
group accusing another of 'heresy'. In order to. understand the 
processes at work here it is necessary first to consider the notion 
of formal division in the Sangha (smigha-bheda) from the legal 
perspective of the Buddhist monastic code encapsulated in the 
Vinaya.23

--- PAGE 70 ---
so 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
Two communal ceremonies are fundamental to the constitu-
tion of the Sangha; the first is the ordination ceremony itself, 
the second is the fortnightly rehearsal of the rule (priitimok$al 
piitimokkha). As I have already mentioned, for an ordination to 
be legitimate the participation of at least five monks of ten years' 
standing is required. The priitimok$a ceremony involves the 
gathering together of the members of the Sangha in a given locale 
ity in order to recite the rule and confess any breaches; a valid 
ceremony requires a quorum of at least four monks. Since both 
valid ordination and priitimok$a ceremonies are thus essential 
for any group of monks' claim to be monks, it follows that, even 
in the short term, only a schismatic group that includes at least 
four monks in its party is viable; for a schismatic group to be viable 
in the long term it must include five senior monks in its party. 
Clearly in the first century or so after the Buddha's death, as 
the numbers in the Sangha increased and it expanded across first 
northern India and then the whole subcontinent, the establish-
ment of groups of monks around particular teachers, perhaps asso-
ciated with particular views on certain issues of Abhidharma, was 
both natural and inevitable. But as long as such groups followed 
essentially the same Vinaya and recognized the validity of each 
other's ordination lineage, movement between the groups would 
present no problem: monks from one group could legitimately 
attend and participate in the ceremonies of another group; there 
was no question of formal division in the Sangha. 
One should note here that holding a particular opinion or view 
on any matter-let alone on a moot point of Abhidharma philo-
sophy-cannot be grounds for expulsion from the Sangha. The 
grounds for expulsion from the Sangha are sexual intercourse, 
taking what is not given, intentionally killing a human being, 
and falsely claiming spiritual attainments. The only opinion or 
view that is even to be censured according to the Vinaya is the 
view that sexual intercourse is not an 'obstacle'.24 It is easy to see 
the practical reason why: it threatens the very basis of a celibate 
community. Since the Vinaya left monks and nuns largely free 
to develop the Buddha's teaching doctrinally as . they saw fit, 
there would be little incentive to provoke a schism on purely

--- PAGE 71 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
51 
doctrinal grounds. What was of public concern was living by the 
monastic rules, not doctrinal conformity. We are dealing here 
with orthopraxy, not orthodoxy. The implications of this state of 
affairs were not fully realized in the earlier scholarly studies of 
the formation of the Buddhist schools, such as Andre Bareau's 
important work, Les Sectes bouddhiques du petit vehicule. 
It is not surprising to find then that the earliest indication in 
Buddhist \Vritings of schismatic tendencies in the Sangha con-
cerns interpretation of the Vinaya and not questions of Buddhist 
doctrine. As with the first 'communal recitation', the ancient 
sources that have come down to us via various schools are in broad 
agreement that one hundred years-the figure is likely to be 
approximate-after the death of the Buddha a dispute arose con-
cerning ten points of Vinaya. A group of senior monks convened 
at Vaisali (Pali Vesali:), decided against the ten points, and ini-
tiated a second communal recitation of the scriptures. 
The traditions preserved in the ancient sources concerning the 
Buddhist councils and the division of the Sangha into its various 
schools are complex and inconsistent. Despite the scholarly 
discussion that has been devoted to them, a satisfactory inter-
pretation of these sources explaining the contradictions and 
presenting a coherent and consistent history of Buddhism in the 
centuries after the death of the Buddha has yet to be worked 
out. It seems clear that, at some point after the'Vaisali meeting, 
the primitive Sangha formally divided into two parties each of 
which thenceforth had its own ordination traditions. The ancient 
accounts are inconsistent as to what provoked the split. Some 
suggest that it was the result of a dispute over five points, later 
associated with a monk named Mahadeva, concerning the nature 
of the arhat. That this was indeed the cause of the division was 
accepted by Bareau. Other ancient sources attribute the division 
to a disagreement over questions of Vinaya, and the more recent 
scholarship suggests that this is the explanation to be preferred. 
According to this view a reformist group in the Sangha proposed 
tightening discipline on certain matters of Vinaya, while the 
majority were happy to leave things as they stood. Since the two 
parties failed to come to an agreement, the Sangha divided

--- PAGE 72 ---
52 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
into two: the reformist sthaviras (Pali thera) or 'elders' and the 
majority mahiisiirrtghikas or 'those of the great community'.25 The 
dating of this important event in the history of Buddhism is also 
extremely problematic since it hinges on the vexed question of 
the date of the death of the Buddha himself. With the growing 
scholarly consensus that dates the Buddha's death at the end of 
the fifth century BCE or even the beginning of the fourth, it seems 
that we must place the event of the first division of the Sangha 
some time around the beginning of the third century BCE before 
the accession of the emperor Asoka (c.268 BeE); although it is 
not impossible that we should follow certain of our sources 
which suggest that the division occurred actually during the reign 
of Asoka. 
In the century or so following this fundamental division of 
the Sangha into the Sthaviras and Mahasa:q1ghikas it is clear 
that further schools emerged. Yet the processes by which these 
schools came into being is not so clear; whether they occurred 
as the result of formal disagreements over some Vinaya issue that 
resulted in deadlock and was thus the occasion for formal divi-
sion of the Sangha (i.e. smigha-bheda), or whether they merely 
represent de facto divisions of the Sangha that evolved haphaz-
ardly as the Sangha spread and grew, is not certain. The names 
of the schools variously suggest characteristic teachings, geo-
graphical location, or the followings of particular teachers. At 
least some of the schools mentioned by later Buddhist tradition 
are likely to have been informal schools of thought in the manner 
of 'Cartesians', 'British Empiricists', or 'Kantians' for the history 
of modern philosophy.26 
The primary sub-schools. of the Sthaviras focus on certain 
technical points of Abhidharma. The Vatsiputriyas ('followers 
of Vatsiputra') and their sub-schools adopted a particular posi-
tion on the ontological status of 'the person' (pudgala/puggala) 
and were thus referred to as 'advocates of the doctrine [of the 
existence] of the person' (pudgala-viidin). 
Another group developed a particular understanding of the 
way things exist in past, present, and future time; they were known 
as 'advocates of the doctrine that all things [past, present, and

--- PAGE 73 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
53 
future] exist' (sarviisti-viidin). Yet another group were known 
as 'advocates of the doctrine of analysis' (vibhajyaviidin). In 
some contexts this last group is represented as analysing exist-
ence as either in the past, present, or future, in oppositio,n to the 
Sarvastivadins; elsewhere the exact significance of the appella-
tion is not made clear. The Sri Lankan Theravada or 'advocates 
of the doctrine of the elders' in facttraces its lineage through the 
Vibhajjavadins (Sanskrit vibhajyaviidin ). According to their tra-
ditions the Vibhajjavadins were the favoured party in a dispute 
that took place at Pa!aliputra during the reign of the emperor 
Asoka. Bareau therefore concluded that this dispute concerned 
the split between the Sarvastivadins and Vibhajjavadins on the 
matter of the abstruse Abhidharma question of existence in the 
three times. The ancient accounts of this dispute are, however, 
confused and inconsistent.27 Its basis, in so far as it is stated in 
the sources, seems to have been not so much the finer points 
of Abhidharma philosophy as a Vinaya matter: the fact that non-
Buddhists were masquerading as Buddhist monks without being 
properly ordained or keeping to the rules of the Vinaya. The 
outcome is stated as the expulsion of the false monks from the 
Sangha and a third communal recitation (after those of Rajagrha 
and Vaisali) of the canon of Buddhist scriptures. The latter 
turned on-rather incongruously given the stated nature of the 
dispute-the exposition by Moggaliputtatissa of the Kathiivatthu 
('Discussion Points'), a manual of moot Abhidharma points, 
which was thereafter counted as one of the canonical works 
of the Pali Abhidhamma Pi!aka. AsK. R. Norman suggests, it 
would appear that two different events have been conflated. 
The relevance of such abstruse matters as existence in the three 
times of present, past, and future to the theory and practice of 
Buddhism may not be immediately clear to the reader, and is 
something I shall return to in Chapter 8. But the very technical. 
nature of these matters makes it, I think, extremely unlikely that 
they were ever the real impetus behind formal division in the 
Sangha. It is inconceivable that a Buddhist monk who did or did 
not adopt the position of, say, sarviistiviida should ever be charged 
with a Buddhist equivalent of 'heresy' and that this should

--- PAGE 74 ---
54 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
become an issue in determining whether he could participate in 
the formal ceremonies of the Sangha. The failure to realize this 
is something of a shortcoming in Bareau's pioneering and schol-
arly study of the Buddhist councils. 
Certain non-Theravadin sources are also suggestive of a dis-
pute at Pataliputra during the reign of Asoka, but they link. the 
dispute to the second communal recitation or, as we have seen, 
the question of Mahadeva's five points; only one of these sources 
-a relatively late one-mentions a third communal recitation 
in this connection.28 Yet that some kind of dispute did occur at 
Pataliputra during the reign of Asoka receives some corrobora-
tion in the form of his so-called schism edict. 
Ancient Buddhist sources preserve various lists of schools 
which invariably state the total number to be eighteen while in 
fact listing rather more; the number eighteen seems to be ideal 
and symbolic.29 A rough assessment of the evidence in the light 
of the witness of inscriptional evidence, extant Vinayas, and the 
Chinese pilgrims, suggests that we should rather think in terms 
of four major groupings-the Mahasarpghikas, the Sthaviras, 
the Vatsiputriya-Sarpmatiyas, and the Sarvastivadins-with the 
Mahisasakas, Dharmaguptakas, and Kasyapiyas also represent-
ing significant sub-schools of the Sthaviras. 
It is legitimate, I think, to see the exposition of the basic prin-
ciples and method of Abhidharma as the product of the first gen-
eration of the Buddha's disciples. As such it obviously carried 
great weight and authority, and for much of the tradition was 
indeed 'the word of the Buddha'. And yet, even while granting 
it the status of the Buddha's word, in acknowledging the con-
tribution of the early disciples in its transmission, the tradition 
itself retains a sense that the Abhidharma is one step removed 
from the Teacher himself. It is in this respect that I suggest that 
the early Abhidharma can be seen as the original 'commentary' 
upon the Buddha's teaching. But as Buddhism spread across the 
Indian subcontinent, subsequent generations of the Buddha's 
disciples further refined the Abhidharma systems of thought and 
contribut~d to the gradual evolution of the different schools. 
Increasingly in this context the Buddhist tradition as a whole began

--- PAGE 75 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
55 
to acknowledge freely that its new literary productions did not 
have the status of 'the word of the Buddha' (that is, Siltra or 
Agama), but were rather commentaries (atthakathii, bha~ya, 
vibhii~ii) on or textbooks (sastra) of the teaching of the Buddha. 
· In all this there is no convenient point after which we can say we 
are dealing exclusively with self-conscious commentary. Most of 
the commentaries and manuals come down to us in a form that 
post-dates the beginning of the Christian era, yet they refer 
to and record the views of 'the ancient teachers', and we can 
be certain that some of their traditions are considerably older, 
although it may not always be easy to determine precisely which. 
The exegetical literature of most of the ancient schools is 
lost. We only have significant knowledge of two traditions: the 
Sarvastivadins and the Thervadins, the Sri Lankan representat-
ives of the Sthaviras. I would like to single out two manuals that 
I shall be continually referring to throughout this book as pro-
viding convenient and at the same time authoritative summaries 
of Buddhist theory and practice. Both these manuals were pro-
duced in the fifth century CE but their authority has continued 
to be recognized down to the present day. 
The first is the Visuddhimagga or 'Path of Purification', a sum-
mary statement of Theravada teaching, whose text in English trans" 
lation runs to over 8oo pages.30 It is the work of Buddhaghosa, 
a monk who, so the story goes, travelled from north India to 
Anuradhapura, the ancient capital of Sri Lanka and an import-
ant centre of Buddhist learning, where he took up residence in 
the Mahavihara (the Great Monastery). With access to earlier 
commentaries preserved in the Mahavihara, he produced, as well 
as the Visuddhimagga, definitive commentaries to the principal 
works of the Pali canon. The Visuddhimagga is one of the classic 
texts of the Theravada or 'southern' tradition of Buddhism. 
The second manual is the Abhidharmakosa or 'Treasury of 
Abhidharma', which takes the form of a summary statement of 
the teachings and traditions of the Sarvastvadins in just less than 
6oo verses. Its author, Vasubandhu, a monk who lived in north 
India, furnished these verses with his own commentary (bha~ya) 
which, in addition to expanding on the verses, provides a critique

--- PAGE 76 ---
56 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
of the Sarvastivada from the perspective of the Sautrantika 
school. In English translation the verses along with their com-
mentary fill more than 1,300 pages.31 The Abhidharmakosa was 
translated into Chinese in the sixth century and again in the sev-
enth; later it was also translated into Tibetan. It thereby came 
and continues to be one of the great theoretical texts of both east 
Asian Buddhism and northern Buddhism. 
The Mahayana sutras 
In this manner, in the centuries following the Buddha's death, 
the various ancient schools of Indian Buddhism began to evolve, 
preserving their distinctive recensions of the Siitra and Vinaya 
Pitakas, and developing their characteristic understandings 
of Abhidharma. Against this background we find, beginning 
around the beginning of the Christian era, a rather different kind 
of Buddhist literature emerging. Hitherto unknown texts that begin 
with the words 'thus I have heard' -the traditional opening of 
the discourses of the Buddha~begin to appear. In other words, 
these new texts present themselves not as the commentary or 
understanding of a particular school of Buddhism, but as actual 
siitras. They thus claim the status of 'the word of the Buddha'. 
The texts in question are the early siitras of 'the Great 
Vehicle' (mahayana). The origins of the Mahayana are complex 
(see Chapter 9), but this was not a sectarian literature dissemin-
ated by one of the existing schools nor did it lead to the devel-
opment of a formal division of the Sangha (sarrtgha-bheda), 
with an associated Mahayana recension of the Vinaya. Indeed, 
the very idea of an exclusively Mahayana Vinaya seems only to 
have emerged in eighth/ninth-century Japan with the Tendai monk 
SaichO. At the time of the emergence of Mahayana literature 
in ancient India, members of the Sangha who were sympathetic 
to it followed their interest while remaining within the already 
existing schools and ordination lineages of the Sangha, almost 
invariably continuing to live alongside monks and nuns who did 
not necessarily share their interest. The question of the status 
and authority of the new literature was thus initially not decided

--- PAGE 77 ---
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
57 
along sectarian lines; monks from various of the existing schools 
would have been more or less favourably inclined towards the 
new stltras. In time, certain schools more formally and explicitly 
refused to acknowledge the authority of the Mahayana siitras, 
but such uncompromising attitudes were perhaps not relevant 
until as late as the fifth century CE. The reason for this was that 
for the most part the new sfitras represented something of a minor-
ity and esoteric interest,.rather than a mass popular movement;. 
and this appears ·to have remained so for at least several 
centuries.32 According to the figures reported by the Chinese 
monk Hsiiantsang, by the seventh century monks following the 
Mahayana constituted about half of the Indian Satigha.33 But it 
is likely that this is an inflated figure. 
The production of Mahayana stitras spans a period of some 
six or seven centuries. Just as the earlier sfitras of the Nikayas/ 
Agamas had already given rise to the Abhidharma andthe dis-
tinctive interpretations of a number of schools, so the Mahayana 
stitras are also associated with the production of treatises and 
commentaries associated with the emergence of new philosoph-
ical schools of Buddhism. Three writers should be singled out in 
this connection since I will be referring to them from time to time. 
The first is Nagarjuna, a monk probably from the south of India 
who lived in the second century CE arid was the author of the 
Madhyamaka-karika ('Verses on the Middle') as well as anum-
ber of other works. He is revered by the Buddhists of China · 
and Tibet as the founding father of one of the principal 'Sastra' 
systems of Mahayana philosophy, namely the Madhyamaka or 
Sunyavada. The other two authors can be taken together. Indeed, 
tradition has it that they were brothers. They are Asatiga and 
Vasubandhu, who lived in north India at the end of the fourth 
or beginning of the fifth century CE. According to tradition, ques-
tioned by modern scholarship (see Chapter 7), this Vasubandhu 
is one and the same Vasubandhu whom .I mentioned above as 
author of the Abhidharmakosa. Together these two are regarded 
as the founding fathers of the other great 'Sastra' school of 
the Mahayana, namely the Yogacara or Vijfianavada, which ex-
pounded the theory that apart from consciousness or mind ( citta,

--- PAGE 78 ---
58 
The Word of Buddha: Scriptures and Schools 
vijiitina) and the ideas and information ( vijiiapti) it processes, there 
is nothing. 
Mahayana Buddhism as a more or less separate tradition of 
Buddhism, with its clearly defined subdivisions and philosoph-
ical schools,. is to some extent the outcome of the history of 
Chinese and Tibetan Buddhism. As it evolved in China and 
Tibet, Buddhism came to adopt an exclusively Mahayanist out-
look in a way that it never did in India. As Buddhism began to 
fade from the Inpian scene in the eleventh and twelfth cen-
turies, the Buddhists of China, Japan, and Korea to the east, and 
Tibet and Mongolia to the north, were left as heirs to-the Indian 
Mahayanist vision. To the south the Buddhists of Sri Lanka and 
South-East Asia became the only surviving representatives of the 
perspective of the non-Mahayana. Yet we must remember that 
much of what modern Buddhists in Sri Lanka, China, or Tibet 
have inherited from the past was held in common by both the 
Mahayana and non-Mahayana tradition. And it is with this 
common heritage that I am mostly concerned in this book. At 
the same time we should not forget that the Buddhists of Sri Lanka, 
Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, China, Korea, Japan, 
Tibet, and Mongolia have all produced their own distinctive 
literatures, and continued to do so right up to the present day. 
Having briefly reviewed the development of the Buddha's 
teaching in the form of literary texts, I wish to turn in the next 
chapter to the actual content of that teaching. In the first place 
we shall focus on those basic principles which are presented in 
the four Nikaya/Agama collections of the Buddha's discourses 
and have been assumed and taken for granted by the subsequent 
Buddhist tradition.

--- PAGE 79 ---
3 
Four Truths 
The Disease, the Cause, the Cure, the Medicine 
The orientation of the Buddha's teaching 
What did the Buddha teach? The early siitras present the Bud-
dha's teaching as the solution to a problem. This problem is the 
fundamental problem of life. In Sanskrit and Pali the problem is 
termed du/:lkha/dukkha, which can be approximately translated 
as 'suffering'. In a Nikaya passage the Buddha thus states that 
he has always made known just two things, namely suffering and 
the cessation of suffering.1 This statement can be regarded as 
expressing the basic orientation of Buddhism for all times and 
all places. Its classic formulation is by way of 'four noble truths': 
the truth of the nature of suffering, the truth of the nature of 
its cause, the truth of the nature of its cessation, and the truth 
of the nature of the path leading to its cessation. One of the 
earliest summary statements of the truths is as follows: 
This is the noble truth of suffering: birth is suffering, ageing is suffering, 
sickness is suffering, dying is suffering, sorrow, grief, pain, unhappiness, 
and unease are suffering; being united with what is not liked is suffer-
ing, separation from what is liked is suffering; not to get what one wants 
is suffering; in short, the five aggregates of grasping are suffering. 
This is the noble truth of the origin of suffering: the thirst for repeated 
existence which, associated with delight and greed, delights in this and 
that, namely the thirst for the objects of sense desire, the thirst for exist-
ence, and the thirst for non-existence. 
This is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering: the complete fad-
ing away and cessation of this very thirst-its abandoning, relinquish-
ing, releasing, letting go. 
This is the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffer-
ing: the noble eightfold path, namely right view, right intention, right

--- PAGE 80 ---
6o 
Four Truths 
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right 
concentration.2 
The temptation to understand these four 'truths' as function-
ing as a kind of Buddhist creed should be resisted; they do not 
represent·'truth claims' that one must intellectually assent to on 
becoming a Buddhist. Part of the problem here is the word 
'truth'. The word satya (Pali sacca) can certainly mean truth, but 
it might equally be rendered as 'real' or 'actual thing'. That is, 
we are not dealing here with propositional truths with which we 
must either agree or disagree, but with four 'true things' or 'real-
ities' whose nature, we are told, the Buddha finally understood 
on the night of his awakening. The teachings of the Buddha thus 
state that suffering, its cause, its cessation, and the path to its 
cessation are realities which we fail to see as they are, and this 
is as true for the 'Buddhist' as the 'non-Buddhist'. The 'Buddhist' 
is simply one committed to trying to follow the Buddha's pre-
scriptions for coming to see these realities as they are. This is not 
to say that the Buddha's discourses do not contain theoretical 
statements of the nature of suffering, its cause, its cessation, and 
the path to its cessation, but these descriptions function not so 
much as dogmas of the Buddhist faith as a convenient concep-
tual framework for making sense of Buddhist thought.3 Thus 
from one point of view any piece of Buddhist theory can be con-
sidered as to do with the analysis of one or other of the four truths. 
The disease of suffering 
The starting point of the Buddha's teachings is, then, the reality 
of suffering. Yet the summary statement of the first truth quoted 
above should not be seen as seeking to persuade a world of other-
wise perfectly contented beings that life is in fact unpleasant. Rather 
it addresses a basic fact of existence: sooner or later, in some form 
or another, no matter what they do, beings are confronted by 
and have to deal with duf:tkha. This is, of course, precisely the 
moral of the tale of the Buddha's early life in Kapilavastu: even 
with everything one could possibly wish for, he had not found

--- PAGE 81 ---
Four Truths 
61 
true happiness as long as he and those dearest to him were prey 
to disease, old age, and death. This is the actuality of dul:zkha. 
Rich in meaning and nuance, the word du/:lkha is one of the 
basic terms of Buddhist and other Indian religious discourse. 
Literally 'pain' or 'anguish', in its religious and philosophical con-
texts dul:zkha is, however, suggestive of an underlying sense of 
'unsatisfactoriness' or 'unease' that must ultimately mar even our 
experience of happiness. Since any pleasant experience, whatever 
its basis, is ultimately unreliable and subject to loss, if we rest 
our hopes of final happiness in it we are bound to be disappointed. 
Thus dul:zkha can be analysed in Buddhist thought by way of three 
kinds: suffering as pain, as change, and as conditions.4 
The first is self-evident suffering: when we are in mental or 
physical pain there is no question that there is dul:zkha. Yet when 
we are enjoying something, or even when there is nothing that 
is causing us particular unhappiness, things are always liable to 
change: what we were enjoying may be removed from us or 
something unpleasant may manifest itself-this is dul:zkhq as 
change. In fact everything in the world, everything we experi-
ence, is changing moment by moment. Some things may change 
very rapidly, some things extremely slowly, but still everything 
changes, everything is impermanent (anitya!anicca). When we 
begin to be affected by the reality of this state of affairs we may 
find the things that previously gave us great pleasure are tainted 
and no longer please us in the way they once did. The world 
becomes a place of uncertainty in which we can never be sure 
what is going to happen next, 'a place of shifting and unstable 
conditions whose very nature is such that we can never feel 
entirely at ease in it. Here we are confronted with du/:lkha in a 
form that seems to be inherent in the nature of our existence 
itself-dul:zkha as conditions. To put it another way, I may be 
relaxing in a comfortable armchair after a long, tiring day, but 
part of the reason I am enjoying it so much is precisely because 
I had such a long, tiring day. How long will it be bef9re I am 
longing to get up and do something again-half an hour, an hour, 
two hours? Or again, I may feel myself perfectly happy and 
content; the suffering I hear about is a long way away, in another

--- PAGE 82 ---
Four Truths 
town, in another country, on another continent. But how close 
does it have to come before it in some sense impinges on my 
own sense of well-being-the next street, the house next door, 
the next room? That is, we are part of a world compounded of 
unstable and unreliable conditions, a world in which pain and 
pleasure, happiness and suffering are in all sorts of ways bound 
up together. It is the reality of this state of affairs that the teach-
ings of the Buddha suggest we each must understand if we are 
ever to be free of suffering. 
On the basis of its analysis of the problem of suffering, some 
have concluded that Buddhism must be judged a bleak, pessimistic 
and world-denying philosophy. From a Buddhist perspective, 
such a judgement may reflect a deep-seated refusal to accept 
the reality of du}:tkha itself, and it certainly reflects a particular 
misunderstanding of the Buddha's teaching. The Buddha taught 
four truths and, by his own standards, the cessation of suffering 
and the path leading to its cessation are as much true realities 
as suffering and its cause. 
The growth of early Buddhism must be understood in the con-
text of the existence of a number of different 'renouncer' groups 
who shared the view that 'suffering' in some sense characterizes 
human experience, and that the quest for happiness is thus only 
to be fulfilled by fleeing the world. Some historians have felt that 
the emergence of such a view and its general acceptance in east-
ern India of the fourth and third centuries BCE requires a par-
ticular kind of explanation. In short, there must have been a lot 
of suffering about. Various suggestions have been made, from 
psychological unease caused by urbanization to the spread of dis-
ease.5 Whether or not such factors played a role, I am uncon-
vinced that as historians we are driven to seek $Uch explanations, 
for this is to conclude that the decisive historicaldeterminants in 
this case are the physical and mental well-being of society at large; 
rather than individual personalities. An individual's sense of suf-
fering need not be related to the amount of suffering in society as 
a whole, nor even to the amount of suffering he or she has per-
sonally undergone. Nor am I convinced that the idea that suffering 
_in some sense characterizes human experience is so extraordinary

--- PAGE 83 ---
Four Truths 
and culturally specific that it requires particular explanation; the 
ancient Indian sage might protest with some justification: 
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy: 
This wide and universal theatre 
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene 
Wherein we play in.6 
Historians seem prepared to accept that the Buddha was a 
charismatic personality and something of a genius. That such an 
individual might well have had a certain success in convincing 
others of the soundness of his understanding of the nature of 
the world, and that they in turn might have had considerable 
influence on the overall cultural outlook does not seem to me 
historically implausible. 
It is worth noting, however, that the Buddhist tradition itself 
makes certain observations concerning the circumstances in 
which beings will be receptive to the teaching of dul:zkha. Accord-
ing to the understanding of traditional Buddhist cosmology 
the universe comprises many different types of beings. Some 
of these beings' lives are so pleasurable that, although it is not 
impossible for them to appreciate that their happiness is not 
final or absolute, it is certainly difficult. On the other hand, other 
beings are preoccupied with lives of such misery that coming to 
understand the subtlety of the Buddha's teaching is extremely 
difficult. According to the ancient commentary to the Jiitaka, 
it was the consideration of the circumstances in which beings 
would be receptive to his teachings that the Bodhisattva took 
into account when he was reflecting in the Tu~ita heaven on when 
and where to be reborn for the last time and become a buddha 
and teach Dharma.7 
The Buddhist tradition has sometimes compared the Buddha 
to a physician and the four truths to a medical diagnosis: the truth 
of du/:lkha is like a disease, the truth of the origin of du/:lkha is 
like its cause, the truth of the cessation of du/:lkha is like the dis-
ease's being cured, and the truth of the path leading to the cessa-
tion of du/:lkha is like the medicine that brings about the disease's 
cure.8 It is the wish to relieve the suffering of the disease and

--- PAGE 84 ---
Four Truths 
eradicate its cause that is the starting point of Buddhist practice. 
All this suggests something else that is fundamental to the ori-
entation of Buddhist thought and practice: the wish to relieve 
suffering can in the end only be rooted in a feeling of sympathy 
(anukampii) or compassion for the suffering of both oneself and 
of others. This feeling of sympathy for the suffering of beings is 
what motivates not only the Buddha to teach but ultimately every-
one who tries to put his teaching into practice.9 
The Buddha's teaching thus represents the medicine for the 
disease of suffering. Or, according to the metaphor of the fourth 
truth, it is the 'path' (miirga/magga) or 'way' (pratipad!pa{ipadii) 
that one follows in order to reach the destination that is the 
cessation of suffering. Or, as we saw in the previous chapter, it 
is a system of training in conduct, meditation, and wisdom. If one 
were to define Buddhism in keeping with this understanding, 
it would have to be as a practical method for dealing with the 
reality of suffering. Yet it is usual to classify Buddhism as 'a reli-
gion'. Asked to define the meaning of the word religion, English 
speakers would probably not immediately suggest 'a practical 
way of dealing with the reality of suffering'. Certainly this is not 
the kind of definition we find in contemporary dictionaries. Yet 
in the Indian cultural context this is essentially how many of the 
traditions which we today generally class as 'religious' conceive 
of themselves. One of the ancient and recurring images of Indian 
religious discourse is of 'crossing the ocean of existence', that is, 
crossing over from the near shore, which is fraught with dangers, 
to the further shore, which is safe and free from danger. This 
is equivalent to escaping or transcending the endless round of 
rebirth that is smpsiira and the condition of dul:zkha. 
One contemporary dictionary definition of religion is as fol-
lows: 'belief in, worship of or obedience to a supernatural power 
or powers considered to be divine or to have control over human 
destiny' .10 This is illustrative of a modern tendency to understand 
religion as principally a kind of belief system-usually revolving 
around a God who is both creator and saviour-that an individual 
takes on board and which then provides him or her with a way 
of looking at the world. Probably the reduction of religion to

--- PAGE 85 ---
Four Truths 
this kind of belief system should be seen as a relatively recent 
phenomenon---,-the legacy of the Reformation and the Enlight-
enment. Protestant theology tended to emphasize the primacy 
of 'faith' over 'works'; by seeming to expose the irrationality 
of the theoretical beliefs regarded as the underpinnings of this 
Christian faith, the post-Enlightenment traditions of philosophy 
and science appeared about to cause the collapse of religion. All 
this amounts to a modern preoccupation with particular beliefs 
as the essence of religion. Arguably the very nature of Christianity 
makes it predisposed to understanding itself as a particular set 
of beliefs; nevertheless historically Christianity has clearly been 
much more than its creeds-as much a question of adopting cer-
tain practices as of adopting beliefs. Theoretically the modern 
aqtdemic study of religion should have made us all aware of the 
multi-dimensional nature of religion, but cultural biases are not 
so easily corrected in practice.11 Thus the tendency to understand 
religion as primarily involving the adoption of particular kinds 
of beliefstill informs what we expect 'religions' to be; this hinders 
our understanding of Christianity, let alone of Judaism, Islam, 
Hinduism, and Buddhism. 
I am not concerned here to pronounce on a question that is 
sometimes asked of Buddhism: is it a religion? Obviously it 
depends on how one -defines 'a religion'. What is certain, how-
ever, is that Buddhism does not involve belief in a creator God 
who has control over human destiny, nor does it seek to define 
itself by reference to a creed; as Edward Conze has pointed 
out, it took over 2,ooo years and a couple of Western converts 
to Buddhism to provide it with a creed.U On the other hand, 
Buddhism views activities that would be generally understood 
as religious-such as devotional practices and rituals-as a legit-
imate, useful, and even essential part of the practice and train-
ing that leads to the cessation of suffering. 
Buddhism regards itself as presenting a system of training 
in conduct, meditation, and understanding that constitutes a 
path leading to the cessation of suffering. Everything is to be 
subordinated to this goal. And in this connection the Buddha's 
teachings suggest that preoccupation with certain beliefs and

--- PAGE 86 ---
66 
Four Truths 
ideas about the ultimate nature of the world and our destiny in 
fact hinders our progress along the path rather than helping it. 
If we insist on working out exactly what to believe about the world 
and human destiny before beginning to follow the path of prac-
tice we will never even set out. 
An important incident is related in the Cu!a-Miilulikya Sutta 
('short discourse to Malmikya') and concerns ten matters that 
are 'unexplained' or 'undetermined' (avyiikrta/avyiikata) by the 
Buddha.B These ten undetermined questions are as follows: 
(1) is the world eternal or (2) is it not eternal? (3) is the world 
finite or (4) is it infinite? (5) are the soul and the body one and 
the same thing or ( 6) is the soul one thing and the body another? 
(7) after death, does the Tathagata (i.e. a buddha or arhat) exist 
or (8) does he not exist or (9) does he both exist and not exist 
or ( 10) does he neither exist nor not exist? One evening, it seems, 
the monk Malmikyaputta felt that he had been patient with the 
Buddha long enough. Malmikyaputta went to the Buddha and 
declared that unless he answered these questions or· straight-
forwardly stated that the reason he did not answer them was 
because he did not know the answers, he would abandon his 
training under the Buddha. The Buddha responded by asking 
Malmikyaputta a question: had he ever said to Malmikyaputta 
that he should come and practise the spiritual life with him and 
he would explain to him whether or not the world was eternal? 
Malmikyaputta confessed that he had not. The Buddha then 
suggested that whoever declared that he would not practise the 
spiritual life with the Buddha until he had explained these ques-
tions would certainly die without the Buddha having explained 
them; he then related a story of a man struck by an arrow. 
It is as if there were a man struck by an arrow that was smeared thickly 
with poison; his friends and companions, his family and relatives would 
summon a doctor to see to the arrow. And the man might say, 'I will 
not draw out this arrow as long as I do not know whether the man by 
whom I was struck was a brahmin, a k~atriya, a vaisya, or a sfidra ... as 
long as I do not know his name and his family ... whether he was tall, 
short or of medium height .. .' That man would not discover these 
things, but that man would die.14

--- PAGE 87 ---
Four Truths 
Why did the Buddha refuse to give categorical answers to these 
questions? It has been claimed by some modern scholars that the 
Buddha was simply not interested in metaphysical questions and 
that he wished to leave these matters open.15 Such an interpreta-
tion seems to miss the point. The Buddha's refusal to answe'r has 
a philosophically more sophisticated and subtle basis. It is stated· 
in the Cu!a-Miilunkya Sutta that one of the reasons why he did 
not explain these matters was because they were not connected 
with the goal and purpose of the path, namely the cessation 
of suffering; what the Buddha explained was just suffering, its 
cause, its cessation, and the way leading to its cessation. This leaves 
no doubt as to the practical intent of the Buddha's teaching, 
but what precisely is being said about these questions when it is 
declared that their explanation does not conduce to the cessa-
tion of suffering? 
The Buddha might be suggesting that he neither knew the 
answers to these questions nor was he interested in pursuing the 
questions because he considered them irrelevant. Yet this is quite 
definitely not the understanding of the later Buddhist tradition, 
which tended to regard the Buddha as knowing everything; and 
the Buddha of the earlier texts certainly never straightforwardly 
admits to not knowing the answers to these questions. Thus if 
we take this line we are driven to the conclusion that either the 
Buddha himself or the authors of the early texts were embar-
rassed about his ignorance of these matters and sought to cover 
it up. Alternatively the Buddha might have had answers to these 
questions which he simply refused to divulge on the stated 
grounds that it would not help his followers in their progress in 
the training. Such a possibility might seem to be confirmed by 
another tradition that reports the Buddha as once saying that there 
were indeed many things which he knew and understood but 
did not communicate on the grounds that they did not conduce 
to the cessation of suffering.16 But the passage ip. question gives 
no explicit indication that these ten questions are included in 
this category of things the Buddha understands but does not 
communicate. The third possibility would seem to be that these 
questions are somehow by their very nature unanswerable. It

--- PAGE 88 ---
68 
Four Truths 
is fairly clear that this is indeed how the early texts and the 
subsequent Buddhist tradition understand the matterY The 
reason why these questions are unanswerable concerns matters 
that lie at the heart of Buddhist thought. In simple terms the 
questions are unanswerable because they assume, as absolute, 
categories and concepts-the world, the soul, the self, the 
Tathagata-that the Buddha and the Buddhist tradition does not 
accept or at least criticizes or understands in particular ways. That 
is, from the Buddhist perspective these questions are ill-formed 
and misconceived. To answer 'yes' or 'rio' to any one of them is 
to be drawn into accepting the validity of the question and the 
terms in which it is couched-rather like answering 'yes' or 'no' 
to a question such as, 'Are Martians green?' One's answer may 
be construed in ways one had not intended. Thus the Buddha 
tells the insistent Malunkyaputta that whichever one of these views 
he might embrace, the real work remains: 
It is not the case that one would live the spiritual life by virtue of hold~ 
ing the view that the world is eternal. Nor is it the case that one would 
live the spiritual life by virtue of holding the view that the world is not 
eternal. Whether one holds the view that the world is eternal, or whether 
one holds the view that the world is not eternal, there is still birth, 
ageing, death, grief, despair, pain, and unhappiness-whose destruction 
here and now I declare. 18 
In fact, such views (d!$tilditthi) about the ultimate nature of the 
world are, from the Buddhist perspective, the expression of a men~ 
tal grasping which is but one manifestation of that insatiable 'thirst' 
or 'craving' which Buddhist thought regards as the condition for 
the arising of suffering, and to which we will now turn. 
The origin of suffering: attachment, aversion, and delusion 
Why do beings suffer? What is the truth or reality of the origin 
of suffering? At the outset it is worth drawing attention to a point 
of contrast with the approach to suffering found in certain 
traditional Jewish, Christian, and Islamic theologies. As we 
have already seen, and shall see more clearly in Chapter 5, the 
Buddhist understanding of the world is not based upon th~

--- PAGE 89 ---
Four Truths 
ccmcept of a creator God-omnipotent or otherwise. Thus there 
is no need in Buddhist thought to explain the existence of suf-
fering in the face of God's omnipotence and boundfess love. The 
existence of suffering in the world is not to be related in some 
way to God's purpose in creating the world and, in particular, 
mankind as in the traditional Christian theodicies of Augustine 
and Ireneus. For Buddhist thought suffering is simply a fact of 
existence, and in its general approach to the problem, Buddhist 
thought suggests that it is beings themselves who must take 
ultimate responsibility for their suffering. This may come as 
rather depressing news, but on the other hand, to anticipate our 
discussion of the third and fourth truths, precisely because our 
suffering is something that we must each bear a certain respons-
ibility for, it is also something that we can do something about. 
This way of looking at things has sometimes been perceived 
by people brought up in an intellectual and cultural tradition in 
part moulded by Christian thought as a rather bleak view of affairs, 
contrasting with the message of the saving Christ proclaimed 
by Christianity. Yet it is important to appreciate that in its own 
cultural context this is most definitely presented and perceived 
as a message of hope. Furthermore this outlook of individual 
responsibility does not entail that individuals are, as it were, for-
ever and absolutely 'on their own'. On the contrary, the message 
is precisely that help is at hand in the form of the Buddha's teach-
ings and of those who have followed and are following the path. 
Moreover, from a Buddhist perspective, the sense that one is 
forever and absolutely on one's own must rest in part on a self-
delusion from which one can be eventually released by the Bud-
dha's teachings (see Chapter 6). With the Buddha's awakening 
'the doors to the deathless' are once more open for those who 
have the faith to set out on the path.19 As John Ross Carter has 
put it, there is no need of a saviour not because suffering human-
ity is its own saviour, but because of the efficacy of Dharma when 
made the integral basis of one's life.2° 
So suffering is created by beings, but how? The summary de-
finition of the second truth states the condition for the arising of 
suffering as 'the thirst for repeated existence which, associated

--- PAGE 90 ---
Four Truths 
with delight and greed, delights in this and that'; this is then 
specified as 'the thirst for the· objects of sense desire, the thirst 
for existence and the thirst for non-existence'. I have translated 
the word l!fiJii (Pali: ta!Jhii) as 'thirst'. This is its literal meaning, 
but in the present context it is a figurative word for strong desire 
or craving. In fact tr~IJii or 'thirst' belongs to the corpus of Bud-
dhist technical vocabulary and has very specific meanings and 
connotations. Thus 'craving', while certainly conveying a good 
deal of the sense of tr~IJii in Buddhist discourse, requires a cer-
tain amount of commentary and explication. 
The suggestion is that deep in the minds of beings there is a 
greed or desire that manifests as an unquenchable thirst which 
is the principal condition for the arising of suffering. As the 
summary quotation points out, this thirst or craving takes dif-
ferent forms: craving for the objects of the senses, for existence 
and non-existence. It is the cause of suffering because it can never 
be finally satisfied. This is clear with the objects of the senses: 
pleasure based on these is always liable to be taken from us because 
of their unstable and unreliable nature; on another level desire 
· for the objects of the senses has always the tendency to increase; 
never content with what it has, it is always looking for new 
objects to satisfy itself. But craving for the objects of the senses 
is just a particular manifestation of craving. I may crave to be 
some particular kind of person, or I may crave fame and even 
immortality. On the other hand, I may bitterly and resentfully 
turn my back on ambition, craving to be a nobody; I may 
become depressed and long not to exist, wishing that I had never 
been born; in this state I may even take my own life; I may 
passionately believe that I possess an immortal soul and that I 
will exist after death; or I may be absolutely certain in my con-
viction that death will be the final end, and that I shall die and 
there will be no more of me. From the perspective of Buddhist 
thought all these feelings, desires, and beliefs are the products 
of the workings of tr~IJii, the workings of craving for existence 
and non-existence. Yet in a world where everything is always 
changing, in a world of shifting and unstable conditions, craving 
of whatever kind will never be able to hold on to the things it 
craves. This is the origin of suffering.

--- PAGE 91 ---
Four Truths 
7I 
At first desires may be like the trickle of a stream, but they 
grow into a river of craving which carries us away like the 
current of a swiftly flowing river.21 Craving is understood to 
crystallize as 'grasping' or 'attachment' (upiidiina): the various 
things we like evoke desires in us; these turn to cravings; 'as a 
result of our craving we grasp at things and try to take posses-
sion of them; in short, we try to call them our own. Buddhist 
texts provide a stock list of four kinds of attachment: attachment 
to the objects of sense desire, attachment to views, attachment 
to precepts and vows, attachment to the doctrine of the self.22 
These suggest the complex and subtle network and web of attach-
ment that Buddhist thought sees as enmeshing beings. 
The ultimately significant thing in all this is craving and at-
tachment rather than whatever is the object of that attachment 
and craving. Thus it is not the objects of sense desire that cause 
us suffering, but our attachment to those; it is not views, precepts 
and vows, and the doctrine of self that in themselves cause suf-
fering but our attachment. This is not to say that all views, pre-
cepts and vows, and doctrines about the self are regarded as equal 
in Buddhist thought. Certain attachments are most definitely 
considered more harmful and more productive of suffering than 
others. Thus an attachment to the first of the five Buddhist pre-
cepts, the precept of not harming living creatures, is not to be 
considered as of the same order as an attachment to the habit of 
killing creatures. Indeed, deliberately killing living creatures is 
regarded as a particularly unwholesome act, and to the extent 
that attachment to the precept of not harming living creatures 
prevents us from killing, it is a positive good; nevertheless, as 
long as it remains an attachment-an abstract principle we tena-
ciously cling to-it too must remain a contributory cause of 
dul;kha. The problem ·is that we can become attached to even 
useful and helpful things, even to the practice of the Buddha's 
teaching: 
'It is as if there were a man who had set out on a long journey. He might 
see a great river in flood, the near shore fearful and dangerous, the far 
shore safe and free of danger, but there might be no ferry or bridge for 
crossing from one side to the other. And this man might think, "This is 
a great river in flood. The near shore is fearful and dangerous, the far

--- PAGE 92 ---
72 
Four Truths 
shore safe and free of danger, but there is no ferry or bridge to cross 
from one side to the other. What if I were to gather together grass, sticks, 
branches and foliage and bind together a raft, and then using that raft, 
striving with my hands and feet, safely cross over to the further shore?" 
Thereupon that man might gather together grass, sticks, branches and 
foliage and bind together a raft, and then using that raft, striving with 
his hands and feet he might safely cross over to the further shore. Once 
he had crossed over it might occur to him, "This raft is very useful to 
me. Using this raft, striving with my hands and feet I have safely crossed 
over to the further shore. What if I were to now lift it on to my head 
or raise it on my back and set off as I pleased?" What do you think of 
this, monks? If the man did this with the raft would he be doing what 
is appropriate?' 
'Not at all, lord.' 
'So what might this man do with the raft in order to do what is appro-
priate? In this case once he had crossed over it might occur to him, "This 
raft is very useful to me. Using this raft, striving with my hands and feet, 
I have safely crossed over to the further shore. What if I were now to 
beach this raft on the shore or sink it in the water and go on my way as 
I pleased?" The man who did this with the raft would be doing what is 
appropriate. Even so, monks, as being like a raft, I have taught you how 
Dharma is for the purpose of crossing over and not for the purpose of 
holding on to. Those who 'understand the similarity to a raft will let go 
even of the teachings and practices (dhammii), let alone what are not 
the teachings and practices ( adhammii) '.23 
This does not mean that in relinquishing his or her attachment 
to the precept of not harming living creatures the Buddhist saint 
suddenly starts harming living creatures. Rather the Buddhist saint 
does no harm to living creatures not out of attachment to some 
precept or ethical principle he or she has undertaken to live by, 
but because of rooting out any motivation that might move him 
or her to want to harm living creatures. Thus as well as indicat-
ing the, as it were, horizontal range of craving and attachment, 
Buddhist thqught draws up a vertical hierarchy of attachment 
which the Buddhist practitioner progressively relinquishes as he 
or she follows the path. 
Something of this hierarchy of attachments is indicated by the 
ancient list of the ten 'fetters' or 'bonds' (saf!lyojan(l) that bind

--- PAGE 93 ---
Four Truths 
73 
beings to suffering and the round of rebirth: the view of indi-
viduality, doubt, clinging to precepts and vows, sensual desire, 
aversion, desire for form, desire for the formless, pride, agita-
tion, and ignorance. As we shall presently see, the practice of the 
Buddhist path begins with the taking of ethical precepts aimed 
at restraining particularly damaging kinds of behaviour; these 
provide the basis for the cultivation of meditation practices that 
bring the practitioner to direct experience of the subtle worlds 
of 'form' and 'the formless'. Nevertheless, as the list of the ten 
fetters makes clear, attachment to both precepts and to the worlds 
of form and the formless experienced in meditation must be relin-
quished for the end of the path to be fully realized. 
The list of ten fetters includes four items that are not prima-
facie aspects of craving or attachment: doubt, aversion, agita-
tion, and ignorance. The psychological relationship of aversion 
to craving is not hard to see. Unfulfilled craving and frustrated 
attachment become the conditions for aversion, anger, depres-
sion, hatred, and cruelty and violence which are in themselves 
quite manifestly unpleasant (dul:zkha as pain) and in turn bring 
further suffering. But what about doubt, agitation, and ignorance? 
Developed Buddhist thought understands these states as having 
an important psychological relationship. Even in the absence of 
craving and aversion, we view the world through a mind that is 
often fundamentally unclear, unsettled, and confused. Not sur-
prisingly we fail to see things as they truly are. At this point it 
begins to become quite apparent just how and why craving leads 
to suffering. There is a discrepancy between our craving and the 
world we live in, between our expectations and the way things 
are. We want the world to be other than it is. Our craving is based 
on a fundamental misjudgement of the situation; a judgement 
that assumes that when our craving gets what it wants we will be 
happy, that when our craving possesses the objects of its desire 
we will be satisfied. But such a judgement in turn assumes a world 
in which things are permanent, unchanging, stable, and reliable. 
But the world is simply not like that. In short, in craving we fail 
to see how things truly are, and in failing to see !;low things truly 
are we crave. In other words craving goes hand in hand with a

--- PAGE 94 ---
74 
Four Truths 
fundamental ignorance and misapprehension of the nature of 
the world. 
Thus we can state the three fundamental defilements of the 
mind according to Buddhist thought: greed (raga, lobha), aver-
sion (dve.Ja/dosa), and delusion (moha, avidyii/avijjii). It is these 
that combine and interact, that manifest in different ways and 
result in du/:tkha. In this way the great focus of Buddhist thought 
is the workings of the mind. The processes by which the mind 
responds to its various stimuli to bring about either the arising 
of du/:tkha or the path that leads towards the cessation of du/:tkha 
is considered in Buddhist thought by way of a particularly im-
portant and significant teaching that I referred to in passing in 
recounting the story of the Buddha's awakening. This teach-
ing is known as 'dependent arising' or 'dependent origination' 
(pratitya-samutpiida/paticca-samuppiida ). Dependent arising is to 
be understood as in certain respects an elaboration of the truth 
of the origin of suffering, but this difficult teaching is intertwined 
with other important themes of Buddhist thought and I shall 
postpone its full explanation until Chapter 6. 
The cessation of suffering: nirval)a 
Ip. the normal course of events our quest for happiness leads us 
to attempt to satisfy our .desires-whatever they be. But in so 
doing we become attached to things that are unreliable, unstable, 
changing, and impermanent. As long as there is attachment to 
things that are unstable, unreliable, changing, and impermanent 
there will be suffering-when they change, when they cease to 
be what we want them to be. Try as we might to find something 
in the world that is permanent and stable, which we can hold on 
to and thereby find lasting happiness, we must always fail. The 
Buddhist solution is as radical as it is simple: let go,Jet go of every-
thing. If craving is th<:; cause of suffering, then the cessation of 
suffering will surely follow from 'the complete fading away and 
ceasing of that very craving': its abandoning, relinquishing, 
releasing, letting go. The cessation of craving. is, then, the goal 
of the Buddhist path, and equivalent to the cessation of suffer" 
ing, the highest happiness, nirva1,1a (Pali nibbiina).

--- PAGE 95 ---
·Four Truths 
75 
Nirval).a is a difficult concept, but certain things about the 
traditional Buddhist understanding of nirval).a are quite clear. Some 
of the confusion surrounding the concept arises, I think, from a 
failure to distinguish different dimensions of the use of the term 
nirviil'}a in Buddhist literature. I want here to discuss n!rval).a in 
terms of three things: (I) nirval).a as, in some sense, a particular 
event (what happens at the moment of awakening), (2) nirval).a 
as, in some sense, the content of an experience (what the mind 
knows at the moment of awakening), and (3) nirval).a as, in some 
sense, the state or condition enjoyed by buddhas and arhats after 
death. Let us examine this more closely. 
Literally nirviil'}a means 'blowing out' or 'extinguishing', although 
Buddhist commentarial writings, by a play on words, like .to 
explain it as 'the absence of craving'. But where English trans-
lations of Buddhist texts have 'he attains nirval).a/parinirval).a', 
the more characteristic Pali or Sanskrit idiom is a simple verb: 
'he or she nirval).a-s' or more often 'he or she parinirv~a-s' 
(parinibbiiyati). What the Pali and Sanskrit expression primarily 
indicates is the event or process of the extinction of the 'fires' 
of greed, aversion, and delusion. At the moment the Buddha under-
stood suffering, its arising, its cessation, and the path leading to 
its cessation, these fires were extinguished. This process is the same 
for all who reach awakening, and the early texts term it either 
nirval).a or parinirval).a, the complete 'blowing out' or 'extinguish-
ing' of the 'fires' of greed, aversion, and delusion. This is not a 
'thing' but an event or experience. 
· 
After a being has, as it were, 'nirval).a-ed', the defilements 
of greed, hatred, and delusion no longer arise in his or her 
mind, since they have been thoroughly rooted out (to switch to 
another metaphor also current in the tradition). Yet like the 
Buddha, any person who attains nirval).a does not remain there-
after forever absorbed in some transcendental state of mind. On 
the contrary he or she continues to live in the world; he or she 
continues to think, speak, and act as other people do-with the 
difference that all his or her thoughts, words, and deeds are com-
pletely free of the motivations of greed, aversion, and delusion, 
and motivated instead entirely by generosity, friendliness, and 
wisdom. This condition of having extinguished the defilements

--- PAGE 96 ---
Four Truths 
can be termed 'nirvat;~.a with the remainder [of life]' (sopadhise::;a-
nirviifJa/sa-upiidisesa-nibbiina ): the nirvat;~.a that comes from end-
ing the occurrence of the defilements ( klesa/kilesa) of the mind; 
what the Pali commentaries call for short kilesa-parinibbiina.24 And 
this is what the Buddha achieved on the night of his awakening. 
Eventually 'the remainder of life' will be exhausted and, like 
all beings, such a person must die. But unlike other beings, 
who have not experienced 'nirvat;~.a', he or she will not be reborn 
into some new life, the physical and mental constituents of being 
will not come together in some new existence, there will be 
no new being or person. Instead of being reborn, the person 
'parinirvat;~.a-s', meaning in this context that the five aggregates 
of physical and mental phenomena that constitute a being cease 
to occur. This is the condition of 'nirvat;~.a without remainder [of 
life]' (nir-upadhise~a-nirviil}alan-upiidisesa-nibbiina ): nirvat;~.a that 
comes from ending the occurrence of the aggregates (skandha/ 
khandha) of physical and mental phenomena that constitute a 
being; or, for short, khandha-parinibbiina.25 Modern Buddhist 
usage tends to restrict 'nirvat;~.a' to the awakening experience and 
reserve 'parinirvat;~.a' for the death experience.26 
So far we have considered nirvat;~.a from the perspective of a 
particular experience which has far-reaching and quite specific 
effects. This is the more straightforward aspect of the Buddhist 
tradition's understanding of nirvat).a. There is, however, a fur-
ther dimension to the tradition's treatment and understand-
ing of nirvat;~.a. What precisely does the mind experience at the 
moment when the fires of greed, hatred and delusion are finally 
extinguished? At the close of one of the works of the Pali canoh 
entitled Udiina there are recorded several often quoted 'inspired 
utterances' (udiina) said to have been made by the Buddha 
concerning nirvat;~.a. Here is the first: 
There is, monks, a domain where there is no earth, no water, no fire, 
no wind, no sphere of infinite space, no sphere of nothingness, nd 
sphere of infinite consciousness, no sphere of neither awareness nor 
non-awareness; there is not this world, there is not another world, there' 
is no sun or moon. I do not call this coming or going, nor standing;

--- PAGE 97 ---
Four Truths 
77 
nor dying, nor being reborn; it is without support, without occurrence, 
without object. Just this is the end of suffering.27 
This passage refers to the four elements that constitute the phys-
ical world and also what the Buddhist tradition sees as the most 
subtle forms of consciousness possible, and suggests that there 
is a 'domain' or 'sphere' (iiyatana) of experience of which these 
form no part. This 'domain' or 'sphere' of experience is nirval)a. 
It may also be referred to as the 'unconditioned' (asmrzskrta/ 
asar(lkhata) or 'unconditioned realm' (asar(lskrta-/asar(lkhata-
dhiitu) in contrast to the shifting, unstable, conditioned realms 
of the round of rebirth. For certain Abhidharma traditions, at 
the moment of awakening, at the moment of the extinguishing 
of the fires of greed, hatred, and delusion, the mind knows this 
unconditioned realm directly. In the technical terminology of the 
Abhidharma, nirval)a can be said to be the object of conscious-
ness at the moment of awakening when it sees the four truths.28 
Thus in the moment of awakening when all craving and attach-
ments are relinquished, one experiences the profoundest and ulti-
mate truth about the world, and that experience is not of 'a 
nothing' -the mere absence of greed, hatred, and delusion-but 
of what can be termed the 'unconditioned'. 
We can, then, understand nirval)a from three points of view: 
(I) it is the extinguishing of the defilements of greed, hatred, 
and delusion; (2) it is the final condition of the Buddha and 
arhats after death consequent upon the extinction of the defile-
ments; (3) it is the unconditioned realm known at the moment 
of awakening. The critical question becomes the exact definition 
of the ontological status of (2) and (3). The earlier tradition tends 
to shy away from such definition, although, as we have seen, 
it is insistent on one point: one cannot say that the arhat after 
death exists, does not exist, both exists and does not exist, nei-
ther exists nor does not exist. The ontological status of nirval)a 
thus defies neat categorization and is 'undetermined' (avyiikrta/ 
avyiikata ). None the less the followers of Sarvastivada Abhidharma 
argue that nirval)a should be regarded as 'real' (dravya), while 
followers of the Theravada state that it should not be said to be

--- PAGE 98 ---
Four Truths 
'non-existence' (abhiiva). But for the Sautriintikas, even this is 
to say too much: one should not say more than that nirviil)a is 
the absence of the defilements.29 With the development of the 
Mahayana philosophical schools of Madhyamaka and Y ogacara 
we find attempts to articulate the ontology of nirviil).a in different 
terms-the logic of 'emptiness' (sunyatii) and non-duality (advaya). 
In the face of this some early Western scholarship concluded 
that there was no consensus in Buddhist thought on the nature 
of nirviil).a, or persisted in arguing either that nirviil).a was mere 
annihilation or that it was some form of eternal bliss.30 If one 
examines Buddhist writings one will find material that can be inter-
preted in isolation to support the view that nirviil).a amounts to 
annihilation (the five aggregates of physical and mental phenom-
ena that constitute a being are gone and the arhat is no longer 
reborn), and material to support the view that it is an eternal 
reality. But this is not the point; the Buddhist tradition knows 
this. The reason why both kinds of material are there is not because 
the Buddhist tradition could not make up its mind. For, as we 
have seen, the tradition is clear on one point: nirviil).a, as the postc 
mortem condition of the Buddha and arhats, cannot be char-
acterized as non-existence, but nor can it be characterized as 
existence. In fact to characterize it in either of these ways is to 
fall foul of one of the two basic wrong views ( dr~fi/di!!hi) between 
which Buddhist thought tries to steer a middle course: the anni-
hilationist view (uccheda-viida) and the eternalist view (siisvata-1 
sassata-viida ). Thus although the schools of Buddhist thought may 
articulate the ontology of nirviil).a in different terms, one thing 
is clear, and that is that they are always attempting to articulate 
the middle way between existence and non-existence, between 
annihilationism and eternalism. And it is in so far as any for-
mulation of nirviil).a's ontolgy is judged to have failed to main-
tain the delicate balance necessary to walk the middle path that 
it is criticized. Of course, whether any of Buddhist thought's 
attempts at articulating the ontology of the middle way will 
be judged philosophically successful is another question. And 
again the tradition seems on occasion to acknowledge even this. 
Although some of the things one might say about nirviil).a will

--- PAGE 99 ---
Four Truths 
79 
certainly be more misleading than others,. ultimately whatever 
one says will be misleading; the last resort must be the 'silence 
of the Aryas', the silence of the ones who have directly known 
the ultimate truth, for ultimately 'in such matters syllables, 
words and concepts are of no use'.31 
What remains after all is said-and not said-is the reality of 
nirval).a as the goal of the Buddhist path conveyed not so much 
by the attempt to articulate it philosophically but by metaphor. 
Thus although strictly nirval).a is no place, no abode where beings 
can be said to exist, the metaphor of nirval).a as the destination 
at the end of the road remains vivid: 'the country of No-Birth-
the city of Nibbana, the place of the highest happiness, peaceful, 
lovely, happy, without suffering, without fear, without sickness, 
free from old age and death'.32 
As if, monks, a person wandering in the forest, in the jungle, were to 
see an ancient path, an ancient road along which men of old had gone. 
And he would follow it, and as he followed it he would see an ancient 
city, an ancient seat of kings which men of old had inhabited, possess-
ing parks, gardens, lotus ponds, with high walls-a delightful place ... 
Just so, monks, I saw an ancient path, the ancient road along which the 
fully awakened ones of old had gone ... I followed it and following it 
I knew directly old-age and death, the arising of old-age and death, the 
ceasing of old-age and death and the path leading to the ceasing of old 
age and death.33 
So let us now turn to the path that leads to the city of nirvaiJ.a. 
The way leading to the cessation of suffering 
So far in this chapter we have seen that Buddhist thought starts 
from the premiss that life presents us with the problem of suf-
fering. The schema of the four truths analyses the nature of the 
problem, its cause, its solution and the way to effect that solu-
tion. The first three truths primarily concern matters of Buddhist 
theory; with the fourth truth we come to Buddhist practice pro-
per. That is, the first three truths provide a framework for the 
application of the Buddhist solution to the problem of suffering.

--- PAGE 100 ---
8o 
Four Truths 
The second truth suggests that we must recognize that the mind 
has deep-rooted tendencies to crave the particular experiences 
it likes, and that this craving is related to a fundamental misap-
prehension of 'the way things are': the idea that lasting happi-
ness is related to our ability to have, to possess and take hold of, 
these experiences we like. In a world where everything is con-
stantly changing beyond our control, such an outlook brings us 
not the happiness we seek, but discontent. Thus the third truth 
suggests that lasting happiness lies in the stopping of craving and 
grasping, in the rooting-out of greed, aversion, and delusion. Of 
course, these latter mental forces are varied and psychologically 
subtle; we can get caught in the trap of craving not to crave-
of desiring what is, in a sense, desireless, namely nirval)a. Yet 
as long as we crave nirva:Qa or the cessation of suffering, then 
by definition the object of our craving is not nirva:Qa, not the 
'reality' of the cessation of suffering, but a mere idea of what we 
imagine nirval)a, the cessation of suffering, to be like. Nirval)a 
is precisely the ceasing of all craving, so even the craving for 
nirvaQ.a must be rooted out and eventually abandoned. The 
fourth truth is concerned with the practical means for bringing. 
this- about. But, as I have already suggested, from the perspect-
iye of the path certain cravings are less harmful than others 
and, to an extent, even necessary, to progress along the path. 
Ultimately, however, as the simile of the raft indicates, attach-
ment to even the teachings and practices of Buddhism must be 
relinquished. 
According to Buddhist thought, just as there. are various 
defilements of the mind-principally greed, hatred, and delusion 
-so there are various wholesome (kusala/kusala) qualities of 
the mind. As well as greed, hatred, and delusion there are then 
their opposites, namely non-attachment (alobha), loving kind-
ness (adve~a/adosa, maitrJ!mettii), and wisdom (prajftiilpaftftii); 
Were it not for these there would be no way of breaking out 
of the cycle of greed, hatred, and delusion, and thus no path 
leading to the cessation of du/:1-kha. The principal, if not only, aim 
of the Buddhist path is to develop and cultivate (bhiivayati/ 
bhiiveti) these and related wholesome qualities.

--- PAGE 101 ---
Four Truths 
8I 
TABLE I. The noble eightfold path 
right view 
seeing the four truths 
l 
{ desirelessness 
wisdom 
right intention 
friendliness 
(prqjiiii) 
compassion 
! 
<OfrniiDog from '''" •p=h 
right speech 
refraining from divisive speech 
refraining from hurtful speech 
refraining from idle chatter 
conduCt 
{ refraining from harming living beings 
(§fla) 
right action 
refraining from taking what is not given 
refraining from sexual misconduct 
right livelihood 
not based on wrong speech and action 
! 
toP"""' uruuiieo uowholewme '"'" 
right effort 
to abandon arisen unwholesome states 
to arouse unarisen wholesome states 
to develop arisen wholesome states 
! 
o=t<mpl•ti= of bod> 
meditation 
(samiidhi) 
right mindfulness 
contemplation of feeling 
contemplation of mind 
contemplation of dharma 
right concentration 
practice of the four dhyiinas 
In the earliest Buddhist texts the noble truth of the path to 
the cessation of suffering is most frequently summed up as the 
'noble eightfold path': 'perfect', 'right', or 'appropriate' (samyak/ 
sammii) view, intention, speech, conduct, livelihood, effort, mind-
fulness, and concentration. The basic meaning of these eight items 
is clearly explained in a number of places in th~ early Buddhist 
texts (see Table I), but the interpretation of the overall struc-
ture of the eightfold path is perhaps not so straightforward.34 We 
all have certain views, ideas, beliefs, and opinions about ourselves, 
others, and the world (I); depending on these we turn towards 
the world with various intentions and aspirations (2); depending 
on these we speak (3), act (4), and generally make our way in 
the world (5). So far so good, but the meaning of the last three

--- PAGE 102 ---
Four Truths 
items of the eightfold path is not so transparent. Effort (6), 
mindfulness ( 7 ), and concentration (8) are in effect technicalterms 
of Buddhist meditation practice whose expression in everyday 
language is less obvious. In practice they relate to one's under-
lying state of mind or, perhaps better, emotional state. In other 
words, the list of eight items suggests that there is a basic rela-
tionship between one's understanding, one's actions, and one's 
underlying emotional state. 
The eight items of the path are not, however, to be understood 
simply as stages, each one being completed before moving on to 
the next. In fact, when we look at the extensive treatment of the 
eightfold path in Buddhist literature, it becomes apparent that 
view, intention, speech, conduct, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, 
and concentration are presented here as eight significant dimen-
sions of one's behaviour-mental, spoken, and bodily-that are 
regarded as operating in dependence on one another and as 
defining a complete way (miirga/magga) of living.35 The eight 
items are significant in that they focus on the manner in which 
what one thinks, says, does, and feels can effect-and affect-
the unfolding of the path to the cessation of suffering. Ordinarily 
these eight aspects of one's way of life may, at different times, 
be either 'right' and 'appropriate' (samyak/sammii) or 'wrong' 
and 'inappropriate' (mithyii/micchii); that is, they may either 
be out of keeping with the nature of things, leading .one further 
away from the cessation of suffering, or they may be in keeping 
with the nature of things, bringing one closer to the cessation of 
suffering. By means of Buddhist practice the eight dimensions 
are gradually and collectively transformed and developed, until 
they are established as 'right', such that-they constitute the 'noble' 
(iiryalariya) eightfold path. Strictly, then, the noble eightfold 
path represents the end of Buddhist practice; it is the way of 
living achieved by Buddhist saints-the stream-attainers, once-
returners, non-returners, arhats, and bodhisattvas who have worked 
on and gradually perfected view, intention, speech, conduct, 
livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and concentration. For such as 
these, having perfect view, intention, speech, action, livelihood, 
endeavour, mindfulness, and concentration is not a matter of

--- PAGE 103 ---
Four Truths 
trying to make their behaviour conform to the prescriptions of 
the path, but simply of how they are in all they think, say, and 
do. We are talking of an inner transformation at the deepest 
levels of one's being. 
Alongside the eightfold path, Buddhist texts present'the path 
that ends in the cessation of suffering as a gradual and cumu-
lative process involving a hierarchical progression of practice, 
beginning with generosity (dana), moving on to good conduct 
(sllalfila), and ending in meditation (bhiivanii); alternatively we 
find the sequence: good conduct (szlalslla), meditative concen-
tration (samiidhi), and wisdom (prajiia!pafiiiii). According to this 
kind of scheme, the early stages of the practice of the path are . 
more concerned with establishing good conduct on the basis of 
the ethical precepts; these provide the firm foundation for the 
development of concentration, which in turn prepares for the per-
fection of understanding and wisdom. This outlook is the basis 
of the important notion of 'the gradual path' which finds its earli-
est and most succinct expression as 'the step by step discourse' 
(anupurvikii kathii/anupubbi-kathii) of the Nikayas/Agamas: 
Then the Blessed One gave instruction step by step ... namely talk on 
giving, talk on good conduct, and talk on heaven; he proclaimed the 
danger, elimination and impurity of sense desires, and the benefit of desire-
lessness. When the Blessed One knew that the mind [of his listener] was 
ready, open, without hindrances, inspired, and confident, then he gave 
the instruction in Dharma that is special to buddhas: suffering, its ori-
gin, its cessation, the path.36 
The psychological understanding that underlies this is not hard 
to see. In order to see the four truths, the mind must be clear 
and still; in order to be still, the mind must be content; in order 
to be content, the mind must be free from remorse and guilt; in 
order to be free from guilt, one needs a clear conscience; the bases 
of a clear conscience are generosity and good conduct. 
The eight items of the eightfold path can also be analysed in 
terms of the three categories of good conduct, concentration, 
and wisdom: the first two items of the path (view and intention) 
are encompassed by the third category, wisdom; the next three

--- PAGE 104 ---
Four Truths 
(speech, action, and livelihood) by the first category, good con-
duct; and the final three (effort, mindfulness, and concentration) 
by the second category, meditative concentration.37 That the 
sequence of the items of the path does not conform to the order 
of these three categories of practice highlights an understanding 
of the spiritual life that sees all three aspects of practice. as, 
although progressive, none the less interdependent and relevant 
to each and every stage of Buddhist practice. The practice of the 
path is not simply linear; in one's progress along the path it is 
not that one first exclusively practises good conduct and then, 
when one has perfected that, moves on to meditative concen-
tration and finally wisdom. Rather the three aspects of the prac-
tice of the path exist, operate, and are developed in a mutually 
dependent and reciprocal relationship. In other words, without 
some nascent sense of suffering and what conduces to its cessa-
tion one would not and could not even begin the practice of the 
path,_ This is not necessarily a conscious understanding capable 
of being articulated in terms of Buddhist doctrine, but is perhaps 
just a sense of generosity and good conduct as in some way 
constituting 'good' or wholesome (kusala/kusala) behaviour-
behaviour that is in accordance with Dharma and conduces to 
the cessation of suffering for both oneself and others. The details 
of the cultivation of the path to the cessation of suffering form 
the subject matter of Chapter 7, but let us now turn to consider 
Buddhist practice more generally: the way of life of Buddhist 
monks, nuns, and lay followers:

--- PAGE 105 ---
4 
The Buddhist Community 
Monks, Nuns, and Lay Followers 
The Buddha's followers and the origin of the Buddhist order 
As we saw in Chapter I, Buddhism grew out of the ancient 
Indian 'renouncer' tradition; the Buddha's own teachers were 
such renouncers, as were those to whom he first addressed his 
teachings. Thus in presenting a system of training and practice 
geared to the eradication of greed, aversion, and delusion as 
the root causes of suffering, the Buddha's teaching suggests that 
the ideal basis for this training is the way of life followed by the 
Buddha himself, the life of a homeless, mendicant wanderer-
in short, the life of a Buddhist monk (bhik~u/bhikkhu) or nun 
(bhik~wfi/bhikkhuni). Indeed, while the earliest texts allow that 
one may achieve full awakening and arhatship without first 
formally becoming a monk, an old tradition argues that in such 
a case one inevitably either joins the Buddhist order or dies the 
same day. 1 
The basis of the renouncer's lifestyle lies in two things: (I) re-
nunciation of the household life for the sake of the religious 
life, and (2) dependence upon the generosity of the population 
at large for the provision of material needs-food, clothing, and 
dwellings. The success of early Buddhism thus assumes both a 
desire on the part of certain members of the population to give 
up 'normal society' or 'the household life', and sufficient good 
will on the part of those remaining in normal society to allow 
them to do so. The followers of a teacher such as the Buddha 
thus fell into two socially distinct categories: homeless wanderers 
and lay supporters. Buddhist texts talk of the four 'assemblies' 
(pari~at/parisii): of monks, nuns, male lay followers, female lay 
followers.

--- PAGE 106 ---
86 
The Buddhist Community 
Buddhists have, then, always understood the Buddha's mes-
sage not only as an invitation to give up the household life and 
join the Buddha's group of monks, but also as an invitation to 
the wider community to support the religious life. The Buddhist 
understanding of the nature of the lifestyle of 'one gone forth' 
sees the Buddhist monastic community as a significant part of 
society as a whole. Thus when the Buddha is reported, shortly 
after his awakening, as instructing his growing group of newly 
'awakened' monastic followers to set off, never two by the same 
way, to teach Dharma that is 'lovely in the beginning, lovely in 
the middle, and lovely in the end', 'for the benefit and happiness 
of the many, out of sympathy for the world, for the good, bene-
fit, and happiness of gods and men', this represents more than 
simply a recruitment drive for the Sangha or Order of monks 
and nuns.2 The presence of Buddhist monks and nuns within a 
society has been seen as in itself a positive good and of benefit 
for all. Let us turn now to consider the members of the assem-
blies of the monks and nuns. 
The procedures governing ordination, along ·with the rule 
governing life as a Buddhist monk or nun, are set out in the 
Vinaya, the division of Buddhist scriptures devoted to monastic 
'discipline'. As we saw in Chapter 2, a number of different 
versions of this survive from ancient times. Only three are in 
actual use today. In Sri Lanka and South-East Asia monks in 
principle follow the rule of the Pali Theravadin Vinaya; in East 
Asia (China, Korea, and Japan) monks follow the rule of the 
ancient Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, translated into Chinese from 
an Indian original in the fifth century; in Tibet and Mongolia 
monks follow the rule of the Mfilasarvastivada, a branch of the 
Sarvastivada school, translated into Tibetan in the ninth century.3 
The Vinayas fall into two basic parts: (1) a set of rules governing 
the life of the individual monk or nun known as the priitimok~a 
(Palipiitimokkha); and (2) regulations concerning the communal 
ceremonies and corporate 'acts' of the Sangha (i.e. an 'act' that 
is confirmed after having been formally proposed before a chap-
ter of the Sangha either just once or three times, depending on 
the type of proposal), beginning with admission to the order.4

--- PAGE 107 ---
The Buddhist Community 
While there is considerable variation in the details of the surviv-
ing Vinayas, there is a fundamental agreement in structure and 
core content. 
Ordination and the Buddhist monastic ideal 
According to tradition, becoming a Buddhist monk could ini-
tially be accomplished without much ceremony; 'going forth' 
(pravrajyiilpabbajjii)-from the household life into homelessness 
-and 'ordination' (upasampadii) involved only a request to the 
Buddha and its acceptance by him with the words, 'Come, monk 
Well taught is the Dharma. Live the spiritual life for the complete 
ending of suffering.'5 Subsequently 'going forth' and ordina-
tion proper were distinguished as two distinct ceremonies; by 
undergoing the former ceremony of pravrajyii one becomes a 
'novice' (sriimalJera/siimalJera), while the latter ceremony of 
upasampadii renders one a bhik~u proper.6 The ordination and 
discipline of the Buddhist nun (bhik~uTJ'flbhikkhunl) follows essen-
tially the same pattern. 
The Theravadin Vinaya specifies that the candidate for pra-
vrajyii must be old enough to scare crows away, usually taken as 
meaning 7 or 8.7 Going forth involves formally requesting that 
a monk of at least ten years' standing becomes one's preceptor 
(upadhyiiyalupajjhiiya) and teacher (iiciiryaliicariya). The novice's 
head is shaved, and he puts on ochre robes. He then recites the 
formula of going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, 
and takes the ten precepts or 'rules oftraining' (silcyii-/sikkhii-pada): 
(r) to refrain from harming living creatures, (2) to refrain from 
taking what is not given, (3) to refrain from all sexual activity, 
(4) to refrain from false speech, (5) to refrain from intoxicants 
that cause heedlessness, (6) to refrain from eating after midday, 
(7) to refrain from attending entertainments, (8) to refrain from 
wearing jewellery or using perfumes, (9) to refrain from sleeping 
on luxurious beds, (ro) to refrain from handling gold and silver.8 
One becomes a candidate for full ordination at the age of 20.9 
The upasampadii ceremony requires the participation' of at least 
five properly ordained bhik~us of at least ten years' standing. For

--- PAGE 108 ---
88 
The Buddhist Community 
someone over the age of 20 the pravrajyii and the upasampadii 
may be performed together at one occasion. 
At the end of his ordination ceremony a Buddhist monk is 
informed that the four basic 'resources' (nisraya!nissaya) that 
he can count on for the four 'requisites' (pari!jkiira/parikkhiira) 
of food, clothing, lodging, and medicine are food offered to him 
as alms, robes made of discarded rags, the foot of a tree, and 
fermented urine respectively. Another list of requisites allows 
the monk eight items as his personal possessions: three robes, an 
alms-bowl, a razor, a needle, a belt, and a water-strainer. · 
The ideal of the Buddhist monk then is of one who steps out 
from ordinary society: his appearance is different (his head is 
shaved and he wears monastic robes); he renounces the ordinary 
household life of wife, children, and family and takes a vow of 
complete sexual abstinence; in adopting the way of life of the 
monk he abandons any profession or means of livelihood; his per-
sonal possessions are minimal and for the little he can expect in 
the way of creature comforts he is dependent on the generosity 
of others. 
While in the course of the Sangha's long history in India and 
beyond there has been some adaptation and local variations 
have developed, the basic pattern of ordination set out in the 
Vinaya remains relevant to the monastic traditions ofTheravada 
Buddhism, East Asian Buddhism, and Tibetan Buddhism.10 The 
most visible variation is that Theravadin monks wear orange or 
brown robes, while the monks of East Asia wear grey or black 
robes, and the monks of Tibet wear maroon robes. In Tibet (and 
sometimes in China) there has been a tendency for a consider" 
able proportion of the Sangha to remain as sriimal}eras and 
never take full ordination.n In China pravrajyii ordination has 
been extended by separating initial tonsure, sometimes by many 
years, from formal taking of the ten precepts, while higher 
ordination has usually involved, in addition to the rules of the 
priitimok!}a, taking the fifty-eight 'bodhisattva vows' set out in 
the Chinese 'Brahma's Net' sutra (Fan-Wang-Ching)P In South-
East Asia temporary ordination as a monk for a year or even: 
just a few months has become widespread.

--- PAGE 109 ---
The Buddhist Community 
After upasampadii one becomes a bhik~u-a Buddhist monk 
proper-and as such one's life is governed by the complete set 
of rules which constitute the priitimok~a. The precise number 
of rules that make up the monk's priitimok~a varies;, for the 
Theravada there are 227 rules, for the Mfilasarvastivada (followed 
by the Tibetans) there are 258, for the Dharmaguptakas (followed 
in East Asia) there are 250, but the basic structure of the rules 
and the individual rules involving serious offences are held in 
common. In principle the rules simply elaborate a way of life based 
on keeping the ten precepts of the novice, distinguishing between 
serious and less serious breaches of these precepts. In this way 
the rules fall into eight categories. Four offences involve 'defeat' 
(piiriijika), i.e. expulsion from the saiigha: sexual intercourse, tak-
ing what is not given, killing another human being, and falsely 
laying claim to spiritual attainments of any sort.13 These four 
piiriijika offences map out the theoretical basis of the monastic 
way of life: celibacy and reliance on the generosity of lay sup-
port. The failure to keep his vow of celibacy undermines one 
of the defining characteristics of the Buddhist monk: he has 
renounced the ordinary 'household' life of wife, children, and fam-
ily; furthermore sexual abstinence is associated with channelling 
one's energies towards spiritual attainments. To seek to solve 
the problem of suffering by killing other human beings is the 
grossest manifestation of greed, hatred, and delusion. To take 
from society what is not freely given betrays the fundamental 
relationship of trust between the monk, who undertakes to live 
the life of the ascetic wanderer, and those who in good faith offer 
their material support. Since any monk thought to be spiritually 
accomplished is likely to become the object of lay admiration and 
even devotion, to lie about spiritual attainments equally betrays 
the trust of lay supporters. 
The second category of rules comprises thirteen saf!1ghiiva8e~a 
(Pali sa1J1ghiidisesa) offences which are punishable by a period 
of probation involving loss of full status as a member of the San.gha; 
these involve sexual impropriety of various sorts, as well as 
the building of certain types of dwelling, making false accusa-
tions, promoting schism in the Sangha, refusing to accept the

--- PAGE 110 ---
90 
The Buddhist Community 
admonishments of the Sangha, and corrupting families. The 
thirteen saf!Ighiivase$aS are followed by two further rules con-
cerning charges of possible sexual impropriety whose penalty is 
not fixed but must be determined by the Sangha according to 
circumstances. Next come thirty ni/:tsargika (Pali nissaggiya) rules 
which mostly concern inappropriate use of robes, rugs, money, 
bowls, and medicines; the offence should be ~onfessed and the 
item given up. A further ninety or ninety-two minor piiyantika 
(Pali piicittiya) rules prohibit various kinds of lying, physical 
violence, and abusive speech, as well as further regulating the 
use of the monk's requisites, and his conduct in a monastery or 
in the presence of women; breach of these rules only requires 
confession. A further four miscellaneous offences merely require 
confession (priitidesaniyalpiifidesaniya). The category of minor 
rules of training (saik$alsekhiya) varies from 66 to rr3, de-
pending on the recension of the Vinaya, and covers the general 
decorum and manners of a monk as he eats, walks, dresses, and 
so forth. The bhik$u's priitimok$a concludes with seven rules 
concerned with the settling of disputes. Traditionally all mem-
bers of the Sangha in a given locality gather on the fortnightly 
po$adha (Pali uposatha) days-the days of the new and full moon 
-to recite the rules that make up the priitimok$a and to confess 
any breaches. 
A note on Buddhist nuns 
Tradition relates how the nuns' or bhik$U1Jis' order was founded 
after a request to the Buddha from Ananda on behalf of women 
wanting to take up the spirituallife.14 On that occasion the Bud-
dha explained his reluctance to ordain women not because he 
regarded them as incapable of attaining arhatship, but because 
their ordination would hasten the decline of the Dharma. This 
attitude has often been interpreted as betraying a negative view 
of women, although in part it might be read simply as reflecting 
a realistic view of what happens when men and women who have 
undertaken the celibate life live in close proximity. None the less, 
the Buddha is represented as laying down eight special rules (garu-
dhamma) subordinating the nuns' order to that of the monks.

--- PAGE 111 ---
The Buddhist Community 
91 
However, it has been argued on the grounds of inconsistencies 
in the nuns' Vinaya that these eight rules represent a later inter-
polation.15 Otherwise the priitimok~a of Buddhist nuns is similar 
in broad outline to that of the monks, although in all recensions 
it comprises rather more rules. 
The Buddhist canon contains a whole collection of verses, 
the Therzgiithii, attributed to female arhats as well as numerous 
examples of accomplished female religious teachers. At the same 
time, while allowing that women may become arhats, a canonical 
tradition represents the Buddha as denying that it was possible 
that a woman could be a buddha; the same passage also denies 
the possibility of a woman's being Mara.16 Of course, such an under-
standing assumes also the reality of rebirth; the status of Mara 
or Buddha is thus not denied finally to any being since a being 
born as a woman-or a Brahma (who is strictly without sex)-
in one life may be born as a man in another. Inscriptional evid-
ence from the early centuries CE points to the active role of both 
Buddhist nuns and lay womenP 
At some point the Theravada order of nuns died out, per-
haps as early as the eleventh century in Sri Lanka, while the full 
nun's ordination lineage may never even have been established 
in Tibet. This nieans that fully ordained Buddhist nuns are only 
found today within East Asian Buddhism. Nevertheless, in the 
Theravada and Tibetan traditions a significant number of women 
still effectively live as nuns by permanently keeping the ten pre-
cepts of the novice nun or the eight precepts of the committed 
female lay disciple; some continue to be regarded as respected 
teachers of meditation.18 There is a movement to re-establish the 
bhikkhunz ordination lineage in Theravada Buddhism,.although 
the attitude of some 'nuns' towards this is ambivalent, since full 
ordination as a bhikkhWJl brings with it the eight special rules 
mentioned above. 
The underlying concerns of the Vinaya 
It is possible, I think, to identify four particular concerns in the 
Buddhist monastic rule as set out in Vinaya: (1) the unity and

--- PAGE 112 ---
92 
The Buddhist Community 
cohesion of the Sangha, (2) the spiritual life, (3) the dependence 
of the Sangha upon the wider community, and (4) the appear-
ance of the Sangha in the eyes of that community. These require 
some elaboration. 
The Buddhist monastic community is the prerequisite for the 
existence of Buddhism in a given society. As we saw in Chap-
ter 2, in a traditional Buddhist society it is only through contact 
with the monastic community that laity can have any knowledge 
of the Buddha's teachings. The Sangha lives the teaching, pre-
serves the teaching as scriptures, and teaches the wider commun-
ity. Without the Sangha there is no Buddhism. The Vinaya thus 
attempts to provide a framework which renders the Sangha a 
stable and viable institution, showing considerable concern for 
unity and the settling of disputes. The Sangha's constitution as 
set out in the Vinaya provides for no formal head or leader; 
authority rests in the agreement and consensus of bodies of 
senior monks. The formal hierarchy of the Sangha is based on 
seniority calculated from the time and date of one's ordination. 
The existence and survival of the Sangha for well over two 
millennia in· diverse cultures is a measure of the Vinaya's sue~ 
cess in establishing a structure that is tight enough to prevent 
disintegration of the community, but flexible enough to allow for 
adaptation to particular circumstances. 
If the life as a monk is fundamental to the Buddhist vision of 
the spiritual life, then it follows that one of the Vinaya's prime 
concerns must be to regulate a way of life that conduces to the 
realization of the Buddhist path. The Vinaya's success in this 
respect is perhaps harder to gauge; there are, alas, no stat-
istics for the number of realized 'saints'-bodhisattvas, stream-
attainers, once-returners, never-returners, and arhats-it has, 
fostered. Yet the widespread view that, for example, the Thai 
monk Acharn Mun who died in 1949 was an arhat indicates that 
'enlightenment' is still regarded by some as a realistic aspiration 
for the Buddhist monk, even if the prevalent attitude in some 
circles is that arhatship is no longer possible.19 The sanctity, or 
otherwise, of past and present members of the Sangha is hardly 
a matter to be determined by academic enquiry; nevertheless the

--- PAGE 113 ---
The Buddhist Community 
93 
Vinaya's concern with the minutiae of a monk's handling of the 
requisites exhibits an awareness of human foibles as well as of 
the mind's ingenuity and even deviousness in the face of .rules 
and regulations designed to curb greed, aversion, and delusion. 
Anyone genuinely attempting to put this way of life into prac-
tice is very soon likely to be made aware of the multifarious 
ways in which his or her greed, aversion, and delusion work. 
Furthermore the number of minor rules concerning more gen-
eral behaviour seem intended to make for a certain alertness 
or mindfulness, one of the mental qualities to be cultivated in 
meditation. 
The final two concerns of the Vinaya-the dependence of 
the Sangha upon the wider community, and the appearance of 
the Sangha in the eyes of that community-are interlinked. The 
Buddhist monk may be one who renounces society, but the 
genius of the Vinaya is that having invited the monk to give 
up society it then requires him to live in dependence upon it, 
thereby forcing him back into a relationship with it. It has 
sometimes been suggested that the Buddha originally intended 
to institute only a movement of committed ascetics removed 
from society; these are the true and original Buddhists. From 
this perspective the involvement of lay followers represents 
something of an afterthought on the part of the Buddha. If the 
basic conception of the Vinaya is attributable to the Buddha 
himself, then such an interpretation is hardly sustainable, for the 
interaction of the monastic and lay communities is integral to the 
way of life set out by the Vinaya. 
Many of the rules of the Vinaya concerned with food, for 
example, are clearly designed to force members of the Sangha 
to be dependent on lay support. That is, if the Vinaya was 
intended to regulate the life of a self-sufficient community of 
ascetics who had no contact with society at large, it could have 
been structured differently. Instead it specifies that a monk 
should not handle money;20 he should not eat food that he has 
not received from someone else;21 he should not dig the ground 
or have it dug, and so is effectively prohibited from farming;22 
strictly he should not store food unless sick, and then only for

--- PAGE 114 ---
94 
The Buddhist Community 
seven days;23 finally he is discouraged from cooking.24 If called 
on to preach or attend to a lay supporter in various ways, then 
the community of monks should provide someone.25 All these 
rules have the effect of drawing the Buddhist monk into a 
relationship with society, and balancing any tendency towards 
becoming a movement of eremitic ascetics. 
The lifestyle of the Buddhist monk is thus founded on a rela-
tionship of trust between himself and his supporters. In accept-
ing lay support in the form of robes, food, and lodgings, the monk 
enters into a kind of social contract; it becomes his responsib-
ility to live in a certain way, namely to live the holy or spiritual 
life (bnihmacarya) to the best of his ability. If Buddhism is 
unthinkable without the Sangha, then it is also true that the Sangha 
is unthinkable without lay support. The texts are thus at pains 
to point out that certain kinds of behaviour become inappro-
priate in the light of this contract; to spend one's time playing 
games or at entertainments; to spend one's time practising 
astrology and various kinds of divining. The concern here seems 
not so much to condemn these practices as such but merely 
to reinforce the principle that as a Buddhist monk one accepts 
lay support in order to practise the spiritual life. As a Buddhist 
monk one is deserving of lay support to the extent one attempts 
to put into practice the teachings of the Buddha, al)d not because 
of one's skills as an astrologer or doctor. Thus to lie about 
one's spiritual attainments is, as we have seen, undermining of 
this relationship of trust. Yet if the responsibility resting on the 
shoulders of the Buddhist monk should appear too heavy, the 
Buddha is recorded as reassuring them that if one dwells for 
even a finger-snap absorbed in meditation on loving kindness, 
then one has not eaten the country's alms food in vain.26 
Other Vinaya rules are concerned to make sure that a monk 
avoids behaviour that might be misconstrued by the laity; his 
conduct should be in all respects beyond reproach. Thus talking 
in private with a woman or spending the night in the same 
house as a woman are prohibited.27 The monk should also avoid 
behaviour that might be considered bad manners or give offence 
in some other way.

--- PAGE 115 ---
The Buddhist Community 
From wandering to settled life: forest dwellers 
and town dwellers 
95 
1'he ideal that the lifestyle of the Buddhist monk is founded upon 
is that of the homeless wanderer who, having renounced all 
possessions and gone forth from the household life, dresses in 
robes made from discarded rags, begs for his food, and takes as 
his dwelling the forest, a mountain cave, or the foot of a tree. 
Perhaps one of the most uncompromising descriptions of the re-
nouncer's lifestyle is that found in a poem.near the beginning of 
the Suttanipiita. Here the renouncer is advised to wander alone, 
free from any ties of family and friendship, 'like the [single] 
horn of the Indian rhinoceros' .28 Although Buddhist tradition 
has not seen this account as a general prescription for Buddhist 
monastic life, there has been a tendency for modern scholarship 
to take the kind of picture it presents at face value. The history 
of the Sangha in ancient India can then be read as a series of 
compromises that amount to a gradual corruption of the ancient 
ideal. On this view, the monks at first wandered completely 
homeless in their single-minded intent on the goal of nirval).a. 
Increasing numbers of spiritually inexperienced and immature 
monks made it necessary for the Buddha to lay down more rules 
and regulations. Step.. by step this led to the institutionalization 
of the Sangha. Particularly significant in this process was a rule 
which is said to have been laid down in response to complaints 
that Buddhist monks wandering about during the monsoon 
rainy season were causing damage to plants and small creatures; 
this rule therefore requires monks to take up residence in one 
place for the three months of" the rains. The consequence of this 
was the establishment of residential monasteries and the grad-
ual evolution of a more settled way of life.29 
But there are problems with such a model of the evolution of . 
the Sangha. To begin with, as the more recent work of Mohan 
Wijayaratna and Gregory Schopen has shown, the Vinaya texts 
as we have them certainly already assume the development of 
a settled way of life and the picture of the typical monk's way 
of life reflected in them is not exactly that of the homeless

--- PAGE 116 ---
The Buddhist Community 
wanderer. Schopen takes this as reason to conclude that the Vinaya 
texts as we h;we them reflect a state of affairs long after the death 
of the Buddha and in their present form must belong to a rather 
later period than is usually assumed-the early centuries of the 
Christian era. And yet, as Steven Collins has pointed out in his 
introduction, Wijayaratna's study of the early Pali sources brings 
out the extent to which they contain a coherent, developed, and 
well-integrated conception of monastic life, and this suggests that 
we must redraw our picture of the Buddhist monk as exclusively 
a homeless forest dweller even in the lifetime of the Buddha. 
Schopen might respond that in pushing the existence of a settled 
monastic way of life too far back in time, we assume too much 
development in too short a period of time and deny the Sangha 
any history.30 But the fact remains that we are still unclear of 
the extent to which the Sangha can be regarded as having a 
'pre-Buddhist' history. That is, a comparison with Jain monastic 
organization indicates that certain rules and principles, includ-
ing the institution of a residential rains, are held in common. This 
suggests that either Buddhism and Jainism have borrowed from 
each other or that both have drawn on a common heritage. It 
may well be the case that the varied 'renouncer' tradition from 
which both Jainism and Buddhism emerge had already devel-
oped certain institutional patterns by the time of the Buddha, 
and that these have been drawn upon and adapted to suit the 
characteristically Buddhist vision of a mendicant order. 
Again as Gregory Schopen has made clear, if we want to form 
some idea of the reality of ancient Buddhism, in addition to the 
evidence of ancient texts, we must take into account the archaeo-
logical evidence of ancient inscriptions and other artefacts. Dating 
from the third or second centuries BCE, these reflect the reality 
of how Buddhism was actually practised less problematically than 
the ideals of the texts. Once again the picture that can be drawn 
on the basis of these makes it clear that the homeless mendicant 
wanderer, meditating in the forest, intent on nirval).a, was nei-
ther the only, nor probably the numerically dominant, actuality. 
For a general picture of Buddhist monastic life in ancient 
India and Sri Lanka through the centuries of the first millennium

--- PAGE 117 ---
The Buddhist Community 
97 
cE, the most generally useful textual sources, apart from the vari-
ous Vinayas, are the Pali commentaries and the records of three 
Chinese Buddhist pilgrims: Fa-hsien, who spent some fifteen 
years travelling in northern India and Sri Lanka at the,beginning 
of the fifth century (399-414), Hsiian-tsang, who travelled through-
out India, in the first half of the seventh century (630-643), and 
I-tsing, who visited India and the Malay archipelago towards 
the end of the seventh century (671-695).31 Archaeological and 
inscriptional evidence comes from a great variety of monastic sites 
across India and from Sri Lanka. 
These sources suggest that monks lived as more or less per-
manent residents in monasteries ( vihiira, iiriima) that usually con-
sisted of a number of buildings: residential quarters, a teaching 
hall, and a po~adha hall (for the fortnightly recitation of the monas-
tic rule). The religious heart of a monastery was threefold: a stiipa 
(containing relics, ideally of the Buddha or of some acknowledged 
'saint'), a Bodhi-tree (an asvattha or ficus religiosa-the type of 
tree the Buddhagained awakening under-often growing on a 
platform), and finally a shrine hall or image house.32 All three 
would have been the object of considerable devotional practice 
by monks and laity alike. Monasteries varied enormouslyin size. 
Fa-hsien records that the Abhayagiri Vihara at Anuradhapura, 
the ancient capital of Sri Lanka, housed s,ooo monks, while I-
tsing states that at the famous monastic university of Nalanda in 
eastern India there were some 3,000 residents.33 Such monastic 
establishments included kitchens, refectories, latrines, bathing 
facilities, and libraries. Whether or not the figures of the Chinese 
pilgrims are exaggerated, the remains of these ancient monastic 
complexes are impressive in themselves and bear witness to 
their grand past. Patronized by royalty and the wealthy, many 
monasteries had considerable endowments in the form of pro-
perty, lands, and other material goods. Thus in both India and 
Sri Lanka we find the development of a system (already adum-
brated in the Vinaya itself) whereby monasteries' requirements 
for food were provided by the produce of land farmed on behalf 
of the monastery by laity who received a share in return.34 Large 
monasteries also employed considerable numbers of lay servants

--- PAGE 118 ---
The Buddhist Community 
of various sorts in order to handle donations of money and goods 
and oversee their running. The canonical Vinaya sources refer 
to the office of kappiya-kiiraka (Sanskrit kalpi-kiira), a layman 
who makes 'allowable' (kappiya) gifts that would otherwise, 
according to the strictures of the Vinaya, not be permissible. 
This is relevant especially to donations of.land and money, which 
individual monks and nuns are strictly forbidden from accepting 
or handling, but which the kappiya-kiiraka could receive and 
administer on their behalf.35 The Sangha could thus become the 
effective owner of considerable property, wealth, and resources, 
while individual monks also came to exercise rights over pro-
perty which in certain circumstances extended to being able to 
leave it to their monastic pupils.36 
A situation where a monk lives in a wealthy monastery effect-
ively enjoying personal rights of ownership over a share of that 
monastery's wealth is somewhat removed from the ideal of the 
homeless mendicant, wandering from village to village with alms-
bowl and dressed in rag robes retrieved from a dust heap, intent 
on his spiritual quest. But we must remember that there were 
also monks, perhaps the majority, who lived in more modest small 
village monasteries. There were also those, no doubt a small minor~ 
ity, who continued to be inspired by the ascetic ideal, setting off 
for the forest, living in caves, or donning robes made from rags 
discarded on rubbish heaps, 
In the context of developed Buddhist monasticism, dwell-
ing in the forest or wearing robes made of rags from a dust 
heap became two of a set of twelve or thirteen specialized ascetic 
practices (dhuta-gu!Ja/dhutmiga) that an individual monk might 
undertake for a shorter or longer period.37 These forest-dwelling 
( iira!Jyaka/iiraiiiiika) or rag robe-wearing (parrzsu-!parrzsu-kulikii) 
monks are contrasted with the town-dwelling (giima-viisin) monks. 
Although the numbers of forest monks may have been relatively 
small, their strict practice meant that they attracted the sup~ 
port of the laity and that they enjoyed considerable prestige and 
influence.38 Ironically this meant that they did not always suc-
ceed in maintaining their ascetic practice and that in ancient Sri 
Lanka, for example, monks belonging to nominally Arafifiika

--- PAGE 119 ---
The Buddhist Community 
99 
or Paq1sukulika groups did not necessarily dwell in the forest or 
wear rag robes. The tendency of the laity to direct their special 
gifts and particular devotions towards monks whose lifestyle 
approximates most closely to the traditional ascetic ide:;tl at once 
invests them with power and threatens to undermine the basis 
of that power. Their monastic establishments become the most 
prosperous and, as a consequence, their ascetic tradition was most 
in danger of being compromised.39 Yet the ideal of the wan-
derer intent on the Buddhist monk's traditional spiritual quest 
continued to be seen as embodied in the forest-dwelling or rag 
robe-wearing monk, and the periodic attempt to re-establish the 
ancient ascetic ideal is one of the defining features of the history 
of Buddhist monasticism. But, as the following story illustrates, 
it is the spirit of that ancient ideal that inspires the tradition, not 
the letter. 
Two friends, it seems, were ordained as monks at Thiiparama 
(one of the monasteries belonging to the Mahavihara) in 
Anuradhapura, the ancient capital of Sri Lanka.40 One went off 
to Pac1nakhal)<;laraji, a forest monastery in the east; the. other . 
remained at Thuparama. Ten years passed by. One day it occurred 
to the monk at Pac1nakhal)<;laraji that he should invite his old 
friend to come and practise at this secluded forest monastery. He 
set off for Anuradhapura. There he was welcomed by his former 
companion. Over the course of the day the visiting monk was 
continually waiting for choice foods and other comforts to be 
provided by servants, attendants, and lay supporters. But none 
was forthcoming. Instead they wandered through Anuradhapura 
and got only a ladleful of gruel. As the two wandered through 
the town, the visiting monk enquired whether his friend always 
lived in such a frugal manner. When he was told that he did, the 
visitor reminded him that Pactnakhal)<;laraji was comfortable 
and suggested that they go there. As they passed the gate of the 
city the other elder took the road to Pactnakhal)<;laraji. 
'Why do you take this road?' asked the visitor. 
'Didn't you just recommend Pactnakhal)<;laraji?' 
'But don't you have some extra possessions in this place 
where you have lived so long?'

--- PAGE 120 ---
roo 
The Buddhist Community 
'Yes, I have the bed and chair belonging to the Sangha, which 
have been put away. There is nothing else.' 
'But I have left my staff, my oil tube, and my sandal bag.' 
'Have you collected so much living here for one day?' 
Humbled, the visitor declared, 'For those such as you every-
where is a forest dwelling.' 
A note on the Sangha and the state 
Strictly speaking the Sangha is an autonomous organization and 
no provision is made within the Vinaya for formal links with the 
state or government. But this does not mean that in practice close 
links and associations between the Sangha and the state have not 
developed. The history of Buddhism in all the regions of the world 
where it has taken root, from ancient times down to the present 
day, affords numberous examples of such -links and associations. 
For much of its history the Sangha has existed in countries 
ruled by a king or emperor. A king may become a patron of the 
Sangha granting it his support. Theoretically he may do this as 
an individual lay follower (upiisaka), and his individual support 
should be possible to distinguish from official state support. In 
practice this distinction becomes hard to maintain. For Buddhist 
tradition it is the figure of the Indian emperor Asoka who has 
become the archetype of a Buddhist king. Asoka reigned c.268-
23 r BCE arid extended the Mauryan empire across nearly the entire 
Indian subcontinent. Asoka's rock and pillar edicts, which have 
been found in various locations throughout India, indicate that 
after a particularly bloody military campaign in Kalinga (eastern 
India) he turned to Buddhist teachings and came to regard him~ 
self as a committed lay supporter (upiisaka) of the Sangha. His 
edicts subsequently go on to self-consciously promote Dharma 
throughout his empire and beyond, commending in particular 
the non-injury of living creatures, the provision of medical care 
for the sick, and tolerance among all religious groups, while at 
the same time highlighting his own. efforts in these directions. 
Although he seems personally to have favoured Buddhism, he 
continued to support other religious groups. His edicts are not 
so much a bid to convert his subjects to Buddhism as an attempt

--- PAGE 121 ---
The Buddhist Community 
IOI 
to put into practice some of its principles in his role as emperor. 
Thus while his vision of Dhamma is not couched in narrow and 
exclusively Buddhist terms it does appear to owe much to his 
personal understanding of Buddhist teaching. Buddhist trqdition 
claims Asoka as its own and many legends about his life are 
recounted in the Asokiivadiina and the Sinhalese chronicles 
(Dtpavaf!Isa and Mahiivaf!1sa). 41 
Once a king has become involved in supporting the Sangha, 
then the avenues are open not only for state interference in and 
control of the affairs of the Sangha, but also _for the Sangha to 
become involved in the affairs of the state and political intrigue. 
The state may seek to justify its actions-including war-in the 
name of support for the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha; it may 
seek to support the sections of the Sangha that it judges as 
representing the true Dharma; the Sangha may connive in this, 
with different factions appealing for state support. Thus an anci-
ent Sri Lankan chronicle, the Mahiivaf!Isa, seeks to justify 
Dutthagamini's war against the Tamil king, Elara, as a victory for 
Dharma; in medievalJapan rival gangs ofTendai 'monks' (some 
armed) clashed in the struggle for political influence; in Tibet Sa-
skya Pal).<;lita's meeting with the Mongol Khan in 1249 paved the 
way for a 'patron-priest' relationship (yon mchod) with political 
overtones; in modern times Buddhism has been closely linked 
to the legitimation of power in Sri Lanka and South-East Asia.42 
The spiritual life: the practice of 'meritorious action' 
The heart of Buddhist spiritual life, whether lay or monastic, is 
-pw:zya (Pali puiiiia ). This term is usually translated as 'merit' and 
refers to certain significant kinds of action that are regarded as 
auspicious and potent deeds. Essentially, merit is good 'karma' 
(karman/kamma): wholesome (ku§ala!kusala) deeds which plant 
seeds that bear fortunate and pleasant fruits, whether in this life 
or lives to come, and thereby create conditions for further mer-
itorious action in the future. 43 These are the kinds of action that 
conduce to the development of the qualities of the eightfold path. 
Moreover it is making merit that binds the lay and monastic

--- PAGE 122 ---
102 
The Buddhist Community 
communities together. The traditional 'bases of merit' are gen-
erosity (dana), ethical conduct (sflalsfla), and meditation (bhiivanii). 
In its widest sense 'generosity' is understood as embracing all 
acts performed with a generous and giving spirit, but it also has 
a more specific application: it refers especially to the generosity 
of the laity in supporting the Sangha materially. This first basis 
of merit is thus regarded as of particular concern to the laity. Yet 
as the recipients of the laity's material gifts, members of the Sangha 
have a special responsibility, namely to act as the 'field of merit' 
(pwy,ya-k$elra/puiiiia-kkhetta) for the gifts of the laity. A monk 
is only a fertile and productive field of merit as long as he lives 
according to the Vinaya, behaving as a monk should. One of the 
principles of Buddhist ethics is that the unwholesome or whole-
some quality of one's acts is also affected by their object: to kill 
a human is a weightier unwholesome act than killing a dog; a gift 
to a spiritually accomplished monk is a more powerful whole-
some act than a casual gift to one's neighbour. Of course, pre-
occupation with a recipient's worthiness to receive gifts on the 
part of the donor is liable to be bound up more with the motiva-
tions of greed and delusion than with generosity and wisdom, and 
should thus be avoided as undermining the very act of giving. 
The principle is more important for the one who receives a gift 
than the donor. Thus the onus is on a monk to make himself a 
suitable recipient of the laity's gifts. So long as a monk lives in 
accordance with the basic precepts of the Vinaya, he fulfils his 
obligation to society and renders himself a field of merit for the 
laity. The more fully a nionk lives out the spiritual life, the more 
fruitful a field of merit he becomes for the laity's gifts; thus 
the Sangha consisting of the different kinds of 'noble persons' 
( iirya-pudgala/ariya-puggala) of stream-attainers, once returners, 
never-returners, and arhats-the Buddhist saints-becomes the 
'unsurpassable field of merit'. 
The practice of generosity is, however, also relevant to the 
Sangha. As I suggested above, in becoming a monk one enters 
into a contract with society: in return for material support one 
undertakes to live the spiritual life and to give in return the gift 
of Dharma.44 As a medieval Sinhalese work advises monks:

--- PAGE 123 ---
The Buddhist Community 
103 
'Householders continually provide you with gifts of material 
goods, and in return you must· provide them with the gift of 
Dharma. '45 To an extent just living the life of a monk is a teach-
ing in itself, a gift of Dharma to society. But the Sangha'& gift of 
Dharma is conceived in broader terms. 
As a 'field of merit' the Sangha is under some obligation 
simply to make itself available to the laity. One of the principal 
ways in which the Vinaya brings this about is by requiring monks 
to receive food from the laity every day. Moreover, the Vinaya 
stipulates that the Sangha is normally bound to accept the laity's 
invitations, especially when a building or land is being offered 
to the Sangha, or when a lay follower has built a new house, gets 
married, or dies. In such circumstances the Sangha should send 
some representative. A monk's presence on such occasions has 
the effect of rendering them auspicious; they become opportun-
ities for acts of merit. In the first place a monk can be offered 
food and simply act as a field of merit, but they became, and in 
the countries of Theravada Buddhism continue to be, primary 
occasions for members of the Sangha to offer the· gift of Dharma 
to the laity by preaching the Dharma directly to them and 
chanting 'blessings of protection' (rak#ilparitta) to ward off the 
dangers of accident and disease (see pp. 168-9). It should be noted 
in this context, however, that the Buddhist monk does not tra-
ditionally act as a 'priest' on these occasions: marriages and 
funerals do not involve rituals or 'sacraments' that require the 
participation of an ordained member of the Sangha to consecrate 
them.46 Again blessings chanted by the laity are still effective, 
although, in line with the kind of thinking outlined above, those 
chanted by a group of spiritually accomplished monks are likely 
to be considered more auspicious and potent. 
For a member of the Sangha, the basis of merit that consists 
in ethical conduct centres on his following the prescriptions 
of the Vinaya, and this I have already discussed. What of the 
Sangha's practice of 'meditation'? In the ancient period it is 
tempting to associate serious devotion to the practice of medita-· 
tion with the forest-dwelling tradition, but not all 'forest-dwellers' 
lived in the remote jungle, and (as our story illustrated) it is not

--- PAGE 124 ---
104 
The Buddhist Community 
necessarily the case that the life of monks in the larger well-
endowed city monasteries was lax or especially comfortable; 
some of these monasteries kept up a strict regime of spiritual prac-
ticeY Moreover all monks would have participated alongside 
the laity in the various devotional practices which are associated 
with the 'recollections' (anusmrtilanussati) (seep. 179) and which 
are intended to arouse and cultivate religious emotions that are 
an aspect of 'calm' (samatha) meditation. Essentially such de-
votional practices take the form of worship (pujii) by means of 
prostrations, circumambulation, and making offerings of flowers, 
incense; and lamps to 'relics' (dhiitu) of the Buddha. These may 
be of three kinds: actual physical remains of the body of the Buddha 
(or some other Buddhist saint); articles 'used' by.the Buddha, 
such as his bowl or the Bodhi-tree; and 'reminders', such as images 
of the Buddha.48 Worship of the first two types of relic centred 
principally around the veneration of the stiipas enshrining such 
relics-though images too might enshrine relics-and of the 
Bodhi-trees normally found in each monastery. 
In addition to this kind of worship, monks also seem to have 
participated in other activities along with the laity, commission-
ing and even sometimes making images of the Buddha, and 
other Buddhist monuments. The making of works of art was an 
act of merit, and the ancient inscriptions record that often the 
merit from such acts was dedicated or 'transferred' to parents or 
even to the benefit of all sentient beings.49 
In Chapter 2 I drew attention to a distinCtion made in later Pali 
sources between two main duties: the 'task of spiritual insight' 
(vipassanii-dhura) and the scholarly 'task of books' (gantha-dhura).50 
This distinction indicates that as well as having the responsibility 
of putting the teaching into practice by keeping the Vinaya and 
cultivating meditation, the Sangha has also traditionally been 
responsible for the preservation and study of the scriptures. Some 
Buddhist monasteries have thus also been great centres of learn~ 
ing and scholarship, which has taken in not only the study of 
Buddhist and other systems of philosophical and religious thought; 
but also the study of such disciplines as ·medicine, grammar, liter~ 
ature, astronomy, and astrology.51 This distinction between the

--- PAGE 125 ---
The Buddhist Community 
105 
vocations of practice and scholarship corresponds in part with 
that between forest-dwelling and town-dwelling. But these two 
vocations should not be seen as mutually exclusive in that an 
individual monk might in the course of his monastic career at 
one time spend a period meditating in the forest and at another 
devote himself to scholarship in a large monastery. 
While the very success of the Sangha may have in certain re-
spects compromised the original ascetic ideal of the Buddhist 
monk, it would be a mistake to conclude that it extinguished 
it. The ascetic ideal remained alive and not only continued to 
inspire the life of the Sangha, but continued to be realized. Of 
course the grand monasteries of the 'city-dwelling' (grama-vas in) 
monks patronised by royalty and the wealthy will inevitably leave 
more substantial remains than the abodes of 'forest-dwelling' 
(arm;ya-vasin) monks; the literary activities of scholar (gantha-
dhura) monks leave material evidence in the form of manuals 
and treatises; monks who commission statues or stiipas and 
dedicate the merit to.their deceased parents leave behind inscrip-
tions. But the signs left by anonymous monks following the path 
of meditation ( vipassanti-dhura) in the forest are harder to trace 
and follow. This makes problematic Schopen's assertion that the 
literary and archaeological evidence forces us to the conclusion 
that the ascetic ideal of the forest monk became early in the 
history of Buddhist monasticism merely 'a dead letter'.52 The 
history of Buddhist monasticism can be seen in the light of a 
continued interplay, and sometimes tension, between the town-
dwelling monks and the forest monks, between the scholar 
monks and the practitioners. Although the former may have been 
numerically more significant, the ideal of the forest saint has 
continued to exercise a considerable power over the imaginations 
of both the Sangha and the laity down to the present day, with 
the consequence that there have always been significant attempts 
to put that ideal into practice.53 
I have been talking in broad terms and of the past. What of the 
present actuality? The various studies that have been made of 
Theravada Buddhist practice in Sri Lanka and the countries

--- PAGE 126 ---
ro6 
The Buddhist Community 
of South-East Asia suggest that the general pattern of monastic 
practice and its organization are not entirely dissimilar from the 
historical pattern. Indeed, one of the significant conclusions of 
Richard Gombrich's important study of traditional Buddhism 
in the rural highlands of Sri Lanka in the 1960s was that things 
appeared to have changed rather little over the previous fifteen 
hundred years (although the significance of modernist tenden-
cies among the urban middle classes of Colombo and Bangkok 
should not be underestimated).54 It is dangerous to generalize 
about the reality of Buddhist monasticism in such diverse set-
tings as Sri Lanka, Cambodia, China, Japan, and Tibet. There 
are, nevertheless, features of the practice of Buddhist monastic-
ism in these different settings that amount to a certain continuity 
of tradition, and suggest that the picture that can be drawn on 
the basis of the ancient sources is not tp.erely of archaeological 
and antiquarian interest. Moreover, the basic pattern is similar. 
What we tend to find throughout Buddhist history and through-
out the Buddhist world are a number of grand, important and 
wealthy monasteries (especially in capital cities and large urban 
centres), many more smaller local village monasteries, together 
with a small but always significant group of monks following a 
more secluded way of life in the forest, in caves, or in more 
isolated monasteries. Individual monks may gravitate towards 
one kind of lifestyle or another, but the tendency to view Bud~ 
dhist monastic practice in terms of a stark polarization between 
the meditating forest monk and the town-dwelling scholar 
monk should be tempered with the reminder that these are ideal 
abstractions. In the course of a monastic career in all Buddhist 
traditions monks are likely to move between monasteries and 
ways of life.55 
. While this pattern remains generally relevant one should 
bear in mind that Buddhist monastic practice has developed 
characteristic features in various places at various times. Strict 
adherence to the letter of the Vinaya have been affected both by 
individual temperaments and local circumstances. For example, 
everywhere today there is certain laxity with regard to the rule 
prohibiting the handling of money, although some Theravadin

--- PAGE 127 ---
The Buddhist Community 
107 
forest monks will strictly adhere to it; the practice of not eating 
solid food after midday is more strictly followed in Theravada 
monasticism than in East Asian and Tibetan;56 among the Ch'an 
monks of China it became the norm for monks to farm and grow 
their own food in accordance with the additional code of Pai-
chang and Ta-chih Huai-hai (720-814), laying down that monks 
should perform some productive labour every day;57 the alms 
round, which remains common in South-East Asia but rarer in 
Sri Lanka, became very rare in China where, however, begging 
for money has been more common;58 Chinese monasticism in-
volves a more definite tradition of physical austerities (such as 
the burning of incense cones on one's head at ordination); in the 
context of Japanese Pure Land tradition we find the transforma-
tion of the m(?nastic Sangha into what is effectively a married 
priesthood, while following the Meiji Restoration of 1868 the 
Japanese government decreed that monks should marry;59 in cer-
tain schools of Tibetan Buddhism a tradition of lay teachers and 
practitioners has become more developed and formalized. 
So while it is possible to read the history of the Buddhist Sangha 
as the process of the gradual compromising of its ascetic ideal, 
it is also possible that we should see the compromise as inher-
ent in the characteristically Buddhist vision of the life of the 
homeless wanderer. That is, the tendency to leave society is 
deliberately balanced in the Vinaya by rules which force the monk 
back into a relationship with society. The dynamic of the Buddhist 
monastic way of life is then to be seen as rooted in the inter-
action between a _more settled monastic lifestyle and the ideal 
of the forest-dwelling wanderer. 
The lay community 
As I have already indicated, the support of a lay community 
is essential to the existence of the Buddhist Sangha and thus 
to Buddhism. The Buddhist lay community is traditionally said 
to comprise the two 'assemblies' of male (upiisaka) and female 
lay disciples ( upiisikii). An upiisaka/upiisikii is one who formally 
declares that he or she goes to the Buddha, the Dharma, and

--- PAGE 128 ---
I08 
The Buddhist Community 
Sangha as refuge, and we can see this act as loosely defining an 
individual as a 'Buddhist'. In ancient India the Buddhist Sangha 
probably received considerable support from 'householders~ 
who would not have regarded themselves as formally Buddhist 
upiisakas or upiisikiis; moreover becoming even an upiisaka or 
upiisikii did not necessarily involve an exclusive commitment to 
the Buddhist Sangha.60 Some householders seem to have supported 
. wanderers of various groups-Jains, Aj1vikas, Buddhists-rather 
indiscriminately, with little awareness of their different teachings, 
seeing them all as 'holy men' and as such deserving of some 
support. Other householders and their families clearly developed 
a sense of loyalty and commitment to one particular group ot 
teacher, seeking out their company and requesting them to 
teach. But even this need not have involved exclusive allegiance. 
Thus we are told that when a supporter of the Jain order took 
refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, the Buddha sug-
gested that he should honour the traditions of his family and not 
withdraw all support from the Jains.61 Historically the degree of 
commitment and support offered to the Sangha, the degree of 
interest taken in Buddhist teachings and practice by lay supporters 
must have varied a great deal. Much the same state of affairs 
prevails in Buddhist cultures today. Thus in Theravada practice 
today the term upiisaka or upiisikii implies a commitment to 
and involvement with Buddhist practice beyond what is implied 
by the routine taking of the refuges; in East Asian and Tibetan 
Buddhism formally 'going for refuge' often becomes an expres-
sion of a particular commitment to Buddhist practice. 
As we saw at the close of Chapter 3, the Buddhist path can be 
summed up in terms of the progressive development of generosity 
(dana), good conduct (slla/slla), and meditation (bhiivana). The. 
very act of giving is seen in general as loosening attachment, turn-
ing the mind away from selfish concerns. From the point of view 
of Buddhist psychological theory, generosity is an expression of 
two of the wholesome 'roots' or fundamental motivating forces of 
the mind: non-attachment and friendliness. Many of the stories 
of the Buddha's previous lives (jataka) tell of the Bodhisattva's 
heroic acts of generosity. One of the most famous relates how

--- PAGE 129 ---
The Buddhist Community 
!09 
he offered his flesh to a hungry tigress in order that she might 
have the strength to succour her young.62 Another well-known 
tale tells of Prince Vessantara, who gave away even that which 
is most precious: his children and family. 63 Such heroic acts 
of generosity are expressions of a bodhisattva's practice of 'the 
perfection of generosity', inspiring faith rather than providing 
examples of behaviour to be emulated. In everyday practice, 
generosity is developed by the laity especially by acts of generosity 
directed towards the Buddhist religion itself. This takes the form 
of supporting Dharma by donating money, time, and effort for 
the building of monasteries and temples, and for the general 
support of the Buddhist monastic community, for the copying or 
publication of Buddhist writings. In the countries of Theravada 
Buddhism the term dana refers in particular to the act of giving 
alms directly to Buddhist monks either by offering food at a 
monastery or by placing it directly into the bowls of monks who 
still undertake a traditional alms round. 
Relevant to the cultivation of generosity are two practices 
which are not, however, exclusively lay: the transference of 
merit and the rejoicing in the merit of others. The practice of the 
transference of merit-the giving ofone's-merit-is an ancient 
and extremely widespread and common Buddhist practice. What 
it indicates is that spiritual practice is to be entered into in a · 
generous spirit, not for the sake of acquiring merit exclusively 
for oneself but for the benefit of others too. Indeed, only acts 
undertaken in this spirit are truly meritorious in the first place. 
The rejoicing in the merit of others also indicates that, in under-
taking meritorious acts, it is one's state of mind that is crucial: 
thus if one gives grudgingly, with an ungenerous heart, the aus-
piciousness of one's acts is compromised; on the other hand, if 
one gives nothing at all but is deeply moved by another;s act of 
generosity, then that in itself is an auspicious occasion, an act of 
merit. Thus for many Buddhists it is customary at the end of Bud-
dhist devotions and rituals to offer the merit generated during 
the ceremony for the benefit of other beings-either specific beings 
such as dead relatives, or all sentient beings-and in so doing to 
invite all present (whether they have directly participated in the

--- PAGE 130 ---
IIO 
The Buddhist Community 
ceremony or not, whether they have physical presence or are un-
seen ghosts or gods) also to rejoice in the merit of the ceremony. 
The practice of good conduct takes the form of commitment 
to the five precepts usually recited in conjunction with the three 
refuges: (1) to refrain from harming living creatures, (2) to 
refrain from taking what is not given, (3) to.refrain from sexual 
misconduct, (4) to refrain from false speech, (5) to refrain from 
· intoxicants that cause heedlessness (see pp. 170-2). In addition 
the lay disciple may on special occasions (traditionally the full 
moon 'observance' days) or for longer periods take the eight 
precepts, replacing the third precept (refraining from sexual 
misconduct) with complete sexual abstinence and adding (6) 
refraining from eating after midday, (7) refraining from attend+ 
ing entertainments and using perfumes, etc., and (8) refraining 
from using luxurious beds. In taking the eight precepts the lay 
follower takes on a discipline that approximates to the ten pre-
cepts of novice members of the Sangha. 
As far as the lay cultivation of meditation is concerned, prac-
tice can be seen as centring around the various kinds of offerings 
(pujii) which arouse the religious emotion of faith (sraddhii!saddhii) 
and conduce to the development of the initial stages of calm 
meditation (seep. 179). Pilgrimages to the sites associated with 
the events of the Buddha's life and also to local holy places and 
shrines are another significant feature of lay Buddhist practice, 
as too are festivals of various sorts. These again fit into the gen~ 
eral pattern of arousing religious emotion. The fact that Buddhist 
devotions centred on stU pas, Bodhi~trees and images of the Bud-
dha, the finest and most sacred of which were generally to be 
found in the grounds of monasteries, meant that monasteries were 
also centres of lay religious activity. 
Spiro's schema: apotropaic, kammatic, and 
nibbanic Buddhism 
In an important anthropological study of post-war Burmese Bud~ 
dhist practice, Melford Spiro proposed a distinction between three 
forms of Buddhism: 'apotropaic', 'kammatic', and 'nibbanic';64 
By the first he meant Buddhist activity that is concerned with

--- PAGE 131 ---
The Buddhist Community 
III 
day-to-day 'protection' of a community and individual and im-
proving conditions in the here and now. By the second he meant 
Buddhist practice that is concerned with acquiring 'merit' and 
producing a better rebirth. By the third he meant Buddhist prac-
tice that aims directly at the attainment of nirval).a (Pali nibbana) 
and release from the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth that is 
sarp.sara. The first Spiro regards as basically using 'magical' means 
such as chants, amulets, and so forth; the second involves the 
traditional practice of generosity and ethical conduct; the third 
the practice of meditation. While based on his observation 
of Burmese Buddhism, such a schema can, with certain quali-
fications, be seen as more generally relevant. As a number of 
writers have pointed out, Spiro, although recognizing that these 
three complexes are not entirely distinct, nevertheless has a tend-
ency to present them as such. Moreover, he also tends to see their 
goals as incompatible and even contradictory; only the goal of 
nirval).a represents a truly Buddhist goal, while apotropaic and 
kammatic Buddhist practice represent a corruption and com-
promise respectively of the true and original ideal of Buddhism. 
Yet, as we shall see, the use of protective chants is certainly ancient 
(seep. 168) and the appeal to powerful beings for short-term help 
and protection is not necessarily in conflict with the principles of 
Buddhism; what is, is the notion that an all-powerful being might 
bring one ultimate salvation. Equally the association of the prac-
tice of meditation with certain extraordinary 'magical' powers is 
normative in the ancient texts (pp. 185-6); their practice is not 
generally condemned, only their display by monks for money or 
to win converts. Moreover, the practice of at least some of what 
Spiro identifies as 'apotropaic' Buddhism can be seen as part of 
creating an environment of protection conducive to the practice 
of calm meditation. Again, as we shall see (p. 179), there is no 
sharp divide between certain merit making activities of piljii and 
certain of the traditional subjects of calm meditation. Finally one 
should avoid the conclusion that what Spiro calls apotropaic and 
kammatic Buddhism are the strict preserve of the layman and 
nibbanic Buddhism the preserve of the monk. In practice many, 
perhaps most, monks are equally concerned with apotropaic and 
kammatic Buddhism and a few lay followers with nibbanic.

--- PAGE 132 ---
5 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
The Thrice-Thousandfold World 
Of space and time: world-systems 
In Chapter 3 we saw how the Buddha's teaching seeks to address 
the problem of du/:tkha or 'suffering'. For Buddhist thought; 
whatever the circumstances and conditions of existence-good 
or bad-they are always ultimately changeable and unreliable; 
and hence du/:tkha. Complete understanding of the first noble truth 
is said to consist in the complete knowledge of the nature o~ 
du/:tkha. One of the preoccupations of Buddhist theory, then; is 
the exhaustive analysis of all possible conditions and circumstances 
of existence. Buddhist thought approaches the analysis of du/:tkhOj 
from two different angles, one cosmological and the other psyl 
chological. That is, it asks two different but, in the Buddhist 
view of things, fundamentally related questions. First, what are 
the possible circumstances a being can be born, exist, and die in~ 
And second, what are the. possible states of mind a being migM, 
experience? The complete Buddhist answer to these question$; 
is classically expressed in the Abhidharma systems. In this chap:-!' 
ter I want to look primarily at the first question, though, as I hav~, 
just suggested, this cannot be entirely separated from the sec~ 
ond. To begin with, however, I shall return to certain of thos~ 
questions raised by the monk Maluti.kyaputta. 
As we have seen, among the questions he demanded that the;: 
Buddha answer were whether or not the universe was eternaJ:i 
and whether or notit was finite. The Buddha refused to give cat~ 
egorical answers, but that does not mean that he had nothing tO) 
say on the subjects raised by these questions. I have already intro::;~ 
duced the bare concept of sm:p.sara or the round of rebirth. Butj 
when did it all begin? How long, according to Buddhist thinking)

--- PAGE 133 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
on the matter, have you and I together with other beings been 
wandering from birth to death through saq1sara? 
In response to just this question the Buddha is said to have 
declared that saq1sara's beginning was inconceivable and that its 
starting point could not be indicated; he went on to ask the group 
of monks he was addressing which they thought was greater, the 
mother's milk they had drunk in the course of their long jour-
ney through saq1sara or the water in the four great oceans. 'Cer-
tainly the mother's milk drunk by you is greater,' they were told. 1 
We have, it seems, been wandering in saq1sara for aeons. But 
how long is an aeon? When asked this question, the Buddha 
refused to answer in terms of numbers of years, or hundreds or 
even thousands of years; instead he gave a simile: 
Suppose there was a great mountain of rock, seven miles across and seven 
miles high, a solid mass without any cracks. At the end of every hun-
dred years a man might brush it just once with a fine Benares cloth. 
That great mountain of rock would decay and come to an end sooner 
than ever the aeon. So long is an aeon. And of aeons of this length not 
just one has passed, not just a hundred, not just a thousand, not just a 
hundred thousand.2 
If this is how the age of the universe is to be conceived, 
what of its spatial extent? On another occasion the Buddha told 
a householder, Kevaddha, of a monk who wished to discover just 
where the four elements of earth, water, fire, and wind ceased 
completely.3 We can understand this as wishing to discover the 
limits of the physical universe. The monk was a master of medi-
tation (samiidhi) and so was able to attain a state of concentra-
tion in which he was able to visit the realms of various devas or 
'gods' and put his question to them. First he approached the gods 
of the Four Kings; they were unable to answer his question but 
directed him to yet higher gods who in turn passed him on to 
still higher gods: the gods of the Thirty-Three, the Yama gods, 
the Contented gods, the gods who Delight in Creation, the Mas-
ters of the Creations of Others, the gods of Brahma. None could 
answer his question. Finally he approached Great Brahma him-
self, who repeatedly answered only that he was Great Brahma,

--- PAGE 134 ---
II4 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
'mighty, unconquerable, all-seeing, master, lord, maker, creator, 
overseer, controller, father of all who are and will be'. In the face 
of the monk's persistence, Great .Brahma eventually took him 
aside and confessed that he too did not know where the elements 
cease and suggested that the monk return to the Buddha and put 
the question to him. The Buddha's answer, we are told, was that 
where the four elements cease completely is in the conscious-
ness that knows nirval)a.4 
This story from the Kevaddha Sutta ('Discourse to Kevaddha') 
indicates how in the traditional Buddhist view of things the uni-
verse is not to be thought of as just inhabited by the beings that 
make up the human and animal world but also by various classes 
of deva or 'god' that form a hierarchy of increasing subtlety and 
refinement. Thus the world comprises 'its gods, its Mara and 
Brahma, this generation with its ascetics and brahmins, with its 
princes and peoples'.5 Moreover, elsewhere, the earliest texts 
inform us that there is not just one such world with its gods, its 
Mara and Brahma; in fact the universe as a whole comprises 
vast numbers of 'world~spheres' or 'world-systems' ( cakra-viida/ 
cakka-vii!a) each with its gods, its Mara and Brahma. Clust~r~ 
of a thousand 'world-spheres' may be ruled over by yet higher 
gods, called Great Brahmas, but it would be wrong to conclude 
that there is any one or final overarching Great Brahma-God 
the· Creator. It may be that beings come to take a particular 
Great Brahma as creator of the world, and a Great Brahma may 
himself even form the idea that he is creator, but this is just the: 
result of delusion on the part of both parties. In fact the universe: 
recedes ever upwards with one class of Great Brahma being; 
surpassed by a further, higher class of Great Brahma.6 
So how many world-systems are there in all? The early Nikaya/ 
Agama texts sometimes talk in terms of 'the thousandfold world" 
system', 'the twice-thousandfold world-system', and 'the thrice!J 
thousandfold world-system'. According to Vasubandhu, the las(: 
of these embraces a total of r,ooo,ooo,ooo world-systems, accorcllt 
ing to Buddhaghosa, r,ooo,ooo,ooo,ooo.7 But even such a vast 
number cannot define the full extent of the universe; it is merely, 
the highest explicit number of world-systems reported in th~! 
tradition. There is no spatial limit to the extent of world-systems:~

--- PAGE 135 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
II5 
Buddhaghosa tells us in the Atthasiilinz ('Providing the Mean-
ing') that if four Great Brahmas from the realm of the Supreme 
Gods were to set off in the four directions at a speed which allowed 
them to traverse a hundred thousand world-systems in the time 
it takes a swift arrow to pass over the· shadow of a palm 'tree, 
they would reach nirval).a without ever finding the limit of world-
systems.8 Great Brahmas of the realm of the Supreme Gods are 
beings in their last existence who are certain of reaching final 
nirval).a at the end of their lives, which last r6,ooo aeons. Bearing 
in mind the simile for the length of an aeon, I leave it to the reader 
to ponder how many hundreds of thousands of world-systems 
these GreatBrahmas might traverse in r6,ooo aeon~. 
The earliest strata of Buddhist writings, the Nikayas/Agamas, 
do not provide a systematic account of the Buddhist under-
standing of the nature of the cosmos, but they do contain many 
details and principles that are systematized into a coherent 
whole by the Abhidharma traditions of Buddhist thought. Two 
great Abhidharma traditions have come down to us, that of 
the Theravadins, which has shaped the outlook of Buddhism in 
Sri Lanka and South-East Asia, and that of the Sarvastivadins, 
whose perspective on many points has passed into Chinese and 
Tibetan Buddhism. The elaborate cosmological systems detailed 
in these two Abhidharmas are, however, substantially the same, 
differing only occasionally on minor points of detail. This elab-
orate and detailed cosmology is thus to be regarded as form-
ing an important and significant part of the common Buddhist 
heritage. Moreover, it is not to be regarded as only of quaint 
and historical interest; the world-view contained in this traditional 
cosmology still exerts considerable influence over the outlook 
of ordinary Buddhists in traditional Buddhist societies. In the 
one or two instances in what follows where the Sarvastivadin and 
Theravadin traditions differ, I have, as a matter of convenience, 
presented what is handed down in the Theravadin texts. 
According to the developed cosmology of the Abhidharma, 
sa111sara embraces thirty-one levels or realms of existence-that 
is, there are thirty-one basic classes of beings comprising the round 
of rebirth, and any being may be born at any one of these levels 
(see Table 2). Indeed, one should rather say that every being has

--- PAGE 136 ---
TABLE 2. The thirty-one realms of existence according to the Pali sources 
WORLD 
(dhiitu) 
FORMLESS 
WORLD 
(arilpa-dhiitu) 
WORLD OF 
PURE FORM 
(rilpa-dhiitu) 
1l 
destruction 
by wind 
COSMOLOGY 
REALM (bhiimi) 
Neither Consciousness nor 
Unconsciousness 
( nevasaiiiiiiniisaiifu'iyatana) 
Nothingness 
( akiiicaiiiidyatana) 
Infinite Consciousness 
( viiiiiiiiJaiicdyatana) 
Infinite Space 
( iikiisdnaiicayatana) 
The Supreme (akani{!ha) 
The Clear-sighted (sudassin) 
The Lovely (sudassa) 
The Serene (atappa) 
The Durable (aviha) 
Unconscious Beings 
( asaiiiia-satta) 
Great Reward ( vehapplzala) 
Complete Beauty 
(subha-kiiJha) 
Boundless Beauty 
(appamiiiJa-subha) 
L' 
PURE 
ABODES 
(suddhaviisa) 
PSYCHOLOGY 
LIFE SPAN 
KARMA 
(leading to rebirth in corresponding realm) 
84,000 aeons 
6o,ooo aeons 
40,000 aeons 
2o,ooo aeons 
Formless 
attainments 
(arilpa-samiipatti) 
I6,ooo aeons l 
Path of non-return 
8,ooo aeons 
(aniigiimi-magga) 
4,000 aeons or transcendent 
2,ooo aeons 4th jhiina 
r Fourth jhiina 
r,ooo aeons 
sao aeons 
asaiiiia-samiipatti 
sao aeons Ordinary 4th jhiina 
64 aeons 
32 aeons r Third jhiina 
FORMLESS-
SPHERE 
MIND 
(arilpiivacara) 
FORM-
SPHERE 
MIND 
(rupavacara)

--- PAGE 137 ---
WORLD OF 
THE FIVE 
SENSES 
(kiima-dhiitu) 
11 
destruction 
by water 
11 
destruction 
by fire 
Streaming Radiance 
( iibhassara) 
Boundless Radiance 
(appamii(liibha) 
Limited Radiance 
(parittiibha) 
Great Brahmii 
(mahiibrahmii) 
Brahmii's Ministers 
(brahma-purohita) 
Brahmii's Retinue 
(brahma-piirisajja) 
The Masters of the 
Creations of Others 
(paranimmita-vasavattin) 
Those who Delight in 
Creation (nimmii(Ul-ratin) 
The Contented (tusita) 
The Yama Gods (yiima) 
The Thirty-Three Gods 
( tiivatil[lsa) 
The Gods of the Four Kings 
( ciitummahiiriijika} 
Human Beings (manussa) 
Jealous Gods ( asura) 
Hungry Ghosts (petti-visaya) 
Animals (tiracchiinayoni) 
Hell Beings (niraya) 
HAPPY 
DESTINIES 
(sugati) 
DESCENTS 
(apiiya) 
8 aeons1 
4 aeons Second jhiina 
2 aeons 
r aeon) 
112 aeon First jhiina 
113 aeon 
r28,ooo divine years 
64,000 divine years t ro courses of wholesome karma 
r6,ooo d~v~ne years motivated by non-.attachment, 
8,ooo diVIne years friendliness and Wisdom 
2,ooo divine years 
soo divine years 
variable 
unspecified ) 
ifi d 
ro courses of unwholesome karma 
unsece 
. 
.-
p .fi· d motivated by attachment, averswn 
unspec1 e 
. 
unspecified and delusiOn 
Note: Table 2 is based on Vibhariga 422-6, Visuddhimagga vii. 40-4, xiii. 29-65; Abhidhammattha-sarigaha 22-4. 
SENSE-
SPHERE 
MIND 
( kiimiivacara)

--- PAGE 138 ---
u8 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
during the course of his or her wandering through sarpsara at; 
some time or another been born in every one of these conditions' 
apart, that is, from five realms known as 'the Pure Abodes'; beings 
born in these realms, such as the Great Brahmas of the realm of 
the Supreme Gods just mentioned, have reached a condition in 
which they inevitably attain nirval)a and so escape the round of 
rebirth. The most basic division of the thirty-one realms is three-. 
fold. First there is the world of the five senses (kiima-dhiitu, 
-loka), which comprises eleven realms ranging from the realms' 
of hell and 'the hungry ghosts', through the realms of animals, 
jealous gods, and human beings, to the six realms of the lower. 
gods; the common characteristic of beings in all these realms is' 
that they are all endowed with consciousness and five physical 
senses. Above this there is 'the world of pure form' (rupa-dhiituf: 
-loka) which consists of sixteen realms (the highest of which' 
are the Pure Abodes just mentioned) occupied by various higher 
gods collectively known as Brahmas; these refined beings have 
consciousness but only two senses-sight and hearing. Finally there 
are the four realms of 'the formless world' (arupa-dhiitu, -loka) 
occupied by a further class of Brahmas who have only con-. 
sciousness. These thirty-one realms, from bottom to top, thus reflect 
a basic movement from gross to subtle. 
It is the lower levels of the universe, that is the world of the 
five senses, that arrange themselves into the various distinct 
'world-spheres' or cakra-viirjas. At the centre of a cakra-viirja, 
is the great world mountain, Meru or Sineru. This is surrounded( 
by seven concentric rings of mountains and seas. Beyond thes~J 
mountains, in the four cardinal directions, are four continents;y 
The southern continent, J ambudvipa or 'the continent of the rose.i:J 
apple tree', is the continent inhabited by ordinary human beings;: 
the southern part, below the towering abode of snows (himalaya) 
is effectively India, the land where buddhas arise. In the spaces 
between world-spheres and below are various hells, while in the 
shadow of the slopes of Mount Meru dwell the jealous gods called 
Asuras, expelled from the heaven of the Thirty-Three by its king 
Sakra (Pali Sakka). On the slopes of Mount Meru itself and 
rising above its peak are the six realms inhabited by the gods of

--- PAGE 139 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
the sense-sphere. A Great Brahma of the lower realms of pure 
form may rule over a thousand such world-spheres, while Brahmas 
of the higher realms of the form-sphere are said to rule over a 
hundred thousand. 
What determines in which realm a being is born? The short 
answer is karma (Pali kamma): a being's intentional 'actions' 
of body, speech, and mind-whatever is done, said, or even just 
thought with definite intention or volition. In general, though with 
some qualification, rebirth in the lower realms is considered to 
be the result of relatively unwholesome (akusala!akusala), or 
bad (papa) karma, while rebirth in the higher realms the result 
of relatively wholesome (kusalalkusala), or good (pw:zya!puiiiia) 
karma. Correspondingly, the lower the realm, the more unpleas-
ant and unhappy one's condition; the higher the realm the more 
pleasant, happy, and refined one's condition. One should note, 
however, that this hierarchy does not constitute a simple ladder 
which one, as it were, climbs, passing out at the top into nirval).a. 
In fact, nirval).a may be obtained from any of the realms from 
the human to the highest of the Pure Abodes and the four form-
less realms, but not from the four lowest realms. Yet, rather than 
attaining nirval).a, beings generally rise and fall, and fall and rise 
through the various realms, now experiencing unhappiness, now 
experiencing happiness. This precisely is the nature of sa111sara: 
wandering from life to life with no partiCular direction or purpose. 
Cosmology and psychology: macrocosm and microcosm 
It is easy to conclude that the detailed enumeration of realms is 
the result of an overactive scholastic imagination and is thus of 
no practical interest, but to begin to understand the system we 
must turn to the subtle and exact psychological insights of the 
Abhidharma understanding of consciousness and the processes 
governing its occurrence. 
The key to understanding the Buddhist cosmological scheme 
lies in the principle of the equivalence of cosmology and psychology. 
I mean by this that in the traditional understanding the various 
realms of existence relate rather closely to certain commonly (and

--- PAGE 140 ---
120 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
not so commonly) experienced states of mind. In fact Buddhist 
cosmology is at once a map of different realms of existence and 
a description of all possible experiences. This can be appreciated 
by considering more fully the Buddhist understanding of the nature 
of karma. At root karma or 'action' is considered a mental act 
or intention; it is an aspect of our mental life: 'It is "intention'' 
that I call karma; having formed the intention, one performs acts 
(karma) by body, speech and mind. '9 Thus acts of body and speech 
are driven by an underlying intention or will (cetanii) and they 
are unwholesome or wholesome because they are motivated 
by unwholesome or wholesome intentions. Acts of body and speech 
are, then, the end products of particular kinds of mentality. At 
the same time karma can exist as a simple 'act of will', a force~' 
ful mental intention or volition that does not lead to an act of 
body or speech. 
The nature of bad action is usually illustrated by reference to 
a list of the ten courses of unwholesome action (karma/kamma~ 
patha) which consist of three bodily courses of action (taking life) 
taking what is not given, sexual misconduct), four vocal courses 
of action (lying, divisive speech, hurtful speech, frivolous speech)\ 
and three mental courses of action (covetousness, ill-will, wrong 
view).10 
In the commentarialliterature the notion of a course of action 
is explained with reference to an action's being performed with 
full intention and full awareness of what one is doing. Thus in 
order for the unwholesome course of action of killing to have 
occurred, five conditions must have been fulfilled: there must be 
a living creature, one must know the creature is living, one must 
intend to kill the creature, one must perform the necessary action, 
and finally the creature must actually die.11 The nature of good 
action is similarly summed up in terms of the ten courses of whole-
some action which consist in refraining from the seven courses 
of unwholesome bodily and vocal action and, for the mental courses 
of action, desirelessness, kindness, and right view. 
Essentially the psychological states that motivate the ten un-
wholesome courses of action-strong greed, hatred, and delusion 
-lead to rebirth in the unhappy destinies or 'descents': in a hell

--- PAGE 141 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
121 
realm, as a hungry ghost, an animal, or a jealous god. In fact 
rather a precise correlation exists here: dominated by greed one 
becomes a hungry ghost, a class of beings ever discontent and 
anguished because of being unable to satisfy their greed; domin-
ated by hatred one enters one of the hell realms where one 
suffers terrible pain; dominated by ignorance one becomes an 
animal ruled by the instincts of food and reproduction.12 On 
the other hand the psychological states that give rise to the ten 
wholesome courses of action-desirelessness, friendliness, and 
wisdom-lead to rebirth in the happy realms: as a human being 
or in one of the six realms of the gods immediately above the 
human realm where beings enjoy increasingly happy and care-
free lives. Wholesome action can also be characterized by way 
of the triad of terms that are often used to sum up the practice 
of the Buddhist path: generosity (dana), ethical conduct (fila!sfla ), 
and meditation (bhavana). The first two essentially embrace con-
duct already covered by the ten wholesome courses of action; 
the third term takes us into rather different territory and refers 
to the cultivation of various spiritual exercises of contemplation 
and meditation in order to develop states of deep peace and con-
centr~tion (samatha/samatha, samiidhi, dhyiina/jhana) and insight 
and wisdom (vipasyanalvipassanii, prajiia/paiiiia). As result of 
attaining these states to different degrees one is reborn as a Brahma 
in one of the realms of pure form; essentially such beings are thus 
conceived of as existing absorbed in states of meditation.D 
In their analysis of consciousness into a hierarchy of various 
classes the Abhidharma systematizations further bring out the 
way in which cosmology is essentially a reflection of psychology and 
vice versa. The basic structure of this hierarchy of conscious-
ness parallels quite explicitly the basic structure of the cosmos. 
Irrespective of which cosmological realm a being inhabits, its state 
of mind might, at different times, be classified as belonging either 
to the sense-sphere (kamavacara), the form-sphere (rupavacara), 
or the formless-sphere (arupavacara), corresponding to the way 
in which beings exist either in the sense-world (kama-loka), the 
form world (riipa-loka), or formless world (ariipa-loka). More-
over, in detailing the types of consciousness or states of mind

--- PAGE 142 ---
I22 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
that beings reborn in the various realms are able to experience. 
(or have access to), the Abhidharma provides a further indica-
tion of the parallelism between the psychological order and the 
cosmological order.14 Beings in the lowest realms (hell, animal, 
hungry ghosts, Asuras) can only experience sense-sphere con-
sciousness; beings in the human realm and the heavens of the 
sense-sphere characteristically experience sense-sphere conscious7 
ness but can in special circumstances (i.e. when attaining dhyiina} 
experience form and formless-sphere consciousness; the basis of 
existence in the form and formless worlds is form and formless• 
sphere consciousness respectively, but the beings born there also 
experience certain forms of both wholesome and unwholesome. 
sense-sphere consciousness, but not those associated with hatred 
and unpleasant feeling. The logic governing this arrangement is 
as follows. A being in one of the lower realms must experience 
at least a modicum of wholesome consciousness, for otherwis.e 
h~ or she would be stuck there forever, never able to generate. 
the wholesome karma necessary to bring about rebirth in a 
higher realm. Similarly beings in the Brahma worlds must expe. 
rience some unwholesome consciousness, otherwise they would 
be for ever reborn in these blissful realms where no unpleasan:t 
bodily or mental feeling ever occurs, escaping dul:zkha perma, 
nently rather than only temporarily (albeit for an aeon or two): 
Finally, beings such as humans who are in the middle are evenly 
poised; they may experience the most unwholesome kinds of con, 
sciousness or they may experience the most wholesome-they 
may go right to the bottom or right to the top. 
Thus in sum one can say that Buddhist cosmology takes the 
form of a hierarchy of certain realms of existence related to cer-
tain kinds of mentality. The dynamics of the system viewed from. 
the perspective of the human realm might be stated along the 
following lines. When a human being experien~es unpleasant 
mental states, such as aversion, hatred, or depression, then there 
is a sense in which that being can be said to be experiencing some~ 
thing of what it is like to exist in a hell realm-in other words, 
he makes a brief visit to the hell realms; when those unpieasanl 
states pass (as they inevitably will), the being will return to the

--- PAGE 143 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
123 
mental state natural to human beings-a mental state which is 
understood to be essentially wholesome 11nd pleasant. But if 
those states of aversion, hatred, and depression become the 
habitual states of mind for that being, the danger is that he will 
end up visiting the hell realms for rather longer than he 'might 
have envisaged-in other words, when the wholesome conditions 
that placed him in the human realm are exhausted and he dies, 
he might find himself not just visiting hell but being reborn there. 
Similarly, if a human being should have a somewhat intense 
experience of such happy states of mind as friendliness and 
generosity, then that is to experience briefly how it feels to be 
a deva in one of the various heaven realms immediately above 
the human realm; once more, if those states of mind become 
habitual and second nature to that being, he is likely to be 
reborn among those devas. If a being experiences the even more 
subtle and refined states of mind associated with the various 
levels of meditation-the so-called dhyiinas-he temporarily visits 
the Brahma worlds; if he becomes a master of dhyiina, he can be 
reborn as a Brahma. 
Such is a world-system, but world-systems are not static; they 
themselves go through vast cycles of expansion and contrac-
tion across the vast aeons of time. According to the Abhidharma 
and commentarial traditions of both the Theravadins and 
Sarvastivadins, world-systems contract in great clusters (Bud-
dhaghosa in his Visuddhimagga speaks of a billion world-systems 
contracting at a time); and when they contract, they contract 
from the bottom upwards, the lower realms of world-systems 
disappearing first.l5 An ancient passage introduces this process 
of expansion and contraction as follows: 
Now there comes a time when after a long period of time this world 
contracts. When the world contracts beings are for the most part born 
in the realm of Radiance. There they exist made of mind, feeding on 
joy, self-luminous, moving through the air, constantly beautiful; thus they 
remain for a long, long time.16 
According to both traditions the passage quoted, referring as it 
does to the rebirth of beings in the realm of Radiance (a realm

--- PAGE 144 ---
124 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
corresponding in the psychological hierarchy to the level of the 
second dhyiina) at the time of worldccontraction, describes this 
contraction as the result of destruction by fire. This fire starts in 
the lower realms of the sense-sphere and, having burnt up these, 
it invades the formrealms; but, having burnt up the realms cor-
responding to the first dhyiina, it stops. The realms correspondmg 
to the second, third, and fourth dhyiinas and the four formless 
realms are thus spared the destruction. But destruction by fire 
is not the only kind of destruction, merely the most frequent-
water and wind also wreak their havoc. When the destruction is 
by water, the three realms corresponding to the second dhyiina 
are included in the general destruction. The destruction by wind 
invades and destroys even the realms corresponding to the third 
dhyiina. Only the seven realms corresponding to the fourth 
dhyiina and the four formless realms are never subject to this 
universal destruction. 
What becomes of the beings that occupy the lower realms when 
fire, water, and wind wreak their destruction? They cannot just 
disappear from the round of rebirth, for the only way to achieve 
that is to gain awakening as buddhas and arhats do. So these beings 
must go somewhere. Opinions differ as to what precisely hap-
pens to them. Some say that all the beings occupying the lower 
realms should be understood as being reborn in those higher 
Brahma worlds that escape the destruction-this is/true even of 
the beings in the lowest hell realms. But rebirth in the Brahma 
worlds can only be gained as the result of the appropriate karma, 
namely the achievement of dhyiina. Such states of peace and 
calm are impossible in the lower realms, but Buddhaghosa 
explains that there is no being in Sail!Sara that has not at some 
tirrie or other performed the karma necessary for rebirth in the 
happy realms of the sense-sphere. Thus even beings born in 
hell realms as the result of the severest unwholesome karma will 
always have a latent good karma that can come to fruition at 
the time of the pending contraction of the world-system. Once 
reborn in a sense-sphere heaven, they subsequently cultivate 
the dhyiina leading to rebirth in the Brahma-worlds. On this view 
all beings must at some time have dwelt in the Brahma-realms

--- PAGE 145 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
125 
corresponding to the second, third, and fourth dhyiinas, and 
periodically-though the periods may be of inconceivable dura-
tion-all beings return to these realms. But according to others, 
such as Vasubandhu and Dhammapala, at the time of, destruc-
tion hell beings whose unwholesome karma is not exhausted are 
reborn in a world-system not in the process of contraction. 
Such mythic accounts may seem fantastic, yet embedded within 
them are important points of Buddhist thinking, such as, for 
example, the suggestion that all beings have the latent potential 
to attain-and indeed have some distant knowledge and experi-
ence of-the condition of the fourth dhyiina. The condition of 
the mind in the fourth dhyiina is, according to the classical the-
ory of the stages of the Buddhist path, pivotal to the attainment 
of the awakening knowledge itself. The fourth dhyiina represents 
a particular clear and open state of mind in which the awakening 
knowledge can arise. The suggestion that every being in smp.sara 
in some sense already knows such a state introduces a theme that 
becomes particularly significant in certain strands of Indian 
Mahayana Buddhist thought, and which is especially emphasized 
in Japanese Zen. I am referring to the notion of tathiigata-garbha 
or the inherent 'Buddha-nature' of all beings, about which I shall 
say more in Chapter g. 
, 
In a certain sense the elaborate and fantastic traditional cos-
mology of Buddhism is nothing more than a full account of all 
possible experience: this is the world, the universe in its entirety. 
It may not be circumscribed spatially and temporally but there 
is no possible manner of being or conceivable experience that is 
not included here. Wherever one goes, whatever one experiences, 
it is encompassed by this map of sa:rp.sara. For Buddhist the-
ory the cosmological scheme defines the round of rebirth-the 
uncertain, unstable, changing conditioned world of time and 
space-in its entirety. Thus just as in day-to-day experience one 
fails to find any physical or mental condition that is not change-
able, that can give permanent satisfaction arid happiness, so, even 
if one is reborn in the condition of a Brahma living 84,000 aeons, 
the calm and peaceful condition of one's existence is not ulti-
mately lasting or secure. Just as our ordinary happinesses are in

--- PAGE 146 ---
126 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
this sense du/:tkha, so too are the lives of the Brahmas even though 
they experience no physical or mental pain. 
It is a curious fact of the developed cosmological scheme 
that it comprises just thirty-one realms. There is some reason for 
thinking that the number thirty-two connotes completion and 
fulfilment in Buddhist thought: the body is described as con-
sisting of thirty-two parts; the Great Man has a body with thirty-
two marks. Yet sa111sara has only thirty-one realms. What is 
missing is nirval).a. But then nirval).a is precisely not a state or 
condition that can be defined spatially or temporally; one can-
not be reborn in nirval).a, nor can one come to nirval).a however 
far or long one journeys: 
That the end of the world where one is not born, does not age, does not 
die, does not pass away, does not reappear is to be known, seen or reached 
by travelling-that I do not say ... And yet I do not say that one makes 
an end of suffering without reaching the end of the world. Rather in 
this fathom-long body, with its perceptions and mind, I declare the world, 
the arising of the world, the ceasing of the world, ·and the way leading 
to the ceasing of the worldP 
The Buddhist cosmological account represents the complete 
description of the conditioned world-the whirling circle ( vatta) 
of sa111sara. This is du/:tkha on the macrocosmic scale. One's per-
sonal day-to-day experiences, on the other hand, are du/:tkha on 
the microcosmic scale. in short, what we experience from day 
to day is a microcosm of the cosmos at large. As we shall see in 
Chapter 6, for Buddhist thought the law that governs the workings 
of both the microcosm of individual experience from moment 
to moment and also the birth and death of beings across vast aeons 
is .one and the same: 'dependent arising' (pratitya samutpiida/ 
paticca-samuppiida ). 
Cosmology, folk religion, and modern science 
I have suggested that the elaborate Buddhist cosmological schema 
that we have been considering is in part to be understood by 
reference to Buddhist psychology. The equivalence between

--- PAGE 147 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
127 
psychology and cosmology is old and to be regarded as intrinsic 
to the system and not a stratagem employed by Buddhist mod-
ernist apologetics in order to render a primitive, pre-modern 
understanding of the world palatable to contemporary tastes. Yet 
this should not be taken as meaning that Buddhist cosmological 
descriptions were traditionally read simply as accounts of mental 
states in symbolic and imaginative language. Quite clearly they 
were not, nor are they so read in traditional Buddhist cultures 
today. For many Buddhists, in the present as in the past, the beings 
and realms described in the cosmology are as 'real' as the Queen 
of England and Buckingham Palace. Yet equally clearly there 
can be intellectually more nai:Ve and more sophisticated ways 
of understanding the Buddhist cosmological world-view. But 
again we should avoid coming to the conclusion that somehow 
the psychological interpretation represents the 'real' Buddhist 
understanding, whereas a literal understanding feeds the pop-
ular imagination and, as such, must be suffered by sophisticated 
intellectuals. What we have to do with here is a question of a dif-
ferent conception of the nature of 'reality': a conception that allows 
what we would call a psychological and symbolic interpretation 
to coexist with a literal interpretation. Whatever ultimate inter-
pretation one puts on traditional Buddhist cosmology, it remains 
a flexible ·framework within which to make sense of a rich spec-
trum of experience. 
Nevertheless at another practical level this cosmologicai frame-
work has allowed Buddhism to accommodate and take under 
its wing certain aspects of what might be called, for want of a 
better term, 'folk religion'. This process of accommodation is as 
old as Buddhism itself-perhaps older. Many of the gods and dif-
ferent kinds of being found in the ancient cosmology have been 
absorbed into the Buddhist scheme of things from pre-existing 
folk and religious traditions. In precisely the same way they have 
been absorbed and adapted by Jain and Brahmanical tradition. 
Thus figures such as Brahma and Sakra or Indra, such classes of 
being as Asuras, Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Y ak~as and 
Yak~inis, Rak~asas (types of demon and nymph), Nagas (myth-
ical serpents), Garu<;las (mythical birds), and other classes of minor

--- PAGE 148 ---
!28 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
deities dwelling in forests, groves, and trees-all these form part 
of a vast Indian mythical and folk-religious heritage that the vari-
ous Indian traditions draw upon. 
Each tradition preserves slightly different accounts of these 
beings; in each tradition they are adapted and reinterpreted, tak~ 
ing on slightly different characters· and acquiring particular asso-
ciations, while still retaining certain common features. In the fully 
developed Buddhist cosmology, these sorts of beings are gener-
ally associated with the gods of the lower sense-sphere heavens. 
But their presence in the Buddhist scheme of things in part 
reflects a simple fact of the cultural milieu in which Buddhism 
grew. We are concerned here with something which is in prin-
ciple as relevant to Indian religion today as it was 2,000 years 
ago. Then as now most people lived in a world alive with fairies, 
demons, goblins, ghosts, nymphs, dragons, angels, as well as vari-
ous gods. Such beings are as real to people's experience as any 
human being. For the most part in the context of the practice of 
contemporary Hinduism, the interaction and dealings with such 
beings concerns matters of day-to-day living rather than ques-
tions of the ultimate cessation of suffering. Thus such beings 
are seen as causing various kinds of disease by 'possessing' one; 
or they may be able to grant fulfilment of certain aspirations; 
help with a harvest or passing an exam; the acknowledgement 
of these beings assists the smooth running of day-to-day matters 
and grants a measure of protection against calamity .18 
The various cultures beyond India where Buddhism has estab-
lished itself over the last 2,500 years have been very similar to 
India herself in this respect. The existence of various kinds of 
beings has been taken for granted, as has the fact that they may 
be able to assist in limited ways with everyday human affairs. 
In this manner Buddhism has been able to accommodate and 
coexist with a considerable range of local and indigenous reli-
gious practice wherever it has established itself. Thus the Bud-
dhists of Sri Lanka visit the shrines of various local and Hindu 
gods, the Buddhists of Burma have various rites associated 
with a class of being known as nats, while the. Thais seek the 
assistance of the phiis; Japanese Buddhists worship at the Shinto

--- PAGE 149 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
129 
shrines of the kami; Tibetan Buddhists acknowledge the exist-
ence of various kinds of spirit and god, invoking the presence 
of some as 'protectors of Dharma' (chos skyong). 19 Such beha-
viour troubled some early Western observers of the practice of 
Buddhism in its traditional cultures and led them to conclude that 
the people who participated in these practices were not 'true' 
Buddhists. This conclusion was based in part on a failure to appre-
ciate the nature of the relationship between this kind of practice 
and the cultivation of the Buddhist path; in part on an image of 
Buddhism artificially constructed from a selective reading of early 
Buddhist texts; and in part on an exclusivist conception of the 
nature of 'a religion' -one is either a Hindu or a Buddhist, one 
cannot be both-which is inappropriate to the Asian context. 
It has sometimes been claimed that the belief that such beings 
can answer one's pleas for assistance flies in the face of the 
Buddhist theory of karma: expecting a god to provide the cure 
for an illness must be inconsistent with the belief that falling 
ill is the inevitable result of one's own previous unwholesome 
actions.20 But this is to misunderstand the Buddhist theory of ac-
tion and result, which is not a species of determinism. From the 
Buddhist perspective certain experiences in life are indeed the 
results of previous actions; but our responses to those experiences, 
whether wished for or unwished for, are not predetermined but 
represent new actions which in time bear their own fruit in the 
future. The Buddhist understanding of individual responsibility 
does not mean that we should never seek or expect another's 
assistance in order to better cope with the troubles of life. The 
belief that one's broken leg is at one level to be explained as the 
result of unwholesome actions performed in a previous life does 
not mean that one should not go to a doctor to have the broken 
leg set. There was and is no need in Buddhist theory to deny the 
existence of 'divine' beings or to repudiate the Buddhist villager's 
efforts to get their help. The only comment that Buddhist theory 
has to make in this context is that divine beings-like doctors-
won't be able to get to the root of the problem: they may help 
one get what one wants in the short term, but they are unable to 
bring about the final cessation of suffering.

--- PAGE 150 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
The world of the earliest Buddhist texts is a world, like the 
contemporary Indian villager's, alive with various kinds of being. 
The Buddha and his followers are represented as being visited 
by these various beings, as having discussions with them, as teach-
ing them, as being questioned by them, and as being honoured 
by them. Yet in their reading of the texts many nineteenth-
and early twentieth-century scholars felt inclined to treat such 
accounts of 'supernatural' beings as later mythical additions to 
an earlier more sober and purely philosophical stratum of Bud-
dhist literature that was originally uncluttered by such materiaL 
Indeed this outlook continues to influence the approach of some 
scholars. Yet the fact remains that these so-called mythical ele-
ments are so embedded in, so entangled with the conceptual, 
ethical, and philosophical dimensions of early Buddhist literat-
ure that the task of extricating them is extremely problematic. 
The arguments for excising the mythic material often become 
circular: we know that the mythic passages are later because early 
Buddhist teaching was a purely ethical and philosophical system 
uninterested in myth, and we know that early Buddhist teaching 
was devoid of myth because the mythic passages are later. 
What can be said with certainty is that we have no evidence, 
either in the ancient texts or in the different contemporary tra-
ditions, for a 'pure' Buddhism that does not recognize, accom-
modate, and interact with various classes of 'supernatural' being. 
Such a pure Buddhism is something of a theoretical and schol~ 
arly abstraction. This point needs particular stress in relation 
to Theravada Buddhism since the notion that the Theravada tra-
dition represents-or ought to represent-a pure, unadulterated 
tradition of precisely this kind is widespread and yet is a largely 
theoretically constructed model of what Theravada Buddhism is. 
I suggested above that a Buddhist's dealings with and inter-
action with ghosts, demons, and spirits is for the most part tangen-
tial to his or her practice of the Buddhist path. This is certainly 
so, and yet the separateness of these two dimensions of a Bud-
dhist's life can be over-emphasized. In the earliest texts the world 
of the Y ak~as, Nagas, Gandharvas, and so on merges with the 
world of the sense-sphere devas. Such beings precisely acquire

--- PAGE 151 ---
The Buddhist Cosmos 
I3I 
ethical and spiritual associations in the theory and practice of 
ancient Buddhism, and such associations are not irrelevant to 
our appreciation of the role of the gods in the practice of con-
temporary Buddhism. A traditional Buddhist contemplative medi-
tation exercise involves the recollection of the qualities 'of the 
gods (devatiinussati) as beings who have arrived at a fortunate 
and happy condition as a result of their good karma; 
There are the gods of the Four Kings, the gods of the Thirty-Three, the 
Yama gods, the Contented gods, the gods who Delight in Creation, the 
Masters of the Creations of Others, the gods of Brahma, and yet higher 
gods. Endowed with faith those gods passed away from the human realm 
and were reborn in that condition; such faith is present in me too. Endowed 
with virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom those gods passed away 
from the human realm and were reborn in that condition; such virtue, 
learning, generosity, and wisdom are present in me too.21 
The kind of thinking indicated by this passage suggests how the 
world of ghosts, demons, spirits, and gods merges and blends 
with the world of Buddhist practice. But perhaps the most graphic 
illustration of this comes from Buddhist art. Early stone reliefs 
depicting the Buddha's enlightenment show the gods of various 
kinds gathering around the tree of awakening. The Great Stiipa 
at Safici (second century BCE), a representation of the cosmos 
itself, is encircled by a walkway entered by four gateways; here 
the decoration depicts animals, Yak~as and Y ak~inis, Nagas and 
Gandharvas, and the gods; at the centre is the great dome of the 
stiipa enshrining sacred relics. The interior of Buddhist shrine 
rooms through the ages has similarly often been decorated with 
murals depicting the various realms and beings of the cosmos. 
In conclusion it is worth considering briefly Buddhist and 
Indian cosmology in relation to the cosmology of the West. 
Clearly the Buddhist conception of the spatial and temporal 
extent of the universe contrasts markedly with the traditional 
Judaeo-Christian conception of a single world beginning with its 
creation at a particular point-a point that has on occasion been 
defined very precisely: Archbishop Ussher (158I-I656) calculated 
it as 4004 BeE. Whereas from the Buddhist perspective there are

--- PAGE 152 ---
132 
The Buddhist Cosmos 
countless world-systems passing through vast cycles of expan-. 
sion and contraction, in the Judaeo-Christian perspective there 
is one world whose 'history' begins at one point and moves 
towards one final doomsday, and is to be read, moreover, as the 
working out of God's purpose. There is a point of real contrast 
here that is not of purely theoretical interest; these two tradi-
tional cosmologies give rise to quite different cultural perspect-
ives on matters of social and political progress. This is a complex 
subject, and I merely draw the reader's attention to it. 
A number of writers over the last twenty years have suggested 
that there is a certain affinity between aspects of traditional 
Indian cosmology and the findings of modern astronomy and 
physics.22 Some caution is needed here. Quite clearly the con-. 
ception of the cakra-vatf,a taken as a literal description of the 
geography of the world (which it clearly was and is by many) is 
as inaccurate from a scientific perspective as anything found in 
the biblical Judaeo-Christian cosmologies. Curiously though, 
the traditional conception of the cakra-viilja persisted in Indian 
thought even after the realization, early in the Christian era, that 
the world was in reality a globe.23 The fact that these two quite 
different conceptions of the world continued to live side by 
side suggests that in part their functions are somewhat different. 
Nevertheless, the notion of Mount Meru can fare no better in 
the eyes of modern science than that of the Garden of Eden. Yet 
Buddhist cosmology's understanding of the age and size of the 
universe, its countless world-systems, the absence of a creator 
God, do perhaps sit more comfortably with certain of the notions 
of modern astronomy and physics than a Judaeo-Christian 
biblical cosmology. Yet it would be nai've to suggest that they 
somehow anticipate such modern scientific theories. The language 
of Buddhist cosmology is not the language of modern physics. If 
we wish to understand it, the Buddhist tradition itself suggests 
that we should look no further than our own minds, for in many 
respects the workings of the vast cosmos are nothing other than 
the workings of our minds writ large.

--- PAGE 153 ---
6 
No Self 
Personal Continuity and Dependent Arising 
The Buddhist critique of self as unchanging 
The story of the journeying monk in the Kevaddha Sutta (see above, 
pp. II3-I4) is in fact a very precise parable of Buddhist thought. 
To understand the nature of du/:tkha is precisely to reach the lim-
its of the world. Ultimately the monk in the story is directed to 
the nature of the mind itself, for it is here that the secret of the 
arising of the world, the ceasing of the world, and the way lead-
ing to the ceasing of the world is to be found. Thus, although 
from a particular perspective the elaborate cosmology outlined 
in the previous chapter does indeed represent the complete 
Buddhist description of du/:tkha, nevertheless it is in the analy-
sis of individual experience of the world-this fathom-long body 
with its perceptions and mind-that duJ:tkha's ultimate nature is 
to be penetrated. In this chapter I wish to turn to the basic prin-
ciples of that Buddhist understanding of our individual experi-
ence of the world, and of consciousness and its workings. 
The Buddhist critique of the notion of 'self' or iitman is rooted 
in a specific historical context and initially directed towards par-
ticular understandings of the notion of self. The evidence of brah-
manical, Jain, and Buddhist sources points towards the existence 
in north India of the fifth century BCE of a considerable variety 
of views and theories concerning the ultimate nature of the indi-
vidual and his destiny. 
Among the questions the early brahmanical texts known as 
the Upani~ads seek to explore are: to whom or what the various 
experiences and parts of a being belong; who or what controls 
them; what is the ultimate nature of a being's self. The standard

--- PAGE 154 ---
134 
No Self 
term that the Upani~ads use for the 'self' in its ultimate nature 
is atman, which; although also employed as the ordinary word 
for 'self' in Sanskrit, may etymologically be derived from a word 
originally meaning 'breath'. For the early Upani~ads such as the 
Brhadaral}yaka and Chandogya (sixth century BeE), the self in 
its ultimate nature is a mysterious, ungraspable entity; it is the 
unseen seer, the unheard hearer, the unthought thinker, the 
unknown knower; it is the inner controller; it is what is immor-
tal in us.1 Although it is much easier to say what it is not than to 
specify it concretely, certain quite definite things can be said of 
it. This ultimate metaphysical self is the unchanging constant under-
lying all our various and unstable experiences. As such it is inde-
structible and ultimately unaffected by any specific experience 
and quite beyond suffering: 
The self is not this and not that. Ungraspable it is certainly not grasped; 
indestructible it is certainly not destroyed, without clinging it is certainly 
not clung to; unbound it comes to no harm, it does not suffer.2 
Furthermore the immortal indestructible atman that is the ulti-
mate self is, according to the early Upani~ads, to be identified 
with the underlying ground of all reality known as brahman. In 
the final analysis I am not something different from the under-
lying ground of the universe itself. This is the famous Upani~adic 
equation of atman and brahman.3 
This does not appear to be the only notion of the atman 
known to Buddhist texts. In later Indian thought we find the 
concept of a plurality of eternal unchanging 'selves', each cor-
responding in some way to individual beings in the world. Such 
a teaching is characteristic of the Indian schools of philosophy 
known as Sarp.khya andY oga and seems to be adumbrated in the 
Upani~ad of Svetasvatara.4 What we have, then, in the notions 
of both the universal and individual atman is an assumption of 
an unchanging and constant self that somehow underlies and is 
the basis for the variety of changing experiences; moreover this 
unchanging self is to be identified as what we ultimately are and 
as beyond suffering. It is this general understanding of the self 
that early Buddhist thought seeks to examine and question.

--- PAGE 155 ---
No Self 
135 
While this specific historical context dictates the terms of 
reference, it is none the less the case that the issues raised by 
the Buddhist critique of self touch on universal problems of per-
sonal identity. Our everyday linguistic usage of terms such as 'I' 
amounts in practice to an understanding of self as preCisely an 
unchanging constant behind experiences. Thus when someone 
declares, 'I was feeling sad, but now I am feeling happy,' he or 
she implies by the term 'I' that there is a constant, unchanging 
thing that underlies an.d links the quite different experiences of 
happiness and sadness. Linguistic usage and no doubt certain 
emotional and psychological circumstances predispose us to an 
understanding of personal identity and selfhood in terms of an 
'I' that exists as an autonomous individual and who has various 
experiences. In this way I assume-perhaps unconsciously-that 
although my experiences may vary there is something-me-that 
remains constant. In other words, it only makes sense to talk in 
terms of my having experiences if there is a constant 'I' that can 
somehow be considered apart from and separately from those 
experiences.5 It is in this conceptual framework that Buddhist 
thought begins to ask various questions about the nature of the 
'I', the constant unchanging self underlying experience. 
One task that Buddhist thought attempts is a descriptive ana-
lysis of the nature of experience, or, to put it simply, of just what 
it is that seems to be going on all the time. This exercise is in 
fact one of the preoccupations of Buddhist thought and it offers 
a number of ways of analysing the nature of experience which 
are integrated in the complex Abhidharma systems of the devel-
oped schools of Buddhist thought. Perhaps the most important 
analysis of individual experience found in the early texts and 
carried over into the Abhidharma is an account in terms of the 
five 'aggregates' or 'groups' (skandhalkhandha) of physical and 
mental events. 
The list and description of the five skandhas represent a 
response to such questions as: what is a being? what is going on? 
what is there? In the first place I can say that I seem to have a 
body with five senses of sight, hearing, smell,· taste, and touch. 
There is then the physical world, what the Buddhist texts call

--- PAGE 156 ---
No Self 
'form' (rupa). In the second place there is variety of mental 
activity going on, much of it in direct response to the various 
physical stimuli. Thus my experiences continuously produce in 
me pleasant, unpleasant, or indifferent feelings (vedanii). I am 
also continuously classifying and sorting my experiences such 
that, confronted by various sense stimuli, there can be recog-
nition (saf(ljiiii/saiiiiii) of something as an 'apple' or a 'cup of 
tea' .6 Furthermore, my experiences seem to provoke various 
desires, wishes, and tendencies-volitional 'forces' or 'formations' 
(sarrzskiira/saf(lkhiira); thus, if I perceive an apple when I am 
hungry, quite strong desires may arise which may lead to my 
being unable to resist reaching out and taking it; in fact, given a 
variety of circumstances, the emotions produced in response to 
my experiences may lead to all sorts of actions from self-sacrifice 
to vicious murder. Finally we can say that there is a basic self-
consciousness ( vijiiiinalviiiiiiiJJa )-an awareness of ourselves as 
thinking subjects having a series of perceptions and thoughts. In 
this way my individual experience can be analysed as consisting 
of various phenomena that can be conveniently classified as 
forming five collections or aggregates: bodily phenomena, feel-
ings, labelling or recognizing, volitional activities, and conscious 
awareness. 
Buddhist thought presents these five aggregates as an exhaust-
ive analysis of the individual. They are the world for any given 
being-there is nothing else besides. The question now arises 
whether any given instance of these five groups of phenomena 
can qualify as a 'self'-an unchanging, constant underlying experi-
ence. Steven Collins effectively identifies three arguments for the 
denial of the self in early Buddhist texts.7 
One of the Upani~adic characterizations of the self was as the 
'inner controller', and the first argument employed is that in fact 
we have no ultimate control over any of the five aggregates: 
Body is not a self. If body were a self then it might be that it would not 
lead to sickness; then it might be possible to say, 'Let my body be like 
this, let my body not be like this.' But since body is not a self, so it leads 
to sickness, and it is not possible to say, 'Let my body be like this, let 
my body not be like this.'8

--- PAGE 157 ---
No Self 
137 
The same can be said of feeling, recognition, volitions, and con-
scious awareness. It is simply ridiculous to take things that are 
bound up with change and sickness, and over which we have no 
ultimate control as self. 
, 
A second argument against the self is to be found in the fol-
lowing exchange between the Buddha and his monks, which 
occurs frequently in the earliest Buddhist texts, sometimes but-
tressing the argument from lack of control. The Buddha asks: . 
'What do you think, monks? Are body ... feeling ... recognition ... voli-
tions ... conscious awareness permanent or impermanent?' 
'Impermanent, lord.' 
'But is something that is impermanent painful or unpainful?' 
'Painful, lord.' 
'But is it fitting to regard something that is painful, whose nature it 
is to change as "this is mine, I am this, this is my self"?' 
'Certainly not, lord.' 
'Therefore, monks, all body ... feeling ... recognition .... volitions 
... conscious awareness whatsoever, whether past, present or future, 
whether gross or subtle, inferior or refined, far or near, should be seen 
by means of clear understanding as it really is, as "this is not mine, I am 
not this, this is not my self" .'9 
That something which is impermanent must be regarded as 
'painful' (dul:zkha) follows, of course, from principles we have 
already found expressed in the second of the four noble truths: 
if we become attached and try to hold on to things that will 
inevitably change and disappear, then we are bound to suffer. 
This argument also seems to be aimed directly at the early 
Upani~adic notion of the self as an unchanging, eternal absolute 
that is free from all suffering; in the phrase 'this is not mine, I 
am not this, this is not my self' there appears to be a deliberate 
echo and rebuttal of the Chandogya Upani~ad's 'this is the self, 
this is what you are'.10 
A third argument centres on the meaninglessness of the term 
'self' apart from particular experiences.U There are three pos-
sibilities: one must regard the self as the same as experience, or 
one must regard the self as something apart from experience, or 
one must regard the self as having the attribute of experience.

--- PAGE 158 ---
No Self 
But none of these ways of viewing the self is coherent. The 
first method, in failing to distinguish the self from changing 
experiences, ends up with a self that continuously changes as our 
experiences change; but a self, by definition, is something that 
does not change as experiences change, it is the unchanging 
thing behind those experiences. The second method makes no 
sense either since (in a kind of inversion of the Cartesian 'I think 
therefore I am'), apart from experiences, how can one possibly 
think of oneself as existing? So we are left with the third pos-
sibility, namely a self that is something different from experi-
ence, yet not without experience; a self that experiences or has 
the attribute of experience. Such a self must still in some sense 
be distinguishable from experiences, yet there is no basis upon 
which to make such a distinction, since it remains the case that 
apart from particular experiences it is not possible to think of 
oneself as existing. 
The gist of the Buddhist critique of the notion of 'self' is then 
this. It cannot be denied that there is a complex of experience 
going on; this can be conveniently analysed by way of the five 
aggregates. But where precisely in all this is the constant, un~ 
changing self which is having all these experiences? What we find 
when we introspect, the Buddha suggests, is always some par~ 
ticular sense datum, some particular feeling, some particular idea, 
some particular wish or desire, some consciousness of some'-
thing particular. And all these are constantly changing from one 
moment to the next; none of them remains for more than a mere 
moment. Thus, apart from some particular experience, I never 
actually directly come across or experience the 'I' that is having 
experiences. It is something entirelyelusive. This looks suspicious. 
How can I know it is there? For it is impossible to conceive of 
consciousness apart from all these particular changing details, and 
if we abstract all the particular details of consciousness we are 
not left with a constant, individual 'self' but a blank, a nothing. 
The early Upani~ads themselves acknowledged that the self 
was something of a mysterious, ungraspable entity, but-and here 
Buddhist thought lays down its challenge-perhaps its nature is 
actually so mysterious and ungraspable that it does not make

--- PAGE 159 ---
No Self 
139 
any coherent sense at all. Thus Buddhist thought suggests that 
as an individual I am a complex flow of physical and mental 
phenomena, but peel away these phenomena and look behind 
them and one just does not find a constant self that one ~an call 
one's own. My sense of self is both logically and emotionally just 
a label that I impose on these physical and mental phenomena in 
consequence of their connectedness. In other words, the idea of 
self as a constant unchanging thing behind the variety of experi-
ence is just a product of linguistic usage and the particular way 
in which certain physical and mental phenomena are experienced 
as connected. 
An ancient Buddhist text, the Milindapaiiha ('Milinda's Ques-
tions') records the meeting of a Buddhist monk and the local 
Bactrian Greek king, Milinda or Menander. The monk introduces 
himself as Nagasena, but then adds that this is just a convenient 
label, for in reality no 'person' can be found. The king is puzzled 
and accuses the monk of talking nonsense. Nagasena then asks 
how the king came to this hermitage, and the king replies that 
he came in a chariot. 'But what is a chariot?', asks Nagasena. Is 
it the pole? Is it the axle? Is it the wheels, or the framework, 
or the yoke, or the reins? King Milinda is forced to admit that it 
is none of these. Nevertheless, he persists, it is not meaningless 
to talk of a 'chariot', for the term is used as a convenient label 
in dependence upon pole, axle, wheels, framework, yoke, reins, 
etc. Just so, responds Nagasena, it is not meaningless to talk of 
'Nagasena', for terms such as 'Nagasena' or 'being' are used as 
convenient labels when all the relevant constituents-the five 
aggregates-'-are present, yet there is no such independent thing 
as 'Nagasena' or 'a being' P 
Language and the fact th,at experiences are somehow connected 
fools us into thinking that there is an 'I' apart from and behind 
changing experiences-apart from the fact of experiences being 
connected. In reality, as we shall presently see, for Buddhist thought 
there is only their 'connectedness'-nothing besides that. The fact 
that experiences are causally connected is not to be explained 
by reference to an unchanging self that underlies experience, but 
by examining the nature of causality.

--- PAGE 160 ---
No Self 
The problem of personal continuity: self as 
'causal connectedness' 
We have seen how Buddhist thought criticizes the concept of 
an unchanging self as incoherent; however, both ancient and 
modern critics have argued that to do away with the self in the 
manner of Buddhist thought in fact creates insurmountable 
philosophical and moral problems. How can the experienced facts 
of personal continuity-after all it is I who remember getting 
up this morning and going to the shops, not you-be accounted 
for? Again, central to the Buddhist world-view is the notion 
of rebirth, but surely for this to be meaningful some part of a 
person must remain constant and be reborn, which is precisely 
what the teaching of no self seems to deny. Furthermore, if there 
is no self, is not the whole foundation of morality undermined? 
If I am not the same person as the one who robbed the bank 
yesterday, how can I be held responsible? In fact does not the 
teaching of no self render life meaningless and is it not tanta,. 
mount to a doctrine of nihilism? For its part, Buddhist thought 
claims that it has adequate answers to these questions and has 
always categorically denied the charge that it is a species of 
nihilism.13 The answers to these questions are all in one way ot 
another to be referred to the particular Buddhist understanding 
of the way in which things are causally connected. ·· 
We have seen how Buddhist thought breaks down an individ'< 
ual into five classes of physical and mental events known as skand-
has or 'aggregates'. But the list of five aggregates represents only 
one of various possible ways of analysing the constituents ofa, 
being. An alternative analysis sees the individual as comprising 
twelve 'spheres' (iiyatana): the six senses (five physical senses and 
mind) and the six classes of object of those senses; a variation o~ 
this talks of eighteen 'elements' (dhiitu): six senses, six classe~ 
of sense object, and six classes of consciousness.14 For Buddhis~ 
thought the physical and mental events that comprise a being 
and his or her experiences can be analysed, grouped, and viewe'(,t 
from a number of different perspectives. But whatever the per~ 
spective, the concern is to show that physical and mental event~'

--- PAGE 161 ---
No Self 
141 
occur in various relationships to each other. As such, physical 
and mental events or phenomena are termed dharmas (Pali 
dhamma). This is a term whose full discussion must be reserved 
for Chapter 7, but it can be defined in the present context as 
an ultimate 'event' or 'reality' that, in combination with other 
ultimate events or realities, constitutes the basis of reality as a 
whole. The occurrence of physical and mental events is not just 
arbitrary or random; on the contrary there is a deep and real rela-
tionship of causal connectedness between events or phenomena. 
And it is the concern with the nature of this causal connected-
ness that lies at the heart of Buddhist philosophy and which is 
seen as validating all Buddhist practice. 
A story has it that the wanderer Sariputra's introduction to 
the teaching of the Buddha was in the form of a summary verse 
recited to him by the monk Asvajit: 
Of those dharmas which arise from a cause, the Tathagata has stated 
the cause, and also the cessation; such is the teaching of the Great Ascetic. 
Hearing this verse, Sariputra immediately gained a profound insight 
into the Dharma, although he was not to become an awakened 
arhat for another fortnight.l5 The verse thus encapsulates the 
Buddha's teaching and as such states the secret of the cessa-
tion of suffering-if we could but understand it. Later Buddhist 
tradition regarded this verse as possessing an almost magical 
potency, and in ancient times, throughout the Buddhist world, 
it was inscribed on bricks, metal plates, and images to make a 
protective amulet that might be worn or enshrined in stiipas.16 
Another succinct formula states the principle of causality (idaf!1-
pratyayatii) as 'this existing, that exists; this arising, that arises; 
this not existing, that does not exist; this ceasing, that ceases'P 
But the most important statement of the Buddhist understand-
ing of how causality operates is in terms of the twelve links (nidiina) 
of the chain of 'dependent arising' (pratftya-samutpiida/paficca-
samuppiida): 
Conditioned by (r) ignorance are (2) formations, conditioned by 
formations is (3) consciousness, conditioned by consciousness is (4) 
mind-and-body, conditioned by mind~and-body are (5) the six senses,

--- PAGE 162 ---
No Self 
conditioned by the six senses is (6) sense-contact, conditioned by sense-
contact is (7) feeling, conditioned by feeling is (8) craving, conditioned 
by craving is (9) grasping, conditioned by grasping is (ro) becoming, 
conditioned by becoming is (n) birth, conditioned by birth is (12) old-
age and death-grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow, and despair come into 
being. Thus is the arising of this whole mass of suffering.18 
The verse and the succinct formula state baldly that the secret 
of the universe lies in the nature of causality-the way one thing 
leads to another. The chain of twelve links goes rather fur~ 
ther; it attempts to reveal the actual pattern and structure of 
causal conditioning. And we are told in the ancient texts that he 
who sees dependent arising-this pattern of conditioning-sees 
Dharma itself.19 
According to Buddhist analysis a person should be seen as 
five classes of physical and mental events that arise dependently 
at any given moment in time and also over a period of time. 
What this means then is that the causal connectedness of events 
is such that events occur in certain quite specific clusters and 
patterns. From this perspective a 'person' is a series of clusters 
of events (physical and mental) occurring in a 'human' pattern, 
as opposed to, say, the canine pattern of a 'dog'. Furthermore; 
causal connectedness is such that the patterns in which events 
occur tend to reproduce themselves and so are relatively stable 
over a period of time. Thus it does not happen that a man is a man 
one moment and a dog the next, rather over a period of time a 
baby becomes a child, and a child an adult. So although I am not 
now the same person as I was when I was 3 years old in that there 
is no single part of me that is the same as it was, there is never-
theless a continuous causal connectedness between the clusters 
and pattern of physical and mental events that occurred thirty~ 
five years ago, and those occurring now. The 'person' that is me 
thus subsists not in some entity remaining constant for thirty-five 
years but merely in the fact that certain clusters of physical and 
mental events are linked causally. 
In other words, Buddhist thought understands change not in 
terms of a primary substantial essence remaining constant while 
its secondary qualities change, but solely in terms of the causal

--- PAGE 163 ---
No Self 
143 
connectedness of different qualities. There is no primary substance 
to remain constant: 
There is neither identity nor difference in a sequence of continuity. For 
if there were complete identity in a sequence of continuity there would 
be no curds produced from the milk; if there were complete difference 
the owner of the milk would not own the curds. This is the case with all 
conditioned things.20 
What is more, this causal connectedness of events does not 
suddenly cease at the death of a 'person'. In fact death from the 
perspective of the Buddhist understanding of the causal con-
nectedness of events is simply the breaking up of a particular 
configuration of those events. As I have said, the stability of 
particular configurations of events is only relative; eventually it 
must break down: But the nature of the causal connectedness of 
physical and mental events is such that as soon as one particu-
lar configuration breaks down events begin to build themselves 
into a new one. This then is 'rebirth'. The new pattern of events, 
although certainly connected with the old, may be of a different 
kind. A man may be reborn as an animal; a god may be reborn 
as a man. 
Although I have been talking in terms of physical and mental 
events, one should note that in the breaking down of a particu-
lar configuration of events that is death, it is the mental events 
that are crucially determinative of the nature ofthe new pattern 
of events, for as we saw in the previous chapter, the workings of 
karma, of action and result, are essentially a matter of intention. 
We have now returned from the microcosm of a person consist-
ing of patterns of events arising and ceasing to the macrocosm 
of the universe of beings passing through cycles of birth, death, 
and rebirth. 
Let me sum up the Buddhist response to the questions I posed 
at the beginning of this section. The basic experienced facts 
of personal continuity are to be explained not with reference to 
an enduring substantial self, but with reference to the particular 
way in which the phenomena that make up a being are causally 
connected. And just as this causal connectedness is the basis of

--- PAGE 164 ---
144 
No Self 
continuity within a particular life, so it is the basis of continu-
ity between lives. Just as no substantial self endures during a 
lifetime, so no substantial self endures from death to rebirth. 
None the less there is a causal connection between the phenomena 
that constitute a being at the time of death and the phenomena 
that constitute a being at the start of a new life. This linking 
(pratisandhilpa{isandhi) of different lives into a causal series; 
such that we can speak of someone being reborn as someone 
else, is understood as a particular function of mental phenomena 
(rather than physical phenomena); death is then not an interruption 
in the causal flow of phenomena, it is simply the reconfiguring 
of events into a new pattern in dependence upon the old. Thus, 
when asked whether the one who is reborn is the same or dif• 
ferent from the one who died, the Buddhist tradition replies that 
strictly he (or she) is neither the same nor different.21 
The way in which phenomena are causally connected is also 
seen as sufficient to account for moral responsibility. The monk 
Nagasena put it as follows to King Milinda. Suppose that some• 
one should steal some mangoes from another man's trees; if he 
were to claim in his defence that the mangoes he stole were not 
the mangoes the other man planted, we would point out that the 
mangoes he stole nevertheless arose in dependence upon the man-
goes that were previously planted. Similarly I cannot, by appeal 
to the teaching of no self, claim that it was not I who robbed the 
bank yesterday but some other person who no longer exists, since 
the teaching of no self states quite categorically that the 'I' who 
exists today only exists by virtue of its dependence upon the 'I' 
that existed yesterday; there is a definite causal connection. 
Properly understood the principle of the causal connectedness 
of phenomena is sufficient, claims Buddhist thought, to answer 
critics of the teaching of no self and redeem Buddhism from the 
charge of nihilism. Of course, philosophers, ancient and modern, 
Indian and Western, need not necessarily accept that this is the 
end of the matter and that Buddhist thought has dealt with the 
problems of the theory of no self once and for all. Throughout 
its history Buddhist philosophy has continued to try to refine both 
its treatment of these problems as well as its own critique of the

--- PAGE 165 ---
No Self 
145 
notion of enduring substances, but this is as far as we need pur-
sue the matter at present. I shall, however, mention two further 
dimensions to the teaching of no self here. The first concerns the 
notion of 'the middle way' and the second the notion of two kinds 
of truth. 
The understanding that sees a 'person' as subsisting in the 
causal connectedness of dependent arising is often presented in 
Buddhist thought as 'the middle' (madhyama/majjhima) between 
the views of 'eternalism' (sasvata-!sassata-viida) and 'annihila-
tionism' (uccheda-viida).22 If we understand a 'person' as subsisting 
in an unchanging, .constant self that underlies different experi-
ences, then, since we have postulated something that endures with-
out change, we have fallen prey to the view of 'eternalism'; if on 
the other hand we understand that there is no real connection 
between the person at one point in time and another point in 
time, then we have fallen prey to the view of 'annihilationism'. 
In other words, if we deny that there is a real connectedness 
between events this is annihilationism, but if we understand that 
connectedness in terms of an unchanging self this is etemalism; 
the middle way is that there is only the connectedness, there is 
only dependent arising. 
Part of the Buddhist critique of the concept of self involves 
the claim that language predisposes us towards and indeed con-
fuses us into thinking that an enduring self does in fact exist. 
Sentences such as 'I am going to London tomorrow' suggest that 
there is something constant to which the term 'I' refers, namely, 
my 'self'; yet in reality, claims Buddhist thought, such a self is 
not to be found. However, this does not mean that the terms 'self', 
'I', and so forth are to be systematically removed from all truly 
Buddhist discourse. Indeed, such terms are perfectly normal in 
Buddhist discourse. Developed Buddhist thought articulates what 
is involved here in terms of a distinction between conventional 
(saf!lvrti!sammuti) and ultimate (paramiirtha!paramattha) truth. 
From this perspective the Buddhist denial of self is not an abso-
lute denial of self as such, but a quite specific denial of self as 
an enduring substance. As we have seen, for Buddhist thought 
terms like 'self', 'being' and 'person' are conventional labels for

--- PAGE 166 ---
No Self 
what in reality is a mass of constantly changing, causally com 
nected physical and mental phenomena. The problem is not with 
the words in themselves but with what we understand by the words: 
we are misled by their conventional usage into thfuking that selves, 
beings and persons have an ultimate existence in their own right; 
The Buddha, on the other hand, makes use of such words with~ 
out holding on to them and being led astray.23 Thus when a Buddha, 
or any other awakened being, says 'I', he or she merely uses 
the term as a matter of convenience, rather than saying 'this par-
ticular group of five aggregates'-just as a nuclear physicist will 
refer to a 'table' rather than 'a mass of subatomic particles'. So 
it is not that it is not true to say that I exist, but that it is only 
conventionally true; from the ultimate point of view there are 
only five aggregates of physical and mental phenomena. 
Ignorance, attachment, and views of the self 
The Buddhist critique of the notion of a self rests on the claim 
that we never in fact experience an unchanging self, and that there 
is therefore no reason to posit an unchanging self underlying 
experience. In other words, the idea that one exists as a perman-
ent, unchanging self is born of faulty reasoning based on the fail-
ure to perceive the world as it actually is. This notion of self is 
born of delusion (moha) or ignorance (avidyii/avijjii). But there 
is another strand to the Buddhist critique of the notion of self 
which sees it as intimately bound up with craving (tm;a/taFJhii) 
and attachment (upiidiina). 
A passage from the early Buddhist scriptures that I referred 
to earlier concludes by stating that someone who succeeds in nei-
ther regarding the self as the same as experience, nor as some-
thing that is apart from experience, nor as something which has 
the attribute of experience is thereby one who 'does not grasp 
at anything in the world, and through not grasping he craves no 
longer, and through ncit craving he effects complete nirval).a'.24 
Thus for Buddhist thought, to understand the world in terms 
of self is not only to see it wrongly but to be led by greed, de-
sire, and attachment. One's sense of 'self' springs not only from

--- PAGE 167 ---
No Self 
147 
delusion, but from the desire to identify and claim some part or 
parts of the universe as one's own, as one's possession, and say 
of them 'this is mine, I am this, this is my self'. To identify with 
the five aggregates, either collectively or individually, is a kind 
of conceit-the conceit 'I am' (asmi-miina). 
' 
As a function of both ignorance and greed, the belief in self is 
something that we construct, not only at a conscious and intel-
lectual level, but also at a deep psychological and emotional level. 
We continually crave to be particular kinds of person. In so far 
as they are entangled with craving, the notions of self and of 
personal identity can, from the Buddhist point of view, only lead 
to suffering-for both ourselves and others. The appropriating 
of some part or parts of the universe as mine, as opposed to 
yours, the desire to construct my 'self' or personal identity, must 
lead inevitably to self-ish concerns. It drives me to accumulate 
'possessions'-both physical and psychological-that define and 
reinforce my sense of my own selfhood as student, teacher, ban-
ker, lawyer, politician, craftsmen, Buddhist monk-as some 
kind of person as opposed to some other kind of person. And 
when I feel that what I regard as my self, that what I regard as 
by rights mine, is in danger of being taken from me, I become 
angry, frustrated, fearful; I may even be driven to violence and 
kill. And yet disease, old age and death for sure will take from 
me all that I have regarded as mine-body, feelings, ideas, voli-
tions, mind. Indeed an ancient image compares our identifying 
ourselves with any of the five aggregates to trying to grasp at vari-
ous kinds of grass, reeds, and rushes as we are being swept along 
in a river's fierce current: they all slip from our grasp or break 
away from the bank.25 My continued grasping at self in the face 
of this fact sets my selLover and against others' selves. We all 
become rivals in the fruitless struggle of trying to find something 
in the universe which we can grasp and call 'mine'. Selves thus 
cause problems for all concerned, and the aim of Buddhism is 
therefore to realize selflessness, both metaphysically and ethically; 
or, to borrow the title of Steven Collins's comprehensive study 
of the teaching of no self, the goal of the Buddhist path is to become 
a truly 'self-less person'.

--- PAGE 168 ---
No Self 
The idea of belief in self as something conditioned by greed 
is stated as the fourth of the four kinds of grasping mentioned 
in the previous chapter: grasping at the doctrine of self. There 
are then these two complementary aspects to the Buddhist 
critique of self: the claim that the notion is based on a faulty under, 
standing of the world; and the claim that it is a function of deep-
seated greed and attachment. Conditioned by these two things 
the notion of self brings only suffering into the world. 
The Buddhist critique of self is directed at all theories or views 
of the self that imply some sort of unchanging self whether that 
self is conceived of as eternal, immortal, or merely subsisting 
unchanged for the duration of a particular lifetime, or any period 
of time. As Professor Norman has shown, the refutation of the 
Upani~adic identification of the iitman with the world is the pri~ 
mary focus of the critique of self contained in the Alagaddupama 
Sutta ('discourse on the simile of the water-snake').26 Elsewhere 
Buddhist texts attack a whole range of views concerning the self;· 
We saw above (pp. 137-8) how three specific ways of regarding 
the self are dismissed. In another extremely important and 
famous text, the Brahmajiila Sutta ('discourse on the supreme 
net'), the Buddha gives an account of sixty-two different views; 
fifty-four of which concern ways of perceiving the self.27 Many 
of these views involve the misinterpretation of meditation expe• 
rience: someone experiences some subtle and sublime level of 
consciousness in meditation and takes this as the unchanging self 
underlying other experiences. Another often repeated passage 
gives four different ways of constructing a view of self based 
on each of the five aggregates, making twenty varieties of the 
view that the individual exists (satkiiya-dr~tilsakkiiya-ditthi): one 
regards the body as the self, or the self as possessing body, or 
body as in the self, or the self as in body, and so forth.28 Yet another 
passage describes how someone, tortuously preoccupied with 
understanding the nature of self, falls prey to one of six views 
about the self: 
Thus someone reflects inappropriately, 'Did I exist in the past? Did I 
not exist in the past? What was I in the past? How was I in the past?

--- PAGE 169 ---
No Self 
149 
... Will I exist in the future? Will I not exist in the future? What will I 
be in the future? How will I be in the future?' Or he is uncertain about 
himself in the present, 'Do I exist? Do I not exist? What am I? How am 
I? From where has this being come, and where will it go?' To one reflect-
ing inappropriately in this way one of six views occurs. The definite and 
firm view arises, 'I have a self' or, 'I do not have a self' or, 'By the self 
I perceive what is self' or, 'By the self I perceive what is not self' or, 'By 
what is not self I perceive what is not self' or, 'That which is my self 
here, which speaks, feels, and which experiences at different times the 
results of good and bad deeds, will become permanent, constant, eter-
nal, not subject to change.' This is called being lost to views, the grip of 
views, the jungle of views, the turmoil of views, the commotion of views, 
the bond of views. Bound by the bond of views the ignorant ordinary 
man is not freed from birth, old age and death, from distress, grief and 
suffering. 29 
In this way Buddhist thought sees us as being seduced by greed 
and ignorance into constructing all manner of views, opinions, 
and beliefs about our selves. Sometimes the view is founded on 
elaborate but, from the Buddhist perspective, faulty reasoning; 
for some it is everyday experiences that mislead them into 
believing in a self, for others it is the more subtle experiences of 
meditation that mislead. 
The elaboration of the teaching of dependent arising 
I introduced above the notion of dependent arising and the for-
mula of twelve links that most commonly describes it. In the earli-
est Buddhist texts there are a number of variations on this list, 
some omitting links, some changing the order. This has led some 
modern textual scholars to speculate as to the possible stages 
in the evolution of the formula. These problems need not con-
cern us here. Whatever its history, it is clear that the twelvefold 
formula became standard early in the development of Buddhist 
thought. But curiously, apart from stating the formula and using 
it in a variety of contexts, the earliest texts give very little explana-
tion of how the formula is to be understood. For that we must 
turn to the later manuals of the fifth century CE such as Bud-
dhaghosa's Visuddhimagga and Vasubandhu'sAbhidharmakosa.30

--- PAGE 170 ---
No Self 
Both Vasubandhu and Buddhaghosa present as standard a 
way of taking the twelvefold formula as relating to three differ"' 
ent lives of a being (cf. Table 3). In our previous life we have' 
performed various actions, we have been prey to the various 
volitions, impulses, and activities of the mind, both meritorioti~ 
and unmeritorious, wholesome and unwholesome, and thes'e 
are collectively summed up in the formula as (2) 'formations' 
(saJ?1skiira/saJ?1khiira); although some of our actions have beet}: 
wholesome, we never entirely succeed in freeing ourselves fron11 
a fundamentally distorted and partial seeing of the way things 
are; like a blind man we stumble from the right road to the wrong 
road without really understanding what we are doing;31 thus 
(1) 'ignorance' (avidyiilavijjii), as a positive misconception and: 
not the mere absence ()f knowledge,32 forms the background to 
all our past actions, and so the formula begins, 'conditioned by 
ignorance are formations'. In the present we are heirs to these. 
past deeds. In the process of rebirth at the moment of conception 
in ou'r mother's womb we come into existence with (3) a minq 
or consciousness ( vijiiiina/viiiiiiil}a) that is directly conditioneq 
by these past deeds; in turn this consciousness gives rise to 
(4) our basic mental and physical make-up (niima-rupa) which 
in turn conditions the physical and mental capacities with which 
we turn to the world, (5) our five physical senses, and the mind 
(iiyatana). Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakosa relates these last two 
links to the gradual development of the foetus in the womb. 
From the moment of birth by way of these six senses ( 6) various 
sensations (sparsa!phassa) and experiences come to us lead-
ing to ( 7) pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral feelings ( vedanii); 
Vasubandhu relates this link to the stage in its development when 
a child learns to distinguish clearly those things which will bring 
pleasure and those that will bring pain. This world of feelings, 
some of which we like, some of which we dislike, some of which 
we are indifferent towards, gives rise to (8) craving (tT$1Jii/fa1Jhii) 
for more of the pleasant feelings and fewer of the painful feel-
ings. For Vasubandhu this link is particularly associated with the 
awakening of sexual passion at puberty. In re~ponse to our crav-
ing we determine on and (9) cling to (upiidiina) various courses

--- PAGE 171 ---
No Self 
ISI 
of action as the means to bring about the particular pleasant 
experiences we repeatedly crave;33 and so we carry out these par-
ticular courses of action; as we repeatedly carry them out they 
( ro) become our particular ways of being ( bhava ). And so a future 
( 11) birth (jiiti) conditioned by these very courses of action must 
occur, and whatever is born will once more (12) age and even-
tually die (jarii-maralJa ). So the process goes on without any known 
beginning or end. 
Buddhaghosa gives us the following vivid image of dependent 
arising. A blind man (ignorance) stumbles (formations) and falls 
(consciousness); as a result of the fall a swelling develops (mind 
and body) and on that swelling there forms an abscess which weeps 
(six senses); this abscess gets continually knocked and bruised 
(contact) causing terrible pain (feeling) which the man longs 
to remove (craving); in consequence he seizes on (grasping) 
and applies (becoming) to the swelling various remedies that he 
thinks will relieve the pain; but instead of relieving the pain their 
effect is simply to change the condition of the swelling for the 
worse (birth) and finally the whole swelling bursts (old age and 
death).34 
Theravada commentaries preserve some further points of 
analysis of the formula that can be best set out in the form of a 
table (see Table 3). In the first place there are three main tran-
sition points (column 2) that divide the twelve links of the for-
mula into four sections (column 3). Thus our previous ignorance 
and formations represent the 'past cause' of the 'present fruit' 
which consists of the consciousness, mind and body, six senses, 
sense-contact, and feeling which we presently experience; the. way 
we react to this fruit in the present, by way of craving, grasp-
ing and becoming, constitutes the 'present cause' that will bear 
fruit in the form of the conditions of our future birth, ageing, and 
death. Viewing the formula in this way also reveals a certain 
symmetry: if links I and 2 (ignorance and formations) were active 
in the past, then inevitably links 8, 9, and IO (craving, grasping, 
and becoming) were also active in the past; similarly if links 8, 
9, and IO are active in the present, so must links I and 2 (ignor-
ance and formations); and the future existence of links I I and I2

--- PAGE 172 ---
TABLE 3· Dependent arising 
12 LINKS 
3 TRANSITIONS 
4 SECTIONS 
20 FACTORS 
3 TIMES 
I. ignorance 
} first transition 
{ 
I. ignorance 
8. craving 
} PASTLIFE 
2. formations 
PAST CAUSE 
2. formations 
9· grasping 
ro. becoming 
3. consciousness 
) =nd trnn•tioo 
l 
3· consciousness 
4· mind and body 
PRESENT 
4· mind and body 
5. six senses 
5. six senses 
6. sense-contact 
FRUIT 
6. sense-contact 
7· feeling 
7· feeling 
r PRESENT LIFE 
8. craving 
} third transition 
{ 
8. craving 
I. ignorance 
9· grasping 
PRESENT 
9· grasping 
2. formations 
IO; becoming 
CAUSE 
IO. becoming 
FUTURE FRUIT l 
3~ consciousness 
·) FUTURE LIFE 
H. btr!b 
) 
4· mind and body 
12. old age & death 
5· six senses 
6. sense-contact 
7· feeling

--- PAGE 173 ---
No Self 
153 
(birth, old age, and death) is a shorthand way of referring to the 
coming into being and subsequent decay of links 3, 4, 5, 6, and 
7 (consciousness, mind and body, six senses, sense-contact, and 
feeling) in a future life. In this way, each of the four sections of 
column 3 can be seen as comprising five factors, making a total 
of twenty, instead of twelve, links. 
The formula of dependent arising states that 'conditioned 
by' a certain phenomenon a certain other phenomenon comes 
into being. The Theravadin tradition analyses in some detail the 
ways in which a phenomenon can be a condition for another 
phenomenon by applying a scheme of twenty-four possible types 
of condition to each of the twelve links and detailing which are 
relevant in each case.35 Another important point made in the 
exegetical literature is that, although the formula states just one 
condition for each subsequent link, this should not be taken 
as suggesting that a single cause is a sufficient condition for the 
arising of each further link. Each condition is stated as a repres-
entative and significant cause; the Theravada tradition records 
here as a fundamental axiom the principle that a single cause 
does not give rise to either a single result or several results; nor 
do several causes give rise to just one result; but rather several 
causes give rise to several results.36 
The details of all this need not concern us here, and if it 
sounds complicated, it is and deliberately so. Yet what is con-
veyed is how we as individual beings-our lives and experience 
-consist of a complex web of conditions built around the inter-
action of passive fruits and active causes. I said above that the 
formula of dependent arising is intended to reveal the actual 
pattern and structure of causality. Buddhist thought does not 
understand causality in terms similar to, say, Newtonian mech-
anics, where billiard balls rebound off each other in an entirely 
predictable manner once the relevant information is gathered. 
First, the Buddhist attempt to understand the ways of causal 
conditioning is concerned primarily with the workings of the 
mind: the way in which things we think, say, and do have an effect 
on both our selves and others. Second, Buddhist thought sees 
causal conditioning as involving the interaction of certain fixed

--- PAGE 174 ---
I 54 
No Self 
or determined effects and certain free or unpredictable causes. 
If, presented with a situation, I deliberately kill another human 
being, this action must lead to some unpleasant result in the future; 
it may also make it easier for me to kill in the future, eventually 
establishing something of a habit; and this may lead me into 
circumstances-life as a bandit, say, or rebirth as a tiger-where 
the only way to live is by killing; and yet in some measure the 
freedom not to kill, not to act in accordance with established habits, 
remains. 
On the one hand, we are born with a certain mental and phys, 
ical make-up, and are presented with various experiences over 
which we have no control; on the other hand, we continually choose 
certain courses of action in response to what is given us. We like 
or do not like our experiences, ourselves, and our bodies, and 
we decide to act in certain ways in order to try to change our 
lives. But from the Buddhist perspective, because of the funda-
mental condition of ignorance, we fail to act effectively and lose 
our way in the labyrinth of conditions that constitutes our being. 
That dependent arising is indeed presented by the Buddhist tra~ 
dition as something profound and, in a sense, difficult and com-
plicated is aptly summed by a saying attributed to the Buddha 
himself: 
Profound is this dependent arising and profound too is its appearance. 
It is through not knowing its nature, not penetrating its nature that beings 
become like a tangled skein, like a knotted ball of thread, like a weave 
of grass and rushes and fail to pass beyond sarp.sara with its descents, 
unhappy destinies, and perdition.37 
While the method of taking the twelvefold formula as describ-
ing a process over three lives is common to the ancient schools, 
it is also clear that it should be taken on a number of different 
scales-as describing, for example, the process whereby in re-
sponse to some circumstance we determine upon and carry out 
one particular course of action.38 The Abhidharma tradition of 
both the Theravadins and Sarvastivadins points out that the for-
mula should also be applied to each moment of consciousness-
that is, every thought that occurs arises in accordance with this

--- PAGE 175 ---
No Self 
ISS 
twelvefold formula. Dependent arising describes the structure 
of reality however, wherever, and whenever we dissect it. The 
application of the formula to a thought moment has some in-
teresting implications. The formula describes a process, and we 
usually conceive of processes as by definition taking place over 
a period of time, and yet for the Abhidharma such a process occurs 
quite literally in one moment: the twelve links arise simultane-
ously. This is something that touches upon complex tensions 
and issues in the history of Buddhist thought. The point that is 
being made is that reality is at heart something dynamic, some-
thing fluid; however one looks at it, reality is a process; analyse 
reality down to its smallest possible components or constituents, 
and what one finds are, not static buildingblocks, but dynamic 
processes. This is vividly summed up in the notion of 'death' as 
something we live through in each moment: 
From the standpoint of ultimate truth the moment of a being's life is 
extremely short-just the occurrence of a single thought. Indeed just 
as the rolling wheel of a cart rolls on just one point of its rim, and rest-
ing rests on just one point, exactly so the life of a being lasts but the 
moment of one thought, and as soon as that thought has ceased the being 
has ceased ... Life, personality, pleasure and pain all come together in 
a single thought-the moment passes swiftly; the aggregates of one who 
dies or of one who remains are all alike-gone never to be met with 
again. Without the occurrence of thought the world is not born, with 
its arising it lives, with its passing it dies. This is understanding in the 
ultimate sense.39 
Yet again we move from the macrocosm of beings dying and being 
reborn to the microcosm of our changing thoughts. But the fact 
that reality is at heart a process relates also once more to the 
notion of the middle way. True process, true change cannot be 
explained either in terms of eternalism (a thing exists unchang-
ing) or annihilationism (a thing exists for a time and then ceases 
to exist). The process of change as described by dependent aris-
ing is thus a middle between these two extremes, encapsulating 
the paradox of identity and difference involved in the very notion 
of change.

--- PAGE 176 ---
No Self 
Buddhaghosa thus records that the teaching of dependent 
arising makes four points.40 (r) It shows that there is continuity 
and identity in the process of change and thereby denies the view 
of annihilationism; if we misunderstand the nature of this iden~ 
tity, however, we fall into the trap of eternalism. (2) By indic-
ating how various different phenomena condition each other, 
dependent arising also shows that there is difference and divers-
ity involved in the process of something changing, and thereby 
denies the view of eternalism; but when this aspect of dependent 
arising is not correctly grasped, we are drawn to the view of anni-
hilationism. (3)By indicating that actions are to be understood 
not as the work of an autonomous self but rather as the outcome 
of the complex interaction of diverse impersonal conditions, the 
view of selfhood is denied; but an incorrect grasp of this aspect 
of the teaching can lead to the view that actions are not real 
and have no moral consequences. (4) Finally, by indicating that 
appropriate consequences follow from specific causes, both the 
view that actions are not real and the view that causality is not 
real are abandoned; but wrongly grasped this aspect of dependent 
arising can lead both to the view of determinism and the view 
that causality is not real. In all this, then, views that see the world 
as random chaos, or as mechanically determined, or see individuals 
as having absolute free will or as having no choice whatsoever and 
simply being prey to random conditions or fixed destiny, are under-
stood as cut through by the middle way of dependent arising. 
All this may sound very conceptual, abstract, and philosophical 
but it is related rather precisely to the Buddhist understanding 
of spiritual practice. For there is one more aspect of the teach-
ing of dependent arising that I have so far left unmentioned. The 
twelvefold formula I quoted above is in accordance with the aris~ 
ing of suffering, but when the formula is quoted in Buddhist texts 
it is nearly always quoted with a second version in the order of 
the ceasing of suffering: 
With the utter fading away and ceasing of ignorance is the ceasing of 
formations, with the ceasing of formations is the ceasing of conscious~ 
ness, with the ceasing of consciousness is the ceasing of mind-and-body; 
with the ceasing of mind-and-body is the ceasing of the six senses, with

--- PAGE 177 ---
No Self 
I 57 
the ceasing of the six senses is the ceasing of sense-contact, with the 
ceasing of sense-contact is the ceasing of feeling, with the ceasing offeel-
ing is the ceasing of craving, with the ceasing of craving is the ceasing 
of grasping, with the ceasing of grasping is the ceasing of becoming, with 
the ceasing of becoming is the ceasing of birth, with the ceasing of birth 
is the ceasing of old age and death-grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow and 
despair cease. Thus is the ceasing of this entire mass of suffering. 
Thus not only does dependent arising hold the key to the way in 
which beings become enmeshed in suffering, it also points to the 
way in which they can free themselves from suffering. Precisely 
because all things occur in accordance with the law of dependent 
arising, small changes in the nature of the conditions that con-
stitute the process can produce different effects. And because 
the mind contains the seeds of wholesome action-namely non-
attachment, friendliness, and wisdom~as well as of unwhole-
some action, the root causes of suffering-namely ignorance 
and craving-can be gradually undermined and eradicated. It is 
because selfhood or personal continuity resides in the causal 
conditioning that is circumscribed by dependent arising that we 
can change, that we can bring about the cessation of suffering. 
Indeed, if I were an unchanging 'self', what would be the point 
of trying to change myself? The spiritual life would be meaningless. 
The work of Buddhist practice then is quite simply to cultivate 
those conditions that set in motion and bring about the process 
of the ceasing of ignorance leading to the ceasing of suffering. 
A significant ancient variation on the formula of dependent aris-
ing, having detailed the standard sequence of conditions lead-
ing to the arising of this whole mass of suffering, thus goes on to 
state that: 
Conditioned by (1) suffering, there is (2) faith, conditioned by faith, there 
is (3) gladness, conditioned by gladness, there is (4) joy, conditioned 
by joy, there is (5) tranquillity, conditioned by tranquillity, there is (6) 
happiness, conditioned by happiness, there is (7) concentration, condi-
tioned by concentration, there is (8) knowledge and vision of what truly 
is, conditioned by knowledge and vision of what truly is, there is (9) dis-
enchantment, conditioned by disenchantment, there is ( IO) dispassion, 
conditioned by dispassion, there is (II) freedom, conditioned by free-
dom, there is (12) knowledge that the defilements are destroyed.41

--- PAGE 178 ---
No Self 
FIGURE r. The Tibetan 'Wheel of Existence'

--- PAGE 179 ---
No Self 
I 59 
This version of the formula introduces some of the technical 
terminology of Buddhist meditation which will be discussed in 
the next chapter. But what we must understand here is that Bud-
dhist thought envisages that there are essentially two currents of 
the mind, one leading towards the arising of suffering, 'and one 
leading towards its cessation; both function according to the pro-
cess of dependent arising, since this describes the way things are, 
whether or not there is any buddha or Buddhist teaching in the 
world to draw it to our attention. The law of dependent arising 
is the way things are, it is Dharma-even when there is no bud-
dha in the world to point this out.42 
The chain of dependent arising is sometimes referred to in 
Buddhist texts as 'the wheel of becoming' (bhava-cakra/-cakka), 
There is an old tradition of representing this graphically. Indeed, 
instructions for this are included in the Mfilasarvastivadin Vinaya, 
although nowadays the tradition is continued only in Tibetan 
Buddhism (see Figure I ).43 The wheel itself is shown clutched in 
the hands and jaws of Yama, the god of death. The outer circle 
shows the twelve links: a blind man (ignorance), a potter fash-
ioning a pot (formations), a monkey picking a fruit (conscious-
ness), a boat on a journey (mind and body), a house with six 
windows (the six sense-spheres), a couple embracing (sense con-
tact), a man struck in the eye by an arrow (feeling), a man drink-
ing (thirst), a man taking hold of a fruit (grasping), a pregnant 
woman (becoming), a woman in labour (birth), a man carrying 
a corpse to a charnel ground (old age and death). The next cir-
cle in shows six basic realms of rebirth: at the top, the heavenly 
realms of the gods, moving clockwise, the jealous gods, animals, 
hells, hungry ghosts, and humans. Moving inwards again we see 
beings rising (on the left) and falling (on the right). At the hub, 
driving the whole process, are a cock (greed), a snake (hatred) 
and a pig (ignorance).44 
Did the Buddha deny the existence of the self? 
I have been discussing just what is involved in the Buddhist denial 
of the self, and some of the possible philosophical difficulties that

--- PAGE 180 ---
160 
No Self 
arise from conceiving of persons in terms of sequences of caus-
ally connected physical and mental events rather than enduring 
substances. As I have indicated, the philosophical and concep-
tual elaboration of the teaching of no self in conjunction with 
that of dependent arising is one of the hallmarks of Buddhist 
thought. But the view that the teaching of no self annihilates the 
individual and with it the basis of morality has been a feature 
of the work of a number of nineteenth- and twentieth-century 
scholars of Buddhism. Some of these accept the conclusion that 
the teaching of the Buddha is thus irredeemably nihilistic. Others 
have argued that the Buddhist elaboration of the teaching of no 
self is the work of later scholastics who have misunderstood what 
the Buddha actually taught.45 Such scholars generally proceed by 
pointing to the fact that in the earliest texts the Buddha certainly 
uses the term 'self' and at the same time fails to deny categoric-
ally the existence of the self. Much in the manner of certain 
Upani~adic teachers, the Buddha is merely represented as stating 
what is not the self. Thus, it is claimed, when the aggregates are 
said not to be self, only the things that constitute our ordinary 
experience are denied as self; the door is left open for a metaphys-
ical, absolute self that underlies or is beyond those experiences 
-the mysterious, ungraspable iitman of the Upani~ads. The argu-
ment here is that, as a pragmatic teacher, either the Buddha was 
an agnostic as far as a metaphysical self was concerned, or he 
did indeed accept its existence but wished to avoid becoming in-
volved in unnecessary speculations concerning its ultimate nature. 
The point that the Buddha uses the term 'self' in the earliest 
texts has in effect already been dealt with above since it is to be 
referred to the distinction between conventional and ultimate truth; 
Moreover, it should be noted in this connection that the word 
iitman is used in Sanskrit as an ordinary reflexive pronoun: thus 
if one wants to say, 'he threw himself into the river' in Sanskrit, 
one says that he threw his iitman into the river without any sug-
gestion that it is his eternal and immortal soul that has been thrown 
into the river. 
The point that the Buddha fails to deny the self, but only states 
what it is not, is more interesting. In one particular passage of

--- PAGE 181 ---
No Self 
r6r 
the Nikayas we are told how the Buddha was once asked by the 
wanderer Vacchagotta whether the self existed.46 The Buddha 
remained silent. Vacchagotta asked whether the self did not 
then exist. The Buddha once again remained silent. The J?uddha 
then explained to the curious Ananda that if he had answered 
that the self exists it would have been to side with those ascetics 
and brahmins who hold the doctrine of 'eternalism'; moreover 
it would not have been in accordance with his understanding 
that all phenomena (dharma) are not self. On the other hand if 
he had answered that the self does not exist it would have been 
to side with those ascetics and brahmins who hold the doctrine 
of 'annihilationism'; moreover it would have thrown poor Vac-
chagotta into even more confusion, as he would have concluded 
that formerly he had a self but now he did not. 
Essentially this refusal to answer Vacchagotta categorically 
must be seen in the same light as the refusal to give unequivocal 
answers to the ten undetermined questions; that is, the terms in 
which the question is couched are not accepted. Furthermore, 
we should note that, while the Buddha may refuse to give a cat-
egorical answer when asked whether or not the self exists, he is 
nevertheless recorded as stating that all those ascetics and brah-
mins who contemplate the self in various ways in fact contem-
plate the five aggregates or one of them, and on the basis of this 
come to the conclusion, 'I exist'.47 This makes it clear, I think, 
that to talk of a self that exists apart from the five aggregates is 
meaningless for the Buddha. Thus the Buddha's silence here is 
not about leaving the door open for some mysterious, ungrasp-
able absolute self. The Buddha's suggestion to Ananda that if he 
had told Vacchagotta that the self does not exist he would have 
become even more confused is revealing. 
What is at issue here is not so much the question of the exist-
ence or non-existence of the self, but that in seeking to answer 
the question of its existence the ordinary unawakened mind that 
is not free from grasping inevitably gets entangled in views and 
theories about the self. As we have seen, the awakened mind, 
on the other hand, breaks free from all views about the self. Part 
of the problem here stems from a failure on the part of some

--- PAGE 182 ---
No Self 
modern scholars to appreciate the relationship between the 
intellectual (cognitive) and emotional (affective) dimensions of 
the teaching of no self. From the Buddhist perspective, the mind 
needs to give up all attachment to any view about the self. That 
is, to think 'I do not exist' reveals no less preoccupation and en tan~; 
glement with the notion of my self and its existence than to think 
'I exist'. Buddhist thought is thus concerned with both our con~ 
scious intellectual theories about our 'selves' and also the way; 
in which our minds and emotions cling to the idea of our indk 
vidual existence at a subconscious level. This is well illustrateci; 
by the story of the monk Khemaka who informs a group of monkS' 
that, although he does not view any one of the aggregates as th~; 
self, yet the idea of his own existence in the subtle form of the! 
'the conceit "I am"' clings to the aggregates as a faint smell of 
dirt might still cling to washed clothes. 48

--- PAGE 183 ---
7 
The Buddhist Path 
The Way of Calm and Insight 
Introductory remarks 
The previous two chapters have focused on the Buddhist under-
standing of the nature of the world and of the individual; we have 
seen how Buddhist thought sees the world of our. experience 
as constructed in dependence upon a variety of conditions, the 
most crucial of which are greed, hatred, and delusion. The dis-
cussion of cosmology, the self, and dependent arising in effect 
represents an elaboration of the first and second of the four noble 
truths, namely suffering and its arising. This discussion has at times 
touched on quite technical areas of Buddhist intellectual theory. 
We come now to the fourth truth, the path leading to the cessa-
tion of suffering, the practice of Buddhism. In this connection 
also, Buddhist tradition provides us with rather elaborate theor-
etical accounts, this time focusing on the stages of the path. There 
is sometimes the idea in the West that Buddhism is an overly 
philosophical and intellectual religion, but we should be careful 
not to mistake Buddhism's intellectual theories for Buddhism 
itself-just as we should not confuse learning to swim with gain-
ing an understanding of the theory of buoyancy and propulsion, 
or being able to play a musical instrument with an exact the-
oretical knowledge of where one has to put one's fingers on a 
fretboard or keyboard to produce a certain melody. Such theor-
etical knowledge may be useful in the process of learning, but the 
experience of practice is never quite what one's understanding 
of theory leads one to expect. 
Buddhist theory is, then, the soil in which understanding may 
grow.l It should, moreover, be considered as intended more for 
the benefit of monks or committed lay followers, who already

--- PAGE 184 ---
The Buddhist Path 
have some basis in ordinary, everyday Buddhist practice, than 
for the beginner. The vast majority of Buddhists today, as in the 
past, do not concern themselves with intellectual theory but with 
basic Buddhist practice. There are, furthermore, traditions in 
Buddhism that are somewhat critical of theory, suggesting that 
too much at the wrong time may clutter our minds and actually 
get in the way of the practice that can eradicate·attachment and 
bring true wisdom. With this in mind let us turn to the theoret-
ical account of the path that leads to the cessation of suffering. 
As we saw in Chapter 3 (pp. 81-2), in the earliest Buddhist texts 
the noble truth of the path to the cessation of suffering is most 
frequently summed up as the noble eightfold path: right view; 
right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right 
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. But rather 
than presenting it as equivalent to Buddhist practice in general} 
Buddhist writings usually understand the noble eightfold path in 
a more restricted sense, implied by the epithet 'noble' (iirya!ariya); 
The term indicates that one who has established these eight 
qualities has in fact found the way to the cessation of suffering__::: 
like one finding a path in the jungle leading to a beautiful city'~ 
But the 'ordinary man' (prthagjana/puthujjana) who is plagued 
by greed, hatred, and delusion cannot simply call into being the 
right view of such 'noble ones' (iirya!ariya) who have found the 
path. He cannot, as it were, simply open the door and set out ott 
the noble eightfold path, first he must negotiate the jungle of his 
views, behaviour, and emotions in order to find the eight quaP 
ities. Much of the Buddhist path is thus concerned not so much 
with walking the noble eightfold path as with finding the noble. 
eightfold path. The Buddhist practitioner thus sets out on the· 
ordinary path of Buddhist practice in order gradually to transform 
view, intention, speech, action, endeavour, mindfulness, and con_. 
centration into the eight qualities of the noble path; once on the! 
noble path he may further develop and perfect these eight quah 
ities and follow the path to the complete cessation of suffering. 
It is the structure of the 'the step-by-step discourse' (anuparvikii,, 
kathii/anupubbi-kathii), rather than the eightfold path, that inform.s

--- PAGE 185 ---
The Buddhist Path 
!65 
the general accounts of the Buddhist path as a gradual progres-
sion from the fundamental practices of generosity (dana) and con-
duct (szlalfila), to the cultivation of concentration (samiidhi) and 
wisdom (prajiia/paiiiia) by means of meditative development 
(bhiivanii) (see above, pp. 83-4). The often repeated step-by-step 
discourse represents perhaps the most succinct statement of this 
gradual path in the Nikayas/ Agamas. An equally early but fuller 
expression is found in the schema of 'the fruits of asceticism' 
(sriimm:zya-phala/samaiiiia-phala ), an essentially stock account of 
the path, which is again repeated with slight variations in anum-
ber of places in the Nikayas/ Agamas. This schema is assumed and, 
in one way or another, adapted by the later manuals such as the 
Visuddhimagga, the Abhidharmakosa, Kamalasila's Bhavanakrama 
('Stages of Meditation', eighth century) and also Chinese and later 
Tibetan works such as Chih-i's Mo-ho chih-kuan ('Great Calm and 
Insight') and Hsiu-hsi chih-kuan tso-ch'an fa-yao ('The Essentials 
for Sitting in Meditation and Cultivating Calm and Insight', 
sixth century), sGam-po-pa's Thar-pa rin-po-che'i rgyan ('Jewel 
Ornament of Liberation', twelfth century) and Tsong-kha-pa's 
Lam rim chen mo ('Great Graduated Path', fourteenth century). 
It is within this basic framework that I shall set out Buddhist prac-
tice. I will be referring to the details as set out by Buddhaghosa 
in his Visuddhimagga and Vasubandhu in his Abhidharmakosa, 
since both these accounts acquired a certain authority for those 
that followed. It must be emphasized, however, that the Bud-
dhist meditation tradition is extremely rich, and the material I 
am presenting embodies a tradition of creative adaptation that 
continues down to the present day. Important approaches to the 
practice of Buddhist meditation that I am forced to pass over 
include Ch'an (Japanese Zen) and esoteric systems of Tibetan 
tantra, Chinese Chen Yen (Japanese Shingon), and the less well-
known esoteric Theravada tradition (see Chapter 10). 
The role of faith 
While the noble eightfold path may he understood as strictly 
relevant only to the practice of the 'noble ones', nevertheless its

--- PAGE 186 ---
!66 
The Buddhist Path 
basic structure can still be seen as revealing something general 
about the nature of the spiritual path: the basic dependence; 
of one's actions (items 3-5) upon one's beliefs and aspiration~ 
(items 1-2), and, in turn, of one's basic emotional state (items' 
6-8) upon one's actions. In fact here is a certain parallelism 
between the structure of the eightfold path and the chain of; 
dependent arising, where ignorance conditions certain action&l 
which in turn condition one's rebirth. The parallelism is clearer 
when, as often in the early texts, we find talk of wrong view, wrong' 
intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wron~' 
endeavour, wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration. Moreover;! 
as the positive sequence of dependent arising begins with faith\ 
(sraddhii/saddhii), so the sequence of the eightfold path begins; 
with right view (samyag-dr~tilsammii-ditthi). Without some inP 
tial trust in the fact that there is a way out of suffering, withouf 
some seed of understanding of the nature of suffering and its cesJ 
sation, we would never begin to look for the path and we would( 
have no hope of finding it. 
An ancient formula describes the beginning of the path in the 
following terms: 
A Tathagata appears in the world ... He teaches the Dharma that is, 
beautiful in the beginning, beautiful in the middle, and beautiful in the: 
end. A householder or a householder's son or someone born into some7 
family hears that Dharma. And hearing the Dhafma, he gains faith in 
the Tathagata.2 
Faith or confidence in the Buddha, his teaching (dharma/dhamma) 
and the community (smigha) of those who have followed and real-
ized the teaching is the starting point of the Buddhist path that 
is assumed both by the earliest texts and by those brought up 
in traditional Buddhist cultures today. Yet those of us whose 
sensibilities have been moulded by more recent Western inteiJ 
lectual traditions are often uncomfortable in the presence of 
religious faith and its devotional and ritual expression. Indeeq 
nineteenth- and early twentieth-century enthusiasts have on occa~ 
sion presented Buddhism as the answer to the modern world's 
'crisis of faith': a religion devoid of belief in God and the saving

--- PAGE 187 ---
The Buddhist Path 
power of rituals, whose truths are not accepted on the authority 
of scripture, but verified by direct experience. 
Certainly the Buddha counsels the Kalamas not to reject or 
accept things because tradition, scripture, reasoning, logic, or 
argument tells them to do so, nor out of respect for some ascetic, 
but rather because of their own direct knowledge.3 Yet a preoc-
cupation with the Kalama Sutta as a repudiation of faith betrays 
a misunderstanding of the very nature of faith and its devotional 
and ritual expression in Buddhism. As the Buddhist scholar 
Edward Conze has commented: 
This sceptical age dwells anyway far too much on the intellectual side 
of faith. Sraddhti, the word we render as 'faith', is etymologically akin 
to Latin cor, 'the heart', and faith is much more a matter of the heart 
than the intellect.4 
Conze's comment highlights a distinction that is sometimes made 
between faith as 'cognitive' and faith as 'affective'. Faith in its 
cognitive mode is a putative knowledge or awareness that amounts 
to belief in propositions or statements of which one does not, or 
cannot, have direct knowledge. Faith in its affective mode, on 
the other hand, is a positive emotional response to sonieone or 
something one has heard or read. The Buddhist understanding 
of 'faith' is almost entirely affective. In other words, Buddhist 
texts understand faith in the Buddha and Dharma not so much 
as a matter of intellectual assent to certain propositions about 
the world in the form of a Buddhist creed, as of a state of trust, 
confidence, affection, and devotion inspired by the person of the 
Buddha and his teachings-a confidence that there is indeed a 
path leading to the cessation of suffering which has been walked 
by the Buddha and his followers. 
· 
The traditional expression of one's faith, one's commitment 
to the Buddhist path, is the act of going to the three 'jewels' of 
the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha for refuge, realized by the 
formal recitation of the threefold formula set out at the end of 
Chapter I (seep. 34).5 Going for refuge implies the adopting 
of one of two broad approaches to Buddhist practice: the way of 
the lay follower (upiisaka) and the way of the ordained monk

--- PAGE 188 ---
I68 
The Buddhist Path 
(bhik~u!bhikkhu) or nun (bhik~wfi/bhikkhuni). In practice, the, 
strength of commitment of both may vary, but generally, of course, 
the monastic way of life represents the ultimate commitment to 
the religious life, the ultimate expression of faith. But for lay 
follower and monastic alike, the three 'jewels' remain powerful 
objects for the ritual and devotional expression of their faith. 
The precise form the earliest devotions took is unclear, but 
they centred around the worship of stfipas. Thus the Buddha 
himself is presented as recommending that faithful monks, nuns, 
laymen, and laywomen visit the four sites where he was born; 
gained awakening, first taught Dharma, and died; he adds that any 
one who dies with a serene heart in the course of making such 
a pilgrimage will gain a good rebirth.6 Given the Indian cultural 
context, worship no doubt took a form not entirely dissimilar from 
more contemporary Buddhist practice: the making of offerings 
-especially of flowers, incense, and lamps-and the chanting of 
verses and formulas as the basis for the recollection of the qual-
ities of the Buddha, Dharma, and Satigha.7 Early Buddhist art 
is often described as 'aniconic' since it avoided representing the 
Buddha in human form, using instead various symbols (an empty 
seat beneath the tree of awakening or the wheel of Dharma), 
but from the second century CE the Buddha image increasingly 
became a focus for such devotions and meditations. Another 
ancient ritual practice important for the subsequent history of 
Buddhism and which seems to be witnessed already in the earliest 
writings is the recitation of certain sfltras as protective charms 
(rak~ii/paritta).
8 The Vinaya describes monks circumambulating 
a monastery and chanting to protect the Buddha when they 
believe his life is threatened.9 One of the oldest such protective 
. chants is the Atiiniitiya Sutta, a charm to protect the monk medit-
ating in the forest from unsympathetic demons (yak~a/yakkha).
10 
Alongside specific charms for the protection of women in child~ 
birth or the pacifying of dangerous snakes, for example, chanting 
Buddhist texts and formulas, such as the refuges and precepts, 
in general came to be regarded as effective in protecting one against 
the dangers of disease and accident. The second- or first-century 
BCE Milindapanha, while acknowledging the inability of such

--- PAGE 189 ---
The Buddhist Path 
charms to give us absolute protection from the effects of our 
bad karma, nevertheless defends their efficacy in certain circum-
stances.11 The different traditions of Buddhism in Sri Lanka and 
South-East Asia, in East Asia, and in Tibet have all developed 
their own distinctive forms of devotional and protective ritual, 
yet these derive from a common ancient ancestry. 
The Buddha of the early texts may be critical, then, of cer-
tain kinds of brahmanical ritual, especially those involving the 
sacrifice of animals; he may also deny that faith and rituals can 
of themselves bring about the final cessation of suffering. But 
there is no real evidence in the early texts to suggest a negative 
attitude to faith and its ritual and devotional expression; indeed 
we even find the Buddha apparently approving of worship at 
non-Buddhist shrines.12 Faith and the activities which express that 
faith are, in fact, seen as performing a spiritually crucial function: 
they soothe and settle the mind thereby arousing the confidence 
to continue the practice of the path. Moreover, the mind that is 
quietly confident and trustful of the power of the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha is its own protection. Two ancient images for faith 
are worth noting. Faith is compared to a gem which, when thrown 
into a stream that has just been stirred up by the passing of an 
emperor's army, immediately causes the sand, silt, and mud to settle. 
Or if on.e were standing at the bank of a river in spate unable to 
judge whether it might be possible to leap over it and someone 
should come along and indeed jump across, then there might arise 
the confidence that it is indeed possible to cross the torrent. So 
faith has two characteristics: it causes the mind to become set-
tled and composed and it inspires it with the confidence to leap 
forward. 13 In sum, devotional and ritual practice constitute a pre-
liminary meditation practice, settling and composing the mind in 
preparation for the higher stages of Buddhist meditative practice. 
Good conduct 
I have already briefly discussed generosity and good conduct as 
bases of 'auspicious ·action' or 'merit' (pu~J,ya!puiiiia) above (see 
pp. 101-2). In the present context I wish to comment further

--- PAGE 190 ---
The Buddhist Path 
on the Buddhist understanding of 'good conduct' or 'virtue: 
(sllalsfla ).It is useful here to make a distinction between the good 
conduct as the refraining from various deeds that are considered 
unwholesome and harmful to both oneself and others, and the 
perfected conduct of one who is awakened, such as a buddha 
or arhat. The ordinary unawakened person sometimes acts in a 
wholesome, sometimes in an unwholesome manner. The goal 
of the Buddhist path is to eradicate the unwholesome motivac 
tions that cause harmful behaviour. To achieve this the mind 
needs to be 'trained'. Part of the training involves the undertak~ 
ing of various precepts, literally principles or bases of training 
(sik$iipada/sikkhiipada), in order to try to restrain the mind and 
draw it back from the grosser kinds of unwholesome behaviour; 
For one who is awakened such precepts are redundant, not 
because he or she is now permitted these kinds of behaviour, but 
because conduct is now perfected and the temptation or rather 
the motivation at the root of such kinds of behaviour has gone. 
That is, the ordinary unawakened person's actions are sometimes 
motivated by greed, aversion, and delusion and sometimes by 
non-attachment, friendliness, and wisdom. Since a buddha or arhat 
has completely eradicated the defilements and any latent tendency 
to attachment, aversion, or delusion, he or she acts exclusively 
from non-attachment, friendliness, and wisdom. 
As part of the practice of the path, it is traditional for the 
lay follower to take on five precepts: to refrain from harming liv-
ing creatures, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, false 
speech, intoxicants that cause heedlessness. On occasion, for 
limited periods, the committed lay follower may take on eight 
precepts, while the monk's good conduct is founded on ten basic 
precepts elaborated in terms of the the 200 plus rules of the 
priitimok$a (see Chapter 4); much of this elaboration in prin-
ciple involves distinguishing between serious and less serious 
breaches of the ten precepts. 
The five precepts are for the most part self-explanatory, 
although there is a certain subtlety in their definitjon. The first pre~ 
cept is usually taken as specifically referring to killing, although 
a wider definition is not excluded. The second refers in simple

--- PAGE 191 ---
The Buddhist Path 
terms to stealing, although once more the wider definition begs 
the question of what precisely constitutes 'what is not given'. The 
third precept is traditionally taken as referring to sexual inter-
course with partners who are prohibited-in other words, adul-
tery; but again, the precept raises the question of what exactly 
constitutes sexual misconduct (and even, since a literal transla-
tion of the expression might be 'misconduct with regard to sen-
sual desire',· questions about more general sensual indulgence). 
The fourth precept refers specifically to lying but the question 
of right speech is elaborated upon in Buddhist texts (see below). 
The fifth precept also has wider implications. Heedlessness is inter-
preted by Theravadin commentators as the absence of 'mindful-
ness' (smrtilsati), an important psychological quality. It is not the 
taking of alcohol or other drugs as such that is problematic, but 
the state of mind that it generally induces: a lack of mental clar-
ity with an increased tendency to break the other precepts. The 
fifth precept also highlights once more that what we have to do 
with here are 'principles of training' and what is of paramount 
importance in the Buddhist conception of spiritual training is 
mental clarity: this helps to create the conditions that conduce 
to seeing the way things truly are. The additional precepts in the 
lists of eight and ten are similarly principles of training seen as 
helpful in the cultivation of the path, rather than prohibitions 
against intrinsically unwholesome ways of conduct. 
The kinds of behaviour that the five precepts are intended 
to prevent one from committing are outlined by the list of ten 
courses of unwholesome action: harming living creatures, taking 
what is not given, sexual misconduct, false speech, divisive speech, 
harsh speech, frivolous speech, covetousness, anger, wrong view 
(see above, pp. 120-1). In these ten actions-three of body, four 
of speech, and three of thought-we find speech further elabo-
rated, while the particular emphasis on actions of thought and 
the mind draws attention once again to the Buddhist focus on 
karma as essentially a matter of the mind and intention: what is 
important is one's state of mind, and a moment of intense anger 
and hatred,· even .if it does not lead to actual physical violence 
or verbal abuse, nevertheless constitutes a real 'deed' or karma.

--- PAGE 192 ---
The Buddhist Path 
The five precepts and the ten courses of action essentially 
define for us right speech and action of the eightfold path. What 
of 'right livelihood', the third item of the eightfold path that bears 
on good conduct? This is basically understood as making one's 
living by means that avoid activity infringing the five precepts. 
Such occupations as that of the soldier, butcher, or trader in 
alcohol are therefore called into question. Yet in approaching 
questions of good conduct and the precepts, Buddhist tradition 
has generally shown an attitude of practicality and flexibility. 
In order to illustrate this it is worth briefly considering the ques-
tion of vegetarianism in the light of the first precept. 
The ethical ideal that underlies the precepts is considered 
to be rather exalted, such that only someone very advanced on 
the path (a stream-attainer, or even a buddha or arhat) could 
really live up to it. Indeed, good conduct is ultimately under-
stood in Buddhist thought not in terms of adherence to ex-
ternal rules, but as the expression of the perfected motivations 
of non-attachment, friendliness, and wisdom. Thus the arhat is 
described as simply being incapable of intentionally acting in a 
manner that is not in accordance with the precepts and ten 
courses of wholesome action.14 In other words, ordinary beings 
cannot hope to keep the precepts perfectly; rather they abide by 
the precepts as rules of training in order to curb the grosser forms 
of bad conduct. At a deeper level there is also perhaps a sense 
in which no one, not even a buddha, can hope to live in the world 
and cause absolutely no harm to any living being. That is, it is 
almost impossible to isolate and disassociate oneself absolutely 
from activities that indirectly cause harm to living creatures. 
That this is so is an aspect of the deepest level of the first noble: 
truth: the world, sarp.sara, is by its very nature an imperfect 
place, a place where suffering is always lurking in one form or 
another. The question of acting ethically then becomes one of 
where to draw the line. 
In respect of harming living creatures Buddhist thought has 
generally and in the first place drawn the line at direct and in ten-: 
tional killing. Of course, this does not mean that harm that falls 
short of killing is ethical, or that by only giving the order to kill

--- PAGE 193 ---
The Buddhist Path 
173 
one is free of blame. Yet there is no direct prescription against 
the eating of meat in the earliest Buddhist texts. Buddhist monks 
and nuns, who are dependent on what is offered to them, are 
encouraged not to be too fussy and are permitted to accept meat 
provided it has not been specifically slaughtered to 'teed them 
(though certain kinds of flesh such as that of humans, snakes, 
and horses are never allowable ).15 On the other hand there is 
also an ancient and widespread Buddhist attitude that regards 
vegetarianism as the appropriate response to the first precept. 
Although many Buddhists in traditional Buddhist cultures are 
not strict vegetarians, eating no meat is respected as further-
ing the aspiration to live without harming living creatures that 
underlies the first precept. The Mahayana Larikiivatiira Sutra 
explicitly argues at length against meat-eating, and its outlook 
has been influential especially in East Asian Buddhism, where 
vegetarianism has often been the norm for members of the Bud-
dhist monastic community and committed lay followers.16 
But there is also in the Buddhist attitude to good conduct the 
suggestion tha:t adherence to 'moral' principles for their own sake 
may be an expression of rigid views and attachment-'clinging 
to precepts and vows' (slla-vrata-pariimarsa!sfla-bbata-pariimiisa) 
-rather than of true compassion. Ultimately Buddhism teaches 
that the nature of good conduct is subtle and complex-so com-
plex that it precisely cannot be solved by reference to precepts 
and rules of conduct. It can only be solved by following a path 
of training that ends in rooting out greed, aversion, and delu-
sion. Ethical precepts are a necessary part of the training that 
constitutes that path, but attachment to those precepts, like all 
attachments, must itself be given up. 
As with faith, the practice of good conduct is once more ori-
entated towards meditation practice. An important aspect of medi-
tation practice is the stilling and calming of the mind. Apart from 
the harm they cause to others, and the unpleasant results they 
will bring upon us through the operation of the law of karma and 
the process of rebirth, the ten courses of unwholesome action 
are also seen as damaging to one's own sense of well-being, result-
ing in feelings of guilt and remorse. At a subtler level they are

--- PAGE 194 ---
174 
The Buddhist Path 
seen as intrinsically disturbing. Keeping the precepts, on the other 
hand, frees the mind from guilt and also has a strong protective 
quality, warding off danger. Thus it is said that the one who abides 
by the precepts 'experiences a blameless happiness within'Y In 
fact, as expressions of deep faith and trust in the Buddha's teach: 
ing, Buddhist devotional and ritual acts (going for refuge, taking 
the precepts, chanting siltras, etc.) are generally seen as having 
a protective quality, keeping the mind free of fear and warding 
off danger.18 We have here an understanding that verges on the 
magical. 
The practice of calm meditation 
Basic principles of Buddhist meditation 
We come now to the subject of meditation and its role in the 
Buddhist spiritual path. Curiously it is difficult to find a precise 
equivalent of the term 'meditation' in Buddhist technical termi-
nology. The two principal candidates are bhiivanii and yoga. The 
first of these is the older, specifically Buddhist term and means 
literally 'bringing into being'; it refers to mental or spiritual exer.; 
cises aimed at developing and cultivating wholesome mental 
states that conduce to the realization of the Buddhist path, Such 
exercises may centre on sitting quietly in a cross,legged posture; 
but should not be reduced to that. The second term means 
approximately 'effort' or 'work' and relatively early in the his-
tory of Indian religion came to refer to specifically spiritual work 
and techniques. In this sense the term is one of very varied ap-
. plication, there being many different approaches to yoga within 
Indian tradition from those such as hatha-yoga which focus on 
the practice of different bodily postures (iisana) to those such as 
Buddhist yoga which focus on contemplative techniques while 
sitting in some form of the cross-legged posture. 
Buddhist tradition comes to consider meditation by way of two 
different but complementary aspects, namely calm .(samatha/ 
samatha) and insight ( vipasyaniilvipassanii), which are geared to 
the cultivation of deep states of concentration (samiidhi) and

--- PAGE 195 ---
The Buddhist Path 
175 
wisdom (prajiiii/pannii) respectively. Some modern scholars have 
seen these two kinds of meditation as reflecting tensions and even 
disagreements within the earliest Buddhist tradition concerning 
the nature of the Buddhist path. I shall return to this matter 
presently. But, whatever their early history and origin's, it is clear 
that in developed Buddhist theory the two aspects of meditation, 
calm and insight, are seen as together forming the basis for the 
realization of the Buddhist goal: when calm and insight medita-
tion are brought together (yuga-naddha), the unconditioned may 
be experienced. 
According to a cardinal principle of Buddhist psychology our 
minds are fundamentally clear and pure; they have become stained 
by the operation of adventitious defilements (kle§a/kilesa). 
Radiant is the mind, monks, but sometimes it is defiled by defilements 
that come from without. The ordinary man without understanding does 
not know it as it truly is.19 
The goal of Buddhist practice is to bring to an end the operation 
of these defilements. The basic method is to restore to the mind 
something of its fundamental state of clarity and stillness. This 
clarity of mind provides the opportunity for seeing into the op-
eration of the defilements and the mind's true nature, for seeing 
things as they really are, for fully awakening. The way of return-
ing the mind to its state of clarity is by the use of the techniques 
of calm meditation, which can temporarily suppress or block the 
immediate defilements that disturb the mind; the way of seeing 
clearly into the nature of the mind is by the methods of insight 
meditation, which, in association with calm, can finally eradicate 
those defilements. 
The way of Buddhist meditation is, then, to look deep into 
ourselves to see the very nature of our minds. The principal 
immediate mental defilements that constitute the obstacles to the 
path are known as the five 'hindrances' (nivara1Ja): sensual desire, 
ill-will, tiredness and sleepiness, excitement and depression, and 
doubt. An ancient simile compares the mind that is continually 
prey to the five hindrances to a bowl of water disturbed or con-
taminated in five ways: mixed with red dye, steaming hot, full of

--- PAGE 196 ---
The Buddhist Path 
moss and leaves, ruffled by the wind, muddied and in a dark place. 
If someone should look down into a bowl of water contaminated 
in any one of these five ways, then he would not be able to see 
a clear and true reflection of himself. On the other hand, if one 
were to look down into a bowl of water that is free of such con-
taminations, one would see a clear and true reflection. Likewise; 
the mind that is disturbed by the hindrances will never succeed 
in coming to know its true nature. 
This then is the basic theory of Buddhist meditation stated in 
the terms of the oldest texts. While later schools and traditions 
may change and adapt the terminology used, while they may elab-
orate the stages and techniques in a number of different ways, 
while they may give distinctive technical accounts of the content 
of the knowledge gained in insight meditation, the basic prin-
ciple for the most part holds good: one stills and clears the mind 
and then turns it towards investigation and insight. 
Stilling the mind 
The techniques of calm meditation involve counteracting the. 
tendency of the mind to restlessly seek out new and different 
objects of the senses. This is accomplished by developing a basic 
capacity of the mind to rest undisturbed on an object of per-
ception. This capacity, termed 'concentration' (samiidhi), is in 
fact understood as a prerequisite of all thought, .but in normal 
consciousness it functions only minimally. When this capacity is 
developed in meditation practice, however, it brings the mind to 
a condition of stillness in which it finds complete contentment 
with just one object of contemplation. In this condition the 
mind enters into quite different states of consciousness from its 
habitual, ordinary states. These states of consciousness may 
themselves be.termed samiidhi, or alternatively they are known 
as the dhyiinas (Palijhiina), a term which means something like 
'deep thought' or 'meditation'. In Buddhist technical terms, the 
mind has temporarily escaped from 'the sphere of the senses~ 
(kiimiivacara)-its normal preoccupation with thoughts that are 
in some way bound up with the objects o£ the five senses-to the 
subtle 'sphere of pure form' (rupiivacara )-a refined world of

--- PAGE 197 ---
The Buddhist Path 
177 
pure, abstract 'forms' (riipa ). The experience of this refined world 
of pure form comprises four increasingly subtle dhyiinas corres-
ponding to the sixteen Brahma realms of the Buddhist cosmos 
(Chapter 5). 
To begin to still the mind by the practice of calm meditation 
one needs, then, a suitable object of contemplation. Drawing 
on the earlier Nikayas/Agamas, later manuals such as Upatissa's 
Vimuttimagga ('Path of Freedom') and Buddhaghosa's Visud-
dhimagga give standardized lists of thirty-eight and forty ob-
jects of meditation (kammatthiina) respectively; Vasubandhu's 
Abhidharmakosa focuses on a more limited number of medita-
tion objects. Upatissa and Buddhaghosa initially discuss the sub-
jects of meditation from two points of view: (1) their suitability 
for the practice of the preliminary or advanced stages of calm 
meditation, and (2) their suitability for different personality 
types (see Table 4).20 
Certain objects-the six recollections ( anusmrti!anussati) of the 
Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, good conduct, generosity, 
and the gods, along with mindfulness of death-are suited to the 
preliminary practice of calm known as 'access concentration' 
(upaciira-samiidhi), which is a level of concentration considered 
to be on the brink offull dhyiina or 'absorption' (appanii). Others 
-the ten 'devices' (kasil;a), along with mindfulness of breath-
ing (iiniipiina-smrti!-sati)-are suitable for both the preliminary 
and more advanced stages. Yet others, such as the four 'form-
less' (arupa) meditations, can only be cultivated by the advanced 
practitioner of calm. Certain meditation subjects are also tra-
ditionally regarded as particularly suited to different character 
types. Thus someone with a strong tendency towards sensual desire 
should balance this by cultivating the ten meditations on 'ugliness' 
(asubha/asubha), that is, on the body in ten different degrees of 
putrefaction; someone with strong faith will respond to the first 
six recollections; while for someone with a tendency to intel-
lectualize and get lost in speculations, mindfulness of breathing 
is particularly recommended as cutting off discursive thinking; 
someone whose temperament is irritable and who tends towards 
states of anger and hatred might take one. of the four coloured

--- PAGE 198 ---
TABLE 4· The forty subjects of calm meditation according to Buddhaghosa 
SUBJECT 
PERSONALITY 
LEVEL 
SUBJECT 
PERSONALITY 
LEVEL 
roKASINAS 
ID RECOLLECTIONS 
earth l 
of the Buddha 
water 
all personality 
of the Dharma 
fire 
types 
of the Sangha_ 
r 
faith 
air 
of good conduct 
? access 
blue l 
rst-4th jhiina 
of generosity 
yellow 
hate 
of the gods 
red 
mindfulness of death 
intelligent 
white 
mindfulness of the body 
greed 
rstjhiina 
light 
} 
all personality 
mindfulness of breathing 
delusion/discursive 
rst-4th jhiina 
limited space 
types 
of peace 
intelligent 
access 
ID UGLINESSES 
4 IMMEASURABLES 
the bloated 
loving kindness 
) 
} rst-3rd jhiina 
the livid 
compassion 
hate 
the festering 
sympathetic joy 
the cut-up 
equanimity 
4thjhiina 
the gnawed 
greed 
rstjhiina 
the scattered 
4 FORMLESS MEDITATIONS 
the ·hacked and scattered 
boundless space 
the bleeding 
boundless consciousness 
the worm-infested 
nothingness 
all personality 
4thjhiina 
the skeleton 
neither perception nor 
types 
repulsiveness of food 
} . 
II" 
non-perception 
determining the 4 elements 
mte Igent 
access

--- PAGE 199 ---
The Buddhist Path 
179 
discs as a meditation subject. Upatissa and Buddhaghosa go into 
some detail concerning the analysis of different character types 
and how the way one carries out various tasks (how one eats or 
walks, for example) reveals the tendencies of one's personality. 
In this connection, they also emphasize the need for a medita-
tion teacher-the good friend (kalyii]Ja-mitral-mitta)-who can 
suggest and teach a suitable meditation subject. The importance 
of the teacher is, of course, one of the great themes of Buddhist 
practice. The teacher of meditation stands in the place of the 
Buddha himself and, just as one should have faith and trust in 
the Buddha and his teachings, so one must have faith and trust 
in the meditation teacher and his instructions; without such faith 
it is impossible to put the teacher's instructions into practice with 
the necessary sense of commitment. Thus kneeling before one's 
teacher and paying him appropriate respect are recommended 
as generating faith. 
It is sometimes suggested in scholarly studies that 'medita-
tion' is traditionally the preserve of a minority and elite group 
of Buddhist monastics.21 Obviously the question of which Bud-
dhists 'meditate' depends on how one defines 'meditation'. As 
. I suggested above, it is not entirely clear which Buddhist tech-
nical term the English word 'meditation' corresponds to. But it 
is clear that much of ordinary, everyday Buddhist devotional prac-
tice takes the form of some kind of recollection of the Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha, and also the other recollections of good con-
duct, generosity, and the gods.22 For Upatissa and Buddhaghosa 
such recollection practice constitutes the preliminary stage of 
calm meditation. There is, then, a real sense in which nearly all 
Buddhists-lay or monastic-can be considered 'meditators'. Even 
if the term bhiivanii is taken to imply the systematic cultivation 
of a particular meditation subject, the line between Buddhist devo-
tions and formal, systematic meditation is not sharp. Devotions 
arouse faith and compose the mind; to this extent they form a 
preliminary stage of calm meditation, settling the mind in a state 
close to dhyiina, technically termed 'access concentration'. To fully 
develop calm, however, one must cultivate a further subject of 
meditation.

--- PAGE 200 ---
180 
The Buddhist Path 
The hindrances and the limbs of dhyana 
The basic instructions for beginning meditation are very simple. 
One finds a quiet place and sits down in a cross-legged position 
and arousing the appropriate motivation one gently places the 
mind's attention on whatever is the particular object of medita-
tion. Inevitaply the meditator finds that his or her mind wanders 
and the attention must be repeatedly brought back to the object 
of meditation. The reason the mind fails to become absorbed in 
the object of meditation is twofold. On the one hand, the mind 
is prey to the five hindrances already mentioned. On the other 
hand, it has not developed sufficient skill in bringing the object 
to mind or, in technical terminology, the five. 'limbs' of dhyiina 
are not sufficiently strong. 
In principle, something ofthe process of overcoming the hind-
rances and developing the factors of dhyiina can be observed 
whenever the mind is applied to any new task that requires a 
certain mental application and dexterity. Take the example of 
learning to play a musical instrument. In order to progress one 
needs to practise regularly and patiently. Almost inevitably, at 
times other less taxing activities seem much more attractive 
and pleasurable than struggling with one's practice. This is the 
first hindrance of desire for the objects of the senses. At times 
one may become frustrated, irritated, and angry, seeing faults in 
one's musical instrument or teacher, or using the fact the neigh-
bours are making too much noise as a reason for not persever-
ing with one's practice. This is the second hindrance of ill will. 
Or the very thought of one's practice may make one feel tired 
and drowsy, yet when one thinks of doing something else that 
the mind finds more interesting, suddenly one feels wide awake 
and alert. This is the third hindrance of tiredness and sleepiness. 
Or one may suddenly become over-excited at one's progress, 
or depressed at what one sees as one's lack of progress. This 
is the fourth hindrance of excitement and depression. Finally 
one may doubt the whole enterprise, asking oneself what the 
point is in learning to play a musical instrument anyway. Just 
as anyone wishing to make progress in the learning of a musical

--- PAGE 201 ---
The Buddhist Path 
I8I 
instrument must acquire some measure of control over such 
hindrances, so the meditator intent on developing his meditation 
subject must deal with these immediate defilements of the mind. 
Again, at the outset of learning to play the guitar or piflno, the 
beginner must very consciously think where to put each individual 
finger. At the same time one must begin to pay attention to the 
subtler aspects of just how one places a finger on a key or plucks 
a string; one must pay attention to the subtle differences this 
gives to the quality and length of a note. These two aspects of 
paying attention to an object of consciousness are referred to 
in Buddhist psychology as vitarka!vitakka and vicara, which can 
be rendered very approximately as 'application of thought' and 
'examining'; these are the first two of the five limbs of dhyana. 
When these two aspects of thinking are developed in the con-
text of a particular skill we are trying to learn, a certain kind of 
quickening occurs: suddenly the mind is enlivened by its facility 
in the task at hand and begins to take pleasure in it; in con-
sequence it begins to feel more at ease and content. This is the 
arising of the next two limbs of dhyana, joy (prztilplti) and happi-
ness (sukha ). And as the mind feels happy and content it becomes 
less distracted and more absorbed in whatever it is doing. This 
is the arising of the fifth limb of dhyana, namely 'one-pointedness 
of the mind' ( cittaikagratalcittass' ekaggata) which is another term 
for 'concentration' or 'collectedness' (samadhi) itself. In the case 
of meditation practice, the mind ceases to seek out new objects 
of consciousness and becomes unified, resting on one object of 
consciousness without any tendency to move. 
The signs and the stages of joy 
The overcoming of the five hindrances and the coming into 
balance of these five limbs of dhyana is, according to the later 
manuals, equivalent to the mind becoming settled in 'access' 
concentration, a state of mind on the threshold of dhyana.23 The 
manuals describe the stages leading to access concentration in 
two different ways (see Table 5). In effect, Upatissa and Bud-
dhaghosa give an account in terms of three successive mental 
images or 'signs' (nimitta) and five stages of joy (pili), while Asanga

--- PAGE 202 ---
r82 
The Buddhist Path 
TABLE 5· Ascending stages of calm meditation 
meditational powers/higher knowledge/insight/formless attainments 
4thjhana 
3rd jhiina 
2ndjhiina 
Ist jhiina 
dhyiina 
suffusing joy 
access 
transporting joy 
descending joy 
momentary joy 
slight joy 
5 stages of joy 
concentration 
Buddhaghosa's 
stages of calm 
counterpart sign 
acquired sign 
preparatory sign 
3 'signs' 
concentrating 
unifying 
complete calming 
calming 
settling 
complete stilling 
thorough stilling 
continued stilling 
stilling the mind 
Asai:tga's stages 
of calm 
and Vasubandhu, the fathers of the Yogacara tradition of 
Mahayana thought, detail nine stages of the settling of the mind 
( citta-sthiti), although they too make reference to the mental images 
(pratibimba) seen in meditation. I will not go .into the details of 
the latter account here, but it has come to have great authority 
for Tibetan manuals of meditation.24 
The concept of the nimitta is most easily explained with ref-
erence to meditation on the coloured disks. To undertake this 
kind of meditation the meditator should first prepare a disk of 
the appropriate colour. He should then set it up in front of him 
and, sitting down, begin to try to place his attention on the disk. 
The 'initial' or 'preparatory sign' (parikamma-nimitta) is the 
gross physical object. After some practice, the meditator will no 
longer need the actual physical object to contemplate, but will 
be able to visualize the object in his mind directly; the object of 
meditation is now the 'acquired sign' (uggaha-nimitta). As the

--- PAGE 203 ---
The Buddhist Path 
meditator investigates and explores the acquired sign, there even-
tually arises the 'counterpart sign' (pa{ibhiiga-nimitta). The aris-
ing of the counterpart sign is concurrent with the attainment 
of access concentration. Whereas the acquired sign is a mental 
visualization of the physical object exactly as it appears-an 
eidetic image-the counterpart sign is a purified conceptual image 
free of any marks or blemishes. In the case of, say, the white or 
red disk the mind becomes completely absorbed in the concept 
of 'whiteness' or 'redness'. The arising of the counterpart sign is 
compared to the moon coming out from behind clouds. 
I have already mentioned how, as the mind becomes fam-
iliar with the object of meditation, it is enlivened and begins to 
feel more at ease. The stages of this process are charted rather 
exactly in the list of the five kinds of joy. Thus the initial stage 
of 'slight joy' simply raises the hairs of the body; 'momentary. 
joy' comes like repeated flashes of lightning, while 'descending 
joy' is stronger and washes over the body again and again and 
then subsides; 'transporting joy' has the power to lift the body 
into the air. A Thai meditation manual written at the turn of the 
last century describes it as follows: 
When transporting joy arises it is very strong; it makes the whole body 
shake and tremble. The meditator will fall to the left or to the right, 
bow down, clap hands and feet, sit down, stand up, and then run around 
filled with strange emotions. The meditators will cry and laugh and will 
not be able to shut their eyes or mouths. The veins will protrude and 
the blood feel hot and cold. The body will feel as if it is expanding and 
will levitate the length of a finger span, a cubit, an arm's length.25 
We are counselled that such phenomena are not a sign of mad-
ness. Rather they indicate the progress of one's meditation prac-
tice. Eventually, the mind settles in 'suffusing joy'; this kind of 
joy pervades the whole body touching every part and is likened 
to water flooding into a rock cave. The spiritual (niramisa) joy felt 
in meditation is contrasted by the tradition with carnal (samisa) 
joy. The point here seems not so much to suggest sexual pleasure 
as a mere metaphor for spiritual joy, but rather to indicate that 
the increasing joy experienced as the mind gradually becomes

--- PAGE 204 ---
The Buddhist Path 
settled and calm in meditation parallels in a real sense the stages 
of sexual excitement and enjoyment. Indeed, it is in such terms 
that some contemporary Buddhist monks describe their medita-
tion experience.26 The kinds of joy and 'signs' are in fact indic-
ative of the variety of visual and physical phenomena that may 
accompany meditationY Such phenomena seem to be something 
of a universal in the experience and lives of contemplatives from 
whatever religious tradition. 
With the suppression of the five hindrances and the arising of 
the counterpart sign, or, in Asanga's terms, wit!J. the attainment 
of the ninth stage of the settling of the mind, consciousness 
reaches the relative peace and quiet and clarity of 'access con-
centration'. This is distinguished from absorption or dhyiina 
proper by virtue of the fact that, although fully present, the five 
limbs of dhyiina are weak and unstable and liable to fail the med-
itator who will then fall from the state of concentration rather 
like a child who takes his first tentative steps and then falls in a 
heap. With practice the meditator achieves skill in absorption. 
The most ancient description of this process is as follows: 
Abandoning these five hindrances which are defilements of the mind 
and weaken understanding, quite secluded from the objects of sense-
desire and unwholesome states, he attains the first jhlina, a state of joy 
and happiness born of seclusion and accompanied by application of 
thought and examining. He soaks, pervades, fills and suffuses this very 
body with that joy and happiness born of seclusion such that there is no 
part of his whole body that is not suffused by that joy and happiness 
born of seclusion. It is as if a skilled bath attendant or his apprentice, 
having sprinkled bath-powder onto a bronze tray, were to knead it together 
evenly with drops of water such that the ball of bath-powder is covered 
and filled with moisture, is suffused with moisture within and without, 
and yet does not drip.28 
The stages of dhyana 
The initial attainment of meditative absorption or dhyiina is 
characterized by the presence and balancing of five mental qual-
ities, the limbs of dhyiina. But this initial attainment can be fur-
ther refined. The process of refinement seems once again best

--- PAGE 205 ---
The Buddhist Path 
understood by reference to some such process as that of learning 
to play a musical instrument. In the initial stage of competence 
the mind will still have to pay attention in the way described 
above: it will have to think consciously what to do. H;owever, as 
one's facility develops the process will become increasingly auto-
matic and unconscious-that is, the concert pianist does not 
have to think consciously where to put his hands or how to place 
her fingers, she just does it; nevertheless he is still fully aware 
of what he is doing. In much the same way, it seems, the med-
itator becomes able to attain states of concentration by simply 
adverting to the object of meditation. Attaining to states of con-
centration in this way without 'application of thought' or 'exam-
ining' is the characteristic of the second dhyiina, which thus has 
only three remaining limbs of dhyiina: joy, happiness, and one-
pointedness of mind. From here the state of concentration can 
be further refined. Joy is experienced as something that in itself 
can disturb the mind. With the subsiding of joy one attains the 
third dhyiina. In a similar manner the meditator eventually lets 
go of happiness too, and finally attains the fourth dhyiina, a state 
of purified equanimity and balance. 
The fourth dhyiina represents something of a turning point in 
the theory of the Buddhist path. In attaining the fourth dhyiina 
the process of stilling and calming the mind is essentially com-
plete. Although the theory allows for the further refining and 
stilling of the mind in the meditative attainments known as the 
four formless (arupa) attainments, these are presented as essen-
tially modifications and refinements of the fourth dhyiina.29 
The fourth dhyiina also forms the basis for the development of 
various meditational powers: the rddhis (Pali iddhi) or 'higher 
knowledges' (abhijfzii/abhiftfiii). The meditator is able to produce 
'mind-made' bodies: 
Being one he becomes many, being many he becomes one; unhindered 
he passes into ... an invisible state, through house-walls, through city-
walls, and through mountains, as if through space; he goes down into 
the earth and comes up, as if through water; he goes over firm wa(er, 
as if over earth; he travels through the sky cross-legged, as if he were 
a bird with wings; he touches and strokes with his hand the sun and

--- PAGE 206 ---
186 
The Buddhist Path 
the moon ... he has mastery with his body as far as the world of 
Brahma. 
Or he has knowledge of distant sounds, knowledge of the state 
of others' minds, knowledge of his own and others' past lives.30 
The place of the various meditational powers in Buddhist 
practice is a question of some dispute.31 Sometimes it is suggested 
by scholars that these powers are regarded as entirely peripheral 
and even disparaged in the earliest texts. There is no real evid-
ence for such a view. In fact, although it is quite true that both 
the earliest texts and the later manuals do not present the medi-
tational powers as an essential or necessary part of Buddhist 
practice, they nevertheless regard them as useful complements 
to the meditator's practice that may facilitate his practice of the 
higher stages of the path. More significantly, with the attainment 
of the final goal of awakening, skill in the meditational powers 
becomes a means for teaching and helping others. We thus find 
stories of the Buddha and his awakened disciples using their 
ability in meditational powers to aid others in the practice of the 
path. In other contexts they are simply presented as a natural 
by-product or consequence of the practice of calm meditation. 
Stories of such meditational powers are everywhere part of the 
Buddhist tradition; they are told of the tantric siddhas of Tibet, 
(see Chapter 10) and of the modern saints and practitioners of 
South-East Asia.32 
The brahma-vihiiras 
One group of ancient meditation practices that the Theravadin 
meditation manuals accommodate to the scheme of dhyiinas 
(but which it has been suggested were originally conceived as 
a path to complete awakening in their own right) are the four 
'immeasurables' (apramiilJalappamanna) or 'divine abidings' 
(brahma-vihiiras).33 The underlying motivation for the practice 
of the Buddhist path is generally understood to be the bene-
fit and welfare of both oneself and others. Thus according to 
Theravadin Abhidharma the wholesome mind always contains 
the seed of 'loving kindness' (maitr"i/mettii). It is this seed that

--- PAGE 207 ---
The Buddhist Path 
can be taken as a subject of meditation and developed as a 
'divine abiding'. Loving kindness is understood as the wish for all 
beings-oneself and others-to be well and happy. It is likened 
to the feelings of a mother towards her child. Loving kindness is 
the basis of the second 'divine abiding', compassion (karu!Jii), 
which is the wish for the suffering of all beings to cease, and is 
likened to the feelings of a mother towards her sick child. The 
third divine abiding is 'sympathetic joy' (muditii), the delight in 
the good fortune of others and the wish for it to continue; this 
is likened to the feelings of a mother at her child's successes. The 
final divine abiding is 'equanimity' (upek~iilupekkhii), a state 
of calm balance with regard to the sufferings and pleasures of 
beings; it is likened to the attitude of a mother to a child that is 
busy withits own affairs, indicating that equanimity should not 
be misunderstood as mere indifference.34 
The four divine abidings are described as being developed by 
beginning with the wish for one's own well-being and happiness; 
this feeling is then gradually extended-through a dwelling, a town, 
across a country-to other beings, until the meditator dwells per-
vading all directions with a mind that is imbued with loving kind-
ness and free from enmity.35 
The stages of insight meditation 
With the es~ential work of calming the mind completed, with 
the attainment of the fourth dhyiina, the meditator can focus 
fully on the development of insight and the wisdom that under-
stands the four truths. Insight meditation aims at understanding 
three aspects of the nature of things: that they are impermanent 
and unstable (anitya/anicca), that they are unsatisfactory and 
imperfect (du/:tkha/dukkha), and that they are not self (aniitman/ 
anattii). The philosophical nuances of these three terms may 
be expressed differently in the theoretical writings of various 
Buddhist schools, but in one way or another the higher stages of 
the Buddhist path focus on the direct understanding and seeing 
of these aspects of the world.

--- PAGE 208 ---
188 
The Buddhist Path 
The culmination of calm meditation is the attainment of a state 
of calm where the mind rests in complete ease and contentment 
-either access concentration or on~ of the four dhyiinas; the 
culmination of insight meditation is likewise a state of calm and 
ease-one of the dhyiinas or also (according to the Sarvastivadins) 
the state of access concentration. But the difference is that in the 
final stage of insight meditation the mind settles not with an abstract 
concept as its object, but in the direct seeing of suffering, its cause, 
its cessation, and the path leading to its cessation. There are thus 
two varieties of concentration-one achieved solely as a re-
sult of calm meditation, the other achieved as a result of both 
calm and insight meditation. The latter may be either ordinary 
(laukika/lokiya) or transcendent (lokottara/lokuttara) depend-
ing on whether it involves a direct experience of nirvana or not. 
The point at which a meditator actively turns to the contem-
plation of phenomena as impermanent, suffering, and not self is 
not fixed either for the ancient manuals or in modern practice. 
The theoretical models of the paths set out in the classical man-
uals of Upatissa, Buddhaghosa, and Vasubandhu accommodate 
two basic approaches: one in which the meditator practises the 
dhyiinas fully before turning to the development of insight and 
one in which the meditator attempts to cultivate insight with only 
a minimal basis of calm. 
Just as the manuals provide various schemata for the stages of 
calm meditation, so also they provide different accounts of the 
stages of insight meditation. After Buddhaghosa, the Theravadin 
tradition works primarily with a system of seven 'purifications' 
(visuddhi) alongside a series of eight (or sometimes ten) know-
ledges. From the north Indian tradition, and especially the writ-
ings of Vasubandhu and Asailga, the Mahayana traditions of China 
· and Tibet inherit a system of five paths (miirga) and four 'stages 
of penetrative insight' (nirvedha-bhiigiya) which comes to be set 
alongside a system often 'levels' (bhumi) ofthe bodhisattva paths 
to buddhahood (see Tables 6 and 7). 
The scheme of the seven purifications 
In the system of seven purifications, the first two ('purification 
of conduct' and 'purification of consciousness') are concerned with

--- PAGE 209 ---
The Buddhist Path 
good conduct and the practice of calm meditation in the manner 
just described. Together these two purifications are seen as the 
roots for the five purifications directly concerned with insight. 
The first of these is 'purification of view', also ,referred to as 
'the analysis of formations'. At this stage the practitioner is con-
cerned with beginning to break down his sense of a substantial 
self. To this end he contemplates any given experience in terms 
of the five aggregates, or the six senses and their respective 
objects. The purpose here is to impress upon the mind that, when 
we look at any particular experience, what we find is not a sub-
stantial person or being but just mind and body in dependence 
upon each other. Like two sheaves of grass propped up against 
each other, if we remove one the other falls. But in undertaking 
this practice we are warned to be careful. Some may be unre-
sponsive to this teaching, but others may go too far and think 
that the task is to annihilate themselves. 
Having established a sense of experience as subsisting in the 
interdependence of mind and body, the practitioner moves on 
to the fourth purification, that of 'crossing over doubt'. The prac-
tice at this stage is referred to as 'comprehension of conditions'. 
In the previous stage the practitioner contemplated the inter-
dependence of mind and body in any given experience; here he 
broadens the meditation to take in the past, present, and future. 
In other words, the practice moves from the contemplation of 
the particular to the general, and one begins to see that what is 
in operation is a universal 'law'-the law of dependent arising; 
one begins to see that, just as mind and body are interdependent 
now in the present, so they have been in the past and so they 
must be in the future. One sees that mind and body, although 
existing, have not been created or brought into being out of noth-
ing by some creator God. Thus there is no particular beginning 
to their existence and no end. The law of dependent arising alone 
is a sufficient explanation of their existence. Direct insight into 
this process is presented as deeply affecting the meditator. 
His outlook on the world is profoundly changed. His under-
standing of the teaching has ceased to be purely theoretical 
and become a matter of direct experience which cannot be 
denied. Thus the meditator is said to cross over doubt and

--- PAGE 210 ---
The Buddhist Path 
thereby complete the fourth purification to become a 'lesser 
attainer of the stream'. 
The meditator now moves on to a more committed and 
deeper level of insight practice in which he contemplates the world 
as made up of various categories and groupings of phenomena 
that are all alike impermanent, suffering, and not self. This 
results in knowledge based on 'taking dharmas in groups'; from 
this he passes on to 'the contemplation of rise and fall'. At this 
stage he begins to experience directly a world made up not, as 
we normally assume, of substantial beings and objects, but of pat-
terns of events rising and falling, coming into existence, and pass-
ing out of existence. A feeling for the meditator's experience at 
this stage is well evoked by the images (drawn from the earlier 
texts) that Buddhaghosa gives in this connection: the world is no 
longer experienced as consisting of things that are lasting and 
solid but rather as something that vanishes almost as soon as it 
appears-like dew drops at sunrise, like a bubble on water, like 
a line drawn on water, like a mustard-seed placed on the point 
of an awl, like a flash of lightning; things in themselves lack sub-
stance and always elude one's grasp-like a mirage, a conjuring 
trick, a dream, the circle formed by a whirling firebrand, a fairy 
city, foam, or the trunk of a banana tree.36 
This experience is profoundly peaceful and with it the mind 
begins to settle into a state . of peace close to jhiina. Drawing 
on an earlier list, Buddhaghosa describes the mind at this time 
as characterized by ten qualities: illumination, knowledge, joy, 
tranquillity, happiness, commitment, resolve, alertness, equan-
imity, and, significantly, attachment. Because of the presence of 
the last these ten qualities are collectively referred to as 'the ten 
defilements of insight'. What is being said here is that the mind 
being so deeply affected by its experience grasps at it and takes 
it for the experience of awakening itself. In other words, the prac-
titioner mistakenly concludes that he has reached the end of the 
path. The texts warn that the meditator may live for many years 
convinced that he or she has attained arhatship. Only when some 
experience-like the arising of strong anger or fear-dissuades 
him or her from this view does the meditator complete the fifth

--- PAGE 211 ---
The Buddhist Path 
purification of 'knowing and seeing what is the path and not 
the path'; the meditator then passes to the sixth purification of 
'knowing and seeing the way'. 
So the meditator returns to the practice of the contef11plation 
of the rise and fall of dharmas, which had been disabled by the 
ten defilements of insight. Now, like the lion, king of beasts, who 
finds delight, not when put in a golden cage, but only in the three-
thousand-league expanse of the Himalayas, the meditator sees 
delight not in the pleasant rebirths of the sense, form, or form-
less realms, but only in his three contemplations of impermanence, 
suffering, and no self.37 In addition to the knowledge (r) of see-
ing the rise and fall (of dharmas ), the sixth purification is said to 
embrace seven other knowledges, making eight in all: the know-
ledge (2) of contemplating breaking up (of dharmas), (3) ofthe 
presence of danger, (4) of contemplating distress, (5) of con-
templating disenchantment, (6) of the desire for release, (7) of 
contemplating with discernment, (8) of equanimity with regard 
to formations. This sequence of knowledges niay be illustrated 
by the story of a man who set out to catch a fish: 
Taking his fishing net, he sank it into the water. When he put his hand 
into the mouth of the net and seized hold of a snake by the neck, he 
thought he had caught a fish and was delighted. Thinking that he had 
caught a big fish, he lifted it out to take a look but when he saw the three 
markings and realised it was a snake he became frightened. Seeing that 
he was in danger, he felt distaste for what he had grasped and wished 
to be released. Devising a way of getting free, he unwrapped [the coils) 
from his arm, beginning with the tip of the tail, and then, raising his arm 
and swinging the snake round his head two or three times in order to 
weaken it, he flung it away thinking, 'Be gone damn snake!' Then with-
out delay he climbed up the bank of the pool and stood there looking 
back at the way he had come thinking, 'Goodness! I have escaped from 
the mouth of a huge snake!'38 
A person's initial satisfaction with his sense of his own individu-
ality is likened to the man's initial delight at grasping a snake. A 
meditator's seeing the three marks of impermanence, suffering, 
and no self through (r) seeing the rise and fall and (2) the break-
ing up of phenomena is like the man's seeing the three markings

--- PAGE 212 ---
The Buddhist Path 
on the snake. Just as the man became frightened, so the medit-
ator (3) knows the presence of danger; just as he knew fear, so 
the meditator (4) contemplates his distress; just as he felt dis-
taste for what he had grasped, so the meditator (5) contemplates 
disenchantment; just as he desired to be free of the snake, so too 
the meditator ( 6) desires release; and just as he devised a means 
of letting go, so the meditator (7) discerns all dharmas to be imper-
manent, suffering, and no self such that they cannot appear to 
him again as lasting, pleasant, beautiful, and self. So with the eighth 
knowledge, all formations are seen as empty (suftfta). 
The eight knowledges culminate at a point where the mind is 
once more settled and at peace. One should not be misled by the 
ra_ther elaborate and complex descriptions that are given of what 
happens next. In part they seem intended to present the profound 
and subtle nature of an expe.rience which happens very rapidly. 
With the mind having reached a point of balance, it settles in 
transcendent jhiina and in a moment it directly sees and under-
stands suffering, its arising, its cessation, and the way leading to 
its cessation; it directly sees and experiences nirval).a. Accord-
ing to the Theravadin sources this understanding quite literally 
occurs in one moment: the conditioned world that is saq1sara 
(suffering and its cause) and nirval).a and the transcendent path 
(cessation and the path leading to cessation) are finally fully 
known in a single flash of transcendent insight and peace. This 
is the culmination of previous practice and this moment is itself 
termed 'path' (magga); in this moment all the conditions that con-
tributed to the development of the path are at once fulfilled. 
Frequently these conditions are listed as thirty-seven in all: four 
establishings of mindfulness, four right endeavours, four bases 
of success in concentration, five spiritual faculties, five spiritual 
powers, seven 'limbs' of awakening, and the eightfold path itself. 
The 'path' moment is understood as being immediately followed 
by a transcendent jhiina of similar qualities, this time termed 'fruit' 
(phala). 
The theoretical models of the path allow a number of pos-
sibilities concerning precisely what happens when . the mind 
settles in transcendent dhyiina. In the first place, the mind may

--- PAGE 213 ---
The Buddhist Path 
193 
TABLE 6. The stages of insight according to Buddhaghosa's 
Visuddhimagga 
PURIFICATION 
7· by knowing and seeing 
6 .. by knowing and seeing the way 
5· by knowing and seeing what is path 
and not path 
(ro defilements of insight) 
4· by crossing over doubt 
(the lesser stream-attainer) 
3· of view 
2. of consciousness 
r. of conduct 
KNOWLEDGE 
of the paths & fruits of stream 
attainment etc. 
of the lineage [of the Noble Ones] 
conforming [to the truth] 
8. of equanimity with regard to 
formations 
7· of contemplating with discernment 
6. of desire for release 
5· of contemplating disenchantment 
4· of contemplating distress 
3· of the presence of danger 
2. of contemplating breaking up 
r. of seeing the rise and fall 
[of dharmas] 
taking in groups 
(comprehension of conditions) 
(analysis of formations) 
settle at a level of concentration equivalent to any one of the 
four dhyiinas. When the mind settles in transcendent dhyiina, 
defilements are not merely temporarily suppressed as in ordinary 
dhyiina, they are once and for all eradicated. The attainment of 
the transcendent path thus changes one into a different person 
in the most radical of senses: one ceases to be an ordinary per-
son (prthagjana/puthujjana) and becomes one of the nobles ( iirya/ 
ariya), that is one of those who has directly seen the four truths. 
From an early period the texts seem to have envisaged that 
the attaining of the transcendent path may not necessarily erad-
icate all defilements immediately. Basically there are four possib-
ilities, depending on which defilements are actually eradicated. 
The possibilities are usually set out with reference to the list 
of ten bonds or fetters (saytlyojana) which bind one to rebirth

--- PAGE 214 ---
194 
The Buddhist Path 
(see above, pp. 72....:.3). By the abandoning of the first three fet-
ters one becomes a 'stream-attainer' (srotiipdnna/sotiipanna), 
that is, one whose final awakening is assured within a maximum 
of seven rebirths. By the abandoning of the first three and the 
permanent weakening of the next two one becomes a 'once-
returner' (sakrdiigiimin!sakadiigiimin ), that is, one whose final. 
awakening is assured and who will be reborn as a human being 
no more than once. By the complete abandoning of the five lower 
fetters one becomes a 'non-returner' (aniigiimin), that is, one who 
at death will not be reborn as a human being but in one of five 
'Pure Abodes' (realms corresponding to the fourth dhyiina) where 
he will gain final awakening. By the complete abandoning of all 
ten fetters one becomes an arhat, never to be subject to rebirth 
again. The attainment of any of these four successive paths of 
stream-attainment, mice-return, non-return, and arhatship con-
stitutes the seventh purification of 'knowledge and seeing'. 
What precisely governs which of these four states is attained 
is not clear in the earliest texts. Two basic possibilities seem to 
be envisaged: either (I) that, at the first arising of the transcend-
ent path, depending on individual circumstances, one may attain 
any one ofthe four states immediately; or (2) that one must attain 
each state successively, either in one life or over a series of lives. 
The interpretation of the later tradition is also not entirely clear. 
Buddhaghosa seems closer to the latter understanding, although 
one may attain each state in such rapid succession that one in 
effect goes straight from being an ordinary being to being an 
arhat. As we shall presently see, Vasubandhu seems closer to the 
former. 
The scheme of the five paths 
The classical north Indian manuals of Vasubandhu and Asailga 
map out the path according to a system of five paths: the path of 
equipment (sambhiira-miirga), the path of application (prayoga-
miirga ), the path of seeing ( darsana-miirga ), the path of develop-
ment ( bhiivanii-miirga ), and the path of completion (ni${hii-miirga) 
or of the adept (asaik$a-miirga). 39 The path of equipment covers

--- PAGE 215 ---
The Buddhist Path 
195 
the general basis of the spiritual life in the form of faith, gen-
erosity, good conduct, and the preliminary development of calm 
and insight. The path of application consists of the further 
development of calm and particularly insight. The path of see-
ing involves a direct seeing of the four truths in the manner of 
the seventh purification of Buddhaghosa's scheme. The path of 
development is twofold: either ordinary (laukika) or transcend-
ent (lokottara ). The ordinary path of development consists in 
mastery of calm, the attainment of the dhyiinas and formless 
attainments. The transcendent path of development consists in 
the final eradication of attachment to these meditative attainments 
and the realms of the cosmos that correspond to them. The 
ordinary path of development may thus precede or succeed the 
paths of application and seeing: in the case of a practitioner who 
develops the dhyiinas before turning to insight it precedes, and 
· in the case of one who develops them after stream-attainment 
(accomplished by the path of seeing) it succeeds. The path of 
completion is equivalent to the final attainment of arhatship. As 
we shall see in Chapter 9, in the Mahayana this scheme of five 
paths becomes the basis for the ten stages of the bodhisattva path 
(see Table 7). 
In his Abhidharmakosa, Vasubandhu describes the immediate 
preparation for the path of application in terms of the practice 
of calm meditation based either on meditation on the different 
types of 'ugliness' or on mindfulness of breathing. The practi-
tioner develops one of these until he or she attains concentra-
tion (samiidhi); Vasubandhu does not specify of what degree but 
no doubt access or dhyiina is intended. The meditator then turns 
the mind towards insight by means of the practice of the four 
'establishings of mindfulness' (smrtyupasthiina/satipa{{hiina). This 
is an extremely old and important set of meditations based on 
different contemplations: of the body, of feeling, of the mind, and 
fourthly of physical and ment~il processes (dharma).40 
Essentially what is assumed by the practice of the four 'estab-
lishings of mindfulness' is that one attains a certain degree of 
mental clarity and calm and then turns one's attention first of all 
to watching various kinds of physical phenomena and activities,

--- PAGE 216 ---
The Buddhist Path 
TABLE 7· The scheme of the five paths and the ten bodhisattva stages 
WHOLESOME ROOT 
CONNECTED WITH 
PENETRATIVE INSIGHT 
PATH 
BODHISATTVA 
STAGE 
of the adept 
Buddhahood 
of cultivation 
of seeing 
highe~t ordinary state l 
summit 
f 
1. 
. 
o app rcatron 
acceptance 
initial glimmering 
of equipment 
ro. cloud of 
Dharma 
9· excellent 
8. unshaking 
7· far-reaching 
6. face-to-face 
5· invincible 
4· resplendent 
3· radiant 
2. stainless 
r.joyful 
PERFECTION 
IO. knowledge 
9· strength 
8. determination 
7· skill in means 
6. wisdom 
s.dhyana 
4· vigour 
3· patient acceptance 
2. good conduct 
r. generosity 
then to watching feeling as pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral, then 
to watching one's general mental state; and finally, at the fourth 
stage, to integrating the previous three stages so that finally one 
watches the totality of physical and mental processes. This final 
stage is equivalent to watching the five aggregates: the world is 
seen as consisting simply in the interplay of five groups of phys-
ical and mental events. 
Vasubandhu presents this set of contemplations as involving 
a gradual movement from the gross to the subtle. His presenta-
tion corresponds closely to Buddhaghosa's presentation of the 
insight practice involved at the stage of the 'purification of view'. 
As the meditator contemplates the world of dharmas his mind 
eventually settles in a state of concentration which involves 
an initial direct seeing of the four truths. This attainment is 
described as the 'heat' or 'glow' (~magata) of wisdom and it marks 
the first stage of the path of application. The attainment of 'the

--- PAGE 217 ---
The Buddhist Path 
197 
glow' is the first of four 'stages of penetrating insight' (nirvedha-
bhtigzya); the subsequent three stages are known as summit 
(murdhan), acceptance (k~anti), and the highest ordinary state 
( laukikagra-dharma). 
The first three of the four stages of penetrating insight are 
each divided into three stages of weak, medium, and strong, 
making ten stages of penetrative insight in all. These stages rep-
resent successive attainments of states of concentration through 
the practice of the fourth manifestation of mindfulness in which 
the meditator's direct understanding of the four truths in all 
their aspects is gradually deepened. The culmination of this 
process is a single moment of insight-the highest 'ordinary' 
state. This is immediately followed by a direct vision of the four 
truths in sixteen aspects-'the path of seeing'. In contrast to the 
Theravadins, the Sarvastivadins suggest that it takes sixteen 
'thought' moments to see the truths. This appears to be a the-
oretically constructed notion, in part connected with the idea that, 
since one can only know one thing at a time, one could not directly 
know sa111sara and nirval)a (suffering and itscessation, the con-
ditioned and the unconditioned) in a single moment of thought. 
Interestingly the Theravadins suggest one can. But the length of 
a moment of thought is m1derstood as so short that even for the 
Sarvastivadins the path of seeing is still understood as in effect 
instantaneous. Strictly the path of seeing endures for only fifteen 
moments, and is once more understood as the fulfilment of all 
the thirty-seven conditions contributing to awakening; the six-
teenth moment is taken as belonging to the transcendent path 
of development and constitutes the attainment of the transcend-
ent 'fruit'. 
What happens in the attainment of the transcendent path and 
fruit is said to depend on one's previous practice. The meditator 
who has previously mastered the attainment of the dhyanas (by 
the ordinary path of development) and thereby already estab-
lished a certain ability to let go of craving as far as the world of 
the five senses is concerned will, in the path of seeing, once and 
for all abandon that craving and become either a once-returner 
or a never-returneL The meditator who has not previously

--- PAGE 218 ---
The Buddhist Path 
mastered the dhyiinas eradicates by the path of seeing the grosser 
defilements associated with craving for the world of the five 
senses and thereby becomes a stream-attainer. By the successive 
attainment of the various dhyiinas and abandoning of subtler 
and subtler kinds of attachment by means of the ordinary and 
transcendent paths of development, the meditator subsequently 
becomes a once-returner and non-returner. Finally by means of 
the path of 'completion' or the 'adept' and the attainment of the 
diamond-like concentration, he or she eradicates all defilements 
and becomes an arhat. 
All these lists of stages can seem to the modern mind like schol-
astic excess. But what they seem intended to indicate is the grad~ 
ual and cumulative process of the spiritual path which is kept 
going by the meditator's repeated and persistent practice of 
essentially the same exercise: contemplating the world in terms 
of dharmas or watching the rise and fall, the coming and going 
of phenomena in dependence upon each other. Gradual though 
the process is, it is distinguished by various landmarks which the 
lists of stages are intended to indicate; what is more it culminates 
in a more or less sudden and immediate understanding of the 
world which has the effect of changing one for good. Some of 
the ancient similes for the progress of meditation practice evoke 
the experience of this rather more vividly than all our lists of stages. 
As a mason or a mason's apprentice, when inspecting the handle of his 
chisel, sees the impressions of his fingers and thumb and yet has no know-
ledge that so much of the handle has been worn away on that day, so 
much the day before, so much previously, but when the last bit has been 
worn away then he has knowledge-just so the monk who lives engaged 
in the practice of meditation has no knowledge that so much. of the 
defilements has been worn away that day, so much the day before, so 
much previously, but when the last bit has been worn away then he has 
knowledge.41 
The relationship of calm and insight 
We have seen how developed Buddhist theory envisages two basic 
possibilities as far as meditation is concerned. In the first place,

--- PAGE 219 ---
The Buddhist Path 
199 
by the practice of calm meditation one abandons the gross for 
the sake of the subtle. That is, by seeing certain experiences 
as disturbing, the mind seeks peace in the subtler and subtler 
experiences of the dhyiinas. This has the effect of weakening 
attachment to experiences tied up with the world of the five senses, 
but in subtler experiences there lurk subtler attachments which 
may not be recognized for what they are. So although defilements 
are controlled they are not rooted out. In the second place, by 
the practice of insight meditation one sees experiences as inher-
ently flawed because of the characteristics of impermanence, 
suffering, and no self, and thus, instead of letting go of the gross 
merely to grasp at the subtle, one lets go of them completely. 
In this unqualified letting go of the conditioned one experiences 
the unconditioned, nirval)a. Yet in practice in order to see things 
as inherently characterized by impermanence, suffering, and no 
self one's mind must be clear and undisturbed; more significantly 
in order to relinquish the subtlest forms of attachment one must 
see the subtle experiences of the dhyiinas as impermanent, suf-
fering, and not self; and to achieve this one must generally first 
of all actually experience them. In this way the practice of calm 
and insight meditation are bound up together. 
Although the theoretical position of the classical meditation 
manuals seems basically clear, the precise relationship of calm 
meditation and insight meditation is a live issue for both con-
temporary historical scholarship and contemporary Theravada 
practice. Let me begin with the latter issue. Within contempor-
ary Theravada practice there is a broad movement of insight 
meditation that has had considerable influence in the West. The 
tendency of this movement is to. take the view that since the 
dhyiinas are only impermanent, relatively pleasant states, the med-
itator should not strive to attain dhyiina but aim at developing 
insight from the outset. Moreover, there is a Buddhist tradition 
of seeing the highest understanding of other religions as based 
on misinterpreted dhyiina experiences. From this perspective, the 
dhyiinas can thus even be seen as in· a sense not characteristic-
ally 'Buddhist', since they can be attained in the absence of the 
liberating insight which brings direct knowledge of nirviil)a. At

--- PAGE 220 ---
200 
The Buddhist Path 
the academic level this kind of thinking is reflected in an author-
itative modern scholarly treatment of Theravada meditation by 
Winston King that presents the dhyiinas as taken over by the 
Buddhist tradition from pre-existing Indian brahmanical yogic 
practices.42 What Buddhism added was the practice of insight 
meditation. 
In a controversial but at least in part convincing study, 
Johannes Bronkhorst has argued precisely the opposite: what is 
innovative and distinctive about early Buddhist meditation is the 
attainment of peaceful and pleasant states through the practice 
of the dhyiinas.43 There is no evidence that this kind of medita-
tion existed in India prior to the appearance of Buddhism, and 
non-Buddhist Indian writings conceive of meditation or yoga 
not as something peaceful and pleasant, but rather as a painful 
austerity which burns off accumulated karma and thereby even-
tually removes the cause of further rebirths and thus brings lib-
eration from sarp.sara. 
Bronkhorst, like a number of scholars such as La Vallee Poussin, 
Frauwallner, Schmithausen, Vetter, Griffiths, and Gombrich, goes 
on to see certain inconsistencies in the earlytexts' presentation 
of, on the one hand, the dhyiinas as the path of meditation lead-
ing to arhatship and, on the other hand, discriminating insight 
into the four truths, dependent arising and the three marks as 
the way to arhatship.44 For such scholars what underlies the early 
texts is a certain tension between the advocates of the practice 
of meditation in the form of the dhyiinas and-the advocates of 
a more intellectual and rational approach. The later systematic 
accounts of the path would thus represent a compromise which 
tries to reconcile what were in origin quite different conceptions 
of the nature of the Buddhist path. 
The arguments and textual analyses of these scholars are com-
plex and often extremely philologically sophisticated and I can-
not begin to review them here; a general comment will have to 
suffice. That some tension between rival approaches underlies 
the texts may be so. Yet, as Lance Cousins has indicated, from 
the point of view of the later manuals it is a mistake to see the 
tension in terms of either the practice of calm or the practice of

--- PAGE 221 ---
The Buddhist Path 
201 
insight: the question for them is rather how much calm and 
how much insight are required at the various stages of the path.45 
Even if there is an increased willingness to countenance the pos-
sibility of complete awakening without the the priqr basis of the 
dhyiinas, the later manuals are all agreed that the meditator needs 
both, and that the culmination of the path consists in a medi-
tation attainment that consists in the coming together of calm 
and insight. To see a certain tension in early Buddhism between 
those who emphasize the importance of the dhyiinas and those 
who advocate the development of insight without the prior basis 
ofdhyiina is not unreasonable. Such a tension does seem to under-
lie the later systematic accounts and is also apparent among 
contemporary practitioners. We also perhaps see such a tension 
reflected elsewhere, in the history of Mahayana Buddhism: the 
Madhyamika approach to 'emptiness' appears more orientated 
to insight in comparison to the Y ogacarin focus on the stages 
of calm and the deep, hidden levels of the mind; similarly, in 
Tibetan Buddhism, the dGelugs emphasis on analytic meditation 
on emptiness contrasts with the rNying rna practice of rdzogs chen 
(see Chapters 9 and 10). Yet it is not necessary to see such ten-
sjons as originating in fundamentally opposed conceptions of the 
nature of the Buddhist path. Such a view assumes, in part at least, 
a rather intellectual and rational conception of the nature of insight · 
meditation. It is also perhaps to confuse the issue with another 
tension in the history of the practice of Buddhist monasticism: 
the tension between the life of the monk as a forest-dwelling med-
itator and a town-dwelling scholar (see above pp. 95-roo). 
The systematic and theoretical accounts of the path that I have 
focused on in this chapter may not always represent the final word 
on meditation practice for practitioners today. Some schools of 
China and Tibet have adapted them to bring them in line with 
certain principles of Mahayana Buddhism; others such as the Ch'an 
and Zen schools on the surface apparently ignore such elaborate 
theoretical accounts. But in one way or another these systematic 
accounts and the ways of thinking that underlie them have influ-
enced the forms of Buddhist meditation practice of whatever 
school.

--- PAGE 222 ---
8 
The Abhidharma 
The Higher Teaching 
Stories, legends, texts, and authors 
It is told by some that after the Buddha gained awakening he 
sat beneath the .tree of awakening for seven days contemplating 
the Dharma which he had penetrated. Then he got up from his 
seat and for. seven days he stood gazing with unblinking eyes at 
the seat thinking, 'On this seat I gained knowledge.' At that time 
the gods thought that perhaps the Buddha still had something to 
accomplish as it appeared he had not abandoned attachment to 
the seat of awakening. So the Buddha performed the miracle of 
the pairs, emitting streams of fire and water from every pore of 
his body. Then for seven days he walked up and down between 
the seat of awakening and where he had been standing. Now, 
twenty-one days after he had gained awakening, he sat in the 
House of Jewels, so called because here, over seven days, he 
conceived the seven books of the Abhidharma---the jewels of the 
Dharma. On the seventh day, when he began to contemplate 
the contents of the seventh book, the Great Book, his body be-
gan to emit rays of six colours: blue, yellow, red, white, maroon, 
clear. And as he contemplated this infinite and immeasurable 
Dharma, the rays emitted from his body lit up the earth, the waters, 
and the skies. They lit up the realms of the gods and flooded beyond 
throughout billions of world systems. 
The Buddha did not, it seems, immediately teach the Dharma 
in this full form in which he had conceived it while seated in the 
House of Jewels. Many years later in response to a challenge from 
teachers of other schools the Buddha once again performed the 
miracle of the pairs, emitting streams of fire and water from every 
pore of his body. Having performed this miracle he considered

--- PAGE 223 ---
The Abhidharma 
203 
what previous buddhas had done after performing this miracle. 
It came to his mind that they had ascended to the heaven of the 
Thirty-Three gods to teach the Dharma to their mothers. And so, 
in keeping with this tradition, the Buddha ascended t~ the heaven 
of the Thirty-Three gods and there, seated beneath the Coral Tree 
on the rock called Pal).qukambala, the throne of the great god 
Sakka, for the three months of the rains he taught his mother 
and the assembled gods the seven books of the Abhidharma. 
At that time the Buddha would create a mind-made Buddha 
to carry on teaching while he went to gather alms food in the dis-
tant land of Uttarakuru. Then he would sit down on the shores 
of Lake Anotatta, eat his meal, and retire to sit in meditation 
in a forest of sandal trees. And Sariputta, the disciple chief in wis-
dom, would come and the Buddha would teach him the method 
of Abhidharma. Sariputta in turn taught it to five hundred of 
his own pupils. They say that many aeons ago in the time of the 
Buddha Kassapa they had been born as bats and, hanging in a 
cave, they had one day heard the sound of two monks reciting 
the Abhidharma. Of course, as bats they were unable to under-
stand the meaning of what they heard, yet even so it seems that 
the very sound of the Abhidharma left an impression. So they 
were reborn in the world of the gods, where they remained for 
the vast interval of time between one Buddha and the next. Fin-
ally they were born as men and became monks and the pupils 
of Sariputta, who, teaching them the seven books, made them 
masters of Abhidharma.1 
The term abhidharma (Pali abhidhamma) means approximately 
'higher' or 'further' Dharma. For Buddhist tradition it refers to 
two things: first, a set of books regarded by most ancient schools 
as 'the word of the Buddha' and as such forming the contents of 
the third basket of scriptures, the Abhidharma Pitaka; secondly, 
the particular system of thought and method of exposition set 
out in those books and their commentaries. The above legend 
of. the genesis of the Abhidharma is drawn from Theravadin 
sources, but the sentiment is indicative of a more general tradi-
tional attitude to the Abhidharma.2 The Abhidharma is thought

--- PAGE 224 ---
204 
The Abhidharma 
out and taught only by a buddha. Hearing it being recited-even 
without understanding it-can have a far-reaching effect. The 
Abhidharma catches the very essence of the Dharma, which means 
that its sound can operate almost as a charm or spell. 
The suggestion in the legend that the form in which the 
Abhidharma has coine down to us has been mediated through 
the person of Sariputra perhaps reflects the historical reality that 
the canonical Abhidharma works must be regarded as somewhat 
later than the siitra material of the Nikayas/ Agamas, and in part 
explains why some schools of thought, such as the Sautrantikas 
('those who follow the teaching of the siitras'), later declined to 
give the Abhidharma works the status of 'the word of the Buddha' 
(see Chapter 2). The two canonical Abhidharma collections that 
survive are those of the Theravadins and the Sarvastivadins, the 
latter only in Chinese translation. All the books of' the Theravadin 
Abhidharma, with the exception of the Y amaka, have been 
translated into English; the Sarvastivadin cat10nical Abhidharma 
works remain untranslated into a modern European language. 
Both these collections consist of seven books but their titles 
and contents vary considerably. None the less they share two tasks 
in common. In the first place they attempt to give a systematic 
and exhaustive account of the world by breaking it down into its 
constituent physical and mental events (dharma/dhamma). Sec-
ondly, they both contain works which address various points of 
dispute that arise out of the preceding exercise. Although the 
status of the Abhidharma as word of the Buddha may have been 
challenged, the stamp that the Abhidharma systems, methods, 
and debates have left on subsequent Buddhist thought is indis-
putable. They provide the terms of reference and determine the 
agenda which result 1n the Mahayana schools of Madhyamaka 
and Y ogacara. 
Apart from the canonical Abhidharma, a great variety of 
Abhidharma manuals exist. These manuals aim at introducing the 
essentials of the complicated canonical systems. For the Theravadins, 
Buddhaghosa's comprehensive Visuddhimagga contains much of 
their Abhidharma system; chapters 14 to 17 form a self-contained

--- PAGE 225 ---
The Abhidharma 
205 
TABLE 8, The Abhidharma Pitaka 
THE ABHIDHAMMA OF THE 
THERAVADINS 
Dhammasmigm;i 
('Enumeration of Dhammas') 
Vibhmiga 
('Analysis') 
D hiitukathti 
('Discourse on Elements') 
Puggalapaiiiiatti 
('Designation of Persons') 
Kathtivatthu of Moggaliputtatissa 
('Points of Discussion') 
Yamaka 
('Pairs') 
Patthtina 
('Conditions') 
THE ABHIDHARMA OF THE SARVASTIVADINS 
Jiitinaprasthtina of Katyayana ' 
('The Foundation of Knowledge') 
Prakarm;aptida of Vasumitra 
('The Treatise') 
Vijiitinakaya of Devak~ema/ 
Deva~arman 
('Compendium of Consciousness') 
Dharmaskandha of Maudgalyayana/ 
Sariputra 
('Compendium of Dharmas') 
PrajiiaptiStistra of Maudgalyayana/ 
Mahakatyayana 
('Manual of Concepts') 
Dhtitukaya of Vasumitra/PiirJ.la 
('Compendium of Elements') 
Saf!!gltiparytiya of Mahakau~thila/Sariputra 
('Discourse on the Collective Recitation') 
section entitled 'the ground of understanding' (pafifui-bhiimi) which 
is essentially an introduction to the Theravadin Abhidharma. A 
more direct introduction to the canonical Theravadin Abhidharma 
is the Abhidhammiivatiira ('Introduction to Abhidharma') writ-
ten in the fifth century by Buddhadatta, a contemporary of Bud-
dhaghosa. But the most commonly used introductory manual in 
the countries of Theravada Buddhism today is a twelfth-century 
work of Anuruddha, the Abhidhammattha-smigaha ('Compendium 
of the Topics of Abhidharma'). 
In the second or third century cE, Sarvastivadin Abhidharmikas 
('exponents of Abhidharma') in north-west India began compil-
ing an authoritative Abhidharma commentary or vibhii~ii. This 
survives in Chinese translation in three different recensions. Of 
particular influence were the views of the Kasmira Sarvastivadins,

--- PAGE 226 ---
206 
The Abhidharma 
who are often simply referred to as the Vaibha~ikas (exponents 
of the Vibha~a). In the early centuries of the Christian era the 
Sarvastivadins also produced a number of summary Abhidharma 
manuals such as the * Abhidharma-hrdaya ('The Heart of Abhid-
harma') of Dharmasri and the * Abhidharmiimrtarasa ('The Taste 
of the Deathless') of Gho$aka.3 But by far the most influential 
manual for later Chinese and Tibetan Buddhism is Vasubandhu's 
Abhidharmakosa ('Treasury of Abhidharma'). The influence of 
this work is to be explained in part by the fact that for the 
Chinese and Tibetans its author is none other than Vasubandhu, 
brother of Asailga and author of some of the seminal treatises 
of the Y ogacara, · one of the ·principal schools of Mahayana 
Buddhist thought. This traditional view has been disputed by mod-
ern scholarship, notably by Frauwallner, who has argued that the 
Mahayanist Vasubandhu, author of Y ogacarin treatises, lived in 
the fourth century CE and must be distinguished from the 
Vasubandhu who is author of the Abhidharmakosa and lived in 
the early part of the fifth century. The question is unresolved.4 
Whoever he was, Vasubandhu's Kosa gives a masterly survey of 
Sarvastivada-Vaibha~ika Abhidharma supplemented by his own 
critique of certain positions, which often betrays a Sautrantika 
sympathy. Such was the authority of the Abhidharmakosa that 
Paramartha's and Hsfian-tsang's Chinese translations (in the 
sixth and seventh centuries respectively) led to the formation of 
a significant, if relatively short-lived, schqol of Sino-Japanese 
Buddhism named, after the text, the Kosa or, in Chinese and 
Japanese, the Chti-she/Kusha school. Vasubandhu's criticism 
of certain Vaibha~ika positions prompted further works that 
attempted to address his points of criticism, such as Sailghabhadra's 
* Abhidharma-samaya-pradipika ('Illumination of Abhidharma') 
and * Nyiiyiinusiira ('In Accordance with Method'), and the an-
onymous Abhidharma-dipa ('The Lamp of Abhidharma'). 
A number of Indian Abhidharma texts that belong neither to the 
Theravadin nor to the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma also survive in 
Chinese translation, principally the Siiriputriibhidharma-siistra 
('Treatise on the Abhidharma of Sariputra') and Harivarman's 
* Satya-siddhi-siistra ('Treatise on the Demonstration of Truth'),

--- PAGE 227 ---
The Abhidharma 
207 
but in such texts we do not have a full system in the manner of 
the Theravadin or Sarvastivadin Abhidharma. A third complete 
system of Abhidharma is, however, elaborated in certain of 
the works of the· Mahayana Y ogacara tradition, principally in 
Asailga's Abhidharma-samuccaya ('Compendium of Abhidharma') 
and in Hstian-tsang's commentary on Vasubandhu's Trirrzsikii 
('Thirty Verses'), the Ch'eng-wei-shih lun or Vijnapti-mtitratii-
siddhi ('Demonstration of the Theory of Mind Only'). While this 
Y ogacarin Abhidharma owes much to the Sarvastivadin system, it 
also incorporates and adapts certain aspects of other Abhidharma 
systems in order to present a complete Abhidharma in accord-
ance with a Mahayanist outlook and the view that mind ( vijnapti) 
alone is ultimately 'real'. 
The Abhidharma as a system of Buddhist thought 
As a system of thought Abhidharma is to be contrasted with 
Siitranta (Pali suttanta), the system of the siitras or discourses 
of the Buddha. Siitranta is regarded as the application of the 
principles of the Buddha's teaching to a particular situation: each 
siitra preserved in the Nikaya/ Agama collections is a discourse 
delivered by the Buddha, or one of his disciples, at a particular 
time, in a particular place, and to a particular person or group. 
Siitranta teachings are embellished with poetic language, with 
similes and metaphors that inspire the listener. The Abhidharma 
method, in contrast, presents the Buddha's teachings without mak-
ing concessions to time or place or audience, and in technical 
terms that are precisely defined to ensure analytical exactitude. 
The contrast between the methods of Siitranta and Abhidharma 
coincides in part with other distinctions sometimes made in 
the texts between types of teachings. Some teachings are said 
to be expressed in terms whose meaning must be determined 
(neyiirtha/neyyattha)~, while others are expressed in terms whose 
meaning is already determined (nfttirtha/nitattha). Some teachings 
are expressed in conventional terms (sarrzvrti/sammuti), others 
are expressed in ultimate terms (paramiirtha/paramattha). The

--- PAGE 228 ---
208 
The Abhidharma 
point of these distinctions is to draw attention to the fact that, 
as we have seen in Chapter 6, if we come across a Buddhist text 
that talks in terms of persons and selves, we should not imme-
diately assume that the teaching of no self is being undermined; 
it is rather that that particular text is talking in conventional terms 
whose ultimate meaning needs drawing out. The later tradition 
would regard the Nikaya/ Agama collections of siitras as in fact 
containing teachings of both kinds. 
What is distinctive about the Abhidharma is that it is an at-
tempt to give a comprehensive statement of the Buddha's teach-
ings exclusively in ultimate terms. A useful analogy, I think, for 
the relationship between the Abhidharma and the Sfitranta is that 
of the relationship between a grammar book of a language and 
the language as spoken and used. In the same way as a grammar 
book aims at giving a bare account of how a particular language 
works, its structure and forms of expression, based on observa-
tion of the actual use of that language, so the Abhidharma is an 
attempt to lay bare and describe accurately and precisely, allow-
ing for all circumstances and eventualities, the underlying struc-
ture of the Dharma as found in the discourses of the Buddha. 
Indeed, the. pages of certain Abhidharma texts, with their lists 
of terms and definitions, might be mistaken for the pages of a 
grammar book, and in the same way that reading a grammar book 
may not seem the most inspiring of pastimes, so .too may the study 
of Abhidharma. Yet a good grammar book may impress one with 
its clear and intelligent account of a language; it may bring one 
to a better understanding of that language and equip one to 
recognize unexpected forms of words and modes of expression. 
In a similar way the sheer cleverness and intricacy of aspects 
of the Abhidharma is impressive in itself. Indeed, one scholar 
has described the seventh book of the Theravadin Abhidharma, 
the Patthiina ('Causal Relations'), as 'one of the most amazing 
productions of the human mind'.5 Moreover it is the study of 
Abhidharma that allows the practitioner to extrapolate from the 
peculiarities of his own experience to the peculiarities of another's. 
These days the study of grammar may not be very fashionable 
and some may point out that grammarians and lexicographers

--- PAGE 229 ---
The Abhidharma 
209 
do not always make the best poets, writers, or orators. But just 
as the theoretical understanding of language cannot be achieved 
without the study of grammar, so the theoretical understand-
ing of Buddhism must be based in the study of ,some form of 
Abhidharma. 
Abhidharma represents the theoretical counterpart to what the 
meditator actually experiences in meditation. It can be summed 
up as the attempt to give a systematic and exhaustive account of 
the world in terms of its constituent physical and mental events. 
This enterprise has two aspects: first, to categorize all possible 
types of event; secondly, to consider all possible ways in which 
those mental events can interact and so categorize the various 
kinds of causal relationships. 
Physical and mental events are known as dharmas (Pali 
dhamma). The relationship between Dharma and dharmas might 
be stated as follows. Dharma is the way things ultimately are; 
it is also the Buddha's teaching since th1s is in accordance with 
the way things ultimately are. Physical and mental events are the 
ultimate building blocks of the way things ultimately are; thus to 
understand the Buddha's teaching and see Dharma is to see things 
in terms of dharmas. 
Ultimately dharmas are all that there is. In this respect dharmas 
are very like atoms (when atoms were regarded as the ulti-
mate 'bits' of matter). Thus just as a table might be analysed by 
a chemist as consisting of innumerable atoms, so a person is ana-
lysed by Abhidharma as consisting of innumerable dharmas. 
While the analogy of atoms is a useful one, we must always bear 
in mind that dharmas embrace both physical and mental things, 
not just physical ones. These mental and physical events that are 
dharmas fall into various classes. Again this is analogous to the 
way atoms are of different types: there are hydrogen atoms, oxy-
gen atoms, lead atoms; gold atoms, a:qd so on. In fact chemistry 
tells us that the physical world is constructed out of one hundred 
or so basic types of atom. So, just as the wood that makes up a 
table can be analysed into atoms of various elements, a person's 
mind and body can be analysed into dharmas of various classes. 
Again we should be careful in using this analogy. In so far as

--- PAGE 230 ---
210 
The Abhidharma 
we think of atoms as bits of matter there is a tendency for the 
layman to conceive of them as inert enduring things, despite what 
modern nuclear physics tells us to the contrary. Similarly, as we 
saw in the context of insight meditation, dharmas are not endur-
ing substances, they are evanescent events, here one moment and 
gone the next-like dewdrops at sunrise or a bubble on water, 
like a mirage or a conjuring trick. 
Just as there is a more or less finite number of elements, so 
there is a more or less finite number of classes of dharmas. 
But we should also note that the term dharma is used both of a 
particular instance of a class of dharma and of the whole class. 
Thus according to the Sarvastivadins the number of dharmas is 
seventy-five, meaning not that there are only seventy-five events 
in the world-given the duration of a dharma the world would 
be over in a very short time-but that there are only seventy-
five possible types of event. The Y ogacarins count some one 
hundred classes, while later Theravadin sources give eighty-two 
classes of dharma.6 Let us take a closer look at the Theravadin 
analysis, the basic principles of which are shared with the other 
Abhidharma systems. 
Eighty-one types of dharma are 'conditioned' (saY(lkhata). That 
is to say, the conditioned world of saq1sara from the lowest hell 
realms to the highest heavens of the Brahma world is con-
structed from the combination of these dharmas. The eighty-
second dharma is the unconditioned ( asayt1khata ), namely nirvfu).a. 
Conditioned dharmas fall into three main groups: consciousness 
(citta), associated mentality (cetasika), and physical phenomena 
(rilpa). The first, consciousness, constitutes a single class of 
dharma; the second, associated mentality, comprises fifty-two 
classes of dharma; the third, physical phenomena, comprises 
twenty-eight classes of dharma. Each of these eighty-one classes 
of dharma is precisely defined by, among other things, a distinc-
tive characteristic (lakkhaJJa). For example, greed (lobha) is one 
particular class of dharma. The nature of greed may vary from 
a mild wanting as one gazes through a shop window to an un-
stoppable craving. Yet all dharmas that are instances of 'greed' 
share the distinctive characteristic of 'grasping at some object';

--- PAGE 231 ---
The Abhidharma 
2II 
this is what defines them as greed as opposed to some other 
dharma. 
In this technical sense of a dharma the characteristic of 'con-
sciousness' is the bare sense of being aware of some object: it is 
the phenomenon of being conscious of something. We can never 
actually experience just this bare consciousness, for 'conscious-
ness' never arises as a single isolated dharma; according to the 
Abhidharma, for the mind to be aware of some object it needs 
the help of a number of associated mental factors, some of the 
fifty-two dharmas of the associated mentality group. The min-
imum number of associated mental factors required is seven. In 
other words, to be conscious in fact requires the occurrence of 
a minimum of eight dharmas: consciousness, contact, feeling, recog-
nition, volition, one-pointedness, life-faculty, and bringing-to-mind. 
I shall pass over the precise technical definitions that the 
Abhidharma supplies for each of these dharmas, but the basic 
Abhidharma conception of how the mind functions is this: a col-
lection of at least eight dharmas (consciousness and associated 
mental factors) arises for a moment and then falls away to be 
immediately followed by the next combination of conscious-
ness and associated mental factors. Each combination is con-
scious of just one object. The arising and passing of each moment 
of consciousness is understood to occur extremely rapidly-so 
rapidly that a countless number passes even in a finger-snap. The 
flow of consciousness is thus analogous to the rapid sequence 
of the frames of a movie film; consciousness is experienced as 
a continuous flow, but is in fact made up of the rapidly occur-
ring sequence of consciousness moments, each with a particular 
object. We may think that we are thinking of two or three things 
at once, but according to the Abhidharmikas we are just very 
rapidly turning from one thing to another and back again. Sim-
ilarly we experience each moment of consciousness as unified, 
yet rather like the way in which a colour photograph in a printed 
book is seen as an unbroken whole when it is in fact made up 
of countless tiny dots of just four colours, so consciousness is 
made up of separate dharmas. Thus, to extend the analogy, the 
infinite variety and richness of the mind is to be explained by the

--- PAGE 232 ---
212 
The Abhidharma 
combination of just eighty-one classes of dharma. Indeed, accord-
ing to an old image, the mind is far more complex, subtle, and 
varied than any painting? Moreover the arising of dharmas is 
seamless and the difficulty of distinguishing different kinds of 
dharma in actual experience is compared to tasting the waters 
of the sea and knowing that certain water comes from one river 
and certain water from another river.8 
The term citta or consciousness is used in two senses: (I) as a 
name for one of the eighty-one classes of dharma, namely the 
bare phenomenon of consciousness; ( 2) as a term for a given com-
bination of consciousness and its associated mental factors. Con-
sciousness in this second sense might be compared to a hand: 
the hand excluding the fingers is like the bare dharma of con~ 
sciousness (the' first sense), while the fingers are like the various 
associated mental factors; a given arising of consciousness is 
thus analogous to consciousness experiencing or picking up an:d 
handling a particular object by means of the associated mental 
factors. The flow of consciousness involves the mind picking up 
and putting down successive objects by means of successive sets 
of associated mental factors. In fact an old image from the siltras 
compares the mind to a monkey swinging quickly through the 
trees in the forest: as soon as it lets go of one branch it grasps 
another.9 
Although there is a total of fifty-two types of associated 
mental factor, only certain combinations of these are possible; 
for example it is impossible for the mental factors of greed and 
aversion to arise together in the same moment of consciousness 
for the simple reason that it is not possible to want something 
and not want it in the same moment-this does not, of course, 
mean that we cannot want something one moment and not want 
it the next. As I have already mentioned, for the Theravadins 
the simplest kind of consciousness that can occur involves seven 
associated mental factors. More complex consciousnesses involve 
up to a maximum of thirty-six types of associated mental factor. 
The Theravadin Abhidharma tabulates a system of eighty-nine 
basic classes of consciousness based on possible combinations 
of consciousness and associated mental factors. Normal human

--- PAGE 233 ---
The Abhidharma 
213 
consciousness involves forty-five of these classes of conscious-
ness. Of the other forty-four, eighteen concern the mind that has 
attained ordinary jhana (either in meditation or as a result of rebirth 
in one of the Brahma worlds), eight concern the mind that has 
attained transcendent jhana (at the moment ot" attaining one 
of the paths and fruits of stream-attainment, once-return, non-
return or arhatship ), and eighteen are restricted to the con-
sciousness of one who is awakened. 
The forty-five classes of normal consciousness fall into four 
broad groups: seventeen rootless (ahetuka), twelve unwholesome 
(akusala) consciousnesses, eight wholesome (kusala) classes of 
consciousness, and eight consciousnesses that are the karmic 
results ( vipiika) of wholesome consciousness. The seventeen 
rootless classes of consciousness are so called because they are 
motivated neither by greed, aversion or delusion, nor by non-
attachment, friendliness, or wisdom; they are considered to 
operate in a largely mechanical way in the processes of simply 
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting; or touching something. Of the 
remaining kinds of consciousness, the unwholesome and whole-
some are bound up with the way we react to what we experience 
through the senses, while the eight resultants principally oper-
ate as bhavmiga, our basic state of mind when no active mental 
process is occurring (for example, in deep, dreamless sleep). 
Thus if we crave or cling to what we see, hear, smell, taste, or 
touch then we experience one of the eight types of conscious-
ness rooted in greed; if we feel annoyed or irritated by it we 
experience one of the two types of consciousness rooted in aver-
sion; if we simply feel dull or confused then we experience one 
of the two types of consciousness rooted in delusion. On the other 
hand, instead of feeling attached, irritated, or dull, we may feel 
generous, friendly, and awake. 
One aspect of the Buddhist conception of a wholesome or 
'healthy' mind is made particularly clear in the Abhidharma. That 
is that we should not confuse enjoyment with greed or desire. 
According to the Buddhist analysis feeling is of five basic types: 
painful physical sensation, enjoyable physical sensation, men-
tal pleasure, mental displeasure, and neutral feeling. Painful or

--- PAGE 234 ---
214 
The Abhidharma 
enjoyable sensations are neither wholesome or unwholesome, 
but considered to be the results of previous unwholesome or 
wholesome karma respectively. Mental displeasure only occurs 
in unwholesome consciousness rooted in aversion. In fact it is 
the distinctive characteristic of these types of consciousness; 
Thus, if there is mental displeasure, then we know that there is 
unwholesome consciousness. Mental pleasure and neutral feel-
ing are more subtle. They can accompany both consciousness 
rooted in greed and consciousness rooted in non-attachment, 
friendliness, and wisdom. Accordingly mental pleasure may be 
a characteristic of both unwholesome and wholesome conscious-
ness. That wholesome consciousness is, on the Buddhist view, 
associated with pleasant states of mind is in line with the Bud-
dhist goal of finding a complete cessation of suffering. Thus 
Buddhist thought would resist any suggestion that, in teaching 
that the world is dukkha or 'suffering,' it presents a bleak and 
depressing outlook on the world. What Abhidharma analysis 
makes clear is that wholesome states of mind-those that con-
duce to relinquishing of attachments, those that possess the seeds 
of understanding and wisdom, those that resemble most closely 
the states of mind of one who is awakened-are precisely not un-
pleasant states of mind. This is not to say that one who attempts 
to put Buddhist teaching into practice immediately leaves behind 
all unpleasant and unwholesome states of mind-certainly the 
mind may experience much pain and suffering before it finally 
relinquishes its attachments. Yet it is not necessarily so. 
According to another Abhidharma classification there are 
those whose practice is unpleasant and who take a long time 
to come to understanding; there are those whose practice is 
unpleasant but who come to understanding quickly; on the other 
hand there are those whose practice is pleasant who come to under-
standing slowly; and there are those whose practice is pleasant 
and who also come to understanding quickly.10 The point I am 
making here by way of reference to the Abhidharma is essen-
tially the same point as was made by Bronkhorst on the basis of 
historical arguments about the nature of Buddhist meditation which 
we met at the end of the last chapter. The Buddhist path aims

--- PAGE 235 ---
The Abhidharma 
215 
at the cultivation of happy and balanced states of mind as the 
basis for the gaining of the understanding that liberates the mind 
by rooting out greed, aversion, and delusion. 
The consciousness process, karma, and rebirth 
For the Theravadin Abhidharma there are two basic modes of 
the mind: the mind that is involved in process (vUhi-citta) and 
the mind that is free of process (v"ithi-mutta). The mind that is 
in process is the mind that is actively perceiving objects and 
reacting to those objects; the mind that is free of process is 
resting in the inactive mode known as bhavailga. This inactive 
mode characteristically occurs in deep, dreamless sleep. How-
ever, according to the theory of consciousness process, the mind 
momentarily returns to the inactive mode of bhavailga between 
each consciousness process. The mind in this inactive mode of 
bhavailga is compared to a spider resting in the middle of its web.11 
The web extends out in different directions and when one of 
the threads of the web is struck by an insect the spider in the 
middle stirs, and then runs out along the thread and bites into 
the insect to drink its juice. Similarly, when one of the senses is 
stimulated, the mind, like the spider, wakes up and adverts to 
the 'door' of the particular sense in question. Like a spider run-
ning out along the thread, the mind is then said in due order to 
perceive the object, receive it, investigate it, and establish its nature. 
Finally, again like our spider, the mind enjoys and savours the 
object. As I have already indicated, this whole process occurs 
extremely rapidly. In fact what one would ordinarily experience 
as the simple awareness that one is, say, looking at a beautiful 
lotus flower is understood to be constructed from countless sense-
door consciousness processes of the type just described, as well 
as mind-door processes internalizing the information received 
through the senses.12 
In the simple consciousness process the functions of perceiv-
ing, receiving, and investigating an object are said to be performed 
by classes of rootless resultant consciousness. That is to say, 
the nature of the sense data presented to our minds is regarded

--- PAGE 236 ---
2!6 
The Abhidharma 
as determined by our previous actions. Whenever I see, hear, 
smell, taste, or touch something that is intrinsically 'desirable' 
(ittha). or pleasing, I experience a result of previous wholesome 
consciousness; whenever I see, hear, smell, taste or touch some-
thing that is intrinsically 'undesirable' (anittha) or unpleasing 
I experience a result of previous unwholesome consciousness. 
The basic experiences that I have are thus the result of my pre-
vious karma and beyond my immediate control; they come to 
me whether I wish for them or not. But in each consciousness 
process the mind has a choice in how it will react to the experi-
enced object. It is only the final stage when the mind has chosen 
to enjoy and savour its object in some way that actively unwhole-
some or wholesome consciousness plays its part and sows the seeds 
that will bear future results. In this way the Abhidharma in effect 
provides an exact small-scale analysis of the process of depend-
ent arising. 
The theory of bhavaliga consciousness requires some further 
commentY Bhavaliga is the state of mind a being is born with 
and it is the state of mind to which a being returns in deep, dream-
less sleep and in between every consciousness process. More 
strictly it is the state of mind that arises at the moment of con-
ception in the womb, forming the link (patisandhi) between one 
life and the next. The particular characteristics of a bhavaliga 
consciousness are unique to an individual being; a particular 
bhavaliga thus reproduces itself and recurs throughout a being's 
life, defining that being as an individual. For human beings the 
function of bhavaliga is performed by one of eight general classes 
of wholesome resultant consciousness. Like the consciousnesses 
that perceive, receive, and investigate an object, these kinds of 
consciousness are the results of previous karma. But unlike the 
former they are not rootless; rather they have the roots of non-
attachment, friendliness, and sometimes also wisdom. They are 
therefore much richer and complex kinds of consciousness .. 
The basis of a rebirth as a human being is then one of these 
eight types of consciousness that are the result of previous 
wholesome karma. This wholesome karma may have been per-
formed many lifetimes ago; more often it is wholesome karma

--- PAGE 237 ---
The Abhidharma 
2J7 
done in the immediately previous life that is significant. What i~ 
said to be crucial in the process of rebirth is one's state of mind 
at the time of death. It is understood that at death significant 
acts performed during one's life tend to present, themselves to 
one's mind. Certain kinds of action-for example, certain types 
of murder -are regarded as so 'weighty' that they cannot but come 
to mind at the time of death. In the absence of these what tends 
to come to mind are one's habitual actions or the actions that 
one performs close to the actual time of death. The widespread 
Buddhist understanding that actions performed at the time of 
death can be of crucial significance in determining the nature 
of one's rebirth relates to various customs aimed at turning the 
mind of a dying person to some meritorious action that he or she 
has performed. Thus flowers, incense·, lamps, or chanting may 
be offered on the dying person's behalf. And because the dead 
person's new state may be short-lived or, in the Tibetan view, a 
temporary 'in-between state', relatives and friends may continue 
to perform actions for his or her benefit for some time after death.14 
The Tibetan belief in the bar-do or 'in-between state' (antarii-
bhava) is inherited from the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma and is 
associated with the elaborate practices of the Bar-do Thos-grol, 
the so-called Tibetan Book of the Dead. This notion of the 'in-
between state' was a subject of dispute among ancient Indian 
schools of Buddhism; the Theravadins denied that it was co-
herent from an Abhidharma perspective, since an in-between 
existence must be another kind of existence.15 
Essentially Abhidharma is a device for promoting mindfulness 
and understanding. The study of Abhidharma encourages the 
practitioner to pay attention to the kinds of mental states that 
are occurring whatever he or she is doing. It also draws the prac-
titioner's attention to the way in which the spiritual process is 
understood to unfold. To this extent it can be seen as simply 
the elaboration of the analysis of the five aggregates and the 
twelvefold chain of dependent arising. 
One cannot make oneself think nice things or have beauti-
ful wholesome thoughts, by simply wishing it. The mind works 
according to certain laws and principles that are in significant

--- PAGE 238 ---
zr8 
The Abhidharma 
respects beyond our conscious ~ontrol. '!'hat is to say, certain. thin~s 
happen to us because of prev1ous actiOns; we react to thmgs m 
certain ways because of past tendencies and patterns of thought 
which nurture deep-rooted habits. Thus I may decide that 
aggressive behaviour is unwholesome and that I will no longer 
indulge my temper; yet when provoked, when the conditions arise, 
I still find myself unable to control my temper. We react in un-
wholesome and unhealthy ways because greed, hatred, and delu-
sion have not been rooted out. These tendencies lurk in our minds, 
and when the appropriate conditions arise they come to the fore. 
On the other hand there are also present in the mind the seeds 
of wholesome and healthy states of mind. According to the the-
ory of the Buddhist path these must be gradually and patiently 
nurtured.and cultivated. The process is compared to the way in 
which a hen cannot simply hatch her chicks by a mere wish; she 
must sit patiently nurturing the eggs until suddenly they finally 
hatch.16 
Some Abhidharma problems 
The Abhidharma analysis represents a continuation of two 
aspects of Buddhist theory: the breaking down of the individual 
into its constituent parts and the analysis of the causal relations 
that exist between those parts. As we saw in the account of 'no 
self' in Chapter 6, the first is characterized by the analysis of 
a being .into the five skandhas or aggregates of physical and 
mental phenomena; the second by the analysis of causality in 
terms of the twelve links of dependent arising. The first counters 
the 'eternalist' tendency of beings to cling to the view that their 
existence is substantial and enduring; the second the 'nihilist' 
tendency to see the world and their own existence as chaotic 
and meaningless. Again, as we saw in Chapter 6, past and pre-
sent critics of Buddhist theory argue that the breaking up of the 
individual into parts cannot account for the experienced facts 
of personal continuity and ends in devaluing the moral status 
of the individual. Buddhist thought counters that such a criti-
cism does not take proper account of the causal continuity that

--- PAGE 239 ---
The Abhidharma 
219 
exists between the parts, and that anyway it is true that we must 
relinquish attachment to our own individuality in order to act 
selflessly. 
The rigorous Abhidharma analysis of the mind and body in 
terms of linear series of momentary dharmas arising and ceas-
ing in every moment meant that Buddhist thought was required 
to give an equally rigorous intellectual account of the processes 
that govern psychological and bodily continuity. For example, I 
can remember past events, but if the dharmas that constituted 
those events no longer exist, what is it that I remember? More 
significantly, how can something that no longer exists have 
an effect in the present? Buddhist practice is based on the fact 
that actions have various kinds of results. Wholesome and un-
wholesome actions lead to pleasant and unpleasant results in 
the future-sometimes in far distant future lives. Yet how can 
an action performed many lifetimes ago suddenly have an effect 
now? Moreover, according to Buddhist thought, actions are habit-
forming, creating tendencies in the mind. Yet if actions begin and 
cease in every moment how do these tendencies accumulate, how 
do we learn to do things? And how is it that an acquired skill 
like swimming or speaking a language can be retained when it 
is not used, even for many years? And crucially, where is the poten-
tiality for anger when it is not active? Suppose that I am sitting 
peacefully experiencing thoughts of generosity and friendliness 
towards the world. At that time, according to Abhidharma, there 
is no occurrence of thoughts motivated by greed, aversion, or 
delusion, but only of thoughts motivated by non-attachment, 
friendliness, and wisdom; therefore my mental state should not 
be distinguishable from an arhat's or even a Buddha's. Yet if Mara 
should send his armies against me or if his daughters should appear 
before me, it would probably not be long before a state of fear 
or hatred or desire arose in me. So here is the difference: in me 
there is a potentiality for greed, hatred, and delusion that is 
not found in a Buddha or arhat. But how does the potentiality 
for unwholesome thought suddenly emerge from wholesome 
thoughts, and how do wholesome dharmas, operate as a condi-
tion for unwholesome dharmas? 
·

--- PAGE 240 ---
220 
The Abhidharma 
One of the most intellectually creative explanations of thes~ 
related sets of questions is expounded by the Sarvastivadins. Their 
theories are in the first place based on a radical understanding 
of the nature of time, the view that all three times-present, past, 
and future-exist (sarviisti-viida). According to this view, to say 
of dharmas that they are future or past is not to say that they 
do not exist; they exist, but they happen to exist in the past or 
the future, just as other dharmas happen, for a moment, to exist 
in the present. Time is thus conceived as a kind of dimension 
through which dharmas travel. Four different ways of under-
standing this are associated with the names of four Sarvastivadin 
theorists of the early centuries CE. From the perspective of mod-
ern philosophy Buddhadeva's suggestion that a dharma can be 
said to be 'present', relative to simultaneous dharmas, 'past' relat" 
ive to dharmas that come after arid 'future' relative to dharmas 
that come before-like a woman who is daughter and mother 
-is. perhaps the most philosophically subtleY Nevertheless it 
was the view of Vasumitra that apparently carried the most 
authority: a dharma moving through the different times does not 
change in essential nature but only in position (avasthii), just as 
in decimal counting a 'one' signifies 'one', 'ten' or 'one hundred' 
according to position. 
In connection with their understanding of the existence of 
dharmas in the three times, the Sarvastivadins proposed two 
dharmas that governed the operation of dharmas. As an ordin-
ary unenlightened person, when one experiences, say, desire, there 
is a 'possession' (priipti) of present desire; but when it is past, 
although there may be no 'possession' of present desire, there is 
still a 'possession' of past desire and also one of its future results; 
this 'possession' of the future result will continue to reproduce 
itself from moment to moment until it matures into a 'posses-
sion' of a present result. For an unenlightened person there is 
also 'non-possession' (apriipti) of certain kinds of wholesome 
dharmas associated with the higher stages of meditation and the 
Buddhist path; such 'non-possession' is not the mere absence 
of these wholesome dharmas but a real dh~rma in itself which 
must be destroyed, along with the 'possessions' of unwholesome

--- PAGE 241 ---
The Abhidharma 
221 
dharmas, by the practice of the path. Critics of the Sarvastivadins 
objected that if 'possession' is a dharma like other dharmas 
then it must require 'possession' in order to operate: there would 
have to be possession of 'possession' of 'possession' and so on, 
ad infinitum. The Sarvastivadins responded with the notion of a 
'secondary possession' (anupriipti) that both possessed and was 
in turn possessed by the primary possession. 
For certain Buddhist theorists the intellectual sophistica-
tion, not to say abstraction, of the Sarvastivadin analyses rendered 
them problematic. Among the critics of the Sarvastivada a group 
styled the Sautrantikas or 'those who follow the method of the 
sutras' are especially important for the subsequent history of 
Buddhist thought. Although the Sautrantikas did not accept 
the Abhidharma as the 'word of the Buddha', it would be wrong 
to think of them as rejecting the Abhidharma method in its 
entirety. In fact the basic Abhidharma system is largely assumed 
by their criticisms; it is particular doctrines characteristic of the 
Vaibha~ika-Sarvastivada Abhidharma that they took issue with. 
Two theories are especially associated with their name: the the-
ory of the radical momentariness of dharmas and the theory 
of seeds. 
Rejecting the idea of dharmas existing in the three times of 
present, past, and future, Sautrantikas criticized the Sarvastivadin 
conception of the duration of a dharma in the present moment. 
For the Sarvastivadins dharmas are substantial realities (dravya), 
existing in their own right, which for a moment operate in the 
present. From this perspective, the present moment although a 
very short period of time, is none the less a period of time. There 
is no Sarvastivadin consensus on the length of a moment but figures 
given in the texts work out at between o. 13 and 13 milliseconds.18 
Yet, object the Sautrantikas, if something endures unchanged 
for even a moment, then the fundamental Buddhist principle of 
impermanence is compromised. If things are truly impermanent, 
then they must be changing continuously and cannot remain 
static for any period of time, however short.19 This kind of think-
ing led to the conception of moments as point instants of time 
which, just as geometric points have no extension in space, have

--- PAGE 242 ---
222 
The Abhidharma 
no duration in time. It is in the light of this that we should under-
stand the Abhidharma account of the twelve links of inter-
dependent arising occurring in a moment: analyse reality down 
to the shortest conceivable moment of time and what we still find 
is a process rather than inert, or static bits. 
Instead of the theory of 'possession' the Sautrantikas pro-
posed that the mechanism whereby dharmas produce effects 
long after they cease to exist can be understood by reference to 
the images of seeds and 'perfuming'.2° When I perform an action 
motivated by greed, it plants a 'seed' in the series of dharmas 
that is my mind. Such a seed is not a thing in itself-a dharma-
but merely the modification or 'perfuming' of the subsequent flow 
of dharmas consequent upon the action. In the course of time 
this modification matures and issues in a particular result, in the 
same way as a seed does not produce its fruit immediately, but 
only after the 'modifications' of the shoot, stem, leaf, and flower. 
The Sautrantikas also suggested that there are two types of 
seed. In addition to seeds that are planted by our wholesome and 
unwholesome deeds, there are certain seeds that subsist in the 
mental continuum of beings from time immemorial; such seeds 
constitute an innate potentiality for wholesome behaviour that 
can never be destroyed. In the Sautrantika theory of seeds we 
have the precursors of two extremely important concepts of later 
Mahayana Buddhist thought: the Yogacarin 'store consciousness' 
(iilaya-vijfuina) and the notion of 'the embryo of the Buddha' 
(tathiigata-garbha) or Buddha-nature, the innate capacity in all 
beings to gain enlightenment. The latter concept was to prove 
particularly influential in the development of certain tendencies 
of East Asian Buddhist thought. 
For their part the Theravadin Abhidharmikas seem to have 
referred the answer to the kinds of problem we have been con-
sidering to their understanding of the consciousness process, out-
lined briefly above. Between each active consciousness process 
the mind returns to a basic state of consciousness ( bhavaflga) that 
defines a being as an individual before emerging once more in 
response to some physical or mental stimulus. Thus instead of 
referring the continuity of character traits and habitual tendencies

--- PAGE 243 ---
The Abhidharma 
223 
to a continuously present (but still always changing) underlying 
state of mind, which the Sautrantikas and later the Y ogacarins 
tended to do, the Theravadins refer it to a continually interven-
ing state of mind.21 
As a footnote to this discussion of Abhidharina problems, I 
should mention the theory of one more Buddhist school, the 
Pudgalavadins or 'those who affirm the existence of the person'. 
Their ideas seem to have been formed in the context of early 
Abhidharma discussions of the undetermined questions, karma 
and rebirth, the unconditioned, and the nature of conscious-
ness.22 To some extent the 'person' of the Pudgalavadins might 
be seen as performing an analogous functidn to 'possession', 
seeds, or bhavmiga. While other schools accused them of having 
smuggled in an atman or 'self', they vigorously denied that their 
person was a 'self': it cannot be said to be the same or different 
from the five aggregates; it is not susceptible to annihilation 
nor is it eternal; in fact it is strictly ineffable (avaktavya). The 
writings of the Pudgalavadins themselves hardly survive and 
our knowledge of their ideas is largely based on the refutations 
of other schools.23 Although the affirmation of the person can 
hardly be regarded as characteristic of mainstream Buddhist 
thought, it is associated particularly with the Vinaya lineage 
named after the monk Vatsiputra, the Vatsiputriya-Sammatiyas. 
Ac<:ording to the Chinese pilgrim Hsiian-tsang who visited India 
in the seventh century, around a quarter of the monks in India 
belonged to this school. Of course, that a monk had been or-
dained into a particular ordination lineage need not have meant 
that he automatically subscribed to the doctrinal positions asso-
ciated with that ordination lineage. Not all monks. ordained 
as Sammatiyas need have been pudgalaviidins, just as not all 
Sarvastivadin monks need necessarily have been sarviistivadins. 
This last point is aptly illustrated by the fact that the contem-
porary Tibetan monks are ordained in the tradition of the 
Miilasarvastivadins (a sub-school of the ancient Sarvastivada), 
yet none would subscribe to the view that dharmas exist in the 
three times.

--- PAGE 244 ---
9 
The Mahayana 
The Great Vehicle 
The beginnings of the Mahayana 
The production of Buddhist siitras or texts claiming to be 'the 
word of the Buddha' is something that continued for many cen-
turies after the death of the Buddha. Although different schools 
of Buddhism gradually developed a sense of defined collections 
of scriptures having the authority of the word of the Buddha, the 
notion of a fixed canon seems to have remained somewhat loose. 
As the history of Theravada Buddhism in Sri Lanka and South-
East Asia illustrates, even where there exists a defined canon it 
is quite possible for 'non-canonical' sfltras to continue to circulate 
and be used.1 But around the beginning of the Christian era there 
began to emerge scriptures that challenged certain established 
Buddhist teachings and ways of understanding, and which advo-
cated what is represented as a superior path of practice leading 
to a superior understanding. 
The defining idea of the vision of Buddhist teaching presented 
in these sfltras is one that I outlined at the end of Chapter I: the 
superiority of Gautama's awakening to that of his disciples. 
Gautama's awakening is characterized by the perfect develop-
ment of all spiritual qualities, and as such it exceeds the accom-
plishment of his disciples. The path followed by Gautama is thus 
the mahii-yiina-the 'great vehicle'-or the vehicle of the Bod-
hisattva (bodhisattva-yiina) ending in the perfect awakening of the 
fully awakened samyak-sambuddha as opposed to 'the inferior 
vehicle' (hina-yiina), the vehicle of the disciple (sriivaka-yiina), 
ending in arhatship. 
The dating of the earliest Mahayana sfltras, like that of all ancient 
Indian texts, is extremely problematic. The earliest firm date we

--- PAGE 245 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
225 
have for their existence is the late second century CE when 
a number of Mahayana siitras were translated into Chinese 
by Lokak~ema. Many Mahayana siitras as we have them show 
evidence of a particular kind of literary history: an older core 
text is expanded and elaborated; thus the siitras translated by 
Lokak~ema originated possibly a century or so earlier in India. 
Most scholars push the date of the earliest Mahayana siitras back 
into the first century BCE, but the production and elaboration of 
Mahayana siitras certainly continued for a number of centuries. 
For their part, however, the Mahayana siitras present them-
selves as teachings which, having been originally delivered by the 
Buddha himself, were not taught until the time was ripe. 
Modern scholars have sometimes sought to connect their 
production with particular areas of India (either the south or the 
north-west), but the evidence is problematic and inconclusive. 
Following the lead of certain later Mahayana writers themselves, 
some modern scholars have also sometimes traced the origins 
of the siitras to a particular school of the ancient Sangha, namely 
the Mahasarpghikas; but more recent scholarship tends to stress 
the fact that Mahayana was not in origin a sectarian movement. 
Rather than causing a schism within the Sangha, Mahayana teach-
ings were esoteric teachings of interest to small groups of monks 
from various ofthe ancient schools (see above pp. 56-8). Again, 
while earlier scholarship has tended to represent Mahayana as 
a movement inspired by popular lay religiosity and stiipa wor-
ship, more recent scholarship has suggested that we might see 
the origins of the Mahayana in the activity of forest -dwelling ascetic 
monks attempting to return to the ideals of original Buddhism.2 
.Other writers have also connected the rise of the Mahayana with 
a growing cult of the book.3 
The most important Mahayana siitras can be conveniently 
grouped according to the characteristic ideas they expound: 
• Siitras setting out the stages of the bodhisattva path: the 
Bodhisattva-pitaka, the Dasabhumika Sutra. 
• The 'perfection of wisdom' (prajnii-piiramitii) siitras. These 
are among the earliest Mahayana siitras, and of these the

--- PAGE 246 ---
226 
The Mahiiyiina 
earliest is probably the A:ftasiihasrikii or 'Perfection of Wis-
dom iii 8,ooo Lines'. The characteristic teaching is the 'empti-
ness' of dharmas. 
• The 'ideas only' (vijiiapti-miitra) stitras. These sfltras intro-
duce the idealist doctrine that the 'mind', 'ideas' or 'informa-
tion' ( vijiiapti) alone is real. The most important early sutra 
is the Saf!1dhinirmocaria Sutra but its teachings along with 
associated theories are found developed in the next group 
of sfltras. 
• The 'embryo of the Tathagata' (tathiigatagarbha) sfltras: the 
Tathiigatagarbha Sutra, Mahiiparinirviil}a Sutra, Lankiivatiira 
Sutra, Srfmiiliidevf-sif!1haniida Sutra. 
• Two sfltras of particular importance in East Asian Bud-
dhism are the Saddharmapul}t;larfka Sutra ('Discourse ofthe 
Lotus of the True Dharma', commonly referred to simply 
as the 'Lotus Sutra'), which expounds the notion of the 'one 
vehicle' (seep. 228), and the (Buddha-) Avataf!1saka Sutra 
(incorporating the Gal}t;lavyuha and Dasabhumika Sutras ), 
which develops the notion of the 'interpenetration of all 
phenomena' (see pp. 264-5). 
• The 'pure land' sfltras: the smaller and larger Sukhiivau-vyuha 
Sutras, the Amitiiyur-dhyiina Sutra. These sfltras describe the 
'pure land' of the Buddha of Boundless Light and become 
the basis for the Pure Land school of East Asian Buddhism. 
• Meditation sfltras: Pratyutpanna-buddha-sammukhiivasthita-
samiidhi Sutra, Samiidhi-riija Sutra, Surangama-samiidhi Sutra. 
These sfltras describe particular meditation practices. 
Such a list indicates only in outline the nature and scope of a few 
of the most important Mahayana sfltras. Let us now turn to the 
summary exposition of the ideas artiCulated in these sfltras and 
the related expository manuals or siistras. 
The vehicle of the bodhisattva 
That all Buddhism has a bodhisattva path follows from the fact 
that all Buddhism knows the story of the ascetic variously named 
~s Megha (in the Mahiivastu) or Sumedha (in Pali sources) and

--- PAGE 247 ---
The Mahayana 
227 
his meeting with a previous buddha, Dipmpkara. Megha could 
have chosen to become a disciple of Diparpkara and followed 
the path, to awakening, and thus become an arhat in that very 
life. If he had done so that would have been the end, of the mat-
ter: there would have been no Gautama Buddha, only the arhat 
Megha. But he did not follow the path to immediate arhatship; 
instead he chose to practise the perfections (paramita/paramz) 
and so eventually-many, many lifetimes, many, many aeons later 
-he became the samyaksam-buddha, Gautama. The reason for 
Megha's decision is that he was inspired by the compassionate 
ideal of the bodhisattva path: having become awakened him-
self, he would lead others to awakening.4 The traditional notion 
of the arhat is that he becomes awakened and then effectively dis-
appears from sarpsara; the bodhisattva, on the other hand, spends 
many aeons in saq1sara perfecting spiritual qualities, and, in the 
process, working for the benefit of sentient beings; eventually 
he becomes a fully awakened buddha, but only when the teach-
ing of the previous buddha has disappeared from the world. In 
choosing the path of the bodhisattva, Megha thus forgoes his 
own immediate release from suffering, as an arhat, in order to 
become a buddha and teach the path to the cessation of suffer-
ing to other beings. 
This basic distinction between the career of the disciple and 
the career of the bodhisattva is thus presupposed by all Buddhist 
thought. But the,earlier tradition tends to emphasize that as 
far as the fundamental liberating knowledge of the four noble 
truths is concerned the Buddha and his disciples are equal. But 
a gap between the Buddha and arhat none the less exists. We 
can trace in Buddhist literature generally an increasing tendency 
to exalt the figure of the Buddha and to dwell on the description 
of his incomparable virtues and superhuman powers; lists such 
as the ten powers of the Tathagata and the eighteen special qual-
ities of a Buddha are common to all Buddhist schools. But with 
a text such as the Lokanuvartana Sutra ('discourse on con-
forming to the world') the Buddha is seen less and less as a his-
torical personality and more and more as a transcendent being 
who merely appears to conform to the conventions of worldly

--- PAGE 248 ---
228 
The Mahayana 
existence.5 And the more this happens, the greater the opportun-
ity for the suggestion that the attainments of his arhat disciples 
fall somewhat short of the complete awakening of the Buddha. 
What is characteristic of the Mahayana vision of Buddhism is the 
view that the attainment of the disciple falls so far short of full 
Buddhahood that it cannot be considered as a worthy spiritual 
goal; contrary to the traditional formula which states the arhat 
'has done what has to be done', he or she in fact has further work 
to do. Thus for the earlier tradition, as for the Theravada today, 
the normal route to awakening was considered the path of 
arhatship, and the heroic path of the bodhisattva an option for 
the few. 6 The parting of the two ways of the bodhisattva and 
sravaka is illustrated by the traditional story of Megha. For the 
Mahayana, however, the path to arhatship appears tainted with 
a residual selfishness since it lacks the motivation of the great 
compassion (mahakarwJa) of the bodhisattva, and ultimately the 
only legitimate way of Buddhist practice is the bodhisattva path. 
The traditions of Indian Buddhism that resisted the Mahayana 
vision continued to think in terms of three approaches to what 
was essentially one and the same final release from suffering, 
nirval)a: the path of the sravaka or 'disciple' leading to arhat-
ship, the path of the pratyeka-buddha and the path of the bod-
hisattva leading to the attainment of the samyak-sambuddha 
(see above, pp. 32-4). The Mahayana sfitras express two basic 
attitudes to this? The first is that the path of the disciple and the 
path of the pratyeka-buddha do lead to a kind of awakening, a 
release from suffering, nirval)a, and as such are real goals. These 
goals are, however, inferior and should be renounced for the 
superior attainment of buddhahood. The second attitude, clas-
sically articulated by the Lotus Sutra, sees the goal of the dis-
ciple and the pratyeka-buddha as not true goals at all.8 The fact 
that the Buddha taught them is an example of his 'skill in means' 
( upaya-kau§alya) as a teacher.9 These goals are thus merely 
clever devices ( upaya) employed by the Buddha in order to get 
beings to at least begin the practice of the path; eventually their 
practice must lead on to the ,one and only vehicle (eka-yana) that 
is the mahayana, the vehicle ending in perfect buddhahood.

--- PAGE 249 ---
The Mahayana 
229 
From this perspective the difference between hznayiina and 
mahiiyiina is effectively the difference between progressive stages 
of the same path. This kind of understanding is expressed in the 
classic Tibetan presentations of 'the gradual path' (lam rim) to 
awakening.10 Thus even 'Mahayanists' (people who accept the 
Mahayana vision) do not necessarily begin their spiritual prac-
tice with the motivation of the bodhisattva simply established in 
their hearts; they must first undertake various practices in order 
to arouse and cultivate this motivation in the form of 'the mind 
of awakening' (bodhi-citta): spiritual practice begins by letting 
go of the delights of this world, by arousing a sense of the pain 
and suffering of saq1sara and desiring release; it is ~:mly then that 
the motivation of the bodhisattva becomes crucial.11 That is to 
say, at the beginning of the path we are almost inevitably prim-
arily motivated by the wish to rid ourselves of our own individual 
suffering; it is only as we progress along the path that we come 
to understand that, in fact, suffering is above all something that 
beings share in common; with the dawning of this realization we 
are moved by compassion and the desire to help others; our moti-
vation for following the path shtfts and we enter the Mahayana 
proper. The bodhisattva thus at once turns away from saq1sara 
as a place of suffering and at the same time turns back towards 
it out of compassion for the suffering of the world: 
And he who hopes for the welfare of the world thinks to himself: Let 
me undertake religious practice, that I may bring welfare and happiness 
to all beings. And he sees the aggregates (skandha) as like a magic show, 
but he does not wish to disown the aggregates; he sees the senses 
(dhiitu) as like a poisonous serpent, but he does not wish to disown the 
senses; he sees sensory awareness (ayatana) as like an empty village, 
but he does not wish to disown sensory awarenessP 
The Mahayana texts may emphasize that the motivation of the 
bodhisattva is quite different from that of the sriivaka or dis-
ciple, but in practice the two paths are not so different: one de-
velops essentially the same spiritual qualities, but to the perfect 
degree of a buddha. The bodhisattva's practice, like the sriivaka's, 
consists of the development of good conduct, concentration, and

--- PAGE 250 ---
230 
The Mahayana 
wisdom: he stills the mind by means of calm meditation and then 
turns the mind to insight. A new scheme of ten stages or levels 
(bhumi) of the bodhisattva path, as set out in such texts as the 
DaSabhumika ('On the Ten Levels'), is superimposed on the older 
map of five paths (see Table 7 above), giving a scheme of thirteen 
spiritual stages. As I have just indicated, the bodhisattva path is 
seen as beginning with a series of meditations aimed at arousing 
the 'awakening mind' (bodhi-citta). What is meant here is the 
arousing and establishing in one's heart of a genuine desire to 
become a buddha, and this is brought about by an awareness of 
the sufferings of beings. As a result one is truly affected by their 
anguish and d~eply moved by compassion. The arousing and estab-
lishing of bodhi-citta correspond to the paths of equipment and 
application, and are thus spiritual attainments of some depth. 
With the 'path of seeing'-the point, on the path of the sravaka, 
at which one became a stream-attainer-one has reached the 
first of the ten levels of the bodhisattva path and begun the de-
velopment of the six perfection~ (paramita): generosity (dana), 
good conduct (fila), patient acceptance (k$anti), vigour (virya), 
meditation (dhyana), wisdom (prajflii). This standard list of six 
perfections is correlated with the first six levels; an additional four 
perfections of skill in means (upaya-kausalya), determination 
(prm;idhiina), strength (bala), and knowledge (jiliina), are then 
related to the final four levels. The practice of all ten perfections 
constitutes 'the path of development' ending in the tenth level, 
the 'Cloud of Dharma', and the attainment ofbuddhahood; beyond 
is the path of 'one in need of no further training', a buddha.B 
Thus whereas from the non-Mahayana perspective the path 
of seeing is the point at which the meditator sees the four truths 
directly and attains'the stream' that ends in arhatship, from the 
perspective of the Mahayana path this path of insight is the point 
of establishing oneself on the first of ten levels that culminate in 
full buddhahood. 
Reaching the first level corresponds to stream-attainment; at 
the sixth level the bodhisattva has reached the stage when he could 
attain the nirval).a of arhatship, but the journey to full buddha-
hood is not yet complete and he must pass on to the seventh level.

--- PAGE 251 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
231 
The bodhisattva of these higher bhumis is a quite extraordinary 
being who works ceaselessly for the benefit of all beings. Born 
as god in the realms of the devas or of Brahma, he in fact already 
has many of the powers and qualities of a buddha.14 Indeed 
according to some sources the bodhisattva already manifests 
created bodies which perform all the twelve acts of a Buddha 
(see Chapter r) at the tenth stage: 
At will he displays the array of the realms of all the Buddhas at the end 
of a single hair; at will he displays untold arrays of the realms of the 
Buddhas of all kinds; at will in the twinkling of an eye he creates as 
many individuals as there are particles in untold world-systems ... In 
the arising of a thought he embraces the ten directions; in a moment 
of thought he controls the manifestation of innumerable processes of 
complete awakening and final nirval)a ... In his own body he controls 
countless manifestations of the qualities of the Buddha fields of innu-
merable Blessed Buddhas.15 
If this is what tenth-stage bodhisattvas do, then what do buddhas 
do? The short answer is much, much more of the same-such 
that one cannot properly begin to conceive of what buddhas truly 
do. Nevertheless it appears that we are to understand that at some 
point in the process-the repeated process of manifesting the 
acts of buddhas and carrying out their work-these tenth-stage 
bodhisattvas do actually become buddhas. But for the Mahayana 
buddhahood this final attainment occurs in the Akani~tha {Pali 
Akanittha) realm, the highest of 'the Pure Abodes' (see above 
p. rr8). 
Transcendent buddhas 
In the earlier tradition the Tathagata, or 'the one who has gone 
thus', teaches the Dharma and at death attains parinirva1;1a or 
'final nirva1;1a'. Although after death he strictly cannot be said to 
exist, not exist, both exist and not exist, or neither exist nor not 
exist, effectively he disappears from sarpsara never to be seen 
again. The Buddha of the Mahayana, however, continues to be 
present and in some way active. Strictly, for all Buddhism, we 
cannot speak of a buddha as 'existing' in any ordinary sense, since

--- PAGE 252 ---
232 
The Mahiiyiina 
to exist in an ordinary sense means to be born as an individual 
being in a particular realm; Buddhas have precisely transcended 
the round of rebirth, so cannot be said to exist at a particular 
time and place as 'individuals'. For the Mahayana becoming a 
Buddha generally involves attaining. what is characterized as 
the 'unestablished' or 'non-abiding' (aprati$thita) nirva!).a: on the 
one hand the knowledge of a buddha that sees emptiness, is 
not 'established' in saq~.sara (by seizing on birth as an individual 
being, for example), on the other hand the great compassion of 
a buddha prevents the complete turning away from saq~.sara. So 
ultimately he abides neither in saq~.sara nor in nirva!).a.16 Thus, 
while it may appear that a buddha takes birth as an individual 
being like the rest of us, in truth he does not-What we ordinarily 
see here on earth, as it were, is merely a body created by the 
Buddha, a nirmiiJJa-kiiya. Where is the Buddha really? 
In the process of following the path the bodhisattva gradually 
develops the ability to magically transform himself and the 
world around him for the benefit of beings. The Indian yogic and 
meditation theory generally recognizes the development of vari-
ous powers (see pp. 185-6), but in the context of the development 
of the bodhisattva path the ability is perfected and becomes of 
a different order. In a sutta in the Pali canon the Buddha is 
described as having a body endowed with thirty-two marks. But 
these marks are obviously not marks of the Buddha's ordinary 
body that we normally see. They are the marks of a body gradu-
ally developed over many aeons by the practice of perfections. 
Again, various kinds of 'subtle bodies' are universal to Indian 
meditation theory. For the yogin his other body (even if more 
subtle), developed and experienced in the stages of meditation, 
comes to be more real than his ordinary physical body. So there 
is a sense in which the yogin gradually becomes this other body. 
For the bodhisattva the end point of this development is the 'enjoy-
ment body' (sambhoga-kiiya) of a buddha teaching the Dharma 
in a 'buddha-field' (buddha-k$etra). This enjoyment body is closer 
to what a buddha really is and may, indeed, be seen by some; for 
the rest of us, we must be content with the grosser manifestations 
of the Buddha's bodies of magical creation (nirmiiJJa-kiiya ). Yet

--- PAGE 253 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
233 
the enjoyment body is, again hardly what the Buddha ultimately 
is. What a buddha is in 'himself' is the dharma-kiiya. This expres-
sion originally seems to have meant that a buddha is ultimately 
the sum ( kiiya) of perfected good qualities (dharma) that consti-
tute a Buddha. But the expression comes to be'interpreted, at 
any rate in the Y ogacara tradition, as referring to the ultimate 
truth of the way things are: the eternal, unchanging truth per-
ceived by a buddha, 'thusness' (tathatii)Y Buddhas in the world, 
nirmiil}a-kiiyas, come and go, live and die, as Gautama did in the 
fifth century BeE; cosmic buddhas, sambhoga-kiiyas, spend count-
less aeons teaching in their pure lands and manifesting nirmiil}a-
kiiyas; strictly dharma-kiiyas do not do anything at all. 
For the earlier non-Mahayana tradition there can only be one 
buddha at any given time and we must wait until his teaching has 
disappeared for the next to arise. Previous buddhas, although 
recognized and the object of devotions and rituals, are, like the 
Buddha Gautama, doctrinally at least beings of the past rather 
than the present.18 Maitreya (Pali Metteyya), universally acknow-
ledged as the bodhisattva who will become the next buddha, must 
already be far advanced along the path, but his time is yet to come. 
For the Mahayana all this changes; the notion of the sambhoga-
kiiya is developed and exploited, emphasizing that there must, 
in the infinite universe, be buddhas now teaching in their pure 
lands and buddha-fields.19 These buddhas-the 'unshakeable' 
Ak~obhya, the 'medicine' Buddha Bhai~ajya Guru, the bound-
less radiance of Amitabha-and their lovely pure lands are 
accessible to us, through either meditation or rebirth. Moreover 
the Mahayana conception allows that numerous advanced bod-
hisattvas are now working for the benefit of beings-not only 
Maitreya, but also A valokitesvara, the lord who looks down with 
compassion, the charming Mafijusri, bodhisattva of wisdom, and 
the 'saviouress' Tara.20 Indeed, according to the Lotus Siltra, 
Gautama, Sakyamuni Buddha, is still around. 
The development of the worship of various buddhas and 
bodhisattvas is a feature of Mahayana Buddhist practice, and it 
continues especially in East Asian Pure Land Buddhism and 
in Tibetan Buddhism. Yet this development can be seen as a

--- PAGE 254 ---
234 
The Mahayana 
continuation of the practice of the recollection and visualization 
of the Buddha and his qualities (buddhiinusmrti!buddhiinussati), 
and the contrast with contemporary Theravadin attitudes can 
be overstated. While the Theravadin doctrinal position on the 
ontological status of the Buddha and arhats of the past (which, 
we should remember, includes the stricture that we should not 
say that they do not exist) remains, in practice the power of the 
Buddha Gautama is thought of as somehow persisting until 
the final disappearance of all his relics, which, it is thought, in 
the last days of the Dharma will spontaneously come together 
at the site of the Buddha's awakening and vanish (the tradition 
of dhiitu-parinibbiina).21 The devotional cult of arhats is anci~ 
ent, and the presence of the arhats is invoked in. South-East 
Asia, and one whom many regarded as a twentieth-century arhat, 
Ajahn Mun, is described as meeting and conversing with the arhats 
of the past.22 
Emptiness (siinyata) and the 'perfection of wisdom' 
(prajiiaparamita) 
Mahayana siltras see the motivation underlying the arhat's attain-
ment as lacking the great compassion (mahii-karwJii) of a buddha; 
of equal concern to the siltras. is perfect wisdom. Together, wis-
dom and compassion become the two great themes of Mahayana 
thought. 
The 'Perfection of Wisdom' (prajftiipiiramitii) literature 
evolved over many centuries and comprises a variety of texts, 
including some of the oldest Mahayana siltra material. Edward 
Conze, a pioneer of the scholarly study of this literature,. con-
sidered the oldest and most basic text to be the A~{asiihasrikii­
Prajftiipiiramitii ('Perfection of Wisdom in 8,ooo Lines'), which 
he dates from the first century BCE. Subsequent centuries saw the 
production of vast expanded versions, such as those of Ioo,ooo 
lines, 25,000 lines, and I8,ooo lines, as well as shorter versions, 
such as the Vajracchedikii and Hrdaya (the 'Diamond' and 
'Heart' Siltras), although it now appears that the last, a text only

--- PAGE 255 ---
The Mahayana 
235 
a few lines in length, was originally composed in Chinese and only 
subsequently rendered into Sanskrit.23 
In the century or so prior to the appearance of the Perfection 
of Wisdom literature, Buddhism had, in the form of Abhidharma, 
begun to evolve increasingly detailed and sophisticated theor-
etical accounts of the nature of reality and of the stages of the 
path to awakening. Central to the Abhidharma is the distinction 
between the conventional truth (that persons and selves exist) 
and the ultimate truth (that persons and selves are ultimately 
simply aggregates of evanescent dharmas-physical and mental 
events). The main teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom is that, 
from the perspective of perfect wisdom, even this account of the 
way things are is ultimately arbitrary. 
Since we fail to see things as they really are-impermanent, 
suffering, and not self-we grasp at them as if they were per-
manent, as if they could bring us lasting happiness, as if we 
could possess them as our very own. Thus the cultivation of calm 
and insight involves breaking up the seemingly substantial and 
enduring appearance of things. Things-our very own selves, our· 
own minds-are actually nothing but insubstantial, evanescent 
dharmas (see above, p. 190). Abhidharma theory and the asso-
ciated meditations thus provide a way of getting behind appear-
ances to a world that is quite different from the one ordinarily 
experienced-a way of easing the mind from the ways and pat-
terns of thought it habitually uses to understand the world. So far 
so good, but the currents of craving run deep, and the habitual 
ways and patterns of thought are subtle and devious. Our minds 
have a predilection to the formulation of views (dr~{i/ditthi), to 
conceptual proliferation (prapanca/papanca), and to the manu-
facture of conceptual constructs (vikalpa); it is these which we 
tend to confuse with the way things are and to which we become 
attached. In other words, we are always in danger of mistaking 
our own views and opinions for a true understanding of the way 
things are. This danger-and this is the really significant point-
may apply to views and opinions based on the theoretical teachings 
of Buddhism (the Abhidharma and the account of the stages 
of the path) no less than to views and opinions derived from

--- PAGE 256 ---
The Mahayana 
other theoretical systems. Perfect wisdom, however, is what see~ 
through the process of the mind's conceptual construction artcl) 
is not tainted by attachment to any view or opinion. In particu.: 
lar, it is not attached to the views and conceptual constructs 
of Buddhist theory: unwholesome and wholesome qualities, th~ 
levels of meditation or dhyana, the stages of insight, the attain" 
ment of the Buddhist path, nirval)a itself, the general theory of 
dharmas. From the perspective of perfect wisdom all these are 
seen for what they ultimately are: empty (sunya!suiiiia). That 
is, the conceptual constructs of Buddhist theory are ultimately 
no less artificial and arbitrary entities than the conceptual con~ 
structs of the ordinary unawakened mind which sees really exist~ 
ing persons and selves. The mind can grasp at the theory of dharma.s 
and turn it into another conceptual strait-jacket. Thus the Large 
Siltra can state that: 
there is no ignorance and no cessation of ignorance ... no suffering and 
no knowledge of suffering, no cause and no abandoning of the cause, 
no cessation and no realization of cessation, and no path and no devel-
opment of the path ... It is in this sense, Sariputra, that a bodhisattva, 
a great being who practises perfect wisdom, is called one devoted [to 
perfect wisdom].24 
The teaching of emptiness should not be read, as it sometimes 
appears to be, as an attempt to subvert the Abhidharma theory 
of dharmas as a whole. After all it applies to the constructs of all 
Buddhist theory, including the Mahayana and, crucially, itself: 
there are no bodhisattvas and no stages of the bodhisattva path. 
Two points are of importance here. First, we are concerned here 
with the perfection of wisdom, how the world is seen by the 
awakened mind. Secondly the perfection of wisdom texts pre-
sent what they have to say about wisdom not as an innovation 
but as a restatement of the original teaching of the Buddha. 
The wisdom or understanding of ordinary beings becomes 
tainted by attachment to views and conceptual construction; 
this attachment manifests as a certain rigidity and inflexibility of 
mind; the perfect wisdom of a buddha is free of all attachment 
and clinging. In carving up reality into dharmas in the manner 
of the Abhidharma, we are essentially constructing a theoretical

--- PAGE 257 ---
The Mahayana 
237 
'model' or map of the way things are. Like any model or map, 
it may be useful and indeed help us to understand the way things 
are. In a provisional or conventional way, it may actually corres-
pond to the way things are. Some maps and models will reflect 
the way things are better than others, but they nevertheless 
remain models and maps. As such, none should be mistaken for 
the way things are. Thus for the Perfection of Wisdom, just as 
persons and beings are ultimately elusive entities, so too are all 
dharmas. In fact the idea that anything exists of and in itself is a 
simply a trick that our minds and language play on us. 
The great theme of the Perfection of Wisdom thus becomes 
'emptiness' (sunyata/suiiiiata)-the emptiness of all things that 
we might be tempted to think truly al}d ultimately exist of and 
in themselves. To see any dharma as existing in itself is to grasp 
at it, to try to hold on to it, but dharmas are like dreams, magical 
illusions, echoes, reflected images, mirages, space; like the moon 
reflected in water, a fairy castle, a shadow, or a magical creation; 
like the stars, dewdrops, a bubble, a flash of lightning, or a cloud 
-they are there, but they are not there, and if we reach out for 
them, we find nothing to hold on to.25 Some of these similes and 
images are older than the Perfection of Wisdom, and in refer-
ring and adding to them the literature is not so much suggesting 
that the theory of dharmas is wrong as that it must be under-
stood correctly.26 
The term 'emptiness' is not new to the Perfection of Wisdom 
literature; it is already employed, albeit somewhat loosely and 
only occasionally, in the Nikayas/Agamas and the canonical 
Abhidharma texts to characterize the experiences of meditation, 
and the five aggregates and dharmas.Z7 But the emphasis on per-
fect wisdom as that which understands emptiness becomes the 
hallmark of the Perfection of Wisdom literature and its philo-
sophical explication by Nagarjuna. 
Nagarjuna and the 'middle' (Madhyamaka) school 
Nagarjuna, who probably lived in the second century CE, is 
the father of the Madhyamaka or 'middle' school of Buddhist

--- PAGE 258 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
philosophy. The Madhyamaka was to become one of the two 
great philosophical traditions of the Mahayana, but lest there b~. 
confusion let me remind the reader that a philosophical school 
of thought is quite a distinct matter from a division and group~ 
ing of the monastic Sangha (nikiiya); in India the Madhyamaka 
was not and never becomes a school in the sense of the 
Mahasarpghika, Theravada, Sarvastivada, or Sammatiya. In fact; 
as a Buddhist monk, Nagarjuna was presumably ordained into 
one of these four main ordination lineages, though which is not 
known, and remained in that tradition for the rest of his monas.; 
tic life. The Madhyamaka was a philosophical outlook that, like 
the Mahayana in general, would have crossed the boundaries of 
the various ordination lineages of the Sangha. 
This philosophical school is named after Nagarjuna's prin-
cipal work, Mula-Madhyamaka-Kiirikii or 'Root Verses on the 
Middle', and refers to the way in which Nagarjuna presents 
'emptiness' as equivalent to that fundamental teaching of the 
Buddha, 'dependent arising', and, as such, as articulating the 
'middle' between the extremes of eternalism and annihilation-
ism. If something arises in dependence upon some other thing, 
as a dharma is supposed to, then how, Nagarjuna asks, can it be 
defined in the manner that certain Abhidharma theorists want, 
as that which exists of and in itself, as that which possesses its 
own existence (svabhiivalsabhiiva)? For if something is suf-
ficient to explain its own existence, then it must exist as itself for 
ever and ever, and could never be affected by anything else, since 
as soon as it was affected it would cease to be itself. And if things 
cannot truly change, then the whole ofBuddhism is undermined, 
for Buddhism claims that suffering arises because of causes 
and conditions and that by gradually eliminating unwholesome 
conditions and cultivating wholesome conditions we can change 
from being unawakened to being awakened. Thus the one who 
claims that dharmas ultimately exist in themselves must either 
fall into the trap of eternalism by denying the possibility of real 
change, or, if he nevertheless insists that change is possible, fall 
into the trap of annihilationism since, in changing, what existed 
has gone out of existence. Therefore, concludes Nagarjuna, the

--- PAGE 259 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
239 
teaching of the Buddha is that everything is empty of its own 
inherent existence. 
But Nagarjuna was quick to point out that we should not con-
clude that emptiness itself is equivalent to the view that nothing 
exists; in fact those who see in emptiness some kind of 'annihila-
tionism have a faulty view of emptiness, and 'when it is wrongly 
seen, emptiness destroys the dull-witted, like a snake that is 
wrongly grasped or a magical spell that is wrongly cast'.28 It is 
not that nothing exists, but that nothing exists as an individual 
essence possessed of its own inherent existence. In particular, to 
see 'emptiness' as undermining the teaching of the Buddha is to 
fail to take proper account of the basic Abhidharma distinction 
between conventional truth and ultimate truth. The point is that, 
for Nagarjuna, the Abhidharma account of the world in terms 
of dharmas cannot be the ultimate description of the way things 
are; rather it still falls within the compass of conventional truth. 
The ultimate truth about the way things are is emptiness, but 
conventional truth is still truth, not conventional falsehood, and 
without it the Buddha's teaching is hopeless: 
The buddhas' teaching of Dharma depends equally on two truths: ordin-
ary conventional truth and. truth from the point of view of the ultimate; 
tliose who do not perceive the difference between these two truths do 
not perceive the deep 'reality' (tattva) in the teaching of the buddhas. 
Without resorting to ordinary conventions, what is ultimate cannot be 
taught; without recourse to what is ultimate, nirvaJ:.la is not attained.29 
But nirval).a is not some 'Absolute Reality' existing beyond the 
phenomenal conditioned world, behind the veil of conventional 
truth, for again this would commit us to eternalism. Emptiness 
is the ultimate truth of reality and of nirval).a-it too is empty of 
its own existence, it is not an existent. It follows that nirval)a can-
not be understood as some thing, some .existent, which is other 
than the conditioned round of existence, sa111sara: 
There is nothing that distinguishes sarp.sara from nirva1.1a; there is noth-
ing that distinguishes nirva1.1a from sarp.sara; and the furthest limit of 
nirva1.1a is also the furthest limit of sarp.sara; not even the subtlest dif-
ference between the two is found.30

--- PAGE 260 ---
The Mahayana 
In emptiness, then, Nagarjuna attempts to articulate very pre-
cisely what he sees as the Buddha's teaching of dependent aris-
ing and the middle between annihilationism and eternalism: 
emptiness is not a 'nothing', it is not nihilism, but equally it is 
not a 'something', it is not some absolute reality; it is the abso-
lute truth about the way things are but it is not the Absolute. 
For to think of emptiness in terms of either an Absolute or a 
Nothingness is precisely to turn emptiness into a view of either 
eternalism or of annihilationism. But in fact the Buddha taught 
Dharma for. the abandoning of all views and emptiness is pre-
cisely the letting go of all views, while those for whom emptiness 
is a view are 'incurable'.31 
Tibetan tradition has identified two basic schools of thought 
in the history of Madhyamaka in India after Nagarjuna. The first 
is the prasmigika or method 'of consequences', exemplified 
by Buddhapalita (sixth century) and Candrakirti. This involves 
drawing out the undesirable and contradictory consequences 
that follow from attempting to take up a philosophical position 
on some issue. The classic form of this method amounts to a kind 
of reductio ad absurdum of four possibilities (catu;;-koti), that 
something is the case, is not the case, both is and is not the case, 
neither is nor is not the case. All four are shown to be unten-
able, and 'emptiness' follows directly from this. Thus, for example, 
chapter 12 of Nagarjuna's Mula-Madhyamaka-Karika tries to 
demonstrate the incoherence of maintaining that suffering is 
produced by oneself, that it is produced by another, that it is 
produced by both oneself and another, that it is produced by 
neither. The method is thus primarily negative, there being no 
attempt to adduce independent (svatantrika) positive arguments 
aimed at establishing the philosophical 'position' of emptiness. 
This alternative svatantrika method is associated with the name 
of Bhavaviveka (sixth century). 
The term 'view' (dr~tilditthi) becomes crucial for the Perfec-
tion of Wisdom and Nagarjuna. The Nikayas and Agamas dis-
tinguished between 'wrong' view (e.g. that our actions have no 
results, that the self exists) and 'right' views (e.g .. that actions do 
have results and that all things are not self) and recommend the

--- PAGE 261 ---
The Mahayana 
241 
latter. At the same time these early Buddhist texts stress that the 
arhat transcends and is free of all views and opinions. What the 
Perfection of Wisdom and Nagarjuna are concerned to articu-
late is that there is a level at which views in general-even 'right' 
ones-should be seen as a form of mental rigidity, a' form of 
opinionatedness: that is, we become attached to our right under-
standing. Thus the awakened mind is free of all views-even right 
views; it simply sees that dharmas are empty, it simply sees the 
way things are; the unawakened mind grasps at or fixes upon 
particular conceptual understandings or verbal expressions. This 
does not mean that 'right' views are somehow wrong, only that 
theoretical understanding should not be confused with real see-
ing. Right views and opinions are ultimately merely devices to 
bring about perfect understanding itself; the theory is for the sake 
of understanding. That is, a buddha cannot strictly be said to hold 
the view, opinion, or belief that all dharmas are empty; strictly 
speaking he does not hold any views or opinions, he simply sees 
the way things are. That is, the mind that sees emptiness (as 
opposed to the mind that merely has a theoretical grasp) is free 
of any tendency to impose some sort of conceptual construct 
on the way things are. On the other hand, although we may be 
convinced by Nagarjuna's argument and form the view that it is 
certainly true that all things are empty of inherent existence, 
nothing actually changes for us and our minds continue to grasp 
at objects of experience, whether physical or emotional, as if they 
were so many possessions to have or to reject. 
Like the Prajfiaparamita in general, Nagarjuna's analysis has 
often been presented in modern scholarly discussions as subverting 
the whole Abhidharma enterprise. This is to simplify Nagarjuna 
to the point of distortion. Nagarjuna's discussion is couched in 
Abhidharma technical terminology and assumes a thorough 
understanding of Abhidharma principles of analysis. Nagarjuna 
is not attempting to show that Abhidharma is somehow wrong, 
just as he is not attempting to show that the four noble truths, 
or any of the other categories of Buddhist teaching, are wrong. 
Rather Nagarjuna is concerned with a particular Abhidharma issue, 
namely the ontology of a 'dharma': how is one to define what a

--- PAGE 262 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
'dharma' is? What he wants to point out, by appeal to funda-
mental principles that all Buddhist thought takes for granted, 
is that a 'dharma' certainly cannot be defined as that which pos-
sesses its own inherent existence (as opposed to the conven~ 
tional existence of the 'self', for example). An account of reality 
in terms of ultimately real, self-existent .dharmas cannot have 
the status of ultimate truth but only conventional truth. In as much 
as it presents dharmas as representing the ultimate divisions 
in the analysis of experience, beyond which one cannot go, all 
Abhidharma tended to define dharmas as those things which 
exist in themselves (svabhiivalsabhiiva). Nagarjuna's point is 
that, on Buddhist principles, such ultimate divisions of analysis 
are always arbitrary and cannot be taken as referring to ultimate 
realities in themselves. Although he is not explicit, in presenting 
his critique of dharmas as 'self-existents', he seems to have in 
mind particularly the kind of ontology of a dharma we know 
from the works of the Sarv.astivada-Vaibha~ika Abhidharma.32 
This lays great stress on dharmas as the ultimate 'substantial bits' 
(dravya) of mentality or materiality out of which the world as a 
whole is constructed. For Nagarjuna an account of the world in 
Abhidharma terms is perfectly legitimate, as long as we do not 
view it as an exact and final description of how things are; like 
the Buddha's teachings generally, Abhidharma must ultimately 
be seen as 'conventional', taught for the purpose of the aban-
doning of greed, hatred, and delusion.33 
The Perfection of Wisdom literature is Mahayanist in so far 
as it privileges the path of the bodhisattva; likewise, on the evid-
ence of the other writings usually attributed to him, the author 
of the Mula-Madhyamaka-Kiirikii seems to have been a follower 
of the Mahayana. But if Nagarjuna is a Mahayanist, this fact 
is entirely incidental to the philosophy of the Madhyamaka-
Kiirikii. In seeking to establish his understanding of emptiness, 
he appeals not to the authority of the Perfection of Wisdom Siitras, 
but to that of the discourses of the Buddha on dependent arising 
preserved in the ancient Saq~.yukta division of the canon.34 In fact 
neither the early Perfection of Wisdom siitras nor Nagarjuna seem 
to present their understanding of 'emptiness' as a teaching pecu-

--- PAGE 263 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
243 
liar to the Mahayana; that is, the understanding of emptiness of 
all dharmas is not seen as exclusive to bodhisattvas and buddhas 
but as the wisdom common to sriivakas, pratyeka-buddhas and 
buddhas. Certainly this is how Candrakirti, Nagarjuna's seventh-
century commentator, understood the matter. Thus' for the Per-
fection of Wisdom and for Nagarjuna, 'the emptiness of dharmas' 
( dharma-sunyatii) is not a further teaching, but sqmething required 
by the logic of 'the emptiness of persons' (pudgala-sunyatii). Self 
(iitman) and 'inherent existence' (svabhiiva) are equivalents, only 
the scale is different: the doctrine that there is no substantial 
self underlying·persons (pudgala-nairiitmya) entails the doctrine 
that there is no substantial self underlying dharmas (dharma-
nairiitmya);just as there is no ultimate unchanging 'thing' behind 
the label 'person' or 'self', so there is no ultimate, unchanging 
thing behind the labels 'greed', .'hatred', or 'ignorance', behind 
the labels 'non-attachment', 'loving kindness', and 'wisdom'. 
And this is what arhats and buddhas have always seen. Some 
Mahayana writers, however, did want to claim the understanding 
of the emptiness of dharmas as the preserve of the bodhisattva: 
arhats understand the emptiness of persons and thereby re-
move the obstacles that consist in the defilements ( klesa-iivara7Ja ), 
but only buddhas understand the emptiness of dharmas and 
remove all the obstacles to full knowledge (jneya-iivara7Ja ). Thus 
although they abandon the defilements, arhats are still subject 
to subtle traces left by the defilements (klda-viisana), which can 
cause, for example, an arhat to skip like a monkey, echoing a 
previous life.35 
Both the Perfection of Wisdom and Nagarjuna understand 
themselves as explicating an understanding ofthe Buddha's teach-
ing as originally taught by the Buddha, and in certain respects 
such a view of the matter may not be entirely unhistorical. 
The earliest Buddhist teachings place great emphasis on the 
wisdom of the arhat as transcending fixed views and opinions in 
a manner that is not dissimilar from the Perfection of Wisdom 
and Nagarjuna. Moreover, non-Mahayana manuals that basically 
subscribe to the Abhidharma outlook share in significant respects 
a common understanding with the Perfection of Wisdom and

--- PAGE 264 ---
244 
The Mahayana 
Nagarjuna on these matters: certainly dharmas are ultimately; 
ungraspable and evanescent; certainly the arhat's knowledge; 
transcends all views, even right views.36 
Of all Buddhist thinkers, it is Nagarjuna who has repeatedly; 
captured the modern imagination. Modern scholars have presented 
his thought as prefiguring Kant (Stcherbatsky), Wittgenstein 
(Gudmunsen), and, most recently, Rorty and Derrida (Hunting.:: 
ton). Other scholars, such as Robinson and Hayes, have suggested' 
that Nagarjuna's arguments employ a kind of logical sleight of 
hand and in places are simply logically fiawed.37 Hayes has also 
questioned his influence on subsequent Indian Buddhist thought, 
yet he remains a towering and legendary figure for later Chinese 
and, especially, Tibetan Buddhist thought. 
'Ideas-only' (vijiiapti-matra) and the Yogacara 
The basic understanding of this tradition is that the world we 
live in-the round of rebirth or saq1sara-is to be explained 
in its entirety in terms of the workings of the mind: the three-
fold universe (see Chapter 5) is only 'ideas' (vijnapti-matra).38 
The theories and teachings associated with this understanding 
are found in various siltras, the most important being the 
Sal?ldhinirmocana ('Unravelling the Mystery of Thought') and 
the Laftkavatara ('Arrival in Lanka'); they receive their initial 
systematic exposition in the works of Asaiiga and Vasubandhu, 
such as Asaiiga's Mahayana-Saf!lgraha ('Summary of the Great 
Vehicle') and Vasubandhu's Vif!Zsatika ('Twenty Verses') and 
Trif!lsika ('Thirty Verses'), Tri-Svabhava-Nirdda ('Exposition of 
the Three Natures'), and his commentary to the Madhyanta-
Vibhaga ('Analysis of the Middle Path'), a work traditionally 
regarded as given, along with several others, to Asaiiga by the 
Bodhisattva Maitreya in the Tu~ita heaven. The work of these 
two thinkers was subsequently commented upon and elabor-
ated in India by Sthiramati (sixth century) and Dharmapala 
(seventh century), and in China by Paramartha (sixth century) 
and Hsiian-tsang, who studied with Dharmapala at Nalanda in 
the seventh century and later wrote the Cheng-wei-shih lun or

--- PAGE 265 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
245 
Vijiiaptimiitratiisiddhi, a commentary on Vasubandhu's Trif!lsikii 
incorporating the views of various Indian teachers. 
The teachings of this school in certain respects represent a 
reworking of particular Abhidharma themes in response to the 
PrajiUiparamita and Madhyamaka teaching ot' emptiness. The 
Saf!ldhinirmocana Sutra thus presents its own teachings as a 
third and definitive 'turning of the wheel of the Dharma', fol-
lowing the Buddha's provisional teachings of the four truths in 
the deer park outside Benares, and of emptiness in the manner 
of the Prajfiaparamita.39 That is, for the Saf!ldhinirmocana, the 
presentation of emptiness in the Prajfiaparamita is too prone 
to the wrong sort of interpretation by the unwary and needs 
further explication. 
The Prajfiaparamita and Madhyamaka point out that the logic 
of 'dependent arising' demands that dharmas cannot be thought 
of as the absolute, ultimate existents of the universe. In peeling 
away the conventional truth of the existence of persons and 
selves and seeing the underlying dharmas, we do not arrive at 
ultimate existents, but only at another, perhaps deeper layer of 
conventional truth; the ultimate truth is that dharmas too are 
empty of their own existence. From the Y ogadira perspective, 
however, this is to tell us what things are ultimately not, but it 
is to tell us much too little about what things are and, crucially, 
how they come to appear other than the way they are. Thus 
while Madhyamaka was primarily concerned to critique a parti-
cular analysis of the ontology of a dharma, Y ogacara returns to 
giving a positive account of the workings of the mind in terms 
of dharmas in a new ontological framework. As the name of 
the school indicates-Yoga Practice-its approach is perhaps 
especially based in meditation, and the writings of Asatiga and 
Vasubandhu show a special interest in calm meditation. There 
are two basic parts to the account of mind given in Y ogacara: 
the first concerns the eight types of consciousness ( vijftiina) and 
the second the 'three natures' (tri-svabhiiva ). Let us turn to these 
in turn. 
Early Buddhist thpught analysed consciousness as consist-
ing of six basic types corresponding to the five senses and the

--- PAGE 266 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
mind. Building on the traditions of the earlier Abhidharmikasi 
Y ogacarin thinkers give what amounts to a rather more complex 
account of the sixth, mind consciousness, focusing on what are 
in effect the deeper layers of the mind. The active or surface level 
of the mind continues to be seen as comprising six type of con• 
sciousness: our primary awareness of five type,s of sense data 
and our conscious thoughts, which for human beings are mostly 
related to the former in various ways. But underpinning these 
types of active consciousness are two further types of conscious-' 
ness which are crucial in creating the world as we ordinarily 
experience it. The first is 'the defiled mind' (kl~{a-manas), so called 
because it is afflicted with four basic defilements: the view of indi-
viduality, the conceit 'I am', clinging to self and delusion.40 The 
object of this defilement, what the defiled mind in some way takes 
as the self, is the eighth consciousness, 'the store consciousness' 
(iilaya-vijniina).41 Below the threshold of consciousness proper;42 
the store consciousness is the particular repository of all the seeds 
sown by the defilements of a being's active consciousness; it is 
the result of a being's past karma, the accumulation of all past 
tendencies, strong or weak, to greed, hatred, and delusion; as such 
the store consciousness is also the condition for the perpetu-
ation of these defilements in present and future active conscious-
ness; it thus continually interacts with active consciousness 
according to the principles of dependent arising,43 Of course, the 
store consciousness is not a self, a thing in itself; what, in our 
subconscious, the defiled mind takes for a self is merely an 
underlying mass of ever changing causes and conditions, arising 
and falling, but which none the less, as it flows on, maintains a 
certain pattern which gives it the appearance of relative identity. 
The store consciousness is thus the underlying basis and support 
(iisraya) of our conscious lives: the largely hidden heart of our 
personalities. 
The world of experience has three different natures (tri-
svabhiiva). Clearly something is going on: we have experiences. 
The problem, according to the Y ogacara, is that what we 
experience is ourselves as conscious subjects enjoying a world 
of objects that exist 'out there', independently from us. This is

--- PAGE 267 ---
The Mahayana 
247 
experience in its 'imagined' (parikalpita) nature, for the world 
of experiencing subject or 'grasper' and experienced object or 
'thing grasped' is in fact a world of unreal imaginings, of things 
that do not ultimately exist. Both the grasper and the th,ings grasped 
are in fact ideas, pieces of information (vijnapti), thrown up by 
the traces and seeds deposited in the store consciousness. This 
is experience in its dependent (para-tantra) nature. The opera-
tion of the eight kinds of consciousness ultimately consists in 
nothing more than a flow of 'ideas' (vijnapti-matra), arising in 
dependence upon each other.44 By force of a long-standing habit 
-throughout beginningless saq1sara-we have imagined in the 
dependent flow of 'pieces of information' a world of independ-
ent subjects and independent objects. But when, as buddhas, we 
understand the complete absence of the duality of subject and 
object in the 'dependent nature' of experience, then experience 
appears in its perfected (ni$panna) nature. In crude summary, 
the imagined nature is the unawakened mind, the perfected 
nature is the awakened mind, while the dependent nature is the 
common basis. 
As the realization of the Buddhist yogin at the culmination 
of the Buddhist path, the perfected nature consists in the non-
conceptual knowledge (nirvikalpaka-jnana) which is empty of any 
sense of experiencing subject and experienced object. Its attain-
ment is marked by 'the turning around of the basis' (asraya-
paravrtti), a revolution at the very centre of one's being whereby 
all defilements are cut off, and the imagined nature is no longer 
imposed upon the dependent nature, which appears instead as 
the perfected nature. As a result of this 'turning around of the 
basis', the seeds in the store consciousness cease to function as 
the basis for the imagined nature.45 What appears as the contra-
diction at the heart of reality is seen through: certainly the pro-
cess of imagining the duality of subject and object exists, but since 
a subject and object are not in the end to be found, the process 
is empty (suny a), and yet this 'emptiness' itself is something that 
is definitely found. The middle way is to be found in the way 'real-
ity' is somehow existent, non-existent, and yet existent at the same 
time. Ultimately reality is thus characterized not as an absolute

--- PAGE 268 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
'something' (either mind or matter), but simply as the way things 
are: 'thusness' (tathatii).46 
Modern scholars have disagreed on the question of whether 
Y ogacara constitutes a true philosophical 'idealism', asserting that 
the mind only is real and that the external material world is un-
real. The argument essentially turns, as Griffiths has neatly put 
it, on the question of whether Y ogacara is primarily making an 
epistemological point (that all we have access to is mental rep-
resentation) or an ontological one (that mental representation 
is all that exists).47 Certainly Yogacara starts from the premiss 
that the world we know, the world we live in, is strictly a mental 
world: everything comes to us in the form of 'information' or 'ideas' 
(vijnapti). Apart from vijnapti there is no world, th~re is no 
experience. Equally certainly it is saying more than that simply 
in practice, de facto, we are trapped in our own private mental 
world unable to know whether or not there is in reality an exter-
nal world that corresponds to our ideas about it, to our percep~ 
tions of it. Y ogacara is not a doctrine of solipsism. Vasubandhu's 
Vilrtsatikii thus attempts to argue that, although objects do not 
exist out there apart from our perceptions of them, nevertheless 
similar past karma results in the sharing of common experiences 
in the present. But these experiences are simply the products of 
the workings of consciousness, amounting to the arising of sim~ 
ilar pieces of information in different streams of consciousness. 
We are, as it were, dreaming similar dreams; and just as the pieces 
of information that come to us in a dream lack independent objects; 
so do the direct perceptions of our wakeful state: 
Thus people are hypnotized with a sleep arising from impressions left 
by the habit of false ways of thought, and, as in a dream, when they see 
things that are unreal, so long as they do not wake up they do not under• 
stand their non-existence. When, however, they wake up by acquiring 
the transcendent knowledge which is beyond thought and opposed to 
that same sleep, then, by the realization of the purified ordinary aware, 
ness that is gained as a consequence, they understand the non-existence 
of the objects of the senses.48 
Yogacara thus does not appear to be agnostic about the nature 
of the external world. Rather it claims to present an account of

--- PAGE 269 ---
The Mahayana 
249 
how we construct our world our of ideas, of how this causes us 
suffering, and of how we can turn this process around and escape 
from suffering. In other words, like all Buddhism it presents us 
with an account of the four truths. Yogacara denies the ultimate 
independent existence of a separate experiencing subject on the 
one hand and another separate world 'out there' of experienced 
objects. ·That the world appears like this is an illusion con-
structed out of consciousness; or mind. But this is not to be taken 
as saying that I, the experiencing subject, somehow exist as my 
mind, my consciousness, while the external world of objects does 
not exist. It is precisely both that are ultimately fictions, illusions-
' ideas' ( vijflapti) fabricated by mind. True, Yogacara privileges 
'mind' or 'consciousness' in so far as it is the operation of the 
mind that brings about the illusion of the duality of subject and 
object. But 'mind' that is not an experiencer or enjoyer of ex-
ternal objects is not exactly mind as we ordinarily understand 
it. For Y ogacara, as for all Buddhist thought, it is the way things 
are rather than what actually is, that is crucial: the truth under-
lying reality is 'thusness' (tathatii). 
In many ways Y ogacara represents the culmination of the north 
Indian Buddhist intellectual tradition. Its treatises set forth a full 
psychological theory (which represents a reworking of earlier 
Abhidharma systems), a complete map of the path (outlining in 
some detail the progress of calm and insight meditation), and a 
complex understanding of the nature of buddhahood. As with 
all Buddhist thought, one should not be misled by the philosoph-
ical sophistication of Madhyamaka and Yogacara thought. Their 
teachings are not seen as mere intellectual abstraction which to 
all practical intents and purposes we can forget about. The the-
oretical content of these systems are as ever orientated towards 
·releasing beings from suffering. For Madhyamaka, as long as 
we see a world of things that exist in themselves, we are trying, 
however subtly, to hold on to things that ultimately must slip 
from our grasp, and this can only cause ourselves and others suf-
fering. Likewise, for Y ogacara, as long as we see the world in 
terms of really existent experiencing subjects and really existing

--- PAGE 270 ---
The Mahayana 
experienced objects, we are trapped in a world of beings grasping 
at their experiences as objects of possession; once more this 
will only end in more suffering for all concerned. What both 
Madhyamaka andY ogadira point towards is not simply a change 
of intellectual view, but a radical change of heart, deep within 
ourselves. While it is certainly the case that both Madhyamaka 
and Y ogacara are concerned with the highest understanding, 
the perfect wisdom that penetrates directly to the way things are; 
they also focus on the subtlest forms of greed-the subtlest 
tendencies of the mind to grasp, cling, and fix-as the root of all 
other forms of greed. In other words, the concern is with the greed 
and delusion as the principal causes of suffering, and a complete 
letting go as its cessation. 
As I have already indicated, it is important to understand in 
what sense the Indian authors of the Madhyamaka andY ogacara. 
theoretical writings are 'Mahayanists'. Essentially they are 
Mahayanists in that they privilege the path of the Bodhisattva 
and recognize the authority of the Mahayana sii.tras. But they 
do not reject the earlier tradition. These authors continued to 
operate within the existing ordination lineages of the Sangha, 
and when trying to justify their understanding of emptiness or 
the store consciousness they will as soon appeal to the generally 
accepted texts of the Nikayas/ Agamas and Abhidharma as to the 
Mahayana sii.tras. Much of Madhyamaka and Y ogacara theory 
represents a continuation of and development of particular lines 
of thought within the broad Abhidharma tradition. Abhidharma 
is not rejected or thrown out; rather a particular understanding 
of the ontology of a dharma is rejected. But, although dharmas 
may ultimately not exist in themselves, the broad Abhidharma 
framework remains as the theoretical basis for understanding 
the workings of consciousness, for analysing progress along the 
path, and for breaking down our basic attachment to self. 
The Tathagatagarbha 
There is suffering, and the root defilements of greed, aversion, and 
delusion cause beings suffering in all its forms. The cessation of

--- PAGE 271 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
251 
these defilements brings about the cessation of all that suffering. 
This is a statement of the first three of the four noble truths-a 
statement in primarily negative terms. But we can state the mat-
ter in more positive terms: it is not only the cessation of greed, 
aversion, and delusion that bring about the cessatio~ of suffer-
ing but the positive cultivation of wisdom, loving kindness, and 
generosity. And this is the fourth noble truth: it is the develop-
ment of such qualities that constitutes the path that leads to the 
cessation of suffering. 
Another way of talking about the process of the arising of suf-
fering and its cessation is in terms of the formula of dependent 
arising; again the usual statement is couched in negative terms: 
the progressive cessation of the various links in the chain ends 
in the cessation of suffering, but we saw too that this could be 
stated positively in terms of the progressive arising of various 
qualities beginning with faith and ending in knowledge and free-
dom. For the ordinary unawakened person the root causes of 
suffering, the defilements (klesa!kilesa) of greed, aversion, and 
delusion, do battle with the root causes of awakening, the good 
qualities of wisdom, loving kindness, and generosity: we are 
internally in conflict. But this does not mean that we should con-
ceive of ourselves as merely a battleground for a conflict that may 
go either way. For, although this may be how things appear in 
the short term, it is, according to the teaching of the Buddha 
as presented in the Nikayas/ Agamas, our better nature that re-
flects our true nature: the mind is naturally radiant but becomes 
defiled by adventitious defilements (seep. 175). At heart we are 
not Maras but buddhas, and this is true of the being that is Mara 
himself. This way of thinking is part of the common heritage of 
all Buddhism, but in Mahayana siltras it finds expression and is 
developed in the notion of the tathiigata-garbha: the 'womb' or 
'embryo' (the Sanskrit garbha connotes both) of the Tathagata. 
Thus in the Mahayana Tathiigatagarbha Siltra, the Buddha 
observes: 
[W]hen I regard all beings with my buddha eye, I see that hidden within 
the klesas of greed, desire, anger and stupidity there is seated augustly

--- PAGE 272 ---
The Mahiiyiina 
and unmovingly the tathagata's wisdom, the tathagata's vision, and the 
tathagata's body ... [A)ll beings, though they find themselves with all 
sorts of klesas, have a tathagatagarbha that is eternally unsullied, and 
that is replete with virtues no different from my own.49 
The basic treatise of the tathiigatagarbha tradition of thought is 
the Ratnagotravibhiiga (also known as the Uttaratantra) attributed 
to Maitreya/Asatiga. The tathiigatagarbha is an element of Bud~ 
dhahood (buddha-dhiitu) at the heart of our being, our intrinsic 
'buddha nature'. Although some Mahayanist writings acknow-
ledged the possibility of beings who are eternally cut off from 
the possibility of buddhahood, the prevailing tradition, particu-
larly important in East Asian Buddhism and reaching its most 
developed statement in Dagen's Zen, is that all beings are intrins~ 
ically Buddhas. 
Talk of the tathiigatagarbha as our eternal and true nature 
in contrast to illusory and ultimately unreal defilements leads to 
a tendency to conceive of it as an ultimate absolutely existing 
thing. The Mahayana Mahiiparinirviif}a SiUra, especially influen-
tial in East Asian Buddhist thought, goes so far as to speak of it 
as our true self (iitman). Its precise metaphysical and ontolo--
gical status is, however, open to interpretation in the terms of 
different Mahayana philosophical schools; for the Madhyamikas 
it must be empty of its own existence like everything else; for the 
Y ogacarins, following the Lankiivatiira, it can be identified with 
store consciousness, as the receptacle of the seeds of awaken-
ing. Yet the problem of the metaphysics of the tathiigatagarbha 
persisted and is perhaps most clearly exemplified in the rang-
stonglgzhan-stong debate in Tibet (see Chapter IO).

--- PAGE 273 ---
10 
Evolving Traditions of Buddhism 
South, East, North, and West 
Theravada Buddhism in Sri Lanka and South-East Asia: 
Southern Buddhism 
Buddhism arrived in Sri Lanka in the third century BeE; for 
the next thousand years or so Sri Lanka was a great centre of 
Buddhist learning. The early spread and history of Buddhism 
in South-East Asia, on the other hand, is complex. While the 
Theravada Buddhism· of the Sri Lanka and South-East Asia 
should not be viewed as a uniform and monolithic whole, it does 
have a certain unity exemplified by the persistence of one main 
monastic Vinaya lineage and the authority of the Pali canon and 
its commentaries, inherited from the Mahavihara of ancient 
Anuradhapura. But this is no simple orthodoxy; a variety of inter-
pretations and practices have probably always existed and per-
sist down to modern times. Too often the models and norms for 
religious history employed by modern scholarship revolve around 
concepts of schism, heresy, orthodoxy, sect, and denomination, 
derived from the history of Christianity. These concepts are not 
always appropriate, and obscure the religious history of Buddhism 
rather than shed light upon it. 
Sri Lanka 
The initial formative phase of Theravada Buddhism was com-
pleted by woo CE. This is not to say that there are no subsequent 
developments or changes, but that Theravada Buddhism largely 
defines itself by reference to traditions and teachings that were 
established between the fifth and tenth centuries in Sri Lanka; 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries should also be seen as a 
significant creative period.

--- PAGE 274 ---
254 
Traditions of Buddhism 
Following the introduction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka by 
Mahinda in the third century BCE (see Chapter 2) there emerged 
three great divisions of the Sangha on the island, each centring 
on a monastery in the ancient capital of Anuradhapura. The 
oldest, the Mahavihara or 'great monastert, was established 
by Mahinda himself in the third century, the Abhayagiri~vihara 
in the first century BCE, and the Jetavana in the third century 
cE. Famed as a centre of Buddhist learning, Anuradhapura at-
tracted visiting monks from the Indian mainland-including one 
of Theravada Buddhism's subsequently most celebrated com-
mentators, Dhammapala (seventh century?)-and also China (Fa-
hsien in the early fifth century). 
Beginning in the fifth century, a series of commentators (Bud-
dhaghosa, Buddhadatta, Mahanama, Upasena, Dhammapala I, 
Dhammapala II) drawing on the traditions and textual resources 
of the Mahavihara established the classical doctrinal form of the 
Theravada, and it is their writings that have come down to us. 
The fifth century also saw the basic content and structure of the 
Pali canon finally established: (r) a Vinaya comprising two prin-
cipal works; (2) a Sutta Pitaka comprising the four primary 
Nikayas and the fifteen works of the Khuddaka Nikaya; (3) an 
Abhidhamma Pitaka comprising seven works. 1 
Since none of the writings of the monks of the Abhayagiri 
and Jetavana monasteries survive (with the possible exception 
of Upatissa's Vimuttimagga, which exists only in Chinese trans-
lation), it is not entirely clear in what manner their traditions 
differed from those of the Mahavihara.2 The tendency to see 
the undoubted rivalry between them in terms of a Mahavihara 
opposition to their Mahayana sympathies is both simplistic and 
problematic. It is important to bear in mind, however, that the 
Abhayagiri and Jetavana monasteries continued to flourish and 
their monks were as much part of the Sri Lankan Buddhist scene 
as those of the Mahavihara. 
Invasions of the island from south India resulted in the Sri 
Lankan court fleeing further south to Polonnaruva, which was 
established as the permanent capital of the island in the eleventh 
century after the defeat of the south Indian invaders by Vijaya

--- PAGE 275 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
255 
Bahu I. From the second century BCE south Indian kings had 
invaded and ruled on several occasions in Anuradhapura with-
out causing any cultural discontinuity, but the wars of the tenth 
and eleventh centuries proved particularly destructive of ancient 
Sri Lankan culture; the extent to which the lineage of the Bud-
dhist Sangha was disrupted is not entirely clear, but it appears 
that the order of nuns died out at this time and that contacts with 
Burma played some part in the re-establishment of the traditions 
of the three ancient lineages of the Mahavihara, Abhayagiri, 
and Jetavana.3 In n65, however, following a dispute between 
these three lineages, King Parakrama Bahu I unified the Sangha 
according to the rule of the Mahavihara. But the Buddhism 
of Sri Lanka should not be regarded as a simple Mahavihara 
'orthodoxy' at this period or earlier; indeed, it is doubtful that 
Buddhism anywhere has ever operated quite in the manner of 
an 'orthodoxy'. From early times continued contacts with south 
India (where it appears Theravada traditions flourished until 
at least the fourteenth century) and the arrival of monks from 
outside the island meant that various Buddhist influences and 
practices, including those of the Mahayana and the Vajrayana, 
were present on the island. 
Invasion from south India led to the fall of Polonnaruva in 
1215. The following centuries witnessed a relative decline in the 
institutions of Buddhism in Sri Lanka. From the sixteenth cen-
tury the Portuguese (1505-1658), the Dutch (1658-1796), and 
finally the British controlled the coastal kingdom centred on 
Korte and then Colombo, with only the central Kandyan kingdom 
retaining its independence. The state of. monastic Buddhism 
reached a low ebb in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 
resulting in the sending of missions to South-East Asia in order 
tore-import the higher ordination lineage. This was successfully 
accomplished in 1753 during the reign of Kirti Sri Rajasirpha 
(1747-81). In 1815the British took control of the Kandyan king-
dom, and their colonial rule of the whole island lasted until 
1948. The nineteenth and twentieth centuries saw the emergence 
of new 'modernist' trends-sometimes referred to as 'Protest-
ant Buddhism'-in response to Christian missionary activity,

--- PAGE 276 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
modernization, and increasing European interest in Buddhist 
thought and practice.'4 
South-East Asia 
Indian cultural influence began to extend into South-East Asia 
from the early centuries of the Christian era, and various forms 
of Hinduism and traditions of Buddhism had established them~ 
selves throughout the region by the end of the first millennium; 
Tradition has it that Buddhism first entered the area in the third 
century BCE with missions sent' by Asoka, and this is not impos-
sible. Archaeological evidence confirms the existence of a form 
of Theravada Buddhism in the Pyu and Mon kingdoms (in what 
is now Burma and Thailand) from the fifth century cE; this form 
of Theravada may have been introduced from southern India rather 
than Sri Lanka.5 Links between the capital of the Burmese king-
dom at Pagan and Sri Lankan Theravada in the eleventh cen-
tury during the reign of King Anawratha (I 044-77) indicate that 
by this period the Theravada lineages of the Sangha were well 
established in the region. 
The powerful kingdom of the Khmers (centred on Angkor) 
dominated much of the region to the south-east (parts of what 
is now Thailand and Cambodia) from the eighth to the fifteenth 
centuries and here different forms of both Hindu and Buddhist 
practice flourished. Inscriptional evidence from the eighth cen~ 
tury suggests the presence of the Theravada Sangha within the 
Khmer cultural sphere, and from the t~elfth century Mon forms 
of Theravada became increasingly influential both at court and 
among the population as a whole. The Thai kingdoms began to 
establish themselves from the thirteenth century, centring first 
on Sukhotai in the north (until the fifteenth century), then on 
Ayudhya (until the eighteenth century) and finally on Bangkok 
(until the present). State support for the Theravada Sangha and 
links with Sri Lanka have been a feature of the kingdom. 
While Cambodia and Burma became French and British col-
onies respectively, Thailand retained its independence throughout 
the colonial period. But modernizing influences were not absent 
from the country, and in the nineteenth century Rama IV (I8SI-
68) instigated the,establishment of the reformed Dhammayuttika

--- PAGE 277 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
257 
lineage of the Sangha. The influence of this reform in Thai-
land and beyond has resulted in the gradual decline of many of 
the older esoteric traditions and practices of South-East Asian 
Theravada associated with the Mahanikaya lineage and docu-
mented in the works of Fran<;ois Bizot.6 These traditions flour-
ished until most recently in Cambodia, but the fanatical activities 
of Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge between 1975 and 1978, when per-
haps a million Cambodians died, involved the murder of many 
monks and the forced disrobing of the rest. This means that little 
is left on the ground. 
China, Korea, and Japan: East Asian Buddhism 
The Buddhism of China, Korea, and Japan constitutes a unity that 
can be referred to as East Asian or Eastern Buddhism because 
it shares a common basis in the scriptural resource of the Chi-
nese Tripi!aka and because Korean and Japanese forms and 
schools derive directly from Chinese forms and schools, although 
they subsequently developed distinctive local traditions. Bud-
dhism began entering China during the Han dynasty (206 BCE-
220 CE ), probably in the first century BCE or CE, principally via the 
ancient silk routes through central Asia. From China Buddhism 
entered the Korean peninsula (fourth century) and thence Japan 
(sixth century). 
· 
Significant in the establishment of Buddhism as a part of Chi-
nese life in the following centuries was the appeal of Buddhist 
ideas and meditation practices to the followers of neo-Taoism 
(Hsilan Hsileh ), although the growing popular acceptance of this 
'foreign' doctrine also prompted periodic opposition from both 
Confucian and Taoist circles.7 The T'ang dynasty (618-907) wit-
nessed the greatest flourishing of Buddhism in China. Buddhism 
continued to flourish until the end of the thirteenth century 
under the Sung, but the period from the fifteenth century is gen-
erally regarded as one of relative decline. Yet in the first half of 
the twentieth century Buddhism was still the most significant reli-
gious force in ·china.8 The Communist take-over of 1949 and espe-
cially the 'Cultural Revolution' of 1966-72 brought with them a

--- PAGE 278 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
widespread government suppression of Buddhism, which, in the 
more recent period, has given way to a more tolerant attitude.9 
The traditions of Chinese Buddhism also continue in Taiwan and 
Hong Kong. 
The development of the Chinese canon 
When Buddhism began entering China the Mahayana was still 
in its early stages of development; the writings of Nagarjuna, 
Asmiga, and Vasubandhu were still to come. The most import-
ant early centre of Buddhism in China seems to have been at 
Lo-yang and it is here, from the middle of the second century, 
that foreign monks such as An Shih-kao and Lokak~ema (Chih 
Lou-chia-ch'an) began the work of translating Indian Buddhist 
texts into Chinese; these first translations included texts on med-
itation (such as the non-MahayanaAnapana-smrti Sutra or 'Dis-
course on Mindfulness of Breathing' and the proto-Mahayana 
Pratyutpanna-buddha-sarJ1mukhiivasthita-samadhi Sutra or 'Dis-
course on the Samadhi of Direct Encounter with the Buddhas 
of the Present') and portions of the Perfection of Wisdom in 8,ooo 
Lines (A~ta-sahasrika Prajiiaparamita).10 
The manner of these early translations is characteristic of 
the whole process of translation of Indian Buddhist texts into 
Chinese. The Indian canonical collections were never translated 
into Chinese en bloc. The Chinese Tripi taka (San-tsang) or 'Great 
Treasury of S1itras' (Ta-tsang-ching) evolved over a period of 
over a thousand years.11 Rather than a strictly defined canon, the 
Chinese Tripitaka represents a library containing all the Chinese 
translations of Buddhist sfitras and sastras made over the cen-
turies, as well as a variety of indigenous Chinese treatises rel-
ating to Buddhism. The oldest surviving catalogue of Chinese 
Buddhist texts dates from the sixth century and details over 2,ooo 
works; the first printed edition, produced from 130,000 wooden 
blocks and completed in 983, contained 1,076 works. Subsequent 
catalogues and editions, produced in Korea and Japan as well as 
China, show some divergence both in the arrangement of the canon 
and in its contents. The modern standard is the Taisho edition, 
produced in Japan between 1924 and 1932.1ts fifty-five volumes,

--- PAGE 279 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
259 
each some I,ooo pages in length, contain 2,I84 works: volumes 
I to 32 consist of translations of ancient Indian works (I ,692 texts); 
volumes 33 to 54 of works by Chinese monks (452 texts); volume 
55 of ancient catalogues (40 texts). The whole is supplemented 
by a further 45 volumes containing works of Japanese origin, and 
other ancillary material.12 
The Taisho edition groups texts on more or less historical prin-
ciples. A more traditional arrangement is reflected by an im-
portant catalogue produced at the end of the nineteenth century 
by the Japanese scholar Bunyiu Nanjio.B This is basically a 
catalogue of an edition of the Chinese Tripi taka produced in the 
early seventeenth century at the end of the Ming dynasty which 
contains a total of I,662 works and provides the easiest way 
for gaining an impression of the range and scope of the Chinese 
canon. The three traditional divisions of Sutra (ching), Vinaya 
(lu), and Treatise (tun) are each subdivided according to the cat-
egories of 'Mahayana' and 'Hinayana', and finally supplemented 
by a fourth division. The Sutra collection is the largest {I,o8I 
texts); although largely taken up by the vast corpus of Mahayana 
sutras, it also contains the Chinese Agamas corresponding to the 
Pali Nikayas. The Vinaya section (85 texts) contains translations 
of the Vinayas of various Indian schools and related works. The 
third division (I54 texts) is devoted to treatises; this section 
includes the canonical Abhidharma texts of the Sarvastivadins, 
as well as other Abhidharma, Madhyamaka, and Yogacara treat-
ises and commentaries. These three divisions of translations of 
Indian Buddhist materials are supplemented by a miscellaneous 
collection of writings (342 texts) by Indian and Chinese Buddhist 
masters. 
The schools of East Asian Buddhism 
The schools (tsung) of Chinese Buddhism divide into two main 
categories: those which have a more or less direct Indian counter-
part and those which are native to China. The principal schools 
of the former category are the Vinaya, the Kosa, the Madhyamaka, 
theY ogacara, and the Mantrayana; of the latter category, Ch' an, . 
Pure Land, T'ien-t'ai, and Hua-yen. In principle these are also

--- PAGE 280 ---
260 
Traditions of Buddhism 
the schools of Korean and Japanese Buddhism. In practice cer-
tain of the schools developed more significant local traditions 
than others. In Korea special mention should be made of the 
Son (Ch'an) teaching of Chinul (n58-12I0).14 In Japan Tendai 
(T'ien-t'ai), Zen (Ch'an), Shingon (Mantrayana), Pure Land, along 
with the distinctively Japanese tradition of Nichiren have been 
of special importance. 
Chinese Buddhist monks eventually came to be ordained 
according to the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, and Chinese Buddhist 
schools do not constitute separate ordination lineages, but focus 
on a lineage of teaching and interpretation of Buddhist thought 
and practice. Movement between the schools seems to have been 
normal. But early attempts to establish the norms of Buddhist 
monastic practice in China were felt to be hampered by a lack 
of knowledge of the Vinaya. It was this that prompted Fa-hsien, 
at the age of almost 6o, to set out in 399 on a journey to India 
and Sri Lanka that was to last fourteen years. Subsequently the 
Vinaya School (Lli-tsung)of Chinese Buddhism was founded in 
the early seventh century by Tao-hsiian (596-667) as a focus for 
Chinese Vinaya studies .. 
The great translator Kumarajiva (344-413), a central Asian 
monk who had studied in Kashmir, arrived in China in 383; his 
translation of two works by Nagarjuna and a third by Aryadeva 
marks the beginning of the Chinese Madhyamaka or 'Three 
Treatise School' (San-lun-tsung).15 The development in China 
of the other great Indian Mahayana system, the Yogacara, is 
associated with the work of the Indian monk Paramartha, who 
arrived in Canton in 546, and Hsiian-tsang, who, as mentioned 
above, visited India in the seventh century and returned to China 
to found the 'Characteristics of Dharmas' (Fa-hsiang) school. 
Ancillary to this school was the Chu-she or (Abhidharma-)Kosa 
school. 
The form of Mahayana Buddhist practice known as 'the 
vehicle of protective spells' (mantra-yiina) or tantra is most wide~ 
spread within Tibetan Buddhism (see below), but a tradition of 
esoteric practice was introduced into China early in the eighth 
century by the Indians Subhakarasirpha ( 637-735) and Vajrabodhi

--- PAGE 281 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
261 
(671-741) and the Sri Lankan Amoghavajra (705-74). The 
principal text was the Mahiivairocana and Vajrasekhara Siitras, 
associated with the practice of the garbha-kosa-dhiitu and vajra-
dhiitu mm:ujalas respectively. A maiJt;iala is a diagram (usually 
based on a square and/or circle orientated to the' four direc-
tions) of the cosmos in the form of a vision of a set of buddhas 
and bodhisattvas which then acts as a basis for visualization and 
meditation for those who have been initiated into its practice by 
an accomplished master. Chinese Mantrayana or 'True Word' 
(Chen Yen) flourished only briefly, although it enjoyed a limited 
revival in the twentieth century, partly because of Tibetan and 
Japanese influence. The school was, however, early on introduced 
to Japan by one of the great geniuses of Japanese culture, Kiikai 
or KobO Daishi ( 774-835), who in 804 travelled to China in search 
of instruction. Shingon remains a significant school of Japanese 
Buddhism today.16 
Ch'an Buddhism 
The term ch'an (Japanese zen) derives from the Sanskrit dhyiina, 
which, as we have seen, is used in Indian Buddhist theory to 
designate the attainment of a deep state of peace by the means 
of calm meditation. The term comes to refer to one of the import-
ant schools of East Asian Buddhism. Ch'an tradition looks to 
the legendary figure of the Indian monk Bodhidharma, who is 
said to have come east in the fifth or sixth century cE; as its first 
'patriarch', but it is likely that the roots of Ch'an lie further back 
in Chinese Buddhist history with the interest shown in medi-
tation practice by such figures as Tao-an (312-85), Hui-yfian 
(334-416), and Tao-sheng (360-434). 
Ch'an tradition has it that, beginning with Bodhidharma, the 
lineage of teaching and the title of 'patriarch' passed from mas-
ter to pupil. The transmission to the sixth patriarch, however, 
became the object of dispute. Originally it was assumed to have 
passed to Shen-hsiu (6oo-7o6), but in 734 this succession was 
challenged by a southern monk named Shen-hui (670-762), who 
claimed that in fact Hui-neng (638-713) had been the true sixth

--- PAGE 282 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
patriarch. Shen-hui and his 'southern' school of Ch'an were the 
effective winners of the dispute, with Hui-neng now looked 
upon as a second founder of Ch'an. 
Shen-hui was an advocate of the doctrine of 'sudden awaken-
ing', and one of the things that he charged Shen-hsiu with was 
teaching a doctrine of 'gradual awakening'. This dispute over 
whether awakening should be regarded as a gradual process or 
a sudden event was not confined to Ch'an circles, but was a ques-
tion that preoccupied Chinese Buddhism from an early dateY 
To some extent the problem reflects the old Abhidharma dis-
cussion over the question of whether, at the time of awakening, 
the four noble truths are seen gradually (as the Sarvastivadins 
argued) or in a single instant (as the Theravadins, amongst others, 
argued): ultimate truth is not something one can see part of; 
one either sees it complete, or not at all. yet the account ofthe 
bodhisattva path the Chinese inherited from India details vari-
ous stages with definite attainments and points of no return. After 
Shen-hui, Ch'an became very much associated with a sudden awak-
ening view. 
Bodhidharma is said to have emphasized the teachings of the 
Lankiivatiira Sutra, and the theoretical basis of Ch'an centres on 
the notions of the tathiigatagarbha and 'emptiness' as pointing 
beyond all conceptual forms of thought. Our innermost nature 
is simply the Buddha-nature (fo-hsing) which is to.be realized in 
a direct and sudden experience of inner awakening ( wulsatori). 
Ch'an tradition has a marked tendency to be critical of con-
ventional theory and discursive philosophy, which it sees as 
cluttering the mind and creating obstacles to direct experience. 
Emphasis is put on just sitting in meditation (tso ch'an/zazen), 
the carrying out of ordinary routine tasks and the all-important 
instruction of the Ch'an master. Ch'an's own considerable liter-
ary and intellectual tradition centres on the stories of the sayings 
and deeds of these Ch'an masters, who may be portrayed as behav-
ing in unexpected and spontaneous ways and responding to ques-
tions with apparent non-sequiturs and riddles (kung-an/koan) in 
order to jolt their pupils from their habitual patterns of thought 
and prompt in them an awakening experience.

--- PAGE 283 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
Question: 'If a man has his head shaved, wears a monk's robe, and takes 
the shelter Buddha gives, why then should he not be recognized as one 
who is aware of Buddha?' Master: 'It is not as good to have something 
as to have nothing.'18 
Although as many as five different Ch'an schools had emerged 
by the ninth century, only two of these remained important after 
the government suppression of Buddhist monasticism in 842-5: 
the Lin Chi (Japanese Rinzai) and Ts'ao Tung (Japanese Soto). 
The former placed particular emphasis on the paradoxical riddle 
of the kung-an, and the master's bizarre behaviour; the latter placed 
more emphasis on formal sitting meditation; in Japan it is asso-
ciated with the important figure of Dagen ( 1200-53). 
Pure Land Buddhism 
As we saw in the opening chapter, the Buddha has always been 
seen as possessor of incomparable powers and as the incompar-
able teacher of the Dharma. For earliest Buddhism the actual 
person of the Buddha is no longer directly accessible after his final 
parinirval)a, and devotion to the Buddha centred on the worship 
of his relics, the recollection of his qualities (buddhiinusmrtil 
buddhiinussati), and perhaps also visualization. Such practices 
clearly were felt to bring one in some sense closer to the pres-
ence of the Buddha. Early Buddhism also knew of Maitreya/ 
Metteyya, the next buddha, who at present waits in the Tu~ita 
heaven; the aspiration to be reborn at the time when Maitreya 
will teach the Dharma may have become part of Buddhist prac-
tice early on. With the rise of the Mahayana came the idea that 
buddhas are at present teaching in other parts of the universe in 
their own special 'buddha fields' or 'pure lands' where the con-
ditions for the practice of the Dharma are extremely favourable. 
With this came the aspiration to be reborn in these pure lands. 
The inspiration for Chinese and Japanese 'Pure Land' Buddhism 
is provided by three siitras: the larger and the smaller Sukhiivati-
vyuha ('Vision of the Realm of Happiness') and the Amitiiyurd-
hyiina ('Meditation on the Buddha of Boundless Life'). The 
two former are of Indian origin, while the last may have been

--- PAGE 284 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
composed in central Asia or China. These siitras tell of the pure 
land of the Buddha Amitabha (Boundless Light) or Amitayus, 
known in Japanese as Amida. The particular focus of East 
Asian Pure Land Buddhism became the vow of Amitabha in the 
Sukhiivati-vyuha to bring to his pure land after death any one 
who sincerely calls on his name. The characteristic practice of 
Pure Land Buddhism;advocated in the writings ofsuch masters 
as T'an-luan (476-542), Tao-cho (562-645), and Shan-tao (613-
81), is known as nien-fo (Japanese nembutsu), calling on or utter-
ing the name of the Buddha. Also associated with the school is 
a preoccupation with the old Indian idea that the practice of 
the Buddha's teaching must pass through successive periods of 
decline and eventually disappear.19 This led to an emphasis on 
the .futility of expecting to be able, by one's own efforts, to de-
velop the good conduct and meditation necessary for awakening 
in the final days of the Dharma (mo fa/mappo); better to aspire 
to rebirth in Amitabha's pure land. The eventual development 
in Japan was a doctrine of grace associated above all with the 
figure of Shinran (II73-1262), founder of the 'True Pure Land 
School' (Jodo Shinshii): it is not 'one's own power' (jiriki) but 
the 'power of the other' (tariki)-the grace of Amitabha-that 
is effective in bringing one to his pure land.20 
Tien-t'ai and Hua-yen 
By the middle of the sixth century Indian Buddhist texts of vari-
ous sorts and from numerous schools all purporting to be the 
word of the Buddha had been translated into Chinese. Both 
Tien-t'ai and Hua-yen start from the premiss that the diverse 
and seemingly contradictory teachings represented by these 
texts must be ordered and arranged into a coherent whole. Both 
schools thus propose & system of division and classification of the 
Buddha's teachings (p'an-chiao). The theoretical basis for this 
is the concept of the Buddha's 'skill in means' ( upiiya-kausalya ): 
the notion that the Buddha adapted his teachings according to 
the ability of his hearers to understand. 
For Chih-i (538-97), the founder of T'kn-t'ai, the Buddha's 
teaching should be arranged according to the 'five periods and 
eight teachings'. The final teaching ofthe Buddha is found in the

--- PAGE 285 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
265 
Lotus Siitra. Chih-i expressed his understanding of Buddhist 
metaphysics and dependent arising in the form of a doctrine known 
as 'the threefold truth': phe.qomena are at once empty of exist-
ence, temporarily existing, and poised in the middle between 
existence and non-existence. Associated with th:e elaboration 
of this doctrine, which is seen as relating all things to each other 
and to the whole, is a theory of the 'interpenetration' of all 
phenomena: every individual thing in the universe contains and 
at the same time is contained in everything else, or, as Chih-i 
himself would put it, one thought is the 3,000 worlds.21 While some 
of the writings of Chih-i represent sophisticated (and mind-
boggling) intellectual meditations on the interdependence of all 
things, others also show a concern for the down-to-earth prob-
lems and practicalities of just sitting in meditation.22 
The Hua-yen school was founded by Tu-shun (557-640) and 
its thought was developed especially in the writings of Fa-tsang 
( 643-712 ). For Hua-yen the vast Avataq1saka or 'Flower Garland' 
Siitra collection represents the highest teaching. As with Tien-t'ai, 
great emphasis is put on an elaborate theory of the interpenetra-
tion of all phenomena.23 
Nichiren 
An important and distinctive form of Buddhism is associated with 
the name of the Japanese prophet Nichiren (1222-82). Nichiren's 
Buddhism springs from the view that Japanese Buddhism and 
Japanese society were, in the mid-thirteenth century, passing 
through a state of crisis. Although he criticized other forms of 
Buddhist practice as ineffective, his understanding of the Lotus 
Siitra as the highest teaching ofthe Buddha derives from Tendai 
(T'ien-t'ai); his insistence on a single chant as the only effect-
ive form of practice in the days of mappi5 owes something to 
Japanese Pure Land traditions. Nichiren's Buddhism thus cen-
tres on the repeated chanting of the daimoku, homage to the sacred 
title of the Lotus Siitra (na-mu myi5-hi5-ren-ge-kyi5), backed up 
by a complex and sophisticated theory of the manner in which 
the syllables of the chant actualize Sakyamuni Buddha, trans-
forming the individual and society. By all accounts Nichiren was 
an uncompromising and provocative teacher. In the centuries after

--- PAGE 286 ---
266 
Traditions of Buddhism 
his death Nichiren's message attracted a considerable following 
in Japan, and today the numerous sub-sects of Nichiren Buddhism 
together continue to constitute one of the significant schools of 
Buddhism in Japan. Among the important Nichiren sub-sects 
is the Nichiren ShOshU or Soka Gakkai, which has been active' 
in Japanese politics since the 196os, and must also be reckoned 
a significant presence in the context of Buddhism in Europe and 
America.24 
Tibet and Mongolia: Northern Buddhism 
Tibetan tradition makes reference to a first and second diffusion 
of Buddhism in Tibet. Tradition links the introduction of Bud-
dhism to Tibet with the two wives of King Srong-bsan-sgam-po 
(d. 649 ), one of whom came from Nepal and the otherfrom China, 
who thus introduced both Indian and Chinese forms of Bud-
dhism. But the Buddhist presence in Tibet remained superficial 
for another century. It was not until the latter half of the eighth 
century, during the reign of King Khri Srong-lde-brtsan (756-
97?), that the Indian monk Santarak~ita was invited to estab-
lish the first monastery, bSam-yas. In order to accomplish his 
purpose, Santarak~ita is said to have had to call on an Indian 
yogin, Padmasambhava, to assist in the task of subduing the local 
demons hostile to Buddhism. Tradition records a dispute at bSam-
yas or Lhasa in 792-4 between an Indian faction, headed by 
Santarak~ita's disciple Kamalasila, and a Chinese faction, headed 
by the teacher (hva-shang) Mahayana.25 The dispute is charac-
terized as centring on the question of gradual (the Indians) or 
sudden (the Chinese) awakening; the Indian opinion supporting 
gradual awakening is said to have prevailed, but all this is prob~ 
ably a simplification of a complex history, and we can assume some 
influence of Chinese forms of Buddhism on Tibetan Buddhism. 
A 'second diffusion' of Buddhism in Tibet occurred after its 
suppression during the reign of gLang-dar-ma (838-42), and is 
associated especially with the activity of the Indian monk and 
yogin Atisa (982-1054), which led to the founding of the mon-
astery of Rva-spreng by his disciple 'Brom-ston in 1057, and the

--- PAGE 287 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
establishment of the bKa' gdams-pa school, which set the course 
for the future development of Buddhist monasticism in Tibet. 
Atisa also wrote for his Tibetan pupils a short but extremely 
influential and much commented upon summary of Buddhist prac-
tice, the Bodhi-patha-pradfpa ('Lamp on the Path to Awakening'). 
The Kanjur and Tenjur 
As with the Chinese translation of Buddhist texts, Indian canon-
ical collections of Buddhist texts were not translated en bloc, 
rather individual texts were translated one by one over several 
centuries.26 Tibetan Buddhist tradition divides its scriptures into 
two canonical collections: the Kanjur (bKa' 'gyur), or 'translated 
word of the Buddha', and the Tenjur (bsTan 'gyur), or 'trans-
lated treatises'. 
The Kanjur came into existence at the beginning of the four-
teenth century in response to a need to collect and arrange the 
enormous numbers of these texts that had been translated into 
Tibetan between the seventh and thirteenth centuries. The earli-
est woodblock printed edition was in fact produced in 1410 in 
Peking and not in Tibet. Like the Chinese Tripitaka, the Kanjur 
exists in several editions and recensions which diverge slightly 
in their arrangement and the number of texts they include, but 
it usually comprises 700-Soo texts in just over 100 volumes. One 
of the most widely used and favoured editions today is a repro-
duction of the Derge (sDe dge) block-print edition of 1733. 
The arrangement of the Kanjur does not follow the three-
fold division of the earlier Indian canonical collections; the fol-
lowing division into seven categories is typical: (I) Vinaya or 
monastic discipline ('Dul-ba), (2) Perfection of Wisdom (Sher 
ph yin), which is often further divided, (3) the Buddhavatarp.saka 
(Phal-chen), (4) Ratnakuta (dKon-brtsegs) (5) Sutra (mDo), (6) 
the Mahayana Maha-Parinirval)a (Myang 'das), and (7) tantra 
(rGyud). The huge Sutra collection occupies a third of the Kanjur 
and is almost entirely devoted to Mahayana sutras, although some 
material from the earlier Nikayas/Agamas is included. Next in 
size is the tantra collection which occupies about one-fifth of the 
Kanjur. At one-eighth of the whole, the Vinaya comes third in size.

--- PAGE 288 ---
268 
Traditions of Buddhism 
The canonical Abhidharma texts, which constituted the third 
division of the older Indian canons, are not included in the 
Tibetan Kanjur. Tibetan study of the Abhidharma is based on 
Sarvastivadin and Y ogacarin treatises included in the other great 
canonical collection of Tibetan Buddhism, namely the Tenjur, 
which contains over 3,500 texts (mostly translations of Indian 
commentaries and treatises) in over 200 volumes. 
Tantric Buddhism 
The forms of Buddhist practice and teaching that were introduced 
to Tibet from the seventh to the twelfth centuries were funda-
mentally those current across northern and eastern India at the 
time. Tibetan Buddhist teaching and practice divides into two 
main types: (I) the conve_ntional Mahayana 'gradual path' (lam 
rim) of the perfections and bhumis as taught in the Mahayana 
siltras and expounded by subsequent tradition; (2) the esoteric 
path of the tantras (Tibetan rgyud). 
Tantra represents the final development of Indian Buddhism. 
It should not be regarded as a further development in Bud-
dhist thought, but is rather a particular approach to the practice 
of the Buddhist path occurring within the general Mahayana 
philosophical framework, as set out by the Madhyamaka and 
Y ogacara, and giving special emphasis to the idea of the equi-
valence of nirval).a and saf!lsara. Tantra is also referred to as 'the 
vehicle of protective spells' (mantra-yiina/sNgagstheg-pa) or 'the 
vehicle of the diamond thunderbolt' (vajra-yiinalrDo-rjetheg-
pa). Tibetan tradition links its practice in India and transmission 
to Tibet to a group of eighty-four siddhas (grub-thob) or 'accom-
plished ones', legendary for their extraordinary magical powers 
and their eccentric and unpredictable behaviour.27 
Tantras are texts setting out certain esoteric meditation prac~ 
tices which present themselves as a secret teaching deriving 
directly from the Buddha himself. Modern scholarship, however, 
dates the production of these texts to a period over I ,ooo years 
after the Buddha, and regards them as evolving as part of a wider 
Indian tantric movement. The Vajrayana is seen as a powerful 
and extremely effective method of practice leading directly· to

--- PAGE 289 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
the complete awakening of a buddha, but it requires absolute 
commitment and dedication. Tibetan Buddhist schools tend to 
follow their own particular lineages and versions of the gradual 
path and tantric teachings; in both instances, however, the teach-
ings of different schools are broadly similar in outlodk. 
Tantras are generally classified according to a hierarchical 
scheme offour classes: action (kriya), performance (carya), yoga, 
and supreme yoga (anuttara-yoga)38 Effective practice (sadhana) 
of any tantra depends on receiving the appropriate 'consecration' 
(abhi~eka/dBang) and instruction directly from a teacher (guru/ 
bLama) who is a master of the tantra in question. The practice 
of the lowest tantras centres on external rituals and devotions 
directed towards the gods, goddesses, and buddhas of the tantra. 
At all stages of tantric practice a complex and elaborate sym-
bolism links visualizations, liturgy, and ritual in order to fully 
engage and focus the activity of body, speech, and mind. The cary a 
and yoga tantras develop complex visualizations of and medi-
tations on 'chosen deities' (i~ta-devatalyi-dam) and buddhas of 
sublime reaJms; by a process of gradual identification, the prac-
titioner actualizes their wisdom, compassion and other spiritual 
qualities. The higher tantras increasingly centre on an elaborate 
theory of yoga involving a complex physiology of the 'chan-
nels', 'centres', 'winds', and 'drops' of the subtle body which the 
practitioner learns to control and manipulate in order to trans-
form his or her own body into the body of a buddha. One aspect 
of the theory of the subtle body involves an esoteric relation-
ship between the experiences of bliss in sexual union and the 
primordial bliss of the mind. The initial consecration and prac-
tice associated with the supreme yoga tantras may thus involve 
sexual union with a consort, the underlying symbolism here 
being the union of wisdom (female) and compassion (male). Such 
a practice may also be performed as a visualization; in the case 
of ordained monks, whose vows prohibit any sexual activity, it 
can only be performed as such. The purpose here, as with all 
Buddhist practice, is not, of course, the feeding of desire but its 
final transformation and eradication: desire is employed at an 
advanced stage of practice in order finally to reveal its nature.

--- PAGE 290 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
The schools of Tibetan Buddhism 
The schools of Tibetan Buddhism focus on particular lineages 
of teachings passed from teacher to disciple, and not on differ-
ent monastic ordination lineages. Four main schools of Tibetan 
Buddhism survive today, with, as one might expect, a number 
of sub-schools. The rNying-ma-pas trace their roots back to the 
first diffusion of Buddhism in Tibet and the legendary figure 
of Padmasambhava, many of whose teachings were considered 
to have been concealed as 'hidden treasures' (gTer-ma) to be 
subsequently found and taught by a series of 'treasure finders' 
(gTer-stons). The rNying-ma-pas preserve a distinctive classi-
fication of Buddhist teachings into nine 'vehicles'. The first three 
are the conventional vehicles of the disciple, solitary buddha, 
and bodhisattva; the middle three concern lower tantric practice, 
while the final three concern highest tantric practice, called by 
the rNying-ma-pas rDzogs-chen or 'great fulfilment', and under-
stood as the realization of the primordial and spontaneous purity 
of mind. Characteristic of the rNying-ma school, although not 
confined to it, is a strong tradition of lay trantric teachers known 
as sNgags-pa-s. 
The bKa'-brgyud-pas look back to the Indian yogin Naropa 
(956-I040), and trace the lineage of their teachings through 
Mar-pa (Ioi2-96), Mi-la Ras-pa (I040-II23), and sGam-po-pa 
(1079-II53). Their gradual path teachings derive from Atisa's 
bKa'-gdams-pa tradition and were set out classically by sGam-
po-pa in his J ewe! Ornament of Liberation; their tantric teachings 
centre on the 'Great Seal' (mahiimudrii/phyag-chen). The bKa'-
brgyud spawned various sub-schools. The Kar-ma bKa' -brgyud 
sub-school is headed by a teacher given the title Karma-pa; the 
first of these, Dus-gsum-mkhyen-pa (I I I0-93), is said to have 
prophesied the manner and circumstances of his future birth, 
so that his spruls-skus or 'creation body' (nirmiiJJa-kiiya) could 
be identified and installed as the next Karma-pa.29 This custom 
whereby a teacher gives instructions for recognizing his reincarn-
ated successor is now most famously associ.ated with the office 
of the Dalai Lama of the dGe-lugs school.

--- PAGE 291 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
271 
Sa-skya-pa origins and history are intimately connected with 
the 'Khon family. 'Khon dKon-mchog rGyal-po founded the 
Sa-skya monastery in south-west Tibet in 1073. Characteristic 
of the Sa-skya school is a monastic tradition in association 
with a specifically 'Khon family lineage of married yogins pass-
ing the teaching from father to son or from uncle to nephew. From 
the beginning of the twelfth until the middle of the fourteenth 
century the Sa-skya-pas enjoyed considerable political influence 
in Tibet. Five 'great masters' are recognized, the most important 
of which is usually regarded as Sa-skya Pa:t;u;lita (n82-1251). 
The Sa-skya-pa gradual-path 'siitra' teachings, known as the 
'Leaving behind the Four Desires' (zhen-pa bzhi bra!), revolve 
around the exegesis of four lines said to have been uttered by 
the Bodhisattva of Wisdom, Mafijusri, to the. n-year-old Kun-
dga' snying-po (1092-II58), the second of the five masters: 
If you desire this life, you are not a religious person. 
If you desire the round of existence, you have not turned around with 
conviction. 
If you desire benefit for yourself, you do not have the thought of 
awakening. 
If grasping ensues, you do not have the view. 
The other main teaching of the school is a combined siltra and 
tantra teaching called 'Path and Fruit' (lam-'bras), which is asso-
ciated with the Hevajra tantra. This teaching is traced to the Indian 
tantric yogin Virilpa (c. ninth century), one of the eighty-four 
siddhas. 
In more recent Tibetan history it is the powerful dGe-lugs-
pa school that has been politically dominant. The dGe-lugs-pa 
school sees itself as the principal inheritor of the bKa' gdams-pa 
tradition. Founded in the fourteenth century by the scholar-monk 
Tsong-kha-pa (1357-1419), the school reaffirmed monasticism 
and is famed for its scholarship, . particularly its exegesis of 
Madhyamaka thought. Its siltra and tantra teachings are based 
on Tsong-kha-pa's two principal works: The Great Gradual Path 
(Lam-rim chen-mo ), a commentary on Atisa's Lamp, and The

--- PAGE 292 ---
272 
Traditions of Buddhism 
Great Path of Mantra (sngags-rim chen-mo ), which centres on 
the Kiilacakra and Guhya-samiija tantras. 
The head of the dGe-lugs was officially the abbot of Gandeti 
( dGa' -ldan), the original dGe-lugs monastery founded by Tsong• 
kha-pa, but this position has been gradually overshadowed by 
the Dalai Lamas, chief incumbents of Drepung ('Bras-spungs) 
monastery. The title goes back to the sixteenth century and to 
dGe-lugs relations with the Mongols, whose ruler, Altan Khan, 
declared bSod-nams-rgya-mtsho, the third in a line of rein, 
carnating dGe-lugs lamas, 'an ocean (Mongolian dalai) (of wis~ 
dom]'; bSod-nams-rgya-mtsho was thus subsequently regarded 
as the third Dalai Lama. From the time of the fifth Dalai Lama, 
bLo-bzang-rgya-mtsho (r612-82), the Dalai Lama has acted as 
Tibetan head of state. The Dalai Lama is thus neither the for:-
mal head of Tibetan Buddhism-a kind of Tibetan Buddhist 
equivalent to the Pope-nor strictly the head of the dGe-lugs-
pa school. As the head of the Tibetan government in exile and 
as a teacher of great spiritual authority in his own right, the pre-
sent Dalai Lama remains a focus for the Tibetan community's 
devotion and respect. Chinese troops invaded Tibet in 1950; by 
1959 the Dalai Lama had little option but to flee to India. In Tibet 
first the People's Liberation Army and then the Red Guard 
continued the systematic destruction of Tibetan Buddhist cul-
ture involving the death of perhaps a million Tibetans and the 
destruCtion of over 6,ooo monasteries.30 
Buddhist thought in Tibet 
Tibetan Buddhism has not developed distinctively Tibetan tra-
ditions of Buddhist philosophy quite in the manner of Chinese 
T'ien-t'ai and Hua-yen. Generally the Madhyamaka doctrine 
of emptiness is regarded as the highest and final philosophical 
statement of Buddhist teaching, though ideas and teachings asso-
ciated with the Y ogacara remain influential, and ·the precise 
interpretation of Madhyamaka is nuanced in various ways. The 
most significant philosophical debate centred on the question 
of whether behind appearances there is some reality that can be 
characterized as ultimately existing or not, a true 'Absolute'. The

--- PAGE 293 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
273 
view that there is such an ultimately existing reality is known as 
'empty of what is other' (gzhan stong); that is to say, true real-
ity is empty in so far as it is empty of everything other than itself. 
The view was expounded by Dol-po-pa Shes-rab rGyal-mtshan 
(1292-1361) and has found considerable support within Tibetan 
Buddhism. The more mainstream Madhyamaka view is known 
as 'empty of itself' (rang stong), emphasizing that ultimate truth 
about the nature of reality is that it is empty even of its own 
existence. This is a discussion that once more reflects the prob-
lems Buddhist thought has had in arriving at a proper statement 
of the middle between the two extremes of eternalism and 
annihila tionism. 31 
A final note: Buddhism in the West 
The earliest European contact with Buddhism is likely to have 
been around the beginning of the third century BCE, when 
Megasthenes, ambassador of Seleucus Nicator, Alexander the 
Great's successor in his eastern empire, was at the Mauryan court 
of Candragupta in Pataliputra (modern Patna). Megasthenes' 
Greek account of Indian life does not survive in full, but it was 
the chief source of information about India in ancient Europe 
and is known from its frequent quotation by ancient authorities. 
Although there is clear evidence of trade between Alexandria 
and Rome, on the one hand, and south India and Sri Lanka, on 
the o~her, the extent of cultural exchange between the European 
classical world and India is unclear. For the fifteen hundred years 
from the time of Megasthenes down to the thirteenth century 
we have no real record of direct contact between Europeans and 
Asian Buddhists; knowledge of Indian and Chinese culture was 
to remain almost non-existent in Europe. But from the thirteenth 
century, with the gradually increasing trade and missionary act-
ivity which culminated in full-blown European colonialism in 
Asia, Europeans began travelling to Mongolia, China, India, and 
Tibet and writing accounts of their travels which included some 
reference to and information on Buddhism. One of the earliest 
and perhaps most celebrated accounts is that of Marco Polo,

--- PAGE 294 ---
274 
Traditions of Buddhism 
who was supposedly in China from 1275 to I29I. Yet these early 
European travellers' interest in and knowledge of Buddhism 
remained limited. Possibly the earliest sustained attempt to 
understand Buddhist thought by a European is represented by 
the Jesuit father Ippolito Desideri, who spent five years in the. 
Tibetan capital, Lhasa, at the beginning of the eighteenth cen-
tury, endeavouring to come to grips with Tsong kha pa's pre-
sentation of Madhyamaka Buddhist thought.32 
A European tradition of oriental and Buddhist scholarship 
-associated with such names as William Jones ( 1746-94), Alex-
ander Csoma de Koros (1798-1842), Eugene Bumouf (180!-52), 
Friedrich Max Muller (1823-1900), T. W. Rhys Davids (1843'"" 
1922), Hermann Oldenberg (1854-1920), Theodor Stcherbatsky 
(1866-1942), Louis de La Vallee Poussin (1869-1938), Giuseppe 
Tucci ( 1894-1984), and Etienne Lamotte ( 1903-83)-began to make 
available in Europe translations of Indian, Chinese, and Tibetan 
texts.33 These fed the imaginations of the likes of Schopenhauer 
(1788-1860), Emerson (1863-82), Thoreau (1817-1862), W. B. 
Yeats (1865-1939), and T. S. Eliot (1888-1965). 
Following this firing of the European imagination, the final years 
of the nineteenth century saw Europeans beginning to set off for 
A:sia not just as civil servants or scholars, but in search of 'the 
wisdom of the east': in 1890 Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott, 
who had founded the Theosophical Society in 1875 in New York, 
publicly took the refuges and precepts in Sri Lanka; in 1898 Allan 
Bennett, a former member of the esoteric Order of the Golden 
Dawn, left Bdtain, travelling to Sri Lanka and then on to Burma, 
where in 1901 he was ordained as the Buddhist monk Ananda 
Metteyya; Anthon Gueth (1878-1956) made a similar trip from 
Germany to ordain as Nyanatiloka in 1904, returning to Sri 
Lanka to found the Dodanduwa 'Island Hermitage' in 19u; in 
1912 the remarkable Frenchwoman Madame Alexandra David-
Nee! (r868-1969),had an audience with the thirteenth Dalai Lama 
in Kalimpong and subsequently spent many years in Sikkim and 
Tibet involved in Buddhist practice. 
Back in Europe and America various Buddhist groups were 
established. East Asian immigration to the USA at the end of

--- PAGE 295 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
275 
the nineteenth century was particularly significant in the early 
establishment of Zen traditions there. But it is the period since 
the Second World War that has witnessed the greatest growth 
in Western interest in Buddhism. A particular feature of this inter-
est has been the increased contact with the living traditions of 
Asian Buddhist practice. This contact has resulted both from the 
movements of various Asian groups to all parts of the world in 
the period after the war and the growing numbers of Westerners 
travelling east since the late 1960s. Of particular significance in 
this context has been the presence since I 959 of the Tibetan refugee 
community in Dharmsala in north India; this has served as both 
a source of teachers coming to the West and a destination for 
Western travellers. 
In the West today the various schools of Tibetan Buddhism 
are all represented in Europe, the USA, Australia and New 
Zealand. East Asian Buddhism is represented especially by Jap~ 
anese Zen in the USA and also in Europe; the Nichiren sub-
sect, Soka Gakkai, is also a significant presence. The Theravada 
presence takes the form of the Sangha from Sri Lanka and 
South-East Asia and several samatha and vipassanii meditation 
schools and centres. There are also more eclectic groups, such 
as the Western Buddhist Order, founded in 1967 by the English-
. man Sangharakshita (Dennis Lingwood, b. 1925) who, having 
been originally ordained as a Theravadin monk in India, came 
to regard traditional Asian forms of Buddhist practice as inap-
propriate to the West. 
The number of Westerners ordaining into the Theravada, 
Tibetan, and East Asian Sanghas and living as monks both in 
Asia and the West has increased significantly in the last twenty-
five years; in Buddhist circles in the West it is not uncommon to 
find Westerners with thirty or forty years of involvement with 
Buddhist practice behind them; some Westerners have gained 
an authority as teachers which is recognized by Asian Buddhists. 
The overall numbers of committed practitioners may still be 
relatively small, but the growth of interest among Westerners in 
Buddhism since the Second World War is a significant feature 
of religious practice in the West.

--- PAGE 296 ---
Traditions of Buddhism 
Nearly 2,500 years ago, 'out of compassion for the world, for 
the benefit and welfare of the many', Buddhist monks began 
their journey south to take the word of the Buddha across India. 
Several centuries later their successors began to follow the long 
trade routes east through central and South-East Asia into 
China. Several centuries later still, monks crossed the mountain 
passes to the north and entered Tibet. In India itself Buddhist 
monasteries were gradually deserted and all that remained were 
crumbling monuments to the past. The twentieth century has wit-
nessed the establishment of the Buddha's word in the West and 
the return of the Buddhist Sangha to its homeland in India.34 And 
despite 'the killing fields' of the Khmer Rouge and the ravages 
of the Red Guard, the richness and diversity of Buddhism re-
mains: outside a cottage in the English countryside a small group 
of people places food in the bowls of European and American 
monks as they file past in silence; a hundred miles or so from the 
place ofthe Buddha's birth, pilgrims to the shrine of the primordial 
Buddha Svayambhunatha in Nepal turn the countless prayer 
wheels as they approach the great stiipa; in the hall of a 
monastery situated amidst the rice fields of Korea a group of monks 
sits silently in meditation; at Aukana in Sri Lanka a woman dressed 
in white carefully places an open lotus bud at the feet of the giant 
standing Buddha and raises her joined palms to her forehead.

--- PAGE 297 ---
Notes 
References to Pali texts are normally to the volume and page number 
of the edition of the text published by the Pali Text Society (London 
and Oxford); these references can be used by the reader who knows no 
Pali since the pagination of the PTS editions is included in the transla-
tions cited in the bibliography below, either in the body of the text or 
at the head of the page; Buddhaghosa's Visuddhimagga, however, is cited 
by reference to the chapter and section of the translation (and the Harvard 
1950 edition of the text). Other texts are cited in the notes by reference 
to the pagination of the cited translation (and of an edition of the text, 
where the latter is not included in the translation), or by reference to 
the chapter (in roman numerals) and verse/section (in arabic numerals) 
of the original. 
Introduction 
I. L. S. Cousins, 'Buddhism', in John R. Hinnells (ed.), A Handbook 
of Living Religions (Harmondsworth, 1984), 278-343 (278). 
2. Cf. Richard H. Robinson and Willard L. Johnson, The Buddhist 
Religion (Belmont, Calif., 1982), 129-95; Cousins 'Buddhism', 279; 
Peter Harvey, An Introduction to Buddhism (Cambridge, 1990), 4· 
3· This expression has been used by both Paul Harrison and Paul 
Williams; in an unpublished paper Williams has commented that 
he believes it to have been first used by Eric Cheetham in teaching 
materials used by the Buddhist Society, London. 
Chapter I. The Story of the Buddha 
I. See Edward Thomas, The Life of the Buddha (London, 1949), 
160-3; H. Hartel, 'Archaeological Research on Ancient Buddhist 
Sites', in Bechert, The Dating of the Historical Buddha, i. 61-89. 
2. See Gregory Schopen, 'Burial "Ad Sanctos" and the Physical 
Presence of the Buddha in Early Indian Buddhism', Religion, 17 
(1987), 193-225. 
3· e.g. Digha Nikaya i. 49· 
4· Padmanabh S. Jaini, The Jaina Path of Purification (Delhi, 1979), 
IO.

--- PAGE 298 ---
Notes to Pages IO-IJ 
5· See Padmanabh S. Jaini, 'Sramai.J.as: Their Conflict with Brahmai.J.ical 
Society', in J. W. Elder ( ed. ), Chapters in Indian Civilization (Dubuque, 
I970), i. 39-8!. 
6. See Digha Nikaya i. I6I-77; Majjhima Nikaya i. 387-92. 
7· For the list of six teachers see, e.g. Digha Nikaya i. 5I-9; for the list 
of ten see Ailguttara Nikaya iii. 276; cf. A. L. Basham, History and 
Doctrines of the Afivikas (London, I95I). 
8. See Gavin Flood, An Introduction to Hinduism (Cambridge, I996), 
87-90. 
9· This question has been discussed by Richard Gombrich; see his 
Theravlida Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benares to 
Modern Colombo (London, I988), 6o-86; 'Recovering the Buddha's 
Message', in Tadeusz Skorupski (ed.), The Buddhist Forum, I 
(I990), 5-20; 'The Buddha's Book of Genesis?', Indo-Iranian Jour-
nal, 35 (I992), I59-78; How Buddhism Began: The Conditioned 
Genesis of the Early Teachings (London, I996). 
IO. Richard Gombrich, 'Dating the Buddha: A Red Herring Revealed', 
in Heinz Bechert ( ed. ), The Dating of the Historical Buddha ( Gottingen, 
I992), ii. 237-257· 
I I. Gananath Obeyesekere, 'Myth, History and Numerology in the 
Buddhist Chronicles', in Bechert, The Dating of the Historical 
Buddha, i. I52-82. 
I2. L. S. Cousins, 'The Dating of the Historical Buddha: A Review 
Article', Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 6 (I996), 57-63. 
I3. Etienne Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to 
the Saka Era (Louvain, I988), 639. 
I4. For a discussion of changing attitudes towards the life of the 
Buddha in modern scholarship see Charles Hallisey, 'Roads Taken 
and Not Taken in the Study ofTheravada Buddhism', in DonaldS. 
Lopez (ed.), Curators of the Buddha: The Study of Buddhism under 
Colonialism (Chicago, I995), 3I-6I. 
IS. For the Nikayas see especially the Mahlipadlina (Digha Nikaya ii. 
I-54), Mahliparinibblina (Digha Nikaya ii. 72-I68), Bhayabherava 
(Majjliima Nikaya i. I6-24), Ariyapariyesana (Majjhima Nikaya i. 
I60-75) and Mahlisaccaka (Majjhima Nikaya i. 237-5I) Suttas. For 
the parallel Chinese materials see Bareau, Recherches sur Ia bio-
graphie du Buddha. The materials in the Pali Nikayas relevant to 
the life of the Buddha (excluding the Mahlipadlina Sutta) have been 
collated in Nai.J.amoli, The Life of the Buddha (!):andy, I992). See 
also the Catu$pari$at Sutra and items by Beal and Rockhill in the 
bibliography for this chapter.

--- PAGE 299 ---
Notes to Pages I7-26 
279 
r6. For extracts from the Mahiivastu and Buddhacarita see Edward 
Conze, Buddhist Scriptures (Harmondsworth, 1959), 19-66; for the 
Nidiinakathii see Jayawickrama; The Story of Gotama Buddha. 
17. e.g. Paul Bigandet, The Life or Legend of Gaudama the Buddha 
of the Burmese (London, I9II), a translation of an early modern 
Burmese text; Thich Nhat Hanh, Old Paths, White Clouds (London, 
1992), a modern telling of the story drawing on a variety of anci-
ent sources. See Frank Reynolds, 'The Many Lives of Buddha', in 
Donald Capps and Frank Reynolds (eds.), The Biographical Pro-
cess (The Hague, 1976), 37-61 for further examples. 
r8. For Tibetan tradition, see Eugene Obermiller (trans.), History of 
Buddhism (Chos-/:lbyung by Bu-ston) (Heidelberg, 1931-2), ii. 
7-72; for the Theravada, see Buddhavarp.sa-atthakatha 298. 
19. Adapted from Hultzshch's translation; see Thomas, Life of the 
Buddha, r8. 
20. Bellanwila Wimalaratana, Concept of Great Man (mahiipurisa) in 
Buddhist Literature and Iconography (Singapore, n.d.). 
21. Aiiguttara Nikaya i. 145-6. 
22. Majjhima Nikaya i. So, 245; cf. Lalitavistara ii. 387 (Lefmann ed. 
(Halle, 1902-8), 254). 
23. Jataka i. 71 (Jayawickrama, The Story of Gotama Buddha, 94). 
24. Cf. Majjhima Nikaya i. 21-3 and Digha Nikaya ii. 30-35, Majjhima 
Nikaya i. 167, Sarp.yutta Nikaya ii. 104-6; see Etienne Lamotte, 
'Conditioned Co-production and Supreme Enlightenment', in 
Somaratna Balasooriya et al. (eds.), Buddhist Studies in Honour of 
Walpola Rahula (London, 1980), rr8-32. 
25. Lalitavistara ii. 490-97 (Lefmann ed. 325-31 ). This incident 
(Sarp.yutta Nikaya i. 124, Suttanipata v. 835) is placed in a different 
context in Pali sources, see Na!)amoli, Life of the Buddha, 60-4. 
26. Majjhima Nikaya i. 167. 
27. For example, the Tevijja Sutta explains the way to companionship . 
with Brahma as meditation on loving kindness, sympathetic joy, 
compassion, and equanimity (Digha Nikaya i. 235-53). See also 
Atthasalini 129. 
28. Piili Chanting with Translations (Bangkok, 1974); cf. Majjhima 
Nikaya i. r68. 
29. Buddhavarp.sa-atthakatha 3 does this for the first twenty years of 
the Buddha's teaching career. 
30. Translation adapted from Rhys Davids, Dialogues of the Buddha, 
ii. 107 (Digha Nikaya ii. roo). 
31. Digha Nikaya ii. 144.

--- PAGE 300 ---
280 
Notes to Pages 28-38 
32. Majjhima Nikaya i. 140. 
33· e.g. Sarp.yutta Nikaya iv. 380-4. 
34· Sumarigala-Vilasini 59-67 gives an elaborate traditional explana-
tion of tathiigata, see Bhikkhu Bodhi (trans.), The Discourse on the 
All-Embracing Net of Views: The Brahmajiila Sutta and its Com-
mentaries (Kandy, 1978), 331-4. 
35. Cf. David L. Snellgrove, Indo-Tibetan Buddhism (London, 1987), 
5-II, 29-38. 
36. Ariguttara Nikaya ii. 37-9. 
37· Cf. J. W. de Jong, 'The Study of Buddhism: Problems and Per-
spectives', in Buddhist Studies by J. W. de long, edited by G. Schopen 
(Berkeley, 1979), 15-26. 
38. Digha Nikaya iii. 84. 
39· Sarp.yutta Nikaya iii. 120. 
40. Digha Nikaya iii. 142-62; see also U. McNab et al. (trans.), The 
Suttanta on the Marks (Greenstreete, Wales, 1996). 
41. See Visuddhimagga viii. 23; Frank Reynolds, 'The Several Bodies 
of the Buddha: Reflections on a Neglected Aspect of Theravada 
Tradition', History of Religions, r6 (1977), 374-89; Paul Harrison, 
'Is the Dharma-kiiya the Real "Phantom Body" of the Buddha?', 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 15 
(1992), 44-94· 
42. Majjhima Nikaya iii. 8. 
Chapter 2. The Word of the Buddha 
r. Digha Nikaya ii. rr9-2o; Majjhima Nikaya i. 492-3. 
2. e;g. Visuddhimagga xiv. I4; Abhidharmakosa vi. s; Rupert Gethin, 
The Buddhist Path to Awakening (Leiden, 1992), 222-3. 
3· Cf. Tilmann Vetter, The Ideas and Meditative Practices of Early 
Buddhism (Leiden, 1988), 10. 
4· William Graham, Beyond the Written Word (Cambridge, 1987), 67-
77· On the development of writing in India see Richard Salomon, 
'On the Origin of the Early Indian Scripts: A Review Article', 
Journal of the American Oriental Society, IIS (1995), 271-9. 
5· Walpola Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon (Colombo, 1956), 
158-6r. 
6. Verse attributed to Nan-chiian P'u-yiian (748-834); see Heinrich 
Dumoulin, A History of Zen Buddhism (London, 1963), 67. 
7. John Ross Carter, Dhamma: Western Academic and Sinhalese Bud-
dhist Interpretations (Tokyo, 1978), 131-5.

--- PAGE 301 ---
Notes to Pages 39-50 
28! 
8. L. S. Cousins, 'Pali Oral Literature', in Philip Denwood and 
Alexander Piatigorsky ( eds. ), Buddhist Studies: Ancient and Modern 
(London, I983), I-n; Rupert Gethin, 'The Matikas: Memorization, 
Mindfulness and the List', in Janet Gyatso (ed.), In The Mirror of 
Memory (Albany, NY, 1992), 149-72. 
9· Graham, Beyond the Written Word, and Wendy O'Flaherty, Other 
Peoples' Myths (New York, I988), s6-64. 
10. Vinaya ii. I39; see K. R. Norman, Piili Literature (Wiesbaden, 
I983), 3; Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, S49-93· 
I I. On the absence of evidence for the influence of Sinhalese Prakrit 
on the language of the Pali canon seeK. R. Norman, 'Pali and the 
Language of the Heretics' in his Collected Papers, i. (Oxford, I990), 
238-46~ 
I2. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, IS6~ 
I3. Ibid., IS6-64. 
14. Louis Renou and Jean Filliozat (ed.), L'Inde classique, 2 vols. 
(Paris, I947-S3), ii. 392 (§ 2037), 440 (§ 2I24); Lamotte, History of 
Indian Buddhism, I6S-79· 
IS. Richard Gombrich, 'How the Mahiiyiina Began' in The Buddhist 
Forum, I (I990), 2I-30 (22). 
. 
I6. Or alternatively: 'Thus have I heard at one time. The Lord .. .'-
the Buddhist tradition recognizes two ways of punctuating this 
phrase. See Brian Galloway ' "Thus Have I Heard: At One Time 
.. . "',Indo-Iranian Journal, 34 (I99I), 87-104. 
I7. Vinaya ii. 289-90. 
r8. Digha Nikaya ii. I23-6. 
19. See Gethin, 'The Matikas'. 
20. ManorathapuraJ:li i. I23 (Cousins, 'Pali Oral Literature'); cf. Vinaya 
iv. IS. See also Ronald Davidson, 'An Introduction to the Standards 
of Scriptural Authenticity in Indian Buddhism', in Robert E. 
Buswell (ed.), Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha (Honolulu, I990), 29I-
32S, and Etienne Lamotte, 'The Assessment of Textual Authentic-
ity in Buddhism', Buddhist Studies Review, I (I984), 4-Is. 
21. Majjhima Nikaya i. 292-8. 
22. J. McDermott, 'Scripture as Word of the Buddha',Numen,3I (I984), 
22-39; G. McQueen, 'Inspired Speech in Mahayana Buddh\sm', 
Religion, u-12 (I98II2), 303-I9, 49-6s. 
23. Cf. Gombrich, Theraviida Buddhism, IIO-I2. 
24. Gombrich, Theraviida Buddhism, 104. The relevant rules are 
Pacittiya 68-9 of the Theravada Vinaya (Vinaya iv. I34-s); see Mohan

--- PAGE 302 ---
Notes to Pages 52-63 
Wijayaratna, Buddhist Monastic Life (Cambridge, 1990), 104-6. 
The rules are also found in other Vinayas; see Charles S. Prebish, 
Buddhist Monastic Discipline: The Sanskrit Prlitimok~a Satras of the 
Mahlislif!lghikas and Malasarvlistivadins (University Park, Pa., 
1975), 104-6. 
25. Janice Nattier and Charles Prebish, 'MahasaJ.llghika Origins', 
History of Religions, 16 (1976), 237-72; Lance Cousins, 'The "Five 
Points" and the Origins of the Buddhist Schools', The Buddhist Forum, 
2 (1991), 27-60. 
26. I am indebted to Oman Rotem for this comparison. 
27. SeeK. R. Norman, 'Asoka's "Schism" Edict', Collected Papers, iii. 
(Oxford, 1992), 191-218. 
28. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 279. 
29. Cf. Obeyesekere, 'Myth, History and Numerology in the Buddhist 
Chronicles', in Bechert, The Dating of the Historical Buddha, i. 152-82. 
30. Nal).amoli (trans.), The Path of Purification (Colombo, 1964). 
31. Leo Pruden's translation in 4 vols. (Berkeley, 1988) from the French 
of Louis de La Vallee Poussin's translation in 6 vols. (Brussels, 
1923-31) from the Chinese from the Sanskrit. 
32. See Gregory Schopen, 'The Inscription on the Ku1.>an Image of 
Amitabha and the Character of the Early Mahayana in India', 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 10 
(1987), 99-137, and Paul B:arrison, 'Who Gets to Ride in the Great 
Vehicle?', Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies, 10 (1987), 67-89. 
33· Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 544· 
Chapter 3· Four Truths 
1. Majjhima Nikaya i. 140. 
2. SaJ.llyutta Nikaya v. 421-2. 
3· See Gethin, 'The Matikas'. 
4· Visuddhimagga xvi. 34-5; Di:gha Nikaya iii. 216; SaJ.llyutta Nikaya 
iv. 259, v. 56; Nettippakaral).a 12. · 
5· Gombrich, Theravlida Buddhism, 57-9. 
6. As You Like It, ii. vii. 136-9. 
7· Story of Gotama, 64-5 (Jataka 48-g). 
8. Lalitavistara ii. 525, 538-9 (Lefmann ed. 351, 358-9); Visud-
dhimagga xvi. 87. A. Wezler concludes that there is no evidence that 
the Buddha borrowed the schema of the four truths from Indian 
medical traditions; if anything, it is more likely that the latter indir-

--- PAGE 303 ---
Notes to Pages 64-76 
ectly derive their fourfold schema from Buddhist texts: see 'On the 
Quadruple Division of the Yogasastra, the Caturvyiihatva of the 
Cikitsasastra and the "Four Noble Truths" of the Buddha', Indo-
logica Taurinensia, I2 (I984), 29I-337· 
9· Harvey Aronson, 'Equanimity (Upekkha) in Theravaditl Buddhism', 
in A. K. Narain (ed.), Studies in Pali and Buddhism: A Memorial 
Volume in Honor of Bhikkhu Jagdish Kashyap (Delhi, I979), I-18, 
and Love and Sympathy in Theraviida Buddhism (Delhi, I98o ), 3-I8. 
ro. Collins Dictionary of the English Language (Glasgow, I984). 
II. Cf. Wilfred Cantwell Smith's The Meaning and End of Religion 
(New York, 1963), which attempts in part to trace the evolution of 
the contemporary concept of 'religion', and Ninian Smart's The 
Phenomenon of Religion (Oxford, I978), which attempts to define 
religion as consisting in six basic dimensions. 
I2. Conze is referring to Christmas Humphreys, Buddhism (Harmond-
sworth, I962), 7I-6. 
I3. Majjhima Nikaya i. 426-437. 
I4. Ibid., 429. 
I5. Vetter's The Ideas and Meditative Practices of Early Buddhism is 
an example of a recent work that takes this view. 
I6. Sarp.yutta Nikaya v. 437-8. 
I7. Steven Collins, Selfless Persons (Cambridge, I982), 13I-8. For an ana-
lyis of contemporary scholarly interpretations of the 'unanswered 
questions' see Richard Hayes, 'Nagarjuna's Appeal', Journal of 
Indian Philosophy, 22 (I994), 299-378 (356-61). 
r8. Majjhima Nikaya i. 430. 
19. Ibid., I69. 
20. John R. Carter, On Understanding Buddhists (Albany, NY, I993), 
69. 
21. Atthasalini 24. 
22. e.g. Digha Nikaya ii. 58; defined at VibhaiJ.ga 375; Visuddhimagga 
xvii. 239-46. 
23. Majjhima Nikaya i. 134-5; see Edward Conze, Buddhist Wisdom 
Books (London, 1958), 34-5, for the parable of the raft in the 
Mahayana Vajracchedikii Siitra . . 
24. Dhammapada-atthakatha ii. 163; VibhaiJ.ga-atthakatha 433· 
25. Ibid. 
. 
26. For a recent discussion see K. R. Norman, 'Mistaken ideas about 
Nibbiina', The Buddhist Forum,3 (I994), 2II-25; IfollowNorman's 
interpretation of upadhise$alupiidisesa.

--- PAGE 304 ---
Notes to Pages 77-87 
27. Udana So. 
28. L. S. Cousins, 'Nibbana and AbhidtJ.amma', Buddhist Studies Re-
view, I (I984), 95-I09. 
29. Cf. bha:?ya to Abhidharmakosa ii. 55d; Visuddhimagga xvi. 62-74; 
Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 609-II. 
30. Guy Welbon, The Buddhist Nirvar:ta and its Western Interpreters 
(Chicago, I968). 
31. Etienne Lamotte (trans.), The Teaching ofVimalak"irti (Vimalakir-
tinirdesa), trans. by Sara Boin (London, I976), 203; Etienne Lamotte 
(trans.), Le Traite de la graride vertu de sagesse de Nagarjuna 
(Mahaprajiiaparamitasastra), 5 vols. (Louvain, I944-8o), i. 30 n. 2, 
iv. 202I-7. 
32. Frangois Bizot, Le Figuier a cinq branches: Recherches sur le boud-
dhisme khmer (Paris, I976), 82; cf. Charles Hallisey, 'Nibbanasutta: 
An Allegedly Non-Canonical Sutta on Nibbana as a Great City', 
Journal of the Pali Text Society, I8 (I993), 97-I30. 
33. Sarp.yutta Nikaya ii. 105-6. ' 
34. e.g. Digha Nikaya ii. 311, Majjhima Nikaya iii. 25I, Sarp.yutta 
Nikaya v. 8-10; see Gethin, Buddhist Path to Awakening, I90-7. 
35. See especially the Mahacattar"isaka Sutta (Majjhima Nikaya iii. 7I-
8) and Gethin, The Buddhist Path to Awakening, 216-23. 
36. e.g. Majjhima Nikaya i. 379-80. 
37· See ibid. 301. Some sources classify items I, 2, and 6 as to do with 
wisdom; see Sravakabhiimi IOI; Satyasiddhisastra ii. 43, 448-9. 
Chapter 4. The Buddhist Community 
I. Milindapafiha 264-7; cf. Kathavatthu 267-8. See also George D. Bond, 
'The Arahant: Sainthood in Theravada Buddhism', in Richard 
Kieckhefer and George D. Bond (eds.), Sainthood: Its Manifesta-
tions in World Religions (Berkeley, I988), I40-7I (I44). 
2. Vinaya i. 20-1. 
3· Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, I69..,.-70. The Mi1lasarvas-
tivadin (along with the Mahasarp.ghika) bhik$u-pratimolqa can be 
found in Prebish, Buddhist Monastic Discipline, 42-113. For an 
analysis of the skandhaka portion of the Mi1lasarvastivadin Vinaya 
as preserved in Tibet see Anukul Banerjee, Sarvastivada Literature 
(Calcutta, I979), 78-246. 
4· Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, I65-6. 
5· e.g. Vinaya i. I7. 
· 
6. Vinaya i. 56; see Wijayaratna, Buddhist Monastic Life, 117-2I on 
ordination.

--- PAGE 305 ---
Notes to Pages 87-9I 
7· Vinaya i. 79· Gombrich, Theraviida Buddhism, 104. 
8. Vinaya i. 82-4; cf. Sao Htun Hmat Win, The Initiation of Novice-
hood and the Ordination of Monkhood in the Burmese Buddhist 
Culture (Rangoon, 1986); Frangois Bizot, Les traditions de la 
pabbajjii en Asie du Sud-Est (Gottingen, 1988). 
9· Vinaya i. 78. 
IO. See e.g. Tambiah, Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in North-East 
Thailand (Cambridge, 1970), 97-ns; Spiro, Buddhism and Society; 
Richard Gombrich, Buddhist Precept and Practice (Delhi, 1991); 
Karl Ludvig Reichelt, Truth and Tradition in Chinese Buddhism 
(Shanghai, 1934), 223-41; Holmes Welch, The Practice of Chinese 
Buddhism I900-I950 (Cambridge, Mass., 1967), 247-301; Christoph 
von Ftirer-Haimendorf, The Sherpas of Nepal (London, 1964); 
Giuseppe Tucci, The Religions of Tibet (London, I98o ). 
I I. Geoffrey Samuel, Civilized Shamans; Buddhism in Tibetan Societ-
ies (Washington, DC, I993), 206; Kenneth Ch'en, Buddhism in China 
(Princeton, 1964), 246-7; in more recent times higher ordination has 
been the norm in China, see Welch, The Practice of Chinese Buddhism, 
294· 
I2. Welch, The Practice of Chinese Buddhism, 105, 247, 275, 294. 
I3. This piiriijika is often quoted by modern commentators as to do with 
laying false claim to 'miraculous' powers, but the Vinaya under-
stands the term uttari-manussa-dhamma as applying to any spiritual 
attainment; see Gethin, The Buddhist Path to Awakening; 97-101. 
I4. Vinaya ii. 253-6. 
15. Richard Gombrich, Buddhist Studies Review, I2 (I995), 95-6. 
I6. Majjhima Nikaya iii. 65. 
_ 
17· Schopen, Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks, 248-50. 
I8. Tessa Bartholomeusz, Women under the Bo Tree (Cambridge, 
I994); L. W. Bloss, 'The Female Renunciants of Sri Lanka', Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, I o (I 978), 7-3 I; 
H. Kawanami, 'The Religious Standing of Burmese Buddhist Nuns 
(thila shin)', Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies, I3 ( 1990 ), 17-39; P. Richman, 'Gender and Persuasion: The 
Portrayal of Beauty, Anguish, and Nurturance in an Account of a 
Tamil Nun', in Jose Cabez6n ( ed. ), Buddhism, Sexuality, and Gender 
(Albany, NY, I992), 1n-36; Kathryn Tsai (trans.), The Lives of the 
Nuns: Biographies of Chinese Buddhist Nuns from the Fourth to Sixth 
Centuries: A Translation of the Pi-ch'iu-ni chuan compiled by Shih 
Pao-ch'ang (Honolulu, I994); Hanna Havnevik, Tibetan Buddhist 
Nuns: History, Culiural Norms and Social Reality (Oslo, 1989).

--- PAGE 306 ---
286 
Notes to Pages 92-97 
rg. Maha-Boowa Nyanasampanno, The Venerable Phra Acharn Mun 
Bhuridatta Thera: Meditation Master (Bangkok, 1982); Gombrich, 
Buddhist Precept and Practice, 333-4· 
20. Nil;lsargika-payantika/Nissaggiya-pacittiya 18, 19, 20; see Prebish, 
Buddhist Monastic Discipline, 70-1; Vinaya iii. 236-46. 
21. MUlasarvastivadin Payantika 39 (Prebish, Buddhist Monastic Dis-
cipline, 81); Theravadin Pacittiya 40 (Vinaya iv. go). 
22. MUlasarvastivadin Payantika 73 (Prebish, Buddhist Monastic Dis-
cipline, 8g); Theravadin Pacittiya 10 (Vinaya iv. 32-3). 
23. Mfilasarvastivadin Nil;lsargika-Payantika 30, Payantika 38 (Prebish, 
Buddhist Monastic Discipline, 73-4, 81); Theravadin Nissaggiya-
Pacittiya 23, Pacittiya 38 (Vinaya iii. 251, iv. 86-7). 
24. See Wijayaratna, Buddhist Monastic Life, 65-6; Vinaya i. 210-12. 
25. Gregory Schopen, 'The Ritual Obligations and Donor Roles of Monks 
in the Pali Vinaya', Journal of the Pali Text Society, 16 (1992), 
87-107. 
26. Aiiguttara Nikaya i. 10; iv. 128-35; Harvey B. Aronson, Love and 
Sympathy in Theraviida Buddhism (Delhi, 1980), 24-8. 
27. Mulasarvastivadin Payantika 28, 65 (Prebish, Buddhist Monastic 
Discipline, 79, 87); Theravadin Pacittiya 44, 45 (Vinaya iv. g6-7). 
28. Suttanipata vv. 35-75. 
29. This is the kind of view put forth in the works of Sukumar Dutt; 
see Steven Collins' introduction to Wijayaratna, Buddhist Monastic 
Life, pp. xii-xix. 
30. Schopen in Lopez (ed.), Buddhism in Practice, 475· 
31. For Fa-hsien see JamesLegge (trans.), A Record of Buddhist King-
doms (Oxford, 1886); for Fa-hsien and Hsiian-tsang see Samuel Beal 
(trans.), Si-yu-ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World (1884), and 
The Life of Hiuen-tsiang by the Shamans Hwai li and Yen-tsing (r885); 
for I-tsing see J. Takakusu (trans.), A Record of the Buddhist Reli-
gion as Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671-695) 
(Oxford, 1896). 
32. While the shrine hall with its buddha-image has become a feature 
of Buddhist monasteries, this was not so true in the ancient period 
(cf. Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, 121-9). 
33· Legge, A Record of Buddhist Kingdoms, 102; Takakusu, A Record 
of the Buddhist Religion, 65. 
34· Vinaya i. 250; Lal Mani Joshi, Studies in the Buddhistic Culture of 
India During the 7th and 8th Centuries A.D. (Delhi, 1977), 65-73; 
Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, 135-52; R. A. L. H.

--- PAGE 307 ---
Notes to Pages 98-zo4 
Gunawardana, Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Inter-
est in Early Medieval Sri Lanka (Tucson, Ariz., 1979), 53-136. 
35· Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, 146-7; Gunawardana, 
Robe and Plough, 97-100. 
36. Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, 8o-6, 147-53; Gombrich, Thera-
viida Buddhism, 165-6; Gregory Schopen, 'Deaths, Funerals, and 
the Division of Property in a Monastic Code', in Lopez ( ed.), Bud-
dhism in Practice, 473-502, and 'Monastic Law Meets the Real 
World: A Monk's Continuing Right to Inherit Family Property in 
Classical India', History of Religions, 35 (1995), 101-23. 
37· Visuddhimagga ii.; Vimuttimagga 27-38; Reginald Ray, Buddhist 
Saints in India (New York, 1994), 293-323. 
38. Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, 41-7. 
39· Cf. Gombrich, Theraviida Buddhism, 156-7. 
40. Visuddhimagga iii. 31-4. 
41. John Strong (trans.), The Legend of King Asoka (Princeton, 1983); 
Romila Thapar, Asoka and the Decline of the Mauryas (Delhi, 
1973), 184-202 (for a translation of Asoka's edicts); Anuradha 
Seneviratna (ed.), King Asoka and Buddhism: Historical and Lit-
erary Studies (Kandy, 1994). 
42. Mahavarpsa xxv. 98-n6; Gananath Obeyesekere et al. (eds.), The 
Two Wheels of Dhamma: Essays on the Theravada Tradition in India 
and Ceylon (Chambersburg, Pa., 1972 ); Daigan Matsunaga and Alicia 
Matsunaga, Foundation of Japanese Buddhism, 2 vols. (Tokyo, 1974-
6), ii. 284-8; John Powers, Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism (Ithaca, 
NY, 1995), 139; Bardwell L. Smith (ed.), Religion and Legitimation 
of Power in Thailand Laos and Burma (Chambersburg, Pa., 1978). 
43· L. S. Cousins, 'Good or Skilful? Kusala In Canon and Commentary', 
Journal of Buddhist Ethics, 3 (1996), 136-64 (electronic journal: 
http://www.gold.ac.uk!jbe (UK address); http://jbe.la.psu.edu (USA 
address)). 
44· Wijayaratna, Buddhist Monastic Life, 132. 
45· From the Saddharmiilmikiiraya; quoted by Rahula, History of 
Buddhism in Ceylon, 194. 
46. Schopen, 'The Ritual Obligations and Donor Roles of Monks'; 
Richard Gombrich, 'The Monk in the Pali Vinaya: Priest or Wed-
ding Guest?', Journal of the Pali Text Society, 21 (1995), 193-7. 
47· Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, II2-14; Gunawardana, Robe 
and Plough, 143-4; cf. Welch, The Practice of Chinese Buddhism, 
14, I28.

--- PAGE 308 ---
288 
Notes to Pages I04-IO 
48. E. W. Adikaram, Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon (Migoda, 
I946), I35-42; Gombrich, Buddhist Precept and Practice, I23-4). 
49· Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, I63-:S; Gregory Schopen, 
'Filial Piety and the Monk in the Practice of Indian Buddhism', T' oung 
Pao, 70 (I984), uo-26. 
so. Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, I58-63. 
SI. Sukumar Dutt, Buddhist Monks and Monasteries of India (London, 
I962), 3I9-66; Joshi, Studies in the Buddhistic Culture of India, I2I-4I. 
52. See DonaldS. Lopez (ed.), Buddhism in Practice (Princeton, I995), 
475· 
53· Cf. Ray, Buddhist Saints in Ancient India, 447. Other studies of the 
'forest tradition' are Stanley Tambiah, The Buddhist Saints of the 
Forest and the Cult of Amulets (Cambridge, I 984 ); J. L. Taylor, Forest 
Monks and Nation-State: An Anthropological and Historical Study 
in Northeastern Thailand (Singapore, 1993); Michael Carrithers, 
The Forest Monks of Sri Lanka (Delhi, I983); Kamala Tiyavanich, 
Forest Recollections: Wandering Monks in Twentieth Century Thai-
land (Honolulu, I997). 
54· See Gombrich, Precept and Practice; Richard Gombrich and 
Gananath Obeyesekere, Buddhism Transformed: Religious Change 
in Sri Lanka (Princeton, I988); Spiro, Buddhism and Society; Stanley 
Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer (Cambridge, 
I976); Tambiah, The Buddhist Saints of the Forest. 
55· Ray, Buddhist Saints in India; Reichelt, Truth and Tradition in 
Chinese Buddhism; Tucci, The Religions of Tibet, uo-62; Welch, 
The Practice of Chinese Buddhism. 
56. Welch, The Practice of Chinese Buddhism, 70. 
57· Ch'en, Buddhism in China, 363; Welch, The Practice of Chinese 
Buddhism, I04. 
58. Welch, The Practice of Chinese Buddhism, 207-8. 
59· Robinson and Johnson, The Buddhist Religion, I8r. 
6o. Gombrich, Theraviida Buddhism, 74-6; Schopen, Bones, Stones, and 
Buddhist Monks, So. 
6r. Vinaya i. 236-8; Majjhima Nikaya i. 379--80. 
62. Conze, Buddhist Scriptures, 24-6. 
63. Margaret Cone and Richard Gombrich, The Perfect Generosity of 
Prince Vessantara (Oxford, I977). 
64. Spiro, Buddhism and Society, I I-I4; Samuel, Civilized Shamans, 24-
7, discusses the relevance of such a schem& to Tibetan Buddhist 
society.

--- PAGE 309 ---
Notes to Pages IIJ-34 
Chapter 5· The Buddhist Cosmos 
1. Sarp.yutta Nikaya ii. r8o-I. 
2. Ibid., r8r-2. 
3· Digha Nikaya i. 215-23. 
4· Digha Nikaya i. 223. This interpretation is in keeping with the com-
mentary (Sumailgalavilasini 393-4), but the precise interpretation 
of this passage is problematic. 
s. e.g. Digha Nikaya i. 62. 
6. Digha Nikaya i. 17-9; Majjhima Nikaya i. 326-31; cf. Sarp.yutta 
Nikaya i. 142-4. 
7· Ailguttara Nikaya i. 227-8; Abhidharmakosa iii. 73-4; Manora-
thapural).I ii. 340-1. 
8. Atthasalini r6o-1. 
9· Ai:lguttara Nikaya iii. 415; cf. Atthasalini 88-9. 
ro. Digha Nikaya iii. 269. 
II. Atthasalini 95-104; Conze, Buddhist Scriptures, 70-3 (= Papafica-
sUdani i. 198-200, 203-4); Bhikkhu Bodhi (trans.), The Discourse 
on the All-Embracing Net of Views, n8-25 (= Sumailgalavilasini 
69-76; Digha-nikaya-atthakatha-tika i. 143-54). 
12. Atthasalini 128. 
13. Ailguttara Nikaya ii. 126, 230; iv. 39; 241; see Marasinghe, Gods in 
Early Buddhism, 244-68. 
14. Abhidhammavatara 182-289. 
15. Visuddhimagga xiii. 31-62; Abhidharmakosa iii. 89-90, roo-2. 
r6. Digha Nikaya iii. 84-5. 
. 
17. Sarp.yutta Nikaya i. 6r-2 = Ailguttara Nikaya ii. 47-9. 
18. Simon Weightman, Hinduism in the Village Setting (Milton Keynes, 
1978). 
19. Giuseppe Tucci; The Religions of Tibet (London, 1980 ), 163--90; John 
Powers, Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism (Ithaca, NY), 431-47. 
20. Spiro, Burmese Supernaturalism (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1967), 
253-7; Richard Gombrich, 'Buddhism and Society', Modern Asian 
Studies, 6 (1972), 483-94 (490). 
2f. Visuddhimagga vii. II5. 
22. F. Capra, The Tao of Physics (London, 1976). 
23. Basham, The Wonder That Was India, 490. 
Chapter 6. No Self 
1. Brhadaral).yaka Upani~ad 3· 7· 23; 3· 8. n; 4· 4· 25. 
2. Ibid., 3· 9· 26; 4· 2. 4; 4·-4· 22; 4· 5· 15; cf. 4· s. 14.

--- PAGE 310 ---
Notes to Pages I34-48 
3· Ibid., 4· 4· s; Chandogya Upani!)ad 3· 14. 4· 
4· r. 4-5; cf. M. Hulin, SiifJlkhya Literature (Wiesbaden, I978), I30-I. 
5· Cf. David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature (Oxford, I978), i. 4. 
6; A. H. Lesser, 'Eastern and Western Empiricism and the "No Self" 
Theory', Religious Studies, IS (I979), 55-64. 
6. For safJljftii as recognition see Nyanaponika, Abhidhamma Studies 
(Kandy, I976), 72; Gethin, Buddhist Path to Awakening, 41. 
7· Collins, Selfless Persons, 97-103. 
8. Sarpyutta Nikaya iii. 66-7. 
9· Majjhima Nikaya i. I38-9, 232-3; Saf!lyutta Nikaya ii. 125, 249; 
iii. 67-8, 88-9, 104, ros, I87-8. See Rupert Gethin, 'The Five 
Khandhas', Journal of Indian Philosophy, I4 (I986), 35-53 (43-4). 
ro. Chandogya Upani!)ad 6. 8-I6; cf. K. R. Norman, 'A Note on attii in 
theAlagaddupama-sutta' in Collected Papers, ii. (Oxford, I99I), 200-9. 
I r. Digha Nikaya ii. 66-8. 
I2. Saf!lyutta Nikaya i. I35; Milindapafiha 25-8. 
I3. Majjhima Nikaya i. 140. 
I4. Gethin, 'The Five Khandhas', 48-9. 
IS. Vinaya i. 39-44; Majjhima Nikaya i. 497-502; Cat~pari$atsi1tra 93; 
Mahavastu iii. 62. 
I6. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 495; Daniel Boucher, 'The 
Pratltyasamutpiidagiithii and its Role in The Medieval Cult of the 
Relics', Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 
I4 (I99I), I-27. 
I7. Majjhima Nikaya iii. 63; Saf!lyutta Nikaya v. 387; etc. 
I8. e.g. Kindred Sayings ii. I6 (Saf!lyutta Nikaya ii. 20). 
I9. Majjhima Nikaya i. I90-I; Boucher, 'The Pratltyasamutpiidagiithii 
and its Role in the Medieval Cult of the Relics', 2. 
20. Visuddhimagga xvii. I66-7. 
21. Milindapafiha 46. 
· 
22. Saf!lyutta Nikaya ii. 20. 
23. Digha Nikaya i. 202. 
24. Ibid., ii. 68. 
25. Saf!lyutta Nikaya iii. I37· 
26. Norman, 'A Note on attii in the Alagaddupama-sutta'; cf. 
Brhadaralj.yaka Upani!)ad 4· 4-5, Chandogya Upani~ad 3· I4. 
27; Views I -8, I7-62 (Digha Nikaya i. 13-22, 28-38). 
28. e.g. Majjhima Nikaya i. 300; Atthasalini 353-4; Conze, Buddhist 
Thought in India, 38; Alex Wayman, 'The Twenty Reifying Views' 
in A. K. Narain (ed.), Studies in Pali and Buddhism: A Memorial 
Volume in Honor of Bhikkhu Jagdish Kashyap (Delhi, I979), 375-80.

--- PAGE 311 ---
Notes to Pages I49-67 
29. Majjhima Nikaya i. 8. 
30. Visuddhimagga xvii. ( cf. ViblJatiga-atthakatha 130-213); Abhidhar-
makosa iii. 21-36. For some account of Asailga's interpretation 
see Jeffrey Hopkins, Meditation on Emptiness (London, 1983), 707-
II. 
31. Vibhailga-atthakatha 150. 
32. For avidyii as not the mere absence of knowledge, see B. K. Matilal, 
'Ignorance or Misconception? A Note on Avidya in Buddhism', in 
S. Balasooriya et al. (eds.), Buddhist Studies in Honour ofWalpola 
Rahula (London, 1980), 154-64. 
33· For upiidiina as purposeful and goal-orientated see Vibhailga-
atthakatha 185-7, 192. 
34· Vibhailga-atthakatha 196. 
35· Visuddhimagga xvii. 66-wo; the 24 types of conditional relation 
(paccaya) are the subject of the Patthiina, the seventh book of the 
Abhidharma Pitaka. 
36. Visuddhimagga xvii. 105-7; Vibhailga-atthakatha 147-8. For the 
Sarvastivadin understanding of types of condition, see Abhidhar-
makosa ii. 60-73. 
37· Digha Nikaya ii. 55; Saqtyutta Nikaya ii. 92. 
38. Cf. Vibhailga-atthakatha 192. 
39· Visuddhimagga viii. 39· 
40. Vibhailga-atthakatha 198-9. 
41. Sarpyutta Nikaya ii. 29-32; cf. Bhikkhu Bodhi, 'Transcendental 
Dependent Arising', The Wheel (1980), 277/8; Vimuttimagga, 267. 
42. Sarpyutta Nikaya ii. 25. 
43· The oldest surviving painting appears to be in the Ajanta caves (sixth 
century) in India: see J. Przyluski, 'La Roue de la vie a AjaQ.ta', Journal 
Asiatique (1920), 313-31. Cf. Visuddhimagga vii. 7-8 for the image 
of the wheel. 
44· See David Snellgrove, Buddhist Himalaya (Oxford, 1957), 14-15. 
45· See Collins, Selfless Persons, 7-10. 
46. Sarpyutta Nikaya iv. 400-1. 
47· Ibid., iii. 46-7. 
48. Ibid., 126-32. 
Chapter 7· The Buddhist Path 
1. Visuddhimagga xiv. 32. 
2. e.g. Digha Nikaya i. 63; Majjhima Nikaya i. 179. 
3· Ailguttara Nikaya i. 189. 
4· Conze, Buddhist Thought in India, 48.

--- PAGE 312 ---
Notes to Pages I67-84 
5· John Ross Carter (ed.), The Threefold Refuge in Theravlida Bud-
dhist Tradition (Chambersburg, Pa., 1982). 
6. Digha Nikaya ii. 140-I. 
7· On six recollections (anusmrtilanussati) see Ailguttara Nikaya 
iii. 284-8, 3I2-I7. 
8. Peter Skilling, 'The Rakl?ii Literature of the Sriivakayiina', Journal 
of the Pali Text Society, 16 (1992), I09-82; Gombrich, Buddhist Precept 
and Practice, 236-46. 
9· Vinaya ii. 194: 
ro. Digha Nikaya iii. I94-2o6. 
I 1. Milindapaiiha 150-4. 
12, Digha Nikaya ii. 74-5. 
I3. Milindapaiiha 34-5· 
14. Digha Nikaya iii. 133, 235. 
15. Majjhima Nikaya i. 368-71. 
I6. Lanklivatlira Satra 2rr-22 (244-59). 
I7. e.g. Digha Nikaya i.; Majjhima Nikaya i. r8o. Cf. Visuddhimagga 
i. 23, Ailguttara Nikaya v. I, Digha Nikaya ii. 86; Bhikkhu Bodhi, 
The All-Embracing Net of Views, 276-8. 
18. Abhidhammatthasangaha-trka 54· 
19. Anguttara Nikaya i. ro. 
20. Visuddhimagga iii. 104-33; Vimuttimagga 63-70. 
2I. e.g. Richard Gombrich, 'From Monastery to Meditation Centre: Lay 
Meditation in Modern Sri Lanka' in Denwood and Piatigorsky 
(eds.), Buddhist Studies Ancient and Modern (London, 1983), 20-
34· 
22. Visuddhimagga vii. 101-2 on the practice of slllinussati by lay 
followers. 
23. The Theravadin term is upaclira, the Sarvastivadin anagamya or 
samantaka. 
24. Madhyantavibhaga-sastra vi. 3-4; Mahayanasutralarpkara xvi. rr-
14; Sravakabhumi I08-IO; Beyer, The Buddhist Experience, I07 
(Kamalaslla's Bhlivanlikrama i.); Alex Wayman (trans.), Calm-
ing the Mind and Discerning the Real (New York, I978), 14I-3 
(Tsong-kha-pa's Lam-rim chen-mo ); Jeffrey Hopkins, Meditation 
on Emptiness (London, 1983), 67-90. 
25. Donald Swearer, 'The Way of Meditation', in Donald Lopez ( ed. ), 
Buddhism in Practice, (Princeton, I99S), 207-I5, (2I2). 
26. Cf. L. S. Cousins, 'Buddhistlhlina', Religion, 3 (I973), II 5-3 I (I21), 
Spiro, Buddhism and Society, 56.

--- PAGE 313 ---
Notes to Pages IB4-200 
27. Phra Maha Boo';a Nal).a~ampanno, Forest Dh[lmma: A Selection pf 
Talks on Buddh1st Pract1ce (Bangkok, r973), r6-22; Geshe Gediin 
Lodro, Walking through Walls: A Presentation of Tibetan Medita-
tion (Ithaca, NY, 1992), 222-9, 252-4. 
28. e.g. Majjhima Nikaya i. 276. 
29. e.g. in Visuddhimagga presentation of forty kammatthtina. 
30. Digha Nikaya i. 77-83; Visuddhimagga xii-xiii (see Conze, Buddhist 
Scriptures, 121 -33). 
31. Gethin, The Buddhist Path to Awakening, 97-IOI. 
32. e.g Patrick Pranke, 'On Becoming a Buddhist Wizard', in Lopez, 
Buddhism in Practice, 343-58, a Burmese text; Tambiah, The Bud-
dhist Saints of the Forest, 272. 
33· On the four brahma-vihiiras as leading to awakening see Richard 
Gombrich, How Buddhism Began (London, 1996), 57-64. 
34· Visuddhimagga ix. I08-g. 
35· Ibid., 8~u, ID3; Harvey B. Aronson, Love and Sympathy in Thera-
viida Buddhism (Delhi, 1980). 
36. Visuddhimagga xx. I04. 
37· Ibid., xxi. 43· 
38. Ibid., xxi. 49· 
39· Abhidharma-samuccaya 104. Louis de La Vallee Poussin, 'A 
Summary Note on the Path', Abhidharmakosabhii~yam, trans. by 
Pruden, iii. pp. xiv-xxii. 
40. See Satipatthiina Sutta, Digha Nikaya ii. 290-315, Majjhima Nikaya 
i. ss-63. 
41. Sarp.yutta Nikaya iii. 155; Ariguttara Nikaya iv. 127. 
42. Winston King, Theraviida Meditation (University Park, Pa., 1980). 
43· Johannes Bronkhorst, The Two Traditions of Meditation in Ancient 
India (Delhi, 1993). 
44· Louis de La Vallee Poussin, 'Musila et Narada', Melanges chinois 
et bouddhiques, 5 (1937), 189-222; Lambert Schmithausen, 'On 
Some Aspects of Descriptions or Theories of "Liberating Insight" 
and "Enlightenment" in Early Buddhism', in Klaus Bruhn and 
Albrecht Wezler (ed.), Studien zum Jainismus und Buddhismus: 
Gedenkschrift fur Ludwig Alsdorf (Wiesbaden, 1981), 199-250; 
Paul Griffiths, 'Concentration or Insight: The Problematic of 
Thera vida Buddhist Meditation-Theory', Journal of the American 
Academy of Religion, 59 (rg8r), 605-24; Vetter, The Ideas and 
Meditative Practices of Early Buddhism; Gombrich, How Buddhism 
Began, 96-134.

--- PAGE 314 ---
294 
Notes to Pages 20I-I7 
45· L. S. Cousins, 'Samatha-Yana and Vipassana-Yana', in G. Dham-
mapala et al. (eds.), Buddhist Studies in Honour of Hammalava 
Saddhiitissa (Nugegoda, I984), 56-68. For a clear statement from 
KamalasYla's Bhavanakrama I see Beyer, The Buddhist Experience, 
I09. 
Chapter 8. The Abhidharma 
I. Atthasalini I2-I?; E. W. Burlingame (trans.), Buddhist Legends 
Translated from the Original Pali Text of the Dhammapada Com-
mentary, 3 vols. (London, I969), iii. 35-6. 
2. On the Sarvastivadin legend of the preaching of the Abhidharma, 
see Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, I86. 
3· An asterisk before a title indicates a reconstructed Sanskrit or Pali 
title from an ancient Chinese translation in the case of texts whose 
Sanskrit or Pali original is lost. 
4· Erich Frauwallner, On the Date of the Buddhist Master of the Law, 
Vasubandhu (Rome, I95I); Padmanabh S. Jaini, 'On the Theory of 
Two Vasubandhus', Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies, 22 (I958), 48-53. 
5· Warder, Indian Buddhism, 309. 
6. For the Yogacarin list see Walpola Rahula (trans.), Le Compen-
dium de la super-doctrine (philosophie) (Abhidharmasamuccaya) 
d'Asmiga, (Paris, I97I), 6-I8; Louis de La Vallee Poussin (trans.), 
Vijfiaptimiitratiisiddhi: Le Siddhi de Hiuan-Tsang (Paris, I928-9), 
i. 296-395; Junjiro Takakusu, The Essentials of Indian Philosophy 
(Bombay, I956), 96. 
7· Atthasalini 64. 
8. Milindapafiha 87; Atthasalini I42. 
9· Sarpyutta Nikaya ii. 95. 
IO. Dhammasaii.gm.:ti 36-7. 
I I. Atthasalini 279. 
I2. Shwe Zan Aung (trans.), Compendium of Philosophy, (London, I9IO ), 
30-2; Lama Anagarika Govinda, The Psychological Attitude of 
Early Buddhist Philosophy (London, I969), I34-42. 
I3. Rupert Gethin, 'Bhavmiga and Rebirth according to the Abhid-
hamma', The Buddhist Forum, 3 (I994), II-35· 
I4. Gombrich, Buddhist Precept and Practice (New Delhi, I99I), 256-
7, 27I-2. 
I5. Kathavatthu 36I-6; Abhidharmakosa iii. IO-I9; Alex Wayman, 
'The Intermediate-State Dispute in Buddhism' in L. S. Cousins

--- PAGE 315 ---
Notes to Pages 2r8-28 
295 
et al. ( eds.), Buddhist Studies in Honour of I. B; Horner (Dordrecht, 
I974), 227-39; W. Y. Evans-Wentz (trans.), The Tibetan Book of 
the Dead (London, I957). 
I6. Smpyutta Nikaya iii. I54· 
I7. Paul Williams, 'Buddhadeva and Temporality', Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 4 (I977), 279-94. 
I8. Conze, Buddhist Thought in India, 282; Abhidharmakosa iii. 85-90. 
I9. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 603; Abhidharmakosa iv. 2-3. 
20. Padmanabh Jaini, 'The Sautrantika Theory of Brja', Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental Studies, 22 (I959), 237-49; Conze: Buddhist 
Thought in India, I4I-3; Abhidharmakosa ii. 36. 
21. Gethin, 'Bhavmiga and Rebirth according to the Abhidhamma'. 
22. L. S. Cousins, 'Person and Self', in Buddhism into the Year 2000: 
International Conference Proceedings (Bangkok and Los Angeles, 
I994), I5-32. 
23. K. Venkataramanan, 'Sammitiyanikaya Sastra', Visva-BharatiAnnals, 
5 (I953), I54-243; Kathavatthu I-69; Satyasiddhisastra ii. 69-74; 
Abhidharmakosa ix. 
Chapter 9· The Mahiiyiina 
I. Charles Hallisey, 'Tul}c,lilovadasutta: An Allegedly Non-Canonical 
Sutta', Journal of the Pali Text Society, IS (I990), I54-95 and 
'Nibbanasutta: An Allegedly Non-Canonical Sutta on Nibbana as 
a Great City', Journal of the Pali Text Society, I8 (I993), 97-I3o; 
Padmanabh Jaini, 'Akaravattarasutta: An 'Apocryphal' Sutta from 
Thailand', Indo-Iranian Journal, 35 (I992), I93-223. 
2. Paul Harrison, 'Searching for the Origins of the Mahayana', East-
ern Buddhist, 28 (I995), 48-69. 
3· Gregory Schopen, 'The Phrase "sa prthivrpradesaS caityabhato 
bhavet" in the Vajracchedikii: Notes on the Cult of the Book in 
Mahayana', Indo-Iranian Journal, I7 (I975), I47-8I, and 'Two 
Problems in the History of Indian Buddhism: The Layman/Monk 
Distinction and the Doctrines of the Transference of Merit', Studien 
zur Indologie und Iranistik, IO (I985), 9-47; Richard Gombrich, 'How 
the Mahayana Began', The Buddhist Forum, I (I990), 2I-30. 
4· Cf. Conze, Buddhist Scriptures, 23, 3o-3, I64, for extracts from the 
Mahavastu, *Mahaprajfiaparamita Sastra and Vajracchedika. 
5· Mahavastu i. I24-40; Paul, Harrison, 'Sanskrit Fragments of a 
Lokottaravadin Tradition', in L. A. He reus et al. ( eds. ), Indo logical 
and Buddhist Studies (Canberra, I982), 2II-34·

--- PAGE 316 ---
Notes to Pages 228-33 
6. For the Theravada account of the Bodhisattva path see Bhikkhu 
Bodhi (trans.), 'A Treatise on the Paramis', in The Discourse on 
the All-Embracing Net of Views, 2S4-330 (= Cp-a 276-332); 
H. Saddhatissa (trans.), The Birth Stories of the Ten Bod.hisattas 
(London, I97S). 
7· Louis de La Vallee Poussin (trans.), Vijnaptimatratasiddhi: La 
Siddhi de Hiuan-Tsang, 2 vols. (Paris, I928-9), 676-7, 72I-S. 
8. Also Srimaladevi 78-94; and Latikavatara SUtra 63; cf. Herbert 
V. Guenther (trans.), The Jewel Ornament of Liberation (London, 
I5no), 4-6. 
9· On the notion of 'skill in means' see Michael Pye, Skilful Means 
(London, 1978); Wi1liams, Mahayana Buddhism, I43-50. 
IO. Oral teachings from His Holiness Sakya Trinzin on the Zhen pa bzhi 
brat or 'Leaving behind the four desires', Tibet House, New Delhi, 
II-IS Jan. 1982. (Cf. Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, I99·) 
II. Lodro, Walking through Walls, 367-75. 
12. Kamalasila's Bhavanakrama I; see Beyer, The Buddhist Experience, 
III. 
I3. Guenther, Jewel Ornament of Liberation, II2, 232-s6. 
I4. Conze, Large Satra on Perfect Wisdom, I63-78; Guenther, Jewel 
Ornament of Liberation, 239-56. 
15. Dasabhfimikasiitra (Rahder ed., Leuven 1926), 9I; Cleary, The 
Flower Ornament Scripture ii. I08. 
I6. La Vallee Poussin, La Siddhi, 67I; Williams, Mahiiyiina Buddhism, 
I8I-3; Nagao, 'The Bodhisattva Returns to this World', in Leslie 
Kawamura (ed.), The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhism (Waterloo, 
Ontario, I98I), 61-79. 
I7. Paul Harrison, 'Is the Dharma-kaya the Real "Phantom Body" of 
the Buddha?', Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies, IS (I992), 44-94· 
18. Richard Gombrich, 'The Significance of Former Buddhas in 
Theravadin Tradition', in Somaratna Balasooriya et at. (eds.), 
Buddhist Studies in Honour ofW alpola Rahula (London, I 980 ), 62-72: 
I9. Conze, Buddhist Scriptures, 2II-I4 (= Milindapafiha 237-9; Maha-
prajfiaparamita-sastra 93b-c). 
20. R. Binibaum, The Healing Buddha (London, 198o); Paul Harrison 
(trans.), The Samadhi of Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the 
Present (Tokyo, I990); Alan Sponberg and Helen Hardacre (eds.), 
Maitreya: The Future Buddha (Cambridge, 1988); Stephan Beyer, 
The Cult of Tarii: Magic and Ritual in Tibet (Berkeley, 1973). For

--- PAGE 317 ---
Notes to Pages 234-44 
297 
material on Amitabha, see section on 'Pure Land Buddhism' in 
Chapter to. 
21. Vibhanga-atthakatha 433; Gombrich, Buddhist Precept and Practice, 
34I; Reynolds, 'The Many Lives of the Buddha', 53· 
22. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 690-9; John Strong, The 
Legend of Upagupta (Princeton, I99I); Ray, Buddhist Saints in 
India, 178-2I2, 358-95; Maha-Boowa Nyanasampanno, The Vener-
able Phra Acharn Mun Bhuridatta Thera, I9o-2. 
23. Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, 41-2; Jan Nattier, 'The Heart 
Satra: A Chinese Apocryphal Text?', Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies, IS (I992), 192-223. 
24. Paficavirp.satisahasrika 6r. 
25. On these similes see Conze, Buddhist Thought in India, 222; 
Buddhist Wisdom Books, 68-7I; Lamotte, Le Traite i. 357-87. 
26. Visuddhimagga xx. 104 gives a number of similes, most of which 
are traceable to earlier Nikaya sources, see p. I40 above. 
27. Etienne Lamotte, 'Three Su.tras from the Saip.yuktagama Concern-
ing Emptiness', Buddhist Studies Review, IO (I993), I-23; Majjhima 
Nikaya iii. ro4-I8; Dhammasangal).i 25-6 ('the section on empti-
ness); Patisambhidamagga i. I77-84 ('the discussion of emptiness'). 
28. Milla-Madhyamaka-Karika xxiv. II. 
29. Ibid., 8-ro. 
30. Ibid., XXV. I!)-20. 
3 r. Ibid;, xiii. 8. 
32. Paul Williams, 'On the Abhidharma Ontology', Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 9 (I98I), 227-57. 
33· Cf. Sunyatasaptati-karika 69. 
34· A.K. Warder, 'Is Nagarjuna a Mahayanist?' in M. Sprung (ed.), The 
Problem of Two Truths in Buddhism and Vedanta, (Dordrecht, 
I973), 78-88. 
35·· a. Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, 46-7; Hopkins, Meditation on Empti-
ness, 29-30; Donald Lopez, 'Do Sravakas Understand Emptiness', 
Journal of Indian Philosophy, I6 (I988), 65-I05. Etienne Lamotte, 
'Passions and Impregnations of the Passions in Buddhism', in L. S. 
Cousins et al. (eds.), Buddhist Studies in Honour of I. B. Horner 
(Dordrecht, I974), 94-I04. 
36. Bhikkhu Nal).ananda, Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist 
Thought (Kandy, I976); Luis 0. Gomez, 'Proto-Madhyamika in the 
Pali Canon', Philosophy East and West, 26 (I976), I37-65; Collins, 
Selfless Persons, II7-3I; Padmanabh Jaini, 'Prajiia and dr~ti in the

--- PAGE 318 ---
Notes to Pages 244-54 
Vaibha~ika Abhidharma', in Lancaster, Lewis ( ed. ), PrajFtiipiiramitii 
and Related Systems: Studies in Honor of Edward Conze, (Berkeley, 
1977), 403-15. And see nn. 21-2 above. 
37· Th. Stcherbatsky, The Conception of Buddhist Nirviil')a (Leningrad, 
1927); C. Gudmunsen, Wittgenstein and Buddhism (London, 1977); 
C. W. Huntington, The Emptiness of Emptiness: An Introduction 
to Early Indian Miidhyamika (Honolulu, 1989); Andrew Tuck, 
Comparative Philosophy and the Philosophy of Scholarship: On the 
Western Interpretation of Niigijrjuna (Oxford, 1990); Paul Williams, 
'On the Interpretation of MadhyamakaThought', Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 19 (1991), 191-218; Richard Hayes, 'Nagarjuna's Appeal', 
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 22 (1994), 299-378, for a useful and 
provocative discussion and bibliography. 
38. Vi:tp.satika I (Anacker, Seven Works ofVasubandhu, 161). 
39·. Lamotte, Saf!1dhinirmocana, 206-7; Powers, Wisdom of the Buddha, 
139-41. 
40. Mahiiyiina-Saf!1graha i. 6 (Lamotte, La Somme, 16). 
41. Tri:tp.sika 5-6; La Vallee Poussin, La Siddhi, 250-3. 
42. Tri:tp.sika 3· 
43· Mahayana-Sa:tp.graha i. 19-20. 
44· Ibid., ii. 15. 
45· Larikavatara Siltra 55; La Vallee Poussin, La Siddhi, 607-12; 
Tri:tp.sika 26-30; Conze, Buddhist Thought in India, 257; Lambert 
Schmithausen, Alayavijniina (Tokyo, 1987), 198; Williams, Mahiiyiina 
Buddhism, 92-3. 
46. Madhyanta-Vibhaga-bha~ya i. 1-3, 13-i4. 
47· Griffiths, On Being Mindless, 82-3. 
48. Vi:tp.satika-vrtti to J7c. 
49· Tathagatagarbha Siltra 96. 
Chapter IO. Evolving Traditions 
1. Atthasalini 18; Steven Collins, 'On The Very Idea of the Pali 
Canon' ,Journal of the Pali Text Society, 15 (1990), 89-126. 
2. K. R. Norman, 'The Literary Works of the Abhayagiriviharins', 
Collected Papers, iv (Oxford, 1993), 202-17; Peter Skilling, 'A 
Citation from the *Buddhava:tp.sa_ of the Abhayagiri School', 
Journal of the Pali Text Society, 18 (1993), 165-75; and 'Vimut-
timagga and Abhayagiri: the Form-Aggregate according to the 
Saf!1skrtiisaf!1skrta-ViniScaya', Journal qf the Pali Text Society, 
20 (1994), 171-210.

--- PAGE 319 ---
Notes to Pages 255-63 
299 
3· Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, 271-7. 
4· Gombrich and Obeyesekere, Buddhism Transformed. 
5· Janice Stargardt, 'The Oldest Known Pali Texts, 5th-6th Century: 
Results of the Cambridge Symposium on the Pyu Golden Pali Text 
from Sri K~etra', Journal of the Pali Text Society; 21 (1995), 199-
213; Peter Skilling, 'The Advent of Theravada Buddhism to 
Mainland South-east Asia', Journal of the International Association 
of Buddhist Studies, 20 (1997), 93-I07. 
6. L. S. Cousins, 'Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism', in Peter 
Connolly and Sue Hamilton (eds.), Indian Insights: Buddhism, 
Brahmanism and Bhakti (London, 1997), 185-207; F. Bizot, Le 
Figuier d cinq branches (Paris, 1976); F. Bizot, Le Chemin de Lmikii 
(Paris, 1992). 
7· Ch'en, Buddhism in China, 61-9, 135-44; Erik Zurcher, The Bud-
dhist Conquest of China, 2 vols. (Leiden, 1959). 
8. Holmes Welch, The Practice of Chinese Buddhism; The Buddhist 
Revival in China (Cambridge, Mass., 1968); Buddhism under Mao 
(Cambridge, Mass, 1972). 
9· Alan Sponberg, 'A Report on Buddhism in the People's Republic 
of China', Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies, 5 (1982), I09-I7· 
ro. Paul Harrison, 'The Earliest Chinese Translations of Mahayana 
Buddhist Siitras: Some Notes on the Works of Lokak~ema', Bud-
dhist Studies Review, IO (1993), 135-77. 
I I. On the Chinese Tripi taka see Renou and Filliozat, L 'Inde classique, 
ii. 398-461; Ch'en, Buddhism in China, 365-86; J. W. de Jong, 
'Buddha's Word in China', in Gregory Schopen (ed.), Buddhist Studies 
by J. W. de Jong (Berkeley, 1979), 77-IOI. 
12. For a detailed analysis of the Taisho edition see Renou and 
Filliozat, L'Inde classique, ii. 431-61. 
13. Bunyiu Nanjio, A Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the 
Buddhist Tripitaka (Oxford, 1883). 
14. Robert Buswell, 'Buddhism in Korea' in Buddhism and Asian 
History, 151-8; Tracing Back the Radiance: Chinul's Korean Way 
of Zen (Honolulu, 1991). 
15. Ch'en, Buddhism in China, 8r. 
16. Ibid., 325-37; Welch, The Buddhist Revival in China, 196-9; Mat-
sunaga, Foundation of Japanese Buddhism, i. I?I-201. 
17. Ch'en, Buddhism in China, II9-20. 
18. Chang, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, 276.

--- PAGE 320 ---
300 
Notes to Pages 264-73 
19. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, I91-202; Ch'en, Buddhism 
in China, 297-300; Jan Nattier, Once Upon a Future Time: Studies 
in a Buddhist Prophecy of Decline (Berkeley, 1991). 
20. Daniel Stevenson, 'Pure Land Buddhist Worship and Meditation 
in China' and 'Death-Bed Testimonials of the Pure Land Faithful', 
in Lopez, Buddhism in Practice, 359-79, 592.,-602; Matsunaga, 
Foundation of Japanese Buddhism, ii. 85-127. 
21. Paul L. Swanson, Foundations of T'ien T'ai Philosophy: The 
Flowering of the Two Truths Theory in Chinese Buddhism (Ber-
keley, 1989). 
22. See Chih-i's Hsiu-hsi chih-kuan tso-ch'an fa yao, Dwight Goddard 
(ed.), A Buddhist Bible (Boston, 1970), 437-96. 
23. Garma Chang, The Buddhist Teaching of Totality (London, 1972); 
Francis Cook, Hua-yen Buddhism (University Park, Fa., 1977). 
24. Matsunaga, Foundation of Japane!je Buddhism ii. 147-18i. 
25. Snellgrove, Indo-Tibetan Buddhism, .426-50; David Seyfort Ruegg, 
Buddha-nature, Mind and the Problem of Gradualism in a Compar-
ative Perspective (London, 1989). 
26. Kenneth Ch'en, 'The Tibetan Tripitaka', Harvard Journal of Asian 
Studies, 9 (1945-7), 53-62; Renou and Filliozat (ed.), L'Inde clas-
sique, ii. 388-97; Tadeusz Skorupski, A Catalogue of the sTog 
Palace Kanjur (Tokyo, 1985); Paul Harrison, 'A Brief History of 
the Tibetan bKa' 'gyur', in Jose Ignacio Cabez6n and Roger R. .Jackson 
(eds.), Tibetan Literature: Studies in Genre (Ithaca, NY, 1996), 70-94. 
27. James B. Robinson (trans.), Buddha's Lions: The Lives of the 
Eighty-Four Siddhas (Berkeley, 1979); K"ith Dowman (trans.), 
Masters of Mahamudra: Songs and Histories of the Eighty-Four 
Buddhist Siddhas, (Albany, NY, 1985). 
28. Snellgrove, Indo-Tibetan Buddhism, 1 19-21; Tadeusz Skorupski, 'The 
Canonical Tantras of the New Schools', in Cabez6n and Jackson, 
Tibetan Literature, 95-no. See Tucci, The Religions of Tibet, 76-87 
for the slightly different rNying-ma-pa scheme. 
29. Tucci, The Religions of Tibet, 41, 134-5; Snellgrove, Indo-Tibetan 
Buddhism, 498-99. 
30. Powers, Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism, 169-87; DonaldS. Lopez 
and Cyrus Stearns, 'A Report on Religious Activity in Central 
Tibet', Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 
9 (1986), IOI-7. 
31. Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, w5-9;Shenpen Hookham, The 
Buddha Within: The Tathiigatagarbha Doctrine according to the

--- PAGE 321 ---
Notes to Pages 274-76 
301 
Shentong Interpretation of the Ratnagotravibhiiga (Albany, NY, 
I99I). 
32. DonaldS. Lopez, Curators of the Buddha (Chicago, 1995), 253-7. 
33· J. W. de Jong, A Brief History of Buddhist Studies in Europe and 
America (Varanasi, 1976). 
34· Trevor 0. Ling, Buddhist Revival in India: AspectS of the Sociology 
of Buddhism (London, 1980).

--- PAGE 322 ---
Select Bibliography 
Texts (Pali, Sanskrit, Chinese, and Tibetan) 
Only texts which have been translated into a modern European language 
are listed here. A translation into French has been cited where no 
English translation is available or where the translation constitutes an 
important scholarly work of reference in its own right. An asterisk 
before a title indicates a reconstructed Sanskrit or Pali title from an ancient 
Chinese translation in the case of texts whose Sanskrit or Pali original 
is lost. 
Abhidhammattha-sa1Jlgaha (Anuruddha). Bhikkhu Bodhi (trans.), A 
Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma (Kandy, 1993). 
*Abhidharma-hrdaya (Dharmasri). C. Willemen (trans.), The Essence 
of Metaphysics (Brussels, 1975). 
Abhidharmakosa-bhii~ya (Vasubandhu). Louis de La Vallee Poussin 
(trans.), L 'Abhidharmakosa de V asubandhu: traduction et annotations, 
6 vols. (Brussels, 1971), trans. by Leo M. Pruden, 4 vols. (Berkeley, 
1988). 
Abhidharmasamuccaya (Asanga). Walpola Rahula· (trans.), Le Com-
pendium de Ia super-doctrine (philosophie) (Abhidharmasamuccaya) 
d'Asmiga (Paris, 1971). 
Amitiiyurdhyiina Satra. Max Muller ( ed.), Sacred Books of the East, XLIX. 
161-201. 
* Amrtarasa ( Gho1:>aka ). Jose Van Den Broeck (trans.), Le saveur de l'im-
mortel (Louvain-la-Neuve, 1977). 
Anguttara Nikiiya. E. M. Hare and F.L. Woodward (trans.), The Book 
of the Gradual Sayings, 5 vols. (London, 1923-6). 
Atthasiilinl [of Buddhaghosa?]. Maung Tin (trans.), The Expositor 
(London, 1920). 
Avataytlsaka Satra. Thomas Cleary (trans.), The Flower Ornament 
Scripture, 3 vols. (Boston, 1984-7). 
Bhiivaniikrama I (Kamalasila). Stephan Beyer, The Buddhist Experi-
ence: Sources and Interpretation, 99-II5. 
Bodhipathapradlpa (Atisa). Ronald Davidson, 'Atisa's A Lamp for the 
Path to A wakening', in Lopez ( ed.), Buddhism in Practice (Princeton, 
1995), 290-301; Richard Sherburne (trans.),A Lamp for the Path and 
Commentary, (London, 1983).

--- PAGE 323 ---
Select Bibliography 
Buddhacarita (Asvagho~a). E. H. Johnston (trans.), The Buddhacarita 
or Acts of the Buddha, 2 vols. (Calcutta, 1936). 
Buddhavmrzsa-atthakathii (Madhuratthaviliisin'i) (Buddhadatta). I. B. 
Horner (trans.), The Clarifier of the Sweet Meaning (Lol)don, 1978). 
Catu$pari$at Siltra. Ria Kloppenborg (trans.), The CatU$pari$atsiltra: 
The Siltra on the Foundation of the Buddhist Order: Relating to the 
Events from the Bodhisattva's Enlightenment up to the Conversion 
of Upafi$ya and Kolita, (Leiden, 1979). 
Ch'eng wei-shih lun (Hsiian-tsang). (1) Louis de La. Vallee Poussin 
(trans.), Vijiiaptimiitratiisiddhi: La Siddhi de Hiuan-Tsang, 2 vols. 
(Paris, 1928-9). (2) Wei Tat (trans.), Ch'eng Wei-Shih Lun: The 
Doctrine of Mere Consciousness by Hsilan Tsang (Hong Kong, 1973). 
Dasabhilmika Siltra. Thomas Cleary (trans.), The Flower Ornament 
Scripture, ii (Boston, 1986). 
. 
Dhammapada-attiJakathii (Buddhaghosa). Eugene Watson Burlingame 
(trans.), Buddhist Legends Translated from the Original Pali Text of 
the Dhammapada Commentary, 3 vols. (London, 1969). 
DhammasmigmJi. C. A. F. Rhys Davids (trans.), Buddhist Psychological 
Ethics (London, 1900). 
D'igha Nikiiya. Maurice Walshe, The Long Discourses of the Buddha 
(London, 1987). 
Hsiu-hsi chih-kuan tso-ch'an fa-yao (Chih-i). Dwight Goddard (ed.), 
A Buddhist Bible (Boston, 1970), 437-96. 
Jiitaka. E. B. Cowell and et al. (trans.), The Jiitaka or the Stories of the 
Buddha's Former Births, 6 vols. (London, 1895-1907). 
Jiitakamiila (Arya Sura). Peter Khoroche (trans.), Once the Buddha Was 
a Monkey (Chicago, 1989). 
Kathiivatthu. C. A. F. Rhys Davids (trans.), Points of Controversy 
(London, 1915). 
Lalitavistara Siltra. Gwendolyn Bays (trans.);· The Lalitavistara Siltra, 
2 vols. (Berkeley, 1983). 
Lam rim chen mo (Tsong-kha-pa). Alex Wayman (trans.), Calming the 
Mind and Discerning the Real: Buddhist Meditation and the Middle 
View (New York, 1978). 
Laitktivatiira Siltra. D. T. Suzuki (trans.), The Laitkiivatiirasiltra (London, 
1932). 
Madhyiintavibhiiga Siistra (Vasubandhu). Stefan Anacker (trans.), 
Seven Works ofVasubandhu, (Delhi, 1984), 191-286. 
*Mahtiprajfiiipiiramitiisiistra [Nagarjuna?]. Etienne Lamotte (trans.), 
Le Traite de la grande vertu de sagesse de Niigiirjuna, 5 vols. (Louvain, 
1944-80).

--- PAGE 324 ---
Select Bibliography 
Mahiivaf[lsa. Wilhelm Geiger (trans.), Mahiivaf[lsa: The Great Chronicle 
of Ceylon (London, 1912). 
Mahiivastu. John James Jones (trans.), The Mahiivastu, 3 vols. (London, 
1949-56). 
Mahiiyiinasmigraha (Asanga). (I) Etienne Lamotte (trans.), La Somme 
du Grand Vehicule d'Asaliga, 2 vols. (Louvain, 1938-9). (2) John P. 
Keenan (trans.), The Summary of the Great Vehicle by Bodhisattva 
Asaliga (Berkeley, 1992). 
Mahiiyiinasatriilaf[lkiira (Asanga). Sylvain Levi (trans.), Expose de la doc-
trine du Grand Vehicule selon le systeme Yogiiciira, 2 vols. (Paris, 
1907-II). 
Majjhima Nikiiya. Bhikkhu Nai).amoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi (trans.), The 
Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha (London, 1995). 
Milindapaiiha. !saline B. Horner (trans.), Milinda's Questions 2 vols. 
(London, 1963-4). 
Mo-ho chih-kuan (Chih-i). Neal Donner and Daniel Stevenson (trans.), 
The Great Calming and Contemplation: A Study and Annotated Trans-
lation of the First Chapter of Chih-i's Mo-ho Chih-kuan (Honolulu, 
1993). 
Mala-Madhyamaka-kiirikii (Nagarjuna). Kenneth K. Inada (trans.), 
Niigiirjuna: A Translation of his Mulamadhyamakaktirikii (Tokyo, 
1970). 
Nettippakarm:za (Kaccana). Bhikkhu Nai).amoli (trans.), The Guide 
According to Kacciina Thera (London, 1962). 
Nidiinakathii. N. A. Jayawickrama (trans.), The Story of Gotama 
Buddha: The Nidiina-Kathii of the Jtitakatthakathii, (Oxford, 1990). 
Paiicavif[lsatisiihasrikii Prajiilipiiramitii. Edward Conze (trans.), The 
Large Satra on Perfect Wisdom with the Divisions of the Abhisa-
maytilaf[lklira (Delhi, 1979). 
Pa{isambhidiimagga. Bhikkhu Nai).amoli (trans.), The Path of Discrim-
ination (London, 1982). 
Patthiina. U Narada (trans.), Conditional Relations, 2 vols. (London, 
1969-81). 
Prajiiiipiiramitii-Hrdaya Satra. Edward Conze, Buddhist Wisdom Books: 
Containing The Diamond Sfitra and The Heart Sfitra (London, 
1958), 77-I07; Conze, Buddhist Scriptures, 162-4. 
1?-g Veda. Wendy Doniger O'Flaherty, The Rig Veda: An Anthology 
(Harmondsworth, 1981). 
Saf[ldhinirmocana Satra. John Powers (trans.), Wisdom of the Buddha: 
The Saf[ldhinirmocana Mahiiyiina Satra (Berkeley, 1995).

--- PAGE 325 ---
Select Bibliography 
*Satya-siddhi-sastra (Harivarman). Aiyaswami Sastri, Satyasiddhisastra 
of Harivarman 2 vols (Baroda, 1975-8) 
Srtivakabhiimi [ Asariga ?]. Alex Wayman, Analysis of the Srtivakabhiimi 
Manuscript (Berkeley, 1961). 
Srlmtiladevl-sif!'lhantida Siitra. Alex Wayman and Hideko Wayman 
(trans.), The Lion's Roar of Queen Srlmtilti: A Buddhist Scripture on 
the Tathtigatagarbha Theory (New York, 1974). 
Sukhtivatlvyiiha Siitras. Luis Gomez (trans.), The Land of Bliss: The 
Paradise of the Buddha of Measureless Light: Sanskrit and Chinese 
Versions of the Sukhtivatlvyiiha Siitras (Honolulu and Kyoto, 1996) .. 
Sutta-Nipata. H. Saddhatissa (trans.), The Sutta-Nipata (London, 1985). 
Tathtigatagarbha Siitra. William Grosnick, 'The Tathtigatagarbha Siitra', 
in Donald Lopez (ed.), Buddhism in Practice (Princeton, 1995), 92-
I06. 
Thar-pa rin-po-che'i rgyan (sGam-po-pa). Herbert Guenther (trans.), 
The Jewel Ornament of Liberation (London, 1970). 
Theragtithti and Therigtithti. K. R. Norman (trans.), Elders' Verses, 2 vols. 
(London, 1969-71). 
Trif!'lsika (Vasubandhu). Stefan Anacker (trans.), Seven Works of 
Vasubandhu (Delhi, 1984), 181-90. 
Tri-Svabhtiva-Nirdesa (Vasubandhu). Stefan Anacker (trans.), Seven 
Works of Vasubandhu (Delhi, 1984), 287-97. 
Udana. Peter Masefield (trans.), The Udana (Oxford, 1994). 
Upani$ads. Patrick Olivelle, Upan~ads (Oxford, 1996). 
Vajracchedikti Siitra. Edward Conze, Buddhist Wisdom Books: Con-
taining The Diamond Sutra and The Heart SUtra (London, 1958), 
21-74· 
Vibhmiga. U Thittila (trans.), The Book of Analysis (London, 1969). 
Vibhmiga-atthakathti (Sammohavinodanl) [Buddhaghosa?]. Nal)amoli 
(trans.), The Dispeller of Delusion, 2 vols. (London, 1987-90). 
Vimalakirti-nirdesa Siitra. Etienne Lamotte (trans.), The Teaching of 
Vimalakirti (London, 1976). 
Vif!'lsatika (Vasubandhu). Stefan Anacker (trans.), Seven Works of 
Vasubandhu (Delhi, 1984), 157-79. 
*Vimuttimagga (Upatissa). N. R. M. Ehara et al. (trans.), The Path of 
Freedom (Kandy, 1977). 
Vinaya-Pitaka. I. B. Horner (trans.), The Book of the Discipline, 6 vols. 
(Oxford, 1938-66). 
Visuddhimagga (Buddhaghosa). Nal)amoli (trans.), The Path of Puri-
fication (Colombo, 1964).

--- PAGE 326 ---
306 
Select Bibliography 
General, introductory, and background 
Basham, A. L., The Wonder that Was India: A Survey of the History and 
Culture of the Indian Sub-continent before the Coming of the Muslims 
(London, 1967). 
Bechert, Heinz, and Gombrich, Richard ( eds. ), The World of Buddhism: 
Buddhist Monks and Nuns in Society and Culture (London, 1984). 
Beyer, Stephan, The Buddhist Experience: Sources and Interpretations 
(Encino, Calif., 1974). 
Conze, Edward, Buddhist Scriptures (Harmondsworth, 1959). 
--Buddhist Thought in India (London, 1962). 
Cousins, L. S., 'Buddhism', in John R. Hinnells (ed.), A Handbook of 
Living Religions (Harmondsworth, 1984), 278-343. 
Dundas, Paul, The Jains (London, 1992). 
Gombrich, Richard, Theravtida Buddhism: A Social History from Anci-
ent Benares to Modern Colombo (London, 1988). 
Harvey, Peter, An Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History and 
Practices (Cambridge, 1990). 
Kitagawa, Joseph M., and Cummings, Mark D. (eds.), Buddhism and 
Asian History (New York, 1989). 
Lamotte, Etienne, History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the 
Saka Era (Louvain, 1988). 
Lopez, DonaldS. (ed.), Buddhism in Practice (Princeton, 1995). 
Nakamura, Hajime, Indian Buddhism: A Survey with Bibliographical 
Notes (Hirakata, 1980). 
Norman, K. R., Pali Literature: Including the Canonical Literature 
in Prakrit and Sanskrit of all the Hznaytina Schools of Buddhism 
(Wiesbaden, 1983). 
Prebish, Charles S. (ed.), Buddhism: A Modern Perspective (University 
P<:trk, Pa., 1975). 
Rahula, Walpola, What the Buddha Taught (London, 1967). 
Renou, Louis and Jean Filliozat ( ed. ), L 'Inde classiqite: manuel des etudes 
indiennes (Paris, 1947-53). 
Robinson, Richard H., and Johnson, Willard L. The Buddhist Religion: 
A Historical Introduction (Belmont, Calif., 1982). 
Saddhatissa, H., The Buddha's Way (London, 1971). 
Warder, A. K., Indian Buddhism (Delhi, 1980). 
Zwalf, W. (ed.), Buddhism: Art and Faith (London, 1985). 
Chapter I: The Story of the Buddha 
Bareau, Andre, Recherches sur Ia biographie du Buddha dans les 
Siitrapi{aka et les Vinayapi{aka anciens (Paris, 1963-71).

--- PAGE 327 ---
Select Bibliography 
Beal, Samuel (trans.), The Romantic Legend of Siikya Buddha: A Trans-
lation of the Chinese Version of the Abhini(fkramal}asutra (London, 
1875). 
Bechert, Heinz (ed.), The Dating of the Historical Buddha/Die Dati-
erung des historischen Buddha, Parts I-2 (Gottinget1, 1991-2). 
Carrithers, M., The Buddha (Oxford, 1983). 
Cousins, L. S., 'The Dating of the Historical Buddha: A Review 
Article', Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 6 (1996), 57-63. 
Dallapiccola, Anne Libera ( ed. ), The Stupa: Its Religious, Historical and 
Architectural Significance (Wiesbaden, 1980 ). 
Herbert, Patricia, The Life of the Buddha (London, 1993). 
Jayawickrama, N. A. (trans.), The Story of Gotama Buddha: The 
Nidiina-Kathii of the Jiitakatthakathii (Oxford, 1990). 
Nagao, Gadjin, 'The Life of the Buddha: An Interpretation', The 
Eastern Buddhist, 20 (1987), 1-31. 
--'The Buddha's Life as Parable for Later Buddhist Thought', The 
Eastern Buddhist, 24 (1991), 1-32. 
Nal).amoli, The Life of the Buddha (Kandy, 1992). 
Pye, Michael, The Buddha (London, 1979). 
Reynolds, Frank E., 'The Many Lives of Buddha: A Study of Sacred 
Biography and Theravada Tradition', in Donald Capps and Frank E. 
Reynolds (eds.), The Biographical Process: Studies in the History and 
Psychology of Religion (The Hague, 1976), 37-6r. 
--'The Several Bodies of the Buddha: Reflections on a Neglected 
Aspect of Theravada Tradition', History of Religions, r6 (1977), 
374-89. 
Rockhill, W. W., The Life of the Buddha and the Early History of his 
Order Derived from Tibetan Works of the Bkah-hgyurand Bstan-Hgyur 
(London, 1907). 
Thich Nhat Hanh, Old Paths, White Clouds: The Life Story of the 
Buddha (London, 1992). 
Thomas, Edward J., The Life of the Buddha: As Legend and History 
(London, 1949). 
Chapter 2: The Word of the Buddha 
Bareau, Andre, Les sectes bouddhiques du petit vehicule (Saigon, 1955). 
Bechert, Heinz, 'The Importance of Asoka's so-called Schism Edict', 
in L.A. Hercus et al. (eds.), Indological and Buddhist Studies: Vol-
ume in Honour of Professor J, W. de long on his Sixtieth Birthday 
(Canberra, 1982), 61-8.

--- PAGE 328 ---
Select Bibliography 
Carter, John R., Dhamma: Western Academic and Sinhalese Buddhist 
Interpretations: A Study of a Religious Concept (Tokyo, I978). 
Collins, Steven, 'On The Very Idea of the Pali Canon', Journal of the 
Pali Text Society, IS (I990), 89-126. 
--'Notes on Some Oral Aspects of Pali Literature', Indo-Iranian 
Journal, 35 (I992), I2I-35· 
Cousins, L. S., 'Pali Oral Literature', in P. Denwood and A Piatigorsky 
(eds.), Buddhist Studies: Ancient and Modern (London, I983), I-II. 
--'The "Five Points" and the Origins of the Buddhist Schools', The 
Buddhist Forum, 2 (I99I), 27-60. 
Davidson, R. E., 'An Introduction to the Standards of Scriptural 
Authenticity in Indian Buddhism', in Robert E. Buswell (ed.), Chi-
nese Buddhist Apocrypha (Honolulu, I990), 29I-325. 
Galloway, Brian,' "Thus Have I Heard: At One Time .. . "',Indo-Iranian 
Journal, 34 (199I), 87-!04. 
Gethin, Rupert, 'The Matikas: Memorization, Mindfulness and the 
List', in J. Gyatso (ed.), In The Mirror of Memory: Reflections on 
Mindfulness and Remembrance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism 
(Albany, NY, I992), I49-72. 
Graham, William A, Beyond the Written Word: Oral .Aspects of 
Scripture in the History of Religion (Cambridge, I987). 
Hallisey, Charles, 'Councils as Ideas and Events in the Theravada', The 
Buddhist Forum, 3 (I99I),.I33-48. 
Harrison, Paul, 'Who Gets to Ride in the Great Vehicle? Self-Image 
and Identity among the Followers of the Early Mahayana', Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, ro (I987), 67-89. 
Hiniiber, Oskar von, A Handbook of Piili Literature (Berlin, I996). 
Lamotte, Etienne, 'The Assessment of Textual Authenticity in Bud-
dhism', Buddhist Studies Review, I (I984), 4-I5. 
Lopez, DonaldS. (ed.), Buddhist Hermeneutics (Honolulu, I988). 
McDermott, J.P., 'Scripture as Word of the Buddha', Numen, 3I (I984), 
22-39· 
McQueen, G., 'Inspired Speech in Mahayana Buddhism', Religion, 
II-!2 (I98I-2), 303-I9, 49-65. 
Nattier, Janice J., and Prebish, Charles S., 'Mahasatp.ghika Origins: 
The Beginnings of Buddhist Sectarianism', History of Religions, I6 
(I976), 237-72. 
Norman, K. R., 'Asoka's "Schism" Edict', Collected Papers III (Oxford, 
I992), I9I-2I8. 
Prebish, Charles S., 'A Review of Scholarship on the Buddhist 
Councils', Journal of Asian Studies, 33 (I974), 239-54.

--- PAGE 329 ---
Select Bibliography 
Schopen, Gregory, 'The Inscription on the Ku~an Image of Amitabha 
and the Character of the Early Mahayana in India', Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies, 10 (1987), 99-137. 
Chapter J: Four Truths 
Cousins, L. S., 'Nibbiina and Abhidhamma', Buddhist Studies Review, 
I (1984), 95-109. 
Hallisey, Charles, 'Nibbanasutta: An Allegedly Non-Canonical Sutta on 
Nibbana as a Great City', Journal of the Pali Text Society, 18 (1993), 
97-130. 
Norman, K. R., 'The Four Noble Truths: A Problem of Pali Syntax', 
in L.A. Hercus et al. (eds.), Indological and Buddhist Studies: Vol-
ume in Honour of Professor J. W de long on his Sixtieth Birthday 
(Canberra, 1982), 377-91. 
--'Mistaken Ideas about Nibbana', The Buddhist Forum, 3 (1994), 
2II-25. 
Saddhatissa, Hammalawa, Buddhist Ethics: Essence of Buddhism 
(London, 1970). 
Welbon, Guy, The Buddhist Nirvti1Ja and its Western Interpreters 
(Chicago, 1968). 
Wezler, A., 'On the Quadruple Division of the Yogasastra, the 
Caturvyiihatva of the Cikitsasastra and the "Four Noble Truths" of 
the Buddha', Indologica Taurinensia, 12 (1984), 291-337. 
Chapter 4: The Buddhist Community 
Banerjee, Anukul Chandra, Sarvtistivtida Literature (Calcutta, 1979). 
Bartholomeusz, Tessa, Women under the Bo Tree (Cambridge, 1994). 
Beal, Samuel (trans.), The Life of Hiuen-tsiang by the Shamans Hwai li 
and Yen-tsing, 1885). 
Buswell, Robert E., The Zen Monastic Experience: Buddhist Practice in 
Contemporary Korea (Princeton, 1992). 
Carrithers, Michael, The Forest Monks of Sri Lanka: An Anthropo-
logical and Historical Study (Delhi, 1983). 
Dutt, Sukumar, Buddhist Monks and Monasteries of India (London, 1962 ). 
Evers, H., Monks, Priests and Peasants: A Study of Buddhism and 
Social Structure in Central Ceylon (Leiden, 1972). 
Foulk, T. Griffith, 'Daily Life in the Assembly', in DonaldS. Lopez ( ed. ), 
Buddhism in Practice (Princeton, 1995), 455-72. 
Gombrich, Richard, Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the 
Rural Highlands of Ceylon (Oxford, 1971).

--- PAGE 330 ---
310 
Select Bibliography 
Gombrich, Richard, 'The Monk in the Pali Vinaya: Priest or Wedding 
Guest?', Journal of the Pali Text Society, 21 (1995), 193-7. 
Gunawardana, R. A. L H., Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Eco-
nomic Interest in Early Medieval Sri Lanka (Tucson, Ariz., 1979). 
Havnevik, Hanna, Tibetan Buddhist Nuns: History, Cultural Norms and 
Social Reality (Oslo, 1989). 
Holt, John C., Discipline: The Canonical Buddhism of the Vinayapitaka 
(Delhi, 1981). 
Huxley, Andrew S., 'The Vinaya: Legal System or Performance 
Enhancing Drug', The Buddhist Forum, 4 (1996), 141-63. 
Hyer, Paul, and Jagchid, Sechin, A Mongolian Living Buddha: 
Biography of the Kanjurwa Khutughtu (Albany, NY, 1983). 
Joshi, Lal Mani, Studies in the Buddhistic Culture of India During the 
7th and 8th Centuries A.D. (Delhi, 1977). 
Kamala Tiyavanich, Forest Recollections: Wandering Monks in Twen-
tieth Century Thailand (Honolulu, 1997). 
Legge, James (trans.), A Record of Buddhist Kingdoms (Oxford, 1886). 
Miller, Robert James, Monasteries and Culture Change in Inner Mon-
golia (Wiesbaden, 1959). 
Prebish, Charles S., Buddhist Monastic Discipline: The Sanskrit 
Prlitimok~a Siltras of the Mahlislirrtghikas and Mulasarvlistzvlidins 
(University Park, Pa., and London, 1975). 
Rabten, Geshe, The Life and Teaching of Geshe Rabten: A Tibetan Lama's 
Search for Truth (London, 1980). 
Rahula, Walpola, History of Buddhism in Ceylon: The Anuradhapura 
Period (Colombo, 1956). 
Ray, Reginald, Buddhist Saints in India: A Study in Buddhist Values and 
Orientations (New York, 1994). 
Schopen, Gregory, 'Deaths, Funerals, and the Division of Property in 
a Monastic Code', in DonaldS. Lopez (ed.), Buddhism in Practice 
(Princeton, 1995), 473-502. 
--Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks: Collected Papers on the 
Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in India 
(Honolulu, 1997). 
, Seneviratna, Anuradha ( ed. ), King Asoka and Buddhism: Historical and 
Literary Studies (Kandy, 1994). 
Spiro, Melford E., Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and its 
Burmese Vicissitudes (Berkeley, 1982). 
Takakusu, J. (trans.), A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in 
India and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 67I-695) (Oxford, 1896).

--- PAGE 331 ---
Select Bibliography 
3II 
Tambiah, Stanley J., World Conqueror and World Renouncer (Cam-
bridge, 1976). 
--The Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets (Cam-
bridge, 1984). 
Tsai, Kathryn Ann (trans.), The Lives of the Nuns: Biographies of Chi-
nese Buddhist Nuns from the Fourth to Sixth Centuries: A Translation 
of the Pi-ch'iu-ni chuan compiled by Shih Pao-ch'ang (Honolulu, 
1994). 
Welch, Holmes, The Practice of Chinese Buddhism I900-I950 (Cam-
bridge, Mass., 1967). 
Wijayaratna, Mohan, Buddhist Monastic Life: According to the Texts of 
the Theraviida Tradition (Cambridge, 1990). 
Chapters: The Buddhist Cosmos 
Boyd, J. W., Satan and Mara: Christian and Buddhist Symbols of Evil 
(Leiden, 1975). 
Fuller, Christopher John, The Camphor Flame: Popular Hinduism and 
Society in India (Princeton, 1992). 
Gethin, Rupert, 'Meditation and Cosmology: From the Aggafifia Sutta 
to the Mahayana' History of Religions, 36 (1997), 183-219. 
Gombrich, Richard, Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the 
Rural Highlands of Ceylon (Oxford, 1971). 
--'Buddhism and Society', Modern Asian Studies, 6 ( 1972 ), 483-94. 
-- 'Ancient Indian Cosmology', in C. Blacker and M. Loewe ( eds. ), 
Ancient Cosmologies (London, 1975), no-42. 
Kirfel, W., Die Kosmographie der Inder (Bonn and Leipzig, 1920). 
Kloetzli, R., Buddhist Cosmology: From Single World System to Pure 
Land (Delhi, 1983). 
Kongtrul, Jamgon (Lodro Taye), Myriad Worlds: Buddhist Cosmology 
in Abhidharma, Kiilacakra and Dzog-chen (Ithaca, NY, 1995). 
Ling, T. 0., Buddhism and the Mythology of Evil: A Study in Theraviida 
Buddhism (London, 1962). 
Marasinghe, M. M. J., Gods in Early Buddhism: A Study in Their Social 
and Mythological Milieu as Depicted in the Nikiiyas of the Piili Canon 
(Vidyalankara, 1974). 
Masson, Joseph, La Religion populaire dans le canon bouddhique piili 
(Louvain, 1942). 
Reynolds, F. E., and Reynolds, M. B. (trans.), Three Worlds according 
to King Ruang: A Thai Buddhist Cosmology, (Berkeley, 1982).

--- PAGE 332 ---
312 
Select Bibliography 
Sadakata, Akira, Buddhist Cosmology: Philosophy and Origins (Tokyo, 
1997). 
Spiro, Melford E., Burmese Supernaturalism: A Study in the Explana-
tion and Reduction of Suffering (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1967). 
Tambiah, Stanley J., Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in North-East Thai-
land (Cambridge, 1970). 
Chapter 6: No Self 
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, 'Transcendental Dependent Arising', The Wheel, 
277/8 (Kandy, 1980). 
Collins, S., Selfless Persons: Imagery and Thought in Theraviida Bud-
dhism (Cambridge, 1982). 
Cox, Collet, 'Dependent Origination: Its Elaboration in Early 
Sarvastivadin Abhidharma Texts', in Ram Karan Sharma (ed.), 
Researches in Indian Philosophy: Essays in Honour of Professor Alex 
Wayman (Delhi, 1993), II9-4L 
Gethin, R. M. L., 'The Five Khandhas: Their Treatment in the Nikayas 
and Early Abhidhamma', Journal of Indian Philosophy, 14 (1986), 
35-53· 
Hamilton, Sue, Identity and Experience: The Constitution of the Human 
Being According to Early Buddhism (London, 1996). 
. 
Lesser, A. H., 'Eastern and Western Empiricism and the "No Self" 
Theory', Religious Studies, IS (1979), 55-64. 
Norman, K. R., 'A Note on attil in the Alagaddapama-sutta' in Collected 
Papers, ii (Oxford, 1991), zoo-g. 
Nyanatiloka, 'The Significance of Dependent Origination in Theravada 
Buddhism', The Wheel, 140 (Kandy, 1969). 
Wayman, Alex, 'The Twenty Reifying Views (sakkayaditthi)', in 
Narain A. K. (ed.), Studies in Pali and Buddhism: A Memorial Vol-
ume in Honor of Bhikkhu Jagdish Kashyap (Delhi, 1979), 375-80. 
Chapter T The BuddhistPath 
Aronson, Harvey B., Love and Sympathy in Theraviida Buddhism 
(Delhi, 1980). 
Bronkhorst, Johannes, The Two Traditions of Meditation in Ancient India 
(New Delhi, 1993). 
Buswell, Robert E., and Gimello, Robert M. ( eds. ), Paths to Liberation: 
The Marga and its Transformation in Buddhist Thought (Honolulu, 
1992).

--- PAGE 333 ---
Select Bibliography 
Cousins, L. S., 'Buddhist Jhiina: Its Nature and Attainment according 
to the Pali Sources', Religion, 3 (1973), n5-3I. 
-- 'Samatha-Yana and Vipassana-Yana', in G. Dhammapala eta!. ( eds.), 
Buddhist Studies in Honour of Hammalava Saddhiitissa (Nugegoda, 
1984), 56-68. 
-- 'Vitakka!Vitarka and Vicara: Stages ofSamadhi in Buddhism and 
Yoga', Indo-Iranian Journal, 35 (1992), 137-57. 
--'The Origins of Insight Meditation', The Buddhist Forum, 4 ( 1996), 
35-58. 
Endo, Toshiichi, Dana: The Development of its Concepts and Practice 
(Colombo, 1987). 
Gethin, Rupert, The Buddhist Path to Awakening: A Study of the 
Bodhi-Pakkhiyil Dhammil (Leiden, 1992). 
Gombrich, Richard F., 'From Monastery to Meditation Centre: Lay 
Meditation in Modern Sri Lanka', in Philip Denwood and Alexander 
Piatigorsky (eds.), Buddhist Studies Ancient and Modern (London, 
1983), 20-34· 
Gomez, Luis 0., 'The Bodhisattva as Wonder Worker', in Lewis 
Lancaster (ed.), Prajnaparamita and Related Systems: Studies in 
Honor of Edward Conze (Berkeley, 1977), 221-6r. 
Griffiths, Paul, 'Concentration or Insight: The Problematic of 
Theravada Buddhist Meditation-Theory', Journal of the American 
Academy of Religion, 49 (1981), 605-24. 
King, W. L., Theraviida Meditation: The Buddhist Transformation of Yoga 
(University Park, Pa., 1980). 
La Vallee Poussin, Louis de, 'A Summary Note on the Path', in 
Abhidharmakosabhii$yam, translated from the French by Leo M. 
Pruden (Berkeley, 1989), III, pp. xiv-xxii. 
Lati Rinbochay, et al., Meditative States in Tibetan Buddhism (London, 
1983). 
. 
Lodro, Geshe Gedtin, Walking through Walls: A Presentation of 
Tibetan Meditation (Ithaca, NY, 1992). 
Pranke, Patrick, 'On Becoming a Buddhist Wizard', in DonaJd S. Lopez 
(ed.), Buddhism in Practice (Princeton, 1995), 343-58. 
Ruegg, David Seyfort, 'Ahirp.sa and Vegetarianism in the History of 
Buddhism', in Somaratna Balasooriya eta!. (eds.), Buddhist Studies 
in Honour ofWalpola Rahula (London, 1980), 234-41. 
Skilling, Peter, 'The Rak~a Literature of the.Sravakayana', Journal of 
the Pali Text Society, 16 (1992), 109-82.

--- PAGE 334 ---
Select Bibliography 
Swearer, Donald K., 'The Way of Meditation', in DonaldS. Lopez (ed.), 
Buddhism in Practice (Princeton, 1995), 207-15. 
Vetter, Tilmann, The Ideas and Meditative Practices of Early Buddhism 
(Leiden, 1988). 
Chapter 8: The Abhidharma 
Cousins, L. S., 'The PaHhiina and the Development of the Theravadin 
Abhidhamma', Journal of the Pali Text Society, (1981), 22-46. 
--'Person and Self', in Buddhism into the Year 2000: International 
Conference Proceedings (Bangkok and Los Angeles, 1994), 15-32. 
Cox, Collett, Disputed Dharmas: Early Buddhist Theories on Existence: 
An Annotated Translation of the Section on Factors Dissociated from 
Thought from Sanghabhadra's Nyiiyiinusiira (Tokyo, 1995). 
Frauwallner, Erich, Studies in Abhidharma Literature and the Origins 
of Buddhist Philosophical Systems (Albany, NY, 1995). 
Gethin, Rupert, 'Bhavanga and Rebirth according to the Abhidhamma', 
The Buddhist Forum, 3 (1994), 11-35. 
Gorkom, Nina van, Abhidhamma in Daily Life (London, 1990). 
Govinda, Lama Anagarika, The Psychological Attitude of Early Bud-
dhist Philosophy and its Systematic Representation according to 
Abhidhamma Tradition (London, 1969). 
Guenther, Herbert V., Philosophy and Psychology in the Abhidharma 
(Berkeley, 1976). 
J aini, Padmanabh S., 'The Sautrantika Theory of Bfja', Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental Studies, 22 (1959), 237-49. 
--'The Development of the Theory of the Viprayukta-Salflskiiras', 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 22 (1959), 531-47. 
-- 'The Vaibhii1.>ika Theory of Words and Meanings', Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental and African Studies, 22 (1959), 95-107. 
-- 'Prajnii and dr$ti in the Vaibha1.>ika Abhidharma', in Lewis Lan-
caster (ed.), Prajniipiiramitii and Related Systems: Studies in Honor 
of Edward Conze (Berkeley, 1977), 403-15. 
Jayasuriya, W. F., The Psychology and Philosophy of Buddhism: An 
Introduction to the Abhidhamma (Kuala Lumpur, 1976). 
Karunadasa, Y., The Buddhist Analysis of Matter (Colombo, i:967). 
Nyanaponika Thera, Abhidhamma Studies: Researches in Buddhist 
Psychology (Kandy, 1976). 
Nyanatiloka Mahathera, Guide through the Abhidhamma Pitaka (Kandy, 
1971). 
Potter, Karl H. (ed.), Abhidharma Buddhism to I 5o A.D. (Delhi, 1996).

--- PAGE 335 ---
Select Bibliography 
315 
Rowlands, Mark (ed.), Abhidhamma Papers (Manchester, 1982). 
Takakusu, Junjiro, 'The Abhidharma Literature of the Sarvastivadins', 
Journal of the Pali Text Society, 5 (1905), 67-146. 
Wayman, Alex, 'The Intermediate-State Dispute in Buddhism', in 
L. S. Cousins et al. (eds.), Buddhist Studies in Honour of I. B. Horner 
(Dordrecht, 1974), 227-39. 
Williams, Paul, 'Buddhadeva and Temporality', Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 4 (1977), 279-94. 
--'On.the Abhidharma Ontology', Journal of Indian Philosophy, 
9 (1981), 227-57· 
Chapter g: The Mahayana 
Dayal, Har, The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 
(London, 1932). 
Gombrich, Richard F., 'How the Mahayana Began', The Buddhist 
Forum, 1 (London, 1990), 21-30. 
Griffiths, Paul J., On Being Mindless: Buddhist Meditation and the 
Mind-Body Problem (La Salle, Ill. 1986). 
-- On Being Buddha: The Classical Doctrine of Buddhahood 
(Albany, NY, 1994). 
Harrison, Paul, 'Who Gets to Ride in the Great Vehicle? Self-Image 
and Identity among the Followers of the Early Mahayana', Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 10 ( 1987), 67-89. 
--'Searching for the Origins of the Mahayana: What are we Looking 
for?', Eastern Buddhist, 28 (1995), 48-69. 
Hayes, Richard, 'Nagarjuna's Appeal', Journal of Indian Philosophy, 
22 (1994), 299-378. 
Hopkins, Jeffrey, Meditation on Emptiness (London, 1983). 
Huntington, C. W., The Emptiness of Emptiness: An Introduction to Early 
Indian Miidhyamika (Honolulu, 1989). 
Lancaster, Lewis, 'The Oldest Mahayana Sutra: Its Significance for the 
Study of Buddhist Development', Eastern Buddhist, 8 (1975), 30-,41. 
Lopez, DonaldS., 'Do Sriivakas Understand Emptiness?', Journal of 
Indian Philosophy, 16 (1988), 65-105. 
-- 'Sanctification on the Bodhisattva Path', in Richard Kieckhefer 
and George D. Bond (eds.), Sainthood: Its Manifestations in World 
Religions (Berkeley, 1988), 172-217. 
Matilal, Bimal Krishna, 'A Critique of Indian Idealism', in L. S. Cousins 
et al. (eds.), Buddhist Studies in Honour of I. B. Horner (Dordrecht, 
1974), 139-58.

--- PAGE 336 ---
Select Bibliography 
Napper, Elizabeth, Dependent-Arising and Emptiness: A Tibetan Bud-
dhist Interpretation of Miidhyamika Philosophy Emphasizing the 
Compatibility of Emptiness and Conventional Phenomena (London, 
1989). 
Pagel, Ulrich, The Bodhisattvapi[aka: Its Doctrines and their Position in 
Mahiiyiina Literature (Tring, Herts. 1995). 
Pye, Michael, Skilful Means (London, 1978). 
Ruegg, David Seyfort, La Theorie du tathiigatgarbha et du gotra: etudes 
sur Ia soteriologie et du gnoseologie du bouddhisme (Paris, 1969). 
--The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India 
(Wiesbaden, 1981). 
--Buddha-nature, Mind and the Problem of Gradualism in a Com-
parative Perspective (London, 1989). 
Schopen, Gregory, 'The Phrase "sa prthivipradesas caityabhilto bhavet" 
in the Vajracchedikii: Notes on the Cult of the Book in Mahayana', 
Indo-Iranian Journal, 17 (1975), 147-81. 
--'Mahayana in Indian Inscriptions', Indo-Iranian Journal, 21 (1979), 
1-19. 
Sponberg, Alan, and Hardacre, Helen (eds.), Maitreya: The Future 
Buddha (Cambridge, 1988). 
Streng, Frederick J., Emptiness: A Study in Religious Meaning (New York, 
1967). 
Tuck, Andrew P., Comparative Philosophy and the Philosophy of 
Scholarship: On the Western Interpretation of Niigiirjuna (Oxford, 1990 ). 
Williams, Paul M., Mahiiyiina Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations 
(London, 1989). 
Chapter IO: Evolving Traditions 
Almond, P., The British Discovery of Buddhism (Cambridge, 1988). 
Batchelor, Stephen, The Awakening of the West: The Encounter ·of 
Buddhism and Western Culture (London, 1994). 
Baumann, Martin, 'The Dharma has Come West: A Survey of Re-
cent Studies and Sources', Journal of Buddhist Ethics, 4 (1997), 
194-211. Electronic journal: http://www.gold.ac.uk (UK address); 
http://jbe.la.psu.edu (USA address). 
Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism (New York, 
1971). 
Chang, Garma C. C., The Buddhist Teaching of Totality: The Philo-
sophy of Hwa-yen Buddhism (London, 1972).

--- PAGE 337 ---
Select Bibliography 
Ch'en, Kenneth, 'The Tibetan Tripitaka', Harvard Journal of Asian 
Studies, 9 (1945-7), 53-62. 
-- Buddism in China: A Historical Survey (Princeton, 1964). 
Cook, Francis H., Hua-yen Buddhism: The Jewel Net of Indra (Uni-
versity Park, Pa., 1977). 
Cousins, L. S., 'Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism', in Peter 
Connolly and Sue Hamilton (eds.), Indian Insights: Buddhism, 
Brahmanism and Bhakti (London, 1997), 185-207. 
De Silva, Lynn, Buddhism: Beliefs and Practices in Sri Lanka (Colombo, 
1980). 
. 
Dumoulin, Heinrich, A History of Zen Buddhism (London, 1963). 
Gombrich, Richard F., and Obeyesekere, Gananath, Buddhism Trans-
formed: Religious Change in Sri Lanka (Princeton, 1988). 
Hakeda, Yoshito S., Kukai: Major Works: Translated with an Account 
of his Life and a Study of his Thought (New York, 1972). 
Hurvitz, Leon, 'Chin-i (538-597): An Introduction to the Life and Ideas 
of a Chinese Buddhist Monk', Melanges Chinois et Bouddhiques, 
12 (1963), 1-372. 
de Jong, J. W., A Brief History of Buddhist Studies in Europe and 
America (Varanasi, 1976). 
Lancaster, Lewis R. (ed.), Introduction of Buddhism to Korea: New 
Cultural Perspectives (Berkeley, 1989). 
-- (ed.), Assimilation of Buddhism in Korea: Religious Maturity and 
Innovation in the Silla Dynasty (Berkely, 1991). 
Ling, Trevor 0., Buddhist Revival in India: -Aspects of the Sociology of 
Buddhism (London, 1980). 
Lopez, DonaldS., Curators of the Buddha: The Study of Buddhism under 
Colonialism (Chicago, 1995). 
Matsunaga, Daigan, and Matsunaga, Ali<iia, Foundation of Japanese 
Buddhism, 2 vols. (Tokyo, 1974-6). 
Mellor, Philip A., 'Protestant Buddhism? The Cultural Translation of 
Buddhism in England', Religion, 21 (1991), 73-92. 
Nanjio, Bunyiu, A Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka: The Sacred Canon of the Buddhists in China and Japan 
(Oxford, 1883). 
Nattier, Jan, Once Upon a Future Time: Studies in a Buddhist Prophecy 
of Decline (Berkeley, 1991). 
Powers, John, Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism (Ithaca, NY, 1995). 
Samuel, Geoffrey, Civilized Shamans: Buddhism in Tibetan Societies 
(Washington, DC, 1993).

--- PAGE 338 ---
318 
Select Bibliography 
Snellgrove, David L., Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and their 
Tibetan Successors (London, 1987). 
Swanson, Paul L., Foundations of T'ien T' ai Philosophy: The Flowering 
of the Two Truths Theory in Chinese Buddhism (Berkeley, 1989). 
Tucci, Giuseppe, The Religions of Tibet (London, I 980). 
Welch, Holmes, The Buddhist Revival in China (Cambridge, Mass., 1968). 
--Buddhism under Mao (Cambridge, Mass., 1972).

--- PAGE 339 ---
Glossary of Technical Terms and Names 
Abhidharma/Abhidhamma 'higher teaching'; one of the three main divi-
sions of the ancient Buddhist canon 
Abhidharmika/Abhidhammika a specialist in Abhidharma 
Agama a division of the Siitra Pitaka section of the ancient Buddhist 
canon(= Nikaya) 
aggregate (skandha/khandha) the five aggregates (physical form, feel-
ing, recognition, other mental forces, consciousness) that together con-
stitute a living being 
akusala/akusala bad, unskilful, unwholesome 
Ananda one of the Buddha's principal disciples; his attendant 
anatman/anatta 'not self'; the Buddhist depial of a permanent and sub-
stantial self 
arhat/arahat an awakened Buddhist saint; cf. srtivaka 
Asanga c-4th-century CE Indian Buddhist thinker associated with the 
Yogacara school of thought 
Asoka/Asoka Indian emperor who reigned c.268-232 BCE and was a 
patron of Buddhism 
iitman/atta 'self' 
afthakathii a primary Pali commentary to a text of the Buddhist canon 
Bhagavat 'the Blessed One', 'the Lord'; an epithet of the Buddha 
bhii~ya an exegetical commentary 
bhiivana '(mentaVspiritual) development'; Buddhist meditation 
bhik~u/bhikkhu a Buddhist monk 
bhik~u~i/bhikkhuni a Buddhist nun 
bodhisattva/bodhisatta one on the path to Buddhahood 
Brahmii a class of high gods 
Buddhaghosa sth-century CE compiler and author of Pali commentarial 
and exegetical works associated with the Theravada school 
dependent arising (pratityasamutpiida/paficcasamuppiida) the Bud-
dhist doctrine of causality 
deva a god 
Dharma/Dhamma the underlying law of reality; the teaching of the 
Buddha 
· 
dharmas/dhammas the mental and physical phenomena, or the teach-
ings, that constitute Dharma

--- PAGE 340 ---
320 
Glossary 
dhyana/jhiina a meditation attainment 
d~kha/dukkha 'pain'; the unease or unsatisfach.>riness which charac-
terizes existence 
karma/kamma good and bad actions of body, speech, and mind whose 
pleasant and unpleasant results are experienced in this and subsequent 
lives 
kusala/kusala good, skilful, wholesome 
Madhyamaka 'the middle'; alongside Yogacara, one of the two prin-
cipal schools of Mahayana Buddhist thought 
Madhyamika a follower of Madhyamaka ( q.v.) 
Mahasiilpghika 'a follower of the great community', an ancient Bud-
dhist school 
Mahayana 'great vehicle'; a broad school of Buddhism 
Mantrayana 'the secret spell vehicle', commonly referred to as Tantric 
Buddhism 
Mara the tempter figure in Buddhist mythology 
Maudgalyayana/Moggallana the disciple of the Buddha regarded as chief 
in meditational powers 
Nagarjuna c.2nd-century CE Buddhist thinker associated with the 
Madhyamaka school of thought 
never-returner (sakrd-/sakad-iigiimin) one who has attained the third 
of the four noble paths culminating in arhatship 
Nikaya a division of the Siltra Pitaka section of the ancient Buddhist 
canon ( = Agama) 
nirval}.a/nibbana the 'blowing out' of the fires of greed, hatred, and delu-
sion; the ultimate goal of Buddhist practice; the unconditioned 
once returner (aniigiimin) one who has attained the second of the four 
noble paths culminating in arhatship 
parinirval}.a/parinibbana the final death of a buddha or arhat; or 
another term for nirval).a (q.v.) 
prajiia/paiiiia 'wisdom', 'understanding' (Buddhist meditation), cf. 
Samatha 
Prajiiaparamita 'perfection of wisdom'; a class of Mahayana Buddhist 
liteniture 
pratimok~a/patimokkha the Buddhist monastic rule contained in the 
Vinaya 
pratyeka-buddha/pacceka-buddha a solitary buddha (as distinct from 
a samyak-sambuddha) 
Pudgalavadin a follower of the Pudgalavada or 'teaching that the per-
son exists'; an ancient Buddhist school

--- PAGE 341 ---
Glossary 
puJ.Iya/puiiiia 'merit'; auspicious and fortunate karma 
samadhi 'concentration', cf. dhyiina 
321 
samatha/samatha 'calm' (one of two main types of Buddhist medita-
tion); cf. vipasyana 
sa~psara the round of rebirth 
samyak-sambuddha/sammii-sambuddha a perfectly awakened one as 
distinct from a sriivaka or pratyeka-buddha 
Sangha the Buddhist monastic order of monks and nuns 
Sariputra/Sariputta the disciple of the Buddha regarded as chief jn 
wisdom 
Sarvastivadin a follower of the Sarvastivada or 'teaching that all exists'; 
a Buddhist school 
sastra a commentarial or exegetical manual as distinct from the 'word 
of the Buddha' contained in the si1tras 
Sautrantika 'a follower of the Siitras'; a school of thought which denied 
the authority of the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma 
sila/sila ethics, good conduct 
sravaka/savaka 'hearer'; a disciple of the Buddha as distinct from one 
following the bodhisattva path to full buddhahood of the samyak-
sambuddha 
stream-attainer (srotiipanna/sotiipanna) one who has attained the 
first of the four noble paths culminating in arhatship 
siinyata/suiiiiata 'emptiness'; a Buddhist spiritual term used to charac-
terize the ultimate nature of things 
siitra/sutta a discourse attributed to the Buddha; one of the three main 
divisions of the ancient Buddhist canon 
tantra a class of esoteric ritual and meditational Buddhist texts used in 
Vajrayana/Mantrayana Buddhism 
Tathiigata 'the thus gone/come'; an epithet of the Buddha 
Theravadin a follower of the Theravada or 'teaching of the elders'; a 
Buddhist school 
fika a subcommentary 
Tripifaka/Tipifaka 'three baskets' (= the three basic divisions of the 
ancient Buddhist canon) 
Tu~ita/Tusita the heaven ·of 'the Contented' where the bodhisattva 
awaits the appropriate time to take birth as a human being before 
finally becoming a buddha 
Upani~ads a set of sacred brahmanical texts included in the Veda 
upasaka male lay follower 
upasikii female lay follower

--- PAGE 342 ---
322 
Glossary 
Vaibhii~ika a follower of the teaching of the Mahiivibhii:;ii, a comment-
ary on the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma 
Vajrayiina 'the diamond/thunderbolt vehicle', commonly referred to as 
tantric Buddhism 
Vasubandhu (the Elder) c-4th-century CE Indian Buddhist thinker 
. associated with theY ogacara school of thought; by tradition the same 
as Vasubandhu the Younger 
Vasubandhu (the Younger) c.sth-century CE Indian Buddhist thinker, 
author of the Abhidharmakosa, a compendium of Vaibha~?ika/ 
Sautrantika thought; by tradition the same as Vasubandhu the Elder 
Veda the corpus of sacred brahmanical texts 
vijiiapti-miitra the idealist doctrine of 'ideas only' 
Vinaya '(monastic) discipline'; one of the three main divisions of the 
ancient Buddhist canon 
vipasyanii/vipassana 'insight' (one of two main types of Buddhist 
meditation); cf. samatha 
Yogiiciira 'yoga practice'; alongside Madliyamaka, one of the two 
principal schools of Mahayana Buddhist thought; also known as 
citta-miitra/vijiiapti-miitra

--- PAGE 343 ---
Index 
Abhayagiri Vihiira 97, 254, 255 
Abhidhammattha-smigaha 205 
Abhidhammiivatiira 205 
Abhidharma 3, 6, 40, 47-9, 50, 52, 
53, 54, s6, 57, II2, IIS, I35, I86, 
202-3 passim, 245, 246, 249, 250, 
268; and cosmology us, 121-3; 
on dependent arising I54-5; on 
nirvaQ.a 77-8; and Prajnaparamita/ 
~adhyamaka 235-9,24I,243 
Abhidharma Pitaka 47, 48, 49, 53, 
254 
Abhidharma-dipa 206 
Abhidharma-hrdaya 206 
Abhidharmiimrta-rasa 206 
Abhidharma-kosa 55-6, 57, I49, I65, 
'I77, I95, 206, 260 
Abhidharma-samaya-pradlpika 206 
Abhidharma-samuccaya 207 
abhijftii (abhiftftii) I85-6 
aeon, length of II3 
Afghanistan I, 8 
Agamas 43-5, 48, 55, 57, 58, 259; 
see also Nikayas 
aggregates, five 3I-2, 59, 76, 78, I38, 
I39, I40, I46, I48, I89, I96, 2I7, 
2I8,229,235;defined I35-6;as 
impermanent, suffering, and not 
self I37; as momentary I55 
Ajivikas II, Io8 
Akani~tha 23I 
Ak~obhya 233 
Alagaddapama Sutta 148 
iilaya-vijftiina 22, 246 
Alexander the Great 273 
Alexandria 273 
alms round ro7, I09 
alobha So 
Altan Khan 272 
Amida, see Amitabha 
Amitabha 233, 263-4 
Amitiiyur-dhyiina Satra 226, 263-4 
Amoghavajra 26I 
Ananda 25,26,90, I6I 
Ananda ~etteyya 274 
Aniipiina-smrti Sutra 258 
aniitman/anattii, see no self 
Anawratha, King 256 
Angkor 256 
Ailguttara Nikaya 44 
animal realm I7, 29, uS, I2I, I22 
annihilationism, see views 
Anotatta, lake 203 
antarii-bhava 2I7 
anukampii 64; see also compassion 
anupubbi-kathii 83, I64-5 
An Shih-kao 258 
Anuradhapura 55, 97, 99, 253, 254, 
255 
Anuruddha 205 
apramii!Jas/appamaftftas, four 186 
AraQa/Alara Kalama 2I 
AraQ.yaka ('forest' books) I2 
Arafiiiika ('forest' monks) 98-roo, 
!03, ros, !07, 20I 
arhat/arahat 7, 9, 32-3,40,46, SI, 92, 
I02, I94, I95, 198, 2I9, 244; after 
death 66, 75, 78, 234; distinguished 
from buddha 26, 224, 227-8; 
female 91 
arrow, story of man struck by 66-7 
arupa-dhiitu II8 
ariipa meditation I77, I85 
arya, ·as opposed to ordinary person 
I64, I93; silence of 79 
iirya-pudgala/ariya-puggala I02 
Aryadeva 260 
Aryas, invasion of II-I2 
A~adha (Asalha) 19 
asaf!lskrta-/asmJ1.khata-dhiitu 77, 210 
Asailga 3I, 44, 57, I8I-2, 188, I94, 
207,244,245,252,258 
asceticism IO; see also dhuta-gu!Ja 
ascetics 10, IS, 20

--- PAGE 344 ---
324 
Index 
asmi-mtina I47, I62 
Asoka I4, I9, 42, 52, 53, !00-I, zs6; 
schism edict of 54 
Asoktivadtina IOI 
tisraya-paravrtti 247 
assemblies (pr~at), four 85, 86, 107 
A${Siihasrikti Prajiitiptiramitti 226, 
234, 258 
asubha-bhtivanti I77 
Asuras, realm of uS, I22, I27 
Asvagho~a I7 
Asvajit/Assaji I4I 
Attinti{iya Sutta I68 
Atisa z66-7, 270 
atman, see self 
atthakathti 54; see also commentaries 
Atthastilin'i II 5 
Augustine 69 
Aukana 276 
Australia 275 
A valokitesvara 233 
Avataf!lsaka Satra zz6, 265, 267 
avidytilavijjti, see ignorance 
avyakrta/avytikata 66-8, 77 
awakening IS, 24, I24, 227, 228; 
fourth dhytina and I25; gradual! 
sudden 262, z66; nirvaQ.a and 
75-7, I92; seven limbs of I92; 
thirty-seven conditions that 
contribute to I92, I97 
tiyatana, twelve I40, 229 
Ayudhya 256 
Bar-do Thos-grol 2I7 
Bareau, A. I6, 51,54 
Benares 2I, 25, 245 
Bennett, A. 274 
Bhai~jya Guru 233 
bhti$ya 54 
bhtivanti 83, I02, I2I, I74, I79; 
-mtirga I94, 197-8; wisdom arising 
from 36; see also meditation 
Bhtivantikrama I65, 229 
bhavanga 2I3,2I5-I6,zzz,zz3 
Bhavaviveka 240 
bhik$ulbhikkhu, see monk 
Bible 41 
Bihar IS 
Bizot, F. 257 
bKa' gdams-pa 267, 270, 27I 
bKa' brgyud 270 
Blavatsky, H. P. 274 
BLo bzang-rgya-mtsho 272 
bodhi, see awakening 
bodhi-citta 229, 230 
Bodhidharma z6I, 262 
Bodhi-patha-prad'ipa 267 
Bodhi Tree IS, 22, 30, 36, 97, I04, 
IIO, I68, 202 
bodhisattva 3, 92; career of 17-23, 
IoS-9; fifty-eight vows of 88; path 
of I95,224,226-3I,242;ten 
bhumis of ISS, 230-I, 268 
Bodhisattva-pi{aka 225 
brahma 30; -vihtiras, four I86-7 
Brahma 47, 9I, I25; Great II3-I4, 
IIS, II9; realms of nS-24 passim, 
176; Sahampati 24-5 
brahmacariya 36, 94 
Brahmajtila Sutra, Chinese 88 
Brahmajtila Sutta I48 
brahman I34 
brahmanical tradition 9, II-I3, 20, 
29,4I, I27, I69 
brahmi script 7 
'Brom-ston 266 
Brorikhorst, J. zoo, 2I4 
bSam-yas 266 
bSod-nams-rgya-mtsho 272 
Buddha 3, 7-8, IS, 27-9, 32-4, 2I9; 
after death 66, 75-8; becoming in 
Akani~tha 23I; bodies of 30-2, 
232-3; compared to arhat 26, 224, 
227-8; date of 14, 19; god or man 
29, 33; his life threatened I68; 
historical I3-I6, 32; images of 
23,24,97, I04, IIO, I68;legend 
of I6-27; as physician 63-4; 
recollection of I04, I77, 234, 263; 
sources for life of I6-17; pratyeka-
lsrtivaka-/samyaksam- 32-3, 228, 
243; as teacher 32-4, 47; twelve 
acts of 17; transcendent 23I-4; 
woman cannot be 9I; word of 39, 
44,46-8,54,203,22I,224;and 
views 240, 243 
Buddhacarita I7 
Buddhadatta 205, 254

--- PAGE 345 ---
Index 
325 
Buddhadeva 220 
buddha-fields (-k$etra) 232, 264 
Buddhaghosa 55, II4, I24, I49, ISO, 
ISI, I56, I65, I77, I79, ISI, ISS, 
I90, I94, 196,204,254 
buddha-nature 125, 222, 252, 262 
Buddhapalita 240 
Buddhism, common heritage of 3, 4, 
44, sS; conceptions of 163, 166-7; 
definition of 2-3; mainstream s; 
nibbanic, kammatic, and apotropaic 
no-n; Protestant 255; and 
religion 64-5; schools of 4I, 4S, 
49-56; southern, eastern, and 
northern traditions of I -2, 40; and 
the West 255, 266, 273-5 
Buddhist, definition of 107-S 
Buddhist texts, oral transmission of 
37, 49; canons of 40-2, 46; 
Chinese/Tibetan translations of 4I, 
43,44,45,49,56,205,225,254, 
25S-9,26S 
Burma I, 5S, IIO-II, 12S, 256, 274 
Burnouf, E. 274 
cakra-viilja!cakka-vii!a n4-19, I23, 
132 
cakra-vartin/cakka-vattin 20, 26 
Cambodia I, 24, sS, 106, 256, 257 
Candragupta 273 
Candrakfrti 240, 243 
Carter, J. R. 69 
caste I3 
causality, Buddhist theory of 140-4; 
and single cause 153; see also 
dependent arising 
celibacy so, S9; see also sex 
cetasika 210-I3 
Ch'an 3S, 107, 165, 201, 259, 260, 
26I-3; see also Zen 
Channa 2I 
Chen Yen (Shingon) I65, 260, 
261 
Ch'eng-wei-shih tun 207, 244-5 
Chih-i r65, 264-5 
China I, 40, 57, sS, Io6, us, I65, 
ISS, 206, 273, 276; Buddhist 
pilgrims from 54, s6, 97, 223; 
see also East Asian Buddhism 
Chinul 260 
chos skyong (Dharma protectors) 
129 
Christianity 23, 2S, 33, 42, 46, 65, 
68-9, 253, 255 
Chii-she/Kusha school 206, 260 
citta 57-S, 2IO-I3; see also 
consciousness 
Collins, S. 96, 136, I47 
commentaries 47,54-5 
Communism 2, 257 
compassion 64, IS7, 22S, 230, 234, 
269,276 
conceit I47, I62 
Confucianism I, 257 
consciousness 57, I2I-2, I36, ISO, 
2IO-I3, 215-16; altered states of 
10; Y ogacarin understanding of 
24S-6,24S-9 
Conze, E. 65, I67, 234 
cosmology, Buddhist 3, 6; 
expansion/contraction of cosmos 
123-5; and folk religion 127-31; 
Judaeo-Christian 131-2; and 
psychology n9-23, I26-7; and 
science 132 
councils, Buddhist, see sarp.giti 
Cousins, L. S. 200 
craving (tmta!taJJhii) 69-71, 73, So, 
150, 235, 237; and self I46; see also 
greed 
creeds 65 
Csoma de Koros, A. 274 
Cufa-Miilu!Jkya Sutta 66-7 
Cultural Revolution 257 
Dalai Lama 270, 272, 274 
dana, see generosity 
darsana-miirga I94, 195, 197 
Dasabhumika Satra 225, 226 
David-Nee!, A. 274 
defilements (klesalkilesa) 175, 
243; extinguishing of 76; ten 
defilements of insight 190-I; three 
fundamental (greed, hatred, 
delusion) 29, 32, 74, 75, 77, So, S9, 
93, 213, 25I; traces of (klesa-
viisana) 243; see also craving, 
ignorance

--- PAGE 346 ---
Index 
dependent arising (prautya-
samutpiida/pa(icca-samuppiida) 3, 
6,22-3,74, I26, I4I-2, IS9,2I7, 
25I; as middle way I45, ISS, IS6, 
23S;momentary I54-5;overthree 
lives ISO-I; transcendent IS7-S 
Derrida, J. 244 
Desideri, I. 274 
Devadatta 26 
devotional practice 65, I04, I67-9, 
I79 
dGe-lugs 270, 271-2 
Dhammapala I25, 254 
dhammatii, thirty features of in a 
buddha's life I7 
Dhammayuttika reform 256 
Dharma 24, 30, 34-40, 46, 47, 69, S6, 
I6S; as scripture, practice and 
realization 3S-9; turning the wheel 
of 25, 34; three turnings of 245 
Dharmaguptakas 54; Vinaya of S6, 
S9,26o 
dharma-kiiya 30,3I,232-3 
dharma-nairiitmya 243 \. 
Dharmapala 244 
dharmas (phenomena) 30, 3I, I4I, 
I6I,204,209-I2, 220-2,234-7, 
23S,242,243,244,245,2SO; 
contemplation of rise and fall 'of 
I90, 19I; similes for I90, 210, 237 
DharmasrT 206 
dhiitus, eighteen I40, 229 
dhuta-gwJa/dhutmiga 9S 
dhyiina/jhiina Io,22, I2I, I23, I24-5, 
I76-7, I9o, I95, I97, I9S, I99-2oi, 
2I3, 230, 26I; the fourth 125, ISS, 
I94; limbs of ISO-I, IS5; stages of 
IS4-5; transcendent I92-3; 
see also meditation, samiidhi 
Digha Nikaya 43 
Diparpk.ara IS, 227 
DTpaVar(ISa I4, IOO 
Dodanduwa 274 
Dogen 252, 263 
Dol-po-pa She-rab rGyal-mtshan 
273 
doubt 73 
Drepung ('Bras-spungs) 272 
drugs I7I 
du~kha/dukkha 27,2S,s9-64,7I,73, 
II2, I22, I26, I33, 137, IS7, 240, 
249, 250; according to Abhidharma 
213-I5; Bodhisattva's experience 
of 2 I; its cessation 7 4; its origin 
6S-7o, 73, 74; three kinds of 6I-2; 
the way leading to its cessation 
79-S4; see also four noble truths 
DutthagaminT IOI 
East Asian Buddhism I, 44, S6, SS, 
S9,-9I, I07, wS, 222, 226, 233, 252, 
257-66, 274-5; schools of 259-6I; 
see also China, Japan, Korea 
eightfold path SI-3, IOI, I64, I65-92 
E!ara IOI 
Eliot, T. S. 274 
Emerson, R. W. 274 
emptiness (silnyatii/suiiiiatii) I92, 
226,236,237,23S-43,245,247, 
272-3 
enlightenment, see awakening 
esoteric Buddhism I65, 257, 26S 
eternalism, see views 
ethics I02, I69-74; see also karma, 
precepts, srla 
Fa-hsiang-tsung 260 
Fa-hsien 97, 254 
faith (sraddhii/saddhii) no, I66-9, 
I79 
Fan-Wang-Ching SS 
fetters (sar(lyojana ), ten 72-3, I93-4 
four noble truths 22, 59-60, I93, 2SI; 
seen in one or sixteen moments 
I97 
Frauwallner, E: 200, 206 
friendliness, see maitrf 
Gam-po-pa (sGam-po-pa) I65, 270 
Gm:u)avyilha Satra 226 
Ganden 272 
grandharva/gandhabba I27, I30, I3I 
gantha-dhura 3S, 104-5 
garut;la I27 
garu-dhamma, eight 90-I 
Gautama/Gotama 14, IS, 27, 29, 
32-3, 224, 227, 233' 
Gelug (dGelugs) school 20I, 27I-2

--- PAGE 347 ---
Index 
generosity (dana) 30, 83, 84, 88, I02, 
Io8-1o, I2I,230,25I 
Gho~aka 206 
gLang-dar-ma 266 
gods(deva) I7-I8,23,27,29,33,47, 
II3, II4, I23, I29, I30-I; in Tantra 
269 
God 28,64,65,68-9, II4, I32, I66, 
I89 
. 
Gombrich, R. F. I4, 45, 106, 200 
Gudmunsen, C. 244 
dueth, A. 274 
Guhya-samaja Tantra 272 
Great Man (mahiipur~a/ 
mahiipurisa), marks of 20, 126, 232 
greed 29,74,75,77,80,89,93; 
Abhidharma understanding of 
2IO-II, 2I3; subtle forms of 
249-50,25I 
Griffiths, P. J. 200, 248 
Han dynasty 257 
Harivarman 206 
hatred 29,73-4,75,77,80,89,93,2I3 
Hayes, R. P. 244 
Heart Siitra 234-5 
hells 27, 28, uS, I22 
Hevajra Tantra 27I 
Himalaya II8, 19I 
hinayana I,224,229 
hindrances (nlvara!Ja ), five 175-6, 
ISO-I 
Hinduism 65, I28, 256 
Hong Kong 258 
Hsiu-hsi chi-kuan tso-ch'an fa-yao 
I65 
Hsiian-tsang 57, 97, 206, 207, 223, 
244, 260 
Hua-yen 259, 264, 265, 272 
Hui-neng 26I-2 
Hui-yiian 26I 
human beings, realm of I7, 27, 28, 
29, I22-3,2I6 
hungry ghosts (preta/peta) uS, I2I, 
I22 
Huntington, C. W. 244 
ignorance (avidya/avijja) 73-4, I50; 
and self; see also defilements 
Iliad 37 
impermanence 61, I87 
India I, 2, 7-8, II, I8-I9, 42, 49, 58, 
276; European knowledge of 273; 
monasticism in 96-7; writing in 37 
Indra I27; see also Sakra/Sakka 
intoxicants 87, 170, I7I 
Iran I, II 
Ireneus 69 
Islam 23, 28, 4I, 65, 68 
I-tsing 97 
Jainism 9, IO, II, 96, 108, I27, 133 
Jambudvipa/Jambudipa I8-I9, uS 
Japan I,8,56,86, IOI, ro6, I07, I65, 
· 
257-66 passim, 275; see also East 
Asian Buddhism 
Jataka 17, IS, 63, ro8 · 
Java I 
Jetavana 254 
Jewels, three 24, r67, r68 
JOdo Shinshu 264 
Jones, W. 274 
joy (plti) five kinds of I8I, I83-4 
Judaism 23, 28, 33, 4I, 65, 68 
· 
Kiilacakra Tantra 272 
Kalama Sutta 167 
kalyii1Ja-mitra 179 
Kamalasila I65, 266 
kami 129 
kammatthiina I77 
Kandyan kingdom 254 
Kanjur 40, 4I, 43, 45, 267-8 
Kant, I. 244 
Kapilavastu/Kapilavatthu 14, 27 
kappiya-kiiraka 98 
karma 3, IOI, II9, 124, I29, 213, 
215-17, 219, 222; ten karma-patha 
I20-I, I?I-3 
Karma-pa 270 
karu!Jii, see compassion 
kasi!Ja, ten ·177 
Kassapa (Buddha) 203 
Kasyapiyas 54 
Kathavatthu 53, 205 
KausambiiKosambi 26 
Kevaddha Sutta II3-I4, 133 
khandha, see aggregates

--- PAGE 348 ---
Index 
Khemaka 162 
Khmer kingdom 256 
Khmer Rouge 257 
'Khon dKon-mchog rGyal-po 271 
'Khon family 271 
Khri Srong-lde-brtsan 266 
Khuddaka Nikaya 44, 254 
killing so, 71, 89, 102, 170, 173 
King, W. L. 200 
Kirti Sri Rajaslip.ha 255 
knowledge 32, 36; non-conceptual 
247; obstacle to 243; three 
knowledges 22; see also wisdom 
Korea I, 40, sS, 86, 257, 258, 260, 
276; see also East Asian Buddhism 
koan 262 
Kiikai 261 
Kumarajiva 260 
Kun-dga'-snying-po 266 
kuiala/kusala, see wholesome 
qualities 
La Vallee Poussin, L. de 274 
Lalitavistara 17 
Lamotte, E. rs, 44, 274 
lam rim 268 
Lam rim chen mo 165, 271 
Lmikavattira Sutra 226, 244, 252 
Laos r, 58 
lay community 39, 45, 47, 85, roo, 
107-IO; relationship with Sangha 
92-3, 101-3; see also uptisaka 
Lhasa 26, 274 
Lingwood, D. 275 
Lokak~ema 255, 258 
Lokanuvartana Siitra 227-8 
Lotus Sutra 226, 228, 233, 264-5, 265 
loving kindness, see maitrf 
Lo-yang 258 
Lumbini 19 
Lii-tsung (Vinaya School) 260 
~adhyamaka 3,57,78,20I,237-44, 
245,250,259,260,268,271,272~3, 
274; prasangikalsvtitantrika 240 
Madhyamaka-kiirika 57, 238-40, 242 
Madhyanta-vibhtiga 244 
~ahi'ideva, five points of 51, 54 
~ahi'imaya 19 
~ahi'imudra 270 
~ahanikaya 257 
~ahanama 254 
mahiipadesa, four 46-7 
Mahtiparinibbtina Sutta 26 
Mahtiparinirvtirw Sutra 226, 252, 267 
~ahiisa~p.ghikas 51-2, 54, 225 
~ahavairocana 260 
MahtiVa/'flSa IOI 
Mahavastu 17, 226 
Mahavedalla Sutta 47 
~ahavihara 55,99,253,254,255 
~ahayana r,2,3,4-5,3I,33,44,78, 
125, r88, 201, 207, 224-52 passim, 
250,254,255,258;defined 224; 
origins of 225; Siitras 44, 56-8, 
224-6,234,251,263,267 
Mahtiytina-sa!Jlgraha 244 
~ahinda 42, 254 
~ahisasakas 54 
~aitreya 233, 244, 252, 263 
maitrT/mettti 26, 29,75-80, 94, ro8, 
r86-7,251 
~ajjhima Nikaya 43 
~alunkyaputta 66, 68, u2 
mm:u;lala 26 r 
~afijusri 233, 271 
~antryayana 259, 260-1, 268; 
see also tantra, Vajrayana 
mappi5 264, 265 
~ara 23-4,91, 114,2I9,25I 
~arco Polo 273 
margalmagga, see path 
~ar-pa 270 
matrkttlmatikti 40 
~audgalyayana/~oggallana 25 
meditation 3, 6, 10; calm (samatha/ 
samatha) 104, uo, III, I2I, 
I74-87,230,235,245,249,275; 
defined 174, I79; insight (vipsyantil 
vipassanti) I2I, I87-98, 230, 235, 
249, 275; and magical powers III, 
185-6, 268; nine stages of calm 
I82; relationship of calm and 
insight I74-5, I98-2oi; Sangha 
and 103-4; ten defilements of 
insight I90-I 
~egasthenes 273 
~egha (Bodhisattva) r8, 226-8

--- PAGE 349 ---
Index 
Meiji 107 
Menander I39 
merit (pwJyalpunna) IOI-4, II9, 
I69; transference of 104, 109-IO 
Meru, Mt. II8, I32 
Middle Indo-Aryan xvii, 7, 4I, 42, 
43,45 
Milarepa (Mi-la Ras-pa) 270 
Milindapanha I39, I69-70 
Milinda I44 
mindfulness (smrtilsati) I7I; of 
breathing I77, 258; four 
establishings of I92, I95-6, I97 
Ming dynasty 269 
miracle of the pairs 25, 202-3 
Moggaliputtatissa 53 
Mo-ho chih-kuan I65 
momentariness 22I 
monasteries 97-8, 106, IIO 
Mongol Khan 10I 
Mongolia I, 2, 40, 58, 273 
Mongols 272 
Mon kingdom 256 
monks 85-I I I passim; forest/village 
dwelling 98-IOO, 103, I05, 10'], 
2oi; ordination of 37, 45, 49-50, 
87-9; refuse-rag wearers 98-9; 
requisites of 88; western 10, 25, 
39,47,50,53, I68,238,274,276 
muditii I87 
Mulasarvastivadin Vinaya 86, 89, 
223 
Muller, F. M. 274 
Mun,Acharn 92,234 
Naga (serpent) 24, I27, I30, I31 
Nagarjuna 44, 57, 237-44, 260 
Nagasena I39, I44 
Nairafijana/Nerafijana I5 
Nalanda 244 
Nandabala 22 
Nanjio, Bunyiu 259 
Naropa 270 
nats 128 
nembutsu 264 
Nepal I, 7, I4, 276 
never-returners (anagamin) 92, 102, 
I94, I97 
neyiirtha/neyyattha 207 
New Zealand 275 
Nichiren 260, 265-6, 275 
Nidiinakathii I7 
Niddesa 47 
nihilism, Buddhist denial of I40, I44, 
I6o 
Nikayas 42, 47, 48, 57, 58, 207, 254, 
259,267 
nimitta (in meditation) I8I-3 
nirmii!Ja-kiiya 232-3, 270 
nirvaJ.la/nibbana 24,74-9,95, III, 
II4, 126, I92, 199, 210, 230, 239; 
aprati:fthita 232; craving for So; 
see also parinirvaJ.la 
nirvedha-bhiiglya, four I88, I96-7 
nisrayalnissaya, four 88 
nltiirtha/nltattha 207 
no self (aniitmanlanattii) 3, 6, 243; 
arguments for I36-9; and 
dependent arising 14I-2; and 
insight meditation I87; problems 
with 140; and rebirth I43-4; and 
selfishness/selflessness I47; as 
taught by the Buddha I59-62; 
see also self 
Norman, K. R. 53, I48 
nuns 37,39,46,47,50,84,85,86,87, 
90-I, I68 
Nyanatiloka 274 
Nyiiyiinusiira 206 
Nying-ma (rNying-ma) 20I, 270 
Odyssey 37 
Old Indo-Aryan xvii, II 
OlCott, H. S. 274 
Oldenberg, H. 274 
once returner (sakrd-/sakad-
iigiimamin) 92, I02, I94, I97 
Padmasambhava 266 
Pai-change, code of 107 
Pali I, 4I 
Pali Canon 40, 4I-2, 43, 45, 49, 55, 
253, 254 
Pali commentaries 38 
Parpsukfilikas 98-9 
papa II9 
piiriijika, four 89 
Parakrama Bahu I 255

--- PAGE 350 ---
330 
Index 
Paramartha 206, 244, 260 
parinirva1,1a/parinnibbana 26, 75, 76, 
23I, 263; of relics 234; see also 
nirvaQ.a 
par~at/paristi, four 85-6 
paritta chanting I03, III, I68-9 
Pataliputra (Patna) I2, 53, 54, 273 
path 25, 27-8, 34, 64, 74, 79-84, 
I63-20I passim; bodhisattva's I95, 
224, 226-3I, 242; five paths I88, 
I94-8, 230; gradual 83-4, I65, I98, 
268; ordinary/transcendent I88, 
I95; path moment I92; see also 
eightfold path, meditation 
Pa!!htina 202,208 
Peking'267 
Peppe, w.c. 7,27 
perfections (ptiramittilptiraml) 18, 
32,227,230 
Perfection of Wisdom 
(Prajnaparamita) 225-6, 234-7, 
240-I,242,243,267 
phiis (spirits) I28 
pilgrimage IIO, I68 
Piprahwa 7 
Pol Pot 257 
Polunnaruva 254, 255 
po~adhaluposatha 90, IIo; hall 97 
prajiiti/paiiiiti, see wisdom 
Prakrit 7, 4I 
prapaiica 235 · 
prtipti 220-I 
pratibimba I82 
prtitimok~a/ptitimokkha 45, 50, 86, 
88-90, J70 
pratisandhilpa{isandhi I44 
pratyeka-/pacceka-buddha 32-3, 228, 
243 
Pratyutpanna-buddha-
sammukhtivasthita-samtidhi SiUra 
226,258 
precepts 7I, 73, 170-4; five IIO, 
170-2; eight 9I, IIO, 170; ten 87, 
88, 9I, 170; clinging to I73 
prthagjanalputhujjana I64, I93 
pudgala-nairtitmya 243 
Pudgalavada 52, 223 
pujti I04, IIO, III, I68 
Pure Abodes II8, II9, I94, 23I 
Pure Land Buddhispt I07, 233, 259, 
260, 263-4; its siitras 226 
purifications ( visuddhi), seven 
I88-94 
Pyu kingdom 256 
raft, simile of 7I -2 
Rahula 20 
Rajagrha 40, 42, 53 
rtik~asas I27 
Rama IV 256 
rang-stong/gzhan-stong 252, 273 
Ratnagotravibhtiga 252 
rddhiliddhi I85-6 
rdzogs-chen 20I, 270 
rebirth 3, 17, 27-8, 2I6-17; and 'no 
self' I40, I43-4 
recollection (anusmrtilanussati) I04, 
I77; of gods I3I, I79 
refuges, three 34, I07-8, I66, I67, 
I73 
relics (of the Buddha) 26-7,97, 104, 
234 
religion, definition of 64-5 
renouncer tradition 9-II, 62, 85, 95, 
96 
Rg Veda I2, 37, 45 
Rliys Davids, T. W. I4, 274 
ritual 65, 109, I66-9 
robes, monastic 87; rag 88, 95, 98-9 
Robinson, R 244 
Rome 273 
Rorty, R 244 
rupa I35-6, 2IO 
riipa-ktiya 3 I 
Russia I 
Saddharmapw:u;larika Sutra, see 
Lotus Sutra 
SaichO 56 
Sakra/Sakka II8, I27,203 
Sakya (Sa-skya) 27I 
Sakya (Sa-skya) Pa1,1!;lita IOI, 27I 
Sakyamuni 8 
Sakyas 7-8, I9, 27 
samtidhi IO, 32, 36, 83-4, II3, I2I, 
I74, I76, I77, I79, I8I; see also 
dhytina, meditation · 
Samtidhi-rtija Satra 226

--- PAGE 351 ---
Index 
331 
samatha/samatha, see meditation 
sambhoga-kaya 232-3 
Saf!ldhinirmocana Siltra 226, 244 
saf!!g!ti (Buddhist 'councils') 40, 42, 
46,5I,53,54 
saf!ljFza!saFzFza I36 
Sarpmatiyas see Vatsiputriyas 
Satpsiira 27, 64, II I, II2-I3, IIS, I25, 
I 26, 229, 232, 239; see also rebirth 
Saf!!Skara/Saf!!khara I36, ISO 
Satpyutta Nikaya 43, 242 
Safici I3I 
Sangha 34,37,45,49,SO,SI,8S-III 
passim, 238, 250, 254, 256; acts of 
86; division of 49-52, s6, 89, 253; 
expulsion from so, 53-4, 89; as 
'field of merif 102-3; and society 
91-4; and state 100-1; in the West 
275; see also monks 
Saftghabhadra 206 
Sangharakshita 275 
San-lun-tsung 260 
Sanskrit xvii, I, rr; translation of 
Buddhist scriptures into 4i-2, 43, 
' 45 
Santaraksita 266 
Sariputra./Sariputta 25, 141, 203, 204 
Sarijmtrabhidharma-sastra 206 
Sarvastivada 48, 49, 52-6 passim, 86, 
223, 262; Abhidharma 204-5, 210, 
220-1, 242; cosmology rrs, I23; 
view of awakening 197; view of 
nirviil.la 77 
sastras ss, 57, 226, 258 
satan 23 
Satya-siddhi-sastra 206 
Sautrantikas 48, 56, 78, 204, 206, 
22I-2, 223 
Schopen, G. 95-6, 105 
Schopenhauer, A. 274 
seeds (b!ja), Sautrantika theory of 
222 
Seleucus Nicator 273 
self (atman!atta) 133-62 passim; in 
brahmanical tradition I33; and 
greed I46-8; Pudgalavada view 
of 223; in Sanskrit I6o; and 
tathagatagarbha 252; in y ogacara 
246; see also no self 
sex 50, I7I, I84; abstaining from 87, 
88, 89, rro; and the Vajrayana 269 
Shan-tao 264 
Shen-hui 26I-2 
Shen-hsiu 26I 
Shingon see Chen Yen· 
Shinran 264 
ShintO 2, 128-9 
Siddhartha/Siddhattha I4, 19, 24 
siddhas I86, 268 
Sikkim 274 
slla/slla 32, 36, 83-4, 102, ro8, I2I, 
169-74, 230; see also precepts 
Sineru, Mt. rr8 
skandha, see aggregates 
skill in means 228, 230, 264 
snake, simile of 191-2 
Soka, Gakkai 266, 275 
soul 66, 68; see also self 
South-East Asia I, 33, 40, 49, s8, 86, 
88, 101, 106, 107, IIS, 224, 234, 
254, 276; Buddhism in 256-7 
Spiro, M. IIO-II 
. 
Sravaka/savaka 32, 228, 229, 230, 
243; see also arhat 
Sri Lanka I, 5, I4, 33, 38, 40, 42, 49, 
53,SS,S8,86, IOI, 105, Io6, I07, 
IIS, I28, 224, 274, 276; Buddhism 
in 9I,96-7,98-9,253-6 
Srlmala-devl-sif!!hanada Siltra 226 
Srong-bsan-sgam-po 266 
Stcherbatsky, T. 244, 274 
sthaviras/theras SI-2, 54, 55 
stream-attainer (srotapanna/ 
sotiipanna) 92, 102, 194, 195, I98, 
230; lesser 190 
stupa 7,27,97, IIo, I31,225,276 
Subhiikarasimha 260 
SuddhodanaiSuddhodana 20 
suffering, see duf:zkha 
Sujata 22 
Sukhavati-vyilha Siltra 226, 263-4 
Sukhotai 256 
Sumatra I 
Sumedha (Bodhisattva) I8,.226 
Sunyavada 57; see also Madhyamaka 
Silraf!!gama-samadhi Sutra 226 
sutra/sutta I7, 40, 42-8, 55, 57, 207, 
258,259,267

--- PAGE 352 ---
332 
Index 
Sutranta/Suttanta 207-8 
Siitra Pitaka 45, 49, 254 
Suttanipiita 47, 95 
svabhava 238,242,243 
Svayambhunatha 276 
Ta-chih Huai-hai I07 
TaishO Tripitaka 40, 258-9 
Taiwan 258 
Tamils IOI 
T'ang dynasty 257 
T'an-luan 264 
tan tra I 65, 260 
Tantric Buddhism 268-9; see also 
Mantryana, Vajniyana 
Tao-an 26I 
Tao-chan 264 
Tao-hsiian 260 
Taoism r, 257 
Tao-sheng 26I 
Tara 233 
Tathagata 26, 27, 28, 66, 68 
tathiigata-garbha 125, 222, 250-2, 
262; see also buddha-nature 
Tathiigata-garbha Siitra 226, 25I 
tathata 248 
Tendai s6, IOI, 260, 265 
Tenjur 40, 4I, 267-8 
terma (gTerma) 270 
Thailand I, I28, 256-7 
theory, Buddhist attitude towards 
I63-4 
Theosophical Society 274 
Theravada I,40,4I,48,49,53,54, 
55,88, 105,106,107,109,197,224, 
234, 262, 275; Abhidharma 204, 
21o-I8; cosmology IIS-I9, I23; 
esoteric 165, 257; history of 253-7; 
nuns 91; and 'pure' Buddhism 
130; understanding of causality 
153; view of nirvaQ.a 77-8; Vinaya 
86,89 
Therigiithii 91 
Thirty-Three, Heaven of 25, II3, 
203 
Thoreau, H. D. 274 
Thiiparama 99 
Tibet 40, 57, 86, IOI, ro6, 107, ro8, 
II5, 188, 273, 274, 276; Buddhist 
thought in 272-3; Chinese invasion 
of 272; monks in 223; nuns in 91 
Tibetan Buddhism 2, 5, 17, 44, 58, 
88,89, !65,233,252,266-73; 
schools of 270-2; in the West 275 
Tibetan Book of the Dead 217 
Tibetan Wheel of Existence 159 
T'ien-t'ai 259, 260, 264-5, 272 
Trixp.sika 207, 244, 24 s 
Tripitaka/Tipitaka 40, 49; Chinese 
40,42,43,45,257,258-9 
tri-svabhava 245, 246-7 
Tri-svabhiiva-Nirdesa 244 
tr~JJiiltm:tha, see craving 
truth (satya/sacca) 69; two 
(conventional/ultimate) 145-6, 
207, 239, 242, 245; see also four 
noble truths 
Tsong-kha-pa 165, 271, 274 
Tucci, G. 274 
tulku (sprul-skus) 270 
Tu-shun 265 
Tu~ita/Tusita Heaven 17-18, 18, 
19-20, 63, 263 
Udiina 76 
Udraka Ramaputra/Uddaka 
Ramaputta 21 
undetermined (avyakrta/avyakata) 
questions 66-8, 77 
upiidiina 71, 146, 150 
Upani~ads 12, 133':.4, 137, 138, 148, 
!60 
upiisaka/upasika 100, 107-8, I67; see 
also lay community 
Upasena 254 
upasampadii 87-8 
Upatissa 177, 179, 181, 254 
upiiya-kau§alya 228,230,264 
upek~a/upekkha 187 
uposatha, see po~adha 
USA 274-5, 275 
Ussher, Archbishop 131 
Uttarakuru 203 
Uttaratantra 252 
Vacchagotta 161 
Vaibha~ika 206, 242; see also 
Sarvastivada

--- PAGE 353 ---
Index 
333 
Vaislikha!Vesakha I9, 22 
Vaisa!IIV esali 5 I, 53 
Vajrabodhi 260 
Vajracchedikii Sutra 234 
Vajrasekhara Sutra 26I 
Vajraylina 2, 255, 268; see also 
Tantric Buddhism 
Vakkali 30 
van;a/va!J!Ja, four 12-13 
Vasubandhu 44, 55, 57, II4, I25, I65, 
I82, ISS, I94, I95, I96,zo6,244, 
245,248,258;on 'dependent 
arising' I49-50 
Vasumitra 220 
Viitsiputriyas 52, 54, 223 
vedanii 136, I50,213-15 
Vedas 12, 45-6 
vegetarianism I72-3 
Vessantara Jiitaka I09 
Vetter, T. zoo 
vibhajyaviida!vibhajjaviida 53 
vibh~ii 54 
Vietnam I, 58 
views (dr~tilditthi) 68, 7I, 235, 236; 
annihilationist and eternalist 
78, I45, I55,238-40,272-3;in 
~adhyamaka 238,240-I,243-4; 
and nirvlil).a 78; purification of 
I89, I96; right I66; of the self 
148-9; twenty views of 
individuality 148 
Vijaya Blihu I 254 
Vijfilinaviida 57; see also 
consciousness, Y ogliclira 
vijiiapti-miitra 58, 207, 226, 244, 247, 
248-9; see also consciousness, 
Yogliclira 
Vijiiapti-miitratii-siddhi see Ch 'eng-
wei-shih lun 
vikalpa 235 
ViY(lsatikii 244, 248 
Vimuttimagga 177, 254 
Vipaya 17, 40, 45, 48-56 passim, 
86-7,89,223,253,254,259,267; 
four underlying concerns of 91-4; 
Vinaya School (Lii-tsung) 260 
Vinaya Pi~aka 45, 49 
vipassanii-dhura 38, 104-5 
vipasyaniilvipassanii, see meditation 
Viriipa 27I 
visuddhis, seven ISS-94 
Visuddhimagga 55, I23, 149, I65, 
!77,204 
West, Buddhism in the 39, 273-6 
Western Buddhist Order 275 
wheel of becoming I 59 
wholesome (kuSala/kusala) qualities 
84, roi, II9; three roots of (non-
attachment, friendliness, and 
wisdom) 75, So, 108, 2I3, 25I 
Wijayaratna, ~- 95-6 
wisdom 32, 83, 84, I2I, 230, 269; 
three kinds of 36; see also 
wholesome qualities, Perfection of 
Wisdom 
Wittgenstein, L. 244 
world-systems (expansion and 
contraction of) 123-5 
worship 104; see also pujii 
writing (in India) 37 
yak~as 127, I30, I3I, I68 
y asodhara 20 
Yeats, W. B. 274 
yoga I74 
Yogliclira 3,57,78, r82,20I,244-50; 
and Abhidharma 207, 210; in 
China 259, 26o; in Tibet 268, 272 
yon mchod 10I 
zazen 262 
Zen 38, 125, I65, zot, 252, 260, 262, 
263, 275; see also Ch'an

--- PAGE 354 ---
The Foundations of 
'sUDDHlSM 
Rupert Gethin 
The 0 PUS series provides concise 
and original introductions to a 
wide range of subjects. 
'The Buddhist way of meditation, 
compassion and non-injury to 
sentient beings is a deeply 
attractive philosophy. This book 
is the best available introduction.' 
Andrew Linzey, 
Mansfield College, Ox/Q.,rd 
Caver photo by Jean· Louis Nou. 
OXFORD · 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
www.oup.com 
OPUS 
'A hundred miles or so from the place 
of the Buddha's birth, pilgrims to the 
shrine of the primordial Buddha 
Svayambhbnii.tha in Nepal turn the 
countless prayer wheels as they 
approach the great stii.pa; in the hall of 
a monastery situated amidst the rice 
fields of Korea a group of monks sits 
silently in meditation; at Aukana in Sri 
Lanka a woman dressed in white 
carefully places an open lotus bud at 
the feet of the giant standing Buddha 
and raises her joined palms to her 
forehead.' 
Buddhism is a vast and complex 
religious and philosophical tradition 
with a history that stretches back over 
2,500 years. In this book, Rupert Gethin 
investigates the common threads 
connecting diverse traditions of 
Buddhist thought and practice: the ~tory 
of the Buddha, the scriptural tradition of 
his teachings, the four 'noble truths', 
monastic and lay ways of life, karma and 
rebirth, ethics, meditation, and 
philosophy. While concentrating on the 
formative phase of Buddhism in India, 
he also considers the ways in which these 
foundations have shaped the 
development of Buddhism beyond India 
and into the twentieth century. 
ISBN 0-19 ~289223-1 
9 780192 89~232 >
