
=== [PAGE 5 / Journal p.93] ===
5 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 93–105 
 
SOME PALI DISCOURSES IN THE LIGHT 
OF THEIR CHINESE PARALLELS 
PART TWO * 
 
ANÓLAYO 
 
he present article is a follow up to my examination of the potential 
of the Chinese Ógamas as a corrective and supplement to the Pali 
discourses, published in the previous issue of Buddhist Studies Review.1 
While in the earlier article I took up examples from the ﬁrst ﬁfty dis-
courses in the Majjhima Nikåya, the present article treats examples from 
the remainder of the same collection. 
Placing the Pali discourses and their counterparts in the Chinese 
Ógamas side by side often brings to light an impressive degree of 
agreement, even down to rather minor details. This close agreement 
testiﬁes to the emphasis on verbatim recall in the oral transmission of 
the early discourses. In this respect the early Buddhist oral tradition 
forms a class of its own in the ambit of oral literature in general, where 
often relatively free improvisation is the rule. Oral performance of a 
narrative type in a setting like Africa or medieval Europe demands in-
novation and improvisation from the performer, whose task is to pre-
sent the tale in such a way as to best entertain the audience. Such a type 
of oral literature is thus recreated every time it is told. In contrast, the 
purpose of the early Buddhist oral tradition was to preserve sacred ma-
terial, for which free improvisation is not appropriate. Moreover, the 
performance situation of the early discourses was not only public, but 
                                                        
* 
I am indebted to Bhikkhu Bodhi, Bhikkhu Ñåˆatusita, Professor Enomoto and Dr. 
Rupert Gethin for reading an earlier draft of this article and offering me the gift of 
their comments. It goes without saying that I remain responsible for whatever errors 
should still be found in my presentation. 
1  Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 1–14. 
T



=== [PAGE 6 / Journal p.94] ===
6 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
94 
also private, and recitation was often undertaken communally, which 
leaves little scope for free improvisation.2 
In this emphasis on verbatim recall, the early Buddhist discourses 
stand in the tradition of Vedic oral literature, where verbatim recall was 
similarly of central importance. Unlike the Brahmin reciters, however, 
not all Buddhist monk reciters were trained in memorizing texts from 
their early youth onwards.3 Thus in spite of the formidable feat of 
transmitting a vast corpus of material to posterity, some of the errors 
bound to occur during oral transmission have also left their impact on 
the Pali discourses. Such errors can involve a shift of material to a dif-
ferent place, or even loss of material. At times, due to the need for ex-
planation during oral performance, it might also happen that material 
which originally was of a commentarial nature inﬂuenced a discourse, 
or even became part of it. 
An example of a shift of material to a different place can be found in 
the CË¬asakuludåyi Sutta. The Pali and Chinese version of this discourse 
record a discussion between the Buddha and the wanderer Sakuludåy¥ 
on the way to an entirely pleasant world, which according to both ver-
sions is to be found in the development of the jhånas. After describing 
the attainment of the four jhånas, the Pali discourse turns to an account 
of the gradual path, which depicts how someone goes forth and attains 
the four jhånas and the three higher knowledges. 
The CË¬asakuludåyi Sutta’s treatment of the gradual path follows each 
jhåna and higher knowledge with the declaration that this attainment is 
a state superior to the way to an entirely pleasant world discussed ear-
lier. This procedure creates a somewhat perplexing proposition, as in 
this way the CË¬asakuludåyi Sutta proclaims that each of the jhånas men-
tioned in its description of the gradual path is superior to the jhånas 
mentioned in its earlier discussion of the path to an entirely pleasant 
world.4  
                                                        
2  M. Allon, Style and Function (Tokyo, 1997), p. 366. 
3  O. von Hinüber, Der Beginn der Schrift und frühe Schriftlichkeit in Indien (Mainz, 1989), p. 
67. 
4  MN 79 at MN ii 38,8: ‘He dwells having attained the ﬁrst jhåna. This ... is a state supe-
rior and more sublime’ [than the earlier mentioned four jhånas] (pathamajjhånaµ 
upasampajja viharati. ayam pi kho ... dhammo uttaritaro ca paˆ¥tataro ca). 



=== [PAGE 7 / Journal p.95] ===
7 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
95
The Madhyama Ógama parallel to the CË¬asakuludåyi Sutta treats the 
gradual path already at an earlier point, when describing the path to an 
entirely pleasant world.5 By doing so the Madhyama Ógama version 
takes up the jhånas only once and thus does not have the perplexing 
proposition found in the Pali discourse, according to which the jhånas 
are superior to the jhånas. Judging from its location in the Chinese dis-
course, perhaps the gradual path exposition up to the four jhånas origi-
nally served as an introduction to the attainment of an entirely pleasant 
world. This would leave only the three higher knowledges in the place 
where they are found now, three attainments that are indeed superior 
to the entirely pleasant world of the jhånas.  
Another meeting between the Buddha and the same wanderer Saku-
ludåyi is the theme of the Mahåsakuludåyi Sutta. This discourse lists ﬁve 
qualities that cause the Buddha’s disciples to respect their teacher. The 
treatment of the ﬁrst four qualities is fairly similar in the Pali and 
Madhyama Ógama version of this discourse.  
The ﬁfth quality in the Madhyama Ógama account takes up the Bud-
dha’s instructions on the three higher knowledges.6 According to the 
Madhyama Ógama discourse, these instructions inspire conﬁdence in 
the Buddha’s disciples, as it enables them to go beyond doubt and reach 
the other shore. 
The Pali version instead works its way through a long exposition of 
various aspects of the Buddhist path, covering the four satipa††hånas, the 
four right efforts, the four roads to power, the ﬁve faculties, the ﬁve 
powers, the seven awakening factors, the noble eightfold path, the eight 
liberations, the eight bases for transcendence, the ten kasiˆas, the four 
jhånas, insight into the nature of body and consciousness, production of 
a mind-made body, supernormal powers, the divine ear and telepathic 
knowledge of the mind of others, before coming to the same three 
higher knowledges.7  
                                                        
5  MÓ 208 at T i 785c24. 
6  MÓ 207 at T i 783b16, which explicitly mentions only the ﬁrst and the third knowl-
edge, recollection of past lives and destruction of the inﬂuxes, though from the con-
text it seems safe to assume that the second knowledge, the divine eye, should be 
supplemented. 
7  MN 77 at MN ii 11–22. 



=== [PAGE 8 / Journal p.96] ===
8 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
96 
When considering this exposition in the light of its Madhyama Ógama 
parallel, it would seem that the Buddha’s ability to teach how to attain 
the three higher knowledges sufﬁces to explain why his disciples respect 
him. In fact the long exposition given in the Pali discourse appears to 
be somewhat out of proportion, as a comparatively brief treatment of 
the ﬁrst four qualities is followed by a disproportionately long exposi-
tion of the ﬁfth quality. Due to this extensive exposition of the ﬁfth 
quality, the Mahåsakuludåyi Sutta has become a rather long discourse 
and would ﬁnd a more ﬁtting placement in the D¥gha Nikåya, instead of 
being included among discourses of ‘middle length’. Hence one might 
wonder if the long exposition in the Pali version could be a later expan-
sion of what originally was only a relatively brief treatment, similar to 
the treatment in its Madhyama Ógama parallel. 
A somewhat similar situation can be found in the case of the 
Piˆ!apåtapårisuddhi Sutta. The topic of this discourse, as indicated in the 
titles of the Pali version and its Saµyukta Ógama parallel, is ‘puriﬁcation 
of alms food’.8 In order to undertake such puriﬁcation, according to 
both versions a monk should avoid the arising of desire and other 
deﬁlements while collecting alms food. If on inspection the monk real-
izes that deﬁlements have arisen in his mind, he should make a deter-
mined effort to remove them, whereas if he has remained free from 
deﬁlements he may joyfully continue to train himself in wholesome 
states. 
The Saµyukta Ógama version explains that through such training in 
wholesomeness when walking, standing, sitting and lying down a monk 
puriﬁes his alms food, after which this discourse concludes.9 The Pali 
version continues instead by treating various other topics. These cover 
overcoming the ﬁve types of sensual pleasures and the ﬁve hindrances; 
understanding the ﬁve aggregates; developing the four satipa††hånas, the 
four right efforts, the four roads to power, the ﬁve faculties, the ﬁve 
powers, the seven factors of awakening, the eightfold noble path, tran-
quillity and insight; and realizing knowledge and liberation.10  
                                                        
8  MN 151 at MN iii 297,36: piˆ!apåtapårisuddhi and SÓ 236 at T ii 57b25: !"#$% 
9  SÓ 236 at T ii 57b24. 
10  MN 151 at MN iii 295,13–297,20. 



=== [PAGE 9 / Journal p.97] ===
9 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
97
Though by undertaking all these practices a monk would certainly 
become a thoroughly puriﬁed recipient of alms, the comparatively brief 
treatment given in the earlier part of the Pali version, found in similar 
terms also in its Saµyukta Ógama parallel, would seem to be an ade-
quate and sufﬁcient explanation of how a monk undertakes ‘puriﬁca-
tion of alms food’. Thus in this case, too, the possibility that the long 
exposition found only in the Pali version could be due to a later expan-
sion of an originally more concise presentation needs to be taken into 
consideration. 
Another case where a treatment in a Pali discourse is considerably 
longer than its Chinese counterpart can be found in the Mahåråhu-
lovåda Sutta, which presents a range of meditation instructions given by 
the Buddha to his son Råhula. The Pali version reports that, on being 
asked by his son about the development of mindfulness of breathing, 
the Buddha delivered detailed instructions on how to contemplate the 
ﬁve elements of earth, water, ﬁre, air and space, followed by taking up 
in brief the brahmavihåras, contemplation of the unattractiveness of the 
body (asubha) and perception of impermanence, before giving a de-
tailed exposition of mindfulness of breathing.11  
According to the Ekottarika Ógama counterpart to the Mahåråhu-
lovåda Sutta, before Råhula inquired about mindfulness of breathing the 
Buddha had already brieﬂy instructed him on the brahmavihåras and on 
contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, and it was after 
Råhula’s inquiry that the Buddha took up the practice of mindfulness of 
breathing.12 The detailed instructions on the ﬁve elements, given by the 
Buddha to his son in the Pali version of the Mahåråhulovåda Sutta, are 
not found at all in the Ekottarika Ógama discourse. 
Here again one might wonder whether the Pali version’s exposition 
on the elements is in its proper place, since in both versions Råhula had 
asked the Buddha how to develop mindfulness of breathing so that it 
will be of great fruit.13 In view of such an inquiry one would not expect 
the Buddha to broach a range of different subjects and give such a de-
                                                        
11  MN 62 at MN i 421–25. 
12  EÓ 17.1 at T ii 581c16 and T ii 582a13. 
13  MN 62 at MN i 421,24: kathaµ bhåvitå nu kho, bhante, ånåpånasati ... mahapphalå hoti? 
EÓ 17.1 at T ii 582a6: &'()*+,%%%,-./0? 



=== [PAGE 10 / Journal p.98] ===
10 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
98 
tailed exposition of the ﬁve elements before taking up the topic of 
mindfulness of breathing.  
A discourse in the A!guttara Nikåya and its parallel in the Saµyukta 
Ógama also record an instruction on the elements given by the Buddha 
to his son Råhula.14 Though this evidently remains hypothetical, per-
haps during the course of oral transmission this instruction on the ele-
ments came to be added to the Mahåråhulovåda Sutta. 
Another instance where comparing the Pali and Chinese versions of a 
discourse bring to light a noteworthy difference is the Mahåcattår¥saka 
Sutta. The Pali version of this discourse examines wrong path factors, 
right path factors and supramundane path factors. The deﬁnitions 
given to the same wrong and right path factors in its Madhyama Ógama 
counterpart are similar to the Pali presentation. The Madhyama Ógama 
discourse differs in so far as it does not treat supramundane path factors 
at all.15 A quotation of the same discourse in Íamathadeva's commen-
tary on the Abhidharmakoßa, preserved in Tibetan, also does not record 
such a treatment of the supramundane path factors.16 
A closer scrutiny of the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta brings to light that the 
terminology employed to deﬁne the supramundane path factors is pre-
cisely the same as the terminology used in the Vibha"ga’s exposition of 
the path factors according to the methodology of the Abhidhamma, 
distinct from the way the same work analyses these path factors when 
applying the methodology of the discourses.17 Some of the Pali terms 
used in the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta, such as when deﬁning supramundane 
right intention as ‘ﬁxing’ (appanå) of the mind and as ‘mental inclina-
tion’ (cetaso abhiniropanå), are not found in other discourses and belong 
                                                        
14  AN 4:177 at AN ii 164–65 and SÓ 465 at T ii 118c–119a. SÓ 465 takes up six ele-
ments, whereas AN 4:177 treats only four elements. The examination of the elements 
in AN 4:177 is also shorter than its counterpart in MN 62, as it does not list the bodily 
manifestations of each internal element. 
15  MÓ 189 at T i 735c18; for a detailed study of this discourse cf. K. Meisig, ‘Sheng Tao 
King, die Chinesische Fassung des Mahåcattar¥saka Sutta’, Hinduismus und Buddhismus 
(Freiburg, 1987), pp. 220–48. 
16  Derge edition mngon pa nyu 44a5 or Peking edition thu 83b5. 
17  This is the Abhidhammabhåjaniya treatment of the fourth noble truth at Vibh 106,3, 
preceded by treating the same subject from the viewpoint of the discourses in the Sut-
tantabhåjaniya. 



=== [PAGE 11 / Journal p.99] ===
11 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
99
to the type of language used only in the Abhidhamma and historically 
later Pali texts.18 When applying the supramundane treatment to 
speech, action and livelihood, the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta uses a string of 
terms that does not occur in this way in other discourses, while the same 
string of terms is found in the deﬁnition of these three path factors in 
the Abhidhamma.19  
Another noteworthy aspect of the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta’s treatment of 
the path factors is that it reckons the mundane wholesome path factors 
to be ‘with inﬂux’ and as ‘ripening in attachment’.20 The way the Mahå-
cattår¥saka Sutta deﬁnes these mundane path factors corresponds to the 
deﬁnitions used in other discourses, where these path factors are part of 
the noble eightfold path that leads to the eradication of dukkha.21 Thus 
what other discourses reckon as an integral part of the path to libera-
tion, the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta’s treatment considers as something that is 
with inﬂux and ripens in attachment. 
This mode of presentation shows the inﬂuence of Abhidhammic type 
of thought, as works like the Dhammasa"gaˆ¥ use the qualiﬁcation ‘with-
out inﬂuxes’ only for the four paths and fruits, and for the uncondi-
tioned element.22 From this perspective, any other type of experience, 
however wholesome or conducive to liberation it may be, will be reck-
oned to be ‘with inﬂux’ and consequently to ‘ripen in attachment’. 
At this point the question could be posed to what extent the Mahåcat-
tår¥saka Sutta’s overall exposition requires the treatment of the supra-
                                                        
18  MN 117 at MN iii 73,15 lists takko vitakko sa"kappo appanå vyappanå cetaso abhiniropanå 
to deﬁne sammåsa"kappo ariyo anåsavo lokuttaro magga"go. The terms appanå, vyappanå, 
and cetaso abhiniropanå do not seem to recur in other discourses. The same listing can 
be found at Dhs 10,17 or at Vibh 86,8: takko vitakko sa"kappo appanå vyappanå cetaso ab-
hiniropanå. 
19  MN 117 at MN iii 74,9+35 and MN iii 75,25: årati virati pa†ivirati veramaˆ¥, a string of 
terms that recurs in the deﬁnition of these path factors at Dhs 63,35 and Dhs 64,2+7 
and at Vibh 106,26+30 and Vibh 107,4. 
20  e.g. for the path factor of right intention in MN 117 at MN iii 73,6: såsavo ... 
upadhivepakko. 
21  MN 117 at MN iii 73,9, MN iii 74,3+30 and MN iii 75,20 deﬁne mundane right inten-
tion, right speech, right action and right livelihood in the same way as e.g. MN 141 at 
MN iii 251,16+19+23+26. 
22  Dhs 196,16: ariyåpannå maggå ca maggaphalåni ca asa"khata ca dhåtu, ime dhammå 
anåsavå. 



=== [PAGE 12 / Journal p.100] ===
12 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
100 
mundane path factors. According to the preamble found in the Chinese 
and the Pali versions of this discourse, the main intent of the Buddha’s 
exposition was to show the supportive function of the other path factors 
for the development of right concentration. That is, the central point at 
stake was not to present the path factors individually, but rather to show 
their interrelation as a basis for developing right concentration. To 
bring out this point, the supramundane treatment of the path factors 
would not be required. 
Hence from the perspective of the central topic of the discourse the 
treatment of the supramundane path factors does not seem to be indis-
pensable. The same treatment shows distinct Abhidhammic characteris-
tics and vocabulary, and it is absent from the Madhyama Ógama and 
Tibetan parallels. This suggests the treatment of the supramundane 
path factors in the Pali version of the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta to be a later 
addition. Perhaps an early commentary on this discourse considered the 
path factors from the supramundane perspective of path attainment, 
and what originally was only an alternative mode of explanation pre-
served in an oral commentary was later absorbed into the discourse it-
self during the process of oral transmission. 
Another case where the understanding of the reciters may have 
inﬂuenced the wording of a discourse could be the Uddesavibha"ga 
Sutta. The Pali version of this discourse and its Madhyama Ógama paral-
lel begin with a short statement by the Buddha, after which he retired to 
his dwelling.23 From the perspective of the Pali discourse this comes as 
quite a surprise, since the Buddha had announced that he would teach 
the monks a summary and an exposition.24 In spite of this announce-
ment, he left without giving an exposition, after teaching only the sum-
mary. According to the Madhyama Ógama account, however, the Bud-
dha did not announce a summary and an exposition. Thus in the 
Madhyama Ógama version the Buddha’s departure does not stand in 
contradiction to what he said earlier. 
                                                        
23  MN 138 at MN iii 223,14 and MÓ 164 at T i 694b24. 
24  MN 138 at MN iii 223,5: ‘I will teach you a summary and an exposition, monks, listen 
and attend well, I am about to speak’ (uddesavibha"gaµ vo, bhikkhave, desissåmi, taµ 
suˆåtha sådhukaµ manasikarotha, bhåsissåmi). 



=== [PAGE 13 / Journal p.101] ===
13 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
101 
A reference to a summary and an exposition recurs also in the Mahå-
kaccånabhaddekaratta Sutta and in the Lomasaka"giyabhaddekaratta Sutta.25 
According to the introductory narration in both discourses, a visiting 
deva had asked a monk if he knew the ‘summary and the exposition on 
an auspicious night’, followed by also asking him if he knew the ‘verses 
on an auspicious night’.26 As the verses correspond to the summary, ei-
ther the reference to the summary or the reference to the verses seems 
to be redundant.27 
Just as in the case of the Uddesavibha"ga Sutta, in the Mahåkaccåna-
bhaddekaratta Sutta the reference to a summary and an exposition stands 
in contrast to the remainder of the discourse, since here too the Bud-
dha announced a summary and an exposition but then got up and left 
after giving only the summary, without delivering the corresponding 
exposition.  
In all these three cases the Chinese and Tibetan parallels do not refer 
to a summary and an exposition.28 This suggests that the reference to a 
summary and an exposition originally might not have been part of these 
discourses.  
The reason for these references to a summary and an exposition in 
the Pali versions could be that the basic pattern of following a summary 
with an exposition is a characteristic mark of most of the discourses 
found in the chapter where these three Pali discourses are located, the 
                                                        
25  In MN 133 at MN iii 192,10 and in MN 134 at MN iii 199,27 a deva asked a monk ‘do 
you, monk, remember the summary and the exposition on an auspicious night?’ 
(dhåresi tvaµ, bhikkhu, bhaddekaratassa uddesañ ca vibha"gañ ca?). 
26  After the inquiry mentioned above in note 25, according to MN 133 at MN iii 192,16 
and MN 134 at MN iii 200,5 the deva asked: ‘but do you, monk, remember the verses 
on an auspicious night?’ (dhåresi pana tvaµ, bhikkhu, bhaddekaratiyo gåthå?). 
27  MN 133 at MN iii 193,24 reports that after the Buddha had spoken the verses without 
explaining their meaning, the monks wondered who would be able to explain the 
meaning of this ‘summary’, uddesa, thereby identifying the verses as the summary. In 
fact, apart from the verses it would be difﬁcult to ﬁnd anything else that could be 
reckoned as a ‘summary’. 
28  The parallels to MN 133 are MÓ 165 at T i 696c7, T 1362 at T xxi 881c11, and a Ti-
betan parallel found thrice in the Derge edition at mdo sa 161b4, rgyud ba 56b2 and 
gzungs waµ 90a5 (the Peking edition has only two versions of this discourse at mdo shu 
171a and rgyud ya 96b). The parallels to MN 134 are MÓ 166 at T i 698c14 and T 77 at 
T i 886b7. The parallel to MN 138 is MÓ 164 at T i 694b18.  



=== [PAGE 14 / Journal p.102] ===
14 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
102 
Vibha"ga Vagga of the Majjhima Nikåya. Perhaps this caused the reciters 
to make explicit what in some instances was only implicit, by beginning 
these three discourses with the announcement that a summary and its 
exposition will be given.  
Another case where a passage in a Pali discourse may have been 
inﬂuenced by later developments can be found in the Dakkhiˆåvibha"ga 
Sutta. In the context of a treatment of different types of offering, the 
Pali version states that even if an individual monk should be of evil 
character and of bad morality, as long as a gift to him is given on behalf 
of the whole community, such a gift will be of immeasurable merit.29 Its 
Madhyama Ógama counterpart does not speak of a monk who is of evil 
character and of bad morality, but only of a monk who is not ener-
getic.30 A quotation of this passage in Íamathadeva's commentary on the 
Abhidharmakoßa also does not envisage that a monk worthy of offerings 
could be of evil character and of bad morality.31 
The Madhyama Ógama version continues by explaining that as even a 
gift to a monk who is not energetic is of much merit, what to say of the 
merit of giving to a monk who practises and has reached various ac-
complishments. The Pali version instead continues by stating that a gift 
to an individual will never be as meritorious as a gift given to the whole 
community.32 The commentary adds that even a gift given to an arahant 
individually will not measure up to a gift given to someone of bad mo-
rality, as long as the gift is given in the name of the community.33  
This presentation in the Dakkhiˆåvibha"ga Sutta and its commentary is 
surprising. If mere membership of the Buddhist order would sufﬁce to 
ensure the worthiness of receiving a gift, one would be at a loss to un-
                                                        
29  MN 142 at MN iii 256,6: ‘there will be clan members, with yellow robes around their 
necks, immoral and of evil character, I say an offering made to those immoral ones in 
the name of the community ... is incalculable and immeasurable’ (bhavissanti ... gotrab-
huno kåsåvakaˆ†hå duss¥lå påpadhammå, tesu duss¥lesu sa"ghaµ uddissa dånaµ ... 
asa"kheyyaµ appameyyaµ vadåmi). 
30  MÓ 180 at T i 722b1:,123. 
31  Derge edition mngon pa ju 255a4 or Peking edition tu 290b4. 
32  MN 142 at MN iii 256,10: ‘I say that a gift given to an individual person is never of 
greater fruit than a gift given to the community’, na ... kenaci pariyåyena sa"ghagatåya 
dakkhiˆåya på†ipuggalikaµ dånaµ mahapphalataraµ vadåmi. 
33  Ps v 75. 



=== [PAGE 15 / Journal p.103] ===
15 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
103 
derstand why in the Pali and Chinese versions of the Mahå-Assapura 
Sutta and the CË¬a-Assapura Sutta the Buddha gave recommendations on 
proper conduct to the monks in order to ensure that gifts given to them 
will be fruitful,34 or why the Pali and Chinese versions of the Óka"kheyya 
Sutta stipulate morality as a factor required to make the services and 
support a monk receives become fruitful.35 
As the declaration about the meritoriousness of a gift given to an evil 
monk of bad morality in the Dakkhiˆåvibha"ga Sutta seems difﬁcult to 
harmonize with other discourses, one might wonder whether the need 
to ensure a constant supply of gifts even for less well-behaved monks 
may have led to a conscious change of the wording of this discourse. 
Such conscious changing of the wording of a discourse, however, 
does not seem to be behind most of the variations found between Pali 
discourses and their Ógama counterparts, variations that often appear to 
be just the outcome of the vicissitudes of oral transmission. 
A passage where such a simple transmission error may have occurred 
can be found in the DantabhËmi Sutta, which proceeds from satipa††håna 
practice without giving room to thought directly to the attainment of 
the second jhåna.36 This passage strikes an unfamiliar note, since it 
seems to imply that the practice of thought-free satipa††håna corre-
sponds to the attainment of the ﬁrst jhåna.  
Though satipa††håna is an important foundation for the development 
of the jhånas,37 in itself satipa††håna does not constitute a form of jhåna. 
A central characteristic of satipa††håna meditation is to be aware of the 
changing nature of phenomena,38 whereas attainment of a jhåna re-
quires concentration on a single and stable object. Therefore one would 
not expect that practice of satipa††håna meditation enables the direct 
                                                        
34  MN 39 at MN i 271,16 and MN 40 at MN i 281,10; and their parallels MÓ 182 at T i 
724c25 and MÓ 183 at T i 725c24. 
35  MN 6 at MN i 33,16 and its parallel MÓ 105 at T i 595c23. 
36  MN 125 at MN iii 136,26: må ... vitakkaµ vitakkes¥ ti! so vitakkavicårånaµ vËpasamå ... 
dutiyajjhånaµ ... upasampajja viharati. 
37  The foundational role of satipa††håna for deeper levels of concentration can be seen 
e.g. in DN 18 at DN ii 216,12 or in S 52:6–24 at SN v 299–305. 
38  MN 10 at MN i 56,30: samudayadhammånupass¥ vå ... viharati, vayadhammånupass¥ vå ...  



=== [PAGE 16 / Journal p.104] ===
16 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
104 
attainment of the second jhåna, without any need to develop the ﬁrst 
jhåna. 
In view of this it comes as no surprise when one ﬁnds that the 
Madhyama Ógama counterpart to the DantabhËmi Sutta proceeds from 
thought-free satipa††håna practice to the attainment of the ﬁrst jhåna, 
before turning to the remaining jhånas.39 
Perhaps the occurrence of the word vitakka in the passage on sati-
pa††håna without thought led to a lapse on the part of the reciter(s) of 
the discourse, who continued straight away with the calming of vitakka 
mentioned at the outset of the standard descriptions of the second 
jhåna, thereby unintentionally dropping the ﬁrst jhåna in between. 
Another case of accidental loss of text appears to occur in the Chabbi-
sodhana Sutta, which describes how to check someone’s claim to be fully 
awakened.40 In spite of announcing a six-fold purity in its title, the Chab-
bisodhana Sutta presents only ﬁve aspects of the purity of an arahant. The 
Pali commentary notes this inconsistency and quotes an opinion from 
the ‘elders living on the other side of the sea’,41 who explain that the 
purity of an arahant’s attitude towards the four nutriments should also 
be taken into account. This explanation is puzzling, since though in this 
way a sixth type of purity will indeed be obtained, the Chabbisodhana 
Sutta does not refer at all to the four nutriments. 
The Madhyama Ógama parallel to the Chabbisodhana Sutta resolves 
this puzzle, as in addition to the ﬁve types of purity treated in the Pali 
version, it also describes an arahant’s detached attitude towards the four 
nutriments.42 Thus, unlike the Pali version, the Madhyama Ógama dis-
course does indeed treat a six-fold purity. 
Judging from the title of the Pali version, it seems safe to conclude 
that a similar treatment of the four nutriments originally was part of the 
Chabbisodhana Sutta’s exposition. The ‘elders living on the other side of 
the sea’, mentioned in the Pali commentary, were apparently still famil-
iar with the earlier version that included the four nutriments, a treat-
                                                        
39  MÓ 198 at T i 758b25. A translation of this discourse is under preparation for Buddhist 
Studies Review 23.1. 
40  MN 112 at MN iii 29–37. 
41  Ps iv 94: parasamuddavåsittherå. 
42  MÓ 187 at T i 732b14. 



=== [PAGE 17 / Journal p.105] ===
17 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
105 
ment lost at some point before or during the transmission of the Pali 
discourse from India to Sri Lanka. 
The variations found between Majjhima Nikåya discourses and their 
Chinese parallels, selected for the present article, conﬁrm the truth of a 
statement made in the Sandaka Sutta, according to which oral tradition, 
anussava, may be well remembered or else not well remembered.43 The 
same applies all the more to the discourses found in the Chinese Óga-
mas, which in addition to transmission errors also sometimes suffer 
from translation errors. Since, however, the purpose of the present arti-
cle is to highlight the potential of the Chinese Ógamas as a corrective 
and supplement to the Pali discourses, I have selected only cases that 
illustrate this potential. 
Thanks to the efforts of the ancient reciters and translators we have a 
vast corpus of material at our disposal that enables us to place different 
versions of a discourse side by side. Such comparisons conﬁrm much of 
what a study of only one tradition will yield, in addition to which they 
bring out some details with increased clarity. The resultant vision of 
early Buddhism could be illustrated with the example of a one-eyed 
man whose second eye had its sight restored. What he now sees with 
both eyes is the same as what he saw earlier with only one eye, yet his 
vision has become broader and more precise. 
 
ANÓLAYO 
Bodhi Monastery 
 
Abbreviations 
AN 
A!guttara Nikåya 
Ps 
PapañcasËdan¥ 
Dhs 
Dhammasa"gaˆ¥ 
SÓ 
Saµyukta Ógama 
DN  
D¥gha Nikåya 
SN 
Saµyutta Nikåya 
EÓ 
Ekottarika Ógama 
T 
TaishØ 
MÓ 
Madhyama Ógama 
Vibh  
Vibha"ga 
MN 
Majjhima Nikåya 
 
 
                                                        
43  MN 76 at MN i 520,6: sussutam pi hoti dussutam pi hoti. 


