--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
BUDDHIST STUDIES REVIEW 
volume 22 ! part 2 ! 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the journal of the 
uk association for buddhist studies 
 
 


--- Page 2 ---
 
 
BUDDHIST STUDIES REVIEW 
 
 
Buddhist Studies Review is the semi-annual journal of the UK Association 
for Buddhist Studies. The Journal seeks to publish quality, peer-
reviewed articles on any aspect of Buddhist studies. Contributions 
should be submitted to the Editor, from 2006 (volume 23): 
 
Professor Peter Harvey, School of Art, Design, Media and Culture, 
University of Sunderland, Priestman Building, Green Terrace,  
Sunderland SR1 3PZ, UK (email: peter.harvey@sunderland.ac.uk). 
 
Books for review should be sent to the Book Reviews Editor:  
 
Dr Mahinda Deegalle, School of Cultural and Historical Studies, Bath 
Spa University, Newton Park Campus, Newton St Loe, Bath BA2 9BN 
(email: m.deegalle@bathspa.ac.uk). 
 
Editorial Board 
Rupert Gethin (Editor 2005) 
Mahinda Deegalle (Book Reviews Editor) 
T. H. Barrett 
 
Cathy Cantwell  
Elizabeth Harris  
Peter Harvey 
 
Ulrich Pagel 
 
Charles S. Prebish  
 
Andrew Skilton 
 
From 2006 Buddhist Studies Review will be published by 
Equinox Publishing. 
 
For new subscription details, please see inside the back cover. 
 
 


--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
BUDDHIST STUDIES REVIEW 
volume 22 ! part 2 ! 2005 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Editor’s Note ............................................................. iv 
Some Pali Discourses in the Light of Their Chinese Parallels Part ii 
by Anålayo............................................................. 93 
How long is a Lifetime? Buddhadåsa’s and Phra Payutto’s Interpre-
tations of pa†iccasamuppåda in Comparison 
by Martin Seeger ..................................................... 107 
Apsarases: The Buddhist Conversion of the Nymphs of Heaven  
by Linda Covill ...................................................... 131 
Fifty Years of Buddhist Studies in Britain 
by Richard Gombrich ................................................ 141 
‘Only if you let go of that tree’: Ordination without Parental Con-
sent in Theravåda Vinaya  
by Kate Crosby ....................................................... 155 
On the Nature of dhammas: A review article 
by Rupert Gethin .................................................... 175 
Book Reviews.......................................................... 195 
Obituary: Heinz Bechert 
by Russell Webb ...................................................... 211 
UKABS Conference .................................................. 217 
 
 
issn 0265-2897 
© 2005 Buddhist Studies Review 
Printed in Great Britain by Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham, Wiltshire 
 


--- Page 4 ---
 
 
 
 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
 
 
 
With this second issue of volume 22 of Buddhist Studies Review (2005) my 
role as interim Editor comes to an end. Beginning with volume 23.1 
(2006), Professor Peter Harvey will take on the role of Editor and Bud-
dhist Studies Review will be published by Equinox Publishing Ltd. For the 
new subscription rates please see inside the back cover. 
 
 
Rupert Gethin 
Editor for volume 22 (2005) 
 
 


--- Page 5 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 93–105 
 
SOME PALI DISCOURSES IN THE LIGHT 
OF THEIR CHINESE PARALLELS 
PART TWO * 
 
ANÓLAYO 
 
he present article is a follow up to my examination of the potential 
of the Chinese Ógamas as a corrective and supplement to the Pali 
discourses, published in the previous issue of Buddhist Studies Review.1 
While in the earlier article I took up examples from the ﬁrst ﬁfty dis-
courses in the Majjhima Nikåya, the present article treats examples from 
the remainder of the same collection. 
Placing the Pali discourses and their counterparts in the Chinese 
Ógamas side by side often brings to light an impressive degree of 
agreement, even down to rather minor details. This close agreement 
testiﬁes to the emphasis on verbatim recall in the oral transmission of 
the early discourses. In this respect the early Buddhist oral tradition 
forms a class of its own in the ambit of oral literature in general, where 
often relatively free improvisation is the rule. Oral performance of a 
narrative type in a setting like Africa or medieval Europe demands in-
novation and improvisation from the performer, whose task is to pre-
sent the tale in such a way as to best entertain the audience. Such a type 
of oral literature is thus recreated every time it is told. In contrast, the 
purpose of the early Buddhist oral tradition was to preserve sacred ma-
terial, for which free improvisation is not appropriate. Moreover, the 
performance situation of the early discourses was not only public, but 
                                                        
* 
I am indebted to Bhikkhu Bodhi, Bhikkhu Ñåˆatusita, Professor Enomoto and Dr. 
Rupert Gethin for reading an earlier draft of this article and offering me the gift of 
their comments. It goes without saying that I remain responsible for whatever errors 
should still be found in my presentation. 
1  Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 1–14. 
T


--- Page 6 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
94 
also private, and recitation was often undertaken communally, which 
leaves little scope for free improvisation.2 
In this emphasis on verbatim recall, the early Buddhist discourses 
stand in the tradition of Vedic oral literature, where verbatim recall was 
similarly of central importance. Unlike the Brahmin reciters, however, 
not all Buddhist monk reciters were trained in memorizing texts from 
their early youth onwards.3 Thus in spite of the formidable feat of 
transmitting a vast corpus of material to posterity, some of the errors 
bound to occur during oral transmission have also left their impact on 
the Pali discourses. Such errors can involve a shift of material to a dif-
ferent place, or even loss of material. At times, due to the need for ex-
planation during oral performance, it might also happen that material 
which originally was of a commentarial nature inﬂuenced a discourse, 
or even became part of it. 
An example of a shift of material to a different place can be found in 
the CË¬asakuludåyi Sutta. The Pali and Chinese version of this discourse 
record a discussion between the Buddha and the wanderer Sakuludåy¥ 
on the way to an entirely pleasant world, which according to both ver-
sions is to be found in the development of the jhånas. After describing 
the attainment of the four jhånas, the Pali discourse turns to an account 
of the gradual path, which depicts how someone goes forth and attains 
the four jhånas and the three higher knowledges. 
The CË¬asakuludåyi Sutta’s treatment of the gradual path follows each 
jhåna and higher knowledge with the declaration that this attainment is 
a state superior to the way to an entirely pleasant world discussed ear-
lier. This procedure creates a somewhat perplexing proposition, as in 
this way the CË¬asakuludåyi Sutta proclaims that each of the jhånas men-
tioned in its description of the gradual path is superior to the jhånas 
mentioned in its earlier discussion of the path to an entirely pleasant 
world.4  
                                                        
2  M. Allon, Style and Function (Tokyo, 1997), p. 366. 
3  O. von Hinüber, Der Beginn der Schrift und frühe Schriftlichkeit in Indien (Mainz, 1989), p. 
67. 
4  MN 79 at MN ii 38,8: ‘He dwells having attained the ﬁrst jhåna. This ... is a state supe-
rior and more sublime’ [than the earlier mentioned four jhånas] (pathamajjhånaµ 
upasampajja viharati. ayam pi kho ... dhammo uttaritaro ca paˆ¥tataro ca). 


--- Page 7 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
95
The Madhyama Ógama parallel to the CË¬asakuludåyi Sutta treats the 
gradual path already at an earlier point, when describing the path to an 
entirely pleasant world.5 By doing so the Madhyama Ógama version 
takes up the jhånas only once and thus does not have the perplexing 
proposition found in the Pali discourse, according to which the jhånas 
are superior to the jhånas. Judging from its location in the Chinese dis-
course, perhaps the gradual path exposition up to the four jhånas origi-
nally served as an introduction to the attainment of an entirely pleasant 
world. This would leave only the three higher knowledges in the place 
where they are found now, three attainments that are indeed superior 
to the entirely pleasant world of the jhånas.  
Another meeting between the Buddha and the same wanderer Saku-
ludåyi is the theme of the Mahåsakuludåyi Sutta. This discourse lists ﬁve 
qualities that cause the Buddha’s disciples to respect their teacher. The 
treatment of the ﬁrst four qualities is fairly similar in the Pali and 
Madhyama Ógama version of this discourse.  
The ﬁfth quality in the Madhyama Ógama account takes up the Bud-
dha’s instructions on the three higher knowledges.6 According to the 
Madhyama Ógama discourse, these instructions inspire conﬁdence in 
the Buddha’s disciples, as it enables them to go beyond doubt and reach 
the other shore. 
The Pali version instead works its way through a long exposition of 
various aspects of the Buddhist path, covering the four satipa††hånas, the 
four right efforts, the four roads to power, the ﬁve faculties, the ﬁve 
powers, the seven awakening factors, the noble eightfold path, the eight 
liberations, the eight bases for transcendence, the ten kasiˆas, the four 
jhånas, insight into the nature of body and consciousness, production of 
a mind-made body, supernormal powers, the divine ear and telepathic 
knowledge of the mind of others, before coming to the same three 
higher knowledges.7  
                                                        
5  MÓ 208 at T i 785c24. 
6  MÓ 207 at T i 783b16, which explicitly mentions only the ﬁrst and the third knowl-
edge, recollection of past lives and destruction of the inﬂuxes, though from the con-
text it seems safe to assume that the second knowledge, the divine eye, should be 
supplemented. 
7  MN 77 at MN ii 11–22. 


--- Page 8 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
96 
When considering this exposition in the light of its Madhyama Ógama 
parallel, it would seem that the Buddha’s ability to teach how to attain 
the three higher knowledges sufﬁces to explain why his disciples respect 
him. In fact the long exposition given in the Pali discourse appears to 
be somewhat out of proportion, as a comparatively brief treatment of 
the ﬁrst four qualities is followed by a disproportionately long exposi-
tion of the ﬁfth quality. Due to this extensive exposition of the ﬁfth 
quality, the Mahåsakuludåyi Sutta has become a rather long discourse 
and would ﬁnd a more ﬁtting placement in the D¥gha Nikåya, instead of 
being included among discourses of ‘middle length’. Hence one might 
wonder if the long exposition in the Pali version could be a later expan-
sion of what originally was only a relatively brief treatment, similar to 
the treatment in its Madhyama Ógama parallel. 
A somewhat similar situation can be found in the case of the 
Piˆ!apåtapårisuddhi Sutta. The topic of this discourse, as indicated in the 
titles of the Pali version and its Saµyukta Ógama parallel, is ‘puriﬁcation 
of alms food’.8 In order to undertake such puriﬁcation, according to 
both versions a monk should avoid the arising of desire and other 
deﬁlements while collecting alms food. If on inspection the monk real-
izes that deﬁlements have arisen in his mind, he should make a deter-
mined effort to remove them, whereas if he has remained free from 
deﬁlements he may joyfully continue to train himself in wholesome 
states. 
The Saµyukta Ógama version explains that through such training in 
wholesomeness when walking, standing, sitting and lying down a monk 
puriﬁes his alms food, after which this discourse concludes.9 The Pali 
version continues instead by treating various other topics. These cover 
overcoming the ﬁve types of sensual pleasures and the ﬁve hindrances; 
understanding the ﬁve aggregates; developing the four satipa††hånas, the 
four right efforts, the four roads to power, the ﬁve faculties, the ﬁve 
powers, the seven factors of awakening, the eightfold noble path, tran-
quillity and insight; and realizing knowledge and liberation.10  
                                                        
8  MN 151 at MN iii 297,36: piˆ!apåtapårisuddhi and SÓ 236 at T ii 57b25: !"#$% 
9  SÓ 236 at T ii 57b24. 
10  MN 151 at MN iii 295,13–297,20. 


--- Page 9 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
97
Though by undertaking all these practices a monk would certainly 
become a thoroughly puriﬁed recipient of alms, the comparatively brief 
treatment given in the earlier part of the Pali version, found in similar 
terms also in its Saµyukta Ógama parallel, would seem to be an ade-
quate and sufﬁcient explanation of how a monk undertakes ‘puriﬁca-
tion of alms food’. Thus in this case, too, the possibility that the long 
exposition found only in the Pali version could be due to a later expan-
sion of an originally more concise presentation needs to be taken into 
consideration. 
Another case where a treatment in a Pali discourse is considerably 
longer than its Chinese counterpart can be found in the Mahåråhu-
lovåda Sutta, which presents a range of meditation instructions given by 
the Buddha to his son Råhula. The Pali version reports that, on being 
asked by his son about the development of mindfulness of breathing, 
the Buddha delivered detailed instructions on how to contemplate the 
ﬁve elements of earth, water, ﬁre, air and space, followed by taking up 
in brief the brahmavihåras, contemplation of the unattractiveness of the 
body (asubha) and perception of impermanence, before giving a de-
tailed exposition of mindfulness of breathing.11  
According to the Ekottarika Ógama counterpart to the Mahåråhu-
lovåda Sutta, before Råhula inquired about mindfulness of breathing the 
Buddha had already brieﬂy instructed him on the brahmavihåras and on 
contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, and it was after 
Råhula’s inquiry that the Buddha took up the practice of mindfulness of 
breathing.12 The detailed instructions on the ﬁve elements, given by the 
Buddha to his son in the Pali version of the Mahåråhulovåda Sutta, are 
not found at all in the Ekottarika Ógama discourse. 
Here again one might wonder whether the Pali version’s exposition 
on the elements is in its proper place, since in both versions Råhula had 
asked the Buddha how to develop mindfulness of breathing so that it 
will be of great fruit.13 In view of such an inquiry one would not expect 
the Buddha to broach a range of different subjects and give such a de-
                                                        
11  MN 62 at MN i 421–25. 
12  EÓ 17.1 at T ii 581c16 and T ii 582a13. 
13  MN 62 at MN i 421,24: kathaµ bhåvitå nu kho, bhante, ånåpånasati ... mahapphalå hoti? 
EÓ 17.1 at T ii 582a6: &'()*+,%%%,-./0? 


--- Page 10 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
98 
tailed exposition of the ﬁve elements before taking up the topic of 
mindfulness of breathing.  
A discourse in the A!guttara Nikåya and its parallel in the Saµyukta 
Ógama also record an instruction on the elements given by the Buddha 
to his son Råhula.14 Though this evidently remains hypothetical, per-
haps during the course of oral transmission this instruction on the ele-
ments came to be added to the Mahåråhulovåda Sutta. 
Another instance where comparing the Pali and Chinese versions of a 
discourse bring to light a noteworthy difference is the Mahåcattår¥saka 
Sutta. The Pali version of this discourse examines wrong path factors, 
right path factors and supramundane path factors. The deﬁnitions 
given to the same wrong and right path factors in its Madhyama Ógama 
counterpart are similar to the Pali presentation. The Madhyama Ógama 
discourse differs in so far as it does not treat supramundane path factors 
at all.15 A quotation of the same discourse in Íamathadeva's commen-
tary on the Abhidharmakoßa, preserved in Tibetan, also does not record 
such a treatment of the supramundane path factors.16 
A closer scrutiny of the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta brings to light that the 
terminology employed to deﬁne the supramundane path factors is pre-
cisely the same as the terminology used in the Vibha"ga’s exposition of 
the path factors according to the methodology of the Abhidhamma, 
distinct from the way the same work analyses these path factors when 
applying the methodology of the discourses.17 Some of the Pali terms 
used in the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta, such as when deﬁning supramundane 
right intention as ‘ﬁxing’ (appanå) of the mind and as ‘mental inclina-
tion’ (cetaso abhiniropanå), are not found in other discourses and belong 
                                                        
14  AN 4:177 at AN ii 164–65 and SÓ 465 at T ii 118c–119a. SÓ 465 takes up six ele-
ments, whereas AN 4:177 treats only four elements. The examination of the elements 
in AN 4:177 is also shorter than its counterpart in MN 62, as it does not list the bodily 
manifestations of each internal element. 
15  MÓ 189 at T i 735c18; for a detailed study of this discourse cf. K. Meisig, ‘Sheng Tao 
King, die Chinesische Fassung des Mahåcattar¥saka Sutta’, Hinduismus und Buddhismus 
(Freiburg, 1987), pp. 220–48. 
16  Derge edition mngon pa nyu 44a5 or Peking edition thu 83b5. 
17  This is the Abhidhammabhåjaniya treatment of the fourth noble truth at Vibh 106,3, 
preceded by treating the same subject from the viewpoint of the discourses in the Sut-
tantabhåjaniya. 


--- Page 11 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
99
to the type of language used only in the Abhidhamma and historically 
later Pali texts.18 When applying the supramundane treatment to 
speech, action and livelihood, the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta uses a string of 
terms that does not occur in this way in other discourses, while the same 
string of terms is found in the deﬁnition of these three path factors in 
the Abhidhamma.19  
Another noteworthy aspect of the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta’s treatment of 
the path factors is that it reckons the mundane wholesome path factors 
to be ‘with inﬂux’ and as ‘ripening in attachment’.20 The way the Mahå-
cattår¥saka Sutta deﬁnes these mundane path factors corresponds to the 
deﬁnitions used in other discourses, where these path factors are part of 
the noble eightfold path that leads to the eradication of dukkha.21 Thus 
what other discourses reckon as an integral part of the path to libera-
tion, the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta’s treatment considers as something that is 
with inﬂux and ripens in attachment. 
This mode of presentation shows the inﬂuence of Abhidhammic type 
of thought, as works like the Dhammasa"gaˆ¥ use the qualiﬁcation ‘with-
out inﬂuxes’ only for the four paths and fruits, and for the uncondi-
tioned element.22 From this perspective, any other type of experience, 
however wholesome or conducive to liberation it may be, will be reck-
oned to be ‘with inﬂux’ and consequently to ‘ripen in attachment’. 
At this point the question could be posed to what extent the Mahåcat-
tår¥saka Sutta’s overall exposition requires the treatment of the supra-
                                                        
18  MN 117 at MN iii 73,15 lists takko vitakko sa"kappo appanå vyappanå cetaso abhiniropanå 
to deﬁne sammåsa"kappo ariyo anåsavo lokuttaro magga"go. The terms appanå, vyappanå, 
and cetaso abhiniropanå do not seem to recur in other discourses. The same listing can 
be found at Dhs 10,17 or at Vibh 86,8: takko vitakko sa"kappo appanå vyappanå cetaso ab-
hiniropanå. 
19  MN 117 at MN iii 74,9+35 and MN iii 75,25: årati virati pa†ivirati veramaˆ¥, a string of 
terms that recurs in the deﬁnition of these path factors at Dhs 63,35 and Dhs 64,2+7 
and at Vibh 106,26+30 and Vibh 107,4. 
20  e.g. for the path factor of right intention in MN 117 at MN iii 73,6: såsavo ... 
upadhivepakko. 
21  MN 117 at MN iii 73,9, MN iii 74,3+30 and MN iii 75,20 deﬁne mundane right inten-
tion, right speech, right action and right livelihood in the same way as e.g. MN 141 at 
MN iii 251,16+19+23+26. 
22  Dhs 196,16: ariyåpannå maggå ca maggaphalåni ca asa"khata ca dhåtu, ime dhammå 
anåsavå. 


--- Page 12 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
100 
mundane path factors. According to the preamble found in the Chinese 
and the Pali versions of this discourse, the main intent of the Buddha’s 
exposition was to show the supportive function of the other path factors 
for the development of right concentration. That is, the central point at 
stake was not to present the path factors individually, but rather to show 
their interrelation as a basis for developing right concentration. To 
bring out this point, the supramundane treatment of the path factors 
would not be required. 
Hence from the perspective of the central topic of the discourse the 
treatment of the supramundane path factors does not seem to be indis-
pensable. The same treatment shows distinct Abhidhammic characteris-
tics and vocabulary, and it is absent from the Madhyama Ógama and 
Tibetan parallels. This suggests the treatment of the supramundane 
path factors in the Pali version of the Mahåcattår¥saka Sutta to be a later 
addition. Perhaps an early commentary on this discourse considered the 
path factors from the supramundane perspective of path attainment, 
and what originally was only an alternative mode of explanation pre-
served in an oral commentary was later absorbed into the discourse it-
self during the process of oral transmission. 
Another case where the understanding of the reciters may have 
inﬂuenced the wording of a discourse could be the Uddesavibha"ga 
Sutta. The Pali version of this discourse and its Madhyama Ógama paral-
lel begin with a short statement by the Buddha, after which he retired to 
his dwelling.23 From the perspective of the Pali discourse this comes as 
quite a surprise, since the Buddha had announced that he would teach 
the monks a summary and an exposition.24 In spite of this announce-
ment, he left without giving an exposition, after teaching only the sum-
mary. According to the Madhyama Ógama account, however, the Bud-
dha did not announce a summary and an exposition. Thus in the 
Madhyama Ógama version the Buddha’s departure does not stand in 
contradiction to what he said earlier. 
                                                        
23  MN 138 at MN iii 223,14 and MÓ 164 at T i 694b24. 
24  MN 138 at MN iii 223,5: ‘I will teach you a summary and an exposition, monks, listen 
and attend well, I am about to speak’ (uddesavibha"gaµ vo, bhikkhave, desissåmi, taµ 
suˆåtha sådhukaµ manasikarotha, bhåsissåmi). 


--- Page 13 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
101 
A reference to a summary and an exposition recurs also in the Mahå-
kaccånabhaddekaratta Sutta and in the Lomasaka"giyabhaddekaratta Sutta.25 
According to the introductory narration in both discourses, a visiting 
deva had asked a monk if he knew the ‘summary and the exposition on 
an auspicious night’, followed by also asking him if he knew the ‘verses 
on an auspicious night’.26 As the verses correspond to the summary, ei-
ther the reference to the summary or the reference to the verses seems 
to be redundant.27 
Just as in the case of the Uddesavibha"ga Sutta, in the Mahåkaccåna-
bhaddekaratta Sutta the reference to a summary and an exposition stands 
in contrast to the remainder of the discourse, since here too the Bud-
dha announced a summary and an exposition but then got up and left 
after giving only the summary, without delivering the corresponding 
exposition.  
In all these three cases the Chinese and Tibetan parallels do not refer 
to a summary and an exposition.28 This suggests that the reference to a 
summary and an exposition originally might not have been part of these 
discourses.  
The reason for these references to a summary and an exposition in 
the Pali versions could be that the basic pattern of following a summary 
with an exposition is a characteristic mark of most of the discourses 
found in the chapter where these three Pali discourses are located, the 
                                                        
25  In MN 133 at MN iii 192,10 and in MN 134 at MN iii 199,27 a deva asked a monk ‘do 
you, monk, remember the summary and the exposition on an auspicious night?’ 
(dhåresi tvaµ, bhikkhu, bhaddekaratassa uddesañ ca vibha"gañ ca?). 
26  After the inquiry mentioned above in note 25, according to MN 133 at MN iii 192,16 
and MN 134 at MN iii 200,5 the deva asked: ‘but do you, monk, remember the verses 
on an auspicious night?’ (dhåresi pana tvaµ, bhikkhu, bhaddekaratiyo gåthå?). 
27  MN 133 at MN iii 193,24 reports that after the Buddha had spoken the verses without 
explaining their meaning, the monks wondered who would be able to explain the 
meaning of this ‘summary’, uddesa, thereby identifying the verses as the summary. In 
fact, apart from the verses it would be difﬁcult to ﬁnd anything else that could be 
reckoned as a ‘summary’. 
28  The parallels to MN 133 are MÓ 165 at T i 696c7, T 1362 at T xxi 881c11, and a Ti-
betan parallel found thrice in the Derge edition at mdo sa 161b4, rgyud ba 56b2 and 
gzungs waµ 90a5 (the Peking edition has only two versions of this discourse at mdo shu 
171a and rgyud ya 96b). The parallels to MN 134 are MÓ 166 at T i 698c14 and T 77 at 
T i 886b7. The parallel to MN 138 is MÓ 164 at T i 694b18.  


--- Page 14 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
102 
Vibha"ga Vagga of the Majjhima Nikåya. Perhaps this caused the reciters 
to make explicit what in some instances was only implicit, by beginning 
these three discourses with the announcement that a summary and its 
exposition will be given.  
Another case where a passage in a Pali discourse may have been 
inﬂuenced by later developments can be found in the Dakkhiˆåvibha"ga 
Sutta. In the context of a treatment of different types of offering, the 
Pali version states that even if an individual monk should be of evil 
character and of bad morality, as long as a gift to him is given on behalf 
of the whole community, such a gift will be of immeasurable merit.29 Its 
Madhyama Ógama counterpart does not speak of a monk who is of evil 
character and of bad morality, but only of a monk who is not ener-
getic.30 A quotation of this passage in Íamathadeva's commentary on the 
Abhidharmakoßa also does not envisage that a monk worthy of offerings 
could be of evil character and of bad morality.31 
The Madhyama Ógama version continues by explaining that as even a 
gift to a monk who is not energetic is of much merit, what to say of the 
merit of giving to a monk who practises and has reached various ac-
complishments. The Pali version instead continues by stating that a gift 
to an individual will never be as meritorious as a gift given to the whole 
community.32 The commentary adds that even a gift given to an arahant 
individually will not measure up to a gift given to someone of bad mo-
rality, as long as the gift is given in the name of the community.33  
This presentation in the Dakkhiˆåvibha"ga Sutta and its commentary is 
surprising. If mere membership of the Buddhist order would sufﬁce to 
ensure the worthiness of receiving a gift, one would be at a loss to un-
                                                        
29  MN 142 at MN iii 256,6: ‘there will be clan members, with yellow robes around their 
necks, immoral and of evil character, I say an offering made to those immoral ones in 
the name of the community ... is incalculable and immeasurable’ (bhavissanti ... gotrab-
huno kåsåvakaˆ†hå duss¥lå påpadhammå, tesu duss¥lesu sa"ghaµ uddissa dånaµ ... 
asa"kheyyaµ appameyyaµ vadåmi). 
30  MÓ 180 at T i 722b1:,123. 
31  Derge edition mngon pa ju 255a4 or Peking edition tu 290b4. 
32  MN 142 at MN iii 256,10: ‘I say that a gift given to an individual person is never of 
greater fruit than a gift given to the community’, na ... kenaci pariyåyena sa"ghagatåya 
dakkhiˆåya på†ipuggalikaµ dånaµ mahapphalataraµ vadåmi. 
33  Ps v 75. 


--- Page 15 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
103 
derstand why in the Pali and Chinese versions of the Mahå-Assapura 
Sutta and the CË¬a-Assapura Sutta the Buddha gave recommendations on 
proper conduct to the monks in order to ensure that gifts given to them 
will be fruitful,34 or why the Pali and Chinese versions of the Óka"kheyya 
Sutta stipulate morality as a factor required to make the services and 
support a monk receives become fruitful.35 
As the declaration about the meritoriousness of a gift given to an evil 
monk of bad morality in the Dakkhiˆåvibha"ga Sutta seems difﬁcult to 
harmonize with other discourses, one might wonder whether the need 
to ensure a constant supply of gifts even for less well-behaved monks 
may have led to a conscious change of the wording of this discourse. 
Such conscious changing of the wording of a discourse, however, 
does not seem to be behind most of the variations found between Pali 
discourses and their Ógama counterparts, variations that often appear to 
be just the outcome of the vicissitudes of oral transmission. 
A passage where such a simple transmission error may have occurred 
can be found in the DantabhËmi Sutta, which proceeds from satipa††håna 
practice without giving room to thought directly to the attainment of 
the second jhåna.36 This passage strikes an unfamiliar note, since it 
seems to imply that the practice of thought-free satipa††håna corre-
sponds to the attainment of the ﬁrst jhåna.  
Though satipa††håna is an important foundation for the development 
of the jhånas,37 in itself satipa††håna does not constitute a form of jhåna. 
A central characteristic of satipa††håna meditation is to be aware of the 
changing nature of phenomena,38 whereas attainment of a jhåna re-
quires concentration on a single and stable object. Therefore one would 
not expect that practice of satipa††håna meditation enables the direct 
                                                        
34  MN 39 at MN i 271,16 and MN 40 at MN i 281,10; and their parallels MÓ 182 at T i 
724c25 and MÓ 183 at T i 725c24. 
35  MN 6 at MN i 33,16 and its parallel MÓ 105 at T i 595c23. 
36  MN 125 at MN iii 136,26: må ... vitakkaµ vitakkes¥ ti! so vitakkavicårånaµ vËpasamå ... 
dutiyajjhånaµ ... upasampajja viharati. 
37  The foundational role of satipa††håna for deeper levels of concentration can be seen 
e.g. in DN 18 at DN ii 216,12 or in S 52:6–24 at SN v 299–305. 
38  MN 10 at MN i 56,30: samudayadhammånupass¥ vå ... viharati, vayadhammånupass¥ vå ...  


--- Page 16 ---
ANÓ LAYO 
 
104 
attainment of the second jhåna, without any need to develop the ﬁrst 
jhåna. 
In view of this it comes as no surprise when one ﬁnds that the 
Madhyama Ógama counterpart to the DantabhËmi Sutta proceeds from 
thought-free satipa††håna practice to the attainment of the ﬁrst jhåna, 
before turning to the remaining jhånas.39 
Perhaps the occurrence of the word vitakka in the passage on sati-
pa††håna without thought led to a lapse on the part of the reciter(s) of 
the discourse, who continued straight away with the calming of vitakka 
mentioned at the outset of the standard descriptions of the second 
jhåna, thereby unintentionally dropping the ﬁrst jhåna in between. 
Another case of accidental loss of text appears to occur in the Chabbi-
sodhana Sutta, which describes how to check someone’s claim to be fully 
awakened.40 In spite of announcing a six-fold purity in its title, the Chab-
bisodhana Sutta presents only ﬁve aspects of the purity of an arahant. The 
Pali commentary notes this inconsistency and quotes an opinion from 
the ‘elders living on the other side of the sea’,41 who explain that the 
purity of an arahant’s attitude towards the four nutriments should also 
be taken into account. This explanation is puzzling, since though in this 
way a sixth type of purity will indeed be obtained, the Chabbisodhana 
Sutta does not refer at all to the four nutriments. 
The Madhyama Ógama parallel to the Chabbisodhana Sutta resolves 
this puzzle, as in addition to the ﬁve types of purity treated in the Pali 
version, it also describes an arahant’s detached attitude towards the four 
nutriments.42 Thus, unlike the Pali version, the Madhyama Ógama dis-
course does indeed treat a six-fold purity. 
Judging from the title of the Pali version, it seems safe to conclude 
that a similar treatment of the four nutriments originally was part of the 
Chabbisodhana Sutta’s exposition. The ‘elders living on the other side of 
the sea’, mentioned in the Pali commentary, were apparently still famil-
iar with the earlier version that included the four nutriments, a treat-
                                                        
39  MÓ 198 at T i 758b25. A translation of this discourse is under preparation for Buddhist 
Studies Review 23.1. 
40  MN 112 at MN iii 29–37. 
41  Ps iv 94: parasamuddavåsittherå. 
42  MÓ 187 at T i 732b14. 


--- Page 17 ---
PALI DI SCOU RSES A ND THEIR CHINESE PARA LLELS II 
105 
ment lost at some point before or during the transmission of the Pali 
discourse from India to Sri Lanka. 
The variations found between Majjhima Nikåya discourses and their 
Chinese parallels, selected for the present article, conﬁrm the truth of a 
statement made in the Sandaka Sutta, according to which oral tradition, 
anussava, may be well remembered or else not well remembered.43 The 
same applies all the more to the discourses found in the Chinese Óga-
mas, which in addition to transmission errors also sometimes suffer 
from translation errors. Since, however, the purpose of the present arti-
cle is to highlight the potential of the Chinese Ógamas as a corrective 
and supplement to the Pali discourses, I have selected only cases that 
illustrate this potential. 
Thanks to the efforts of the ancient reciters and translators we have a 
vast corpus of material at our disposal that enables us to place different 
versions of a discourse side by side. Such comparisons conﬁrm much of 
what a study of only one tradition will yield, in addition to which they 
bring out some details with increased clarity. The resultant vision of 
early Buddhism could be illustrated with the example of a one-eyed 
man whose second eye had its sight restored. What he now sees with 
both eyes is the same as what he saw earlier with only one eye, yet his 
vision has become broader and more precise. 
 
ANÓLAYO 
Bodhi Monastery 
 
Abbreviations 
AN 
A!guttara Nikåya 
Ps 
PapañcasËdan¥ 
Dhs 
Dhammasa"gaˆ¥ 
SÓ 
Saµyukta Ógama 
DN  
D¥gha Nikåya 
SN 
Saµyutta Nikåya 
EÓ 
Ekottarika Ógama 
T 
TaishØ 
MÓ 
Madhyama Ógama 
Vibh  
Vibha"ga 
MN 
Majjhima Nikåya 
 
 
                                                        
43  MN 76 at MN i 520,6: sussutam pi hoti dussutam pi hoti. 


--- Page 18 ---


--- Page 19 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 107–30 
 
HOW LONG IS A LIFETIME ? 
BUDDHADÓSA’S AND PHRA PAYUTTO’S 
INTERPRETATIONS OF PAÈICCASAMUPPÓDA 
IN COMPARISON* 
 
MARTIN SEEGER 
 
Introduction 
lthough it is questionable how far Buddhist beliefs in the literal 
existence of rebirth, hells and heavens are still relevant for Thai 
modern religious life,1 it is undeniable that, despite urbanization, ad-
vanced education, globalization, and modernisation, these beliefs are 
still widespread in contemporary Thailand. A survey of 1,482 students at 
six major Bangkok universities conducted in 1996 revealed that 33.1% 
of the surveyed students believe in a rebirth that is qualitatively in ac-
cordance with the kamma (Pali) performed in the current life; 21.9% of 
the students polled said that they believed in the literal existence of 
hells and heavens in which one will be reborn in accordance with the 
moral quality of one’s deeds (kamma) in this current life. And even 
more interestingly, according to this survey it seems that belief in literal 
rebirth, heavens and hells is more ubiquitously held by urban raised, 
highly educated Thais than by highly educated Thais with a rural up-
bringing.2 This shows that according to this study in the case of Thai-
                                                        
*  This paper is partly a more or less literal translation from parts of my PhD dissertation 
(Seeger 2005). Many parts, though, are the outcome of more recent ideas and re-
search. I would like to express my deepest thanks to the following persons for their 
very valuable critique on this paper: Phra Charles Nirodho (Wat Umong, Chiang Mai), 
Prof. Lambert Schmithausen (University of Hamburg), Prof. Mark Williams (Univer-
sity of Leeds), Dr Mudagamuwe Maithrimurthi (University of Leipzig), Dr Mike Parn-
well (University of Leeds), and Dr Rupert Gethin (University of Bristol). 
1  Phra Phaisan Wisalo 2546, 96. 
2  Kanittha Siphaibun and Kiti Yingyongcaisuk 2539, 22–61. 
A


--- Page 20 ---
SEEGER 
 
108 
land it cannot be inferred that urbanization and globalization are nec-
essarily leading to a demythologized worldview, at least amongst better-
educated youths. A recently conducted survey which was targeted at 
Thai students who currently study in the UK conﬁrms the outcome of 
this study. Out of thirty-six respondents to a questionnaire which I sent 
out via email, twenty-seven said that they believed in a next life. And 
twenty-four students replied that they believed in the literal existence of 
heavens and hells.3 
Another important point which can be conjectured from the two sur-
veys is the enormous diversity of beliefs and interpretations of Buddhist 
doctrines in modern Thai Buddhism. This is also corroborated by the 
apparent religious kaleidoscope of the many and multifarious move-
ments and belief systems in contemporary Thai Buddhism. Although 
Thai Buddhism was characterized by its enormous religious diversity 
before the 1902 Sa!gha Act heralded the ‘the beginning of a govern-
ment policy favouring religious as well as cultural homogenization’,4 it 
seems that its current fragmentation into diverse movements and inter-
pretations which was fostered by the rapid economic growth since the 
1960s is unprecedented in Thai history.5 
This paper seeks to explore how the two foremost Buddhist thinkers 
of modern Thailand, Buddhadåsa Bhikkhu (1906–1993) and Phra Pa-
yutto (1939–) interpret the Theravåda Buddhist canon with regard to 
the beliefs of rebirth, heaven and hells. As has been shown elsewhere,6 
the Theravåda Buddhist canon, the Tipi†aka, plays a crucial role as a 
reference and legitimating source in current Thai Buddhist debates 
about the ‘Truth’, national and religious identity, gender issues, and 
ethical norms. And in connection with these debates, the interpretation 
of canonical text is essential, since the ascertainment of the original 
meaning and authenticity, and thereby the authority, of the texts of the 
Tipi†aka is very closely connected to the interpretative approach. 
                                                        
3  Even in the West the belief in reincarnation is held by a ‘signiﬁcant minority’, e.g. 
according to the 1990 European Value Survey (EVS) 24% of the British belief in rein-
carnation (Walter 2001, 21). 
4  Kamala Tiyavanich 1997, 254. 
5  Aphinya Fuengfusakun 2541, 4; Phra Phaisan Wisalo 2546, 147–57. 
6  Seeger 2005. 


--- Page 21 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
109 
There are two tasks required to guarantee the continuity and rele-
vance of Theravåda Buddhist tradition. In order to become a normative, 
formative and, thereby, relevant text, the text surface of the canon must 
be preserved and transmitted in its most original form so that the his-
torical connection to the Buddha and his teachings will not be inter-
rupted. At the same time, however, in a process of interpretation the 
‘timeless truths’ which are embedded in these texts have to be distilled 
from its historically grown surface and subsequently accommodated to 
current socio-cultural reality. In Thailand, the canonical requirements 
of preservation of text surface with the concomitant accommodation of 
text content have recently led to various debates about the ‘right’ tex-
tual approach, as, for example, in the cases of women’s ordination in 
the Theravåda tradition, the teachings of the Wat Phra Thammakai 
temple in Pathum Thani, or the contentious text-criticism of Phra Mano 
Mettanando. Since I have already investigated this elsewhere,7 this arti-
cle will delve neither into the mechanism, debates and ideas of securing 
and ascertaining the text authenticity, nor into the debates as to how to 
approach the text hermeneutically. The aim, here, is to compare the 
two different readings of canonical teachings which are connected to 
the core teaching of rebirth. In this way, I shall investigate how the 
‘timeless truths’ of the ancient canonical texts can respond to modern 
beliefs and context. By comparing the interpretations of Buddhadåsa 
with those of Phra Payutto, it will be argued that the latter’s way of 
teaching canonical Buddhism can be characterized as inclusive and 
comprehensive and as an attempt to demonstrate the coherence, doc-
trinal richness and ﬂexibility of canonical and post-canonical texts. 
Buddhadåsa’s and Phra Payutto’s Interpretations of 
pa†iccasamuppåda 
Arguably, there is no other Buddhist tenet where the concept of rebirth 
appears in a more elaborate context than in the teaching of ‘Dependent 
Origination’ (pa†iccasamuppåda). This teaching certainly belongs among 
the most essential and peculiar doctrines of Buddhism. And at the same 
time, it is undoubtedly one of those Buddhist principles which poses the 
                                                        
7 Seeger 2005. 


--- Page 22 ---
SEEGER 
 
110 
biggest difﬁculties and challenges for understanding and interpretation. 
This may be explained by the fact that ‘apart from stating the formula 
[of pa†iccasamuppåda] and using it in a variety of contexts, the earliest 
[Buddhist] texts give very little explanation of how the formula is to be 
understood’.8 It is only in later text layers of the Theravåda tradition 
where we come across various more or less detailed explanations of this 
important teaching, as in the texts of the Abhidhammapi†aka or in the 
more recent texts of the commentarial and post-commentarial 
Theravåda literature, especially the inﬂuential Visuddhimagga that was 
composed by Buddhaghosa. The commentaries (a††hakathå) and the 
Visuddhimagga, however, were compiled or composed, respectively, rela-
tively late, namely in the ﬁfth century ce. The endeavour to grasp the 
‘original’ meaning of pa†iccasamuppåda has thus led to many different 
interpretations, speculations and theories in the ﬁeld of both modern 
Western and Thai Buddhist studies. Indeed, the Pali canon has it that 
the Buddha already warned his disciple Ónanda of the profundity of 
pa†iccasamuppåda after the latter had characterised this tenet as ‘very 
clear’ (uttånakuttånaka):  
Don’t say this, Ónanda. Don’t say this, Ónanda. Pa†iccasamuppåda is profound 
and profound in its appearance. Ónanda, it is because of the not-
understanding and not-penetrating of this teaching that beings, like a tan-
gled thread, like a knotted ball of thread, like a weave of grass and rushes, do 
not escape from the low regions, painful existences and round of rebirths.9 
In fact, the spiritual comprehension of pa†iccasamuppåda is tanta-
mount to awakening or the attainment of nibbåna, i.e. the ﬁnal and ul-
timate goal of Buddhist soteriology (M i 190–91). The objectives of this 
teaching are to show how the arising (samudaya) and cessation (nirodha) 
of suffering (dukkha) take place. 
In the canonical texts pa†iccasamuppåda occurs in various forms. In its 
complete form, though, it consists of twelve components:  
 
                                                        
8  Gethin 1998, 149. 
9  D ii 55 (= S ii 92): må h’ evaµ, Ónanda, avaca, må, Ónanda, avaca. gambh¥ro cåyaµ, 
Ónanda, pa†iccasamuppådo gambh¥råvabhåso ca. etassa, Ónanda, dhammassa ananubodhå 
appa†ivedhå evam ayaµ pajå tantåkulakajåtå gulåguˆ†hikajåtå muñjababbajabhËtå apåyaµ 
duggatiµ vinipåtaµ saµsåraµ nåtivattati. 


--- Page 23 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
111 
• 
With (1) ignorance (avijjå) as condition (paccaya), (2) volitional and af-
fective impulses (saµkhåra); 
• 
with volitional and affective impulses as condition, (3) consciousness (vi-
ññåˆa); 
• 
with consciousness as condition, (4) name and form (nåma-rËpa); 
• 
with name and form as condition, (5) the six senses (sa¬åyatana); 
• 
with the six senses as condition, (6) contact (phasso) 
• 
with contact as condition, (7) feeling (vedanå); 
• 
with feeling as condition, (8) craving (taˆhå); 
• 
with craving as condition, (9) clinging (upådåna); 
• 
with clinging as condition, (10) becoming (bhava); 
• 
with becoming as condition, (11) birth (jåti); 
• 
with birth as condition, (12) aging and dying (jarå-maraˆa), sorrow, 
lamentation, pain, mental suffering and infuriation. 
 
While this form seeks to show the process of the origination of suffer-
ing, there is another form which explains the cessation of it. In this lat-
ter form the word paccayå (‘with … as condition’) is replaced by the 
word nirodhå (‘with the cessation of …’). 
According to the established Theravåda Buddhist explanation, these 
twelve components of pa†iccasamuppåda comprise three lifetimes, i.e. 
while ignorance and volitional and affective impulses are positioned in 
one lifetime, consciousness, name and form, the six senses, contact, 
feeling, craving, clinging and becoming are thought to take place in a 
second lifetime. However, the remaining constituents – birth, aging and 
dying together with sorrow, lamentation, pain, mental suffering and 
infuriation – occur in another, third lifetime. In order to simplify mat-
ters, this explanation of pa†iccasamuppåda will be called the ‘Three-
Lifetimes Theory’ (TLT). 
In a lecture which he gave in his monastery on the 12 of June 1971, 
Buddhadåsa criticised this TLT with sharp words. He compared this 
presentation of pa†iccasamuppåda with ‘cancer, an incurable tumour of 
Buddhist scholarship [pariyatti]’.10 For Buddhadåsa, this interpretation 
is ‘un-Buddhistic’, as it is not coherent with the other canonical teach-
                                                        
10  Buddhadåsa 2538, 123. 


--- Page 24 ---
SEEGER 
 
112 
ings. According to Buddhadåsa, however, coherence is an essential con-
dition for ascertaining the authenticity of original meaning.11 
Buddhadåsa gives several reasons for his assertion: the TLT is contra-
dictory to fundamental characteristics of Buddhist teaching which – ac-
cording to the Påli canon – are that the Buddhist teaching ‘can be seen 
by oneself’ (sandi††hika), ‘is timeless’ (akålika) and ‘is to be directly ex-
perienced by the wise’ (paccattaµ veditabbo viññËhi).12 Buddhadåsa 
maintains that by dismantling it into three lifetimes pa†iccasamuppåda 
cannot be practised and loses, therefore, all these three basic character-
istics. For this reason, pa†iccasamuppåda is in this three-lifetimes explana-
tion ‘completely useless’ and has been reduced to a ‘playful polemic’.13 
In addition, Buddhadåsa holds that the TLT leads to an ‘extreme 
view’ (antagåhika-di††hi) and to the ‘view of eternalism’ (sassata-di††hi), 
which postulates a permanent self (attå). And, again, these two views 
contradict a very basic Buddhist teaching, namely the teaching of Not-
Self (anattå). Buddhadåsa says: ‘The Buddha, [however] taught 
[pa†iccasamuppåda], precisely in order to destroy the antagåhikadi††hi and 
the sassatadi††hi.’14 Buddhadåsa sees another argument for the inconsis-
tency of the TLT with the main body of original Buddhist teaching in 
the biography of the Buddha: if a literal interpretation of pa†iccasamup-
påda was correct, the Buddha would have died immediately after his 
awakening, as the elimination (nirodha) of avijjå brings about the ‘cessa-
tion of name and body’ (nåmarËpa-nirodha). And the ‘cessation of name 
and body’ in this interpretation would imply death. But since the Bud-
dha was alive for another forty-ﬁve years after his destruction of igno-
rance, the literal explanation of pa†iccasamuppåda can ‘deﬁnitively’ not 
be correct.15 
According to Buddhadåsa a semantic analysis of the term pa†icca-
samuppåda would give further weight to his proposition of the faultiness 
                                                        
11  Buddhadåsa 2538, 17–18. Buddhadåsa refers here to the famous four mahåpadesa in 
the Mahåparinibbåna Sutta (D ii 123–126; Lamotte 1947, 218–22; Bareau 1970, 222–
39; v. Hinüber 2000, 6). 
12  See M i 37; AN iii 285. 
13  Buddhadåsa 2538, 38. 
14  Buddhadåsa 2538, 91. 
15  Buddhadåsa 2538, 97. 


--- Page 25 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
113 
of the TLT: ‘the word pa†icca means “depending on”, but it is a “de-
pending on” in the sense of an uninterrupted relatedness’,16 which 
would not be possible if the components of pa†iccasamuppåda were disas-
sembled in three lifetimes. 
Buddhadåsa consequently summarizes his multifarious criticism of 
the TLT by using a canonical dichotomy and says that this reading of 
pa†iccasamuppåda contradicts the original meaning in terms of both the 
letter (byañjana) and meaning (attha).17 For Buddhadåsa 
[The TLT causes] great harm, as we lose our freedom to control our mental 
deﬁlements [kilesa] and [our] action [kamma], since both are continuously in 
an existence [jåti] other than our [current one]. This life [jåti] is the vipåka 
[i.e. the result of former lives], we ourselves are vipåka. We who we are sitting 
here are vipåka. The origin of this vipåka is the kamma and the kilesas of that 
existence, the previous existence. And, therefore, the kilesas and the kamma 
of this life will appear, as a result, as vipåka in that next life.18 
Buddhadåsa teaches how the canonical texts have to be read with the 
‘right’ hermeneutical approach, so that the authentic meaning can be 
grasped.19 The Buddha, explains Buddhadåsa, taught on two levels of 
language: while he used the ‘everyday language’ when he was teaching 
moral behaviour to ordinary people, he talked in the ‘dhamma lan-
guage’ when he was expounding the ‘higher truths’ (paramattha) to 
people with a high potential of spiritual apprehension.20 
By using this hermeneutical concept Buddhadåsa sees himself able to 
ascertain the ‘real’ meaning of pa†iccasamuppåda. In this way, birth or 
jåti does not denote ‘the birth from the belly of the mother’ or that ‘af-
ter having entered the cofﬁn, one is reborn anew’.21 The real meaning 
of birth is rather the arising of the fabricated feeling ‘I’ (tuaku, T.): 
‘Bhava or jåti in the dhamma language take place several times a day. 
That means that when an ‘I’ (tuaku) or a ‘mine’ (khongku, T.) arise 
                                                        
16  Buddhadåsa 2538, 121. 
17  Buddhadåsa 2538, 72. 
18  Buddhadåsa 2538, 91. 
19  See Gabaude 1988. 
20  Literally: ‘people with little dust in their eyes’. 
21  Buddhadåsa 2538, 109, 111. 


--- Page 26 ---
SEEGER 
 
114 
once, bhava and jåti become manifest once.’22 These ‘I’ and ‘mine’ are 
therefore  
a mental birth, which follows a contact (phassa). Wherever a phassa that is 
constituted by ignorance takes place, there is a mental birth. If, for example, 
the eye perceives a form and ignorance is involved, one is delighted in this 
form and so forth. This delightedness causes the arising of craving (taˆhå), 
i.e. a feeling (vedanå) causes taˆhå – a mind (citta) that feels craving. Here, 
we have a craving person. And then the clinging (upådåna) onto an ‘I’ arises: 
I want that, I want this, I’ve got that. If upådåna arises in this way, one calls 
this ‘getting born’, that means [the concept of] an individual is born!23 
According to Buddhadåsa’s reading, pa†iccasamuppåda is occurring ‘here 
and now’ and is a ‘mental process that leads to suffering, and happens 
quickly and strongly, like a ﬂash, and takes place in our daily life’.24 
Buddhadåsa blames the historical loss of the hermeneutic dichotomy 
of everyday language/dhamma language for the misunderstanding of 
the ‘real’ meaning of pa†iccasamuppåda. He surmises that this perversion 
of the original sense of pa†iccasamuppåda began after the Third Re-
hearsal, i.e. about 300 years after Buddha’s passing away. The oldest 
traceable testimony of this tendency of misapprehension, though, is the 
famous and inﬂuential compendium of Theravåda Buddhist doctrine, 
the Visuddhimagga, which was composed by Buddhaghosa in the ﬁfth 
century. Buddhadåsa’s criticism of Buddhaghosa, who is the most im-
portant commentator in Theravåda history is severe: he accuses him of 
having misinterpreted the original meaning of pa†iccasamuppåda and, by 
doing this, making this important Buddhist tenet Brahmanistic.25 
For his denial of the traditional TLT and for his interpretation of 
pa†iccasamuppåda as a hic and nunc occurring phenomenon, Buddhadåsa 
was attacked from various sides. This happened amongst other things 
because his disapproval of the TLT was considered as a negation of 
physical rebirth or as nihilism (natthika-di††hi). For many Thai Buddhists, 
Buddhadåsa’s metaphorical reading of jåti implied a blatant undermin-
                                                        
22  Buddhadåsa 2538, 69. 
23  Buddhadåsa 2537, 286. See also Gabaude 1988, 194. 
24  Buddhadåsa 2538, 33. 
25  Buddhadåsa 2538, 93. 


--- Page 27 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
115 
ing of their traditional Buddhist beliefs.26 In addition, Buddhadåsa’s 
interpretation was perceived as being arbitrary and heterodox.27 
In his magnum opus Buddhadhamma28 Phra Payutto points out to the 
critics of Buddhadåsa that the ‘one-moment’ or ‘daily-life’ interpreta-
tion of pa†iccasamuppåda is absolutely justiﬁable from a canonical point 
of view. At the same time, however, Phra Payutto does not agree with 
Buddhadåsa’s assertion that the TLT is a perversion of authentic Bud-
dhist meaning. For, according to Phra Payutto, the TLT can be legiti-
mated by the suttas.29 What Phra Payutto criticizes in this connection is 
not the interpretation itself but the one-sided emphasis on the TLT by 
the Theravåda tradition. According to Phra Payutto this over-
emphasizing of the TLT has completely eclipsed the daily-life explana-
tion. He agrees with Buddhadåsa that this extensive accentuation of 
TLT is a result of the enormous inﬂuence of the Visuddhimagga which 
leaves the daily-life 
interpretation of pa†iccasamuppåda entirely 
unmentioned. Phra Payutto goes on to explain that the author of the 
Visuddhimagga, Buddhaghosa, is also responsible for the composition of 
the commentarial text, the Sammohavinodan¥, which Buddhaghosa – ac-
cording to his own statement – has compiled from the ‘old commentary 
texts’ (poråˆa††hakathå).30 In a nearly identical way to the Visuddhimagga, 
the Sammohavinodan¥ explains the interpretation of pa†iccasamuppåda as 
a three-lifetime phenomenon. But in contrast to the Visuddhimagga the 
Sammohavinodan¥ also treats – although only very brieﬂy – pa†iccasamup-
påda according to the one-moment interpretation. Phra Payutto’s pre-
sumption that the complete omission of the daily-life explanation from 
the Visuddhimagga and the only brief mention in the Sammohavinodan¥ 
indicate that the daily-life interpretation had already disappeared in 
scholarly 
circles 
during 
the 
time 
of 
Buddhaghosa 
conﬁrms 
Buddhadåsa’s considerations. However, Phra Payutto does not identify 
the loss of the hermeneutic everyday-language/dhamma-language as a 
                                                        
26  Sathianphong Wannapok 2532, 41–44; Jackson 1988, 143–50; Olson 1989, 337; Su-
wanna Satha-anand 1990, 398–99. 
27  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 140; interview with Phra Payutto on 20 November 2002. 
28  Phra Thammapidok 2538a. 
29  Interview with Phra Payutto on 20 November 2002; Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 107. 
30  Vibh-a 1. 


--- Page 28 ---
SEEGER 
 
116 
reason for this, but rather sees the complexity of this teaching as re-
sponsible.31 
For Phra Payutto, the TLT and the one-moment explanation of 
pa†iccasamuppåda are actually one and the same thing: 
[I]n order to understand a matter really, it is necessary to see its components 
… The consideration of the smallest constituents is an analytical method, 
[that means that things are] deconstructed [vibhajja] so that we can see 
[their] components … At the same time we have to connect the components 
in order to describe them in accordance with the condition [sabhåva] of hu-
man existence. That means that when we conceive the interrelated micro 
components occurring in every moment in connection, a long interval will 
come into existence.32 
In reply to Buddhadåsa’s objection that the TLT is implicitly postulat-
ing a permanent self, Phra Payutto states that this is not necessarily the 
case: 
The life process functions according to the law of the three characteristics of 
being [tilakkhaˆa], which is a stable law of nature. [The three characteristics 
of being] are impermanence [aniccatå], suffering [dukkhatå] and not-self 
[anattatå]. These become manifest in jåti, jarå, and maraˆa, both in their 
coarse, superﬁcial and profound meaning … The life continuum which pro-
ceeds according to the natural law and changes according to causes and 
conditions, while not having a permanent essence, is nevertheless iden-
tiﬁable as a continuum or process that differs from other continua or proc-
esses. This life continuum is called conventional self.33 
In order to illustrate this compatibility of continuity and not-self 
[anattå], Phra Payutto gives a metaphor in which he compares the life 
continuum of an individual with a river. Compared with other rivers this 
river has individual characteristics. This river can therefore be named 
                                                        
31  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 140–42. Buddhaghosa admits (Vism 522) that the expla-
nation of pa†iccasamuppåda poses a problem for him: ‘Today I would like to explain the 
teaching of Dependency, [although] I can’t gain ground, as if submerged in a sea.’ 
(vattukåmo ahaµ ajja paccayåkåravaˆˆaµ | pati††hitaµ nådhigacchåmi ajjhogå¬ho va såga-
raµ.) 
32  Interview with Phra Payutto on 20 November 2002. 
33  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 91–92. 


--- Page 29 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
117 
and is inﬂuenced by eternal factors with which it interacts and builds up 
its individuality.34 
In this way the canonical words jåti, jarå, and maraˆa can refer to a 
physical or literal birth, but also to a mental birth which occurs in mind-
moments. In the second book of the Abhidhammapi†aka, the Vibha"ga, 
the explanation of pa†iccasamuppåda is divided into two sections: the 
suttantabhåjan¥ya, which gives the TLT, and the abhidhammabhåjan¥ya, in 
which the one-moment interpretation is expounded. In addition, Phra 
Payutto sees the daily-life explanation as legitimized by various suttas.35 
Moreover, according to him the buddhavacana (words of the Buddha) 
which corroborate the TLT can also be interpreted in the sense of the 
daily-life interpretation.36 
To Buddhadåsa’s criticism that with the traditional division of 
pa†iccasamuppåda into three life times the criteria of timelessness and 
opportunity of direct experience cannot be safeguarded, Phra Payutto 
replies that the TLT is solely an explanation with a didactic objective 
that aims in its form to make reality comprehensible: ‘We are not able 
to expound all natural realities [sabhåva] at the same time … We there-
fore have to proceed step by step… and by doing this we explain things 
in a way so that they are comprehensible.’37 
According to Phra Payutto the various constituents of pa†iccasam-
uppåda are not disconnected in the TLT, but remain connected in 
causal interdependence. The formal sequence of the twelve compo-
nents and the division into three lifetimes do not mean that 
pa†iccasamuppåda must necessarily operate along a chronological se-
quence. That is to say that the three existences (jåti) of the TLT overlap. 
In this way, the current life is at the same time the future life of the past 
life and also the past life of the future life. Thus, if ignorance (avijjå) 
and volitional and affective impulses (saµkhåra) are located in a former 
life, it does not imply that these are the only factors present. All the 
                                                        
34  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 210. 
35  Cetanåsutta (S ii 65 f.), Dukkhanirodhasutta (S ii 71–72) and the Lokanirodhasutta (S ii 
73–74). 
36  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 107; interview with Phra Payutto on 20 November 2002. 
37  Interview with Phra Payutto on 20 November 2002. 


--- Page 30 ---
SEEGER 
 
118 
other ten factors of pa†iccasamuppåda can also be present at the same 
time. Graphically, this concept can be depicted as follows: 
 
 
 
 
former life  
current life  future life  
 
former life 
current life 
future life  
 
 
 
former life 
current life 
future life 
 
This shows that, according to Phra Payutto, pa†iccasamuppåda in its di-
vision into three lifetimes has a conceptual, analytical usefulness.38 Ap-
prehended in this way, the TLT is an explanation of ‘natural realities 
[sabhåva]… [that is,] of how things take place … As things have been 
taking place, in this way things are still taking place’.39 And in this way 
this law can potentially be experienced by the human mind at any time 
and, therefore, fulﬁl the criterion of ‘timelessness’ (akålika). 
But Buddhadåsa’s criticism of the traditional interpretation is not lim-
ited to the TLT, which he believes to be a post-canonical development. 
Buddhadåsa distinguishes between three kinds of interpreting 
pa†iccasamuppåda: 
• 
the (‘authentic’) daily-life explanation, 
• 
the (‘faulty’) TLT, and 
• 
the explanation which is given in the Abhidhammapi†aka, the third 
division of the Pali canon. 
About the latter, Buddhadåsa says:  
Nåma [name] and rËpa [form] arise and cease, arise and cease, arise and 
cease, arise and cease in every mental moment [!"#$%&'()]. This is a level [of 
explanation of pa†iccasamuppåda] about which no one knows and no one 
wants to know and about which it is not necessary that you know … That is 
                                                        
38  See Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 102–07. 
39  Interview with Phra Payutto on 20 November 2002. 


--- Page 31 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
119 
the language of the Abhidhamma, which exceeds the normal needs … The 
frequency is so high that we are not aware that we are born, cease, are born, 
cease, are born, cease. We have to rely on this kind of study of the mind so 
that we know that nåma and rËpa, i.e. an individual, are born and cease, are 
born and cease with such a high frequency in every mind moment, and even 
quicker than the frequency of electricity, which we use day-to-day. This is a 
kind of being born and ceasing, being born and ceasing, which has nothing 
to do with pa†iccasamuppåda … Thus, it is excessive knowledge in the inﬂated 
manner of the Abhidhamma.40 
While Buddhadåsa considers the Abhidhamma explanation to be ‘ex-
cessive’, ‘inﬂated’ and ‘not useful’, since it cannot be put into practice, 
Phra Payutto admits that this explanation cannot obviously be found in 
the suttas, but is a work of the authors of the Abhidhamma who ‘had se-
lected the explanations [of pa†iccasamuppåda] in the suttas in order to 
connect them to one complete systematic structure’.41 None the less, 
Phra Payutto stresses the usefulness and importance of the Abhidhamma 
explanation of pa†iccasamuppåda and perceives it as a testimony for the 
expertise of the authors of the Abhidhamma: ‘The people who were able 
to compose the Abhidhamma … must have had a really high familiarity 
with the suttas.’42 Phra Payutto sees in the Abhidhamma explanation of 
pa†iccasamuppåda an example of the ﬂexibility of Buddhist teaching, 
which is able to respond to the individual situation of the interlocutor 
without having to give up its essential structure.43 
From the above, it has become clear that Phra Payutto – in contrast to 
Buddhadåsa – emphasizes that pa†iccasamuppåda is primarily a descrip-
tion of a natural process and, therefore, not a teaching instruction for 
immediate application (pa†ipatti). For, ‘our duty is to know [pa†iccasam-
uppåda].’44, since pa†iccasamuppåda is ‘a natural process [#*&+,-#.* 
$/01**23.)(] and shows a natural phenomenon. It is not a path of 
                                                        
40  Buddhadåsa 2538, 81–82. 
41  Inteview with Phra Payutto on 20 November 2002. 
42  Interview with Phra Payutto on the 20 November 2002. In contrast to this, it seems 
that for Buddhadåsa the Abhidhammapi†aka does not have a particularly important sote-
riological value. He says that the Abhidhammapi†aka could be thrown into the sea and 
the world would miss nothing (Gabaude 1988, 164). 
43  Interview with Phra Payutto on 20 November 2002. 
44  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 570; see also: Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 121. 


--- Page 32 ---
SEEGER 
 
120 
practice [pa†ipadå]’.45 Or in other words, within the Buddhist teaching, 
pa†iccasamuppåda is located in the area of dhammadesanå (teaching of the 
truth), which aims to establish ‘right view’ (sammådi††hi). This right view, 
however, is ‘only’ one component of the Noble Eightfold Path which in 
its entirety is the Buddhist practice.46 
It seems that for Phra Payutto pa†iccasamuppåda of the Abhidhamma al-
lows a more profound way of looking at reality than Buddhadåsa’s ‘oc-
casional one-mind-moment interpretation’. According to Phra Payutto, 
pa†iccasamuppåda shows that, due to their ignorance, human beings per-
ceive conditioned things as essential and categorize them as ‘being, per-
son, Self, we or he’. But, actually, all these things are only 
streams consisting of small material and mental components, which are re-
lated to and condition each other … The individual is a result of feelings, 
thoughts, wishes, habits, prejudices, views, knowledge, understandings, be-
liefs […], opinions, various feelings of value and so on. At any speciﬁc point 
in time, all this is a result of cultural tradition, education and upbringing and 
all the various reactions, which are happening in the mind and which are di-
rected towards the environment and are taking place permanently … It does 
not matter which point in time we take, it is always the case that the human 
being is seeking a condition which has more happiness than the current 
moment. Ordinary people, therefore, brush every current moment away or 
break away from it. Every single moment is a life condition which is unbear-
able. One wants to disappear, one wants his self to escape [from this condi-
tion] in order to attain a condition which satisﬁes the needs. The will to get, 
the will to be, and the will not to be, rotate the whole time in the daily life of 
ordinary people. This is a process that is so subtly taking place in every mind-
moment that human beings are not aware that life per se is a struggle in 
every single moment: one wants to escape from the elapsed moment and to 
seek for a means of satisfaction in a new life situation.47 
                                                        
45  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 573. 
46  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 121. This does, of course, not mean that sammadi††hi is 
not important in Phra Payutto’s eyes. Quite the opposite is the case. For Phra Payutto 
emphasizes the great importance of sammadi††hi, which according to him plays a very 
crucial role in the Buddhist practise: it is the starting point, the leader and the end in 
the practise of the Noble Eightfold Path (see Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 613–16). 
47  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 123–24. 


--- Page 33 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
121 
Whereas Buddhadåsa seems to perceive little value in the preoccupa-
tion with the subtler mind-processes, for Phra Payutto the study of the 
mind on this level allows for a profound understanding of the workings 
of mind which he deems necessary for the right comprehension of an-
other very central teaching of Buddhism, namely that of kamma. Be-
sides, according to Phra Payutto, this approach can be connected to the 
ﬁndings of Freudian psychoanalysis, and thereby facilitate the under-
standing of the complex kamma-tic processes.48 Phra Payutto explains 
these two points as follows: ‘All the things we do, think about … do not 
disappear. They are all in our mind. We only are not aware of it and 
can’t recall them via our consciousness.’49 The actual results of our bod-
ily, verbal and, most importantly, mental actions50 become mainly mani-
fest in the unconscious mind which forms the huge part of the ‘ex-
tremely complex human mind’. In Buddhism the conscious mind-level, 
which is only the minor part of ‘the iceberg that has its greatest part 
under water’, is called v¥thicitta. The subconscious mind, though, is 
called bhava"ga.51 And it is precisely on this level of the unconscious 
mind where we normally start to fabricate our own characteristic traits 
which will cause us to experience or perceive the world in a certain way. 
The bhava"ga mind therefore is the starting point for the creation of 
both one’s individual fate (3&).#**2) and also of the fate of the whole 
of society. For it is in the mind where the societal values originate.52 His 
teachings about ‘social kamma’ which are based on this idea are a nov-
elty in Thai society, where kamma has been taught and understood 
mostly as an exclusively individual process. Phra Payutto’s emphasis on 
the social aspects of such basic doctrines as kamma and pa†iccasamuppåda 
                                                        
48  Phra Payutto criticises various misunderstandings and confusions about the Buddhist 
concept of kamma that are very widespread in Thailand (Phra Thammapidok 2538b, 
3–12). It is e.g. often believed that kamma is a mysterious, wondrous power that ‘ﬂoats 
in an unknown place, ambuscades in order to punish us’ (Phra Thammapidok 2538b, 
76). For Phra Thammapidok’s own understanding of kamma, see Payutto 1996. 
49  Phra Thammapidok 2538b, 82. 
50  Kåya-kamma, vac¥-kamma and mano-kamma. 
51  Phra Thammapidok 2538b, 80. 
52  Phra Thammapidok 2538b, 78–79. 


--- Page 34 ---
SEEGER 
 
122 
could therefore have enormous implications for further interpretations 
of the social and structural dimensions of the canonical doctrines.53 
With regard to canonical passages which deal with ‘heavens and 
hells’, when compared with his interpretation of pa†iccasamuppåda, Phra 
Payutto seems to have an equivalent way of reading the texts. For he 
reads them on three semantic levels: while admitting that according to 
the Pali canon the existence of ‘heavens and hells’ as actual post mortem 
planes of being cannot be denied, he explains that it is possible to in-
terpret canonical mention of ‘heavens and hells’ in a metaphorical way, 
as well. At the same time, however, Phra Payutto observes that although 
the canonical mention of post mortem heavens and hells is quite ubiqui-
tous, detailed descriptions of how these modes of being look are not 
found very often in the canon.54 Descriptions of heavens and hells can 
be most frequently found in the Khuddaka Nikåya. Phra Payutto, 
though, cautions against understanding these depictions literally, since 
they are to be understood as literary means which use pictures for di-
dactic purposes. That means that already existing belief systems were 
used in order to explain the Buddhist teaching. Later, in the commen-
tarial literature, this approach has been expanded, became associated 
with brahmanastic ideas and was developed into a complex cosmology.55 
Phra Payutto surmises that the canonical terms for heavens and hells 
designate concrete levels of existence (bhava, bhËmi) which are located 
in ‘another dimension’ (4-5&2()(). According to Phra Payutto, canoni-
cal terms like sahass¥lokadhåtu and dasasahass¥lokadhåtu (‘thousand fold 
universe’ and ‘ten-thousand fold universe’ respectively) suggest the exis-
tence of countless universes which have such subtle qualities that mean 
they cannot be perceived with the human senses under normal circum-
stances.56 
                                                        
53  Payutto 1996, 60–72; Suwanna Satha-anand 2002, 80–82; Phra Phaisan Wisalo 2546, 
447–455. 
54  Especially the Bålapaˆ!itasutta (M iii 163–78) and the DevadËtasutta (M iii 178–87) 
give detailed accounts of heavens and hells. Both suttas have had a great inﬂuence on 
descriptions of heavens and hells in the later literature. 
55  The Thai-Buddhist text Traiphum Phra Ruang is a very good testimony to this tendency 
(Reynolds & Reynolds 1982). 
56  Interview with Phra Payutto on 15 July 2002. 


--- Page 35 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
123 
With regard to the metaphorical level, Phra Payutto discriminates be-
tween a coarse state of mind and very subtly proceeding mind processes 
which  
means the mental state, which is the permanent perception or reaction to 
perceived things in every moment … it is the permanent fabrication and col-
lection on a very subtle level. Its results become manifest on the second level 
… When we talk about the long-term manifestation of these results, we arrive 
at the hells and heavens of the ﬁrst level [which is the literal meaning]. All 
[these three levels] are [in this way] connected …57 
Conclusion 
It has frequently been noted that Buddhadåsa’s way of teaching Bud-
dhist doctrine is indeed able to respond to the religious needs of mod-
ern intellectual Buddhists but is asking too much of Buddhists of other 
population strata.58 It seems that – expressed in the words of Max Weber 
– Buddhadåsa’s teachings are missing an accommodation to the ‘spe-
ciﬁcally religious need for emotional experience of the superworldly 
and for emergency aid in external and inner distress’.59 With the help of 
his hermeneutical theory, Buddhadåsa reduces phenomena like heav-
ens, hells, rebirth and so on (all mentioned in the Pali canon) to mental 
processes which can be experienced in the here and now. Although, he 
does not explicitly deny the existence of these things in their literal 
meaning, his way of teaching Buddhist doctrine has been understood as 
a narrow, positivistic Buddhism. And it was said about him that he has 
the belief that ‘all Buddhist concepts are empirical and to make them 
metaphysical is to make Buddhism not Buddhism’.60 Also, when viewed 
from the outcomes of Western historical-philological research in 
Buddhology which tries to identify the ‘original intention’ on the basis 
of ‘relevant primary sources’ dealing with pa†iccasamuppåda, Buddha-
dåsa’s reading seems to be highly problematic. For, according to 
                                                        
57  Phra Thammapidok 2545, 46. 
58  Nithi Iausiwong 2537, 106; Sisak Wanliphodom in Phra Thammapidok et al. 2544, 
129; Gabaude 1990, 211–29. In this context, Gabaude refers to Buddhadåsa’s teach-
ings as ‘a “bitter portion” to swallow for the majority of the Thais’ (211). 
59  Weber 1958, 236–37. 
60  Somparn Promta 1999, 98. 


--- Page 36 ---
SEEGER 
 
124 
Schmithausen, the argument that the distribution of pa†iccasamuppåda 
over three existences cannot be found in the canon is not tenable: al-
though this concept cannot explicitly be found in the canon, it is clear 
that ‘the original intention’ aims to analyze literal rebirth and its condi-
tions.61 In contrast, Phra Payutto’s explanations of pa†iccasamuppåda 
seem to be more compatible with the position proposed by Western 
Buddhologists. For Phra Payutto carefully separates and highlights the 
different stages of the development of the teaching of pa†iccasamuppåda. 
His explanations try to integrate the various explanations of 
pa†iccasamuppåda into one coherent ediﬁce and, by doing this, give le-
gitimacy to all of them. 
At this point, however, two things must be emphasized. Buddhadåsa, 
and the same applies to Phra Payutto, are primarily not philologists but 
– in its broader sense – ‘theologians’: their textual interpretations aim 
to distil truths which can be put into a spiritual practice that leads to the 
soteriological goal of nibbåna and which can be veriﬁed by this practice. 
That means that it is primarily not their objective to understand the ca-
nonical texts but reality with the help of these texts. Also, it has to be 
kept in mind that Buddhadåsa’s messages – ‘a “bitter potion” to swallow 
for the majority of the Thais’62 – and his sharp language have to be un-
derstood in their speciﬁc socio-historical context of Thai Buddhism, 
where popular beliefs in kamma and literal rebirth are very often associ-
ated with rather materialistic or superstitious notions and practices, 
which seem to have no canonical legitimacy: life-prolonging ceremo-
nies, donating money in order to be reborn as a millionaire, the amulet-
                                                        
61   Schmithausen 2000, 41: ‘soll hier noch einmal versucht werden, anhand der relevan-
ten Primärquellen so nahe wie möglich an die ursprüngliche Intention heranzukom-
men’. Schmithausen 2000, 74: ‘Auch das Argument, dass die Verteilung der zwölf-
gliedrigen Formel auf drei Existenzen das Werk der Abhidharma-Systematiker sei und 
nirgendwo im Kanon vorkommen würde – und deshalb sekundär und der Sache nicht 
gemäß sei – dürfte sich durch die obigen Überlegungen zur Genese dieser Formel er-
ledigt haben …’ See also Bodhi 1998a and 1998b. In these two articles, Bhikkhu 
Bodhi tries to vindicate the TLT against Ñåˆav¥ra’s suggestion that this traditional 
reading of pa†iccasamuppåda is a product of later tradition which is not in conformity 
with the earliest Buddhist teaching. For Ñåˆav¥ra, the original pa†iccasamuppåda is non-
temporal and applies to the present life only. 
62  Gabaude 1990, 211. 


--- Page 37 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
125 
market, nibbåna imagined as some kind of heavenly paradise, the con-
cepts of an eternal self, and so forth. Buddhadåsa perceived these con-
cepts as ‘wrong views’ which he wanted to ‘destroy’.63 
In Thai buddhology, by some of the most inﬂuential Thai Buddhist 
thinkers, canonical sections where demons and gods play a decisive role 
have been perceived either as later accretions to the original texts or as 
a metaphorical code which has to be deciphered with the ‘right’ her-
meneutical approach.64 
In this point Phra Payutto’s reading of the Påli canon differs enor-
mously from Buddhadåsa and other inﬂuential Thai thinkers. Without 
addressing the issue of the ontology of all the things beyond the normal 
empirical scope, Phra Payutto accepts these things in their literal mean-
ing.65 According to this topic, for didactic reasons the Buddha has in-
corporated these things in his teachings. Following this example in his 
lectures and books, Phra Payutto uses phenomena like wonders (iddhi-
på†ihåriya), past and future lives, deities, heavens and hells both in their 
literal and their metaphorical meaning. His teaching strategy tries har-
moniously to integrate these motives into one system that leads its re-
cipients to the principal doctrines of Buddhism. For him, even the be-
lief in spirits (phi, T.) which is very widespread in Thailand can be toler-
ated and legitimized from a canonical point of view and can be coher-
ent with original Buddhism if the Thais take the right attitude towards 
the spirits. Furthermore, Phra Payutto argues that even the acceptance 
of amulets and other ‘magic’ or ‘holy things’ (64*78/0*.0$/0$590/ 
:(80;9#<(=:(!1(=) can be legitimized from a canonical point of view given that 
interaction with these things is coherent with Buddhist teaching.66 
The comprehensiveness, ﬂexibility and inclusivity of Phra Payutto’s 
approach can arguably be best demonstrated by his teachings on 
pa†iccasamuppåda and the related teachings about heaven, hell and re-
birth, which allow at the same time a macro- and microcosmic level of 
reading. As a result, this explanation can tolerate the concept of physi-
                                                        
63  Gabaude 1994, 48. ‘As he grew older, [Buddhadåsa] acknowledged that being so out-
spoken had never really paid off except in a negative way.’ (Gabaude 1994, 49) 
64  Seeger 2005, 264. 
65  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 455–56. 
66  Phra Thammapidok 2538a, 474–75. 


--- Page 38 ---
SEEGER 
 
126 
cal rebirths, which can occur in the different levels of existence, mental 
conditions and permanently proceeding mental processes on such a 
subtle level that most people are not even aware of it. However, the ob-
jective – and here he is in complete agreement with Buddhadåsa – re-
mains always the same: the motivation for Buddhist practice in the here 
and now. 
Furthermore, as has been shown, his comprehensive and ﬂexible in-
terpretation of pa†iccasamuppåda is also a starting point for his teachings 
about the social dimensions of canonical doctrines which go far beyond 
the perception that Buddhism is concerned with the individual mind 
only. 
By convincingly explaining a wide range of canonical and post ca-
nonical texts as coherent and, thereby, as authentic and authoritative, 
Phra Payutto is able to incorporate the doctrinal variations of later 
commentarial Theravåda tradition. He has thereby a wider scope of 
meaning and, therefore, ﬂexibility in the accommodation at hand. For 
him, the canon is primarily not a source for the reconstruction of his-
torical events. Rather, he perceives the Tipi†aka as a corpus with a peda-
gogical purpose. This means that he reads the Pali canon not histori-
cally but pragmatically. 
Although Phra Payutto’s way of teaching Buddhism is distinguished 
by its comprehensiveness and inclusiveness, it seems that it does not 
receive much reception from social strata outside the middle-class intel-
lectuals or educated monks. For many Thais, the complexity of his lan-
guage and argumentations pose too big an intellectual challenge. In this 
regard, he has been criticised for using language that is too academic 
and, therefore, hardly comprehensible to non-intellectuals.67 His way of 
teaching Buddhism is perceived as ‘dry’ and unattractive.68 For these 
reasons, it is hardly possible that Phra Payutto’s teachings will directly 
expand into the rural or less educated social strata of Thai society. What 
                                                        
67  Phra Thammaraksa 2538, 113; Phra Chayasaro Phikkhu 2539, 40; Pricha 
Changkhwanyuen 2540, 1–54, 161–70; Olson 1989, 376–84, 396. According to Pricha 
Changkhwanyuen (2540, 51), Phra Payutto books lack a ‘motivating character’ and 
are therefore not able to raise faith in the Buddhist religion. 
68  Phra Thammaraksa 2538, 113; Rawi Phawilai 2539, 104; interview with Sathianphong 
Wannapok on 21 August 2002. 


--- Page 39 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
127 
is needed for this purpose are followers who, having ‘digested’ his mes-
sage, convert it into a simpler language. 
Unlike Phra Payutto, Buddhadåsa often uses catchy and provocative 
slogans or titles, like ‘Empty Mind’, ‘nibbåna here and now’, ‘die before 
you die’ or ‘heaven in every movement’. This causes a stir, attracts atten-
tion and gives his teachings a lasting effect. Also, in contrast to Phra Pa-
yutto, Buddhadåsa is regarded, in addition to his image as a ‘monk of 
wisdom’, as a ‘master’ (acan, T.) who teaches the meditative aspects of 
Buddhism.69 Whereas Buddhadåsa has affected Thai Buddhism through 
his books, his charisma and his monastery Suan Mokh, which is one of 
the most famous in the whole of Thailand, Phra Payutto is mostly and 
almost always revered for his intellectual accomplishments of which his 
many books are testimony.70 Buddhadåsa perceives himself as a ‘de-
stroyer’ – ‘not of people but of their wrong views and passion’71 and 
tries to galvanize Thai society with his ‘shocking’ messages.72 Phra Pa-
yutto’s approach, though, is to build up a ‘bridge’ to the people, in or-
der to lead them from their current standpoints to the canonical ideals. 
 
Martin Seeger 
University of Leeds 
 
Bibliography 
 
Aphinya Fuengfusakun (2541 be), ‘Nganwicai satsanathat khong chumchon mueng samai 
mai sueksa korani wat phra thammakai’ [Research Report: the Religious Views of the 
New Urban Population: a Study of the Wat Phra Thammakai Case], in: Journal of Bud-
dhist Studies of the Chulalongkorn University 5 (1), pp. 4–88. 
Bareau, André (1970), Recherches sur la biographie du Buddha dans les SËtrapi†aka et les Vi-
nayapi†aka anciens, Paris: École Française d’Extrême-Orient. 
                                                        
69  Olson 1990, 261. 
70  Interview with Phra Phaisan Wisalo on 20 October 2002. 
71  Gabaude 1994, 47–50. 
72  Jackson 1988, 146; Olson 1989, 257. 


--- Page 40 ---
SEEGER 
 
128 
Bodhi, Bhikkhu (1998a), ‘A Critical Examination of Ñåˆav¥ra Thera’s “A Note on 
Pa†iccasamuppåda” Part One’, in: Buddhist Studies Review 15 (1), pp. 43–64. 
—— 
(1998b), 
‘A 
Critical 
Examination 
of 
Ñåˆav¥ra 
Thera’s 
“A 
Note 
on 
Pa†iccasamuppåda” Part Two’, in: Buddhist Studies Review 15 (2), pp. 157–81. 
Buddhadåsa Bhikkhu (2537 be), Idappaccayatå khong Phutthathat Phikkhu: chabapyonkhwam 
cak chut thammakhot [Buddhadåsa’s idappaccayatå, abbreviated edition from the Tham-
makhot series], Bangkok: Sukhaphapcai. 
—— (2538 be), Pa†iccasamuppåda khue arai? [What is pa†iccasamuppåda?], Bangkok: Suk-
haphapcai. 
Chayasao, Phra (2539 be), ‘Interview’ in: Nanathatsana kiaukap Phra Thammapidok (Prayut 
Payutto) [Various Views on Phra Thammapidok (Prayut Payutto)], interviewed and ed-
ited by Dr. Sunthon Phlamin and Chutima Thanapura, pp. 32–47. 
Gabaude, Louis (1988), Une herméneutique contemporaine de Thaïlande: Buddhadasa Bhikkhu, 
Paris: École Française d’Extrême-Orient. 
—— (1990), ‘Thai Society and Buddhadasa: Structural Difﬁculties’ in: Radical Conserva-
tism. Buddhism in the Contemporary World. Articles in Honour of Buddhadasa’s 84th Birthday 
Anniversary, Bangkok: Thai Inter-Religious Commission for Development and the In-
ternational Network of Engaged Buddhist, pp. 211–29. 
—— (1994), ‘Buddhadasa’s Contribution as Human Being, as a Thai, as a Buddhist’ in: 
The Quest for a Just Society: The Legacy and Challenge of Buddhadasa Bhikkhu, Sulak 
Sivaraksa (ed.), Bangkok: The Inter-Religious Commission for Development Santi 
Pracha Dhamma Institute, pp. 155–75. 
Gethin, Rupert (1998), The Foundations of Buddhism, Oxford, New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
v. Hinüber, Oskar (2000), A Handbook of Påli Literature, Berlin and New York: W. de 
Gruyter. 
Jackson, Peter A. (1988), Buddhadasa: a Buddhist Thinker for the Modern World. Bangkok: 
Siam Society under Royal Patronage. 
Kamala Tiyavanich (1997), Forest Recollections: Wandering Monks in Twentieth-century Thai-
land, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books. 
Kanittha Siphaibun and Kiti Ingyongcaisuk (2539 be), ‘Raingan kanwicai: phruettikam lae 
khwamchuea thang satsana khong naksueksa chauphut nai mahawitthayalai khong rat 
nai Krungthepmahanakhon’ [Research Report: Religious Behaviour and Beliefs of 
Students of State Universities in Bangkok], in: Journal of Buddhist Studies of the Chula-
longkorn University 3(3), pp. 5–61. 


--- Page 41 ---
HOW LONG IS A LIF ETI M E ? 
129 
Lamotte, Étienne (1947), ‘La critique de l’authenticité dans le Bouddhisme’, in: India 
Antiqua. A Volume of Oriental Studies Presented to J. Ph. Vogel, Leiden: Brill, pp. 213–22. 
Nithi Iausiwong (2537 be), ‘Latthiphithicaumaekuanim [The Ritualism Mae Kuanim]’ in: 
Sinlapawatthanatham 15 (10) Aug. pp. 78–106. 
Olson, Grant Allan (1989), ‘A Person-Centered Ethnography of Thai Buddhism: The Life 
of Phra Rajavaramuni (Prayudh Payutto)’, unpublished PhD dissertation, Cornell Uni-
versity. 
—— (1990), ‘From Buddhadasa Bhikkhu to Phra Debvedi: Two Monks of Wisdom’ in: 
Radical Conservatism. Buddhism in the Contemporary World. Articles in Honour of Buddha-
dasa’s 84th Birthday Anniversary, Bangkok: Thai Inter-Religious Commission for Devel-
opment and the International Network of Engaged Buddhist, pp. 251–67. 
Payutto, P.A. (1996), Good, Evil and Beyond: Kamma in the Buddha’s Teaching, Bangkok: 
Buddhadhamma Foundation. 
Phaisan Wisalo, Phra (2546 be), Phutthasatsana thai nai anakhot naeunom lae thangok cak 
wikrit [Thai Buddhism in the Future: Tendencies and the Way out of the Crisis], Bang-
kok: Sotsi-Saritwong Foundation. 
Pricha Changkhwanyuen (2540 be), Thammawacanawohan, Bangkok: Chulalongkorn 
University. 
Rawi Phawilai (2539 be), ‘Interview’ in: Nanathatsana kiaukap Phra Thammapidok (Prayut 
Payutto) [Various Views on Phra Thammapidok (Prayut Payutto)], interviewed and ed-
ited by Dr. Sunthon Phlamin and Chutima Thanapura, pp. 91–113.  
Reynolds, Frank E. and Reynolds, Mani B. (1982), Three Worlds According to King Ruang: A 
Thai Buddhist Cosmology, Translation with Introduction and Notes by Frank E. Reynolds 
& Mani B. Reynolds, Berkeley: University of California. 
Sathianphong Wannapok (2532 be), Cak Sathianphong Wannapok thueng Phra Thepwethi lae 
Phutthathat Phikkhu [From Sathianphong Wannapok to Phra Thepwethi and 
Buddhadåsa Bhikkhu], Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation. 
Schmithausen, Lambert (2000), ‘Zur zwölfgliedrigen Formel des Entstehens in Abhän-
gigkeit’, in: HØrin 7, pp. 41–76. 
Seeger, Martin (2005), Phra Dhammapi†aka und die Påli-Kanon-Debatte in Thailand: Ein Bei-
trag zur Untersuchung des modernen Buddhismus, Hamburg: Staats- und Universitätbiblio-
thek Hamburg Carl von Ossietzky 
 
(http://www.sub.uni-hamburg.de/opus/volltexte/2005/2342/). 
Somparn Promta (1999), ‘Buddhism and Science in Thai Society’ in: Manusya: Journal of 
Humanities 2 (2) Sept. pp. 88–105.  


--- Page 42 ---
SEEGER 
 
130 
Suwanna Satha-anand (1990), ‘Religious Movements in Contemporary Thailand: Bud-
dhist Struggles for Modern Relevance’, in: Asian Survey 30 (4) Apr. p. 395–407. 
—— (2002), ‘Karma as Moral Justice in Thai Buddhism’ in: Manusya: Journal of Humanities 
Special Issue No. 4, p. 72-83. 
Thammapidok, Phra (2538a be), Phutthatham [Buddhadhamma], Bangkok: Mahachu-
lalongkorn University. 
—— (2538b be), Narok-sawan samrap konrunmai [Hells and Heavens for the New Genera-
tion], Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation. 
—— (2545 be), Narok-sawan nai Phra Traipidok [Hells and Heavens in the Tipi†aka], 
Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation. 
Thammapidok, Phra, Prawet Wasi, Ekawit na Thalang (2544 be), Sawaengha thangok cak 
phawa wikrit phaitai khwamsapson khong sangkhom thai [To Seek for a Way out of the Cri-
sis under the Complexity of Thai Society], Bangkok: Phakhathat. 
Thammaraksa, Phra (2538 be), Phra Thepwethi nakpatibat nai khrap khong nakwichakan 
[Phra Thepwethi: The Practitioner in the Skin of a Scholar], Bangkok: Rungsaenkan-
phim. 
Walter, Tony (2001), ‘Reincarnation, Modernity and Identity’ in: Sociology 35(1), p. 21-38. 
Weber, Max (1958), The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism, trans. 
and edited by Hans H. Gerth and Don Martindale, Glencoe, Illinois: The Free Press. 
 


--- Page 43 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 131–39 
 
APSARASES: THE BUDDHIST CONVERSION 
OF THE NYMPHS OF HEAVEN * 
 
LINDA COVILL 
 
he Saundarananda, a mahåkåvya composed by the Buddhist monk 
and poet Aßvagho"a in the early second century of the common era, 
contains amongst its dramatis personae a pivotal character – or rather, 
500 pivotal characters – of whom little notice has been taken by modern 
scholars but who aroused a great deal of interest in earlier times. This is 
the minor female divinity known in Sanskrit as an apsaras and in Pali as 
accharå, commonly depicted in Indian mythology as an inhabitant of 
heaven. An accomplished singer and dancer, and always ravishingly 
beautiful, the Apsaras was a popular subject for artists and sculptors. 
Sometimes she is shown in ﬂight, sometimes standing in the typical 
tribha"ga or triple bend pose, which accentuates her curves.1 Both In-
dian folklore, especially in its epic-puråˆic phase, and Pali Buddhism 
include the Apsaras in the heavenly package with which the virtuous are 
rewarded in the afterlife. However, Buddhism tended to shy away from 
the open eroticism which the epic-puråˆic imagination invested in the 
Apsaras, preferring to envisage her as a demure lady-in-waiting. This 
article summarises these two opposing conceptions of the Apsaras, and 
also investigates a few traces of her sexuality that remain in early Bud-
dhist literature. 
The origin of the Apsarases is attributed in the Råmåyaˆa to the 
churning of the ocean. However, it is said that when they emerged, nei-
ther the gods nor the asuras would have them for wives, so they became 
common to all. Although Vedic literature associates them with trees and 
                                                        
*  This article was presented as a paper to the Fourteenth Conference of the Interna-
tional Association of Buddhist Studies, London, on 2 September 2005. 
1  At Angkor Wat in Cambodia there are over 1,600 representations of Apsarases. They 
are also found in carvings at Borobudur in Indonesia and in frescoes at Sigiriya in Sri 
Lanka. 
T


--- Page 44 ---
COVI LL 
 
132 
water, in later literature they are conceptualised as residing in svarga – 
heaven, speciﬁcally the Trayastriµßas heaven presided over by Indra, 
and in particular, as amusing themselves in the heavenly garden of de-
light known as Nandana. A man reborn here would ﬁnd that his experi-
ence of heaven consists of the perfect satisfaction of his senses, which all 
continue to operate. The Bhagavad G¥tå (ix 20d), for instance, men-
tions that those who reach the domain of Indra ‘enjoy the divine pleas-
ures of the gods’ (aßnanti divyån divi deva-bhogån). The underlying 
metaphor of eating – aßnanti, literally, ‘they eat’ – reveals that this is a 
heaven in which physical functionality endures. Heaven is beautiful to 
look at, smells nice, and it is cooled by pleasant breezes. There is plenti-
ful food and drink of a celestial standard, while entertainment is offered 
by the Apsarases, the heavenly nymphs, who dance and sing divinely. 
Music and song are not all that they offer, though, for they are also 
strongly associated with sex, nor do they conﬁne their favours to the 
Gandharvas, the heavenly musicians with whom they are often paired. 
Already in the Ùg Veda (RV) passing reference is made to the sexuality 
of the Apsarases; one passage2 refers to the Apsarases as taking lovers 
(jåra), while another3 relates the myth of the Apsaras Urvaß¥, casting her 
as a decidedly sexual being. Temporarily banished from heaven, she 
comes to earth and becomes the adored lover of King PurËravas, who, it 
is said, makes love to her three times a day (this story is most famously 
rendered in Kålidåsa’s drama Vikramorvaß¥). The Atharva Veda (AV) spe-
ciﬁes that in heaven the virtuous man is blessed with a perfect body, free 
of disease and distortion. It also bluntly informs us that a man’s penis is 
not incinerated in the funeral ﬁre, but is retained in heaven, adding 
that for such a man, many womenfolk – bahu straiˆam – are his.4  
The popular perception of the Apsarases as celestial paramours for 
those who have been virtuous in their conduct, zealous in their ritual-
ism, or courageous in battle is embodied chieﬂy within the epic-puråˆic 
tradition. The Mahåbhårata (MBh) stresses the Apsarases’s physical at-
tributes, seductiveness and immodest gestures, and often depicts them 
                                                        
2  RV x 123,5. 
3  RV x 95. The story is also found at Íatapatha Bråhmaˆa xi 5,1. 
4  AV vi 120,3 and iv 34,2. 


--- Page 45 ---
APSAR ASES 
133 
as underdressed, such as Tilottamå who wears just one piece of red 
cloth,5 or even naked, such as Menakå after the wind whips off her 
skirt.6 The epic provides a list of the quintessential features of the Ap-
saras: she has lotus eyes with which she casts ﬂirtatious glances, a narrow 
waist, heavy buttocks, and breasts that jiggle as she dances. She invaria-
bly disturbs the mind of any man who beholds her.7 Typically, an Ap-
saras is sent by Indra to distract a sage from his tapas, since Indra is no-
toriously jealous of and alarmed by the ascetically derived power of 
sages. Ironically, those same sages are rewarded for their ascetic re-
straint by the sexual possession of those very Apsarases in heaven.8 In 
contrast to St. Augustine’s wish to be chaste later9, it seems that Indian 
sages are chaste ﬁrst and are later rewarded with the ﬂeshpots of 
heaven. At other times the nymphs do act independently. So Urvaß¥, 
bent on the seduction of Arjuna, says: 
All [Apsarases] are unconﬁned in their choice … [Those] that have come 
here as a result of ascetic merit enjoy us without incurring any sin. Please do 
not to send me away tormented and burning with desire. Make love with me 
who loves you, O hero.10 
Turning to the Pali textual tradition, one discovers that the Accharås 
appear frequently in similes, where they ﬁgure as the conventional 
upamåna, or object of comparison, for the dancing girls who grace the 
courts of kings. In these similes, the number of dancing girls, and hence 
of the Accharås, often seems to be ﬁxed at either 8,000 or 16,000.11 The 
use of an Apsaras as a sexual weapon deployed by Indra is also retained 
                                                        
5  MBh i 204, 9 
6  MBh i 66, 5 
7 
etåß cånyåß ca nan®tus tatra tatra varå"ganå˙ | citta-pramathane yuktå˙ siddhånåµ padma-
locanå || mahå-ka†i-ta†a-ßroˆya˙ kampamånai˙ payodharai˙ | ka†åk#a-håva-mådhuryaiß ceto 
buddhi-manoharå˙ || (MBh iii 44, 31–32) 
8  MBh xiii 109, 52; 110, 12, 15, for example. In the ﬁrst of these, ‘a hundred virgin 
Apsarases will pleasure that man [who honours the gods]’ (ßataµ cåpsarasa˙ kanyå 
ramayanti taµ naram). 
9  Confessions viii, 7: ‘Give me chastity and continence, but not yet.’ 
10  anåv®tåß ca sarvåh… || … ye … tv ihågatåh | tapaså ramayanty asmån na ca te#åµ vyatik-
rama˙ || tvat pras¥da na måm årtåµ visarjjayitum arhasi | h®cchayena ca santaptåµ bhaktåµ 
ca bhaja månada || (MBh iii 1858–60, Calcutta edition, 1834) 
11  e.g. Jåtaka i 470, iii 408. 


--- Page 46 ---
COVI LL 
 
134 
in one Jåtaka story. Indra, here named Sakka, sends the nymph Alam-
buså to seduce the ascetic Isisi!ga. However, in an interesting Buddhist 
twist, when Alambuså is later offered a boon, she asks never to have to 
seduce another ascetic again.12 Indeed, she had previously requested 
that some other Accharå be given the job. Such moral misgivings are 
entirely absent in the stereotypical Apsaras of the Mahåbhårata. This 
Jåtaka story reﬂects the dilemma for Buddhism which, with its ascetic 
bent and its emphasis on containment and dispassion, was uncomfort-
able with holding out a promise of celestial prostitutes as a post-mortem 
reward for its adherents. Where such a promise is made, as in the well-
known story of Nanda to be discussed shortly, it is hedged about with 
exculpatory justiﬁcations. The general unease felt by the tradition in 
respect of the Accharås is evident in the Accharå Sutta of the Saµyutta 
Nikåya, in which the Accharås are labelled ‘demons’ (pisåcas), while 
Nandana, the Grove of Delight in which the Accharås traditionally be-
sport themselves, is renamed Mohana, or delusion. In his commentary 
on this sutta, Buddhaghosa explains that these words are spoken by a 
monk who dies of exertion during meditation and is reborn in the 
Tåvatiµsa heaven. Fearfully disappointed because he has missed libera-
tion and attained heaven, the wrong goal, he perceives the beautiful 
Accharås coming towards him and hails them as demons.13 How then 
could Buddhism cope with the wayward reputation of the Apsarases? 
The answer lay in ignoring their sexual aspect more or less entirely and 
turning them into heavenly attendants and ladies-in-waiting – still very 
beautiful, still musical and graceful, but deﬁnitely chaste.  
In the Pali canon, the Accharås appear most prominently in the 
Vimåna-vatthu stories of the Khuddaka Nikåya. The chief feature of the 
Vimåna stories is that acts of generosity to the Buddha or Sangha are 
rewarded by rebirth as devas in the Tåvatiµsa heaven. Though generos-
ity is the most celebrated virtue, those who revere their parents, readily 
pardon others and take no pleasure in quarrels are also reborn in the 
Tåvatiµsa heaven. The characters thus rewarded are all lay people, 
since monks are not depicted as striving for heaven, and most of them 
                                                        
12  The Alambuså Jåtaka, no. 523. 
13  Saµyutta Nikåya i 33, commentary at Såratthappakåsin¥ i 85–88. 


--- Page 47 ---
APSAR ASES 
135 
are women, though some are men and two are animals. The underlying 
stucture of the stories is provided by Mahåmoggallåna’s visit to heaven, 
during which he asks those he encounters how they won their position, 
and they recount the good deed responsible for their current pleasant 
situation. Each deva lives in a sort of aerial palace or vimåna, studded 
with jewels and gold, in which they can travel down to earth, though 
they cannot go to any region higher than their own. The devas have a 
human form and are endowed with the ﬁve senses, but they are far 
more brilliant and dazzling than anyone on earth. They have unaging 
bodies, colourful garments and exquisite ornaments. The Tåvatiµsa 
heaven in which they live is reﬁned, delicate, and sensuous. There is an 
abundance of ﬂowers, plants and creepers; breezes are soft and per-
fumed. The fortunate heaven-dweller frequently has a retinue of Ac-
charås, up to 100,000. Interestingly, the devout lay followers here de-
scribed are never reborn as Accharås themselves, but only as devas or 
devatås attended by Accharås. The Accharås of the Vimåna-vatthu appear 
as attendants, sometimes as ministering with song and dance, but never 
as potential sexual partners. Outside the Pali tradition there are the 
texts such as the Mahåvastu or the Lalitavistara in which the role of the 
Apsarases is conﬁned to non-sexual activities such as tending to the 
bodhisattva’s mother during her pregnancy and labour, or providing a 
kind of chorus that miraculously appears during the important mo-
ments of the Buddha’s life to sing his praises. 
It should be noted that in the Pali texts, heaven is softened into a 
place that women might actually want to be reborn into – perhaps early 
Buddhism had to ﬁnd something to offer the female laity, who after all 
may have been the most regular alms-givers. Thus the promise of a 
woman-friendly heaven is held out to them, a heaven where women 
could move about freely, unshackled by husbands and domesticity, and 
with many attendants. They zoom around in splendid jewel-encrusted 
vimånas, and the Accharås become their servants – an attractive pros-
pect, one should imagine, for the ordinary Indian woman whose life 
probably consisted of excessive child-bearing and endless domestic la-
bour. Heaven is revised for women residents; in this heaven they are not 
just part of the engaging furniture, as in the epic-puråˆic conception, 


--- Page 48 ---
COVI LL 
 
136 
but VIPs in their own right. As one modern Indian woman writer has 
said: 
One day I realised that we [women] don’t even have a heaven of our own! 
When I think of the pictures of Heaven in any religion, I see that it is a man’s 
idea; whether it’s apsarases or nymphs or houris, it comes to the same thing 
really. Only a man could dream of Heaven as a place where he can lie about 
all day, surrounded by beautiful women, being served by them.14  
The Pali texts, however, do offer a heaven for women too. As a result, in 
the Pali texts there is only very sporadic mention of the sexual bliss dis-
pensed by the Apsarases. One such is the story of the monk Sudinna.15 
Sudinna’s family try to tempt him back to lay life by showing him some 
enormous heaps of gold. When he tells them to dump it all in the 
Ganges, they try another tack and bring in his former wife, all decked in 
her ﬁnery. She comes in, touches his feet, and says, rather ﬂirtatiously: 
‘What are they like, those Accharås for whose sake you practise brah-
macariya (that is, the life of celibacy and self-control)?’ He replies, ‘O 
Sister, I do not practise brahmacariya for the sake of the Accharås.’ And 
at being called ‘sister’ (bhagin¥), the former wife falls down in a faint. It 
would be difﬁcult to understand why the former wife would mention 
the Accharås unless she sees them as sexual rivals. Indeed, she hopes 
that Sudinna can still be motivated by sex. When Sudinna asserts that he 
is not interested in any sexual relationship, either with the Accharås or 
with his wife, whom he now regards as a sister, she faints. What is no-
ticeable in this story is the allusion to the epic-puråˆic ‘pay now, buy 
later’ conception that the sexual favours of the Accharås can be pur-
chased in advance by a life of celibate restraint. 
In the Udåna, one of the oldest Pali texts, the monk Mahåkassapa is at 
one time described with the phrase ‘having rejected those 500 deities’,16 
without any further information as to what situation or context this 
phrase might refer to. Given their reputation, it is likely that he rejected 
the sexual blandishments of the Accharås, just as the bodhisattva re-
                                                        
14  The novelist Shashi Deshpande, from a talk given on 30 October 1997 in Zurich. 
15  Recounted at Vinaya iii 17. The same happens to the monk Ra††hapåla, as recounted 
at Majjhima Nikåya ii 64.  
16  Udåna 4: tåni pañcamattåni devatå-satåni pa†ikkhipitvå. 


--- Page 49 ---
APSAR ASES 
137 
jected the temptations of the daughters of Måra. However, hundreds of 
years later the commentator Dhammapåla speciﬁcally identiﬁes the dei-
ties as Accharås, and accounts for the phrase by having Mahåkassapa 
refusing to take alms from the Accharås, saying to them ‘Be off with 
you! You have made merit, you already have great enjoyment; I will act 
sympathetically towards those who are badly off.’ At this they meekly 
return to the deva-loka whence they came.17 Dhammapåla’s rather con-
trived explanation suggests a shift in the portrayal of the Accharås from 
heavenly temptresses to heavenly devotees interested only in alms-
giving. 
Apart from these half-hints and intimations, the sexuality of the Ac-
charås is in the foreground in only one early Buddhist legend, and that 
is in the story of the Buddha’s half-brother Nanda, of which there are 
several accounts in addition to Aßvagho"a’s Saundarananda.18 The basic 
story runs like this: the Buddha enters Nanda’s house on his wedding 
day, places his bowl in Nanda’s hand and then leaves. Nanda is forced to 
follow, with the bowl still in his hand. When Nanda’s new bride is inter-
rupted with the news that the Buddha is taking her husband away, she 
rushes to the top of the house with her hair half-combed and calls out 
to him to return soon. In Aßvagho"a’s version, Nanda’s wife makes him 
promise to return before her make-up has dried. However, Nanda does 
not return; instead, the Buddha leads him to the vihåra and has him 
unwillingly ordained. Though ordained as a monk, Nanda ﬁnds the 
celibate life incredibly hard; as Aßvagho"a (Saund vii 1) melliﬂuously 
puts it, na nananda nanda˙ (‘Nanda did not rejoice’). The Buddha 
summons Nanda and enquires the reason for his depression, and 
Nanda replies that it is because he cannot forget his beautiful wife. The 
Buddha then takes Nanda by the arm, and the two immediately travel 
up to heaven. There they behold 500 Accharås. Nanda almost dies of 
lust on the spot. The Buddha asks Nanda who is fairer, his wife or the 
nymphs. Nanda enthusiastically replies that the Accharås are much 
                                                        
17  Udåna-a††hakathå 61–2. 
18  The Nanda story is a popular one and appears in full or in part in Pali sources (Udåna 
21–24, Dhammapada 13–14, Theragåthå 157–58, Jåtaka no. 182, also commentaries on 
the ﬁrst three of these and on Vinaya i 82), the Chinese Abhini#kramaˆa SËtra and the 
much later Sundar¥-nandåvadåna by K"emendra. 


--- Page 50 ---
COVI LL 
 
138 
more beautiful. When the Buddha promises that he can earn the ﬁve 
hundred nymphs through ascetic practices, Nanda agrees to persevere 
with brahmacariya. With that they swiftly return to earth. When the other 
monks come to hear that Nanda is practising brahmacariya in order to 
obtain the Accharås, they mock him, which so humiliates Nanda that he 
begins to practise diligently and soon attains liberation.  
The Buddhist tradition feels considerable unease over this whole 
business of purposefully exposing Nanda to the irresistible Apsarases. 
Why would the Buddha seem to act contrary to everything he had ever 
taught about desire? Why would he actually try to aggravate lust in 
someone? In his commentary on the Udåna version of the Nanda story, 
Dhammapåla uses a medical model in the Buddha’s defence. He ex-
plains that a physician, when treating a patient suffering from excessive 
humours, ﬁrst exacerbates the symptoms of his patient in order thereaf-
ter to purge them completely. So too does the Buddha exacerbate 
Nanda’s symptoms of lust in order to purge them with the medicine of 
the noble path (ariya-magga-bhesajja). He makes the same point in his 
commentary on the Theragåthå, comparing the Accharås to a drink of 
oil by which a doctor prepares a patient for purging.19 The Questions of 
Milinda explains that the Buddha has a variety of methods (aneka-
pariyåya) for liberating people, just as a physician has a variety of treat-
ments at his disposal. In Nanda’s case, the method chosen by the Bud-
dha for the sake of liberating him (bodhana-hetu) was to show him the 
500 dove-footed Accharås.20 Thus the Apsarases become part of the 
Buddha’s skilful means; they are themselves made an instrument of 
conversion.21 In his poem, the Saundarananda, Aßvagho"a too justiﬁes 
the Buddha’s action on the grounds that he is like a doctor: just as a 
doctor expunges the humours from the body by initially exacerbating 
his patient’s pain, so does the Buddha destroy Nanda’s lust by ﬁrst in-
                                                        
19  Theragåthå-a††hakathå ii 33. 
20  Milindapañha 169. 
21  The tradition recognises this to some extent: the Theragåthå verses attributed to Nanda 
(157–58) have him rejoice in his liberation ‘by the Buddha, skilled in means’ (upåya-
kusalena … buddhena). Dhammapåla (Udåna-a††hakathå 171) reports that whilst ferrying 
Nanda to heaven, the Buddha thinks ‘I must make his lust subside through [skilful] 
means’ (upåyenassa rågaµ vËpasamessåmi). 


--- Page 51 ---
APSAR ASES 
139 
ducing a far greater lust.22 Thus the Buddha is exonerated by repeated 
comparison to a well-intentioned doctor who is unquestionably wiser 
than his patient, while the Apsarases are justiﬁed as a necessary medica-
tion, with nasty side-effects perhaps but efﬁcacious in the long-term.23 
In summary, it is likely that within early Buddhist culture the Ap-
sarases were subject to a process of de-eroticization. While in the epic-
puråˆic imagination the Apsarases were seen as dispensers of sexual 
bliss, in early Buddhism they are allotted the role of graceful attendants 
only. In the one obvious reminder of their sexual function, which oc-
curs in the story of Nanda, Buddhist interpreters assuage their doubts by 
redeﬁning the celestial sirens as themselves facilitators of spiritual pro-
gress. To conclude: the Mahåvastu contains a long hymn of praise for 
those who offer even the smallest service to the Buddha. Amongst them, 
it is said that he who has cleaned a stËpa will win thousands of Apsarases, 
lovely and sweet-scented, but never feel any lust for any of them24 – a 
statement which nicely summarises the Buddhist conversion of the Ap-
saras from celestial concubine to decorative but decorous divinity. 
 
Linda Covill 
University of Oxford 
 
                                                        
22  Saund x 43: do#åµß ca kåyåd bhi#ag ujjih¥r#ur bhËyo yathå kleßayituµ yateta | rågaµ tathå 
tasya munir jighåµsur bhËyastaraµ rågam upåninåya || (‘And just as a doctor seeks to 
draw out humoral faults from the body by further paining it, so the sage, intending to 
destroy passion in him, ﬁrst brought about a far greater passion.’) 
23  The Dhammapada commentary (i 122), rather than resorting to the popular medical 
metaphor, describes the Accharås as ‘bait’ (åmisa). 
24  Mahåvastu ii 386. 


--- Page 52 ---


--- Page 53 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 141–54 
 
FIFTY YEARS OF BUDDHIST STUDIES IN BRITAIN* 
 
RICHARD GOMBRICH 
 
n 1997 a conference was held in Bangkok to survey the state of Bud-
dhist studies internationally over the previous twenty-ﬁve years; it was 
organised by the Center for Buddhist Studies of Chulalongkorn Univer-
sity under Dr Wit Wisadavet, Director of the Center. A scholar was in-
vited from each of some ﬁfteen countries in which Buddhist studies 
could be presumed to ﬂourish – which is more or less the same as say-
ing, where the subject could be studied at university level. I enjoyed the 
conference. I found it entertaining to observe how people conformed to 
the expected national stereotypes. The Germans (who, incidentally, 
were represented by an Israeli) equated Buddhist studies with textual 
and historical research on Buddhism and barely even mentioned the 
social sciences, even though German scholarship has made notable con-
tributions in that area. The Americans perfectly complemented the Ger-
mans, in that they mentioned only work in the social sciences, if one 
may include under that rubric empirical work on contemporary phe-
nomena carried out under the rubric of ‘religious studies’ – work that 
so often turns out to be simply rather mediocre anthropology. 
While the Germans presented a vast bibliography, the American pres-
entation did not attempt to include anything like a comprehensive bib-
liography, but instead ran way over time and characterised each indi-
vidual work discussed as ‘stunning’. The French were lightly ironic and 
always to the point; the Koreans were humorous; the Japanese earnest. 
The Burmese delegate was so frightened that he did not dare mention 
                                                        
* 
This was originally delivered on 15 September 2004 as a paper to the Fiftieth Anniver-
sary Conference of the British Association for the Study of Religion at Harris-
Manchester College, Oxford. I was to speak for thirty minutes, so naturally made no at-
tempt to be exhaustive. 
I


--- Page 54 ---
GOMBR ICH 
 
142 
any research done within the prescribed period. At least I did not have 
that problem. 
What the Thai organisers really wanted to know was how the rest of 
the world saw ‘engaged Buddhism’. Were Buddhist studies being pur-
sued only in an entirely detached spirit, or was Buddhism being used to 
offer values and insights in other academic areas, such as politics or 
ecology? I suspect that they were rather disappointed at ﬁnding them-
selves alone in this concern; and this may largely explain the somewhat 
unsatisfactory aftermath of the conference. A volume containing ver-
sions (some radically revised) of ten of the papers, plus an introduction, 
ﬁnally appeared in 2000.1 Thus material which was in any case doomed 
to obsolescence appeared in print only when approaching its sell-by 
date. Each contribution was now equipped with a bibliography, but – 
perhaps through some misguided notion of fairness – this included only 
books, not articles, so that much of the material some of us had gone to 
great pains to assemble was wasted.2 And misprints abounded. In short, 
the proceedings as published serve best to illustrate the Buddhist doc-
trines of impermanence and unsatisfactoriness. 
This experience serves me as a kind of parable. Scripta manent, the 
Latin tag rightly has it: It is writings that endure. So yes, there is much to 
be said for the traditional scholarly view: that a survey of what has been 
achieved in an academic ﬁeld should consist ﬁrst and foremost of a bib-
liography. Although in general information services have vastly im-
proved in the past ﬁfty years, Buddhist studies are unfortunate: the ad-
mirable ongoing bibliography Bibliographie Bouddhique stopped publish-
ing in 1967, its last volume covering only up to May 1958. I suppose 
that as the general rate of publication increased, it became more and 
more difﬁcult to produce a comprehensive bibliography of the ﬁeld, 
                                                        
1  Donald K. Swearer and Somparn Promta, eds, The State of Buddhist Studies in the World 
1972–1997, Bangkok: Center for Buddhist Studies, Chulalongkorn University, 2000. 
2  It may however be useful if I reproduce from Donald Swearer’s introduction his ﬁrst 
footnote: ‘For earlier assessments of the state of Buddhist studies, see Edward Conze, 
‘Recent Progress in Buddhist Studies’, Thirty Years of Buddhist Studies (Columbia: Uni-
versity of South Carolina Press, 1968); J.W. de Jong, A Brief History of Buddhist Studies in 
Europe and America (Tokyo, Kosei Publishing Company, 1997); Hajime Nakamura, In-
dian Buddhism: A Survey with Bibliographical Notes (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, 
1987).’ (Swearer and Promta, p. viii.)  


--- Page 55 ---
FIFTY YEA RS OF BU DDHI ST STU DI ES 
143 
while on the other hand search engines such as Google make it seem 
easy to ﬁnd what one needs on the Internet, and publishing printed 
volumes seems impossibly slow by contrast. As anyone can, I have rapidly 
located on the Internet a ‘Bibliography of Buddhist Studies Bibliogra-
phies in Western Languages’, fourteen pages long; but it was last up-
dated in March 2001, and most of the items are either bibliographies of 
narrowly deﬁned areas like the Lotus Sutra or of extremely broad areas, 
such as whole countries or ﬁelds like ‘Indian philosophy’, within which 
one would have to trawl for oneself. Besides, very few of the bibliogra-
phies seem to be critical. Moreover, that they only deal with western 
languages is obviously a major deﬁciency. Incidentally, the British con-
tribution in this area has been pitifully modest. 
Maybe the very idea of a comprehensive bibliography of Buddhist 
studies is now obsolete. It could be argued that as it has grown, the ﬁeld 
of Buddhist studies has, inevitably, become so divided that such a com-
pilation would interest hardly anyone, since – to take examples at ran-
dom – a new scholarly edition of the writings of a Korean Soen master 
would be of no concern whatever to an anthropologist of Sinhalese 
Buddhism, and vice versa. I would argue nevertheless that specialisation 
brings losses as well as gains. The hazardous enterprise of trying to grasp 
the big picture is unpopular, even sometimes despised, within acade-
mia, but quite the opposite with the general public on whose patronage 
the scholarly work so largely depends. So I for one feel that a constantly 
updated and comprehensive bibliography would still be a valuable work 
of reference. 
However, the lesson I have learnt from the Chulalongkorn experi-
ence is that a survey of an academic ﬁeld should not consist primarily of 
a list of publications, for besides being indigestible to a live audience 
this very soon becomes dated. When we assess progress in a ﬁeld like 
Buddhist studies which, whether we like it or not, is highly specialised, 
we need the perspective of a still wider context. The fate of a particular 
academic ﬁeld cannot but be linked to that of higher education in gen-
eral. I know that it constantly appears to us that our ﬁeld is in decline, if 
not in crisis, if not under threat of extinction in Britain. And yet when 
we compare where we are now with where we were ﬁfty years ago, we get 
a jolt. When I came up to Oxford as a student in 1957, the University 


--- Page 56 ---
GOMBR ICH 
 
144 
employed no one to teach Buddhism, and I don’t think it ﬁgured on 
any syllabus, undergraduate or postgraduate. I believe the same was true 
of Cambridge. That reminds us, while we bemoan decline, how radically 
things have improved. It is true that the greatest advances were probably 
made some time back, in the sixties and seventies. But the main reason 
for our apparently paradoxical perception must be that higher educa-
tion overall has so greatly expanded that even if the exiguous percent-
age of its resources and personnel devoted to studying Buddhism has, 
say, halved, that still means a huge increase in teaching posts and library 
facilities. 
Another global trend from which we have beneﬁted – as must be ob-
vious to this audience – is the virtual creation of Religious Studies as a 
separate academic ﬁeld. (I hesitate to call it a ‘discipline’.) The ﬁrst 
chair of Comparative Religion in Britain was created at Manchester 
University in 1903 and its ﬁrst occupant was the great scholar of early 
Buddhism, T. W. Rhys Davids. As we all know, however, the establish-
ment of Religious Studies in the British university system must stand 
largely to the credit of another Buddhologist, Ninian Smart; he ﬁrst oc-
cupied the chair in this subject at Lancaster University, where he set up 
a department in 1967. Luckily a few of his direct disciples are still 
among us and provide my story with a pleasing thread of continuity. 
The greatly expanded and somewhat systematised study of non-
Christian religions must in turn be linked to the fortunes of faith com-
munities, who provide both demand and supply. When this Association 
was formed in 1954, it was natural to make it primarily an association 
for the study of the history of religions, i.e., of their past, because their 
living presence was not a salient feature of the local landscape. The im-
migration which sharply increased at around that time, and the conse-
quent rise in the population from non-Christian religious traditions, 
began to make it reasonable to regard Britain as a multi-cultural society. 
The impact was not immediate; but as the non-Christian immigrants 
began to send their children to school, it became necessary to cater for 
them in primary and secondary education. Here too, Ninian Smart was 
a pioneer: in 1969 he played a leading part in creating the Shap Work-
ing Party on World Religions in Education. This small body of volun-
teers tried to offer the school system – and to some extent also other 


--- Page 57 ---
FIFTY YEA RS OF BU DDHI ST STU DI ES 
145 
public services such as hospitals and the police, plus any inquirers from 
the general public – at least a minimum of accurate and not unsympa-
thetic information about living non-Christian traditions as now found in 
Britain. For most of the period under survey, the Shap Working Party 
has annually published and distributed both a calendar of religious fes-
tivals and a compilation (known as the ‘Shap Mailing’), aimed specially 
at schoolteachers, which takes a new theme each year and contains arti-
cles on that theme applied to various religions. 
Once these religious traditions were taught in schools, it became nec-
essary to train teachers, and even in due course school inspectors, who 
knew something about them. This in turn meant jobs for some gradu-
ates of university departments of Religious Studies. This then led to a 
rise in standards and to formal examinations, so that it became possible 
to take ‘A’ levels in Religious Studies with papers devoted to speciﬁc 
non-Christian religions. 
Because of the pattern of immigration, Buddhism beneﬁted less from 
these developments than did Islam, Hinduism and even Sikhism. When 
I ﬁrst joined the Shap Working Party, an extremely well-meaning senior 
ﬁgure, who was I believe responsible for the teaching of non-Christian 
religions throughout the Birmingham area, told me that Buddhism was 
not suitable for children, by which he meant that it was too intellectual 
and abstruse. It was Peggy Morgan who coined the response ‘Buddhists 
have children too’, and who began producing materials suitable for 
teaching Buddhism to children in British primary schools. 
On the other hand, in higher education Buddhism has beneﬁted 
from a tragedy and a success. The tragedy has been the Chinese inva-
sion of Tibet. In particular, the conquest of Lhasa and the ﬂight to In-
dia in 1959 of the Dalai Lama have had massive consequences for the 
spread of Tibetan Buddhism across the world and the academic study of 
Tibet. The Tibetan exodus was initially into India, where the majority of 
the Tibetan Sangha have stayed, but signiﬁcant numbers have gone on 
to North America and, secondarily, to Europe. 
Fifty years ago I don’t think there was a department of Tibetan studies 
at any university in the world, and there was certainly no international 
organisation for the subject. Now many universities, including Oxford 
and SOAS, teach the Tibetan language and Tibetan studies; and the 


--- Page 58 ---
GOMBR ICH 
 
146 
recent international conferences of the International Association for 
Tibetan Studies have been better attended that the corresponding 
meetings of the International Association for Sanskrit Studies. Tibetan 
studies are of course not all about Buddhism, but surely well over half of 
them are. 
The success to which I have just alluded is the Japanese economic 
miracle. Japanese efforts to export their culture have not been in pro-
portion to their economic clout – and one could say the same, later, of 
the Koreans. Nevertheless, some Japanese Buddhist organisations have 
been generous in supporting the study of Buddhism abroad, not least in 
Britain. The most notable donor has been the Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 
The Society for the Advancement of Buddhist Understanding, also 
known among us as the Numata Foundation, after its founder. In the 
1980s Mr Yehan Numata, from his base in Tokyo, began to found chairs 
in Buddhist studies in the western world. There was some variation, but 
the general pattern was for a university to have a visiting scholar to teach 
each year, paid for by the BDK; and extra money was also paid, with the 
intention of endowing a permanent chair. 
Though Mr Numata himself was an adherent of Jodo Shinshu, the 
Pure Land Buddhist tradition founded by Shinran, the BDK has wisely 
and nobly supported Buddhist studies in general. Oxford was the ﬁrst 
British university to beneﬁt: an annual visiting fellowship, attached to 
Balliol College, began in 1989. Later SOAS and Cambridge received 
benefactions from the same source. With my retirement, it is greatly 
hoped that the visiting position at Oxford can be converted into a per-
manently endowed chair, as Mr Numata originally envisaged. This 
would be the ﬁrst endowed chair in Buddhist studies not merely at Ox-
ford but at any British university. 
In my contribution to the Chulalongkorn survey I published a table 
headed ‘British institutions offering teaching in Buddhism at under-
graduate and/or postgraduate level’ (pp. 176–8). The only centre for 
Buddhist studies which then (in 1997) existed in Britain had recently 
been founded at Bristol University under the leadership of Paul Wil-
liams. How did this come about? Bristol’s Department of Theology and 
Religious Studies had already acquired a reputation in Buddhism, and 
this in turn arose partly because Bristol, alone of all British universities, 


--- Page 59 ---
FIFTY YEA RS OF BU DDHI ST STU DI ES 
147 
had two posts in the ﬁeld. So how did that happen? Most of the credit 
must go to Professor Denis Nineham; but a little also to me. When ap-
proaching the end of a distinguished academic career, Prof. Nineham 
made a surprise move: he resigned as Warden of Keble College, Oxford, 
and went to head the department at Bristol. Whether he went on condi-
tion that the department would be expanded or whether he persuaded 
the university authorities to do it after he got there I do not know, but 
the university then advertised a new post in Buddhist studies. Two of my 
pupils, Paul Williams and Steve Collins, both applied. They were close 
friends and I thought the world of both of them, so I accepted the awk-
ward task of writing a reference for both. I wrote a very long letter, ex-
plaining that both of them were so good – and yet so different – that it 
was impossible for me to give my preference to either: both fully de-
served the job. Professor Nineham then managed to offer jobs to both, 
by appointing Paul to a vacant position in the philosophy of religion. 
Even after Steve Collins left for America, the two posts were retained 
and his post was advertised, which is how we come to have Rupert 
Gethin here with us now.  
Certain other institutional landmarks deserve to be at least brieﬂy re-
corded. In 1976 the energy and vision of Professor A. K. Narain, who 
had then moved from Benares to the University of Wisconsin, founded 
the International Association of Buddhist Studies and its journal, the 
International Journal of Buddhist Studies. Here in Britain Peter Harvey, Ian 
Harris and colleagues founded the UK Association for Buddhist Studies, 
which has held an annual conference since 1996. Though they pub-
lished somewhat irregularly, there were already two British journals of 
Buddhist studies, the Journal of the Pali Text Society and the Pali Buddhist 
Review, the latter originally a one-man enterprise by Russell Webb. In 
1983–84 Russell’s journal broadened its scope and editorship to be-
come the Buddhist Studies Review, and in 1998 this became the ofﬁcial 
organ of UKABS. Russell has recently announced his retirement from 
the editorship and we must all be grateful to him for his great contribu-
tion to our ﬁeld. Other important innovations have involved use of the 
Internet. Damien Keown and Charles Prebish were founding editors of 
the electronic Journal of Buddhist Ethics (website: http://jbe.gold.ac.uk). 
Peter Harvey, of the University of Sunderland, has pioneered serious 


--- Page 60 ---
GOMBR ICH 
 
148 
distance learning with his web-based MA in Buddhist Studies, which be-
gan in 2002 (http://www.sunderland.ac.uk/buddhist); in 2005, it will in-
clude a module on Pali. 
If I try to survey the intellectual trends in Buddhist studies in Britain 
over the last ﬁfty years, I do not see how I can avoid repeating some of 
what I said in my Chulalongkorn paper. 
Perhaps the most notable intellectual development ‘has been the 
growth, from an almost non-existent base, of the anthropological (and, 
to a lesser extent, sociological) study of Buddhist communities and tra-
ditions. In this area it is undoubtedly Theravada Buddhist studies that 
have led the ﬁeld,’ especially in Britain. In 1971 I published my ﬁrst 
book, Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural Highlands of 
Ceylon.3 This book appeared just after two comparable full-scale anthro-
pological studies of Buddhism in Burma and Thailand respectively: Mel-
ford Spiro’s Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and Its Burmese Vicissi-
tudes4 and S. J. Tambiah’s Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in North-east Thai-
land.5 Spiro’s book has no connection with Britain, but Tambiah’s was 
written while he was teaching at Cambridge (he later moved to Har-
vard), and was followed while he was still there by World Conqueror and 
World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand against a His-
torical Background.6 The literature on modern Thai Buddhism was fur-
ther enriched in this period by Jane Bunnag’s Buddhist Monk, Buddhist 
Layman: A Study of Urban Monastic Organization in Central Thailand.7 
Within Britain this scholarly tradition was carried forward by Michael 
Carrithers’ The Forest Monks of Sri Lanka8 and David Gellner’s Monk, 
Householder and Tantric Priest: Newar Buddhism and Its Hierarchy of Ritual;9 
both books are based on Oxford doctoral theses. It is regrettable that 
(so far as I know) Gustaaf Houtman has not published his SOAS PhD 
                                                        
3  Oxford: Clarendon Press. A revised edition was published as Buddhist Precept and Prac-
tice, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1991. 
4  New York: Harper & Row, 1970; 2nd revised edn, Berkeley and London: University of 
California Press, 1982. 
5  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970. 
6  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976. 
7  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973. 
8  Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1983. 
9  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. 


--- Page 61 ---
FIFTY YEA RS OF BU DDHI ST STU DI ES 
149 
thesis, ‘Traditions of Buddhist Practice in Burma’ (1990), which con-
tains much fascinating material. Although it was written while he was 
teaching in Australia, Geoffrey Samuel’s book Civilized Shamans: Bud-
dhism in Tibetan Societies10 must be included in this series of major an-
thropological monographs. Gananath Obeyesekere and I together pub-
lished Buddhism Transformed: Religious Change in Sri Lanka.11 The works 
of Carrithers, Gellner and Samuel, as well as (I hope) my own are in-
formed by that sensitivity to a culture which cannot be acquired without 
a thorough knowledge of its language; they also have in common an 
interest in the diachronic as well as the synchronic dimension of their 
subjects. The social study of Buddhism is being carried forward by Cathy 
Cantwell and Geoffrey Samuel (Tibetan Buddhism), David Gellner 
(Newar and Japanese Buddhism), Ian Reader (Japanese Buddhism), 
Hiroko Kawanami (Burmese Buddhism) and several excellent scholars 
who study Buddhist practice in Britain itself. In the last category I must 
single out for mention the monograph A Time to Chant: The Soka Gakkai 
Buddhists in Britain12 by the distinguished British sociologist Bryan Wil-
son and his Belgian co-author Karel Dobbelaere. 
Among the more traditional lines of Buddhological research, it is 
perhaps philological and doctrinal studies of the Theravåda which have 
ﬂourished most in Britain. K. R. Norman’s contribution to Pali studies 
can hardly be over-emphasised, and was recognised by a special number 
of Indo-Iranian Journal in his honour (vol. 35, 1992). Besides his magis-
terial editions and translations of Pali canonical texts, there are his his-
tory of Pali literature in the Harrassowitz A History of Indian Literature 
series (1983),13 and his Collected Papers, so far amounting to seven vol-
umes, published by the Pali Text Society.14 Many further contributions 
to scholarship of this general character are gathered in the PTS Journal. 
Dr. Margaret Cone is being employed by the PTS to write what will be 
essentially a new version of its Pali-English Dictionary15 (originally by Rhys 
                                                        
10  Washington DC : Smithsonian Institution Press, 1993. 
11  Princeton, N.J. : Princeton University Press, 1988. 
12  Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
13  Påli Literature, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1983. 
14  Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1996–2001. 
15  London: Pali Text Society, 1921–25. 


--- Page 62 ---
GOMBR ICH 
 
150 
Davids and Stede); the ﬁrst of three projected volumes has appeared,16 
and this will in due course make an enormous contribution to the study 
of Pali and hence of Buddhism. 
It is not always sensible to try to draw a line between a really good in-
troduction to a subject and a contribution to scholarship. Though there 
are probably too many introductions to Buddhism on the market, in 
this area we seem to do rather well. For example, Michael Carrithers’ 
The Buddha17 may contain nothing which a scholar would ﬁnd absolutely 
new, but its mere appearance in the Oxford University Press Past Masters 
series (and now in the Short Introduction To series) and its excellent liter-
ary style make it a signiﬁcant contribution to Buddhist studies. I hope 
the same can be said for the lavishly illustrated book which I edited with 
Heinz Bechert: The World of Buddhism: Buddhist Monks and Nuns in Society 
and History.18 Similarly, the books which Paul Williams (Mahåyåna Bud-
dhism: The Doctrinal Foundations)19 and I (Theravåda Buddhism: A Social 
History from Ancient Benares to Modern Colombo)20 contributed to the Rout-
ledge series of books on world religions are primarily intended to serve 
as college textbooks or introductions for the general reader, but do also 
contain some original material. Williams’ book has been particularly 
successful and has been translated into Italian; mine has appeared in 
German. I understand that Andrew Skilton’s A Concise History of Bud-
dhism21 has been used as an introductory course textbook by at least one 
famous American scholar of Buddhism. Peter Harvey’s Introduction to 
Buddhism22 has been even more widely acclaimed and is being translated 
into several languages. Still more recently, we greeted excellent intro-
ductory works by Paul Williams (with Anthony Tribe)23 and by Rupert 
Gethin.24  
                                                        
16  A Dictionary of Påli. Part I: a–kh, Oxford: Pali Text Society, 2001. 
17  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983. 
18  London and New York: Thames & Hudson, 1984. 
19  London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1989. 
20  London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1988. 
21  Birmingham: Windhorse, 1994. 
22  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
23  Buddhist Thought: A Complete Introduction to the Indian Tradition, London: Routledge, 
2000. 
24  The Foundations of Buddhism, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998. 


--- Page 63 ---
FIFTY YEA RS OF BU DDHI ST STU DI ES 
151 
In the vast ﬁeld of Mahåyåna studies, it is notable that work on the 
Indo-Tibetan tradition has been comparatively ﬂourishing, even though 
until recently SOAS was the only university ofﬁcially to offer a regular 
course in Tibetan. David Snellgrove, who for many years was the Ti-
betan teacher at SOAS, is no longer active in the ﬁeld, and much of his 
work is perhaps being superseded, but he deserves great credit (and was 
accorded a Festschrift (1990)) for laying foundations and stimulating 
interest. The current doyen in this ﬁeld is Professor David Seyfort 
Ruegg, whose eminence as a Buddhologist was recognised by his elec-
tion as President of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 
and by a volume of papers published in his honour.25 Important recent 
translations and monographs in this ﬁeld include the books of Martin 
Boord,26 Rob Mayer,27 Ulrich Pagel28 and Bulcsu Siklos.29 Paul Williams, 
who writes primarily as a philosopher (though his philological skill is 
impeccable), has been very productive, especially on the dGe lugs pa 
school. 
I have omitted many areas, but I did warn you that I was not out to 
produce a catalogue. Let me now become a triﬂe self-indulgent and say 
that the development in Buddhist studies which interests me most per-
sonally is the revival, since about 1990, in investigating the earliest Bud-
dhism, which I take to be that of the Buddha himself and that of his 
immediate disciples. In this area I think a revolution has occurred, 
though I am not sure that everyone has noticed. Until about ten years 
ago, the book that I invariably recommended to beginners was What the 
Buddha Taught30 by Walpola Rahula. That book is still constantly re-
printed, and deservedly so. But nowadays when I recommend it I say 
                                                        
25  Tadeusz Skorupski and Ulrich Pagel (eds), The Buddhist Forum: vol. 3, 1991–1993: 
Papers in Honour and Appreciation of Professor David Seyfort Ruegg’s Contribution to Indologi-
cal, Buddhist and Tibetan Studies, London: School of Oriental and African Studies, 1994. 
26  The Cult of the Deity Vajrakila According to the Texts of the Northern Treasures Tradition of 
Tibet, Tring: Institute of Buddhist Studies, 1993. 
27  A Scripture of the Ancient Tantra Collection: the Phurpa bcu-gnyis, Stirling: Kiscadale, 1996. 
28  The Bodhisattvapi†aka: Its Doctrines, Practices and Their Position in Mahåyåna Literature, 
Tring: Institute of Buddhist Studies, 1995. 
29  The Vajrabhairava Tantras: Tibetan and Mongolian Versions, Tring: Institute of Buddhist 
Studies, 1996. 
30  Bedford: Gordon Fraser, 1959. 


--- Page 64 ---
GOMBR ICH 
 
152 
that I can no longer accept the title at face value. I regard the book as 
an admirable introduction to the Buddha’s teachings as interpreted by 
Buddhaghosa, in other words to the Theravåda tradition. But I feel that 
when we study Buddhism as a historical phenomenon we should take 
seriously the Buddha’s own dictum that all phenomena in this world are 
liable to change and decay. By this I do not mean that I regard all 
change as bad or undesirable. What I mean is that in the four centuries 
between the Buddha’s lifetime and the writing down of the Pali canon 
the religion must have changed, and gone on changing thereafter, for 
there is no recorded example of an institution or ideology remaining 
unchanged for such a long time. Therefore scholars are free to examine 
the early texts critically and need not follow the interpretations of the 
commentaries if they see good reason not to. 
The most remarkable application of this principle has perhaps been 
Sue Hamilton’s book Early Buddhism: A New Approach.31 I feel that this 
book has not yet had the recognition it deserves. By a most scrupulous 
examination of the canonical texts, Sue has argued, to my mind con-
vincingly, that the Buddha did not preach that no such thing as a soul 
(whatever that might be) exists, but that the question of its existence 
was not relevant to what concerned him and should concern us: how to 
attain salvation – nirvana. The Buddha, Sue maintains, was not preach-
ing an ontology at all, but was only concerned with experience. Since we 
could never experience a self, the Buddha argued, we should not 
bother about it all. In a recent Oxford DPhil Noa Gal builds on Sue’s 
discovery in a most fruitful and interesting way and shows how Bud-
dhism came to develop an ontology and so subtly change its doctrines. 
Her book is about to be published by RoutledgeCurzon as the ﬁrst vol-
ume in the monograph series of the Oxford Centre for Buddhist Stud-
ies.32 
It is not really surprising that the Pali commentaries show little 
awareness of the Buddha’s historical context, and in particular of the 
teachings which he was opposing. They thus failed to notice that there 
                                                        
31  Richmond: Curzon Press, 2000. 
32  Now published: Noa Ronkin, Early Buddhist Metaphysics: The Making of a Philosophical 
Tradition, London and New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2005; the subject of a review arti-
cle in the present issue of Buddhist Studies Review, pp. 175–94 (Editor). 


--- Page 65 ---
FIFTY YEA RS OF BU DDHI ST STU DI ES 
153 
are indubitable allusions in the sutta-s to the Upani!ads, especially the 
B®hadåraˆyaka. It is more surprising that this had until recently also es-
caped the attention of modern commentators. Moreover, it is quite 
clear that some passages in the sutta-s must have been transferred from 
their original contexts to others in which they do not make good sense, 
and that the commentaries ascribed to Buddhaghosa offer varying and 
inconsistent interpretations of these passages. I gave striking instances 
of both phenomena in my short article ‘Three souls, one or none’.33 No 
one who reads that article can remain in doubt that there are inconsis-
tencies both between sutta-s and between commentaries, so trusting in 
the inerrancy of every word is no longer an option. 
I suggested in ‘The Buddha’s Book of Genesis?’34 that the cosmogony 
propounded in the Aggañña Sutta is best understood as a parody of Ve-
dic cosmogony. In my book How Buddhism Began35 I combined these 
concerns with an attention to some of the metaphors the Buddha em-
ployed, and showed, for example, that it is the ﬁve khandha which are 
normally on ﬁre with greed, hatred and delusion, the khandha being the 
bundles of ﬁrewood which it was the daily duty of a brahmin student to 
collect in order to feed the three sacred ﬁres. The normal translation of 
khandha as ‘aggregates’ tells us nothing. In the same book I argue that 
comparison with the B®hadåraˆyaka Upani!ad enables us to say with some 
certainty that in the Tevijja Sutta the Buddha was preaching that kind-
ness (mettå) by itself can enable one to attain nirvana; and I enlarge on 
this in my Gonda Memorial Lecture of 1997, published as Kindness and 
Compassion as Means to Nirvana.36  
However, the most remarkable discovery of this kind has been made 
by Professor Joanna Jurewicz of the University of Warsaw. The chain of 
dependent origination has to be understood on two levels, the general 
and the particular. At the general level, it embodies the Buddhist claim 
that nothing exists without a cause and that indeed there are no ‘things’ 
existing in total isolation from other ‘things’; there are only causal 
                                                        
33  ‘Three souls, one or none: the vagaries of a Pali pericope’, Journal of the Pali Text Society, 
1987 (11), 73–78, 
34  ‘The Buddha’s Book of Genesis?’, Indo-Iranian Journal, 35 (1992), 159–78. 
35  London: Athlone Press, 1996 (2nd edn, London: Routledge, 2006). 
36  Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, Amsterdam, 1998.  


--- Page 66 ---
GOMBR ICH 
 
154 
processes. Over the centuries Buddhists came to regard the Buddha’s 
teaching as ‘the middle way’ in this sense: that he proclaimed neither 
the existence of things in their own right, which we would now call es-
sentialism, nor some kind of nihilism, but that the world of our experi-
ence is a world of ﬂux and process. On the other hand, the particular 
interpretation of the chain of dependent origination has been con-
tested among Buddhists from the earliest days: there is simply no 
agreement on the matter. In her article ‘Playing with Fire: The 
prat¥tyasamutpåda from the Perspective of Vedic Thought’,37 Professor 
Jurewicz has demonstrated that the Buddha chose to express himself in 
these terms because he was responding to Vedic cosmogony as repre-
sented particularly in the famous ‘Hymn of Creation’, Ùg Veda x, 129, 
and in the ﬁrst chapter of the B®hadåraˆyaka Upani!ad, but also in the 
Íatapatha Bråhmaˆa and other Upani!ads. Given the centrality to Bud-
dhist doctrine of dependent origination, I think this may rank as one of 
the most important discoveries ever made in Buddhology. 
Since I am on the point of retiring I suppose this could be regarded 
as a kind of swansong. I am proud to have played a part in helping to 
disinter some of the Buddha’s meanings, a process which is already be-
ing carried forward by my pupils such as Alex Wynne and will no doubt 
continue. Perhaps perversely, I am also proud that I am still being at-
tacked now and again for my lack of methodology. Just as in some cases 
theology can act as a kind of surrogate for faith, methodology, in my 
view, is a blind for having nothing to say. Methodology means ‘How do 
you do it?’ Once one realises this simple fact, it becomes obvious that to 
elevate this straightforward question, necessary at the outset of any en-
terprise whatsoever, into an alleged academic ﬁeld is sheer hocus pocus. 
At least Buddhist studies in Britain have achieved one thing: they have 
been sincerely interested in Buddhism, and generally avoided fatuous 
verbiage. 
 
Richard Gombrich 
Oxford Centre for Buddhist Studies 
 
                                                        
37  Journal of the Pali Text Society, 2000 (26), 77–103 


--- Page 67 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 155–73 
 
‘ONLY IF YOU LET GO OF THAT TREE’ 
ORDINATION WITHOUT PARENTAL CONSENT 
IN THERAVÓDA VINAYA 
 
KATE CROSBY 
 
his article explores how the Theravåda commentarial tradition, 
represented by the Samantapåsådikå (Sp), the Vinaya commentary 
attributed to Buddhaghosa, understood the rule that a monk cannot 
receive ordination (pabbajjå) without the permission of his parents, and 
reﬂects on the signiﬁcance of the commentarial interpretation for our 
understanding of the nature of Theravåda Buddhism. 
The rule that a monk cannot receive ordination without his parents’ 
permission is often cited in general studies of Theravåda monastic life as 
a simple statement without any indication that its interpretation evolved 
as the Sangha developed in complexity. This is because even writings 
which claim to look at the history of this lineage are often based solely 
on what are regarded as the earliest strata of Theravåda literature, 
namely the Sutta and Vinaya Pi†aka of the Canon, even though much of 
the Canon is regarded as dating to before the emergence of Theravåda 
as a distinct strand of Buddhism and overlaps substantially with the ear-
liest literature of other South Asian Buddhist traditions. Thus Wi-
jayaratna in his Buddhist Monastic Life according to the texts of the Theravåda 
tradition twice makes the point that a monk cannot be ordained without 
parental permission, citing ﬁrstly the Vinaya ruling (Vin i 83) laid down 
by the Buddha to this effect, and secondly the canonical list of this and 
the other debarments from ordination, such as certain illnesses.1 He 
does not cite any ‘texts of the Theravåda’ from the subsequent two mil-
lennia. Likewise, Gombrich, in his Theravåda Buddhism. A Social History 
from Ancient Benares to Modern Colombo, in the chapter on ‘The Sangha’s 
                                                        
1  1990: 14, 120. 
T


--- Page 68 ---
CROSBY 
 
156 
Discipline’ writes that the novitiate ‘must have his parents’ consent’, 
also citing Vin i 83, without differentiating between ‘original’, historical 
or modern practice.2 The same point is brieﬂy made by Va-
jirañåˆavarorasa in the discussion of ordination in his modern guide to 
monastic practice, the Vinayamukha, which, written in a period of re-
form of the Thai Sangha, also relies heavily on the canonical Vinaya.3 
Thus all three authors cited, appropriately drawing on the still authori-
tative canonical statements, are correct in a narrow sense, but they ig-
nore the evolution of Theravåda monastic law on this issue. The com-
mentarial discussion on this rule examined below demonstrates in mi-
crocosm the potential shortcomings of this methodology – not least be-
cause it appears that under speciﬁc conditions, monks can be ordained 
without parental consent. 
The narrative context for the establishment of the rule on parental 
consent as recorded at Vin i 83 is the ordination of the Buddha’s son 
Råhula. Råhula follows his father around, repeatedly pestering him with 
the demand, ‘Father, give me my inheritance.’ While the demand might 
be construed as a criticism of the Buddha’s neglect of his son, whom he 
left behind as a newborn baby when setting out on his quest for enlight-
enment, the commentary (Sp) provides a kinder interpretation. Råhula 
is asking his father for his inheritance only in obedience to his mother. 
She in turn is curious regarding the whereabouts of a treasure known to 
have been in the Buddha’s possession before his departure, but now 
mislaid. With it she plans for Råhula to establish himself as a universal 
emperor, the role that is his rightful inheritance, a role that had been 
open to the Buddha himself, but which he rejected when he renounced.  
In response to Råhula’s pestering, the Buddha ﬁnally turns to the sen-
ior monk, Såriputta, and tells him to ordain Råhula, thus giving him his 
true ‘inheritance.’ This narrative provides the background for the estab-
lishment of two rules, the one regarding parental consent for ordina-
tion, the other regarding the number of novices a monk may take on at 
one time. 
                                                        
2  1988, 106 with note 101. 
3  1983, iii 97 (English translation of Thai original, which was published in 1921). 


--- Page 69 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
157 
According to the narrative framework, it is king Suddhodana, the 
Buddha’s father and Råhula’s grandfather, who instigates the rule on 
parental consent. He is upset by Råhula’s ordination and reminded of 
the poignancy of the grief that he felt at the Buddha’s own renuncia-
tion. Suddhodana explains to the Buddha the grief he felt on both oc-
casions, a grief he experiences in spite of being a supporter of the Bud-
dha, Dhamma and Sangha.4 In the hope of sparing other parents the 
same grief Suddhodana persuades the Buddha not to allow sons to be 
ordained without parental permission.5 Thus the Buddha lays down the 
rule that someone may not receive ordination without the consent of his 
parents. To ordain someone without the consent of that individual’s 
parents is ruled a wrongdoing (dukka†a) in Sangha law (Vinaya). This is 
a lower category of offence than the rules contained in the Påti-
mokkhasutta, but it indicates expected good practice. 
The Buddha formulates the rule with respect to sons and not daugh-
ters. This probably reﬂects the fact that this rule is laid down before the 
foundation of the nuns’ order in the chronology of the biographical 
framework in which the rules are set. That the rule applies to daughters 
as well is clear from the commentary on this passage. Although the rule 
reads putta ‘son’, Sp takes it to apply to offspring of either gender, as 
becomes apparent in the clariﬁcation of the rule as it pertains spe-
ciﬁcally to the duhitå, ‘daughter’, of a nun. This is further conﬁrmed by 
the discussion of the ordination of nuns in the Bhikkhun¥vibha!ga sec-
tion of the Vinaya Pi†aka.6 The rule is also included among the rules 
governing nuns, the Bhikkun¥påtimokkha. Interestingly, its inclusion 
among the Påtimokkha rules for nuns makes it a more serious offence 
for a nun than for a monk to ordain someone without parental permis-
sion. For nuns it is one of the offences requiring ‘simple expiation 
[through confession]’, suddhapåcittiyå, no. 80.7  
                                                        
4  The latter point is made by the commentary, Sp. In the main text Suddhodana de-
scribes the poignancy of a parent’s grief. The story as found in the main text is partially 
translated by Wijayaratna 1990: 13–14. 
5  The motive is made explicit in Sp.  
6  Translation, Rhys Davids and Oldenberg 1885, iii 349. 
7  Norman and Pruitt 2001, 189. 


--- Page 70 ---
CROSBY 
 
158 
The rule that parental consent is necessary for ordination is all very 
well as far as it goes, but since the Vinaya is largely a system of binding 
monastic law, it had to be applicable to the realia of monastic life. If one 
tries to apply this law in practice, or even if one is of a legalistic frame of 
mind, a series of objections occurs, such as: What if the parents are 
dead, disagree or live in another country? What if the candidate for or-
dination is grown up and long independent of his parents? While one 
may wish to hazard one’s own commonsense answers, a consensus on 
commonsense may not be achievable between relevant parties. Fur-
thermore, unless laid down in Sangha law, ‘commonsense’ solutions 
leave the monk performing the ordination open to the charge of 
wrongdoing. They might also leave a prospective candidate entirely at 
the mercy of the character of the individual monk he approaches, the 
possibility of ordination depending on whether that monk veers towards 
the literalistic or interpretative in his application of Vinaya law. Further 
down the line, uncertainties in the validity of the ordination of one 
member of a particular monastic lineage (nikåya) may invalidate the 
entire lineage. Such weaknesses make a nikåya particularly vulnerable in 
times of competition and reform.  
Inevitably, Vinaya traditions responded to such practicalities of actual 
monastic life in real communities, and for this reason it may be naïve to 
rely only on the rules issued by the Buddha in the Vinaya Pi†aka for an 
accurate presentation of early monastic life. The Vinaya Pi†aka itself in-
cludes many further adaptations of rules, still attributed to the Buddha 
himself, including exceptions where infringement is not an offence. 
After the closure of the Canon, Vinaya experts continued to introduce 
amendments to rulings which proved in practice to be unrealistic or 
insufﬁciently speciﬁc, in response to either envisaged or actual excep-
tions. This process of adaptation and interpretation is one that contin-
ues to this day in response to the realia of modern, including global, 
Buddhism.8 
                                                        
8  Relatively recent developments include the different approaches taken by different 
nikåyas to such problems as the ubiquitous need to handle money in the modern 
world, and to adaptations of such matters as monastic habit and rules on eating in re-
sponse to the needs of Theravådin monks now living in colder climes, as missionaries, 
serving Diaspora communities or for more individual reasons. 


--- Page 71 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
159 
Sp provides evidence of such developments as had taken place up to 
the time of its composition in c. ﬁfth century ce.9 In commenting on 
passages in the Vinaya Pi†aka, it provides additional legalistic interpreta-
tions and rules. It also mentions alternative interpretations of monastic 
law that had been developed in closely related Vinaya traditions, the 
Andhaka and Kurundi traditions. In the commentary to the account of 
Råhula’s ordination, it offers closer deﬁnition of the rule on parental 
consent as well as amendments to it. It includes both a list of situations 
which, while not straightforward, nonetheless do not present exceptions 
to the rule and a list of those circumstances which do present excep-
tions and consequently mean that the performance of an ordination 
without parental consent is not an act of wrong doing.  
No translation of Sp from Pali into a European language has yet been 
published. Samantabhadra’s Chinese translation of Sp has been trans-
lated into English, but the Chinese text lacks most of the detail of the 
Pali passage on this subject, even stating the opposite on one point, an 
issue to which I shall return below.10 I therefore offer a translation of 
the list of amendments as found in the Pali text (Sp v 1011,6–1012,30) 
in full below. The list includes some of the ‘commonsense’ answers we 
might have hazarded, but it also includes some surprising reﬁnements 
and concessions. For the sake of clarity I have broken up the text, which 
is otherwise continuous, into separate bullet points. I have also provided 
a heading of the issue being explained for all but the ﬁrst two points. 
These are in square brackets, as are other words I have added for the 
sake of clarity. 
• 
In this context ‘parents’ refers to birth parents.11 
                                                        
9  See von Hinüber 1996, 104 (§ 209) regarding the nature of the attribution of Sp to 
Buddhaghosa. 
10  Bapat and Hirakawa 1970. A new translation of the Chinese version is in preparation 
by Toshiichi Endo.  
11  Påli jananijanake, literally, ‘set of people producing’, i.e. the birth parents. I wondered 
if this might be a broader reference to members of the direct blood lineage, since the 
rule is made in response to Suddhodana’s situation and one might suppose that it 
would include natural grandparents and so forth as well. However, this is precluded by 
the subsequent dve, ‘both’. Nevertheless, it is interesting that the list of relatives ex-
cluded from the required consultative process given below begins with ‘aunt’ and not 
‘grandparent’.  


--- Page 72 ---
CROSBY 
 
160 
• 
If he still has both parents, both must be consulted. 
• 
[One parent deceased] If the father or the mother is dead, the remaining 
living parent must be consulted. 
• 
[Parents themselves already ordained] Even if they have themselves been 
ordained they must still be consulted. 
• 
[Who seeks permission?] The parental consent must be sought in person 
by the monk planning to carry out the ordination, or he may send some-
one else in his place. Alternatively he may send the candidate himself with 
the instruction, ‘Go and return once you have consulted your parents.’ If 
the candidate says ‘I have received permission,’ he can be ordained if the 
monk performing his ordination regards him as trustworthy.  
• 
[Child following parent into Sangha] A father who has himself been or-
dained and wishes his son to receive ordination too must still consult the 
mother before having him ordained. In the converse case, a mother want-
ing her daughter to receive ordination must still consult the father before 
having her ordained.  
• 
[Father abandoned family] Suppose the father has deserted his son and 
wife making no provision for them, and the mother gives the son to the 
monks saying, ‘Ordain him.’ If in response to the question ‘Where is his 
father?’ she says, ‘He has deserted us pursuing his own selﬁsh whims,’ 
then it is permitted to ordain him.  
• 
[Mother abandoned family] Suppose the mother has run off with some 
man, while the father hands over [the son] saying, ‘Ordain him.’ The 
same principle applies in this case as in the previous one. 
• 
[Father away from home] While the father is away from home, the 
mother instructs, ‘Ordain him’. When the question is put ‘Where is his fa-
ther? [she replies,] ‘Why do you need the father, I will vouch for [his an-
swer].’ According to the Kurundi [Vinaya tradition] it is permissible to 
proceed with the ordination.12 
                                                        
12  The implication is that this view is not acceptable in the Sri Lankan Mahåvihåra tradi-
tion of which Buddhaghosa, to whom the commentary is attributed, is representative 
here. Buddhaghosa mentions the contrary opinion of other commentaries. If they go 
against a statement or implicit understanding in the Canon itself he points this out 
and rejects them. The Kurundi tradition is currently known only through its mention 
by Buddhaghosa and later commentators who use Buddhaghosa’s work. 


--- Page 73 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
161 
• 
[Relative in loco parentis] Suppose the parents are both deceased and the 
child has been raised by an aunt or other relatives. When he is being or-
dained his relatives either quarrel or take offence. Therefore, in order to 
avoid disputes, one should consult [the relatives] before ordaining him. 
But there is no offence committed by someone who performs the ordina-
tion without having consulted them. 
• 
[Adoptive parents] Suppose a child, having been adopted as an infant, 
calls those who raised him ‘mother and father.’13 The same principle ap-
plies to them as to the last. 
• 
[Ordination of an independent adult] Suppose the son lives independ-
ently, while his parents do not. Even if he is the king himself, his parents 
must still be consulted before he can be ordained. 
• 
[Repeat ordinations] A boy is granted permission by his parents, but after 
his ordination he leaves the order again. Even if he is ordained and leaves 
a hundred times, his parents must be consulted again each time before he 
is ordained. Suppose the parents say, ‘He leaves the order and comes back 
and does no work for us. He is ordained but does not keep your vow. 
There is no need for him to consult us, ordain him any time.’ Once such 
permission has been given it is permissible to proceed with any further 
ordination even without consulting the parents. Likewise the boy who was 
given in his infancy with an agreement such as ‘This boy is given to you. 
Ordain him when you want.’ can be ordained time and time again with-
out again consulting the parents. But a child whose parents gave permis-
sion when he was still a child with the instruction ‘Lord, ordain him,’ if 
they do not give their permission later on when the boy is grown, this per-
son cannot be ordained without again consulting his parents.  
• 
[Threatening behaviour] Someone who has quarrelled with his parents 
comes demanding to be ordained. On being told to come back after he 
has consulted his parents, he replies, ‘I will not leave unless you ordain 
me. I shall set ﬁre to the monastery, I shall attack you with a knife, I shall 
harm your relatives or supporters by damaging the hermitage, etc.14, I 
                                                        
13  The term is posanaka, literally ‘nourisher’, here ‘foster/adoptive parents’. This mean-
ing is not in PED. 
14  I am not sure of ‘by damaging the hermitage’ as the meaning of åråmacchedanåd¥hi. It 
literally means either by ‘by park/hermitage-cutting etc.’ or ‘by stopping, cutting etc.’ 
If we take åråma in the former sense of ‘hermitage/park’, following its usual use in Pali 
texts, which gives the meaning of the sentence as ‘I shall harm/cause loss to your rela-


--- Page 74 ---
CROSBY 
 
162 
shall jump off a tree and die, I shall join a gang of robbers, I shall emi-
grate.’ If it is in order to protect life itself, it is permissible to proceed with 
his ordination. Now when his parents come and ask, ‘Why have you or-
dained our son?’ one should relate the circumstances to them and ex-
plain to them, ‘We ordained him for his own protection – verify this with 
your son.’ When someone has climbed up a tree and is threatening to 
jump from it, it is only permissible to ordain him once he has released his 
hands and feet from the tree.15 
• 
[From another region] Also one who requests ordination after going to a 
different region should be ordained if he went there after consulting [his 
parents]. If not, he should be ordained after a young monk has been sent 
to consult his parents. If it is an extremely long way, it is permissible to es-
tablish consent by sending him off with monks even after ordination. In 
the Kurundi Vinaya tradition, by contrast, it is stated: ‘If it is far away and 
the road is very difﬁcult, it is permissible to proceed with the ordination 
after forming the resolution, ‘We shall go and consult them.’’  
• 
[Parental permission not speciﬁc to one son] Now if the parents have 
many sons, and say the following, ‘Sir, ordain whichever of our children 
you choose,’ [the ordaining monk] may ordain whichever child he wishes 
after inspecting them.  
• 
[Collective permission not speciﬁc to one son] Also if an entire family or 
village gives the permission with the statement, ‘Sir, ordain whichever 
member of this family or village you choose,’ the one he chooses can be 
ordained [without separate consent from that individual’s parents]. 
                                                                                                                         
tives and supporters by damaging the hermitage, etc.’, this threat does not appear to 
be in line with the degree of severity of the other threats mentioned here. The verbs 
bhedana and uddålana are found for vandalism of monastic property in the Vinaya, but 
for smaller items, so perhaps chedana is possible in this context. I have not found the 
phrase elsewhere in the Canon or commentaries, which is surprising, given that it ap-
pears to be a speciﬁc list. Nor have I found a gloss for this phrase in the commentaries 
either to Sp or to Såriputta’s Pålimuttakavinayavinicchaya, which includes this passage 
verbatim (for the commentary to the pabbajjå section in the latter, see Pannasara and 
Nanavimalatissa 1908: 69–84).  
15  The wording ‘hands and feet’ here probably reﬂects the method of climbing tall palm 
trees by binding the feet and hands together around the tree, then levering oneself up 
by means of the thongs between the hands and feet, the thongs resting in the horizon-
tal ridges of the trunk. 


--- Page 75 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
163 
Perhaps the most surprising adaptation of the rule is that monks are 
ofﬁcially sanctioned in bowing to pressure, in that they should give in to 
what appears to be blackmail if the situation threatens to escalate into 
life-threatening violence. When the parents of the novitiate arrive, in-
dignantly demanding to know why the Sangha has ordained their son 
without consulting them, the monks are to reply that it was for his own 
safety. In other words, they may invoke the higher consideration of pro-
tecting life. A similar consideration is found in canonical stories about 
reluctant parents giving their consent for ordination in order to prevent 
their son dying after he has undertaken a hunger strike to persuade 
them. The most famous such story is probably that of Sudinna, the ﬁrst 
member of the Sangha to have sexual intercourse after ordination, nar-
rated in the frame story for the ﬁrst påråjika rule (offence requiring ex-
pulsion from the Sangha). This story, as an aside, gives a further, eco-
nomic reason for ensuring parental consent prior to ordination, not 
made explicit in Sp. Sudinna has sexual intercourse for economic rea-
sons – because he had failed to provide his parents with a male heir be-
fore ordaining, and the government therefore threatens to appropriate 
their estate.16 
Avoidance of confrontation more generally, a theme in the narrative 
framework of rules laid down in the Vinaya Pi†aka itself, continues as 
the motivation behind a number of the recommendations and rulings 
here. This is the reason that adoptive parents and relatives who have 
looked after the child should be consulted anyway, even though their 
consent is not actually required from a Vinaya perspective. It is curious 
that, although the rule was, according to both the Canon and the com-
mentary, originally laid down in response to the grief of Råhula’s grand-
father, adoptive parents and relatives other than the birth parents do 
not have the same rights as the birth parents. Even if they are called 
‘mother’ and ‘father’ by the prospective ordinand, and could presuma-
bly experience the same grief as birth parents, they should be consulted 
only out of politeness to ensure harmony, not because the adoptive par-
ents have the right of veto granted to the birth parents. The compound 
                                                        
16  For Sudinna’s story, see Suttavibha"ga påråjika 1, Vin i 11 ff.; cf. Ra††hapåla Sutta (no. 
82), M ii 55–65.  


--- Page 76 ---
CROSBY 
 
164 
referring to relatives is cË¬amåtåd¥naµ, ‘little mother, etc’, i.e. junior 
aunt, etc. It is possible that this is meant to indicate relatives who are not 
direct ancestors. This amendment to the rule suggests that a motive 
other than grief, such as ancestral rites or inheritance law, may have 
contributed to this rule.  
The statement that deceased parents do not need to be consulted 
may seem to be stating the obvious, but restricting the requirement for 
permission to living parents becomes more relevant when one bears in 
mind that Theravåda thrived in some societies that included in their 
religious framework both ancestor worship and consultation of spirits 
and ancestors for permission for personal undertakings. 
Interestingly from the perspective of gender relations, mother and fa-
ther have an equal say in their child’s ordination. A further point worth 
noting is that even parents who have themselves received ordination still 
appear to have the right to grant or withhold permission for the ordina-
tion of their child. Furthermore, they must still negotiate with the other 
parent of their child on the subject. Thus the ‘leaving of society’ to join 
the Sangha does not automatically deprive one of all the rights or duties 
held as a member of a family. One remains ‘legally’ connected both to 
one’s offspring and to the other parent in this matter. The continued 
rights of parents who are ordained contrast with the lack of rights of a 
father who has abandoned his wife and child, or a woman who has run 
off with another man. By doing this, the parent has lost his/her legal 
rights regarding the child according to Sangha law. The reference to a 
monk seeking to ordain his own son or a nun her own daughter further 
suggests that it was sometimes practice for people to keep a child of the 
same sex with them after ordination by also having the child ordained.17 
Perhaps entire families sought ordination at the same time, and same-
sex family units could remain intact. 
Trust appears to have paid a part in the decision whether or not to 
ordain a person: thus if the candidate for ordination convinces the or-
daining monk that his parents approve, the ordination can go ahead. 
                                                        
17  This is the implication of the gender-speciﬁc instructions, the father in the case of a 
son (both then become members of the male Sangha), the mother in the case of a 
daughter (both then become members of the female Sangha). 


--- Page 77 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
165 
Similarly, consultation of parents who live very far away can take place 
after the ordination. The Kurundi tradition appears more disposed to 
rely on trust in the absence of one parent. For example, it allows a 
mother to vouch for the response the father would give, were he able to 
be present. It also allows an ordination to go ahead with a statement of 
intent to seek the parents’ permission on a later, convenient occasion 
should the journey to reach them be a difﬁcult one. It seems that Sp 
regards the ordination as fully valid only once the consent has been ob-
tained, even if this is after the ordination has taken place. Unfortunately 
we know very little about the Kurundi tradition, other than what we 
glean from Sp, which makes it difﬁcult to contextualise such differ-
ences. 
It is clear from statements such as, ‘Sir, ordain whichever member of 
this family or village you choose,’ that by the time of Buddhaghosa or-
dination was not always a matter of personal choice. Clearly a family or 
village could decide it was in their interest to have one of their number 
ordained, perhaps in the collective desire for the good merit resulting 
from such an act or in personal response to the monk to whom they 
offered the candidate. In such instances, a collective will for member-
ship of the Sangha on the part of an individual of that group is ex-
pressed. This is far removed from the personal motivations expressed in 
the testimonies of early members of the Sangha.18 In a few of the scenar-
ios described above it appears to be the parents who are actively seeking 
ordination of their child for their own reasons, perhaps when the child 
is still quite young, rather than in response to their offspring’s own de-
sire for ordination. This suggests that the belief that having one’s chil-
dren ordained beneﬁts one’s own karmic welfare – a belief current in 
Theravåda countries to this day – was already present by the time of 
Buddhaghosa. Conﬁrmation of this belief at that period is provided by 
the c. ﬁfth-century Sri Lankan Theravåda chronicle, the Mahåvaµsa, 
which relates how Asoka had his son Mahinda and daughter 
Sa!ghamittå ordained after being informed that this was the highest 
possible gift to the Sangha. The undated Upåsakamanussavinayavaˆˆanå, 
‘Explanation of the Code of Conduct for Good Buddhists’, also advo-
                                                        
18  For example in the Thera- and Ther¥gåthå. 


--- Page 78 ---
CROSBY 
 
166 
cates ordination of one’s son or daughter as the surest route to a heav-
enly rebirth: ‘Parents who have their son or daughter ordained in the 
dispensation of the Buddha will be reborn in heaven.’19 All this reﬂects 
a Sangha that had to some extent already become an institutionalised 
niche within society, without expectations that ordination should neces-
sarily be motivated by personal soteriological aspiration.  
The importance of having children ordained as a means of merit-
making for parents by this period suggests a further reason for such de-
tailed consideration of the issue of parental consent. Given Buddhist 
emphasis on intentional action, for merit to be accrued intent is impor-
tant. Ascertaining parental consent could be viewed from the parental 
side as a means of ensuring that, through such expressed intent on their 
part, the resulting merit is guaranteed for them. This outcome could be 
compromised if the ordination took place without their knowledge, par-
ticularly given the mechanisms of merit-making and so-called ‘merit-
transfer’ in Theravåda. Even in highly ritualised Theravåda merit trans-
fer practices, such as those for deceased relatives, the intended recipient 
of the merit must be named. While the model of such reference to the 
person in whose name a meritorious act, such as feeding monks or hav-
ing paritta texts recited, may be sacriﬁcial Indian religion, the success of 
such practices are explained from a doctrinal perspective in Theravåda 
with reference to the change in consciousness of the recipient of the 
merit when they witness the good act performed in their name. 
The amendments concerning the problem of an individual whose 
parents live at a distance suggests that seeking ordination in the 
Theravåda tradition was not necessarily a matter of joining the local 
religious group, although it is unclear whether this reﬂects individuals 
choosing one nikåya over another, or the relative inaccessibility of the 
Sangha for some people, who were nevertheless in some way under its 
inﬂuence.  
                                                        
19  ye puttadh¥taraµ buddhasåsane pabbåjenti te sagge uppajjanti. Final folio of manuscripts, 
c. 5 lines from the end. For Sinhalese mss see Somadasa 1987–95. For Lånnå ms see 
von Hinüber 1996, 196 (§ 424). This text has not yet been published, although an edi-
tion and translation are currently under preparation by the present author. For a fuller 
description see Crosby (in press). 


--- Page 79 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
167 
Finally, the ﬁfth-century Chinese translation of Sp by Samantabhadra 
includes a version of this passage. In their translation of it, Bapat and 
Hirakawa note, ‘Pali Text does not wholly support this, as it insists upon 
permission even after an emergency conversion.’20 From this remark it 
would appear that Samantabhadra’s text is more lenient than the Pali 
text, in that it allows for ordination without parental consent in some 
emergency circumstances where the Pali text does not. Bapat and Hira-
kawa’s translation of the entire passage from Samantabhadra reads:  
Therefore, in the original Vinaya, it has been said: ‘If the father and mother 
do not permit, then he cannot be converted into a recluse’.21 If the father 
and mother permit, then he may be converted. Having once been converted, 
he may return to worldly life. If he again wants to become a recluse, he has to 
seek permission from his father and mother. If the father and mother do not 
permit, he cannot be converted into a recluse. 
 
 
If a man seeks to become a recluse, the Bhikkhus would ask him: ‘Have 
your father and mother permitted you to become a recluse?’ He replies, ‘Not 
permitted.’ If he is thus not permitted, then he cannot be converted into a 
recluse. If he says to the Bhikkhus: ‘If you do not convert me, then I would 
burn your monastic establishment’ – under such a difﬁcult situation, if one 
converts him into a recluse, then there is no offence. If there be [some other 
province in] a different direction, or if there is another town where he can 
get converted, then one need not ask about his parents’ [permission].22 
It is immediately clear that Samantabhadra’s text is far shorter and 
less detailed on the subject of parental consent. It lacks most of the ﬁner 
points such as the procedure to follow if parents are dead, not one’s 
birth parents, have abandoned their family, or are in the Sangha. Even 
where it does cover the same point, such as the need for renewed per-
mission for someone who disrobes and then joins the order again, it 
does not distinguish between the different types of permission offered 
by parents. While it states there is no offence committed if the prospec-
tive candidate threatens the monastery, it does not discuss threats the 
candidate makes against himself or other people. Nor does it explain 
how to deal with aggrieved parents. Contrary to Bapat and Hirakawa, 
                                                        
20  Bapat and Hirakawa 1970, 510, footnote 5. 
21  i.e. ordained. 
22  Bapat and Hirakawa 1970, 509–10. 


--- Page 80 ---
CROSBY 
 
168 
the ordination does proceed ‘after an emergency conversion’ without 
the parents’ permission. The last sentence of the passage, which deals 
with a different direction or another town, appears to waive the need 
for parental permission if the ordination is taking place in a different 
region or town from that of the parents. Here the Pali text offers a list of 
recourses to ensure parental consent in such circumstances. Neverthe-
less, it is not clear that the Pali text is in fact stricter on this point. The 
bottom line in both texts is that the ordination can take place without 
parental consent in such circumstances. The Pali text, however, stresses 
the need for retrospective permission in the latter cases, and consulta-
tion in the former case of emergency ordination. In doing so the Pali 
text presents fuller advice. As well as laying down the legal requirements 
the Pali text offers advice on how to deal with the consequences of ex-
ceptions. These include how to treat adoptive parents and how to deal 
with aggrieved parents whose child has been ordained without their 
consent.23 
In summary, Sp reafﬁrms the rule that an individual may not receive 
the pabbajjå ordination without their parents’ consent. A number of ex-
ceptions nevertheless apply. Most of these exceptions are responses to 
circumstances in which one or both parents are inaccessible through 
death or desertion. Absence of a parent through travel or the distance 
of their residence from the proposed place of ordination does not war-
rant an exception to the rule, although consent may be sought retro-
spectively in some conditions. The only genuine exception, which un-
dermines the general rule in that it allows ordination without parental 
consent even when those parents are available for consultation, is the 
ruling that one should give in to the threats of someone seeking ordina-
                                                        
23  See Bapat and Hirakawa 1970, xlv ff. for a discussion of the differences between the 
Chinese and Påli texts. The differences between the two texts may reﬂect later reﬁne-
ments to Sp in the Pali tradition or deliberate abridgement by Samantabhadra of the 
text on which he based his translation. Although we would not expect Samantabhadra 
to choose to abridge this very passage because of the emphasis placed on ﬁlial piety in 
Chinese Buddhism, the fact that the divergence between the Påli and Chinese texts 
increases as the work progresses has led Toshiichi Endo to conclude that the di-
vergence is indeed due to increasing abridgement by Samantabhadra (personal com-
munication, 10 May 2003). This passage occurs towards the ﬁnal stages of the com-
mentary, where divergence is greater. 


--- Page 81 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
169 
tion if life is at stake. If somebody threatens extreme harm to them-
selves, the Sangha or those connected with the Sangha, one should or-
dain that person. Aggrieved parents are then advised to sort out the 
matter with their child after the ordination has taken place.  
This list of endorsements and amendments to the rule regarding pa-
rental consent provides practical advice on how to proceed if the per-
mission of both parents is not readily available for any reason. The text 
also reveals certain attitudes towards ordination, endorsed by Buddhag-
hosa in the ﬁfth century, that may seem removed from the original 
spirit of Buddhist renunciation yet can be recognised in modern 
Theravåda. These include the move towards childhood ordination, the 
decision to ordain being a family or collective decision rather than an 
individual’s, and family responsibilities continuing after ordination.  
The statements of Sp on such matters are important because they in-
dicate the developments that took place within the monastic life of 
Theravåda within the ﬁrst millennium of Buddhism. They are also im-
portant within Theravåda itself, because Buddhaghosa came to be re-
garded as the authority in matters of Vinaya. This is particularly true for 
all those nikåyas, ordination lineages, which regarded themselves as 
heirs to the reformed Mahåvihåra tradition of twelfth-century Sri Lanka, 
because Såriputta, the leading light of the Mahåvihåra reform at that 
time, based several of his own Vinaya writings on Sp.24 The prestige of 
the twelfth-century Sri Lankan reform, in conjunction with the authority 
of Buddhaghosa, led to the Vinaya as seen through Sp being taken as 
ideal monastic law throughout much of medieval Theravåda. 
This exploration of the rule on parental consent demonstrates that 
the Vinaya is not monolithic and indicates how important it is not to 
take the canonical component of Theravåda Vinaya to represent the 
whole of this tradition and the life of the Sangha throughout its history. 
In practice and for a very long time Theravåda Vinaya has not consisted 
solely of precepts enunciated by the Buddha, but has been highly pro-
ductive in terms of subsequent development and adaptation. The Vi-
naya, whatever its origin, came to be a sophisticated legal system even 
                                                        
24  See Pecenko 1997 for an overview of Såriputta’s writings, and Crosby 2006 regarding 
the three texts he compiled on the basis of Sp. 


--- Page 82 ---
CROSBY 
 
170 
within the ﬁrst millennium of its existence. This should warn us that the 
tendency to view the Theravåda tradition as simple, unevolved, original 
Buddhism, is achieved only by ignoring the two and half millennia of 
development which can to some extent be followed through the com-
mentarial and paracanonical literature. Thus writers on Theravåda 
Buddhism, such as the authorities Wijayaratna and Gombrich cited at 
the outset, representing ‘the texts of the Theravåda tradition’ and its 
‘social history’ respectively, are misleading when they take modern 
Theravåda as an expression of original Buddhism through an anachro-
nistic reference to the earliest level of Theravåda literature. They do so 
in part for simplicity’s sake, but in so doing they inhabit or at least 
conﬁrm the worldview of intentional reformers and apologists of 
Theravåda, such as Vajirañåˆavarorasa, also cited at the outset, who 
sought to make the claim that Theravåda was original Buddhism and 
must be adapted to appear as such. It is important to remember the ex-
tent of reforms throughout Theravådin history and that modern con-
formity with the most emphasised features of canonical Buddhism may 
be an indication of intentional changes made in this lineage rather than 
of a stagnation maintained since the canonical texts were established. 
To some extent, those post-canonical texts that have survived in 
Theravåda are from those traditions that were most conservative or anx-
ious to reform Theravåda, to establish their nikåya as orthodox with ref-
erence to the authority of the Canon, of which Sp is an example. Never-
theless, developments within Theravåda can still be traced through such 
post-canonical literature. Such development is more easily seen through 
the pragmatic concerns of Vinaya and in the open intellectual discourse 
of Abhidhamma than through the relatively overworked material of the 
Sutta Pi†aka, yet post-canonical Vinaya and Abhidhamma materials are 
still little represented in accounts of Theravåda Buddhism. Here one 
small example has been used to show how looking into such post-
canonical material may tell us a great deal about Theravåda’s develop-
ment into an institutionalised religion, with a sophisticated and diver-
gent legal system, designed not solely for those in pursuit of Nibbåna. 
Finally, the interpretation of the rule on parental consent in Sp poses 
questions regarding its application in modern globalised Theravåda. 
The requirement for parental consent is embodied in all Theravåda 


--- Page 83 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
171 
litanies for ordination, so ordaining monks remain aware of this re-
quirement and ask about parental consent as part of the ritual, even if 
they are unfamiliar with the commentarial analysis of this require-
ment.25 However, cultural differences in attitudes towards parents mean 
that Western converts to Buddhism seeking ordination are less likely to 
ask their parents for permission. How should the ordaining monks re-
spond to this attitude in the light of Sp? The perception of greater in-
dependence of Westerners from their parents should not waive the 
regulation, given the statement that even a king needs his parents’ con-
sent. The modiﬁcation of the rule in distant lands does not apply, given 
that modern technology removes any difﬁculties of communication. 
The grief experienced by the parent, which instigated the laying down 
of the rule in the ﬁrst place, may still apply. From these perspectives, 
monks ordaining Western converts should therefore still require the 
parents’ consent. However, parents of Western converts are less likely to 
believe in merit-making or in the necessity of a lineage of progeny for 
welfare after death. They are less likely to need children for economic 
reasons. If these appear to be strong considerations in the commentar-
ial insistance on keeping to the letter of this rule, then the case for in-
sisting on parental consent in the case of converts is weakened. Another 
factor is that Western converts are more likely to have explicitly sote-
riological rather than social motives for ordination, and are also more 
likely to be eclectic in their acceptance of textual authority. Familiar 
with the story of the Buddha’s own renunciation against his father’s 
wishes, they may see his biography as holding greater authority in their  
                                                        
25  See Bizot 1988 for the ordination litanies used in Theravådin traditions. 


--- Page 84 ---
CROSBY 
 
172 
own case than the requirement for parental consent stipulated by the 
Buddha at a later stage in his life.26  
 
Kate Crosby 
School of Oriental and African Studies 
 
Abbreviations 
 
M 
Majjhima Nikåya 
PED The Pali Text Society’s Pali-English Dictionary, T. W. Rhys Davids 
and William Stede, Pali Text Society, 1921–1925, repr. Oxford, 
1986 
Sp 
Samantapåsådikå 
Vin  Vinaya Pi†aka  
 
(Page references are to the Pali Text Society’s editions.) 
 
Bibliography 
 
Bapat, P. V. and Hirakawa, A. (1970), Shan-Chien-P’i-P’o-Sha, A Chinese version by 
Sa"ghabhadra of Samantapåsådikå, Commentary on Pali Vinaya translated into English for the 
ﬁrst time, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona. 
Bizot, F. (1988). Les traditions de la pabbajjå en Asie du Sud-Est: Recherches sur le bouddhisme 
khmer iv, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen. 
                                                        
26  While I have not conducted a systematic study of this issue in the ordination of West-
ern converts, I am aware of many cases of converts not seeking parental consent, and 
of a few where the parents have been against the ordination. I have also several times 
encountered Diaspora Buddhists who have been attracted to the Friends of the West-
ern Buddhist Order, designed as a form of Buddhism suited to Western culture, ex-
plicitly because it authorises its attitude to ﬁlial obedience with reference to the Bud-
dha’s biography, rather than to the Vinaya rule that the tradition accepts as replacing 
that authority. The approach taken to this regulation by some scholars and convert 
practitioners is of relevance to discussions of so-called protestant and orientalist 
inﬂuences in the cultures of both. 


--- Page 85 ---
ORDINAT ION WITHOUT PAR ENT AL CONSENT 
173 
Crosby, Kate (2006), ‘Såriputta’s Three Works on the Samantapåsådikå’, Journal of the Pali 
Text Society, xxviii, 49–59. 
—— (in press), ‘A Theravada Code of Conduct for Good Buddhists: the Upåsakamanussa-
vinaya’, Journal of the American Oriental Society. 
Gombrich, R. F. (1988), Theravåda Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benares to Modern 
Colombo, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London. 
von Hinüber, O. (1996), A Handbook of Påli Literature, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin & New 
York. 
Norman, K.R. and Pruitt, W. (2001), The Påtimokkha, The Pali Text Society, Oxford. 
Pannasara, K. and P. Nanavimalatissa (1908), Palimuttaka Vinaya Vinicchaya Sangaha†¥kå, 
Sudarsana Press, Matara. 
Rhys Davids, T. W. and Oldenberg, H. (1885), Vinaya Texts translated from the Påli, Part iii, 
The Kullavagga, iv–xii, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Pecenko, Primoz (1997), ‘Såriputta and his works’, Journal of the Pali Text Society xxiii, 
159–79. 
Somadasa, K. D. (1987–95), Catalogue of the Hugh Nevill Collection of Sinhalese manuscripts in 
the British Library, 7 vols, Pali Text Society, London. 
Takakusu, J., Nagai, M. and Mizuno, K. (1936), Samantapåsådikå: Buddhaghosa’s Commen-
tary on the Vinaya Pi†aka, vol. v, The Pali Text Society, repr. Oxford, 1998.  
Vajirañåˆavarorasa (1983), The Entrance to the Vinaya: Vinaya Mukha, vol. iii, Mahåmakut 
Råjavidyålaya Press, Bangkok. Thai original 1921. 
Wijayaratna, M. (1990), Buddhist Monastic Life according to the texts of the Theravåda tradition, 
Cambridge University Press, translated by C. Grangier and S. Collins from Le Moine 
bouddhiste selon les textes du Theravåda, Editions du Cerf, Paris, 1983.  
 
 


--- Page 86 ---


--- Page 87 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 175–94 
 
ON THE NATURE OF DHAMMAS 
A REVIEW ARTICLE 
 
RUPERT GETHIN 
 
oa Ronkin’s book, Early Buddhist metaphysics: the making of a philoso-
phical tradition,1 is a revised version of her Oxford DPhil disserta-
tion.2 It is concerned with the development of systematic Buddhist 
thought, speciﬁcally the Theravådin Abhidhamma, both canonical and 
commentarial. In particular she focuses on the fundamental Abhi-
dhamma notion of a dhamma. This is an important topic that hitherto 
has had insufﬁcient attention paid to it. 
Demonstrating how the notion of a dhamma shifted over the centuries 
involves Ronkin in trying to trace the precise lines of development of 
not only the speciﬁcally Theravådin conception of a dhamma but also, in 
as much as it both coincides and contrasts with the Theravådin, the 
Sarvåstivådin. To accomplish this she employs two main strategies in 
addition to straightforward exegesis of Buddhist texts. First, she consid-
ers the development of Buddhist thought within the wider context of 
the history of Indian ideas, providing helpful accounts of particular 
Buddhist ideas in relation to developments in Indian thought more 
generally, but especially the Vaiße!ika school. Secondly, she elucidates 
the general philosophical ideas under discussion – substance, process, 
                                                        
 
Abbreviations: Abhidh-s = Abhidhammatthasa!gaha; Abhidh-s-mh† = Abhidhammattha-
vibhåvin¥†¥kå; As = Atthasålin¥; Dhs = Dhammasa!gaˆi; Dhs-m† = Dhammasa!gaˆi-mËla†¥kå; 
M = Majjhima Nikåya; MW = Monier-Williams, A Sansk®it-English Dictionary (Oxford); 
Nett = Nettippakaraˆa; Nidd-a i = Mahåniddesa-a††hakathå; Moh = Mohavicchedan¥; Pa†is = 
Pa†isambhidåmagga; Pa†is-a = Pa†isambhidåmagga-a††hakathå; Pa††h = Pa††håna; Pe† = 
Pe†akopadesa; S = Saµyutta Nikåya; Vibh-a = Vibha!ga-a††hakathå; Vism = Visuddhimagga. 
Unless stated otherwise, editions are those of the Pali Text Society. 
1  Early Buddhist metaphysics: the making of a philosophical tradition. Noa Ronkin. London & 
New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2005. xiii, 279 pp. £70/$105. isbn 0415345197. 
2  Noa Gal, ‘A metaphysics of experience: from the Buddha’s teaching to the Abhid-
hamma’ (2003). 
N


--- Page 88 ---
GETHI N 
 
176 
events, categories, individuation, causality – by references to western 
philosophical debate both historical and contemporary. 
In both these respects her study is a model of academic method and 
provides an essential resource for anyone interested in the development 
of Indian Buddhist philosophy. Much of Ronkin’s thesis I ﬁnd broadly 
persuasive. Certain details and aspects of her understanding of the de-
velopment of the Abhidhamma notion of a dhamma, however, I ﬁnd 
problematic. Nevertheless there is no doubt that Noa Ronkin’s book 
makes an important contribution to the scholarly discussion of the is-
sues, shifting it to a new level of sophistication. Since the notion of a 
dharma/dhamma is basic to Buddhist thought, while the published schol-
arly discussion of particularly the Theravådin understanding is limited, 
it seems worth considering Ronkin’s study at some length. 
1. From dhamma to dhammas 
She begins by suggesting that the gap between the Nikåyas and at least 
the canonical Abhidhamma in terms of epistemology and metaphysics 
may not be as wide as it is sometimes portrayed. The Buddha’s refusal to 
answer certain questions does not amount to a rejection of metaphysics 
per se, since choosing to leave certain matters ‘unexplained’ has phi-
losophical signiﬁcance; she argues that ‘despite the Buddha’s silence on 
certain ontological matters, he clearly had a distinctive epistemology, 
subject to the constraints of which there followed, if only implicitly, a 
particular kind of metaphysics’ (p. 12). Brieﬂy, she sees the Buddha as 
rejecting ‘the notion that the encountered world is made up of distin-
guishable substances, and the linguistic theory that words refer to these 
substances which they represent’ (p. 245); instead he offers a ‘radical 
metaphysics’ that ‘undermines the very epistemology from which it 
stems’, advancing ‘a deﬂationary theory of truth’ epitomized by the 
pa†iccasamuppåda formula (p. 247). While the Abhidhamma enterprise 
may end in an account of the world in terms of dhammas conceived of as 
ultimate ‘realities’, nevertheless, argues Ronkin, the concerns which 
motivate it, especially in the canonical period, remain consonant with 
the Nikåyas’ epistemological, psychological and soteriological preoccu-
pations; it is only in the period of the Abhidhamma commentaries that 


--- Page 89 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
177 
the ontology of dhammas becomes an issue, and even here the earlier 
concerns are not entirely lost sight of. 
Following Richard Gombrich,3 she suggests that the usage of the word 
dhamma (singular and plural) in the sense of teaching(s) is primary and 
its usage in the sense of ‘psychological characteristic(s)’ develops from 
the way in which texts such as the Satipa††håna Sutta is present medita-
tion as contemplation of such things as the four truths, which are 
dhammas in the sense of the Buddha’s teachings, but also, crucially, the 
objects of experience in insight meditation (pp. 37–38). From this de-
rives the Nikåya usage of the term dhamma to refer to the objects of ex-
perience more generally: ‘all knowable sensory phenomena of whatever 
nature’ (p. 39). The totality of these phenomena is analysed by way of 
various schemes – the ﬁve khandhas, the twelve åyatanas, the eighteen 
dhåtus – but, Ronkin emphasizes, the concern of these different ways of 
analysis is with the processes that govern our experience, not with the 
nature of the sensory phenomena themselves. The latter, however, does 
become a concern of the Abhidhamma. 
The Abhidhamma’s dhamma theory is, suggests Ronkin, the product 
of an attempt to clarify the workings of the processes that govern our 
experience in ever greater detail. This involves a shift of focus from 
mental processes to the discrete events – dhammas – that make up these 
processes: the processes are reduced to fundamental events which can-
not be analysed further. This shift, at least initially, is not so much a shift 
in ontology as in epistemology. The Nikåyas and the Abhidhamma are 
in accord in rejecting a substance metaphysics (p. 71); they differ in the 
details of their conception of that metaphysics. Moreover, the focus of 
at least the canonical Abhidhamma remains essentially epistemological: 
it is concerned ‘with psycho-physical occurrences that arise in con-
sciousness – and in this sense form one’s “world” – not with what exists 
per se in a mind-independent world’ (p. 76).  
The kind of account Ronkin offers of the semantic evolution of 
dhamma (in the sense of the teaching) to dhammas (in the sense of ‘ob-
                                                        
3  Richard F. Gombrich, How Buddhism Began: The Conditioned Genesis of the Early Teachings 
(London: Athlone, 1996), pp. 34–37. 


--- Page 90 ---
GETHI N 
 
178 
ject of thought’) might be questioned.4 Certainly there are other possi-
ble models. The Geigers, for example, saw matters rather differently,5 
and more recently I have suggested that the Nikåya usage of dhamma at 
the end of a bahuvr¥hi compound in the sense of a particular nature or 
quality possessed by something is adequate to explain the basic usage of 
dhamma in the sense of a psychological quality or characteristic in the 
Nikåyas and canonical Abhidhamma: the shift of focus is simply from 
the nature, quality or characteristic of some particular thing, to qualities 
or characteristics conceived more generally; in fact, the usage of dharma 
in the sense of ‘property’ or ‘characteristic attribute’ would seem to de-
rive directly from the Vedas, Bråhmaˆas and early Upani"ads.6 
2. Sabhåva as the individuator and cause of a dhamma 
Precisely how dhamma comes to be used in the early Abhidhamma in the 
sense of psycho-physical event is incidental to Ronkin’s main focus, 
which is how the Abhidhamma understood the ‘true nature’ of the psy-
cho-physical occurrences termed dhammas. The key concept here, she 
suggests, is that of sabhåva, and she devotes some considerable space to 
its development in Buddhist doctrinal thought. She cites Ñåˆamoli’s 
observation that the term sabhåva seems to appear only once in the 
canon (Pa†is ii 178), yet goes on to note that it is also found in the ca-
nonical Buddhavaµsa (twice) and in the paracanonical Pe†akopadesa, Net-
                                                        
4  In their review of Gombrich’s How Buddhism Began, Maithrimurthi and von Rospatt 
have pointed out that the evidence of other early accounts of sm®tyupasthåna in Bud-
dhist Sanskrit and Chinese translation shows that ‘the scope of the term dharma in the 
Sm®tyupasthånasËtra came to be extended because dharma was already used in other 
contexts in its broad meaning as referring to any thing or phenomenon, and not vice 
versa, as [Gombrich] suggests’ (Indo-Iranian Journal, 41 (1998), 164–79 (175, n. 11)). 
5  The Geigers tend to see dhamma in the sense of the ‘law’ of the world – or, perhaps, 
ultimate ‘truth’ about reality – as basic. Because the dhamma – the law of the world and 
nature consisting in the arising and disappearance, the ﬂeetingness and emptiness of 
reality – becomes manifest in the ‘things’ that constitute the world of experience as 
perceived by the mind, they come to be designated ‘laws’, ‘norms’or ‘truths’, because 
seeing them, one sees the Law, the Truth. See Magdelene and Wilhelm Geiger, Påli 
Dhamma vornehmlich in der kanonischen Literatur (Munich: Bayerischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, 1920), pp. 8–9. 
6  Rupert Gethin, ‘He who sees dhamma sees dhammas: dhamma in early Buddhism’, Jour-
nal of Indian Philosophy, 32 (2004), 513–42 (530–34). 


--- Page 91 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
179 
tippakaraˆa and Milindapañha (p. 87).7 She suggests that in these texts 
sabhåva is used in a variety of senses (nature, essence), but – with the 
exception of the Pe†akopadesa and Nettippakaraˆa – without a speciﬁc 
technical meaning related to the notion of a dhamma. She moves on to 
consider the concept of sabhåva in the Pali commentarial texts. She 
concludes that in these, in contrast to the earlier texts, sabhåva is unam-
biguously used for the ﬁrst time in the sense of ‘an atemporal category 
determining what each and every single dhamma is’; a sabhåva is ‘a de-
terminant of a dhamma’s individuality’ (p. 114).8 Nevertheless, Ronkin 
again stresses that this is not so much a question of ontology as psychol-
ogy; the concern is ‘[to determine] the individuality of the dhammas as 
psycho-physical events as they appear in consciousness, not their exis-
tence per se’ (p. 111). In this connection she suggests that Paul Williams 
may be overconﬁdent in his claim that the Sarvåstivådins and 
Theravådins straightforwardly agree that ‘it is the presence or absence 
of the svabhåva that renders the entity a primary existent’.9 As she notes 
(pp. 111, 226), it is signiﬁcant that the Theravådin Óbhidhammikas 
rejected the Sarvåstivådin equation of dharma with dravya, a term used 
in the technical sense of ‘substance’ by the Vaiße"ikas. 
None the less, Ronkin argues (p. 122; see also pp. 153, 161), the 
Theravådin commentarial Abhidhamma does draw a speciﬁc ontology 
from its account of the world in terms of dhammas determined and indi-
viduated by their sabhåvas. For once every possible event presenting it-
self to consciousness is knowable and nameable, ‘the words and con-
                                                        
7  In fact searchable digital texts allow us to add occurrences in the verses of the Apadåna 
(p. 319), Cariyåpi†aka (79) and Jåtaka (iii 523). 
8  Given her earlier discussion (pp. 98–103) of the use of sabhåva in the Pe†akopadesa, and 
Nettippakaraˆa, it is not clear to me why she regards the sense of ‘a determinant of a 
dhamma’s individuality’ as ﬁrst found in the commentaries. In both these texts (Pe† 
104, Nett 78–81) the ‘cause’ (hetu) of a dhamma is explained as the sabhåva, its ‘own-
nature’, in contrast to its condition (paccaya) which is the parabhåva or ‘nature of an-
other’ (or perhaps better, ‘that which has a different nature’); she comments (p. 100) 
that here ‘sabhåva is what determines the individuality of a dhamma as this particular 
instant rather than that’. It seems that she takes the dhammas referred to in these pas-
sages as the Buddha’s teachings or ‘dhamma series’ rather than speciﬁc psycho-physical 
occurrences; I am not convinced this is warranted. 
9  Paul Williams, ‘On the Abhidharma Ontology’, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 9 (1981), 
227–57 (242). 


--- Page 92 ---
GETHI N 
 
180 
cepts employed in the systematic discourse that is thus developed 
uniquely deﬁne their corresponding referents’; and this 
paves the way for conceptual realism – a world view that is based on the no-
tion of truth as constituted by a correspondence between our concepts and 
statements, on the one hand, and the features of an independent, determi-
nate reality, on the other hand. (p. 122) 
Indeed, there can be little doubt that the ﬁnal outlook of the 
Theravådin Abhidhamma should be characterised as involving some 
form of ‘conceptual realism’. In fact this seems most clearly articulated 
in connection with Abhidhamma theory of concepts, which involves a 
distinction between concepts of things which are existent (vijjamåna-
paññatti) and nonexistent (avijjamåna-paññatti),10 but Ronkin only 
brieﬂy considers the notion of paññatti (pp. 28, 161, 179).  
A difﬁculty with the details of Ronkin’s account of the evolution of 
the concept of sabhåva in the Theravådin Abhidhamma, however, is that 
at crucial points she is swayed by earlier scholars’ speciﬁc translations of 
the word in particular contexts, which causes her sometimes to over in-
terpret the term. I suggested above that the technical Abhidhamma use 
of dhamma might be seen as deriving from a more general usage in the 
sense of ‘quality’ or ‘characteristic’; this helps us to make sense of the 
commentarial equation of dhamma and sabhåva (noted by Ronkin on p. 
114), and speciﬁcally the statement that dhammas are so-called ‘because 
they support (dhårenti) their own particular natures, or because they are 
supported (dhår¥yanti) by causal conditions’.11 Both dhamma and sabhåva 
thus start as different words for the ‘condition’, ‘quality’, ‘nature’ or 
‘characteristic’ of something, and the etymological explanation might 
then be understood, I think, as a direct counter to the Nyåya-Vaiße"ika 
idea of dharmas as ‘properties’ that are ‘supported’ by or possessed by an 
                                                        
10  e.g. Abhidh-s 43, Abhidh-s-mh† 194. 
11  As 39: attano pana sabhåvaµ dhårent¥ ti dhammå. dhår¥yanti vå paccayehi, dhår¥yanti vå 
yathå sabhåvato ti dhammå. (cf. Nidd-a i 16; Pa†is-a i 18; Moh 6.) The same basic 
deﬁnition is also found in the northern sources; see Collett Cox, ‘From category to on-
tology: the changing role of dharma in Sarvåstivåda Abhidharma’, Journal of Indian Phi-
losophy, 32 (2004), 543–97 (558–59, n. 70). 


--- Page 93 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
181 
underlying substance (dharmin) distinct from themselves;12 Buddhist 
dhammas, in contrast, are not the properties of anything. This reinforces 
a point that Ronkin makes in several places, namely, that the develop-
ment of Abhidharma thought should be understood against the back-
ground of Nyåya-Vaiße"ika thought. 
It seems clear that the Buddhist usage of sabhåva derives from the or-
dinary Sanskrit sense of svabhåva, which would seem to be the ‘natural 
condition’ or ‘inherent nature’ of something.13 Note that it is bhåva in 
the sense of ‘condition’, ‘state’ or ‘disposition’, rather than ‘being’ or 
‘existence’ that seems primarily relevant to svabhåva.14 Ronkin begins 
her own discussion with the Pa†isambhidåmagga (ii 178) statement: jåtaµ 
rËpaµ sabhåvena suññaµ. She initially translates (partially): ‘Born mate-
riality is empty of sabhåva …’ This begs the question of the force of the 
instrumental sabhåvena. The phrase might be translated ‘produced ma-
teriality is by nature (i.e. naturally, intrinsically) empty’.15 In fact this 
seems to ﬁt Ronkin’s understanding of the Pa†isambhidåmagga here bet-
ter than her implied ‘born materiality is empty of nature’: 
Taking into account the context, namely, expounding the predication of the 
world by the term ‘empty’, and which dhammas are listed in the above måtikå, 
this extract means that the totality of human experience is devoid of an en-
during substance […] because this totality is dependent on many and various 
conditions, and is of the nature of being subject to a continuous process of 
origination and dissolution … In this context, then, the term sabhåva appears 
to be interchangeable with dhamma in its sense of ‘nature’. (pp. 92–93) 
                                                        
12  W. Halbfass, India and Europe: An Essay in Understanding (Albany: State University of 
New York Press, 1988), p. 334. That the commentarial deﬁnition of a dhamma as that 
which carries its ‘own nature’ should not be interpreted as implying that a dhamma is a 
substantial bearer of its qualities or ‘own-nature’ has been pointed out by Nyanaponika 
Thera, Abhidhamma Studies, 4th edn (Boston: Wisdom, 1998), pp. 40–41, and Y. Ka-
runadasa, The Dhamma Theory, The Wheel Publication 412/413 (Kandy: Buddhist Pub-
lication Society, 1996), pp. 14–16. Ronkin notes this (p. 112), but does not attach par-
ticular signiﬁcance to it. 
13  cf. MW, s.v. svabhåva, cites its usage in the Ívetåßvatara-Upani#ad, Manusm®ti and Ma-
håbhårata; the use of the term in Buddhist literature generally is clearly relatively late. 
14  cf. MW s.v. bhåva; among the meanings included for bhåva here are nature, tempera-
ment, character. 
15  MW (s.v. svabhåva) gives svabhåvåt, svabhåvena, svabhåvatas all as meaning ‘by nature’, 
‘naturally’, ‘by oneself’. 


--- Page 94 ---
GETHI N 
 
182 
An argument for translating ‘empty of sabhåva’ might, however, be 
made on the basis of context. The Pa†isambhidåmagga’s ‘discourse on the 
empty’ (suññakathå) (ii 177–83) begins by quoting a Nikåya discussion 
of emptiness where it seems we must translate an instrumental with su-
ñña- as ‘empty of …’.16 The Pa†isambhidåmagga then proceeds by ex-
plaining a series of twenty-ﬁve types of emptiness. Mostly this involves 
specifying how something is empty of something else. This suggests that 
when we come to ‘the emptiness that is change’ (vipariˆåma-suñña) we 
should translate accordingly: ‘produced materiality is empty of sabhåva; 
materiality that has departed is both changed and empty’ (jåtaµ rËpaµ 
sabhåvena suññaµ. vigataµ rËpaµ vipariˆatañ c’ eva suññañ ca). The 
problem is then to decide what precisely sabhåva means. Given the clear 
emphasis on materiality – and all the other 198 items speciﬁed here – as 
‘produced’ (jåta) and ‘departed’ (vigata), it seems quite possible that it 
is materiality’s own existence, rather than nature, that is intended. But 
the argument for translating ‘empty of sabhåva’ here remains inconclu-
sive, since in the case of some kinds of emptiness we have a different 
construction.17 
A little later Ronkin turns to the Mahånåma’s commentarial exegesis 
of this passage (Pa†is-a iii 634–35). Ñåˆamoli provides a translation of 
this in a note to his translation of the Pa†isambhidåmagga.18 I think there 
are a number of problems with Ñåˆamoli’s interpretation; in particular 
his translation of bhåva as ‘essence’ obscures the different explanations 
of sabhåva offered in the commentary. Ronkin does not offer her own 
translation, and it seems clear that her interpretation is largely based on 
Ñåˆamoli’s: 
Mahånåma initially analyses the compound sabhåva as sayaµ bhåvo, or sako 
bhåvo, that is, ‘essence by itself’ or ‘essence of itself ’, explaining this to mean 
‘arising by itself ’ (sayam eva uppådo) or ‘own-arising’ (attano yeva uppådo). 
                                                        
16  S iv 54: yasmå ca kho, Ónanda, suññaµ attena vå attaniyena vå tasmå suñño loko ti vuccati. 
This kind of usage of the instrumental is, of course, quite regular; see also M iii 104: 
ayaµ migåramåtupåsådo suñño hatthigavassava¬avena. 
17  Pa†is ii 179: ‘by means of desirelessness, sense-desire is both suppressed and [made] 
empty’ (nekkhammena kåmacchando vikkhambhito c’ eva suñño ca). 
18  Bhikkhu Ñåˆamoli, The Path of Discrimination (London: Pali Text Society, 1982), p. 
362, n. 1. 


--- Page 95 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
183 
Given this interpretation, to translate bhåvo as ‘nature’ is inappropriate, for 
the commentator points to the narrower and more technical sense of es-
sence. Mahånåma then turns to an explication of the coupling sabhåvena su-
ññaµ. First, he states that essence, bhåva, is but a ﬁgurative designation for 
dhamma, and since each single dhamma does not have any other dhamma 
called ‘essence’, it is empty of essence other than itself. This, in fact, reveals a 
different analysis of sabhåva, as ‘the essence that it has of itself’ (sakassa 
bhåvo). It thus follows that every single dhamma has a single ‘essence-hood’ 
(ekassabhåvatå). (pp. 93–94) 
Following Ñåˆamoli, Ronkin here takes bhåva in the context of what are 
two quite distinct explanations of sabhåva as meaning ‘essence’. She also 
suggests that the second of Mahånåma’s initial analyses of sabhåva is as 
sako bhåvo. In fact there is a variant here in the different editions; the 
Burmese and Thai editions both read not sako vå bhåvo but sato vå bhåvo, 
and three times attato where the PTS edition has attano.19 The ablatival 
sato (Sanskrit svatas) and attato seem to make better sense.20 I would 
thus translate Mahånåma’s ﬁrst explanation as follows: 
Sabhåva here is self (sayaµ) existence (bhåvo); ‘arising just by itself’ is what it 
means. Alternatively, sabhåva is existence (bhåvo) from self (sato); ‘arising just 
of itself’ is what it means. Because of [materiality’s] occurring depending on 
conditions, there is no existence within it just by itself, there is no existence 
just of itself without a causal condition, and so it is empty of self-existence; ‘it 
is empty of existence just by itself, just of itself’ is what is being said.21 
As my translation indicates, I agree that here, in the context of Mahå-
nåma’s explanation, we must take the instrumental sabhåvena in the 
sense of ‘of sabhåva’. Yet, while I think Ronkin is right in suggesting that 
‘to translate bhåvo as “nature” is inappropriate’, I do not think ‘essence’ 
works here either – notwithstanding her distinction (p. 94) between the 
                                                        
19  My comments are based on the texts of the ‘Cha††ha Sa!gåyana’ (Vipassana Research 
Institute, Igatpuri) and BUDSIR (Mahidol University, Bangkok) CD-ROMs. 
20  cf. the play on svabhåva at MËla-madhyamakakårikå i 3–5 na svato nåpi parato na dvåb-
hyåµ nåpy ahetuta˙ | utpannå jåtu vidyante bhåvå˙ kva cana ke cana || … na hi svabhåvo 
bhåvånåµ pratyayådi!u vidyate | avidyamåne svabhåve parabhåvo na vidyate || 
21  sabhåvena suññan ti ettha sayaµ bhåvo sabhåvo, sayam eva uppådo ti attho. sato vå bhåvo 
sabhåvo, attato yeva uppådo ti attho. paccayåyattavuttittå paccayaµ vinå sayam eva bhåvo, at-
tato eva vå bhåvo etasmiµ natth¥ ti sabhåvena suññaµ, sayam eva bhåvena, attato eva vå 
bhåvena suññan ti vuttaµ hoti. 


--- Page 96 ---
GETHI N 
 
184 
epistemological and ontological senses of ‘essence’. Mahånåma glosses 
bhåva with uppåda and his explanation seems concerned with how some-
thing comes into existence: he suggests that something such as material-
ity cannot be said to come into existence by itself in the absence of 
causal conditions. 
Mahånåma goes on to offer an alternative explanation where I think 
the sense of ‘nature’ is appropriate. I would translate as follows: 
Alternatively, sabhåva is the nature (bhåvo) of an associate (sakassa). For a 
particular dhamma among the various material and immaterial dhammas such 
as earth, etc., is called ‘an associate’ with reference to another [dhamma]; 
bhåva is also a synonym for dhamma, and one particular ‘quality’ (dhamma) 
does not belong to another ‘quality’ (dhamma) – here termed ‘nature’ 
(bhåva). Therefore [materiality] is empty of the different nature of an associ-
ate; ‘an associate is empty of a different nature’ is what it means. By this it is 
stated that one particular dhamma has one particular nature.22 
It seems that, like Ñåˆamoli, Ronkin misunderstands saka in the above 
passage, which must be being used in the general sense of ‘what belongs 
to’ (i.e. friends, relatives, property) and I have rendered as ‘associate’. 
Although certainly contrived as an explanation of sabhåvena suññaµ in 
its Pa†isambhidåmagga context,23 it says nothing more than that a dhamma 
is to be deﬁned as a single distinct ‘quality’ in relation to other qualities. 
Yet Ronkin goes on to suggest that:  
Mahånåma oscillates between an epistemological and ontological interpreta-
tions of sabhåva as essence: his initial explanation of sabhåva as sayaµ/sako 
bhåvo draws on the epistemological sense of essence as an individuator of a 
dhamma. His analysis of sabhåva as sakassa bhåvo/ekassabhåvatå, though, relies 
on the ontological aspect of essence as the cause of a dhamma’s being. The 
meaning suggested here is that a dhamma is independent of other dhammas 
for its existence; it bears its own reality all by itself. (p. 94) 
                                                        
22  atha vå sakassa bhåvo sabhåvo. pathav¥dhåtu-åd¥su hi anekesu rËpårËpadhammesu ekeko 
dhammo paraµ upådåya sako nåma. bhåvo ti ca dhammapariyåyavacanam etaµ. ekassa ca 
dhammassa añño bhåvasa"khåto dhammo natthi, tasmå sakassa aññena bhåvena suññaµ, 
sako aññena bhåvena suñño ti attho. tena ekassa dhammassa ekasabhåvatå vuttå hoti. 
23  It seems Mahånåma wants to avoid contradicting the commentarial dictum that a 
dhamma upholds its own nature (sabhåva); he therefore contrives a way of interpreting 
sabhåvena suññaµ as saying a dhamma is empty not of its own nature but of another 
dhamma’s nature (sakassa bhåvo). 


--- Page 97 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
185 
But all that Mahånåma is doing here, I think, is offering two different 
explanations of sabhåva based on two quite distinct senses of bhåva – 
‘existence’ and ‘nature’.24 Moreover, Mahånåma’s initial explanation of 
sabhåva precisely denies that ‘a dhamma is independent of other dham-
mas for its existence’; while ‘his analysis of sabhåva as sakassa 
bhåvo/ekassabhåvatå’ does not explicitly go beyond the epistemological 
sense of sabhåva as an individuator of a dhamma. I see no evidence in 
this passage for the claim that Mahånåma understands that ‘sabhåva is 
the cause of the dhamma’s actual existence’ or that he ‘begins by analys-
ing sabhåva as sva+bhåva, “own-nature”, but eventually divides the com-
pound into sat+bhåva, “real essence” ’. 
I render Mahånåma’s third explanation of sabhåva as follows: 
Alternatively, ‘empty sabhåvena’ means ‘empty because of being empty in na-
ture’. What is being said? That it is empty simply because of the emptiness of 
what is empty, not because of other alternative senses of emptiness.25 
Ronkin suggests (p. 95) that this explanation is more in harmony with 
the Pa†isambhidåmagga’s spirit, and I think she is right. What I think Ma-
hånåma wants to suggest here is that the Pa†isambhidåmagga phrase 
might be taken (as I initially suggested above) as meaning ‘produced 
materiality is inherently empty’. But rather puzzlingly Ronkin seems to 
conﬂate this third explanation with the second when she claims that in 
this context Mahånåma ‘refers to “every single dhamma” (ekassa dham-
massa), thus attesting to the view that the emptiness of essence is a dis-
tinguishing mark unique to every single dhamma’, a view she considers 
out of harmony with the Pa†isambhidåmagga. Yet it is a single nature (eka-
sabhåvatå) that Mahånama says ‘every single’ dhamma has, not ‘empti-
ness of essence’. 
Appended to Mahånåma’s three explanations is a further discussion 
of the implications of saying that something is empty sabhåvena. It seems 
worth offering a full translation as an alternative to Ñåˆamoli’s:  
                                                        
24  Richard Hayes argues that Någårjuna exploits the same two senses of svabhåva at MËla-
madhyamakakårikå i 3–5; see ‘Någårjuna’s Appeal’, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 22 
(1994), 299–378 (308–15). Hayes also offers a clear account of the possible meanings 
of svabhåva based on the principles of Påˆinian grammar (316–17). 
25  atha vå sabhåvena suññan ti suññasabhåven’ eva suññaµ. kiµ vuttaµ hoti? suññasuññatåya 
eva suññaµ, na aññåhi pariyåyasuññatåhi suññan ti vuttaµ hoti. 


--- Page 98 ---
GETHI N 
 
186 
However, suppose some should argue as follows: ‘Sabhåva is something’s own 
(sako) nature (bhåvo), so what is meant by saying something is “empty of its 
own nature”? A dhamma is a “nature” and when it is distinguished by its own 
position in relation to another it is called “that which has its own nature” 
(sabhåva); [and so] when it is said that produced materiality is empty of its 
own nature, because of the non-existence of any dhamma, the non-existence 
of materiality is stated.’ In that case it conﬂicts with the words ‘produced ma-
teriality’, for something which lacks arising cannot be called ‘produced’. In-
deed, nirvana lacks arising and it cannot be called ‘produced’; and birth, old 
age and death lack arising and cannot be called ‘produced’. It is precisely for 
this reason that in the present context [Pa†is ii 178] the words ‘produced 
birth is empty of its own nature, produced old age and death are empty of 
their own nature’ are not included, and the explanation ends with ‘becom-
ing’. If it were valid to say of something even though it lacked arising, ‘it is 
produced’, then ‘produced birth … produced old age and death …’ should 
have been stated [here]. Since the word ‘produced’is not used of birth, old 
age and death which lack arising, the statement that what is by its own nature 
empty is non-existent conﬂicts with the statement that it is something ‘pro-
duced’, since something that is non-existent lacks arising. Moreover, that the 
statement ‘it is empty’ applies to something that is non-existent conﬂicts with 
ordinary usage of language as stated above, and also with the words of the 
Blessed One, and with statements in the books of grammar and logic; in-
deed, it conﬂicts with several rational arguments. Therefore the statement 
should be discarded as rubbish. Both on account of several authoritative 
statements of the Buddha such as [… S iii 138–39] and of several arguments 
the conclusion to be reached about this matter is that dhammas certainly exist 
in their own moment.26 
                                                        
26  sace pana keci vadeyyuµ ‘sako bhåvo sabhåvo, tena “sabhåvena suññan” ti kiµ vuttaµ hoti? 
bhåvo ti dhammo, so paraµ upådåya sapadena visesito sabhåvo nåma hoti. dhammassa kassa ci 
avijjamånattå “jåtaµ rËpaµ sabhåvena suññan” ti rËpassa avijjamånatå vuttå hot¥’ ti. evaµ 
sati ‘jåtaµ rËpan’ ti vacanena virujjhati. na hi uppådarahitaµ jåtaµ nåma hoti. nibbånañ hi 
uppådarahitaµ, taµ jåtaµ nåma na hoti, jåtijaråmaraˆåni ca uppådarahitåni jåtåni nåma na 
honti. ten’ ev’ ettha ‘jåtå jåti sabhåvena suññå, jåtaµ jaråmaraˆaµ sabhåvena suññan’ ti 
evaµ anuddharitvå bhavam eva avasånaµ katvå niddi††haµ. yadi uppådarahitassåpi ‘jåtan’ ti 
vacanaµ yujjeyya, ‘jåtå jåti, jåtaµ jaråmaraˆan’ ti vattabbaµ bhaveyya. yasmå uppådarahitesu 
jåtijaråmaraˆesu ‘jåtan’ ti vacanaµ na vuttaµ, tasmå ‘sabhåvena suññaµ avijjamånan’ ti va-
canaµ avijjamånassa uppådarahitattå ‘jåtan’ ti vacanena virujjhati. avijjamånassa ca ‘suñ-
ñan’ ti vacanaµ he††hå vuttena lokavacanena ca bhagavato vacanena ca ñåyasaddaganthava-
canena ca virujjhati, anekåhi ca yutt¥hi virujjhati, tasmå taµ vacanaµ kacavaram iva 


--- Page 99 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
187 
With reference to this further discussion, Ronkin points out that Ma-
hånåma thus rejects the inference that being empty sabhåvena entails 
non-existence – ‘that dhammas are completely empty having no reality at 
all’ (p. 95). I agree. Mahånåma is clearly concerned to avoid the sugges-
tion that dhammas do not really exist, and may well have as his target 
here the Mådhyamika notion of ßËnyatå. Nevertheless, I think Ronkin 
over interprets Mahånåma’s account of sabhåva when she suggests that 
he presents the sabhåva as ‘the cause of the dhamma’s actual existence 
and its evidence’ (p. 94). 27 The sabhåva here is what a dhamma is, rather 
than the cause of its existence. 
In chapter four of her book, Ronkin explores in precisely what way 
the terms of Abhidhamma discourse ‘uniquely deﬁne their correspond-
ing referents’. As Ronkin points out, dhammas as they actually occur are 
conceived of as unique ‘individuals’, differing in quality and intensity 
from other instances of a dhamma of the same kind (pp. 147–50). With 
reference to the philosophical concept of an ‘individual’ and the history 
of ‘categories’, both western and Indian, Ronkin concludes: 
[Sabhåva] denotes a structural constituent that is essential to a dhamma and 
that enables us to fathom why that dhamma possesses the characteristics it 
has. Sabhåva is what determines the dhamma’s internal organization or dispo-
sition, which makes it behave in a certain way or fulﬁl a speciﬁc function. We 
are now in position to say that sabhåva is the principle cause of the dhamma’s 
individuality; what makes the dhamma the very particular it is rather than any 
other individual of the same kind. (p. 170) 
Certainly, as she points out (p. 171), ‘there is a close connection be-
tween being an individual – being distinguishable, determined and de-
ﬁnable – and existing’, but as I indicated above, it is not clear to me 
precisely on what grounds Ronkin identiﬁes the sabhåva as the cause of 
                                                                                                                         
cha!!itabbaµ. [… S iii 138–39] åd¥hi anekehi buddhavacanappamåˆehi anekåhi ca yutt¥hi 
dhammå sakakkhaˆe vijjamånå evå ti ni††ham ettha gantabbaµ. 
27  In her note (p. 125, n. 49) Ronkin abbreviates the commentary so drastically as to 
misrepresent it. I take keci vadeyyuµ as referring to everything from sako bhåvo sabhåvo 
to rËpassa avijjamånatå vuttå hot¥ ti, and kiµ vuttaµ hoti as referring only to sabhåvena 
suññan ti. What is to be rejected ‘as rubbish’ is not the statement ‘sabhåva is its own ex-
istence and hence it is empty of its existence’ (as she translates) but the inference that 
saying something is ‘empty’ applies to a non-existent thing. 


--- Page 100 ---
GETHI N 
 
188 
a dhamma’s existence; it seems in part based on her interpretation of the 
Abhidhamma notion of hetupaccaya, which I shall return to below. 
3. Sabhåva, individuation and categorial theory 
Ronkin emphasizes (pp. 154–56) that the theory of dhammas must be 
seen as a categorial theory rather than a system of classiﬁcation. Her 
point, as I understand it, is that a particular instance of, say, lobha occur-
ring in one’s mind individuates the lobha category by conforming to the 
lobha ‘blueprint’; it is not that a dhamma has occurred possessing 
(among perhaps other properties) the property of lobha (allowing it to 
be classiﬁed as a member of the lobha class), for lobha is what the 
dhamma is. 
As I have already indicated, it seems to me that the technical under-
standing of sabhåva that Ronkin advances is not always as clearly and 
consistently articulated as she suggests. In a †¥kå passage that she herself 
quotes (p. 115) in explanation of the statement that ‘either the speciﬁc 
nature (sabhåva) or general nature (såmañña) is termed “the character-
istic” of the various dhammas’,28 we ﬁnd the following: 
The speciﬁc nature (sabhåva) is what is not common, such as being hard, 
etc., and touching, etc., [of earth and contact respectively]. The general na-
ture is the speciﬁc nature (sabhåva) of being impermanent, etc. But in the 
present context [Dhs 1], the characteristic of being wholesome should be re-
garded as the general nature since it is the speciﬁc nature (sabhåva) common 
to all that is wholesome; or [it can be regarded] as the speciﬁc nature (sab-
håva) because of its not being common to what is unwholesome.29 
Such a passage shows sabhåva being used rather loosely in the sense of a 
particular property speciﬁc to – and this is crucial – certain classes of 
things. For clearly something may have the speciﬁc nature or property 
(sabhåva) of being wholesome, but that does not deﬁne it as an individ-
ual, since many things will also have that property, and what will distin-
guish it from other wholesome things are other properties it possesses. 
                                                        
28  As 63: tesaµ tesaµ dhammånaµ sabhåvo vå såmaññaµ vå lakkhaˆaµ nåma. 
29  Dhs-m† Be 64: sabhåvo kakkha¬ådi-phusanådiko asådhåraˆo. såmaññaµ sådhåraˆo aniccådi-
sabhåvo. idha ca kusalalakkhaˆaµ sabbakusala-sådhåraˆasabhåvattå såmaññaµ da††habbaµ, 
akusalåd¥hi asådhåraˆatåya sabhåvo vå. 


--- Page 101 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
189 
This makes it difﬁcult to be certain that sabhåva is not being used in a 
similar manner in relation to individual dhammas, that is, a given occur-
rence of a dhamma is an instance of, say, dosa because it has the charac-
teristic or speciﬁc nature of anger (caˆ!ikka-lakkhaˆa) (As 257), which 
deﬁnes it as belonging to the dosa class of events. 
Such a model, of course, poses certain difﬁculties for the coherence 
of the Abhidhamma system, since it undermines the notion of dhammas 
as instances of the fundamental and ﬁnal categories of experience. As 
Ronkin makes clear, the Abhidhamma understands that instances of a 
given dhamma category differ, but how exactly? Certainly it seems dosa is 
meant to cover individual mental occurrences that range from mild irri-
tation to raging anger, but then this suggests that instances of the same 
dhamma have different qualities. Yet if dhammas are themselves the basic 
qualities of experience, they cannot themselves have further qualities 
since this would render them capable of further analysis, of being bro-
ken down into more basic qualities. The Óbhidhammika might be able 
to respond that relative strength or intensity are general qualities that 
apply across the categories and do not undermine the notion of a dis-
tinctive category being individuated. Moreover, while dhammas cannot 
themselves have further qualities, they can nevertheless be associated with 
further qualities. Thus the Óbhidhammika can distinguish the experi-
ence of envy from mere hate by suggesting that it is the function of two 
separate dhammas – dosa and isså – arising in association: envy is thus 
hate that has, or is associated with, the further quality of being directed 
towards someone else’s good fortune. And yet it is hard to see how the 
Abhidhamma analysis of experience can avoid talking at some point in 
terms of subcategories of what are meant to be basic dhamma categories. 
The problem can be illustrated by reference to the absence of a 
dhamma category that might be taken as specifying the emotion of fear 
from the Theravådin list of ﬁfty-two cetasikas. It would seem that we 
should not conclude from this that fear was not identiﬁed by the Ób-
hidhammikas as a real emotion. Indeed on occasion it is considered an 
emotion of some signiﬁcance. In the context of the ten deﬁlements of 
insight (vipassanupakilesa) and the completion of ‘puriﬁcation by know-
ing and seeing what is path and not path’, the Visuddhimagga tells the 
story of a certain Mahånåga Thera who had considered himself an ara-


--- Page 102 ---
GETHI N 
 
190 
hat for sixty years, until he was persuaded by his wiser pupil to use his 
own iddhi to conjure up an angry elephant. This causes Mahånåga to 
jump up in fear, whereupon his pupil asks him: ‘Sir, does one whose 
taints are destroyed have fear?’ At this point Mahånåga realises that he 
is not an arahat. 30 
Our storyteller does not tell us which of the eighty-nine types of citta is 
supposed to have arisen in Mahånåga’s mind at the moment he felt 
fear, but let us conduct an Abhidhamma thought experiment. It seems 
that from the start we can rule out the types of wholesome citta. And it 
does not seem that Mahånåga’s mind felt attracted to the elephant, so 
we can also rule out the eight unwholesome cittas rooted in greed. Nor 
would it seem that his mind was characterised by doubt (vicikicchå). This 
leaves just three possibilities: the two types rooted in hate, and the one 
rooted in delusion associated with ‘agitation’ (uddhacca).31 In terms of 
speciﬁc dhammas it would seem that dosa and uddhacca are the most 
likely places to locate the speciﬁc emotion of fear: Mahånåga did not 
like the elephant and it caused him strong agitation. This leaves the two 
rooted in hate as the only types of citta that combine both dosa and 
uddhacca. Common experience, however, suggests that not all instances 
of dosa and uddhacca are characterised by ‘fear’. But unless one is pre-
pared to maintain that ‘fear’ can be regarded as simply different intensi-
ties of hate and agitation, then its experience can only be accounted for 
within the Theravådin Abhidhamma analysis as instances of dhammas 
with the particular characteristic (lakkhaˆa) and intrinsic nature (sab-
håva) of dosa and uddhacca, but with the further quality of ‘fear’, making 
it dosa-uddhacca of the ‘fear’ type. 
Thus, even though from a theoretical philosophical perspective it 
should not (since dhammas are supposed to be the ultimate individuated 
unites of experience), the Abhidhamma framework none the less seems 
                                                        
30  Vism 634–35 (xx 110–13); the same story is told in a different context at Vibh-a 489–
90. The word for ‘fear’ here is sårajja, a synonym for bhaya (see M i 72, Vibh-a 506). 
The term bhaya is used in a positive sense of fear of unpleasant consequences in the 
deﬁnition of ottappa at As 124–27, but this kind of ‘fear’ cannot be what is meant in 
the present context. 
31  Vism 454 (xiv 93). 


--- Page 103 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
191 
in practice to operate sometimes as a classiﬁcatory system rather than a 
categorial theory 
4. The notion of hetupaccaya 
In her ﬁnal chapter Ronkin examines Buddhist theories of causality, 
considering both the theory of the twelve nidånas of dependent arising 
and the Pa††håna’s theory of twenty-four causal conditions (paccaya). She 
draws attention (p. 206) to certain peculiarities of the Nikåya notion of 
causation: it concerns ‘not the production of entities but the arising and 
ceasing of psycho-physical processes’, not physical causality but connec-
tions between mental conditions, not a binary connection between a 
single cause and a single effect but ‘a manifoldness of supporting condi-
tions’; and while the latter is not to be construed in terms of a ‘network 
of interrelated conditions’, it none the less does involve some sense of 
mutual conditioning (p. 208). She concludes (p. 230) ‘that the 
Pa††håna theory of paccaya is not about causation at all’ in the sense of 
causal production; rather it ‘is intended to account […] for the indi-
viduality of each and every dhamma as a capacity of a certain mental 
event that occurs within a network of interrelations of causal condition-
ing’; but this, she suggests involves a circularity since ‘causal conditions 
individuate dhammas only if the latter are already individuated’ (p. 252). 
She emphasizes (pp. 206–08) that there appear to be no grounds for 
distinguishing between hetu and paccaya as ‘cause’ and ‘condition’ re-
spectively in the Nikåyas; such a distinction is characteristic of especially 
the Sarvåstivådin theory of the six hetus and four pratyayas, although she 
suggests that something of the distinction is found within Theravådin 
sources as well, arguing (pp. 226–32) that the Pa††håna’s and subse-
quent commentarial understanding of hetupaccaya has a certain afﬁnity 
with the Sarvåstivådin discussions.  
Unfortunately her discussion is premised on a basic misunderstand-
ing of the Abhidhamma notion of hetupaccaya as referring to an ‘essen-
tial causal condition’ that ‘individuates its related dhamma’ and can be 
equated with sabhåva (pp. 214, 222–26). This is not so. For the Thera-
vådin Abhidhamma, hetupaccaya refers to the way in which six speciﬁc 
dhammas (alobha, adosa, amoha, lobha, dosa and moha) act as ‘cause’ (hetu) 


--- Page 104 ---
GETHI N 
 
192 
by being a ‘root’ (mËla) in relation to certain other dhammas that are 
associated it and have arisen together with it in the same moment.32 
5. Abhidhamma and the art of mapmaking 
Throughout her study Ronkin seeks to demonstrate that especially the 
canonical – but also in large part the commentarial – Abhidhamma’s 
concerns are epistemological, ‘meta-psychological’, and soteriological 
rather than ontological per se; to this extent ‘the Abhidhamma system-
atic and allegedly divergent method’ (p. 236) is consonant with the 
Nikåyas. Yet the Abhidhamma project of naming the world and creating 
ultimate units of categorization in the end ignores what Ronkin sees as 
the Buddha’s critique of language (p. 246) and results in the espousal 
of a conceptual realism that takes the dhammas named as real existents. 
Such a realism, she suggests, is at odds with the metaphysics of the 
Nikåyas. It is also philosophically problematic, for ‘to draw ontological 
conclusions on the grounds of linguistic practice is a non sequitur’ (p. 
251). Indeed, Ronkin concludes, Någårjuna and the Mådhyamikas’ cri-
tique can be seen as justiﬁed both philosophically and on the grounds 
of reasserting the original message of the Buddha. 
At the beginning of her study Ronkin comments (p. 10) that her ap-
proach at times involves ‘philosophical reconstruction’ and that there-
fore she does not want to claim that ancient Buddhists would have un-
derstood their positions in precisely the philosophical terms in which 
she articulates them. These are important caveats. In part her philoso-
                                                        
32  The crucial deﬁnition of hetu is found at Dhs 242–43; Pa††h (Be) i 1 gives a succinct 
deﬁnition of hetupaccaya, and its application is set out e.g. at Pa††h (Be) iii 1 ff.; see also 
Abhidh-s-mh† 184. Ronkin’s misunderstanding appears to be based in part on conﬂat-
ing the identiﬁcation of sabhåva as the ‘cause’ (hetu) of a dhamma (at Pe† 104, Nett 78–
81) with the Pa††håna’s understanding of hetupaccaya. Yet the position of Pe† and Nett 
in the development of the speciﬁcally Theravådin Abhidhamma remains problematic. 
These texts seem not to be based on exclusively Theravådin traditions. Indeed, the 
passage she cites on p. 101 (Pe† 158) is an example. It suggests that of the ﬁve 
hindrances four are intrinsic deﬁlements (sabhåvakilesa) while th¥na-middha is a 
secondary contributory deﬁlement (n¥varaˆapakkhopakilesa). This seems to assume a 
system in which th¥na-middha is not exclusively unwholesome, that is, a non-Theravådin 
system; signiﬁcantly the bhå#ya to Abhidharmakoßa ii 26a–c cites a canonical Abhid-
harma list of dharmas universal to all unwholesome (kleßamahåbhËmika) citta that does 
not include styåna. 


--- Page 105 ---
ON THE NATUR E OF DHAMM AS 
193 
phical reconstruction involves ﬁlling in gaps and making explicit what is 
implicit in order to reveal the logic underlying certain developments. 
And she does this very well. Yet one might view the gaps as in some 
sense intrinsic to the Abhidhamma project: the fact that the system is 
not always completely worked out might be seen as one of its strengths. 
Ronkin makes the general observation that, despite its concluding in 
an ontology that conceives of dhammas as real existents, the Abhid-
hamma in large measure remains faithful to speciﬁc themes of the 
Nikåyas’ metaphysics: a ‘process’ philosophy and progress along the 
Buddhist path. One might seek clariﬁcation over a certain underlying 
assumption in her book that somehow epistemology is ‘a good thing’ 
but ontology ‘a bad thing’, and question whether the Nikåyas really es-
chew questions of ontology so completely. Yet her overall thesis that the 
ﬁnal Abhidhamma conception of a dhamma presents certain philoso-
phical difﬁculties is difﬁcult to deny. But despite what one might see as 
a certain attempt on her part to reassess aspects of Abhidhamma 
thought, she ends on a note that implies that the Abhidhamma ediﬁce 
stands or falls on the philosophical coherence of the concept of a 
dhamma. Yet at precisely this point one might seek to reinforce her more 
general point that the philosophical coherence of the ontology of 
dhammas was not always of central concern to the Óbhidhammikas. I do 
not mean to suggest by this that the exponents of Abhidharma had no 
interest in demonstrating the rationality and coherence of their systems. 
Clearly the Sarvåstivådin Vaibhå"ikas who formulated the account of 
pråpti and a dharma’s existence in past, present and future were very 
much driven by principles of rationality and coherence, and demon-
strated considerable philosophical sophistication and ingenuity. Yet 
their fellow Óbhidhammikas to the south seem to have been less em-
broiled in such matters. This does not mean that they regarded their 
Abhidhamma system as any less a true and ﬁnal representation of real-
ity, but it does perhaps mean that at certain points their system shied 
away from certain more purely abstract and philosophical issues.  
Perhaps the art of mapmaking offers a certain analogy for the devel-
opment of the Abhidhamma. Maps serve a practical purpose: a map is 
ultimately only useful if it helps us ﬁnd our way around. To do this a 
map must represent the terrain accurately. But this can mean different 


--- Page 106 ---
GETHI N 
 
194 
things. Harry Beck’s 1930s map is an efﬁcient tool for negotiating the 
London Underground system, but if one wanted to walk from, say, 
Leicester Square to Russell Square over ground, it might not be so help-
ful. For that one would require a different kind of map, in part more 
detailed, in part more accurate – or at least more accurate in a different 
way. The Abhidhamma’s shift of focus from the more general processes 
that govern progress along the Buddhist path to the events that consti-
tute those processes, might be viewed as an attempt to provide a more 
detailed and accurate map of the path. Indeed, some of the Óbhi-
dhammika ‘mapmakers’ seem to have regarded the ﬁnal Abhidhamma 
map as the ultimate map – a map that showed everything. 
Lewis Carroll tells of a people who produced a map of their country  
‘on the scale of a mile to the mile’, but it was never spread out: ‘the 
farmers objected: they said it would cover the whole country, and shut 
out the sunlight! So we now use the country itself, as its own map, and I 
assure you it does nearly as well.’33 In similar vein, Jorge Luis Borges 
tells of cartographers who ‘struck a Map of the Empire whose size was 
that of the Empire, and which coincided point for point with it’; subse-
quent generations, however, ‘who were not so fond of the Study of Car-
tography as their Forebears had been, saw that that vast Map was Use-
less, and […] delivered it up to the Inclemencies of Sun and Winters’.34 
Perhaps it is the case that the ancient Óbhidhammika mapmakers 
eventually lost their way in an obsession with mapping the paths of the 
mind in every detail, and mistook their map for reality itself. But as 
Carroll’s and Borges’s tales suggest, a map that succeeded in showing 
everything would be redundant. Paradoxically, then, it may be precisely 
in so far as the Óbhidhammikas failed in the task of producing the ulti-
mate map that their map is useful. 
 
Rupert Gethin 
University of Bristol 
                                                        
33  Lewis Carroll, Sylvie and Bruno Concluded (chapter xi, ‘The Man in the Moon’), 1893. 
34  Jorge Luis Borges, ‘On Exactitude in Science’ in Collected ﬁctions, translated by Andrew 
Hurley (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1998), p. 325. 


--- Page 107 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 195–210 
 
BOOK REVIEWS 
 
 
Der Ursprung der japanischen Vinaya-Schule, RisshË 4 5, und die Entwick-
lung ihrer Lehre und Praxis. László Hankó. Göttingen: Cuvillier Verlag, 
2003. xiii, 433 pp. !50. isbn 3898736202. 
 
László Hankó’s work aims at providing an overview of the history of the 
Japanese Vinaya School (the RisshË School) from its very beginning, i.e. 
the vinaya of the Indian Dharmaguptaka School, to the time of the 
monk GyØnen (1240–1321), author of the 4 5 6 7 RisshË kØyØ, a 
history of the Vinaya School. The work is divided into ﬁve chapters.  
The ﬁrst chapter provides an annotated translation into German of 
the pråtimok#asËtra (list of rules) for monks of the Dharmaguptaka 
School: the 8 9 : ; < Sifen seng jieben (T. 1429), the Chinese trans-
lation of which is attributed to the ﬁfth-century Indian master Buddha-
yaßas. Most probably, however, the text is a seventh-century compilation 
by the monk = > Huaisu. Interesting is that László Hankó’s annotation 
is not limited to an analysis of the translated text itself, but also gives 
some information on later Mahåyåna reactions. The translation is intro-
duced by a short history of the Dharmaguptaka texts and of the Vinaya 
School in China. The focus lies on the most important branch, the Nan-
shanlüzong, the school founded by the vinaya master ? @ Daoxuan 
(596–667).  
It is a pity that the introduction is not written in a more critical way, 
but often just repeats some traditional viewpoints, even when these have 
already been severely criticised by several other researchers. This is the 
case for instance for the date of the death of the Buddha, and for the 
dates of the ﬁrst councils: the date of death is placed in 486 bc (p. 328, 
note 758), the council of Råjag®ha in 483 bc (p. 2), the second council 
in 383 bc (p. 2). No critical note is given, despite the many works that 
discuss these and other dates related to the historical Buddha. Neither 
do we ﬁnd any more critical information on the events that were attrib-


--- Page 108 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
 
196 
uted to these councils: the ﬁrst recitation of vinaya rules, the ﬁrst 
schisms in the Buddhist community.  
Similarly, we read on p. 3 and p. 10 that the Dharmaguptaka School 
had no doctrine, but only focussed on rules and on correct ceremonies. 
Although most texts attributed to the Dharmaguptakas are certainly 
vinaya texts, to say that this school had no doctrinal viewpoints (‘Lehre’) 
at all seems too farfetched to me, certainly when no comment whatso-
ever is given. On p. 10, the founder of the school is said to be Dharma-
gupta, an ascetic of Ceylon. A note refers to the work of E. J. Eitel origi-
nally published in 1904. Again, this viewpoint is highly controversial 
and most modern scholars consider Dharmagupta to be a legendary 
person (see, for instance, E. Lamotte, Histoire du Bouddhisme indien des 
origines à l’ére Íaka, Louvain, 1958, p. 575).  
The translation is generally quite correct. Still, a comparison with the 
Vinayas of other schools1 and with the Indian texts or fragments that are 
still extant could have prevented several errors. For instance, the ﬁrst 
påråjika rule2 says: ‘If a bhik#u undertakes the same training (;, ßik#å) as 
the other bhik#us, if he does not disavow the training, and if he does not 
confess to be weak with respect to the training, and if he has impure 
conduct, and if he does impure things, also with an animal …’3 László 
Hankó’s translation (pp. 19–20) is as follows: 
Wenn der Mönch mit einem (anderen) Mönch, dem die selben Gebote gel-
ten, unsaubere Handlungen eingeht und unkeuschen Begierden erliegt, so-
gar wenn er (die sexuellen Handlungen) mit einem Tier tut, ohne (erst) die 
Gebote zu verwerfen […] – in denen er schwach ist und (dafür) nicht (ein-
mal) die Reue zeigt […] 
László Hankó thus says that ‘when a monk does impure things with an-
other monk who follows the same rules’, he commits a påråjika offence. 
This is clearly an erroneous translation, which further leads to the 
strange statement (p. 20) that this precept is commonly seen as a pre-
                                                        
1  As already done by W. Pachow (1955), A Comparative Study of the Pråtimok#a on the Basis 
of Its Chinese, Tibetan, Sanskrit and Pali Versions, Santiniketan.  
2  A monk or nun who commits a påråjika offence permanently looses his/her monastic 
status. 
3  For details, see A. Heirman (2002), The Discipline in Four Parts, Rules for Nuns according 
to the Dharmaguptakavinaya, Delhi, Part ii, pp. 278–79, note 35. 


--- Page 109 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
197 
cept on sexual contact with women although only sexual acts with other 
men or animals are pointed at. 
Also in other rules, a comparison with other texts could have been 
very useful. So, for instance, in the ﬁrst nai˙sargika-pråyaßcittika rule,4 it is 
said: ‘If a bhik#u, when the robes have already been ﬁnished and the 
ka†hina cloth has already been removed, keeps an extra robe, he may 
keep it for ten days without assigning it.’ Ka†hina is generally explained 
as ‘raw cotton’. The ka†hina cloth refers to a ceremonial cloth that was 
spread out near the monastery to inform the lay people that the period 
for the donation of robe material had come. Contrary to what László 
Hankó says on p. 35, this period can be as long as ﬁve months (and not 
just one month). At the end of this period, the ka†hina cloth is removed 
(A chu).5 This can be done for one individual monk (for instance when 
he leaves the district without the intention to come back) or for the 
whole community. During the ka†hina period it is allowed to have an 
extra robe. Outside this period, this is forbidden.6 Due to a misinterpre-
tation of the technical term A, László Hankó’s translation (p. 35) tells a 
different story: ‘Wenn der Mönch seine (drei) Gewänder schon be-
kommen und die Ka†hina-Gewänder bereits weggegeben hat, kann er sei-
ne überzähligen Gewänder, die er besitzt, zehn Tage lang behalten, oh-
ne dass er sie seiner Reinheit wegen verspenden muß.’ The monk has 
not, as translated by László Hankó, given away his ka†hina robes, but, in 
fact, the ka†hina period has come to an end.  
The explanatory notes on the translation are generally interesting, 
but unfortunately not always consistent. For instance, for three out of 
the four påråjika rules for monks, a comparison is made with the rules 
for nuns. For the third påråjika, the påråjika on murder, the comparison 
is missing. The explanatory notes, further, do not always rely on the 
same tradition as the translated text. Note 2 on p. 35, for instance, says 
that nuns have ﬁve robes: three of these robes are the same as for 
monks, two are additional. According to note 2, these two additional 
robes are an undergarment (saµkak#ikå) and a loincloth (kusËla). In 
                                                        
4  A monk or a nun who commits a nai˙sargika-pråyaßcittika offence has to give up an 
unlawfully obtained object and has to repent of his/her offence.  
5  See Heirman, op. cit., Part ii, p. 487, note 9, on B she, variant of A chu.  
6  See Heirman, op. cit., Part i, pp. 221–26. 


--- Page 110 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
 
198 
fact, the Dharmaguptaka tradition has the following two additional 
robes: a breast band (saµkak#ikå)7 and a robe that covers the shoulder 
(gaˆ!apraticchådana ?(pa†a)). The two robes mentioned by László 
Hankó appear in the MËlasarvåstivåda tradition.8  
Very interesting, though, are the many cross-references between the 
earlier H¥nayåna and later Mahåyåna rules. For this aim, the rules have 
been analysed and divided in several categories according to their con-
tent. This method makes it possible to compare the viewpoints of the 
Mahåyåna and H¥nayåna vinaya masters on every detail treated in the 
disciplinary texts (pp. 92–104, pp. 182–91, and pp. 218–32). 
The second chapter of László Hankó’s work gives an introduction to 
and a translation of the C D E Fanwang jing, the Brahmå’s Net SËtra (T. 
1484), a Mahåyåna text that contains a set of ﬁfty-eight precepts valid 
for both lay followers and monastic disciples. Although according to the 
introduction to the Fanwang jing, the text has been translated from San-
skrit into Chinese by Kumåraj¥va in 406, the text has in fact been com-
piled in China in the ﬁfth century. It became the basic text of the Ma-
håyåna, so-called bodhisattva, ordinations, ﬁrst in China and later in 
Japan. The ﬁrst translation of the Fanwang jing into a Western language 
was made by J. J. M. De Groot, Le code du Mahåyåna en Chine, Son 
inﬂuence sur la vie monacale et sur le monde laïque, Amsterdam, 1893. It is a 
pity that the latter work has not been used by László Hankó who has 
made a new annotated translation into German. A short introduction 
(pp. 106–24) comments on the coming into being of the Fanwang jing.  
The structure of the translation takes into account the Mahåyåna 
views on what a Buddhist rule should preferably be (based on T. 1581, a 
ﬁfth-century translation into Chinese of the BodhisattvabhËmi, Stages of 
the Bodhisattva): the actual rule, an exhortation to perform good deeds, 
and an exhortation to perform charity for living beings. If possible, the 
rules have been divided in these three aspects. This structure certainly 
allows a fuller understanding of the message of the Fanwang jing. The 
annotations to the translation are generally useful, and contain some 
                                                        
7  On this term, see O. von Hinüber (1975), ‘Kulturgeschichtliches aus dem Bhik#uˆ¥-
Vinaya: die saµkak#ikå’, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 125, 133–
39. 
8  See A. Heirman, op. cit., Part II, pp. 802–05, note 199. 


--- Page 111 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
199 
interesting references to earlier disciplinary texts. Just as in the transla-
tion of the Dharmaguptaka pråtimok#a, however, the information is quite 
often insufﬁcient or unclear. All precepts, for instance, have been given 
a short title based on the opinion of Chinese masters, such as Zhiyi, 
Fazang or Mingkuang. Who these masters were, what role they played in 
the commentaries on the Fanwang jing, or why they have been chosen, is 
not said. For several notes, the source of information is unclear. Note 3 
on p. 126, for instance, tells us that a bodhisattva is allowed to kill a 
human being, if by doing so he can save the life of many others. The 
source of this information is not given. Many other notes explain a 
technical term without referring to the disciplinary tradition on which 
the explanation is based, as if all vinaya traditions were exactly the same. 
On p. 137, for instance, it is said that in ‘old Buddhism’ one could, un-
der certain circumstances, eat meat or ﬁsh. Five kinds of pure (and thus 
allowed) meat, F G " H wu zhong jing rou, are opposed to ﬁve kinds of 
impure (and thus forbidden) meat: human beings, elephants, horses, 
dragons and dogs. László Hankó does not tell us on which vinaya tradi-
tion the latter enumeration is based. It might be the Dharmaguptaka 
tradition, since the Dharmaguptakavinaya (T. 1428, pp. 868b9–869a18) 
gives us the same list of forbidden meat. On another page of the Dhar-
maguptakavinaya (p. 1006a19–21), however, we ﬁnd a list of ten forbid-
den kinds of meat. Also, the term F G " H wu zhong jing rou does not 
appear in the Dharmaguptaka tradition. Instead we ﬁnd the I G " H 
san zhong jing rou, ‘three kinds of pure meat’ (p. 872b11 et passim): the 
consumption of meat is permitted as long as a monk or a nun has not 
seen or heard, or does not suspect that the animal has been killed espe-
cially for him or her.  
The third chapter consists of a short introduction to and a translation 
of the . J K ; " DaijØ jukaikyØ, SËtra on the Mahåyåna Ordination, a 
text that claims to contain 250 rules for monks, but actually only gives 
248. The text also gives a short explanation on the ordination ceremony 
and a brief history of the DaijØ jukaikyØ itself. It is claimed that the text 
has been translated into Chinese by the Indian master Amoghavajra 
(705–774), and that it has been brought to Japan shortly after it was 
translated. As shown by László Hankó, however, the DaijØ jukaikyØ has in 
all probability been written in Japan between 819 and 822 (pp. 195–


--- Page 112 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
 
200 
96). As a vinaya document, the text is quite interesting as it seems to be 
an attempt to establish a kind of middle way between the H¥nayåna and 
Mahåyåna traditions. The attempt failed, however, and the text only 
played an insigniﬁcant role in the establishment of an ordination cere-
mony in Japan (p. 236). In the present work, the text has been trans-
lated, and the content of the rules has – as was also the case in the ﬁrst 
two chapters – been compared with the other vinaya traditions. The an-
notation is short, but useful. Sometimes, however, one would have liked 
to receive a little bit more information. Why, for instance, is the Yinyang 
School mentioned in rule 212, if this school did not exist in Japan, as 
said on p. 214? 
A very interesting chapter is the fourth one. It contains a study and a 
translation of the biography of L M Jianzhen (Jap. Ganjin, 688–763) as 
originally written by his disciple N O Situo.9 Jianzhen belonged to the 
Nanshanlüzong, the Vinaya School founded by the monk Daoxuan. Ji-
anzhen had received both the Dharmaguptaka and the bodhisattva 
(Mahåyåna) ordination. On the invitation of Japanese monks, he sailed 
to Japan in 753/754, bringing with him many Chinese Buddhist texts. 
In Japan, he established an ordination ceremony that was based on the 
Dharmaguptaka tradition (for monks and nuns) and on the bodhisattva 
ordination (only for lay people). It was the beginning of the Japanese 
RisshË School. Jianzhen’s journey to Japan was not without numerous 
obstacles. Only after several failed attempts did he reach his goal. His 
adventures have been recorded by Situo who was with him from the ﬁrst 
attempt to go to Japan. Situo’s account has been summarised into a 
lively report by the Japanese P Q M R I S Oumi no Mabito Mifune 
in 779. This summary is in all probability very faithful to Situo’s account 
(pp. 308–310). László Hankó offers us a carefully annotated translation 
that makes the reading of Jianzhen’s journey into an interesting and 
pleasant experience. ,
In the ﬁfth and last chapter, László Hankó describes the establish-
ment of the Japanese RisshË School on the basis of the account by the 
monk GyØnen (1240–1321): 4 5 6 7 RisshË kØyØ, The Essentials of the 
                                                        
9  For an earlier translation, see J. Takakusu (1925), Kanshin’s (Chien-Chên’s) Voyage to the 
East, A.D. 742–54, by Aomi no Mabito Genkai (A.D. 779), London. 


--- Page 113 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
201 
Vinaya Tradition. Of the latter work, László Hankó has translated the 
part on Japan.10 In his commentary on GyØnen’s work, the author refers 
to other relevant sources, such as the T < U Nihongi, a history of early 
Japan compiled at the beginning of the eighth century (pp. 334–36) 
and the : V W SØniryØ, Rules for Monks and Nuns (pp. 336–38), a list of 
twenty-seven law articles of the very beginning of the eighth century 
(based on the seventh-century Chinese ? : X Daosengge). Very inter-
esting are the genealogical tables on the different branches of the Vi-
naya School in China, and on the RisshË School in Japan (pp. 356–58).  
To summarise, the book mainly offers a compilation of translated 
texts important for our understanding of the development of the Vinaya 
School in the East. All these texts give us a huge amount of information 
on the way one attempted to regulate monastic life. Secondary litera-
ture, including the works of many Japanese researchers, has been inten-
sively consulted. A detailed research of this mass of information is in 
fact too much for one single book, and inadequacies are unavoidable. 
Still, the translations are useful and offer the reader a general under-
standing of the disciplinary tradition in China and Japan. It is a pity, 
however, that the basic translation of the Dharmaguptaka pråtimok#a 
contains several, mostly technical, mistakes. It is also to be regretted 
that, due to the overwhelming task that the author has given himself, 
the introductions and annotations to the translated disciplinary texts 
had to remain brief, or even incomplete. One often feels the need for 
some more critical research. The explanatory notes, albeit generally 
interesting, have to be read with caution. The source of information is 
often lacking, or is not consistent with the tradition of the translated 
text. The last two chapters, on Jianzhen’s travels and on the establish-
ment of the RisshË School, are actually the ﬁnal goal of László Hankó’s 
work. These translations have been more extensively annotated and of-
fer the reader a lively account. This is especially true for the chapter on 
Jianzhen’s adventures. To conclude, László Hankó’s work has its ups 
 
 
                                                        
10  For an earlier translation, see L. Pruden (1995), The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition, 
Numata Center, Berkeley, pp. 122–42 (not annotated).  


--- Page 114 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
 
202 
and downs. Sometimes inadequate, sometimes very interesting and 
lively, it leaves the reader with mixed feelings. 
 
Ann Heirman 
University of Ghent 
 
 
Buddhist Practice on Western Ground: Reconciling Eastern Ideals And Western 
Psychology. Harvey B. Aronson. Boston, MA: Shambhala Publications, 
2004. xiii, 253 pp. $14.95. isbn 1590300939. 
 
Aronson is a psychotherapist in a private practice in Houston, Texas, 
and is meditation teacher-in-residence and founder of the Dawn Moun-
tain Tibetan Temple, Community Centre and Research Institute in 
Houston.  
The book is presented as addressing three fundamental questions, 
from a Western American psychological perspective, as it examines the 
differences between Asian and Western cultural and spiritual values. 
Aronson’s assessment of his own anxiety and that of a number of clients 
in ﬁctional composites provides an intriguing insight into the difﬁculties 
experienced by Western meditators, who, for a variety of reasons ﬁnd 
that meditation practice does not address all the psychological concerns 
that they hold, and some of whom ﬁnd themselves confused or disap-
pointed as a result. Issues addressed include:  
• 
The cultural belief that anger should not be suppressed versus 
the Buddhist teaching to counter anger and hatred. 
• 
Psychotherapists’ advice that attachment is the basis for healthy 
personal development and supportive relationships versus the 
Buddhist condemnation of attachments as the source of suffer-
ing. 
• 
Western culture’s emphasis on individuality versus the Asian em-
phasis on interdependence and fulﬁlment of duties, and the 
Buddhist teachings on no self, or egolessness. 


--- Page 115 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
203 
In his introduction (p. xiii) he claims that Western meditators require 
culturally appropriate interventions such as psychotherapy, to help deal 
with ‘anxiety, depression, isolating narcissism, or numbed disengage-
ment’. 
Aronson suggests there is a cultural conﬂict ongoing between medita-
tors and traditional teachers. The meditator who requires therapy is 
taught to meditate by developing patience, abandoning anger and giv-
ing up attachment in the context of community-sangha. A western psy-
chotherapy on the other hand would encourage those with emotional 
shutdown to express their feelings of anger, etc., to facilitate the quest 
for relationship and intimacy in the context of self-assertion and indi-
viduality (p. xiv). He further argues that teachers of meditation could 
compound issues by their implicit encouragement of students towards 
what may be seen as passivity and self-denial. The cultural gaps that ap-
pear are consequently breeding grounds for misunderstanding between 
teacher and student often resulting in ‘alienation, and emotional injury’ 
(p. xiv). Failing to understand these cultural differences results in 
beneﬁts from profound spiritual teachings being lost. The answer to 
these difﬁculties is, in part, he claims, to come out from the protective 
canopy of Buddhism and seek additional perspectives. 
The abandoning of cultural values and habitual inclinations is seen as 
a great obstacle to practice in a world where he claims a ubiquitous 
inﬂuence of therapy. Such an inﬂuence it is suggested results in time 
spent on the cushion immersed in the content of our minds as opposed 
to following the processes of traditional instruction. To overcome the 
problems he presents, he somewhat paradoxically claims that continued 
practice over time would enhance understanding of the tradition and 
the psychological processes that affects it from a Western cultural per-
spective. In so doing it seems he is arguing that by discerning differ-
ences it is possible to reﬂect on ‘who we are and what we may wish to 
become’ (p. xvi). 
A number of psychological propensities and vulnerabilities lend 
themselves to certain interpretations of Buddhist teachings. The out-
come of which can be for the psychologically needy to ﬁnd refuge in a 
Buddhism that counsels renunciation and nonattachment. If this is the 
case then there is only a psychological picture available to the student 


--- Page 116 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
 
204 
limiting their ability to absorb from the tradition, and thereby simulat-
ing change without any real shift of consciousness. It is to this process 
Aronson reﬂects on four themes in Buddhist and psychological practice 
that he claims are at once signiﬁcant and yet confusing. They are: self, 
anger, love and attachment. He draws on his own experiences as a psy-
chotherapist and Buddhist teacher to consider both forms of experi-
ence, based on the four themes above. This implicitly supposes that by 
taking a view of Buddhist practice encompassing the psychological, in 
Western terms, Western practitioners can see anew the positive effects 
of a combined approach in reducing harm to themselves and to others. 
In chapter one Aronson reﬂects the differences in cultural under-
standing of a classic Buddhist approach, that of the meditation retreat. 
He compares the emotional stance of a group of white American par-
ticipants compared to that of an ethnic Chinese group on the same re-
treat, run by a Chinese Zen master. The White Americans reinforced 
their individuality and sense of self-realization in the process, whilst the 
Chinese group exclaimed deep emotional responses to the retreat, 
based on repentance and shame and a sense of greater responsibility to 
their elders. This example of cultural differentiation is highlighted by 
Aronson’s own dilemma of the 1970s. Whilst practicing meditation he 
found he was suffering severe anxiety attacks. He reluctantly entered 
into psychotherapy and found it unlocked his deep psychological con-
cerns resulting in his adopting a ‘both/and approach’ (p. 9) to his prac-
tice. This is the approach he is advocating to Western practitioners of 
Buddhism, as complimentary forms of practice. 
In chapter two and three consideration is given to the needs of West-
ern practitioners, inferring they should understand the background to 
Buddhist/Asian culture in order to grasp the nature of the differences 
that ultimately affect one’s relationship to traditional forms of Buddhist 
experience in the West. He uses examples of extended familial relations 
and monasticism that encouraged a culture of duty, which focused on 
roles, as opposed to Western cultures, which, emphasizes rights and in-
dividuals. 
The culture of separateness is a theme taken up here, a prominent 
aspect of Western societies, where individuality based on feelings and 
choice (which includes romantic love), are seen as areas difﬁcult to rec-


--- Page 117 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
205 
oncile with some forms of traditional Buddhist teaching, which empha-
sise duty and passivity. The cautious note intended here is not to expect 
too much from meditation, or Eastern cultures that support its origins, 
a failing often of Western practitioners. He poses an important question 
for Western minds in asking, if understanding our relatedness in Bud-
dhist terms does not impair a sense of individual freedom. 
In chapters four, ﬁve and six there is a gradual development from 
understanding the basic background of Western rational, scientiﬁc 
knowledge in comparison to Asian societal and personal obligations 
developed out of a culture that subordinates the individual for the sake 
of others. Using a model developed by Shweder (psychologist) called 
‘thinking through culture’ (p. 35), Aronson investigates the ways in 
which Westerners understand the ‘other’ in a cultural context, and how 
that affects many who he claims suffer ‘Dharma loneliness’, in practic-
ing with others whom they never come to know. He highlights the dif-
ference in practice between content and process, and recommends try-
ing alternative methods of meditation as an experiment in integration, 
in order to understand one’s own needs using psychology as well as tra-
ditional practice. The speciﬁc alternative he cites (p. 46) is Ira Progoff’s 
system of ‘Mantra Crystals’, a seven-syllable phrase that reﬂects mood 
and can be co-ordinated with the breath. Unusually it requires one to 
make notes of experiences in meditation as they occur. This outlines 
the difference in the approaches to attention in therapy and medita-
tion. He goes on to discuss with some clarity the ways in which Western-
ers assimilate Buddhist practice (using Piaget’s theory) putting new in-
formation into old patterns, which affectively acts as a barrier to change. 
This discussion is made more lucid using existing psychological modes 
of understanding to explain the predisposition of Western practitioners 
to the needs of a wider psychological understanding of self, and how 
that creates and affects tensions with traditional Buddhist practice. 
Chapters seven to ten deals with self and pride, anger, a middle path 
for anger and embodied love. He examines pride and ego and the cul-
tural and spiritual differences that are found where, for example, West-
ern self-assertion can often be seen as part of self-expression. For many, 
according to Aronson, it is a fundamental part of their psychological 
makeup. He advocates the need to readdress certain attitudes (p. 90) 


--- Page 118 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
 
206 
towards self-assertion and gender hierarchy in light of cultural expecta-
tions in the West. He takes time here to present a nuanced understand-
ing of what it means to give up ‘I am’, both spiritually and psychologi-
cally. His treatment of anger deals with a fundamental question, to ex-
press it (in psychological terms) or abandon it (in the Buddhist con-
text). This again raises the issue of the tension between traditional Bud-
dhism and Western psychology, when it comes to understanding emo-
tions. The discussion suggests that emotion can be seen as psychologi-
cally manifest in Western thought and manifests itself more in physical 
terms in traditional Asian cultures. The question of intervention leads to 
a debate about a middle path to anger in the ninth chapter. Here the 
representative view put forward is to deal with the two extremes of emo-
tion, the ‘under-expressive’ and the ‘over- expressive’. Aronson suggests 
a middle way of integration using psychological techniques, but is well 
aware of the danger of ‘over-psychologizing the dharma’. He suggests 
internal and external sharing as a method to greater freedom and liber-
ating insight, (p. 126). In chapter ten he builds on this method by offer-
ing and investigation of mettå practice and the Mahåyåna development 
of love and compassion. The use of interrelatedness and how that is 
viewed relative to Western understandings of rebirth and karma also 
highlights cultural differences in the nature of understanding interde-
pendence and reciprocity. A model of the ‘true self/false self’ is investi-
gated which delineates a Western propensity to be restrained, emotion-
ally. This feeds into a discussion of how difﬁcult it is for Western practi-
tioners to deal adequately with generosity, without psychological sup-
port in developing the mind of enlightenment, common to the Bodhisat-
tva. 
Chapters eleven to thirteen deal with attachment in various forms, 
and how to deal with the concept beyond the abstract. A number of 
misunderstandings arising from a Western view (often verging on the 
annihilation of activity altogether) are delineated in this section. Fun-
damental to the discourse is the polemic that is set up by the negative 
connotation of attachment from a Buddhist view, and the positive no-
tion of psychological attachment theory from a Western standpoint. The 
differences in approach develop the ﬁxated notion of mind and action 
in comparison to a non-attached understanding, reducing clinging and 


--- Page 119 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
207 
developing through practice, internal freedom. Aronson advocates 
healthy attachment in adults, acknowledging ourselves and others fully, 
whilst embracing our differences – ‘connection without ﬁxation’ 
(p. 161). He draws a clear distinction between detachment – meaning 
psychological disengagement and the Buddhist usage of nonattach-
ment. In this context the subtleties of Aronson’s writing are in his ability 
to explain (using examples of realized Tibetan teachers in his own ex-
perience) to present the paths to nonattachment, in Theravåda, Mahå-
yåna and Vajrayåna/Tantrayåna teachings. The tension of the paradox 
that knows of something in the future (the ‘Enlightened’ state) that is 
only achieved when one is fully present is discussed at length. 
The concluding two chapters address the nonattachment issue using 
a Western model, which highlights the difﬁculties Westerners have in 
developing a secure family attachment, due to cultural and economic 
pressures, compared to the extended family relations that Asian chil-
dren grow up with. Thus making Asian children and adults more readily 
comfortable with a community of practitioners. The paradox here for 
Western children is in their ability to accept being alone whilst growing 
up only in the presence of their mothers. This paradox creates, accord-
ing to Aronson, ‘the creative true self’ (p. 187). The parent’s unintru-
sive silence helps develop this skill in children. Western psychotherapy 
opens up a position of mutual understanding with classical Buddhism 
here. The source of the ‘true self’ of the child is the non-attached par-
ent, who allows the child to feel securely attached (in the psychological 
sense) by his/her actions. This course of development is in preference 
to ‘ reactive defensive detachment’ caused by injury or abuse as a child, 
which can later manifest as ‘distance-as-a-refuge’, and ﬁnd in Buddhism, 
mistakenly, detachment they perceive to be congruent with their own 
emotional state. This is not however what is being discussed in the Bud-
dhist presentation. The suggestion is, the need once more for a synergy 
of both meditation and psychotherapy where this type of problem 
arises. 
Aronson sets out, and largely achieves his aim in presenting a little 
discussed dimension in the transmission of Buddhism to the West: that 
of the differences between traditional Buddhist societies, which have for 
generations developed a psycho-spiritual environment, and a Western 


--- Page 120 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
 
208 
society in which it is not as easy to replicate such an environment. His 
thorough investigation of this issue supports his contention that ‘it is 
not possible to replicate all segments of that web [language, philosophy 
and social customs] when we incorporate Buddhist practice into our 
lives’. The only reservation with the content of this book is for the 
reader to be aware of the tendency to psychologize the Dharma. It 
nonetheless rings true empirically of experience in modern Western 
societies and the encounter with Buddhism. 
 
Phil Henry 
University of Derby 
 
 
Buddhism, War, and Nationalism. Chinese Monks in the Struggle against Japa-
nese Aggressions, 1931–1945. Xue YU. London: Routledge, 2005. xiii, 
278 pp. £46.00 (hardcover). isbn 0415-975115. 
 
In the ﬁrst three decades of the twentieth century, the very existence of 
monastic Buddhism in China was threatened by a state hungry for new 
forms of revenue and public space. Reform-minded ofﬁcials cam-
paigned successfully for the conﬁscation of fertile monastic lands, and 
suggested that monastery buildings might be put to better use as public 
schools. Just as leading monks began to mount a defence against these 
new encroachments on their livelihood, Japanese military aggression, 
culminating in full-scale invasion of China, made matters even worse. 
Against the backdrop of these desperate times, Xue Yu chronicles the 
response of monks, nuns and lay Buddhists to the challenge of foreign 
invasion and the moral quandaries it brought with it. As detailed by Yu, 
some monks did their best to ignore the unignorable, hiding away in 
their monasteries and waiting for the dark days of war to pass in the 
conviction that Buddhist monks should have nothing to do with armies, 
guns and bloodshed. Indirect evidence suggests that some monks ac-
tively opposed monastic participation of any kind in the war (p. 58). 
Most, however, chose to participate in the war in one way or another.  
Many of the monks who did participate in the war went to some 
lengths to justify what on the surface seems to be a clear violation of the 


--- Page 121 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
209 
Buddhist prohibition on killing. Some literally demonized the enemy, 
saying that, as Buddhists were permitted to ﬁght against demons, they 
could exterminate Japanese invaders without compunction (p. 48). 
More commonly, monks claimed that by ‘killing one they could save 
many,’ thus rendering shooting a Japanese soldier a ‘compassionate 
act’. Indeed, far from causing bad karma, killing with a compassionate 
mind was said to reap merit (p. 50). Arguments such as these, occasion-
ally supported by scripture, allowed monks to at least consider a wide 
range of responses to the Japanese invasion, including armed combat. 
With such rhetoric as background, perhaps the most interesting chap-
ters of Yu’s book are those that describe the various actions Chinese 
monks took during the war years either to support resistance to the 
Japanese military, or, in Japanese-occupied territories, to support the 
Japanese cause. Following on a long-standing tradition, monks con-
ducted large-scale public rituals to provide spiritual support to the Chi-
nese resistance, though even monks questioned the efﬁcacy of ritual 
against machine guns, ﬂamethrowers and bombs (p. 72). Others con-
tented themselves with the grim work of burying the war dead. Leading 
monks threw themselves into another traditional monastic role, solicit-
ing donations for public works, with the funds collected going towards 
the purchase of ﬁghter planes (p. 117). Probably more important for 
the war effort than any of these measures were the ‘Sangha Rescue 
Teams’ – a sort of Buddhist Red Cross – formed by monks to provide 
elementary medical care to Chinese soldiers on the battleﬁeld. Yu’s dis-
cussion of the efforts of leading monks to maintain these ‘Rescue 
Teams’ – plagued by insufﬁcient funding, poor organization, and scep-
ticism – are among the most compelling parts of the book. By order of 
the state, all monks of ﬁghting age were in theory to have received mili-
tary training, but relatively few monks seem to have joined in the actual 
ﬁghting. And those who did join the army in general abandoned all 
outward sign of their original vocation – there were no battalions of 
keßåya-clad infantry. Just as Chinese monks in Nationalist or Communist 
controlled areas justiﬁed support for the war as an expedient means to a 
loftier end, Chinese monks in Japanese-occupied territories justiﬁed 
their support of the Japanese military (through prayers for the success 
of the Japanese army and in one case by raising funds to purchase a 


--- Page 122 ---
BOOK REVI EW S 
 
210 
Japanese war plane!) by claiming that the Japanese were the only hope 
for protection of the Dharma from the atheist communists gathering 
power in the northwest. 
Yu relies almost exclusively on Buddhist sources – chieﬂy the writings 
of prominent monks and publications in Buddhist journals. While this 
provides a detailed picture of the Buddhist view of the role of monks in 
the war, it gives little sense of how others viewed Buddhism at the time, 
or of the impact of the activities of monks on the war. Though young 
‘revolutionary monks’ wrote enthusiastically of their contributions to 
the war effort, one wonders what weight generals gave to their activities. 
Nor does Yu examine his sources critically. Hence, we are told that a 
monk named Hongming who had organized a Sangha Rescue Team 
‘became arrogant and began to associate with gangsters’, and later that 
he had been ‘framed’ when arrested for treason (p. 126). But without 
conﬁrmation from other sources, what are we to make of such claims? 
Similarly, references to monks acting as double agents (p. 142) and to 
Japanese atrocities (p. 147) are based on one biased source each, giving 
such claims little more credibility than rumour. 
Finally, the author was not well served by his publisher. I have never 
read a book, academic or otherwise, as poorly edited as this one. Run-on 
sentences, missing prepositions and articles, misspellings, incorrect 
Romanization of Chinese terms, wrong tenses, lack of subject-verb 
agreement and generally unidiomatic English run from the ﬁrst page to 
the last. Scarcely a page can be found without jarring errors. Appar-
ently, Routledge did no editing whatsoever of a manuscript written in 
ungrammatical English by a non-native speaker. The poor English is 
extremely distracting, even when the general meaning is clear. It is 
nothing short of disgraceful that Routledge should publish a book in 
this condition. This complete lack of editing is unfortunate as the book 
contains much valuable information on a fascinating period of Chinese 
Buddhist history. 
 
John Kieschnick 
University of Bristol 
 


--- Page 123 ---
 
Buddhist Studies Review 22 (2005), 211–16 
 
OBITUARY 
 
Heinz Bechert  
26 June 1932 – 14 June 2005 
 
ollowing two strokes, the world of academe has lost the European 
doyen of Buddhist studies in the ﬁelds of South-East Asia (princi-
pally Sri Lanka) and Central Asian lexicography. 
Professor Dr Bechert inherited the mantle of Ernst Waldschmidt, 
continuing his studies and initiating new ventures at Göttingen Univer-
sity. Their most notable, enduring and ongoing serial publications are 
the Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden (9 fascicles, 1965–2004, 
with Bechert co-editing Nos. 6–9) and the accompanying Sanskrit-
Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfanfunden (17 fascicles, 
1973–2004, with Bechert supervising the meticulous work of an edito-
rial team). Sponsored by the Kommission für buddhistische Studien of 
Göttingen’s Akademie der Wissenschaften, no less than four symposia 
were convened by Bechert between 1974 and 1988. From the titles of 
the published Proceedings (edited by him), these spanned the ﬁelds of 
Buddhism in Ceylon and Studies on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries 
(1978), The Language of the Earliest Buddhist Tradition (1980), Zur Schul-
zugehörigkeit von Werken der H¥nayåna-Literatur (2 vols, 1985–87) and The 
Dating of the Historical Buddha (3 vols, 1991–97). To reach a wider read-
ership, the English-language entries and most of the German entries in 
translation also appeared in a single volume entitled When Did the Bud-
dha Live? The Controversy on the Dating of the Historical Buddha (Delhi, 
1995). Moreover, Bechert not only contributed to all these Proceedings 
but also penned numerous articles, particularly on the last-named sym-
posium to relevant journals around the world. Also under his editorship 
and the auspices of the Akademie, the Bibliographische Erfassung der 
buddhistischen Sanskrit-Literatur was launched in 1972, although to date 
only two surveys have actually appeared: Akira Yuyama’s Systematische 
F


--- Page 124 ---
OBITU ARY 
 
212 
Übersicht über die buddhistische Sanskrit-Literatur I. Vinaya-Texte (1979) and 
Ernst Steinkeller and M. Torsten Much’s Texte der erkenntnistheoretischen 
Schule der Buddhismus (1995). 
Heinz Bechert was born in Munich but spent his youth in Rosenheim 
(near Salzburg in Austria). In 1949 he returned to Munich where his 
father hoped that he would also qualify as a lawyer. However, the son 
enrolled at Munich University where he read Classical Philology and 
History, Indology and Tibetology (1950–56) and at Hamburg (1954), 
his tutors including Helmut Hoffmann and Helmut Humbach. He ob-
tained his doctorate from Munich in 1956 for an edition of the 
Anavataptagåthå and Sthaviragåthå published under the title Bruchstücke 
buddhistischer Verssammlungen aus zentralasiatischen Sanskrithandschriften 
(Berlin, 1961). He served as a research assistant at Saarbrücken (1956–
61), Research Fellow at Colombo (1958–59) and a research assistant at 
Mainz (1961–64) from where he was ‘habilitated’ by his thesis on the 
‘Geschichte der Sanskritliteratur bei den Singhalesen’; this was revised 
for publication as Eine regionale hochsprachliche Tradition in Südasien: 
Sanskrit-Literatur bei den Buddhistischen Singhalesen (Vienna, 2005). Ap-
pointed Reader at Mainz, after six months he was invited to join the 
Oriental faculty at Göttingen and, in 1965, succeeded Waldschmidt as 
Head of the Seminar für Indologie und Buddhismuskunde. Later, he 
was twice invited to Yale as Visiting Professor (1969–70 and 1974–75). 
Regarding South-East Asian textual studies, he has, for example, co-
edited Singhalesische Handschriften (3 fascicles, Wiesbaden, 1969–97) and 
Burmese Manuscripts 1 (Wiesbaden, 1979 – upto 2004 a further 4 fasci-
cles have been compiled by different authors); these works were based 
on the Seminar’s library of 30,000 volumes. He also edited Sanskrittexte 
aus Ceylon, including some of the prescribed texts in the monastic cur-
riculum (Munich, 1962), and, with Heinz Braun, Påli N¥ti Texts of Burma 
(PTS, 1981). His magnum opus is undoubtedly the deﬁnitive survey of 
Buddhismus, Staat und Gesellschaft in den Ländern des Theravåda-Buddhis-
mus (3 vols: i Frankfurt-Hamburg, 1966; ii and iii Wiesbaden, 1967–73; 
i Grundlagen. Ceylon (Sri Lanka), repr. Göttingen 1988; ii Birma, 
Kambodscha, Laos, Thailand, rev. ed. Göttingen, 2000), the most com-
prehensive study in this ﬁeld. 


--- Page 125 ---
OBITU ARY 
213 
He contributed numerous papers on the Theravåda Buddhist culture 
and institutions, past and present, in South and South-East Asia (includ-
ing Nepal, Bangladesh and Indonesia) together with the indigenous 
and Sanskrit literature of Sri Lanka, supplemented with essays on what 
he termed ‘Buddhist Modernism’ (the preferred term to the somewhat 
misleading ‘Protestant Buddhism’ adopted by other scholars). To him, 
it denoted ‘modern Buddhist revivalism’, applied to the context of post-
colonial societies of which that of Sri Lanka was the pre-eminent exam-
ple. He outlined twelve features which encapsulate this essentially twen-
tieth-century phenomenon: (1) a tendency towards relying on an in-
dependent and non-traditional understanding of the Buddha’s teaching 
as found in the early sources; (2) a process of ‘demythologisation’ of 
Buddhism; (3) the characterisation of Buddhism as a ‘scientiﬁc relig-
ion’; (4) the emphasis on Buddhism as a ‘philosophy’ rather than a 
creed or religion; (5) on its being a ‘philosophy of optimism’ in contrast 
to Western criticism of ‘Buddhist pessimism’; (6) in terms of more prac-
tical issues the emphasis on ‘activism’ as forming an important feature 
of the Buddhist way of life; (7) in terms of social relations setting great 
store by ‘social work’; (8) the claim by modernists that Buddhism ‘has 
always included a social philosophy’ which is described as a ‘philosophy 
of equality’; (9) the demand that a Buddhist society should be democ-
ratic; (10) the emergence of Buddhist nationalism; (11) a tendency of 
modern Buddhists towards ‘rewriting history in accordance with their 
particular understanding of national history’; (12) the revival and popu-
larisation of Buddhist meditation as an important development in Bud-
dhist religious practice. He followed up this formula by highlighting 
‘new trends in contemporary Buddhism’: (1) its contribution to envi-
romentalism (the worldwide Green Movement); (2) emphasising ‘the 
Buddhist concept of universal tolerance’; (3) reacting against modern-
ism by ‘reasserting the teachings and values of traditional Buddhism’; 
(4) attempting a ‘radical return to the roots of Buddhism’; (5) aiming 
at the ‘renewal of the ideals of the forest-dwelling monks’; (6) reviving 
samatha meditation (vipassanå having already become part and parcel of 
standard Buddhist modernism); (7) the ‘revival of ritualism and spread 
of Tantrayåna’ in countries such as Taiwan, Singapore or in Buddhist 
communities in the West; (8) the emergence of a ‘new type of Buddhist 


--- Page 126 ---
OBITU ARY 
 
214 
syncretism, viz. the combination of various Buddhist traditions’; (9) a 
‘tendency towards a “re-mythologisation”’; (10) a strong tendency to-
wards the ‘reassertion of women’s rights in contemporary Buddhism’; 
the attempts and subsequent actions taken to restore the Order of fully-
ordained nuns in both the Theravåda and Vajrayåna. 
Bechert also turned his attention to the broad ﬁeld of Indian 
Buddhology (e.g. he co-edited, with Georg von Simson, Einführung in die 
Indologie, Darmstadt, 1979, rev. ed., 1993) and the Sanskrit text-based 
remains of the former Buddhist kingdoms of the Silk Road. 
With regard to the Sanskrit-Wörterbuch, it was decided to limit the ma-
terial used to the Buddhist texts from the Turfan collection (acquired 
by the four German expeditions to the modern Chinese province of 
Xinjiang before the First World War) and to include the evaluation of 
canonical and semi-canonical texts only. Thus, kåvya texts, including 
stotras, fragments of Buddhist dramas and similar material would be 
held in reserve for a possible, future second part of the dictionary. As 
for the textual material which is included in the dictionary, the follow-
ing decisions were made: with two exceptions of the Sarvåstivådin Pråti-
mok#asËtra and the Sanskrit-Tocharian bilingual text of the Kar-
mavåcanå, only published texts are quoted. It is planned as a dictionary 
of the Sarvåstivådin texts to which most of the Central Asian H¥nayånist 
Sanskrit texts belong, but it also includes a few MËlasarvåstivåda and 
Dharmaguptaka fragments. The citation of other Central Asian mate-
rial, including Mahåyåna works, dhåraˆ¥ and mantra texts, etc., was dis-
continued after fascicle two in order to arrive at a more homogeneous 
selection of texts. Starting with fascicle four, the published Central 
Asian mss from other collections in France, England, Russia and Japan 
were also evaluated. In this way, the dictionary will constitute a thesau-
rus of all known Sarvåstivåda texts. During a meeting of the supervisory 
committee in 1982, it was also decided that the MËlasarvåstivådin Abhi-
dharma texts should be similarly evaluated.  
Bechert contributed a guide to this ambitious lexicographical project, 
‘Das ‘Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der Turfan-Funde’ als Hilfsmittel für die 
Zentralasienforschung’ (Klaus Röhrborn [Head of Dept of Turkology 
and later successor to Bechert as Editor-in-Chief of the SWTF] and W. 
Veenker, ed., Sprachen des Buddhismus in Zentralasien, Wiesbaden, 1983).  


--- Page 127 ---
OBITU ARY 
215 
His edition of the ‘Marburger Fragmente’ of the Saddharma-
puˆ!ar¥kasËtra (NAWG, 1972) constituted a pioneer piece of detective 
work. He established that (1) this text had been originally transmitted 
orally in a Middle Indic (i.e. Prakrit) language before being committed 
to writing; (2) it comprised only two recensions (Nepalese-Kashmiri and 
Central Asian) by proving that the Gilgit mss represented an earlier 
stage of the Nepalese version; and (3) ﬁve incomplete Central Asian 
folios belonged to a single ms, different portions of which had been sold 
to the Russian, Aurel Stein, German and Otani expeditions. 
Insofar as textual studies are concerned, attention should be drawn to 
his summaries, viz., ‘The Importance of Central Asian Manuscript Finds 
for Sanskrit Philology’ (Proceedings of the First International Sanskrit Confer-
ence [New Delhi, 1972], ed. V. Raghavan, Section Two, Part 1, 1975; 
Journal of the Bihar (and Orissa) Research Society 63–64, 1977–78), ‘Cata-
loguing of Buddhist Manuscripts from Sri Lanka, from Burma and from 
Central Asia in Germany’ (International Association of the Vrindaban Re-
search Institute Bulletin 4, SOAS, 1978), ‘Central Asian Manuscripts and 
Buddhist Studies’ (All India Frontier Bauddha Sammelan. International 
Buddhist Conference, ed. Lodi G. Gyari, Delhi, 1978), ‘The Catalogue of 
Sinhala Manuscripts in Germany and the Present State of Cataloguing 
Sinhala Manuscripts’ (Spolia Zeylanica 35, Colombo, 1980) and ‘Die 
Handschriftensammlung des Seminars für Indologie und Buddhismus-
kunde’ (250 Jahre George-August-Universität Göttingen, 1987). Related lit-
erary ventures include extensive entries on Pali and Sinhala Buddhist 
texts (Kindlers Literatur Lexikon 5–7, Zürich, 1969–72), the religious tra-
ditions of India, Tibet and South-East Asia (Taschenlexikon. Religion und 
Theologie, ed. Erwin Fahlbusch, 4 vols, Göttingen, 1971, 5 vols, 1983) 
and the invaluable research tool distilled from A Critical Påli Dictionary 
and those text editions and dictionaries he compiled, Abkürzungsver-
zeichnis zur buddhistischen Literatur in Indien und Südostasien (Göttingen, 
1990). 
On the occasion of his sixtieth and sixty-ﬁfth birthdays, commemora-
tive volumes were produced, respectively, Studien zur Indologie und Budd-
hismuskunde (ed. Reinhold Grünendahl, Jens-Uwe Hartmann and Petra 
Kieffer-Pülz, Bonn, 1993) and Bauddhavidyåsudhåkara˙ (ed. P. Kieffer-


--- Page 128 ---
OBITU ARY 
 
216 
Pülz and J-U. Hartmann, Swisttal-Odendorf, 1997). These tomes in-
clude the subject’s vast bibliography. 
From his youth, Bechert’s prime pastime was mountaineering: unless 
he was undertaking ﬁeldwork in Sri Lanka or South-East Asia, he was to 
be found climbing in the Alps. Like Anton Gueth (who became the ﬁrst 
German bhikkhu, Nyånatiloka), he also played the violin and partici-
pated in an orchestra conducted by one of his tutors, Hoffmann. 
He leaves behind a widow, Marianne (née Würzburger), who acted as 
his ‘manager’, secretary and chauffeur. His mourning card was adorned 
with the Dharmacakra ﬂanked by the two deer as at Sarnath. However, 
since the funeral was a strictly family affair, we may never know whether 
he actually professed Buddhism – such declaration being almost incon-
ceivable in his public position as perhaps was realised by T. W. Rhys Da-
vids (the founder of the Pali Text Society) over a hundred years ago. 
 
Russell Webb 
 


--- Page 129 ---
 
 
UKABS CONFERENCE 
 
 
Buddhism & Popular Culture 
Lancaster University 
14–16 July 2006 
speakers include 
Anne Blackburn (Cornell) ‘Writing Histories from Landscape and 
Architecture: Sukhothai and Chiang Mai’ ! Gregory Schopen 
(UCLA) ’Religious Festivals in Early North Indian Buddhist Monaster-
ies’ ! George Tanabe (Hawaii) ‘The Death and Rebirth of Buddhism 
in Contemporary Japan’ ! Cathy Cantwell (Oxford) ‘Variations in 
Tibetan Buddhist Meditations on Deities: the Process of Generating 
Practices’ ! Kate Crosby (SOAS) ‘Penalties for Sacrilege: Mistreat-
ment of the Sacred in Theravada Literature’ ! Ven. Mahinda Dee-
galle (Bath Spa) ‘Role of Texts in Popular Buddhist Preaching in Sri 
Lanka’ ! Silke Geffcken (Ghent) ‘Travelling in Search for Enlight-
enment: Chan Encounters with Yuanwu Keqin (1063–1135)’ ! Peter 
Harvey (Sunderland) ‘Buddhist Reﬂections on Crime  Prevention and 
Punishment’ ! Hiroko Kawanami (Lancaster) ‘The Bhikkhuni Ordi-
nation Debate: the Position of Burmese Sangha’ ! Rob Mayer (Ox-
ford) ‘Buddhism and the Sensuous Underworlds of the Asuras’ ! Law-
rence Normand (Middlesex) ‘Shangri-La and History in 1930s Eng-
land’ ! Sam van Schaik (British Library) ‘Pilgrims and Palaeography at 
Dunhuang’ ! Gay Watson (SOAS) ‘Buddhism, Psychotherapy and 
Neuroscience’ 
 
 
Conference Fee: £30 (waged)/£15 (unwaged) 
Accommodation (single ensuite room + breakfast): £48.23 per night 
 
For further details email Ian Harris (i.harris@ucsm.ac.uk) 
 


--- Page 130 ---


--- Page 131 ---
 
 
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
 
1. Individual membership of UK Association for Buddhist Studies (in-
cluding subscription to BSR): £15/$28/!30 (unwaged £10) by cheque 
made payable to ‘UK Association for Buddhist Studies’ to be sent to Ms 
Janet Joyce, Equinox Publishing, Unit Six, The Village, 101 Amies 
Street, London SW11 2JW, UK (email: jjoyce@equinoxpub.com).  
 
2. Subscriptions to Buddhist Studies Review (journal only) from volume 
23 (2006): 
• 
Institutional price: £40/$75 
• 
Developing-world institutional price: £19.50/$37.50 
• 
Individual price: £19.50/$37.50/!33 
• 
Student price: £15.60/$30/!26.50 
Send all orders, sample-copy requests, claims and queries to: 
Journals Department 
Subscription Customer Services Manager 
Turpin Distribution Services 
Stratton Business Park 
Biggleswade 
Bedfordshire SG18 8QB 
United Kingdom 
 
Email: subscriptions@turpin-distribution.com 
Tel: +44 (0)1767 604 951 
Fax: +44 (0)1767 601 640 
www.turpin-distribution.com 
 
! 
uk association for buddhist studies 
www.sunderland.ac.uk/~os0dwe/bs5.html 
buddhist studies review 
www.equinoxpub.com/journals/prices.asp?jref=59 
