# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2007-mackenzie-new-buddhist-movements-thailand.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 13:54:39
# Total Pages: 268
# File Size: 1.45 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 2841.1 chars/page, total chars: 761,419)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
NEW BUDDHIST MOVEMENTS 
IN THAILAND
This book examines two new Buddhist movements in Thailand, namely the
Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke. These movements represent two
distinctive trends within contemporary Buddhism in Thailand. Vastly different in
belief and practice, they emerged in Thailand in the 1970s at a time of political
uncertainty, social change and increasing dissatisfaction with the Thai Sakgha
and its leadership.
Rory Mackenzie explains why these movements have come into being, what
they have reacted against and what they offer to their members. The Wat Phra
Dhammakaya tradition views itself as a large, modern movement structured for
growth, convenience and efficiency. It has spread to eleven different countries and
Westerners are increasingly being attracted to the movement through the practice
of Dhammakaya meditation. The author argues that there is some justification in
describing this highly progressive movement as fundamentalist and millenarian
due to their strong focus on meditation, and the belief that some members have
in their leader a saviour figure. Santi Asoke members view the communities in
which they live as places where they experience justice and support for living
morally upright lives. They also view their communities as a locus for their
liberation from suffering. The author suggests that Santi Asoke may best be
described as an ascetic/prophetic, utopian movement with legalistic tendencies. 
This book should appeal to those interested in Buddhism’s confrontation with
modernity, and its responses to evolving social issues in Thailand, as well as to
those interested in new religions in the broader context of religious studies.
Rory Mackenzie teaches Buddhism and Practical Theology at the International
Christian College, Glasgow. He has lived in Thailand for eleven years, is involved
in the Thai community in Edinburgh and makes regular visits back to Thailand.

--- PAGE 3 ---
ROUTLEDGE CRITICAL STUDIES 
IN BUDDHISM
General Editors
Charles S. Prebish and Damien Keown
Routledge Critical Studies in Buddhism is a comprehensive study of the Buddhist tradition.
The series explores this complex and extensive tradition from a variety of perspectives,
using a range of different methodologies.
The series is diverse in its focus, including historical studies, textual translations and
commentaries, sociological investigations, bibliographic studies, and considerations of
religious practice as an expression of Buddhism’s integral religiosity. It also presents
materials on modern intellectual historical studies, including the role of Buddhist thought
and scholarship in a contemporary, critical context and in the light of current social issues.
The series is expansive and imaginative in scope, spanning more than two and a half
millennia of Buddhist history. It is receptive to all research works that inform and advance
our knowledge and understanding of the Buddhist tradition.
A SURVEY OF VINAYA
LITERATURE
Charles S. Prebish
THE REFLEXIVE NATURE
OF AWARENESS
Paul Williams
ALTRUISM AND REALITY
Paul Williams
BUDDHISM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
Edited by Damien Keown, 
Charles Prebish, Wayne Husted
WOMEN IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF
THE BUDDHA
Kathryn R. Blackstone
THE RESONANCE OF EMPTINESS
Gay Watson
AMERICAN BUDDHISM
Edited by Duncan Ryuken Williams and
Christopher Queen
IMAGING WISDOM
Jacob N. Kinnard 
PAIN AND ITS ENDING
Carol S. Anderson
EMPTINESS APPRAISED
David F. Burton
THE SOUND OF LIBERATING
TRUTH
Edited by Sallie B. King and 
Paul O. Ingram
BUDDHIST THEOLOGY
Edited by Roger R. Jackson and 
John J. Makransky
THE GLORIOUS DEEDS 
OF PURNA
Joel Tatelman
EARLY BUDDHISM – A NEW
APPROACH
Sue Hamilton

--- PAGE 4 ---
CONTEMPORARY BUDDHIST
ETHICS
Edited by Damien Keown
INNOVATIVE BUDDHIST WOMEN
Edited by Karma Lekshe Tsomo
TEACHING BUDDHISM IN
THE WEST
Edited by V. S. Hori, R. P. Hayes and 
J. M. Shields
EMPTY VISION
David L. McMahan
SELF, REALITY AND REASON IN
TIBETAN PHILOSOPHY
Thupten Jinpa
IN DEFENSE OF DHARMA
Tessa J. Bartholomeusz
BUDDHIST PHENOMENOLOGY
Dan Lusthaus
RELIGIOUS MOTIVATION
AND THE ORIGINS OF BUDDHISM
Torkel Brekke
DEVELOPMENTS IN AUSTRALIAN
BUDDHISM
Michelle Spuler
ZEN WAR STORIES
Brian Victoria
THE BUDDHIST UNCONSCIOUS
William S. Waldron
INDIAN BUDDHIST THEORIES OF
PERSONS
James Duerlinger
ACTION DHARMA
Edited by Christopher Queen,
Charles Prebish & Damien Keown
TIBETAN AND ZEN BUDDHISM 
IN BRITAIN
David N. Kay
THE CONCEPT OF THE 
BUDDHA
Guang Xing
THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESIRE 
IN THE BUDDHIST PALI CANON
David Webster
THE NOTION OF DITTHI IN
THERAVADA BUDDHISM
Paul Fuller
THE BUDDHIST THEORY OF 
SELF-COGNITION
Zhihua Yao
MORAL THEORY IN FANTIDEVA’S
FIKSASAMUCCAYA
Barbra R. Clayton
BUDDHIST STUDIES FROM INDIA
TO AMERICA
Edited by Damien Keown
DISCOURSE AND IDEOLOGY 
IN MEDIEVAL JAPANESE
BUDDHISM
Edited by Richard K. Payne and 
Taigen Dan Leighton
BUDDHIST THOUGHT AND
APPLIED PSYCHOLOGICAL
RESEARCH
Edited by D. K. Nauriyal, Michael S.
Drummond and Y. B. Lal
BUDDHISM IN CANADA
Edited by Bruce Matthews
BUDDHISM, CONFLICT AND
VIOLENCE IN MODERN 
SRI LANKA
Edited by Mahinda Deegalle
THERAVADA BUDDHISM AND
THE BRITISH ENCOUNTER 
Religious, missionary and colonial 
experience in nineteenth century 
Sri Lanka
Elizabeth Harris

--- PAGE 5 ---
The following titles are published in association with the 
Oxford Centre for Buddhist Studies
The Oxford Centre for Buddhist Studies conducts and promotes rigorous teaching and
research into all forms of the Buddhist tradition.
EARLY BUDDHIST METAPHYSICS
Noa Ronkin
MIPHAM’S DIALECTICS AND THE DEBATES ON EMPTINESS
Karma Phuntsho
HOW BUDDHISM BEGAN
The conditioned genesis of the early teachings
Richard F. Gombrich
BUDDHIST MEDITATION
An anthology of texts from the Pali canon
Sarah Shaw
REMAKING BUDDHISM FOR MEDIEVAL NEPAL 
The fifteenth-century reformation of Newar Buddhism
Will Tuladhar-Douglas
METAPHOR AND LITERALISM IN BUDDHISM
The doctrinal history of Nirvana
Soonil Hwang
THE BIOGRAPHIES OF RECHUNGPA
The evolution of a Tibetan hagiography
Peter Alan Roberts
BEYOND ENLIGHTENMENT
Buddhism, religion, modernity
Richard Cohen
BUDDHISM IN THE PUBLIC
SPHERE
Reorienting global interdependence
Peter D. Hershock
BRITISH BUDDHISM
Teachings, practice and development
Robert Bluck
BUDDHIST NUNS IN TAIWAN 
AND SRI LANKA
A critique of the feminist 
perspective
Wei-Yi Cheng
NEW BUDDHIST MOVEMENTS 
IN THAILAND
Towards an understanding of Wat 
Phra Dhammakaya and 
Santi Asoke
Rory Mackenzie

--- PAGE 6 ---
NEW BUDDHIST
MOVEMENTS IN
THAILAND
Towards an understanding of 
Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke
Rory Mackenzie

--- PAGE 7 ---
First published 2007
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, 
an informa business
© 2007 Rory Mackenzie
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available 
from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Mackenzie, Rory, 1951–
New Buddhist movements in Thailand : towards an understanding
of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke / Rory Mackenzie.
p. cm. – (Routledge Critical Studies in Buddhism series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Buddhism–Thailand–History–20th century. 2. Buddhist sects–
Thailand. 3. Munnithi Thammakai (Khlong Luang, Thailand)
4. Santi’Asok (Organization) I. Title.
BQ566.M33 2006
294.39–dc22
2006020969
ISBN10: 0–415–40869–5 (hbk)
ISBN10: 0–203–96646–5 (ebk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–40869–1 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–203–96646–4 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2007.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-96646-5 Master e-book ISBN

--- PAGE 8 ---
TO ROSALYN, BEST FRIEND AND FELLOW
TRAVELLER FOR 30 YEARS, AND BECCA, JO AND
MI-MI WHO JOINED US ON THE JOURNEY

--- PAGE 9 ---


--- PAGE 10 ---
CONTENTS
Preface
x
Acknowledgements
xii
Note on the use of Thai words and referencing
xiii
Map of Thailand
xiv
Introduction
1
Review of scholarly literature on the Wat Phra 
Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke movements
9
1
Setting the scene: the religious and socio-political context 
of the development of the two movements
18
2
The inception and development of the 
Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement
30
3
An analysis of the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement
56
4
The approach of Wat Phra Dhammakaya to spiritual development
98
5
The history of the Santi Asoke movement and a 
description of its various communities
115
6
The distinctives of Santi Asoke and an analysis of the movement
143
7
The approach of Santi Asoke to spiritual purification
174
8
Conclusion
186
Appendix one: research methodology
197
Appendix two: analysis of the Santi Asoke questionnaire
201
Notes
210
Bibliography
236
Index
247
ix

--- PAGE 11 ---
x
PREFACE
An Introduction to New Buddhist Movements in Thailand: Towards an
Understanding of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke.
This book seeks an understanding of two new Buddhist movements which
emerged in Thailand in the 1970s. Vastly different in belief and practice, they
developed in a time of political uncertainty, social change and increasing
dissatisfaction with the Thai Sakgha and its leadership.
I have sought both insiders’ (emic) and outsiders’ (etic) understandings of the
movements. Members of both movements view their respective leaders as having
qualities of amnat (power), ittipon (influence) and parami (moral stature or
charisma). In addition, they are confident in the veracity of their models of
spiritual purification. Wat Phra Dhammakaya views itself as a large, modern
movement structured for growth, convenience and efficiency. It communicates
effectively with its members throughout the world via its satellite TV channel.
The movement plans shortly to host 1 million attendees at its temple for special
meetings geared towards world peace. The writer sees some justification in
describing this highly progressive movement as fundamentalist and millenarian
due to its strong focus on meditation, and the belief that some members have in
their leader a saviour figure.
Santi Asoke members view the communities in which they live as places where
they experience justice and support for living morally upright lives. This is in
contrast to their experience in mainstream Thai society. They also view their
communities as a locus for liberation from suffering.
Despite their strict, ‘peasant’ image, Santi Asoke are considerably less of a
fundamentalist movement than Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Asoke members view
their leader as a highly skillful teacher but not a saviour, thus they cannot be
considered millenarian. I have highlighted similarities between Santi Asoke and
the Catholic ‘base community’ movement, as well as the Thai ‘community
culture’ school of thought. Despite some similarities in these areas, I suggest that
Santi Asoke may best be described as an ascetic/prophetic, utopian movement
with legalistic tendencies.

--- PAGE 12 ---
PREFACE
xi
This thesis suggests that the continuing ‘well-being’ of Wat Phra Dhammakaya
and Santi Asoke indicate both a disenchantment with traditional expressions of
mainstream Thai Buddhism and a desire for Buddhist solutions for contemporary
living. While Buddhism continues to inform the Thai psyche, the state regulated
Sakgha no longer has the credibility and status which it once enjoyed. It will not,
therefore, be the ‘legitimising’ tool in the hands of the Thai government that it
traditionally has been.

--- PAGE 13 ---
xii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This is the publication of my doctoral thesis, along with a few updates. Research
students have supervisors and I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Peter
Harvey, for his help during my years as a part-time research student. Despite
a very busy schedule he read through several drafts of the thesis and supplied
me with helpful information. I have greatly benefited from his comments and
attention to detail. A thesis has examiners and I appreciate the constructive
comments made by my external examiner, Professor Ian Harris.
There are several people I would like to thank at the institute where I teach, the
International Christian College, Glasgow. The vice-principal ensured there was
adequate time set aside for my research, both in terms of sabbaticals and annual
study leave. The librarians were extremely efficient in obtaining inter-library
loans for my work, and patient with me at the end of the project when I misplaced
some publication details! Dr John Jeacocke was always very helpful when I ran
into computing challenges or needed advice regarding the production of the
manuscript.
I am grateful to those at Santi Asoke who welcomed me as an ‘outsider’ and
helped me to think like an ‘insider’. Two of my mentors at the 2001 Putta Pisek
ceremony (rigorous yearly training camp) made sure I was not simply an observer
but a participant! I learnt a lot from this intensive involvement. Most of the
questionnaires completed by the Santi Asoke members were translated into
English by Bee Yacam. She also translated other Thai texts which proved
important for the research. I appreciate her contribution. Thanks are also due to
those who helped me at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. The archive staff of the Bangkok
Post were helpful, allowing me on several occasions to remain after office hours
to research their extensive records.
Finally, thanks to my wife Rosalyn. She has been a constant source of
encouragement to me throughout my research.
Edinburgh 2007

--- PAGE 14 ---
NOTE ON THE USE OF 
THAI WORDS AND REFERENCING
It may be assumed that the romanising of the Thai script is phonetic. The only
exceptions are a very few word endings where the final letter of the Thai word
reads one way but is pronounced another! For example, in Thai, a final ‘l’is read ‘n’,
thus what is pronounced ‘Mahidon’ is spelt ‘Mahidol’. Those skilled in
romanising Thai script may wince at ‘Luang Phaw’ (Venerable Father) preferring
‘Luang Phoh’ but I have felt it best to follow Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s rendering
of the title.
Pali words are italicised and diacritical marks are used. Thai words are also
italicised except in the case of names. For example, Dhammakaya meditation as
it refers to a technical term within Buddhism; Wat Phra Dhammakaya, however,
is not italicised as it refers to a temple and a movement. It appears to be a general
convention not to use diacritical marks with Thai words. I depart from this
protocol, however, if the Thai word is also a Pali word, for example, maha. Since
I am dealing with Theravada Buddhism I use Pali terms, for example, ‘nibbana’
rather than the Sanskrit term ‘nirvaja’. The only exception to this is the use of
‘karma’ (Sanskrit), rather than the not well-known Pali term ‘kamma’.
In the Thai context, the name that is used is the given name rather than the
surname. In order to standardise the referencing and bibliography of the book,
I have used the surname of Thai nationals as the official name.
The Thai use the Buddhist calendar, dating from the parinibbana of the
Buddha, thus 2006 CE is 2549 in the Buddhist Era. I use the Christian era
equivalent for the publication date of the Thai texts.
xiii

--- PAGE 15 ---
Map 1 Map of Thailand.
Source: Reproduced with permission of the Central Intelligence Agency.

--- PAGE 16 ---
INTRODUCTION
The two New Buddhist Movements studied in this thesis emerged in Thailand in
the 1970s. The social context included the emergence of an increasingly well-educated
middle class, political control by the military and political protests by the people
(1970 and 1973). In addition, an unstable situation was created by the activities of
the Thai Communist Party and the war in Vietnam. There was also the difficulty
of relating traditional Buddhist values to a generation very different from previous
generations. These two movements have developed their own identities since Santi
Asoke was excommunicated from the Sakgha in 1990 after 15 years of contro-
versy.1 In 1999, the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement came close to leaving the
Sakgha after an intense period of allegations of unorthodox teaching, forceful
marketing strategies and the alleged mishandling of funds by the abbot.
This book sets out to answer the following 
five questions
G
How did the Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke movements begin and
develop?
G
What are their distinctive features and why do they appeal to their respective
memberships?
G
How accurate are the outsiders’ descriptions and analyses of the two
movements?
G
How do the members of these movements go about their spiritual development?
G
What do the findings of this research contribute to an understanding of the
possible future structure of state regulated Buddhism within Thailand, and
possible implications this may have for Thai society.2
Discussion of terms such as ‘sect’, ‘cult’, their Thai 
equivalents and ‘New Buddhist Movement’
It seems appropriate at this stage to define some key terms.
1

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sect
A ‘religious group or movement which has broken away from a more orthodox
mainstream religious denomination, or represents an entirely new religious
formation’ (Barnard and Burgess, 1996:481). A sect may be viewed by the
mainstream group it has departed from, or society in general, as schismatic,
heterodox or heretical. Adherents of the new sect will usually judge the mainstream
as having failed to maintain orthodoxy, or as being unwilling to accept new
truth/practice.
The term sect seems to be an accurate one for Wat Phra Dhammakaya as it
captures something of some deviance away from mainstream but with a lack of
actual rejection by it. Indeed, this movement is actively involved in helping the
aging and frail leadership (Thai Maha thera samakom) of the Thai Sakgha. Santi
Asoke have been excommunicated from the Thai Sakgha principally for their
harsh criticism of what they consider to be lax behaviour among mainstream
monks and refusing to comply with orders from monastic leadership. A result of
this excommunication is that a good number of critics would say ‘Santi Asoke are
not proper Buddhists’ – at least not the state regulated Thai version of Buddhism!
Informed observers of the religious scene in the kingdom view Santi Asoke as
being much further from mainstream than Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
Cult
Derived from the Latin cultus (‘worship’), a cult is a religious movement which
draws its inspiration from other than the primary religion of the culture (Glock
and Stark, 1965:245). Clearly both Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke are
thoroughly Buddhist in orientation, although they borrow from non-standard Thai
interpretations of Buddhism. Technically, they may be described as sects but
not cults. Sometimes, however, critics of a group will vilify the group by referring
to it as a cult. It may be that critics justify the usage of the term by the ‘cult-like’
characteristics of the group, such as the dissolving of marriages, and the
unquestioning acceptance of all that the leader says.
New Religious Movement
This term is used as an umbrella term for ‘movements or organisations that
have been called “alternative religions”, “non-conventional religions,” “cults” or
“contemporary sects” ’ (Barker, 1989:4). The two movements considered in my
research began in the 1970s, have well-defined structures and procedures and
clearly qualify as ‘New Religious Movements’. They may more accurately be
referred to as New Buddhist Movements.
It is important to consider the terms the Thai use for ‘movement’. Klum and
khana are Thai words meaning ‘group’, or movement. Puak and fai may also be used
for group or movement although, when used, tend to have a negative connotation.
INTRODUCTION
2

--- PAGE 18 ---
False (te am) when used of a group indicates false teaching, while laa te
corresponds directly to our word cult.3 Nevertheless, Thai tend to be less exclusive
in their language than Westerners and use less condemnatory speech. There is
also an understandable tendency among Thai to present Buddhism as unified,
rather than divided. This is demonstrated by the fact that I seldom heard Thai who
are critical of these movements refer to them as cults (Thai laa te).
It is attractive to describe these two movements as fraternities (Thai nikai) of
Buddhism. This, however, becomes problematic in the Thai Buddhist context as
the Mahanikai and Thammayut orders are the only official fraternities within Thai
Buddhism.4 Chao is a Thai term meaning ‘people of a certain country’ and Santi
Asoke members use it while speaking of themselves that, that is, Chao Asoke.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya members define themselves as those who go to the Phra
Dhammakaya temple, thus for a man ‘pom bi Wat Phra Thammakai’. The movement
is also known as the Dhammakaya Foundation (Monetee Thammakai).
Model of research
There is a full description of the research methodology in Appendix One. I have
located this in the appendices as I recognise some readers may be frustrated by
being presented with several pages of methodological explanation! What follows
is a brief introduction to my approach to the study of the movements.
I have sought to avoid ‘projection’and ‘reduction’ideas and tried to gain, to the
extent it is possible, an insider’s (emic) understanding of both movements. The
projection approach assumes that a movement’s belief and practice is simply a
creation out of the needs and aspirations of those who belong to the movement.
Traditionally, it has been used to show how human needs have created the image
of some ultimate being, rather than man receiving revelation from that being. The
reduction approach ‘explains religious phenomena (hence reducing it) in terms of
the methods employed and the conclusions reached by disciplines other than
religion’ (Cox, 1992:43).
The thrust of the phenomenological approach is an attempt to justify the study
of religion on its own terms rather than on the terms of the theologian or social
scientist’ (Erricker, 1999:83). While there is no firm agreement on a definitive
phenomenological approach to the study of religions, it is a model that is quite
widely used. Those who use it seek to understand that religion, or movement, on
its own terms. Through a process (described in Appendix One) I arrived at an
understanding of the movements based on my observation of life within the
movements, as well as information and explanation from insiders. At this stage in
the research I began to examine possible ways in which sociological and cultural
forces may have shaped these movements. That is, I gathered and engaged with
etic (outsiders’views). Some of these outsiders were academics researching in the
area. Others were lay people who had contact with the movements. In addition,
I used typologies used in the classification of movements and applied these to Wat
Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke. The use of these typologies widened the
INTRODUCTION
3

--- PAGE 19 ---
discussion as links were made to other movements which were not immediately
obvious. I also tried to define how these movements work (and attract new
members) by examining how their leadership functions in terms of the accepted
Thai qualities of leadership, namely, power (amnat), influence (ittiphon) and
moral goodness (parami).
Brief remarks on some sociological factors that 
produce change
If religion does not continue to meet changing needs, adherents will declare it
irrelevant, or have only a very nominal commitment to it. New Religious
Movements thrive in rapidly changing social conditions. They provide meaning
and purpose by offering an explanation of, or ways of dealing successfully with
change. A new group may either reject or embrace new forces such as consumerism
or globalisation.
The researcher of New Religious Movements in the ‘Two Third’s’ world needs
to be aware of the way movements are or have responded to forces such as
secularisation, globilasation, urbanisation, economic growth and decline and
dynamics of the nation state. These issues are now briefly identified.
Secularisation may be regarded as the shrinking relevance of the values of
religion to integrate individuals in society, or legitimise political or social
structures.5 Wilson defines secularisation as ‘The decline of the influence of
religious institutions, thinking and practices upon social life’ (Barnard and
Burgess, 1996:323).
To combat secularisation, religious groups will often make considerable effort
to make religion appear vibrant again. This has certainly been the case in Thailand
since the establishing of a modern education system where schools are no longer
based in temples and monks no longer teach. Monks have had to face a diminished
role in Thai society for some time. The major challenge facing the Sakgha,
however, is reassuring the Thai people of the high moral standards of the monks,
as the press have reported a number of financial and sexual scandals in which
monks have allegedly been involved.
Globalisation involves the movement of goods, finance, ideas, fashion, people,
information, leisure and social activities around the world. The key issue for
sociologists is the manner in which these movements create problems for a par-
ticular nation’s social life and political governance. Economic globalisation,
spearheaded by multinational companies, ‘is widely understood to have led to the
reduced control of nation states over economic policy’ (Nash, 2000:49). There is
pressure then on countries to create a good climate for the multinational corpora-
tions, otherwise they will lose business to other countries. At the same time they
are left to manage the negative consequences of globalisation such as excessive
economic dependence on the multinational companies, loss of political power
over the nation, ecological damage and erosion of traditional values and/or
cultural distinctives.
INTRODUCTION
4

--- PAGE 20 ---
Globalisation is translated into Thai as ‘lukanuwat’. It is derived from lok the
Thai word for world.6 The word is closely associated with lokiya ‘worldliness’and
thus has a negative connotation for many Thai. It ‘evokes all that is unethical and
immoral about the consequences of the globalizers’ practices’ (Reynolds,
2002:318).
MacDonalds, Svensens and Pizza Hut workers are being de-cultured through
serving in these restaurants, as are those who use them. For the traditionalist, it
appears that Western values have hijacked local culture. There is a cultural tension
between the tradition and progress. Western food chains and fashion items such
as Nike trainers, while powerful icons of globalisation, are not the only dissemi-
nators of Western values. Satellite TV and the Internet are also incredibly influ-
ential. What is being globalised is a secular capitalist system which is ‘almost
totally orientated to the accumulation of wealth rather than to the satisfaction of
basic human needs’ (Padilla, 2001:7). 
Consumerism has been defined as ‘a culture centred on the promotion, sale and
acquisition of consumer goods’ (Bilton et al., 1996:656). The teachings of
Buddhism and Christianity address the materialism associated with a consumer
mentality, possibly through redistribution of wealth, or a simpler lifestyle.
New Religious Movements are not only brought about by changes in society.
Sometimes they emerge due to tensions within religious traditions. Examples of
this would include a group’s perceived loss of commitment to its religious values,
or leaders who are considered to be too lax in their practice, or are understood to
be no longer teaching ‘the truth’. Often personality conflicts are dressed up as
doctrinal controversies and a new group emerges! The new group is invariably
marginalised by the old group, and perhaps even by society. In time, as leadership
of the new group mellows and the issues that inspired the breakaway from
mainstream are addressed, the new group may be viewed as much less radical.
Field work
Interviews and questionnaires within the movements
Santi Asoke: I was permitted to attend the Puttha Pisek festival at Phai Sali, some
300 kilometres north of Bangkok. More than 1,000 members gathered for six
days of intensive teaching. I was privileged to be assigned two informants who
steered me through the programme which started at 03:15 and went on to 21:00.
They were skilled at explaining the reasons that underpinned Santi Asoke prac-
tice, such as walking barefoot and washing dishes in a particular way. As well as
observing and participating in the various activities, I had opportunities to inter-
view various members. Interviews were mainly carried out in Thai. I was also
able to conduct a questionnaire in Thai. This was qualitative in nature and invited
a ‘free-text’ response. The questionnaire was examined by several monastics for
approval and then distributed to the lay membership. I received 62 returns from
the 94 distributed questionnaires. Translation of the questionnaires was carried
INTRODUCTION
5

--- PAGE 21 ---
out by two Thai as I found the translation very time consuming due to ‘hard to
read’ handwriting and some difficult terminology. I was involved, however, in
working with both translators and was able to clarify any questions I had regarding
aspects of translation.
During my three field visits (1999, 2001 and 2002), I was able to stay on two
separate occasions at Phatom Asoke, some 60 kilometres to the east of Bangkok,
and also visit extensively at Santi Asoke in Bangkok. On these occasions I was
able to have informal conversations as well as conduct formal interviews with
monastics (including Bodhirak, the founder of the movement) and lay members.
Normally Thai was used for these interviews but sometimes the interviewees
spoke good English.
I was also able to make visits to Wat Phra Dhammakaya in 2001, but because
of the intense media attention they were receiving, and their difficulties with the
Sakgha leadership, they were unwilling for me to conduct questionnaire work, or
discuss controversial issues such as their views on the nature of nibbana. I was,
however, able to visit Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram, a temple which
uses the same meditation model as Wat Phra Dhammakaya, as well as Wat
Paknam to which both of these movements trace their inception.
Media attention had considerably diminished by the time I carried out my third
field visit (2002) and Wat Phra Dhammakaya responded positively to my
supervisor’s request for me to carry out research at the temple. I was assigned an
ubasok who functioned as an informant, arranged for my visits to the temple and
lined up interviews with Phra Dattacheewo, the acting abbot and another
monastic.7 I was able to talk to members freely on Sundays and observe a variety
of ceremonies at the temple.
My practice was to explain that I was an academic researcher who already had a
faith commitment (Christian) and not a seeker after a new set of beliefs. This clar-
ified to informants the reason I required the information. If I were understood to be
a seeker, then an informant might assume ‘evangelistic mode’ and be disappointed
at the end of the conversations when I did not change my religious allegiance.8
I spent time in Thailand in August and September 2006 engaging with both
movements. I provided copies of my thesis to representatives of both movements
and invited their comments, unfortunately there was little feedback. I also took
the opportunity to gather information to update the research.
Interviews and information gathering outwith 
the new movements
I attended the four day International Conference on Southeast Asian Studies at
Mahidol University, Bangkok, in February 2001. This gave me the opportunity to
discuss aspects of the two movements with Marja-Leena Heikkilä-Horn (whose
doctoral work was on the Santi Asoke movement) and Peter Jackson (who has
written widely on Thai religion and culture). During my second and third field
trips I was able to meet with a number of specialists in Thai Buddhism both
INTRODUCTION
6

--- PAGE 22 ---
monastic and lay. Phra Suthithammanuwat (formally known as Phramaha Thiab
Mali), dean of one of the postgraduate schools at Mahachulalongkorn University
was helpful in arranging interviews and providing some research material.
Dr Tavivat Puntarigvivat was a valuable source of information on aspects of Thai
society as well as the proposed Fourth Sakgha Act. During my third field trip
I was able to discuss some aspects of both movements with Dr Apinya
Feungfusakul, who completed doctoral work on these two movements in 1993.
There were many others outside the movement who provided information. As
I travelled around people would ask me what I was doing and I would take the
opportunity to ask about their perspectives on these two movements. One former
member of Santi Asoke who remained positive towards the movement provided
me with a particularly helpful way of understanding the Asoke ‘mindset’. The
archives of the Bangkok Post proved extremely useful for tracing the progression
of the legal proceedings against the two movements.
Scope of the book
The preview of the book is as follows:
Introduction – Research objectives; discussion of some terms; methodological
approach and some comments on sociological factors.
Literature review – An overview of the contribution of seven key writers in
the field.
Chapter 1 setting the scene – The religious and socio-political context of the
development of the two movements.
This section briefly examines the reforms initiated by King Mongut (1804–68)
who was a monk for 27 years before ascending the throne in 1851. The Sakgha
Acts of 1902, 1941 and 1962 are examined. The proposed Fourth Sakgha Act
is also discussed. The main thread running through the development of Thai
Buddhism since 1824 is the tensions between the Thammayut and Mahanikai fra-
ternities. In brief, Mahanikai and Thammayut family allegiances are no longer as
strong as they once were. In some cases it may be argued that a person who would
gain from the flourishing of the traditional Thai political system, and who in the
past would have had an allegiance to the Thammayut fraternity, would be attracted
to the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement. The ability of the Thai military to
manipulate the state apparatus and its eventual loss of power is related to the
emergence of the middle class with its desire to be involved in shaping issues that
affect them, for example, the political process.
An analysis of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and its approach to spiritual purification –
Chapter 2 traces the story of Luang Phaw Sot’s alleged discovery of Dhammakaya
meditation in Thailand. Luang Phaw Sot’s career as abbot of Wat Paknam is
discussed, as is his meditative practice. Khun Yai Chan’s contribution as a teacher
of meditation and encourager of her young students is recorded, and how this
led to the inception of Wat Phra Dhammakaya. The growth of the temple and
the associated Dhammakaya Foundation is described, as is the forming of
INTRODUCTION
7

--- PAGE 23 ---
Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram as a separate movement from Wat Phra
Dhammakaya. There is description of some of the alleged land-owning irregularities
associated with the abbot, and the associated legal proceedings. Highlights of my
visits to the temple are recorded towards the end of this chapter.
Chapter 3 commences by offering an insiders’ (emic) understanding of Wat
Phra Dhammakaya, this highlights the movement’s attraction for its members. Six
perspectives are offered including having a leader with qualities of power
(amnat), influence (ittipon) and moral goodness (parami). Six similarities
between the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement and Saka Gakkai are discussed.9
This serves to highlight some of the movement’s distinctive features. Four
outsiders’ (etic) perspectives on Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement are examined.
These include fundamentalism, millenarianism, a neo-galactic structure and a
Buddhist prosperity movement. Typologies traditionally used to classify New
Religious Movements are examined to see if any are useful in the quest to
understand Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
Chapter 4 focuses on Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s approach to spiritual
development. The movement’s understanding of nibbana and ayatananibbana is
examined, as is the model of meditation. There is discussion about Tibetan and
Yogavacara practices as being a possible source of Luang Phaw Sot’s approach to
meditation.
An analysis of Santi Asoke and its approach to spiritual purification – Chapter 5
traces the life of Rak Rakphong and the founding of the Santi Asoke movement.
There is considerable description of Chamlong Srimuang’s political career and
involvement with Santi Asoke.10 The legal proceedings against the movement
which eventually led to excommunication from the Sakgha are examined. There
is description of the various Asoke communities based on my visits, interviews
and reading. Structures of the movement, its use of schools and adult education
are mentioned, as are its yearly festivals.
Chapter 6 commences with four insiders’ (etic) understandings of Santi Asoke.
Four key distinctives of Santi Asoke are examined. Theories that have been put
forward by outsiders to explain/classify Santi Asoke are described and evaluated.
These include ‘fundamentalist’, ‘millenarian’, a Buddhist version of Christian
‘base communities’ and a ‘community culture’ movement. I suggest an under-
standing of Santi Asoke as an ascetic/prophetic utopian movement with strong
(nomian) legalistic tendencies. As with Wat Phra Dhammakaya, typologies are
examined to see if they may be used helpfully to explain and categorise.
Chapter 7 focuses on Santi Asoke’s approach to spiritual development. The
Asoke understanding of nibbana is considered, as is the Asoke approach to med-
itation, the Eightfold Path and spiritual development.
In conclusion, a summary of the answers to the first four research questions is
made. The final research question is answered as suggestions are made regarding
the future of state-regulated Buddhism within Thailand, and possible implications
these may have for society within the kingdom.
INTRODUCTION
8

--- PAGE 24 ---
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
ON THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
AND SANTI ASOKE MOVEMENTS
By the mid-1980s, the Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke movements had
gained a high profile in Thai society. The former sent teams of white clothed
members, predominantly students, into the housing estates to collect donations
and recruit members. Santi Asoke were under investigation by the Sakgha but had
also attracted the attention of the populace with their rigorous practice and asso-
ciation with Chamlong, the then governor of Bangkok. Scholars thus began to
investigate both movements at that stage, and published work soon followed. This
review examines what I consider to be important texts on these movements.
Peter Jackson was born in Sydney, Australia in 1956. He first became known
in the field of Thai studies with his 1988 publication Buddhadasa: A Buddhist
Thinker for the Modern World. In 1989 he published Buddhism, Legitimation and
Conflict: The Political Functions of Urban Thai Buddhism. This work is presented
in two parts. It commences with an overview of Buddhism and the Thai elite. The
second part examines the life and beliefs of some reformist monks including
Buddhadasa. The Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke movements are com-
prehensively covered. Jackson points out that although Wat Phra Dhammakaya is
in the Mahanikai fraternity it is highly likely that it has members with Thammayut
affiliations (traditionally associated with the establishment).1 The movement
has drawn a number of upper class laity who benefit from association with the
establishment, viewing Wat Phra Dhammakaya as a means of preserving the
status quo of traditional governance. Drawing from some findings that Jackson
cites (1989:86), these probably would be people who appreciate the outward
demonstration of discipline, good organisation, association with the royal family,
bureaucracy and the military but are less concerned about orthodox teaching. Wat
Phra Dhammakaya, according to Jackson is
[T]he religious expression of a political establishment which is seeking
to retain its power by co-opting members of the increasingly wealthy and
influential middle class, in particular, that section of the middle class
seeking to establish itself in the patterns of authority and power.
(1989:205)
9

--- PAGE 25 ---
Wat Phra Dhammakaya utilises intense meditation training reminiscent of the
Thai forest tradition. By undertaking such training some meditators attain
unusual psychic or spiritual experiences. Jackson (1989:206) argues that such
followers ‘appropriate for themselves the spiritual power and legitimacy
which has traditionally been attributed to the forest monks’. This has the effect of
reducing the sacred aura perceived by many to surround monks in the forest
tradition.
In chapter seven of his book, Jackson carefully analyses factors contributing to
the discourse within the Santi Asoke movement. First, Bodhirak’s understanding
of Buddhadasa (1906–93).2 In some of his writings, Bodhirak acknowledges the
significant influence of Buddhadasa on his thinking. However, he goes on to
show how his ‘teachings represent a development and improvement over those of
the senior monk’ (Jackson, 1989:165). Buddhadasa taught his followers not to
cling strongly to anything, yet Buddhadasa’s views have become so highly
esteemed that many cling dogmatically to his teachings. According to Bodhirak,
this strong attachment to Buddhadasa’s ideas will block perceptions of truth
(Jackson, 1989:165). Jackson correctly describes Bodhirak’s commitment to eth-
ical, rather than meditative practice and his criticism of teachers who do not insist
on the translation of teaching into practice.
Second, Jackson (1989:166–8) discusses the Asoke members’ mindset by
juxtaposing them with typical supporters of Buddhadasa. In summary, Asoke
members may be understood as coming from the merchant or small businessmen/
tradesmen class who (like Bodhirak) are of Chinese or Sino-Thai extraction.3
While being rationalistic and critical of what they regard as supernatural practices
within Buddhism, they do not go quite as far as Buddhadasa, who de-emphasises
some aspects of Buddhist belief, for example, karma. Bodhirak’s followers
are disenchanted with the political system which is implicitly supported by the
Buddhism of the establishment. To join Asoke is to protest against being margin-
alised and to participate in a community that offers a different way of living.
Third, Jackson analyses the critical response of Anan Senakhan to Santi
Asoke.4 The analysis of Anan’s protest gives insight into some aspects of Thai
society, and helps the reader better understand the Asoke movement. Jackson
points out that both Anan and Bodhirak believe that Buddhism in Thailand has
been corrupted. Bodhirak has responded by withdrawing from the Sakgha.
Anan’s response is to reform it from within, thus avoiding divisive factions which
could undermine the security and integrity of Thai Buddhism. Jackson suggests
that considerations of the backgrounds of Bodhirak and Anan help to understand
these differences. Bodhirak is a former TV personality and member of the middle
class. This, along with his Chinese–Thai ethnic mix locates him outside of the
establishment. It seems unreasonable for him to support something which is
not disposed to benefiting him or those from a similar background. In contrast,
Anan is a former member of the ‘Thai bureaucracy and he identifies strongly
with the monarchy, symbols of national unity and with political policies which per-
petuate the pivotal place of the Thai bureaucracy as an agent and administrator
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
10

--- PAGE 26 ---
of the centralist policies of the state’ (Jackson, 1989:171). Anan sees Bodhirak as
dangerous precisely because his criticisms of the Sakgha are legitimate! Yet to
attack the Sakgha (and control of it by the state) and seek independent sources of
authority is to weaken society and create confusion.
Jackson’s analysis of these movements reflects an in-depth understanding of
the Thai socio-political scene. Much has happened in the field since his book was
published in 1989. Jackson briefly reflects this in a chapter entitled ‘Buddhism’s
Changing Political Roles’.5
It is no longer possible to make a strong claim that any particular
religious form is politically crucial as an ideological justification for a
given sector’s position or role in society...Legitimacy in Thailand, as in
most capitalist countries, is now framed largely in terms of instrumental
values, that is, the state’s capacity to deal effectively with social,
economic and ecological problems and to increase the material well
being of the population.
(1997:77)
Jackson argues that the lack of reform of the Sakgha indicates that ‘religion has
become increasingly separated from state political processes’ (Jackson, 1997:77).
While recognising that individuals are still religious, Jackson appears to suggest
that the political apparatus no longer feels the need to regulate Buddhism. This
demonstrates that a secularisation of the establishment has been in process.
Donald Swearer, professor of religion at Swarthmore College, Pennsylvania
has spent some years teaching in Thailand and has researched Thai Buddhism
extensively. Written in 1991, his chapter in Fundamentalisms Observed is
important to the study of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke, as it discusses
the distinctive features of fundamentalism in Theravada Buddhism.6 Initially,
Swearer suggests that Wat Phra Dhammakaya seeks to recreate the old galactic
policy with the intention of restoring a ‘vivid and dynamic past to a fragmented
Thai society and a political environment continually beset by corruption and
factionalism, in which the symbolic power of the monarchy is waning and the
practical power of religion is virtually non-existent’ (Swearer, 1991:657).7 This
perceptive point highlights the pivotal role of the temple. For example, ascetic
forest practice is arranged to take place in the temple grounds rather than in a
forest in the provinces. I engage with Swearer regarding the galactic model in the
etic perspectives on Wat Phra Dhammakaya towards the end of the Chapter 3.
Swearer points out that Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s decision not to open other
temples throughout the country protects it from the charge of creating a new sec-
tarian tradition. He also notes that this has been unnecessary as the movement
dominates the Buddhist societies of virtually all the universities and colleges in
the country.
Swearer views fundamentalism in Sri Lanka and South-East Asia as a reaction
to the introduction of Western values, technology, education and political systems.
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
11

--- PAGE 27 ---
He suggests that they may be even characterised as ‘postmodern in that it seems
to be a direct consequence of, and formed in reaction to, the adjustments
traditional Theravada Buddhism made to the challenge of modernity in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries’ (Swearer, 1991:677). He views the
following distinctives as part of fundamentalism in Theravada Buddhist societies
in the region:
G
A quest for identity (national, communal and individual). This search
involves a return to what is perceived to be primordial and ideal;
G
Strong, charismatic leaders whose followers consider themselves to be under
threat;
G
Ideologies which tend to rest on simplistic, dualistic and absolutistic
worldviews. That is, non-negotiable understandings of what is acceptable/
unacceptable with no possibility of synthesis of extremes;
G
Often exclusive (sometimes evangelistic), the movements reject competing
views as ‘morally evil, spiritually confused, and/or intellectually misguided’;
G
An obsessive sense of their unique role or destiny. Such movements may be
‘quasi-messianic or explicitly millenarian’;
G
A tendency to stress the value of direct experience coupled with plain and
simple religious practice.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya, according to Swearer
[A]stutely packages a fundamentalistic form of Thai Buddhism that
offers a way of embracing a secularized modern lifestyle while retaining
the communal identity once offered by traditional Buddhism – all the
while maintaining that it is ‘authentic’ or ‘true’ Buddhism, in contrast to
its competitors.
(1991:666)
Swearer sees Santi Asoke’s ‘born-again Buddhism’ as exhibiting several aspects
of fundamentalism. He understands the movement to be reacting against a
secular, materialistic culture which is replacing a traditional life informed
by Dhammic principles. Furthermore, Swearer understands Asoke to have a
dualistic and absolutist Weltanschauung.
Phra Ajahn Maha Sermchai Jayamanggalo (now referred to as Phra
Rajyanvisith is the abbot of Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram and is also
director of the Dhammakaya Buddhist Meditation Institute.8 His book (English
Language) The Heart of Dhammakaya Meditation was published in 1991. The
writer, formally a researcher and lecturer, entered the monkhood in 1986. He was
appointed abbot of the newly registered Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram
temple in 1991 and continues to be in demand as a meditation teacher. His pub-
lication is a detailed manual of Dhammakaya meditation. Wat Phra Dhammakaya
have recently simplified this approach. In addition, Sermchai’s book defines
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
12

--- PAGE 28 ---
terms, and explains concepts. For example, he asserts that all conditioned things
are non-self but nibbana is self, a departure from orthodox Theravada, which
views nibbana as non-self. Phra Rajyanvisith maintains that the Five Aggregates
being conditioned phenomena cannot possess the nibbanic condition (1991:72).
The nibbanic condition may, however, be possessed by the Dhammakaya (as it is
unconditioned). Nibbana is an unchanging, permanent existence, devoid of all
defilements and is supreme happiness. Through knowledge of the Dhammakaya,
nibbana may be experienced.
Apinya Feungfusakul, a Thai, lecturers in sociology at the University of Chiang
Mai (northern Thailand). She completed her doctoral work in 1993 at the
University of Bielefeld, Germany. Her thesis is entitled Buddhist Reform
Movements in Contemporary Thai Urban Context: Thammakai and Santi Asoke.9
Feungfusakul shows that the traditional social image of the monk is one who
both represents transcendence and is a community leader. As communities are no
longer dependent on monastics for education, medicine, etc., a gap has emerged
between society and the Sakgha. This has resulted in a loss of status for monas-
tics who are now only largely required for religious rituals. Within the Sakgha
there are those who are considering how a restoration of monks’ status might best
be achieved. One issue currently being discussed is the nature of the lay persons’
religious need and how it may best be addressed by monastics.
Feungfusakul (1993:195) takes the view that Wat Phra Dhammakaya and
Santi Asoke ‘chose to secure their own channel of resource acquisition through
tighter organisation and control of their lay sub-groups’. She suggests that merit
making and how it is legitimised and connected to the transcendent level is a key
issue here. According to Feungfusakul (1993:195), Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s
‘conformist disposition enables it to synthesize consumerist competitive and
advertising strategy with the traditional belief of merit accumulation which ends
up in the merchandization of merit’. Wat Phra Dhammakaya offer a variety of
options, and have an emphasis on convenience and comfort. This then revitalises
traditional belief in karmic theory as the accumulation of merit through the cycle
of rebirths.
In contrast, Santi Asoke takes a non-traditional approach. Rather than a focus
on individual cause and effect, Santi Asoke considers the act of merit making
as taking into account a wider social implication. The merit-making act and its
effect should be viewed in the context of society; therefore any kind of social
exploitation is a sin (Feungfusakul, 1993:195). Thus for Asoke, economics and
social relationships in the community must be part of the realisation of the tran-
scendence goal. This goal may only be realised ‘within favourable and suitable
worldly conditions’ (Feungfusakul, 1993:195).
Feungfusakul highlights the way in which both movements seek to restore the
status of their monks through a rigorous recruitment policy and strict monastic
practice. She also shows how these two ‘reform movements’ move away from the
traditional view of ‘salvation in this life’ being possible only for monks. If salva-
tion is for the ‘here and now’ for both monk and lay person, then there is a shift
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
13

--- PAGE 29 ---
from ‘emphasis on merit making rituals to ascetic practices based on conscious
individual effort in mundane daily activities’ (Feungfusakul,1993:197). Wat Phra
Dhammakaya members emphasise the importance of daily meditation and obser-
vance of the Precepts. Santi Asoke members focus on rigorous keeping of the
Precepts and continual self-control. Lay members of both movements thus live
‘exemplified’ lives.
According to Fuengfusakul (1993:202), in order for movements to achieve
self-affirmation, they must either negate or separate themselves from mainstream
Thai Buddhism. Wat Phra Dhammakaya segregates itself from mainstream by its
emphasis on the superiority of its meditation method and its modern organisa-
tional structure. It seeks to retain links with the Sakgha through good relation-
ships with senior monastics. On the other hand, Asoke nourishes its self-image
by projecting an image of the Thai Sakgha as ‘impure’. The expression of
segregation and negation require the invention of new symbols, for example, uni-
form: white clothes for Wat Phra Dhammakaya and blue peasant outfits for Asoke
lay members.10 Other examples of this include a new form of greeting used
by Santi Asoke members, and the adaptation of a crystal ball as Wat Phra
Dhammakaya’s sacred symbol (Feungfusakul, 1993:202). Both movements asso-
ciate their identity with the early Buddhist tradition. Wat Phra Dhammakaya
relate to Buddhist texts which it sees as supporting its view of the nature
of Dhammakaya, while Santi Asoke presents itself as a traditional Buddhist
community from a previous era.
In a Thai journal11 Feungfusakul (1998:64–7) describes the ‘myth’ circulating
within the Wat Phra Dhammakaya community.12 Prior to the creation of this
world there was Dhammakaya, within which there existed a dualism of good
(white party) and evil (black party). A war between the two parties led to the
creation of a new world. This new order was destroyed by the Black Dhammakaya.
Another world was created which was again destroyed by the Black
Dhammakaya. The White Dhammakaya responded by giving mankind certain
qualities of wisdom, understanding, etc. The Black Dhammakaya retaliated by
sending lust into the world which resulted in mankind killing each other. The
current status is one where only those who practise Dhammakaya meditation
may break out of their deluded state and behave in an enlightened manner. Phra
Dhammachayo, the movement’s leader, is an Awatan (Thai) or Avatara (Pali) who
was part of the original White Dhammakaya party. Some members at the temple
view him as their deliverer from the forces of the Black Dhammakaya, and also
as the one who leads them in the ongoing war.13 The dissonance between such
beliefs and orthodox Theravada ideas is notable.
Marja-Leena Heikkilä-Horn is a Finnish academic who currently lectures at the
Salaya campus of Mahidol University, just outside Bangkok. Her doctoral thesis
Santi Asoke Buddhism and Thai State Response was published in 1996.14 In 1997,
Heikkilä-Horn published a revised version of her thesis in English. It is entitled
Buddhism with Open Eyes: Belief and Practice of Santi Asoke.15 The book was
published by Fah Apai, the Santi Asoke publishing house. Heikkilä-Horn lived
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
14

--- PAGE 30 ---
at Santi Asoke in Bangkok for six months gathering data for her research. Indeed,
she has expressed concern that ‘The few academic articles concerning Santi
Asoke are not based on first hand knowledge and seem to rely on information
supplied by the critics of the Santi Asoke group’ (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:9).
Buddhism with Open Eyes: Belief and Practice of Santi Asoke gives good
insight into day to day living in the Asoke communities. There is detailed descrip-
tion of progression within the movement, organisational structures and various
ceremonies. Apart from these insightful observations the writer makes the fol-
lowing important points. First, she suggests that there is a clear connection
between the crushing of the student movements of the early 1970s, the de-robing
of dissident monks and the emergence of alternative Buddhist groups, including
Santi Asoke (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:110).16
Second, Heikkilä Horn writes that Wat Phra Dhammakaya was perceived as
acceptable by the state whereas Santi Asoke was censored by the Sakgha. She
suggests that this is because Asoke was strongly associated with General
Chamlong, the then governor of Bangkok and leader of the Phalang Dhamma
Party.17 Heikkilä-Horn proposes that ‘orthodox Buddhism’ and ‘unorthodox
Buddhism’ in Thailand are terms which are defined by the state authority rather
than by any independent or Buddhist scholarly authority (Heikkilä-Horn,
1997:203). Wat Phra Dhammakaya was not pursued by the Sakgha until the
economic recession of 1997 because it enjoyed protection from senior political
and military personnel.
Third, Asoke holds egalitarian and democratic values for which activists fought
in the 1970s. While acknowledging that she did not meet any such activists in
Asoke, Heikkilä-Horn argues that people joined the movement because of the
‘sense of frustration that they felt towards the mainstream Sakgha’s corrupt and
lax practices’ (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:205).
Heikkilä-Horn suggests that Santi Asoke may be a millenarian movement
(Thai phu mi bhun). She has indicated that this is an idea which she wished to
develop, linking the millenarian movements in North-East Thailand at the begin-
ning of the twentieth century to the emergence of Santi Asoke.18 I describe these
and the Huppasawan movement under ‘Wat Phra Dhammakaya – a millenarian
movement?’ in Chapter 3. I engage with Heikkilä-Horn’s hypothesis of Santi
Asoke as a millenarian movement in Chapter 6.
Jeffery Bowers published Dhammakaya Meditation in Thai Society in 1996.
This is the fruit of his research undertaken while a MA student at Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok. Bowers expresses concern that writers on Wat Phra
Dhammakaya have not visited the temple as often as necessary in order to gain a
good understanding of the movement and its model of meditation.
A strength of Bowers’ work is his engagement with the three movements which
teach Dhammakaya meditation.19 His section on the development of Wat Luang
Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram is important as this school of Dhammakaya medita-
tion is virtually ignored by researchers.20 Bowers draws on his knowledge of
Dhammakaya meditation which he gained from Phra Rajyanvisith (whose book
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
15

--- PAGE 31 ---
we have briefly mentioned). There is a clear description of the process of this model
of meditation, along with an explanation of what is experienced at each stage.
Bowers makes two important contributions to research in this area. First, he
points to a number of similarities between Dhammakaya meditation and Tibetan
Tantric practices (Bowers, 1996:33–45). In Chapter 4, I engage with Bowers’
hypothesis that Luang Phaw Sot developed the Dhammakaya model of meditation
as a result of meeting a practitioner from within the Tibetan tradition.
Second, Bowers explains aspects of higher-level Dhammakaya meditation
(wicha-rop): the ‘ongoing universal battle of good over evil where high-level
Dhammakaya meditators use their powers obtained in Dhammakaya meditation
to defeat Mara, the leader of evil in the universe’ (Bowers, 1996:24). While
this was an essential feature of Luang Phaw Sot’s work at Wat Paknam, monas-
tics are reluctant to discuss it with outsiders, thus this important information is
hard to obtain.
Most of the research on these movements has taken place in the early 1990s.21
Much has happened since then both in Thai society and also within the move-
ments. This book examines the recent history of both movements – nine years is a
long time in the life of a religious movement which is only 30 years old, especially
if society is going through a period of change. In reviewing the literature I have
concluded that the application of typologies which have been developed in the
field of religious studies/social sciences would make an original contribution to an
understanding of the movements. This forms part of my outsider’s (etic) perspec-
tive. Also absent from previous writings on Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi
Asoke is an analysis of how leadership of the movements function in terms of
amnat (‘power’), ittipon (‘influence’) and parami (‘moral stature/charisma’).
These are the key components of leadership within Thai culture, and a study of
their function in these contexts is helpful for an understanding of the movements.
Born in 1939, Phra Dhammapitaka (Prayudh Payutto) ‘has emerged as the
unrivalled dean of Thai Buddhist Scholarship’(Swearer, 1995:139). He has served
as a visiting lecturer in America, published extensively in Thai and English,
and in 1994, was one of the recipients of the UNESCO prize for Peace Education.
His book Karani Thammakai ‘The Dhammakaya Case’ was published in 1998.
This Thai text is a firm defence of the supremacy of the Pali canon over other
versions of the Buddhist scriptures and a clear warning not to draw ideas from
Mahayana teachings. Indeed, he suggests that changes made to the Theravada
scriptures may uproot the Sakgha. Phra Dhammapitaka highlights the importance
of monks keeping the monastic code of discipline by suggesting that the vinaya
is more important to Buddhism than the constitution is for the Thai nation. The
systematic engagement with a variety of Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s teachings from
his understanding of the Pali scriptures clearly demonstrates to the Thai that the
movement is heretical in its beliefs.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya is well known for its provocative teaching that
‘nibbana is atta [self]’and the belief that nibbana, referred to as ayatananibbana,
is a literal realm in which all enlightened beings exist. The temple also believe
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
16

--- PAGE 32 ---
that advanced level Dhammakaya meditators may visit ayatananibbana
temporarily. Phra Dhammapitaka (1998:9) expresses the opinion that Wat Phra
Dhammakaya do not stick to the Pali cannon, and in absolute terms, there is no
such thing as atta. Phra Dhammapitaka views ayatananibbana as the nibbana, or
extinguishing of the fires of greed, hatred and delusion. Indeed, the scholar-monk
(1998:80–6) comments that there is a lot of speculation on nibbana and that the
important issue is not to define nibbana for others but rather to look into oneself
to see if defilements are decreasing.
Towards the end of his book, Phra Dhammapitaka answers a series of questions
about Wat Phra Dhammakaya. He begins with some comments about how the
practice of magic does not lead to the reduction of sufferings. Indeed, the move-
ment simply makes people too excited (Phra Dhammapitaka, 1998:358). This
appears to be a reference to September and October 1998 when many thousands
of Wat Phra Dhammakaya members claimed to have seen an image of Luang
Phaw Sot in the middle of the sun. (They were miraculously able to look at
the sun.) In the next section, the issue of making merit is addressed. Phra
Dhammapitaka (1998:361) explains how making merit with a pure heart will lead
to less suffering; in contrast, the will to benefit as a result of the action will lead to
an increase of suffering. He goes on to say that the best form of merit making is
keeping the Precepts, as opposed to making donations. In a similar vein, the
author points out that religion has to do with creating people of high moral
character rather than building grand buildings. Indeed, such people are of more
importance than those who have great wealth. Later, Phra Dhammapitaka engages
with the movement’s belief that its Maha Dhammakaya pagoda (cetiya), and
indeed, the buildings that make up the temple complex, will become the eighth
‘Wonder of the World’. He points out that the ‘Wonders’ did not reduce human
attachments! Anyway, the modern wonders of the world are well known for being
small (high-tech inventions) rather than huge buildings. There may be a pagoda
many years into the future but the author asks ‘will there also be Buddhism?’
(Phra Dhammapitaka, 1998:374).
The scholar-monk (1998:377) goes on to make the point that Wat Phra
Dhammakaya cannot create a centre by constructing an impressive building.
Religions already have their centres, for example, Mecca and Lumbini. Buddhists
go on pilgrimage to the birth place of the Buddha even although there is no large
building there; they will not go to Wat Phra Dhammakaya, despite the impressive
pagoda. Towards the end of this section, Phra Dhammapitaka suggests that if a
large number attend a meeting and receive skillful teaching then that is certainly
positive. If, however, they receive unskillful teaching then that is a tragedy as
there are so many people. This remark is aimed at the large attendances at Wat
Phra Dhammakaya. The author concludes by saying that many people feel better
after taking drugs but that does not mean that taking drugs is a good activity!
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE
17

--- PAGE 33 ---
18
1
SETTING THE SCENE
The religious and socio-political context of the
development of the two movements
Emergence of the Thammayut and Mahanikai
fraternities
In 1824, the 21-year-old Crown Prince Mongkut was ordained into the Sakgha.
Some ‘fifteen days after the Prince’s ordination, his father, King Rama II passed
away and due to failing health he had been unable to find a successor to the
throne’(Nyanasamvara, 1992:6). The charitable view is Prince Mongkut ordained
to make merit for his ailing father. Another perspective (Heinze, 1977:24) and
(Wyatt, 1984:167) is that the prince faced a dangerous political situation where
the Privy Council preferred an older half-brother to become king; the Sakgha was
therefore the safest place for the prince.
Prince Mongkut commenced serious study of Pali and religious texts.1
‘Finding the practice of Thai Buddhism considerably at variance with the classic
Theravada canon, he took the daring step of breaking with Thai Buddhist
traditions and borrowed the dress and disciplinary forms of the Mon sect’ (Wyatt,
1969:27). Thus, Prince Mongkut had eighteen Mon monks re-ordain him on a raft
on a canal in front of Wat Samorai (also known as Wat Rajadhiwat).2
Prince Mongkut began to give in-depth teaching to those within his care and
insisted on strict adherence to the vinaya. In time, those who followed his practice
were ordained according to the Mon lineage. In the late 1830s, Prince Mongkut
was invited by the king to move with the monks under his tutelage to Wat
Bowonniwet. There the prince became abbot and ‘in effect the head of a separate
order within the Siamese monkhood. Mongkut named it the Thammayutika [Thai
Thammayut], the “Order Adhering to the Dhamma,” the teachings of the Buddha,
as contradistinguished from the older order, the Mahanikai, to whom Mongkut
derogatively referred as the “Order of Long-Standing Habit” ’ (Wyatt, 1984:176).3
Currently there are around 450,000 monks in Thailand (out of phansa), of which
90 per cent are in the Mahanikai fraternity.4
The result of Prince Mongkut’s study and reforms was a strict form of doctri-
nal Buddhism which swept away much of the magical practice (Thai saiyasat,
which Mongkut saw as what the Buddha referred to as Pali tiracchanavijja,
or ‘base arts’) of Buddhism as practised at that time. Jackson maintains that

--- PAGE 34 ---
King Mongkut’s ‘religious reforms in the 1830’s also involved a rejection of the
supernatural’ (Jackson, 1989:58). Jackson suggests that Mongkut (who was then
still a monk) rejected manipulation of protective power through the use of
material objects such as magical amulets and cloths with magical formula written
on them because it was based on local practice and did not contribute to support
for the monarchy. On the other hand, as king, Mongkut promoted the Brahmanical
deities as they were universal and served to unify the Siamese people. An example
of this is his proposing of Phra Sayamdevadhiraja as the national deity, or spirit,
of Siam. The Lak Muang or city foundation stone of Bangkok was first erected in
1782 by King Rama I and is said to be the shrine where the overlord or deity of
Siam resides.
Ishii (1986:159) notes that the prince was aware that ‘it was the folk beliefs
appended to Buddhism that underlay their [the Western missionaries] contempt
for his religion’. If Westerners were able to criticise or discredit Buddhism, then
some Siamese might question their own cultural/religious practice. Worse, the
legitimisation of the monarchy, which is supported by Buddhist belief might
begin to be eroded. Certainly any criticism of Buddhism would be counterpro-
ductive to national identity, cohesion and the development of monarchical power
which royalty was working towards. Wyatt takes the view that Prince Mongut’s
reforms created the emergence of a universal religion ‘which could compete with
Christianity for the allegiance of intellectual Thai minds on very favourable
terms’ (Wyatt, 1969:28).
The Sakgha Act of 1902
In 1868, King Chulalongkorn (1853–1910) was appointed5 to the throne as the
fifth king of the Chakri dynasty on the death of his father King Mongut.6 In 1898,
shortly after his return from his first trip to Europe, King Chulalongkorn
tasked Prince Wachirayan7 (1860–1921) to carry out a ‘Plan for the Organisation
of Provincial Education’.8 It became clear that educational development in
the provinces depended on the cooperation of the Sakgha. It was felt that there
was a need to standardise and control the practice of the Sakgha, nationwide
Pure, consistent religious teaching and practice needed to be enforced as
an impure Sakgha would result in a loss of faith in Buddhism.9 This would result
in a shaking of the moral foundation of society, which in turn could lead to
political instability, even lack of obedience to the king. At that time central
religious control was limited and local practice varied considerably. In the north
and north-east
Buddhist texts were written in local languages, and monastic power
practice varied widely. Local religious authority often rested with
popular abbots. After the millenarian revolts, Bangkok was especially
SETTING THE SCENE
19

--- PAGE 35 ---
sensitive to the possibility of heterodox religion forming the basis for
political opposition of the periphery against the center.
(Phongpaichit and Baker, 1997:231)10
The government promulgated The Buddhist Church Administration Act of the
Ratanakosin year 121; this is normally referred to as The Sakgha Act of 1902.
The drafting of the forty-five article document was overseen by Prince
Wachirayan and was constructed to produce ‘a unified national Sakgha hierarchy
for the first time in Siamese history and establish a centralized authority’
(Suksamran, 1981:31). The king made or approved all important religious
appointments and dissident monks throughout the nation could be disciplined.
The Sakgha Act of 1902 ‘paralleled the reforms of the secular bureaucracy which
King Chulalongkorn had instituted in 1892’ (Jackson, 1989:69) and allowed the
government to keep tight control over the Sakgha.
The Sakgha Act of 1941
On 24 June 1932, while King Prajadhipok (who reigned from 1925 to 1935) was
on holiday, a group of around 100 minor officials carried out a swift coup d’etat.
The public were only aware of the event after it took place and there was only one
minor shooting incident. Some 18 months later King Prajadhipok left for Europe
to seek medical treatment and ‘In March 1935, while still in Europe, he
announced his abdication. The government chose as successor Prince Ananda
Mahidol, who was then at school in Switzerland’ (Phongpaichit and Baker,
1997:255). King Prajadhipok was Siam’s last absolute monarch and for the next
15 years the country had no resident king.
The introduction of The Sakgha Act of 1941 is clearly related to the June 1932
transfer of power from the king and his advisors to a group of civil and military
officials. The following quote encapsulates the spirit of the Sakgha after the
transition from absolute to constitutional monarchy:
The new political ideas penetrated into the temple grounds. ... Novices
and young monks were sometimes requested not to leave the temple
grounds during the period of revolutionary activity. The pull was too
great, however. The roads of Bangkok were dotted with yellow robes
during the exciting days. Some temples forbade discussion of political
subjects. There were people who suggested that a democratic form of
government was needed in the temples as well as elsewhere. To this
some of the head priests agreed. Many more objected.
(Suksamran, 1981:34)
Without meddling in the Sakgha affairs, there was little the government could
do to introduce a more democratic style of clerical governance. Senior Thammayut
monks resisted any movement towards democracy as this would give the
SETTING THE SCENE
20

--- PAGE 36 ---
Mahanikai monks a much greater influence in decision making and administration.11
The Supreme Patriarch who was in the Thammayut fraternity died in 1937, and
was replaced the following year by Somdet Phra Phutthajan from the Mahanikai
fraternity. This was the first time in eighty-four years that a Mahanikai monk
occupied the top position in the Sakgha. With the cooperation of the new
Supreme Patriarch the government passed The Sakgha Act of 1941.
The Sakgha Act of 1902 located authority in the Supreme Patriarch, who
governed through a Council of Elders. The Sakgha Act of 1941 was ‘closely
modeled on civil government, and the Supreme Patriarch [Thai Somdet Phra
Sakgharat, monastic equivalent to the constitutional monarch] exercised power
through and with the advice of a legislative Sakgha council [Thai Sakgha Sapha].
This council was headed by a clerical Prime Minister [Thai Sakgkhanayok] and
consisted of not more than 45 life-long members who were appointed by the
Supreme Patriarch, mainly on the basis of seniority’. (Suksamran, 1981:36)
Although this Sakgha administration had the appearance of greater democracy
than The 1902 Sakgha Act, it remained well within the control of the government.
The Supreme Patriarch’s appointment was made by the king, acting on the advice
of the government. The Minister of Education had to approve the appointment of
ministers of the clerical cabinet (Article 28 of The 1941 Sakgha Act). He also had
the right to raise matters for discussion at the highest levels (Articles 16) and
grant or refuse permission to publish (Article 27). Furthermore, the Minister of
Education could overrule the decision of the Sakgha Sapha (Suksamran,
1981:37).
The new administrative system meant that the majority of monks on the
Sakgha Sapha were Mahanikai, a change of status for the Thammayut fraternity
who were clearly used to equality, if not dominance. Even more threatening to the
Thammayut movement was the government’s goal of bringing the two fraternities
together.
Some members of the government also intended the 1941 Act to provide
the basis for the administrative absorption of the Thammayut order into
the larger Mahanikai order, in order to remove an anti-democratic legacy
of the absolute monarchy and a source of anti-democratic agitation
within the Sakgha.
(Jackson, 1989:74)
In 1942, the government founded Wat Simahathat, a temple in the north of
Bangkok. Six monks from both the Thammayut and Mahanikai traditions were in
residence. The project to operate a bi-fraternal monastery was unsuccessful, and
Wat Simahathat was eventually taken over by the Thammayut fraternity
(Tiyavanich, 1997:190). An official review (Thai sakghayan) by the Sakgha was
undertaken to unite the two fraternities. Both were unwilling to compromise on
issues of clerical practice and all attempts to unify the two fraternities were
abandoned in 1951.
SETTING THE SCENE
21

--- PAGE 37 ---
The Sakgha Act of 1962
In 1958, Prime Minister Sarit abolished the constitution and declared martial law.
According to Suksamran (1981:39) he justified his authoritarian behaviour on the
following exigencies:
G
Communism was attempting to destabilize the nation by uprooting
the monarchy and destroying Buddhism;
G
Several political parties had abused the constitution and manipulated
the principles of democracy for their own gain. Such behaviour,
according to Sarit, would eventually destroy the nation;
G
The worsening situation in Indochina due to communist activity.
(Suksamran, 1981:39)
It was inevitable that Sarit would intervene in the Sakgha’s affairs for the
following reasons:
G
Buddhism legitimised the government and conflict between the two
fraternities lowered the status of the Sakgha in the eyes of the public;
G
Since The Sakgha Act of 1941, the administration of the Sakgha was
modelled on democratic principles. This ran counter to Sarit’s centralised,
authoritarian approach;
G
The government recognised the potential of the Sakgha to bring about
national unity, thus functioning as a political tool.
Sarit increasingly concentrated on the monarch as both the focus of loyalty for
the citizen and the source of legitimacy for the government. ‘Government in turn
became a secular arm of the semisacral kingship and was worthy of respect and
obedience by virtue of that connection’ (Wyatt, 1984:281).12 The monarch was
now high profile in Thai society, extensively touring in the provinces and officiating
at important functions such as university graduation ceremonies.13 The royal
kathin ceremonies were reintroduced and the king went out in procession to offer
robes to monks and donations to monasteries as well as presiding at ceremonies
for the building of new temples (Phongpaichit and Baker, 1997:283).14
The 1962 Sakgha Act is currently in force. It can be seen as a reversion to The
1902 Sakgha Act and differs from The 1941 Sakgha Act in that the Supreme
Patriarch can make decisions without reference to his Council of Elders.15 ‘While
bolstering the Supreme Patriarch’s authority, however, the new act also deepened
the Sakgha’s subordination to secular authority, by stipulating that the Supreme
Patriarch, whose tenure of office had hitherto been lifelong, could be dismissed
by decree’ (Ishii, 1986:116).16 The Third Act did away with the Ecclesiastical
Assembly, Ecclesiastical Cabinet and the Ecclesiastical Courts, replacing them
with the Maha thera samakom (Council of Elders). The Maha thera samakom
consists of around fourteen of the country’s most senior monks, and ‘the Director
SETTING THE SCENE
22

--- PAGE 38 ---
General of the Department of Religious Affairs is the ex-officio president of the
Maha thera samakom. Thus all Sakgha affairs are closely controlled and super-
vised, through the Secretary-General by the government’ (Suksamran, 1981:42).
A proposed Fourth Sakgha Act and the 
government–Sakgha relationship
In 1982 the Ministry of Education (which administers the Department of
Religious Affairs) set up a committee to examine possible changes to The Sakgha
Act of 1962 and monastic regulations that were passed since then (Taylor,
1993:72). More recently, Phra Luang Da Mahabua investigated the way the
Sakgha’s finance would be controlled in the new system and concluded that there
were insufficient officials involved.17 This has generated considerable discussion
and is one of many reasons why progress is slow. Dr Tawevat Bontarigavewat
speaks for many lay people who wish to see checks and balances built in to the
monastic–laity–government relationship. This is viewed as an important compo-
nent of good civil society. According to Dr Tawevat, the role of the government is
to look after Buddhism ‘at a distance’and allocate finance. The role of the monastics
is the study of the suttas and the moral support of the laity. The laity should have
a greater say in monastic affairs, such as deciding which monks and novices
reside in their local temple. Phra Suthithammanuwat indicated that most of the
Sakgha would not accept these ideas, and while possibly open to suggestions
from lay people, would expect monastics to retain control.18
The relationship of the government to Buddhism is a critical area. Many
Buddhists feel betrayed by the government’s decision not to officially recognise
Buddhism as the state religion of the nation. The decision of the senate to name
the new ministry dealing with religious and cultural affairs the ‘Culture Ministry’
was challenged by about ‘2,000 protestors...demanding the office be named the
“Ministry of Buddhism and Thai Culture” ’ (Bangkok Post, 21.9.02). These
protestors view Article 38 of the constitution which states that ‘any Thai is free to
choose their religion’ as a legal loophole capable of being used by those of other
faiths to disrupt Buddhism.19 Indeed, many see the Wat Phra Dhammakaya
controversies as engineered by Christians who wish to see Buddhism in disarray.
While 94 per cent of the population of 63 million are Buddhist, the Thai
government does not wish that to translate into a constitutional statement which
establishes Buddhism as the state religion. They believe this would create two
groups within Thai society, namely Buddhists and non-Buddhists, this would
result in conflict. Such a move would be viewed by secular, Western governments
viewing such a decision as dated and backward.
Aspects of contemporary Thai Buddhist practice
Older people tend to take the opportunity to listen to the monks preach and chant
at the temples on holy days (wan phra). They have more leisure than the younger
SETTING THE SCENE
23

--- PAGE 39 ---
generation and because of the immanence of death are more interested in religion
than their children and grandchildren. Younger people may attend the temple on
festivals and for funerals. A good number will occasionally attend to make merit
(for themselves or a departed loved one), seek supernatural help through chanting
or prayer, or pastoral advice from a monk. Wat Phra Dhammakaya has been
particularly successful in recruiting young, well-educated recruits, often through
the activities of their younger members among their university friends.
The Phra Thammayut and the Phra Thammacharik monks (monastic community
development and outreach activity) are mentioned in Chapter 6. The Thai forest
tradition and the work of Buddhadasa are briefly described in an attempt to widen
the context of the inquiry into the two New Buddhist Movements.20 Both
movements tend to mimic the austere practices of the forest tradition and Santi
Asoke has been influenced by Buddhadasa’s creative rationalising of Buddhism.21
The forest monks tend now to live in monasteries in rural areas, rather than
wander in the forest.22 This is in part due to deforestation but there was an attempt
by the Sakgha leadership to locate forest mendicants in the north-east region in
monasteries. This appears to be an effort to control these wandering ascetics. The
phra thudong tend to be associated with the Thammayut fraternity. In the late
nineteenth century some of the well-known teachers in the forest tradition
were re-ordained in Thammayut orders as they felt they and their disciples would
have more time for meditation rather than if they remained within the Mahanikai
order.23 According to Tiyavanich (1997:264) another reason for the popular
association of the phra thudong with the Thammayut fraternity are that the
Thammayut are wealthier than the Mahanikai fraternity. Thus they have the
ability to publish books (and often distribute freely) about their better known
monks in the forest tradition.
Acharn Mun (1870–1949), Acharn Sao (1859–1942), Acharn Chah (also dead)
and Acharn Mahabua are the best known teachers in the ‘forest tradition’. Due to
members of the royal family visiting some of Acharn Mun’s disciples in the
1970s, the tradition became sought after by the nation’s elite (Tiyavanich,
1997:289). This interest coincided with a loss of confidence in the ‘state’ monks:
a suspicion perhaps based on mistrust of the government as much as a perceived
laxity in the Sakgha. The 1970s and 1980s was a period of growth for the phra
thudong movement. Indeed by 1988, over eighty monasteries in Acharn Chah’s
(Mahanikai) lineage had been established in North-East Thailand. This includes
the International Forest Monastery (Wat Pa Nanachat) near Ubon which
has attracted a number of Westerners to ordain and practice in the forest tradition.
In 1977, American born Phra Sumedho, a disciple of Acharn Chah, accompanied
his master to England. When Acharn Chah returned to Thailand, Phra Sumedho
remained with the intention of establishing monasteries in the Thai forest
tradition.24
Buddhadasa (1906–93) was ordained in the Mahanikai fraternity in 1926. After a
brief period of study in Bangkok, Buddhadasa lived a life of a forest monk near his
home in South Thailand. He was in time joined by others and a monastic community
SETTING THE SCENE
24

--- PAGE 40 ---
grew around an abandoned temple which was renamed Suan Mokkhaphalaram
(Thai, meaning ‘The Garden to Arouse the Spirits to Attain Liberation’). Currently
around eighty monks live there. There is a strong focus on meditation and study, and
many westerners are attracted to its English language programme.
Buddhadasa sought to reinterpret Buddhism to well-educated Thai.
Fundamental to his thought was if Buddhism is not perceived as relevant, then
it is not being taught properly. A combination of his ability to think ‘outside
the box’, use teachings from other Buddhist traditions, particularly Zen,25 and
non-condemnatory approach to his more traditional colleagues brought a large
following and wide readership26 as well as recognition from the Thai Sakgha.27
Readers of Buddhadasa will be familiar with his teachings on ‘everyday
language – Dhamma language’ (Thai phasa kon – phasa tham) where he sets out
his hermeneutic for interpreting the teachings of the Buddha. Buddhadasa uses
this distinction to argue that many of the interpretations of the Buddhist scriptures
in Thailand remain at the ‘everyday level’ (Jackson, 1988:73), as the interpreter
lacks sufficient insight to understand the Dhamma meaning. Emerging from his
hermeneutical system are ideas such as rebirth taking place moment by moment
and dependant on our choices, as well as at the end of one life cycle. Nibbana is
another important doctrine that is given three different meanings and has a strong
application to the ‘here and now’.28
Emergence of an increasingly vocal middle class 
and the quest for democracy
Increased opportunity for education and exposure to Western ideas (either
through travel or media coverage) have resulted in a middle class who wish to
participate in the decisions that affect them. They want to ‘be ruled by people as
enlightened and sophisticated as themselves’ (Phongpaichit and Baker,
1998:234). The right of the military to overthrow and appoint governments at will
was challenged by protests in 1973 and 1976.29 In October 1973, a massive
demonstration of over 250,000 mainly students but also trade unionists brought
down the regime of Field Marshals Thanom Kittikachorn and Praphas
Charusathien. The military killed at least 65 of the protestors. To prevent a civil
war starting, some senior army officers refused to be involved in the crackdown
against protestors, the palace persuaded the dictators to go into exile, and a
predominantly civilian caretaker government was established (Political
Repression in Thailand, undated:15).
In 1976, former Prime Minister Thanom returned from exile and was ordained as
a Buddhist monk in the Thammayut fraternity. His return had been welcomed by
the right wing, and his respectability seemed confirmed when members of the royal
family visited him (Wyatt, 1984:302). This provoked daily student protests which
led to a violent crackdown by the military, ‘an army radio station called upon
patriots to join against the students and “kill communists!” ’ (Wyatt, 1984:302).30
Members of Nawaphon, Red Gaurs, Village Scouts and Border Patrol Police
SETTING THE SCENE
25

--- PAGE 41 ---
attacked students at Thammasat University ‘killing over 100 students and arresting
1,300’ (Phongpaichit and Baker, 1997:311).31 The official overall death toll was
given at forty to fifty; however, the Po Tek Tung (an independent Chinese burial
society) indicated it was no less than 300, and around 3,000 were arrested
(Solidarity, undated:18). The military appointed a civilian prime minister but
Thanin Kraivichien, a former lawyer, turned out to be ‘more authoritarian than
any of his military predecessors’ (Wyatt, 1984:302).
The military, or more accurately, the National Peace Keeping Council (NPKC)
staged a coup in February 1991. It initially received popular support, as the
existing Chatichai government was considered corrupt. Anand Panyarachun, a
prominent Bangkok businessman and former foreign service officer, was
appointed prime minister. Anand made a promising start by introducing many
economic reforms. The NPKC, however, ‘wheeled and dealed’ with key players
in the previous government. Charges of corruption brought against many of them
were dropped in return for a promise of support for the military controlled
government. The army began to produce a constitution which would establish
military dominance of the political apparatus:
They planned to restore the framework of the early 1980’s, which had
allowed the military to dominate politics by remote control. They were
surprised when this strategy ran into fierce opposition from a new
quarter: the urban middle class.
(Phongpaichit and Baker, 1998:231)
The NPKC appointed General Suchinda Kraprayoon as the new prime minister
after the elections of March 1991. It is constitutionally possible to appoint a non-
member of parliament as prime minister, but many Thai were extremely unhappy
at the appointment. Suchinda was the army commander in chief, as well as
the supreme commander (posts he resigned from to become the new prime
minister), and his appointment was viewed as junta rule, similar to that in
Myanmar and Vietnam but inappropriate for a progressive nation. Further,
Suchinda had clearly stated that he would not become prime minister. This
‘about turn’ was viewed as a lack of integrity and a tiresome return to old-style
politics. The key group who engineered the coup saw themselves as being in the
tradition of Sarit (prime minister from 1958 to 1963). This regression to military
governance was viewed as autocratic and signally out of place for a modern and
educated society.
In April 1992, demonstrations began demanding that Suchinda step down from
leadership. Many who organised these protests had been through the student
protests of 1973 and 1976. Some had even spent time in the jungle with the
Communist Party of Thailand. Others did not have this involvement but were
alarmed by the NPKC’s clear intention of long-term domination of Thai politics,
and found the media blackout and misinformation imposed by the government
totally unacceptable.
SETTING THE SCENE
26

--- PAGE 42 ---
Samudavavanija (1997:52) is of the opinion that military factions opposed to
those who led the 1991 coup aligned with intellectuals, owners of small- to
medium-sized businesses, some political party members, intellectuals and stu-
dents made up the protest movement. He goes on to comment ‘this uprising was
not so much pro-democracy, as is often claimed, but rather a movement opposed
to the possibility of a new alliance of the military and business leading to a dic-
tatorship.’The purpose of the non-violent protests was to force the resignation of
Suchinda from the premiership.32
Alarmed by the ongoing violence, and rumours of an internal squabble
within the military, the King summoned Suchinda and Chamlong
[former governor of Bangkok] and ordered them to stop the violence. ...
On 24 May, after issuing an amnesty for all acts committed during the
demonstrations, Suchinda resigned.
(Phongpaichit and Baker, 1995:360)
Anand was brought back as prime minister and led the interim government
until elections four months later. By the narrowest of margins, the Democrats
emerged as the largest party and were able to form a government to exclude the
pro-military parties. Chuan Leekpai, from a humble, non-military, non-bureaucratic
background became the next prime minister.
A high percentage of the protestors were over thirty, married, with good incomes
and fairly well educated. The mobilisation of the middle class was the most
dramatic element in the crisis. The press coined the term ‘the mobile phone mob
(Thai mob mu teuh) (Phongpaichit and Baker, 1998:239). Callahan (1995:90–115)
argues that the most significant factors of the 1992 protests are the protestors’
employment of non-violent tactics, and the involvement of non-government
organisations (who created a multicentred movement thus making the protest so
difficult for the military to deal with). In the 1973 and 1976 demonstrations,
participants were workers, peasants and students. While many from these
categories were also involved in the 1992 protests, and perhaps suffered the brunt
of the military’s reprisals, the high percentage of middle class demonstrators must
not be ignored. There is a wide range of socio-political opinion among the middle
classes, but what unites them is the wish to participate in the decision-making
processes which affect them. They are increasingly vocal at what they perceive
to be lack of integrity and ability in leadership. This applies to religious as well as
political leadership, and the media are increasingly critical of not only substandard
behaviour but leadership’s inability to deal with such behaviour.
Thailand’s economic recession (1997–2000)
From 1986 to 1992 Thailand’s economy developed as a result of domestic
entrepreneurs developing export industries. Non-Asian investors rushed to invest
in Thailand from 1992 onwards, attracted by pegged exchange rates, high interest
SETTING THE SCENE
27

--- PAGE 43 ---
rates and the climate of economic growth. Much of the investment was in banking
loans and not in industries which had made the Thai economy successful during
1986 to 1992. A typical financial speculator’s approach during the later period of
the economic boom was ‘buy something, boost its value, borrow against it, buy
something bigger’ (Phongpaichit and Baker, 1998:104). By 1994 the boom was
over, and in July 1997 the baht was floated and devalued to half of its former
value. According to Phongpaichit and Baker (1998:315–9, 2000:2) the following
factors contributed to the economic crisis:
G
The Japanese economy, which contributed to the success of other
economies in the region for around ten years, stagnated and went
into decline;
G
Lack of demand in the export market for Thai manufactured goods
meant a lack of revenue, no re-investment in the export industries
and over investing in the domestic market which led to over-capacity
and poor returns;33
G
Irresponsible lending and careless spending – credit was available
with little collateral. When western banks became nervous and
called in Thai banks to repay loans many were unable to do so as
their borrowers were unable to draw on collateral;
G
The combined approach of pegging exchange rates (which facili-
tated trade by removing currency risk) and liberalization of finance
(which stimulated investment) resulted in a loss of control over
monetary policy.
(Phongpaichit and Baker, 1998:315–9, 2000:2)
In February 2000 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) declared the eco-
nomic crisis to be over (Reynolds, 2002:311). The IMF had imposed austere
measures on the kingdom during the 3-year downturn, and the Thai felt that the
surrendering of economic control to IMF was a form of being colonised.34 The
economy gradually improved, yet many Thai have been very negatively impacted
by the recession. Countless businesses have closed down, and the collapse of the
construction and manufacturing industry meant a huge rise in unemployment.
There was widespread disillusionment with the incompetence of the government
in its management of the economy, and greed of the large conglomerates. Phrases
such as ‘build people, not buildings’ were commonly heard. Foreign banks and
currency speculators were compared to the Burmese invasion and looting of
Ayutthaya in 1767 (McCargo, 2001:99).
Traditional unifying values of Thai society
The three pillars of Thai society are the monarchy, Buddhism and the Thai
people.35 In recent crisis points of the nation, particularly 1976 and 1992, the
king’s ‘benign intervention not only ended the bloodshed but also provided
SETTING THE SCENE
28

--- PAGE 44 ---
a breathing space to restore rationality and good sense’ (Thefravit, 1992:892).
King Bhumibol, born in 1927, became king in 1946. He exemplifies the Thai
understanding of the king as part father figure, part divine and thus enjoys the
affection and respect of his subjects. His political interests are conservative but
open to gradual change. In his speeches he emphasises unity, discipline and a
working together of each individual for the common good. HRH Crown Prince
Vajiralongkorn is the only son of the king and heir to the throne. HRH Princess
Maha Chakri Sirindhorn is loved and respected throughout the kingdom and for
many years frequently accompanied her father on official royal duties.36 King
Bhumibol now lives in the summer palace at Hua Hin, a coastal town on the west
side of the Gulf of Thailand and rarely appears in public. The Thai do not discuss
succession to the throne, except among trusted friends. To be caught talking about
this issue could mean facing charges of lèse majesté.37
The Thai Sakgha is protected and supported by the monarchy and government,
and in turn legitimise these institutions. Jackson (1997:77) is correct to point out
that the government is currently less interested in controlling Thai Buddhism
because its legitimacy to govern depends on its ability to control economic and
social issues. On the other hand, governments of nation states such as Thailand
can easily find themselves at the mercy of global forces and are not beyond using
that which they do not value to retain legitimacy. The Thai press has recently
been very vocal in their criticisms of the Sakgha. The Maha thera samakom is
portrayed as moribund and some monastics are accused of moral failure and
financial impropriety. Repeated criticisms in the press serve to undermine public
respect for the Sakgha. The non-standard practice of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and
Santi Asoke generates criticism among monastics and laity. This forces the
Sakgha leadership into high-profile court cases – situations they would much
rather avoid. If the excommunicated Santi Asoke movement were to gain public
support, or the influential Wat Phra Dhammakaya were to leave the Sakgha, then
the Sakgha’s influence would be weakened. A corollary of this would be the
further loss of a political tool for the government.
Should the kingdom’s traditional pillars of monarchy and state-regulated
Buddhism experience crisis simultaneously then that would lead to social unrest.
This would be especially true if the economy was also weak. One possible
response to this scenario would be a resurfacing of right-wing tendencies among
certain traditionalists in the business community and military.38
SETTING THE SCENE
29

--- PAGE 45 ---
30
2
THE INCEPTION AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
MOVEMENT
The fastest growing and most radical group within the Thai Sakgha is the
Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement. Their marketing methods are thoroughly
twenty-first century and have drawn fire from both the Sakgha and the public as
excessively ‘this worldly’, and consequently inappropriate.1 It is not only their
soliciting of funds that is in question, their meditative practice and understanding
of doctrinal issues, for example nibbana, are also highly controversial.
The Dhammakaya Foundation is based at Wat Phra Dhammakaya (Mahanikai)
on an 800 acre site in the province of Pathumthani, approximately one hour’s
drive north of Bangkok. The movement is founded on the meditation practice and
teaching of Phra Mongkhonkolthepmuni (Sot Candasaro), popularly referred to
as Luang Phaw Sot or Luang Phaw Wat Paknam.2 Sot was born on 10 October
1885, in Songpinong, Supanburi, 180 kilometres west of Bangkok. His family
were involved in transporting rice by barge. Sot was the second of five children,
and was 14 years old when his father died. At the age of 18, after an unpleasant
experience in which he believed his life and those of his crew to be in danger,
Sot decided to enter the monkhood. After several months preparation, Sot ‘was
ordained in July 1903 at Wat Songpinong and was given the name of Candasaro
Bhikkhu (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:29).3
By the time Luang Phaw Sot had been in the monkhood a few months he
decided to focus on Pali studies. His biographer points out ‘the Pali studies were
for him only a means to an end – the mastery of the knowledge of the Buddha
through meditation’ (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:29). The biographer goes
on to tell us that the young monk concealed a copy of the Mahasatipatthana Sutta
in the temple with the goal of devoting himself to meditation once he gained
enough knowledge of Pali in Bangkok to translate these scriptures.4
After several years of Pali study in Bangkok, Luang Phaw Sot started his own
Pali school in the temple where he lived, Wat Phra Chetuphon.5 Around ten
students attended the class in which he taught Pali up to grade five.6 Because of
a change in the approach to Pali study and the examination system within the
Sakgha7 Luang Phaw Sot merged his school with some other schools.
On a return visit to his old temple (Wat Songpinong) some 11 years after his
ordination, Luang Phaw Sot remembered the text he had concealed, and realised

--- PAGE 46 ---
that he had reached the standard he had set for himself in Pali studies. ‘He was
now able to translate that bundle freely’ (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:37).
Luang Phaw Sot discontinued his Pali studies and began to focus on the practise
of meditation.
Luang Phaw Sot’s discovery of the alleged meditative 
practice of the Buddha and his early followers8
It was just before a ‘rains’ retreat which Luang Phaw Sot was spending at Wat
Bangkuvieng, the temple of his first teacher, just outside Bangkok, that he had his
first breakthrough experience.9 For three hours he had been sitting meditating on
the samma arahaÅ mantra.10 Although feeling intense pain to the extent that he
felt every bone in his body would break, he was able to let go of the pain and
detach himself from his suffering.
Suddenly his mind became still and firmly established at the very centre
of his body. He perceived a bright and shining sphere of Dhamma.
The size of the sphere of Dhamma was equal to the yolk of an egg. The
experience which filled his body was one of inexplicable bliss which
rinsed away all the agony.
(Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:43)
Luang Phaw Sot continued to meditate and that afternoon, the sphere was again
experienced at the centre of this body and became increasingly brighter. He had
never heard of this kind of experience from any of his meditation masters but was
convinced that this sphere was the doorway to explore the deeper dimensions of
reality. Luang Phaw Sot heard two Pali words come from the centre of the sphere,
‘majjhima-patipada’ (‘middle way’); this he took to be guidance to proceed
between the extremes of ascetic and indulgent practice. As he continued, so new
spheres appeared within the previous spheres, each sphere presenting itself
brighter and clearer than the last, in which he could see hidden dimensions of
himself. Luang Phaw Sot maintained that he rediscovered the true spiritual nature
of the Dhamma – body, which exists inside everyone, and the meditative tech-
nique practised by the Buddha and his followers which fell into disuse. Jackson
(1990:201) sums up Luang Phaw Sot’s position as follows: ‘The spiritual essence
of the Buddha and nibbana exists as a literal reality within the human body.’
Luang Phaw Sot sought to relate his breakthrough to the Satipatthana Sutta. He
interpreted a phrase which is normally understood as ‘contemplating the body as a
body’ as contemplating the body in the body. ‘His interpretation was that inside the
physical body of a person there exists a series of astral and spiritual bodies of pro-
gressive fineness which could be revealed in meditation’(Bhawilai, 1987:4). Luang
Phaw Sot’s understanding of the Pali term Dhammakaya or (Thai Thammakai) is
much closer to the Mahayana interpretation, than the Theravadin. ‘In Mahayana
Buddhism the term Dhammakaya denotes the nature or essential character of the
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
31

--- PAGE 47 ---
Buddha in his state of perfect wisdom in nirvaja’ (Jackson, 1990:201). Jackson
goes on to suggest that the Theravadin concept of Dhammakaya is more of one who
expresses the truth, teaching and wisdom of the Dhamma because he/she has fully
embraced the Dhamma, or teaching of the Buddha.
Luang Phaw Sot’s career as abbot of Wat Paknam
In 1916, Luang Phaw Sot was made acting abbot at Wat Paknam, in Bangkok. It
was initially a difficult charge as many of the monks at Wat Paknam were lax in
their practice. Luang Phaw Sot’s approach was to indicate his commitment to living
out the vinaya as rigorously as possible and to call for those who would not follow
his example not to impede the efforts of those who would. One evening during a
sermon, an attempt was made on Luang Phaw Sot’s life by a local villain, the bullet
passing through the abbot’s robes. Luang Phaw Sot’s response to the problem of
local unruly children who were disruptive within the temple grounds was to set up
a school for them (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:61). Gradually the local
community was won over to the new abbot, despite his insistence on high standards.
Over the years, the number of monks at Wat Paknam grew from 13 to 1,000.
An institute for Pali study was developed, and of course there was a strong
focus on teaching Dhammakaya meditation. Wat Paknam was not a temple under
royal patronage, and despite achieving considerable growth in ordination of
monks and lay attendance, its abbot had to wait for over 30 years until he was
awarded a royal title.
Dhammakaya meditation may be divided into ordinary level and high-level
meditation. Low-level meditation is practised by many for spiritual purification,
wisdom and success. High-level meditation is extremely advanced and has as one
of its foci the resolution of serious problems through spiritual conflict (Thai
wicha-rop) with evil forces. Much of the power that has been gained at the lower
level of Dhammakaya meditation may be put into action at the higher level.
Among these special powers are
those which enable one to visit one’s own past lives, or the lives of
others, discover where someone has been reborn and know the reasons
why the person was reborn there, cure oneself or others of any disease,
extra sensory perception, mind control and similar accomplishments.
(Bowers, 1996:24)
These powers are in line with the psychic powers (Pali iddhi) described in the Pali
Canon as developable by mastery of meditation, especially samatha. The texts
also warn of attachments to these powers (Harvey, 1990:252–3).
To facilitate this high-level approach, Luang Phaw Sot developed a meditation
workshop (Thai rongngahn thamvijja). Two rooms were constructed for this
purpose and male and female meditators were strictly segregated.11 The workshop
operated all day, every day (meditators working in six hour shifts). Those chosen as
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
32

--- PAGE 48 ---
the most gifted meditators dedicated themselves to the investigation and
engagement of the supernatural through Dhammakaya meditation. Non-selected
personnel were not permitted to enter the workshop and necessities were passed
through small windows to the meditators. Luang Phaw Sot was the lead ‘warrior’
in this spiritual conflict, bringing the problems to this elite group of meditators
and seeking with them to destroy the forces of Mara as evidenced in the problems
that they were trying to overcome.
The standard Thai monastic answer to ‘what is Mara?’ is Mara is a giant, (Thai
yak, although the related Pali word ‘yakkha’ means ‘troublesome spirit’); death
(possibly ‘disguised by the mask of worldly pleasure’ (Grimm, 1958:319); temp-
tations to do wrong; the Five Khandhas, (body, sensation, perception, volition and
consciousness).12 Mara then is a symbol of all forms of unenlightened behaviour
that seeks to prevent progress to enlightenment, and release from saÅsara. The
root meaning of the term Mara is ‘death’ (marayati: that which kills) – death
referring not only to an individual’s passing away but also to continual death after
rebirth (Boyd, 1976:155). Mara is depicted as the upholder of false views which
arise out of ignorance (avijja) and the opposer of the spread of the Enlightenment
the Buddha has passed into (Ling, 1997:51). Mara is ‘portrayed as the highest
deva in the heavens of the Kamaloka, whose meritorious past lives have brought
him honour, wealth and prestigious power’ (Boyd, 1975:142).13 Mara is said to
dwell on the edge of the sixth and highest sense–desire heaven (Harvey, 1990:35),
and has an influence that spreads throughout all of saÅsara. Moving beyond
Mara’s influence is to move across the stream from saÅsara to the ‘far shore’ or
nibbana. Thus, only those who have seen the Dhamma and are overcoming greed,
hatred and delusion will escape the influences of Mara.
‘Mara is sometimes called the Dark One and associated with “smokiness” and
“murkiness” ’ (Boyd, 1976:165). The intention then of Mara is to blind people to
the true nature of reality, and this darkening activity is expressed by one of his
titles – the ‘Dark One’ (Kajha) (Ling, 1997:61). Some Wat Phra Dhammakaya
lay people refer to Mara as the ‘Black Buddha’. One member indicated that Phra
Dhammachayo’s purpose was ‘to destroy the factory of the black guy through
Dhammakaya meditation’.14 This is one way of depicting Mara, who may also be
described as the leader of the Black Dhammakaya, a force in conflict with the
White Dhammakaya, who seek to overcome Mara’s Black Party (Thai fai dam)
through the agency of Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
It would appear that the select few who engaged in this high-level meditation
at Wat Paknam were supported by those who practised the lower form of
Dhammakaya meditation. To this end these practitioners would concentrate on
the purity and clarity of their visualised image, maintaining its brightness.
‘Otherwise the power one gains through meditation will be passed on to the evil
or indifferent dimension of the universe. Once there, it can be used in the spiritual
conflict (wicha-rop) to destroy the good forces’ (Bowers, 1996:26). The greater
the number of people who are meditating at the same time, the more powerful the
resultant force. This is one reason why Dhammakaya meditation is normally
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
33

--- PAGE 49 ---
conducted in a group rather than meditators practising by themselves. A further
reason is that it is easier to meditate as part of a group. Wat Phra Dhammakaya
members living overseas will make great effort to attend the centre nearest to
them in order to be connected via the internet to Wat Phra Dhammakaya in
Thailand.15
Shortly after the inception of the meditation workshop someone who was
to become extremely influential in Dhammakaya meditation began to attend
Wat Paknam. Chan Khonnokyuung’s father passed away when she was only 14.
His death occurred before she could ask him for forgiveness for any unintentional
misdeeds. She was particularly concerned about an incident where her father,
in a fit of rage, cursed his children with deafness for the next 500 births.
Chan thus wanted to meet again with him and offer her apologies for making
him angry.
At the age of 26, Chan went to Bangkok after hearing ‘Luang Phaw Sot had
rediscovered the Wisdom of Dhammakaya that included the knowledge of heaven
and hell’ (Dhammakaya Foundation, 2002:1). She served as a maid, and in due
course came under the tutelage of Dhongsuk Samdaengpan, a nun from Wat
Paknam. ‘With the help and advice of the nun, she managed to harness the
Wisdom of Dhammakaya to seek for her late father’ (Dhammakaya Foundation,
2002:1).
Dhongsuk took Chan to meet Luang Paw Sot shortly after the inception of
the meditation workshop. Luang Phaw Sot ‘recognised in her an innate aptitude
for meditation and greeted her with the words “what kept you so long” ’
(Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:96). Within a short time Chan, who eventually
was given the title Khun Yai, became the leader of the group of meditators of
advanced Dhammakaya meditation who practised during the night.16 It appears
that a combination of her quick rise to leadership, lack of ability to read and write
and poor social background meant Khun Yai Chan was looked down on by many
at Wat Paknam (www.dhammakaya.be Elementary Lesson No.5).
Wat Phra Dhammakaya followers believe that Khun Yai Chan became Luang
Phaw Sot’s leading meditation disciple. However, a leading Buddhist academic
informed me that Khun Yai Chan was not in the abbot’s inner circle but just one
of a large number of meditators.17
There are a number of stories that are still circulating about the achievements
of Dhammakaya meditation under the leadership of Luang Phaw Sot. Some of
these come from the Second World War era when Thailand was occupied by
Japanese forces from 1939 to 1942. Many members of the public believed Luang
Phaw Sot had special powers enabling him and his supporters to survive. The
people in the area of Wat Paknam would go to the temple compound rather than
the air raid shelter when the siren was sounded. Public belief was shaped in part
by the press coverage given to the sighting by many people of ‘nuns from Wat
Paknam floating in the air, intercepting the bombs dropped by the bombers and
patting them with their bare hands to fall harmlessly in the water or uninhabited
areas of forest’ (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:96). Phra Dhattacheewo, the
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
34

--- PAGE 50 ---
deputy abbot of Wat Phra Dhammakaya said in an interview with Baan Mai Ruu
Rooy magazine:
The stories they have written are all true. Including the story about the
mae chii (nun) of Wat Paknam who flew up to push away the bombs
(from dropping on Bangkok) during World War Two....You may ask why
it fell on Japan and killed so many people. I can answer by saying the
power of the Dhamma pulled to Japan when the Japanese were bellicose
and wanted to make war. That pulled the bomb in their direction.
(Jackson, 1989:204)
Another offered explanation is ‘meditators at Wat Paknam used the mind
controlling powers to force the planners to change their target’ (Bowers,
1996:28).18 Dhammakaya members are not surprised when Westerners ask them
about this story. It was explained to me as follows. Khun Yai Chan, who had deve-
loped the ability to travel through meditative power (e.g. she was able to visit her
father in hell), was able to travel in her mind to the halls of power in Washington.19
It was there she heard of the plan to drop nuclear bombs on Thailand. Through the
power of meditation she was able to change the mind of the American leadership
and the bombs were eventually dropped on Japan instead.
Luang Phaw Sot had a reputation not only as a meditation master and skilled
temple administrator, but also as a healer. Many who had been diagnosed as
terminally ill were brought by relatives to Wat Paknam and Luang Phaw Sot’s
advanced meditation practitioners would try to determine the cause of illness
through meditation.
If the patient was approaching the end, his disciples would say so. If the rea-
son for the illness was the ripening of the effects of past evil deeds, they
would heal the illness by having the patient perform an act of major merit
to escape the clutches of his past evil karma. If the reason for the illness
was physical, they would use the power of meditation to adjust the patient’s
internal functioning along with the administration of herbal medicine.
(Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:71)
In later years, those who sought healing at Wat Paknam were instructed to
leave a note for the abbot, stating their name, time and date of birth, and the nature
of their illness. ‘Long distance healing by mind continued to yield miraculous
results in the case of the terminally ill’ (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:74).
Luang Phaw Sot’s meditative approach, and the way he used specially selected
practitioners in high-level meditation with a view to combating the work of Mara
and curing illnesses, was a departure from other forms of meditation used in
Thailand.
Another interesting, although fairly prosaic departure from normal Thai temple
practice was the preparation of food in the temple for the 500 monks and nuns
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
35

--- PAGE 51 ---
plus visitors. Bowers explains it as Luang Phaw Sot’s compassionate desire
for the monks under his care not to be dependant on the daily alms round (in Sot’s
experience as a young monk in Bangkok this was less than an adequate
provision). A second advantage in monks not going on the morning alms round
is more time available for meditation, or study. Interestingly, the lay community
associated with the temple was also catered for. It was not just that they ate what
was left over after the monk’s meal but food was specifically prepared for them
(Bowers, 1996:49).
The first European to be ordained in the 
Thai Sakgha
In 1953 Phra Thitavedo, a monk at Wat Paknam travelled to England and during
his time there met William Purfurst (also known as Richard Randall) an English
journalist and Buddhist lay teacher. The following year Purfurst took up residence
at Wat Paknam and came under the tutelage of Luang Phaw Sot. It appears that
the abbot had a vision for spreading Dhammakaya meditation beyond Thailand.
During the war he had hoped to be able to spread his model of meditation to
Germany. Indeed, Luang Phaw Sot ‘had a prophecy that if the Germans won the
war, Buddhism could easily spread to Europe and it would turn entirely Buddhist’
(www.dhammakya.be Elementary Lesson No. 5).20 The abbot wished the
Germans to win and asked Khun Yai Chan for her prediction. Through the power
of meditation she allegedly came to know that the Germans would not win the
conflict and informed the abbot accordingly. The recruitment of a Westerner to
Wat Paknam should thus be understood in the context of spreading Dhammakaya
meditation to the West.
Purfurst developed pneumonia in both lungs shortly after his arrival at Wat
Paknam, and records how Luang Phaw Sot told him that as well as sending for a
doctor, he wanted his meditating nuns to come and meditate for him to assist his
recovery. Luang Phaw Sot was aware of the Westerner’s sceptical approach to ‘the
power of magic’but he was keen for the meditation to take place. The Englishman
made a full recovery and was ordained as a samajera almost immediately
afterwards.21
After a short time Purfurst was deemed ready for upasampada, or higher
ordination as a bhikkhu. Luang Phaw Sot selected Vaisakha day May 1954 for the
ceremony and Purfurst was the only person to receive ordination on that occasion.22
The ceremony which lasted three and a half hours was presided over by Luang Phaw
Sot and was probably the ‘biggest ordination ceremony in Thailand, with ten
thousand people present on monastery ground’ (Randall, 1990:95). As a result
‘Many others were inspired to be ordained’ (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:129).
During the ordination Luang Phaw Sot gave Purfurst the monastic name of
Kapilavaddho, meaning, ‘he who spreads and increases the Teaching’. Phra
Kapilavaddho returned to England at the end of 1954 to teach the Dhamma for one
year. He went with Luang Phaw Sot’s blessing and the invitation to bring back to Wat
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
36

--- PAGE 52 ---
Paknam suitable men who wished ordination as Buddhist monks. Phra Kapilavaddho
returned a year later with three men who wished ordination. Indeed, Luang Phaw Sot
recommended Phra Kapilavaddho to be elevated to anusavanacariya status so that
he could officiate at the ordination of the three Englishmen (Randall, 1990:192).23
The English monk passed the examinations for anusavanacariya and assisted at the
ordination of his fellow countrymen. He returned to England in March 1956 to con-
tinue his lecturing and the development of the English Sakgha Trust.
A return to Thailand was required for Phra Kapilavaddho, as he received a
telegram informing him that one of the English monks was ill and should return
to England (Randall, 1990:195). There was apparently a misunderstanding
between Luang Phaw Sot and the foreign monks. The monks requested special
privileges from the abbot but walked out of a meeting of all the monks called by
the abbot to discuss these issues. Luang Phaw Sot is recorded as saying ‘I cannot
let this incident pass by, or else they will continue to trample on respect for
everything else in the Buddhist religion.... they have to know how to conduct
themselves in [this] land of Buddhist religion’ (Dhammakaya Publications,
1998:131). The monks left Wat Paknam and Phra Kapilavaddho spent the rest of
his life furthering the cause of Buddhism in the UK.
While there may have remained much to do, Luang Phaw Sot must have been
optimistic about the future of the Dhammakaya model of meditation. The method
was well owned by the movement, as opposed to a blind following of a charismatic
leader. Those meditators who Luang Phaw Sot regarded to be highly proficient in
Dhammakaya meditation travelled to other parts of Thailand, and so this technique
extended well beyond Wat Paknam.
Shortly before his death in February 1959, Luang Phaw Sot reminded his
followers of the need to continue with meditation by saying, ‘Our reach is
too short. We cannot beat Mara this lifetime. We are still in his clutches’
(Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:135). He instructed his disciples ‘to continue
teaching people to attain the Wisdom of Dhammakaya, and to spread the tradi-
tion far and wide; since this would help bring peace to the people of the world’
(Dhammakaya Foundation, 2002:1). He is alleged to have ordered Kuhn Yai Chan
not to be in a hurry to die! Don’t give up the teaching for the seclusion
of the forests! After my passing the others will have to rely on you to
teach Vijja Dhammakaya and keep them on the straight and narrow path.
If you don’t teach them, they will fall victim to the work of Mara.
(Dhammakaya Foundation, 1998:136)24
During his illness, Luang Phaw Sot was unable to lead the advanced meditators,
or train new meditators. Without the abbot’s involvement, the emphasis of the
temple swung away from its focus on meditation and meditation research towards
the study of Pali and Thai Buddhist texts. Indeed, by the time Luang Phaw Sot
died, most of the highly experienced meditators had left Wat Paknam to live in
isolation (www.dhammakaya.be Elementary Lesson No.5).
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
37

--- PAGE 53 ---
The inception of the Dhammakaya Foundation and 
Wat Phra Dhammakaya
Luang Phaw Sot passed away on 3 February 1959, aged 73 years. His biographer,
writing as a Wat Phra Dhammakaya member, cites the story of a palm reader who
went to Khun Yai Chan’s kut and predicted that she would ‘one day have a large num-
ber of students and be a refuge to thousands of people’ (Dhammakaya Foundation,
1998:137). 25 Shortly after this prediction, students interested in meditation began to
visit the temple and came under Khun Yai Chan’s tutelage. The group grew ‘until the
number of students exceeded the space available. Khun Yai Chan’s group moved to
the present site of Wat Phra Dhammakaya in Pathumthani in 1971’ (Dhammakaya
Foundation, 1999:17). Here, on land donated by a widow and Dhammakaya fol-
lower, the essential teachings of Luang Phaw Sot were practised and the
Dhammakaya Foundation (which became Wat Phra Dhammakaya) began.
There were allegedly some tensions between the teachers of meditation at Wat
Paknam after Luang Phaw Sot’s death as to which of his closest disciples should
be the most influential. Indeed, there were differences of opinion as how best to
meditate using the Dhammakaya model. Khun Yai Chan’s and (now Wat Phra
Dhammakaya’s) approach is challenged by Phra Rajyanvisith as being a narrow
version of what Luang Phaw Sot taught.26
Phra Rajyanvisith claims that Dhammakaya meditation at the highest levels
enables the meditator to understand the Dhamma through Dhammakaya meditation.
A prerequisite to operating at these advanced levels is the ability to read the suttas
in Pali (Bowers, 1996:68). It is well known that Khun Yai Chan was illiterate. The
Dhammakaya movement which she helped found, however, sees no tension between
being illiterate and reaching a very high standard of meditative ability.
Phra Rajyanvisith believes that Khun Yai Chan’s lack of ability to read Pali inva-
lidates the claim for her to be the true teacher of Dhammakaya meditation. Indeed,
he identifies Khun Yai Chan’s unique supernatural ability as that of assessing merit
She is described as having the ability to determine exactly how much
merit, and one would assume demerit, one has made by a given act. This
fact would explain a great deal about the emphasis Wat Phra
Dhammakaya places on giving, primarily money.
(Bowers, 1996:69)
The inception of the Dhammakaya Buddhist 
Meditation Foundation and Wat Luang 
Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram
The alleged claims of the followers of Khun Yai Chan to be the only group
practising the authentic forms of Dhammakaya meditation, coupled with the new
movement’s businesslike approach to raising funds and recruiting new members
caused concern both in the Sakgha and in some sections of society. A group of
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
38

--- PAGE 54 ---
people who were practising Dhammakaya meditation outwith the newly
constituted Dhammakaya Foundation became concerned that any Sakgha-led
investigations of the new movement might result in censorship which could
include the Dhammakaya system of meditation. To prevent collateral damage:
The Assistant Abbot for Meditation Affairs of Wat Paknam, Phra
Bhavana Kosol Thera [Veera Kanuttamo] and an enthusiastic lay
meditation instructor, [Acharn] Sermchai Polparthanaridhi [now Phra
Rajyanvisith], organised the Dhammakaya Buddhist Meditation Institute
on 74 rai of land in Rajburi Province. Like Wat Phra Dhammakaya, this
institute also has a foundation to support it. It is the Dhammakaya
Buddhist Meditation Foundation. And also like Wat Phra Dhammakaya,
the institute became a temple.
(Bowers, 1996:67)27
The objectives of the institute are (www.concentration.org.)
G
Teach Dhammakaya Buddhist meditation to the general public who
are interested in Dhamma practice for purifying the mind and keep-
ing the mind peaceful from passions that cause suffering;
G
Educate Buddhist monks on Buddhist theory and train those who
are interested in Dhammakaya Buddhist meditation in order to
become qualified meditation masters and instructors;
G
Maintain the correct Dhammakaya Buddhist meditation practices,
according to the teachings of Luang Phaw Sot, the late abbot of Wat
Paknam Bhasicharoen.
Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram was registered in 1991 as a temple, and
Phra Rajyanvisith (who had recently been ordained as Phra Jayamanggalo) was
unanimously voted for and then appointed as abbot on 9 July 1991. The goals of
the temple/institute are achieved by sending out teams of meditation instructors
to conduct meditation workshops throughout the country. This gives the opportu-
nity for team members to explain Dhammakaya meditation to those who are
interested. It also provides opportunity to defend the Dhammakaya model to
those who are less than impressed with the way Wat Phra Dhammakaya oper-
ates. The abbot is a sought after speaker. Currently his sermons are broadcast
on radio on Sunday mornings, and they are also televised from time to time.
He has lectured on a regular basis in America and Malaysia. The Dhammakaya
meditation technique is taught at different levels at the twice yearly retreats. On
these occasions up to 1,000 monks, nuns and lay people join the monks and
novices of Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram. Currently (2006) there are
seventy monks and thirty-three novices.
Phra Rajyanvisith’s approach is said to be exoteric, in that he refuses to
guard esoteric knowledge of high-level meditation. His practice is to teach
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
39

--- PAGE 55 ---
these upper level secrets to those he believes would benefit from such teaching.
This has drawn fire from some of the practitioners at Wat Paknam. Phra
Rajyanvisith is clearly concerned that a lack of openness could well lead to the
demise of the practise of Dhammakaya meditation and perhaps its disappear-
ance.28 My own experience, however, indicated that the abbot was reluctant to
discuss issues surrounding spiritual conflict between the Black and White
Dhammakaya.
In the mid-1990s Phra Rajyanvisith estimated that 30 per cent of the
movement’s followers come from outside Bangkok. At that time those members
who lived in Bangkok practised Dhammakaya meditation at Wat Saket three
times a week.29 They would only make the 90 kilometre journey to Wat Luang
Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram on special occasions. According to Bowers (1995:81)
the followers of Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram are people who
thoroughly approve of Phra Rajyanvisith’s efforts to advance the group’s approach
to meditation throughout Thai society. Many are medium, or high-ranking
government officers, or successful business people. Meetings are no longer held
at Wat Saket and members travel either by car or the bus provided for them, which
leaves Wat Saket early on Sunday morning, returning in the evening. A core group
of around 100 members of the Dhammakaya Buddhist Meditation Institute attend
the Sunday meeting at Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram, Rajburi.
The growth of Wat Phra Dhammakaya
The growth of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and its associated movement, the
Dhammakaya Foundation has been spectacular. Much of this is due to the vision
and charismatic leadership of the abbot and vice-abbot. The abbot, Phra
Dhammachayo was born in 1944 in Central Thailand and given the name
Chaiyabuun Sutthiphon.30 ‘After his mother’s death he was sent to a boarding
school whose owner was a member of the royal family who gave the boy loving
care as if he were his relative’ (Feungfusakul, 1993:75).
Phra Dhammachayo graduated in economics from Kasetsart University and
was ordained at Wat Paknam in 1969. This was ten years after the death of Luang
Phaw Sot and a year before the move of Kuhn Yai Chan and her followers to
Patumthani, where construction started on the temple on 76 acres of purchased
land. When Wat Phra Dhammakaya was opened in 1977, Phra Dhammachayo
was appointed abbot. Feungfusakul (1993:71) comments ‘The lay Dhammakaya
Foundation was also established in the same year indicating the group’s early
realisation of the necessity of having a lay establishment as an important
spearhead.’ Phra Dattacheewo, however, made the point that there was no
intention to open a temple, it was supposed to function as a centre for meditation
but ‘we got into some trouble for not registering as a temple with the authorities
and so we registered but it was not our purpose to start a temple.’31
In 1991, Phra Dhammachayo was promoted to the Lower Royal Order. In 1994
he was awarded the honorary doctorate degree by Mahachulalongkorn University.
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
40

--- PAGE 56 ---
In 1996, he was promoted to the Higher Royal Order, and now has the monastic
title of Phra Rajbhavanavisudh (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1999:79).32
Phra Dattacheewo was born in 1940, in Kanchanaburi, Central Thailand, not
far from the Burmese border.33 Born into a working class home, his parents gave
him the name Phadet Phorngsawat. He graduated in agriculture from Kasetsart
University, where Phra Dhammachayo studied prior to his ordination. He went on
to gain a diploma in dairy farming from an Australian university before being
ordained as a monk at Wat Paknam, some two years or so after Khun Yai Chan
and her disciples moved to Phatumthani. Phra Dattacheewo provides constant
support for Phra Dhammachayo, with whom he is very close (Taylor, 1990:141).
Indeed, Phra Dhammachayo introduced Phra Dattacheewo to the practice of
Dhammakaya meditation with Khun Yai Chan. In 1982, Phra Dattacheewo was
promoted to the Lower Royal Order and has the monastic title of Phra
Bhavanaviriyakhun.
Since the inception of the Dhammakaya Foundation back in 1970 with around
twenty members, the moment has experienced phenomenal growth. Numbers
attending the temple to meditate on special occasions may reach the 200,000
mark. According to a temple report issued at the end of 1998, the movement had
881 monks and novices, 116 male and 369 female full-time lay workers and
615 manual workers. It also has 5,000 regular volunteers and can draw on
10,000 additional volunteers for stewarding for mass meetings (Bangkok Post,
21.12. 98).
In August 2002 there were 700 monks, with an extra 100 ordained for the
phansa period. There were, in addition, 500 novice monks. The full time
volunteer group are no longer referred to as asa kalayanamit but are now known
as ubasok (male) and ubasika (female).34 In addition, the temple has 1,000 paid
officials (chaonatee). They commit themselves to keeping the Five Precepts, and
fulfil specialist positions such as video technicians, or carry out maintenance or
cleaning tasks. After satisfactory completion of a year’s service, they are offered
a room at the temple. Currently (2006) there are around 600 monks, this number
may increase to 800 during phansa.35 There are 300–400 novice monks, increasing
to 1,000 during phansa. There are around 200 ubasoks and 500 ubasikas.
The temple complex now covers an area of around 800 acres and is referred to
as the World Dhammakaya Centre. The Great Sapha Dhammakaya Hall, which is
used for teaching, meditation and large ceremonies, extends to 40 acres and can
accommodate 300,000 people. The temple sanctuary (bot) itself is recognisably
in the Thai style, yet its simple lines are much less ornate, and the black and white
colour scheme is an obvious deviation from the traditional red-tiled temple
roofs.36 The temple’s foundation stone was laid by HRH Princess Maha Chakri
Sirindhorn on behalf of the king in December 1977 (Dhammakaya Foundation,
1999:18). This indication of royal approval served to enhance the profile of the
movement within Thai society.
In 1994, the ground-breaking ceremony of the Maha Dhammakaya Cetiya
(Figure 2.1), a dome-shaped pagoda took place. The inside of this 32 metre
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
41

--- PAGE 57 ---
high structure was completed in March 2000. The Dhammakaya Cetiya is
hemi-spherical in design, following the architectural style of the oldest surviving
Indian Buddhist cetiya, located at Sanchi in India. According to the temple, the
purpose of the monument is to honour the Triple Gem.
The hemispherical dome which is 108 metres in diameter, contains a sacred
image of the Buddha in solid gold, along ‘with some relics of the Lord Buddha’.37
The hemispherical dome is seen as expressing the movement’s homage to the
Buddha. Cosmologically speaking, the dome is the astral bowl of the universe
symbolising saÅsara, and the possibility of liberation through passing the mind
through the centre of the meditator’s body. This act of Dhammakaya meditation
is symbolised by the sacred gold image of the Buddha at the very centre of
the structure. The dome is referred to as the tathagatagarbha, the ‘womb’ or
‘birthplace’ of the Dhammakaya (Undated Dhammakaya Cetiya publicity). It is
interesting to note that this is a Sanskrit term used in Mahayana Buddhism for
the buddha-nature within all beings.
One million images of the Buddha cover the cetiya. These images symbolise
the spreading of the Dhamma ever outwards for the peace of all beings of
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
42
Figure 2.1 The Dhammakaya Cetiya – The embodiment of the Triple Gem.
Source: Kindly supplied by Wat Phra Dhammakaya.

--- PAGE 58 ---
the world. According to undated Wat Phra Dhammakaya publicity, for 10,000
Baht (£170) the donor could have a Buddha image with his/her name on it placed
inside the structure.38 A larger donation secured an image situated nearer to the
main Buddha image. As well as proving lucrative, the selling of images involves
many thousands (up to a million) making a long-term commitment to the
Dhammakaya Foundation because of their sponsorship of an image.
Choompolpaisal (2003:37–8) conducted interviews with four Wat Phra
Dhammakaya members regarding a range of issues surrounding the cetiya. He
discovered that the three members who contributed to the installation of the stat-
ues in the cetiya were all ‘delighted’ to have had that opportunity. The newest
member was disappointed that he did not have the opportunity. Choompolpaisal’s
research provides valuable insight into the effect the cetiya has on the insider, an
area easily overlooked by the outsider. In response to the question ‘How does
the stupa [cetiya] have a bearing on your practice of dana [giving], sila[moral
practice] and samadhi [meditation]? The following responses were given: (1) the
cetiya reminds me to practice these practices; (2) seeing the Buddha-images
help my mind stay calm and make me want to practice these practices; (3) I feel
as if the cetiya were the medium through which the virtuous power comes to
encourage me to undertake these practices and (4) I feel inspired and delighted
to practice these practices (Choompolpaisal, 2003:37).
Members purchasing images for the cetiya and contributing financially in other
ways would have provided a good source of income for the temple. The cetiya
is clearly a symbol of the movement; yet one must remember that it provides
religious space where insiders may recollect the virtues of the Buddha and be
encouraged in their spiritual practices (Choompolpaisal, 2003:29).
The second component of the Triple Gem, the Dhamma is symbolised by the
raised concentric terrace surrounding the cetiya (this appears empty in
Figure 2.1). Members understand the outer concentric terrace (which has monks
meditating on it in Figure 2.1) to honour the Sakgha, the Third Gem. This terrace
is used for novices and monks meditating on special religious occasions.
Snodgrass flags up the magnitude of the area surrounding the outer concentric
circle when he comments that it is capable of providing space for up to a million
meditators (Choompolpaisal, 2003:16).
Wat Phra Dhammakaya programmes
A glance through Dhammakaya Foundation publicity reveals the inroads it has
made into a variety of social and career groupings within Thai society. The move-
ment offers training in the area of meditation and ethics. Groups of nurses,
student teachers, police officers, judicial staff and soldiers are examples of groups
from the public sector who have attended courses. Dhammakaya Foundation
trained volunteers and monks frequently attend schools in Bangkok to give train-
ing in meditation and ethics. Since 1981, a National Dhamma Quiz Contest has
been in operation and is used by over 5,000 institutions. This incorporates peace
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
43

--- PAGE 59 ---
and ethics education based on the Makgala Sutta with a built-in quiz component.
Children of adults attending Wat Phra Dhammakaya are catered for through
Sunday school and crèche while their parents attend the adult sessions in the
Great Sapha Dhammakaya Hall.
There are also programmes for female lay followers (upasikaratanam). The
first programme of this kind took place as a retreat on the 7–9 August 1998. It
was organised to commemorate Thai National Mother’s Day, and to dedicate
merit to her Majesty the Queen of Thailand on the auspicious occasion of Her
Majesty’s birthday on 12 August (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1999:34).39 Around
200,000 participants attended this event, including some from a number of Asian
and Western countries.
The Buddhist societies of many of the universities and colleges are led by
supporters of the Dhammakaya Foundation.40 This being the case, students from
other Buddhist perspectives will not normally have the opportunity to introduce
speakers who are not sympathetic to the temple’s belief and practice. Wat Phra
Dhammakaya is glad to resource students who request help from them, and the
movement has many members who are university students. These institutions of
higher learning offer Wat Phra Dhammakaya an excellent opportunity to recruit
intelligent young people, many of whom will one day be in leadership in society.
During a visit to one Bangkok university, I noticed that there were two Buddhist
societies – Wat Phra Dhammakaya and a general one.41 The ‘general’ society
had a strong focus on the forest tradition. When I asked about its relationship with
the Wat Phra Dhammakaya group, I was informed that the general society had
nothing against the ideas of this group but that Wat Phra Dhammakaya members
preferred to meet by themselves. I tried to visit the Wat Phra Dhammakaya group
but found the meeting room vacant.
The Dhammadayada Training Programme was inaugurated in 1972 as an Eight
Precept retreat for students, lasting for 15–30 days.42 In 1979, students who
successfully completed the first month of the training were selected for tempo-
rary ordination. Students in tertiary education may apply to be considered for the
Dhammadayada programme which begins with four days military style training
conducted by members of the Thai army. This partnership with the military has
allayed suspicions that the movement posed a security threat (Bangkok Post,
22.3.00). The initial military style training is followed by a period of intense
spiritual training where trainees observe the Eight Precepts. They live the life of
a forest monk, sleeping outside under an umbrella with an attached mosquito
net.43 During this period there is a strong concentration on Dhammakaya
meditation and many students report unusual psychic experiences (Jackson,
1990:210). The ordination of students who are specially selected takes place
at Wat Benjamabophit (also known as the Marble Temple) and the newly ordained
monks continue their ascetic practices for another month before disrobing.44
After disrobing, students usually continue to be involved with activities at Wat
Phra Dhammakaya.
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
44

--- PAGE 60 ---
A Sunday visit to Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 4.2.00
Buses leave various parts of Bangkok to travel to Wat Phra Dhammakaya which
is located on 800 acres of land belonging to the Dhammakaya Foundation, some
35 kilometres north of the city centre. Regular attenders at the temple are readily
identified as they wear white clothes.45 This ‘uniform’ has three functions:
G
It provides a heightened feeling of belonging;
G
It allows the poor to appear well dressed;
G
It is restful on the eyes, 200,000 people in a variety of styles and colours
would jar the eyes. The overall effect of each person wearing white is one
of order, an ambience the temple is keen to create. More recently, many
members have taken to wearing white tee-shirts with large Dhammakaya
motifs. This has created a less ‘restful’ look.
A couple in their late thirties invited me to join with them in their activities
before finding a place in the Great Sapha Hall. They took me to the shrine of
Luang Phaw Sot where they paid homage and spent 10 minutes in meditation
before placing a donation in an offering box. This was for them an opportunity to
prepare themselves mentally before the meditation led by Phra Dhammachayo.
It was also an opportunity for them to focus again on the teachings and values of
the founder of the movement. The couple then took me to the shrine of Khun Yai
Chan where they paid homage to the movement’s ‘maternal figure’. This was
poignant as Khun Yai Chan had passed away some four months previously.46
Before passing me on to the information desk, the couple took me to the air
conditioned shop which has a good stock of tapes, books, images (especially of
crystal spheres) and white outfits to wear.
The information desk escorted me to ‘Pole 17’, this is the reception/information
area for foreigners and is staffed with volunteers who speak English. A retired
Chinese/Thai gentleman made me very welcome and supplied me with some of
the English literature that was on hand. He went on to explain that he had started
attending the temple 2 years previously as a result of the negative press it was
receiving. He liked what he saw and had been attending ever since. Although
he had never seen the crystal sphere as a result of his meditation, he found the
practice gave him great peace.
By 10 am the monks were sitting in the meditative position on a tiered platform
which has a golden sphere as its focal point. A life-like statue of Luang Phaw Sot
is located under the sphere. When everything was ready, Phra Dhammachayo and
Phra Dattacheewo arrived by limousine, driving the last 50 metres through a
guard of honour made up of female volunteers. The two leaders took up position
under the statue of Luang Phaw Sot.
Being the first Sunday of the month, a crowd of 20,000 had gathered, and were
sitting in rows. Attention to detail and order is remarkable. For example, shoes
were left at the edge of the carpet that the meditators sat on, all pointing the same
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
45

--- PAGE 61 ---
way and placed the same distance apart. Volunteers walked around keeping an
eye on things and would rearrange any shoes that were slightly out of line.
Another interesting feature was the good behaviour of the children present.
There were quite a number of families with three generations present. Phra
Dhammachayo seeks to bring people into the temple from the shopping malls,
believing it to be far more beneficial for people to meditate than to shop. There
was a good mix of ages, and a high percentage of people in their twenties
and thirties. This is unusual as traditional Thai temples are mainly attended by
the elderly.
After the traditional chanting took place, Phra Dhammachayo led the congre-
gation in a one hour meditation. The excellent sound system and large number of
colour TV monitors mean that despite the distance from the speaker no one feels
removed from the events of the meeting. Volunteers carrying ‘walkie-talkies’ kept
an eye on the congregation, offering help if required. One volunteer instructed me
not to take pictures!
Being the first Sunday of the month, the Phra Dhammachayo led the monks
and laity in the ritual of presenting the artistically arranged fruit around the
bottom of the dais to the Buddhas (past, present and future) in nibbana.47 This
understanding of nibbana as being a distinct place where Buddhas exist and have
self-awareness is a controversial belief in Thai Buddhism.
After the presenting of food to the Buddhas was complete, the members went
into their small groups for lunch. Members eat at different locations throughout
the temple complex but the vast majority seemed to bring food which they shared
in their small groups. I was invited to join a small group for lunch. The group
contained two female ubasika (full time lay personnel), one of them was studying
for an MA in Buddhist studies at Chulalongkorn University, and was sympathetic
to my research project.
After lunch I was impressed to see the monks going round the various groups
encouraging the people in their various activities and answering their questions.
The respect practising Buddhists show towards monks is much greater than the
Protestant Christians’ approach towards their minister. The Asian concept of
teacher–student relationship where respect is shown towards the teacher, and
commitment given by the teacher to the student is partly responsible for this.
The afternoon programme started with an introduction to some of the
Westerners who were studying meditation at the temple. This was followed
by a report from an English monk who was pioneering the work of the
Dhammakaya Foundation in Belgium. The abbot resumed his position on the
dais and led the congregation in another meditation. When this was completed,
devotees who wished to donate towards the laying of a granite floor around
the recently constructed cetiya went forward to make their offerings. I was
informed that those who participated made donations of 4,000 Baht each (£67).
The suggested figure in the publicity was 5,000 (£83) Baht, and was said to be
sufficient to pay for a square metre of flooring for the outer concentric terrace
surrounding the ceita which would be used for monks and novices to meditate
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
46

--- PAGE 62 ---
during important religious ceremonies.48 After making their donation, donors
had their fingerprints taken so as they may be recorded on the flooring. The
publicity indicated
Each square metre block of the floor will be signified by the thumb print
of its patron. These patrons will be moved with a sense of pride and
joy whenever they record the magnitude of their generosity in becoming
patrons to the amphitheatre. In addition, they may rejoice in their merit
each and every time someone comes to be the benefactor of this remark-
able facility.
(‘Create History with your Own
Thumb Print’, undated publicity)
Phra Dhammachayo announced that the funeral service of Khun Yai Chan had
not yet being finalised and an announcement would be made.49 However, a piece
of gold cloth was being created for the occasion as a mark of Wat Phra
Dhammakaya’s respect and gratitude for her life and all that she had done for the
temple. Devotees were invited to come forward and donate to this cause. Clearly,
the congregation were prepared for this and individuals and groups came forward
to hand over sealed envelopes to monks who handed over a memento to each
donor. A feature of this offering was the joy with which the donation was handed
over.50 The giver (dayaka) often has an enjoyable or moving experience, made
stronger by the slightly formalised, or ritual context in which dana usually occurs.
In Buddhist theory this is a short-lived experience of a higher state – a foretaste
of later stages of the path (Cousins, 1997:395).
The rest of the afternoon was taken over with a three and a half hour ceremony
for Khun Yai Chan. Her coffin, referred to as ‘her house’, was on the stage in
a smaller hall. The first monk who spoke pointed out that although Khun Yai Chan
could neither read nor write, she was committed to helping people, and for 30 years
looked after the temple she had helped found. The second monk who preached was
Phra Dattacheewo. In a very well crafted sermon, excellently delivered, he
reminded the congregation that Khun Yai Chan was clean and tidy and loved order,
just like a soldier, and she loved these things in a deep way.
Sunday visits to Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 25.8.02 and 1.9.02
On these two Sundays I was able to engage in informal conversations with monks
and lay people at the temple. I was privileged to be granted an audience with
Phra Dattacheewo.51 In our conversation about meditation, the acting abbot
explained his understanding of meditation and the inner light it brings through the
use of the Gajakamoggallana Sutta (Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha,
1995:874–9). He wished to demonstrate that his approach to meditation
had a scriptural basis, and explained that his movement had nothing to do with
Santi Asoke, as he believed their practices were not founded on the Theravadin
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
47

--- PAGE 63 ---
scriptures. Phra Dattacheewo indicated he wished to see the Dhammakaya
meditation spread beyond Thailand so that it could be used by people of all faiths,
or no faith.
A middle-aged dentist informed me that she was particularly happy that day as
she was going to donate 30,000 Baht (£500) to the cetiya fund for Khun Yai Chan.
She invited me to watch her present Phra Dattacheewo with the donation and
thus participate in her act of merit making. This lady went on to explain that
Dhammakaya meditation was a quick way to purify the mind. She indicated
that a mind could be generated to a high level of purity and power and used to
benefit others. She cited the example of an ill person seeking out someone with
skills in higher meditation. Assuming the sick person keeps the Five Precepts
he/she may be cured through the power generated by the advanced meditator.
After consulting with others, she indicated that higher meditation around the
clock was not carried out at Wat Phra Dhammakaya, as it was in the days of
Luang Phaw Sot.
The following day I discussed this issue with Phra Nicholas who confirmed the
non-practice of higher meditation around the clock. He indicated that there were
those who were capable of high-level meditation but the Dhammakaya
Foundation were in the phase of developing, teaching and organising its people.
The media had made life incredibly difficult for the movement for several years
and there was no opportunity to develop in this area. Phra Nicholas also indicated
that Phra Dhammachayo intended to take up the development of higher medita-
tion by his 60th birthday, in 2004.52
The first Sunday of the month draws the highest number of members to the
temple. This is due to the special ceremony of making an offering of food to
the Buddhas in nibbana. It appeared to me that numbers were down on the
previous visit I made on a first Sunday of the month (4.2.00), when attendance
on that occasion was confirmed at 20,000. Raised platforms used by monks for
sitting on while meditating were left in the area used for the congregation. This
had the effect of masking the smaller attendance at the temple. On these last
two visits to Wat Phra Dhammakaya, I observed an increased number of poorer
people attending than during my visits in 2001. This may have been due to a
number of buses visiting from less affluent areas in the provinces. Bussing in
people from further afield may have been an attempt to improve the poorer
attendances on Sundays other than the first Sunday of each month.
On the afternoon of 1.9.02 an amulet making ceremony took place and all
attendees were invited to participate in the ceremony. Monks initiated the cere-
mony but many thousands of attendees queued up to press the plaster with the
appropriate seal. This merit making activity was conspicuous by no financial
contribution being made by those who participated in the ceremony.
That afternoon, Phra Dhammachayo concluded a session of meditation by
the chanting of taking refuge in the Triple Gem. In addition to taking refuge in
the Buddha, Dhamma and the Sakgha the congregation added a fourth gem
by taking refuge in ñaja, (Pali ‘inner knowledge’). This ‘addition’ is apparently
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
48

--- PAGE 64 ---
common practice at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. It does not, however, occur at
traditional Thai Temples. This is an example of the temple using a term in an
unusual manner, thus creating the impression that they know more and have a
more advanced practice than the mainstream.53
Sunday visits to Wat Phra Dhammakaya in 
August and September 2005
I had the opportunity to spend four consecutive Sundays at the temple and attend
weekly activities. The first Sunday of the month service (4.9.05) was well attended
by around 18,000 members. On the other occasions I estimated attendances of no
more than 4,000 members. It was interesting to note on one of these afternoons
that two families came forward and bequeathed land (5 and 11 rai) to Phra
Dhammachayo to do with as he wished, including selling the land and using the
proceeds as he saw fit.54 On one of the Sunday afternoons, Phra Dhammachayo
called for members to make donations for the purchasing of medicines for monks.
He indicated that this was an important service, not only for their monks but also
for those in other monasteries. Phra Dhammachayo mentioned that merit from this
activity would happen at the point of deciding to give to the medicine gift fund.
My August and September visits occurred during the phansa period. Part of
the Wat Phra Dhammakaya tradition for the phansa period involves a different
cell group (kalyanamitra, or ‘good friend’ group) each Sunday afternoon lighting
a large gas flame emitting from a giant candle. This ceremony marks the start
of the afternoon programme. It involves a procession through the temple after
all the monks are in position and like all Wat Phra Dhammakaya activities it is
choreographed to a very high standard. The last event of the Sunday programme
is usually a memorial service for Khun Yai Chan and a further meditation
session. This takes place in the hall that houses Khun Yai Chan’s relics. Wat Phra
Dhammakaya members refer to the remains of Khun Yai as relics, not ashes. The
bones of an enlightened person on cremation allegedly crystallise rather than turn
to ash. The emotional/spiritual bond between members and Khun Yai is clearly
viewed as important to foster. One example of this is the playing of a music video
which has children laughing and singing ‘She has not gone far from us – she is still
with us.’ Wat Phra Dhammakaya members believe that Khun Yai Chan is in Dusit
(Pali Tusita) – the fourth level of a ‘sense-desire’ heaven. This is where Luang
Phaw Sot, Tara and Kuan Im55 are understood to exist, indeed, it is ‘the realm in
which Bodhisattas spend their penultimate life, and in which Metteyya now
dwells’(Harvey, 1990:35).56 Thus, Khun Yai Chan and Luang Phaw Sot, although
both departed from this life, are available to assist those who look to them for help.
Continuing growth but increasing public controversy
To an extent, controversy was associated with Wat Phra Dhammakaya from its
early days and for a variety of reasons. For example, it was accused of holding
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
49

--- PAGE 65 ---
weapons and mobilising a massive following for a political force. This may well
have been the result of the temple’s request for the military to come in and deliver
military style training to students who wished to participate in the spiritual deve-
lopment programme. The vice-abbot, Pha Dattacheewo replied that ‘there was no
need for such concern because his temple’s greatest fear was becoming the tool
of politicians. ...and political involvement was inappropriate for monks and that
the temple had no connection with political parties’ (Bangkok Post, 4.5.87).
In the same newspaper article, Phra Dattacheewo is reported to have indicated
that ‘the temple plans to set up offices in every province this year and mobilise at
least 1,000,000 people to meditate at the temple as part of his Majesty the King’s
birthday celebration’.
A second area of negative publicity for the movement was caused by protests
from the tenant farmers who were still farming the land when Wat Phra
Dhammakaya bought the land some 18 years previously. According to news
articles (Bangkok Post of 9, 10 and 19.11.88), each family was offered the equiv-
alent of 70,000 Baht (£1,170) per rai by the temple to move. Those farmers whose
leases did not expire were allowed to stay until their leases expired. Phra
Dattacheewo indicated that only seven families had turned down the offer of
compensation and refused to leave. Some 200 families, however, raised the
profile of the movement’s purchasing of the vast amount of land by threatening to
commit suicide and set fire to the temple.
Former Prime Minister, Kukrit Pramoj criticised Wat Phra Dhammakaya over
what he called the temple’s ‘expansionist design and indulgence in materialistic
luxury’. Writing in his Soi Suan Phlu column in the Siam Rath newspaper, he
asked ‘How is it that [Wat Phra Dhammakaya] has such a great deal of money
to purchase 2,000 rai [of land] while land is so expensive?’57 He went on to
comment, ‘Selling a religious pleasure is a strange and new thing. It has the
potential to make huge money.’ Kukrit Pramoj indicated early action against Wat
Phra Dhammakaya was needed lest Buddhism go into decline in Thailand
(Bangkok Post, 20.7.88). One senior monk, Phra Padet, indicated that had Wat
Phra Dhammakaya not purchased the land it would have gone to developers and
would have been turned into golf courses or housing estates. The monk said
‘People should have thanked the monks for saving the huge plot of land...The
Christians have the Vatican, and the Muslims have Mecca, but we Buddhists do
not have one pilgrimage centre yet’ (Bangkok Post, 11.8.88).
In 1990, an article in the Bangkok Post (6.7.90) indicated that the Dhammakaya
Foundation property was valued at 10,000 million Baht (£142.28 million) and the
group had a monthly income of 10–20 million Baht (£142,857–285,714). The
Thod Kathin ceremony (offering robes to monks at the end of the three month
‘rains’ retreat) of 1992 was said to have brought 400 million Baht (£5,714,000) in
donations to the temple.58 ‘The large sum of money donated by the followers
was played down by temple officials who said that such a big temple like
Wat Phra Dhammakaya needs such funds to keep its activities going’ (Bangkok
Post, 2.11.92).
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
50

--- PAGE 66 ---
For the next six years Wat Phra Dhammakaya managed to keep out of the media
spotlight. One possible reason for this was the growing economy within Thailand.
The economic downturn in 1997 and the subsequent financial hardships (ruin, in
many cases) highlighted the vast amounts of money that had been donated to Wat
Phra Dhammakaya, and the temple’s continued call for giving. The Deputy
Education Minister, Arkom Engehuan inspected the temple and as a result, the
abbot of Wat Yan Nawa was appointed to find out if Wat Phra Dhammakaya was
guilty of religious misconduct (Bangkok Post, 27.11.98). A telephone line was set
up to gather information from the public (referred to as a ‘hope line’). Most of
the callers tended to be Wat Phra Dhammakaya supporters. Prime Minister Chuan
Leekpai urged the critics of the temple to be restrained lest Buddhism be
damaged. A fifteen-member civilian panel was formed to speed up investigations,
as a report was to be forwarded to the Sakgha for judgement by the end of
January 1999 (Bangkok Post, 1.12.98).
While merit making is part of Buddhist practice, it was the scale with which
it occurred at Wat Phra Dhammakaya that caused such concern. Supaj Dontrakul of
the Social Science Institute indicated that in this situation merit was being marketed
as some kind of commodity which could be exchanged for money. He went on to
comment, ‘This goes against the will of Buddhism in which merit should be done
for pure reasons and be willingly done’ (Bangkok Post, 27.11.98). In the same
article, Phra Maha Chanya Suthiyano of Wat Umong in Chiang Mai acknowledged
the good the temple did, yet pointed out ‘that many of its teachings end with “merit
making” which, by its meaning, is to give as much money as possible. Why do
people have to give so much in donations in order to gain merit?’
Wat Phra Dhammakaya was perceived by critically aware members of the
public as trying to secure political legitimacy through the mass ordination of
novices on the occasion of the King’s 72nd birthday in 1999.59 The temple
claimed 150,000 attended the ceremony which enjoyed two-hour coverage by TV
Channels 5 and 11. The positive media coverage conveyed the impression that the
movement was well accepted by society, while in fact it was under investigation
(Bangkok Post, 2.2.99).
Phra Prommolee, head of the investigation unit was reported to be planning
discussions with Phra Dhammachayo to convince him that the orthodox concept
of nibbana was selflessness. The senior monk indicated he wished Wat Phra
Dhammakaya to give up its status as a temple and become a centre for meditation
(Bangkok Post, 10.2.99). Thailand’s highly regarded scholar monk, Phra
Dhammapitaka sought to identify Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s position as heretical
by commenting ‘In all Buddhist scriptures, both the Tipitaka and the commen-
taries, there is no evidence that nibbana is atta. But there is much evidence [that]
nibbana is anatta.... The Buddha taught that nibbana is a state free of defile-
ment, and being non-self’(Bangkok Post, 19.2.99). The scholar-monk took the
view that ayatananibbana, the term used by Wat Phra Dhammakaya to describe
the location of all enlightened beings, and which may be visited temporarily by
those who have the ability to practice Dhammakaya meditation at the highest
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
51

--- PAGE 67 ---
level was erroneous. He thought that the term was simply another way of
expressing the extinguishing of the fires of greed, hatred and delusion. Indeed,
Phra Dhammapitaka (1998:80–6) comments that there is a lot of speculation
about these issues and the important issue is not to define nibbana for others but
to look into oneself to see if defilements are decreasing. Phra Dhammapitaka’s
book, The Case of Dhammakaya drew fire from the movement it sought to
critique. A Wat Phra Dhammakaya member using the penname Dr Ben Barakul
produced a series of books which accused Phra Dhammapitaka of ‘being a
communist sympathiser and part of a Christian conspiracy to destroy Buddhism
in Thailand’. These books had strong financial backing and were distributed
to temples nationwide. Police confiscated these books from stores and ‘issued
an arrest warrant for the author, Ben Barakul, on a charge of defamation.
However, as it is a pseudonym, police have been unable to locate him’ (Bangkok
Post, 17.1.00).
Former monastic and well-respected Buddhist scholar and writer Professor
Sathiarapong Rachabandit also criticised the teachings and practices of Wat Phra
Dhammakaya. Threats were allegedly made on his life by temple supporters by
telephone and also in a letter to the Matichon newspaper. As a result two Special
Branch policemen were detailed to guard Professor Rachabandit and his family at
their house in the Bang Kruay district of Bangkok. A petrol bomb was thrown into
the compound of Professor Rachabandit’s house around midnight of 1 March
1989. ‘The attack caused no injury but the bonnet of a car and front tyre were
damaged and smoke blackened a wall...Police believe the attack was meant
as a threat’ (Bangkok Post, 2.3.89). Professor Rachabandit indicated that the
attack had been carried out by experienced operators and no one had been
arrested in connection with the incident.60 This event was widely reported and
understandably created negative press for Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
The greatest damage done to Wat Phra Dhammakaya was caused by donations
to Phra Dhammachayo of approximately 1,700 rai (approximately 2.7 square
kilometres) of land in fifteen provinces. The Supreme Patriarch of the Thai
Sakgha ordered the disrobing of Phra Dhammachayo, the abbot of Wat Phra
Dhammakaya for serious offences against the monkhood (Bangkok Post, 30.4.99).
The article went on to state that these offences were the distortion of the
Dhamma, falsely claiming there to be flaws in the Tipitaka and refusing to trans-
fer to the temple properties acquired while being a monk. It would be possible for
the Sakgha Council ‘to exercise its power under Provision 21 of the Sakgha
regulation to temporarily expel Phra Dhammachayo from the monkhood, or apply
Provision 24 to remove him as abbot of the temple on the grounds of causing
disunity within the clergy’ (Bangkok Post, 22.5.99). While the Religious Affairs
department wished to charge Phra Dhammachayo with embezzlement and have
him defrocked as soon as possible, the police interrogators took a different view.
They ‘found no valid reason to charge Phra Dhammachayo with embezzlement
because he had obtained through donations. His disciples had bought the land and
donated it to the abbot unconditionally’ (Bangkok Post, 29.6.99).
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
52

--- PAGE 68 ---
Phra Sumethaporn, the monk in charge of Phatum Thani, the region in which
Wat Phra Dhammakaya is located, was heavily criticised over his perceived
reluctance to consider the ecclesiastical charges against Phra Dhammachayo, and
his deputy Phra Dattacheewo. An aide of the region’s chief monk defended his
superior by stating ‘the process had been slow because the chief monk of Pathum
Thani could not decide whether the charges against the abbot and his deputy
should be considered separately’ (Bangkok Post, 1.7.99). The next issue of the
Bangkok Post indicated that the region’s chief monk was to accept the charges
made against the two leaders of Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
Phra Dhammachayo and Phra Dattacheewo were summoned to appear before
Phra Sumethaporn, the chief monk of the Phatum Thani region. Security arrange-
ments were tight on the 6 August 1999, with 350 police and a bomb disposal
squad in attendance at Wat Moonchindaram (the temple where the region’s chief
monk is the abbot). The two leaders did not appear but sent four junior monks to
explain that they did not accept the charges made against them as they originated
with a lay man, Manlop Polpairin, from the Department of Religious Affairs
(Bangkok Post, 7.8.99). The seriousness of this situation is indicated by the inter-
vention of Prime Minister Chuan LeekPai, who called for Phra Dhammachayo to
surrender to the police and fight the charges in court. Wat Phra Dhammakaya
members responded by setting up road blocks around the approaches to the
temple. A leader of the Dhammakaya Foundation, Veerask Hadda, indicated that
‘the abbot would surrender if Mr Chuan guaranteed he would not be defrocked
nor incarcerated’. The abbot had been a monk for 30 years and it would be tanta-
mount to an execution if he were defrocked (Bangkok Post, 25.8.99). Although
the prime minister responded that he was not in a position to guarantee bail, the
abbot turned himself over to police at Wat Chanasong in Bangkok on the next
day. The 600 riot police outnumbered the 500 monks and temple members who
came along to demonstrate support for the abbot and vice-abbot. After three hours
of questioning, the abbot and a close aide were released on a bail of 2,000,000
Baht (£33,330) each.
In an interview for Asiaweek, Julian Gearing (1999) asked Phra
Dhammachayo, ‘As an abbot can you own land? Don’t you need to transfer
the pieces of property in your own name to the temple?’ The abbot replied:
A monk having land is not against the law [vinaya] at all.61 The criminal
charge is that I have been taking advantage of people who want to give
land to the temple, not to me. But I don’t know about these things because
all these things have been handled by my deputy. When the hard facts
are discovered by the people, the truth will be there. I don’t worry at all.
A month later Phra Dhammachayo wrote to his superiors requesting to be
suspended from his duty on grounds of ill health, citing diabetes and allergy as
reasons. He also nominated the vice-abbot Phra Dattacheewo to take over on a
temporary basis (Bangkok Post, 7.10.99). In December, Phra Dhammachayo was
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
53

--- PAGE 69 ---
suspended from his leadership of the temple ‘pending his trial on embezzlement
charges’. The acting chief monk of the district permitted him to nominate a
successor. Thus Phra Dattacheewo became acting abbot of Wat Phra
Dhammakaya, a post he still retains. Phra Dhammachayo, however, is the leader
of the Dhammakaya Foundation and clearly viewed as the movement’s leader.
A Wat Phra Dhammakaya monastic indicated that Phra Dhammachayo would
not resume the abbot’s position as it would attract media attention.62 The reality
is that he does not have that option, as he remains suspended from his abbot’s
duties as he has not transferred ownership of the land over to the temple. Phra
Nicholas indicated that Phra Dhammachayo wished to return the land to the own-
ers but was strongly advised against it by some lay people close to him. Some of
the donors are now dead and returning land to their next of kin could prove
awkward, as some of the families may not have known that their relatives actually
owned the donated land.
The Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement has come through a period of sustained
media attention. The negativity generated by the economic recession seemed to
focus on the money and land amassed by the abbot during a time of financial ruin
for many. While the case has not been closed, nothing appears to be happening.
Phra Dhammachayo’s removal from being abbot of the temple is viewed by some
opponents as a sufficient reprimand. The nation’s economy is improving and the
media spotlight has moved on.
Some opponents of Wat Phra Dhammakaya indicated that they would wish the
movement to leave the Thai Sakgha. Indeed one monk at the temple indicated
that the pressure had been so great on the movement that they almost decided
themselves to withdraw from the Sakgha.63 This would have significantly
contributed to a further loosening up of heavily regulated Buddhist practice and
teaching within the Thai Sakgha. Pulling out of the Sakgha, or a forced expulsion
from it would considerably weaken the ability of the government and the Sakgha
to regulate Thai standardised Theravada Buddhism. Indeed, the Sakgha may well
have recognised this and not pressed charges against Phra Dhammachayo.
Phra Santikaro in a talk at Cornell University indicated that Wat Phra
Dhammakaya was supported by many of the older monks in the Mahanikai
tradition, as Wat Phra Dhammakaya is part of this tradition and is viewed as a
powerful force.64 Some of these older monks are resentful of the Thammayut’s
privileges, and see the potential of Phra Dhammachayo to acquire the position of
Supreme Patriarch (Pali Sakgharaja) of the Thai Sakgha (Bangkok Post, 22.3.00).
It is also probable that a number of Mahanikai monks are in leadership of temples
who teach Dhammakaya meditation. Any censorship of Phra Dhammachayo may
result in a clampdown on Dhammakaya meditation, which they would not want.
Conclusion
Phra Nicholas informed me that a key feature of Wat Phra Dhammakaya was
lineage. The Dhammakaya model of meditation is held in great esteem, as are the
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
54

--- PAGE 70 ---
masters of the tradition. The first of these is of course Luang Phaw Sot, the one
who ‘rediscovered’ the meditative approach after it had ‘fallen into disuse for
around 2,000 years’. Khun Yai Chan is the second figure in the lineage, as she
introduced many people to Dhammakaya meditation, including Phra Dhammachayo
and Phra Dattacheewo. The third figure in the tradition is Phra Dhammachayo, the
current leader of the movement. In this chapter we have examined the develop-
ment of the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement by focusing on these key figures.
The inception of Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram and the associated
Dhammakaya Buddhist Meditation Foundation in 1991 was ostensibly the result
of concern at Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s excessively commercial approach to fund
raising and recruitment. While there were criticisms of Wat Phra Dhammakaya
before 1991, it was not until 1998 that the temple came under intense public and
monastic scrutiny. This was mainly due to the temple’s continuing call on
members to finance its many projects, and Phra Dhammachayo’s ownership of
land donated to him by temple members. The wealth of the temple and Phra
Dhammachayo’s ownership of land proved extremely emotive for the public given
the context of a severe economic recession and resultant suffering (financial
ruin in the case of many). Monastic and police investigations were conducted,
resulting in Phra Dhammachayo being suspended from his position as abbot,
and being replaced by Phra Dattacheewo as acting abbot. The land donated by
members to Phra Dhammachayo remains in his ownership.
Although vociferous in their treatment of Wat Phra Dhammakaya, the Thai
press fulfilled their responsibilities to the public by flagging up these issues
and keeping them in the public domain. Wat Phra Dhammakaya member
Choompolpaisal (2003:12) takes a different perspective when he reports that a
number of Thai newspapers expressed their ‘regret over their distorted and exag-
gerated reporting’. Clearly the impact of these issues on the public would have
been significantly less had they emerged in a time of economic growth. Perhaps
it was the timing of the reporting, rather than the severity of the issues that caused
the Wat Phra Dhammakaya ‘case’ to be viewed as yet another monastic scandal,
inadequately dealt with by the Sakgha’s aging leadership.
The appeal of Wat Phra Dhammakaya to its followers, and how it may best be
understood as a New Buddhist Movement are important issues. It is to these that
we now turn.
WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA
55

--- PAGE 71 ---
3
AN ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA
DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
Six inside (emic) understandings of the movement – the appeal 
of Wat Phra Dhammakaya to its membership
We have a leader with qualities of amnat, ittipon and parami
In the Thai context, a leader with status is important in attracting people to a
movement, and retaining them. This sense of confidence in the leader’s ability
to achieve provides a personal sense of well being for the individual member, as
well as an individual’s belief in what the movement believes in, and stands for.
A movement or group which is perceived to have gifted leadership will recruit
and retain more successfully than a group which is perceived to have less able
leadership yet better policies and aims. There is a degree of uncertainty about
life in a culture which has no national health service and other government
benefit schemes. The forging of relationships with people who can be of benefit
take on a priority in the Thai context that is not found in the more secure British
landscape.
The three most discussed aspects of leadership in the Thai context are authority/
power (amnat Thai), influence (ittipon Thai) and moral stature or charisma
(parami Thai and Pali). Amnat means ‘power, authority and influence’ (Hass,
1964:622). Amnat resides in position, and is formally granted by a society or
organisation (Conner, 1996:215). Of course, the founder of an organisation or
movement receives that status (and consequently amnat) by virtue of being the
initiator. Phra Dhammachayo along with Phra Dattacheewo and Khun Yai Chan
in the background are viewed as founding members of Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
Although forced to relinquish the abbot’s position, Phra Dhammachayo is still
referred to as the abbot of the temple, and remains president of the Dhammakaya
Foundation. Temple abbots in mainstream Thai Buddhism possess a lot of author-
ity in the running of their temples, and by virtue of their authority are able to instil
respect or at least compliance in their subordinates. Phra Dhammachayo’s
remoteness in the temple means he is not seen to be using authority. Phra
Dattacheewo, as acting abbot along with a core of monks referred to as ‘inner
monks’ (Thai phra nai) carry out temple leadership duties.1
56

--- PAGE 72 ---
Phra Dhammachayo’s power and authority are also firmly rooted in the
White/Black Dhammakaya myth which describes him as part of the original
White Dhammakaya and an Avatara ‘whose words are holy and true and no one
can argue with him’ (Fuengfusakul, 1998:67). This gives the leader a tremendous
amount of amnat and ittiphon. The rumours circulating throughout the movement
of Phra Dhammachayo’s psychic and meditative powers, his remoteness at the
temple, yet his communication skills when he does lead in meditation and preach,
serve only to enforce to the members that their leader has enormous reservoirs
of amnat and influence (ittiphon).
Amnat enables a leader to instil respect, even fear, in subordinates, as well
as the general public, when necessary (Conner, 1996:222). In the case of
Phra Dhammachayo, outsiders may be unaware, or indeed disbelieve the myth
which empowers his leadership. They are also beyond his jurisdiction, and so
Phra Dhammachayo has little influence in the public domain. It is, however,
completely different for members of Wat Phra Dhammakaya, where the ultimate
reward would be recognition from, or a very rare audience with the leader.
Disapproval from Phra Dhammachayo is likely to have a devastating effect on
members.
Amnat needs to be supplemented by influence (ittiphon) and/or moral stature
(parami) in order for effective leadership to take place. Ittiphon is defined
(Hass, 1964:623) as power or influence. Cognate words such as itthirid means
supernatural power, or force, often having a violent connotation. However, in
normal usage ittiphon is understood as influence. Ittiphon ‘enables the leader to
influence the behavior of others in order to generate personal benefits for that
leader....or generate corporate benefits for his or her own retinue of followers’
(Conner, 1996:235). A person with considerable ittiphon is referred to as a phu
mi ittiphon. The colloquial term, which more accurately captures the negative
connotation of ittiphon is chao pho. Chao pho is a term given to those important
people with influence in a locality. The term may have been invented to translate
the title of the film The Godfather. ‘Certainly since the showing of the film, the
term chao pho has been popularly used to describe rich influential persons who
successfully flout the law. The term has tended to supplant the more formal
description of “men of influence” ( phu mi ittiphon) or the more expressive “dark
influences” (ittiphon meud)’ (Conner, quoting Pasuk and Sungsidh, 1996:232).
Phra Dhammachayo has enormous influence at Wat Phra Dhammakaya, yet that
influence does not extend beyond the movement. Had he preached beyond the
temple or published, it would have been different. This lack of outside influence
is in sharp contrast to Phra Buddhadasa and Phra Dhammapitaka; scholar-monks
whose writing and preaching tapes have been widely circulated and well received.
The other reason for the limited influence of the movement is that the Wat Phra
Dhammakaya message focuses on its model of meditation.
This leads us to parami, the third component of leadership. Parami originates
in the moral goodness or virtue (kwam di) of the individual (Conner, 1996:240).
This is opposed to originating in amnat which is a corollary of status, or the
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
57

--- PAGE 73 ---
ability to exercise control over others. Parami may be translated as high moral
standing, charisma, the sum total of the selfless expression to others of the Ten
Spiritual Perfections.2
The parami of a leader is an important factor when people decide who best to
follow. People will try to assess the amount of parami a leader has as this will
affect their progress. This is especially true of a master/disciple relationship in the
context of meditation. One lay person who practised Dhammakaya meditation
and knew the three Dhammakaya movements said that the abbot of Wat Luang
Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram (Phra Rajyanvisith) could not progress as much as
Phra Dhammachayo because his meditation teacher did not have as much parami
as Khun Yai Chan, (the one who taught Wat Phra Dhammachayo).
As virtuous behaviour is directed from the leader to the follower, the follower
may respond with a sense of obligation (bun khun); thus a bonding takes place
between the two parties. Well does Conner (1996:251) comment:
At the same time, those observing this selfless behaviour directed
towards those beneficiaries develop a sense of appreciation for as well
as a need to identify with the moral goodness toward others expressed
by the individual. In instances when these two parties know one another,
their joint review of the moral goodness of the individual in question,
expressed through his or her meritorious selfless behaviour, reinforces
the perceptions of both.
Phra Dattacheewo gives an example of the above when he says of the movement
‘We must build up our parami to create public acceptance’ (Bangkok Post,
21.12.98). A leadership style which draws heavily from parami is particularly
appropriate for a monastic in leadership, or as we have seen, a temple within
the community. The source of parami is understood to be a person’s merit, char-
acter, observance of the moral codes and, to a lesser extent, the person’s family
background.
The leader’s perceived power and remotness does not mean he is perceived as
a leader without parami, rather his status as an Avatara implies that he must have
the perfections (parami ) of a Bodhisatta. Nevertheless, to an outsider, the awe the
members appear to have for Phra Dhammachayo indicate amnat as the dominant
characteristic of his leadership.
We have economic and ‘spiritual’ salvation
A large number of Thai businesses went bankrupt in 1997 as Swiss banks
demanded their Thai counterparts to repay the money they had borrowed from them.
As the Thai banks had lent money to borrowers who had offered little collateral,
a huge economic downturn resulted, and the days of easy borrowing and economic
boom came to an abrupt end. It was interesting during my first field trip (1999) to
observe and hear of an expansion of the King Chulalongkorn (1853–1910) cult.
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
58

--- PAGE 74 ---
Thai regard this king as the saviour of the nation from the many threats posed
by the British and French colonial powers, during his lifetime. Just as he guided
the nation through perhaps the most difficult period of its history, so many Thai
look to him to guide them through a period of great uncertainty. Nithi expresses
the popular Thai belief that King Chulalongkorn was ‘reborn in a spiritual realm
as a divine being (thep), and because of his great mercy for all human beings he
disseminates his charismatic power (phra parami) to aid and look after all those
who have faith in him’ (Jackson, 1999:266).3 Thai who have wealth look to some-
one to help them retain their prosperity. Those who have lost their wealth will
seek someone in whom to place faith, to help them regain their lost fortunes. The
past years have been extremely difficult for the Thai economy.
It is alleged by Wat Phra Dhammakaya that one will gain financial security
by donating funds to the temple. The following seven benefits (according to an
undated Dhammakaya Foundation publicity) would come about as a result of
owning a Buddhist image (purchased for £170) located in the Dhammakaya
cetiya. They are:
G
Inspiration with the power to protect against and overcome all obstacles
and perils;
G
Wealth and prosperity;
G
Personal beauty, radiance and endearment to all;
G
Career success, strong health and long life;
G
Right understanding of the world, purity and radiance of mind;
G
Forthrightness and steadfastness in Dhamma practice;
G
Endowment with worldly riches, heavenly riches and the riches of nibbana.
Another approach for encouraging merit making/fund raising for the temple, and
securing future financial security for the member is the ‘Millionaire Forever’
merit-making project. ‘Donors who opt for this are promised wealth in every
[subsequent] lifetime if they contribute 1,000 baht [£17] a month for the temple’s
food fund throughout their life’ (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98). Specific rewards are
associated with particular actions, and a sense of confidence created in the donor
as to the outcome of his/her actions.
Many ‘one-off’ merit-making opportunities arise, for example, the appeal on
27 August 2005 to donate to a ‘Medicine Gift Fund’. Members also have a belief
in the efficacy of Phra Dhammachayo’s power of meditation and his ability to
bless those in his presence. At the end of a Sunday afternoon meditation session,
Phra Dhammachayo concluded by blessing the people as follows:
May you have safety in your families, success in your businesses and in
helping others. May you create parami and become very wealthy.
Whatever work you do I wish you prosperity, and may we have a family
of Dhammakaya that will not be separated. May older people think
about the families they leave behind and their future. May we all have
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
59

--- PAGE 75 ---
peace in our hearts at all times even if we are sending our children
up country or overseas. The Ti-Ratana is our foundation so let us
think about our merit and our achievements. Merit is about to flow so
pray – make a wish for what you want, this is an important action to do.4
Economic security is not the only kind of security required. ‘Spiritual’
salvation from the forces of darkness is a felt need of the movement’s member-
ship. Dr Feungfusakul informed me that Phra Mettanando, a former leading
monk at Wat Phra Dhammakaya who left over what he considered to be the
excessive pressure placed on members to donate funds to the movement, divulged
the following information to her.5 Within the movement it is said that Phra
Dhammachayo is an Awatan (Thai) or Avatara (Pali).6 Indeed Phra
Dhammachayo’s followers ‘believe him to be a messiah and a reincarnation of
the Buddha’ (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98). Prior to the creation of this world-realm
there was emptiness but also Dhammakaya.7 There exists a dualism within
Dhammakaya of good and evil, this is referred to as fai cow (white party) and
fai dam (black party). There was a war between both parties which resulted
in the White Dhammakaya creating a new world. This was in time destroyed
by the Black Dhammakaya. The White Dhammakaya in time created a new
world where everything was perfect. This was eventually spoiled by the Black
Dhammakaya. The White Dhammakaya responded by giving mankind qualities
of wisdom, understanding and abilities to use plants for medicinal purposes
etc. It appears that the Black Dhammakaya sent lust into this world which resulted
in mankind killing each other. The present status is one where only those who
practice Dhammakaya meditation may break out of their deluded state and
behave in an enlightened manner (Feungfusakul, 1998:64–7).
This myth indicates that the ultimate goal is the overcoming of the Black
Dhammakaya by the White Dhammakaya, which is viewed as a holy task.8 The
success of the White Dhammakaya means man will move beyond his deluded state,
both individually and collectively, and behave in an enlightened manner. Wat Phra
Dhammakaya seeks the transcending of delusion through the practice of
Dhammakaya meditation. If a critical mass of meditators can be achieved, then the
deluding and destructive forces of Black Dhammakaya may be halted. If a sufficient
number of meditators practise higher meditation and focus the generated power on
the Black Dhammakaya, then evil will be destroyed. The more Dhammakaya medi-
tation is practised; the easier non-practitioners will find it to discover Dhammakaya
meditation (the ‘lost kernal’or sudhamma of Buddhism). This will have the effect of
people being more contented and behaving in a more enlightened manner.
Phra Nicholas compared the mission of Wat Phra Dhammakaya to the film The
Matrix.9 This film focuses on Thomas Anderson (who is given the name Neo) and
his quest to know the truth of the ‘Matrix’. Neo is told that he cannot be told what
the Matrix is: ‘you have to see it for yourself’. As Neo begins his search under
Morpheus (captain of a hovercraft crewed by those who have been freed from the
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
60

--- PAGE 76 ---
simulated reality that is the Matrix):
[H]is world recedes revealing a horrifying and unbelievable truth – he
is cocooned in a pod with billions of other people whose brains are all
connected to a computer programme called the ‘Matrix’. It was designed
to fool humans into believing that they exist in the world as it was in
1999. The year is in fact nearer 2099 and the world is powered by
machines powered by human energy.
(Archer et al., 2001:5)
Once Neo is rescued by Morpheus from the Matrix, he very quickly develops
certain powers and joins the fight to release mankind from the delusion that they
believe to be reality. Morpheus and his followers’ ability to fight the Matrix lies
in an electromagnetic pulse that disables electric systems. The similarity between
Wat Phra Dhammakaya and the fight against the Matrix is obvious to many
temple members familiar with the film. Wat Phra Dhammakaya led by Phra
Dhammachayo (an Avatara) is involved in trying to help people break free from
their delusion by practising Dhammakaya meditation. The power/vibrations
generated by high-level Dhammakaya meditation may be used to neutralise the
deluding influence of the Black Dhammakaya.
The responsible task of facilitating people to see through their delusion, and
opposing the Black Dhammakaya is said to create a sense of apprehension within
the membership at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. The most likely reason for members
remaining within the movement is the desire to be saved from destruction.
Feungfusakul is reported as saying that many Wat Phra Dhammakaya devotees
believe their movement is their ‘last train to “world salvation” which makes them
all the more ready to sacrifice themselves [work hard and contribute financially]
to “conquer the Devil” ’ (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98).
The extent to which members believe that Phra Dhammachayo is an Avatara is
unclear. Phibul Choompolpaisal informed me that it is not an insider’s under-
standing.10 I have come to the position that members have different ‘instincts’ and
seek different experiences at the temple. Some members especially appreciate the
logic and relevance of the Dhamma talks, others draw much from the effect the
cetiya and other images have on them, others place a special value on meeting
their friends and clearly many have a very strong focus on meditation. I have also
met members who look to experience the miraculous at the temple and find
it hard to believe that they would not believe that their leader is an Avatara. Thus
it may be said that there are many insider understandings as people participate in
the life of the temple in different ways.
A further reason for lack of clarity in this, and related areas, is monastics at Wat
Paknam, Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram and Wat Phra Dhammakaya
are extremely reluctant to discuss issues such as Mara, high-level meditation etc. A
monk at Wat Paknam indicated that some skilled meditators may still be engaged in
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
61

--- PAGE 77 ---
higher-level meditation but nothing like the practices that took place under the lead-
ership of Luang Phaw Sot.11 He indicated that he was not an ‘advanced meditator’
and was disinterested in, for example, the dynamics of healing, as it was beyond his
capabilities. A monk at Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram refused to discuss
Mara, or the Black Buddha, saying he would need to obtain permission from the
abbot before answering my questions.12 When I did speak about this topic to the
abbot, Phra Rajyanvisith, he gave the standard Thai monastic response as to the
identity of Mara.13 That is, Mara is the temptations within us, death etc. While
higher meditation is taught at this temple, the focus does not appear to be the neu-
tralising of evil spiritual forces through meditation.
Two young Wat Phra Dhammakaya monks were extremely ill at ease when
asked by a senior layman to answer my questions about Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s
conflict with Mara. They believed they would contradict the vinaya should they
respond.14 Senator Pong Leng-ee, a high profile Wat Phra Dhammakaya member
was clearly displeased to discover that a lay man was discussing how the power
of Dhammakaya meditation could destroy ‘the Black Buddha’.15 The senator
commented by way of explanation to me (and perhaps rebuke to the lay man) ‘We
do not discuss such issues with outsiders’. The lay man pursued the conversation
with me later at his club, and said Phra Dhammachayo’s purpose was ‘to destroy
the factory of the black guy [Black Buddha] through Dhammakaya meditation’.
Mara is sometimes referred to as the Dark One and associated with ‘smokiness
and murkiness’ (Boyd, 1976:165). The intention of Mara is to blind people to the
true nature of reality. This darkening activity is expressed by one of his titles – the
‘Dark One’ (Kajha) (Ling, 1997:61). This is one way of depicting Mara,
who may also be described as the leader of the Black Dhammakaya, the force in
conflict with the White Dhammakaya.
On the one hand, there is the myth of Phra Dhammachayo being part of the
original White Dhammakaya, an Avatara coming down to lead Wat Phra
Dhammakaya in the conflict against the Black Dhammakaya. On the other hand,
there is the admission from Phra Nicholas that higher-level meditation is some-
thing that is practised very little, if at all, at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. For their own
internal and external credibility Wat Phra Dhammakaya need to be seen to be
involved in some attempt to engage with the forces of darkness. This was very
much part of Luang Phaw Sot’s practice, and fits in with the global purpose of
the temple, that is, to overcome delusion. It may be argued that not to practice
spiritual engagement (wicha-rop) with the Black Dhammakaya is to depart from
Luang Phaw Sot’s tradition. This then raises questions about lineage – may the
movement truly claim to be following on in the founder’s tradition if it does not
engage in one of his key practices? An outsider wishing to assess which is the
closest of the three Dhammakaya meditation practising movements to the original
vision and practice of Luang Phaw Sot would probably see the use of high-level
meditation to overcome ‘dark powers’ as one of the criteria to be used.16
This lack of engaging with the forces of darkness through higher meditation
also contradicts the veracity of the myth of Phra Dhammachayo. One probable
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
62

--- PAGE 78 ---
reason for Wat Phra Dhammakaya members not speaking about the use of higher-
level meditation to overcome the Black Dhammakaya is because this practice
does not take place at the temple! The practice of giving a picture of a relative
who is ill to a skilled meditator in order for that person to be healed still takes
place.17 There is no evidence, however, of a meditation programme dedicated to
overcoming the Black Dhammakaya. Phra Nicholas indicated that Phra
Dhammachayo intended to teach higher level meditation practice at the temple
once he reached his 60th birthday in 2004, as by then he would be able to lay
down some of his responsibilities. The beginning of the fifth of a 12-year cycle is
an auspicious occasion, and, as predicted, work has commenced on the construc-
tion of a building where higher meditation may be carried out. This building is
referred to as the sixtieth Year Building (Akan hoksip) and it is hoped to have it
completed for 2007 when it is planned to invite a million people to the temple for
special meetings. The unifying of different Buddhist fraternities appears to be one
aspect of this project. In a Dhamma talk on 27.8.05 at Wat Phra Dhammakaya,
Phra Dhammachayo mentioned the need to bring different Buddhist groups
together. ‘We need to produce a Buddhism in the right direction and bring these
different Buddhists together to come up with a unified kind of Buddhism.’
Wat Phra Dhammakaya is developing the facilities to host such a gathering.
The movement is also seeking to bring together those from different faiths, and
indeed those with no faith. Clearly Dhammakaya meditation is the key compo-
nent in this process. Genuine interfaith dialogue is an important activity for a
variety of reasons but is Dhammakaya meditation sufficiently neutral to be appro-
priate for people of other religious traditions? Temple members believe it to be so,
yet I remain unconvinced. The religious commitment of those who lead medita-
tion and the ‘sacred space’ of the temple are both significant. If this were not the
case then why do temple members find it more helpful to meditate with fellow
members at the temple rather than at home? This model of meditation is informed
by a Buddhist understanding of the self, spiritual development and the cosmos
thus preventing it from spiritual neutrality, at least if practiced in any depth. This
kind of meditation, together with the ensuing exploration of the experience,
which may have input from the meditation teacher, requires caution. I know of
three Christian Westerners, who, after practising Dhammakaya meditation for
some time ordained as monks at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. If the desired outcome
of teaching Dhammakaya meditation is conversion of non-members to the
movement then meditation is valid as a form of evangelism. In that case, Wat Phra
Dhammakaya should state its intention is to recruit new members.
We see then that Wat Phra Dhammakaya appeals to its members because it
teaches a model of meditation where some results may be achieved relatively
easily. These may be relief from stress or entering into a variety of intriguing
meditative experiences. The commodifying approach to merit making promises
specific rewards for particular donations. This has its own appeal to pragmatists
in a time of economic uncertainty. There is a success ethos created by large
numbers of people attending the Sunday meetings, and the highly organised cell
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
63

--- PAGE 79 ---
structure provides camaraderie and support for members. Clearly the movement’s
aesthetically pleasing grounds and buildings, well-run programmes and university
educated monks and lay personnel create a sense of well being in the membership
and confidence in Wat Phra Dhammakaya. The myth of the conflict between
White and Black Dhammakaya and Phra Dhammachayo as an Avatara may create
a belief in some of the membership that they are on the winning side.
We have a large movement structured for efficiency and convenience
A visitor to Wat Phra Dhammakaya cannot help but admire the cleanliness
and order of the grounds and buildings, as well as the efficient way all aspects
of the programme are administered. The presence of 20,000 followers at the
first Sunday service of the month, gives devotees the feeling of being part of a
‘success story’. This is important in the Thai context where small numbers indi-
cate lack of significance. Recent negative press coverage may well have increased
the corporate identity of the movement as members closed ranks to protect Phra
Dhammachayo. Well-known Thai journalist Santisuda Ekachai states:
Urban Thai society is ruled by consumer culture, and the [Wat Phra]
Dhammakaya movement by integrating capitalism into its structure has
become popular with contemporary urban Thais who equate efficiency,
orderliness, cleanliness, elegance, grandeur, spectacle, competition, and
material success with goodness.
(Bangkok Post, 21.12.98)
The annual ceremonies of Kathin and Makha Bucha at Wat Phra Dhammakaya
are well choreographed.18 They attract well over 100,000 people. For many weeks
before the ceremonies are carried out, a considerable number of members are
involved in preparing light and sound effects as well as background scenes. The
resultant performances are only possible because of disciplined practice, great
attention to detail and superb discipline (Fuengfusakul, 1993:173).
Temple members are proud of their monastics. Ekachai also points out that
the Thai public are weary of uneducated monks (some of them rogues), and the
lack of screening that takes place before a man may be ordained as a monk. In
contrast, Wat Phra Dhammakaya ‘monks have university education, etiquette, and
proof of religious dedication by having passed the temple’s rigorous screening
process’ (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98). On Sunday visits to Wat Phra Dhammakaya I
have been impressed to see the monks going around the groups of members
who usually sit with fellow ‘cell-group’ members. The monks spent time with
lay membership answering questions and encouraging them in their various
activities. I particularly observed the interpersonal skills of the monks and the
obvious respect in which they were held by the laity.
Ubasok and ubasika as well as monks are required to be educated to degree level.
The temple with its underground car parks, air-conditioned carpeted rooms for
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
64

--- PAGE 80 ---
meditation, well-stocked shop and 40 acre meditation area has the feel of a huge,
extremely well-organised and successful organisation. This is further reinforced by
observing the lay staff in their directing of activities and giving out of information.
Huge numbers of people in their standardised white clothes all following the same
programme further create and confirm the movement’s success ethos.
Our way of meditation produces results
Within the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement, monks and lay people alike are all
committed to its practice. The movement provides a spiritual practice which fits
well with a busy, consumer lifestyle. Schober (1995:320) offers a useful perspec-
tive, ‘[Wat Phra] Dhammakaya offers its followers concrete methods for attaining
spiritual enlightenment in this life and membership in a pristine Buddhist
community that promises to restore the nation’s moral life, individual peace and
material success’. Thai urban professionals are both hard pressed for time and
pragmatic. It would be wrong to suggest that Dhammakaya meditation is simpler
than the other meditation models practised in Thai society (to reach a deep level of
proficiency demands considerable commitment) but the benefits of Dhammakaya
meditation seem to be more readily experienced than with the more traditional
models.19 There is no shortage of mentors around to guide in meditation and the
testimonies of the benefits that result from Dhammakaya meditation all serve to
motivate enquirers to begin. The well educated respond positively to the explanation
of the meditation model and the opportunity to test the teachings empirically.
Certain senior figures in Thai society approve of us
Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s association with members of the royal family, and
senior military officers and politicians sends reassuring signals to many of the
movement’s members. In 1977, the foundation stone for the main chapel (bot)
was laid by HRH Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn on behalf of the king
(Dhammakaya Foundation, 1999:14). In 1995, HRH Crown Prince Maha
Vijiralongkorn was televised presiding over the Maga Bucha ceremony
(Songkhla, 1999:114). Others who have been seen to approve of the movement
include General Chaovalit and General Arthit, both previous army commanders-
in-chief (Jackson, 1989:200). A ceremony to celebrate the king’s 60th birthday in
1987 took place at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. It was sponsored by the Thai Army
and three leading banks. This ‘clearly shows what mighty economic and political
connections Wat Phra Dhammakaya has’ (Heikkilä-Horn, 1996:3).
Wat Phra Dhammakaya leadership has not been critical of the Sakgha and its
controlling council (one reason for the reluctance of the Maha thera samakom to
condemn the movement in the recent controversy) and has been careful to comply
with Sakgha regulations. Furthermore, the movement is not opening new temples
throughout the kingdom; such an activity would be viewed as sectarian. Given
its ability to operate through the Buddhist societies of colleges and universities;
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
65

--- PAGE 81 ---
its TV programmes delivered through regular channels (internet and satellite);
network of cell groups and having influence in other temples, one may argue that
it does not need to open other temples! This non-polemic approach to the Maha
thera samakom and the Sakgha is reiterated by Phra Somchai, who comments
that the movement is not trying to ‘challenge fundamental Buddhist ideas
or the Sakgha Council’s authority’. The monk goes on to say ‘We always respect
existing institutions in Thai society and never question nor try to change the rules’
(Daorueng, 1999:40).
We are a new reform movement
Peter Jackson has suggested that families who may have had connections with a
temple within the Thammayut fraternity may now be supportive of Wat Phra
Dhammakaya, although the temple is part of the Mahanikai fraternity. This
interesting theory had some basis to it when it was suggested in the early 1990s,
although even then the Thammayut – Mahanikai division was not nearly as distinct
as it once was. While some older monks may still hold strong views about the
distinctions of the fraternities, it is currently a historical issue for most lay people.
Contemporary public interest focuses on reported inappropriate behaviour of monks
by the media, and the perceived ineptness of the leadership of the Maha thera
sammakom. Even the process of excommunication of Santi Asoke from the Sakgha
which was completed in 1995 appears to be all but deleted from public memory.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya with its association with some high-ranking army
officers and politicians, along with occasional sponsorship from members of the
royal family, has an appeal to those from a traditional middle-class background,
that is, those who benefit from some connection with the establishment. Many of
the distinctives mentioned concerning Wat Phra Dhammakaya will clearly be
attractive to the traditional middle class. It may well have been that they were
viewed in the early 1990s as a new reform movement which would bring about an
upgrading of the Thai Sakgha. To an extent, Wat Phra Dhammakaya is today what
the Thammayut movement was during the reigns of Kings Rama IV and V. As we
have seen, however, Wat Phra Dhammakaya has come in for a savaging from
the Thai media. Criticisms focus on the refusal of Phra Dhammachayo to hand
over the title deeds of land donated to him by temple members to the movement.
Then there are the unproven allegations that the temple placed undue pressure on
its membership to make merit by giving to the temple during a time of serious
economic downturn in the region. Last, there are the criticisms levelled at
the temple’s teaching by highly respected monks such as Phra Dhammapitaka.
The Thammayut movement sought to bring monastics to a relatively narrow
understanding of Buddhist belief and practice. On the other hand, Wat Phra
Dhammakaya has moved sideways into Mahayana-like concepts and forwards
into contemporary methods of recruiting, accounting and communicating.
The established middle class are, in general, more concerned with preserving
their power rather than with an allegiance to a particular expression of Thai
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
66

--- PAGE 82 ---
Buddhism. A Sakgha that is perceived to be well educated, morally upright, and
able to address contemporary issues can only bring credibility to a government
which it legitimises. A pro-establishment group which modernises the state-
regulated Sakgha is a reform group well worth supporting if you benefit from the
establishment. Membership of Wat Phra Dhammakaya, however, must have been
difficult for many during the times of the intense criticisms of the temple.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya may yet have a similar function to that of the
Thammayut movement, despite its many differences. Currently Phra Dattacheewo
is involved in assisting the Maha thera samakom in facilitating communications
and providing leadership more in touch with contemporary Thai society. While
some of the Sakgha’s leadership recognise the need for modernisation, they
themselves do not have the creativity and capacity to effect change. Under Phra
Dattacheewo’s leadership, Wat Phra Dhammakaya offers secretarial help and
assistance with communication for the Maha thera samakom. Indeed, Wat Phra
Dhammakaya is the only temple within the kingdom large enough to accommo-
date all of the country’s senior monks coming together for meetings.20 As the
years go by, the Wat Phra Dhammakaya controversies will be replaced with new
issues, and the movement’s emphasis on Dhammakaya meditation and size of
operations will become more accepted within Thai society. It is interesting to note
that a number of the movement’s members, both lay and monastic are engaged in
postgraduate studies overseas. It may well be that on return to Thailand these
graduates will move into positions of influence in teaching Buddhist studies and
associated languages. As a result of all of this, Wat Phra Dhammakaya will
become an agent for change within the Thai Sakgha. It would not be surprising if
many at the temple see their movement as a prime mover in bringing Thai
Buddhism into the twenty-first century.
Six similarities between Wat Phra Dhammakaya 
and Soka Gakkai
‘After 1945, with the coming of full religious freedom and the discrediting of pre-
war Shinto and Buddhism in the eyes of many, the new religions grew mightily
for several decades’ (Bern, 1987:411). Japanese government neutrality towards
religious organisations is comparatively new, and one of the distinctive factors of
the Japanese cultural milieu is the plethora of New Religious Movements, facili-
tated in part by economic growth. While Soka Gakkai (essentially a lay move-
ment) had its inception in Japan in the 1930s, it traces its roots back to Nichiren,
the thirteenth-century Buddhist prophet and founder of Nichiren Buddhism. It is
therefore more accurate to describe Soka Gakkai as a revitalised expression
of Nichiren Buddhism. Nichiren (and Soka Gakkai) believe that the teachings of
the Buddha found its highest expression in the Lotus Sutra.21 The essence of the
message of the Lotus Sutra is found in its title, ‘Sutra of the Lotus of the Good
Law’. For Soka Gakkai members ‘Nichiren’s teaching was that the whole point of
the Lotus Sutra was to wean people away from dependence on Buddha’s mercy
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
67

--- PAGE 83 ---
and to make them reliant on the unsurpassed wisdom latent within themselves’
(Wilson and Dobbelaere, 1994:5). By chanting ‘na-mu myo-ho renge kyo,’
Japanese for ‘veneration to the Sutra of the Lotus of the Good Law,’ and
contemplating a majdala with these words and the names of some Buddhas on
it, the buddha-nature, which is within everyone, would be activated.22 This will
lead to the moral uplift of the individual and society. Eventually it will bring
the devotee to the attainment of enlightenment. Both Nichiren and Soka Gakkai
believe that Japan is the chosen country for the spreading of Buddhism through-
out the world and establishing a universal Buddhist movement.
Around 6 per cent of the Japanese population are members of the Soka
Gakkai movement (Waterhouse, 2002:127). Its International branch (Soka Gakkai
International – SGI) allegedly extends to over 163 countries (Waterhouse,
2002:131), with hundreds of thousands of members overseas (Wilson and
Dobbelaere, 1994:11). Clearly how many members constitute a presence in a
particular country is an issue here! A visitor to Wat Phra Dhammakaya familiar
with Soka Gakkai may observe similarities between the two movements in the
following six areas.
Readily understood teaching
Soka Gakkai’s easily understood teaching is attractive to its members. Yamamori
leaves himself open to the charge of oversimplification when he writes ‘To the
fundamental human quest, “What must we do to be saved?” the Soka Gakkai
member replies “Believe only in the worship object and recite the Daimoku, and
you will be saved” ’ (Yamamori, 1974:5). Yet a simple technique promising inner
power and practical results is a winsome feature of the Soka Gakkai message.
Many, perhaps the majority, of Wat Phra Dhammakaya lay members, live in the
‘fast lanes’ of commerce. Their capitalist background demands quick results, and
they do not have time for a complex philosophy or a meditative practice that does
not deliver. Donald Swearer comments (1991:662):
The Dhammakaya movement’s world-view demythologises the
traditional cosmological structure of classical Thai Buddhism, but it
lacks the erudition of the earlier reform tradition. The Dhammakaya
world-view is also highly simplistic relative to the sophisticated and
sometimes controversial interpretations of various brilliant contempo-
rary reformers – monastic intellectuals such as Buddhadasa Bhikkhu or
scholars such as Phra Depvedi [Dhammapitaka].
Yet as the years have gone by, Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s understanding of the
cosmos has been developed. There has been a lot of focus on the supernatural
abilities of Khun Yai Chan to locate a deceased person suffering in hell, to travel
there and bring merit to that person. Then there is the ritual of offering food to the
Buddha in nibbana, a practice conducted by the Phra Dhammachayo on the first
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
68

--- PAGE 84 ---
Sunday of every month which has led to a distinctive Wat Phra Dhammakaya
view of nibbana. This reminds members that the knowledge of the supernatural
world and the skills to navigate it lie with the movement’s leadership. Part of
Wat Phra Dhammakaya explanation of the cosmos is an attempt to commodify
abstract concepts. One member took me to view a large metal model of the
cosmos covering some 900 square metres.23 She described the various heavens
and hells in detail, explaining how certain hells may be avoided and heavens
gained through the giving of specific sums of money to the temple. Swearer is
correct when he asserts Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s teaching is less philosophical
than that of Buddhadasa and Phra Dhamapitaka. However, the movement reinter-
prets classical Theravadin cosmology in terms designed to encourage members
to give to the work of the temple.
Prosperity now
According to Soka Gakkai teaching, the pursuit of happiness is the goal of
human life. Happiness means good health, stable relationships and economic pros-
perity. This ‘this world’message is on target for Japanese consumer society. Wat Phra
Dhammakaya also has a high this world appeal for its lay followers, many of whom
have been attracted from the business community by the movement’s ability to
demonstrate the material (as well as the spiritual) benefits of Dhammakaya
meditation practice and supporting the work of the temple through donations.
From a reading of the above one could dismiss members of these movements
as excessively self-focused. Chryssides comments (1999:219) that Soka Gakkai
International, ‘appears to teach that enlightenment is achieved through desire
rather than by removing it’, desires and enlightenment being interconnected.
Waterhouse takes the view that a practitioner’s desires will be more altruistic as
he/she becomes more enlightened.
Early in their association with the Soka Gakkai, individuals are encour-
aged to chant for superficial, tangible benefits to prove to themselves the
efficacy of the practice and strengthen their faith. As they develop,
according to the movement’s own understanding, they will change so
that the short term, superficial view is no longer focal. The satisfaction
brought by the achievement of short-term goals is replaced by a more
long term view and more altruistic goals.
(Waterhouse, 2002:130)
Wat Phra Dhammakaya members see no incongruence between pursuing/
enjoying a prosperous lifestyle and developing in meditation prowess. The latter
facilitates the former. The temple’s constant call to its membership to make merit
through donations challenges attachment to wealth! Members will argue that the
creation of wealth is good for the national economy and without material prosperity
they could not contribute so much to Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s development.
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
69

--- PAGE 85 ---
Excellent publicity
Soka Gakkai work hard on their public relations, staging high-profile events at which
well-known figures are seen. Showing international academics and celebrities in
discussion with Dissaku Ikeda, (the present leader), serves to bestow prestige or
authenticate the movement.24 The use of attractive publications, including videos,
testimonies of satisfied devotees and TV programmes conveys the impression that
the movement is successful and one would do well to join. In 1983, Seikyo Shinbun
the organisation’s newspaper had a circulation of 4.5 million copies daily.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya has similar high standards of publicity, including
videos and use the attendance of members of the royal family such as the prince
and princess at the casting of a gold image and the laying of the foundation stone
of Wat Phra Dhammakaya respectively. The Pim Thai daily newspaper, which
was declining in sales was bought over by the movement. It has a strong focus on
Wat Phra Dhammakaya activities which it presents in a good light, unlike some
of the nation’s other newspapers.
Building national significance through global expansion
The loss of face brought about through losing the Pacific War was enormous for
Japan (a shame-based culture). Shame led to covering up of the facts and a drive
towards regaining honour and restoring face. In the Japanese situation, this was
orientated towards economic success and industrial excellence. For many Japanese,
something more than the economic miracle is needed to restore national signifi-
cance, as they perceive a national spiritual/moral vacuum. The working towards the
spread of ‘true Buddhism’ throughout the world, referred to as kosen-rufu meaning
‘to widely declare and spread’, and subsequent world peace, is a worthy vision.
Japan being the centre of that universal Buddhist movement restores national pride
and gives members a goal and purpose for their activities.
While Thailand did not suffer humiliation like Japan, there is a feeling that Thai
Buddhism is not what it once was, both in terms of its out of touch leadership and
recent scandals among monks. To become seriously committed to the Wat Phra
Dhammakaya Weltanschauung is to think in terms of the spread of Dhammakaya
meditation throughout the world.25 As Luang Phaw Sot was born in Thailand, and
‘rediscovered’ Dhammakaya meditation there, it is reasonable (if you are a Wat
Phra Dhammakaya member) to assume that Thailand should be the centre for
Dhammakaya teaching and practice. For Wat Phra Dhammakaya members, the Maha
Dhammakaya Cetiya is viewed as the centre of their operations. Bowers explains
Labelling Wat Phra Dhammakaya the centre is essential for high-level
Dhammakaya meditation as concentration must be focused some place
where the power generated during meditation can be put to best use. It
should be remembered that the battle of the supernatural takes place in
the deep cosmos, but it can be controlled from Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
(Bowers, 1996:65)
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
70

--- PAGE 86 ---
It may well be that the Thai public would be more supportive of Wat Phra
Dhammakaya if they were aware of the movement’s goal of spreading
Dhammakaya meditation throughout the world. It may serve to help them under-
stand why Wat Phra Dhammakaya feels such a need to raise such a high level of
funding. Phra Nicholas believes Thai would not be supportive for the following
reasons.26 First, jealousy is a characteristic of Thai society. In the words of a Thai
proverb, ‘you can be good but don’t become great’, the implication being that you
will be criticised if you become too successful! ‘Who do you think you are,
telling everyone how to meditate?’ is a common criticism levelled at Wat Phra
Dhammakaya according to Phra Nicholas. Second, not only is there opposi-
tion to Wat Phra Dhammakaya within the Sakgha, there is opposition from a
number of alcohol and cigarette manufacturing companies. They have suggested
there should be less emphasis on the movement’s preaching on keeping the Five
Precepts – an upturn in morality is not good for business. More recently, the
temple has had high-profile ceremonies of pouring alcohol away and destroying
cigarettes. Indeed, members of other religious traditions joined with Wat Phra
Dhammakaya on these occasions. Third, Thai movements tend to be national
rather than international. For a Thai organisation to become international, it
requires the sponsorship of the Thai government.
Soka Gakkai’s well-publicised goal of becoming a worldwide Buddhist
movement has contributed a sense of significance and identity to its membership.
It has also created suspicion, and in some cases, ill will towards the movement.
Phra Nicholas referred to the Buddha’s refusal to allow his disciples to wear boots
to help them walk over rough terrain. This meant slow progress, yet the people
would not view the disciples as soldiers advancing quickly, perhaps out to
attack them. The abbot compared the best approach for progress to the spilling
of water – it eventually spreads everywhere in a quiet way.
Just as Soka Gakkai (known outside Japan as Soka Gakkai International, SGI)
has expanded significantly in the Americas and Europe adjusting its approach sen-
sitively to fit with local culture, so Wat Phra Dhammakaya is beginning to expand
outside Thailand. Currently (2006), the movement has centres in thirteen countries
outside Thailand.27 There are five centres in America, including a delegation to
the United Nations. One feature of Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s approach is that
Dhammakaya meditation is not taught as a Buddhist practice but as a religiously
neutral technique suitable for those of all faiths, or none.28 A Western meditation
instructor informed me that Phra Dhammachayo had told him that he did not wish
people to change their religion as a result of practising Dhammakaya meditation
but rather to become more committed members of their faith systems.29 This
instructor, while qualified to answer questions about meditation, is not authorised
to answer questions about Buddhism, as Phra Dhammachayo considers the
Westerner’s knowledge to be insufficient in this area.
While respecting the movement’s desire to introduce non-Buddhists to
Dhammakaya meditation without converting them to Buddhism, one wonders if
this is the best long-term policy for all concerned. A number of monks and lay
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
71

--- PAGE 87 ---
people involved in Dhammakaya meditation have expressed the opinion that
Dhammakaya meditation is essentially Buddhist and is only neutral at a basic
level. Once the meditator advances he/she is taken into a world and cosmology
informed by Buddhist understanding.
A sense of belonging
Soka Gakkai are especially diligent in reaching the ‘lost’: those who have lost
their family ties through moving from the country to the city to work; those wives
who have lost their husbands to business, or ‘another woman’; those mothers who
have lost their children as the children have left home; businessmen who have lost
their wealth for whatever reason. Such people have been ‘found’ by Soka Gakkai.
Identity and companionship is found through membership of the religious com-
munity. In Soka Gakkai, belonging and identity are further developed through
membership of fortnightly local discussion groups, as well as occupational or
interest groups.
Thai society has many lost people who have been brought, or come along
by themselves to Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Many have found the companionship,
spirituality, and ability to live a morally upright life to be what they were looking
for. While not as tightly structured as Soka Gakkai, the temple does have interest
groups, task-orientated teams, and cell groups (kalyanamitra, or ‘good friend’
groups) in which members are encouraged to be involved. Bangkok is divided
into eight divisions and there are fifty divisions throughout the country. There are
over 100,000 families registered in kalyanamitra ‘cells’ throughout the country.30
Phra Dhammachayo appoints the leader of each cell group and assigns a name
for each group.
Normally members eat lunch in their cell groups between the morning
and afternoon programmes. They usually meet as cell groups during the week,
and one of their responsibilities is to follow-up new attendees from their area at
the temple. One member informed me that her group met most nights to medi-
tate. They varied the venue of the meetings so the responsibility of hospitality was
shared between the cell membership. Another member told me that members of
his cell group regularly joined him at his house for weekly meditation. In some
areas, large meeting rooms are hired, for example the Silom district (central area
of Bangkok) where there were approximately 300 members in 2003.
Recruitment to the movement and fund raising
Critics of both movements allege that excessive pressure is applied to non-
members to either donate and/or become members. Soka Gakkai have been
heavily criticised in Japan for their forceful approach (less used in recent years)
to sharing their beliefs with non-members. This confrontational approach is
known as shakubuku. Within the Japanese Buddhist tradition there are two prin-
cipal methods of propagating the faith, shoju and shakubuku. Nichiren viewed
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
72

--- PAGE 88 ---
shakubuku as a necessary approach in Buddhist countries in the Later Day of the
Law.31 He considered shoju to be more appropriate to non-Buddhist countries
(Wilson and Dobbelaere, 1994:11). Shoju ‘involves teaching by example without
the forceful refutation of views’ (Waterhouse, 2002:117).
Earhart (1969:167) comments ‘Shakubuku means to correct one’s evil mind
and convert it to good.’ Hesslegrave (1967:131) prefers the translation ‘coercive
propagation’ as it focuses upon the method rather than the object of the process.
This polemic way of operating necessitates a vigorous attack on the belief system
of the outsider and a demonstration of the truth of the teachings of the Lotus
Sutra. To facilitate members in their proselytising approach, they are ‘supplied
with handbooks containing quotations from Nichiren’s writings and explana-
tions of the Lotus Sutra’s teachings’ (Waterhouse, 2002:128). These handbooks
also contain sample answers to questions non-members are likely to ask. This
confrontational approach along with the use of personal testimony of the benefits
of chanting have contributed to the growth of the movement in Japan.32 Soka
Gakki International, the term for the movement outside Japan, take the more
irenical shoju approach to evangelism. Indeed, more recently, Soka Gakkai within
Japan has moved away from the shakubuku model to a more dialogical approach,
as it has abandoned the view that other religions are evil. Nichiren Sho-shu, the
parent movement, however, has not modified its confrontational approach.
My own experience is that Wat Phra Dhammakaya members seek to encourage
non-members to try Dhammakaya meditation, mentioning the benefits they have
received as a result. The discovery of the model by Luang Phow Sot is explained
and there is a clear invitation to try and see as this is an approach that achieves
results quickly. Invitations to attend the Sunday meetings at the temple are made,
and for those who do not have their own transport, there are instructions as how
to make use of the free buses leaving prominent parts of the city for Wat Phra
Dhammakaya. A shakubuku approach would not be acceptable in Thai culture,
which tends to be non-confrontational. Persistence is permitted and there are
stories of Wat Phra Dhammakaya members steadily working away at their circle
of contacts. Wat Phra Dhammakaya recruited school principals, hospital direc-
tors, and other such civil servants, then had them pressure their staff to attend
Wat Phra Dhammakaya activities and make donations (Bangkok Post, 22:3:02).
A lady shopkeeper described the activities of a relative who tried to sell
her images.33 The relative wished further recognition from temple leadership
for her prowess in fund raising. The issue here seemed to be one of recognition
rather than any material gain. Certain amulets are presented and worn almost like
a medal; they are recognised as a badge of achievement by fellow members.
While both movements grow through the zealous activities (including door to
door work) of members who are persistent and persuasive, it would be wrong for
someone familiar with Soka Gakkai to assume that Wat Phra Dhammakaya takes
a shakubuku style approach to outsiders.
In 1990–91, many of the tensions between the Nichiren Sho-shu and Soka
Gakkai movements came to a head in accusation/counter-accusation, some of
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
73

--- PAGE 89 ---
which involved legal proceedings. Soka Gakkai were excommunicated by the
Nichiren Shoshu priesthood on the grounds that they had gone against Nichiren
Shoshu teachings (Wilson and Dobbelaere, 1994:240). Soka Gakkai were able to
use the services of a number of Nichiren Sho-shu priests who felt they wished to
continue their association with them. These priests therefore chose to leave
Nichiren Sho-shu.
Many within the Thai Sakgha were very upset with Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
The key charge levelled at Phra Dhammachayo was his refusal to give up the title
deeds to land donated to him. This led in 1999 to Phra Dhammachayo stepping
down as abbot and Phra Dattacheewo being appointed as acting abbot. A number
of the movement’s distinctives were also attacked, particularly appeals for dona-
tions and their belief system, (especially the nature of nibbana). At the height of
the media attack and Sakgha investigations Wat Phra Dhammakaya almost left
the Sakgha but as we have seen from the end of the Chapter 2 this crisis has past.
It is also important to point out that Wat Phra Dhammakaya has not been publicly
critical of the Sakgha and its leadership. On the other hand, Soka Gakkai
members were critical of the Sho-shu priests for their extravagant standards of
living, and the excessive profits they made from selling memorial tablets for the
dead. Soka Gakkai statements such as ‘inner heart and attitude, not the shaven
head and robe determine who was to be regarded as the true priest’ were under-
stood to be combative by Shoshu priests, who accused the lay movement of
carrying out functions without priests in attendance (Mackenzie, 1995b:12). It
would appear that Wat Phra Dhammakaya will remain within the Sakgha, and not
go through a withdrawal or excommunication process like Soka Gakkai.
While similarities have been identified, one dissimilarity which needs to be
mentioned is political associations. In 1964, Soka Gakkai founded the Komeito,
or ‘Clean Government’ party, under President Ikeda of the Soka Sakkai move-
ment. ‘Komeito claimed that it was a people’s political party as well as a religious
political party and cited the example of Christian parties in Europe, arguing that
the development of religious political parties in Japan was inevitable’ (Murakami,
1980:154). Despite 15.4 per cent of the total national vote in 1968 and its
ambition to be the second ranking opposition party, it became less of a religious
political party (Murakami, 1980:156). Wat Phra Dhammakaya is a monastic-led
movement and officially has no political party associated with it. On the other
hand, the Thai Maharat Party (Great Party of the People) in its zenith allegedly
had a membership of 200,000 people, mostly made up of Wat Phra Dhammakaya
members (Taylor, 2001:141).
Four outside (etic) perspectives on Wat Phra Dhammakaya
Wat Phra Dhammakaya – a ‘fundamentalist’ movement?
The term fundamentalist carries the connotation of being aggressive and reactionary.
The word was first used as a self-designation term by a group of Baptists in the
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
74

--- PAGE 90 ---
northern United States in 1920 to describe their own view of the Christian Scriptures,
as well as their reaction against higher criticism and liberal theology within their
own denomination. In the 1970s, the term was first applied to the Ayatollah Komeini,
and then to other Islamic groups, eventually being applied to other movements. It
may initially seem inappropriate to apply the term to certain religious traditions
which have a reputation for being inclusive, such as Buddhism.
The American based ‘Fundamentalism Project’ was a comprehensive study of
the term fundamentalism and was conducted between 1988 and 1993. It ‘involved
over a hundred scholars from a variety of academic disciplines and religious
traditions’(Harris, 2001:10). The project resulted in the publication between 1991
and 1995 of a five volume series. At the end of the project, nine characteristics
of ‘fundamentalisms’ were identified and are summed up by Harris.34 Points of
contact between Harris’ summary and Wat Phra Dhammakaya are made under
each heading.
Reactivity to the marginalisation of religion (especially to secularisation, both in
opposing and exploiting it.) Those who seek ordination, or wish to become
ubasok and ubasika at Wat Phra Dhammakaya, are expected to have completed
undergraduate studies. Members of the movement tend to be well educated and
appreciate monastics and staff workers having a similar social and academic
background to themselves. One of the problems facing the Sakgha is its loss of
status in society. Monks, up until comparatively recently, functioned as teachers
in temple-based schools. With the development of government schools, this
role is no longer required from the Sakgha. It is a challenge for an increasing
number of well-educated, upwardly mobile Thai to respect monastics who have
not had university education. Another way in which the Sakgha has been judged
irrelevant is through the number of financial and moral scandals which have
been reported by the media concerning monastics. Wat Phra Dhammakaya has a
strong but practical emphasis on morality through the practice of meditation
and listening to teaching. The temple’s approach is not to reject financial gain or
the enjoyment of possessions but rather to keep the Precepts while enjoying a
prosperous lifestyle. 
Selectivity (both in selecting and shaping particular aspects of their religious
tradition, and in selecting some aspects of modernity to affirm and others
to oppose) Dhammakaya meditation is selected as crucial for the progress of
individuals as well as the movement’s expansion. Its practice leads to moral
purity, equipping one to fulfil ones’full potential, and the neutralising/destruction
of evil forces.
Moral dualism
(dividing the world into light and darkness, good and evil).
As already stated, the myth of the Black and White Dhammakaya is strongly
dualistic. It provides a theoretical base for the financing of a centre for
Dhammakaya meditation which will be global in its scope.
Absolutism and inerrancy
(affirming the absolute validity of the perceived
fundamentals of the tradition and, in the case of the Abrahamic religions and
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
75

--- PAGE 91 ---
Sikhism, treating sacred texts as inerrant). Wat Phra Dhammakaya takes the study
of texts seriously (albeit selected texts).35 In response to a question regarding
Santi Asoke’s model of meditation, Phra Dattacheewo asked me to read the
Gajakamoggallana Sutta and then explained some aspects of the sutta to me.
Phra Dattacheewo believed Santi Asoke’s approach to be ill informed because it
does not sufficiently engage with the texts. There is within the Wat Phra
Dhammakaya an absolutism about Dhammakaya mediation being the model of
meditation practised by the Buddha. He is seen to have used it aged seven while
waiting for his father to leave the ploughing ceremony at which he was officiat-
ing. Gotama stopped using that method of meditation as other models were taught
to him by wandering ascetics. He returned to it, however, and as a result was
able to achieve enlightenment. Dhammakaya meditation ceased to be part of
Buddhist practice within the first 500 years of the movement, as supposedly
predicted by the Buddha. The genius of Luang Phaw Sot is his ‘rediscovery’ of
the true Dhamma (sudhamma) of Buddhism, that is, the meditative practice of the
Buddha. This is the key belief and distinguishing characteristic of the movement,
and its members are extremely keen to involve outsiders in the practice of
Dhammakaya meditation.
Millennialism and messianism
(promising victory to the believer in the
culmination of history). The movement is a millenarian movement, and Phra
Dhammachayo is understood by members to be a saviour figure. This is
explained, propagated and sustained by myth, rumour and mystery.
Elect membership
(viewed often as the faithful remnant). Membership of the
movement will mean hard work for those who are committed. Yet there is the idea
that a person’s good karma has resulted in the enormous privilege of having the
opportunity to develop in Dhammakaya meditation.
Sharp boundaries
(separating the saved from the sinful). Negative media atten-
tion, public condemnation and monastic proceedings have caused the movement to
‘draw in’. Yet according to Phra Nicholas this has served to draw the membership
closer together.36 The more one practises Dhammakaya meditation, the more one
is liberated from delusion. A moral purification takes place as one’s original right-
eousness is reclaimed. The colour of the interior area surrounding the location
of the crystal sphere is some indication of a person’s character. Black indicates
evil, white represents purity and grey is a position in between these extremes.
Ultimately, those on the side of the White Dhammakaya are safe, while those who
do not practise Dhammakaya meditation (and are thus deluded) are lost.
Authoritarian organisation
(with a charismatic leadership and little possibility
of opposition from within). Although monastic proceedings and public criticisms
of the abbot eventually caused Phra Dattacheewo to move from being vice-abbot
to acting abbot, Phra Dhammachayo remains the leader. Indeed he is still referred
to by many as the abbot! Phra Dhammachayo has enormous authority which is
legitimised by myth, further confirmed by rumours of his physic powers, and
enhanced by his remote lifestyle at the temple. There is a core of inner-circle
monks committed to ensuring Phra Dhammachayo’s wishes are carried out.
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
76

--- PAGE 92 ---
Behavioural requirements
(treating the member’s time, space and activity as
a group resource). Cell groups are used to integrate members into the movement,
and each group has a particular activity focus, including the raising of funds.
Use is made of members’ resources and networks for the common good of the
movement.
Donald Swearer (1991:678) cites what he considers to be the distinctive features
of fundamentalism in the Theravadin context. These include
G
Being lead by strong, (often militantly aggressive) charismatic leaders;
G
Followers who perceive themselves to be under some kind of threat;
G
The movement will have an obsessive sense of their unique role or destiny and
have anti-rationalist, anti-intellectual and even anti-ritualistic tendencies;
G
They will also tend to stress the value of direct experience coupled with plain
and simple religious practice;
G
Idealogies embraced tend to rest upon simplistic, dualistic and absolutistic
world views.
To demonstrate connections between Swearer’s criteria and Wat Phra
Dhammakaya would be too repetitive. It would appear from the criteria from
Swearer and Marty and Applby that Wat Phra Dhammakaya may be classified
as fundamentalist. Yet the size, progressive nature and global vision of the
movement do not resonate with the term fundamentalist, and in that sense the
term is misleading. On the other hand, the complete commitment to practising
(and encouraging others to practise) Dhammakaya meditation, as well as the
insistence that it was the meditation model that the Buddha used, indicate a
fundamentalist mood.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya – a millenarian movement?
Millenarianism, as a religious phenomenon, is the belief that the end of the world
is at hand, and a new, just order will replace it. ‘The more exclusive the concern
with the end itself, the more such belief shades off toward the catastrophic, the
more exclusive the concern with the New World, the nearer it approaches the
utopian’ (Skek, 1987:521). The present order, (which the movement devalues
and reacts against) will be destroyed. There is also a sharp distinction between
insiders who will be saved (or live in peace), and those who are committed to
maintaining the status quo, who will eventually be destroyed.
A millenarian movement in Thai is referred to as a phu mi bun movement. Phu
mi bun means ‘person with merit’, and followers of such a person view their
leader as a holy person. This person may be identified by a demonstration of
miraculous acts which benefits a few individuals. In this case such a person is
referred to as a phu wiset meaning ‘a person with extraordinary powers’. Keyes
(1977:289) points out that such a person will gain a reputation of being able to
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
77

--- PAGE 93 ---
help many who come to him seeking help. This person (often a monk) will be
known as a phu mi bun.37 If such leadership is on hand during a time of perceived
crisis, then the phu mi bun will be looked to for deliverance.
Thailand has had several phu mi bun movements. Perhaps the best known one
occurred at the beginning of the twentieth century, and is referred to in English
as ‘The Holy Men’s Rebellion’. This uprising’s roots can be traced back to 1867
‘when the Siamese court was forced by France to relinquish its tributary author-
ity over the Kingdom of Cambodia’ (Keyes, 1977:293). Fifteen years later, senior
government officials were sent to the north-east region of Siam to strengthen
King Chulalongkorn’s control in the region. They began to take on the duties (and
privileges) previously held by local ruling families. High taxes, losses of freedom,
(an example of this was the outlawing of tattooing by Prince Sanphasit, who was
in charge of the area), displaced people, poor harvests in the region over two con-
secutive years, all contributed to people feeling anxious, marginalised and in
great social need.
By 1899, Siamese officials began to receive reports that phu wiset had emerged
who were doing miracles (probably healings) and issuing people with sacred water.
Singers had begun to go around the region singing about the coming of a phu mi bun.
The prediction not only spread by song but also through hand-written manuscripts.
According to Keyes (1977:295), there were at least four different written versions of
the message. Each version commenced with the prediction of imminent disaster.
During the disaster many ordinary things would be transformed. Wyatt writes,
Gravel will become gold and silver and gold and silver will become
gravel. Gourds and pumpkins will become elephants and horses, albino
buffalo and pigs will become man – eating yaksa [giants]. Thao
Thammikarat (a Lord of the Holy Law) will come to rule the world.
(Wyatt, 1984:214)
The manuscripts go on to say that those who follow the phu mi bun will not only
be delivered from harm, but prosper.
Whoever wishes to remain free from these evil happenings should copy
or retell this story and make it generally known. If one is pure and has
not performed any evil or bad karmic deeds (or if one wishes to become
rich), one should collect pebbles so that Thao Thammikarat can trans-
form them into gold or silver.
(Keyes, 1977:296)
A clear millenarian pattern emerges. There is a prediction of the immanent
destruction of the status quo, a reversal of natural conditions, and there is both
deliverance and hope for a new future for those who demonstrate their trust in
the phu mi bun.38 In February 1902, Phra Yanarakkhit the senior monk in the
north-east region reported that in the Sakgha (Surin province) everyone was
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
78

--- PAGE 94 ---
talking about the phu mi bun. In some places the rice was not harvested and the
cattle were allowed to eat it (Keyes, 1997:297).
Early in 1902, three key leaders of the phu mi bun movement in north-east
Thailand were identified. Man, from French Laos, claimed to be Cao (or Ong)
Prasatthong.39 A local government official wrote,
[H]e claims to be a phu wiset and has gone about demonstrating his
powers by keeping the (Eight) Precepts, meditating in caves and in the
hills, and making sacralized water. He deceives the populace that he is a
phu wiset who can cure various illnesses with magic (rut), sacralized
water and enchanted medicine (khunya).
(Keyes, 1977:297)
Thao Bucan was a leader of another faction of the phu mi bun movement which
operated in the region now known as Sri Sisaket, in North-East Thailand. He was
disappointed not to be made governor of his region, and left town along with two
other noblemen. They established themselves as phu mi bun in a nearby village,
attracting a following of around 6,000.
Lek was the third figure in this broad based phu mi bun movement. He had a
(probably small) following in what is now referred to as the province of
Mahasarakham. It is less than clear the extent to which these leaders related
to each other, and whether or not they shared the same goals. According to
Keyes (1977:298), one minor leader interviewed after the uprising was quashed
indicated that they shared the common objective ‘to establish a kingdom which
was not under the Siamese or the French’. Once the opposing powers in the region
were neutralised, power was to be shared by four of the main leaders, each leader
located in a different principal town in the north-east region.
Siamese military patrols were dispatched to arrest the movement’s ring
leaders. Thao Buncan was killed and his followers were dispersed. The other
military patrols were not so successful. Man and Lek joined forces and led a
party of 2,500 followers on one of the large towns in the area. They killed
two of the chief nobles of the city, captured the governor of the province and
looted the town. More followers joined the millenarian movement. This, however,
galvanised the Siamese government to send in more troops. After a 4 hour battle
the rebels were comprehensively defeated. While there was no loss of life
among the government solders, 200 rebels were killed, 500 injured and around
400 eventually captured. The senior leaders were executed in their home
villages as an example of what happens to rebels. The minor leaders were impris-
oned, while the followers had to participate in ceremonies in which they drank
the water of allegiance and pledged loyalty to King Chulalongkorn (Keyes,
1977:299).
A government review of the uprising caused it to conclude that poverty was a
contributing factor. Projects to help the people of the region were established,
including a railway system to open up the region. The government wisely slowed
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
79

--- PAGE 95 ---
down the pace of change in the region, and recruited local land owners into the
civil service. The Sakgha Act of 1902 was passed by the government which began
a process of standardisation of Buddhist teaching and practice. Buddhism and
education, (which at that time was carried out in temple schools) were used as
tools for unifying the kingdom. ‘The message conveyed to villages throughout
Siam was “only the person who has merit” has the power to share the benefits
of this merit with others and that is the King of Siam’ (Keyes, 1977:300).
It would be wrong, however, to think that millenarian movements were
restricted to the rural poor. The Hupphasawan movement which reached its zenith
in terms of popularity in the late 1970s ‘drew a considerable degree of its support
from among some of the most privileged and powerful sections of Thai society’
(Jackson, 1988:134). This movement was founded by a Sino-Thai spirit medium,
Suchart Kosonkittiwong. Suchart, born in 1943 and brought up in a poor family
in Bangkok, had a basic education and spent some time in the army as a conscript.
On leaving the army, Suchart became a healer and sold magical cures from his
house in Thonburi, just across the Chao Phraya river from Bangkok. He claimed
that he had been selected by the spirit world to act as a medium for three deceased
monks who are highly regarded in Thailand.40 ‘Suchart saw himself as a material
focus of a supernatural power whose mission was to save Thailand, and the world,
from the moral degeneration and suffering which communism had given rise to’
(Jackson, 1988b:140). Just as the marginalised in North-East Thailand had
aligned themselves with a phu mi bun and looked forward to deliverance from
danger and better things to come, so those in the urban context who felt their posi-
tions (economically and/or politically) were under threat from communism
sought help from Suchart.
The perceived threat of communism was very real in Thailand, and the focus
of the nation was resisting it. Cambodia, (bordering on Thailand), broke off diplo-
matic relations with Thailand in 1959. North Vietnam and the People’s Republic
of China began to support anti-government insurgency in Thailand (Wyatt,
1984:287) and by 1962, the Voice of the People of Thailand was broadcasting
from South China. The Communist Party of Thailand (CPT) were particularly
strong in North-East Thailand and in the late 1960s they linked up with a number
of Islamic Socialist groups in the southern part of the country and also ‘among
the Meo/Hmong and Yao groups in the north, and among the Karen settlements
in the west along the Burmese Border’ (Phongpaichit and Baker, 1995:295). The
American government worked very closely with their Thai counterparts giving
them every assistance in combating the communist insurrection.41. Despite these
efforts, in 1979 the CPT ‘had an estimated 10,000 armed members’(Phongpaichit
and Baker, 1995: 311).
Aware of the mounting tension communism was bringing, Suchart commenced
the building of a religious centre in 1970. It was named ‘The Religious State of
the Vale of Heaven’ (Thai Anajak Hupphasawan Muang). Located in Ratburi
Province, approximately two hours drive south-west of Bangkok, it functioned as
an international federation of religions and organised pan-religious opposition to
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
80

--- PAGE 96 ---
the spread of communism. The inter-religious aspect of the movement was
represented by statues of the Buddha, Jesus, Mary, Shiva and Kuan Im (Chinese,
Guan Yin).42 The centre attracted the Supreme Patriarch and senior Roman Catholic
clergy on the occasion of an exhibition on Christianity, Buddhism and peace. The
movement had its critics. Anun Senakhan, ‘gate-keeper’ of traditional Thai beliefs
and practices, referred to Suchart as a phi bun (Jackson, 1988:138). This play on sim-
ilarly sounding words but different tone means Suchart is accused of being a ghost
(Thai phi) rather than a ‘person of merit’. As the movement gained protection from
influential people, Suchart became more extreme in his predictions.
He predicted that Thailand would become the focus of the world’s
ideological rivalry, would be invaded simultaneously by the Vietnamese,
the Chinese, and the US, and would be the flash-point for a nuclear war.
The catastrophe would occur in 1982 unless people supported his move-
ment of spiritual opposition. Suchart announced that only he and the
King could engineer the salvation of Thailand. The government were no
more than a ‘flock of sparrows’, while he and the King were equivalent
‘phu mi bun’ (men of merit) who had the sole responsibility to lead the
spiritual crusade against communism. He advised the King to abdicate
and join him in his crusade.
(Phongpaichit and Baker, 1995:318)
At the end of 1981, police raided the Ratburi centre. Suchart escaped but was
caught some six years later. He was given a one year prison sentence and later
released on bail. Just as the millenarian movement in the north-east region in
1902 was brought to an end by the establishment, so the Hupphasawan movement
was declared to be unacceptable by the establishment. It may well be that reli-
gious and political leaders were prepared to support, or even ignore some aspects
of the Hupphasawan movement in its earlier days because of its anti-communist
position. The call, however, for the king to abdicate and co-lead the nation with
the Hupphasawan founder was an extremely sensitive issue. To make public such
vision suggests either madness, or a very strong power base with support in the
upper echelons of society/government. Jackson (1988:164) quotes Buddhist critic
Krajang Nanthapho:
The activities of Huppasawan received increasing coverage until those
with secular and religious power in the country began suspecting that
the movement was no longer an instrument of their own policies as they
had previously thought. This was especially the case when Suchart
became a famous person eclipsing even the leading figures in the
government.... The movement was destroyed because it grew large
beyond all bounds, to the point that people at the level of government
could not control it.
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
81

--- PAGE 97 ---
The appeal of Hupphasawan was to middle to upper class Thai who were to
some extent not wielding as much political power as they would have wished.43
These people believed they would lose wealth and/or status, should communism
become a strong force within the nation. The movement provided a supernatural
hope and legitimisation of opposition to communism in the name of well-
accepted Buddhist folk religion outwith the Sakgha, the official expression
of Buddhism.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya, in a similar way to Hupphasawan, offers a myth of a
supernatural force located out with the Thai Sakgha which offers protection to
wealth and prestige. Wat Phra Dhammakaya remains within the Sakgha, yet
within the movement there is a particular understanding of their function as White
Dhammakaya overcoming Mara as well as Phra Dhammachayo’s role as being an
Avatara and part of the original White Dhammakaya. This suggests that Wat Phra
Dhammakaya is a millenarian movement, and Phra Dhammachayo fulfils the
role of a phu mi bun to the membership. Feungfusakul points out that the
bio-graphy of Phra Dhammachayo uses a traditional genre such as is used
to describe traditional heroes and Buddhist saints to portray the movement’s
leader as a sanctified leader.44 For example, during her pregnancy, Phra
Dhammachayo’s mother is said to ‘have had a dream that she was given a
Buddha image which, after being rubbed, shone so brightly it lit up the town’
(Bangkok Post, 21.12.98).
It would appear that there are stories circulating around Wat Phra Dhammakaya
that Phra Dhammachayo is a ‘holy crusader’ with mind reading powers. Members
also talk of light radiating from his body (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98). One temple
trainee described the leader as follows:
His carriage was magnificent, his complexion clear, clean, and radiantly
glowing beneath the yellow robe. The attractiveness of his appear-
ance...caused me to be filled with such joy that tears flowed without my
realising it. That picture will surely remain firmly in my heart and mind
as long as I live.
(Swearer, 1991:665)
The leader of Wat Phra Dhammakaya is thus viewed by the movement’s
membership as a person with great merit. The myth that explains the genesis
of White Dhammakaya and the mission of Wat Phra Dhammakaya as well as
the role of Phra Dhammachayo, all serve to perpetuate an understanding that the
leader is a phu mi bun. The mysterious, indeed sacred image is further enhanced
through Phra Dhammachayo’s remoteness. He does not eat with monks in the
main hall and unlike Phra Dattacheewo, he very seldom appears in public.
The exact time his followers can meet him is on a Sunday afternoon
in a pavilion in the inner part of the temple. He is said to be a very
good meditation teacher, but only the selected ones have the chance
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
82

--- PAGE 98 ---
to learn directly from him, usually the close followers, high ranking
lay personnel or certain lay contributors who, according to the abbot’s
judgement, possess certain inherent mental faculty.
(Feungfusakul, 1993:76)
In the two examples of millenarianism which we have examined, we have noted
a perception by followers that leaders have access to miraculous powers.45 Indeed,
this perception legitimises the leaders in the eyes of the followers. The demon-
stration of miraculous/magic power demonstrates the ability of a leader to deliver
what potential followers require. As the need is met, an allegiance is formed
between the leader and followers. This may be diagrammed as follows:
Source: Adapted from a diagram by Charles Kraft (1991:258–65).
The power encounter is a significant sign, or signs, where the phu wiset/phu mi
bun demonstrates the possession of a power that is greater than opposing threats,
or delivers something that potential followers are seeking. An example of the for-
mer is a magical charm that protected followers from bullets from the protesting
Chinese tin miners in South Thailand. The biography of Phra Dhammachayo tells
of the monk, then a student at Kasetsart University, having a ‘duel of supernatu-
ral powers with Padet Pongsawat, an older Kasetsart University student. After
losing, Mr Padet turned into Phra Dhammachayo’s foremost supporter, and is now
Phra Dattacheewo’ (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98). This is possible, as we read Phra
Dattacheewo ‘turned his back on his former expertise in black magic to pursue a
life of virtue’ (www.dhammakaya.be Lesson No.5, Section 9). A member of
the movement informed me that all he knew about a power encounter was that the
then Mr Padet was with Phra Dhammachayo when the latter triumphed over ‘the
so-called supernatural powers of others.’46
The explanation of the source of power may well be made by followers who
attribute it to the merit amassed by the phu wiset/phu mi bun, or his contacts
with the supernatural world, as observed in the Hupphasawan movement. In the
initial stages it will be the aspiring leader who will explain why he has such
power, and how it is relevant to potential followers. A new allegiance is the result
of a convinced enquirer making a commitment to the one who has power and
becoming part of the movement.
Richard Shek (1987:526) notes that millenarian movements go through phases:
‘an expansive phase during which believers move out to a ripening world and an
astringent phase during which they pull in toward a holy refuge’. This statement
resonates with Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s short history. In the early years of the
movement, their fund raising and recruitment was high profile as white-clothed
members went door-to-door on housing estates. Media criticism and eventual
legal and monastic investigations curtailed the movement’s activities, causing
Power
encounter
New
allegiance
Explanation of the 
source of power
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
83

--- PAGE 99 ---
them to ‘pull in to a holy refuge’. This experience, as well as the movement’s loss
of initial vitality has brought about lower profile methods of operating.
Millenarians tend to believe that a new day will soon dawn for them; millenarian-
ism ‘is distinguished from other eschatological belief systems in that the millennium
is believed to be imminent’ (Keyes, 1977:283). This was clearly the case with the
North–East Thailand and Hupphasawan movements. Wat Phra Dhammakaya is a
curious mix of millenarian and prosperity movements. The element of the immediate
is inherent in experiencing the benefits of meditation and alms-giving. Yet the move-
ment is also concerned with long-term mission, which is the releasing of mankind
from the delusion that prevents them from seeing the truth. Wat Phra Dhammakaya
is being prepared to be the centre for these operations.
In response to the question ‘May Wat Phra Dhammakaya be considered a
millenarian movement?’ Phra Nicholas responded ‘It is Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s
practice to emphasize the tradition, not the leader. In more recent times with
the intense pressure placed on the movement by the media, Phra Dhammachayo
has become very high profile.’47 Phra Nicholas went on to point out that the
movement pays great honour to the Dhammakaya model of meditation and
the masters of the tradition. He cited Luang Phaw Sot who rediscovered
Dhammakaya meditation and Khun Yai Chan who trained Phra Dhammachayo
and Phra Dattacheewo, the two leaders of the movement.48 Currently, Phra
Dhammachayo is understood to be the leader of the movement.
Lineage then is seen as a particularly important concept within Wat Phra
Dhammakaya. In other traditions, when a high-profile leader passed away, the
movement went into decline, as it focused on a person rather than a tradition
and/or lineage. Phra Nicholas cited the example of the temple at Suan Mokh
(South Thailand) which was built up through the scholarship and teaching of
Buddhadasa (1906–93) and went into decline when Buddhadasa passed away.
This in his opinion was the result of the Thai practice of following a strong leader
who is perceived to have merit. Phra Dhammachayo expresses his confidence in
the ability of the movement to continue after his death, ‘If I die, the system here
has already been put in place. If I pass away, the temple can carry on with its
mission. Nobody worries about that’ (Gearing, 1999). It is true that lineage is
important to Wat Phra Dhammakaya, and that the movement will continue when
Phra Dhammachayo dies. This, however, does not weaken the argument for Wat
Phra Dhammakaya being classified as a millenarian movement.
Economic instability brings anxieties, just as the activities of the Communist
Party of Thailand did, for example diminished earning power and ability to control
situations. Wat Phra Dhammakaya members believe that their giving to the temple
and practice of Dhammakaya meditation will help ensure their prosperity and
status. Just as there was the possibility of a physical conflict with communist
armed troops, so Wat Phra Dhammakaya members currently see a spiritual power
encounter ahead. It would be interesting to know if part of the purpose of the myth
was to recreate a sense of physical uncertainty after communist dominance ceased
to be a threat in the region. In terms of surviving the spiritual conflict between
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
84

--- PAGE 100 ---
the White and Black Dhammakaya and being on the winning side, there is a
clear dependence on Phra Dhammachayo, a phu mi bun, or greater still Avatara.
‘Though not clearly spelt out in public, many Wat Phra Dhammakaya followers
believe that world calamity is approaching and their leader is to be the new
messiah when the world “has cooled down”’ (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98). There is a
faith in and commitment to Phra Dhammachayo, indeed there is a rumour of a rit-
ual of members making a vow to be willing to die for him (Bangkok Post, 22.3.00).
Wat Phra Dhammakaya – a galactic structure?
Stanley Tambiah describes what he has termed the ‘galactic polity’. Galactic
polity models understandings of cosmological structures. Precise patterns of
organisational groupings around the centre vary. For example, they may be in
radial patterns or concentric circles. A particular majdala may be used which is
modelled on a certain number of units, for example, 9, 17 or 33, or indeed, larger
units. Such schemes ‘mirrored a cosmos that was deployed first and foremost
topographically. And since this topography represented a cosmic harmony, there
was a good reason to pattern the state after it’ (Tambiah, 1976:110).
The concept of the galactic polity is that of a central space from where control
is exercised over a surrounding area. This ‘centre represents the totality and
embodies the unity of the whole’ (Tambiah, 1976:114). Rigid area boundaries do
not exist in the galactic paradigm; instead boundaries expand/contract depending
on the increase/decrease of power at the centre. Located in the centre of the
galactic system was the king’s capital. It was surrounded by provinces controlled
by princes or governors appointed by the king. These, in turn, were surrounded by
more or less independent ‘tributary’ polities (Tambiah, 1976: 112).
Donald Swearer believes that the informing ideas of the galactic polity have
virtually disappeared due to the dissolution of the absolute monarchy in 1932 and
the development of the modern nation state. Swearer takes the view that Wat Phra
Dhammakaya is re-creating the old galactic policy and in so doing offers a visible
structure that is reminiscent of the past to a society who views the Sakgha as
important.
By fashioning a distinctive movement within the Mahanikaya tradition,
organised around a national centre, [Wat Phra] Dhammakaya proposes
in effect to recreate the old galactic polity model and thereby to restore
a vivid and dynamic past to a fragmented Thai society and a political
environment continually beset by corruption and factionalism, in which
the symbolic power of the monarchy is waning and the practical power
of religion is virtually non existent.
(Swearer, 1991:657)
Schober disagrees with Swearer’s theory and writes, ‘The new Buddhist
movements redefine the role of religious community within society. This trend
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
85

--- PAGE 101 ---
has promoted further laicization in religious matters and erosion of centralised
monastic authority’ (Schober, 1995:308). Also, these new movements ‘position
themselves largely antithetically to the social–religious paradigms of the galactical
polity of the modern nation-state’ (Schober, 1995:319).
The Sakgha has been used to legitimise kingship and government within the
nation. It has also been utilised to strengthen the nation’s security. For example,
the Phra Thammacharik order worked among the tribes of North Thailand trying
to convert them from the practice of Primal Religion (Animism) to Buddhism.
This was to assimilate them into Thai society and minimise communist growth
in the region. Swearer attributes the re-creation of the galactic polity to Wat
Phra Dhammakaya without reference to other components of galactic polity, for
example, hegemony, economic control and political function. A discussion of Wat
Phra Dhammakaya in reference to its relationships with these components would
strengthen Swearer’s claim. It may, however, be argued that Swearer is simply
using the concept of Wat Phra Dhammakaya operating out of a strong centre, to
influence that which is grouped around it.
There has been an ebb and flow of Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s influence within
the Thai Sakgha since Swearer and Schober wrote in the early to mid 1990s.
Since the beginning of the economic recession in 1997, the media have been
highly critical of Wat Phra Dhammakaya, and the movement lost much of its
credibility; indeed it has struggled to remain within the Thai Sakgha. Since the
stepping down of Phra Dhammachayo as abbot, Wat Phra Dhammakaya has
received much less criticism in the media. Indeed, the movement is increasingly
involved in supporting the administrative work of the Maha thera samakom in its
leadership of the Thai Sakgha.
Swearer’s connection between Wat Phra Dhammakaya and galactic polity may
be sustained if the movement were to be viewed as operating on an international
rather than a national basis. Wat Phra Dhammakaya members view its temple as
the centre of the world. From this centre, the delusion-overcoming message of
Dhammakaya meditation will radiate out to the rest of the world. This global
perspective is much grander than Swearer’s national view, which is based on a
reconstruction of Ayutthaya (and later Bangkok) as being the centre of the power
which controlled Siam. Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s vision is much greater than
rejuvenating the Thai Sakgha. Their understanding of a galactic structure is a
strong centre in Bangkok but radiating to the ends of the earth with a message not
currently accepted by the Thai Sakgha.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya centres throughout the world may be viewed as
satellites – ‘more or less “autonomous” entities held in orbit and within the sphere
of influence of the centre’ (Tambiah, 1976:113). A contemporary use of the
galactic model does not rely on the replication of a ceremony that has first been
conducted at the centre. In times past seasonal rites were orchestrated so that a
rite was first performed at the capital by the king or his delegate. It was then
repeated by the provincial rulers, and then by their lesser district heads (Tambiah,
1976:111). The use of Satellite TV and web-based technology now mean that
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
86

--- PAGE 102 ---
throughout the world Wat Phra Dhammakaya members may simultaneously
participate in an act of meditation being led by Phra Dhammachayo, or other
senior monks at the temple in Bangkok.49 Members of the movement go to
extraordinary lengths to be with other members at a Wat Phra Dhammakaya
centre for Sunday sermons, especially on the first Sunday of each month when the
offering is presented through meditation to the Buddhas in ayatananibbana.50
The act of being together with other members and joining in meditation which is
being led by the movement’s leader in Bangkok, creates a feeling of identity. This,
coupled with the travel (often a journey of several hours) to the movement’s
centre, functions as an act of allegiance to the leader and the movement. Teaching
disseminated like this will be received uncritically and will serve to ensure that
‘the lesser unit is a reproduction and imitation of the larger’ (Tambiah, 1976:112).
A high-profile centre is certainly created through the presence of 700 ubasoks
and ubasikas, 600 monks and 3–400 novices. Indeed, the number of monks and
novices considerably increase during phansa. In addition, the movement offers
lay people the opportunity to purchase small houses on temple land to use for
relaxation and meditation. The temple is a central base for hosting training and
conferences as well as gatherings of senior monks. Indeed, there is no need to
leave the centre to engage in the conservative forest dwelling ascetic practices.
These are held on temple grounds and Wat Phra Dhammakaya ‘thus short-circuits
the seeking out of spiritual power from forest monks by relocating that power
within the lay followers themselves’ (Jackson, 1989:207). The temple has also
become a place of pilgrimage for Dhammakaya meditators from around the
world. Western lay people often come for special training in meditation, and non-
Wat Phra Dhammakaya monks from other Asian countries, as well as from within
the kingdom are sponsored to attend meditation courses at the temple.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya – a Buddhist commodity/prosperity movement?
Outsiders may describe Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s style of Buddhism as ‘com-
modity Buddhism’. A Buddha image is offered for sale and purchasing it is said
to secure a variety of benefits for the donor. The item, transaction and results are
clearly explained, identifiable and measurable, rather than abstract. Suwanna
Satha-Anand, associate professor of Buddhist philosophy at Chulalongkorn
University, is quoted as saying: Wat Phra Dhammakaya concretises Buddhist
ideals to respond to the consumer culture which dominates Thai society. It gives
people a ‘you can see what you pay for kind of feeling’ (Daorueng, 1999:39).
Fuengfusakul agrees and writes that the Thai word bun (merit) is ‘thus treated as
though it were a concrete object. Expressions such as “a heap of bun” or “greedy
for bun” are frequently used [by members]’ (1993b:167). Temple members would
dispute this perspective, pointing out that the image or amulet is simply a memento
from the temple to remind the donor of that act of merit-making.
The Dhammakaya Foundation system is ‘user-friendly’ for the busy person.
There is a clear advantage in meeting on a Sunday as opposed to a Buddhist holy
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
87

--- PAGE 103 ---
day which is often on a day during the working week. There are activities for
children and young people and a commitment to working with the young at Wat
Phra Dhammakaya. This is very attractive for parents raising their children in a
rapidly changing and increasingly Westernised Thai urban culture.51 The temple
permits members a prosperous life style, yet provides a sense of the spiritual
through participation in meditation, chanting and listening to the teaching of the
Dhamma. One business man shared how, since meditating and applying the
temple’s teaching to his life, he is able to resist the normal temptations faced
by businessmen in Thailand.52 The movement’s lifestyle promotes good family
values and seeks to provide a network of like minded friends to facilitate spiritual
development.
In ‘1988 the movement won an award from the Business Management
Association of Thailand for its religious market planning strategies’ (Jackson,
1997:83). This honour is not recorded in the list of organisational awards in the
movement’s ‘Introduction to the Work of the Dhammakaya Foundation’, their well-
produced piece of English language publicity. It was in the same year that Kukrit
Pramoj, the kingdom’s prime minister from 1975 to 1976 and astute socio-political
commentator questioned ‘whether the temple is offering spirituality or “religious
pleasure” comparable to that of recreation clubs and fishing parks’ (Keyes,
1991:395). Wat Phra Dhammakaya respond by saying that they are empowering
lay people to engage with, rather than renounce the world they live in, through
moral and meditation training. This synthesis of spirituality, economic success and
consumerism, however, does not sit well with many Thai traditionalists.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya may be described as a Buddhist prosperity movement
as the acquiring of wealth is emphasised as well as securing a good rebirth. The
movement promises peace and prosperity as donors contribute to temple causes.
There will be altruistic donors whose main purpose in giving, for example, to the
Dhammakaya Cetiya, is to contribute to the construction of a monument that
gives appropriate honour to the teachings of the Buddha, as well as reminding
members of the movement’s stated aim of bringing about world peace through
inner peace (the Dhammakaya within).53 Less altruistic donors may have the
personal fruit of the merit-making action primarily in mind as they purchase an
image to be placed in the cetiya.
The crucial issues here are: to what extent is psychological pressure exerted on
people in order to secure donations, and is Buddhist teaching in any way distorted
as a result of the advertising process? In 1999, certain sections of the media
complained to the police about the way in which the public were being
pressurised into purchasing Buddha images by Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Had
they been able to collect at least ten people willing to formalise a complaint, they
could have called for an official investigation. Despite over 400,000 images
having been sold at that point, the media were unable to bring an official
complaint to the police department (Thanavuddho, 2000:11).
Potential pressure applies not just to donors but also to those members who are
trying to sell images within their own networks, and who may be operating under
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
88

--- PAGE 104 ---
real or imagined burdens from their leaders to secure sales. Phra Santikaro alleges
‘Wat Phra Dhammakaya recruited school principals, hospital directors, and other
such civil servants, then had them pressure their staff to attend Wat Phra
Dhammakaya activities and make donations’ (Bangkok Post, 22.3.02).54
Feungfusakul mentions 62 subgroups who are encouraged to use a direct face-to-
face approach to mobilise funds from their network of family, friends and work
colleagues, as well as door-to-door visitation. She goes on to comment,
For the members, merit making means not only that the person himself
does the act, but also that he should persuade as much people as possi-
ble to join this stream of merit....Techniques to encourage fund-raising
are continuously discussed in the sub-group leader meetings. Rewards in
the various forms are offered to members who can raise a given amount
within a determined period, e.g. golden shields, lockets decorated with
precious stones and a picture of Khun Yai Chan, and various sizes of
crystal Buddha images.
(Feungfusakul, 1993:125)
One Thai academic 55 informed me that Wat Phra Dhammakaya uses a pyramid
operational structure where sales/recruitment teams and their hierarchical manage-
ment are rewarded for the number of sales made, or recruits brought in to temple
membership.56 The booking form for a Dhammakaya image for the cetiya requires
the name of the team, group, staff name and staff number to be completed, yet this
does not prove sales people are rewarded in any way for securing donors. Wat Phra
Dhammakaya point out that every temple expects to receive from those who attend
and use its services. Their expenses are significant as they provide services for those
who do not donate, for example, bringing monks from all over Thailand and outside
the kingdom to Wat Phra Dhammakaya for instruction in meditation. Phra Nicholas
indicated that the Dhammakaya Foundation had no hesitancy in asking its mem-
bership to give.57 Indeed, the more a member gives the more that member will
benefit. This is in line with the general Buddhist idea that dana ‘leads simply and
naturally to the more advanced stages. Above all, it reduces possessiveness and self-
ishness, leading naturally to the sensitivity of others’(Cousins, 1997:395). Not only
does the giver (dayaka) progress on the spiritual path, there is also the karmic fruit
of the giving to be experienced at some future point. If the act of giving is conducted
with pure motives, and the giving is to a noble cause (such as Wat Phra
Dhammakaya) then the act of giving is truly meritorious. Nevertheless, traditional
Buddhism does not say that if you give ‘x’, you will automatically receive ‘y’.
Unlike Santi Asoke, Wat Phra Dhammakaya is comfortable with the capitalist
approach to economics (Thai thun-niyom). A good economy is understood as
benefiting the nation. Clearly as members are enabled to work harder and be
morally restrained through the practice of Dhammakaya meditation, then they
will become more prosperous. Yet the act of giving is not only meritorious, it
curbs striving after wealth and hoarding possessions. Phra Dattacheewo
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
89

--- PAGE 105 ---
challenged me to answer what would happen to Thailand if Santi Asoke’s
economic model of bun-niyom was adopted.58 Bun-niyom is a Buddhist approach
to economics based on meritism, where the profit margin is deliberately marginal.
According to Bodhirak, the leader of the Santi Asoke movement, this approach
encourages people to help others, and results in ‘the birth of a “Buddha mind”
which enables people to live according to the teachings of the Buddha’ (Heikkilä-
Horn, 1997:122).59 Clearly the expected answer to Phra Dattacheewo’s answer
was the country would quickly go into economic decline!
No critique of capitalistic development has come from the Sakgha [leadership]
since 1957 (Keyes, 1990:389), as this would be detrimental to economic devel-
opment (and the government regulates to a large extent the Sakgha’s public state-
ments).60 Economic prosperity results in more donations to the Sakgha from
government, companies, charities and individuals. There have, however, been
concerns expressed by monks about an excessively materialistic approach that
ignores Buddhist principles. Buddhadasa is an example of a monastic who criti-
cally engaged with a development approach that ignored Buddhist principles.
‘We still run after the tail end of the progress of those who are materially devel-
oped. Why do we worship the material side of development?...because we don’t
know that it is dangerous to humanity’ (Jackson, 1988:236).
There are some similarities between Wat Phra Dhammakaya and the Christian
prosperity gospel. A basic tenet of the latter is that poverty and sickness are a
consequence of ‘the fall’, which is the work of evil. ‘The reason the Son of God
appeared was to destroy the devil’s work’ (1 John 3:8), thus those who have faith in
Christ and what he may provide for them may claim prosperity and good health.61
An essential feature of such movements is teaching on the relationship between
giving to the movement (the same as giving to God) and being blessed by God. It is
set forward in terms of cause and effect, and the donor is promised that he/she will
invariably be better off as a result of giving. Important and (legitimate) principles in
fund raising are to demonstrate to the donor how the project is in line with his/her
value system and of the essential value of the donor’s contribution to the continua-
tion of the project. Dhammakaya Foundation teaching flags up the importance of
making merit (Thai tham bun); if we give now we will have it returned to us, not by
God, but by the process of karma. From the Buddhist perspective this is all true, but
to specify maturation dates and quantify the fruit of karmic effort is to commodify
the merit-making process and make it rather mechanical and deterministic.
Use of typologies to classify Wat Phra Dhammakaya
Glock and Stark’s deprivation model
Deprivation refers to ‘any and all of the ways that an individual or group may be,
or feel disadvantaged in comparison either to other individuals or groups, or to an
internalized set of standards’ (Glock and Stark, 1965:246). Deprivation tends to
be accompanied by a desire to overcome it, except when it is legitimised by
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
90

--- PAGE 106 ---
society, for example, in the Hindu caste system. Glock and Stark put forward a
development of Merton’s idea that social changes arise because of an imbalance
between cultural goals and the cultural means to attain them. ‘Groups and indi-
viduals lacking these cultural means may be seen as deprived’ (Bernard and
Burgess, 1996:332). A sense of deprivation is a precondition for the emergence
of a new social or religious movement but it is not sufficient in itself. Also
required are the additional conditions that the deprivation be shared, that no
alternative institutional arrangements for its resolution are perceived, and that a
leadership emerge with an innovating idea for building a movement out of the
existing deprivation (Glock and Stark, 1965:249).
Glock and Stark identify five types of deprivation (Bernard and Burgess,
1996:333; Glock and Stark, 1965:248) but only ‘psychic deprivation’ may be
identified as a feature of Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Psychic deprivation may arise
when people experience a lack of a meaningful value system around which to
organise their lives. Such a condition may well be caused by a perceived social
exclusion and may result in disillusionment or despair. The quest for a faith, ethic
or experience is an attempt to address this deprivation. Psychic deprivation may
categorise many well-educated, morally principled Thai, especially those who
live in an urban context. Traditional sermons in a typical temple may well be
perceived as irrelevant by those within this grouping. In contrast, Wat Phra
Dhammakaya readily establishes credibility as a result of its well-educated
monastics and efficiently run programme. It demonstrates an understanding of
the needs and aspirations of the urban middle class, and offers an approach to life
that sees no tension between increasing prosperity and spiritual development. The
temple emphasises purity of life and the means to achieve that – Dhammakaya
meditation. Here then may be found relevant teaching, and a purpose in life, that
is, participating as a lay person in the life and work of Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya is a homogenous unit characterised by both the prosper-
ity of its members and their desire to take religion seriously. The movement offers
a religious system and network which re-enchants its members. These people
have found that aspects of traditional Buddhist teaching/temple attendance do
not resonate with their lifestyle and expectations as well-educated (and usually
considerably prosperous) Thai.
While psychic deprivation is the only category within Glock and Stark’s
typology that may be applied to Wat Phra Dhammakaya, it is interesting to note
clear signs of ‘organismic deprivation’ in the sick who went to Luang Phaw Sot
for healing. Indeed, under his leadership, Wat Paknam was the focal point of a
healing movement. Mettanando (1999:1) confirms this when he writes ‘After the
end of World War II, the monastery had established itself as a renowned centre for
healing meditation which attracted hundreds of visitors everyday’. Organismic
deprivation is caused by some form of disability, addiction or illness. Advances
in medical treatment, and an empowering of the disabled in some parts of the
world mean this is a reduced category.62 Along with other high-level meditators,
Luang Phaw Sot exercised a healing ministry. These meditators would seek to
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
91

--- PAGE 107 ---
determine the cause of the illness through meditation and then give relevant
advice. If the reason for the illness was physical [as opposed to karmic fruit] the
meditators ‘would use the power of meditation to adjust the patient’s internal
functioning along with the administration of herbal medicine’ (Dhammakaya
Publications, 1998:71). With significant advances in medical science and the
development of government hospitals, there is now much less dependence on
monastics as healers. Organismic deprivation, however, cannot be seen as part of
the reason for the growth of the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement. Temple
members tend to be affluent and thus able to afford the best of health care. Those
not in this category will certainly benefit from recent increased accessibility to
low-cost government medical care.
Bryan Wilson’s typology
Bryan Wilson (Bernard and Burgess, 1996:333; Wilson, 1973:18–30) talks of
sects being ideological movements whose aim is maintaining and (perhaps even)
propagating certain ideological positions. These positions are the result of the
response of a movement to the belief that salvation from evil is no longer to be
found within the tradition they have left. Wilson describes seven such positions,
two of which are held and propagated by Wat Phra Dhammakaya members.
First, there is a ‘conversionist’ element to Wat Phra Dhammakaya. ‘Salvation is
seen not as available through objective agencies but only by a profoundly felt,
supernatural transformation of the self’ (Wilson, 1973:22). The world is trans-
formed through changed lives. A member may view attendance at the temple and
a cell group, along with making some progress in meditation and change of
behaviour as evidence of conversion. Temple members familiar with the Black
and White Dhammakaya myth believe that their association with the temple will
keep them safe from forthcoming conflicts with the Black Dhammakaya. The
‘commodifying’ nature of the temple’s teaching, for example, giving a certain
sum of money to the temple to guarantee avoidance of a particular hell, creates
a confidence in achieving salvation from specific torturous rebirths. The more a
member gives, the more he/she will be delivered from suffering and spiritual
conflict.
Second, one can discern a ‘thaumaturgical’ aspect to the movement, that is, a
belief that it is possible to experience the supernatural or ultimate reality in every-
day living. ‘The individual’s concern is relief from present and specific skills by
specific dispensations. The demand for supernatural help is personal and local: its
operation is magical’ (Wilson, 1973:22). Wat Phra Dhammakaya members have
a deep belief that the practice of Dhammakaya meditation can produce extraordi-
nary results.63 Benefits of such meditation are understood to include an increased
performance in the work place and the ability to resist temptations to engage in
unskilful practice (akusala). A new world opens up to the meditator who engages
in Dhammakaya meditation. The centre of the body becomes the place to observe
and understand emerging images, and to adjust one’s understanding of reality
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
92

--- PAGE 108 ---
accordingly. In a sermon prior to the cremation of Khun Yai Chan, Phra
Dattacheewo said:
Many people from the temple would tell Khun Yai Chan some of their
amazing experiences, perhaps of seeing a huge building or strange
animal while on an overseas trip. Khun Yai, however, never expressed
surprise or excitement because what she had seen inside herself was
more amazing than what they had seen in their travels.64
In addition to that which arises within, the meditator may develop a heightening
of the senses or other special qualities. After one session of Dhammakaya medita-
tion, one member informed me that his sense of hearing became so acute he could
hear the sound of insects moving in the grass by the roadside.65 Another component
to the thaumaturgical nature of Wat Phra Dhammakaya is Phra Dhammachayo’s
presenting of donors’ offerings to the Buddhas in ayatananibbana.66 The conver-
sionist and thuamaturgical categories of Wilson’s typology are clearly in evidence
to an outsider observing the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement.
Roy Wallis’ typology
Wat Phra Dhammakaya is a ‘world-affirming’ New Religious Movement, and
resonates with a number of Wallis’ observations of movements he places in this
category. Wat Phra Dhammakaya has been heavily criticised in the media for its
robust recruiting strategy, as well as its alleged pressurising of people to donate
to the temple’s many projects. There is congruence with Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s
practice and the world-affirming category of Wallis’ typology. Wallis (2003:52)
writes,
As the world-affirming movement does not reject the world and its
organization, it will quite happily model itself upon those aspects of
the world which are useful to the movement’s purpose. The salvational
commodity includes a set of ideas, skills and techniques which can be
marketed like any other commodity since no sense of the sacred renders
such marketing inappropriate (as it might, for example in, say, the idea
of marketing the Mass, or Holy Communion).
Wat Phra Dhammakaya members have joined the movement for precisely the
same reason that people join other world-affirming movements. That is, ‘not to
escape or withdraw from the world and its values, but to acquire the means to
achieve them more easily and to experience the world’s benefits more fully’
(Wallis, 2003:46).
There is, however, some dissonance between Wat Phra Dhammakaya and other
world-affirming movements in the area of collectiveness. Individualism and self-
realisation mean that ‘collective activities have little or no sacred quality and
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
93

--- PAGE 109 ---
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
94
indeed are likely to have only a small place in the enterprise’ (Wallis, 2003:49).67
Wat Phra Dhammakaya members engage in meditating together as a group. They
believe that it is easier to obtain a more positive individual outcome when medi-
tating together, rather than meditating in isolation. In addition, there is the strong
conviction that a greater power is generated when members meditate together.
This is partly why Wat Phra Dhammakaya places such importance on meditating
together each Sunday morning. Indeed, on these occasions satellite technology is
used to create a link-up with members throughout the world. Skilled meditators
meditating in teams was a distinctive of Luang Phaw Sot’s practice at Wat
Paknam. This practice was engaged in to generate power against negative
forces including the Black Dhammakaya, which according to the Dhammakaya
discourse, causes mankind to remain in a deluded state.
Lance Cousin’s categories
Our final set of categories is taken from Cousins’ (1997:408–11) observations on
recent trends within Theravada Buddhism. The three germane to Wat Phra
Dhammakaya are: ‘Buddhist modernism’, ‘revival of meditation’ and ‘Theravada
Tantrism’.
Buddhist modernism includes ‘some customs and values based upon Christian
practices’ (Cousins, 1997:410). Wat Phra Dhammakaya meet on Sundays rather
than on Buddhist holy days which occur four times each month according to
the four main lunar phases. The meeting of members in weekly cell groups and
their working together on various tasks, for example, recruiting, are similar to the
practices of some of the large, new Bangkok churches. Perhaps these patterns of
operation have led to the development of the rumour that Wat Phra Dhammakaya
was borrowing some ideas from Christianity. Indeed, some have suggested that
Christianity was seeking to destabilise Buddhism in Thailand through influencing
the temple’s beliefs and practice, thus bringing it into conflict with the Sakgha.68
The essential feature of Wat Phra Dhammakaya is its extremely strong focus on
Dhammakaya meditation. Wat Phra Dhammakaya has over 60,000 lay members
who practice Dhammakaya meditation. It is practiced in cell groups, and there
are midweek classes at the temple as well as on Sunday. Vocational groups, for
example, nurses and soldiers, as well as children’s groups visit the temple and are
introduced to Dhammakaya meditation. Through the use of satellite technology
Wat Phra Dhammakaya groups throughout the world screen the Sunday morning
meditation meeting held at the main temple. Members, regardless of location, are
thus able to participate in the programme of meditation which takes place.
As already mentioned, it is particularly important for all members to join in the
offering made to the Buddhas in nibbana on the first Sunday of each month. This
is normally led by Phra Dhammachayo. The strong focus on meditation by
monks, novices, ubasok and ubasika is paralleled by Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s lay
members. This resonates with Cousins observation of the revival of meditation
within Buddhism in the twentieth century.

--- PAGE 110 ---
The final category drawn from Cousins’ trends in modern Southern Buddhism
is esotericism. It is sometimes referred to as Theravadin Tantrism. While such
practices may be viewed as coming out of the Indian Tantric tradition, Cousins
is correct to suggest ‘it may be better to avoid so specific a terminology’
(1997:410). Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s meditative practice may well have had its
genesis in esoteric Theravada Buddhism which survived the Thammayut reforms
of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Within the Luang Phaw Sot and
Wat Phra Dhammakaya traditions, however, the teaching of this model of medi-
tation has been exoteric. That said, monks from Wat Paknam and Wat Phra
Dhammakaya are reluctant to talk about higher meditation and spiritual warfare
(Thai wicha-rop) between the forces of good and evil.
In the following chapter the Dhammakaya meditative technique is
described.69 This includes use of a crystal sphere being drawn into the centre of
the body via five resting points. The five smaller spheres associated with the
sighting of the crystal sphere at the centre of the body are also mentioned. This
is viewed by Bowers (1996:33–45) as an indication that Tibetan Tantric practice
was the source of the Dhammakaya model of meditation. The use of the Samma
ArahaÅ mantra is also an important part of the ritual of the visualisation of the
crystal sphere. Progress in meditative skill, mental purity and insight are indi-
cated by the brightness of the spheres, their content and ultimately the width of
the Dhammakaya figures. There are connections here between the Dhammakaya
technique and some of the points Cousins (1997b:194–7) makes vis-•-vis
visualisations within the human body and knowledge of higher realities. The
Yogavacara tradition is an alternative term for Esoteric Southern Buddhism or
Tantric Theravada. A number of similarities between Dhammakaya meditation
and the Yogavacara tradition are discussed in Chapter 4.70 This suggests that
Wat Phra Dhammakaya lies within Cousins’ category of Esoteric Southern
Buddhism.
Conclusion
From an insider’s (emic) perspective
Wat Phra Dhammakaya members have every reason to be proud of its
efficiently run temple and programmes with its well-educated monastics and
lay staff. There is a strong belief in the efficacy of Dhammakaya meditation and
affirmation for keeping the Five Precepts. A materialistic lifestyle is not
censored, indeed, Dhammakaya meditation and networking at the temple help
members to achieve greater prosperity. Association with the movement may
contribute to members believing that their wealth will be protected during a
period of economic recession. There is also the confidence among some
members that they will be safe in future conflict between the Black and White
Dhammakaya as they are following a leader with has great power (amnat) and
charisma (parami).
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
95

--- PAGE 111 ---
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
96
Soka Gakkai is a lay movement, while Wat Phra Dhammakaya has a very
strong monastic focus.71 Nevertheless, the following similarities have been
identified between the two movements: readily understood teaching; prosperity
now; excellent publicity; restoration of national significance through global
expansion; a sense of belonging, and recruiting and fund-raising techniques.
While both Soka Gakkai and Wat Phra Dhammakaya have attracted fierce criti-
cism in their respective contexts, Wat Phra Dhammakaya has not been publicly
critical of the Thai Sakgha and has remained within it. Soka Gakkai, on the other
hand, was highly critical of the Nichiren Shoshu priests and eventually withdrew
from their relationship with them.
From an outsider’s (etic) perspective
It is suggested that a reasonable outsider’s perspective of Wat Phra
Dhammakaya is of a Buddhist prosperity movement with some millenarian and
fundamentalist characteristics. Wat Phra Dhammakaya, as we have seen,
encourages members to be prosperous and generous in giving to the various
projects of the temple. Temple administration encourages member-giving by
creatively identifying projects such as purchasing a square metre of granite for
the terrace surrounding the cetiya, or purchasing an image of the Buddha to be
located in the cetiya. Donations to projects take place in large public meetings,
or may be received by a particular monk by special arrangement. On occasions,
but not nearly as much as one would expect, Wat Phra Dhammakaya suggests
specific results for particular donations. An example of this is guaranteed wealth
(termed a ‘millionaire-for-ever’) in subsequent lives for the donor who commits
to providing 1,000 Baht (£17) a month for the temple’s food bill for the rest of
his/her life.
Despite its progressive nature, Wat Phra Dhammakaya may be described as
fundamentalist, and millenarian. The myth regarding an ultimate ‘showdown’
between White and Black Dhammakaya, and Phra Dhammachayo being an
Avatara and part of the original White Dhammakaya party indicate a millenarian
mindset. What is unclear is the extent of acceptance of the myth among Wat Phra
Dhammakaya members. How many is ‘many Wat Phra Dhammakaya devotees
believe their movement is their last train to world salvation’? (Ekachai, 1998:9).72
While lineage is important to Wat Phra Dhammakaya, this does not alter the faith
of ‘many’ members who believe in Phra Dhammachayo’s ability to ensure their
continuing prosperity and ultimate deliverance from the destructive forces of the
Black Dhammakaya.
Categories of various typologies developed by those working in the field of
New Religious Movements were examined and particular resonance was observed
between Wat Phra Dhammakaya and the categories of physic depravation (Glock
and Stark) and conversionist and thaumaturgical (Wilson). ‘World-affirming’
(Wallis) is a clearly discernable characteristic within the movement. Cousins’

--- PAGE 112 ---
observations on recent trends in Theravada Buddhism could be particularly
identified in the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement in the areas of Buddhist
modernism, revival of meditation and Theravada Tantrism. The application of
these typologies causes us to examine Wat Phra Dhammakaya from a variety
of perspectives and thus achieve a more accurate understanding of the movement.
It also indicates that Wat Phra Dhammakaya has some of the characteristics
exhibited by other New Religious Movements.
As already identified, the principle concept of Wat Phra Dhammakaya is
spiritual development through the practice of Dhammakaya meditation. This is
the subject of Chapter 4.
ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
97

--- PAGE 113 ---
4
THE APPROACH OF WAT PHRA
DHAMMAKAYA TO SPIRITUAL
DEVELOPMENT
Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s understanding of nibbana
The traditional Thai Buddhist perspective of nibbana follows the Theravada
approach of nibbana with substrate,1 and nibbana without substrate.2 The first
term refers to the arahat’s experience of nibbana while still alive. The second term
is used in reference to the arahat nibbanic condition, post death.
The position of ‘doctrinal’ Thai Buddhism is that the Buddha helps us by his
example and teachings. However, he is unable to actively help us now as he has
passed into nibbana without substrate and we should not seek his help as we
are all responsible to help ourselves. This remoteness is difficult to live with for
many Thai people facing the rigours of daily living without any form of national
health service and social security etc. That said, the chanting (and listening to the
chanting) of passages from the Pali scriptures (parittas) provide comfort and
allegedly secures safety and blessing partly through the pleasing and subsequent
assistance of gods who are devotees of the Buddha, as well as by helping to
arouse wholesome qualities in chanters and listeners and drawing on the teach-
ings of the Buddha (Harvey, 1990:181). Nevertheless, for a high percentage of
Thai people, nibbana is remote, abstract and even unattractive. The quest for
merit in order to have a better rebirth seems a more attractive option than
enduring the demands placed on the one seeking enlightenment. Thus ‘karmatic’
rather than ‘nibbanic’ Buddhism characterises the average Thai Buddhist.3
‘Nibbana is atta’ (self) is a pithy phrase which sums up the Dhammakaya
understanding of nibbana. It is designed to reflect the movement’s understanding
of nibbana as being a place where the Buddhas reside and concretise what is
considered by the average Thai as abstract (and possibly irrelevant). Critics of the
movement may say that this is part of the ‘commodifying’ of their brand of
Buddhism. In the three Dhammakaya traditions in Thailand, nibbana is described
‘as a permanent blissful realm where the Buddha and other enlightened ones
reside after death’ (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98). This is not referring to the state of
anupadisesa (nibbana without substrate) but a physical location called
ayatananibbana (a sphere/realm of nibbana).4 The Dhammakaya understanding
is that all enlightened beings exist for ever in ayatananibbana in a permanent,
98

--- PAGE 114 ---
perfect and unchanging world beyond saÅsara.5
Scholar-monk Phra
Dhammapitaka appears to take the view that the term ayatananibbana is erro-
neous, and simply another way of referring to the state of the enlightened person
who is free from the fires of greed, hatred and delusion. He comments
(1998:80–6) that there is a lot of speculation about nibbana and rather than
define the concept for others, one should look within to see if defilements are
decreasing.
Phra Rajyanvisith, abbot of Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakaya, writes that
all compounds, or conditioned things are non-self but these do not include the
non-compound (unconditioned phenomena) like nibbana (Jayamanggalo,
1991:45). Classical Theravada Buddhism, in contrast, views nibbana as non-self.
Indeed, Phra Dhammapitaka (1988:9) writes that Wat Phra Dhammakaya do not
stick to the Pali canon, and in absolute terms, there is no such thing as atta. In
the Luang Phaw Sot tradition it is taught that the Five Aggregates (as they are
conditioned phenomena) cannot possess the nibbanic condition). The nibbanic
condition can, however, be possessed by the Dhammakaya (which is uncondi-
tioned). The meditator who achieves the Dhamma-body of Arahatship
(Dhammakaya Arahatta) achieves the nibbana condition. Such a person may,
through the power of higher Dhammakaya meditation, visit ayatananibbana. In
the three Dhammakaya traditions in Thailand Dhammakaya is understood as
being within everyone, that is buddha-nature waiting to be realised.
The Mahayana triple-body doctrine (Tri-kaya)
The Transformation-body, Enjoyment-body and Dharma-body are three aspects
of Buddhahood in the Mahayana tradition (Harvey, 1990:126). Nirmajakaya is
‘the temporal form, in which the Buddha appears like an ordinary mortal and
teaches the Dhamma through ordinary language’ (Klostermaier, 1999:40). This,
according to the Mahayanists, is the main focus of non-Mahayana traditions.
A Mahayana two-fold development prior to the Yogacara school of philosophy
made a distinction between the bodily appearance of the historical Buddha, and
the essence of his nature. This was further developed to divide the appearance
of the historical Buddha in two ways, or as two bodies, the Transformation-body
(nirmajakaya) and the Enjoyment-body (saÅbhogakaya).
The Transformation-body refers to ‘earthly Buddhas, seen as teaching
devices compassionately projected into the world to show people the path to
Buddhahood’ (Harvey, 1990:126). Nirmajakaya is sometimes translated ‘apparition
body’ or ‘phantom body’ and ‘is the physical manifestation of Buddhahood, the
ordinary perishable form, as exemplified by the “historical Buddha” ’ (Harrison,
1992:44). Cabezón, (2000:26) is not alone among Buddhists in viewing Jesus as a
transformation-body, or nirmajakaya. Indeed, Harvey (1990:126) mentions that
D.T. Suzuki viewed some religious teachers from non-Buddhist traditions as
Transformation-bodies, appearing in a form appropriate to a particular culture.
There is interesting speculation (e.g. Keith, 1923:271; Thomas, 1933:243;
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
99

--- PAGE 115 ---
Williams, 1989:178) about the nature of such a body: is it a ‘real’ body of flesh and
blood, or is it simply ‘like’ a human body, as the Mahasakghikas taught? AYogacara
interpretation of a nirmajakaya appearance would be that it is ‘seen to be only an
appearance in the mind-stream of others, with no direct mind-stream of its own other
than that of the projecting sambhogakaya’ (Harvey, 2003:8).6 A similar but less
complex debate was hotly contested in Christianity in the fourth century, in Egypt.7
The Enjoyment-body (saÅbhogakaya) can be described in general terms as a
subtle physical body. It may be regarded as a ‘more exalted and splendid mani-
festation of the enlightened personality’ (Harrison, 1992:44) but regardless of
how glorious and long-lived it is, it is not eternal. The Enjoyment-body is adopted
by heavenly Buddhas for their own enjoyment as well as for the benefit and
enjoyment of the Bodhisattvas in the heavenly realms.8 According to Harvey
(1990:127), in the Yogacara school Dharmakaya ‘is what is known and realised
on attaining Buddhahood, it is nirvaja’ and ‘It is regarded as having a very subtle,
shining, limitless material form from which speech can come.’
Towards an understanding of Theravadan and Wat Phra
Dhammakaya views of Dhammakaya
The Theravada tradition generally understands the term Dhammakaya as the
teachings and moral greatness that was the Buddha’s, and which exists today
in the teachings of the Buddha contained in the Pali canon. The physical body
of the Buddha (rupakaya) is represented by certain stupas, or cetiyas. Thus,
Dhammakaya and rupakaya are the two legacies of the Buddha, and key
symbols of Buddhism. Those who practise Dhammakaya meditation, however,
also understand Dhammakaya to be ‘the supra-mundane body which is of the
purest element and is not compound. It is not subject to the three characteristics
of anicca, dukkha and anatta’ (Jayamanggalo, 1991:108).
There is a history of Theravada ideas on spiritual ‘bodies’. Theravadins have
emphasised the importance of the physical (karma formed) body of the Buddha
(rupakaya). They also taught that a mind-made body (manomayakaya) could be
created by the power of the mind of the Buddha, and indeed by others who could
achieve jhana. This mind-made body is separate and distinct from the physical
body. Indeed having attained this body the Buddha was ‘able to visit the various
heavenly realms where the Brahma deities live’ (Reynolds, 1976–77:379). The
meditator who wishes to create the manomayakaya9 should do so on emerging
from the basic jhana. The meditator, as regards the physical body should
resolve [to] ‘Let it become hollow.’ It will become hollow. Then he
adverts to another body inside it, and having done the preliminary work
in the way described, he resolves ‘Let there be another body inside it.’
Then he draws it out like a reed from its sheath, like a sword from its
scabbard, like a snake from its slough.
(Buddhaghosa, 1979:444)
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
100

--- PAGE 116 ---
In addition to rupakaya and manomayakaya, Dhammakaya (in a sense
other than the teachings and moral greatness that was the Buddha’s) was also
accepted by some in the Theravada tradition. The fifteenth-century com-
pendium entitled Saddharmharatnakaraya written by the Sinhalese forest monk
Venerable Dhammadinnacariya Wimalakitti, contains some new perspectives on
Dhammakaya which are also in keeping with the traditional Theravada texts
(Reynolds, 1976–77:380). Reynolds focuses on Venerable Dhammadinnacariya’s
division of the Buddha’s attainments into three bodies, that is, Dhammakaya,
nimittakaya (which is conditioned) and a suñyakaya or emptiness body. In the text
the Dhammakaya is the body which is seen by the wisdom eye of those who are
endowed with the Dharmatma, or Dharma-self (which chases away evil and
brings happiness). The Dhammakaya is seen by those who have attained the eight
jhanas, the five abhiññas (higher knowledge) and the four types of analytical
knowledge. Reynolds (1976–77:381) argues that the Dhammakaya in ‘this more
limited sense appears, in this new context, to be the direct successor of the
manomayakaya [a supra-normal, mind produced body] of the canon and com-
mentaries.’ Harrison, however, points out that some believe the manomayakaya
‘to be a forerunner of the saÅbhogakaya’. (Harrison 1992:46).
The nimittakaya (sign-body), according to the Saddharmaratnakaraya,
remains congruent to the traditional Theravada understanding of Dhammakaya,
as it is concerned with the eight supra-worldly stages of the path and the attain-
ment of nibbana. Reynolds (1976–77:381) points out the two adjustments that
have taken place. First, the supra-worldly nature of the nimittakaya has been
compromised with the association of ‘all but the most exalted stages of the path
with the divine realms in the Buddhist cosmological schema and by associating
it with the divine eye which, in the traditional Theravada perspective, has the
capacity to perceive beings within the cosomological hierarchy’. Second, the
nibbana attained with the attainment of nimittakaya is soapadisesa nibbana
(nibbana in which certain remnants still exist). This has resulted in the introduc-
tion of a fourth body – the suñyakaya, or emptiness body. This is associated with
anupadisesa nibbana a state in which absolutely nothing conditioned remains.
It is a ‘body’ which has no death or change of any nature.
It is important to explore understandings of Dhammakaya and ways in which
it may have developed. The three Thai Dhammakaya fraternities, however, would
view any understanding of Dhammakaya as being produced or created by the
meditator (as is the case with the manomayakaya) as erroneous. To equate
Dhammakaya with nimittakaya would be seen as a downgrading of Dhammakaya
as nimittakaya is conditioned. Dhammakaya in the Dhammakaya tradition is
seen as buddha-nature, or the immortal body which exists within everyone. It is
immortal because this supra-mundane body it is not composed of the Five
Aggregates and is not subject to the three characteristics of anicca, dukkha and
anatta (Jayamanggalo, 1997:156). Within Dhammakaya, according to those in
the Dhammakaya tradition, reside all ultimate truths, and qualities that make the
Buddha, a Buddha. The extent to which the meditator is able to view the
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
101

--- PAGE 117 ---
Dhammakaya (which has ontological existence) will depend upon his/her mental
purity and meditative prowess.
The Dhammakaya meditative technique
The meditator visualises a crystal sphere the size of his fingertip floating in front
of his face. The crystal sphere is drawn in through the right nostril, (left if the
practitioner is female). The meditator visualises the sphere at five10 other points
before it reaches the central part of the body.11 At each point the samma arahaÅ
mantra is repeated three times.12 The mantra continues to be used until the
visualized sphere is stabilised in the centre of the body, and the meditator has
firmly focused on the centre of the crystal sphere. (This visualisation technique
for bringing the mind to the centre of the body is not normally necessary for expe-
rienced meditators). Attachments are seen to pull the mind outside the body, the
greater the attachments, the further the mind drifts. The bringing back of one’s
mind to the ‘true centre of our being’ is seen to bring an inner peace ‘but this is
only a dim reflection of the deep happiness that comes from the mind firmly at a
standstill’ (Dattajeevo, 1995:31).
When the mind is brought to a position of rest at the very centre of the mediator’s
body then there is the first sighting of the pathama-magga sphere, also referred
to as the Dhamma sphere.13 The attaining of this first sighting of the sphere is
an important achievement for the meditator, as an unwholesome person could
not advance to this stage. Some virtuous meditators, however, do not reach this
level as they have poor concentration powers. Such people have the consolation
that Dhammakaya meditation has a calming effect on the mind, even though
they are unable to visualise the bright crystal sphere. The attaining of the first
sighting of the sphere appears similar to attaining access concentration in
samatha meditation.
Further concentration on the centre of the pathama-magga or Dhamma sphere
will cause a brighter, more refined sphere, known as the sphere of moral conduct,
or sila, to arise. ‘Through this sphere, we can refine physical, verbal and mental
deeds more efficiently and on a deeper level than through common morality’
(Jayamanggalo, 1991:66). This purification process can be described as higher
morality (adhisila).
As the mind remains at rest and focus continues on the centre of the sphere of
higher moral conduct, a brighter more refined sphere will arise in its place. This
is known as the sphere of samadhi or mental concentration. As the mind ‘rests
still and deep in samadhi at this stage, it will destroy the Five Hindrances (lust,
malice, sloth, anxiety and doubt about practice) and goodness will be attained.
This is the first stage of absorption [ jhana]’ (Jayamanggalo, 1991:66). The mind
at this stage is ready to practice insight meditation in order to gain wisdom, and
can be described as being in a position of ‘higher mind’ (adhicitta).
The sphere of wisdom (pañña) is the next sphere to arise; this is followed by
the sphere of liberation (vimutti). As this sphere is kept pure through meditation, the
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
102

--- PAGE 118 ---
sphere of knowledge and vision of liberation (vimutti-najadassana) emerges, this is
the sixth and final sphere encountered by the Dhammakaya meditator. In summary,
the six spheres appear in the following order; the pathama-magga or Dhamma
sphere, sila, samadhi, pañña, vimutti and finally the vimutti-ñajadassana sphere,
a term normally used for Arahatship.
As the mind is further concentrated, a crude human form (pajita-manussakaya)
emerges from the centre of the vimutti-ñajadassana sphere. This is the first in a
sequence of eight inner bodies. A meditation teacher informed me that meditation
practitioners are not told in advance about what will arise in the centre of this sixth
sphere; yet when they reach this stage and are asked to describe what they have seen,
they all describe a Buddha in the lotus position. When asked to describe the face of
the Buddha, each meditator describes his/her own face without realising it.
The next step in the process is focusing on the centre of the first body until the
refined human body (panita-manussakaya) appears. ‘When this body appears at
the centre of the mediator’s body, he/she is instructed to let the body expand in
order to become that body’ (Bowers, 1996:17).
The next body to appear is the crude ‘celestial body’ (dibbakaya); this expands
to become the ‘refined celestial body’ (panita-dibbakaya). In turn this gives
way to the crude ‘form Brahma body’ (rupabrahmakaya), which has inside it
the ‘refined form Brahma body’ (panita-rupabrahmakaya). In the final stages the
crude ‘formless Brahma body’ (arupabrahmakaya) arises and expands to become
the ‘refined formless Brahma body’ (panita-arupabramakaya). This series of
bodies seems to broadly correspond to the meditative development up to the four
jhanas, through them, and then the four formless meditation attainments.
The body that arises from the formless Brahma body is the first of five
Dhammakaya bodies; as with the previous bodies, these bodies have both a normal
and refined form. Physical descriptions of these bodies are the same, and so their
size is important in order to identify what kind of ‘Dhammakaya body’ is seen.
The size of the normal and refined Dhammakaya bodies are the same, the differ-
ence is one of purity, or brightness. These Dhammakaya bodies are simply a
way of measuring attainment in Dhamma practice. The following information is
adapted from Jayamanggalo, 1997:70–4 and Bowers, 1996:22–3:
G
Dhammakaya-Gotrabhu (gotrabhu Pali) means ‘a change of lineage’, a
traditional term for one on the brink of stream entry); this has a height and
lap-width of 9 metres or more;
G
Dhammakaya-Sota this has a height and lap-width of 10 metres or more,
a meditator able to see this body has reached stream entry, is a Sotapanna
and has embarked on the Noble Path. Such a person will experience full
enlightenment within seven lives;
G
Dhammakaya-Sakadagami this has the height and lap-width of 20 metres or
more, a meditator able to experience this body has become a Once-returner,
and will return to this sense-desire world one more time as a human or lower
god, any other rebirths will be in a higher heaven;
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
103

--- PAGE 119 ---
G
Dhammakaya-Anagami this has the height and lap-width of 30 metres or
more. This penultimate level is achieved by a Non-returner who will never be
reborn in a sense-desire world, as a result of having destroyed all ill will and
all subtle sensuous desires;
G
Dhammakaya-Arahatta this has a height and lap-width of 40 metres or more.
This is the ultimate level in the Dhammakaya meditative system, and only
the Arahat, (one who has destroyed all fetters and illusions) can view
this kaya. If the meditator at this level can successfully focus his mental
energy on becoming the refined Dhammakaya-arahatta, he/she will reach
ayatananibbana, even if only on a temporary basis. According to the
Dhammakaya tradition, this is where the Buddha and the Arahats exist forever.
Personal experience of meditation at Wat Phra Dhammakaya
As already noted, Wat Phra Dhammakaya members believe that Dhammakaya
meditation is suitable for people of all faiths, or none. While sitting in on a
number of meditation sessions at Wat Phra Dhammakaya, the only formal
training I received was a session with Phra Nicholas Thanissaro. Knowing I was
a Christian, he invited me to substitute my own words for the samma arahaÅ
mantra and to select my own image if I did not wish to use a crystal sphere. I was
able to concentrate on the substitute image two fingers breadth above the navel.
The inside of my body appeared grey and cloudy, although the ideal is to visu-
alise a clear interior. I also noticed my head falling to one side and felt that I was
falling asleep. According to Wat Phra Dhammakaya members, this is a result
of the mind moving from the head to the centre of the body. I was surprised to
discover that the image I was focusing on became smaller and spun around, and it
was as if I was being drawn into a mental journey that led into a world with which
I was unfamiliar. To prevent that journey continuing, I focused on restoring the
mental picture of my chosen image. I lost track of time, and was disappointed
when Phra Nicholas drew the exercise to a close as I found it to be physically and
mentally refreshing.
It is very easy to understand the attraction of Dhammakaya meditation. In my
case it quickly delivered a sense of mental and physical well-being. I felt that to
have embarked on the journey I described would have brought a heightened sense
of calmness and mental power. The presenting nature of this journey, however,
indicated a Buddhist pathway and to take it would have meant considerable
adjustment in my Christian commitment. Phra Nicholas made the point that
images which arise during meditation should be explored; the implication being
that they may lead us into a deeper understanding of reality. I can well understand
how Dhammakaya meditators find their practice refreshing and invigorating, and
why many would wish to spend considerable periods of time meditating. The
exercise highlighted the importance of having the support of a meditation teacher,
not only to assist in the developing of skills but also to discuss what has arisen
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
104

--- PAGE 120 ---
during the process. Lay Dhammakaya meditators have stressed to me the importance
of being supervised whilst meditating, indicating that unguided meditation may
be dangerous. One Dhammakaya meditator, knowing of my interest in the subject
offered to guide me in meditation. He said
It is dangerous if a meditator is not supervised; a meditator needs to have
a teacher. The teacher is aware of the mind of the meditator and guards
it, keeping it safe from spiritual attack, because there is conflict between
the Black and White Buddha. If there is moral purity in the life of the
meditator then he will be safe from the evil forces. The relationship with
the teacher will continue after the teacher passes away, and it is very
important to understand that progress in meditation depends on the
parami of the teacher.14
Examination of two theories regarding the development 
of Dhammakaya meditation in Thailand
Tibetan Buddhism as a possible source of the 
Dhammakaya meditation technique
Bowers (1996:33–45) points to a number of similarities between Dhammakaya
meditation and Tibetan Tantric meditation practices and believes it possible that
Luang Phaw Sot may have come across some Tibetan Tantric practices while
studying at Wat Po (also known as Wat Phra Chetuphon), a cosmopolitan
Bangkok temple where monks passing through the city would visit and often stay
for a number of nights. Meditative techniques are an important topic of discus-
sion in monastic circles and it is feasible that Luang Phaw Sot himself heard of a
Tibetan meditation model there. Meditators in the Dhammakaya tradition do not
accept this theory.15 They hold that Luang Phaw Sot discovered the meditation
method ‘used by the Buddha’. Phra Mettanando suggests that
[W]hen Dhammakaya meditation was lost five hundred years after the
Buddha’s passing away, that the system could have moved into Tibet.16
Lacking the qualified monks to maintain the system caused it to fall into
the confused state Tantric meditation appears in today.
(Bowers, 1966:44)
Initially, there appears to be some similarity between the crystal sphere system
in the Dhammakaya tradition and the majdala17 of the cosmic Buddhas found in
the Tibetan tradition.18
Although not mentioned thus far, Dhammakaya meditation teaches that
five smaller spheres are components of the larger pathama-magga or Dhamma
sphere. Unfortunately, permission to reproduce this diagram was not granted.
The following is, therefore, a verbal description of the visualised pathama-magga
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
105

--- PAGE 121 ---
or Dhamma sphere. In the centre of this sphere is a space in which the
consciousness element or viññajadhatu is located. The function of this small
sphere is to control consciousness, while the space element in which it is located
controls the various gaps within the body. From that central spherical space
within which the consciousness element is located, four thin, bright, clear lines
extend outwards in the direction of the four cardinal points of the compass, to
connect to the four other spheres. These four spheres are located within the
circumference of the pathama-magga or Dhamma sphere. They are as follows:
G
Water element, located at the front of the pathama-magga or
Dhamma sphere. This sphere controls the fluid function of the body;
G
Earth element, located on the right side of the pathama-magga or
Dhamma sphere. The function of this sphere is the control of the
solid parts of the body;
G
Fire element, located at the rear of the pathama-magga or Dhamma
sphere. This sphere controls body temperature;
G
Wind element, located on the left side of the pathama-magga or
Dhamma sphere. This sphere controls the movement of gases within
the body.
(Jayamanggalo, 1997:64–5)19
Initially, there appears to be some similarity between the pathama-magga or
Dhamma sphere in the Dhammakaya tradition and the majdala20 of the cosmic
Buddhas found in the Tibetan tradition. Figure 4.1 is a model of the cosmic
Buddhas majdala. Both the majdala and the pathama-magga or Dhamma sphere
have a central sphere surrounded by four outer spheres. In a recent visit to Samye
Ling Tibetan Buddhist monastery,21 a nun commented that there is a space in the
centre of the majdala (not indicated in Figure 4.1).22 In the Dhammakaya tradi-
tion, Dhammakaya, or buddha-nature, lies within each person. It is realised by
meditation on a visualised crystal sphere within. In the Tibetan system, the Vajra-
being appears to be the equivalent of Dhammakaya, the enlightened mind.23 Both
are considered to be of great radiance and purity.
It would appear that the similarities between the Tibetan and Dhammakaya med-
itative systems are restricted to five spheres being laid out in a similar pattern. In the
Tibetan cosmic majdala a Buddha is visualised, indeed the sphere is the Pure-Land
or domain of a particular Buddha. Specific qualities (signified by a mudra or hand
gesture) are associated with each Buddha. An example of this is RatnasaÅbhava,
who is depicted with his palm facing outwards in the gesture of giving (dana-mudra),
the gift given to the world is the Three Jewels Tri ratna.24 RatnasaÅbhava ‘radiates
forth as the yellow light of the Wisdom of Equality’(Govinda, 1969:120) and is asso-
ciated with the element of earth. The wisdom associated with this Buddha is the
‘Wisdom of the Great Mirror’ in which things are neither existing, nor non-existing,
things appear yet one cannot say if they are within, or outside the mirror.
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
106

--- PAGE 122 ---
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
107
The function of this Dhyani Buddha in terms of spiritual purification is the
transforming of self-centred feeling into a compassion for all living beings through
the wisdom of equality as embodied in RatnasaÅbhava (Govinda, 1969:109). There
appears, then, to be no detailed correlation between the highly complex majdala of
the cosmic Buddhas and the Dhammakaya model of the spheres and elements
located at the centre of the body as mooted by Bowers (1995:33–5).
In the Dhammakaya meditation there are five levels of Dhammakaya to be
achieved. As we have seen they are ‘Russian-doll’ like arrangements; the more
refined image (although larger) emerges from within the previous (less refined)
image as the meditator advances in concentration and insight. As we have
seen, the more fetters the meditator has broken, the more refined and larger
the visualised Buddha image will be. Bowers is right to point out that there are
similarities here with the tantric idea of the ‘Five Sheathes’. Drawing on Lama
Anagarika Govinda as his source, Bowers (1996:37) describes these and points
out that the fifth, or innermost sheath
All-accomplishing
wisdom
AMOGHASIDDHI
Component of
impulses
Pure absolute 
wisdom
VAIROCANA
Component of
form
Mirrorlike
wisdom
AKSOBHYA
Component of
consciousness
Discriminating
wisdom
AMITABHA
Component of
perception
Equalising
wisdom
RATNASAMBHAVA
Component of
feeling
.
.
Figure 4.1 The cosmic Buddha majdala.
Source: (Klostermaier, 1999:193).a
Note
a It should be noted that different Tantric systems give different correspondence, to elements, partly
because a different Buddha is seen as the central one.

--- PAGE 123 ---
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
108
Is the body of the highest, universal consciousness, nourished and sustained
by exalted joy. It is only experienced in a state of enlightenment, or in
the highest states of meditation. It corresponds in the terminology of the
Mahayana to the ‘Body of Bliss’: the SaÅbhogakaya.
(Govinda, 1969:148)25
Clearly the experiencing of SaÅbhogakaya through accessing the innermost
sheath has some similarities to the experience of Dhammakaya, as inner bodies
are accessed in the Dhammakaya tradition.
One of the distinctive features of Dhammakaya meditation is the use made of
psycho-physical centres. Bowers (1996:39–43) compares this with Tibetan
Tantric practice, although at no point does he exclude other Buddhist Tantric
approaches. These psycho-physical cakras are ‘centres’ in the body where
consciousness is centred. These points or centres of force ‘collect, transform and
distribute the forces flowing through them...From them radiate secondary
streams of psychic force...by activating or awakening the activities of the various
centres, we spiritualise and transform our body’ (Govinda, 1969:135). The five
cakras (related to the brain, throat, heart, navel and root) are divided up into
three different sections in Tibetan practice. The brain and throat centres belong
to the ‘cosmic’ zone, which is linked by the heart centre (‘human’ zone) to the
‘terrestrial’ zone in which the navel and root centres exist. This latter zone is
the plane of corporeality (having body) and earth-bound forms of nature.
These five psycho-physical centres are five different units which represent
man, and are reflected in the shape of a stupa. There is a detailed relationship
between the cakras and the cosmic Buddhas. For example, the heart centre is
represented by a triangle (see Figure 4.2); this is thought to contain the sacred
flame which purifies and then integrates the various aspects of our personality
The cosmic Buddha Aksobhya (seen in some tantric systems as Vajrasattva) is
associated with this cakra. This detailed symbolism and complex practice
underpinned by an elegant philosophy associated with the cakras in the
Tibetan tradition, is absent from Dhammakaya meditation. As we have seen
from the earlier description of Dhammakaya meditation, the body centres are
used to facilitate the visualisation of the crystal sphere two finger breadths
above the navel. This is understood to be the resting place of the mind and
where all meditative attention is focused. The other body centres only function
as reference points to help the visualisation process. Indeed, the experienced
meditator would go straight to the ultimate resting place, without giving atten-
tion to the body centres.
It is just within the realms of possibility that Luang Phaw Sot met someone
with experience of the Tibetan approach to meditation in Bangkok around 1910
to 1915, the time he began to practise what is now known as Dhammakaya
meditation. There is, however, no evidence to support the theory submitted by
Bowers that Luang Phaw Sot borrowed ideas from Tibetan Buddhist meditation
for his own approach.

--- PAGE 124 ---
The Yogavacara tradition as a possible source of the Dhammakaya
meditation technique
According to Crosby, Yogavacara means ‘practitioner of spiritual discipline
(i.e. meditation), this term recurs in the texts examined by Bizot with reference
to the person undertaking the practices advocated therein’ (Crosby, 2000:141).
‘Tantric Theravada’ (Bechert) and ‘Esoteric Southern Buddhism’ (Cousins) are
alternative terms for Yogavacara.
Crosby (2000:178–9) mentions three theories as to the possible development of
the Yogavacara tradition in Thailand. First, it may have been the case that the
Yogavacara tradition came to Thailand through the Mon (Southern Burmese)
expression of Buddhism. Second, there is the idea that Hinduism influenced
Theravada practice (particularly through Brahmanic Tantric practices associated
with the kings of Siam and Cambodia). Third, Yogavacara emerged due to the
cross-fertilisation between the Mahayana and Theravada traditions, as Mahayana
Buddhism was already in the region before Theravada became the established
school. One other possibility, not mentioned by Crosby, may be the influence of
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
109
Brain centre Blue; either element.
Associated cosmic Buddha is Vairocana.
Throat centre Green; air element.
Associated cosmic Buddha is Amitabha.
Fire centre Red; fire element.
Associated cosmic Buddha is Aksobhya.
·
Naval centre White; water element.
Associated cosmic Buddha is Ratnasambhava.
Root centre Brown; earth element.
Associated cosmic Buddha is Amoghasiddhi. 
Figure 4.2 Parts of the human body, represented by the elements in the stupa.
Source: Adapted from Steve Clarke & Mel Thompson, Buddhism, A New Approach (Hodder &
Stonghton Educational, 1996). Information adopted from Govinda (1969:184).

--- PAGE 125 ---
ethnic Thai and Chinese bringing forms of Chinese Buddhist practice with them
as they migrated from South China to Siam.
The Thammayut movement, in its desire to standardise Thai Buddhism and
eradicate superstitious practice, may well have sought to eliminate a variety of
meditative techniques and practices that were deemed to be unacceptable.26 This
would have been especially true in Bangkok and the areas in the provinces
where the Thammayut influence was particularly strong. Monks and laity away
from the Thammayut influence, however, continued to practise as they pleased,
and meditative techniques, magical practices and esoteric teachings were passed
down by word of mouth. As a young monk, Prince Mongkut believed the Mon
tradition to be the one most in keeping with the original teachings of the Buddha
and he was re-ordained by Mon monks. It would thus be ironic if this tradition
was the carrier of ideas that the Thammayut fraternity sought to discredit in their
bid to standardise Thai Buddhism!
Crosby very helpfully identifies eleven distinctive features of Yogavacara
practice. Although she does not relate Dhammakaya meditation to these, I suggest
some congruence between the following features from her list and Dhammakaya
meditation:
G
‘The creation of a Buddha within through the performance of ritual by
placing and recognizing within one’s body the qualities of the Buddha, which
in turn become the Buddha’ (Crosby, 2000:141). In Dhammakaya meditation
there is the identification of a Buddha at the centre of the body which
arises through meditation. As already described there are five Dhammakaya
bodies or Buddhas. These vary in width and correspond to the stages of
enlightenment from achieving Stream entry to becoming an Arahat;
G
Replacing of the original object of meditation by another object, which is
then treated as the original (Crosby, 2000:141), (it may be argued that this
technique is not exclusive to the Yogavacara tradition). In the Dhammakaya
tradition there is an initial focus on a crystal sphere at the centre of the body.
As the meditator advances in skill and purity, five more refined spheres are
visualised. In turn, these are replaced by a sequence of eight inner-bodies.
Ultimately the five Dhammakaya states may be achieved. The precise state is
verified by the height and lap-width of the visualised Buddha images;
G
Esoteric interpretations of words, objects and myths that otherwise have a
standard exoteric meaning or purpose in Theravada Buddhism (Crosby,
2000:142). A clear example of this is nibbana. This is normally viewed as
not-self (anatta) in traditional Theravada terms. In the Dhammakaya tradi-
tion, however, nibbana is taught as being atta and a place to which someone
with a high state of enlightenment may visit on a temporary basis through
the power of Dhammakaya meditation. A sense of intrigue and interest in
nibbana is created by the practice of Phra Dhammachayo allegedly travelling
to ayatananibbana through the power of meditation to make offerings to
the Buddhas on the first Sunday of each month. The concretising and
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
110

--- PAGE 126 ---
commodifying of nibbana by the movement has already been discussed.
Reference has been made in Chapter 2 to an afternoon chanting session led
by Phra Dhammachayo in which ñaja (inner-knowledge) was used as an
addition to the Triple Gem. This ‘addition’ is apparently common practice at
Wat Phra Dhammakaya. It does not, however, occur at traditional Thai
temples. The effect of using ñaja (inner-knowledge) as an addition to the
Triple Gem is to create an impression that Wat Phra Dhammakaya practice
may be more advanced than that of mainstream Thai Buddhism;
G
The focus of practice is to achieve both soteriological and worldly ends,
such as healing, longevity and protection (Crosby, 2000:142). As well as
progression on the path to enlightenment, Wat Phra Dhammakaya members
seek prosperity and the healing of self and others;
G
Expertise in the Yogavacara tradition is not restricted to monks (Crosby,
2000:142). At Wat Phra Dhammakaya, the contribution made by nuns
and lay people is recognised, indeed the key figure, as we have seen, in the
formation of Wat Phra Dhammakaya was a nun.
The main distinctive on Crosby’s list which is not present in Dhammakaya
practice is the importance of Abhidhamma categories and the books of the
Abhidhamma Pitaka. Traditionally, however, it is the Sutta Pitaka which is
emphasised in the Thai Theravada tradition.
A monk at Wat Paknam informed me that Luang Phaw Sot was not the first to
use a crystal sphere in meditation; this was something the Dhammakaya leader
would have learned from a meditation teacher.27 The significance of Luang Phaw
Sot’s achievement was his ability to reach a much deeper and purer level than
others who used the crystal sphere visualisation technique. The Dhammakaya
method initially appears to be a samatha approach as there is the intense focus of
the mind on a selected object, and then an inner image (nimitta) of this, in this
case a bright and pure light in the form of a crystal sphere, located within the
body, two finger widths above the navel. The model of meditation does, however,
go on to include vipassana elements as that which arises is contemplated and
sought to be understood.
Crosby (2000:187) states that the ‘meditation system used by the Dhammakaya
(Thammakai) Foundation is derived from the Yogavacara tradition’. This state-
ment is made in the context of a review of Phra Mettanando’s doctoral thesis, and
no supporting evidence is produced.28 In the introduction to his thesis Phra
Mettanando indicates that his hypothesis is ‘that there must have been a prede-
cessor of the school of [the] Thammakai method of meditation, left unrecognized
by the modern Theravada tradition in Thailand’ (Mettanando Bhikkhu, 1991:2).
He goes on to say that he discovered in the book he was using as a primary source
for his research ‘instructions, diagrams and descriptions for higher meditation
practices, some were very familiar to those taught by Phra Mongkon-thep-muni
[Luang Phaw Sot]’ (Mettanando Bhikkhu, 1999:2).29 Surprisingly, Phra
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
111

--- PAGE 127 ---
Mettanando does not specify which practices he is referring to, neither does he
cite any other evidence which would support his hypothesis. The only reference
he makes to the Dhammakaya tradition is on page 59 of the thesis, footnote 343.
Here, Phra Mettanando discusses a section of Phra Maha Cai Yaso¯tharat’s book
concerning the maximising of the amount of merit gained from an offering cere-
mony.30 Phra Mettanando points out that the belief ‘that there is a single location
within the physical body that maximizes the amount of merit is also intriguing.
The similar idea is strongly held in the modern Thammakai school, but there the
centre of power is listed as the Centre of the Body’ (Mettanando, 1999:59). Phra
Mettanando, however, stops short of suggesting that Dhammakaya meditation
was influenced by the meditative practice taught by Supreme Patriarch Kai
Thuean which Crosby (2000:187) suggests is in the Yogavacara tradition.
My identification of five commonalities between Dhammakaya meditation
and Crosby’s list of distinctives of the Yogavacara tradition serve to support her
position that Dhammakaya meditation is ‘a somewhat adapted, form of the
Yogavacara tradition’ (Crosby, 2000:187). Some Dhammakaya borrowing from
the Yogavacara tradition appears probable; however, there is not yet sufficient
evidence to prove that Dhammakaya meditation is ‘derived from the Yogavacara
tradition’ (Crosby, 2000:186).
Conclusion
Dhammakaya meditation is within the bounds of acceptability of Thai Buddhism.
It is taught and practised at Wat Phra Dhammakaya, Wat Paknam and Wat Luang
Phaw Sot Dhamakayaram, as well as in other smaller temples. Many who criti-
cise Dhammakaya meditation do so because they disapprove of the high-profile
nature of Wat Phra Dhammakaya, its teaching and approach to fund raising. Were
it not for these issues Dhammakaya meditation would be more widely acceptable.
Wat Paknam and Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram also have similar per-
spectives on nibbana as Wat Phra Dhammakaya, but because of their much lower
profile they do not come in for criticism. Some31 relate the story of how towards
the end of his life Luang Phaw Sot approached officials at Wat Mahathat with the
request that a senior monk visit Wat Paknam and assess his meditative abilities.32
Luang Phaw Sot allegedly confessed that he had been wrong to emphasise
Dhammakaya meditation as he had come to realise that Vipassana was the best
method of meditation. By that time Luang Phaw Sot had a large following of
Dhammakaya meditators at Wat Paknam and was understandably reluctant to
inform them that he had been mistaken. As one would expect, Dhammakaya
meditators reject this story.
It is possible, though unlikely, that someone who had contact with a Tibetan model
of meditation may have met Luang Phaw Sot around 1910–15. The similarity
between Dhammakaya meditation and Tibetan approaches, in terms of the pathama-
magga and the cosmic majdala has already been mentioned. It is interesting, how-
ever, to note that the four outer spheres (water, earth, fire and wind) have been
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
112

--- PAGE 128 ---
discontinued in meditative practice at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Their use is
considered cumbersome and unnecessary to the practice of Dhammakaya meditation.
Similarities also exist between the concepts of the crystal sphere and the Vajra
(diamond or thunderbolt). They both represent the highest spiritual state and
function as focal points of meditation. There is commonality between the
Russian-doll arrangements of the increasingly refined images which arise and the
Five-Sheathes, the innermost corresponding to the most refined body visualised
by the Dhammakaya meditator. The use of psycho-physical centres of the body
(cakras) in Dhammakaya and Tibetan approaches to meditation appear to be
another commonality. Yet the Yogavacara tradition, or esoteric practices within the
Theravada tradition also make extensive use of cakras.33 This is a closer tradition
to Dhammakaya meditation than Tibetan Buddhism and thus a more likely influ-
ence. We have seen, however, that Wat Phra Dhammakaya no longer insist on
the process of using or imagining a crystal sphere at the various cakras before
bringing it to rest at the seventh base of the mind, a position in the centre of
the body two finger-breadths above the navel. While these commonalties may be
demonstrated, the cross-fertilisation theory between Dhammakaya meditation
and Tibetan Buddhism suggested by Bowers has not been proved.
The Dhammakaya is seen as the Tathagata, which is one of the titles of the
Buddha. Indeed, the Dhammakaya is viewed as a kind of buddha-nature which
resides within each person and when a person achieves Dhammakaya Arahatta,
he has become an enlightened being, the possessor of the Unconditioned.
Yogavacara ideas rather than Tibetan influences shaping Luang Phaw Sot’s
approach to meditation are much more likely. Yogavacara practices in the north-
east region may have continued throughout the reforming processes carried out
by the Thammayut fraternity, and passed on to Luang Phaw Sot, possibly through
a monastic or lay meditator visiting the capital. I have identified five commonal-
ties between Crosby’s list of distinctives of the Yogavacara tradition and
Dhammakaya meditation. Some Dhammakaya borrowing from the Yogavacara
tradition appears probable. There is, however, not yet sufficient evidence to
prove that Dhammakaya meditation is ‘derived from the Yogavacara tradition’
(Crosby, 2000:186).
It is quite possible that Luang Phaw Sot developed his approach to meditation
as a result of his psychic experiences and refined it through practice. Wat Phra
Dhammakaya members believe that their founder rediscovered the spiritual nature
of the Dhamma-body which exists inside everyone, and the meditative technique
practised by the Buddha and his followers which subsequently fell into disuse.
Dhammakaya meditation is claimed by Wat Phra Dhammakaya members to be
very helpful in the purifying of thoughts and intentions. It is alleged that it
increases the ability of the meditator to achieve goals and gain insight into the
true nature of things. As progress is made in Dhammakaya meditation, it is
alleged that some meditators develop a variety of psychic and healing powers.
These claims may also be made by those from other traditions of meditation. We
have seen from previous chapters that higher Dhammakaya meditation was
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
113

--- PAGE 129 ---
practised around the clock at Wat Paknam and temple members draw on a number
of stories to verify the efficacy of that practice. While some skilled meditators
still seek to heal people through meditation, higher meditation does not appear to
have been part of Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s programme. The construction of Akan
Hoksip (‘sixtieth Building’), which is being built for the practice of Dhammakaya
meditation, including higher meditation, heralds a return to lost practice.34 It may
also serve as the opening of a new phase of the movement’s development.
APPROACH TO SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
114

--- PAGE 130 ---
5
THE HISTORY OF THE SANTI ASOKE
MOVEMENT AND A DESCRIPTION OF
ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
Rak Rakphong and the founding of the Santi Asoke movement1
The founder of Santi Asoke, Rak Rakphong, was born in 1934 in Srisaket, a
province in North-East Thailand. He was named Mongkol by his Chinese father
and Thai mother. His mother died when he was a teenager and he worked hard
supporting his six brothers and sisters. During his studies at Poh Chang College
of Arts and Crafts, he changed his name from Mongkol to Rak.2 After graduation
from college in 1958, Rak began working with a Bangkok TV station, in time
becoming well known as a song composer and TV programmer.
Rak’s spiritual search took him to ‘black magic’, faith healing, hypnotism and
mediumship before focusing on the teachings of the Buddha (Bangkok Post, 22.7.88).
He shocked his family and friends by shaving his head, wearing only
simple white clothes and going round barefoot. By the time he finally
decided to resign from his job, he had been a strict vegetarian for a
number of years.
(Poompanna, 1989:12)
In his autobiography the Asoke leader describes an insight experience he had
which convinced him he was an ariya, or worthy disciple of the Buddha.
At two o’clock in the morning of Tuesday January 1970 I woke up and
walked from my bedroom into the bathroom to relieve myself. Suddenly
a brilliant flash occurred within me – a brightness, openness, and detach-
ment which could not be explained in human terms. I knew only that my
life opened before me and that the whole world seemed to be revealed. I
knew at that moment that I had no more doubts.
(Swearer, 1991:180)
In November 1970, aged 36, Rak was ordained as a monk by Phra
Ratchaworakhun, abbot of Wat Asokaram, a Thammayut monastery in Samut
Prakaan, some 20 kilometres from Bangkok. One probable reason for the choice
of monastery was its association with the ascetic practices of the Thai forest
115

--- PAGE 131 ---
tradition. On his ordination Rak was given the Pali monastic name of Bodhiraksa,
Bodhirak in Thai.3
It would appear that Bodhirak was not only strict in his practice of Buddhism
but he was intolerant of those who he considered to be lax in their spiritual
practice. He began to preach sermons to the laity denouncing his fellow monks
for superstitious practices, smoking and eating meat (although this is not for-
bidden in the vinaya) and being lazy. In his preaching he taught that, if his fellow
monks ‘were not able to give up crude kilesa (moral blemishes) such as these,
they would not be able to give up subtle kilesa and so progress towards nibbana’
(Jackson, 1989:161). Bodhirak’s call to disciplined living struck a chord with a
number of lay people but understandably drew fire from his fellow monks who
regarded him as being divisive. Bodhirak justified his critical remarks by
maintaining that his state of insight gave him the ability to discern the spiritual
behaviour of another, and placed on him the responsibility to correct (what he
considered to be) substandard behaviour and teaching.
Bodhirak is recorded as saying ‘I am frank. And loud. I am not a nanny. My
job is not to cradle the baby gently’ (Bangkok Post, 22.7.88). On another occasion
he justified his forthright approach as follows:
There is a misconception that the Buddha only said nice things that
fell easily on the ears. Once, after one of his sermons, 60 monks died
suddenly because of the hard-hitting teachings, 60 resigned, and the
other 60 attained enlightenment. No one has died or resigned because of
my teaching yet.
(Bangkok Post, 22.7.88)
Bodhirak’s lively and controversial teaching drew a following of both
Thammayut and Mahanikai monks and lay people. He referred to his followers
as the ‘Asoke group’, and they met outside Nakhorn Pathom, some 50 kilometres
west of Bangkok. Bodhirak’s ‘Thammayut preceptor strongly objected to
Bodhirak’s project and demanded that he resign his Thammayut membership by
turning in his official monastic identification card’ (Swearer, 1991:670). The pre-
ceptor’s objection was based on the fact that there were Mahanikai monks in
Bodhirak’s group. In 1973 Bodhirak handed back his monk’s registration card to
the abbot of Wat Asokaram and was re-ordained at a Mahanikai monastery at
Nakhorn Pathom. Bodhirak continued to develop his own religious centre, known
as Daen Asoke, situated at Kampansaen, some 40 kilometres from the provincial
town of Nakhorn Pathom. There he and his followers practised what they
considered to be the basic teachings of the Buddha, free from sectarian division
and state control. He initially refused to register his centre as required by the
Department of Religious Affairs, justifying his action as follows:
I do not need to be affiliated with either the Thammayut or Mahanikai
because I was ordained into Buddhism. I do not wish to be either
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
116

--- PAGE 132 ---
Mahanikai or Thammayut because in the time of the Buddha there
was no nikai.
(Jackson, 1989:161)
Dr Tavivat Puntiarigvivat is of the opinion that Bodhirak’s background was such
that he had no family affiliations to either Mahanikai or Thammayut, but that he
also had a poor grasp of Theravada Buddhism.4
Initial separation from the Sakgha and growth of the 
Santi Asoke movement
Bodhirak eventually registered Daen Asoke as a monastery, as the provincial
Sakgha governor threatened to inform the police that he was contravening The
1962 Sakgha Act (Jackson, 1989:161).5 In 1975, the Sakgha governor of Nakhon
Pathom province pressurised the abbot of Nong Kratum temple (who was well
respected by the Asoke and local communities), to force Asoke monastics to wear
the normal saffron robes, rather than the brown robes they had adopted.6
According to Swearer (1991:670), Asoke was also instructed to dismantle their
accommodation7 at Daen Asoke.8 The abbot of Nong Kratum temple was repri-
manded by the provincial Sakgha governor for not dealing effectively with Santi
Asoke, and when the abbot subsequently fell ill, this was viewed by the local
community as being the indirect fault of Asoke. Bodhirak’s response was to
require the Maha thera samakom to deal directly with him, rather than pres-
surising the abbot of Wat Nong Kratum (Feungfusakul, 1993:91). Bodhirak thus
declared himself completely independent from the Mahanikai and Thammayut
groupings, and the enforcing mechanism of state-regulated Thai Buddhism.
The Maha thera samakom were unable to respond effectively to Bodhirak’s
unprecedented action. This slow and weak response to the Asoke community gave
the movement time to grow and develop.9 The community in Nakhon Pathom
province attracted the support of a number of lower middle and working-class
people who felt that the state regulated Sakgha favoured the establishment, who
continued to marginalise them. Bodhirak’s background prior to becoming a monk
(Chinese father, poor circumstances and hard work until finally becoming well
known and prosperous) was also attractive to this section of Thai society, as many
of them had struggled to educate themselves and rise out of poor circumstances.
Bodhirak’s criticisms of ‘superstitious’ practice and his rationalistic approach to
Buddhism certainly sat comfortably with this education-valuing group who favoured
an approach to their religion based on rigorous self-effort, and rationalism.10
In 1976, three Asoke centres were established (Swearer, 1991:670).11 These were:
Santi Asoke in the then outskirts of Bangkok, Sri Saket in North-East Thailand and
Sali Asoke in Phai Sali, Central Thailand. Feungfusakul (1993:92) mentions the
mobile nature of the Asoke communities. Rather than depending on people coming to
their centres, or focusing on the homes of members, they move out to where the people
are. As they travel around, the Asoke monastics and lay people walk barefoot, eating
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
117

--- PAGE 133 ---
only one vegetarian meal per day, and sleeping in the evenings in a klot.12 Thus, the
Asoke interpretation of the Dhamma is taught from place to place. Indeed, the Asoke
term for this peripatetic activity is charik, meaning ‘to roam’.13 This ‘roaming’ was
distinct from the forest monks’ approach which usually involved individual monks
going to remote parts to practise meditation in solitude. The Asoke approach included
both monastic and laity, involved a considerable number of people and focused on the
urban rather than the rural.14As a result, a large number of people were presented with
the Asoke message. Some, particularly those who felt themselves to be suffering, or
not receiving the justice they deserved, aligned themselves to the group.
The charik facilitates the spiritual development of those who participate. The
practice involves a high level of self-discipline, and mindfulness in all activity
undertaken, particularly walking barefoot. Not only does this lead to a building
up of strength and self-discipline but it also improves concentration eventually,
it is said, leading to enlightenment.15 As participants listen to sermons from
the monks, and talk to people about Asoke belief and practice, and how these
beliefs have led to a great reduction in suffering for them personally, they are
strengthened in their beliefs and practice.
In 1977, the Dhammasanti Foundation was founded. This branch of the Asoke
movement deals with the production and distribution of literature, varying from
monthly news letters to doctrinal books written by Bodhirak.
In November 1979, the Maha thera samakom met to consider Bodhirak and his
growing group of followers. They sought to challenge Bodhirak’s credibility and
described the movement as being subversive, levelling the following charges
against the Asoke community:
G
Many of the monks had been being incorrectly ordained. According
to Thai monastic law, the preceptor who sponsors an ordination
must have been a monk for at least ten years. Some monks at
Bodhirak’s centre were officially ordained elsewhere but others
were ordained by Bodhirak who had not been ordained for the
required length of time;
G
Bodhirak’s monks wrongly criticised other Buddhist monks for
being lax in their practice;
G
Bodhirak’s monks disseminated propaganda which promoted a
misunderstanding of the vinaya;
G
Bodhirak’s monks advertised themselves as being disaffiliated from
the Thai Sakgha.
(Jackson, 1989:169)
Bodhirak was therefore accused of threatening the well-being of Buddhism and
the security of the nation. Consequently the Maha thera samakom instructed all
abbots in Thailand to keep a careful watch on the activities of Santi Asoke.
Perhaps Santi Asoke’s most vocal critic is Phra Anan Senakhan (Chayananto).
In 1982, while ordained as a monk, Anan published a book heavily criticising
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
118

--- PAGE 134 ---
Bodhirak for not conforming to traditional practice and for disassociating himself
from the Sakgha.16 In fact, Anan is also critical of monks who are superstitious
and/or lax in their practice, stating that such practice only strengthens Bodhirak’s
case.17 Anan and Bodhirak are both critical of what they consider to be substandard
practice within the Sakgha; Anan, however, wishes to purify from the inside,
while Bodhirak pursues a ‘back to basics’ approach, in open confrontation with
the Sakgha.
Certainly Anan, a police officer prior to his ordination into Thammayut monas-
tic orders, was pro-Thai bureaucracy and wants to see the state protection and
favour of the Sakgha continue. In return, the Sakgha should continue to legitimise
the government so that Buddhism prospers because of central control. Bodhirak
did not come from a family with government connections. His working-class
Chinese background means he is marginalised by Thai bureaucracy.
Anan and an associate made an official complaint at the beginning of 1982 to
the Commander of the Suppression Division of Bangkok police (Jackson,
1989:173). The result was that the Maha thera samakom ‘eventually wrote to the
police advising that they should find more facts and conduct more investigations
before proceeding further with the case’ (Jackson, 1989:174). Phra Anan18
responded by saying that the statement should have been released a long time ago
but said that the secretariat had been more concerned with the Rattana Kosin
bicentennial celebrations recently (Bangkok Post, 1.7.82).19
A number of dynamics come into play here, but two brief comments are rele-
vant. First, Bodhirak keeps the vinaya and according to the vinaya he had taken
no action (not even the returning of his ordination certificate to his preceptor) to
suggest that he is not a monk. However, in terms of The Sakgha Act of 1962,
Bodhirak could be accused of substandard practice with regard to a number of
issues.20 Clearly, the difference between the vinaya and the state imposed Sakgha
acts is a very difficult issue to resolve for the Maha thera samakom and to a lesser
extent, the Department of Religious Affairs. Second, the emergence of the middle
class and their increasing ability to articulate their political and social views
lessens the establishment’s ability to act as it might wish. Indeed, it has to be said
that there are those within the new elite who are anti-establishment.
Santi Asoke, Chamlong Srimuang and Thai 
politics in the 1980s
During the 1988 General Elections, the spotlight shone once again on Santi Asoke
due to the campaign of Major General Chamlong Srimuang to become governor
of Bangkok. Chamlong, born in 1935 into a lower-middle-class family, had been
a high-profile figure in Thai politics since his appointment in 1980 as Secretary
General to Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanond.
Known as maha for living a frugal, highly religious life, and eating only
one vegetarian meal a day, the Bangkok Post (3.8.81) points out Chamlong’s
commitment to his work, leaving home at 6.30 am and returning at 10 pm21
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
119

--- PAGE 135 ---
When asked why so many senior monks had so many worldly possessions, he
replied ‘I now have so many enemies, don’t let me have more among senior
monks.’ Chamlong travelled around the country giving talks or sermons to vari-
ous groups of people. On these occasions he would sleep outside under a klot just
like a wandering forest monk. Of course, Chamlong travelled beyond the confines
of Thailand. When he did he attracted attention due to his ascetic lifestyle, as
the following quote indicates:
The star of General Prem Tisulanonda’s trip to Australia last week was
apparently not the prime minister himself but his 46 year old Secretary
General Col Chamlong Srimuang. The Melbourne Age pointed up the
colonel’s practice of eating one vegetarian meal each day, practising
celibacy along with his wife and his crackdown on bars and night-clubs
which made him unpopular with tourists.
(Bangkok Post, 12.7.86)
It was in 1981 that Chamlong had launched his first political campaign. His
leadership and rhetoric skills focused on the defeating of a proposed abortion bill.
With the backing of a group of Santi Asoke supporters, Chamlong organised a
series of pro-life, nationwide meetings. Despite drawing cross-party support, and
engaging in successful rally-style politics (which was later to become a hallmark
of his political style), he was unable to stop the bill becoming law (McCargo,
1993:84). Indeed, the first reading in the House of Representatives resulted in a
79 to 3 vote to legalise abortion, with many politicians abstaining. This resulted
in Chamlong resigning his position as secretary general in disgust (Bangkok Post,
21.10.81). Chamlong’s position is that according to Buddhism, life begins when
an ovum mixes with sperm. Abortion then breaks the First Precept (the taking of
life). It also contradicts the Second Precept which forbids theft because abortion
‘is tantamount to stealing the life of a baby’ (Bangkok Post, 25.5.88).
Chamlong and his wife Sirilak were both active in the Santi Asoke movement.
In 1981, Chamlong set up the ‘Dhamma Army Foundation’. The name of this
charitable trust ‘suggested an early Chamlongian vision of Santi Asoke, as a
military force engaged in a form of moral Buddhist warfare’ (McCargo,
1993:85). Some 3 years later, Chamlong established the ‘Dhamma Practitioners’
Association’.22 Chamlong was promoted from colonel to major general in
October 1985 but resigned two days later in order to take part in civil elections
for governor of Bangkok. A good number of Santi Asoke practitioners formed the
core of Chamlong’s support group23 which helped him reach an overwhelming vic-
tory in his quest to become Bangkok’s governor in 1985.24 Chamlong was the first
ever independent candidate to be elected governor of the capital (Bangkok Post,
15.11.85) and the first elected governor in a decade of Interior Ministry
appointments (Asia Magazine 11.1.87). Of course, there were others outside the
Santi Asoke network who helped Chamlong to victory, principally a number of
loyal military associates. In spite of the obvious close relationship between
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
120

--- PAGE 136 ---
Chamlong and his Santi Asoke supporters, an appearance of detachment between
the two was maintained in public (McCargo, 1993:87).
In 1988 Chamlong set up the Phalang Dhamma political party. 25 The party was
able to meet the Interior Ministry’s criterion of 5,000 members spread widely
throughout the country before it could be registered. This was made possible
through the nationwide Asoke network. Indeed, 10,310 names were submitted as
members of Phalang Dhamma (McCargo, 1993:89). The new party decided to
contest more seats than any other party for the elections of 24 July, and most of
the party’s executive committee and around half of the candidates who contested
for seats outside Bangkok were known followers of Santi Asoke.26 Bodhirak’s
approach was to encourage his lay followers to be politically engaged and indeed
viewed such activity as Dhamma activity or practice. Santi Asoke members may
well have been advised to vote for the Phalang Dhamma Party and certainly
would not be expected to support a candidate whose moral views were in conflict
with the Santi Asoke movement. Bodhirak publicly expressed his support for
Chamlong before the elections, but apparently predicted that the party would not
do well. It should be pointed out that many of the candidates were rejects from
mainstream parties. The party was extremely disappointed as only 14 out of its
295 candidates were elected to parliament. Only one candidate was a Santi Asoke
practitioner. Chamlong was disheartened with the result because of heavy vote
buying and a low turnout of voters in the capital (Bangkok Post, 28.7.88).
At the time of the 1988 elections, many opponents of the Santi Asoke move-
ment felt that Chamlong’s position as governor of Bangkok and his membership
of Santi Asoke gave a certain protection to the Asoke movement. Chamlong
enjoyed a good relationship with General Prem, the then prime minister. General
Prem was trying to ‘clean up’ national politics, Chamlong was attempting to do
the same in the metropolis, and Bodhirak had introduced rigorous standards into
the way Asoke practised Buddhism. Yet Chamlong’s association with Santi Asoke
at this time was not entirely positive. Aspersions were cast on Santi Asoke for
having a political agenda. Bodhirak had gone on record during the run-up to the
elections as saying ‘religion and politics are one and the same’ and clearly many
senior monks were alarmed by this mix of religion and politics.
The ascetic practice and frequent references to Buddhist teaching was per-
ceived as evidence of Chamlong’s moral goodness (kwam di). Chamlong was
viewed as a politician with moral stature and charisma (parami), which had a
particular drawing power. Politicians and army generals often seek out ascetic
monks who have a good reputation and ask for a blessing (usually a fairly public
ceremony). This ‘stamp of approval’ by the monastic evidenced in his blessing of
the leader gives a measure of credibility to the leader. McCargo (1993:43) points
out that Chamlong ‘unifies the secular and the sacred in a single personage, [and]
already possesses the kind of spiritual “credibility” which many other prominent
figures in Thailand so conspicuously lack’.
Chamlong was very popular as governor, having a reputation as an anti-
corruption, simple living, wise leader.27 Whilst governor of Bangkok, Chamlong
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
121

--- PAGE 137 ---
spent his entire entertainment budget on providing breakfasts for the capital’s
street sweepers. This was served by Chamlong and his top aides. Indeed,
Chamlong who normally rises at 3 am has been known to join the street sweepers in
their early morning cleaning (McCargo, 1993:54). The thesis Chamlong completed
for his MSc degree was on labour unrest in Thailand. His understanding of working-
class mentality brought about by his studies and upbringing meant he related well
to manual workers. That said many street sellers allegedly expressed their disap-
pointment with Chamlong as he moved them off Bangkok streets in his attempts
to clean up the city (McCargo, 1993:61).
Of course, not everyone found Chamlong’s style of governance attractive!
Some critics see him as a Thai Buddhist version of the Ayatollah
Komeini. Others say that he is an uncompromising man who cannot take
criticism lightly, that he will become a dictator if he attains power, that all
that he has done for the last two years is sweep the streets of Bangkok.
(Bangkok Post, 2.11.88).
Clearly, Chamlong’s agenda was driven by his ascetic nature, desire for
cleanliness and belief that greed should be curbed (all Santi Asoke distinctives).
His goal to reduce the national debt and focus on moral rather than economic
development meant he did not invest in urgently needed public programmes such
as better waste-disposal systems and public health. Of course, setting up systems
gave businessmen the opportunity to engage in corrupt activities, something
Chamlong was particularly keen to stamp out.
Another attack on the Asoke movement came as a result of the criticisms of
Samak Sundaravej, leader of the Prachakorn Thai Party. Working closely with the
conservative Buddhist movement Parian Dhamma Samaakhom, the Prachakorn
Thai Party distributed 5,000 eight-page booklets in central Bangkok, criticising
Santi Asoke and their involvement with Phalang Dhamma. A Parian Dhamma
Samaakhom banner displayed on a truck read ‘Choose Phalang Santi Asoke to be
MP’s and get a sexually abnormal person for prime minister and Bodhirak
Bhikkhu as head of a new Buddhist order’ (McCargo, 1993:91).28
The assistant abbot of Wat Bovornnivet, Phra Sophon Ganabhorn, declared that
‘Santi Asoke could be a threat to the stability of Buddhism within Thailand’
(McCargo, 1993:92).29 The idea here is that if Chamlong became Prime Minister,
and/or if Phalang Dhamma obtained a strong presence in parliament, Santi
Asoke could become a legitimate fraternity like Mahanikai and Thammayut,
and this could lead to a detrimental change of the status quo in state-regulated
Buddhism. Immediately after polling was completed on 24 June 1988, Phra
Dhammapitaka (Prayudh Payutto) released an unbound booklet entitled
Karani Santi Asoke.30 The booklet criticised the support Santi Asoke offered
the Phalang Dhamma Party, and while it did not influence the outcome of the
election, it was calling for a serious examination of Santi Asoke’s approach to
political involvement.
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
122

--- PAGE 138 ---
Ecclesiastic and civil court proceedings against the 
Santi Asoke movement
After considerable discussions between the Maha thera samakom Department of
Religious Affairs, Ministry of Education and the National Security Council,
Bodhirak was approached in September 1988 with the following five point proposal:
G
Asoke has to come back under the control of the Maha thera samakom;
G
Asoke has to be legally registered with the Department of Religious Affairs.
This would require the approval of the Maha thera samakom;31
G
Asoke has to stop criticising the Maha thera samakom;
G
Asoke has to discontinue its activities;
G
The authorities will not take any measures against Asoke.
(adapted from Feungfusakul, 1993:183)
Santi Asoke rejected this five point proposal. On 23 May 1989 an assembly of
150 senior monks meeting at the Buddha Monton Centre on the outskirts of
Bangkok, unanimously agreed to ask the Ecclesiastical Council to defrock Phra
Bodhirak for allegedly defying and distorting the Sakgha’s discipline. The
Supreme Patriarch and chair of the meeting, Somdet Phra Yana Sangvorn lauded
the senior monks’ decision, saying the move would be a ‘blessing to Buddhism’.
Describing Santi Asoke’s refusal to come under the Ecclesiastical Council as
‘a thorny issue subverting the religion and the Sakgha,’ the Supreme Patriarch went
on to compare the Asoke issues to the controversies which arose in the Sakgha after
the parinibbana of the Buddha when some monks challenged the Buddha’s teach-
ings. The chairman of the Ecclesiastical Council, Phra Thera Yana Munee of Wat
Pathum Kongka, informed the gathering that Bodhirak’s denunciation of the
Ecclesiastical Council posed a major threat to Buddhism (Bangkok Post, 24.6.89).
In response, Bodhirak pointed out that the Ecclesiastical Council’s ‘action was
severe and provocative, but that he and his group would show mercy towards the
council because it does not know what it is doing’. The Asoke leader commented
that monks who pass judgement should be monks who do not break the monastic
code of conduct imposed by the Buddha and questioned how many of the monks
who passed judgement on him practice all the precepts (Bangkok Post, 31.5.89).
Bodhirak went on to apply that piece of polemic by adding ‘according to Buddhist
law, monks with sins cannot judge other monks’. Sunai Sethboonsan, an Asoke
follower and assistant secretary to the Bangkok governor, Chamlong Srimuang
said that ‘the reaction against Asoke was fuelled by jealousy of other monks at the
movement’s popular appeal to a large number of followers’ (Bangkok Post,
3.6.89). Sunai went on to suggest a debate between the two disagreeing factions
(i.e. Santi Asoke and the Ecclesiastical Council).
The well-known social critic, Sulak Sivaraksa, responded to the crisis by urging
Santi Asoke to leave the Sakgha and become an independent entity with a new
name and a change of uniform, commenting that Asoke should not be so obsessed
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
123

--- PAGE 139 ---
with the saffron robe. Sulak demonstrated even-handedness by making the point
that ‘The Sakgha Act of 1962 upon which the verdict against Bodhirak was based
had its origins in a time when Thailand was under the dictatorial rule of the late
Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat’ (Bangkok Post, 3.6.89).
The government clearly did not wish this controversy to escalate, or to draw
criticism of the Sakgha leadership. Interior minister Police General Pramarn
Adireksarn ‘ordered the Special Branch to “request” the press to refrain from
favourable coverage of the Buddhist centre [Santi Asoke] which is in conflict the
Ecclesiastical Council. Closure threats were also levelled against media running
stories, cartoons and photographs deemed to ridicule the council or give a nega-
tive image of Buddhism’ (Bangkok Post, 4.6.89). General Pramarn is recorded
as defending himself by saying he was ‘merely seeking co-operation from news-
papers and had not ordered them to refrain from covering the issue’. The
Reporters’Association of Thailand, although critical of General Pramarn, did not
make an official complaint as the warning from the Interior Ministry had been
verbal, not written (Bangkok Post, 4.6.89).
Bodhirak, after discussions with the Minister of Education on 9 June 1989,
agreed to stop using the title ‘phra’ and start wearing a different colour and style
of robe from the mainstream monks.32 According to Bodhirak’s lawyer, Thongbai
Thongpao, ‘Bodhirak even consented not to identify his institutional activities
with the word Buddha’ (Poompanna, 1991:23). Phra Sophon Kanaporn, deputy
abbot of Wat Bovornnivet, claimed that Bodhirak’s change of robes was ‘a trick
to gain public sympathy’. He expressed the official line that Bodhirak’s activities
during the past years have been a ‘threat to the teachings of the Lord Buddha’,
and that Bodhirak is ‘destroying the whole structure of Buddhism in this country,
creating disunity and causing the people to go astray’ (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:71).
Bodhirak’s compromise was not sufficient for the Ecclesiastical Council and the
Education Minister Mana Rattanakoses insisted that the Asoke leader must agree
to a formal defrocking ceremony before 17 June 1989 (Bangkok Post, 13.6.89).
A face-saving approach was taken by the National Tactical Operations Centre
in an attempt to resolve the ecclesiastical conflict. It was reported that the plan
had been presented to Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan, thus indicating the
seriousness with which the conflict was now being taken. Bodhirak reported the
loss of his identity card at Lard Prao police station. The monk then went to
Bangkapi district office where he was photographed and provided with a tempo-
rary identity card in the name of Rak Rakpong, aged 55. ‘One of Santi Asoke’s
lawyers, Police Lt-Colonel Rungrot Roengrit, who accompanied Bodhirak to the
district office, said the centre’s 79 other “monks” would begin applying for ID
cards today’ (Bangkok Post, 16.6.89). Chaipak Siriwat, secretary to the Minister
of Education maintained that ‘Bodhirak’s application for an ID card was sufficient
to signify departure from the monkhood and he hoped the Ecclesiastical Council
would be satisfied’ (Bangkok Post, 16.6.89). The same article which carried the
headline ‘Santi Asoke leader is now a layman’ reported Phra Sophon Kanabhorn,
assistant abbot of Wat Bovornnives, the leading Thammayut temple, as saying
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
124

--- PAGE 140 ---
‘Phra Bodhirak, in legal terms is no longer a monk’. The deputy abbot added
‘By the Sakgha discipline, he should still have to utter the words that he is leaving
the monkhood to complete the defrocking ceremony’.
The creative solution to the stand-off was unsuccessful and Phra Bodhirak was
detained on 19 June 1989 ‘at the Police Private School in Bangkhen district on
charges of violating The Sakgha Act of 1962 in failing to defrock himself.33
The Santi Asoke leader was denied bail and his dark brown robe was changed
for a white one at the detention centre’ (Bangkok Post, 20.6.89). Heikkilä-Horn
(1997:71) informs us that the ‘Ministry of Interior announced that all TV cover-
age of the detention will be banned and that TV stations breaking the rule would
simply be closed down. Press coverage was also restricted. The media coverage
ban was a ploy to prevent Bodhirak’s expected criticism of the Thai Sakgha and
its leadership from reaching the public. Santi Asoke took the opportunity to inform
people that their leader did not wish to defrock and that by reciting the formula
that he wished to leave the monkhood Bodhirak would be telling a lie: Bodhirak
was quoted ‘Would those senior persons who have Dhamma or ethics in mind be
content to force someone to lie?’ (Bangkok Post, 20.6.89).
Bodhirak was apparently unperturbed by his detention. Some 50 lay members
of the movement arrived at the Police Private School. These included the well-
known, socially engaged pop singer Yuenyong Opakul (better known as Ad
Carabao). Santi Asoke monks went about their alms rounds as usual, in the area
around their temple. Prime Minister General Chatichai indicated that the ban on
reporting the arrest of Asoke leader applied only to TV stations, and ‘the government
felt it was not proper to give religious problems TV air time’. The prime minister
continued ‘We think that some unsuitable pictures might be publicised. This is a
sensitive issue. We did not intend to cover up anything. Newspapers are free to
report on the issue’ (Bangkok Post, 21.6.89).
On 22 June 1989, Bodhirak was released on 20,000 Baht (£335) bail. The
money was put up by an Asoke sympathiser. There had been representations from
the Civil Liberties Union to permit bail for the Santi Asoke leader. The letter was
signed by the union’s president, Professor Samphon Hunayon who noted that the
charge, if sustained, carried a maximum penalty of only six months imprisonment,
and should not be considered serious. He also indicated that Bodhirak gave no
indication of planning to escape. Professor Somphon’s letter was in response to
the refusal by the police to grant bail on the grounds that Phra Bodhirak’s ‘release
could cause confusion and might trigger a confrontation between mainstream
Buddhists and Santi Asoke followers’ (Bangkok Post, 22.6.89). On the same day
the human rights lawyer, Thongbai Thongpao, agreed to defend Bodhirak. He
commented ‘Bodhirak is no longer a monk in legal terms after he applied for an
identification card’ (Bangkok Post, 22.6.89).
Police investigators recommended that the public prosecutor charge Bodhirak and
‘it was intended to set up a committee of 36 police officers to conduct further inves-
tigations in areas where Bodhirak’s disciples are located’ (Bangkok Post, 12.7.89).
The following week it was reported that the abbot of Wat Pan-On in Muang District
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
125

--- PAGE 141 ---
was dismissed by a meeting of senior monks in Chiang Mai. The 43-year-old
abbot was asked to sign a statement expressing his desire to resign for following
the teachings of Santi Asoke. The abbot refused to sign the document, indicating that
he went to many different centres such as Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Suan Mokkh
to gain ideas about preaching the Dhamma. On 8 August 1989, all of the Asoke 105
clerics were detained for questioning at the Bangkhen Police Private School.
Metropolitan Police Deputy Commissioner Police Major General Viroj Pao-In
indicated that the police had now ‘sufficient evidence to interrogate all Asoke monas-
tics for allegedly defying Article 208 of the Penal Code’. This article ‘specifies
that whoever wrongfully dresses or uses a symbol to manifest that he is a priest, novice,
holy man or clergyman of any religion is liable to imprisonment not exceeding one
year, or a fine not exceeding 2,000 Baht, or both’(Bangkok Post, 9.8.89). On 9 August
1989 police released 26 of the 105 members of Santi Asoke ‘after finding they were
properly ordained as monks’ (Bangkok Post, 12.8.89). The remaining seventy-nine
monastics were released shortly after on bail of 8,000 Baht (£135) each.
Bodhirak and his seventy-nine clerical followers were ordered to be released on
a temporary basis after investigators failed to complete their investigations in
time. ‘The Public Prosecutor said the eighty suspects were asked to report back
to his office on 6 October 1989 for a decision on whether investigators had gath-
ered sufficient evidence to support prosecution’ (Bangkok Post, 9.9.89). A month
later 1,500 people turned up to witness Bodhirak’s second hearing. Defence
lawyer Thongbai Thongpao cross-examined acting Director General of the
Religious Affairs Department, Sanoh Puangpinyo. 
Mr Tongbai pointed out that The Sakgha Act of 1962 does not prohibit the
setting up of a new Buddhist sect and Article 25 of the constitution gives
the Thai people the right to religious beliefs. ‘Moreover, Mr Thongbai
presented documents such as an ID card, which showed that Mr Rak
[Bodhirak] had complied with the Sakgha Council’s order to disrobe him.
Mr Sanoh reportedly failed to reply to many questions
(Bangkok Post, 5.10.89).
Defence lawyer Tongbai Thongpao was successful in his attempt to have the
court consider as one case all 80 cases lodged against Phra Bodhirak and his 79
followers. ‘Mr Tongbai reasoned that all 80 cases contain the same charges and
require the same witnesses for examinations’ (Bangkok Post, 21.2.90). Fifty-two
lawyers were tasked to defend the accused who were being charged with imitating
Buddhist monks (a violation of Article 208 of the Criminal Code). The trial was
set for the first and third Thursdays of each month, and was appointed to be
held in a civilian court. Amnesty International called on Prime Minister Anand
Panyarachun and his government to drop legal action against the Santi Asoke
leader and his seventy-nine followers, and end their persecution in court. The
British-based human rights charity referred to each of the Asoke monastics as a
‘potential prisoner of conscience’ (Bangkok Post, 26.9.02).
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
126

--- PAGE 142 ---
The Bangkok Post of 30 December 1995 carried a summary of the court’s
findings. Bodhirak was not a monk authorised to conduct ordinations. He and his
seventy-nine followers had no right to accept alms or wear saffron robes. The
court sentenced Bodhirak to 66 months in prison and his followers to three
months. The sentence was to be suspended for two years as there was no record
of previous convictions. The court also found Bodhirak guilty for not meeting the
defrocking deadline, although they acknowledged he stopped wearing the saffron
robe and called himself Mr instead of phra. On the other hand, they noted he still
received alms and referred to himself as atama.34 For this offence, the court handed
down a six months suspended sentence to Bodhirak. The six-month sentence on
the second charge was upheld by the Appeals Court on 19 March 1997. The
66-month suspended sentence (now for some reason 54 months) was upheld in
the Supreme Court on 16 September 1998 (Bangkok Post, 17.9.98).
Santi Asoke, Chamlong Srimuang and Thai politics 
in the late 1980s and 1990s
Chamlong’s association with Bodhirak clearly provided ammunition for his
enemies to attack him. One week before the general election of 24 July 1988,
Mr Sangwian Poorahong, president of the Parian Dhamma Association, expressed
his organisation’s intention to take action against Bodhirak because he had
announced support for Chamlong and the Phalang Dhamma Party. Sangwian
indicated that he would also ‘ask the police department to investigate Phra Bodhirak
and his followers for allegedly wearing Buddhist robes without authority’. He
went on to say that if Santi Asoke were allowed to continue operating it ‘could
become a threat to the stability of Buddhism in Thailand’ (Bangkok Post, 18.8.88).
Sangwian acknowledged that Major General Chamlong had not violated the
law, yet went on to protest that ‘As a top administrator who could become prime
minister in the future, he [Chamlong] should not support Santi Asoke, which has
introduced a religious cult that could be detrimental to national security’
(Bangkok Post, 18.7.88). Bodhirak responded the following day by saying ‘he felt
sorry for them [the Parian Dhamma Association] who misunderstood him but
thanked them for thinking about him’. He went on to say ‘he had not seen the
Bangkok governor for several weeks’. The Asoke leader continued, ‘We regard
all people here (at the centre) as equals, and Governor Chamlong is one of
the many people who are interested in studying the Dhamma at Santi Asoke’
(Bangkok Post, 18.7.88).
In the Bangkok Post (29.5.89), Chamlong appeared in a photo taken at an Asoke
monastery. He indicated that he had just returned from Surat Thani where he had
spoken to several monks who practised the Dhamma at Suan Mokkh and they
expressed sympathy for Santi Asoke.35 He argued that Buddhadasa, ‘who is known
never to hold reservations against corrupt practices of any monks, does not even say
anything about Santi Asoke’. The governor pledged his attendance at a Dhamma
ceremony the following week to mark a Santi Asoke anniversary. On the other hand,
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
127

--- PAGE 143 ---
there were some 14 members of the Phalang Dhamma Party who released a
statement indicating that their party had no connection with Santi Asoke.
The only connection was that our leader Maj General Chamlong went to
practice the Dhamma at Santi Asoke’ said Dr Udomsilp Sriangnam, the
party’s Secretary-General. Dr Udomsilp said he could not understand
why Santi Asoke, which taught people to be good, had been attacked. In
contrast, monks who distributed palad khik amulets (depicting the male
sexual organ) were praised.
(Bangkok Post, 25.5.89)
In January 1990, in the immediate wake of Bodhirak’s trial, Chamlong was
re-elected governor of Bangkok with a huge majority. Anti-Asoke members of
the public sought to make an issue of the association between Chamlong and the
outlawed movement.36 Cleverly, Chamlong was able to cite the criminal court order
on making public comments about Santi Asoke thereby silencing public criticism.37
The relationship between Santi Asoke and Chamlong was a dilemma for the governor
of Bangkok. While he trusted Asoke members who were politically involved with
him, according to McCargo (1993:99) Chamlong did not wish Asoke members to
be selected as parliamentary candidates as the connection with the movement was
proving to be too problematic. There were those within Santi Asoke who continued
to show respect to Chamlong but felt he could have done much more in their defence.
Not only had many Asoke members volunteered their services to help Chamlong
during his campaigns, but their political involvement had attracted both monastic
and public criticism. Some may well have felt that this resulted in the ecclesiastic and
civil court cases in 1988, following a period of relative silence.
In January 1992, Chamlong resigned his post as governor of Bangkok in order
to stand for parliament. The Phalang Dhamma Party was very successful in the
elections of March 1992, though according to McCargo (1997:102) there were
virtually no Santi Asoke members among those elected from the Phalang
Dhamma Party. A corollary of this was that Phalang Dhamma was perceived no
longer to be closely associated with Santi Asoke. Indeed, there was a greater
degree of tolerance towards the Asoke movement, possibly because it had been
dealt with by the Sakgha. When Suchinda, the non-elected army general who was
imposed as the army’s choice for prime minister, criticised Chamlong in parliament
for trying to establish a new Buddhist order, he was not taken seriously. In fact, it
was felt to be ‘a ploy to divert attention from the real political issues at hand’
(McCargo, 1997:102).
Chamlong’s high-profile rally style of political protest, along with his fasting
surprisingly went against him and the Phalang Dhamma Party in September 1992.
The more people came to realise the ‘blackness’of the events of May 1992, the more
Chamlong was blamed (at least in part) for the deaths, injuries and disappearances
(McCargo, 1997:276).38 Chamlong’s main political rival, Chuan Leekpai, was able
to market his non-involvement in the protests of May 1992 as reasonable and polite,
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
128

--- PAGE 144 ---
claiming he had worked behind the scenes to help secure the king’s intervention.
McCargo (1997:278) points out that while some believed Chamlong had ‘boldly
risked his political future to challenge the NPKC’s attempts to continue dictatorship’,
others (especially in Bangkok) favoured the democratic approach of Chuan to the
confrontational approach of Chamlong.39
Chuan as leader of the party (Democrats) with most votes was elected prime
minister. Chamlong was relegated to the back-benches as he had indicated prior
to the election that he would only serve as prime minister, and in no other capacity.
Veteran politician and economist Boonchu Rojanastien became the Phalang
Dhamma leader; party MP’s, however, continued to meet at Chamlong’s house on
Tuesday mornings. This resulted in both of Thailand’s English newspapers to
referring to Chamlong as ‘the party’s de facto leader from January 1993 until
September 1994, when he resumed formal leadership of Phalang Dhamma’
(McCargo, 1997:284).
Although honoured as a pro-democracy hero overseas, Chamlong’s popularity
within Thailand was waning.40 This was perhaps best brought home to Chamlong
on 22 July 1993 when he went to pacify protestors against the government’s
decision to use part of Lumpini Park in central Bangkok as a workshop for the
new overhead railway. McCargo (1997:285) comments ‘the once-loved former
city governor found himself booed and jeered by an angry crowd in a nasty
incident which almost turned violent’.41 Chamlong was re-elected leader of
Phalang Dhamma on 17 September 1994. This was despite the lack of support of
half of the party’s MP’s who supported Boonchu, and felt Chamlong favoured the
other half of the party which included some who were Asoke supporters. A month
before the party elections, Bodhirak claimed that he had been calling on him
[Chamlong] to withdraw from Phalang Dhamma since the MP’s rebellion of
1990. He said that Chamlong had not taken his advice and had fallen into the
trap of the Democrats because of power seekers among his party members
(McCargo, 1997:290). It may well have been that the abbot could see that
Chamlong was a ‘yesterday man’ in the ever-changing nature of Thai political
life, and continued involvement would be unproductive for Chamlong, and
therefore Santi Asoke.
Bodhirak’s advice turned out to be sound. A change in the party’s membership
meant Chamlong had to make decisions based on compromise with ministers of
a questionable political/financial reputation. After some months as deputy prime
minister, Chamlong withdrew the support of Phalang Dhamma from the coalition
government, which led to the collapse of the government led by Chuan Leekpai
of the Democratic Party, and the general election of 2 July 1995. Chamlong
resigned from leadership of Phalang Dhamma and was replaced by Taksin
Shinawatra, satellite communications and mobile phone baron who was to
become prime minister in 2000. Chamlong’s attempt to return to his previous
position was unsuccessful at the June 1996 elections for governor of Bangkok.
Phalang Dhamma was virtually wiped out at the November 1996 general election,
the Bangkok electorate dissatisfied with Taksin’s political performance.
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
129

--- PAGE 145 ---
Chamlong and his wife Sirilak continue their association with Santi Asoke, but
are not nearly as involved as they were during their years of political activity.
They have a very small house (modelled on a monk’s shelter, or Pali kuti) in the
grounds of Pathom Asoke, some 50 kilometres west of Bangkok, to which they
sometimes retreat. Chamlong’s energies are now focused on leadership training
sessions for new generation politicians and emerging community and local
government leaders. It could be argued that Chamlong’s training programmes
based in Kanchanaburi (Central Thailand) keep him from having more contact
with Santi Asoke. There may also be some truth in the idea that Chamlong feels
a certain ‘loss of face’ at not having listening to Bodhirak’s advice to be less
politically involved after ceasing to be Bangkok’s governor.
Santi Asoke centres and activities
Santi Asoke in Bangkok
There are currently nine Santi Asoke centres in Thailand and each centre
administers its own affairs. The Santi Asoke headquarters, located in the suburbs
of Bangkok, 20 kilometres from the city centre, function loosely as the coordi-
nating centre of the movement, with good transport links with the other centres.
The land on which the temple and buildings are built was donated by an elderly
female member. Surrounding land has been purchased, resulting in a fairly large
centre. On the edge of the temple compound and fronting a very busy road are a
number of shops and stalls belonging to the movement. The vegetarian restaurant
is popular with Asoke supporters visiting the centre (especially at weekends)
as well as non-Asoke members. Asoke members are pleased that non-Asoke
vegetarian restaurants have recently opened up in the vicinity; there are now
eight. The vegetable and fruit stalls, also noted for their value, are well patronised,
as are the herbal medicine shops and the two supermarkets.
There is also a well-stocked air conditioned shop selling Asoke and other
approved Buddhist publications and teaching tapes.42 The results of a questionnaire
indicated that 18 per cent of the respondents were first drawn to Santi Asoke
through reading the movement’s literature.43 This relatively high percentage is
not surprising given that Santi Asoke has its own printing press (Fah Apai Co.
Ltd.) and is dedicated to spreading its teaching through low-cost or even free
literature designed for different target groups such as students and farmers.44
Current printing projects include San Asoke, the monthly Asoke newsletter which
has a circulation of 9,000 copies.45 Dok Bua Noi (‘The Little Lotus’) is a magazine
aimed at young teenagers and 8,000 copies are published every two months. Row
Kit Aray (‘What We Think’) contains a lot of articles written by Bodhirak; it is
also a bi-monthly magazine with a circulation of 2,500 copies. The most widely
circulated publication (22,000 copies) is the bimonthly magazine Dok Yaa
(‘Daffodil’). Each of these publications make use of creative artwork and reflect
Bodhirak’s training and continuing interest in that area.
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
130

--- PAGE 146 ---
There were two respondents (3.2 per cent) who indicated that they were first
attracted to Santi Asoke through listening to the movement’s radio programmes.
The Asoke communities in Bangkok and Nakhon Phatom both broadcast part-time
on FM local radio and serve to build a bridge between the movement and the
community.46 Only one respondent indicated that she was drawn to the movement
through listening to teaching tapes. Santi Asoke produces a lot of such tapes and
videos and it is surprising that they do not figure more significantly as the entry
point into Asoke.
In the lanes leading away from the main road there are a number of houses
which have been converted into microfactories, where, for example, medicines
are prepared and packed, literature stored and shampoo produced and bottled.
There is a medium-sized library which contains mainly Thai language Buddhist
titles. A volunteer librarian is on hand to help Asoke members or visitors with
their questions.
Asthetically, the focal point of Santi Asoke in Bangkok is the temple. The
architectural style bears no resemblance to traditional Thai temples. The circular
tower structure has seven floors, and has at its base a large man-made waterfall.
The temple dome allegedly contains relics of the Buddha and Arahats. A number
of Buddha images donated to the temple are housed in the dome as Bodhirak did
not wish Asokans to develop a dependence on images. Indeed, he did not donate
these images to other temples as he believed they already had too many images.47
The whole area with its trees and water features is a symbol of part of what Asoke
is seeking to do, that is, drawing people back to a simple lifestyle and a harmo-
nious relationship with nature. As of 2006, the interior of the temple is still to be
completed and volunteer artists and other craftsman are working on projects
which depict scenes from the life of the Buddha and Bodhirak. One mural depicts
a policemen and a senior monk pointing at Bodhirak and declaring him to be an
enemy of Buddhism – a clear reference to the court case against the movement,
and its subsequent excommunication by the Maha thera samakom. The Thai
national flag and the Santi Asoke flag both fly from the top of the temple. The latter
is a white ring on a brown background. The circle represents a mind free from all
attachments; this is the Asokan understanding of emptiness (Pali sunyata).
Pathom Asoke
Pathom Asoke is located at Nakhon Pathom, a 90-minute drive from the centre of
Bangkok. A modern building houses the school and a state of the art recording
studio where CD’s are cut and videos edited and produced. A tofu factory (which
also produces soya milk), large mushroom farm, charcoal producing station, small
production centres for producing herbal medicines, food flavouring and natural
fertilisers are all to be found on the 100 rai of land at Pathom Asoke.48
Considerable effort is put into garbage recycling, and a resident inventor has for
some time been working to develop a gas fuel produced by the burning of garbage.
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
131

--- PAGE 147 ---
There are eight organic vegetable gardens at Pathom Asoke, totalling about
12 acres. Most of the food consumption of the community is met by the produce of
these gardens. A wide range of fruits and vegetables are grown but rice cultivation
stopped several years ago. Rice is obtained from the other Asoke centres and from
groups within the natural farming network. Here, as at other centres, the school
children are involved in farming work. Indeed, the adults working without the
assistance of the young people would be unable to produce such large quantities.
Asoke communities do not use modern agriculture chemicals such as pesticides
and fertilisers. Santi Asoke was one of the first organisations in Thailand to start
practising organic farming.
By following the first precept of Buddhism we vow to not harm any
living creature, including insects, such as those found on and below the
soil surface (and of course mosquitoes and flies have to be counted as
living creatures!). And by farming organically, there is no harm arising
from modern agricultural chemicals to ourselves, to customers who buy
our product, or to other creatures.
(Santos, undated:5)
In order to minimise damage to the soil, there is in the Asoke communities a
reluctance to plough, or otherwise disturb the soil.
In the Asoke communities a lot of reflection on practice and learning from
experience takes place. This is particularly true of the agricultural work. Some
9 years ago in the Asoke communities there was a strong focus on putting into
practice the Fukuoka approach to natural farming.49 The mix of crops within a
small space all maturing at different times does not overtax the soil. Although good
soil management, it was found to require a lot of effort by those gathering in the
produce, as large amounts were required for cooking and sending to the other
centres. What was good practice then for a household was inappropriate for a large
community. Another example of agricultural development is the improved quality
of organic compost. The process is started by a microbe soup to which organic
materials such as food scraps and leaves are added. The compost, which has a lot of
microbiological life in it, is ready to use after a 20-day maturation process. Another
method used to enrich the soil is the use of charred rice husks, as they have a high
alkaline content which serve to balance out the acidic soil.50
Sali Asoke and the Puttha Pisek festival
Sali Asoke is located outside the small town of Phai Sali, an hour’s drive from
the provincial capital of Nakhon Sawan. From 6 to 10 February 2001, I joined over
1,000 Asoke members for the annual Puttha Pisek ceremony. This coincides with the
Makha Bucha day ceremony which is a public holiday in Thailand.51 In mainstream
temples, after chanting by the monks in the evening, there is a clockwise circumam-
bulation of the main pagoda three times by lay people who have candles and lotus
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
132

--- PAGE 148 ---
flowers in their hands. The ritual is referred to in Thai as tien wein. While mainstream
practice focuses on the circumambulation, Asokans emphasise listening to sermons
by Bodhirak.52 Puttha Pisek has the meaning in Thai Buddhism of making existing
images, statues or artifacts powerful through the chanting of a group of monks. The
intensive five-day training programme at Sali Asoke is referred to as Puttha Pisek.53
Asokans are further polishing their buddha-nature, and bringing out the best in them-
selves through intense activity (as opposed to chanting over artifacts in order to
sacralise them!). Here then is a jibe at mainstream practice, as well as an affirming
comment on the Asoke spiritual development programme. This ceremony attracts
all the monastics and the vast majority of temple dwellers, as well as committed
members (yatitham) who do not reside at the Asoke centres.
The hospitality of the Asoke people was impressive. I was provided with a klot,
two schoolboys were detailed to instruct me how to use it, and to show me around
the centre grounds. For the duration of my five-day visit, I was provided with
an informant who took me on tours of the centre, introduced me to many of the
conferees, and sought to answer my many questions. Asoke communities are
accustomed to researchers and appreciate any interest shown in the movement.
During the Puttha Pisek ceremony, the lay community live like the monks.
A typical day started with rising at 3 am in order to be ready for chanting in the
bot at 3.15 am54 The monastic community are at the front of the bot and when
the half-hour chanting session is complete, they turn round to face the audience.
In accordance with Thai monastic tradition the most senior monk (Bodhirak)
sits on the extreme left of the audience, and then monks sit in a line in an order
dictated by date of ordination. At 3.45 am Bodhirak commenced his sermon,
which lasted for two hours. The theme of this year’s Puttha Pisek was ‘Emotional
Quotient’. Bodhirak read from his 288 page book EQ Lokuttara, and commented
on issues raised by the text.55
After the sermon was completed, monks, sikkhamats and lay people prepared to
go around the various villages in the area on an alms round.56 The alms round
terminated at the Asoke centre with members who did not go on the alms round
giving to the monastics. After all the food was prepared, the monks, sikkhamats
and novices took and ate their food. Lay people then lined up in two rows, sitting
cross-legged, and facing each other. Apart from families with young children, men
and women remained segregated. Large pots of food were passed down the rows of
people. What is being emphasised in this method of eating is dependence on the
land, valuing of traditional rural, community orientated Thai culture and simple
lifestyle. This is accentuated by the simple peasant-style clothes worn by the lay
people. The image of the poor farmer then is used to express Asoke values of simple
lifestyle and world renouncing anti-materialism. This is further reinforced once
everyone was ready to eat by a blessing said for the farmers and others who had
worked hard to produce the food. While a good number of the movement are
from rural backgrounds, Apinya Feungfusakul is unaware of Asoke members who
are poor farmers who subsist on farming a small patch of rented land.57 Those
who are farmers within the Santi Asoke movement tend to own sizeable amounts of
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
133

--- PAGE 149 ---
land and cannot be considered to be poor. Feungfusakul’s point is that the image of
the peasant does not reflect the reality of the membership’s socio-economic status.
This is an important observation, and one perspective is to view the peasant focus
as a symbol for communicating the Asoke value system. There again, it would be
hard not to project the peasant image given the need to dress simply, because of
manual work in vegetable gardens, rice fields or cottage industries. These cheap,
blue, loose-fitting clothes function as a kind of non-military uniform (green clothes
would be viewed as sinister due to its military connotation) which identify the wear-
ers as Asoke members when they travel away from the base communities. A corol-
lary of wearing peasant-style clothing and eating in the style that they do is the
creation of an impression of a rural community from a previous generation.
A vegetarian meal is the only meal of the day for monastics and most temple
dwellers. Children and those who are unwell eat again in the late afternoon.
My informant asked me how I enjoyed the food; he was dissatisfied with my
positive response and told me that the correct answer was ‘it is not tasty, and it is
not not tasty, it is nourishing’. This comment gives us an insight into the intensity
of Asoke principles and practice. Eating is yet another opportunity to practise
both mindfulness and non-attachment. I soon found out there was even an Asoke
method of washing dishes, which minimised the use of water, made maximum
use of scraps of left over food and provided another opportunity of practising
mindfulness. When the meal was completed, lay people took the opportunity to
approach the monastics with their requests and questions.
At midday, a bell was rung and everyone broke off their activities to meditate
for one minute for world peace; this is a daily ritual throughout the Asoke com-
munities. There was often some time at this stage in the day for conferees to talk
to each other. The topics of conversation tended to focus on fairly weighty issues
such as the benefits of organic farming, vegetarianism, the teachings of the
Buddha, and how individuals were developing in the practice of the Dhamma. The
Chow58 Asoke standard greeting to members and outsiders alike is not ‘sawadee’
but ‘charun tham’, the Thai for ‘prosper in the Dhamma’.59 This greeting is an
example of how the movement is seeking to return to a basic society founded on
the teachings of the Buddha. It reacts against what is perceived to be a meaning-
less Thai greeting sawadee, as well as an informal Western greeting such as ‘Hi!’
Asoke members show great respect to those more senior than themselves. Yet
the lack of formal respect they offer mainstream monks is noticeable. It is not
uncommon to have mainstream monks attend some of the Asoke meetings; there
were six or so at the Puttha Pisek event I attended. When asked about this, my
informant told me that mainstream monks did not have the high standards of the
Chow Asoke, therefore did not merit the same respect. Santi Asoke, however, is
less overtly critical of mainstream monks than they used to be.
In the afternoon, one could attend a demonstration of how to prepare and use
natural fertiliser for organic farming. There were also a number of small groups
of lay people sitting around a monk or sikkhamat asking questions and engaging
in discussion. Quite a number of lay people did the rounds of the small groups
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
134

--- PAGE 150 ---
and settled where they found an interesting topic being discussed. The last hour,
or so, of the afternoon was spent bathing, washing clothes and preparing klots for
bedtime at around 9 pm.
The evening meetings (held outside) started with music and singing by some of
the schoolchildren. Schoolchildren from all the Asoke centres were present, and
were involved in the catering arrangements, moving equipment around and setting
up and monitoring the sound and lighting systems. This was followed by a talk on
diet and exercise by a panel of doctors. The evening was concluded with a talk
from Bodhirak which included answering questions from the audience.
Santi Asoke communities in North-East Thailand
Sisa Asoke is located in the north-east province of Sisaket. It was opened in 1976
and although smaller than Phatom Asoke has a similar range of shops, gardening
and farming facilities. Sima Asoke, which was opened in 1990, is located in
the province of Nakhon Ratchasima. It has a large mushroom farm, orchards
and produces noodles from rice flour. These products are used in the vegetarian
restaurant in Nakhon Ratchasima, the capital town of the province. The third centre
is located in the province of Ubon Ratchathani, and is referred to as Ratchathani
Asoke. It was opened in 1997. The last centre to open in the north-east region is
Hin faa faa nam in Chaiyabhum.60
Santi Asoke in North Thailand
In 1995, a centre was opened one hour’s drive from Chiang Mai, the principal
city in the north of Thailand. Referred to as Lana61 Asoke, or Bhu pha faa nam, it is
800 metres above sea level, and is fast building a reputation for experimenting with
natural agriculture.62 New monks spend their first five phansa studying at Lana
Asoke under the tutelage of a senior monk.63 Some years ago, Asoke communities
experimented with having Wednesdays as a silent day. The adults, as far as possi-
ble, and certainly the monastics, did not speak. This practice has been discontinued
except at Lana Asoke where Wednesday remains a day of silence.
The vegetarian restaurant in Chiang Mai is large, housing the ten or so
volunteers who work there, and providing accommodation for visiting monastics.
Its location on the outskirts of the city and its closure over the weekends mean
that it does not have the influence it might in terms of propagating its vegetarian
message, and raising the Asoke profile. A more central location would seem
desirable, given the large numbers of students in the city, as well as world
travellers, many of them on a spiritual search.
Santi Asoke in South Thailand
The only centre in the southern part of the kingdom is Taksin Asoke in Trang,
which is very close to the Thai border with Malaysia.
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
135

--- PAGE 151 ---
Membership of the movement
In 1995 there were ninety-two samajas and twenty-three sikkhamats. This
increased to 102 samajas and 25 sikkhamats by March 2001. There were 9,929
registered members in 2001 but there are also a large number, perhaps several thou-
sand, who are in sympathy with the movement and follow its activities with inter-
est. In 2005 there were 105 samajas and 27 sikkhamats but no figure was available
for registered membership. One indicator of the membership must surely be the
number of monthly Asoke newsletters circulated to temple dwellers and registered
members. Currently (2006) this stands at 9,000 copies. It may be that in the inter-
ests of saving paper Asoke do not circulate to each temple dweller and expect them
to share. That said it appears that there is no growth in membership. This is contrary
to members’ perception that the movement is growing. This perception may be
partly caused by the steady stream of visitors to Asoke centres.
Education of children and youth
Education of children
Some Thai schools are located on temple grounds, a reminder that traditionally
schools were part of the temple and monks functioned as teachers. The Asoke
movement have schools at their centres and they are staffed by volunteers. Some
of the teachers are members of the movement; others are more loosely associated
and teach on a part-time basis. In the Bangkok community there are around thirty
to forty teachers, with a variety of visiting specialists who help in this manner.64
These schools are recognised by the Ministry of Education and mainly serve the
children of Asoke members or supporters. The school children wear blue uni-
forms, and at national and interschool events their respective centres may be iden-
tified according to the colours of their Boy Scout style scarves. There are
currently 590 school children in the various Asoke communities.
In addition to the usual syllabus, collaborative working, art, music and
Buddhist morals are particularly emphasised in the Asoke schools. Pupils who
enter the Asoke secondary school system, regardless of their age, are required to
start in the first year of the school programme. They and their parents are inter-
viewed in Bangkok, and if the committee believe it to be appropriate for the
pupils to commence schooling within the Asoke system, they are then accepted.
If a pupil wishes to study at another Asoke centre, then he/she has to have an addi-
tional interview at that location. Much of the content of the teaching is negotiated
between students and their teachers. If a student wishes to pursue a particular
study interest towards the end of secondary education, then Asoke can provide
specialist input through one of its lay members. Recent examples of this are studies
in civil engineering and English language.
Exiting a highly structured community poses a challenge for any leaver. This is
particularly true for the school children who have gone through the Asoke system
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
136

--- PAGE 152 ---
and intend continuing with their education at university or college. Some have
successfully made that transition. Many opt to continue with the familiar and
remain in the Asoke communities. As they have been raised with the concept that
‘more is less’ and possessions lead to suffering there is no incentive to go and
make money. The retention of youth within the movement is crucial for the sur-
vival of Asoke. Many of these high school graduates are key workers in the agri-
cultural and small-factory programmes.
Childrens’camps
Santi Asoke also organise camps for children and young people, typically ages
range from 5 to 15 years, and the camps which run for about a week will focus
on developing self-reliance. The first camp was organised in 1985 and currently
around 500 children attend these camps. Samaja Thera Chitta, an Asoke member
for 20 years commented ‘initially the camp attracted only children of parents who
often frequented the Asoke community and those who could not afford to pay
huge sums to send their children to expensive camps, but now well off parents were
increasingly sending their children to the community’ (Bangkok Post, 19.4.99).
The results of these camps include children returning home and helping parents
with the household chores, keeping their clothes and rooms clean, and no longer
snacking between meals.
Tertiary education
A course is now offered within the Asoke movement for those who wish to study
beyond secondary school. The name initially given to the programme, Mahalai
Wang Chiwit, drew the criticism that it was misleading, as it created the impression
of an institute for higher learning (Bangkok Post, 8.6.96).65 Santi Asoke responded
by saying the name meant a great place to live. The name was adjusted shortly
afterwards to Sammasikkhalaya Wang Chiwit, and is normally shortened to Wang
Chiwit. While conventional learning focuses on the study of textbooks and class-
room based learning, the Asoke approach is that one’s inner world is the most
complex subject of study. The Asokan teaching approach thus emphasises con-
stant practice at trying to reduce one’s ego and selfishness through reducing greed
and by working with other people. Nomdin Thayatham, one of the academy
teachers, comments, ‘Our aim is to study how to live a moral life and how to be
self sufficient so that we will not be a burden on nature, or society’ (Bangkok Post,
23.8.96). Wang Chiwit’s educational philosophy, according to one Thai educa-
tionalist associated with the programme, is best expressed in their slogan
‘Orthodox in keeping sila, efficient in working, and knowledgeable in studying
subjects’ (Asoketrakul, undated:6).66
The Wang Chiwit students are referred to as nisit, meaning ‘inhabitants’, as
they are required to be resident in their respective communities throughout their
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
137

--- PAGE 153 ---
training. The Wang Chiwit programme was first started at Sima Asoke in Nakorn
Ratchasima, but is also available at Pathom Asoke and Santi Asoke in Bangkok.
In 2003 there were approximately 40 nisit, many of whom had completed
their secondary education within the Asoke system. This figure rose to 241 in
2005. The significant growth may have been caused by Bodhirak’s vision for
lay members not to stagnate but to continue to grow through facing new and
continuing challenges. The minimum age for entry to the Wang Chiwit programme
is eighteen and there is no upper limit. While there is no academic entry require-
ment for the programme, candidates are required to live for a probationary year
in an Asoke community and to pass an interview with a committee made
up of samajas, sikkhamats and teachers. They are required to keep the Eight
Precepts which according to the Asoke tradition includes being a vegan.
Successful completion of the course leads to the award of a certificate (panyabat).
A minimum period of six years is required for a nisit to complete his/her course
at Wang Chiwit. A nisit may continue on the programme for as long as he/she
wishes, provided the Eight Precepts are observed. Indeed, the longer the period,
the more beneficial it may be for the nisit in making positive and permanent
behavioural change (Asoketrakul, undated:6).
In terms of curriculum design, there is a strong focus on ecology, natural
farming and Buddhism. Assessment of students is rigorous. It comprises of self-
evaluation, peer and community members’ evaluation as well as the evaluation
of teachers. The ‘learning-through-work’ approach involves a lot of personal
experiment. For example, each student will be given land to be responsible for, as
well as being involved in one of the many cottage industries which are located
at the Asoke centres. Once a week nisits, like all other temple dwellers, reflect in
a group setting on how well they have kept the Precepts. This is referred to as
check sin and involves the filling in of a form for each Precept.67 In the context
of a discussion with a samaja or sikkhamat, ways are examined of overcoming
besetting failures. No nisit has yet completed the course and thus received the
award of a certificate (panyabat).68 It would be of interest to know what status
potential employers place on the training given to Asoke graduates. Concerning
employability of future graduates, Asoke member Somporn Soraniyo commented
‘Whether they get jobs depends on the faith each work place has in Santi Asoke’
(Bangkok Post, 6.7.96). It is quite likely, however, that many of the graduates
will opt to stay as temple residents.
Annual festivals other than Puttha Pisek
Pluksek is similar to Puttha Pisek. The Pluksek ceremony takes place for seven days
in April at Sisa Asoke. Pluksek is the term given to the setting aside of an item by
a monk and his reciting a short Pali formula over it. This is believed to sacralise
the object so that it is considered sacred and contains power, for example, an
amulet which is believed to ward off danger. The extremely rigorous week-long
Asoke practice and listening to sermons for hours each day really wakes members
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
138

--- PAGE 154 ---
up and brings out the power from within!69 This is another example of how
spiritual development is recognised as taking place within the Asoke commu-
nities, as opposed to what they consider to be the ‘superstitious’ practices of
mainstream Buddhism.
The Asoke remembrance day and the veneration of the relic of the Buddha day
celebration (Thai Asoke Lamluk) is a ceremony which takes place at Santi Asoke
in Bangkok. It was the wish of Asokans to have a ceremony on Bodhirak’s birthday
(5 June). The founder, however, expressed a preference to mark the occasion
(9 June) when he ceased to function as a Sakgha accredited monk and began to
function independently as a monk. Thus, Bodhirak and his fellow monks ceased
to use the title phra (Thai title for a Buddhist monk) and changed to using
samajea (Pali word for monk). This is an occasion to commemorate the Asoke
court case when the movement was accused of being unorthodox in its practice.
The following day (10 June) there is the veneration of a relic of the Buddha
housed in the dome of the temple. There is a carnival atmosphere about this
‘get together’ which runs for several days, unlike the austere Pluksek and Puttha
Pisek gatherings.
The Mahapawarana celebration lasts for five days and takes place in Pathom
Asoke after the rainy season (phansa) when monastics remain in their monasteries.
This period in early November is a time when elections of new abbots to the
various putthasatans take place. Heikkilä-Horn (1997:131) comments that for
the monastics the most important part of the ceremony is the gathering, where the
monastics criticise each other. The monks and sikkhamats have their day-long
Mahapawarana meetings on separate days. No lay people are allowed to attend
the meetings and discussions are never reported to lay followers.
The New Year Celebration and the Ariya Fair takes place at Ratchathani
Asoke, and goods are sold at less than the cost of producing them as an act of
merit-making and goodwill to the community (Asoketrakul, undated:3).
Structure of the Asoke communities
Each of the Asoke centres has an abbot (Thai somphaan).70 If it is a busy centre
where there is a heavy administrative load, the abbot may have a deputy rong
somphaan. If the work load is especially heavy, an assistant abbot (Thai phu chuei
somphaan) may be appointed. Each year, as we have seen, during
Mahapawarana, abbots are appointed for each centre and the monks alone are
involved in making these decisions. The terms of service for abbots may be
extended if they so wish, and if the results of the centre are good in terms of agri-
cultural production and moral development of those associated with the centre
(Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:64). Bodhirak is the movement’s overall leader, and pre-
sides at the main meetings, as well as functioning as a consultant to the abbots
and other leaders. He normally resides at Ratchathani Asoke but regularly spends
time at the two other large centres of Pathom and Santi Asoke. This is due to the
work at these three centres being more developed than at the other centres, and
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
139

--- PAGE 155 ---
thus requiring more attention to detail. He is always accompanied by at least one
other monk. Even when he is sleeping he has someone close to his kuti; one rea-
son for this practice is to avoid any suspicion of impropriety.
A committee comprising of all the abbots and deputies is referred to as the
‘monks’committee’. There is also a monks’assembly, which includes all the monks
in the Asoke movement. This committee considers, approves or rejects the plans put
forward by the abbots for the development of the work of the centres, as well as
working through some of the more serious problems of the centres (Heikkilä-Horn,
1997:67). Hierarchy is considerably flattened, compared for example to Wat Phra
Dhammakaya. Each Asoke centre has an elected committee which meet monthly
under the chairmanship of a monk.71 The work of each centre is discussed monthly
by committee members who represent different aspects of the centre’s work. There
is a board displaying the names and photographs of current committee members
located at a central point at each Asoke temple (putthasathan).
The initial administrative structure to be started at Santi Asoke was the Santi
Foundation (monitee). It was jokingly referred to as the ‘ministry of the interior’
by my informant! It is run by a committee of approximately twelve members who
are elected each year. Interestingly, the chairperson is referred to as ‘the servant’
(phu rap chai), and is assisted by a secretary and a treasurer. There are no
ordained people on the committee but monks may be consulted. The monthly
meeting of this committee is held in Bangkok, but there is a cross section of
representatives from the other Asoke communities. Bodhirak also attends the
monthly committee meeting. Those who serve on this committee will work full
time in administering the business of the community. The following four examples
indicate key aspects of the committee’s work:
G
Schools: there are schools at almost all of the nine communities. In 2002,
the principal ones were Sisa Asoke: 200 pupils, Pathom Asoke: 200 pupils,
Santi Asoke: 85 pupils, Sali Asoke: 60 pupils and Chiang Mai: 35 pupils;
G
Gong Bun: also known as sawadeegaan. This deals with the basic issues of
accommodation, health and medicine, food, clothing and travel;
G
Pa Tea San Tan: this covers the work of telephone counselling as people con-
tact the centres to seek advice (some members are set aside to provide this
service). It includes receiving people from outside the movement, providing
information and face-to-face counselling;
G
Administration: examples of this include ensuring that all community bills
are paid, negotiating with government departments and service providers, for
example, water board and electricity department.
Chamlong Srimuang was partially responsible for setting up the Gong Thab
Tham (Dhamma Army) and continues to be elected each year as president. 
This foundation may be referred to as the ‘ministry of the exterior’! This was
started two years after the Santi Foundation and has the same structure of election
and monthly meeting.
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
140

--- PAGE 156 ---
A significant responsibility of the Dhamma Army is to liaise with those who
request speakers from Santi Asoke to speak at particular meetings, for example,
university societies or clubs. Asoke local radio announces where meetings are to
be held and invites members of the public to attend. A fairly typical programme
might include a vegetarian cooking demonstration along with a presentation of
the movement’s basis beliefs. The preparing and serving of vegetarian food free
of charge is known as Rong Boon Mangsewerak and offers Asoke people the
opportunity to share their belief that there is great merit in reducing animal
suffering. Large-scale vegetarian food festivals are held by all the communities on
two to three occasions each year, the key occasion being the king’s birthday.
The Dhamma Practitioner’s Society came into being as the government would
not accept the vegetarian restaurants as a non-profit making charity, and thus full
tax was required to be paid by the restaurants. This society, known in Thai as
‘Samakom Phu Patepattam’ has responsibility for the vegetarian restaurants and
a variety of other projects such as vehicles, teaching tapes and videos, the
libraries and the natural farming network.
Conclusion
Bodhirak seems to have the Chinese characteristics of hard working and straight
talking. His success as a TV programmer and song writer meant he was used to
forging his own way through life. Clearly a natural leader, it was never going to be
easy for him to follow others. Bodhirak’s re-ordination in 1973 in the Mahanikai
tradition, and the forming of his own group mimics the culture of protest that was
emerging in Thai society at that time. Many students (but also trade unionists)
demonstrated against the military’s practice of replacing government leadership at
will. At the heart of these demonstrations was the desire for democracy.
Bodhirak’s own quest was to practise Buddhism which had distinctives, such as
rigorous lifestyle, vegetarianism, non-acceptance of financial donations except
from those who knew the movement well and a rationalistic approach to teaching.
This approach coupled with Bodhirak’s charismatic style of leadership struck a
chord with many who were disenchanted with mainstream Thai Buddhism and
wished to be part of a radical and supportive community. Bodhirak’s working-class
Chinese background, and lack of connections with the establishment, under-
standably appealed to those from a similar milieu. Many young people joined
Santi Asoke around that time. Indeed, many have remained with the group since
its inception in the mid-1970s.
Proceedings against Bodhirak were not nearly as traumatic for Santi Asoke as
the legal proceedings against Phra Dhammachayo proved to be for Wat Phra
Dhammakaya. Excommunication of Santi Asoke from the Sakgha seems to have
been gradual. Initial proceedings were taken by the Maha thera samakom against
Bodhirak and the Asoke group in 1979. In 1991 Asoke monks ceased using the
title phra (venerable) and began to wear a different colour of robe from main-
stream monks. Santi Asoke temples were referred to as putthasathan rather than
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
141

--- PAGE 157 ---
wat (temple).72 In 1989, Asoke ordained members were detained by the police but
later released. At the end of 1995 a court judged that Bodhirak and his fellow
monks had no right to accept alms or wear the saffron robes of mainstream Thai
Buddhist monks. In 1998 Bodhirak received a suspended prison sentence which
was never served on the grounds that he had no previous convictions.
In the early days, Santi Asoke was extremely vocal in its criticisms of the Thai
Sakgha. The movement is now considerably less high profile. For example, it no
longer goes on its peripatetic mission, or charik. It remains largely within the
confines of its putthasathan and functions more as a model for harmonious
living, rather than mounting hostile opposition to mainstream Thai Buddhism.
Asoke’s perceived close relationship with the Phalang Dhamma political party
was viewed as highly inappropriate by traditionalists within and out with the
Sakgha. Nearly half of the 319 party members who were candidates in the 1988
general election were Santi Asoke followers. Indeed, McCargo (1993:48) points
out that ‘an early action of the Chatahai Choonavan government was to reopen the
file on Santi Asoke’. Of course the Sakgha legitimises the state, and functions on
occasions as its mouthpiece. In return, the state protects the Sakgha. This symbiotic
relationship has been viewed as both appropriate and necessary; yet any relation-
ship between groups within these institutions, in this case Santi Asoke and the
Palang Dhamma Party, is viewed as subversive. The leaders of both groups,
Bodhirak and Chamlong, both came from humble backgrounds, were viewed as
excessively moralistic, and their special relationship together was viewed by
many as a serious challenge to the status quo and national security. It is little wonder
that monastic persecution of Santi Asoke intensified shortly after the start of the
association between Santi Asoke and the Phalang Dhamma party.
The high-school students in the Asoke communities are a valuable labour
resource. This is facilitated by a curriculum which has a strong focus on agricul-
ture and cottage industries. While developing discipline, team working/leadership
skills and mental awareness students are able to contribute effectively to the
livelihood of their respective communities. On graduation many continue as
valued adult members of the movement and have an increased input into the
communities.
Santi Asoke’s nine communities provide support for those who wish to engage
in serious religious practice.73 Although highly structured, decision making is
often devolved to those who are most affected. The mu glum, or ‘will of the
group’ is a highly valued process of decision making – as well as an effective tool
for disciplining new members! The next chapter examines the distinctives of
Santi Asoke and offers understandings of the movement from both within and
outwith the movement.
SANTI ASOKE AND ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
142

--- PAGE 158 ---
6
THE DISTINCTIVES OF 
SANTI ASOKE AND AN ANALYSIS 
OF THE MOVEMENT
Four inside (emic) understandings of the movement – the
appeal of Santi Asoke to its membership
We have a leader with qualities of amnat, ittipon and parami
As we have seen at the beginning of Chapter 3, most discussed aspects of
leadership in the Thai context are authority/power (amnat), influence (ittipon)
and moral stature or charisma (parami Pali and Thai). By pioneering the Asoke
movement, Bodhirak achieved amnat, something which would not have been
granted to him by the Sakgha because of his constant criticism of its practice.
An aspect of amnat is that it is depleted through use as excessive usage strains
relationships.1 Bodhirak’s economic use of amnat means that he continues to
retain it, thus retaining his followers. On the occasions he uses it, it is always
perceived by members to be for the common good of the movement and never for
his own benefit.
In order for effective leadership to take place amnat needs to be supplemented
by influence (ittiphon) and/or moral stature (parami). Due to his excommunica-
tion from mainstream Thai Buddhism, Bodhirak has very little status outside the
movement he founded. Within his movement he is held in such high regard that it
would appear he does not need to intentionally use his influence to get things
done in a particular way.
Parami , the third component of leadership, originates in the moral goodness
or virtue (kwam di) of the individual (Conner, 1996:240). Those observing
Bodhirak’s selfless behaviour directed towards them develop a sense of apprecia-
tion for his moral goodness. As a result, a bonding takes place where followers
respond with a sense of obligation (bun khun) to Bodhirak.
In the questionnaire (Q3b, part two) completed by some Asoke members,
almost half the responders indicated that they joined the movement through the
influence of an Asoke member.2 It is significant to note that in 26 per cent of all
responses Bodhirak is cited as a person who advised them to begin to practise.
Bodhirak is accessible despite his busy schedule. This is in sharp contrast to Pha
Dhammachayo of Wat Phra Dhammakaya, who meets only with the temple’s
senior leadership. It is interesting, however, that one in every eight males in the
143

--- PAGE 159 ---
survey indicated that Bodhirak had been a factor in influencing them to practise
with the movement. On the other hand, one in every three female respondents
indicated that Bodhirak advised them to begin to practise in the Asoke tradition.
An accurate conclusion may not be made from such a small sample, yet perhaps
there is a hint that Bodhirak is viewed as a ‘male-friend figure’ and protector
by many females, whereas he may be viewed more of an ‘authority figure’ by
some males.
Bodhirak’s high moral standing among Asoke members, his rhetoric and
sagacity, as well as his track record of guiding Asoke through its turbulent history,
mean that he is viewed as an inspiring leader with great parami. Members of the
movement believe that Bodhirak is the true teacher of Buddhism, a being with a
high level of enlightenment. The flattened hierarchical structure of Santi Asoke and
the approachability of Bodhirak appeal to the Thai appreciation of freedom and the
dislike of the inappropriate use of amnat and ittiphon.
We help members to be free from suffering
Many people come to the Asoke communities suffering from strained family
relationships, or other disappointments/hardships in life. The regimented, ascetic
lifestyle and advice from temple dwellers who have worked through similar issues
provide a supportive context for dealing with suffering. This theme of liberation
from suffering emerges from the following responses to the questionnaire: In
response to Question 3b (part one), ‘Why did you start this practice?’ 13 per cent
of the responders indicated that it was ‘to move beyond suffering’. There was an
identical response to Question 6, ‘What attracted you to become a member of this
movement?’ Replying to Question 4 ‘What advice would you give to someone
who wished to gain nibbana?’ 21 per cent of responders specifically mentioned
being ‘free from’ or ‘moving beyond’ suffering as part of their definition of
nibbana.
Santi Asoke’s approach is to teach people to get rid of suffering, step by step.
First, they teach them self-control and morality (sila), they then demonstrate
meditation (samadhi) which leads to pañña, or understanding of nature (Bangkok
Post, 22.7.88). Asokans are convinced that material wealth and possessions
produce suffering. The solution to the problem of suffering, then, is to give away
one’s wealth and possessions. The Asoke communities throughout the kingdom
are places where a person who wishes to be rid of all attachments will receive
acceptance and support from people with similar goals.
We are ‘just’ communities
Suffering is not only caused by one’s attachments but also by the lack of justice
in society. It is seen as difficult for a person who wishes to practise morality
to function in the warp and woof of Thai government service, or business life.
To take a stand against bribery and corruption has implications for others.
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
144

--- PAGE 160 ---
Commenting on the retirement of General Prem from government leadership in
1989, a Bangkok taxi driver remarked to me ‘A good person cannot stay, nobody
likes him’.3 An Asoke friend informed me that he worked as a government forestry
officer and would not permit illegal logging in his area. Those whose businesses
had been affected by his moral stand bombed his house. The government depart-
ment responded by transferring him to a different department in another part of
the country. This person now attends Santi Asoke in Bangkok at the weekends and
has a limited experience of what it is to be in, and contribute to a just society.
Living in a community which is orientated to moral living leads to a reduction
in suffering. It is also a key to spiritual development, a common Asoke belief is
‘If you want to purify your heart you need good friends’ (Bangkok Post, 3.9.02).
In response to Question1, ‘What practices do you engage in so that you progress
and reach nibbana?’ 6.7 per cent of responders cited the importance of being
part of a good community and having good friends. Two quotes which are
representative of this are: ‘have friends that facilitate your development’ and
‘become a member of a practising group, have good friends and live in a
supportive situation’.
Our practice of purification works
In response to Question 6, ‘What attracted you to become a member of this
movement?’ 29 per cent of the responders viewed Santi Asoke as the place where
the truth was taught and put into practice. A good number mentioned practice/
practise more than once in their answers. For example: ‘If you practise together it
will be more effect than practising alone. The effect of practice is to cool you
down.’ Also, ‘The teacher puts into practice that which he/she teaches. I get
results when I put the teaching into practice.’
Many Asoke members in common with their founder come from Chinese
backgrounds where people tend to be pragmatic and industrious. It is hardly
surprising, then, that their religious practice should have a strong activist strand.
Asoke practice focuses on carrying out (often mundane) tasks with mindfulness.
This process is an essential part of spiritual development but what is achieved is
viewed as work which needs to be completed. Further indication of a pragmatic
approach to assessing spiritual development is the number of responders who
suggested that their practices must be correct because they result in a reduction
of suffering and an increase in wisdom.
Four key distinctives of Santi Asoke practice
Status of female renunciates in Santi Asoke
There is an account in the Vinaya Pitaka of the Buddha seemingly reluctantly
agreeing to allowing Mahapajapati, his aunt and foster-mother to become a
female mendicant on the death of her husband. Ananda, clearly moved by
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
145

--- PAGE 161 ---
Mahapajapati’s commitment asked the Buddha if women were capable of attaining
enlightenment, as men were.4 When the Buddha responded positively, Ananda
reminded the Buddha of all that Mahapajapati had done for him and again
requested that Mahapajapati (and other women) be admitted to Buddhist orders.
The Buddha agreed, provided Mahapajapati would accept the eight gurudharma.5
Mahapajapati responded ‘even so do I, honoured Ananda, accept these eight
important rules never to be transgressed during my life’(Cullavagga, X:354). This
constituted her ordination as a bhikkhuni and the bhikkhuni Sakgha commenced.
The Buddha mentioned to Ananda that he believed the true Dhamma would
last for only 500 years now that women were ‘going forth’ (had women not
ordained as bhikkhuni then the true Dhamma would have endured for 1,000 years)
(Cullavagga, X:356).
At some point, the Theravada order of nuns died out, perhaps as early as
the eleventh century in Sri Lanka (Gethin, 1998:91), and the thirteenth century
in Burma. According to Barnes
Inscriptions indicate that there were still bhikkhuni in Burma in the year
1279. It was apparently from Burma that the Theravada bhikkhu Sakgha
was introduced to Thailand in the thirteenth century, but the bhikkhuni
Sakgha seems never to have been transmitted.
(Barnes, 1996:267)
The women of the order of mae chi in Thailand are renunciates but not full
bhikkhuni. The earliest record of this order can be traced back to the seventeenth
century, although they could have existed earlier (Kabilsingh, 1991:36). Mae chi
shave their head, wear white and undertake to keep the Five or Eight Precepts.
The total number of mae chi in Thailand ‘probably does not much exceed 10,000’
(Kabilsingh, 1991:38). It is not hard to discern negative attitudes to women in
Thailand; for example, they are considered to be a threat to a monk maintaining
his purity. Despite a few exceptions, mae chi come from low-income backgrounds
and therefore have received limited education. This results not only in their
lack of self-confidence but in a general disregard by society. Mae chi, unlike
monks, are not viewed as an appropriate ‘field of merit’. There is, therefore,
a lack of financial sponsorship for these women, who often live in their own
quarters in temple grounds and carry out domestic chores in return for food
and accommodation.
There have been attempts to start an order of bhikkhunis in Thailand but these
‘ordained’ women have not been recognised by mainstream Buddhism within
the kingdom.6 In 1928, Sara Bhasit and her sister Chongdi were ordained as
female novices (samaneri). The monk who was suspected of conducting the
ceremony was forced to disrobe. Four years later the sisters were ordained as
bhikkhunis. As there were no bhikkhunis to ordain them the ceremony was
considered invalid. Their practice of wearing saffron robes and referring to
themselves as bhikkhunis was considered heretical, and the Sakgharat wrote
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
146

--- PAGE 162 ---
to the mayor of Nonthaburi (just outside Bangkok) where they stayed, declaring
the sisters’ ordination invalid and ordering them to disrobe. Despite a brief period
of imprisonment, the sisters continued referring to themselves as bhikkhuni for a
further two years before disrobing as a result of monastic and public disapproval
(Kabilsingh, 1991:45–7).
In 1956, Voramai Kabilsingh requested the Eight Precepts from a respected
monk in Bangkok.7 She wore a light yellow robe to distinguish herself from the
bhikkhu and mae chi. The following year Voramai purchased property close to
Bangkok where she established a residence for women and started a variety of
projects. Voramai was ‘challenged by Sakgha and civil authorities for usurping
privileges reserved for the bhikkhu Sakgha’ (Barnes, 1996:270). The maha thera
samakom investigated the allegations and decided there was no case to answer. In
1971, she received ordination as a bhikkhuni in the Chinese Sakgha. This, how-
ever, is not recognised by the Thai Sakgha. The struggle to have recognition for
bhikkhuji in Thailand continues, particularly through Voramai Kabilsingh’s
daughter, Dr Chatsumarn Kabilsingh (Dhammananda bhikkhuji) who has in
recent years ordained as a bhikkhuji in Sri Lanka.
The Santi Asoke ‘nuns’ or sikkhamat are ordained on the Ten Precepts as are
the male novices.8 A ratio of four monks to every one sikkhamat is maintained in
the Asoke community. Reasons for this proportional restriction are not stated in
public; Heikkilä-Horn (1997:46) concludes that ‘allowing the numbers of
sikkhamats to expand might further infuriate the mainstream monks who do not
promote the position of “ordained” women.’ One pa (female aspirant) clearly
indicated that the reason for this ratio was that a woman had more obstacles to
overcome to reach a stage of readiness to become a sikkhamat, than a man had
to become a monk.9 Women, in her opinion, found it harder to deal with issues
such as renouncing possessions, and living in an intense community situation. For
her, the path of purification was much more demanding for a female than a male.
On the other hand, Thai girls are used to helping their mothers with the domestic
chores, such as cooking, cleaning and looking after the younger children. Boys,
however, are left to their own devices. It is widely recognised that young males
will ‘do their own thing’ before settling down in their early twenties. There is
therefore little point in disciplining a boy. A corollary of this different approach
to bringing up children according to gender is that women, because they have
been disciplined, can function in a more orderly way than their male counterparts.
This is clearly seen in businesses, voluntary organisations and families. One
female writer referred to women as ‘the kangaroo’s tail’, meaning that women
give stability to Thai society. Thai parents may well hope that their sons will learn
discipline in the armed forces should they be conscripted, and/or as monks as they
follow the Thai tradition of ordaining for one phansa in their early twenties.
The sikkhamat enjoys a status considerably much higher than that afforded
to the mae chi, or even the dasa sil matavo of Sri Lanka.10 The sikkhamat is tech-
nically on the same level as a novice monk (although they bow to the novices) and
the lay members of the Asoke community are expected to pay their respects to
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
147

--- PAGE 163 ---
the sikkhamats as well as to the monks. The sikkhamats perform a variety of
important functions such as teaching in the school, Sunday school and groups
which may include men. They have responsibility for the female residents of the
temples and give counsel to a wide variety of visitors to the Asoke communities.
Some of them are fluent in English, French and Chinese dialects and spend part
of their time dealing with non-Thai visitors.
Rigorous progression from lay person to samaja and sikkhamat
The basic level of Santi Asoke membership is seeking to put Asoke principles into
practice but not residing in the grounds of a putthasathan. Such a person is referred
to as a yatitam. The following section outlines progression from this stage up to
the levels of samaja and sikkhamat. The samajas decide the advancement of the
males, while the sikkhamats make decisions regarding the progress of the women;
they then bring these decisions to the monks for ratification. The monks do
not pose formal questions to the female candidates (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:197).
Sometimes a person will choose to spend more time than is necessary at a par-
ticular stage, and may be overtaken by a person who has been in the system for a
shorter time. In other situations a person may be asked to remain at a particular
level until a deeper level of maturity is evidenced. The following outline of
the stages is based on Heikkilä-Horn’s (1997:195–7) research and my own
interviewing of Asoke members.
Stage One: This is becoming a temporary guest (akhantuka chon) at one of the
putthasathans. Permission is gained from the abbot, and needs to be renewed
every seven days. Even at the initial stage of living on a temporary basis in the
temple area, a person is required to be a vegetarian and observe the Eight
Precepts.11 Dormitory space is used for females; males may be given some space
in one of the temple buildings. During my stays at Pathom Asoke, I slept on a
veranda above the main sanctuary (bot). I later discovered that this was a privileged
place to hang one’s mosquito-net (klot), as the samajas used this space during the
day for their study and meetings. Normally only senior aspirants sleep in that
location. While attending the Puttha Pisek ceremony at Sali Asoke, I slept in a
field in the temple grounds under a mosquito net (klot).
Stage Two: After 3 to 12 months as a temporary temple visitor, a person may
apply to become a permanent guest (akhantuka pracham). Like a temporary
guest, a permanent guest requires to obtain permission every seven days to
continue living at the temple.
Stage Three: After a minimum period of 6 months as a permanent guest, a
person may apply to become a temple resident aramik (male) aramika (female).
Those who have reached this level will be distinguished by the temple resident
badge they are required to wear.
Stage Four: Once a temple resident has stayed at the temple for 18 months
he/she may apply to become a patepat (abbreviated to pa). Pa are recognised by
the following distinctive items of clothing: males wear brown trousers and shirts,
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
148

--- PAGE 164 ---
while the women wear brown sarongs and blouses. Pa do not shave their heads
but are required to have hair shorter than 10 centimetres.
Stage Five: After being a pa for four months (six in the case of a female), it is
possible to apply to be a nak (male) and krak (female). Those who reach this stage
shave their heads. The males have a light brown strip on their tunic collars, while on
formal occasions the females drape a brown piece of cloth over their left shoulders.
Stage Six: After four months a nak can apply to become a novice (samanutthet).
A krak is required to wait for 18 months before she may become a sikkhamat. A
sikkhamat is distinguished by the wearing of a grey piece of cloth over her shoulder.
Stage Seven: A novice (samanutthet) may be ordained a monk (samaja) after
a minimum period of four months.
In theory, the quickest in which a male could go from being an outsider to
ordination as a samaja would be three years and three months. In reality, the
process takes much longer. The aspirant is under the scrutiny of the community
in which he lives, and any of his weaknesses are exposed through rigorous
lifestyle and community living. Given the fairly stable nature of Asoke member-
ship, Asoke see no need to expand their current monastic quotient of around 105
samajas and 25 sikkhamats; to do so would be to place an increased burden on
the Asoke communities. There is a real sense in which Santi Asoke focus on the
quality rather than the quantity of aspirants. As we have seen, Wat Phra
Dhammakaya also have high standards for men applying for ordination, and
applicants are carefully vetted over a period of time. On the other hand, standards
are much less stringent for ordination in mainstream Thai Buddhism. It is not
uncommon for a man to be ordained as a samanera on the Ten Precepts and later
the same day (assuming he is over 20 years of age, and has a reasonable under-
standing of Buddhism) to be ordained as a bhikkhu.
The practice of Buddhist economics (bun-niyom)
One of the distinctive features of the Asoke shops is that ‘the goods have two
prices labelled on them; the original price for which it was purchased and the
new price which the shop is selling the goods for. The difference between
the prices is extremely low’ (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:122). This is a practice based
not on capitalism, but on the Buddhist concept of meritism (Thai bun-niyom, Pali
puñña-niyama).12 According to Bodhirak, ‘the belief in bun-niyom encourages
people to be good, to do good and to help others, so that people will gain more
merit (bun)’.13 This practice is seen to lead to a state of contentment where people
are happy with what they have, are not attached to material riches, are gener-
ous and protect the environment. This is seen by Asokans as standing in
contrast to capitalism, where people are attached to material riches, are self-
ish, competitive and pollute the environment. As Bodhirak comments on the
bun-niyom approach to economics, ‘our loss is our gain’ (Heikkilä-Horn,
1997:123). Santi Asoke divides Buddhism into four different categories,
depending on whether a person’s desires are decreased or increased. The greater
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
149

--- PAGE 165 ---
one’s desires, the greater the sufferings. The following material is based on
Poompanna (1989:20).
Magical Buddhism: Followers of this tradition depend on non-human powers,
superstition, charms, fortune telling, sprinkling of holy water etc. This form of
Buddhism increases people’s desires in life as they seek out practitioners who
have special skills, for example, the ability to predict a winning lottery number,
or to make a person interested in marrying them. Asokans point out that these
ceremonies are not only a hoax but encourage an unhealthy dependence on
another person. This kind of Buddhism is very common in Thailand, and is based
on an approach which synthesises the use of supernatural power and Buddhism.
Capitalistic Buddhism: This type of Buddhism increases both the desires and
the ability to satisfy the desires of the followers. For example, the businessman or
banker spends time in meditative practice in order to decrease his stress level and
increase his mental powers in order to go out again and exploit society.
Hermetic Buddhism: This decreases both the followers’desires and their ability
to satisfy these desires. This type of Buddhism encourages renouncing the world
and adopting an ascetic lifestyle like the forest monks. Santi Asoke view this type
of Buddhism as being a selfish way for oneself, with no benefits for society.
Fundamental Buddhism: This tradition, according to Asoke may also be
described as authentic Buddhism. Followers can decrease their excessive desires
and become more industrious. As mainline Buddhism in Thailand functions
according to the first three categories, there is, therefore, the need for the emergence
of a Buddhism which goes back to basic belief. This then justifies the existence of
the Santi Asoke movement.
Buddhism recognises that acquiring wealth is not itself evil, and in general
terms we can say that Buddhism takes a middle path between the extremes of
poverty and a materialistic acquisition of riches for their own sake (Harvey,
2000:195). Critical issues relate to how riches are acquired, used, and of the
owner’s attachment to his/her riches. Indeed, reasonable material comfort and
economic security should be achieved as a platform for acquiring mental
well-being and inner freedom (Payutto, 1994:36). A number of the Buddha’s
lay disciples were wealthy such as the banker and businessman Anathapijdika,
who constructed the Jetavana monastery at Savatthi. In one conversation
with him, the Buddha pointed out that there was absolutely nothing wrong with
being contented with wealth, providing the wealth was gained lawfully, and
shared with others.
In the case where this enjoyer of sense pleasures seeks after wealth
lawfully, not arbitrarily, and in so doing makes himself happy and
cheerful, and also shares his wealth with others and does meritorious
deeds therewith, and further makes use of it without greed and longing,
without infatuation, and is not heedless of the danger or blind to his own
salvation – in such a case he is praiseworthy on four counts.
(Akguttara Nikaya, 1972: Vol 5.181)14
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
150

--- PAGE 166 ---
‘A true Buddhist lay person not only seeks wealth lawfully and spends it for the
good, but also enjoys spiritual freedom, not being attached to it, infatuated with
or enslaved by that wealth’ (Phra Rajavaramuni, 1990:11).15 Asokans are much
more pessimistic about wealth. They view material possessions as potentially
dangerous, and the safe position to be in is to renounce everything which is
non-essential. This indicates an extension of monastic standards to include laity.
This is reflected in other areas of Asoke practice such as lay people eating only
one meal per day, living in very basic accommodation and confessing any ‘falling
short’ of the Eight Precepts. One Asoke lay member who comes from a wealthy
background even said that giving to others was not a joyful experience. She
viewed the receiving of goods by the other as an additional attachment and burden
for that person. This, however, contradicts the Buddhist teaching on the joy that
comes from giving.
Phra Payutto (1994:34) helpfully distinguishes between the terms tajha
(craving) and chanda (desire-to-do, purpose); when chanda is focused on benefit
for others, it is referred to as metta (loving kindness):
Tajha is directed towards feeling; it leads to seeking of objects which
pander to self interests and is supported and nourished by ignorance.
Chanda is directed toward benefit, it leads to effort and action, and is
founded on intelligent reflection.
In terms of spiritual practice the Santi Asoke practitioners I have spoken to appear
to focus on the elimination of tajha, as opposed to the development of chanda.
This may be due to their radical approach to achieving peace without suffering.
That is, severing all attachments, be they to relationships or material possessions.
Asokans may well respond by saying that their bun-niyom approach reflects their
world-renouncing ethos and is a vital message to be communicated to the Thai
people, who operate on a capitalist or tun-niyom (Thai) system.
Some comparisons which may be made between Santi Asoke and some
expressions of evangelical Christianity are as follows: a focus on personal salvation,
concern for one’s own communities, and a proclamation of the method of salvation/
liberation with the invitation to those who show interest to join their particular
communities. Both traditions demonstrate a lack of vision in sharing their
resources with those who need them the most. Asoke members indicate that they
need to experience more liberation from their attachments before they may be of
help to the vulnerable in society (such as the street sweepers whom Chamlong
served breakfast to). At other times they have said that the best thing anyone can
do is discover what causes suffering and then adjust his/her lifestyle accordingly.
Clearly Asoke communities offer the perfect supportive/teaching environment for
that process. A move away from being caught up in their own communities
towards meeting social needs in society at large, for example, children at risk, or
the disabled, would not only fulfil a vital need in society but enrich the Asokan
spiritual quest, and soften its austere image. Thus Santi Asoke practitioners would
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
151

--- PAGE 167 ---
do well to put energy into the cultivation of chanda and metta, as well as the
elimination of tajha. This ‘self-focused’ approach, however, is not unique to
Santi Asoke!
One encouraging development involving Santi Asoke in social engagement is
its partnership with the Bank for Agriculture and Cooperation. The bank has
offered those in debt to them a three-year freeze on their repayments, providing that
they undertake training with Santi Asoke. This programme started around May
2002, and necessitates groups attending Asoke monasteries for a five-day course.
There is basic Dhamma teaching, as well as classes on natural farming (the clients
of this bank tend mainly to be farmers) and managing finances. During my visit
to Pathom Asoke in August 2002, there was considerable business as the com-
munity prepared for an influx of 105 bank customers. The bank was paying Santi
Asoke the equivalent of £3.50 per day per person (a considerable sum) to feed and
train these farmers. An Asoke trainer would then follow up the clients in their
communities to see if the training was being applied to practice. All the Asoke
communities (apart from Bangkok) were involved in these training projects, and
it has proved to be demanding work. This development is recognition of Asoke’s
skills in natural farming and disciplined living. The more this sort of recognition
occurs, the more the ‘excommunicated’ Asoke movement is recognised by Thai
society as a legitimate expression of Buddhism.
Blurring of some distinctions between Theravada and Mahayana
Asoke de-emphasises some traditional differences between Theravada and
Mahayana Buddhism. Of course there is nothing new in the rejection of labels,
especially in Buddhism where clinging to a set of beliefs just because they are
those of a teacher, or particular group, is considered to be unenlightened practice.
Yet this is not just a rejection of labels but a belief that there is valuable teaching
in both traditions. Indeed, Bodhirak argues that he is merely trying to bring the
good things in both the Mahayana and Theravada traditions together once again
by going back to the fundamental teachings and practices of ancient times as he
understands them (Bangkok Post, 22.7.88). One sikkhamat argued that Asoke’s
return to the origins of Buddhism takes it beyond historical divisions, as the
Buddha was neither in the Mahayana nor Theravada tradition.16 Traditionally
Buddhists have not known much about the practice of Buddhism in other schools,
often because of considerable geographical separation. In recent times, however,
there has been not only an awareness of the different teachings of other schools
but a borrowing of concepts. An example of this would be the use Buddhadasa
made of Zen terms and concepts ‘to justify a shift of emphasis within Theravada
doctrine’ (Jackson, 1988:219). Areas in which distinctions are blurred between
traditional Thai and Mahayana expressions of Buddhism are vegetarianism, the
status of women and to a lesser extent the Bodhisatta ideal.
Vegetarianism: The First Precept is ‘I undertake the rule of training to
abstain from harming living beings’ (Harvey, 1990:199). Thus ‘it is worse to swat
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
152

--- PAGE 168 ---
a fly – an immediate act of killing – than to eat the carcass of an already dead
animal’ (Harvey, 1998:39). While the killing of animals cannot be right, and to
make one’s livelihood from such an activity would be a breach of the fifth aspect
of the Eight Fold Path, that is, Right Livelihood, the Buddha did not condemn
meat-eating. Indeed, he resisted an attempt by his cousin, a monastic by the name
of Devadatta, who, in order to create a schism within the Sakgha ‘proposed to the
Buddha that all monks should be vegetarian and follow a number of previously
optional ascetic practices such as living at the root of a tree’ (Harvey, 2000:160).
Vegetarianism was practised by the Jains and other individuals during the time
of the Buddha (484–404 BCE). The Buddha rejected ascetic practice, taking a
middle path between excessive rigour and indulgence (both of which he proved
to be counterproductive). He permitted the eating of allowable meat by monks
provided they had not seen, heard or suspected that the animal had been killed
especially for them (Harvey, 2000:159).17 To have a fairly restricted diet may
be viewed as being in bondage to a particular kind of food, and may make it
onerous for lay people to provide for the monastic. Nevertheless, Asoke monks
and sikkhamats who follow them on alms rounds politely refuse to receive
non-vegetarian food, and those who wish to support the Asoke community
subsequently adjust their offering.
There are several terms in the Thai language used to describe vegetarianism.
‘Jay’is a Chinese word used by both Chinese and Thai to describe abstinence from
eating meat for religious reasons. ‘Mangsawerat’ is a Thai word which is used to
describe a person who ‘skips’ eating meat (including fish), it has no religious
nuance. ‘Mi gin sat’ (not eating animals), or ‘mi gin neua’ (not eating meat) are
other synonyms used for vegetarianism. There is no word in the Thai vocabulary
for vegan, although Asoke practice is to refrain from eating any form of animal
products. Asoke members use mangsawerat, and they consider eating meat in any
form to be a breach of the First Precept. This was not the position in non-
Mahayana ancient Indian Buddhism and is not normal in the Theravada tradition.
In the Thai context, vegetarianism is practised by a few devout mainstream
Buddhists on holy days (wan phra). Such people normally also observe the Eight
Precepts on such occasions. This may appear to be a more rigorous interpretation
of the First Precept for a holy day but it is also related to ascetic practice, and
is sometimes accompanied by eating two instead of three meals per day.
In Question 2 of my questionnaire, ‘What is the most important practice you
engage in to progress and achieve nibbana?’ 37.1 per cent of responders cited
a vegetarian (or more accurately a vegan) diet. For a further 16 per cent of
the responders, their cited main practice of keeping the Precepts would include
vegetarianism. All Asokans would view the First Precept (I undertake a rule of
training to abstain from harming living beings) as implying a vegetarian diet.
Not everyone who cited the importance of a vegetarian diet went on to mention
its advantages. Stated benefits of a vegetarian lifestyle tended to focus on issues
such as: increased mental purity and a desire to demonstrate compassion to
animals and humans.
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
153

--- PAGE 169 ---
During my time at the Puttha Pisek retreat of 2001, a number of the older
men indicated their regret to me that they had killed animals for both food and
sport in their younger days. One man who lost an arm indicated it was his
karmic fruit for killing birds in his youth. Bodhirak has said that the most
meritorious occupation is that of preparing and serving of vegetarian food, as
this does away with the killing of animals.18 It also facilitates the eating of
vegetarian food which is viewed as a skillful deed. Indeed, one of the first
questions an Asoke member will ask of an outsider is ‘Do you eat meat?’ As
I am a vegetarian, I am not sure what the Asoke response would be to a non-
vegetarian. In my case they wanted to know how long I had been a vegetarian,
why I had given up eating meat, and if there were many in my country who
were also vegetarian.
Many Thai who come into contact with Asokans would identify with
Harvey’s (1998:40) comment ‘feelings of moral superiority is a common danger
among vegetarians’. The practice of vegetarianism on holy days is viewed as
meritorious by Thai but it is viewed as extreme if it is one’s permanent practice.
The Thai dislike extreme forms of behaviour, even religious behaviour. Thus
Santi Asoke is viewed as an extreme movement with unnecessarily high
standards. On the other hand, Asoke members consider meat eaters to be in
breach of the First Precept, and indicative of a low attainment of pañña and
sila. This rigorous interpretation of the First Precept may be viewed as more
at home in Chinese Mahayana Buddhism (Harvey, 2000:163) than the Thai
Theravada tradition.
Status of women: We have already noted how the bhikkhuni order is extant in
Chinese Mahayana Buddhism, yet has not existed in the Theravada tradition for
some eight centuries. While Santi Asoke have not sought to reintroduce a bhikkhuni
order within their movement, they have considerably enhanced the status of
women by ordaining suitable female aspirants on the Ten Precepts. The sikkhimats
are de facto bhikkhunis in the regard in which they are held, and in their teaching
and leadership roles within the Asoke communities. An attempt to go one small
step further and try to reinstate the bhikkhuni order would bring the movement
under the monastic spotlight once again, resulting in the disruption of what have
become well-ordered communities.
Use of the Bodhisatta ideal (Sanskrit Bodhisattva): There is the idea that
the king is a Bodhisatta in Thai society, drawing to some extent on ‘Brahmanical
ideas of the deva-raja or ‘god-king’ which surrounded the Siamese monarchy
in the Ayutthaya period and whose echoes persist to the present day’ (Jackson,
2000:266). King Chulalongkorn (Rama IV) and King Bumibhon (Rama IX,
the present monarch) are particularly held in high regard. King Chulalongkorn
who passed away in 1910, still lives on in the minds of many Thai and is seen
as ready to help them through his charisma and moral goodness (parami).
The placing of trust in the Bodhisatta is present in the Thai Theravada
tradition. We have mentioned the Brahmanic influence but perhaps Mahayana
practice mediated through the Chinese population has had a greater influence,
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
154

--- PAGE 170 ---
for example, the Sino-Thai cult of Kuan Im as a goddess (Bodhisatta) of
protection and help.19 Moving on, however, to the application of the Bodhisatta
ideal we have the example of Thai academic Chatsumarn Kabilsingh (who, as
we have seen, has taken ordination as a bhikkhuji in Sri Lanka and is now known
as Dhammananda Bhikkhuji). She states ‘I want to be enlightened only because
once I’m enlightened, I would have much more capacity to help others, to help
all sentient beings. This kind of conviction must be very strong in order to lead
you to action’ (Leach, 1994).
The Santi Asoke leader goes much further than Chatsumarn’s statement of
intent. One informant told me that several years ago Bodhirak had suggested that
the world was at the mid-point between the parinibbana of the historical Buddha
Gotama and the arrival of Metteyya Buddha, and such a period would be marked
by the coming of a great Bodhisatta.20 This being would be identified by his
success in bringing the following, through his teaching, to their respective levels
of enlightenment – 9 Arahats, 90 Non-returners, 900 Once-returners and 9,000
Stream-enterers. Bodhirak encouraged his followers to strive for the highest level
of enlightenment possible to them, to see if he was the great Bodhisatta of the
mid-point between the historical Buddha and Metteyya. Although there does not
currently appear to be any mention of this, there is a belief that some members
consider their leader to be a Bodhisatta.
In Question 6 of the questionnaire, ‘What attracted you to become a member of
this movement?’two responded as follows: ‘Bodhirak is an Arahat and Bodhisatta.
He brings the teaching of the Buddha to practice and uses it in the right way.’Also,
‘I saw a Bodhisatta in my meditation, and therefore searched for one.’
In a mass ceremony in India in October 1956, Dr Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar
(1891–1956) and around 500,000 scheduled caste members converted to
Buddhism in a mass ceremony (Gomez, 1989:99). It is interesting to note that
while the Ambedkarite movement is in the Theravada tradition, they regard
Dr Ambedkar as a Bodhisatta (Harvey, 1990:299). Although Dr Ambedkar did
not claim to be a Bodhisatta, he is regarded both as a Bodhisatta and an Arahat
by his followers.21 Santi Asoke is not unique in making the Bodhisatta ideal more
central within the Theravada tradition. It is nevertheless worth noting that their
justification for using the concept rests ‘on their being no Theravada or Mahayana
during the time of the Buddha’.
Six outside (etic) perspectives on Santi Asoke
Santi Asoke – a fundamentalist movement?
Swearer and Keyes, two specialists in the Thai socio-religious context, both view
Santi Asoke as a fundamentalist movement. Swearer writes ‘it strives to strip
away the “chaff” and return to the “fundamentals”, or essence of Buddhism, a
moral and religious transformation which does not rely upon, and rejects as
superfluous, the usual magical and merit-making rituals’ (Swearer, 1991:668).
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
155

--- PAGE 171 ---
He (1991:678) goes on to cite what he views as the distinctive features of
fundamentalism in the Theravada context. They include:
G
Being lead by strong, charismatic leaders;
G
Followers who perceive themselves to be under some kind of threat;
G
The movement will have an obsessive sense of its unique role or destiny and
have anti-rationalist, anti-intellectual, and even anti-ritualistic tendencies;
G
The tendency to stress the value of direct experience coupled with plain and
simple religious practice.
The above criteria fit the Asoke situation apart from the anti-rationalist approach.
Asoke take a very rationalist approach and value the practical and logical
practices and beliefs.
Charles Keyes notes ‘The Santi Asoke sect, with its religious centre on the
outskirts of Bangkok, most closely fits the fundamentalist mould of any of
the movements in contemporary Thailand’ (Keyes, 1991:395). Santi Asoke is a
reaction against the state Sakgha but the direction of change is back to the
Buddhism which was taught and practised by the Buddha (as understood by the
Asoke movement). The relatively high value given to the sikkhimats, the stripping
away of superstitious practice and the removal of fraternity labels all indicate a
fundamentalist, or ‘back to the basics’Buddhist movement. What some would see
as missing in the fundamentalist criteria is a focus on scripture – a key feature of
King Mongkut’s reforms which lead to the establishment of the Thammayut order.
Bodhirak is not a text-based monk and believes that his understanding of doctrine
comes from his high level of insight, not from his study of scripture. One former
Asoke member informed me that Bodhirak got his ideas and then checked out
that they were in keeping with the scriptures.22
Santi Asoke – a millenarian movement?
Heikkilä-Horn understands fundamentalism to be a vague and inadequate term.
She (1997:207) moots the possibility that Santi Asoke has some similarities
with the millenarian movements that occurred in North-East Thailand, which
were discussed in Chapter 3.
We have already seen that the Santi Asoke community has been marginalised
by the Thai Sakgha. It may also be said that Asoke is a reaction of the lower
middle class against the gate keepers of Thai society. This may be described in
general terms as the quest of many individuals seeking one form of ‘fair-play’ or
another. We also note that Asoke communities have established a new order based
on high moral standards, strict ascetic practice, vegetarianism and bun niyom
economics. Asoke culture stands in sharp contrast to the prevailing materialistic
and hedonistic attitudes of Thai throughout the kingdom. These utopian commu-
nities express the nature of Asoke – ‘peace without suffering’ through the practice
of non-attachment. Community members are open to those who wish to learn to
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
156

--- PAGE 172 ---
live like them, and who will commit to keeping the Five or Eight Precepts. Part
of Santi Asoke’s purpose is to be present to an increasingly Westernised, glob-
alised, Buddhist-value rejecting society, as an example of how an ideal Buddhist
society should function. Clearly in this regard Asoke can be viewed as prophetic.
Bodhirak is viewed as a person with a great amount of merit, a highly enlight-
ened monk, who, in a Buddhist world which has lost its way, is considered by his
followers to be the true teacher of Buddhism.23 In terms of moral power and
accumulation of merit, Bodhirak easily qualifies as a phu mi bun in the Santi
Asoke context. He would not, however, be viewed as a phu wiset, a person who
performs miraculous deeds; this would be incongruent with his status as a
monk, and not in keeping with the highly rationalistic Asoke belief system. This,
however, need not invalidate Heikkilä-Horn’s suggestion that Santi Asoke is a
millenarian movement.
In Santi Asoke, a magic-renouncing, rationalistic system with a strong focus
on moral purity, potential followers will not be impacted by miraculous signs
but by moral power. A sign of corporate high moral standards and absence of
suffering is presented to any visitor to an Asoke community. If such a visitor is
seeking peace and contentment, or looking for a place where religious practice
is encouraged, then the visit will make a powerful impact. The explanation of
this experience will both contain reference both to the ability of Bodhirak to
teach truths not currently taught in Buddhism, and to the function of Asoke
communities to provide teaching and support which will result in ‘peace without
suffering’. A rejection of former thinking and lifestyle will take place if the per-
son associates with Santi Asoke.
The high-profile nature of Asoke’s missionary encounter with society and
polemic approach to the Sakgha have modified since the movement’s excommu-
nication from the Sakgha. Asoke communities now function as model communities
where mainstream monks and lay people from every tradition are free to come
and observe Asoke belief and practice. A move then is clearly discernible from
the former high-profile engagement with a world needing to be changed (at least
in Santi Asoke’s opinion), to a low-key example of a particular form of Buddhist
practice for those who wish to visit Asoke communities.
Asoke is, of course, based on the putthasathan. The ‘pull in toward a holy
refuge’ is only natural for religious communities of a monastic nature. With the
development of schools, cottage industries, farms and orchards, all necessary
parts to a self-sustaining community, there is much less time available for mission
outside of the putthasathan. Indeed, to understand Santi Asoke teaching and
practice one needs to visit one of the communities, and observe its members in
their normal activities of working and eating. One reason for this is that much
of Asoke teaching is related to the practice of austerity in every area of life and
performing all activities with a high level of mindfulness.
Millenarians tend to believe that a new day will soon dawn for them. Keyes
(1977:283) makes this point when he writes that millenarianism ‘is distinguished
from other eschatological belief systems in that the millennium is believed
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
157

--- PAGE 173 ---
to be imminent’. This is not the case with Santi Asoke. They are taking a ‘long-haul’
approach. This is evidenced by discussion of new leadership of the movement after
Bodhirak passes away. Members talk about the slow nature of helping urban Thai gain
Dhamma-based perspectives on issues such as economics, caring for the environ-
ment, vegetarianism and other forms of selfless living. Indeed, Bodhirak believes24
that it will take 500 years of Asoke example before Thailand will produce only what
is needed, and where there is governance informed by Dhamma principles.25
While Asokans highly value Bodhirak’s leadership and level of spiritual
attainment. they clearly recognise that their leader is unable to liberate them from
their suffering. One lady who had involvement with several different Buddhist
fraternities, including a time as treasurer at Wat Phra Dhammakaya, disagreed
with my suggestion that Santi Asoke was a millenarian movement.26 This was
based on the view that Asoke members believe that liberation comes through self-
effort, rather than the effort or merit of the leader. The key quality of Bodhirak,
according to the interviewee, was his ability to set out the right path to liberation,
as opposed to other teachers. This was confirmed by a conversation with another
committed member, who in response to a question about Bodhirak’s level of
enlightenment expressed disinterest.27 He went on to say that the important issue
for him was that the teaching of Bodhirak had enabled him to cope with the
disappointments he had experienced over the past 30 years.
The movement’s understanding of Bodhirak being a teacher rather than a
saviour, their long-term commitment to modelling the Dhamma, and the disinterest
in material gain indicate that Santi Asoke is not a millenarian movement.
Santi Asoke – a Buddhist version of Christian ‘base communities’?
Basic Christian communities, known as base communities first appeared in Brazil
but very quickly spread throughout Roman Catholic Latin America in the early
1960s.28 They subsequently spread much further afield and may now be viewed
as an aspect of Roman Catholic church life. Their inception and development took
place during what is known as the ‘Decade of Development’ in Latin America. ‘It
was a time of great economic progress and enormous social vitality, particularly on
the popular level’ (Boff, 1991:174), which translated into the development of trade
unionism and community organisations. Even when economic growth tailed off and
democracies were replaced by military juntas in some countries, base communities
continued to expand. One of their distinctives was the study of the bible and
application to the ‘here and now’ of the base community and its context. The short-
age of priests available for ministry necessitated the participation of lay people in
religious leadership and is posited as one of the major reasons for the emergence of
base communities. While this is true, the quest for meaningful relationships in a
Christian context, and the desire to participate in determining what affected them
are two other motives for the development of base communities.
Base communities which developed in the context of military governments and
economic hardship were often support structures for their members during these
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
158

--- PAGE 174 ---
difficult times. They created opportunities to think communally and theologically
as to how their situation could be changed, and how they as individuals and
communities could develop spiritually. The base communities provided a locus
for the discussion and ‘doing’ of liberation theology.29 The results of these reflec-
tions have been documented and used to demonstrate how communities may
reflect on and apply the bible to praxis.
The Asoke communities put into practice the teachings of Bodhirak. This leads
to new approaches to economics, crop management and children’s education.
Base and Santi Asoke communities have visitors who come to learn and possibly
apply lessons to their own situations. One Roman Catholic priest discusses the
self-belief and affirmation that is brought to base-community members as out-
siders come to ask questions and learn from them. The marginalised who are
unsure and do not speak well ‘begin to take on themselves the attributes of the
prophet and teacher that Paul talked about so much’ (Hebblethwaite, 1993:124).
The same phenomenon is to be observed in the Asoke traditions as mainstream
monks, Roman Catholic priests and laity, as well as academic researchers visit
and seek an understanding of the movement.
Santi Asoke emerged during a period of considerable flux in Thai society. The
anti-government protests of 1973, despite the appalling crackdown from the military,
legitimised protest against the status quo. Bodhirak’s non-compliance with the
Sakgha’s edicts must be seen as both a protest against hierarchical structures of
the Sakgha (and by association the establishment), and the quest to exercise his
own independent nature. Some of the attractions which Asoke communities hold
out to their members are similar to those of base communities. They include: the
moving away from an ecclesiastical and centrally controlled hierarchy (Roman
Catholicism or state-regulated Buddhism) to a flattened form of hierarchy which
encourages the involvement of each member of the community. There is also
the move away from societies which are not supportive of the development of
spiritual purity to communities who encourage spiritual development.
Margaret Hebblethwaite (1993:109) notes that one of the base community’s
tasks is to influence people away from ‘the materialism of imitating the richest
culture in the world, towards a sense of pride in being one of God’s beloved
people.’ Santi Asoke seeks to bring Thai people back from individualistic, mate-
rialistic lifestyles to a possession-renouncing community approach based on
Buddhist principles. One would expect Bodhirak to endorse Brazilian theologian
Leonardo Boff’s comment
When it comes to identifying the causes of the miseries they suffer,
the members of the basic communities see the main one – not the only
one, but the main one as the capitalist system. But worse than the system
itself, is its individual spirit of accumulation, its social irresponsibility,
and its insensitivity toward human beings, who are treated as ‘manpower’
to be sold at auction.
(Boff, 1992:42)
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
159

--- PAGE 175 ---
In both base and Asoke communities, women enjoy a status and leadership role
not afforded to them in the mainstream traditions. This progressiveness does not
lead to women being ordained as priests in the Roman Catholic tradition, nor can
it be expected to. To date, the sikkhamats have the same status as the novice
monks yet, as already discussed, it is unlikely that an attempt will be made to
reinstate the bhikkihuni order within the Asoke movement.
An obvious difference between the Catholic base communities and Asoke
communities is the source of understanding. The base communities draw wisdom
from reflection on the bible and its engagement with their context; it is both deduc-
tive and inductive. In the Asoke tradition, as we shall see in the next chapter, belief
is based on insight which arises from high levels of concentration which result
from carrying out activities with intense mindfulness. The teachings of Bodhirak
are considered definitive. He is an extremely able communicator, inspiring leader
and prolific author and is respected as having a high level of enlightenment. The
insights of Asoke members are seen to confirm the teachings of their leader.
Another clear difference is that base-community members continue to live in
their own homes but meet together to study and work together for the community.
In this regard it may seem more appropriate to compare Santi Asoke with Indian
ashrams. The ashram in its Hindu religious context is a place in which the austere
life is practised for spiritual purposes.30 On the other hand, non-temple residents
(yatitham) associated with Asoke, especially in Bangkok and Nakhorn Pathom,
may choose to live in close proximity to the centre. They retain their secular jobs
but join in aspects of community life either in the evening or at the weekend.
Thai religious studies specialist, Tavivat Puntarigvivat (1998) points out how
the Buddha was not concerned ‘with political liberation from social conditions,
but personal liberation from psychological suffering arising from the cycle of
birth, old age, sickness and death’. Dr Tavivat calls for social engagement based
on the Five Precepts which works towards the socio-political liberation of society,
and encourages base communities to increasingly work towards that end. He
points to a number of socially engaged Buddhist communities, and refers to them
as Buddhist base communities in Thailand.31 Interestingly he makes no mention
of Santi Asoke, a movement of which he is well aware.
Santi Asoke – a ‘community culture’ movement?
There is a resonance between Asoke communities and the approaches taken
by the community culture school of thought (wathanatham chumchon) which
has emerged over the last 20 years, or so. Two of the forces which shaped
this movement are the increase of international aid through Non-Government
Organisations (NGOs) and the increased Roman Catholic positive regard for
working with local cultures/communities since the Second Vatican Council
(1962–65). One of the most influential thinkers in the community culture movement
is Father Niphot Thianwihan. After ordination as a priest in 1975, he worked
with the Karen, a tribal group in the north of the kingdom. At the same time he
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
160

--- PAGE 176 ---
was director of the Centre of Social Development of the Catholic Council of
Thailand (CCTD).
The community culture school of thought maintains that each community
has its own value system and culture. The care demonstrated by this community
culture shows the importance it places on harmony within the community, as well
as the value it places on human beings. The common ancestors are the link
between present and past members of the community. Strong community culture
means that the community (village) can organise itself into various activities and
resist external exploitation. Community culture remains intact (despite develop-
mental changes) because its activities have been turned into rituals. Anyone
who causes disharmony within a village should be viewed as engaging in sinful
behaviour (according to community culture thought) as disharmony can lead to
the breakdown of community culture and the undermining of village life. Those
within the community culture school of thought maintain that it is crucial to
understand the dynamics of the culture of a community in order to work with
those who are key players and energisers of the community. Father Niphot
Thianwihan considers religion to be the essence of the community culture as it
explains various values and is the ideology and standpoint of the community.
Development workers may aid communities by helping them discover the reasons
behind their practices and the origins of their rituals. This heightened conscious-
ness of their own situation assists community members to recover their ‘real’
consciousness which helps them not to take on a ‘false’ consciousness which
really belongs to outsiders.
This high view of community culture among Roman Catholic thinkers may be
due to the belief that eternal salvation may be obtained by community members
maintaining the standards of their particular community. Those who behave well
according to their own belief system may be judged righteous by God regardless
of the religious orientation of their community. Community culture is thus
elevated to a level which approximates the moral standards within Christianity.32
A corollary of this view for the Roman Catholic Church is adjusting its practice
to that of the community culture in which it is placed. Thus the Second
Conference of Asian Bishops, which met in Calcutta in 1978, agreed ‘The Church
should try to maintain and promote local culture, successfully complete God’s
work with these people, through their natural culture, even before they have a
chance to hear the word of Christ (Nartsupha, 1991:127).
Just as Father Niphot Thianwihan has developed community culture from a
Christian perspective, so Buddhist social scientists have brought a Buddhist
perspective to the same school. Prawet Wasi is a good example of such a thinker.33
Nartsupha (1991:121–5) points out three distinctives of Prawet Wasi’s interpretation
of community culture. First, it is anti-state. The state ‘is a power-centralised
system, giving out commands vertically’. This bureaucratic system discourages
the participation of ordinary people as almost everything has to be first officially
approved. Prawet advocates a handing over of power to the communities to make
the decisions that affect them. Some Asoke members have suffered at the hands
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
161

--- PAGE 177 ---
of corrupt government officials, yet the movement, while against corruption,
and egalitarian in its own ethos, may not be described as anti-state. There is the
official flag-raising ceremony and singing of the national anthem each morning
for the teachers and school children.
Second, there is an emphasis on the promotion of community. Rural communities,
according to Prawet, should possess the following five qualities which he refers
to as Five Aggregates. He describes them as
G
Righteousness, diligence and solitude;
G
A subsistence mode of production of integrated agriculture;
G
A balance with the natural environment;
G
Economic self-reliance and the eradication of external dependence;
G
Communal life, the institutions of family and Buddhist temple wat,
and also a communal culture of mutual aid.
(Nartsupha, 1991:124)
Third, development must improve both the peoples’ spirit and the environment.
Religious principles must therefore be applied in development work. Without a
‘moral and ethical base, there can be no real development for the people’.34 Prawet
views Buddhism not as a state-religion but the religion which guards Buddhist
harmony. Empowered by Buddhist practice, villagers will be able to resist the state,
greed, selfishness and exploitation, ‘which are products of a capitalist way of
development’. Whereas Father Niphot views God at work in all that is good in the
Buddhist value system, Professor Prawet seeks to introduce Buddhist thought and
practice to create a moral community (Nartsupha, 1991:124–6).
Opponents of community culture flag up the harsh realities of much of
community living, and cite examples of people with influence exploiting those
with less influence, and behaving in a selfish way rather than pursuing the
common good. The empowering and equipping of local communities is viewed
by such people as ‘a conservative force, promoted by utopians and conservative
nationals, which threatens the march of progress and may even damage what
urban modernism has achieved’ (Phongpaichit and Baker, 2000:211).
Community culture received a boost as a result of King Bhumibol’s 1997
birthday speech which was delivered on television.35 ‘The speech linked the
[economic] crisis, the principle of self-sufficiency, and the idea of going back to
a simpler economy’ (Phongpaichit and Baker, 2000:194). Asoke members viewed
the speech as justifying their long-standing, self-sufficient, community approach.
It appears that as the Asoke communities developed from their inception in
1970s, community culture ideas were applied. Common features are discernible
such as relying on the use of physical labour, self-reliance of the communities, a
high regard for the natural environment, and a reaction against globalisation
which serves multinational corporations and those who support them and erodes
a traditional value system in the process. How much of Asoke’s practice was
shaped by the existing models of ‘community thought’? McCargo (1997:77)
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
162

--- PAGE 178 ---
points out that Prawet Wasi has written very favourably on Santi Asoke, viewing
it as ‘a viable model for Buddhist community development’. On the other hand,
Pongpaichit and Baker’s (2000:193–216) comprehensive section on the community-
culture movement makes no reference to the Asoke movement. None of the Santi
Asoke members to whom I spoke seemed to be aware of the community culture
school, and indicated that the concept of living together as Buddhist communities
was Bodhirak’s idea. One former member indicated that in the early days of the
movement, Bodhirak used to sometimes talk about Gandhi and his ashram, as
well as the kibbutz programme in Israel. Indeed, there are comparisons between
Asoke’s ascetic communities and Gandhi’s ashram. One example is the former
Asoke practice of refraining from talking for one day a week.36 This mimics one
of the distinctive features of Gandhi’s approach to community life.
Santi Asoke – a utopian society reminiscent of a previous generation?
Santi Asoke members walk around barefoot and non-monastics wear peasant
dress (unchanged in style for many decades, perhaps centuries). This, coupled
with the use of basic equipment for farming and cottage industries creates an
old-fashioned, rural ambience. Is Thai sociologist Tavivat Puntarigvivat correct,
however, in describing Santi Asoke as a ‘retro’-utopian movement?
The central issue of utopia, a term coming either from eu-topos (Greek word
for ‘good place’), or ou-topos (Greek word for ‘no place’) is a good and just
society brought about by social order. Utopianism may be applied to a variety of
ideologies which either idealise a period in the past (retro-utopianism) or look
forward to a future period which will be perfect, (as opposed to the present).37 An
example of the former in the Christian context is the perfection of Adam and Eve
in the Garden of Eden and the intimacy they enjoyed with God. The rule of Christ
on earth at some point in the future, possibly after a period of intense persecution,
is an example of the latter. This, however, would be termed millenarianism.
Indeed, utopian thought is often to be found in millenarian movements, such as
cargo cults or other New Religious Movements. Utopian communities have
enjoyed success from time to time, especially in America – a land of freedom, and
new beginnings. Many had a religious bias such as those established by the
Mennonites in the 1600s and by the Shakers in the 1700s. They ‘were attempts to
manifest the laws of heaven on earth’ and to some extent were a reaction to ‘the
country’s strong tradition of individualism’ (Rohmann, 2000:419).
While Thai have strong commitments to their families and in many cases to
their seniors at work, Mulder (1992:111) observes
There appears to be hardly any conception of an overall order of society
to which individuals should submit themselves. Consequently the Thai
concept of ethics is, like the Buddhist concept, individual centred: peo-
ple are not responsible for either their society or their fellow-man but
merely for themselves and their social self expression.
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
163

--- PAGE 179 ---
It may well be that just as the Mennonites and Shakers reacted against the
excessive individualism of the America of their time, so Asoke is reacting against
the selfish individualism of contemporary Thailand. It does so through the
creation of mini-societies where there is accountability, commonality and the
working together for the spiritual development of one and all. These mini-
communities hold out examples for Thai society to emulate, and Santi Asoke’s
regard for society may be seen in slogans such as ‘eat little, use little, work a lot,
and save the rest for society’ (Schober, 1995:321).
Burrell and Dale (2002:108) sum up six features which utopian-based move-
ments have in common as they endeavour to secure organisation and structure for
their communities. They are mentioned with some brief comments about Santi
Asoke and serve to support the idea that Asoke is a utopian movement.
G
Protection: utopia offers the spiritual, political, physical and moral protection
of the community around its membership. Asokan practice reflects this as its
members are offered protection in these areas. An example of this is the
strong focus of Santi Asoke on using natural remedies and providing health
care at each of its centres;
G
Boundaries: utopias have strong demarcations between utopian and non-
utopian , or dystopian areas. Asoke communities have their sanctuary central
to their communities, and temple dwellers obviously reside on temple
(putthasathan) land. Non-temple dwellers (yatitham) like to live as close to
the temple as possible and will either rent or buy property nearby. Asoke
samaja and sikkhamat, are distinguished from mainstream monks and mae
chi by the wearing of different coloured robes. Lay members of Asoke are
identified through the wearing of traditional ‘farmer-style’ clothes;
G
The ‘beastliness’ of the outside and the ‘bestliness’ of the inside: The idea
here is that utopian communities contain within their boundaries all that
is worthy of nurture, and exclude all that is beastly in the world of nature.
In Asoke’s case this is literally true, as nature is cultivated by low-cost,
community-produced organic fertilisers. Asoke followers campaign against
the use of pesticides which they claim is unnecessary and harmful to humans
and the environment;
G
Control: utopian thought does not usually speak of ‘control’ but rather of
‘harmony.’The aim is that harmony and control need to be in place to prevent
individuals threatening harmony. Rigorous self-discipline and the practice of
‘the view of the group’(Thai mu klum) serve as an important corrective to the
disturbing of the movement’s harmony.38 A lot of straight talking takes place
concerning spiritual development and conformity to the system. Senior
members admonish their juniors with the words khat klao (Thai) meaning
‘polish it, or make it better’ – a call to increased effort;
G
Patterns: utopian existence is often meant to follow predetermined patterns
of behaviour that have been laid down before the community is even
settled. Santi Asoke, as we have seen, takes seriously the view of the group.
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
164

--- PAGE 180 ---
Indeed, policy making and decision taking in Asoke communities is done
through elected communities. Hierarchy is considerably flattened, and there
is a strong focus on the natural development of projects according to the
desires and resources of members.
G
Formality: utopian thought often follows the notion that jurisprudence is
important to the community and lays down rules which are meant to be
formal, objective and understood by all. This issue is discussed in the next
section. While law and regulation are important in Asokan communities,
there is also creativity in whatever is done and a willingness to listen to the
majority which circumvents inflexibility.
McLeish and O’Leary (1993:769) makes the point that ‘ascetic’ utopians are
making a comeback in post-industrial thought and goes on to mention the utopian
approach of banishing a practice and reintroducing an alternative that will be
to the ultimate benefit of everyone. In the Asoke case a Buddhist approach to
economics (bun-niyom) replaces capitalism (thun-niyom).
If one looks at the dress code of Asoke lay members and their carrying out of
basic farming and selling tasks, then one could easily conclude that they were a
retro-utopian group. Yet one has to be aware of one sikkhamat’s warning ‘don’t
compare us to the Amish, that would be to misunderstand us’.39 Bodhirak’s
penchant for art and design influences the approach taken by the movement
to communicate the message. Computer graphics and latest photography and
sound-recording equipment are part of Asoke life. While the traditional farmers’
image of caring for and living off the land capture much of Asoke’s anti-
consumer, anti-Western, value system there is also a focus on the transformation
of society’s values. Despite the Buddha’s prediction that morality will decrease
until knowledge of his teaching will be lost to mankind and reintroduced by
Metteyya, the next Buddha; Asokans believe that they can gradually transform
Thai society until its practice is based on the Dhamma. Santi Asoke’s form of
utopia may thus be described as ‘ascetic but prophetic’ as it seeks, through
example, to call people back to a life-style informed by the Buddhist principles
of simplicity and non-grasping.
Santi Asoke – an excessively legalistic movement?
Check Sin is the term introduced at the end of section four on ‘Inside
Understandings of Santi Asoke’. This practice involves the filling in of a booklet
entitled ‘The [Eight] Precepts Check Book’.40 Temple residents and permanent
guests are required to submit the booklets to their spiritual advisers each week,
after the daily completion of the fill-in sections. Heikkilä-Horn (1997:199) points
out that male practitioners take their booklets to a samaja while female practi-
tioners have the option of presenting theirs either to a samaja or sikkhamat; they
cannot, however, be forced to show their booklets to a samaja. The purpose of
the booklet is to facilitate the lay practitioner in understanding and improving
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
165

--- PAGE 181 ---
his/her everyday behavior. This is brought about by the recording of occasions
when the precepts were broken, reflection on practice and discussion with the
spiritual mentor regarding a specific strategy for improvement. The Asokans I
spoke to viewed this accountability structure positively and indicated appreciation
for the helpful advice given by the samaja or sikkhamat.
The Eight Precepts’ Check Book commences with the following verse:
Life is like a little boat on a big sea
Where stormy seas are always ready to drown you
If you have not reached the other shore your boat will be pitching about
There is only one way to sort this out and reach your destination
So stop sailing around in a circle in the ocean.
This then is a call to daily examine how one has kept the Eight Precepts; and the
second page goes on to say:
Check the precepts everyday for Arahatship is not far [from you]
If you have real merit there is no need to regret your actions
Righteous men give praises and a good reputation spread out to be an
example to others
Away from evil – so stand firm in the Dhamma.
Each of the Eight Precepts begins with a statement of its purpose, for example,
the First Precept is to decrease and stop anger. The check book then lists five
levels of achievement in keeping the precept. Continuing with the first precept we
note these levels as follows:
1
The precept is torn (kat) when an animal is killed on purpose, or anger is
expressed through kicking a dog or hitting a cat.
2
The precept is penetrated (talu) when one deliberately speaks angrily, or
orders a killing or attack on someone. Another example cited is to ridicule
someone.
3
The precept is stained (dang) when the practitioner is angry, or holds a
grudge.
4
The precept is tainted (roy) when one is discouraged and views the world
as ‘grey’.
5
We are free through the [keeping of the] precept (ben thai). At this stage the
practitioner will observe only mercy arising in his/her heart; there will be no
form of anger.
An example of how the law (precept) is awarded elevated status may be viewed
in Asoke practice of the Sixth Precept, the avoidance of ‘eating at an unreason-
able time’. In the Theravada context this is understood to be not eating solids
after noon. The booklet reminds practitioners that the purpose of the Sixth Precept
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
166

--- PAGE 182 ---
is to decrease the practitioner’s addiction to food and to eat moderately. It is
interesting to note:
1
The precept is torn when more than one meal per day is eaten, or more than
two meals for someone who has a less-rigorous standard because he/she is
less advanced.
2
The precept is penetrated when the practitioner asks for his/her favourite food.
3
The precept is stained when the taste and smell of the favourite food is
imagined or desired for.
4
The precept is tainted when one is happy to see, or receive food.
5
One is freed through the keeping of the precept when there is no desire for food.
It may be argued that there is a parallel between Santi Asoke’s relationship to
Buddhism and the Pharisees’ (and also the Essenes’) relationship to Judaism.
While the research of Neuserner and Rivkin (Mason, 2000:783) question the posi-
tion and prestige afforded to the Pharisee by traditional scholarship, it is clear that
this fraternity had a deep attachment to the religious legal code. In order to be sure
of not breaking any of God’s laws, the Pharisees developed complex behavioural
codes. Religious and social life orbited around Pharisaic regulations, and there was
a certain pride in strict religious observance. In the Asoke movement we see love
for the Dhamma as well as an extremely rigorous interpretation of the precepts
which contain additions which when applied serve to obliterate attachments.
While zealous, this extremely ascetic approach seems somewhat closer to
the spiritual path the Buddha rejected, rather than the Middle-Way he taught.
Like the Pharisees, Asokans can be proud of their superior achievements
(compared to the perceived laxities of nominal mainstream Thai Buddhists). The
fulfillment of these regulations, while reducing attachments, also serve to enhance a
practitioner’s status within the Asoke communities. Admission to higher orders such
as from pa to nak or krak is decided on such performance. Failure, even in what we
would view as fairly minor areas, for example, drinking a Coke, can lead to discour-
agement. A former member of the movement indicated that excessive criticism of
practitioners in these areas was detrimental to their development, serving only to make
them feel excessively guilty.41 He went on to indicate that he considered the movement
to be excessively rigorous, and that some who successfully kept the regulations felt
proud of their achievements. Such members, then, may be in danger of being bound
by the spiritual fetter of silabbota-paromasa ‘clinging to virtues and vows’. On the
other hand, those who feel they are underachieving may feel demoralized.
Use of typologies to classify Santi Asoke
Glock and Stark’s ‘Deprivation model’
Refusal of people (who have subsequently become members of Asoke) to
co-operate in corrupt work practice has led in some cases to intimidation, both
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
167

--- PAGE 183 ---
emotional and physical. In these, and less extreme cases, people have experienced
a marked discrepancy between their own moral standards and those of society
in general. This ‘inability to lead their lives according to their own lights’ (Glock
and Stark, 1965:248) and persecution by society because of their religious
convictions creates ‘ethical deprivation’. Living together with like-minded
people, or at least having supportive friends has been a strong motivating factor
for a good number to join Santi Asoke. For members, mutual accountability
and the will of the group (mu glum), provide security in a way that the lack of
accountability and excessive individualism of society fails to do.
Bryan Wilson’s typology
A number of Asoke distinctives may be observed in Wilson’s explanation of
‘introversionist’.
The sect develops a particular Weltanschauung and considers itself
an enlightened elect; inner values may be regarded as incommunicable
and eschatological ideas are unarticulated or of little significance. No
evangelism is undertaken and a strong in-group morality is developed;
the sect withdraws from the world, or allows its members to be active
in the world only for human betterment at the behest of conscience and
at the periphery of social concern. It is indifferent to other religious
movements.
(Wilson, 1967:24)42
As already pointed out Santi Asoke has a strong ascetic utopian ethos.43 Wilson
sees the ‘utopian’ response as wishing to reconstruct the world, and replace its
social organisation, being more ‘active and constructive than the introversionist
response of simply withdrawing from the world’ (Wilson, 1973:26). While the
introversionist category encapsulates the essence of Asokan belief and practice
well, it fails to reflect Asoke’s low-key example to society vis-á-vis its utopian
communities. While the introversionist category is clearly the major one, the
utopian classification reminds us of the gradual transformation Asoke expect to
make on society.44
Roy Wallis’ typology
According to Wallis (2003:36) ‘world-rejecting’ movements believe that society
has pursued materialism to the extent that it ‘has succeeded in creating a polluted
environment; a vice-ridden society in which individuals treat each other purely as
means rather than as ends; a world filled with conflict, greed, insincerity and
despair. This sums up the Asoke understanding of the world in which they live.
The pursuit of materialism is a result of attachment and causes suffering for the
person who seeks to gain, as well as people who may be exploited as a result.
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
168

--- PAGE 184 ---
The Asoke communities are mirror images of what they perceive society to be.
Those who join these communities (which are founded on a rigorous keeping
of the Precepts) are affirmed in their desire to put into practice their desire to
achieve a high level of mindfulness and non-attachment.
The Asoke movement not only criticises society, it also condemns the Thai
Sakgha as being lax in monastic disciplines. Particular criticisms are that main-
stream monks have excessive funds available for personal use and that they do
not practise vegetarianism. The movement models Dhamma values to society
and the Sakgha whose values they reject as they view them to be excessively
materialistic.
Santi Asoke members are totally committed to their movement. Permanent
guests and temple dwellers who do not work full time for Asoke (a very small
minority), will engage in appropriate work outside the community, for example,
operating a vegetarian restaurant. In their free time they will be involved in the
activities of the community. A considerable number of non-temple-dwelling
members (yatitam) who have secular jobs and/or family commitments find
accommodation very close to the Asoke communities. This means they may
participate in the community’s activities and enjoy the support of their fellow
members. Wallis’ comment is apposite to this distinctive of the Asoke practice.
The religious involvement of members is thus a full-time activity. The
committed adherent will need to break completely with the worldly life
in order to fulfil the movement’s expectations, and separation may result
in a rift with family and former friends, with conventional education
and career. The movement is a ‘total institution’, regulating all its
adherents’ activities, programming all of their day but for the briefest
periods of recreation or private time. Not only will the member live in
the community, normally he will also work for it.
(Wallis, 2003:39)
Santi Asoke, unlike ISKCON, the Unification Church and The Family, do not
engage in street solicitation for funds.45 Although monastics go on morning
alms rounds like mainstream monks, they do not accept money. Indeed, Asoke
communities will only accept a donation to their work if they think the donor has
a good understanding of the movement. In the true sense of the term they may be
considered as world-rejecting.
Lance Cousins’ categories
Santi Asoke has a very strong focus on achieving insight and non-attachment
through ascetic practice, vegetarianism, hard work – all conducted with a consis-
tently high level of morality (sila). This approach relates to ‘ultimatism’, one of
several growing trends Cousins has observed in Southern Buddhism. Ultimatism
is taking ‘what is true from the viewpoint of ultimate truth, or at an advanced
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
169

--- PAGE 185 ---
level of spiritual practice as if it were the whole of Buddhism’ (Cousins,
1997:409). Cousins goes on to mention that ultimatism in Southern Buddhism
takes the form of a
rejection of much traditional practice and ceremonial as well as of
many of the outward forms customarily associated with merit-making
activities. It is often supported by reference to early Buddhism, while in
more extreme forms it may be associated with symbolic interpretation
of rebirth and of supernatural elements in Buddhist tradition. The
emphasis tends to be directed toward insight meditation and more
rigorous interpretation of the Four Noble Truths.
(Cousins, 1997:409)
Asoke’s highly rationalistic expression of Buddhism seeks to draw support
from its understanding of early Buddhist practice. The movement rejects a great
deal of traditional Thai Buddhist practice. One example of this is the widespread
practice of a monk reciting a short Pala formula over an amulet (pluksek), or
well-respected monks meditating in front of a collection of images in order to
sacrilise them (puttha pisek). Asoke members poke fun at what they consider to
be these superstitious practices. In contrast, they have their own Pluksek and
Puttha Pisek ceremonies – extremely rigorous week-long events dedicated to
listening to teaching several hours each day and engaging in ascetic activities
designed to create mindfulness and non-attachment. This is what really brings
out the power! Indeed, it is difficult to find an image of the Buddha in Asoke
communities. Closer inspection of Asoke practice, however, indicates extremism
rather than a narrow focus on a few key issues and the ignoring of everything
else. It would appear that the ascetic practices of some Asoke lay members
are closer to the excessively rigorous path the Buddha rejected, rather than the
‘Middle-Way’ he taught.
Conclusion
Inside perspective
Despite marginalisation by the Thai Sakgha Santi Asoke members appear to
practise unhindered. Their communities are miniatures of moral and fair
societies. There the quest for upright living, with advice, training and support are
offered to those whose goal is ‘peace without suffering’.
Santi Asoke members have a great respect and fondness for their leader who
they consider to be an enlightened being and a Bodhisatta. Although Bodhirak
spends much of his time at Sisa Asoke, he frequently visits the other communities.
His transparent lifestyle, wisdom and high standard of behaviour confirm his high
moral standing or charisma (parami) among his followers.
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
170

--- PAGE 186 ---
Four key distinctives
The path from outsider through the various stages to samaja and sikkhamat is
closely monitored and is much longer and more rigorous than the layman’s pro-
gression to phra in the mainstream. The sikkhamat enjoys a comparable status to
that of a bhiksuni in the Mahayana tradition, given her teaching and leadership
roles. The role of women is one example of a blurring of distinctions between the
Mahayana and Theravada schools. Vegetarianism and the use of the Bodhisatta
ideal are two others. One possible explanation for this blurring of distinctions
between the two traditions is that Bodhirak and a good number of the samaja and
sikkhamat are from Chinese families where there was limited exposure to the
Theravada tradition but a familiarity with Mahayana practices such as the
Bodhisatta concept and a belief in the superiority of a vegetarian diet.46
Outside perspective
Swearer (1991:668) and Keyes (1991:395) both understand Asoke to be a
fundamentalist movement, although some of the features used to suggest funda-
mentalism also suggest a millenarian movement – a position held by Asoke
researcher Heikkilä-Horn. Clearly there are parallels between Asoke and the
millenarian movements that occurred in North-East Thailand, for example,
marginalisation, a high regard for their leader and a ‘them and us’ mentality.
Also the trend of millenarian movements to move from an ‘expansive’ to an
‘astringent’ phase fits Asoke’s short history. The emphasis, however, on the
necessity of self-effort coupled with the belief that Bodhirak is a great teacher
but not a saviour make it impossible to sustain the position that Santi Asoke is a
millenarian movement.
Base communities gave Latin Americans a sense of security and identity
during the changes experienced by society in the 1960s. Groups of people
organised around Catholic Christianity enjoyed mutual support and the
experience of empowerment as they began together to take control of their
own lives. Connections may be made between Catholic base communities and
Asoke communities. Some examples include the reaction against excessive
possessions acquired by individuals and the desire to take control of one’s own
life. An obvious dissimilarity between the two systems is that base-community
members live in their own homes while many Asoke members live together on
temple ground.
Community culture ideas are clearly discernible in the ethos of Asoke
communities. Some examples of this include the improvement of peoples’ spirit
and environment through the resisting of capitalistic ways of development,
economic self-reliance and commitment to maintaining the ethical/moral
standards of the community. While community culture values may be observed in
the Asoke communities, its roots do not go down into community culture thought.
Santi Asoke has been shaped by the quest for a ‘just’ community and Buddhist
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
171

--- PAGE 187 ---
teachings such as a rigorous interpretation of the First Precept and the practice of
non-attachment. Those who know Santi Asoke mention the references Bodhirak
made in the early years of the movement to Gandhi and the Israeli kibbutz.
Aspects of utopianism were discussed and it was found that it may be
misleading to categorise Santi Asoke as retro-utopian. While using images from
the rural past such as lay members wearing farmers’ clothes and using traditional
ways of eating meals together, the movement, at the same time, is progressive in
its use of technology. The better designation for Santi Asoke is ‘ascetic/prophetic’
utopian.47 This captures the idea of very basic world-renouncing lifestyles which
prophetically challenge Thai society which has been ensnared by excessive
materialism and Western values.
Last, it has been observed that Asoke is an excessively legalistic movement
where some lay people observe the Eight Precepts and other additional practices
in an extremely rigorous manner. There is the risk that for some this will lead
to a clinging to virtues and vows. On the other hand, less ‘successful’ practitioners
may feel discouraged. I suggest that any legalistic approach to excessively
rigorous practice is counter to the Middle-Way taught by the Buddha.
Use of typology
Santi Asoke clearly fit into Wilson’s introversionist category. Asoke may also be
described as a world-rejecting movement which has an attraction for those
with high moral standards who have suffered some form of persecution/rejection.
This is referred to by Glock and Stark as ethical deprivation. The movement
fits into the ultimatism category, one of several trends observed by Cousins within
Southern Buddhist countries. That is, taking an advanced level of spiritual
practice as if it were the whole of Buddhism and focusing on it to the exclusion
of other teaching. Asoke defends its rejection of much of traditional Thai
Buddhist practice along with its appreciation for rationalism by referring to its
understanding of early Buddhism. This is a further indicator of ultimatism.
Many Thai are becoming more socially engaged and ecologically aware.
Because of the recent economic failure precipitated by reckless borrowing and
lending, materialism is increasingly viewed as being detrimental to the nation.
This would seem to bode well for the growth of the Asoke movement. Yet Asoke’s
ascetic approach is viewed as being too strict by the fun-loving Thai and
is unlikely to grow significantly beyond the 10,000 members, or so, who are
currently associated with the movement. Well does Sulak Siviraksa comment
‘The strict demands made by Santi Asoke upon its followers will tend to limit its
appeal’ (Bangkok Post, 23.7.88).
In 2005, there were 105 samajas and 27 sikkhamats. Much of the success of
the movement is due to the personality, leadership-style, and most importantly,
parami (as perceived by Asokans) of the 71-year-old founder, who currently
appears to be in good health. That said, one member informed me that Bodhirak
had recently indicated he would not be with them much longer.48 He informed
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
172

--- PAGE 188 ---
members that he still had much to teach and would need to work quickly. 
The participative-style-leadership approach taken by Bodhirak indicate that Santi
Asoke may fare better than other movements when its founder passes away. There
are a number of highly capable senior monks respected within the movement, and
Bodhirak himself has indicated that he does not foresee difficulties in the area of
future leadership.
Thai academic, Dr Puntarigvivat, is of the opinion that the treatment of Santi
Asoke has sent a message to other Buddhist groups that if they wish to continue
to be viewed as orthodox Buddhist, they need to be accepted by the Sakgha
hierarchy and the Thai state. He also made the interesting comment that Asoke
continue their activities without using the Buddhist ‘uniform’ and the Buddhist
‘brand name’.49 Marginalisation by the Sakgha means that many Thai now take
the view that Santi Asoke is not ‘proper Buddhism’. Excommunication by the
Sakgha means Asoke’s serious approach to the religious life, including its anti-
consumer message, will be viewed as subversive by those who support the status
quo. On the other hand, it may be argued that Santi Asoke’s continued existence,
indeed, increasing maturity, prove that excommunication and survival are not
mutually exclusive.
DISTINCTIVES AND ANALYSIS OF SANTI ASOKE
173

--- PAGE 189 ---
7
THE APPROACH OF SANTI ASOKE TO
SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
The Santi Asoke understanding of nibbana
The general understanding in Thai Buddhism is that only a monk is likely to
become an Arahat, and thus achieve nibbana. According to Bodhirak, when
one becomes an Arahat, then one experiences a state where one is completely free
from self-centredness. The Asoke leader views nibbana as a state of mind where
one may work effortlessly for the benefit of others, as all attachments are severed.
Bodhirak assures his followers that nibbana ‘can be reached in this life since it is
a state of mind. Nibbana is not something supernatural, or other worldly. To be
enlightened means to be peaceful and calm’ (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:118).
To teach that nibbana is within the grasp of the lay person is perceived by some
traditionalists as undermining the spiritual status of the monastic community.
Heikkilä-Horn (1997:118) is right to point out that if the Sakgha is not seen as
the focal point of superior spiritual practice, then it can no longer legitimise the
state’s political authority. Indeed, such a view challenges the standard under-
standing of the Sakgha as the best ‘field of merit’. Yet encouraging Asoke lay
members to strive for enlightenment does not diminish the respect lay people
show to Asoke samajas and sikkhamats. Asoke monastics lead lives which
heavily involve them with lay members of the Asoke community. This is due in
part to monastics working closely on administrative and practical tasks with
volunteers, rather than studying or meditating in isolation. Monks in the main-
stream normally live in a fair degree of isolation from the public. A significant
number of Asoke members, however, live in the Asoke temples ( putthasathan),
and would have watched the progress of samajas and sikkhamats up through the
ranks described in the Chapter 6. The blurring of the distinction between who may
achieve nibbana (monastics or lay people) is not problematic in the micro-Asoke
context, as it is in macro-mainstream Thai Buddhism.
Bodhirak readily acknowledges that he has been influenced by Buddhadasa.
Yet he also believes that ‘strong attachment to Buddhadasa’s ideas by many
people blocks perception of truth’ (Jackson, 1989:165) and that Buddhadasa (and
his followers) did not go nearly far enough in applying theory to practice.1
Buddhadasa viewed nibbana as the original condition of the mind. It could be
‘retained or re-attained by remaining mindful and by not allowing the delusions
174

--- PAGE 190 ---
and ignorance of “I” – “mine” to arise’ (Jackson, 1988:165). Buddhadasa
recognised three levels of nibbana:
G
Tadakganibbana (circumstantial-nibbana): a state which comes about
momentarily when external circumstances do not produce conditions for ‘I’,
‘me’ or ‘mine’ to arise. It is the attainment of a mental calm because of the
influence of a peaceful environment. This state is not permanent, as a move
to a troubled environment will lead to a loss of the nibbanic condition;
G
Vikhambhananibbana (arresting-nibbana): this state is similar to the above
but has been brought about because of the mental control exercised in
samadhi meditation, in which intense concentration arrests or paralyses the
arising of kilesa (Jackson, 1988:165). These defilements (kilesa) are not in
fact abolished but arise again when meditation ceases;
G
Samucchedanibbana (cutting-off nibbana): this state corresponds with the
Thai traditional view of enlightenment. Here mental peace results from the
termination, rather than the simple suppression, of mind-disturbing kilesa
(Jackson, 1988:166).
Buddhadasa regarded the first two stages of temporary nibbana as a continuation
of the development of a freed mind (Thai chit-waang) and a precursor to what he
viewed as the third stage of nibbana (which is the main traditional Thai under-
standing). His creative approach, while having its critics (e.g. Anan Senakhan),
serves to make nibbana more accessible to the lay community, and although devi-
ating from traditional Thai teaching, Buddhadasa is not viewed as being heretical.
Although intellectually provocative, he was highly regarded as a scholar, and was
not really viewed as a threat to Thai Buddhism, as he did not insist in a change of
traditional practice, unlike Bodhirak.
The following quote is a helpful summary of the Asoke understanding of
nibbana (in life):
It is the neutral state of the soul of living beings who have attained their
perfect equilibrium, no feeling of content or discontent, neither attachment
nor repulsion, no sense of egoism. It is a state full of nothing, a state of
calm, tranquillity and total peace; a state of consciousness and complete
knowledge of all. It is a state of the conscious awareness of only existing
to be useful to all other living beings. It is the complete end of ‘me’.
(Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:118)2
Typical but less technical Asoke responses to ‘what is nibbana?’ are: ‘Nibbana
is the state of mind when one is free from suffering’; ‘Nibbana is beyond suffer-
ing’; ‘Nibbana is a means of relieving oneself from suffering’ and ‘The way to
nibbana leads away from suffering’ (Questionnaire Q4). These brief definitions
are reflected in the Asoke use of the word nibbana to describe freedom from an
addiction. If, for example, a member ceases to crave coffee, he/she would
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
175

--- PAGE 191 ---
describe such an achievement as nibbana from coffee (Thai nippan jak caffe).
This achieving of non-attachment is viewed as a freedom from the suffering
caused by the negative effects of this addiction. There is some congruence
between this Asoke understanding of nibbana and Buddhadasa’s concept of
tadakganibbana or vikhambhananibbana.
In one of his sermons, Bodhirak raises the question ‘is nibbana atta or
anatta?’3 He uses the question to make the point that our uncertainty on the
matter stems from our lack of insight. Before understanding the difference
between atta and anatta, one has to have achieved sammaditthi (right view and
understanding). According to Bodhirak, atta is found in the person who has not
yet achieved sammaditthi and so still clings to (or dwells in) avijja (ignorance).
In contrast, the Arahat is anatta, free from all defilements and all forms of cling-
ing. In the same sermon, Bodhirak criticises religions which believe in the ‘great
soul’ (Thai parmatman) or God, which is simply another way to describe the
‘great self’ to which unenlightened people cling. Buddhism, by holding out the
special insights of the Noble Eightfold Path, Bojjhakga (seven factors of enlight-
enment) and Bodhipakkhiyadhamma (37 qualities contributing to enlightenment)
gives one the ability to achieve true knowledge. With such an understanding, one
will know that God has no ontological existence and clinging to the concept is
delusion. Bodhirak quotes from where the Buddha is recorded to have said that
any religion which does not have the Noble Eightfold Path cannot have the four
levels of holy people.4 Indeed, Bodhirak takes the position that one who believes
in God cannot purify his heart by the Noble Eightfold Path, as Buddhism (in his
opinion) rejects the existence of God.
The Asoke philosophical position regarding the character of nibbana is the
antithesis of Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s understanding. As we have seen, Wat Phra
Dhammakaya asserts that nibbana is atta. The meditator who has advanced to the
stage of achieving Dhammakaya Arahatta (which is described as unconditioned)
can thus be described as atta, as can nibbana that ‘blissful realm where the
Buddha and other enlightened ones reside after death’ (Bangkok Post, 21.12.98).
Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s provocative statement on atta is readily perceived by
the Thai as not fitting in to the schema of Buddhism. Indeed, some identify it
with Brahmanism.
Commenting on attempts to smuggle a ‘self’ into Buddhism, Walpola Rahula
(1978:56) comments ‘it will not do for anyone to try to introduce into Buddhism
an idea which the Buddha never accepted, as far as we can see from the extant
original texts.’5 On the other hand, there is a suggestion (Lorgunpai, 1995:207)
that one possible meaning for anatta may be lack of self-control. In the
Culasaccaka Sutta an account is given of Saccaka suggesting to the Buddha that
the five khandhas constituted a real self. The Buddha responds by asking Saccaka
whether the King of Kosala or Magadha has power over subjects so that he could
banish or execute one of his subjects should they so deserve. Saccaka answers
that this is the case. The Buddha puts the following question to Saccaka, ‘When
you assert that the five khandhas are yourself, have you power over them, have
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
176

--- PAGE 192 ---
you control over them, so that you can say “Let my five khandhas be thus, let
my five khandhas be not thus?”’ Saccaka is unable to answer and acknowledges
he was mistaken in his understanding of self.
With ‘skill-in-means’, the Buddha pointed out to Saccaka that genuine self is
something over which one should have full control. Self, by definition, belongs to
a particular person, that person should be able to exercise sovereignty over it. As
one cannot exercise sovereignty over one’s body and mind, we are in Karunadasa’s
(1994:109) words ‘being possessed by our own possessions’. ‘There is no self
because we are unable to control the actions and reactions that are constantly aris-
ing and falling in our khandhas. Our khandhas have no leader, no guide, no inner
controller’ (Mackenzie, 1995c:16). Nevertheless, the one travelling on the Holy
Path may be described as a great self (mahatta) (Harvey, 1995:56). This progres-
sion from a ‘small self’ to a great self, that is, a strong, calm person encapsulates
ideas of progression in psychological strength and wisdom. The one who has
entered into the Dhamma Stream understands that the empirical self is in constant
flux and is thus not a permanent self in control of itself; this leads to enhanced
spiritual strength. This perspective may lend some strength to the Wat Phra
Dhammakaya belief that while anatta is appropriate to unenlightened beings,
when a person is enlightened by insight into ultimate reality, it is more appropriate
to speak of his/her condition as atta.
The Santi Asoke path to nibbana
Santi Asoke’s method in helping people is to show them why they suffer, for
example, striving after possessions and clinging to people. By example, testimony
and teaching, Asoke members demonstrate the minimising and transcending of
suffering by letting go of all attachments. In sharp contrast to the Wat Phra
Dhammakaya movement, Asoke de-emphasises the formal practice of medita-
tion. Indeed, monks do not chant (which has a meditative quality) nearly as much
as mainstream and Wat Phra Dhammakaya members. Asokans often poke fun at
groups who have a strong focus on sitting or formal meditation by asking ‘How
does sitting with your eyes closed help you? When you open your eyes and stand
up you are the same as before you started meditation!’The samaja from whom I
obtained permission to stay at Pathom Asoke compared sitting meditation to a
bottle of dirty water. If the bottle is kept still the sediment settles at the bottom of
the bottle and the water appears clear. In other words, defilements are not seen.
As the bottle is shaken the water becomes clouded with sediment. In a similar way
the meditator’s problems and defilements reappear once he/she stops meditating.
For Asoke members ‘every moment of the day should be meditation in the form
of mindfulness (sati), consciousness and awareness of the surrounding world’
(Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:161). As Asokans carry out their duties with mindfulness
they will consider what defilements they have, and those more advanced on the
spiritual path will think how they may be better examples to others of a life free
from desires and concerns.
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
177

--- PAGE 193 ---
Despite negative comments about sitting meditation, Asoke members do use
forms of meditation other than ‘working with concentration’. There is a period of
silence before the main (in many cases only) meal of the day, when members reflect
on the work of the farmers in planting, caring for and harvesting the crops. After
this silence, which usually lasts for a couple of minutes, a monk leads the group in
a statement of appreciation for those who have worked the land on their behalf.
Each day at noon in every Asoke community a gong is struck, and members spend
a minute in silent meditation for global peace. More experienced members may
also channel their thoughts into the wish that all beings may know freedom from
suffering.’6 Regular optional samatha meditation sessions are often held in the
afternoons at Asoke centres.7 Some Asokans do practise basic samatha meditation
briefly at the end of a busy day, as it helps them relax. In the three Asoke temples
(putthasathan) which I visited, I observed corpses displayed in glass cases. Members
may view these corpses in the traditional way to develop their understanding of
impermanence.8 On the other hand, the corpses tend to be seen as testimonies
of Asoke members who attained a high level of moral practice before passing away.
In viewing these corpses, members are inspired to emulate the high levels of non-
attachment achieved by these departed Asoke members.9Asoke members are taught
to walk with mindfulness in their training but ‘walking-meditation’ per se does not
appear to be an essential feature of Asoke practice.
Asokans have a different approach to the Threefold Training of sila, samadhi
and pañña10 than mainstream Thai Buddhists. Asoke members have an extremely
strong emphasis on sila, (even more so than mainstream) as well as a different
approach to the development of the mind. In Question 1 of the questionnaire,
‘What practices do you engage in so that you progress and achieve nibbana?’there
were no responses specifically related to sitting meditation. There was, however,
an overwhelming response indicating moral development (sila). The Asoke path to
peace without suffering is one with an unusually high concentration on sila.
The three following components of The Eightfold Path receive special emphasis
in Thai Buddhism: Right View (sammaditthi), Right Effort (sammavayama) and
Right Mindfulness (sammasati) (Payutto, 1995:195). Bodhirak (1999:88) views
Right Effort and Right Mindfulness as being the heart and brains of Right View
(sammaditthi). Yet while recognising the interconnectedness of these three
aspects, Varadhammo (1996:133) points out the importance of commencing the
practice of the Eightfold Path by having the correct view. This is supported by
Payutto (1995:192) when he writes
[P]roper understanding [correct view] has been set up as the initial step
because in the very first stages of practice a person must practise a
conducive outlook, correct views and proper understanding for the
course on which he is about to embark.
Proper understanding, or right view, (the eye which directs all other factors)
is also foundational in the Asoke approach. Bodhirak (1999:88) flags up the
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
178

--- PAGE 194 ---
importance of having a right understanding of the Path, wrong understanding
(micchaditthi) will lead only to wrong practice, resulting in wrong concentration
(micchasamadhi).
Along with these three components mentioned above are four further aspects
of The Path. They are:
G
Right Thoughts (sammasakkappa): the intended purpose for practising the
moral precepts;
G
Right Speech (sammavaca): the Fourth Precept, that is, to abstain from false,
divisive, harsh or pointless speech;
G
Right Action (sammakammanta): this requires the practice of the first three
of The Five Precepts, that is, abstaining from taking life, taking what is not
given and sexual misconduct;
G
Right Livelihood (sammajiva): this is fulfilled by observing the Five
Precepts (Pañica-Sila).
These seven core-constituents of the Noble Eightfold Path are viewed by Asokans
as the first part of the Threefold training and are referred to as training in Higher
Morality, or adhisin in Thai (Poompanna, 1989:23). Mainstream Buddhism views
only right speech, right action and right livelihood as pertaining to sila or moral
virtue (Harvey, 1990:68). However,
These seven paths mentioned above, is the first of the Threefold Training
(Training in Higher Morality) which reduces craving and clinging. It
helps to purify our minds and free it from the Five Hindrances which are
sensual desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor, destruction and remorse, and
uncertainty.
(Poompanna, 1989:23)
If practitioners follow these seven aspects of The Eightfold Path they have
the potential of achieving what they understand as right concentration
(sammasamadhi).11 This is training in Higher Mentality, or concentration (adhijit),
the second part of the Threefold Training. Traditionally, mental development
(samadhi) is concerned with three factors: right effort, right mindfulness and
right concentration.
At this stage Asoke members are conducting their activities with high levels of
morality and concentration. In time, the Asoke training in higher wisdom
(adhipañña, the third part of the Threefold Training) will lead to right insight into
reality as ‘The purified conscious mind will be able to perceive reality as it really
is’ (Poompanna, 1989:23). Perception of reality at this level leads to right insight
and right deliverance. Poompanna appears and view this as an extra two steps
making The Eightfold Path (Figure 7.1) into a Tenfold Path.12 Heikkilä-Horn
(1997:114) expresses it differently ‘The final result of this method is a kind of
additional step on the Noble Eightfold Path’. She understands Asoke as believing
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
179

--- PAGE 195 ---
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
180
that right insight and right deliverance are an additional step and a result of
training in Higher Wisdom. This Higher Wisdom (which is the ability to perceive
reality as it is) will help elevate Higher Morality. This will feed into Higher
Concentration which results in wisdom at a greater level. ‘Each [factor] supports
to elevate one another. This is the “dynamic” effect of the Noble Eightfold Path’
(Unpublished Asoke paper).
Right view of 
understanding
Right thought 
(intention of 
the precepts)
Right concentration
Training in 
higher mentality
Right insight 
Right deliverance
Training in 
higher wisdom
Right effort
Right mindfulness
Right livelihood 
(the precepts 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
Right speech 
(the precept 4)
Right action 
(the precepts
1, 2, 3)
Training in 
higher morality
Figure 7.1 Santi Asoke’s understanding of the Noble Eightfold Path.
Source: Poompanna (1989:25).

--- PAGE 196 ---
‘When one successfully practices the Eightfold Path, it is only a natural course
that one will work harder, consume less and share the rest of what one has with
society’ (Unpublished Asoke paper). The development of the right conditions
for enlightenment by strict moral behaviour, disciplined living and a highly
developed sense of awareness lead to a high view of every conceivable activity.
In terms of mental development, mundane activities such as physical labour,
attending to personal hygiene and washing dishes are to the Asoke practitioner
what visualising the crystal sphere is for the Wat Phra Dhammakaya member.
During my time at a five-day Asoke camp, I was given detailed instructions as
how to wash my used plate after the daily meal. This relatively long process (by
Western standards) involved scraping what was leftover into appropriate slop
buckets, washing the plate carefully with community produced soap and ensuring
that the soap was wiped off the plate (in order to prolong the cleanliness of the
rinsing water) before very careful rinsing. The whole operation was designed to
produce the minimum of waste and to encourage mindfulness. Indeed, even the
busy sikkhamats, whose time is at a premium, will spend several hours each day
doing manual work. An example of this is the sikkhamat in charge of teaching
English in the school attached to Pathom Asoke, who spends several hours each
day sewing torn garments. She views this manual labour as an important means
of developing her mindfulness and a necessary supplement to her teaching and
counselling work. As Heikkilä-Horn (1997:160) observes, ‘For the Asoke people
working is meditation....every moment of the day should be meditation in the
form of concentration, consciousness and awareness of the surrounding world.’
This approach to carrying out mundane activities with mindfulness and being
aware of the present moment may appear similar to aspects of Zen practice.
Certainly in reading the work of Buddhadasa, Bodhirak would have been exposed
to some Zen concepts. Mindfulness in daily tasks and having a ‘free-mind’ (Thai
chit-waang) are two ideas in particular which Buddhadasa drew from Zen and
developed in the Thai Theravada tradition.13 Buddhadasa viewed Zen as interest-
ing, and a return to the basic teaching of the Buddha from a Mahayana worship-
ping of the Bodhisattvas (Jackson, 1988:211). Unlike Zen practitioners, though,
Asoke members do not use sitting meditation (zazen) except to unwind at the end
of a busy day. An essential feature of Asoke practice is that mindfulness arises
from focus on daily tasks rather than concentration on a meditative object.
Phra Rajyanvisith is of the opinion that ‘Santi Asoke focus on sila, followers of
Buddhadasa concentrate on pañña, while the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement
sees the development of samadhi through Dhammakaya meditation as being very
important.’14 The abbot of Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram went on to say
that in his fraternity ‘equal attention was given to the three aspects of the training’.
In mainstream Thai Buddhist thought, mental pollutants or defilements (kilesa)
are seen as alien to the true nature of the mind and fall into three categories. The
first category is vitikkama (transgression) or crude form. As the name suggests,
they are easily identified through actions such as violent conduct, harsh speech
and substance misuse. Troubles and restlessness in families, communities and
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
181

--- PAGE 197 ---
countries are brought about by the non-extinguishing of these defilements. This
category of defilement is temporarily extinguished through moral practice (sila).
This may be compared to hacking away long grass to make a path. This produces
a result which is still temporary, since before long the grass will grow and make
the path impassable as before (Thitavanno, 1999:32). In medical terms, sila is
able to deal only with the symptoms of the disease, that is, the crude form of
pollutants or vitikkama.
The second category of pollutants is referred to as the mild form, or pariyutthana
(pervading). These pollutants act on the conscious mind. These are less obvious
than the previous category; their effect, however, is dangerous as they prevent
mental development. This may occur through lust, hatred and distraction, and these
are inhibited through the practice of meditation (samadhi). As soon as the control
measures are slackened, ‘the “culprits” will spring into action again, often with a
vengeance, since their roots are still intact’ (Thitavanno, 1999:32).
The third category of pollutants is referred to as the subtle form, or latent
tendency (anusaya). As the name suggests, these pollutions are hard to identify.
They are extinguished through wisdom (pañña). This is in effect the digging up
and removing of the defilements.
Mainstream Thai Buddhism regards Asoke’s focus on sila in order to be free
from suffering as inadequate. The lack of formal meditation practice means that
anything beyond crude defilements will not be adequately dealt with, and wisdom
will not be achieved.15 Bodhirak, however, himself views the other approaches
within the Thailand as being ‘incomplete’ (Poompanna, 1989:16).
The Eightfold Path is first followed at the mundane level (lokiya). Most
Buddhists practise at this level, the goal being the accumulation of merit and a
better rebirth, rather than enlightenment. The Middle Way may also be followed at
a supramundane (lokuttara) level; this then is referred to as the Noble Eightfold
Path (Ariya-Magga). When a person has been freed from the defilements of self-
belief (belief in the Khandhas as somehow related to a permanent self), and doubt
and superstition (clinging to virtue, vows and rituals as sufficient for enlighten-
ment) then such a person has attained the lowest level in the supramundane plane,
and become a Stream-enterer (Sotapanna). ‘At stream-entry, a person gains a first
glimpse of nibbana and the ‘stream’ which leads there, and enters this, the Holy
Eightfold Path’ (Harvey, 1990:69). Such a person will reach enlightenment within
seven lifetimes. According to Heikkilä-Horn (1997:117), Asoke teaches that a
person becomes a Stream-enterer when that person is free of the following six
vices: ‘drinking, smoking, gambling, practising illicit sex, frequenting night
entertainment, and laziness’.16 Showing respect to the Triple Gem and keeping
the Five Precepts in the rigorous Asoke style are also seen as prerequisites to
‘Stream-entry’. As stated earlier, Asoke members are strict vegans and would view
meat eating as a violation of the First Precept. It is impossible, according to Santi
Asoke members to be a meat eater and a person on the Noble Eight-fold Path.
The person on the next level of enlightenment is called a Sakadagami or
Once-returner.
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
182

--- PAGE 198 ---
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
183
A Once-returner can only be reborn once in the sense-desire world, as
a human or lower god. Any other births will be in the higher heavens.
This is because he has destroyed the gross forms of the next two fetters,
sensual desire and ill-will.
(Harvey, 1990:71)
Asoke’s belief is the same as mainstream when it teaches that a person moves
from being a Sotapanna to a Sakadagami by becoming free of the gross forms of
the fetters of sensual desire and anger. There is an expectation in the Asoke
communities that a Sakadagami should be keeping the Eight Precepts.
At the next stage of enlightenment a person is referred to as an Anagami, or
Never-returner.
A person who has reached this level cannot be reborn in the sense-desire
world. His insight is not quite sufficient for him to become an Arahat,
and if he does not manage to become one later in life, he is reborn in the
first of the five ‘pure abodes’ the most refined heavens in the pure form
world, where only Non-returners can be reborn. In these he matures his
insight till he becomes a long-lived Arahat-god.
(Harvey, 1990:71)
The Anagami has completely broken the fourth and fifth fetters, so that there are
no traces of sensual desire and ill will. Santi Asoke explain that an Anagami ‘feels
no temptation to worldly pleasures, and worldly events do not have any effect on
him or her. The person at this level still has some defilements within his or her
mind, but they are not shown outside’ (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:117).
The noble person who succeeds in breaking all of the ten fetters reaches the
final level of enlightenment and becomes an Arahat. Such a person is
free from the idea of ‘self’, and can work for the benefit of others
because he himself or she herself has no self [no sense of ‘I am’]. This
stage is nibbana, which is a state of mind in which the person has no
self, and thus no selfishness, anger, greediness or delusion.
(Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:117)
Bodhirak, in the early days of the movement, declared himself as being at the
second stage on the Noble Path – a Sakadagami (Poompanna, 1989:16). Asoke
members say Bodhirak is simply telling the truth about his own enlightenment,
yet it is against the vinaya for a monk to disclose the stage of his spiritual enlight-
enment. He has also implied that he is a reincarnation of or, at the very least, a
follower in the footsteps of Phra Sariputta (Poompanna, 1998:14).17 Asoke
members, however, now regard Bodhirak as an Arahat (Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:110),
one who has been enlightened through his own spiritual search, and who, because
of his great compassion has returned as an important Bodhisatta to teach true

--- PAGE 199 ---
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
184
Buddhism.18 Asokans believe that an Arahat may choose to be a Bodhisatta. They
understand that a Bodhisatta would enter nibbana from where he could return to
this world to assist others. An Arahat, on his passing, would enter parinibbana
from where he would be unable to return to help others.
Training and support given on the path
As already noted at the end of the previous chapter temple residents and
permanent guests are required to fill in ‘The Eight Precepts Check Book’ (Check
Sen) and submit it to their spiritual adviser each week. This is an optional task for
a member who does not reside at the temple ( yatitam) but is obligatory for the
temple dweller (akhantuka pracham). Members I spoke to viewed accountability
structure as a helpful way to receive advice from an experienced practitioner.
One former member, while positive about some aspects of the movement felt
that some members were excessively competitive about achieving high standards
of moral practice.19 He indicated that this resulted in condemnation of those
who did not maintain high standards. The use of the ‘Check Book’ is an official
part of the Asokan’s training and is an opportunity for a samaja or sikkhimat to
mentor a temple dweller in his/her spiritual development.
Temple dwellers have ample opportunity to work alongside samajas and
sikkhamats. They are usually given tasks in keeping with their secular training or
abilities. When they ‘win their spurs’ they are offered increased responsibilities,
should they so wish. Attending morning meetings, listening to audio tapes/
reading Bodhirak’s sermons and going to the rigorous annual Pluksek and Puttha
Pisek events, as well as engaging informal discussion with more experienced
practitioners, are all important components to the training and support on the
Asoke path to ‘peace without suffering’. Members may feel that their develop-
ment is facilitated through recognition as a practitioner ( patepat) and higher.
As seen from the Chapter 6, such progression takes considerable time and is
closely monitored by monastics.
Conclusion
A common understanding of nibbana in the Asoke communities is a mind free
from attachment and suffering. This may be achieved by lay members as well
as monastics. Intense focus (sati) on the task being carried out leads members
to identify defilements and attachments in their own minds. Training in Higher
Morality (adhisin) draws on the practice of the following interconnected seven
components: (1) Right Understanding or View; (2) Right Effort; (3) Right
Mindfulness; (4) Right Thought; (5) Right Speech; (6) Right Action; (7) Right
Livelihood. The achieving of Right Concentration (sammasamadhi), the eighth
component of the Noble Eightfold Path, trains the practitioner in Higher
Mentality (adhijit). This is the second part of the Threefold Training.

--- PAGE 200 ---
As Asokans conduct their activities with high levels of morality and
concentration, insight will eventually evolve. This is acquiring Higher Wisdom
(adhipañña ), the third part of the Threefold Training. Perception of reality at this
level leads to right insight (adhisammapothe) and right (full) deliverance from all
ten fetters. This final stage is enlightenment (Thai balu or tratru), the ultimate
goal of the Asoke practitioner.
SANTI ASOKE AND SPIRITUAL PURIFICATION
185

--- PAGE 201 ---
CONCLUSION
The conclusion begins with five sections which correspond to the research
objectives outlined at the beginning of the thesis. Summary tables of the similarities
and differences between the two movements follow. Finally there is a
consideration of issues for further research.
How the Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke 
movements began and developed
This has been set out in Chapters 2 and 5 respectively. The propagation of
Dhammakaya meditation for a new generation appears to have been the purpose
of the group that left Wat Paknam and set up a Dhammakaya meditation centre
which later became Wat Phra Dhammakaya. This model of meditation was
popularised for young Thai students. The movement began to be patronised by
older Thai, who were attracted not only by Dhammakaya meditation but also
by well-educated monks and lay followers.
Bodhirak’s excessively disciplined approach to his monastic practice and his
criticisms of the laxity of fellow monks struck a chord with some Thai who were
disillusioned with the standards of mainstream monastic practice. They tended to
be those who had been marginalised by the establishment, for example, govern-
ment workers who led honest lives but were persecuted by dishonest colleagues.
Had Bodhirak quietly pursued gradual reform within the Sakgha, he may
well have been allowed to remain within it. Some temples are known to have a
particular emphasis and Bodhirak, in time, may have become abbot of a temple
known for ascetic practice and vegan diet. Bodhirak’s highly critical approach and
refusal to comply with orders from senior monks led him into repeated conflicts.
Thai Buddhism tolerates a wide range of beliefs but when praxis is changed the
Sakgha feels threatened. Thus excommunication was inevitable for Bodhirak and
his followers.
Physical space is used by both movements to create a particular ambience. The
300-acre expanse of Wat Phra Dhammakaya, and the 40-acre hall which can
accommodate 300,000 meditators serve to create a feeling (among members) of
being part of a successful movement. The cetiya (stupa), in particular, inspires
186

--- PAGE 202 ---
a recollection of the qualities of the Buddha among members. It also reminds them
of the ongoing need for giving to the work of the temple, keeping the Precepts and
the practice of Dhammakaya meditation. All members wear white outfits; this
creates an impression of unity and tranquillity. The large suite of well-administered
offices along with the attentive nature of the many officials further enforce the
temple’s success ethos. The Thai desire to be part of something big and success-
ful is played to by many organisations – Wat Phra Dhammakaya is no exception.
The temple sanctuary (bot) while obviously Buddhist, differs in style from the
typical Thai pattern. This epitomises the enigma of Wat Phra Dhammakaya. It
is clearly Thai Buddhist, yet with significant differences. The temple sanctuary
is some way from the centrally located Great Sapha Dhammakaya hall where
meditation takes place. This could give the impression that meditation, which
takes place within the Great Sapha Dhammakaya hall, is central to the move-
ment’s activities. The hemispherical, 108 metre diameter cetiya is only used on
special occasions.1 At all other times, access is denied by security guards. The
intrigue created by this massive, closely guarded structure contributes not only to
the mystery of the myth of the Black and White Dhammakaya but also to the true
identity of the leader and the purpose of the temple.
Santi Asoke has created its space to demonstrate how Buddhist communities
should function and how they may be the locus for an individual’s freedom
from suffering. A rural atmosphere of a previous generation is created through
members walking barefoot and wearing peasant dress. The use of simple home-
made natural fertilisers, basic farm machinery and members sitting on the ground
in two rows facing each other while eating along with a meditation on thanks-
giving to the farmers before eating all signify a land-dependent community
with a simple lifestyle. The presence of schools within these communities and
the pupils’ involvement in the life of the community communicate a sense of
vitality and optimism for the future. Shops located at the entrance to these
communities sell basic commodities at low prices. This is a deliberate acting out
of Asoke’s anti-consumerist, anti-capitalist world view. The Asoke message is
best expressed through communities rather than a high-profile centre like Wat
Phra Dhammakaya.2 These utopian communities are places where justice is to be
found, as well as support for those who wish to practise selflessness.
The appeal of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke to 
their respective membership
The leaders of both movements are perceived by their respective followers as
having unique leadership qualities. Phra Dhammachayo’s power is rooted in
the belief among some of his followers that he is an Avatara.3 He is considered
to be very advanced in his meditative prowess, and his ability to teach
Dhammakaya meditation. This perception of his power is enhanced by his
remoteness from day to day living at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Phra
Dhammachayo appears for special occasions when he performs very well
CONCLUSION
187

--- PAGE 203 ---
in preaching and leading in meditation. The non-appearance of the leader at
meetings and in the day-to-day running of the temple is explained by his poor
health. He normally wears dark glasses as his eyes are sensitive to the light.
He suffers from diabetes as well as a skin condition. Phra Dhammachayo’s
remoteness means there is no possibility that familiarity will breed contempt!
The leader’s reclusive nature, however, means that monks and those who work
at the temple may carry out their duties in a more relaxed manner. Wat Phra
Dhammakaya members believe that while they remain under Phra
Dhammachayo’s authority they will benefit from his power.
In contrast, Bodhirak is never out of earshot of his monks. He is easily accessed
by members and non-members alike. Indeed, it may be said he is ‘on show’ all the
time. This transparency brings a warmth and trust to the relationship between
Bodhirak and his followers. Wat Phra Dhammakaya may respond by saying it
would be a member’s dream to be granted an audience with Phra Dhammachayo.
Bodhirak’s power is understood by Asokans to reside in his parami, which, for
them, is demonstrated in their leader’s selfless behaviour, skilful leadership
(through difficult times) and teaching/preaching abilities. The flattened hierarchy
of Asoke communities appeals to the Thai appreciation of freedom. This research
has discovered a considerable level of disenchantment among the Thai with Thai
Buddhism and the way the Sakgha is administered. The study of the movements
is partly the story of the re-enchantment of Thai Buddhism for perhaps 80,000
Thai Buddhists. Thai who are now Wat Phra Dhammakaya members wished for
well-educated monastics, as well as programmes and teaching geared for people
in the fast lane of commerce or professional life. Those who joined Santi Asoke
wanted to be part of a group of people who sought a rigorous approach to
Buddhist practice. Living with, or at least in close association with Asoke
members was enormously attractive to those who were persecuted by colleagues,
or family because of their virtuous lifestyle.
A more academic approach as exemplified by Phra Buddhadasa and Phra
Dhammapitaka would not offer the spiritual protection and excitement for the
type of people attracted by Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Those who find Santi Asoke’s
approach appealing would agree with much of what Buddhadasa has said but
would feel that he had not leapt the firebreak from theory to praxis.
Outsider’s (etic) analysis of the two movements
There are certain fundamentalist tendencies within Wat Phra Dhammakaya and
Santi Asoke. Both movements share the following criteria which Swearer
(1991:678) has cited for fundamentalism within Theravada Buddhism:
G
Being led by strong, charismatic leaders;
G
Followers who perceive themselves to be under some kind of threat;
G
A stress on the value of direct experience coupled with simple religious
practice.
CONCLUSION
188

--- PAGE 204 ---
Wat Phra Dhammakaya presents two further distinctives which Swearer has
suggested are indicative of a fundamentalist movement. They are:
G
An obsessive sense of their unique destiny;
G
Ideologies which tend to rest upon simplistic, dualistic and absolutistic
world views.4
Each of the nine distinctives of fundamentalism as set out by the American-
based ‘Fundamentalism Project’ may be clearly identified in Wat Phra
Dhammakaya. Only three of these nine distinctives may be observed in the Asoke
movement. An initial glance, however, may suggest Asoke to be the more
fundamentalist of the two movements. Its creation of ascetic–prophetic utopian
communities and high view of living simply, off the land serve to create
this impression. In comparing both movements to the two sets of criteria for
fundamentalism (Harris, 2001:10; Swearer, 1991:678), it is the ultra-modern,
‘user-friendly’ Wat Phra Dhammakaya which is, surprisingly, considerably more
fundamentalist than Santi Asoke.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya is to some extent currently functioning as a millenarian
movement for a number of its members. Those who believe in the myth circulating
at Wat Phra Dhammakaya will believe in a final showdown between the White
and Black Dhammakaya and will wish deliverance. Association with Phra
Dhammachayo will ensure salvation, as he is understood to be an Avatara with
great powers. Members who have not heard the myth, or are unsure about it, will
still view their leader as a person with merit due to his alleged spiritual powers.5
It may well be that some of these members have a reliance on the merit of their
leader to secure financial success in the current period of economic uncertainty.
This is reminiscent of the 1970s when middle-to upper-class Thai who were
members of the Huppasawan movement looked to Suchart, their leader, for
protection from the loss of wealth and power that would befall them should
communism gain increased influence within the nation.
It seems inappropriate to classify Santi Asoke as a millenarian movement.
Asokans highly esteem Bodhirak’s level of spiritual attainment, yet they recognise
his inability to liberate them from their suffering. Bodhirak, according to Asoke
membership, has the unique ability to set out the right path to liberation. Liberation,
however, comes about through the disciplined endeavours of practitioners. The
movement’s members believe that their leader is a teacher who has reached a high
level of enlightenment, rather than a saviour. They have a long-term commitment
to modelling the Dhamma. Indeed, Bodhirak believes it will take 500 years of
the example of Asoke community living before Thai society will adjust to gover-
nance informed by Dhamma principles. In addition, Asokans do not wish to gain
materially. Clearly this is not the profile of a millenarian movement.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya has been accused of creating ‘commodity Buddhism’.
The item, associated transaction and results are clearly explained almost as if one
were making a purchase. For example, the ‘Millionaire Forever Project’ involved
CONCLUSION
189

--- PAGE 205 ---
the monthly payment of the equivalent of £17 to the temple’s food fund for the
duration of the donor’s life. As a result, donors were promised wealth in each of
their subsequent lives. On the other hand, some of the publicity material requesting
donations for a specific temple project do not mention a specific reward.6 They
simply call for a contribution to a particular cause. To assist the donor to recall
the generous deed, a monk may present a memento of the act of giving.
Prosperity Buddhism is closely related to commodity Buddhism. Wat Phra
Dhammakaya encourages its members to give. The more a person gives the more
the giver (dayaka) will generate good karma ( puñña). Allegations have been
made that Wat Phra Dhammakaya sales-team members place excessive pressure
on potential donors. These charges are widely believed and form current public
perception of the movement. Wat Phra Dhammakaya denies the charges and
points out that the police did not receive any complaints from donors.
Those familiar with the ‘base-community’ movement (mainly Roman Catholic
clergy) may identify some similarities between base communities and Santi
Asoke. These include the moving away from central ecclesiastical control to a
flattened hierarchy and the insistence that theory must be applied to praxis. Base
communities flourished in Latin America partly because people aspired to partic-
ipate in the decisions which affected them. There is congruence here between
what happened in Latin America and the Asoke situation. The main dissimilarity
is that base-community members continue to live in their own homes but come
together to work and reflect on issues concerning them as a community. Indeed,
Asoke might be closer to a combined monastery and convent than a base
community. This is based on the idea that all committed Asoke members live in
community and practise an ascetic lifestyle whether they are monastics or lay
people. Given that Gandhi has been an inspiration to Bodhirak it may also be
worthwhile to compare Asoke communities to ashrams in India.7
The values of the ‘community-culture’ school of thought (Thai wathanatham
chumchon) are similar to those exhibited by Santi Asoke. These are the devolution
of decision-making powers to communities and the commitment to developing
people and their environment. Asoke members, however, are unaware of community-
culture thought and see their community lifestyle as coming directly from
Bodhirak.
It is the writer’s opinion that Santi Asoke may best be described as an ascetic
utopian movement with strong nomian (legalistic) tendencies.8 While Asoke
members may look back to a period when people lived simple lives depending
on the land, the reality is that they have a vision for a future society to be regulated
by the Dhamma. Such a society, in Asoke’s opinion, is infinitely preferable to the
excessively materialistic, secularised, Western-value espousing dystopia to be
found in Thailand. Indeed, it would seem best to categorise Santi Asoke as an
ascetic and prophetic utopian movement modelling a simple but non-suffering
lifestyle.
The daily recording of any breach of the Eight Precepts and the weekly
presentation of this list to a spiritual adviser appears a salutary exercise. It may be
CONCLUSION
190

--- PAGE 206 ---
viewed as the laity adopting the monastic practice of confession. However,
disciplines originally used to discover unhelpful attachments have been elevated by
some more zealous members to the level of a test of commitment to the Asoke path.
One example would be abstention from washing oneself for several days.
The Pharisees of the Jewish tradition developed complex behavioural codes in order
to ensure they did not violate any of God’s laws. Devotion to the law was apparent,
yet there was also a certain amount of pride in and attachment to their law keeping
and achievements. There was also a disdain for those who were less rigorous in
observance. In a similar way some Asoke members, it is alleged, are proud of their
practice and condemnatory of fellow members who do not manage to sustain such
‘committed’ behaviour. What were originally presented as possible occasional
methods for the development of spiritual practice have for some become a sign of
commitment to the Asoke path. Failure to live up to these extreme standards results
in criticism and discouragement for a number of excessively legalistic practitioners.
Nomianism is simply excessive attachment to a legal system, and is far from the
Middle Way espoused by the Buddha. Indeed, the clinging to precepts, vows and
practices is viewed as a spiritual fetter by Buddhists.
Four sets of typologies of New Religious Movements were applied to these
movements. Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s beliefs and practice locate it within the
following main categories:
G
Psychic deprivation (Glock and Stark, 1965:247); temple members tend to be
well-educated, middle class, Thai city dwellers. This homogenous unit is
characterised by the desire to integrate religious practice with a prosperous
lifestyle. The traditional Thai temples do not come up to the expectations of
Wat Phra Dhammakaya members in areas such as cleanliness of the temple
and its grounds and education of the monks. Wat Phra Dhammakaya offers
a modern, efficiently administered system, with dynamic leaders. In the process
they create a re-enchantment of Buddhism for those who have previously felt
that what was on offer was totally irrelevant for their purposes;
G
‘Conversionist’ and ‘thaumaturgical’ are two of Bryan Wilson’s seven
categories (Barnard and Burgess, 1996:332; Wilson, 1973:18–30) that apply
to Wat Phra Dhammakaya. The conversionist aspect of the movement
presents in the way a member will seek to have a transformed life. This trans-
formation results in salvation from a variety of evils, for example, financial
misfortune and future suffering in hells. The ‘supernatural’ or ‘magical’
approach locate Wat Phra Dhammakaya within the thaumaturgical category.
For example, the belief that a new world opens up when one begins to prac-
tise Dhammakaya meditation. Thus, there may be the developing of certain
qualities such as clairaudience, or wishes coming true in a way not previously
experienced;
G
Roy Wallis’ (2003:52) ‘world-affirming’ category resonates with Wat Phra
Dhammakaya members’ desire not to escape from the world but rather
experience the world’s benefits more fully;
CONCLUSION
191

--- PAGE 207 ---
G
‘Buddhist modernism’ (some customs and values based on Christian
practices), ‘revival of meditation’ and ‘esotericism’ are trends which Lance
Cousins’ (1997:408–11) has observed within Southern Buddhism. They may
be applied to Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
Santi Asoke beliefs and practice resonate with the following categories:
G
‘World-rejecting’; one of Roy Wallis’ three categories (Wallis, 2003:36–44).
Asoke’s rejection is evidenced in its condemnation of the Thai Sakgha as
being too lax in its monastic disciplines, and Thai society for becoming
excessively materialistic and selfish;
G
‘Ethical deprivation’; one of Glock and Stark’s (1965:247) five categories.
That is, Asoke members have very high ethical standards, and as a result,
experience persecution in society, or at least feel a wide gulf between their
own standards and that of society;
G
‘Introversionist’; one of Brian Wilson’s seven categories (Barnard and
Burgess, 1996:332; Wilson, 1973:23). This describes an Asoke mindset
where they consider their position to be ‘enlightened’ and one which
outsiders are unlikely to accept;
G
‘Ultimatism’ (Cousins, 1997:409); Asoke have distinct spiritual practices
which are emphasised to the exclusion of other aspects of Buddhism. The
movement rejects much of mainstream Thai Buddhist practice. An example
of this is the Asokan disdain for a respected monk meditating in front of
an image in order to sacrilise it. Asoke members ‘sacrilise’ themselves
by participating in two annual, arduous week-long ‘boot-camps’. They give
these camps the same names (Putta Pisek and Pluksek) as are used for the
processes of monks trying to sacrilise images!
The use of these typologies force an examination of these two movements
through a variety of lenses. This ensures that a variety of perspectives is covered.
It also demonstrates that the movements under consideration share several of
the characteristics of New Religious Movements. Indeed, six similarities were
identified between Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Soka Gakkai, the New Japanese
lay-Buddhist Movement.9
The methods used by the movements for spiritual development
Wat Phra Dhammakaya and particularly Santi Asoke both emphasise that
spiritual development takes place with the support of like-minded friends – a
traditional Buddhist idea. Both movements are convinced of the efficacy of their
approach to spiritual development. Wat Phra Dhammakaya emphasises a distinc-
tive form of samatha meditation, while Santi Asoke stresses sila (moral virtue)
and sati (mindfulness). Not surprisingly these are the key distinctives of each
movement. The teaching and practice of Dhammakaya meditation is the focus
CONCLUSION
192

--- PAGE 208 ---
of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and its various cell groups. Dhammakaya meditation
is presented as the missing kernel (sudhamma meaning ‘true Dhamma’) of
Buddhism. An expectation that certain phenomena may arise during meditation is
set out in the teaching literature and tapes. Testimonies of members also contribute
to the meditator’s expectations. Through skilful introduction, meditation instruc-
tors create a sense of tranquillity for their students. The movement would not have
such a following if members did not benefit from Dhammakaya meditation.
Members claim meditation purifies thoughts and intentions. They also claim an
increased ability to achieve their goals and gain insight into the nature of reality.
Santi Asoke’s approach to spiritual development is to facilitate an austere, indeed
monastic lifestyle for lay people. This is done in supportive communities where use
is made of accountability to monastics and peers. Right Mindfulness and Right
Effort enhance awareness of self and the surrounding world. Defilements (crude,
mild and latent) are identified and progressively extinguished by practising the
Asoke approach to the Eight Fold Path. As attachments and defilements are dealt
with, the practitioner will increasingly experience ‘peace without suffering’. It
would appear that very rigorous patterns of behaviour by zealous members became
a standard for Asoke members to follow. This leads to a legalistic (perhaps at times
less than tolerant) group within some of the Asoke communities. Santi Asoke
promotes a highly regimented lifestyle within its ascetic/prophetic utopian
communities. Through observing very strict practices, keeping rules and being
accountable, members identify and extinguish their defilements and attachments.
This ascetic life is seen as worthwhile by those who are suffering as it is understood
to lead to peace without suffering.
Possible implications for Thai society
Buddhism in Thailand has traditionally enjoyed the patronage of the king and
government. In return it has legitimised the monarchy and government. At the
beginning of the twentieth century, the government’s organisation of a state
school system initiated a downturn in lay peoples’ reliance on their local temples.
The move away from an agricultural-based economy, urbanisation, and the
media’s reporting of monastic improprieties are all key factors in the continuing
loss of the Sakgha’s influence in society. The Sakgha is keenly aware of this
phenomenon. Many monastics and lay Buddhists feel betrayed by the govern-
ment’s decision not to officially recognise Buddhism as the state religion. The
government defended its action by saying that it did not wish to create tension
within society by having two categories of citizens, namely Buddhist and non-
Buddhist. This is a gloss on a collage of issues such as the lay people’s disen-
chantment with the Sakgha and the reluctance of educated people to have their
socio-political landscape dominated by institutions such as the military, and
religion (despite 94 per cent of the population being Buddhist). The Thai govern-
ment probably feels that a close connection between government and religion
would be viewed as dated by modern Western governments.
CONCLUSION
193

--- PAGE 209 ---
CONCLUSION
194
The existence of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke indicate that a section
of the people are disenchanted with mainstream Thai Buddhism, yet do not want
to abandon Buddhism. The two movements have offered teaching, lifestyle and
practice in keeping with the aspirations of their followers (Tables C.1 and C.2).
Santi Asoke’s excommunication from the Sakgha was meant to marginalise the
movement as heterodox. This loss of ‘brand name’ (monks had to change what
they called themselves and their temples) and ‘packaging’(monks also had to adopt
different colour/style of robes) initially meant that the movement was perceived
as not being authentically Buddhist. A key lesson from this situation is that
excommunication and survival are not mutually exclusive. It is possible to survive
and prosper as a Buddhist group in Thailand outside the state-regulated Sakgha.
There was a period in 1999 when there was a strong cry from every area of
Thai society for Wat Phra Dhammakaya to be expelled from the Sakgha. Indeed
the temple’s leaders themselves seriously considered leaving the Sakgha. To the
surprise of many, the movement weathered the storm and remained within the
Sakgha. If Wat Phra Dhammakaya had left, the sheer number of members, their
political and business connections and public-relations acumen would have
ensured that the work of Wat Phra Dhammakaya would have continued much as
before. This would have further challenged the competence of the Maha thera
samakom, and the role of the Sakgha and state-regulated Buddhism at the
beginning of the twenty-first century. Not only has Wat Phra Dhammakaya
remained within the Sakgha, it is facilitating the institution’s elderly leadership by
providing administrative expertise and support. This symbiotic relationship
Table C.1 Summary table of similarities between Wat Phra Dhammakaya (WPD) and
Santi Asoke (SA)
1
Both use space, symbol and ‘uniform’ to express their ethos. WPD project a
contemporary, progressive image. SA express their simple, anti-materialistic lifestyle
by creating rural/agriculture-based communities reminiscent of a bygone era
2
Both view their leader as having reached a high state of enlightenment and moral
stature/charisma (parami)
3
Both appeal to Thai who are disenchanted with mainstream Thai Buddhism
4
Both perceive themselves to be under threat
5
Both have a rigorous (and distinctive path) for spiritual development and a high
standard for temple dwellers or those who seek ordination
6
Both emphasise the importance of good friends for ones spiritual development
7
Both have been heavily criticised by the Sakgha. SA has been excommunicated
while WPD are now actively involved in helping the Sakgha leadership
8
Both have practices that are not in keeping with traditional expressions of Thai
Buddhism, though these are still identifiably Buddhist
9
Both achieve enhanced credibility through adopting forest-monk practices
10
Both associate their identity with early Buddhism. WPD refer to the alleged
meditative practice of the Buddha. SA members live simple, austere lives in
communities that live off the produce of the land. This gives the impression of
having returned to the essential features of Buddhism

--- PAGE 210 ---
CONCLUSION
195
brings credibility and power to Wat Phra Dhammakaya and greatly assists the
Sakgha leadership. The crisis which could have precipitated a serious loss of
credibility for the Sakgha has passed. Many Thai people, however, have moved
beyond accepting the legitimising and unifying role of state-regulated Buddhism.
The three pillars of Thai society are considered to be the people, Buddhism
and the monarchy. King Bhumibol (born in 1927) ascended the throne in 1946.
He enjoys the enormous respect and affection of his people. Indeed, the vast
majority of the population will not remember a time when he was not their king.
It is conceivable, however, that a new generation of Thai may view a new monarch
in a different light. Should Thai people lose confidence in these two traditional
supports of Thai society, an unstable situation could well emerge. It may well be
that in a period of social unrest or power vacuum; a political faction may call for
military intervention and appeal to state-regulated Buddhism for the legitimisation
of a particular course of action. It will then be demonstrated that Buddhism is no
longer the unifier and legitimiser that it once was.
Issues for further research
Due to (understandable) lack of openness to me as a researcher, I was unable to
explore to the degree that I wished, some of Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s more esoteric
beliefs. These include the nature of the Black and White Dhammakaya and
the spiritual conflict (wicha-rop) between them. The examination/comparison of
spiritual power and the nature of spiritual conflict in the Wat Phra Dhammakaya
movement and Charismatic Christian tradition would be a worthwhile research
project. The study of such a topic might create an appropriate context for Buddhist–
Christian dialogue.
Table C.2 Summary table of differences between Wat Phra Dhammakaya (WPD) and
Santi Asoke (SA)
1
WPD (despite its highly progressive image) is more fundamentalist in its approach
than SA
2
WPD may be described as a millenarian movement (at least for a good number of its
membership). SA is not millenarian. It is world-rejecting and views its leader as a
teacher, not a saviour
3
WPD is hierarchical; SA is egalitarian
4
WPD integrates religious practice with a prosperous lifestyle while SA is anti-
materialistic. Both have differing perspectives on economic theory and practice and
justify their positions from Buddhist thought
6
WPD remain within the Sakgha (despite a trial and censorship). SA has been excom-
municated from the Sakgha and as a result are viewed by some as ‘not proper
Buddhist’
7
SA maintain a strict vegetarian diet and are critical of non-vegetarian practice; PD do
not share SA’s interpretation of the First Precept and are not vegetarian
8
WPD emphasise dana, in the form of material giving. SA’s emphasis is on the dana
of dedicated effort

--- PAGE 211 ---
Wat Phra Dhammakaya may increasingly find itself less at the margins of
the life of the Thai Sakgha, especially given the way it assists the Maha thera
samakom. On the other hand, this wealthy, pro-establishment movement has many
influential members both in business and politics. It is, therefore, quite possible
that the media spotlight will shine again on Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Currently
Wat Phra Dhammakaya is on expansion mode. As already mentioned, they are
planning to host a meeting for 1 million people at the temple in 2007. The use of
Dhammakaya meditation in bringing together Buddhists from different traditions
and reaching out to non-Buddhists is something which we may expect to hear
more of. Research into the results of these initiatives to extend the influence of
the temple will lead us to a greater understanding of the Wat Phra Dhammakaya
movement.
It would appear that there is a perceived cultural vacuum in contemporary Thai
society. This has been evidenced in the enormously successful recent release of
Homrong (‘The Overture’), a cheaply produced film about a ranat player in
Thailand.10 The film succeeds in reminding the Thai viewer of some of the
country’s history and culture. If people (particularly the young) currently adrift
on a sea of cultural syncretism begin to search for the roots of their cultural
identity, they may well find the Santi Asoke movement attractive. Its non-
alignment with the Thai Sakgha and strong focus on Thai traditions hold out
potential identity. Asoke’s rigorous practice, however, will prevent it becoming a
significantly larger movement.
CONCLUSION
196

--- PAGE 212 ---
APPENDIX ONE
Research methodology
The emic (insiders’) stage of the phenomenological 
model – (stages one to seven)1
Cox understands phenomenology of religion to be a step-by-step method of the
study of religion which he outlines (1992:24–38). He views his model as a set of
guiding principles rather than a precise instrument and would wish to engage with
the milieu of the religion being studied.2 My approach is similar to Cox’s model
up to stage seven. As Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke are similar in many
respects to mainstream Thai Buddhism, I have no need to construct a complex
model in order to compare phenomena between a variety of religious communi-
ties. The last stage (stage eight, referred to as the etic or outsiders’ stage) is where
the sociological/cultural theories and typologies of new movements are analysed.
Perform epoche (i.e. suspend judgement)
Previous opinions about the movements based on talking with those who have
worked in the field and reading are bracketed out. As a researcher from out with the
movements, I sought to express respect for that which was important to them, while at
the same time not giving the impression I was a ‘convert’, or potential convert.
Perform empathetic interpolation
My research activities involved me in being present as an observer at a large number
of ceremonies. While developing empathy with the members of the movements
I researched, I sought to allow the data to speak for itself and interpolate what
being part of these religious communities must feel like for members.
Maintain epoche
I found that I needed to be careful not to let an attitude or practice present in one
of the movements influence a perspective on a parallel belief/practice in the other
movement. For example Santi Asoke was very welcoming and open while the
197

--- PAGE 213 ---
officials at Wat Phra Dhammakaya were closed and suspicious of me during my
initial contacts.3 The retaining of a critical distance while remaining empathetic
to both movements is vital during the research process.
Describe the phenomena
By being part of these communities, (particularly Santi Asoke who allowed me
to live with them and participate fully in their activities in a number of locations)
I was able to gain a sensitive understanding of the communities through: obser-
vation; listening to conversations and discussions with practitioners and partici-
pation in various activities. For example, I would ask members why they used
a particular phrase, trying to understand the underpinning belief or motive. My
focus was on deviations from standard Thai Theravada beliefs and practice, so
standard activities were thus not described.
Name the phenomena
I initially wondered if following stages five and six of Cox’s model was necessary,
given the many similarities of these two movements to mainstream Thai Buddhism.
I decided that it would extend the opportunity to examine the phenomena and
so I placed the data into the following categories: religious vocabulary, rituals,
models of meditation and spiritual development, appeal (or non-appeal) for offerings
to support the movement, approach to economics, administrative structures and
aesthetics.4
Describe relationships and processes
The traditional phenomenologist notes the interconnection between the various
categories at this stage. ‘Myths for example, are often related to rituals; myths
form the context for ritual activities and rituals bring myths into the present
experience of believers’(Cox, 1992:33). In my research on Wat Phra Dhammakaya,
for example, there were connections between categories of Buddhist doctrine
(karma), appeal for funds, approach to economics and rituals. A modification of
that relationship could also be observed within a period of two years, probably in
response to media allegations of a ‘hard sell’ fund-raising approach. Cox has
a further three stages in his model.5 I did not see benefits in including these stages
as I was researching only two movements, both variations of Thai Buddhism,
whereas Cox has in mind the need to compare a number of movements from
different contexts.
Explain the movement from an emic perspective
At this stage, a researcher taking a phenomenological approach would hope that
there would be a good deal of resonance between his understandings of the
APPENDIX ONE: RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
198

--- PAGE 214 ---
movement and the opinion of insiders. Despite respect for members of a movement
and their practice, it is possible not to gain adequate ‘inside’ knowledge to suffi-
ciently appreciate aspects of the movement, for example, the role of images in
worship. Some excellent mentoring by two Santi Asoke male members and
the openness of monastic and lay members from a wide range of backgrounds
contributed to achieving, what I consider to be, a good understanding of Santi
Asoke. Wat Phra Dhammakaya were less forthcoming than Santi Asoke about
their practices. They had just passed through a period of intense, negative media
coverage and were suspicious of outsiders wishing to gather information. There
are areas in which Wat Phra Dhammakaya practice is harder for an outsider to
understand than that of Santi Asoke, for example, the effect various images and
stupas (cetiyas) have on members. I think, therefore, that my insider’s perspective
on the Asoke movement is more complete than that of my understanding of
Wat Phra Dhammakaya. At this point in the research I began to examine the
possible ways the sociological and cultural forces may have shaped these
movements. That is, I gathered and engaged with etic (outsiders’ views). This is
described in the next stage.
The etic (outsiders’) stage of the phenomenological 
model (stage eight)
Analyse and critique theories and typologies that have or may be used 
to describe the two movements
I took the theories that scholars in the field had put forward in an attempt to clas-
sify and explain Santi Asoke and Wat Phra Dhammakaya.6 In addition, I discussed
some new possibilities, for example, Santi Asoke as an ‘ascetic/prophetic’, utopian
and nomian (legalistic) movement, and Wat Phra Dhammakaya as a millenarian
movement.7 I also identified a number of striking similarities between Wat Phra
Dhammakaya and Soka Gakkai (a New Buddhist Movement which originated in
Japan). Part of the criteria used in the evaluation of the theories are the responses
of the members to these suggestions. It seems inappropriate not to ask members to
respond to theories outsiders have used to describe them. Thus, emic and etic
understandings are compared for resonance and dissonance. Typologies used in
the classification of sects were also applied to Wat Phra Dhammakaya and
Santi Asoke. Special reference was made to the ideas of Glock and Stark
(1965:185–250) who discuss perceived deprivation in a particular area and how
aspirations may be achieved. Members of a new movement may feel disadvan-
taged in comparison to society in general in one, some, or all of the following:
G
Economic deprivation;
G
Social deprivation;
G
Organismic deprivation (due to physical or mental deformities. A healing
movement may be rendered ineffective through medical discoveries);
APPENDIX ONE: RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
199

--- PAGE 215 ---
G
Ethical deprivation (where individuals or a group witness a constant failing
of society to reach its moral standards);
G
Psychic deprivation (where people find themselves without an adequate
‘world view’ to understand and organise their lives) (Barnard and Burgess,
1996:333; Glock and Stark, 1965: 246–50).
Roy Wallis’ (2003:36–58) typologies of world rejecting, world accommodating
and world affirming were also examined. Wilson’s typology is wider reaching
and also proved helpful. His seven types are: conversionist, revolutionist, intro-
versionist, manipulationist, thaumaturgical, reformist and utopianist (Barnard
and Burgess, 1996:332; Wilson, 1967:22–33; Wilson, 1973:18–30).8
Reflecting on developments within Southern Buddhism in the nineteenth and
twentieth century, Lance Cousins (1997:408–11) has identified certain trends.
They also were examined, and are
G
Reformism: ‘the general aim of such groups is closer conformity to the ideals
of the early Sakgha’. This is not a new phenomenon;
G
‘Ultimatism’: taking ‘what is true from the viewpoint of ultimate truth or at
an advanced level of spiritual practice as if it were the whole of Buddhism’;
G
Buddhist Modernism: trends such as the development of lay organisations
and the introduction of some customs and values based upon Christian
practices;
G
Esotericism in Southern Buddhism: may also be termed as Theravada
Tantrism;
G
Meditation revival: there has been a marked increased in lay Buddhists
practicing meditation.
Analysis using such categories was done after fieldwork was completed and I was
unable to enter into discussions with members regarding my findings.
As already mentioned in the main text, I also tried to define how these
movements work (and attract new members) by examining how their leadership
functions in terms of accepted Thai qualities of leadership, namely, power
(amnat), influence (ittiphon) and moral goodness ( parami).
APPENDIX ONE: RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
200

--- PAGE 216 ---
APPENDIX TWO
Analysis of the Santi Asoke questionnaire
A Questionnaire on achieving nibbana (english translation)
The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of what Santi Asoke
members think a person needs to do in order to progress and eventually achieve
nibbana.
1.
What practices do you engage in so that you progress and achieve nibbana?
Please list these in order of importance.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
2.
What is the most important practice you engage in to progress and achieve
nibbana? In what ways has this practice helped you?
3a. Please indicate what you consider to be your most important practice. If you
were to write some things about the benefit of this practice what would you
write?
3b. Why did you start this practice? Who advised you to start?
3c. Why do you feel this practice is more useful than the other practices you
mentioned?
3d. How long have you been engaging in this particular practice?
4.
What advice would you give to someone who wished to achieve nibbana?
5.
How long have you been a member of this movement?
6.
What attracted you to become a member of this movement?
Please tick the appropriate boxes:
K
male
K
female
201

--- PAGE 217 ---
Age
K
18–25
K
26–40
K
40–50
K
51 or over
Please indicate your occupation.
Thank you very much for co-operating in this research by completing the
questionnaire.
Rory Mackenzie
Aim of the questionnaire
This questionnaire was prepared in Thailand to be used with both Santi Asoke and
Wat Phra Dhammakaya members. I originally intended to focus on practices
which members believed facilitated spiritual development and ultimately led to
nibbana. On my second field trip (2001), Wat Phra Dhammakaya were under
intense media scrutiny. Civil and religious proceedings were in progress regarding
the abbot’s ownership of donated land. There was also much criticism regarding
the movement’s fund-raising activities and beliefs, particularly about nibbana.
Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s Public Relations committee was understandably
unhappy with my proposal to examine the temple’s teaching on nibbana. They
refused to give me permission to research into that aspect of its belief system.
On my third field trip (2002), Wat Phra Dhammakaya members were open to
me visiting the temple and carrying out some research. The media spotlight had
moved from the temple partly as a result of Phra Dhammachayo’s stepping down
from his position as abbot and being replaced by his deputy. Despite increased
openness at Wat Phra Dhammakaya, I considered it inappropriate to distribute
questionnaires at the temple. Thus the comparing of the movement’s different
approaches to spiritual development is not possible in the way I had intended.
Method
I wished to give responders the opportunity to respond to my questions according
to their experience, and decided that a ‘free text’ qualitative approach best suited
this aim.
I designed the questionnaire in the field and some of the language was
modified by a Thai national.
Considerable effort was put into cross-checking by asking a number of
questions in slightly different ways. The purpose of this was to establish the
consistency of the answers, and thus the reliability of the instrument. Congruence
was looked for in the responses to the following clusters of questions: Q1, Q2,
Q3a; Q3a, Q3c, Q4 and Q3b (second part) and Q6.
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE
202

--- PAGE 218 ---
The questionnaire was examined by several Santi Asoke monastics, including
Bodhirak. No modifications were suggested, and I was permitted to distribute the
questionnaire at the 2001 Puttha Pisek retreat at Phai Sali (some 300 kilometres
north of Bangkok). Bodhirak asked me to introduce myself in Thai at a meeting
and explain my research objectives. A samaja then announced that those prepared
to cooperate should take a questionnaire, complete it and return it to the information
centre. 94 questionnaires were taken and 62 returned – a response rate of 66%.
Considerable effort was put into cross-checking by asking a number of questions
in slightly different ways. The purpose of this was to establish the consistency of
the answers, and thus the reliability of the instrument. Congruence was looked for
in the responses to the following clusters of questions: Q1, Q2, Q3a; Q3a, Q3c,
Q4 and Q3b (second part) and Q6.
We now move on to the results. The following conventions have been used –
questions are in bold type, categories have been underlined, and I have put my
comments regarding responses to questions in italics.
Results
Q1. What practices do you engage in so that you progress and achieve
nibbana? Please list these in order of importance (1 to 5).
Develop moral behavior 65 out of a total of 2841 responses (22.9%)
Keep the Precepts 59 responses (20.8%)
Reduce cravings and attachments 59 responses (20.8%)
Have good friends and be part of a supportive community 19 (6.7%)
The importance of having morally upright friends who will support them
in their practice is very important to Asoke members. The world outside
the Asoke communities is a difficult place in which to practice Buddhist
teachings in a rigorous manner.
Have a vegetarian diet 18 responses (6.3%)
Develop self-awareness 13 responses (4.6%)
Follow the Eightfold Path 10 responses (3.5%)
Pursue wisdom 8 responses (2.8%)
Get rid of The Six Bad Habits 5 responses (1.8%)2
Develop a right understanding 5 responses (1.8%)
Unclear response 12 responses (4.2%)
Q2. What is the most important practice you engage in to progress and
achieve nibbana? In what ways has this practice helped you?
Being a vegetarian 37.1% of responders (n  23)
Reducing cravings 24.2% of responders (n  15)
Keeping the Precepts 16.1% of responders (n  10)
Being self-aware 4.8% of responders (n  3)
Cultivating morality 4.8% of responders (n  3)
Understanding the Dhamma 3.2% (n  2)
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE
203

--- PAGE 219 ---
Cultivating wisdom 1.6% of responders (n  1)
Question not answered, or answer unclear 8.1% of responders (n  5)
The most interesting response to this question is that 23 responders cited
vegetarianism as their most important practice. (In some of these cases
more than one practice was cited. In these cases the response was cred-
ited as an indication of vegetarian practice.) 36% of all male responders
and 39.5% of all female responders cited vegetarianism in this response.
It would appear that a vegetarian diet and the compassion to animals
associated with it increases compassion to all beings and improves
physical health. 21 responders to Q1. cited vegetarianism as one of the
5 practices they engaged in. All Asokans would view the First Precept
(I undertake a rule of training to abstain from harming living being) as
implying a vegetarian, or more accurately a vegan diet. Implicit then
in an Asokan’s response of keeping the Precepts is the understanding of
non-involvement in any activity which might result in the taking of any
form of life.
Q3a. Please indicate what you consider to be your most important practice.
If you were to write some things about the benefit of this practice what
would you write?
71% of responders (n  44) indicated more than one practice. The figures
are cited below:
One practice 25.8% of responders (n  16)
Two practices 17.4% of responders (n  17)
Three practices 15% of responders (n  15)
Four practices 16.1% of responders (n  10)
Five practices 1.6% (n  1)
Six practices no responders
Seven practices 1.6% (n  1)
Unclear 3.2% of responders (n  2)
The fact that 71% of responders indicated more than one practice may
indicate that Asoke members engage in a variety of practices and are
unable to cite just one practice. Different practices have different functions
and complement each other.
No clear response emerged from those responders who cited only one prac-
tice. Getting rid of addictions, defilements and lusts and developing insight
were the two main categories identified.
Q3b. Why did you start this practice? Who advised you to start?
Direct influence of an Asoke monastic, member, or a family member 48.4%
of responders (n  30)
It initially appears that the importance of personal contact is flagged up by
almost half of the respondents, suggesting that they had been advised to
commence a particular practice by a member of the movement (or in a few
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE
204

--- PAGE 220 ---
cases someone who was familiar with it). Members are keen to take their
contacts to meet Bodhirak if he is available. Indeed, 53.3% (n  16) of the
responders who mentioned the personal influence of an Asoke member or
family member mentioned Bodhirak 3 as the one who advised them to take
up the practice they cited.
12.5% of male responders (n  3) cited Bodhirak as the person who advised
them to start the particular practice. 34.2% of female responders (n  13)
identified Bodhirak as the person who advised them to commence the practice
they identified. These female responders had been in membership for 16.5 years
(14.2 years was the average overall length of membership of responders).
Through reading the movement’s literature and listening to teaching tapes
21% of responders (n  13)
The Santi Asoke member tends to be studious and values education. The
Fah Apai Press produces a variety of good quality books, booklets, news-
letters and leaflets at extremely low prices. It is hardly surprising that 21%
of those who responded were influenced by literature or teaching tapes.
Freedom from suffering 13% of responders (n  8)
Specifically indicated Santi Asoke’s teaching or practice 6.5% of
responders (n  4)
Listening to the movement’s local radio station 3.2% of responders (n  2)
Nothing in common with the above, or each other 8% of the responses (n  5)
Q3c. Why do you feel this practice is more useful than the other practices
you mentioned?
The responses of those who cited one practice were examined and
categorised as follows:
It leads away from suffering 37.5% of responders (n  6)
Convinced by personal experience 31.25% of responders (n  5)
Teaching 12.5% (n  2)
It focuses on different aspects of enlightenment 6.25% of responders (n  1)
It overcomes my lusts 6.25% of responders (n  1)
Q3d. How long have you been engaging in this particular practice?
For 84% of the responders (n  52), membership of the movement and
practising according to the practices described was the same time. For 3.2%
of responders (n  2) membership of the movement differed from practic-
ing by more than 2 years. 11.3% of responders (n  7) indicated that length
of membership exceeded practice (normally by 1 year). This may reflect
the time taken to adjust to the rigorous Asoke lifestyle. The three occurrences
where practice exceeded membership may indicate a person putting Asoke
teaching into practice prior to joining the movement.
Q4. What advice would you give to someone who wished to achieve nibbana?
Develop a serious approach to good practice 43.6% of responders (n  27).
This included four responses that specified vegetarian practice.
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE
205

--- PAGE 221 ---
Nibbana was defined in terms of the absence of suffering. The advice was
to seek to gain nibbana as this was the only way we could be liberated from
suffering 21% of responders (n  13)
Understand Buddhist teachings in general, birth and death, kamma and nib-
bana 9.7% of responders (n  6)
Be a good example to others and influence them to aim for nibbana 8% of
responders (n  5)
Specific mention of following the Asoke way in order to achieve results
4.8% of responders (n  3)
Nothing in common with each other or the categories mentioned above
12.9% of the responses (n  8)
Q5. How long have you been a member of this movement?
The average membership was 14.2 years.
Questionnaires completed by those in membership for less than five years
were compared to those who had been in membership for a longer period.
The only discernible difference was in three out of nine cases only two
practices were entered instead of a possible five. In every other response to
Q1, five practices were mentioned.
Q6. What attracted you to become a member of this movement?
Direct influence of Santi Asoke members 42% of responders (n  26)
Note the congruence between this response and Q3b (first response)
Teaching, or the practice of the movement 29% of responders (n  18)
The apparent mismatch between this response and Q3b (response 4) may be
accounted for by the response to Q3b (response 2) where the movement’s teach-
ing (which has a heavy focus on practice) is disseminated through literature.
Unclear responses/did not fall into a discernible category 16% of responders
(n  10)
Wished to be free from suffering 13% of responders (n  8)
There is congruence here with Q3b (response 3)
Biographical details of interviewees
Gender
25 male (40.4%), 37 female (59.6%)
Age group
18–25: 4.8% (n  3); 26–40: 27.4% (n  17); 40–50: 37% (n  23); over
51: 30.6% (n  19)
Occupation
Temple volunteers 30.6% (n  19); Undisclosed 22.6% (n  14);
Farmers 11.3% (n  7); Civil Servants 11.3% (n  7); Merchants 6.5%
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE
206

--- PAGE 222 ---
(n  4); Employees 6.5% (n  4); Manual workers 3.2% (n  2);
Retired 3.2% (n  2); Nurse 1.6% (n  1); Student 1.6% (n  1);
Nutritionist 1.6% (n  1).
Limitations
In order to ascertain the accuracy of the responses to the questionnaire, I asked
the same questions in different ways. For example similarities would be looked
for in the responses to Questions 2, 3a and 4. On reflection, this quest for cross-
checking was unnecessary. Asoke members are proud of their belief and practices,
and would wish to reveal rather than conceal their activities. The number of the
questions lengthened the time taken for responders to complete the questionnaire
and made collation and analysis all the more difficult.
The sample size of 62 respondents was small. The high-return (low ‘hold-out’)
factor can be explained by respondents receiving, completing and returning the
questionnaire at the residential retreat. Another contributing factor to the high
return may have been the discussion amongst those attending the retreat regarding
the questionnaire and myself. An even higher return may have been achieved
if the questionnaire had been simpler to complete. It may well have been the case
that some potential responders were kept from responding by their demanding
duties during the retreat.
There was a good cross section of age (apart from the under 25s) and gender.
There were comparatively few young people at the retreat apart from school-
children and students of the Asoke higher education programme (Mahalai
Wang Chiwit). Those in their late teens and early 20s appeared to be very active
carrying out a variety of practical duties such as shifting equipment, public
address and computer/administrative activities. It may have been that the under
25s did not feel they had the time for this exercise or were disinterested in
the questionnaire.
A high percentage of the responders were temple dwellers (30.6%). Indeed, it
may have been that a number of those who did not disclose occupation (22.6%)
were also temple dwellers. It may be argued that the sample reflect those who are
the most committed within the movement. On the other hand, Santi Asoke attracts
people who are prepared to engage in serious, indeed extremely rigorous practice.
There may be little difference between the temple-dweller’s practice and the
Asoke member (yatitam) who lives away from the temple.
As already mentioned, the original intention was to use the questionnaire to
gather data regarding Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s and Santi Asoke’s approach to
spiritual development. Comparative work was not possible due to not receiving
permission from Wat Phra Dhammakaya. On reflection, it would have been use-
ful to have used the questionnaire with a group of mainstream Thai Buddhists, as
this would have helped placed the Asoke findings in context. For example, such
a questionnaire, I believe, would have indicated very few citations of vegetarianism
as a practice for spiritual development.
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE
207

--- PAGE 223 ---
If I had to conduct the questionnaire again, I would redesign the questions as
follows:
1.
What do you understand by the term nibbana? Is it a long-term aspiration
for you, or a goal or state you expect to achieve within your lifetime? (This
would serve to indicate the respondents’ level of knowledge as well as
providing important perspectives).
2.
What key practices do you undertake in order to reach/achieve nibbana?
3.
Please indicate if there is one practice more important than any of the others
you engage in, in your quest to reach/achieve nibbana?
4.
Why did you join Santi Asoke?
5.
Who introduced you to the movement?
6.
How long have you been a member of the movement?
7.
Gender. (Please tick the appropriate box.)
K
Male
K
Female
8.
Age. (Please tick the appropriate box.)
K
18–25
K
26–40
K
40–50
K
over 51
9.
Occupation
If you are a temple dweller, please indicate your status, for example, temporary or
permanent guest, resident, patepat, nak or krak.
Conclusion
The most significant factor emerging from this questionnaire is 37.1% of responders
(n  23) cited vegetarianism as their most important practice (Question 2).
16.1% indicated (n  10) keeping the Precepts as their main practice. As already
mentioned, implicit in keeping the First Precept for the Asoke member is a
vegetarian diet.
Almost half the responders indicated that they joined the movement through
the influence of an Asoke member (Question 3b). In 26% of responses to this
question (n  16), Bodhirak is mentioned as being the person who advised the
responder to start a particular practice. Members appear to be keen to bring
visitors to meet with their leader. Bodhirak is clearly accessible to members and
outsiders, despite his heavy schedule of meetings and teaching. This accessibility
is in sharp contrast to Phra Dhammachayo reclusive lifestyle. One in eight men
indicated being influenced by Bodhirak. One in every three women said they had
been encouraged to take up a particular practice by Bodhirak. These female
responders had been in membership for an average of 16.5 years. One perspective
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE
208

--- PAGE 224 ---
on this statistic is these females may view Bodhirak as a male friend and
protector. Thai men tend to respond less positively to authority figures.
21% of responders (n  13) took up Asoke practice through reading the
movement’s literature and listening to teaching tapes (Question 3b). This points
to the studious nature of Asoke members. Santi Asoke publish material ‘in house’
and sell this literature at the book shops located in their communities.
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE
209

--- PAGE 225 ---
210
NOTES
INTRODUCTION
1 In Thailand the term ‘Sakgha’ refers to the Buddhist monastic order that is, Buddhist
monks. Some traditions of Buddhism understand the term to mean the community of
Buddhists, both lay and ordained.
2 Research on members of New Religious Movements uncover dissatisfactions with
society and/or the religious system, as well as deprivations (real or imagined). These
forces may be a growing trend and contribute to the future shape of society.
3 ‘Late communist’ was used to describe the feared communist party. During the 1970s
‘to be Thai is to be Buddhist’ was a common slogan. The intention was to convince
Thai people that believing in communism was incompatible with being Thai, as it was
such a perceived threat to the nation.
4 The Pali term ‘Thammayutika’ (Thai ‘Thammayut’), meaning ‘Order adhering to the
Dhamma’, was first used by Prince Mongkut (a monk from 1824–50, and later King
Rama IV), to describe the order he founded. Thammayut distinguished the prince’s
new order from the older order, the ‘Mahanikai’ (Wyatt, 1984:176). The differences
between the two groupings apply only to monks and not laity. ‘Fraternity’ appears to
capture this concept better than ‘denomination’.
5 Drawing from Larry Shiner 1967 ‘The Concept of Secularization in Empirical Research’
pp.207–20 in Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion Vol. 6, No. 2, Michael
Hill (1973:228–50) mentions six different meanings of the term ‘secularisation’.
They are as follows:
1
The decline of religion where accepted symbols, doctrines and institutions
lose their prestige and influence. This process will eventually terminate in a
religion-less society.
2
The shift from ‘other-worldly’to ‘this-worldly’orientations within religious groups.
Religious people in this case are motivated more by present circumstances rather
than future life.
3
The disengagement of society from religion. Instead of religion’s function being
that of a primary source of legitimisation for the whole of society, it becomes
increasingly a matter of private choice.
4
The transposition of beliefs and activities that were once thought of as having a
divine point of reference to activities that have an entirely secular content.
5
The world is gradually deprived of its sacral character. Humanity increasingly
discards a magical/superstitious understanding of its environment and embraces a
scientific explanation. At the end of this process all mystery and superstition will
be removed from this world.

--- PAGE 226 ---
NOTES
211
6
Change from a sacred to a secular society. The sacred society is one where people
are unable/unwilling to adjust to change. Secular society, in contrast, predisposes
its members to welcome and respond to the culturally new.
6 The Thai word comes from the Pali loka.
7 An ubasok is a male worker at the temple who keeps the Eight Precepts.
8 I often make the point that I am not a journalist but am seeking to understand the
movement through the eyes of its adherents and in its wider social setting.
9 Essentially a lay movement based on the beliefs and practices of Nichiren Buddhism
that developed from the 1930s onwards in Japan. Comparisons between Wat Phra
Dhammakaya and the Fokuangshan Buddhist Order in Taiwan are also interesting.
10 Governor of Bangkok from 1985 to 1992.
REVIEW OF SCHOLARLY LITERATURE ON THE WAT PHRA
DHAMMAKAYA AND SANTI ASOKE MOVEMENTS
1 In the 15 years since Jackson wrote this chapter, Thai family affiliations with
Thammayut or Mahanikai have become even more tenuous.
2 Bodhirak is the founder and current leader of the Santi Asoke movement.
3 Jackson does not mention farmers (who may have a reasonable amount of land) and
government officers, for example, teachers. The Chinese background is very important
as it highlights a history of marginalisation and a mentality that is disposed to
commitment and hard work. While Jackson does not mention it, I understand it to be
a key in understanding the Asoke Weltanschauung.
4 Anan Senakhan’s outspoken stance is both complex and far reaching. A cultural
conservative, he served as a police officer and was ordained as a monk in the
Thammayut fraternity only to disrobe and attempt to prevent members of the armed
forces and their supporters from undermining the democratic processes of government.
Although a royalist, Anan spent four and a half years in prison on charges of
lese-majestie (Jackson, 1989:189).
5 In Political Change in Thailand: Democracy and Participation.
6 ‘Fundamentalistic Movements in Theravada Buddhism’ pp.628–90 in M Marty and
RS Appleby Fundamentalisms Observed.
7 The concept is that society is grouped around a centre. This centre is the royal domain
and has as its focal point the royal temple. Each lesser unit in the galactic system is an
imitation of the larger. Power is located at the centre and is used for the control of all
within the system. The originator of the term, Stanley Tambiah, developed the concept
in chapter seven of his World Conqueror and World Renouncer.
8 The temple and institute are located 94 kilometres south-west of Bangkok. The
institute seeks to teach Dhammakaya meditation to monks, members and all those who
express interest.
9 Feungfusakul’s summarises her doctoral research in 1993b ‘Empire of Crystal and
Utopian Commune: Two Types of Contemporary Theravada Reform in Thailand’
Sojourn Vol. 8, No. 1, pp.153–83.
10 White is the colour in which people dress when keeping the Eight Precepts on holy days.
11 1998 ‘Sasanasat Kong Chum Chon Muang Samai Mi: Koruni Wat Phra Thammakaai’
[Religious Understanding of Contemporary Urban Society – The Case Study of Wat
Phra Thammakaai] The Journal of Buddhist Studies Bangkok: Chulalongkorn
University Vol. 5, No. 1, pp.41–67.
12 Myth is used in the technical sense of a ‘legitimising story’ and not intended to be
pejorative. This information is important in helping us understand both the attraction
of following Phra Dhammachayo (a saviour) and the purpose of Wat Phra

--- PAGE 227 ---
Dhammakaya. It was ‘leaked’ to Dr Feungfusakul by Phra Mettanando, a former monk
at the temple (personal conversation in Chiang Mai on 18.9.02).
13 If a critical mass of meditators can be assembled, then the deluding and destructive
forces of Black Dhammakaya may be halted. Indeed, if a sufficient number of
meditators practise higher meditation and focus the generated power on the Black
Dhammakaya, then the evil forces will be destroyed.
14 It was published by Abo Akademi University, Turku, Finland, the institute where she
undertook her doctoral studies.
15 The title seems to reflect Asoke’s approach to meditation: that is carrying out everyday
tasks with mindfulness rather than having periods of sitting meditation (when the eyes
are normally closed).
16 A reference to monastics with communist sympathies who were forced to leave the
Sakgha.
17 The ‘Moral Force’ Party.
18 In a personal conversation at Mahidol University on 1.2.01.
19 Wat Paknam, Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram and Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
20 The temple is briefly described in Chapter 2 under ‘The inception of the Dhammakaya
Buddhist Meditation Foundation and Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram.’
21 In some cases there has been a considerable delay between field work and publication.
1 SETTING THE SCENE: THE RELIGIOUS AND SOCIO-POLITICAL
CONTEXT OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE TWO MOVEMENTS
1 The prince’s monastic name was Makuto Bhikkhu (Blofeld, 1972:15).
2 The prince believed that the water boundary (Pali upakkukhepa sima) would function
as a pure boundary. 
3 In 1894, it was agreed that the Mon and Thammayut orders should be unified (Heinze,
1977:28).
4 This figure increases during the rainy season (Thai phansa) when young men on a
‘one-off basis’ ordain as monks for a three month period. Note also that on National
Day in 1939, Phibun (Prime Minister from 1938 to 1944) announced that Siam was
renamed Thailand [Thai Prathet Thai, meaning ‘free country’] (Pongpaichit and Baker,
1997:260). The move was in keeping with the military leaders’ desire to reclaim the
land that rightly belonged to them but had been taken away by French and British
powers.
5 ‘They also chose a new “second king” (uparaja), and appointed the chief
among Mongkut’s ministers, Chaophraya Si Suriyawong (Chuang Bunnag), to act
as regent during the remaining five years of the young king’s minority’ (Wyatt,
1969:35).
6 The Chakri Dynasty commenced (with the move of the Siamese capital from Thonburi
to Bangkok) in 1782 with King Rama I. The present monarch, King Bhumibol, also
known as King Rama IX, is the ninth king of the Chakri Dynasty.
7 A younger half-brother of King Chulalongkorn who was ordained at the age of 20.
Some three years later he passed the level five Pali examinations and was appointed
deputy leader of the Thammayut fraternity. He became the fraternity leader in 1894.
According to Wyatt (1969:217) Prince Wachirayan had already founded seven schools
in some of the Thammayut monasteries (independent of the Department of Education)
prior to the king’s request.
8 Wyatt (1984:217) notes how the Burmese Sakgha resisted the drive to deliver a
standard syllabus and reflects, ‘The difference must be that the Siamese efforts had all
the prestige and power of the indigenous ruling family and government behind them.’
NOTES
212

--- PAGE 228 ---
9 Details of the drawing up and implementation of these plans, along with the results
may be found in David K Wyatt 1969 The Politics of Reform in Thailand: Education
in the Reign of King Chulalongkorn, chapter seven onwards.
10 These millenarian revolts are described in detail in Chapter 3. There were those who
emerged in 1902, such as Thao Bucan and Man who were seen by the ordinary people
as ‘people with merit’ phu mi bun and ‘people with extraordinary powers’ phu wiset.
These men were viewed by the masses as delivers from poverty and oppression
by those in authority. These millenarian movements were viewed as subversive by
government and stamped out. 
11 Around 92 per cent of the Sakgha were in the Mahanikai fraternity, yet the minority
Thammayut fraternity enjoyed more influence due to royal patronage. For example,
from 1910 to 1951, three of the four Supreme Patriarchs belonged to the Thammayut
fraternity. 
12 The current monarch King Bhumibol (Rama IX) was king at that time, having
ascended the throne in 1946.
13 King Bhumibol made around 400 public appearances per year during Sarit’s time in
office, as opposed to 100 visits in the pre-Sarit period.
14 Pali kathina, Thai kathin referred originally to a wooden frame on which a monk
stretched cloth in order to make robes. Later the term was used of a robe that was made
for a monk woven from raw cotton within a single day. Kathin robes are presented to
monks at a ceremony which must take place within a lunar month after the end of
vassa, Thai phansa (the three month rainy season in Thailand which ends on the full
moon of the eleventh month) (Rajadhon, 1986:69).
15 The Sakgha Act of 1902 made no provision for the leadership role of the Supreme
Patriarch. Ishii believes this partly to be due to the fact that there was no Supreme
Patriarch when the Act was passed. Prince Wachirayan, although head of the
Thammayut fraternity did not become Supreme Patriarch until 1910 (Ishii, 1986:118).
16 The Supreme Patriarch has enormous decision making powers, he is ex-officio the
chairman of the Council of Elders, and is permitted to appoint from half to two thirds
of the membership of the council. Sarit ensured that the government had the legal
power to remove the Supreme Patriarch from office. This represents a remarkable
intrusion of secular (military to be precise) authority into the religious domain.
17 One of the country’s most respected monks from Udon Thani in the north-east of
Thailand, and founder of the Pha Pa Chuay Chat (Donation to Help the Nation)
(Phongpaichit and Baker, 2000:174).
18 Dean of one of the postgraduate sections of Mahachulalongkorn University, Bangkok
(personal email correspondence 17.11.03). 
19 Discussions with Phra Bhavana Visuthikhun in Ratburi (12.3.01) and former monk and
Thai culture specialist Dr Nantichai Mejung in Bangkok (3.9.02).
20 The name Buddhadasa (Thai Putthathat) means (‘servant of the Buddha’). The name
should be prefixed with the title ‘Phra’, as Buddhadasa is a monk. He tends to be
referred to by his name without his title, although he is sometimes referred to as
Buddhadasa Bhikkhu, or Than Putthathat.
21 It is partly for this reason Buddhadasa has been selected for inclusion in this
brief overview. Phra Payutto (whose current monastic title is Phra Dhammapitaka),
an outstanding but more conservative scholar could just as easily been cited as a
representative of contemporary Thai Buddhist scholarship.
22 The dhutakgas are a set of thirteen ascetic practices that Buddhist monks voluntarily
undertake. Their purpose in each case is to counteract mental defilements. The forest
tradition is sometimes referred to as the Kammatthana tradition. The word means
‘basis, or place of work’, and describes the contemplation of certain meditation themes
in order to uproot defilements, craving and ignorance from the mind. 
NOTES
213

--- PAGE 229 ---
23 Mahanikai monks were at that time obliged to participate in construction work around
the temple and village ceremonies. Thammayut monks were not permitted to engage
in these activities. This was to facilitate Pali studies, not (as the early forest teachers
thought) to create opportunity for extra meditation! (Tiyavanich, 1997:267).
24 In 1992, Phra Sumedho (referred to by his disciples as Luang Phaw Sumedho) was
awarded the ecclesiastical title of Phra Sumedhachariya.
25 Buddhadasa ‘has a fondness for paradox and irony, being much influenced by the Zen
School of Buddhism. And, as in Zen, Buddhadasa often likes using language provoca-
tively with the object of stimulating his audience to reconsider their customary views’
(Jackson, 1988:115).
26 Donald Swearer (1989:2) comments that Buddhadasa’s ‘influence extends beyond the
confines of Suan Mokkh. The small collection of his writing given to me 30 years ago
has expanded to the largest corpus of thought ever published by a single Theravada
thinker in the entire history of the tradition. For some years to come students of Thai
Buddhism will be summarising, distilling and interpreting Buddhadasa’s contribution
to Buddhist thought’.
27 Buddhadasa, despite his radical teachings, has observed Thai monastic traditions and not
been schismatic. In 1980 he received a honorary doctorate from the Mahachulalongkorn
Buddhist University, the first it presented in its 90 year existence. The degree was
conferred by the Supreme Patriarch of the Thai Sakgha.
28 This is discussed in Chapter 7.
29 ‘The students of these years, the first to benefit from the expansion of higher
education, were the vanguard of the middle class’(Phongpaichit and Baker, 1998:234).
They were inspired to some extent by the activities of students around the world who
protested against the Vietnam War. The Thai students demonstrated against Japanese
economic exploitation and America’s military activities in the region. (Phongpaichit
and Baker, 1997:305). The students were not the only group to participate. There were
also a significant number of trade unionists protesting. These demonstrations were
viewed as communist inspired and treacherous and resulted in a violent response from
the military. Over 3,000 arrests were made and in 1976, 2,000–3,000 left Bangkok to
join the Communist Party of Thailand.
30 ‘Right kill left’ was part of right wing political rhetoric during this time. Sadly, a
number of politically active members of the public (all with perceived left-wing
sympathies) were assassinated. A number of pro-right wing movements were formed
or utilised in the crackdown on pro-democracy protestors. The New Force movement
or ‘Nawaphon’ was probably the best known. It recruited businessmen and officials
and by late 1975 claimed a million members (Phongpaichit and Baker, 1997:307).
31 The Red Gaurs are known in Thai as ‘Krathing Daeng’, they were a right-wing
vigilante group drawn from vocational students (facing an uncertain future during the
economic downturn), as well as the unemployed and disaffected of the city. The Village
Scouts were founded by the Border Patrol Police in 1971. In time, the movement
gained popularity in Bangkok, where it became a ‘high-society’ expression of loyalty
to the king and nation (Phongpaichit and Baker, 1997:308).
32 Sadly during the demonstrations some fifty people were killed by the military and
paramilitary and around 700 civilians injured (500 were minor injuries). These are the
government statistics; other sources estimate that there may have been several hundred
casualties.
33 A key reason for this was the ability of China, Vietnam and Indonesia to undercut Thai
manufacturers.
34 IMF’s strategy was based on one designed for Latin America in the 1980s. Fieldwork by
the IMF and the World Bank attempting to adapt the strategy for the Thai situation was
hastily carried out (18 days fieldwork). This gave the impression that the foreign econo-
mists were not genuinely interested in Thailand (Pittaya cited by McCargo, 2001:102).
NOTES
214

--- PAGE 230 ---
35 This is reflected in the three colours of the Thai flag. Red represents the blood of the
Thai people (patriotism), white (purity) is symbolic of Buddhism, while blue stands for
the monarchy.
36 King Bhumibol and Queen Sirikit have four children. Ubonrat (5.4.51) resigned her
royal status in order to marry an American, she subsequently divorced. HRH Crown
Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn (28.7.52) was installed as Crown Prince of Siam in 1972.
He has studied in the UK, USA and completed military training in Australia. HRH
Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn (2.4.55) is unmarried and has extensively accompa-
nied her father on official engagements. Princess Chulabhorn (4.7.57) is the fourth
child. She married a commoner in 1982 and has recently gone through divorce
proceedings (That-Pian, 2003:2001).
37 Penalties have been increased in recent years and few who are charged escape penalty
(Hewison, 1997:60). 
38 The highly politicised leadership of the armed forces was severely discredited by
the May 1992 incident (Samudavanija, 1997:53). Due to relative security in Thailand
and South-East Asia, the military have much less influence than they traditionally
enjoyed. The return to significance for certain sections of the military might be to
join forces with some who represent large business interests, and intervene in the
democratic system.
2 THE INCEPTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE WAT PHRA
DHAMMAKAYA MOVEMENT
1 Derogatorily referred to as puttha phanit meaning ‘Buddhist business’.
2 Luang Phaw means ‘reverend father’. Paknam is the name of the temple, it means
‘entrance to the water’; it is located near a canal off the River Chao Phraya which
separates Thonburi from Bangkok.
3 Candasaro is a Pali name meaning the one with a bright radiance like the moon.
Bhikkhu is the Pali term for a monk.
4 This Sutta was to become a key text in Luang Phaw Sot’s approach to meditation and
indeed is a classic text for much Theravada meditation.
5 Also known as Wat Po, a famous Bangkok tourist attraction because of the image of
the reclining Buddha and the school of traditional Thai massage.
6 Pali is taught up to grade nine in the Sakgha and this normally requires nine years full
time study to achieve. After achieving grade three a monk is given the title Phra maha.
7 There was a shift away from free translation to a more grammatical approach and the
oral exams became written assessments.
8 The Satipatthana method may well have been used by the Buddha; it is much stressed
in the Pali Canon. Wat Phra Dhammakaya members claim that this was the case and
that Luang Phaw Sot also discovered the method meditating by himself.
9 Monks are required to spend the rainy season [known as phansa] at a temple. This is
to prevent damage to newly planted crops by their wandering round the countryside.
Phansa is a time when temple activities are practised by the monks in a more intense
manner.
10 Samma ArahaÅ means the ‘righteous Absolute of Attainment which a human being can
achieve’.
11 Sot viewed a contribution to the building of these rooms as an act of great merit. On
announcing his plan to construct these buildings, one supporter offered to pay for the
entire project. Sot refused saying that ‘it must be a collective effort because sponsoring
even a single plank or a single nail for the building of the workshop would bring
incalculable merit day and night, as the workshop had been built in order to bring an
end to saÅsara’ (Dhammakaya Publications, 1998:94).
NOTES
215

--- PAGE 231 ---
12 Although Mara is spoken of many times in the suttas, monks are reluctant to discuss
the topic viewing it as unnecessary, perhaps even dangerous.
13 As a deva, Mara has a mind-made body which, unlike that of a human being is not born
of a father and mother. He is self-luminous, long-lived, does not cast a shadow, and like
Satan, is capable of deeds far beyond the powers of man. (Boyd, 1976:150). Mara,
although a deva, is subject to change, sorrow and death, and will reap the fruit of his
karma (Boyd, 1976:152).
14 Mr Lek, at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 25.8.02.
15 I know one PhD student in Edinburgh, an ardent Wat Phra Dhammakaya follower,
who travelled regularly from Edinburgh to the Wat Phra Dhammakaya centre in
London, for the first Sunday of the month meeting. At 02:30 on Sunday mornings the
small group connect to the temple in Thailand and join in meditation with over 20,000
temple members.
16 Yai is the term used for a person’s mother’s mother. ‘Khun Yai’ then is a term of respect
for an old lady. Dhammakaya members refer to Chan Khonnokyuung as Khun Yai Chan.
17 Professor Sathiangphong, Rachabandit in an interview in his office on 19.2.01.
18 In response to the question ‘Why target Bangkok at all?’ Phra Mettanando replies that
at that time there was a large presence of Japanese troops in Thailand, and the wiping
out of these troops through atomic warfare would cause the Japanese government to
lose heart and surrender. Luang Phaw Sot, it is maintained, knew of this through his
mental powers and directed his meditators to focus their power on those responsible for
the operation to alter their target.
19 Interview with Khun Lek (not his real name) on 11.2.01.
20 Why did Luang Phaw Sot not recognise that Hitler was on the same side as Mara? It
may have been that the atrocities committed by the Germans were not reported in
Thailand. A number of senior Thai military officers were pro-German, having received
training there. Indeed, there was a fascist component within the Thai government of the
time. It viewed the Chinese in Thailand as ‘worse than the Jews’ (Phongpaichit and
Baker, 1997:258).
21 A samajera is a novice monk and is ordained on The Ten Precepts. These include the
Five Precepts that any Buddhist should observe; however, the third Precept is changed
from abstaining from the wrong indulgence in sensual pleasures to abstaining from any
form of sexual indulgences. The five extra disciplines are refraining from eating after
midday, refraining from attending places of entertainment, refraining from adorning
the body, for example, use of jewellery or perfumes, refraining from sleeping on a
luxurious bed, and lastly, refraining from handling or possessing money, or storing
wealth of any kind. Full ordination, that is ordination as a bhikkhu, requires the monk
to abide by the monastic code of the vinaya, which has 227 disciplines to observe.
22 Vaisakha is the celebration of the birth of Gotama, and also his enlightenment 35 years
later, as well as his parinibbana (death, or passing into final nibbana) at the age of 80.
23 Anusavanacariya and the karmavacariya (Sanskrit) are the two monks who assist the
preceptor at a monk’s ordination (upasampada).
24 Vijja (knowledge) Dhammakaya, this is the transcendental wisdom and higher knowledge
gained by those practising vipassana beyond the attainment of Dhammakaya.
25 Thai kut, Pali kuti is a very basic shelter (often only a roof with no walls). This is the
traditional dwelling place for a monk or nun.
26 Phra Rajyanvisith formerly held the ecclesiastic title of Phra Visuthikhun. Prior to that
he was referred to as Phra Jayamanggalo, before his ordination he was known as Achan
(title given to a teacher or lecturer) Sermchai.
27 One acre is equivalent to 2.5 rai.
28 As already pointed out, it was Luang Phaw Sot who is believed to have recovered this
lost meditative technique.
NOTES
216

--- PAGE 232 ---
29 Wat Saket is also known as the Golden Mountain Temple. It is located in the centre of
Bangkok.
30 Now referred to by members as Luang Phaw Dhammachayo. His ecclesiastical title is
Phra Phrarajbhavanavisudh.
31 Interview at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 25.8.02.
32 Founded in 1896, this university serves the educational needs of Mahanikai monks and
is situated in the grounds of Wat Mahatat in central Bangkok.
33 Now referred to as Luang Phaw Dattacheewo. His ecclesiastical title is Phra
Bhavanaviriyakhun.
34 Ubasok (Pali upasaka) and ubasika (Pali upasika) are committed to keeping the Eight
Precepts; like the monks they eat only two meals a day and not after lunchtime. They
rise at 4 am for meditation practice. Many of the men aspire to monastic ordination and
view this period as a time of training and opportunity to serve the temple through
conducting its business.
35 Phansa is the three-month Buddhist lent period which runs concurrently with the rainy
season. During this time monks remain within their monasteries as much as possible and
heighten their spiritual practice. This tradition goes back to the time of the Buddha who
restricted his followers from travelling so as to prevent damage to newly planted crops.
36 The guide who showed me round the complex in September 1998 indicated that
Phra Dhammachayo who designed the bot wanted a structure that would be easy and
inexpensive to maintain.
37 108 is an auspicious number in Buddhism.
38 Due to the economic crisis in the region from 1997 onwards there was grave financial
hardship for the Thai people due to the collapse of the economy.
39 A male lay followers’ (upasakaratanam) retreat also exists to commemorate Father’s
day, which is held around the time of the king’s birthday (5 December).
40 According to Feungfusakul, almost fifty Buddhist societies in higher education had
student leaders who were members of Wat Phra Dhammakaya. She writes ‘Most of the
temporary unpaid lay volunteers are high school, college or university students who
are drawn either through the Buddhist clubs of their educational institutions or through
the former participation in Wat Phra Dhammakaya’s public moral training program’
(Feungfusakal, 1993:85).
41 King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology, Ladkrabang, just outside Bangkok, on 15.2.00
42 Dhammadayada is a Pali word meaning ‘heir of the Dhamma’.
43 Known in Thai as a ‘klot’.
44 Female students are allowed on this programme but are not candidates for ordination.
45 White is symbolic of purity in the Thai context, for example, in the Thai flag white
represents Buddhism. Some Buddhists will wear white on holy days as they go to
the temple.
46 Khun Yai Chan passed away on 10 September 2000 due to natural causes. She was
91 years of age. Her official title is now Khun Maharatana Upasika Chandra
Khonnokyoong.
47 This is a practice that the abbot developed prior to his ordination. It was considered to
be an ancient ceremony that had long ago fallen into disuse. It attracted the attention
of many young people during the time when Khun Yay Chan mentored her group of
students at Wat Paknam. On the following Sunday (11.2.00) an elderly lady justified
the practice to me by saying that many at Wat Phra Dhammakaya had travelled
through the power of meditation to nibbana and there seen countless Buddhas. She
pointed out that each person invariably described the same thing.
48 Members understand this terrace as an expression of their devotion to the Sakgha,
the third component of the Triple Gem. Please refer back to the diagram of the
Dhammakaya Cetiya.
NOTES
217

--- PAGE 233 ---
49 Senator Pong Leng-ee, representing disciples of Khun Yai Chan made a petition to the
abbot to postpone the cremation ceremony until the construction of the Dhammakaya
Cetiya was completed. The abbot and the committee of monks ‘confirmed the fact that
all disciples have become more enthusiastic in meditation and practise of the Dhamma.
Thus, the rescheduling of the cremation ceremony will surely result in the intensified
spiritual development of all disciples. Consequently, the announcement of the ceremony
postponement was formally made’ (www.dhammakaya.th.org 28.3.01). The cremation
ceremony took place on 3 February 2002. Senior monks from 30,000 Buddhist temples
throughout Thailand and from twenty other countries were present.
50 That evening a member described the conflict that there often is in making a donation.
There is initial reluctance to give and a sense of joy in handing the donation over. The joy
partly comes about through the triumph of conquering self and selfishness.
51 This took place at the temple on 25.8.02 and lasted for an hour.
52 Phra Nicholas is a British monk who has been a monk at Wat Phra Dhammakaya for
15 years (‘rains’).
53 In an interview in Bangkok on 28.9.02, a Buddhist academic (whose identity I do not wish
to reveal) indicated that this was simply another example of Wat Phra Dhammakaya using
a term in an unusual manner in order to attract interest to the movement.
54 One acre is approximately 2.5 rai.
55 The female expression of Avalokitefvara ‘The Lord Who Looks Down With
Compassion’. Known in Chinese as Guan Yin, see Harvey, 1990:131 for discussion.
56 The Bodhisatta who will be the Buddha of the next age.
57 Soi Suan Phlu is the street in which the former prime minister lived.
58 Chavalit Yongchaiyudh (who later served as prime minister) was deputy chairman of
the ceremony and was pictured in a meditative pose on that occasion.
59 This was King Bhumibol’s sixth 12-year cycle and a particularly auspicious occasion.
60 In an interview at his newspaper office in Bangkok on 19.2.01.
61 This is correct but the general understanding is a monk should own only a few very
basic possessions.
62 Interview with Phra Nicholas on 27.8.02 at Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
63 Interview with Phra Nicholas on 27.8.02 at Wat Phra Dhammakaya
64 Phra Santikaro is an American monk based at Suan Mokk, in South Thailand. He was
a disciple of the late Buddhadasa.
3 AN ANALYSIS OF THE WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA 
MOVEMENT
1 Phra nai are monks who have taken a lifetime vow. Phra nok (outside monks) are those
who have not taken lifetime vows, and are free to leave at any time (Bangkok Post,
21.12.98).
2 The Ten Virtues (or things that should be practised continually in order to gain parami)
are: dana (generosity and giving); sila (morality, good conduct); nekkhamma (renuncia-
tion); pañña (wisdom, insight or understanding); viriya (energy, effort, endeavour); khanti
(forbearance, tolerance, endurance); sacca (truthfulness); adhitthana (resolution, self-
determination); metta (loving-kindness, friendliness); upekkha (equanimity, indifference
to praise and blame in the performance of duty) (Dictionary of Buddhism, 2000:284).
3 Jackson (1999:267) translates Thai writer Nithi Aevosrivongse as follows: ‘King
Chulalongkorn amulets and images are associated with “improving commerce” and mak-
ing you loved and trusted by people who meet you, so you can conduct your business
undertakings successfully’ (Nithi, 1993:31) translated and quoted by Jackson, 1999:267.
4 At Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 1.9.02. ‘It is customary for Thai monks to end their
sermons with blessings for happiness (kwam-suk) and prosperity (kwam jarern)’
(Jackson, 1999:263).
NOTES
218

--- PAGE 234 ---
5 In an interview in Chiang Mai on 18.9.02.
6 Literally the term means ‘a descent’and suggests the idea of a deity coming down from
heaven to earth. The literal meaning also implies a certain diminution of the deity when
he or she assumes the form of an Avatara (Kinsley, 1987:14).
7 The meaning of the word is unclear in this context. It carries the idea of primordial
force within which is both good and evil. This does not resonate with the movement’s
understanding of Dhammakaya as buddha-nature (see discussion in Chapter 4), and is
a topic for future research.
8 ‘Myth’ is used in the technical sense of a story concerning an explanation of spiritual
power, particularly as it relates to our world.
9 In an interview at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 27.8.02. The Matrix was directed by
Andy and Larry Wachowski, Warner:1999. The Matrix Reloaded, second of a trilogy,
was released in 2003. See article by R Corliss in Time 12.5.03, pp.53–61 for a helpful
overview of the film.
10 A temple member currently undertaking doctoral research in London. This interview
took place in Bangkok in September 2006.
11 In an interview at Wat Paknam on 19.02.01.
12 In an interview at Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram on 12.3.01. The monk did,
however, point out that those who achieved high levels of ability in Dhammakaya
meditation could do miraculous deeds.
13 In an interview at Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram on 12.3.01.
14 11.2.01 at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. The lay man, a friend of Phra Dattacheewo, went to
the acting abbot’s accommodation and returned with a booklet written by Phra
Dattacheewo entitled Buddhist Ways to Overcome Obstacles. Phra Dattacheewo takes
the view that by the word Mara ‘the Buddha meant the obstacles in our way of life and
work’ (p.15). These five groups of temptation are 1) Kilesa mara – worldly desires
which give a man a bad nature and make him do bad things. 2) Khandha mara – physical
or mental defects which may cause men to behave in a self-consuming way.
3) Abhisangkhara mara – a past, bad behaviour that becomes a label following a man
and continually damaging him. 4) Dhevabutt mara – disciples of temptation such as
gangsters and bad people obstructing us in our work, or preventing us from doing
good. 5) Machu mara – death, putting an end of our chance of doing good (p.17).
15 Mr Lek at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 25.8.02.
16 The three Dhammakaya meditation practising movements are Wat Paknam, Wat Luang
Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram and Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
17 Interview at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 4.2.01. Mr Lek indicated that people still
brought pictures to the abbot who through the power of meditation was able to absorb
them into his body, resulting in possible healing.
18 Makha Bucha (Thai) commemorates the occasion when the Buddha allegedly gave the
patimokkha to a gathering of 1,250 Arahats. Tradition has it that the Arahats were not
informed in advance of the meeting but because of their enlightened state knew the
meeting was going to take place; they all came together at the same time. In Thailand
the commemoration takes place in February. The patimokkha is the 227 rules of
monastic discipline/training found in the Vinaya Pitaka. It is chanted by monks on
observance days which fall on the full and new moons.
19 Those who practice Dhammakaya meditation testify of greater ability to concentrate.
This has a positive knock-on effect for business. Members say it also leads to improved
stress management and brings a sense of peace.
20 The temple at Putthamonthon (on the western outskirts of Bangkok) was originally
constructed for this purpose but the space is now used as a permanent display of the
history of Buddhism.
21 The Lotus Sutra is understood by Nichiren Buddhists and Soka Gakki members (as
well as others within the Mahayana tradition) as a sermon preached by Shakyamuni.
NOTES
219

--- PAGE 235 ---
‘Most western scholars would regard it as originating considerably later, possibly
around 250CE’(Chryssides, 1999:215). In this sutra, the Buddha teaches that he became
enlightened countless eons ago. Since that time, he has constantly been teaching in this
world system and countless others in appropriate forms (Harvey, 1990:125). This
Primordial or Adi Buddha is regarded by Nichiren and Soka Gakkai members as
Nichiren, and thus Nichiren Daishonin (daishonin or ‘great sage’) assumes greater
importance than the historic Buddha (Chryssides, 1999:215).
22 The other practice is the recitation of part of chapter two (Hoben) and the whole of
chapter sixteen (Juryo). Soka Gakkai members believe that these writings contain the
essence of the Lotus Sutra and indeed all of the Buddha’s teaching. These writings are
chanted according to a phonetic script. Comprehension is not required in order to gain
full benefit from the practice and prayer beads are fingered during the ritual which may
last 30 minutes (Mackenzie, 1995b:14).
23 At Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 1.9.03.
24 British historian, Arnold Toynbee is such an example. He was invited to Japan as a
guest of Ikeda and Ikeda used the videoing of the meeting to give the impression that
Toynbee approved of him and his activities. According to Polly Toynbee (the historian’s
daughter), this was not the case, and in fact, her father hardly knew Ikeda (BBC
Television documentary on Soka Gakkai 1995).
25 This is true for all three Dhammakaya movements, that is, Wat Paknam, Wat Luang
Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram and Wat Phra Dhammakaya. Yet it appears that Wat Phra
Dhammakaya is the only movement with a global vision and strategy.
26 In an interview on 26.8.02 at Wat Phra Dhammakaya.
27 Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia, Australia, New Zealand, America,
Belgium, France, Germany, Denmark and Spain. There is the intention to open a centre
in the Middle East as there are already members in the region.
28 It is not uncommon for Buddhist and other forms of meditation to be introduced as a
neutral practice. It may be that the meditator can be introduced to other aspects
associated with the practice at a later stage.
29 Interviews with Bob Mawson at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 4.02.01 and at the Rama
Gardens hotel on 20.02.01. Bob Mawson, however, was ordained as a Buddhist monk
in 2002 for phansa.
30 In an interview at the temple with Ekchat Mankhong, an ubasok with special
responsibility for foreign relations at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 27.8.02.
31 The Buddhist apocalyptic legend of three periods of Buddhism. The first period is
known as the ‘Law Age’ or Sharma, it lasted for 1,000 years from the death of
Sakyamuni. During this time, monastic discipline was strictly observed and believers
were deeply pious. The second period was known as the age of the ‘Copied Law’.
While morality declined during this period, piety was evidenced in the building of
temples. The third age was known as the age of the ‘Later Law’ (Mappo) – a reign
of vice and terror lasting for 10,000 years (Mackenzie, 1995b:3). The age of the ‘Later
Law’ is seen to have commenced in AD 1050 (Yamamori, 1974:50).
32 It is understandable that members in the Japanese context do this as they are taught that
‘faith that is not expressed in shakubuku is insufficient’ and ‘happiness is attainable
only through the accumulation of merit by winning converts’ (Yamamori, 1974:9).
33 On New Road, Bangkok, in February 2000.
34 These characteristics first appeared in M Marty and RS Applby (eds) 1991
Fundamentalisms Observed.
35 The Makgala Sutta and the Mahasatipatthana Sutta are two examples of this.
36 In an interview at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 27.8.02.
37 Charles Keyes (1977:290) gives the example of a monk towards the end of the nineteenth
century in South Thailand who had come to be recognised as a phu mi bun. The monk
was urged by several men to flee to the hills along with the other villagers, as Chinese
NOTES
220

--- PAGE 236 ---
tin miners were expected to attack the village. The monk (who was abbot of the local
temple) refused to leave and the men stayed with him. The monk issued each man with
a magical cloth (Thai pha praciat) – a white cloth with sacred writing on it. The Chinese
attacked the village and were so surprised by the unexpected resistance that they ran
away. Some villagers who had earlier run away returned to their village when they heard
the news. The monk issued them with magical cloths to protect them. Shortly afterwards,
a larger band of Chinese attacked but were again repelled. This story demonstrates how
a monk with extraordinary powers became the deliverer not just of a few men, but a
whole community. The community was in a social relationship of dependence on the
monk, or, more accurately, the monk’s merit, which could be transferred to the villagers
and in this case led to deliverance from the common threat. The monk continued to
produce various charms for protection after the crisis and his reputation grew as a result.
The Siamese government skilfully prevented the monk’s following becoming politically
subversive by promoting him to a leadership position within the local Sakgha. This, in
effect, institutionalised the monk’s influence and perceived power.
38 This would be done by disposing of their gold and silver, killing off buffalo and swine
and collecting pebbles. Even a sexual element is added as women who are unmarried
are urged to take a husband. Those who do not follow these prescriptions will suffer a
horrible death – being eaten by giants (Keyes, 1977:297).
39 The English translation is ‘Lord Golden Serenity’.
40 Luang Pu Thuat, a seventeenth century Supreme Patriarch of the Sakgha during the
Ayutthaya period. This monastic was famous for his supernatural powers. Pu too was
a senior titled monk in the reigns of King Mongkut and his son King Chulalongkorn
(the Bangkok period). King Mahabrahma Jinnapañjara was a legendary follower of
Moggallana, a disciple of the Buddha. See Jackson, 1988b:142.
41 There is a very helpful overview of the development and activities of the CPT and the
government’s response in Thailand: Economy and Politics, chapter nine (Phongpaichit
and Baker, 1997).
42 Kuan Im is the Thai rendering of Guan Yin, the Chinese name given to a female form
of the ninth stage Bodhisattva Avalokitefvara whose Sanskrit name means ‘the Lord
who looks down (with compassion)’ (Harvey, 1990:131). In Thailand, Kuan Im is also
referred to as ‘the goddess dressed in white’ and the ‘blessed mother of mercy’
(Jackson, 1999:268).
43 ‘Suchart’s non-Sakgha religion was supported by a faction of the establishment which
had lost control of the political mechanisms of the state, including control over the
Sakgha and the official expression of Thai Buddhism’ (Jackson, 1988b:164).
44 Phra Dhammachayo’s life story is included in a Thai language Wat Phra Dhammakaya
book celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the movement.
45 Both examples are typical of millenarianism in the Thai context, especially the winning
over of a following to a leader by the demonstration of his miraculous power.
46 Dr Nok’s comments, Edinburgh, 2000.
47 In an interview at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 27.8.02.
48 In September and October 1998, many thousands of Wat Phra Dhammakaya members
claim to have seen an image of Luang Phaw Sot in the middle of the sun (the colour
was so soft and clear that it was possible to look at the sun). The image of the
founder of the movement became so big that eventually the sun was a small crystal
in his stomach (Daorueng, 1999:39). A former office bearer within the movement
believed the alleged sighting could be explained by mass hypnosis. (I do not
wish to disclose the identity of the person, the interview took place in Bangkok
on 31.8.02.)
49 At www.dmc.tv one may access recorded programmes and live events at Wat Phra
Dhammakaya. The temple has its own satellite TV programme.
50 This term is discussed at the beginning of the Chapter 4.
NOTES
221

--- PAGE 237 ---
51 At a Wat Phra Dhammakaya meditation training session at the Rama Gardens hotel on
20 February 2000, Mrs Noi, a top-level manager of a large and prosperous company
told me of the importance of finding a place which delivered suitable teaching for her
two children. She felt that the temple provided a good service in this regard.
52 Mr Lek at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 11.2.02.
53 This reason was suggested to me by a Wat Phra Dhammakaya member who at that time
was a PhD student studying in Edinburgh.
54 An American monk in the Phra Buddhadasa tradition.
55 Interview on 12.2.02.
56 Such as Amway, an American company who sell detergents and toiletries through sales
teams. The principle is that management receive a percentage of the seller’s sales. The
higher the level of management (the more sales he/she is responsible for) the greater
level of financial reward there is.
57 Interview at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 2.8.02.
58 In an interview at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 25.8.02.
59 The idea of bun-niyom is described in detail in the section on ‘The Practice of Buddhist
Economics’ in chapter five of the thesis.
60 Pridi Phanomyong, one of the leaders of the group who established a Constitutional
Monarchy in 1932, and prime minister in 1946 advocated a form of Buddhist socialism.
Phiun Songkram, prime minister from 1938–44 and again from 1947–57, encouraged
a form of economic nationalism which he justified vaguely in Buddhist terms. See
footnote 106 of Keyes (1990:407).
61 There is also an interesting comparison between Wat Phra Dhammakaya and
Christianity in the destruction of evil through spiritual conflict.
62 On the other hand, there is an increase in organisations such as Alcoholics Anonymous.
63 One Thai pharmacist told me how she wanted to come to the UK to undertake doctoral
research. As she meditated, she felt sure she would be accepted for a particular uni-
versity, and even had a picture of the kind of house she would live in. When she arrived
to commence her research she was allocated a house exactly the same as the one she
had visualised. This story illustrates the alleged efficacy of Dhammakaya meditation.
64 On a visit to Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 4.2.00.
65 Bob Mawson in a conversation at Wat Phra Dhammakaya on 11.2.00.
66 This term is discussed at the beginning of the Chapter 4.
67 Wallis cites the Church of Scientology, the Transcendental Meditation Movement,
Soka Gakkai and the Inner Peace Movement all as world-affirming.
68 For example, the ‘nibbana is self’ statement may be seen as an adaptation of the
Christian view of the saved enjoying heaven.
69 In the section entitled ‘The Dhammakaya meditative technique’.
70 In the section entitled ‘The Yogavacara tradition as a possible source of the
Dhammakaya meditation technique’.
71 Normally there are 600 monks and up to 400 novices (not counting temporary ordina-
tions during phansa) at the temple.
72 Quoting a comment made by Dr Feungfusakul who completed doctoral research into
the movement in 1993.
4 THE APPROACH OF WAT PHRA DHAMMAKAYA TO 
SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT
1 Sa-upadisesanibbana, also known as kilesaparinibbana (Pali). The concept here is that
although the Five Khandhas or Aggregates (rupa, vedana, sañña, sakkhara and viññaja)
of the Arahat are still functioning, they are not ‘on fire’, as the fires of attachment, hatred
and delusion are extinguished. Fire was a metaphor that the Buddha frequently used,
normally with a negative association.
NOTES
222

--- PAGE 238 ---
2 When the enlightened one (Arahat) dies he passes into nibbana without substrate, this
is known as anupadisesa nibbana (Pali). Not only are the fires extinguished, the
khandhas no longer exist. The Buddha refused to describe the nature of the existence
of an Arahat after death. While some form of existence is a possibility, how we may
describe such an existence is impossible, as all normal terms of reference that we
might use no longer apply to the Arahat. It would be wrong to say the enlightened one
exists in nibbana, and it would also be wrong to say he does not exist.
3 The demands of the Noble Eightfold Path necessary for enlightenment (described as
nibbanic Buddhism) are considered excessively rigorous. The carrying out of merito-
rious deeds leading to a ‘good’ rebirth (karmatic Buddhism) is thus considered more
appropriate by many Buddhists. These terms were coined by Melford Spiro on his
reflection on Buddhism in post-war Burma [Myanmar] (Gethin, 1998:110).
4 The diameter of ayatananibbana is said to be 141,330,000 yote, (Rachabandit,
1999:95). A yote is an ancient Thai measurement roughly equal to 10 miles.
5 It is noteworthy that the Wat Phra Dhammakaya movement has reinterpreted Buddhist
beliefs in a cosmologicalway for well-educated, upwardly mobile Thai. Buddhadasa’s
approach (to the same target group) was much more rational. What unifies these
approaches is the desire to view these beliefs (e.g. nibbana) as having relevance for
everyone in the ‘here and now’.
6 Ordinary beings are seen as streams of mental processes, with an ‘external’ world as a
projection from their direct experience.
7 The Docetic Movement were those who understood that the humanity of Jesus Christ
was an appearance or illusion. The term comes from the Greek dokien ‘to appear’, or
‘to seem’. A typical Docetic view of Christ was he was revealed as a man, but it was
not a ‘Rear body’. The Apostles’ and Nicene Creeds disagreed with the Docetic
position. The Definition of Calcedon (451 CE) describes Christ as being ‘truly God and
truly man’.
8 The Dharma is communicated to the Bodhisattvas through the appearance and speech
of the Enjoyment-body.
9 The meditator who wishes to create the manomayakaya needs to first achieve the
fourth jhana (meditative trance).
10 Namely: the eye socket, right if the meditator is male, left if female; the centre of the
head; the palate; the throat aperture; the navel, the point where the breath is thought to
end is the sixth position.
11 This is at the intersection of two lines, one running from two finger breadths above the
navel to the back, the other running from one side to the other, at the same level. This is
the centre of the body and the seventh position. ‘This is the mind’s permanent resting
place. Whenever a person or any other creature is born, dies, sleeps or wakens, the
Dhamma sphere which governs the body rises from this position’ (Jayamanggalo,
1997:62). In this meditation process, the sphere appears to float up from the sixth to the
seventh and final position. While visualising the inner body, the meditator is instructed to
consider it to be an empty space, devoid of all organs but filled with happiness and joy.
12 The Pali words are explained to mean ‘the righteousness Absolute of Attainment which
a human being can achieve’ (Dhammakaya Foundation, 1990:8). Literally, ‘the perfect
Arahat’.
13 Wat Phra Dhammakaya define pathama-magga as ‘the trailhead of the Path to
Nirvaja, manifesting inwardly to meditators as a diamond-clear sphere when the mind
comes to a standstill. Can be equated with the first jhana’ (Dhammakaya Foundation,
1998:147). Out with Dhammakaya meditation, the term pathama-magga, or ‘first
path’, usually refers to the attainment of Stream entry.
14 This conversation took place on 17.2.01 at the Santi Asoke putthasatan in Bangkok. The
Dhammakaya meditator was attending a special meeting on the nature of socially engaged
Buddhism. You may wish to review the discussion on parami at the beginning of Chapter 3.
NOTES
223

--- PAGE 239 ---
15 A Wat Phra Dhammakaya monk in London responding to my question on this matter
indicated that this was impossible given the lack of contact between these two
traditions when Luang Phaw Sot made the discovery in approximately 1915.
16 Phra Mettanando was a fairly young but senior monk at Wat Phra Dhammakaya when
he made that suggestion. He has since left Wat Phra Dhammakaya due to his concerns
regarding the abbot’s financial practice. In 1999, at the University of Hamburg, Phra
Mettanando completed a doctoral thesis entitled Meditation and Healing in the
Theravada Buddhist Order of Thailand and Laos.
17 The majdala is a sacred circle representing a sacred realm. It often consists of
concentric circles, enclosed by a square, all contained within a sacred circular
boundary. The majdala contains ‘symbols and images that depict aspects of the
enlightened psycho-physical personality of the Buddha and that indicate Buddhist
themes and concepts’ (Powers, 1995:227). The images used will depend on the special
distinctives of the main deity whose ‘land’ is being typified. Helpful discussion of
majdalas are found in Powers, 1995:266–70 and Saunders, 1987:155–8.
18 The cosmic Buddhas are the SaÅbhogakaya Buddhas which appear in meditation.
Thus the name of ‘meditation Buddhas’. The names of these Buddhas are Vairocana,
Aksobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi. These and the cosmic
Bodhisattvas are part of the Buddhist Tantric system. Govinda (1969:111) points out
that the Tibetan word Iha generally corresponds to the Indian word deva and is used of
the cosmic Buddhas, as well as advanced Bodhisattvas such as Avalokiteshvara or
Padmapaji, and Samantabhadra.
19 Phra Rajyanvisith is the abbot of Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram, a temple
located within the Dhammakayaram Buddhist Meditation Institute at Damnoen
Saduak, in the province of Rajburi, 94 kilometres south-west of Bangkok. After prac-
tising meditation since 1970 and co-founding the Dhammakaya Buddhist Meditation
Institute, Phra Rajyanvisith ordained as a monk at Wat Paknam and published The
Heart of Dhammakaya Meditation in 1991 under the name Phra Ajarn Maha Sermchai
Jayamanggalo. His current monastic name was bestowed on him in 2004 after having
being known as Phra Bawana Visutikhun since 1998.
20 The majdala is a sacred circle representing a sacred realm. It often consists of
concentric circles, enclosed by a square, all contained within a sacred circular boundary.
The majdala contains ‘symbols and images that depict aspects of the enlightened
psycho-physical personality of the Buddha and that indicate Buddhist themes and
concepts’ (Powers, 1995:227). The images used will depend on the special distinctives
of the main deity whose ‘land’ is being typified. Helpful discussion of majdalas are
found in Powers, 1995:266–70 and Saunders, 1987:155–8.
21 Field visit to the Samye Ling monastery, Eskadalemuir, in the Scottish Borders on 29.4.02.
22 The space may well represent the clarity and purity of the enlightened mind. See
Harvey, 1990:135.
23 Vajra means ‘diamond’. This symbolises the ‘indestructible nature of the perfection of
wisdom and compassion that characterises Buddhas. These form an indissoluble unity,
which is able to destroy the bonds of ignorance and other afflictive emotions’ (Powers,
1995:230).
24 That is the Buddha, Dhamma and the Sakgha. Notice the use of ratna in the name of
the Dhyani Buddha Ratnasambhava. Ratnasambhava means ‘the origin of the jewels’.
25 Drawing on ideas of Indian yoga, these sheathes are not separate layers but forms of
energy. The outer (our physical body) is built up through nutrition. The next area is our
ethereal, energy or pranic body nourished by our breath. The third sheath is our
thought body, or personality which is formed by our thoughts. Fourth, there is the body
of our potential consciousness. Ultimately there is body of the universal consciousness.
26 The Thammayut movement was also influential in Laos and Cambodia.
NOTES
224

--- PAGE 240 ---
27 An interview conducted with a monk who had been at Wat Paknam for 26 ‘rains’.
28 As mentioned in the Chapter 3, Phra Mettanando (a former medical doctor) was a sen-
ior monk at Wat Phra Dhammakaya. He left the movement as a result of what he con-
sidered to be excessive pressure placed on members to donate to the temple. Phra
Mettanando divulged information to Dr Apinya Feungfusakul regarding the belief
within the temple that Phra Dhammachayo is an Awatan (Thai) or Avatara (Pali). His
thesis is Meditation and Healing in the Theravada Buddhist Order of Thailand and
Laos, 1999, University of Hamburg.
29 The book is a collection of Yogavacara texts copied from manuscripts by Phra Maha
Cai Yaso¯tharat (Crosby, 2000:186). It was published in 1935. The title is A Book of
Samatha and Vipassana-kammathan of Four Eras. Phra Mettanando’s thesis focuses on
the translation of texts from Phra Maha Cai Yaso¯tharat’s book which relate to healing
through meditation.
30 This would appear to be the reproduction of various instructions made by Supreme
Patriarch Phra Kai Thuean. Prior to becoming the Supreme Patriarch of the Thai
Sakgha Phra Kai Thuean was a forest-dwelling monk and meditation teacher. He
passed away in 1822 at the age of 90.
31 This story was recounted to me by two leading Thai Buddhist scholars and a
well-qualified monk who studied at Wat Mahathat. I have chosen not to disclose their
identity.
32 I have been shown a photocopied document from Wat Mahathat which states that
Luang Phaw Chadok went to Wat Paknam in February 1955 to assist Luang Phaw Sot
assess his own prowess of meditation, using the Dhammakaya model. Apparently
Luang Phaw Sot admitted that Luang Phaw Chadok (who used the Vipassana
approach) was the more skilled meditator.
33 Phra Mettanando discusses various healing practices which make use of the cakras in
his doctoral thesis.
34 Work commenced on the building in 2004 to celebrate the 60th birthday of Phra
Dhammachayo. This was his fifth, twelve-year cycle, and as such, considered to be a
highly auspicious occasion.
5 THE HISTORY OF THE SANTI ASOKE MOVEMENT AND A
DESCRIPTION OF ITS VARIOUS COMMUNITIES
1 The two Pali words Santi (peace) Asoka (grief-less) are translated ‘Peace without
suffering’. Members often refer to themselves as Chao Asoke (the people of Asoke).
2 Rak is the Thai word for ‘love’ in the sense of a strong liking for a person or thing.
3 Bodhirak is understood by the Asoke community as meaning ‘the true teacher of
Buddhism’.
4 Dr Tavivat Puntarigvivat , Department of Humanities, Mahidol University, Bangkok.
Interview at Mahidol University, 12.2.01.
5 The 1962 Sakgha Act requires all religious centres to be registered with the Department
of Religious Affairs.
6 A temple in the Mahanikai fraternity.
7 The kutthi (Pali) kut (Thai) are shelters used for the monks and lay people and are
1.5 by 2.5 metres in length. This, according to the Asoke community is in complete
compliance to the vinaya, and in contrast to the living quarters of some senior monks
in the richer, Bangkok temples.
8 In 1980, the centre at Daen Asoke was transferred to a few kilometres outside the
provincial capital town of Nakhon Pathom and renamed Pathom Asoke.
9 There were around 45 members (both lay and monastic) of the community at this time.
NOTES
225

--- PAGE 241 ---
10 Bodhirak draws on the work of Buddhadasa, an outstanding scholar monk who died in
1993. Buddhadasa’s concern was to impact the modern, well-educated Thai middle
class with relevant Buddhist teaching. Although Buddhadasa’s teaching was contro-
versial, he remained within the Sakgha as his practice was not viewed as schismatic.
Bodhirak has criticised Buddhadasa for not applying his teaching to practice.
11 These centres are referred to as putthasathan, the Thai for the ‘venue of the Buddha
(Buddhism)’. This is considered to be a high word, more so than the term wat which is
the normal Thai word used to denote a temple. Calling the centre a putthasatan marks
it out from mainstream and stresses the independent nature of the movement.
12 A klot is a lightweight, one person brown tent/mosquito net normally used by forest
monks.
13 Dhamma-charik is the Thai term for ‘missionary-monks’.
14 Doing things in isolation is not a culturally accepted Thai approach to any activity. It
is therefore little wonder that a reasonably large group proved to be successful, not just
for those who participated but also in terms of impacting the communities visited.
15 The Santi Asoke approach to enlightenment is based on working hard with deep
concentration. This distinctive will be examined later.
16 The book was published in Thai Bodhirak – Saatsadaa Mahapha. This translates into
English as ‘Bodhirak – The Highly Dangerous Prophet’ (Jackson, 1989:170). This book
was published under the auspices of Anan’s movement, the ‘Organisation to Protect
Buddhist Teachings of Thailand’(Ongkaan Phithak Phutthasaat). Apparently, three months,
or so, prior to Anan’s attack on Bodhirak, Anan published a book entitled Kham Sawn
Tithiyai (‘Heretical Teachings’). This book criticised the teachings of Buddhadasa.
17 One example of Phra Anan Chayananto’s quest for orthodoxy can be seen when he
urged police to take action against the Thammarangsri religious cult, a brand of the
Huppasawan movement (discussed in Chapter 3) which the government ordered to
close (Bangkok Post, 14.2.82). It is, however, interesting to note in the same article that
Somporn Tepsittha, president of the Young Buddhists Association pointed out that Phra
Anan was ‘wrong for consecrating and distributing amulets, and that he had been
warned about this activity’.
18 According to a Bangkok Post report around this period police agents were ordered to
keep a close watch on Anan’s movement to prevent possible violence against Santi
Asoke.
19 These celebrations marked the founding of the Chakri Dynasty and two-hundredth
anniversary of Bangkok being the capital of the kingdom. Sukhothai, Lan na,
Ayutthaya and Thonburi are the previous dynasties and capitals of the kingdom.
20 For example, Article 44 of The Sakgha Act of 1962 states ‘Whoever charges the order
of the Sakgha of Thailand with an accusation that could produce disgrace and discord
shall be punished with a fine of not more than 5,000 Baht, or an imprisonment of not
more than one year, or both.’
21 Maha is the Pali word for ‘great’. It is the title bestowed upon monks who have passed
the grade three Pali examinations. It also has the nuance of being a holy person.
22 This umbrella association included the following groups, Dhamma Education,
Celibacy Club, Vegetarian Club, Dhamma Pencraft Club, Coconut Shell Handicraft
Club, and the Student Practitioners’ Club (Feungfusakul, 1993:99). Members of these
clubs were required to keep the Five Precepts.
23 Known as Ruam Phalang (‘joining in the force’), this group was the forerunner of the
Phalang Dhamma Party.
24 ‘He polled 480,000 votes, double that of his closest competitor’ (Asia Magazine,
11.1.87).
25 Phalang Dhamma (Thai Tham) may be translated ‘power of the Dhamma’, or ‘moral
force’.
NOTES
226

--- PAGE 242 ---
26 Chamlong, as governor of Bangkok, did not run for election.
27 Chamlong received the ‘Man of the Year’ award from the Personality Development
Centre. He eventually agreed to accept it provided the venue was changed from the
up-market Shangri-La Hotel! (Bangkok Post, 2.11.86).
28 This is a reference to the celibate lifestyle of Chamlong who keeps The Eight Precepts
while married.
29 The leading Thammayut monastery where the Mahamakut Buddhist University is also
located.
30 Thai may be translated ‘The Santi Asoke Case’.
31 ‘In October 1982 the then Director-General of the Department of Religious Affairs,
Chamiyang Wutthijan, estimated that there were 3,500 unauthorised or unregistered
monasteries and religious centres in the country’ (Jackson, 1989:178). This had
increased to 4,900 by October 1985 (Jackson, 1989:80). These monasteries are not
critical of mainstream Buddhist practice or leadership. It should be pointed out
that although The 1962 Sakgha Act require all monasteries to register with the
Department of Religious Affairs, there is no law which can enforce registration and
the department have no power to close down unregistered monasteries.
32 The Thai Sakgha wear saffron coloured robes, except for the forest tradition who wear
brown robes. Bodhirak chose to wear a dark brown long-sleeved shirt and trousers,
covered by a robe of similar colour. The title phra meaning ‘venerable’, was replaced
by Samaja, a Pali word meaning ‘renunciate’. It should not be confused for Samajaen
(Thai) for ‘novice’ (from the Pali samajera meaning ‘little Samajac’).
33 The particular charge was an alleged violation of Article 27 of The Sakgha Act of 1962.
This is a refusal to defrock within seven days after having being ordered to do so by
the Ecclesiastical Council. The charges which are criminal are subject to a maximum
of six months in prison.
34 The pronoun used by a Thai monk when referring to himself.
35 Literally the ‘Garden of Liberation’. This is the temple in South Thailand where the
late Buddhadasa (1906–93) established his centre of teaching and meditation.
36 Anan Senakhan tried to organise a large group of monks to protest at Chamlong’s
campaign to run for another term of office as governor of Bangkok, given his association
with Santi Asoke.
37 See D McCargo, 1993:99 for a discussion of this issue.
38 Military propaganda, including carefully edited videos, presented the army as peace
keepers and Chamlong and other demonstrators as antagonists.
39 National Peacekeeping Council; for details please refer to Phongpaichit and Baker,
1997, pp.355–7.
40 The previous year, Chamlong was awarded the Il-Ga (One Family) award. This award
is given to honour those who sacrifice themselves for promoting the welfare of all
mankind. The award (a medal and US$20,000) commemorates the life and work of the
late Dr Kim Yong-Ki (from South Korea) for his intense pioneering spirit. Il-Ga was
Dr Kim’s ‘pen name’ (Bangkok Post, 18.9.91). Chamlong received the Roman
Magsaysay award for government service in Manila in July 1992. The former Bangkok
governor was cited for inspiring tens of thousands of Thai during the pro-democracy
protests in May 1992. According to the Bangkok Post (21.7.92), the citation on the
award read ‘With a stunning act of non-violent protest that prompted his arrest, he
galvanised the public to reject the unelected leader (General Suchinda Kraprayoon).’
The Magsaysay awards are given in five categories annually to outstanding Asians or
institutions in the regions. These awards were established in memory of former
Philippine president Ramon Magsaysay who died in a plane crash in 1957.
41 While the protest may have become out of hand due to right wingers who wished to
make trouble for Chamlong, it clearly illustrated the politician’s lack of influence in
NOTES
227

--- PAGE 243 ---
Bangkok. It should be born in mind that Chamlong was MP for Kanchanaburi, and so
spent a lot of his time in this town – a four-hour drive from Bangkok.
42 There are a significant number of titles by Buddhadasa (1906–93).
43 Appendix one.
44 Fah Apai (Thai) means ‘forgiveness as vast as the heavens’.
45 Information gathered from Mr Lek on 17.9.05 at Santi Asoke.
46 I was involved in these programmes at Santi Asoke. The interviews (which were con-
ducted in Thai) explored my reasons for visiting Thailand and my understanding of
Santi Asoke.
47 Information given by the librarian at Santi Asoke on 1.9.05.
48 One rai is 0.4 of an acre.
49 Fukuoka is a Japanese ecologist whose book The One Straw Revelation outlines the
benefits of mixing a variety of crops in a small area.
50 This information was gained from a discussion with Troy Santos who was experi-
menting with natural farming methods at Pathom Asoke where I met with him on
21.8.02.
51 This event commemorates the gathering of 1,250 Arahats to receive the patmokkha
(227 rules or disciplines for monks). The meeting was not announced in advance but
due to their enlightened state the Arahats allegedly knew that it was going to take place
and attended.
52 In an interview on natural farming with the librarian at Santi Asoke in early March
2001, and Mr Lek on 31.8.02. Both interviews were carried out at Santi Asoke in
Bangkok.
53 See Terwiel BJ, 1994 Monks and Magic, pp.65–9 for description of this ceremony.
54 The main sanctuary.
55 Lokuttara is the Thai and Pali for ‘supramundane, transcendental’, or ‘beyond these
worlds’. The book was published by Fah Apai Press in 2000.
56 Sikkhamat is the Thai version of two Pali words – sikkha ‘learn’ and mata ‘mother’,
thus ‘mother in training’. It is the Asoke term for a female renunciate. This issue is
expanded on in the section of the status of women in Santi Asoke.
57 In an interview in Chiang Mai, 18.9.02. Dr Apinya Feungfusakul completed doctoral
research on Santi Asoke and Wat Phra Dhammakaya in 1993.
58 Chow is the Thai for ‘the people of’, and ‘Chow Asoke’ is a common term used by
Asoke people to refer to themselves.
59 Sawadee is the standard Thai greeting. The younger, or person with the lower social status
will raise his/her hands, palms together, to the face while making the greeting. The older,
or person from a higher social standing will then respond in a similar fashion.
60 The literal meaning is ‘Rock, Sky and Water’. The idea is a place of natural elements.
61 Lana (literally 100,000 fields) is the name for the old Northern Kingdom of Siam.
62 This may be translated as ‘rocks and water right up to the sky’.
63 A monk reckons his time in robes not in years but in vassa (Pali) or phansa (Thai),
the period of time when he is required to stay in his temple, or in Asoke terms
putthasathan. The three-month rainy season ends on the full moon of the eleventh month
(November).
64 According to Mr Lek, an engineer who has been involved in schooling and publishing
at Santi Asoke for many years. An interview at Santi Asoke on 31.8.02.
65 The Thai name mahalai is similar to the term for university mahawitialai. The idea
created is that of a university of life.
66 This is a translation of the better sounding Thai phrase sin din, ben ngan, chan wecha.
67 This procedure is discussed fully in the section on Asoke spiritual development.
68 Literally ‘wisdom certificate’. I understand that the course has now being recognised
as being the equivalent of an undergraduate degree.
NOTES
228

--- PAGE 244 ---
69 Some Asoke members go beyond the standard practise of one vegetarian meal per day
and rising at 3 am to listen to the preaching of the Dhamma. They fast from food for
extended periods, and wipe themselves down with a damp cloth instead of having a
shower.
70 This differs from chao-o-wat, the mainstream term for ‘abbot’.
71 Bodhirak presides himself over the monthly meetings at Santi Asoke, Phatom Asoke
and Ratchatani Asoke. These are the oldest and most developed centres. They have
more members and projects which inevitably entail more problems to solve.
72 Putthasatan meaning a ‘station of the Buddha’.
73 In 2005 there were thirty-nine Asoke groups without resident Samaja and sikkhamat.
These groups are made up of Asoke members who farm their own land and have
invited other members to come and work with them.
6 THE DISTINCTIVES OF SANTI ASOKE AND AN 
ANALYSIS OF THE MOVEMENT
1 A Thai writer once told me ‘Amnat is like soap, the more you use it, the sooner it is
gone!’
2 This research was carried out at the Puttha Pisek retreat in February 2001 at Phai Sali,
a four-hour drive north of Bangkok. Please refer to Appendix Two for the results and
analysis. The raw data may be found in my PhD thesis An Analysis of the Wat Phra
Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke Movements and their Approaches to Spiritual
Development 2005, University of Sunderland.
3 Khon dee u mi die, mi me cry chob.
4 Gotama’s natural mother passed away shortly after his birth. His father married his first
wife’s sister who brought up Gotama.
5 1) A nun must pay homage to a monk regardless of how much longer she has been
ordained; 2) A nun must not spend the ‘rains’ in a residence where there is no monk;
3) Every half month a nun should ask the monks as to when the observance day is (Thai
wan phra) and invite a monk(s) to give an exhortation on that occasion; 4) After the
rains a nun must invite comments (feedback) from both Orders in respect of her behav-
iour and practice; 5) A nun offending against an important rule must undergo discipline
for half a month before both Orders; 6) When as a probationer the woman has trained
in the six rules for two years, she should seek ordination from both Orders; 7) A monk
must not be abused or reviled in any way by a nun; 8) Admonition of monks by nuns is
forbidden, admonition of nuns by monks is not forbidden (Cullavagga X: 354–5).
6 Bhikkhuni is the Pali for a ‘female mendicant’.
7 Voramai Kabilsingh had been a schoolteacher prior to taking the Eight Precepts in
1956. She had been married to a politician and had a daughter who grew up to share
her interests. Her daughter, Dr Chatsumarn Kabilsingh was a professor of religion and
philosophy at Thammasat University prior to taking early retirement. She is active in
trying to reinstate bhikkhuni ordination in the Theravada tradition. In 1987, she
co-founded Sakyadhita ‘daughters of the Buddha’. This organisation comprises
monastics, practitioners and scholars who work towards improving the lives of
Buddhist women throughout the world. See Warner R and Gayley H, 1999 ‘Feminism
and Buddhism in Thailand: The Spiritually-Based Social Action of Chatsumarn
Kabilsingh’, pp.213–26. Several years ago, Chatsumarn Kabilsingh took full ordina-
tion in Sri Lanka as a bhikkhuni. She is now known as Dhammananda Bhikkuni and
resides at Songdhamma Kalayaji Temple in Nakon Pathom, some 50 kilometres from
Bangkok.
8 These are the abstention from the following: 1) taking or injuring life; 2) taking what
is not given; 3) sexual activity; 4) false and slanderous speech; 5) using intoxicants;
NOTES
229

--- PAGE 245 ---
6) bodily adornments; 7) eating solids after noon; 8) watching plays and dancing;
9) handling money; 10) sleeping on a high [soft or comfortable] bed.
9 An interview conducted at Santi Asoke in early March 2001.
10 The dasa sil matavo means ‘Ten-Precept women’, of whom there are more than
2,000 in Sri Lanka. Current dasa sil matavo are not held in such high esteem as
the forerunners of the movement, many of whom came from affluent families. The
movement came into being at the end of the nineteenth century partly to resist
the domination of Buddhism by Christianity. The combination of saffron and white
colours in their dress code symbolise a middle path between being a fully ordained
monastic and an ordinary layperson (Barnes, 1996:262–5). Apparently they now
have bhikkuni ordination in Sri Lanka and Chatsumarn Kabilsingh recently ordained
as one.
11 Please refer to the note on The Ten Precepts. In reality, temple dwellers lie on a mat
thus fulfilling the Tenth Precept. The Ninth Precept – abstaining from handling money
is the real difference between the Eight and Ten Precepts. If all temple dwellers refused
to handle money then the work of the temple would be severely restricted.
12 Puñña-niyama meaning ‘the order/law of kammic fruitfulness’. Kammic (Pali) Karmic
(Sanskrit).
13 For an in-depth description of bun-niyom see Heikkilä-Horn, 1997:122.
14 (Tr.) FL Woodward 1972.
15 Also known as Phra Dhammapitaka and Phra Payutto.
16 Sikkhamat Chinda in an interview conducted at Santi Asoke on 20.8.99.
17 Non-allowable meat for monks are the flesh of elephant or horse (they are regarded as
royal emblems), snake and dog – flesh are viewed as unclean, and hunting animals, that is,
lions, tigers, panthers, bears and hyenas as other such animals would smell the eaters
and attack them (Harvey, 2000:159).
18 Interview with Troy Santos at Pathom Asoke on 20.8.02.
19 Kuan Im is the Thai rendering of Guan Yin, the Chinese name given to a female form
of the Mahayana ninth stage Bodhisattva Avalokitefvara.
20 Mr Anurak, at Pattalung, South Thailand on 29.8.02.
21 In a telephone conversation with Mr Lal, an Ambedkarite Buddhist from Birmingham
on 7.10.03.
22 Mr Anurak, at Pattalung, South Thailand on 29.8.02.
23 According to some Asoke members, one possible translation of Bodhirak (‘enlightenment-
protector’) is ‘true teacher’.
24 This emerged in conversations with Asoke members, for example, Ms Fang Fon, a
teacher, and also an interview with Bodhirak on 24.8.02, at Santi Asoke.
25 Most Asokans dislike city living, yet they maintain a strong presence in Bangkok as
they believe capital-dwellers must first change as they are trend setters for the rest of
the nation. Another reason for a Bangkok presence is the Thai believe every significant
movement must have a presence in the nation’s capital.
26 Mrs Moo is a married, middle-aged Thai who helps out at Santi Asoke. Interview at
Santi Asoke on 31.8.02.
27 Mr Lek, an engineer in his fifties has spent 20 years in America. Prior to going to the
US, he headed up Fah Apai, the Santi Asoke publishing house. He now looks after his
ageing mother, and washes dishes in the vegetarian restaurant at Santi Asoke.
Interview at Santi Asoke on 3.9.02.
28 It is estimated that there are around 10,000 base communities in Brazil, with a total
membership of 250,000. It should be pointed out that base communities do not represent
the poorest of the poor in society, as their practice requires a certain level of literacy.
29 Liberation theology starts with the basic questions of oppression, violence and
marginalisation and focuses on practical solutions which result in liberation. Unlike
NOTES
230

--- PAGE 246 ---
conventional approaches to theology, which conclude with an explanation of and
possibly a reflection on issues, liberation theology seeks to be part of the process
through which situations are resolved. Just as conventional theology borrows concepts
from Plato and Aristotle, so liberation theology draws from Marxist understanding
in terms of class struggle, the oppressive nature of capitalism and the need for
revolutionary struggle. Salvation will include political freedom and a quality of life.
Liberation theologians reject a spiritualising of the bible and view God as a liberator,
the key example being the exodus of the Jews from oppression in Egypt.
30 There are also Christian ashrams. The first Protestant ashram was started in 1917 at
Satara, India. It was started by N.V. Tilak, a National Christian leader who tried to
contextualise Christianity to the Indian situation. Others Ashrams followed, both
Protestant (1921) and Catholic (1941). The eating of vegetarian food, celibacy and long
hours of work and religious practice are distinctive features of ashram living.
31 Dr Puntarigvivat deliberately refrains from defining the term base community in the
hope that his readership might arrive at their own definition of the term through exam-
ining the activities of these communities. However, he gives the following examples
of what he describes as Buddhist base communities: Phra Khamkhian Suvanno’s
community in north-eastern Chaiybhum; Phrakhun Sakorn’s community in Yokkrabat
(central Thailand) and the Buddha-Kasetra community in northern Thailand.
32 For example, the Decalogue, ‘Sermon on the Mount’ and St Paul’s ethical teaching.
33 Prawet Wasi was born in Kanchanaburi (Central Thailand) and brought up in a family
of merchants. He studied medicine, gaining a PhD in Haematology from the University
of Colorado, and became a professor in the Faculty of Medicine at Sirirat Hospital in
Bangkok. In 1981 he was awarded a Magsaysay award for his contribution to the work
of NGOs.
34 It seems appropriate at this stage to give some background to the Sakgha’s involvement in
rural community work. The two Bangkok Buddhist universities for monks,
Mahachulalongkorn (Mahanikai) and Mahamakut (Thammayut) created programmes in
1963 to train monks in developing rural communities. According to Suksamran (1976:63),
the three main objectives of this mission were: First, to maintain and promote the monks’
status as refuge of the people by providing them religious education and general knowl-
edge concerning community development. Second, to encourage monks to participate in
community development and thus help existing community development programmes to
achieve their aims. Third, to promote unity among the Thai people and thus help promote
national and religious security. Two groups (or orders) of monks were established as part
of this initiative. First, the Phra Thammathut group (thut is the Thai word for ‘ambassa-
dor, or envoy’). There were around 1,300 such monks in 1967, and their focus was to
strengthen the Buddhist beliefs of the villagers and provide some aid to those in need.
Second, the Phra Thammacharik group. These monks worked among the tribes in North
Thailand and tried to convert them from their Primal Religion to Buddhism. This was to
assimilate them into Thai society and minimise communist growth in the northern region.
35 The key section of the speech includes the following:
Being a tiger is not important. What is important is to have enough to eat and
to live; and to have an economy which provides enough to eat and live. Having
enough to eat and live means supporting oneself to have enough for oneself.
I have said before that this sufficiency does not mean that each household has
to produce its own food, weave its own cloth. That is too much. But within
a village or district, there must be a certain amount of self-sufficiency.
(Phongpaichit and Baker, 2000:193)
36 This practice has been discontinued at all but one of the Asoke communities. It was felt
that it was impractical due to all the work that needed to be done in the fields and small
NOTES
231

--- PAGE 247 ---
factories. Lana Asoke maintains the practice of not talking on Wednesdays. This is partly
a discipline for the junior monks in the first five years of their training. One monk in
inviting me to visit joked ‘don’t come on Wednesdays because we won’t speak to you’.
(The word ‘Wednesday’ and ‘speak’ sound the same in Thai, thus ‘wan put mi poot’.)
37 The term was coined by Thomas More (1478–1535) MP and chancellor who published
Utopia in 1516. More’s substantially urbanised island utopia is noted for its religious tol-
erance and kind priests who seek to enlighten the few who hold to the forbidden views
that the soul is mortal, that the world came about by chance and that there is no reward or
punishment after death. More’s book ‘inaugurated a long tradition of fiction – a genre that
reached a wider audience than polemical tracts, and being classed as fantasy, avoided
political censure’ (Rohmann, 2000:417). Utopians’ confidence in the ability of mankind
to live in harmony, and positive regard for uniformity and conformity has caused some
writers to point out the dangers of such an approach, terming it dystopia (Greek word for
a ‘bad place’). Such dystopian writers include Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World, George
Orwell’s 1984 and Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale (Rohmann, 2000:418).
38 Mu klum (Thai) means ‘the view of the group’. The general consensus of the group is
considered important and a corrective to headstrong individuals.
39 Sikkhamat Rinpha in an interview conducted at Phathom Asoke on 10.2.00.
40 The booklet is available on the bookstands for non-temple dwellers to purchase and use.
41 Mr Anurak Poonnoo was a member of Santi Asoke for approximately seven years
before leaving in the early 1990s. The interview was conducted in Pattalung, South
Thailand on 29.8.02.
42 That said, there is a strong focus on retaining the young who have grown up within the
movement. This is partly achieved by offering them positions of responsibility at an
early age.
43 This was discussed in the section entitled Santi Asoke – a utopian society reminiscent
of a previous generation?
44 In an interview on 24.8.02, at Santi Asoke, Bodhirak indicated that it will take 500 years
of Asoke example before governance will be informed by Dhamma principles.
45 ISKCON (International Society for Krishna Consciousness), are also referred to as the
Hare Krishna Movement. Members of the Unification Church are often referred to as
‘Moonies’. The Family used to be known as ‘The Children of God’.
46 While there are very few Mahayana temples in Thailand, there are shrines in most
communities where there are Chinese families. Such families would also have shrines
in their homes. Thus Chinese Mahayana traditions are maintained within Theravada
Buddhism.
47 Men and women are segregated and food is passed along two rows of people facing
each other.
48 In an interview at Santi Asoke on 2.9.05.
49 Personal email correspondence in 2000.
7 THE APPROACH OF SANTI ASOKE TO SPIRITUAL 
PURIFICATION
1 At the end of my time at an Asoke retreat in Phai Sali in February 2002, I was
interviewed by three monks for an Asoke magazine. They were keen to evaluate my
understanding of Buddhism, and particularly my view of how Asoke differs from the
teachings of Buddhadasa. They summed up their understanding of the difference as
follows: ‘Buddhadasa talks about doctrine, we put it into practice.’ This, however, is
not unrelated to the difference between remaining as a respected member of the
Sakgha like Buddhadasa, and being excommunicated like Bodhirak!
2 Translated from a quote originally in French from a book written by Sikkhamat
Thipdevi and Aporn Poompanna.
NOTES
232

--- PAGE 248 ---
3 Pages 11–20 of Tawt Rahat (Thai) which is best translated by the English term
‘password’.
4 Stream-enterer, Once-returner, Non-returner and Arahat.
5 Mrs Rhys-Davies and Christmas Humphries are two Western Buddhists who have been
accused of this.
6 Interview with a newly ordained samaja on 19.8.02 at Pathom Asoke.
7 Asoke members refer to this as ‘jay toh samatha’.
8 It is not uncommon for newly ordained monks to be brought by their mentor to view,
touch and in some cases spend time meditating on a corpse as it awaits cremation in
the temple grounds. The monks will be reminded that their body is of the same nature
and that they too will die.
9 The corpse of the lady who became a sikkhamat and donated a considerable amount of
land on which Santi Asoke (Bangkok) is located and may be viewed in the putthasathan
at Santi Asoke.
10 The practice of morality, concentration/mental development and wisdom. These three
practices constitute The Noble Eightfold Path or Ariya-Atthakgika-Magga. This is
referred to in Thai as Ma ong phet.
11 Traditionally seen as the four jhanas of samatha meditation, and these are the basis of
vipassana.
12 Right Insight and Right Deliverance being the last core-constituents (and part of the
training in Higher Mentality).
13 If a mind at any moment is free (voided) from greed, hatred, delusion and the notion
of self it may be considered as free mind or chit-waang (Buddhadasa Bhikkhu,
1988:35).
14 The abbot of Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram. I was able to interview him at his
temple on 12.3.01 at Ratburi, 90 kilometres south of Bangkok.
15 There are three types of wisdom – wisdom resulting from study, wisdom resulting from
reflection and wisdom resulting from spiritual development. There are three levels of
wisdom – Primary wisdom, which was taught before the Buddha’s enlightenment. This
level of wisdom is concerned with relative truth as opposed to absolute truth. The
second level is the wisdom that comes from the Four Noble Truths, and is referred to
as Noble Truth (Ariya-Sacca). This level of wisdom was achieved by Gotama the
Bodhisatva, upon achieving Buddhahood. As the Four Noble Truths are understood,
and the Noble Eightfold Path, Ariya-Magga followed, this second or intermediate level
of wisdom is realised. The third and ultimate level of wisdom is the wisdom which
comes from understanding the Law of Dependent Origination Paticca-Samuppada.
This level was also realised by Gotama on achieving Buddhahood. It includes insight
into the true nature of existence (impermanence, suffering and non-self) and achieving
the original purity of the mind (free from pollutants and suffering). There is also
the ability, at this level, to detach from any feeling that arises. The second level is
achieved and sustained by the following of the Noble Eightfold Path. Those who
have achieved the highest level need no longer practise anything as they have moved
beyond attachment and desire (Varadhammo, 1996:133–5).
16 This appears very close to the Six Bad Habits of the Sigalouada Sutta (Thai Abayamuk,
Pali Apayamukha). These habits led to ruin and are as follows: being lazy, gambling,
watching entertainment, going out late at night, being friendly with bad people and
addictive behaviour. Indeed, it may well be that it is the Six Bad Habits which is being
referred to, as they feature in the questionnaire.
17 Sariputta was one of the main disciples of the Buddha who gained the Dhamma vision
not long after the Buddha commenced his itinerant teaching. Sariputta was famous
for his wisdom and is often depicted in Buddhist art/iconography as standing on one
side of the Buddha, while Moggallana, another leading disciple (famous for his
psychic powers) stands on the other side. Both Sariputta and Mogallana were Arahats.
NOTES
233

--- PAGE 249 ---
In Theravada Buddhism Arahats are not reborn; therefore Bodhirak is making an
unorthodox statement.
18 This was the view of a senior female member of the Santi Asoke community in
Bangkok (Interview 14.3.00) and is representative of the Asoke membership.
19 Mr Anurak in an interview at Pattalung on 29.8.02.
CONCLUSION
1 In the Thai language ‘108’ (roi phet) conveys the impression of a large number, too
many to mention. As already mentioned, the number ‘108’ is also considered an
auspicious number in Buddhism, for example, Buddhist rosaries sometimes have
108 beads.
2 In having nine communities throughout the country (eight of them outside the capital)
Santi Asoke appears less threatening to the Sakgha than if it had a large centre in
Bangkok.
3 The belief is that Phra Dhammachayo is an Avatara (a descent into this world) of one
of the original leaders of the White Dhammakaya, a group of enlightened beings who
created a perfect world which was spoiled by the Black Dhammakaya. Other members
consider their leader to be ‘messiah and a reincarnation of the Buddha’ (Bangkok Post,
21.12.98).
4 Examples of this are the opposites of the Black and White Parties, and those who have
a measure of insight through the practice of Dhammakaya meditation, as opposed to
those who remain deluded due to their non-participation in this kind of meditation.
5 An example of this would be the ceremony on the first Sunday of each month when
Phra Dhammachayo allegedly presents offerings to the Buddhas in nibbana.
6 The publicity suggesting a donation of 5,000 Baht (£80) towards the purchase and
fitting of a square metre of granite around the cetiya. No mention was made of specific
rewards, although any Buddhist would expect such meritorious giving to generate
merit (Pali puñña). As a reminder of their generosity, donors were to have their
thumbprints set into a slab of granite.
7 The ashram is a community where the religious life is practiced. The eating of
vegetarian food, celibacy and long hours of work and religious practice are distinctives
of ashram living.
8 Nomian from the Greek nomos meaning ‘law’.
9 These are: readily understood teaching: prosperity now; excellent publicity; building
national significance through global expansion; sense of belonging; recruitment to the
movement and fund raising.
10 The ranat is a Thai traditional instrument similar to a wooden xylophone.
APPENDIX ONE: RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
1 I understand the terms emic and etic were first used in 1967 by Kenneth Pike to make
the inside/outside distinction.
2 In an interview at New College, University of Edinburgh on 25.4.03.
3 This was due to the intense media coverage they were subjected to at that particular
time and understandable reservations towards those who asked questions which
flagged up their differences from mainstream Thai Buddhism.
4 Cox cites the categories of myths, rituals, sacred practitioners, scripture, art, morality,
beliefs and rituals (Cox, 1992:31).
5 Stage seven Constructing the paradigmatic model. Stage eight Performing the eidetic
intuition (arriving at a substantive definition of the movement being studied). Stage
nine Testing the intuition (in the light of the observed phenomena).
NOTES
234

--- PAGE 250 ---
6 For example, Marja-Leena Heikkilä-Horn suggests that Santi Asoke may be viewed as
a millenarian movement. Donald Swearer understands Wat Phra Dhammakaya as
seeking to create the old galactic system. That is, the grouping of society around a
temple where power is located and used for managing all within the system.
7 A nomian movement elevates ‘law’ or ‘rules’ to a high level and views ‘rule-keeping’
as the litmus test of achievement/orthodoxy. From the Greek nomos meaning law.
8 The ‘conversionist’ is concerned to be ‘saved’. The ‘revolutionist’ tries to overthrow
the world. ‘Introversionists’ withdraw from the world. The ‘manipulationist’ helps
members of his/her group rise above the world. The ‘thaumaturgical’ believes it
possible to experience the supernatural in everyday life. ‘Reformists’ try to gradually
change the world, while ‘utopians’ attempt to create a perfect society on earth.
APPENDIX TWO: ANALYSIS OF THE SANTI ASOKE 
QUESTIONNAIRE
1 If each of the 62 responders fully completed this section where they were invited
to itemise five practices there would have been a total of 310 responses. Some,
(particularly new members) mentioned less than five practices.
2 The Six Bad Habits (Thai Abayamuk, Pali Apayamukha) that lead to ruin are: being
lazy; gambling; watching entertainment; going out late at night; being friendly with
bad people and addictive behaviour.
3 In some cases Bodhirak was mentioned along with other Santi Asoke monastics.
NOTES
235

--- PAGE 251 ---
236
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allen D, 1987 ‘Phenomenology of Religion’pp.272–85 in M Elaide (ed.) The Encyclopedia
of Religion Vol. 11, London: Collier McMillian Publishers
Allison GH, 1997 Jumbo English–Thai Dictionary Bangkok: Oden Store Ltd
Archer D, Puntis C and Watkins T, 2001 What Does the Bible Say about ‘The Matrix’
Southhampton: Damaris Trust
Ariyaratne AT, 1999 Buddhist Economics in Practice Salisbury: Sarvodaya Support Group
Asoketrakul R, undated A Development of the Non-Formal Education Model for
Organizing Self Reliance Based on Asoke’s Concept unpublished paper by PhD student
at Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
Barker E, 1989 New Religious Movements London: HMSO
Barnard A and Burgess T (eds) 1996 Sociology Explained Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press
Barnes NJ, 1996 ‘Buddhist Women and Nun’s Order in Asia’ pp.259–94 in CS Queen and
SB King (eds) Engaged Buddhism Albany: State University of New York Press
Batchelor M and Brown K, 1992 Buddhism and Ecology London: Cassell Publishers
Beall T, 2000 ‘Essenes’ pp.342–8 in C Evans and S Porter (eds) Dictionary of New
Testament Background Leicester: IVP
Bell J, 1993 Doing Your Research Project Buckingham: Oxford University Press
Bern J, 1987 ‘NewReligion in Japan’ pp.410–24 in M Eliade (ed.) The Encyclopedia
of Religion Vol. 10, London: Collier McMillian Publishers
Bhawilai R, 1987 Buddhism in Thailand: Description and Analysis paper presented to the
International Conference on Thai Studies, Canberra, Australian National University, July
1987 pp.4 quoted in Jackson P, 1989 Buddhism, Legitimation and Conflict: Political
Functions of Urban Thai Buddhism Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies p.200
Bilton T et al. (eds) 1996 Introducing Sociology Basingstoke: Palgrave
Blofeld J, 1972 King Maha Mongkut of Siam Singapore: Asia Pacific Press
Bodhirak Samana (Thai) 1999 Tatrahat Bangkok: Fai Apai Publishing
Bodhirak Samana (Thai) 2000 EQ Lokuttara [Supramundane Emotional Intelligence]
Bangkok: Fah Apai Publishing
Boff C, 1991 ‘Church Base Communities’ pp.173–7 in Lossky et al. (eds) Dictionary
of the Ecumenical Movement Geneva: WCC Publications
Boff L, 1992 Ecclesiogenesis: The Base Communities Reinvent the Church Maryknoll,
New York: Orbis Books
Bowers JS, 1996 Dhammakaya Meditation in Thai Society Bangkok: Chulalongkorn
University Press

--- PAGE 252 ---
Boyd JW, 1975 Satan and Mara: Christian and Buddhist Symbols of Evil Leiden: E.J. Brill
Brown A, 1997 ‘Locating Working Class Power’ pp.164–78 in K Hewison (ed.) Political
Change in Thailand London: Routledge
Buddhadasa Bhikkhu, ET1 undated Handbook for Mankind Bangkok: Dhammasapa
Buddhadasa Bhikkhu, ET undated Heart-Wood from the Bo Tree Bangkok: Dhammasapa
Buddhadasa Bhikkhu, ET 1988 Buddhadhamma for Students Bangkok: Dhamma Study
and Practice Group
Buddhadasa Bhikkhu, ET 1988 Keys to Natural Truth Bangkok: Dhamma Study and
Practice Group
Buddhadasa Bhikkhu, ET 1990 A Buddhist Charter Bangkok: Vuddhidhamma Fund
Buddhaghosa Bhadantacariya, ET 1979 The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) Kandy:
Buddhist Publication Society, translated by Ñajamoli Bhikkhu
Bunbongkarn S, 1996 State of the Nation: Thailand Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies
Burrell G and Dale K, 2002 ‘Utopiary: Utopia, Gardens and Organization’ pp.106–27 in
M Parker (ed.) Utopia and Organization Oxford: Blackwell Publishing
Butr-Indr S, 1995 The Social Philosophy of Buddhism Bangkok: Mahamakut Buddhist
University
Cabezón JI, 2000 ‘A God, but not a Savior’ pp.17–31 in Gross RM and Muck TC (eds)
Buddhists Talk about Jesus: Christians Talk about the Buddha New York: Continuum
Callahan WA, 1995 ‘Non-Governmental Organizations, Non-Violent Action, and Post
Modern Politics in Thailand’ in Sojourn (Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia)
Vol. 10, No. 1, pp.90–115
Cappa W, 1995 Religious Studies Minneapolis: Augsburg
Choompolpaisal Phibul, 2003 Materialism or Religious Practice? An Application of the
Debate between Gadamer’s and Habermas Hermeneutics to a Studt of Phra Dhammakaya
Buddhist Temple: the Stupa and its Interpretations MA thesis submitted to the Study of
Religions of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London
Chryssides G, 1999 Exploring New Religions London: Cassell
Clark S and Thompson M, 1996 Buddhism: A New Approach London: Hodder and Stoughton
Collins S, 1982 Selfless Persons: Imagery and Thought in Theravada Buddhism
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Conner DW, 1996 Personal Power, Authority and Influence: Cultural Foundations for
Leadership and Leadership Formation in Northeast Thailand and Implications for Adult
Learning Training Unpublished EdD thesis, Northern Illinois University
Conze E, 1967 Thirty Years of Buddhist Studies Oxford: Bruno Cassirer Ltd
Corliss R, 2003 ‘Unlocking the Matrix’ in Time 12.5.03 pp.53–61
Cousins LS, 1997a ‘Buddhism’ pp.369–444 in JR Hinnells (ed.) A New Handbook of
Living Religions Oxford: Blackwell Publishers
Cousins LS, 1997b ‘Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism’ pp.185–207 in Connolly P
and Hamilton S (eds) Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti Papers from
the Annual Spalding Symposium on Indian Religions London: Luzac Oriental
Cox J, 1992 Expressing the Sacred Zimbabwe: University of Zimbabwe
Crosby K, 2000 ‘Tantric Theravada: A Bibliographic Essay on the Writings of François
Bizot and others on the Yogavacara Tradition’ in Contemporary Buddhism Vol. 1, No. 2,
pp.141–98
Cross FL and Livingstone EA (eds) 1997 ‘Liberation Theology’pp.978–9 (no article-author
cited) in The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church Oxford: Oxford University Press
BIBLIOGRAPHY
237

--- PAGE 253 ---
Daorueng P, 1999 ‘Buddhism Inc.’ in Far Eastern Economic Review 11.2.99 pp.38–41
Darlington SM, 1998 ‘The Ordination of a Tree: The Buddhist Ecology Movement in
Thailand’ in Ethnology Vol. 37, No. 1, Winter pp.1–115
Dattajeevo (Dattacheewo) Bhikkhu, ET 1992 Buddhist Ways to Overcome Obstacles
Bangkok: Khumson Books
Dattajeevo (Dattacheewo) Bhikkhu, 1995 ‘The Biochemistry of a Still Mind’ in The Light
of Peace Vol. 7, No. 2, pp.30–1
Davis JR, 1993 Poles Apart Bangkok: Kanok Bannasan
Dawson LL (ed.) 2003 Cults and New Religious Movements: A Reader Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing Ltd
Dhammapitaka Phra [also known as Payutto Prayudh Phra] (Thai) 1998 Karani
Thammakai Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation
Dietrich A, 1997 ‘Santi Asoke: Buddhism the Gandhian Way’ in Seeds of Peace Vol. 13,
No. 2, pp.23–6
Earhart HB, 1969 Japanese Religion: Unity and Diversity California: Dickenson
Publishing Company
Earhart HB, 1974 Religion in the Japanese Experience: Sources and Interpretations
California: Dickenson Publishing Company
Ekachai S, 2001 Keeping the Faith: Buddhism at the Crossroads Bangkok: Bangkok
Post Books
Erricker C, 1999 ‘Phenomenological Approaches’ pp.73–104 in P Connolly Approaches to
the Study of Religion London: Cassell
Feungfusakul A, 1993 Buddhist Reform Movements in Contemporary Thai Urban Context:
Thammakai and Santi Asoke PhD thesis submitted to the Faculty of Sociology of the
University of Bielefeld, Germany
Frymer-Kensky T, 1987 ‘Utopia’ pp.159–63 in M Eliade (ed.) The Encyclopedia of
Religion Vol. 5, London: McMillan Collier Press
Fuengfusakul A, 1993 ‘Empire of Crystal and Utopian Commune: Two Types of
Contemporary Theravada Reform in Thailand’ in Sojourn Vol. 8, No. 1, pp.53–183
Fuengfusakul A (Thai) 1998 ‘Sasanasat Kong Chum Chon Muang Samai Mi – Koruni
Wat Phra Thammakai’ [‘Religious Understandings of Contemporary Urban Society –
The Case Study of Wat Phra Thammakai’] in The Journal of Buddhist Studies
(Chulalongkorn University) Vol. 5, No. 1, pp.41–67
Gabaude L, 1990 ‘Thai Society and Buddhadasa: Structural Difficulties’ pp.211–26 in (no
editor cited) Radical Conservatism: Buddhism in the Contemporary World [Articles in
honour of Buddhadasa’s 84th birthday] Bangkok: INER
Gane M, 2001 ‘Durkheim’s Project for a Sociological Science’ pp.79–88 in Ritzer G and
Smart B (eds) Handbook of Social Theory London: Sage Publications
Gearing J, 1999 ‘Between Faith and Fundraising’in Asiaweek 17.9.99 (page numbers unclear)
Gethin R, 1997 ‘Cosmology and Meditation: From the Aggañña Sutta to the Mahayana’ in
History of Religions Vol. 36, No. 3, pp.183–217
Gethin R, 1998 The Foundations of Buddhism Oxford: Oxford University Press
Glock CY and Stark R, 1965 Religion and Society in Tension Chicago: Rand McNally
and Co.
Gnoli G, ET 1987 ‘Zoroastrianism’ pp.579–91 in M Eliade (ed.) The Encyclopaedia of
Religion Vol. 15, London: McMillan Collier Press
Govinda Anagarika Brahmacari, 1969 Foundations of Tibetan Mysticism London:
Rider and Co.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
238

--- PAGE 254 ---
Grimm G, 1958 The Doctrine of the Buddha Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Ltd
Gunaratna VF, 1970 The Satipatthana Sutta and its Application to Modern Life Kandy:
Buddhist Publication Society
Hall SG, 2000 ‘Doceticism’ p.163 in TA Hart (ed.) The Dictionary of Historical Theology
Carlisle: Paternoster Press
Hamilton MB, 1995 The Sociology of Religion London: Routledge
Hammersley M and Atkinson P, 1995 Ethnography London: Routledge
Harris H, 2001 ‘How Helpful is the Term “Fundamentalist”?’ pp.4–18 in CH Partridge
(ed.) Fundamentalisms Carlisle: Paternoster Press
Harrison P, 1988 ‘Buddhism: A Religion of Revelation After All?’ in Numen Vol. 34,
Fasc. 2, pp.256–64
Harrison P, 1992 ‘Is the Dharma-Kaya the Real “Phantom Body” of the Buddha?’ Journal
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies Vol. 15, No. 1, pp.44–94
Harvey P, 1990 An Introduction to Buddhism Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Harvey P, 1995 The Selfless Mind: Personality, Consciousness and Nirvaja in Early
Buddhism Richmond: Curzon Press
Harvey P, 1998 ‘Buddhist Attitudes to and Treatment of Non-human Nature’ in
Ecotheology Vol. 4, pp.35–50
Harvey P, 2000 An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Harvey P, 2003 Mahayana Perspectives on Buddhahood: the ‘Three Body’ Doctrine
University of Sunderland MA Buddhist Studies [BUDMO1: Buddhist Traditions]
Hass MR, 1964 Thai-English Student’s Dictionary Stanford: Stanford University Press
Hay D, 1989 Economics Today: A Christian Critique Leicester Apollos
Hebblethwaite M, 1993 Base Communities: An Introduction London: Geoffrey Chapman
Heikkilä-Horn M-L, 1996 ‘Two Paths to Revivalism in Thai Buddhism: The Dhammakaya
and Santi Asoke Movements’ in Temenos Vol. 32, pp.93–111
Heikkilä-Horn M-L, 1997 Buddhism with Open Eyes: Belief and Practice of Santi Asoke
Bangkok: Fah Apai Co. Ltd
Heinze R-I, 1977 The Role of the Sakgha in Modern Thailand Taipei: The Chinese
Association for Folklore
Hesselgrave DJ, 1967 ‘Soka Gakkai’s Inner Thrust’ in Evangelical Missions Quarterly,
Spring, pp.129–37.
Hewison K, 1997 ‘The Monarchy and Democratisation’ pp.58–93 in K Hewison (ed.)
Political Change in Thailand London: Routledge
Hill M, 1973 A Sociology of Religion: Theoretical and Comparative Perspectives London:
Heinemann
Hirst P (ed.) 1996 Seeing Forests For Tree: Environment and Environmentalism in
Thailand Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books
Holton RJ, 2001 ‘Talcott Parsons: Conservative Apologist or Irreplaceable Icon’
pp.152–63 in G Ritzer and B Smart (eds) Handbook of Social Theory London: Sage
Publications
Hudhes DA, 1996 Has God Many Names? An Introduction to Religious Studies Leicester:
Appollos
Humphreys C (ed.) 1962 A Popular Dictionary of Buddhism London: Arco Press
Inada KK and Jacobson NP (eds) 1984 Buddhist and American Thinkers Delhi: Sri Satguru
Publications
Ishii Y, ET 1986 Sakgha, State and Society: Thai Buddhism in History Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press
BIBLIOGRAPHY
239

--- PAGE 255 ---
Jackson PA, 1988a Buddhadasa: A Buddhist Thinker for the Modern World Bangkok:
The Siam Society
Jackson PA, 1988b ‘The Hupphaasawan Movement: Millenarian Buddhism among Thai
Political Elite’ in Sojourn Vol. 3, No. 2, pp.134–70
Jackson PA, 1989 Buddhism, Legitimation and Conflict: The Political Functions Of Urban
Thai Buddhism Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies
Jackson PA, 1993 ‘Re-Interpreting the Traiphuum Phra Ruang: Political Functions of
Buddhist Symbolism in Contemporary Thailand’ pp.64–101 in T Ling (ed.) Buddhist
Trends in Southeast Asia Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies
Jackson PA, 1997 ‘Withering Centre, Flourishing Margins: Buddhism’s Changing Political
Roles’ pp.75–93 in K Hewison (ed.) Political Change in Thailand London: Routledge
Jackson PA, 1999 ‘Royal Spirits, Chinese gods, and Magic Monks: Thailand’s Boom-Time
Religions of Prosperity’ in South East Asia Research Vol. 7, No. 3, pp.245–320
Jayamanggalo Phra Ajahn Maha Sermchai, 1991 The Heart of Dhammakaya Meditation
Bangkok: Dhammakaya Buddhist Meditation Foundation
Kabilsingh Chatsumarn, 1991 Thai Women in Buddhism Berkeley: Parallax Press
Kalansuriya ADP, 1991 A Philosophical Analysis of Buddhist Notions: The Buddha and
Wittgenstein Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications
Karunadasa Y, 1967 Buddhist Analysis of Matter Colombo: Department of Cultural Affairs
Karunadasa Y, 1994 ‘The Buddhist Doctrine of Non-Self and the Problem of the
Over-Self’ in The Middle Way Vol. 69, No. 2, pp.107–18
Keith AB, 1923 Buddhist Philosophy Oxford: Clarendon Press
Keyes CF, 1977 ‘Millennialism, Theravada Buddhism, and Thai Society’ in Journal of
Asian Studies Vol. 36, No. 2, pp.283–302
Keyes CF, 1991 ‘Buddhist Economics and Buddhist Fundamentalism in Burma and
Thailand’ pp.367–407 in M Marty and RS Appleby (eds) Fundamentalisms Observed
Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Kim Y-B, 2001 ‘Minjung Theology’ pp.552–3 in SW Sunquist (ed.) A Dictionary of
Christian Liberation Grand Rapids: WB Eerdmans
Kinsley D, 1987 ‘Avatara’ pp.14–15 in M Eliade (ed.) Encyclopedia of Religion Vol. 2,
London: McMillian Collier Press
Klostermaier KK, 1999 Buddhism: A Short Introduction Oxford: Oneworld
Kraft C, 1991 ‘What Kind of Encounters do we Need in our Christian Witness?’ in
Evangelical Missions Quarterly Vol. 27, No. 3, pp.258–65
Laird J, 2000 Money Politics, Globalisation and Crisis: The Case of Thailand Singapore:
Graham Brash Pte. Ltd
Lee RLM, 2003 ‘The Re-Enchantment of the Self: Western Spirituality, Asian Materialism’
in Journal of Contemporary Religion Vol. 18, No. 3, pp.351–67
Leifer M (ed.) 1995 ‘Kingdom of Thailand’ pp.33–6 Dictionary of the Modern Politics of
Asia London: Routledge (no article-author cited)
Lerrtjitlekha C, 1998 Buddhist Pañña: A Study of Theravada Buddhist Ethics in Dialogue
with Christian Morality Bangkok: Saengtham College Press
Ling T, 1997 Buddhism and the Mythology of Evil Oxford: Oneworld
Lorgunpai S, 1995 World Lover-World Leaver Unpublished PhD thesis, New College,
University of Edinburgh
Lundy D, 2003 ‘Globalization and the Support of Nationals’ in Evangelical Missions
Quarterly Vol. 39, No. 2, pp.166–74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
240

--- PAGE 256 ---
McCargo D, 1993 ‘The Three Paths of Major-General Chamlong Srimuang’ in South East
Asia Research Vol. 1, No. 1, pp.27–67
McCargo D, 1997 Chamlong Srimuang and the New Thai Politics London: Hurst and Co.
McCargo D, 2001 ‘Populism and Reformism in Contemporary Thailand’ in South East
Asia Research Vol. 9, No. 1, pp.89–107
Mackenzie R, 1995a Meaning and Meditation: Some Aspects of the Life and Teaching of
Buddhadasa Unpublished MTh thesis, New College, University of Edinburgh
Mackenzie R, 1995b Soka Gakkai: New Movement or Medieval Buddhism? Unpublished
essay, New College, University of Edinburgh
Mackenzie R, 1995c Anatta and the Buddhist-Christian Dialogue Unpublished essay;
New College, University of Edinburgh
Mackenzie R, 2001 ‘Back to the Basics of Buddhism: The Santi Asoke Movement’
pp.137–54 in CH Partridge (ed.) Fundamentalisms Carlisle: Paternoster Press
McLeish K and O’Leary, 1993 ‘Utopianism’ pp.768–9 in K McLeish (ed.) Guide to
Human Thought: Ideas that Shaped the World London: Bloomsbury Publishing Ltd
Malalasekera GP (ed.) 1971 ‘Buddha-Nature’(article written by AGSK) pp.435–44 in
Encyclopedia of Buddhism Vol. 3, Colombo: Government of Ceylon
Mandel JR, 2003 Globalisation and the Poor Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Masaharu A, 1916 Nichiren the Buddhist Prophet Boston: Harvard University Press
Mason S, 2000 ‘Pharisees’ pp.782–7 in C Evans and S Porter (eds) Dictionary of
New Testament Background Leicester: IVP
Medhidhammaporn Phra, 1994 Buddhist Morality Bangkok: Mahachulalongkorn
rajvidyalaya University Press (Wat Mahadhatu)
Mettanando Bhikkhu, 1999 Meditation and Healing in the Theravada Buddhist Order of
Thailand and Laos Unpublished PhD Thesis, Hamburg University
Mulder N, 1997 Thai Images: The Culture of the Public World Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books
Murakami S, ET 1980 Japanese Religion in the Modern Century Tokyo: University of
Tokyo Press
Murashima E, 1988 ‘The Origin of Modern Official State Ideology in Thailand’ in Journal
of Southeast Asian Studies Vol. 19, No. 1, pp.80–96
Murti TRV, 1960 The Central Philosophy of Buddhism London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd
Ñajasampanno Acariya Maha Boowa, 2003 ET Venerable Acariya Mun Bhuridatta:
A Spiritual Biography Baan Taad (NE Thailand): Forest Dhamma of Wat Pa
Baan Taad
Nartsupha C, 1991 ‘The Community Culture School of Thought’pp.118–41 in M Chitakasem
and A Turton (eds) Thai Constructions of Knowledge London: University of London
Nash K, 2000 Contemporary Political Sociology: Globalization, Politics and Power Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers
Naylor BC, 1988 ‘Buddhas or Bitches?: Nicheren’s Attitude to Women’ published in
Religious Traditions (no further details given)
Northcott MS, 1999 ‘Sociological Approaches’ pp.193–225 in P Connoly (ed.)
Approaches to the Study of Religion London: Cassell
Nyanaponika Thera, 1962 The Heart of Buddhist Meditation London: Rider and Company
Nyanasamvara HH Somdet Phra, ET 1992 Buddha Sasana Vaysa: A Buddhist Monastic
Lineage Bangkok: Mahamakut Press
O’Connor RA, 1986 ‘Merit and the Market: Thai Symbolism of Self-Interest’ in Journal
of the Siam Society Vol. 74, pp.62–80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
241

--- PAGE 257 ---
O’Connor RA, 1990 ‘Place, Power and Discourse in the Thai Image of Bangkok’in Journal
of the University of the South Sewanee, Tennessee pp.61–73
O’Connor RA, 1993 ‘Interpreting Thai Religious Change: Temples, Sakgha Reform and
Social Change’ in Journal of Southeast Asian Studies Vol. 24, No. 2, pp.330–9
Olson GA, 1991 ‘Cries over Spilled Holy Water: “Complex” Responses to a Traditional
Thai Religious Practice’ in Journal of Southeast Asian Studies Vol. 22, No. 1, pp.75–85
Padilla R, 2001 ‘Mission at the Turn of the Century/Millennium’in Evangel Vol. 19, No. 1,
pp.6–12
Paribatra S, 1993 ‘State and Society in Thailand: How Fragile the Democracy?’ in Asian
Survey Vol. 33, No. 9, pp.878–93
Payutto Prayudh Phra, ET undated Buddhist Solutions for the Twenty-first Century
Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation
Payutto Prayudh Phra [also known as Phra Dhammapitaka], 1990 Thai Buddhism in the
Buddhist World Bangkok: Mahachulalongkorn University Press
Payutto Prayudh Phra, ET 1994 Buddhist Economics: A Middle Way for the Market Place
Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation
Payutto Prayudh Phra, ET 1995 Buddhadhamma: Natural Laws and Values for Life
Albany: State University of New York Press
Payutto Prayudh Phra, ET 1997 A Constitution for Living Bangkok: Dept of Religious
Affairs and Ministry of Education [Thai Government]
Phongpaichit P and Baker C, 1997 Thailand: Economy and Politics Oxford: Oxford
University Press
Phongpaichit P and Baker C, 1998 Thailand’s Boom and Bust Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books
Phongpaichit P and Baker C, 2000 Thailand’s Crisis Copenhagen: Nordic Institute of
Asian Studies
Poompanna A, 1989 Insight into Santi Asoke-Part One Bangkok: Kittiya Veerapan Press
Poompanna A, 1991 Insight into Santi Asoke-Part Two Bangkok: Kittiya Veerapan Press
Powers J, 1995 Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism New York: Snowlion Publications
Prebish CS (ed.) 1962 Historical Dictionary of Buddhism London: Scarecrow Press Inc.
Puntarigvivat T, 1992 ‘Luangpor Teean: The Dynamic Practices of a Thai Meditation
Master’ in Crossroads Vol. 7, No. 1, pp.69–89
Puntarigvivat T, 1998 ‘Toward a Buddhist Social Ethics: The Case of Thailand’ in Cross
Currents (College of New Rochelle) Vol. 48, No. 3, pp.347–65
Puntarigvivat T, 1999 ‘Bhikkhuni: An Indian Institution not yet Reaching Thailand’ in
Waraendiasuksa (Indian Studies Journal) No. 4 pp.43–63
Puntarigvivat T, 2001 ‘Thai Buddhism: A Socio-Political Perspective’ in The World
Fellowship of Buddhists Vol. 38, Nos. 3 and 4, pp.69–76
Rahula W, 1978 What the Buddha Taught Gordon Fraser: London
Rajadhon P, 1986 ‘Popular Buddhism in siam and other essays on Thai Studies’ Bangkok:
Thai Inter-Religious Commission for Development and Sathirakoses Nagapradipa
Foundation
Randall, R, 1990 Life as a Siamese Monk Bradford on Avon: Aukana
Ratchbandit S, 1999 Thai Botrean Chow Put jak Goreni Thammakaai [Lessons for Buddhists
from the Case of Dhammakaya] Bangkok: Society for Study Mahahchulalongkorn
University
Reader I, 1991 Religion in Contemporary Japan Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press
Reid D, 1991 New Wine: The Cultural Shaping of Japanese Christianity Berkeley:
Cambridge
BIBLIOGRAPHY
242

--- PAGE 258 ---
Reynolds CJ, 1972 The Buddhist Monkhood in Ninteenth Century Thailand PhD thesis,
Cornell University
Reynolds CJ, 2002 ‘National Identity and its Defenders’ pp.308–38 in CJ Reynolds (ed.)
Thai Identity in the Age of Globalization Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books
Reynolds F, 1976–77 ‘The Several Bodies of the Buddha: Reflections on a Neglected
Aspect of Theravada Tradition’ in History of Religions Vol. 16, pp.374–89
Reynolds FE, 1990 ‘Ethics and Wealth in Theravada Buddhism’ pp.59–87 in RF Sizemore
and DK Swearer (eds) in Ethics, Wealth and Salvation Columbia: University of South
Carolina
Rohmann C, 2000 Dictionary of Important Ideas and Thinkers London: Hutchinson
Ruegg DS, 1974 ‘Pali Gotta/Gotra and the term Gotrabhu in Pali and Buddhist Sanskrit
pp.199–210 in L Cousins, A Kunst and K Norman (eds) Buddhist Studies in Honour of
IB Horner Dordrecht: D Reidel Publishing Co.
Russel B, 1946 History of Western Philosophy London: George Allen and Unwin
St John M, 1996 Self-Understanding of Thai: Targeting a Message So It Hits the
Mark PhD thesis, unknown American University
Samudavanija C-A, 1997 ‘Old Soldiers Never Die, they are just bypassed: The Military,
Bureaucracy and Globalisation’ pp.42–178 in K Hewison (ed.) Political Change in
Thailand London: Routledge 63 BCE–66CE
Sanders EP, 1992 Judaism: Practice and Belief 63 BCE–66 CE London: SCM Press
Sangkhlaburi Min Zin, 2003 ‘Mon Culture: Dying or Reviving?’ in The Irrawaddy Vol. 11,
No. 8, pp.24–5
Saunders ED, 1987 ‘Buddhist Majdalas’ pp.155–8 in M Eliade (ed) The Encyclopaedia of
Religion Vol. 9, London: McMillan Collier Press
Schober J, 1995 ‘The Theravada Buddhist Engagement with Modernity in Southeast Asia:
Whether the Social Paradigm of the Galactic Polity’ in Journal of Southeast Asian
Studies Vol. 26, No. 2, pp.307–25
Seresopha S, 1995 Jotmai tung Nong Lek [Letter to Lek] Bangkok: Dhammakaya
Foundation
Sharma TR, 1994 An Introduction to Buddhist Philosophy Delhi: Eastern Book Linkers
Shek R, 1987 ‘Millenarianism’ pp.521–36 in M Eliade (ed.) Encyclopaedia of Religion
Vol. 9, London: McMillian Collier Press
Shigeyoshi M, 1980 Japanese Religion in the Modern Century Tokyo: University of Tokyo
Press
Sivaraksa S, 1987 ‘Thai Spirituality’ in Journal of The Siam Society Vol. 75, pp.75–90
Sizemore RF and Swearer DK (eds) 1990 Ethics, Wealth and Salvation Columbia:
University of South Carolina Press
Smith A, 1982 Siamese Gold: A History of Church Growth in Thailand: An Interpretive
Analysis 1816–1982 Bangkok: Kanok Bannasan
Smith D, 2003 Mission after Christendom London: Darton, Longman and Todd
Snellgrove DL, 1987 ‘Celestial Buddhas and Bodhisattvas’ pp.133–43 in M Eliade (ed.)
Encyclopaedia of Religion Vol. 3, London: McMillian, Collier Publishing
Somaratna GPV, 2001 ‘Ashram Movement’ pp.43–4 in SW Sunquist (ed.) A Dictionary of
Asian Christianity Grand Rapids: WB Eerdmans
Songkhla Ntayada na, 1999 Style and Ascetics: Attractiveness, Power and the Thai Sangha
PhD thesis submitted to the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of
London
Suksamran S, 1976 Political Buddhism in Southeast Asia New York: St Martin’s Press
BIBLIOGRAPHY
243

--- PAGE 259 ---
Suksamran S, 1981 ‘Political Patronage and Control over the Sakgha’ Research Notes and
Discussions Paper No. 28, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies
Swatos W and Olson D (eds) 2000 The Secularization Debate Oxford: Rowan Littlefield
Publishers Inc.
Swearer DK, 1989 ‘Buddhism in Southeast Asia’ pp.107–28 in JM Kitagawa and
MD Cummings (eds) Buddhism and Asian History London: Collier, McMillian Publishers
Swearer DK, 1991 ‘Fundamentalistic Movements in Thervada Buddhism’ pp.628–90 in
M Marty and RS Appleby Fundamentalisms Observed Chicago: University of Chicago
Press
Swearer DK, 1995 The Buddhist World of Southeast Asia Albany: State University of
New York Press
Swearer DK, 1996 ‘Sulak Sivaraksa’s Buddhist Vision for Renewing Society’ pp.195–233
in CS Queen and SB King (eds) Engaged Buddhism Albany: State University of
New York Press
Tambiah SJ, 1976 World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity
in Thailand Against a Historical Background Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Taylor JL, 1988 ‘From Wandering to Monastic Domestication: The Relationship between
the Establishment of the Thammayut Nikaai in the Northeast Region and Ascetic Monks
in the Lineage of Phra Ajaan Man Phuurithatto’ in Journal of the Siam Society Vol. 76,
pp.64–84
Taylor JL, 1990 ‘New Buddhist Movements in Thailand: An “Individualistic Revolution,”
Reform and Political Dissonance’ in Journal of Southeast Asian Studies Vol. 21, No. 1,
pp.135–54
Taylor JL, 1991 ‘Living on the Rim: Ecology and Forest Monks in Northeast Thailand’ in
Sojourn Vol. 6, No. 1, pp.106–125
Taylor JL, 1993 ‘Buddhist Revitalization, Modernization, and Social Change in
Contemporary Thailand’ in Sojourn Vol. 8, No. 1, pp.62–91
Taylor JL, 2001 ‘Embodiment, Nation, and Religio-politics in Thailand’ in South East Asia
Research Vol. 9, No. 2, pp.129–47
Terwiel BJ, 1994 Monks and Magic: An Analysis of Religious Ceremonies in Central
Thailand Bangkok: White Lotus
Thanavuddho Somchai Phra, 2000 ‘What was the Controversy About’ in The Light of
Peace Vol. 12, No. 1, pp.10–11
That-Pian SK, 2003 Kings, Country and Constitutions London: Routledge
Thefravit K, 1992 Thailand in Crisis: A Study of Political Turmoil of May 1992 Bangkok:
Chulalongkorn University Printing House
Thitavajjo Pichir (Ven. Phra Srivisuddhikavi), 1999 Mind Development Bangkok:
Mahamakut Rajavidyalaya Press
Thomas EJ, 1933 History of Buddhist Thought London: Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co.
Tiyavanich K, 1997 Forest Recollections: Wandering Monks in Twentieth-century Thailand
Chiang Mai: Thailand
Utthayi Supreme Patriarch Ariyavaysagatañaja (ed.) 1968 His Majesty King Rama the
Fourth Mongkut Bangkok: Mahamakuta-Rajavidyalaya Press
Varadhammo Varasak (Phra), 1996 Suffering and No. Suffering Hinsdale (USA):
Buddhadharma Meditation Centre
Wallis R, 2003 ‘Three Types of New Religious Movement’ pp.36–58 in L Dawson (ed.)
Cults and New Religious Movements: A Reader Oxford: Blackwell
BIBLIOGRAPHY
244

--- PAGE 260 ---
Warner R and Gayley H, 1999: ‘Feminism and Buddhism in Thailand: The Spiritually-Based
Social Action of Chatsumarn Kabilsingh’ pp.213–26 in Socially Engaged Buddhism for
the New Millenium; Essays in Honour of the Ven. Phra Dhammapitaka (Bhikkhu P.A.
Payutto) on his 60th Birthday Anniversary Bangkok: The Sathirakoses-Nagapradipa
Foundation and Foundation for Children (Publishers) No editor cited
Waterhouse H, 2001 ‘Buddhist Responses to Environment Crisis’ pp.155–91 in D Herbert
(ed.) Religious and Social Transformations Aldershot: Open University Press
Waterhouse H, 2002 ‘Soka Gakkai Buddhism as a Global Religious Movement’pp.109–55
in J Wolffe (ed.) Global Religious Movements in Regional Contexts Milton Keynes: The
Open University
Wayman A, 1994 ‘The Diamond Vehicle’ pp.219–41 in Takeuchi Yoshinori (ed.) Buddhist
Spirituality London: SCM Press
Web J, Schirato T and Danaher G, 2002 Understanding Bourdieu London: Sage
Publications
Weber M, 1976 The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism London: George Allen
and Unwin Ltd
Webster DD, 1984 ‘Liberation Theology’ pp.635–7 in WA Elwell (ed.) Evangelical
Dictionary of Theology Grand Rapids: Baker Books
Wells K, 1975 Thai Buddhism: Its Rites and Activities Bangkok: Suriyabun Publishers
Whimster S, 2001 ‘Max Weber: Work and Interpretation’ pp.54–65 in G Ritzer and
B Smart Handbook of Social Theory London: Sage Publications
Williams P, 1989 Mahayana Buddhism London: Routledge
Wilson BR, 1967 Patterns of Sectarianism London: Heinemann
Wilson BR, 1973 Magic and the Millenium London: Heinemann Educational 
Books Ltd
Wilson BR and Cresswell J (eds) 1999 New Religious Movements London: Routledge
Wilson BR and Dobbelaere K, 1994 A Time to Chant Oxford: Clarendon Press
Winichakul T, 1994 Siam Mapped Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press
Wyatt DK, 1969 The Politics of Reform in Thailand: Education in the Reign of King
Chulalongkorn New Haven and London: Yale University Press
Wyatt DK, 1984 Thailand: A Short History New Haven and London: Yale University 
Press
Yamamori T, 1974 ‘Soka Gakkai: A Religious Phonex’in Japanese Religions Vol. 8, No. 1,
pp.1–18
Yong-Hun Jo, 2001 ‘Globalization as a Challenge to the Churches in Asia Today’ in Asia
Journal of Theology Vol. 15, No. 2, pp.348–63
Zenher E, 1996 ‘Thai Protestants and Local Supernaturalism: Changing Configurations’
in Journal of Southeast Asian Studies Vol. 27, pp.293–319
Electronically sourced articles
Ekachai S, 21.12.98 Phra Dhammakaya Controversy: Keeping the Faith Bangkok Post
Homepage www.bangkokpost.com [accessed February 2002]
Ekachai S, 6.6.99 A Return to the Basics Will Inform Us Bangkok Post Homepage
www.bangkokpost.com [accessed February 2002]
Ekachai S, 22.3.00 Life After Dhammakaya Bangkok Post Homepage www.bangkok
post.com [accessed February 2002]
BIBLIOGRAPHY
245

--- PAGE 261 ---
Leach M, 1994 ‘Helping the doughters of Buddha. Interview with Dr Chatsumarn
Kabilsingh’ December 1994 issue of Shore International http://www.share-international.
org/ARCHIVES/social-justice/sj_mlhelping.htm [accessed 4 October 2006]
Meditation for Beginners: Elementary Lesson 5 www.dhammakaya.be [accessed 25 March
2002]
Books/articles without a cited author/editor
Acts on the Administration of the Buddhist Order of [the] Sakgha of Thailand: BE 2445,
BE 2484 and BE 2505 1989 Bangkok: Mahamakuta Educational Council
Checksin [Eight Precepts Check Book] (Thai) an undated Santi Asoke publication
Clues to Thai Culture and to Cross Cultural Adjustment, Communication and Innovation
1981 Bangkok: Central Thai Language Committee
Dhammakaya Foundation 1999 ‘World Peace through Inner Peace’ Pathumthani, Thaliand:
Dhammakaya Foundation
Dhammakaya Foundation 2002 A tribute published for Khun Yai Maharatana Upasika
Chandra Khonnukyoong on the occassion of her cremation
Dictionary of Buddhism (Thai) 2000 Bangkok: University of Maha Chulalongkorn
How to Meditate 1990 Bangkok: Dhammakaya Foundation
Political Repression in Thailand European Co-ordinating Committee for Solidarity with
the Thai People (No date or place of publishing)
Santi Asoke: The New Trend of Buddhism in Thai Society (No date or place of publishing)
The Life and Times of Luang Phaw Wat Paknam 1998 Bangkok: Dhammakaya Foundation
Buddhist scriptures
Akguttara Nikaya, ‘The Lay-Followers’ in Book of Gradual Sayings Vol. V, pp.119–35 (tr.)
FL Woodward 1972 London: (Pali Text Society) Luzac and Co.
Cu¬asaccaka Sutta, in The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha pp.322–31 (trs)
Ñajamoli Bhikkhu and Bodhi Bhikkhu 1995 Boston: Wisdom Publications
Cullavagga X, Vinaya Pitaka (Book of the Discipline Vol. V,) pp.352–70 (tr.) IB Horner
1952 London: Luzac and Co.
Gajakamoggallana Sutta, in The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha pp.874–9 (trs)
Ñajamoli Bhikkhu and Bodhi Bhikkhu 1995 Boston: Wisdom Publications
Sigalovada Sutta, in Thus I Have Heard: The Long Discourses of the Buddha pp.461–70
(tr.) M Walsh 1987 London: Wisdom Publications
BIBLIOGRAPHY
246

--- PAGE 262 ---
INDEX
abbot 139
absolutistic 77
Achan Chah 24; Achan Mahabua 24;
Achan Mun 24; Achan Sao 24
Ad Carabao 125
adhijit (higher morality or concentration)
179, 184
adhipa¶¶a (higher wisdom) 185
adhisin (higher morality) 179, 178
advanced meditator 48
akhantuka 148; chon 148
akhantuka pracham 148, 184
akusala 92
Ambedkar 155
Amish 165
amnat 4, 8, 16, 56, 57, 95, 141, 143, 148
Amnesty International 126
amulet making ceremony 48; amulets 73
Anagami 104
Anan Senakhan 118, 119
anatta 100, 110
anicca 100
Arahat 98, 99, 104, 110, 113, 155, 
174, 176
aramik 148
aramika 148
Ariya 115; Fair 139
article 38 (constitution) 23; article 
208 126
arupabrahmakaya 163
ascetic 121, 165
ashrams 160, 190
Asoke Lamluk 139
atama 127
atta 16, 17
Avatara 14, 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 64, 82, 
85, 187
Awatan 14, 60
ayatananibbana 8, 16, 17, 51, 87, 99, 
104, 110
Ayatollah Komeini 75
Ayutthaya
bail 53, 125
balu (enlightenment) 185
Bangkaen 125, 126, 128
Bangkruany 52
Bank for Agriculture and 
Cooperation 152
base communities 158–60, 171
bhikkhu 36, 146, 147, 149, 154, 
160, 171
Black Buddha 33, 62, 105; 
see also Mara
black magic 115
bodhisatta 58, 100, 152, 154, 170
Bodirak 10, 116, 122, 123, 125, 126, 141,
142, 143, 156, 158, 172, 174, 181, 183,
186, 188, 189
Bontarigovewat 23
Boonchu R 129
border patrol police 25
bot 41, 133, 148
Bowers J 15
Brahmanic 109
Buddha: buddha-mind 90; buddha-nature
42, 68, 133; historical 99; Metteyya
155; Monton Centre 123; presenting 
of food to the 46, 48; refusal 71;
teachings of the 98
Buddhadasa 57, 68, 69, 84, 174, 181
Buddha images 43
Buddhism as a commodity 190; 
state religion 162
Buddhist destruction of 43
bun 87, 90, 149
247

--- PAGE 263 ---
bun khun (obligation) 58, 143
bun-niyom (Buddhist economics) 90, 151;
Santi Asoke understanding of 149–52
cakras 108, 109
Cambodia 80
camps 137
celibacy 120
cell groups 64, 72, 77, 94
cetiya 42, 43, 46, 48, 70, 88, 89, 186; see
also stupas
Chamlong 27, 119, 120, 121, 123, 127,
128, 129, 130, 140, 142
chanda 151, 152
chaonatee 41
chao pho 57
Chao Phraya river 80
charik 118
charun tham 134
Chatsumarn Kabilsingh 147, 155; see also
Dhammananda
check sin 165
Chiang Mai 126, 135
children’s education 159
Chinese background 145
Chinese Sakgha 147
chit waang 175, 181
Christianity 151
Christians 23; Christian conspiracy 52;
prosperity 90
Chulalongkorn university 87
circumambulation 133
commodifying approach 63
communist party of Thailand 22, 
26; communism 80, 86
community 13, 25, 145, 159; community
culture movement 160–3, 171, 190;
just 144
companionship 72
consumerism 5
conversionist 92
cottage industries 142
coup d’etat 20; coup 21
Cousins’ categories 94–5, 192
crop management 159
crystal ball 14; refined crystal body 103;
sphere 111
Culasaccaka Sutta 176
cult 2; Thai words for 3
Daen Asoke 117
Daimoku 68
dana 43, 47, 89
dark powers 62
dasa sil matavo 147
dayaka 47, 89, 190
demerit 38
Department of Religious Affairs 123, 126
deprivation 90, 91
Devadatta 153
Dhamma 31, 32, 134, 158, 167, 169;
activity 121; army 141; Army
Foundation 120, see also Gong Thab
Tham; body 31, 99, 125, 128; language
25; practitioner 120, 141; quiz contest
43; stream 177; talks 61, 63, 65;
teaching 152
Dhammadayada training programme 44
Dhammakaya 13, 14, 42; Arahata 176;
Black Dhammakaya 14, 31, 32, 40, 75,
76, 85, 92, 95, 187, 189, 195;
Dhammakaya Buddhist Meditation
Foundation 38, 39, 41, 44, 45, 46, 50,
54, 55; Dhammakaya Foundation 87;
Dhammakaya within 55; Great Hall
41; meditation 16, 32, 33, 34, 36, 39,
40, 41, 51, 54, 67, 109, 112, 113, 186,
187, 191, 192, 193, 196; meditator 17,
104; ‘The Case of Dhammakaya’ 52;
White Dhammakaya 33, 40, 57, 60, 62,
64, 75, 76, 85, 92, 93, 187, 189, 195
Dhammananda 133, 147, 155, 158, 167,
169; see also Chatsumarn Kabilsingh
Dhammasanti Foundation 118
Dhyani 107
dibbakaya 103
Disrobe 146, 147
Dok Yaa 130
Dualism 60; dualistic 77
dukkha 100, 101
Dusit 49
Ecclesiastical Council 123, 124
economic recession (1977–2000) 27
education of children and youth 136
Eighfold Path 8, 153, 176, 178, 182, 193
elements 106
embezzlement 52, 54
emic 3, 8
Emotional Quotent 133
enjoyment body 99
eschatological belief 84
esoteric 39, 95, 109
etic 3, 8, 11, 16
everyday language–Dhamma language 25
exoteric 40
INDEX
248

--- PAGE 264 ---
Fah Apai Co 130
fai cow 60; fai dam 60
faith 91
Feungfusakul A 13, 14
field marshals 25
field of merit 146, 174
forest monks 10, 24, 87, 118, 150, 226
Fourth Sakgha Act 7, 23
Fukuoka (approach to farming) 132
fundamentalist 8, 11, 12, 74, 77;
fundamentalism 156, 189, 194;
Fundamentalist Project 75, 189; 
Santi Asoke 155–6
galactic 11, 85, 86
Gajakamoggallana Sutta 76
Gandhi 163
Gong Thab Tham 140; see also 
Dhamma Army
gotrabhu 103
governor 120, 123
globalisation 4, 5
Glock and Stark deprivation model
90–92, 191, 192
great self 177
healing (of the mind) 35, 115
heavens and hells 69
hegemony 86
Heikkïla-Horn ML 14
higher meditation 63
Hindu 160; Hinduism 109
Holy Men’s Rebellion 78
Homrong ‘The Overture’ 196
Hua Hin 29
Huppasawan 80, 82, 84, 189
hypnotism 115
Ikeda 70, 74
impermanence 178
Indochina 22
informant 140
interior ministry 121
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 28
ISKCON 169
itthirid 57
ittiphon 4, 8, 16, 56, 57, 143, 144
Jackson P 9, 18
Japan 68, 70, 72; consumer society 69;
Japanese forces 34
jay (vegetarian) 153
jhana 100
kalyanamitra 49, 72
Kanchanaburi 41, 130
karma 10, 76, 90, 190; karma formed
100; karmatic Buddhism 98; karmic
effort 90; karmic fruit 89, 154; karmic
theory 13, 35
kathin ceremonies 22, 64
kaya 104
khandas 33, 137
Khun Yai Chan 7, 34, 35, 36, 38, 40, 41,
45, 55, 56, 58, 68; coffin 47; cremation
93; funeral service 47, 49
kibbutz 163, 172
kilesa 111, 175, 177, 181
King Bhumibol 29, 153, 154, 162, 195;
King Chulalongkorn 19, 58, 78, 79,
153; King Mongkut 7, 18, 19, 156; King
Prajadhipok 20; king’s birthday
celebration 50, 51; king’s capital 85;
kingship 86; Kings Rama IV and V 66
klot 118, 133, 135, 148
komeito 74
kosen-rufu 70
krak 149, 167
Kuan Im 155
kut (shelter) 38, 130
Lak Muang 19
Lana Asoke 135
lèse majesté 29
liberation theology 159
lineage 84
Lotus Sutra 67, 73
Luang Phaw Sot 7, 17, 30, 31, 32, 35,
36, 38, 45, 55, 61, 62, 70, 84, 91, 105,
111; (also known as Phra
Mongkhonkolthempmuni); death of 38;
in Dusit 49
Lumpini Park 129
mae chi 146, 147, 164
Magha Bucha 64, 65
maha 119
Mahachulalongkorn university 7, 40
Mahalai Wang Chiwit 137
Mahanikai 7, 9, 18, 21, 23, 116, 117
Mahapajapati 145, 146
Mahapawarana 139
Mahasatipatthana Sutta 30, 220
Maha thera samakom 2, 22, 28, 79, 117,
118, 119, 123, 131, 141, 147, 194, 195
Mahayana 16, 24, 31, 42, 99, 109, 152,
154, 171
INDEX
249

--- PAGE 265 ---
Majjhima-patipada (middle way) 31
Man (name of protestor) 79
majdala 68, 85, 105, 106, 107
mangsawerat 153; see also vegetarianism
manomayakaya 100, 101
mantra 102
Mara 33, 37, 62, 82
meat-eating 153
medicine for monks 49
meditation (high and low level) 32, 39,
155; higher 48, 62, 63; prowess 69;
workshop 32
mediumship 115
Meo 80
merit making 17, 18, 38
Messiah 60
metta 151
Middle-Way 167, 171
millenarian 8, 12, 15, 77, 78, 83, 84
mind reading powers 82
ministry of education 136
ministry of the interior 140
Mon 18
moral dualism 75
mudra 106
mu klum (view of the group) 142, 164
mundane level (lokiya) 182
nak 149, 167
Nakhon Pathom 116, 131, 160
Nakhon Ratchasima 138
¶aja (inner knowledge) 48, 111
Nation Peace Keeping Council (NPKC)
26, 129
nibbana 8, 13, 17, 25, 52, 33, 46, 68, 69,
74, 98, 99, 110, 144, 153, 174, 178,
184; arresting 175; circumstantial 175;
cutting off 175; nibbana is anatta 176;
nibbana is atta 51, 176; Santi Asoke
understanding 174–7
Nichiren 67, 68; Nicheren Sho-Shu
73, 74
nimitta 111; nimittakaya 101
Niphot (Father) 160–2
nirmajakaya 99, 100
nisit 137, 138
Non-returner 155
non-self 13
Nonthaburi 147
North Vietnam 80
nuns 36
Once-returner 102, 155
pa 147, 148, 149, 167, 182, 183; see also
patepat 184
pagoda 41, 132
panita-rupabhahma kaya 103
pa¶¶a 102, 103, 144, 154, 178, 181, 182
parami 4, 8, 16, 58, 105, 121, 144, 
170, 188
Parian Dhamma Association 127
parinibbana 184
partitas 98
pathama-magga (Dhamma-sphere) 102,
105, 106
Pathom Asoke 6, 132, 131–2, 152
Pathumthani 38, 41
peace without suffering 157, 193
peasant-style clothes 133, 163, 187
People’s Republic of China 80
Phai Sali 5, 117
Phalang Dhamma 121, 122, 128, 129
phansa 18, 41, 48, 135
Pharisees 167, 191
Phatom Asoke 6, 132
phra 127, 171
Phra Ajahn [Achan] Maha Sermchai
Jayamanggalo (also referred to as Phra
Rajyanvisith) 12
Phrachakorn Thai Party 122
Phra Dattacheewo 6, 34, 40, 41, 45, 47,
48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 67, 
83–4, 90, 187
Phra Dhammachayo 14, 40, 41, 45, 49,
52, 56, 57, 60, 61, 72, 76, 82, 83, 86,
143, 188; 60th birthday 48, 63, 64
Phra Dhammapitaka (also referred to as
Phra Payutto) 17, 51, 52, 57, 66, 68,
69, 99, 122
Phra Kapilavaddho (also known as Randall R
and Purfurst W) 36, 37
Phra Luang Da Mahabua 24
Phra Maha Cai Yasotharat 112
Phra Mettanando 60, 105, 111, 112
phra nai 56
Phra Nicholas 41, 54, 60, 62, 71, 84, 
89, 104
Phra Padet 50
Phra Rajyahvisith (also referred to as Phra
Ajahn [Achan] Maha Sermchai) 13, 15,
38, 39, 181
Phra Santicaro 89
Phra Sumedho 24
Phra Sumethaporn 53
Phra Suthithammanuwat 23
Phra Thammacharik 24, 86
INDEX
250

--- PAGE 266 ---
Phra Thammayut 24
Phra Yanarakkhit 78
phu mi bhun 15, 77, 78, 79, 80, 82, 83,
85, 157
phu rap chai 140
phu wiset 79, 83, 157
Pim Thai 70
ploughing ceremony 76
pluksek 138, 139, 170, 184
pole 17, 45
Po Tek Tung (burial society) 26
Prawet Wasi 161–3
preceptor 118
Precepts 17, 41, 44, 48, 71, 75, 79, 138,
146, 147, 148, 151, 157, 165, 166,
171,172, 179, 182, 184, 190
Prime Minister Anand Panyarachun 126
Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai 51, 
53, 129
Prime Minister General Chatichai
124, 125
Prime Minister Kukrit Pramoj 50, 86
Prime Minister Prem Tisulanonda 120
Prime Minister Sarit 22, 26
Prime Minister Suchinda 27
Prime Minister Tanin Kraivichien 26
Prime Minister Thanom 25
Prince Ananda 20
Prince Prajadhipok 20
Prince Sanphasit 78
Princess (HRH) Maha Chakri Sirindhorn
29, 41, 65
Prince Vajiralongkorn (HRH Crown
Prince) 29, 65
Prince Wachiryan 19
printing press 130
prison 127
pro-democracy 129
psychic powers 32
Puttha Pisek 5, 132–5, 138, 139, 154,
170, 184
putthasathan 139, 140, 141, 142, 148,
157, 164, 174, 178
pyramid operation 89
Rachabandit Professor 52
rai 49, 50, 52, 131
Rajburi (Ratburi) 40, 81
Rak Rakphong 115
Ratnasambhava 106, 107
rebirth 88
Red Guars 25
re-enchantment 188
Right Action 179, 184; Concentration
179, 184; Effort 178, 184, 193;
Livelihood 153; Mindfulness 178, 184,
193; Speech 179, 184; Thoughts 179,
184; View 178, 184
rongngahn tamvijja 32
rupakaya 100
Russian doll 106, 113
sacralized water 79
saffron robes 124, 127
saiyasat 18
Sakadagami 103
Saka Gakkai 8, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 
73, 84
samadhi 43, 102, 103, 144, 175, 178, 179
samaja 136, 137, 138, 139, 148, 164,
165, 166, 171, 172, 174, 177, 184
samajera 36, 149
samatha 178, 179, 181, 182, 192
sambhogakaya 101, 108
samma arahaÅ mantra 31, 95, 102, 104
samsara 33, 42
sakgha 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 29, 30, 43, 51, 54, 55, 67,
71, 74, 75, 78, 82, 86, 90, 117, 118,
125, 128, 139, 141, 142, 143, 146, 147,
153, 156, 159, 173, 174, 186, 188, 192,
193, 194; in Bangkok 130–1; Council
126; English Trust 37; in NE Thailand
135; in N Thailand 135; Sakgha Act of
1902 19, 20, 21; Sakgha Act of 1941
20, 21, 22; Sakgha Act of 1962 22, 117,
125; Santi Asoke 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 13,
14, 16, 89, 115, 117, 120, 122, 124,
128, 131, 141, 142, 144, 145, 151, 157,
167, 173; in S Thailand 135–6;
typologies to classify 167–8, 172–3;
utopian society 163–5
Santi Foundation 140
Sariputta 183
satellite TV 86
sati 177
Satipatthana Sutta (Mahasatipatthana
Sutta) 31
sawadeegaan 140
scope of the book 7–8
secondary school system 136
Seikyo Shinbun 70
self-control 144
servant 140
shakubuku 72, 73
Shinto 67
INDEX
251

--- PAGE 267 ---
shoju 72, 89
shopping malls 46
Siamese 78, 79
Siam Rath 50
Sikkhamats 133, 136, 138, 147, 148, 149,
152, 153, 154, 156, 164, 165, 166, 171,
172, 179, 184
sila 43, 102, 103, 137–44, 154, 167, 173,
178, 181, 182, 192
Sima Asoke 138
skill-in-means 177
somphaan 139; phu chuei 139;
rong 139
Sotapanna 103
soya 131
spheres 31, 106
spiritual fetter 167
spirituality 72, 78
Sri Lanka 147
Srisaket 115, 117
Stream Entry 103, 110, 155, 182
students 25, 26; protests of 1973 and
1976 26
stupas 100, 109; see also cetiya
Suan Mokkhaphalaram (Suan Mokkh)
25, 126
sudhamma 76
Sulak Sivaraksa 123
sujyakaya 101
Supanburi 30
supernatural 83
superstitious 117, 119
Suppression Division 119
Supreme Patriarch 21, 22, 52, 54
Surat Thani 127
suttas 23
Swearer D 11, 12
Taksin Asoke 135
Taksin Shinawatra 129
tajha 151, 152
Tantrism 94, 95, 97, 107, 109
Tara 49
Tathagata 113
Tathagatagarbha 42
tattooing 78
Tavivat Puntiarigvivat 117, 163
Ten Spiritual Perfections
tertiary education 137–8
Thai 71, 111; Maharat Party 74; 
Mother’s Day 44; people 98; press 55;
society 85
Thammayut 7, 20, 21, 24, 25, 54, 63, 66,
110, 116, 117, 119, 124, 156
Thaumaturgical 92, 93, 191
The Godfather 57
The Matrix 60
Theravada 14, 152, 171; Theravada
Buddhism 54, 94, 99, 117; Theravada
canon 18, 31; Theravadan scriptures 47
Thod Kathin 50
Thongbai Thongpao 124, 125, 126
thumb print 47
thun-niyom 151
Ti [Tri]-Ratana 60, 106
Tibetan 8, 105
tien wein 133
Tipitaka 52
Transformation body 99
Triple Gem 43, 111
ubasika 41, 46, 64, 75, 87, 94
ubasok 6, 41, 64, 75, 87, 94
UNESCO 16
Unification Church 169
United Nations 71
upasampada 36
upasikaratanam (female lay follower) 44
utopian 168, 172, 187, 193
Vajra 113; being 105
Vatican 50
vegan 138, 186
vegetarian 130, 131, 135, 141, 148, 152,
153, 154, 156, 171, 195
Village Scouts 25
vimutti 102, 103
vimutti-najadassana 103
vinaya 18, 53, 116, 118, 119, 145, 183
vi¶¶ajadhatu 106
vitikkama 181, 182
Voice of the People of Thailand 80
volunteers 41
Vorami Kabilsingh 147
Wallis’ typology 93–4, 191, 192
Wang Chivit 138
wan phra 23, 153
washing dishes 134
Wat Asokaram 115, 116
Wat Bangkuvieng 31
Wat Benjamabophit (Marble Temple) 44
Wat Bovornnivet 124
Wat Chamasong 53
INDEX
252

--- PAGE 268 ---
Wat Luang Phaw Sot Dhammakayaram
12, 15, 38, 40, 49, 55, 58, 61
Wat Moonchindaram 53
Wat Nong Kratum 117
Wat Paknam 7, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 
40, 61
Wat Pa Nanachat 24
Wat Pan-on 125
Wat Pathum Kongha 123
Wat Phra Chetupon (also known as 
Wat Po) 30
Wat Phra Dhammakaya 1, 2, 6, 8, 9, 13,
14, 17, 24, 28, 29, 30, 36, 38, 39, 
40, 44, 45, 47, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54, 
55, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 71, 77, 
82, 83, 84, 86, 93, 94, 140, 
141, 181, 189, 191
Wat Po 105
Wat Saket 40
Wat Songpinong 30
Wat Umong 51
Weltanschauung 12, 72, 168
wicha-rop (spiritual conflict) 32, 33, 
62, 95
Wilson’s typology 92–3, 191, 192
world peace 134, 195
World War II 35
Yao 80
yatitham 133, 148, 160, 164, 169
Yogacara 99, 100
Yogavacara 109, 110, 111, 112, 113
Zen 25, 152, 181
INDEX
253
