--- Page 1 ---
Buddhist Studies Review 24(2) 2007, 192–225 ISSN (print): 0256-2897
doi: 10.1558/bsrv.v24i1.192 ISSN (online): 1747-9681
writing Buddhist histories from Landscape and
Architecture: Sukhothai and Chiang Mai1
Anne M. Blackburn
Cornell University, ithaca NY
ABStrACt: This essay offers a preliminary account of the ways in which alterations
to the landscape of fourteenth- and fifteenth-century Sukhothai and Chiang Mai fig-
ured within the micro-politics of these city-states. i show how landscape alterations
inspired by Laṅkā and mainland South Asia served the consolidation and projection of
royal power within the context of local and regional competition, and how such alter-
ations formed part of strategic royal engagement with Buddhist monastic lineages.
iNtrOdUCtiON
historical narratives and lineage texts produced in Sri Lanka and mainland
Southeast Asia often include accounts of the alteration of landscape 2 by Buddhist
1. This essay is dedicated to Donald K. Swearer with great respect, gratitude, and affection. An
early version of this essay was read at the 9th international Conference on thai Studies (at
deKalb, illinois, 2005) for a panel in celebration of Professor Swearer’s many contributions to
Buddhist Studies and thai Studies. i am grateful for questions and comments on that version,
especially those offered by Professor Swearer himself. My first attempt to explore the histori-
cal and hermeneutical problems raised by the study of spatial copying and the constitution
of landscape occurred with students at Cornell University in a seminar titled ‘Monks, Texts,
and relics: transnational Buddhism in Asia’. i would like to thank Bryce Beemer and Christian
Lammerts for their thoughtful contributions to our work, and Lawrence Chua and Jonathan
Young for later stimulating conversations on related topics. A revised version of the essay was
read to the UK Association of Buddhist Studies conference held at Lancaster University in July
2006. i am particularly grateful to Ashley thompson, ian reader, and Peter Skilling for their
comments on that occasion. Subsequently, I have greatly benefited from comments and refer-
ences offered by Peter Harvey, Justin McDaniel, Stanley O’Connor, and the anonymous reader
for Buddhist Studies Review.
2. Susan Alcock writes of the term ‘landscape’: ‘Landscape, a capacious and currently much uti-
lized concept, contains a multitude of meanings, all of which revolve around human expe-
rience, perception, and modification of the world. Landscape thus embraces the physical
environment, patterns of settlement, boundaries and frontier, fields, cities, natural features,
monuments, pathways, holy places, wilderness, and much much more’ (2002, 30). in this essay
i am most concerned with sites associated with protective supernatural powers, and sites that
served as foci for remembrance of Sakyamuni Buddha and powerful rulers.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007, Unit 6, the village, 101 Amies Street, London Sw11 2Jw

--- Page 2 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 193
patrons. that is, such texts include reports of meritorious activity in the form
of building construction and the establishment of sites for the recollection of
Sakyamuni Buddha and other enlightened beings. Such reconstitutions of the
landscape are, in particular, evoked and described in reports of kingship. thus,
for example, the Mahāvaṃsa reports of King Duṭṭhagāmaṇi:
Spending a hundred thousand (pieces of money) the king hereupon com-
manded a great and splendid ceremony of gifts for the great Bodhi-tree.
As he then, when entering the city, saw the pillar of stone raised upon
the place of the (future) thūpa and remembered the old tradition, he
became glad, thinking; ‘I will build the Great Thūpa. … When the where-
withal to build was thus brought together he began the work of the Great
Thūpa on the full-moon day of the month Vesākha, when the Visākha-
constellation had appeared. … When the king, glad at heart, had thus
had preparation made upon the spot where the Great Thūpa was to be
built, he arranged on the fourteenth day of the bright half of the month
Āsāḷha, an assembly of the brotherhood of the bhikkhus, and spoke thus:
‘To-morrow, venerable sirs, I shall lay the foundation-stone of the Great
Cetiya. then let our whole brotherhood assemble here, to the end that
a festival may be held for the Buddha …
(Geiger 1950, 28:1–3, 29:1–2, 13–16)
So, too, the Jinakālamālī celebrates some of the actions of King Tilokarāja3 as
follows:
the emperor tilaka, the Universal Monarch Siridhamma, for the sake of
his parents’ gaining substantial merit had an Uposatha-hall constructed
at the place of cremation of the remains of his mother and father at the
Great rattavana Monastery. On the Great invitation day of the follow-
ing year, the year of the Monkey of the royal Saka era, the Sovereign
Lord tilaka measured out a region of twenty fathoms on all sides of the
Uposatha-hall … . When the formal act of the Order of Agreement on a
Sīmā was over, for seven days, the righteous monarch conducted a mag-
nificent ceremony of dedication. (Jayawickrama 1968, 137–8)
Such textual references strongly suggest that we should see the Buddhist
worlds of South and Southeast Asia as participating within a ‘cultural system
of using buildings and statues to signal approbation and power’ (elsner 2003,
219).4 historians of Buddhism in South and Southeast Asia have long recognized
the importance of such merit-making and patronage to Buddhist kingship and
elite politics. however, we have not yet assessed such acts of construction as
elements in arguments developed geographically in response to micro-political
demands. we have not, in other words, yet adequately explored the ways in which
3. See the end of this article for a list of thai kings and their dates.
4. elsner writes of the roman world.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 3 ---
194 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
the construction and reconstruction of buildings for Buddhist activities, and the
delineation of landscape sites for ritual and pilgrimage, formed part of specific
local efforts to consolidate and articulate lineage and power.5 in this essay i hope
to offer a preliminary account of some of the ways in which alterations to the
landscape of Buddhist practice in Sukhothai and Chiang Mai6 occurred within the
context of the micro-politics of these city-states, and efforts to alter or affirm local
and regional hierarchies of status, authority and potency. Such efforts assumed
several simultaneous functions of space and site that present-day scholars of
Buddhism might be inclined to distinguish (given our own taxonomies), namely:
(1) the samsaric protection offered by landscape alteration as merit-making; (2)
the immediate potent (or ‘magical’) protection provided by marking and enhanc-
ing certain sites; (3) the demonstration of power and authority through massive
visual signs of patronage and the reorientation of spaces for ritual practice; (4) the
alteration of the hierarchy of monastic lineage controlled by a king through the
enhancement of sites related to one line and the diminution or neglect of those
related to another; (5) the ‘citation’7 of claims to participate in the unfolding of
a specific local history of the sāsana. By ‘citation’ I refer to the manner in which
the material forms instantiated through architecture and landscape alterations
help to shape, and then to support, oral and textual claims made to lineage and
inheritance, as well as claims of supersession and encompassment.
examining two instances of altered landscape (in the area we know as thailand)
during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, I show how these interventions,
which drew inspiration from elements of Buddhist landscape in Laṅkā8 and main-
land South Asia, served the consolidation and projection of royal power, royal
engagement with competing Buddhist monastic lines, and the protection of
Buddhist persons. i look at the reconstitution of Buddhist landscapes in Sukhothai
5. the most substantial contribution in this regard is duncan (1990), which i discuss in the con-
cluding section of this essay.
6. i have developed this essay without independent access to materials in thai, Northern thai
and Khmer and the essay is thus greatly dependent on translated materials and secondary
scholarship on Chiang Mai and Sukhothai. i look to colleagues working more centrally in the
local histories of Southeast Asian Buddhism for further refinements and corrections.
7. this term was suggested to me by Ashley thompson (personal communication), in a slightly
different context. I find it a richly suggestive term with which to think about the power of
material forms to make, or to participate in, narrative arguments about temporality and
belonging. An examination of the place of material forms in such arguments made within the
Buddhist worlds of South and Southeast Asia could fruitfully include study of the micro-politics
involved in selecting and establishing copies of powerful images, in addition to the already well
discussed traffic in the theft of relics and royal palladia. On image copies, see the important and
suggestive work of A. B. Griswold (1957; 1965). Justin Mcdaniel rightly notes, in his thoughtful
treatment of the Jinakālamālī, that Lān Nā chronicles such as the Jinakālamālī work to establish
‘temporal and spatial authenticity’ for Lanna through the use of ‘spatial terminology and the
establishment of sacred geography in their histories’ (2002, esp. 161, 168). In this regard see
also Mcdaniel (2000).
8. I use the term ‘Laṅkā’ to refer to the island we now know as Sri Lanka in the period before
1948.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 4 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 195
and Chiang Mai as activities that were, for royal patrons, part of ‘building a world’9
in their present, and for their samsaric futures. in what follows here i focus on the
immediate context for patronage, construction and landscape alteration rather
than the reception accorded to such changes. however, i certainly do not assume
that the patron’s vision of his or her altered landscape (its aims, its effects) was
something received with uniformity. there would have been, presumably, a range
of responses, affected by very personal experiences as well as by social location.
the BUddhA’S FOOtPriNtS At SUKhOthAi
Territory and Power
According to Betty Gosling, King Lü Thai or Mahā Dhammarāja I (r. 1347–?)10 com-
missioned four engravings of the Buddha’s footprint in the 1350s and had them
placed on hilltops at Nakhon Sawān (Braḥ Pāṅ), Bang Phān (Pāṅ Bān), Si Sajjanalai,
and Sukothai (1991, 70-71).11 Her claim finds support in Sukhothai Inscription 3
(in thai), which lists a series of footprint installations in Sukhothai, Si Sajjanalai,
Pāṅ Bān, and Pāk Braḥ Pāṅ, and emphasizes that ‘[t]there is an inscription with
(the footprint) at each of those places’ (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 464). According
to this inscription, which accompanied the enshrinement of a relic at Nagara Juṃ,
each of the footprint installations was placed at the top of a hill or mountain.12
The footprints are explicitly associated with Laṅkā:
Brañā Dharmikarāja sent to Siṅhala to make impressions of the trace of …
Our Lord’s Foot which is stamped on top of Mount Sumanakūṭaparvata,
to measure its size, and to bring (the impressions) back to be copied for
everyone … (465, original parentheses)
This refers to the Lankan site of Śrī Pāda, or Adam’s Peak, located in the south-
central region of Laṅkā, long understood by Asian Buddhists to be one of the
locations on which Sakyamuni Buddha reached, and marked, the island we now
know as Sri Lanka.
the content of this inscription suggests that the installation of Buddha foot-
prints on these sites served as an opportunity for the articulation of royal author-
ity (real or desired) in relation to competition from other müang (city-state)
centres. reference to the Buddha footprint installations follows words of praise
for the king and a condensed account of his expectations regarding proper king-
ship, succession and inheritance for men of rank as well as commoners:
9. the words are Stanley O’Connor’s, in a lecture addressed to the Southeast Asia Program at
Cornell University, 2 September 2004.
10. See further below regarding these regnal dates.
11. See also Griswold (n.d., 55–8).
12. Griswold & Prasert date the inscription to 1357 (1992, 433).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 5 ---
196 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
* Wat Saphan Hin
* Ram Khamhäng’s
Mango Grove
* Mahā Dhammarāja I’s
Royal Mango * Wat
Grove Monastery Mahāthāt. Royal Palace
* Brahminic Shrine
* Mahā Dhammarāja I’s
Sukhothai Footprint
MAP 1: Sukhothai sites13
From now on if any ruler … in this city he must do what is right … [he
must do homage to] stupas, cetiyas and śrīmahābodhi trees [along the
banks of] this River Biṅ without missing a single time; he must respect
the monks, [honor his parents, love his elder and] younger brothers, and
respect the aged. He must be kind to the common people; [if they are
strong enough to perform a certain] task, he may use them for it, but if
they are not strong enough he must not use them, [and those who are
too old should be allowed to do as they please]. He must (keep) reserves
of rice and an abundance of salt in his Möaṅ; if [he does so] … [the rul-
ers of] other countries will come to rely and lean upon him; but if [he
does not], he himself (may have to) seek help from the countries of other
rulers, who will treat him with contempt and … him besides. When com-
moners or men of rank [die] … he must not seize their estates; when a
father dies (the estate) must be left [*to the sons; when an elder brother
dies, it must be left to] the younger. Any ruler who acts in accordance
with these principles … will rule this Moaṅ for a very long time; any
(ruler) who acts in violation of them will not last long at all.
this statement is rather brief but there is a detailed statement in an
inscription at Sukhodaya … at the Mahādhātu, …
(Griswold & Prasert 1992, 463–4, original punctuation)
the location of the footprint installations described by inscription 3 suggests
that the footprints, and their inscriptional accompaniments, served as a means
through which Mahā Dharmarāja I made claims to royal authority at Sukhothai
and over territories beyond the müang. in addition to the footprint established in
Sukhothai, the inscription refers to Si Sajjanalai, a city-polity sometimes linked
13. Adapted from Gosling (1996, 75; 1991, rear inset); not to scale.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 6 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 197
to Sukhothai by royal family line, strategically located to the north of Sukhothai
and a buffer to the polities of Nān and Lān Nā. Pān Bāng and Braḥ Pāṅ were both
sites to the south of Sukhothai, important to the control of trade and military
movement between Sukhothai, Ayutthaya, and southern political centres.14
the possibility that Buddha footprint installations functioned in part to artic-
ulate territorial claims and to forge (or at least to mark) royal authority within
a competitive local and regional climate finds further support from Face I of
Inscription 11 (in Thai), attributed by A. B. Griswold and Prasert ṇa Nagara to
the reign of Mahā Dhammarāja I and discovered near Braḥ Pāṅ.15 this face of
the inscription describes a royal patron clearing the area, building a cover for an
existing Buddha footprint, and planting a bodhi tree at the site. the patron subse-
quently established a cetiya, a vihāra, and another bodhi tree in the nearby town.
All of this activity is linked by the inscription to the celebration and protection
of two family lines, that of the patron and that of a high-ranking person named
Brañā Braḥ Rāma. ‘May whatever sons, grandsons and great-grandsons in (our)
family lines who become rulers in the future follow the example of these two
brothers, the elder and the younger, who loved each other’ (Griswold & Prasert
1992, 472). Historians of Sukhothai debate the identity of Brañā Braḥ̇ Rāma. The
important point for our present purposes is that the royal inscription once again
connects a Buddha footprint site to the stability of royal succession and alliances
within the Sukhothai region.16
Another Sukhothai inscription clarifies the competitive context within which
King Mahā Dhammarāja I’s footprint installations occurred. This is Inscription
4, composed in Khmer well after the king’s accession to the throne and after
he had (temporarily or permanently) left the throne as an ordained monk. the
inscription offers a retrospective account of Mahā Dhammarāja’s acquisition of
the throne at müang Sukhothai. Sukhothai historiography remains rife with con-
troversy about the politics surrounding Mahā Dhammarāja I’s accession (as about
much else). inscription 4 gives the following account of the challenges connected
to the king’s abhiseka.
14. Gosling (1991, 97) and Stratton and Scott (1989, 15) have argued that the installation of copies
of the stūpa tower at Sukhothai’s Wat Mahāthāt in neighboring cities may have been intended
to served a similar function of signaling royal authority over and access to these areas. On the
cosmological designs of the Buddha footprints see Stratton and McNair (1981, 87), Griswold &
Prasert (1992, 202–7), diCrocco (2004, 31–64), and woodward (2005).
15. The surviving text of the inscription contains only a partial name, ‘Brañā Mahādhar.’
their attribution is made on the basis of style and spelling forms (Griswold & Prasert 1992,
466–7).
16. For a fuller discussion see Griswold & Prasert (1992, 466–72). vickery argues that the dating of
both faces of Inscription 11 is uncertain. ‘Concerning Face II, its content does resemble part of
No. II [2], and the opinions of Griswold and Prasert and Prince Chand that it refers to Srī Saddhā
[Si Satha] are acceptable, although the assertion that he was the author is not certain. I would
say in conclusion that all historical reconstructions based on No. XI must be set aside pending
further study’ (1978, 187–8).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 7 ---
198 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
In 1269 śaka, a year of the boar, Braḥ Pāda Kamrateṅ Añ Ḷidaiyarāja,
who is the grandson of Braḥ Pāda Kamrateṅ Añ Rāmarāja, having led his
army out of Śrī Sajjanālaya, came up rapidly, with all his troops prepared,
(to a point) outside the capital. On Friday the fifth day of the waxing
moon of jyaiṣṭha he commanded his troops … to approach, to surround,
to seize, to break open the gates, to attack, and to strike down all his
enemies. Then … he entered [the capital] to reign supreme in this land
of Sukhodaya, as successor to his father and his grandfather. Quickly …
all the kings living in the four directions [*filled with affection towards
him,] brought .. the crown, the [sacred] sword Jayaśrī and the white para-
sol, conferred the abhiṣeka on him, and gave him the name Braḥ Pāda
Kamrateṅ Añ Śrī Sūryavaṃśa Mahādharmarājādhirāja.
(Griswold & Prasert 1992, 490, original punctuation)
Although Inscription 4 does not detail the ‘enemies’ who stood in the way of
Mahā Dhammarāja I’s accession, David Wyatt has noted the unstable character of
Sukhothai’s regional alliances at this time, and the king’s attempts to control his
territory in the face of growing power in Ramaññadesa, Lān Nā, and Ayutthaya
(2003, 48–9).17
Spatial Copying
the Buddha footprints established on hilltops in and near müang Sukhothai were,
in a sense, copies of Laṅkā’s Śrī Pāda. Inscription 3 makes evident the desire to
copy publicly from the Lankan site,18 as does the name used for the hilltop site
of the Sukhothai footprint, Mount Sumanakūṭa (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 465).
however, as hiram woodward notes, the style of two extant footprints attrib-
uted by him to Mahā Dhammarāja I’s reign, betrays a more complex heritage of
association to Laṅkā. ‘The two footprints of 1357, in which there is Sri Lankan
stylistic influence, display the symbols [of a Buddha’s marks] in the Burmese
configuration’ (2005, 304). The footprints suggest the conjunction of Lankan and
Paganese influence mediated through Martaban, where Sīhala monastic influ-
ence was established.19
Griswold’s discussion of relic copies offers some assistance as we consider the
possible motivations for, and the claims made by, the introduction of footprint
copies in Sukhothai. Griswold considers the copying of material objects associated
with the activities of Sakyamuni Buddha, such as bodhi trees and Buddha foot-
prints, as well as those, such as Buddha images, which are icons for remembrance
17. See also Gosling (1991, 93).
18. ‘Brañā Dharmikarāja sent to Siṅhala to make impressions of the trace of … Our Lord’s Foot
which is stamped on top of Mount Sumanakūṭaparvata’ (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 465).
19. On Pagan footprints see woodward (2005, 300) as well as di Crocco (2004, 44–9).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 8 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 199
of Buddha virtues and Buddha biography.20 According to Griswold, in this context
effective copying of a structure or object is a matter of copying what is essential
rather than every detail. he argues that what is essential is what relates to line-
age in the sense that it must be possible to identify the new copy as participat-
ing in a series of forms connected to powerful places and moments in mainland
South Asia and Laṅkā.
Copying is creation. Certain essential features must be reproduced, but
not necessarily the outward appearance. (1965, 181)21
the principle governing this kind of copying is like the process of plant-
ing a descendant of the living paribhogacetiya, the original Mahabodhi
tree: the sapling, though far smaller, and possessed of far fewer branches
and leaves, is no less a ficus religiosa; and while it can never resemble its
ancestor exactly in configuration, it will be able to exercise the same
power over men’s minds. (p. 181)
Griswold understood relic copies to serve the interests of elite patrons as well as
larger communities of Buddhists who sought the reassurance and merit of con-
tact with traces of Sakyamuni Buddha. with respect to royal construction and
installation projects at Sukhothai, Griswold noted the importance of copies such
as footprints and Buddha images to the activities through which rulers expressed
their authority and their claims to support the sāsana.
And when a ruler wishes to signify that in his land ‘Buddha’s religion
will flourish’, he can hardly do better than to install such seals on hill-
tops near his principal cities, at the same time ordering his sculptors to
make images of the lord of the world himself converting the people and
impressing his Footprint. (n.d., 57)
Moreover, he stressed the way in which alterations to the landscape through
copies of sites associated with Sakyamuni Buddha created opportunities for local
pilgrimage and ritual action in mainland Southeast Asia.
20. Cf. the three kinds of shrines (cetiyas) referred to at Jātaka IV.228 (cf. Milindapañha 341): (i)
sarīrika-cetiya, containing funerary remains of the Buddha or an Arahant, or copies of these,
or hair or nail clippings from such people; (ii) pāribhogika-cetiya, shrines of things used by the
Buddha – the bodhi-tree or its descendants, his bowl or robe, or copies of these, and sites associ-
ated with his life; (iii) uddesika-cetiya, shrines ‘indicating’ the nature of a Buddha, in the form of
symbols or images of him.
21. Writing about Sukhothai footprints, Griswold notes that ‘[s]ince the grouping [of the 108 symbols
on the footprint] varies so much in different examples, it is plain that the Footprints are by no
means accurate copies of any one model, let alone the print on Adam’s Peak – they are inspired
simply by the list given in the Pali texts’ (n.d., 56). it is not clear, however, which of such texts were
present at what date, orally or in written form, at Sukhothai. Peter Skilling indicates that ‘the
earliest list known in Siam is that given in Pāli verse in a 14th century stone inscription from Wat
traphang Chang Phuak at Sukhothai’ (1992, 67), an inscription dated by Griswold and Prasert to
the period shortly prior to Mahā Dhammarāja I’s accession to the throne (1992, 203).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 9 ---
200 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
Journeys to such far off places as Bodhgaya and Ceylon were beyond
the reach of most people, but this sort of copying provided a substitute.
Places could be named after the holy sites in Ceylon and india, and their
most important features reproduced … By such means the stay-at-homes
could be given the opportunity to make the same merit that they would
have got from worshipping at the original holy places, and to gain the
same psychological advantages. (1965, 181–2)
ian reader has noted a similar dynamic at work in the development of miniature
pilgrimage circuits in Japan such as those associated with Kōbō Daishi.
Thus the [Shikoku] pilgrimage was really only accessible to those who
could leave home for many months, who had sufficient funds to permit
this or who were prepared to endure the hardships of begging for suste-
nance. For most people in most parts of the country, then, the Shikoku
pilgrimage was not a very realistic prospect. in consequence, the energy
inherent in the pilgrimage culture of the tokugawa age found its expres-
sion diverted, to a great degree, to local and more accessible levels. in
short, when the pilgrim could not go to the pilgrimage, the pilgrimage
was brought to the pilgrim. (1988, 55)
in addition, according to reader, the proliferation of miniature pilgrimage cir-
cuits served local and regional interests in another sense as well, since the ‘desire
to assert more clearly a sense of local identity’ contributed to their rise (p. 55).22
Lineage and Landscape
these observations by Griswold and reader provide a provocative broad context
within which to consider Mahā Dhammarāja I’s move to install footprint copies
within his region. we can, however, also move towards another scale of analysis
in the interpretation of the footprint installations by examining more closely the
ways in which the micro-politics of royal and monastic lineage intersected with
alterations to the Buddhist landscape in Sukhothai and its environs.
Looking at the inscriptions from this period we see Mahā Dhammarāja I’s con-
siderable attention to incorporating within his kingdom potent signs and persons
connected to Laṅkā and Sīhala (i.e. descended from the Lankan saṅgha) monastic
lineages. In addition to the footprint installations, Mahā Dhammarāja I patron-
ized a new community of Sīhala monks imported from the south and developed
22. reader makes two other points relevant to the Southeast Asian phenomena discussed by Gris-
wold. the terminology used to refer to smaller pilgrimages associated with Shikoku made
explicit a lineage relationship between original and subsequent miniature pilgrimages (1988,
58). Moreover, the forms of miniatures focused more on ‘the symbolic levels of meaning than
on any direct physical replication (apart, of course, from the obvious point of having the same
number of sites)’ (p. 61).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 10 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 201
sites for these monks as centres of royal ritual. he even took ordination (pabbajā
and upasampadā) within the community of monks he had imported. i suggest that
we understand the king’s footprint installations – his introduction of copies asso-
ciated with Sakyamuni Buddha and with the sāsana’s Lankan supports – within
the context of the unstable politics internal to Sukhothai and characteristic of
his place within the region.
It is important to note that Mahā Dhammarāja I was not the first person of high
rank at Sukhothai to seek connections to Laṅkā. His own engagement with sites
and persons associated with Laṅkā and the Sīhala saṅgha should be understood
as participation in a cluster of arguments about authority, potency and purity
already underway within his realm. his grandfather, for instance, King ram
Khamhäng, brought monks within a Sīhala lineage to Sukhothai from Nakhon
Si thammarat, settling them at wat Saphan hin west of the city (Gosling 1991,
29).23 during the following reign of King Lo thai, the period immediately prior to
Mahā Dhammarāja I’s own reign, the ordained son of a leading family in neigh-
boring müang Rat made an extended visit to Laṅkā. This man, Si Satha Mahāthera,
returning from the island with Lankan relics, undertook major repairs as well as
new construction in the centre of Sukhothai at Wat Mahāthāt.24 Si Satha belonged
to one of two families that had played a central role in the establishment of
Sukhothai under tai rule in place of Khmer control, and was thus a high-ranking
person within the region. Although Mahā Dhammarāja I’s accession to the
throne appears to have been fraught with difficulty involving competition within
müang Sukhothai and the immediately adjacent müang, there is insufficient evi-
dence to judge conclusively whether Si Satha and/or his family contested Mahā
Dhammarāja I’s accession to the throne or supported competing interests after
the death of King Lo thai. however, the contents of inscription 2 frames Si Satha’s
activities at Wat Mahāthāt in terms of his own family line, and it is striking that
such lineage claims would have been made in one of Sukhothai’s central ritual
locations at a time of instability within Sukhothai and its court. the inscription
suggests that the connections forged by Si Satha to Laṅkā and Lankan monastic
communities were in some way drawn into competing patron–client relations at
Sukhothai. I thus agree with Michael Vickery’s reading (1978, 212) of the inscrip-
tion (in thai) as intended to glorify a family line other than the Sukhothai royal
line of Lo Thai and Mahā Dhammarāja I.25 this supports Gosling’s suggestion that
23. See also Hazra (1982, 142–8).
24. See Griswold & Prasert (1992, 343–5, 402–3) and Gosling (1991, 42). Griswold and Prasert
attribute inscription 2, and thus Si Satha’s return, to the period of King Lo thai’s reign. how-
ever, Prince Chand (1976, 44) says that Si Satha returned during the period after Lo thai’s
death, perhaps before the accession of Mahā Dhammarāja I or in the early years of his reign.
25. there is considerable disagreement about the authorship of inscription 2 and about the loca-
tion of some of the events it discusses. A voice shift within the inscription from third person
to first person in the account of Si Satha’s activities has posed interpretive problems. Vickery
(1978) summarizes and addresses earlier scholarship on this and other Sukhothai inscriptions.
Although Griswold (1967) attributed the inscription to King Lo Thai (the father of King Mahā
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 11 ---
202 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
some of Mahā Dhammarāja I’s construction projects at Sukhothai be understood
as a rejoinder to the activities of Si Satha at Wat Mahāthāt (Gosling 1991, 65–6).
The alterations to the Buddhist landscape undertaken by Mahā Dhammarāja
i are intelligible as acts of patronage undertaken in the context of elite competi-
tion, particularly the command of public royal ritual space through the devel-
opment of new sites in and near the city. Close to Wat Mahāthāt and the city
centre, so greatly enhanced by Si Satha, the king constructed his own royal palace
(Gosling 1991, 65). however, his royal monastery was constructed two kilometres
west of the city walls, midway between an earlier forest monastery associated
with Ram Khamhäng and the central Wat Mahāthāt, in a grove of mango trees
said to have been planted by King Ram Khamhäng (Gosling 1996, 28; Gosling 1991,
65–6).26 New large images of Viṣṇu and Śiva were installed in a brahminic shrine
nearby (Gosling 1991, 65, 67). with such acts, the centre of gravity for royally
sponsored monastic and protective rituals appears to have shifted west of the
city centre, some distance from Mahāthāt.27
Mahā Dhammarājā I’s installation of the Buddha footprints followed these
developments, with the Sukhothai footprint installed slightly more than ten years
after his abhiseka (Gosling 1991, 70–72; Griswold & Prasert 1992, 551). the site of
the footprint installation at Sukhothai coheres well with the king’s move to situ-
ate the royal monastery in the western sphere. it was located west of the city
centre, to the south of the Mango Grove complex that included the new royal
monastery, due south from the earlier forest monastery associated with King
Ram Khamhäng and the Sīhala saṅgha supported by him. within one or two years
of the dedication of this Sukhothai footprint, King Mahā Dhammarāja I brought
Dhammarāja I), in their later joint work Griswold and Prasert stop short of that attribution,
while discussing reasons in favor of such a reading (1992, 358–60). According to Gosling the
‘writer and protagonist of Inscriptions 2 and 11.2 is Si Satha, a grandson of Sukhothai’s libera-
tor, Pha Muang, and a nephew of ram Khamhaeng’ (1996, 24). to my mind, the inscription reads
fluidly as an account of Si Satha’s heritage, Buddhist aspirations, experiences in Laṅkā and
activities at Sukhothai. if we assume that he was the patron of the inscription or the primary
force behind it, rather than its author in the narrowest sense, it becomes easier to understand
both the shift in voice internal to the inscription and the manner in which the inscription com-
bines the styles of recounting lineage, announcing merit-making, and reporting relic miracles
since each of these topics has its own generic formulation. I agree with Vickery (1978, 212) that
the inscription includes references to the Lankan Mahādhātu. Vickery notes further: ‘that to
the extent the author, probably Srī Saddhā, dealt with Sukhothai history at all, it was to glorify
a family other than that of the Sukhothai kings and who may plausibly be seen as his ancestors
and their rivals’ (p. 212). See also vickery (p. 216) on the question of Lo thai’s succession and
the possible reign of Nua Nāṃ Thaṇ.
26. See Inscription 5: ‘Formerly this place was the royal [garden] of Brañā Rāmarāja the grandfa-
ther … [who] planted this grove of mango-trees in rows’ (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 508, original
punctuation).
27. Gosling notes the presence of an uposatha hall with sīmā in the vicinity of the royal monastery
though she does not date those structures (1996, 28). It would have been natural for King Mahā
Dhammarāja I to establish a new centre for monastic ordination in proximity to his royal mon-
astery and the residence of the saṅgharāja appointed by him. See further below.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 12 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 203
monks from Martaban who were associated with a forest-dwelling lineage of
Sīhala saṅgha monks, establishing one of them as Saṅgharāja at the Mango Grove
complex (Gosling 1991, 73; Griswold & Prasert 1992, 475–6). Since Buddhist monks,
and indeed Buddhist monks connected with Laṅkā and her saṅgha, were already
established within müang Sukhothai, we must understand Mahā Dhammarāja I’s
introduction of a new monastic line, and the appointment of a new saṅgharāja,
as acts that introduced new royal favourites within the saṅgha, and that probably
reduced or constrained the power and resources of previous monastic lineages
at Sukhothai. the king’s appointment of the saṅgharāja was part of the stand-
ard repertoire of actions through which Lankan and Southeast Asian kings con-
nected with Buddhist institutions asserted royal control and altered the balances
of power and patronage within elite circles.
this understanding of the king’s activities is further supported by Sukhothai
inscriptions 4 (in Khmer) and 5 (in thai), which closely link the arrival of the new
saṅgharāja, the dedication of a bhūmisparśa image in the Wat Mahāthāt compound
on the side closest to the royal palace and the ordination of Mahā Dhammarāja I
in 1361. the king is described as conducting his novitiate ordination in the pres-
ence of the new image and of the saṅgharāja within the royal palace site. the
saṅgharāja demonstrated allegiance to the king by his presence in the royal pal-
ace before the newly installed image. Only then did the king move to the Mango
Grove complex for upasampadā, leaving the image in residence at the palace itself.
According to inscription 5:
if we wished to make a comparison, that road {on which the saṅgharāja
arrived} was as beautiful to look at as a road in the city of heaven. then
[the King] invited the Mahāsāmī Saṅgharāja to go into retreat for the
full three months of the rainy season.
At the end of the retreat, [the King] made a great presentation of alms
(to the monkhood) and consecrated a bronze statue cast [the same size as]
(the statue of?) our Lord the Buddha, erected in the middle of the city of
Sukhodaya to the east of the Śrīratanamahādhātu. [For the] consecration
he listened to the [preaching of the] Dharma every day for a full hundred
days, and at that time he distributed offerings of ten thousand of gold,
ten thousand of silver, ten million cowries, ten million areca nuts, four
hundred [sets of] robes, four hundred almsbowls, four hundred cushions,
four hundred pillows, [four hundred] mattresses, and countless gifts of
all sorts. As for the accessory [offerings] brought by members of the royal
family and nobility, they cannot be counted. And the gifts presented to
the Mahāsāmi Saṅgharāha {sic} cannot be counted [either].
{i omit a discussion of the date of the king’s pabbajā.}
Brañā Śrī Sūryavaṃśa Rāma Mahādharmarājādhirāja … made the
resolve to observe the Ten Precepts as an ascetic … in the presence of
the golden statue of the Buddha which was installed in the royal Palace,
and which he himself had caused to be … on that day. Then he invited the
Mahāsāmī Saṇgharāja, together with the theras, the anutheras, and the
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 13 ---
204 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
assembly of monks, to enter the Royal Palace … and he received the ordi-
nation as a samaṇera there. When he was about to [receive] the Precepts,
Brañā Śrī Sūryavaṃśa Rāma Mahādharmarājādhirāja, standing with
raised hands, did homage to the golden [statue of the] Buddha, homage
to the Scriptures … which were kept there, and homage to the Mahāsāmī
Saṅgharāja. (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 512–13, curly brackets added)
Inscription 6 (in Pāli), attributed by Griswold and Prasert to the saṅgharāja,
reports that:
After receiving his ordination as a novice, the King went down from
his palace as tranquil in mind as a mahāthera of sixty seasons. Looking
ahead of him no more than the distance of a yuga, venerated with innu-
merable honors by the throng of weeping people, he proceeded to the
excellent Mango Grove. In that charming place filled with all sorts of
birds like indra’s garden, strewn with sand the color of pearls and silver,
in that excellent Mango Grove, (which) because of its purity is worthy
to be the abode of solitary mendicants, he received his ordination as a
monk. (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 518–19, original punctuation)
According to Gosling, King Mahā Dhammarāja I’s ordination in 1361 marked
his abdication (1996, 252–4 n.63). Griswold and Prasert, however, argue that
he remained a bhikkhu for a limited period, returning to active military cam-
paigns thereafter. Central to their claim is an intertextual reading of portions of
Inscriptions 3 and 8 (1992, 551–4).28 Wyatt places the death of Mahā Dhammarāja
I in the period between 1368 and 1374, mentioning his death rather than any
abdication as the central moment with respect to Sukhothai’s regional politics
(2003, 57). I find it difficult to believe that King Mahā Dhammarāja I abdicated
the throne, although I am not confident of Griswold and Prasert’s reconstruc-
tion of the king’s military activity from Inscriptions 3 and 8. The logic of the
royal activities described in inscriptions 4, 5, and 6 presumes the king’s return
to rule. there would have been little reason for the king to establish a new royal
monastery and other sites for royal ritual, and to alter the administration of his
monastic community at the highest level, only to give up kingship permanently.
Nor, i think, is it likely that inscriptional comparisons to vessantara and indra
would have been used to describe the activities of a permanently abdicating king.
The Pāli phrase in Inscription 6 translated by Griswold and Prasert as ‘abdicated
the kingship in which he was firmly established’ need mean nothing so final: ‘the
king named Lideyya, a mine of virtues, conducting himself with respect to the
welfare of the sāsana and the welfare of the whole world, growing weary of/turn-
ing away from kingship even as he ruled ….’29 weeping observers and pleas from
28. See also Griswold (1967, 37) and Gosling (1996, 252–4 n.63). Prince Chand assumes the king’s
temporary ordination (1976, 27–8).
29. ‘rājā lideyyanāmako sāsanassa hitaṃ sabbalokassa ca hitañ caraṃ rajje ṭhito pi rājattanibbindanto
guṇākaro’ (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 515).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 14 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 205
the king’s retinue to retain the throne are formulae within accounts of the virtu-
ous, temporary, renunciation of royal power. it was not uncommon for Buddhist
kings of Southeast Asia to leave the throne temporarily for monastic ordination
and its spectacular merit.
Landscape, Power and Protection
In any case, whether Mahā Dhammarāja I returned to the throne or not follow-
ing his monastic ordination, it should be clear that his installation of Buddha
footprints occurred in temporal proximity to other alterations to the Buddhist
landscape of Sukhothai that were linked to shifts within local lay and monastic
lineage. the Buddha footprints were part of a network of activities that privileged
certain ritual spaces and locations over others, and certain persons over others,
while asserting the power and propriety of King Mahā Dhammarāja I’s claim to
müang Sukhothai and its environs. however, the function of the footprint instal-
lations was not limited to their important place within such competitive articula-
tions of lineage and elite hierarchy. They were also intended to offer immediate
and longer-term comfort and protection.
Inscription 3, dated 1357, indicates the degree to which Mahā Dhammarāja I
and his contemporaries understood themselves to live at the onset of a precari-
ous period. this inscription commemorates the enshrinement of a Lankan relic
and bodhi tree seeds at the city of Nagara Juṃ. This inscription discusses the life-
cycle of the sāsana at considerable length, predicting dramatic signs of decline as
soon as 99 years from the date of the inscription, as well as the complete end of
the sāsana in three thousand years and the absence of any opportunity for merit-
making and heavenly rebirth.
in the year of the boar, ninety-nine years from the year this relic is
enshrined, the Three Piṭakas will disappear. There will be no one who
really knows them, though there will still be some who know a little bit
of them. As for preaching the Dharma, such as the Mahājāti, if the begin-
ning is known the end will not be, or if the end is known the beginning
will not be; and as for the Abhidhamma collection, the Paṭṭhāna and the
Yammaka will disappear at that time. (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 453)
the inscription continues to predict further stages of decline over a subsequent
three thousand years. The implications for King Mahā Dhammarāja I’s contem-
poraries are vividly stated:
From now on, all good people should make haste to perform meritori-
ous actions (in accordance with) the Buddha’s religion while it still sur-
vives. the present generation has the immense advantage of being born
in time (to know) the Lord’s religion; so everyone should be assiduous
in doing homage to stupas, cetiyas and śrīmahābodhi trees, which is the
same as (doing homage to) our Lord in person. if anyone (when doing
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 15 ---
206 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
homage to them) makes a wish with perfect faith, it will come true, even
if he makes the wish that he will be reborn in heaven, (that he will stay
there) until Śrī Ariyamaitri comes down (to earth) to become a Buddha,
and that he will be reborn on this earth at the same time.
(Griswold & Prasert 1992, 456–7)
Inscription 8, attributed to King Mahā Dhammarāja I and dated some time after
1359, specifically announces the wish-fulfilling character of the Buddha footprint
on the hill at Sukhothai.
This hill is called Sumanakūṭaparvata … It is so named because (an
emissary) went to make impressions of the Footprint of our Lord the
Buddha which is stamped on top of Mount Sumanakūṭaparvata in dis-
tant Laṇkādvīpa, and brought them to establish on top of this hill so that
everyone might get a sight of this imprint of our Lord Buddha’s Footsole
with the full hundred and eight signs in bright colors and that all divini-
ties [and men] might salute it, honor it and do homage to it. May they
[attain] the happy condition of Buddhahood!
How can a person [attain] the happy conditions?
{the inscription then contains a badly damaged discussion of births
and forms of happiness, as a human king, as a monk and, perhaps, in
heavenly rebirth.}
If anyone climbs up to the top of this Mount Sumanakūṭaparvata and
worships the imprint of our Lord Buddha’s Footsole with firm faith that
these three happy conditions … (can be attained), he will attain them
without fail. (Griswold & Prasert 1992, 560–61, curly brackets added)
the king’s inclination towards footprint installations as sites for merit-making,
wish-fulfillment and samsaric protection was natural given the growing influence
in Southeast Asia of monks connected to the Sīhala saṅgha. By the time of this
inscription, Sīhala saṅgha monks connected to the forest-dwelling lineage of the
Lankan Udumbaragiri fraternity, had already reached Sukhothai and Si Sajjanālai
(Hazra 1982, 142–5).30
we do not know which texts accompanied these monks to the Sukhothai
region, or were encountered by Sukhothai travelers to Laṅkā, and so we cannot
specify the impact of particular works on devotional developments at Sukhothai.
viedlinger warns us not to overestimate the textual (as opposed to oral/aural)
character of Sukhothai Buddhism (2006, 45–8). However, the thirteenth-century
composition date of the Pāli Samantakūṭavaṇṇanā, and its apparent authorship
within a Lankan line of forest-dwelling monks (Hazlewood 1986, ix), indicates
the intensification of attention to the Buddha’s footprint within Lankan Buddhist
devotional culture, as do other works in Sinhala and Pāli composed in Laṅkā
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries (Skilling 1992, 68). It would have
30. See also Viedlinger (2006, 43–8).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 16 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 207
been entirely natural for monks connected to the forest-dwelling (araññavāsi)
lineages of Laṅkā to transmit ideas about the power of Buddha footprints dur-
ing their movement within Southeast Asian kingdoms, whatever the medium of
that transmission.31
Against the backdrop of a lengthy Buddha biography, vedeha thera’s
Samantakūṭavaṇṇanā describes the creation of the Buddha’s footprint at Śrī Pāda
at the request of Sumana, god of the mountain. Mount Samanta is described in
paradisial language and the footsole itself is depicted in terms of the cakka and
other auspicious marks of the worlds of men and gods (Hazelwood 1986, vv. 721–
70). The final verse of the text prior to the colophon runs as follows in the printed
version, giving a sense of the remarkable properties of the footprint:
thus did the King of the dhamma, who provided good for people and
who was freed from the host of the enemy anger, make his footprint on
the delightful peak of Mount Sumana in the park of Laṅkā. Like the Sage,
that footprint will give you heaven and nibbāna merely when your heart
believes. So, sirs, be gladdened, bow down and pay homage to that which
is praised by the good! (v. 796)
in the context of anxiety about sāsana decline, belief in the liberating possibili-
ties of Metteyya Buddha’s dispensation and confidence in the footprint’s power
to fulfill rebirth wishes, were a potent combination.32 George Coedès and Charles
Archaimbault have noted acutely that the very anticipation of the sāsana’s decline,
and the specification of the phases of its deterioration, created anxious opportu-
nities for those invested in the vitality of the sāsana.
C’est Buddhaghosa, pense-t-on, qui en accordant cinq mille ans au règne
du Dharma aurait repoussé l’échéance mais, en précisant les différentes
phases de régression qu’il scandait en cinq périodes, il donna en fait à
tous les religieux, pieux laïques, simples fidèles, la possibilité de con-
stater par eux-mêmes le déclin inéluctable de la religion. Que Lidaiya
(Lü Tai) roi de Sukhodaya ait partagé très tôt ces croyances, il suffit pour
s’en convaincre relire les inscriptions qu’il fait graver pour commémorer
les événements importants de son règne. (1973, ix)33
31. See note 20, above. De Silva (2005, 35–48) notes the rising popularity of Śrī Pāda as a pilgrim-
age site and focus for royal patronage after the eleventh century, tracing this in part to the
increasingly forceful presence of maritime trade in the western and southwestern regions of
the island.
32. in addition to the inscriptional references to sāsana decline discussed above, note that King
Mahā Dhammarāja I’s skills in mathematics, calendrical computation, and calendrical rectifi-
cation are stressed within the praise sections of inscriptions from his reign. Such knowledge is
part of what authorizes the king’s adjudication of cosmological as well as royal cycles. See also
Andaya (1978, 10).
33. ‘Buddhaghosa is believed to have postponed the end of the Dharma by granting it five thou-
sand years. But, in detailing the different phases of its decline, delineated into five periods, he
actually gave all the monastics, pious laity, common devotees, the possibility of verifying for
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 17 ---
208 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
Mahā Dhammarāja I’s inscriptional persona shows a fascination with both the
threat and promise of sāsana decline, with the fears and aspirations to rebirth.
those connected to the installation of Buddha footprints reveal with particu-
lar clarity the promise of an encounter with such traces of Sakyamuni Buddha,
who offered the security of bridging to the world of his successor, the Buddha
Metteyya.34
The location of Mahā Dhammarāja I’s footprint installations on hilltop sites
prompts another line of reflection about the protective function of these altera-
tions to the landscape.35 Müang Sukhothai stood at the confluence of Khmer and
themselves the unavoidable decline of the religion. to satisfy oneself that Lidaiya (Lü tai), king
of Sukothai, shared these beliefs very early on, it is enough to re-read the inscriptions that he
had engraved to commemorate the important events of his reign.’
34. Such preoccupation with cosmic order, kingship and the life of the Buddha-sāsana is central to
the Trai Phum (three worlds). the Trai Phum has long been considered the work of King Mahā
Dhammarāja I, and said to have been composed in his younger days as uparāja at Si Sajjanālai.
this view was accepted with only minor reservations in a contemporary english transla-
tion of the text (Reynolds & Reynolds 1982, 10, 39), and in the French translation (Coedès &
Archaimbault 1973, xi). See also Andaya (1978). However, Michael Vickery has questioned the
attribution of the text to the Sukhothai period and to King Mahā Dhammarāja I, particularly
on the basis of features of the exordium (introduction) and colophon within the eighteenth-
century manuscripts from which printed editions have been prepared (vickery 1974, 1991).
there remains uncertainty about whether all or part of the Trai Phum may be attributed to the
Sukhothai period, although many of its central ideas about kingship, cosmology and ethics
have a long and secure history in Buddhist texts prior to the era of the Sukhothai kingdom.
it may be said that the exordium and colophon of the Trai Phum (in the French and eng-
lish translations) conform exceedingly well to the devotional tenor of King Mahā Dhammarāja
i’s inscriptions and footprint installations. these passages cluster associations between the
decline of the sāsana, faith (saddhā), heavenly rebirth, the coming of Metteyya and the Buddha’s
footprints. the opening verses of the Trai Phum, as one would expect, pay honor to the triple
Gem. Strikingly, the Buddha in this case is immediately indexed to his footprint: ‘I salute with
great joy and happiness the lotus-like foot of the Conqueror, who desires to be worshipped for
a very long time, who infatuates good men who are like bees, who bestows the taste of honey,
whose instep has the down of the supreme perfections, whose fragrant redolence corresponds
to the glory of his virtues’ (Reynolds & Reynolds 1982, 43). Slightly later, the text runs as fol-
lows: ‘What was the purpose for which it was composed? It was composed in order to enhance
the usefulness of the Abhidhamma, and because of [the author’s] desire to preach to his royal
mother. Another purpose was to advance the cause of dhamma’ (pp. 45–6). Just prior to the
closing colophon, the text concludes: ‘Whoever wishes to reach the celestial treasure, which is
the deliverance of Nibbāna, let him listen to this Sermon on the Three Worlds with care and inter-
est, with faith in his heart, and without being heedless in any way. he will then be able to meet
the Lord Sri Ariya [Metteyya] when he is born in the future, to pay his respects to him, and
to listen to the dhamma that he will preach’ (p. 350). the colophon’s emphasis on the Abhid-
hamma coheres well with arguments for Mahā Dhammarāja I’s authorship (or sponsorship) of
the Trai Phum. the composition of the text is implicitly compared to the Buddha’s preaching of
the Abhidhamma to his mother in heaven after the attainment of enlightenment. Given inscrip-
tion 3’s prediction that the Abhidhamma would cease to exist within 99 years of the inscription’s
composition, and the centrality of the Abhidhamma to protective rituals, composition (or spon-
sorship) of a text like the Trai Phum was an understandable, if massive, merit-making offering.
35. i am grateful to Ashley thompson for suggesting this line of enquiry.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 18 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 209
Tai cultural influences. Indeed, by Mahā Dhammarāja I’s reign Tai supercession
of Khmer dominance in the region was barely a century old. evidence from both
tai and Khmer cultural areas indicates strong associations between mountain and
hilltop sites and supernatural powers understood to offer protection to the locale
within which they stood.36 ian Mabbett and david Chandler observe, for instance,
the importance of the structure of nak ta (ancestral spirit) ritual and ritual space
to the ritual spatial order established by the kings of Angkor.37
each village community has its nak ta, an ancestral spirit or a number of
them, domesticated by ritual to the protection of the place. the rulers
of Angkor, correspondingly, established cults of grand divinities to guard
the kingdom. in doing so they employed the ingredients and vocabulary
of imported religion; but their patrons were nak ta nonetheless.
(1995, 112)
dhida Saraya describes similar processes at work further north.
From the adoption of Buddhism in the fourteenth century the whole
concept of the muang cult changed. the worship of the sacred relic, as
it appeared in tamnan-history [the history articulated by the local lin-
eage texts of Lān Nā], gave new impetus to the power of the phi sua
muang [spirits of the muang]. … First, relic worship continued the wor-
ship of the sacred site by absorbing the muang cult and the sacred relics
were enshrined at the sacred sites of each muang. the sacred relics then
became symbolic objects inheriting the territorial rights and powers of
the phi sua muang. … the king was associated with the territorial power
of the ancestral spirits at the sacred site reinforced by the universal
Buddhist power. (1982, 116–17)38
As Donald Swearer has observed with respect to Lān Nā, the northern Tai cul-
tural environment was one in which striking natural formations including moun-
tain sites were associated with powerful spirits connected to particular locales.
‘In the legends of Doi Suthep, Doi Kham, and Doi Ang Salung Chiang Dao, super-
natural figures identified with the mountains become protectors of the inhabit-
ants of the valleys’ (Swearer et al. 2004, 24). Similar to the manner in which the
attention to hindu supernaturals was framed by Khmer expectations of nak ta
cults and sites, thai Buddhist polities drew the protective powers associated with
Sakyamuni Buddha into their prior understandings of supernatural geography.
thus, for instance, major mountain sites such as dòi Suthep at Chiang Mai came
36. See, for instance, Mabbett & Chandler (1995, esp. chs 8–9) and Chandler (1996, esp. pt I).
37. See also Chandler (2000, chs 3–4) on temple mountains and royal construction at Angkor.
38. See also Tanabe (2000). Of course, by the Sukhothai and Lān Nā reigns discussed in this essay
there was already a long Buddhist history of connecting potent reminders of Sakyamuni Bud-
dha and other powerful beings to markers of elite power and territorial control. One thinks, for
instance, of the distribution of Sakyamuni Buddha’s own relic-remains after the parinibbāna.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 19 ---
210 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
to be associated with the fortunes of müang Chiang Mai, protected by the pres-
ence of a Buddha relic at the site of Sakyamuni Buddha’s prior visit. According to
Tamnān Phra Thāt Suthep, ‘[a]ll the kings who ruled in Chiang Mai from King Kue
Na to thao Kaeo placed great faith in the Buddha relic on Suthep Mountain and
continuously made offerings to it’ (in Swearer et al. 2004, 80).
Gosling notes evidence of the importance of pre-Buddhist ‘animistic’ deities
to early Sukhothai inscriptions, such as inscription 1 dating to the late thirteenth
century and inscription 45 dating to the late fourteenth century.
Although Inscription XLV dates from roughly one hundred years after
the documentation of Theravāda practices at Sukhothai (in Inscription
i), it details a developed animistic structure that included not only tens
and hundreds of thousands of spirits or phi who dwelt in lakes, forests
and rivers, but also specifically named spirits who ruled over particular
geographical locales. (1984, 17)
it is, i believe, more in terms of transition and change, of confrontation
between Buddhist and non-Buddhist systems, rather than continuation
of past Buddhist tradition, that the history of theravada development
at Sukhothai in the fourteenth century should be written. (p. 22)39
Although we cannot know for certain, given the paucity of our records for
fourteenth-century Sukhothai and its regional cultural history, it seems likely
that – given the shared Khmer and tai associations between hill sites, protec-
tive supernatural powers, and the delineation of territorial boundaries – Mahā
Dhammarāja I’s footprint installations were in part an effort to draw protective
power toward müang Sukhothai and his rule by establishing the wish-fulfilling
footprints at particularly potent locations.40
39. Further, Gosling writes, provocatively, ‘Equally important, I think, for the study of early Thai
history is that the above considerations provide a different gestalt for that study. While the
foregoing thoughts in no way intend to disclaim the exciting interplay between the early thais
at Sukhothai and the other culture groups with whom they were in contact, we are here pro-
vided a framework for the study of thai history in which the thai are perceived not merely
as the passive inheritors of those cultures, but a cultural entity in their own right. it was this
unique heritage that provided the roots for the flowering of classical Thai culture – the progen-
itor as well as the beneficiary of cultural exchange. Within this framework, the development of
Theravāda Buddhism, which was to become the most Thai of all religious institutions, can be
approached not only in terms of the theravadin inscriptions, but also taking into consideration
the social and cultural milieu which prompted the conscious and determined espousal of those
doctrines’ (1984, 23).
40. Quaritch Wales observed long ago: ‘we see that the animism of the early Thai still enjoyed the
royal protection, despite the fact that the Kings of Sukhodaya had adopted much of Khmer
Brahmanism and were fervent Buddhists as well. But it appears that there was only one spirit
who was thought worthy of royal patronage, and it was a mountain spirit. Probably this class of
spirit always enjoyed a pre-eminent position, and may have been the earliest type of guardian
spirit of a city’ (1931, 301).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 20 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 211
THE MAHĀBODHI TEMPLE IN CHIANG MAI
The Mahābodhi Temple of King Tilokarāja
the Jinakālamālī, a northern Thai lineage text, recounts that King Tilokarāja (r.
1441/2–1487) ‘listened to the disquisition on the Dhamma on the planting of the
Bodhi trees from the ‘Sīhaḷa’ monks’ and became ‘desirous of planting a Great
Bodhi.’ in 1455, the king planted a bodhi tree. the Jinakālamālī reports that the king
had built a structure of some sort (perhaps a railing) around the tree, and marked
the seven sites associated with the weeks immediately following the Buddha’s
enlightenment. twenty-two years later, again according to the Jinakālamālī,
King Tilokarāja built a great monastic dwelling at the site (Jayawickrama 1968,
139–40; Buddhadatta 1962, 98).41 the Tamnān Wat Jet yòt (a local history of the
the Mahābodhi monastery that uses the site’s other name, the ‘Seven Spires
Monastery’) reports that King Tilokarāja constructed a pavilion for more than
one hundred monks who assembled at the site for a 1477 saṇgāyanā, and that he
had built a library for the Tipiṭaka itself (in hutchinson 1951, 43).42
The name of the Mahābodhi monastery (Wat Bodhārāma) associated the site
at once with Bodh Gayā in mainland South Asia and Anurādhapura in Laṅkā.
Moreover, one of the buildings erected at the site explicitly evoked the Mahābodhi
temple site at Bodh Gayā,43 as did the installation at the Chiang Mai site of mark-
ers associated with the seven-week period after Sakyamuni Buddha’s enlight-
enment. Tilokarāja’s engagement with Wat Bodhārāma caught the attention of
art historians some years ago. In his article on Bodh Gayā and Southeast Asia,
Robert Brown drew attention to the re-creation of the Bodh Gayā Mahābodhi
temple on at least four sites in the areas we now know as Burma and thailand
beginning in the eleventh century. Brown associated Southeast Asian inter-
est in Bodh Gayā with the growing formal presence of Theravāda Buddhism
in the region. ‘Bodhgaya drew South-east Asian Buddhists mentally as well as
physically, as it was the site that allowed them to get the closest to the historic
Buddha’ (Brown 1988, 105). Earlier, A. B. Griswold had pointed toward the case
of Mahābodhi temple replications in Pagan, Pegu, and Chiang Mai in the course
of his broader meditations on the replication of sites and landscapes within the
Theravādin world (1965, esp. 181–2).44 Brown and Griswold are right to associate
41. See also Coèdes (1925, 35).
42. i am reliant on hutchinson’s paraphrase of the tamnān. Many portions of the text are presented
in what appears to be a condensed and edited translation. See also Penth (1994, 215–24).
43. The site’s other name, Wat Jet Yòt, refers to ‘one of its buildings that is chiefly made of laterite,
the outside of which is ornamented with images of stucco devatās, and which has a roof with
7 spires, resembling the Mahābodhi sanctum at Buddhagayā (Bodhgayā) on a much reduced
scale’ (Penth 1994, 216).
44. Tilman Frasch writes of engagement with Bodh Gayā: ‘In contrast to their Sinhalese counterparts,
who focused on the tree, Burmese kings took a special interest in the temple, repairing it continu-
ally over the centuries and also copying it. This difference, I think, can be easily explained. The
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 21 ---
212 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
* Wat
Bodhārāma
(cid:65) To Dòi Suthep
* Wat Pā * Wat * Wat
Däng Suan Dòk Jedī Luang
MAP 2: Chiang Mai sites45
Tilokarāja’s involvement with Wat Bodhārāma with the presence of persons
connected to the Sīhala saṅgha who drew on texts and monastic ordination lines
we now tend to associate with the Theravāda,46 and to suggest that activities
Sinhalese Buddhist tradition with its old roots perceived itself as the legitimate heir and succes-
sor of indian Buddhism. Anuradhapura not only housed a sapling of the Bo tree, but also a good
number of Buddha’s bodily relics. Compared to these central symbols of Buddhist worship, the
Mahabodhi Temple was considered of minor importance. … But on the other hand, the reverence
of temple building had, since Pyu days, been of much higher importance in Burma than in Ceylon,
and taking into account that temple construction was at its height in Pagan at that time, it was
almost natural to reduplicate the temple rather than the tree’ (1998, 81–2).
Brown and Griswold have compared at some length the Mahābodhi temple sites at Chiang
Mai, Pagan and Bodh Gayā. There are numerous differences across these sites, including struc-
tural handling of the towers surrounding the central tower, and the nature of the images that
decorate the stucco exterior. Despite such differences, the step-pyramid style of the central
tower and the location of the seven sites associated with the Sakyamuni Buddha’s enlighten-
ment, are a clear evocation of Bodh Gayā and would have required detailed knowledge of the
Bodh Gayā site and/or the Mahābodhi temple at Pagan constructed in the thirteenth century.
The seven sites are associated with the seven weeks following the Buddha’s final attainment:
one week, respectively, under the bodhi tree, gazing at the bodhi tree, and engaged in walking
meditation, followed by two weeks in seated meditation, one week seated under the protection
of Mucalinda, and one further week of seated meditation culminating with the receipt of a
dāna (see Brown 1988, 112). Brown (1988) and Griswold (1965) discuss in considerable detail the
architectural and art historical evidence in support of Pagan and/or Bodh Gayā as the model
for the site at Chiang Mai. their arguments do not appear conclusive and, although a clearer
understanding of the transmission would be valuable, its absence does not affect the argu-
ments that follow here. See also Hutchinson (1951, 37–8).
45. Adapted from Penth (1994, xx). the distances between sites marked by * follow the scale of
Penth’s map. here 2.5 cm = approximately 1 km. Note that dòi Suthep is approximately 15 km
northwest of Wat Jedī Luang.
46. I have retained other scholars’ use of the term ‘Theravāda’ within this essay but agree decid-
edly with Skilling (n.d.) that more caution is in order when using the term ‘Theravāda’ to 1
describe manifestations of Buddhism in historical South and Southeast Asia. the evidence
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 22 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 213
related to Wat Bodhārāma be understood as part of the work of memory and
claims to lineage within Buddhist Southeast Asia. however, as in the case of the
footprints at Sukhothai, it is possible to retrieve at least the outlines of a fuller and
more local history of the landscape alterations associated with Wat Bodhārāma
and other sites in the Chiang Mai area that benefited from Tilokarāja’s patron-
age. If we look closely at the evidence connected to Wat Bodhārāma and other
acts of construction and re-construction in fifteenth-century Chiang Mai we
see the ways in which these activities functioned within the context of Chiang
Mai politics, involving assertions of power and lineage as well as efforts to draw
on the protective power of merit-making and the (re-)creation of potent sites.
Territory and Power
Like Mahā Dhammarāja I of Sukhothai, Tilokarāja’s accession as king was not
straightforward. His father, King Sām Fang Kän (r. 1401–1441) was deposed from
the throne by a palace official, Sām Dek Yoi. Sām Dek Yoi may have had designs
on the throne himself, but orchestrated Tilokarāja’s succession, after which Sām
Fang Kän left Chiang Mai for müang Sat. According to Wyatt, Sām Fang Kän’s allies
did not accept Tilokarāja’s accession quickly, bringing something near to civil
war on Lān Nā. This was a dangerous time for local dissension, as tensions grew
between Chiang Mai and the southern regional state of Ayutthaya (wyatt 2003,
66–8). Sām Fang Kän died in 1447 (Likhit Likhitamonta 1980, 69). Tilokarāja’s ritual
and construction activities following 1447 are intelligible within the context of
fraught royal succession and trouble with Ayutthaya.47
Shortly after his father’s death, in 1448, Tilokarāja undertook temporary ordi-
nation at Wat Pā Däng, the headquarters for the second lineage of Sīhala monks
at Chiang Mai (Swearer & Premchit 1978, 30; Buddhadatta 1962, 96). Under any
circumstances it would have been natural for a son to offer ordination merit to his
deceased parent. in the context of political dissent within müang Chiang Mai and
its environs, however, ordination is likely to have served as a public act of filial
piety that formed part of the creation of a new and happier narrative of family
lineage and obligation, and as a sign of the king’s reciprocal patronage relations
with leading monks of the second lineage of Sīhala saṅgha monks resident in the
Chiang Mai region. These monks, connected to Wat Pā Däng, had been established
at Chiang Mai by Tilokarāja’s father, Säm Fang Kän. Temporary ordination within
the line of monks established and patronized by his father was a public way of
demonstrating right to rule, as well as support for the new king by the most pow-
erful section of the Chiang Mai saṅgha.48 donald Swearer and Sommai Premchit
from Sukhothai and Chiang Mai discussed here reveals Buddhists’ identification with monastic
lineages and teachers, and with the Buddha sāsana, rather than with ‘Theravāda’ Buddhism.
47. On the pressures emanating from Ayutthaya, see also Mcdaniel (2002, 171).
48. Tilokarāja had earlier signalled his support of the Pā Däng lineage, ordaining five hundred
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 23 ---
214 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
have noted, based on northern Thai lineage texts, that the Pā Däng monks were
embroiled in controversy from the time of their arrival in Chiang Mai. disputes
over specifically monastic matters appear to have overlapped with other strug-
gles within elite circles.
The controversy during the time of Sām Fang Kaen was probably a bit-
ter sectarian fight that focused on vinaya rules. Both the chronicles and
the existence of double sīmā boundary markers around uposatha halls
of this period testify to the fact that the new order both reordained
monks and also reconsecrated sacred monastery precincts. we do not
know the exact nature of the relationship between the reformist reli-
gious group and the aristocracy that supported Tilokarāja against his
father. it may well be that the religious controversy merely provided a
convenient excuse for those who opposed Sām Fang Kaen to seize power.
Whatever the particular historic circumstances, the new Sīhala Order
provided a basis within the religious sphere … for change within the
political sphere. (Swearer & Premchit 1978, 28)49
Tilokarāja moved quickly to alter the Buddhist landscape of Chiang Mai and to
offer substantial patronage to the monks within the Pā Däng lineage. In 1452
Wat Pā Däng received its own sīmā, a sign of secure fortunes and royal patronage
(Buddhadatta 1962, 97).50 By 1455 Tilokarāja had taken his first steps to construct
a new temple complex at Wat Bodhārāma.
Military campaigns continued to characterize Tilokarāja’s reign; periods of
military activity and diplomatic struggle coincided with aggressive efforts to alter
the ritual landscape of müang Chiang Mai. We do not know when Tilokarāja com-
pleted the architectural allusions to Bodh Gayā with a seven-spired structure at
Wat Bodhārāma. It is likely that it would have been complete before the Tipiṭaka
council held there in 1477, and the construction of a structure to house a purified
recension of the texts. Preparations on a grand scale at Wat Bodhārāma occurred
near the time of Tilokarāja’s enhancements of the main structure at Wat Jedī
monks very shortly after his accession in 1441 (Buddhadatta 1962, 95). Tilokarāja is said to have
left royal control in the hands of his mother during his monastic tenure (p. 96), which suggests
continued threats to his power even after his father’s death.
49. On monastic disputes during this period, and their possible relationship to shifting habits of
literacy and orality, see Viedlinger (2006, ch. 3). Dhida Saraya writes: ‘From the beginning of his
career, tilok was supported for the throne by a group of monks from Ceylon. he was responsi-
ble for the revision of the scriptures in the year 1477, which indirectly affirmed his power to
purify the Sangha. He confirmed his being a Buddhist king with rights over land, by consecrat-
ing boundary stones (sema) to unify the Sangha’ (1982, 105). See also Viedlinger (2006, 85).
50. dhida Saraya observes acutely that acts of royal patronage could also serve royal ambitions to
circumscribe monastic power. ‘In Tilokrat’s reign efforts were made to limit the power of the
Sangha through religious reform and by establishing a new religious centre of the Singhalese
order at Wat Pā Daeng Luang. … In the year 1453 he added more land endowed to Wat Pā Daeng
Luang and proclaimed the separation between “the land of the muang” and “the land of the
wat”’ (1982, 169).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 24 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 215
Luang, increasing its height and the dramatic effect of the central spire. The work
on Wat Jedī Luang continued into 1481, culminating with the installation of a relic
associated with the monks of the Wat Pā Däng line, and a powerful Buddha image
brought to the city from Lampāng to serve as a palladium of rule. This was the
Phra Käo, or Emerald Buddha, installed in a shrine modelled on the Lohapasāda
shrine at Anurādhapura in Laṅkā (Likhit Likhitamonta 1980, 75; Hazra 1982, 161).
With the improvements at Wat Jedī Luang, the city of Chiang Mai was compared
to a heavenly city in the Tāvatiṃsa heaven:
And this ‘Royal Spire’ which was thirty-five fathoms across, forty-five
in height, ending in a tier with a single spire and exceedingly beauti-
ful to behold, the crowning glory of the capital city of Nabbisi [Chiang
Mai], shone like the Cūḷāmaṇi-cetiya in Vāsava’s heavenly city of
Masakkasāra. (Jayawickrama 1968, 140)
the 1470s, in other words, witnessed an aggressive reconstitution of the ritual
landscape by King Tilokarāja. These alterations were demonstrations of royal
authority and right to rule, made in the context of unstable regional politics and
the king’s ongoing struggles with King Trailokarāja of Ayutthaya. They were, at
the same time, acts to enhance the supernatural potencies available to protect
Tilokarāja as ruler of müang Chiang Mai.
Dhida Saraya describes the fifteenth century, and particularly the reign of
Tilokarāja, as a period characterized by unprecedented attempts to unify Lān Nā
territories under rule from Chiang Mai. During this time, efforts were made to
integrate diverse müang, clan groups, and ethnic groups within the region we now
know as Lān Nā. This was linked to an emergent sense among rulers of Chiang
Mai that they ruled a substantial polity that sought to dominate extensive rela-
tions of patronage and tribute.
eventually the muang developed into a kingdom in the fifteenth century
when all the muang were united under the name Lanna. In this unified
state the status of the ruler was raised to that of a king, the political
organization became more developed, and the kingdom grew. especially
in the reign of tilokrat, development towards social and political inte-
gration continued and culminated in the assertion of Chiangmai as a
krung [royal capital city] competing with Ayutthaya. (1982, 80, 104)51
Tilokarāja’s appellation signalled these ambitions: he, like his rival to the south
in Ayutthaya, Trailokarāja, presented himself as the ‘ruler of the three worlds,’
the designation used by kings with ‘imperial’ aims. Dhida Saraya outlines a proc-
ess whereby Tilokarāja altered ritual practices and locations as part of efforts
51. ‘It was not until Kuna who ruled in the latter half of the fourteenth century, that Chiangmai
began to be an important center and the line of rulers at Chiangmai became identified with
Mangrai’s line. … The Chiangmai genealogy and the Mangrai genealogy became identical’
(Dhida Saraya 1982, 101).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 25 ---
216 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
to unify the müang over whom he sought control. Crucial to this process was
the installation of relics and images at the centre of müang Chiang Mai, in part
by drawing towards the city centre potent objects previously located in other
müang or associated with leaders of other family lines. From this perspective,
Tilokarāja’s enhancements at Wat Jedī Luang, and the establishment there of the
emerald Buddha, drew on the logic of prior associations between potent objects
and the physical centre of political gravity in order to buttress a new form of pol-
ity extending across prior boundaries of the müang.
the emphasis on the sacred relic at the center of the muang corresponds
with the worship of sacred sites such as the sadue muang [centre of the
muang]. The worship of sacred relics fits into the scheme of legitima-
tion of power and territorial rights provided by the muang cult. But the
radiating power of the relics expanded across the political boundaries
of the clan-based muang. (Dhida Saraya 1982, 144)
the image cult which had been popular from the time of King Kuna was
organized in such a way that only the king, not the other lords, could
take possession of those images and keep them in the center of the king-
dom. the emerald Buddha and the Buddha Sihing were worshipped in
special monasteries in Chiangmai. (p. 105)
According to Justin McDaniel, Tilokarāja’s city improvements achieved dramatic
effect. The ‘aesthetic, ritual, and royal accouterments’ developed around Wat Jedī
Luang made it ‘the center of at least the Yuan-speaking … world, if not the entire
tai-speaking religious world that covers present-day Northern thailand, eastern
Burma and Laos in the early sixteenth century’ (in press, 90).
As the language of ‘legitimation’ used by Dhida Saraya suggests, the potent
objects assembled at Chiang Mai during Tilokarāja’s reign were symbolic markers
of authority that participated in visual arguments for the propriety of Tilokarāja’s
patron status in regional patron-client relations developed according to the logic
of mandalic polities.52 however, it is important to recall that the value of such
objects was by no means limited to their capacity to signify authority. the lan-
guage of ‘legitimation’ may conceal from view a richer understanding of the
efficacy of potent objects that characterized the period in question. At least as
important as their role as symbolic markers of authority, if not more so, was
their understood capacity to protect Chiang Mai and its ruler, and to enhance the
potent vitality of Tilokarāja’s reign.53 this understanding of potent objects is made
evident by Lān Nā narratives (now accessible to us within the Chiang Mai Chronicle)
that discuss the rivalry between Tilokarāja and Trailokarāja of Ayutthaya in terms
we might call ‘magical’. Ayutthaya’s estimation of Chiang Mai’s strength is said
to have included an assessment of the potent objects located within Chiang Mai.
52. See also Reynolds (1978).
53. See also Swearer & Premchit (1978, 31).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 26 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 217
the Chronicle describes Ayutthaya’s military movements against Chiang Mai, but
also efforts made by the southern kingdom to diminish the vitality of Chiang Mai
by altering the alignment of potent forces within the city’s landscape.
Tilokarāja’s activities at Wat Bodhārāma occurred within the broader context
of such ideas about the emplotment of powerful objects within the territory of
a royal aggressor. The manner in which Tilokarāja developed Wat Bodhārāma,
and his activities there, suggest that he conceived of the potent landscape alter-
ations at that site primarily through an understanding of the activities proper
to a cakkavattin king. That is, Tilokarāja engaged the space at Wat Bodhārāma
as a space at which to enact his acquisition of cakkavattin status, his status as a
righteous Buddhist ruler of vast dominion. Wat Bodhārāma eventually contained
a bodhi tree and visual evocations of Sakyamuni Buddha’s enlightenment and
preparation to teach. On this site that thus signalled the beginning of Sakyamuni
Buddha’s sāsana, Tilokarāja undertook to turn the wheel of the Dhamma again as
patron of a Tipiṭaka recension that ‘purified’ the teaching and protected its textual
manifestations within the temple site.54 the Jinakālamālī’s account of Tilokāraja
(composed after his death by a monk writing within the Pā Däng lineage and con-
nected with Wat Bodhārāma; Jayawickrama 1968, xlvi) 55 celebrates Tilokarāja as a
cakkavattin king and ruler of three worlds in a manner unmatched by its account
of other Chiang Mai rulers.
The Royal Dead
Thus, Tilokarāja’s alterations to the Buddhist landscape of Chiang Mai included
construction and ritual activity at Wat Bodhārāma. The latter appears to have
served his ambitions to become a cakkavattin king, helping to surround him with
‘the symbols of a Universal Monarch which enhance both the sacrality and the
magical power of his territory’ (Swearer & Premchit 1978, 31). However, his altera-
tions to the Buddhist landscape of Chiang Mai through work at Wat Bodhārāma
also offered another sort of protection altogether. The evidence related to
Tilokarāja’s Mahābodhi temple site strongly suggests that the site was con-
structed by Tilokarāja as his cremation site, and that he intended merit-making at
54. the seven weeks after the Buddha’s enlightenment prepare the newly enlightened Buddha
to teach and convince him of the value of such teaching. votive tablets discussed by Brown
preserve this set of associations. According to Brown, one style of votive tablets popular at
Bodh Gayā as well as sites in Thailand and Burma, contains the following potent combina-
tion: a Buddha in Dhammacakra mūdra initiating the dispensation of this sāsana, framed by
Mahābodhi temple, accompanied by a deer and a wheel associated with the first sermon (1988,
117). The visual logic of these tablets clarifies the naturalness of Tilokarāja’s choice to establish
a saṇgāyanā and a site for the preservation of Tipiṭaka manuscripts, at a location associated with
Sakyamuni Buddha’s enlightenment and the first turning of the wheel of the Dhamma.
55. Note also the close ties between Wat Pā Däng and Wat Bodhārāma described in the Jinakālamālī’s
account of royal patronage in the two reigns following Tilokarāja’s death.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 27 ---
218 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
Wat Bodhārāma to protect his journey across the dangerous waters of saṃsāra.
By 1451, both of Tilokarāja’s parents were dead. On the site of their cremations,
within the precincts of Wat Pā Däng, Tilokarāja erected a monastic residence
(Asokārāma) as well as an uposatha hall and sīmā (Hazra 1982, 161; Buddhadatta
1962, 97). The king’s establishment of these sites at Wat Pā Däng were substantial
acts of patronage vis-à-vis the city’s dominant monastic community. in doing so
Tilokarāja made Wat Pā Däng, situated directly west of the city, the higher ordi-
nation site for the Sīhala saṅgha within the Pā Däng line. Bringing higher ordina-
tion into a ritual site specifically established by him within the royally sponsored
Pā Däng complex, from its earlier site on the river Ping (Penth 1994, 49, 228),
expressed Tilokarāja’s control of the monastic community and affirmed his con-
nections to Wat Pā Däng.56 However, Tilokarāja quickly moved beyond this com-
plex so closely associated with his parents to begin work at Wat Bodhārama, the
Mahābodhi temple site located to the northwest of the city. The installation of a
powerful bodhi tree brought previously from Laṅkā to Chiang Mai suggests that
the king already envisioned Wat Bodhārāma as central to his reign. This is made
yet clearer by the Jinakālamālī’s account that he replanted there the bodhi tree
taken from the base of the powerful mountain site of dòi Suthep (Buddhadatta
1962, 98; Penth 1994, 214). Dòi Suthep was understood as a space inhabited by
powers protecting müang Chiang Mai. In addition, it was associated with the first
line of Sīhaḷa saṅgha monks to reach Chiang Mai during the reign of King Kü Na.
the monastery at dòi Suthep seems to have served in some respects as a sister
site to Wat Suan Dòk, the city headquarters for monks of the first Sīhala lineage to
reach Chiang Mai. the sites were bound together through shared possession of a
valuable Buddha relic brought to Chiang Mai in the fourteenth century (Swearer
et al. 2004, 33, 78). Bringing the existing bodhi tree from dòi Suthep to the new site
of Wat Bodhārāma Tilokarāja drew the power of Dòi Suthep within this sphere.
It also made a visual claim for the primacy of Wat Bodhārama and Wat Pā Däng
monks over the earlier line of wat Suon dòk.57
The site plan of Wat Bodhārāma suggests the importance of the location to
Tilokarāja’s samsaric concerns. According to the plan presented by Hutchinson,
access to the complex proceeded along a road running between the site’s most
substantial outbuildings, after which one arrived at the stairs offering entry to the
cedi itself. The outbuildings on either side of the road leading to Wat Bodhārāma
are death memorial sites for King Tilokarāja himself. On the right side, while
approaching the main cedi, is a subsidiary cedi containing Tilokarāja’s ashes. On
the left side is King Tilokarāja’s cremation ground, where an uposatha hall was
later constructed (1951, 9, 45). According to the Tamnān Wat Jet yòt, Tilokarāja’s
grandson carried Tilokarāja’s remains to Wat Bodhārāma, cremated them and
56. For a discussion of the relations between Wat Pā Däng and Wat Suan Dòk monastics, see, for
instance, Swearer & Premchit (1978), Blackburn (2003) and the important new work of Viedlin-
ger (2006).
57. this occurred within a few years of the establishment of sīmā at Wat Pā Däng.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 28 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 219
deposited them within a funerary monument to be honoured by residents of the
area (hutchinson 1951, 44).
Tilokarāja’s death rituals for his parents indicate the expectations related to
the royal dead characteristic of his time, and his own attentiveness to death and
merit-making. death rituals and memorial installations shaped and expressed
family lineage, sometimes in the context of great political vulnerability. we
should not forget, however, the gripping concerns about death and rebirth that
underlay such memorial activity, and the anxieties about the restless dead that
animated attention to them through the rituals and landscapes of müang Chiang
Mai. the Chiang Mai Chronicle’s account of construction at Wat Jedī Luang (prior
to the reign of Tilokarāja) offers a window on to the relationship between mas-
sive construction projects and the fate of the royal dead.58
when King Kü Na died, his soul was not at rest, and he became a tree
spirit (rukkhadevata) in a banyan tree along the road to Pagān. There
was a / group of Chiang Mai merchants who went to trade at Pagān who
on their return trip stopped to rest in the shade of that tree. the tree
spirit Kü Na showed himself to them, and said, ‘I am Phraya Kü Na. I lived
as ruler in Chiang / Mai … On dying, I became a spirit in this tree. I cannot
be born in the World of the Gods (devaloka), [so] I ask you merchants to
tell my son … that he should build a cetiya in the middle of the city [of
Chiang Mai] … Please [ceremonially] pour water to dedicate the merit
to me so that i can be reborn in the realm of the Gods.
(Wyatt & Aroonrut Wicheinkeeo 1998, 69–70, original punctuation)
Substantial construction projects developed, in part out of obligations to improve
the rebirth fortunes of dead family members. Moreover, persons with access to
power and resources could ease the path to death and rebirth by constructing
sites for their own cremation and commemoration in addition to their more gen-
eral practices of merit-making.
We have seen that Tilokarāja’s activities at Wat Bodhārama can be under-
stood within the frame of reference associated with aspirations to the power and
authority of a cakkavattin king. Construction and ritual activity at the site served
the king’s living fortunes as ruler, and would-be victor in his own region and
beyond. Simultaneously, Wat Bodhārama formed part of Tilokarāja’s investment
in his own samsaric future as he made protective merit at the site apparently
intended as his death memorial. The scale of such investment was magnificent:
Tilokarāja installed sites associated with the inauguration of Sakyamuni Buddha’s
58. the version of the Chiang Mai Chronicle used here (several versions were in manuscript circula-
tion) was prepared from a manuscript dating to the late nineteenth or early twentieth century.
wyatt and Aroonrut wicheinkeeo discuss the composite character of the text and its depend-
ence on sources composed prior to the nineteenth century (1998, xxv–xxxix). I use the text as
a source from which to gauge the mentality of medieval Lān Nā with respect to certain royal
practices, rather than as a record of Tilokarāja’s reign.
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 29 ---
220 BUddhiSt StUdieS review
dispensation, and then protected this sāsana by ‘purifying’ the texts that con-
tained its teaching. According to hutchinson’s paraphrase of the Tamnān Wat Jet
yòt:
[i]n the year 1477 King Tilok summoned a council for the revision of the
scriptures by a group of over 100 monks at Wat Bodhārām in Nabisi. As
Patron of religion, King Tilok built a mondop [pavilion] for the Council
in Wat Bodhārām in order to spare the monks any inconvenience. Phra
dhammadinna, Abbot of wat Patal-noi, was at the head and the council
lasted a year. King tilok built a Library to contain the three Baskets of
the Scriptures. this was the eighth Council of revision and there were
great celebrations in honour of the Scripture and the Library.
(1951, 43–4)59
The grand scale of Tilokarāja’s work at Wat Bodhārama may have owed something
to prophecies of sāsana decline. Like Mahā Dhammarāja I at Sukhothai, Tilokarāja
lived with an awareness that Buddhist patrons fought against the destructive
powers of time in their engagement with the Buddha-sāsana and its unstable mani-
festations in the human world.
though there is no direct allusion to the fact in the records, it may be
guessed that he intended it [Wat Bodhārama] as a lavish act of merit in
connection with the 2000th anniversary of the Buddha’s parinibbāna, for
it was founded in that same ‘year of the Boar’ about which King Lü Thai
[Mahā Dhammarāja I] of Sukhodaya had made such a sorrowful forecast
ninety-nine years earlier. (Griswold 1965, 182)
CONCLUSiON
Some years ago, in a thought-provoking study of landscape and politics within
Laṅkā’s Kandyan Kingdom, James Duncan proposed that ‘landscape is a signify-
ing system of great but unappreciated social and political importance, and that
it offers enormous promise as an object of study’ (1990, 3). According to Duncan,
the communicative function of landscape makes it an important part of social
life and, particularly, of power relations. duncan was particularly interested in
the ways in which landscape helped to establish hegemonic discourses within a
social setting.
the landscape, i would argue, is one of the central elements in a cultural
system, for as an ordered assemblage of objects, a text, it acts as a signify-
ing system through which a social system is communicated, reproduced,
experienced, and explored. (1990, 17)
59. See also viedlinger (2006, ch. 3).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007

--- Page 30 ---
BLACKBURN BUddhiSt hiStOrieS FrOM LANdSCAPe ANd ArChiteCtUre 221
Further, ‘[b]y becoming part of the everyday, the taken-for-granted, the objec-
tive, and the natural, the landscape masks the artifice and ideological nature
of its form and content’ (p. 19). in his study of the Kandyan Kingdom, duncan
explored the ways in which alterations to the urban landscape of Kandy may be
read as instantiations of discourses of royal power connected both to the model
of King Asoka and to indra, King of the Gods. in doing so he emphasized the
ways in which elements of the new Kandyan landscape may be understood as
part of a ‘mythic structure’ (p. 97): landscape elements are read in relation to
the elements of dominant cultural narratives. duncan assumed that alterations
to landscape might serve the ends of elite patrons, although he seems to have
understood these patrons’ engagement with the power of landscape as occur-
ring at a level beyond full intention.60 Although his theoretical comments were
directed more towards the work of cultural geography than towards studies of
Buddhism or other religious traditions, duncan’s discussion of Kandyan politics
and landscape pointed towards the possibility that studies of Buddhist landscape
might play an important role in our efforts to understand the mentalities of prior
groups associated with Buddhist texts and practices, and that acts of construc-
tion and installation might be read as historically located visual arguments made
by Buddhist patrons.
One way to think about such arguments is to interpret the evidence of land-
scape alterations as claims made for and against certain memories. As Susan
Alcock has suggested, in a study of memory and archaeology in ancient Greece,
tracking the lives and afterlives of monuments, then, might testify
most immediately to alterations in what was deemed commendable to
remember or wise to forget. Landscape analysis reveals conditions favo-
rable for memory’s conservation or loss, or for the prompting of new
memorial traditions to be made. (2002: 31)
if conceived somewhat more broadly to include a range of objects extending
beyond the narrowly ‘memorial’, Alcock’s formulation offers a useful way to con-
ceptualize Buddhist projects of construction and installation. that is, by attend-
ing to the social and political character of monuments and other constructed
visual forms, we may read landscape alterations as part of the ways in which
historical identities and understandings of lineage are constituted during peri-
ods of marked change, including royal succession and diplomatic-cum-military
struggle. It is important to remember, however, as Jaś Elsner’s work on iconoclasm
(2003) indicates with considerable elegance, that claims to authority, patron-
age and lineage status through alterations to landscape could occur through the
emplotment of new spaces and objects, but also through the reduction of atten-
60. ‘[Landscape] is, therefore, as unwittingly read as it is unwittingly written’ (Duncan 1990, 19).
But, on the other hand, according to Duncan, Sri Vickrama attempted ‘a magical solution to the
problems besetting his kingdom’ by reshaping the city (p. 93).
© equinox Publishing Ltd 2007