--- Page 1 ---
BSRV 26.1 (2009) 1–31 Buddhist Studies Review ISSN (print) 0256-2897
doi: 10.1558/bsrv.v26i1.1 Buddhist Studies Review ISSN (online) 1747-9681
Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of
the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism1
Martin Seeger
University of Leeds
In this paper I investigate a number of public intellectual debates in current
Thai Theravāda Buddhism that are related to several fundamental questions
regarding the meaning and function of the Pali canon. This investigation
focuses on debates in which the Thai scholar monk Phra (Ven.) Payutto
(b. 1939) has been playing a significant role. In these debates, the Pali canon
is regarded as a central text-corpus endowed with special normative and
formative authority. I will look at contestations that concern Theravāda-
ness and, at the same time, and inextricably linked with this, at concepts of
demarcation between the Theravāda and systems of religious beliefs and prac-
tices that are believed to be ‘outside’ the Theravāda. This, of course, engages
the question of inclusivism, exclusivism and pluralism within the Theravāda.
In so doing, I explore and posit concepts of the meanings and functions of the
Pali canon that position it either as the or an authoritative reference.
1. A short version of this paper with the title ‘Authority, Identity and Pluralism: “On the
Very Idea of the Pali Canon” in Thai Buddhism’ was first read at the Annual Confer-
ence of the UK Association of Buddhist Studies at York St John University, York (UK), on
2 September 2008. A few parts of it have more or less literally been translated from my
PhD dissertation (Seeger, 2005a) which was written in German. Major parts of this paper,
though, have been the outcome of more recent reflections and research. Also, I was able
to add many additional sources which underscore the major lines of arguments that I was
developing in my PhD thesis. A part of the title of this paper is an allusion to Steven Col-
lins’ seminal paper ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ (Collins, 1990) and I hope that
mine will make a contribution to the investigation of the role the Pali canon has in the
modern Theravāda world. When using ‘Buddhism’ or ‘Buddhist’ in this paper, this has to
be understood as referring to Theravāda Buddhism, unless stated otherwise. In this paper,
I will leave aside recent discussions on the problematic usage of the term ‘Theravāda’.
I have used my own standardized phoneticization of Thai script except in cases where the
author’s or person’s name mentioned in this paper have an established way of translitera-
tion. Throughout this paper, Thai words are differentiated from Pali words by underlining
(Pali words are italicized; Thai words are italicized and underlined). I would like to thank
Louis Gabaude, Justin McDaniel, David Pattinson, Mudagamuwe Maithrimurthi, Peter Har-
vey and Robin Moore for their valuable comments on this paper. Also, my deepest thanks
go to Phra Payutto, who has given enormous support for this research in various ways, and
Samana Phothirak for their time. All the translations from Pali and Thai are mine, unless
stated otherwise.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009, Unit 6, The Village, 101 Amies Street, London SW11 2JW

--- Page 2 ---
2 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
In the context of Thailand, the scholars of Buddhism Ajan Prapod and Peter
Skilling have observed that:
[t]he Tripiṭaka [Pali tipiṭaka] is not simply an inert collection of manuscripts or
books. It is a living thing, a store of ideas that has marked many aspects of life,
from ritual to ethics to meditation practice, to literature, art and education. The
ideas and ideologies pervade society. (Prapod and Skilling 2002, 1)
In this paper, I intend to look into the role of the Theravāda’s tipiṭaka (i.e. the
Pali canon) as a ‘living thing’. Specifically I want to investigate a number of public
intellectual debates in current Thai Theravāda Buddhism that are related to sev-
eral fundamental questions regarding the meaning and function of the Pali canon.
In these debates, the Pali canon is regarded as a central text-corpus endowed with
special normative and formative authority (cf. Assmann 2000, 53–59, and 2002,
103–129). The way that the ‘ideas and ideologies’ from the Pali canon are being
brought to life and give meaning to Thai religious, cultural, social and even politi-
cal discourses is obviously quite crucial. As a consequence of this, hermeneutical
practices and concepts of the authoritativeness of the Pali canon have become
contested (see also Seeger, 2006 and 2007). In the following, I will also investi-
gate contestations of conceptual boundaries that have recently emerged in Thai
Buddhism in which the Pali canon is taken as the centre of reference for iden-
tity or legitimation for religious practice. Consequently, the contested concepts
that I examine not only deal with the demarcation between authentic and non-
authentic Theravāda practice and teaching, but also include ideas concerning the
relationship of the Theravāda to other, non-Theravāda religious practices and
teachings. This means I will look at contestations that concern Theravāda-ness
and, at the same time, and inextricably linked with this, at concepts of demarca-
tion to systems of religious beliefs and practices that are believed to be ‘outside’
the Theravāda. This, of course, engages the question of inclusivism, exclusivism
and pluralism within the Theravāda. In so doing, I explore and posit concepts
of the meanings and functions of the Pali canon that position it either as the or
an authoritative reference. As we will see, this will also necessarily include an
investigation of Thai concepts of how Theravāda Buddhism should be screened
and meaning be controlled and preserved.
As shown by a number of academic studies, there exists a closely and com-
plexly intertwined relationship between mainstream Thai Buddhism and the Thai
nation-state.2 Despite being certainly very intriguing and important, due to the
complexity of this relationship, in this paper I will focus solely on the debates
and lines of argumentations that concern the functions and meaning of the Pali
canon. This will be done by primarily and almost exclusively looking at them
from a Buddhist studies perspective. This means I aim to study how the proposed
Buddhist hermeneutics and lines of arguments in these debates are connected to
and built on Pali texts: how Theravāda identity is constructed and contested by
various interpretational approaches to canonical and post-canonical texts of the
Theravāda tradition. The implications of these interpretations for Thai national
identity or the possibly involved sentiments of nationalism, male chauvinism and
2. See e.g.: Jackson, 1989; Ishii, 1986; Swearer, 1999; Tambiah, 1976; Taylor, 1993; Terwiel, 2005.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 3 ---
Martin Seeger 3
religious intolerance are not addressed here.3 Also, the role of the Thai state and
constitutional law and its interpretations will not be considered.
Historiographically, there are ample references that demonstrate the impor-
tance and authority of the Pali canon in Thai history. Traditionally, the Thai
Buddhist kings have been depicted as, and been expected to be, supporters and
protectors of Theravāda Buddhism. In this way, the king’s concern has been to
work against the distortion and disappearance of Buddhist scriptures in order
to secure the integrity and longevity of Buddhism (Suchip Punyanuphap 2539,
29–46). In Thai history, we repeatedly come across kings who, by following the
paradigms of Indian Buddhist kings, sponsored the organization of Buddhist
rehearsals (saṅgītis) with the objective of establishing and securing the intact-
ness of the canonical texts. Possessing a complete and intact collection of Pali
canonical texts was perceived to be crucially important for ‘the health of the
state’ (Reynolds 1973, 53–54). Thai kings also screened the behaviour of the Thai
monastic community (saṅgha) when they determined that monastic practice
was deviating from canonical norms to an alarming extent. Prominent examples
for this are the ‘cleansing’ of the saṅgha by the Thai kings Narai (r. 1656–1688)
and Taksin (r. 1767–1782), or the issuing of Ecclesiastical Laws by King Rama I
(r. 1782–1809)(Channarong Bunnun, 2546). Furthermore, kings supported
Buddhist scholarship (pariyatti) as the study of the canonical and post-canonical
texts was believed to be crucially important for the survival of Buddhism. Rama I,
for example, had the Pali canon copied and distributed to all royal monasteries4
so that these texts could be studied by the monastic community (Reynolds 1973,
50; Wyatt 1994, 152). The importance attached to Buddhist scholarship for the
longevity of Buddhism is nicely expressed in an eighteenth century Thai chroni-
cle where it was said that ‘as long as the study of scriptures [pariyatti] is exist-
ent, the religion [sāsana, i.e. Buddhism] is existent’.5 In the process of building a
new kingdom after the devastating defeat by the Burmese in 1767, the Pali canon
played an enormously significant role for King Rama I. Using the threat of the
death penalty, he tried to rid Thai religion of phallic worship. According to his
understanding, this practice could not be legitimized from a canonical perspec-
tive (Wyatt 1994, 156). Furthermore, he:
appointed a commission of eleven judges and royal pundits to revise or edit
(chamra) all the legal texts from the beginning to end. They were to make the laws
accord with the Pali (presumably of the Tipitaka), eradicate errors and duplication,
and arrange the various sections logically. (Wyatt 1994, 156)
Prince Patriarch Phra Wachirayan (1860–1921) reportedly referred to the
words of the Buddha in order to justify Thailand’s6 involvement in the First World
War (Phaisan 2546, 36).
3. This, of course, does not imply that the interpretations that are discussed in the following,
either consciously or sub-consciously, are not motivated or influenced by these kinds of
sentiments or views. This question is simply not addressed here.
4. McDaniel explains ‘royal monasteries’ as , ‘loosely meaning monasteries directly supported
by royal coffers and more formally meaning monasteries ritually dedicated by the king and
given a royal seal’ (McDaniel 2008, 110).
5. ‘pariyattiyā ṭhitāya sāsanaṃ ṭhitaṃ hoti’ (Phra Wannarat 2536, 324).
6. Before 1939 known as Siam.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 4 ---
4 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
These examples demonstrating the historical importance of the Pali canon
should not, however, disguise the fact that Pali canonical core teachings, like the
Four Noble Truths, the Three Characteristics of Being, the Dependent Origination
or the Noble Eightfold Path, have not had a major influence on Thai cultural
and religious life. Rather, as can quite easily be seen from temple architecture
and murals and Thai religious ceremonies and rituals, Jātaka-stories, particu-
larly the Vessantara-Jātaka, and accounts of Buddhist cosmology (particularly,
the ‘Traiphum Phra Ruang’ and ‘Phra Malaisut’7) have, for many centuries, exerted
the most significant formative impact on Thai religious life, as these texts have
been circulated and used most widely in Thai Buddhism (Keyes 1989, 179–181).
In fact, it seems that canonical texts on central Buddhist teachings were referred
to and studied, if at all, mostly by the social and religious elite, i.e. the highly-
educated court and monastics. Nevertheless, as shown above, the Pali canon and
the privileged monastic study of it had an enormous symbolic and legitimating
importance for the Buddhist state.
At the same time, however, it seems that Thais often have a rather blurred
concept of the Pali canon, as they ‘use the term Tipiṭaka to refer to all types of
religious texts, not simply the three baskets’ (McDaniel 2002, 24). McDaniel points
out that the Pali canon, ‘in practice, is fluid and open’.8 While having a signifi-
cant symbolic function in the Thai Buddhist belief system — for example it is a
wide-spread Thai custom to donate a set of the Pali canon in a cabinet with glass
windows to monasteries — Thai scholars remark that only a rather small number
of Thais, both lay and monastics, are actually familiar with the content of the
collection of books that Western or Thai Buddhist studies scholars have in mind
when they refer to the ‘Pali canon’.9 With regard to this, the Thai Pali scholar
Adisak Thongbun relates:
There are numerous monasteries [in Thailand] that preserve the Pali canon like a
treasure [yang huanghaen]: they do not allow the Pali canon cabinet to be opened
explaining that the Pali canon is the fundamental scriptures of Buddhism and ‘we
have to preserve it from destruction. Once lost, we certainly have to wait for a long
time before devout people will donate another set’. Other monasteries, though,
might explain: ‘Even if we open the Pali canon cabinet so that people can read it,
no-one will understand it anyway. We have to wait for a Pali canon expert who
will explain it to us’. For these reasons, the Pali canon cabinet remains closed and
locked, until in some cases it becomes the food of termites.
(Adisak Thongbun 2542, 57)
Furthermore, the traditional Thai monastery library is called ‘hotrai’ in Thai,
i.e. literally the ‘three [basket] tower’, but seldom contains the complete collec-
tion of the Three Baskets (tipiṭaka). This is further evidence that in the Thai con-
text ‘tipiṭaka’ actually does not have the same meaning Buddhist studies scholars
normally have in mind when they use the term ‘tipiṭaka’.10
7. See: Brereton 1995; Reynolds and Reynolds 1982.
8. McDaniel 2006, 18; see also: Collins 1990, 102–104; Veidlinger 2006, 19–20.
9. Somphan Phromtha 2550, 17–18; Maechi Suphaphan na Bangchang cited in: Editorial Board
Sarnsaeng-Arun 2550, 76.
10. I thank Louis Gabaude for making me aware of this information. See also: McDaniel 2008.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 5 ---
Martin Seeger 5
That the Pali canon as a closed list of authoritative texts, nevertheless, plays
a significant normative and formative role in current Thai society, can easily
be demonstrated by a number of examples of public debates during which the
Pali canon has been frequently referred to: various attempts have been made in
Thailand to revive the vanished nun-order (bhikkhunī) of the Theravāda tradi-
tion. So far, however, the Thai Saṅgha Supreme Council (Mahatherasamakhom)
has made clear that this would be impossible, as it is regarded to be in conflict
with the respective canonical texts.11 In the late 1990s, the fervent debates about
the ‘right’ interpretation of canonical texts dealing with the description of the
soteriological goal of Buddhism, Nibbāna, had been for more than a year a focal
point of attention for the Thai media and public, and became so heated that
death threats against a number of esteemed Thai scholars of Buddhism were
made, bomb attacks were carried out and extremely costly smear campaigns
were started (see Seeger 2005a, 36–38). Some five years ago, various Thai Buddhist
associations campaigned against the showing of films which they regarded as dis-
torting Pali canonical narratives (see Seeger 2005a, 34–35). The fact that forma-
tive and normative authority is attributed to the Pali canon can also vividly be
demonstrated by a speech that the then recently appointed and still incumbent
Thai saṅgha Patriarch gave in 1989 during a monastic meeting that decided that
Phra Phothirak, the leader of the controversial Santi Asok movement, should be
expelled from the Thai saṅgha. The Supreme Patriarch reportedly declared that
‘someone’ whose Theravāda Buddhist religious practice deviates from the canoni-
cal norm and who at the same time rejects canonical truths, ‘should not live in
Thailand and should not be a Thai. If you are a Thai, you will have to accept the
things accepted by the Thai nation, i.e. the Pali canon’.12
Recently, a number of scholars have described the Thai saṅgha or individual
monks as being intolerant or undermining freedom of religion. For example, the
political scientist Duncan McCargo states that ‘Thai Buddhism is … highly intoler-
ant of those who deviate from mainstream teachings, making a mockery of ideas
of freedom of religion’ (McCargo 2004, 155), and the Thai scholar of religious stud-
ies and philosophy, Suwanna Satha-anand remarks that:
Buddhist pluralism is negated both within Thai Buddhism as evidenced in the
purging of the Santi-Asokha and the Dhammakaya groups, as well as in its relation
to other religions, as evidenced in the blackening of the religious others in recent
years.13
It was even maintained that freedom of religion does not exist within the Thai
saṅgha.14 The reason why I mention these comments here is not because I intend
to engage with them directly; to investigate if, how and to what extent these
statements might be valid. Nor do I aim, as already indicated above, to look into
the actions or non-actions and nationalistic ideologies of Thai religious and secu-
11. Seeger 2005a, 194–211, 2006, and 2007, 5–6.
12. Cited in: Seeger 2005a, prologue; see also: McCargo 1997, 95. The original speech in Thai is
available online: http://newweb.bpct.org/content/view/223/33/ (accessed on 04/05/2009).
13. Suwanna Satha-anand 2003, 212; see also; Suwanna Satha-anand 2007; Streckfuss and Tem-
pleton 2002.
14. Streckfuss and Templeton 2002, 78; see also: Stewart 1999. For further comments in this
respect see below.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 6 ---
6 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
lar authorities involved in the controversies and discourses that sparked these
comments. However, I mention these comments as they have all been made in
connection with controversies in which proposed concepts of meaning and func-
tion of the Pali canon have, to varying extents, played a significant role. Indeed,
some of the concepts regarding the Pali canon that are investigated below have
repeatedly and directly been criticized as being in conflict with or at least prob-
lematic in connection with the right to freedom of religion.15 This again under-
scores the importance of concepts of Pali canonical authoritativeness within the
specific context of Thai Buddhist studies.16
The Theravāda scholar-monk Phra Payutto (b. 1939), who is in Thailand widely
regarded as one of or even the foremost authority on doctrinal questions, has
been playing a prominent role in most of the public debates which I examine
below. Due to his comprehensive knowledge of canonical and post-canonical
Theravāda texts and his expertise in Pali, for many Thais Phra Payutto ‘embod-
ies’ the tipiṭaka. This kind of idea is reflected in his former ecclesiastical title ‘Phra
Dhammapiṭaka’, bestowed upon him by the King of Thailand, which translates as
‘Venerable Basket of the Dhamma’,17 that is the basket of the Buddha’s teaching.18
He has also been called a ‘living or walking tipiṭaka’19 and it has been said that to
‘argue with him means to argue with the Buddha [himself]’ (Rawi Phawilai 2539,
111). Nevertheless, as a consequence of his advocating his concepts of meaning
and function of the Pali canon, he has repeatedly come in for criticism: he was
accused of ‘being narrow-minded’ (mi naeu khwamkhit khapkhaep), ‘attached to the
Pali canon’ (tit yu kap phra traipidok), a ‘dogmatist’ or ‘a purist’ who tries ‘to pre-
vent religious freedom and thus promot[es] religious intolerance’.20 These criti-
cisms have been brought against him during the controversies surrounding the
two prominent Thai Buddhist movements Santi Asok and Wat Phra Thammakai
(Dhammakāya), during which Phra Payutto resolutely criticized these move-
ments for ‘distorting the Buddha’s teaching’. In the case of the former, a book
written by Phra Payutto on the ‘Santi Asok Case’ (Payutto 2531) was said to have
played an important role in the background for monastic proceedings to exclude
Santi Asok from the official Thai saṅgha institution.21 In the case of the latter,
15. The discussions and lines of argumentations examined in this paper took place in the context
of the 1997 Thai Constitution which was abolished in 2006. See also: Seeger 2009.
16. Thai Buddhist studies, here, does not exclusively refer to academic engagement with Bud-
dhism and Buddhist texts, but also, and at least equally important here, to Buddhist practice.
As a consequence of this, I will also examine concepts that have been brought forward by
Buddhist practitioners as a result of their Buddhist practice (see also: Seeger 2007, 2–3).
17. ‘ Dhamma’ is a polysemantic word. In this paper, depending on the context, I use it mainly in
the meaning of ‘the teaching of the Buddha’ or the ‘Truth’.
18. Phra Payutto’s current ecclesiastical title is ‘Phra Phromkhunaphon’ which was bestowed
on him by the Thai King in August 2004. His titles before are as follows: Phra Siwisutthi-
moli (1969–1973), Phra Rajavaramuni (1973–1987), Phra Thepwethi (1987–1993), and Phra
Dhammapiṭaka (1993–2004). For biographical details of Phra Payutto’s life, see: Olson 1989;
1995, 1–33; Apha Cantharasakun 2538.
19. Thawiwat Puntharikwiwat 2544, 45; Sanitsuda Ekachai 2000.
20. Sanitsuda Ekachai, in Bangkok Post, 17 January 2000; Wimuttinantha 2548, 10; Payutto 2547, 69;
see also: Olson 1995, 21; Seeger 2005a, 147–151.
21. Olson 1995, 21; Channarong Bunnun 2547, 46–47.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 7 ---
Martin Seeger 7
his book ‘The Dhammakāya Case’, which very quickly became a ‘bestseller’, has
been regarded as the authoritative source for opponents and critics of Wat Phra
Thammakai’s teachings and practices. In the course of both controversies, in
these and a number of other publications Phra Payutto has proposed detailed
concepts of the meaning and function of the Pali canon. In Thai society these
concepts have been widely circulated through articles in major Thai newspapers,
academic and non-academic books (often reprinted several times) and TV and
radio programmes. Often, they have been referred to either as a source of legiti-
mation for specific views or as focal point of criticism (see below).
THE TExTUAL HIERARCHY
For Phra Payutto, Theravāda tradition excels in that it has been able to transmit
the earliest, most accurately preserved and most complete collection of Buddhist
texts available.22 He accepts the standard Theravādin view that the other early
schools have developed later as they split from the Theravāda (Payutto 2542a, 47).
According to him, the Theravāda has developed into a specific historical entity
with a specific programme, which is the conservation of the Pali canon. Thanks
to its conservatism, it has come to be not only the oldest but also the most suc-
cessful school in the preservation of original meaning of the Buddha’s teaching
and is therefore most suitable to offer access to the authentic teaching of the
Buddha (Payutto 2542a, 15–49).
Whilst acknowledging that during the long and complex period of formation
and transmission of the Pali canon, distortions, loss and interpolations of textual
material occurred (Payutto 2538, 9 and 2542a, 32–33), Phra Payutto seems to be
confident that major parts of the canon are authentic buddhavacana (words of the
Buddha) and largely intact; that is, to a large extent they are what they claim to
be. For this reason, according to him the Pali canon is very well able to serve as
standard for the ascertaining of authentic practice and teaching of Buddhism.
Phra Payutto’s conviction concerning the textual integrity of large portions of the
Pali canon is based on his hermeneutical approach through which he perceives
these texts to a large extent as being coherent, both in terms of their semantic
deep-structure which he describes as ‘marvelous’ and in terms of their surface
structure (see below).23
In order to illustrate the centrality and normative and formative authority of
the Pali canon, Phra Payutto writes that ‘the Pali canon is more important for
adherents of Buddhism than the Constitution is for the citizens [of a state]’ (Payutto
2542, 18). Phra Payutto explains that before his death, the Buddha had vested his
teaching (Dhamma) and the monastic discipline (Vinaya) that he established with
the highest authority in Buddhism, when he said that the Dhammavinaya will be
the new ‘teacher’ (‘satthā’; DN II 154) after his demise. Shortly after his death,
during the First Rehearsal (saṅgāyanā/saṅgīti), the Dhammavinaya was compiled
by disciples of the Buddha and, as it was later augmented by additional textual
22. Payutto 2542a, 32, 34, 47. Here, I will not address debates on the authenticity of the canonical
Theravāda scriptures as they take place in Western Buddhist studies. Western philological
approaches have shown that the Theravāda’s claim to be the oldest of the early Buddhist
schools must be doubted (see e.g. Salomon 1999, 7–8; Choong 2000, 2–5).
23. Payutto 2543a, 95; see also: Seeger 2005a, 94–107.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 8 ---
8 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
material, developed into the Pali canon. In this way, the Pali canon had become
the ‘surrogate’ or ‘dwelling place’ (thisathit) of the Buddha (Payutto 2543b, 5,
11), and it has, therefore, come to be the text embodying the ‘standard’ (mat-
trathan) by which Theravāda Buddhist teaching, faith and practice have to be
assessed and validated (Payutto 2545b, 63–65): ‘If the Buddha’s teaching [which
is imbedded in the Pali canon] is existent, it is as if the Buddha is still existent’
(Payutto 2545b, 62). According to Phra Payutto, the Pali canon is the ‘fundamen-
tal text’ of Buddhism that generates identity and gives guidance both on a per-
sonal and social level and ‘the highest method of preserving Buddhism is when
the Pali canon has been ingested into one’s life and does not just consist of let-
ters’ (Payutto 2543b, 15).
As already discussed elsewhere,24 based on various canonical and post-canon-
ical concepts, Phra Payutto explains that statements about Theravādin teaching
and practice have to conform to a specific textual hierarchy. Here, the ‘words of
the Buddha’ (buddhavacana) in the Pali canon are taken as the most authoritative
standard, followed, with descending authority, by the commentarial, sub- and sub-
sub-commentarial textual layers of the Theravāda tradition. One’s ‘own opinion/
view’ (attano mati) is the least decisive authority on statements on Theravādin
teaching and practice. This means that teachings or statements of contemporary
monks, academics and meditation masters that claim to be Theravādin would
have to be regarded as less authoritative than any of the above texts. Each layer of
text or teaching has to be in conformity with the most authoritative layer, so that
it can be accepted as a valid view of the Theravāda. This, however, Phra Payutto
explains, does not imply that critical comments about the Buddha’s teaching
or the Theravāda cannot be made, or that critical engagement with or innova-
tive interpretations of the Theravāda text corpus is not permissible: while the
authoritative texts have to remain untouched, one can disagree, be critical of,
or even disapprove of the texts.25
For Phra Payutto, faithful referencing to the Pali canon and complying
with the textual hierarchy prevents semantic erosion of original meaning. He
observes, however, that in Thai Buddhism the principle of textual hierarchy is
disregarded to an ‘alarming’ extent: often the teachings of contemporary monks
are referred to as the authority to decide fundamental principles and teachings of
the Theravāda. Furthermore, Phra Payutto perceives a major danger of distortion
of original meaning, in the process of communicating Buddhist meaning: as origi-
nal meaning derived from the Pali canon is in Thailand very often transmitted
by passing several ‘stations’ from teachers and elder generations in an oral tradi-
tion without double-checking the information with the scriptural ‘standard’, the
danger of semantic distortion and loss is quite high.26 For him, another cause for
concern is that numerous contemporary publications on Buddhism level out the
textual hierarchy whereby peripheral post-canonical texts are given at least the
24. Seeger 2005a, 126–127; 2007, 7.
25. Payutto 2547, 66–67. Besides this hierarchy of textual authority, Phra Payutto also often
refers to the arguably most famous ‘control mechanism’ that is to prevent the distortion of
original meaning, i.e. the so-called four ‘Great Authorities’ (mahāpadesa) which occur twice
in the Pali canon (DN II 123–126; AN II 167–170; see also: Lamotte 1947, 218–222; Bareau 1970,
222–239; Fernhout 1994, 42–43; von Hinüber 2000, 6; Bond 1982, 22–30; Gethin 1998, 46–47).
26. Payutto 2542a, 35–36, 189, 230; see also: Maechi Suphaphan na Bangchang 2550, 115.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 9 ---
Martin Seeger 9
same authority as the central canonical texts. In this way, authentic and original
teachings might become distorted too (Payutto 2538, 928).
According to Phra Payutto, the annulling or leveling of the textual hierar-
chy leads to the confusion of authentic with non-authentic and central with
peripheral information. This can cause ‘semantic chaos and distortion’ of origi-
nal Buddhist practice and teaching. This state of ‘anything goes’ will lead to the
disappearance of ‘true’ Buddhism (see Seeger 2005a, 131–34). Phra Payutto says
that:
to teach things that are not in the Pali canon as teaching of the Buddha or to
delete, distort, or add interpolations to the buddhavacana and promulgations of the
Buddha [buddhapaññatti] in the Pali canon (…is called saddhammapaṭirūpa [pseudo-
Dhamma]) … [and] is the worst thing [chua rai raeng thisut]. It is the direct destruc-
tion of the essence of Buddhism.27
For Phra Payutto, it is the duty of every Buddhist, but particularly of members
of the saṅgha, to counteract distortions of original meaning and the deviations
of monastic behaviour and practice from canonical norms (Payutto 2533, 6–7).
Phra Payutto strongly emphasizes this duty of monastics: ‘When monks reject
and do not accept [patiset mai yomrap] the Pali canon, this is equal to the rejec-
tion and non-acceptance of their own being as monks’ (Payutto 2542a, 19–20,
97). Elsewhere he writes that: ‘By being a monk, one is obliged to teach correctly
according to the principles of Buddhism’ (Payutto 2533, 78).
For Phra Payutto, the control of original meaning is not only important for
intra-Buddhist interpretations, though, but also for how adherents of other beliefs
use Buddhist vocabulary. When Buddhist terminology and concepts are distort-
edly used by other religions with the purpose of misleading and conversion, Phra
Payutto considers it necessary to ‘criticize’ this approach. He perceived such a
‘danger for Buddhism from the outside’, when texts published in Thai by Catholics
declared that God established Dependent Origination (paṭiccasamuppāda) or that
the Buddha was a precursor of Jesus.28 A number of Thai scholars saw these kinds
of statements as having been made in the context of alleged Catholic attempts to
‘assimilate’ Thai Buddhism under the disguise of interreligious dialogue.29
AN OLD DISPUTE: THEORY AND PRACTICE OR PRACTICE AND THEORY?
Phra Payutto contends that the study (pariyatti) of buddhavacana is a neces-
sary condition for one’s practice: ‘A practitioner without pariyatti is impossible,
unless these are practitioners who have no connection to Buddhism, that is, they
founded their own religion’.30 Also, in order to prevent diachronic and synchronic
27. Payutto 2533, 64. Needless to mention, here, this statement and the following statements of
Phra Payutto have to be understood in the context of Theravāda Buddhism and in reference
to the Pali canon, only. They are, of course, not intended to criticize other Buddhist schools or
their production of ‘new’ texts, as these schools do not claim to be Theravāda. For more about
this, see below.
28. Payutto 2545b, 31–40; see also: Olson 1989, 287–334.
29. See: Cohen 1991; see also: Rabaeb Ṭhitañāno 1984.
30. Payutto 2544b, 48–49. According to Phra Payutto, this does, of course, not imply or neces-
sitate that each Theravāda Buddhist has to study the Pali canon directly. Authentic canoni-
cal meaning is very often communicated by a teacher, who explains and contextualizes the
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 10 ---
10 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
fragmentation of the Theravāda, ‘the paṭipatti [Dhamma-practice] has to have a
stable pariyatti as basis’ (Payutto 2529, 69). For Phra Payutto, historical and syn-
chronic unity and integrity of the Buddhist community are important necessary
factors for the longevity of Buddhism (Payutto 2529, 69–70).
These concepts of ‘textual hierarchy’ and ‘pariyatti as basis for paṭipatti’ have
repeatedly either directly or indirectly been discussed or challenged both by Thai
academics and Buddhist practitioners. A prominent debate on the relationship
between pariyatti and paṭipatti took place in 1972, when Phra Mahabua (b. 1913),
the most famous of the very few still living disciples of Acan Man Bhūridatto
(1870–1949), the ultimate paradigm of Thai forest monks, was criticized for his
biographical accounts of Acan Man’s life. Phra Mahabua described how Buddhas
together with a great number of their awakened disciples came to visit Acan
Man in order to converse with him and congratulate him on his own awaken-
ing (e.g. Bua Ñāṇasampanno 2541, 127).31 In a column published in the newspa-
per Sayamrat, Kukrit Pramot (1911–1995), who was to become Thailand’s Prime
Minister, (1975–1976), argued that such accounts are ‘most strange’ (plaekpralat
yangying) and can ‘certainly’ (naenon) not be found in the Pali canon (Kukrit
Pramot 2547, 570). Phra Mahabua replied to this criticism by referring to Acan
Man who had told him that Dhamma comprises many more aspects than those
outlined in the Pali canon, as the Pali canon contains only a very small fraction
of the Dhamma:
The Dhamma that is not written down in the Pali canon can be compared to the
amount of water in the great ocean, whilst the Dhamma that appears in the Pali
canon is comparable to the amount of water in a small jar.
(Bua Ñāṇasampanno 2541, 344)
In addition to this, Phra Mahabua explained that, due to their long history of
transmission, the canonical texts might also have come to be corrupted by con-
cepts and personal opinions of later tradition (at faeng pai duai khwamru khwam-
hen khong phucotcaruek). Scholarly study, despite being useful, would not be able
to lead to the comprehension of the enormously profound and comprehensive
Dhamma. For this reason, the fact that the Pali canon contains no reference that
could authenticate some of the supernatural occurrences in Acan Man’s biog-
raphy would not invalidate these insights and experiences. Consequently, as a
source for determining the real meaning of Dhamma, Phra Mahabua advocated
the superiority of personal experience as result of paṭipatti over the study of
truths as outlined in the Pali canon (Bua Ñāṇasampanno 2541, 343–346).
Another debate during which the relationship between pariyatti and paṭipatti
was discussed occurred during the controversy surrounding the Santi Asok move-
ment in the 1980s. As mentioned above, this controversy finally resulted in the
decision to defrock Samana Phothirak, the leader of this movement. Amongst
other things, Samana Phothirak has been accused of distorting central canoni-
Dhammavinaya so that the believer attains most possible benefit from it in his/her individual
context. In this way, this teacher acts as a ‘kalyāṇamitta’ (good friend) (see Seeger 2005a, 66).
31. Here, it should be mentioned that the life account of Acan Man, written by Phra Mahabua,
contains numerous stories describing a broad range of supernatural experiences. The belief
in the supernatural is quite widespread in Thai society and has been lent support by the unu-
sual experiences Acan Man and many of his disciples are reported to have had.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 11 ---
Martin Seeger 11
cal teachings and meaning, such as by claiming that a person can concurrently
be an arahant and a bodhisatta (Buddha-to-be); that monastics can from a canoni-
cal point of view legitimately ‘proclaim one’s own ariya-status’ (i.e. as partially
or fully awakened) in front of non-monastics; and that monastics should be veg-
etarians (see Sunai Setbunsang 2537, 62–63). He has also been reproached for his
repeated public claims of having reached transcendental states of mind. Samana
Phothirak maintains that only people who have attained transcendental insight
(paṭivedha) into the Dhamma have the competence to apprehend and, therefore, to
teach authentic canonical meaning.32 W. Chaiphak, writing in support of Samana
Phothirak, vindicates this approach by arguing that language keeps changing
and,
is only a ‘medium’ or a conventional truth [sammutisacca]… the person who has
already achieved the status of Highest Truth [paramatthasacca] is arguably able to
explain language in such a way that it leads to the Highest Truth in the best and
most direct way. (W. Chaiphak 2533, 44)
Based on his alleged higher insights (ñāṇa), Samana Phothirak claims to be able
to ascertain the original meaning of canonical Pali terms (Sunai Setbunsang 2537,
58). He contends that if Buddhism is taught by puthujjanas, that is un-awakened
persons, it will inevitably and continuously be infiltrated by attano mati (personal
opinion) and therefore decay, as authentic meaning would inevitably become
distorted (au phian pai).33
In stark contrast to this, Phra Payutto argues that the canonical texts are
unambiguous in this respect: referring to the fourth pārājika (Vin III 91)34 and a
pācittiya rule (Vin IV 25) of the canonical monastic code (pātimokkha), he main-
tains that Theravāda monks are not allowed to reveal their actual or alleged spir-
itual attainments to non-monastics (and novices). In addition, he also explains
that sanctioning public claims to transcendental and supernatural abilities and
insights would be dangerous to Buddhism, as it would open the floodgates for
impostors. Also, Buddhism could be monopolized by individuals and would poten-
tially depend on the fate of these individuals:
It is the duty of the founder of the religion to refer to his awakening … In terms of
teaching [the religion], the responsibility of followers [sāvaka] who later volun-
tarily joined this religion lies not in referring to their own spiritual attainments
but is to teach in accordance with the teaching of the founder of the religion.
(Payutto, 2538: 442)
In the opinion of Phra Payutto, allowing followers of Buddhism to refer to
actual or alleged personal spiritual attainments runs the risk of exploitation,
in the case of impostors, and distortion of meaning, in the case of impostors or
32. Interview with Samana Phothirak on 30/10/2002.
33. Interview with Samana Phothirak on 30/10/2002.
34. ‘Whatever bhikkhu should, while not knowing [for certain], boast a superhuman state,
knowledge and insight deserving the name “noble”, as being present in himself, [saying], “I
know thus, I see thus”, then afterwards on another occasion should, whether being exam-
ined or not being examined, having committed the offence and looking for purification, say
thus, “Friend, not knowing, I said, ‘I know’; not seeing, I said, ‘I see’ ; I spoke falsely, lying”,
other than from an overestimation [of himself], he too becomes defeated, not in communion’
(Pruitt and Norman 2001, 11).
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 12 ---
12 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
people who have a weak pariyatti or mistakenly believe in the authenticity of
their spiritual insights. Either possibility might lead to ‘the loss of integrity of
the [authentic] Buddhist teaching (sia ekkaphap haeng khamson khong phra phut-
thasatsana)’ (Payutto 2538, 442). In his magnum opus ‘Buddhadhamma’ (2538),
Phra Payutto writes that, according to the commentary to the Vinaya,35
You don’t need to fear that those who have attained ariya status will boast or
announce it, since it is natural for them not do so. In other words, whoever boasts
to be a noble one [ariya] is actually saying that he/she is not. (Payutto 2538, 442)
He argues that it is not relevant who is teaching the Dhamma, but rather
whether the statements that are made and purport to be Buddhist conform to
the textual hierarchy. In this way, even when uttered by insane or drunk people,
authentic teachings can allow a person who listens to and thoroughly reflects
(using yoniso manasikāra) on them to comprehend the Dhamma (Payutto 2538, 641,
924). Moreover, Phra Payutto explains that an arahant who is not a bahussuta (a
man of great learning) ‘is only adept in the paṭipatti method that he himself has
practised’ (Payutto 2542b, 30).
W. Chaiphak vehemently criticizes Phra Payutto for his seemingly purely tex-
tual approach. Perhaps alluding to MN II 197, he contends that due to his ‘entirely
worldly’ (lokiya), textual (pariyatti) approach that does not involve paṭipatti,
Phra Payutto is a dogmatist (ekaṃsavādo) and not an analyst (vibhajjavādo) (W.
Chaiphak 2533, 92). As the latter designation has become synonymous with the
Theravāda school, W. Chaiphak seems to imply that Phra Payutto’s approach is
not Theravādin.
Repeatedly and not only in connection with the controversy on Samana
Phothirak’s untraditional teachings, Phra Payutto has been criticized for an
alleged ‘lack of competence’ in ascertaining ‘authentic meaning’ as, so it was said,
‘he is only a scholar (nak pariyat [pariyatti])’36 who ‘write[s] about mangoes without
first giving them an adequate taste’.37 In particular, in the on-going controversy
about the textual interpretations of characteristics of Nibbāna, this criticism has
repeatedly and from various sides been brought against Phra Payutto. Since the
early 1990s, the question as to whether there is a Higher Self (attā) to be found in
Nibbāna or whether Nibbāna is void of Self (anattā), has been fervently discussed
in Thai Buddhism (cf. Williams, 2009: 125-28, Cholvarn, 2007). Various groups of
followers of the famous Thai meditation master Luang Pho Sot (1884-1959) have
been teaching that Nibbāna is attā. As a reaction to these teachings, Phra Payutto
has written several books and articles, which have been published in several
editions and reprinted many times. Also, he has repeatedly given interviews and
35. ‘ tattha abhūtaṃ ārocesuṃ, idha bhūtaṃ. Bhūtampi puthujjanā ārocesuṃ, na ariyā’ (Vin-a IV 752).
This commentary passage explains ‘Yo pana bhikkhu anupasampannassa uttarimanussadhammaṃ
āroceyya bhūtasmiṃ, pācittiyanti’ in the Vinayapiṭaka (Vin II 211) where the Buddha for-
bids his monks to announce their actual (bhūtasmiṃ) superhuman accomplishments
(uttarimanussadhammaṃ) to people who are neither a monk (bhikkhu) nor a nun (bhikkhunī).
36. Manat Komontha 2547, 186, 187, 209. Samana Phothirak admits, though, that Phra Payutto’s
books are of immense value for the study of Buddhism, but ‘it is a pity…, as he [Phra Payutto]
should practice [paṭipatti] in order to achieve higher insights [banlu tham]… Then, he would
be extraordinary and he would be even more useful for the world’ (interview with Samana
Phothirak on 30/10/2002).
37. Olson, 1990, 261; see also: Olson 1989, 369.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 13 ---
Martin Seeger 13
talks on this topic. In these speeches and publications, Phra Payutto forcefully
criticizes these groups for their teaching that Nibbāna is attā. In his major pub-
lication on this topic ‘The Dhammakāya Case’ (which is over 400 pages long), he
accuses the Thai Wat Phra Thammakai movement, the most influential of the
aforementioned groups, of doctrinal distortion, ‘insulting the Buddha’s teaching
[Dhammavinaya] (cuangcap phra thammawinai)’ and ‘showing disrespect to the Pali
canon (loplu phra traipidokbali)’ (Payutto 2542a, 12). While admitting that there
is no buddhavacana in the Pali canon that explicitly states that Nibbāna is anattā,
Phra Payutto asserts that later canonical (Parivāra; Vin V 8638) and post-canoni-
cal texts did so (Payutto 2542, 63–71). As this is in conformity with a number of
buddhavacana in the canon that allow the interpretation that Nibbāna is anattā,39
for Phra Payutto it is undoubtedly clear that from a Theravāda point of view
the teaching ‘Nibbāna is a Higher Self (attā)’ is not acceptable. Those who write
in defence of the Dhammakāya movements have attacked Phra Payutto for his
criticism of the Dhammakāya teaching. Some of them have argued that, based on
their alleged spiritual insights, numerous acclaimed Thai meditation masters40
were able to confirm the existence of a Higher or Real Self (attā). Some of Phra
Payutto’s critics seem to warn him and others who get ‘this issue wrong’ by their
teaching ‘Nibbāna is anattā’: they refer to the fate of two post-canonical figures
who are rather well-known in Thai Pali scholarly circles:41 that is ‘Empty Palm-
leaf’ (Tucchapoṭṭhila)42 and Kapila.43 Both, so the Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā texts tell
38. ‘Impermanent are all conditioned things, painful, not-Self, and conditioned, and certainly
Nibbāna is a description meaning not-Self (aniccā sabbe saṅkhārā dukkhānattā ca saṅkhatā,
nibbānañc’eva paññatti anattā iti nicchayā)’. Translation by Peter Harvey.
39. Here, Phra Payutto is e.g. referring to: Kvu.68; SN III 46; MN III 64; AN I 27 and most frequently
to ‘sabbe dhammā anattā’ (Dhp 279; Thag 678; AN I 286).
40. They made this claim with regard to, amongst others, Acan Man Bhūridatto, Luang Pho Sot
and Phra Mahabua.
41. Sompho Chanawangsa 2537, 114–115; Phutthathammaprathip, n.d.: 28–34.
42. This narrative can be found in the Dhammapada commentary (Dhp-a III 417–21). The monk
Poṭṭhila had excelled himself by his great learning of the Pali canon for an extremely long
period of time (a time period which spans over the lives of seven Buddhas!), when the Bud-
dha thought that it is time for Poṭṭhila to attain Nibbāna for himself (attano dukkhanissaraṇaṃ).
For this reason, the Buddha decides to stir him up (saṃvejessāmi) by frequently calling him
‘Empty-Palm leaf’ (tucchapoṭṭhila; the texts being written on palm-leaves). This prompted
Poṭṭhila to pursue the Buddhist practice and he started to look for a teacher. This, however,
was not easy for him, as all monks he asked refused to teach him, due to his pride (māno).
Only when his pride was finally removed (nihatamāno), and Poṭṭhila was willing to learn from
a seven-year old novice who was using rather unusual methods of instruction, did he attain
arahant-ship himself (arahatte patiṭṭhahīti).
43. The narrative on Kapila can be found in the Dhammapada commentary (Dhp-a IV 37). Kapila
together with his older brother Sāgata, his mother Sādhinī and his sister Tāpanā were
ordained into the religion of the Buddha Kassapa. When the two brothers inquired as to how
many tasks exist in Buddhism (imasmiṃ sāsane kati dhurānī’ti), they learned that there are the
‘task of textual study’ (ganthadhuraṃ) and the ‘task of insight meditation’ (vipassanādhuraṃ).
Whilst Sāgata decided to pursue the task of insight meditation (pūressāmi), and attained ara-
hant-ship after five rains (pañca vassāni), Kapila turned towards textual study. He learned
the texts of the three baskets (tīṇi piṭakāni uggaṇhi), and ‘drunk by his eruditeness’ (bāhusac-
cama dena) argued with everyone. Having been admonished by other monks, he reproached
them by calling them ignorant: ‘What do you know; you are like an empty fist (tumhe kiṃ
jānā tha ritta muṭṭhisadisā’ti)’. Besides, he affronted and treated them with contempt (khuṃ-
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 14 ---
14 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
us, did not proceed on the spiritual path as they were too attached to the theo-
retical study of the Pali canon. The former finally managed to attain awakening,
after being admonished by the Buddha himself, whereas the latter ‘drunk by his
eruditeness’ (bāhusac cama dena), was so arrogant in his scriptural knowledge that
as a kammic result of this he was reborn in the worst of Buddhist hells.
At the same time, however, it must be noted that there are numerous monks
and academics who have publicly stated that Phra Payutto is an accomplished
practitioner (Seeger 2005a, 149–151). Following the principle of textual hierarchy,
Phra Payutto has never publicly expressed any opinion on these comments on his
competence regarding the teaching of Buddhism. Rather, he counters his critics
by maintaining that the canonical texts are on the aforementioned controversies
unambiguous. For this reason, for him these conflicts do not involve an epistemo-
logical or interpretational problem but a purely factual one, namely what the Pali
canonical and post-canonical texts have to say regarding these questions.
Phra Payutto explains that even Sāriputta, Buddha’s foremost disciple of wis-
dom, despite already being an awakened one (arahant) and (alongside Moggallāna)
having advanced to become the most important disciple of the Buddha, con-
sulted the Buddha when ambiguities regarding the Buddha’s teaching arose.
Furthermore, Phra Payutto refers to awakened disciples who, despite their awak-
ening, studied the words of the Buddha (buddhavacana) in order ‘to help to pre-
serve Buddhism (phuea chuai damrong phra phutthasatsana)’ (Payutto 2542a, 90).
Here he is referring to a passage in the Vinaya-commentary where the Buddhist
scholarship of arahants is called ‘bhaṇḍāgārika pariyatti’ (‘the study of the store-
house keeper’; Vin-a I 24). It is also explained that an arahant (khīṇāsavo), who
studies the words of the Buddha (buddhavacanaṃ pariyāpuṇanto), is a preserver
of the holy texts (tantidhārako), a custodian of the tradition (paveṇipālako) and a
preserver of the tradition (vaṃsānu rakkhako) (MN-a II 107; Vin-a I 25).
These Thai debates seem to revolve on the question of whether the spiritual
insights by a charismatic figure can uncover authentic hidden or lost meaning in
or beyond the canonical texts and should, therefore, be regarded as more than,
or at least equally authoritative to, Theravāda’s textual tradition. In this respect,
Phra Payutto’s concept of textual hierarchy has been criticized as being arbitrary.
In connection with the ‘Nibbāna: attā or anattā?’ controversy, the academic and
follower of the Dhammakāya teaching Manat Komontha asked why the opinion
of commentarial texts should have more weight than the spiritual insights of
sento vamb hento). Even when his brother Sāgata explained to him: ‘Kapila, the correct practice
[sammāpaṭipatti] of people like you is the longevity of the religion (āvuso Kapila tumhādisānaṃ
hi sam mā paṭi patti sāsanassa āyu nāma)’, all these attempts had no impact on Kapila’s wrong
views. Eventually, this caused ‘the one who behaves badly’ (durācāro), i.e. Kapila, to be shunned
by the other, well-behaved monks (pesalā bhikkhū). One day, when Kapila recited the monastic
regulations (pātimokkhaṃ) and the present monks refused to give him an answer, he said that
‘There is neither Dhamma nor Vinaya (dhammo vā vinayo vā natthi)’. As a consequence of the
damage that he had caused to the teaching (pariyattisāsanaṃ) of the Buddha Kassapa, after his
death he was reborn in the worst hell of Avīci. His mother Sādhinī and his sister Tāpanā, who
adhered to the wrong views of Kapila (diṭṭhānugatiṃ), affronted the well-behaved monks and
were reborn in hell. Later, Kapila was reborn in the river Aciravatī as a gold-coloured fish who
stank out of his mouth (Kapilamaccha). Fishermen captured the fish and showed him to the
king who took it to the Buddha in order to ask for the reason of the bad breath. The Buddha
interviewed the fish Kapila and as a consequence of this Kapila died ‘being overwhelmed by
remorse’ (vip paṭisārābhibhūto). After his death, he, again, was reborn in hell.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 15 ---
Martin Seeger 15
contemporary monks, especially given the fact that there is no explicit buddha-
vacana regarding the point of controversy (Manat Komontha 2547, 116, 197). For
defenders of the Dhammakāya teaching, a coherency between pariyatti, paṭipatti
and paṭivedha has to be taken as the hermeneutical criterion by which the authen-
tic meaning of the Dhamma can be ascertained:44
The investigation of solely scriptural evidence is not sufficient, as distortions from
the true Dhamma of Buddhism might occur. This is because this is a scriptural
interpretation which follows an understanding that is based on one’s personal
perception [saññā] and consciousness [viññāṇa].45
The debates on the relationship between pariyatti and paṭipatti are reminis-
cent of an old and well-known conflict in the Theravāda. In the commentary on
the Aṅguttara-nikāya, the Manorathapūraṇī, we find the narrative (AN-a I 192-193)
on a controversy that must have taken place some 400–500 years after Buddha’s
death. Several hundred monks in Sri Lanka disputed the question ‘Is the pariya-
tti the basis of the religion, or is it the paṭipatti (pariyatti nu kho sāsanassa mūlaṃ,
udāhu paṭipattī’ti)?’. The so-called Paṃsukūlika-monks46 advocated paṭipatti as basis
by referring to a passage in the Mahā pari nibbāna Sutta where the Buddha tells
Subhadda47: ‘When the monks, Subhadda, live righteously, the world will not be
void of arahants’.48 However, when the Dhammakathika-monks49 had brought for-
ward their arguments50 for pariyatti as basis of Buddhism, the Paṃsukūlika-monks
were silent (tuṇhī ahesuṃ). In this way, the dispute came to an end in favour of
the Dhammakathika-monks. The commentary gives the following reason for this
decision:
When amongst 100 or 1,000 bulls there is no cow that preserves the lineage, the
tradition will not continue. Just so, there is no realization of the Noble Path when
there is no studying [pariyatti], even when hundred or thousand monks begin to
44. Referring to Suchip Punyanuphap’s explanation of the Pāsādika Sutta (DN III 128) Suwanna, in
another context, also holds that, according to ‘Theravādin Buddhist philosophy’, one would
have expected that insights gained through paṭipatti are also taken ‘as criteria to ascertain the
authenticity of textual meaning’ (Suwanna Satha-anand 2545, 99; see also: Suwanna Satha-
anand 2545, 106).
45. Students and Practitioners of the True Dhamma 2537, 19, 44–45.
46. ‘ Paṃsukūlika’ literally means ‘one who wears clothes made of rags taken from a dust heap’
(Rhys Davids/Stede 1994, 379).
47. Subaddha becomes the last disciple of the Buddha before his death and after having been
instructed by the Buddha he attains arahant-ship (DN II 149–53).
48. ‘ ime ca, subhadda, bhikkhū sammā vihareyyuṃ, asuñño loko arahantehi assāti’ (DN II 152).
49. A Dhammakathika is a teacher and reciter of the Dhamma.
50. The Dhammakathika-monks give the following rationale for their view: ‘As long as the suttas
exist and the Vinaya shines, the [monks(?)] will see light, as if the sun has risen; when the
suttas do not exist [anymore], and the Vinaya has been forgotten; darkness will come into the
world, as if the suns set; when the suttas are preserved, the practice is preserved; the wise
person is grounded in the practice, he does not fall away from perfect freedom [=Nibbāna]’.
(‘Yāva tiṭṭhanti suttantā, vinayo yāva dippati; tāva dakkhanti ālokaṃ, sūriye abbhuṭṭhite yathā
‘Suttantesu asantesu, pamuṭṭhe vinayamhi ca; tamo bhavissati loke, sūriye atthaṅgate yathā.
‘Suttante rakkhite sante, paṭipatti hoti rakkhitā; paṭipattiyaṃ ṭhito dhīro, yogakkhemā na dhaṃsatī’ti’.;
AN-a I 93).
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 16 ---
16 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
practise insight meditation.51
For Walpola Rahula, this decision demonstrates a shift of paradigm in the
history of Buddhism, since ‘according to the original teaching of the Buddha the
practice of the dhamma (paṭipatti) is of greater importance than mere learning
(pariyatti)’.52 Ray comments on this ‘change’ as follows:
The vocation of texts and scholarship, with its fruition in the writing down of the
Buddhist texts, must, as it rose to prominence, have changed Buddhist tradition in
some dramatic and irreversible ways … Thus there arises the tendency to locate the
‘authentic teachings’ not, as originally, in the understanding of the realized saint,
but rather in external and objectified form, in the authoritative texts.
(Ray 1994, 32)
THE TRADITION AND ITS SCRIPTURES
The controversial scholar monk Mettānando, who has meanwhile left the
monkhood to pursue a political career, heavily criticizes Thai traditional studies
of the Pali canon that take the commentarial texts as a framework to explain the
canonical texts. Mettānando describes himself as a ‘radical thinker’, who ‘dares to
break [with traditional thinking?] and investigates [things] deeply’.53 According to
him, the Thai traditional monastic education system is ‘extremely conservative...,
like the religion in Europe during the middle ages at the time of the crusades’.54
Mettānando describes this system as ‘stultified’ (lalang) (Mettānando Bhikkhu,
2545a: 136) and attached to traditional interpretations of the Pali canon, not tol-
erating alternative exegeses. Mettānando writes: ‘The method of interpretation
which is used in Theravāda Buddhism … is in contradiction to the buddhavacana
in the Pali canon’. He argues that the Buddha criticized the Brahmanical tradition
for the very interpretational approach that follows a textual hierarchy.55 In con-
nection with this, he also refers to the famous Kālāma Sutta where the Buddha is
51. ‘ Yathā hi gavasatassa vā gavasahassassa vā antare paveṇipālikāya dhenuyā asati so vaṃso sā paveṇi
na ghaṭīyati, evam eva āraddhavipassakānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ satepi sahassepi saṃvijjamāne pariyattiyā
asati ariyamaggapaṭivedho nāma na hoti’ (AN-a I 93).
52. Rahula 1966, 158. Rahula also explains: ‘Out of this new development seem to have evolved, as
a necessary corollary, two vocations termed gantha-dhura and vipassanā-dhura. Gantha-dhura
or the vocation of ‘books’ denotes the learning and teaching of the dhamma, while vipassanā-
dhura or vocation of meditation means reflecting on life as impermanent, suffering and with-
out permanent entity. No such division of vocation is known to the original texts. Nor are
the terms gantha-dhura and vipassanā-dhura known to the early texts. A knowledge of the
dhamma as well as meditation was part and parcel of a monk’s life according to the original
conception. This division is found only in the Pāli Commentaries of the 5th century A.C. and
other non-canonical works. Acceptance of the new idea that learning is the basis of religion
seems to have given rise to this innovation’ (Rahula 1966, 159–160). See also: McDaniel 2008,
253–254.
53. ‘radical thinker... kla taek hak co luek’ (Mettānando Bhikkhu 2545a, 136). In 2003 he wrote: ‘I
may be the most controversial figure in Thai Buddhism at present’ (Mettānando Bhikkhu,
2003).
54. ‘ anurakniyom sut khua... muean kap satsana khong yurop nai yuk muet samai songkhram khruset’
(Mettānando Bhikkhu 2545a, S. 122).
55. Mettānando 2548, 219; Mettānando Bhikkhu 2545b, 130. Mettānando refers here to a passage
in the Caṅkī Sutta (MN II 170), where the Buddha compares the Vedic teachers with a chain of
blind people in which one is attached to another (paramparāsaṃsattā).
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 17 ---
Martin Seeger 17
reported to have said ‘Do not believe tradition (mā paramparāya)’ (AN I 189).56
In Thai Theravāda history, as far as we can say, Buddhist scholarship that
attributes normative and formative authority to the Pali canon above the com-
mentarial texts seems to be a rather recent phenomenon, though. The Thai his-
torian Nithi Iausiwong understands that in pre-Bangkok era Thai history, people
attributed ‘a more horizontal than vertical’ relationship between the canonical
and post-canonical texts. The ‘value of truth [khunkha khong khwamcing] embed-
ded in the Pali canon and other scriptures was thus equal’ (Nithi Iausiwong 2527,
391). Only during the first reign of the Bangkok-era (1782–1809), due to a grow-
ingly influential ‘rationalist thinking’ amongst the elite, did the ‘respect paid
to the commentaries decline’. Emerging critical approaches were undermin-
ing their authority. This trend culminated in the Dhammayuttika-nikāya move-
ment founded by the Prince-monk Mongkut (before becoming King of Siam in
1851, Mongkut had been a Buddhist monk for 27 years). This movement pur-
sued a ‘return to original texts, i.e. the Pali canon’ (Nithi Iausiwong 2527, 415).
More recently, Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu (1906–1993), who, alongside Phra Payutto, is
regarded as the most influential Thai Buddhist thinker of the second half of the
twentieth century, and who also pursued a ‘return to the Pali canon’ approach,
has assessed the commentarial texts as ‘late accretions, useless and even harm-
ful to Buddhism’ (Gabaude 1993, 50).
For Phra Payutto, however, the commentarial texts seem to play a much more
significant role. As shown in many of his works, he very frequently makes use of
the commentaries and sub-commentaries of the Theravāda. For him, the ‘best’
explanations of the meaning of the Pali canonical teachings are to be found in
the commentaries (Payutto 2539, 55). He explains that the commentarial texts
are the outcome of a continuous process of oral tradition in which the Buddha’s
teachings were explained from teachers to students. Students later might have
become teachers themselves and added new explanations. In this way, the tra-
dition was augmented by a growing number of texts and, thereby, developed
into a specific historical entity which these very texts are the product of and
give evidence of. This particular tradition excels by its conservatism; that is, its
followers attempted to avoid adding their own interpretations, as far as pos-
sible (cf. Norman 2006, 195–219). While admitting that the commentarial texts
contain problematic and self-contradictory statements, Phra Payutto maintains
that these texts are the expression of the Theravāda and therefore to be seen as
authoritative for its view (see Seeger 2005, 216-19). Whilst explaining his under-
standing of a passage in the already mentioned Kālāma Sutta where the Buddha is
reported to have said ‘Do not believe in scriptures’, Phra Payutto writes that:
Both the belief and non-belief in the texts can be a blind belief [ngom ngai], if we
lack discernment [vicāraṇañāṇa]… A thorough practice which does not contradict
the teaching ‘not to believe the texts’ is to avoid groundless belief. Before com-
ing to a judgment of or rejecting the texts we should thoroughly and completely
study what they have to say. If we then want to interpret or take an opinion that
deviates from them, we can [of course] do so (Payutto 2538, 927).
In this way, Phra Payutto himself is far from agreeing with all that the commen-
tarial texts have to say, and admits that these texts can indeed be ‘harmful’(pen
56. See however: Pagorn Singsuriya 2549.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 18 ---
18 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
thot), if they are approached in the wrong way.57 However, Phra Payutto stresses
that ‘if we want to answer what [teachings] the Theravāda adheres to, we have
to accept the views [mati] of the commentaries, too’.58
Suwanna described Buddhadāsa’s approach to the Pali canon as ‘clearing a path
through the impenetrable jungle in the Pali canon (kan phaeu thang parokchat nai
phra traipidok)’. Buddhadāsa’s radically critical approach to the Pali texts caused
‘shock waves’ (sansathuean) in Thai Buddhist studies and ‘immense dissatisfaction
in Buddhist conservative groups’ (Suwanna Satha-anand 2536, 21–22). Referring
to the above instruction in the Kālāma Sutta, ‘Do not believe in scriptures’ and the
four ‘Great Authorities’ (mahāpadesa) that postulate coherency as means of ascer-
taining authenticity, Buddhadāsa maintained that a significant part of the Pali
canon is not the authentic word of the Buddha (buddhavacana), but interpolations
by later tradition. He said: ‘Presently, we are too stupid [in our attitude] towards
what we call the Pali canon to such an extent that we have become slaves of each
letter of the Pali canon’.59 Buddhadāsa suggested ‘tearing out’ (chik ok) all inter-
polations from the Pali canon in order to identify authentic Buddhism. When fol-
lowing this approach, only some 40% of the Pali canon would remain (Buddhadāsa
2529, 21–22). Phra Payutto has not joined the critics of Buddhadāsa who attacked
him because of this radical approach. Quite the opposite is the case: after his
views on the Pali canon were repeatedly contrasted with those of Buddhadāsa
(e.g. an adherent of the Dhammakāya teaching referred to Buddhadāsa’s radical
textual approach in the course of the ‘Nibbāna: attā or anattā?’ controversy),60 Phra
Payutto argued that Buddhadāsa’s specific and ‘possibly rather radical’ (atca run-
raeng noi) methods of teaching Buddhism aim to ‘urge’ (tuean) people to develop
the correct handling of Pali canonical messages, but do not actually imply a dis-
tortion or abrogation of core principles of the Buddha’s teaching. Phra Payutto
views ‘[Buddhadāsa’s teaching as] completely Theravāda (than eng pen therawat
temtua)’ and argues that Buddhadāsa’s statement of ‘tearing the Pali canon’ has
to be understood in the specific context of current Thai society where Buddhists
‘have a superficial understanding [of Buddhist doctrine] and are attached to form
instead of penetrating the core teachings’. Overall, Buddhadāsa was perfectly in
line with Theravādin conservatism: ‘Actually… Buddhadāsa wants the [canonical
texts] to be preserved [as they are]’.61
AT THE HEART OF THERAVāDIN IDENTITy: THE FIRST REHEARSAL
Another ongoing debate in Thai Buddhism that concerns the authoritativeness of
the Pali canonical texts pertains to the event that Theravādins look to as lending
ideological support to the name ‘Theravāda’: the First Rehearsal of elder monk-
57. Interview with Phra Payutto on 04/01/2004.
58. Interview with Phra Payutto on 10/07/2002.
59. ‘ rau patcuban ngom-ngai to sing thi riak wa pidok rue phra traipidok kan mak koen pai con pen that
khong phra traipidok thuk tua akson’ (Buddhadāsa 2529, 6).
60. Payutto 2539, 48; see also Payutto 2547, 66–67.
61. ‘ cingcing ... than tongkan hai raksa au wai’ (Talk of Phra Payutto on ‘Theravāda of the Columnist
and Theravāda According to Correct Principles; Part 3’; talk given on 26/08/2551; available
online as MP3 file: http://www.watnyanaves.net/sounds/wikrit-kanmuand.htm accessed on
17/12/2008)
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 19 ---
Martin Seeger 19
arahants, during which according to a canonical account (Vin II 283–288) the
Dhammavinaya was compiled and it was decided that the collection of monas-
tic rules should not be changed. As I have shown elsewhere (Seeger 2006 and
2007), the events at the First Rehearsal as depicted in the Pali canon have become
extremely important for the creation of Theravādin identity. With a variety of
arguments, however, various Thai scholars of Buddhism have recently advocated
a return to the ‘original spirit’ of Buddhism during the time of the Buddha. They
see the upholding of the decision to freeze the texts containing monastic dis-
cipline as restrictive and anachronistic, at odds with the intention of Buddha,
or even, in the case of one scholar (Mettānando Bhikkhu 2545c), as a perpetua-
tion of a Brahmanistic plot undermining ‘real’ Buddhism. In short, Thai scholars
have argued for a re-opening of the Pali canon, either through applying text-
critical methods with the aim of isolating authentic Buddhist teachings from
‘non’- or even ‘anti-Buddhist’ interpolations, or by ‘updating’ the spirit of ‘origi-
nal Buddhism’, which would imply doing away with a number of traditionally
held quite significant practices and beliefs that have become central markers of
Theravādin identity. This approach would involve the Theravāda being required
to reconsider its identity and traditional hermeneutical practice. In connection
with the nun-ordination controversy in Thailand (see Seeger 2006), Thai scholar
of Buddhism Channarong Bunnun expresses this idea in a rather critical way
when he says that the Theravāda could ‘[change its history] by changing the
agreement [mati] of the First Rehearsal so that it has less oppressive authority
and prioritizes the authority of the buddhavacana’ (Channarong Bunnun 2548,
20). Channarong perceives the upholding of the decision of the First Rehearsal
as a breach of the hierarchy of textual authority: he sees the agreement of the
Rehearsal as being ‘placed’ above the buddhavacana. However, for Phra Payutto,
Channarong’s argumentation does not hold water, as the First Rehearsal’s agree-
ment is rather ‘a decision to pay highest respect to the Buddha’62 than being in
contradiction to it:
[Despite being aware of the anachronism that this would involve] the saṅgha [dur-
ing the First Rehearsal] agreed to sacrifice itself: ‘Let us completely preserve the
Buddha’s teaching! For, if we would change it, it would be for our own benefit’.63
In this context, Phra Payutto sees it as important to make the distinction
between permission and an order. This seems to be congruent with the expla-
nation of the respective canonical passage given in the commentary on the
Mahāparinibbāna Sutta, where it is explained that the Buddha formulated his per-
mission to abrogate (samūhanatu) minor rules as an option (vikappavacaneneva
ṭhapesīti), as he foresaw that at the First Rehearsal it would be agreed to freeze
these texts (DN-a II 592). The Thai Pali scholar Thongyoi Saengsinchai argues that
the agreement of the First Rehearsal conforms to the third point of the Buddha’s
first set of ‘factors not leading to decline for monks’ (bhikkhu-aparihāniyadhamma)
in the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta (DN II 76–77), and is therefore perfectly legitimate
and completely in line with the buddhavacana (Thongyoi Saengsinchai 2546b,
108–109). The passage Thongyoi is referring to, here, translates as:
62. Interview with Phra Payutto on 04/01/2004.
63. Interview with Phra Payutto on 04/01/2004.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 20 ---
20 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
As long as, bhikkhus, the bhikkhus do not establish what has not (yet) been estab-
lished, and do not abrogate what has been established, and practice according to
the established training rules, the bhikkhus can hope for growth and not decay.64
For Thongyoi, Theravādin conservatism based on this instruction by the
Buddha and the decision of the 500 arahants of the First Rehearsal forms the
central marker of Theravādin identity: ‘If a monastic group in Thailand has the
intention to abrogate [minor rules], they will have to leave the Theravāda school
[nikāya], as the abrogation of training rules [sikkhāpada] is not a principle of the
Theravāda. To be Theravādin and at the same time to make use of the permission
to abrogate training rules is impossible’ (Thongyoi Saengsinchai 2546b, 124).
RELIGIOUS PLURALISM AND CANONICAL AUTHORITY
Both for Phra Payutto and Thongyoi, the complete canon has to be taken as the
‘standard’ for practice and teaching in the Theravāda. That means that it is not
only the Buddha’s monastic regulations (Vinaya) that are to exert authority on
religious practice and formation of identity but also, as shown above, soteriologi-
cal teachings (Dhamma) claiming to be Theravādin have to conform to canonical
standards, too. Mettānando seems to disagree with this concept, for he remarks
that diversity in terms of interpreting Buddhist soteriology was present at the
very inception of Buddhism and still is so in modern Thai Buddhism. This, he
argues, has not caused dissension or segregation within the monastic community;
rather, differences in the interpretation of the monastic rules were the cause of
dissent and schism (saṅghabheda) (Mettānando Bhikkhu 2531, 57, 59). The Thai
scholar monk, Phra Somchai Ṭhānavuḍḍho, who is one of the main public fig-
ures of the Dhammakāya movement located in Pathum Thani, argues similarly,
albeit apparently perceiving the normative authority of canonical soteriology as
more comprehensive than Mettānando does. For him, Buddhist teachings can be
divided into two parts, that is the instructions for the ‘right’ spiritual practice,
such as the Noble Eightfold Path (aṭṭhaṅgika-magga) and the Four Foundations of
Success (iddhipāda), and the teachings on metaphysics (aphipratya), like the law
of kamma, Nibbāna, and cosmology.
As the Buddha did not give detailed explanations with regard to metaphysics, but
only hinted at [bok pen nai hai sap thaunan] them, the opinions and understanding
on these things consequently are very varied and it is difficult to come to a unani-
mous conclusion with regard to these things. (Somchai Ṭhānavuḍḍho 2542, 11)
He regards the insistence on one opinion in these matters and the rejection of
other interpretations as leading to ‘saddhammapaṭirūpa’ (pseudo-Dhamma) and,
therefore, to the destruction of Buddhism. The realization of these ‘metaphysical’
things should be left to one’s own personal experience in spiritual practice (see
also Sawaeng Udomsi 2543, 66–67). As long as Buddhist practice consistently fol-
lows the canonical standards, Buddhism can be preserved while respecting doctri-
nal diversity regarding ‘metaphysics’. This approach, he observes, is ‘democracy
64. ‘ Yāvakīvañca, bhikkhave, bhikkhū apaññattaṃ na paññapessanti, paññattaṃ na samucchindis-
santi, yathāpaññattesu sikkhāpadesu samādāya vattissanti, vuddhiyeva, bhikkhave, bhikkhūnaṃ
pāṭikaṅkhā, no parihāni’ (DN II 77).
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 21 ---
Martin Seeger 21
in Buddhism’ and in conformity with traditional practice in Thailand.65 Somphan
Phromtha, a Thai scholar of Buddhism, agrees to allow doctrinal diversity in
Thai Buddhism, even if the teachings are not justifiable from a canonical point
of view. For him, it only starts to become a problem that needs to be addressed
when teachings are propagated with the aim of deceiving, exploiting and cheat-
ing others.66
While advocating the Theravāda’s strict conservatism and heavily criticiz-
ing attempts to undermine canonical authority, Phra Payutto at the same time
acknowledges that Buddhism ‘allows for a lot of space for interpretational free-
dom (hai itsaraphap nai kantikhwam mak)’ (Payutto 2533, 48). As Suwanna remarks,
however, the demarcation line between arbitrary and ‘valid’ interpretation is a
rather difficult thing to ascertain (Suwanna Satha-anand 2545, 101–106). In his
voluminous literary output, besides outlining his concepts of meaning and func-
tion of the Pali canon, Phra Payutto expounds his understanding of the flexible
structure of Buddhism: interpretations of canonical teachings are acceptable as
long as the meaning of the Dhammavinaya is not distorted and the interpretation
conforms to the principles of the Buddha’s teaching (Payutto 2533, 48–50).
Phra Payutto understands Pali canonical teachings as a complex system of
meaning that has a firm and clear structure and direction. This system is enor-
mously flexible in that it can be drawn on and adapted to a wide range of socio-
cultural contexts and levels of individual spiritual development, whilst its basic
semantic structure must be maintained in order to secure authenticity. In this
way, based on his hermeneutical approach, canonical teachings on rebirth or
heavens and hells can be interpreted and taught as referring to psychological
phenomena constantly and rapidly occurring in the un-awakened human mind,
that is as mental states, or can be taken in their literal meaning in which they refer
to a complex cosmology that incorporates the existence of gods, demons, ghosts
and all kinds of miracles (Seeger 2005b). This semantic broadness is very inclusive
and allows accommodation of the religious needs of both modern educated intel-
lectuals and people who have faith in more traditional aspects of Thai religion.
Also, in Phra Payutto’s opinion suttas like the Āṭānāṭiya Sutta (DN III 194–207),
Mahāsamaya Sutta (DN II 253–262), Dhajagga Sutta (SN I 218–220) or Candima Sutta
(SN I 50–51) show that the teachings of the Buddha are not interested in discuss-
ing ontological truths with regards to gods and demons, but rather have a peda-
gogical purpose that tries to connect to already existent belief systems with the
aim of human development towards Nibbāna. In their pragmatics and deep struc-
ture, suttas like the Āṭānāṭiya Sutta in which gods, demons, ghosts and supernatu-
ral powers play a significant role are coherent with other canonical texts that
contain more obviously Buddhist soteriology (see Seeger 2005a, 233–270). These
suttas would thus actually lend a degree of legitimacy to traditional Thai beliefs
in ghosts (phi) and ‘holy objects’ (singsaksit).67
65. Phra Somchai Ṭhānavuḍḍho 2542, 13; see also: Seeger 2005a, 223–226.
66. Cited in: Phiphat Phasutharachat 2549, 405.
67. For further more comprehensive descriptions of Phra Payutto’s inclusive reading of Pali
canonical texts with regards to ‘holy objects’, see Seeger 2005a, 262–270; Parnwell and Seeger
2008, 105–106, 161.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 22 ---
22 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
In this way, despite his conservative stance regarding the strict safeguard-
ing of the text-surface of the relevant scriptures, Phra Payutto’s hermeneuti-
cal approach is quite inclusive with regard to beliefs in the supernatural and
amulets, which are quite widespread in Thai society. In addition to this, he
emphasizes that Buddhism needs a process of accommodation and actualiza-
tion of canonical text content so that Buddhism will not lose its relevancy to
its contemporary followers: Phra Payutto himself has written numerous texts,
in which he tries to contemporize and contextualize canonical text content. In
this way, his publications have titles such as ‘Buddhist Economics’, ‘Buddhist
Jurisprudence’, ‘Hells and Heavens for Modern People’, ‘Modern Medicine from
a Buddhist Perspective’, ‘Education Reform: What Role should Buddhism Play?’,
‘The Role of the Monastic Community in Present Thai Society’. In connection with
this, Phra Payutto differentiates between two kinds of Buddhism, that is ‘cul-
tural Buddhism’ (phutthasatsana fai watthanatham/phutthasatsana baep chau ban)
and ‘original Buddhism’ (phutthasatsana thae/phutthasatsana fai thammawinai).
Cultural Buddhism is Buddhism as it has become manifest in Thai cultural and
religious life, that is as it is practised, understood and transmitted by the Thais.
Original Buddhism, however, is Buddhism as outlined in the Pali canon. He sees
a necessary interdependence between these two Buddhisms: ‘If not transformed
into cultural Buddhism, original Buddhism is arguably not able to immerse itself
in Thai-ness’. And at the same time, however, original Buddhism has to be taken
as a standard to review cultural Buddhism. It also must serve as a source for per-
manently augmenting and enriching cultural Buddhism with authentic meaning.
Otherwise, Buddhism in general will deteriorate (Payutto 2544a, 98–100). In this
way, in cultural Buddhism people might even believe in Nibbāna as a physical
‘eternal city’ (amatamahānagara); monks as preservers of original Buddhism must
carefully try to ‘link’ these beliefs with canonical truth and closely watch that
these beliefs do not distort or replace canonical meaning. The objective here is
not to eradicate existent beliefs but to integrate them into the flexible structure
of Buddhism with the goal to help people develop spiritually towards the canoni-
cal ideals (Payutto 2542, 95). Phra Payutto elaborates this point:
Buddhism … allows for [a lot of] freedom and does not use violent methods and
force. For this reason, it is necessary to have fundamental principles and methods
that ensure [the existence of authentic Buddhism]. These consist in studying in
order to allow Buddhists, starting with monks, to be able to differentiate between
what is Buddhism and what is not Buddhism.
He further argues that Buddhism ‘neither oppresses nor impedes’ other beliefs
(Payutto 2549, 14) and, unlike other religions, has also no ‘ritual regulations’ or
‘clear formal procedures like religions of faith and ritual’. For this reason, this
‘freedom’ has to be counterbalanced by ‘study’ so that both intentional and unin-
tentional distortion of authentic meaning and, ultimately, semantic chaos can be
prevented (Payutto 2545, 19). According to Phra Payutto, it might even become
necessary for Buddhist rehearsals (saṅgāyanā/saṅgīti) to be convened in order
to rectify teachings that distort fundamental Pali canonical doctrines (Payutto,
2542: 6). The mutual and dynamic relationship between canonical Buddhism and
actual Thai Buddhism demands from the custodians of original Buddhism, that
is primarily the monks, that their teachings and practices are grounded in the
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 23 ---
Martin Seeger 23
canon, but at same time, able to be responsive to the various religious needs of
contemporary Buddhists and assist them in their spiritual development.
CONCLUSION
All Thai Theravādins and scholars involved in the debates discussed above seem
to be concerned about the longevity of Buddhism. Some of them are worried
that authentic meaning in Buddhism could become distorted by the fact that
Buddhism is taught from the personal perspective of individuals. The under-
standing of what ‘personal opinion’ (attano mati) constitutes varies enormously,
however. Some argue that ‘personal opinion’ interferes with one’s reading of
the canon and has thus to be eradicated, by becoming awakened; only then is a
‘real’ understanding of the meaning of canonical teachings possible. Here it is
also argued that the canon might have been corrupted during its long and com-
plex history of transmission, during which it was redacted and semantic erosion
and distortion might or must have occurred; or, that the meaning of Pali canoni-
cal terms has changed as a result of socio-cultural change that has taken place
since the time of the Buddha. For this reason, so it is argued, spiritual insight is
a necessary hermeneutical tool as it allows the comprehension of the ‘things’
(dhammā) the canonical texts are describing and pointing at. Or, in other words,
understanding the Truth (Dhamma) first is a necessary prerequisite to properly
interpreting and teaching the texts in which this Truth had been imbedded. This
approach is criticized by those who adhere to the concept of ‘textual hierar-
chy’. They accept ‘personal opinion’ of any contemporary person as representa-
tive of the Theravāda only as the least authority and only when in conformity
with the more authoritative text-layers. At the same time, they emphasize that
in their advocating of their understanding of meaning and function of the Pali
canon, they do not want to get involved in a debate on Truth per se but are only
concerned to delineate the extent of possible interpretations of the canonical
texts and acceptable statements in the name of the Theravāda. Realisation of
Truth (Dhamma) is an individual experience that cannot be shared and is not
up for debate. They fear that Buddhism could be monopolized and exploited by
individuals who claim to have superior insights and therefore the privilege of
‘right’ interpretation and teaching. At the same time, they want to counteract
processes of denominational fragmentation and semantic distortion which they
see as triggered by disregarding the textual hierarchy. For them, the teachings
of individuals that disregard the textual hierarchy might lead to the ‘bending’
of the Theravāda towards what they call ‘ācariyavāda’, literally ‘teaching of the
teacher’.68 Whereas ‘ācariyavāda’ had initially been used to refer to the commen-
tarial texts of the Theravāda (DN-a II 567: ācariyavāda nāma aṭṭhakathā), it later
quite ‘paradoxically’ came to designate non-Theravāda teachings and interpre-
tations (Karunadasa 1963, 163). In present Thai Buddhism, however, this term
possesses at least three different meanings, which very often seem to overlap
semantically or are blurred. In this way, ‘ācariyavāda’ is used to refer to Mahāyāna
Buddhism, to other early pre-Mahāyāna Buddhist schools, or is understood quite
literally as teachings of contemporary Buddhist teachers, whose teachings are
regarded as deviations from or unacceptable distortions of Theravāda. The usage
68. See e.g.: Payutto 2542, 35–36; Maechi Suphaphan na Bangchang 2550, 115–116.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 24 ---
24 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
of ‘ācariyavāda’ in many of the discussed debates above, however, expresses the
concern about losing authenticity, integrity and historical continuity by becom-
ing ‘other’.
The debates presented in this paper have also shown that there are quite
divergent views amongst Thai scholars as to the extent to which the Pali canoni-
cal and commentarial texts are to be taken to impose normative authority on
contemporary Buddhist teachings and practice. In this way, some hold that only
orthopraxis should be prescribed by the canon, whilst teachings based on per-
sonal interpretation of the Dhamma that are derived from individual spiritual
achievements should be possible or even are desirable. As long as orthopraxis is
in conformity with Pali canonical norms, the Theravāda would be able to main-
tain its integrity. Here, however, there is also no unanimous view on what con-
stitutes orthopraxis: is it the monastic discipline (Vinaya), only, or does it include
spiritual practice, like the Noble Eightfold Path (aṭṭhaṅgika-magga), too? Others,
however, hold that both praxis and doctrine are to be in conformity with the Pali
canon if they claim to be Theravāda.
Phra Payutto, who is a major participant in the debates discussed above, has
repeatedly been described as a ‘personification or representation of [Theravāda]
tradition’, ‘wholly Theravāda’ 69 or ‘an authentic [Theravāda] monk’ (phra thae)
(see Seeger 2005a, 27). This paper has lent some weight to these assessments: Phra
Payutto, on the one hand, claims that the Pali canon contains universal and always
valid (akālika) truths and can provide ‘solutions to the problems of the world’ (a
concept that has also been criticized70). At the same time, however, his conserv-
ative stance aims at preventing ‘centrifugal’ forces (panha kracat kracai) in Thai
Buddhism by upholding the principle of ‘textual hierarchy’ (Payutto 2545b, 106).
Here, Phra Payutto takes the whole textual tradition of the Theravāda as a yard-
stick for assessing teachings and practices that can be accepted as Theravādin.
Whilst being highly critical of teachings that claim to be Theravādin but, from
his point of view, distort Pali canonical principles to an unacceptable extent,
Phra Payutto emphasizes that his critique does not aim to doubt the actuality
of individual spiritual experience. He has repeatedly pointed out that his con-
cern, here, is not with ‘Truth’ per se. For him, within the Theravāda, only teach-
ings that conform with the textual hierarchy can be accepted. Rejection of and
critical engagement with Pali canonical texts are possible, but the ‘changing’ of
them must not be accepted. Based on his hermeneutics, which comprises a syn-
chronic and diachronic approach to the Theravādin text corpus, he largely per-
ceives variations in canonical and post-canonical texts not as contradictions or
discrepancies but either as an expression of Buddha’s enormous teaching skills
in accommodating his message to the specific context of his interlocutors, or
as congruent with original meaning and therefore legitimate interpretations
of later tradition respectively. With the help of the doctrinal variations within
the canon and of later tradition, he is able to make more precise and definite
statements about Theravādin doctrine, which has been particularly crucial in
69. Olson 1989, 188; see also: Olson 1989, 192. The well-known Thai scholar of Buddhism Camnong
Thongprasoet once described Phra Payutto as: ‘he is wholly Theravāda’. (Olson 1989, 256).
70. E.g. by the historian Thongchai Winichakul (see: Wanchai Tantiwithayaphithak/Wiwat
Phanthawuthiyanon 2545, 142).
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 25 ---
Martin Seeger 25
the ‘Nibbāna: attā or anattā?’ controversy. At the same time, the rich breadth of
Theravādin doctrines allows him to respond to a wide range of religious needs
of Thai Buddhists, for example with regards to widespread beliefs in spirits, gods
and supernatural abilities or the amulet cult.
For Phra Payutto, the flexibility and inclusiveness of the Pali canon also allows
a wide spectrum of doctrinal diversity and methods of teaching, as long as fun-
damental principles of the Theravāda are not undermined. This has become par-
ticularly clear from the way he has resolutely intervened in the Santi Asok and
Dhammakāya cases (amongst others), but has regarded the ‘creative herme-
neutics’ of Buddhadāsa (and many other Thai Theravāda monks and teachers)
as being in line with the Theravāda. Or in other words, whilst arguing firmly in
favour of keeping the canon closed by strictly following the principle of textual
hierarchy, Phra Payutto has also extensively propounded the canon’s enormous
potential for flexibility, inclusiveness and adaptability.
This understanding of Phra Payutto has become also quite clear in his stance
in connection with debates regarding the revival of the Theravāda ordination lin-
eage of fully-ordained nuns (bhikkhunīs): while maintaining that, as it stands, an
ordination of Theravādin bhikkhunīs is not possible due to technical reasons (as
existing Theravādin bhikkhunīs are required by the procedures for the ordaining
of new ones), Phra Payutto argues that the Theravāda could be augmented with
new elements, for example by establishing an alternative institution, a ‘bhikkhunī
[order] in a new form’ (phiksuni nai rup mai) (for more on this see Seeger 2005a,
194–211, 2006, and 2007, 5–6).
In this way, it seems that, for him, the canon is closed and open at the same
time: whilst clear demarcation between the Theravāda and non-Theravāda belief
systems must be maintained, usage of canonical meaning carefully screened and
authenticated, with nothing added or taken away from the closed list of canonical
texts, the deep semantic structure of the canonical texts allows or even asks for
accommodation and interpretation so that canonical teachings fit specific socio-
cultural contexts and are able to unfold their salvific messages. For Phra Payutto,
the Pali canon constitutes not only the source for identity of Theravāda Buddhists
and the basis for historical continuity and integrity of the Theravāda, but also the
source of enthusiasm, motivation and impetus for spiritual practice.
ABBREVIATIONS
AN Aṅguttara-nikāya
AN-a Aṅguttara-nikāya Aṭṭhakathā (Manorathapūraṇī)
DN Dīgha-nikāya
DN-a Dīgha-nikāya Aṭṭhakathā (Sumaṅgalavilāsinī)
Dhp Dhammapada
Dhp-a Dhammapada Aṭṭhakathā
Kvu Kathāvatthu
MN Majjhima-nikāya
MN-a Majjhima-nikāya Aṭṭhakathā (Papacasūdanī)
SN Saṃyutta-nikāya
Thag Theragāthā
Vin. Vinaya Piṭaka
Vin-a Vinaya Aṭṭhakathā (Samantapāsādikā)
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 26 ---
26 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Note: B.E.: Buddhist Era. Articles and books published in Thai are typically dated according to B.E.
rather than C.E., and where this is the case I have retained this signification. B.E. = C.E. + 543
years.
Adisak Thongbun. 2542. ‘poet tu phra traipidok’ [Opening the Pali Canon Cabinet]. In
kep phet cak khamphi phra traipidok [Gathering Gems from the Pali Canon], 57–74.
Bangkok: Mahachulalongkorn University.
Apha Cantharasakun. 2538. chiwaprawat phra thammapidok [Biography of Phra
Dhammapiṭaka]. Bangkok: Kasetsat University.
Assmann, Jan. 2000. Religion und kulturelles Gedächtnis. München: Beck.
———. 2002. Das kulturelle Gedächtnis: Schrift, Erinnerung und politische Idendität in frühen
Hochkulturen. München: Beck.
Bareau, André. 1970. Recherches sur la biographie du Buddha dans les Sūṭrapitaka et les
Vinayapiṭaka anciens: 2: Les derniers mois, le Parinirvāṇa et les funérailles. 2: Tome
1. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient. Publications de l’École Française
d´Extrême-Orient.
Bond, George D. 1982. ‘The Word of the Buddha’: The Tipiṭaka and its Interpretation in
Theravāda Buddhism. Colombo: Gunasena.
Brereton, Bonnie Pacala. 1995. Thai Tellings of Phra Malai: Texts and Rituals Concerning a
Popular Buddhist Saint, Tempe: Arizona University Press.
Bua Ñāṇasampanno, Phra Maha. 2541. prawat than phra acan man phurithatta thera [The
Biography of Venerable Acan Man Bhūridatta Thera]. Bangkok: Chuanphim.
Buddhadāsa. 2529. phet nai phra traipidok [Gems in the Pali Canon]. 2nd printing.
Bangkok: Dhamma Study and Practice Group.
Channarong Bunnun. 2546. ‘rat kap phutthasatsana: sueksa cak “kotphrasong” nai kot-
mai tra sam duang [State and Buddhism: A Study from the “Monastic Laws” in
the Three Seals Code’]. Silapakorn University Journal 23(3): 11–149.
———. 2547. ‘kansangkhayana nai mummong mai: honthang su kankae panha khong
khana song thai patcuban’ [New Perspectives on the Rehearsals: Ways to Solving
Problems of the Contemporary Thai Saṅgha]. In khwam riang mai ruesang pratya
tawanok [New Essays on the Reconstructing of Eastern Philosophy], edited by
Sunwanna Satha-anand, 1–78. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University Press.
———. 2548, ‘kanpokpong sutthiphawa khong kan sangkhayana lae satsana anurakni-
yom’ [The Defending of Purity of the Rehearsals and the Conservative Religion].
Paper presented at Annual Training Course 2005 held by Philosophy and
Religions Society of Thailand and Department of Humanities, Faculty of Social
Science and Humanities, Mahidol University on May 20, 2005. [with permission
from the author].
Choong, Mun-keat. 2000. The Fundamental Teachings of Early Buddhism: A ComparativeStudy
Based on the Sūtrāṅga Portion of the Pāli Saṃyutta-Nikāya and the Chinese
Saṃyuktāgama. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Cholvarn, P. 2007. ‘Nibbāna as Self or Not Self: Some Contemporary Thai Discussions.’
Unpublished MPhil dissertation, University of Bristol.
Cohen, Erik. 1991, ‘Christianity and Buddhism in Thailand: The “Battle of
the Axes” and the “Contest of Power”’. Social Compass 38(2): 115–140.
doi:10.1177/003776891038002001
Collins, Steven. 1990. ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali canon’. Journal of the Pali Text Society
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 27 ---
Martin Seeger 27
15: 89–126.
Davidson, Ronald M. 1990. ‘An Introduction to the Standards of Scriptural Authenticity
in Indian Buddhism’. In Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, edited by Robert E. Buswell,
291–325. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Editorial Board Sarnsaeng-Arun Magazine. 2550. ‘phra traipidok kap kansawaengha
dindaen saksit khong chiwit’ [The Pali Canon and the Searching for the Sacred
Realm of Life]. Sarnsaeng-Arun Magazine 11(2): 67–82.
Fernhout, Rein. 1994. Canonical Texts Bearers of Absolute Authority. Bible, Koran, Veda,
Tipiṭaka: A Phenomenological Study. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Gabaude, Louis. 1994. ‘Buddhadasa’s Contribution as a Human Being, as a Thai, as a
Buddhist’. In The Quest for a Just Society: The Legacy and Challenge of Buddhadasa
Bhikkhu, edited by Sulak Sivaraksa, 27-59. Bangkok: The Inter-Religious
Commission for Development Santi Pracha Dhamma Institute.
Gethin, Rupert. 1998. The Foundations of Buddhism. Oxford and New York: Oxford
University Press.
Group of the Defendants of Security of Buddhism. (s.d.), The Catholic Plot Against
Buddhism: Classified Excerpts from the Bulletin of the Secretariat for Non-Christians
(Confidential Publication of the Vatican) and Some Interesting Evidences and Data.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 2000. A Handbook of Pāli Literature. Berlin: W. De Gruyter.
Ishii, Yoneo. 1986. Sangha, State, and Society: Thai Buddhism in History. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press.
Jackson, Peter A. 1989. Buddhism, Legitimation and Conflict: the Political Functions of Urban
Thai Buddhism. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Karunadasa, Y. 1963. ‘Ācariyavāda’. In Encyclopedia of Buddhism: Fascicle Acala-Ākaṅ, edited
by G.P. Malalasekera, 163. Government of Ceylon.
Keyes, Charles F. 1989. Thailand: Buddhist Kingdom as Modern Nation-State. Bangkok:
Duang Kamol.
Kukrit Pramot. 2547. [column in Sayamrat of 23 March 2515]. In Luang Ta Mahabua,
prawat than acan man phurithatto [The Biography of Venerable Acan Man
Bhūridatto], 570. Bangkok: Phikhanet.
Manat Komontha. 2547. nipphan nitcang/sukhang/atta rue anatta? mummong sahawithay-
akan [Nibbāna niccaṃ sukhaṃ attā or anattā? From the Perspective of Integrated
Sciences]. Bangkok: Thammasat University Printing Press.
McCargo, Duncan. 1997. Chamlong Srimuang and the New Thai Politics. London: Hurst.
———. 2004. ‘Buddhism, Democracy and Identity in Thailand’. Democratization 11(4):
155–170. doi:10.1080/1351034042000234576
McDaniel, Justin. 2002. ‘The Curricular Canon in Northern Thailand and Laos’. Manusya:
Journal of Humanities 4: 20–59.
———. 2006. ‘Liturgies and Cacophonies in Thai Buddhism’. Aséanie 18: 119–149.
———. 2008. Gathering Leaves & Lifting Words: Histories of Buddhist Monastic Education in
Laos and Thailand. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Mettānando Bhikkhu. 2531. khwamru rueang thammakai [Knowledge about
Dhammakāya]. Bangkok: Rawikan.
———. 2545a. ‘sonthana tham kap mettanantho phikkhu phra phu kla’ [Conversation
with Mettānando Bhikkhu, the Brave Monk]. GM Gentlemen’s Magazine 17(267):
118–136, 180–191.
———. 2545b. hetkoet pho so 1 (B.E. 0001). Lem 1: wikhro korani phutthaparinipphan [It Happened
in the Buddhist Year 1. Vol. 1: Analysis of Buddha’s Death]. Bangkok: Phra Athit.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 28 ---
28 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
———. 2545c. hetkoet pho so 1 (B.E. 0001). Lem 2: wikhro korani pathom sang khayana lae
phikkhunisong [It Happened in the Buddhist Year 1. Vol. 2: Analysis of the First
saṅgīti and the bhikkhunī- saṅgha]. Bangkok: Phra Athit Mettānando.
Mettānando, Phra. 2548. ‘senthang an dot diau khong phra nakkhit thai (The Lonely
Path of a [Thai] Thinker Monk)’. Thaikhadisueksa 2(20): 211–237.
———. 2003. ‘Faiths Together for Human Dignity: Developing a Perspective’. WFB
Review: Journal of the World Fellowship of Buddhists 40(3): 6–14.
Nithi Iausiwong. 2527. pakkai lae bairuea [Pen and Sail]. Bangkok: Amarin.
Norman, K.R. 2006. A Philological Approach to Buddhism. 2nd edition. Lancaster: Pali Text
Society.
Olson, Grant. 1989. A Person-Centered Ethnography of Thai Buddhism: the Life of Phra
Rajavaramuni (Prayudh Payutto). Unpublished PhD thesis, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY.
———. 1990. ‘From Buddhadasa Bhikkhu to Phra Debvedi: Two Monks of Wisdom’. In
Radical Conservatism: Buddhism in the Contemporary World, 251-267. Bangkok: Thai
Inter-Religious Commission for Development and the International Network of
Engaged Buddhists.
———. 1995. Introduction. In Phra Prayudh Payutto, Buddhadhamma: Natural Laws and
Values for Life, translated by Grant A. Olson, 1–33. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Pagorn Singsuriya, 2549. ‘wiphak thritsadi kantikhwam phratraipidok khong
Mettanantho phikkhu nai nangsue “hetkoet pho so nueng”’. Conference paper
presented at the ‘Academic Seminar on Buddhism and Buddhist Philosophy’,
9-10 August 2549 [with permission from the author].
Parnwell, Michael and Martin Seeger. 2008. ‘Relocalization of Buddhism in Thailand’.
Journal of Buddhist Ethics 15: 78–176.
Payutto, Phra [Phra Ratchaworamuni]. 2529. kansueksa khong khana song panha thi ro
thang ok [The Education of the saṅgha: The Problem that waits to be solved].
Bangkok: Komonkhimthong Foundation.
———. 2531. korani santi asok [The Santi Asok Case]. 4th printing. Bangkok:
Buddhadhamma.
———. 2533. phuea khwamkhaucai panha phothirak [For the Understanding of the
‘Phothirak Problem’]. 3rd (extended) edition. Bangkok: Buddhadhamma
Foundation.
———. 2538. phutthatham [Buddhadhamma]. Bangkok: Mahachulalongkorn University.
———. 2539. nipphan anatta [Nibbāna anattā]. 3rd printing. Bangkok: Buddhadhamma
Foundation.
———. 2542a. korani thammakai botrian phuea sueksa phra phutthasatsana lae sangsan sang-
khom thai [The Thammakai Case: A Lesson to Study Buddhism and Build a Thai
Society]. 15th edition. Bangkok: Thunwutthitham.
———. 2542b. ‘thammakhatha khong phra thammapidok’ [A Dhamma-Talk by Phra
Dhammapiṭaka,]. In chae konlawithi thamlai phra phutthasatsana khong klum doktoe
ben barakun [Disclosure of the Deceitful Methods of the Group Dr. Ben Barakun
to Destroy Buddhism]. edited by Ongkonkhrueakhaichauphut phuea upatham
lae khumkhrong phraphutthasatsana, 23–35. Bangkok: Sahathammik.
Payutto, Phra [Phra Dhammapiṭaka]. 2543a. korani ngueanngam: phra phutthacau parinip-
phan duai rok arai [The Case with a Catch: Due to which Illness did the Buddha
Die?]. Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 29 ---
Martin Seeger 29
———. 2543b. rucak phra traipidok phuea pen chau phut thi thae [Knowing the Pali Canon
in Order to be a Real Buddhist]. Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation.
———. 2544a. ‘khwamsamkhan khong phra phutthasatsana nai thana satsana pracam-
chat’ [The Importance of Buddhism as National Religion]. In Saratthatham.
At the Occasion of the Bestowal of an Honrary Doctrate in Buddhist Studies to Phra
Dhammapiṭaka (Phra Payutto), 43–104. Bangkok: Sahathammik.
———. 2544b. patibat tham hai thuk thang [The Correct Practice of the Dhamma]. 60th
edition. Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation.
———. 2545a. tang krasuang phra phutthasatsana hetphon thi thae yu nai khonthai mai
caikhaep tae rawang wai ya hai panya khaep [The Establishment of Ministry
of Buddhism: Where are the Real Reasons? Thais are not Narrow-minded,
but be Careful: Do not Become Narrow in Terms of Wisdom!]. Bangkok:
Buddhadhamma Foundation.
———. 2545b. phai haeng phra phutthasatsana nai prathet thai [The Dangers for Buddhism
in Thailand]. Bangkok: Buddhadhamma Foundation.
———. 2547. ‘khwamhen to warasan phutthasatsueksa’ [Opinion about the Journal of
Buddhist Studies]. Chulalongkorn University Journal of Buddhist Studies 11(1): 63–88.
[Phra Phromkhunaphon], 2549. ‘rau sanong ngan khong than phutthathat ko thau-
kap rau sanong ngan khong phra phutthacau’ [To reciprocate the work of
Buddhadāsa is if we would reciprocate the work of Buddha, too]. In roi khon roi
tham nueng roi pi phutthathat [100 People 100 Dhammas, 100 years Buddhadāsa],
edited by Niphon Caemduang, 11–16. Bangkok: Sukkhaphapcai.
Phaisan, Wisalo, Phra. 2542. phra thammapidok kap anakhot khong phutthasatsana [Phra
Dhammapiṭaka and the Future of Buddhism]. Bangkok: Wutthitham.
———. 2546. putthasatsana thai nai anakhot naeunom lae thang ok cak wikrit [Thai
Buddhism in the Future: Tendencies and Ways out of the Crisis]. Bangkok: Sitsi-
Saritwong Foundation.
Phiphat Phasutharachat. 2549. rat kap satsana botkhwam waduai anacak satsanacak lae
seriphap [State and Religion: A Text on Secular Power, Religious Power and
Liberty]. 2nd edition. Bangkok: Sayam.
Phutthathammaprathip, n.d. lak kanphitcarana phra nipphanathat tam naeu phra phutthad-
amrat lae atthakatha [Principles of Investigating the Nibbānadhātu According to
the Teachings of the Buddha and the Commentary Texts]. (No publisher speci-
fied).
Prapod Asavavirulhakarn and Peter Skilling. 2002. ‘Tripiṭaka in Practice in the Fourth
and Fifth Reigns: Relics and Images According to Somdet Phra Saṅghrāja
Pussadeva’s Paṭhamsambodhi Sermon’. Manusya: Journal of Humanities 4: 1–6.
Pruitt, William, ed. 2001. The Pātimokkha. Translated by K.R.Norman. Oxford: Pali Text
Society.
Rabeab Ṭhitañāno [Phra Sophon Ganabhorn]. 1984. A Plot to Undermine Buddhism.
Bangkok: Siva Phorn.
Rahula, Walpola. 1966. History of Buddhism in Ceylon. Colombo: M.D. Gunasena.
Rawi Phawilai. 2539. Interview. In nanathatsana kiaukap phra thammapidok [Various
Views on Phra Dhammapiṭaka]. Interviewed and compiled by Sunthorn
Phalamin and Chutima Thanapura, 91–113. 2nd edition. Bangkok:
Buddhadhamma Foundation.
Ray, Reginald A. 1994. Buddhist Saints in India: a Study in Buddhist Values and Orientations.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009

--- Page 30 ---
30 Phra Payutto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism
Reynolds, Craig James. 1973. The Buddhist Monkhood in Nineteenth Century Thailand.
Unpublished PhD thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
Reynolds, Frank E. and Mani B. Reynolds. 1982. Three Worlds According to King Ruang: a
Thai Buddhist Cosmology. Berkeley, CA: Asian Humanities Press.
Salomon, Richard, 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra: The British Library Karoṣṭhi
Fragments. London: The British Library.
Sanitsuda Ekachai. 2000. ‘Scholar Monk under Fire’, Bangkok Post, 17 January, 2000.
Sawaeng Udomsi. 2543. wikhro nikhahakam thammakai [Analysis of the niggahakamma of
Dhammakāya]. Bangkok: Prayunwong.
Scott, Rachelle M. 2006. ‘A new Buddhist sect?: The Dhammakaya temple and the
politics of religious difference’. Religion 36(2006): 215–230. doi:10.1016/j.reli-
gion.2006.10.001
Seeger, Martin. 2005a. Phra Dhammapiṭaka und die Pāli-Kanon-Debatte in Thailand:
Ein Beitrag zur Untersuchung des modernen Buddhismus. Staats- und
Universitätsbibliothek Hamburg – Carl von Ossietzky, Hamburg. http://www.
sub.uni-hamburg.de/opus/volltexte/2005/2342/.
———. 2005b. ‘How Long is a Lifetime: Buddhadāsa’s and Phra Payutto’s
Interpretations of paṭiccasamuppāda in Comparison’. Buddhist Studies Review
22(2): 107–130.
———. 2006 [2008]. ‘The Bhikkhunī-Ordination Controversy in Thailand’. Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies 29: 155–183.
———. 2007. ‘Thai Buddhist Studies and the Authority of the Pali Canon’. Contemporary
Buddhism 8(1): 1–18. doi:10.1080/14639940701295039
———. 2009. ‘Theravāda and Human Rights: Perspectives from Thai Buddhism’ (forth-
coming).
Somchai, Phra, Ṭhānavuḍḍho. 2542. nipphan pen atta rue anatta [Is Nibbāna Attā or
Anattā?]. Bangkok: Pradiphat.
Somphan Phromtha, 2550. ‘phra thraipidok kap sangkhom thai patcuban’ [The Pali
Canon and Present Thai Society]. Sarnsaeng-Arun Magazine 11(2): 14–26.
Sompho Chanawangsa. 2537. ‘nipphan: anatta rue attawimutti priapthiap thatsanawican
khong phra thammapidok kap khochicaeng khong phra mahasoemchai chayaman-
gkhalo’ [Nibbāna: anattā or attavimutti? Comparison of Phra Dhammapiṭaka’s
Critical Views with the Explanations of Phra Mahasoemchai Chayamaṅgalo].
Thammakai Magazine 9(2): 103–115.
Stewart, Robb. 1999. ‘Defending the Faith(s): Buddhism and Religious Freedom in
Thailand’. Paper presented at the Seventh International Conference on Thai
Studies, Amsterdam, July 4–8.
Streckfuss, David and Mark Templeton. 2002. ‘Human Rights and Political Reform
in Thailand’. In Reforming Thai Politics, edited by Duncan McCargo, 73–90.
Copenhagen: NIAS.
Suchip Punyanuphap. 2539. phra traipidok chabap samrap prachachon [The Pali Canon:
Edition for the People]. 16th edition. Bangkok: Mahamakut.
Sunai Setbunsang. 2537, ‘kemphasa kap kanchai phasa satsana khong chau Asok’
[Language Game and the Use of Language of the Asok Followers]. Chulalongkorn
University Journal of Buddhist Studies 1(3): 53–81.
Suphaphan na Bangchang, Maechi. 2550. ‘phra traipidok sing thi rau yang mai ru…’ [The Pali
Canon: the Things we do not Know yet…]. Sarnsaeng-Arun Magazine 11(2): 98–118.
Suwanna Satha-anand. 2536. pratya phutthathat kap mahayan tham [The Philosophy
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2009