--- Page 1 ---


--- Page 2 ---
␣
␣
3
 
Frontispiece:  the calligraphy in seal  
script by Shi Weimiao, translated into 
Chinese by Shi Liaocan, reads: 
 
 
Whose āsavas are destroyed, and who 
 is not dependent  upon food, whose realm 
 is empty and unconditioned release, 
 his track is hard to follow, 
 like that of birds in the sky. 
 
 
Dhammapada VII, v.93 (tr. K.R. Norman) 
© 1997 Pali Text Society 


--- Page 3 ---
␣
␣
4
 
EDITORIAL 
 
This year marks the birth centenary of Étienne Lamotte (1903-
83), undoubtedly one of the greatest Western scholars of 
Buddhism and possibly the last polymath in the field of Sino-
Indian philology. 
 
      For many years he was Professor at the Institut Orientaliste of 
the Catholic University of Louvain (Leuven), Belgium, where he 
at first taught Greek Language and Literature, soon adding 
Sanskrit, Pāli, Indology, the History and Philosophjy of India and 
what came under the umbrella term of ‘Buddhist Languages’, as 
well as occupying various other academic positions. However, 
what made his career unique was his decision systematically to 
translate, often for the first time in a European language, the 
major texts of Mahāyāna Buddhism from their originals in 
Sanskrit, Chinese and Tibetan. In turn, his authorised translator, 
Sara Boin-Webb, has rendered the French versions into English, 
notably his magnum opus, Le Traité de la grande vertu de sagesse de 
Nāgārjuna (Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra/upadeśa), in five volumes, 
which regrettably continues to languish in the office of Peeters 
Press (Leuven) in the hope that it will be published. 
 
      Lamotte’s accurate, almost pedantic yet highly readable 
trans-lations, enhanced by the wealth of introductory essays and 
illuminating footnotes, have ensured him a permanent place in 
the history of Buddhist textual studies. To paraphrase a popular 
remark in another context, everything you ever wanted to know 
about mainstream Indian Mahāyāna thought and practice can be 
found, in unequalled measure, in his writings. 
 
      To commemorate this anniversary, we are featuring Sara 
Boin-Webb’s translation of his ‘Vajrapāṇi en Inde’ (in two parts), 
to our knowledge the only substantial study of this subject. By so 
doing, we wish both to keep alive the memory of Lamotte’s 
inspiring and life and career and to encourage a greater 
acquaintance and appreciation of his unique literary work. 


--- Page 4 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
1
VAJRAPĀṆI IN INDIA* 
 
ÉTIENNE LAMOTTE 
       
I 
 
I.  THE YAKṢAS VAJRAPĀṆI AND INDRA 
This proteiform spirit who, beginning from a humble origin, rose 
to the summit of the Buddhist pantheon, is referred to in the 
texts by the titles of Yakṣa Vajrapāṇi, Guhyakādhipati, Malla, ‘the 
spirit Thunderbolt-wielder, great leader of the Guhyakas, the 
Malla’. Here a few words of explanation are called for: 
      Yakṣa is an elastic term: sometimes it serves to designate all 
the non-human beings (amanuṣya) which make up the both des-
pised and dreaded class of the demi-gods. At other times, it is 
used to describe the great gods, such as Śakra,1 Māra2 and even 
the Buddha himself.3  An infinite number of yakṣas (‘beings 
worthy of worship’) exists, terrestrial  (bhauma, dwelling on the 
surface of the earth or underground) – aerial (ākāśastha), etc. In 
Buddhist cosmology, certain categories of them are also 
inhabitants of Mount Meru. 
      On Mount Meru there are four terraces (pariṣaṇḍa) of 16,000, 
8,000, 4,000 and 2,000 yojanas, each separated from the other by 
10,000 yojanas. The first three are inhabited by the karoṭapāṇi   
‘bowl-holding’ yakṣas, the mālādhara ‘garland-bearing’ yakṣas 
and the sadāmada ‘ever-drunken’ yakṣas. The fourth terrace is 
the preserve of the Four Great Kings (caturmahārāja) who, with 
their entourage, form the first class of the gods of the realm of 
desire (kāmadhātu).4 The Four Great Kings, also called World 
Guar-dians (lokapāla) are charged with the surveillance of the 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
*   Translated by Sara Boin-Webb from the French original ‘Vajrapāṇi en Inde’, 
in Mélanges de Sinologie offerts à Monsieur Paul Demiéville I, (Bibliothèque de 
l’Institut des Hautes Études Chinoises XX), Paris 1966, pp.113-59, and 
published with gratefully acknowledged permission. 
1   Majjhima I, p.252.10. 
2   Mahāvastu II, p.261.11. 
3   Majjhima I, p.386.31. 
4   Kośa III, pp.159-60. 


--- Page 5 ---


--- Page 6 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
3
‘of mysterious traces’. Further on we will see that, during his 
threatening interventions, Vajrapāṇi shows himself only to the 
Buddha and his direct adversary and remains invisible to the 
mass of watchers. On the other hand, he will end as the guardian 
of the ‘mysteries’ of the Buddha and bodhisattvas. 
      Finally, and as far as I know, his title of Malla is never 
encountered in the Indian originals but only in the 
corresponding Chinese versions which invariably render it by Li-
shih              . Li-shih is a common noun which means ‘athlete’; it is 
also a proper name used to designate an ancient population of 
northern Bihar: the Mallas of Pāva and Kuśinagara who had the 
honour of being present at the Parinirvāṇa of the Buddha and of 
performing his funeral. According to certain sources, Vajrapāṇi 
played an import-ant part in these ceremonies. 
     What should be r/emembered from the above remarks is the 
close relationship linking Vajrapāṇi to Indra, the great Aryan 
god, whose story is that of continual decadence.10 
      In Vedism, Indra is the most famous of all the deities: gigantic 
warrior, drinker and profligate, he wields the vajra fashioned for 
him by Tvaṣṭṛ. With this invincible weapon, he kills the dragon 
Vṛta, massacres demons, hacks the dasyus to pieces, releases the 
waters and vanquishes the light: he is the glory of the warrior 
caste of which he is the official protector. 
      Already in Brahminism, Indra slots into a hierarchy and is 
aligned over the Lokapālas. If he retains his vajra and 
prerogatives as a warrior, he is above all a god of the rains and 
his main weapon is magic. Furthermore, he is exposed to threats 
which impose upon him the ascetism of the Brahmins, and the 
slaying of Vṛta, which entitled him to great glory, is now taxed 
with brahminicide. In order to expiate this misdeed, he has to 
leave the heaven by hiding in a fibre of lotus and only regains his 
rule over the world on the intervention of Bṛhaspati and Agni 
who have discovered his hiding place. 
      Under the name of Śakra ‘the powerful’ (a Vedic epithet), 
Indra has acquired acceptance in Buddhism and, in the legend of 
the Buddha, there are few episodes in which he does not play his 
part. Śākyamuni’s birth and first bath, the return of Māyā and 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
10   Cf. L. Renou, in Inde classique I, Paris 1947, pp.319-21 and 492-3. 


--- Page 7 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
4
the new-born boy to Kapilavastu, the great departure and 
cutting of the Bodhisattva’s hair, the bathe in the Nairañjanā, 
Māra’s assault, the invitation to teach, visit to Bimbisāra, great 
wonder at Śrāvastī, descent of the gods at Sāṃkāśya: on each 
occasion Śakra inter-venes and, if his good offices are not always 
accepted, his zeal is no less fervent, and the stanza which he 
utters immediately after Śākyamuni’s Parinirvāṇa summarises 
the Four Noble Truths in a few words. His appearances are not 
the result of later augmen-tations of the legend: the presence of 
a Sakkasaṃyutta in the Nikāyas and Āgamas in itself demonstrates 
his ‘canonicity’. 
      However, the Buddhist Śakra, a bashful devotee, no longer 
bears any relation to the Indra Vṛtahan of the Vedic hymns. He is 
neither strong nor particularly intelligent and his imperfections 
are many. He has not eliminated the threefold poison of craving, 
hatred and delusion,11 remains subject to death and rebirth12 and 
is caught up in the whirl of the round of rebirths.13  He is timid, 
subject to panic and often flees. Nevertheless, he retains his 
characteristic attribute, the thunderbolt; on occasion he wields 
that vajra or mass of flaming iron (ādīpta ayaḥkūṭa) for the pro-
tection of the future Buddha or his followers.14 
      A mere substitute for Śakra at the beginning of his history, 
Vajrapāṇi ended by becoming completely detached from him; 
then, in a separate form, he remounted all the steps his 
prototype had descended. 
 
II.  VAJRAPĀṆI, MERE  MANIFESTATION OF ŚAKRA 
Given the late compilation of the texts, it is extremely difficult to 
return to the very outset of the Buddhist tradition. The only way 
in which we can approach this is to base ourselves on the 
common sections of the Pāli Tipiṭaka on the one hand and the 
Sanskrit Tripiṭaka on the other, the latter existing on the whole 
only in Chinese translations. 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
11   Aṅguttara I, p.144.6-7. 
12   Ibid., 24-26. 
13   Aṅguttara IV, p.105.4-5. 
14   Jātaka III, p.146.6; V, p.92.3; VI, p.155.11. 


--- Page 8 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
5
      If Śakra frequently appears in the canonical writings (Sūtra, 
Vinaya and Abhidharma), Vajrapāṇi, who is still only his sub-
stitute, makes only a very few appearances in them. His inter-
ventions are only episodic in nature and always pursue the same 
aim: to force the recalcitrant to answer the Buddha’s questions. 
1.  Two sūtras only, attested in the Pāli Nikāyas and Sanskrit 
Āgamas, mention Vajrapāṇi: 
      In the Ambaṭṭhasutta,15 the Buddha asks the young Ambaṭṭha a 
question but the latter remains silent: 
At the same moment the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi, with his great mass of 
iron, burning, flaming and all light, stood in the air above the 
young Ambaṭṭha.  If the young Ambaṭṭha, he said, questioned 
up to three times by the Beneficent One on a matter 
concerning the Dharma, does not answer, I will instantly 
cause his head to shatter into seven fragments. Only the 
Beneficent One and the young Ambaṭṭha saw the spirit 
Vajrapāṇi. 
      An identical scene, reproduced in the same terms, is in the 
Cūḷasaccakasutta,16 when Satyaka Nirgranthaputra in turn refused 
to answer the Buddha.       
2.  The Pāli Vinaya does not breathe a word of Vajrapāṇi, and the 
other Vinayas, with the exception of that of the Mūlasarvāsti-
vādins, are almost equally reticent. 
      In order to ensure descendents in his family, the monk 
Sudinna had fathered a child on his former wife. His fellow 
monks denoun-ced him to the Buddha and the latter questioned 
the accused. This fact is narrated in all the Vinayas,17 but that of 
the Mahīśāsakas18 is the only one to mention Vajrapāṇi: 
The Buddha, for that reason, assembled the community of monks. 
It is a constant rule of the Buddhas to question or not in full 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
15   Dīgha I, p.95.8-18; Dīrgha, T 1, ch.13, p.83a16-21; Fo k’ai chieh fan chih a p’o 
ching, T 20, p.260b19.  
16   Majjhima I, p.231.30-37; Saṃyukta, T 99, ch.5, p.36a15-20; Ekottara, T 125, 
ch.30, p.716a7-12. 
17 Pāli Vin. III, p.231; Dharmaguptaka Vin., T 1428, ch.1, p.570b11-16 ; Sar-
vāstivādin Vin., T 1435, ch.1, p.1c2-7. 
18   T 1421, ch.1, p.3b8-13. 


--- Page 9 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
6
knowledge of the case. [The traditional formula follows: jānantāpi 
tathāgata pucchanti, etc.] It is also a constant rule of the Buddhas to 
have five hundred Vajrapāṇi yakṣas to protect them to left and 
right. When the Buddha has questioned three times and someone 
does not answer, the recalcitrant’s head shatters into seven pieces. 
      We also read in the Sarvāstivādin Vinaya:19 
The Buddha was dwelling in Śrāvastī. Then the monks in the Jeta-
vana were defecating everywhere. The yakṣa Guhyaka Vajrapāṇi 
and the other Amanuṣyas became angry and criticised: Is it here 
that you should do your fouling? The Buddha said to the monks: 
You should not defecate everywhere; so do it in one place. 
      Finally, a Vibhāṣā on the same Vinaya20 explains the pradak-
ṣiṇā in the following way: 
‘To circumambulate a person while keeping him to the right’. Ac-
cording to the Buddha’s Dharma, this circumambulation is done to 
the right. If someone were to turn to the left, the Guhyaka 
Vajrapāṇi strikes him with his vajrakūṭa. 
3.  The early school of sculpture which flourished in Central India 
during the last centuries before the Common Era abounds in 
representations of gods and demi-gods. Śakra, his hair dressed 
with a tiara, with or without thunderbolt, frequently appears in 
scenes of the Buddha’s life (invitation to teach, visit to Indra-
śailaguhā, descent of the gods at Saṃkaśya, etc.) or in Jātaka 
stories (Viśvantara, Śyāmajātaka, etc.). The ancient sculptors 
represented quite a number of yakṣas which the inscriptions 
some-times enable us to identify and whose names are partly 
known through literary sources. However, at Bhārhut, Bodh-
Gayā or Sāñcī, among the monuments known up to now, there is 
no rep-resentation of Vajrapāṇi going back to an early date. At 
Sāñcī, it is only during the Gupta period that the Mahāyānist 
bodhisattvas, such as Avalokiteśvara and Vajrapāṇi, make their 
appearance.21 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
19   T 1435, ch.38, p.276a14-17. 
20   T 1440, ch.5, p.534a10-11. 
21   Cf. Sir John Marshall and A. Foucher, The Monuments of Sāñcī  I, Calcutta 
1939, p.253. 


--- Page 10 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
7
      It seems to result from the relative silence of the texts as well 
as the total absence of carved representations that, at the outset 
of the Buddhist tradition, the thunderbolt-wielding yakṣa did not 
yet constitute a proper entity but merely a manifestation of 
Śakra in his minor role as a threatening deity. 
      Buddhaghosa (fifth century), the great exegetist of the Pāli 
Canon, was in no doubt about this. Commenting upon the 
Ambaṭṭha- and Cūḷasaccakasuttas mentioned above, he explains:22 
A thunderbolt-wielder is he who has a thunderbolt in his hand. 
When yakkha is said, this does not mean such-and-such (a parti-
cular) yakkha, but merely Sakka, the king of the gods. 
      It is quite natural that, in order to frighten Ambaṭṭha or 
Satyaka Nirgranthaputra, Śakra should borrow the form of one of 
these thunderbolt-wielding yakṣas promoted to the guardianship 
of the Trāyastriṃśa gods and residing with them on the summit 
of Mount Meru. 
      According to the Avadānaśataka,23 Śakra is in the habit of 
doing this: 
Śakra, the king of the gods, has the knowledge and sight of all that 
occurs beneath him. He saw the king [Dharmagaveṣin] consumed 
by a desire to hear the Good Word, and wondered to himself: 
Maybe I should test the king. Then Śakra, the king of the gods, 
assumed the form of Guhyaka and, transforming his hands, feet 
and eyes, he confronted this king and uttered the following 
stanza… 
      Śakra does not have a monopoly of these transformations. 
Every deity, and even more so, the Buddha and bodhisattvas, can 
at will assume lesser forms. Sometimes it is even a necessity, as 
we know from the misadventure of the devaputra Hastaka who, 
because he wanted to manifest himself on earth without taking 
on a coarse form (auḍārika ātmabhāva) in advance, collapsed and 
fell without being able to stand: it was like melted butter or oil 
spread on the sand.24 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
22   Sumaṅgalavilāsinī  I, p.264.12-13; Papañcasūdanī  II, p.277.34-35. 
23   Ed. J S Speyer, I, p.220,5-7. – See also ibid., I, p.189,3-7. 
24  Cf. Aṅguttara I, pp.278-9; Saṃyukta, T 99, ch.22, p.159a; Mahāprajñā-
pāramitopadeśa, T 1509, ch.10, p.128a (tr. in  Lamotte, Traité I, pp.562-5). 


--- Page 11 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
8
      The Mahāvastu claims that the Buddha, having reached the 
town of Kusumā with his disciples, took on the aspect of 
Vajrapāṇi through pity for beings.25  In the Mahāyāna sūtras the 
great bodhi-sattvas assume the most varied of forms in order to 
win over beings: They become moons, suns, Śakra, Brahmā or 
Prajeśvara, they become water, fire, earth or the winds.26  
Quantities of Māras who go and tempt beings in innumerable 
universes are in reality bodhisattvas who behave like Māra 
through skilful means.27 
      In the various worlds, the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara teaches 
the Dharma to creatures in the most diverse of forms. The 
Saddharmapuṇḍarīka lists a good fifteen of them and concludes by 
saying: To creatures who are susceptible to being won over by 
Vajrapāṇi, he teaches the Dharma in the form of Vajrapāṇi.28   
      It happens that some of the Vajrapāṇis introduced into the 
Mahāyāna sūtras are mere magical creations, transformations 
(nirmāṇa) which do not correspond to any reality. A passage in 
the Mahāyānist Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra,29 translated into Chinese at 
the beginning of the fifth century, is significant in this respect: 
The bodhisattva Kāśyapa said to the Buddha: Bhagavat, that the 
bodhisattvas consider all beings equally as their only son is such a 
profound mystery that I cannot grasp it. Bhagavat, the Tathāgata 
should not say that the bodhisattvas consider equally and 
impartially all beings as their only son. Why? In the Teaching of 
the Buddha, there are immoral (duḥśīla) beings, guilty of faults 
(sāvadyakārin) 
and 
destroyers 
of 
the 
Good 
Dharma 
(saddharmadūṣaka). How could such men be considered as one’s 
only son? 
      The Buddha said to Kāśyapa: It is, however, true: I consider 
beings as my only son Rāhula. 
      The bodhisattva Kāśyapa further said to the Buddha: Bhagavat, 
one day the poṣada pañcadaśika was taking place and the assembly 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
25   Ed. É. Senart, I, p.183,8-9. 
                              
26   Cf. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa, tr. Lamotte, English version, pp.183-4, v.23. 
27   Ibid., p.150. 
28   Saddharmapuṇḍarīka, ed. Kern-Nanjio, p.445, 6. 
29   T 374, ch.3, p.380c3-17; T 375, ch.3, p.620b12-27; Tib. Trip., Vol.30, p.151, f. 
43a4-b2. 


--- Page 12 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
9
was purifying itself. A young man (dāraka) whose bodily, vocal and 
mental actions were bad, hid himself and fraudulently listened to 
the prātimokṣa being recited. Guhyaka, the Malla, under the super-
normal impulse (adhiṣṭhāna) of the Buddha, took his vajrakūṭa and 
reduced his head to dust. O Bhagavat, that yakṣa Vajrapāṇi was 
truly cruel thus to deprive that young man of his life. How, there-
fore, can the Tathāgata truly consider all beings as his only son 
Rāhula? 
      The Buddha said to Kāśyapa: Do not say that! That young man 
was only a magical creation (nirmāṇa) merely serving to expel im-
moral beings and destroyers of the Good Dharma and make them 
leave the community. Vajrapāṇi, the Guhyaka, was also a magical 
creation. 
      To sum up, in the early canonical texts Vajrapāṇi is merely a 
substitute for Śakra, and again in some Mahāyānist texts he may 
sometimes, but not always, reveal himself in a metamorphised 
form of Śakra or the Buddha or of some bodhisattva. 
      It is therefore mistakenly that some authors have wanted to 
see the identification of Vajrapāṇi with Indra as the last stage in 
the evolution of the personage of Vajrapāṇi,30 or the beginnings 
of a new religion with Śakra as its patron.31 
III. VAJRAPĀṆI,  AUTONOMOUS SPIRIT,  AND HIS INTERVENTIONS 
The Canon of texts, scholarly and didactic in nature, was 
followed by the post-canonical literature which was more 
populist-inspired. 
Reproducing 
and 
complementing 
the 
biographical fragments in the early writings, it supplied new 
versions of the life of the Buddha (Mahāvastu, Lalitavistara, 
Buddhacarita, etc.) and col-lections of stories and fables 
(Avadānaśataka, Divyāvadāna, etc). Part of this output was 
incorporated into the Sanskrit Āgamas: we find an Aśokāvadāna 
in the Saṃyukta, numbers of stories and fables in the Ekottara 
and a complete life of the Buddha in the Mūlasarvāstivādin 
Vinaya, the compilation of which was not com-pleted until the 
second century CE. 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
30   Sten Konow, ‘Note on Vajrapāṇi-Indra’, in Acta Orientalia VIII, 4, 1930, 
pp.311-17. 
31   C.E. Codage, ‘The Place of Indra in Early Buddhism’, in Ceylon University 
Review III, 1, 1945, p.52. 


--- Page 13 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
10
      Vajrapāṇi made a place for himself in this new literary bed. 
He appears there, no longer as a secondary form of Śakra, but as 
an autonomous spirit, endowed with his own personality and 
often juxtaposed to Śakra from whom he is completely detached. 
He is no longer a mere bogy destined to frighten the Buddha’s 
adver-saries: he takes an active part in events. 
      I shall indicate here some of his interventions in the life of 
the Buddha. 
 
The Buddha’s conception. – When the Buddha entered his mother’s 
womb, Vajrapāṇi was attached to his person with other deities, 
including Śakra. This is affirmed by the Lalitavistara:32 
While the Bodhisattva was seated in this way, Śakra, the lord of the 
gods, the four Great Kings, the twenty-eight leaders of the army of 
yakṣas, the one named Guhyakādhipati from whom the race of 
Vajrapāṇi yakṣas sprang, having learned that the Bodhisattva had 
entered his mother’s womb, were always and ceaselessly attached 
to his person. 
The great departure. – When Śākyamuni left Kapilavastu to take up 
the homeless life, the deities, including Śakra and Vajrapāṇi, 
were present at that great departure. Here again, details are 
supplied by the Lalitavistara:33 
The gods of the earth and the air, as well as the World Guardians, 
Śakra the lord of the gods with his retinue, the Yāma and Tuṣita 
gods and the Nirmita and Paranirmita gods hastened … 
      And the magnanimous leader of the Guhyakas, also wielding a 
flaming thunderbolt, stood in the air, a breastplate girding his 
body, endowed with power, vigour and courage, holding in his 
hand a sparkling thunderbolt. 
The victory over the heretics and the great wonder at Śrāvastī. – Unlike 
the two preceding episodes, this one is not mentioned in the 
canonical sources. A narrative in Pāli is incorporated into the 
Commentaries on the Dīgha and Dhammapada;34 the much more 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
32   Lalitavistara, p.66, 4.7.   
33   Ibid., p.219.        
34   Sumaṅgalavilāsinī I, p.57; Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā III, pp.204-16 (tr. E.W. 
Burlingame, Buddhist Legends III, pp.38-47). See also Jātaka IV, pp.263-5. 


--- Page 14 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
11
developed Sanskrit version is found in the Divyāvadāna.35 It is 
especially upon the latter that A. Foucher based his remarkable 
study on the ‘Great Miracle of Śrāvastī’.36 
      In the sources just cited, Vajrapāṇi is not mentioned, but he 
appears in what are probably some of the earliest texts: 
1. The Dharmapadāvadāna is a collection of stories aimed at 
illustrating the verses of the Dharmapada. It was translated into 
Chinese at Lo-yang between 290 and 306 by Fa-chü and Fa-li of 
the eastern Chin, but it was only the second translation.37 
      Here is an excerpt in which the rôle played by the yakṣas 
Pañcika and Vajrapāṇi is emphasised:38 
Formerly, in the kingdom of Śrāvastī, there was a Brahmin master 
named Pūraṇa Kāśyapa, accompanied by five hundred disciples. 
The king of the country and the population had at first welcomed 
him. When the Buddha attained enlightenment, he went with his 
dis-ciples from Rājagṛha to Śrāvastī: his bodily marks were brilliant 
and his teaching very pleasing. Hence, in the royal palace and 
among the adjoining population, there was no-one who did not 
revere him 
      Then Pūraṇa Kāśyapa became envious and began to criticise the 
Bhagavat, in the hope of being the only one to receive honours. At 
the head of his disciples, he went to King Prasenajit and said to 
him: Among ourselves, the elders first followed the teachings of 
the old masters. But since the śramaṇa Gautama left home in 
search of the Path and, without truly being a holy man, claims to 
be the Buddha, the king has abandoned me in order to pay homage 
most especially to him. Now I would like to measure myself in 
virtue against the Buddha in order to know who is the better. 
Whoever wins, the king may honour until the end of his life. 
      The king declared that to be acceptable and, mounting a fine 
chariot, went to the Buddha. After having greeted him, he said to 
him: Pūraṇa Kāśyapa wishes to measure himself in depth against 
the Bhagavat and manifest wonders of supernormal power (ṛddhi-
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
35   Divyāvadāna, pp.143-66 (tr. E. Burnouf, Introduction du buddhisme indien, 2nd 
ed., pp.144-68). 
36   A. Foucher, The Beginnings of Buddhist Art, Paris-London 1917, pp.147-84. 
37   See Chu, T 2145, ch.2, p.9c21; Li, T 2034, ch.6, p.66b24. 
38   Fa chü pi yü ching, T 211, ch.3, pp.598c1-599a16. 


--- Page 15 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
12
prātihārya). Would that not be expedient? The Buddha replied: 
Very well, in seven days I will engage in a bout of magic. 
      To the east of the town, on a vast levelled terrain, the king built 
two pavilions (maṇḍapa), adorned with the seven jewels. There he 
set up banners and laid mats. The distance between the two 
pavilions measured two li. The disciples of both parties settled at 
their feet. The king, the ministers and a great crowd assembled in a 
mass in order to witness the bout of magic between the two men. 
Kāśyapa and his disciples, having reached the foot of the pavilion, 
climbed up it by means of a ladder. 
      The king of the yakṣas named Pan-shih             (Pañcika), seeing 
Kāśyapa’s falsity and envy, raised a great wind and blew on his 
pavi-lion: the seating was overturned and the banners flew away. 
Sand, gravel and stones rained down to such a degree that the eye 
could no longer see. 
      As for the Bhagavat’s pavilion, it remained calm and still. The 
Buddha and the great community approached in good order and, 
once close, found themselves suddenly at its summit. All the 
monks sat down calmly and in order. The king and the ministers, 
re-doubling their respect, bowed down their heads before the 
Buddha and said to him: We would like you to display wonders of 
super-normal power (ṛddipratihārya) and humiliate the heretics; 
thus the population of the kingdom would have fervent and 
sincere faith. 
      Thereupon the Buddha vanished from his pavilion with the 
speed of lightning and, rising into the air, emitted great rays. He 
disappeared from the East only to reappear in the West, and it was 
the same in the four directions. His body emitted water and fire, 
alternately from above and below. Whether sitting or standing in 
the air, he performed the twelve transformations. Then, suddenly, 
he disappeared and resumed his place at the summit of the 
pavilion. The devas, nāgas and yakṣas offered him flowers and 
perfumes, gave great cries and shook the earth. 
      Pūraṇa Kāśyapa, wholly disorientated, lowered his head in 
shame and dared not raise his eyes. Thereupon Vajrapāṇi the Malla 
lifted his vajrakūṭa from the top of which fire issued and 
threatened Kāśyapa: Why, he asked him, do you not display your 
own super-normal wonders?  Kāśyapa, fear-stricken, leaped from 
his pavilion and fled. His five hundred pupils ran away and 
scattered. 
      The Bhagavat remained imperturbable, displaying neither joy 
nor displeasure. He returned to Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove in the 


--- Page 16 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
13
Jetavana. The king and his ministers, full of joy, took their leave of 
him and went away. 
      While Pūraṇa Kāśyapa and his disciples were leaving in shame, 
they encountered on their path an aged upāsaka named Mo-ni            
(Maṇi).39 The latter cursed them, saying: Fools that you are! 
Without judging yourselves, you wanted to measure yourselves in 
virtue against the Buddha. Mad fools and imposters, you are 
unaware of shame. With a face like yours, you should not present 
yourselves before the Buddha. 
      Pūraṇa Kāśyapa and his disciples reached the bank of a river 
and, deceiving his disciples, Kāśyapa said: I am going to throw 
myself into the water and I will certainly be reborn as a 
Brahmadeva. If I do not return, know that I have that happiness. 
His disciples waited for him but he did not return. They said to one 
another: Our master has surely risen to the sky, where should we 
dwell? One after the other, they threw themselves into the water, 
hoping to rejoin their master but, unaware of what their offence 
implied, they fell into hell. 
2.  Compiled in Turfan by Hui-chiao and his colleagues from 
notes assembled in Khotan, the Hsien yü ching was published in 
445 in Liang-chou.40 It contains a detailed account of the ‘Victory 
over the Six Masters’, in which events are narrated day by day. It 
is during the eighth that Vajrapāṇi appears alongside Śakra:41 
On the  eighth day, at the invitation of Śakra devendra, a lion-
throne (siṃhāsana) was made for the Buddha. The Tathāgata 
mounted it; Śakra devendra stood to his left and Brahmarāja stood 
to his right. The whole community, in silence, was seated in 
meditation. Slowly, the Buddha extended his arm and grasped the 
throne with his hand. Suddenly there was a great noise, like the 
trumpeting of an elephant. At that moment five huge yakṣas were 
pushing and pulling the great pavilion (maṇḍapa) of six masters. 
Vajrapāṇi the Malla seized his vajrakūṭa from the top of which fire 
issued and threatened the six masters. The latter, terror-stricken, 
fled on foot and, filled with shame, threw themselves into a river 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
39   In the Divyāvadāna, p.164, 27, the role of Maṇi is played by a eunuch 
(paṇḍaka) whose name is not given. 
40   Cf. Chu, T 2145, ch.9, pp.67c-68a, and S. Lévi, ‘Le Sūtra du sage et du fou’, in 
JA, 1925, p.312. 
41   Hsien yü ching, T 202, ch., p.363a1-9. 


--- Page 17 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
14
where they perished. The disciples of the six masters, nine 
hundred thousand in number, took their refuge in the Buddha and 
asked to become his disciples. 
3.  The twelfth chapter of the Divyāvadāna, entitled Prātihārya-
sūtra, is entirely devoted to the great wonder at Śrāvastī. It has 
been translated by E. Burnouf.42  The close relationship uniting 
the Divya and the Mūlasarvāstivādin Vinaya has long since been 
noted. For E. Huber, S. Lévi and H. Lüders,43 the first would be an 
offshoot of the second; in contrast, J. Przyluski44 thought that the 
compilers of the Vinaya had borrowed from the Divya or from an 
earlier version of that text. In the chapter which occupies us, the 
two sources generally coincide, except towards the end. The 
Vinaya presents a sober and coherent account in which 
Vajrapāṇi plays his traditional rôle. Conversely, the Divya 
complicates and enlivens the narration of events: it clearly seeks 
to amalgamate various sources, thus betraying its later 
compilatory nature. Furthermore, it substitutes Pañcika for 
Vajrapāṇi. Here, facing each other, are the two versions of the 
passage: 
                     Vinaya45 
Then King Prasenajit said to the six 
masters: ‘The Great Bhagavat Master has 
already displayed supernormal wonders. 
Friends, now is the time for you to per-
form them’. Then the tīrthya Pūraṇa 
remained silent and said not a word. 
Then he nudged Maskarī Gośālīputra 
with his elbow. It was the same to the 
end: they successively nudged each 
other as far as the sixth, but not a single 
one dared answer. Three times the king 
Divya46 
Then Prasenajit, the king of Kosala, said 
to the Tīrthyas: ‘Bhagavat has just 
displayed supernormal wonders superior 
to the human condition; it is your turn to 
display them too’. At those words, the 
Tīrthyas re-mained silent, thinking only 
of departing.Twice more Prasenajit, the 
king of Kosala, said the same thing to 
them: Bhagavat has just displayed 
supernormal wonders superior to the 
human condition; it is your turn to 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
42   E. Burnouf, Introduction…, 2nd ed., p.165. 
43   See the references in L. Renou, ‘Sylvain Lévi et son œuvre scientifique’, in 
JA, 1936, p.27, n.1. 
44   J. Przyluski, ‘Fables in the Vinaya-Piṭaka of the Sarvāstivādin School’, in 
IHQ, 1929, p.5. 
 
45   T 1541, ch.26, p.553c16-28. 
46   Divya, pp.163,10-162,5. 


--- Page 18 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
 
15
ordered them to display supernormal 
powers and each time the six masters set 
to nudging each one after the other but, 
as before, they remained silent, drawing 
in their necks and lowering their heads. 
As if they had entered deep meditation, 
they remained unresponsive. 
   Thereupon Vajrapāṇi, the great yakṣa 
general, had this thought: ‘Those six 
fools have long tor-mented Bhagavat. A 
means must be found to make them go 
away; they  have  no  courage,  they  will  
flee and bury themselves’. 
   Having reflected thus, he raised a 
violent storm mixed with rain and hail. 
The magic pavilion (ṛddhimaṇḍapa) of 
the Tīrthiyas crumbled on the spot. The 
Tīrthiyas and their wicked dis-ciples all 
scattered. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Some of them, terror-stricken, entered 
mountain hollows, trees and forests, 
tufts of grass and re-mained hidden. 
Others entered temples of the gods and 
chapels: they held their stomachs, filled 
with sorrow. 
   As for the Buddha’s magic pavilion, it 
was not shaken even once. 
display them too. At those words the 
Tīrthyas, nudging one another, said to 
each other: ‘Get up, it is for you to get 
up’; but none of them got up. 
 
 
   Now at that time Pañcika, the great 
yakṣa general, was in the assembly. This 
thought came to his mind: ‘Here are 
foolish per-sons who will long continue 
to torment  Bhagavat and the  Com- 
munity of monks’. 
   Having thought in this way, he raised a 
violent storm, accom-panied by wind and 
rain. Because of that storm accompanied 
by wind and rain, the Tīrthiyas’ pavilion 
became invisible. The Tīrthiyas, struck 
by the thunder and rain, fled in all 
directions. 
     Several hundreds of thousands of 
living beings struck by that violent rain, 
drew near the Bhagavat; and when they 
had arrived, having greeted his feet by 
touching them with their heads, they sat 
to one side. But the Bhagavat acted so 
that not even a single drop of rain fell on 
that assembly, Then those many hun-
dreds of thousands of living beings who 
were seated to one side gave vent to 
these words of praise: ‘Ah, the Buddha! 
Ah, the Dharma! Ah, the Community! Ah, 
how 
well 
the 
Dharma 
has 
been 
expounded’. 
      Pañcika, the yakṣa general, said to the 
Tīrthyas; ‘You, foolish persons, take your 
refuge in the Buddha, in the Dharma, in 
the Community of monks!’ 
   But they screamed as they fled: ‘We 
take our refuge in the mountain; we seek 
refuge in trees, walls and hermitages’. 
 


--- Page 19 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
16
4. Again in the eleventh century, the Kashmirian poet Kṣemendra 
devoted to these events some verses of his Bodhisattvāvadāna-
kalpalatā (XII, v.57): 
In the meantime, noting that the Sectaries persisted in remaining 
obstinate adversaries of the Bhagavat, the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi, raising 
a violent storm accompanied by rain, scattered them and forced 
them to find refuge in caves, in the ground’.47 
Devadatta’s attacks. – A cousin and rival of Śākyamuni, Devadatta 
hatched several plots against the Buddha: he hired assassins to 
kill him, he dislodged a rock in order to crush him and he set the 
drunken elephant Nālāgiri on him. The second attack deserves 
attention since Vajrapāṇi, as the development of the tradition 
proceeded, ended by having the leading rôle. 
1. The Pāli Vinaya,48 partly reproduced by the Milindapañha,49 
recounts that one day the Buddha was walking at the foot of the 
Gṛdhrakūṭaparvata in Rājagṛha. Devadatta climbed the mountain 
and, from the summit, threw a rock at him with the intention of 
crushing him. Two mountain ridges joined together and inter-
cepted the rock (dve pabbakūṭa samāgantvā taṃ silaṃ sam-
paṭicchiṃsu); a sliver of stone flew off and injured the Buddha on 
the foot. 
2.  In the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya,50 the rock is stopped by an 
anonymous deity who replaces it on the mountain peak. 
3.  The Vinayas of the Mahīśāsakas and Sarvāstivādins, the Ekot-
tarāgama, the Hsing ch’i hsing ching and the Vinayadānasūtra 51  
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
47   In the passage which occupies us here the Sanskrit text is corrupt, and the 
edition by P.L. Vaidya, Darbhanga 1959, I, p.115, marks no progress over the 
old edition by S. Chandra Das, Calcutta 1888, I, p.427. Here I adopt the cor-
rections proposed by S. Lévi (cf. A. Foucher, Beginnings…, p.175 in the notes): 
                      Atrāntare Bhagavataḥ satataṃ vipākṣān 
                      sarvātmanā kṣapaṇakān avadhārya yakṣaḥ, 
                      kṣiptogravātavṛtavarṣavaraiś cakāra 
                      vidrāvya randhaśaraṇān bhuvi Vajrapāṇiḥ. 
48   Vin. II, p.193. 
49   Milinda, p.136. 
50   Ssü fen lü, T 1428, ch.4, p.592c24. 
51   T 1421, ch.3, p.20a28; T 1435, ch.36, p.260a20; T 125, ch.47, p.803b16; T 197, 
ch.2, p.170c1; T 1464, ch.5, p.870a11. 


--- Page 20 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
17
claim that the rock was intercepted by the yakṣa Kumbhīra (or 
Kiṃbila) who had his dwelling-place on the Gṛdhrakūṭaparvata. 
4.  The Mūlasarvāstivādin Vinaya, the last date-wise, introduces 
Vajrapāṇi into the legend while still associating him with the 
yakṣa Kumbhīra. After having described the plot, it continues:52 
The gods saw what was happening below them. At that moment, 
the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi had this thought: That Devadatta, who is very 
wicked, wishes to harm the Tathāgata. Having reflected thus, he 
went to the dwelling of the yakṣa Kumbhīra and said to him: 
Devadatta has built a great catapult on the summit of the Gṛdhra-
kūṭaparvata; he will make great balls fly in order to wound the 
Buddha. The Bhagavat is now resting in your home. When 
Devadatta throws the rock, I will break it in flight with my 
vajrakūṭa. You should help me so that no sliver of rock (prapāṭika) 
harms the Buddha: it is for you to protect him. Kumbhīra signalled 
his agreement. 
      Then the Bhagavat, having risen from his seat, was about to 
enter the cave at the foot of the mountain when Devadatta and his 
five hundred companions aimed a flying rock straight at the 
Tathāgata. The yakṣa VajrapāṇI struck the rock in the air with his 
vajrakūṭa and broke it. A sliver of rock was about to fall on the 
Buddha. The yakṣa Kumbhīra tried to grasp it, but was unable to do 
so: it struck him; from there it rebounded and wounded the 
Buddha on the foot. Then the Bhagavat uttered this stanza 
(Dhammapada v.127; Divya, p.532): 
                          Naivāntarīkṣe na samudramadhye 
                          na parvatānāṃ vivaraṃ praviśya 
                          na vidyate sa pṛthivī pradeśo 
                          yatra sthitaṃ na prasaheta karma. 
      ‘Neither in the sky, nor in the midst of the sea, nor by entering 
mountain hollows, will one find a place where action does not 
follow’. 
      Then the yakṣa Kumbhīra who had received the rock full on his 
body understood that he was going to die and made the aspiration 
to be reborn after his death among the Trāyastriṃśa gods. 
5. A later, strictly Mahāyānist source, the Mahāprajñāpāramito-
padeśa, eliminates the yakṣa Kumbhīra from the story, retaining  
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
52   T 1450, ch.18, p.192c1-19. 


--- Page 21 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
18
only Vajrapāṇi:53 
Devadatta conceived a malign thought (duṣṭacitta): he pushed a 
rock in order to crush the Buddha. However, Vajrapāṇi, the Malla, 
with his vajrakūṭa, hurled the rock far away. Nevertheless, a sliver 
of rock flew off and injured the Buddha on the toes. 
The Buddha’s Parinirvāṇa. – If Vajrapāṇi was thus able to insinu-
ate himself into several episodes of the Buddha’s life, it would 
indeed be surprising if he did not play any part in the crucial 
moment of the Parinirvāṇa. However, here again the oldest 
sources make no mention of him; it is only with time that he 
carved himself a place in the legend. 
1.  The Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra relates that after the decease of 
Śākyamuni the devas and disciples uttered several stanzas. The 
Pāli recension54 places them on the lips of Sakka devānam inda, 
Anuruddha and Ānanda; the Sanskrit version55 on those of a ‘cer-
tain’ bhikṣu, Śakra devendra, Brahmā Sahāṃpati and Aniruddha. 
It is then that Śakra utters his famous stanza condensing the 
Four Noble Truths: 
                              Anitya vata saṃskārā utpādvyayadharmiṇaḥ 
                              utpadya hi nirudhyante teṣāṃ vyupaśamaḥ sukham. 
      ‘Impermanent indeed are all formations; their nature consists of 
aris-ing and disappearing; having arisen, they cease; their calming is 
happi-ness’. 
2. However, in the version of the same sūtra, as it appears in the 
Dīrghāgama,56 the gods and men who chant the stanzas are no less 
than twenty-seven in number: Brahmā Devarāja, Śakra devendra, 
Vaiśravaṇa, Aniruddha, Ānanda, the yakṣa Kumbhīra, Guhyaka 
Malla, Māyā the Buddha’s mother, the deity of the two Śāla trees, 
the deity of the Śāla grove, the four devarājas, the king of the 
Trāyastriṃśa gods, the king of the Yama gods, the king of the 
Tuṣita gods, the king of the Nirmitavaśavartin gods, the king of 
the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods and, finally, several bhikṣus. 
      It will be noted that Guhyaka Malla, otherwise known as  
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
53   T 1509, ch.14, p.165a2-4 (tr. in Traité II, p.874). 
54   Dīgha II, p.157. 
55   Ed. E. Waldschmidt, pp.398-400. 
56   T 1, ch.4, pp.26c-27b. 


--- Page 22 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
19
Vajrapāṇi, speaks after Śakra devendra from whom he is clearly 
differentiated, and that the latter in turn is given as different 
from the king of the Trāyastriṃśa gods, which is contrary to the 
teach-ings of Buddhist cosmology. 
       Vajrapāṇi’s stanza is: ‘Henceforth and thereafter, the 
Brahma-loka, the gods and mankind will no longer see the virile 
man, the lion of the Śakyas’.57 
3. A text entitled ‘Sūtra of the sorrow and love of Guhyaka 
Vajrapāṇi, the Malla, when the Buddha entered Nirvāṇa’ was 
translated into Chinese by an anonymous hand under the 
Western Chin (385-431).58  It is purely Hīnayānist in inspiration. 
The scene occurs in Kuśinagara, in the Śāla grove. Guhyaka 
Vajrapāṇi, the Malla, seeing the Buddha about to pass away, 
sinks to the ground like a mountain collapsing,59 then, having 
recovered himself, breaks into long lamentations. The Master 
comforts him with a discourse on impermanence. 
      The weakness that laid Vajrapāṇi low is represented on 
several Gandhāran bas-reliefs60 and Hsüan-tsang, in his Hsi-yü-
chi, de-votes a special mention to it.61 
4. The Lien hua mien ching (T386) is one of the few Mahāyāna 
sūtras that can be dated with any precision: it is situated 
between the death of Mihirikula (c. 530-540), whose misdeeds it 
predicts, 
and 
the 
Chinese 
translation 
concluded 
by 
Narendrayaśas in April 584.62  It is a Parinirvāṇa sūtra relating 
the last months of Śākyamuni’s life. 
      The Buddha is in Vaiśālī on the banks of the Markaṭahrada. 
Accompanied by Ānanda, he makes his way to Pāpā, bathes on 
the way in the river Acīravatī and causes a disciple to admire his 
marvellous body. He predicts to him his entry into Nirvāṇa, 
which will take place three months later, and advises him of the 
fate reserved for his relics. Leaving Pāpā, the Master starts a 
great tour of the kingdoms where he performs innumerable 
conversions. Having reached Magadha, he settles in Bodh-Gayā 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
57   Ibid., p.27a9-11. 
58   Cf. K’ai, T 2154, ch.4, p.519a2. 
59   T 394, p.1.116a26-27. 
60   A. Foucher, Art gréco-bouddhique I, figs 277, 279, 280. 
61   T 2087, ch.6, p.904a12-15 (tr. in Watters II, p.35). 
62   Cf. Li, T 2034, ch.12, p.102c16. 


--- Page 23 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
20
on the bodhi-maṇḍa. He announces to Ānanda that he will enter 
Nirvāṇa fifteen days later. It is then that the twenty-seven 
groups of deities, Vaiśravaṇa and Śakra at their head, break into 
tears and each utter a stanza. The twenty-fifth group consists of 
Vajrapāṇi Guhyaka accompanied by an hundred milliard yakṣas. 
The stanza he recites is further evidence of his disarray: ‘This 
supreme town, this great land of plenty is abandoning the Śākya 
clan: so where should we go?’63 
      Then follows the famous prediction which is the subject of 
the sūtra: The merchant Lotus-Face, says the Buddha, will be a 
king with the name of Mei-shih-ho-lo-chü-lo (Mihirakula), will 
an-nihilate the Dharma and, as a true brute, will smash my pātra. 
After his wretched death, seven gods will be incarnated one after 
the other in order to re-establish Buddhism in Kashmir.64 
Other episodes. – Further minor incidents in which Vajrapāṇi 
plays a part can be found in the narrative literature. 
1.  When Sumāgadhā, the daughter of Anāthapiṇḍada, who was 
married to a heretic from the Puṇḍavardhana, invited the 
Buddha to her kingdom, the Master went there by means of his 
super-normal power, together with a group of Arhats and deities: 
To the right of the Tathāgata was Brahmarāja devarāja; to his left 
Śakra devendra, holding a fly-whisk in his hand; behind the Tathā-
gata was Guhyaka Vajrapāṇi, the Malla, holding the vajrakūṭa in his 
hand. The devaputra Vaiśravaṇa, holding a chattra adorned with 
the seven jewels, stood in the air above the Tathāgata, for fear that 
some dust might sully the Tathāgata’s body.65 
2.  The Mūlasarvastivādin Vinaya records that one day the 
Bhaga-vat, taking the medicine-king Jīvaka with him, went to the 
Hīma-vat where all kinds of medicinal plants glittered like lamps. 
He asked Jīvaka to gather them, but the latter declined because 
he was afraid. Thereupon, at the request of the Buddha, 
Vajrapāṇi collected them in his place.66 
3. The Divyāvadāna recounts how the yakṣa made a breach in the  
 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
63   T 386, ch.2, p.1075a21-24. 
64   Ibid.,  p.1075c. 
65   Sumāgadhāvadāna, T 125, ch.22, p.663c6-9; T 128, p.841b17-20. 
66   Gilgit Manuscripts, ed. N. Dutt, III, part 2, p.44, 8-13. 


--- Page 24 ---


--- Page 25 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
22
-sessed the ṛddhibala, subjugated the dragon Nandopananda69 
and, as we shall see, the honour of having subdued Apalāla 
devolved above all on Vajrapāṇi. 
      Certain sources locate the subjugation of Apalāla in Ma-
gadha,70 others in North India in Gandhāra (Ch. Ch’ien-t’o-lo)71 or 
in Uḍḍiyāna (Ch. Wu-chang),72 finally others sometimes in 
Magadha and sometimes in North India.73 Similar divergences are 
explained by one of those transfers of legends which are so 
common in hagiography or, quite simply, by the monstrous size 
of the nāgas ‘whose tail is still in Takṣaśīlā whilst its head is 
already in Vāranaṣī’.74
 
      Vajrapāṇi was perhaps the hero of Magadha before becoming 
that of North-West India, and the Mahāmāyūrī 75 no doubt has its 
reasons in making the yakṣa the protector of Rājagṛha, with his 
dwelling on the Gṛhdrakūṭa. However, whether the event occur-
red in Magadha or in the North-West, the developments of the 
legend are identical: in the victory over Apalāla, Vajrapāṇi plays 
merely a secondary rôle and it is only in the later sources that he 
alone carries off the laurels of victory. His elevation over all the 
attendants of the Buddha occurred only gradually. 
 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
69   Cf. Visuddhimagga, ed. H.C. Warren, pp.336-8; Jātaka V, p.126; Ekottara, T 125, 
ch.28, pp.703b-704c; Divya, p.395; Nandopanandanāgarājadamana, T 597, p.131; 
Upadeśa, T 1509, ch.32, p.300a29 ff. 
70  Fên pieh kung tê lun, T 1507, p,51c15; P’u sa pên hsing ching, T 155, p.116c6; Fo 
pên hsing ching, T 193, p.56c19. 
71  Buddhacarita of Aśvaghoṣa, T 192, p.40c16; Buddhānusmṛtisamādhi, T 643, 
p.679b7 (near Nagarahāra). 
72   Aśokarājāvadāna, T 2042, p.102b13; Ekottara, T 125, p.661c23 (variant Wu-
chang instead of Ma-t’i); Fa-hsien chuan, T 2085, p.858a18; Lo-yang ch’ieh lan chi, T 
2092, p.1020a18 (on emerging from Mung-chieh-li); Hsi-yü-chi, T 2087, p.882b25 
(on emerging from Mung-chieh-li, near the sources of the Swāt). 
73 The Mūlasarvāstivādin Vinaya (T 1443) locates Apalāla sometimes in Ma-
gadha (p.19b14 and 18; p21c; p.40c6), sometimes in the North-West (p.40b6-8). 
– Similarly the Upadeśa (T 1509) first locates Apalāla in Rājagṛha, the capital of 
Magadha (p.78a28), then in North India, in the land of the Yüeh-chih 
(p.126b27). 
74   Abhiniṣkramaṇasūtra, T 190, ch.37, p.828b17. 
75   Ed. S. Lévi, JA, 1915, p.30:  Vajrapāṇī Rājagṛhe Gṛdhakūṭe kṛtālayaḥ. 


--- Page 26 ---


--- Page 27 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
24
the kingdom of Nagarahāra (modern Jalālābād), converted a 
poisonous dragon and left his shadow in the Rakṣas’ cave. The 
dragon’s name is not given, but it was probably Gopālaka and not 
Apalāla; and, more precisely, the Cave of the Shadow is situated 
20 li  to the south-west of Nagarahāra, in the village of Pālitakūṭa, 
near modern-day Chahr-Bagh. A Kashmirian Vinaya-master, 
Buddhabhadra, banished from Lo-yang and staying on Mount Lu, 
described this miraculous shadow to Hui-yüan and it was based 
on that information that the master of Lu made his famous image 
which was unveiled in 412.78   If, as is claimed by certain 
sources,79 Buddhabhadra was a native of Nagarahāra (and not 
Kapilavastu), he would have been able to supply first-hand 
indications on the folklore of the North-West. In any case, it was 
he who later, in Nanking, between 420 and 429 made a 
translation of the Buddhā-nusmṛtisamādhi  under the title of Kuan 
fo san mei ching.80 
      The subjugation of the dragon took place in the presence of 
several disciples: Kāśyapa, Maudgalyāyana, Śāriputra, Kātyāyana 
and Ānanda. The yakṣa Vajrapāṇi, making flaming whirls (ālāta-
cakra) with his great mass, burnt the body of the nāga and the 
latter took refuge in the Buddha’s shadow. The main rôle, how-
ever, fell to Maudgalyāyana who, transformed into a Garuḍa, 
made the nāga swear not to molest living beings any more and 
taught him the precepts.81 
b. To judge from the texts analysed up to now, the legend still 
contains many hesitations, both as to the name and localisation 
of the one of more nāgas subjugated, and as to the exact role 
plated by Vajrapāṇi in the event. It rests with the 
Mūlasarvāstivādin Vinaya (T 1448) to dispel all doubts. In the 
Section on Medica-ments (Bhaiṣajyavastu) this Vinaya recounts a 
long journey under-taken by the Buddha in central and northern 
India. This journey was subdivided into three parts: 
      First part: Accompanied by Ānanda, the Buddha journeyed in 
six stages: 1. Hastinapura, 2. Mahānagara, 3. Śrughna, 4. Brāhma-
ṇagrāma, 5. Kālanagara, 6. Rohitaka. 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
78   Cf. E. Zürcher, The Buddhist Conquest of China, Leiden 1959, pp.224-5. 
79   Cf. Kao sêng chuan, T 2059, ch.2, p.334c17; Ch’u, T 2145, ch.14, p.103b28. 
80   Li, T 2034, ch.7, p.71a9. 
81   Cf. Buddhānusmṛtisamādhi, T 643, ch7, pp.679b-681b (tr. In Przyluski, op. cit., 
pp.565-8. 


--- Page 28 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
25
      Second part: Separating from Ānanda, and accompanied only 
by Vajrapāṇi, the Buddha undertook a long circuit in North-West 
India with the following seventeen stages: 1.Seen from afar, the 
Tāmasavana, 2. Rāśimat (?), 3. Retuka or Netraka, 4. crossing the 
Indus, 5. Ṛṣivihāra, 6. Apalālanāgarājabhavana, 7. seen from afar, 
the Kāśmīramaṇḍala, 8. Bhraṣṭālaya, 9. Kanthā, 10. Dhānyapura, 
11. Naitarī, 12. Śādvalā, 13. Pālitakūṭa, 14. Nandivardhana, 15. 
Kuntī, 16. Kharjūrikā, 17. return to Rohitaka. 
      Third part: Separating from Vajrapāṇi and rejoining Ānanda, 
the Buddha returned to Mathurā, passing through Ādirājya and 
Bhadrāśva. 
     The second part of this journey has been translated by J. 
Przyluski82 on the basis of Chinese and Tibetan versions. The 
discovery of the Gilgit Manuscripts in 1931, and their publication 
by N. Dutt in 1948,83 has given us possession of several folios of 
the Sanskrit original concerning this journey. With the aid of 
these documents, I have been able to reconstruct the itinerary 
almost completely and draw up, in Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese, 
a list of the various locations through which the Buddha 
travelled.84 Taking my inspiration from the works of A. Foucher I 
have attempted, with less success, to locate the ancient place 
names on a modern map of India and Afghanistan. Fortunately, 
the recent campaigns by G. Tucci in the Swāt have enabled the 
Italian scholar to provide corrections and new details: the place 
where the Buddha saw Kashmir from afar is Shangla; Bhraṣṭālaya 
and Kanthā can be located between there and Shakorai or 
Mangalore; Dhānyapura and Naitarī correspond respectively to 
Dan-gram and Net-mera; finally, and especially, the Ming-chieh-li 
of Hsüan-tsang is not Mangalore as was supposed but Mingaora-
Butkara where the Italian mission has just discovered important 
Buddhist foundations.85 
      With regard to this journey in the North-West I will merely 
reproduce here the passages concerning Vajrapāṇi. It will be 
noted that the original Sanskrit contains details which the  
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
82   Przyluski, ‘Le Nord-Ouest’, pp.495-522. 
83   N. Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts III, part 1, Srinagar 1948, pp.xvii-xviii, and 1-17. 
84  É. Lamotte, ‘Alexandre et le bouddhisme’, in BEFEO XLIV, 1961, pp.152-8. 
85  G. Tucci, ‘Preliminary Reports and Studies on the Italian Excavations in 
Swāt (Pakistan)’, in East and West IX, 1968, pp.285, 288, 325 n.12, 327. 


--- Page 29 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
26
Chinese version neglected. 
[In Rohitaka] the Bhagavat reflected as follows: The life-span at my 
disposal is very short: hardly have I appeared in the world than the 
time of my Nirvāṇa has arrived. Great work of conversion still 
remains for me to accomplish. If I go with the bhikṣu Ānanda into 
the land of North India, that work of conversion will be difficult to 
complete. Now, it is with the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi that I should under-
take those conversions. [The Buddha then addresses the yakṣa with 
two stanzas in which he stresses the advantages of the smṛti-
mantaḥs.] He then says to the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi: Do you wish to come 
with me to North India to convert the nāga Apalāla? – I agree to 
that, O Bhagavat. – The yakṣa Vajrapāṇi and the Bhagavat, rising 
into the air, departed. The Bhagavat saw from afar a green forest 
and said to the yakṣa: Do you see that green forest? – He replied: I 
see it, O Sugata. – The Buddha went on: One century after my 
Nirvāṇa a saṃghavihāra will be built on that site: for those who 
practise śamatha, it will be a place of great value.86 
      [Having reached the palace of the nāgarāja Apalāla, the Buddha 
joined battle with him.] Then, having reflected, he said to the 
yakṣa Vajrapāṇi: You must attack that wicked nāgarāja. Thereupon 
the yakṣa, obeying the Tathāgata’s order, struck the mountain 
summit with his vajrakūṭa, and the mountain crumbled, half-
overwhelming the nāga’s pool.87 
      Having converted the dragon, the Bhagavat saw from afar a 
completely green forest and he again said to the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi:88 
Do you see that completely green forest? – I see it, O Bhagavat. – 
That, O Vajrapāṇi, is the district of Kashmir. One hundred years 
after my Nirvāṇa, there will be a bhikṣu named Madhyandina, a 
companion of the bhikṣu Ānanda. He will convert the wicked 
dragon Huluṭa and then, crossed-legged, will introduce my 
teaching throughout the district of Kashmir.89 
      The Bhagavat reached Kharjūrikā, and there he saw some 
young boys playing with some stūpas made of clay. Seeing that, he 
again said to the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi:90 Do you see, O Vajrapāṇi, those 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
86   T 1448, ch.9, pp.39c21-40a7. 
87   Ibid., p.40b20-22. 
88  According to the Lien hua mien ching, T 386, ch.2, p.1075b16, this prediction 
was made to Ānanda. 
89   Gilgit Manuscripts III, part 1, p. xvii,1-7. 
90   According to Fa-hsien (T 2085, p.858b13) and Hsüan-tsang (T 2087, ch.2, 
p.879c12), this prediction was made to Ānanda. 


--- Page 30 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
27
young boys playing with stūpas made of clay? – Yes, Venerable 
One. – That one, four hundred years after my Nirvāṇa, will be the 
king named Kaniṣka of the Kuṣāṇa dynasty. In this very place he 
will inaugurate a stūpa which will be designated by the name of 
Stūpa of  Kaniṣka, and after my Parinirvāṇa, he will do Buddha 
deeds.91 
      This last prediction proves that the passage concerning 
North-West India could not have been written before the reign of 
Kaniṣka which, according to the latest opinions, began in 78, 128 
or 144 CE. 
      Thanks to the Mūlasarvāstivādin Vinaya, three points will sur-
face in the first or second century CE. First, Ānanda was the 
companion of the Buddha during the first and third part of the 
journey, but Vajrapāṇi alone followed him during the second. 
This is not a matter of a substitution of a yakṣa for a favourite 
disciple, as Przyluski claimed, but a juxtaposition of a great yakṣa 
with a great disciple according to the concepts of the developing 
Mahāyāna. Second, in the North-West Vajrapāṇi became the only 
attendant of the Buddha and no longer shared this honour with 
others. Third, all hesitation is removed from what concerns the 
subjugation of Apalāla by the powerful yakṣa: it was in the 
North-West (Swāt or Gandhāra) that this took place, no longer in 
Magadha. 
      This localisation is confirmed by the ‘Legend of Aśoka’92 which 
briefly summarises the whole journey to the North-West, the 
oldest recension of which was translated into Chinese by An Fa-
ch’in in about the year 300. Furthermore, it was in Wu-shang 
(Uḍḍiyāna), near the sources of the Śubhavastu (Swāt), that is, in 
North-West India, that the Chinese pilgrims Fa-hsien, Sung Yün 
and Hsüan-tsang, who visited the holy sites respectively in 399, 
520 and 630, heard of the subjugation of the ‘wicked dragon’ Apa-
lāla.93 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
91   Gilgit Manuscripts III, part 1, pp.1,20-2, 5. 
92 Aśokarājāvādana, T 2042, ch.1. p.102b16-16 ; Saṃyukta, T 99, ch.23, p.165b-21-
23 ; Aśokarājasūtra, T 2043, ch.2, p.135b14-16 ; Divyāvādana, p.348, 20-22 
(corrupt text). 
93  Fa-hsien chuan, T 2085, p.858a18-25 (tr. Legge, p.29); Lo-yang ch’ieh lan chi, T 
2092, ch.5, p.1020a17-20 (tr. Chavannes, BEFEO III, 1903, p.409); Hsi yü chi, T 
2087, ch.3, p.882b25-c13 (tr. Watters, I, pp.228-9). 


--- Page 31 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
28
      The tradition concerning the journey to the North-West has 
already defied time and is again found in the eleventh century 
from the pen of Kṣemendra. In Chapter 56 of his Avadānakal-
palatā, the Kashmirian poet tells how, after having converted the 
dragon Gopāla on the Stone Mountain (pāṣaṣaparvata), at the end 
of the village of Hingumardana, the Buddha met Vajrapāṇi by 
chance and did him a favour (cakre ’nugraham). He went into the 
forest, near the rocks ‘hallowed by the manifestation of the 
lotus-feet of the past Buddhas’, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni and 
Kāśyapamuni. There, to Indra surarāja who came to see him 
(saṃdarśanāpta) and who asked him the reason for his smile, he 
explained that he too had chosen his dwelling ‘near these 
streams of pure and limpid water, in hermitages favourable to 
inoffensive people and peaceful places which purify the minds of 
ascetics devoted to the Dharma’.94 
     In those forests and hermitages, P. Demiéville95 recognised the 
Tāmasavana, between Cīnabhukti and Jālandhara, mentioned by 
the Mūlasarvāstivādin Vinaya and where Hsüan-tsang was still 
able to see the footprints of the four Buddhas of the past. ‘It will 
be noted,’ adds Demiéville, ‘that in Kṣemendra Vajrapāṇi makes 
but a brief appearance, only to give way immediately to Indra, 
but both are thunderbolt-wielders, and Buddhaghosa, for 
example, confuses the two’.96  This proves that during the Indian 
middle ages, at a time when Vajrapāṇi had already enjoyed a 
long career, the memory of distant times when he was still only a 
secondary form of Indra had not been lost. 
 Vajrapāṇi in Gandhāran art. – If Vajrapāṇi won acceptance in 
folklore and the post-canonical literature of the Stories and 
Fables, he occupies a yet more important place in the carved 
statuary of the Gandhāran school of sculpture where he followed 
the Buddha like a shadow. In the hundred scenes of the life of the 
Buddha reproduced by A. Foucher in volume I of Art gréco-
bouddhique (figs 182 to 282), ‘there is hardly a single illustration 
in which we do not perceive the Beneficent One flanked by that 
inevitable escort’. Vajrapāṇi appears for the first time at the  
 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
94   Avadānakalpalatā, ed. P. Vaidya, II, p.339. 
95  Tr. From P. Demiéville, ‘Les versions chinoises du Milindapañha’, in BEFEO  
XXIV, 1924, p.37. 
96    Tr. from idem, ibid., p.39, n.6. 


--- Page 32 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
29
moment of the Great Departure and does not definitively 
disappear until after the Parinirvāṇa: ‘for more than half a 
century he remains attached to the steps of the Master’. 
        Nothing, I believe, can be added to the study which A. 
Foucher devoted to the iconographic character of Vajrapāṇi.97 
His innumerable examples are divided into beardless Vajrapāṇis 
(with a tendency to assume, under the influence of classical 
memories, the bearing of a Hermes, Eros or Dionysos) and 
bearded Vajra-pāṇis (turning into Pan on the one hand, Zeus or 
Herakles on the other). Sometimes he appears as a Pariah, 
wearing a simple loin-cloth or Indian-style breeches; sometimes 
he is clothed antique-style in chlamydos, himation or exomis. He 
is never separated from the vajra ‘a kind of double pestle, swollen 
at each end and ordinarily rounded which is grasped by the 
middle’. 
      The impressive excavation campaign undertaken in the Swāt, 
in 1956-58, by G. Tucci and his Istituto per il Medio ed Estremo 
Oriente have restored to the Gandhāran school 335 new sculp-
tures published and analysed by D. Facenna.98  Vajrapāṇi appears 
on 37 of them, always closely linked to the life of the Master: 
presentation of the betrothed Yaśodharā (pl.162), great 
departure (pl.151), exchange of clothing with the hunter (pl.173), 
encounter with the grass-cutter (pl.23), first discourse (pl.54), 
Parinirvāṇa and cremation (pl.126, Nos 5 and 6). One will see 
(pl.107) a subjugation of the nāga Apalāla, which can be added to 
the representations already indicated by Foucher in his Art gréco-
bouddhique (I, pp.544-54). 
      Recent research on the chronology of the art of Gandhāra also 
enables us to ascertain that Vajrapāṇi survived all the 
vicissitudes of the school. In his posthumous work The Buddhist 
Art of Gandhāra, published in Cambridge in 1960, Sir John 
Marshall distinguished between three periods of artistic 
evolution: ado-lescence (ca. 60-100 CE), early maturity period 
(100-140 CE) and late maturity period (140-320 CE). Vajrapāṇi is 
equally re-presented during the three phases: 
a) Period of adolescence, figures 53, 55-61, 63, 66-68 (Mardān 
group), 69, 70-72 (Sanghao-Nathu group), 75 and 76 (Sikri group). 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
97   Art gréco-bouddhique II, pp.48-64. 
98   Sculptures from the Sacred Areas of Butkara I, Part 2, Rome 1962. 


--- Page 33 ---
Lamotte – Vajrapāṇi in India (I) 
 
 
30
b)  Early maturity period, figures 87-88, 96, 98, 100. 
c)  Late maturity period, figures 113, 115, 116, 119, 127-129. 
      The yakṣa appears for the first time on a bas-relief from 
Mardān, representing the donation of the Jetavana (fig.53), a bas-
relief which Sir John Marshall considers to be ‘the earliest 
representation of the Buddha by a Gandhāran artist known to us’ 
(p.41). He is again found in the grandiose representation of the 
Parinirvāṇa from Swāt and Takht-i-Bahī (figs 127-129), the last 
products of the school before the conquest of Gandhāra by the 
Sassanids. 
      In the Kuṣāṇa empire, in parallel and simultaneously with the 
Graeco-Buddhist school in Gandhāra, the Indian school of 
Mathurā developed. The points of contact between the twin 
schools are many. They both abounded in representations of 
yakṣas, but while Gandhāra multiplied its Vajrapāṇis to infinity, 
Mathurā, as far as I can judge,99 did not represent him once. This 
contrast clearly emphasises the northern character of the yakṣa 
as the Hellenic artists conceived him. We hasten to add that this 
northern character did not prevent Vajrapāṇi over the course of 
time from manifesting his presence on the carved monuments of 
India (particularly at Amarāvatī100 and Nāgārjunakoṇḍa101), Cen-
tral Asia, China and Tibet. 
(to be concluded) 
 
 
 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
99 According to the works of J.P. Vogel, Catalogue of the Archaeological Museum at 
Mathurā, Allahabad 1910; ‘La sculpture de Mathurā’, in Ars Asiatica XV, Paris 
and Brussels 1930. 
100  Cf. S. Sivaramamurti, Amarāvatī Sculptures in the Madras Government Museum, 
Madras 1942, p.186 and pl.57, fig.4; p.257 and pl.62, fig.2; Ph. Stern and M. 
Benisti, Evolution du style indien d’Amarāvatī, Paris 1961, p.60a. 
101   A.H. Longhurst, The Buddhist Antiquities of Nāgārjunakoṇḍa, Delhi 1938, pl.40, 
48, 50a. 


--- Page 34 ---


--- Page 35 ---


--- Page 36 ---


--- Page 37 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
36
that the sixteen youths with the Noble Maitreya at their head’ 
(MaitrH1 II, 1565); antra ötrü tözün maitri qadašï ačitida ulatï biš 
ygrmi urïlar birlä ‘After that the fifteen youths with Ajita, the 
brother of the Noble Maitreya, at their head’ (MaitrH II, 1693); 
anta ötrü tözün maitri bodisvt ačitida ulatï biš ygrmi urïlar birlä ‘After 
that the Bodhisattva Maitreya with the fifteen youths with Ajita 
at their head’ (MaitrH II 1937); tözün maitri ačitida öngisi qalmïš tört 
ygrmi urïlar  ‘The Noble Maitreya, Ajita and the other remaining 
fourteen youths’ (MaitrH II 2114). 
 
r 01-23 = Sn 1029-1031 
      01  [                          ba]va[ri2                ] 
      02  [            ] sizlär [ögrünč                    ] 
      03  [-lüg bol]ung-lar : a[                        ] 
      04  [                     ] ögrünč-lig bolt[ïlar3]  
05 [altï y]grmi  braman urï 
06 [-lar] igid4 [                                     tu]γurdï-lar : 
07 [qut] bulalïm tip ötünti 
08 [-lär] : tükäl bilgä tngri burxan 
09 bolar-nïng qutrulγu yiltizi bolup 
10 ikizig[                                               ] 
11 mängizl[                             ] tngri 
12 burxan q[    ] : uluγ av[ant] 
13 [                       ]n [     ] tngri 
14 burxan-[qa] birär sezik ayïtdï 
15 –[l]ar : tükäl bilgä tngri burxan 
16 [o]lar-nïng ayïtmïš sezik-lärin 
17 [               ]in [     ]d[    t]ïl[taγï]n 
18 [a]yu birdi : tört ygrmi toyïn 
19 –lar qut bultï-lar  : ačiti maitri 
20 [i]kigü qaltï-lar ekagr sudur-ta 
21 ögmiš uluγ küčlüg arxant-lar 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
1   MaitrH = Geng Shimin, H.-J. Klimkeit, in collaboration with H. Eimer and J.P. 
Laut: Das Zusammentreffen mit Maitreya. Die ersten fünf Kapitel der Hami-Version 
der Maitrisimit 1-2, Wiesbaden 1988.  
2   This reading is a very bold conjecture, but not quite impossible. 
3   This addition is uncertain. 
4   This reading is uncertain. 


--- Page 38 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
37
22 boltï : burxan nomïnta üküš asïγ 
23 tusu qïltï-lar : 
 
(01-08) [The divine Buddha said:] ‘[Bā]va[ri… also] you, should be 
[glad]!’ [And they were] glad. The [six]teen Brahmin youths 
arous-ed [the wish(?)] and requested: ‘We wish to gain 
[happiness]!’ 
(08-13) The perfectly wise divine Buddha found that to be freed 
from this root, [… …] to the divine Buddha […] great cause [      ] . 
(13-15)  They each put questions to the divine Buddha. 
(15-18) The perfectly wise divine Buddha deigned [to answer] the 
questions [asked and (?) named the cause [for …]. 
(18-23) The fourteen monks attained salvation. Ajita and 
Maitreya both remained (behind). They became, as in the 
Ekāgra-sūtra, celebrated mighty Arhants. They did much good 
through (or for) the Buddha’s teaching. 
      At line 20 ekagr sudr = Sanskrit ekāgra-sūtra, attested in the 
Skt-OTk bilingual text TT VIII H 5 (ekāgrisūdhar) and 7 (ekāgṛ-
sūdhar). On this bilingual text J.-U. Hartmann and D. Maue write: 
‘Text H (…); but quite unmistakably it contains the beginning of a 
commentary on the Agraprajñaptisūtra, i.e. on a discourse in 
which the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are declared to be the 
foremost (agra) of their kind – the Buddha perhaps as the fore-
most among living beings. The canonical location of this sūtra 
has not, as far as we know, been established; but it must have 
possessed a certain importance in North Turkestan, because the 
Sanskrit version is represented by fragments in all relevant col-
lections. The Berlin collection even preserves remains of a 
commentary in one of the old palm-leaf manuscripts, but since in 
this commentary a different section of the sūtra from that in the 
bilingual is treated, it is not at present possible to determine 
whether there is any connection between the two works’.5   Text 
H 7 speaks directly of the ‘hundred Arhats with Ājñāta-
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
5   J.-U. Hartmann, D. Maue, ‘Die indisch-türkishe Bilingue TT VIII G’, in: Turfan, 
Khotan und Dunhuang. Vorträge der Tagung ‘Annemarie v. Gabain und die 
Turfanforschung’, veranstaltet von der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften in Berlin (9.-12.12.1994), ed. R.E. Emmerick et al. (Berichte 
u. Abhandlungen Sonderband 1), Berlin 1996, p.149. 


--- Page 39 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
38
Kauṇḍinya at their head’, who are named in the Ekāgrasūtra 
expounded by the Buddha. The title also appears in two further 
fragments: in an OTk alliterative poem written indiscriminately 
with Brāhmī char-acters, i.e. not a padārtha text,6, in a strophe 
alliterating on e/i/ï : (Brāhmī) ekāgra (Uighur script) sudur […] ‘[in 
the…(?)] Ekāgrasūtra’ (back of Ch/U 6-11, line 14); in a panegyric 
or colophon text: (Brāhmī) ekāgra (Uighur script) sudur ičintä 
ögiḍilmiš [a]lqatmïš […] ‘praised and glorified in the Ekāgrasūtra 
[…]’ (back of Ch/U 7230, line 3). 
      In the following sections Ajita’s questions and  the Buddha’s 
answers are framed each time by opening and closing formulas.7 
 r  24-32 = Sn 1032 
maitri’i8 ačiti ik[i toyïn-l]ar [birä]r sezik ayïtdï-lar burxan-qa ötrü a[čiti] 
ïnča tip ayïtdï 
          a nägü yörgänmiš ol bo yirtinčü 
         b kir yam bo yirtinčü-nüng qayu ol 
         c nägü-kä yarumaz yalnguq-lar 
          d uluγ qorqïnč qayu ol anï yrlïqang tükäl bilgä 
tip ötünti 
‘Maitreya and Ajita, the two monks, each asked the Buddha 
questions.9   Then Ajita asked thus: 
           a With what is this world bound up? 
           b  What is in this world filth and dust? 
           c  Why do humans not shine? 
           d  What is great terror? Tell me, perfectly wise one! 
Thus he asked. 
SktY  a kenāyaṃ nivṛto lokaḥ        Pāli  a kena-ssu nivuti loko, 
                                                                             icc-āyasmā Ajito 
           b kenāyaṃ na prakāśate                b kena-ssu na-ppakāsati 
           c  kiṃ cābhile panaṃ brūṣe           c  ki ’ssābhile paṇaṃ brūsi 
 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
6   On this term, cf. D. Maue, Alttürkische Handschriften, Teil 1: Dokumente in 
Brāhmī und tibetischer Schrift, Stuttgart 1996, Text 19.10. 
7   Parallels are given for Pāli after PTS, for Sanskrit after Enomoto. 
8   Unexplained spelling for the usual m’ytry. 
9   This sentence added, perhaps by the OTk translator. 


--- Page 40 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
39
           d  kiṃ ca tasya mahad                    d  kiṃ su tassa mahab- 
                  bhayaṃ                                              bhayaṃ. 
We must assume that the OTk translator did not follow the pādas 
exactly. Pādas b and c have been reversed, and the words anï 
yrlïqang tükäl bilgä in pāda d belong to pāda c.  The variant 
yalnguq-lar  in c is noteworthy: presumably Chinese    ling was 
mistranslated. According to Mathews 4043, it means not only ‘To 
command. To tell. To cause. An order’, but also ‘Good, honour-
able. A term of respect’, and it can also be used for persons. It is 
not impossible that the translator has made a mistake here. The 
verbal form, too, does not show any sign of a causative, because 
yaru- ‘to shine, radiate’ is intransitive. If my conjecture of a 
mistranslation is correct, this would be an indication that the 
source of the Old Turkish text was Chinese. 
 
r 32-v 03 = Sn 1033 
yeti bilig-lig burxan a[či]ti ayïtmïš sezik ïnča yörä yrlïqadï 
           a  biligsiz biligkä [yirtinčü] 
              (…) 
[  ]qa[      tü]käl bilgä [tngri burxan] yrlïγ är[                        ] 
 ‘The Buddha with keen knowledge deigned to explain the ques-
tion posed by A[ji]ta: 
           a  With ignorance [is this world] covered. 
           b   [Because of greed and lethargy it does not shine]. 
           c   [Idle chatter, I say, is impure]. 
           d   [Suffering is great terror]. 
…[That] is the declaration of the [per]fectly wise [divine 
Buddha]’. 
SktY  a  avidyānivṛto lokaḥ            Pāli  a   avijjāya nivoto loka 
                                                                               Ajitā ti Bhagavā  
          b  pramādān na prakāśate            b   vevicchā pamādā na- 
                                                                               ppakāsati, 
          c jalpābhile panaṃ brūmi             c   jappābhile panaṃ, brūmi 
          d duḥkaṃ tasya mahad                 d  dukkham assa maha- 
                bhayaṃ                                               bhayaṃ. 
a  örtülüp. Whereas in the source the same verb was used, the 
translator here uses a different verb of similar meaning. 


--- Page 41 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
40
v 04-10 = Sn 1034 
[ačit]ti tängr[i burxan-qa] ymä sezik ayï[tdï] 
          a  bulmaduq yalang[uq]-nung tamčuq-larï 
          b  an[             ] üčün qurïtur : 
         c  tamčuqluγ ög[üzlar]-ning tïdγuluq alïn sözlär 
         d  taq[                                  ] 
[tip ötünti] 
‘[Aji]ta now put to the div[ine Buddha] the [following] question: 
          a Undiscovered are the currents of beings (?) 
          b  For [    ] he causes it to be dry (?) 
          c  He states the method whereby the floods are to be tamed. 
          d  [                            ] 
[Thus he asked.]’ 
SktY  a  sravanti sarvatah srotāḥ     Pāli  a  savanti sabbadhī sotā, 
                                                                               icc-āyasmā Ajito 
          b   srotasāṃ kiṃ nivāraṇaṃ            b  sotānaṃ kiṃ nivāraṇaṃ 
            c  srotasāṃ saṃvaraṃ brūhi          c  sotānaṃ saṃvaraṃ 
                                                                                brūhi 
          d  kena srotāḥ pidhīyate               d   kena sotā pithiyyare. 
a  tamčuq ‘stream’ = Skt srotas id. This word, attested here more 
than once, cannot be found in texts hitherto published.10 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
10   G. Clauson in his Etymological Dictionary of Pre-Thirteenth-Century Turkish, 
Oxford 1972, has only the verb tamčïr-, and in some languages tamčï ‘drop’ is 
attested (ref. by M. Stachowski, cf.Ė.V. Sevortjan, Ėtimologečeskij slovar’ 
tjurkskich jazykov. Obščetjurkskie i mežtjurkskie osnovy na buku “V”, “G” i “D”, 
Moscow 1980, p.140). The derivation is difficult, cf. also Á. Berta, Deverbale 
Wortbildung im Mittelkiptschakisch-Türkischen, Wiesbaden 1996, p.323: tam-*-
(X)g+čl+k or tam-Čï+q. But perhaps another possibility is more likely. Because of 
the unambiguous form tamčuq here, we have to reckon with a labial vowel in 
the suffix, and thus the suffix –(O)k is probably the right one. And if we start 
from a reciprocal verb tam-ïš, a noun *tamïšuq > *tamšuq should be expected. 
As a parallel to the development of š> č can anyway point to the same 
phenomenon in Soyonic: ‘After occlusives in Soyonic the old š (suffix of the 
co-operative aspect) becomes č, after liquids ğ: tïpčïr, tïpčïp, tïpčï’ (K.H. Menges, 
‘Das Sojonische und Karagassische’, Philologiae Turcicae Fundamenta [I], 
Wiesbaden 1959, p.654). Cf. also T. Tekin, ‘Inner-Turkic Evidence for the 
Correspondence Turkic /š/, Chuvash /ś/ and Mongolian /č/, Gedanke und 


--- Page 42 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
41
c  tïdγuluq alïn sözlär  ‘he says (speaks) the method of taming’ 
corresponds to the Skt saṃvaraṃ brūhi. The OTk aorist is 
inexplicable, Indian sources anyway have the imperative (brūhi). 
v 10-15 = Sn 1035 
tükäl [bilgä tngri burxan ïnča yörä] yrlïqad[ï] 
           a   [                        t]amčuq-lar ol : 
           b  anï [                     ] ök ol  
           c  apa[                    ta]m[ču]q-larïγ 
           d  bi[l]igin tïdar toyur 
‘The perfectly [wise divine Buddha] deigned [to explain] : 
           a  [Craving in the world] is the currents 
             b to restrain [those] it is [mindfulness] alone. 
             c  [I say how they can be [prevented,] the currents: 
             d  With knowledge one checks and cuts [them] off.’ 
 SktY   a yāni srotāṃsi lokasya      Pāli  a  yāni sotāni lokasmiṃ 
                                                                              Ajitā ti Bhagavā 
              b smṛtiḥ teṣāṃ nivarāṇaṃ         b  sati tesaṃ nivarāṇaṃ 
              c  srotasāṃ saṃvaraṃ                 c  sotānāṃ saṃvaraṃ 
                   brūmi                                              brūmi 
            d  prajñayā hi pidhīyte                 d  paññyāy’ ete pithiyyare. 
 
Of the OTk translation of this strophe, only the end is properly 
preserved.  This agrees clearly with the original. 
v 15-21 = Sn 1036 
ymä ačiti tngri burxan-qa sezik ayïtdï 
           a  ögin biligin tngrim tam[čuq]-luγ-larïγ qorqïtmïš-sn 
           b  [                              ]  ol 
           c  ög-li bilig-li ymä ayïtmaz uγušluγ törü-lär :  
           d  näčük toyar ïnaγ-ïmz anï sözläng :  
‘And Ajita put a question to the Buddha: 
             a With understanding and wisdom, my Lord, you have 
frightened those in the current. 
 
 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣
Wirkung, Festschrift zum 90. Geburtstag von Nikolaus Poppe, ed. W. Heissig and K. 
Sagaster, Wiesbaden 1989, pp.341-5.   


--- Page 43 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
42
           b  [                                       ] 
           c Understanding and wisdom, also things one does not 
ask(?) 
           d  What concludes [those]?  Tell us our refuge!’ 
SktY  a prajñāyāś ca smṛteś             Pāli  a  paññā c’ eva satī ca, 
                 caiva                                                       icc-āyasmā Ajito 
            b nāmarūpasya sarvaśaḥ              b  nāmarūpañ ca mārisa, 
          c  ācaksya pṛṣṭa etan me                  c  etaṃ me puṭṭho pabrūhi 
          d kutraitad uparudhyate               d  katth’ etaṃ uparujjhati. 
a The expression tam[čuq]-luγ-larïγ qorqïtmïš-sn  ‘you have fright-
ened those in the current’ cannot be explained from textual 
sources. 
c  Here again we have to reckon with a transference of the pādas: 
ayïtmaz uγušluγ törü-lär seems to represent nāmarūpa in b, for this 
term denotes the totality of the elements; cf. O. Rosenberg, Die 
Probleme der buddhistischen Philosophie, Heidelberg 1924, p.145. 
v 21-28 = Sn 1037 
tngri burxan ïnča tip yrlïqadï 
             a tuymaq-qa külänmiš ol törü-lär 
           b tuymaq tuysar ol barča öčär-lär 
           c  ačiti ötrü ïnča tip ayïtd[uq        ]ngi[       ] isimäk-tä 
                  yilinmäsär 
           d  ötrü tuymaq tuyar :  ämgäk-tä ozar : 
‘The divine Buddha said: 
             a  By perception things are known. 
             b  When one has perception they all vanish. 
             c  When one [   ] through the heat asked about by Ajita, 
                    does not cling (to things), 
             d   If one has perception, one is freed from suffering.’ 
SktY   a  prajñā caiva smṛtiś          Pāli  a yam etaṃ pañhaṃ apucchi 
                 caiva                                                 Ajita taṃ vadāmi te  
            b  nāmarūpaṃ sa sarvaśaḥ        b yattha nāmañ ca rūpañ ca 
                                                                             asesaṃ 
          c  vijñānasya nirodhād dhi          c  viññāṇassa nirodhena 
          d  atraitad uparudhyate            d  etth’ etaṃ uparujjhati. 


--- Page 44 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
43
Only in the Pāli is there an insertion with Ajita, although in a 
different pāda. 
c  isimäk ‘heat’ is the equivalent of Skt uṣmagata (BHSD 149b), the 
designation of the first four stages of penetration (nirvedha-
bhāgīya, BHSD 305a). In the AbhK, ‘uṣmagata, prolonged for some 
time (prakarasakvāt = prabandhkatvāt), has the Four Truths as its 
object’ (L. de La Vallée Poussin, L’Abhidharmakośa de Vasubandhu, 
Louvain 1925, VI, p.163). Cf. also W. Scharlipp, ‘Fragmente eines 
uigurischen Kommentars zur Triṃśikavijñapti-mātratāsiddhi des 
Vasubandhu’, UAJb N.F.6 (1986), p.128, line 82. 
v 28-34 = Sn 1038 
ačiti  ötrü ïnča tip ötünti 
            a  tngrim sizing titsi-lar-ïngïz bilg biligig ötgürmiš-lar 
          b  kim ymä säkiz türlüg tözün yol-qa kirmiš-lär 
          c  kim ymä qut bulmaduq tsui-lar 
          d  olar näčük qïlz-un-lar : 
‘Ajita then respectfully asked : 
            a My Lord! Your pupils are those who have penetrated 
                  wisdom, 
            b  and who have also entered the Noble Eightfold Path. 
            c  (For them:) What are the sins that prevent the gaining of 
                  salvation? 
            d  What are they to do?’ 
 SktY  a  kathaṃ smṛtasya carato   Pāli  a  ye ca saṃkhātadham-  
                                                                                  māse, 
           b  vijñānam uparudhyate            b  ye ca sekhā puthū idha, 
           c   ākakṣya pṛṣṭa etan me            c  tesaṃ me nipako iriyaṃ 
           d  yathātatham asaṃśayaḥ           d uṭṭho pabrūhi mārisa. 
The correspondences here are at best those of content, for the 
choice of words departs completely from the source. It seems 
that the Pāli is closest to the OTk version. 
 b  Here there is a completely concrete reference to the treading 
of the Noble Eightfold Path. Cf. Sn (Nyanaponika’s [German] 
translation, note to 1038: ‘fighters’ or ‘practitioners’ as a term for 
those who have determined to tread the Noble Eightfold Path. 


--- Page 45 ---


--- Page 46 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
45
did not itself contain the Pārāyaṇasūtra, because this is quoted: 
parayani šlokda körkitü ‘in the Pārāyaṇa verses12  [he deigned] to 
show’. 
      The Pārāyaṇasūtra has (whether as an independent text or as 
part of the Sn) a complicated history, the reconstruction of 
which is specially difficult. Individual verses of Sn appear as 
quotations in other parts of the Pāli Canon, as well as numerous 
Chinese translations of Buddhist texts but, as is known, there is 
no com-plete Chinese translation. The Central Asian Sanskrit 
fragments of the Pārāyaṇasūtra alone show that sometimes we 
have only approximate parallels to the text of Sn.13  But I cannot 
go further into this problem here. 
      The fact that the story of Bāvari was reflected both in the 
Xianyujing, the collection of Tales of the Wise Man and the Fool, 
and also in the Maitreyasamitināṭaka, was already clearly stated by 
S. Lévi.14 The Xianyujing version makes a very concise impression, 
so that we cannot be sure whether this part of the Maitreya-
samitināṭaka is an expanded and embellished version of the 
Xianyujing tale, or whether the latter is a compressed version of 
the former. But the relationship in unmistakable and can be 
proved in detail. 
      In the supplement to the second facsimile volume of the Mai-
trisimit, A. von Gabain summarised the conclusions to be derived 
from the mentions and reviews of the first volume.15  Special 
emphasis must be laid on the parallels to the Maitrisimit passages. 
E. Lamotte, in his History, gave a survey of the Maitreya literature 
which has become the basis for further Maitreya research.16   
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
12   The word šlok is derived from Skt śloka, but in the OTk texts it is a general 
form for verses. 
13   SHT 50, cf. I, p.34; IV, pp.236-9; SHT 1581-2, VI, pp.198-200. 
14   S. Lévi, ‘Le sūtra du sage et du fou dans la littérature de l’Asie Centrale’, JA 
207 (1925), pp.318 ff. 
15   P. Demiéville in TP 47 (1958), pp.433-40. 
16   E. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, From the Origins to the Śaka Era [tr. 
from French by Sara Boin-Webb], Louvain-la-Neuve 1988, pp.699-710. Many 
questions about the cult of Maitreya were treated in contributions to the 
collective work Maitreya, the Future Buddha, ed. A. Sponberg and H. Hardacre, 


--- Page 47 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
46
      The Maitrisimit  is a compilation which is known in this form 
only from the Central Asian tradition. The search for parallels, in 
whole or in part, is an important task. J.P. Laut summarised his 
thoughts as follows: ‘Anyway, it seems as if the Maitrisimit con-
stitutes an example of, so to speak, “Central Asian eclecticism”, 
i.e. a category of the most varied traditions with, in part, even 
some original peculiarities’.17 
      The identity of the Bādhari story with the account of Bāvari 
in Sn was very cautiously put forward by A. von Gabain, the more 
so since at that time the Hami version had not yet been edited. 
Today, on the basis of a comparison between Sn, Xianyujing 57 
and Maitrisimit, we can conclude that the first chapters of Maitri-
simit18 are based on the Pārāyaṇasūtra or, more probably, Xian-
yujing No.57.19  This will be made clear in another context; here 
we shall merely refer once again to the possible identity of the 
two names.20  In the Tokharian Maitreyasamitināṭaka it is 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣
Cambridge University Press 1988, but by no means exhaustively for the 
Central Asia components. Work on these important sources has since the 
discovery of Tokharian and Turkish Maitrisimit texts been a primary area of 
Turfan philology, but further efforts are necessary. International 
collaboration is proceeding, but there are still numerous desiderata. The new 
partial edition of the OTk Hami version, as well as the planned Berlin 
catalogisation are essential elements for a critical text-edition, which is an 
essential precondition for further Maitreyan text research. 
17 J.P. Laut, ‘Die Gründung des buddhistischen Nonnenordens in der alt-
türkischen Überlieferung’, Türkische Sprachen und Literaturen. Materialien der 
ersten deutschen Turkologen-Konferenz Bamberg, 3.-6. Juli 1987, ed. I. Baldauf et al., 
Wiesbaden 1991, p.269. 
18   The agreement between the Tokh. and the OTk text was discussed by W. 
Thomas, cf. his Tocharische Maitreya-Parallellen aus Hami, Stuttgart 1990, pp. 11-
20. 
19   In MaitrH, p.221, the authors refer to Xianyujing No.61. This must, how-
ever, be a mistake as Bāvari does not appear at all in this story of the Lion with 
the Firm Oath. 
20   Cf. J.P. Laut, Der frühe türkische Buddhismus und seine literarischen Denk-mäler, 
Wiesbaden 1986, p.126: he compares the OTk form badari, badri, with Skt 
Bādhari (Laut has *, because only attested in Tokh.) and Pāli Bāvarī (now, 
according to SHT, also Skt!). Cf. also P. Demiéville in TP 46 (1958), p.438. When 


--- Page 48 ---
Zieme – The Pārāyaṇasūtra in Old Turkish 
 
 
47
Bādhari,21 and the OTk spelling is p’d’ry, which can also stand for 
Bādhari. In Sn it is Bāvarī,22 and not only in Pāli but also in the 
Sanskrit fragments from Central Asia.23  The Chinese texts, which 
mostly have               Bōpoli (or similar spellings, all Bāvari), as 
well as the OTk manuscript in which the spelling p’β’ry = Bāvari 
occurs (U 1536 recto(?) 05) therefore belong to this tradition. 
Prof. Dr Peter Zieme 
(Berlin-Brandenburgische 
Akademie der Wissenschaften 
-Turfanforschung, Berlin) 
 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣
my conjecture that the name-form Bādhari might have arisen from a 
misreading (the characters for dha and va are very similar) seemed to me too 
bold so that I had withdrawn it, I found in S. Lévi’s article the following note-
worthy passage [tr.]:  ‘The alteration of the name Bāvarī, as it is found in the 
Pāli Sutta Nipāta, to Pāvari first in the Hsien-yü ching, to Bādhari in the 
Karasharian, whence Badari in Uighur, is of no surprise. The Paiśācī languages 
of India, particularly Cūḷikāpaiśācī, are apt to substitute the voiceless for the 
initial voiced consonant; on the other hand, the Kucha language has no voiced 
consonant; a twofold influence, coming both from the Indian frontier and 
Central Asia, caused the name Bavari to take the form Pāvari. The aspirated 
dental consonant of the form Bādhari is of another origin; it certainly springs 
from a misreading; in writings of the Gupta type, the letters v and dh are 
difficult to differentiate’ (S. Lévi, ‘Le sūtra du sage et du fou’, op. cit., pp.322-3). 
According to this theory (and this is the problem), we have to assume that an 
original misreading was retained throughout, because in the one tradition the 
name always has -dh- (or –d-) and in the other always –v-. 
21   A. v. Gabain, Supplement to Maitrisimit II, p.16, writes ‘pādhari’, but the texts 
themselves usually have Bādhari, cf. E. Sieg and W. Siegling, Tocharische 
Sprachreste I, Berlin and Leipzig 1921, Nos 212-16. 
22   L.R. Goonesekere suggests in Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, ed. G.P. Malala-
sekera, Colombo, 11, 4, p.575a, that ‘the name Bāvarī may be a representative 
of the famous Kātyāyana school of the White Yajurveda (Bādarī)’.  
23   Cf. also G.P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, 1-2, London 1937-
8, pp.279-80. 


--- Page 49 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
49
ON THE INTERACTION OF BUDDHISM AND PSYCHOLOGY* 
 
JOHN PICKERING 
 
This article is more about psychology than Buddhism, but it deals 
with some changes that will help their interaction.  Firstly we 
look at the context of these changes, then at the changes 
themselves and finally at what might follow from better inter-
action.  Here ‘Buddhism’ does not refer to any particular tradition 
but to views and practices that are common to them all. 
The Postmodern Context 
Modern psychology, the child of a nineteenth century union of 
philosophy and physiology, was conceived when confidence in 
science was high and increasing. So much so that towards the end 
of the century some physicists even advised students against 
entering the subject since it was nearly finished. It appeared that 
nature could be completely understood in physical terms. This 
confidence was felt in the life sciences too, and since nature 
included life and minds, the founders of modern psychology 
expected the discipline would eventually become a branch of 
physics. Religion traditions were to be dismissed as superstitious 
dogmas inherently opposed to science. Thus humiliated, they 
would be left behind as humanity ascended into the sunlit 
uplands of rational acquaintance with its own condition. 
      This heroic programme was to be carried out from a detached, 
objective viewpoint. From there, it was assumed that scientific 
discoveries would be immune from distortion by prejudice and 
could thus be used to create a benign and just society. This ideal 
was expressed by an intellectual community stretching from the 
philosophes of the Enlightenment to the scientists of the late 
nineteenth century.  The common objective was the systematic, 
rational investigation of the world for human good. This was the 
                                                 
* Based on a presentation given at the Fifth Annual UKABS Conference, Bristol 
2000. 


--- Page 50 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
50
Enlightenment Project, the heroic metanarrative of the modern 
era.   
      Postmodernism is a rupture with this project. The twentieth 
century showed all too clearly that scientific rationality does not 
of itself ensure a secure and fair life for all. More conflict and 
ecological destruction clearly awaits us in the coming century 
because the forces unleashed by science and technology cannot 
be contained. This has led to profound skepticism towards the 
Enlightenment 
Project 
and 
similarly 
all-embracing 
metanarratives.   
      This is the postmodern condition of knowledge (Lyotard, 
1984). The cultural image of science as the systematic, pro-
gressive and authoritative disclosure of pre-extant reality has 
been re-framed or even abandoned. The postmodern turn 
discloses: ‘... the Enlightenment's ascription to science of a 
prescriptive authority whereby other forms of knowledge can be 
humiliated is itself an illusion ... a unitary scientific method, even 
a scientific world-view, is merely one of the many superstitions 
of enlightenment cultures’ (Gray, 1995, p.154). A pluralist 
framework for knowl-edge has emerged within which science 
takes its place as one among many ways of discovering, as the 
biologist John Haldane once put it, that  ‘the universe is not only 
stranger than we suppose, but stranger than we can suppose’. 
      The postmodern condition is one of radical pluralism in which 
new meaning is synthesised in conversations between different 
traditions. No one view or intellectual framework is final nor can 
its 
conceptual 
vocabulary 
predominate. 
Constructive 
postmodern-ism provides a framework within which science, 
including psycho-logy, may interact with Buddhism in a new and 
more productive way.  
     Scientific discoveries during the twentieth century shook the 
worldview that had made physics appear so universal.  
Phenomena at the subatomic level demonstrate that detached 
observation is a special case and that what it discloses is 
fundamentally incomplete. The physical world has turned out to 
be subtly interconnected at all levels. Discoveries in systems 
theory and in the life sciences have likewise shown that the 


--- Page 51 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
51
linear decomposition of organic systems only provides a limited 
type of understanding. Organic systems are complex wholes and 
their activity is intrinsically historical. They are self-organising 
and exhibit emergent, non-linear properties not present in any 
particular part of the system. Thus no inventory of parts at a 
particular instant, however accurate and complete, could of itself 
explain how the system as a whole behaves.    
      This realisation is particularly important for psychology. Its 
principal object of interest, the dynamic unfolding of human 
mental life, is the most complex phenomenon known to science.  
Within it, patterns of organic causation dialectically unite parts 
to the whole and the whole to its parts. Attempts to isolate 
particular parts or particular types of causes are strictly limited 
and as general epistemological framework quite inappropriate.  
For psychology to adopt the metaphysics of nineteenth century 
science is an encumbrance.  
      This is not to reject science's findings or its methodology. It is, 
however, a recognition that what they may have led us to think 
of as universal and absolute are actually more relative and 
historically contingent than we supposed. Richard Rorty, a 
philosopher of the postmodern turn, takes this as a sign of 
intellectual maturity. Like his role-model John Dewey, he feels it 
is naive to believe that science and philosophy are discovering 
eternal, pre-extant, truths. Instead, they are participants in the 
constantly diversifying con-versations through which human 
beings attempt to co-ordinate their views of the world and to 
lead their lives together. As Rorty puts it: truth is made, not 
found (Rorty, 1999). 
      This does not mean that enthusiasm for science has 
diminished. Life sciences like cognitive neuroscience and 
genetics, presently have the totemic role that physics and 
chemistry had at the start of the previous century.  However, the 
cultural context is different.  Science and technology are treated 
with caution rather than being uncritically hailed as progressive. 
One reason is increasing concern about the ecological impact of 
technology. Another, more directly the result of the postmodern 
turn, is that that scientific discoveries are not now taken to be 
the privileged disclosure of how the world ‘really is’.  Instead, 


--- Page 52 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
52
they are more likely to be regarded as pro-visional creations 
suffused with cultural values. They are part of what Ernest 
Becker called the ‘fragile fiction’, the symbolic worldview which 
people construct in order to make sense of a world not of their 
making (Becker, 1971).   
      Rorty notes that it is no longer possible to establish what he 
calls a ‘normal discourse’. This is a primary explanatory vocabu-
lary to which all other ways of describing the world are in some 
sense secondary.  The idea of a normal discourse lies at the heart 
of the fear of science.  It is the fear that the world, and us with it, 
will be made too comprehensible. As Rorty puts it ‘The fear of 
science, of “scientism”, of “naturalism”, of self-objectivation, of 
being turned by too much knowledge into a thing rather than a 
person, is the fear that all discourse will become normal 
discourse’ (Rorty, 1980, p.388). 
      The theoretical and methodological pluralism of the post-
modern turn can help to allay that fear.  Practices and insights 
from other systems of knowledge are entering into a new and 
more balanced discourse with science (Griffin, 1988). This is not 
mere ‘anything goes’ relativism, but a move towards the 
discursive pro-duction of knowledge through dialogue. Rather 
than one particu-lar tradition claiming to have the final say, new 
meaning is synthesised in informed conversations between 
traditions. Inevi-tably, the geopolitical facts of life will mean that 
from time to time some traditions will have greater influence 
than others. Presently globalisation distorts Eastern traditions 
but in time we can expect a more balanced inter-change to 
emerge.   
      Thus, and in contrast to conditions when modern psychology 
appeared, the interchange between Western science and Eastern 
traditions can proceed in a more even-handed way. This being 
the case, interaction between Buddhism and psychology can be 
looked at in a new light. Additionally, the postmodern turn has 
precipi-tated changes in psychology that are making interaction 
more plausible and more informed. 
Changes in Psychology 


--- Page 53 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
53
Postmodernism has diversified both the theory and methods of 
psychology (Kvale, 1992). The changes to be sketched here con-
cern the decline of Cognitivism and the consequent return of 
con-sciousness as a central topic of mainstream research.  
Additionally, feeling and experience are once more accepted as 
primary psycho-logical data.  
      The two major paradigms shaped psychology in the twentieth 
century, Behaviourism and Cognitivism, both adopted the 
mechanistic metaphysics of the nineteenth. As a result, both 
were 
equally 
dismissive 
of 
consciousness. 
Behaviourism 
considered subjective mental processes to be methodologically 
intractable as they could not be observed directly or quantified.  
Therefore, since no properly scientific account could be given for 
them, thoughts, feelings, emotions and consciousness were 
virtually ignored. It seemed almost to be a point of honour to 
deny common experi-ences any place in psychology, no matter 
how significant they were felt to be. They were merely 
phenomenological illusions that would, eventually, be dispelled 
by more objective data.   
      Behaviourists limited themselves to observing the external 
manifestations of mental life. This was successful up to a point 
and the period left a legacy of effective techniques. But it also had 
major shortcomings.  Many experiments of the era were 
unnatural. Animals pressing levers in cages being the 
paradigmatic case. Behaviourism was also unable to provide a 
satisfactory account for reflexive and open aspects of human 
mental life, such as language and creative problem-solving.   
      Concern about these shortcomings reached a critical mass 
soon after the halfway point of the century.  Then Behaviourism 
was rather suddenly displaced as psychology's central paradigm 
in what is sometimes referred to as the 'Cognitive Revolution' 
(Gardner, 1985). Cognitive psychology, or Cognitivism as it will be 
termed here, approached the mind as if it was an information 
processing system like a computer. Computational models of 
mental pro-cesses were tested against human performance in 
more natural experiments on perceiving, remembering, making 
decisions, solving problems and using language.   


--- Page 54 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
54
      The conceptual vocabulary of Cognitivism has become, 
broadly speaking, the lingua franca of mainstream psychology.  
Significantly, in using this vocabulary it was assumed that the 
computational essence of mental life is separable from culture 
and even from biology (Gardner, 1985, p.6). Moreover, the 
vocabulary is primarily expressed in third-person terms, that is, 
how the mind seems from the outside. How it seems from the 
inside, the first-person world of feelings, values and experience, 
is secondary.  This was something that would be properly 
understood once psychology had framed a universal theory of 
cognition in com-putational terms. 
      The ethos of Cognitivism, like that of Behaviourism before it, 
leaves psychology at a reductive impasse.  To assume that a formal 
computational account might be found for human mental life is a 
Cartesian conceit that harks back to the Enlightenment Project. 
Although Cognitivism has been useful, computation per se no 
longer seems a plausible candidate for a universal psychological 
theory. To propose that the essence of mental life lay in com-
putation, and hence could be formalised, was an attempt to give 
psychology the identity and authority of a modern science 
(Newell, 1991). Following the postmodern turn this restriction is 
easing.  Alternatives to Cognitivism, such as Connectionism and 
the dy-namic systems approach have appeared.  Their 
significance here is that they open the way to more fruitful 
interaction with Buddhism.    
      Connectionism is a critical response to the idea that nervous 
activity was, essentially, computation. Brains lack the necessary 
functional architecture to make this biologically plausible.  
Instead of well-defined locations where information is stored and 
pro-cessed, they comprise densely interconnected networks. 
Their activity is far less homogeneous than formal computational 
theory requires. Connectionism is an attempt to understand this 
activity from the bottom up, as it were, by making models of the 
dense interconnectivity and massively parallel activity of natural 
nervous systems. These models have inputs from and outputs to 
their environment. Some of their connectivity is programmed in 
advance but some is the result of activity in the network. This in 
turn depends on the activity in world around it as well as on the 


--- Page 55 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
55
principles of self-modification built into the network. In short, 
networks become actively attuned to their environment. 
      How well neural networks serve as psychological models, is 
not yet clear.  Even the very largest networks so far constructed 
are minute when compared with natural nervous systems. They 
are nevertheless proving to be of practical significance in the 
recog-nition of voices and faces.  Connectionism also provides a 
power-ful conceptual vocabulary in which to re-state some 
enduring questions, such as the interaction between nature and 
nurture.   
      Whatever their significance turns out to be, the point of 
interest here is that connectionist models are necessarily 
historical.  Cognitivism sought the essence of mental life in 
computational principles. These, being formal, were hence 
independent of the history of the mental being concerned. 
Connectionism, by contrast, is a psychological theory without 
essences. Where Cognitivism proposed rules and representations, 
Connectionism proposes only connections, activity and history. 
Any particular state of a network, and thus by extension any 
mental state, is explained in terms of the conditions that gave 
rise to it.  There is a striking resemblance here to Buddhist view 
that mental life reflects the ceaseless arising of conditions. 
      Other critical responses to Cognitivism are the dynamic sys-
tems approach and theories of embodied cognition (Clark, 1999). 
These hold that mental life reflects the particular organic system 
in which it is expressed. Cognitivism treats organisms as if their 
nervous systems were computationally speaking identical. The 
dynamic systems approach by contrast takes the nervous system 
to be engaged in a cyclic process of adjustment to the flow of 
action in which organisms participate. Now different organisms 
act in fundamentally different ways. Accordingly, rather than 
treating all nervous systems as if they performed identical 
computational functions, the dynamic systems approach treats 
them as partici-pants in unique patterns of activity. These 
patterns extend beyond the organism to reflect the particular 
conditions in which the activity occurs, activity in the whole 
system being a form of sensitive chaos. The similarity to Buddhist 
notions of inter-dependence is again striking. 


--- Page 56 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
56
      Both Connectionism and the dynamic systems approach 
indicate that psychology is: ‘Reclaiming Cognition’ from Cog-
nitivism (Nunez & Freeman, 1999). Mental life cannot be for-
malised.  Instead, it has to be treated as an aspect of organic 
action, inseparable from the biological and cultural processes 
which are its vehicle.  With the move towards embodiment, and 
away from the over-rationalised approach of Cognitivism, 
emotion and feeling are once again being treated as the core of 
mental life (Damasio, 1996, 1999).  This is not a new idea, William 
James having proposed just that when laying the foundations of 
the Science of Mental Life, to use his never-bettered name for 
psychology. That it was forgotten shows how far Behaviourism 
and Cognitivism took psychology from the world of everyday 
lived experience. There, it is patent that feeling, not reason, is the 
essence of psychological life.  
      The reclaiming of cognition has prompted an explosion of 
interest in consciousness, bringing psychology face to face with 
awareness itself (Chalmers, 1995; Shear et al., 1999). Conscious-
ness is once again at the centre of the research arena, where 
William James originally put it. It is a uniquely significant pheno-
menon for scientific investigation since to investigate it properly, 
science will have to enlarge both its methods and its worldview.  
Phenomenological methods are increasingly used in psychology 
and since there is some unfamiliarity and mistrust of them, 
traditions where such methods have been used for millennia are 
recognised to have something to offer. These developments will 
be important in the interaction with Buddhism in the coming 
decades, which is the concern of the final section of this article.  
Prospects, Problems and Possible Outcomes  
During the eras of Cognitivism and Behaviourism, the attitude of 
mainstream psychology to religious traditions was essentially 
that of nineteenth century science. The assumption was that 
religious traditions, being concerned with beliefs and values, 
could have no real interaction with science, the latter being 
concerned with hypotheses and empirically established facts. 
Faith and reason do not mix. To compare them was regarded as a 
category mistake.   


--- Page 57 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
57
      Although this attitude has hindered contact with Buddhism, 
psychologists did occasionally note that it presents a account of 
mental life comparable with Western systems (e.g. Thouless, 
1947, Suzuki, Fromm and De Martino, 1956). There was also an 
increase in contact with Buddhism in the 1960’s but it suffered 
from the superficiality of then fashionable engagement with all 
things Eastern. Subsequently though there has been more 
informed work (e.g. Molino, 1998) 
      While the prospects for interaction are improving many 
limitations remain, some of them being distant echoes of the 
assumed opposition of science and religion. But, ironically, since 
science now provides most people with their creation myth, their 
image of themselves and an understanding of their relation to the 
rest of the universe, it has had to take on some of the cultural 
roles of religion. For most scientists this is unwelcome as it seems 
to compromise the integrity of science. But this is only true if 
science is saddled with being a uniquely authoritative, 
progressive human understanding, replacing all others.   
      Now science deserves a special place: it has permitted the pre-
diction of events and their technological control to an unpre-
cedented degree. However, the postmodern re-appraisal of 
science's hypotheses and methods shows that they also reflect 
their cultural context. To frame a hypothesis about a 
phenomenon is to express a belief about what sort of a thing it 
might be. Likewise, choosing a method of observation expresses a 
belief about how a phenomenon will disclose itself. The choices 
and beliefs expressed in science reflect their cultural context just 
as those expressed in religious traditions do.    
      It is unrealistic to propose that science is somehow outside 
the more universal arena of inquiry, within which cultural forms 
such as Buddhism also approach the common phenomena of 
human existence. Buddhism investigates mental life in ways that 
have been critically and systematically developed over millennia. 
There is every reason to suppose that these will complement the 
scientific investigation of the mind. It is un-helpful to assume 
there can be no interaction between them merely because of the 
supposed incompatibility of science and religion inherited from 
the last few centuries of Western thought. 


--- Page 58 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
58
      More helpful is the paradigm shift, itself part of the post-
modern turn, which has seen the mechanistic worldview of the 
nineteenth century displaced by one based on organic processes 
(Griffin, 1998). Process philosophy is an enduring strand in 
Western thought that stretches from pre-Socratic philosophers, 
such as Heraclitus to more contemporary figures such as James, 
Bergson, Whitehead and Bohm (Rescher, 1996; 2000). Although 
they express it in different ways, these philosophers share the 
view that mind is a part of, not apart from, what Whitehead 
called ‘the creative advance of nature’. It is significant here that 
process philosophy is again attracting attention since paradigm 
shifts actually start with a revision of implicit metaphysics  (e.g. 
Gare, 1999, p.28). 
      The changes in psychology sketched above reflect just such a 
revision. They lessen hindrances to the interaction with 
Buddhism that linger on in psychology as implicit nineteenth 
century atti-tudes. With the decline of Cognitivism and the 
vigorous return of interest in consciousness there has come an 
increased contact with phenomenological traditions (Varela & 
Shear, 1998). Treatments of selfhood and its relation to the wider 
order of nature are now appearing that to a greater or lesser 
extent are influenced by Buddhism (e.g. Macy, 1991; Clark, 1991; 
Parfitt, 1987). The re-semblance to anatta, is again striking. 
Instead of a Cartesian sub-stance, selfhood is seen as dynamic, 
interconnected, primordially relational and essentially without 
essence (Pickering, 1997).   
       In fact, this is not a good time for essentialism in general.  A 
worldview without essences is replacing the mechanistic meta-
physics of the nineteenth century. In theories of evolution, 
development and cognition the systems view displacing attempts 
to explain the dynamics of complex wholes by attributing causal 
powers to their parts (Oyama, 2001). In psychology too, 
interaction with Buddhism has recovered from the superficiality 
of the 1960's and now demonstrates maturity and critical depth 
(e.g. Rama-krishna Rao, 2002). Cycles of contingent causality are 
the under-lying field of being from which organic action, human 
cognition and culture emerge (Rosch, 1994).  These developments 
all enrich contact with Buddhism   (Waldron, 2000).   


--- Page 59 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
59
      Questions arise here that go beyond mere methodology to the 
purpose of investigating the mind. Buddhism values personal, 
direct investigation as it is readily available and, with appropriate 
training, free from distortion.  It is considered to be intrinsically 
valuable since it enables the investigator to live more skillfully. 
Cognitivism, by contrast, following the ethos of nineteenth 
century science, puts most values depersonalised investigation 
which, apart from logical truth-values, is otherwise assumed to 
be value-neutral.  How skilfully psychologists themselves live is 
neither here nor there, although, in the spirit of the 
Enlightenment Project, it is assumed that investigation will help 
to improve the conditions of life.   
      However, value-laden aims are implicit in science. These are 
that mechanistic reduction will allow greater prediction and 
control and that this is desirable. Now the postmodern turn takes 
us be-yond the unlikely distinction between an external value 
system and the internal concepts and practices of science which 
are assumed to be value-neutral. Value-neutral knowledge is a 
fiction.  Knowledge becomes value laden by virtue of the manner 
and purpose of getting it. This is particularly important for 
psychology to take on board since it is the science that is most 
directly mirrors the human condition. If it denies subjectivity any 
significance, adopts mech-anistic metaphysics and aims for 
prediction and control, then the outlook for human autonomy is 
poor. The actual experience of human beings has no place in such 
a science. It is as if we look into the mirror only to find we are not 
reflected in it.    
      If instead psychology's metaphysical framework was the 
ceaseless arising of conditions without essence, then it would 
more directly reflect the world of lived experience, as Husserl 
and Bergson as well as James proposed. That world, after all, is 
the world in which the psychologists themselves live, and to 
acknowl-edge this would help create a more humane and less 
alienating discipline. However, it is very important in Western 
academic realpolitik for psychology to appear ‘scientific’. 
Accordingly, experience itself is downgraded as something 
secondary, to be explained away. In its struggle to be accepted as 
a science psychology needed to show that it too could do the 


--- Page 60 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
60
reductive job on its subject matter that other sciences appeared 
to have done on theirs. Physicists suggested that heat was ‘just’ 
motion. Bio-chemists suggested that being alive was ‘just’ to 
metabolise. Geneticists suggested that to evolve was ‘just’ to alter 
the genome … and so on. Given this, it is no surprise to find 
psychologists suggesting that experience is ‘just’ computation 
and brain mechanisms. To do so gives them the authority of 
science.    
      Psychology’s search for the status of the natural sciences 
explains why it presently has little more to offer than to attempt 
to reduce the complexities of experience to something else, 
which is simpler and more ‘real’. It also explains the massive 
preference for objective over subjective methods. This 
conceptual poverty and methodological imbalance are signs of 
the reductive impasse. Attempting to do for mental phenomena 
what natural science appears to have done for physical and 
biological ones sets psycho-logy an impossible task. The 
formidable technology used in psychological research does not of 
itself give the discipline the authority to pronounce on 
experience. It may produce finer and finer descriptions of, say, 
brain activity, but what will be revealed by doing this?  It will be 
only part of the story; a description of the vehicle for 
consciousness.   
      What is carried by this vehicle, the flow of conscious experi-
ence itself, cannot be reduced. It participates with numerous 
interacting factors in a system that does not stop at the 
boundaries of the body. This means that consciousness cannot be 
fully under-stood from a third-person description of only one 
part of it, no matter how accurate it may be.  Events within the 
brain are but one such part, and it is as yet unclear what their 
role is in shaping the situated actions of people and other 
organisms within the larger systems that they inhabit.   
      But things are improving. The developments in psychology 
that have been sketched here, especially the embodied treatment 
of cognition and the increasing influence of dynamic systems 
theory, shift attention strongly towards the whole and away from 
the parts.  Methodologically, things are also changing for the 
better. Pheno-menology, qualitative methods and first-person 


--- Page 61 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
61
data are becoming more acceptable in mainstream psychology 
(Varela et al., 1991). It is becoming clear that while third-person 
data are reliable and powerful, is a reductive mistake to assume 
that on their own they could provide a complete account of 
experience. To understand how human experience is bound up in 
the systems that support it will also require first-person 
investigation, changing science’s methods and its image.  This is 
the peculiar challenge in investi-gating consciousness: to 
preserve the integrity of scientific methods whilst at the same 
time broadening them to treat the world of lived experience. 
      Buddhism starts with that world and deals with it in ways that 
everyone can recognise. While scientific psychology makes a dis-
tinctive contribution, it is nevertheless a highly specialised one, 
tied to a particular era and cultural milieu. Cognitivism does not 
in general help people to understand their own experience, nor is 
it intended to do so. By contrast, the resilience and endurance of 
Buddhism testifies that many people from many cultures and at 
many periods of history have recognised in it something 
universal about their own lived experience.   
      Now the findings of science are also supposed to be universal, 
but this is most easily demonstrable in physics, in the life 
sciences it is less so and in mainstream experimental psychology, 
it is even more questionable. Science expresses the outward-
directedness of Western thought over the last millennium. This 
dominates the study of the mind, despite the fact that the 
principal thing we know about it is our inner experience. It has 
meant that third-person descriptions of the outer manifestations 
of mental life are far more highly valued than first-person 
accounts, what mental life feels like from the inside. The latter 
have been treated with suspicion in Western psychology because 
previous attempts to use them have failed.  This suspicion 
extends to meditative traditions where there appears to be no 
equivalent of the controlled experiments and publicly verifiable 
data that are the hallmark of good scientific research. Even 
serious research on meditation can still lapse into something akin 
to Orientalism by treating meditation as an anthro-pological 
curiosity – an esoteric practice of another culture, often by 
implication, a more primitive one. 


--- Page 62 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
62
      Those more familiar with Buddhist traditions will recognise 
that this is not a well-informed position.  The use of meditation 
can be as systematic and critical as any scientific programme. As 
Charles Tart, a psychologist with impeccable scientific 
credentials as well as experience with meditation, has recently 
put it like this: ‘My professional and personal studies on 
consciousness, especially mindfulness meditation (vipassana) 
have convinced me that ordinary consciousness is quite 
undifferentiated 
and 
unskillful 
at 
observing 
its 
own 
manifestations – hence the failures of early Western attempts at 
an introspective psychology that was to be a science of the mind 
per se. But we can learn to become much more discriminative 
observers of our own mental processes. Western psychology gave 
up far too early trying to become a science with mental events as 
primary data – we simply weren’t trained’ (Tart, 1999). 
      But mistrust of meditation is diminishing.  It was due in part 
the projective distortion of Eastern traditions which we are now 
more aware, following the work of Jung, Said and the postmodern 
insight into the vicissitudes of working with knowledge. It was 
also in part a reaction to the superficiality 1960’s, when Eastern 
practices became trivialised spiritual fashion-accessories. Things 
have improved greatly in the past few decades with better 
teachings and more balanced research. Many psychologists, like 
Tart, now have some experience of the direct engagement with 
mental life that meditation provides (e.g. Rosch, 1997).   
      However, despite the changes sketched here, the clear and 
important differences between scientific psychology and 
Buddhist traditions will need to be born in mind. There will 
remain 
a 
necessary 
tension 
between 
meditation 
and 
conventional scientific methods.  Private experience obtained 
under special conditions and after special training does not rest 
easily alongside the public data of experimental science. Many 
psychologists, though, are begin-ning to recognise that the way 
forward is not too exclude any method of studying mental life but 
continually to enrich their synthesis. 
      This in turn will not only enrich psychological research but 
also raise broader questions about its purpose. What sort of 
knowledge of the mind do we want and why do we want it?  


--- Page 63 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
63
Experimental psychologists want sort of knowledge that is pro-
duced by good scientific research. They want it because mental 
life is intrinsically interesting. However, this is too simple. 
Scientific knowledge, of the mind or anything else, is not value-
neutral.  Scientific ends always end up as technological means.  
Presently we face a serious ecological crisis, whose most basic 
cause is the alienation of human experience from nature by 
runaway science and technology. The ecological crisis is thus also 
is a psycho-logical crisis. Accordingly, rather than technologising 
the mind, as Cognitivism was wont to do, psychology needs to 
study it within its biological and cultural contexts.    
      It will help this project to engage with Buddhist views of 
selfhood and its organic interdependence on the world around it 
(Macy, 1991; Hillman,1995). A synthesis of traditions will help 
create a more balanced science of mental life and one more 
relevant to the difficulties facing us. It will present its own 
difficulties of course. It is easy to mis-attribute to Buddhism 
things which are merely contemporary concerns. The genuine 
openness of science and its capacity for radical revision should 
not be under-estimated when compared with what in Buddhist 
traditions is rigid and authoritarian. But so long as they are 
recognised, these dif-ficulties need not hinder the pursuit of 
better interaction between Buddhism and psychology. The 
decline of Cognitivism and the growth of an organic worldview 
open the way to deeper, more informed and relevant interaction 
between the two traditions. 
Dr John Pickering 
(Psychology Department 
Warwick University) 
 
 
References 
Becker, E. (1971), The Birth and Death of Meaning: An Interdis-
ciplinary Perspective on the Problem of Man, London. 
Chalmers, D. (1995), ‘Facing up to the problem of consciousness’, 
Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (3), pp.200-19. 
Clark, A. (1999), ‘An Embodied Cognitive Science?’, Trends in 


--- Page 64 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
64
Neuroscience 3 (9), pp.345-51. 
Clark, S (1991), ‘How many selves make me?’, in D. Cockburn 
(ed.), Human Beings, London (Suppl. 29 to the Royal Institute 
of Philosophy’s Journal: Philosophy), pp.213-33. 
 Damasio, A. (1996), Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human 
Brain, London. 
Damasio, A. (1999), The Feeling of What Happens, London. 
Gardner, H. (1985), The Mind’s New Science: A History of the Cognitive 
Revolution, New York. 
Gare, A. (1999), ‘Speculative Metaphysics and the Future of 
Philosophy’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 77(2), pp. 127-
46. 
Gray, J. (1995), Enlightenment’s Wake: politics and culture at the close 
of the modern age, London. 
Griffin, D. (1988), ‘Introduction’, in D. Griffin (ed.), The 
Reenchantment of Science: Postmodern Proposals, Albany. 
Griffin, D.R. (1998), Unsnarling the World Knot, London. 
Hillman, J. (1995), ‘A psyche the size of the earth’, in Eco-
psychology: Restoring the Earth, Healing the Mind, ed. T. Roszak, 
M. Gomes & A. Kanner, San Francisco pp.xvii-xxiii. 
Kvale, S. (1992) (ed.) Psychology and Postmodernism, London. 
Lyotard, J.-F. (1984), The Postmodern Condition : A Report on 
Knowledge, Minnesota. 
Macy, J. (1991), Mutual Causality in Buddhism and General Systems 
Theory, Albany, NY. 
Molino, A. (1998) (ed.) The Couch and the Tree: Dialogues in 
Psychoanalysis and Buddhism, London. 
Newell, A.(1991), Unified Theories of Cognition, Cambridge. 
Nunez, R. & Freeman, W. (1999), ‘Restoring to Cognition the 
Forgotten Primacy of Action, Intention and Emotion’, Jour-
nal of Consciousness Studies 6 (11-12), pp.ix-xix. 
Oyama, S. (2001) (ed.) Cycles of Contingency: Developmental Systems 
and Evolution, London. 
Parfitt, D. (1987), ‘Divided Minds and the Nature of Persons’, in 
Mindwaves, ed. C. Blakemore & S. Greenfield, Oxford, pp.19-
28. 
Pickering, J. (1997), ‘Selfhood is a process’ in The Authority of 
Experience, ed. J. Pickering, London, 149-69. 
Ramakrishna Rao, K. (2002), ‘Bridging Eastern & Western 


--- Page 65 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
65
Perspectives of Consciousness’, Journal of Consciousness 
Studies 9 (11), pp.63-8. 
Rescher, N. (1996), Process Metaphysics: An Introduction to Pro-cess 
Philosophy, Albany, NY. 
Rescher, N. (2000), Process philosophy: a survey of basic issues, 
Pittsburgh. 
Rorty, R. (1980), Philosophy and the Mirror Of Nature, Oxford. 
Rorty, R. (1999), Philosophy and Social Hope, London. 
Rosch, E. (1994), ‘Is Causality Circular?’, Journal of Conscious-ness 
Studies 1 (1), pp.50-65. 
Rosch, E. (1997), ‘Mindfulness Meditation and The Private Self’, in 
The Conceptual Self in Context, ed. U. Neisser, Cam-bridge, 
pp.185-202. 
Shear, J. et al. (1999) (ed.), Explaining Consciousness – The ‘Hard 
Problem’, London. 
Suzuki, D.T., Fromm, E. & Martino, R. (1970) (ed.), Zen Buddhism 
and Psychoanalysis, New York. 
Tart, C. (1999), Observation of mental processes. Posted on 1 Nov 
1999 to jcs-online@yahoogroups.com. For the archive of 
this group, contact: jcs-online-owner@yahoogroups.com. 
Thouless, R. (1940), Riddell Memorial Lectures, Oxford. 
Varela, F. & Shear, J. (1999) (ed.) The View From Within, Exeter. 
Varela, F., Thompson, E. & Rosch, E. (1991), The Embodied Mind, 
London. 
Waldron, W. (2000), ‘Beyond Nature/Nurture: Buddhism and Bio-
logy on Interdependence’, Contemporary Buddhism 1 (2), 
pp.199-226. 
 
 


--- Page 66 ---
Pickering – Buddhism and Psychology 
 
 
66
 
 


--- Page 67 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
67
THE ETHICS OF THOUGHTLESSNESS: 
THE PROBLEM OF ETHICS IN rDZOGS CHEN THOUGHT* 
JOHN PEACOCK 
Buddhist thought in its many manifestations has as its desider-
atum the direct perception of reality and the subsequent eradi-
cation of duḥkha through knowledge of the way things really are. 
Thus crucially Buddhist epistemology is directly linked to its 
soteriology. A clear and unmediated perception of the real is 
seen as vitally important in the determination of how the 
individual is to act. In other words, one either acts in accordance 
with the way things are, as revealed in an act of unmediated 
perception, or one acts through a partial or even distorted idea of 
the way things are. When we begin in this way to talk of acts we 
are led ineluctably into the field of ethics. 
      Through an examination of the problems of ethics in rDzogs 
chen we begin to confront a more general problem in the field of 
Buddhist ethics. The problem is this: how are ethical acts 
possible given the Buddhist stress on the non-conceptual 
apprehension of reality? Ethical acts, one might wish to argue, 
require the utilisa-tion of ethical judgements and hence some 
form of conceptual discrimination. If this is the case what sense 
can be made of ethical acts arising through unmediated 
perception without the attendant employment of ethical 
concepts? 
The rDzogs Chen Position 
Before entering into a discussion of the problem of ethics in 
rDzogs chen thought let me firstly attempt a brief reconstruction 
of the rDzogs chen view. rDzogs chen thought, particularly as it 
is presented by the great fourteenth century rNying ma lama and 
scholar kLong chen rab ‘byams pa (1308-63), can be seen as a skil-
ful combination of the basic ideas of Yogācāra and Madhyamaka 
philosophy. It takes as its starting point the Yogācāra theory of 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
*   Originally presented at the Fifth Annual UKABS Conference, University of 
Bristol, 2002.  


--- Page 68 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
68
predispositions or potentialities of experience (bags chags, 
vāsanā) and the Madhyamaka denial of intrinsic existence or 
essence (rang bzhin med, niḥsvabhāva). The bags chags are im-
pressions, traces or habits that have been constructed in the 
course of experience and provide a habitually based ‘schemata’ 
for our perception of the world. What commences as an open 
field of experience with the potential for differentiation in early 
childhood is, gradually over the course of time, reduced to a 
world of seemingly static objects composed of individuated 
‘minds’ (don gyi bags chags) and bodies (lus kyi bags chags). Thus it 
is experience in terms of the bags chags that rDzogs chen 
practitioners refer to as ‘mistakenness’ or ‘going astray’ (’khrul 
pa). 
      It is an error to conceive of the bags chags as lying inertly 
within the ālaya-vijñāna (the ‘store-consciousness’, kun gzhi rnam 
shes), 
postulated 
by 
Yogācāra 
thinkers, 
because 
these 
impressions act as ‘seeds’ (bīja) or potentialities for future 
activities. What therefore is indicated is a dynamic process 
wherein past impres-sions and influences are ‘stored’ or retained 
and then projected to create future experience. It is the kun gzhi 
rnam shes  that creates certain horizons for meaning and 
understanding. However, the kun gzhi rnam shes is not an 
unconscious and should not be viewed as such, for the 
development of the theory of the kun gzhi rnam shes went 
together with the Cittamātra denial of the belief in an external 
world, a notion that is totally foreign to Western psychological 
theories 
concerning 
the 
unconscious. 
The 
Citta-mātra 
repudiation of the belief in an external world could be seen as a 
corrective to realist strands within Indian thought that appeared 
more concerned with theorising and conceptualising the 
external world than paying attention to the ‘world’ as an 
existential horizon of meaning. It was only by being attentive to 
the world in this way that human beings, so it was claimed, could 
begin to disentangle their participation in the world-as-Saṃsāra, 
and as a correlate, initiate a responsiveness to the world-as-
Nirvāṇa. 
      Central to the claims of the mentalistic systems was the ac-
knowledgement that ‘going-astray’ or ‘mistakenness’ was 


--- Page 69 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
69
attribu-table to the lack of recognition of a luminous and non-
dualistic form of awareness as the origin of experience. This 
form of aware-ness, so they claimed, was beyond the subject-
object bifurcation (gzung ’dzin) that was involved in ordinary 
perceptual states. However, the Madhyamaka rejected this 
notion, viewing it as a mere hypothesis and thus possessing no 
‘intrinsic existence’. For the Madhyamaka the shape that ‘going-
astray’ assumed was a generalised form of belief in taking things 
to exist in a particular way, i.e., with intrinsic existence 
(svabhāva), when nothing existed in that way. What we see within 
the Madhyamaka is a repudiation of the notion of all absolutes, 
what one may term ‘an absolute absence of all absolutes’. With 
the obsessive concern over onto-logical issues, the Madhyamaka 
contended, there was a genuine forgetting of ‘knowing’ and 
‘being’. Thus, any form of philoso-phical or ontological 
hypostatising was deemed a limitation to the ‘open-ness’ (stong 
pa nyid) of experience.  The Madhyamaka  per-spective is 
forcefully demonstrated in the ninth chapter of Śāntideva’s 
Bodhicaryāvatāra. Within this chapter there is pre-sented a 
putative attack on the Madhyamaka claim that entities, both 
internal and external, are ‘apparition-like’. The mentalistic 
opponent of the Madhyamaka claims that there must be a form 
of awareness or consciousness that remains undeceived by the 
magical show of existence (v.29-32). Furthermore, the opponent 
claims, if this form of awareness did not exist, we would all be 
like the magician who inevitably falls in love with the māyā-
woman/ man that they have conjured up. What is being argued 
here is that if this were the case there would be no way out of 
our delusion if everything were an apparition. Nevertheless, 
Śāntideva rejects this claim and argues that the only reason that 
you are likely to fall in love with the māyā-woman/man is that 
your understanding and perception of śūnyatā is rather tenuous. 
If the experience of ‘emptiness’ were stronger there would be 
little likelihood of falling for the māyā-woman/man and taking 
them to be a ‘real’ woman/ man. Thus it is claimed there is a 
failure to see the woman/man as an illusion at all with the 
ineluctable consequence that they are apprehended as some real 
object. Illusoriness, therefore, becomes not simply a lack but a 


--- Page 70 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
70
presence that is freed from the compul-siveness, obsessiveness 
and deceptiveness of the bags chags. 
      It is important to understand that within the rDzogs chen 
position there is a rejection of the mentalistic conclusions of 
Cittamātra thought and its theory of the bags chags, i.e., the un-
warranted conclusion that everything is a projection of one’s 
own mind.  rDzogs chen thinkers thus claim that, although 
presencing (snang ba) may be the presencing of the bags chags and 
therefore mental (sems), i.e., apprehending something as an 
object, the apparent object is not mental. What is being argued 
for here is that, although the conditions required for the 
presencing of the apparent object are mental, we are not 
justified in assuming that the object apprehended is mental. This 
doctrine is strangely akin to Kant’s claim in The Critique of Pure 
Reason that although he is a transcendental idealist he is also an 
empirical realist.  The con-clusion, therefore, that kLong chen 
rab ‘byams pa comes to is that Saṃsāra is a mistaken mode of 
apprehending objects that are characterised by ‘dependent 
origination’ (rten brel).1 
      The rDzogs chen thought of kLong chen rab ‘byams pa is 
obviously of far greater complexity and subtlety than the above 
presentation.  Nevertheless, I will have hopefully managed to 
convey something of the ‘flavour’ of that position, albeit in a 
very succinct form. The question that I now wish to address is, 
‘does this system provide a grounding for genuine ethical 
praxis?’ Or, more simply, do the ethics that arise out of this 
system make sense? 
      Let us first of all examine a statement by Rig ‘dzin ‘Jigs med 
gling pa, the eighteenth-century rNying ma scholar and 
visionary, that is found in a small and rather condensed text 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
1  kLong chen rab ‘byams pa in the Yid bzhin rin pe che’i mdzod says the 
following: ‘Although entities lack reality, it is the dualistic power of the appre-
hendable and the apprehending that gives rise to conditioned genesis, like an 
apparition. So long as the dualism of the apprehending and the 
apprehendable remains, cause and effect will miraculously appear as the 
cause and result of action’. 


--- Page 71 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
71
entitled gNas lugs tshig rkang. ‘Jigs med gling pa claims the 
following: 
The genuine path to action is to act on the basis of what is and 
the possibilities that it offers, not to act according to a set of 
rules or prescriptions which will always be problematic. Ethics if 
seen as a system encompassing symbols and sanctions will 
always be un-ethical for it blinds one to the possibilities 
contained in what is. Far from meaning that ‘anything is 
permissible’ any genuine ethical action must be based on what is, 
and ‘what really is’ is revealed through insight and 
understanding.2 
      Prime facie this position has an intuitive appeal with its patent 
rejection of prescriptive ethical doctrines and its eulogising of an 
ethics based on ‘what really is’. However, I would suggest that 
the idea of acting in accordance with ‘what really is’ possesses a 
lack of clarity that could be distinctly unhelpful when coming to 
know how to act in any given ethical situation. 
      One of the claims made by Buddhist thought in general, and 
rDzogs chen thought in particular, is that conceptual thought 
has a tendency to inhibit or block our initial apprehension of the 
‘real’ by introducing elements of deceptiveness and falsity into 
our per-ception. What is lost, so it is claimed, is the vibrancy of 
our initial contact with ‘what is’. The emphasis in rDzogs chen 
thought, therefore, is on the immediacy of perception as the 
foundation for ethical action and behaviour.  As kLong chen rab 
‘byams pa states in the Shingta chen po: 
The true nature of the mind is freedom from concepts and 
expressions … there are no words and letters because the 
meaning of phenomena is beyond [the object] of mental 
conceptions and concepts which cause delusions … so it should 
be known that all phenomena are peaceful, natural and pure and 
that they tran-scend all the characteristics of conceptualisation.3 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
2   gNas lugs tshig rkang, II 35a. 
3   Shingta chen po, 79b/3. 


--- Page 72 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
72
      It is this immediacy that forms the basis for all subsequent 
enquiry. However, words and concepts are said to be incapable of 
conveying this immediacy; at best words can point in the 
direction of this experience without ever getting to its heart. 
Given this emphasis on the immediacy of experience, and the 
deep suspicion of language and concepts, it is difficult to see how 
ethical actions that involve genuine ethical judgements could 
occur. 
     Let me try to outline the problem. Conventionally, we think of 
ethical actions as involving ethical judgements. For example, as a 
being in the world I am confronted continuously by situations 
that demand ethical responses, and thus am engaged constantly 
in hav-ing to make judgements how to act for the best is any 
given situation. Such situations require at minimum a utilisation 
of con-cepts such as the ‘good’. In other words, I have to make a 
judge-ment about the good and that judgement is made via the 
concept of ‘goodness’. Thus ethical judgement is akin to aesthetic 
judge-ment that requires the application of the concept of the 
‘beautiful’. Without the utilisation of conceptual structures, 
which at minimum deliver judgements such as ‘this is good’, ‘this 
is bad’, and ‘this is beautiful’, ‘this is ugly’ it is extremely difficult 
to con-ceive of a non-conceptual ‘ethics’. We may be speaking of 
some-thing else in this case, but would it be ‘ethics’ as we 
normally understand it? Could we, for example, make sense of 
ethical experience in the form of ethical dilemmas? How would 
we know how to act? 
      The rDzogs chen answer, of course, is that it is through pene-
trating awareness (rig pa) that one knows how to act, and it is 
through loss of intrinsic awareness (ma rig pa), so it is claimed, 
that ethically improper acts occur. However, judgement it would 
appear is intrinsic to an ethical or moral existence. Nevertheless, 
as we have seen, thinkers such as ‘Jigs med gling pa within the 
rDzogs chen tradition appear explicitly to reject the notion of 
ethical judgement, based on the utilisation of ethical concepts, as 
we would normally understand them. 
Is Awareness Enough? 


--- Page 73 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
73
A contemporary rDzogs chen master, Namkhai Norbu, highlights 
the importance of awareness in conduct in the following passage: 
Awareness is the only rule in Zogqen. Or, perhaps, it would be 
better to say that awareness replaces all rules in Zogqen, because 
a Zogqen practitioner never either forces himself to anything, 
nor submits to being conditioned by anything ‘external’ … 
Awareness means one is aware of everything… 4 
      However, before dealing with awareness I would like to take 
us back to Immanual Kant whose transcendental idealism was 
men-tioned earlier. Kant’s ethical position, based on the primacy 
of duty and universalisability, appears to be the very antithesis 
of the rDzogs chen stance. 
     For Kant a reliance on reason, that is the application of 
concepts, and an autonomous will are ethical prerequisites: 
Reason is imparted to us as a practical faculty, that is, one which 
is to influence the will … nature’s true intention is to produce a 
will.5 
      The by-product of this will is the conscious intent which 
moti-vates any true moral or ethical action, for without it Kant 
claims one is bereft of the full sense of what one is doing and 
why. Therefore, for Kant, one who is acting without such 
conscious intent would be acting from false consciousness. 
Furthermore, it appears that Kant is suggesting that any act 
performed without conscious intention is ultimately devoid of 
meaning. 
      Nevertheless, crucial to Kant’s argument is the disjunction 
between self and other together with the strong feeling of one’s 
own individual self-awareness. The affirmation of one’s own self-
awareness and autonomy comes with the attendant recognition 
of the individual autonomy of the other. Rather than there being 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
4 Namkhai Norbu, The Crystal and the Way of Light: Sutra, Tantra and Dzogchen, 
London 1986, pp.112-13. 
5   Immanuel Kant, The Groundwork of the Metaphysique of Morals, tr. H.J. Paton, 
London 1968, pp.112-13. 


--- Page 74 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
74
any sense of connectedness within the Kantian perspective, 
there is an almost irreconcilable division between self and other. 
Addition-ally, Kant claims that we are subordinate to the dictates 
of the universal, and that for the propagation of the moral order 
the universal, i.e., God, is an absolute necessity. Moreover, any 
moral judgement is required to be in itself universalisable. 
      Buddhists, of course, would view with deep suspicion the 
claims of any universal, as the general tenor of Buddhist thought 
is towards uniqueness and away from universals which always 
relativise that uniqueness. Universals, from this perspective, 
homogenise and dilute rather than lead to, or reveal, genuine 
autonomy. Thus there is an inhibiting of any truly authentic 
encounter between human beings. 
      With the elevation of the universal, within Kantian thought, 
we encounter the primacy of law – civil, moral and divine. 
However, from the rDzogs chen perspective, if not the Buddhist 
perspective in general, the primacy of law would hinder, if not 
completely block, truly ethical encounters between human 
beings. Such appears to be the thrust behind ‘Jigs med gling pa’s 
statement quoted above.  ‘Jigs med gling pa is not arguing for a 
complete abandonment of laws and rules but that one should 
primarily live within the awareness of the way things are.  One 
dimension of this would be the recognition of the internal 
contradictions to be found within the notions of universals and 
the judgements that are derived from them, together with the 
hypothetical nature of such constructs.  What ‘Jigs med gling pa 
is asking the individual to do is to probe the conceptual nature of 
normalising ethical judge-ment to discover a genuine field of 
reciprocity between human beings that is based on an 
understanding of ‘not-self’.  It is with this movement that rDzogs 
chen thinkers would claim that we discover the glimmerings of 
compassion (thugs rje) as a respon-siveness to ethical situations. 
This can only be discovered, it is argued, once the obstructions of 
conceptualisation have been removed. kLong chen rab ‘byams 
pa, when defining the state of cessation, for example, claims: 
The State of Cessation: It is the cessation of all conceptualisation 
(sPros pa) … In the case of the cessation attained by the 


--- Page 75 ---
Peacock – Ethics in rDzogs Chen Thought 
␣
␣
75
bodhisattvas, through the power of their compassion they con-
tinue to serve living beings … 
Q; If they are free of conceptualisation how can they continue to 
have compassion? 
A:  There is no conceptualisation because he possesses the com-
passion of the wisdom of no-concepts.6 
      Thus we can see that within the rDzogs chen tradition the 
arisal of genuine compassion, interpreted as ‘responsiveness’ 
(thugs rje), is firmly linked to conceptuality and is, in addition, 
coupled with wisdom (ye shes). 
      The above has, I hope, highlighted some of the problems 
associated with the ethical position of the rDzogs chen tradition 
by contrasting it with Kantian deontological ethics. I have not 
attempted at this stage a thorough-going reconstruction of an 
ethics of ‘non-conceptuality’ but have simply attempted to 
provide some philosophical ‘food for thought’ which would allow 
us to re-think this notion rather than merely assent to it or 
dismiss it. 
Dr John Peacock 
(Director, 
 Sharpham College for Buddhist 
 Studies and Contemporary Enquiry) 
 
 
 
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣
␣
6  Shingta chen po, 121a/3. 


--- Page 76 ---


--- Page 77 ---


--- Page 78 ---


--- Page 79 ---


--- Page 80 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
83
BOOK  REVIEWS 
 
Summary of the Topics of Abhidhamma (Abhidhammattha-saṅgaha) 
by Anuruddha, and Exposition of the Topics of Abhi-dhamma 
(Abhidhammatthasaṅgahavibhāvinī) by Sumaṅgala, being a 
commentary to Anuruddha’s Summary of the Topics of 
Abhidhamma. Translated by R.P. Wijeratne and Rupert Gethin. 
Pali Text Society, Oxford 2002.  xxi, 415 pp. £18.00. ISBN: 0 86013 
412 1. 
In 1989 the PTS published in one volume a new edition of the 
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (Abhid-s) by Hammalawa Saddhātissa, 
together with the first edition in Roman script of the Abhi-
dhammatthasaṅgahavibhāvinīṭīkā (Abhid-s-mhṭ), the commen-
tary of Abhid-s. 
     Hearing of the imminent appearance of the edition of the 
Abhid-s-mhṭ, the late Dr R.P. Wijeratne was stimulated to start 
the translation of the text he had often contemplated making but 
had postponed again and again. When completed it was sent to 
the PTS. Dr Saddhātissa recommended its publication, subject to 
certain corrections and changes, which he undertook to make 
himself. He also agreed to write an introduction. Unfortunately, 
he died before he could begin work on either undertaking. 
      It was not easy for the PTS to find someone capable of doing 
what was needed to the translation, but eventually Dr Rupert 
Gethin of the University of Bristol agreed to do so. His university 
duties hindered progress until he was granted a University 
Research Fellowship in 1998, which allowed him to concentrate 
on completing the necessary work. 
      Dr Saddhātissa’s two edition were kept separate, but in this 
translation the relevant portions of the ṭīkā are inserted in their 
appropriate place after each section of Abhid-s, with the page 
numbers of Saddhātissa’s editions inserted in square brackets to 
facilitate reference to the Pāli originals. 
     In his Introduction (pp.xii-xxi) Dr Gethin discusses the author 
and date of Abhid-s, and suggests that a date as early as the sixth 
or early seventh century is not impossible. He considers the 
significance of Abhid-s and Abhid-s-mhṭ, and gives his reasons 
for leaving the technical terms jhāna, dhamma, kamma and kiriya 
untranslated. 


--- Page 81 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
84
      To the translation are added lists of corrigenda to the PTS 
1989 edition of Abhid-s-mhṭ, of preferred readings (pp.369-72), 
and of Abbreviations (pp.373-5). There is a Bibliography (pp.377-
8), a Pāli-English Glossary (pp.379-89), and Index of Pāli, Sanskrit, 
and Sinhala texts cited by Sumaṅgala or referred to in the notes 
(pp.391-2), and a general index (pp.393-415). 
      When one scholar’s work is corrected or edited by another it 
becomes impossible to assess how much of the final work 
represents each scholar’s input. Dr Gethin states (p.x): ‘What I 
have produced in the end must be regarded as virtually a fresh 
translation, one which does, however, take as its inspiration and 
basis  Dr Wijeratne’s hard and sustained work’, and he 
generously places Dr Wijeratne’s name before his own on the 
title page. 
      He repeats (p.xi) Dr Wijeratne’s wish that the translation, as 
finally published, will provide scholars with the inspiration to 
work on improving our knowledge of the traditions of 
Abhidhamma as handed down in the Pāli texts. 
K. R. Norman 
 
Journal of the Pali Text Society, Volume XXVII. Edited by O. von 
Hinüber and R.F. Gombrich. Pali Text Society, Oxford 2002.  183 
pp. £18.75.  ISBN 0 86013 407 5. 
Volume XXVI (2000) of the Journal of the Pali Text Society was 
noted in an earlier number of this journal (BSR 18, 2, 2001, 
pp.250-2). Volume XXVII has now appeared. 
      It contains: 
     (1) Anne M. Blackburn, ‘Notes on Sri Lankan Temple Manu-
script Collections’ (pp.1-59).  This provides a preliminary account 
of the manuscripts held in six Sri Lankan Buddhist temples 
located in the Kandyan and Kurunǟla regions. 
     (2)  Primoz Pecenko, ‘Līnatthapakāsinī and Sāratthamañjūsā: 
The Purāṇaṭīkās and the Ṭīkās on the Four Nikāyas’ (pp.61-113).      
This article contains a comparison of portions of the recently 
discovered manuscript of the Līnatthapakāsinī, the purāṇa-ṭīkā 
on the Manorathapūraṇī (the commentary on the Aṅguttara-
nikāya), with the later ṭīkā named Sāratthamañjūsā. 
     (3) Thomas Oberlies, ‘A Study of the Campeyya Jātaka, 
Including Remarks on the Text of the Saṅkhapāla Jātaka’ (pp.115-
46). This is an English translation of the article which was first 
published in German under the title ‘Eine Studie des Campeyya-


--- Page 82 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
85
Jātaka (mit textkritischen Bemerkungen zum Saṅkhapāla Jātaka’ 
in WZKS  XXXIV (1990), pp.79-106).  
     (4) Heinz Braun, ‘The Colophons of Burmese Manuscripts’ (pp. 
147-53).  This is an English translation of an essay which was first 
published in German in Untersuchungen zur buddhistischen 
Literatur, Zweite Folge, 1997, pp.35-9. 
     (5) Peter Skilling, ‘On a New Edition of the Syāmaraṭṭhassa 
Tepiṭakaṭṭhakatha’ (pp.155-8).  This is a report on a new Thai-
script edition of the Pāli commentaries which was published in 
Bangkok in 1992. 
     (6)  Peter Skilling, ‘Some Citation Inscriptions from South-East 
Asia’ (pp.159-79).  This is a report on recently discovered inscrip-
tions in Angkor Borei in Cambodia, Si Thep in Thailand and Go 
Xoni in Vietnam which include excerpts from Buddhist texts. 
      (7)  An Index to JPTS  IX-XXVII (pp.177-83). 
K. R. Norman 
 
The Glorious Deeds of Pūrṇa.  A translation and study of the 
Pūrṇavadāna. Joel Tatelman. Curzon, Richmond 2000, £40.00; 
Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi 2001. xii, 228 pp. Rs 295.00. ISBN 0-
7007-1082-5. 
The book under review is ‘an extensive revision of a thesis 
approved for the M.A. in Religious Studies, McMaster University, 
1988’. Although it is not usual for an MA thesis to appear in book 
form the present study fully deserves publication and is a useful 
contribution to the study of Buddhist narrative literature.  The 
legend studied by Joel Tatelman deals with the life of a Buddhist 
monk who allegedly introduced Buddhism to the land of 
Śronāparāntaka, largely corresponding to the present state of 
Gujarat. In the introductory chapter the author adduces some 
evidence for the history of Buddhism in this part of India and 
then summarises what we know about Buddhist narrative 
literature, especially its oldest layer. Although not entirely new, 
it is a balanced and readable presentation that tries to 
incorporate what has been written on the topic recently. 
Unfortunately, Tatelman repeats the old error that the date of 
the Divyāvadāna, ‘generally thought to have been compiled in the 
third or fourth century’ (p.8). The arguments proposed for this 
early date are valid only for the sources of the Divyāvadāna, not 
for the text itself. For the date of its compilation we do not have 
any reliable clue and the situation is complicated by the fact that 


--- Page 83 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
86
the text is not uniform (cf, e.g. the catalogue of the Sanskrit 
manuscripts in the Tokyo University Library by Seiren 
Matsuname, Tokyo 1965). Likewise, Tatelman’s dating of the 
Vinaya of the Mūlasarvāstivādins (‘first or second century’, p.14), 
based on Gnoli’s opinion (in his edition of the Saṃghabhedavastu), 
seems to be much too early. 
      Tatelman traces all the texts in Sanskrit, Pāli, Tibetan and 
Chinese that deal with the life of Pūrṇa. They are summarised 
and translated for the greater part in the book, even those in 
Chinese. 
Texts 
of 
a 
similar 
character 
such 
as 
the 
Sumāgadhāvadāna are also adduced and analysed. At the end of 
his introduction Tatelman offers some interesting ideas about 
the narrative, literary, his-torical and philosophical aspects of 
quasi-legendary works like the Pūrṇavadāna. 
      The translation of the longest version of the legend, that from 
the Divyāvadāna (chapter 2), is followed by an analysis that 
begins with the allegory of names. Another central topic is the 
unity of a family and the reasons why and how it can be 
destroyed. Next, Tatelman tries to sketch the psychological 
development of the hero Pūrṇa from a very clever and successful 
businessman and merchant to a monk. The instruction of Pūrṇa 
is also dealt with, although this is a part rich in stock phrases. A 
long, final section treats Pūrṇa’s meritorious deeds for the 
Saṃgha which seem to reflect actual historical events. The four 
appendices contain two translations from the Pāli, one from the 
Sanskrit (Kṣemendra) and one from Chinese. 
      In my opinion the publication is a mature and useful work 
that can be consulted with great profit for study of works of a 
similar character. It is richly documented, well produced and 
almost free of printing mistakes. 
      I would like to conclude my review with a few philological 
notes on the translations: 
      The central text of the present study is the Pūrṇavadāna, the 
second legend of the Divyāvadāna. The author provides us with a 
complete English translation. His textual basis is the editio 
princeps by Cowell and Neil (Cambridge 1886), the slightly revised 
edition by Vaidya (Darbhanga 1959) and the ‘Notes on the 
Divyāvadāna’ by Shackleton Bailey (JRAS 82, 1950-51). These 
latter notes are based on the Tibetan translation of those parts of 
the Divyāvadāna that can also be found in the Vinayavastu of the 
Mūlasarvāstivādins (MSVV), which was most probably the direct 


--- Page 84 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
87
source of the Divyāvadāna. The text of the MSVV is obviously 
better than that of the comparatively late Mss of the 
Divyāvadāna, its Tibetan translation is very good and reliable, and 
therefore Shackleton Bailey was able to propose a great number 
of convin-cing emendations. Tatelman has made full use of the 
notes and has occasionally suggested additional emendations 
that bear testi-mony to his careful reading of related passages 
and texts. His translation is good and pleasant to read. The places 
to be cor-rected are few and not particularly significant. 
– p.46.20: Bhavatrāta means ‘protected by Bhava, i.e. Śiva’, not 
‘Bhava’s Protector’. Cf. Tatelman’s incorrect analysis of the com-
pound on p.98!_ 
– p.49.34: Here Tatelman has changed the transmitted text 
kātarāḥ ‘timid, discouraged’ to *cāturāḥ ‘clever’ on the basis of 
one of the few mistakes by Shackleton Bailey, who read the Tib-
etan translation wrongly as sṅar ma rnams. In fact, the Tibetan 
has sdar ma rnams which renders kātarāḥ. Therefore, no 
alteration is required. 
– p.50.8-9: Tatelman translates yad idānīṃ nirastavyāpārās tiṣṭhā-
maḥ as ‘if we now give ourselves up to that which should be 
regarded as unimportant’. Why not simply ‘if we stay idle’? 
– p.51.7: I would prefer ‘in a good mood’ for saṃmodamānāḥ 
instead of ‘conversing amiably’. 
– p.54.1-2: For ‘Now what sort of king is he in whose home there 
is no yellow (“ox-head”) sandalwood?’ the Tibetan has ‘Who is he 
in whose home there is yellow (“ox-head”) sandalwood?’ I find 
this at least as sensible as the transmitted Sanskrit text of the 
Divyāvadāna. 
– p.63.20: Tatelman’s emendation sauratya for saurabhya is 
certainly correct, although I would prefer the translation ‘friend-
liness’ over ‘compassion’. Edgerton has ‘gentleness, mildness’, 
which is more or less the same. The usual Tibetan equivalent is 
des pa. The translation ‘compassion’ occurs again on p.64. 
– p.63.3-10: The name of the metre, Śārdūlavikriḍita, does not 
mean ‘Tiger’s Roar’, as given in note 80, but ‘the playfulness of a 
tiger’. 
– p.65, line 2 from bottom: Instead of ‘these fearless ones’ for 
vigatabhayā as an attribute of the gods invoked in the situation of 
danger, I would prefer the rendering ‘by whom this danger dis-
appears’. 


--- Page 85 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
88
– p.66.3: The translation ‘assailed’ is based on the emendation         
-daṣṭhāḥ (for -dasthāḥ). Did Tatelman mean -daṣṭāḥ? 
– p.69.3-8: The Sanskrit text of the two stanzas contains two 
metrical mistakes. In vapuṣmattayā the syllable -ma- has to be 
short and in nipīditayauvanāḥ instead of the two short syllable        
-ḍita- only one short syllable is required. In other places 
Tatelman has successfully corrected the defective metrical 
portions. 
– p.92, note 153: Read pratyekabodhi instead of pretyakabodhi. 
      For whatever reason Tatelman writes ‘Darukarṇin’ for  ‘Dāru-
karṇin’ throughout. 
       Another laudable addition is the translation of Kṣemendra’s 
version of the Pūrṇa legend that can be found as story No.36 of 
the Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā. Again, Tatelman’s translation is 
good and very readable. It is a great pity that De Jong’s paper 
‘Notes on the Text of the Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā, pallavas 7-
9 and 11-41’, published in Hokke Bunka Kenkyū 22 (1996), pp.1-92, 
has escaped Tatelman’s attention, since it contains a substantial 
number of very good corrections. Thus the translation of stanzas 
1, 6, 10, 12, 22, 24, 60, 69, 80 and 82 has to be altered slightly.  
Apart from that I would translate upaniṣat in st.17 as ‘cause, basis’ 
(cf. BHSD), not as ‘secret knowledge’. In st.29 I suggest 
translating ‘cooling even fire’ instead of ‘which imparts coolness 
even to that which is on fire’,  Skt dahanasyāpi śītadam.  In st.59 
udīrṇa means ‘grown, risen’, not ‘generated’. In st.68 ‘awaited’ is 
not so felicitous an addition by Tatelman. In st.44 and 56 De 
Jong’s emendations have to be rejected. 
Michael Hahn 
(University of Marburg) 
 
Madhyamakahṛdayam [sic] Bhavyakṛtam: Madhyamakahṛdayam of 
Bhavya. Edited by Chr. Lindtner. The Adyar Library and Research 
Centre, Adyar (Chennai) 2001.  liii, 169 pp. $75.00. ISBN 81-85141-
40-1. 
The Madhyamakahṛdaya-Kārikās (MHK), Bhavya’s major in-
dependent treatise on the Madhyamaka or ‘Middle [Theory]’, are 
one of the masterpieces of the literature of this school of Indian 
Mahāyāna Buddhism. Its author – known also as Bhā(va)viveka 
and Bhāvin – lived in the sixth century and was the source of the 
so-called Svātantrika, or ‘Autonomist’, branch of the Madhya-
maka. Unlike several other masters belonging to the 


--- Page 86 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
89
Madhyamaka school, Bhavya insisted that the use by the 
Mādhyamika philo-sopher-practiser of autonomous (svatantra 
‘independent’) infer-ences (anumāna), inferential signs (liṅga = 
hetu) and formal proofs (prayoga or ‘syllogism’) was required not 
only for estab-lishing his religio-philosophical position against 
opponents, but also for arriving at the understanding (jñāna) of 
reality (tattva), – i.e., svabhāvaśūnyatā  ‘Emptiness of (hypostatic) 
self-existence’ – and hence for attaining liberation (mukti, mokṣa).  
In this way Bhavya’s school has closely and very interestingly 
linked together the logical, epistemological, soteriological and 
gnoseological sides of Buddhist thought.  Although opposed by 
Candrakīrti and his ‘Apagogist’ (*Prāsaṅgika) branch of the 
Madhyamaka, Bhavya was highly respected by Mādhyamikas in 
general as a major inter-preter and thinker in the line of 
Nāgārjuna’s Madhyamaka. He indeed composed a seminal 
exegesis of Nāgārjuna’s Madhya-makakārikās (the Prajñāmūla) 
entitled Prajñāpradīpa (now avail-able only in Tibetan and 
Chinese translations), on which there exists a voluminous and 
valuable sub-commentary by Avalokita-vrata (available only in a 
Tibetan version). 
        Bhavya introduces his MHK through the two topics of the 
bodhicitta, the bodhisattva’s ‘Thought of Awakening’, and the 
munivrata, the ascetic’s vow. Ch. 3, the 360-verse centre-piece of 
the treatise, is then devoted to the search for the knowledge of 
reality (tattvajñānaiṣaṇā). As a major Buddhist thinker, Bhavya 
considers in the following two chapters the doctrines of (4) the 
Śrāvaka in relation to the Mahāyāna, and (5) the Yogācāras (i.e., 
the Vijñānavādins). As a critical philosopher and also as a doxo-
grapher, Bhavya next discusses in four chapters the Brāhmanical 
schools of the (6) Sāṃkhya, (7) Vaiśeṣika, (8) Vedānta, and (9) 
Mīmāṃsā.  Finally, in Chapter 10, he establishes that the Buddha 
was an omniscient being (sarvajña). Bhavya’s work closes with 
two verses eulogising the Buddha and one characterising the 
treatise as the hṛdaya ‘heart, essence’ of the Madhyamaka. 
Curiously, the work is referred to in the Sanskrit colophon of the 
manuscript as tarkajvālā nāma sūtra.  The great commentary 
(vṛtti) on the MHK entitled Tarkajvālā, which is ascribed to Bhavya 
himself, is avail-able to us only in a Tibetan translation. 
       The Sanskrit manuscript serving as the basis of the present 
edition of the MHK was formerly kept at the Ža lu monastery in 
Tibet where it was photographed by G. Tucci, and where Rāhula 


--- Page 87 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
90
Sāṅkṛtyāyana made a hand-copy (from which V.V. Gokhale later 
made a further hand-copy). The manuscript was later removed 
to Beijing, where another set of photographs was then made; 
these have been published as an appendix to the first volume of 
Papers in honour of Prof. Dr Ji Xianlin on the occasion of his eightieth 
birthday (Beijing 1991). The present edition has been prepared 
from prints of this second set of photographs which Lindtner 
compared with prints from Tucci’s earlier and less satisfactory 
photographs. 
      The publication under review is the first edition in a single 
volume of all eleven chapters of the MHK. Previously, individual 
chapters of the MHK had been edited by Lindtner’s predecessors 
as well as by Lindtner himself, in some cases accompanied by an 
English translation. Annette Heitmann also carried out prepara-
tory work on the MHK for her proposed Copenhagen doctoral 
thesis (cf. p.xiv of the present publication); and she compiled a 
useful ‘Bibliographie zur Bhavya-Literatur’ extending to 1995 
and covering the dauntingly intricate history of research on 
Bhavya. Heitmann’s bibliography has been published in K.N. 
Mishra (ed.), Glimpses of the Sanskrit Buddhist Literature (Sarnath 
1997), pp.106-54. 
        The damaged Sanskrit manuscript of the MHK presents a 
number of gaps and some illegible places, so that the Tibetan 
version 
(made 
in 
the 
eleventh 
century 
by 
Atiša 
Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna and Nag tsho Tshul khrims rgyal ba, the 
translators also of the Tarkajvālā) is invaluable both for filling 
lacunae in the manuscript and also (notwithstanding Lindtner’s 
restrictions on pp.xlvi-xlvii) for interpreting the Sanskrit text. 
Where there are more or less extensive gaps in the Sanskrit 
manuscript of Chapters 3 and 5, Lindtner has very usefully 
printed the corresponding Tibetan translation. But in a large 
number of other cases he has not done so without, however, 
explaining why he has proceeded in such dif-ferent ways in his 
edition. Thus, parts of Chapters 6, 7, 9, 10 and 11 – and also 
several places in Chapter 8 – are missing owing to lacunae in the 
Sanskrit manuscript, but the corresponding por-tions of the 
Tibetan have nevertheless not been reproduced in this edition. 
This text in Nāgarī  script may be intended as an editio minor, on 
which a fuller editio maior in Roman transliteration is to follow 
(see the dust jacket of this volume). 


--- Page 88 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
91
      The text-edition is preceded by Lindtner’s introduction in 
which he provides an outline of its contents. He also mentions 
several other works ascribed to Bhavya – in particular the 
Prajñāpradīpa, the Tarkajvālā and the Madhyamakaratnapradīpa – 
but without hinting even in passing at the philological and 
historical problems that attach to the attribution of the last two 
works to the author of the MHK. (Aspects of this thorny problem 
as concerns the latter works and the Madhyamakārthasaṃgraha 
have been discussed by the present reviewer in D. Seyfort Ruegg 
and L. Schmithausen [ed.], Earliest Buddhism and Madhyamaka 
[Leiden 1990], pp.59-71; and, with regard to the Madhyamaka-
ratnapradīpa alone, in our Buddha-nature, Mind and the problem of 
gradualism [London 1989], pp.206-9.)  The reader is thus told 
nothing of the many important, and very interesting, historical 
and philosophical questions that continue to surround our 
under-standing of Bhavya’s thought. Lindtner’s allusions on p.xii 
to Bhavya’s contemporaries are also elliptical. As it stands, the 
for-mulation on p.xvi according to which the Mādhyamika 
admits the existence of a bhāva ‘entity’ on the surface-level of  
saṃvṛti would hardly be acceptable to Mādhyamikas of 
Candrakīrti’s school.  For it leaves unclarified the philosophically 
highly significant questions as to whether, even on the saṃvṛti-
level, bhāvas can properly be said to be produced, and 
consequently whether the qualification (viśeṣaṇa) ‘paramārthatas’ 
(‘in absolute reality’) should at all be affixed to Nāgārjuna’s 
statement negating the arising of bhāvas (as Bhavya and his 
followers have maintained).  For Candrakīrti, such a qualification 
by Bhavya of statements relating to reified entities in fact proves 
to be philosophically incoherent and unintelligible (see 
Prasannapadā i.1). 
      The edition of the MHK, beautifully produced by the Vasanta 
Press at Adyar, is followed by an index of half ślokas, and by an 
Apparatus criticus (for which the Tibetan version has been only 
partially exploited for reasons advanced by Lindtner at pp.xlvi-
xlvii). Regrettably, on p.149, no bibliographical details have been 
provided for several of the earlier (partial) editions to which 
reference is made by various sigla in the Apparatus criticus. 
      This edition of the MHK in a single handy volume will doubt-
less give a new impulse to the study of this great monument of 
Madhyamaka thought and its renowned author. 


--- Page 89 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
92
D. Seyfort Ruegg 
 
Śaṅkaranandanas Īśvarāpākaraṇasaṅkṣepa  mit einem anonymen 
Kommentar und weiteren Materialen zur buddhistischen Gottes-
politik, Teil I: Texte; Teil 2: Annotierte Übersetzungen und Studie 
zur Auseinandersetzung über die Existenz Gottes. Helmut 
Krasser. (Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asien Nr 39) 
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
Vienna 2002. xix, 127 & 378 pp. Pb. ISBN 3-7001-3024-4. 
The author of this scholarly publication is a seasoned researcher 
into Buddhist epistemological and logical texts in the post-
Dignāga tradition of Dharmakīrti (c.600-660); another of his 
publications (1991), on the validity of knowledge as expounded 
by Dharmottara (c.740-800), was belatedly reviewed in this 
journal in 1994  (BSR 11, 2, pp.190-2). This time he has turned his 
attention to the arguments brought forth within Dharmakīrti’s 
tradition against theistic ‘proofs’ of the existence of God as 
discussed in the ‘Summary of Refutations of God’ by 
Śaṅkaranandana (c. 940/50-1020/30) on the basis of nine stanzas 
from Dharmakīrti’s work Pramāṇavārttika (Exposition of Means of 
Knowledge). These few verses represent, remarkably, the 
beginning of Buddhist anti-God polemics on logical grounds. 
Dignāga (fifth century), the founder of the Buddhist school of 
logic, does not appear to have been pre-occupied with this 
problem. 
      The rejection of the idea of a Creator God goes back to the 
oldest Buddhist sources (cf. Aṅguttara-nikāya, PTS, I, 174 = III, 61, 
3). Helmuth von Glasenapp (Der Buddhismus – eine atheist-ische 
Religion) dealt with this theme quite extensively already in 1954, 
including also Mahāyāna sources up to Nāgārjuna, although he 
was criticised for his terminology. It is probably preferable to 
employ the term ‘non-theistic’ for Buddhism, which accepts the 
existence of the category of (non-eternal) gods. The author 
points out further sources which reject the idea of a Creator God, 
such 
as 
Aśvaghoṣa, 
Abhidharmakośa, 
Abhidharmapradīpa, 
Bhāvaviveka, Śāntideva and others. He also lists a number of 
earlier academic researches into this theme. 
      In order to put Śaṅkaranandana’s work into perspective and 
enable better understanding of his terse text, which presupposes 
knowledge of earlier polemics, the author includes extracts from 
other authors who wrote commentaries on Dharmakīrti’s nine 


--- Page 90 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
93
stanzas. Of great value is his introductory study in the second 
volume, which contains the Sanskrit and Tibetan texts of the 
nine stanzas with a translation and copious explanations and the 
reac-tions to Dharmakīrti’s arguments from six representatives 
of the Nyāya school of Hindu logic in the form of extracts in 
Sanskrit, again with translations and copious explanations. 
      Both volumes are immaculately produced with extensive 
notes, references and indices. All texts are, of course, romanised, 
but there is also a reproduction of a manuscript of 
Śaṅkaranandana’s text. This is a piece of specialised research 
into a little known period of development of Buddhist logic in 
India which should eventually be made available to a wider 
readership in a com-prehensive survey. Works of this kind will 
hopefully one day encourage someone to undertake the task. 
Karel Werner 
(SOAS, London) 
 
Sarvāstivāda Buddhist Scholasticism. Charles Willemen, Bart 
Dessein and Collett Cox. (Handbuch der Orientalistik, HO2, 011), 
Brill, Leiden 1998. xvii, 341 pp. $109.50. ISBN 90-04-10231-0. 
Prime facie this book is presented as the collaborative work of 
three scholars, Charles Willemen, Bart Dessein and Collett Cox. In 
fact Willemen’s only substantive contribution to the volume 
appears to be the two and a half pages (xi-xiii) that comprise the 
preface, at the end of which he indicates that the bulk of the text 
(three of the volume’s four chapters, comprising 167 pages) are 
Dessein’s work, while Chapter Three (116 pp) is the work of Cox. 
      Dessein’s opening chapter, ‘About the Dharma’ begins with 
the death of the Buddha and the first ‘council’ (saṃgīti), here 
dubbed the ‘First Synod’, and a brief discussion of the formation 
of the Sūtra, Vinaya and Abhidharma Piṭakas, before turning to 
‘Sarvāstivāda Philosophical Basics’. Dessein presents these as (1) 
the existence of dharmas in relationship to the three time 
periods of past, present and future, (2) dependent origination 
(pratītya-samutpāda) in terms of four different methods, (3) 
causality in terms of six types of cause, and (4) intermediate 
existence (antarā-bhava) between death and rebirth. The 
Sarvāstivādin account of the Path is only very briefly mentioned 
(pp.31-2). Dessein’s method in each case is largely descriptive, 
setting out the basic ideas, citing passages and concluding with 
an illustrative quotation from the *Samyuktābhidharmahṛdaya of 


--- Page 91 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
94
Dharmatrāta, a text of which he has since published a complete 
translation and study (Bart Dessein, Samyuktābhidharmahṛdaya: 
Heart of Scholasti-cism with Miscellaneous Additions, 3 vols, Delhi 
1999). His brief account of Sarvāstivāda thought cannot be 
recommended for the clarity of its insight, though it is useful for 
tying certain ideas to specific textual sources. These sixteen 
pages are the only deliberate attempt in the volume to provide 
some sort of account of Sarvāstivādin ideas, so despite its title 
the volume contains very little exposition of Sarvāstivāda 
Buddhist thought as such; instead it concentrates on presenting 
the history of the Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma literature: the seven 
canonical works, and the commentarial and exegetical tradition 
of the Vibhāṣā compendia and various treatises (śāstra). 
      Dessein’s second chapter, ‘History and Sarvāstivāda’, is just 
over 100 pages long, and is divided into two parts, ‘The Mauryan 
Empire’ and ‘Bactria and Gandhāra’. The first part considers the 
councils of Vaiśālī and Pāṭaliputra and splits within the early 
Saṃgha, and then moves on to consider the formation of the 
Sarvāstivādin Canon. The second part focuses on the 
development of the Sarvāstivāda school in Bactria and Gandhāra, 
and considers the formation of the various groups and sub-
schools within the Sarvāstivāda – the Dārṣṭāntika Sautrāntika, 
Mūla-Sarvāstivāda, and the Vaibhāṣika. (Incidentally, sub-section 
three on p.121 is entitled ‘Doctrinal Evolution’, but given as 
‘Vaibhāṣika Ortho-   doxy’ in the general contents on p.viii.) 
      Dessein’s purpose in these two chapters is not entirely clear. 
It would seem that he is aiming at a critical survey and summary 
of the relevant scholarship. The problem with these two chapters 
is twofold. In the first place Dessein’s style is somewhat dense, 
such that it is not always easy to follow just what he wants to say 
about the material he is presenting. In the second place, his 
consider-ation of the scholarly literature tends to rely rather 
heavily on the pioneering work of Bareau, Demiéville and 
Frauwallner, while ignoring more recent scholarship, especially 
that concerned with the Southern tradition and Pāli sources. 
Dessein furnishes his text with numerous references to the 
primary and secondary literature, yet his interpretation of these 
is hardly a model of clarity. And when he does offer definite 
interpretations they do not always inspire confidence. Thus, in 
considering the various reasons for the first split in the Saṃgha 
between the Sthaviras and Mahā-sāṃghikas, Dessein, following 


--- Page 92 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
95
Bareau, favours the conclusion that the schism came about as a 
result of the five points of Mahādeva (p.48), simply ignoring 
more recent scholarship that suggests otherwise (e.g. J.J. Nattier 
and C.S. Prebish, ‘Mahāsāṃghika Origins: The Beginnings of 
Buddhist Sectarianism’, History of Religions 16 [1976], pp.237-72; 
and L.S. Cousins, ‘The “Five Points” and the Origins of the 
Buddhist Schools’, The Buddhist Forum 2 [1991], pp.27-60). And 
when dealing with the third council of Pāṭaliputra he again 
follows Bareau in suggesting that this event should be seen as 
concerned with a dispute between the Sarvāstivādins and 
Theravādins, although such a view has no clear justification in 
the sources which, as K.R. Norman has pointed out in his ‘Aśoka’s 
“Schism” Edict’, Collected Papers III (Oxford 1992), pp.191-218, 
appear to conflate two quite different events, the first addressing 
the issue of people masquerading as Buddhist monks without 
being properly ordained or following the prescrip-tions of the 
Vinaya, and the second a communal recitation of the scriptures 
including Moggaliputta Tissa’s exposition of the Kathā-vatthu.  
While Dessein’s first two chapters do succeed in providing a 
useful source of reference if approached cautiously, it has to be 
said that the overall result is a somewhat confused and confusing 
account of both the primary source material and the scholarship 
relating to the origins of the early Buddhist schools. 
      By way of contrast, the third chapter of this volume, Collett 
Cox’s ‘Kaśmīra Vaibhāṣika Orthodoxy’, is a model of clarity and 
good judgement and can be recommended without reservation 
as an introduction to the history and literature of Sarvāstivādin 
Abhidharma. The chapter falls into two main parts, the first of 
which seeks to sketch out the background against which the 
development of Sarvāstivāda-Vaibhāṣika Abhidharma literature 
should be seen. The following observation deserves to be quoted 
in full: 
The circumstances in which Abhidharma emerged caution that an 
accurate reconstruction of its early history would be much more 
complex than the surface picture projected by the extant textual 
record. As with the emergence of any new literary genre, we can 
find predecessors or texts that anticipate Abhidharma style and 
content not included within the corpus of Abhidharma texts. 
Therefore it seems more reasonable to define Abhidharma not as a 
set of individual texts, but rather as a type of exegesis that 
gradually developed in tandem with distinctive content, and 


--- Page 93 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
96
eventually resulted in an independent branch of inquiry and a 
concomitant and separate genre of texts. (p.142) 
Cox goes on to suggest that we should be wary of seeing the early 
canonical Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma texts as originally sectarian 
compositions; rather ‘it is probable that they predate, at least in 
some incipient form, the arising of sharply delineated groups 
and that they circulated in use among many groups’ (p.145). 
      The second and greater part of Cox’s chapter considers the 
structure and  content of in turn the seven works of the 
canonical Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma, the subsequent exegetical 
Vibhāṣā compendia (which define the received interpretations 
and posi-tions of Sarvāstivādin Abhidharma), and three late 
treatises of the Kaśmīra Vaibhāṣikas that were composed partly 
in response to Vasubandhu’s auto-commentary to the verses of 
his 
Abhidharma-kośa, 
namely 
Saṃghabhadra’s 
*Abhidharmasamayapradīpikā and *Nyāyānusāra (which survive 
only in Chinese translation), and the Abhidharmadīpa by an 
unknown author. 
      In the fourth chapter of the volume, ‘Bactria and Gandhāra’, 
Dessein backtracks chronologically to consider a number of trea-
tises that predate the Kośa and only survive in Chinese 
translation, as well as the Kośa itself. In the first section he 
discusses the titles, authors, dates and structure of ‘three Hṛdaya 
works’ – Dharmaśrī’s (or, according to Dessein, who gives due 
weight 
to 
the 
phonetic 
rendering 
of 
this 
name, 
Dharmaśreṣṭhin’s)  *Abhi-dharmahṛdaya and two works that 
expand on this, Upaśānta’s *Abhidharmahṛdaya-śāstra and 
Dharmatrāta’s *Saṃyuktābhi-dharmahṛdaya-śāstra. In the second 
section he turns to the Kośa, providing tables comparing its 
structure 
and 
doctrinal 
positions 
with 
that 
of 
the 
*Saṃyuktābhidharmahṛdaya-śāstra. Much of this material has been 
subsequently published as the introduction to Dassein’s English 
translation of the latter work. Finally, Dessein turns to two 
further treatises, Goṣaka’s *Abhidharmāmṛtarasa and Skandhila’s 
*Abhidharmāvatāra. 
      As with Dassein’s earlier chapters, while there is valuable 
reference material here, the presentation is not always exactly 
coherent. Thus, at one point (p.259) in the course of 
consideration of the Hṛdaya works we are told that Upaśānta’s 
*Abhidharma-hṛdaya-śāstra is ‘the first work after the work of 
Dharmaśreṣṭhin’ and that it was probably composed in the third 


--- Page 94 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
97
century CE; a few pages later (p.278) we are told that Ghoṣaka’s 
*Abhidharmām-ṛtarasa is likewise based on Dharmaśreṣṭhin’s 
*Abhidharma-hṛdaya and was composed in the second century CE. 
      The volume is furnished with a bibliography, divided into 
primary and secondary sources, and two indexes, one general 
and one of Sanskrit technical terms. The bibliography of 
secondary sources includes a considerable number of items by 
modern Japanese scholars; indeed, the account of Japanese 
scholarship is one of the useful features of this book. 
      While the contemporary student of Buddhist thought does 
not want for expositions of Madhyamaka and, though to a lesser 
extent, Yogācāra, a full account of what must be regarded as the 
basis of these Mahāyāna systems, Abdhidharma – and especially 
the Abhidharma of the Sarvāstivādins – remains a desideratum 
for the proper appreciation of Buddhist thought. The present 
vol-ume’s title suggests that one might have expected to find in 
it a rather more sustained exposition of Sarvāstivāda-Vaibhāṣika 
Buddhist thought than it in fact contains, and it could have been 
more accurately entitled ‘A History of Sarvāstivāda Buddhist 
Literature’. In sum this is a rather uneven volume which 
neverthe-less contains some very useful material and, despite its 
short-comings, in the present state of our knowledge and 
appreciation of Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma can only be welcomed. 
Rupert Gethin 
(University of Bristol) 
 
 The Eminent Monk: Buddhist Ideals in Medieval Chinese Hagi-ography. 
John Kieschnick. (Studies in East Asian Buddhism 10), University 
of Hawai’i/Kuroda Institute, Honolulu 1997. vii, 218 pp. ISBN 0-
8248-1841-5. 
This is an engaging study of the three medieval hagiographical 
collections collectively known as ‘The Biographies of Eminent 
Monks’. The ‘Biographies’ were compiled by the scholar-monks 
Huijiao (497-554), Daoxuan (596-667) and Zanning (919-1001), 
and have become a standard source of information for modern 
scholars working on medieval Chinese Buddhism. 
      Two pioneering articles on this topic were published by 
Arthur Wright some fifty years ago and they were still 
considered a standard reference until quite recently. Wright 
considered Huijiao’s attitute to his materials comparable to that 


--- Page 95 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
98
of a modern ‘historian’. He wrote that he ‘was motivated by a 
desire … to res-cue Buddhist biography from the limbo of the 
exotic, the bizarre, and give to the lives of the monks a place of 
honour in the cultural history of China’ (‘Biography and 
Hagiography: Hui chao’s Lives of Eminent Monks’ in Silver Jubilee 
Volume, Kyoto University 1954, p.385). Shinohara Koichi, among 
others, later challenged these views and emphasised Huijiao and 
the other compilers’ keen interest and dependency on miracle 
stories and the powerful notion of ‘cosmic response’ (gantong). 
Kieschnick too moves away from the attempt to establish the 
‘Biographies’ as ‘historical’ sources. Throughout the book, he 
questions the use of categories such as ‘history’, ‘historiography’ 
and ‘hagiography’, and looks instead at the ‘Biographies’ as 
‘representations of the image of the monk, of what monks were 
supposed to be’ (p.1). As he puts it in the introduction, this is a 
study of the ‘monastic imagination’. 
      The book consists of three chapters, plus an introduction and 
final reflections. In the rather brief introduction, Kieschnick 
offers some background information as to the motivations for 
writing the ‘Biographies’, their sources, structure and reception. 
He then proceeds to examine the stories by dividing them into 
three main categories representing monastic ideals: asceticism, 
thaumaturgy and scholarship. Chapter One, ‘Asceticism’, 
discusses the ‘mona-stic distinction’, namely those very 
behaviours and material aspects that characterise a monk’s life. 
While discussing clothing, sex and dietary regimes, Kieschnick 
rightly counterpoints the acceptable norm with its many 
accepted exceptions. The larger socio-religious context is called 
in to explain the creation of a pattern. In the case of the adoption 
of vegetarianism, for example, which has become a fundamental 
feature of Chinese Buddhism, he observes that it was also 
because of ‘social pressure from non-Buddhists as from monks 
and laypeople that diet became such an important part of the 
Chinese monk’s identity’ (p.27). In the final section of the 
chapter Kieschnick examines some of the more extreme acts of 
asceticism based on instructions in the Lotus Sūtra, such as self-
mutilation and ritual suicide, and convincingly argues that ‘as the 
language of self-sacrifice reveals, in these incidents the monk or 
layman through self-mutilation drew on the power of the relic in 
an attempt to transfer or internalise the sanctity of the sacred 
object’ (p.44). 


--- Page 96 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
99
      The second chapter, ‘Thaumaturgy’, examines the stories 
con-cerned with techniques of wonder-working, such as rain-
making, prophecy, fortune-telling, spell-casting, and the 
specialist body of knowledge about the spirit-world. These 
techniques were taken for granted, and accepted as a feature of 
clerical accomplishment. Kieschnick interestingly observes that 
‘in general, these abilities were linked to the perceived alien 
character of a monk’, parti-cularly in the case of spells, since 
‘monks reputed to have mas-tered spells were almost always 
foreigners’ (p.110). This is cer-tainly a very complex topic. The 
late Michael Strickmann devoted some attention to it (see, for 
example, Mantras et mandarins: Le Bouddhisme tantrique en Chine, 
Paris 1996), and I suspect his insightful comments about spells, 
mantras, dhāraṇīs, the use of the human voice, and the power of 
the Sanskrit language in a ritual context might perhaps have 
enriched the discussion herein. 
      The third chapter, ‘Scholarship’, illuminates some aspects of 
the academic training of the scholar-monk. Indeed, as Kieschnick 
rightly points out, ‘many if not most important thinkers in medi-
eval China were monks’ (p.112). An intriguing section of this 
chapter deals with the undeservedly little studied topic of mon-
astic debate. Kieschnick shows that a monk was not only 
expected to be an expert orator, but also to be able to refute all 
kinds of challenges. The medieval debates, it emerges, were 
rather turbu-lent affairs, full of malice, jokes and slander. In this, 
Kieschnick suggests, the Song ‘Biographies’ hinted at the rise of a 
less sombre and austere cleric, and at the humour and 
irreverence of Chan hagiography. 
      The final reflections summarise the salient points of the book. 
The index is extensive and quite useful. The bibliography 
contains a good range of primary and secondary sources, the 
majority of the latter in English and Japanese with some Chinese 
and a few French ones. Apart from some minor mistakes in the 
biblio-graphy, the text is generally very well written and edited. 
In con-clusion, this is a well-researched and carefully argued 
book. Not only does it contain refreshing perspectives on 
Buddhist medieval hagiography and translated some fascinating 
stories, but it also opens up new research avenue on a wide range 
of topics. 
Francesca Tarocco 
(SOAS, London) 


--- Page 97 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
100
 
Mount Lu Revisited: Buddhism in the Life and Writings of Su Shih. 
Beata Grant. University of Hawai’i Press, Honolulu 1994. 249 pp. 
$36.00. ISBN 0-8248-1625-0. 
This monograph is part of a recent attempt by American academ-
ics to re-evaluate the role of Buddhism in post-Tang China, and 
particularly its importance among literati of the Song period. 
During the past decade, studies by Robert Gimello, Daniel 
Stevenson, Peter Gregory, Yü Chün-fang, Daniel Getz and Miriam 
Levering, among others, have contributed immensely to a radical 
reassessment of the place of Buddhism in Chinese culture during 
the late medieval and early modern period. In fact, far from 
being a declining or spent force, as the author of Mount Lu 
Revisited also indicates, ‘Buddhism played an extremely vital role 
in the literary, cultural, and religious life of the Sung 
dynasty’(p.2). 
      The volume focuses on the Northern Song literatus Su Shi 
(1037-1101), arguably one of the most fascinating and complex 
personalities in the whole of Chinese history. The aim of the 
book is to ‘explore the many different levels – intellectual, 
aesthetic and existential – at which Su engaged the Buddhism of 
his time’ (p.10). The book consists of nine chapters, of which the 
first is a prologue and the last an epilogue. In Chapter 2, Grant 
offers a brief survey of eleventh century Chinese Buddhism. This 
picture is somehow dated and has been largely superseded by 
more recent publica-tions, such as Buddhism in the Sung edited by 
Peter N. Gregory and Daniel A. Getz (Honolulu 1999). The core of 
the book (Chapters 3-8) is a chronological treatment of Su’s life 
through his literary activities. In fact, each chapter is named 
after a line of a poem such as ‘Of Arhats and Altruistic Monks’ 
and ‘In Buddha Country’ and contains large excerpts of poems in 
translation as well as a discussion of their supposed ‘Buddhist’ 
background. 
      Su Shi is best known among students of Chinese culture as an 
outstanding painter, poet, calligrapher, critic and essayist. More-
over, he was also very competent in other fields, spanning from 
engineering to political administration to gourmandise. These 
facts alone make him a very complex subject for a monograph. In 
the realms of thought and ‘religion’, Su was not only conversant 
with Confucian literature and exegesis, but also well versed in 
Buddhist as well as Daoist scriptures. In fact, before he became 


--- Page 98 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
101
interested in Buddhism, he had already studied parts of the 
Daoist Canon and made pilgrimages to Daoist sites. Thus, it 
would be dangerous, as Grant herself consents, to construct Su 
Shi as a ‘Buddhist’, as much as it would be to construct him as a 
‘Con-fucian’ or a ‘Daoist’. 
      However, even if this is not the author’s stated aim, the 
exclusive search for ‘Buddhist sources’ can ultimately run the 
risk of obfuscating the degree of inter-textual references and 
cross-religious metaphors present in Su Shi’s writings, let alone 
clarifying his religious practices in the context of the contem-
porary religious landscape. In this, the volume is disappointing, 
particularly, I imagine, for a Su Shi scholar and for a student of 
Chinese religious history. 
      For these and other problems of a more technical nature, the 
volume was negatively reviewed by Curtis Dean Smith in the 
Journal of Chinese Religions 24 (1996), pp.193-5. This said, the book 
is not entirely unrewarding for a student of Chinese Buddhism. 
For example, one can profit by learning something about the use 
and appropriation of Buddhist themes by medieval literati, even 
if specific references to primary sources in the Buddhist Canon 
would have enhanced the scholarly value of the book. More 
detailed information on the interactions with the con-temporary 
monastic milieu would have also been welcomed. Furthermore, 
in a very insightful recent study, Daniel Stevenson pointed out 
that Su Shi had been a patron of the shuilu fahui (see Daniel B. 
Stevenson, ‘Text, Image and Transformation in the history of the 
Shuilu fahui, the Buddhist Rite for Deliverance of Creatures of 
Water and Land’ in Marsha Weidner [ed.] Cultural Intersections in 
later Chinese Buddhism, Honolulu 2001, pp.30-72). This ceremony 
being arguably ‘the most spectacular liturgy in the Chinese 
Buddhist repertoire’, it is remarkable that the verses written by 
Su Shi are still ‘displayed in shuilu altars today, much as they 
were a millennium ago’ (Stevenson, op. cit, p.60). This fact alone 
grants Su Shi a special place in Chinese religious history and 
deserves much more attention than it has received so far.  Grant 
touches on the subject of shuilu poems (pp.144-9), but her treat-
ment of the topic is far from exhaustive. 
      In conclusion, although Chinese and Japanese scholars have 
made much progress in illuminating the religious motives in Su 
Shi’s life and work, Beata Grant’s book still stands, to my knowl-
edge, as one of the few English-language sources for assessing 


--- Page 99 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
102
the complex topic, and this can still be of some interest to those 
who do not have access to Asian sources. 
FrancescaTarocco 
 
The Origins of Buddhist Monastic Codes in China. An Annotated 
Translation and Study of the Chanyuan qinggui. Yifa. (Kuroda 
Institute, Classics on East Asian Buddhism) University of Hawai’i 
Press, Honolulu 2002. xxx, 352 pp. $60.00. ISBN 0-8248-2494-6. 
As the title of this book indicates, the work traces the origins of 
the monastic codes in China and mainly concentrates on the 
Chanyuan qinggui, ‘Rules of Purity for the Chan Monastery’.  The 
Chanyuan qinggui is the earliest extant Chan monastic code and 
was compiled by the Chan monk Changlu Zongze in 1103. The 
code contains a detailed overview of all aspects of daily life in 
public Buddhist monasteries and delineates the administrative 
hierarchy and the various ranks of functions within such monas-
teries. 
      In the first part of the book, the author focuses on the indebt-
edness of the Chanyuan qinggui to the Indian Vinayas and 
describes the Chinese historical and cultural contexts in which 
the code arose. Doing so, she successfully demonstrates a clear 
line of continuity between the Indian Vinayas, the compilation of 
Saṃgha regulations by Chinese monks, such as Dao’an (312-85), 
Huiyuan (334-417), Daoxuan (596-667) and Yijing (635-713), and 
the compilation of various ‘Rules of Purity’. The influence of the 
latter rules in Japan are also discussed. In an interesting and 
original way Yifa further points out the external factors that in-
fluenced the composition of the Chanyuan qinggui. The text 
proves to conform to state decrees concerning such matters as 
travel permits, the sale of certificates and the creation of 
monastic offices.  Court protocol, popular customs and Confucian 
books of rites also exerted some influence. For her study, the 
author relies on a remarkable knowledge of primary and 
secondary sources, especially Chinese and Japanese, but also 
Western. Still, it is a pity that a quite recent work on the Chan 
‘Rules of Purity’ has not been taken into account: Claudia Fritz, 
Die Verwaltungsstruktur der Chan-Kloster in der späten Yuan-Zeit, Das 
4. Buch der Chixiu Baizhang qinggui, übersetzt, annotiert und mit einer 
Einleitung versehen, Bern 1994. The latter work focuses on a code 
compiled in the fourteenth century. Another good tool on 
disciplinary texts missing in the bibliography is Akira Yuyama’s 


--- Page 100 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
103
A Systematic Survey of Buddhist Sanskrit Literature, Erste Teil: 
Vinaya-Texte, Wiesbaden 1979. 
      The second part of the book offers a biography of the author 
of the Chanyuan qinggui and a meticulously annotated translation 
of the text. Again, the author traces back the influence that 
Changlu Zongze experienced, pointing out his debts to both the 
Indian and Chinese traditions. 
      Yifa’s work provides the reader with an excellent overview of 
the first ten centuries of Buddhist monastic discipline in China. 
On the one hand, the author perfectly shows how the monastic 
codes adapted to the cultural and administrative context of the 
Chinese empire and, on the other hand, the work strongly 
emphasises how these codes are indebted to the Indian Vinayas 
and to the commentaries upon the latter. The Indian origin of 
many rules of daily life is pointed out in a detailed way, making 
extensive use of all available Vinaya texts and commentaries. 
Inevitably, however, a few points seem to have been overlooked 
or misunderstood. When, for instance, the three earliest Vinaya 
texts traditionally said to have been translated into Chinese in 
the third century are mentioned (pp.3-4), the reader is correctly 
warned that two of these works – the two extant Dharmaguptaka 
works – probably were not translated in the third century. 
However, no doubt at all is expressed concerning the third work, 
a Mahā-sāṃghika text translated by Dharmakāla. Since this work 
is not mentioned in the earliest extant catalogue compiled by 
Sengyou in 518, it is not certain that it really existed. Moreover, 
given the fact that, contrary to the Dharmaguptaka works, the 
Mahāsāṃghika text is no longer extant, no real indication to 
prove its origin is available. Another work mentioned without 
any warning among the Vinaya texts introduced into China is a 
text on the nuns’ precepts said to be translated by the monk Mili 
(p.5). This no longer extant work was most probably compiled in 
China and has always been considered as apocryphal, even in the 
earliest catalogue available to us (Sengyou, Chu sanzang jiji, T 
2145, 15a1, passim). 
      On p.7, the author states that ‘Emperor Zhong of the Tang 
(r,684) enacted a decree prohibiting the use of the Ten Section 
Vinaya’ (i.e. the Sarvāstivāda Vinaya). The emperor indeed issued 
an imperial order, but probably not during the six weeks that he 
was in power between the end of 683 and the beginning of 684. 
At that time, he was completely under the domination of his 


--- Page 101 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
104
wife, the empress Wei, and of his mother, the dowager empress 
Wu. In 705 he resumed the throne. As a devout Buddhist, he 
stimulated Buddhism throughout the empire. He died in 710. It 
seems there-fore probable that it must have been between 705 
and 710 that the monk Dao’an (654-717) requested the emperor 
personally to impose by imperial order that the Dharmaguptaka 
Vinaya (as promoted by the monk Daoxuan) be followed 
throughout the whole empire. The emperor agreed to the 
request (Zanning, Song gaoseng zhuan, T 2061, 793c25-27) and 
issued a decree imposing the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya. Although 
this surely excluded the use of any other Vinaya, the emperor in 
fact never explicitly forbade the Sarvāstivāda Vinaya. 
      A few misunderstandings concerning the Indian Vinayas have 
slipped into the text. This is, for instance, the case when, on p.13, 
the poṣadha ceremony is explained. At this fortnightly ceremony, 
the list of precepts (prātimokṣa) is recited. All fully ordained 
members of the Saṃgha have to be present. The author presents 
the ceremony introduced in China as a confession ceremony. 
Although confession was certainly its main purpose at the time  
the Buddhist community first installed it, the Indian Vinayas 
translated into Chinese clearly say that if a monk or a nun has 
committed an offence, he or she has to confess it before the start 
of the ceremony. If not, he or she cannot even participate (see, 
for instance, the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, T 1428, 825c23-827b6). 
The author also states that, before the recitation of the precepts, 
representatives of monks and nuns unable to attend the 
ceremony express the wishes of the absent parties. This is most 
probably a misunderstanding of the term yu     , commonly 
translated as ‘to wish’. In the above context, however, yu is a 
rendering of the Indian term chanda, ‘consent’: anyone not able 
to join in a formal procedure must either remain outside the 
boundary (sīmā) of the monastery or send his or her consent 
(chanda,      ) through a-nother monk or nun. No wishes can be 
expressed. 
      On p.54 (and in the translation on pp.112 and 245), the author 
does not make a clear distinction between the seven categories 
of precepts (pārājika, saṃghāvaśeṣa, aniyata, niḥsargika, pātayan-
tika, pratideśanīya, śaikṣa and adhikaraṇaśamatha – of all these 
Indian terms I mention only one variant) and the seven 
categories of offences (pārājika, saṃghāvaśeṣa, sthūlātyaya, 
pātayantika [niḥsargika pātayantika and pātayantika], pratideśaniya, 


--- Page 102 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
105
duṣkṛta and durbhāṣita). This is rather confusing. Moreover, the 
term pārājika is without any remark translated as ‘defeat’ 
following I.B. Horner’s translation of the Pāli Vinaya. Yet, ‘defeat’ 
is to all prob-ability not the correct etymology of the word. On 
the saṃghā-vaśeṣa offence, the author says that it can be atoned 
for by immediate confession before the assembly. This 
explanation of ‘immediate confession’ is very strange since, 
according to the Vinaya texts, a saṃghāvaśeṣa offence is always 
followed by one or two periods of penance. A monk who has 
concealed the offence first has to undergo a parivāsa period, the 
duration of which cor-responds to the number of days that he 
has concealed it. In such a case, there is clearly no ‘immediate 
confession’. Afterwards, a short mānatva penance is inflicted 
upon the monk. Only then can he be rehabilitated. A monk who 
has never concealed his offence only has to undergo a mānatva 
penance. For a nun, there is no parivāsa period of penance. 
      Finally, it is a pity that in a few passages, especially in the first 
part of the work, some incorrect renderings or misspellings of 
Indian terms disturb the picture, such as the term bhikṣuṇī that is 
consistently misspelled. On p.73, an enumeration of phonetic 
tran-scriptions (alile pixile amole                                            , Dharma-
guptaka Vinaya, T 1428, 875b2-3) is translated in the following 
way: ‘harītakī, pixile, āmalaka fruit’. No explanation is given. 
Besides the fact that it would be interesting to provide the reader 
with some information on these trees, the fruits of which are 
often used as medicine, the correct translation should be ‘harītakī 
(or     -ka), vibhītakī (or -ka; cf. U. Wogihara et al., Kan ’yaku Taishō 
Bonwa Daijiten, Tokyo 1974, p.1232), āmalakī (or -ka). 
      It is important to note that the above remarks only concern 
details and that they should therefore not be overemphasised. 
Instead, Yifa’s work presents a thorough study of the complex 
origins of the ‘Rules of Purity’, as well as a carefully annotated 
translation of the Chanyuan qinggui. It is a valuable instrument 
for all those interested in the Chinese monastic codes. 
Ann Heirman 
(University of Ghent) 
 
The Dalai Lama’s Secret Temple: Tantric Wall Paintings from Tibet. Ian 
A. Baker. Photographs by Thomas Laird. Thames and Hudson, 
London 2000. 216 pp, inc. 150 colour illus. £36.00. ISBN 0 500 
510032. 


--- Page 103 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
106
This lavishly produced volume features excellent colour plates of 
the imagery decorating a small temple (Tibetan, klu khang) 
dedicated to the nāga spirits, situated by a lake in the vicinity of 
the Potala Palace in Lhasa. Before the Chinese invasion of Tibet, 
the lower storeys were opened annually for public offerings to 
the nāgas, while the upper storey remained a private chapel 
reserved for the Dalai Lama and his closest teachers and 
attendants.  The temple and its images have suffered 
considerable damage in recent decades and, as well as direct 
neglect or destruction, the temple and the lake have now also 
been made into a Chinese tourist attraction. Thanks largely to 
the Shalu Association, some restoration work is currently 
underway but, given the total undermining of the site’s original 
purpose and the possible threat to its future preservation, it is 
unsurprising that the present Dalai Lama, who left Tibet before 
he was shown his private chapel or had its esoteric teachings 
explained to him, seems to have enthusiastically welcomed the 
project to publish photographs and commentaries on the 
paintings. 
      Other lamas appear to have been more cautious; Baker admits 
(p.209) that the eminent Chatral Senge Dorje (= Bya bral sangs 
rgyas rdo rje?), the prinicipal lama to have explained the 
imagery to Baker, only ‘warily’ gave his consent. The book is 
clearly a feature of the contemporary tendency not only to open 
previously esoteric traditions to wider audiences but, more 
dramatically, to release them into a non-Buddhist market place, 
where they risk receptions ranging from the superficial or 
ignorant to the actively hostile. A major issue here is that of loss 
of control on the part of the previous custodians of the 
traditions, yet since that loss stems mainly from political events 
which now seem irreversible, publications which at least attempt 
to reflect the knowledge and concerns of traditional religious 
authorities may be considered acceptable. In this case, the result 
has been a book with a fascin-ating illustrative guide to Tantric 
meditative techniques and ac-complishments. 
      The book is divided into four sections. After an introduction 
by the Dalai Lama, which includes his own reminiscences, the 
first section begins with a chapter describing the temple’s 
environment, architecture, and lower storeys. The following 
chapters supply some Tibetan historical, cultural and artistic 
background. This is followed by three sections, each devoted to a 


--- Page 104 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
107
single wall of the upper storey’s private chapel, and each 
containing separate sub-sections of description, Tibetan 
transcription of the legends accompanying the paintings, 
translation of these legends, and colour photographs of the 
original artwork. The book’s structure deserves some comment. 
While the material is organised in a reasonably coherent fashion, 
there are two issues raised about the layout. First, the 
integration of the descriptions of the temple’s lower storeys into 
the introductory chapters, with fewer photo-graphs and no 
accompanying Tibetan or translation of the legends of the 
artwork of these floors, points to a comparative neglect of this 
clearly interesting material. Here we find images of the nāgas 
protecting the area, to whom local Tibetans still make offerings 
despite years of Chinese rule, and the walls are also decorated 
with scenes from the Tibetan opera, Padma ’Od ’bar, including an 
expedition into a nāga realm to recover a wish-fulfilling jewel. It 
is unclear whether the limited attention devoted to this imagery 
is due to the greater damage inflicted on the more accessible 
areas of the temple during the early decades of Chinese 
occupation (indeed, the Dalai Lama notes, p.11, that most of the 
original statues and religious artefacts were removed), or 
whether it reflects Ian Baker’s own relative lack of interest in 
this more ‘popular’ Tibetan religious material. The latter appears 
more likely given that the few colour plates which are provided 
of the murals still adorning the walls suggest that at least some 
superb paintings have survived. 
      Secondly, the ordering of each of the three chapters devoted 
to the upper chapel poses some navigational problems. Since the 
descriptions, text, translation and photographs are separated, it 
requires considerable effort to locate the relevant information 
on each specific image, and this effort is hindered by a lack of 
page numbers on most pages with colour plates. Furthermore, 
since in many cases the illustrations do not have a clear or 
sequential order, the monk who transcribed the Tibetan legends 
has had to make his own educated guesses to render a single text 
of the Tibetan writing, and the translator has not always 
followed the same order! In the photographs of larger areas, 
even the reader of Tibetan script is unable to make out the 
writing. Certainly, it would have been far more helpful to all 
readers to have had each colour plate accompanied by its text, 
translation and commentary, and this would have had the added 


--- Page 105 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
108
benefit of not needing to impose what is in some cases a slightly 
artificial order onto paint-ings which are occasionally arranged 
spatially (for instance, a group of figures depicted in a circle 
around a central figure) rather than strictly consecutively. 
      The imagery on the northern, western and eastern walls of 
the upper chamber respectively corresponds to the rNying ma 
tra-dition’s division of Base, Path and Fruit (gzhi, lam, ’bras). Thus, 
we find the theme of conversion and transformation highlighted 
on the northern wall, with paintings of the establishment of the 
religious tradition in Tibet, along with Tantric representations of 
the body, the mechanisms of rebirth, the Buddha figures 
symbolising the true nature of worldly phenomena, and the 
poten-tial for transformation through Vajrayāna techniques. The 
west-ern wall focuses on the specific rdzogs chen techniques of 
khregs chod and thod rgal, while the eastern wall depicts a series of 
realised adepts, including Indian mahāsiddhas, the disciples of 
Guru Padma who are associated with the early transmission of 
the rNying ma teachings in Tibet, and the famous Tibetan 
masters dating to the renowned gTer bdag Gling pa, who was a 
master of the Fifth Dalai Lama in the seventeenth century. 
      For a popular book aimed at a non-specialist readership, the 
introductory and commentarial material is generally useful and 
rarely inaccurate; indeed, Baker draws in parts on some of the 
best current scholarship in Tibetan studies. However, scholars in 
Buddhist studies might find questionable the numerous parallels 
drawn with Western cultural sources, such as Blake, and with 
scientific or pseudo-scientific sources. Specialists might also be 
slightly irritated by some of the general comments or quotations 
accompanying the colour plates, which are frequently not 
specifi-cally related to the imagery concerned and, in the case of 
quota-tions, which sometimes have attributions such as ‘The 
Buddha’ with no further source supplied. Nonetheless, Baker’s 
personal familiarity with some of the rdzogs chen traditions 
described along with his use of teachings and translations by 
contemporary authorities in the tradition, does help to 
communicate the overall ethos of the rdzogs chen meditations 
described. At the same time, while the presentation as a book 
targeted principally at a general audience may excuse the 
omission of precise referencing, it is more problematic that it is 
not always immediately obvious which sections are solely the 
author’s own work. For instance, it is necessary to examine the 


--- Page 106 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
109
small print within the Acknowledge-ments in the final pages to 
discover that the sections of translation were in fact the work of 
Ani Jinba of Shechen monastery in Kathmandu. The same small 
print informs us that Erik Pema Kunsang and Matthieu Ricard 
provided ‘contributions’ to the glossary, but there is no 
indication of whether these were minor editorial suggestions or 
whether the glossary was in fact sub-stantially their work. 
      The Tibetan legends were transcribed by a monk formerly as-
sociated with the temple, whose name we are not given in the 
text. It is presumably P.N. Dhumkhang, who is credited for his 
‘Tibetan calligraphy’ in the Acknowledgements, although the 
Tibetan writ-ing in the book appears to reproduce printed rather 
than hand-written Tibetan. There are a few errors in the 
rendition of the original Tibetan or, in some cases, perhaps 
deliberate corrections. For instance, the inscription ‘rtsa ba 
yengs med gangs shar gnyen pos gcod pa’ (photograph, p.78) is 
amended to ‘rtsa ba g-yengs med gang shar gnyen pos gcod pa’ 
(p.60), while more radically, ‘ngag smyon pa lta bu’ (p.131) 
becomes ‘ngag smyon pa ston pa’ (p.124). There are a number of 
similar examples elsewhere. Ani Jinba’s translation of the 
captions on the western wall (pp.127-8) appears to contain some 
repetition (unless there is in fact repetition on the walls 
themselves). As a result, it is unclear whether the series of 
analogies in which the experience is, for instance, likened to 
someone cured of smallpox, or a bird caught in a snare, applies 
to the thod rgal visions outlined in the sequence of paintings 
translated on p.128, or to the khregs chod practices presented in 
an earlier sequence of images (translated on p.127), or indeed, to 
both. Other than this instance, her translations throughout are 
extremely helpful in clarifying the place and purposes of the 
meditative exercises and other imagery depicted. 
      Finally, although some images are dwelt on, and are 
presented both in detail and included in photographs of larger 
sections of murals, other sections appear to have been entirely 
omitted, such as the depictions of a number of Guru Padma’s 
disciples, and of some later masters of the tradition. It may be 
that these sections have been damaged considerably, but it 
would still have been useful to provide photographs. 
Furthermore, since the overall layout and design are not 
altogether clear from the rough outline sketch plans provided, a 


--- Page 107 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
110
few photographs which could be pieced together to see each wall 
as a whole would have been a helpful addition. 
      Despite my reservations concerning the presentation of the 
material, there is no doubt that the publication of these rich and 
detailed images, text and translation represents a valuable 
source for the study of Tibetan Buddhist meditative traditions. 
Cathy Cantwell 
(University of Oxford) 
 
Ancient Angkor. Michael Freeman and Claude Jacques.  Thames 
and Hudson, London 1999.  232 pp.  £16.95. ISBN 0 500 97485 3. 
Michael Freeman is a well-known and highly competent photo-
grapher who started his career among the Khmer temples of 
Thailand before turning his attention to Cambodia itself. His 
early books, such as A Guide to Khmer Temples in Thailand and Laos 
(1996) and Prasat Phimai (1998), are familiar to any traveller keen 
to take in a few cultural sites after their Thai beach holiday has 
begun to pall. More recently he has teamed up with Claude 
Jacques, a leading French epigraphist and Director of Studies at 
the École Pratique des Hautes Études who, for three decades, has 
been pondering what the inscriptions can tell us about ancient 
Angkor. In a range of works, starting with his Études d’epigraphie 
cambodgienne (1969-72), he has both extended and critically 
engaged with the monumental labours of George Cœdès in an 
attempt to provide an overview of the historical development, 
religious ideas and practices, political content and aesthetic 
achievements of this important South-east Asian civilisation. 
      This is not the first book on which Freeman and Jacques have 
collaborated. Their Angkor: Cities and Temples first appeared in 
1997 and the work under review could be regarded as a spin-off 
from this project. Given its intended purpose as a lavishly colour-
illustrated guidebook covering all the main sites within the 
central Angkorian complex, Jacques, nevertheless, manages to 
situate Angkor within the greater South-east Asian historical and 
cultural context. His depth of knowledge ensures that the reader 
leaves the work with a fair insight into the nature of the 
brahmanical religion expressed in extant materials still 
preserved within the complex, but on the Buddhism that also 
flourished at various stages within the Angkorian period Jacques 
is less expansive. Having said that, it would be wrong to be 


--- Page 108 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
111
pedantic since this book is not intended for a scholarly 
readership. 
      Short accounts of architectural styles, building techniques 
and the inscriptional record are complemented by a brief 
discussion of daily life in Angkor and the modern efforts to 
restore and interpret some of the principal sites. However, the 
bulk of the book consists of reasonably detailed descriptions, 
often with good ground plans, of the principal temples in and 
around the great city Angkor Thom. Angkor Wat, the Bayon, 
Preah Khan and Ta Prohm are naturally given greatest 
prominence but most other important structures are covered. 
Since most of the target audience are unlikely to spend more 
than a few days in the region, the authors are probably correct in 
concluding that interest in visiting outlying temples, with the 
exception of Banteay Srei and some of the structures at nearby 
Rolous, will not be high. The disadvantage of the approach is that 
it fails to convey the true extent of Angkorian civilisation. The 
result is that many important sites outside the central area, such 
as Beng Mealea, Preah Khan of Kompong Thom, Phnom Chisor, 
Koh ker, Preah Vihar, and Banreay Chhmat, to name but a few, 
may appear beyond the Angkorian pale. 
      There can be little doubt that, as a guidebook, Ancient Angkor 
has already proved itself in the marketplace. When I was last in 
Siem Reap several months ago it was selling like hot cakes. The 
illustrations are well-chosen and technically superb, the maps 
are clear and uncluttered and the suggested itineraries provide 
helpful guidance. Advice on travel and accommodation, 
however, is very much oriented towards the more opulent end of 
the market. I wonder, for instance, how many readers of this 
journal will be staying at the Grand Hotel d’Angkor at $360-510 
per night for a double room when they next land in north-
western Cambodia! The book also suffers one major difficulty 
from the purely prac-tical perspective: it is too large to put into a 
small rucksack. In terms of convenience, detail and coverage I 
would prefer to stick to Maurice Glaize’s, admittedly antiquated, 
Les monuments du groupe d’Angkor (1948). It may not be quite up to 
speed when it comes to contemporary scholarship but it still 
takes some beating when one is walking around trying to 
interpret the sites them-selves. And where else can you stumble 
on useful advice about where to hunt for tiger? 


--- Page 109 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
112
Ian Harris 
(University of Lancaster) 
 
The Jesus Sutras: Rediscovering the lost religion of Taoist Christianity.  
Martin Palmer.  Piatkus, London  2001.  xvi, 270 pp. £17.99. ISBN 0 
7499 2250 8. 
The book’s title derives from a collection of Christian scrolls, 
written in Chinese, which were purportedly found in Dunhuang. 
In the words of Palmer, ‘The Jesus Sutras bring together the 
beliefs of the Eastern world of Buddhism and Taoism with those 
of the Western Judeo-Christian world’ whose synthesis created 
‘an astonishing, accessible, vibrant practice of Taoist Christianity 
within the context of Confucian China some fourteen hundred 
years ago’ (p.2). Palmer’s quest has been to relate the lost story of 
Chinese Christianity and present new translations of the Sutras. 
At the very beginning of the Acknowledgements, Palmer notes 
that the texts were translated twice before, in 1930 and 1937, but 
justifies his new translation with the claim that much of the 
meaning and nuances of the texts, which derived from Taoism, 
Confucianism and Buddhism, escaped the notice of Moule and 
Saeki, the earlier translators. Given the importance attached to 
the Sutras, it seems an oversight that the book has no 
photographs of them, especially since these documents are 
mainly in private collections and also in the light of the problems 
surrounding the authenticity of much of the Dunhuang material. 
At the very least, readers would be interested to see what they 
looked like. As such, the core material, which forms the heart of 
the book, is inaccessible and thus does not allow comparative 
readings to be made with the translations of Moule and Saeki to 
highlight major differences between the interpretations. 
      As well as using the Jesus Sutras to illustrate the syncretism 
of Taoism and Christianity in Tang China, Palmer strives to 
acquaint the reader with the rich background of the Church of 
the East and its mission to China. Chapters about the history of 
the Church of the East are interspersed amongst his translations 
and discussions of the Sutras. In this comprehensive approach, 
the juxtaposition of contents in some chapters can appear 
somewhat piecemeal with the relationship between them not 
being explicit. In Ch.4 sections entitled ‘The Indo-Greek Cultures’ 
and ‘Buddha and Apollo’, ‘Christianity meets Buddhism’ 
immediately follow sections des-cribing Christianity in the 


--- Page 110 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
113
Sassanian (Persian) empire. The chapter continues by discussing 
the presence of St. Thomas in India and, finally, there is a section 
on the Church in Tibet. More-over, Palmer’s arguments are often 
highly conjectural, conveying an impression but tending to gloss 
over details and definitions which would lend substance. In some 
instances, the text may lead to misinterpretations, an example 
being on p.99 where Palmer claims that Antioch was once the 
heart of the Church of the East. Antioch was certainly the 
seminal centre of theological argument for the emergent Church 
of the East, but the patriarchate was always located in 
Mesopotamia, 
from 
424 
CE 
at 
Seleucia-Ctesiphon 
and 
subsequently in Baghdad. The association of Antioch was 
foremost with the Syrian Orthodox (Monophysite) church. 
      Equally, Palmer’s treatment of the relations between the 
Church of the East and the Church of the West, the latter being 
his title to cover the Latin and Greek Churches, needs to be 
clarified. On p.99 he sums up the outcomes of the Councils of 
Ephesus and Chalcedon, respectively held in 431 CE and 451 CE, 
with the statement ‘as the Church of the West sought to impose 
its model of theological agreement on the various Christian 
Churches of the Middle East, some went off to join the Coptic 
Church and others found welcome in the Sassanian Empire’. In 
doing so, he does not distinguish between the various branches 
of the Monophysite Church which included the Copts. His 
following statement that the ‘Church of the East never sought to 
enforce agreement in the way the Church of the West did, mostly 
because, as a confederation of Churches, it could not have done 
so’ is at best misleading, suggesting an amalgamation of the 
Monophysite Churches with the Church of the East which 
followed Nestorius. Only on the next page does Palmer correctly 
identify the Church of the East. On p.48 he claims that the 
descendents of the Church of the East, the Assyrian Christians, 
are ‘so called by the Western Churches to distinguish them from 
Protestant and Catholic Christians in modern-day Iraq and Iran’. 
The epithet was coined within the Church of the East during the 
nineteenth century, inspired by the archaeological discoveries of 
the Assyrian empire. 
      Palmer points out the great spread of Christianity but his 
suggestion on p.96 that the Churches of the Sassanian empire 
were more a loose confederation of churches fails to emphasise 
that, despite the vast distances which were covered by its 


--- Page 111 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
114
dioceses, they fell under the direct aegis of the patriarchate 
which was based at Seleucia-Ctesiphon. Source material is 
sparse, but still surviving today in the Vatican is the 
correspondence of Timothy I, the greatest of patriarchs to 
oversee the expansion of the Church of the East throughout 
Central Asia, Tibet and China. This correspondence clearly shows 
that the Patriarch in Mesopotamia was responsible for the 
consecration of metropolitans in his far-flung territories. Indeed, 
Palmer makes an oblique reference to this material on p.45 when 
he says ‘it is only later, in the eighth century, that specific 
references to bishops and churches in China began to appear’. A 
discussion of Syriac primary sources and the administration of 
their Central Asian dioceses appears in my article ‘The Church of 
the East in Central Asia’, Bulletin of the John Rylands University 
Library of Manchester 78: 3 (1996) which Palmer cites in n.29. He 
postulates on p.45 that Aluoben, whom the Xian Stele credits 
with introducing Christianity to China, may have come from one 
of the great cities of Central Asia. This could be so, but a 
Mesopotamian connection may also be possible, and a direct 
parallel to consider would be that the bishops and senior 
hierarchy of the St. Thomas churches in India were often drawn 
from Mesopotamia. 
      Palmer’s interest primarily lies in the presence of Christianity 
in China during the Tang dynasty. The famous Stone Stele which 
is at Xian initially aroused him and led him to discover the Da 
Qin pagoda and the adjacent monastery. Palmer seems unclear 
what their relationship may be and makes several contradictory 
state-ments. On pp.18-23 he suggests that the pagoda is 
synonymous with the monastery, but on p.207 opines that the 
pagoda was added when, as he believes, the Xian Stele was 
erected at the site in 781 CE. He suggests that monuments were 
often erected to celebrate major building projects, but such 
evidence is, at best, circumstantial. Indeed, especial caution 
should be exercised since there are intrinsic differences between 
Chinese accounts and those of seventeenth century Europeans as 
to the actual place of the stele’s discovery. Rather than just claim 
that it was found at Da Qin, Palmer might have discussed the 
various witnesses to its purported provenance; in itself this 
would be a fascinating story. At Da Qin, Palmer makes much of 
his discoveries, but does not mention the finds of the Chinese 
scholars who were there in 1933. These items, which included an 


--- Page 112 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
115
iron bell cast in 1444, may have been subsequently lost or 
destroyed in the Cultural Revolution. The Chinese also recorded 
the clay sculptures but, in contrast to Palmer, offer a Buddhist or 
Taoist interpretation. They found several inscriptions, but did 
not note the inscription on the third floor of the pagoda which 
was written in Syriac script which Palmer suggests is actually 
Greek. 
      The main thesis of the inherent syncretism of Taoism and also 
Buddhism with Christianity in Tang China has much to recom-
mend it and on the whole, despite the aforementioned short-
comings in his usage of the Jesus Sutras, Palmer appears to 
handle the overall idea convincingly. However, in the rich matrix 
of Tang China, it is enigmatic that Manichaeism is mentioned 
only sporadically, especially when Manichaeism shared startling 
simi-larities with Christianity, and appellations such as ‘Religion 
of Light’, ‘Religion of Illumination’ which Palmer cites on p.42 as 
titles of Christianity, were equally applicable. Indeed, as he says 
on p.220, Manichaeism had entered China earlier than Chris-
tianity. It co-existed with Christianity during the Tang dynasty 
and several centuries later in the Yuan dynasty even appears, on 
occasion, to have become fused with Christianity. A remarkable 
Syriac inscription in the National Maritime Museum at Quanzhou 
(Zaitun) records that there was at Quanzhou a bishop who served 
both the Manichaean and Christian communities. The 
remarkable synthesis that was the hallmark of Chinese 
Christianity is also exhibited in the Yuan dynasty in the beautiful 
iconography of the medieval tombstones from Quanzhou which 
juxtapose symbols of Christianity and Buddhism. These 
tombstones are graphic examples of enculturation and are the 
subject of an Australian research project to reconstruct the 
profile of Christianity at Quanzhou during the Yuan dynasty. 
      Returning to the graffito at Da Qin, it is possible that its lan-
guage is old Turkic or Mongolian which used the Syriac script, 
which could suggest a Christian presence at this site as late as 
the thirteenth century. This may endorse a suggestion made by 
Palmer on p.241 that, despite the suppression of Christianity in 
845 CE, it survived, albeit in a clandestine form, perhaps re-
emerging along with the influx of Mongol Christians during the 
Yuan dynasty. A travelling Uighur or Mongol Christian may have 
stayed at the Da Qin complex where there was still a Christian 
presence. Of course, such a proposal might only be answered 


--- Page 113 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
116
when the inscription is deciphered and when a scientific 
archaeological excavation and analysis of the Da Qin site can be 
undertaken. As Palmer has conveyed in his book, the pagoda and 
adjacent monastery site are extremely interesting, but their 
history over the centuries is undoubtedly complex and a 
palimpsest of religious affiliations, perhaps more so than he has 
acknowledged. Palmer writes in his Postscript on p.252 about 
ventures which hopefully will realise the excavation of the site 
and the creation of a joint Museum of the West in Ancient China 
besides the ruins. This welcome initiative would go far in 
answering many questions about the site and also about 
Christianity in Tang China as well as the intriguing possibility, 
which is of interest to the Chinese authorities today, of whether 
there was a continuous Christian presence in China to the Yuan 
dynasty. A scientific study is sorely needed not least to redress 
some of the tantalising shortcomings of Palmer’s book. 
      Palmer has written a popular work that depicts the rich 
heritage of Christianity in Tang China. His prose is arresting and 
conveys the sense of occasion, particularly in the first chapter 
when he describes his visits to the Da Qin pagoda, although there 
is a tendency to overlook the achievements of other scholars. Ch. 
2 outlines the beginnings of the Church in China and introduces 
the first of the Sutras which is called The Sutra of the Teachings of 
the World-Honoured One, followed by the text of Matthew 6 and 7. 
Ch. 3, ‘Panorama of the Early Christian World’, surveys the rise of 
Christianity in the Middle East while Ch.4, ‘The Church of the 
East’, discusses the erstwhile domains of that church. Palmer 
outlines the mosaic of religions in Tang China (Shamanism, 
Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism) in Ch.5, ‘The Multicultural 
World of Seventh-Century China’. Ch.6, ‘The Early Church in 
China’, is largely devoted to the translations of the second Sutra: 
The Sutra of Cause, Effect and Salvation, as well as the third Sutra: 
The Sutra of Origins, and the fourth Sutra: The Sutra of Jesus Christ. 
Four liturgical Sutras are the subject of Ch.7, ‘The Fruits of the 
Church: the Great Liturgical Sutras’. Ch.8, ‘The Way of Light: the 
Stone’s Teaching’, returns to the Stele of Xian to examine its 
contents, whereby Palmer upholds his thesis of Taoist Christians. 
The final chapter, ‘The Fate of the Church’, discusses the decline 
of Christianity in the Tang dynasty and its resurgence under the 
Mongols in the Yuan dynasty. 


--- Page 114 ---
Book  Reviews 
 
 
117
      The brief Bibliography introduces a good variety of works on 
the subject. However, it might have been expedient for Palmer to 
consult some old works such as F.S. Drake, ‘Nestorian Literature 
of the T’ang Dynasty’, Chinese Recorder 66 (1935), and id., 
‘Nestorian Monasteries of the T’ang Dynasty’, Monumenta Serica 2 
(1936-7), especially in the light of the discoveries which were 
made at the Da Qin complex. There is a good sprinkling of maps 
throughout the book which are useful accompaniments to the 
text, although it would have been more helpful to list these 
separately rather than under the general List of Illustrations. 
There are some beautiful colour photographs of the Da Qin 
pagoda and other localities, but the quality of the black and 
white photographs of the sculptures within the pagoda leave 
something to be desired. It would have been highly advantageous 
to have published better quality photos in order to facilitate 
discussion of the iconography. Indeed, this detail needs to be 
considered much more carefully given Palmer’s arguments that 
the sculptures represent en-culturated scenes of the Nativity and 
Jonah. Similarly, the photograph of the Syriac script inscription 
is of too poor quality to allow any realistic decipherment to be 
attempted. Overcoming these technical desiderata may open a 
vital window on the presence of Christianity in China about 
which Palmer has written so enthusiastically. 
Erica C.D. Hunter 
(Visiting Lecturer, SOAS) 
  
 


--- Page 115 ---
Notes to Contributors and Subscribers 
 
We welcome contributions to this journal in any aspect of the 
field of Buddhist studies. 
 
All Mss should be sent to the Editor or the US representative at 
the addresses given below in (2). Copyright will automatically be 
vested in this journal unless a contributor stipulates otherwise. 
 
* * * * * * * * 
Annual Subscription 
 
(1) UKABS Membership (including subscription to BSR) :      £15 
   (unwaged  £10) 
by cheque made payable to ‘UK Association for Buddhist Studies’ 
to be sent to: 
 
Dr Elizabeth Harris, UKABS Treasurer, 33 Buck Lane, London 
NW9 0AP – England   
 
OR 
 
BSR (journal  only):       Individual :  £10 .00 / US$ 14.00 
                                             Joint or institutional :  £15.00 / US$ 21.00 
Sterling payment by Iban to A/C No.GB89GIRB72000526134003, 
direct bank transfer citing BIC No. GIRBGB22 or cheque drawn on 
a UK-based bank (Eurocheques not acceptable), made payable to 
‘Buddhist Studies Review’ to be sent to: 
 
(2) Russell Webb (Editor BSR), 31 Russell Chambers, Bury Place, 
London WC1A 2JX – England  
 (e-mail: buddhiststudiesreview@btinternet.com) 
 
Or, for NORTH AMERICA – payments in US$: 
 
Prof. Charles S. Prebish (US Representative BSR), The 
Pennsylvania State University, Religious Studies Program, 108 
Weaver Building, University Park, PA 16802-5500, USA. 
 
* * * * * * 
The address of the Institut de recherche bouddhique Linh-Sơn is:  
Tùng Lâm Linh-Sơn International, Dhamma Ville, Hameau des 
Bosnages – Rancon, F-87290 Chateauponsac, France. 
 
 
