--- Page 1 ---
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? 43 44 Chipamong Chowdhury
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics: Vol. 2 No.4 August 2009 use the equivalent terms “the language of the Buddha.” What was the
Page: 43-57, Published on August 2010 by the Registrar, Dhaka University
spoken language of the Buddha? Was it Pāli, Sanskrit or something
ISSN-2075-3098
else? How do we ascertain that Pāli-language (Pālibhaāsā) was the
spoken language of the Buddha? In a lecture I gave in 2005 at the
Department of Buddhist Studies, Tribhuvan University in Nepal, I
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? presented the crisis of the differences between the language of the
Buddha and the language of the Pāli Tipiṭaka.
An Investigation of The Buddha-Vacana and Origins of Pāli
I would like to thank to Professor Asanga Tilokaratne (University of
Chipamong Chowdhury1 Colombo) for his insightful comments on the earlier draft which I
wrote in 2004/5, to Professor Sikder Monoare Murshed for his
1. Naropa University, USA patient and getting published it and to Sushupta Gouri Srinidhi for
empty_fullness@yahoo.com
proof reading.
Abstract The Buddhavacana is the general usage for the teaching of the
Buddha in the Pāli texts as noted above. Besides that usage, the
Traditionally South and Southeast Buddhism, which we now call
Theravāda Buddhism, claims that the language of the Buddha is lesser known term “bhagavato-vacana”, the words of the Exalted
‘Pāli’ and hence the language of their sacred texts One, is also mentioned in the Pāli as the actual words of the Buddha
(Tipiṭaka=three canons). In this essay, I investigate the notion of (Bond 24). Throughout the linguistic history of Theravāda
the Pāli language by reconstructing existing Pāli literatures and
Buddhism, it is a commonly held notion that the language of the
contemporary works on Pāli studies. Among other issues, this
Theravāda Buddhist scriptures is ‘Pāli’. For Theravadins, Pāli
investigation explores the following issues: the language
(vacana) of the Buddha, the multilingualism and geopolitics, the Tipiṭaka represents the words of the Buddha (Bond 1). Phra Payutto,
home of Pāli and the origination of Pāli. a Thai Pāli scholar-monk, considers the words of the Buddha
(Buddhavacana) in the Pāli canon are the most authoritative standard
religious texts (Seeger 9).
01: Prologue
Since the inception of Pāli/Theravāda Buddhist studies in the West,
In this essay, I propose to review the term Buddhavacana, “the
particularly in the United Kingdom, there has been a more
authentic words of the Buddha,” and provide a critical assessment of
generalized interest in the linguistic study of the Pāli canon. While
the use of language in Theravāda Buddhism. At the outset, I want to
Buddhist scholarships regarding the Pāli-language (Pālibhāsā) and
make it clear that the distinction between the words of the Buddha
its literatures in cross-canonical contexts have figured most
(Buddhavacana) and the language of the Pāli Tipiṭaka, the canonical
prominently in Western Buddhist studies, with a few exceptions, the
literatures of the Theravāda Buddhism. The words of the Buddha
questions regarding the language of the Buddha and his immediate
specifically refer to the language or dialect spoken by the Buddha
disciples paid relatively little attention.
himself where as the language of the Tipiṭaka is the later evolved
language which now we call Pāli. Though, literary speaking, the term Nevertheless, against the traditional concept of the Pālibhaāsā, the
‘Buddhavacana’ refers to the words of the Buddha, however, I will Pāli scholars of the 19th century, particularly H. Bechert (1980), K R.
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics Vol. 2 No. 4, August 2009

--- Page 2 ---
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? 45 46 Chipamong Chowdhury
Norman (1983/2002), Williams Pruitt (1987), Oscar von Hinüber neither Pāli nor Sanskrit, what language did he use for daily
(1996), Walpola Rahula (1997), and more recently, Kate Crosby conversation as well as regular religious sermons?
(2004) not only began questioning the authenticity of the language of
With a more than two millennia old history, the answer is not easy
the Buddha, but also the language of the Pāli Tipiṭaka as a whole.
and straight forward. However, based on my own criteria of the
With a critical cross examination of the Pāli texts and the Buddhist
linguistic study, namely, philology, phonetic, phonology,
chronicles from the perspective of phonology, philology, phonetic,
figurativeness, stylistic structure and semantic deviation, I strongly
archeological and inscriptional evidences, soon they came to the
that feel there is another way of looking at the vacana of the Buddha
unanimous conclusion that Pāli was not the spoken language of the
and thence language of the Pāli Tipiṭaka. In this criterion or
Buddha.
approach, my specific goal is to reiterate the problematic issue of the
Hinüber further argues that “Pāli has been a spoken language neither Buddhavacana and Pālibhāsā by reconstructing the works of the
in Magadha nor elsewhere. For it is possible to infer from linguistic contemporary scholars and Pāli studies. In a related manner-
peculiarities of this language that is has been created as some kind of approach, I consider following cross textual methodologies: (1) Geo-
lingua franca presumably used in a large area at a time considerably political regions in the times of the Buddha or at least in pre-Aśokan
later than the Buddha” (Hinüber 5). Both theoretically and evidently, period, (2) Vaṃsa (chronicles) literatures of the South and Southeast
if the Pāli was never spoken by Gotama the Buddha and was not Asian, (3) the home of Pāli and (4) etymological interpretation of
even a spoken language in the Buddha’s time as Hinüber nirutti and chandasa. I do not, however, guarantee that this approach
confidently suggested, then the obvious question is: What was will give us an accurate answer for the language of the Buddha.
the actual language of the Buddha? In what language(s) or
dialect(s) did the Buddha communicate with his disciples and
followers alike? 02: Multilingualism and Geo-politics
On other hand, Buddhist scholars are also aware that Northern Regarding the vacana of the Buddha, it is important to have some
ideas about sociolinguistics position and political regions of ancient
Buddhist tradition or Mahāyāna Buddhism preserved their textual
India. In one of the early Pāli canonical texts known as the
corpus in Sanskrit. Is it an indication that the Buddha adopted
Aṅguttara-nikāya, we read a list of sixteen great independent and
Sanskrit as a mean of imparting his dharma? The Buddha did not
republican states (solasamahājanapada) in ancient India (AN: I.213;
adopt Sanskrit because not all Mahāyāna texts are preserved in pure
iv.252 etc.). Similarly the Dīgha-nikāya, another collection of the
Sanskrit. Moreover, we know from the beginning that the Buddha
early Buddha’s doctrinal teachings, informs us the knowledge about
was not in favor of Sanskrit. In the Pāli Vinaya it is mentioned that
the seven sovereignties (satta-bharatā) with their respective capitals
the Buddha strongly reprimanded the monks for using the metrical
(DN: II, 235). Of the sixteen rival monarchies, in terms of politic and
form of Sanskrit (Horner 194). Thus, KR. Norman, a Cambridge Pāli economical powers, the four kingdoms (Māgadha, Kosala, Vaṃsa,
philologist concludes “it, therefore, seems very likely that the and Avānti) were well established in 5th century BCE (Cakravarti 8).
Buddha’s sermons were preached in a non-Sanskritic language” In the Suttanipāta-Pāli, it has been clearly stated that the Sakyas, the
(Norman 2002: 137). This is the mystery for scholars of Pāli studies tribal lineage perhaps founded by Suddhodana, the father of the
to determine the actual language of the Buddha. If the Buddha used Buddha, were subordinate to the king of Kosala (Sn: v. 422).
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics Vol. 2 No. 4, August 2009

--- Page 3 ---
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? 47 48 Chipamong Chowdhury
According to Hajima Nakamura, the Sakyas had a republican But what were those chosen or spoken languages? Following
government (Nakamura, 36). Nakamura’s comments suggest that the Despande’s comparative work on Sanskrit and Prākrit (Despande
Buddha’s father was not as powerful as the king Pesanadi of Kosala. 1993), Jain also believes that the Buddha used Prākrit dialect to
spread his doctrine (Jain 50). At this conjecture, in my position, it is
Coming back to the issue of the language of the Buddha, it is
too early to conclude that the Buddha would have used Prākrit
assumable that they were various dialects and indigenous languages
dialect for propagating his dhamma. Because earlier we have noted
that were widespread in all those states. From the geopolitical
the Buddha wandered from place to place. It is no doubt that each
records mentioned in the Pāli sources, we can visualize that the
place might have their own dialect. In accordance with audience
Buddha traveled to all those places and gave dhamma talks to
needs and capabilities to understand, the Buddha probably has used
different people. The biography of the Buddha, though composed
multiple vernaculars and other common parlances including Prākrit.
later, plainly indicates the Buddha was born in Kapilavatthu, the
capital city of the Sakyan Kingdom (Kalupahana 1) which is now in
Nepal, but he spent most of his times in Māgadha’s region. I suspect
03: Further Complication
that the language of Kapilavatthu is entirely, if not partially different
from the language of Māgadha. In this regard, what language(s) or In connection with these geopolitical records and multiple
dialect(s) did the Buddha use to convey his moral dhamma or spoke sociolinguistic positions of the MIA-language, I want to concentrate
when he voyaged back and forth from one state to another? It is briefly on the Buddhist chronicles (vaṃsa), questioning the
unlikely that the Buddha spoke a single language, whether Māgadhi authoritative language and linguistic pride in these chronicles. The
or a Kosalian-language. vacana of the Buddha becomes even more problematic when we
read the Theravāda historical annals (vaṃsa). Like most Indian
Although the specific language of the Buddha is still debatable, Pāli
authors, the medieval Buddhist authors of South and Southeast Asia
linguistic critics like myself are fully aware of that the Buddha may
take enormous pride in their quality of writing in respect to the
have used multiple local and native dialects. When the Buddha spoke language that they adopted. Vaṃsa literatures, although they are
with common masses, kings, and ministers in different kingdoms and written in Pāli, should never be considered the language of the
places, he might have employed many dialects. He was perhaps a Buddha. They are the works of individual as well as collective
multilingual person. writers long after the Buddha’s parinibbāna.
It is an unfortunate that those dialects are no longer. Thus, the The South and Southeast Asian Buddhist chronicles such as
Buddhavacana remains mysterious. Although those tribal dialects or Mahāvasaṃsa, the Great Chronicles of Sri Lanka (Geiger 1938.),
state-languages of different kingdoms at that time did not survive, Sāsanāvaṃsa, the Burmese Buddhist Chronicles (Law 1952) and
scholars of Indian linguistics generally consider that they are a part other chronicles of Buddhism, proudly claim that Gotama the
of the Middle Indo-Aryan language family (MIA). In his survey of Buddha had visited from time to time to their respective countries.
the Indo-Aryan language, Dhanesh Jain notes: “varieties of MIA Mahāvasaṃsa, written in 5th century ADE, for instance, opens with
were the chosen languages of Buddhism and Jainism since about an introductory remark of the Buddha’s three visits to Sri Lanka
500BC. To reach the masses, he continues, the two religious faiths (Bullis 36ff); while the Burmese Buddhist history (Sāsanāvaṃsa),
[Buddhism and Jainism] opted to use the spoken language” (Jain 50). composed in 1897, narrates that the Buddha, along with five hundred
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics Vol. 2 No. 4, August 2009

--- Page 4 ---
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? 49 50 Chipamong Chowdhury
disciples, visited Burma for four times (Bischoff 5ff). Similarly sermon to Rāvana in Sanskrit? The sūtra (Laṅkāvatara) is written in
Donald Swearer finds that the Buddha’s miracles visit to Thailand Sanskrit does not mean that the Buddha spoke in Sanskrit. Even if
(Swearer 93). One of the monks from Laos who now resides in we assume that the Buddha visited Sri Lanka, it is still hard to
Colorado, US, told me that the Buddha visited Laos several times. I believe that Buddha spoke either Pāli, Sanskrit, or Sinhalese. He
could not verify his claim from the Laotian (Buddhist) textual possibly used the local dialect, which Gair identifies as Sinhala
source, as Laotian Buddhism is relatively new in Buddhist studies Prākrit (Gair 2003).
and virtually no resources are available when I started this paper.
According to the late venerable Walpula Rahula, Mahānāma, the
Not surprisingly all these chronicles were written in Pāli, some author of Mahāvaṃsa, compels to compose Mahāvaṃsa, because,
earlier and some later. Written in Pāli does not, however, mean that “there was a history on the same subject written by the ancients
the language of the Buddha is Pāli, which the authors of the (porāṇehi) which was full of faults such as repetitions and
chronicles adopted. The Buddha’s incredible visit to the Island of unnecessary details” (Rahula 1966: xxii). Since Rahula did not raise
Lanka is still questionable for number of reasons. The same reasons the question of in what language this history was written, I am now
could apply to other countries as well. How did the Buddha come to curious about pre-Buddhist language in Sri Lanka or the native
Sri Lanka? Regrettably Mahāvasaṃsa does not have the answer for language before arrival of Buddhism. Based on epigraphical and
this question. It seems very likely that these chronicles are creative inscriptional evidences James Gair considers thus, “the earliest
arts of writing and innovative information for Buddhists in their attested form of the language, Sinhala-Prakrit, date from the third
respective countries rather than historic fact. I am not, thus, surprised and second century BCE, following the arrival of Buddhism in the
to see Rahula’s conclusion who instead of co-coordinating with the third century BC” (Gair, 2003). The language of the Island
traditional views and attributing to the Buddha as the introductory (laṅkadipa) was perhaps Sinhala Prākrit at that time but it is still
person of Buddhism to Sri Lanka attributes to Mahinda, the favored difficult justify as to whether the Buddha knew Sinhala Prākrit or the
son of the Emperor Aśoka (Rahula 1966: 48). citizens of the island knew whatever language of the Buddha.
Contradictory to the Pāli-Mahāvasaṃsa narrative story, the
Laṅkāvatara sūtra, a purely Sanskrit Mahāyāna text, also mentions
04: The Home of Pāli
the Buddha’s arrival in Sri Lanka and his teaching to the demonic
Rāvana (Suzuki 1973). Sri Lanka is closer to the mainland India than Where is the home of Pāli? Where does the language of the
Burma/Myanmar and Thailand. These countries are geographically, Theravāda Buddhist scriptures originate? The Indologists and
culturally, and linguistically different from India as they are Buddhologists, from both East and West, struggled to arrive at the
separated by a vast ocean and high mountains. Nonetheless, if the conclusive consensus on the issues of the original location of the
Buddha would have been to Sri Lanka or other countries in Southeast Pāli. Instead they offer contradictory conclusions (Harza
Asia, which most likely he was not, then what language(s) or 1994/Gieger 1978/Lamotte 1988). The authors of the Pāli aṭṭhakathā
dialect(s) he employed to exchange the words with the local people? (commentaries), ṭikā (sub-commentaries) and Vaṃsa (chronicles)
Among other questions, following questions are also important in identify the original home of Pāli as “Māgadha/ī”, one of the
this respect: Did the Buddha preach in Pāli or Sinhala Prākrit when politically powerful kingdoms in the time of the Buddha and after
he came to Sri Lanka? How can we be certain that the Buddha gave him. The commentaries, without valid documentation, further claim
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics Vol. 2 No. 4, August 2009

--- Page 5 ---
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? 51 52 Chipamong Chowdhury
that Māgadhī is the root languages of all languages (sabbesaṃ respectively (Thomas 41). A complete different picture emerges
mūlabhāsāya māgadhāya niruttiyā: Mhv XXXVII: 224/Vsm: 441, from Rhys Davids’s opinion, who consistently thinks that Pāli
34). For Theravādins, these commentarial and other chronicle proofs literary language took shape from the spoken dialect of Kosala. More
are reliable enough to believe that the Buddhavacana is actually to his point, he argues “the dialect of Kosala was not only confined
Māgadhī. its at the time of the Buddha, but also equal applicable to east and
west from Delhi to Patna, and north and south to from Sāvatthi to
According to the Mahāvaṃsa, Mahinda brought Pāli Tipiṭaka as
Avanti” (Davids 153-4). Different opinions about the exact location
well as its commentaries and translated to Sīhalabhāsā, the language
of the Pāli are extensively discussed by Kanai Lal Hazra (Hazra
of Sri Lanka for the well being of the people in the Island (Adikaram
1994).
1964). Few centuries later, Buddhaghosa was asked by his mentor to
retranslate the words of the Buddha in to the Māgadha-language Indeed, it might seem unnecessary to argue Rhys Davids’s
(Ñānamoli 1999: xxiv). The author of the Duṭhavaṃsa, conclusion. Because Kapilavatthu, one of the republican states in the
Dhammakitti, writes that he has composed the text in the Māgadha Kosala’s kingdom, was not only the birth place of the Buddha but
tongue (niruttiya māghadikāya) for the benefit of people of other also the place where he was educated and learned science and arts. It
countries (Rahula 1997). Similarly Vacissara, author of was the centre of his primary education and language training.
Thūpawaṃsa, claims that he has written in the idiom of the Māgadha Whatever location the Pāli might have been, what we know is that
(yasmā ca māghadaniruttikato pi thūpavaṃsa, Thup: 4/Jayawikrama Pāli is not Māgadhī or vice versa, although they had some dialectic
147). links to each other. Norman further developed this assertion: “we
know of Māgadhī as described by the grammarians in latter times,
In the Cūlavaṃsa, King Vijayabāhu II himself wrote a most
however, enables us to say that Pāli is not Māgadhī, and although we
excellent letter in the Māgadha tongue and sent it to Burma (Cul:
have no direct evidence about the characteristics of Māgadhī in the
LXXX-6-7/Geiger 1973: 176). Their (Pāli commentators) definite
centuries before Asoka, we can deduce with some certainty that Pāli
indication of the Pāli to the Māgadhī (magadhī bhāsā)) is
does not agree with that either” (Norman 1983: 3).
understandable; because it was there in Māgadha the Buddha ended
up most of his time with the king Biṃbisāra, one of the royal
O5: Pluralistic and Liberal Attitude Towards the Language
patronages of Indian Buddhism. Māgadha was also a stronghold
On the liberal attitude towards the linguistic approach in Pāli
center for Buddhist activities after the death of the Buddha.
Buddhism, it is interesting to explore the implicit meaning of the
From this textual evidence it appears that Māgadhī could have term “chandasa” and “nirutti.” In the Mahāvagga of the Vinaya, we
become an international language. On account of these commentarial find that an assertion of the rules which confirms that the Buddha
scriptural supports early orientalists such as Geiger (Geiger 1943: 1- was totally against Sanskrit vernacular. He even prohibited monks
8) and Winternitz attribute the language of the Theravāda texts to an using Sanskrit as a mean of speaking dhamma: “Monks, the speech
old Māgadhi because Theravāda tradition does not make a distinction of the Awakened One should not be given in metrical form
between Pāli and Māgadha, but the same (Winternitz 7). On the [chandaso āropema). Whoever should give it, [dhamma teaching]
ground philology, other orientalists, particularly H. Kern (Kern 7) there is an offence of wrong doing [dukkhatāpatti] (Horner 194).
and Franke localize the home of Pāli to the Kalinga and Ujjeni Like most of the enigmatic words in the suttas, the Vinaya does not
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics Vol. 2 No. 4, August 2009

--- Page 6 ---
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? 53 54 Chipamong Chowdhury
clarify what is mean by chanda. In the Samantapāsādikā, same. In a pluralistic sense, he writes, “it can mean a more of
Buddhaghosa identifies chanda as the ancient Vedic-prosody-dialect expression, a vehicle of expression, diction, an idiom, and a
language, to which one might claim as ones own dialect, not pre-
(Smk 306). In another commentary, he attributes it to Sakatabhasa or
supposedly only the words of the Buddha” (Hazra 5ff).
Sanskrit language (VA 1214). If “chanda” was none other than the
Sanskrit or Vedic metre as Buddhaghosa recognized, then, we are in
the position to argue that the Buddhavacana is not Sanskrit. Then, in 06: Concluding Remarks
what language did early Buddhist monastic communities (sangha) We have explored some conceptual problems and contradictory
learn the Buddhadhamma? The answer is found in the Vinaya text conclusions among scholars of Buddhism about the language of the
itself. For instance, the Vinaya text records “I allow you, monks, to Buddha and Pāli language. Despite these conflicting opinions among
learn the speech of the Awakened One according to his own dialect the Pāli linguistics, I remain to the view that the Buddha spoke
[sakāya niruttiyā]” (Horner 194). To this point, it would be several dialects which are now lost. Once Steven Collins notes t “As
appropriate to say that the Buddha was realistic in terms of selecting is well know, the word Pāli was not originally the name of a
a language and linguistic approach to learning his doctrinal dhamma. language, but a term meaning firstly a line, bridge, or causeway, and
thence a ‘text’” (Collins 1990: 91). Buddhaghosa also testifies in his
The Pāli dictionary provides a wide range of meanings of the term
writing saying that he was retranslating Sinhalabhāsā (Sinhalese/Sri
nirutti such as grammatical analysis, etymological interpretation;
Lankan language) into a beautiful or delightful language
pronunciation; dialect; and a way of speaking (PED q.v.) Edward J.
(manoramābhāsā) in conformity with the style of Tanti, not into Pāli
Thomas considers “nirutti” as grammar and “chando” as metre
(Rahula 1997). Both Collins and Rahula’s remarks plainly suggest
(Thomas 253). Thomas’s literary interpretation of the term is
that the Pāli was never spoken or a specific language at all but a
doubtful. In fact, Winternitz objected to his interpretation and argues
‘text’ e.g. Buddhist canon/Tipiṭaka. In the Medieval Sri Lankan and
that “he does not think it is possible that sakaya nirutti can mean
Southeast Asian Buddhist writings, we find the generic notion of the
each in his own language (Winternitz vol.ii. 577).
Pāli as an official language (Pālibhāsā) of the Buddha and hence the
According to Buddhaghosa, sakaya-niruttiya represents a form of language of the Pāli Tipiṭaka. According to Pāli scholars of
Māgadhabhāsā, language of the Māgadha, which was adopted by
Theravāda Buddhism, Pālibhāsā or Pāli-language as the specific
Gotama the Buddha: sakaya niruttiya ti ettha saka nirutti nama
named language is developed from 12th century to 17th Century
sammāsambuddhena vuttappakaro māghadhako vohāra (Vinaya
(Pruitt 1987/Crosby 2004).
commentary/VA 1214). He further, in another work, claims that the
Buddha entrusted his word as contained in the tradition he formed, We have also explored the home of Pāli, which also remains
only in the Māgadhi language (VibA: 388). This data does not anonymous. Lamotte writes “it is certain that the [Buddha’s]
support our surmise that sakaya-nirutti is none other than the speech language originated on the Indian mainland, but its home has not yet
of Māgadha which the Buddha used for his dhammic instruction. been determined with certainty” (Lamotte 551). However most
Because sakaya-nirutti could also meant our own language or scholars are in favor of Māgadha including Norman (Norman 2002).
dialect. According to Bimala C. Law it is a native language. He says, Although the actual language of the Buddha and origins of Pāli are
“one’s mother tongue or vernacular would also be an interpretation unknown, the existence of Pāli literatures in which the words of the
of sakaya-nirutti in consistent with the context as well as with the Buddha and his immediate disciples were enshrined is of immense
Buddha’s spirit of rationalism” (Law xiv). Hazra also thinks the value to the students of Buddhist philosophy, psychology,
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics Vol. 2 No. 4, August 2009

--- Page 7 ---
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? 55 56 Chipamong Chowdhury
comparative religious studies, science, history, folklore, grammar, Collins, Steven. 2003 “What is Literature in Pāli?,” in S. Pollock (ed.),
philologist, linguistic and so forth. Literary Cultures in History: University of California Press, pp. 649-
88.
Notes
------ (1992) “Oral Aspects of Pāli Literature,” The Indo-Iranian Journal,
vol. 35, pp. 121-35.
Abbreviation
------ (1990). “On the Idea of the Pāli Canon”. JPTS, Vol. XV. pp. 89-126
AN: Aṅguttara-Nikāya
Cul: Culavaṃsa Crosby, Kate 2004 “The Origin of Pāli as a Language Name in Medieval
DN: Dīgha-Nikāya Theravada Literature”. Journal of the Centre for Buddhist Studies,
Sri Lanka, 2. pp. 70-116.
Mhv: Mahāvaṃsa
PED: Pali English Dictionary Davids, Rhys TW. 1907. Buddhist India. London: T Fisher Unwin.
Sn: Suttanipāta Despande, Madhav 1993 Sanskrit and Prākrit: Sociolinguistic Issue. Delhi:
Smk: Samantapāsādikā MBP.
Thup: Thūpavaṃsa Gair, James W. 2003. “Sinhala,” in George Cardona and Dhanesh Jain
VA: Vinaya-Aṭṭhakathā (eds.), The Indo-Aryan Languages (Routledge Language Family
VibA: Vibhaṅga- Aṭṭhakathā Series), London and New York: Routledgee, 768-817.
Vsm: Visuddhimagga. Geiger, Wilhelm 1950. Mahāvaṃsa or Great Chronicle of Ceylon.
JPTS: Journal of Pali Text Society. Colombo: Ceylon Government Information Department.
------ 1980. Culavaṃsa. London: Pali Text Society, distributed by
References
Routledge& Kegan Paul, ltd.
Adikaran, E.W. 1946. Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon. Dehiwala:
Geiger, Williams 1943. Pāli Literature and Language (English Translation
Buddhist Cultural Centre.
by B Ghosh/Third Reprint, 1978). New Delhi: Munshiram
Bechert Heinz. (ed.) 1980. The Language of the Earliest Buddhist
Manoharlal Publishers, Pvt. Ltd.
Tradition, Göttinggen: Vandenhueck Und Ruprecht.
Hazra, KL. 1994. Pali Language and Literature: A Systematic Survey and
------ (1991). “Methodological consideration concerning the language of the
Historical Study (2 vols.), New Delhi: DK. Print World
earliest Buddhist tradition,” Buddhist Studies Review, 8/1-2: 3-20.
Hinüber, Oscar. 1996. A Handbook of Pāli Literature (Indian Philology and
Bischoff, Roger 1995. Buddhism in Myanmar: A Short History. Kandy:
South Asian Studies), Berlin/New York: Walter de Gruyter.
BPS. No.-399/401
Bond, George D. 1982. The Words of the Buddha: The Tipiṭaka and Its Horner, IB. 1975. The Book of Discipline (Vol. 5). London: Pali Text
Interpretation in Theravāda Buddhism. Colombo (Sri Lanka): M.D. Society, distributed by Routledge& Kegan Paul, Ltd.
Gunasena& Co. Ltd. Jain, Dhanesh 2003. “Sociolinguistics of the Indo-Aryan Languages,” in
George Cardona and Dhanesh Jain (eds.), The Indo-Aryan
Bubenik, Vit 2003. “Prākrits and Apraṃśa,” in George Cardona and
Languages (Routledge Language Family Series), London and New
Dhanesh Jain (eds.), The Indo-Aryan Languages (Routledge
York: Routledgee, 46-63.
Language Family Series), London and New York: Routledge, 203-
239. Jayawikrama, NA. 1971 .The Chronicle of the Thūpa and Thūpavaṃsa
(Trans& ed.) London. Luzac & Company Ltd.
Bullis, Douglas. 1998. Mahāvaṃsa: The Great Chronicles of Sri Lanka
(Trans). Fremont (California): Asian Humanities Press 36-52 Kalupahana, D. and Indrani Kalupahana 1982. The way of Siddhartha: A
Life of the Buddha. Boulder and London: Shambhala Publication.
Chakravarti, Uma. 1987. The Social Dimensions of Early Buddhism.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. Kern, H. 1896. Manual of Indian Buddhism. Delhi: MBPL.
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics Vol. 2 No. 4, August 2009

--- Page 8 ---
Did the Buddha Speak Pāli? 57 58 Chipamong Chowdhury
Lamotte, Ètinne 1988. History of Indian Buddhism: From the Origins to the
Śaka Era (Translated from French by Sara Webb-Boin). Louvain-La-
Neuve: Peeters Press.
Law, Bimala C. 1952. History of Buddha’s Religion (Trans: Sāsanavaṃsa).
London: Luzac Company Ltd.
Nakamura, H. 2000. Gotama Buddha: A Biography Based on the Most
Reliable Texts. Tokyo: Kosei Publishing Co.
Ñānamoli, Bhikkhu 1959. The Path of Purification (Reprinted, 1999).
Penang (Malaysia): Penang Buddhist Association. xxiv
------ 1992. The Life of the Buddha: According to the Pali Canon. Kandy
(Sri Lanka): BPS
Norman, K.R. 2002b, “Pāli and the Language of Early Buddhism,” in
Nicholas Sims-Williams (ed.) Indo-Iranian Languages and Peoples.
Oxford: Oxford University Press (116), 135-150.
------ 1983. Pāli literature: Including the canonical literature in Prakrit and
Sanskrit of all the Hīnayāna schools of Buddhism. Wisesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz.
Pruitt, William. 1987 “References to Pāli in 17th Century French Books.
JPTS 11, 121-131.
Oberrlies, Thomas 2003. “Aśokan Prakrit and Pāli,” in George Cardona and
Dhanesh Jain (eds.), The Indo-Aryan Languages (Routledge
Language Family Series), London and New York: Routledge, 161-
203
Rahula, Walpola. 1966. History of Buddhism in Ceylon. The Anuradhapura
Period 3rd Century BC -10th Century AC. Colombo MD. Gunasena &
Co. Ltd. 48.
Rahula, Walpola. 1997. Humour in Pāli and Other Essays: Colombo:
Rahula Foundation Trust.
Seeger, Martin 2009. “Phra Payatto and Debates ‘On the Very Idea of the
Pali Canon’ in Thai Buddhism,” Buddhist Studies Review, Vol. 26.
No 1pp.1-32.
Suzuki, D. 1973. The Laṅkāvatara Sūtra: A Mahāyāna Text. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.
Thomas, EJ 1967. History of Buddhist Thought: London: Routledge&
Kegan Paul. p.41
Swearer, Donald 1995. The Buddhist World of Southeast Asia. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Winternitz Maurice 1927. A History of Indian Literature (Vol. 1&2).
Delhi: Mushroom Manoharlal. (Reprinted 1977).
The Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics Vol. 2 No. 4, August 2009