--- Page 1 ---
12
The Spread of Sanskrit in Southeast Asia*
Johannes Bronkhorst
Sanskrit makes its first appearance in inscriptions in South Asia during the
early centuries of the Common Era. It then gradually takes over and becomes
the inscriptional language par excellence in the whole of the South Asian
subcontinent and much of Southeast Asia. For almost a thousand years Sanskrit
‘rules’ in this enormous domain. Sheldon Pollock (1996, 2006) speaks for this
reason of the ‘Sanskrit cosmopolis’, which he dates approximately between
ce 300 and 1300.
How do we explain the strange vicissitudes of the Sanskrit language? Was
it a lingua franca for trade, international business and cultural promotion? Is
the spread of Sanskrit into Southeast Asia to be explained by the same reasons
that also explain its spread within the Indian subcontinent?
Pollock, by using the expression ‘Sanskrit cosmopolis’, draws attention to
the political dimension of the spread of Sanskrit. One defining feature of
the Sanskrit cosmopolis, he states (1996: 197), ‘is that Sanskrit became the
premiere instrument of political expression in the polities that comprised it,
those of most of South and much of Southeast Asia’. He rightly points out
that Sanskrit was not a lingua franca:1
Sanskrit’s spread was effected by traditional intellectuals and religious professionals, often
following in the train of scattered groups of traders and adventurers, and carrying with
them disparate and decidedly uncanonized texts of a wide variety of competing religious
orders, ®Saiva, Buddhist, Vai]s]nava, and others. [...] There is little to suggest [...] that
Sanskrit was an everyday medium of communication in South let alone Southeast Asia,
or that [it] ever functioned as a language-of-trade, a bridge-, link-, or koiné language or
lingua franca (except among those traditional intellectuals) [...]

--- Page 2 ---
264 Johannes Bronkhorst
Pollock continues: ‘We have little direct evidence that Sanskrit actually
functioned as a language of practical imperium – the medium of chancellery
communication or revenue accounting, for example – certainly not in
Southeast Asia, almost certainly not in peninsular India or the Deccan [...]’
The hypothesis he then goes on to propose (pp. 198-99) is
that Sanskrit articulated politics not as material power – the power embodied in languages-
of-state for purposes of boundary regulation or taxation, for example, for which so-called
vernacular idioms typically remained the vehicle – but politics as aesthetic power. To some
degree the Sanskrit ‘cosmopolis’ I [i.e. J.B. Pollock] shall describe consists precisely in this
common aesthetics of political culture, a kind of poetry of politics.2
Further explanation follows on p. 199: ‘Constituted by no imperial power
or church but in large part by a communicative system and its political
aesthetic, the Sanskrit ecumene is characterised by a transregionally shared set
of assumptions about the basics of power, or at least about the ways in which
power is reproduced at the level of representation in language, and Sanskrit’s
unique suitability for this task.’ Having discussed the epigraphical and related
evidence from a number of regions, Pollock then depicts the situation around
ce 1000 in the following passage (pp. 229-30):
A traveler around the year 1000 [...] would have seen, from the plain of Kedu in central
Java to the basin of Tonlé Sap in Cambodia, from Ga<ngaiko]dacoapuram in Tamil Nadu
to Patan in Gujarat and beyond, imperial formations that had many features in common.
The material and social ones I have ignored here: their largely hierarchized societies,
administered by a corps of functionaries, scribes, tax collectors, living in grand agrarian
cities geometrically planned in orientation to the cardinal points and set within imaginary
geographies that with their local mountains, rivers, and springs recapitulated the geography
of India, urban structures ‘freighted with cosmic symbolism, helping one to visualize
the order of things’ [...] It is their common political-cultural, especially literary-cultural,
features I have emphasized: the existence of cultural and political élites assiduously
mastering the intricate codes and protocols of Sanskrit poetry, and the publication of
their works throughout these cities, in varying degrees of density and grandeur – stately
public poems in Sanskrit engraved on the ubiquitous copper-plates recording gifts and
donations, or on stone pillars looming up from gigantic architectural wonders.
There was thus, I think, a certain concrete reality to the ‘Sanskrit cosmopolis’, one
that does not exist only in the retrospective gaze of the historian. For a millennium, and
across half the world, élites participated in a peculiar supralocal ecumene. This was a form
of shared life very different from that produced by common subjecthood or fealty to a
central power, even by shared religious liturgy or credo. It was instead a symbolic network
created in the first instance by the presence of a similar kind of discourse in a similar
language deploying a similar idiom and style to make similar kinds of claims about the
nature and aesthetics of polity – about kingly virtue and learning; the dharma of rule;
the universality of dominion. A network, accordingly, wherein the élite shared ‘a broadly
based communality of outlook’, and could perceive ‘ubiquitous signs of its beliefs’.
Readers may be surprised to see that this passage makes no reference to

--- Page 3 ---
The Spread of Sanskrit in Southeast Asia 265
Brahmans. Isn’t there an old and well-established link between Sanskrit and
Brahmans? Can one speak about the spread of Sanskrit without speaking
about Brahmans that presumably travelled with the language? Pollock speaks
very little of Brahmans in these publications.3 Where he does so, his aim
appears to be to weaken or even deny the link between the two. He does
so, for example, where he criticises the notion of ‘legitimation’.4 He cites
(p. 236) in this connection the following passage from an article by Hermann
Kulke (1990: 20 ff.):
At a certain stage of this development Brahmins ‘came hither’ [to mainland Southeast
Asia] in order to legitimize the new status and wealth of these chiefs. Obviously there
existed a tremendous need of additional legitimation which obviously no other traditional
institution was able to provide fully ... Brahmins appear to have been invited particularly
as a sort of ‘extra’ legitimators of a new and more advanced type of authority which
was not sanctioned by the traditional societies of South-East Asia. ... Obviously in both
[South India and Southeast Asia] there had existed the same or at least similar socio-
political needs for a new type of legitimation.5
Pollock is very critical about the notion of ‘legitimation’, and he argues that
‘there is no reason to accept legitimation theory’.6 However, he seems to think
that the rejection of ‘legitimation theory’ also does away with the question of
the connection between Brahmans and Sanskrit in south India and Southeast
Asia, for he does not return to it. And yet, there is ample evidence to show
that there were Brahmans in virtually all the regions that were affected by the
spread of Sanskrit. Even if one were to accept that legitimation theory does
not explain their presence in all those regions, this hardly justifies leaving their
presence altogether out of consideration. Innumerable Sanskrit inscriptions,
both in India and in Southeast Asia, testify to the presence of Brahmans, who
were no doubt involved in many, if not most, Sanskrit inscriptions. It is a
fair question to ask whether the users of Sanskrit in all these regions were not
preponderantly Brahmans. Even if one were to admit that ‘legitimation’ was
not the reason why these Brahmans were there, this is no reason to deny that
they were there, and that their presence was intimately connected with the
use of Sanskrit in those regions.
By disconnecting Sanskrit from Brahmanism and from Brahmans, Pollock
can formulate the questions relating to the spread of Sanskrit in terms of
the language itself rather than in terms of its users. This allows him to
propose his hypothesis of ‘politics as aesthetic power’. A consequence of this
disconnection is that ‘we cannot simply read off automatically from the choice
to express political will in Sanskrit any particular social consequences (e.g.,
hierarchization, hegemony; the production of false belief)’ (p. 245). No, the
qualities of the language itself have to account – if not fully, then at least to
a large extent – for its extraordinary expansion: ‘This had to be a language
of transethnic attraction; a language capable of making translocal claims [...];

--- Page 4 ---
266 Johannes Bronkhorst
one powerful not so much because of its numinous qualities [...], but because
of its aesthetic qualities, its ability somehow to make reality more real. [...]
These aesthetic qualities, moreover, are authenticated by the language’s pos-
sessing a tradition of literary texts that embody and realize them’ (pp. 239-
40). Indeed, ‘the unique expressive capabilities of Sanskrit poetry allow the
poet to make statements about political power that could be made in no other
way’ (Pollock 2006: 139).7
All this leaves one with the apprehension that the traditional connection
between Sanskrit and Brahmans has been too hastily disposed off. Pollock is
no doubt right in rejecting ‘the received account that imagines a “resurgence
of Brahmanism” leading to a “re-assertion of Sanskrit” as the language of
literature and administration after the Maurya period’. Indeed, one of the
consequences of the main argument of my book Greater Magadha (2007) is
that Brahmanism did not resurge after the Maurya period but commenced
at that time its spread over the subcontinent and beyond for the first time.
We are, as a matter of fact, confronted with two remarkable instantiations
of spread: the spread of Brahmanism and the spread of Sanskrit. And the
question that cannot be avoided is, were these two really unconnected? Is it
not more likely that they had something to do with each other?
In order to answer these questions we must be clear what we are talking
about. Pollock’s observations about the spread of Sanskrit are enlightening
and, by and large, sufficient for our present purpose. But what is meant by
‘spread of Brahmanism’? The expression Brahmanism can be used to designate
the religion and culture of the Veda, but it is only in a very limited sense that
these can be said to have spread during the period following the Mauryas.
No, the spread of Brahmanism was primarily the spread of Brahmans as
Brahmans. That is to say, a region is Brahmanised when its population,
or its rulers, accept the Brahmans that have settled there as by right the
most eminent members of society. This population, or these rulers, are not
so much converted to a different religion: no converts are made to Vedic
religion or to any other specific religion promulgated by the Brahmans. No,
these populations or rulers are made to accept a different vision of society,
in which Brahmans are highest because they have access to the supernatural.
An important instrument in the hands of the Brahmans is their knowledge
of the Veda, a collection of texts which the vast majority of the population
is not even allowed to hear recited, much less study. It is their often secret
knowledge that gives them the power to work for the good of a kingdom, its
ruler and its population. It also allows them to do the contrary, and this is an
important reason to humour them.
For reasons that are not at all clear at present, Brahmans succeeded in the
course of time to convince many rulers that it was a good thing to provide
them with what they needed to carry out their rites and do whatever else

--- Page 5 ---
The Spread of Sanskrit in Southeast Asia 267
would benefit the kingdom. The growing presence of Brahmans all over South
Asia is well documented, but they also showed up in Southeast Asia, even in
countries that became Buddhist: ‘even in states where Hinayana Buddhism
prevailed, Brahmans played an important ceremonial part, especially at Court,
and still do so in Burma, Siam and Cambodia, though themselves strikingly
different from their counterparts in India’.8
The oldest known inscriptions in Indonesia – we read in The Economic and
Administrative History of Early Indonesia (Van Naerssen & De Iongh 1977:
18) – are those of East Borneo. Here there are seven stone sacrificial posts,
called y"upas by archaeologists, that date from around ce 400. What is written
on them is described in the following terms:9
In clear, well written Sanskrit verses M"ulavarman ‘the lord of kings’, his father –
A«svavarman, ‘the founder of a noble race’ – and his grandfather, ‘the great Kulotunga, the
lord of men’ – are mentioned on the occasion of a sacrifice. ‘For that sacrifice’, we read
on one of the stone poles, ‘this sacrificial post has been prepared by the chief amongst
the twice-born [dvija, JB]’. (‘Twice-born’ is applied to the members of the brahmanical
or priestly caste.) Apparently these ‘priests [vipra, JB] who had come hither’ (as is written
on the second pole) were rewarded by king M"ulavarman for their religious services.
Thus the third inscription sounds: ‘Let the foremost amongst the priests and whatsoever
other pious men hear of the meritorious deed of M"ulavarman, the king of illustrious and
resplendent fame – (let him hear) of his great gift, his gift of cattle, of a wonder-tree [...],
his gift of land. For this multitude of pious deeds this sacrificial post has been set up by
the priests.’
A Sanskrit rock inscription in West Java dating from about ce 450 deals with
an occasion on which the Brahmans were presented with 1,000 cows.10
About Cambodia we read:11
In Cambodia the Brahmans for many centuries maintained a powerful hierarchy. They
were the only one of the four castes that was really organized, this caste having taken form
in the fifth century and been constantly augmented by immigrants from India.12 In the
days when Ya«sovarman was king (acceded a.d. 889), Saivism was predominant, and we
learn from the following inscription that the Brahmans still enjoyed a position similar to
that which was theirs in India:
‘This king, well-versed (in kingly duties), performed the Ko]ti-homa and the Yajñas (Vedic
sacrifices), for which he gave the priests magnificent presents of jewels, gold, etc.’13
The cult of the Royal God, though founded by Jayavarman II (ce 802), did not reach
the height of its development until some two centuries afterwards, and was especially
associated with Vai]s]navism and the temple of Angkor Vat. This cult led to the Brahmans
enjoying an even more exalted position. The Cambodian hierarchy was established by
Jayavarman II, and the priesthood became hereditary in the family of ®Sivakaivalya, who
enjoyed immense power; indeed, this sacerdotal dynasty almost threw the royal dynasty
into the shade.14 Brahmans were depicted on the reliefs of Angkor Vat and Coedès has
identified Dro]na and Vi«sv"amitra amongst them.15 In one of the reliefs that illustrate a
royal procession, it is interesting to note that the Brahmans are the only onlookers who
do not prostrate themselves before the king, as was also the case in India.16 [...] Another

--- Page 6 ---
268 Johannes Bronkhorst
point of interest that we learn from the reliefs of Angkor Vat and Angkor Thom is that
not only the Brahmans, but also the aristocracy wore the chignon, the lower classes having
short hair.17
One very remarkable sign of the power of the Brahmans during the Angkor period is
that, contrary to the modern custom, by which princesses of the royal blood rarely marry,
formerly alliances were common with the Brahmans;18 and up to the present day there is
a tradition amongst the Bakus, who are the descendants of the ancient Brahmans, that in
the event of the royal family failing, a successor would be chosen from amongst them.19
As early as the reign of Jayavarman V (ce 968) we find evidence of the admixture of
Mah"ay"ana Buddhism with the cult of the Royal God.
‘The purohita should be versed in Buddhist learning and rites. He should bathe on the
days of the festivals the image of the Buddha and should recite Buddhist prayers’.20
And the rites and duties of the purohitas remained a mixture of Hinduism and
Mah"ay"anism until the introduction of P"ali Buddhism in the thirteenth century,21 after
which this powerful sacerdotal caste degenerated with their religion to the position
occupied by the modern Bakus.22 But the Brahmans of Cambodia perhaps never sank so
low as did those of Camp"a, where ‘In the Po Nagar Inscription (No. 30) we read that the
king’s feet were worshipped, even by Br"ahma]nas and priests’.23
King Ya«sovarman of Cambodia created numerous "a«sramas, among them
some that were specifically meant for Vai]s]navas, ®Saivas and Buddhists.
Interestingly, in all three, including the Buddhist "a«srama, Brahmans had to
be honoured more than anyone else: ‘In the Saugat"a«srama, too, the learned
Br"ahma]na should be honoured a little more than the "ach"arya versed in
Buddhist doctrine [...]’.24
The situation in Thailand was not independent from the one prevailing
in Cambodia:25
Though the Thai were Buddhists, their kings surrounded themselves with the
appurtenances of Khmer royalty, and recruited their Court Brahmans from Cambodia.
For centuries, indeed, Brahmanism enjoyed quite an important position; for although
Buddhism was the religion of the people, and was protected by the kings, Hinduism was
still considered as essential to the monarchy, and so received a great share of royal favour.
The famous inscription (about a.d. 1361) of King Dharmar"aja I mentions the king’s
knowledge of the Vedas and of astronomy;26 while the inscription on the ®Siva statue found
at K"a]nbè<n Bejra records the desire of King Dharma«sokar"aja to exalt both Hinduism and
Buddhism. And this is as late as a.d. 1510.27
It would be a mistake to think of the Brahmans in Southeast Asia as an
endogamous group of people, as they were in India. Indeed, G. Coedès
(1964: 54) cites a Chinese text from the fifth century which states that ‘dans
le royaume de Touen-siun [Dun-sun] il y a plus de mille brahmanes de l’Inde.
Les gens de Touen-siun pratiquent leur doctrine et leur donnent leurs filles
en mariage; aussi beaucoup de ces brahmanes ne s’en vont-ils pas.28 (In the
kingdom of Dun-sun there are more than a thousand Brahmans of India. The
people of Dun-sun practice their doctrine and give them their daughters in
marriage. Consequently, not many of these Brahmans do no go away.)

--- Page 7 ---
The Spread of Sanskrit in Southeast Asia 269
De Casparis & Mabbett (1992: 287) sum up present knowledge about the
role of Brahmans in Southeast Asia:
Brahmins had great influence in the Southeast Asian courts in various capacities. As
they had access to the sacred texts, the lawbooks and other literature in Sanskrit, they
were employed as priests, teachers, ministers and counsellors: the principal advisers of
the kings. Government, particularly in early centuries, depended upon such men, who
were the chief available sources of literacy and administrative talent and experience. As
in the early Indian kingdoms, an important office was that of the purohita, a chief priest
with ritual and governmental functions. The epigraphic record of the mainland kingdoms
demonstrates the powerful influence of purohitas, notably in Burma and Cambodia,
where they often served under several successive rulers and provided continuity to the
government in troubled times. In ninth-century Angkor, for example, Indravarman I had
the services of ®Sivasoma, who was a relative of the earlier king Jayavarman II and was said
to have studied in India under the celebrated Ved"anta teacher ®Sa<nkara.
About the origins of these Brahmans – where they Indians or not? – De
Casparis and Mabbett have the following to say:29
If such brahmins were Indians (the Indian brahmins are indeed occasionally mentioned in
Southeast Asian inscriptions), one wonders how or why they should have left India. This
is the more surprising since Indian lawbooks contain prohibitions for brahmins against
overseas travel, which was regarded as ritually polluting. These prohibitions may have had
little practical effect, and would not have deterred ambitious men lured by the hope of
honour and fortune in a distant land. It has been suggested that some learned brahmins
were invited by Southeast Asian rulers at a time when commercial relations between
Indian and Southeast Asian ports had spread the fame of such brahmins to the courts. It
is indeed likely that this happened sometimes, but probably not on a large scale. It is, for
example, striking that the Indian gotra names, never omitted in Indian inscriptions, are
not normally mentioned in Southeast Asia. On the other hand, in the few cases where
they are mentioned it is likely that they refer to Indian Brahmins. It therefore follows that
the great majority of Southeast Asian brahmins would have been Southeast Asians, many
of whom had acquired their knowledge of the Sanskrit texts and of brahmanic ritual in
Indian ashrams.
The services of the Southeast Asian Brahmans extended beyond the limits of
any single religion:30
Not only in the ‘Hindu’ courts, such as Angkor, but also in the Buddhist courts, such as
those of Pagan in Burma and Sukothai in Thailand, the brahmins conducted the great
ceremonies, such as the royal consecration, and functioned as ministers and counsellors,
but had to share their influence with that of the Buddhist monks. By its very nature
Buddhism was concerned with the acquisition of spiritual merit and moral perfection
rather than with the rites and ceremonies of a royal court, which were left to the brahmins.
The grand ceremonies in Pagan [...] required the services of numerous brahmins, although
Therav"ada was then well established. In Cambodia, as late as the thirteenth century [...],
Jayavarman VIII built a temple for the scholar-priest Jayama<ngal"artha, and likewise for
the brahmin Vidye«savid, who became court sacrificial priest. The Chinese visitor Chou
Ta-kuan refers to the presence of brahmins wearing the traditional sacred thread.

--- Page 8 ---
270 Johannes Bronkhorst
De Casparis and Mabbett (1992: 288) draw the following conclusion:
What is shown by the role of such brahmins is that it is appropriate to speak of Brahmanism
as distinct from the specific cults of ®Siva or Vi]s]nu, or any of their innumerable kin:
the priests stood for a social order and for the rituals that gave to the political or local
community a sense of its unity and its place in the world.
The part of this conclusion which must be emphasised is that Brahmanism is
distinct from the specific cults of ®Siva or Vi]s]nu, or any of their innumerable
kin, and that the Brahmans stood for a social order.31 This seems obvious
and undeniable. It is yet often overlooked by scholars who wish to assign
Brahmanism to the category ‘religion’. In reality, Brahmanism is primarily a
social order. Only this way can we make sense of the evidence from Southeast
Asia as well as of the evidence from South Asia.
It appears, then, that some of the proposals made already in 1934 (in
Dutch) by J.C. van Leur still hold good.32 About South Asia he said (van Leur
1955: 97):33
The chief disseminator of the process of ‘Indianization’ was the Brahman priesthood; the
aim of the ‘Brahman mission’ was not the preaching of any revealed doctrine of salvation,
but the ritualistic and bureaucratic subjugation and organization of the newly entered
regions. Wherever the process of ‘Indianization’ took place, ‘religious’ organization was
accompanied by social organization – division in castes, legitimation of the ruling groups,
assurance of the supremacy of the Brahmins. The colossal magical, ritualistic power of
the Brahman priesthood was the most characteristic feature of early Indian history. The
rationalistic, bureaucratic schooling of the priesthood as the intellectual group, which went
to make up its great worth, its indispensability even, for any comprehensive governmental
organization, was [...] interwoven with the sacerdotal function. The Brahman priesthood
developed high qualities in that field as well, but its decisive influence came from the
magical, ritualistic power of domestication it in the absoluteness of its power was able to
develop.
The spread of Brahmanical institutions to Southeast Asia was hardly more
than a continuation of this process (pp. 103-04):
The Indian priesthood was called eastward – certainly because of its wide renown – for the
magical, sacral legitimation of dynastic interests and the domestication of subjects, and
probably for the organisation of the ruler’s territory into a state.
Pollock may object to the word legitimation in these two passages. Nothing
much is lost by removing it.34 The factual situation remains the same.
Brahmans were called to Southeast Asia (or were found in Southeast Asia;
there is no reason to insist on the Indian origin of these Brahmans), and these
Brahmans brought with them their sacred language, Sanskrit.35
We see that it will be hard to separate Sanskrit from Brahmans, both in
South and Southeast Asia. The one complicating factor is Buddhism. What
was the relationship between Buddhism and Sanskrit, and why had Buddhists

--- Page 9 ---
The Spread of Sanskrit in Southeast Asia 271
already in South Asia adopted Sanskrit for their texts? These questions require
a detailed discussion, which cannot be provided within the limits imposed
upon this article.
NOTES
* This is part of a more encompassing study ‘The Spread of Sanskrit’, dealing with the
phenomenon in both South and Southeast Asia, which will appear in the Felicitation
Volume for Dieter Schlingloff.
1. Pollock, 1996: 198.
2. Similarly Pollock, 2006: 14.
3. This in spite of the fact that he observes in another article that ‘to choose a language
for literature [...] is at the same time to choose a community’ (Pollock, 1998: 9).
4. Nemec (2007: 210), reviewing Pollock’s The Language of the Gods in the World of Men
(2006), expresses some reservations about the rejection of legitimation.
5. See, however, Kulke, 1986: 274: ‘legitimation was not the only attraction of
Hinduism for tribal leaders. As pointed out by Wolters, Hinduism must have been
particularly attractive for “men of prowess” because of its highly developed system of
magical power derived from meditation (tapas)’.
6. Elsewhere Pollock calls it a ‘functionalist explanation [which] is not only ana-
chronistic, but really is a mere assumption, and an intellectually mechanical, cultur-
ally homogenizing, and theoretically naive assumption at that’ (1998: 13; cp. 2006:
18). And again: ‘It is typical [...] to reduce one of these terms (culture) to the other
(power) – a reduction often embodied in the use of the concept of legitimation
of power. There is no reason to assume that legitimation is applicable throughout
all human history, yet it remains the dominant analytic in explaining the work of
culture in studies of early South and Southeast Asia.’ See further Pollock, 2006: 511
ff.
7. See further Pollock, 2006: 254 f.
8. Hall, 1968: 12. About Champa, Mabbett (1986: 294) observes: ‘Except for a short
while around the end of the ninth and the beginning of the tenth centuries, Buddhism
in Champa never really rivalled Hinduism. Epigraphic statistics give some idea of
the relative importance of the two faiths, at least in royal and courtly circles: of 130
inscriptions published, 21 are not sectarian, 92 refer to worship of ®Siva, 3 are directed
to Vi]s]nu, 5 to Brahm"a, 7 to Buddhism, and 2 to ®Siva and Vi]s]nu jointly.’ (These
numbers correspond to those given in Mus, 1934: 369.) For the fate of Sanskrit after
the introduction of Therav"ada Buddhism in Burma, see Bechert & Braun, 1981:
xxxviii f.: this language continued to be used for some time for the secular sciences,
i.e., grammar, lexicography, metrics, poetics, medicine, pharmacology, astrology,
gemmology, logic. Interestingly, in Burma a work dealing with the right conduct of
a king (R"ajan$ıti) was composed in P"ali by court Brahmans (Bechert & Braun, 1981:
lxi). However, ‘it seems that all R"ajan$ıti verses are direct translations from Sanskrit’
(Bechert & Braun, 1981: lxxvii).
9. Van Naerssen & De Iongh, 1977: 18. Cf. Vogel, 1918.
10. Ibid.: 23.
11. Quaritch Wales, 1931: 58-60.
12. Aymonier, 1900-04: III: 548. Even though the system of four var]nas does not
seem to have taken root in Southeast Asia, this may not be due to lack of trying.

--- Page 10 ---
272 Johannes Bronkhorst
In Cambodia, according to Chatterji (1928: 239), S"uryavarman I is stated to have
‘established the division of castes’, and Har]savarman III boasts of having made
the people observe strictly the duties of the four castes. Chatterji adds, however
(p. 240): ‘We do not get much substantial evidence of the other [i.e., different from
Brahmins] castes however.’ See further Mabbett, 1977 (p. 439: ‘var]nas [in Angkor]
were largely ceremonial orders’). A text which seems to have been issued in the
fourteenth century ce by King K_rtanagara of East-Java prescribes: ‘The ®Sivaite’s son
shall be a ®Sivaite, the Buddhist’s son a Buddhist, the r"aja’s son a r"aja, the manuh’s
(common layman’s) son a manuh, the ®S"udra’s son a ®S"udra, and so on all classes shall
follow their own avocations and ceremonies.’ (Ensink, 1978: 188)
13. Chatterji, 1928: 114.
14. Chatterji, 1928: 80 f.
15. Coedès, 1911: Pls. xII and xIII.
16. Delaporte, 1878.
17. Groslier, 1921: 58.
18. Aymonier, 1900-04: III: 531. Cp. Coedès, 1964: 219: ‘Jayavarman V [Cambodia,
10th century] maria sa soeur Indralakshm$ı au brahmane hindou Div"akarabha_t_ta, né
dans l’Inde sur les bords de la Yamun"a, auteur de diverses fondations çivaïtes’; p. 223:
‘Les familles brahmaniques s’alliaient souvent avec la famille royale: les mariages entre
brahmanes et kshatriyas semblent avoir été fréquents, ces deux castes constituant, au-
dessus de la masse, une classe à part, représentant l’élément intellectuel et la culture
hindoue, sans qu’il faille en conclure que, du point de vue racial, cette aristocratie ait
été très différente du reste de la population’.
19. Aymonier, 1920: 178.
20. Chatterji, 1928: 163. P"as"adika (2006: 468), referring to an unpublished lecture by
Peter Skilling, provides the following information about the second Sambor-Prei Kük
inscription in Chenla: ‘A Sanskrit inscription ... from the reign of Á«s"anavarman I,
records the erection of a li<nga in ®Saka 549 = ce 627, by the high official Vidy"avi«se]sa,
a P"as"upata Brahman, who was versed in grammar («s"abda), the Brahmanical systems
of Vai«se]sika, Ny"aya, and S"a]nkhya, and the doctrine of the Sugata.’
21. Aymonier, 1900-04: III: 591. An inscription from Arakan, which Johnston
(1944: 365) dates to the beginning of the ninth century, speaks of a king named
�nandacandra, who was a Mah"ay"ana Buddhist and an up"asaka. This did not prevent
him from having four monasteries (ma_tha) built for fifty Brahmans, ‘provided with
lands and servants, furnished with musical instruments and musicians’ (pp. 381-
82).
22. Aymonier, 1900-04: III: 614.
23. Majumdar, 1927: Chapter 14.
24. Goyal, 2006: 221.
25. Quaritch Wales, 1931: 60.
26. Coedès, 1924: 98.
27. Coedès, 1924: 159.
28. Coedès explains in a note (1964: 54, n. 6): ‘Le Touen-siun était une dépendance du
Fou-nan, probablement sur la Péninsule Malaise’.
29. De Casparis & Mabbett, 1992: 287.
30. Ibid.: 288. Cp. Golzio, 2003: 79 f.
31. P"as"adika (2006: 465), referring to Bhattacharya (1997), mentions the ‘synthesis of
®Saivism and gruesome local cult or possibly “the” indigenous religion of Cambodia’.
‘Originally this cult culminated in human sacrifices to the mountain-spirit performed

--- Page 11 ---
The Spread of Sanskrit in Southeast Asia 273
by the king himself. [...] The early Cambodian kings could have had no objection to
the assimilation of a primitive and gruesome cult by Brahmanism thanks to which
[...] the mountain-spirit [...] became Bhadre«svara, i.e. ®Siva [...]’
32. Cp. Kulke, 1986a: 256 f.
33. On the ‘Indianization’ of Southeast Asia, see further Mabbett, 1977a.
34. Or one might replace it with protection: ‘protection of the ruling groups’ and ‘sacral
protection of dynastic interests’ may give less reason for objections.
35. They also brought with them the information about the consecration of temples that
we find in Indian texts such as the K"a«syapa«silpa, information which was also used in
the building of Buddhist structures; see ®SlaÖczka, 2007, esp. Chapters 7.3 and 7.4.
REFERENCES
Bayly, Susan, 1999, Caste, Society and Politics in India from the Eighteenth Century to the
Modern Age (The New Cambridge History of India IV.3.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bechert, Heinz & Heinz Braun, 1981, P"ali N$ıti Texts of Burma: Dhamman$ıti, Lokan$ıti,
Mah"arahan$ıti, R"ajan$ıti, (Pali Text Society, Text Series no. 171) London: Henley: and
Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar, 1997, ‘Religious Syncretism in Ancient Cambodia’,
Dharmad"uta. Mélanges offerts au Vénérable Thich Huyên-Vi à l’occasion de son soixante-
dixième anniversaire, ed. Bh. T. Dhammaratana, Bh. P"as"adika, Paris, pp. 1-12. (not
seen)
Bronkhorst, Johannes, 2007, Greater Magadha: Studies in the Culture of Early India,
(Handbook of Oriental Studies, Section 2 South Asia, 19.) Leiden - Boston: Brill.
Chatterji, Bijan Raj, 1928, Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia, Calcutta: University
of Calcutta.
Coedès, George, 1911, Les bas reliefs d’Angkor Vat, BCAI II, pp. 170-220.
——, 1924, Les inscriptions de Sukhodaya, Bangkok: Bangkok Times Press.
——, 1932, ‘Études cambodgiennes, xxV. Deux inscriptions sanskrites du Fou-nan’,
Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 31 (1931), 1-12.
——, 1964, Les états hindouisés d’Indochine et d’Indonésie, Nouvelle édition revue et mise
à jour, Paris: E. de Boccard.
Das, Rahul Peter, 2005, “Kaste”. Gemeinsame kulturelle Codes in koexistierenden
Religionsgemeinschaften: Leucorea-Kolloquium 2003, ed. Ute Pietruschka. Halle
(Saale). (Hallesche Beiträge zur Orientwissenschaft 38 (2004).), pp. 75-116.
De Casparis, J.G. & I.W. Mabbett, 1992, ‘Religion and Popular Beliefs of Southeast Asia
before c. 1500’, The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia, Volume One: From Early
Times to c. 1800, ed. Nicholas Tarling, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 276-339.
Ensink, Jacob, 1978, ‘®Siva-Buddhism in Java and Bali’, Buddhism in Ceylon and Studies
on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries (Symposien zur Buddhismusforschung,
I.), ed. Heinz Bechert, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Abhandlungen der
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, philologisch-historische Klasse, Nr.
108.), pp. 178-98.
Golzio, Karl-Heinz, 2003, Geschichte Kambodschas, München: C.H. Beck.
Gopinath Rao, T.A., 1926, ‘Kany"akum"ari Inscription of V$ıra-R"ajendra-Deva’, Epigraphia
Indica 18 (1925-26), 21-55.

--- Page 12 ---
274 Johannes Bronkhorst
Goyal, S.R., 2006, ‘History and Cultures of Kambuja and Champ"a as known from Their
Inscriptions’, India’s Interaction with Southeast Asia, ed. G.C. Pande, New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal (History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian
Civilization, I.3), pp. 201-60.
Hall, D.G.E., 1968, A History of South-East Asia, London: MacMillan; New York: St
Martin’s Press.
Johnston, E.H., 1944, ‘Some Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan’, Bulletin of the School of
Oriental and African Studies, 11(2), 357-85.
Kulke, Hermann, 1986, ‘The Early and the Imperial Kingdom in Southeast Asian
History’, Southeast Asia in the 9th to 14th Centuries, ed. David G. Marr and A.C.
Milner, Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies / Canberra: Research School
of Pacific Studies, Australian National University, pp. 1-22. Reprint: Kulke, 1993:
262-93. (References to the reprint.)
——, 1986a, ‘Max Weber’s contribution to the study of “Hinduization” in India
and “Indianization” in Southeast Asia’, Recent Research on Max Weber’s Studies on
Hinduism, ed. D. Kantowsky, Munich: Weltforum-Verlag, pp. 97-116, Reprint:
Kulke, 1993: 240-61. (References to the reprint.)
——, 1990, ‘Indian Colonies, Indianization or Cultural Convergence? Reflections on the
Changing Image of India’s Role in South-East Asia’, Semaian 3, 1990, pp. 8-32.
——, 1993, Kings and Cults: State Formation and Legitimation in India and Southeast
Asia, Reprint 2001, Delhi: Manohar.
Mabbett, I.W., 1977, ‘Var]nas in Angkor and the Indian Caste System’, Journal of Asian
Studies, 36(3), 429-42.
——, 1977a, ‘The “Indianization” of Southeast Asia: Reflections on the Historical
Sources’, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 8(2), 143-61.
Mabbett, Ian, 1986, ‘Buddhism in Champa’ Southeast Asia in the 9th to 14th Centuries,
ed. David G. Marr and A. C. Milner, Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies/
Canberra: Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University,
pp. 289-313.
Mus, P., 1934, ‘Cultes indiens et indigènes au Champa’, Bulletin de l’École Française
d’Extrême-Orient 33 (1933), 367-410.
Nemec, John, 2007, ‘Review of Pollock’, 2006, Journal of the American Academy of
Religion, 75, 207-11.
Ostler, Nicholas, 2005, Empires of the Word: A Language History of the World, New York:
HarperCollins.
P"as"adika, Bhikkhu, 2006, ‘The Development of Buddhist Religion and Literature in
Cambodia and Vietnam’, in India’s Interaction with Southeast Asia, ed. G.C. Pande,
New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. (History of Science, Philosophy and Culture
in Indian Civilization, I.3.), pp. 463-88.
Pollock, Sheldon, 1996, ‘The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, 300-1300: Transculturation,
Vernacularization, and the Question of Ideology’, Ideology and Status of Sanskrit:
Contributions to the history of the Sanskrit language (Brill’s Indological Library, 13),
ed. Jan E.M. Houben, Leiden: E.J. Brill, pp. 197-247.
Pollock, Sheldon, 1998, ‘The cosmopolitan vernacular’, Journal of Asian Studies 57(1),
6-37.
——, 2006, The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in
Premodern India, Berkeley – Los Angeles – London: University of California Press.
Quaritch Wales, H.G., 1931, Siamese State Ceremonies: Their History and Function,
London: Bernard Quaritch.

--- Page 13 ---
The Spread of Sanskrit in Southeast Asia 275
®SlaÖczka, Anna A., 2007, Temple Consecration Rituals in Ancient India: Text and Archaeology,
(Brill’s Indological Library, 26), Leiden – Boston: E.J. Brill.
Van Leur, Jacob Cornelis, 1955, Indonesian Trade and Society: Essays in Asian Social and
Economic History, The Hague. Reprint: Foris Publication Holland, Dordrecht/
U.S.A., Cinnaminson, 1983.
Van Naerssen, F.H. & R.C. De Iongh, 1977, The Economic and Administrative History of
Early Indonesia, (Handbuch der Orientalistik 3.7), Leiden/Köln: E.J. Brill.
Vogel, J.Ph., 1918, ‘The Y"upa Inscriptions of King M"ulavarman, from Koetei (East
Borneo)’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 79, 167-232.