# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2013-foxeus-esoteric-theravada-burma-scripta.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 13:54:36
# Total Pages: 25
# File Size: 0.27 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 2659.4 chars/page, total chars: 66,485)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
55
Niklas Foxeus
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
T
he achievement of independence in 1948 was in many ways a watershed 
in Burma’s history. At this time, a variety of Buddhist movements emerged 
that were part not only of a ‘Burmese Buddhist revival’, in which even the gov-
ernment was involved (see Brohm 1957), but also a general re-enchantment 
of Asia. In the period following World War II, projects of nation-building 
and further modernization were implemented in many newly independent 
Asian nation states. The theories of modernization adopted by the rulers had 
presupposed that a new, rationalized and secularized order that had set them 
on the path of ‘progress’ would entail a decline of religion. However, instead 
there was a widespread resurgence of religion, and a variety of new, eclectic 
religious movements emerged in Southeast Asia (Keyes et al. 1994).1 Charles 
Keyes, Helen Hardacre, and Laurel Kendall (1994) explain this phenomenon 
as being related to a ‘modern crisis of authority’ which was brought about as 
a result of the tensions between these movements and the modernization and 
nation building projects.
In the thriving religious field of postcolonial Burma, two lay Buddhist 
movements associated with two different meditation techniques emerged, 
viz.; the insight meditation movement and the concentration meditation 
movement. The latter consisted of a variety of esoteric congregations com-
bining concentration meditation with esoteric lore, and some of these were 
characterized by fundamentalist trends.2 At the same time, the supermun-
1	
Among these movements can be mentioned Cao Dai in Vietnam and Dhammakāya, 
Santi Asoke, and the Hupphaasawan Movement in Thailand (Keyes et al. 1994, 
Schober 1995); some of these movements were fundamentalist Buddhist movements 
(see Swearer 1991; see also Foxeus 2011). 
2	
The most important features of the ‘esoteric style’ of the esoteric congregations are 
initiation rituals, the master–disciple (hsayā–tapyi) relationship, and secrecy. The 
latter may refer to genuine secrets that should remain hidden due to sociopolitical 
conditions, but is mainly concerned with the social dynamics of a rhetoric of secrecy, 
and serves to a large degree as a proselytizing strategy (see Foxeus 2011: 3–10). 
Secrecy in the latter sense should, following Hugh B. Urban (1998), be understood 
less in terms of its content than of its forms. Being employed as a discursive strategy, 
it ‘transforms a given piece of knowledge into a scarce and precious resource’, and

--- PAGE 2 ---
56
NIKLAS FOXEUS
dane form of Buddhism became increasingly influential in the entire field of 
religion. The aim of the present article is to discuss how this supermundane 
dimension has reshaped the complex religious field in Burma, with particu-
lar emphasis on the esoteric congregations; to present the Burmese form of 
esoteric Theravāda Buddhism, and to situate the fundamentalist trends which 
are present in these contexts. 
The Liberation Era: enlightenment and weizzāhood for anyone
In pre-modern Burma, it was generally regarded as impossible to attain the 
higher stages of the path to nirvana and enlightenment because the Buddha’s 
sāsana was perceived as being too degenerated.3 From the mid-eighteenth 
century and throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the view 
that it was possible to attain nirvana as a Buddhist saint (P. arahant) in the 
present era gradually developed and spread (see Pranke 2011, Turner 2009, 
Braun 2008).4 In early postcolonial Burma, there was a general expectation 
of the possibility for anyone to achieve soteriological success on the path to 
enlighten­ment and nirvana, and this was associated with a seemingly novel 
notion, viz. the Liberation Era (wimoutti-yuga-khayt) that was popular at the 
time, at least in some communities. 
Different cosmological schemes seem to have been used by Burmese 
people­ to make sense of changes brought about in the colonial and post-
colonial periods respectively. At the end of the nineteenth century, a linear 
scheme of gradual sāsana decline in five stages, as Alicia Turner (2009) has 
demonstrated, became popular among Buddhist lay associations and served 
as a conceptual framework to interpret and explain the crisis of the perceived 
decline of Buddhism under colonialism. Such a scheme is inherently pessi-
mistic since the sāsana is explained as undergoing a gradual and inevitable 
the possession of such knowledge ‘bestows status, prestige, or symbolic capital on its 
owner’ (Urban 1998: 210). 
3	
Sāsana – ‘instruction’ – refers to ‘Buddhism’ as it is grounded in society: monks, 
texts, pagodas, monasteries, relics, Buddhist learning and practice, and so forth. Re­
flecting how this notion is generally understood in Theravāda Buddhist countries, 
Heinz Bechert (1970: 762n3) defines it as ‘the totality of the Buddhist institutions in 
a lawful unbroken succession from the time of the Buddha onwards’. 
4	
In this article, ‘P.’ is an abbreviation for Pāli. All foreign words are Burmese, unless 
otherwise indicated. The term ‘nirvana’ will be used instead of the Pāli nibbāna, since 
the former word has been adopted into English as a loan word.

--- PAGE 3 ---
57
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
decline. While that scheme is supported by the Pāli commentarial literature,5 
the cyclical scheme of the Liberation Era appears not to be. Around the 
1940s, many Burmese envisioned Gotama Buddha’s period as an auspicious 
Liberation Era, a time when it was exceedingly easy to attain enlightenment 
and nirvana. It was widely expected that this era would return in 1957, the 
first year of the second half of the Buddhist era (see Houtman 1990, Foxeus 
2011).6 This view therefore reflected the optimism among Burmese Buddhists 
regarding the new political situation of an independent Burma. It was ex-
pected that the Buddha’s sāsana would flourish, and many events during this 
period could be seen as a confirmation of that. For instance, the celebration 
of the 2,500-year anniversary of the Buddha’s final nirvana was held in 1956; 
a ‘Buddhist revival’ was carried out by the parliamentarian government led by 
Prime Minister U Nu, involving events such as the Sixth Buddhist Synod in 
1954–6, and Buddhist lay associations strove to bring about of flourishing of 
Buddhism (see Brohm 1957). The cyclical view of sāsana decline could thus 
be said to have served as a conceptual scheme by which the Burmese people 
could explain, interpret, and make sense of their contemporary situation.
Furthermore, the different views of the meaning of the Liberation Era seem 
to correspond to the interests of two predominantly lay Buddhist movements 
in the post-independence period: the insight meditation (P. vipassanā) move-
ment and the concentration meditation (P. samatha, samādhi) movement. 
Accordingly, the Liberation Era was envisioned by some as the Vipassanā Era, 
the ‘Era of Insight Meditation’ (see Foxeus 2011). It was widely assumed that 
it was now possible to attain enlightenment and nirvana in a single lifetime, or 
at least attain the lower stages of that path; the cult of living Buddhist saints (P. 
arahant) reached its peak in these years (see Pranke 2011), and a mass medi-
tation movement practising insight meditation emerged and was supported 
by the state (see Brohm 1957; Houtman 1990, 1999; Jordt 2007).7 Ingrid Jordt 
(2007) has referred to this lay Buddhist movement as the ‘New Laity’. On 
the other hand, some esoteric communities envisioned the Liberation Era as 
the ‘Great Weizzā Era’, at which time it would be easier to attain success on 
the path of esoteric knowledge and become a semi-immortal, accomplished 
5	
The linear scheme was originally outlined by Buddhaghosa in his commentary 
Manorathapūraṇī to the Aṅguttara Nikāya (see Turner 2009, Foxeus 2011). 
6	
The cyclical scheme comprised five stages, as follows: 1) the Liberation Era,  
2) the Era of Concentration Meditation, 3) the Era of Suttas, 4) the Era of Buddhist 
Precepts, and 5) the Donation Era (see Houtman 1990, Foxeus 2011).
7	
With regard to this movement, Gustaaf Houtman (1999: 8) therefore spoke of a de-
mocratization of enlightenment (on the path to arahanthood).

--- PAGE 4 ---
58
NIKLAS FOXEUS
esoteric master by practising Gandhāra lore combined with concentration 
meditation (see Foxeus 2011).8 In this way, the concept of the Liberation Era, 
in its two versions, could provide legitimacy for two different soteriological 
orientations. The state – especially the parliamentarian government led by 
Prime Minister U Nu – supported the insight meditation movement, while 
the semi-military, socialist government (BSPP) under General Ne Win sup-
pressed the esoteric congregations in the early 1980s (see Tosa 1996, Foxeus 
2011, Pranke 2011). 
The supermundane Ariya discourse in the field of religion  
in contemporary Burma
The main currents of the religious field in Burma are, roughly; ‘traditional’ 
mainstream Buddhism, supported by the state and the Buddhist lay people; 
the Buddhist esoteric congregations; and the spirit cults (nat), whose religious 
specialists are female and male spirit mediums, or natkadaws –‘wives of the 
spirits’. The esoteric congregations are situated hierarchically somewhere in 
between the mainstream Buddhism and the nat cults. Moreover, we should 
add at least two varieties of ‘modern’ Buddhism: rational modern Buddhism, 
which to a large degree corresponds to the popular insight meditation move-
ment, and esoteric modern Buddhism, which corresponds to some esoteric 
congregations in the concentration meditation movement (see Foxeus, forth-
coming). However, the reality is not as neat as this picture might suggest, 
and there are many overlaps, tensions, and interlinkages between the various 
currents and established forms of the religion. Moreover, these segments or 
subfields do not only stand in hierarchical relationships to one another, but 
also form hierarchies internally.9 
The versions of Buddhism associated with the monastic community are 
generally ascribed greater authority, and represent different facets of an ideol-
ogy with a more or less hegemonic status in Burmese society. Being natural-
ized, its privileged status is taken for granted (see Brac de la Perrière 2009a).
These facets are mainly constituted by traditional mainstream Buddhism and 
rational modern Buddhism (cf. Gravers 2012, Schober 2011). In Burma, just 
as in other Theravāda Buddhist countries, the varieties of modern Buddhism 
8	
For more on the concept of weizzā/weizzādhour and the Gandhāra lore, see below. 
For a comparison of these two movements, see Foxeus, forthcoming. 
9	
For more on hierarchies among the nat cults, see Brac de la Perrière 2009b.

--- PAGE 5 ---
59
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
emerged in response to colonization and modernization in the nineteenth 
century (see Lopez 2002, Braun 2008, Houtman 1990, Gombrich and 
Obeyesekere 1990, King 2002, Kirichenko 2009). The most typical and well-
known form of modern Buddhism is the rationalist version, which is strongly 
informed by a Protestant model of religion and emphasizes doctrines, anti-
ritualism, canonical texts, and religious experience, and which is regarded as 
compatible with Western science; it downplays supernatural powers and the 
miraculous and mythological dimensions of Buddhism. Moreover, rational 
modern Buddhism represents an adaptation to modernity and Western post-
Enlightenment rationality.10 In response to criticism raised by Protestant mis-
sionaries against Buddhist ‘superstition’ in the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries, some scholastic monks, especially Ledi Hsayādaw (1846–1923), 
presented Buddhism as a kind of rational philosophy, claimed to be not mere-
ly compatible with Western science, but superior to it and to Christianity. Ledi 
Hsayādaw emphasized the relevance of a doctrinal form of Buddhism for the 
Buddhist laity (see Braun 2008, Kirichenko 2009). Accordingly, he dissemin­
ated to the lay people a simplified version of what had previously been the 
prerogative of the elite community among the monks, viz. sophisticated and 
intricate Abhidhamma philosophy and insight meditation.11 He was the first 
person to organize lay people in the study of the Abhidhamma, and created 
lay groups to this end throughout Burma. In the idiom of modern Buddhism, 
this study would enable the Buddhist laity to make spiritual progress ‘in this 
very life’ (Braun 2008: 295). This rational and doctrinal form of Buddhism 
was initially popular among the emerging middle-classes in Burma, and a 
comparable development occurred in Sri Lanka during the same period (see 
Gombrich and Obeyesekere 1990). It was not until the early post-independ-
ence period, starting in 1948, that the two currents of Buddhist meditation 
turned into large-scale movements. 
10	
Traditional mainstream Buddhism presupposes a clear and unambiguous divide 
between the monastic community and the Buddhist laity; it stresses the merit-
making activities of the Buddhist lay people, especially giving alms to the monks, 
and the observance of a few Buddhist precepts. This is Buddhism as sāsana – that is 
to say, as grounded in society and as a social fact. Modern Buddhism, by contrast, is 
‘Buddhism’ as a bhāthā, a ‘religion’, viz. as informed by the Protestant model, empha-
sizing a set of doctrines, and able to be separated from its social context  
(see Kirichenko 2009, Houtman 1990, see also Brac de la Perrière 2009a). 
11	
For more on the history of insight meditation in Burma, see Pranke 2011.

--- PAGE 6 ---
60
NIKLAS FOXEUS
In contemporary Burma, especially in urban areas, rational modern 
Buddhism is very influential, and is manifested in what I elsewhere (Foxeus, 
forthcoming) have referred to as the ariya discourse, a ‘discourse on the 
noble’. This discourse is coextensive with the supermundane (P. lokuttara) 
dimension of Buddhism, and is contrasted with the mundane dimension 
(P. lokiya). The latter is concerned with worldly matters such as luck, pro-
tection, success in life, curing ills and afflictions, and acquiring supernat­ural 
powers (cf. Tosa 1996). While the supermundane dimension is typically per-
ceived as a superior form of Buddhism, the mundane is at best viewed as 
a lower form of Buddhism, or even as non-Buddhist. The practices of the 
esoteric congregations are mainly concerned with this mundane dimension. 
The supermundane dimension, as articulated in the ariya discourse, empha-
sizes ‘doctrines’ extracted from the canonical texts, Abhidhamma, and the 
practice of insight meditation, both by the monks and the lay people. Linked 
to the expectations concerning the soteriological prospects opened by the 
Liberation Era, the early postcolonial period was sometimes envisioned as 
the Ariyā Weizzā Era – the ‘Era of Noble Knowledge’ (see Foxeus 2011). The 
gradual noble path (P. ariyamagga) to enlightenment and nirvana is typically 
understood in terms of the four noble truths, the three characteristics of exist-
ence, the eightfold path, the practice of meditation, and the four noble ones 
(P. ariyapuggala) who attain various degrees of enlightenment, viz. the stream-
entrant, once-returner, never-returner, and the Buddhist saint (P. arahant).12 
The last of these has attained nirvana, and the highest possible form of en-
lightenment for the Buddha’s disciples, viz. his ‘hearers’ (P. sāvaka). This path 
is what Ledi Hsayādaw (1985: 293) refers to as ariyā-weizzā (P. ariyavijjā), the 
‘noble knowledge’, in his well-known Vijjāmagga Dīpanī, ‘Explanation of the 
Path to Knowledge’. It could be added that this form of Buddhism is similar to 
what could be called ‘textbook Buddhism’, that is, a simplified, doctrinal form 
of Buddhism as described in the introductory books on Buddhism which are 
typified by Walpola Rahula’s seminal book What the Buddha Taught, origin­
ally published in 1959. From the point of view of this ariya discourse, even 
traditional mainstream Buddhism may be downgraded (see Houtman 1990, 
Foxeus 2011). 
In Theravāda Buddhism, this supermundane ariya path was originally in-
tended for the ordained, viz. monks and nuns, but in contemporary Burma 
12	
In this scheme, meditation today is almost exclusively understood as the insight 
meditation (P. vipassanā) which may be practised at the meditation centres found 
throughout Burma.

--- PAGE 7 ---
61
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
many lay people have embarked on this path. In the early postcolonial period, 
insight meditation was favoured by the urban middle-classes, but has later 
spread to people from all social strata (see Brohm 1957, Jordt 2007).13 This 
form of supermundane Buddhism is therefore frequently regarded as being 
situated at the top of the hierarchy, and the nat cults at the bottom. Bénédicte 
Brac de la Perrière (2009a) has even described the latter as having a subaltern 
status, disparaged by both Burmese Buddhists and Western scholars alike. 
In contrast to the insight meditation movement, the esoteric congrega-
tions emphasized the practice of concentration meditation, which has been 
ascribed a more dubious Buddhist identity (see Houtman 1990). This move-
ment attracted people of various backgrounds – the middle-classes, politi-
cians, peasants, etc. – but it could be conjectured that the lower strata in society 
dominated. Both of these soteriological movements consisted predomin­antly 
of the Buddhist laity, and represented different versions of modern Buddhism 
in the sense of being communities of lay Buddhists who have embarked on 
the path to enlightenment and nirvana, emphasize the practice of medita-
tion to this end, and expect immediate results (see Foxeus, forthcoming). As 
noted above, I have referred to these forms of Buddhism as rational modern 
Buddhism and esoteric modern Buddhism. These two forms of lay Buddhism 
have tended to blur the boundaries between the monastic community and 
the Buddhist lay people, thereby entailing a ‘monasticization’ of the laity (see 
Houtman 1990, Turner 2009). 
In contemporary Burma, the ariya discourse serves, at least in urban ar-
eas, as the measure of normative Buddhist values. The lower segments in the 
hierarchy of the religious field tend to appropriate elements from the super-
mundane ariya discourse as a discursive strategy – or a rhetorical strategy 
– for acquiring legitimacy, authority, status, and respectability.14 In post-
independence Burma, there seems to have been an increasing tendency to 
emphasize this supermundane dimension of Buddhism.15 The esoteric con-
13	
Mahāsi Hsayādaw’s insight meditation technique has remained the most popular 
technique in postcolonial Burma, and goes back to Mingun Hsayādaw (1869–1954) 
(see Braun 2008: 396–7; Houtman 1990; Jordt 2007). 
14	
Here ‘discourse’ refers mainly to the ‘official’ presentation of a congregation, in its 
books as well as by its leaders and some members; it does not necessarily entail that 
the practice of the members is informed by it, although it can have that implication. 
15	
The popularity of the insight meditation movement is not the only evidence for the 
increasing stress on the supermundane dimension; the latter is rather a tendency that 
pervades the entire religious field. The intervention of the state in the affairs of the 
Sangha in the early 1980s followed that line (see Schober 2011). Keiko Tosa (2006: 
2) maintains that new esoteric congregations tend to underscore a supermundane

--- PAGE 8 ---
62
NIKLAS FOXEUS
gregations are ascribed higher status in proportion to the degree of their as-
similation of the ariya discourse. The variegated esoteric congregations in 
particular have been competing with one another over claims to authority, 
and their success is directly related to the degree to which they have – or claim 
to have – incorporated the ariya discourse into their tenets and practices (cf. 
Tosa 1996, 2006). However, as Tosa (1996: 242) observes, in some strategic 
uses of the Burmese words for the supermundane (lawkuttara) and mundane 
(lawkī) the exact meanings of these words are not always important.16 
The esoteric congregations which have been accorded the highest status 
are therefore those defining themselves as supermundane congregations and 
displaying a high degree of ariya discourse incorporation. Those with the 
lowest­ status, and with the correspondingly lowest degree of assimilation of 
this discourse, are the mundane, so-called Gandhāra congregations (see be-
low). Dialogue, in terms of mutual exchange, does occur between esoteric 
currents, and to a certain extent between lower esoteric congregations and 
the nat cults (see Brac de la Perrière 2012). While the supermundane con-
gregations tend to exclude the lower nats (the 37 Lords, etc.) altogether, but 
incorporate the Buddhist gods (P. deva) known from the Pāli texts, the lower 
mundane congregations tend to include both (see Tosa 1996, 2006; Foxeus 
2011).17 At the same time, representatives of rational modern Buddhism, 
monastic and lay, tend to criticize the esoteric congregations (see Houtman 
1990, Patton 2012), especially those of the Gandhāra kind, which are closer 
to the nat cults at the bottom of the hierarchy. The nat cult represents the 
main ‘Other’ in relation to which those who perceive themselves as repre-
senting ‘authentic’ Buddhism define and differentiate themselves (cf. Brac de 
la Perrière 2009a).18 In this sense, the nat cults are indispensable for such 
identity strategies. Moreover, I agree with Brac de la Perrière (2009a: 188) 
that all the segments of the religious field, which are distinguished in terms of 
orientation. Buddhicizing trends have grown since the 1950s (see Bekker 1989), and 
have recently entailed situations where many spirit mediums have switched to be-
ing mediums of the accomplished Buddhist esoteric masters (see Brac de la Perrière 
2012). 
16	
For instance, some representatives of esoteric congregations may claim to be super-
mundane as a way to say that they are pious or true Buddhists while maintaining that 
some other congregations are too mundane as a way of criticizing them (see Tosa 
1996: 242). 
17	
For more on the nats, see Spiro 1996.
18	
For more on the relationship between the esoteric cults and the nat cults, see Brac  
de la Perrière 2012.

--- PAGE 9 ---
63
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
organization, religious/ritual specialists, tenets and practices, and so forth, are 
‘part of the overarching framework of Burmese Buddhism’.
Burmese esoteric Theravāda Buddhism19
Let us take a phenomenological view of the notions, practices, and forms of 
organization of esoteric Buddhism, particularly in contemporary Burma. The 
practices and notions of the esoteric path represent a curious, creative syn-
thesis or hybrid of a range of sources, such as Theravāda Buddhism, (Indian) 
alchemy, Daoism (see Pranke 2011), and local practices and concepts. Some 
of these concepts and practices are shared with other countries in Southeast 
Asia, such as Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia (see Crosby 2000). In general, 
the esoteric congregations represent the most flexible, hybrid, and variegated 
segment of the Burmese religious field. This could partially be explained by 
the prevalence of charismatic authority being ascribed to the cult leaders, 
which tends to enable innovations, as well as the supernatural sources of au-
thority represented by the accomplished esoteric masters. It is the latter to 
whom we will now turn. 
The Burmese word weizzādhour (often abbreviated as weizzā) is derived 
from the Pāli vijjādhara, ‘bearer of knowledge’, ‘expert in crafts’, etc., and will 
henceforth be glossed as ‘accomplished esoteric master’. In contemporary 
Burma, the path of esoteric knowledge (weizzā-lan:) represents an alterna-
tive soteriology by which final extinction and enlightenment (P. bodhi) as a 
Buddhist saint or a buddha can ultimately be attained. A mundane accom-
plished esoteric master is a Buddhist layman or a monk who has attained 
success in various mundane arts or crafts, typically the Gandhāra lore, and 
has thereby acquired supernatural powers (P. siddhi) such as being able to fly, 
to be present in two places at the same time, to materialize objects, to predict 
the future, and so forth.20 This practice is combined with Buddhist morality 
(P. sīla), concentration meditation, and occasionally the observance of vege­
tarianism. Moreover, to attain success a practitioner should receive instruc-
19	
The presentation of the esoteric currents below is based on my own material (see 
also Foxeus 2011). For other discussions of this phenomenon, see Mendelson 1961a, 
1961b, 1963; Ferguson and Mendelson 1981; Pranke 1995, 2011; Rozenberg 2010a, 
2010b. 
20	
In Burma, the ‘Gandhāra lore’ (P. gandhārī-vijjā) usually comprises alchemy based 
on mercury or iron, esoteric squares, syllabic figures, and medicine (with mantras 
sometimes being added to this category).

--- PAGE 10 ---
64
NIKLAS FOXEUS
tions from a cult leader, usually through initiation into an esoteric congrega-
tion, and/or from an accomplished esoteric master in dreams or during medi-
tation. The latter is a kind of supernormal cognition that is usually referred to 
as ‘hearing and seeing’ (akyā-amyin). 
An accomplished esoteric master has undergone an ontological trans­
mutation by which his (for he is invariably a male) lifespan has been im-
mensely prolonged, and he has thereby exited the round of rebirth. Two var­
ieties of this transmutation, or ‘reaching the place of exit’ (htwek-yap-pauk), 
are distinguished: ‘going out alive’ (ashin-htwek) and ‘going out [apparently] 
dead’ (athay-htwek). In the former case, typically represented by Bho Bho 
Aung, the accomplished esoteric master exits the round of rebirth with his 
mind and body intact. While absorbed in meditation the practitioner may, for 
instance, suddenly disappear from view and leave his clothes behind. In the 
latter case, of which one example is Bho Min Khaung, his living consciousness 
is separated from the body. Having attained the transmutation, the accom-
plished esoteric master leaves for a hidden abode – typically Mahāmyaing, 
the ‘Great Forest’, or the slopes of Himalaya, etc. – which only accomplished 
esoteric masters can see and enter. From such abodes the esoteric masters 
can communicate with their disciples; they can leave the abode temporarily 
to enter the human world and possess a human, or they may appear in visual 
form as apparitions before their disciples to deliver a message or give them 
orders. In some rare cases, an accomplished esoteric master may even pos-
sess a human more or less permanently, thereby making a human body his 
new embodiment (see Mendelson 1961a, 1961b; Spiro 1982; Foxeus 2011). 
Having prolonged his lifespan, the accomplished esoteric master will be able 
to remain in one and the same existence until he attains enlightenment and 
nirvana as a Buddhist saint or a buddha in the remote future. 
In many esoteric congregations in Burma, the myth of the appearance 
of the Phantom Buddha and the nirvana of Gotama Buddha’s relics at the 
end of the Buddhist era is very popular. In contrast to the Pāli commentarial 
tradition (Buddhaghosa), the Burmese version of this cosmic drama is as-
sociated with a soteriological eschatology, in the sense that it will provide 
the last auspicious opportunity for accomplished esoteric masters to attain 
enlightenment and nirvana as Buddhist saints (see Spiro 1982, Pranke 1995, 
Foxeus 2011).21 Other semi-immortal accomplished esoteric masters seek to 
21	
In the Theravāda commentarial tradition, Gotama Buddha’s final extinction (P. 
pari­nibbāna) is divided into three stages: 1) ‘extinction of the impurities’ (P. kilesa), 
which he attained at the time of the enlightenment, 2) ‘extinction of the mental and

--- PAGE 11 ---
65
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
attain nirvana when Arimetteyya Buddha arrives.22 Still other accomplished 
esoteric masters have embarked on the path to buddhahood, and will fare 
on during innumerable lives until they attain buddhahood (see Pranke 1995, 
2011; Foxeus 2011).
An accomplished esoteric master does not only seek to achieve his own 
personal salvation, but is essentially regarded as a champion of Buddhism and 
its adherents. Like the Burmese kings, he should work ceaselessly to carry out 
his duties to promote and defend the Buddha’s sāsana, on the one hand, and 
to save all beings, on the other.23 In this latter duty, he assumes the role of a 
compassionate bodhisatta, a ‘future buddha’, who saves the beings from suf-
fering, both in the here and now and ultimately. In the former case, he (or an 
intermediary) typically alleviates their suffering in terms of afflictions caused 
by supernatural agencies, such as evil spirits, witches, sorcerers, etc. by means 
of exorcism; and in the latter case, he helps them to achieve release from the 
round of rebirth. 
The majority of the still existing esoteric congregations seem to have been 
established during the late colonial and early postcolonial eras (1940s–60s), 
respectively (see Tosa 1996, 2006).24 An esoteric (weizzā) congregation (gain) 
is founded either by a person who is considered to have attained complete 
weizzāhood himself or by a person who is able to receive messages and in-
structions from an accomplished esoteric master operating from a hidden 
dimension. The esoteric congregations may range from small, loosely organ-
ized cult groups with only a few adherents to large-scale congregations with 
thousands of members. 
The accomplished esoteric masters may also transfer power and knowl-
edge to their disciples, either from afar or through possession. This process is 
called dhāt-sī, being ‘ridden by power’ (or dhāt-kein, etc.). As for possession, 
bodily factors’ (P. khandhā), which he achieved when he passed away, and 3) ‘extinc-
tion of the relics’ (P. dhātu-parinibbāna) which will take place 5,000 years after the 
extinction of the mental and bodily factors. According to Buddhaghosa, an image 
– the Phantom Buddha (buddha-rūpa) – will emerge from the relics whereupon the 
latter will attain nirvana (see Foxeus 2011). 
22	
The hope of attaining enlightenment and nirvana in the presence of Metteyya 
Buddha is in accordance with the traditional, pre-modern Buddhism of South and 
Southeast Asia. 
23	
These two tasks are encapsulated in the two phrases thāthanā-pyu, which could be 
rendered as ‘work to maintain the Buddhist dispensation’, and thatta-wā-keh, ‘to save 
all beings’. For more on the duties of the kings in Burma, see Koenig 1990.
24	
In contrast to monastic organizations, the esoteric congregations are not registered 
with the Ministry of Religious Affairs (Tosa 2006: 2).

--- PAGE 12 ---
66
NIKLAS FOXEUS
a cult leader – male or female – may temporarily transform into an accom-
plished esoteric master, acquiring his supernatural powers and knowledge. In 
this way, the esoteric cults mediate between the spirit cults and mainstream 
Buddhism, and thus represent something in between the two. In a sense, 
these esoteric cults represent a kind of Buddhicized spirit cult; that is, the 
idiom of the spirit mediums is appropriated in a context that is defined as 
Buddhist by practitioners themselves.25 In addition, this hybrid is perceived 
as more acceptable and legitimate by some urban, middle-class Buddhists. 
However, the concomitant blurring of boundaries may risk undermining not 
merely the Buddhist identity but also the status, authority, and respectability 
of the esoteric cults. Some urban cult leaders today therefore tend to main-
tain that accomplished esoteric masters never possess their disciples, thereby 
establishing a distinct boundary vis-à-vis the nat cults.26 
The better-organized congregations require initiation before providing ac-
cess to their tenets, practices, and books. Through esoteric initiation rituals, in 
the idiom of transmitting esoteric ‘knowledge’ (P. paññā), the initiate acquires 
supernatural powers (P. siddhi) and potencies by means of tattoos, esoteric 
diagrams (in, sama) inscribed with syllables or numbers, power-transfer by 
slapping the initiate’s hands, and recitation of texts; sometimes the initiation 
master serves as a mediator between the accomplished esoteric masters and 
the initiate, transferring powers from the former to the latter. Through the 
initiation rituals, the initiate is authorized to serve as an exorcist and to initi-
ate others. For instance, the popular esoteric congregation Shway Yin Kyaw 
Gain has nine initiation levels. The initiates are tattooed with ‘medicine’ of a 
red colour, saturated with supernatural powers, which is said to have been 
produced by the congregation’s accomplished esoteric masters. The tattoos of 
various Buddhist motifs are inscribed on various parts of the upper body, but 
the colour disappears after some time. Moreover, the initiate ingests water-­
containing ash from burnt esoteric diagrams (sama) inscribed on paper. 
Women are only allowed to be initiated up to the fifth, while men can reach 
the higher levels and be entrusted with a tattooing instrument (a long pointed 
25	
In this way, the exchanges between the esoteric cults and the nat cults, determined by 
the relation of domination and subordination, are sometimes concealed or masked 
when elements from the latter are incorporated into the esoteric cults, while the re-
verse holds the other way around.
26	
I observed this tendency during fieldwork in upper Burma which I conducted peri­
odically between 2005 and 2008. For more on the relationship between esoteric 
ritual specialists and the spirit mediums, as well as their respective forms of posses-
sion, see Brac de la Perrière 2012.

--- PAGE 13 ---
67
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
stick of metal) and medicine, and thereby become authorized to initiate new 
members. Both women and men can nevertheless serve as exorcists to allevi-
ate disturbances or afflictions (payawga) instigated by supernatural agencies 
such as evil spirits, etc.27 All esoteric congregations offer healing by means of 
exorcism which is a way of saving the beings, and combating such evil is a way 
of protecting Buddhism in the world. Moreover, esoteric congregations may 
offer clients not only exorcism but also healing with traditional medicine.28 
It is frequently thought that members’ wishes can be granted by the spe-
cific accomplished esoteric masters linked to the esoteric congregations (see 
Foxeus 2011). Moreover, members can learn certain tenets and practices in 
order to acquire supernatural powers and to attain enlightenment and nir-
vana. Smaller cult groups that do not require initiation may offer some of 
the above-mentioned felicities, but may also provide counselling regarding 
business or family problems, exams, and so forth. Such services are similar to 
those provided by the spirit mediums (natkadaw) of the nat cults. For these 
and other reasons, the cult groups are in general ranked lower than the better 
organized congregations, and evince more affinity to the nat cults. 
The historical, pre-colonial background of esoteric Theravāda Buddhism 
in Burma remains to be investigated. According to John P. Ferguson and 
Michael E. Mendelson (1981: 74), the cult of the accomplished esoteric 
masters – as it is known today – represents a relatively late development in 
Burmese Buddhism, and should be understood as having originated as a ‘sym-
bolic reaction to the shock of colonization’.29 In canonic­al, commentarial, and 
apocryphal Pāli texts, as well as in local Burmese texts from the eighteenth 
century onward, the weizzādhour is sometimes portrayed as a martial figure 
holding a sword and furnished with supernatural powers­, such as being able 
to fly in the sky (see Foxeus 2011). Given the sense of threat Burmese people 
felt regarding the survival of Buddhism under British colonialism in the late 
nineteenth century (see Turner 2009, Braun 2008), it is not surprising that the 
powerful figure of vijjādhara, armed with weapons, was partly utilized as an 
anti-colonial figure, and a protector of Buddhism and local traditions. That 
27	
For more on esoteric initiation rituals and exorcism, see Foxeus 2011, Rozenberg 
2012, Spiro 1996. 
28	
For more on exorcism and healing, see Tosa 2006, Foxeus 2011, Rozenberg 2012.  
For more on Shway Yin Kyaw Gain and initiation rituals, see Rozenberg 2012, 
Foxeus 2011.
29	
No convincing evidence has yet been presented to disprove their thesis. For a differ-
ent hypothesis about the origin of this phenomenon in Indian Mahāsiddha cults, see 
Pranke 2011.

--- PAGE 14 ---
68
NIKLAS FOXEUS
was particularly the case with the figure of Sekyā Min, the world emperor (see 
below). 
The esoteric congregations with the explicit purpose of maintaining and 
propagating the Buddha’s sāsana seem to have emerged ad hoc as a response 
to the British colonization of Burma, and its abolition of the monarchy in 
1885. The colonization dissolved the symbiotic relationship which had ex-
isted between the king and the monastic community and represented the 
Asokan model’s two wheels of the Dhamma. According to that model, the 
king had a duty to promote and maintain Buddhism, and offer the monas-
tic community lavish gifts. Moreover, the kings of Burma were considered 
to be bodhisattas and were bestowed the title of a cakkavattin (sekyā-min:), 
viz. a world emperor. As a response to the British colonization, a variety of 
Buddhist lay associations emerged from the late nineteenth century onwards. 
Perceiving Buddhism to be in danger due to the colonization of the country 
by non-Buddhist foreigners, these associations sought to assume the respon-
sibility to maintain and promote the Buddha’s sāsana in the absence of a king 
(see Turner 2009). As we have seen, another kind of Buddhist lay organiza-
tion also emerged during this period, viz. a number of esoteric (weizzā) con-
gregations which likewise sought to support and maintain Buddhism. Some 
of the esoteric congregations founded in the early post-independence period 
were characterized by nationalist and fundamentalist trends, and it is to one 
of these we will now turn. 
The ariyā-weizzā organization: fundamentalist Buddhism
Colonial powers introduced modernization projects in the colonies which 
continued in the independent states, and fundamentalist movements later 
emerged as a reaction to the modern predicament (see Marty and Appleby 
1991a, 1991b; Swearer 1991).30 Using religion as a source of identity is fre-
quently considered the hallmark of fundamentalist movements (see Marty 
and Appleby 1991a, 1991b; Swearer 1991). The ariyā-weizzā organization 
fulfils most of the criteria that Donald K. Swearer outlines for fundamen-
talist Theravāda Buddhist movements in South and Southeast Asia, such as 
30	
The diversity of fundamentalist movements has led scholars to speak of similar­
ities between these variegated and heterogeneous phenomena in terms of Ludwig 
Wittgenstein’s concept of ‘family resemblances’ (Marty and Appleby 1991a). 
Alternatively, we could refer to a set of polythetic criteria to cover this diversity  
(see Foxeus 2011).

--- PAGE 15 ---
69
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
Dhammakāya and Santi Asoke in Thailand. Such movements represent a 
negative or even aggressive response to modernization; they display a quest 
for identity (individual, national, and communal); their search for identity 
assumes the character of a ‘return to the roots’, viz. restoring a primordial 
condition of unity, certainty, and purity; they have strong, often militantly ag-
gressive, charismatic leaders whose followers perceive themselves to be under 
threat – as individuals, a community, or a nation; they may have an almost 
obsessive sense of their unique role or destiny, and can be millenarian in na-
ture; etc. (Swearer 1991: 678, 633; see also Foxeus 2011, 2012).31 Moreover, 
these movements are typically characterized by a nationalism based on re-
ligious identity which must be protected against foreign influences, such as 
postcolonial modernity (see Swearer 1991). As a nationalist slogan of the 
early twentieth century stated, ‘To be a Burmese is to be a Buddhist.’32 That 
is, Buddhism has been the main medium through which individual, local, 
and national identity have been forged. This quest for identity is a focal con-
cern in the ariyā-weizzā organization which sought to restore the pre-colonial 
aristocratic or royal Buddhism, thereby fostering a royal identity among the 
members. While rationalist modern Buddhism tends to affirm moderniza-
tion and Western rationality, fundamentalist movements are negative towards 
it and reject it.
Sekyā Min: an anti-colonial hero
Throughout most of the colonial era, the figure of Sekyā Min (P. cakkavattin), 
the world emperor, mainly represented anti-colonial resistance, and a series 
of rebellions against the British colonizers were led by people claiming to be 
this mysterious personage. In postcolonial Burma, millenarian expectations 
of his return were held in many communities. Sekyā Min was expected to 
establish a Buddhist utopia of material abundance; for instance, there would 
be plenty of gold, silver, and rice, and Buddhism would flourish (see Foxeus 
2011, Sarkisyanz 1965). According to one prophecy, when Sekyā Min arrives 
he will ride on an elephant, his queen will ride on another elephant, and a 
third elephant will carry a Tipiṭaka (see Foxeus 2011). Sekyā Min will thus 
arrive together with his queen to restore both the monarchy and the authentic 
form of Buddhism, as represented by the Tipiṭaka. Some esoteric congrega-
31	
For the ariyā-weizzā organization, the primordial condition of unity and certainty 
was represented by the pre-colonial royal traditions of Burma. 
32	
This nationalist slogan was allegedly coined by the Young Men’s Buddhist Associ­
ation (YMBA) in the early twentieth century (Schober 2011: 66).

--- PAGE 16 ---
70
NIKLAS FOXEUS
tions were founded by individuals believed to be embodiments of this mil-
lenarian figure, who was considered to be a powerful accomplished esoteric 
master, a righteous king (P. dhammarāja) and a bodhisatta. These congre-
gations typic­ally combined royal symbolism, insignia, pretensions, and con-
duct, on the one hand, and esoteric notions and practices, on the other. I 
have referred to these as ‘royal esoteric congregations’. After a long period of 
colonization, the royal esoteric congregations aimed to ‘restore’, at least in a 
minimalist manner, the monarchy that had been abolished by the British in 
1885 (see Foxeus 2011, 2012). 
The religious currents in early postcolonial Burma were a response not 
only to the disenchantment with the state’s projects of modernization and na-
tion building, but also to the ongoing impact of the previous colonial period­. 
Such vestiges of colonialism were frequently viewed as a threat, as undermin-
ing or contaminating the indigen­ous culture and Buddhism (see Houtman 
1990, Foxeus 2011). The influence of the colonial legacy and the prevalence 
of Westernizing trends in early post-independence Burma led Michael Aung-
Thwin (1989) to speak of ‘Burma’s myth of independence’ or its ‘pseudo in-
dependence’ at the time.33 To gain ‘real’ independence, he explains, it was 
necessary to purge Burma of its colonial past so that the people could recover 
their lost identity (Aung-Thwin 1989).
Accordingly, the influx of Western and other foreign ideologies was 
sometimes perceived as a threat to the survival of Buddhism in postcolonial 
Burma. Some esoteric congregations, especially the ariyā-weizzā organiza-
tion, used military terminology and titles to underscore the gravity of their 
mission to defend and support Buddhism, which had been the traditional 
duty of the Burmese kings.34 Furthermore, Sekyā Min was expected to inau-
gurate the Liberation Era, a Buddhist millennium in which it was expected­ 
that Buddhism would flourish, Burma would be peaceful, and the foreign ide-
ologies would be expelled. 
The fundamentalism of the ariyā-weizzā organization is partly concerned 
with some extreme and nationalist features in its ideology. It sought to revive 
33	
English was still the lingua franca in higher education, etc., and Western projects of 
modernity were dominant in the areas of the economy, politics, culture, law, etc. 
34	
For instance, in the 1970s and 1980s, the founder of the ariyā-weizzā organization 
conferred military titles on the leaders, and they constituted an ‘army’. Filled with a 
‘spirit of patriotism’, they were to protect the Buddha’s sāsana and their culture, tra-
ditions, country, nationality/race, etc., irrespective of whatever dangers they might 
encounter, and were not to hesitate to sacrifice their lives in their work for Buddhism 
(see Foxeus 2011, 2012).

--- PAGE 17 ---
71
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
the royal traditions and the pre-colonial form of Buddhism, at least as they 
were perceived in the early postcolonial period. For the members of the ariyā-
weizzā organization, the pre-colonial form of Buddhism in combination with 
esoteric notions and practices mainly served as important sources of identity 
at a time when Buddhism and local traditions were perceived as being threat-
ened by foreign influences. Furthermore, the members were constituted as 
the Great Elect, and represented a moral, millenarian, royal, and nationalist 
community, with the responsibility of safeguarding the survival of Buddhism 
in the face of the threat of the forces of secularism and modernization in post-
colonial Burma. As an implicit criticism of some other forms of Buddhism 
in post-independence Burma it claimed to represent ‘authentic Buddhism’. I 
have argued that the ariyā-weizzā organization constituted an opposition – a 
counter-discourse – to the prevailing socio-political conditions (in U Nu’s 
Burma and especially during the Ne Win years), and a criticism of the place of 
Buddhism in society in post-independence Burma (see Foxeus 2011). 
Since the 1950s, the ariyā-weizzā organization in Burma has waged a 
Buddhist ‘war’ against what it perceives to be the enemies of Buddhism. The 
alleged conflict between Buddhism and its enemies is perceived as a cosmic 
battle between good and evil, righteousness and unrighteousness, dhamma 
and adhamma. The enemies are here mainly to be understood as foreign, 
Western ideologies, errant religions, such as Islam, as well as errant govern-
ments, and so forth. Although the esoteric organization’s discourses on the 
cosmic battle against the destructive forces are framed in military termin­ology 
and the rhetoric of militancy, the ‘battle’ is mainly fought by members seated 
in a cross-legged position in pagodas performing ritual violence. Members 
employ solely supernatural weapons and rituals in their battle. Whether or 
not there is a battle, and if it has claimed any victims, however, is a matter of 
belief. The ariyā-weizzā organization is, in fact, just as anti-colonial and anti-
Western as the anti-colonial rebellions during the British era, but its battle has 
taken on cosmic proportions and is waged by supernatural means (Foxeus 
2011, 2012).
The ariya discourse in the ariya-weizzā organization
Traditional esoteric congregations are not primarily concerned with soteriol-
ogy but are typically limited to the apotropaic dimension of Buddhism, such 
as exorcism and traditional medicine. For instance, the mundane Gandhāra 
congregation Shway Yin Kyaw Gain does not give instructions for practice 
designed for the attainment of enlightenment and nirvana. The members are 
merely provided with the means to serve as exorcists (see also Rozenberg

--- PAGE 18 ---
72
NIKLAS FOXEUS
2012). We could refer to these congregations as traditional esoteric congrega-
tions with an apotropaic orientation. By contrast, the ariyā-weizzā organiza-
tion represents a modern form of Buddhism; more precisely esoteric mod-
ern Buddhism. Like the representatives of rational modern Buddhism in the 
insight meditation movement, the congregation consists predominantly of 
Buddhist lay people who have embarked on the path to enlightenment and 
nirvana, practice meditation, and expect immediate results (here: transmuta-
tion, supernatural powers, etc.). This is a supermundane congregation with 
both a soteriological and apotropaic orientation (the members can serve as 
exorcists). 
The ariyā-weizzā organization was founded by a layman – a former mili-
tary officer – in the late 1940s, and the members refer to him as the ‘Exalted 
Royal Father’ (khamedaw-hpayā).35 The founder, who was ascribed charis-
matic authority by his followers, was – and is still – believed to be an ‘in-
carnation’ of Sekyā Min, as well as a future Buddha, a dhammarāja and an 
accomplished esoteric master.36 Symbolically restoring the monarchy in ac-
cordance with the Asokan model and its two wheels of the Dhamma, the hier-
archical organization of the congregation was – at least nominally – complete 
with minor­ vassal kings and other royalties, such as a chief queen and crown 
prince at each local centre, and it also had a small community of monks with 
its own hierarchy. Moreover, the members were ascribed a royal identity 
and understood to be part of a royal family. The congregation’s practices are 
part of a fully-fledged Theravāda Buddhist bodhisattayāna, a ‘vehicle of fu-
ture buddhas­’ (see Foxeus 2011). Adopting the soteriological model of the 
Burmese kings, the ariyā-weizzā organization’s self-image is one of a moral 
community of bodhisattas.37 
The tenets and practices of the ariyā-weizzā organization are claimed to 
represent ‘real’ or ‘authentic’ Buddhism38 as distinguished from traditional or 
inherited Buddhism.39 Some leaders described the latter as a rather simple 
35	
I conducted fieldwork in Burma periodically from 2005 to 2008, both in Upper and 
Lower Burma. Due to the nature of the ariyā-weizzā organization, I have decided to 
alter its name and render my informants anonymous. 
36	
The founder passed away in 1999, but the members believe that rather than dying he 
underwent a transmutation and left for a hidden abode. 
37	
The kings modelled their soteriological careers on the narrative of Gotama Buddha. 
For more on this model for the kings, see Koenig 1990. For more on Gotama 
Buddha’s path to buddhahood as a model for esoteric congregations, see Foxeus 
2011.
38	
ta-keh.bouddha-bhāthā. 
39	
mi-you:hpalā-bouddha-bhāthā.

--- PAGE 19 ---
73
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
form of practice in terms of merit-making (giving alms-food to the monks, 
etc.) and the observance of some Buddhist precepts.40 While that represented­ 
a kind of passive form of Buddhist practice, both the esoteric congregation 
and the insight meditation movement, by contrast, claimed to represent 
more active forms of practice requiring effort, resolution, and commitment 
(see Houtman 1990, Foxeus 2011). The esoteric congregation’s ‘authen-
tic’ form of Buddhism is said to be largely derived from a supernatural and 
likewise esoteric source of authority, viz. the accomplished esoteric master 
U Dhammasāri and his Golden Book.41 The founder claimed to have learnt 
about the content of this book in the hidden country of the semi-immortal 
accomplished esoteric masters. In contrast to pre-colonial Buddhism, but like 
modern Buddhism in general, the ariyā-weizzā organization is ‘doctrinal’, 
framing its tenets in Abhidamma-style terminology. 
The ariyā-weizzā organization’s tenets and practices are thus characterized 
by a high degree of ariya discourse assimilation. In line with the quest for 
authentic Buddhism, its esoteric tenets and practices – by which both mun-
dane and supermundane weizzāhood, as well as arahanthood and buddha­
hood can be attained – are qualified as ariyā (P. ariya) ‘noble’, ‘pure’.42 For 
instance, the founder’s ‘second book’, entitled Ariyā-weizzā Paṭipāt Dhāt-tek-
sin-­kyan (1997), ‘The Development of Dhāt and the Practice of Noble Esoteric 
Knowledge’, underscores doctrines such as the four noble truths, the eightfold 
path, the noble path of the four noble ones, the wrong notion of personal-
ity belief (P. sakkāya-diṭṭhi), and so forth. Moreover, the members must vow 
to observe the rather austere ‘noble discipline’ (P. ariya-sikkhā), an essential 
element of which is the vow to seek to fulfill perfections (P. pāramī) to at-
tain final release from the rounds of rebirth in one of five modalities of en-
lightenment.43 The emphasis on moral discipline is in accord with several 
40	
This form of Buddhism is what has been referred to as traditional mainstream 
Buddhism above.
41	
U Dhammasāri is regarded as a monk. Hence, like the modern lineage of insight 
meditation monks (see Houtman 1990), monastic authority is emphasized in 
esoteric­ Buddhism as well. In general, many founders of esoteric congregations are 
said to have been monks, or the esoteric knowledge disseminated in esoteric congre-
gations is claimed to be derived from monks (see Tosa 2006). 
42	
A variety of supernatural powers can also be acquired by means of these practices 
(see Foxeus 2011). 
43	
At the initiation rituals, every member must make a vow to observe the noble dis-
cipline for the rest of their lives as follows: 1) to observe the five Buddhist precepts 
(P. sīla), 2) to take refuge in the Three Jewels, 3) to pay respect to the Five Eternities 
(Buddha, Dhamma, Saṅgha, teachers, and parents), 4) to support and defend the

--- PAGE 20 ---
74
NIKLAS FOXEUS
new Buddhist movements in Southeast Asia (see Schober 1995), including 
fundamentalist ones (see Swearer 1991). Moreover, the congregation’s most 
important practices are its own meditation techniques, the generic name of 
which is ariyā-weizzā-paṭipāt, the ‘noble esoteric practices’. These consist of 
five main meditation practices and three auxiliary ones, most of which are 
peculiar ‘tantric’ visualization techniques classified as concentration medi-
tation.44 Such visualizations include the practitioner temporarily transform-
ing into the Buddha, a cosmic Buddha influencing the whole world, or into 
a mighty world emperor combating the anti-Buddhist forces (see Foxeus, 
forthcoming).45
The ariya discourse represents a purist orientation, aiming to criticize or 
eliminate what are perceived as non-Buddhist elements, such as the Gandhāra 
practices. For the ariyā-weizzā organization, qualifying its tenets and prac-
tices as ariya thus serves as a discursive strategy to present itself as a super-
mundane congregation. This discourse therefore posits the congregation as 
being superior to the majority of the other esoteric congregations, which are 
typically concerned with mundane Gandhāra lore.46 
Conclusion
Since the the colonial period in Burma, the supermundane ariya discourse 
spread and became increasingly relevant for the Buddhist lay people, especi­
ally through the effort of the famous monk Ledi Hsayādaw. His dissemination 
of a simplified version of the abstract and scholastic form of Buddhism which 
had previously been reserved for an elite in the monastic community was to 
Buddha’s sāsana and save all beings, 5) and to seek to attain one of five kinds of en-
lightenment (P. bodhi) and nirvana as a Buddha or a saint. These vows are renewed 
at every communal ritual. The majority of the male members have made bodhisatta 
vows to attain enlightenment as a buddha.
44	
All but two of these altogether eight practices are visualization techniques. According 
to the congregation, to attain sainthood and buddhahood it is also necessary to prac-
tice insight meditation, at least in the final stages. 
45	
Moreover, like other supermundane congregations, the ariyā-weizzā organization 
excludes the lower nats but includes the Buddhist gods (P. deva, brahmā) in its rit­
uals. 
46	
For other supermundane esoteric congregations employing this strategy, see Tosa 
1996: 242. In its more or less explicit criticism of the Gandhāra lore, the ariyā-weizzā 
organization sides with many practitioners of insight meditation, who disparage 
these practices as being non-Buddhist (see Houtman 1990: 186; Patton 2012).

--- PAGE 21 ---
75
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
a large extent motivated by an urge to defend Buddhism against criticism 
from Christian missionaries. In the postcolonial period, the ariya discourse 
– this simplified, doctrinal textbook Buddhism – was disseminated by the 
insight meditation movement, etc.; it represented a rational form of modern 
Buddhism and became an influential force in the religious field. In the colo-
nial era and the early post-independence period, the ariya discourse seems 
mainly to have been popular among the Burmese middle-classes, but today 
has spread to people across all the social strata. The notion of the Liberation 
Era – specified as the Era of Insight Meditation – served as a conceptual 
framework to make sense of the Buddhist resurgence in the early postcolo-
nial period, and as a rationale for the relevance of the ariya discourse among 
the Buddhist lay people. Moreover, it provided legitimacy for the concomitant 
view that anybody could make soteriological progress. Throughout the post-
independence period in Burma, we can thus see an increasing trend toward 
emphasizing the supermundane ariya dimension of Buddhism, and a cor-
responding criticism of the ‘Others’ of this discourse, such as the Gandhāra 
congregations, the nat cults, foreign elements, etc. 
For the congregations representing esoteric modern Buddhism that view 
themselves as supermundane with a soteriological orientation, the ariya dis-
course has served as a discursive strategy to acquire legitimacy, authority, and 
status. That is, it has served as an idiom by which congregations can claim 
high status for themselves while criticizing others. As a case in point, the 
ariyā-weizzā organization, characterized by fundamentalist features, sought 
to revive a simplified form of what was perceived as the authentic aristocratic, 
pre-colonial form of Buddhism, untainted by foreign ideologies, and it as-
similated the ariya discourse to a very large degree. At the same time, the 
congregation’s eclectic form of Buddhism served as a Buddhist bulwark in 
the congregation’s cosmic ‘battle’ by ritual means against what it feared to be 
anti-Buddhist forces (Western ideologies, errant religions, technology, etc.) 
endangering the existence of Buddhism in the world. However, this contest 
should largely be understood as a way of dealing with (Western) modernity 
and the corrosive force it was feared to be exerting on the indigenous tradi-
tions, culture, and religion. In general, the ariya discourse could be said to 
represent a purist trend in a quest for an authentic Buddhism, one that has 
had an immense influence on the field of religion in postcolonial Burma.

--- PAGE 22 ---
76
NIKLAS FOXEUS
References
The ariyā-weizzā organization [pseud.] 
1997 (1957) Ariyā-weizzā Paṭipāt Dhāt-tek-sin-kyan. 
Aung-Thwin, Michael 
1989	
1948 and Burma’s myth of independence. In Josef Silverstein (ed.), Inde­
pendent Burma at Forty Years: Six Assessments, 19–34. Ithaca, NY: Southeast 
Asia Program, Cornell University.
Bechert, Heinz 
1970	
Theravada Buddhist sangha: some general observations on historical and 
political factors in its development. Journal of Asian Studies 29(4): 761–78. 
Bekker, Sarah M. 
1989	
Changes and continuities in Burmese Buddhism. In Josef Silverstein (ed.), 
Independent Burma at Forty Years: Six Assessments; pp. 51–61. Ithaca, NY: 
Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University. 
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte 
2009a	 An overview of the field of religion in Burmese studies. Asian Ethnology 
68(2): 185–210. 
2009b	 ‘Nats’ wives’ or children of Nats’: from spirit possession to transmission 
among the ritual specialists of the cult of the Thirty-Seven Lords. Asian 
Ethnology 68(2): 283–305. 
2012	
Spirits versus Weikza: two competing ways of mediation. Journal of Burma 
Studies 16(2): 149–79. 
Braun, Erik Christopher 
2008	
Ledi Sayadaw, Abhidhamma, and the Development of the Modern Insight 
Meditation Movement in Burma. PhD diss., Harvard University. 
Brohm, John Frank 
1957	
Burmese Religion and the Burmese Buddhist Revival. PhD diss., Cornell 
University. 
Crosby, Kate 
2000	
Tantric Theravāda: a bibliographic essay on the writings of François Bizot 
and others on the Yogāvacara tradition. Contemporary Buddhism 1(2): 141–
98. 
Ferguson, John P., and Michael E. Mendelson 
1981	
Masters of the Buddhist occult: the Burmese weikzas. In John P. Ferguson 
(ed.), Contributions to Asian Studies 16; pp. 62–80. Leiden: Brill. 
Foxeus, Niklas 
2011	
The Buddhist World Emperor’s Mission: Millenarian Buddhism in Postcolonial 
Burma. PhD diss., Stockholm University.
2012	
The world emperor’s battle against the evil forces. Journal of Burma Studies 
16(2): 1–26.
(forthcoming) “I am the Buddha, the Buddha is Me”: Concentration Meditation and 
Esoteric Modern Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar.

--- PAGE 23 ---
77
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
Gombrich, Richard, and Gananath Obeyesekere 
1990 (1988) Buddhism Transformed: Religious Change in Sri Lanka. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass Publishers. 
Gravers, Mikael 
2012	
Monks, morality and military: the struggle for moral power in Burma – and 
Buddhism’s uneasy relation with lay power. Contemporary Buddhism 13(1): 
1–33.
Houtman, Gustaaf 
1990	
Traditions of Buddhist Practice in Burma. PhD diss., London University, 
SOAS.
1999	
Mental Culture in Burmese Crisis Politics: Aung San Suu Kyi and the National 
League for Democracy. Tokyo: Tokyo University of Foreign Studies. 
Jordt, Ingrid 
2007	
Burma’s Mass Lay Meditation Movement: Buddhism and the Cultural Con­
struction of Power. Athens: Ohio University Press. 
Keyes, Charles F., Helen Hardacre, and Laurel Kendall 
1994	
Introduction to Charles F. Keyes, Laurel Kendall, and Helen Hardacre 
(eds), Asian Visions of Authority: Religion and the Modern States of East and 
Southeast Asia; pp. 1–16. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
King, Richard
2002 (1999) Orientalism and Religion: Postcolonial Theory, India and the ‘Mystic 
East’. London: Routledge. 
Kirichenko, Alexey
2009	
From Thathanadaw to Theravāda Buddhism: constructions of religion and 
religious identity in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Myanmar. In 
Thomas David DuBois (ed.), Casting Faiths: Imperialism and the Trans­
formation of Religion in East and Southeast Asia; pp. 23–39. Hampshire: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Koenig, William J. 
1990	
The Burmese Polity, 1752–1819: Politics Administration, and Social Organ­
ization in the Early Kon-baung Period. Ann Arbor: Center for South and 
Southeast Asian Studies, the University of Michigan.
Ledi Hsayādaw 
1985 (1898) Vijjā-magga-dīpanī. In Ledi Dipani-paung-hkyup, vol 2. Yangon: 
Thathana-yay-u-si-htana-pon-hneik-taik. 
Lopez, Donald S., Jr 
2002	
Introduction. In Donald S. Lopez, Jr (ed.), Modern Buddhism: Readings for 
the Unenlightened; pp. ix–xliii. London: Penguin Books.
Marty, Martin E., and R. Scott Appleby 
1991a	 Conclusion to Martin E. Marty and R. Scott Appleby (eds), Fundamentalisms 
Observed; pp. 814–42. The Fundamentalism Project, vol. 1. Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 24 ---
78
NIKLAS FOXEUS
1991b	 Introduction to Martin E. Marty and R. Scott Appleby (eds), Fundamentalisms 
Observed; pp. vii–xiii. The Fundamentalism Project, vol. 1. Chicago: The 
Uni­versity of Chicago Press. 
Mendelson, Michael 
1961a	 The king of the weaving mountain. Journal of the Royal Central Asian Society 
48: 229–37. 
1961b	 A messianic Buddhist association in Upper Burma. Bulletin of the School of 
Oriental and African Studies 24(3): 560–80.
1963	
Observations on a tour in the region of Mount Popa, Central Burma. France-
Asie 19: 780–807.
Patton, Thomas 
2012	
In pursuit of the sorcerer’s power: sacred diagrams as technologies of po-
tency. Contemporary Buddhism 13(2): 213–31.
Pranke, Patrick 
1995	
On becoming a Buddhist wizard. In Donald S. Lopez, Jr (ed.), Buddhism in 
Practice; pp. 343–58. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
2011	
On saints and wizards: ideals of human perfection and power in contempor­
ary Burmese Buddhism. Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 33(1–2): 453–88. 
Rozenberg, Guillaume 
2010a	 Renunciation and Power: the Quest for Sainthood in Contemporary Burma. 
Transl. Jessica L. Hacket et alia. New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asia 
Studies. 
2010b	 Les Immortels : visages de l’incroyable en Birmanie bouddhiste. Vannes Cedex: 
Sully. 
2012	
Powerful yet powerless, powerless yet powerful: the Burmese exorcist. 
Journal of Burma Studies 16(2): 251–82. 
Sarkisyanz, E. 
1965	
Buddhist Backgrounds of the Burmese Revolution. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 
Schober, Juliane 
1995	
The Theravāda Buddhist engagement with modernity in Southeast Asia: 
whither the social paradigm of the galactic polity. Journal of Southeast Asian 
Studies 26(2): 307–25. 
2011	
Modern Buddhist Conjunctures in Myanmar: Cultural Narratives, Colonial 
Legacies, and Civil Society. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Spiro, Melford E. 
1982 (1970) Buddhism and Society: a Great Tradition and its Burmese Vicissitudes. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
1996 (1967) Burmese Supernaturalism, expanded edition, with a new introduction 
by the author. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.

--- PAGE 25 ---
79
Esoteric Theravāda Buddhism in Burma/Myanmar
Swearer, Donald K. 
1991	
Fundamentalistic movements in Theravada Buddhism. In Martin E. Marty 
and R. Scott Appelby (eds), Fundamentalisms Observed; pp. 628–90. The 
Fundamentalism Project, vol. 1. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
Tosa, Keiko 
1996	
A consideration of weikza belief in Burma: the meaning of làwki and làwkok-
tara for the gaìng. Mizokugaku Kenkyu 61: 215–42.
2006	
Weikza beliefs and healing: rituals for the prevention of disease and disas-
ter. Unpublished paper presented at the 2006 International Burma Studies 
Conference, Singapore. 
Turner, Alicia 
2009	
Buddhism, Colonialism and the Boundaries of Religion: Theravada Buddhism 
in Burma, 1885–1920. PhD diss., University of Chicago.
Urban, Hugh B. 
1998	
The torment of secrecy: ethical and epistemological problems in the study of 
esoteric traditions. History of Religions 37(3): 209–48.
