--- Page 1 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam:
From Khun Chang Khun Phaen to the Buddha Amulet
Chris Baker* and Pasuk Phongpaichit**
The main purpose of this article is to argue for the importance of protection as a
concept for understanding religion, power, and social structuring in Thai tradition.
Protection is a prominent motif in the Thai folk epic, The Tale of Khun Chang Khun
Phaen, and the work describes a range of practices and devices sought to provide
protection against various sources of danger. The article traces the origins of this
“knowledge” and its modern adaptation into the Buddha amulet.
Keywords: Siam, Thailand, protection, power, amulet, supernaturalism
Today in Thailand the wearing of an amulet (พระเครื่องphra khrueang), a small image of
the Buddha or of a famous monk usually enclosed in some form of casing and attached to
a cord or chain worn around the neck, is among the most widespread of religious prac-
tices.1) The principal benefit of such amulets is protection from dangers of various kinds,
verging into a more positive desire for good fortune. InKhun Chang Khun Phaen (((KCKP),
a massive folk epic dating back to the late Ayutthaya era, the demand for protection
against dangers is a dominant theme, and many devices are used for this purpose.
In the study of religion, power, and social ordering in Thai society, the key concepts
have been merit and power, prowess, patron-client ties, kingship, and so on.2) All these
concepts betray a top-down view, a focus on explaining why certain people are powerful.
The concept of protection comes into play when the angle of vision switches to bottom-
up and concentrates on what people seek from religion, power, and social institutions.
In historical study, the nature of the few sources available (chronicles, laws) has favored
* Independent Researcher, Thailand
Corresponding author’s e-mail: chrispasuk@gmail.com
**ผาสุก พงษไ์ พจิตร, Faculty of Economics, Chulalongkorn University, 254 Phayathai Road, Pathum-
wan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
1) The term “amulet” is sometimes used to describe protective devices of all kinds. In this article,
the term refers to this specific type.
2) Some of the most important works defining the field have been Akin (1996), Tambiah (1976), Hanks
(1962), Wolters (2008), and Ishii (1986).
Southeast Asian Studies, Vol. 2, No. 2, August 2013, pp.215–242 215
©Center for Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 2 ---
Kyoto University
216 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
the top-down view. However, literary sources that emerged from a popular tradition
offer the possibility of moving outside this straitjacket. Similarly, in contemporary study,
the concept of protection or security has emerged with increasing attention to the anal-
ysis of popular religious practice. In his recent pathbreaking work, Justin McDaniel
argues that besides the well-known Buddhist qualities of non-attachment, compassion,
and enlightenment, everyday practice points to “the importance of security and protection
(((khwam plotphai, kan pongkan), abundance . . . , graciousness . . . , and heritage” (McDaniel
2011, 219).
In this article, we trace the concept of protection from the late Ayutthaya era to the
present. The early sections analyze the meaning and prominence of protection inKCKP,
and the range of devices and practices deployed in its pursuit. The later sections trace
the emergence of the modern amulet and the changing role of the Buddha in the business
of protection.
Khun Chang Khun Phaennas a Source
KCKPPis a long folk epic that developed in an oral tradition of storytelling for local audi-
ences. The plot, set in the provincial urban society of central Siam, is a love triangle
ending in tragedy. Khun Phaen is handsome and dashing but his family was ruined after
his father was executed by the king for an error on royal service. Khun Chang is the
richest man in the local town but fat, ugly, and crass. The two compete for the lovely
Wanthong. Khun Phaen woos and weds her, but Khun Chang then uses his wealth and
court connections to take her away. The rivalry continues through two pitched battles,
two court cases, trial by ordeal, jail, treachery, abduction, and other mayhem. Tiring of
this disorder, the king summons the three and commands that Wanthong be executed
for failing to choose between the two men.
Probably the tale originated around 1600 and developed in an oral tradition of story-
telling for local audiences, becoming hugely popular by the eighteenth century, and very
long (21,000 lines excluding late sequels). It was then adopted by the court, converted
to written form, extended with new episodes and sequels, and embellished with fancier
poetry. The first printed edition appeared in 1872, but the work is known today through
an edition published in 1916–17 by Prince Damrong Rajanubhab, half-brother of King
Chulalongkorn.3)
3) Today there are many printed versions of the same text; the best known is published by Khurusa-
pha, a government textbook printer, in three volumes.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 3 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 217
Works likeKCKPP that develop through repeated interaction between performers
and audiences over a long period, as did many of the classics of world literature, come to
reflect the tastes and values of their society. While the court revisions greatly changed
the surface of KCKP, the plot, tone, structure, and rhythm of the work retained much of
their original character. The epic is a rare document that reflects the society and mind-
set of premodern Siam.
Protection in Khun Chang Khun Phaen
Throughout the tale, characters seek protection (คุม้ ครองkhum-khrong,ป้องกนั pong-kan)
against risks, dangers, and threats (เสี่ยงsiang,ภยั phai,อนั ตรายantarai, คุกคามkhuk-kham)
in order to ward off sorrowful hardship (ทกู ข์thuk) and achieve peaceful contentment (สุข
suk). They look for someone whom they can depend on (พ่งึ phueng), and who will feed
or support them (เล้ียงliang). When the father of a main character dies, his servants lament
“We have lost our protector,” and fear harassment by local officials (p.47).4) When news
arrives that the hero, Khun Phaen, has died on a military campaign, his mother-in-law’s
first thought is “Who’ll protect us?” (p.228). When a father announces he will give his
daughter to Khun Phaen, she protests, “My lord and master, do you no longer protect
your child?” (p.207). To gain admittance to a bandit gang, a man begs the chief, “I want
to live in your lair and shelter under your protection from now on” (p.1178). On the eve
of a marriage, a father orders, “Protect and enjoy her, my son” (p.1247). When Khun
Phaen comes under attack by his rival, Khun Chang, he asks himself, “How can I protect
myself?” (p.316) and goes off to acquire the tools to extract his revenge—a powerful
sword, horse, and personal spirit.
The three main sources of danger are defined in the second chapter recounting the
deaths of the three main characters’ fathers. The first source is nature, especially the
wild forest; the father of the heroine, Wanthong, dies from a forest fever contracted on
a trading expedition. The second is human wickedness; Khun Chang’s father is killed by
a professional bandit gang. The third is authority; Khun Phaen’s father is executed by
the king.
Finding protection from the third source of danger, authority, is the key organizing
principle of the social structure known as sakdina, at least when seen from below, the
angle of vision of the key characters inKCKP. Men donate some or all of their labor to
a patron in return for protection from various forms of authority. In the classic form of
4) All page references toKCKPP refer to Baker and Pasuk (2010).
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 4 ---
Kyoto University
218 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
sakdina, men become dependents (ไพร่phrai,ทาสthat) in the service of a khun nanggnoble.
Khun Phaen’s father is an effective patron in the provincial town of Suphanburi because
he has an official post as a soldier and recognition from the king. As a result, local officials
“shook their heads [and] knew never to cross him” (p.8). After the father is killed, his
servants lament that, “nobody dared bully us, because everyone feared Khun Krai. But
now they’ll all come and push us around” (p.35). But this classic form of patronage is
not the only one. The same principles apply in many other circumstances. After being
branded as an outlaw, Khun Phaen places himself under the patronage of a provincial
governor who plans to employ him as a guard. The chief of a bandit lair gives shelter to
fugitives who in turn must work as robbers. An abbot urges Khun Phaen to stay in the
monkhood because the robe is protection against the dangers of conscription.
The model for the role of protector is a parent’s custodianship of children, and espe-
cially the male in the combined role of father, husband, and householder. Good parents
protect their children from all dangers, even the menace of sun, wind, and insects. Hus-
bands shelter their wives like the spreading branches of a bo tree (“Oh, little bo tree
shelter of your darling wife . . . , ” p.748). Women cannot usually take the role of protec-
tor as wives (and children) are legally the property of the husband. Marriage is a trans-
fer of the daughter from the protection of the father to that of the husband. The usual
word for marriage seen from the male side isคคู่ รองkhu-khrong, “partner-rule-protect.”5)
The paternal role is a metaphor for other relations of protection. InKCKP, the word
for father,pho, is used as a pronoun between ward and protector. Wives address their
husbands as pho. Khun Phaen addresses his official patrons, Phramuen Si and Phra
Phichit, as pho, and they reciprocate by addressing him as a child. After Khun Phaen
secures the release of 35 convicts from jail to serve as soldiers, they address Khun Phaen
as pho.
The ability to serve as a protector depends on personal qualities, wealth, and polit-
ical connections. Wanthong’s mother prefers Khun Chang over Khun Phaen as a suitor-
protector because Khun Chang has wealth and connections in the Ayutthaya court while
Khun Phaen is poor and fatherless. Later, after Khun Phaen has won a military victory,
a village headman in the north presents Khun Phaen with his daughter in anticipation
that Khun Phaen will win royal favor and social advancement.
The king is at the apex of this official pyramid of protection. Two of the main items
of royal regalia, the sword and multi-tiered umbrellas, are symbols of protection. In the
invocations that preface the king’s appearances inKCKP, he “protects the mass of the
5) Today ครองkhrongg has acquired a broader and softer meaning, but the definition in Pallegoix’s early
nineteenth-century dictionary is “to rule, to govern, to repress.”
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 5 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 219
populace and soldiery so they are joyful” (p.506) and “offers protection to the great and
small throughout the world” (p.402) so well that other territories eagerly seek the same
shelter. In court formalities the king is addressed as “lord protector,” “divine protector,”
or “paramount protector.” The young Khun Chang is taken to be presented as a royal
page so that he will enjoy royal protection.
But political power is double-edged. It contains the ability to protect, but also the
potential to threaten. This is true at all levels of the social structure, but as the summit
of the political order, the king is both the most effective protector and the most terrible
threat. Khun Phaen’s father has status in his home town because he is a soldier in royal
service, but when he commits an error, the king orders his execution and the seizure
of his property and family. All the major character in the tale, and many of the minor
ones, lose life, liberty, property, rank, spouse, or kin at the hands of the king. Although
the monarch is also a giver of rank and property, particularly to those who bring him
victory in war, this aspect receives much less emphasis in KCKP than his capacity to
deprive.6)
Education
Patronage is only one way to seek protection and is not wholly effective. To combat all
three sources of danger (nature, human wickedness, and authority), skills and devices
also come into play. Before undertaking any risky exploit (a journey, marriage, war),
characters inKCKPP seek protection for themselves in various ways. They use methods
of divination in order to locate dangers in time and space so they may be avoided. They
adorn themselves with protective devices and recite formulas that have supernatural
power to avert various forms of threat including weapons, fierce animals, and the mali-
cious intentions of enemies.
Around the age of 14, Phlai Kaeo (the future Khun Phaen) enters the watt as a n ovice
to gain education in these skills and devices. He is intent upon following in his late
father’s footsteps as a soldier. The skills and devices are primarily for use in war, but
also have application in everyday life.
His primary training is at Wat Som Yai in Kanburi:7)
6) Late Ayutthayan history is strewn with stories of great nobles who lose position, possessions, and
life in succession disputes and court intrigue.
7) Kanburi is the name used inKCKPP for the old site of Kanchanaburi, 17 kilometers west of the
modern town. This frontier outpost was abandoned in the wars of the late eighteenth century and
never reoccupied.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 6 ---
Kyoto University
220 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
The novice studied to read and write. With diligence, he soon mastered Khmer, Thai, arith-
metic, the main scriptures, calculating the sun and moon, and translation of texts. (p.58)
Even this basic course of reading, writing, arithmetic, and languages includes some
astrology. When the abbot discovers that he has a bright pupil, he adds some fundamen-
tals of supernaturalism:
The abbot had nothing left to tell him. He patted Kaeo on the back and the head and said,
“That’s the end of my gut, my dear Novice Kaeo.
There’s only the big treatise with the heart formulas8) and mantras. I’ve been collecting them
since I was a youth. Until now in my old age, I haven’t shared them with anyone.
This is the extent of my knowledge. Because I’m fond of you, Kaeo, I’ll pass it on to you.
There’s everything—invulnerability, robbery, raising spirits—something for every occasion.”
(pp.58–59)
Phlai Kaeo absorbs the abbot’s treatise but knows there is more to learn. After all,
Kanburi is a border outpost, and the abbot had collected his knowledge on his own. Phlai
Kaeo moves to Suphanburi, his old family home, which is a long-established religious
center. There he studies with two renowned abbots who had earlier taught his own
father. In this secondary stage, he first attends Wat Palelai, where the emphasis is on
scriptures and pedagogy.
Novice Kaeo had an agile mind beyond compare, and was diligent without being told. After
three months of practice, he had sermons down by heart.
Whether it was the Mahachat, sermons on the teachings, or anything else, he spoke beautifully
with a peerless choice of words, and a voice as charming as a cicada. Wherever he gave sermons,
people loved to come and listen. (p.61)
As a talented student, he also takes evening classes in intermediate supernaturalism.
In the evenings he went to the main kuti to pay his respects, attend to the abbot, and take
instruction: how to make a sword for war; how to transform a thorny branch into a buffalo charm;
how to enchant dummy soldiers; how to charm a woman so that once their eyes had met, her
heart would be captivated and she would never forget.
His master laughed. “Young Kaeo, I know you’re interested in the stuff about being a lover.
Don’t do damage to people’s wives but old maids and widows, take them!
I’ll teach you everything about sacred mantras and formulas. You’ll be a real gem.” He spat
out the betel he was chewing and passed it to Novice Kaeo to eat the remains. Then the master
hit him with a pestle, almost chipping his skull. “There! It didn’t crack or bruise. Like hitting a
stone.” The master rolled about with laughter. (p.61)
8) A form of mantra abbreviated for easy memorization and quick application.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 7 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 221
Shortly after, Phlai Kaeo moves to Wat Khae where Abbot Khong takes his studies
to the tertiary stage.
The abbot promptly began to instruct him on everything:
putting an army to sleep and capturing its men; summoning spirits; making dummies with
power to fight courageously; writing pathamang;9) concealment; invulnerability; undoing locks and
chains;
all the arts of victorious warfare; all knowledge for overcoming enemies with no hope of resis-
tance; calculating auspicious times for any action; enchanting tamarind leaves to become wasps;
expertise in all covert war tactics; commanding troops in hundreds of thousands; defeating
whole territories; the Great Beguiler mantra to induce strong love;
stunning people; invisibility; gaining the strength of a lion; withdrawing athan10) protective
powers and preventing their replacement; and keeping spirits to act as spies.
He studied all branches of knowledge, reciting both old and new repeatedly to commit to
memory. (pp.124–125)
In the course of this education, Phlai Kaeo has learned the basics of reading, writing,
arithmetic, and languages, then more advanced courses on divining and manipulating the
supernatural forces which operate in this world. He makes only limited use of these
skills in his early career: he summons up a spirit when he needs a quick ride through the
air; he uses love mantras to seduce women; in his first military campaign, he is aided by
his body’s ability to resist weapons. Supernaturalism plays a very minor role in this stage
of the story, but that changes dramatically when his rival, Khun Chang, gains advantage
by using the power of his money and his political connections at court. Khun Phaen then
turns to supernaturalism to protect himself against these powerful forces.
The skills that Khun Phaen learns and deploys can be roughly divided into two types:
divination of supernatural forces, and manipulation of these forces.
Divination
The main technique for divination depends on astrology, signs read from the position of
celestial bodies. In Siam, the royal court imported the Indian system of astrology known
as Jyotisha, meaning “light, heavenly body,” probably via Sri Lanka (see Fig. 1).11) It also
9) The first letter of a mantra or formula, usually in Pali or old Khmer. This is basic training for making
yantra (see below).
10) See below.
11) The standard modern work with details of two methods of calculation is Wisandarunakon ([1965]
1997). This manual was originally prepared for the court in 1923 using new methods of calculation.
It was republished in 1965 and presented to the king.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 8 ---
Kyoto University
222 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
Fig. 1 Jyotisha Diagram
imported Brahmans to use the technique, and rewarded them with high posts in the
nobility. The Jyotisha system plots the path of nine heavenly bodies (sun, moon, five
planets, and two imaginary planets) against a map of the sky divided into 12 houses named
after constellations. Each house represents a certain mental aspect (stability, tolerance,
love, judgment, etc.), and each heavenly body represents a certain aspect of life (ego,
wealth, mind, etc.). A reading taken at birth determines which of the heavenly bodies
will influence which aspects of that life. Reading of the position of these influential bod-
ies at a future time can then be used to divine events.
This technique can be applied to individuals, cities, kingdoms, anything for which a
“birth” time can be identified. But the calculations are extremely taxing, and the court
practitioners had made the system infinitely complex by giving meaning to subdivisions
of measurement and to various interactions between the heavenly bodies in play.12)
The divinations made by Khun Phaen and his teachers and battle foes do not use
fully fledged Jyotisha, but other systems which are based on the same principle of locat-
ing heavenly bodies within a map but which require much simpler forms of calculation.
Several of their predictions seem to use the method known asmahathaksa (มหาทกั ษา),
meaning “great skill.” To construct the birth chart, all that needs to be known is the
lagna, the celestial body rising on the eastern horizon at the time of birth or, in an even
simpler variant, the day of the week. The other bodies are assigned to their spheres of
12) In Siam in 1687–88, Simon de La Loubère acquired a document describing the calculations for the
sun and moon. He had it translated into French and examined by M. Cassini of the Royal Academy
of Sciences, who pronounced the technique “ingenious.” The calculations appear similar to those
used in Thai astrology today. The document is not found in the English translation of La Loubère,
but in Jacq-Hergoualc’h (1987, 488–503).
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 9 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 223
influence in simple sequence. To examine the forces acting at any future point, another
chart can be made in the same way. In alternative versions, the calculation of which
bodies are influential at any time is made through a simple arithmetical progression from
the birth chart.
Astrology is only one of many systems of divination used in KCKP. Two others also
focus on identifying auspicious and inauspicious times. The Circles method depends on
the intersections between lunar and solar calendars. The conjunction of certain days in
the week and certain dates in the (lunar) month are prescribed as auspicious, and others
as inauspicious (Baker and Pasuk 2010, 319, note 23). The Three-Tiered Umbrella uses
the birth-year and age to locate a certain position on a chart where each segment is
associated with a legendary episode (mostly from the Ramakian) with metaphorical
meaning (ibid., 208, note 4). Nowadays, charts setting out the results of these and
similar methods are published in manuals such asPhrommachat.13) Possibly something
similar is indicated when manuals are mentioned inKCKP. In the 1680s, La Loubère
wrote that an “Almanac which he [the king] causes Annually to be made by a Brame
[Brahman] Astrologer, denotes to him and his Subjects the lucky or unlucky days for
most of the things they used to do” (La Loubère 1793, 66).
Besides these divinations based on aspects of time, Khun Phaen and other charac-
ters in KCKPP gather many different omens from nature. They look at the clouds for
shapes that predict success or failure. They examine the breath through their nostrils
to gauge the chances of success in any endeavor and to determine what direction to head
when starting out. They listen to sounds made by insects and animals, which are catego-
rized as propitious or unpropitious in manuals. They study the brightness of the stars
and the halo of the moon to predict the outcome of warfare or other exploits. They tease
meanings out of dreams that foretell events not only in the immediate future but over
decades ahead. They interpret omens that come from visual oddities (seeing someone
without a head) or unusual events (a staircase breaking). Many of these omens and signs
are documented in old manuals, including various versions of theManual on Victorious
Warfare (ตาํราพชิ ยั สงครามtamra phichai songkhram), a military treatise.14) What is striking
is the sheer variety of these predictive methods. At decisive moments, the characters in
KCKPP will use not one but several.
13) There are several compendia of astrology and other predictive techniques published under this title.
See for example Hora Burajan (2006).
14) The most extensive and accessible edition isTamra phichai songkhram chabap ratchakan thi 1
(2002). Parts of a manual are reproduced in facsimile and French translation in Pattaratorn (2011).
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 10 ---
Kyoto University
224 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
Manipulation
Khun Phaen is also educated in methods to manipulate the hidden forces in the world.
These methods can be classified into three types: formulas; powerful devices found in
nature; constructed devices.
The formulas may be spoken out loud or chanted under the breath (often several
times) and then blown. Phlai Kaeo is specifically trained in usinghua jai (หวั ใจ) or heart
formulas, an abbreviated form made by using the initials of words in the original formula,
or the initial letter of several formulas (see Fig. 2). These have the advantage of being
easier to memorize and quick to use.
These formulas seem to influence events through two pairs of forces: repulsion,
warding off danger or, in its most complete form, providing invulnerability; andattraction,
inducing love, sympathy, or good fortune;constraint, preventing an event or action; and
release, removing constraints, such as undoing locks and chains, or ensuring a smooth
delivery at birth. The four formulas which appear most often in KCKPPare for these four
actions respectively. The Great Prescription (มุขใหญ่muk yai) formula provides protec-
tion or invulnerability. The Great Beguiler (มหาละลวยmahalaluai) induces love and is
used not only to charm women but to win sympathy from those in authority. The Subduer
(สะกดsakot) is principally used to immobilize enemies during battle. The Great Loosener
(มหาสะเดาะmahasado) opens locks and chains, induces a smooth childbirth, and removes
other blockages.15)
The second method uses substances that are found in nature and believed to be
intrinsically powerful (ขลงั khlang) because of some unusual property that defies the laws
of nature. A prominent example is mercury, a metal that acts like a liquid, which conveys
protection by flowing to any part of the body threatened by penetration. Other examples
are: cat’s eye, a semi-precious stone which looks like an animal’s organ; hard, stone-like
cores found in plants or animal’s eggs; and splinters of tusk that are lodged in trees or
Fig. 2 Hua jai Heart Formula
15) There are several compilations of formulas and yantra today, often extracted from the works of
Thep Sarikabut. As they tend to be geared towards achieving success in business, they are rather
different from the selection in KCKP, but still enshrine the principles of repulsion-attraction and
constraint-release.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 11 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 225
Fig. 3 Adept’s Knife
ant-heaps by charging elephants in musth. Mostly these objects are carried to convey
protection or invulnerability.
A variant of this method consists of precious or powerful objects inserted under the
skin, and believed to be capable of moving to block the intrusion of a blade or bullet. The
Chiang Mai military commander, Saentri Phetkla, makes extensive use of these devices:
He had a jet gem embedded in his head,
golden needles in each shoulder, a large diamond in the middle of his forehead, a lump of fluid
metal in his chest, and herbal amber and cat’s eye in his back.
His whole body was a mass of lumps and bumps in ranks and rows. Since birth he had never
been touched by a weapon, and did not carry even the scratch from a thorn. (p.631)
The third method uses constructed devices. Simple forms mentioned in KCKP
include water, betelnut, or powdered clay that have been sacralized by reciting formulas;
spirit oil extracted from a corpse; beads made with sacralized powder and powerful herbs;
and lip wax, especially a variant made from the face mask of a corpse. Among more
complex forms, two prominent examples are an adept’s knife and yantra. These devices
serve as media for transferring the power of an adept to somebody else.
An adept’s knife (มีดหมอmit mo, see Fig. 3) has to be made by an adept using special
materials and observing strict practices, and “activated” through a ritual, often convoking
many different spirits and deities to endorse the knife’s power. Other people can then
use the knife and tap the adept’s own powers which have been instilled in the article.
These knives are kept at home to ward off danger; carried into battle where they convey
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 12 ---
Kyoto University
226 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
invulnerability; steeped in water to make medicine; and placed on the subject’s head
during ceremonies to overcome spirit possession. Among the four forces, the knife has
the force of protection, but can also be used to defeat the protective forces of enemies.
Khun Phaen uses an adept’s knife to neutralize the spirits and other protective devices
before invading Khun Chang’s house. Skystorm (ฟ้าฟ้ืน fa fuen), the sword that Khun
Phaen has specially made, is a superlative version of an adept’s knife. The manufacture
begins with the collection of an array of metals with connotations of power and protection:
Metal from the peaks of a relic stupa, a palace, and a gateway. Metal fastening for the corpse
of a woman who died while with child. Metal binding from a used coffin. Fixing for a gable board.
Diamond bolt.
Bronze pike. Copper kris. Broken regal sword. Metal goad. Bolt from a gateway. Mushroom
nail. Five-colored smart metal. Household metal. All genuine articles.
Fluid metal. Ore cast at the Phrasaeng mine. Iron ore and metal from Kamphaeng and
Namphi. Gold. Bronze. Nak from Aceh. Genuine silver. Forest copper. (pp.317–318)
In some modern manuals for making an adept’s knife, the recipe has been adapted
from this passage inKCKP.
The constructed device that appears most often inKCKPP is the yantra (ยนั ตร์yan,
เลขยนั ตร์lek yan). These diagrams probably began in the Indic tradition of asceticism as
visual aids for meditation. One of the simplest is a pair of interlocking triangles to aid
con centration on duality (see Fig. 4). The device then spread widely, particularly within
Buddhist traditions, but was adapted in very different ways in various regions. Tibetan
tanka paintings are one such variant. Another are designs found on Japanese armor. The
mandala used in architecture and statecraft is a specific form.
In the Southeast Asian tradition, these devices have been developed by the addition
of several other visual elements. The geometrical shapes have acquired symbolic mean-
ing; for example, a circle or oval signifies the Buddha. Pictures of powerful figures have
been added, including Hindu deities, legendary figures such as Hanuman, imaginary
creatures from the Himaphan Forest, and fierce animals such as lion, tiger, and snake.
Written formulas are also included, usually in Pali language in Khom script,16) and often
in abbreviated form. Sequences of numbers may be added, again in Khom script, with
individual numbers signifying a deity or a formula, and longer sequences having super-
natural significance (see Fig. 5). As McDaniel (2011, 103) notes, these various elements
constitute “an algebraic system that seeks to manipulate a series of knowns in order to
16) Khom is a script adapted from Khmer and used in religious and historical texts. Several other scripts
are also used in yantra, but Khom is the most common. The formulas may also be in Thai or other
languages but Pali is more common.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 13 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 227
Fig. 4 Duality Graphic
Fig. 5 Narai Transforming Yantra
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 14 ---
Kyoto University
228 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
Fig. 6 Takrut, Unrolled and Rolled
control or uncover a wide array of unknowns.”
Yantra thus bring together devices from several traditions including ascetic mastery,
the Hindu pantheon, Buddhist cosmology, spirit beliefs, and numerology. They must be
made by an adept under very strict conditions, and activated by pronouncing formulas.
Their primary function is to provide protection, but they can also attract, constrain, and
release. They are a means of transferring the intrinsic power of the adept to another
person, animal, or thing by using a wide array of media. They can be tattooed on the skin;
drawn on wearable articles such as shirts, bandanas, or cloth fashioned into belts and
rings; inscribed on metal and strung round the arm, neck or waist; or written with pow-
der that is then daubed on the forehead or poured into the haft of a weapon (Bizot 1988;
Yanchot 1995; Becchetti 1991; Bunce 2001; Thep Sarikabut n.d., esp. Vol. 1).
The single most common form of these yantra devices found inKCKPP is the takrut
(ตะกรุด), a sheet of thin, pliable metal such as tin or gold, which is inscribed with the
yantra then rolled around a cord and tied around the neck, waist, or upper arm (see Fig.
6). Complex designs may extend across several sheets strung on a single cord.
Roots
These methods have roots in several traditions, some of which originated in India but
have been adapted and rearranged over many centuries in Southeast Asia.
The first of these roots goes back to the Vedas, the great texts of Hinduism. Besides
three volumes of philosophical texts, there is a fourth volume with a long inventory of
beliefs and practices about threats to man and how to resist them. This inventory includes
ways to influence natural forces in the world, particularly to achieve protection against
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 15 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 229
threats from disease, natural disasters, and the perfidies of fellow man.17) The methods
include natural substances with supernatural powers, formulas for recitation, and devices
constructed by adepts—the same three methods found in KCKP. They also utilize the
same two pairs of forces: repulsion and attraction, constraint and release. The title of
the compilation as AtharvaVeda survives in Thai as อาถรรพณ์,athan (sometimesathap,
athanpawet). In KCKP, athan means protection, particularly the convoking of super-
natural forces to protect a city, palace, or other location. The term’s modern usage has
broadened to mean supernaturalism in general.18) The historical connection between the
AtharvaVeda and the Thai concept of athan is tantalizingly unknown.19)
The second of these roots, also from Indic tradition, is a belief that mastery over
oneself conveys mastery over natural processes; through mental control and ascetic
practices, a rishi or yogi attains supernatural abilities. In life stories of the Buddha, he
was schooled in ascetic practice and acquired extraordinary powers such as flying through
the air, multiplying his body, and recalling previous lives. Samuel (2008) argues that the
Buddha adopted the ascetic practices of local shaman cults. Buddhist schools that are
wary of such supernaturalism have argued that the Buddha forbade his followers to use
such practices on grounds of danger, but after his death, some followers continued to use
them and pass them on by teaching (Fic 2003, 42–44).
In India from the sixth to twelfth century, this idea of mastery through asceticism
was combined with other folk practices and spirit beliefs to become the core of a distinct
strand of Buddhism later dubbed as tantric or esoteric (Samuel 2008; Davidson 2002).
According to one theory, this strand emerged in the context of an era of vicious warfare,
and spread because the metaphor of individual power through mastery was appealing to
warrior princes. Davidson (2002, 114) suggests that this appeal for warrior rulers was
behind the spread of this strain of Buddhism to East and Southeast Asia, but his evidence
is very scanty. The passage of the idea of mastery from Indic tradition to Southeast Asia
is uncharted, and probably took multiple routes. The main point is that the concept of
17) Two main recensions of the Atharva Veda have survived. This inventory forms the first of four parts
in the Shaunakiya or northern recension. Dating is difficult and controversial but may be around
the eleventh or twelfth century BC. Some scholars have speculated that this inventory is a record
of local belief and practice in north India at the time theVedas were composed. Others argue that
the inventory may have earlier origins, perhaps in Central Asia (Witney 1905; Whitaker 2004;
Michaels 2004).
18) The Royal Institute dictionary defines athan as follows: “Rites following saiyasattmanuals to create
auspiciousness and protect against danger, or to cause danger to others . . . recondite power believed
to cause effects.”
19) However the Royal Institute dictionary insists on a connection by starting the definition cited in the
previous note with “Something passed down from theAtharva Veda.”
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 16 ---
Kyoto University
230 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
mastery was present at the core of Buddhist teaching—in the life story of the Buddha—
and was thus available for adoption and adaptation in different ways in various local
Buddhist cultures (on which more below).
The third of these roots lies in the belief, found throughout Southeast Asia and
indeed in much of the world, in the pervasive presence of spirits and deities that deter-
mine processes in the natural world. Khun Phaen has the skill to raise and direct spirits.
He has a personal team of spirits and adds a particularly powerful one made from the
fetus of an unborn child. These spirits provide him with personal protection, and also
are able to attack and remove similar protection from opponents. In addition, Khun Phaen
has the ability to summon up spirits in the surrounding area for special uses ranging from
emergency transport to attacking his enemies. Finally he has the ability to convert grass
into spirit warriors—considered one of the most difficult skills in the repertoire.20)
In the Siamese tradition, the methods of athan, the idea of mastery, and the belief
in spirits have become closely intertwined. Mastery of oneself gives the adept the abil-
ity to control spirits and activate natural forces using athan’s repertoire of formulas,
unusual substances, and other devices. In the manufacture of his sword, Khun Phaen
draws on all three of these techniques. He first collects an array of unusual metal sub-
stances, then combines them to the accompaniment of many incantations, and finally
convokes the spirits and deities to instill the weapon with exceptional power.
In modern Thai, this complex of practices to influence the hidden forces in nature
is calledsai or saiyasatt(ไสยศาสตร์), derived possibly from Sanskritsaya, dark, or from a
Khmer word meaning excellence or expertise. But in KCKP, this word appears only
twice.21) Instead,KCKPP uses two other vocabularies. The first is disarmingly simple.
An adept is khon di (คนดี), a “good person,” and the practice as a whole isthang nai (ทางใน),
the “inner ways,” a phrase which nicely captures the depth of the knowledge, its arcane
origins, and its reliance on the innate talent of the practitioner. What is striking about
this vocabulary, which appears in the older passages of the tale, is its use of simple,
everyday words. This simplicity portrays the practice as familiar, normal, universal.22)
20) According to Thep Sarikabut (n.d., Vol.2, 24–25), making dummy soldiers by enchanting grass is
the most advanced department of lore and very difficult to master. He had never seen a successful
example and reported that Phrakhru Wimonkhunakon (Suk) of Wat Makham Thao, Chainat, a most
famous practitioner who had studied the art, managed to transform only the legs and feet.
21) Both in passages which were probably added in the nineteenth century.
22) Today in Thailand these practices are associated with the Khmer. In the nineteenth century they
were associated with the “Lao” (McDaniel 2011, 34–43). These associations are absent in KCKP.
It seems that Thai modernity requires that the origin of these practices be found outside Siam, but
not too far away, in countries sharing the same cultural history but deemed less modern.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 17 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 231
The second vocabulary uses words of Indic origin: มนตร์,mon is the Thai rendering
of mantra, meaning a Buddhist prayer or formula; คาถา,khatha is a verse in a Buddhist
Pali text; อาคม, akhom, from Sanskrit agama meaning “that which has come down,” is
used among other things for the inventory of prescriptions found in the Atharva Veda
(Sharma 1979, xviii); เวท,wettderives from Veda, the Hindu scriptures. In KCKP, these
individual words are used almost interchangeably for a specific exercise of skill, such as
intoning a formula. They are also used in various conjoined forms (wet mon, khatha
akhom, etc.) to refer to the practice of these skills in general. Alternatively, these skills
are calledวชิ า,wicha, from Sanskrit meaning knowledge. This is the same word which,
via Indo-European, gives us “witch” and the fashionable modern version, “wican.” This
vocabulary suggests exceptional forms of knowledge authenticated by age, exotic origins,
and textual recording—lore.
In Siam, this tradition of lore is closely integrated with the everyday practice of the
Buddhist monkhood. Khun Phaen’s teachers are all abbots. Buddhist scriptures are
taught alongside astrology and the formulas and mantras of lore with no sense of incom-
patibility.
In some Buddhist cultures, these practices have been isolated as a specific tradition.
François Bizot has argued that this was the case in Cambodia where practices which he
calls “tantric” became mainstream at the height of the Angkorian era, but subsequently
continued as a distinct, heretical, and covert sect (Bizot 1976; 1981).23) In Siam, however,
practices of self-mastery seem always to have been part of the mainstream Buddhist
tradition, particularly (but not exclusively) among the “forest” rather than “town-
dwelling” lineages. Ascetics with miraculous powers have prominent roles in old legends
and chronicles, and are integrated into the iconography of watt decoration. The introduc-
tion of a purer form of Buddhism from Sri Lanka in the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries
failed to displace old practices. King Mongkut’s reforms in the mid nineteenth century
and, more importantly, the bureaucratization of thesangha by his successor, have since
shifted the balance, but far from completely. To this day, monks carry outathan rites
for house building, and bless amulets which are the modern-day equivalent of yantra.
“Forest” monks imitate the Buddha’s life, including extreme forms of asceticism, and
are accredited with supernatural powers (Tambiah 1970, 49–51; 1984, 45, 315). Royalty,
politicians, generals, and senior police officers endeavor to associate themselves with
these figures in order to draw on their power.
23) McDaniel (2011, 106–108) counter-argues that terms such as “tantric” and “esoteric” are mislead-
ing in the Southeast Asian context, and that this “stratum” of Buddhism has always been part of the
mainstream.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 18 ---
Kyoto University
232 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
InKCKP, the practice of lore is almost entirely a male preserve. The skills are learnt
so a male can fulfill his role as protector. All the adepts are male. All the teachers are
male.24) Only men are present at ritual events such as making Khun Phaen’s sword or
convoking the spirits before a battle or other risky exploit. Women are not only excluded
from the practice, but sometimes figure as a threat to the power of lore. Khun Phaen
takes off all his protective devices before making love to Wanthong. When they steal
into the Chiang Mai palace, Khun Phaen warns his son against fondling palace women as
that might weaken the lore that has enabled them to put everyone to sleep and enter the
palace unseen:
Seeing his son fondling, Khun Phaen clenched his fist and thumped his son’s back. “This is
royal property! Don’t touch! If you get carried away, we’ll fail.
We shouldn’t do this, you see, we’re phrai. These are ladies who are forbidden to others.
What’s more, to be expert in warfare, you shouldn’t dally with women.” (p.662)
From Yantra to Amulet
The amulet is the lineal descendant and modern equivalent of the yantra. Like yantra,
amulets can be carried on the body; their principal benefit is protection;25) they incorpo-
rate exotic materials believed to have intrinsic power; they are crafted under strict con-
ditions by a teacher, preferably from the ascetic tradition, known to have exceptional
powers; they serve as a means of transferring the adept’s powers to other people; they
are largely a male preserve; and they are immensely popular.26)
The emergence of the amulet is a long story, only partially glimpsed.27) InKCKP,
the amulet in its modern form does not figure at all among the vast range of protective
devices mentioned. Indeed, images of the Buddha are not part of the lore in KCKP. In
some yantra today, the Buddha is depicted symbolically by a circle or collection of circles.
However, in the yantra named in KCKPP and identifiable today, only one has such a
symbol—the chakra or wheel yantra, which is inscribed on the stock of the Skystorm
24) There is one partial exception, and it is controversial. After Khun Phaen is put in jail, his mother
takes over the education of her grandson, using Khun Phaen’s library. Some critics see this is a
blemish in the plotting of KCKP. Others point out that the grandmother, after being widowed, takes
on some of the “male” attributes of a household head.
25) Amulets also have the benefit of attraction, winning love and favor.
26) On the modern process of creating amulets, see especially Tambiah (1984), Cook (2012), Swearer
(2004), and Turton (1991). Stengs (1998) emphasizes the male bias but also notes the emergence
of equivalent devices for female use.
27) This discussion draws heavily on Chalong Soontravanich (2005; 2013).
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 19 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 233
sword (see Fig. 7)—and only in a stylized form.28) InKCKP, the Buddhism of sermons,
Jatakas, and scriptures on the one hand, and the lore for divining and manipulating the
supernatural forces in the world on the other, are closely associated through the wat, yet
still delicately separate.
The one device in KCKPP that partially resembles a modern amulet is aphakhawam
(พระภควาํ), a word collapsed from Phra Gavampati, an early disciple of the Buddha.29) A
phakhawam is usually a small, almost spherical metallic image, showing the monk with
hands over eyes, and sometimes extra pairs of arms for covering other orifices (see Fig.
8). InKCKP, these images are placed in the mouth to give power to speech, carried into
battle for protection, and steeped in water used to induce invulnerability.
The form of the modern amulet seems to have developed from votive tablets,phra
phim, small images of the Buddha made by pressing clay into a mold (Pattaratorn 1997).
The earliest examples of these tablets may have been brought to Siam by itinerant monks
from South Asia and have been found at many early archeological sites. Later, these
images were often made in large quantities to be placed inside stupas or affixed in rows
on the walls of watt buildings to enhance the religiosity of these sites. Such votive tablets,
retrieved from a ruined watt or stupa, and known as “broken-wall Buddhas,” later became
popular as protective devices. A few amulets today are believed to have originated in
this way (Srisakra Vallibhotama 1994, 81–82, cited by Chalong 2013).
In the early to mid nineteenth century, some monks manufactured amulets with a
28) The Thepnimit mantra comes in several different designs, some with and some without Buddha
symbols.
29) In the canonical literature and early commentaries from Sri Lanka, Gavampati is mentioned among
the second group of disciples of the Buddha, associates of Yasa, but with no detail. Probably on
account of his name meaning “Lord of Cattle,” other early texts gave him a background as an ox
herder, and a quirky trait of chewing the cud. He also displayed supernatural ability to hold back a
river that threatened to swamp the Buddha and a group of disciples. From around the fourteenth
century onwards, texts appeared in Southeast Asia that celebrated 80 early disciples, including
Gavampati, and gave several of them substantial biographies. He is described as so beautiful in
appearance that he was often mistaken for the Buddha, and as a result used special powers to make
himself ugly—hunched, potbellied, flat-faced. When he was approaching death, he set himself the
task of converting Somphon (Sanskrit Sambala), a Brahman who stubbornly rejected Buddhism, by
delivering a series of sermons on impermanence in which he stated that the human body was a
“public place” because its nine orifices (two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, mouth, urethra, anus)
served only to emit impure excretions, and to admit impurities from the outside. Somphon was
converted instantly, and went on to achieve nirvana. Gavampati subsequently also achieved nirvana,
underwent a magnificent funeral ceremony presided over by the Buddha himself, and became an
arahant. Since the Sukhothai era, Gavampati has been depicted in statuary as a potbellied monk,
often known as Sangkachai or Mahakaccayana. In lore, images of Gavampati are credited with strong
powers to convey invulnerability. See Lagirarde (2000, 57–78; 2003); Strong (2005); Kanchanak-
phan and Nai Tamra na Mueang Tai ([1961] 2002, 682); Yanchot (1995, 31–39).
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 20 ---
Kyoto University
234 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
Fig. 7 Wheel Yantra
Fig. 8 Phakhawam
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 21 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 235
Buddha image. We cannot be sure the practice was not present earlier, but older amulets
known today all seem to be of the “broken-wall” type (see above). The modern form of
the amulet seems to combine the Buddha image of the votive tablet with the convenient
portability of a takrut. This form was possibly inspired by the popularity in the mid-
nineteenth century of small Buddha images with a hollow cavity containing a ball, which
had been imported from China and dubbedphra kring, “bell Buddhas.” Today the most
famous of the early amulet-makers is Somdet To (สมเดจ็ โต, also known as Phra P hutthachan),
a monk who lived from around 1788 to 1872. According to one of the many versions of
his life, he was a son of King Rama I, sired on a northern peasant girl. He was appointed
abbot of Wat Rakhang in Bangkok, had a close relationship with King Rama IV, and
became famous for his ascetic practice and supernatural powers (McDaniel, 2011, ch.1).
He made several types of protective device, including yantra, but also Buddha amulets
which are the most desired and most expensive in the market today.
Somdet To also wrote a manual on amulet making which shows the close similarity
to the creation of yantra. In Somdet To’s description, the amulet is made from powerful
materials (enchanted powder, precious metals, herbs used in lore) following strict rules,
including the recitation of mantra, and finally is “activated” by ritual (ibid., especially
189–219). Also like yantra, an amulet is effective only if made by a monk or adept famous
for supernatural power (like Somdet To). In addition, most Buddha amulets have a small
yantra inscribed on the reverse side.
Over the nineteenth century, some other famous monks produced amulets which
are now highly valued, and the acquisition of these amulets became popular among the
high elite. King Chulalongkorn sought them out during his upcountry tours. By the early
twentieth century, amulets were being produced by monks famous for asceticism and
supernatural power in many parts of the country, and the habit of acquisition spread more
widely as mobility increased with the coming of roads and railways. Nobles and members
of the emerging commoner middle class made pilgrimages to honor famous monks and
brought back their amulets as mementos.
But only slowly did the amulet become the dominant protective device. Official
patronage played a role. Since the Ayutthaya era, military leaders have distributed pro-
tective devices to their troops, mostly yantra in various forms. Troops sent to engage
with the French in Cambodia in 1940 were given amulets but only senior officers and
only an amulet with the image of a monk rather than the Buddha (Textor 1960, 526; Ruth
2011, 131–132). During the scares caused by bombing of Bangkok during World War II,
the devices sought for protection were still mainly yantra and sacred water (Lawan
Chotamara 1984, 228–229, cited by Chalong 2013). In the 1950s, Robert B. Textor drew
up an inventory of supernatural devices found in a village outside Bangkok. He listed
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 22 ---
Kyoto University
236 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
118 objects as well as Buddha-image amulets. Simple amulets made from plaster were
being manufactured by monks in the village, and Textor’s informants estimated that 90
to 100 percent of households had one. But another 20 devices were owned by the same
percentage (Textor 1960; 1973). Amulets were popular but not yet dominant. Writing
in the 1960s and looking back to the recent past, W.A.R. Wood (1965, 88) placed the
Buddha amulet as just one among many protective devices in everyday use:
There are dozens of different kinds—tattoo marks, written formulas, knotted strings, tiny images
of the Buddha, precious stones, dried seeds, needles in the body, and others too numerous to
mention.
Chalong Soontravanich traces the final rise to dominance of the modern amulet in
two phases. The first took place in the era of lawlessness, banditry, and gangsterism
after World War II. A small amulet market appeared in Bangkok. Experts authored two
weighty biographies of Somdet To, compiled a compendium of known amulets, and iden-
tified a “League of Five” amulets of highest value. Businessmen sponsored the produc-
tion of amulets by famous monks in batches of several thousand. Official patronage now
focused on the amulet. The prime minister, Phibun Songkhram, distributed amulets to
troops sent to Korea, and to constituents at the 1957 election (Textor 1960, 526). Soldiers
who volunteered to fight in Vietnam in 1967 were given Buddha amulets by their com-
manding officers, by monks at the Temple of the Emerald Buddha, and by the prime
minister (Ruth 2011, 45, 48, 67, 131–132). When Barend Terwiel surveyed supernatural
practices in a Ratchaburi village in 1967, he found people wearing various protective
devices including tattoos, yantra designs, sacred thread, and splinters of wood, but
Undoubtedly the most popular [protective] object which is worn on a cord or chain around a man’s
neck is the image of the Buddha. These images can be cast from metal, or carved out of piece of
wood, ivory or resin, but the most common traditional ones are those manufactured from a mixture
of many ingredients, pressed in a mould and baked. (Terwiel 1975, 62)
The second phase, according to Chalong, took place against the background of the
war against communist insurgency in the 1970s and early 1980s, and the spread of mass
media including newspapers, magazines, and television. By the 1980s, amulets had
become prominent enough to warrant a major study by a leading international anthro-
pologist (Tambiah 1984). In this era, businessmen and generals made merit by sponsor-
ing the production and distribution of amulets to soldiers and villagers in the affected
areas. Enterprising monks began manufacturing amulets on a large scale to raise funds
for constructingwatt buildings and schools. Among the most popular were amulets pro-
duced by Luang Phor Khoon, who was emerging as the most famous forest monk of the
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 23 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 237
era. The price of his amulets soared in 1993 when survivors of two disasters, a factory
fire and a hotel collapse, publicly attributed their fortune to their Luang Phor Khoon
amulets (Pattana 2012, ch.5; Jackson 1999). The popularity of amulets reached another
stage in 2006–7 when a particular physical form, known as Jatukam-Ramathep, was no
longer tied to a particular origin but effectively “franchised”30) for production at many
different places which competed by adding value in production materials and methods and
by price-cutting, creating a brief marketing frenzy (Pattana 2012, ch.7; Reynolds 2011).
Conclusion: Protection, Power, and the Buddha
In premodern Siam, seeking protection against danger was a key organizing principle of
belief, ritual, education, and social structure. Protection was the main (though not sole)
benefit of a vast range of devices and techniques culled from various traditions and
described collectively as “knowledge.” The exchange of labor (or other services) for
protection lay at the basis of thesakdina hierarchy and other forms of patronage. The
ability to provide protection was partly a function of ascribed status, but also a skill gained
through education and asceticism. The provision of protection was very much a male
preserve.
The development of the lore of protection has a long but largely invisible history.
There is some connection back to early Indic tradition, particularly that represented by
the Atharva Veda, evident in the survival of the term athan as well as the similarity
between the principles and devices found in that text and in Thai lore. The belief in
supernatural power developed by ascetic practice, as well as belief in the role of spirits
as the moving forces behind natural processes, are two other key elements of lore. What
is striking is the way that these three elements are combined. An adept who practices
self-mastery can convoke the spirits and activate the latent power of special substances.
Yantra are the most prominent device in KCKPP perhaps because of their ability to accom-
modate a range of techniques of power—the use of special substances in manufacture;
the depiction of divine beings, powerful animals, magic numbers, and verbal formulas in
the designs; the ascetic discipline required for manufacture; and the use of ritual for
“activation.” Yantra are assemblies of power.
30) An earlier and more limited form of such “franchising” emerged around amulets named after Khun
Phaen (although they depict a Buddha in the usual way, not Khun Phaen). The originals were first
named after the Suphanburi watt where they were made but later enterprisingly renamed as “Khun
Phaen amulets,” after which other production sites appropriated the same branding tactic. The
Suphanburi National Museum has an extensive display.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 24 ---
Kyoto University
238 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
Between the era of KCKPP and the present, this wide range of devices has largely
been replaced by one form, the Buddha amulet.31) In part this is because other forms
have suffered a decline in popularity. A businessman can wear several amulets concealed
under his shirt or in his pockets, but would probably feel ill-at-ease sporting a shirt dyed
with yantra, a phrajiatt bandanna round his neck, a phirott ring of plaited cotton on his
finger, apalat khik wooden phallus dangling from his belt, a tattoo visible over his collar,
a small buffalo charm or phakhawam carried in his mouth, and his lips smeared with
beeswax.32)
The form of the modern amulet seems to have evolved as a marriage between the
votive tablet and the takrut, a yantra strung on a cord. It grew in popularity very gradu-
ally over a century and a half. The amulet incorporates many elements of earlier devices,
particularly the use of powder made from powerful substances, and the need to be made
by a powerful adept and “activated” by ritual.
The rise of the amulet at a time when other devices were falling out of favor attests
to the continuing importance of protection. But there is another important aspect of the
story.
None of the protective devices found in KCKPP feature an image of the Buddha.
Excerpts from Buddhist texts were used in the composition of yantra and in the ritual of
activation, and some disciples of the Buddha also feature in the imagery of yantra, but
this explicitly Buddhist contribution is a rather small part of the lore inKCKP. Of course,
“seeking the refuge of the Triple Gem” is a fundamental concept of the liturgy. The
Buddha is invoked as a source of protection in early Buddhist texts, and has probably
always been prominent in protective rituals of the court. But in the popular practice
portrayed inKCKP, the Buddha as image or voice is noticeably absent. With the rise of
the amulet, the Buddha has been transformed into the primary force of the protection
once sought from many other sources in popular tradition. Production of amulets is now
virtually monopolized by thewatt and is a major part of the laity’s interaction with thewat.
The process of producing amulets has been elaborated with the ritual paraphernalia of
Buddhism—sacred threads, sutta chants, holy water—to a far greater extent than the
production of protective devices described in KCKP. The chants which finally “activate”
31) Some modern amulets contain the same kind of unusual substances found inKCKP, such as mer-
cury, cat’s eye, or splinters of ivory, rather than the Buddha. Some feature famous monks, Hindu
gods, or royal figures. Yet the vast majority have an image of the Buddha.
32) These items have not disappeared, but their usage is now much more limited than the Buddha
amulet. Phrajiatt bandanas are often distributed to soldiers along with amulets, and are worn by
boxers. Palat khik are often carried discreetly. A few adepts still use a wide range of the devices
found in KCKP; see for example the famous policeman, Khun Phan, brilliantly analyzed by Craig
Reynolds (2011).
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 25 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 239
a modern amulet invoke the power of the Buddha alone, whereas the parallel ceremonies
inKCKPP call on every possible variant of spirit and every known deity of the Indic tradition.
Some “reformists” decry amulets as antithetical to the Buddhist emphasis on the
individual’s progress towards spiritual perfection “because protection and good fortune
result from power developed through meditative and moral discipline” (Cook 2012, 37).
But as Cook demonstrates, others argue that most people are only a small way along the
path to perfection and can be helped in the short term by wearing devices which are
instilled with the power of an adept further along the path. Besides, amulets and other
protective devices are often believed to be only effective or more effective if the wearer
observes good moral practice—an idea not found inKCKP. In this modern rationalization,
the inner power of the seeker and the instilled power of the device are not contradictory
but complementary, based on a single ideology of protection and power.
In short, compared to the era of KCKP, in ritual and ideology the Buddha now has a
much larger role in the provision of protection, and the provision of protection has a much
larger role in popular Buddhism.
Accepted: July 27, 2012
Acknowledgements
The illustrations in this article are by Muangsing Janchai. Thanks to two referees for very useful
comments and advice, and also to Craig Reynolds, Joanna Cook, Pattana Kitiarsa, Trasvin Jittidecharak,
and Chalong Soontravanich.
References
Akin Rabibhadana. 1996. The Organization of Thai Society in the Early Bangkok Period 1782–1873.
Bangkok: Amarin.
Baker, Chris; and Pasuk Phongpaichit, trans. and eds. 2010. The Tale of Khun Chang Khun Phaen. 2
vols. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Becchetti, Catherine. 1991. Le mystère dans les lettres [Mystery in writing]. Bangkok: Edition des
Cahiers de France.
Bizot, François. 1988. Les traditions de la pabbajja en Asie du Sud-East. Recherches sur le bouddhisme
Khmer, iv [The traditions of the pabbajja in Southeast Asia. Research on Khmer Buddhism, iv].
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
―. 1981. Notes sur les yantras bouddhiques d’Indochine [Notes on Buddhist yantra in Indochina].
In Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R. A. Stein, Vol.1, edited by Michael Strickmann, pp.155–
191. Brussels: Institute Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises.
―. 1976. Le figuier a cinq branches: Recherche sur le bouddhisme Khmerr[The five-armed image:
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 26 ---
Kyoto University
240 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
Research on Khmer Buddhism]. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Bunce, Frederick W. 2001. The Yantras of Deities and Their Numerological Foundations: An Iconographic
Consideration. New Delhi: DK Printworld.
Chalong Soontravanich. 2013. The Regionalization of Local Buddhist Saints: Amulets, Crime and Vio-
lence in Post-World War II Thai Society. Sojourn 28(2): 179–215.
―. 2005. Buddhist Amulet Culture in Thailand and Its Rise to Supremacy. Unpublished paper
presented at Sophia-AGLOS Symposium, Tokyo, October 14, 2005.
Cook, Joanna. 2012. Power, Protection and Perfectibility: Aspiration and Materiality in Thailand. In
Southeast Asian Perspectives on Power, edited by Liana Chua, Joanna Cook, Nicholas Long, and Lee
Wilson, pp.37–50. London and New York: Routledge.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Fic, Victor. 2003. The Tantra: Its Origins, Theories and Diffusion to Nepal, Tibet, Mongolia, Japan and
Indonesia. New Delhi: Abhinav.
Hanks, Lucian. 1962. Merit and Power in the Thai Social Order. American Anthropologistt 64(6):
1247–1261.
Hora Burajanโหรา บุร่จารย.์์ 2006. Tamra Phrommachat chabab sombunตาํรา พรหมชาติ ฉบบั สมบรู ณ์์[Phrom-
machat, the complete manual]. Bangkok: Liangchiang.
Ishii, Yoneo. 1986. Sangha, State, and Society: Thai Buddhism in History, translated by Peter Hawkes.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Jackson, Peter A. 1999. The Enchanting Spirit of Thai Capitalism: The Cult of Luang Phor Khoon and
the Post-Modernization of Thai Buddhism. South East Asia Research 7(1): 5–60.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel. 1987. Etude historique et critique du livre de Simon de La Loubère “Du Royaume
de Siam,” Paris 1691 [Historical and critical study of Simon de La Loubère’s Kingdom of Siam, Paris
1691]. Paris: Editions recherche sur les civilizations.
Kanchanakphan (Sanga Kanchanakphan, Khun Wichitmatra); and Nai Tamra na Mueangg Tai (Plueang na
Nakhon)กาญจนาคพนั ธุ์์(สง่า กาญจนาคพนั ธุ,์ ขนุ วจิ ิตรมาตรา),และ นายตาํรา ณ เมืองใต ้้(เปล้ืองณนคร). [1961]
2002. Lao rueang Khun Chang Khun Phaenเลา่เรื่องขนุ ชา้งขนุ แผน[Telling the story of KCKP]. Bang-
kok: Amarin.
La Loubère, Simon de. 1793. A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam, translated by A. P. Gen.
London.
Lagirarde, François. 2003. Devotional Diversification in Thai Monasteries: The Worship of the Fat
Monk. InThe Buddhist Monastery: A Cross-Cultural Survey, edited by Pierre Pichard and François
Lagirarde, pp.149–168. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
―. 2000. Gavampati et la tradition des quatre-vingts disciples du Buddha: Texte et iconographie
du Laos et de Thaïlande [Gavampati and the tradition of the 80 disciples of the Buddha: Text and
iconography from Laos and Thailand]. Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orientt87(1): 57–78.
Lawan Chotamara ลาวณั ย ์โชตามระ. 1984. Chiwit chao krung muea khrueng satthawat ma laeoชีวติ ชาวกรุงเมอื่
คร่ึงศตวรรษมาแลว้ [Life of Bangkokians half a century ago]. Bangkok: Phrae Phittaya.
McDaniel, Justin. 2011. The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk:Practicing Buddhism in Modern
Thailand. New York: Columbia University Press.
Michaels, Axel. 2004. Hinduism: Past and Present. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Pattana Kitiarsa. 2012. Mediums, Monks, and Amulets: Thai Popular Buddhism. Chiang Mai: Silkworm
Books.
Pattaratorn Chirapravati, M.L. 2011. Divination au Royaume de Siam: Le corps, la guerre, le destin
[Divination in the Kingdom of Siam: Body, war, fate]. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
―. 1997. Votive Tablets in Thailand: Origin, Styles, and Uses. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 27 ---
Kyoto University
Protection and Power in Siam 241
Reynolds, Craig J. Forthcoming. Magic and Buddhism. In The Buddhist World, edited by John Powers.
London: Routledge.
―. 2011. Rural Male Leadership, Religion and the Environment in Thailand’s Mid-South,
1920s–1960s. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies42 (1): 39–57.
Ruth, Richard A. 2011. In Buddha’s Company: Thai Soldiers in the Vietnam War. Honolulu: University
of Hawai‘i Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2008. Origins of Yoga and Tantra: Indic Religion to the Thirteenth Century. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Sharma, Narendra Nath. 1979. Kalpacintāāāmanih of Damodar Bhatta, an Ancient Treatise on Tantra,
Yantra, and Mantra. Delhi: Eastern Book Publishers.
Srisakra Vallibhotama ศรีศกั ร วลั ลิโภดม. 1994. Phrakhrueang (rang): Phutthabucha rue phutthapanitพระ
เครื่อง (ร่าง) พทุ ธบชู าหรือพทุ ธพานิชย์[Buddha amulets: Buddhist worship or Buddhist commerce]. S inlapa
watthanatham [Art and culture magazine] 15 (3): 81–82.
Stengs, Irene. 1998. Collectible Amulets: The Triple Fetishes of Modern Thai Men. Etnofoorr 11(1):
55–76.
Strong, John S. 2005. Gavampati in Pali and Sanskrit Texts: The Indian Background to a Southeast
Asian Cult. Paper presented at the Fifteenth Conference of the International Association of Bud-
dhist, SOAS, London, August 30, 2005.
Swearer, Donald M. 2004. Becoming the Buddha: The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. 1984. The Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets: A Study in
Charisma, Hagiography, Sectarianism and Millennial Buddhism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
―. 1976. World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand
against a Historical Background. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
―. 1970. Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in North-East Thailand. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Tamra phichai songkhram chabap ratchakan thi 1ตาํราพชิ ยั สงครามฉบบั รัชกาลที่1 [Manual of victorious war-
fare, First Reign edition]. 2002. Committee for Memorial Books and Records for Celebration of
the King’s Age Equalling that of King Rama I in 2000. Bangkok: Ruansin.
Terwiel, B.J. 1975. Monks and Magic: An Analysis of Religious Ceremonies in Central Thailand. Scan-
dinavian Institute of Asian Studies Monograph Series 24. London: Curzon Press.
Textor, Robert B. 1973. Patterns of Worship: A Formal Analysis of the Supernatural in a Thai Village. 4
vols. Human Relations Area Files, New Haven, Connecticut.
―. 1960. An Inventory of Non-Buddhist Supernatural Objects in a Central Thai Village. Ph.D.
dissertation, Cornell University.
Thep Sarikabut เทพย ์สาริกบตุ ร. n.d. Phra khamphi phrawetพระคมั ภรี ์พระเวท[Manuals of lore]. 6 vols. Bang-
kok: Utsahakam kan phim.
Turton, Andrew. 1991. Invulnerability and Local Knowledge. In Thai Constructions of Knowledge, edited
by Manas Chitkasem and Andrew Turton, pp.155–182. London: SOAS.
Whitaker, Jarrod L. 2004. Ritual Power, Social Prestige, and Amulets (mani) in the Atharvaveda. In
The Vedas: Texts, Language and Ritual, edited by Arlo Griffiths and Jan E.M. Houlson. Groningen:
Egbert Forsten.
Wisandarunakon, Luang (An Sarikabut) หลวงวศิ าลดรุณกร (อ้นั สาริกบุตร). [1965] 1997. Khamphi horasat
thai mattrathan chabap sombunคมั ภีร์โหราศาสตร์ไทยฉบบั สมบรู ณ์์[Standard Thai astrology, complete
edition]. 2nd ed. Bangkok: Sinlapasan.
Witney, William Dwight. 1905. Atharva-Veda Samhita. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 28 ---
Kyoto University
242 C. BAKERR and PASUK P.
Wolters, O.W. 2008. Early Southeast Asia: Selected Essays, edited by Craig J. Reynolds. Ithaca: Cornell
University Southeast Asia Program.
Wood, W.A.R. 1965. Consul in Paradise: Sixty-eight Years in Siam. London: Souvenir Press.
Yanchot, Achan Hon (Chayamongkhon Udomsap) ญานโชติ, อาจารยโ์ หร (ชยั มงคล อดุ มทรัพย)์์์. 1995. Khamphi
sayasat chabap sombunคมั ภีร์ไสยศาสตร์ ฉบบั สมบรู ณ์[The complete manual of supernaturalism]. Bang-
kok: Sinlapa Bannakhan.
NII-Electronic Library Service