--- Page 1 ---
Cracow Indological Studies 
vol. XVI (2014) 
10.12797/CIS.16.2014.16.03
Andrea Acri 
a.acri81@gmail.com
(Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre, ISEAS)
The Śaiva Atimārga in the Light of Niśvāsaguhya 12.1–22ab*
Summary:  My essay investigates a short passage of the Guhyasūtra—the longest, most 
detailed, and arguably youngest of the  ‘Sūtras’ constituting the  Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, 
being the earliest Śaiva Tantra known to us. This is formed by verses 1–22ab of Paṭala 
12, which single out the soteriological means and goals specific to such scantily docu-
mented Śaiva groups as the Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas, the followers of the Pramāṇaśāstras, 
the Kārukas, and the Vaimalas. By categorizing such groups according to their emphasis 
on conduct, initiation, or gnosis, the text presents a taxonomy of the Atimārga as seen from 
the perspective of Mantramārga Śaivism. Having compared, and contrasted, this model 
to analogous ones found scattered over the extant literature of the Śaiva Mantramārga, 
I tackle the issue as to whether those taxonomies reflect actual social realities or are the result 
of post hoc systematising attempts by medieval authors.
Keywords:  Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Guhyasūtra, Svacchandatantra, Raurava, Pāśu­pata­
sūtra, Pañcārthabhāṣya, Ratnaṭīkā, Sadyojyotis, Rāmakaṇṭha, Kṣemarāja, Pāñcārthika, 
Pāśupata, Lākula, Kāruka, Vaimala, Pramāṇa, Atimārga, Mantramārga, Alepaka.
Introduction
Surviving in  a  single 9th-century Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript, 
the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā is arguably the earliest Śaiva Tantra known 
*	 This contribution is largely based on a much earlier draft presented 
at the ‘Workshop on early Śaivism: The testimony of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā’, 
held at the Pondicherry Centre of the École française d’Extrême-Orient in Jan-
uary 1–15, 2007. I wish to thank Dominic Goodall for inviting me to that 
Workshop, as well as subsequent ones on the Niśvāsa.


--- Page 2 ---
8
Andrea Acri
to us. While its five sections or ‘Sūtras’—the Mukha-, Mūla-, Naya-, 
Uttara-, and Guhya-sūtras—appear to  have been composed at  dif-
ferent times, the  oldest among them, the  Nayasūtra, has been ten-
tatively dated back to  between 450 and 550 AD.1 Because of its 
antiquity, and because it describes idiosyncratic doctrines and prac-
tices that are rarely—if  at  all—accounted for in  other scriptures, 
the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā is regarded as a source of primary importance 
for our understanding of early Śaivism. It provides us with a precious 
testimony of the ‘formative’ phase of the Mantramārga, i.e. an early 
form of Saiddhāntika Tantric Śaivism, as well as the earlier Atimārga 
matrix, i.e. Pāñcārthika Pāśupata and ‘Lākula’ Śaivism, from which 
Mantramārga Śaivism has evolved.2
Unlike the majority of Siddhāntatantras known to us, the Niśvāsa­
tattva­saṃ­hitā displays a keen, first-hand awareness of the cosmolo-
gies, doctrines and practices of the  Śaiva Atimārga. In  so  doing, 
it reveals a direct dependence on the textual corpus of the latter tradi-
tion—the greatest part of which is irretrievably lost to us. As shown 
by Sanderson (Sanderson 2001:28, Sanderson 2006:166–175), 
long portions of Paṭala 4 of the  Niśvāsamukha  and Paṭalas 3–7 of 
the Niśvāsaguhya incorporate descriptions of the Lākula cosmic ladder 
of worlds and Rudras (bhuvanādhvan), which are likely to have been 
borrowed from a lost Atimārga source. Furthermore, a detailed account 
of the ascetic observances of the Pāśupatas (pāśupatavrata) is given 
in Niśvāsamukha 4.69–97, a section that virtually paraphrases large 
blocks of the Pāśupatasūtra (henceforth PS.).3
1	 See Goodall and Isaacson 2007:6.  Besides the  codex unicus 
(NGMPP A 41/14 [here Ms]) there exist two 20th-century Nepalese apographs 
(NAK 5-2406, NGMPP A 159/18 [here K], and Wellcome Library MS Indic 
δ 41 [here W]), which are often helpful to reconstruct the missing akṣaras 
at the worn-out edges of the original manuscript.
2	 On the categories of Atimārga and Mantramārga Śaivism, and their 
characterization in the Mukhasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (henceforth 
Niśvāsamukha), cf. especially Sanderson 2006:158–160, 1988:664–667.
3	 Cf. Goudriaan and Gupta 1981:35; Sanderson 2006:158.


--- Page 3 ---
9
The Śaiva Atimārga…
The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā shows a tendency to intelligently incor-
porate doctrinal elements from the competing, albeit closely related, 
Atimārga systems and accommodate them as ‘relative truths’ existing 
within the  superior doctrinal edifice of the  Mantramārga.4 The  ele-
ments of continuity with the earlier Atimārga tradition found in several 
parts of the text indicate that the shift from Atimārga to Mantramārga 
Śaivism was still ‘in the making’. This status quo in turn suggests that 
the text was composed in a historical period in which the traditions 
of the Atimārga and Mantramārga shared several elements in common 
and were just beginning to  differentiate themselves as  distinct, and 
competing, systems of salvation within the Śaiva stream (śaivamārga).
In this essay I shall investigate a short, yet remarkable, passage 
of the  Guhyasūtra5 (henceforth Niśvāsaguhya) that has thus far not 
been discussed in print.6 This is formed by verses 1–22ab of Paṭala 12, 
which single out the soteriological means and goals specific to such 
scantily-documented Śaiva groups as  the  Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas, 
the  followers of the  Pramāṇaśāstras (known variously as  Lākulas, 
Mahāvratas, Mahāpāśupatas), the Kārukas (seemingly encompassed by 
the Pramāṇa system), and the Vaimalas. By categorizing such groups 
according to their emphasis on religious observance (caryā), initiation 
(dīkṣā), or gnosis (jñāna), the text presents a typology of the Atimārga 
as envisaged by the overarching Mantramārga Śaivism.
My main concern here is to show that some of the verses in ques-
tion display themes that are directly traceable to Pāśupata sources, and, 
4	 What is probably the earliest evidence of this hierarchical system 
encompassing different Śaiva streams is found in the Niśvāsamukha, where 
the five streams Laukika, Vaidika, Ādhyātmika, Atimārga and Mantramārga 
are arranged as if having been revealed from the five faces of Sadāśiva—
the  Mantramārga being the  superior one insofar as  it  springs forth from 
the upturned face of Īśāna (cf. Sanderson 2006:156–157; infra, pp. 31, 44).
5	 This is  the  longest, most detailed, and apparently youngest of 
the Sūtras constituting the Niśvāsa (cf. Goodall and Isaacson 2011:125).
6	 With the  exception of 17cd–18, which is  edited and paraphrased 
in Sanderson 2001:30, fn. 32.


--- Page 4 ---
10
Andrea Acri
even more importantly, that some of the elliptic statements scattered 
over the verses offer revealing information on the self-perception of 
the Mantramārga with respect to Atimārga Śaivism. This will hope-
fully add to the understanding of a poorly documented historical stage 
of the Śaiva religion.
Overview of Niśvāsaguhya, Paṭala 12
The 58 verses of Paṭala 12 (folios 87r6–88r1 of the Nepalese ms.) pri-
marily deal with mantras.7 The  verses may be  subdivided into two 
thematic units. The  unit dedicated to  practical aspects of ‘mantric 
technology’ starts from verse 30, after Nandikeśvara mentions Devī’s 
protracted breath (v. 22)8 and her pledge to Śiva to provide an exhaus-
tive account of the Brahmamantras (vv. 23–25). The Lord does fulfill 
her request by explaining the placement of the phonemes of the San-
skrit syllabary (mātr̥kā) in a maṇḍala enthroning Sadāśiva (30–44); 
the  combination of ‘male’ and ‘female’ syllables (yonis and bījas, 
i.e. consonantal and vocalic phonemes), as well as more complex clus-
ters, to realize various kinds of supernatural powers (45–49); the fruits 
of mantras, and the five aṅgas or mantric limbs of Śiva (50–58).
The first unit, up to verse 21, is concerned with a mantric subject 
insofar as it deals with the five Brahmamantras. However, its main 
focus is  a  characterization of the  Śaiva (i.e.  Mantramārga) system 
as stemming from the mantric body of Sadāśiva, from which lower 
divisions (i.e. the Atimārga) also spring up, and which form a constitu-
tive part thereof. The five Brahmamantras themselves function in a way 
that epitomizes the continuity-cum-change between the former tradi-
tion and the latter: they are central and pervasive in the cult of Atimārga 
7	 The Paṭalas that immediately precede and follow it also deal with mant-
ric subjects: Paṭala 11 details a version of the Vyomavyāpimantra, whereas Paṭala 
13 provides practical instructions for the extraction of the Pañcabrahmamantras.
8	 This will constitute the pretext for illustrating a nirvacaṇa of niśvāsa 
(‘exhalation’, as well as the title of the Tantra) in verses 25–29.


--- Page 5 ---
11
The Śaiva Atimārga…
Śaivism, and yet survive—alongside other even more important mantras, such 
as the Nāvātman—in the doctrine and practice of Mantramārga Śaivism.9
Hereafter I present an edition and translation of verses 1–22ab,10 
which I have subdivided into five thematic sub-units. Each sub-unit 
is followed by a commentary where I discuss the points of interest 
in the verses and elaborate on the Śaiva groups they appear to refer to.
Niśvāsaguhya 12.1–6: The Atimārga’s Pañcabrahmamantras
r̥ṣ[[ir uvāca]]
pañcānān tu pavitrāṇām uddhāraṃ11 kathayasva me /
tvaṃ vettā śivaśāstrasya12 bhagavan nandikeśvara // 1
yathā yogañ ca yāgañ ca ekaikasya pr̥thakpr̥thak13 /
9	 The  five Brahmamantras constitute the  early Mantric substratum 
common to both Atimārga and Mantramārga Śaivism; yet, it is the earliest 
sources that devote to them the highest attention. For instance, each one of 
the five sections making up the PS. is closed by an invocation to the aspect of 
Śiva characterized in the respective Brahmamantra. The five mantras remain 
central in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, especially in Niśvāsaguhya 12–15.
10	 The edition presented here is largely based on the e-text prepared by 
Goodall et al., which collates the Nepalese manuscript (Ms) and its two apographs 
(K and W). Here I only use the original Ms, and occasionally supplement the read-
ings from the apographs when useful to fill gaps in the palm-leaf manuscripts 
(marked by cruxes †…†), enclosing them within double square brackets [[ ]]. 
Triangular brackets < > enclose conjectural restorations of a portion of text that 
has been lost because of manuscript damage. Sporadic attempts have been made 
to emend the non-Pāṇinian, aiśa-register of Sanskrit characterizing these verses 
(and the whole Niśvāsa-corpus). Emendations already appearing in the e-text of 
the preliminary edition are marked as ‘(e-text)’. The appended translation was first 
produced during reading classes held at the former Kern Institute of Leiden Uni-
versity from September throughout December 2006, attended by Arlo Griffiths, 
Dory Heilijgers-Seelen, Raju Bakker and myself, and then thoroughly revised by 
myself in the course of 2012. Any flaws are, of course, mine alone.
11	 Em. (e-text); uddhāra Ms.
12	 Em. (e-text); śivāśāstrasya Ms post corr.; śivāśāstrāsya ante corr.
13	 Em. (e-text); pr̥thakapr̥thak Ms.


--- Page 6 ---
12
Andrea Acri
samudāyena ācakṣva sandigdhaṃ niścitaṃ vada // 2
nandikeśvara uvāca 
pañcamantramayaṃ devaṃ14 pañcamantraśarīriṇam15 /
pañcamantra †…† mantra †…† sadāśivam // 3
yat tayātrapadaṃ †haradi…† / 
pramāṇe vaimale caiva śaive ca bahudhā sthitam // 4
paramantreṣu yat sādhyaṃ pañcārthajñānaniścitam16 /
pañcamantrā viditvā tu vidhānaṃ17 pratipadyate // 5
dīkṣā jñānañ ca caryā ca mantrabhūtivinirṇayam / 
mantrabhūtārthacaryā18 ca rudrasāyojyagāminī // 6
The R̥ṣi spoke:
Please tell me about the extraction of the five Pavitras. You are the knower 
of the Śaiva doctrine, o Lord Nandikeśvara. (1)
Explain to me the method and the ritual application19 of each one individu-
ally and collectively. Make clear what is doubtful. (2)
Nandikeśvara spoke:
The god made of five mantras, embodied in five mantras †…† mantras †…† 
Sadāśiva. (3)
That through which this plain, found multifariously in the Pramāṇa, the Vai-
mala and the Śaiva [systems] †haradi …†.20 (4)
What is [still] to be realized in other mantras, is [already] accomplished 
through the Pañcārthajñāna. Upon knowing the five mantras, the ­prescribed 
regimen is achieved.21 (5)
Initiation, gnosis and religious observance, certainty about the supernatural 
14	 Em. (e-text); deva Ms.
15	 Ms post corr.; pañcamantraśaṃrīriṇam Ms ante corr.
16	 Em. (one the basis of the apographs); pañcārthaṃ jñānaniścitam Ms, e-text.
17	 Em. (e-text); vidhāna Ms.
18	 I take this to mean mantrabhūtyarthacaryā.
19	 This will constitute the main topic of Paṭala 14. Cf. 14.3: pañcānāṃ 
tu pavitrāṇāṃ yāgāṃ vakṣyāmi suvrate / yaṃ yaṣṭvā ca japitvā ca āśuste 
[i.e. āśu te?] sarvakāmadāḥ //.
20	 Hara here is  most unlikely to  be  a  vocative (‘O Hara’ [=Śiva]) 
as Nandikeśvara is reporting the speech of Śiva; in any event, the reconstruc-
tion of these syllables is uncertain.
21	 An alternative translation could be the following: ‘Whatever might 
be  accomplished with other mantras, is  certain [to  be  attainable] through 


--- Page 7 ---
13
The Śaiva Atimārga…
powers of the [five Brahma]mantras, and religious observance with a view 
to [obtaining] the power of the [five Brahma]mantras lead to unity with 
Rudra. (6)
The five opening verses set the agenda of the topics that will be treated 
in the rest of the passage (up to verse 22ab): the extraction of the Pañ-
cabrahmamantras and their relationship with the  different traditions 
constituting the Śaiva stream.
vv.  3–4:  The  five Brahmamantras, which form the  body of 
Śiva,22 are here implicitly linked to the subdivisions of the Ati­mārga, 
viz.  the  Pāñcārthika (i.e.  Pāśupata, denoted by the  term pañcārtha­
jñāna),23 the  ‘Pramāṇa system’ (including the  Lākulas/Mahāvratas 
and, seemingly, the Kārukas too),24 and the Vaimala. The fifth mem-
ber is  ­represented by the  Śaiva stream, understood in  the  narrow 
sense of (early) Saiddhāntika Śaivism. The five Brahmamantras play 
[the  mantras of] the  Pañcārtha system. Upon  knowing the  five mantras, 
the method for using them is set forth [in the ritual section that follows]’.
22	 The idea that these mantras are connected with the faces (pañca­
vaktra) or aspects of Sadāśiva, and make up His five-limbed mantric body 
(pañcamantratanu), is ubiquitous in Saiddhāntika texts: cf. Svacchandatan­
tra  11.43e—45b; Niśvāsamukha  3.191c, 4.40c–12b, 4.130, 4.133c–134b; 
Mr̥gendratantra Kriyāpāda 8.78—79 and Vr̥tti thereof; Mataṅgapārameśvara 
Vidyāpāda, Adhikāratattvaprakaraṇa 14–15.
23	 The term Pañcārthajñāna is used in the Saṃskāravidhi (54, cf. Acha-
rya 2007:42–43, fn. 95) to indicate the seminal scripture of the Pāśupatas, 
i.e. the Pāśupatasūtra. As Peter Bisschop (2009*) notes, this usage is also 
attested in a newly recovered manuscript of the Pañcārthabhāṣya. On the other 
hand, the author of the Ratnaṭīkā apparently uses that term to refer to the philo-
sophical system based on the Sūtras along with the Pañcārthabhāṣya (cf. 1.1ab, 
p. 3 l. 12; 1. 3, p. 5 l. 28; 1.5cd, p. 9 l. 4). For the meaning of -jñāna as ‘scrip-
ture’ in Tantric texts, cf. Goodall 1998:xxxvi and 2004:139 fn. 5.
24	 The Kārukas are mentioned infra (v. 18b), and indeed we need them 
in order to fill all the slots of the fivefold Śaiva revelation. Perhaps here they were 
understood as being subsumed under the ‘Pramāṇa system’ (like the Lākulas/
Mahāvratas, cf. Sanderson 2006:169–177 and Bakker 2000:4–7), or their name 
occurred in the missing portion of the line due to a lacuna in the Ms.


--- Page 8 ---
14
Andrea Acri
an important role in each one of the above groups, being the basis 
of their practices of visualization and worship, and they were also 
employed in the ritual of initiation.25
v.  5:  The  knowledge of the  Brahmamantras leads to  vidhāna 
(‘method’, ‘rule’), which here could mean something to the effect of 
‘prescribed regimen’ (of the Pāñcārthika Pāśupata system).26 The point 
seems to be that the five pavitras (‘purifying formulas’, a synonym for 
Brahmamantras)27 as taught in the Pāñcārtha system are (even from 
the  vantage point of the  Mantramārga) superior to, or in  any event 
as effective as, the mantras taught by different systems.
v. 6: dīkṣā, jñāna and caryā are the three fundamental ‘ingredi-
ents’ in the ‘recipe’ leading to salvation according to both Atimārga and 
Mantramārga Śaivism. The factor that differentiates one group from 
the other is the emphasis laid on one or the other element(s) at the expense 
of the other(s). The goal of unity with Rudra (rudrasāyojya, equi­valent 
to rudrasāyujya) is a feature of the Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas—for accord-
ing to this system Rudra is the supreme deity and highest principle 
of the universe, standing at the top of the twenty-five tattvas defined 
by Sāṅkhya ontology—and, more generally, of Atimārga groups such 
as the followers of the Pramāṇas, which added an extended hierarchy 
of Rudras and cosmic stations.
Niśvāsaguhya 12.7–8: The Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas
bhikṣā caryā yamādiś ca bhasmasnānajapakriyā / 
aṣṭāṅgabrahmacaryañ ca ā dehapatanā<d eva>28 // 7
25	 Cf.  e.g.,  Niśvāsamukha 4.88 (discussed in  Sanderson 2006:190), 
attesting to the central role of these mantras in the Lākula initiation.
26	 Compare the vidhi mentioned in Pāñcārthika Pāśupata texts, which 
is often understood as a synonym of caryā, the practice of the prescribed regi-
men or ‘good conduct’ comprising the observances of bhasmasnāna, etc.
27	 For the pañcapavitras as pañcabrahmas, cf. Ratnaṭīkā ad kārikā 1.7 
(p. 17 l. 27, p. 18 l. 14, p. 19 l. 1).
28	 Conj.;  ā dehapatanā<ntikam> conj.  Sanderson (e-text). I  opt 
for the  ablative construction ā dehapatanād since it  is  attested in  both 


--- Page 9 ---
15
The Śaiva Atimārga…
<ṣaḍaṅ>genopahāreṇa triṣkālam29 anuvarttinā /
yajñadānakriyādīni30 manasā vinikalpayet // 8
The religious observance31 [of the Pāśupatas is] mendicancy and the prin-
cipal commandments etc., the ritual of bathing in ash and muttering, 
as well as the eightfold celibacy until the end of the body. (7) 
Attending32 the three times of the day through the sixfold offerings, 
[the Pāśupata practitioner] should mentally carry out the acts of sacrifice, 
giving, and so forth. (8)
Among the systems mentioned in vv. 4–5, the Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas 
are dealt with first. As such, they stand at the bottom of the Śaiva hier-
archy as the lowest category of practitioners, whose practices are per se 
valid, yet not powerful enough to grant the level of liberation accorded 
to the followers of more advanced Śaiva doctrines.
The  account shows a  keen awareness of the  Pāśupata doc-
trinal milieu as  it  describes a  set of observances and doctrinal 
items that correspond to  those laid out in  the  original sources that 
have survived, namely the  PS. with  the  commentary attributed 
to  Kauṇḍinya (Pañcārthabhāṣya), and the  commentary (Ratnaṭīkā), 
attributed to  Bhāsarvajña (or Haradattācārya), on  the  Gaṇakārikā. 
It is therefore reasonable to suggest that the author of this section of 
the Niśvāsaguhya either had a first-hand knowledge of the above men-
tioned texts, or in any event was sufficiently conversant with the philo-
sophical and soteriological tenets of the Pāñcārthika system as they 
filtered into his milieu.
v.  7: The  items enumerated here are part of the  curriculum of 
the Pāśupata adept in the first stage of his ascetic career, as described 
the Pañcārtha­bhāṣya and Ratnaṭīkā (cf. infra, p. 16), and is also common-
ly encountered in the Epics and Purāṇas (however, it is slightly unmetrical 
as the metre requires a penultimate short syllable here).
29	 Ms. has tr̥ṣkālam, as at many other places in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā.
30	 Em.; Ms seems to read yajñādānakriyādīni.
31	 For caryā as ‘prescribed regimen’ (vidhi) of the Pāśupatas, cf. my 
fn. 26 and my comments to this verse below.
32	 I interpret anuvarttinā as an aiśa nominative singular (m.c.?).


--- Page 10 ---
16
Andrea Acri
in Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtras 1.8–9. The entire verse indeed echoes 
a passage of the Pañcārthabhāṣya (ad sūtra 5.30, p. 129 ll. 9–11) char-
acterizing that stage:
tatrādidharmā apy asya tāvad āyatane vasaty arthaḥ vr̥ttir bhaikṣyaṃ 
balam aṣṭāṅgaṃ brahmacaryam kriyāḥ snānahasitādyāḥ33 snānaṃ kaluṣā­
pohaḥ śuddhiḥ jñānāvāptiḥ akaluṣatvaṃ ca lābhā iti
The factors when he is in the first stage are as follows: the dwelling place 
is in a temple; the way of livelihood is alms; the power is the eightfold 
chastity, the actions are such as bathing (in ashes), laughter, etc.; the purity 
is the removal of impurity; the attainments are the attainment of know­
ledge and freedom from impurity. (Trans. Hara 2002:176)
—bhikṣā: This technical term may stand for the practice of beg-
ging for alms, i.e. bhaikṣyam, as outlined in several passages of 
Pañcārthabhāṣya and Ratnaṭīkā.34
—caryā: This term, along with kriyā and vidhi, is used in the sense 
of ‘proper ritual’ or ‘prescribed regimen’ in Pāśupata literature.
—yamādiś ca …  ā dehapatanā<d eva>: The  yamas or general 
commandment are an  integral part of the  Pāśupata observance. 
They number ten, including the five niyamas (as opposed to Sāṅkhya 
and Yoga, which separate the five yamas from the five niyamas). 
According to the Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 1.9 (p. 26 l. 7), the ten 
yamas should be practised at all times, for there is no cessation of 
them up to the time of death (ā dehapātād yamānāṃ na nivr̥ttir 
asti). An analogous view is found in the Ratnaṭīkā.35 This verse 
33	 Em. Hara (2002:176); sthāna° ed. 
34	 Cf., e.g., Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 1.2 (p. 8 l. 21) grāmādibhyo bhaikṣyavad 
bhasmārjanaṃ kartavyam; 1.9 (p. 31 l. 12) cāturvarṇyaṃ cared bhaikṣyam patitāṃs 
tu vivarjayet; 5.14 (p. 118  ll. 18–19) tac ca nagara­grāmādibhyo gr̥hād gr̥haṃ paryaṭa­
to bhakṣyabhojyādīnām anyatamaṃ yat prāpyate kr̥tānnādivacanād bhaikṣyam; 
Ratnaṭīkā ad kārikā 1.2 (p. 4 l. 20 to p. 5 l. 18).
35	 Cf. Ratnaṭīkā  ad kārikā 1.6cd (p.  17 l.  4): ā dehapātāt tatraivā­
nir­gacchatā stheyam ityayaṃ viśeṣaḥ […]; Yamaprakaraṇa v.  4, App. 


--- Page 11 ---
17
The Śaiva Atimārga…
seems to imply that not only the commandments, but the wider set 
of practices characterizing the Pāśupata observance, should be car-
ried out up to the practitioner’s death.
—bhasmasnānajapakriyā: Ash-bathing and muttering are distinc-
tively Pāśupata practices. The  two items are specifically linked 
to  the  Pāśupatas—whose highest goal is  the  cosmic station of 
Īśvara—in two passages of the Svacchandatantra:36
vrataṃ pāśupataṃ divyaṃ ye caranti jitendriyāḥ /
bhasmaniṣṭhā japadhyānās te vrajanty eśvaraṃ padam // 10.1169
japabhasmakriyāniṣṭhās te vrajanty aiśvaraṃ padam // 11.74cd
—aṣṭāṅgabrahmacarya:  The  ‘eightfold celibacy’, or ‘eightfold 
religious studentship’, is  a  technical term of the  Pāśupata sys-
tem. It appears in the Pañcārthabhāṣya (ad sūtra 1.9 and 5.30) 
and the Ratnaṭīkā (ad kārikā 1.3), where it is mentioned as a pre-
rogative of the Pāśupata adept in his first stage of ascetic practice. 
Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 1.9 presents a (seemingly incomplete) 
list enumerating the actions of ‘standing [in the presence of the mas-
ter]’ (utthāna), ‘rising from one’s seat [when he ­approaches]’ 
(pratyutthāna), ‘salute [him] respectfully’ (abhivādana), etc.37 
1 on Ratna­ṭīkā: daśaivādehapatanāt pañcārthe yogināṃ yamāḥ.
36	 Note, however, that verse 10.1169 is taken by Kṣemarāja as referring 
to the Lākulas (cf. infra, p. 25).
37	 Cf.  Pañcārthabhāṣya  ad sūtra 1.9 (p.  27 ll.  13–14): aṣṭāṅgaṃ 
brahmacaryaṃ […] tadyathā utthānapratyutthānābhivādanagurukārya­
hita­kārī // ‘The eightfold celibacy […] namely standing [in the presence of 
the master], rising from one’s seat [when he approaches], salute [him] respect-
fully, adoring the master, doing services [for him], […]’. The list enumer-
ates only three behaviors to be observed by the disciple, then continues with 
a  seemingly additional series of behaviours and qualities of the  disciple. 
This leads to the suspicion that a portion of text has gone missing between 
the first list and the second. Note that a series beginning with utthāna and 
pratyutthāna is regarded by the Ratnaṭīkā (on kārikā 1.7) as part of kriyā.


--- Page 12 ---
18
Andrea Acri
On the other hand, the same text ad sūtra 5.3038 refers to aṣṭāṅgaṃ 
brahmacaryam when defining the  item ‘power’ (bala)—a  view 
that is in harmony with the interpretation given by Ratnaṭīkā ad 
kārikā 1.3,39 which understands aṣṭāṅgabrahmacārya as  defin-
ing the eight intellectual qualities mentioned in connection with 
the power (bala) of devotion (bhakti), itself one of the eight vāsas 
(‘impregnating oneself with doctrine’ or ‘living by a teacher’).40
v. 8ab: The first pāda, <ṣaḍaṅ>genopahāreṇa, contains a clear refer-
ence to the sixfold Pāśupata regimen of worship during the first ascetic stage. 
The lacuna in the text may therefore be nicely filled accordingly. Here upahāra, 
‘offering’, functions as the standard technical term used in Pāśupata literature 
to denote the six acts of devotion to Rudra, namely (the offering of) laughter, 
song, dance, bellowing, adoration, and muttering of the five Brahmamantras.41 
The scriptural basis for such acts is the injunction found in PS. 1.8:
hasitagītanr̥ttahuḍukkāranamaskārajapyopahāreṇopatiṣṭhet42
One must serve with offering of laughter, song, dance, bellowing, inner 
worship and prayer.
The compound ṣaḍaṅgopahāra itself occurs in Ratnaṭīkā ad kārikā 1.7 
(p. 19 ll. 4–7), where it refers to the six acts:
38	 Quoted supra, p. 16.
39	 Cf. Ratnaṭīkā ad kārikā 1.3 (p. 6 ll. 9–10): yato balam aṣṭāṅgaṃ 
brahmacaryam ity asyāyam arthaḥ //, and further lines 11–15.
40	 Cf. Hara 1958:15, fn. 49. The eight intellectual qualities are grahaṇa, 
dhāraṇa, ūha, apoha, vijñāna, vacana, kriyā, and yathānyāyābhiniveśa.
41	 Compare, with some slight differences, Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa 40, 
1.11: nivedya nirmālyagandhahārī hāsagītavādanādyupahārān //. Bisschop 
and Griffiths (2003:327, fn.  58) suggest that nirmālyagandhadhārī could 
be a corruption or conscious revision for nirmālyaliṅgadhārī.
42	 °huḍuk conj. (compare Ratnaṭīkā p. 19 ll. 4–6 and Niśvāsamukha 
1.153b); °ḍuṃḍuṃ Ed. (probably a silent emendation of °huḍuk by the ­editor, 
as  suggested by Bisschop and Griffiths 2003:327, fn. 59); °huḍḍuṅ conj. 
Sanderson (2001:30, fn. 32); °huḍuṃ conj. Bisschop (2009*).


--- Page 13 ---
19
The Śaiva Atimārga…
dhyāyann īśaṃ hasitagītanr̥tyahuḍukkāranamaskārajapyaiḥ 
ṣaḍaṅgopahāraṃ bhagavan mahādeva yuṣmadanujñayā nirvartitavān 
aham avabhr̥thasnānaṃ ca kariṣyāmīty evaṃ nivedayet
Meditating upon the Lord, he should declare thus: ‘O Lord Mahādeva, 
with your consent I have performed the acts consisting of six parts, 
[namely] laughter, song, dance, bellowing, inner worship and prayer, and 
[now] I will carry out the purificatory bath’.
—triṣkālam anuvarttinā: The occurrence of nirvartitavān (nir-√vr̥t) 
in the above passage in connection with the upahāras calls to mind 
the odd form—an instrumental seemingly understood as a nomi-
native—anuvarttinā (anu-√vr̥t) in  pāda b of our verse. That  all 
the six acts of worship had to be performed in close temporal con-
nection with three ‘bathing-times’ (the  three daily sandhyās)43 
results evidently, besides from the passage quoted above, also from 
Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 1.8 (p. 13 ll. 9–10):
atha triṣu snānakāleṣu sadyojātādisaṃskr̥tena bhasmanā japatā snātvā 
japataivāyatanam abhigantavyam […]
First, at  the  three bathing times, having bathed with ashes purified by 
the  mantras Sadyojāta etc., and while still muttering, he  should go 
to the ­temple.
The six acts are then described one by one in the portion of text following there-
upon. The whole line 8ab of our section indeed echoes a passage of the Niś­
vāsa­mukha (1.153b–154ab), whose context is apparently the pāśupatavrata:
[...] tantrīvādyasya vādakaḥ /
huḍukkārasya nr̥tyasya mukhavādyāṭṭahāsayoḥ // 153
triṣkālaṃ caiva kurvāṇo bhaved gaṇaḥ44 sa cottamaḥ /
[...] The  performer of lute-music, of the  sound huḍuk, of the  dance, of 
the mouth-sound and boisterous laughter, and he who performs for three 
43	 Cf. PS. 1.2 and Bhāṣya thereof (p. 8 l. 24 to 9 l. 5): bhasmanā tri­ṣavaṇaṃ 
snāyīta // triṣavaṇam iti // […] pūrvasaṃdhyā madhyāhnasaṃdhyā apara­saṃdhyeti 
saṃdhyātrayam // triṣavaṇaṃ trisaṃdhyaṃ trikālam ity arthaḥ //.
44	 Em.; Ms gaṇa.


--- Page 14 ---
20
Andrea Acri
times in a day the uttering of huḍuk, dance, drumming with the mouth and 
boisterous laughter, he becomes an excellent attendant [of Rudra].
Compare also Niśvāsaguhya  9.8cd, referring to  a  Pāśupata 
practitioner:45
triṣkālam arcayed devaṃ triṣkālasnānam ācaret //
One should worship God [through the six acts] three times [a day]; one 
should carry out [ash-]bathing during the three times [of the day].
v. 8cd: The final half-verse contains a terminology that is remi-
niscent of Pāśupata themes. The pair dāna and yajña (both defined 
as  kriyās) recalls the  pair of technical terms atidāna (‘transcen-
dental giving’) and atiyajana (‘transcendental sacrifice’) men-
tioned in Pañcārthabhāṣya ad PS. 2.15 (atidattam atīṣṭam), as well 
as in Ratnaṭīkā ad Gaṇakārikā 1.7. In both texts the pair is further sup-
plemented by a third element, atitapas (‘transcendental asceticism’),46 
which in  our verse might be  implied by the  °ādi in  the  compound 
yajñadānakriyādīni. The emphasis laid on the mental aspect of giv-
ing and sacrifice through the word manasā in our verse would seem 
to  carry the  same force of the  prefix ati° (‘transcendental’) occur-
ring in atidāna, atiyajana, and atitapas. The Pañcārthabhāṣya (p. 68 
ll. 3–21), in replying to the question as to how many divisions there 
are in performing good, quotes sūtra 2.15 and interprets it as referring 
to the offering of oneself (ātmapradāna) as opposed to the offering of 
45	 The  sectarian allegiance of the  practitioner can be  argued, apart 
from the reference to bathing (in ashes), from his being characterized as japa­
homarato nityaṃ in 9.8a, which calls to mind the japadhyānaparo nityaṃ 
in  Niśvāsamukha 4.76cd—itself manifestly referring to  a  Pāśupata adept. 
The reading °homa° in Niśvāsaguhya 9.8a is suspicious, for sacrificial fire 
(homa) was forbidden to the Pāśupata adept but prescribed for the adept of 
the  Śaiva Mantramārga. It  might be  a  corruption, or ex-post revision, for 
°dhyāna°. For japa and dhyāna as constitutive elements of the Pāśupata regi-
men, cf. Gaṇakārikā 1.7.
46	 A short study dedicated to this triad may be found in Hara 2002:47–55.


--- Page 15 ---
21
The Śaiva Atimārga…
material objects,47 and as involving the giving of the six acts, which form 
vidhikriyā, in contrast to the offering of Vedic ­sacrifices.48 The Bhāṣya 
goes on  to  list the  third means, atitapas (PS. 2.16, atitaptaṃ tapas 
tathā), explaining it as an eminently mental form of asceticism.49
Niśvāsaguhya  12.9–12ab:  The  Pramāṇa System (Lākula and 
Kārukas?)
mantrasūtrāṇi vidyāni rudrāś ceti catuṣṭayam / 
bhasmasnānañ ca śaucañ ca upahāran50 tathaiva ca // 9
47	 Compare Ratnaṭīkā ad kārikā 1.7 (p. 17 ll. 27–28): pañcasu pavitreṣv 
āvartyamāneṣu daśabhir namaskāraiḥ parameśvarāyātmasamarpaṇaṃ 
dānam, ‘Giving (dāna) is to surrender one’s self to Parameśvara by means 
of ten sorts of reverence (namaskāra) in  the  course of reciting the  five 
purifying prayers (pavitra)’. Note that recitation (japya) of the  five Brah-
mamantras is  regarded as  a  mental operation by the  Pañcārthabhāṣya  ad 
sūtra 1.8 (in the section coming right after the explanation of the six acts): 
mānasaṃ tu namaskaraṇaṃ namaskāraḥ (p. 14 l. 4), ‘Salutation is mental 
salutation’, japyaṃ nāma sadyojātādiṣv akṣarapaṅktyāṃ manasā bhāvasya 
saṃcāravicāraḥ. (p. 14 ll. 6–7), ‘Recitation is reflecting on, and going through, 
with the mind, the nature [embodied] in the sequence of syllables of [the man-
tras] Sadyojāta, etc.’. Compare Ratnaṭīkā ad kārikā 1.7 (p. 18 ll. 29–30): atra 
japanamaskārau mānasāv eva.
48	 Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 2.15 (p. 68 ll. 18–19): atiyajanaṃ nāma 
yadā­yatane loke vā // tatrāyatane snānahasitādyā loke ca krāthana­spanda­
nād­yā vidhikriyā //.
49	 Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 2.16 (p. 69 ll. 4–6): nāyānty ādhyātmik­
ādhibhautikādhidaivikās teṣāṃ svaśāstroktena krameṇa manasi saṃmatānāṃ 
matānām anupāyataḥ pratīkāram akurvatāṃ tapo niṣpadyate, ‘Asceticism 
being produced within those who endure in  mind (manasi) the  sufferings 
arising from the self, from the outside world, and from fate, without resort 
to external means, in conformity with the manner prescribed in their own 
scripture’ (trans. Hara 2002:50–51). Regrettably, the text is corrupt and lacu-
nose. Compare Ratnaṭīkā ad kārikā 1.7 (p. 18, l. 3) and Pañcārthabhāṣya ad 
sūtra 1.9 (p. 25.6–10—note the occurrence of manasi).
50	 Em.; upasaṃhāran Ms (unmetrical).


--- Page 16 ---
22
Andrea Acri
kapālañ51 caiva khaṭvāṅgaṃ52 bhasmavāsañ ca sarvadā /
cāturvarṇikabhaikṣyañ ca vastavyaṃ vijane vane // 10
jñānānveṣī śive bhakti yogadhyānaparāyaṇaḥ53 /
e<kākī> brahmacaryaṃ ca yathālabdhena varttayet // 11
evañ carati vidvān so jitakrodho jitendriyaḥ / 12ab
Mantras, Sūtras, Vidyās, Rudras: thus is the tetrad. Then the bath in ashes 
and the purification, as well as the offerings. (9)
[Bearing] the skull, the skull-staff and the ash-dress at all times, taking alms 
from people of all four classes [is to be adopted]; residence should be taken 
in a depopulated forest. (10)
Devoted to Śiva, striving for knowledge, excelling in Yoga and  ­Meditation. 
Alone, he should [observe] celibacy and survive with whatever he has 
at hand. (11) 
Thus that sage goes about, with anger and senses subdued. (12ab)
Various elements in the above verses suggest that the focus has shifted from 
a Pāñcārthika Pāśupata milieu to a Pramāṇa-Pāśupata one, which presum-
ably encompassed the Mahāvratas/Kapālavratins, as well as the Kārukas.54
v. 9ab: Although we do not know from any other scriptures about 
a  standard tetrad formed by Mantras, Sūtras, Vidyās, and Rudras, 
these elements appear to  represent a  series of additional doctrines 
and practices added by post-Pāñcārthika Pāśupata groups on top of 
the Pāñcārthika core doctrines and observances. ‘Mantras’ here might 
refer to the Pañca­brahmamantras; ‘Sūtras’ to the PS. and/or an additional 
corpus of scriptures, such as the Pramāṇaśāstras;55 ‘Vidyās’ to a series 
51	 Corr. (e-text); kapālaṃñ Ms.
52	 Corr. (e-text); khaṭvāga Ms.
53	 Corr. (e-text); yogadhyānaparāyanaḥ Ms.
54	 The  latter group will be  mentioned further down in  v.  18b. Cf. Sand-
erson  2006:170–179, discussing, among other passages, Niśvāsamukha 4.128–
129ab: kapālavratam āśritya dhruvaṃ gacchanti tatpadam / lokātītaṃ samākhyātaṃ 
mahāpāśupataṃ vratam // prakriyāsu ca saṃyukto dhruvaṃ gacchati tatpad­
am / (Dhruva being the Rudra in the cosmic level aimed at by the followers of 
the Pramāṇaśāstras, as well as (according to some sources) by the Vaimalas; cf. infra).
55	 The existence of this lost corpus of scriptures is suggested by sec-
ond-hand accounts found in Mantramārga sources. The only original passage 


--- Page 17 ---
23
The Śaiva Atimārga…
of prescribed mantras and spells;56 and ‘Rudras’ to the extended series 
of Rudra-manifestations and Rudra-worlds, ­correlated to the ­ladder of 
tattvas in the pure section of the Śaiva cosmos, worshiped by the adher-
ents to the Pramāṇa system.57
vv.  9cd–10ab:  As we  know from other accounts scattered 
over the  Mantramārga corpus, there existed a  continuity between 
the Pramāṇa-Pāśupatas and the Pāśupatas proper insofar as the former 
adopted many of the observances of the latter, such as bathing in ash-
es (bhasmasnāna) for the purpose of purification (śauca), and the six 
‘offerings’ (upahāra), to which they however added an extra set of 
even more extreme observances such as the bearing of the skull-vessel 
(kapāla), the staff (khaṭvāṅga), and the perpetual (sarvadā) ash-smear 
(bhasmavāsa).58 Insofar as they were following such a regimen, called 
great observance (mahāvrata), the  Mahāvratas aimed at  emulating 
the expiatory penance of Śiva the Brahmin-slayer, and in so doing ulti-
mately look like living portions of Rudra (rudrāṃśa), their iṣṭadevatā.59
to have survived is a seven-verse fragment of the Pañcārthapramāṇa, quot-
ed by Kṣemarāja (first half of the 11th century AD) in his commentary ad 
Svacchand­atantra 1.41–43, which contains an analysis of the aghoramantra; 
cf. Sanderson 2006:169–176.
56	 Such is  the  standard usage of the  word in  Śaiva Tantric texts 
of the  Mantramārga. Also  note the  class of semi-divine beings known 
as Vidyādharas or Siddhas, who are often associated with magic and anti-
nomian practices reminiscent of those carried out by the  post-Pāñcārthika 
Pāśupata groups. 
57	 Cf. Sanderson 2006:170–176, 200–202, and Bakker 2000:2–6.
58	 Cf. the  description of a  Mahāvratin given by Niśvāsamukha 
4.88–89: ālabdhaḥ pañcabhir guhyair dīkṣitaś caiva so bhramet / khaṭvāṅgī 
ca kapālī ca sa jaṭī muṇḍam eva vā // vālayajñopavītā ca śiromuṇḍaiś ca 
maṇḍitaḥ / kaupīnavāso bhasmāṅgī divyābharaṇa[[bhūṣitaḥ]] //.
59	 As it is alluded to in Niśvāsaguhya 3.30–33, where a practitioner 
of the  mithyāvrata falsely accuses himself of having killed, among oth-
ers, a Brahmin; and who his said to bear kapāla, khaṭvāṅga and permanent 
ash-smear; to dance, sing and laugh like a madman; and to spend his nights 
in a cremation-ground (cf. Sanderson 2001:31 fn. 5, and 2006:209).


--- Page 18 ---
24
Andrea Acri
v. 10cd: caturvarṇikabhaikṣyaṃ: Mendicancy among people of 
the four classes is prescribed in the PS. for the Pāśupata practitioner 
during the first stage of his ascetic practice, while the injunction of tak-
ing residence in a depopulated forest (vijane vane) would seem to refer 
rather to the third stage, when he should live in solitude in an empty 
house or a cave (śūnyāgāraguhāvāsī, PS. 5.9). This entails no con-
tradiction, however, as in Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 5.30 bhaikṣyaṃ 
is  prescribed also to  the  Pāśupata in  his third stage:  ‘The  dwell-
ing place is an empty house or cave; the way of livelihood is alms’ 
(trans.  Hara  2002:177), tathā vasaty arthaḥ śūnyāgāraguhā vr̥ttir 
bhaikṣyaṃ.
v. 11ab: jñānānveṣī śive bhakti yogadhyānaparāyaṇaḥ: The char-
acterization of a  practitioner as carrying out visualization and yoga 
(intended as  ‘union’), totally and constantly absorbed in  Śiva 
(i.e. Rudra), calls to mind a Pāśupata practitioner in his fourth and fifth 
stage of asceticism. Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 5.27, quoting from 
an unknown scripture:
ākr̥tim api parihr̥tya dhyānaṃ nityaṃ pare rudre / yena prāptaṃ yoge 
muhūrtam api tat paro yogaḥ
That union by which the constant visualization of the highest Rudra, albeit 
devoid of aspect, is obtained even for an instant, that is the highest union.
Compare Pañcārthabhāṣya ad 5.30, where visualization (dhyāna), 
constant union with God (devanityatā), and victory over the  senses 
(jitendriyatva)60 are attributed to the fourth stage of the Pāśupata ­practice:
kriyā adhyayanadhyānādyā ajitendriyavr̥ttitāpohaḥ śuddhiḥ lābhas tu 
devanityatā jitendriyatvaṃ ceti //
The actions are repetition and meditation etc.; the purity is the removal of 
the vice of possessing uncontrolled bodily organs in activity; the attainment 
is the state of being constantly associated with God and the control over 
one’s bodily organs.
60	 This is mentioned infra in our passage, pāda 12b.


--- Page 19 ---
25
The Śaiva Atimārga…
Victory over the senses (jitendriya) is a quality attributed to the prac-
titioner in  the  third stage too (cf.  PS. 5.11, jitendriyo). This adjec-
tive occurs in Niśvāsaguhya 3.33,61 a passage describing the Pāśupata 
gaṇa­vrata, as  well as  in  Svacchandatantra  10.1169,62 a  verse 
describing the  practitioners of the  Īśvara-leading pāśu­pata­vrata, 
but which is  understood by the  commentator Kṣemarāja as  refer-
ring to the Lākulas rather than to the Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas. It may 
be argued indeed that stress on a constant and extreme form of Rudra-
worship was peculiar to the post-Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas carrying out 
the Mahāvrata. This extreme form of rudrabhakti clearly emerges from 
a passage of the Niś­vāsa­mukha (4.90–91ab) characterizing a follower 
of the lokātīta­vrata:
jagad rudramayaṃ matvā rudrabhakto dr̥ḍhavrataḥ /
sarvādaḥ sarvaceṣṭaś ca rudradhyānaparāyaṇaḥ // 
rudraṃ muktvā na cānyo ’sti trātā me devataṃ param /
Being devoted to  Rudra, steadfastly practicing his observances, eating 
everything (i.e. whatever is at hand), carrying out all [the prescribed] be-
haviours, and addicted to the visualization of Rudra, he thinks: ‘The whole 
Universe is entirely made of Rudra; there is none besides Rudra, the highest 
God, my saviour!’
v.  11c:  e<kākī>: Conjecturally reconstructed on  account of 
the solitary character of the Pāśupata observance in the third and fourth 
stage, as characterized in PS. 4.6 and Bhāṣya thereon (p. 97 ll. 6–7):
unmattavad eko vicareta loke
[…] eka ity asaṃvahatā cintyate // ekenetarebhyo vicchinnenāsahāyenety 
arthaḥ //
He must wander about by himself like a madman.
[…] ‘By himself’ is conceived of as being unaccompanied. The meaning 
conveyed by the word ‘by himself’ is that he is without others, without 
companions.
61	 bhasmāṅgī cīravāsaś ca gaṇavratam idaṃ smr̥tam / japayukto 
bhaikṣabhujo loṣṭuśāyī jitendriyaḥ //.
62	 Quoted supra, p. 17.


--- Page 20 ---
26
Andrea Acri
v. 11d: yathālabdhena varttayet: The dietary regimen consisting 
of whatever one can find is prescribed in PS. 5.32, and attributed by 
the Bhāṣya (p. 131 ll. 8–10) to the fourth stage of the pāśupatavrata:
yathālabdhopajīvakaḥ labhate rudrasāyujyam
[…] tad yathālabdham annapānaṃ śmaśānād anirgacchatā divase divase 
jīvanāya sthityarthaṃ 
tadupajīvan yathālabdhopajīvako bhavatīty arthaḥ
Surviving on whatever he may find, he obtains unity with Rudra.
[…] Thus, living on whatever food and drink he may find, [merely] for dai-
ly survival, without his going out from the cremation ground, he becomes 
‘one who survives on whatever food he may find’.
Compare Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 5.30 (pp. 129 l. 18 to 130 l. 2), 
briefly characterizing the fourth stage as follows:
tathehāpi śmaśāne vasatyarthaḥ vasan dharmātmā // yathālabdham iti 
vr̥ttiḥ kriyā smr̥tiḥ asmr̥tyapohaḥ śuddhiḥ lābhas tu sāyujyam //
Similarly, here [in the fourth stage]: the dwelling place is in a cremation 
ground; the power is the possession of merit of one’s own; the way of 
livelihood is food acquired by chance; the action is mindfulness (of God); 
the purity is the removal of failure of mindfulness (of God); the attainment 
is conjunction (with God). (Trans. Hara 2002:177)
Here smr̥ti is likely to be used as a synonym of dhyāna; sāyujyam 
denotes the highest goal of union (yoga) with the Lord.
v. 12ab: vidvān so: The epithet ‘wise’, rather than being a cliché, 
could have retained the technical meaning it has in Pāśupata literature. 
For instance, in the series of verses closing the prose commentary of 
Pañcārtha­bhāṣya ad 5.30 (p. 130 l. 5), we find the following statement:
yas tu budhyati pañcārthe sa vidvān nātra saṃśayaḥ //
One who knows the five categories is a wise man; there is no doubt about that.
The expression sa vidvān recalls the synonymous vidvān so in our 
pāda 12a, and may thus hint at a ‘knower of the Pañcārtha system’. 
On  the  other hand, the  word vidvān in  the  meaning of ‘­Brahmin’ 


--- Page 21 ---
27
The Śaiva Atimārga…
is ­attested in Pañcārtha­bhāṣya (p. 88 ll. 15–16) ad sūtra 3.19:63 ‘Know­
ledge (vidyā) is the distinguishing mark of a Brahmin, consisting in the clar-
ification of the meanings of the words found in the scriptures’ (vidyā nāma 
yā granthārtha­varti­padārthānām abhi­vyañji­kā vipra­tvalakṣaṇā).
Niśvāsaguhya 12.12cd–13ab: The Vaimalas
vaimalācāryadīkṣā64 ca śivasāyojyam ucyate // 12cd
jñānacaryā ahiṃsā ca śivasāyojyatāṃ vrajet / 13ab
And the initiation by a master of the Vaimalas is known as Unity 
with Śiva.65 (12cd)
[By] ascetic regimen, gnosis and non-violence [the Vaimala adept] 
will proceed to Unity with Śiva. (13ab)
This interesting, albeit rather elliptic, statement about the Vaimalas 
seems to  be  an  attempt at  distinguishing them from the  Pramāṇa-
Pāśupatas characterized in the preceding verses 9–12ab. The ca (‘and’) 
in the first line would seem to imply that the Vaimalas too carried out 
the above-mentioned observances, yet they added a ‘dīkṣā imparted 
by a Vaimalācārya’, as  well as  an  element of gnosis (jñāna). Even 
if the alternative translation ‘The Vaimalas [say] that Unity with Śiva 
is known as initiation and ascetic regimen’ is chosen, the stress here 
still seems to be on a special kind of dīkṣā that was associated with 
the Vaimalas. This may also be inferred by the fact that, as the verse 
seems to imply, this dīkṣā leads to unity with Śiva instead of unity with 
63	 paribhūyamāno hi vidvān kr̥tsnatapā bhavati:  ‘For a  wise man, 
being ill-treated, accomplishes thereby all asceticism’.
64	 Conj.; vaimalācaryadīkṣā Ms.
65	 Following my proposed emendation of vaimalācaryadīkṣā into 
vaimalācāryadīkṣā. If we take carya as a shortened version of caryā (to suit 
the pathyā cadence) and vaimalā as an elliptical use of plural (with visarga 
dropped) to  introduce their point of view, an  alternative translation could 
be:  ‘The  Vaimalas [say] that Unity with Śiva is  known as  initiation and 
ascetic regimen’. This translation, however, is at odd with the fact that caryā 
is already featured in line 13ab.


--- Page 22 ---
28
Andrea Acri
Rudra—Śiva being superior to Rudra, the paramount aspect of Śiva 
worshiped by the Atimārga, from the perspective of the Mantramārga.
Niśvāsaguhya 12.13cd–22ab: The fourfold Atimārga and the super­
iority of the Mantramārga
jñānenaiva tu66 śaivānām dīkṣā yā ca viśiṣyate // 13cd
śivabhakti japo yajña dhyānaṃ prāṇanirodhanam /
evam eva samākhyātā pañcamantravidhi[[s tu yaḥ]]67 // 14
sadāśivamukhodgīrṇṇaṃ68 mokṣamārgaprakāśakam /
jñātvā pāśupataṃ jñānaṃ pañcamantreti pañcadhā // 15
pañcabrahma parityajya yo ’nyaṃ vijñātum icchati /
viphalaṃ tac chivaṃ jñānaṃ jñānamokṣañ ca pañcabhiḥ // 16
pañcabhis tu tataḥ sarvaṃ yad bhūtaṃ yac ca bhāvyati /
īśāne śaivam utpannaṃ vaimalaṃ puruṣā<t>69 smr̥tam // 17
pramāṇaṃ hr̥dayāj jātaṃ vāmade<vāt> tu kārukam70 /
sadyāc ca lakulīśāntaḥ71 pañcabhedāḥ prakīrtitāḥ // 18
brahmaviṣṇusurā sarve gaṇā skandapurogamāḥ72 /
r̥ṣayo ’psarasā yakṣā nāgagandharvakinnarāḥ // 19
daityā vidyādharā sarvā ye cānye puravāsinaḥ73 /
sthāpya pañcatanun74 devam arccayanti sadāśivam // 20
na tatra mr̥tyur nna jarā na vyādhir na ca duḥkhitāḥ75 /
evaṃ prāpya ni†…† // 21
īdr̥śaṃ ca paraṃ saukhyaṃ nityaṃ pramuditotsavāḥ76 / 22ab
66	 Conj.; ajñānena tu apograph K; ajñānenaiva tu Ms (unmetrical).
67	 Thus apograph K.
68	 Em. (e-text); sadāśivamukhodgīrṇṇa Ms.
69	 The  ‘loss’ of final -t in  ablative forms is  a  common feature 
in the Niśvāsa corpus.
70	 Em. (e-text); vāmade†…†n tu kārakam Ms.
71	 Em.; lakulīśāntāḥ Ms.
72	 Em. (e-text); skandha° Ms.
73	 Verses 19–20ab are the same as Mūlasūtra 1.2cd–3 (with the variant 
siddhas tathānye in 1.3cd).
74	 Em.; pañcatanur Ms.
75	 The half-verse 21ab is the same as Mūlasūtra 1.7ab.
76	 Em. (e-text); pramuditotsayā Ms.


--- Page 23 ---
29
The Śaiva Atimārga…
But for the  Śaivas [sāyojyam is  attained] indeed by Gnosis, and theirs 
is [also] an initiation which is distinguished as special. (13cd)
Devotion to  Śiva, Muttering, Worship, Meditation, Restraint of 
breath:  thus the  five-mantra-regimen is  proclaimed. But  he  who, (14) 
having known as  ‘the  five mantras’ the  fivefold Pāśupata gnosis, 
which has been cast forth from Sadāśiva’s mouth, and which shows 
the path to liberation, (15)
leaves behind the  five Brahma[mantras] and wishes to  know more, [for 
him] that knowledge of Śiva is fruitless, and release through knowledge by 
means of the five [is too]. (16)
Thus from the five77 the whole [of the Śaiva knowledge] that was and will 
be [arises]. The Śaiva has arisen in Īśāna, and the Vaimala is said [to have 
arisen] from the Puruṣa. (17 )
The  Pramāṇa was born from the  heart (= Aghora), the  Kāruka from 
Vāmadeva; from Sadya (= Sadyojāta) the  doctrine [taught by] Lakulīśa 
[arises]. [Thus] the five divisions have been proclaimed. (18)
Brahmā, Viṣṇu and all the [other] gods; the troops headed by Skanda; the Seers 
and Apsarases; the Yakṣas; the Nāgas; the Gandharvas; the Kinnaras; (19)
the Daityas; the Vidyādharas, and the other dwellers in [Śiva’s] city, they 
install Sadāśiva with five bodies and worship him. (20)
There, there is no death, no aging, no disease, no sufferers. Having thus 
obtained †…† (21)
and this kind of paramount happiness, always enjoying merriment. (22ab)
The final passage displays an attitude that may be considered ‘inclusivist’ insofar 
as it describes the various divisions of the Atimārga and their tenets as if spring-
ing forth from the four faces of Sadāśiva, the paramount deity of the Siddhānta. 
In so doing it praises—and therefore appropriates—the ­Pañcabrahma-based 
Mantric system of the Atimārga, which it warns against being abandoned 
even by the Śaiva practitioner within the more advanced Mantramārga path. 
Yet the superiority of the Śaiva Mantramārga, springing forth from the upper-
oriented face of Īśāna, over the Vaimala system and the  whole Atimārga 
is claimed on account of its superior, gnosis-­bestowing initiation. The apolo-
getic crescendo culminates with a praise of Sadāśiva as the ­paramount deity, 
worshiped by various gods in His heaven characterized by cessation of pain 
and utmost happiness.
77	 Assuming that instr. pañcabhis stands for abl. pañcabhyas.


--- Page 24 ---
30
Andrea Acri
v. 13c: jñānenaiva tu śaivānām: This is my conjectural emenda-
tion of the unmetrical ajñānenaiva tu śaivānām; other possible emen-
dations could be  ajñānena tu śaivānām (as  in  the  apograph K), or 
ajñānenaiva śaivānāṃ. The reading ajñānena would yield the follow-
ing translation: ‘(But) [the initiation of the Vaimalas] is (just) through 
ignorance with respect to that of the Śaivas, whose initiation is supe-
rior’. Whatever the  original form of this line might have been, its 
apparent intent is to convey the notion that the initiation of the Śaiva, 
entailing jñāna, is superior to the initiation imparted by the Vaimalas, 
and in any event superior to the Vaimala regimen (i.e. ascetic conduct, 
gnosis and non-violence) .
v.  14:  The  five aspects of Pāśupata practice or vidhi are said 
to be Devotion to Śiva, Muttering, Worship, Meditation, Restraint of 
breath. I have not been able to find a corresponding list of five items 
in any Śaiva source known to me. However, the Pāñcārthika Pāśupata 
system—as its very name implies—is rife with pentads of means or cat-
egories that define its practices and goals. Witness, for instance, the five 
topics (pañcārtha) implied in the very title of the Pañcārthabhāṣya,78 
and the various pentads mentioned in the verses quoted by Kauṇḍinya 
in Pañcārthabhāṣya ad sūtra 5.30 (p. 130 ll. 4–13), correlating the five 
stages with respectively the five lābhas (‘attainments’), malas (‘impu-
rities’), upāyas (‘means’),79 deśas (‘places’).80
78	 These are deemed to  be  kārya (‘effect’), karaṇa (‘cause’), yoga 
(‘union’), vidhi (‘prescribed regimen’), duḥkhānta (‘the end of suffering’).
79	 According to Gaṇakārikā 1.7, the five upāyas are vāsa (‘impregnat-
ing oneself with doctrine’ or ‘living by a teacher’), caryā (‘good conduct’), 
japadhyāna (‘muttering and visualization’), sadārurasmr̥ti (‘constant mind-
fulness on Rudra’), prasāda (‘grace’); contrast the verse quoted in Pañcārtha­
bhāṣya ad sūtra 5.30 (p. 130 ll. 10–11): vāso dhyānam akhilakaraṇanirodhas 
tathā smr̥tiś caiva / prasāda iti copāyā vijñeyāḥ pañca pañcārthe //.
80	 This series of five appears to be linked to the five items vasaty­artha 
(‘dwelling place’), bala (‘power’), kriyā (‘faction’), śuddhi (‘purity’), and 
lābha (‘attainment’) mentioned in the prose part of the commentary ad sūtra 
5.30.


--- Page 25 ---
31
The Śaiva Atimārga…
vv. 17–18: The passage presents a model of the Śaiva stream ema-
nating from the five faces of Sadāśīva that is in every respect analogous, 
yet richer in details, to that presented in the beginning of the Paṭala 
(vv. 3–5). Besides the Śaiva, Vaimala, Pramāṇa and Pāñcārthika81 sys-
tems, the latter series of verses mention also the Kārukas, who were 
seemingly only implied in verses 9–12ab. This hierarchic model can 
be compared to analogous ones categorizing various Śaiva and non-
Śaiva traditions, as well as the canon of Śaivatantras, as coming forth 
from the five faces of Sadāśiva:
NiMu, SvT
NiGu
Mr̥g CP
Sadyojāta 
West 
laukika 
pāñcārthika
bhūta­
tantras
Vāmadeva 
North 
vaidika 
kāruka 
vāma­
tantras
Aghora 
South 
ādhyātmika 
pramāṇa
bhairava­
tantras
Tatpuruṣa 
East 
atimārga{ 
vaimala
gāruḍa­
tantras
Īśāna 
Zenith
mantra­mārga
śaiva{
siddhān­
ta­tantras
A Typology of the Śaiva Atimārga
Niśvāsaguhya 1–22ab presents an emic model accounting for the sub-
divisions of the  Śaiva Atimārga as  seen from the  perspective of 
Mantramārga Śaivism. To sum up: verses 7–9 refer to the Pāñcārthika 
Pāśupatas, the lowest group in the hierarchy, who emphasized ascet-
ic conduct (caryā) leading to the union with Rudra (rudrasāyujya). 
Verses 10–11 refer to  the  Pramāṇa system, which encompassed 
81	 I interpret the °antaḥ in the compound lakulīśāntaḥ (emended from 
the plural Lakulīśāntāḥ) as meaning ‘doctrine’ (compare ‘Siddhānta’), thus 
yielding the meaning of ‘the doctrine taught by Lakulīśa’ i.e. the Pāñcārtha. 
Sanderson (2001:30, fn. 32) proposes the emendation lakulīśotthaṃ (‘stem-
ming from Lakulīśā’).


--- Page 26 ---
32
Andrea Acri
the  Mahāvratas and Kārukas, who are attributed superiority over 
the  Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas on  account of their emphasis on  gno-
sis (jñāna) besides dīkṣā and caryā, and who also aim at union with 
Rudra. Verse 12 refers to the Vaimalas, whose superior dīkṣā impart-
ed by a Vaimala master, along with gnosis and ascetic conduct, leads 
to the union with Śiva (śivasāyujya). At the top of the hierarchy are 
placed the  mainstream Śaivas, who are characterised by a  superior 
form of gnosis-bestowing dīkṣā.
I shall now compare the data gathered from the verses analyzed 
above with relevant textual evidence scattered over later Śaiva Tantric 
sources, which make rare statements about the prerogatives and status-
es of the Atimārga groups. This comparison will show that the Niśvāsa­
guhya presents a typology of the Atimārga that agrees in many respects 
with the views found in later scriptures of the Śaiva Mantramārga.
At the very outset, I should like to point out that a great deal 
of textual and historical evidence relating to the Śaiva Atimārga and 
Mantramārga divisions of Śaivism has been gathered by Alexis Sand-
erson on the basis of his readings of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā and other 
unpublished Sanskrit texts. In a series of masterful studies (1988, 2001, 
2006), of which abundant use I have gratefully made here, Sanderson 
has elaborated a compelling theory on the historical development of 
Atimārga and Mantramārga Śaivism. In his ‘The Lākulas: New Evi-
dence of a System Intermediate between Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism and 
Āgamic Śaivism’ (Sanderson 2006), Sanderson has discussed in detail 
the two types of Atimārga recognized by the Niśvāsamukha, name-
ly Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism (Atimārga I) and Lokātīta, Mahāvrata or 
Pramāṇa Pāśupatism (Atimārga II). He has referred to the latter divi-
sion as ‘Lākula Pāśupatism’, on the basis of seminal Tantric scriptures 
and exegetical works such as Kṣemarāja’s commentary on the Svac­
chandatantra.
Sanderson (Sanderson 2006:191–193) observed that dīkṣā, jñāna 
and caryā are the three indispensable items in order to obtain libera-
tion according to the soteriology of the Lākulas, and further argued 
that the  fundamental difference between Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas, 


--- Page 27 ---
33
The Śaiva Atimārga…
Lākulas and Saiddhāntika Śaivas precisely lied in their forms of dīkṣā. 
According to him, the Pāśupata type of initiation is a mere saṃskāra, 
after which the practitioner should enact the practices that allow him 
to achieve and maintain his purity; the initiation of the Lākulas differed 
from that of the Pāśupatas in that it defined itself as capable of purify-
ing the initiate’s soul from the bondage of the lower levels of the cos-
mic path, thereby bestowing liberation.82 A similar claim, underlying 
a new conception of initiation as capable of destroying the innate cos-
mic impurity (mala), will be made at a later stage by the Saiddhāntika 
Śaivas with respect to their nirvāṇadīkṣā.
The gist of the competition for supremacy among Śaiva groups 
appears therefore to have lied in the nature and power of dīkṣā, which 
validated their claims of superiority of one over the other. This predica-
ment resulted in a model that Sanderson has defined as ‘competitive 
extension’, involving the accommodation of each group in the cos-
mic path according to a hierarchical scale. In his words (Sanderson 
2006:193),
[The  Lākulas] differ from the  Pañcārthikas and agree with the  Āgamic 
Śaivas in conceiving of the universe as a hierarchy of worlds divided into 
two parts, a lower, impure universe (aśuddho mārgaḥ) and a higher, pure 
universe (śuddho mārgaḥ), the two separated by a vast barrier termed Gran-
thi which only initiation and the cultivation of gnosis during post-initiatory 
observance can enable one to go beyond. […] For the Lākulas this is initia-
tion followed by asceticism and gnosis whereas for the Śaivas it is initiation 
followed by a much more accommodating range of religious practice, from 
the devotion of the exonerated initiate, which differ in no way from those 
of the lay Śivabhakta, to specifically Śaiva practice in which Yoga, Gnosis 
or ritual may predominate.
The analysis of Niśvāsaguhya 12.1–22 presented here lends fur-
ther support to the observations made by Sanderson, insofar as it indi-
viduates in the passage the description of a model according to which 
the  various groups within the Atimārga, as  well as  the  overarching 
Mantramārga Śaivism, shared as the core of their religion the three 
82	 Cf. Sanderson 2006:187–193 (especially p. 190).


--- Page 28 ---
34
Andrea Acri
means of caryā, dīkṣā and jñāna;83 what set apart one from the other was 
the different emphasis put on any one, or two, of those means, as well 
as the goals granted by them. In this manner an ascending hierarchy 
is envisaged, according to which the groups that put emphasis on gno-
sis and transformatory initiation stand above the practice-oriented ones. 
This typology can be summarized in the following (tentative) scheme:
caryā 
dīkṣā 
jñāna
Distinctive sādhana
Goal
Pāśupata 
(Pāñcārthika) 
Sadyojāta
+
+
+ 
pāśupata­vrata
rudra­
sāyojya
Pramāṇa I 
(Kārukas)
Vāma­deva
+++
++
++
extended pāśu­pata­
vrata, extended 
pra­kriyādhvan
rudra­
sāyojya
Pramāṇa II 
(Mahāvratas)
Aghora
++
++
+++
extended pāśu­pata­
vrata, transformatory 
dīkṣā, gnosis of full 
prakriyādhvan
rudra­
sāyojya
Vaimala
Tatpuruṣa
++
+++
+++
extended pāśu­pata­
vrata, superior transfor-
matory dīkṣā imparted 
by a Vaimalācārya
śiva­
sāyojya
Śaiva
Īśāna
+
++++
++++
superior transformatory 
dīkṣā bestowing gnosis
 śiva­
sāyojya
The view that the pair formed by dīkṣā and jñāna retains a primary 
importance in the purificatory process leading the soul of the initiate 
in the Pramāṇa and Vaimala systems to higher stations is documented 
in a number of passages in the Niśvāsa-corpus and related sources. 
These sources concordantly link the initiates whose souls have been 
‘purified by initiation and gnosis’ to high cosmic stations in the pure 
path (śuddhādhvan). Their goals are identified with the  stations of 
83	 This appears to be the gnosis of the additional hierarchy of Rudra-
worlds in the prakriyādhvan described in the Pramāṇaśāstras: cf. Sanderson 
2006:189–190.


--- Page 29 ---
35
The Śaiva Atimārga…
the  Rudras Tejeśa/Tejīśa and Dhruva/Dhruveśa, both of which are 
characterized as the one goal of the Pramāṇa system. Such is the case 
in Niśvāsa­guhya 7.261–262ab:
tejiīśaś ca dhruvaś caiva pramāṇādhvānaṃ kīrtitam / 
kapālavratam āsthāya pramāṇāgamasiddhaye84 //
gatā dhruvapadaṃ ye tu dīkṣājñānaviśodhitāḥ /
Tejīśa and Dhruva are taught to be the world-path of the Pramāṇa [system]. 
Having carried out the observance of the skull in order to fulfill the doctrine 
of the Pramāṇas, those [adepts] reach the level of Dhruva, purified by initia-
tion and gnosis.
Similarly, the Kashmirian Svacchandatantra—which notably builds 
its cosmological accounts by incorporating large sections of the Niśvāsa­
guhya—in 10.1174ab attributes both such goals to the so-called ‘Pramāṇas’:
tejeśaś ca dhruveśaś ca pramāṇānāṃ paraṃ padam85
A passage of the Niśvāsakārikā86 (44.77) agrees with the Niśvāsa­
guhya insofar as it links both Tejīśa and Dhruveśa to the Pramāṇa system, 
defining the follower of that path as ‘endowed with initiation and gnosis’:
tejīśaś87 ca dhruveśaś ca pramāṇādhve88 prakīrtitāḥ
oṃ tejīśa namaḥ 
oṃ dhruveśa namaḥ 
pramāṇādhvaniviṣṭhānāṃ89 dīkṣājñānasamanvitam // 77
84	 Conj. Sanderson  (e-text); pramāṇāgama†…† Ms; pramāṇā­gama­
samabhi†…† apograph K; pramāṇāgamasi†…† apograph W.
85	 Compare a nearly identical line in Niśvāsakārikā, Dīkṣottara 7.78ab: tejīśaś 
ca dhruvīśaś ca pramāṇe paramaṃ padam (I quote the whole verse infra, p. 37).
86	 This Tantra is a long appendix to the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (its ‘fifth 
Sūtra’, as  it  calls itself), which has survived only through heavily corrupt 
South Indian manuscripts.
87	 A; tejīśaṃ C; missing in B.
88	 Conj. (entailing the aiśa locative °adhve instead of °adhvani, seem-
ingly m.c.); pramāṇatve A, C; missing in B.
89	 Conj.; prāṇadhvaniniviṣṭhānāṃ A; prāṇādhvanī niṣṭhānāṃ C; missing in B.


--- Page 30 ---
36
Andrea Acri
Compare a  lacunous passage of the  Dīkṣottara (19.43–44ab), 
an appendix to the Niśvāsakārikā:
tejīśaś ca dhruvīśaś ca veditavyā prayatnataḥ / 
†…† <dīkṣā>jñānasamanvitāḥ // 43
tatpadaṃ paramaṃ proktaṃ tathyam etan na saṃśayaḥ //
43a tejīśaś ca dhruvīśaś ca] A ; tejaś ca dhravīśaś caiva B ; tejaś ca dhr̥viśaś caiva C 
43b veditavyā prayatnataḥ] BC ; veditavyaḥ †…† A 43d <dīkṣā>jñānasamanvitāḥ] 
conj.; †…†jñānasamānvitāḥ A ; †…†jñānasamanvitaḥ B ; †…†jñān sāgnvitaḥ C
The passage mentions Tejīśa and Dhruvīśa besides the adjectival com-
pound ‘endowed with (initiation and)90 gnosis’ and concludes with 
the singular tatpadaṃ paramaṃ, so as to indicate that both Rudras con-
stitute one common goal. Arguably, reference to the Pramāṇa system 
might have been made in the missing portion of the verse (compare 
pramāṇādhvaniviṣṭhānāṃ in Niśvāsakārikā 44.77).
Indeed it is only in Svacchandatantra 11.72cd–73 that we find 
a differentiation between the stations of Tejeśa and Dhruva as the goals 
of the Vaimalas and the Pramāṇa-system respectively:
tejeśo vaimalānāṃ ca pramāṇe ca dhruvaṃ padam 
dīkṣājñānaviśuddhātmā dehāntaṃ yāva caryayā 
kapālavratam āsthāya svaṃ svaṃ gacchati tatpadam
For the Vaimalas, the goal is Tejeśa, and for the Pramāṇa [system] 
it is Dhruva. The soul being purified by initiation and gnosis, by keep-
ing discipline until death, and by practising the observance of the skull, 
he reaches the respective goals [of those systems].
This differentiation is likely to amount to a post hoc attempt at sys-
tematizing the goals of various Atimārga groups and accommodate them 
into a coherent classificatory cosmological system. The same attempt 
may be detected in the preceding verses 10.71cd–72ab, which corre-
late the obscure Mausulas—about whom we know ­little besides their 
90	 The missing portion of the compound can be conjecturally recon-
structed by comparing it to Niśvāsakārikā 44.77 and other passages of similar 
context, where a compound formed by the pair dīkṣājñāna occur.


--- Page 31 ---
37
The Śaiva Atimārga…
name—and Kārukas with the Rudras Kṣemeśa and Brahmaṇaḥsvāmin 
respectively.91
91	 Sanderson (2006:169–170) has already pointed out the  appar-
ent contradiction between Svacchandatantra 11.72cd–73, which attributes 
the goals of Tejeśa and Dhruva to the Vaimalas and Pramāṇas respectively, 
and 10.1174ab, which attributes the level of Dhruva to both the Pramāṇa-
Pāśupatas and the Vaimalas. He has further argued that the two statements 
can be reconciled on the basis of the following passage of the Niśvāsakārikā/
Dīkṣottara (7.78):
	
tejīśaś ca dhruvīśaś ca pramāṇe paramaṃ padam /
	
dvau rudrau tu samākhyātau yogamokṣaphalapradau //
	
78a dhruvīśaś] em.; bravīśaś AB; bruvīśaś C
	
78d yogamokṣaphalapradau] A; bhogamokṣaphalapradau BC
According to Sanderson, the compound yogamokṣaphalapradau would 
imply that Tejīśa and Dhruva bestow yoga and mokṣa respectively, thus 
involving a kind of hierarchy. This is in my mind debatable since the other 
two testimonia read bhogamokṣaphalapradau, and this very same compound 
is referred by them to four Rudras in the adjacent verse 7.79 (against A, which 
again reads yogamokṣaphalapradāḥ):
	
tataḥ prāṇaḥ smr̥to devi brahmadattaṃ tataḥ punaḥ /
	
catvāras tu smr̥tā rudrā bhogamokṣaphalapradām //
	
48a tataḥ prāṇaḥ smr̥to] A; tata†…† smr̥to B; tataḥ smr̥to devi C
	
48b brahmadattaṃ tataḥ puna] AB; brahman tataḥ punaḥ C
	
48c smr̥tā] A; smr̥to BC rudrā] BC; rudrāḥ A
	 48d bhogamokṣaphalapradāḥ] B; bhoga­mokṣa­phala­
pradām C; yoga­mokṣa­phala­pradāḥ A
	
I suspect that this compound constitutes nothing more than a fre-
quent formulaic expression, implying no actual difference in  the  goals 
bestowed by the two Rudras. Compare, e.g., the clichés bhuktimuktiphala­
prada and sarvakāmaphalaprada occurring in a passage of the Matsyapurāṇa 
(22.7–8), which describes the sacred sites devoted to the Rudras Avimukta and 
Vimaleśvara (the latter arguably being the tutelary Rudra of the Vaimalas): 
tathā vārāṇasī puṇyā pit ̄r̥ ṇāṃ vallabhā sadā / yatrāvimuktasāṃnidhyaṃ bhuk-
timuktiphalapradam // pit ̄r̥ ṇāṃ vallabhaṃ tadvat puṇyaṃ ca vimaleśvaram / 
pitr̥tīrthaṃ prayāgaṃ tu sarvakāmaphalapradam //.


--- Page 32 ---
38
Andrea Acri
A  somewhat idiosyncratic account is  found in  the  Niśvāsakārikā 
(Dī­kṣottara 18.123–125), which places the Vaimalas in the level of Dhruva:
vaimalāḥ kārukāś caiva tathā pāśupatāś ca ye / 
vaimalānāṃ dhruvaṃ devaṃ kārukāṇāṃ tathopari // 123
granthī dhruvānadhīnānāṃ śivasr̥ṣṭer avasthitā /
teṣāṃ tatparamaṃ sthānaṃ dīkṣādhvānaviśodhitam // 124
īśvaraṃ pāśupatānāṃ sthānaṃ caivam udāhr̥tam /
caryādhvānaviśuddhātmā gacchate nātra saṃśayaḥ // 125
123a vaimalāḥ kārukāś] vaimalā kārakāś ABC 123b pāśupatāś] C; pāśupatā A; †…†ś 
B 123c dhruvaṃ] BC; dhr̥vaṃ A kārukāṇāṃ] em.; kārakāṇām ABC 124a granthī 
dhruvānadhīnānāṃ] conj.; granthidhruvaṃ māhīnāṃ A; grandhī dhruvadhīnāṃ B; 
granthī dhr̥vanadhīnānāṃ C 124b śivasr̥ṣṭer avasthitā] A; śivaṃ ghr̥ṣṭer avasthitā 
B; śivaṃ dr̥ṣṭe svasthitā C 124c tatparamaṃ] A; tatvaparaṃ B; tattvaparaṃ C 125a 
pāśupatānāṃ] em.; pāśupatyānāṃ ABC (m.c.?) 125c caryādhvānaviśuddhātmā] A; 
caryādhyānaviśuddhātmā BC
The  Vaimalas, the  Kārukas, and the  Pāśupatas. Dhruva  is  the  deity of 
the Vaimalas; then92 [there is the level] of the Kārukas. 123 The Granthi 
stands near the [pure] emission of Śiva; it is the supreme goal of those 
who do not rest in Dhruva (i.e. the Kārukas), [and is reached by those] 
whose cosmic path is purified by initiation [only]. 124 Īśvara is declared 
to be the goal of the Pāśupatas. [Their] souls being purified from the hold 
of the cosmic path by means of ascetic conduct, they go [there]; there is no 
doubt about it. 125
Here the  goal of the Vaimalas is  said to  be  Dhruva, who is  placed 
above the  granthi or ‘barrier’ reached by adepts who do not rest 
in  Dhruva—seemingly the  Kārukas mentioned in  verse 123, whose 
cosmic path is purified (only) by initiation (dīkṣādhvānaviśodhitam). 
Further below are the  Pāśupatas, ‘whose souls have been purified 
from the hold of the cosmic path by means of ascetic conduct [only]’ 
(caryādhvānaviśuddhātmā).93 Although the  Vaimalas’ and Kārukas’ 
specific features are not characterized, by comparing this passage 
to those of similar context quoted above one is tempted to see an implied 
92	 In this context, I understand tathopari in the sense of ‘besides’, ‘fur-
ther’, ‘also’.
93	 Note the aiśa form °ātmā, apparently considered a nominative ­plural.


--- Page 33 ---
39
The Śaiva Atimārga…
opposition between the Vaimalas, whose soul is purified by initiation 
and gnosis (dīkṣājñānaviśuddhātma), and other less-advanced practi-
tioners, who lack a complete gnosis of the prakriyādhvan, or whose 
soul/cosmic path is purified by initiation or ascetic conduct only (such 
as in the case of the Pāśupatas).94
This picture, although perforce still uncertain and ambiguous, 
is consistent with the scant information we possess about the Kārukas, 
who, unlike the  more ‘gnostic’ Vaimalas and Mahāvratas/Lākulas, 
adhered to  the  chiefly practice-oriented among the  Praṃāṇaśāstras 
(cf.  infra), thus standing at  a  lower level of the  hierarchy, between 
the  Vaimalas and the  Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas. Their  highest station, 
set over against (or even within) the Granthi, is regarded to be still 
in the realm of Māyā and therefore not yet purified to a degree suf-
ficient to let them cross over into the pure universe.95
Whereas the  above Saiddhāntika accounts apparently reflect 
an  attempt to  sketch a  hierarchy between the  Atimārga groups 
on the basis of the degree of purification attained by initiation, gnosis, 
and/or ascetic regimen, they were by no means in agreement when 
describing their respective goals. It is evident that either the boundaries 
between such groups as the Vaimalas, Kārukas and Lākulas/Mahāvratas 
(the last two being considered part of the ‘Pramāṇa system’) were not 
clear-cut, or the compilers of later Mantramārga sources were not clear 
about the  specific prerogatives and ultimate goals peculiar to  each 
group. This confusion might have originated from the fact that these 
groups were largely superseded at the time when the Mantramārga took 
hold as the mainstream form of Śaivism in the Subcontinent. But one 
94	 Dīkṣottara 12.25 (≈ 13.7) mentions the Pāśupatas, Kārukas and Vai-
malas as the only examples of (non-Mantramārga) Śaiva schools when listing 
inferior (non-Śaiva) truths (i.e. Vedāntins, Pāñcarātrikas, Buddhists, etc.).
95	 Compare the  cosmological accounts reconstructed by Sanderson 
(Sanderson 2006:199–200) on  the  basis of the  Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā  and 
the  Svacchandatantra, which put the  Kārukas, along with the  Mausulas, 
in the impure universe.


--- Page 34 ---
40
Andrea Acri
may also argue that a source of confusion was the allegiance of all these 
post-Pāñcārthika Pāśupata groups to a common canon of scriptures, 
called Pramāṇas, Pramāṇāgamas, or Pramāṇaśāstras. That  this was 
the case is suggested by a remark of the 11th century Kashmirian Śaiva 
commentator Kṣemarāja, who, in  his commentary ad Sva­cchanda­
tantra 11.73, regarded the followers of the Pramāṇaśāstra and the Vai-
mala (vaimala­pramāṇa­śāstraniṣṭho) as superior to the Mausulas and 
Kārukas on account of the latter’s allegiance to the chiefly practice-
oriented among the Pramāṇaśāstras.96 According to Kṣemarāja, the fol-
lowers of the Pramāṇa and Vaimala systems are in Svacchandatan­
tra 11.73a characterized as ‘having their souls purified by initiation and 
gnosis’ (dīkṣājñānaviśuddhātma) precisely because of their allegiance 
to the eight gnosis-oriented Praṃāṇas.97
The concept of ātmaśuddhi, closely linked to that of adhvaśuddhi, 
is  regarded by Sanderson (Sanderson 2006:190) as  the  feature 
that bridges the  initiation of the  Lākula groups with the  Āgamic 
dīkṣā, involving the  presence of an  extended cosmic hierarchy. 
Thus the emphasis of gnosis and initiation was precisely what differen-
tiated the Lākula from the Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas, in this respect setting 
96	 These are the six Pramāṇas extracted from the Hr̥dayapramāṇa (these are 
all lost), and chiefly devoted to the six ritual acts (ṣaṭkriyāpradhānāni pramāṇāni, 
cf. Kṣemarāja ad Svacchandatantra 10.1134); cf. Bakker 2000:4; Sanderson 2006:171.
97	 The passage runs (trans. Bakker 2000:6): ‘For, he who follows the Pramāṇa 
Śāstra and the  Vaimala, ‘‘His soul is  purified by initiation and knowledge, by 
(keeping to) the prescribed praxis until death, while abiding by the Kapāla obser-
vance—he goes to that station that is his own.’’ (SvT 11.73) The quarter-verse ‘His 
soul is  purified by initiation and knowledge’ indicates the  difference here from 
the afore-mentioned Mausulas and Kārukas, who are devoted only to observances 
that are chiefly ritualistic’, vaimalapramāṇaśāstraniṣṭho hi dīkṣājñānaviśuddhātmā 
dehāntaṃ yāva caryayā / kapālavratamāsthāya svaṃ svaṃ gacchati tatpadam // 
dīkṣājñānaviśuddhātmetipadena 
proktakriyāpradhānavratamātraniṣṭhamausula­
kāru­kebhyo ’tra viśeṣo darśitaḥ. For a discussion of Kṣemarāja’s commentary and 
Svacchandatantra  10.1134, elaborating on  the  eight chiefly gnostic Pramāṇas 
(jñānapradhānapramāṇāṣṭaka), cf. Sanderson 2006:171–172.


--- Page 35 ---
41
The Śaiva Atimārga…
the former closer to Agāmic Śaivism, whose initiation is considered 
­superior because of knowledge.
Niśvāsaguhya 12.12cd–13 sheds light on the distinction between 
the Vaimalas and other Pramāṇa-Pāśupatas, as well as the Pāñcārthika-
Pāśupatas, by claiming that the Vaimalas are superior insofar as their 
initiation leads to  śivasāyojya (which is  higher than rudrasāyojya). 
As line 13cd would seem to imply, the initiation of the Saiddhāntika 
Śaivas was in its turn considered superior to that of the Vaimalas inso-
far as  it  intrinsically bestowed gnosis to  the  initiate,98 whereas for 
the  Vaimalas and the  other Pramāṇa-based groups ascetic regimen 
alongside knowledge of the prakriyādhvā was still required to achieve 
final liberation.99 From the perspective of the Mantramārga, an even 
lower status was attributed to  the  proper Pāśupatas, admitting only 
to  the  pāśupatavrata as  their chief means of liberation and lack-
ing ­gnosis as well as a powerful, i.e. gnosis-bestowing, initiation.100 
98	 Cf.,  besides our passage, also Niśvāsanaya 1.88cd–89ab (describing 
Saiddhāntika initiation, granted by Sadāśiva): ‘Initiation bestows gnosis through 
the descent of Śiva’s Power. Thus grace is regarded, and the bestower [of it] 
is Sadāśiva’, śiva­śakti­ni­pātena dīkśā jñānaṃ pra­yacchati // so ’nu­grahaḥ smr̥­to 
hy evaṃ dātā caiva sadāśivaḥ /.
99	 Speaking about the  ‘Lākula’ variety of dīkṣā described 
in  Niśvāsamukha 4.96–97, Sanderson (Sanderson 2006:189–190) remarks 
that ‘gnosis of the prakriyādhvā completes by the time of death the task that 
initiation had almost but not completely accomplished’.
100	 The  Mantramārga dīkṣā was presumably special, in  part because 
of the introduction of fire, but also because it entailed an element of gno-
sis. Besides Niśvāsanaya 1.88cd–89ab (quoted above, fn. 98), cf. Niśvāsa­
mukha  1.156cd–157ab, where a  critique to  the  dīkṣā of a  (gnosis-less) 
Pāñcārthika Pāśupata is made: ‘In such way he worships, the one without 
Gnosis, devoid of initiation bestowed by (or leading to) Śiva. To such initiate, 
[aiming] at liberation, this fruit (i.e. the state of gaṇatā) is promised’, evaṃ yaḥ 
pūjayed ajñaḥ śivadīkṣāvivarjitaḥ // tasyedaṃ phalam uddiṣṭam a[[pava]]–
rgāya dīkṣ[[itaḥ]] /. This type of practitioner—whose Pāśupata affiliation can 
be unquestionably gathered from verse 1.153 attributing to him the ascetic 
regimen formed by such peculiar practices as bellowing (huḍukkāra), dancing 


--- Page 36 ---
42
Andrea Acri
One may argue that for Mantramārga Śaivism it was vital to present 
itself as bestowing a powerful dīkṣā upon the initiates into its ranks, 
who were only required to carry out a bland and accommodating 
post-initiatory regimen.
It thus appears that, at  a  certain stage of the  development of 
the post-Pāñcārthika Atimārga, initiation assumed a primary soterio-
logical importance. This innovation is likely to have been triggered 
by a new conception of impurity (mala), which was not recognized by 
the Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas as a proper metaphysical entity. This new 
concept of mala might have been elaborated already in  the  proto-
Saiddhāntika stage of Śaivism, and achieved its full maturity and 
ritual implementation in  Saiddhāntika Mantramārga milieux from 
ca.  the  seventh century onwards.101 In view of the  statements made 
in  Niśvāsaguhya  12.12cd–13, as  well as  in  the  above-quoted pas-
sages scattered over the Mantramārga corpus, it may be argued that 
(nr̥tya), making musical sound with the mouth (mukhavādya), and boister-
ous laughter (aṭṭahāsa), which lead to the state of Gaṇeśvara (i.e. Rudra)—
is characterized as being devoid of gnosis (ajña) precisely because he lacks 
śivadīkṣā, i.e. initiation bestowed by (or leading to) Śiva.
101	 Although the term mala and its concept as a separate metaphysi-
cal entity is absent in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā as well as early Saiddhāntika 
scriptures (see Goodall et al.  2008, esp.  Introduction), Acharya (Acharya 
2014) has argued that the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā’s description of bonds ‘stands 
between the Pāśupata concept of bonds and the one found in the fully devel-
oped version of the  Śaiva Mantramārga’ (ibid.:12), and that, as  suggested 
by an account by Buddhist logician Dharmakīrti (ca. 550–650 AD), the idea 
of sin as the unseen force of karmic effects was already present in the early 
phase of Śaiva Siddhānta and later developed into the idea of innate impurity 
as an abstract substance. In fact I feel that several passages of the Niśvāsa sug-
gest that the idea of impurity (or, in any event, the concept that some obfuscat-
ing and impeding elements need to be ‘cleansed’ from the soul) was already 
present in some form. Cf., for instance, Nayasūtra 4.72, where a practitioner 
who meditates on himself as being like Śiva (śivavan manyamāno) and free 
from desire and repulsion (rāgadveṣavivarjitaḥ) becomes devoid of impurity 
and pure (nirmalāḥ śuddhāḥ, aiśa plural).


--- Page 37 ---
43
The Śaiva Atimārga…
it was the Vaimala system that implemented a more powerful form of 
dīkṣā—i.e. one able to destroy the innate impurity binding the souls 
and leading to higher stations in the pure cosmic path, and one that was 
imparted by a specialist in Śaiva initiation, the ācārya. If seen from 
this perspective, the very name ‘Vaimala’ carries the implication of 
‘lack of impurity’ (vi+mala), thereby denoting not only ‘the followers 
of [the Rudra] Vimala (‘the Spotless’)’, but also ‘those who call them-
selves ‘‘free from impurity’’’ (however that impurity might have been 
conceptualised).
Indirect evidence in  support of this hypothesis may be  found 
in  a  verse of the  Raurava that survived in  the  version commented 
upon by Sadyojyotis, which Rāmakaṇṭha quotes at  the  very begin-
ning of his Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvr̥tti. Here  we  find the  com-
pound viśikhāmalakārakāḥ , ‘[those] agents [who hold that liberation 
is brought about by the transference] of powers, those agents who are 
devoid of Impurity’ (Watson, Goodall and Sarma 2013:222; see also 
65–69). The amalakārakas are identified by Rāmakaṇṭha as those who 
regard liberation as consisting in what Sadyojyotis calls nirmalatvaṃ 
ca kevalam, i.e. a lack of impurity alone (and not omniscience or omni­
potence). This group might have been the Vaimala.102 Another indirect 
102	 In a series of emails exchanged in January 2013, Alex Watson and 
myself discussed the possibility that the word -kāraka in the Raurava verse 
cited in the Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvr̥tti could be a corruption of (or, ­better 
still, an  attempt by Rāmakaṇṭha and even Sadyojyotis to  make sense of) 
an  original kāruka (on  which, see Acri 2008:195 fn.  13, 196 fn.  14, and 
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa II, s.v. kāruka); in that case, the compound as found 
in the Raurava could have referred to three distinct groups, namely those ‘with-
out a topknot’ (śikhā), i.e. the Pāśupatas, those without impurity, i.e. the Vai-
malas, and the Kārukas. On the identity of the viśikha/viśikhā as Pāśupatas, 
see Watson, Goodall and Sarma 2013:66–67; noteworthy is  the  mention 
in  the  Saṃskāravidhi of the  removal of the  topknot in  Pāś upata initiation 
(see Acharya 2007:35–36 and 46–47), as well as the testimony of the Old 
Javanese Kuñjarakarṇa about a  group of Śaiva ascetics named viśikhin 
(‘Those who lack a topknot’; see Acri 2008:201, fn. 37). For a preliminary 


--- Page 38 ---
44
Andrea Acri
piece of evidence comes from Old Javanese sources from ancient Java 
and Bali, which apparently knew of Śaiva practitioners called Alepa­
kas (‘the Spotless ones’); these I have linked to the Vaimalas known 
from Sanskrit sources (Acri 2008). The word alepaka in Old Javanese 
carries the  double meaning of both ‘spotless, stainless’ (Skt alpha 
privans + lepaka) and ‘dirty, stained’ (Old Javanese prefix a + lepaka). 
The Rāmāyaṇa Kakavin (ca. 9th century AD) playfully exploits this 
ambiguity to criticize the Alepakas and their alleged purity by ridiculing 
their extreme ascetic practices involving lying and/or bathing in ashes. 
On the other hand, the Vr̥haspatitattva (2.1–6, 3.36–43), a Sanskrit-
Old Javanese treatise of early Saiddhāntika persuasion, describes a tri-
partite division of the Śaiva stream comprising Pāśupatas, Alepakas 
and Śaivas. The intermediate position of the Alepakas in the hierarchy, 
as the only intermediate group between the (Pāñcārthika) Pāśupatas and 
the (mainstream or Saiddhāntika) Śaivas, is in harmony with the rela-
tively high position accorded to the Vaimalas by Sanskrit Mantramārgic 
sources, which put them in the cosmic station of Tejīśa/Dhruva, or in any 
event in the śuddhādhvan. Similarly, the loftiest position in the hierar-
chy of non-Mantramārga traditions is  accorded to  the Alepaka sys-
tem in  ślokas 2–3 of the  Sanskrit-Old Javanese Brahmokta Vidhi 
Śāstra (cf. Acri 2008:198–199), where it is cor­related with the head 
of the body of the Holy Veda (saṅ veddha), which is for the rest made 
up by Śīkṣā (tongue), Vaiśeṣika (neck), Māhānātha (chest), Pāśupata 
(heart), Mīmāṃsā (belly), and Kāmatantra (genitals). This is compara-
ble to the Mantramārga model representing the Vaimalas as springing 
up from the eastern face of Sadāśiva, i.e. Tatpuruṣa, which is the high-
est in the hierarchy of the Atimārga as it is usually mentioned before 
the zenith-facing Īśāna from which the Mantramārga originates.103
hypothesis concerning the identity of the Kārukas as an Atimārgic group of 
itinerant ascetics linked to bardic performance, see Acri 2011:78–79.
103	 It may be worthwhile to test this hypothesis against the evidence 
gathered from Sanskrit inscriptions engraved in  Angkorian non-royal 
caves in  Cambodia, where we  find a  mention of Dhruva-seeking ascetics 


--- Page 39 ---
45
The Śaiva Atimārga…
Conclusion
Niśvāsaguhya  12.1–22ab presents a  model accounting for 
the subdivisions of the Śaiva Atimārga as seen from the perspective 
of the  hierarchically-higher Mantramārga Śaivism. In  comparing, 
and contrasting, this model to  analogous ones found scattered over 
the extant literature of the Śaiva Mantramārga, I have suggested that 
the ensuing taxonomies, albeit different in the details and at times con-
tradictory, seem to share an underlying rationale. This rationale is their 
emphasis on  gnosis (jñāna), initiation (dīkṣā), or ascetic conduct 
(caryā) ­respectively.
Because of the  lack of both first- and second-hand accounts 
on the little-known Atimārga groups mentioned in the sources, it is dif-
ficult to determine whether those taxonomies reflect actual social reali-
ties or are the result of post hoc, and inevitably partial, systematising 
attempts by the compilers of seminal scriptures and their learned com-
mentators. The latter especially might have had only scant knowledge, 
if any at all, of the elusive real-world referents of those groups, namely 
the contemporary practitioners belonging to currents that were more 
often than not marginal and ascetic, and which might have been already 
extinct or significantly transformed by their time. Yet, interesting infor-
mation on such groups as the obscure Vaimalas and the Kārukas can 
be found in several early Sanskrit sources, including the Niśvāsa and 
the Raurava, and what seems to be an awareness of both their tenets 
and the stereotypes connected with them is reflected in some Old Java-
nese and (Sanskrit) Khmer sources. In view of this fact, it seems safe 
(cf.,  e.g.,  the  expression dhruvanirantaratattvavandhuḥ in  K 371.8), and 
where the station of Dhruva is defined as ‘spotless’ (dhruvam amalapadaṃ, K 
1049.8). Such relevant inscriptions are currently being (re-)edited, translated 
and studied by Dominic Goodall, from whom I learnt about these interesting 
references at a seminar held at EPHE in 2006, and at the presentation ‘Can 
we identify the sectarian obedience of the Śaiva ascetics of non-royal cave-
inscriptions in Cambodia?’ delivered at the 15th World Sanskrit Conference, 
held in New Delhi in January 2012.


--- Page 40 ---
46
Andrea Acri
to assume that these groups must once have been, if not institution-
alised orders, at least ‘living realities’ (however peripheral), and not 
the mere product of what David White (White 2005:9) calls the ‘pre-
scriptive imagination’ of Medieval South Asian landscapes.
Bibliography:
Primary Sources: 
Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa cf. Bisschop and Griffiths 2007. 
Gaṇakārikā (ascribed to Bhāsarvajña) = Gaṇakārikā of Ācārya Bhāsarvajña 
with the Ratnaṭīkā and four appendices. Ed. C. D. Dalal. Baroda: Oriental 
Institute of Baroda, 1966 [1920]. 
Niśvāsakārikā 
(A)  Devanāgarī transcript, IFP MS T 17, from a  MS belonging 
to M.K.S. Bhattar Madurai; 188 leaves / 635 pp. 
(B) Devanāgarī transcript, IFP MS T 127, from MS GOML R. No. 16804; 
506 pp. 
(C) Devanāgarī transcript, IFP MS T 150, from MS GOML R. No. 14403; 
353 pp. e-texts (Roman) of the above transcripts, typed principally by 
S. A. S. Sarma and Nibedita Rout (T 17), R. Sathyanarayanan (T 127), 
Nibedita Rout (T 150) The verse and chapter numeration used in this 
article is that of the e-text of T 17. 
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā 
(1) Palm-leaf MS, early Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script, NAK 1-227, NGMPP 
Reel No. A 41/14; 114 leaves. 
(2) e-text (Roman and Devanāgarī) prepared by Dominic Goodall, with the contri-
bution of Diwakar Acharya, Peter Bisschop and Nirajan Kafle, from MS NAK 
1-227, supplemented with readings from its two Devanāgarī apographs, MS 
5-2401, NGMPP Reel No. A 159/18 and Sanskrit MS i.33 of the Wellcome 
Institute for the History of Medicine, London. [Includes the Niśvāsamukha, 
Niśvāsamūla, Niśvāsottara, Niśvāsanaya and Niśvāsaguhya]. The verse and 
chapter numeration used in this book is that of Goodall’s edition in progress. 


--- Page 41 ---
47
The Śaiva Atimārga…
Pañcārthabhāṣya ascribed to Kauṇḍinya 
(1) cf. Pāśupatasūtra. 
(2) cf. Bisschop 2009*. 
Pāśupatasūtra = Pasupata Sutras with Pancarthabhashya of Kaundinya. 
Ed.  R.  Anantakrishna Sastri. Trivandrum:  The  Oriental Manuscript 
Library of the University of Travancore, 1940. 
Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama = Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (Vidyāpāda) avec le 
commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha  Ed. N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: IFI, 1977. 
Matsyapurāṇa = Śrīmad-Dvaipāyanamuni-praṇītaṃ Matsyapurāṇam, etad 
pustakam Ānandāśramasthapaṇḍitaiḥ saṃśodhitam. Ed.  H.N.  Apte. 
­Poona, 1981 [1907]. 
Mr̥gendratantra = Mr̥gendrāgama (Kriyāpāda et Caryāpāda) avec le commen­
taire de Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha. Ed. N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: IFI, 1962. 
Ratnaṭīkā ascribed to Bhāsarvajña cf. Gaṇakārikā. 
Vr̥haspatitattva = Wr̥haspati-tattwa, an Old Javanese philosophical text. Nag-
pur: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1957. 
Saṃskāravidhi cf. Acharya 2007. 
Svacchandatantra = The Svacchandatantram; With commentary ‘Uddyota’ by 
Kṣemarājācārya. Ed. Vraj Vallabh Dvivedi. Delhi: Parimal, 1985. 
Svacchandatantroddyota of Kṣemarāja cf. Svacchandatantra. 
Secondary Sources:
Acharya, D. 2007. The Saṃskāravidhi: A Manual on the Transformatory Rite 
of the Lakulīśa-Pāśupatas. In: D. Goodall and A. Padoux (Eds). Mélanges 
tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of 
Hélène Brunner. Pondicherry: IFI/EFEO: 27–48. 
Acri, A. 2008. The Vaimala Sect of the Pāśupatas. New Data from Old Java-
nese Sources. Tantric Studies 1: 193–208. 
Acri, A. 2011. More  On  Birds, Ascetics and Kings in  Central Java. 
Kakawin Rāmā­yaṇa, 24.111–115 and 25.19–22. In: A. Acri, H. Creese and 
A. Griffiths (Eds). From Laṅkā Eastwards; The Rāmāyaṇa in the Litera­
ture and ­Visual Arts of Indonesia. Leiden: KITLV Press: 53–91. 


--- Page 42 ---
48
Andrea Acri
Bakker, H. 2000. Somaśarman, Somavaṃśa and Somasiddhānta. A Pāśupata 
tradition in seventh-century Dakṣiṇa Kosala. In: R. Tsuchida and A. Wezler 
(Eds). Haranandalahari. Volume in Honour of Professor Minoru Hara 
on his Seventieth Birthday. Reinbeck: Dr. Inge Wezler Verlag für Orien-
talistische Fachpublikationen: 1–20. 
Bisschop, P. 2009* Pañcārthabhāṣya; draft critical edition of Chapter 1, sūtras 1–47. 
Bisschop, P.  and A.  Griffiths. 2003. The  Pāśupata Observance (Atharva­
vedapariśiṣṭa 40). Indo-Iranian Journal 46: 315–348. 
Goodall, D. 1998. Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra. 
Vol. I:  Chapters 1–6. Critical  edition and annotated translation. 
­Pondichéry: IFP/EFEO. 
Goodall, D. 2004. The Parākhyatantra; A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. 
A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Pondichéry: IFP/EFEO. 
Goodall, D.  and H.  Isaacson. 2007. Workshop  on  the  Niśvāsa­tattva­
saṃhitā: The Earliest Surviving Saiva Tantra? Newsletter of the Nepal-
German Manuscript Cataloguing Project 3: 4–6. 
Goodall, D.  and H.  Isaacson. 2011 Tantric Traditions. In:  J.  Frazier (ed.). 
The Continuum Companion to Hindu Studies. London/New York: Con-
tinuum International Publishing Group: 122–137. 
Goudriaan, T.  and S.  Gupta. 1981. Hindu  Tantric and Śākta Literature. 
­History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 2. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
Hara, M. 1958. Nakulīśa-Pāśupata-darśanam. Indo-Iranian Journal 2: 8–32. 
Hara, M. 2002. Pāśupata Studies. Edited by J. Takashima. Vienna: Sammlung 
de Nobili, Institut für Südasien-, Tibet- und Buddhismuskunde. 
Sanderson, A.  1988. Śaivism  and the Tantric Traditions. In:  S.  Sutherland 
et al. (Eds). The World’s Religions. London: Routledge: 660–704. 
Sanderson, A. 2001. History  through Textual Criticism in  the  Study of 
Śaivism, the  Pañcarātra and the  Buddhist Yoginītantras. In:  F.  Grimal 
(ed.). Les sources et le temps. A colloquium. Pondicherry, 11-13 January 
1997. Pondicherry: IFP-EFEO: 1–47. 
Sanderson, A. 2006 The Lākulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate 
between Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism and Āgamic Śaivism. Indian  Philo­
sophical Annual 24 [2003–2005]: 143–217. 


--- Page 43 ---
49
The Śaiva Atimārga…
Watson, A., D. Goodall and A. Sharma. 2013. An Enquiry into the Nature 
of Liberation; Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvr̥tti, a com­
mentary on Sadyojyotiḥ’s refutation of twenty conceptions of the liberated 
state (mokṣa), for the first time critically edited, translated into English 
and annotated. Pondicherry: IFP-EFEO. 
White, D.G. 2005. Review of Ronald M. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism. 
A Social History of the Tantric Movement. Journal of the International 
Association of Tibetan Studies 1 (October 2005):1–11. [On-line: http://
iris.lib.virginia.edu/tibet/collections/journal/jiats]


--- Page 44 ---
