# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2014-revire-murphy-before-siam-art-archaeology.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 06:27:32
# Total Pages: 218
# File Size: 22.53 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 2926.2 chars/page in sample)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
Early Mainland 
SouthEaSt aSia
From First Humans 
to Angkor
Charles higham
Before 
Siam
Essays in Art 
and Archaeology
Edited by 
Nicolas Revire &
Stephen A. Murphy
Nicolas Revire & 
Stephen A. Murphy
Before Siam
Essays in Art and Archaeology
The birth of Siam has been traditionally marked by the founding of the great 
city-states of Sukhothai and Ayutthaya respectively. These civilisations, 
however, grew out of a rich milieu of cultures and traditions in the region 
present from as far back as prehistoric times. Whether the Mon Buddhism 
that flourished during the so-called Dvāravatī period, the architectural 
heritage of the Khmers or the Brahmanical and Mahāyāna stimuli of the 
Malay Peninsula, these varied aspects and influences came together to 
shape what became early Siam and today modern Thailand.
The aim of this peer-reviewed publication is to present new research and 
discoveries to reconstruct the cultures, religious persuasions and artistic 
traditions in pre-modern Thailand and its neighbouring regions. Through a 
large array of contributions by renowned experts, the public and academics 
alike will gain a richer and  more multifaceted appreciation of this early 
history which played such a formative role in the birth of Siam.
432 pages 
312 colour illustrations 
56 maps and plans 
ISBN 978 616 7339 41 2

--- PAGE 2 ---
Before Siam
Essays in Art and Archaeology

--- PAGE 3 ---
Before Siam
Essays in Art and Archaeology
Edited by
Nicolas Revire  
& Stephen A. Murphy

--- PAGE 4 ---
First published by River Books & The Siam Society,  
and distributed by River Books Co., Ltd. 
396 Maharaj Road, Tatien,  
Bangkok 10200 
Tel: (66) 2 225 4963, 225 0139, 6221900 
Fax: (66) 2 225 3861 
Email: order@riverbooksbk.com  
www.riverbooksbk.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced  
or transmitted in any form or by means, electronic or including  
photocopy, recording or any other information storage and retrieval  
system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
A River Books & The Siam Society Production
Copyright collective work © River Books & The Siam Society 2014
Copyright text © Individual chapters, the contributing authors 2014
Copyright photographs © Individual chapters, the contributing authors
except where stated otherwise 2014.
Publishers: Narisa Chakrabongse & The Siam Society
Production: Paisarn Piemmettawat
Editors: Nicolas Revire & Stephen A. Murphy
Design: Reutairat Nanta
ISBN: 978 616 7339 41 2
Front cover: Image of Sūrya (the Sun God) found in Si Thep, Phetchabun province, 6th-8th c.  
Currently in the Bangkok National Museum, stone, ca 80 cm. high, inv. no. 01.292/2549  
[Photograph courtesy of Paisarn Piemmettawat].
Frontispiece: An inscribed nāga-Buddha found in Lop Buri province. Currently in the Phra Narai National 
Museum, Lop Buri, sandstone, 55 cm. high, inv. no. LB 126. The inscription registered as LB 13 (K. 995),  
and possibly dated (1)135 śaka (= 1213 CE), is in Old Khmer script and language [Photograph by Nicolas Revire].
Back cover: French archaeologist George Cœdès in Siam in the late 1920s. The photograph was probably  
taken in Chaiya where the Sūrya image of Cōḷa style next to him, now in the Bangkok National Museum,  
inv. no. SV 16, was discovered [Photograph courtesy of EFEO photographic archives, Fonds Cœdès COE00003].
Printed and bound in Thailand by Sirivatana Interprint Public Co., Ltd.
Contents
Foreword by the President of the Siam Society  
6
Preface by Chris Baker 
7
Acknowledgements 
10
Technical Notes 
11
Map of Thailand 
13
Prologue 
11 
What There Was before Siam: Traditional Views  Hiram WoodWard  
14
Part I: transItIons from late PrehIstory to early hIstory 
30
Reconsidering the Palaeo-shoreline in the Lower Central Plain of Thailand   
32
Trongjai HuTangkura
The Early Development of Coastal Polities in the Upper Thai-Malay Peninsula 
68
Bérénice Bellina et al.
An Early Northwest Indian Decorated Bronze Bowl from Khao Sam Kaeo  
90
ian c. glover & SHaHnaj HuSne jaHan
Contacts between the Upper Thai-Malay Peninsula and the Mediterranean World   
98
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
Phromthin Tai: An Archaeological Perspective on Its Societal Transition  THanik lerTcHarnriT 
118
Part II: the growIng emergence of IndIc materIal culture  
132
Multi-religious Linkages across the Bay of Bengal during the First Millennium CE  
134
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
Conch-on-hip Images in Peninsular Thailand and Early Vaiṣṇava Sculpture in Southeast Asia   
152
Paul a. lavy
New Evidence of Early Brahmanical Vestiges in Pattani Province   
174
WannaSarn noonSuk
Pre-Angkorian Communities in the Middle Mekong Valley (Laos and Adjacent Areas)   
188
micHel lorrillard
Sampanago: “City of Serpents” and Muttama (Martaban)   
216
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win 
Part III: early BuddhIst PractIces, landscaPes and artefacts 
238
Glimpses of Buddhist Practices and Rituals in Dvāravatī and Its Neighbouring Cultures   
240
nicolaS revire
Dvāravatī Cakras: Questions of Their Significance  Pinna indorf  
272
The Skeletons of Phong Tuek: Human Remains in Dvāravatī Ritual Contexts  WeSley clarke 
310
Monuments and Identity at the Dvāravatī Town of Kamphaeng Saen  maTTHeW d. gallon 
330
Sema Stones in Lower Myanmar and Northeast Thailand: A Comparison  STePHen a. murPHy 
352
Part IV: later Khmer ImPetus 
372
Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai: A New Reading of Its Iconographic Message  Pia conTi 
374
The Organisation of Space in Pre-modern Thailand under Jayavarman VII   
396
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
Contributors  
420
General Index 
422

--- PAGE 5 ---
6
7
U
ntil a few decades ago, the early history of the regions that became 
Siam and then Thailand was a very sketchy affair. W.A.R. Wood’s 
A History of Siam (1924) devoted only three pages to the subject. In David 
Wyatt’s long-run summary, Thailand: A Short History, first published in 
1984, everything prior to the eleventh century is accomplished in 18 
pages, with only four on events within the region. It is not hard to see 
why. The source data was limited. Rather little earth had been moved in 
archaeological digs; rather few inscriptions had been found, or properly 
edited and published; only a handful of sites had been subject to intense 
analysis. Pioneer interpretations of this data often incorporated a great 
amount of ingenuity and imagination, commanded respect because of 
the extraordinary status of their authors (such as Prince Damrong and 
George Cœdès), and proved difficult to challenge for the same reasons. 
The historical approach was fascinated with the idea of empires 
(Śrīvijaya, Khmer, Dvāravatī), a concept not found in the data but 
dominant in the historians’ own era. The plot of this history ended with 
the emergence of a state that was Thai by ethnic affiliation, Theravāda 
Buddhist by religious faith, and politically unified around a monarchy, 
and all the strands of the plot tended to lead towards this ending.
Over the intervening decades, the prehistory part of this tale has 
changed quite remarkably. We now have a relatively well-accepted 
chronology of the coming of bronze and iron, a detailed picture of 
metalworking industries, and some appreciation of their impact on 
society (rather distinctive from that in other areas of the world). The 
emergence of settled agriculture is becoming clearer. The extent 
of settlement is now known to be much more widespread than once 
thought. Exotic artefacts found in burial sites or ancient trading posts 
are testament to early commercial links and cultural transfer. 
This transformation of the prehistory has resulted from more digging 
and newer technologies applied in major sites, but also from new access 
to satellite data, and more surface archaeology that has carried study 
into new geographical areas. One striking finding of this work has been 
the sheer variety (across space and across time) of the burial practices, 
pottery, and other artefacts found at various sites across the region.
The transition from prehistory to history over the course of the 
first millennium CE has remained more of a puzzle. The changes are 
striking. Proto-cities appear along with large religious constructions. 
Written sources also emerge in the form of inscriptions, foreign 
accounts (especially Chinese), and tamnan chronicles (referring to this 
era though surviving only in manuscripts from later eras). Yet the 
writings and monuments offered only limited help in understanding the 
social and political changes of this era. The early inscriptions found so 
far are often brief and fragmentary, while the tamnan-style chronicles 
offer legendary accounts that may have been rewritten many times in 
intervening centuries. Physical sites offer limited information because 
so few structures (mostly religious and defensive) were built of durable 
materials. Records kept by the Chinese imperial court have the enormous 
benefit of being securely dated, but the enormous disadvantage that 
the data have been translated or transcribed into Chinese language 
and filtered through the Chinese imperial worldview. It has proved 
T
he history of the region that became Siam and then Thailand 
has developed tremendously over the last 150 years. The first 
collections of inscriptions were made in the late nineteenth century, and 
the first archaeological digs in the early twentieth. The pace quickened 
after the Second World War with the expansion of Thai universities, 
more activity by the Fine Arts Department, and the interest of many 
foreign scholars.
The Siam Society has contributed to this development from its very 
first day. The Journal of the Siam Society has published many pioneering 
works, such as the series of epigraphic studies by Prasert na Nagara and 
Alexander B. Griswold, and hosted countless lectures and conferences, 
including the symposium on the Ramkhamhaeng stele controversy.
This book presents exciting new work which promises to 
revolutionise the history of this area in the first millennium CE prior to 
the establishment of Thai kingdoms. The Siam Society is proud to be a 
partner in bringing this work to publication.
I would like personally to thank all the authors for their exceptional 
contributions; the editors, Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy, 
for their effort in bringing this collection together; the James H.W. 
Thompson Foundation for its support; and River Books for producing 
such a beautiful volume. I am confident this book will be recognised as 
a landmark in the discipline.
Bilaibhan Sampatisiri
President
The Siam Society under Royal Patronage
October 2013
Preface
Foreword

--- PAGE 6 ---
8
9
frustratingly difficult to cross-reference between these different types of 
information: Chinese records, physical remains, epigraphy, and legends. 
Only rarely can key toponyms from the Chinese record be securely 
located on the map and securely identified with physical remains. 
Several towns or states mentioned in inscriptions are still a mystery. The 
exact significance of “Dvāravatī,” perhaps the most important proper 
name in this area and era, remains enigmatic.
The research presented in this book form the bow of a wave that 
is about to crash over the history of this transitional era. With a few 
exceptions written by well-established scholars, the majority of the work 
comes from doctoral theses and postdoctoral projects either recently 
completed or still in progress. In five key ways, this work builds on 
earlier study but moves decisively beyond it.
First, the work is technically more sophisticated than earlier efforts. 
Dating methods, aerial imagery, and laboratory analyses have become 
more sophisticated and more accessible. Epigraphic and philological 
skills have also developed. 
Second, the research herein bring into historical focus geographical 
areas which were overlooked because they are not the political centres 
of the present day but were of special importance in their own 
period. The early Indian influences on the mid reaches of the Thai-
Malay Peninsula have been known for a long time from both sites and 
inscriptions. But new research shows that this area was a major centre 
of craft production, a meeting place of Chinese and Indic cultural 
influences, and a key point in trade routes stretching from China to the 
Mediterranean world. Similarly, the importance of the middle Mekong 
can be assumed on geographical grounds, but now is proved by research 
made possible after the ending of the Cold War.
Third, these researchers are ready to challenge and revise work by 
the pioneers, often by painstaking re-reading of old data in the light of 
new techniques and perspectives.
Fourth, they are working with much larger datasets: more 
inscriptions that have come to light over recent years, more cakras and 
semas that have been found, more sites identified from the sky, and more 
monuments that have been rescued from the undergrowth.
Fifth, researchers are more open and better equipped to break 
through the Chinese walls that divide disciplines. The best work draws 
on techniques from archaeology, art history, religious studies, and other 
approaches.
In the picture that is now emerging, settlements spread throughout 
the upper Chao Phraya Delta, Mun valley, and middle Mekong. The 
people seemed to prefer a certain distance between settlements rather 
than clustering, which perhaps indicates the continued importance of 
hunting and gathering. In the few places where long-range data are 
available, sites were occupied over a long period, and perhaps this was 
more generally true. The emergence of larger settlements, early towns, 
especially in the west of this region, may then have been a consequence 
of gradual development rather than the intrusion of some shock 
element such as new migrants or developments in long-distance trade.
These larger places adopted ideas and practices from India where 
proto-urbanisation had occurred at least a millennium earlier and where 
social practices had been developed for living in these larger, denser 
communities. In particular, gods and goddesses, beliefs, and forms of 
worship arrived. However, new research warns us against applying 
modern labels for religious affiliations to this early period, and against 
imagining that these gods and practices were in competition or conflict. 
As today, Buddhism, Brahmanical deities, and animism could coexist, 
serving different purposes.
 Most importantly, these deities, beliefs, and forms of worship were 
everywhere adapted to local circumstances, creating new practices and 
forms. Possibly the cakra symbol was married with some local idea of a 
stele or hero stone to create the distinctive monumental pillars which 
may have been the flagstaffs of a new Buddhist kingship. Similarly, and 
with even more complexity, the idea of bounding sacred space seems 
to have been combined with a stone-carving culture and the idea of 
publicly illustrating the didactic jātaka stories to create distinctive sema 
stones. What is more, this same combination was achieved with great 
local differences of style in different parts of the region.
In this changing religious milieu, the idea that may have had the 
most impact was the concept of making merit, perhaps because of its 
many functions in societies of growing complexity: inducing moral 
behaviour, funding public goods, and constraining the powerful.
In the epigraphy, we find local rulers boasting Indic royal titles, 
powerful lineages, and political capitals. But on current evidence, 
political structures seem to have been small scale, multiple, and often 
fleeting. “Dvāravatī” may yet turn out to be something larger and more 
lasting, but the evidence is still moot. Even when Khmer influence 
spreads over a wide area of present-day Thailand, it spreads in the form 
of temple architecture, roads, fire-houses, hospitals, and royal or divine 
images, not conquering armies and imperial mandarins.
The variety of local tradition found in the late prehistory is sustained 
into this era, but is gradually overlain by some common cultural practice. 
Two cultural zones gradually emerge which can be labeled as Mon or 
Dvāravatī and Khmer respectively, with the important caveat that we 
know little about their mix of ethnicity or everyday language use. In 
the absence of any political consolidation, these zones seem to have 
been formed by sharing and copying, probably along routes of trade 
and pilgrimage. As the geographical spread of the research increases, 
we more and more see that these zones overlap and interpenetrate. 
In architecture, iconography, and decorative design, we see exchange 
between the zones and the development of hybrid forms. Local 
preference seems more important than political fiat. No two places 
build a “Khmer temple” in exactly the same way. Strikingly, there is as 
yet no evidence of major conflict in this era.
In sum, the general picture emerging from these new researches 
is characterised by slow and steady evolution, rather than dramatic 
change. Yet the picture is still rather unclear and can still be changed 
by new evidence. Only recently, stripping the cover from a large grassy 
knoll in Si Thep revealed an unusually complete monument built using 
techniques and design that seem unique. 
In this volume, history “before Siam” comes into much clearer 
focus, but there is still room for surprise.
Chris Baker
Honorary editor
Journal of the Siam Society
October 2013

--- PAGE 7 ---
10
11
Country Names 
The name Thailand (or pre-modern Thailand) and the adjective Thai 
in the collected essays of this volume refer to the area of the current 
Kingdom, although Siam was its official name until 1939. Similarly, 
the contemporary names of Cambodia, Vietnam, Laos, Malaysia, and 
Myanmar (instead of Burma) are used for its present-day neighbours. 
However, since these nation states are creations of the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries, such concepts as Thailand and “Thainess” have no 
historical relevance in the first millennium CE and prior to the rise of 
Thai kingdoms in the thirteenth century. Hence the present authors have 
tended to favour use of the indigenous and original names of the entities 
or polities of the past – if known – which they describe in their essays.
Transliterations
The use of local scripts (Thai, Myanmar, Lao, Khmer) is avoided 
and restricted solely to certain etymological cases. While there are 
several systems for transliterating Thai into the Latin alphabet, that 
of the Royal Institute of Thailand (Ratchabanditsathan) has been 
adopted in this volume, despite its imperfections and inconsistencies, 
since it is widely accepted in Thailand. Likewise, romanised Chinese 
transliterations follow the Pinyin system. But where no universally 
accepted system exists for transliterating a language (e.g. Myanmar, 
Cambodian), spellings preferred by individual authors or commonly 
used forms have been followed.
The spelling of Thai geographical names (provinces and districts) 
similarly follows the official list given by the Royal Institute despite 
certain inconsistencies regarding word separation. According to this 
official list, for example, the cities and provinces of Phetchaburi, 
Ratchaburi, and Kanchanaburi are spelled as one word but Lop Buri, 
Suphan Buri or Chon Buri spelled as two.
Local References
In citations of Thai bibliographic references, common local usage is 
followed here; that is, the given (first) name is cited as the key reference 
and not the surname of the authors, as is the practice elsewhere. The 
given name is listed alphabetically in the reference list; e.g. the entry 
for Damrong Rajanubhab is to be found under D. The spelling of 
Thai proper names generally follows the rules of the Royal Institute 
except when the preference of the author is known; as for example, 
Phasook Indrawooth is the author’s own spelling and used here, and not 
Phasuk Inthrawut as might be the case under Royal Institute rules. Full 
transliterations are given for references and titles published in Thai and 
Myanmar, followed by an English translation. Since dates in Thailand 
and Myanmar generally follow the Buddhist Era (BE) beginning in 
543/544 BCE, Thai and Myanmar publications are given and listed in 
BE with an equivalent given in CE.
T
he idea for this book originally arose in a panel organised by Nicolas 
Revire, the first editor of this volume, at the 11th International 
Conference on Thai Studies, held by the Research Institute for 
Languages and Cultures of Asia, Mahidol University, at Bangkok, 
26-28 July 2011. Stephen Murphy came on board as co-editor later 
that year and contributions began to come from the panellists and other 
scholars. The scope of the collected papers and the high calibre of the 
work far exceeded our expectations. Before Siam became an anthology of 
18 essays written by established as well as by young researchers in the 
field, presenting new and exciting discussions on the origins of Siam, 
now Thailand, and its neighbouring regions.
We are happy to acknowledge first and foremost the support of 
the Siam Society for our endeavour from the beginning as a partner 
in producing the present volume. We deeply appreciate the Society’s 
extensive activities in promoting Thailand’s cultural heritage and 
encouraging scholarly initiatives. 
We also wish to express our sincere gratitude to the James H.W. 
Thompson Foundation for their generous financial assistance for 
the publication of this book. The Foundation is likewise dedicated 
to promoting public understanding and appreciation of Thailand’s 
cultural past. We hope that the analyses of the art and archaeology of 
pre-modern Thailand in this volume will help fulfil both the Siam 
Society’s and James H.W. Thompson Foundation’s objectives of 
defining and disseminating information about the evolution of the rich 
cultural developments in the Kingdom.
We particularly appreciate Chris Baker’s preface and his very 
helpful role in liaising with the Siam Society Council on this project. 
Jane Puranananda similarly supported us in her advisory capacity 
with the James H.W. Thompson Foundation. Without the personal 
involvement of Chris and Jane, it is fair to say that our project would 
not have come to fruition.
Narisa Chakrabongse and Paisarn Piemmettawat, as well as 
Reutairat Nanta from River Books, have taken great pains in producing 
the book and deserve our credit for their professionalism and patience.
Last but not least, special thanks are due to the contributors for their 
meticulous work and collegial cooperation, to the external reviewers 
who – often anonymously – offered helpful comments and suggestions 
on the various essays, and to all those who supplemented various 
photographs and maps for the book. 
In investigating Thailand’s remote past and the many influences that 
melded to create the kingdom of Thailand, we have wanted to make 
Before Siam a significant contribution to knowledge of this particular field 
and to spur further interest in its research.
 
The Editors
Technical Notes
Acknowledgements

--- PAGE 8 ---
12
13
Pāli and Sanskrit
References to Pāli texts are made to Pali Text Society publications for 
the most part, in which case publication details are not included in 
the list of references. All Pāli references have been assigned a unique 
abbreviation by the Critical Pali Dictionary, which is recognised and 
adopted internationally. For convenience in reading, a list of such 
abbreviations related to specific essays appears at the end of the 
concerned essay.
In the case of a prose Pāli text, the volume number, if any, is followed 
by the page number(s). For instance, a reference to Dīghanikāya, volume 
II, page 35, would be shown as D II 35. In the case of a text in verse, 
the number of the verse(s) alone is given (e.g. Dhp 67 for Dhammapada, 
verse 67). In the case of a text containing both prose and verse, the page 
number(s) of the original (if prose text is referred to) or number of the 
verse (if one or more verses are referred to) is given; for example, Sn 
p. 107 or Sn 635 refers to Suttanipāta, page 107 or verse 635. If reference 
is made to a translation or an edition that has been published by a body 
other than the Pali Text Society, that reference is treated in the same 
manner as any regular book, following the author/date system.
References to Pāli and Sanskrit terms, texts or names are treated as 
compounds; that is, without a space or hyphen, such as in Dīghanikāya, 
not Dīgha Nikāya or Dīgha-nikāya, and dharmacakramudrā, not dharmacakra 
mudrā or dharma-cakra-mudrā, to mention just a few examples.
Abbreviations
Common abbreviations and acronyms cited in this volume include the 
following.
AMS 
Accelerator Mass Spectrometry
BCE 
Before the Common Era, equivalent to BC: Before Christ
BE 
Buddhist Era 
BP 
Before the Present
CE 
[Modern] Common Era, equivalent to AD: Anno Domini
CNRS 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
EFEO 
École française d’Extrême-Orient
FAD 
Fine Arts Department of Thailand
IK. 
Inventory indicator for Khmer monuments
K. 
Inventory indicator for Khmer inscriptions 
MSL 
Mean Sea Level
PTS 
Pali Text Society
P. 
Pāli
Skt 
Sanskrit
SOAS 
School of Oriental and African Studies
T. 
Thai
M
e
k
o
n
g
 
 
M
ekong 
Ayutthaya
Chiang Mai
Phitsanulok
Haripuñjaya  
Lop Buri
Phetchaburi
Nakhon Si Thammarat
Bangkok
U Thong
Bago
(Pegu)
Īśānapura
(Sambor Prei Kuk)
Wat Phu
Nakhon Pathom
Chaiya
Nakhon Ratchasima
Pattani
Yarang
Si Thep
Khu Bua
Khon Kaen
Kalasin
Mueang Fa Daet
Chai Nat
Nakhon Sawan
Prachin Buri
Trang
Ancient Sites
Modern Cities
Dong Si Mahosot
Songkhla
Chumphon
Khao Sam Kaeo
Phrae
Phnom Penh
Vientiane
Phuket
Krabi
Khlong Thom
Sathing Phra
Takua Pa
Tha Chana
Surat Thani
Kedah
Yangon
Thaton
Mawlamyaing
(Moulmein)
Sampanago
Lampang
Sukhothai  
Si Satchanalai  
Luang Prabang
Angkor
Angkor Borei
Oc Eo
Hanoi
Savannakhet
Pakse
Stœng Treng
Phimai
Phanom Rung
Ubon Ratchathani
Preah Vihear
Udon Thani
Chon Buri
Kamphaeng Saen
Saraburi
Kanchanaburi
Phong Tuek
Phromthin Tai
0
500  km
N
100
CAMBODIA
 MYANMAR        
LAOS 
VIETNAM
THAILAND
GULF 
OF 
THAILAND
GULF 
OF 
MUTTAMA
(MARTABAN)
ANDAMAN SEA
Major places cited in the volume [Map drawn by Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 9 ---
15
14
PROLOGUE
WHaT THere WaS Before Siam: 
TradiTional vieWS

--- PAGE 10 ---
17
16
Back to the Buddha’s Lifetime
A
lthough a narrative history extending back for more than two 
thousand years and providing the names of kings, queens, and 
Buddhist monuments has been preserved in Sri Lanka, no such history 
exists today in Thailand, which also professes Theravāda Buddhism. 
One reason is the fact that the population of Thai speakers became 
established only around the thirteenth century; in the first millennium, 
Mon was the predominant language. If vernacular Mon histories once 
existed, they have been irretrievably lost. Nonetheless, Thai-language 
(and in some cases, Pāli) texts give us insight into how people have 
regarded the distant past, and some knowledge of the sorts of legends 
that have been preserved provide a kind of ground upon which the 
studies in Before Siam, which utilise the skills archaeology, epigraphy, 
art history, and other modern approaches can provide, might be said 
to stand. In some cases, moreover, these texts provide genuine 
historical insights.
The stories in the old texts arise from various concerns. One is the 
nature of Buddhist identity and whether there is a need to demonstrate 
that Buddhism had been implanted in the very soil upon which people 
live as long ago as the Buddha’s lifetime. Another is the presence of 
ancient monuments, whose existence calls for historical explanation. 
Then there might be mere curiosity about what life may have been 
like in the distant past. The kinds of stories that are invented or 
appropriated are modified and linked in a variety of ways, depending 
upon whether the stress is upon continuity or upon social and political 
rupture, or, as will be seen, upon a kind of continuity that endures 
despite the ruptures. The texts are relatively limited in number, and 
among the ones chosen here, dealing with Haripuñjaya, Phra That 
Phanom, Nakhon Si Thammarat, and Nakhon Pathom, most can be 
read in English translation. 
Haripuñjaya
Haripuñjaya (the modern Lamphun) is the one site where there is a 
record of historical continuity, where a dynasty of late-Dvāravatī Mon 
speakers is transformed into the Thai kingdom of Chiang Mai. There 
are two well-known historical accounts, both written in Pāli, the first, the 
Cāmadevīvaṃsa, composed by the monk Bodhiraṃsi in 1410, the second, 
the Jinakālamālī, about a hundred years later. Queen Cāmadevī, who 
grew up near Lop Buri, is said in the Jinakālamālī to have moved north 
at a date equivalent to 662 CE. If she is understood to have been a more 
or less historical figure, the date is likely to have been the tenth century, 
What There Was before Siam: 
Traditional Views
Hiram WoodWard
Opposite Figure 1:  
Phra That Haripunchai at  
Wat Phra That Haripunchai, 
Lamphun [Photograph courtesy  
of Nicolas Revire].
Previous pages:  
Footprints of the four Buddhas which 
have appeared in this “Auspicious 
Era” [bhaddakappa], Wat  
Phra That Haripunchai, Lamphun 
[Photograph courtesy of Nicolas 
Revire].

--- PAGE 11 ---
Hiram WoodWard
19
18
following the absorption of some of the old Dvāravatī polities by the 
Khmer empire. Her behaviour, in the Cāmadevīvaṃsa, does not differ from 
that of an ideal contemporary monarch. “Everyone, the royal ministers 
and the people, both town and village dwellers, followed the example of 
Cāmadevī  and her sons in supporting a flourishing Buddhism” (Swearer 
& Sommai 1998: 80). Historical distance is created not with her but 
with the inhabitants of the North prior to the coming of the queen. 
They were ruled by isi, hermits or sages (Skt, ṛṣi). These hermits had the 
ability to fly through the air and to have offspring whose mothers were 
deer, and they were able to create the city of Haripuñjaya before Queen 
Cāmadevī arrived. They were mythical figures. Four key sages had once 
been Buddhist monks, but they left the monkhood and acquired higher 
knowledges in the Himavanta forest, a land that figures in numerous 
jātaka tales and provided a model for the world of the hermits. In fact, 
hermits may have had a significant role historically in the centuries of 
“Indianisation;” they were presumably descendants of village shamans, 
and, in one of the handful of Dvāravatī inscriptions, a ṛṣi was credited 
with the establishment of a carving of the seated Buddha in one of the 
Khao Ngu caves near Ratchaburi in the seventh-eighth century.1
Although there were no such early Buddhist dedications in northern 
Thailand, Buddhism had nevertheless been implanted there during the 
lifetime of the Buddha, according to the Cāmadevīvaṃsa. He had come to 
Thailand, stood on a stone platform (P. silāpaṭṭa), and made a prediction 
– not concerning Queen Cāmadevī but her successor King Ādittarāja, 
who would later discover a relic of the Buddha and enshrine it at 
Phra That Haripunchai [Figure 1].2 A model for the Buddha’s 
prediction of much later historical events was provided by inscriptions 
of the Burmese king Kyanzittha, in the late eleventh century, and the 
physical presence of the Buddha was sanctioned by the Sri Lankan 
chronicle, the Mahāvaṃsa, which describes visits made by Gotama to 
Sri Lanka. The stone platform echoes the manosilātala (“red-arsenic 
plateau”) in the Himavanta, which also inspired King Ramkhamhaeng 
of Sukhothai (r. 1279?-1298), who established a similarly named stone 
throne for his own authoritative speech.
Phra That Phanom
The historical circumstances at Phra That Phanom [Figure 2], a 
reliquary tower near the banks of the Mekong river in Nakhon Phanom 
province, are quite different (Pruess 1976). Some of the elements in 
the local legend, however, parallel those in the Cāmadevīvaṃsa. At 
Haripuñjaya, the stūpa built by King Ādittarāja to house the relic 
he discovered (in 1063 CE, according to the Jinakālamālī; actually, 
probably, in the twelfth century CE) still stands, its appearance altered 
by subsequent re-buildings [Figure 1].3 At Phra That Phanom, on the 
other hand, the monument dates (probably) from the tenth century, was 
abandoned, and then re-dedicated in the seventeenth century, at which 
time the supporting myth was composed.4 In this text, the Urāṅganidāna 
(“Tale of the Breastbone”), as in the Cāmadevīvaṃsa, the Buddha pays a 
visit, but his tasks are expanded: he makes a prediction, that his disciple 
Mahākassapa will bring a relic to this spot, and leaves three footprints, 
in different places. In Sri Lanka, on the other hand, the Buddha had 
left only a single footprint. Time shrinks. Mahākassapa soon arrives 
with the relic, and it is encased in a vaulted chamber by the ruler, with 
the cooperation of the leaders of four neighbouring kingdoms, each 
working on one of the four faces and subsequently making offerings 
there (Pruess 1976: 34-35). An analysis of the names of the kings would 
probably show that they allude to the Angkorian period, as well as to 
legendary Lao rulers, but it may also be that the point was to establish 
a model of ideal behaviour, dating from the distant past, that would be 
relevant to the political rivalries of the seventeenth century.
An image of a thoroughbred horse was constructed to the north, 
“meant to signify that the Breast-bone Relic of the Buddha had 
emerged to demonstrate its miraculous powers” (Pruess 1976: 36). This 
appears to allude to an episode described at greater length in a poem 
from Nakhon Si Thammarat, concerning the uncovering of a relic by 
King Asoka:
Men and women of every age went and looked; big and 
small, they flooded the area. They saw the radiant image of a 
deva riding a caparisoned horse, from which he dismounted.
Figure 2: Phra That Phanom, 
Nakhon Phanom province 
[Photograph courtesy of  
Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 12 ---
Hiram WoodWard
21
20
They saw the relic just as they had hoped; it was in a golden 
casket and was beautifully radiant. The king took the relic from 
the back of the horse, and people jammed together in order  
to see.
The statue of the royal horse would obey only the deva. 
Some people got up on each other’s shoulders. Others stetched 
their necks in order to see the beautiful sight.
Beautiful lanterns and candles dispelled all gloom; they 
glowed radiantly, and flowers blossomed all around. (FAD  
2504: 10; my translation)
Then, later, the tower was built over the vaulted chamber – not 
by humans but by Viśvakarman, the architect of the gods. On its 
exterior walls, Phra That Phanom has décor of carved brick, featuring 
in each panel horses and elephants with riders, surrounded by foliage 
[Figure 3]. Their original meaning is not known, but the Urāṅganidāna 
describes them as portraits of the same rulers who had constructed 
the reliquary chamber (Pruess 1976: 40). This would be a case, therefore, 
of an interpretation of sculptural relief turning into legend.
Nakhon Si Thammarat
The poem just quoted, which relates the history of the “Supreme 
Reliquary” (T. bǫrommathat = P. paramadhātu), or stūpa, of Nakhon Si 
Thammarat, is not well known, but two prose chronicles from Nakhon 
Si Thammarat with related content were exhaustively analysed by 
David Wyatt (1975), and another Thai Buddhist treatise was among 
the earliest to be described in English (Low 1843). Wyatt’s texts are 
found in nineteenth-century manuscripts that were compiled at a time 
when it was thought important to establish regional identity. The Phra 
Borommathat was very likely built in the twelfth century and then 
renovated in about the fifteenth [Figure 4], but there were gaps in 
its support, gaps brought about by plague and political upheaval. The 
earlier history of the enshrined relic was constructed with the help of 
the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, the “History of the Tooth Relic,” and of one or more 
texts describing the recovery by King Asoka (third century BCE) of 
the relics deposited by King Ajātasatru (fifth century BCE), who had 
received one of the original eight measures of ashes following the 
Buddha’s cremation. This recovery involved the neutralisation of a 
guarding device John Strong called the “Roman robots” (2007: 132-
136). This particular episode is described in a Chinese translation of 
306 CE (Strong 1983: 302) and then in several Pāli texts of considerably 
later date, including the Thūpavaṃsa and the Lokapaññati, a cosmography 
composed in Myanmar, based on Sanskrit as well as Pāli sources (Denis 
1977). The Dāṭhāvaṃsa, the Lokapaññati, and the Thūpavaṃsa were 
arguably the product of the same milieu, the interlinked Buddhist 
communities around the edges of the Bay of Bengal and the Indian 
Ocean – Bodhgayā, Pagan, the Thai-Malay Peninsula, and Sri Lanka 
− in the eleventh-thirteenth centuries.
According to the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, one of the tooth relics of the Buddha 
was installed in a stūpa in Kalinga, on the northeastern coast of India, 
but warfare erupted over it, and eventually the king’s daughter and her 
husband were entrusted to carry it to Sri Lanka, where it would be 
safer. On the way, the couple deposited it temporarily in the middle of 
a “heap of sand” (P. vālukā-rāsi-majjha), where its presence was detected 
by a flying monk, a mahāthera, and then by a nāga-king, who seized it 
(Law 1925: 34-40).5 Returned to the couple through the powers of 
the mahāthera, it eventually safely reached Sri Lanka. It was the heap 
of sand that captured the imagination of the people of the peninsula; 
it became the Hat Sai Kaeo, the “crystal sands,” surrounded by the 
sea, and the mahāthera who had saved it made a prediction, that at 
this site a king named Thammasokarat would rule over a city called 
Nakhon Si Thammarat, where a “Great Reliquary” would be built 
(Wyatt 1975: 66, 70).
Thammasokarat  (Dharmāsokarāja) is the Thai name for King 
Asoka of India, and it became a local dynastic title, used by historical 
rulers in the twelfth-thirteenth century. The first local Asoka, according 
to the chronicle, was a contemporary of King Asoka, and his behaviour 
may have been partly modeled on that of King Devānampiyatissa of 
Sri Lanka, another contemporary, who, similarly, had decided to build 
a stūpa before actually knowing where any relics could be found (Geiger 
1960: 78, 116). The story of the discovery of the relics deposited 
by King Ajātasatru, properly an accomplishment of the Indian 
Figure 3: Detail of Phra That 
Phanom. Carved brick panel showing 
horse with rider, before the collapse of 
the monument [Photograph courtesy 
of Srisakra Vallibhotama].
Figure 4: Phra Borommathat  
(the “Supreme Reliquary Stūpa”), 
Wat Phra Borommathat,  
Nakhon Si Thammarat [Photograph 
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 13 ---
Hiram WoodWard
23
22
Asoka, was appropriated and assigned to the local 
Thammasokarat. In the words of the poem quoted 
above, the “People began to dig. Men and women 
were everywhere, and they interfered with each 
other. Fighting with each other as they dug, some fell 
down and couldn’t manage to stand up again” (FAD 
2504: 6). But an obstacle is encountered, a phapphayon 
(in Indic spelling, bhābayanta, i.e. bhāvayantra, a magical 
diagram of images) that emerges and slashes off 
people’s heads.
“Don’t dig any more or you’ll die, your life will 
be at an end.” The king was downcast and angered 
at this obstacle, this thing which wouldn’t yield and 
which was still there after all these years.
“You elders, chiefs, and ministers, have you seen 
this before?” he said. “Has this ever happened? 
Councilors and wise men, tell me now.”
Astrologers and citizens, councilors and 
ministers, made the obeisances and said, “According 
to the texts, this is a warning. What has occurred is 
called a bhāvayantra.” (FAD 2504: 7; my translation)
Eventually the god Indra dispatches Viśvakarma 
(spelled Beśṇukarrm in the printed text), who with a 
magic arrow neutralises the bhāvayantra. This version 
of the story accords in general with that in the 
Thūpavaṃsa, where the protective device is more specifically described 
as a rapidly turning wheel, with automatons brandishing swords on 
the edge (the Roman robots). There, it is called a vāḷa-saṅghāṭa-yanta, 
presumably a device of arrayed wild beasts (FAD 2511: 47, 165). In 
the Lokapaññati, it is also a kind of yantra, a bhūta-vāhana-yanta, that is, 
vehicle-for-spirits machine (Denis 1977: I, 141).
The magical qualities of these machines distinguish them from the 
“great wheel armed with sharp swords that spun with the force of the 
river” in the Chinese text of 306 CE (Strong 1983: 302). The wheel was 
placed in the swiftly flowing Ganges river and operated on scientific 
principles. Still, since this wheel is in Chinese a lun, the same word used 
to translate cakra and is later applied to yantras in the shape of circles 
of letters, it is possible to imagine it turning into something magical.6 
In the Chinese text it is halted, following the advice of a monk, by the 
application of quantities of plums that gum up the works. Although in 
one of the Nakhon Si Thammarat versions the application of medicinal 
leaves neutralises the bhāvayantra prior to the descent of Viśvakarma 
(Wyatt 1975: 82), it is hard, when comparing these texts, to find any 
firm ground that would enable us to conclude that at one or another 
point we can attribute a particular belief to the Mahāyāna phase of 
the peninsula’s past, prior to the spread of Pāli texts in the eleventh-
thirteenth centuries. 
Nakhon Pathom
The case of Nakhon Pathom is for various reasons more 
intriguing than are Haripuñjaya, Phra That Phanom, or 
Nakhon Si Thammarat. There are competing legends, 
and they cannot be understood merely by consulting 
English-language studies or translations. Somewhat 
complicating the situation is the existence of two ancient 
sites with rather similar names, which are easy to confuse 
and doubtless have been mixed up in the past. One is 
Phra Pathom Chedi, the great tiled stūpa restored by 
King Mongkut (r. 1851-1868), today the memorable 
focal point of the modern town [Figure 5]. The 
other is Phra Prathon Chedi, the site of which marks 
the centre of the ancient Dvāravatī city. Prior to King 
Mongkut’s reconstruction, the original stūpa of Phra 
Pathom Chedi was surmounted by a prang (a Khmer-type 
tower), of uncertain date. A prang was also constructed at 
some point atop the chedi at Wat Phra Prathon (i.e., Phra 
Prathon Chedi), and it was left standing in the recent 
clearing of the monument [Figure 6].
Furthermore, the names of the two monuments have 
complicated histories. In older texts, such as a legend 
recorded in 1807 (Wichianpricha 2506: 69) and a nirat 
by the poet Sunthon Phu (2508 and 1986), Phra Pathom 
Chedi is called “Phra Prathom,” spelled Braḥ Praḥdham 
(พระประธม). This “dham” is like the thom of Angkor Thom 
at Angkor, a Khmer word meaning “great,” and this part of the name 
may have considerable antiquity. In Inscription no. 2 of Sukhothai, of 
the fourteenth century, there is a passage that has been translated “The 
cetiya, [including] the new construction as well as the old, reached a 
height of a hundred and two fathoms. The Khòm call it ‘Braḥ Dhaṃ.’ 
It is built in the middle of Lord Kris’s city” (Griswold & Prasert 1972: 
121-122).7 The interpretation of this section of Inscription no. 2 is one 
of the most contested issues in Thai epigraphy, but the view that the 
stūpa in question is Phra Pathom Chedi (Wright 1985: 231) is entirely 
reasonable.8 It was evidently located in a place where there were 
speakers of Khmer (Khòm), and the Hindu god Kṛṣṇa’s (Lord Kris’s) 
city was Dvāravatī (Jacques 2009: 27). If the identification is correct, 
it incidentally provides additional information: that by the fourteenth 
century the monument was no longer known by its original Mon or 
Indic name but by the name given by the recent overlords, the Khmers.
At this point the analysis of names becomes even more complicated. 
There is another Khmer word, daṃ, “to perch,” which would in Thai 
be pronounced thom, and it is the root of a derivative, phdaṃ, “to sleep” 
(restricted to royalty), which eventually became the words parrdam 
(บรรทม, pronounced banthom) and praḥdam (ประทม, pronounced prathom), 
with the same meaning in modern Thai (Uraisi 2553: 298). Phra 
Prathom, according to manuscripts recorded in Nakhon Pathom in the 
nineteenth century, was built at the site of a place where the Buddha 
had for a period come to lie down (Thiphakorawong 2469: 31). Phra 
Prathom Chedi was therefore, traditionally, “the stūpa (built at the place 
where the Buddha) reclined.” 
Figure 5: Phra Pathom Chedi,  
early twentieth century, Nakhon Pathom 
[After Karl Döhring, Buddhistische 
Tempelanlagen in Siam, Siam: 
Asia Publishing House, 1920,  
first plate volume, pl. 14].
Figure 6: Phra Prathon Chedi, 
Nakhon Pathom [Photograph 
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 14 ---
Hiram WoodWard
25
24
This did not accord at all well with the beliefs of King Mongkut, who 
told his chronicler Chao Phraya Thiphakorawong (2469: 1) that he had 
seen the spelling paṭhama (ปฐม), pronounced pathom, in old manuscripts. 
Paṭhama is the Pāli word for “first,” and it is the word King Mongkut 
designated as the official name for the monument. Mongkut’s views 
about the great antiquity of the stūpa also depended on historical and 
archaeological evidence (Thiphakorawong 2469: 1, 3). The “historical 
evidence” was the information in the Mahāvaṃsa (Geiger 1960: 86) 
about the missionaries sent by King Asoka to various countries (Soṇa 
and Uttara were sent to Suvaṇṇabhūmi) − “evidence” not previously 
encountered in this survey.9 On the archaeological side, Mongkut was 
able to deduce from the size of the bricks that the structure was surely 
very old.
The name prathon (spelled ประโทน, praḥdōna) seems to be somewhat 
less complicated. Manuscripts seen by Chao Phraya Thiphakorawong 
in the nineteenth century (2469: 17-19) quite explicitly connect it with 
Doṇa (Skt, Droṇa), the Brahmin who measured the Buddha’s relics with 
a cup that was also called a doṇa (Strong 2007: 116-123). Just before 
battle was about to break out among eight armies intent on acquiring 
the Buddha’s relics, the Brahmin Doṇa stepped forward and offered 
to parcel out eight portions equally. At a moment when no one was 
watching, Doṇa sneaked a tooth relic under his turban. He was seen, 
however, by the god Indra, who swooped down, snatched away the 
relic unnoticed, and carried it back to the Heaven of the Thirty-three 
for installation in the Cūḷāmaṇi Cetiya. Doṇa, when he discovered 
the relic missing, could not very well ask who had stolen it, and so he 
made a request for the measuring cup itself, which was granted. It is 
this measuring cup that is said to be installed at Phra Prathon Chedi. 
The prefix pra- is linguistically Khmer; according to Philip Jenner and 
Saveros Pou (1980-81: xxxvi), it “retains the causative and factive ideas 
of simple /p-/.” Praḥdōna, therefore, might mean “caused (i.e., built) by 
Doṇa.” Given this straightforward etymology, it could be that the name 
Prathon is the oldest, that the name pra- plus dham (great) 
was subsequently coined following the same pattern, and 
that eventually pra-dham (pronounced prathom), whatever it 
may have originally meant, acquired the meaning of its 
homophone pra-dam (recline).
Before returning to the Brahmin Doṇa, it is worth 
taking up both the best-known legend concerning Phra 
Prathom and the experiences of Sunthon Phu, as recorded 
in his poem (2508 and 1986). The legend is quite different 
in character from any of those encountered so far. It is 
found in a collection of  historical tales compiled in 1807, 
in the early Bangkok period (Notton 1939: 82-96), and in 
variant form in the manuscripts viewed by Chao Phraya 
Thiphakorawong.10 The ruler of Kanchanaburi, Phraya 
Kong, was told by astrologers that his son would later kill 
his own father. Phraya Kong sent his son away to live with 
an old woman called Yai Hom, and she raised him as 
her own. Later this prince joined the army of the Phraya 
of Ratchaburi, and he encouraged the Phraya to stop 
sending tribute to Phraya Kong of Kanchanaburi. War 
ensued, and the prince, ignorant of his father’s identity, 
at last faced Phraya Kong himself in 
elephant combat. Phraya Kong fell, 
the prince entered Kanchanaburi in 
triumph, and he was consecrated as 
Phraya Phan. Phan then entered the 
women’s apartments, where he heard 
a cat say, “Look at this son who’s 
searching for his mother!” Phan was 
startled, and when he met his real 
mother, she was able to identify him 
on account of a scar he had had on his 
forehead since he had been an infant. 
She revealed his parentage to him. His 
first action was to put his foster mother, 
Yai Hom, to death for having kept 
his identity to herself. Subsequently 
Phraya Phan was told by monks that he 
could cleanse his karma (T. lang kam) by 
building a chedi. Phra Prathom Chedi 
was the result.
Looking into Indian literature 
for a counterpart to this myth does 
not appear to bring positive results. 
Rather obviously, it seems like a 
parable of ethnic change, and one 
of the variants reported by Chao 
Phraya Thiphakorawong (2469: 27) 
supports this interpretation. There, 
Kong is the ruler of Śrīvijaya, that 
is, Nakhon Chaisi (Nagara Jaiyaśrī), 
the ancient site of Nakhon Pathom 
itself, and the prince is raised by the 
king of Sukhothai as if he were his 
own son. Returning south, he kills 
his father and subsequently builds Phra Prathom Chedi. Looked at 
this way, the myth cannot have had anything to do with the original 
foundation of the monument but would have been much tied up 
with its renovation. Unfortunately, it is not yet possible to use art 
historical evidence to anchor these events. The Phra Pathom Chedi 
National Museum houses a number of stucco heads that can be dated 
to about the late thirteenth century, indicating activity in this period 
[Figure 7]. The exact date of the prang, or Khmer-type tower, that 
was built surmounting the bell-shaped stūpa has not, however, been 
determined.  Its proportions, according to the depiction in a mural in 
the eastern wihan at the site [Figure 8], appear too slender for the late 
thirteenth or the fourteenth century and suggest it may not have been 
constructed until the sixteenth century, during the Ayutthaya period. 
In another depiction [Figure 9], however, the fatter proportions are 
compatible with the earlier date.
In 1842, Sunthon Phu (1786-1855), the greatest poet of the period, 
visited Phra Pathom Chedi (which was not yet known by that name), 
and his trip became the basis for his 895-line poem, Nirat Phra Prathom. 
A nirat is a travel poem filled with expressions of longing for an absent 
Figure 7: Head of a crowned figure, 
probably the Buddha, circa late  
13th cent. Stucco, H. 11 cm. 
Currently in the Phra Pathom Chedi 
National Museum [Photograph by 
Hiram Woodward].
Figure 8: Mural in the eastern 
wihan at Phra Pathom Chedi, 
showing the older monument  
encased by the stūpa built by  
King Mongkut [Photograph  
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].
Figure 9: Modern mural in the 
southern wihan at Phra Pathom 
Chedi, showing the older monument 
as found in ruin by Prince Mongkut, 
then in the monkhood [Photograph 
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 15 ---
Hiram WoodWard
27
26
loved one, and with sadness at the recollection 
of past loves. Place names play an important 
part in evoking these feelings, and what might 
sound in translation like a litany of the names 
of former girlfriends is lightened in Thai by 
the musicality of the sounds of the words. The 
view of “Phra Prathom” presented in the nirat 
is simultaneously determined by the poet’s 
sensibility and by experiences that would have 
been shared by any tourist from the city.
Sunthon Phu finds the base of the stūpa 
surrounded by vegetation, although there are 
some structures where wandering monks may 
stay. He is able to look up and discern the 
architectural features of the surmounting prang, 
its gables and the re-entrant angles of its plan 
(line 596). He finds the staircase and ascends 
to an upper level, where he carries out a ritual 
triple circumambulation and makes offerings 
(some entrusted to him by others). The poet 
calls “Phra Prathom” a paramadhātu (bǫrommathat, 
like the stūpa at Nakhon Si Thammarat), 
meaning that it houses a relic, but he does not 
record any information about the relic’s identity, 
or speculate concerning its origin. He turns to 
subjective experience, hoping that his poems will last forever and that 
the merit earned by his pilgrimage will enable him to join his deceased 
loved one in the Heaven of the Thirty-three. On the way down, still 
apparently self-absorbed, he picks up a loose brick and flings it, but the 
monument is so broad that the brick does not land beyond the base 
(line 749).
Having descended (walking backwards down the steep staircase), 
Sunthon Phu finds image halls (T. bot and wihan) and a large sculpture 
of a reclining Buddha. He meets up with villagers, who point out the 
portrait and commemorative stone sculptures of Phraya Kong, Phraya 
Phan, and Phraya Phan’s mother (lines 810-811). He briefly recounts 
their story. Phra Prathon Chedi [Figure 6], he writes (actually he 
describes it as “Phra Prang Prathon”), was built by Phraya Phan in 
recognition of the love bestowed by Yai Hom, his foster mother, whom he 
had been fated to kill. He cremated his mother and father and installed 
the remains in a cave (tham), over which the golden “Phra Prathom” 
(i.e., Phra Pathom Chedi) was built. According to Erik Seidenfaden’s 
1929 Guide, at that time, the images of Phraya Kong and Phraya 
Phan, both in actuality Dvāravatī stone sculptures of the Buddha or 
of a disciple, were installed outside the northern and southern wihan, 
respectively (1929: 26, 33). The statue known as Yai Hom, placed in the 
gallery, was in form a Bodhisattva, whose head had been stolen (1929: 
39). Today the sculpture of Yai Hom that receives reverence is not at 
Phra Pathom Chedi but at Wat Phra Prathon, in accordance with what 
Sunthon Phu wrote about her connection with the monument there 
[Figure 10].
The Question of Historical Evidence
This account of the various legends and linguistic mazes appears to 
have taken us back a certain distance in time − to the period of Khmer 
domination − but not beyond. Let us look closely, however, at a statement 
that appears at the beginning of Chao Phraya Thiphakorawong’s 
account of one of the manuscripts, that of Mr Thong.
In the time before the capital city of Jaiyaśrī had been 
established, there was a brāhmaṇa village, called the home 
of Doṇabrāhmaṇa [an alternative translation is “called 
Doṇabrāhmaṇa village”], who took the doṇa, which is the 
golden coconut-shell cup [thanan] that had measured the relics 
of the lord Buddha, to install there in a stone chamber [ruean], 
at the time when, it is said, the Buddhist Era had reached 1,133 
years [= 690 CE]. (Thiphakorawong 2469: 17; my translation) 
Parts of this passage recall the words of Doṇa, when he made 
his plea for the measuring cup, as found in the vernacular Thai life 
of the Buddha, the Pathom Somphothikatha (P., Paṭhamasambodhi). “This 
golden coconut-shell cup that measured the relics I shall take, build a 
chedi for, and install, making it an object of reverence and worship” 
(Paramanuchit 2505: 516). The interesting detail − though it is 
somewhat ambiguous − is that the village should be connected with 
the name Doṇa. In the Pāli texts, no information is given about 
Doṇa’s home village. In Sanskrit and Chinese texts connected with the 
Sarvāstivādin and Mūlasarvāstivādin schools of Buddhism, however, the 
Brahmin’s village is called Droṇagrāmaka (Bareau 1971: 290). There is 
a possibility, therefore, that the statement in Mr Thong’s manuscript 
reflects a tradition that originated in Dvāravatī times, and that this little 
tidbit is a legitimate piece of evidence in the ongoing controversy about 
the nature of Dvāravatī Buddhism.
Perhaps buried in other manuscript sources there are similar 
nuggets offering revelations about early Thailand. It would be a 
mistake, however, to think that this sort of research is only worthwhile 
when it leads to such discoveries. Surely, as new vistas unfold, we gain in 
breadth of understanding by knowing how people of recent centuries 
have managed to construct a meaningful ancient past.
Acknowledgements
For advice and assistance of various sorts, I thank Forrest McGill, 
Samerchai Poolsuwan, and Nicolas Revire.
Figure 10: Modern sculpture 
of Yai Hom with the prince, Phra 
Prathon Chedi, Nakhon Pathom 
[Photograph courtesy of Nicolas 
Revire].

--- PAGE 16 ---
Hiram WoodWard
29
28
References
Bareau, André 
1971  Recherches sur la biographie 
du Buddha dans les Sūtrapiṭaka et les 
Vinayapiṭaka anciens : II. Les derniers 
mois, le parinirvāṇa et les funérailles. 
Volume 2. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Boisselier, Jean 
2000  La reconstruction de 
Phra Pathom Chedi : quelques 
précisions sur le site de  
Nakhon Pathom. Aséanie 6:  
159-189. [Originally published  
in 1978]
Cœdès, George  
1961  Recueil des inscriptions du Siam. 
Pt. II. Inscriptions de Dvāravati, de 
Çrīvijaya et Lăvo. Bangkok: Fine 
Arts Department. [Second Revised 
Edition; First Edition 1924.  
In Thai and French]
Denis, Eugène 
1977  La Lokapaññati et les idées 
cosmologiques du bouddhisme 
ancien. Three Volumes. Lille: 
Reproductions des thèses, 
Université de Lille III.
Dhani Nivat 
1956  Phra Pathom in Mediaeval 
Tradition. Artibus Asiae 19: 227-229.
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2504  Tamnan phra bǫrommathat 
nakhǫn si thammarat klǫn suat (History 
of the Great Reliquary Stūpa of 
Nakhon Si Thammarat, a Poem 
for Chanting). Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai; 1961 CE]
2511  Phra khamphi thupawong tamnan 
wa duai kansang phra sathupčhedi  
(The Scripture Thūpavaṃsa, a 
History Concerning the Building 
of Stūpas). Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai; 1968 CE]
2534  Wannakam samai rattanakosin 
lem 1 (muat sasanačhak) khamphi 
mahawong (Bangkok-period 
Literature, vol. 1 (Religion Section): 
the Mahāvaṃsa). Bangkok:  
Fine Arts Department. [In Thai; 
1991 CE]
Geiger, Wilhelm (trans.) 
1960  The Mahāvaṃsa or the Great 
Chronicle of Ceylon. Colombo: 
Ceylon Government Information 
Department.
Endnotes
1 
At least according to the reading of Cœdès (1961: 
19), although the word ṛṣi is not really clear in this 
inscription (Revire, this volume).
2 
Silāpatta according to the Swearer and Sommai 
English translation of Bodhiraṃsi (1998: 49), but 
the correct form is silāpaṭṭa. There are two distinct  
Pāli words, patta (alms bowl; Skt, pātra) and paṭṭa  
(slab; Skt, paṭṭa). The late Michael Wright asked 
(2004-05) why King Ramkhamhaeng’s stone 
platform (in Inscription no. 1) is called a pātra 
(when one would have expected paṭṭa). Perhaps  
it was because of confusion between the two  
Pāli words.
3 
In this introductory essay, the terms stūpa, cetiya, 
and chedi (or čhedi) are considered interchangeable.
4 
In 1975, the tower collapsed but was then re-built.
5 
For the Pāli text, see: http://www.buddhanet-de.
net/ancient-buddhist-texts/Buddhist-Texts/X2-
Dathavamsa/Dathavamsa.pdf.
6 
The Ayuwang Zhuan, T. 2042.50.0131a05  
(Taishō reference). I thank Dr Hui-Wen Lu for 
confirming the accuracy of the translation in 
Strong (1983: 302).
7 
Thom in the inscription is not spelled ธม but ธํ, i.e. 
with a little circle over the consonant to denote 
anusvāra, as in modern Khmer.
8 
Winai (2000: 156) also raised the possibility 
of a connection with Inscription no. 2. It has 
been pointed out that the career of Si Sattha 
in Inscription no. 2 is paralleled in one of the 
legends of Nakhon Pathom by that of Maha 
Lai Lai (“Tatooed Shoulders”). See Woodward 
(1975: I, 157-158) and Winai (2000: 157). Winai’s 
short article was composed as an introduction to 
Boisselier (2000), which was a re-publication of a 
book that appeared in 1978.
  9 A translation of the first thirty-six chapters of 
the Mahāvaṃsa into Thai was made by Phraya 
Thammaparohit in 1796 CE. For the Thai 
translation of this passage, see FAD (2534: 186). 
Revire (2011: 99) has argued that the reference 
of King Mongkut was possibly based on a local 
adapted Pāli version such as the “Extended 
Mahāvaṃsa,” or else the Vaṃsamālinī composed 
during the reign of Rama I.
10 Early printings of this book are hard to come 
by and have been little noticed. More recently 
the book was issued in pamphlet form by the 
Samnak-ngan Chat Prayot lae Raksa Ong Phra 
Pathom Chedi in 1979, and in 1985 the Fine Arts 
Department published Rueang phra pathom čhedi: 
krom sinlapakǫn truat sop chamra mai (The Story of 
Phra Pathom Chedi, re-edited and corrected by 
the Fine Arts Department), cited by Winai (2000: 
158), which I have not seen. I do not know whether 
it indicates if any of the original manuscripts are 
still in existence. The narrative account by Chao 
Phraya Thiphakorawong (2469: 1-16) parallels his 
account in the royal chronicle of the reign of King 
Mongkut, translated by Flood (Thiphakorawong 
1965-74: II, 499-519), which was the primary 
source for Boisselier (2000). The sections on the 
manuscripts (2469: 17-26 and 27-32) are briefly 
summarised in Woodward (1975: I, 152-158). 
Some parts of these texts were utilised by Prince 
Dhani (1956) and Winai (2000).
Griswold, Alexander B. & 
Prasert na Nagara 
1972  King Lödaiya of Sukhodaya 
and his Contemporaries. 
Epigraphic and Historical Studies, 
No. 10. Journal of the Siam Society 
60(1): 21-152.
Jacques, Claude 
2009  Dvāravatī, un royaume 
sans histoire. In Baptiste, Pierre & 
Zéphir, Thierry (eds), Dvāravatī : 
aux sources du bouddhisme en Thaïlande. 
Paris: Musée Guimet, pp. 27-29.
Jenner, Philip N. & Saveros Pou 
1980-81  A Lexicon of Khmer 
Morphology. Mon-Khmer Studies 
Volumes IX-X. Manoa: University 
Press of Hawai’i.
Law, Bimala Charan  
(ed. & trans.) 
1925  The Dāṭhāvaṁsa (A History  
of the Tooth-relic of the Buddha).  
Lahore: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Low, Lt.-Col. James 
1843  Gleanings in Buddhism;  
or Translations of Passages  
from a Siamese Version of a  
Pali Work, Termed in Siamese  
‘Phra Pat’hom.’ Journal of the  
Asiatic Society of Bengal 12(2): 72-98.
Notton, Camille (trans.) 
1939  Légendes sur le Siam et le 
Cambodge. Bangkok: Imprimerie  
de l’Assomption. [Translation of 
Wichianpricha 2506]
Paramanuchit Chinorot,  
Krom Somdet Phra (trans.) 
2505  Phra pathom somphothikatha 
(The Paṭhamasambodhi). Bangkok: 
Department of Religion.  
[In Thai; 1962 CE]
Pruess, James B.  
1976  The Thāt Phanom Chronicle:  
A Shrine History and Its Interpretation. 
Data Paper Number 104. Ithaca, 
New York: Southeast Asia 
Program, Cornell University.
Revire, Nicolas 
2011  Facts and Fiction: The Myth 
of Suvaṇṇabhūmi through the 
Thai and Burmese Looking Glass. 
Mahachulalongkorn Journal of Buddhist 
Studies 4: 79-114.
Seidenfaden, Erik 
1929  Guide to Nakon Patom. 
Bangkok: Royal State Railways  
of Siam.
Strong, John S.  
1983  The Legend of King Aśoka: 
A Study and Translation of the 
Aśokāvadāna. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
2007  Relics of the Buddha. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Sunthon Phu  
2508  Prachum nirat sunthǫn phu 
(Collected Nirats of Sunthon Phu). 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department. 
[In Thai; 1965 CE]
1986  Nirat phra prathom. English 
Translation by Montri Umavijani. 
Bangkok: Private Publisher. 
Swearer, Donald K. &  
Sommai Premchit (trans.) 
1998  The Legend of Queen Cāma: 
Bodhiraṃsi’s Cāmadevīvaṃsa. A 
Translation and Commentary. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Thiphakorawong,  
Chao Phraya (ed.) 
2469  Rueang phra pathom čhedi  
(The Story of Phra Pathom Chedi). 
Bangkok: National Library.  
[In Thai; 1926 CE]
1965-74 The Dynastic Chronicles, 
Bangkok Era, The Fourth Reign B.E. 
2394-2411. (A.D. 1851-1868). 
English Translation by Chadin 
(Kanjanavanit) Flood. Five 
Volumes. Tokyo: Centre for  
East Asian Cultural Studies.
Uraisi Varasarin 
2553  Rǫngrǫi phasa khamen nai phasa 
thai. Bangkok: Silpakorn University. 
[Originally published in 1984 as 
Les élements khmers dans la formation de 
la langue siamoise; In Thai; 2010 CE] 
Wichianpricha 
2506  Phongsawadan nuea 
(Chronicle of the North).  
In Prachum phongsawadan lem 1. 
Bangkok: Khurusapha, pp. 1-127. 
[In Thai; 1963 CE]
Winai Pongsripian 
2000  Présentation et commentaire. 
Aséanie 6: 155-158. [Introduction to 
Boisselier 2000]
Woodward, Hiram W., Jr 
1975  Studies in the Art of Central 
Siam, 950-1350. Doctoral 
Dissertation. New Haven: Yale 
University. [Unpublished]
Wright, Michael 
1985  Note on Betty Gosling’s 
Article: Why Were the Jatakas 
“Hidden Away” at Wat Si Chum 
(JSS Vol. 72). Journal of the Siam 
Society 73: 226-234.
2004-05  Language Anomalies in 
Inscription One. Journal of the Thai 
Khadi Research Institute 2(1): 173-187.
Wyatt, David K.  
1975  The Crystal Sands: The 
Chronicles of Nagara Śrī Dharrmarāja. 
Data Paper Number 98. Ithaca, 
New York: Southeast Asia 
Program, Cornell University.

--- PAGE 17 ---
30
PART I
TranSiTionS from laTe PreHiSTory  
To early HiSTory

--- PAGE 18 ---
33
32
Introduction
A
rchaeologists who in recent decades have studied the transition 
 between protohistory and early Thai history have often noted that 
the entire area of the present-day Lower Central Plain of Thailand was 
covered by seawater that formed a palaeo-gulf up to the period of circa 
600-700 CE. According to this scheme, its northernmost shoreline was 
supposedly located in the area of Ang Thong province [Figure 1].
Phytogeography, that is, geomorphological and palynological studies, 
together with a range of relative calibrated ages of new radiocarbon 
dates from sedimentary sequences of the Lower Central Plain, form 
the basis of the present essay.1 The findings tend to temper and even 
scientifically disprove the model described above by archaeologists, 
at least for the first-millennium CE palaeo-shoreline of the Gulf 
of Thailand. The study reveals that landform of the Lower Central 
Plain developed from a palaeo-gulf during the Holocene Maximum 
Transgression from 8,400 calendar years before the present (cal BP; or 
ca 6,400 BCE) and that its shoreline has been characterised by mangrove 
forest located in the area of present-day Suphan Buri and Ang Thong 
provinces. This palaeo-shoreline has moved continuously southward 
over the centuries under the influence of the Holocene Regression. 
Dated evidence of mangrove remains found in a sedimentary sequence 
suggests that the palaeo-shoreline was actually located in the vicinity of 
present-day northern Bangkok around 600-700 CE. 
Geographical Setting
The strategic location of the Lower Central Plain for economic and 
political activity makes it one of the most geographically attractive 
regions of Thailand. The deltaic sediment that carpets the basin is 
nutrient-rich and appropriate for growing rice – hence, the area is 
known as the “rice bowl of Thailand” (Fukui 1971: 371). The main 
Siamese political powers emerged in this region, during the Ayutthaya 
period (1350-1767 CE) and in the more recent Thon Buri (1767-1782 
CE) and Bangkok periods (1782-present CE).
The Central Plain is located in the middle of the kingdom of 
Thailand. Its primary features are a fluvial plain to the north, a deltaic 
plain to the south and the coastal area at its southernmost reach (DMR 
2544). In the past, the Central Plain was topographically divided into 
three parts: the northern basin, the Nakhon Sawan area, and the 
southern basin (Alekseev & Takaya 1967; Takaya 1968, 1969 and 
1972). According to the most recent geological study, the northern basin 
and Nakhon Sawan area are considered to be a single region, namely 
Reconsidering the Palaeo-shoreline in the 
Lower Central Plain of Thailand
Trongjai HuTangkura
Figure 1: A conceptual illustration of the relationship between the positions of ancient cities and the palaeo-shoreline during the 
Dvāravatī period based on topographic elevation [Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura, modified from Phongsi & Thiwa 2524].
Previous pages: Pottery lamp  
from the ancient city of Mueang Bon,  
Nakhon Sawan province, ca  
5th-6th century, 9 cm. high. Bangkok 
National Museum, inv. no. 1/9 
[Photograph courtesy of Paisarn 
Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 19 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
35
34
the Upper Central Plain, while the southern 
basin is alternatively called the Lower Central 
Plain (Phisit 1995; Sin 2000) [Figure 2]. 
The Upper Central Plain receives fluvial 
sedimentation only from northern Thailand. 
The Lower Central Plain receives fluvial 
sedimentation from three directions which 
has been deposited over the marine clay 
stratigraphy of Early to Middle Holocene 
from approximately 7,000 to 3,000 BCE.
The Upper Central Plain is where the 
Ping, Wang, Yom, and Nan rivers join 
to become the Chao Phraya river in the 
area of Pak Nam Pho at Nakhon Sawan. 
Sedimentation of the plain originates from 
the erosion and weathering process of the 
fluvial action and provides a diverse fluvial 
topography of floodplains, terraces, and 
freshwater swamps.
The Lower Central Plain is a depression 
area that extends approximately north-south 
from Ang Thong to Samut Prakan and east-
west from Chachoengsao to Nakhon Pathom. 
Its topography is characterised by a large 
deltaic plain, which originated by sediment 
discharge of the Chao Phraya river flowing 
from Nakhon Sawan in the Upper Central 
Plain southerly to the Gulf of Thailand at 
Samut Prakan. Besides the influence of the 
river system from the north, other influences 
emanate from the eastern and western sides 
of the deltaic plain. Flowing from the west 
are the Mae Klong, the Sakae Krang, and the 
Tha Chin rivers, while those from the east are 
the Pasak, the Lop Buri, and the Bang Pakong rivers. However, only 
four rivers (the Chao Phraya, the Tha Chin, the Mae Klong, and the 
Bang Pakong) empty into the Gulf of Thailand.
The term Lower Central Plain has been employed in recent 
geological work to describe the zone which was influenced by the 
Holocene sea-level change and resulted in traces of a palaeo-gulf, 
brackish/old marine clays, fragments of sea shells, and palaeo-
mangrove occupation. However, the term Chao Phraya Delta is also 
equally used (Umitsu et al. 2002). A number of alternative names 
were used for the Lower Central Plain in previous work, such as the 
“Southern Basin of the Central Plain” (Takaya 1969), the “Bangkok 
Plain” (Hattori 1972b), the “Chao Phraya Depression” (Charan 1975), 
the “Chao Phraya-Mae Klong Basins” (Selvakumar 1977), the “Lower 
Chao Phraya Basin” (Sangad & Vella 1983), and the “Southern Central 
Plain” (Rau & Prinya 1983).
State of Problems
Standardised Radiocarbon Dates as Cal BP
Geologists have from late in the 1960s recognised traces of marine 
transgression during the Holocene period (Pons & Kevie 1969; Takaya 
1968, 1969, 1971a, 1971b, and 1972; Hattori 1972a and 1972b). Plant 
and animal remains that are associated with marine conditions have 
been studied continuously since the 1980s (Chongpan et al. 1983; 
Somboon 1987 and 1988; Chutamat et al. 1987). A geomorphological 
study has revealed that the marine transgression, the result of the sea-
level rise, began during the transitional period approximately between 
10,000 and 6,000 BCE, covering the terminal Late Pleistocene and 
Early Holocene. Accordingly, the sea level reached its maximum point or 
the so-called Mid-Holocene Highstand around 6,000 uncalibrated BP 
(Somboon & Narong 1992). From then onward, the sea level decreased 
gradually along with marine regression. All studies have indicated 
that the geological structure of the Lower Central Plain is a result of 
landform changes from shallow sea to floodplain environments.
Studies before the year 2002, however, only used radiometric ages 
(i.e. uncalibrated BP) in their discussion. So far no calibrated ages have 
been discussed. The first two studies to use calibrated ages (Saito et al. 
2002; Umitsu et al. 2002) pinned the maximum transgression between 
8,000 and 7,000 cal BP (or ca 6,000-5,000 BCE). The following year, 
Tanabe et al. (2003) improved the palaeo-shoreline concept of Umitsu 
et al. (2002). Mauro Negri (2009), however, who used molluscan remains 
as a sea-level indicator, proposed that the maximum position of palaeo-
shoreline stood at 5,500 ± 50 cal BP (or ca 3,500 BCE). Unfortunately, 
the present author has also found that the result “5,500 ± 50” is actually 
not a calibrated age. Negri (2009) in fact only referred to the date given 
in the earlier work of Chongpan et al. (1983), which is reported as a 
radiometric age.
To date, most radiocarbon ages in the Lower Central Plain have 
been dated by radiometric or radioactive methods while only a few have 
been dated by accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS). Moreover, some 
have been calibrated and some others not. The results are therefore 
difficult to use in determining positions of the palaeo-shorelines to a 
reliable standard. Therefore, the present author herewith proposes that 
all radiocarbon ages for the Lower Central Plain be standardised by 
recalibration with the most up-to-date calibration program, such as 
CALIB 6.0.2
Phytogeographical Changes
Traces of plant communities in sedimentary sequences of the Lower 
Central Plain can be investigated by using palynology. Previous 
palynological investigation in the sedimentary sequences has, however, 
been limited to the Bangkok clay horizon. The upper horizons, 
i.e. the weathered clay and covered soil horizons, were reported as 
non-productive sediments for pollen analysis and mostly neglected by 
previous researchers (Somboon 1988; Chutamat et al. 1987; Paramita 
2550). It is fair to say that a complete palynological study in sedimentary 
Figure 2: Location of the Central 
Plain of Thailand; A: The Upper 
Central Plain, B: The Lower 
Central Plain [Drawing by Trongjai 
Hutangkura, modified from Sin 
2000].

--- PAGE 20 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
37
36
sequences of the Lower Central Plain has never yet been undertaken. 
The present study was based on the author’s doctoral research. It presents 
results extracted from palynofloral remains in the sedimentary horizons 
of the Lower Central Plain of Thailand, with the aim of obtaining as 
complete information as possible on ancient plant communities of the 
Holocene sedimentary sequences.
Landform Changes and Archaeology in the Lower 
Central Plain
The absence of prehistoric evidence in the Lower Central Plain has 
been noted from the beginning of prehistoric studies in Thailand 
(Seidenfaden & Kerr 1930; Sarasin 1933). Most parts of the plain 
were covered by seawater during the Early to Middle Holocene, 
approximately 7,000-3,000 BCE, as is confirmed with the occurrence 
of acid sulphate in surface soil layers which developed under brackish 
conditions (Pons & Kevie 1969; Kevie & Banchong 1972; ISM 1981) and 
with the discovery of brackish and marine sediments in deeper layers 
(Alekseev & Takaya 1967; Takaya 1968, 1971a-b; Hattori 1972a-b). 
The geological evidence, however, has not been corroborated or 
exploited by historians and archaeologists until recently. At the beginning 
of the 1980s, some Thai scholars (Phongsi & Thiwa 2524; Thiwa 2526) 
attempted to estimate the position of the palaeo-shoreline during the 
so-called Dvāravatī period (ca the second half of the first millennium 
CE) by using data from Takaya’s (1969) topographical analysis and 
location of the ancient cities of the first millennium. The concept was 
used again by Karen Mudar (1999) in order to analyse the administrative 
moated settlements of the Dvāravatī culture in the Central Plain of 
Thailand. The following pages briefly review this literature, which has 
had a profound impact on ancient historical studies for the region.
The so-called Holocene Maximum Transgression occurred at 6,000 
uncalibrated BP (Somboon & Narong 1992) or during 8,000-7,000 cal 
BP (Umitsu et al. 2002; Tanabe et al. 2003), corresponding to 6,000-
5,000 BCE, resulting in a vast shallow sea that covered most parts of the 
plain. At that time, archaeological sites of pre-Neolithic or Hobinhian 
cultures were distributed mainly in limestone caves of mountainous 
complexes such as cave sites in Kanchanaburi (Rasmi 2000). It is 
obvious that the shallow sea environment was not congruent with pre-
Neolithic settlement patterns that relied on limestone cave sites. For that 
reason, there is no evidence for pre-Neolithic settlements on the alluvial 
fans of the palaeo-gulf during the Maximum Transgression phase.
After the Maximum Transgression phase, the sea level has 
continuously regressed until the present level; this phase is called the 
“Holocene Regression” (Somboon & Narong 1992; Umitsu et al. 2002; 
Tanabe et al. 2003). For this phase, land progradation has been activated 
to form new areas behind mangroves, i.e. a floodplain environment. 
Subsequently, the mangroves moved southward under the influence 
of sea-level fall and freshwater sedimentation in the areas behind the 
mangroves. This phase corresponds to the Neolithic culture (ca 4,000-
2,000 BCE) and Metal Age (ca 2,000 BCE-1,000 CE) (Suraphol 2550: 
16-17). The new floodplain areas were not, apparently, yet ready for 
either Neolithic or Metal Age settlements because no archaeological 
sites have been observed in those areas. In contrast, Metal Age 
settlements were abundant on the undulated terraces covering an area 
from Nakhon Sawan to Lop Buri (Suraphol 2550: 65-97), approximately 
100 km. north of Ayutthaya. During the transition period between 
protohistory and history around the middle of the first millennium, 
moated settlements of Dvāravatī culture started to emerge and were 
distributed throughout the old alluvial fans and terraces of the Lower 
Central Plain, except in the new areas of progradation.
The application of such topographic information to archaeology 
since the early 1980s has, however, led to a very different interpretation. 
The absence of Dvāravatī cultural evidence in the new areas of 
progradation led Phongsi and Thiwa (2524) to interpret alternatively 
that the moated settlements of the mid-to-late first millennium CE could 
have been located near to the sea. Furthermore, that would explain why 
there was no settlement on the lowlands of the Lower Central Plain, 
but only on old deltaic plain and terraces at elevations of higher than 
4 m. above the recent mean sea level (MSL). The hypothesised palaeo-
shoreline was therefore clearly drawn by the suggested topographic 
contour line of 4 m. above MSL [Figure 1] and defined the coastal 
zone during the so-called Dvāravatī period. It was also associated with 
the positions of ancient cities, which were considered de facto “ancient 
ports.” The concept of such a “palaeo-gulf of Dvāravatī” has been 
adopted by many archaeologists since then. Mudar (1999), for example, 
used the model designed by Phongsi and Thiwa (2524) to propose a new 
distribution of Dvāravatī-period moated settlements on the Central 
Plain [Figure 3].
Conflicting interpretations have, however, arisen between 
recent geological information and archaeological applications since 
the 1980s regarding the age of the maximum size of the palaeo-
gulf of Thailand. The concept of the “palaeo-gulf of Dvāravatī” 
has been widely accepted and used in archaeological publications 
and in information distributed to Thai National museums. 
For example, the information is reproduced for showing in the 
Phra Pathom Chedi National Museum [Figure 4]. This author’s 
doctoral research (Trongjai 2012) is aimed at improving the picture 
of the transition period and explaining the relation between the 
Holocene sea-level changes and the ancient topography of the 
Dvāravatī cultural period.
Methodology
Eight geological cores have been extracted from the Lower Central 
Plain in order to provide information on sedimentary sequences, ancient 
plant communities and radiocarbon dates. The cores were labelled 
with provincial names as follows: SR (Saraburi), AT (Ang Thong), 
SB (Suphan Buri), AY2 (Ayutthaya site 2), PT (Pathum Thani), NN 
(Nakhon Nayok), NP1 (Nakhon Pathom site 1) and SS (Samut Sakhon) 
[Figure 5]. Sedimentary sequences have been described according 
to such physical properties as texture, colour and materials in the 
sequences and associated with the results of previous studies (Somphat 
et al. 2530; Sin 2000; Tanabe et al. 2003). Information on ancient plant 
communities was obtained from analysis of extracted pollen samples 
at the CEPAM laboratory of the University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis

--- PAGE 21 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
39
38
Figure 4: Concept of the palaeo-shoreline during the Dvāravatī period, based on Phongsi & Thiwa 2524, on 
displays at the Phra Pathom Chedi National Museum, Nakhon Pathom [Photograph by Trongjai Hutangkura].
Figure 3: Moated settlements in the Lower Central Plain during the mid-to-late first millennium CE  
[Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura, modified from Mudar 1999].

--- PAGE 22 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
41
40
(UNSA) in France. Pollen identification was based on pollen types in the 
“Modern Pollen Collection of the Indochinese Peninsula” of CEPAM 
(Bui Thi Mai et al. 2005) and other photographic publications of Asian 
pollen and spore morphology (Academia Sinica 1982; Huang 1972; 
Thanikaimoni 1987; Zhang et al. 1990). Radiocarbon dates obtained 
from this research and previous work have been calibrated using CALIB 
6.0 with 95.4% confidence (2 sigma) in order to standardise the dates 
in discussing the relation between calibrated ages and the maximum 
extension of the palaeo-gulf of Thailand.
Research Results
Sedimentary Sequences of the Lower Central Plain
Figure 6 displays the geomorphology of the Lower Central Plain that 
is based on existing studies of the region and shows many kinds of 
landform according to period of sedimentation and flood condition. 
Five types of Holocene landforms outlined: old deltaic plain (no. 8), old 
lagoon (no. 9), young lagoon (no. 10), tidal flat (no. 11) and natural levee 
and back marsh (no. 12).
Sedimentary sequences in the sampled cores may be classified in 
two groups according to Holocene sea-level changes: marine-influenced 
and non-marine-influenced sequences. Marine influence were found 
in sedimentary sequences of the cores NN, AT, AY2, NP1, PT, SB 
and SS, which were extracted in the vicinity of the Holocene deltaic 
plain. Non-marine-influenced sequences, or the so-called freshwater/
floodplain sediments, occurred in the core SR. Marine influences in 
the sedimentary cores indicate that the locations of sampling sites were 
located in the boundary limit of the Holocene Maximum Transgression 
onto the Lower Central Plain. The core that contains only non-marine-
influenced sequences was located beyond the reach of the transgressive 
sea level.
Marine-influenced Cores
Sedimentary sequences of the marine-influenced cores contain both 
freshwater and brackish-marine sediments that can be classified as four 
geological horizons from bottom to top (Somboon 1987; Somphat et al. 
2530):
(a) The “stiff clay horizon” is generally characterised by 
freshwater/fluvial sediments consisting of various types of 
particles from clay, silty clay to sandy-silty clay or sandy 
clay. This horizon is the base of Holocene sedimentary 
sequences. It is always overlain by soft clay sequences, the 
so-called “Bangkok clay horizon.”
(b) The “soft clay horizon,” or Bangkok clay horizon, is 
characterised by marine-influenced deposition, i.e. brackish 
and marine sediments. The sediment particles mainly 
consist of clay with a high organic content of very fine 
Figure 5: Coring sites for palynological study in the Lower Central Plain [Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura].

--- PAGE 23 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
43
42
plant remains and are occasionally interbedded with peat 
layers. The thickness of this horizon differs from place to 
place, e.g. NN (8.7 m.), AY2 (7.1 m.), AT (2.9 m.), NP1  
(> 6.4 m.), NP2 (7.4 m.), and PT (7.7 m.). Jarosite (yellow 
mottles) and gypsum needles are occasionally found 
throughout the horizon. The occurrence of jarosite may 
reflect brackish conditions during deposition.
(c) The “weathered clay horizon” is normally characterised 
by a very thin layer (0.75 m. to 1.75 m. thick) interbedded 
between “Bangkok clay” and “covered soil horizons.” 
Sediment particles consist of clay or silty clay. Various 
mottle colours, mainly yellow, red, brown, black and white, 
occur throughout the horizon along with gypsum needles 
and, occasionally, pisolitic iron oxide concretions.
(d) The “covered soil horizon” is very thin humic soil deposits 
with thickness ranging from 0.30 to 0.50 m. Mottles, both in 
cloudy and concentric form, commonly occur throughout 
the horizon, especially in red, brown and yellow colours. 
This horizon was deposited under floodplain conditions.
The overall characteristics of the marine-influenced sequences are 
comparable to previous works on stratigraphic classification (Somphat 
et al. 2530; Sin 2000; Tanabe et al. 2003). Previous studies have also 
reported occurrence of sand ridge sequences in many parts of the 
Lower Central Plain (Prinya et al. 1984; Narong 1984).
Furthermore, the SB core contains only thin layers of brackish 
sediments indicated by the presence of jarosite in dry peaty clay samples. 
The brackish sediments are overlain by a long sequence of freshwater 
sediments. Therefore, this core is situated on the marginal limit of 
the Holocene Maximum Transgression in the Lower Central Plain. 
The geomorphological map [Figure 6] shows that the location of 
the SB core, which is the old deltaic plain, corresponds with the 
palaeo-environment of sub-lagoons with back mangrove flora at the 
time of the Holocene Maximum Transgression, circa 6,000 BCE, as 
presented in a palaeo-geographical map created by Somboon & Narong 
(1992: 59, fig. 8).
Non-marine-influenced Core
The SR core was extracted to a depth of 15 m. and it contained 
only freshwater sedimentary sequences. Absence of brackish/marine 
sediments in the core indicates that the sampling site was never 
impacted by the Holocene Maximum Transgression. The sedimentary 
sequences of the SR core consisted of four horizons, from the bottom 
to the top: stiff clay, soft clay, weathered clay and covered soil horizons. 
Characteristics of the sequences indicate that the core was derived from 
fluvial/floodplain sediments that have accumulated since the end of 
Late Pleistocene, from approximately 10,000 BCE to the present day.
Opposite Figure 6: 
Geomorphological map of the 
Lower Central Plain based on flood 
condition [Drawing by Trongjai 
Hutangkura, based on Narong 
1984, Haruyama 1993, and 
Tanabe et al. 2003].

--- PAGE 24 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
45
44
Palynofloral Records of the Lower Central Plain
Palynomorphs in sedimentary sequences of the Lower Central Plain 
in this study were obtained from the eight core samples mentioned 
above. According to the pollen analysis, the palynomorphs were divided 
according to “pollen and fern spores” and “non-pollen palynomorphs” 
(NPP), in which 190 types of pollen and fern spores were identified. 
Unidentified pollen and fern spores were divided into three sub-
groups: (1) recognisable pollen morphology, (2) recognisable fern spore 
morphology and (3) amorphous pollen grains. The NPP group was 
morphologically analysed into two categories, algal and fungal remains.
Palynomorphs and Environmental Types
Identifiable palynofloral remains of the sedimentary sequences consisted 
of 167 pollen types and 23 fern spore types. The remains reflect palaeo-
vegetation habitats and may be described according to nine types 
of environment: (1) swampy mangrove, (2) landward mangrove, (3) 
back mangrove, (4) landward edge of back mangrove, (5) fern marsh, 
(6) wetland, (7) swamp forest/lowland vegetation, (8) highland 
vegetation, and (9) tropical ferns. These nine environmental types may 
be grouped into three kinds of palaeo-environments: (1) mangrove 
ecology, (2) transitional swamp and (3) floodplain environment.
The mangroves are characterised by three types of environment: 
swamp mangrove, landward mangrove and back mangrove. Assemblage 
of Rhizophoraceae pollen types –, for example, Rhizophora mucronata type 
(P22), Rhizophora mucronata/Rhizophora apiculata type (P19), Rhizophora 
apiculata type (P16), Ceriops tagal/Bruguiera species (sp.) type (P13), 
and Bruguiera gymnorrhiza type – indicates the existence of a swampy 
mangrove area. Assemblage of brackish pollen types – for example, 
Nypa fruticans, Ceriops decandra type, Lumnitzera racemosa, Xylocarpus sp., 
and Excoecaria agallocha – indicates the presence of landward mangrove 
ecology. Examples of pollen types in mangroves are shown in Figure 7.
The transitional swamp consisted of two environmental types: 
landward edge of back mangrove and fern marsh. The transitional 
swamp was a palaeo-environment located between two different 
environmental conditions, that is “saline” and “freshwater.” Remarkable 
pollen types consist of Oncosperma tigillarium, Phoenix paludosa, Aglaia 
cucullata, Barringtonia sp., Derris indica, Pandanus odoratissimus, Suaeda 
maritima, Sesuvium/Trianthema, and Flagellaria indica. Fern spore types of 
the fern marsh environment may be divided into three kinds based on 
the following life forms: (1) aquatic fern (e.g. Acrostichum sp., Ceratopteris 
thalictroides, and Azolla/Salvinia types), (2) climber fern (e.g. Stenochlaena 
palustris and Lygodium microphyllum), and fern (e.g. Pteris sp.). Example 
of palynofloral remains of the transitional swamp are shown in 
Figures 7-8.
The floodplain environment was interpreted by the occurrence of 
101 wetland and swamp forest pollen types. The most abundant types 
in this environment are Gramineae and Cyperaraceae. Other remarkable 
wetland pollen types consist of Typha angustifolia, Alternanthera sp., Araceae 
type, Lemna sp., Potamogeton sp., Utricularia bifida type, and Ipomoea sp. 
Remarkable swamp forest pollen types consist of Borassus flabellifer, 
Elaeocarpus sp., Ficus sp., Moraceae/Ulmaceae type, Myrtaceae, Combretaceae/
Melastomataceae type, Randia sp., Leguminosae type, Amaranthus/Achyranthus 
type, Compositae and Dendrophthoe sp. Samples of the pollen types are 
shown in Figure 8.
Furthermore, there were two minor groups of pollen grains: 
highland vegetation and tropical ferns. Pollen grains of the highland 
vegetation that were occasionally found in mangrove environments were 
considered to be allochthonous pollen grains – for example, Castanea/
Lithocarpus type, Hopea/Shorea type, Pinus sp., and Quercus type. Fern 
spores were also occasionally found in the pollen content. Generally, 
fern spores can be found in various environments from mean sea level 
to higher mountaintops. Therefore, it is difficult to specify their host 
environments. In a broad sense, the occurrence of fern spores in pollen 
contents is considered as an indicator of humidity. Remarkable fern 
spore types obtained from the pollen analysis consisted of, for example, 
Angiopteris evecta, Selaginellaceae type, and Davalliaceae/Polypodiaceae type.
The group of non-pollen palynomorphs (NPP) obtained from the 
pollen analysis was mainly divided into two sub-groups: algal remains, 
which indicate aquatic or swampy condition, and fungal remains, 
Figure 7: Mangrove ecology:  
a. Avicennia sp., b. Rhizophora sp. 
(type P22), c. Rhizophora sp. 
(type P19), d. Rhizophora sp. 
(type P16), e. Ceriops tagal/
Bruguiera sp. (type P13),  
f. Bruguiera gymnorrhiza 
type, g. Kandalia candel type; 
Transitional swamp: h. Phoenix 
paludosa, i. Aglaia cucullata, 
j. Oncosperma tigillarium,  
k. Cynometra ramiflora type,  
l. Derris indica type,  
m. Ceratopteris thalictroides 
(not to scale), n. Lygodium 
microphyllum [Photographs by 
Trongjai Hutangkura].

--- PAGE 25 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
47
46
Figure 8: Transitional swamp: 
o. Stenochlaena palustris; 
Floodplain environment:  
p. Gramineae, q. Cyperaceae,  
r. Hydrocera triflora,  
s. Polygonaceae, t. Araceae  
type, u. Typha angustifolia,  
v. Alternanthera sp. [Photographs  
by Trongjai Hutangkura].
Figure 9: Algal remains:  
w. Zygnema type, x. Mougeotia 
sp., y. Spirogyra sp.,  
z. Pseudoschizeae sp.;  
Fungal remains [Photographs  
by Trongjai Hutangkura].
which imply humid and wet conditions. Algal remains were abundantly 
found in the weathered clay horizon of the transitional swampy section, 
but they were rare in the palaeo-mangrove sedimentary section. In 
contrast, the fungal remains were often found in the palaeo-mangrove 
sedimentary section, sometimes their percentage values were higher 
than 30 % in the palynomorph sum in some certain layers of the palaeo-
mangrove. Some interesting NPP remains are shown in Figure 9.
Pollen Diagrams and Pollen Zonation
The pollen diagrams of the main studied cores are composed of 
12 groups of palynomorphs: (1) swampy mangrove, (2) landward 
mangrove, (3) back mangrove, (4) landward edge of back mangrove, 
(5) fern marsh, (6) ricefields, (7) wetland/floodplain, (8) swamp forest/
lowland vegetation, (9) highland vegetation, (10) tropical ferns, (11) 
unidentified pollen and fern spores and (12) non-pollen palynomorphs 
(NPP). These groups were reclassified to obtain synthetic data of palaeo-
environments which were presented by two types of synthetic pollen 
diagrams: “environmental classification” and “environmental changes” 
(Trongjai 2012: figs 6.5h-6.5v).
In the synthesis of environmental classification, the diagrams 
presented pollen sum of each environmental type of the standard 
pollen diagrams, except that the ricefield group was added to the 
wetland/floodplain group because it was considered part of the 
floodplain environment since rice is a Gramineae and grows naturally in 
such environment. The NPP group from the standard pollen diagram 
was presented as two kinds in the synthetic diagram of environmental 
classification, i.e. fungal remains and freshwater NPP (algal remains) in 
order to show their percentage values relating to the changes of pollen 
percentage values in each environmental type.
Environmental types from the diagram of environmental 
classification were grouped into three major environments: (1) mangrove 
ecology, (2) transitional swamp and (3) floodplain environment, in order 
to demonstrate obvious changes between different phytogeographical 
zones. The percentage values of the mangrove ecology group were 
created by adding the values of the swampy mangrove, landward

--- PAGE 26 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
49
48
mangrove and back mangrove groups. The values of the transitional 
swamp were created by adding the values of the landward edge of 
back mangrove and fern marsh groups. Lastly, the values of the 
floodplain environment were created by adding values of the wetland/
floodplain and swamp forest/lowland vegetation groups. The remaining 
groups – i.e. the highland vegetation, tropical fern, fungal remains and 
algal remains – were excluded from the synthetic diagram of 
environmental changes.
Radiocarbon Dating Calibration
All radiocarbon ages obtained from sedimentary sequences of the Lower 
Central Plain were converted to the calibrated calendar years calculated 
by CALIB 6.0 with the datasets of intcal09.14C for terrestrial materials 
and the marine09.14C for marine materials considering the marine 
reservoir correction, Delta R = -19 ± 70 (Southon et al. 2002). Details 
of the calibration method have already been described in the present 
author’s dissertation (Trongjai 2012). Provenance of all radiocarbon 
samples in the Lower Central Plain are shown in Figure 10 and in 
Table 1.
Furthermore, to estimate the past sea level of the Lower Central 
Plain, two sets of oyster shell samples on rock and one set of corals 
on intertidal reef-flats were considered and calibrated. Locations of the 
sites are shown in Figure 11. The first sample set, reported by Narong 
Thiramongkol (1984), was tested on oyster shell colonies from a cliff in 
Prachuap Kiri Khan province (site no. 77). Since the cliff is located on 
the side of the Gulf of Thailand, the calibration used the Delta R value 
of -19 ± 70. The second sample set, reported by Sin Sinsakul (1990), 
was tested on oyster shell colonies from a cliff in Phang-nga province 
(site no. 78), and the third sample set, reported by Scoffin & Le Tissier 
(1998), was massive fossil corals on reef-flats at Ko Taphao Yai, east of 
Phuket island (site no. 79). Since the cliff and the reef-flats are located 
on coastal side of the Andaman Sea, the calibration used the Delta R 
value of +32 ±70 (Southon et al. 2002).
The calibrated ages revealed that these organic materials obtained 
from the Bangkok clay horizon were dated in the Holocene period 
ranging approximately 8,000-1,000 cal BP, or 6,000 BCE-1,000 CE. 
The dates found in the northern part of the Holocene deltaic plain, 
interestingly, gave an estimated range of 7,000-3,000 BCE, while that 
of the southern part gave a wider range of 7,000 BCE-1,000 CE. For 
the reference point of the sea-level changes from southern Thailand, 
the oldest dates of the sites nos. 77, 78 and 79 were approximately 
5,200-4,500 BCE (at 2 m. above MSL), 4,700-4,000 BCE (at 2 m. above 
MSL) and 4,500-4,100 BCE (at 0.97 m. above MSL), respectively. All 
mentioned calibrated age ranges from the Lower Central Plain and the 
peninsula are shown in Tables 2-3.
New Interpretation and Discussion
In archaeological applications of the above results, the time of the 
Holocene Maximum Transgression must be accurately determined and 
aligned against the timeline of the Lower Central Plain of Thailand. 
Figure 10: Zonation for radiocarbon sites in the Lower Central Plain sampled during the year 1971 to 2009  
[Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura].

--- PAGE 27 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
51
50
Table 1: Selected References of Radiocarbon Age Dating (Uncalibrated)
Site number  
(aS coded in thiS reSearch)
Province
original location code
referenceS
Radiocarbon Sample Zone I: Southeastern Part
1
Chon Buri
KL2
Maloney 1991
2
Chon Buri
BML2
Maloney 1991
4
Chachoengsao
980302-1
Umitsu et al. 1999 & 2002
5
Chachoengsao
Loc.163
Takaya 1972
Radiocarbon Sample Zone II: Eastern Part
6
Chachoengsao
S18
Somboon & Narong 1992
12
Prachin Buri
S24
Somboon & Narong 1992
Radiocarbon Sample Zone III: Northeastern Part
13
Nakhon Nayok
S38
Somboon & Narong 1992
14
Nakhon Nayok
NY48 (Ongkharak)
Sin 2539
18
Pathum Thani
S56
Somboon & Narong 1992
20
Ayutthaya
S55
Somboon & Narong 1992
Radiocarbon Sample Zone IV: Northern Part
23
Ayutthaya
971215-6
Umitsu et al. 2002
24
Ayutthaya
S74
Somboon & Narong 1992
25
Ayutthaya
S69
Somboon & Narong 1992
27
Ayutthaya
971215-5
Umitsu et al. 2002
Radiocarbon Sample Zone V: Northwestern Part
30
Suphan Buri
Locality 3
Narong 1984
Radiocarbon Sample Zone VI: Western Part
40
Nakhon Pathom
NP23
Phisit et al. 2529
Radiocarbon Sample Zone VII: Southwestern Part
50
Ratchaburi
Locality 10
Narong 1984
52
Ratchaburi
BTD (Ban Tak Daet)
Negri 2009
53
Ratchaburi
BPL/BTD2RM
Negri 2009
54
Ratchaburi
990108-3
Umitsu et al. 2002
Radiocarbon Sample Zone VIII: Upper Central Part
55
Pathum Thani
Wat Hoi
Chongpan et al. 1983
60
Pathum Thani
Locality 5
Narong 1984
62
Pathum Thani
990114-2
Umitsu et al. 2002
Radiocarbon Sample Zone IX: Lower Central Part (Chao Phraya River)
63
Nonthaburi
PK (Ban Don Tan)
Negri 2009
64
Bangkok
Senanivate
Somboon 1987
67
Bangkok
NC1 (Ban Ko)
Negri 2009
68
Samut Prakan
CD (King Kaeo)
Wickanet et al. 1999
71
Samut Prakan
980302-3
Umitsu et al. 2002
73
Samut Prakan
Pit 1 (Ban Praeksa)
Tanabe et al. 2003
Radiocarbon Sample Zone X: Lower Central Part (Tha Chin River)
76
Samut Sakhon
Pit 2
Tanabe et al. 2003
Note: Radiocarbon sample zonation is shown here as in Figure 10. Samples were dated in earlier research work.
Table 2: Calibrated Age Ranges of Radiocarbon Samples from the Research Sites
Site: 
Province name
SamPle & dePth 
(m.)
material
radiocarbon age: 
uncalibrated bP
Selected calibrated 
age range (cal bP)
Ang Thong
(AT)
AT 3.40
Wood fragment
6,830 ± 40 BP
7,957-7,785 cal BP
AT 5.20
Wood fragment
6,795 ± 45 BP
7,936-7,714 cal BP
AT 7.40
Micro-charcoal
6,735 ± 45 BP
7,862-7,675 cal BP
Ayutthaya
(AY2)
AY2 7.50
Wood fragment
6,020 ± 40 BP
7,133-7,005 cal BP
AY2 8.50
Wood fragment
6,170 ± 40 BP
7,421-7,246 cal BP
AY2 9.10
Wood fragment
6,220 ± 35 BP
7,422-7,277 cal BP
AY2 9.90
Wood fragment
6,940 ± 40 BP
8,029-7,923 cal BP
Nakhon Nayok
(NN)
NN 3.10
Wood fragment
6,750 ± 40 BP
7,864-7,685 cal BP
NN 5.60
Wood fragment
7,355 ± 40 BP
8,428-8,304 cal BP
NN 6.70
Micro-charcoal
7,360 ± 50 BP
8,453-8,291 cal BP
Nakhon Pathom
(NP1)
NP1 3.50
Micro-charcoal
5,425 ± 35 BP
6,484-6,314 cal BP
NP1 4.20
Micro-charcoal
5,970 ± 40 BP
7,175-6,946 cal BP
NP1 7.30
Charcoal
6,075 ± 35 BP
7,295-7,156 cal BP
NP1 7.80
Wood fragment
6,940 ± 40 BP
8,029-7,923 cal BP
NP1 8.60
Wood fragment
7,030 ± 40 BP
8,161-7,971 cal BP
Pathum Thani 
(PT)
PT 3.90
Charcoal
4,390 ± 35 BP
5,332-5,267 cal BP
PT 7.00
Wood fragment
4,745 ± 35 BP
5,747-5,597 cal BP
PT 9.00
Charcoal
5,545 ± 40 BP
6,655-6,445 cal BP
Suphan Buri (SB)
SB 6.80
Wood fragment
7,425 ± 45 BP
8,524-8,369 cal BP
Samut Sakhon
(SS)
SS 4.00
Wood fragment
modern
modern
SS 5.70
Wood fragment
2,270 ± 30
2,623-2,433 cal BP
SS 5.75
Wood fragment
2,260 ± 30
2,619-2,427 cal BP
SS 7.50
Wood fragment
7,710 ± 40
8,809-8,600 cal BP
Note: The calibrated age ranges were provided by Trongjai (2012: 212-214) using the program CALIB 6.0  
and were selected with a 95.4% confidence level (2 sigma) with relative area under distribution of 1 or nearest 1.  
For other ranges in each sample, see Trongjai (2012: Tables 6.3a-6.4l).
Figure 11: Locations of the sites 
nos. 77 (Prachuap Khiri Khan), 
78 (Phang-nga), and 79 (Phuket) 
and other relative locations: 1) The 
Lower Central Plain, 2) Andaman 
islands, 3) Ca Mau Cape, 4) Marine 
Reservoir Correction Site for the 
Andaman Sea: Nicobar islands  
(ΔR = 32 ±70) and 5) Marine 
Reservoir Correction Site for the  
Gulf of Thailand: Ko Ang Trang  
(ΔR = -19 ±70) [Drawing  
by Trongjai Hutangkura].

--- PAGE 28 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
53
52
Table 3: Selected Calibrated Age Ranges of Radiocarbon Samples 
Site number
Province
dePth (m.)
radiocarbon age :
uncalibrated bP
Selected calibrated  
age range (cal bP)
1. Selected Samples Used in Estimating the First Stage (8,000-7,000 cal BP or 6,000-5,000 BCE)
40
Nakhon Pathom
3.50-4.50 m.
6,380 ± 90 BP
7,438-7,002 cal BP
30
Suphan Buri
2.00 m.
6,830 ± 140 BP
7,939-7,458 cal BP
25
Ayutthaya
2.00-3.50 m.
6,990 ± 300 BP
8,382-7,270 cal BP
27
Ayutthaya
4.00 m.
6,180 ± 110 BP
7,467-6,995 cal BP
24
Ayutthaya
1.45-1.80 m.
7,600 ± 190 BP
8,784-7,972 cal BP
23
Ayutthaya
2.50 m.
6,950 ± 110 BP
8,170-7,719 cal BP
60
Pathum Thani
2.00 m.
6,490 ± 135 BP
7,657-7,156 cal BP
20
Ayutthaya
0.25-1.30 m.
6,800 ± 260 BP
8,176-7,157 cal BP
18
Pathum Thani
1.50-3.00 m.
6,690 ± 280 BP
8,043-6,893 cal BP
13
Nakhon Nayok
4.47-6.00 m.
7,020 ± 180 BP
8,177-7,507 cal BP
12
Prachin Buri
3.00-4.30 m
7,570 ± 170 BP
8,725-7,964 cal BP
6
Chachoengsao
2.40-3.90 m.
7,310 ± 100 BP
8,343-7,930 cal BP
5
Chachoengsao
2.80 m.
7,440 ± 150 BP
8,522-7,968 cal BP
4
Chachoengsao
4.90 m.
6,410 ± 90 BP
7,613-7,313 cal BP
2. Selected Samples Used in Estimating the Second Stage (7,000-5,000 cal BP or 5,000-3,000 BCE)
55
Pathum Thani
3.00-4.00 m.
5,500 ± 50 BP
6,562-6,182 cal BP
14
Nakhon Nayok
3.00-4.00 m.
6,330 ± 90 BP
7,504-7,031 cal BP
1
Chon Buri
2.25-2.29 m.
5,560 ± 160 BP
7,030-6,182 cal BP
2
Chon Buri
3.96-4.00 m.
6,560 ± 100 BP
7,794-7,436 cal BP
3. Selected Samples Used in Estimating the Third Stage (5,000-3,000 cal BP or 3,000-1,000 BCE)
54
Ratchaburi
1.30 m.
3,420 ± 170 BP
4,280-3,339 cal BP
50
Ratchaburi
1.30 m.
3,670 ± 125 BP
4,557-3,768 cal BP
52
Ratchaburi
1.40 m.
4,450 ± 65 BP
4,859-4,398 cal BP
53
Ratchaburi
2.00 m.
3,670 ± 50 BP
3,826-3,393 cal BP
63
Nonthaburi
2.50 m.
4,785 ± 70 BP
5,313-4,826 cal BP
62
Ayutthaya
4.00 m.
6,410 ± 70 BP
7,467-6,995 cal BP
67
Bangkok
1.50 m.
3,995 ± 60 BP
4,428-4,064 cal BP
4. Selected Samples Used in Estimating the Fourth Stage (3,000-2,000 cal BP or 1,000-1 BCE)
64
Bangkok
1.50 m.
2,250 ± 120 BP*
2,544-1,949 cal BP (wood)
2,735-2,057 cal BP (shell)
68a
Samut Prakan
1.25 m.
2,000 ± 240 BP
2,710-1,520 cal BP 
5. Selected Samples Used in Estimating the Fifth Stage (2,000-1,000 cal BP or 1-1,000 CE)
76
Samut Sakhon
4.00 m.
2,210 ± 60 BP
2,062-1,595 cal BP
(= 113 BCE-355 CE)
73
Samut Prakan
3.25 m.
2,070 ± 40 BP
1,868-1,477 cal BP
(= 82-473 CE)
71
Samut Prakan
1.63 m.
940 ± 120 BP
1,165-626 cal BP
(= 785-1,324 CE)
Notes: The calibrated age ranges were provided by Trongjai (2012: 211-214) using the program CALIB 6.0  
and were selected with a 95.4% confidence level (2 sigma) with relative area under distribution of 1 or nearest 1.  
For other ranges in each sample, see Trongjai (2012: Tables 6.3a-6.4l). 
* Somboon (1987: 113, fig. 4.3) did not report uncalibrated material appropriate for such radiocarbon dating.  
Using CALIB 6.0, a wood sample could range between 2,544 and 1,949 cal BP. A shell sample could range  
between 2,735 and 2,057 cal BP.
Results from the author’s doctoral research indicate that the Holocene 
Maximum Transgression completely changed the topography of 
the Lower Central Plain from a floodplain environment of the Late 
Pleistocene at 10,000 cal BP to a complete shallow sea environment at 
8,400 cal BP (ca 6,550 BCE), with reference to the age of a charcoal 
sample from the SB site. Archaeologically speaking, the Holocene 
Maximum Transgression, therefore, occurred in the prehistoric period 
of Hoabinhian culture and provided a vast shallow sea area covering 
most parts of the Lower Central Plain at that time.
The Holocene Maximum Transgression resulted in the maximum 
size of the palaeo-gulf of the Lower Central Plain. This is more or less 
comparable to previous geological estimates by Takaya (1969), Somboon 
(1987), Somboon and Narong (1992), Umitsu et al. (2002) and Tanabe 
et al. (2003). The age of the Holocene Maximum Transgression has 
been estimated by some (Somboon 1987; Somboon & Narong 1992) as 
6,000 BP or circa 4,000 BCE and by others (Umitsu et al. 2002; Tanabe 
et al. 2003) at between 8,000 and 7,000 cal BP or circa 6,050 to 5,050 
BCE. This maximum size is also comparable to the size of the palaeo-
gulf proposed by Phongsi and Thiwa (2524) during the Dvāravatī 
period (ca mid-to-late first millennium CE).
Pollen evidence indicates that the palaeo-environment of this 
region was a marine environment of mangrove ecology. According to 
radiocarbon dates obtained from the Bangkok clay horizon, the palaeo-
shoreline dominated by the Rhizophora mangrove community clearly 
played an important ecological role in the region since at least 7,000 
BCE. Today, the descendants of this palaeo-mangrove community is 
still important in preventing coastal areas of the Lower Central Plain 
from erosions caused by storms, although it has gradually decreased 
through deforestation.
Furthermore, Rhizophora pollen evidence together with new 
standardised radiocarbon dates [Tables 2-3] give a more accurate 
idea of the palaeo-shoreline evolution from circa 6,550 BCE to the first 
millennium CE. Because Rhizophora pollen grains only occur in the 
Bangkok clay horizon, the age range of this horizon also reflects the 
age of the palaeo-mangrove community at each site. The age of the 
upper part of the Bangkok clay horizon coincides with the age of the 
last palaeo-mangrove community. For example, the upper parts of the 
Bangkok clay horizon in the vicinity of Suphan Buri (SB site) and Ang 
Thong (AT site) provide age ranges of approximately 6,550 to 5,800 
BCE. This evidence implies that marine environment disappeared from 
the region around Suphan Buri and Ang Thong at least after 5,800 
BCE and after the mean sea level entered its marine regression phase. 
The Holocene Maximum Transgression is considered the first stage of 
the palaeo-gulf evolution occurring between circa 6,000-5,000 BCE 
[Figure 12].
The upper parts of the Bangkok Clay Horizon in the vicinity of 
Pathum Thani (sites nos. 55 and 56) provide age ranges from circa 4,600-
4,200 BCE. In the vicinity of Nonthaburi (site no. 63), the upper part 
gives an age range from circa 3,300-2,800 BCE. These two age ranges 
suggest that the mangrove community palaeo-shoreline had gradually 
moved southward. These movements could be considered respectively 
as the second stage (ca 5,000-3,000 BCE) [Figure 13] and the third 
stage (ca 3,000-1,000 BCE) [Figure 14] of the palaeo-gulf evolution.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
55
54
Figure 12: Phytogeography of the Lower Central Plain, Stage 1 [Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura].
Figure 13: Phytogeography of the Lower Central Plain, Stage 2 [Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura].

--- PAGE 30 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
57
56
Figure 14: Phytogeography of the Lower Central Plain, Stage 3 [Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura].
The palaeo-shoreline of the next stage (ca 1,000-1 BCE), is 
attested by the presence of the last mangrove community in Bangkok 
(site no. 64) providing an age range of between circa 700 BCE and 
1 CE. Furthermore, the appearance of two Metal Age archaeological sites 
at the western side of the palaeo-gulf has to be considered. The sites are 
Khok Phlap (KP) located in Ratchaburi and Ban Nong Song Hong 
(BN) located in Samut Sakhon [Figure 14]. The existence of these 
two Metal Age sites, which are relatively dated to circa 500 BCE, 
confirms that prehistoric people dwelled on the young Delta in the area 
between Ratchaburi and the western side of Samut Sakhon. Moreover, 
according to a study of fossil coral reef in Phuket (Scoffin & Le Tissier 
1998: 274), the fossils found at the level of 0.45 m. above recent MSL 
gave a calibrated age range of 929 BCE-126 CE. Therefore, the past 
sea level of the Lower Central Plain during the first millennium BCE 
may have been comparably situated at approximately 0.45 m. above 
the recent MSL.
Finally, the fifth stage of the palaeo-gulf evolution occurred in the 
first millennium CE. Radiocarbon samples from the upper layers of areas 
in Samut Sakhon (site no. 76: 113 BCE-355 CE) and Samut Prakan (site 
no. 71: 785-1324 CE and site no. 73: 935-1395 CE) indicate that those 
areas may have been mangrove forest and shallow sea. Phytogeography 
of this stage also seems to be contemporary with the expansion of the 
Dvāravatī culture, circa mid-to-late first millennium CE [Figure 15].
Palaeo-shorelines in the Archaeological Context of the 
Lower Central Plain
Landform evolution data can be applied in archaeological research 
as a means of reaching an understanding of the impact of landform 
changes on human settlements. In the case of the Lower Central 
Plain, no Palaeolithic sites that date roughly from 30,000 to 10,000 
BP have been found in the plain, although some have been identified 
near mountainous complex zones of pre-Quaternary and Pleistocene 
landforms, which are older than 10,000 BP. The above results and 
analysis clearly indicate that the Lower Central Plain was flooded 
by a rising sea level since the Early Holocene and that the Holocene 
Maximum Transgression occurred around 6,500-6,400 BCE. The 
pollen analysis indicates that pollen grains of Rhizophora sp. were the 
dominant vegetation in the vicinity of the palaeo-gulf of Thailand. 
Therefore, the palaeo-shoreline of 6,500 BCE may have hosted a 
mangrove belt covering the shore of the palaeo-gulf.
All the evidence shows that the shoreline around 6,500-6,400 
BCE was located in the area between modern-day Suphan Buri and 
Ang Thong and that most parts of the Lower Central Plain was 
flooded by the sea. People were unable to inhabit such an environment 
[Figure 12: Stage 1]. The sediments of the palaeo-mangrove belt 
between 6,000 and 5,000 BCE might correspond to palaeo-brackish 
sediments of the SB core and palaeo-mangrove sediments of the cores 
AT and NN, and other radiocarbon sampled sites in the vicinity of 
the belt.
From 5,000 to 3,000 BCE, the shoreline was probably located in 
the upper part of Nakhon Pathom,and areas of Pathum Thani, and

--- PAGE 31 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
59
58
Nakhon Nayok [Figure 13: Stage 2]. The area of the Lower Central 
Plain was still unavailable for settlement because the area between Ang 
Thong and Pathum Thani might have been a young deltaic plain, 
possibly a wetland zone. Sediments of this young deltaic plain might 
correspond to the weathered clay horizon of cores AT and NN. The 
palaeo-mangrove sediments of this mangrove belt might correspond to 
the upper part of the Bangkok clay horizon belonging to cores AY2 and 
PT, and sites nos. 1, 2, 44 and 55.
Between 3,000 and 1,000 BCE, the shoreline moved southerly to 
the areas of Nonthaburi [Figure 14: Stage 3]. The Palaeo-mangrove 
sediments of this belt might correspond with the age of the upper part 
of the Bangkok clay horizon in the NP1 core and other nearby sites 
of radiocarbon sampling. This period corresponds archeologically 
to the Neolithic culture of Thailand which is generally given as circa 
4,000-2,000 BCE (Suraphol 2550). While most prehistoric sites of 
the Neolithic culture were still located on terraces of the Pleistocene 
landform, two sites were located on the Holocene deposits in the 
eastern side of Bang Pakong river. They are Khok Phanom Di (KD) 
and Nong No (NG) in Chon Buri province (Higham & Rachanie 2012: 
46-69) dated around 2,000 BCE. The existence of Khok Phanom Di 
implies that Neolithic people had settled down on the young deltaic 
plain since at least the second millennium BCE. Therefore, the position 
of the site could be used as a marker for estimating the palaeo-shoreline 
position in this period. The locations of two other archaeological sites 
on the western side of the plain, Khok Phlap (KP) and Ban Nong Song 
Hong (BN), correspond to the mangrove belt in this stage. Naturally, 
it was impossible for prehistoric people to settle in such swampy 
mangrove area. Therefore, the settlement must have been occupied after 
1,000 BCE.
Between 2,000 and 1,000 BCE, the shoreline moved southerly to 
the areas of southern Nakhon Pathom and most parts of Bangkok and 
Chachoengsao [Figure 15: Stage 4]. The sediments of the mangrove 
belt might correspond with the upper parts of the Bangkok clay horizon 
in the SS core and the radiocarbon sampled sites nos. 64 and 75. This 
period correspond to the Metal Age in Thailand which is generally given 
as circa 2,000 BCE-1 CE (Suraphol 2550). In the Lower Central Plain, 
most Metal Age villages were still located on Pleistocene landforms. 
However, several Metal Age sites have been discovered on Holocene 
deposits of Ratchaburi and Samut Sakhon. On the western side of the 
plain, there was a group of Metal Age villages in Pho Hak sub-district, 
Bang Phae district of Ratchaburi province of which the most prominent 
is Khok Phlap (KP) (Sot 1978a-b). A radiocarbon date is unavailable for 
this site, but a relative chronology of archaeological evidence suggests 
that Khok Phlap had been a Metal Age village in the first millennium 
BCE. Approximately 7 km. southward from the site, another Metal Age 
site, namely Ban Nong Song Hong (BN), was discovered in the vicinity 
of Samut Sakhon (FAD 2553). Unfortunately, only a preliminary report 
is available with no radiocarbon dates. The chronology of the site was 
gauged by the occurrence of metal artefacts, probably appearing at 
least in the first century CE. The Ban Nong Song Hong site, therefore, 
might have been contemporary with the Khok Phlap site and these two 
archaeological sites are considered as the fixed point for estimating the 
boundary of the palaeo-shoreline in its fourth stage.
Figure 15: Phytogeography of the Lower Central Plain, Stage 4 [Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura].

--- PAGE 32 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
61
60
Figure 16: Phytogeography of the Lower Central Plain, Stage 5 [Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura].
In the first millennium CE, the shoreline moved further southward to 
southern Nakhon Pathom and most parts of Bangkok and Chachoengsao 
[Figure 16: Stage 5]. The sediments of the mangrove belt at this stage 
might correspond with the upper parts of the Bangkok clay horizon in 
the radiocarbon sampled sites nos. 68 and 70. The upper parts of the 
Bangkok clay horizon, i.e. sites nos. 71, 73, 74 and 76, were used in 
estimating the boundary of the shallow sea area. This stage corresponds 
with the Dvāravatī historical period, the first “indianised” culture of 
people who settled in ancient central Thailand (Clarke, Gallon, Indorf, 
Revire and Thanik, this volume). The culture is variously dated between 
the sixth and the eleventh centuries CE. Even in that period of time, 
no Dvāravatī sites have been found in the areas of the Lower Central 
Plain. The absence of ancient archaeological sites or cities from this 
period implies that the vast area between Ang Thong and present-day 
Bangkok was still inadequate for city construction. The area might have 
been occasionally flooded and might be described as a young floodplain 
[Figure 17].
The absence of ancient cities in the area of the Lower Central Plain 
has led to misunderstanding about the form of the Dvāravatī-era palaeo-
gulf of Thailand. Without applying geomorphological information 
and radiocarbon dates, previous studies on the palaeo-topography of 
the first millennium CE initially suggested that these Dvāravatī cities 
had been located close to the palaeo-shoreline and that the plain was a 
large palaeo-gulf (Phongsi & Thiwa 2524; Thiwa 2526; Mudar 1999). 
Based on recent information on landform evolution and radiocarbon 
dates, it appears that the alleged “large palaeo-gulf ” of previous studies 
actually correspond with the palaeo-gulf of the Holocene Maximum 
Transgression at circa 6,400 BCE.
Radiocarbon dates of giant oyster assemblages confirm that the 
palaeo-shoreline had moved southerly to Pathum Thani (site no. 55) 
between 4,600 and 4,200 BCE and to Nonthaburi (site no. 63) between 
3,300 and 2,800 BCE. The radiocarbon sample from northern Bangkok 
(site no. 64) that provides the calibrated age range of 700 BCE to 100 
CE also indicates that the last mangrove forest had already existed in 
northern Bangkok before the rise of the Dvāravatī culture, around 
600 CE. Therefore, the northern limit of the palaeo-gulf during the 
Dvāravatī period could not exceed the vicinity of Bangkok.
Historical documents attest that the first city in the Lower Central 
Plain was only constructed in the fourteenth century CE. The oldest 
document that refers to the existence of an urban site in the area is 
the Royal Chronicle of the Old City of Ayutthaya (Anonymous 2547: 3). It 
describes Wat Phanan Choeng as the oldest temple of Ayutthaya, built 
in the year 1324 CE. The first generation of people in Ayutthaya had 
thus established themselves in the Lower Central Plain since at least the 
early fourteenth century, before the city was proclaimed the new capital 
of the Ayutthaya kingdom in 1350 CE.
Evidence from other indirect historical documents suggests that 
urban construction in the floodplain area of the Lower Central Plain 
had begun at least by the early fourteenth century, but perhaps not 
before the thirteenth. Moreover, the position of the recent shoreline has 
not changed since the fifteenth century.

--- PAGE 33 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
63
62
Conclusion and an Afterword
Sedimentary sequences of the Lower Central Plain contain three palaeo-
environments: mangrove ecology, transitional zone and floodplain 
environment. The mangrove ecology is indicated by the dominance 
of Rhizophora pollen assemblage; the transitional zone by dominance 
of pollen types of Derris indica, Acrostichum aureum, Stenochlaena palustris, 
Ceratopteris thalictroides, Pteris sp., and Azolla/Salvinia; and the floodplain 
environment by the dominance of Gramineae and Cyperaceae.
Pollen evidence confirms that a mangrove belt covered most of the 
palaeo-shoreline of the Lower Central Plain. Radiocarbon dating of 
samples from the SB site yields estimates for the palaeo-shoreline of 
the Holocene Maximum Transgression of circa 8,500-8,400 cal BP or 
6,500-6,400 BCE. Remote correlation of the past sea level based on the 
oyster assemblage suggests that the sea level of the Holocene Maximum 
Transgression must have been higher than 2 m. and the Holocene 
Regression began after approximately 5,000 BCE.
In addition, phytogeographical information indicates that 
prehistoric settlements were absent in the Lower Central Plain before 
circa 3,000 cal BP (Stage 3) because most parts of the plain had been 
covered by the young Delta, the palaeo-mangrove belt and the palaeo-
gulf. In prehistoric sites published by Higham and Rachanie (2012), all 
Palaeolithic and Hobinhian culture sites, dated roughly from 10,000 
to 5,000 BCE, disappeared from the Lower Central Plain during this 
period. However, some sites such as Khok Phanom Di, Khok Phlap 
and Ban Nong Song Hong were still found in low terrace areas around 
the Lower Central Plain. This seems to suggest that prehistoric people 
lived in mountainous and terrace areas at the period of the Holocene 
Maximum Transgression, circa 6,400 BCE. It is also possible that the 
Palaeolithic people of the Late Pleistocene period, dated 126,000-
12,000 BCE, might have settled in palaeo-valleys corresponding to 
the ancient topography of the plain before the Holocene rise in sea 
level. Consequently, prehistoric people of the early to middle Holocene 
period, circa 10,000-5,000 BCE, could not have settled in most parts of 
the young deltaic plain because the land might have been occasionally 
inundated by seasonal floods.
Moreover, the above phytogeographical information also disproves 
the long-accepted theory that the boundary of the palaeo-gulf as 
proposed by Phongsi and Thiwa (2524) dates from the Dvāravatī period 
(ca mid-late first millennium CE). In all likelihood, that palaeo-gulf 
boundary belongs in fact to the Holocene Maximum Transgression 
(ca 8,500-8,400 cal BP, or 6,500-6,400 BCE). The northern boundary 
of the palaeo-gulf during the Dvāravatī period was probably in the 
vicinity of present-day Bangkok and Samut Prakan. In any case, during 
the early historical period (ca first millennium CE), people could not 
inhabit the young deltaic plain because sedimentation along the rivers, 
or the so-called natural embankments, might have been too low to avoid 
the seasonal floods. Dvāravatī cities were therefore only established on 
the terrace areas of the Lower Central Plain. The scenario of the vast 
seasonal flood plain of Dvāravatī, covering areas between the present 
Ayutthaya and Bangkok [Figure 17], can be seen today along the local 
roads of Nakhon Pathom, Nonthaburi, Samut Sakhon and Samut 
Prakan. These areas are dry in summer, but they are full of freshwater 
Figure 17: Reconstructing map of the phytogeography during the first millennium together with locations of key Dvāravatī cities 
[Drawing by Trongjai Hutangkura].

--- PAGE 34 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
65
64
and weeds through the rainy season. The seasonal floodplain areas 
have, however, been encroached upon by rice agriculture and housing 
projects in ways ill adapted to the geography of the area. Chronic flood 
problems in the Lower Central Plain, especially the large 2011 flood, 
have been caused by land elevation for residential building projects that 
block natural floodways of the Lower Central Plain. In effect they form 
many small barrages in the flood plain area that has created a complex 
blockage. As a result, in the year 2011, a huge mass of floodwater was 
blocked and remained in most parts of the plain during September and 
November.
Historical documents (Anonymous 2479 and 2547) cite that the 
“Ayutthaya people” established the first cities in the Lower Central 
Plain. The absence of local archaeological evidence of city construction 
before the fourteenth century implies that this area had long been 
considered unfit for large settlements because of the seasonal floodplain 
topography. Wetland and marshy areas could have been the palaeo-
environment of that early historical period as attested by the occurrence 
of sedimentary sequences containing high percentages of freshwater 
fern spores and Gramineae and Cyperaceae pollen grains in the weathered 
clay horizon.
While large settlements might not have been established in the 
Lower Central Plain up to the fourteenth century, small and temporary 
villages could, however, have flourished along the embankments of 
the main rivers and their branches. However, as yet no archaeological 
evidence confirms or supports such an hypothesis. Interestingly, some 
administrative towns such as Mae Klong (present-day Samut Songkhram 
city), Tha Chin (present-day Samut Sakhon city) or Pak Nam (present-
day Samut Prakan city) of the latter period of the Ayutthaya kingdom 
(1350-1767) in the Lower Central Plain were located on natural 
embankments along the main rivers of the plain. As for Bangkok, it is 
likely that the first elements of this town were built on the western side 
of the Chao Phraya bank, which is the present Thon Buri. The Ayutthaya 
Chronicle of Phanchanthanumat (Choem version), makes first mention of 
Thon Buri giving the year 1555 CE (Anonymous 2479: 87). There is no 
trace of the name of Bangkok before then. Thon Buri could be said to 
have been built by at least the sixteenth century CE and the village of 
Bangkok, located on the other side of the bank, could have been settled 
at a later time. Thon Buri and Bangkok were mentioned together in the 
reign of King Narai the Great (1656-1688) by Simon de La Loubère 
(1700: 8) who recorded their names as Fon and Bancok.
Acknowledgements
The author is most grateful to the French Government and the Princess 
Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre (SAC) for funding his 
doctoral research in France, to Frank Braemer, Bui Thi Mai, and Michel 
Girard, from the CEPAM, for their constant support and sharing of 
deep knowledge in palynology, and, lastly, to the editors of this volume 
as well as to Kim Atkinson for editing the results in this essay.
Endnotes
1 
The substance of this essay formed the doctoral 
research of the author at the University of Nice-
Sophia Antipolis (Trongjai 2012).
2 
For the instruction manual in English, see:  
http://calib.qub.ac.uk/calib/manual/  
(accessed on 7 March 2011).
References
Academia Sinica 
1982  Zhōngguó rèdài yàrèdài 
bèizǐzhíwù huāfěn (Angiosperm Pollen 
Flora of Tropic and Sub-tropic China). 
Beijing: Institute of Botany & 
South China Institute of Botany, 
Academia Sinica. [In Chinese]
Alekseev, M.N. & Takaya 
Yoshikazu 
1967  An Outline of the Upper 
Cenozoic Deposits in the Chao 
Phraya Basin, Central Thailand.  
Southeast Asian Studies 5(2): 334-352.
Anonymous 
2479  Prachum phongsawadan 
phak thi 64: phongsawadan krung si 
ayutthaya chabap phan chanthanumat 
(choem) (The Ayutthaya Chronicle of 
Phanchanthanumat: Choem Version). 
Bangkok: Commemorative 
book for the cremation 
of Lady Patiphanphiset 
(Lamun Amatayakun) at Wat 
Prayunrawongsawat, Bangkok, on 
9 March 2479. [In Thai; 1936 CE]
2547  Praratchaphongsawadan krung 
kao chabap luang prasoet (The Royal 
Chronicle of the Old City of Ayutthaya: 
Luang Prasoet Version). Nonthaburi: 
Sukhothai Thammathirat Open 
University. [In Thai; 2004 CE]
Bui Thi Mai, Trinh Thi Lâm, 
Hoang Viêt & Girard, Michel 
2005  A Bank of Data on Pollens 
of References of the Indochinese 
Peninsula. In The 2nd Conference of 
Asia Network (Réseau Asie) (28-30 
September 2005): Workshop XXVI - 
The “civilisation du végétal” in Question. 
Paris. [Unpublished]
Charan Achalabhuti 
1975  Petroleum Geology of the Gulf 
of Thailand. Economic Geology 
Bulletin no.7. Bangkok: Economic 
Geology Division, Department of 
Mineral Resources, Thailand.
Chongpan Chonglakmani, 
Rucha Ingavat, Piccoli, 
Giulliano & Robba, Elio  
1983  The Last Marine 
Submersion of the Bangkok Area 
in Thailand. Memorie di Scienze 
Geologiche 36: 343-352.
Chutamat Sangsuwan,  
Yaowalak Jongkanjanasoontorn  
& Hillen, Roeland  
1987  A Palynological Study of the 
Bangkok Clay at Senanivate Pit, 
Bangkok, Thailand. In Wezel F.W. 
(ed.), Proceedings of CCOP Symposium 
on “Developments in Quaternary 
Geological Research in East and 
Southeast Asia during the Last Decade” 
(27-30 October 1986). Bangkok: 
CCOP Technical Secretariat,  
pp. 197-205.
Department of Mineral 
Resources (DMR) 
2544  Thorani witthaya prathet thai 
(Geology of Thailand). Bangkok: 
Department of Mineral Resources. 
[In Thai; 2003 CE] 
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2553  Thabian borannasathan changwat 
samut sakhon (The List of Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites  
in Samut Sakhon Province).  
Ratchaburi: Fine Arts Department, 
1st Regional Office of Archaeology, 
pp. 147-151. [In Thai; 2010 CE]
Fukui Hayao 
1971  Environmental Determinants 
Affecting the Potential dissemination 
of High Yielding Varieties of Rice 
– A Case Study of the Chao Phraya 
River Basin. Southeast Asian Studies 9(3): 
348-374.
Hattori Tomoo 
1972a  Some Properties of 
Brackish Sediments along the 
Chao Phraya River of Thailand. 
Southeast Asian Studies 9(4): 522-532.
1972b  Some Properties of Recent 
Sediments in the Bangkok Plain 
of Thailand. Southeast Asian Studies 
10(2): 321-334.
Haruyama Shigeko 
1993  Geomorphology of the 
Central Plain of Thailand and Its  
Relationship with Recent Flood  
Conditions. GeoJournal 31(4): 327-334.
Higham, Charles &  
Rachanie Thosarat 
2012  Early Thailand: From Prehistory 
to Sukhothai. Bangkok: River Books.
Huang Tseng-Chieng 
1972  Pollen Flora of Taiwan. Taipei: 
Department of Botany, National 
Taiwan University. 
International Soil Museum 
(ISM) 
1981  Thionic Fluvisol (Sulfic Tropaquept), 
Central Plain Region, Thailand. Soil 
Monolith Paper 1. Wageningen: 
International Soil Museum. 
Kevie, W. van der &  
Banchong Yenmanas 
1972  Detailed Reconnaissance Soils 
Survey of Southern Central Plain Area. 
Bangkok: Report SSR-89, Soil 
Survey Division, Department of 
Land Development. [Unpublished]
La Loubère, Simon, de 
1700  Description du Royaume de  
Siam (Tome premier). Amsterdam:  
Chez Henry & la Veuve de 
Theodore Boom.
Maloney, Bernard K.  
1991  Palaeoenvironments of 
Khok Phanom Di: The Pollen, 
Pterdophyte Spore and Microscopic 
Charcoal Record. In Higham, 
Charles & Ratchanie Bannanurag 
(eds), The Excavation of Khok Phanom 
Di: A Prehistoric Site in Central Thailand 
(Volume 2). London: Thames and 
Hudson, pp. 7-44.
Mudar, Karen M. 
1999  How Many Dvaravati 
Kingdoms? Location Analysis of 
First Millennium A.D. Moated 
Settlements in Central Thailand. 
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 
18: 1-28.
Narong Thiramongkol 
1984  Geomorphology of the 
Lower Central Plain, Thailand. 
In Proceeding of the 3rd Meeting of the 
Working Group on Geomorphology of 
River and Coastal Plain (11-17 December 
1983). Bangkok: Department of 
Geology, Chulalongkorn University, 
pp. 13-25. [Unpublished]
Negri, Mauro Pietro 
2009  Fossil Mollusc-Faunas: Their 
Bearing on the Holocene Evolution 
of the Lower Central Plain of

--- PAGE 35 ---
Trongjai HuTangkura
67
66
Suraphol Natapintu 
2550  Rakngao banphachon khon thai: 
phatthanakan thang watthanatham kon 
prawatisat (Origin of Thai People: 
Prehistoric Cultural Development in 
Thailand). Bangkok: Matichon 
Publication House. [In Thai;  
2007 CE]
Takaya Yoshikazu 
1968  Quaternary Outcrops in 
the Central Plain of Thailand. 
In Geology and Mineral Resources 
in Thailand and Malaya (Reports 
on Research in Southeast Asia, N-3). 
Kyoto: Kyoto University, pp.7-68.
1969  Topographical Analysis of 
the Southern Basin of the Central 
Plain, Thailand. Southeast Asian 
Studies 7(3): 293-300. 
1971a  Two Brackish Clay Beds 
along the Chao Phraya River of 
Thailand. Southeast Asian Studies 
9(1): 46-57.
1971b  Physiography of Rice 
Land in the Chao Phraya Basin 
of Thailand. Southeast Asian Studies 
9(3): 375-397.
1972  Quaternary Outcrops of the 
Southern Part of the Central Plain 
of Thailand. Southeast Asian Studies 
10(2): 298-320.
Tanabe Susumu, Saito Yoshiki, 
Sato Yoshio, Suzuki Yuichiro, 
Sin Sinsakul, Suwat Tiyapairach 
& Niran Chaimanee 
2003  Stratigraphy and Holocene 
Evolution of the Mud-dominated 
Chao Phraya Delta, Thailand. 
Quaternary Science Reviews 22: 789-807.
Thanikaimoni, Ganapathi  
1987  Mangrove Palynology. 
Pondicherry: The Sri Aurobindo 
Ashram Press.
Thiwa Suphachanya 
2526  kanchueamyong doi praman khong 
naeo chai fang thale doem rop ao thai 
(Tentative Correlation of Old Shorelines 
around the Gulf of Thailand). In 
Narong Thiramongkol & Visut 
Pisutha-Arnond (eds), First Symposium 
on Geomorphology and Quaternary 
Geology of Thailand (October 1983), 
Bangkok. Bangkok: Department 
of Geology & Chulalongkorn 
University, Department of Mineral 
Resources, Geological Society of 
Thailand, pp. 96-105. [In Thai; 
1983 CE]
Trongjai Hutangkura 
2012  Pollen Analysis of the Holocene 
Sedimentary Sequences from the Lower 
Central Plain of Thailand and Its 
Implications for Understanding Palaeo-
environmental and Phytogeographical 
Changes. Doctoral Dissertation. 
Nice: University of Nice-Sophia 
Antipolis. [Unpublished]
Umitsu Masatomo, Sin Sinsakul, 
Suwat Tiyapairach, Niran 
Chaimanee & Kumiko Kawase 
1999  Late Holocene Sea-level 
Change and Evolution of the 
Central Plain, Thailand. In 
Proceedings of the Comprehensive 
Assessments on Impacts of Sea-level 
Rise, Bangkok, 1-4 December 1999, 
pp. 34-39. [Unpublished]
Umitsu Masatomo, 
Suwat Tiyapairach, Niran 
Chaimanee & Kawase Kumiko 
2002 Late Holocene Sea-level 
Change and Evolution of the 
Central Plain, Thailand. In 
Symposium on Geology of Thailand, 
Bangkok, 26-31 August 2002,  
pp. 201-206. [Unpublished]
Wickanet Songtham, Manas 
Watanasak & Prakainetra Insai 
1999  Holocene Marine Crabs 
and Further Evidence of a Sea-
level Peak at ca 6,000 Years B.P. 
in Thailand. In Proceedings of the 
Comprehensive Assessments on Impacts 
of Sea-level Rise, Bangkok, 1-4 
December 1999, pp. 222-230. 
[Unpublished]
Zhang Yulong, Xi Yizhen, 
Zhang Jintan, Gao Guizhen, 
Du Naiqiu, Sun Xiangjun, 
Kong Zhaochen 
1990  Spore Morphology of Chinese 
Pteridophytes. Beijing: Science Press. 
Website 
CALIB Radiocarbon Calibration: 
http://calib.qub.ac.uk/calib/
manual/
Bangkok (Thailand). Journal of 
Asian Earth Sciences 35: 524-544.
Paramita Phanwong 
2550  Kansasom khong renu nai din 
niao krung thep chak amphoe ongkharak 
changwat nakhon nayok lae nai thi 
kiaonueang kap saphap phumisat phuet 
boran (Pollen Deposit in Bangkok Clay 
from Ongkharak District, Nakhon Nayok 
Province, and Their Implication on 
Paleo-phytogeography). Master Thesis. 
Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University. 
[Unpublished in Thai; 2007 CE]
Phisit Dheeradilok  
1995  Quaternary Coastal 
Morphology and Deposition in 
Thailand. Quaternary International 
26: 49-54.
Phisit Dheeradilok, Niran 
Chaimani, Naramet 
Thirarangsikun 
2529  Raingan kansamruat thorani 
withaya chabap thi 0065: thorani 
withaya rawang changwat suphan buri 
lae rawang amphoe bang len (Geological 
Survey Report no.0065: Geology of 
Suphan Buri Province (5037 IV) and 
Bang Len District (5037 III) Map 
Sheets). Bangkok: Department of 
Mineral Resources. [Unpublished 
in Thai; 1986 CE]
Phongsi Wanasin &  
Thiwa Suphachanya 
2524  Mueang boran boriwen chai fang 
thale doem khong thi rap phak klang 
prathet thai: kansueksa tamnaeng thi tang 
lae phumisat samphan (Ancient Cities on 
the Former Coastline in the Central Plain 
of Thailand: The Study of Sites and 
Geographical Correlation). Bangkok: 
Chulalongkorn University Press. 
[In Thai; 1981 CE]  
Pons, Leendert Japhet &  
Kevie, W. van der 
1969  Acid Sulphate Soils in Thailand. 
Bangkok: Report SSR-81, Soil 
Survey Division, Land Development 
Department. [Unpublished]
Prinya Nutalaya, Rau,  
Jon L. & Sopit Sodsee 
1984  Surficial Geology of the 
Lower Central Plain, Thailand. 
In Conference of Applications of 
Geology and the National Development 
(19-22 November 1984). Bangkok: 
Chulalongkorn University,  
pp. 147-156. [Unpublished] 
Rasmi Shoocongdej 
2000  Forager Mobility Organization 
in Seasonal Tropical Environments 
of Western Thailand. World 
Archaeology 32(1): 14-40.
Rau, Jon L. &  
Prinya Nutalaya 
1983  Geology of the  
Bangkok Clay. Geological Society of  
Malaysia Bulletin 16: 99-116.
Saito Yoshiki, Tanabe Susumu, 
Sato Yoshio & Suzuki Yuichiro 
2002  Holocene Evolution of the 
Lower Central Plain of Thailand. 
In Symposium on Geology of Thailand, 
Bangkok, 26-31 August 2002,  
pp. 196-200. [Unpublished]
Sangad Bunopas & Vella, Paul 
1983  Opening of the Gulf of 
Thailand – Rifting of Continental 
Southeast Asia, and Late Cenozoic 
Tectonics. Journal of the Geological 
Society of Thailand 6(1): 1-12.
Sarasin, Fritz 
1933  Prehistorical Researches 
in Siam. Journal of the Siam Society 
26(2): 171-202.
Scoffin, Terence P. &  
Le Tissier, Martin D.A. 
1998  Late Holocene Sea Level 
and Reef Flat Progradation, 
Phuket, South Thailand. Coral  
Reefs 17: 273-276.
Seidenfaden, Erik &  
Kerr, Arthur F.G. 
1930  Ethnology. In Siam: Nature 
and Industry. Bangkok: Ministry of 
Commerce and Communications, 
pp. 80-106.
Selvakumar, Sinnadurai 
1977  Analysis of Quaternary Terrace 
Levels of the Chao Phraya – Mae Klong 
Basins, Thailand. Master Thesis. 
Bangkok: Asian Institute  
of Technology. [Unpublished]
Sin Sinsakul 
1990  Evidence of Sea-level Changes 
in the Coastal Area of Thailand: 
A Review. Paper presented at the 
CCOP-UNEP Workshop on Global 
Environmental Change, Chiang Mai,  
2-7 July 1990. [Unpublished]
2539  Takon puenphieo boriwen 
changwat nakhon nayok lae puenthi 
klai khiang (Surficial Sediments 
of Nakhon Nayok Province and 
Adjacent Areas). In Sin Sinsakul 
(ed.), Thorani withaya singwaedlom 
changwat nakhon nayok lae phuenthi  
klai khiang (Environmental Geology 
of Nakhon Nayok Province and 
Adjacent Areas). Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department and Department of 
Mineral Resources, pp. 39-68.  
[In Thai; 1996 CE]
2000  Late Quaternary Geology  
of the Lower Central Plain, 
Thailand. Journal of Asian Earth 
Sciences 18: 415-426.
Somboon Jarupongsakul 
1987  Stratigraphy of Bangkok 
Clay and Holocene Transgression 
of the Chao Phraya Delta, Central 
Thailand. Master Thesis. Kyoto: 
Graduate School of Agriculture, 
Kyoto Prefectural University. 
[Unpublished]
1988  Paleontological Study of the 
Recent Marine Sediments in the 
Lower Central Plain, Thailand. 
Journal of Southeast Asian Earth 
Sciences 2(3/4): 201-210.
Somboon Jarupongsakul & 
Narong Thiramongkol 
1992  Holocene Highstand 
Shoreline of the Chao Phraya 
Delta, Thailand. Journal of Southeast 
Asian Earth Sciences 7(1): 53-60.
Somphat Wongsomsak, 
Soemsak Tiyaphan, Nukul 
Nusi & Charoen Inthasen  
2530  Raingan kansamruat thorani 
witthaya chabap thi 0086 thorani 
witthaya rawang amphoe phak hai  
(5037 I) lae rawang amphoe lat lum 
kaeo (5037 II) (Geological Survey Report 
no. 0086: Geology of Phak Hai District 
(5037 I) and Lat Lum Kaeo District 
(5037 II) Map Sheets). Bangkok: 
Department of Mineral Resources. 
[Unpublished in Thai; 1987 CE]
Sot Daeng-Iet  
2521a  Kanpathibat ngankhut 
samruat laeng borannakhadi 
khok phlap (Excavation of the 
Archaeological Site at Khok Phlap, 
Ratchaburi Province). Silpakorn 
Journal 22(4): 22-31. [In Thai;  
1978 CE]
2521b  Khok phlap: laeng 
borannakhadi kon prawatisat 
(Khok Phlap: A Newly Discovered 
Prehistoric Site). Muang Boran 4(3): 
17-25.
Southon, John, Kashgarian, M., 
Fontugne, M., Metivier, B. & 
Yim, W. 
2002  Marine Reservoir Corrections 
for the Indian Ocean and Southeast 
Asia. Radiocarbon 44: 167-180.

--- PAGE 36 ---
69
68
Introduction
T
he late fourth and third centuries BCE witnessed the political 
unifications of Mauryan India (including north India after 321 
BCE, and most of the subcontinent by 265 BCE) and Han China (206 
BCE-220 CE), and the completion of connections between the different 
regional networks linking the classical western world and Asia. This 
chain of intertwined networks inaugurated a trading boom and major 
transnational cultural processes. For Southeast Asia, a producer of 
several products sought after by her two major economic and political 
neighbouring regions of China and South Asia, this interconnection 
opened an avenue to economic and cultural integration. It is argued 
herein that the inception of this network coincided with the fashioning 
of political and socio-cultural configurations that predicted certain 
patterns described for the later historical periods. 
It is also argued that the much earlier integration within long-
distance maritime networks of pre-existing local and regional networks 
had already allowed, and encouraged, the emergence of a chain of 
separate, independent, local “trading” polities both in what is today 
South Asia and in Southeast Asia. Evidence tends to suggest that the 
levels of complexity and the sizes of these polities varied, contributing 
to the development of a hierarchy and possibly to different economic 
specialisations within this network. Economic specialisation seems 
to have involved various social groups at distinct socio-political levels 
of organisation, and occupying different environments. Amidst those 
emerging exchange-based complex polities, the “port-entrepôts” or 
port-cities constitute the focus of this essay. 
By the final centuries BCE, certain port-cities were already able 
to concentrate control over both local and far-reaching ties. The 
economic and cultural vitality of some of these nodes acted as catalysts 
for the creation of syncretic cultural configurations, amongst which, it 
is argued, were a shared cosmopolitan-type of urbanism and culture 
that touched spheres of life ranging from material culture (daily life 
utensils and technologies) through the ideational sphere and even 
culinary preferences. Such assertions are based on the results of recent 
investigations led by the Thai-French archaeological mission, working 
in the upper Thai-Malay Peninsula since 2005, and by the Thai Fine 
Arts Department. The essay thus emphasises continuity, in the sense 
The Development of Coastal Polities in 
the Upper Thai-Malay Peninsula 
Bérénice Bellina et al.
[Praon SilaPanTH, BoonyariT cHaiSuWan, cHolaWiT 
THongcHaroencHaikiT, jane allen, vincenT Bernard, 
BrigiTTe Borell, PHaedra BouveT,  criSTina caSTillo, 
laure duSSuBieux, julie malakie laclair, SacHiPan 
Srikanlaya, SoPHie PeronneT, THomaS oliver Pryce]
Opposite Figure 1: Hard 
stone ornament types of productions 
identified at Khao Sam Kaeo based 
on morpho-technological criteria 
[Photographs and drawing by 
Bérénice Bellina].
4 GRoUPS oF HARD SToNE PRoDUCTIoNS

--- PAGE 37 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
71
70
that the so-called Silk Road networks did not emerge ex-nihilo but 
developed out of a pre-existing chain of socio-economic and political 
networks that crystallised in the maritime “Silk Road” trade, allowing 
the fashioning of broader transregional socio-economic practices, the 
results of hybridised cultural traits processed in the coastal port-cities.
The Early Importance of Coastal Polities  
and Transpeninsular Routes
The research presented here has been conducted in the Kra Isthmus 
area, in the present-day provinces of Chumphon to the east and 
Ranong to the west, where the peninsula is the narrowest, approximately 
50 kilometres. The Isthmus can be seen as a stepping stone between 
the Bay of Bengal and the South China Sea, and the authors of 
this collective essay believe that its transpeninsular routes were used 
even before the Mauryan and Han unifications took place, for early 
exchange among independent polities located around the two basins, 
before circumnavigation of the peninsula began to be used in the 
first century BCE at the earliest (Wheatley 1961: 12). The early use 
of the northern transpeninsular routes is conjectured and based on a 
reference in the Qian Han Shu which alludes to the mission sent by the 
Han Emperor Wu (r. 140-87 BCE) to the kingdom of “Huangzhi,” said 
to have been located at Kanchipuram, Tamil Nadu, in southern India 
(Wheatley 1961: 8-13). 
The intensity of the use of transpeninsular routes during the 
historical periods fluctuated depending on the political situation and the 
prevalence of piracy. The use of Isthmian land routes, which crossed 
over very irregular terrain, implies that travel required combining 
different modes of transport (men, porters, wagons, pack animals – 
including elephants –, bull carts, boats, rafts, and pirogues). According 
to the season and the route, the duration of a journey could vary 
tremendously from a week to a month (Andaya 2008). 
Even if the use of transpeninsular routes was not easy, they had the 
advantage of shortening the journey. Based on Chinese accounts, Paul 
Wheatley (1961: 12) estimates that their use saved about four months 
on a total journey from South Asia to China (twelve months as against 
sixteen). Until recently, the region and its transpeninsular routes that 
lack major monumental Brahmanical or Buddhist remains were felt 
not to have played any major historical role. Michel Jacq-Hergoualc’h 
(2002: 104), for example, concluded that “Panpan,” which is known 
from Chinese sources to have emerged around the fourth century CE, 
was the earliest “indianised” city-state of the peninsula, but that the 
actual remains of fully fledged “indianised polities” only appeared from 
the fifth century CE onwards and further south from the regions of 
Chumphon-Ranong.
While the upper part of the peninsula is devoid of monumental 
remains, its archaeological sites are rich in debris of local industries 
including metal-, glass- and, stone working, dating in some cases to the 
Metal Age from the fifth century BCE. It is this richness in industrial 
remains that opened the avenue to investigate the development of the 
coastal polities that produced them. The analysis of these remains 
at certain sites revealed complex technological transfers and hybrid 
production techniques which suggest that early and close contacts 
between populations occupying the two maritime basins took place 
there. These remains and associated structural remnants unravelled 
complex socio-economic structures and their close association with the 
emergence of exchange-based, complex polities at the end of the first 
millennium BCE.
Although work is being conducted at sites of various types in the 
peninsula, in particular those of the forested interior, this essay focus 
on partly contemporary port-entrepôts situated on the two coasts of the 
upper peninsula that might have been located at the two ends of sets of 
northern transpeninsular routes: Khao Sam Kaeo on the east coast and 
the complex of Phu Khao Thong/Bang Kluai Nok on the west coast 
[Map 1].
Khao Sam Kaeo, on the east coast of the peninsula, excavated for 
five seasons by a French-Thai team, has proved to be an early urban 
settlement with socio-professional quarters delimited by series of walls 
and embankment berms, and characterised by a hydraulic system. There, 
several highly specialised industries implementing foreign technologies 
were producing prized products, some of which were clearly part of 
the symbolic assemblage shared by maritime Southeast Asian elites. 
The overall configuration at Khao Sam Kaeo finds no comparison yet 
in contemporaneous Southeast Asian settlements but predicts those of 
certain later maritime city-states that thrived along the fringes of the 
South China Sea – e.g. sites like Pasai, Banten and Malacca. One of the 
goals of the archaeological research at Khao Sam Kaeo, however, is to 
focus on production and its organisation, an aspect rarely and poorly 
described by later historical sources for these early polities. 
Phu Khao Thong, on the west coast of the peninsula, is a smaller 
site that seems to have been part of a complex of sites in the Kluai 
Khao Sam Kaeo
Thung Tako
Tham Pla
Tham Nam Lot Yai
Tham Nam
Lot Noi
Ko Din
Ban Nai Hyan
Lamai
Wat Pathumthararam
Bang Khlak 1
Bang Khlak 2
Bang Kluai
 Nok
Phu Khao Thong
M Y A N M A R
T H A I L A N D
Khao Krim
Khao Muenni
0
50 km
Map 1: Map showing Khao 
Sam Kaeo on the east coast and 
the complex of Phu Khao Thong/
Bang Kluai Nok on the west coast 
[Drawing by the Thai-French 
archaeological mission].

--- PAGE 38 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
73
72
Bay. This complex includes Bang Kluai Nok, which yielded a significant 
amount of material from South Asia, and, further west, two very small 
sites, Bang Khlak 1 and Bang Khlak 2.
Khao Sam Kaeo
Our excavations at Khao Sam Kaeo from 2005 to 2009 revealed a coastal 
complex polity of cosmopolitan and proto-urban character whose 
emergence seems clearly linked to the development of the maritime silk 
roads. Based on the radiocarbon-dating results of 30 samples consisting 
of charcoal, wood, and organic material, using conventional (13) and 
AMS (17) radiocarbon analysis, the site is securely dated to the very 
early fourth to second or first century BCE.
Located five kilometres from the coast today, the site extends over 
four hills; it is limited on its western side by the Tha Taphao river, which 
connects it with the Gulf of Thailand and the China Sea in the east 
and with resource-rich forests in the north. One hundred and thirty 
five test pits opened (2 x 2 m.) over an area of 55 hectares revealed 
an occupation stricto sensu over 35 hectares delimited by walls and 
palisades; however, erosion of the western part of the site by the river 
makes it difficult to estimate the size of the area it occupied [Map 2]. 
The bordering walls include simple and twin parallel earth walls that 
were probably surmounted by wooden palisades that do not survive. 
A ditch usually ran beside the wall. In the steepest parts of the hills, 
indirect evidence suggests that wooden palisades were placed in cuts in 
bedrock. These ramparts were probably built during two main phases, 
the second apparently corresponding to an extension of the site towards 
the north. The presence of these ramparts expresses a double concern: 
first to retain sediments upslope and upstream, avoiding the erosion and 
redeposition that are induced by heavy monsoon rains (Allen 2009), 
and second to delineate the urban space, delimiting specialised zones 
(Malakie LaClair 2008: 28-33). 
The enclosing system finds no comparison amongst contemporaneous 
Southeast Asian sites, which, except in the case of the Co Loa citadel 
in northern Vietnam, consist of a moat surrounding the site. At Khao 
Sam Kaeo, in contrast, valleys were crossed by earth walls. Their 
structure varied according to their role. The wall in Valley 1 aimed at 
maintaining a flooded area, that probably corresponded to a mooring 
place for boats sailing up the river; the wall prevented its silting-in. On 
the other hand, the succession of earth walls blocking Valley 3 aimed 
at containing the water streaming from the hills towards the west; this 
system kept the western part of the valley dry and retained water in 
its east, upstream zone, which may have been dedicated to agriculture 
(Bellina-Pryce & Praon 2008).
As for agriculture, Cristina Castillo’s research (2009 and 2011) 
indicates that dryland cultivation was practised on the hills. The 
archaeobotanical finds so far include rice and foxtail millet, crops that 
originated in China, as well as mung beans and horse gram, which 
are of South Asian origin. Evidence for dryland cultivation is also 
found further south on the peninsula, where, for example, it supported 
historical city-states in Kedah, on the north-western coast of peninsular 
Malaysia, from the early centuries CE to the middle of the second 
millennium (Allen 1991 and 1999).
Opposite Map 2: Map of Khao 
Sam Kaeo suggesting two stages of 
rampart erection [Drawing by the 
Thai-French archaeological mission].

--- PAGE 39 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
75
74
The morphology of the settlement of Khao Sam Kaeo resulted from 
both the natural landscape and fully human-constructed boundaries. 
The encircling walls do not trace a distinguishable geometric or other 
cultural pattern but follow the natural topography, even enhancing it. 
Their morphology and the configuration of the site are not comparable 
to those of the contemporaneous irregular concentric-moated sites of 
northeast Thailand, the Mimotian sites in Cambodia, or the northern 
Vietnamese citadel of Co Loa, 17 kilometres north of Hanoi (Kim 
et al. 2010).
Khao Sam Kaeo’s enclosed pattern finds pertinent comparisons with 
early cities that emerged in northern Indian polities from the mid-first 
millennium BCE onwards (Smith 2003: 274-275). Data concerning the 
morphology, size, structure, and network integration of early historical 
cities is still sparse, and the changes made during long-term occupations 
of settlements greatly limit the understanding of their earliest phases. 
Nonetheless, it appears that cities were situated, for the greater part, on 
flat lands of low or average height but took advantage of hills, hillsides, 
and other higher elevations punctuating the landscapes (Deloche 1992). 
The early cities in northern India were not uniform in plan and seem 
to have been adapted to local topography, especially when integrating a 
river. They were delimited by ramparts, each consisting of an earthen 
structure constructed of fill excavated from an adjacent ditch, and laid 
out to follow the natural topography (Smith 2003: 275; Deloche 1992). 
The ramparts served multiple purposes besides warfare, controlling 
floods, restricting the access of outsiders to markets, encouraging the 
development of civic identity, and generating social cohesion in part 
through the need to maintain the ramparts cooperatively at regular 
intervals. In any case, the ramparts embodied a level of political control 
capable of mobilising and organising the labour needed to produce and 
maintain them (Smith 2003: 280-283). As for their size, they surrounded 
sites that range from more than 241 hectares in area (Pataliputra) to 
much smaller areas between 16 and 14 hectares (e.g. Bhita) (Coningham 
1995: 58). It appears that Khao Sam Kaeo’s morphology, location, 
and encircling boundary wall find more pertinent comparisons with 
contemporaneous Indian cities than with contemporaneous Southeast 
Asian settlements, although the cities in both regions at the time were 
small, independent polities, not parts of a unified nation-state, like 
today’s Thailand or India.  
The occupation area at Khao Sam Kaeo was delimited by the walls. 
No structures other than the hydraulic ones have been found outside 
the boundary walls. Inhabitants built structures on piles and on terraces 
set on plateaux and the gentle slopes of the four hills. The bases of 
the hills and the river banks were also occupied. Occupied zones are 
characterised by domestic or craft structures of small dimensions 
(terraces, floors, wells, low walls, drains, and holes left by posts) and 
by monumental structures (pathways with drains and terraces). 
The network of habitations on piles and terraces was dense and is 
characterised by accumulations of terraces and drains.
All craft activities (iron, copper-base alloy, and hard stones) 
expanded both on the plateaux and at the bases of the hills, except 
that the lapidary glass, stone, and glass-bracelet craft centres have been 
identified exclusively in the lower parts of Valley 1 and along the river. 
The western and low slopes of Hill 2 seem to have held a cemetery, 
which we could not excavate but which yielded a rich small-material 
assemblage (hard stone ornaments, glass, and gold) and thick jars.
The study of the occupation of the site combines data from the 
excavations of the settlement with the results of technological analysis 
of the artefacts, an approach from the anthropology of techniques 
(Bellina-Pryce & Praon 2008: 260). Data from technological analysis, 
integrated in Geographic Information Systems (GIS), reveal a spatial 
distribution by groups in different zones; a series of statistical tests 
has established that this distribution is statistically significant (Malakie 
LaClair 2008: 28-33). 
Two clearly defined zones emerge from the spatial analysis: a 
southern area corresponding to Hills 1 and 2, most likely used for 
indigenous occupation, and a northern area, including Hills 3 and 4, 
occupied by various Asian groups: South Asian, Southeast Asian, and 
East Asian. 
The southern part of the site provides objects whose style is South 
China Sea-related, and locally produced, using:
- techniques found in Southeast Asian areas around the South China 
Sea, as for instance certain types of shell-incised ceramics that relate 
to the Sa Huynh-Kalanay complex elaborated by Wilhelm Solheim 
(Bellina et al. 2012);
- Indian raw materials were probably worked under the aegis of 
a few experienced Indian craftspersons. These productions comprise 
ornaments in hard stone (Bellina 2003 and 2007; Bellina-Pryce & Praon 
2008) and facetted lapidary-worked glass ornaments that is ornaments 
whose “chaîne opératoire” used some lapidary techniques. The lapidary 
glass beads and an important proportion of the bracelets are made 
from a transparent green glass with a m-Na-Al 3 composition, which 
is particularly abundant in the southern part of the site and has been 
identified at other contemporaneous sites around the South China Sea 
(Dussubieux & Bellina, forthcoming). Evidence of primary m-Na-Al 3 
glass manufacture in northeastern India indicates a possible source area 
for the same type of glass found at Khao Sam Kaeo. Both ornaments 
implemented Indian lapidary techniques (Bellina-Pryce & Praon 2008), 
and are characterised by a high level of expertise that necessitates 
an apprenticeship of several years (Roux 2000). The presence of a 
fully-developed glass industry, involving complex technologies, in the 
earliest occupation levels makes it very unlikely that this glass tradition 
evolved locally. 
The hard-stone ornament production [Figure 1], referred to as 
“South China Sea siliceous production,” and found in the southern part 
of the settlement, consists of both finished and unfinished products. 
This type of production, combining Indian raw material and highly 
skilled Indian technologies with South China Sea-related style, is the 
earliest hard stone tradition identified in Southeast Asia, beginning in 
the fourth century BCE and found in central Thailand (Ban Don Ta 
Phet), central and southern Vietnam (Sa Huynh sites) and Palawan 
in the Philippines (Tabon caves) (Bellina 2001: 280, 2003: 291 and 
2007: 33). 
This type of production shared a workshop with those producing 
facetted glass beads and bracelets, at the bases of Hills 1 and 2. Other 
stone-working workshops occupy the summits of Hills 3 and 4, and 
both iron smithies are located on Hill 3’s western and eastern plateaux.

--- PAGE 40 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
77
76
The northern part of the settlement (Hills 3 and 4) yielded evidence 
for habitation and for different types of craft production associated with 
various groups from South, Southeast, and East Asia. Some materials 
were imported; others were locally produced with exogenous or local 
techniques.
Materials associated with South Asia were found concentrated on 
both plateaux of Hill 3. They consist of goods that were imported, like 
Indian rouletted and knobbed ware (Bouvet 2008 and 2012: 318, 429-
449); or locally produced. Local wares include some Indian-influenced 
Fine Wares (Bouvet 2012: 441-443) and hard-stone ornaments whose 
skilled manufacturing techniques, good-quality materials, and certain 
stylistic elements appear either South Asian or South Asian-inspired. 
The stylistic repertoire includes auspicious symbols, for some of which 
we do not know the ancient name or significance (triratna, minayugala, 
svastika, haṃsa, and nandipāda). A third category includes owners’ names 
inscribed on seals in Prakrit, written with Brāhmī characters; some of 
these are unfinished [Figure 1]. This north part of the settlement also 
yielded evidence for the transfer of Indian metallurgical technologies to 
local craftspeople, especially those involving high-tin bronze (Murillo-
Barosso et al. 2010). Fragments of high-tin bronze bowls decorated 
with Indian motifs comparable to those found in central Thailand 
(Ban Don Ta Phet and Khao Chamuk) have been recovered at Khao 
Sam Kaeo by looters (Glover & Bellina 2011: 35; Glover & Shahnaj, 
this volume). This type of bowl was used by numerous Southeast Asian 
communities during the late prehistoric period and constitutes one of 
the pieces of evidence for early contacts with polities in certain areas of 
the Indian subcontinent (Bellina & Glover 2004). It appears most likely 
that Khao Sam Kaeo imported the copper (in metal or mineral form), 
which is lacking in the Thai-Malay Peninsula, and exploited the rich 
tin ores of the peninsula, to produce high-tin bronze ingots for bowl 
manufacture or exchange (Pryce et al. 2008; Murillo-Barroso et al. 2010). 
Furthermore, Khao Sam Kaeo’s high-tin bronze production represents 
the most ancient evidence for exploitation of the peninsula’s vast tin 
resources, an industry whose importance to Arabic trade during the 
historical period is well known (Murillo-Barroso et al. 2010). 
The earliest iron-working evidence recovered on the peninsula 
comes from a workshop on the eastern plateau of Hill 3, a workshop 
later covered by a wall but that was active during the fourth to second 
centuries BCE (Bellina-Pryce & Praon 2008). At Khao Sam Kaeo, 
smithing was practised but, as opposed to other technologies, seems 
to have involved only rudimentary skills, while bloomer-smelting was 
common (Biggs et al. 2013).
Materials recovered at Khao Sam Kaeo also attest to links with 
the insular world of the South China Sea. These include imported 
ceramics, which represent a minority at the site (Bouvet 2009 and 2012: 
433; Bellina et al. 2012: 14-15), and ornaments such as bicephalous 
ornaments and lingling’o, which were produced in the workshops of Hill 
3 using imported materials [Figure 1]. Analysis of nephrites recovered, 
indicates that part of that material assemblage originated at the eastern 
Taiwanese source of Fengtian. Green nephrite from Fengtian was used 
to make these two very specific forms of ear pendant, which were 
distributed along a network that extended from the Philippines, eastern 
Malaysia, southern Vietnam, and eastern Cambodia to peninsular 
Thailand (Hung et al. 2007; Hung & Bellwood 
2010).
Hills 3 and 4 also yielded what is currently 
the most abundant Western Han (206 BCE- 
9 CE) Chinese artefact corpus found outside China 
and northern Vietnam. Metal artefacts include 
a complete bronze mirror of the type called xing 
yunjing (“mirror with stars and clouds”). A mirror 
fragment from Khao Sam Kaeo is fairly similar 
to Western Han mirrors recovered in central and 
southern Vietnam (Pryce et al. 2008: 11). The 
Han-style metallic assemblage also includes a 
prismatic arrowhead comparable to examples 
found in quantity at Co Loa Citadel near Hanoi in 
northern Vietnam, an axe, and two bronze seals. 
One of these seals which has been dated to the 
first century BCE has a turtle shape and bears an 
inscription that reads in Chinese: Lü Yougongyin, that 
is “the seal of Lü Yougong,” Lü being a common 
family name during the Han dynasty (206 BCE-
220 CE). Eighty-four Han-style ceramic storage-jar 
sherds were recovered on Hills 3 and 4 [Figure 2]. 
Most are decorated with a seal-on-net design. 
This net pattern was very popular throughout the 
Han dynasty, especially in South China around 
Guangdong (Canton), but also in northern 
Vietnam, in the province of Thanh Hoa. Twenty 
sherds are stamped with a “checkered design,” a 
pattern very popular in eastern China during the 
Han period; jars with this design are numerous in 
tombs in Zhejiang, Jiangsu, and Anhui provinces. 
Also related to eastern China are two handles decorated with animal 
masks (Peronnet & Sachipan, forthcoming).
Finally, Hill 4 hosted another type of stone production, one 
characterised by lower-quality mass-production techniques and 
large numbers of similar or identical items. The extensive and rapid 
looting that took place on Hill 4 did not give us much opportunity to 
observe many ornaments or to define the style. It seems to include 
large spherical and ellipsoid beads and flat agate pendants like those 
found at prehistoric sites in central (Bellina 2001: 145, 157, Table 5; 
Bellina 2007: CD Rom) and northeast Thailand, such as Noen U Loke 
(Theunissen 2007). It is likely that this hill was used at the very late stage 
of the site’s activity.
Discussion on Khao Sam Kaeo
Thriving local populations occupied the southern part of the 
settlement. They had been participating in the South China Sea sphere 
of interaction, probably for a long time already. During the period 
when the site was most active (ca late fifth-second centuries BCE), 
autonomous polities engaged in exchanges of commodities such as tin 
and “prestige goods” like Dong Son drums and developed a shared 
symbolic and material culture. 
Figure 2: Han style ceramics 
recovered at Khao Sam Kaeo on Hills 
3 and 4 [Photographs by Bérénice 
Bellina].

--- PAGE 41 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
79
78
When the Bay of Bengal and the South China Sea networks were 
interconnected by nodes such as Khao Sam Kaeo, merchants and 
also craftspeople could access products and markets from different 
Southeast Asian networks. At Khao Sam Kaeo, the earliest industries 
are believed to have involved South Asian craftsmen who used highly 
skilled traditional Indian techniques to produce very fine-quality goods 
of types that fit within the South China Sea cultural repertoire. Khao 
Sam Kaeo’s central role in the maritime trade network would have 
been strengthened initially by the presence of these foreign specialists. 
These productions at the site would have made it a location that exerted 
complete control over this important, forest-to-coast, segment of the 
extra-regional trade network.
Quite plausibly, the few foreign craftspersons who resided at a centre 
and were involved in producing a mixed range of products enhanced 
the reputation of the polity hosting them (Bellina 2007: 92). By doing 
so, these foreign residents probably served the strategies of Khao Sam 
Kaeo’s elite, who were presumably engaged in competitive exchanges 
with other socio-political systems around the South China Sea, a type 
of relationship that has been described by Colin Renfrew and John F. 
Cherry (1986) as “peer polity interaction.” This prestige-enhancing role 
of the artisans probably remained important during the later occupation 
of the site, when the evidence suggests that some trade items were still 
being produced by patronised South Asian artisans. 
At a later stage of the occupation at Khao Sam Kaeo (perhaps from 
the late fourth-third centuries BCE?), this cultural sphere integrated 
more ostentatious South Asian-inspired or “indianised” elements. 
This evidence includes elements such as the hard-stone products made 
on the eastern plateau of Hill 3 and also found in the cemetery area, 
which display symbols belonging to the “Indian” ideational world at 
that time, that is still undefined Brahmanical/Buddhist/Jain symbols 
used in small, individual polities on the Indian subcontinent. This 
“indianised” South China Sea product repertoire differs in many 
respects from what would be found in contemporaneous South Asian 
sites. These very fine ornaments display a wide range of morphologies, 
some of them only rarely or never used for ornaments in South Asia 
(Bellina, in press). These later “South China Sea indianised” products, 
motifs, and techniques, whose distribution quickly expanded within the 
Southeast Asian sites of the late prehistoric period, would have been 
produced mainly for Southeast Asian populations either in the process 
of “Indianisation,” that is probably the coastal trading elites or those 
wanting the same symbolic items as those acquired by the former, at 
Khao Sam Kaeo or elsewhere as for instance at the contemporary site 
of Ban Don Ta Phet (Glover & Bellina 2011). 
At Khao Sam Kaeo, South Asian specialists may have been 
welcomed by local elites to set up industries that played a role in the 
economic and political strategies of the South China Sea early trading 
polities. Their industries which the main author of this essay believes 
may have been attached to the local elite (Bellina 2007: 91-93), produced 
elements which became part of this cultural sphere. As early as this 
period some South Asian representations and technologies began to be 
transferred to Southeast Asia, especially in the coastal trading polities. 
The development of these industries and their possible close association 
to political strategies might be better understood if we look at other 
contemporaneous sites on the peninsula that were involved at different 
levels of this trans-Asiatic network.
Phu Khao Thong and Bang Kluai Nok
Phu Khao Thong or “Golden Hill,” is located in Suk Samran sub-
district, Ranong province, on the Andaman coast. It is a small site that 
can be interpreted as an entrepôt. It may have been part of a trading 
complex located along the shoreline of an ancient bay, protected by 
small islands, such as Ko Kluai, from the waves of the Andaman Sea. 
Phu Khao Thong is located approximately 20 kilometres from the 
mouth of Kraburi river, beside which one may find a path that crosses 
the Isthmus of Kra. 
This complex includes a bigger site, Bang Kluai Nok, and two minor 
sites, Bang Khlak 1, and Bang Khlak 2, 
both now completely destroyed. They all 
yielded a variety of imported artefacts 
and evidence for glass and semi-precious 
ornament production. 
Captain Boonyarit Chaisuwan from 
the Fine Arts Department conducted 
excavations at the base of the hill in 2006 
and 2008 (Boonyarit 2011). The Thai-
French archaeological mission conducted 
three surveys in May 2006, April 2007 
and 2009 consisting of non-systematic 
survey, section clearing, sampling and 
material study. Because no in-depth 
investigations could be conducted, the 
nature of these severely looted sites is 
difficult to interpret. The chronological 
sequence of the sites is based on relative 
dating, mostly of material collected on 
the surface.
The relief of the hill is quite steep. 
Our survey and the mapping done on 
the accessible part of the hill led us to 
observe that some terraces had been cut 
into the rock, as at Khao Sam Kaeo, 
thus providing flat areas for activities 
conducted there [Map 3]. We did not 
observe any embankment that would 
have delimited the site, in contrast with 
Khao Sam Kaeo.
Phu Khao Thong’s early period of 
activity (perhaps around the third-first 
centuries BCE?) coincides with the later 
period of activity at Khao Sam Kaeo. Part 
of the assemblage is very comparable, 
for example the Indian ceramics and 
some morphological types of hard-stone 
ornaments (flat lozenge, lion, nandipāda, 
etc). But its sequence may have extended 
Proﬁle A-A’
initial relief
30.
20.
10.
0
50 m
0.
10.
20.
30.
South
North
Excavated terraces
Phu Khao Thong
A’
A
Map 3: Topographic profile of  
Phu Khao Thong [Drawing by the 
Thai-French archaeological mission].

--- PAGE 42 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
81
80
a little later, probably until the second or third century CE. As we would 
expect from a site located along the Andaman Sea, Phu Khao Thong 
yielded a significant amount of South Asian material, as well as material 
from further west. This is well demonstrated with ceramics.
So far, with Khao Sam Kaeo, Phu Khao Thong has yielded a large 
corpus of Indian Fine Wares. At Phu Khao Thong, Phaedra Bouvet 
(2012: 287-301) distinguished “rouletted wares,” stamped and unstamped 
bowls, knobbed wares, dishes with a rouletted or chattered rim and a 
stamped leaf medallion at the centre of the inner base [Figure 3].
Besides Khao Sam Kaeo, sherds of Fine Wares have been recorded 
on the east coast at Tha Chana (Surat Thani province) and in the caves 
of Tham Thuai (Thung Tako district, Chumphon province) (Bellina 
2009: 122). On the west coast, sherds have been identified at the sites of 
Bang Kluai Nok and Wat Pathumthararam, a small riverine trading post 
probably of second order in Kapoe district (both 
in Ranong province), and Bang Ro (in Phang-
nga province). Bouvet’s study demonstrates that 
Indian imports at Phu Khao Thong are much 
more numerous and more diverse than the 
imports at Khao Sam Kaeo, and that the Fine 
Wares may come from various Indian workshops 
[Figure 3].
Amongst the sherds found at Phu Khao 
Thong, one surface find recovered at the base of 
the hill during the Thai-French mission’s 2006 
survey is worth mentioning [Figure 4]. Prof. 
Iravatham Mahadevan and Richard Salomon 
(pers. comm.) tentatively identified three letters 
on the sherd as part of a fragmentary inscription 
in Tamil-Brāhmī which would seem to read 
tū Ra o..., possibly part of the Tamil word tuṟavōn 
or tuṟavōr, which means “ascetic” or “recluse” 
(Skt, ṛṣi or sannyāsin), but not of a Buddhist kind (Skt, bhikṣu; P., bhikkhu). 
Alternatively, Emmanuel Francis (pers. comm.) proposes tūṟavam, 
“common black plum,” or tūṟavu for a “plum recipient.” The inscription 
may date to the second century CE on a palaeographic basis and is 
the earliest Tamil inscription found so far in Southeast Asia. Parallels 
are found in Egypt and the Red Sea area (site of Berenike), where 
both Tamil-Brāhmī and standard-Brāhmī inscriptions are found. This 
inscription thus predates a third- or fourth-century CE inscription 
engraved on a touchstone from Khuan Luk Pat in Krabi province (Amara 
1996: 87).
Fragments of steatite containers [Figure 5] have also been found 
at both Phu Khao Thong and Khao Sam Kaeo. Similar early steatite 
containers were used or re-used as reliquaries and were found in stūpa 
complexes for example in the region of Gandhāra (modern Pakistan; 
Jongeward 2012). Their contents varied from bones to deposits of 
“treasures” (ornaments in ivory, crystal, bronze, and semi-precious 
stones). The systematic use of such containers as reliquaries, however, 
remains unproved until they are found in context. These were often 
and primarily used as household containers for cosmetics, scents, spices, 
and jewels (Jongeward 2012: 44-46). Any Buddhist connexion for the 
steatite containers recovered at Khao Sam Kaeo and Phu Khao Thong 
is therefore wanting and cannot be established at this stage. It would 
need confirmation through discovery of these containers in situ in 
clearly established Buddhist contexts or structures. 
Indirect links with areas even further west, with the Roman world, 
are suggested by the presence of Roman-like intaglios and pendants, 
mosaic glass, a granulated gold bead comparable to specimens from 
Iran, and a fragment of glazed ware. These items place Phu Khao 
Thong in a trading network that extended beyond the Bay of Bengal. 
Several intaglios dating to the Roman Imperial period (from the late 
first century BCE to the third century CE) have been reported from 
southern Thailand, from Khuan Luk Pat (Krabi province), Tha Chana, 
another port-entrepôt of the early centuries CE (Surat Thani province), 
and from both Phu Khao Thong and Khao Sam Kaeo (Borell et al., this 
volume). 
Figure 3: Fine Wares from Phu 
Khao Thong and Khao Sam Kaeo 
[Drawing by Phaedra Bouvet].
Figure 4: Sherd bearing three 
letters, fragmented inscription in 
Tamil-Brāhmī [Photograph by 
Bérénice Bellina].

--- PAGE 43 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
83
82
Phu Khao Thong yielded one fragment of turquoise-glazed ware or 
pottery [Figure 6]. Similar discoveries were also found in the peninsula 
at sites including Takua Pa (Lamb 1963), sites in Kedah, Malaysia 
(Allen 1988: 483-486), and Kota Cina, Sumatra in Indonesia (Milner 
et al. 1978). Jane Allen (1988: 484) believes that these wares were used 
by visiting merchants, rather than as trade wares. This type of pottery 
was probably manufactured in modern-day southern Iraq, for example 
at the kilns in Old Basra and in southern Iran (Mason & Keall 1991: 
52-55). The turquoise ware has a wide distribution, reaching coastal 
sites around the Indian Ocean from Tanzania to Pakistan and Southeast 
Asia and travelling as far east as Japan (Glover 2002: 167-173). 
This extensive distribution network is further supported by the 
analysis of glass, part of which was imported from the Mediterranean 
world (Dussubieux et al. 2012). Of particular interest is a fragment of a 
moulded bowl from Phu Khao Thong made of mosaic glass composed 
of cane sections fused together, which create spirals of opaque yellow 
in a matrix of translucent green that Brigitte Borell dates from the late 
second century BCE to the early first century CE.
Moulded glass bowls, in particular the ribbed type, were part of 
the traded commodities in the Indian Ocean, from the Red Sea coast 
to the sites at Pattanam, Arikamedu, and Dharanikota on the Indian 
subcontinent (Cherian 2010: 271-272). They appear to have been mass-
produced from the first century BCE to the first century CE. Another 
parallel with Arikamedu can be made through two types of glass (potash 
and m-Na-Ca-Al/Arika glass) present in identical proportions at the 
two sites, suggesting not only that both sites were ports of entry for these 
types of glass in South and Southeast Asia but also that Arikamedu 
and Phu Khao Thong were parts of the same trade sphere, with long-
distance connections.
Connections between exchange-based polities on the western coast 
of the peninsula and South Asia and areas further west are also attested 
at the neighbouring site of Bang Kluai Nok. This evidence can only be 
introduced briefly because of the lack of excavation and the resulting 
dearth of context. Like Khao Sam Kaeo and Phu Khao Thong, the site 
occupies a small hill that might have been suited for settlement. As at 
Phu Khao Thong, we did not observe any evidence of 
embankments. 
The site yielded finished siliceous stone ornaments and 
evidence for glass bead manufacture. It is worth noting that 
no stone industrial remains seem to have been reported so 
far at this site, in contrast with the clear workshop evidence 
found at both Phu Khao Thong and Khao Sam Kaeo. 
Bang Kluai Nok also yielded an intaglio with a horse 
motif of Indian inspiration and probably relatively early, 
perhaps first century BCE (Borell et al., this volume, fig. 7). 
It also produced a fragmented cameo of Roman Classical 
inspiration that shows a “Bacchic scene” probably dating 
from the late first century BCE to early first century CE.
In addition to the already-mentioned Fine Wares, 
Bang Kluai Nok yielded evidence from the South China Sea and 
mainland Southeast Asia in the form of a coin of “rising sun and 
śrīvatsa” Type A. Similar coins have been attributed to sites in Myanmar 
(Halin and Binnaka), to the Dvāravatī realm in Thailand (U Thong), 
Opposite Figure 5: Fragments 
of steatite containers found at Phu 
Khao Thong and Khao Sam Kaeo 
[Photographs and drawings by 
Bérénice Bellina].
Figure 6: Fragment of a turquoise 
glazed ware or pottery recovered at 
Phu Khao Thong [Photograph by 
Bérénice Bellina].

--- PAGE 44 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
85
84
and to the Funan region in Cambodia and southern Vietnam (found 
near Ho Chi Minh City and at Oc Eo) (Wicks 1992: 117).
Like Phu Khao Thong, Bang Kluai Nok has also yielded a significant 
Brāhmī inscription in reverse on a golden seal [Figure 7]. This 
inscription is in Sanskritised-Prakrit and surrounds a representation 
of a bhadrapīṭha or auspicious seat/throne. Once inverted, Oskar von 
Hinüber and Peter Skilling have been able to read the inscription as 
brahaspatiśarmasanāvikasa which can be rendered as “Of the sailor/
captain Brahaspatiśarma.” Skilling believes it may date to the first to 
second century CE and von Hinüber to the fourth century CE at the 
latest (pers. comm.). This inscription adds to the known mahānāvika 
references such as the famous “Buddhagupta” stone slab, which was 
found in Seberang Perai (formerly Wellesley province), Malaysia 
(Chhabra 1935: 22; Allen 1988: 253-265).
Finally, Bang Kluai Nok also provided material from China, in 
the form of two fragments of Eastern Han (25-220 CE) mirrors, thus 
providing further argument for the possible use of the transpeninsular 
routes between the east and the west coasts. The maritime route would 
have been a very long journey, whereas at this point, the Isthmus is 
narrow and could be crossed relatively quickly on a pathway like the 
one mentioned above, beside the mouth of the Kraburi river.
Discussion on Phu Khao Thong and Bang Kluai Nok
We are well aware that the lack of in-depth investigation at the sites on 
the west coast and their destruction greatly limit interpretation of their 
economic and political organisation as well as any comparisons with 
Khao Sam Kaeo on the east coast. 
The first limitation is affected by the hazy respective dating of Phu 
Khao Thong and Bang Kluai Nok. Both sites contain materials, most 
out of context, that date stylistically to the late centuries BCE or the 
early centuries CE. Phu Khao Thong produced late-century BCE 
material similar to some at Khao Sam Kaeo, such as the Fine Wares 
(rouletted ware, stamped ware, etc.) and the Sasanian-Islamic turquoise-
glazed ware, which dates to between the seventh and the eleventh or 
twelfth century CE. Bang Kluai Nok yielded fewer Fine Ware sherds 
than Phu Khao Thong, but produced Eastern Han material, as well 
as intaglios and cameos that probably date to the initial centuries CE; 
it also provided mid-to-late first-millennium CE objects such as the 
śrīvatsa coin. Were Phu Khao Thong and Bang Kluai Nok active exactly 
at the same time? Was there a period when their activities overlapped, 
or did Bang Kluai Nok emerge after Phu Khao Thong’s decline? 
A second limitation affects our understanding of the specialisation at 
each of the four sites. Phu Khao Thong appears small but concentrates 
more evidence for ornament production (glass and stone industries) 
than Bang Kluai Nok. Meanwhile, Bang Kluai Nok’s topography 
appears more appropriate for settlement, and the site yielded evidence 
for more recent occupation. On a political level, the question remains as 
to whether they belong to the same political entity, a polity that would 
have thrived from the last century BCE until about the mid-late first 
millennium CE. No definitive answer can be provided at this stage. 
Khao Sam Kaeo was apparently an enclosed settlement housing various 
foreign communities and trading and industrial activities. In contrast, 
the two sites on the west coast do not provide evidence for boundary 
walls, for hydraulic systems, or for the concentration of as many 
activities as in Khao Sam Kaeo. Phu Khao Thong might have hosted 
South Asian traders, given the extensive numbers of Indian wares found 
there. However, again, the absence of in-depth investigation prevents 
our discussing any potential distribution of different activities within 
various portions of the site area. 
What roles were played by Bang Khlak 1 and Bang Khlak 2, the 
two neighbouring sites that yielded stone-production evidence? What 
were their relationships with Phu Khao Thong and Bang Kluai Nok? 
As far as we are aware, Bang Kluai Nok has not yielded any evidence 
for industrial activities or their distribution networks. 
Finally, what was the role of Bang Kluai Nok, compared to its 
neighbour Phu Khao Thong? If the sites were partially contemporary, 
were their activities complementary, with Phu Khao Thong serving 
as a port-entrepôt and specialised industrial site, and Bang Kluai Nok 
serving as the area’s main settlement? These hypotheses still need to be 
confirmed by more extensive research and surveys at the sites.
Conclusion
The three sites, Khao Sam Kaeo in the east and Phu Khao Thong and 
Bang Kluai Nok in the west, were clearly trading nodes on the maritime 
trade routes linking the South China Sea and the Bay of Bengal with 
their extensions further east and west [Map 1]. A major part of the 
organisation of the political and economic networks of these sites is 
unfortunately missing, thus restricting evaluation of their capacity, 
extensions, evolution, and local peculiarities at this developing stage.
Our understanding of the subsistence modes and agricultural 
regimes of these coastal trading posts, and in particular the western 
sites, is still very limited. At both Khao Sam Kaeo and Phu Khao 
Thong, the results of archaeobotanical research corroborate the 
technological reconstruction of the industries, demonstrating that the 
sites participated in the exchange of crops coming from both the East 
and the West. Evidence also indicates that Khao Sam Kaeo had the 
capacity to develop an agricultural system able to sustain local as well 
Figure 7: Original golden seal with 
a Brāhmī inscription from Bang 
Kluai Nok (left) and its mirror image 
(right) [Photograph by Boonyarit 
Chaisuwan].

--- PAGE 45 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
87
86
as transient populations. It is clear from the volume of rice remains 
recovered at the site that it was the main cereal consumed at Khao Sam 
Kaeo. Geomorphological evidence suggests that many areas near the 
settlement could have been used for dryland cultivation, as could the 
hill slopes and plateaux within the settlement. The archaeobotanical 
study conducted by Cristina Castillo at Phu Khao Thong (sampling 
during surveys conducted in 2007 and 2009) shows that the processing 
of rice was taking place on-site and that rice was again the most 
important cereal, although not enough evidence is available yet to 
help us understand where agriculture was taking place and where the 
rice originated. 
Indian pulses are represented more prominently at Phu Khao 
Thong than at Khao Sam Kaeo, suggesting that they were probably 
brought in by the Indian population, as some of these pulses would 
not have been available in peninsular Thailand on their arrival. On the 
other hand, no assertion can be made about the subsistence base for 
Bang Kluai Nok, where no archaeobotanical study has been conducted, 
and no information is available concerning the agricultural regime as to 
level of production, crop variety, or destinations of the various products.
We will conclude by saying that achieving an integrated view of 
the economic, political, and social networks represented at these sites 
requires not only considering the trans-Asiatic networks and their 
populations but also the various local ones (i.e. interior, coastal, from 
the sea), an approach Laura Lee Junker (1999) has applied in her 
research concerning later sites in the Philippines and that researchers 
have applied in other areas including peninsular Malaysia and Sumatra 
(e.g. Miksic 1979; Allen 1988). What potential change did integration 
within a transregional network bring to these interior populations and 
their environments? Alternatively, how did those local populations affect 
the long-distance networks? These populations, based on the evidence 
for interior groups studied by later ethnographic observers including 
F.L. Dunn (1975), lived in close association with the forest, knew its 
products intimately, and exploited their environments for the benefit of 
Figure 8: Examples of ornaments 
found in Khao Muenni caves of the 
interior in Thung Raya sub-district, 
Sawi district, Chumphon province 
[Photographs by Bérénice Bellina].
References
Allen, Jane 
1988  Trade, Transportation, and 
Tributaries: Exchange, Agriculture, and 
Settlement Distribution in Early Historic-
period Kedah, Malaysia.  Doctoral 
Dissertation. Mānoa: University of 
Hawai’i. [Unpublished]
1991  Trade and Site Distribution 
in Early Historic Period Kedah: 
Geoarchaeological, Historic and 
Locational Evidence. Bulletin of the 
Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 10: 
307-319.
1999  Managing a Tropical 
Environment: State Development 
in Early Historical-era Kedah, 
Malaysia. In Bacus, E. & Lucero, 
L. (eds), Complex Polities in the Ancient 
Tropical World. Arlington: American 
Anthropological Association,  
pp. 131-150. 
2009  Étude géomorphologique : 
paléo-drainage, érosion, gestion des 
sols et agriculture. In Bellina, B. 
(ed.), Campagne de fouilles à Khao Sam 
Kaeo. Campagne 2009 : rapport pour le 
Ministère des Affaires Étrangères. Paris: 
CNRS. [Unpublished]
Amara Srisuchat 
1996  Merchants, Merchandise, 
Markets: Archaeological Evidence 
in Thailand Concerning Maritime 
Trade Interaction between 
Thailand and Other Countries 
before the 16th Century A.D. In 
Amara Srisuchat (ed.), Ancient Trades 
and Cultural Contacts in Southeast 
Asia. Bangkok: The Office of the 
National Culture commission,  
pp. 237-266.
Andaya, Leonard Y. 
2008  Leaves of the Same Tree. Trade 
and Ethnicity in the Straits of Melaka. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press.
Bellina, Bérénice 
2001  Témoignages archéologiques 
d’échanges entre l’Inde et l’Asie du 
Sud-Est, morphologie, morphométrie et 
techniques de fabrication des perles en 
agate et en cornaline (VIe siècle avant 
notre ère – VIe siècle de notre ère).  
Doctoral Dissertation. Paris: 
Sorbonne Nouvelle. [Unpublished]
2003  Beads, Social Change  
and Interaction between India 
and Southeast Asia. Antiquity 77: 
285-297.
2007  Cultural Exchange between India 
and Southeast Asia: Production and 
Distribution of Hard Stone Ornaments, 
6th c. BC-6th c. AD. Paris: Éditions de 
la Maison des sciences de l’homme.
the coastal polities, via networks of riverine way-stations (e.g. Bronson 
1977). According to this scheme, the leaders at stations in the network 
could control the traffic, whether of goods or travellers, for their own 
benefit and that of the local people who supported them.
The Thai-French mission is only beginning to investigate interior 
regions, which almost certainly constituted vital parts of the hinterlands 
that supported the complex coastal polities. A few discoveries of artefacts 
[e.g. Figure 8] at sites in the interior that are similar to those found 
at coastal sites suggest that it may eventually be possible to identify, 
for periods as early as the final centuries BCE, the kind of symbiotic 
relationship that is described in ethnographic accounts. In the context of 
the multiple social and political strategies that were used by the various 
populations, and based on ethnographic extrapolations, it seems likely 
that these artefacts might have been used as gifts to strengthen alliances 
with other elites, as well as to recompense the loyalty of subordinates 
(Bronson 1977; Junker 1990: 176-177). This study would allow us to 
address whether, some groups became highly economically specialised, 
some collecting forest products or precious ores in the interior, others 
becoming specialised in the offshore collection of sea products for 
the maritime trade networks and so on. In this way, a much earlier 
“globalisation” would have thus contributed significantly to the creation 
of cultural identities in Southeast Asia. 
Acknowledgements
Bérénice Bellina wishes to acknowledge the help received by Peter 
Skilling for his advice and guidance with any material displaying 
inscriptions and both him and Jane Allen for checking a previous 
version of this essay.

--- PAGE 46 ---
Bérénice Bellina et al.
89
88
2009  Carte archéologique 
régionale : repérage et prospections 
à l’échelle régionale. In Bellina, B. 
(ed.), Campagne de fouilles à Khao Sam 
Kaeo. Campagne 2009 : rapport pour le 
Ministère des Affaires Étrangères. Paris: 
CNRS. [Unpublished]
In Press  Maritime Silk Roads’ 
Ornament Industries: Socio-
political Practices and Cultural 
Transfers in the South China Sea. 
Cambridge Journal of Archaeology.
Forthcoming  Stone Ornament 
Production System’s Sociopolitical 
Environment, Social Identities and 
Cultural Transfers in Khao Sam 
Kaeo. In Bellina, B. (ed.), Khao 
Sam Kaeo: An Early Industrial Port-city 
between the Indian Ocean and the South 
China Sea. Paris.
Bellina, Bérénice &  
Glover, Ian C. 
2004  The Archaeology of Early 
Contacts with India and the 
Mediterranean World from the 
Fourth Century BC to the Fourth 
Century AD. In Glover, I.C. & 
Bellwood, P. (eds), Southeast Asia  
from the Prehistory to History.  
London: Routledge/Curzon Press, 
pp. 68-88.
Bellina-Pryce, Bérénice & 
Praon Silapanth 
2008  Weaving Cultural Identities 
on Trans-Asiatic Networks: Upper 
Thai-Malay Peninsula – An Early 
Socio-political Landscape. Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 93 
[for 2006]: 257-293.
Bellina, Bérénice, Bacus, 
Elizabeth, Pryce, Thomas 
oliver & Wisseman Christie, 
Jan (eds)  
2010  50 Years of Archaeology in 
Southeast Asia: Essays in Honour of Ian 
Glover. Bangkok: River Books.
Bellina, Bérénice, Epinal, 
Guillaume & Favereau, Aude 
2012  Relations et échanges en 
Mer de Chine Méridionale à 
la fin de la préhistoire : début 
de caractérisation du matériel 
céramique de la péninsule Thaïe-
Malaise. Archipel 84: 7-33.
Biggs, Lynn, Bellina,  
Bérénice, Martinon-Torres, 
Marcos & Pryce,  
Thomas oliver 
2013  Prehistoric Iron Production 
Technologies in the Upper Thai-
Malay Peninsula: Metallography 
and Slag Inclusion Analyses of 
Iron Artefacts from Khao Sam 
Kaeo and Phu Khao Thong. 
Archaeological and Anthropology Science 
5(4): 311-329.
Boonyarit Chaisuwan 
2011  Early Contacts between 
India and the Andaman Coast in 
Thailand from the Second Century 
BCE to the Eleven Century CE. In 
Manguin, P.-Y., A. Mani & Wade, 
G. (eds), Early Interactions between 
South and Southeast Asia. Reflections on 
Cross-Cultural Exchange. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, pp. 84-111.
Bouvet, Phaedra 
2008  Étude préliminaire de 
céramiques « indiennes » et 
indianisantes du site de Khao  
Sam Kaeo. Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 93 [for 2006]:  
353-390.
2009  Rapport sur la céramique 
à Khao Sam Kaeo, saison 2009. 
In Bellina, B. (ed.), Campagne de 
fouilles à Khao Sam Kaeo. Campagne 
2009 : rapport pour le Ministère des 
Affaires Étrangères. Paris: CNRS. 
[Unpublished]
2012  Interactions culturelles entre l’Asie 
du Sud-Est et l’Inde aux 4e-2e s. av. 
J.-C.: étude technologique des céramiques 
de Khao Sam Kaeo (Thaïlande 
péninsulaire, province de Chumphon). 
Doctoral Dissertation. Nanterre-La 
Défense: Université Paris-Ouest. 
[Unpublished]
Bronson, Bennet 
1977  Exchange at the Upstream 
and Downstream Ends: Notes 
Towards a Functional Model of the 
Coastal State in Southeast Asia. In 
Hutterer, K. (ed.), Economic Exchange 
and Social Interaction in Southeast Asia: 
Perspectives from Prehistory, History and 
Ethnography. Ann Arbor: Michigan 
Papers on South and Southeast 
Asia 13, pp. 39-52.
Castillo, Cristina 
2009  The Archaeobotany of 
Khao Sam Kaeo: 2009 Season. 
In Bellina, B. (ed.), Campagne de 
fouilles à Khao Sam Kaeo. Campagne 
2009 : rapport pour le Ministère des 
Affaires Étrangères. Paris: CNRS. 
[Unpublished]
2011  Rice in Thailand: The 
Archaeobotanical Contribution. 
Rice 4(3/4): 114-120.
Cherian, P.J. 
2010  Pattanam Excavations and 
Explorations 2007 & 2008: An 
Overview. In Forte, M., Campana, 
S. & Liuzza, C. (eds), Space, Time, 
Place. Third International Conference 
on Remote Sensing in Archaeology 17th-
21st August 2009, Tiruchirapalli, 
Tamil Nadu, India. Oxford: 
Archaeopress, pp. 269-274.
Chhabra, B.C. 
1935  Expansion of the Indo-
Aryan Culture during the Pallava 
Rule, as Evidenced by Inscriptions. 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 
1: 1-64.
Coningham, R.A.E. 
1995  Dark Age or Continuum? 
An Archaeological Analysis of the 
Second Emergence of Urbanism 
in South Asia. In Allchin, F.R. 
(ed.), The Archaeology of Early Historic 
South Asia: The Emergence of Cities 
and States. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 54-72.
Deloche, Jean 
1992  Étude sur les fortifications  
de l’Inde. II. Les fortifications  
de l’Inde ancienne. Bulletin  
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  
79: 89-131.
Dunn, F.L.  
1975  Rain-forest Collectors and Traders 
– A Study of Resource Utilization in 
Modern and Ancient Malaya. Kuala 
Lumpur: Malaysian Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society.
Dussubieux, Laure, Lankton, 
James, Bellina, Bérénice & 
Boonyarit Chaisuwan  
2012  Early Glass Trade in South 
and Southeast Asia: New Insights 
from Two Coastal Sites, Phu 
Khao Thong in Thailand and 
Arikamedu in South India. In 
Tjoa-Bonatz, Mai Lin, Reinecke, 
Andreas & Bonatz, Dominik (eds), 
Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from 
the 13th International Conference of the 
European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Volume 1. Singapore: 
NUS Press, pp. 307-338.
Dussubieux, Laure &  
Bellina, Bérénice 
Forthcoming  Glass from Early 
Southeast Asian Producing and 
Trading Centre. In Bellina, B. (ed.), 
Khao Sam Kaeo: An Early Industrial 
Port-city between the Indian Ocean and 
the South China Sea. Paris.
Glover, Ian C. 
2002  West Asian Sassanian-
Islamic Ceramics in the Indian 
Ocean, South, Southeast and East 
Asia. Man and Environment 27(1): 
165-177.
Glover, Ian C. & Bellina, 
Bérénice 
2011  Ban Don Ta Phet and 
Khao Sam Kaeo: The Earliest 
Indian Contacts Re-assessed. In 
Manguin, P.-Y., Mani, A. & Wade, 
G. (eds), Early Interactions between 
South and Southeast Asia: Reflections on 
Cross-Cultural Exchange. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, pp. 17-42.
Hung, H.-C. & Bellwood, Peter  
2010  Movement of Raw Materials 
and Manufactured Goods Across 
the South China Sea after 500 
BCE: From Taiwan to Thailand, 
and Back. In Bellina, B., Bacus, 
E. A., Pryce, T. O. & Wisseman 
Christie, J. (eds), 50 Years of 
Archaeology in Southeast Asia. Essays 
in Honour of Ian Glover. Bangkok: 
River Books, pp. 234-245.
Hung, H.-C., Iizuka, Y., 
Bellwood, P., Nguyen, K.D., 
Bellina, B., Silapanth, P., 
Dizon, E., Santiago, R., Datani, 
I. & Manton, J.H.  
2007  Ancient Jades Map 3,000 
Years of Prehistoric Exchange in 
Southeast Asia. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 104,  
pp. 19745-19750.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel 
2002  The Malay Peninsula. Cross-
roads of the Maritime Silk-Road (100 
BC-1300 AD). Leiden: Brill.
Jongeward, David 
2012  Survey of Gandharan 
Reliquaries. In Jongeward, D.E., 
Salomon, R. & Baums, S. (eds), 
Gandharan Buddhist Reliquaries. 
Seattle: University of Washington 
Press, pp. 39-110.
Junker, Laura Lee 
1990  The Organization of Intra-
regional and Long-distance Trade 
in Prehispanic Philippine Complex 
Societies. Asian Perspectives 29(2): 
167-209.
1999  Raiding, Trading, and Feasting 
– The Political Economy of Philippine 
Chiefdoms. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press.
Kim, Nam C., Lai Van Toi & 
Trinh Hoang Hiep 
2010  Walls, Warfare, and Political 
Centralization: Recent Excavations 
at Vietnam’s Ancient Capital of 
Co Loa. Antiquity 84:1011-1027.
Lamb, Alastair 
1963  Indianized Inscriptions 
in North-western Malaya. Tamil 
Culture 10(1): 75-86.
Malakie LaClair, Julie 
2008  Identifying Patterns between 
the Looting Pits: Spatial Analysis at 
Khao Sam Kaeo. Master Thesis. 
London: University of London. 
[Unpublished]
Mason, R.B. & Keall, E.J.  
1991  The Abbasid Glazed Wares 
of Siraf and the Basra Connection: 
Petrographic Analysis. Iran 29: 
51-66.
Miksic, John N.  
1979  Archaeology, Trade and Society 
in Northeast Sumatra. Doctoral 
Dissertation. Ithaca: Cornell 
University. [Unpublished]
Milner, Anthony C., 
McKinnon, Edward E. & Sinar, 
Tengku L. 
1978  A Note on Aru and Kota 
Cina. Indonesia 26: 1-42.
Murillo-Barroso, Mercedes, 
Pryce, Thomas oliver,  
Bellina, Bérénice &  
Martinon-Torres, Marcos 
2010  Khao Sam Kaeo – An 
Archaeometallurgical Crossroads 
for Trans-asiatic Technological 
Traditions. Journal of Archaeological 
Science 37: 1761-1772.
Peronnet, Sophie &  
Sachipan Srikanlaya 
Forthcoming  The Chinese-related 
Ceramic at Khao Sam Kaeo. In 
Bellina, B. (ed.), Khao Sam Kaeo:  
An Early Industrial Port-city between 
the Indian Ocean and the South China 
Sea. Paris.
Pryce, Thomas oliver, Bellina, 
Bérénice & Bennett, Anna 
2008  The Development of 
Metal Technologies in the 
Upper Thai-Malay Peninsula: 
Initial Interpretation of the 
Archaeometallurgical Evidence 
from Khao Sam Kaeo. Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 93 
[for 2006]: 295-316.
Renfrew, Colin & Cherry,  
John F. (eds)  
1986  Peer Polity Interaction and 
Socio-political Change. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Roux, Valentine (ed.)  
2000  Cornaline de l’Inde : des pratiques 
techniques de Cambay aux techno-
systèmes de l’Indus. Paris: Éditions de 
la Maison des sciences de l’homme.
Smith, Monica L.  
2003  Early Walled Cities of the 
Indian Subcontinent as “Small 
Worlds.” The Social Construction of 
Ancient Cities. Washington, DC: 
Smithsonian Institute Press,  
pp. 269-289.
Theunissen, Robert 
2007  The Agate and Carnelian 
Ornaments. In Higham, C., 
Kijngam, A. & Talbot, S. (eds), 
The Excavations of Noen U-Loke and 
Non Muang Kao. Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department, pp. 359-377.
Wheatley, Paul 
1961  The Golden Khersonese.  
Studies in the Historical Geography of 
the Malay Peninsula before A.D. 1500. 
Kuala Lumpur: University of 
Malaya Press.

--- PAGE 47 ---
91
90
Introduction
T
owards the end of the second millennium BCE, bronze was 
introduced into Thailand and elsewhere in mainland Southeast 
Asia by various routes from China (Higham & Rachanie 2012: 145-
146). In some areas, especially northern Vietnam, northeast Thailand 
and the areas east of the Chao Phraya valley, bronze largely replaced 
stone tools for everyday tasks, and for small ornaments. This regional 
“Bronze Age” lasted some five hundred years and saw the widening 
of existing trade networks and the consolidation of settlements into 
mounded villages surrounded, especially in the Northeast, by moats 
and earthen banks.
From about 500 BCE, Southeast Asia entered into a major maritime 
exchange network that linked it with China, India and beyond to Persia 
and the Mediterranean world (Glover & Bellina 2011; Borell et al., this 
volume). This had profound cultural changes, involving the adoption 
of iron technology, first into southern and coastal regions, seeing the 
introduction of a wide range of new prestige goods, such as glass 
and semi-precious stone beads, and most importantly, new concepts 
deriving from the religious and political cultures of India. Among the 
new products that appeared at three archaeological sites in Thailand, 
Ban Don Ta Phet, Khao Chamuk1 and Khao Sam Kaeo were some 
twelve high-tin bronze bowls with elaborate designs of people, animals 
in procession and building structures (Bennett & Glover 1992; Glover 
& Bennett 2012). Of these, one vessel stands out from the others on 
account of its more refined and naturalistic decoration and its early 
South Asian iconography and was certainly imported to Thailand at 
some time in antiquity as most probably were the other decorated vessels. 
The one we discuss and illustrate in this essay was said to have been 
found early in 2010 in the Tha Taphao river on the western edge of the 
archaeological site of Khao Sam Kaeo in Mueang district, Chumphon 
province, peninsular Thailand, an important archaeological site which 
has been surveyed, excavated and planned over a number of years 
by a French-Thai team led by Bérénice Bellina (2002; Bellina et al., 
this volume).
The Bronze Bowl
The bowl is 16 cm. in diameter, 8 cm. deep and 1 mm. thick on the 
body, 3-4 mm. at the rim, and its weight is 410 g. [Figure 1]. It is 
currently held in the Buddhadasa Indapanno Archives in Bangkok. 
An Early Northwest Indian 
Decorated Bronze Bowl 
from Khao Sam Kaeo
ian c. glover & SHaHnaj HuSne jaHan
Opposite Figure 1: The bronze 
bowl said to have been found from 
Khao Sam Kaeo, Chumphon district, 
Śuṅga or Śātavāhana period (?) 
[Photograph courtesy of Paisarn 
Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 48 ---
ian c. glover & SHaHnaj HuSne jaHan
93
92
 16 cm
8.4 cm
0.8 cm
1 cm
8 mm
2.1 cm
4.4 cm
2 mm
2
3 4
5
6
2 mm
Figure 2: The decoration laid onto a flat plane 
[Drawing by Shahnaj Husne Jahan and  
Kwanpoom Wilaival].
Figure 3: Cross-section of the bowl with figure 
of one of the three griffins, foliage and a horse 
[Drawing courtesy of Sanguansri Tretappratima].
In January 2011, the authors were able to examine the bowl, to make 
rubbings of the decoration which were redrawn onto a single plane with 
the help of Kwanpoom Wilaival from Silpakorn University, Bangkok.2 
[Figure 2] On the vessel, nine bands of animals and climbing plants 
spiral out from a stylised lotus at the base towards the rim decorated 
with hatched triangles and a dot and circle motif [Figure 3]. This 
vessel differs from the other decorated bronze bowls mentioned above 
on account of the more flowing and naturalistic decoration and its 
clearer iconographic links with northwestern India. The bowl is virtually 
complete yet fragile and it has not been possible to make compositional 
and structural analyses for comparison with the bowls from Ban Don Ta 
Phet and Khao Chamuk.
Above the lotus base, the animals represented include elephants, 
geese, deer, horses and, most unusually a griffin, a mythical winged 
feline3 [Figures 4-6]. The other animals are regular elements in the 
religious iconography of early South and Southeast Asia, often, but 
not exclusive, to Buddhism and are as Peter Skilling (pers. comm.) 
commented multivalent symbols with meanings in several Indian 
religious systems. But the griffin is different; it is unknown to us in 
pre-Thai and other Southeast Asian art and seems to link the vessel to 
the region dominated by the Śuṅga dynasty in the northwestern part 
of South Asia where Graeco-Bactrian influences are regularly found. 
For example, griffins are quite common in India during the Śuṅga 
period (180 BCE to 68 BCE) for the decoration of shrines at Mathurā 
(Uttar Pradesh), Bhārhut (Madhya Pradesh), Sāñci (Madhya Pradesh) 
and ancient Tagara or Ter (Maharashtra) (Marshall & Foucher 1918; 
Sharma 1994; Rhie Quintanilla 2007) [Figures 7-9]. Griffins are 
exquisitely portrayed on the ivory royal furniture fittings found at 
Begrām in Afghanistan, the ancient city of Kāpiśa and summer capital 
of the Śuṅga and Kuṣāṇa rulers of the second or first century BCE to 
the early centuries CE (Hackin 1954; St John Simpson 2011: 23-24) 
[Figure 10] and are occasionally found in the art of Amarāvatī 
(Andhra Pradesh), but further east and later griffins seem to be replaced by 
winged lions which also enter the repertoire of early Southeast Asian art. 
Griffins are fantastic animals with the body of a winged feline and 
the head and beak of an eagle. In the myths of the lands north of 
the Black Sea they were thought by some still to exist and were said to 
roam in pairs or packs, nesting on the ground, preying on horses and 
deer and were seen as protectors of the gold deposits of the region 
hence their symbolic role as guardians of treasure (Mayor 2000: 16).4 
The name, “griffin” is derived from the Greek word gryps, meaning 
hooked and there are many legends about their fearsome nature in 
early Greek literature mostly relating to the Scythians and Sarmatians 
whose tombs contain images of griffins on gold artefacts and tattoos 
on the bodies of the nobility. Images of griffins, alongside other 
mythical and real animals, entered the repertoire of Greek art5 and 
were spread westwards, reaching Celtic Gaul, and eastwards to Iran 
and northern India.
Although no exact parallel for this bronze bowl is known to the 
authors, it shares a number of features found on the well-known brass 
water vessel (loṭā) from Gundla [Figures 11a-b] in Kulu district, 
Himachal Pradesh, northern India which was found in 1857 by Major

--- PAGE 49 ---
94
ian c. glover & SHaHnaj HuSne jaHan
95
Figures 4a-b: Base of the bronze 
bowl (left) showing lotus design (right)
[Photographs courtesy of Paisarn 
Piemmettawat].
Figure 7: Stone moulds for small 
beaten decorations from the Lamture 
Museum, Ter, Maharashtra, India, 
Śuṅga or Śātavāhana period (?) 
[Photograph courtesy of Ariane 
de Saxcé with permission of 
the Department of Archaeology 
and Museums, Government of 
Maharashtra, India].
Figure 8: Lady riding a griffin on 
stone sculpture from Mathurā, India, 
Kuṣāṇa period, ca 1st century CE, 
Varanasi University Museum,  
inv. no. 21768 [Photograph courtesy 
of Nicolas Revire].
Figure 9: Griffin depicted on  
stūpa no. 2 from Sāñci, India  
(in situ), Śuṅga or Śātavāhana 
period (?) [Photograph courtesy  
of Nicolas Revire].
Figures 6a-b: Side view of the  
bronze bowl with griffin (left);  
close-up (right) [Photographs courtesy  
of Paisarn Piemmettawat].
Figure 5: Side view of the bronze 
bowl with horse [Photograph courtesy 
of Paisarn Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 50 ---
ian c. glover & SHaHnaj HuSne jaHan
97
96
Hay in a ruined Buddhist monastery and is generally attributed to the 
Śuṅga period (180 BCE to 68 BCE) (Errington, Crib & Claringbull 
1992: 162-164). 
Conclusion
The discovery of this exquisite imported bowl will strengthen the position 
of Khao Sam Kaeo, a substantial settlement and manufacturing centre 
as the earliest known port-of-trade from the region and as a major 
centre of cultural exchanges. Surely, the cosmopolitan population of 
this favoured place maintained close and lasting links throughout Asia 
permitting the exchange of ideas and decorative styles that came to 
bind South and Southeast Asia for more than two millennia (Bellina 
2002; Bellina & Praon 2007; Bellina et al., this volume).
Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge the help of Dr Bunchar Pongpanich and 
the Suthiratana Foundation for the opportunity to examine the bowl 
in 2011 and for allowing for the photographs to be made, as well as 
Kwanpoom Wilaival and Sanguansri Tretappratima for their assistance 
with the drawings.
Figure 11a: Bronze loṭā from 
Gundla, Kulu Valley, northern 
India, Śuṅga period, British 
Museum, London, inv. no. 1880.22 
[Photograph courtesy of the Trustees 
of the British Museum, Asia].
References
Bellina, Bérénice 
2002  Le port protohistorique de 
Khao Sam Kaeo en Thaïlande 
péninsulaire : lieu privilégié pour 
l’étude des premières interactions 
indiennes et sud-est asiatiques. 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême 
Orient 89: 329-357.
Bellina, Bérénice & Praon 
Silapanth  
2007  Khao Sam Kaeo and 
the Upper Thai Peninsula: 
Understanding the Mechanism 
of Early Trans-Asiatic Trade and 
Cultural Exchange. In Bacus, 
Elizabeth A., Glover, Ian C. & 
Pigott, Vincent C. (eds), Uncovering 
Southeast Asia’s Past. Singapore: 
NUS Press, pp. 379-392.
Bennett, Anna & Glover, Ian C. 
1992  Decorated High-tin Bronze 
from Thailand’s Prehistory. In 
Glover, Ian C. (ed.), Southeast Asian 
Archaeology 1990. Hull: Centre for 
Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 227-
232.
Birdwood, George C.M.  
1880  The Industrial Arts of India. 
London: Chapman and Hall.
Collective 
1997  Lexicon Iconographicum 
Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC), Volume 
VIII (Part 1 and 2). Zurich, Munich, 
Düsseldorf: Artemis & Winkler 
Verlag. 
Errington, Elizabeth, Crib, Joe 
& Claringbull, Maggie (eds)  
1992  The Crossroads of Asia. 
Transformation in Image and Symbol. 
Cambridge: The Ancient India 
and Iran Trust.
Glover, Ian C. & Bellina, 
Bérénice  
2011  Ban Don Ta Phet and 
Khao Sam Kaeo: The Earliest 
Indian Contacts Re-assessed. In 
Manguin, P.-Y., A. Mani & Wade, 
G. (eds), Early Interactions between 
South and Southeast Asia. Reflections on 
Cross-Cultural Exchange. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, pp. 17-42.
Glover, Ian C. & Bennett, Anna 
2012  The High-Tin in Bronzes of 
Thailand. In Jett, Paul, McCarthy, 
B. & Douglas, J.G. (eds), Scientific 
Research into Ancient Asian Metallurgy, 
Proceedings of the Fifth Forbes 
Symposium, Freer Gallery of 
Art at the Freer Gallery. London: 
Archetype Publications Ltd.,  
pp. 101-114.
Hackin, Joseph 
1954  Rencontre de trois civilisations, 
Inde, Grèce, Chine : nouvelles recherches 
archéologiques à Begram (Ancienne 
Kâpici) 1939-40. Two Volumes. 
Paris: Presses Universitaires  
de France.  
Higham, Charles & Rachanie 
Thosarat 
2012  Early Thailand: From Prehistory 
to Sukhothai. Bangkok: River Books.
Karttunen, Klaus  
1989  India in Early Greek Literature. 
Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society. 
Marshall, John & Foucher, 
Alfred 
1918  A Guide to Sanchi. Three 
Volumes. Calcutta: Government 
Printing.  
Mayor, Adrienne  
2000  The First Fossil Hunters. New 
Jersey: Princeton University Press. 
Rhie Quintanilla, Sonya 
2007  History of Early Stone Sculpture 
at Mathura, ca. 150 BCE-100 CE. 
Leiden: Brill.
Sharma, Ramesh Chandra  
1994  Bharhut Sculptures. New Delhi: 
Abhinav.
St John Simpson  
2011  Indian Ivories from Afghanistan 
– The Begram Hoard. London: The 
British Museum Press.
Endnotes
1 Often spelt “Khao Jamook” in earlier publications.
2 The bowl was found by Mr Nai Yao when sand 
mining in the Tha Taphao river between Khao Song 
and Khao Sam Kaeo in early March 2010. On 
the river’s edge villagers have found several bronze 
artefacts, stone, glass and golden beads.
3 Here we take a narrow definition of griffin as a 
mythical animal with the body of a feline with wings 
set low towards the front of the body, talons and 
the head of an avian raptor such as an eagle. Some 
writers on Indian art casually refer to winged lions as 
griffins.
4 Legends in the trans-Oxus region link griffins with 
the finds of fearsome looking, bird-like Cretaceous 
period dinosaur, Protoceratops whose bones and eggs 
are commonly found in the eroding gold-bearing 
sand dunes (Mayor 2000).
5 Another source for the origin and distribution of 
griffins in art is given by Karttunen (1989: 177-80) 
who derives them from pre-dynastic Egypt with 
perhaps a separate origin in Mesopotamia whence 
it was introduced into Syrio-Palestinian art. But he 
accepts that, “In India the griffin is a late import 
from Achaemenian or Hellenistic West and is 
found mainly in early Buddhist sites like Bhārhut, 
Sāñci and Sarnath.” The LIMC lists and illustrates 
many examples of griffins in Greek and Roman art 
(Collective 1997, VIII (1): 609-610 and VIII (2):  
378-379).
Figure 11b: Decoration on  
the bronze loṭā from Gundla  
[After Birdwood 1880: pl. 12].
Figure 10: Griffin on ivory 
furniture bracket from Begram, 
Afghanistan, Śuṅga period (ca 2nd-
1st c. BCE), present whereabouts 
unknown [After Hackin 1954: II, 
fig. 192].

--- PAGE 51 ---
99
98
Introduction
I
n the last centuries BCE and the early centuries CE, the coastal regions 
of mainland Southeast Asia were linked to a network of maritime 
routes. Recent studies based on archaeological finds demonstrated the 
active contacts between South Asia and the upper part of the Thai-
Malay Peninsula. However, for the sea routes between the coasts of 
southern China and India, the Thai-Malay Peninsula acts as a huge 
barrier. In recent years some sites on the western and eastern coast of 
the Isthmus of Kra area have been receiving more and more attention 
from archaeologists – but sadly, also from looters, who find digging for 
artefacts very profitable. These sites yielded an array of finds imported 
from several rather distant regions. It appears that different systems of 
maritime routes were here connected by transpeninsular routes, as had 
already been concluded from a passage in the annals of the Western 
Han dynasty (206 BCE-8 CE) describing a sea voyage from the southern 
Chinese ports in the Gulf of Tonkin to India. Judging from the finds, 
the networks connecting different maritime routes reached as far as 
China in the east, and in the west to the western coasts of the Indian 
Ocean, and from there via the Red Sea ultimately to the Mediterranean 
Sea (Bellina & Glover 2004).
This essay presents a selection of artefacts originating from the 
region of the Mediterranean Sea and mainly dating from the Roman 
Imperial period (here the late first century BCE to third century CE) 
unearthed or reported to have been found mainly at sites in the upper 
part of the Thai-Malay Peninsula: Khao Sam Kaeo, Tha Chana, 
Phu Khao Thong and nearby Bang Kluai Nok [e.g. Figure 1] in the 
region of the Isthmus of Kra (Bellina et al., this volume), and Khlong 
Thom further south. These sites provide a chronological sequence 
from the very early days of the maritime silk roads – i.e. from the fourth 
to the third centuries BCE for the site of Khao Sam Kaeo, then from 
the last centuries BCE and the early centuries CE for the other sites. 
Although a few Mediterranean finds from Khlong Thom, also known as 
Khuan Luk Pat (“bead mound”), in Krabi province, had already come 
to light in the 1980s, some newly reported material from there and also 
from the other sites is introduced. The discussion will focus on the dating 
of the objects, and when they might have been used in their Southeast 
Asian context, their possible function – as well as the types of objects 
which seem to have been most favoured. Objects, whether made in the 
West or inspired by its production, help to illustrate the chronological 
development of long-distance sea routes to this peninsular area.
Contacts between the Upper Thai-Malay 
Peninsula and the Mediterranean World 
BrigiTTe Borell, Bérénice Bellina & 
BoonyariT cHaiSuWan
Opposite Figure 1: Roman 
cameo fragment with satyr and 
standing figure from Bang Kluai 
Nok, Ranong province, early 1st 
century CE, preserved height 19.5 
millimetres, Suthiratana Foundation, 
inv. no. BKN 280 [Photograph 
courtesy of Karunphol Phanich].

--- PAGE 52 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
101
100
The Sites
Khlong Thom, Krabi province, is located about 240 kilometres south 
of the Isthmus of Kra. The site is now about 20 kilometres inland 
from the western coast, and connected to the Andaman Sea by the 
Khlong Thom river. It was in an ideal location for an entrepôt engaged 
both in sea-borne trade and specialist manufacturing activities.
Khao Sam Kaeo is in Chumphon province, on the eastern coast 
of the Kra Isthmus region. According to the chronology established 
by the Thai-French excavations based on radiocarbon dates, the major 
period of activity at the site can be dated between the fourth and first 
centuries BCE, nevertheless some activity appears to have also taken 
place in the early centuries CE (Bellina-Pryce & Praon 2008; Glover 
& Bellina 2011; Bellina et al., this volume). The excavations brought 
to light an astounding array of finds, among them Chinese ceramic 
fragments dating from the Han period (206 BCE to 220 CE) (Peronnet 
2013), large amounts of Indian pottery fragments (Bouvet 2006 and 
2011) as well as other imports from India, indicating the status of the 
site in the trade networks of the period.
The site of Tha Chana in Surat Thani province, about 100 
kilometres south of Khao Sam Kaeo, is likewise situated on the east 
coast. This site has been heavily looted and only briefly surveyed by 
archaeologists, therefore very little is known about it (Amara et al. 1987: 
350). The evidence of waste material from the manufacture of stone 
and glass beads suggests that one of the activities at the site was bead-
making; some of the beads can be compared with those from Khao 
Sam Kaeo and Phu Khao Thong. The finds from the site also include 
sherds of Han period pottery (Peronnet 2013) and Indian Fine Wares 
(Bouvet 2012: 307-308). In addition, fragments of at least seven glass 
vessels of a type known from Han period tombs in the Gulf of Tonkin 
region (Borell 2011: 62, n. 37) were also found at Tha Chana, which 
support a dating of the early phase of the site that covers at least the first 
century BCE and the early centuries CE.
Archaeological investigations have been carried out at Phu Khao 
Thong, Ranong province on the western coast of the peninsula, only 
since 2005. Their preliminary results already point to an identification 
of this site and the group of neighbouring sites including Bang Kluai 
Nok as an important coastal trading station in a period covering the 
last two centuries BCE to the early centuries CE. These sites yielded 
abundant finds of Indian ceramics, among them “rouletted ware,” as 
well as fragments of Han period Chinese ceramics. They are thought to 
be connected to the western end of transpeninsular routes crossing the 
Isthmus (Boonyarit 2011; Bellina et al., this volume).
Lastly, the site of U Thong, Suphan Buri province, in central 
Thailand is a major urban centre of the later Dvāravatī culture. It also 
yielded archaeological evidence of earlier phases, as well as finds that 
parallel those from Oc Eo from the first centuries CE. It is an inland site1 
but was well connected to the trading networks, and appears to have 
been an important place already in the early historic period (Phasook 
2004 and 2009).
Intaglios and a Cameo Fragment
Motifs on Roman intaglios were usually engraved in reverse because 
it was supposed to have been viewed as it appeared on the impression 
or sealing. Here for example, Fortuna [Figure 3] would be correctly 
viewed in an impression holding her rudder with her right hand. The 
Mars in impression [Figure 5b] has his sword and arms correctly 
on his left side. However, this was not always strictly observed by the 
Roman gem-cutters, maybe because the intaglios were also appreciated 
for their decorative value in jewellery. For instance, a motif such as 
the young satyr with a bunch of grapes in his outstretched hand 
[Figures 4a-b] frequently occurs in both versions on Roman intaglios 
with the actions of arms and legs reversed. In this essay, the motifs are 
described as they appear on the stone.
A number of intaglios from the Roman Imperial period have been 
found at Khlong Thom. Three of these are described below and have 
already been discussed in earlier publications (Mayuree 1992: 157, 
fig. 5; Glover 1996a: fig. 5 and 1996b: 65, ill. top row centre which is 
mirror-inverted; Bellina 1998: fig. 8). The first is an oval intaglio with a 
convex face showing two fighting cocks [Figure 2], a motif well known 
from Roman gems.2 The second intaglio, also a carnelian, illustrates 
one of the most popular motifs used on Roman seal stones: Fortuna 
[Figure 3]. She is standing, dressed in a long garment (chiton) with a 
long cloak (himation) draped around her hips and right shoulder, its ends 
falling down over the right forearm. Fortuna holds her characteristic 
attributes: the horn of plenty (cornucopia) and in her other hand she 
grasps the rudder. In addition to the rudder, she holds a corn-ear and a 
poppy-head – attributes originally characteristic of Ceres, the goddess 
of agriculture, for which reason this type is sometimes also called 
Fortuna-Ceres. Judging from photographs, Martin Henig has already 
suggested a date in the late first to second century CE for these two 
intaglios (Glover 1989: n. 5 and 1996b: n. 7).3 The third intaglio is 
an oval carnelian with dark inclusions and a flat face, engraved with 
another motif very common in the Roman Imperial period. It shows 
a young, nude, walking satyr, a mythological figure belonging to the 
retinue of Bacchus, the god of wine [Figures 4a-b].4 The satyr, part 
man, part animal, can be recognised here by the two pointed goat horns 
on his head. Young satyrs of this type are usually shown dancing rather 
than walking. In his raised right hand he holds a bunch of grapes. On 
his left he has the throwing-stick (lagobolon or pedum) for hunting used by 
shepherds and satyrs, and a fawn skin (nebris), customarily worn by the 
Left Figure 2: Roman carnelian 
intaglio with two fighting cocks from 
Khlong Thom, late 1st-2nd century 
CE, Wat Khlong Thom museum, 
Krabi province [Photograph by 
Boonyarit Chaisuwan]. 
Right Figure 3: Roman carnelian 
intaglio with Fortuna from Khlong 
Thom, late 1st-2nd century CE, 15 
millimetres. Formerly at Wat Khlong 
Thom museum, Krabi province  
[After Bellina 1998: fig. 8b].

--- PAGE 53 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
103
102
followers of Bacchus, is draped over his left arm. The style suggests a 
date between the mid-second to early third century CE.
Recently, another Roman intaglio has been found at the site of 
Khao Sam Kaeo [Figures 5a-b]. Like the intaglios from Khlong 
Thom it is without a stratigraphic context. It is an oval, pale yellowish 
carnelian with a flat face. It shows an armed figure, probably Mars the 
god of war, in short military dress with helmet and spear; he stands to 
the front with his head in profile. His one arm is bent with his hand on 
his hip, the sword hangs down behind; the upper arm carries the shield. 
The short military cloak is draped over the arm, two drapery ends hang 
down from the forearm. The impression [Figure 5b] shows the shield 
and sword at his left side which would be customary. The other hand 
(his right hand in impression) is outstretched in front of him, possibly 
meant to hold a shallow libation bowl (patera). The style suggests a date 
in the second or possibly early third century CE.5
At the site of Tha Chana, an amethyst intaglio with the image of 
Bacchus was found [Figures 6a-b]. The oval stone is convex on both 
sides. The face of the seal shows signs of wear where it was exposed 
above the ring setting, but otherwise the stone is in good condition. The 
god stands frontally with his head in profile to the right, he is nude 
except for a long cloak draped over his shoulder and leg. In one hand, 
he holds the thyrsos, a long staff with its cone-shaped top wreathed in 
ivy- and vine-leaves, and in his other hand, the two-handled wine cup 
(kantharos), his characteristic attributes. He is accompanied by his animal, 
the panther, emerging behind his feet. The panther walks with one front 
paw raised, its head turned back and upwards to the god. Amethyst was 
often chosen for an intaglio engraved with a representation of Bacchus 
since the stone was believed to protect the wearer against drunkenness 
(methe). The Greek name for the stone, amethystos, means “not drunken.” 
The classicising style of the figure with its fine and detailed modelling 
suggests a date in the first century CE, possibly even in the early part 
of the century.6
In Boonyarit Chaisuwan’s excavations at Phu Khao Thong, a 
very small carnelian intaglio with the figure of a galloping animal was 
found.7 The schematic rendering and the tiny format does not allow 
a closer dating. From nearby Bang Kluai Nok comes a horizontally 
layered sardonyx with a convex face, now set in a modern ring. The 
stone is engraved with a walking horse and rider [Figures 7a-b]. The 
fine and sensuous modelling of the horse’s head and legs and the wavy 
movement in the rendering of the horse’s tail are very much in the 
tradition of Roman gem-cutting and would suggest a date in the late 
first century BCE to the early first century CE.8 Some peculiarities, 
however, like the spiky mane and, most notably, the absence of a ground 
line, seem to point to an origin in a workshop farther east and possibly 
to a later dating.9 
The same site also yielded a fragment from the lower edge of a 
layered sardonyx cameo [Figure 1]. However, only the lower halves of 
two male figures standing on uneven ground remain. The figure on the 
left has a tail and is therefore to be identified as a satyr. In a stooping 
posture, he moves to the left. The figure on the right, possibly another 
satyr if not the god Bacchus himself, stands in relaxed fashion with his 
weight on one leg and the other bent at the knee. Judging from the style 
of the few details preserved, a date in the late first century BCE or the 
Figures 5a-b: Roman carnelian 
intaglio with Mars from Khao Sam 
Kaeo, Chumphon province, mid-2nd to 
early 3rd century CE, 13 millimetres, 
Suthiratana Foundation, inv. no. KSK 
108 (left: original intaglio; right: 
impression) [Photographs by  
Bérénice Bellina and Brigitte Borell].
Figures 4a-b: Roman carnelian 
intaglio with youthful satyr from 
Khlong Thom, Krabi province,  
mid-2nd to early 3rd century CE,  
12 millimetres, Suthiratana 
Foundation, inv. no. KLP 345  
(left: original intaglio; right: impression) 
[After Bunchar 2552: 148].
Figures 4a-b
Figures 6a-b
Figures 7a-b
Figures 5a-b
Figures 6a-b: Roman amethyst 
intaglio with Bacchus from Tha 
Chana, Surat Thani province, 
ca early 1st century CE, 11.5 
millimetres, Suthiratana Foundation, 
inv. no. TCN 125 (left: original 
intaglio; right: impression) 
[Photographs by Bunchar 
Pongpanich and Brigitte Borell]. 
Figures 7a-b: Layered sardonyx 
intaglio with rider on a walking 
horse from Bang Kluai Nok, Ranong 
province, late 1st century BCE to 
early 1st century CE, Suthiratana 
Foundation, inv. no. BKN 335  
(left: original intaglio; right: 
impression) [Photographs courtesy  
of Karunphol Phanich].

--- PAGE 54 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
105
104
early first century CE may be proposed.10 In this period, such Bacchic 
scenes were particularly popular also on cameo glass. 
In contrast to the cameos, which are purely decorative, intaglios in 
the Graeco-Roman world were used as seals, a function comparable to 
the role of a signature today. Engraved, the carved stones were usually 
mounted in finger rings. Besides their use as seals or signet rings, they 
might also have been prized as items or pieces of jewellery. The high-
quality intaglio with Bacchus from Tha Chana [Figure 6a] allows the 
proposing of a relatively narrow dating. The intaglios from Khlong 
Thom [Figures 2-4a] and Khao Sam Kaeo [Figure 5a] discussed 
here belong to the later Imperial period, when gem-cutting workshops 
made mass-produced intaglios for a wide market of customers. These 
seals were often engraved with standardised representations of gods and 
goddesses chosen by their owners as their tutelary deities; or with other 
motifs, valued for their auspicious meaning. For such mass-produced 
intaglios, it is difficult to give a precise dating based on stylistic analysis 
alone (Guiraud 1992: 51). Quite often it is only possible to assign them 
broadly to a certain time span, as suggested here.
The dating of glass intaglios, like the one found at Khlong Thom 
[Figures 8a-b], presents a different sort of problem. Such glass gems 
were formed in a mould made from the impression of an original stone 
intaglio. The moulds were often formed from high-quality pieces, 
but the glass intaglios were, of course, much cheaper, and therefore 
affordable by a wider group of buyers. Set as ring stones, they might 
have been cherished more for their decorative value than for their use as 
seals, which, in everyday practice, might have been limited, since glass 
gems are more fragile. Such glass intaglios might have been made soon 
after the stone original had been engraved, when a particular motif was 
still en vogue, and so might not be much later in date. Stone intaglios, 
however, might survive for a long time so glass copies could be made 
from collector items or family heirlooms long after the original stone 
intaglio had been created.
The glass intaglio from Khlong Thom [Figure 8a], made of almost 
clear glass, has a slightly convex face and a flat back, and shows a 
miniature scene of rural life.11 On the right stands a bearded herdsman 
leaning on his staff. He is clad in the typical countryman’s garb, consisting 
of a rough skin cloak over a short tunic. In front of him, his dog walks 
to the left, its head raised, one front leg in the air. On the left is a rock 
and a tree; the upper part of the tree bends almost horizontally to the 
right along the oval edge of the glass gem. On top of the rock is an eagle 
with its prey underfoot. The scene appears to have been combined of 
several motifs, including herdsmen looking after their animals, usually 
goats, which became popular in the late first century BCE and early 
first century CE. This was inspired by the pastoral poetry in Roman 
literature flourishing in this period, which praised from the perspective 
of the urban dweller the idyllic country life. The original of the glass 
intaglio might date from the early first century CE. We must be aware, 
however, that, strictly speaking, this suggests only a date for the original 
stone intaglio, not necessarily for the glass gem moulded from it.
It is important to keep in mind these general dating problems of 
stone and glass intaglios and the tentative nature of the dates proposed 
here. In addition, not only is the date of the object itself of interest in 
our context, but also the presumed date of its arrival at the site where it 
was found. Bennet Bronson (1990: 217), though not excluding a direct 
contact with the Mediterranean world in the first or second centuries 
CE, pointed out that other finds from Khlong Thom are indicative of 
a later period, and argued that the seals with motifs of Mediterranean 
origin might only have arrived at a much later date. However, Mayuree 
Veraprasert (1992), based on her later research and excavation, 
re-assessed the chronology of the Khlong Thom site, and proposed for 
it a first phase from the first century BCE to the second century CE, and 
a second phase from the third to fifth centuries CE (Amara 1998: 103-
104, 107; Bellina 1998: 97-98). Judging from the increased evidence 
now available from other Thai peninsular sites, it seems plausible to 
connect some of the Roman intaglios found at Khlong Thom with the 
early phase of the site. 
Fragments of Glass Vessels
In contrast to the intaglios, fragments of glass vessels, found in peninsular 
Thailand, might provide a better indication for the date of their arrival 
in Southeast Asia. At least two or three small glass fragments, identified 
as of Mediterranean origin on the basis of their chemical composition, 
were discovered in the Thai-French excavations at Khao Sam Kaeo. 
Two of these, made of cobalt blue glass, are possibly fragments of 
glass vessels (Lankton et al. 2008: 328; Lankton & Dussubieux 2013: 
431). In addition to these fragments, Khao Sam Kaeo yielded another 
glass fragment probably of Mediterranean origin, although the results 
of its chemical analysis are still unpublished.12 It is of opaque bright 
red glass13 and presumably stems from a small moulded glass vessel. 
However, owing to the tiny size of the fragment, no further inferences 
regarding its original shape are possible at present. 
A more significant fragment of opaque bright red glass was found 
at Tha Chana. It is the rim fragment of a small moulded bowl 
[Figure 9]. The glass analysis indicates a soda glass with a composition 
characteristic of a Mediterranean origin.14 Although small in size, the 
fragment preserves a significant part of its shape which allows it to be 
assigned to a class of moulded bowls of early Roman glass produced 
in the end of the first century BCE and in the first half of the first 
Figures 8a-b: Roman glass 
intaglio with pastoral scene from 
Khlong Thom, Krabi province, 
probably 1st century CE,  
18.5 millimetres, Suthiratana 
Foundation, inv. no. KLP 189 (left: 
original intaglio; right: impression) 
[After Bunchar 2552: 150].

--- PAGE 55 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
107
106
century CE. These carinated bowls, also called patella bowls, were often 
made of glass in intense colours such as the opaque bright sealing-wax 
red glass. They are thought to imitate the famous red sigillata pottery 
where this shape also occurs. The question as to where the shape was 
first developed, however, is still unresolved. At present, the dates suggest 
that the sigillata bowls of this shape are somewhat later than the glass 
vessels (Stern & Schlick-Nolte 1994: 328-329, no. 99; Arveiller-Dulong 
& Nenna 2000: 140-141, nos. 181, 198, nos. 248-250; Weinberg & 
Stern 2009: 40-41). 
In Phu Khao Thong, a few fragments of mosaic glass vessels recently 
came to light (Boonyarit & Rarai 2552: 95-105; Boonyarit 2011: 87). 
One fragment of a mosaic glass vessel [Figure 10] has already been 
analysed. Its chemical composition is characteristic of Mediterranean 
glass.15 The fragment appears to stem from the curved side of a bowl. 
The pattern is composed of cane sections with spirals of opaque yellow 
glass in a matrix of translucent green glass. The cane sections were 
fused together, forming a disc-shaped blank which was then sagged 
over a convex mould (Stern & Schlick-Nolte 1994: 68-70). Such cane 
sections with a spiral design in two colours are one of the two basic 
patterns of Hellenistic mosaic glass vessels, in contrast to the prevalent 
patterns of Roman composite mosaic glass canes (Grose 1989: 189-
190, fig. 102). However, cane sections with a spiral pattern still appear 
occasionally in early Roman mosaic glass vessels, usually among other 
motifs (Grose 1989: 225, 322, no. 513). The fragment herein is too small 
to allow for a more precise dating. It might stem from an early Roman 
mosaic glass bowl of the early first century CE, yet, the attribution to 
a Hellenistic mosaic glass bowl of the late second or first century BCE 
cannot be excluded (Goldstein 1979: 181, no. 475; 188-189, nos. 501-
502; Arveiller-Dulong & Nenna 2000: 140-141, no. 176; Weinberg & 
Stern 2009: 36-38, nos. 63, 67-68). 
We know from various sources as well as from the archaeological 
record that such Mediterranean moulded glass bowls played a role in 
the maritime trade via the Red Sea to India and beyond (Borell 2010). 
In particular, ribbed bowls, a special type of moulded bowl, are easily 
identified, even if only a small fragment is preserved. They were mass-
produced in the period from the first century BCE to the first century 
CE, and fragments of ribbed bowls have been found along the maritime 
trade routes from the Red Sea along the Arabian Peninsula, and in India. 
In addition to the well-known finds of ribbed bowls from Arikamedu 
and Dharanikota on the southeastern coast of India, fragments of at 
least two more such bowls were recently discovered at the Pattanam 
site on the Malabar coast, identified as part of the important port-town 
of Muziris known from ancient sources (Cherian et al. 2007: 7 pl. 1D; 
Cherian 2010: 271-272). It is unlikely that all these glass vessels were 
traded as antiques; they probably arrived at their distant destinations 
relatively soon after manufacture. This is supported by the discovery of 
such a ribbed bowl of mosaic glass deposited in a tomb of the Yangzi 
Delta in the Chinese province of Jiangsu (Borell 2010: 128, fig. 1). 
The tomb has been identified as the burial of Liu Jing, a son of the 
Eastern Han emperor Guangwu (r. 25-57 CE), dated to the year 67 CE. 
Presumably, this ribbed bowl reached China along the maritime routes 
and therefore would have passed coastal sites in southern Thailand 
and then would have even been carried along one of the land routes 
across the peninsula. Although no finds of such ribbed bowls have yet 
come to light in southern Thailand, it would not be surprising if they 
were to do so. It is worth noting here that other objects found in the 
upper Thai-Malay Peninsula show similarities to those from Oc Eo in 
southern Vietnam and Han tombs in southern China, in particular 
polyhedral gold ornaments. This supports the theory that the maritime 
route was already in use at the time (Pryce et al. 2008: 310).
Pendants with Coin Designs 
In addition to these finds imported from the Mediterranean region, 
there is another group of objects with a Mediterranean connection, 
which deserves to be briefly surveyed in this context.16 These are 
pendants, made of gold and bronze, which imitate to varying degrees of 
fidelity, the design of a Roman coin. Such pendants are already known 
from the site of Oc Eo in southern Vietnam (Malleret 1962: 115-117, 
nos. 919-921, pl. 40; Borell 2008a), their design imitating the obverse 
of Roman coins with the portrait heads of Roman emperors in profile. 
Oc Eo, where Louis Malleret conducted excavations in 1944, is 
recognised as an early urban centre of the polity referred to as Funan in 
Chinese sources. A canal connected it to the Gulf of Thailand, and the 
artefacts recovered at Oc Eo demonstrate its participation in maritime 
trade, and underline its cosmopolitan character. The city was laid out as 
a rectangle covering about 3 square kilometres and recent investigations 
indicate that the construction of its central canal and enclosing moats 
may have already begun as early as the end of the second century CE 
(Bourdonneau 2009; Manguin 2009).
The most famous pendant from Oc Eo is a thin gold sheet in repoussé 
technique. Its prototype could be clearly identified as a gold coin (aureus) 
of Antoninus Pius (r. 138-161 CE) dating from the year 152 CE. Another 
pendant from Oc Eo, slightly thicker with a plain reverse and probably 
cast, was initially thought to derive from a coin of Marcus Aurelius 
Figure 9: Rim fragment of a 
Roman glass bowl from Tha Chana, 
Chaiya province, probably 1st half 
of 1st century CE, 2.0 x 1.5 
centimetres, estimated diameter of 
bowl 7.6 centimetres, Suthiratana 
Foundation, inv. no. TCN 100.10 
[Photographs and drawing by 
Brigitte Borell]. 
Figure 10: Fragment of a 
Mediterranean mosaic glass bowl 
from Phu Khao Thong, Ranong 
province, 1st century BCE to 
early 1st century CE, 2.2 x 1.4 
centimetres, 15th Regional Office 
of Fine Arts Department, Thalang, 
Phuket [Photograph by Boonyarit 
Chaisuwan].

--- PAGE 56 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
109
108
(r. 161-180 CE). However, it has been demonstrated elsewhere that 
the coins of Marcus Aurelius do not accurately match the details of the 
Oc Eo obverse, and it has been argued that the prototype for this 
second pendant from Oc Eo was a coin of Commodus (r. 180-192 CE), 
the last of the Antonine emperors, dating from the year 192 CE (Borell 
2008a).
Recently, similar pendants have been found at Khlong Thom. One 
of them closely imitates the obverse of a coin series of Antoninus Pius 
dating from 158-159 CE [Figures 11a-b], whereas its worn reverse 
certainly stems from the coin of a different Roman emperor. On the 
obverse an essential part of legend has been left out when making the 
mould for casting, namely the title Augustus for the Roman emperor, 
usually abbreviated as AVG, and the letter P for PIVS. Instead, above 
the head of the emperor only a blank space exists, probably to provide 
space for the suspension loop of which a piece of soldered-on gold 
wire has been preserved on the back identical to that on the Oc Eo 
pendant imitating a coin of Commodus. Such a spiral of gold wire 
serving as a suspension loop is preserved on a similar pendant from 
Khlong Thom [Figures 12a-b] with a free adaptation of a Roman 
coin design. Imitations of Roman coins made up as pendants are a 
phenomenon well known from India. Roman coins arrived in India 
in enormous numbers during the trade boom with the Roman world 
in the early centuries CE and have been recovered in their thousands. 
These pendants from Khlong Thom and Oc Eo, however, are different 
in appearance to the imitations known from India and were most likely 
manufactured in Southeast Asia. 
The disc-shaped repoussé pendant discovered at U Thong in central 
Thailand was probably also locally produced [Figures 13a-b].17 
Khlong Thom yielded yet two other finds whose design is derived from 
Roman coins. One is a bronze pendant crudely imitating a coin of 
Tiberius (r. 14-37 CE) of the so-called Livia-type [Figures 14a-b], so 
named because the seated figure on the reverse is usually identified as 
Livia, the wife of Augustus and mother of Tiberius. The other find is 
one half of a two-part stone mould for the reverse of such a pendant 
[Figure 15].18 Tiberius coins of this type, which represent one of the 
most common Roman coin types, were probably minted throughout 
Tiberius’ entire reign and were found in large numbers in India where 
they arrived through commercial transactions during the Roman period 
(Turner 1989; Tomber 2008: 35-36). In India, they were also imitated 
in metal and in clay to be used as pendants. Such clay pendants of local 
Indian manufacture are known in particular from Kondapur in Andhra 
Pradesh (Wheeler 1954: 152-153, pls 28-29). Although we cannot be 
sure where the bronze pendant from Khlong Thom was made, the 
mould is definite evidence that local production of such pendants took 
place there.
However, when attempting to date these pendants, we must bear in 
mind that only their prototypes are firmly dated here, coins of Tiberius, 
Antoninus Pius, and Commodus. We have no clues to determine how 
long after these dates the pendants were actually made. 
At present it is difficult to determine to what extent the import of 
these Mediterranean objects like the intaglios, the glass vessels and the 
coins, involved direct contact with traders from the Roman empire. In 
Figures 11a-b: Gold pendant 
from Khlong Thom, Krabi province, 
obverse imitating a coin of Antoninus 
Pius (r. 138-161 CE), diameter 
19 millimetres, weight 4.16 grams, 
Suthiratana Foundation, inv. no. 
KLP 071 (left: obverse; right: reverse) 
[Photographs by Brigitte Borell].
Figures 12a-b: Gold pendant 
from Khlong Thom, Krabi province,  
diameter 19 millimetres, weight  
4.86 grams, Suthiratana Foundation 
(left: obverse; right: reverse) 
[Photographs by Brigitte Borell]. 
Figures 13a-b: Gold pendant  
from U Thong, Suphan Buri province, 
diameter 19-20 millimetres, U Thong 
National Museum (left: obverse;  
right: reverse) [Photographs by  
Brigitte Borell].
Figures 14a-b: Bronze pendant 
from Khlong Thom, Krabi province, 
diameter 18 millimetres, Suthiratana 
Foundation (left: obverse; right: reverse) 
[Photographs by Brigitte Borell]. 
     
 
Figure 15: Stone mould from  
Khlong Thom, ca 4.5 x 3.5 centimetres,  
Wat Khlong Thom museum, Krabi 
province [After Wannasarn 2550:  
28, fig. 3, top]. 
a
a
a
a
b
b
b
b

--- PAGE 57 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
111
110
general, many of such trade transactions would have been conducted by 
intermediaries. As mentioned above, Roman glass vessels were traded 
to India; and a broken intaglio engraved with a portrait of Augustus was 
found in Arikamedu in Tamil Nadu (Malleret 1959: 103-104, figs 4c-d; 
Tomber 2008: 133). The type of pendant such as the one which crudely 
imitates a coin of Tiberius might have been brought by Indian craftsmen 
possibly even immigrants present at a place like Khlong Thom. In this 
case, it would be an indirect adaptation of a Roman prototype, without 
any need for a genuine coin of Tiberius having arrived in southern 
Thailand. In contrast, the later production of gold pendants imitating 
coins of the second century CE differs from the Indian finds and 
appears to be an indigenous development. The imitations are very close 
to their prototypes, therefore we may assume that the moulds for their 
manufacture were directly formed from Roman coins. This suggests 
that at least a few coins actually came to Southeast Asia.
So far, the only Roman coin known to have been found in Thailand 
is an antoninianus of Victorinus (r. 269-271 CE), one of the usurper 
emperors of the so-called Gallic empire. It comes from U Thong 
[Figures 16a-b], dates from 269/270 CE and is attributed to the 
mint in Cologne (Landes 1981; Borell 2008b: 14, n. 51). These debased 
coins of the Gallic empire with a minimal silver content were in 
circulation in the western provinces of the Roman empire until the end 
of the third century CE. They were not used in bulk in long-distance 
trade with India, although occasional finds of such coins are known 
from there.
Written Sources
The contacts between India and Southeast Asia were already well 
developed in the last centuries BCE. The upper Thai-Malay Peninsula 
was the crossroads between maritime networks from an eastern and 
a western direction connecting here with a land crossing. A Chinese 
source (Han Shu, chapter 28B) describes such a land crossing already 
being in use between sea voyages from Hepu and Xuwen in the Gulf of 
Tonkin to Huangzhi, probably to the southeastern coast of India during 
the reign of Han Emperor Wu (r. 141-87 BCE).
Evidence from written sources suggests that maritime networks 
from the West, that is, from the Mediterranean and the Red Sea across 
the Indian Ocean connected with the Far Eastern networks and came 
into use about two centuries later.
The Periplus Maris Erythraei, a mid-first century CE account of 
maritime trade from the Red Sea to India, written in Greek by an 
anonymous author, still has only very little to say about the regions 
east of India. This state of knowledge seems to have changed about 
fifty years later. Claudius Ptolemy, writing in the second century CE, 
gives a much more detailed description of the areas east of India in his 
Geography (1.13-14), in particular of the Thai-Malay Peninsula, which 
he calls the Chryse Chersonesos, i.e. the Golden Peninsula. He relied 
on an account, which is now lost, written by a certain Alexandros, a sea 
captain or navigator. This first hand account is thought to date from 
the late first or early second century CE, as it had also been used by 
another scholar, Marinus, a geographer and cartographer also writing 
in the second century CE but somewhat earlier than Ptolemy. Marinus’ 
geographical treatise is likewise lost and known to us mainly through 
Ptolemy who relies on it although he heavily criticises it. It seems that 
detailed knowledge of the Thai-Malay Peninsula and the land route 
across it can be traced to Alexandros’ account (Dihle 1984: 90, 147; 
Berggren & Jones 2000: 75, no. 51; McLaughlin 2010: 57-59, 133-
134). According to our knowledge, Alexandros was the first person to 
document the circumnavigation of the Thai-Malay Peninsula, having 
returned home safely to be able to bequeath his report. We cannot 
exclude that before him other traders from the Roman empire had 
ventured as far east from time to time, but there exists no trace of this 
in the written records.
However, the presence of individuals from the Roman empire in 
Southeast Asia is witnessed in Chinese sources for October 166 CE, 
when the “embassy” of Andun is recorded as the first official contact 
with the Roman empire (Da Qin). The entry in the annals of the 
Eastern or Later Han dynasty (Hou Han Shu, chapter 88) says:
The king of this country always wanted to enter into diplomatic 
relations with the Han. But the Parthians (Anxi) wanted to trade 
with them in Chinese silk and so put obstacles in their way, so 
that they could never have direct relations (with China) until 
the reign of Emperor Huan, in the ninth year of Yanxi (166 
CE), when Andun, king of Da Qin, sent an envoy from beyond 
the frontier of Rinan who offered elephant tusk, rhinoceros 
horn, and tortoise shell. It was only then that for the first time 
communication was established (between the two countries). 
The document listing their tribute had nothing at all precious 
or rare. Thus one suspects that those who have written about 
it have erred. (Leslie & Gardiner 1996: 51; with minor stylistic 
changes)
This text has been discussed by many scholars, and there is general 
agreement that it was probably not an official embassy sent by the Roman 
emperor, but a group of merchants from the Roman empire somehow 
assuming this role in the eyes of their counterparts (Crespigny 1990: 
42-43; Graf 1996; Leslie & Gardiner 1996: 153-157). The items listed 
which they offer as “tribute” might have been acquired on their way 
along the maritime routes, some of it possibly not far from the frontiers 
of Rinan in present-day Vietnam, and the derogatory comment in the 
Chinese source makes it clear that something was out of proportion. 
The emperor’s name Andun is certainly a rendering of Antoninus, 
however, it is not clear whether it refers to Marcus Aurelius Antoninus 
(r. 161-180 CE), who ruled together with Lucius Verus (r. 161-169), 
or rather to their predecessor Antoninus Pius (r. 138-161 CE). These 
enterprising merchants who ventured beyond India might very well 
have stayed for some years in the East without knowledge of Antoninus 
Pius’ death in March 161 CE. In our context, the interesting point is 
that the “embassy” arrived by the sea route along the Vietnamese coast 
from beyond Rinan, the southernmost commandery of the Han empire, 
extending south probably as far as central Vietnam. They might have 
travelled on board foreign ships from the eastern coast of India, thus 
reaching the western coast of the Thai-Malay Peninsula, which they 
most likely crossed overland in the Kra Isthmus region.
Figures 16a-b: Roman coin (so-
called antoninianus) of Victorinus  
(r. 269-271 CE), 269/270 CE,  
diameter 20 millimetres, U Thong  
National Museum, inv. no. 306/ 
2509 (top: obverse; below: reverse) 
[Photographs courtesy of the  
U Thong National Museum].

--- PAGE 58 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
113
112
Additional information about the presence of traders from the 
Roman empire is found in the Liang Shu, which is ostensibly the history 
of the Southern Liang dynasty (502-556 CE), compiled by Yao Silian 
early in the seventh century CE, but it also includes earlier material. It 
continues with more information about Da Qin:
Their people are traders and often visit Funan and Rinan and 
Jiaozhi, but people of (these) various countries beyond our 
southern border rarely reach Da Qin. […]
In the fifth year of Huangwu of the reign of Sun Quan (226 
CE), a merchant of Da Qin named Qin Lun came to Jiaozhi. 
The prefect of Jiaozhi named Wu Miao sent him to visit (Sun) 
Quan, who asked him about the land and its customs. (Qin) Lun 
gave a detailed reply. (Leslie & Gardiner 1996: 100-101, 158-
159; with minor stylistic changes)
From this information, we may deduce that, in the later second 
and early third centuries CE, merchants from the Roman empire came 
more frequently to Southeast Asia clearly along maritime routes and 
were not uncommon in the regions along the Vietnamese coast, from 
Funan in the south to Jiaozhi in the north. After the collapse of the 
Han empire, one Roman merchant was sent in the year 226 CE to the 
court of the Wu dynasty (222-280) in the area of present-day Nanjing 
(Crespigny 1990: 479-480, n. 38; Graf 1996: 201-202; McLaughlin 
2010: 136-137). To arrive in southern Vietnam these groups of Roman 
traders must have either bypassed the Thai-Malay Peninsula or more 
likely must have crossed it one way or another.
Conclusion
At present, the surprisingly rich archaeological evidence of objects 
of Mediterranean origin found at sites in Southeast Asia raises more 
questions than it answers. Some of the objects may be assigned to early 
dates such as the first century BCE and the first century CE, but it 
is doubtful whether they indicate direct trade. It seems more likely, at 
the present state of research, that they would have reached southern 
Thailand by intermediary trade along the maritime routes via India.
This seems a plausible explanation for the finds of earlier date, and 
in particular for the pendant and mould imitating coins of Tiberius. 
Intaglios could have been brought to southern Thailand by their own 
owners and been lost from or taken out of their ring settings. They 
could have been traded by intermediaries to Southeast Asia as luxury 
goods, or used in trade as gifts of high prestige to the local rulers.
In the later second and in the third century CE, traders from 
the Roman empire, probably from its eastern provinces, may have 
arrived more frequently, as indicated not only by the finds of the 
pendants imitating coins of later emperors but also in written sources. 
Archaeological evidence for still later direct or indirect contact with the 
Mediterranean, or at least with Egypt, is the find of the early Byzantine 
lamp at Phong Tuek, in Kanchanaburi province, which dates from the 
fifth or sixth century CE (Borell 2008b).
Acknowledgements
For giving access to the collection and providing photographs of 
material kept in the Suthiratana Foundation, the generous cooperation 
and untiring assistance of Dr Bunchar Pongpanich is gratefully 
acknowledged. Special thanks for providing photographs are due to the 
U Thong National Museum. For fruitful comments on the intaglios and 
the cameo fragment, Brigitte Borell wishes to express her gratitude to 
Carina Weiß (Würzburg) and Erika Zwierlein-Diehl (Bonn), as well as 
to the anonymous reviewer.
Endnotes   
1 
The maximum transgression of the shoreline, 
which in the past has been connected with the 
Dvāravatī period during the second half of the 
first millennium (Phongsi & Thiwa 2524), occurred 
much earlier, probably between 6,000 and 5,000 
BCE, see Tanabe et al. (2003: fig. 1 and fig. 8A-B); 
also Montri (2011); see also Trongjai, this volume. 
Although shoreline progradation was rapid, owing 
to the deltaic processes of the Chao Phraya and 
the Mae Klong rivers, in the case of U Thong 
there would have been only a minor difference of 
less than 20 kilometres between the shoreline of 
the early historic period and the present shoreline 
(Tanabe et al. 2003: fig. 8E and fig. 8F).
2 
Martin Henig (Glover 1989: n. 5) compared this 
with an intaglio from Aquileia (Italy), see Sena 
Chiesa (1966: 392, no. 1341, pl. 68). For additional 
comparisons with further references, see Zwierlein-
Diehl (1991: 107, no. 1949, pl. 54); for a stylistic 
comparison with a gem from Carnuntum (Austria), 
see Dembski (2005: 142, no. 914, pl. 94).
3 
Martin Henig (see note 2) gave as references 
three intaglios from Aquileia (Sena Chiesa 1966: 
240-241, nos. 602-604, pl. 31), and several 
intaglios from Gadara in Jordan, see Henig & 
Whiting (1987: nos. 102-105); in addition, see 
also Maaskant-Kleibrink (1986: 44-45, no. 90), 
Zwierlein-Diehl (1991: 315, no. 2825, pl. 230), 
Middleton (1991: 81-82, no. 120 and 2001: 41,  
no. 22) and Weiß (1996: 84, no. 147, pl. 20).
4 
The motif has been erroneously identified as 
Perseus with the head of Medusa by Bennet 
Bronson (1990: 217), followed by others including 
very recently by Piriya Krairiksh (2012: 43, fig. 
1.10). For comparisons of the satyr motif, see 
Sena Chiesa (1966: 189, no. 391, pl. 20), Henig 
(1978: 206-208, nos. 159-177, esp. 161), Maaskant-
Kleibrink (1986: 109, app. 18), Henig & Whiting 
(1987: no. 241) and Middleton (2001: 36, no. 18).
  5 For the type, see Sena Chiesa (1966: 149-50, nos. 
217-220, esp. 217, pl. 11) – perhaps holding a 
patera; Zwierlein-Diehl (1979: 169, no. 1281, pl. 
116) – second century CE carnelian, here Mars 
holds out a small Victory. For the style, see Guiraud 
(1988 : no. 542, pl. 37) and Zwierlein-Diehl (1991: 
306, no. 2763, pl. 223).
  6 For the motif, see Maaskant-Kleibrink (1978: 209-
210, nos. 482-483, the latter also an amethyst with 
convex face, pl. 90) and Pannuti (1983: 30, no. 39, 
although without himation) showing a carnelian 
intaglio, convex face, flat back from Pompei (pre-
79 CE).
  7 Found in 2006; measurements 0.85 x 0.6 cm.
  8 For the motif of a rider on a walking horse with 
one front leg raised, see Zwierlein-Diehl (2007: 
131, 423, fig. 520), interpreted as the young C. 
Caesar in military dress and therefore dated to 
around 8 BCE; Pannuti (1983: 108, no. 161), from 
Pompei (pre-79 CE date) depicting a youth likewise 
with his cloak flying out behind; Middleton 
(1991: 154, app. 11a-b), said to be from Persia 
and dated to the second half of the first century 
BCE-beginning of the first century CE, showing a 
helmeted warrior looking back. However, the style 
and, in particular, the iconography of the rider 
differ.
  9 An anonymous reviewer suggested a Bactrian 
origin, however, so far no convincing parallel 
has been found. The intaglio with a horse and a 
Graeco-Bactrian inscription (Middleton 1998: 102-
103, no. 83), interestingly likewise engraved on a 
layered sardonyx, is very different in style. Thanks 
are due for this reference to Erika Zwierlein-Diehl 
who feels that a Bactrian origin may be excluded 
for the Bang Kluai Nok intaglio (pers. comm.).
10 For the unstable stance of the right figure, compare 
the satyr on a cameo at the Hermitage museum in 
Saint Petersburg (Neverov 1988: 50, no. 39).

--- PAGE 59 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
115
114
11 This scene has been erroneously described as the 
abduction of Ganymed by Bunchar Pongpanich 
(2552: 150) and Michael Wright (2552: 48, ills 5-6, 
centre). For the scene of rural life, see Hamburger 
(1968: 21, 35 no. 141, pl. 7); for the motif of dog 
and eagle with its prey under a tree, compare with 
Sena Chiesa (1966: 385-386,  nos. 1291-1293,  pl. 
65) and Zwierlein-Diehl (1991: 87, no. 1810, pl. 
34); for the shepherd, see Maaskant-Kleibrink 
(1978: 250, nos. 658-659, pl. 115), Henig (1994: 
112-113, no. 208), Middleton (2001: 61, no. 36), 
Weiß (2007: 226-227, nos. 333-338, pl. 45), and 
Guiraud (2008: 148, no.1313, pl. 25).
12 This was brought to our attention by Yatima 
Thongkam (pers. comm.), who also showed us a 
photograph of the fragment.
13 This opaque bright red glass (also called sealing-
wax red) is a special glass colour not easily 
achieved in antiquity (Welham et al. 2000). It 
should not be confused with the opaque red glass 
of a different red hue usually encountered in 
glass beads found in Southeast Asia. For analyses 
of red opaque beads from four different sites in 
peninsular Thailand (Khlong Thom, Phu Khao 
Thong, Nang Yon, and Thung Tuek), see Wantana 
et al. (2011). On glass in Southeast Asia in general, 
see Dussubieux & Gratuze (2010).
14 The chemical analysis was carried out by James 
Lankton in 2009. 
15 The chemical analysis was carried out by Pisutti 
Dararutana, Department of Earth Sciences, 
Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 
and Yatima Thongkam. It has also been analysed 
by James Lankton, see Boonyarit & Rarai (2552: 
96); also Boonyarit (2011: 87).
16 For a full discussion of these pendants, see Borell 
(2012).
17 According to information provided by the  
U Thong National Museum, this find was brought 
into the museum from the community in 2006. In 
February 2007, Brigitte Borell had the opportunity 
to see it and take the photographs. 
18 The back of the mould is prepared for casting 
collared disc beads. See also Wannasarn (2550: 28,  
fig. 3, top).
References
Amara Srisuchat  
1998  A Proposed Outline of the 
Chronology of Early History in 
Thailand: Dating and Re-Analysis 
of Data from Recently Excavated 
Sites in Thailand. In Klokke, M.J. 
& Bruijn, T. de (ed.), Southeast 
Asian Archaeology, Proceedings of the 
6th International Conference of the 
European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Leiden, 2-6 September 
1996. Kingston upon Hull: Centre 
for South-East Asian Studies,  
pp. 99-115. 
Amara Srisuchat, Buranee 
Buransiri, Phatraphi 
Khanthakan & Boosaya 
Chaiseno  
1987  An Archaeological Visit to 
the South. In Seminar in Prehistory of 
Southeast Asia. SPAFA Final Report. 
Bangkok: SEAMO Project in 
Archaeology and Fine Arts,  
pp. 345-363.  
Arveiller-Dulong, Véronique & 
Nenna, Marie-Dominique 
2000  Les verres antiques, volume 1 : 
contenants à parfum en verre moulé 
sur noyau et vaisselle moulée, VIIème 
siècle avant J.-C.-Ier siècle après J.-C. 
Musée du Louvre. Paris: Réunion des 
Musées nationaux. 
Bellina, Bérénice  
1998  La formation des réseaux 
dʼéchanges reliant lʼAsie du Sud 
et lʼAsie du Sud-Est à travers le 
matériel archéologique (VIe siècle 
av. J.-C. – VIe siècle ap. J.-C. – le 
cas de la Thaïlande et la Péninsule 
Malaise). Journal of the Siam Society 
86: 89-105.  
Forthcoming The Inception of the 
Trans-national Processes between 
the Indian Ocean and the South 
China Sea from an Early City-state 
on the Thai-Malay Peninsula (4th-
2nd c. BCE). In Boussac, M.-F., 
Roychoudhury, S., Salles, J.-F. & 
Yon, J.-B. (eds), The Ports of the 
Indian Ocean, from the Red Sea  
to the Gulf of Bengal. Delhi:  
Primus Books. 
Bellina, Bérénice & Glover, 
Ian C. 
2004  The Archaeology of Early 
Contact with India and the 
Mediterranean World, from the 
Fourth Century BC to the Fourth 
Century AD. In Glover, I.C. & 
Bellwood, P. (eds), Southeast Asia. 
From Prehistory to History. London: 
Routledge, pp. 68-88. 
Bellina, Bérénice & Praon 
Silapanth  
2006  Khao Sam Kaeo and 
the Upper Thai Peninsula: 
Understanding the Mechanisms 
of Early Trans-asiatic Trade and 
Cultural Exchange. In Bacus, E., 
Glover, I.C. & Pigott, V.C. (eds), 
Uncovering Southeast Asiaʼs Past. 
Singapore: NUS Press, pp. 379-392.
Bellina-Pryce, Bérénice & 
Praon Silapanth  
2008  Weaving Cultural Identities 
on Trans-asiatic Networks: Upper 
Thai-Malay Peninsula – an Early 
Socio-political Landscape. Bulletin 
de lʼÉcole française dʼExtrême-Orient 93 
[for 2006]: 257-293.
Berggren, J. Lennart &  
Jones, Alexander 
2000  Ptolemyʼs Geography. An 
Annotated Translation of the Theoretical 
Chapters. Princeton/Oxford: 
Princeton University Press. 
Boonyarit Chaisuwan  
2011  Early Contacts between 
India and the Andaman Coast in 
Thailand from the Second Century 
BCE to Eleventh Century CE. 
In Manguin, P.-Y., Mani, A. & 
Wade, G. (eds), Interactions between 
South and Southeast Asia: Reflections on 
Cross-Cultural Exchange. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, pp. 83-112.
Boonyarit Chaisuwan & Rarai 
Naiyawat  
2552  Thung tuek chut chueamyong sen 
thang sai mai thang thale/Thung Tuk:  
A Settlement Linking Together the 
Maritime Silk Route. Hat Yai: Trio 
Creation. [In Thai and English; 
2009 CE]
Borell, Brigitte 
2008a  Some Western Imports 
Assigned to the Oc Eo Period 
Reconsidered. In Pautreau,  
J.-P., Coupey, A.-S., Zeitoun, V.  
& Rambault, E. (eds), From Homo 
Erectus to the Living Traditions. Choice 
of Papers from the 11th International 
Conference of the European Association 
of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 
Bougon, 25th - 29th September 2006. 
Chiang Mai: Siam Ratana,  
pp. 167-174. 
2008b  The Early Byzantine Lamp 
from Pong Tuk. The Journal of the 
Siam Society 96: 1-26.  
2010  Trade and Glass Vessels 
along the Maritime Silk Road. 
In Zorn, B. & Hilgner, A. (eds), 
Glass along the Silk Road, from 200 
BC to AD 1000. Mainz: Römisch-
Germanisches Zentralmuseum 
Mainz, pp. 127-142.
2011  Han Period Glass Vessels in 
the Early Tongking Gulf Region. 
In Cooke, N., Tana Li & Anderson, 
J.A. (eds), The Tongking Gulf Through 
History. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, pp. 53-66 and 
172-179.
2012  Roman Coins and 
Derivatives. Paper presented at 
the 14th International Conference 
of the European Association of 
Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 
Dublin, 18-21 September 2012. 
[Unpublished]
Bourdonneau, Éric 
2009  Réhabiliter le Funan. Óc Eo 
ou la première Angkor. Bulletin de 
lʼÉcole française dʼExtrême-Orient 94 
[for 2007]: 111-158.
Bouvet, Phaedra  
2008  Étude préliminaire 
de céramiques indiennes et 
“indianisantes” du site de Khao 
Sam Kaeo IVe-IIe siècles av. J.-C. 
Bulletin de lʼÉcole française dʼExtrême-
Orient 93 [for 2006]: 353-390. 
2011  Preliminary Study of Indian 
and Indian Style Wares from Khao 
Sam Kaeo (Chumphon, Peninsular 
Thailand), Fourth-Second 
Centuries BCE. In Manguin, P.-Y., 
Mani, A. & Wade, G. (eds), Early 
Interactions between South and Southeast 
Asia: Reflections on Cross-Cultural 
Exchange. Singapore: Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 47-81. 
2012  Interactions culturelles entre l’Asie 
du Sud-Est et l’Inde aux 4e-2e s. av. 
J.-C. : étude technologique des céramiques 
de Khao Sam Kaeo (Thaïlande 
péninsulaire, province de Chumphon). 
Doctoral Dissertation. Nanterre-La 
Défense: Université Paris-Ouest. 
[Unpublished]
Bronson, Bennet  
1990  Glass and Beads at Khuan 
Lukpad. In Glover, I.C. & Glover, 
E. (eds), South Asian Archaeology 
1986. Proceedings of the First Conference 
of the Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists in Western Europe. 
Oxford: Archaeopress,  
pp. 213-230. 
Bunchar Pongpanich  
2552  Roi lukpat/Beyond Beads. 
Bangkok: Matichon Publication 
House. [In Thai and English;  
2009 CE]
Cherian, P.J.  
2010  Pattanam Excavations and 
Explorations 2007 & 2008: An 
Overview. In Forte, M., Campana, S. 
& Liuzza, C. (eds), Space, Time, 
Place. Third International Conference on 
Remote Sensing in Archaeology 17th-21st 
August 2009, Tiruchirapalli, Tamil 
Nadu, India. Oxford: Archaeopress, 
pp. 269-274.
Cherian, P.J., Selvakumar,  
V. & Shajan, K.P. 
2007  The Muziris Heritage 
Project: Excavations at Pattanam 
– 2007. Journal of Indian Ocean 
Archaeology 4: 1-10.
Crespigny, Rafe de  
1990  Generals of the South. The 
Foundation and Early History of 
the Three Kingdoms State of Wu. 
Canberra: The Australian  
National University. 
Dembski, Günther  
2005  Die antiken Gemmen und Kameen 
aus Carnuntum. Wien: Phoibos. 
Dihle, Albrecht  
1984  Antike und Orient. Gesammelte 
Aufsätze. Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Dussubieux, Laure &  
Gratuze, Bernard  
2010  Glass in Southeast Asia. 
In Bellina, B., Bacus, E.A., Price, 
T.O. & Wisseman Christie, J. (eds), 
50 Years of Archaeology in Southeast 
Asia. Essays in Honour of Ian Glover. 
Bangkok: River Books, pp. 246-259.
Glover, Ian C.  
1989  Early Trade between India 
and South-East Asia: A Link in the 
Development of a World Trading System. 
Kingston upon Hull: Centre for 
South-East Asian Studies. 
1996a  The Archaeological 
Evidence for Early Trade between 
India and Southeast Asia. In 
Reade, J. (ed.), The Indian Ocean 
in Antiquity. London: Kegan Paul 
International, pp. 365-400.
1996b  The Southern Silk Road: 
Archaeological Evidence for 
Early Trade between India and 
Southeast Asia. In Amara Srisuchat 
(ed.), Ancient Trades and Cultural 
Contacts in Southeast Asia. Bangkok: 
The Office of the National Culture 
Commission, pp. 57-94. 
Glover, Ian C. & Bellina, 
Berénice  
2011  Ban Don Ta Phet and Khao 
Sam Kaeo: The Earliest Indian 
Contacts Re-assessed. In Manguin, 
P.-Y., Mani, A. & Wade, G. (eds), 
Interactions between South and Southeast 
Asia: Reflections on Cross-Cultural 
Exchange. Singapore: Institute  
of Southeast Asian Studies,  
pp. 17-45.

--- PAGE 60 ---
BrigiTTe Borell et al.
117
116
Goldstein, Sidney M.  
1979  Pre-Roman and Early Roman 
Glass in the Corning Museum of Glass. 
Corning, N.Y.: The Corning 
Museum of Glass.
Graf, D.F. 
1996  The Roman East from 
the Chinese Perspective. Annales 
archéologiques arabes syriennes 42:  
199-216. 
Grose, David Frederick  
1989  The Toledo Museum of Art: 
Early Ancient Glass. Core-formed,  
Rod-formed and Cast Vessels and  
Objects from the Late Bronze Age to  
the Early Roman Empire, 1600 B.C.  
to A.D. 50. New York: Hudson  
Hills Press. 
Guiraud, Hélène  
1988  Intailles et camées de lʼépoque 
romaine en Gaule. Paris: CNRS.  
1992  Intaglios from Dura-
Europos. Yale University Art Gallery 
Bulletin (1992): 48-85.
2008  Intailles et camées de lʼépoque 
romaine en Gaule, volume 2. Paris:  
CNRS.
Hamburger, Anit  
1968  Gems from Caesarea Maritima. 
Jerusalem: Department of 
Antiquities and Museums. 
Henig, Martin 
1978  A Corpus of Roman Engraved 
Gemstones from British Sites. Oxford: 
British Archaeological Reports. 
[Second Edition; First Edition 
1974]
1994  Classical Gems. Ancient and 
Modern Intaglios and Cameos in the 
Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Henig, Martin & Whiting, 
Mary  
1987  Engraved Gems from Gadara in 
Jordan. Oxford: Oxford University 
Committee for Archaeology.
Landes, Christian 
1981  Pièce d’époque romaine 
trouvée à U Thong, Thaïlande. 
Silpakorn Journal 26(1): 113-115.
Lankton, James &  
Dussubieux, Laure  
2013  Early Glass in Southeast 
Asia. In Janssens, K. (ed.), Modern 
Methods for Analysing Archaeological 
and Historical Glass. Chichester:  
J. Wiley & Sons, pp. 413-441. 
Lankton, James, Dussubieux, 
Laure & Gratuze, Bernard  
2008  Glass from Khao Sam Kaeo: 
Transferred Technology for an 
Early Southeast Asian Exchange 
Network. Bulletin de lʼÉcole française 
dʼExtrême-Orient 93 [for 2006]:  
317-351.
Leslie, Donald D. & Gardiner, 
Kenneth H.J.  
1996  The Roman Empire in Chinese 
Sources. Studi Orientali, Vol. 15. 
Rome: Bardi. 
Maaskant-Kleibrink, Marianne 
1978  Catalogue of the Engraved Gems 
in the Royal Coin Cabinet The Hague. 
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner.
1986  The Engraved Gems: Roman 
and Non-Roman. Description of the 
Collections in the Rijksmuseum 
G. M. Kam at Nijmegen, Vol. 10. 
The Hague: Ministry of Welfare, 
Health and Cultural Affairs. 
Malleret, Louis  
1959  Les lapidaires et artisans 
du verre de Vîrampatnam. Arts 
Asiatiques 6: 93-106.
1962  Lʼarchéologie du delta du Mékong, 
volume 3. Paris: École française 
dʼExtrême-Orient.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves  
2009  The Archaeology of  
Fu Nan in the Mekong River 
Delta: The Oc Eo Culture of  
Viet Nam. In Tingley, N. (ed.), Arts 
of Ancient Viet Nam. From River Plain 
to Open Sea. New York: Asia Society, 
pp. 103-118.
Mattingly, Harold & 
Sydenham, Edward A.  
1930  The Roman Imperial Coinage, 
Volume III: Antoninus Pius to Commodus. 
London: Spink & Son Ltd.
Mayuree Veraprasert  
1992  Khlong Thom: An Ancient 
Bead-manufacturing Location 
and an Ancient Entrepot. In 
Glover, I.C., Pornchai Suchitta & 
Villiers, J. (eds), Early Metallurgy, 
Trade and Urban Centres in Thailand 
and Southeast Asia. Bangkok: White 
Lotus, pp. 149-161.
McLaughlin, Raoul  
2010  Rome and the Distant East. 
Trade Routes to the Ancient Lands of 
Arabia, India and China. London & 
New York: Continuum.
Middleton, Sheila E. Hoey  
1991  Engraved Gems from Dalmatia, 
from the Collections of Sir John 
Gardner Wilkinson and Sir Arthur 
Evans in Harrow School, at Oxford 
and Elsewhere. Oxford: Oxford 
University Committee for 
Archaeology.
1998  Seals, Finger Rings, Engraved 
Gems and Amulets in the Royal Albert 
Memorial Museum, Exeter. Exeter: 
Exeter City Museums.
2001  Classical Engraved Gems from 
Turkey and Elsewhere: The Wright 
Collection. Oxford: Archaeopress. 
Montri Choowong  
2011  Quaternary. In Ridd, M.F., 
Barber, A.J. & Crow, M.J. (eds), The 
Geology of Thailand. London: The 
Geological Society, pp. 335-350.
Neverov, oleg  
1988  Antičnye kamei v sobranii 
Ėrmitaža. Leningrad: Iskusstvo. 
Pannuti, Ulrico  
1983  Museo Archeologico Nazionale  
di Napoli: Catalogo della collezione  
glittica 1. Roma: Istituto poligrafico 
e Zecca dello Stato.
Peronnet, Sophie  
2013  Overview of Han Artefacts 
in Southeast Asia with Special 
Reference to the Recently 
Excavated Material from Khao 
Sam Kaeo in Southern Thailand. 
In Klokke, M.J. & Degroot, V. 
(eds), Unearthing Southeast Asiaʼs 
Past. Selected Papers from the 12th 
International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Volume 1. Singapore: 
NUS Press, pp. 155-169. 
Peronnet, Sophie & Sachipan 
Srikanlaya  
Forthcoming  The Han-related 
Ceramics. In Bellina, B. (ed.), Khao 
Sam Kaeo: An Early Industrial Port-city 
between the Indian Ocean and the South 
China Sea. Paris.
Phasook Indrawooth  
2004  The Archaeology of the 
Early Buddhist Kingdoms of 
Thailand. In Glover, I.C. & 
Bellwood, P. (eds), Southeast Asia. 
From Prehistory to History. London: 
Routledge, pp. 120-148.
2009  Un antique royaume urbanisé 
de Thaïlande. In Baptiste, P. & 
Zéphir, T. (eds), Dvāravatī : aux 
sources du bouddhisme en Thaïlande. 
Paris: Réunion des Musées 
nationaux, pp. 30-45.
Phongsi Wanasin & Thiwa 
Suphachanya  
2524  Mueang boran boriwen chai fang 
thale doem khong thi rap phak klang 
prathet thai: kansueksa tamnaeng thi tang 
lae phumisat samphan (Ancient Cities on 
the Former Coastline in the Central Plain 
of Thailand: The Study of Sites and 
Geographical Correlation). Bangkok: 
Chulalongkorn University Press. 
[In Thai; 1981 CE]  
Piriya Krairiksh 
2012  The Roots of Thai Art. 
Bangkok: River Books. [First 
published in Thai as Rakngao haeng 
sinlapa thai, 2553 (2010 CE)].
Pryce, oliver, Bellina, 
Bérénice  & Bennett, Anna  
2008  The Development of 
Metallurgies in the Upper 
Thai-Malay Peninsula: 
Initial Interpretation of the 
Archaeometallurgical Evidence 
from Khao Sam Kaeo. Bulletin de 
lʼÉcole française dʼExtrême-Orient 93 
[for 2006]: 295-315.
Sena Chiesa, Gemma  
1966  Gemme del Museo Nazionale 
di Aquileia. Aquileia: Associazione 
Nazionale per Aquileia.
Stern, E. Marianne &  
Schlick-Nolte, Birgit  
1994  Early Glass of the Ancient World 
1600 B.C.-50 A.D.  Ostfildern: 
Hatje.
Tanabe Susumu, Saito 
Yoshiki, Sato Yoshio,  
Suzuki Yuichiro, Sin Sinsakul, 
Suwat Tiyapairach &  
Niran Chaimanee  
2003  Stratigraphy and Holocene 
Evolution of the Mud-dominated 
Chao Phraya Delta, Thailand. 
Quartenary Science Reviews 22:  
789-807.
Tomber, Roberta  
2008  Indo-Roman Trade. From Pots to 
Pepper. London: Duckworth. 
Turner, Paula  
1989  Roman Coins from India. 
London: Royal Numismatic Society.
Wannasarn Noonsuk  
2550  Sayam prathet: kantittolok  
phainok lae phatthanakan khong 
banmueang (Siam: External Contacts and 
Early Development of Cities and States). 
Bangkok: National Discovery 
Museum Institute. [In Thai;  
2007 CE].
Wantana Klysubun, Yatima 
Thongkam, Sorapong 
Pongkrapan, Krit Won-in, 
Jiraroj T-Thienprasert & 
Pisutti Dararutana  
2011  XAS Study on Copper 
Red in Ancient Glass Beads from 
Thailand. Analytical and Bioanalytical  
Chemistry 399: 3033-3040.
Weinberg, Gladys & Stern, E. 
Marianne  
2009  The Athenian Agora, Volume 
34: Vessel Glass. Princeton: The 
American School of Classical 
Studies at Athens. 
Weiß, Carina  
1996  Die antiken Gemmen 
der Sammlung Friedrich Julius 
Rudolf Bergau im Germanischen 
Nationalmuseum, Nürnberg. Nürnberg : 
Verlag des Germanischen 
Nationalmuseums. 
2007  Die antiken Gemmen der 
Sammlung Heinrich Dressel in der 
Antikensammlung Berlin. Würzburg : 
Ergon.
Welham, Kate, Jackson, 
Caroline M. & Smedley,  
James W.  
2000  Colour Formation in Sealing 
Wax Red Glass. Annales du 14e 
Congrès de lʼAssociation internationale 
pour lʼhistoire du verre, Venezia-Milano 
1998. Lochem: Association 
internationale pour l’histoire du 
verre, pp. 11-15.
Wheeler, Robert Eric 
Mortimer, Sir 
1954  Rome Beyond the Imperial 
Frontiers. London: G. Bell & Sons 
Ltd.
Wright, Michael  
2552  Krik-Roman nai usakhane 
(Graeco-Roman in Southeast Asia). 
Bangkok: Matichon Publication 
House. [In Thai; 2009 CE].
Zwierlein-Diehl, Erika  
1979  Die antiken Gemmen des 
Kunsthistorischen Museums in Wien, 
Volume 2. Munich: Prestel.
1991  Die antiken Gemmen des 
Kunsthistorischen Museums in Wien, 
Volume 3.  Munich: Prestel.  
2007  Antike Gemmen und ihr 
Nachleben. Berlin/New York: De 
Gruyter.

--- PAGE 61 ---
119
118
Introduction
K
nowledge about prehistory in Thailand or mainland and maritime 
Southeast Asia is generally well-established (Bellwood 1997; 
Higham 1989 and 2002; Higham & Rachanie 2012), as is the modern 
history of the region (e.g. Wyatt 1984; Tarling 1992). However, it is 
unfortunate that the transition from prehistory to history in Thailand 
and Southeast Asia is still relatively poorly understood, especially 
from archaeological perspectives, due to a lack of research and focus 
on the question. 
In recent years, however, there has been a growing body of 
literature on the archaeology of late prehistory and early history in the 
area (e.g. Glover & Bellwood 2004; Stark 1998). In central Thailand 
in particular, the last decade saw a relatively fair amount of research 
and excavations of archaeological sites dating between 500 BCE and 
500 CE or somewhat later (e.g. Sawang 2002, 2004 and Thanik 2005; 
Suraphol 2545; Saritpong et al. 2011). 
This essay presents additional archaeological data on the transition 
from late prehistory to early history resulting from the recently 
excavated site of Phromthin Tai in central Thailand. This stratified 
multi-component site located in Khok Samrong district of Lop Buri 
province is the main focus of this preliminary study.
Archaeological Investigations  
at Phromthin Tai
Phromthin Tai (named after the modern village where the site is 
located) is about 20 kilometres northeast of the modern town of 
Lop Buri in central Thailand and 12 kilometres northwest of Khao 
Wong Prachan, a hill where prehistoric copper smelting took place in 
the second millennium BCE and continued into the first millennium 
BCE (Pigott et al. 1997). Its geographic position lies at the latitude of 
14º 59’ 26” N and longitude of 100º 37’ 17” E, and it sits on an eroded 
limestone terrace covered with moderately acidic dark clay soil (labeled 
as “Ban Mi district soil series”) near a foothill at an elevation of between 
10-20 metres above the mean sea level, with the average annual rainfall 
at 877-1,317 mm.
Phromthin Tai: An Archaeological 
Perspective on Its Societal Transition
THanik lerTcHarnriT
Opposite Figure 1: A stone 
image of “Buddha-on-a-monster” 
found at Phromthin Tai [Photograph 
by Thanik Lertcharnrit].

--- PAGE 62 ---
THanik lerTcHarnriT
121
120
According to Phongsi Wanasin and Thiwa Suphachanya (2524: 
Appendix 11.2), the site is a relatively small semicircular-shaped ancient 
moated town measuring about 1 kilometre wide and long [Map 1a]. 
The site is poorly known among scholars although Wat Phromthin Tai 
houses a fine stone image of a “Buddha on-a-monster” flanked by two 
deities (Phuthon 2555: 11) [Figure 1], a type of religious icon found 
mainly in the early Buddhist centres of central Thailand and sometimes 
referred to in literature as “Phanasbodi” (e.g. Brown 2011). Two Pāli 
stone inscriptions have also been found by chance in the neighbourhood 
in the late 1970s, early 1980s and are now kept at the Phra Narai 
National Museum in Lop Buri (Phuthon 2555: 22, 24, 29-30; Revire, 
this volume, fig. 10) [Figure 2]. Today, the moat no longer exists 
probably because it was destroyed by modern villagers to clear the area 
for rice agriculture. In this process a number of silver coins ascribed 
to the early historic period were unearthed (Phuthon 2524), suggesting 
that the site was occupied by a Dvāravatī cultural group during the 
sixth to seventh centuries CE. In spite of this, the site received little 
attention and study until 1991 when archaeologists from the Fine Arts 
Department (FAD) carried out an excavation and restored a brick 
structure (probably an ordination hall) dating to the Ayutthaya period 
(fourteenth-seventeenth centuries CE). In a test unit near this structure, 
two human skeletons were excavated at the depth of about 2 metres 
below the present surface. Associated grave goods included pottery, iron 
implements, bronze earrings, bronze rings, bronze bracelets, and beads 
(Nongkhran 2534). More surface finds including glass and stone beads, 
iron slag, polished stone tools, iron implements, earthenware sherds, 
clay anvils, and fragments of stone and ivory bracelets were found 
during a field walking survey conducted by the author and his students 
in January 2004. These findings confirmed the antiquity of the site and 
led to systematic research by the author.
In March 2004, the Department of Archaeology, Silpakorn 
University, decided to run a two-week archaeological field school at the 
site [Map 1b]. Four 3 x 3 m. test units (identified as PTT-S1, PTT-S2, 
PTT-S3, and PTT-S4) were opened in a line about 5 metres west of 
the aforementioned brick structure. These excavations were not finished 
because of time constraints and the high volume of debris and artefacts. 
Several additional field seasons have been conducted every year between 
2005 and 2011 to complete the three earlier excavation units (PTT-S2, 
PTT-S3, and PTT-S4). Two units (PTT-S3 and PTT-S4) were expanded 
into 6 x 6 m. units. It should be 
noted that the excavation of 
PTT-S4 was still in progress in 
2013 during the writing of this 
essay. The previous excavations 
in the area, however, have 
unearthed a number of human 
burials and a large amount 
of 
archaeological 
remains. 
Parts of the earlier excavation 
conducted in 2004 has already 
been published (Thanik 2006).
Figure 2: A stone Pāli inscription 
(ye dhammā formula) from 
Phromthin Tai, now kept at  
Phra Narai National Museum, 
Lop Buri [Photograph courtesy of 
Nicolas Revire].
Map 1a: Aerial view of  
Phromthin Tai moated settlement 
[After Department of Treasury 
2550].
Map 1b: Close-up of Phromthin  
Tai and excavation area  
[After Department of Treasury 2550].

--- PAGE 63 ---
THanik lerTcHarnriT
123
122
Preliminary Results and Discussion
The majority of archaeological data presented in this essay is drawn 
from a series of excavations mentioned earlier. It should be noted that 
the interpretations here are still largely tentative, rather than conclusive, 
and further detailed analysis of archaeological evidence might perhaps 
modify these assertions in the future.
Cultural Chronology and occupational Sequence
Previous and recent excavations reveal a multiple occupation sequence 
at Phromthin Tai. Four cultural layers were identified primarily on 
the basis of stratigraphy and archaeological evidence. Stratigraphic 
and archaeological data demonstrate that the site was probably first 
occupied during the late Bronze Age (ca 700-500 BCE). Supporting 
data for this interpretation is derived from the basal layer of the PTT-S2 
unit where a human skeleton buried in an extended supine position 
with associated grave goods including a bivalve shell, bronze bracelets, 
and pottery was recovered [Figure 3]. One charcoal sample from this 
layer was radiocarbon dated at the Office of Atomic Energy for Peace 
in Bangkok, and the uncalibrated date was 2,430 ± 260 BP. It should 
be noted that data on this cultural layer is very limited as contexts other 
than the burial were not found and the interpretation of the cultural 
sequence is based solely on this result.
The successive occupation at Phromthin Tai is interpreted on the 
basis of cultural materials and radiometric determinations. Stratigraphic 
data showed continuity of occupation from the late Bronze Age deposits 
to the next occupational layer, which is determined as the Iron Age. 
The Iron Age occupation (500 BCE-500 CE) is characterised by the 
presence of extended supine human burials and a wide variety of 
associated grave goods including ceramics, iron tools, glass and stone 
beads, bronze anklets, bronze toe rings, stone earrings, a bronze bowl, as 
well as artefacts found in domestic context: e.g., stone and clay bracelets, 
spindle whorls, polished stone adzes, glass, carnelian and agate beads 
(Thanik 2010 and 2011). This line of evidence is comparable to that 
found in other Iron Age sites in central Thailand, such as Tha Khae 
(Suraphol 2527), Chansen (Bronson & Dale 1972), Noen Makok 
(Sunisa 2532), Ban Don Ta Phet 
(Glover 1990), Sap Champa (Sawang 
et al. 2544), and Ban Pong Manao 
(Suraphol 2545). Radiometric analysis 
of charcoal samples derived from 
the Iron Age occupational layer of 
PTT-S2 has produced dates as shown 
in Table 1. An additional absolute 
date of 2,652 ± 79 BP (uncalibrated) 
was obtained from an Electron Spin 
Resonance (ESR) dating of a dog’s 
tooth found in a human burial.
Table 1: Calibrated Radiocarbon and ESR Dates Associated with Phromthin Tai
ID
Date
Calibrated  
Date*
Material
Context
Excavation 
Unit
OAPE2169
2,430 ± 260
1,211 BCE-73 CE
Charcoal
Bronze Age occupation layer
PTT-S2
OAPE2168
1,810 ± 220
357 BCE-645 CE
Charcoal
Iron Age occupation layer
PTT-S2
OAPE2167
2,170 ± 260
828 BCE-388 CE
Charcoal
Iron Age occupation layer
PTT-S2
OAPE2166
3,110 ± 230
1,912-819 BCE
Charcoal
Iron Age occupation layer
PTT-S2
OAPE2165
2,220 ± 260
903 BCE-355 CE
Charcoal
Iron Age occupation layer
PTT-S2
OAPE2163
2,860 ± 220
1,611-512 BCE
Charcoal
Iron Age occupation layer
PTT-S2
**Unassigned
2,652 ± 79
1,007-543 BCE
A dog’s tooth enamel
Associated with Iron Age burial
PTT-S2
* Calibrated by Scott Kirkland (North Carolina State University, USA) using OxCal 4.1
** Dated using ESR method performed at the Research Institute of Materials and Resources,  
    Faculty of Engineering and Resource Sciences, Akita University, Japan in 2004.
The most intensive and longest occupational phase at Phromthin 
Tai corresponds to the so-called “Dvāravatī period” (sixth-ninth 
centuries CE). It was determined by the appearance of presumably 
classic Dvāravatī artefacts including silver coins [Figures 4a-b], small 
clay seals (with a diameter of 1.5 centimetres) depicting a crouching bull 
[Figure 5], spouted pots (only spouts were recovered, not the whole 
vessels), carinated pots [Figure 6], potsherds with stamped designs, 
clay coins (perhaps used as game-pieces), glass beads of various colors, 
lead earrings, and spindle whorls (Phasook 2528). The date of the 
Dvāravatī cultural occupation is firmly established when it is considered 
in concert with material remains (e.g., silver coins, and stone Pāli 
inscriptions) first reported by Phuthon Phumathon (2524 and 2555). It 
has been proposed on the basis of artefacts cross-dating and comparison 
of inscriptions that the Dvāravatī occupation 
lasted at Phromthin Tai from approximately the 
sixth to the ninth centuries CE. The character 
of the material culture indicated that the site 
was contemporary with other Dvāravatī sites  in 
central Thailand (e.g., U Thong in Suphan Buri 
province, ancient Nakhon Pathom in Nakhon 
Pathom province, Khu Bua in Ratchaburi 
province, Sap Champa in Lop Buri province, 
Chansen in Nakhon Sawan province, and Dong 
Lakhon in Nakhon Nayok province) and 
early historic sites in mainland Southeast Asia 
(e.g. Bronson & Dale 1972; Phuthon 2529; 
Charuek 2534; Phasook 2542; Saritpong et al. 
2011). It is stratigraphically obvious that there is 
no occupational break during the main occupation 
from the late prehistoric (late Bronze Age and 
Iron Age) to the early historic periods (Dvāravatī). 
After the “Dvāravatī period,” the site was left 
unoccupied for centuries and was reoccupied in 
the Ayutthaya period as evidenced by the presence 
of a variety of artefacts (i.e. stoneware ceramics, 
Chinese Blue & White porcelains, Ayutthaya-
style boundary stones) and the presence of an 
Ayutthaya-style brick monument.  
Figure 3: A late Bronze Age burial 
from Phromthin Tai [Photograph by 
Thanik Lertcharnrit].
Figures 4a-b: A silver coin found 
at Phromthin Tai (top: obverse; 
below: reverse) [Photograph courtesy 
of Borisut Boriphon].

--- PAGE 64 ---
THanik lerTcHarnriT
125
124
Mortuary Practice
There are at least 20 human burials that have so far been uncovered at 
Phromthin Tai, and we can comment thus on differences in mortuary 
patterning. Detailed analysis of mortuary tradition is on-going. At 
present, the human burials can be chronologically divided into two 
periods based on their stratigraphic layer and mortuary practice: a 
Bronze Age and several Iron Age burials. 
There is only one Bronze Age burial that has been found thus far, 
the rest belong to the Iron Age. The one late Bronze Age burial was 
found in the basal layer and can be distinguished from the other Iron 
Age burials in terms of the orientation of the heads, associated grave 
goods, and ritual behaviour. It should be noted that one of the Iron Age 
burials was very poorly preserved and only arm bones were still present. 
The other burial, although better preserved, was also incomplete with 
only the lower body parts left intact; the upper parts had been disturbed 
by later occupants of the site. Turning to the burials themselves, both 
the late Bronze Age burial and the Iron Age burials were interred 
in extended supine position, and had their heads oriented to the 
northwest. In terms of grave goods, the late Bronze Age burial was 
interred with a series of bronze bracelets on arms, a cup, potsherds, and 
bivalve shells [Figure 3]. In contrast, the Iron Age burials were richer 
in grave goods. For example, a male burial was elaborately associated 
with a wide variety of grave goods such as high-
tin bronze items (bracelets, anklets, toe rings, finger 
rings, and a bowl), mortuary vessels, and strings of 
glass beads on each leg, a spindle whorl, and an 
iron knife [Figure 7]. It was also observed that the 
head orientation of individuals was not uniformly 
practised; some individuals were buried oriented to 
the east, while some other’s heads were directed to 
the west, northwest, and south.
Finally, a number of mortuary vessels associated 
with the Iron Age burials were mutilated. For 
instance, the pedestals of high pedestal bowls 
were removed and only the bowls themselves were 
interred in the grave. This ritual behaviour, the 
killing or mutilation of grave offerings, seems to 
by typical of Iron Age mortuary practice in central 
Thailand (Glover 1990; Suraphol 2545).
Settlement Pattern and Subsistence
Stratigraphic and archaeological data clearly show that the settlement of 
Phromthin Tai was permanent and continued uninterrupted for at least 
three successive periods and over several generations. Phromthin Tai 
is located in the lowland area where soil is appropriate for rain-fed 
wet-rice agriculture and was easily accessible by land or river. 
Furthermore, it is located near rich natural resources, especially the 
natural copper ore available on the hill of Khao Wong Prachan. 
Excavations have yielded a layer of slag and copper ingots, averaging 
20 cm. thick, in the Iron Age occupation level. Copper smelting was 
probably the key economic activity during the early settlement. Two 
clay moulds used for moulding copper ingots were found as grave goods 
in a human burial. It is believed that key sources of iron ore are located 
in the vicinity of the site as large iron ore deposits were found at Khao 
Thap Kwai, a hill located only 6 kilometres southeast of the site.
The settlement history of Phromthin Tai could probably be 
summarised in the following way. In the early through the late 
prehistoric period (ca 500 BCE-500 CE) people settled in the area as 
a small group with a self-reliant economy (community-based copper 
smelting) while maintaining an exchange or trade relationship with 
neighbouring communities. It is apparent that people used the same 
area for different purposes including domestic, ritual, and specialised 
activities (metal smelting). No clear-cut segregation of land use was 
found. Intensive land use seems to have expanded during the Dvāravatī 
period. For instance, wet rice cultivation was commonly practiced as a 
relatively large number of bricks and brick fragments yielding imprints 
of rice chaff have been excavated at the site.
Trade and Exchange
There is strong archaeological evidence for trade and exchange at 
Phromthin Tai. For example, though there are relatively few copper 
ingots, the abundance of metal slag indicates that the people inhabiting 
this site were engaged in intra- and inter-regional exchanges. Copper 
and iron smelting during the early occupation was carried out for 
exchange purposes, not for household use. Copper ingots made from 
the site might have been distributed widely across the region as some of 
the copper ingots similar in form and size to those made from Phromtin 
Tai have been found in highland sites about 70 kilometres east of 
Phromthin Tai, including Ban Pong Manao and Pong 
Ta Khop (Suraphol, pers. comm.). Beads of various 
size, shape and color, particularly glass beads, were 
among the most common imported items found at this 
site. Agate, carnelian [Figure 8], and gold-foiled beads 
were also present, but in lower number. Preliminary 
technological and compositional studies of some Iron 
Age stone beads found in burial context show that the 
beads might have been made in India (Thanik & Carter 
2010). A preliminary result of composition study of 
Dvāravatī glass beads using a chemical compositional 
analysis method known as Laser Ablation Inductively 
Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MSA) 
Left Figure 5: A clay seal 
depicting a crouching bull from 
Phromthin Tai [Photograph by 
Thanik Lertcharnrit].
Right Figure 6: A Dvāravatī 
period carinated cooking pot from 
Phromthin Tai [Photograph by 
Thanik Lertcharnrit].
Figure 7: An Iron Age burial 
featuring an individual with a variety 
of grave goods from Phromthin 
Tai [Photograph by Thanik 
Lertcharnrit].
Figure 8: A carnelian bead found 
at Phromthin Tai during the 2013 
field investigation [Photograph by 
Thanik Lertcharnrit].

--- PAGE 65 ---
THanik lerTcHarnriT
127
126
method suggests that the beads were made from multiple production 
centres. An electron microscopic study of artefact’s surface topography 
and composition using a method called Scanning Electron Microscope 
(SEM) of glass bead samples also shows that some beads were white 
painted. Other imported commodities during the late prehistoric period 
were high-tin bronze anklets, toe rings and finger rings, fine-grained 
pottery vessels (e.g., orange and buff wares), and stone bracelets. 
Some pottery types (e.g., spouted pots, and pots with flower-stamped 
designs) were probably non-locally produced items as they are rare and 
were made using fine-grained clay. They are similar to those found at 
other early historic sites (e.g., Khu Bua in Ratchaburi province, Sap 
Champa in Lop Buri province, ancient Nakhon Pathom  in Nakhon 
Pathom province) that are thought to have been made from some key 
production centres (Saritpong et al. 2011; Sawang 2004), even though 
household pottery production took place on the site.
Diet and Health
A substantial amount of faunal remains were encountered during test 
excavations. These materials are currently under analysis. Preliminary 
interpretations of diet and consumption patterns are made here on the 
basis of general observations of the artefact assemblages and faunal 
remains.
It appears that the staple diet of the early occupants during the Iron 
Age was probably derived from hunting, gathering and fishing. Their 
major sources of protein came from both land and aquatic animals. Big 
and small game hunting were practised. Identifiable species include wild 
boars, a wide variety of deer and wild bovid species, tigers, elephants, 
birds, rats, dogs, and snakes. Hunting method can only be inferred from 
the presence of clay pellets believed to have been used with wooden 
bows. Fresh water shell and fish bones were present in relatively high 
frequencies. These water species could have been collected from nearby 
ponds, rice fields, and rivers. Rice consumption remains highly possible, 
but no direct or indirect evidence has been recovered thus far. It is 
apparent that the early historic period or the Dvāravatī period saw an 
increase in subsistence based on marine resources and rice cultivation; 
people might have relied heavily on rice domestication. Remains of fish, 
shellfish and marine animals (e.g., turtles and crocodiles), rice grains 
[Figure 9] and rice imprints in bricks and brick fragments have been 
found at the site and at other sites (e.g., Dong Lakhon in Nakhon Nayok 
province). It should also be noted that a sheer number of bones of 
domesticated cattle have been excavated at the site as well, suggesting 
that animal domestication also played a crucial role as a major kind 
of diets consumed by ancient people during the early historic period. 
However, no remarkable change in consumption pattern from late 
prehistoric to early historic times was observed, except for the marine 
resource and rice consumption.
A dental paleopathological study of human teeth from the site found 
that the Iron Age people at Phromthin Tai suffered less dental problems, 
having a low rate of dental carries compared to other prehistoric people 
in northeast and east-central Thailand (Kirkland 2010). An additional 
bioarchaeological study of the Iron Age human remains further found 
that there is a high proportion of very young adult deaths for males, 
and some individuals were scored by cribra orbitalia [Figure 10] or 
porotic hyperostosis suggesting poor nutrition or some form of anemia 
(Case & Burnett 2013).   
Phromthin Tai in a Wider Perspective
The presence of human occupation at Phromthin Tai beginning at 
approximately 500 BCE, if not earlier, and continuing until around 
500-700 CE, the period that saw intensive contact with Indic culture 
and the beginnings of the historic period, is not uncommon in Thailand. 
Archaeological research at various sites in central Thailand and other 
regions has yielded evidence for occupation starting from Iron Age 
(ca 500 BCE) or the late prehistoric period (ca 300-500 CE) to early 
historic times (ca 500-700 CE). 
Figure 9: Rice grains from  
Dong Lakhon, Nakhon Nayok 
province [Photograph courtesy of 
Thongchai Sako].
Figure 10: Cribra orbitalia found 
on an individual at Phromthin Tai  
[Photograph courtesy of Scott Burnett].

--- PAGE 66 ---
THanik lerTcHarnriT
129
128
For instance, recent excavations at the ancient moated town of 
Mueang Sema on the Khorat Plateau (Khemika 2543) unearthed 
evidence of human occupation, beginning in late prehistoric period 
(ca fourth-fifth century CE) which continued uninterrupted until the 
Dvāravatī period of around the sixth-ninth century CE. Similarly, 
recent archaeological investigation at areas near and inside the ancient 
town of Si Thep in the upper reach of the Pasak river valley has yielded 
a large number of late prehistoric period and protohistoric sites dating 
between 2,000-1,500 years ago, before those small communities were 
later aggregated into the large town of Si Thep in approximately the 
seventh century CE (FAD 2554). In addition, at the moated and walled 
town of Sap Champa in the eastern highlands of the central plains of 
Thailand, archaeologists have found prehistoric burials and artefacts 
diagnostic of late prehistoric period or the Iron Age in the basal layers 
of the site, suggesting the continuity of cultural development at the 
site from a small village into a large Buddhist centre (Sawang 2004; 
Suraphol, pers. comm.).   
Considered in a wider perspective, Phromthin Tai was situated not 
only in a good location for procurement of locally available natural 
resources (mainly but not limited to copper), but also in a location 
that could have served nearby agricultural communities as a religious 
centre during the sixth-ninth centuries CE. To the north, Phromthin 
Tai could have had frequent contacts with communities located in the 
undulating area such as Chansen, Ban Mai Chaimongkon, Phai Sali in 
Nakhon Sawan province, and Phu Noi in Lop Buri province (Bronson 
& Dale 1972; Chureekamol 2003; Suraphol 1997). To the east there are 
several ancient settlements on the upland areas dating to the Bronze 
and Iron Ages (Noen Makok, Nong Daeng, Ban Pong Manao, and 
Sap Takhien in Lop Buri province), as well as to the Dvāravatī period 
(Sap Champa). To the west there were ancient communities located 
both in the immediate Lop Buri region, such as Tha Khae, Wang Pai, 
and the ancient city of Lop Buri, and further west, in the Chao Phraya 
river valley, there are sites like U Taphao in Chai Nat province, Ban 
Don Ta Phet in Kanchanaburi province, U Thong in Suphan Buri 
province, and Khu Mueang in Sing Buri province. Very likely, people 
from these settlements would have been in contact with inhabitants of 
Phromthin Tai during the late prehistoric to early historic period. It 
is likewise unlikely that Phromthin Tai was isolated from communities 
located further to the south such as Dong Lakhon in Nakhon Nayok 
province and Dong Si Mahosot in Prachin Buri province.
Conclusion
The above archaeological evidence shows that Phromthin Tai in Lop 
Buri province is an important site for understanding the transition 
from late prehistory to the early historic period in Thailand as well as 
elsewhere in Southeast Asia. The range of evidence recovered from the 
recent investigation and excavation campaigns contributes to several 
important archaeological research questions. 
For example, it indicates that the site is potentially important in 
regard to the investigation of prehistoric mortuary variability. The 
continued sequences of occupation suggest that early people during 
the Iron Age might have increasingly adopted some new traditions, 
evidently Indic beliefs, while also retained their indigenous cultures 
like pottery traditions, subsistence strategies, and metal technology. 
The transition from late prehistory to early history at the site was 
seemingly gradual and slow, with increase in site size and settlement 
pattern during the Dvāravatī period. It is strongly evident that aspects 
of Indic culture (writing and cremation practice), and other religious 
belief (probably “animism”), were common during the early historic 
period. The site also provides several lines of evidence for inter- and 
intra-regional exchanges during the later prehistoric and early historic 
periods in Thailand. 
As noted earlier, however, the interpretations presented here are 
made on preliminary results only. Additional scientific analysis of 
different classes of artefacts and evidence including bronze objects, 
beads, ceramic vessels, potsherds, and faunal and human remains will 
no doubt provide a large amount of information regarding the transition 
from late prehistory to early history, not only at this location, but in 
Thailand and Southeast Asia as a whole. More secure conclusions must 
therefore await the results of continuing investigations.
Acknowledgements
I wish to acknowledge the financial support for the 2004-11 field works 
provided by the Department of Archaeology at Silpakorn University, 
the Thailand Research Fund (TRF), and the Bangkok Insurance 
Foundation. My sincere thanks also go to the editors (Nicolas Revire 
and Stephen Murphy) and an anonymous reviewer for their valuable 
critical comments and suggestions, and Chawalit Khaokhiew from 
Silpakorn University Department of Archaeology for his assistance 
with ESR dating. The abbot of Wat Phromthin Tai has been very kind 
to facilitate my research team in using the temple facilities and space for 
field research. I am also grateful to Daniel Troy Case (North Carolina 
State University, USA) and Scott Burnett (Eckerd College, USA) who 
provided assistance in the analysis of human remains, and to Professor 
Hector Neff (California State University at Long Beach, USA) for his 
assistance in the LA-ICP-MS analysis of glass beads.

--- PAGE 67 ---
THanik lerTcHarnriT
131
130
References
Bellwood, Peter  
1997  Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian 
Archipelago. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press. [Revised Edition]
Bronson, Bennett & Dales, 
George 
1972  Excavation at Chansen, 
Thailand, 1968, 1969: A 
Preliminary Report. Asian 
Perspectives 15 (1): 15-46.
Brown, Robert L. 
2011  A Sky-lecture by the 
Buddha. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific 
Prehistory Association 31: 17-24.
Case, Daniel Troy & Burnett, 
Scott 
2013  Phromthin Tai Skeleton 
Report: 2011 Excavation Season. 
[Unpublished]
Charuek Wilaikaeo 
2534  Borannakhadi mueang u taphao 
(The Archaeology of U Taphao). 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department. 
[In Thai; 1991 CE]
Chureekamol onsuwan 
2003  Metal Age Complexity 
in Thailand: Socio-Political 
Development and Landscape Use 
in the Upper Chao Phraya Basin. 
Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association 23: 7-13.
Department of Treasury 
2550  Kansueksa kankamnot khop khet 
thi din kamphaeng kao – khu mueang 
krom thanarak (The Study of the 
Boundary Demarcation of Ancient Walls 
– Moats by the Department of Treasury). 
Bangkok: Department of Treasury, 
Ministry of Finance. [Unpublished 
in Thai; 2007 CE]
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2554  Si thep: mueang sun klang khwam 
charoen haeng lumnam pasak (Si Thep: 
A Centre of Early Civilisation in the Pa 
Sak River Basin). Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai with English 
Summary; 2011 CE]
Glover, Ian C. 
1990  Ban Don Ta Phet: The 
1984-85 Excavation. In Glover, 
Emily & Glover, Ian C. (eds), 
Southeast Asian Archaeology 1986. 
Oxford: British Archaeological 
Reports, pp. 139-184.
Glover, Ian C. & Bellwood, 
Peter (eds) 
2004  Southeast Asia from Prehistory 
to History. London: Routledge 
Curzon.
Higham, Charles   
1989  The Archaeology of Mainland 
Southeast Asia. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
2002  Early Cultures of Mainland 
Southeast Asia. Bangkok:  
River Books.
Higham, Charles & Rachanie 
Thosarat 
2012  Early Thailand: From Prehistory 
to Sukhothai. Bangkok: River Books.
Ho, Chui-mei 
1992  An Analysis of Settlement 
Patterns in the Lopburi Area. 
In Glover, Ian C., Pornchai 
Suchitta & Villiers, John (eds), 
Early Metallurgy, Trade and Urban 
Centres in Thailand and Southeast Asia. 
Bangkok: White Lotus, pp. 39-45.
Khemika Wangsuk 
2543  Phatthanakan thang 
watthanatham nai lum maenam mun: 
korani sueksa laeng borannakhadi mueang 
sema amphoe sung noen changwat nakhon 
ratchasima (The Cultural Development in 
the Mun River Basin: A Case Study of 
the Archaeological Site at Mueang Sema, 
Sung Noen District, Nakhon Ratchasima 
Province). Master Thesis. Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University. [Unpublished 
in Thai; Available online at www.
opac.lib.su.ac.th; 2000 CE] 
Kirkland, Scott 
2010  Dental Pathology at Phromthin 
Tai: An Iron Age Cemetery from Central 
Thailand. Master Thesis. Raleigh: 
North Carolina State University. 
[Unpublished]
Nongkhran Sichai  
2534  Raingan kankhuttaeng wat 
phromthin tai tambon lumkhao amphoe 
khok samrong changwat lop buri  
(Report on Excavation and Restoration 
at Wat Phromthin Tai, Khok Samrong 
District, Lop Buri Province). Lop Buri:  
Regional Office of Fine Arts 
Department. [Unpublished in 
Thai; 1991 CE]
Phasook Indrawooth 
2528  Dachani phachana dinphao  
samai thawarawadi (Index Pottery 
of Dvāravati Period). Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University Press.  
[In Thai with English Summary; 
1985 CE]
2542  Thawarawadi: kansueksa choeng 
wikhro chak lakthan thang borannakhadi 
(Dvaravati: A Critical Study Based on 
Archaeological Evidence). Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University Press.  
[In Thai with English Summary; 
1999 CE] 
Phongsi Wanasin &  
Thiwa Suphachanya 
2524  Mueang boran boriwen chai fang 
thale doem khong thi rap phak klang 
prathet thai: kansueksa tamnaeng thi tang 
lae phumisat samphan (Ancient Cities on 
the Former Coastline in the Central Plain 
of Thailand: The Study of Sites and 
Geographical Correlation). Bangkok: 
Chulalongkorn University Press. 
[In Thai; 1981 CE]
Phuthon Phumathon 
2524  Rian ngoen thawarawadi 
phop thi lop buri (The Dvāravatī 
Silver Coins Found in Lop Buri). 
Silpakorn Journal 28 (4): 55-63.  
[In Thai; 1981 CE]
2529  Mueang boran sap champa 
(The Ancient City of Sap Champa). 
Lop Buri: Lop Buri Conservation 
of Ancient Monuments, Objects 
and Environments Club. [In Thai; 
1986 CE]
2555  Lakthan laktham yuk raek phop 
thi lop buri (The Earliest Dhamma 
Evidence Found in Lop Buri Province). 
Lop Buri. Document distributed 
at the Seminar The Earliest Dhamma 
Evidence of the Buddhist Era Found in 
Lop Buri Province organised by  
the Lop Buri Conservation of  
Ancient Monuments, Objects  
and Environments Club in  
Lop Buri on 11 December 2012. 
[Unpublished]
Pigott, Vincent C.,  
Weiss, Andrew D. &  
Suraphol Natapintu 
1997  The Archaeology of Copper 
Production: Excavations in the 
Khao Wong Prachan Valley, 
Central Thailand. In Ciarla, 
Roberto & Rispoli, Fiorella (eds), 
South-East Asian Archaeology 1992. 
Rome: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa 
e l’Oriente, pp. 119-158.
Saritpong Khunsong,  
Phasook Indrawooth & 
Suraphol Natapintu 
2011  Excavation of a Pre-
Dvāravatī Site at Hor-Ek in 
Ancient Nakhon Pathom. Journal  
of the Siam Society 99: 150-171.
Sawang Lertrit 
2002  Some Notes on New Data 
from Recent Excavations in the Pa 
Sak River Valley. Silpakorn University 
International Journal 2(1): 119-135.
2004  Sab Champa Revisited: 
Results of Recent Archaeological 
Field Investigations. In Paz, Victor 
(ed.), Southeast Asian Archaeology: 
Wilhelm G. Solheim II Festschrift. 
Quezon City: University of the 
Philippines Press, pp. 504-521.
Sawang Lertrit,  
Priyanut Chumphrom &  
Anan Klinphoklap 
2544  Sap Champa 2544: 
kanpatibat ngan thang 
borannakhadi lae lakthan thi phop 
(Sab Champa 2001: Archaeological 
Research and Evidence Found). 
Muang Boran 27(3): 117-133.  
[In Thai; 2001 CE]
Stark, Miriam  
1998  The Transition to History in 
the Mekong Delta: A View from 
Cambodia. International Journal of 
Historical Archaeology 2(3): 175-240.
Sunisa Mankhong  
2532  Noen makok: raingan  
bueangtan kiao kap chandin lae  
lakthan borannakhadi (Noen Makok: 
Preliminary Report of Stratigraphic  
and Archaeological Evidence).  
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department. 
[In Thai; 1999 CE]
Suraphol Natapintu 
2527  Kantang thinthan samai 
boran thi ban thakae (Ancient 
Settlement at Ban Tha Khae). 
Muang Boran 10(4): 20-27.  
[In Thai; 1984 CE]
1997  Current Archaeological 
Research in Central Thailand 
with Special Reference to the Site 
of Phu Noi, Lopburi Province. In 
Ciarla, Roberto & Rispoli, Fiorella 
(eds), South-East Asian Archaeology 
1992. Rome: Istituto Italiano per 
l’Africa e l’Oriente, pp. 45-51.
2545  Raingan bueangtan 
phon kankhut khan thi laeng 
borannakhadi ban pong manao  
lop buri (Preliminary Results of  
an Archaeological Excavation  
at Pong Manao, Lop Buri).  
Muang Boran 28(2): 139-142.  
[In Thai; 2002 CE]
Tarling, Nicolas (ed.) 
1992  The Cambridge History of 
Southeast Asia, Volume I. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Thanik Lertcharnrit 
[Formerly known as  
Sawang Lertrit] 
2005  Late Prehistoric and Early 
Historic Archaeology in Thailand: 
Recent Evidence from the Central 
Highland. Silpakorn University 
International Journal 5(1-2): 55-72.
2006  The Moated Site of 
Phromthin Tai and the Transition 
from Late Prehistory to Early 
History in Central Thailand.  
In Bacus, Elizabeth A., Glover, 
Ian C. & Pigott, Vincent C. (eds), 
Uncovering Southeast Asia’s Past.  
Singapore: NUS Press, pp. 258-265.
2010  An Early Ivory Bracelet 
from Central Thailand. Expedition 
52(2): 8.
2011  Zoomorphic Spouts from 
Central Thailand. Bulletin of the 
Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association  
31: 25-29.
Thanik Lertcharnrit &  
Carter, Alison 
2553  Phonwichai lasut rueang 
luk pat hin lae luk pat kaeo yuk 
lek chak laeng borannakhadi 
phromthin tai lop buri (Recent 
Research on Stone Beads from 
Phromthin Tai, Central Thailand). 
Muang Boran 36(4): 53-68. [In Thai 
with English Summary; 2010 CE]
Wyatt, David K.  
1984  Thailand: A Short History.  
New Haven: Yale University Press.

--- PAGE 68 ---
133
132
PART II
THe groWing emergence of  
indic maTerial culTure

--- PAGE 69 ---
135
134
In the past kings used to go out on pleasure tours during which 
there was hunting and other entertainment. But ten years after 
Beloved-of-the-God’s (rājā piyadassi) coronation he went on a tour 
to saṁbodhi and thus instituted [Dharma] dhamma tours. During 
these tours, the following things took place: visits and gifts to 
[Brahmins] brāhmaṇas and ascetics [śramaṇas], visits and gifts of 
gold to the aged, visits to people in the countryside, instructing 
them in dhamma, and discussing dhamma with them as is suitable. 
(Major Rock Edict VIII, Girnar version, Sircar 1975: 46)
Introduction
The dhamma or religious policy of the Mauryan King Aśoka, who ruled 
approximately from 272 to 232 BCE, was aimed at giving gifts to both 
Brahmins (brāhmaṇas), Buddhists and other ascetics (śramaṇas) in the 
third century BCE. The king did not stop feeding the Brahmins, nor 
did he denigrate them. Yet in secondary writings, there are references to 
hostility between the different groups. Romila Thapar (2000: 967), for 
example, makes a distinction between Brahmanism and Śramaṇism and 
refers to them as organisationally separate. The latter term, according 
to her, included a variety of Buddhist, Jaina, Ajivika and other “sects,” 
which denied the fundamentals of Brahmanism such as Vedic śruti and 
smṛti (oral and written tradition). Brahmins are seen as legitimisers of 
political authority and Brahmanism is credited with the adoption of 
a common language, viz. Sanskrit. Can one postulate a connection 
between religion and language? What Thapar does not explain is the 
relationship between Buddhism and Sanskrit and the fact that Sanskrit 
was also used by Buddhists by the beginning of the Common Era. 
Was Sanskrit used only for ritual communication by Brahmins? What 
was the language(s) used by trading groups and can identification of 
these languages provide indicators to the religious affiliation of trading 
networks?    
Historians writing within the socio-economic framework of Indian 
history define the post-fourth century CE period as marking a transitional 
phase between the sacrificial Vedic religion and the emergence of 
Purāṇic worship marked by devotion to a deity. This transformation, it 
is suggested, was brought about by the migration of Brahmins from the 
towns and the development of tīrthas or sacred pilgrimage spots (Nandi 
1986: 27-46). Brahmins are credited with being agents of acculturation 
among the tribal populations from the fifth century CE onwards. It is 
suggested that at numerous feudal centres temples were constructed in 
Multi-religious Maritime Linkages 
across the Bay of Bengal during  
the First Millennium CE
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
Previous pages: Wall carving 
showing the Buddha preaching to Śiva 
and Viṣṇu in the Bodhisattva cave, 
Saraburi province [Photograph courtesy 
of Paisarn Piemmettawat].
Opposite Figure 1: 
Ekamukhaliṅga found at  
Nong Wai, Surat Thani province, 
5th-6th century. Currently in the 
Bangkok National Museum, stone, 
104 cm. high, inv. no. SV 31 
[Photograph courtesy of Paisarn 
Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 70 ---
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
137
136
permanent material such as stone for the first time in the fifth century 
CE “inspired by the growing importance of Bhakti and by the newly 
established Smarta-Pauranic religion, which was associated with the 
new social set-up” (Desai 1989-90: 31). Regional states emerged in India 
from the seventh to the tenth centuries marked by complex changes in 
religious dimensions of the society and it is “believed that Bhakti and 
the worship through Bhakti of God as a Lord located in a temple, was 
the key ideological strand of the period” (Chattopadhyaya 1994: 29). 
This framework is by no means limited to writings on early South Asia, 
but has been repeated in works on early Southeast Asia as well. Pierre-
Yves Manguin for example refers to the two phases of “Indianisation” 
and while the term has now been discarded for the period from 500 
BCE to 500 CE, it still provides us with “a convenient term for the 
second phase of cultural exchange between South and Southeast Asia 
[…] to denote profound socio-political modifications brought about 
by the adoption, at least by the ruling elites of state concepts, broad 
based universalist religions and their props (temples and statues) and 
writing in Sanskrit (the language of power)” (Manguin et al. 2011: xx). 
In an earlier paper, Manguin (2004: 295) refers to coastal polities on the 
Malay Peninsula as early as the third century CE which were hosts to 
“hundreds of Brahmins and to large merchant communities from India 
and the Iranian world. Buddhist communities were also active.” What 
was the role of Brahmins in these polities and their relationship with 
Buddhist communities?    
Thus there is a need to interrogate the paradigm of movements 
of Brahmins to courts of regional kings largely for the purpose of 
providing legitimacy; and the proposed shift from Buddhism to 
“Purāṇic Hinduism” around the middle of the first millennium CE. 
The emphasis in this essay is clearly not on sequential development and 
antagonism between adherents of different religions, but on plurality, 
diversity and co-existence of diverse religious traditions at the beginning 
of the Common Era both in South and Southeast Asia. The larger issue 
that the essay addresses is the multi-cultural and multi-religious context 
of early maritime activity across the Bay of Bengal starting from the 
beginning of the Common Era. This included the sharing of languages 
such as Sanskrit, Prakrit, Pāli, but also Tamil, which were written in 
Brāhmī and Kharoṣṭhī scripts. Yet before I move to the central theme, 
a brief historiography indicating the different perspectives adopted by 
scholars on the issue may be appropriate.
Historiography and State of Scholarship
In his recent study, Johannes Bronkhorst (2011: 1) does not share the 
opinion that Buddhism was a reaction against Vedic Brahmanism, as, 
according to him, brāhmaṇas or Brahmins did not occupy a dominant 
position in the region where the Buddha preached. A third coeval 
group with the Brahmins and the Buddhists were the Jains. The earliest 
cave inscriptions from carved beds in a natural cave at Sittanavasal, in 
Pudukkottai district of Tamil Nadu show that Jains were in that region 
at least from second century BCE onwards and may have preceded the 
Buddhists in other regions as well such as in Mathurā [Figure 2]. This 
would suggest that the Jains may have been the main competitors of the 
Buddhists rather than the Brahmins (Bronkhorst 2011: 20). The author 
continues that in the competition between Brahmanism and Buddhism, 
the former had an advantage, as Brahmins had always been involved 
in affairs of the state and were well prepared for counselling the king 
(2011: 99). Thus Bronkhorst introduces a critical element of affiliation 
to political power in the discussion, i.e. the relationship of Brahmanism 
and Buddhism with the king and this is an issue that finds resonance in 
several writings on Siam or Thailand.  
Peter Skilling refers to the complex and hybrid nature of the 
“Siamese religion” as reflected in the Thai phrase samana-chi-
phrām, which may be translated into “mendicants, renunciants and 
brahmanas” (2007: 184). The participation of Brahmins and Buddhists 
in joint rituals is first attested to in the Wat Maheyong inscription from 
Nakhon Si Thammarat, southern Thailand, dated between the seventh 
and ninth centuries, which records donations of buildings and materials 
to Buddhist monks (both as a community and individually) and of food 
to the community of twice-born (dvijas or brāhmaṇas) (Cœdès 1961: 
34-36, pl. XIII). 
In his recent book, Prapod Assavirulhakarn (2010) raises several 
pertinent questions about the introduction of Buddhism into Southeast 
Asia, especially in pre-modern Thailand. On the basis of the 
inscriptional record, he convincingly shows that Pāli Buddhism was 
present in the western part of mainland Southeast Asia from around 
the fifth or sixth centuries CE onwards and did not come only later 
in the twelfth century after the reforms in Sri Lanka that unified the 
Theravāda Saṅghas there, as previously thought. Based on a study 
of the Dvāravatī culture, Stephen Murphy (2010: 73) reaffirms that 
adoption of Buddhism was a unifying feature from the sixth-seventh 
century onwards. What Prapod (2010: 20) called the “Dvāravatī 
Figure 2: Early Jain votive plaque 
with Prakrit inscription in Brāhmī 
script from Kankali Tila, Mathurā, 
India. Currently in the National 
Museum New Delhi [Photograph  
by Himanshu Prabha Ray].

--- PAGE 71 ---
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
139
138
maṇḍalas” expanded over part of central modern 
Thailand and shows strong localisation at centres 
such as U Thong, Nakhon Pathom, Khu Bua, Lop 
Buri and Si Thep. But what was the exact nature 
of this Buddhism and how was it practised in the 
second half of the first millennium?
A stūpa for instance was considered a sacred 
place for public reverence and any devotee could 
participate in its decoration and veneration. As 
evident from inscriptions from large-scale sites such 
as Amarāvatī, Nāgārjunakoṇḍa and Bodhgayā, 
pilgrims from different regions and “sectarian 
affiliations” could reside in the vicinity of stūpas. 
In pre-modern Thailand, it was also common to 
find objects belonging to different traditions in 
the same area making it possible for Brahmanical 
images to be found there as well (Prapod 2010: 
104). For example, Śiva liṅgas are often present 
in Buddhist monastery compounds, as in the case 
of Wat Phra Chetuphon (Wat Pho) in Bangkok. 
Near Lop Buri, Śiva liṅgas were found in such large 
numbers that the hill came to be known as Khao 
Sapphalinga after sarvaliṅga (Prapod 2010: 138, 231, 
n. 84). To this day in Thailand, Buddhism provides 
the moral context and merit-making framework 
for most people, and Brahmanism is used for 
rituals connected with governance and kingship. 
To what extent can this present model be sustained 
in the context of early Thailand and India? In the 
next section, a brief survey of the archaeological 
and inscriptional material is provided to highlight 
the multi-religious nature of many of the so-called 
“Buddhist” sites in Thailand, as also the several 
languages used by Buddhists in the region.
Cultural and Religious Diversity 
in Pre-modern Thailand
Inscriptions from Thailand provide insights into the practice of 
Buddhism and the diversity of languages and expressions used is 
indeed striking. One of the prominent categories includes Old Mon 
inscriptions in a variant of the Brāhmī script, which record donations 
by people from different groups to Buddhist monastic centres and the 
ritual celebrations that followed (Dhida 1999: 196-197). The donors 
represented a cross-section of the populace and include commoners, 
dancers, ascetics, brāhmaṇas, kings and nobles. The donations involved 
such activities as casting of Buddha images, building stūpas and vihāras, 
repairing damaged images or freeing caged animals (Prapod 2010: 86). 
A second category of epigraphs comprises of extracts from the 
Buddhist Canon and several religious formulas mostly in Pāli (Revire, 
this volume). These are engraved on stone dharmacakras or wheels of 
law, octagonal pillars, stone slabs, clay tablets and reliquaries and 
are dated between the sixth and eighth centuries CE [Figures 3-5]. 
This practice is well attested in both ancient Thailand and Myanmar, 
but no contemporary canonical inscriptions have been found in first-
millennium Sri Lanka. In contrast, religious formulas and extracts 
from canonical texts occur at several Indian sites from at least the 
Mauryan period onwards. Old Mon records in Thailand use both 
Pāli and Sanskrit loanwords but there is little unanimity regarding 
Southeast Asian scripts, which continue to follow nineteenth century 
categorisation and are termed “pre-Pallava,” “Pallava,” “Gupta” and 
so on (Skilling 2003: 104-107). 
This diversity in language and script indicating complexity of 
Buddhist traditions adopted in the region, is matched by a variety 
of religious affiliations at archaeological sites. Khok Chang Din for 
example is a cluster of twenty historic sites at the foothills of Khao 
Dok, southwest of the moated settlement of U Thong, which have 
yielded bricks, stones, sherds including Tang ceramics. The site was 
identified in the 1960s, but subsequent excavations by the Fine Arts 
Department unearthed a terracotta vessel filled with silver “coins” 
stamped with the conch symbol from site no. 18. At site no. 5, laterite 
bases of a rectangular structure were discovered, as also finds of stone 
Śiva liṅgas and mukhaliṅgas [Figures 6-8] now displayed in the U Thong 
National Museum (Skilling 2003: 93).
These finds are matched by a large number of hybrid imagery and 
inscriptions found throughout first-millennium Thailand. The sixth-
eighth century “Bodhisattva cave” (Tham Phra Phothisat), in Saraburi 
province shows an enthroned Buddha preaching to the gods Śiva and 
Viṣṇu (see photograph pages 132-133, this volume), while an inscription 
under the huge relief of Buddha seated and preaching in the “Hermit 
cave” (Tham Ruesi) in Ratchaburi province possibly reads “the pious 
work (or gift) of the holy ṛṣi [ascetic or hermit] Śrī Samādhigupta” 
Figure 3: Dharmacakra 
inscribed with Pāli text in Pallava 
script. Currently in the Bangkok 
National Museum, inv. no. KTh 29 
[Photograph courtesy of Paisarn 
Piemmettawat].
Figure 4: Ye dhammā formula inscribed on 
terracotta found at Phra Pathom Chedi, Nakhon 
Pathom. Currently in the Bangkok National 
Museum, inv. no. DV 1-1 [Photograph by 
Himanshu Prabha Ray].
Figure 5: Ye dhammā formula on stone found 
in Si Thep, Phetchabun province. Currently in 
the Phra Narai National Museum, Lop Buri 
[Photograph courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 72 ---
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
141
140
(Cœdès 1961: 19, pl. VII; Brown 1996: 30-31; Revire 2012: 93-98, figs 
1-3). Similarly Robert Brown reports an inscription (K. 981) carved 
on a sema or boundary stone from Wat Si That Pramancha in Udon 
Thani province, which bears the legend “this ascetic honored by the 
brahmans has erected this stone serving as a marker with the bhikṣu” 
(see also Murphy, this volume). But these donative inscriptions are not 
limited to the use of Sanskrit. A Mon inscription of circa 750-850 CE 
on a sema from Wat Non Sila in Khon Kaen province also reads: “The 
Brahman Mahayat gives the fruit of this merit to Rasa, who is of the 
lineage of Brahmā, and to [male name is missing], who is a relative.” A 
second comparable Mon inscription on another sema from the same site 
also seem to record the practice of “transference of merit” by naming 
three men who gave merit to three others and then ends with “May 
the merit be offered to Maitreya” (Brown 1996: 31; Murphy 2010: 93). 
Finally, Brown discusses the stele bearing the Bo Ika inscription which 
carries a Buddhist donation on one side, while the other side records the 
establishment of a golden Śiva liṅga (Brown 1996: 32). 
Furthermore, many first-millennium mitred images of the 
Brahmanical deity Viṣṇu have long been uncovered at sites in southern 
Thailand (O’Connor 1972: 21), as also in eastern Thailand around 
Prachin Buri province. One 67 cm. high four-armed stone image of 
Viṣṇu was found on the site of Wat Sala Thueng in Chaiya (Lavy, this 
volume, figs 1-2). Three other similar images are known: two were found 
in the region of Nakhon Si Thammarat and one in the area of Sichon. 
Other specimens are reported to come from Khao Si Wichai, Wiang 
Sa, Wat Phra Phikanet, about 20 kilometres north of Chaiya, and along 
the coast from Sichon to Nakhon Si Thammarat as well as from Sathing 
Phra. The most impressive is perhaps the 202 cm. high image of Viṣṇu 
from Takua Pa on the west coast of the peninsula (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 
2002: 118-125). These Viṣṇu images are not the sole representatives 
of Brahmanism as Śiva liṅgas are also known to come from the same 
region. These vary in size from 20 cm. to 147 cm. A truly exceptional 
ekamukhaliṅga, with the face of Śiva on one side, was found at Nong Wai, 
about 20 kilometres north of Chaiya [Figure 1]. In addition, we can 
add the twenty ablution bases and mortises found in the area, though it 
is difficult to establish a link between them and the Śiva liṅgas referred 
above, except perhaps with the one found in an ancient temple at 
Nakhon Si Thammarat (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2002: 128-133; Wannasarn, 
this volume, figs 7-9). Sathing Phra also yielded an early, possibly sixth 
century, image of Gaṇeśa which may be the oldest found in the region 
(Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2002: 133-134). In the coastal region extending from 
Sichon to Nakhon Si Thammarat, the finds of Brahmanical images 
were often associated with brick temples and nearly thirty shrines were 
identified, though many of these have since been destroyed. Two of 
the largest were at Khao Kha (Sichon district) and in Wat Mokkhalan 
(Tha Sala district). What is significant is the attested presence of 
Buddhist remains in the same area dated from around the fifth to 
eighth centuries CE (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2002: 143-158).     
From what precedes, it is evident that we can no longer consider 
the Brahmanical and Buddhist material at U Thong, Bodhisattva 
cave, Si Thep, etc. as sequential. Instead, Brahmanism and Buddhism 
clearly coexisted in many areas of pre-modern Thailand. One further 
comment requires emphasis. Secondary writings often divide Buddhism 
into two opposing camps, viz. Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna. This 
classification is however erroneous, since “Hīnayāna” is a polemical 
term that even in Mahāyāna texts is used in specific contexts. Prapod 
reminds us that monks affiliated to different “sects” sometimes lived in 
the same monasteries and lay support was given to members of different 
communities even by the same person. Even today, most Buddhists in 
Thailand do not think of themselves as “Theravāda” Buddhists but 
rather simply as supporters of the Buddha’s sāsana or religion, and 
include in their practice ideas from both “Hīnayāna” and “Mahāyāna” 
traditions, as well as many practices that are not derived from Buddhism 
at all, such as the worship of local spirits (2010: 71-112). 
One has also to desist from identifying schools in Buddhism based 
on linguistic evidence alone. For example languages very similar to 
Pāli were used by other “Hīnayāna sects,” and Sanskrit was used by 
various groups, not necessarily Mahāyānist, such as the Sarvāstivādins 
or Mūlasarvāstivādins, the Dharmaguptakas and even possibly the 
Theravādins of the Abhayagirivihāra branch. As Prapod has underlined: 
People perceived religion as the institution in which to place 
their trust, with all religions being regarded as auspicious, and 
which could be applied to different situations in everyday life 
[...]. The idea that one professes to belong to a single religion 
is foreign to the Southeast Asian mind, which sees no need to 
synthesize multiple beliefs into one exclusive belief. (2010: 147)
In the final analysis it needs to be stressed that in ancient times, 
societies were not monolithic and that religions shared a common 
vocabulary, rather than demanding exclusive allegiance. How does 
this overview compare with the situation in the Indian subcontinent 
during the first millennium of the Common Era? Archaeological 
data corroborates the presence of Brahmanical temples at so-called 
Buddhist sites of Mathurā and Nāgārjunakoṇḍa and the use of Prakrit 
in dharmacakra pillar inscriptions from the Buddhist site of Amarāvatī 
(Seshadri Sastri 1984: 256-257) [Figure 9].    
Figure 8: Stone Śiva liṅga and 
yonī from U Thong, Suphan Buri 
province. Currently in the U Thong 
National Museum [Photograph by 
Himanshu Prabha Ray].
Figure 7: Stone Śiva liṅga from 
Khok Chang Din sanctuary, near 
U Thong, Suphan Buri province. 
Currently in the U Thong National 
Museum [Photograph by Himanshu 
Prabha Ray].
Figure 6: Stone ekamukhaliṅga 
from U Thong, Suphan Buri province.  
Currently in the U Thong National 
Museum [Photograph by Himanshu 
Prabha Ray].

--- PAGE 73 ---
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
143
142
drawn in by movements of trading and craft groups, Buddhist clergy 
as well as internal dynamics associated with the emergence of the site 
as a centre of political power. Nāgārjunakoṇḍa as is evident from the 
archaeological record participated in both coastal networks as well 
as overland trading activity. It is also unusual in the varied secular 
architecture preserved at the site, including a citadel, an elaborate water 
system, residential complex and what has been termed an amphitheatre. 
Several conclusions may be drawn from the excavations at 
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa [Figure 12]. One, the third-fourth century CE kings 
of the Ikṣvāku dynasty performed Vedic sacrifices and patronised the 
construction of temples, while their queens donated to the Buddhist 
Saṅghas. However, both the Brahmanical temples and the monastic 
complexes at the site were supported by lay devotees making it difficult 
to categorise them on the basis of their association with the political 
elite only. The monastic complexes at Nāgārjunakoṇḍa drew resources 
from a vast hinterland and while there is inscriptional evidence to 
suggest that monks from Sri Lanka were possibly resident at the site, 
there is debatable evidence for the centre sending out monks to preach 
in different parts of the subcontinent (Gethin 2012: 35-36).
One final point that needs an explanation is the changing power 
dynamics between the Brahmanical temple and the Buddhist shrine in 
peninsular India, i.e. the region south of the Vindhyas, from the fourth-
fifth century CE onwards. Bronkhorst explains that in this period, 
Buddhists were ready to concede that there were occupations which 
should best be left to Brahmins, such as all forms of divination and 
KARTIKEYA TEMPLE
CUTTING B
A
PEDDA
KUNDELLA
GUTTA
HILL-
MONASTERY
YAKṢA
TEMPLE
EASTERN
GATEWAY
DHĀRAṆĪ-VIHĀRA
CUTTING F
STABLE
POSTERN
GATE
BRICK
FORTIFICATION
WALL
CHINNA
KUNDELLA
GUTTA
BATH
GHAT
SARVADEVA
TEMPLE
AŚVAMEDHA
SITE
WESTERN
GATEWAY
RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS
PUSHPABHADRASVAMI
 TEMPLE
STADIUM
BARRACKS
BUDDHA-
PĀDA
PILLARED HALL(1926-30)
R
I
V
E
R
 
K
R
I
S
H
N
A
100
200
METRES
FEET
0
0
200
200
400
600
800
1000          
100
350
400
400
450
450
500
500
Figure 10: Distribution 
of archaeological sites on 
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa hill, Andhra 
Pradesh, India [Drawing adapted 
from Sarkar & Misra 1999:  
pl. XIII].
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa: The Religious Landscape
A region, which provides crucial archaeological data on the religious 
landscape from the earliest Neolithic settlement in the third millennium 
BCE to the sixteenth century CE, is the secluded Nāgārjunakoṇḍa 
valley extending over 23 square kilometres in Andhra Pradesh, shut 
in on three sides by offshoots of the Nallamalai hill range. More 
than thirty Buddhist establishments, nineteen Brahmanical temples 
and a few medieval Jain shrines were unearthed in several seasons of 
archaeological excavations conducted at the site after its discovery in 
1920 until its submergence in 1960. 
Early Buddhist religious architecture occurs throughout the valley, 
while early Brahmanical or later Hindu temples were located mainly 
along the banks of the Krishna river and around the citadel area 
[Figure 10]. The inscriptional records dated to the third and fourth 
century CE refer to the Ikṣvāku kings based at Nāgārjunakoṇḍa. 
A citadel complex overlooking the Krishna river was unearthed in 
archaeological excavations and several residential structures were 
located outside it. It is significant that religious architecture of both the 
Brahmanical and the Buddhist devotees was built on diverse ground 
plans and both used the apsidal form, associated earlier on only with the 
Buddhists (Ray 2004: 343-359). 
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa is unique in that it provides a large corpus of 
inscriptions associated both with Brahmanical as well as Buddhist 
architecture which allows insights into several aspects of interaction 
between the community and religious architecture. The dynasty of 
the Ikṣvākus is prominently represented in the epigraphs, but royal 
patronage is indicated for only three of the nineteen Brahmanical 
temples; patronage for the other temples being provided by the 
community in general. An analysis of these records of donations 
indicates that in a majority of the Buddhist inscriptions the motive as 
stated by the donor related to attainment of nirvāṇa and the welfare and 
happiness of the world. A similar desire is evident in the inscription from 
the Brahmanical Pushpabhadrasvami temple, which was established by 
the king’s wife and son for his long life and victory (Rupavataram 2003: 
Tables 30-31). 
Generally speaking, Buddhist monuments carried records in Prakrit 
[e.g. Figure 11], while Brahmanical monuments had records in 
Sanskrit, though there were notable exceptions: a Sanskrit epigraph of 
the 24th year of Ehuvala Chantamula, (ca 294 CE) when Kumaranandi, 
the son of Iśvaradatta, and a headman of Syandakaparvata along 
with his son Īśvarabhatta and his wife and other relatives installed a 
stone image of the Buddha (Sircar & Krishnan 1960-61: 17-22); and 
correspondingly a Prakrit record of the 30th year of Ābhīra Vasusēna 
recording the erection of the image of Aṣṭabhujasvāmī or eight-armed 
Viṣṇu (Sircar 1960-61: 197-204). It is also true that a majority of the 
inscriptions are in Prakrit and only six are in Sanskrit (Soundararajan 
2006: 514). 
Thus the assumption by historians that kings established temples 
and donated to brāhmaṇas to seek legitimisation for their rule and that 
these religious shrines were agents of acculturation is not substantiated 
by the available data. Instead the data from Nāgārjunakoṇḍa clearly 
establishes the intersection of diverse religious traditions, some 
associated with communities settled earlier in the region and others 
Figure 9: Dharmacakra pillar 
inscribed with Prakrit inscription 
in Brāhmī script from Amarāvatī, 
Andhra Pradesh, India. Currently 
in the Archaeological Museum 
Amaravati [Photograph courtesy of 
Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 74 ---
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
145
144
interpretation of signs, certain sciences, most notably mathematics and 
astronomy, and the art of giving professional advice to kings. Therefore, 
in the case of physiognomy, astrology, astronomy and mathematics 
there are Brahmanical, but no Buddhist treatises. It is also true that 
there are no Buddhist treatises that might compete with the Arthaśāstra 
or with the Laws of Manu (Bronkhorst 2011: 109). The points raised by 
Bronkhorst are well taken and need serious consideration. Somewhat 
different insights are, however, provided by the diversity of languages 
and scripts that expanded across the Bay of Bengal. Were Brahmins or 
Buddhist monks the sole transmitters of knowledge in this early period? 
In the next section, this issue is discussed with further reference to the 
archaeological data for the writing from the Indian subcontinent and 
Southeast Asia, especially Thailand.  
The Written Word and Information Transfer
In an earlier section, I have referred to the absence of any correlation 
between language, script and religious affiliation. It is suggested here 
that in the historical period, one significant use of writing was for 
codifying knowledge relating to economic transactions. Trading activity 
by its very nature was mobile, cut across political frontiers and as a 
result created its own networks of communication and information 
transfer. Around the third-second centuries BCE, urban centres in the 
western Deccan evolved from exchange and market centres largely as 
a result of the expansion of trade. In Andhra Pradesh, on the other 
hand, urban centres were in most cases, associated with localised 
chieftains and rājas as a result of the growing power of the megalithic 
communities supplemented with trading activities. Further south, there 
is a clear distinction in settlements along the coast in contrast with those 
located inland. 
The pace of change and inputs from trading communities is evident 
in references to the nigāma or market centre and the goṣṭhī or market 
association. In both the western and eastern Deccan changes in the 
nature of settlement are associated with increased religious activity 
as indicated by the construction of Buddhist monastic centres along 
trade routes and along the coasts. This was not the case further south 
where there is evidence for the presence of Jainism in the region around 
Madurai in the archaeological record. The earliest cave inscriptions 
from Sittanavasal from Puddukkotai region of Tamil Nadu show that 
Jains were in that region at least from second century BCE onwards. 
The Jains may have preceded the Buddhists in other regions as well 
and may have been the main competitors of the Buddhists rather than 
the Brahmins in this early period (Bronkhorst 2011: 20). The early 
Tamil sources, however, describe a diverse religious landscape with the 
concurrent presence of brāhmaṇas, the performance of sacrifices and the 
reverence of the hero who led the communities in battle. 
These diverse communities in peninsular South Asia used at least 
four languages, viz. Prakrit, Tamil, Old Sinhalese and Sanskrit, which 
were all written in Brāhmī scripts, with some evidence for the presence 
of Kharoṣṭhī as well. Brāhmī scripts were adopted for inscribing names 
in more than one language on pottery in peninsular India. This clearly 
indicates the presence of at least four language groups involved in 
trading activity in the region – those using Tamil, Prakrit, Sanskrit and 
Sinhala, with several overlaps between these networks. This complexity 
is further enhanced by finds of sherds with early Brāhmī inscriptions in 
fifth-fourth century BCE levels at Anurādhapura in Sri Lanka. 
The finds of sherds inscribed with Brāhmī letters from Anurādhapura 
in Iron Age levels have raised several questions. A majority of the sherds 
are of coarse and medium black and red ware of local manufacture and 
the inscriptions are post firing. The inscriptions comprising of either 
letters or names are often described as being in Prakrit (Coningham 
& Allchin 1995), but this issue needs to be re-examined, in view of a 
different perspective presented by Iravatham Mahadevan (1996a). 
Mahadevan argues for Sinhala-Prakrit (Old Sinhalese) as the language 
of the inscribed sherds, including one sherd from Kodumanal. After 
the early centuries CE, the inscribed sherds decline in frequency and 
this corresponds to the increasing use of palm-leaf manuscripts (oḷas). 
Ivory manuscript covers are also attested to in the excavations at 
Anurādhapura (Coningham & Allchin 1995: 178).
The finds of inscribed sherds at Anurādhapura in well-dated 
sequence has led the excavators to suggest mercantile involvement in 
the rise of a Brāhmī script or at least in its introduction into Sri Lanka 
(Coningham et al. 1996: 73-97). An analysis of the inscribed fragments 
from Anurādhapura indicates that the legends were inscribed on lids 
and on ceramic vessels and that many of these vessels may have been 
dedicated to religious establishments. During excavations of the northern 
and southern ayakas or stone pillars of the main stūpa at Jetavana in 
Anurādhapura, seventeen vessels were found containing conch shells, 
MAIN SHRINE
MAṆḌAPA
BRICK WALL
DHVAJA-
STAMBHA
(INSCRIBED)
ENTRANCE
ENTRANCE
ENTRANCE
PEDESTAL
RUBBLE
WALL
BRICK WALL
0
5
10
0
5 10
20
30
METRES
FEET
NĀGĀRJUNAKOṆḌA,
PUSHPABHADRASVAMI TEMPLE
Figure 12: Plan of an apsidal 
temple at Nāgārjunakoṇḍa, Andhra 
Pradesh, India [Drawing adapted 
from Soundararajan 2006: 227, 
fig. 71].
Figure 11: Four-sided pillar 
inscribed with a Buddhist Prakrit 
inscription in Brāhmī script 
from Nāgārjunakoṇḍa, Andhra 
Pradesh, India. Currently in 
the Archaeological Museum 
Nagarjunakonda [Photograph 
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 75 ---
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
147
146
ivories, over two thousand beads, hundreds of 
fragments of semi-precious stones and so on 
(Coningham et al. 1996: 90). Thus the close 
association of mercantile activity with travels 
by Buddhist clergy is evident. 
In addition, nearly two hundred inscribed 
potsherds were found at the site of Kodumanal 
in Coimbatore district of Tamil Nadu in 
stratified contexts. These are mostly in Tamil 
language written in the Tamil-Brāhmī script 
and a few are in Prakrit in a Brāhmī script. 
These have been dated through archaeo-
magnetic tests to between 300 BCE and 
200 CE (± 50) (Mahadevan 1996a: 59). The 
inscriptions on the pots include Tamil names 
such as Kannan Atan, Pannan, Antavan Atan, 
etc., as also Sanskrit names like Varuni. One 
burial (megalith II) yielded a sherd with the 
name Visaki. Another significant discovery was the presence of the 
term nikama (Rajan 1996: 79). Mahadevan argues for Sinhala-Prakrit 
(Old Sinhalese) similar to the language found on one sherd from 
Kodumanal.1 
At least 17 of the 66 inscriptions on pottery from Arikamedu are 
known to be in Tamil. A majority of the inscribed sherds date to the 
first-second centuries CE, though the earliest find at the site was from 
the megalithic levels dated to the third century BCE. These consist 
largely of masculine personal names, such as “[…] kuttai” and has been 
identified as Prakrit guttä or gutta of the Sri Lankan cave inscriptions. 
Another proper name that has wider prevalence is “Kuyiran” (Tamil) 
or “Kubira” (Old Sinhalese) both derived from Sanskrit Kubera. 
Variants appear as “Kupiro” at Bharhut in central India, “Kubirako” 
from Bhattiprolu in Andhra Pradesh, “Kubira” in Sri Lankan cave 
inscriptions and “Kuviran” in early Tamil cave inscriptions (Mahadevan 
1996b: 295-296).
Another 214 inscribed sherds were recovered from the archaeological 
excavations at Vaddamanu located 10 kilometres south-east of 
Amarāvatī on the Andhra coast. The largest concentration of 109 
sherds was found in the Period II stratigraphic layer dated between 100 
BCE and 200 CE, though the overall chronological span ranges from 
200 BCE to the fourth century CE (Krishna Sastri et al. 1992: 116-140). 
The monastic complex at Salihundam or ancient Kattaharama also 
on the Andhra coast yielded 80 inscribed sherds and the few complete 
readings from the site would suggest that these were on platters or pots 
donated to the monastery (Subrahmanyam 1964: 119-122).    
Thus several language groups used Brāhmī scripts, though there 
are regional variations, and the fact that it had wide currency across 
most parts of the Indian subcontinent around third-second centuries 
BCE is an indication of the extended linkages of the groups using 
it. Inscriptions on pottery have an extensive distribution in the early 
historic period and inscribed pottery fragments are found both at non-
monastic and Buddhist monastic sites. Pots were used for transporting 
commodities and hence the extensive distribution of inscribed sherds. 
Particularly noteworthy in the monastic context are the inscribed bowls 
and vessels carrying dedicative inscriptions (Ray 1987: 2-3). Overall, the 
ceramics which bear inscriptions are varied and include black-and-red 
ware, all-black ware, russet-coated painted ware, rouletted ware and so 
on. Of these, fragments with legible inscriptions are few and these in a 
majority of cases contain names. 
These inscribed sherds are in addition to the large numbers of seals 
and sealings found at archaeological sites in the Indian subcontinent 
(Thaplyal 1972). Seals were used for marking merchandise (Arthaśāstra 
II.21.2-3); they were stamped on wet clay laid over fastenings on the 
mouths of pots containing valuables (Khadiraṅgārajātaka, no. 40). They 
were also used for securing documents and for identification. An early 
Buddhist text, the Milindapañha, refers to the custodian of seals. These 
seals occur in a variety of materials such as stone, ivory, copper and 
the ubiquitous terracotta at a range of archaeological sites. Particularly 
relevant to our discussion are the carnelian seals and intaglios with 
inscriptions found at sites in Sri Lanka and at least at four major coastal 
centres in Southeast Asia, viz. Khuan Luk Pat in Krabi province and 
Chaiya in southern Thailand, Kuala Selinsing on the Malay Peninsula, 
and Oc Eo in southern Vietnam. The earliest specimen of carnelian 
seals with Brāhmī legends from Khuan Luk Pat dates to approximately 
the first century CE, though these continued to be in use until the sixth-
seventh centuries CE as indicated by later finds (Ray 2000: 87-120). 
This corpus is supplemented by finds of seals with legends in alleged 
Kharoṣṭhī, e.g. a seal from U Thong apparently kept in the Phra Narai 
National Museum in Lop Buri. Kharoṣṭhī characters have also been 
identified on a seal matrix of tin from Oc Eo, while the male head on 
another tin seal resembles the head of Kuṣāṇa ruler Miaos on his coins 
(Mukherjee 1990: 3). 
A symbol widely distributed in the Indian Ocean region is the ship 
symbol, which occurs around the first-second centuries CE on punch-
marked, cast copper and Śātavāhana coins, terracotta sealings and 
as graffiti from deltaic Bengal and the Andhra coast (Ray 2000: 52). 
Other examples of the use of the ship-symbol on pottery and coins 
are known from Sri Lanka (Weishaar et al. 2001: 15-16) and southern 
Thailand. A terracotta seal from Nakhon Pathom depicts a two-masted 
ship identified as a Southeast Asian vessel with outrigger (Lyons 1979: 
355) [Figure 13].
Another archaeological site from the other end of the spatial 
spectrum is Khao Sam Kaeo located in the upper Thai-Malay Peninsula 
(Bellina-Pryce & Praon 2008; Bellina et al., this volume). Archaeological 
excavations conducted here have identified settlement patterning at the 
site in the late prehistoric period and the extent to which the socio-
cultural parameters changed in the early historical period. The site on 
the Tha Taphao river is particularly suited for this purpose as it was 
involved with both inland and maritime exchange involving the use 
of complex technology in glass and hard stone working. One gold seal 
bears a Sanskrit inscription that is stylistically dated fifth to sixth century 
CE. Two of the other three seals and the bicolour sphere all display the 
genitive forms of names in Prakrit language, written in an early Brāhmī 
script that was used from the first century BCE to the first century CE. 
One of the earliest Tamil inscription found in Thailand dates to 
around the fourth century CE and is engraved on a small flat rectangular 
stone now in the possession of the temple museum of Wat Khlong Thom 
Figure 13: Terracotta seal from 
Nakhon Pathom depicting a two-
masted ship. Currently in the  
Bangkok National Museum,  
inv. no. 2309 [Photograph courtesy  
of Paisarn Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 76 ---
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
149
148
in Krabi province. It reads “perumpatan kal” or stone of the goldsmith 
(Karashima 2002: 10). How is this data from inscribed pottery and seals 
written in Brāhmī scripts, but in a variety of languages, such as Sanskrit, 
Prakrit, Sinhala and Tamil to be understood? The shared culture that 
extended across not only South Asia, but also the Indian Ocean was 
part of a literate tradition, which was by no means controlled only by 
the ruler or the Brahmins. It also included Buddhist and Jain ascetics, 
as well as navigators and trading and crafts groups. Writing facilitated 
the storing of information, cumulative knowledge promoted new genre 
of cultural and artistic expression and aided ordering of information 
under numeric and alphabetic heads and the use of maps (Goody 
2001: 144). 
There is a marked difference in the distribution pattern of inscriptions 
in stone in peninsular India as compared to those on pottery and seals. 
The earliest are the rock edicts in Prakrit of the Mauryan ruler Aśoka, 
which are unique in the history of South Asia and are not replicated by 
subsequent kings. These are perhaps the only records where the king 
speaks to the populace in the first person and addresses them directly. 
The second-first century BCE period in India marked a shift in the 
relationship between the king, religious centres and the groups that 
patronised these as indicated by the placement and contents of the 
inscriptions. An analysis of the epigraphs shows a shift from local and 
individual entrepreneurs to kin-based trading groups using a common 
language and with more than casual links with religious institutions. 
Epigraphs were now located within Buddhist monastic establishments 
rather than in their vicinity. Instead of providing communication 
between the king and the populace, the inscriptions record donations to 
religious centres made by diverse groups and suggest the beginnings of 
religious travel to sacred centres.
From the fourth century CE onwards, inscriptions were increasingly 
inscribed on copper plates indicating both a change in the nature of 
recording, affiliation to religious institutions and transformation in 
the social base. At the same time these inscriptions reflect political 
consolidation and increasing complexity of the administrative structure 
as compared to those of the earlier period. For example, the Vilavetti 
copper plates of the fifth century Pallava King Siṁhavarman refer to 
taxes payable by metal-workers, leather-workers, weavers, shop keepers, 
artisans, water-diviners and so on, though the specific amounts are not 
mentioned (Mahalingam 1988: nos. 15, 78-81). This is further matched 
by an enlargement in the number of terms used for habitation types 
indicating increasing hierarchy in settlement pattern.
There was a corresponding increase in the resource base as evident 
from grants of land and villages to Brahmanical temples and Buddhist 
monastic establishments and elaboration, as also expansion in the 
social base of the temple, coinciding with marked transformations in 
the nature of the Buddhist monastic establishments. Modifications in 
ritual and ceremony meant alterations in consumption patterns and 
changing patterns of trade. Another change was in the use of language, 
such as Sanskrit mixed with Prakrit from the third and fourth centuries 
CE onwards. 
As in South Asia, in Southeast Asia also early inscriptions are often 
associated with religious structures. In maritime Southeast Asia, the 
earliest inscriptions are in Sanskrit, inscribed on seven stone pillars 
located in the Kutei region of East Kalimantan on the east coast of 
Borneo, traditionally dated to the fifth century CE on palaeographical 
ground. These record the performance of a sacrifice by King 
Mūlavarman at the sacred place of Vaprakeśvara and the setting up of 
the sacrificial post by the Brahmins. A large number of donations were 
made on this occasion. The correspondence between these inscriptions 
and those from India is striking and it is evident that a conventional 
pattern seems to have been followed.
There was also a clear shift in maritime networks around the middle 
of the first millennium CE and pilgrims visiting sites associated with 
the life of the Buddha formed a major category of travellers, as also 
the setting up of religious shrines on successful completion of sea 
voyages. A cluster of fifth-seventh century inscriptions of unequivocal 
Buddhist affiliation was found in Kedah on the west coast of the Malay 
Peninsula. This includes engraving of a Buddhist formula on stone – 
a feature that does not occur among contemporary records from the 
Indian subcontinent, though the formula is found on terracotta sealings. 
Three of these inscriptions are made of local stone and bear similar 
illustrations of Buddhist stūpas. Texts very similar to these inscriptions 
have been found on the island of Borneo and on the coast of Brunei 
(Wisseman Christie 1995: 256). The most interesting of these inscriptions 
in Sanskrit is that of Buddhagupta, which refers to the setting up of 
the stone by the mariner Buddhagupta, resident of Raktamṛttika, often 
identified with Rājbādīdāngā in Bengal, on the successful completion 
of his voyage (Chhabra 1965: 20-26).
Conclusion
From what precedes, certain conclusions may be drawn. First, 
information on seafaring communities from historical and archaeological 
sources indicates that their make-up cut across religious lines. Hence 
attempts at categorising them within present national boundaries may 
be in keeping with current aspirations, but has little support historically. 
Second, while trade provided an important motive for sea-travel, it was 
by no means the only reason for travel by sea and needs to be studied 
within a wider perspective of seafaring activity and maritime networks. 
Third, the role of religions, such as Buddhism or Brahmanism, in 
motivating and supporting seafaring activity needs to be recognised and 
accepted. Finally, for an appreciation of cultural interchanges across 
the Bay of Bengal, it is crucial to highlight the diverse channels of 
communication, which also included oral transmission by priests and 
pilgrims, traders, wandering story tellers and entertainers. It is only then 
that a holistic understanding of cultural interaction across the maritime 
world will emerge. 
Moreover, archaeological research during the last few decades has 
deepened the past of Thailand and challenged the notion of a unified 
superimposed “Dvāravatī kingdom.” In the 1980s, a careful study of 
aerial photographs of the central plain of Thailand produced an atlas 
of sixty-three moated settlements (Phongsi & Thiwa 2524) that have 
been generally identified as remnants of this “Dvāravatī kingdom,” on 
the shores of the former extent of the Bay of Bangkok. During the first 
millennium CE, it has been suggested that the sea level was appreciably 
higher and the shallow bay extended inland many more kilometres

--- PAGE 77 ---
HimanSHu PraBHa ray
151
150
References
Bellina-Pryce, Bérénice &  
Praon Silapanth 
2008  Weaving Cultural Identities  
on Trans-asiatic Networks: Upper  
Thai-Malay Peninsula – An Early  
Socio-political Landscape. Bulletin  
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 93 
[for 2006]: 257-293.
Bronkhorst, Johannes 
2011  Buddhism in the Shadow of 
Brahmanism. Leiden: Brill. 
Brown, Robert L.  
1996  The Dvāravatī Wheels of the Law 
and the Indianization of South East Asia. 
Leiden: Brill. 
Chattopadhyaya, Brajadulal 
1994  The Making of Early  
Medieval India. New Delhi:  
Oxford University Press.
Chhabra, Bahadur Ch.  
1965  Expansion of the Indo-Aryan 
Culture during Pallava Rule. Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal.
Cœdès, George  
1961  Recueil des inscriptions du Siam. 
Pt. II. Inscriptions de Dvāravati, de 
Çrīvijaya et Lăvo. Bangkok: Fine 
Arts Department. [Second Revised 
Edition; First Edition 1924. In Thai 
and French]
Coningham, Robin A.E. & 
Allchin, F.R. 
1995  The Rise of Cities in Sri 
Lanka. In Allchin, Frank R. (ed.), The 
Archaeology of Early Historic South Asia. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 152-184.
Coningham, Robin A.E. et al. (ed.)  
1996  Passage to India? 
Anuradhapura and the Early Use 
of the Brahmi Script. Cambridge 
Archaeological Journal 6(1): 73-97.
Desai, Devangana  
1989-90  Presidential Address, 
Section I. In Proceedings of the 
Indian History Congress, 50th 
session. Gorakhpur: University of 
Gorakhpur, pp. 21-56.
Dhida Saraya 
1999  (Sri) Dvaravati: The Initial Phase 
of Siam’s History. Bangkok: Muang 
Boran Publishing House. 
Gethin, Rupert M.L. 
2012  Was Buddhaghosa a 
Theravādin? Buddhist Identity 
in the Pali Commentaries and 
Chronicles. In Skilling, Peter et al. 
(eds), How Theravāda is Theravāda: 
Exploring Buddhist identities. Chiang 
Mai: Silkworm Books, pp. 1-63.
Goody, Jack 
2001  The Power of the Written Tradition. 
Washington-London: Smithsonian 
Institution Press.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel 
2002  The Malay Peninsula:  
Crossroads of the Maritime Silk Road  
(100 BC – 1300 AD). Leiden: Brill. 
Karashima, Noboru 
2002  Tamil Inscriptions in Southeast 
Asia and China. In Karashima, 
Noboru (ed.), Ancient and Medieval 
Commercial Activities in the Indian Ocean: 
Testimony of Inscriptions and Ceramic 
Sherds. Tokyo: Taisho University,  
pp. 10-18.
Krishna Sastri et al. (ed.) 
1992  Thotlakonda. Hyderabad: 
Government of Andhra Pradesh.
than at present, possibly creating an irregular shoreline with numerous 
peninsulas. Particularly relevant to this section is the Chao Phraya valley, 
the large fertile lowland suitable for rice cultivation and accessible to 
maritime travel through the Gulf of Thailand (Trongjai, this volume). 
While Buddhism provided a common faith to the several contemporary 
centres and the diverse and heterogeneous communities inhabiting the 
region during the first millennium CE, it is also significant that as in 
India, Buddhist centres co-existed with Brahmanical shrines. 
Acknowledgements
A Research Award by POSCO Asia Forum of POSCO TJ Park 
Foundation in 2009-10 made travel to Thailand possible and I am 
grateful to the Foundation for its support. I would also like to thank 
Nicolas Revire and Stephen Murphy for inviting me to contribute to the 
volume and for the hard work that they have put in.  
Endnote
1 
Mahadevan’s study (1996a) has not taken the 
Anurādhapura material into account, but is based 
on nine sherds from coastal centres in India dated 
between second century BCE and the first century 
CE. Other sites in Tamil Nadu include Arikamedu 
(two sherds) and Alagankulam (two sherds).
Lyons, Elizabeth 
1979  Dvaravati: A Consideration of 
its Formative Period. In Smith, Ralph 
B. & Watson, William (ed.), Early 
South East Asia. New York: Oxford 
University Press, pp. 352-359. 
Mahadevan, Iravatham 
1996a  Old Sinhalese Inscriptions 
from Indian Ports: New Evidence for 
Ancient India-Sri Lanka Contacts. 
Journal of the Institute of Asian Studies 
14(1): 55-67.
1996b  Pottery Inscriptions in Brahmi 
and Tamil-Brahmi. In Begley V. et 
al. (ed.), The Ancient Port of Arikamedu: 
New Excavations and Researches 1989-
1992. Pondicherry: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient, pp. 287-315.
Mahalingam, Tēraḷundūr 
Veṅkaṭarāma 
1988  Inscriptions of the Pallavas. New 
Delhi: Indian Council for Historical 
Research and Agam Kala Prakashan.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves 
2004, The Archaeology of Early 
Maritime Polities of Southeast Asia. 
In Glover, Ian & Bellwood, Peter 
(eds), Southeast Asia: From Prehistory 
to History. London and New York: 
Routledge Curzon, pp. 282-313.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves, Mani,  
A. & Wade, Geoff 
2011  Early Interactions between South 
and Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-
cultural Exchange. Singapore: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Mukherjee, Bratindra N.  
1990  Kharoshti and Kharoshti-
Brahmi Inscriptions in West Bengal 
(India). Indian Museum Bulletin 25. 
[Special Issue]
Murphy, Stephen A. 
2010  The Buddhist Boundary Markers 
of Northeast Thailand and Central 
Laos, 7th-12th Centuries CE: Towards 
an Understanding of the Archaeological, 
Religious and Artistic Landscapes of The 
Khorat Plateau. Doctoral Dissertation. 
London: School of Oriental and 
African Studies, University of 
London. [Unpublished]
Nandi, Ramendra Nath  
1986  Social Roots of Religion in  
Ancient India. Calcutta: K.P. Bagchi.
o’Connor, Stanley J. 
1972  Hindu Gods of Peninsular 
Siam. Ascona: Artibus Asiae 
Supplementum. 
Phongsi Wanasin &  
Thiwa Suphachanya 
2524  Mueang boran boriwen chai fang 
thale doem khong thi rap phak klang 
prathet thai: kansueksa tamnaeng thi tang 
lae phumisat samphan (Ancient Cities on 
the Former Coastline in the Central Plain 
of Thailand: The Study of Sites and 
Geographical Correlation). Bangkok: 
Chulalongkorn University Press.  
[In Thai; 1981 CE]  
Prapod Assavavirulhakarn 
2010  The Ascendancy of Theravāda 
Buddhism in Southeast Asia.  
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Rajan, Karai 
1996  Kodumanal Excavations – A 
Report. In Ramesh, K.V. et al. (ed.), 
Gauravam: Recent Researches in Indology. 
New Delhi: Harman Publishing 
Company, pp. 72-86. 
Ray, Himanshu Prabha 
1987  Inscribed Potsherds: A Study. 
Indica 24(1): 1-14.
2000  The Winds of Change: Buddhism 
and the Maritime Links of Early South 
Asia. New Delhi: Oxford University 
Press. [Reprint; First Edition 1994]
2004  The Apsidal Shrine in Early 
Hinduism: Origins, Cultic Affiliation, 
Patronage. World Archaeology 36(3): 
343-359.
2008  Archaeology and Empire: 
Buddhist Monuments in Monsoon 
Asia. The Indian Economic and Social 
History Review 45(3): 417-449.
Revire, Nicolas 
2012  A Comprehensive Study of 
Bhadrāsana Buddha Images from 
First-Millennium Thailand.  
Rian Thai: International Journal of  
Thai Studies 5: 91-152.
Rupavataram, Anita 
2003  An Archaeological Study of  
the Temple in the Eastern Deccan:  
2nd century BC to 8th century AD. M. 
Phil.Thesis. New Delhi: Jawaharlal 
Nehru University. [Unpublished]
Sarkar, Haribishnu &  
Misra, Bhaskar N.  
1999  Nagarjunakonda. New Delhi: 
Archaeological Survey of India. 
Seshadri Sastri, P. 
1984  Dharanikota Dharmachakra 
Pillar Inscription. Epigraphia Indica 
24: 256-260. [Reprint; First Edition 
1937-38].
Sircar, Dines C.  
1960-61 Nagarjunakonda Inscription 
of the Time of Abhira Vasushena, 
Year 30. Epigraphia Indica 34: 197-204.
1975  Inscriptions of Asoka.  
New Delhi: Government of India.  
[Third Edition; First Edition 1957]
Sircar, Dines C. &  
Krishnan, K.G.  
1960-61 Two Inscriptions from 
Nagarjunakonda. Epigraphia Indica 
34: 17-20.
Skilling, Peter 
2003  Dvāravatī: Recent Revelations 
and Research. In Baker, Chris (ed.), 
Dedications to HRH Princess Galyani 
Vadhana Krom Luang Naradhiwas 
Rajanagarindra. Bangkok: The Siam 
Society, pp. 87-112. 
2007  King, Saṅgha and Brahmans: 
Ideology, Ritual and Power in  
Pre-modern Siam. In Ian Harris 
(ed.), Buddhism, Power and Political 
Order. London-New York: Routledge, 
pp. 182-215.
Soundararajan, K.V.  
2006  Nagarjunakonda 1954-1960. 
Memoirs of the Archaeological 
Survey of India, no. 75. New Delhi: 
Archaeological Survey of India.
Subrahmanyam, Rayaprolu 
1964  Salihundam, a Buddhist Site 
in Andhra Pradesh. Hyderabad: 
Government of Andhra Pradesh.
Thapar, Romila 
2000  Cultural Pasts: Essays in  
Early Indian History. New Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.
Thaplyal, Kiran Kumar 
1972  Studies in Ancient Indian Seals. 
Lucknow: Akhila Bharatiya Sanskrit 
Parishad.
Weishaar, Hans J. et al. (ed.) 
2001  Ancient Ruhuna: Sri Lankan-
German Archaeological Project in the 
Southern Province. Mainz am Rhein: 
Verlag Philipp von Zabern.
Wisseman Christie, Jan  
1995  State Formation in Early 
Maritime Southeast Asia: A 
Consideration of the Theories and 
the Data. Bijdragen tot de Taal-,  
Land- en Volkenkunde 151(2): 235-288.

--- PAGE 78 ---
153
152
Introduction
T
he dating of what are probably the earliest Brahmanical sculptures 
from Thailand, and indeed from all of Southeast Asia, has come 
under renewed scrutiny in recent years. The well-known Viṣṇu (or 
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa) image [Figures 1-2], from Chaiya, Surat Thani 
province in peninsular Thailand, has attracted considerable attention, 
but there is little consensus among scholars regarding its date or 
immediate stylistic precedents. 
Since the groundbreaking work of Stanley O’Connor (1972: 39), 
many scholars have followed his fourth century attribution for the 
date of the Chaiya image, or his terminus ante quem of circa 400 CE.1 
Others have accepted O’Connor’s argument (1965: 49-57) that the 
Chaiya image may be the earliest Brahmanical sculpture in Southeast 
Asia, but have advocated various dates ranging through the fifth-
sixth centuries CE.2 The proponents of O’Connor’s fourth century 
date have demonstrated a somewhat blinkered tendency to ignore 
without comment the arguments that favour a later date, and this in 
spite of considerable evidence that a fifth or early sixth century date 
is justified. At the other end of the spectrum, the recent suggestion of 
a date in the second quarter of the sixth century strains the evidence, 
attempts unsupportable specificity construed through debatable stylistic 
comparisons, and perhaps pushes the date rather too late (Havenon 
2006-07: 86-90). 
By comparison to the lengthy and unresolved discussion 
surrounding the Chaiya image, there has been almost no analysis of two 
closely related and long-known Viṣṇu sculptures, both from Nakhon 
Si Thammarat province, Thailand [Figures 3-4, 7-8]. To these may 
be added a third conch-on-hip Viṣṇu from the same province (Preecha 
& Wannasarn 2546: 90-107; Wannasarn 2013: 76-78) [Figures 5-6]. 
Discovered in 2000, it provides important new and corroborating 
evidence for the arguments that will be advanced here.
This essay examines these four sculptures, and offers a reassessment 
of the issues and arguments surrounding their dates and stylistic 
relationships.3 It then seeks to determine a relative chronological 
sequence for their development, an endeavour that has not been 
previously undertaken. While scholars have long observed that the 
Chaiya image exhibits stylistic features that closely relate it to sculpture 
from India, the same cannot be said for the three Nakhon Si Thammarat 
Viṣṇus, which do not have close South Asian counterparts. Thus, this 
essay utilises comparisons with Indian sculpture to reaffirm a late fifth or 
early sixth century date (ca 500 CE) for the Chaiya image, but does not 
Conch-on-hip Images in Peninsular 
Thailand and Early Vaiṣṇava Sculpture  
in Southeast Asia
Paul a. lavy
Far left Figure 1: Vāsudeva-
Kṛṣṇa, found at Wat Sala Thueng, 
Chaiya district, Surat Thani 
province, Thailand, ca 500 CE, 
sandstone (?), H. 67 cm., Bangkok 
National Museum [Photograph 
courtesy of Paisarn Piemmettawat].
Left Figure 2: Profile of 
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, found at  
Wat Sala Thueng, Chaiya district, 
Surat Thani province, Thailand 
[Photograph courtesy of Artibus 
Asiae, after O’Connor 1972:  
fig. 1b].

--- PAGE 79 ---
Paul a. lavy
155
154
depend on South Asian evidence to chart the subsequent development 
of the Nakhon Si Thammarat Viṣṇus.4 Instead, following the advice of 
Robert Brown (2000: 2) to focus on the “evidence within the Southeast 
Asian corpus itself,” it turns attention to their relationships with other 
Southeast Asian sculpture and to comparative analysis among the four 
images themselves.
The Conch-on-hip Image Type
The conch-on-hip iconographic type that is the focus of this essay is 
represented in Southeast Asia by at least seven, and possibly twelve, 
sculptures: (1-4) the four images from peninsular Thailand that are 
discussed here [Figures 1-8]; (5) the Viṣṇu from Tuol Koh in Ta Keo 
province, Cambodia, now in the National Museum, Phnom Penh 
(Dalsheimer & Manguin 1998: 91-93, fig. 1; Lavy 2004: 245-249); 
(6) a Viṣṇu reportedly from the site of Oc Eo in An Giang province, 
Vietnam, and now in the Museum of Vietnamese History, Ho Chi 
Minh City (Malleret 1959: 393-395, pl. LXXXII; Lavy 2004: 275-278); 
and (7) a Viṣṇu image from Wat Krapau Brik in the village of Vong The 
near Ba The, also in An Giang province, and also now in the Museum 
of Vietnamese History (Malleret 1959: 395-396, pl. LXXXIIIa-b; Lavy 
2004: 278-279, 343-344).
There are at least five additional candidates, but in each case it is 
difficult to determine with any degree of certainty whether a conch 
was originally present or placed against the hip. Two high-relief stone 
Viṣṇus from Suphan Buri province, Thailand – one in U Thong district 
and the other at the city pillar shrine in the municipal district of 
Suphan Buri – may have been conch-on-hip images, but they are today 
obscured beneath heavy layers of gold foil (Wannasarn 2013: 86-88, figs 
2.14 and 2.16). Another stone relief sculpture, stylistically related to the 
Suphan Buri images and also presently encrusted in gold leaf, is housed 
at San Phra Kan in Lop Buri, Thailand (Dhida 2545: 127). A fourth 
possibility is a small and badly damaged sculpture from Nhon Nghia 
near Can Tho, Vietnam, now in the Can Tho Museum (Lê 2006: 64, 
77, 198, figs 44-45, 81b). The fifth is an image from Trapeang Veng, 
Tra Vinh province, Vietnam, known to the present author only through 
a drawing (Malleret1963: 17-19, fig. 3). In total, these twelve images 
probably range in date from circa 500 CE (the Chaiya image) to perhaps 
as late as the early seventh century (the Ba The, U Thong, and Lop 
Buri images).
Although these twelve images vary in terms of style, state of 
preservation, and in aspects of their iconography, they belong to a large 
family of early Vaiṣṇava images from Southeast Asia characterised by 
four arms (caturbhuja), a bare torso, a mitred headpiece, and a long robe 
worn around the hips. The primary iconographic trait that distinguishes 
these sculptures from other “Viṣṇu” images is the conch shell (śaṅkha) 
held akimbo by the anterior (or “natural”) proper left hand against the 
proper left hip.5 
Characterised by a heavy round body and pronounced whorls at 
the apex, these śaṅkhas are usually identified as Turbinella pyrum, a species 
of gastropod that inhabits the Bay of Bengal, the coast of southern 
India, and the waters around Sri Lanka. Known more commonly as 
the “Indian Chank,” these shells have a long history of ritual use and 
cultural significance throughout much of India (Hornell 1915). As 
ritual implements for libations, lustrations, or producing sound, they are 
notable in Southeast Asia particularly in the art of eleventh-thirteenth 
century Angkor (Krisda 2010: 156-157). This is a period from which 
numerous ritual conches survive in bronze, stoneware, and, more rarely, 
natural shell with bronze mounts (Boisselier 1966: 333-334; Jessup & 
Zéphir 1997: 322, cat. no. 105; Soutif 2008; Rooney 2010: cat. nos. 
20, 21, 47, 135, 136). As an aquatic symbol associated with creation 
and an emblem of a warrior (i.e. a war-trumpet), the conch has been 
a perennial element of Vaiṣṇava iconography from nearly its inception 
(Krishna 1980: 30-40; Taddei 1991: 647-655; Srinivasan 1997: 185, 
216-217).
Vaiṣṇava images of the conch-on-hip type seem to have first 
appeared in the Kuṣāṇa art of Mathurā (second-third century CE) 
[Figures 9-10], remained relatively common through the Gupta 
period (fourth to mid-sixth century CE) [Figures 11-14], and occurred 
sporadically in Indian art thereafter. By the fifth century, however, the 
conch was increasingly, but to varying degrees, detached from the hip 
(Bautze-Picron 1985: 442) [Figures 13-14].6 In Southeast Asia, conch-
on-hip images appear – according to current evidence and confirmed 
through stylistic analysis – to have been exclusively early in date, 
i.e., confined to the sixth and perhaps early seventh centuries CE. During 
the late sixth and early seventh centuries, the conch-on-hip iconography 
was replaced by, or evolved into, a new iconographical type that was 
probably a Southeast Asian innovation (Brown 2000: 10). The conch 
was no longer placed on the left hip, but was instead elevated in the 
raised left hand. Thus, the new arrangement of the attributes became, 
clockwise from the lower proper right hand, the orb, discus or wheel 
(cakra), conch (śaṅkha), and mace or club (gadā).7 This new iconography 
occurred not only in peninsular Thailand, but also in eastern Thailand, 
Cambodia, southern Vietnam, and, to a more limited degree, in Java and 
Myanmar (Lavy 2004: 303-304, n. 5). It was particularly popular in the 
Khmer artistic tradition where its continuity is indicated by numerous 
sculptures dating from the pre-Angkorian period through the sixteenth 
century (e.g. Jessup & Zéphir 1997: cat. nos. 31, 34, 69, 108, 115) and 
Right Figure 6: Back of Viṣṇu, 
from Wat Ta Nen site, Tha Sala 
district, Nakhon Si Thammarat 
province, Thailand [Photograph 
courtesy of Wannasarn Noonsuk].
Left Figure 5: Viṣṇu, from  
Wat Ta Nen site, Tha Sala district, 
Nakhon Si Thammarat province, 
Thailand, ca early to mid-6th cent. 
CE, grayish white sandstone (?),  
H. 49 cm., currently at  
Wat Sai Kham, Tha Sala district, 
Nakhon Si Thammarat province, 
Thailand [Photograph courtesy  
of Wannasarn Noonsuk].
Figure 4: Back of Viṣṇu, found 
at Wat Phra Phreng, Phra Phrom 
district, Nakhon Si Thammarat 
province, Thailand [Photograph by 
Paul Lavy].
Figure 3: Viṣṇu, found at Wat 
Phra Phreng, Phra Phrom district, 
Nakhon Si Thammarat province, 
Thailand, ca early 6th cent. CE, 
sandstone (?), H. 65 cm., Wat Phra 
Mahathat Museum, Nakhon Si 
Thammarat [Photograph courtesy of 
Paisarn Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 80 ---
Paul a. lavy
157
156
by the late twelfth or early thirteenth century relief sculptures from the 
Bayon that depict standing four-armed Viṣṇu statues in worship and 
holding the same four attributes in the same configuration (e.g. Jessup & 
Zéphir 1997: 137, fig. 4).
Conch-on-hip Images from  
Peninsular Thailand
First published in 1928 and housed today in the Bangkok National 
Museum, the “Chaiya Viṣṇu” [Figures 1-2] was discovered at Wat 
Sala Thueng in the Chaiya district of Surat Thani province (Cœdès 
1928: 25, pl. X, centre). Prior to O’Connor’s studies, scholars tended 
to characterise it and other comparable images, as rustic, mediocre, 
degraded, aberrant, and archaistic works of relatively late date, i.e., the 
seventh-eighth centuries CE (Boisselier 1959b).8 This date was refuted 
by O’Connor (1972: 39), who used Indian evidence to advocate a date 
“at least three centuries” earlier for the Chaiya image.
O’Connor (1972: 25-26) also drew attention to two four-armed Viṣṇu 
sculptures, also from peninsular Thailand, that are closely related to the 
Chaiya image in both iconography and style. Although noted in earlier 
scholarship, neither of these images had previously been the subject of 
serious discussion.9 Both were discovered south of Chaiya in what is 
today Nakhon Si Thammarat province. One of them, displayed today 
at the Wat Phra Mahathat Museum in Nakhon Si Thammarat, was 
found at Wat Phra Phreng in Na San sub-district, Phra Phrom district 
[Figures 3-4].10 The other was found at Ho Phra Narai (“Narayana, or 
Viṣṇu, Shrine”) in the municipal (Mueang) district and is now housed in 
the Nakhon Si Thammarat National Museum [Figures 7-8]. A third 
conch-on-hip Viṣṇu sculpture from Nakhon Si Thammarat province 
was recently discovered at the site of Wat Ta Nen in Pho Thong sub-
district, Tha Sala district, and is currently held nearby at Wat Sai Kham 
in Don Tako sub-district (Wannasarn 2013: 76) [Figures 5-6].   
These four conch-on-hip images [Figures 1-8] share numerous 
stylistic features that, occurring altogether, unite them as a group and 
indicate an early date in the development of Southeast Asian stone 
sculpture.11 These include what O’Connor (1972: 25-26) characterised 
as a “flat, two-dimensional presentation” and a “harsh angular rhythm 
of the contours.” They all exhibit a strict frontality, nude torso, and 
similar calf-length garment with a long vertical fold between the legs. 
All four have a system of two sashes with one wrapped around the waist 
and the other falling in an arc across both thighs. Except for the less 
well-preserved Wat Ta Nen image, the tension of the fabric, wrapped 
tightly around the waist, is indicated by a series of narrow parallel folds 
or creases along the legs. The head of the Wat Ta Nen image has not 
been found, but the other three sculptures have somewhat similar high 
narrow mitres and long, heavy earrings that fall from the earlobes to the 
shoulders.
The Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa from Chaiya
In order to “resolve” the chronological problems posed by the conch 
on-hip images from peninsular Thailand, O’Connor (1972: 32-40) 
turned to the art historical evidence from India and attempted to locate 
Indian prototypes for the Southeast Asian images. He traced their 
lineage ultimately to several Kuṣāṇa-period sculptures from Mathurā 
that share similar iconographic features with the Chaiya image, 
including the anterior proper right hand raised with the palm outward 
Below left Figure 9: Vāsudeva-
Kṛṣṇa, Mathurā, Mathurā district, 
Uttar Pradesh, India, Kuṣāṇa 
period, ca 2nd-3rd cent. CE,  
red sandstone, H. 33 cm.,  
Mathurā Museum, inv. no. MM 
34.2487 [Photograph courtesy of  
the American Institute of Indian 
Studies, acc. no. 54513, negative  
no. 365.65].
Below right Figure 10: 
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, found in a well  
at Baghichal Birhal, Īśapur, 
Mathurā district, Uttar Pradesh, 
India, Kuṣāṇa period, ca  
2nd-3rd cent. CE, red sandstone,  
H. 22 cm., Mathurā Museum,  
inv. no. MM 15.956 [Photograph 
courtesy of the American Institute 
of Indian Studies, acc. no. 469, 
negative no. 20.26].
Left Figure 7: Viṣṇu, found at 
Ho Phra Narai, Mueang Nakhon 
Si Thammarat district, Nakhon Si 
Thammarat province, Thailand, 
ca early to mid-6th cent. CE, 
sandstone (?), H. 78 cm., Nakhon 
Si Thammarat National Museum, 
inv. no. 16/2515 [Photograph by 
Paul Lavy].
Right Figure 8: Back of Viṣṇu, 
found at Ho Phra Narai, Mueang 
Nakhon Si Thammarat district, 
Nakhon Si Thammarat province, 
Thailand [Photograph by Paul 
Lavy].

--- PAGE 81 ---
Paul a. lavy
159
158
in either the gesture of abhayamudrā or vyāvṛttamudrā, the mace held in the 
posterior right hand, and the conch held against the hip by the anterior 
left hand (O’Connor 1972: 33-34; Schmid 2010: 205-235, 534-549, 
figs 24-38) [Figures 9-10]. Like these Kuṣāṇa examples, the Chaiya 
image [Figure 1] would in all likelihood have held a cakra in its now 
lost posterior left hand.
More recent scholarship has convincingly demonstrated that this 
iconography belongs specifically to an early form of Viṣṇu known 
as Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, one of the five Vṛṣṇi Vīras (heroes) who were 
apotheosised probably no later than the early second century BCE. 
They became the focus of an ancestor cult that was centred at-, and 
disseminated from-, Mathurā during late centuries BCE and early 
centuries CE, particularly during the Kuṣāṇa period (Härtel 1987: 
573-587; Srinivasan 1997: 211-220, 240-259; Schmid 2010: 121-171). 
By the late second or early first century BCE, Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa seems 
to have emerged as the most important of the deified Vṛṣṇi heroes 
and the dominant deity of Bhāgavatism while the importance of the 
others gradually diminished (Jaiswal 1981: 62-92). These developments 
were associated with the crystallisation of Vaiṣṇavism, which chiefly 
occurred at Mathurā during the Kuṣāṇa period through the merging of 
previously distinct traditions oriented around (1) the Viṣṇu of the Vedas, 
(2) Nārāyaṇa of the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas, and (3) Bhāgavata 
Vāsudeva (Srinivasan 1997: 257-258; Schmid 2010: 363-385). The 
Viṣṇu of the Vedas was a relatively minor divinity, and the god named 
Viṣṇu does not appear in Indian epigraphy until the Gupta period 
(Härtel 1987: 586). The Hindu deity properly called “Viṣṇu” probably 
first appeared in art during the transitional period from the late Kuṣāṇa 
to the early Gupta period, and thus “so-called Kuṣāṇa Viṣṇu” images 
[Figures 9-10] should be recognised as representations of Vāsudeva-
Kṛṣṇa (Härtel 1987: 585-587). 
Robert Brown (2000: 2-6), following some of the aforementioned 
scholars, has argued that the Chaiya image should be identified not as 
Viṣṇu but rather as Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, and it is this identification that 
is adopted here. Contra Brown, it has been suggested that the term 
Viṣṇu “probably supplanted Vāsudeva by the date” of the Chaiya 
image (Havenon 2006-07: 95-96, n. 19), but it is by no means clear 
that such a transformation was uniformly complete throughout all 
of South and Southeast Asia. With variable iconography (i.e., the 
configuration of the attributes in the four hands), Vāsudeva consistently 
appears as one of the twenty-four forms of Viṣṇu caturviṃśatimūrti (or 
caturviṃśatimūrtayaḥ) enumerated in Indian iconographical texts from 
the Agnipurāṇa, probably the earliest extant description of these forms, 
through their systematisation in circa the ninth century and onwards 
(Bidyabinod 1920; Mallmann 1963: 3-6; Krishna 1980: 86-87).12 In 
Cambodia, there are several pre-Angkorian inscriptions that refer to 
a deity, or deities, named Śrī Kapilavāsudeva (K. 151 and K. 563) and 
Vāsudeva (bhagavate vāsudevāya, K. 134/dated 781 CE) (Cœdès 1942: 
92-94, 198 and 1943-1946: 5-7). Dating from circa the mid-seventh 
to the late eighth century, these inscriptions provide testimony to the 
continued use of the name Vāsudeva, though it cannot be precisely 
determined to what divinity or iconography the name referred.
In addition to iconography, O’Connor (1972: 33) also emphasised 
stylistic similarities between Mathurā sculpture and the Chaiya 
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, such as the carving of the posterior right hand 
against the mace, the banded decoration of the mace, and the 
arrangement of the jewellery. There are, however, significant stylistic 
differences between them. Most notably, the Mathurā images of 
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, whether carved in high-relief or in-the-round, tend 
to have a more fully modeled and robust figure, they lack the looping 
sash, and many of them wear a turban. When trapezoidal or cylindrical 
crowns or mitres do appear in Mathurā art, in what is perhaps a slightly 
later development, they often have prominent rims around the edges 
or vertical flanges on both sides and, in the cases where decoration is 
preserved, lack the foliate pattern of the Chaiya image [Figure 10]. 
Cylindrical mitres without flanges appear circa fourth century CE 
during the transitional period from late-, or post-, Kuṣāṇa to early 
Gupta [Figures 12-13].
Casting more widely for potential comparisons to the Chaiya 
image, O’Connor first turned to a Viṣṇu (or Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa) sculpture 
from Bhinmāl (Rajasthan), then believed to date to circa 400 CE (Shah 
1955-56: 52-54) but now accepted by most art historians as a later 
image [Figure 18]. He noted that the two sculptures not only exhibit 
comparable iconography, but that they seem to emerge from the same 
“stylistic current” (O’Connor 1972: 35, fig. 11). His discussion moved 
next to two sculptures from Andhra Pradesh, both of which he identified 
as “Viṣṇu” (O’Connor 1972: 37-38): a now headless Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa 
sculpture from Yeleśwaram [Figure 15] and a relief from Koṇḍamoṭu 
[Figure 16] that depicts Nārasiṃha and the Vṛṣṇi Vīras, including 
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa. These images were then understood to date to the 
fourth-fifth and third-fourth centuries respectively (Khan 1963: 14 
and 1964: 1-4). The early fourth century, however, may be the latest 
reasonable date for both (Havenon 2006-07: 88, 97, n. 44). They both 
have only two arms, but, like the Chaiya image, they hold a conch 
against the left hip, wear a garment that includes the low-arcing sash, 
and are adorned with heavy earrings that drape onto the shoulders. 
Based on these similarities, O’Connor concluded that, although the 
“ultimate prototypes” for the Chaiya image may be sought in Kuṣāṇa-
period Mathurā, “the most immediate stylistic influence seems to be 
from the fourth century art of the Andhradeśa.” Thus, he argued, it 
dates “no later” than 400 CE, and the Viṣṇus of Wat Phra Phreng 
[Figures 3-4] and Ho Phra Narai [Figures 7-8], which exhibit 
some stylistic similarities to the Chaiya image but slightly different 
iconography, should be ascribed to the fifth century (O’Connor 
1972: 39).
O’Connor’s re-dating of the Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa from the 
eighth to the fourth century won widespread acceptance and remains 
influential to this day (Piriya 2012: 100-101, fig. 1.96). It is now 
clear, however, that there are a number of significant problems with 
his arguments. First, it is unlikely that the “two-armed” Yeleśwaram 
and Koṇḍamoṭu images would have had a direct, or “immediate,” 
relationship with the “four-armed” Chaiya image (Brown 2000: 4). 
Furthermore, the kirīṭamukuṭa (crown or mitre), worn by the Vāsudeva-
Kṛṣṇa in the Koṇḍamoṭu relief does not “match,” as O’Connor (1972: 
38) vaguely stated, those worn by the three peninsular images, neither 
in its overall form nor in its decoration. In spite of the problems with 
comparing relief sculpture to free-standing sculpture (however flat and 
Figure 12: Viṣṇu, Mathurā area, 
Uttar Pradesh, India, post-Kuṣāṇa or 
early Gupta period, ca 4th cent. CE, 
pink sandstone, H. 79.4 cm., The 
Avery Brundage Collection, acc. no. 
B73S17 [Photograph courtesy of  
the Asian Art Museum, San Francisco].
Figure 13: Viṣṇu, northern central 
India, Gupta period, ca late  
4th-early 5th cent. CE, sandstone, 
H. 68.6 cm., Brooklyn Museum, 
acc. no. 81.203 [Photograph 
courtesy of the Brooklyn Museum].
Figure 11: Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, 
Devangaṛh, Nawādā district, 
Bihar, India, post-Kuṣāṇa or early 
Gupta period, ca 4th cent. CE, 
buff sandstone, H. 136 cm., Patna 
Museum, inv. no. Arch.11299 
[Photograph courtesy of the American 
Institute of Indian Studies, acc.  
no. 23959, negative no. 111.13].

--- PAGE 82 ---
Paul a. lavy
161
160
allied to relief the peninsular images may be), some observations can 
be made. 
The Koṇḍamoṭu Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa [Figure 16] appears to wear 
a cylindrical kirīṭamukuṭa belonging to a type, presumably in imitation 
of metal, which first appeared in Vaiṣṇava imagery (i.e., an image 
from Malhār, Chhattisgarh) as early as the second or first century BCE 
(Srinivasan 1997: 185, pls 14.1, 15.3). In both South and Southeast 
Asia somewhat similar mitres are associated with the deities Indra, 
Sūrya, Viṣṇu, and Harihara. Indra images often, but not invariably, 
wear such mitres in the Kuṣāṇa-period art of Mathurā and Gandhāra, 
as well as in relief images at, or from, Sāñcī, Amarāvatī, and 
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa (Coomaraswamy 1928; Pal 1979: 212-219). These 
mitres also occur on Kuṣāṇa-period images of Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa from 
Mathurā (e.g. Schmid 2010: figs 27, 29, 34-40; Härtel 1987: pl. Xa) 
and with regularity on Vaiṣṇava images from the Gupta period onward 
(e.g. Williams 1982: pls 44, 50, 125, 177, 205, 268). 
These early mitres take a variety of shapes – more or less cylindrical, 
trapezoidal, or somewhat square-shaped – and, although rare examples 
are smooth and undecorated, they are much more often adorned with a 
large central crest and/or an all-over cross-hatched pattern (Lavy 2004: 
269, n. 56), precisely the decorative approach taken on the Koṇḍamoṭu 
mitre where the central crest indicates perhaps a stylised floral motif 
or a jewel. Like many Kuṣāṇa and Gupta images, there are also two 
additional motifs above the ears (possibly flowers) and, as occasionally 
encountered in Mathurā art, a wide band across the forehead that may 
be intended to indicate a thickly-rolled strap (Pal 1979: 212, figs 4-5, 9). 
Running along each vertical side of the mitre are long projecting 
flanges, a feature that is widely attested in pre-Pallava southern Indian 
art as well as on Viṣṇu mitres of the Kuṣāṇa and Gupta periods 
(e.g. Coomaraswamy 1928: 41; Pal 1979: figs 8-9).13 
On the three peninsular sculptures with extant mitres 
[Figures 1-4 and 7-8], however, the vertical projections are absent 
and, seen in profile, it is clear that none of the mitres are cylindrical. 
Rather they are flattened rectangular or trapezoidal forms with slightly 
convex and tapering contours.14 On the Chaiya image the tapering is 
visible only in profile [Figure 2], but on the Viṣṇus of Wat Phra Phreng 
and Ho Phra Narai, both the front and side planes incline towards the 
top [Figures 3-4 and 7-8]. 
Of the three peninsular images, the mitre worn by the Ho Phra 
Narai Viṣṇu is the most similar to the one depicted in the Koṇḍamoṭu 
image. In spite of its badly worn condition, a prominent central pattern 
is evident (either floral or perhaps a “mask of glory” of the lion type; 
i.e., siṁhamukha) [Figure 7]. This need not, however, indicate a similar 
date for the Koṇḍamoṭu and Ho Phra Narai images; mitres with a 
variety of similar central crest motifs persist for centuries in the art of 
South Asia.15 In contrast to the Ho Phra Narai and Koṇḍamoṭu images, 
the entire front face of the Chaiya and Wat Phra Phreng mitres are 
decorated with foliate sprays. The condition of the Ho Phra Narai 
sculpture notwithstanding, none of the peninsular mitres are adorned 
with cross-hatching. In fact, with the exception of these three peninsular 
images and Viṣṇu no. 1 from Cibuaya (Karawang regency, West Java), 
there are few other free-standing Southeast Asian Viṣṇu images with 
decorated mitres, and those rare examples that do occur probably date 
to the eighth-ninth centuries or later.16 Most earlier 
(i.e. seventh century) Southeast Asian Viṣṇu mitres 
on free-standing images are smooth and unadorned 
save for an occasional rim around the lower edge 
or a convex protuberance on the top (Lavy 2004: 
270, n. 59).17 The lack of decoration distinguishes 
them from many seventh-eighth century Southeast 
Asian Sūrya images, such as those from Si Thep 
(Phetchabun province, Thailand), which are often 
adorned with one or more floral crests similar in 
design to the decoration on the Chaiya and Wat 
Phra Phreng mitres (e.g. Piriya 2012: fig. 1.108). It 
is, moreover, perhaps only on circa eighth century 
images of Harihara and Sūrya that the mitre is 
incised with geometric patterns (e.g. quatrefoil 
rosettes set within squares) reminiscent of early 
Indian mitres like the Koṇḍamoṭu example (Lavy 
2004: 270, n. 60). 
Rather than the Koṇḍamoṭu Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, 
a much better South Asian comparison for the 
kirīṭamukuṭas worn by the Chaiya and Wat Phra 
Phreng sculptures is to be found on what is probably 
a Viṣṇu image [Figure 17] originally from the 
Śiva temple at Bhumara (Madhya Pradesh, India), 
a temple that scholars variably date from the mid-fifth century to circa 
520-530 CE (Chandra 1970: 73-87; Woodward 1973: 211; Williams 
1982: 120). In all three cases, there is a remarkably similar low-relief 
pattern of flattened foliate forms that scroll outward from centrally 
placed and vertically arranged nodes to cover the entire front face of 
the mitre.
Indeed, rather than fourth century Andhra Pradesh, scholars 
subsequent to O’Connor have stressed stylistic relationships with the 
fifth-sixth century sculpture of northern India. For example, Hiram 
Woodward (2003: 41), while noting similarities between the earrings 
of the Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa and fourth century sculpture from 
northeastern India, has emphasised the similar treatment of the 
necklace and belt shared by the Chaiya image and early fifth century 
Gupta sculpture. Brown (1992: 46-47) observed that both the low 
looping sash and the long earrings that extend onto the shoulders are 
attested in the fifth-sixth century sculpture of western and northern 
India. In addition to re-emphasising relationships between the Chaiya 
and the Bhinmāl images [Figure 18], Brown (1992: 46, 51, n. 2) also 
compared the Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa with a Viṣṇu from Mandsaur 
(Madhya Pradesh), particularly in terms of the similar way the ears are 
pushed forward [Figure 19].  
To these northern Indian comparisons might also be added a lesser-
known conch-on-hip sculpture of Harihara, also from Mandsaur and 
today in the State Museum, Bhopal [Figure 20]. Although the sashes 
are arranged differently, the Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa and the Mandsaur 
Harihara share a similar calf-length garment with a pronounced 
median fold descending from the groin to the base between the feet. 
In both cases, incised folds radiate from this median fold to encircle 
the legs. Another feature shared by Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, the Wat 
Figure 14: Viṣṇu, Unchdih, 
Allahabad district, Uttar Pradesh, 
India, Gupta period, ca early to  
mid-5th cent. CE, buff sandstone, 
H. 80 cm., Allahabad Museum,  
inv. no. AM 857 [Photograph 
courtesy of the American Institute 
of Indian Studies, acc. no. 12028, 
negative no. 12.59].
Figure 15: Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, 
Yeleśwaram, East Godavari district, 
Andhra Pradesh, India, ca 3rd-early 
4th cent. CE, grey limestone,  
H. 61 cm., State Museum, 
Hyderabad [Photograph by M.A.W. 
Khan, courtesy of Artibus Asiae, 
after O’Connor 1972: fig. 12].

--- PAGE 83 ---
Paul a. lavy
163
162
Phra Phreng Viṣṇu, and both Mandsaur images is the appearance of 
two short tassels or loops dangling from the belt and extending over the 
proper left upper thigh.
Today few scholars accept Shah’s date of circa 400 CE for the 
Bhinmāl image, a date upon which O’Connor relied. Although the 
decoration of the Bhinmāl mitre is quite similar to a Kuṣāṇa head of 
Indra from Mathurā (Pal 1979: fig. 10), the most thorough discussions 
of the Bhinmāl and Mandsaur images suggest an early sixth century 
date, perhaps around 500 CE for the prior and 510-520 CE for the 
latter (Schastok 1985: 37-38; Williams 1982: 142-143). Thus, given the 
current state of the field, it is most likely that the Chaiya Vāsudeva-
Kṛṣṇa dates to the late fifth or early sixth century, with a reasonable 
estimate of circa 500 CE, or, i.e., over a century after O’Connor’s 
argued date.  
Michael de Havenon (2006-07: 90), following comments and 
dates offered by Sara Schastok, has recently attempted to date more 
precisely the Chaiya image to the “second quarter of the 6th century” 
by theorising what a supposed northern Indian “model” must have 
looked like. The date is not an entirely unreasonable terminus ante quem. 
However, the additional comparisons he makes to Indian images do 
not convincingly support his argument, which rests on three elements: 
the looping sash, the form of the mitre, and the jewellery (including the 
long earrings). What is questioned here is not so much the date itself, but 
rather the reasoning upon which it is based.  
First, variations of the looping sash worn in conjunction with a 
calf-length garment and long median pleat occur earlier in northern 
Indian art, for example, on a Kuṣāṇa or early Gupta-period Bodhisattva 
torso from Kumrahar (or Kumhrar, Bihar) and possibly on a circa 
fourth century triad of sculptures from Devangaṛh (Bihar), including 
a Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa [Figure 11] (Asher 1980: 11, 18-19, pls 2, 9).18 
While it may be the case that good comparisons can be made with 
the looped sash that became common in the sculpture of Gujarat (the 
Śāmalājī style) and Maharashtra dated by Schastok to circa 525-530 CE 
(1985: 50-51), the narrow, flat, and shallow sashes of the peninsular 
images are not usefully comparable to the thick, deeply-cut sash on a 
fragmentary conch-on-hip Viṣṇu torso from Elephanta that Schastok 
also, but hesitantly, dates to circa 525-530 CE (Havenon 2006-07: 90-91, 
fig. 10; Schastok 1985: 51-52; fig. 115). Nor is it reasonable to compare 
the Chaiya image to the Śāmalājī Viśvarūpa (ca 535-540 CE) based 
on the presence of a looping sash (cf. Havenon 2006-07: 90-
91, fig. 9). The overall aesthetic presentation of the crouching, 
emanatory, eight-armed cosmic form of Viṣṇu is completely 
opposed to the comparatively simple and static peninsular 
images.
Second, against the assertion by Havenon (2006-07: 
90), there is little discernible relationship between the 
mitres worn by the Chaiya image and the Śāmalājī 
Viśvarūpa. The latter is flamboyantly decorated with 
clearly and strongly delineated flower motifs, 
looping pearl swags, and a prominent flame-
shaped and foliate central motif framing a mask. 
All of this stands in dramatic contrast to the 
comparatively restrained and flattened vegetal 
patterns that appear on the Chaiya and Wat Phra 
Phreng mitres, which relate so much more straightforwardly to the 
aforementioned Bhumara image [Figure 17].19 
Third, Havenon’s suggestion (2006-07: 90) that the earrings are 
“almost the same” as figures on the Parel stele (ca 525-530) from the 
Mumbai area is unclear (Schastok 1985: figs 112-113). While the 
earrings similarly fall to the shoulders, they do not appear to take the 
same tasseled form as those of the Chaiya image. Alternately, some of 
the Parel earrings, though they are quite indistinct, may be meant to 
be crouching lions similar to those that appear on a stylistically related 
circa sixth century Śiva sculpture also from Parel (Gorakshkar 1982: 
22, figs 1-3, 5-6). More comparable tasseled earrings are to be found 
on the fourth century Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa [Figure 11] and Balarāma 
images from Devangaṛh (Brown 1992: 46-47). In short, all of the 
supposed mid-sixth century elements emphasised by Havenon occur on 
earlier Indian images. And in his quest to pinpoint a precise date and 
northern Indian model for the Chaiya image, Havenon has assumed 
that Indian art is “more securely dated and identified than it often is” 
(Brown 1992: 45).
The question of the role of southern Indian influence cannot be 
entirely dismissed. In addition to the Yeleśwaram and Koṇḍamoṭu 
images, the looping sash and shoulder-length, sometimes tasseled, 
earrings occur together on several second-third century CE sculptures 
from Andhra Pradesh (Nigam 1980: pl. VI; Prasad 1980: 39-40, pl. 7; 
Ray 1983: pl. 154; Piriya 2012: 14, fig. 4). These deeply cut figures with 
their strong hip-sway stance do not otherwise compare well with the 
flat and static peninsular sculptures. On the other hand, a third-early 
fourth century CE Skanda-Mahāsena image from Nāgārjunakoṇda 
does exhibit strong similarities in its strict frontality and narrow width, 
as well as its looping sash, prominent median fold that descends to the 
socle, and its jewelry (long earrings, necklace, bracelets and armbands) 
(Sarma 1982: 106-107, pl. 71a-b).
It is also worth noting that the peninsular sculptures do not hold 
the conch in precisely the same manner as most of the northern Indian 
images. Whereas Kuṣāṇa Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇas tend to cradle the conch 
against the hip [Figures 9-10], some northern Indian images from 
Figure 16: Nārasiṃha and the 
Vṛṣṇi Vīras including Vāsudeva-
Kṛṣṇa (second from viewer’s left), 
Koṇḍamoṭu, Guntur district,  
Andhra Pradesh, India, ca 3rd- 
early 4th cent. CE, grey limestone, 
H. 81 x W. 181 cm., State Museum, 
Hyderabad [Photograph courtesy 
of the American Institute of Indian 
Studies, acc. no. 16505, negative  
no. 166.70].
Figure 17: Candraśālā with  
Viṣṇu (?), Śiva temple, Bhumara, 
Satna district, Madhya Pradesh, 
India, late Gupta period, ca mid-
5th cent.-520/30 CE, dark pink 
sandstone, H. 37.5 x W. 45 x  
D. 9.5 cm., Allahabad Museum,  
acc. no. 153 [Photograph courtesy 
of the American Institute of Indian 
Studies, acc. no. 11032, negative  
no. 12.39].

--- PAGE 84 ---
Paul a. lavy
165
164
fourth-fifth century CE [Figures 12-14] and all of the aforementioned 
later northern and western Indian images (those from Bhinmāl, 
Mandsaur, and Elephanta) hold the conch in a very specific fashion with 
three fingers inserted into the aperture [Figures 18-20]. The thumb is 
placed on the apex of the conch and the little finger projects across the 
aperture, but is not inserted into it. In contrast, the Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa 
images from Yeleśwaram [Figure 15] and Koṇḍamoṭu [Figure 16], as 
well as all four peninsular images [Figures 1-8], maintain the position 
of the thumb but neatly tuck all four fingers into the aperture of the 
conch. This hand position also occurs, however, on some northern 
Indian images of the Gupta period [e.g. Figure 11], so this trait does 
not provide conclusive evidence of Southeast Asian artistic connections 
with southern India. 
Without therefore excluding the possibility of southern Indian 
influences, the best that can be said is that the Chaiya image most closely 
reflects northern Indian stylistic and iconographic characteristics that 
are broadly associated with the fourth-fifth centuries, but that it most 
closely relates to specific Indian images dated by style, and not by any 
chronologically fixed points, to the late fifth-early sixth centuries (images 
from Bhinmāl, Mandsaur, and Bhumara). However, even these images 
are not unequivocal models for the Chaiya image, and, regardless of 
which Indian precedents are accepted, it remains quite possible that the 
Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa represents a “parallel development” (Quaritch 
Wales 1976: 45) to these northern Indian examples rather than a direct 
descendant from them.
Peninsular Developments after  
the Chaiya Image
Like the Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, the three Nakhon Si Thammarat 
Viṣṇus [Figures 3-8] were originally four-armed figures, each today 
in various states of preservation, however their iconography differs 
slightly. All four hold the conch in the anterior (or “natural”) proper left 
hand, but only the Chaiya image retains the posterior right arm, which 
cradles a long mace (gadā) in a vertical position parallel to the body 
[Figure 2]. While both posterior arms of the Wat Phra Phreng Viṣṇu 
[Figure 4] have broken off and are presumed lost, the Wat Ta Nen 
Viṣṇu [Figures 5-6] preserves the posterior left arm and hand clutching 
the gadā (in contrast to its right-hand position on the Chaiya image). 
The presence of the arm and the gadā on the Wat Ta Nen Viṣṇu help 
to confirm what was likely to have been a similar configuration for the 
Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu [Figure 7]; on the back of the image, a section 
of its posterior left arm is visible in relief against the gadā [Figure 8]. 
The opposing posterior proper right hands of the Wat Ta Nen and 
Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇus, which are now missing, would almost certainly 
have held a cakra.20 The posterior hands of the Wat Phra Phreng Viṣṇu 
[Figure 3] may have had the same arrangement of attributes (gadā in 
the proper left and cakra in the right), but there is also the possibility 
that the configuration was reversed and followed the one presumed for 
the Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, namely with the gadā placed in the proper 
right and the cakra in the left.21 
The anterior (“natural”) and lowered proper right hand of all 
three Nakhon Si Thammarat Viṣṇus is damaged and the attribute 
missing [Figures 3, 5, 7]. Whereas the anterior right hand of the 
Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa is raised to the level of the shoulder in the 
gesture of abhayamudrā or vyāvṛttamudrā, the Wat Phra Phreng Viṣṇu 
clearly holds this hand at waist level with the palm up in the manner 
common to most of the mitred Viṣṇus of Southeast Asia. The broken 
remnants of the anterior hands on the proper right hips of the other 
two Nakhon Si Thammarat Viṣṇu images indicate a similar position. 
In all likelihood, all three images would have originally held a small 
spherical object.
The origin, identity, and development of the spherical object often 
held in Viṣṇu’s anterior right hand is one of the most poorly understood 
aspects of Vaiṣṇava iconography. By approximately the fourth century, 
northern Indian Vaiṣṇava images began to hold a round object or a 
disk that is often identified as some variety of fruit, perhaps a citron 
(Citrus medica or bījapūraka), citraphala (“bright” or “spotted fruit”), or 
wood-apple (Aegle marmelos, bael fruit, or bilva, also known as śrīphala 
or “blessed fruit”) (Chandra 1970: 72, cat. no. 120; Gail 2009: 83-84). 
Similar round, or approximately spherical, attributes occur through 
the Gupta period and into the seventh century. Some scholars have 
identified them as lotuses, lotus seeds, or lotus buds (padma or kamala) 
(e.g. Gail 2009: 83-84). It has been suggested that the lotus first appears 
in Viṣṇu’s hand during the fourth century CE but this is unproven 
(Krishna 1980: 65-66; Härtel 1987: 586).22 Indeed, the lotus does not 
seem to become an attribute of Viṣṇu until the sixth or seventh century 
(G. Bhattacharya 2007: 99-104; Gail 2009: 83-89).23
Top Figure 18: Viṣṇu 
(Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa?), Bhinmāl 
(Bhillamāla), Jālor district, 
Rajasthan, India, late Gupta period, 
ca 500 CE, blue-grey schist,  
H. 44 cm., Baroda Museum, inv. 
no. 2.676 [Photograph courtesy of 
the American Institute of Indian 
Studies, acc. no. 20203, negative no. 
184.29].
Top right Figure 19:  
Viṣṇu, discovered at base of 
Mahadeva Temple ghat, Mandsaur, 
Mandsaur district, Madhya  
Pradesh, India, late Gupta period,  
ca 510-520 CE, grey-black schist, 
H. 29 cm., Mandsaur Circuit  
House [Photograph courtesy of the  
American Institute of Indian Studies, 
acc. no. 15426, negative no. 86.76].

--- PAGE 85 ---
Paul a. lavy
167
166
In Southeast Asia, there are few free-standing stone Viṣṇu images 
that may plausibly and definitively be argued to hold a lotus.24 Viṣṇu no. 
1 from Cibuaya, West Java (Boisselier 1959b: 210), and the conch-on-
hip Viṣṇu from Oc Eo (Malleret 1959: 393-395) are perhaps candidates, 
but in neither case is this identification very convincing (Lavy 2004: 256, 
n. 19, 276-277). In virtually all other instances where this attribute 
survives intact – whether on Viṣṇus from peninsular Thailand, 
Cambodia, or southern Vietnam – it is a smooth-surfaced orb, sometimes 
slightly flattened, most likely representing the earth. That this is the case 
for Khmer art is made clear by a number of inscriptions, dating from 
the seventh through the eleventh centuries, that list Viṣṇu’s attributes 
as the discus (cakra), the conch (śaṅkha), the mace (gadā), and the earth 
(bhū, mahī, pṛthivī, or dhāraṇī) (Dupont 1955: 143-146; K. Bhattacharya 
1961: 103-105; Gail 2009: 84; Soutif 2009: 22-23).25
Without distinguishing between the Viṣṇus of Wat Phra Phreng 
[Figures 3-4] and Ho Phra Narai [Figures 7-8], O’Connor (1972: 
39) dated both of them later than the Chaiya image on the basis of 
iconographic differences (i.e., the lowering of the anterior proper right 
hand to hold what O’Connor supposed was a padma, or lotus, but which 
was more likely a sphere). He did not, however, suggest a developmental 
sequence for the Wat Phra Phreng and Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇus relative 
to one another. Similarly, other publications either do not distinguish 
between the dates of the two Viṣṇus or imply tacitly – through the 
arrangement of plates – that the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu is the earlier of 
the two (Piriya 1980: 20, 82-85; Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2002: 118-119). The 
reverse is, however, a more likely sequence. Given how little is known 
about the precise chronology of Vaiṣṇava iconographic developments, 
as well as the uncertainties that surround the chronological relationships 
between the art of South and Southeast Asia, Forrest McGill (1975: 
143) has quite rightly observed that “[…] developments in iconography 
are not by themselves sufficient” to determine the sequence of these 
images. Fortunately, stylistic features offer some clues to indicate that the 
sequence of development was from the Chaiya image [Figures 1-2] 
to the Wat Phra Phreng Viṣṇu [Figures 3-4] and finally to the Wat 
Ta Nen [Figures 5-6] and Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇus [Figures 7-8].
Of these four peninsular sculptures, the Chaiya image is the 
most closely related to Indian art and is therefore likely the earliest 
of the four. It is also the thinnest, flattest, and the back is much more 
minimally carved with just a hint of modeling along the spine and none 
of the delineation of the waist and thighs that is apparent, however 
rudimentarily, on the three Nakhon Si Thammarat Viṣṇus. The Chaiya 
and Wat Phra Phreng images do, however, share some notable features 
between them. They are virtually identical in height (67 and 65 cm. 
respectively), they exhibit remarkably similar narrow pursed lips in 
contrast to the thick lips and fuller cheeks of the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu, 
and their more pronounced male genitalia (in contrast to the Wat Ta 
Nen and Ho Phra Narai images) align them more closely with a Kuṣāṇa 
and Gupta aesthetic [Figures 9-14]. In addition, the manner in which 
the ears of the Chaiya image are pushed forward occurs to a lesser 
degree on the Wat Phra Phreng Viṣṇu and not at all on the Ho Phra 
Narai Viṣṇu. Finally, the foliate, or leaf-and-vine, decoration of the 
mitres is similar and quite distinct from the central crest adornment of 
the Ho Phra Narai mitre. 
At 78 cm. in height, the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu is the largest of these 
four peninsular sculptures. It relates differently to each of the others. 
With the Chaiya and Wat Ta Nen images, it shares the armband, 
bracelet, and necklace (perhaps similarly decorated with a central 
rosette), all of which are lacking on the Wat Phra Phreng Viṣṇu. Like 
the latter, however, the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu is adorned with heavy 
globular earrings that distend and offset the earlobes to a greater 
degree than the tasseled earrings of the Chaiya image. Compared to 
the straight-sided mitre of the Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, moreover, the 
mitres of the Wat Phra Phreng and Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇus taper slightly 
towards the top and thus, together, exhibit a trait that is relatively rare 
in Southeast Asian art.26 
The differences between the Chaiya and Wat Phra Phreng images, 
on the one hand, and the Ho Phra Narai and Wat Ta Nen Viṣṇus, 
on the other, set the two pairs of images somewhat apart. Remarkably 
similar in style to one another, the Ho Phra Narai and Wat Ta Nen 
Viṣṇus are considerably more solid and robust with wider hips and 
thighs. They also have somewhat more defined and muscular torsos 
that are emphasised by the inclusion of a sacred thread (upavīta or 
yajñopavīta) worn over the proper left shoulder and continuing down the 
back [Figures 5-8]. 
There are two distinguishing features of the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu 
that may suggest a slightly later date, but neither is conclusive. First, the 
fluted halo may be comparable to a type that first appeared in India in 
the fifth century [e.g. Figure 14] but that was not common until the 
sixth-seventh centuries (Brown 2000: 8; Harle 1987: 345). With such a 
wide range of dates, however, the motif is obviously of limited utility for 
any attempt at precise dating.  
Second, the notion of a relatively steady transition from relief 
to “ronde bosse” or sculpture-in-the-round remains one of the basic 
principles employed to understand the development of Southeast 
Asian stone sculpture (Lavy 2004: 206-250), and may correspond to 
the development of greater technical skill and thus a later date. Unlike 
the Chaiya and Wat Phra Phreng images, the vertical median fold of 
the Ho Phra Narai garment does not appear to have joined the socle. 
Furthermore, whereas the legs and garment of the Chaiya and Wat Phra 
Phreng images remain joined by reserves of stone and are essentially 
carved in relief, the lower legs of the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu are cut free 
from one another and the surrounding stone matrix. With what was 
probably an engaged median fold, similar to the Chaiya and Wat Phra 
Phreng images, but now combined with fully cut lower legs more in 
the manner of the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu, the recently discovered Wat 
Ta Nen Viṣṇu may represent a transition to the technique seen in the 
latter and an intermediary stage towards the liberation of the lower legs 
from structural support. While this hypothetical progression seems to be 
justified by the evidence, however, too much emphasis on technique can 
be problematic insofar as, among other things, it presumes rather than 
proves such an evolution and it neglects the possibility that technical 
decisions may also be motivated by ritual imperative, artistic intention, 
and aesthetic choice. 
Related to the way the legs of the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu are carved 
is the configuration of the drapery, and it is this additional feature that 
may offer the clearest indication of its slightly later date. Whereas, 
Figure 20: Harihara, Mandsaur, 
Mandsaur district, Madhya Pradesh, 
India, late Gupta period, ca early 
6th century CE, sandstone, H. 102 
cm., State Museum, Bhopal, inv. 
no. E.914 [Photograph courtesy of 
Donald Stadtner].

--- PAGE 86 ---
Paul a. lavy
169
168
Figure 21: Viṣṇu, found at Wat 
Bot, Mueang Prachin Buri district, 
Prachin Buri province, Thailand, 
ca early 7th cent. CE, sandstone, 
H. 165 cm., Prachin Buri National 
Museum [Photograph courtesy of 
Paisarn Piemmettawat].
the long median fold of fabric on the Chaiya, Wat Phra Phreng, and 
Wat Ta Nen images is carved as one unit with the legs and bears little 
discernible relationship with the lower hem of the garment, on the 
Ho Phra Narai image, it notably bifurcates into the lower hems of the 
garment. Although the descending length of cloth appears to simply 
split into two distinct hems, one over each shin at oblique angles to the 
vertical axis, this treatment may be intended to indicate the tightening 
of the fabric around the calves that would be caused if the central panel 
of cloth was brought between the legs and cinched at the waistband or 
tucked into the hem at the lower back (albeit a feature not indicated 
in the rather abbreviated carving on the posterior of the image). 
Alternately, the median panel may consist of the combined lateral edges 
of fabric that are tucked into the waistband rather than long extensions 
of fabric descending from it. In any case, the bifurcating median fold 
typically occurs on images that, like the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu, have the 
lower legs cut free of one another, including some later Viṣṇus from 
peninsular sites and Dong Si Mahosot (or Dong Si Maha Phot), in 
eastern Thailand, which exhibit a similar configuration of the garment 
(e.g. Piriya 2012: figs 1.99-1.102).27 In these related examples, the details 
are, however, more naturalistically handled so that the median panel of 
cloth articulates with, but is clearly distinct from, the fabric comprising 
the bunching hems [Figure 21]. Probably occurring on the Ho Phra 
Narai image for the first time in the sculpture of Southeast Asia, and 
perhaps South Asia as well, this incipient and rather tentative feature 
is a notable departure from the Chaiya, Wat Phra Phreng, and Wat Ta 
Nen images. The cumulative evidence suggests, therefore, that they are 
somewhat earlier in date and that the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu is the latest 
of the peninsular conch-on-hip images.
Conclusion
Most scholars would agree that a date of circa 500 CE makes the Chaiya 
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa the earliest known Brahmanical image in Southeast 
Asia and, consequently, accord it a pivotal role in the art history of the 
region. Robert Brown (2000: 1) has suggested that it is the only Southeast 
Asian Vaiṣṇava image that can be closely tied to Indian prototypes and 
that it may be “the single extant seed from which all other Southeast 
Asian mitred Viṣṇu images spring.” This may be an overstatement, but, 
with the exception of sculpture likely to have been imported from South 
Asia, few other early Southeast Asian stone sculptures seem to have 
such close comparisons in the corpus of Indian art.28 While Indian art 
may have continued to exert a limited influence on the production of 
mitred Viṣṇus in Southeast Asia, the arguments and new observations 
presented here support the contention that subsequent developments 
were “largely internal” (Brown 2000: 2).
If, according to Indian evidence, the Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa may 
be reasonably placed circa 500 CE, the similarities it shares with the Wat 
Phra Phreng Viṣṇu suggest that the latter must have been made very soon 
thereafter, i.e., in the very early sixth century. Slightly later is the Wat 
Ta Nen image, which appears to be transitional between the Wat Phra 
Phreng and Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇus. In turn, the more developed anatomy 
and drapery of the Ho Phra Narai Viṣṇu (ca early to mid-sixth century) 
foreshadow features associated with the very accomplished sculptures of

--- PAGE 87 ---
Paul a. lavy
171
170
Endnotes
1 
See for example, Quaritch Wales (1976: 43-46), 
Piriya (1980: 80 and 2012: 12-14, 100-101), 
Dalsheimer & Manguin (1998: 92), Dofflemyer 
(1999: 34), Jacq-Hergoualc’h (2002: 116), Gosling 
(2004: 85), and Manguin (2010: 174).
2 
See Boisselier (1969: 59 and 1975: 71, 225), Pisit 
& Subhadradis (1978: 107), Woodward (1973: 
211 and 2003: 41), Brown (1992: 46-47), and 
Lavy (2004: 268-272). Jean Boisselier (1959a: 
66-67 and 1959b: 224-226) initially dated the 
Chaiya image to the seventh-eighth centuries, 
but, following O’Connor, adjusted his dating to 
the fourth century at the earliest (1975: 71). In the 
commentaries added by Jean-Michel Beurdeley 
to Boisselier’s text, the date is given as circa fifth 
century (1975: 225).
3 
This essay revises a portion of my doctoral 
dissertation’s chapter 6, entitled “The Earliest 
Vaiṣṇava Sculpture of Southeast Asia” (Lavy 2004: 
253-275) written under the supervision of Robert 
L. Brown, Anthony Reid, Susan B. Downey, 
and Lothar von Falkenhausen. Some of these 
arguments were presented at Across the South of Asia: 
A Symposium in Honor of Robert L. Brown, San Diego 
Museum of Art, 19 January, 2013.
4 
A date of circa 500 CE is reasonable, and is used 
here for convenience, but it must be recognised 
that the present state of evidence does not support 
the attribution of a specific date, or even a narrow 
range of dates, to the Chaiya image nor to the 
Nakhon Si Thammarat Viṣṇus.
5 
The designation “Viṣṇu” subsumes numerous 
names and it may well be that these various 
images comprise forms of Viṣṇu that may be more 
accurately referred to under specific epithets. 
Given their fragmentary condition and the often 
incompletely preserved state of the iconography, 
however, all will be referred to here as “Viṣṇu” 
except for the Chaiya sculpture and images that 
share its particular configuration of attributes.
6 
Some Kuṣāṇa images of Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa hold 
what appears to be a long-necked flask or vase 
instead of a conch. The flask may indicate an 
earlier date than the conch (Srinivasan 1997: 
245-246; Schmid 2010: 221-223). In addition to 
the examples here, various degrees of separation 
of the conch from the hip can be seen on the two 
Viṣṇus at Udayagiri Cave 6 (Madhya Pradesh, 
India), dated by inscription to 401/2 CE (Schastok 
1985: figs 86-87), and on the Viṣṇu from Jhusī (or 
Jhunsi, Uttar Pradesh, India), circa early to mid-
fifth century CE (Chandra 1970: 88, cat. no. 196).
7 
With a lotus (padma), rather than- or synonymous 
with- the orb, this configuration is identified in the 
Indian iconographical texts that enumerate the 
twenty-four forms of Viṣṇu as either Janārdana or 
Vāsudeva (Bidyabinod 1920: 23-33).
8 
See also Nilakanta Sastri (1949: 91-92), Dupont 
(1955: 133-134), and Boisselier (1959a: 66-67). 
Exceptions to this line of thinking can be found in 
Rawson (1957: 33-34) and Lamb (1961: 70), the 
latter suggesting a date of sixth century or earlier 
for the Chaiya image. Cœdès (1928: 25) considered 
it to be close to Indian prototypes but did not 
specify dates or examples. Le May (1964: 80, fig. 
48) described it as “pure Indian style” without 
offering a date. For further commentary, see Lavy 
(2004: 245-253).
9 
See Cœdès (1928: caption of pl. X centre), 
Nilakanta Sastri (1949: 92), Lamb (1961: 70, pl. 
114), Boisselier (1959b: 221, fig. 3 and 1969: 65, 
fig. 23), and Le May (1964: 80).
10 The name “Wat Phra Phreng” (FAD 2543: 83; 
Banchong 2545: 16) is variably given as “Wat 
Phrapheng” (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2002: fig. 3), “Wat 
Phra Phraeng” (Preecha & Wannasarn 2546: 
107), “Wat Phra Pleng” (Piriya 1980: 84), “Wat 
Phra Loeng” (Piriya 2012: 101), or “Wat Phrang” 
(Wannasarn 2013: 74). Lamb (1961: 70, pl. 114) 
published a photograph depicting the Wat Phra 
Phreng Viṣṇu resting awkwardly on a pedestal that 
consists of the remnants of two lateral supports, 
two feet, and a broken stump corresponding to 
the fragmented  median fold of a garment. The 
pedestal almost certainly belonged to a sculpture 
of Viṣṇu, but its relationship with the Wat Phra 
Phreng image is unclear. It is the smaller of two 
such pedestals (widths approximately 28 cm. and 
the fully developed mitred Viṣṇu tradition of the late sixth-early seventh 
centuries, a localised and largely “internal” Southeast Asian innovation.
Acknowledgements 
I am grateful to the following individuals for their kind assistance at 
various stages in the preparation of this essay: Kurt Behrendt, Jorrit 
Britschgi, Kanako Iwase, Ruth Janson, Jessica Kuhn, Forrest McGill, 
Amy McNair, Paisarn Piemmettawat, Rohayati Paseng, Prapod 
Assavavirulhakarn, Vandana Sinha, Donald Stadtner, and Wannasarn 
Noonsuk. I would also like to thank Nicolas Revire and the anonymous 
reader for their helpful comments and suggestions.
46 cm.) that were found in Na San sub-district 
(previously Mueang district, now Phra Phrom 
district). They are now displayed in the museum at 
Wat Phra Mahathat Woramahawihan (also known 
as Wat Phra Borommathat) with the Wat Phra 
Phreng Viṣṇu. Photographs of both pedestals are 
published in O’Connor (1982: pls 1-2), however it 
should be noted that both photographs are flipped 
so that the right and left sides of the pedestals are 
the reverse of their actual appearance. Lamb’s 
photograph is the correct orientation; see also 
Jacq-Hergoualc’h (2002: fig. 9).
11 To my knowledge, none of the images has 
undergone petrographic analysis. The Chaiya 
image is sometimes said to be limestone (e.g. Le 
May 1964: 80; O’Connor 1972: 20; Boisselier 
1975: 71). All four images, however, may be made 
of sandstone.
12 Portions of the Agnipurāṇa, including those dealing 
with Vaiṣṇava iconography, may date as early as 
the sixth century CE. Earlier, in the Mahābhārata, 
these twenty-four forms occur among the names 
of Viṣṇu, but without description of their 
iconography.
13 For mitres of the Pallava period (seventh-eighth 
centuries CE), see Lavy (2004: 280-281).
14 Similar in its flattened form, but differing in its 
decoration and shape, is the mitre worn by Viṣṇu 
Trivikrama on a circa late fourth or early fifth 
century lintel from Pawaya, Madhya Pradesh, 
India (Williams 1982: fig. 50).
15 For examples from the sixth-eleventh centuries, 
see Desai (1973: figs 6-30). Also present on the Ho 
Phra Narai Viṣṇu mitre are the lateral floral motifs 
perhaps joined by a thickly rolled strap.
16 See Wirjosuparto (1963: 172), Boisselier (1975:  
pl. 66), and Piriya (2012: figs 2.82, 2.84-2.85).
17 Some seventh and eighth century Southeast Asian 
mitres are polygonal or tiered (e.g. Piriya 1980: 
color pl. 3). Mitres occurring in scenes on lintels 
tend to be more ornate than those on free-standing 
sculpture. The comparative simplicity of the latter 
may reflect the practice of equipping sacred images 
with jewelry and metal adornments that have been 
lost or separated from the images, thus making 
them appear less ornate than they were intended to 
appear in worship.
18 It is not clear whether the Devangaṛh images wear 
a low looping sash or a garland (vanamālā).
19 Following Woodward, Havenon refers to the 
Bhumara image in passing but curiously omits it 
from the discussion (2006-07: 97, n. 56).
20 With a lotus (padma), this configuration is identified 
in Indian iconographical texts either as the 
Śrīdhara, Dāmōdara, or Hṛṣīkeśa form of Viṣṇu 
(Bidyabinod 1920: 23-33).
21 With a lotus (padma), a configuration identified 
in Indian iconographical texts either as 
the Trivikrama or Upendra form of Viṣṇu 
(Bidyabinod: 23-33). 
22 According to Härtel (1987: 586), the lowering of 
the anterior right hand and the appearance of the 
sphere accompanied the transition from Vāsudeva-
Kṛṣṇa to Viṣṇu.
23 See also Joshi (1989: 131); Srinivasan (1997: 246); 
Lavy (2004: 255-256).
24 Viṣṇu images holding a lotus do, however, appear 
on pre-Angkorian lintels (Lavy 2004: 256, n. 19).
25 Relevant inscriptions include K. 21, K. 165, 
K. 262, K. 263, and K. 278.
26 For other examples of tapering mitres in Southeast 
Asia, see Jacq-Hergoualc’h (2002: fig. 4) and 
O’Connor (1972: fig. 20).
27 The development of Viṣṇu sculpture in peninsular 
and eastern Thailand after these early conch-on-
hip images is discussed in Lavy (2004: 302-334).
28 A possible early import from South Asia is the 
small sandstone Buddha image (H. 16.5 cm.) found 
at Wiang Sa, Surat Thani province, and now in 
the Bangkok National Museum (Piriya 2012: fig 
1.17). Carved in the Sarnath style of northern 
India, it dates circa late fifth-early sixth century and 
is therefore approximately contemporary with the 
Chaiya Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa.
References
Asher, Frederick M.  
1980  The Art of Eastern India, 300-
800. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Banchong Wongwichian 
2545  Prawatisat borannakhadi 
nakhon si thammarat (The History and 
Antiquities of Nakhon Si Thammarat). 
Nakhon Si Thammarat: Fine Arts 
Department. [2002 CE]
Bautze-Picron, Claudine 
1985  L’image de l’Ādimūrti 
Vāsudeva au Bihar et au Bengale, 
du 5e au 12e siècle. Annali 
dell’Università degli studi di Napoli 
“L’Orientale” 45(3): 437-481.
Bhattacharya, Gouriswar 
2007  Vāsudeva-Viṣṇu Images 
from Bengal: Development and 
Innovation: Is Lotus an Essential 
Attribute? In Bhattacharya, 
Gouriswar et al. (eds), Kalhār (White 
Water-Lily): Studies in Art, Iconography, 
Architecture and Archaeology of India and 
Bangladesh (Professor Enamul Haque 
Felicitation Volume). New Delhi: 
Kaveri Books, pp. 99-108.
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar 
1961  Les religions brahmaniques dans 
l’ancien Cambodge : d’après l’épigraphie 
et l’iconographie. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.

--- PAGE 88 ---
Paul a. lavy
173
172
Lamb, Alastair 
1961  Kedah and Takuapa: Some 
Tentative Historical Conclusions. 
Federation Museums Journal,  
New Series 6: 69-88.
Lavy, Paul A.  
2004  Viṣṇu and Harihara in the Art 
and Politics of Early Historic Southeast 
Asia. Doctoral Dissertation.  
Los Angeles: University of 
California. [Unpublished]
Le May, Reginald 
1964  The Culture of South-East Asia: 
The Heritage of India. London: Allen 
& Unwin. [First published in 1954]
Lê Thị Liên 
2006  Nghệ thuật Phật giáo và Hindu 
giáo ở Đồng bằng sông Cửu Long trước 
thế kỷ X (Buddhist and Hindu Art of the 
Mekong Delta before the Tenth Century). 
Hanoi: Thế Giới.
Malleret, Louis 
1959  L’archéologie du Delta du Mékong. 
Volume 1 : l’exploration archéologique 
et les fouilles d’Oc-Eo. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
1963  L’archéologie du Delta du Mékong. 
Volume 4 : le Cisbassac. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Mallmann, Marie-Thérèse de 
1963  Les enseignements iconographiques 
de l’Agni-Purāṇa. Paris: Presses 
universitaires de France.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves 
2010  Pan-Regional Responses 
to South Asian Inputs in Early 
Southeast Asia. In Bellina, 
Bérénice et al. (eds), 50 Years of 
Archaeology in Southeast Asia: Essays 
in Honour of Ian Glover. Bangkok: 
River Books, pp. 170-181.
McGill, Forrest 
1975  Review of Hindu Gods 
of Peninsular Siam by Stanley J. 
O’Connor, Jr. Artibus Asiae 37,  
1-2: 142-145.
Nigam, M.L.  
1980  Sculptural Art of Andhra. Delhi: 
Sundeep Prakashan.
Nilakanta Sastri, K.A.  
1949  South Indian Influences in the  
Far East. Bombay: Hind Kitabs.
O’Connor, Stanley J., Jr 
1965  Brahmanical Sculptures 
of Peninsular Siam. Doctoral 
Dissertation. Ithaca: Cornell 
University. [Published as Hindu 
Gods of Peninsular Siam, 1972]
1972  Hindu Gods of Peninsular 
Siam. Ascona: Artibus Asiae 
Supplementum.
1982  Ancient Sculptures from 
Tambon Na San, Nakhon Si 
Thammarat Province, Peninsular 
Thailand. Journal of the Malaysian 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
55(2): 60-61.
Pal, Pratapaditya 
1979  A Kushān Indra and Some 
Related Sculptures. Oriental Art 
25(2): 212-226.
Piriya Krairiksh 
1980  Art in Peninsular Thailand 
Prior to the Fourteenth Century A.D. 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department.
2012  The Roots of Thai Art. 
Bangkok: River Books. [First 
published in Thai as Rakngao haeng 
sinlapa thai, 2553 (2010 CE)]
Pisit Charoenwongsa & 
Subhadradis Diskul, M.C. 
1978  Thailand. Geneva: Nagel.
Prasad, B. Rajendra 
1980  Art of South India: Andhra 
Pradesh. Delhi: Sundeep Prakashan.
Preecha Noonsuk & 
Wannasarn Noonsuk 
2546  Phrawisanu baep song thue 
sang nuea phrasoni: kankhonphop 
mai (The Discovery of a New 
Vishnu Image in Southeast Asia). 
Muang Boran 29(2): 90-107.  
[In Thai with English Abstract; 
2003 CE]
Quaritch Wales, Horace 
Geoffrey  
1976  The Malay Peninsula in Hindu 
Times. London: Bernard Quaritch.
Rawson, Philip S.  
1957  Review of La statuaire 
préangkorienne by Pierre Dupont. 
Oriental Art, New Series 3(1): 33-34.
Ray, Amita 
1983  Life and Art of Early 
Andhradesa. Delhi: Agam Kala 
Prakashan.
Rooney, Dawn F.  
2010  Khmer Ceramics: Beauty and 
Meaning. Bangkok: River Books.
Sarma, I.K.  
1982  The Development of Early Śaiva 
Art and Architecture (With Special 
Reference to Āndhradēśa). Delhi: 
Sundeep Prakashan.
Schastok, Sara 
1985  The Śāmalājī Sculptures and  
6th Century Art in Western India. 
Leiden: Brill.
Schmid, Charlotte 
2010  Le don de voir : premières 
représentations krishnaïtes de la région 
de Mathurā. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Shah, Umakant P.  
1955-56  Some Early Sculptures 
from Abu and Bhinmal. Bulletin of 
the Museum and Picture Gallery, Baroda 
12: 43-56.
Soutif, Dominique 
2008  La monture de conque 
inscrite du Musée national de 
Phnom Penh : relecture de 
l’inscription angkorienne K. 779. 
Aséanie 22: 47-61.
2009  À propos de trois possibles 
attributs mobiles dans les inscriptions 
khmères. Siksācakr 11: 22-42.
Srinivasan, Doris Meth 
1997  Many Heads, Arms and 
Eyes: Origin, Meaning and Form of 
Multiplicity in Indian Art. Leiden: 
Brill.
Taddei, Maurizio 
1991  Reflections on Śaṅkha in 
Vaiṣṇava Iconography. In Gail, 
Adalbert J. & Mevissen, Gerd J.R. 
(eds), South Asian Archaeology 1991. 
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag,  
pp. 647-658.
Wannasarn Noonsuk 
2013  Tambralinga and Nakhon Si 
Thammarat: Early Kingdoms on the 
Isthmus of Southeast Asia. Nakhon 
Si Thammarat: Nakhon Si 
Thammarat Rajabhat University.
Williams, Joanna Gottfried 
1982  The Art of Gupta India: Empire 
and Province. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Wirjosuparto, R.M. Sutjipto 
1963  The Second Visnu-image 
of Cibuaya in West-Java. Madjalah 
ilmu-ilmu sastra Indonesia/Indonesian 
Journal of Cultural Studies 1(2):  
170-187.
Woodward, Hiram, Jr  
1973  Review of Hindu Gods 
of Peninsular Siam by Stanley J. 
O’Connor, Jr. Journal of the Siam 
Society 61(2): 210-213.
2003  The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand. From Prehistoric Times 
through the Thirteenth Century.  
Leiden-Boston: Brill. 
Bidyabinod, Pandit B.B.  
1920  Varieties of the Vishnu 
Image. In Memoirs of the 
Archaeological Survey of India no. 2. 
New Delhi: Archaeological Survey 
of India, pp. 23-33.
Boisselier, Jean 
1959a  La statuaire préangkorienne 
et Pierre Dupont. Arts Asiatiques 
6(1): 59-69.  
1959b  Le Visnu de Tjibuaja (Java 
Occidental) et la statuaire du Sud-
Est Asiatique. Artibus Asiae 22(3): 
210-226.
1966  Le Cambodge. Paris: Picard.
1969  Recherches archéologiques 
en Thaïlande. II : rapport 
sommaire de la mission 1965 (26 
juillet-28 novembre). Arts Asiatiques 
20: 47-98.
1975  The Heritage of Thai Sculpture. 
New York: Weatherhill. [First 
published in French as La sculpture 
en Thaïlande, 1974; In collaboration 
with J.M. Beurdeley]
Brown, Robert L.  
1992  Indian Art Transformed: 
The Earliest Sculptural Styles of 
Southeast Asia. In Bronkhorst, 
Johannes (ed.), Panels of the VIIth 
World Sanskrit Conference. Leiden: E. J. 
Brill, pp. 40-53.
2000  The Early Viṣṇu Images 
from Southeast Asia and Their 
Indian Relationships. A paper 
presented at Crossroads and 
Commodification: A Symposium on 
Southeast Asian Art History, University 
of Michigan, 25-26 March 2000. 
[Unpublished]
Chandra, Pramod 
1970  Stone Sculpture in the Allahabad 
Museum: A Descriptive Catalogue. 
Poona: American Institute of 
Indian Studies.
Cœdès, George 
1928  Les collections archéologiques 
du Musée national de Bangkok. Paris: 
Éditions Van Oest.
1942  Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
volume 2. Hanoi: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
1943-46  Quelques précisions sur 
la fin du Fou-nan. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 43: 1-8.
Coomaraswamy, Ananda 
1928  Early Indian Iconography: 
I. Indra, with Special Reference to 
Indra’s Visit. Eastern Art 1(1): 33-41.
Dalsheimer, Nadine & 
Manguin, Pierre-Yves 
1998  Visnu mitrés et réseaux 
marchands en Asie du Sud-Est : 
nouvelles données archéologiques 
sur le Ier millénaire apr. J.-C. 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 85(1): 87-123.
Desai, Kalpana S.  
1973  Iconography of Viṣṇu  
(In Northern India, Upto [sic] the 
Mediaeval Period). New Delhi: 
Abhinav Publications.
Dhida Saraya 
2545  Thawarawadi: ton prawatisat 
thai (Dvaravati: Early History of 
Thailand). Bangkok: Muang Boran 
Publishing House. In Thai;  
[2002 CE].
Dofflemyer, Virginia S.  
1999  Vishnu Images from Ancient 
Thailand and the Concept of 
Kingship. In Brown, Robert L. 
(ed.), Art from Thailand. Mumbai: 
Marg Publications, pp. 34-48.
Dupont, Pierre 
1955  La statuaire préangkorienne. 
Ascona: Artibus Asiae 
Supplementum. 
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2543  Visitors Guide to the Nakhon 
Si Thammarat National Museum. 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department. 
[Second Edition, 2000 CE; First 
published in Thai as Namchom 
phiphithaphan sathan haeng chat nakhon 
si thammarat, 2529 (1986 CE)] 
Gail, Adalbert J.  
2009  The Earth and the  
Lotus: A Contribution to  
Viṣṇu’s Iconography in India. 
Pandanus ︐09: Nature in Literature,  
Art, Myth and Ritual 3(1): 83-91.
Gorakshkar, Sadashiv 
1982  The Parel Mahādeva 
Reassessed and Two Newly 
Discovered Images from Parel.  
Lalit Kalā 20: 15-24.
Gosling, Betty 
2004  Origins of Thai Art. Bangkok: 
River Books.
Harle, J.C.  
1987  The Pleated Siras Cakra. 
In Nagaraja Rao, M.S. (ed.), 
Kusumāñjali: New Interpretation 
of Indian Art and Culture, Sh. C. 
Sivaramamurti Commemoration Volume. 
Volume 2. Delhi: Agam Kala 
Prakashan, pp. 345-347.
Härtel, Herbert 
1987  Archaeological Evidence of 
the Early Vāsudeva Worship. In 
Curaverunt, Edenda et al. (eds), 
Orientalia Iosephi Tucci Memoriae 
Dicata. Volume 2. Rome : Istituto 
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo 
Oriente, pp. 573-587.
Havenon, Michael de 
2006-07  The Earliest Viṣṇu 
Sculpture from Southeast Asia. 
The Journal of the Walters Art Museum 
64/65: 81-98.
Hornell, James 
1915  The Indian Conch (Turbinella 
Pyrum, Linn.) and Its Relation to Hindu 
Life and Religion. London: Williams 
and Norgate.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel 
2002  The Malay Peninsula:  
Crossroads of the Maritime Silk Road. 
Leiden: Brill.
Jaiswal, Suvira 
1981  The Origin and Development of 
Vaiṣṇavism: Vaiṣṇavism from 200 BC 
to AD 500. New Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal Publishers. [Revised 
Edition; First Edition published in 
1967]
Jessup, Helen & Zéphir, 
Thierry (eds) 
1997  Sculpture of Angkor and Ancient 
Cambodia: Millennium of Glory. 
Washington, D.C.: National 
Gallery of Art.
Joshi, N.P.  
1989  Catalogue of the Brahmanical 
Sculptures in the State Museum, Lucknow, 
Part II, Volume 1 (Śiva and Viṣṇu). 
Lucknow: The State Museum.
Khan, M.A.W.  
1963  A Monograph on Yēlēśwaram 
Excavations. Hyderabad: 
Government of Andhra Pradesh.
1964  An Early Sculpture of Narasimha 
(Man-Lion Incarnation of Vishnu 
found from the Coastal Andhra along 
with Pañcha Vīras). Hyderabad: 
Government of Andhra Pradesh.
Krisda Pinsri  
2010  Iconography of Khmer 
Ceramics. In Rooney, Dawn F. 
(ed.), Khmer Ceramics: Beauty and 
Meaning. Bangkok: River Books.
Krishna, Nanditha 
1980  The Art and Iconography 
of Vishnu-Narayana. Bombay: 
Taraporevala.

--- PAGE 89 ---
175
174
Introduction
F
or those who have been following the news from Thailand over the 
past few years, one of the most frequent stories to be heard is the 
tragedies, including various forms of violence such as killings, shootings, 
and bombings, inflicted on the southernmost region of Thailand due 
to the conflict between the Thai state and radical Muslim groups. 
Although a very complex problem with deep roots in history, one 
of the causes of this conflict is the religious struggle between the 
Malay-speaking Muslims and the central government dominated by the 
Thai-speaking Buddhists, the latter being the majority in Thailand and 
who sometimes mistreat other minorities (Chaiwat 2554: 14-16). 
Attempting to win legitimacy over the region, the radical Muslim 
groups have created a powerful discourse stating that Pattani and nearby 
provinces were a pure Muslim land for many centuries,1 and this led to 
the recent burning of the Fine Arts Department Office, a storage for 
ancient artefacts, as well as a stūpa at the Yarang archaeological complex, 
where the archaeological assemblage is predominantly Buddhist, 
in an attempt to erase the Buddhist past of the region [Figure 1].2 
Exaggerated or fabricated claims regarding the religious affiliations of a 
region are common in conflict zones around the world and can usually 
be proven to be untrue. 
Pattani faces a similar situation. Although becoming the most 
powerful Islamic centre in Siam since around the fourteenth century 
(Perret et al. 2004), Pattani, or the area that has become Pattani today, 
housed a large number of archaeological sites, architecture, and artefacts 
associated with Buddhism and Brahmanism, and these ruins and finds 
were older than those of Islam by more than half a millennium. This 
suggests that various religions and their groups or sub-groups have 
probably co-existed in the past in Pattani. Learning from the past, a 
land does not necessarily have to belong to a sole religion, and this short 
essay attempts to uncover the rich and ancient multi-religious milieu of 
Pattani, even before the emergence of Siam or Thailand.
Background on Archaeological Geography
One of the most prominent geographical features of the southernmost 
region of Thailand is the Sankalakhiri mountain range, which forms 
the modern border between Thailand and Malaysia. The range runs 
roughly in an east-west direction with several branches extending 
northward, like fingers, creating several valleys in this region, including 
the Chana, Thepa, Pattani, Saiburi, and Takbai valleys. Each of these 
valleys has rivers running in north-south directions towards the Gulf of 
New Evidence of Early Brahmanical 
Vestiges in Pattani Province
WannaSarn noonSuk
Figure 1: Burnt artefacts from the 
Yarang archaeological complex, now 
displayed at the Nakhon Si Thammarat 
National Museum [Photograph by 
Wannasarn Noonsuk].
Opposite Figure 2: Head of 
Avalokiteśvara, found at Ban Chale, 
Yarang archaeological complex, Pattani 
province, 7th-8th century. Currently 
in the Songkhla National Museum, 
bronze, 13 cm. high [Photograph 
courtesy of Paisarn Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 90 ---
WannaSarn noonSuk
177
176
Thailand (Srisakra et al. 2550: 5-7). One of them is the Pattani valley, 
which has the Pattani river as the main watercourse flowing from Betong 
district in Yala province. Betong is also a mountain pass that leads to the 
west coast of peninsular Malaysia. 
The Sankalakhiri range in the Betong area also feeds a number of 
rivers flowing to the Andaman Sea on the west coast, such as the Merbok 
river, running in an east-west direction and which has the famous Bujang 
cultural complex and other coastal sites, contemporaneous with those 
of Yarang, at its estuary [Map 1]. This geography allowed for trans-
isthmian routes and made the social connectivity and trade between 
the two coasts of the isthmus possible. People from ancient Pattani and 
foreign merchants in the South China Sea could walk or navigate the 
Pattani river upstream, through the mountain pass at Betong and then 
walk or navigate downstream to coastal Kedah where they reached the 
Indian Ocean. These may be the southernmost trans-isthmian routes 
because the area south of the Betong pass was heavily forested and 
comprised of high mountains, which made it almost impossible to cross 
(Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2002: Docs 3 and 7). The region referred to as the 
“isthmus” technically ends here.
The Pattani valley can be divided into three parts, including the 
upper, middle, and lower valleys. The upper valley is close to the 
watersheds and people in this area still cultivate orchards, while the 
middle valley is wider and now the location of a large dam called Bang 
Lang. Most Neolithic sites (ca 5,000-4,000 years BP) with polished 
stone tools have been found in the upper and middle valleys (Preecha & 
Chatchai 2549: 17-19). The lower valley was defined by a broad coastal 
land with the bay of Pattani at the northernmost end. It is here that the 
Yarang archaeological complex is located. Only one possible prehistoric 
site was identified in the lower valley at “Sin cave” or Tham Sinlapa 
where prehistoric paintings were identified along with early historic 
mural paintings on the cave walls, which some scholars date back to 
the Śrīvijaya period (ca the seventh to twelfth centuries CE) (Preecha & 
Chatchai 2549: 22).   
The bay of Pattani, with the spit of land called “Pho” or Laem Pho 
extending into this body of water, like a barrier protecting the bay in 
the north, forms a suitable harbour. This spit, however, may have been 
formed after the sixth to eighth centuries CE when Yarang was at its 
peak. It has been hypothesised that the ancient shores went quite deep 
inland, especially at the estuary of the Pattani river, where they almost 
reached the Yarang archaeological complex (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2002: 
Doc. 17). If this is actually the case, then this deep estuary would have 
also provided protection from the wind and strong currents for ships 
disembarking near Yarang. In this hypothetical geography, Ban Bana 
would have been located right on the shore in the sixth century [Map 2]. 
The Site of Yarang
The most well-known pre-Islamic site in Pattani and all of southern 
provinces for that matter, is perhaps Mueang Boran Yarang, or the 
Yarang archaeological complex (around 600 rais or 96 hectares), which 
comprised of three main moated areas (or so-called mueangs), including 
Ban Wat, Ban Chale and Ban Prawae, from south to north, and a 
number of sites near these moated areas (FAD 2535: 39 and 2549: 77; 
South Kedah
Betong
Sankalakhiri
100 km
Pattani
SOUTH CHINA SEA
ANDAMAN SEA
BAY OF PATTANI
Pattani
Ban Bana
Yarang
Mahut Hill
5 km
Yarin
g 
r
i
v
er
Map 1: Pattani, South Kedah and possible trans-isthmian route  [Drawing by Wannasarn Noonsuk].
Map 2: Ban Bana, Yarang, Mahut Hill and Bay of Pattani [Drawing by Wannasarn Noonsuk].

--- PAGE 91 ---
WannaSarn noonSuk
179
178
Wannasarn 2009: 66-67) [Map 3]. Because most of the structures 
and finds in these sites could be approximately dated to the sixth-ninth 
centuries CE, some scholars propose that the Yarang archaeological 
complex was the centre of the kingdom of Langyaxiu or Langkasuka, 
which according to the Chinese accounts sent its first ambassadorial 
mission to China in 515 CE (FAD 2535: 30-36; Jacq-Hergoualc’h 
2002: 162; Wheatley 1961: 253-255).  
Regardless of what its ancient name may have been, the Yarang 
archaeological complex provided a wealth of Buddhist structures 
and objects, such as terracotta stūpas, so-called “votive stūpas,” “votive 
tablets,” Buddha and Bodhisattva statues (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2002: 171-
187) [e.g. Figure 2]. Two liṅgas and a Śiva bull, however, were also 
found in this complex. The first liṅga is one of the earliest of its kind in 
peninsular Thailand [Figure 3]. Being created in a more naturalistic 
fashion, with its end section (rudrabhāga) being swollen and much larger 
than the rest of its body, Michel Jacq-Hergoualc’h has suggested an early 
date to circa the sixth century. It is now kept at the Songkhla National 
Museum with a record stating that it was found at Ban Prawae in 1962 
(FAD 2549: 78). For the second liṅga, Jacq-Hergoualc’h (2002: 187) 
argues that it was made in a comparatively more traditional fashion and 
may be later in date, in which the rudrabhāga (the end and round section), 
the brahmābhāga (the square section) and the viṣṇubhāga (the octagonal 
section) being made in equal proportion [Figure 4]. It may be dated 
to circa the beginning of the seventh century. As for the stone statue of 
the  bull, it was discovered in an excavation at site BJ8 or Monument 
no. 8 at Ban Chale (FAD 2549: 79) [Figure 5]. It was very badly eroded 
and, therefore, impossible to date at this point (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 
2002: 187). Furthermore, there are some stone architectural parts 
[Figure 6] found in the Yarang archaeological complex, which 
are now kept at the Princess Galyani Vadhana Institute of Cultural 
Studies, Prince of Songkhla University, Pattani campus. However, their 
exact provenances were not recorded when they were moved to the 
Institute in around the 1970s. The only pieces of stone architectural 
parts of which the find-spots are known in Yarang are the threshold 
[Figure 7] and door frame from Monument no. 15 at Ban Wat. The 
pieces are now displayed in front of Monument no. 3 at Ban Chale 
(Preecha & Chatchai 2549: 55). These stone architectural parts seem 
to be uncommon in the Buddhist artistic tradition at Yarang, but quite 
common in the Brahmanical artistic tradition of peninsular Thailand, 
such as those in Tāmbraliṅga, a kingdom that had Brahmanism as its 
dominant religion in circa the fifth to the eleventh centuries, with its 
heartland in what is today Nakhon Si Thammarat (Wannasarn 2013: 
57-157).  
Although Jacq-Hergoualc’h suggested that BJ8 was initially Buddhist 
and then was possibly reused later for Śaiva worship (2002: 187-188), 
it is clear that Brahmanism in fact co-existed along with Buddhism in 
ancient Yarang when we also consider the two liṅgas. The degree of 
Brahmanical practices, however, seems to be quite thin and does not 
0
50
250 metres
150
1 Ban Prawae
2 Ban Chale
3 Ban Wat
Map 3: Yarang archaeological complex [Drawing by Wannasarn Noonsuk based on  
an information sign displayed at the Nakhon Si Thammarat National Museum].
Figure 3: A liṅga (44 cm. in 
height) from the Yarang archaeological 
complex, now kept at the Songkhla 
National Museum [Photograph 
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].
Figure 4: Second liṅga from the Yarang 
archaeological complex, now kept at the 
Cultural Centre of Yala Rajabhat University 
[Photograph courtesy of the Cultural Centre 
of Yala Rajabhat University].

--- PAGE 92 ---
WannaSarn noonSuk
181
180
represent firm evidence for well-established Brahmanical communities. 
The artworks associated with Brahmanism seem to be outside of the 
mainstream artistic tradition of Yarang. Therefore, Brahmanism would 
seem to be only an alternative ritual system within a much larger 
Buddhist context. 
Outside of the Yarang archaeological complex, there have been 
few reports on other archaeological sites, and this has created a large 
gap in our knowledge about ancient Pattani. The remaining part of 
the essay will therefore be devoted to two important sites, so far largely 
underexplored, that yield additional evidence related to the early 
Brahmanical tradition in the region.3   
The Site of Ban Bana
Around 10 kilometres north of Yarang, at the site of Ban Bana, the story 
is quite different from that of Yarang. At this site, the archaeological 
evidence for Buddhism is absent to date but that of Brahmanism is 
manifest in the forms of an ablution basin, a possible liṅga, brick shrines, 
and various architectural parts. 
Ban Bana, roughly translated from Malay as “the village of the 
harbour,”4 is located on a short ancient beach ridge running in an east-
west direction, parallel to the modern shoreline and the spit of Pho. It 
was probably created by the coastal wave-dominated deposits during 
the Holocene Maximum Transgression of the sea water in the years 
6,000-8,000 BP or not long after the sea had regressed (Apichart 2005: 
19-23; see also Trongjai, this volume). The maximum transgression and 
the regression of the sea had also created a number of ancient beach 
ridges in peninsular Thailand, on which ancient communities were 
located, such as the cities of Nakhon Si Thammarat and Chaiya to the 
north of Pattani (Wannasarn 2013: 63). Like other large communities 
on the east coast of peninsular Thailand, Ban Bana is located on an 
ancient beach ridge because it would not have been easily flooded in the 
rainy season and it would be accessible to and from the sea, which was 
important for any fishing and trading community.  
Ban Bana is practically surrounded by water. The 
ancient beach ridge of Ban Bana is situated between 
the deltas of the Pattani and Yaring rivers, which are 
around 4 kilometres to the west and east of Ban Bana, 
respectively. Today, the area between Ban Bana and 
the current shoreline to the north (around 200-metre 
distance) is covered with very fertile mangrove forests. 
On the southern side, the Naring and Maning rivers 
run parallel to the beach ridge and connect Ban Bana to 
the Pattani and Yaring rivers, with which people could 
navigate upstream for rice and forest resources for their 
consumption and trade with foreign merchants.
According to my survey in Ban Bana with my late father, 
Preecha Noonsuk, in June 2002, two brick foundations 
have been identified at the site, including the western and 
eastern structures. The western structure is located in Mu 
3, Bana sub-district, at the location of a modern Islamic 
mosque next to the cemetery. At the northeast corner of 
the mosque, a brick well of 140 cm. diameter is situated. 
At the southeast corner, there is a depression on the ground, 
probably a remnant of an ancient man-made pond associated 
with the shrine. Around the mosque, a number of bricks 
and artefacts, such as stone sculptures, architectural parts, a 
grinding stone, pottery sherds, Chinese ceramics, and an ivory 
bead, were found. Some of them are discussed below.
A large ablution basin (snānadroṇī) was discovered 
[Figures 8a-c]. It is square and quite flat: 247 cm. in length, 
114 cm. in width, and 10 cm. in height. It is made of granite 
and the edges were elaborately carved to suggest the rims were 
equally 21 cm. on all sides. At one end, there is a channel, most 
likely for liquid, and this reminds us of a somasūtra, characteristic 
to Brahmanical tradition. Granite is also a common raw 
material for yonī and architectural parts in ancient Brahmanical 
communities in southern India (Huntington 1999: 303) and in 
Tāmbraliṅga (Wannasarn 2013: 57-157). 
Preecha and Chatchai believed that this piece is a yonī 
(2549: 63-65), and, if it actually is, then this piece would be the 
largest yonī so far discovered in ancient peninsular Thailand. 
There is no hole, however, to insert a liṅga or a statue at the 
middle of this granite slab, which would be very peculiar 
for a yonī. Perhaps, it is only an ablution basin on which a 
statue was put without fixing it within. There is also a slight 
possibility that this piece is a slab for washing clothes but it is 
highly improbable because the piece seems too elaborate to 
be created for mundane uses. I know of two more examples 
of ablution basins from Nakhon Si Thammarat province with 
no hole in the middle. The first one was made of limestone 
from Monument no. 4 at Khao Kha in Sichon district. It has 
a round body (77 cm. in diameter) and a similar prolongated 
channel for sacred water [Figure 9]. It is said to be the most 
naturalistic ablution basin in peninsular Thailand (Nongkhran 
2544: 183); however, the shape of this round ablution basin 
is very different from our specimen at Ban Bana. The second 
piece is a sandstone slab from Wat Phetcharik in the city of 
Nakhon Si Thammarat. It is square (93 x 93 cm.), and quite 
flat (16 cm. in height) and its channel for sacred water is broken. 
It seems to have also been reused as stone for sharpening tools 
and grinding herbs, as suggested by the features on its body 
and edges [Figure 10]. All these ablution basins without a 
hole are exceptional in peninsular Thailand. They seem to 
have been used in a religious context, seemingly associated 
with Brahmanism as it will become clear from what follows.
A possible liṅga was also discovered near the western 
structure of Ban Bana [Figure 11]. It was made of sandstone 
but broken in half and quite weather-beaten; therefore, it is 
difficult to see the original features. The piece, however, is 
dome-like (40 cm. in height) with a carving of a straight line 
running from top to bottom, similar to the rudrabhāga of a 
liṅga. There are also some smooth blocks of sandstone, the 
raw material usually used for sculptures, which appeared to 
be intentionally carved. Perhaps, they were broken parts of 
sculptures or architectural parts.  
Figure 5: The bull (54 cm. in 
height and 66 cm. in length) from 
the Yarang archaeological complex, 
now kept at the Songkhla National 
Museum [Photograph courtesy of 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 6: Threshold from the 
Yarang archaeological complex 
[Photograph courtesy of Jidaporn 
Sangnil, the Princess Galyani 
Vadhana Institute of Cultural 
Studies].
Figure 7: Threshold from 
Monument no. 15 at Ban Wat,  
now displayed in front of Monument 
no. 3 at Ban Chale in the Yarang 
archaeological complex [Photograph 
courtesy of Pornthip Puntukowit,  
the 13th Regional Office of Fine 
Arts Department].

--- PAGE 93 ---
WannaSarn noonSuk
183
182
There are also a variety of stone architectural parts, such as 
foundation rocks, pillar bases, and door frames. One broken door frame 
is particularly interesting [Figure 12]. It was made of granite and had 
a tenon at one end to fit into a mortise of a threshold or lintel. These 
architectural parts suggest the construction techniques characteristic 
to Brahmanical shrines, especially in Tāmbraliṅga, where these types 
of architectural parts were abundant (Wannasarn 2013: 103-109). It 
may be assumed that the western structure was in fact a Brahmanical 
shrine and was made with similar construction techniques used in 
Tāmbraliṅga, in which the body of the shrine may have been made of 
bricks but the superstructure was made of wood and thatch, and stone 
parts were used as pillar bases, door frames, thresholds, and lintels. 
Granite was normally used in Tāmbraliṅga from the eighth century 
onwards, this being partly confirmed by the Thermoluminescence date 
of circa 800 CE from a brick sample excavated at Wat Thao Khot where 
some granite architectural parts were found nearby (Wannasarn 2013: 
138). It may therefore be possible to assume that the western shrine at 
Ban Bana [Figure 13] was erected in some time during approximately 
the eighth to eleventh centuries. It is important to note, however, 
that these stone architectural parts have not been found in Buddhist 
architecture in this region, except when they were reused for other 
purposes which were not their original functions. Therefore, it may be 
assumed at present that these features were mainly characteristic of a 
Brahmanical architectural tradition in the region.   
The eastern structure is located at the centre of the modern-day 
community of Ban Bana in Mu 2, Bana sub-district. This structure 
was largely destroyed by the construction of a new road. Fortunately, 
there are still some bricks and artefacts, such as architectural parts 
[Figure 14], pottery sherds, Chinese ceramics, and grinding stones. The 
bricks are of similar size (around 32 x 17 x 6 cm.) with those 
of the western structure. A broken sandstone door frame with 
a tenon was found, and this suggests the same Brahmanical 
tradition of construction and a contemporaneous date 
(ca the eighth to eleventh centuries). 
Chinese ceramics were found throughout the site of Ban 
Bana. The 113 pieces that we collected can be dated to the 
Yuan (1271-1368), Ming (1368-1644), and Qing (1644-1911) 
dynasties. This suggests that Ban Bana probably became a 
trading station of Chinese ceramics from the thirteenth to 
twentieth centuries as well. The earthenware ceramics have 
not yet been studied in detail, but some of them could be 
identified as kendis since they had spouts, similar to those 
discovered in Songkhla, Nakhon Si Thammarat, and Surat 
Thani provinces.
The Site of “Mahut Hill” or Khuan Mahut
From the evidence presented above, it can be seen that 
Buddhism and Brahmanism most likely co-existed in pre-
Islamic Pattani. Yarang may have been the epicentre, 
dominated by Buddhism in this area, but there were probably 
also some smaller Brahmanical communities, like Ban Bana, 
outside the Yarang complex. In fact, as I and my father 
surveyed the region in 2002 (Preecha & Chatchai 2549: 61-
63), we discovered that Ban Bana is not the sole site of its 
kind. There is another site complex known as “Mahut hill” 
or Khuan Mahut where Buddhist finds were absent while 
Brahmanical ones were numerous.      
Mahut hill is located around 6 kilometres to the southeast 
of the site of Ban Wat in the Yarang archaeological complex. 
It is also around 6 kilometres to the east of the Pattani river. 
The hill is around 77 metres above sea level, almost the 
same height as Khao Kha, the most important Śaiva site 
in Tāmbraliṅga. It is a small hill surrounded by plains and 
would have been like an island in the rainy season. Perhaps, 
it was this sacred geography that made people believe that 
Mahut hill was the sacred mountain in the Brahmanical 
conception, and this led to the construction of a series of 
brick shrines on its top. The hilltop was made into a large 
platform surrounded by stone retaining walls. On top of this 
platform, two brick shrines were built, between which lay a 
man-made pond (5 x 10 m.), the first measuring 5 x 10 m., 
the second 15 x 20 m. Another man-made pond was found 
around 10 metres to the south of the second shrine. There 
were architectural parts, such as door frames, thresholds, and 
lintels, similar to those found in Ban Bana and Tāmbraliṅga. 
According to the villagers, there were “yonīs” found in this site, 
but most of them were badly damaged. The most complete 
one was moved to Niwet Phupha Buddhist monastery (Wat 
Trang). It was almost square (85 x 88 x 7 cm.) and made of 
granite. At the middle of the piece, there was a square hole, 
into which a liṅga could have been inserted [Figure 15].  
Figures 8 a-c: Ablution basin 
(snānadroṇī) from the western 
shrine at Ban Bana, (a) picture 
showing the whole piece, (b) the 
somasūtra, and (c) drawing 
[Photographs by Preecha Noonsuk and 
drawing by Wannasiree Noonsuk].
Figure 9
Figure 10
Figure 11
Figure 12
Opposite Figure 9: Ablution 
basin from Khao Kha, Sichon district, 
Nakhon Si Thammarat province 
[Photograph by Wannasarn Noonsuk].
Opposite Figure 10: Ablution 
basin from Wat Phetcharik, Mueang 
district, Nakhon Si Thammarat, now 
kept at the Nakhon Si Thammarat 
National Museum [Photograph  
by Wannasarn Noonsuk].
Opposite Figure 11: Fragments 
of a possible liṅga from the western  
shrine at Ban Bana [Photograph by 
Preecha Noonsuk].
Opposite Figure 12: A fragment 
of door frame from the western shrine 
at Ban Bana [Photograph by Preecha 
Noonsuk].
a
c
b

--- PAGE 94 ---
WannaSarn noonSuk
185
184
Endnotes
1 
For instance, this claim was reflected in the 
statement by a head of Muslim group, called 
PULO, as appeared in an online newspaper. See: 
http://www.manager.co.th/Politics/ViewNews.
aspx?NewsID=9560000023609 (retrieved on  
20 July 2013).
2 
The burning occurred in 2004 and on 18 
February 2007, which destroyed the whole 
office and valuable archaeological documents. 
Some of the burnt artefacts, such as terracotta 
“votive stūpas,” are now on display at the Nakhon 
Si Thammarat National Museum. Personal 
communication with Ms Pornthip Puntukowit, 
former Head of the Archaeological Unit at 
the Yarang Archaeological Complex. See also: 
http://www.muangboranjournal.com/modules.
php?name=News&file=article&sid=1291 
(retrieved on 20 July 2013).
3 
Preecha and Chatchai (2549: 54-60) wrote in their 
report that some stone sculptures and architectural 
parts were found in several sites outside the  
Yarang archaeological complex as well, including 
(1) Ban Paka-arang in Pattani mueang district, 
where several stone architectural parts, such as 
door frames, were found, (2) Ban Bayomaosumeng 
in Yarang district, where fragments of three 
ablution basins, possibly yonīs, and some stone 
architectural parts were found, (3) Ban Bana, and 
(4) the Mahut hill, which are discussed in detail in 
this essay.  I did not have a chance to join Preecha 
Noonsuk in his survey in Ban Paka-arang and Ban 
Bayomosumeng and could not find photographs of 
his findings at these sites in his collection, therefore 
I intentionally left out here these two sites from  
this study.  
4 
The word ban is Thai and could mean “village,” 
while bana in Malay seems to be derived from 
bandar, which means “harbour” (Perret et al.  
2004: 86-87).
Conclusion
In summary, it may be assumed that the aforementioned ancient 
Brahmanical communities spread along the east coast of peninsular 
Thailand with maritime trade. The evidence from Ban Bana and 
Mahut hill especially suggests that there was a close social connection 
with Tāmbraliṅga. Their shared Brahmanical tradition was distinctively 
similar and may be traced back to southern India where stone 
architectural parts, especially those of granite, were widely used. These 
communities continued to play a role in maritime trade at least until the 
twentieth century, although their religious orientation may have at times 
changed to Islam.
From the foregoing pages, it also appears clear that much more 
archaeological research is needed. Some fine-grained questions are still 
left unanswered. Future research should seek to find more connections 
between Pattani and southern Kedah, which were woven together with 
trans-isthmian trade. New excavations in Pattani province would also 
prove useful in uncovering the multi-cultural and multi-religious past 
and hopefully help mend the bond between people in this conflict zone.
Acknowledgements 
I wish to record my intellectual debt to my father, Preecha Noonsuk, and 
express my gratitude to Wannasiree Noonsuk, Pornthip Puntukowit, 
Jidaporn Sangnil, the Fine Arts Department, the Princess Galyani 
Vadhana Institute of Cultural Studies, and the Cultural Centre at 
Yala Rajabhat University for providing valuable information and 
illustrations for this essay. I am also grateful to Nicolas Revire, Stephen 
Murphy, Cy Calugay, and the reviewer for their comments and insights, 
and to the Ananda Mahidol Foundation and Walailak University for 
supporting my broader research entitled, “the Cultural Landscape of 
Tāmbraliṅga,” of which this modest contribution is partly a result.
Figure 14: A fragment of possible architectural part, 
perhaps a moonstone, from the eastern shrine at Ban Bana 
[Photograph by Preecha Noonsuk].
Figure 15: A yonī from the Mahut hill [Photograph courtesy 
of Pornthip Puntukowit, the 13th Regional Office of Fine Arts 
Department].
Figure 13: The mosque where the 
western shrine is located [Photograph 
by Preecha Noonsuk].
References
Apichart Suphawajruksakul 
2005  Coastal Erosion at the Pak 
Phanang River Basin, Changwat Nakhon 
Si Thammarat. Master Thesis. 
Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University. 
[Unpublished]
Chaiwat Satha-Anand 
2554  Matsayit “daeng”: thon 
khwam runraeng tophuen thi saksit 
nai sangkhom manut (The “Red” 
Mosque: Violence Against Sacred 
Space in Human Societies). Rubaiyat 
2(3): 14-34. [In Thai; 2011 CE] 
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2535  Kansamruat borannasathan mueang 
yarang (The Survey of Ancient Monuments 
at Yarang). Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai; 1992 CE]
2549  Borannawatthu sinlapa nai 
phiphithaphan sathan haeng chat (Artefacts 
and Artworks in the Songkhla National 
Museum). Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai; 2006 CE]
Huntington, Susan  
1999  The Art of Ancient India: Buddhist, 
Hindu, Jain. New York: Weather 
Hill. [Reprint, First Edition 1985; 
With contributions from John C. 
Huntington]
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel 
2002  The Malay Peninsula: Crossroads 
of the Maritime Silk Road (100 BC-1300 
AD). Leiden: Brill.
Nongkhran Srichai 
2544  Khao kha: wiman haeng 
phra siwa maha thep (Khao Kha: 
The Vimana of Śiva). In Fine 
Arts Department (ed.), Prawatisat 
borannakhadi nakhon si thammarat 
(History and Archaeology of Nakhon 
Si Thammarat). Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai; 2001 CE]
Perret, Daniel, Amara Srisuchat 
& Sombun Thanasuk (eds) 
2004  Études sur l’histoire du sultanat 
de Patani. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Preecha Noonsuk & Chatchai 
Sukrakanchana 
2549  Kansueksa phatthanakan khong 
chumchon boran ban bana tambon bana 
amphoe mueang changwat pattani (A 
Study of the Development of the Ancient 
Settlement of Ban Bana, Mueang District, 
Pattani Province, Southern Thailand). 
Nakhon Si Thammarat: Rajabhat 
Nakhon Si Thammarat University. 
[Unpublished report in Thai;  
2006 CE]
Srisakra Vallibhotama, 
Chamrun Den-Udom, Abdulloh 
Laorman & Udom Patnawong 
2550  Lao khan tamnan tai (Tales from 
the South). Bangkok: Lek-Prapai 
Viriyapant Foundation. [In Thai; 
2007 CE]
Wannasarn Noonsuk 
2009  The Isthmian Civilizations: The 
Significance of Peninsular Siam in the 
Southeast Asian Maritime World. Köln: 
Lambert Academic Publishing.
2013  Tambralinga and Nakhon Si 
Thammarat: Early Kingdoms on the 
Isthmus of Southeast Asia. Nakhon Si 
Thammarat: Rajabhat Nakhon Si 
Thammarat University Press.
Wheatley, Paul 
1961  The Golden Khersonese. Studies 
in the Historical Geography of the Malay 
Peninsula before A.D. 1500. Kuala 
Lumpur: University of Malaya Press.

--- PAGE 95 ---
187
186
Introduction
T
he earliest forms of “Indianisation” in Laos have not been the 
subject of much research to date. Henri Parmentier (1927: 
231, 233-235), when introducing some two hundred sites related to 
“Khmer primitive art” – soon reclassified as “pre-Angkorian art” as 
being prior to the ninth century – took into account only five such 
sites located upstream of the Khone falls. Three of them are located 
in the Champassak region [Map 3], viz. “Bàn Huèi Thàmô” 
(i.e. Huei Tomo), “Vat Phu” (hereafter, Wat Phu) and “Čǎn Nakhon” 
(i.e. Phu Lakkhon); the other two being in Savannakhet province 
[Map 6], viz. “Thằt Phoṅ” (i.e. That Phon) and “Thằt Iṅ Raṅ” 
(i.e. That In Hang). Although the latter are relatively far away from 
the Cambodian border, their position was not surprising to the 
architect as communication would have been easy via the Mekong 
river with the southernmost sites. This holds true for two other sites in 
the middle basin of the Se Kong river (Attopeu province) [Map 2]– 
“Vat Sai Phai” (Upmung Se Su) and “Bàn Sáke” (Ban Sakhae) – that can 
also be easily connected to the pre-Angkorian sanctuaries discovered 
at the confluence with the Mekong in the Cambodian districts of 
Stœng Treng and Thala Borivat (Parmentier 1927: 230). Among these 
seven sites, six – Wat Phu excepted – have not been researched until 
very recently.
That part of Laos was largely integrated in the Khmer cultural 
sphere was however made explicit at a rather early stage. Auguste Barth 
edited and translated two inscriptions from the Champassak region at 
the beginning of the twentieth century, namely K. 367 (1902: 235-240) and 
K. 363 (1903: 442-446). Parmentier (1912: 195-197) also acknowledged 
the very ancient origin of Wat Phu, even if the most visible parts of the 
sanctuary belong to the Angkorian period. The inherent sacredness of 
the site – the monumental complex is built at the foot of a mountain the 
shape of whose top suggests a natural liṅga (hence its name Liṅgaparvata) 
– seems indeed to have been recognised very early on by a community 
that had adopted the religious tenets imported from India. George 
Cœdès (1918: 1-3) even considered in his pioneering writings that the 
area had exceptional historical importance, for he viewed the site as 
the cradle of the first Cambodian dynasty – the “land of Kambu” – 
i.e. the territory from which Zhenla had begun expanding to the extent 
of conquering Funan. This theory, based primarily on the interpretation 
of a late Sanskrit inscription found at Wat Phu (K. 475), was reaffirmed 
later on the basis of arguments found essentially in the Chinese annals 
(Cœdès 1928: 124). It then received considerable support with the 
Pre-Angkorian Communities in  
the Middle Mekong Valley  
(Laos and Adjacent Areas)
micHel lorrillard
Thailand
Attopeu
Saravane
Pakse
Wat Phu
Savannakhet
That 
Phanom
Vietnam
Laos
Cambodia
Mekong
Mekong
Se Bang Fai
Se Don
Se Bang Huan
Se Mun
Se Kong
Se Kong
Se Bang Hieng
Se Bang Hieng
Se Su
Se Kaman
Se Champhon
Se Xang Xoi
Se Tha Moak
Se Pon
Se Noi
Thakhek
Nakhon
 Phanom
Opposite Map 1: Khmer and 
Mon sites in southern and central 
parts of Laos. All the sites have  
been referenced by EFEO, excepted  
some sites in Champassak province 
where coordinates have been given  
by PRAL [Drawing courtesy of 
Jérémy Ferrand].

--- PAGE 96 ---
micHel lorrillard
189
188
edition and translation of the Wat Luang Kau stele (K. 365), dated 
paleographically to the second half of the fifth century (Cœdès 1956). 
This inscription, which had been ordered by a mahārājādhirāja named 
Śrī Devānīka, had been found less than 5 kilometres away from Wat Phu 
in a vast complex whose groundplan had at that time just been revealed 
by aerial photography. The images clearly displayed what was hardly 
visible on the ground: in this case a quadrangle of 2,400 m. x 1,800 m. 
(with the Mekong as the eastern side), composed of several concentric 
earthen levee enclosures containing the buried remains of many 
monumental structures. In spite of the importance of the discovery – 
i.e. the remains of an ancient city comparable to Sambor Prei Kuk in 
Cambodia – it did not rapidly trigger the excavation campaign that 
Cœdès called for.1 Most archaeological research at the time was focussed 
on the Angkor area where so many other monuments still had to be 
inventoried and uncovered. Some twenty years later, Bernard-Philippe 
Groslier expressed great interest in extending research in southern 
Laos, but the political situation was already such that access to the area 
was impossible.
The absence of excavation programs in this region for most of 
the twentieth century was detrimental to the recognition of Laos as 
a territory in mainland Southeast Asia deserving in-depth historical 
studies. Concerning the period prior to the emergence of the Lao 
kingdom of Lān Xāng (fourteenth century), the country still appears as 
a large blank spot on the published historical maps where only the site of 
Wat Phu is sometimes mentioned. This observation does not only affect 
the history of Laos itself; the damage caused by the lack of documented 
research also severely impacts the overall vision and the degree of 
knowledge that we can achieve when dealing with regional history. 
As long as we ignore this territory, in spite of it being geographically 
located at the crossroads of the great civilisational currents of Southeast 
Asia, many key questions cannot be satisfactorily addressed. The remark 
applies to the so-called Indianisation process in inland regions, and to 
the type of contacts that may have been established between the first 
historical cultures of the middle Mekong valley and those which thrived 
in the Delta (Funan) or even in the coastal areas of central Vietnam 
(Campā) or central Thailand (Dvāravatī). Moreover, this lack of data 
has prevented any real constructive reflection on the development of 
the first territorial entities created by the Tai-Lao people. At the turn 
of the first millennium CE, this Tai-speaking population gradually 
moved southward along the rivers and settled in areas that other ethnic 
communities had occupied before them. Myths and legends aside, the 
questions of historical continuity on the Mekong banks and of the 
persistence of a cultural substrate have yet to be investigated.
However, thanks to some recent French and Italian field-research 
programs carried out in cooperation with the Lao Ministry of 
Information and Culture, it has now become possible to submit all 
these issues to a thorough review. The archaeological work done in Wat 
Phu between 1991 and 1998 under the aegis of the Projet de recherche en 
archéologie lao (PRAL) led to the discovery of pre-Angkorian structures in 
the upper part of the sanctuary and to the excavation of two monuments 
in the ancient Mekong riverside town (Santoni & Hawixbrock 1998; 
Santoni & Souksavatdy 1999). In the latter case, geomagnetic surveys 
provided substantial data about the settlement pattern, highlighting the 
existence of about thirty structures that are still buried. The surveys 
carried out by this team in 1998 and 1999 further led to the discovery 
of new temples in the southern part of Champassak province, close 
to the Mekong and along the old road connecting Angkor to Wat 
Phu (Santoni & Hawixbrock 1999). More recently, PRAL launched 
new excavation campaigns leading to the partial uncovering of two 
pre-Angkorian monuments in Nong Mung (2011) and Wat Sang-O 
(2013), in and around the ancient city (unpublished reports).
From 2003 to 2009, the École française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO) 
centre in Vientiane has furthermore carried out an ambitious research 
program in the form of extensive surveys focussing on the identification 
and inventory of historical material in the seventeen provinces of Laos. 
While the northern part of the country offers a sizeable amount of 
useful evidence related to Tai-Lao culture in the second half of the 
second millennium, research in the southern and the central parts 
revealed – in addition to Lao remains – about eighty historical sites with 
much older data, dating back to the second half of the first millennium 
and the beginning of the second one [Map 1]. These sites belong to 
the Khmer (pre-Angkorian and Angkorian) and Mon cultural areas that 
had hitherto been largely unnoticed or ignored. This essay will focus 
mostly on the historical value of pre-Angkorian material found in the 
middle Mekong valley, mostly in modern-day Laos from Champassak 
up to Khammuan province, with some references to directly adjacent 
areas in Thailand and Cambodia.2 
Backgrounds on a Regional History 
Whereas our knowledge of the ancient history of Cambodia, Vietnam 
and Thailand is more advanced than that of Laos, the geography of 
pre-Angkorian sites in these three countries has not been extensively 
documented so far. 
The main resource available in this respect is Parmentier’s book 
(1927), whose value is still undiminished in spite of its age. The author 
recorded over one hundred and seventy sites in Cambodia and southern 
Vietnam that can be considered as pertaining to Funan and Zhenla. 
New research has of course resulted in the discovery of other 
pre-Angkorian structures and artefacts. Some art historians and 
archaeologists (e.g. Pierre Dupont, Mireille Bénisti, Jean Boisselier 
and Miriam Stark) have significantly contributed to scholarship with 
relevant information or clarification on matters of style and dating. The 
study of inscriptions, developing from Cœdès’s work (1937-66), has 
also led a few scholars (mainly Claude Jacques and Michael Vickery) 
to supplement and reconsider some matters concerning the dawn of 
Khmer history. All the data currently available in the region should thus 
be collected and submitted to a comparative study taking into account, 
for instance, what we know about settlement modalities, monuments, 
statuary, material culture and textual sources.
Archaeological research in Thailand has also made considerable 
progress, highlighting the high degree of specificity of the northeast 
part of the country, where several native cultures have been recognised. 
It has now been shown that the first historical communities established 
in the region had developed into complex societies as early as the Iron 
Age and already attained an advanced level of technical development

--- PAGE 97 ---
micHel lorrillard
191
190
before they start to show evidence of influence from India (Higham & 
Rachanie 2012). The ethnic identity of these people during the early 
centuries of the Common Era is still a highly speculative issue. They 
probably belonged to the large Austro-Asiatic group, but it is impossible 
to say whether they were part of Khmer or Mon speaking communities 
before the seventh century when some inscriptions in these vernacular 
languages make their appearance (after an initial phase of writings in 
Sanskrit). 
This may be of great importance if we consider, following Cœdès, 
that it was perhaps in both northeast Thailand and southern Laos that 
the first Khmer polities have arisen. Admittedly, information about the 
sites of the first millennium CE identified in northeast Thailand was still 
very scanty in the first half of the twentieth century. However, scholars︐ 
attention was drawn after a few Sanskrit inscriptions dated to the late 
sixth century were discovered in the Mun river basin (see infra). Remains 
of great value were also identified in some sites that appear to have been 
important cities, not only in the centre of the Khorat Plateau such as 
Mueang Fa Daet and Kantharawichai, but even more so in the western 
and southern border areas such as Si Thep and Dong Si Mahosot. 
In the mid-1970s, B.-P. Groslier led two missions in northeast 
Thailand (1997: 199), one of his objectives being to collect information 
about the place of origin of the Khmer communities who had already 
been united into a political entity. He finally discarded the Khorat 
Plateau, where he did not find sufficient data, and pointed rather 
towards the southern Dangrek range (now in Cambodia) and possibly 
southern Laos, i.e. the Wat Phu region, for further investigation. He 
became aware, however, of the importance of the “Round Cities” 
(i.e. large moated sites) in northeast Thailand and drew a parallel 
between these protohistoric sites and most of the places that were 
later selected by the Khmers of the Angkorian period to build temples 
(1997: 206-207). Apparently, Groslier made a clear distinction between 
the communities that founded these moated cities with their peculiar 
hydraulic infrastructures and those that later founded the Khmer 
empire, never thinking of a possible continuity in the settlement 
process. Furthermore, he separated the two above-mentioned areas 
from a third one whose limits included the present-day Thai provinces 
of Kalasin, Sakon Nakhon and Nakhon Phanom. There, according to 
him, a “Civilisation of steles” – a type of artefacts already reported 
by Subhadradis Diskul (1956) – emerged as a cultural area that was 
even more different from that of the Khmers (1997: 202). Groslier’s 
assumptions, stimulating as they were at the time, are now outdated. 
The large-scale work carried out by Thai archaeologists from the 
1970s onwards, paired with the comprehensive research that has 
been conducted recently by Stephen Murphy (2010), has shown that 
the area over which this culture characterised by “Buddhist steles” 
(i.e. sema stones) indeed extended throughout the Khorat Plateau, with 
significant concentrations in some specific places. They also evidenced a 
link between this culture and a Mon-speaking population similar to that 
among which the Dvāravatī culture developed in the Chao Phraya river 
basin (Revire, this volume).
The Geography of Pre-Angkorian Sites  
in the Middle Mekong Valley
Although based on only seven sites, the limits that Parmentier had set 
in 1927 for the pre-Angkorian area in Laos differ only slightly from 
those that are currently established on the basis of the circa fifty sites 
that have been recently inventoried by the Vientiane EFEO centre in 
the southern and central provinces. The contribution of recent research 
concerns the composition and the density of this area rather than its 
geographic extension. 
Not only do the historical sites dated to the second half of the 
first millennium appear to be far more numerous than those dated 
to the first half of the second millennium, but they are also more 
evenly distributed, in relation with the constraints and assets of the 
environment. Parmentier wrote that “the structures displaying primitive 
Khmer style are rather close to rivers” (1927: 44), and his study is to 
a large extent structured on the basis of this observation. Apart from 
the introductory chapter devoted to Sambor Prei Kuk, the work is 
composed of three parts which cover successively the lower Mekong 
basin, the Tonle Sap basin and the upper reaches of the great river 
(upstream from Phnom Penh, including southern Laos and northeast 
Thailand). The maps provided to illustrate his study place particular 
emphasis on the secondary drainage system that is otherwise not so very 
clearly visible in the vast plains of Cambodia and whose importance 
is often underestimated. In Laos, as most of the territory is covered 
with mountains, the role played by the Mekong and its major left-bank 
tributaries appears similarly decisive.
The Se Kong Basin
The Se Kong river, whose upper and middle courses are 
located in the eastern part of southern Laos, flows into the 
Mekong in Cambodia, less than 50 kilometres downstream 
from the Khone falls, the traditional and current frontier 
between the two countries. 
The archaeological wealth at the confluence in both Stœng 
Treng town and Thala Borivat village on the opposite bank 
has been highlighted in previous studies on the pre-Angkorian 
period (Parmentier 1927; Bénisti 1968; Lévy 1970), but current 
historical works tend to neglect it. The near total absence of 
field work so far in the region is surely the reason why no 
Khmer remains has ever been recorded in the lower basin of 
the Se Kong upstream of the confluence of the Se San (less 
than 10 kilometres away from Stœng Treng) up to the border 
of the Lao province of Attopeu, i.e. over a distance of some 150 
kilometres. Partial surveys carried out over a distance of about 
50 kilometres in Lao territory downstream from the town of 
Attopeu have not yet been conclusive. However, many remains 
have recently been found by the EFEO team in the middle 
basin of the river up to the limit of Sekong province – the 
upper basin could not be explored due to difficulty of access 
to the territory – thus confirming the existence of relations 
with pre-Angkorian sites bordering the Mekong [Map 2]. 
CAMBODIA
LAOS  
Se N
a
m
 N
o
i
Map 2: Pre-Angkorian sites  
in the middle Se Kong basin,  
Attopeu province, Laos  
[Drawing courtesy of Pierre Pichard]. 
  1. Ban Khum Kham 
  2. Ban Sok
  3. Ban Sapoan 
  4. Ban Sakhae 
  5. Ban Halang 
  6. Ban Se Kaman Nua
  7. Upmung Se Su
  8. Ban Fang Daeng 
  9. Ban Wat That 
10. Ban Tatkum

--- PAGE 98 ---
micHel lorrillard
193
192
Ban Wat That temple, on the left bank of the Se Kaman and almost 
precisely opposite Wat Ban Fang Daeng, is famous for its stūpa that 
tradition assigns to the reign of the Lao King Setthāthirāt (mid-sixteenth 
century). However, the site might well be much older, since many 
Khmer remains, apparently belonging to the pre-Angkorian period, 
have been discovered there. This applies in particular to the fragment of 
a pedestal cornice and the corresponding dado with pilasters that is still 
half buried. Three large rectangular sandstone slabs may also belong to 
an ancient monument. The remaining parts of a large stone statue of 
the Buddha (crossed-legs and the head) that were to be assembled – as 
shown by the presence of a mortise – have however raised some doubts. 
Some stylistic features, for example the straightened hair, are rather 
reminiscent of the Angkorian style. The site of Ban Wat That might 
well have been a stopover along the course of the Se Kaman, as was the 
case with the Ban Tatkum site located about 30 kilometres upstream, 
at a distance of only 5 kilometres from the nearest mountain barrier 
belonging to the Annamite range. 
Of all the ancient historical sites identified in Laos, Ban Tatkum 
is easternmost (one can hardly find a sanctuary lying further away to 
the east, given the geography of the country); it is also the closest one 
to the historical territory of Campā in Vietnam. The existence of an 
ancient structure cannot be proven. However, the area is characterised 
by the presence of a large stele that lay among some sandstone blocks 
of indeterminate purpose; the upper part is carved in low-relief and 
represents a symbolised trimūrti [Figure 2]. Particular attention has 
been paid to the carving of attributes: a trident (triśūla) for Śiva, flanked 
by the water-pot (kamaṇḍalu) for Brahmā and the wheel (cakra) for Viṣṇu.3 
The three figures stand above a rectangular shape with rounded corners, 
bearing a bulge on the left-hand side. This curious design is reminiscent 
of the shell of a turtle – possibly the turtle supporting the cosmos.
The Champassak Plain
Champassak province, bordering Cambodia and extending on both 
banks of the Mekong, is not surprisingly the area with the highest 
number of ancient remains. Some twenty-four pre-Angkorian sites have 
so far been identified (with Wat Phu and the old city each counted as 
one) whereas only a dozen Angkorian sanctuaries have been found in 
the same region [Map 3]. Virtually all pre-Angkorian sites, from Khong 
island in the south to Phu Lakkhon in the north, are located along the 
Mekong or in its immediate vicinity. The maximum distance from 
the riverside does not exceed 20 kilometres, except for the Ban Huei 
Na/Phu Lek complex (about 30 kilometres), which might have been 
a stopover on the transverse road leading to the Mun valley without 
having to travel up to the confluence. The rationale underlying the 
position of sites is clearly different from that of Angkorian sanctuaries 
that were meant to be primarily stopping places on the land route 
between Angkor and Wat Phu. 
The Huei Tomo site at the confluence of the river bearing the same 
name should be considered as a particular case, not only because it is 
positioned on the left bank of the river (which is unique in the province), 
but also because it harbours both pre-Angkorian (lintel, somasūtra 
with makara head, and perhaps a mukhaliṅga) and Angkorian remains 
Terrestrial east-west routes also ran across the Boloven Plateau 
from these lowlands to the territory surrounding Wat Phu 
(Attopeu and Huei Tomo are located at the same latitude) over 
a distance of about 100 kilometres. Whereas the Attopeu plain 
is rather vast – about 40 kilometres at its widest point – thus 
offering much space for human settlement, we can observe that 
the communities gave preference to riparian habitats, thereby 
confirming Parmentier’s views. Eight of the ten sites where 
evidence of the pre-Angkorian period has been found seem 
to have been places where at least one monument was erected. 
On the banks of the Se Kong, at a short distance from 
each other, three sites with both architectural components 
and ceremonial objects have been identified. Ban Khum 
Kham – the site located furthest upstream – has revealed 
several door jambs, one door head/sill, two ogee steps, a 
somasūtra and fragments of ablution basins (snānadroṇīs) among 
various heaps of bricks. These remains may have belonged to the 
same complex as those found in Ban Sapoan and opposite Ban Sok, 
2 kilometres downstream, in particular large-sized bricks and rectangular 
sandstone slabs which might have been door jambs. In four different 
places in the village of Ban Sakhae, at about 20 kilometres further 
south, on the outer side of a narrow bend, significant remains such as 
a lintel (see infra), thresholds, door heads/sills, door jambs, a somasūtra, 
parts of a pedestal and heaps of bricks, suggesting the presence of an 
important shrine, have been located. A few sandstone fragments found 
in Ban Halang, 2 kilometres south, could be related to this site.
The modern town of Attopeu lies at the confluence of the Se 
Kaman, a major river whose source is located in the Annamite mountain 
range, at the border of Quang Nam province in Vietnam. On the left 
bank of this river, less than 1 kilometre away from the confluence, 
the former existence of an ancient structure is indicated only by the 
presence of a concentration of large bricks amongst which are a few 
scattered objects that suggest religious activity such as fragments of a 
pedestal. After navigating past the meanders of the Se Kaman over 
a distance of about 12 kilometres, travellers arrive at the confluence 
with the Se Su, another river with its source in Kon Tum province in 
Vietnam. An important pre-Angkorian site called “Upmung Se Su” has 
been discovered 2 kilometres upstream on the west bank of this river. 
At least two monuments must have existed there, as can 
be deduced from about twenty sandstone architectural 
components that were found and the extent of the area 
covered by bricks [Figure 1]. The site has obviously 
been heavily looted and no remains of cultual objects 
have been found. The structures were discovered in 
the early twentieth century and the French colonial 
authorities made arrangements to transport two lintels 
of the seventh-eighth centuries that looters had not yet 
taken away to the former mueang (town) of Attopeu, 
somewhat further upstream on the Se Kaman. One of 
them is still displayed in the modern Lao temple of Ban 
Fang Daeng, along with the fragment of a colonette 
probably originating from the Se Su site as well. 
Figure 1: Stele or ogee step, 
Upmung Se Su site, Attopeu province, 
Laos [Photograph by Michel 
Lorrillard]. 
Figure 2: Detail of a stele with a 
symbolised trimūrti, Ban Tatkum, 
Attopeu province, Laos [Photograph 
by Michel Lorrillard].

--- PAGE 99 ---
micHel lorrillard
195
194
is also the confluence of the Tonle Repou, a right-bank tributary of the 
Mekong separating Laos from Cambodia for more than 80 kilometres. 
This river (flowing NW-SE), which the Angkor-Wat Phu land route 
crosses, must have played a major role in giving access to the southern 
flank of the Dangrek range, particularly to the Preah Vihear temple, 
whose religious importance may have been based on the transfer of a 
fragment of the natural Wat Phu liṅga in the early ninth century (Jacques 
1976: 363; Sanderson 2003-04: 410-420). A pre-Angkorian temple with 
two inscriptions on door jambs dating possibly from the seventh century 
(K. 341) was also built on this axis on the Cambodian side, about 
30 kilometres from the Lao border (Cœdès 1966: VIII, 134). This 
region may have been used to travel to Sambor Prei Kuk via Mlu Prei 
and along the Stœng Saen river in Cambodia. Very little research has 
been carried out in these remote areas, particularly on the southern and 
western edges of Champassak province, due to the presence of large 
non-cleared areas.
The Mekong riparian sites in Champassak province belonging to 
the pre-Angkorian age display a linear settlement pattern that cannot 
be so clearly identified in Cambodia, where sites are much more 
scattered. The complex formed by the original Wat Phu sanctuary 
and the adjoining ancient city has obviously played the role of a focal 
point in this network. The remains found there are much older, so 
that it can be assumed that the construction of the monuments really 
started and developed from the time when the sanctity of the mountain 
was recognised, after its summit had been identified as a liṅga. It is 
interesting to note that an almost precisely north-south line of about 
80 kilometres, with an alignment connecting most of the other 
sanctuaries, can be drawn between the old city and the pre-Angkorian 
temple on Khong island located closer to the Khmer border. It even 
seems that the early communities, when electing sites for settlement 
up to a distance of 20 kilometres downstream from the city, where the 
Mekong forms a loop imposing increased travelling time, preferred to 
settle away from the riverside to remain in the alignment and therefore 
use the overland route. This is illustrated by the find-spot of certain 
remains, such as a somasūtra with a makara head and a snānadroṇī with 
its liṅga in Ban Khok Khong, a pancaliṅga in Ban Na Khi Khuai, and 
even more clearly by the location of many ancient artificial basins, as is 
revealed with remarkable accuracy by aerial photography. 
The existence of several pre-Angkorian sanctuaries erected 
along the Mekong is further evidenced by the presence of seemingly 
very early lintels (Khong island, Veun Kaen, Non Sombat, Non Pha 
Khao, That Don Sai, Wat Phu ancient city, Phu Malong), and other 
architectural remains such as door jambs (Outhoum Mai) and vestiges 
of brick structures (Ban Saphang, Wat Lakhon in Champassak). The 
distance between these sites never exceeds a dozen kilometres (some 
are even very close to each other), indicating a rather even distribution. 
Five other small pre-Angkorian sanctuaries (Nong Sombat Nai, Nong 
Sombat Noi, Nong Sombat Gnai, Huei Kadien, Nong Saming), forming 
another alignment perpendicular to the river, though never far removed 
from it, could be slightly more recent, as suggested by K. 1201, an 
inscription of Jayavarman I dated to 654 CE found near Huei Kadien 
[Figure 3], and a different construction mode (Santoni & Hawixbrock 
1999: 396). Lintels have never been found there. As indicated by their 
Map 3: Khmer sites in Champassak 
province, Laos [Drawing courtesy of  
Jérémy Ferrand].
  1. Wat Don Khone 
  2. Khong 
  3. Ban Saphang 
  4. Nong Sombat Nai 
  5. Nong Boa Bo Pong 
  6. Nong Sombat Noi
  7. Nong Sombat Gnai
  8. Huei Kadien 
  9. Sang Mouang 
10. Nong Saming 
11. Veun Kaen 
12. Non Sombat 
13. Non Pha Khao 
14. That Don Sai 
15. Ban Outhoum Mai 
16. Ban Na Khi Khuai
17. Ban Khok Khong 
18. Ban Katup
19. Huei Tomo
20. Khan Mak Houk
21. Ban Muang Kang 
22. Wat Phu 
23. Wat Phu ancient city  
     (Liṅgapura?)
24. Wat Lakhon 
25. Phu Malong 
26. Phu Lakkhon 
27. Ban Sapheu
28. Ban Huei Na 
29. Phu Lek 
30. Ban That 
31. That Na Samliang 
32. Dong That 
33. That Ban Don 
34. That Nang In 
35. Nong Pham Ban Vienne
(sanctuary, inscription K. 362). We still do not know why Yaśovarman I 
(r. 889-910) chose to establish one of his hermitages (āśrama) in this 
place – about 10 kilometres from Wat Phu, specifically on the side of 
the eastern foothills – where occupation seems to have been much 
more modest. 
Khone island also harbours an example of an Angkorian structure 
located along the Mekong; however, with due consideration for the 
continuum that seems to have existed between the oldest sites in Stœng 
Treng province in Cambodia and those in Champassak province, we may 
assume that the place has also been occupied in the pre-Angkorian period. 
The nearby waterfalls separating the modern territories of Cambodia 
and Laos may have been appealing as much as it was a cause of fear, 
and in-depth research on this area would be profitable. A few kilometres 
upstream of Khone island (almost precisely opposite to Khong island) 
Figure 3: Inscribed door jamb from 
Huei Kadien, Champassak province, 
Laos [Photograph courtesy of  
Ang Choulean].

--- PAGE 100 ---
micHel lorrillard
197
196
names in many cases, these sites are here again 
related to rectangular ponds (nong) enclosed in 
large earthen levees. Champassak province is 
home to hundreds of such artificial basins; these 
are very common in Cambodia (trapeang, barai) but 
are almost non-existent elsewhere in Laos. A study 
of their distribution is extremely informative, not 
only because it shows a parallel with the location of 
the shrines, but also indicates ancient settlements 
that have now been swallowed by the forest. 
Some areas that are still unexplored but for which aerial photography 
reveals a number of such structures probably harbour a rich 
archaeological potential. 
The rivers flowing from the eastern end of the Dangrek range down 
to the Mekong, whose general course is roughly west-east, also deserve 
special consideration as they relate to a large extent to the modes of 
settlement. Attention should also be given to Huei Khammuan, a 
stream whose source is located on Phu Pasak, i.e. one of the heights 
overlooking Wat Phu, due to its numerous meanders that make it the 
longest and widest river of Champassak plain. 
Very few shrines have been built on high ground, so that the 
Wat Phu sanctuary, standing on the eastern slope of Phu Kao, is an 
exceptional example. Nevertheless, other places of worship have been 
created along this specific mountainous alignment, including some 
cave structures with only pre-Angkorian inscriptions (K. 723, K. 724, 
K. 1040, K. 1059). The Upmung shrine, very close to Wat Phu, as well 
as the Phu Malong sanctuary that was recently discovered at the other 
end of the range, are early buildings that may have been vested with a 
religious status superior to that granted to the monuments erected close 
to the riverside downstream from the ancient city.
It is possible that, starting from Wat Phu, travellers circumvented 
the Phu Kao (1,416 m.) and Phu Pasak (1,408 m.) mountains along 
the western route and progressed northward to reach the vast plain 
of Phon Thong district, thus easily gaining access to the Mun valley. 
No sanctuary has been found there yet, though several artificial basins 
have been identified. We have already referred to another road crossing 
the Dangrek range, with a stopover in Ban Huei Na/Phu Lek, where 
an interesting fragment of a pre-Angkorian lintel has been discovered 
[Figure 4]. However, the road most travelled must have been the 
Mekong up to the confluence with the Mun at a distance of about 70 
kilometres from Wat Phu. Apart from the Phu Malong shrine located 
on a hill, it does not seem that any sanctuary was built along this way, 
so that a clear distinction should be maintained between the area 
extending upstream from Wat Phu and that located downstream, up to 
the Khone falls.
The Lower Mun Basin
George Cœdès was among the first to put forward the idea that there 
was a form of unity in terms of communities and culture between the 
basin of the Mun river in Thailand [Map 4] and the Champassak area 
in Laos; however, the suggestion has never really been substantiated 
with conclusive data. As a matter of fact, it is highly questionable 
considering that the Khorat Plateau – especially on the western side 
– has not yielded any quantity of pre-Angkorian material comparable 
to what has been discovered in Cambodia and even in southern Laos. 
Just as we can claim that the lower basin of the Mun river has played 
virtually no role in the process of Angkorian penetration beyond the 
Dangrek range – as it developed mainly via passes in the western part 
of the range in the Khmer provinces of Utdor Meanchey and Banteay 
Meanchey –, we must also acknowledge that pre-Angkorian culture 
was propagated to a large extent following the course of the main 
rivers, confirming the importance of the middle Mekong, the Mun and 
its tributaries.
Concerning the lower Mun basin, references are currently restricted 
to the six Citrasena/Mahendravarman inscriptions found in the 
immediate vicinity of the confluence. We should set apart the inscribed 
stele found in Phu Lakkhon (K. 363) since it is located opposite the place 
where the Mun reaches the Mekong, i.e. in Lao territory. Among the 
other five inscriptions found in Ubon Ratchathani province, Thailand, 
two were discovered in Khan Thewada (K. 496 and K. 497), on a hill 
overlooking the confluence; two in Tham Prasat (K. 508 and K. 509), 
a cave shelter overlooking the Mun 2 kilometres from the preceding 
location; and the last one in Pak Dom (K. 1190), 4 kilometres further 
upstream. All of them are fairly short and the few French and Thai 
epigraphists who have examined them suggested that they were items 
commemorating victories (Jacques 1993). In spite of variations that 
are worth examining, these inscriptions prove similar to those found 
on the banks of the Mekong in Cambodia (K. 116, Chroy Ampil and 
K. 122, Thma Krê, Kratie province) and Laos (K. 363, K. 1193 and 
K. 1194, Champassak province), but also farther west on the Khorat 
Plateau (K. 377, Surin province; K. 514, Buri Ram province;4 K. 1102, 
Map 4: Ancient historical sites in 
the Lower Mun basin, Thailand 
[Drawing by Michel Lorrillard and 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 4: Lintel from Ban  
Huei Na, Pakse Museum, 
Champassak province, Laos 
[Photograph by Michel Lorrillard].

--- PAGE 101 ---
micHel lorrillard
199
198
Khon Kaen province; K. 1106, Nakhon Ratchasima region and 
K. 1280, Roi Et province) and in Prachin Buri province (K. 969). 
Whereas most of the bases used for these inscriptions are plain steles, 
one of the two Tham Prasat inscriptions (K. 509) is engraved on a 
large pedestal serving as a base for a stone carved bull, as is the case at 
Wat Phu (K. 1193 and K. 1194), Roi Et (K. 1280), Surin (K. 377) and 
Khon Kaen (K. 1102). 
Another short pre-Angkorian inscription (K. 1096) was found before 
1975 (FAD 2529: I, 284-286) at Wat Sa Kaeo, Phibun Mangsahan 
district, Ubon Ratchathani province, just in front of the Keng Sapheu 
rapids on the Mun, but it seems to have disappeared (FAD 2535: 80). 
It mentioned a king named Nṛpendrapativarman,5 possibly a relative 
of Mahendravarman. Anyway the place where the inscription was 
found is most interesting since it is also there that the first evidence of 
pre-Angkorian architecture was discovered upstream from the 
confluence of the Mun, at a distance of about 40 kilometres, taking 
all meanders into account. On both sides of the river where large 
rocks make it possible to wade across in the dry season, three sites have 
revealed the remains of buildings made of bricks with some sandstone 
components, including two fine lintels dating back to the seventh or 
eighth century CE (Le Bonheur 1995: 67, 79-80; Piriya 2012: 120).
No other important vestige from the pre-Angkorian era has been 
found in the lower reaches of the banks of the Mun itself, but some 
sites located along its tributaries show that the earliest Khmer culture 
had expanded widely in the region, that is in Ban Kaeng Toi (somasūtra, 
colonettes) on the Lam Se Bok river in Ubon Ratchathani province; 
in Don Mueang Toei (brick building, inscription K. 1082) on the 
Chi river in Yasothon province;6 in Don Khum Ngoen (architectural 
remains, inscription K. 1280) on the Lam Sieo Noi river in Roi Et 
province (Kongkaeo 2549; Charuek 2550); and probably also in Ubon 
Ratchathani province (Nam Yuen district) along the lower reaches of 
the Lam Dom Yai river (reclining Viṣṇu carved in rock) whose source 
in the Dangrek is close to that of the Tonle Repou river flowing on the 
other flank of the range down to the Mekong (Dhida 2536: 48). 
The first “Indianisation” process in this region, i.e. the introduction 
of new Indic concepts and forms of aesthetic expression, must have 
developed rather rapidly under political impetus. It is very likely that 
exchanges by waterway were preferred. However, the position of some 
pre-Angkorian sites in the Mun basin shows that the Mekong, via Wat 
Phu, was not the only communication channel from (and to) Cambodia. 
It is highly probable that additional land routes were also rapidly 
established across the Dangrek range, especially in its westernmost 
part. For instance it seems that the early Prasat Phum Pon, dated to the 
second half of the seventh century according to Piriya (2012: 119), in 
Surin province, was integrated rather into an overland network, even if 
two nearby waterways, in the east and west, facilitated communication 
with the Mun. 
The Se Don Basin
After establishing the existence of a link between pre-Angkorian 
structures and waterways beyond the Khone falls on the right bank 
of the Mekong, it is reasonable to assume that this also applies to the 
left bank in Laos. The course of the Se Don river, whose confluence is 
40 kilometres downstream from that of the Mun river, was even more 
likely to harbour substantial archaeological potential as it represents a 
very good alternative to the Mekong for north-south communication 
[Map 5]. When reaching this portion of its course, the Mekong 
had to cut its way across a mountain range over a distance of about 
100 kilometres between the fifteenth and sixteenth parallel and was 
forced to change its orientation (predominantly NW-SE) over a 
significant distance. Navigation in this reach is hampered by dangerous 
rapids; and human occupation, as attested by the presence of cave 
paintings, seems to have been limited only to the prehistoric period. To 
the east of this range, the lower Se Don valley represents a real corridor 
bordering the northern part of the Boloven Plateau. 
The attention that ancient communities paid to the 
physical features of this territory is particularly evident in Ban 
Na Moang Noi, on the right bank of the river. The mountain 
range bordering all the western side of Saravane province is 
characterised there by a narrowing of the ridge line so that 
the valley of the Se Don could cut its way across it. A pre-
Angkorian temple was built at the tip of this wedge formed 
by the lowlands, at a distance of only 11 kilometres from the 
Mekong. Due to the presence of a pass, access to the river 
via a west-facing trail is easy, whereas it is virtually impossible 
elsewhere unless the traveller is prepared to prolong the journey 
by several dozen kilometres to circumvent the range. The ruins 
of the sanctuary form a mound with several pieces of carved 
sandstone emerging out of the ground. Parts of a pedestal, as 
well as a snānadroṇī with its liṅga [Figure 5] have been found 
on the eastern side, on the edge of a rectangular pond. 
Figure 5: Ablution basin 
(snānadroṇī) with its liṅga,  
Ban Na Moang, Saravane province, 
Laos [Photograph courtesy of  
Mr Phakhanxay].
Map 5: Pre-Angkorian and 
Mon sites in Saravane province, 
Laos [Drawing courtesy of 
Jérémy Ferrand].

--- PAGE 102 ---
micHel lorrillard
201
200
Other remains – including a door jamb and a door head, 
the fragments of a base and a liṅga of rough workmanship 
– have been found in Ban Na Tan Se and Ban Okat Yai, 
two sites at a distance of 7 kilometres from each other, close 
to the left bank of the Se Don. Furthermore, at about 30 
kilometres upstream, a liṅga, a pedestal dado (or a socle) 
and three peṣanīs (grinding stones) have been discovered 
in three additional sites, of which two are located on the 
sloping right bank of the river. The upper valley of the 
Se Don, where the Annamite range commands the vast 
Saravane plain in the east, has not so far revealed any trace 
of ancient remains, though the region may also harbour 
archaeological potential.
The only option when travelling between the isolated 
province of Saravane and Savannakhet is following the 
Lakhon Pheng corridor, a narrow (4 kilometres in the 
centre) and long (about 60 kilometres) NW-SE oriented strip 
of lowland wedged between two ranges. On its western side, where the 
mountains are much less elevated, this corridor is cut by the Mekong, 
but geologically extends far beyond the river up to the vast plains of 
the Thai provinces of Amnat Charoen and Ubon Ratchathani. The 
latter feature is quite important as it accounts for the specificity of this 
archaeological space representing the southernmost limit in Laos of a 
cultural area that is distinct from that of the Khmers, though equally 
ancient. Seven sema stones decorated with the stylised representation 
of a stūpa and a low-relief image of a sitting Buddha have indeed been 
discovered at two sites close to each other, in the village of Ban Na Pha 
Bang, at a distance of 12 kilometres from the Mekong. These carved 
stones, one in particular with the kumbha motif, are typical of the Mon 
culture that developed in the second half of the first millennium in 
northeast Thailand (Murphy 2013). The sandstone surface covering 
the first site has been dug out to create a rectangular space, as aerial 
photography shows. Rectangular or oval cavities looking like mortises 
were probably meant to be the base of specific objects (sema stones?). 
The second site, displaying a rather coarse rectangular substructure 
with a medley of sandstone blocks and large bricks, may have been a 
place of worship too, although it has probably been refurbished by the 
Lao people at a later date.
The Se Bang Hieng and Se Bang Fai Basins
Two major left-bank tributaries of the Mekong cross the Savannakhet 
plain in Laos: the Se Bang Hieng in the south and the Se Bang Fai 
in the north, together with their own tributaries, some of which have 
their source in the Annamite range. We can assume that this vast 
lowland area – four times larger than the Vientiane plain – has been an 
attractive zone for settlement, even if the Lao people settled there only 
at a late date. The twenty-four ancient sites that have been found there 
are distributed among different basins, predominantly on the western 
side, where wetlands are larger [Map 6]. 
The circa fifteen sites dating from the second half of the first 
millennium are at a short distance from the Mekong and compose 
a relatively continuous network of stations along the river up to the 
confluence with the Se Bang Fai, opposite the old sanctuary of That 
Phanom in present-day Thailand. This monument, whose original 
structure collapsed in 1975 along with the larger Lao period stūpa that 
covered it, must have been very similar to the pre-Angkorian towers of 
That Phon [Figure 6] and That In Hang [Figure 7], whose shapes 
have survived in spite of successive “restorations.” The few remains 
(bricks, door head/sill, pedestals, somasūtra with makara head, snānadroṇīs 
with liṅga, inscriptions) of the sanctuaries in Ban Na Khu, Ban Nong 
Hai, Ban Don Seng and Nong Hua Thong, located between the 
Se Bang Hieng and the Se Bang Fai, may date back to the same period 
(eighth century?). It seems that the Khmers of the pre-Angkorian era 
never expanded beyond the seventeenth parallel, on either bank of 
the Mekong.
The Mon people, who actually also occupied this area as well as 
others situated much further upstream, in particular in the vast basin 
of the Nam Songkhram in Thailand and in the Vientiane plain, have 
left in Savannakhet province a legacy of about 30 sema stones with 
THAILAND
LAOS
VIETNAM
i    
i    
17o
Se Xang Noi
Se Pon
S
e 
B
a
n
g
 
H
ie
n
g
S
e
 
L
a
n
o
n
g
Se
 B
a
n
g
 
H
ie
ng
Se Ba
ng
 Huan
Map 6: Khmer and Mon sites 
in Savannakhet province, Laos 
[Drawing courtesy of Pierre Pichard]. 
  1. Ban Hua Hat 
  2. Ban Na Khu
  3. Ban Nong Hai 
  4. Huan Hin 
  5. That Ku 
  6. Ban Na Katang
  7. Ban Tum Ye
  8. Ban Nong Savang 
  9. Ban Mueang Phong 
10. Mueang Phin 
11. Ban Se Tha Moak 
12. That Phon 
13. Ban Phumma Chedi 
14. Ban Don Tum
15. Ban Tak Daet 
16. Ban Pha Kha Niai
17. Ban Sompoi Noi
18. That In Hang
19. Ban Don Seng
20. Nong Hua Thong
21. Ban Mak Nao Tai 
22. Ban Kang
23. Ban Na Moang
24. Ban Sikhai
25. Ban Xieng Vang Tha
26. That Sikhot 
Figure 6: That Phon, Savannakhet 
province, Laos [Photograph courtesy 
of EFEO photographic archives, 
Fonds Parmentier, PAR00563, 
dated 1911].
Figure 7: That In Hang, Savannakhet province, Laos 
[Photograph courtesy of EFEO photographic archives, 
Fonds Parmentier, PAR00472, dated 1911].

--- PAGE 103 ---
micHel lorrillard
203
202
stylised stūpa images, including some large-size and well-crafted pieces 
[Figure 8]. These objects of worship have been discovered mainly in 
two areas, each of them harbouring several locations, close to That 
Phon (Ban Tak Daet, Ban Phumma Chedi) and the confluence of 
the Se Bang Fai (Ban Kang, Ban Na Moang, Ban Sikhai, Nong Hua 
Thong), where they tend to mingle with pre-Angkorian vestiges. 
The Khmers of the early second millennium also left evidence 
of their presence in this area. About 50 kilometres downstream of 
Savannakhet, they built (but left unfinished) the Huan Hin temple, 
which at this stage of knowledge definitely represents the northernmost 
Angkorian monument erected on the riverside. It was certainly related 
to several sites that appear to have been established on an axis parallel 
to the Mekong at about 30 kilometres inland, in the Se Champhon 
basin. That Ku, a very small ruined building consisting of three aligned 
cells, is the furthest north. In Ban Na Katang, satellite photography has 
revealed the presence of a double rectangular enclosure made of earth 
levees. On-site surveys led to the discovery of sandstone sculptures, 
including a Buddhist triad of the Bayon style (cf. Multzer o’Naghten, 
this volume, fig. 18). Other carvings in Khmer style have been found in 
Ban Tum Ye, Ban Non Savang and Ban Mueang Phong, between the 
Se Champhon and the Se Xang Noi. 
Two sites have been identified much further inland, in the basin of 
the Se Tha Moak; at this stage, they should be considered marginal, 
as they do not fit in the network of sites identified on the Mekong, but 
further research may lead to identifying such places as stopovers. Ban 
Se Tha Moak and Mueang Phin are indeed positioned on an overland 
route crossing the Annamite range at the nearby Lao Bao Pass. A base 
with a mortise of clearly Khmer style has been discovered in the Lao 
temple of Ban Se Tha Moak, but we have no information about its 
place of origin. It might be appropriate to examine whether there is 
a link between this item and a square pedestal found together with a 
partially buried sandstone block (a dado?) 11 kilometres to the south-
east, close to Mueang Phin. However, these two remains protrude 
from a mound covered with vegetation together with five sema stones 
decorated with the stūpa image, thus suggesting that this region adjacent 
to Quang Tri province in Vietnam received influence from both ancient 
Mon and Khmer cultures.
Whereas the Savannakhet plain opens widely out onto the lower 
basin of the Chi and the Mun rivers, the scanty lowland spaces bordering 
the Mekong in Khammuan province, upstream from the confluence 
of the Se Bang Fai, represent – in terms of physical geography – a 
continuation of the Nam Songkhram and Nam Kam basins (Thai 
provinces of Nakhon Phanom and Sakon Nakhon). The Angkorian 
culture that spread across the region has left some traces on the left 
bank of the Mekong, but no certain conclusion can be drawn as to their 
origin. The angle antefixes in the form of nāgas and the beautiful stele 
reused in Lao time, which were found in the immediate vicinity of That 
Sikhot, raise questions about the internal structure of the monument, 
which could well be much older than is generally assumed. The 
origin of a door jamb (likewise reused for a modern Lao inscription) 
found in Ban Xieng Vang Tha, about 20 kilometres downstream, is 
also challenging. The presence in the same area of two straight earth 
levees, running parallel and continuously over 750 metres, linked by 
perpendicular sections distributed at regular intervals and thus creating 
compartments, as well as large trapeang/barai-type basins, may indicate 
that this has been an area of settlement in ancient times, comparable 
to Nong Hua Thong located at a distance of about 20 kilometres. 
However, no firm conclusion can be drawn at present as no datable 
remains are available.
General Interpretation
This brief review of the pre-Angkorian archaeological evidence 
made available for southern and central Laos – in relation to that in 
the neighbouring regions of Thailand and Cambodia – highlights 
the importance of certain areas that would already have been prime 
candidates by mere examination of a topographical map. Similar to what 
had been noticed for Cambodia, the lowlands represented a privileged 
space for settlement, the more so when the area concerned lay close 
to a waterway. In this connection, the banks of the Mekong played an 
essential role. Contrary to what happened during the Angkorian period, 
we observe an undeniable continuity of occupation along the river in 
the pre-Angkorian era, and there was no major difference in the type of 
settlements both downstream and upstream of the Khone falls. However, 
the distance separating individual sites was variable and we observe that 
uninhabited areas were maintained between the settlement clusters. 
Champassak province, with its regular line of sanctuaries distributed 
over some 100 kilometres (circa 20 spots between Khong island in the 
south and Phu Malong in the north), is comparable – in terms of wealth 
in religious sites – to the area of about 50 kilometres in length between 
Thma Kre and Koh Krieng, in the adjacent Khmer districts of Kratie 
and Sambor. Because of an apparent lack of remains, this latter cluster is 
isolated from that of Stœng Treng/Thala Borivat located 60 kilometres 
upstream. Two territories characterised by a comparable paucity – one 
extending from Stœng Treng up to Khong, the other, further north, 
from the Phu Malong site up to the confluence with the Mun – cover 
Figure 8: Sema stones, Ban Na 
Moang, Savannakhet province, Laos 
[Photograph by Michel Lorrillard].

--- PAGE 104 ---
micHel lorrillard
205
204
the same distance. Savannakhet province displays a regular series of 
pre-Angkorian sanctuaries between Ban Na Khu and That In Hang over 
about 60 kilometres, and then presents an area devoid of archaeological 
remains of about 40 kilometres up to the next cluster, that in the 
confluence of the Se Bang Fai (Nong Hua Thong/That Phanom).
Whereas islands were sometimes preferred to establish sanctuaries 
(Khong and Don Sai in Laos), not all sites were located very close to 
the riverside. It is worth noticing that, when the river flows in vast 
plains, the ancient communities seem to have preferred erecting the 
monument in a place slightly removed from the banks of the river. 
There is no evidence that systematic settlement of riverbanks was 
sought, probably because of flood risk or enhanced exposure to specific 
dangers such as invasions. Nevertheless, the Mekong was the key artery 
for communication in mainland Southeast Asia up to the beginning of 
the modern era, and many sites owe their importance to this river. The 
Wat Phu complex, apart from its being located at the foot of a mountain 
with sacred status, would probably not have developed to the extent 
that it has if it had not been erected close to the Mekong, especially 
during the pre-Angkorian era. Later, the site became the goal of a 
SW-NE-oriented land route coming from Angkor. With this new route, 
travellers came closer to the Dangrek range and could also reach 
Preah Vihear via an additional branch. It is likely that, with the westward 
shift of the seat of power that occurred at the time, the role of the river 
sharply declined, including in religious terms.
Even if the investigations carried out by prehistorians have not 
to date proven the existence of important settlements on the banks 
of the Mekong, it cannot be denied that, in the first centuries of the 
Common Era, the river, as a major link for communication, had led 
to the development of large entities. Attention has so far been paid 
almost exclusively to sites located near the coast, such as Oc Eo and 
Angkor Borei in southern Vietnam and Cambodia, which are associated 
with the Funan culture (without any certainty as to the part played by 
the Khmer component in their development). The shortcomings of 
research in this area is evident: whereas older studies in art history 
have already demonstrated the importance of clusters of monuments 
built on the banks of the Mekong – e.g. Sambor and Stœng Treng/ 
Thala Borivat – no historical study has yet attempted to make their 
specificity explicit.
The ancient city adjoining Wat Phu has also been largely ignored 
in the work of many authors. Among the ancient remains that have 
been found there, it is particularly surprising that the large Devānīka 
(Wat Luang Kau) stele that, according to Cœdès (1956: 211), 
dates back to the second half of the fifth century CE, did not 
spark more questions. It seems more appropriate to consider that 
the “king of kings” who ordered the inscription and “came from 
far away” originated from downstream in Funan rather than 
in a territory to the east (Campā), or even to the west (Si Thep) 
as has sometimes been claimed (Jacques & Lafond 2007: 69). As the 
new evidence above demonstrates, Wat Phu sanctuary in its earliest 
phase was far from being isolated. It was part of a network of sites 
located along the banks of the Mekong that extended from the 
Delta up to a limit that might have reached the confluence with 
the Se Bang Fai at a very early time. It would be no surprise if the 
pre-Angkorian temples (or the simpler structures that preceded them) – 
in addition to being stopping places on popular routes – had indeed 
been erected along much older exchange routes, especially those 
used to transport prized merchandise. We can for instance observe 
a fairly high degree of correspondence between the location of the 
first historic sites in the Mekong middle valley and the places where 
the bronze drums, whose major production centres were in northern 
Vietnam, have been discovered (Eiji 2005). A significant number of 
these ceremonial objects have been found in the Se Bang Hieng basin 
(Phin, Phalanxai and Xonburi districts), not far from the Annamite 
range, but also on the banks of the Mekong up to the confluence with 
the Mun, and its basin.
We also know that the Khorat Plateau in Thailand experienced an 
important development in the Iron Age, paired with the emergence 
of numerous sites displaying a complex layout (Higham 2002). These 
were related to the emergence of chiefdoms for which assertion of 
power was associated with the accumulation of wealth of various 
origins. Supposing that there was shift from the numerous “moated 
sites” that appeared on the Khorat Plateau in protohistoric times to 
the quadrangular cities with a moat on all four sides that developed 
during the pre-Angkorian period – with the same purpose of having 
good control on water resources –, the process that brought about this 
change has not been much investigated. In Laos, the only two large sites 
surrounded by earth levees are the ancient city of Wat Phu and Nong 
Hua Thong, both located close to the river bank. In the former case, 
the borderlines are quadrangular whereas, in the latter one, a semi-
circular enclosure was combined – probably at a later stage – with a 
straight double wall. We have to turn to Cambodia to identify structures 
comparable to the model displayed by the city of Wat Phu, namely at 
Sambor Prei Kuk, which seems to have been erected somewhat later, 
or possibly at Banteay Prei Nokor, to which Parmentier gave special 
importance in his last writings (1948: 93-94). 
Laos does not present the type of large sites with a curved shape 
and moats that exist in Thailand on the western flank of the Khorat 
Plateau, such as Si Thep (Phetchabun province) and Dong Si Mahosot 
(Prachin Buri province), nor the type of protohistoric sites such as Noen 
U Loke, Ban Non Wat or Nong Mueang Kao (Nakhon Ratchasima 
province). However, due to their layout, a number of sites on the left 
bank of the Mekong may be related to more modest places belonging 
to an early period, such as Ban Tamyae, Pit Tong and Nong Phayu 
in the lower basin of the Mun (Si Sa Ket province). I refer here to 
dozens of villages in some specific parts of the Lao provinces of 
Saravane, Khammuan and Savannakhet, corresponding to areas where 
pre-Angkorian ruins have also been found (Lorrillard 2013b). These 
villages become clearly visible with aerial photography, due to the oval 
or quadrangular green belt enclosing them and hinting at the possible 
existence of a former moat that was fed by a stream.
Some Historical Markers 
Whereas pre-Angkorian dynastic history remains to a large extent 
unknown in Cambodia, certain amounts of data delivered by studies 
in epigraphy and art history provide precious historical markers. The

--- PAGE 105 ---
micHel lorrillard
207
206
seventh century seems to have been a period of relative unity, at least 
up to the reign of Jayavarman I who died circa 680. The inscriptions 
for this period are much more numerous and informative than those 
of the eighth century which has often been described as a period of 
great instability related to a lack of central authority (Dupont 1943-46). 
Michael Vickery (1994), however, has questioned this political turmoil 
in the eighth century and the subsequent split into “Land” and “Water 
Zhenla” after Jayavarman I’s death. He says that if it did exist “it was 
not the type of division that has traditionally been postulated,” and 
he strongly believes that Cambodia was in fact at peace during the 
last century of the pre-Angkorian period (1994: 209-210). It appears 
that northern parts of the Khmer realm preserved indeed a political 
autonomy for decades. It was certainly the case for Śambupura in the 
Kratie-Sambor region (Vickery 1998: 379-393), and was likely the same 
a few hundred kilometres further upstream in Savannakhet province, 
and in the Mun, the Se Kong and the Se Don valleys in modern-day 
Thailand and Laos.7 At any rate, the intensity of creative activities was 
probably not much affected by the “political turmoil” as shown by the 
number of monuments built until the advent of Jayavarman II, in 802, 
as the first king of the Angkorian era (Boisselier 1968; Bénisti 1971).
The Inscriptions
We have drawn attention to the specific features of the pre-Angkorian 
inscriptions in the Mun basin and the questions raised by them. As for 
Champassak province, it offers a high number of epigraphic sources 
relative to its territory, along with an impression of historical continuity. 
I have already pointed out above that it was in the ancient city of 
Wat Phu that the famous Wat Luang Kau inscription (K. 365) was found 
[Figure 9]. Its text refers in particular to the consecration of a great 
pilgrimage site (mahātīrtha) named Kurukṣetra. Another inscribed stele 
(K. 477), very large in size, has been discovered in the early twentieth 
century in the same area (Parmentier 1913: 54, 56; Cœdès 1966: 
VIII, 154). It can be surmised, due to the resemblance in shape and 
the apparently archaic form of the script used, that it could also date 
back to the period of King Devānīka (fifth century). Unfortunately the 
text has eroded and become illegible. Two inscribed pedestals (K. 1173 
and K. 1174) serving originally as a base for a stone bull were also 
found very close to the Wat Luang Kau (Jacques 1993). They had been 
ordered by Mahendravarman (circa late sixth, early seventh century) 
after his coronation and pay tribute to his father and his uncle in a 
territory where they may have reigned. These two bases were probably 
related to a nearby monument whose foundations were discovered in 
1993 (Santoni & Souksavatdy 1999: 190). A third Mahendravarman 
inscription has been located on the left bank of the Mekong at Phu 
Lakkhon (K. 366), almost exactly opposite the confluence with the Mun 
[Figure 10], about 70 kilometres upstream of Wat Phu (Barth 1903). 
None of the sixteen inscriptions now assigned to this ruler indicates 
that his “kingdom” extended downstream from the Khone falls and 
we can assume that the middle Mekong valley was the territory he 
preferred.8 As for his son Īśānavarman I (r. ca 612?-637?), he seemingly 
did not leave any inscriptions in Laos or northward of the Dangrek 
range, perhaps because he was busy consolidating his power westward 
and southward from Sambor Prei Kuk. Jayavarman I (r. ca 655?-680?) 
came back to the Champassak region and committed himself to 
developing this territory, as testified in a few inscriptions (K. 367, 
K. 1197, K. 1201, K. 1224).9 This may also have applied to his 
predecessor, Bhavavarman II (r. ca 637?-655?), as both are mentioned 
together in a rock inscription near Wat Phu attributable to a royal 
servant (K. 1059).10 At least eight other inscriptions prior to the ninth 
century have been found in the same area.
No ancient inscriptions have been found so far in Attopeu province, 
although it can be assumed that the region has played a major role in 
the regional network of communication. It was reported to Aymonier 
(1901: 173) at the end of the nineteenth century that an ancient stele in 
Ban Sok had slipped into the Se Kong. It was never recovered. A local 
resident who was recently asked by the present author about the Se Su 
site mentioned the existence of an inscription but the information was 
too vague to spot the object. Unearthing the large sandstone slabs that 
are partially buried in this site, however, is still a desideratum.
Savannakhet province, in which the presence of major ancient 
sanctuaries has also been established, has recently revealed some 
epigraphic documents of great interest. A large base on which a line 
in pre-Angkorian characters dating back to about the eighth century 
has been engraved can be seen among other sandstone blocks in Ban 
Na Khu, a site in ruins; the Sanskrit text is too damaged and does not 
allow accurate deciphering, but it is probably the expression of an 
offering involving a king (nṛpa).11 Three inscriptions have been identified 
in Nong Hua Thong on the edge of silver plates and bowl belonging 
to a “treasure hoard” unearthed in 2008. According to Claude Jacques 
(pers. comm.), one of these inscriptions (K. 1264), written in Sanskrit, 
refers to a person who donated land, slaves, cows and money to ensure 
Śiva worship [Figure 11]. It appears on palaeographic ground to 
date from the eighth century. The other two (K. 1262 and K. 1263), 
which are short donative formulas in Khmer, have been engraved 
using a script that probably dates back to the ninth century. It is then 
necessary to move up to the Vientiane plain to find inscriptions prior to 
the fourteenth century, but these are related to the Mon culture and the 
Angkorian period (Lorrillard 2013b).
Architectural Decoration 
The lintels – and to some extent the colonettes and low-relief brick 
decoration representing miniature edifices (also called “flying palaces”) 
Figure 9: Wat Luang Kau or 
Devānīka stele (K. 365), Face D, 
Wat Phu Museum, Champassak 
province, Laos [Photograph courtesy 
of EFEO photographic archives, 
Fonds Laos 21533a].
Figure 10: Phu Lakkhon stele 
(K. 366), Champassak province, 
Laos [Photograph by Michel 
Lorrillard]. 
Figure 11: Inscription on a 
silver plate (K. 1264), Nong Hua 
Thong, Savannakhet province, Laos 
[Photograph courtesy of Viengkeo 
Souksavatdy].

--- PAGE 106 ---
micHel lorrillard
209
208
– are the only architectural components that make it possible to assign 
a date with reasonable accuracy to the pre-Angkorian sanctuaries. For a 
long time, just seven lintels were the only decorative pieces mentioned in 
the studies on early art history in Laos, and comments were very brief. 
The first three were found in Attopeu province in the early 
twentieth century and did not attract much attention (Anonymous 
1903: 141-143). Recent surveys have shown that two of them still exist. 
The lintel found in Ban Sakhae [Figure 12], with its three pieces now 
glued together with cement, was made in “vegetal” style that developed 
in the setting of the Kompong Preah style during the eighth century 
(Le Bonheur 1995: 78). Two more lintels have been found 20 kilometres 
to the south on the banks of the Se Su (see supra). The first one also 
displays the Kompong Preah style [Figure 13]; however, because 
of the large central figure of Garuḍa, it has a very special character 
whose model may be sought in Campā (Le Bonheur 1995: 78-79; 
Boisselier 1968: 130). The second one, which seems to have disappeared 
[Figure 14], is related to a sub-category of the Prei Kmeng style 
(Le Bonheur 1995: 77), possibly a late form that can be dated to the 
second half of the seventh century. 
Parmentier referred in 1927 (233-234) to two other lintels found in 
Savannakhet province; however, they were never mentioned thereafter, 
except briefly in his posthumous work on Lao art (1988: 148,153). 
The lintel of That Phon is hardly visible because it has been re-used 
in ancient times as a door jamb of the sanctuary [Figure 15] and 
partly disappeared in a layer of concrete cast to make a threshold step 
behind a heavy wooden door that usually remains closed. Due to its 
vegetal decoration, it undeniably belongs to the Kompong Preah style 
(eighth century). The second lintel, of which a fragment was still visible 
in the early twentieth century in That In Hang has now disappeared. 
Parmentier, who left a picture of it [Figure 16], suggested that it should 
be assigned to the Sambor Prei Kuk style – although the presence of a 
makara cannot be established – and therefore assessed it as a model that 
could be dated from the mid-seventh century. 
The other two lintels that have already been mentioned in previous 
studies originate from the province of Champassak. The first one, 
discovered in Huei Tomo, was described by Parmentier (1927: 231) as 
“a tangle of foliage made in a spirit of fun, typical of the primitive 
Khmer art style with capitals” [Figure 17]. It also belongs to the 
Kompong Preah style and is reminiscent of some eighth-century lintels 
found in Cambodia, for example in Ak Yum (cf. Boisselier 1968: fig. 20). 
The second lintel was brought to the attention of Mireille Bénisti (1974: 
154-155) with a photograph that Jean Filliozat had taken in 1970 in 
the old city of Wat Phu, perhaps after uncontrolled excavation work 
Figure 12: Lintel from Ban Sakhae, Attopeu province, Laos [Photograph by Michel Lorrillard].
Figure 13: Lintel 1 from Upmung Se Su site (now in Ban Fang Daeng), Attopeu province, Laos 
[Photograph courtesy of EFEO photographic archives, Fonds Laos 21928, dated 1903].
Figure 14: Lintel 2 from Upmung Se Su site (lost), Attopeu province, Laos  
[Photograph courtesy of EFEO photographic archives, Fonds Laos 21927, dated 1903].
Figure 17: Lintel from  
Huei Tomo, Champassak province,  
Laos [Photograph courtesy of  
Bruno Bruguier, Cisark,  
ref 871_Bruguier_2009_10].
Figure 15: Lintel/door jamb from 
That Phon, Savannakhet province, 
Laos [Photograph courtesy of 
EFEO photographic archives, Fonds 
Parmentier, PAR00564, dated 1911].
Figure 16: Fragment of lintel 
from That In Hang, Savannakhet 
province, Laos [Photograph courtesy of 
EFEO photographic archives, Fonds 
Parmentier, PAR00474, dated 1911].

--- PAGE 107 ---
micHel lorrillard
211
210
had led to the unearthing of the item. Bénisti considered it evidence 
that may be essential for a better understanding of the development 
of pre-Angkorian style. Because of its heterogeneous character, this 
lintel may be assessed as a transitional model which, according to 
the standards of Thala Borivat, introduced innovations that were 
subsequently maintained and developed into the Sambor standards. 
Bénisti concluded finally that the Champassak lintel was not sufficient 
evidence to deliver a final opinion on this issue, for it was stylistically 
unique at the time she wrote. 
However, over the past twenty years, field surveys have revealed 
the existence of twelve other lintels in Champassak province, close 
to Wat Phu. All of them can be traced to the beginning of the pre-
Angkorian period, thus opening new perspectives, not only concerning 
the history of these types of architectural decoration, but also that of 
the propagation of the decorative motifs originating from India. These 
lintels, often very simple in appearance, do not display the complex 
shapes of those visible in Cambodia, raising the question whether this 
should be seen as forms of degeneration due to a marginal position 
or rather an archaic trait. All of these belong to the founding styles of 
Thala Borivat, Sambor Prei Kuk and Prei Kmeng, though they also 
display many original features. For instance, they may deliver valuable 
data when studying the transition between the makara figure and the 
“fleuron” motif. The real provenance of a few pieces is not always 
certain. For example, a nice lintel in Sambor Preah Kuk style [Figure 18] 
is also reported to come from Huei Tomo, Pathumphon district, but it 
is not found in Parmentier’s list. The Prei Kmeng style is represented by 
an elaborate lintel from Veun Kaen [Figure 19], about 50 kilometres 
downstream to Wat Phu – and in an even more surprising manner by 
an exceptional lintel that was found in Thailand in Phibun Mangsahan 
district, Ubon Ratchathani province, in the lower basin of the Mun, 
at the same place as a lintel in Thala Borivat style (Le Bonheur 1995: 
79-80). Other decorated pieces discovered in the vicinity (Dhida 2536: 
93), such as colonettes in Prei Kmeng style [Figure 20] in Wat Kaeng 
Toi (Don Mot Daeng district, Ubon Ratchathani province) and a 
beautiful decorated base found in Don Mueang Toei (Kham Khuean 
Kaeo district, Yasothon province) show that this region was far from 
being isolated from the sculpture workshops where innovative stylistic 
forms emerged from the seventh century onwards.
The Statuary
It is much too early to submit a comprehensive assessment about the 
traditions applying to the sculptures that developed in southern Laos as 
the near totality of the artefacts have been discovered only in and around 
Wat Phu and the process of inventorying local museum collections has 
just started. 
Christine Hawixbrock (2013) has provided evidence of the wealth 
and variety of the collections at the Wat Phu Museum, with special 
emphasis on the significant number of sculptures dating back to the 
pre-Angkorian era and the very ancient character of some of them. 
Śaiva sculpture is represented mostly by a large number of liṅgas that 
were found in various scattered places, and some bull statues representing 
Śiva’s mount. However, no human representation of the god has been 
discovered to date, including in the specific form of Harihara that is 
so well represented in pre-Angkor Cambodia (Lavy 2003). Vaiṣṇaiva 
sculpture seems to have been much favoured in Wat Phu. Several 
figures of Viṣṇu have been found, including a magnificent silver head 
[Figure 21], now lost;12 these are either standing, with a long dhotī or 
a short sampot, or riding Garuḍa who sometimes appears separately. 
To these we should perhaps add a large sandstone cakra and a stone 
image of a mitred female divinity [Figure 22].13 The wealth of 
ancient Buddhist sculpture at Wat Phu has been the cause of an even 
greater surprise. It displays features seemingly betraying not only 
relationships with Dvāravatī art – with for instance a large pendant-
legged fragment of a seated Buddha14 [Figure 23] – but also specific 
links with images from southern Vietnam and Angkor Borei (Funan), 
especially regarding the head features [Figure 24].15 Recent excavation 
work and surveys have also revealed the existence of at least two 
ancient sanctuaries inside and in the close vicinity of the old city of 
Wat Phu that seem to have been devoted to Buddha worship, namely 
Nong Vienne (Santoni & Hawixbrock 1998: 388) and Wat Lakhon in 
Champassak town.
Further to the north, in Savannakhet province, Parmentier (1927: 
235) already mentioned the existence of a statue associated with 
That In Hang tower, but its unexpected style led him to write “that 
it cannot be assigned with certainty to primitive Khmer art.” This 
Figure 18: Lintel (allegedly) from Huei Tomo, 
Pakse Museum, Champassak province, Laos 
[Photograph by Michel Lorrillard].
Figure 19: Lintel from Veun Kaen, Pakse 
Museum, Champassak province, Laos 
[Photograph by Michel Lorrillard].
Figure 20: Colonettes from  
Wat Kaeng Toi, Ubon Ratchathani 
National Museum, Thailand 
[Photograph by Michel Lorrillard].
Figure 21: Silver mitred Viṣṇu 
head (lost), found near Wat Phu, 
Champassak province, Laos 
[Photograph courtesy of EFEO 
photographic archives, Fonds Giteau, 
GITM01783, dated 1969].
Figure 22: Mitred female divinity, 
Wat Phu Museum, Champassak 
province, Laos [Photograph courtesy 
of Stanislas Fradelizi, DPV].
Figure 23: Pendant-legged 
fragment of seated Buddha, Wat 
Phu Museum, Champassak province, 
Laos [Photograph by Michel 
Lorrillard].

--- PAGE 108 ---
213
212
statue broken in two pieces corresponding to the head and the torso 
has sunk into oblivion since it is now secluded in the pre-Angkorian 
sanctuary. It is perhaps one of the early rare human representations of 
Śiva, whose jaṭāmukuṭa is composed on the front side of a chignon with 
three horizontal plaits [Figure 25]. However, the poor condition of the 
figure and the advanced deterioration of the stone make it impossible 
to spot details – e.g. a third eye or the moon crescent – to validate this 
identification.16 Hindu or Brahmanical iconography is illustrated in the 
same area by the three decorated metal plates belonging to the treasure 
found in 2008 in Nong Hua Thong [Figure 26]. These might date 
back to the eighth century, just like one of the inscriptions engraved on 
a plate belonging to the same treasure. They may be associated with 
the rather similar plates reportedly found around Si Thep in Thailand 
and currently housed at the Norton Simon Museum in California 
(Woodward 2003: 90). In a recent conference paper (Lorrillard 2012), 
I have suggested that an overland road may have existed between 
Si Thep and Nong Hua Thong via Mueang Fa Daet and Kantharawichai 
to explain such artistic similarities between the two areas.
Conclusion
The number and variety of historical sites dating back to the first 
millennium CE that have been identified primarily in southern and 
central Laos but also in their neighbouring regions of modern-day 
Thailand and Cambodia lead to revisiting the current views about 
both the role of this continental region in the so-called “Indianisation 
process” and the movements that marked the dawn of Khmer history. 
The most recent findings confirm the importance of the Wat Phu region 
in the early period, and also the existence of a link between its earliest 
archaeological remains and those which were found much further 
downstream in Cambodia and southern Vietnam, thus encroaching on 
the coastal cultural area of Funan.
The Mekong has to a large extent facilitated the first wave that 
disseminated the ideas and practices from India. Further upstream 
from Wat Phu, the major tributaries on the right and left banks have 
contributed to the maintenance of this dissemination up to a certain 
limit after which the overland routes took over this function. It is now 
widely recognised that the extraordinary development of the Khmer 
and Mon cultures from the first millennium CE is to be assigned to 
the major impact of Indic beliefs and customs on the already well-
organised “inland” protohistoric communities. The middle Mekong 
valley, at a time when Khmer history was apparently rather turbulent 
(eighth century), certainly continued to play a crucial role, due in 
particular to the transverse routes that at all times served to connect the 
western and eastern parts of the Indochinese Peninsula. If, as inferred 
by Chinese annals and the paucity of inscriptions, a clear distinction 
between “Land” and “Water Zhenla” is to be given some credit for the 
period just before the emergence of the Angkorian empire, the territories 
extending upstream from the Khone falls, i.e. north of present-day 
Cambodia, certainly offers a rich potential for future archaeological 
research and should spur more collaborative works amongst scholars of 
Laos, Thailand and Cambodia.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to the editors Nicolas Revire and Stephen Murphy as well 
as the anonymous reviewer for their numerous comments and editing on 
earlier drafts. I also wish to thank Arlo Griffiths and Dominic Goodall 
for their meticulous reading of the final draft, and Paul Lavy for sharing 
his expertise of pre-Angkorian sculpture. Lastly, I thank Jean-Claude 
Lejosne for his assistance in translating the manuscript from French into 
English. Any remaining inconsistencies are my own.
Figure 24: Buddha head from 
Wat Lakhon, Wat Phu Museum, 
Champassak province, Laos 
[Photograph courtesy of Stanislas 
Fradelizi, DPV].
Figure 25: Brahmanical (?) 
image, That In Hang, Savannakhet 
province, Laos [Photograph courtesy 
of EFEO photographic archives, 
Fonds Parmentier, PAR00481, 
dated 1911].
Figure 26: Brahmanical image 
on metal plate, Nong Hua Thong, 
Savannakhet province, Laos 
[Photograph courtesy of Viengkeo 
Souksavatdy].
Endnotes
1 
This city is sometimes called, after Cœdès, 
“Śreṣṭapura.” A more appropriate name, 
according to the inscriptions, seems to be 
“Liṅgapura” or even “Kurukṣetra.”
2 
Contributions in the Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient (Lorrillard 2013a-b) provide more 
detailed data in French on all the discovered 
sites. A paper presented at the 14th EurASEAA 
Conference also dealt with specific issues 
concerning the ancient Mon Buddhist culture in 
Laos (Lorrillard 2012).
3 
This type of iconography is rare. For a rather 
similar artefact dating back to second half of 
the seventh century and found in a nearby area 
(Sambor), see Baptiste & Zéphir (2008: 48).
4 
Concerning Tham Pet Thong, Cœdès (1966: 160) 
refers both to K. 513 and K. 514, dating back 
to the same period, but the texts are short and 
not very informative. A third inscription found 
on the same site has been edited and published 
(FAD 2529: I, 153-154). This inscription mentions 
the name Citrasena, so that the total number of 
known inscriptions commissioned by this prince/
king could to date be seventeen.
5 
Personal communications with Arlo Griffiths 
and Dominic Goodall (EFEO rubbing no. 1350). 
The name was read by Cha-em Kaeoklai as 
“Mahipativarman” (FAD 2529: I, 286). 
Two kings named Nṛpendrādhipativarman (father 
and son?) appear in another inscription (K. 388) 
from Nakhon Ratchasima province, some 300 
kilometres away to the west, which has been variably 
attributed from the sixth to the ninth century CE.
6 
This pre-Angkorian inscription mentions a 
genealogy of kings who reigned in Saṅkhapūra, 
i.e. Pravarasena, Kroñcabahu and Dharmasena; 
no link could be established with the rulers of 
Cambodia (Jacques 1995: 43).
7 
The specific artefacts found in these areas are 
sufficient to raise new questions about various 
entities which are mentioned in Chinese annals  
for the eighth century. On this issue, see Woodward 
(2010).
8 
The two documents found in Cambodia in Chroy 
Ampil (K. 116) and Thma Krê (K. 122) in Kratie 
province, both sites being close to the banks of the 
Mekong, just mention Citrasena’s princely name. 
On the basis of more recent inscriptions found in 
Cambodia (K. 149, K. 151, and K. 153) in which 
Mahendravarman is mentioned together with his 
brother and his son, it could be extrapolated and 
claimed that this king had reigned on regions such 
as Sambor Prei Kuk.
9 
Santoni & Hawixbrock (1999: 396), according to 
information provided by Jacques.
10 The chronology of pre-Angkorian rulers is not 
firm. The dates of the reigns which are given here 
rather follow Vickery’s appreciations (1998).

--- PAGE 109 ---
micHel lorrillard
215
214
References
Anonymous (H. Parmentier?) 
1903  Laos (chronique Indochine). 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 3(3): 141-143.
Aymonier, Étienne 
1901  Le Cambodge II. Les provinces 
siamoises. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Baptiste, Pierre &  
Zéphir, Thierry (ed.) 
2008  L’art khmer dans les collections 
du musée Guimet. Paris: Réunion des 
Musées Nationaux.
Barth, Auguste 
1902  Stèle de Vat Phou près de 
Bassac (Laos). Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 2(3):  
235-240. 
1903  Inscription sanscrite du Phou 
Lokhon (Laos). Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 3(3):  
442-446.
Bénisti, Mireille 
1968  Recherches sur le premier 
art khmer I : les linteaux dits de 
Thala Borivat. Arts Asiatiques  18: 
85-101.
1970  Rapports entre le premier art 
khmer et l’art indien. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
1971  Recherches sur le premier art 
khmer III : aux confins des styles 
de Prei Kmeng et de Kompong 
Preah. Arts Asiatiques 23: 93-134.
1974  Recherches sur le premier 
art khmer VI : linteaux inédits et 
linteaux méconnus. Arts Asiatiques  
30: 131-172.
Boisselier, Jean 
1955  La statuaire khmère et son 
évolution. Saigon: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
1956  Arts du Champa et du 
Cambodge préangkorien – La 
date de Mi-so’n E-1. Artibus Asiae 
19(3/4): 197-212.
1965  Récentes recherches 
archéologiques en Thaïlande.  
Arts Asiatiques 12: 125-174.
1968  Les linteaux khmers du VIIIe 
siècle – Nouvelles données sur le 
style de Kompong Prah. Artibus 
Asiae 30: 101-144.
Charuek Wilaikaeo 
2550  Leng borannakhadi don 
khum ngoen (Don Khum Ngoen 
Archaeological Site). Silpakorn 
Journal 50(2): 16-39. [In Thai;  
2007 CE]
Cœdès, George 
1918  Le site primitif du Tchen-la. 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 18(9): 1-3.
1928  La tradition généalogique 
des premiers rois d’Angkor d’après 
les inscriptions de Yaçovarman 
et de Rājendravarman. Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 28: 
124-144.
1956  Nouvelles données sur les 
origines du royaume khmèr : la 
stèle de Văt Luang Kău près de 
Văt Ph’u. Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 48(1): 209-220.
1937-66  Inscriptions du Cambodge. 
Eight Volumes. Hanoi-Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Dhida Saraya 
2536  Mueang Ubon. Bangkok: 
Muang Boran Publishing House. 
[In Thai; 1993 CE]
Dupont, Pierre 
1943-46  Études sur l’Indochine 
ancienne : 1. La dislocation du 
Tchen-la et la formation du 
Cambodge angkorien. Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  
43: 17-55.
1952  Les linteaux khmers du VIIe 
siècle. Artibus Asiae 15(1/2): 31-83.
1955  La statuaire préangkorienne. 
Ascona: Artibus Asiae 
Supplementum.
Eiji, Nitta 
2005  Heger I Drums, Bronze 
Halberds and Rang Societies in  
the Mekong Basin. Bulletin of the 
Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association  
25: 125-128.
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2529  Charuek nai prathet thai 
(Inscriptions of Thailand).  
Five Volumes. Bangkok:  
National Library of Thailand.  
[In Thai; 1986 CE]
2535  Borannakhadi khuean pak 
mun (Archaeology of Pak Mun Dam). 
Bangkok. [In Thai; 1992 CE]
Giteau, Madeleine 
2001  Art et archéologie du Laos,  
Paris: Picard.
Groslier, Bernard-Philippe 
1997  Prospection des sites khmers 
du Siam. In Dumarçay, Jacques 
(ed.), Mélanges sur l’archéologie du 
Cambodge. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient, pp. 189-220. 
[First published in Coûts et profits 
en archéologie, Sophia-Antipolis: 
CNRS, 1980, pp. 33-61].
Hawixbrock, Christine 
2013  Le musée de Vat Phu et 
les collections archéologiques de 
Champassak. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 97-98.  
[for 2010-11]: 271-314. 
Higham, Charles 
2002  Early Cultures of Mainland 
Southeast Asia. Bangkok:  
Rivers Books.
11 Personal communication with Dominic Goodall.
12 Madeleine Giteau (2001: 9, 64) dates this head to 
the beginning of the eighth century.
13 Christine Hawixbrock (forthcoming) and Valérie 
Zaleski (2012: 28) identify it as a representation 
of goddess Śrī, but John Guy (unpublished report) 
recognised in this sculpture the goddess Umā 
(Śiva’s wife), an identification which is reported 
on the Museum caption. Paul Lavy (pers. comm.) 
also suggests a Śaiva affiliation and proposes more 
precisely an identification with Durgā.
14 On this iconography, see Revire (2011).
15 See Zaleski (2012: 60). This Buddha head, like 
others found in Champassak province, can 
especially be compared with sculptures found in 
the Mekong Delta which could date back to the 
fifth or sixth century (cf. Baptiste 2008: 22-23).
16 Paul Lavy (pers. comm.) shares Parmentier’s 
doubts about the Khmer origin of this image 
and suggests an affiliation with Cham sculpture, 
especially Khuong My and Tra Kieu styles of the 
tenth century. The possible artistic influences of 
Campā in this part of the middle Mekong valley, 
especially regarding the site of That Phanom, has 
already been pointed out by Boisselier (1965: 153), 
Woodward (2003: 133-135) and Piriya (2012: 122).
Higham, Charles &  
Rachanie Thosarat 
2012  Early Thailand: From Prehistory 
to Sukhothai. Bangkok: River Books.
Jacques, Claude 
1962  Notes sur l’inscription  
de la stèle de Văt Luang Kău. 
Journal Asiatique 250(2): 249-256.
1976  La stèle du Baphuon,  
K. 583. Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 63: 351-368.
1986  Le pays khmer avant Angkor. 
Journal des savants 1(3): 59-95.
1993  Mahendravarman’s 
Campaigns in North-East 
Thailand: New Evidence from the 
Inscriptions of Wat Phu. Paper 
presented at the Symposium on Thai 
Studie held in London on 5-9 July 
1993. [Unpublished]
1995  Les Khmers en Thaïlande : 
ce que nous disent les inscriptions. 
In Silpakorn University (ed.), 
Actes du Premier Symposium franco-
thaïlandais. La Thaïlande des origines de 
son histoire au XVème siècle. Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University, pp. 38-44.
Jacques, Claude & Lafond, 
Philippe 
2007  The Khmer Empire: Cities and 
Sanctuaries from the 5th to the 13th 
Century. Bangkok: River Books. 
[Originally published in 2004 as 
L’empire khmer. Cités et sanctuaires, 
Ve-XIIIe siècles]
Kongkaeo Wiraprachak 
2549  Charuek phop mai thi 
changwat roi et (A New Inscription 
from Roi Et Province). Silpakorn 
Journal 49(3): 108-109. [In Thai; 
2006 CE]
Le Bonheur, Albert 
1995  L’architecture pré-
angkorienne en Thaïlande et au 
Laos. In Silpakorn University (ed.), 
Actes du Premier Symposium franco-
thaïlandais. La Thaïlande des origines de 
son histoire au XVème siècle. Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University, pp. 58-100.
Lévy, Paul 
1970  Thala Bŏrivăt ou Stu’ṅ 
Trèṅ : sites de la capitale du 
souverain khmer Bhavavarman Ier. 
Journal Asiatique 258(1-2): 113-129.
Lorrillard, Michel 
2012  A New Chapter in the 
History of Laos: Mon Buddhist 
Culture in the First Millennium. 
Paper Presented at the 14th 
EurASEAA Conference, held in 
Dublin on 18-21 September 2012. 
[Forthcoming with the Proceedings]
2013a  Du centre à la marge : Vat 
Phu dans les études sur l’espace 
khmer ancien. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 97-98  
[for 2010-11]: 187-204. 
2013b  Par-delà Vat Phu : données 
nouvelles sur l’expansion des 
espaces khmer et môn anciens au 
Laos (I). Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 97-98 [for 2010-11]: 
205-270. 
Murphy, Stephen A. 
2010  The Buddhist Boundary Markers 
of Northeast Thailand and Central 
Laos, 7th-12th centuries CE: Towards 
an Understanding of the Archaeological 
Religious and Artistic Landscape of the 
Khorat Plateau. Doctoral Dissertation. 
London: School of Oriental and 
African Studies, University of 
London. [Unpublished]
2013  The Distribution of Sema 
Stones throughout the Khorat 
Plateau during the Dvaravati 
Period. In Klokke, Marijke J. 
& Degroot, Véronique (eds), 
Unearthing Southeast Asia’s Past: 
Selected Papers from the 12th 
International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologist, Volume 1. Singapore: 
NUS Press, pp. 215-233.
Parmentier, Henri 
1912  Laos (chronique). Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  
12(9): 195-197.
1927  L’art khmer primitif. Paris:  
G. Van Oest.
1948  L’art architectural hindou dans 
l’Inde et en Extrême-Orient. Paris:  
G. Van Oest.
1988  L’art du Laos. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient. 
[Reprint; First published in 1954]
Piriya Krairiksh 
2012  The Roots of Thai Art. 
Bangkok: River Books. [First 
published in Thai as Rakngao haeng 
sinlapa thai, 2553 (2010 CE)]
Revire, Nicolas 
2011  Some Reconsiderations on 
Pendant-legged Buddha Images in 
the Dvāravatī Artistic Tradition. 
Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association 31: 37-49.
Sanderson, Alexis 
2003-04  The Śaiva Religion 
among the Khmers. Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  
90-91: 349-462.
Santoni, Marielle & 
Hawixbrock, Christine 
1998  Fouilles et prospections dans 
la région de Vat Phu (province de 
Champassak, sud du Laos). Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 85: 
387-405.
1999  Prospections 1999 au sud de 
Vat Phou : du Houay Khamouane 
à la frontière cambodgienne. 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 86: 394-405.
Santoni, Marielle & 
Souksavatdy, Viengkeo 
1999  Fouilles sur le site de  
Vat Phou-Champassak. In Bizot, 
François (ed.), Laos – Restaurer et 
préserver le patrimoine national (colloque 
EFEO 1996). Vientiane: Édition des 
cahiers de France, pp. 167-200.
Stark, Miriam 
2006  Pre-Angkorian Settlements 
Trends in Cambodia’s Mekong 
Delta and the Lower Mekong 
Archaeological Project. Bulletin of 
the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 
26: 98-109.
Vickery, Michael 
1994  Where and What was 
Chenla? In Bizot, François (ed.), 
Recherches nouvelles sur le Cambodge. 
Études thématiques 1. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient,  
pp. 197-212.
1998  Society, Economics, and Politics  
in Pre-Angkor Cambodia: The  
7th-8th Centuries. Tokyo: The Centre 
for East Asian Cultural Studies for 
Unesco/The Toyo Bunko.
Woodward, Hiram 
2003  The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand. From Prehistoric Times 
through the Thirteenth Century.  
Leiden-Boston: Brill.
2010  Dvaravati, Si Thep and 
Wendan. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific 
Prehistory Association 30: 87-97.
Zaleski, Valérie 
2012  Collections du musée de Vat 
Phu/Vat Phu Museum Collections. 
Vientiane: Département du site du 
patrimoine mondial de Vat Phu 
(DPV). [With contributions from 
C. Hawixbrock, C. Jacques,  
M. Santoni & V. Souksavaty]
Website 
Carte interactive des sites 
archéologiques khmers (Cisark): 
http://www.site-archeologique-
khmer.org

--- PAGE 110 ---
217
216
Introduction
T
he discourse between riverine and maritime sites in lower 
Myanmar during the late first and early second millennium CE 
has received little attention, with literature focusing on single sites 
and their dependence upon upper Myanmar [Map 1]. However, as 
we explain in this essay, it was the variety and fluctuations between a 
series of sites that sustained the economic and religious significance of 
this area.  
Our argument is epitomised by the archaeology and chronicles 
of Sampanago (Campānāga) or “City of Serpents” (16°40’5.91”N, 
97°35’46.90”E) 
[Figure 
1]. 
Artefacts recovered 
inside 
and 
around Sampanago, 15 kilometres north of Muttama (Martaban, 
16°32’13.92”N, 97°36’6.67”E), date occupation to circa the seventh to 
the eighteenth century. This longevity is supported by five successive 
toponymns situating Sampanago with a network of 
sacred and mercantile sites on the lower reaches of 
the Thanlwin (Salween) river [Map 2]. The artefacts 
and continual “naming” are concentrated along a 
relatively short span of the Thanlwin, suggesting that 
“Muttama” did not, as previously suggested, spread 
all along the coast from the Thanlwin to the Isthmus 
of Kra under Sukhothai and Ayutthaya control 
from the late thirteenth-sixteenth century (Gutman 
2001: 111). 
The names, such as Muttama-Dhañyawaddy and 
Sampanago-Lakunbyin, instead reflect a distribution 
of loosely linked towns over a 45 kilometre stretch 
of the river from Muttama to Pa-an (Hpa-an, 
16°52’45.42”N, 97°38’28.77”E)  and thence inland 
to Lampang (18°17’25.54”N, 99°30’37.43”E) and 
Phrae in Thailand (18° 9’0.75”N, 100° 9’12.67”E). 
We compare this riverine-maritime configuration 
to the Lampang-Phrae and U Thong-Nakhon 
Pathom-Khu Bua networks to highlight the synergy 
of maritime, riverine and overland interchange 
between lower Myanmar and Thailand (Dhida 
1999: 46).
Sampanago: “City of Serpents” and 
Muttama (Martaban)
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
India
China
Thailand
Bay of Bengal
Laos
Kachin State
Sagaing Region
Shan State
Mandalay Region
Chin State
Rakhine State
Magway Region
Kayah State
Bago Region
Ayeyarwady Region
Yangon Region Kayin State
Mon State
Gulf of Muttama
Legend
Mon State
International Boundary
Coastline
0
75
150
95˚0'0"E
10˚0'0"N
15˚0'0"N
20˚0'0"N
25˚0'0"N
10˚0'0"N
15˚0'0"N
20˚0'0"N
25˚0'0"N
100˚0'0"E
95˚0'0"E
100˚0'0"E
300
Kilometres
Tanintharyi Region
Bangladesh
Map 1: Overall map of Myanmar with the location of Mon state [Adapted from drawing courtesy of Thazin Kaing].
Figure 1: Walled site of Sampanago, aerial view  
[Drawing courtesy of Aung Myint 2542: 256].

--- PAGE 111 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
219
218
Opposite Map 2: Mon state and 
Ye township [Drawing courtesy of 
Thazin Kaing].
Five River Confluence: Geographical Context
The ecological niche of Sampanago, called Puñjaluin in Mon is striking 
and a vital factor in understanding its longevity. The site is safely guarded 
from the drop into the Gulf of Muttama (Martaban), adjacent to the 
confluence of the Thanlwin, Attaran, Jaing, Dontami and Hlaingbwe 
rivers. The area is hilly, pocketed with swamp and flood areas. River 
meanders are common along this lower stretch of the Thanlwin with 
isolated limestone hills and caverns scattered along the ravine such as 
Kaw gun, Yathebyan, Pa-gat and Bingyi caves. 
The surrounding hills are a continuation from those at Thaton, 
which stretch southward into two ranges [Map 3]. The eastern chain 
stretches from north to south-southeast to the confluence of Thanlwin 
and Dontami rivers at Sampanago. The southern more westerly range 
starts from Zimkyaik (Zingyaik) just south of Thaton and Kalama 
taung, summits with an average height of 914 metres. It continues 
south as the “Martaban hills,” connecting to the Taungnyo hills of 
Mawlamyaing (Moulmein) and the Ye area opposite Muttama. The 
end of this chain is rocky terrain called Muh Tamo’ in Mon (Muttama 
in Myanmar language) where chronicles record that King Wareru 
(r. 1287-96) founded the city Ratanapura in 1287. 
Between two ranges is the alluvium of the lower Thanlwin valley 
with cultivation of various crops in a region of stream beds, meanders 
and islands.1 As these details highlight, Sampanago was part of a vital 
nexus near to egress into the bay. The area was fertile, and not being 
directly on the tip of the landmass. “Kin Ywa” or revenue village, 
3 kilometres upriver from the walled site, was probably a fortified way 
station for goods prior to shipment by sea or overland. 
Walled Site Description 
Sampanago is isolated, with no tarmac roads or railways near and 
around the city. The population consists of a small village at the west 
foot of the central hill, Dhat taw ywa, inhabited by Kayin (Karen) 
people but the rest of the site is covered with thick forest and bamboo 
glades. It is 19 kilometres east of Paung, the township headquarters, 
38 kilometres south from Thaton, the district headquarters and 
22 kilometres north from the capital of Mon state, Mawlamyaing. 
The site is easily accessible by boat from Mawlamyaing and Pa-an, the 
capital city of Kayin state, 23 kilometres north along the Thanlwin. It 
can also be reached overland via village tracks along the west bank of 
the river. The nearest sizeable town is Natmaw village, a ferry and local 
administration head-quarters 3.2 kilometres north at the confluence of 
Thanlwin and Dontami rivers. 
The east wall of Sampanago is the Thanlwin (Salween) river with 
newly deposited sandbanks on the opposite side indicating erosion of the 
west bank. The walled site, first documented by Aung Myint from aerial 
photography, remains well preserved (2542: 255-261). Three ramparts 
(15-25 metres wide, 2-4 metres high) and moats enclose the site, best 
preserved on the inner wall on the southwest side [Figure 2]. The wall 
measures 620 metres in length on the north, 2000 metres on the west 
and 500 metres on the south (126 hectares). A long earthen hill on the 
east side near the river is said by villagers to be an ancient reclining

--- PAGE 112 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
221
220
Opposite Map 3: Ancient city 
sites mentioned in text [Drawing 
courtesy of Thazin Kaing].
Figure 2: Moat on southwest of site 
[Photograph by San Win].
image of the Buddha, with scattered laterite carvings around the site 
including a seated image of the Buddha (66 cm. height). The earthen 
and laterite ramparts are mixed with large (46 x 23 x 8 cm.) burnt 
bricks, including a number with finger-markings (Berliet 2011: 85; San 
Win 2530 and 2556) [Figure 3]. There are also brick reinforcements 
of later historical periods. Notably, however, large finger-marked bricks 
pointing to first millennium CE habitation have been found in situ 
throughout this area, including Kin Ywa to the north and Kyauksarit 
to the west. 
The use of the moats to control water to flooded rice fields is seen 
on the southwest of the site where cultivation of mayin (summer paddy) 
has flattened the enclosing walls. The river comes close to the foot of 
the small range (ca 2.4 km.) within the walls that runs parallel to the 
river. This accounts for the slight widening of the site at points and the 
obtuse rounded angle of the southwest corner with possible remnants 
of a walled guard post extending to the southwest. The rectangular site 
is divided by a partition wall crossing from east to west two-thirds of 
the distance from the north to the south that may mark the limit of the 
original site subsequently extended south. 
Ground Survey 
The elevated area traditionally called the “palace site” and principal 
stūpa are in the northern part on a flattened area of about 0.4 hectares 
on the summit of the hill (40 metres) [Figure 4]. Six ruined stūpas 
were found on the summit during 2012 survey of the site, the largest, 
Dhat taw hpaya (relic stūpa) having been repaired in 2000 during 
one of the author’s previous trips to the site. From one stūpa on the 
southern hill of the complex under repair, a baked tablet (mye-bon-hpaya 
or “terracotta earth sacred image”) (7.6 x 5 cm.) was recovered from

--- PAGE 113 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
223
222
U Thong National Museum where elephants of comparable size 
decorate the top of covers or lids for pots (Boonyarit & Rarai 2552; 
Podjanok Kanjanajuntorn, pers. comm.).
Comparison with Other Walled Sites
Thailand
The form of Sampanago is similar to the Dvāravatī sites of Khu 
Bua (13°29’30.72”N, 99°49’56.36”E) and U Thong (14°22’32.00”N, 
99°53’32.00”E) although neither is on a river and neither encloses 
substantial upland area (Dhida 1999: 61, 96-97). However, small 
artefacts such as beads and the elephant terracotta model mentioned 
above are common at Khu Bua and U Thong, with links between 
the brick architecture of these sites to structures such as Winka near 
Sampanago (Moore & San Win 2007). As discussed below, there are 
historical links to the later cities of Lampang and Phrae although the 
moats, walls and topography again differ in enclosing a flat rather than 
hilly area. 
The strongest comparisons, however, are with other sites in lower 
Myanmar which like Sampanago were designed to cope with the 
strong variations in the seasonal monsoons. These include the closely 
distributed walled sites of Muttama, Thaton, Don wun, Winka, 
Ayetthama, and Bago (Pegu).
Muttama
Muttama (Martaban, 97 hectares) is located on the east part of the 
152 metre high Martaban range mentioned earlier. The town site faces 
the river on the east, while the west wall runs along the hillocks with 
Kyaikphyinku “pagoda” on the south-west. The only visible portion of 
the wall is that running from the mountain to the river on the north, 
today known as the Sezon quarter. However, on the northwest the corner 
is visible and Kyaik Kalunpun stūpa sits on the southwest edge of a 
0.5 kilometre long oval-shaped rampart. While Muttama is widely known 
for trans-shipping of large “Martaban” glazed jars, the origins of the city 
Figure 5
Figure 6
Figure 5: Recent bead finds at 
Mupun, Mawlamyaing/Moulmein 
[Photograph by San Win].
Figure 6: Barrel bead from 
Sampanago, black mid-section with 
orange ends separated from middle 
section by a white line; 45 mm. 
length, mid-diameter 12 mm., end 
diameter 6 mm. [After Moore & 
Aung Myint 1993: fig. 58].
Figure 3: Dhat taw hpaya or stūpa, 
“Palace” site within the walled site 
[Photograph by San Win].
Figure 4: Finger-marked 
bricks from area of Sampanago 
[Photograph by San Win].
a relic chamber that had been destroyed by treasure hunters.2 The 
tablet was broken in the top portion by the looters, showing a seated 
image of the Buddha on the front while on the back a name “Shyan 
Mi” (shan mi) was inscribed, probably a monk who donated the tablet. 
Although only one tablet was found in the ruined stūpa, this type of 
tablet is seen in large numbers on the walls of Kaw gun cave where 
they are dated to the fifteenth to seventeenth century. The script on 
the back is Middle Mon probably dating to the fifteenth-sixteenth 
century era of the Muttama 32 myos or cities (Aye Kyaw 2514: 141-145; 
Shorto 1963).
At the foot of the hills, where the plains spread to the west walls, 
are the ledawya or royal rice fields. A number of beads dated to the early 
to middle first millennium CE were collected by one of the authors 
from surface survey, including barrels, short barrels, cylindrical ring and 
cylindrical examples made of bone, carnelian, agate and amber. The 
colours ranged from orange-yellow, orange and black, brown to yellow, 
bluish, and brown banded. Some had evenly spaced black and white line 
decorations although others were plain [Figure 5]. One large barrel-
shaped bead, closely comparable to a bead from U Thong, had a black 
mid-section and orange ends (45 mm. in length, 12 mm. at mid-diameter 
with an end diameter of 6 mm.) (Dhida 1999: 99; Moore & Aung Myint 
1993: fig. 58) [Figure 6]. Another was zoomorphic, a carnelian lion in 
a jumping or crouched position in orange colour about 40 mm. long 
with a hole penetrating the neck and tail. A villager in this area, U Chit 
Aye, reported recovering iron objects and ten stone beads at a depth of 
1.8 metres from a well in front of his house, which he gave to the 
township office in Paung township. U Khin Shwe from this office showed 
one of the authors the beads but these were unfortunately lost during 
1988 riots in Paung township. Similar beads are kept at the Ministry 
of Culture Museum in Mawlamyaing, some recently looted examples, 
and comparable from upper Myanmar include sites such as Maingmaw 
(Pinle), Taungdwingyi, Halin, Śrīkṣetra and Beikthano. Other parallels 
can be seen in beads from central and southern Thailand, including 
Thung Tuek on the west coast (Boonyarit & Rarai 2552).
A significant number of pottery finds were also made during surface 
survey. These include an intact jar, 40 cm. high with a tall neck, flaring 
body and flat base (Naw Yuzana Win 2009) [Figure 7]. While the rim 
of the jar has broken, in form, decoration and finish, it closely recalls 
an unglazed stoneware baluster jar (52 cm.) dated to the fourteenth to 
fifteenth century Sukhothai or Ayutthaya period from the Ban Bang 
Pun kilns, Suphan Buri province, western-central Thailand kept in the 
Freer-Sackler collection.3 Larger glazed “Martaban” jars have been 
found in nearby regions, one over a metre in height, with its glaze well 
preserved, and recent documentation of a road cut exposing numerous 
vessels and an associated kiln structure [Figures 8-9]. Other surface 
finds from survey in 2012, yielded a mixture of similar ironware and 
thinner, red-orange pottery incised with curvilinear wave and V-shaped 
designs [Figure 10]. These recall Dvāravatī wares from Khu Mueang, 
Sing Buri province (Phasook 2528: figs 16, 17, 20). The dating of a 
terracotta model of an elephant, however, remains open to discussion 
[Figure 11]. The 6 cm. model, decorated with rows small circular 
and tear-drop shaped stamped motifs on the back and flank recalls 
similar zoomorphic figures documented at Thung Tuek and in the

--- PAGE 114 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
225
224
are hazy. It has also been proposed that Sampanago was the Kalaśapura 
or “City of Pots” referred to in a seventh century CE Sanskrit inscription 
found at Śrīkṣetra. References to Kalaśapura and its king, Śrī Parameśvara, 
hint at a southern port for the Pyu (Gutman 2001: 109, n. 1). 
Thaton
Thaton (286 ha., 16°54’30.46”N, 97°22’8.16”E) is laid out on the 
escarpment of laterite high ground or myenigon,4 red-earth soil which 
is slightly elevated from the surrounding rice fields. The site naturally 
fortified on the east by the 2.4 kilometre long Myathabaik hills with 
the lowland swamp of Leik-in (Tortoise-lake) on the west, perhaps 
remnants of the Old Thaton harbour. This may have connected with 
the Sa Chaung or Thaton river, an old canal parallel to the railway 
which extends 16 kilometres to the northwest. Numerous small town 
sites such as Hsin Phyu Kyun (16°56’16.56”N, 97°20’29.14”E), 
Mayangon (16°59’7.26”N, 97°15’6.71”E), Seik Kyun (17° 0’1.66”N, 
97°14’47.10”E), Kadaikgyi (17° 2’2.59”N, 97°14’20.40”E) and 
Kadaikgaleh (17° 3’18.26”N, 97°13’49.18”E) are located on isolated 
mounds of laterite high ground 80-160 metres above the surrounding 
rice fields on the west of this canal with artefacts such as pottery, beads 
and mye-bon-hpaya tablets dating to the first millennium CE.
Don Wun
Don wun (17° 8’35.26”N, 97°16’30.09”E), 16 kilometres north of 
Thaton, dates to the fifteenth-sixteenth century Hanthawaddy period 
of the “32 myos” or cities, but the site is linked to Thaton and Muttama, 
referred to in the Chronicle of the Mons as “Wun” and the trader Makuta 
who befriended the king of Sukhothai and eventually became Wariraw 
of Muttama (“Rock Slab City”) (Tun Aung Chain 2010: 32-46).  
Bago and Other Sites
Similar artefacts have been recovered in Taikkala (Ayetthama, 
17°14’39.48”N, 
97° 
3’44.24”E 
and 
Winka, 
17°13’34.42”N, 
97° 4’16.07”E), Kyaikkatha (269 ha.), another of the 32 myos (satellite 
towns) of the sixteenth century kingdom of Hanthawaddy, Sittaung 
(72 ha., Kyaikkalun Pon Hpaya) and its sentinel site, Kawhtin (16 ha.). 
The outer wall of Bago (Ussā-Hanthawaddy) (17°20’2.97”N, 
96°30’42.38”E, 120 ha.) located adjacent to the northeast wall 
of Bayinnaung’s sixteenth century city, encloses a hillock approximately 
1,500 x 800 metres called Hinthagon (“resting place of goose”) 
[Figure 12]. The length of the hillock is similar to that at Sampanago 
but its height, at 28 metres, is only 10 metres above the surrounding 
terrain while that at Sampanago, 39 metres is twice that of the 
surrounding area. It is however, the only site paralleling the unusual 
topography of Sampanago. The Bago “pagoda,” the Shwemawdaw 
Thamaing or chronicle history dates the city to 825 CE with a line of 
seventeen kings linked to Sampanago starting from Thamala, Wimala 
and Assakumma.5 
Figure 7: Baluster jar with line decorations 
on shoulder from the site compared with  
14th to 15th century jar from central Thailand 
[Photograph courtesy of Yuzana Win].
Figure 8: Glazed jar found at In-yar,  
Paw-kyu-kone, near Mawlamyaing 
[Photograph courtesy of Nan Kyi Kyi Kyaing].
Figure 9: Section of road cut near Mawlamyaing 
showing in situ vessels [Photograph courtesy of 
Thazin Kaing].
Figure 10: Sherds and pot [Drawing by San Win].
Figure 11: Model of elephant  
(6 cm.) from Sampanago 
[Photograph by San Win].

--- PAGE 115 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
227
226
Site Distribution
In short, Sampanago was part of a network of walled sites extending for 
some 100 kilometres from northwest to southeast, their form primarily 
determined by the coastal region terrain between the Sittaung and 
Thanlwin rivers. Thaton, Hsin Phyu Kyun, Don wun and other sites 
parallel Sampanago’s proximity to water transport routes. 
Walled enclosures reflecting the lateritic landscape are seen 
throughout the area, including Kyaikkatha, Sittaung and Kadaikgyi 
while the construction of ramparts around a markedly elevated area 
is seen at Ussā-Bago. Within this network, sites of different sizes and 
shapes profile a distinct regional adaptation, fluctuating site hierarchy 
and chronology of at least the middle to late first millennium CE. 
Combining this archaeology and chronicle records, Sampanago may 
have been the successor of Thaton and immediate predecessor of 
Ussā-Bago. This is supported by the size of the site, as Sampanago-
Lakunbyin (126 ha.) is larger than others of the Muttama 32 myos 
such as Wagaru (2,000 metres circumference) or Don wun and larger 
than Sittaung (72 ha.) although smaller than Kyaikkatha (369 ha.) and 
Thaton (259 ha.) with their well-developed central palace site. 
The most viable context within which to understand the long 
chronology and multiple names referring to Sampanago, however, is 
that of an inter-linked trade and pilgrimage network linking this lower 
part of the Thanlwin both to the sea and overland to Thailand. 
Origins of Sampanago 
The name “Sampanago” is thought to derive from the Pāli element 
“sampa” (sappa) (Htoke Sein 1978: 640). Pronounced as “thampa” 
in Myanmar, it is distinct from words such as zabegji, boa constrictor 
and zabaoun, python (Myanmar Language commission 1993: 103). At 
present, written references for Sampanago are limited in two chronicle 
tales, one of a nāga-queen, the mother of princes Thamala and Wimala, 
the founders of Bago and the other of a Khmer nāga-princess who 
comes to Bago. In both cases the accounts are understood here as not 
an actual reptile but reference to a local female lineage and fecundity, 
possibly associated with serpent veneration.
In the first of these, it is said that when King Theinnaginga was 
ruling in Dhañyawaddy (Old Muttama) he mated with a maiden, the 
queen, who was born from an egg laid by a female nāga. She gave 
birth to two sons, the twin brothers of Thamala and Wimala, founded 
Hanthawaddy city. Another traditional account holds that prince Assa, 
the successor of King Wimala at Bago (Ussā, Ussi)6 was famed as a 
warrior in fighting with Indian merchant groups. His renown spread to 
Khmer regions and in due course, a Khmer princess of the same nāga 
race as prince Assa, came to Bago to be married to this prince (British 
Burma Gazetteer 1879; Tin Gyi 1931). 
It has been argued that the Assa story is a later tale, but the 
relevance here is the repeated use of the nāga metaphor in relation to 
the Muttama-Sampanago and Bago (Aung-Thwin 2005: 94). Notably, 
the Sampanago name survived into the colonial era, mentioned as a 
deserted village circle (Tsampa-na-go) in the Martaban (Muttama) 
township, Amherst (Moulmein, Mawlamyaing) district. The location 
is correct for Sampanago, lying on the right bank of the Thanlwin 
(Salween) below the Bheng Laing or Dontami river with a population 
of 4,402 in 1877-78 being assessed for the British capitation tax for 
Rs. 4,327 and land revenue was Rs. 3,893 (British Burma Gazetteer 
1879: II, 834). After that the village was deserted and the population 
shifted to nearby villages with only the name Sampanago remaining on 
the British One Inch map of Burma (No. 94, H, 10) between Nathmaw 
village in the north and Hmawbi in the south.
Written accounts combining Sampanago with “Lakunbyin” occur 
in 1783 and 1874 orders of King Bodawpaya (Badon), the Muttama 
32 myos sittan (The Revenue Inquest of King Bodawpaya for Muttama 
32 myos) where one of the palm leaf manuscripts notes that:
[…] lakunbyin town being set up a palace (for kings), (it was 
called), “Sampanago-Lagwanprañ” and by the Mon they called 
it as “Lakunbyin,” King Sitta ruled over it. (Yangon, National 
Library Palm-leaf manuscripts, no. 2272, “ku” leaf, back face; 
lines 8-9)
From citations such as these, we suggest that Sampanago and 
Lakunbyin refer to the same place, with the former being the original 
name and the latter an additional one. Further, as discussed below, the 
name “Lagwamprañ” or “Lakunbyin” recurs in the later alleged Mon 
migration of Haripuñjaya.
Figure 12: The near square  
16th century palace enclosure at 
Bago with the remains of the earlier 
oblong city of Ussā-Hanthawaddy 
to the east [Photograph courtesy of 
Williams-Hunt Collection (SOAS); 
geo-referenced by S. Lertlum].

--- PAGE 116 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
229
228
Origins of Lakunbyin
The name “Lakunbyin” (Laganphen in Mon) is also given to a site near 
Hlegu in Bago with both possibly connected with the often-cited Mon 
migration from the Haripuñjaya Mon kingdom of Queen “Samadevi” 
(Cāmadevī) in the tenth or eleventh century (Woodward, this volume). 
This migration is best known from the Cāmadevīvaṃsa, a northern Thai 
chronicle written some time between 1410 and 1417 by a monk named 
Bodhiraṃsī, who noted as follows:
At that time the early tenth century the people of Haripuñjaya 
suffered from a widespread cholera epidemic […] the remaining 
population of Haripuñjaya, in order to save their own lives, 
fled to a city named Sudhamma [Thaton] and settled there. 
The city of Haripuñjaya consequently fell into decline and 
was abandoned [...]. The king of Pukam [Bagan or Pagan] 
observing the masses of weak and starving people, was moved to 
pity and out of his compassion restored the city of Sudhamma 
for them to occupy. Unable to bear their suffering any longer, 
the people of Haripuñjaya left Sudhamma [Thaton] and went 
to Haṃsavati [Bago or Pegu] […] where they continued to 
live. At that time the king of Haṃsavati seeing the [needs of 
the] people of Haripuñjaya, […] gave them many necessities, 
including clothing, jewelry, paddy, rice, various salty and sour 
foods, and dwelling places. (Swearer & Sommai 1998: 105-106)
There are many ambiguities in this statement such as why the people 
left Thaton for Bago. However, while the account has been queried due 
to the later date of extant copies it is generally agreed that the migration 
came from the area of Lamphun, Lampang and Phrae in upper-central 
Thailand (Aung-Thwin 2005: 92).7 Their route would have taken them 
across the Thanlwin at Dakwin near Pa-an and continued along the 
upper reaches of Bilin river and valley of the Yanzalin river that joins 
the Thanlwin near Myaing-gyi-ngu opposite Kamamaung in Kayin 
state. From there, they could easily reach Sampanago-Lakunbyin. 
Accepting the traditional occupation of Thaton by Aniruddha in 1057, 
we postulate that the city may have been governed by an appointee of 
Bagan [Pagan], mentioned in the legend of Queen Cāma as the “king 
of Pukam.” The presence of a Bagan governor and depopulation from 
the occupation may have made Bago (Haṃsavatī) a more secure and 
prosperous refuge for the Mons from Haripuñjaya:
The inhabitants of Haripuñjaya and of Haṃsavati came to 
know and love each other. Even their languages were the same 
[…]. When the disease was brought under control those who 
want to return to Haripuñjaya departed and dwelt again in the 
city […]. The people of Haṃsavati, who still love their friends 
and relatives in Haripuñjaya often, visited them bearing many 
letters. (Swearer & Sommai 1998: 105-106)
In brief, the name Lakunbyin at Bago and Muttama (Thaton) may 
derive from this Mon migration from central Thailand with “lakun” 
recalling Lamphun and “byin” for Phrae. In any case, the name 
survived into later records, at times paired with Sampanago and at 
others mentioned as Lakunbyin. For example, in a royal order dated 
10 February 1806, “[…] Yehtinbala, the servant of Sakaingmin, 
is appointed to be Myosa, Governor of Lakunbyin, in Muttama 
confederation” which suggests that Lakunbyin was a satellite town or in 
the revenue circle of Muttama. 
In the Muttama 32 myos sittan revenue inquest of Bowdawpaya noted 
above, dated the eighth waxing day of Nattaw in 1145 (Myanmar Era 
= 1783 CE)8 soon after he had ascended the throne on the fourteenth 
waning day of Tapotwe, Monday, in 1144 (1782 CE) the names of the 
32 myos included Lakunbyin (Pinnya 2462-81: 28).9 Lakunbyin appears 
again in Aye Kyaw’s work (2514: 141-145), where he divided the Muttama 
region into two parts, west and east of the Thanlwin. Lakunbyin, although 
not exactly located, is included in the western group.
A different name is given in Nai Pan Hla’s editing of the Rajadhiraj 
Ayedawpun Kyan, where he notes it as “Lagwanbyin” in Myanmar and 
“Dun Laganphen” in Mon. The importance of the site in this work was 
its strategic position in the connections between Muttama and Zimme 
(Chiang Mai) and Bago (Hanthawaddy or Haṃsavatī) in the fourteenth 
century. Three years after the accession of King Banya-Oo (r. 1348-
1383), father of Rajādhiraj, the rebellion of Saw-ai-dit and Baw-kray 
broke out in Don wun. When the rebels were defeated they fled to 
Chiang Mai for asylum but returned to attack Muttama with the help 
of Chiang Mai. Although the attack failed, many lesser towns along the 
way to Muttama such as Sittaung, Taikkala, Don wun, Yinnyain and 
Lakunbyin were destroyed by the rebels (Nai Pan Hla 2541: 48-49). 
Taking this order in its geographical context, Lakunbyin was not far 
from Muttama. 
Again, fifteen years into Banya-Oo’s Muttama reign another 
rebellion broke out. The king, in distress because of the death of his 
white elephant, went up to the forest in search of good elephants, taking 
his ministers, armed men and family. This time, the rebel leader was 
his brother in law, Brat Htaba, the governor of Muttama to whom he 
entrusted guardianship of his throne. Brat Htaba had three brothers, 
Eiprabun, the governor of Lakunbyin, Lokphya, the governor of 
Myaungmya and U-lo, the governor of Mawlamyaing. They also 
armed their towns against Banya-Oo. As King Banya-Oo could not 
defeat this rebellion, he abandoned Muttama and lived in exile in Don 
wun for six years before re-establishing Bago (Hanthawaddy) in 731 
(1369 CE). During his stay at Don wun (Ton Wun) his chief queen Śrī 
Māyā (Medaw) gave birth to a son Apason or Banya Nwe, later who 
become King Rajādhiraj (Nai Pan Hla 2541: 68).
As soon as Rajādhiraj became king in 745 (1383 CE) in Bago he 
attacked his rivals in the lower Myanmar 32 myos and started to fight Don 
wun, Tayai, Thanmaung and Lakunbyin. In the battle of Lakunbyin, 
Rajādhiraj ordered the whole town to be set on fire. As the governor of 
Lakunbyin, Baw-la-gun, was busy fighting a fire on his elephant’s back, 
Rajādhiraj’s men cut him down and killed him on the spot. Rajādhiraj 
then occupied the town, made Lakunbyin his base to attack Muttama 
and conquered Muttama, Mawlamyaing and all the 32 cities in the 
region. A similar event occurred in a battle of Muttama during the 
reign of King Tabinshwehti of Taungoo (Toungoo, 1530-1550 CE). In 
899 (1537 CE), soon after becoming the king of Hanthawaddy (Bago),

--- PAGE 117 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
231
230
Tabinshwehti marched on the Muttama 32 myos. The Maharajawanthit 
(“The Great New Chronicle”) compiled by Maha-sithu U Tun Nyo 
records the name of Lakunbyin (Lakwnphyan, Lawan) upstream of 
Muttama (Kyaw Win 2551: 39, 60).
The Muttama defence lines were strong with walls made along the 
sides of the hills. On the river side were seven ships armed with cannons 
that destroyed the troops of Tabinshwehti. Tabinshwehti’s fleet as well, 
some 3,000 war boats and 130,000 armed men, could not manage to 
advance. The siege lasted for two months with attacks by river and land 
until at last, Tabinshwehti appointed Thamain Maru as his admiral and 
made Lakunbyin his headquarters. The admiral ordered his men to 
build a bamboo raft measuring 189 metres in length and 91 metres in 
width, on which they piled firewood up to a height of 9 metres. Another 
bamboo raft was built bigger than the former measuring 549 metres in 
length and 110 metres in width on which they built a stockade higher 
than the walls of Muttama. They arranged battlements, railings and 
cannons on the stockade and after setting fire to the piles of firewood 
on the raft, set the two bamboo rafts afloat upstream from Lakunbyin so 
they would move downstream to Muttama at dawn when tidal current 
started to retreat. As a result, all seven ships at Muttama harbour were 
burnt, and as there were no ships to guard the river side on the east 
of Muttama, the raft with the stockade approached the city and fired 
its cannons. The troops guarding the city fled from their defence lines 
and Tabinshwehti occupied Muttama (Kyaw Win 2551: 34-35). As all 
these accounts underscore, Lakunbyin was an ideal military base as 
it was only a short way from Muttama with its defences sustained in 
subsequent centuries. 
Dhañyawaddy and Du’Wop
With Dhañyawaddy and Du’wop, we bring Kaw gun cave into the 
Sampanago-Lakunbyin network. The link is vital as Kaw gun, the most 
significant archaeological and religious site in this region, probably 
stood more closely to Sampanago-Lakunbyin than Muttama. It is not 
only Kaw gun for there are further caverns of note less than 3 kilometres 
to the northwest, at Yathebyan (16°50’28.83”N, 97°33’50.70”E) with 
further caves in the area at Hpa-gat, Bingyi (Bayinnyi) and Dhatkyaik. 
Finger-marked bricks (46 x 41 x 5 cm.) recorded from Kaw gun 
suggesting a first millennium CE date supported by the iconography 
of many of the mye-bon-hpaya tablets and carvings in the cave as well as 
palaeographic dating of the epigraphy. 
All the caves in this area have long been a matter of study, with the 
first British visit in 1827 by the envoy John Crawford. At Kaw gun, 
the entire outer and inner surface of the walls and ceiling are covered 
with mye-bon-hpaya tablets of Sukhothai style dated to the thirteenth 
to fourteenth century CE [Figure 13]. Over time, they have been 
arranged symmetrically to make terraces and spires, many painted 
brown and golden colours (Nai Pan Hla 2007: 68). The plaques 
and other carvings in stone bear many images of Buddha in regalia 
seated in meditation or with legs pendant (Than Tun 2002: 23-24). 
There are also images of the reclining Buddha, all framed with floral 
designs and arches and pediments as well as dancing half-bird figures 
(kinnarā-kinnarī). One standing image of the Buddha is in the fearless 
hand gesture (abhayamudrā), others flanked by royally dressed figures, or 
ones bearing  a human head on a lion body or two lively yakṣas. It is 
within this cave that several significant early inscriptions for our study 
of Sampanago-Lakunbyin are found, one including the phrase “dun du’ 
wop” that we connect to Dhañyawaddy.
The compound-word “Dhañyawaddy” derives from the Sanskrit 
dhānya for rice or paddy and vatī for town site. It was a common name 
for any site with suitable or arable rice lands. So while in Myanmar 
this name is often linked to the Buddhist walled site in Rakhine state 
(Arakan), it may also be a reasonable referent to the walled site north of 
Muttama, Sampanago-Lakunbyin. The name is used for the Muttama 
region in the Mon chronicle, as “Dhaññavatī-Mottama” linked 
with “Suvaṇṇabhūmi-Sudhammavatī” (Thaton) and Hanthawaddy 
(Haṃsavatī or Bago/Pegu) through the Gavampati tradition of the 
Buddha’s visit to the Mon lands (Tun Aung Chain 2010: xxviii). 
Dhañyawaddy may also be connected to the name Du’wop, 
mentioned in an Old Mon inscription engraved on the inner hem of 
the adorned so-called “Jambūpati Buddha” found in Kaw gun cave, 
17 kilometres north of Sampanago. Scholars agree that Mon phonology, 
grammar and lexicon changed considerably over time, some contending 
a linguistic evolution which is unparalleled elsewhere in Southeast Asia 
(Shorto 1971: ix). In this context, we suggest that “Du’ wop” in Old 
Mon comes from the Sanskrit dhānya or Pāli dhañña and vatī, with the 
first changing to “du” and the second to “wop” to accord with local 
pronunciation and scripts. Nai Pan Hla has noted a similar pattern of 
shortening in Indic words when brought into Old Mon (2007: 107-110) 
[Appendix 1].
Figure 13: Overhang at Kaw gun 
cave showing the reliefs and images 
donated by pilgrims over the centuries 
[Photograph by San Win].

--- PAGE 118 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
233
232
The inscription, as seen below, also mentions Sampanago 
(Campānagara or Campānāga) with Nai Pan Hla (2007: 70) connecting 
Du’wop to this site:
The name of the city given in the Old Mon inscriptions 
engraved on the inner hem of the Jambupati Buddha found in 
Kaw gun cave is entirely unknown. We cannot trace the name 
of a city called Du’ Wop in any Mon chronicles. The nearest city 
name known as Campānagara [Campānāga] is located about 
five miles north of Martaban [Muttama] and some 25 miles 
south of Kaw gun cave. 
The Kaw gun image, described by Nai Pan Hla as Jambūpati, may 
in fact depict the descent of the Buddha from Tāvatiṃsa, with a second 
similar image also found at Kaw gun having been identified in this 
manner (Naw Yuzana Win 2009: 51; San Win 2556: 89).  
Remarkably, there is a duplicate of the Kaw gun inscription at 
Thaton, like the Kaw gun example, not bearing a date (Chit Thein 
2509: 9-10). A duplicate of it was placed in the dhammayon of the Thaton 
Shwesayan “pagoda” by Taw Sein Ko in the early twentieth century and 
still kept in an inscription shed in the “pagoda” compound. Thus, even 
though we are not able to give a precise date, the similar palaeography 
temporally pairs Kaw gun and Thaton while the inscription itself puts 
Sampanago into the same timeframe and site network. The inscription, 
according to Nai Pan Hla (2007: 70), reads as follows:
This image of Lord Buddha, it was I, queen Muh Tah residing 
in the city of Du’wop who carved and made this Holy Buddha. 
Stone and clay Buddha situated either in this city or outside the 
kingdom were made by one together with my followers who 
were skilled in carving stone images. Many other teachers and 
craft men appear to carve Buddhas of stone! 
The Old Mon inscription from Kaw gun is dated by Nai Pan Hla 
(2007: 68) to the tenth century, correlating it with a Hindu trimūrti 
stone relief bearing similar Mon writing identifying the piece as Viṣṇu. 
Moreover, a three line old inscriptions referring to Śrī Parameśvara is 
inscribed on the wall of the Kaw gun cave audience hall in Sanskrit 
mixed with Mon. Palaeographically, this undated inscription is ascribed 
in the seventh century (Nai Pan Hla 2007: 67). 
As noted above, along with the proper name, queen Muh Tah, 
the inscription also contains a place name, “Don du’wop,” where we 
follow Nai Pan Hla in connecting to Sampanago-Lakunbyin not later 
than tenth century. Many scholars have long debated the location 
of Du’wop, with Gordon Luce locating it near Pa-an in Kayin state 
(1953: 5 and 1985). Michael Aung-Thwin included it in a table of 
forty urban, sacred/mythical and natural sites in lower Myanmar all 
of which he dates to the eleventh-thirteenth century.10 Du’wop, despite 
Luce’s identification as an urban site, is estimated as fourteenth century 
in reference to the reign of an unnamed queen. As the inscription 
described above is without a written date, he postulates that queen Muh 
Tah was the fifteenth century Shin Saw Bu (Aung-Thwin 2005: 59, 
Table 1).11 
Conclusion
While problems have been raised on drawing connections between 
Thaton,  Muttama and Bago (17°18’34.77”N, 96°29’41.73”E ), the 
Myanmar landscape we describe is more complex, drawing in Kaw gun 
caves (16°49’36.59”N, 97°35’8.85”E) and Winka (17°13’34.79”N, 97° 
4’16.07”E ) to the northwest of Sampanago (Aung-Thwin 2005: 79-103). 
We bring together legends and artefacts to define the trading networks of 
the Mon state in the late first millennium and early second millennium CE. 
An ancient town site of Sampanago-Lakunbyin may also have been called 
Dhañyawaddy, a name derived from Du’wop in Old Mon. Because 
it is built beside the rocky mountain it was also called Muh Tamo’ or 
Muttama (Martaban), a name well-known in the thirteenth century. 
The site thus appears to have been referred to as Sampanago-
Lakunbyin, Muttama, Dhañyawaddy and Du’wop. Each reflects 
the different conditions, with Sampanago and Lakunbyin for 
example, perhaps different groups of Mon-Khmer speaking people. 
Dhañyawaddy, a Sanskrit-derived word, recalls the local ecology and 
appears to have survived in inscriptions such as those at Kaw gun 
cave as Du’wop, a Mon derivation of Dhañyawaddy. Recalling their 
mother’s nāga lineage, Thamala and Wimala, the legendary founders 
of Hanthawaddy-Bago are said to have migrated from Sampanago, 
the “City of Serpents,” in the sixth century. The next Mon influx 
would have been from Haripuñjaya or Lamphun with its associations 
to the name Lakunbyin. Other chronicles and traditional stories call 
it Dhañyawaddy (blessed place) with Sanskrit origins, Muttama and 
Du’wop, the last possibly a Mon derivation of Dhañyawaddy. 
Artefacts from ground survey supporting a sixth to ninth century 
culture include coins, beads and finger-marked bricks paralleling 
finds from Khu Bua, U Thong and other early sites in Kanchanaburi, 
Thailand. Sampanago’s location on the Thanlwin thus facilitated trade 
eastwards as well as to the north, west and to the coast. Sampanago-
Lakunbyin did not exist in isolation, with artefacts, sculpture, chronicles 
and inscriptions from Thaton (Sudhamma) and Kaw gun (Kotgon) 
cave defining the significant role of the Mons in lower Myanmar in the 
second half of the first millennium CE. 
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Department of Archaeology, 
National Museum and Library, Ministry of Culture; Ko Pyiet Phyo 
Kyaw, Department of Archaeology, Yangon University, Ministry of 
Education; Ma Thazin Kaing, Nan Kyi Kyi Kyaing and Ma Yuzana 
Win for the assistance on certain maps and figures; and the Faculty of 
Arts & Humanities, SOAS, University of London for their assistance in 
the research for this essay.

--- PAGE 119 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
235
234
Appendix 1:  
Glossary of Place Names
Amherst: Headquarters of a district in the Tenasserim 
division of lower Myanmar (14˚ 56’-17˚ 2’ N, 97˚ 27’ -  
98˚ 51’ E). It is called Kyaik-kha-mī in Mon with the 
Myanmar name the same. The city was named in 
honour of Lord Amherst (1773-1857 CE), the British 
Commissioner who first governed in Kyaik-kha-mī.
Attaran: A tributary entering the Salween (Thanlwin) 
at their confluence, which Mon people call “bīkatat” 
meaning the river where fishes spawn. 
Ayetthama (Ayassma): A village located on the 
north of Mt Kelāsa, Bilin township, Mon state, lower 
Myanmar. Ayetthama and Winka are traditionally 
considered part of the first “Suvaṇṇabhūmi” later 
shifting to Thaton.
Bago: Myanmar pronunciation for Pegu which was 
formerly known as Haṃsavatī (“City of the Brahman 
Ducks;” see Hinthagon). The Mons also called Upéku, 
carrying the sense of being helped by a stratagem 
(upāya in Pāli means stratagem) and Ussā (after Orissa 
in India). Thamala and Wimala, the twin sons of 
Theinnaganga, the legendary king of Dhañyawaddy in 
592 CE, who were exiled from their father’s kingdom 
when it was discovered that their mother was of nāga 
parentage, traditionally founded the city. 
Bheng Laing: The upper reaches of Dontami river 
near Sampanago are called “Bhan-luin” in Mon. 
There was an old town site with the same name.
Bingyi: A limestone cave in the Kaw gun group near 
Thaton with numerous Buddha statues inside dated 
to be Muttama period of the thirteenth century CE 
onwards.
Dhañyawaddy: In Pāli dhañña meaning uncooked 
grain, in Sanskrit dhānya, to bring in or bestowing 
wealth and good fortune; auspicious, virtuous. An 
old name of Muttama, also known as Sampanago-
Lakunbyin. 
Dhatkyaik: A limestone cave near Thaton called 
Thuim-dhāt-kyāk in Mon meaning the “cave 
enshrined with the Buddha relic.” Finger-marked 
bricks have been found in that cave indicating its use  
in the first millennium CE.
Dhat taw ywa: A village of Kayin people located 
inside the walled site of Sampanago on the western 
slope of the central hill where a stūpa called Dhat taw 
ceti is located.
Dontami (Tontami): A river named after a town 
site called Dun-taṁ in Mon, which means the new 
town. It flows into the Thanlwin (Salween) north of 
Sampanago.
Don wun (Tonwun): An old town site near Thaton. 
“Donwān” in Mon means “Laterite City” from don 
meaning town or city and wān meaning laterite.
Du’wop (Du’wop’): A short form of Mon probably 
derived from Dhañyawaddi, the old Muttama town site 
probably at Sampanago.
Hinthagon: A small hillock located inside the walled 
site of Hanthawaddy. The word derives from “Haṃsa 
Hill” where according to the chronicles the two 
Brahman ducks, male and female, rested one on top 
of the other, at the time of Lord Buddha who foretold 
that on this spot Hanthawaddy city would be built.
Hlaingbwe: “Lhuin blai” in Mon, used to designate a 
river and an old town site near Thaton now located in 
Kayin state.
Hmawbi: Derived from mhow bī in Mon, meaning 
river ferry port, now a small village on the west bank of 
Thanlwin (Salween). 
Hsin Phyu Kyun: From tka’ cin btān in Mon meaning 
the island of the white elephant, located on the north-
west part of the walled site of Thaton.
Jaing: A river joining together with Thanlwin 
(Salween) called “Bīgrān” in Mon.
Kadaikgaleh: This ancient site is called “Little 
Kadaik” in Myanmar and “Katak tot” in Mon.  
(katāk means a shark-like fresh water catfish and tot 
means little). It is a village built on laterite high ground 
surrounded by walls and a moat located on the east 
bank of Bilin river.
Kadaikgyi: A village 1.6 kilometres east of 
Kadaikgaleh called “Katāk jnok” in Mon (“Big 
Kadaik”). The ancient site is built on a large area of 
laterite high ground surrounded by walls and a moat.
Kalama taung: The name means “Mountain of 
Indian Lady” (914 metres in elevation), the highest place 
in the Thaton-Muttama region and a continuation of 
Mt Zingyaik (797 metres in elevation). First millennium 
CE habitation sites have been documented on its slopes 
and summit.
Kaw gun (Kotgon): A celebrated Buddhist limestone 
cavern near a village called Kaw gun located on the 
west bank of Thanlwin (Salween) in Kayin state. 
Other caverns of the same type are found in the area 
including the group of Pagat, Yathebyan, Bingyi, and 
Dhatkyaik.
Kyaikphyinku: This site name refers to a stūpa known 
in Mon as “Kyāk plan pau” which is built on the peak 
where the Buddha and his Arahats first came during 
the Buddha’s journeys to Suvaṇṇabhūmi (Thaton) 
related in the Mon Chronicle. The stūpa is located in 
the southwest corner of the present Muttama old city.
Kyaik Kalunpun: This refers to a stūpa called “Kyāk 
klam ban” in Mon, said that to have been built on the 
spot where the Buddha and his Arahats were prevented 
from continuing their journey by a hundred ogres 
standing with their hands clasped. The name means 
the “pagoda” embraced by a hundred ogres with their 
outstretched arms located in the northwest corner of 
the walled site of old Muttama.
Kyaikkatha: The name of a stūpa located in a village 
of the same name after the legendary hero Smaṅ Assh 
of the Bago (Pegu-Haṃsāvatī) dynasty with remains of 
the earlier Old Mon (Thaton) period. 
Kawhtin: This site is known as “Ko’ hteiṅ” in Mon, 
which is a village and a small walled town site just 
south of Kyaikkatha.
Kyauksarit: This place name is “Tmo’ krah” in 
Mon, meaning “pebble.” It is a small river joining the 
Dontami and the name of a village located southwest of 
Sampanago. A brick structure with finger-marked bricks 
indicating its antiquity was found at Kyauksarit village.
Lakunbyin (Lagunbyin): One of the historically 
documented “32 myos” or towns of Muttama which 
was built on the site of the Mon Sampanago-
Dhañyawaddi town of the later Mon period  
(thirteenth century CE).
Mayangon: The village of Mayangon (in Myanmar) 
means a high ground where the Mayan trees (Bouea 
burmanica) grow located close to Kadaikgyi and 
Kadaikgaleh. The Pāli for Mayan is muragaṅ. The 
Mons call it “Maruiksabum.” In 2006, 137 Neolithic 
polished stone implements were documented at the 
village following dredging works.
Mawlamyaing: This site was known as Moulmein 
in English, now the capital city of the Mon state. 
The Mons call it “Mat ma Luim” and in Pāli it is 
Rammāvatī.
Muttama: This site is Martaban in English, “Muh 
Tamo’” in Mon and the Myanmar call it “Madama,” 
meaning “Rock Slab City.” The Chronicle of the Mons 
(Tun Aung Chain 2010: 7-8) states that “the Lord 
Buddha, [...] then went [flying] through the sky with 
500 arahats, and, in the seven cities of Dhaññavatī, 
Kasavatī, Pupphavatī, Hanthawaddy (Hamsāvatī), 
Rammavatī, Karanaratthavatī and Rock Slab City 
where he arrived, he attained the achievement of 
fruition (phalasamāpatti) and foretold that the religion 
would be established there [...].”
Nathmaw: A village located on the west bank of 
Thanlwin north of Sampanago. The Mons call it 
“Nehah mhoaw” meaning ferry port. 
Pa-an (Hpa-an): This place name is “Bhā aṅ” 
in Mon, meaning the monastery built of wood 
(Dipterocarpus tuberculatus) and in Pāli, pāvana (Pinnya 
2471: 106). It is now the capital city of Kayin state on 
the east bank of Thanlwin river, lower Myanmar.
Puñjaluin: This word is a combination of Pāli, pañca 
meaning five and Mon, luiṅ (Mon) meaning to flow. It is 
the name of the confluence of Thanlwin in its estuary, 
which ends into the Gulf of Muttama (Martaban) 
where five rivers join together: the Thanlwin, Jaing, 
Attaran, Hlainbwe and Dontami. A small island at 
the mouth is also called “Ko’ (kaw) puñjaluin” (Gaung 
hsay kywan in Myanmar) referring to its traditional use 
by the Muttama kings for boat races and the Head-
washing ceremony.
Ratanapura: A name derived from Śrī Ratanapura, 
the formal title of Muttama old city founded by King 
Wareru (Makadu) in 1287 CE.
Sa Chaung: The meaning of this name in Myanmar 
is a salty-creek or channel use for salt production. It 
flows north to south (not east to west like the natural 
streams of the local landscape) connecting Thaton to 
the mouth of Bilin river. It may have been an outlet or 
waterway for the port of Thaton in earlier centuries. 
The Thaton Chronicle mentions it as the Musarani or the 
Thaton river. 
Sampanago: A walled site and village recorded in the 
British Burma Gazetteer (1879) located near Muttama. It 
is referred to as Campānagara or Campānāga in Pāli/
Sanskrit, in this essay as “City of Serpents.”
Seik Kyun: This means “ferry-port island” in 
Myanmar, located near Mayangon village in the 
Kadaikgyi group of sites.
Shwesayan: “Shwesayan” in Myanmar is a common 
name for a zedi (ceti) or stūpa with this example located 
at the ancient site of Thaton. The Chronicle of the Mons 
noted that the Buddha, at the request of Venerable 
Gavampati, visited Thaton (Suvaṇṇabhūmi) during  
the winter of the year 111 Mahā Era (507 BCE?), and 
had first given his hairs for worship to hermits who 
dwelled on various mountains and to Siharāja, king 
of Thaton. Then, when he entered the Final Decease 
in Kusinara (in India) the Mahāthera Gavampati took 
four teeth from the wooden casket to give to Siharāja. 
It is said that King Siharāja built Shwesayan to 
enshrine the Hair Relic and Tooth Relic for veneration 
(Shwe Naw 1931).
Sittaung: This is also known as Sittagaun, the name 
of a river, an old town site and a village within the old 
walls located north of Kyaikkatha.
Taikkala: This is an ancient site of archaeological 
significance in Bilin township, Mon state, which 
lasted until the British occupation of lower Burma 
(Myanmar). Excavations were made during 1975-78 
CE at the site of Mt Kaletha (Kelāsa) to document 
ancient Taikkala (Suvaṇṇabhūmi) 40 kilometres 
northwest of Thaton.
Thaton: A district of Mon state in lower Myanmar. 
This is the historical site of so-called Suvaṇṇabhūmi 
where King Aniruddha of Bagan (Pagan) is said to 
have attacked and occupied in 1057 CE. The ruins 
of Thaton can be traced in and around the modern 
Thaton town.
Ussā: This is one of the names of Bago (Haṃsavatī) 
following the example of Orissa in South India.  
(see Bago).

--- PAGE 120 ---
elizaBeTH H. moore & San Win
237
236
References
Aung Myint 
2542  Myanmar She-haung-myo-daw-
mya (Myanmar Ancient Cities from 
Aerial Photos). Yangon: Ministry of 
Culture. [In Myanmar; 1998 CE]
Aung-Thwin, Michael 
2005  The Mists of Rāmañña:  
The Legend That Was Lower Burma. 
Honolulu: University of  
Hawai’i Press.
Aye Kyaw 
2514  Muttama 32 Myos Sittan 
(Account of the 32 Myos).  
Takkasuil Paññapadesa Sasaung 5(1). 
[In Myanmar; 1970 CE]
Berliet, Ernelle 
2011  Territoires et urbanisation en 
Birmanie des origines (IIe s. av J.-C.) à 
la fin du XIIIe siècle. Paris: Brepols.
Boonyarit Chaisuwan &  
Rarai Naiyawat  
2552  Thung tuek chut chueamyong sen 
thang sai mai thang thale/Thung Tuk: A 
Settlement Linking Together the Maritime 
Silk Route. Hat Yai: Trio Creation. 
[In Thai and English; 2009 CE]
British Burma Gazetteer 
1879  The British Burma Gazetteer. 
Rangoon: Government Press.
Chit Thein 
2509  Mon Kyauksa Paungkhyup  
(A Compilation of Mon Inscriptions). 
Yangon: Department of 
Archaeology. [In Myanmar;  
1965 CE]
Department of Archaeology  
of Myanmar 
2516-31 She Haung Myanmar Kyauksa 
Mya (Ancient Inscriptions of Myanmar). 
Five Volumes. Yangon: Yangon 
University. [In Myanmar;  
1972-87 CE]
Dhida Saraya 
1999  (Sri) Dvaravati: The Initial 
Phase of Siam’s History. Bangkok: 
Muang Boran Publishing House.
Gutman, Pamela 
2001  The Martaban Trade: An 
Examination of the Literature 
from the Seventh Century until 
the Eighteenth Century. Asian 
Perspectives 40(1): 108-118.
Htoke Sein  
1978  The Universal Burmese-English-
Pali Dictionary. Rangoon: U Tun 
Aung Lin, Daily Gazette Press. 
Kyaw Win (ed.) 
2551  Maharajwanthit (The New 
Chronicle of Kings). Yangon: 
Āmyinthit Sāpe. [Second Edition 
in Myanmar; 2007 CE]
Luce, Gordon H. 
1953  Mons of the Pagan Dynasty. 
Journal of the Burma Research Society 
36(1): 1-19.
1969  Old Burma-Early Pagan.  
Volume I: Text. Locust Valley,  
NY: J.J. Augustin Publisher.  
[In collaboration with Bo-Hmu  
Ba Shin]
1985  Phases of Pre-Pagan Burma: 
Languages and History. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Moore, Elizabeth H. &  
Aung Myint 
1993  Beads of Myanmar (Burma): 
Line Decorated Beads Amongst 
the Pyu and Chin. Journal of the 
Siam Society 81(1): 54-87.  
Moore, Elizabeth H. &  
San Win 
2007  The Gold Coast: 
Suvannabhumi? Lower Myanmar 
Walled Sites of the First 
Millennium A.D. Asian Perspectives 
46(1): 202-233.
Myanmar Language 
Commission 
1993  Myanmar-English Dictionary. 
Yangon: Ministry of Education.
Nai Pan Hla 
2541  Yazadarit Ayedawbon Kyan 
(The Yazadarit Ayedawbon Treatise). 
Yangon: Myawaddy Press. 
[Translated in Myanmar;  
Second Edition; 1997 CE] 
2007  A Short Mon History. Paper 
Presented at the First International 
Conference on Mon History, 10-13 
October 2007, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. 
[Unpublished]
Naw Yuzana Win 
2009  Study about the Arts of Wall 
Decoration of Kotgon Cave. Yangon: 
University of Yangon. 
Phasook Indrawooth 
2528  Dachani phachana dinphao samai 
thawarawadi (Index Pottery of Dvāravati 
Period). Bangkok: Silpakorn 
University Press. [In Thai with 
English Summary; 1985 CE]
Pinnya  
2462-81  Muttama Yazawin (Muttama 
Chronicles). Thaton: Suvannavai 
Pitakat Press. [In Myanmar;  
1918-37 CE]
2471  Thaton Yazawin (The Thaton 
Chronicle). Thaton: Suddhammawati 
Press. [In Myanmar; 1927 CE]
San Win 
2530  Sittaung hnit Thanlwin 
Myit-hnit-thehsat-kya-shi She-myo-
haung-mya-ah pannama let-la-kyet 
(Field Survey and Study of Ancient 
Sites in the Region of the Sittaung and 
Thanlwin Rivers). Master Thesis. 
Yangon: University of Yangon. 
[Unpublished in Myanmar;  
1986 CE]
2556  Sanpanago-Lakunbyin 
(Sampanag-lakyunbyin). Myanmar 
Historical Research Journal 22:  
72-102. [In Myanmar; 2012 CE]
Shorto, Harry L.  
1963  The 32 “Myos” in the 
Medieval Mon Kingdom. Bulletin 
of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 26(3): 572-591.
1971  A Dictionary of the Mon 
Inscriptions from the Sixth to the 
Sixteenth Centuries Incorporating 
Materials Collected by the Late 
C.O. Blagden. London: Oxford 
University Press.
Shwe Naw, Sitkeyi 
1931  Mon Rajawan (The Chronicle 
of the Mons and the Collected Historical 
Accounts of Their Pagodas). Yangon: 
Hanthawaddy Pitakat Press.
Swearer, Donald K. &  
Sommai Premchit (trans.) 
1998  The Legend of Queen Cāma: 
Bodhiraṃsi’s Cāmadevīvaṃsa.  
A Translation and Commentary. 
Albany: State University of  
New York Press.
Than Tun 
2002  Buddhist Art and Architecture 
with Special Reference to Myanmar. 
Yangon: Monywe Press.
Tin Gyi 
1931  Burma Gazetteer, Thaton District 
(Vol. A). Yangon: Superintendent, 
Government Printing and 
Stationery.
Tun Aung Chain (trans.) 
2010  A Chronicle of the Mons. 
Yangon: SEAMEO Regional 
Centre for History and Tradition. 
Endnotes
1 
Makyi-Kyun, Mainmahla-Kyun, Kappli-Kyun, 
Dawe-Kyun, Pat Kyi-Kyun, Kula-Kyun,  
Khaung-hse-Kyun, Zweya-Kyun with Mon  
names such as Kaw-Lamu, Kaw-Hla, Kaw-Min,  
etc. (kaw is island in Mon).
2 
A monk staying in a monastery on top of the  
hill where Dhat taw hpaya was under repair  
reported that he found a stone box when they  
dug up the relic chamber of the ruined stūpa.  
The box contained two human figures resembling 
a king and queen, the man being stout and fat. 
However, the box was re-buried again in the 
repaired chamber. Whether apocryphal or fact,  
the anecdote highlights the absence of records  
on artefacts found during successive “pagoda” 
repairs at the site.
3 
Southeast Asian ceramics collection (inv. no. 
S2005.238). See the collection online: http://
seasianceramics.asia.si.edu.
4 
A Myanmar name for red-earth or laterite soil 
found on high ground. Most of the settlements in 
lower Myanmar are located on this type of red-
earth elevated land in a region where the heavy 
rainfall and tidal activity are common.
5 
Another Mon chronicle gives the date of 592 CE 
for the founding of Bago by Thamala and Wimala.
6 
Odradeśa, “land of the Orissans.”
7 
Michael Aung-Thwin notes that the Cāmadevīvaṃsa 
does not mention the language of the Sudhamma 
population but only that of Haṃsavatī and 
cites various locations for Sudhamma including 
Haripuñjaya (2005: 91). 
8 
Here and after in the chronicles, the dates are 
traditionally given in Myanmar or Burmese Era 
starting in 638 CE.
  9 Kon Myo, Zaya Myo , Banhlaing Myo,  
Wakharu Myo, Mawlamyaing Myo, Wanyaw Myo, 
Lakunbyin Myo, Ye Myo, Tonwun Myo, Kyait 
Myo, Tontami Myo, Kaw Myo, Bilukywn Myo, 
Attaran Myo, Myaing Myo, Winyaw Myo (16),  
Eibric Myo, Zami Myo, Taung bo’ Myo, Taikkala 
Myo, Dharai Myo, Thagaing Myo, Zweya Myo, 
Htakyaing Myo, Yannyein Myo, Ei’we Myo, 
Hlaing Bwe Myo, Yin-On Myo, Kaw’ Pain Myo, 
Lamaing Myo, Myawaddi Myo, Paung Myo (32). 
With the addition of Muttama, the capital, the 
number becomes 33 myos.
10 Of these, Bassein, Bilin, Du’wop, Bago, Sittaung 
and Thaton are urban; Kelatha is called natural 
and Kyaik Talan and Kyaik Te sacred/mythical. 
Thaton is given an estimated date of 1479 CE  
in reference to Dhammazedi’s Kalyāṇī inscription 
(Aung-Thwin 2005: 59, Table 1).
11 Aung-Thwin qualified this, noting the link Luce 
had made to the queen as ruler of Muttama living 
in Du’wop and suggests that if Muttama dates to 
1176 CE rather than 1326 as Luce cites then it 
could have been contemporaneous (Luce 1953: 
5 and 1969). He also suggests that it may have 
existed in 1292 CE, although his argument relates 
to evidence to support a kingdom and concludes 
with the Shin Saw Bu identification: “Du’-wop 
may have existed in 1292 if the Rāma Gamheri 
[Ramkhamhaeng] inscription’s identification of 
Martaban with the Tai ‘Mo an …n’ is correct, 
in which case Du’-wop could not have emerged 
earlier than 1292.” (Luce 1969: 2 and 1985: 1372; 
Department of Archaeology of Myanmar 2516-
31: I, 345).
Winka: This is a town site of ancient 
“Suvaṇṇabhūmi” (Thaton-Thudhammavatī), 
excavated during 1975-78 by U Myint Aung. The 
name “Win Ka” in Mon means the “lagoon for fish.” 
It is located at the southeast foot of Mt Kelāsa in  
Bilin near many ancient sites of archaeological interest, 
such as Kyaikhtizaung, Hsindat-Myindat, Zokthoke 
and Muthin. It was also called Taikkala (Winka)  
within the documented ancient laterite culture of  
lower Myanmar.
Zimkyaik (Zingyaik): This mountain is called 
“Zingyaik” in Myanmar referred to a mountain peak 
and a large village at the foot of it. The Mons refer 
to it as “Kyāk braṅ nab,” the pagoda of the female 
nāga which was built on the peak. It is said that the 
legendary King Siharāja of Thaton and his foster 
father, the hermit Tissa, built this stūpa to enshrine 
the Buddha’s sacred hair relic, which was given to the 
hermit for veneration.

--- PAGE 121 ---
238
PART III
early BuddHiST PracTiceS, landScaPeS  
and arTefacTS

--- PAGE 122 ---
241
240
Introduction
T
he study of Dvāravatī has developed significantly since its beginning 
in the first half of the twentieth century, but little still is known 
about the history, political organisation, or the geographical extent 
of this polity.1 What we do know derives mainly from archaeological 
remains, such as stūpa or caitya (T. chedi) foundations, stone and bronze 
sculptures, clay and stucco artefacts, and a fair amount of inscriptions, 
mostly religious in character. Although Buddhist practices and art have 
been inseparable since Buddhism arrived in the region, to the casual 
observer it can be difficult to make sense of this – often fragmentary – 
material culture, and the complex relationships between art, ideology 
and rituals that are at its basis.
In this essay, I shall explore this constant dialogue between the 
material and ritual cultures, as gleaned from archaeological and 
epigraphic evidence. The purpose is to examine the kind of Buddhist 
practices and liturgies that were observed in the Dvāravatī culture 
of today’s central Thailand and beyond in the neighbouring regions 
and near contemporary cultures of east and northeast Thailand. In 
doing this, I will review early archaeological material and inscriptions 
to reconstruct certain religious activities of the period spanning 
approximately the seventh and eighth centuries with some extension 
into the ninth and tenth centuries.2 It should be stated from the outset 
that nearly all artefacts and inscriptions under scrutiny are clearly the 
products of the ideology of merit (Skt, puṇya; P., puñña). While this 
concept is common in Indic religions,3 a closer look at the details as well 
as the regional distributions of these artefacts and inscriptions may be 
revealing. 
The Bases of Meritorious Actions in Buddhism
The ideology of merit is an intrinsic concept in Buddhism and has been 
a major motivation for the production of art since its inception in India 
and Southeast Asia. Merit can, of course, be gained in a number of 
ways and the Pāli Canon identifies several bases of merit, the most basic 
of which is showing humility and paying respect (apacayana) to the three 
gems or tiratana (i.e. the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha). 
Probably echoing this belief, the seventh century-Chinese travelling 
monk Yijing (635-713) reported for mainland Southeast Asia that “the 
inhabitants of all these countries greatly [pay] reverence [to] the Three 
Jewels (Ratnatraya) [sic]” (Takakusu 1998: 10). Archaeological evidence 
Glimpses of Buddhist Practices and 
Rituals in Dvāravatī and  
Its Neighbouring Cultures
nicolaS revire
Previous pages: Ritual tray  
found in Nakhon Pathom, 7th-8th c. 
Currently in the Bangkok National 
Museum, stone, 15 cm. high,  
inv. no. K 133/4 [Photograph courtesy 
of Paisarn Piemmettawat].
Opposite Figure 1: Terracotta 
relief from U Thong showing three 
standing Buddhist monks going  
on an alms round, 7th-8th c. (?);  
20 cm. wide x 16 cm. high. 
Currently located in the U Thong 
National Museum, inv. no. 
65/2509 [Photograph by  
Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 123 ---
nicolaS revire
243
242
supports this statement. A clay Buddhist tablet found in Khok Mai 
Den, Nakhon Sawan province [Figure 2a], is engraved in Pāli with 
the following homage: namo buddhassa namo dhammassa namo saṅghas(sa), 
i.e. “Homage to the Buddha, Homage to the Dhamma, Homage to 
the Saṅgha” (FAD 2529: I, 287-291) [Figure 2b].4 Another “eulogy 
inscription” of uncertain date,5 found at Noen Sa Bua, Prachin Buri 
province, gives a similar salutation to the three gems in ornate Pāli verses 
(PCh 14/K. 997).6 These verses come from the opening homage of the 
Sinhalese Telakaṭāhagāthā and, because of this correspondence, various 
attempts have been made to demonstrate the early “establishment of 
Sri Lankan Buddhism” in Thailand during the so-called Dvāravatī 
period. This effort, however, has not been devoid of important biases 
and methodological problems and the above assertion has ultimately 
been refuted (Revire 2012a).
In addition to showing humility, the following three foundations 
of meritorious actions have been identified in the Puññakiriyavatthusutta 
(A IV 239; D III 218; It 51): giving (dāna), virtue or morality (sīla), 
and mental development or meditation (bhāvanā). The first, dāna, is of 
greatest relevance to the present essay. While the importance of the 
other two foundations cannot be denied, archaeological remains do not 
usually speak to their presence. The practice of dāna, however, has had 
considerable social and economic significance in all Buddhist cultures 
and has left a large corpus of archaeological material and inscriptions 
for study.7 “Giving” is, in fact, essential to the production of any 
Buddhist artefact, image, or monument. In order to be produced, all 
material objects must have patrons and donors as sponsors who thus 
obtain merit depending on the recipients of the donation. The value 
of any act of giving depends not just on the person making the gift, but 
on the beneficiary as well, that is to say, more merit is accrued by giving 
to Buddhas and other enlightened or worthy beings. Since the death of 
the Buddha, however, only certain spiritually qualified members of the 
Ariyasaṅgha are technically described as the worthiest “field of merit” 
(puññakhetta), that is, people can only obtain great positive karmic results 
in giving to them. But in reality, “giving” has always been a key method 
for providing economic support to all monks and nuns alike and to 
Buddhist establishments for centuries. 
A fragmented terracotta relief from U Thong shows three standing 
monks going on an alms round (piṇḍapāta) [Figure 1]. The relief may 
well echo this ancient exercise combined with one of the austerities 
known as dhutaṅga in Pāli. This is the austerity of eating only what is 
donated as alms, regardless of amount or taste.8 Common today among 
the forest monks of the Theravāda tradition, it was also practised in 
various Indian Buddhist lineages or nikāyas of the past (Ray 1994: 
294ff). Yijing reported that many of the monastics present in Dvāravatī 
performed “the begging dhūta” (Takakusu 1998: 9-10, 56, n. 3). 
Accordingly, the laity gives food and other requisites to monks and nuns 
through daily alms rounds9 or through making offerings at monasteries. 
Monks and nuns, in exchange, offer the gift of teaching (dhammadāna) or 
blessing, often exalted as the highest gift.
The act of giving is also emphasised in ancient Buddhist stories and 
tales. It is the supreme virtue perfected by all Bodhisattvas in their long 
path toward perfection (pāramitā) and the perfect self-enlightenment 
(sammāsambodhi). These stories, such as jātakas and avādanas, clearly serve 
a didactic purpose by presenting to laity the moral ideal of living a 
life conducive to the highest realisation, through the action of doing 
good deeds and perfecting one’s virtues (e.g. giving). Celebrated acts of 
a Bodhisattva’s generosity include occasions in which he offers up his 
limbs, his eyes, and even his life to those in hunger or in need. Fine artistic 
examples of this ideology can be seen in the famous series of jātaka 
plaques from Chedi Chula Prathon in Nakhon Pathom (Piriya 2517) 
or from Khok Mai Den, Nakhon Sawan province [Figure 3]. Several 
sema stones from northeast Thailand, dated to the eighth-ninth centuries, 
seem to depict the Vessantarajātaka where the act of giving is the central 
theme of the narrative plot (Murphy 2010: 249-253; Murphy, this 
volume, figs 12-13). The lesson of these stories is that a Bodhisattva is 
willing to give more than material objects, even his wife, his children, 
parts of his body, and even to sacrifice his life (Dayal 1970: 172-188). 
Naturally, the average layperson is not expected to make so great a 
sacrifice. For most people, the practice of dāna is limited to material 
support in order to make merit. 
Sustaining Monasteries as an Act of Merit
While Buddhist texts stress the need for generosity, a number of 
ancient Mon, Khmer, and Sanskrit donation inscriptions dedicated 
by individuals (common people, kings or high officials) relate to lists 
of meritorious offerings for the benefit of monasteries or Buddhist 
communities (Prapod 2010: 86-90). This, again, should be understood 
within the context of the relationship of the near complete dependency 
of monks and nuns on gifts and the alms of laypersons. Records of 
such gifts underline the importance of lay and royal patronage in the 
establishment, development, and preservation of Buddhism in pre-
modern Thailand and neighbouring Buddhist countries. 
A few examples drawn from the list given in Table 1 suffice to 
illustrate this ideology prevalent in central and northeast Thailand 
during the first millennium. What is significant in these inscriptions is the 
record of common people in donations. The epigraphs are often written 
Figure 2a: Obverse of a clay Buddhist tablet 
found in Khok Mai Den, Nakhon Sawan 
province, 7th-8th c. Currently located in the 
Bangkok National Museum, inv. no. 923/2508 
[Photograph courtesy of Disapong Netlomwong].
Figure 2b: Base detail of Fig. 1a, engraved 
in Pāli with homage to the three gems (NW 6) 
[Photograph courtesy of Disapong Netlomwong].

--- PAGE 124 ---
nicolaS revire
245
244
in Old Mon, while royal donations are recorded in Sanskrit 
with the list of offerings sometimes given in Old Khmer. 
The donors are identified either by proper names or titles; 
the recipient can be a Buddha image, a stūpa, a community 
of monks, or a monastery. In Old Mon, these terms are 
given as, or preceded by, the word kyāk which equally refers 
to any sacred object or person [i.e. phra in Thai]. Among the 
common offerings, we find items suitable for alms, such as 
plots of rice fields, cattle, and so on, as well as the donation 
of “slaves”10 as, for example, on the inscribed pillar from 
San Sung, Lop Buri province (LB 1/K. 409) [Figure 4], or 
the Ban Thalat inscription, written in Old Mon, from the 
Vientiane valley in Laos (HPK I/33). A recently discovered 
inscription from Sakon Nakhon in Old Mon (SN 10) even 
seems to refer to the offering of “doors and windows” to a 
local monastery (Kongkaeo 2550).
The epigraphic corpus also often provides information regarding 
the expected results of such donations. Most of the time, making merit 
is the main purpose. The belief in merit was, and still is, a cornerstone 
for sustaining the Saṅgha and their monasteries. Monastic donors were 
relatively few in number when compared to laity in local inscriptions 
found in pre-modern Thailand. This is only too natural for whilst the 
monk is expected to follow the highest teaching of the Buddha, having 
renounced the world and directed his activity toward meditation and the 
gaining of nirvāṇa or nibbāna, the immediate concern of lay Buddhists is 
not nirvāṇa but rather the accumulation of merit. 
Two exceptions, however, are found from Nakhon Ratchasima 
province. One of the Hin Khon inscriptions (NM 31/K. 389) states 
that the fruits of merit from this donation to a royal monastery 
would ultimately lead the donor, most likely a prince who became a 
monk (rājabhikṣu), and all living beings to attain omniscience (sarvajña) 
and become a Buddha. Similarly, the well-known Bo Ika inscription 
(NM 24/K. 400) found at Mueang Sema refers to a donation to the 
local Buddhist community by the king of Śrī Canāśa, who hopes to 
achieve bodhi or “Buddhahood” by this gift. 
These statements seem at odds with the rigid tenet which asserts 
that bodhi can be realised only through meditation and, on the contrary, 
support the idea that self-enlightenment was also attainable by all 
including by making merit or giving. At any rate, the king who is 
commemorated in the Bo Ika inscription probably saw himself as a 
Bodhisattva and was hence supposed to practise diligently the perfection 
of giving (dānapāramitā).
Making Buddha Images or Shrines  
as an Act of Merit
Other dedicatory inscriptions and inscribed artefacts related to this 
ideology of merit through the production of Buddha images, miniature 
tablets or shrines, or the sponsorship of Buddhist buildings are listed 
in Table 2. Repeatedly, the word “merit” appears on these, albeit in 
variant spellings such as puñ, piñ, piñña, puṇya, or puṇa. A few significant 
examples are given below.
The short seventh century inscription from Khao Ngu, Ratchaburi 
province (RB 1), found at the feet of a Buddha image, is possibly a mixture 
of Old Mon-Khmer and Sanskrit; it was first read by George Cœdès 
as follows: puñ vraḥ ṛṣi … śrī samādhigupta, i.e. “the meritorious deed of 
the Holy hermit ... Śrī Samādhigupta” (1961: 19).11 This reading, 
however, cannot be confirmed since only the first word puñ(·) and the 
last word samādhigupta are certain. It is likely that samādhigupta refers 
here to a name and an adept of Buddhist meditation (a recluse monk?) 
and that merit was thus generated because of his practice or his 
dedication.12 It is one of the few epigraphs that also relate directly to an 
iconic form, a pendant-legged Buddha image carved on the cave wall.13 
A few other inscriptions in Old Mon or Sanskrit are found on the 
bases or pedestals of standing Buddha images dated on stylistic grounds 
from the seventh or eighth century. Two well-known examples from 
Lop Buri have been published by Cœdès and the Fine Arts Department 
(FAD). The first one is from Wat Khoi (LB 9/K. 695) where the 
reading is, according to Cœdès (1961: 6), rather uncertainly as follows: 
[…]rlla (…)ñ kauñ vi(…)y cyāga. While Cœdès provided no translation, he 
deduced that the language was probably Mon. The FAD, however, later 
proposed a slightly improved reading: […]rll maṅ koñ vijhay cyāga and 
offered the following translation: “A grand father and his grand children 
beautified the Buddha image” (2529: II, 37). The Thai translation is not 
without problems because the FAD epigraphists interpreted the word 
spelt cyāga as a variant of kyāk (i.e. “Buddha image”) which remains so 
far unattested in the whole corpus of Mon inscriptions. In fact, the word 
cyāga is most likely a blend-form of cāga in Pāli and tyāga in Sanskrit 
which means “abandoning, giving up, renunciation” and the like. But 
given the fragmentary nature of the inscription, a proper translation 
cannot yet be offered. The second dedicatory inscription is clearly in 
Sanskrit and was found long ago in Wat Mahathat, Lop Buri province 
(LB 5/K. 577). It records the installation of a pratimā muneḥ (Buddha 
Śākyamuni?) by a certain nāyaka Ārjava, ruler of the Taṅgur people 
and son of the king of Śāmbūka (Cœdès 1961: 5; FAD 2529: I, 231).14
One so far unpublished example from Sung Noen district, Nakhon 
Ratchasima province, is far less ambiguous. The inscription, in a script 
paleographically datable to the seventh or early eighth century, is 
found on the lower base of a standing Buddha now kept in the Phimai 
National Museum (14/2536) [Figure 5a]. It is fragmentary and can 
only be read on the Buddha’s proper right. The reading in Old Mon 
is kyāk puṇya […] [Figure 5b] which may roughly be interpreted as 
“this ‘Holy One’ [kyāk, i.e. “Buddha image”] is the merit of […]” 
where the title and/or the name of the donor is lost with the break 
on the proper left of the image. A comparable inscription is found on 
the reverse of two clay tablets found in Chon Buri province (DV 36, 
DV 38) [e.g. Figure 6]. The inscription reads: kyāk puñ […] (t)rala, 
i.e. “this Buddha image is the work of merit […] (of) Lord […]” (Bauer 
1991b: 63). Similarly, the proper name of that “lord,” the donor, is 
missing due to the incomplete nature of the inscription. As we shall see 
from the following examples, however, an alternative translation for the 
standard Mon expression kyāk puṇya is possible.
At least three reported bilingual inscriptions in Old Mon and 
Pāli were found on miniature earthenwares15 from Thap Chumphon, 
Nakhon Sawan province, dated on paleographic grounds to the 
Figure 3: Jātaka plaque 
from Khok Mai Den 
(Chaddantajātaka?), Nakhon 
Sawan province, 7th-8th c. Currently 
located in the Bangkok National 
Museum, terracotta, inv. no. 
813/2508 [Photograph by Nicolas 
Revire].
Figure 4: Wheel pillar from  
San Sung, Lop Buri province,  
inscribed in Old Mon (LB 1/ 
K. 409). Currently located in 
the National Library, Bangkok 
[Photograph by Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 125 ---
nicolaS revire
247
246
eighth-ninth centuries [e.g. Figure 7].16 
The inscriptions comprise two lines 
around the lower rim in Mon and Pāli. 
On one occasion (NW 7), the first line 
is written ne’ kyāk puṇa tra[la] […] wihār 
in Old Mon, translated as “this stupa is 
the work of merit of the lord (of) […] 
vihāra” (Bauer 1991b: 65). While this 
interpretation is within the realm of 
possibility, it does not really account for 
the presence of the word vihāra.17 Another 
more complete example, although still 
unregistered by the FAD (NW i), could 
perhaps shed light on the matter. It has 
been read as ne’ kyāk puña tara tra’ jrap 
vihāra, and rendered in Thai as “this is 
the holy merit [phra bun]: sālā and vihāra” 
(Kannika & Phongkasem 2542: 145). If 
this rendition is correct, we would then 
have an occurrence where the Mon term 
kyāk does not refer to the actual object on 
which it is inscribed, for example here a 
terracotta fragment, but acts as a prefix to 
qualify what follows, i.e. puña, hence the 
“holy” merit18 obtained by the gift or the 
sponsorship of a sālā and a vihāra. Moreover, given the many examples 
where the word trala, trala’, tarla’, tirla’ or other minor variants occurs 
in this context in Old Mon inscriptions as a title or honorific meaning 
“lord” or “master” (Bauer 1991b: 61-63), it is tempting to amend the 
reading to tara tra’ for trala, tarla’, or the like. All in all, we would thus 
have something like “this is the ‘holy merit’ [kyāk puña] of the ‘lord’ 
[i.e. trala] of the sālā and vihāra.” According to Bauer, the pronoun ne’ 
i.e. “this,” found in the two above examples, may be a Khmer calque since 
it is rarely attested in Old Mon inscriptions, where wo’ or ’awo’ normally 
occurs in its place (1991a: 40-42). It could also point to Khmer-Mon 
bilingualism (Bauer 1991b: 66-67). A third example (LB 26) is similarly 
inscribed with one line in Old Mon, but has unfortunately become 
much deteriorated. Only two words remain: puṇa and vihāra (Phimphan 
2013: 13). The second line engraved on all these earthenwares is the 
Pāli ye dhammā verse, to which I shall return in a subsequent section.
The above short dedicatory inscriptions in Old Mon found on stone 
or clay images or hollow terracotta fragments seem to link to similar 
inscribed miniature tablets and sema stones originating from the Khorat 
Plateau, where the most frequent words are kyāk and puṇya, “holy” 
and “merit.” Put another way, if kyāk is taken to be a Buddha image, a 
caitya, or a sacred object, it is thus merely produced for puṇya. Two clay 
tablets from Mueang Fa Daet in Kalasin province (KS 1, KS 2), dated 
stylistically to the eighth or ninth century, come to the fore in this regard. 
These have been published several times but the inscriptions on their 
backs have never been fully translated in English. The inscription as 
wo’[or wo] kyāk piñ (’u)pajhāy ’ācāRyya guna wikhyāt [or wikhyā(t)] is virtually 
the same on both tablets (Bauer 1991a: 66). According to Bauer, this is 
the first time that the variant spelling piñ for “merit” is attested in Old 
Figure 5a: Standing Buddha 
bearing an Old Mon inscription at 
its base (Fig. 5b). Currently located 
in the Phimai National Museum, 
inv. no. 14/2536 [Photograph by 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 5b: Detail of Fig. 5a with 
the Old Mon inscription reading kyāk 
puṇya [Photograph by Nicolas Revire].
Mon. The terms ’upajhāy ’ācāryya in Old Mon are evidently derived from 
Pāli (upajjhāya) and Sanskrit (ācārya) and refer to a monk’s preceptor and 
a religious teacher. The two inscriptions may thus be approximately 
translated as “this is the ‘holy merit’ of the preceptor and/or teacher 
who is/are well known by his/their virtue.” It is not known if the 
inscriptions refer to one or two distinct individual(s) in this case. 
A number of other inscribed tablets from Mueang Fa Daet 
(KS 4, KS i) and Na Dun (MKh i, iv, vii), similarly dated to the eighth or 
ninth century on stylistic and paleographic grounds, record in Old Mon 
the merit of certain lords (tala or tarla), rulers or even self-proclaimed 
universal kings or cakravarti (MKh iii). The inscription numbered MKh 2 
(and possibly also MKh 3) reads nai vo’ puṇya kamrateṅ pdai karom’or skuṁ 
das jāti smar (Bauer 1991a: 42) and could be translated as “this is the work 
of merit of the king. May I not be born to a mean existence.” Bauer 
argues that the term nai’ for “this” may be a variant of a similar Khmer 
word which again would suggest contact with Khmer populations in 
this region. This is certainly reinforced by the use of the Khmer royal 
title kamrateṅ p(h)dai karom which appears here for the first time in Mon 
inscriptions (Bauer 1991a: 46). 
Several inscriptions on sema stones mostly found in Chaiyaphum, 
Kalasin, and Khon Kaen provinces refer to merit-making activity 
performed by kings, monks, or commoners from the eighth to the tenth 
centuries.19 Some donors also express the wish “to be reborn again in 
the time of Ārya Maitreya,” the future Buddha (KhK 16 and perhaps 
KhK i). The inscriptions often display the use of a hybrid Mon-Khmer 
language. The inscription from Wat Pho Chai (KS 7), for example, reads 
puṇya pragata kanmun kasmuṅ kyāk cak and has been translated as “this is 
the work of merit bestowed by King Cak” (Uraisi 1995: 200). Here, the 
word pragata has been interpreted by Bauer as Khmer (1991a: 43). It 
also occurs in the Khao Rang inscription from Prachin Buri province 
(PCh 1/K. 505). The title kasmuṅ or ka smuṅ, possibly a variation of smiṅ’ 
(“king,” “prince”), is found on another sema stone from Kalasin, albeit 
with the variant spelling ksmuṅ (KS ii), and is understood as a Khmer-
Mon contact word (Bauer 1991a: 46). Likewise, the title kuruṅ (“king,” 
“to rule”), attested on sema inscriptions from Chaiyaphum (ChY i) and 
Khon Kaen (KhK 17), appears in profusion in Khmer inscriptions. The 
distribution of such terms or titles as pragata or kuruṅ in inscriptions from 
northeast Thailand suggests that these may be Khmer loan words in 
Old Mon (Bauer 1991a: 44-47).20 They could also indicate Mon-Khmer 
bilingualism in the region.
While cases of multilingualism are thus possibly attested in central 
and northeast Thailand, it may be significant that not a single donation 
or dedicatory inscription in Pāli is recorded during the first millennium 
CE [Tables 1-2].21 Most epigraphs recording this ideology of merit 
are written in Mon, sometimes with Khmer and Sanskrit or, to a lesser 
extent, Pāli loan words, while a few donations or installations are 
written in Sanskrit alone22 or in association with Khmer in east and 
northeast Thailand. In what follows, however, I shall deal only with Pāli 
inscriptions of a different kind. These have been found essentially in 
central Thailand [Map 1] and are roughly dated to the seventh and 
eighth centuries. They are almost exclusively “canonical” and are often 
related to the paṭiccasamuppāda and ye dhammā verses, closely connected to 
the teaching of the Four Truths of Buddhism. 
Figure 6: Reverse of a clay 
tablet found in Chon Buri province, 
bearing an inscription in Old Mon. 
Currently located in the Phra Narai 
National Museum, Lop Buri,  
inv. no. DV 36 [Photograph by 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 7: Miniature earthenware 
from Thap Chumphon, Nakhon 
Sawan province, bearing an 
inscription in Old Mon and Pāli. 
Currently located in the Phra Narai 
National Museum, Lop Buri,  
inv. no. 286/2504 [Photograph  
by Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 126 ---
nicolaS revire
249
248
M
e
k
o
n
g
 
 
Nakhon Sawan
Khao Ngu
Chai Nat
Chaiyaphum
Ayutthaya
Chiang Mai
Phitsanulok
Lop Buri
Bangkok
Tak
U Thong
Angkor
Nakhon Pathom
Na Dun
Ban Thalat
Si Thep
Ratchaburi
Khamphaeng Saen
Nakhon Ratchasima
Mueang Sema
Phromthin Tai
Prachin Buri 
Chon Buri
Khon Kaen
Sakon Nakhon
Vientiane
   Ban Phanna 
   Phu Wiang 
Kalasin
Mueang Fa Daet
Udon Thani
0
200  km
N
100
CAMBODIA
LAOS 
VIETNAM
THAILAND
Pāli
Sanskrit
Mon
Sap Champa
Thap Chumphon
Skt/Mon
Skt/Khmer
Pāli/Mon
Pāli/Khmer
Mon/Khmer
Khao Rang
Table 1: Buddhist Donation Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand
Inscr. 
no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/  
Location
Date
Languages
Donors
offerings
Recipients
Expected 
Results
References
NTh 9/
40/2519
Wat Pho Rang,  
Nakhon Pathom/ 
Phra Pathom Chedi 
National Museum
6th-7th c.
Old Mon
unknown
list of gifts: land,  
silver vase
Buddha (kyāk) 
or a “holy 
monastery” (kyāk 
vihār or bihār)
missing
(fragmentary)
Cœdès (1952); FAD 
(2529: II, 27-33); FAD 
(2548: 196-197)
PCh 1/
K. 505
Khao Rang, Sa Kaeo 
prov./National 
Library, Bkk
561 śaka 
= 639 CE
Sanskrit 
and  
Old Khmer
a certain sināhv (name  
or title? pious hermit?)
32 workers: couples 
and children as 
“slaves” (kñuṃ) and 
guardians
monastery (vihār) not expressed
Cœdès (1937-66: V, 
23-24); FAD (2529: I, 
35-39); Vickery (1998: 
129-130, 259, 280-281, 
n. 66)
PCh 14/
K. 997
Noen Sa Bua, 
Prachin Buri prov./
Prachin Buri 
National Museum
11th c. (?)
(probably 
983 śaka 
= 1061 CE)
Old Khmer 
and Pāli
a certain kamrateṅ 
Vuddhasiri
cows
temple
make a wish
FAD (2529: I, 179-186); 
Prapod (2010: 82-84); 
Revire (2012: 153-154)
LB 1/ 
K. 409
San Sung, Lop Buri 
prov./ National 
Library, Bkk
7th-8thc.
Old Mon
list of names and titles: 
Cāp Dyaṅgan, [.]idayya, 
Saṅgha Pathāk, upājhāy, 
Cāp Sumbaṅ, Ju Smac 
Yu (householder) and 
Cāp Inda
list of “slaves” (ḍek), 
robes, cattle, and 
carriages
“pagoda,” i.e. 
temple, stūpa, or 
monastery (kyāk)
merit (puṇya)
Halliday (1930: 82-85,  
pl. VIII); Cœdès (1961: 
7-9, inscr. XVIII);  
FAD (2529: II, 57-66); 
Brown (1996: 113-114)
NM 28/
K. 388
Hin Khon,  
Nakhon Ratchasima 
prov./current 
location unknown
8th-9th c.
Sanskrit 
and Old 
Khmer
a certain rājabhikṣu or 
upādhyāya (religious 
title) also known as 
Nṛpendrādhipativarman 
(local prince or king)
10 monasteries (vihāra) 
with a list of “slaves” 
(dāsa), food, clothes, 
betel, garden, etc.
local Buddhist 
community
(saṅgha)
merit (puṇya)
Cœdès (1937-66: VI,  
73-77); FAD (2529: I,  
251-262); Kannika  
(1995: 279, pl. 34)
NM 31/
K. 389
Hin Khon,  
Nakhon Ratchasima 
prov./current 
location unknown
8th-9th c.
Sanskrit 
and Old 
Khmer
a certain upādhyāya 
of a royal monastery 
(rājavihāra); 
probably same as in 
NM 28/K. 388
list of “slaves” (dāsa), 
lands, cattle (10 
pairs of cows), ritual 
implements, etc.
a temple or a 
deity? (vraḥ or 
vraḥ kamrateṅ añ)
fruits of merit 
(vipākapuṇya) + all 
beings reaching 
omniscience (sarvajña) 
and become a Buddha
Cœdès (1937-66:  
VI, 73, 78-79); FAD 
(2529: I, 263-266)
NM 24/
K. 400
Mueang Sema,  
Nakhon Ratchasima 
prov./Phimai 
National Museum
Face A
(7th-9th c.)
[Face B
790 śaka 
= 868 CE]
Sanskrit 
(Face A)
king of Śrī Canāśa 
(Face A)
10 male and female 
“slaves” (dāsa and dāsī), 
cattle (50 cows and 20 
female buffaloes with 
their calves)
local Buddhist 
community
(saṅgha)
reaching 
enlightenment (bodhi)
Cœdès (1937-66: VI, 
83-85); FAD (2529: III, 
23-29); Kannika  
(1995: 280, pl. 35)
Map 1: Buddhist inscriptions in central and northeast Thailand, 
mid-late first millennium CE [Drawing by Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 127 ---
nicolaS revire
251
250
Inscr. 
no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/  
Location
Date
Languages
Donors
offerings
Recipients
Expected 
Results
References
SN 10
Ban Phanna,  
Sakon Nakhon 
prov./Ban Chiang 
National Museum
9th-10th c.
Old Mon
members of  
Mipa Suraya family
doors and windows (?)
a local 
monastery 
(vihāra)
not expressed
Kongkaeo (2550)
HPK 
I/33
Ban Thalat, Laos/ 
Vat Ho Phra Keo, 
Vientiane
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
a certain lord (trala) 
Waṇṇa
cattle (cows and 
buffaloes), list of 
“slaves” (ḍek)
a “pagoda,” i.e. 
stūpa, (kyāk) or 
Buddha (?) 
merit (puṇya)
Gagneux (1972: 92-96); 
Guillon (1974: 341-344)
Table 1: Buddhist Donation Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand (Continued)
Table 2: Buddhist Dedicatory Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand (Continued)
Table 2: Buddhist Dedicatory Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand
Inscr. no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/ 
Location
Date
Languages
Category of 
objects/Material/
Condition
Donors/
Beneficiaries
References
RB 1
Khao Ngu, Ratchaburi prov./
in situ
7th c.
Old Mon-
Khmer and 
Sanskrit (?)
Buddha image/ 
cave wall/
fragmentary
Samādhigupta (?)
Cœdès (1961: 19, inscr. XXII);  
FAD (2529: I, 68-71);  
Revire (2012b: 94-95, fig. 2)
LB 5/K. 577
Wat Mahathat, Lop Buri/Phra 
Narai National Museum
7th-8th c.
Sanskrit
a “pratimāmuneḥ”
(i.e. Buddha image)/
stone
a certain nāyaka Ārjava, ruler 
(adhipati) of Taṅgur people, 
son of the king (īśvara) of 
Śāmbūka
Cœdès (1961: 4-5, inscr. XVI);  
FAD (2529: I, 229-231)
LB 9/K. 695
Wat Khoi, Lop Buri/ 
Wat Benchamabophit, Bkk
7th-8th c.
Old Mon (?)
Buddha image/
stone/fragmentary
a certain lord (tirla or trala) (?)
Cœdès (1961: 6, inscr. XVII);  
FAD (2529: II, 34-37)
LB 26
Thap Chumphon, Nakhon Sawan 
prov./Chai Nat Hospital (?)
8th-9th c.
Old Mon and 
Pāli [ye dhammā 
cf. Table 4]
earthernware/
fragmentary 
missing
FAD (2524: 38-40); FAD (2529: I,  
244-246); Phimphan (2013: 13)
NW 7
Thap Chumphon, Nakhon Sawan 
prov./ Phra Narai National 
Museum, Lop Buri
8th-9th c.
Old Mon and 
Pāli [ye dhammā 
cf. Table 4]
earthernware
a certain lord or master (trala?) FAD (2524: 34-37); FAD (2529: II,  
95-99); Bauer (1991a: 42); Bauer 
(1991b: 65-66); Phimphan (2013: 13)
unregistered/
NW i
probably Thap Chumphon, 
Nakhon Sawan prov./ Wat  
Nong Kradon, Nakhon Sawan
8th-9thc.
Old Mon and 
Pāli [ye dhammā 
cf. Table 4]
earthenware
a certain lord or master (trala?) Kannika & Phongkasem (2542); 
Phimphan (2013: 12-13)
unregistered/
14/2536
Sung Noen dist.,  
Nakhon Ratchasima prov./ 
Phimai National Museum
7th-8th c.
Old Mon
Buddha image/
stone/fragmentary 
missing
unpublished
Inscr. no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/ 
Location
Date
Languages
Category of 
objects/Material/
Condition
Donors/
Beneficiaries
References
unregistered/
DV 36 + 
DV 38
Mon Nang, Chon Buri prov./ 
Phra Narai National Museum, 
Lop Buri
8th-9thc.
Old Mon
moulded tablets/
fired clay/
fragmentary
a certain lord or master (trala)
Bauer (1991b: 63)
AN 2
Mueang Bueng Khok Chang, 
Uthai Thani prov./unknown
7th c.
Old Mon or 
Prakrit (?)
stone 
unknown
FAD (2529: II, 48-52)
MKh 2/
712/2522
Na Dun, Maha Sarakham prov./
Khon Kaen National Museum
8th-9th c.
Old Mon with 
Khmer loan 
words
moulded tablet/fired 
clay
a certain king (kamrateṅ pdai 
karom?)
FAD (2529: II, 77-81); Bauer  
(1991a: 42, 46, 66); Uraisi (1995: 198, 
fig. 2); Kannika (1995: 254, pl. 11)
MKh 3/
1106/2522
Na Dun, Maha Sarakham prov./
Khon Kaen National Museum
8th-9th c.
Old Mon with 
Khmer loan 
words
moulded tablet/
fired clay/
fragmentary
a certain king (kamrateṅ?)
FAD (2529: II, 82-84); Bauer  
(1991a: 42, 46); Uraisi (1995: 198,  
fig. 4); Kannika (1995: 255, pl. 12)
unregistered/
MKh i
Na Dun, Maha Sarakham prov./
Khon Kaen National Museum
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
moulded tablet/fired 
clay
a certain universal king 
(cakravarti) and a certain lord 
(tarla) Swayāga
Bauer (1991a: 66);  
Uraisi (1995: 198, fig. 6);  
Kannika (1995: 256, pl. 13)
unregistered/
MKh iii
Na Dun, Maha Sarakham 
province. Now at Khon Kaen 
National Museum
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
moulded tablet/fired 
clay
a certain “holy Pārvati”
(kyākpāravati)
Bauer (1991a: 80);  
Uraisi (1995: 198, fig. 9);  
Kannika (1995: 258, pl. 15)
unregistered/
MKh iv
Na Dun, Maha Sarakham 
province. Now at Khon Kaen 
National Museum
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
moulded tablet/ 
fired clay
a certain lord or master (tarla)
Uraisi (1995: 198-199);  
Kannika (1995: 259, pl. 16)
unregistered/
MKh vii
Na Dun, Maha Sarakham prov./
Khon Kaen National Museum
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
moulded tablet/ 
fired clay/fragmentary
a certain lord or master (tarla)
Bauer (1991a: 66); Uraisi (1995: 198, 
fig. 8); Kannika (1995: 257, pl. 14)
KhK 16
Wat Non Sila, Khon Kaen prov./
in situ
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
sema/stone
a few men and women named 
Ko’Naḥ Pu, Ko’Māṅ Daraṅ, 
Ko’ Maṅ Subāhu and Ko’ 
Man Mreṅ
FAD (2529: II, 67-72);  
Bauer (1991a: 65, pls 16-18);  
Uraisi (1995: 199-200, fig. 15); 
Kannika (1995: 248, pl. 5)
KhK 17
Wat Non Sila, Khon Kaen prov./
in situ
8th-9th c.
Old Mon with 
Khmer loan 
words
sema/stone
a certain Mahā Yuta 
Draṅgana, Ko’ Kuruṅ and 
Ko’ ’Upajhāy Vrahma
FAD (2529: II, 73-76); Bauer (1991a: 
65, pls 19-20); Uraisi (1995: 200,  
fig. 16); Kannika (1995: 249, pl. 6)
unregistered/
KhK i
Wat Non Sila, Khon Kaen prov./
in situ
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
sema/stone
a certain Jiv Pāl
Maṅ Bnaḥ
Bauer (1991a: 65-66, pl. 21);  
Kannika (1995: 250, pl. 7)
KhK 25
Phu Wiang mountain, Khon Kaen 
prov./in situ
8th-9th c.
Hybrid Sanskrit 
(?)
Buddha image/ 
stone wall
unknown
Cha-em (2544)

--- PAGE 128 ---
nicolaS revire
253
252
The Paṭiccasamuppāda and the Four Truths
“Dependent Origination”23 (Skt, pratītyasamutpāda; P., paṭiccasamuppāda) 
is a Buddhist description of how the human state of suffering comes 
about and how one can extinguish it. This exposition is given in a verse 
usually divided into twelve links and contains a significant teaching 
of the Buddha closely connected to his awakening experience. It is 
found throughout all Buddhist traditions and their correlated texts, 
including the Pāli Canon.24 For example, the Theravāda tradition 
portrays Sāriputta, the Buddha’s chief disciple, as saying that “whoever 
sees conditioned genesis [i.e. paṭiccasamuppāda] sees dhamma, whoever 
sees dhamma sees conditioned genesis” (M I 190f; trans. Horner 1954: 
236-237). 
According to the Udāna, the genesis of the verse took place with 
the Buddha at Uruvelā, at the root of the bodhi-tree on the bank of 
the river Nerañjarā, just after he had reached enlightenment (Ud 1-3). 
While the Lord was seated there for seven days and experiencing 
the bliss of liberation, he suddenly emerged from that concentration 
in the first watch of the night and paid attention to “dependent 
co-arising in direct order and reverse order” (trans. Masefield 1994: 3). 
Seven weeks after his enlightenment, the Buddha decided to preach the 
doctrine at the Deer Park in Isipatana (i.e. Sarnath, India). This “First 
Sermon” or Dhammacakkappavattanasutta (Discourse on “Turning the 
Wheel of the Law”) explained to his first disciples the path to salvation 
via the so-called “Four Noble Truths” (cattāri ariyasaccāni). Accordingly, 
the Buddha’s diagnosis of life sees everything as suffering (dukkha); 
suffering has an origin (samudaya), namely craving (taṇhā), which can be 
extinguished (nirodha) only through the “Path” (magga). In this specific 
context, a description of the “Four Truths” is also understood in terms 
of the causal theory of Dependent Origination since this complex chain 
of causation always gives rise to suffering. Alternatively, the deactivation 
of any of the twelve links of this chain is bound to break the causal 
process of saṃsāra and to eliminate suffering, the ultimate soteriological 
goal of Buddhists. 
That both Dependent Origination and the Four Truths are found 
inscribed in Pāli on some cakras, cakra pillars or cakra bases from the 
Dvāravatī realm (e.g. Brown 1996: 99-113; Phasook 2008: 24-29; 
Gallon, this volume, fig. 3) is probably not pure coincidence and the 
wheel symbolism should be clear.25 Yet, as Robert Brown wrote regarding 
the spoke-fragment found at Wat Mahathat, Lop Buri, inscribed with a 
portion of the paṭiccasamuppāda (LB 14):  
[…] it is interesting that an inscription has been used on the 
wheel that refers to the Buddha before he went to Sārnāth, 
and that gives a doctrine that is only thought, not yet taught, 
by the Buddha. The chain of causation can be seen, however, 
as proposing, only in more detail, the same arguments for the 
origin of suffering and for its cessation as in the four noble 
truths. (1996: 104)
More precisely, the second truth concerned with the arising of 
suffering is simply explained by the paṭiccasamuppāda in direct order 
(anuloma), while the third truth of cessation of suffering is defined by 
Table 2: Buddhist Dedicatory Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand (Continued)
Inscr. no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/ 
Location
Date
Languages
Category of 
objects/Material/
Condition
Donors/
Beneficiaries
References
KS 1+ KS 2
Mueang Fa Daet, Kalasin prov./
current location unknown
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
moulded tablets/ 
fired clay
a certain 
’upajhāy’ācāryya (preceptor 
and/or teacher)
Prasan (2511: 110-111); FAD 
(2529: II, 85-94); Bauer (1991a: 66); 
Kannika (1995: 246-247, pls 3-4)
KS 4 + KS i 
(unregistered)
Mueang Fa Daet, Kalasin prov./
current location unknown
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
moulded tablets/ 
fired clay
a certain lord or master (tala) 
Āditya
Prasan (2511: 108-109)
KS 7
Wat Pho Chai, Kalasin prov./
in situ
8th-9th c.
Old Mon with 
Khmer loan 
words
sema/stone
a certain King Cak  
(kasmuṅ kyāk cak)
FAD (2529: II, 100-103);  
Bauer (1991a: 43); Uraisi (1995: 200,  
fig. 18); Kannika (1995: 245, pl. 2)
unregistered/
KS ii
Wat Sawang Watthanaram, 
Kalasin prov./in situ
8th-9th c.
Old Mon with 
Khmer loan 
words
sema/stone/
fragmentary 
a certain king or prince (ksmuṅ) Bauer (1991a : 46);  
Uraisi (1995: 200, fig. 19);  
Kannika (1995: 244, pl. 1)
KhK 19
Ban Don Kaeo, Udon Thani 
prov./Khon Kaen National 
Museum
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
sema/stone/
fragmentary
missing
Bauer (1991a: 66);  
Uraisi (1995: 200, fig. 20);  
Kannika (1995: 260, pl. 17)
ChY 1/
K. 404
Phu Khiao, Chaiyaphum prov./
Chaiyaphum City Hall
9th-10th c.
Sanskrit
stone/fragmentary
King Jayasiṅghavarman
Cœdès (1937-66: VII, 73); 
FAD (2529: III, 57-59)
ChY 4/
K. 965
Ban Hua Khua, Chaiyaphum 
prov./6th FAD Regional Office, 
Nakhon Ratchasima
8th-9th c.
Sanskrit
sema/stone/
fragmentary
a certain Candrādityā
Cœdès (1958: 131);  
Cha-em (2537b)
ChY 5
Kaset Sombun, Chaiyaphum 
prov./6th FAD Regional Office, 
Nakhon Ratchasima
913 śaka
 (= 991 CE)
Sanskrit
sema/stone/
fragmentary
the monk (bhikṣu) Amarasiṃha Cha-em (2537a)
unregistered/
ChY i
Wat Phra That Nong Sam Muen, 
Chaiyaphum prov./in situ
8th-9th c.
Old Mon with 
Khmer loan 
words
sema/stone/
fragmentary
a certain king (kuruṅ)
Bauer (1991a: 60, pl. 14);  
Uraisi (1995: 201, fig. 22);  
Kannika (1995: 252, pl. 9)
unregistered/
 ChY ix
Ban Kut Ngong, Chaiyaphum 
prov./in situ
8th-9th c.
Old Mon
sema/stone/
fragmentary
a certain teacher (’ācāryya)
Bauer (1991a : 60, pl. 8)
unregistered/
ChY xi 
Wat Phra That Nong Sam Muen, 
Chaiyaphum prov./in situ
8th-9th c.
Old Mon with 
Sanskrit loan 
words
sema/stone/
fragmentary
a certain king 
(śrīrāja)
Bauer (1991a: 60-61, pl. 13);  
Uraisi (1995: 201, fig. 22);  
Kannika (1995: 253, pl. 10)

--- PAGE 129 ---
nicolaS revire
255
254
Dependent Origination in reverse order (paṭiloma). A similar inscribed 
spoke-fragment has been found at Sap Champa, Lop Buri province 
(Phuthon 2529: 18, fig. 14), and is now kept at the Phra Narai National 
Museum in Lop Buri [Figure 8]. One side of the inscribed spoke 
tentatively reads the following passage from the verse in reverse order:26
Face A: (1) (ta)[ṇ](hā)[niro](dhā) 
 
(2) upādānanirodho
Brown identifies another surviving sample where other excerpts of 
the paṭiccasamuppāda possibly appear. It is inscribed on a circular stone base 
or pedestal from Si Thep (PhCh i) which may or may not have belonged 
to a wheel (1996: 105, fig. 41). A further unregistered Pāli inscription 
from Si Thep, similarly found on a circular stone base or pedestal (FAD 
2550: 127) and possibly dating to the seventh or early eighth century 
on paleographic grounds, argues for the same identification with 
Dependent Origination despite its fragmentary aspect. Since I have not 
been able to see the piece myself, my transliteration of the inscription is 
from the eye-copy [Figure 9] as follows:27 
(1) […] vedanānirodho vedanānirodhā taṇhāniro(dho) ti[…]
(2) […] (pa)ccayā jarāmaraṇa[ṃ] sokaparidevadukkhadom[…]
If the reading is correct, then a good portion of the first line 
(vedanānirodhā taṇhānirodho) is identical with that of Face B from the Wat 
Mahathat spoke-fragment discussed above (LB 14) and translated as 
“from the cessation of feeling [vedanā] there is a cessation of craving 
[taṇhā]” (Brown 1996: 104). In this light, I suspect that the final ti in 
the eye-copy is an error. The last portion can indeed be reconstructed 
as taṇhānirodhā where only the initial t- subsists, probably followed by 
upādānanirodho as in Face A of the Sap Champa fragment (86/2529); 
the rest of the sentence would then be upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho, 
bhavanirodhā jātinirodho and so on, that is, “from the cessation of craving 
(taṇhā), there is a cessation of grasping (upādāna); from the cessation of 
grasping, there is a cessation of becoming (bhava); from the cessation of 
becoming, there is a cessation of birth (jāti)” and so forth. The second 
line connects to the conditions (paccayā) that lead to suffering (dukkha) with 
reference to old age (jarā), dying (maraṇa), grief (soka), and lamentation 
(parideva). Had the break not occurred, we should read jāti- (birth) on 
the left side, preceding -paccayā, and the compound -domanassupāyāsā 
on the right side, that is dejection and despair. According to the theory 
of Dependent Origination, birth is a prerequisite of old age, sickness, 
and death, and is fraught with sorrow, pain, and disappointment. This 
line basically quotes the paṭiccasamuppāda in direct order pertaining to 
the cause of suffering while the first line is in reverse order explaining 
the cessation of suffering. 
Examples of other Pāli inscriptions, all found in central 
Thailand, are listed in Tables 3 and 4 and are located on Map 1. 
I will deal with the ye dhammā inscriptions separately below, but besides 
the Dependent Origination and the Four Truths – always inscribed on 
stone cakras or their related components – other canonical verses appear, 
namely from the Udāna (Ud 1ff; also found in Vin I 2)28 and from the 
Dhammapada (Dhp 153f, 191).29 For example, one inscribed pillar (LB 17), 
possibly two (LB 22), found at Sap Champa, jointly 
displays Ud 1-3 and Dhp 153-154. We have already 
seen the canonical connection between these verses 
from the Udāna, as the Buddha sat under the bodhi-
tree just after reaching enlightenment, and the 
origin of the paṭiccasamuppāda. Accordingly, Ud 1, as 
we have it in Pāli but also in other Sanskrit parallels, 
came to be regarded in all Buddhist traditions as 
the first “stanza of joy” or udāna expressed by the 
Buddha (Skilling 2002: 164-167, 175). There is no 
narrative description in the Pāli Canon, however, 
as to where and when Dhp 153-154 was uttered. 
Despite this fact, and for some unknown reason, 
later commentarial sources (e.g. Dhp-a III 127-129; Sp 17; Sv 16; Ud-a 4) 
seem to consider that Dhp 153-154 was the real “first utterance” of 
the Buddha (paṭhamabuddhavacanaṃ), thus seemingly giving it precedence 
over Ud 1. One of the justifications given for accommodating such a 
view (Pj I 13) is that the Dhammapada verse was only spoken in the mind 
whereas that from the Udāna was uttered in actual speech but only at 
a later stage. The inscription found at Phromthin Tai (LB 24), also in 
Lop Buri province, is equally quoted from Ud 1 as well as from the 
Suttanipāta (Sn 558) which likewise relates to an episode of the life of 
the Buddha shortly following his enlightenment when he meets and 
talks with the Brahmin Sela (Brown 1996: 118-119) [Figure 10]. The 
same verse (Sn 558) is also attested on Face C of a four-sided inscription 
from Nakhon Pathom province (NTh.i; Skilling 1997: 126). The 
importance of these verses for the Theravādins is obviously that they 
were conceived by many as among the “first words” recited by the 
newly enlightened being.  
All in all, I totally adhere to Brown’s own assertion (1996: 115) 
regarding the corpus of Pāli inscriptions found on Dvāravatī wheels 
and pillars:
The passages used from these [Pāli textual] sources  deal with 
the Buddha’s realization of the chain of causation and the 
four noble truths, Śākyamuni’s fundamental understanding 
that coincided with his enlightenment at Bodhgayā, and with 
the subsequent first teaching of this insight at Sārnāth. The 
appropriateness of the subject to the wheels is apparent, yet it is 
important to realize that the verses were carefully selected, and 
in some cases edited, from these sources; particularly interesting 
are the stanzas from the Dhammapada, placed beside the parallel 
“first” words of triumph [i.e. Ud 1] of the just enlightened 
Buddha on the Sab Champa pillar. 
 
That these inscriptions may have been edited, adapted, or shortened 
sections from the Pāli Canon is interesting. Cœdès (1956: 225-226), for 
instance, had already observed that the Four Truths inscribed on the 
Nakhon Pathom wheel (KTh 29) are not actual excerpts taken verbatim 
from the Tipiṭaka as we have it. On the contrary, Skilling (1997: 135-150) 
has confirmed that various details related to the truths as we find them 
in several other inscriptions (SPh 1; ChN 14; ChN 15; LB 17; LB 22) 
are found only in later fragments of commentaries or literature from the 
Figure 8: Pāli inscribed spoke-
fragment found at Sap Champa,  
Lop Buri province. Currently located  
in the Phra Narai National Museum, 
Lop Buri, inv. no. 86/2529 
[Photograph by Nicolas Revire].
Figure 10: Pāli inscription found 
at Phromthin Tai, Lop Buri province 
(LB 24). Currently located in the 
Phra Narai National Museum,  
Lop Buri [Photograph by  
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 9: Pāli inscription from 
Si Thep on a circular stone base 
or pedestal (0996) [Courtesy of 
the “Inscriptions in Thailand 
Database Project”].

--- PAGE 130 ---
nicolaS revire
257
256
fifth century onwards. It is also possible that the Dvāravatī inscriptions 
quote from a different source which is now lost to us (Prapod 2010: 
77) or else, as Brown suggests (1996: 103), “that the inscriptions were 
composed from memory and would not necessarily have exact textual 
counterparts.” 
The Ye Dhammā Verse
This canonical gāthā or verse scarcely needs an introduction. Technically, 
it is not buddhavacana or the word directly “uttered” by the Buddha 
although it has assumed such a function in all Buddhist traditions. 
The Pāli Vinaya refers to the successive conversions of Sāriputta and 
Mogallāna, two of the most prominent disciples of the Buddha, just 
by hearing this stanza first uttered by the venerable Assaji (Vin I 39f). 
Here is the canonical four-line verse or “terse expression of the dhamma” 
recorded on that occasion in Pāli, followed by its English translation:
Ye dhammā hetuppabhavā
Tesaṃ hetuṃ tathāgato āha ǀ
Tesañ ca yo nirodho
Evaṃvādī mahāsamaṇo ti || 
Those things which proceed from a cause, 
Of these the truth-finder [i.e. Tathāgata] has told the cause,
And that which is their stopping – 
The great recluse has such a doctrine. (trans. Horner 1951: 54)
It is said that, having heard this verse and the purport of the Dharma 
in brief, both Sāriputta and, later, Mogallāna immediately attained the 
“deathless” state, that is, the knowledge that lead to liberation or the 
Dharma-eye (dhammacakkhu), before joining the Buddha’s Order (Horner 
1951: 52-56). The connection here between the awakening experience 
of the two monks and the verse is explicit. The ye dhammā gāthā was 
the source of their enlightenment as it represents a shorter version of 
the paṭiccasamuppāda and allows one to see the Four Truths referred to 
above. In the following centuries, its written presence at any particular 
Buddhist site rendered, by extension, that site equal to the traditional 
source of enlightenment. It therefore began to be inscribed in variant 
recensions and languages on stūpas (or enshrined therein) and on images 
and miniature clay tablets and caityas from the fifth or sixth century 
CE onwards, first in northern and western India (Boucher 1991), then 
beyond in ancient Myanmar and Thailand, the Malay Peninsula, 
southern Vietnam, and Indonesia (e.g. Skilling 
1999, 2003-04 and 2008; Griffiths 2011: 142-
146, figs 1a-b).
The verse thus came to be abundantly 
found, albeit exclusively in Pāli, in the 
Dvāravatī cultural sphere inscribed, stamped, 
or engraved on several objects of different 
material: on clay tablets, on bricks or terra-
cotta fragments and stone sculptures of caityas, 
cakra pillars, Buddha images or pieces of 
stone tablets. These seventh-eighth century 
inscriptions clearly attest to the pan-Asian Buddhist practice of writing 
the sacred gāthā on various artefacts.30 An up-to-date list of ye dhammā 
inscriptions found in central Thailand is given in Table 4. According 
to Skilling’s textual classification framework (1999: 180-184), they fall in 
two distinct groups depending on whether the first word of the second 
line is tesaṃ, as in the canonical version (see above), or yesaṃ, a regional 
peculiarity only attested so far in central Thailand. 
New ye dhammā inscriptions continue to be found in Thailand. One 
recent discovery published in Thai occurs on another stone fragment 
from Sap Champa (LB 54), and reads as follows on two sides of the 
stone (Amon 2551: 56-60): 
Face A: (1) […] hetuṃ   
 
(2) […] āha
Face B: (1) tesañ ca yo […] 
 
(2) nirodho ca […]
Being fragmentary, it cannot be said with certainty in which group 
the inscription falls,31 but we can notice, however, a variant reading 
in line 2 of Face B with the addition of ca after nirodho. At least one 
inscription (NTh 10), possibly two (LB 16), offer a similar variant 
reading in Nakhon Pathom and Lop Buri provinces; both belong to the 
yesaṃ group (Skilling 1999: 181).
Several other ye dhammā inscriptions are still unpublished. One 
inscription on a brick said to be from Nakhon Pathom province, 
currently kept in the Bangkok National Museum, is nearly illegible 
but the syllable ye at the beginning of the second line is clear and 
allows us to classify it in the yesaṃ group [Figure 11]. In addition to 
the few bilingual terracotta fragments (Mon and Pāli) allegedly from 
Thap Chumphon, Nakhon Sawan province (LB 26, NW 7, NW i), 
two similar earthenwares reported from Nakhon Pathom province are 
solely inscribed in Pāli with the ye dhammā gāthā [Figure 12; Ray, this 
volume, fig. 4]. Although, a close reading was not possible at the time of 
writing, these inscriptions seem to fall in the yesaṃ group.32 In addition 
to the corpus, a broken image in stone, presumably a standing Buddha 
of which only the feet remain, has a nearly illegible inscription on the 
pedestal (LB i). Though the few letters that remain on the first line 
allow for identification with the ubiquitous verse, yet it is 
not sufficient to say whether it belongs to the tesaṃ or yesaṃ 
group [Figure 13]. 
Last but not least, a significant number of clay 
moulded tablets bearing the ye dhammā gāthā in Pāli 
have been found in central Thailand. While the 
exact number and precise provenance of these 
tablets often elude us, suffice it to say that they are 
mainly of two kinds, both rectangular plaques with 
a complex iconography depicting various figures 
around a central seated Buddha. The first type has 
predominantly been found in Nakhon Pathom at 
Wat Phra Men (Dupont 1959: I 47-49, II figs 34-
40) [e.g. Figure 14].33 On these tablets, the verse is 
directly stamped along the base, below the main scene, 
Figure 11: Ye dhammā 
inscription on a brick from Nakhon 
Pathom province. Currently located 
in the Bangkok National Museum, 
inv. no. 22/10 [Photograph by 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 12: Miniature earthenware 
from Wat Phra Ngam, Nakhon 
Pathom, inscribed with the 
ye dhammā verse. Currently 
located in the Phra Pathom Chedi 
National Museum, Nakhon Pathom, 
inv. no. 305/2519 [Photograph by 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 13: Broken image in stone 
(standing Buddha?) bearing the 
ye dhammā inscription on the pedestal 
(LB i). Currently located in the Phra 
Narai National Museum, Lop Buri 
[Photograph by Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 131 ---
nicolaS revire
259
258
and is repeatedly made from the same mould. According to Pierre 
Dupont (1959: 49), it reads as follows in two lines:
(1) 
ye dhammā hetupprabhavā
(2) 
tesaṃ hetuṃ tathāgato āha 
It is noteworthy that only the first part of the verse (l. 1-2) is 
given here, leaving the rest (l. 3-4) intentionally missing. Although the 
reading on the tablets is rather obscure, a double pa and a subscript 
ra seem to appear, making the compound -ppra in hetupprabhavā clear. 
The inscription would thus be slightly sanskritised since hetuppabhavā is 
expected in “correct” Pāli. The verse apparently falls in the tesaṃ group, 
but the reading is hard to confirm towards the end of line 2 and is 
therefore not absolutely certain. For Dupont, the inscription of tathāgato 
is presented in a more condensed way almost as a monogram to engrave 
all signs on the material available and it is possible that we are dealing 
here with an abridged version of the stanza. 
The second type of tablet bearing the entire ye dhammā gāthā has 
been mainly found in Ratchaburi, Nakhon Pathom, and Suphan Buri 
provinces.34 In this group of tablets, the verse is always inscribed on the 
back in a rather cursive hand and thus difficult to read, probably made 
while the clay was still wet. The reading proposed here is based on a 
fine sample kept in the collection of Wat Matchimawat, in Songkhla, 
but probably originating from Thailand’s central region [Figure 15b]:
(1) 
ye dhammā hetuppabhavā
(2) 
yesaṃ hetuṃ tathāgato 
(3) 
āha tesañ ca yo niro-
(4) 
-dho evaṃvādī mahāsama-
(5) 
-no
Probably for reasons of equal distribution of akṣaras over lines, the 
inscription occupies here five lines, instead of the usual four, with a 
slight deviation of the expected final syllables in lines 2, 3 and 4. It 
belongs to the yesaṃ group with a variant reading at the end of the 
verse, omitting the ti after mahāsamano which is spelt with a dental n 
rather than the standard retroflex ṇ. This spelling peculiarity is rather 
common with other occurrences of ye dhammā inscriptions belonging to 
this yesaṃ group (e.g. NTh 5, LB 26, NW 7, NW i) and cannot, therefore, 
be simply accounted as scribal error. 
An overall pattern seems to emerge in the regional distribution of 
the two variant Pāli spellings of the sacred verse in Thailand 
[Table 4]. While we find most inscriptions from the canonical group 
(tesaṃ) restricted to Nakhon Pathom with just one tesaṃ specimen from 
Phetchaburi (PhB 2) and another one from U Thong (SPh 2), the 
inscriptions from the yesaṃ group appear to be far more numerous and 
widespread in the central provinces of Ratchaburi, Nakhon Pathom, 
Suphan Buri, Nakhon Sawan, Lop Buri, and as far away as Si Thep 
in Phetchabun (LB 23) (Ray, this volume, fig. 5), and possibly Mueang 
Sema in Nakhon Ratchasima (K. 987) and Nong Bua Daeng in 
Chaiyaphum (K. 1166?). This basic observation could indicate that the 
two recensions also have some distinct geographical realities with the 
latter yesaṃ inscriptions marking the furthest extension of ancient Pāli 
literacy in northeast Thailand.
Figure 14: Clay moulded tablet 
bearing a truncated ye dhammā 
verse, from Wat Phra Men,  
Nakhon Pathom. Currently located  
in the Bangkok National Museum, 
inv. no. DV 6-2 [Photograph by 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 15a: Obverse of a clay moulded tablet 
bearing the ye dhammā verse on its reverse 
(Fig. 15b), probably originating from central 
Thailand [Photograph by Nicolas Revire].
Figure 15b: Reverse of Fig. 15a. Currently 
located in the collection of Wat Matchimawat, 
Songkhla, inv. no. MW/458 [Photograph by 
Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 132 ---
nicolaS revire
261
260
The Ritual and Cultic Functions 
of Pāli Verses
The Pāli inscriptions studied above, all closely related to the Four Truths 
of Buddhism, point to a well-known group of discourses by the Buddha 
frequently presented as “citation” or “quotation inscriptions” (Skilling 
2002; Prapod 2010: 72-81). 
Presumably, the content of these passages, a written expression of 
the Dharma, would be used in a context in which it would be unseen 
by most people. The various verses would manifest a presence believed 
to be highly beneficial for the patrons, donors, and worshippers and 
would extend its protection to the place or object that contained it. In 
this vein, the ye dhammā gāthā should be understood as an abbreviated 
version of the paṭiccasamuppāda which is, in turn, intimately related to 
the Four Truths preached by the Buddha at Sarnath.35 It does not really 
matter how long or complete the sacred verses were, and we certainly 
have seen examples of truncated versions above. In other words, these 
selected Buddhist texts may well be fragmentary and, yet, embody the 
whole Dharma.
The gāthās used for such ritual purposes and inscribed on material 
objects often no longer functioned as a means for communicating their 
verbal contents. On the contrary, these inscriptions were frequently 
“hidden” in small characters, often on the back of the artefacts, 
be it a Buddha image or a miniature clay tablet often enshrined in 
a larger stūpa. At any rate, common people could not read the 
inscriptions and only a few scholars or learned monks equipped with the 
necessary language skills and paleographic knowledge could decipher 
or engrave them.
There is ample archaeological evidence, however, that the practice 
of ritually inscribing and presumably reciting such gāthās on clay, brick, 
stone, metal objects, and so on, was well established in South Asia by 
the middle of the first millennium CE and slightly later in Southeast 
Asia. The engraving of such verses was probably conducted by ritual 
specialists, but whether these were laymen or monastics cannot be said. 
In recent decades, a number of scholars have also underlined the 
sacralising power of inserting these verses in caityas, stūpas, Buddha 
images, or other sacred items, as part of a consecrating ceremony devised 
to empower the artefacts (Boucher 1991; Bentor 1996: 42, 114-117, 
217; Skilling 2008: 507). The paṭiccasamuppāda and ye dhammā gāthās, in 
particular, have been seen as closely connected to stūpa construction 
and the cult of relics. Because they epitomise the very essence of the 
Buddha’s teaching, they may also represent the notion of dharmakāya 
(i.e. “Dharma-body) or dharmadhātu (i.e. “Dharma-relic”) and thus echo 
the earlier equation, first expressed in the Pāli Canon, as “He who sees me 
[i.e. the Buddha] sees the Dhamma; he who sees the Dhamma sees me” 
(S III 120).36 In other words, the verses must be honoured and respected 
as if they were a relic since they may represent the Buddha himself.
Once these gāthās were accepted as a substitute for the Buddha, 
they could then be inscribed onto the artefacts at a particular spot. 
The inscription, along with its incantation, would presumably have the 
effect of authoritatively legitimising the object and that spot as a sacred 
and cultic centre. Skilling (2002: 173) has proposed “ritual practices” 
to answer the question as to why identical Pāli texts were inscribed at 
different sites throughout central Thailand and neighbouring Myanmar 
and Cambodia during the first millennium CE. In a different fashion, 
Cœdès had made clear in his seminal article on so-called “votive tablets” 
that the ye dhammā gāthā “must rapidly have acquired in the eyes of the 
ancient Buddhists a sort of magic virtue, and may well have seemed to 
them a quite irresistible charm for the conversion to the faith of any 
who had not heard it” (1926-27: 6). For all these reasons, these verses 
seem to represent something more than mere “citation inscriptions” 
excerpted from the Pāli Canon. Because of their shared sacredness, it 
appears that these stanzas found only in Pāli in the Dvāravatī cultural 
sphere, as well as in Prakrit and Sanskrit elsewhere in Southeast Asia, 
were deliberately chosen for their “ritual” and “cultic” nature, and thus 
also for their alleged supernatural power.37
In this light, it might be worth recalling Lunet de Lajonquière’s early 
interpretation of the Dvāravatī wheels (1909: 36, fig. 17) as possibly 
serving the function of sema stones, that is, to mark the consecration 
of a Buddhist sanctuary. Although this theory was hastily rebutted by 
Cœdès (1956: 225), it could make some sense if we accept their frequent 
association with the Pāli verses described above as having the ritual and 
cultic function of sacralising an artefact or a monument which, in turn, 
may sanctify a religious spot or piece of land. 
Lastly, this also brings us to the question of Pāli literacy at the time 
compared to the situation today. Interesting observations can certainly 
be made about the ancient use of Pāli language in certain rituals in 
the past and today. A few Buddhist scholars (e.g. Skilling 2002: 166, 
173-174; Swearer 2004: 88ff, 107, 115-118, 218-219) have observed 
that chanting certain sacred Pāli verses or parittas – some of which 
are already attested in the Dvāravatī culture (i.e. Ud 1ff; Dhp 153f) – 
occurs regularly during consecration of Buddha images and chedis in 
Thailand and is seen as a form of protection against spirits, to ward off 
evil or deflect negative power. This may well be an indication of ritual 
continuity from the first millennium to this day.
Copying and Reciting Sacred Pāli Verses 
as an Act of Merit
We have seen that an investment in ritual actions may eventually yield 
great results. An additional important function of these sacred verses 
concerns the religious merit generated by copying and reciting them. 
The merit accrues for both the scribe who engraves them and the 
person who recites the gāthās. We do not know when and where exactly 
this practice was first employed in India, but Yijing, in the seventh 
century, has described this tradition as concomitant with the making of 
Buddha images:
 
The priests and the laymen in India make caityas or images with 
earth, or impress the Buddha’s images on silk or paper, and 
worship it with offerings wherever they go. […] Any one may 
thus employ himself in making the objects of worship. Again, 
when the people make images and caityas which consist of gold, 
silver, copper, iron, earth, lacquer, bricks, and stone, or when 
they heap up the snowy sand (lit. sand-snow), they put in the

--- PAGE 133 ---
nicolaS revire
263
262
images or caityas two kinds of sarīras [i.e. relics]. 1. The relics 
of the Great Teacher. 2. The gāthā of the Chain of Causation 
[i.e. ye dhammā or paṭiccasamuppāda gāthās]. […] If we put these 
two in the images or caityas, the blessings derived from them are 
abundant. This is the reason why the sūtras praise in parables 
the merit of making images or caityas as unspeakable. (Takakusu 
1998: 150-151; with minor stylistic changes) 
By this time, copying a verse (gāthā), just as copying an image 
(pratimā), was clearly perceived as a beneficial act of merit in itself, 
not only for the scribe or the image-maker but also for the donor who 
sponsored the act of copying. This is also to say that this practice of 
duplicating a religious object was no longer motivated by the intention 
of preserving the “exact word” or “likeness” of the Buddha but rather 
was primarily aimed at merit-making.38 Hence, producing and copying 
a large number of Buddha images, for example miniature clay tablets or 
earthenwares (Guy 2002; Skilling 2009: 108-109), and engraving them 
with such Pāli verses will necessarily result in great benefits. 
Conclusion
The analysis of these Buddhist practices and rituals as gleaned from 
the archaeological and epigraphic records of Dvāravatī and to a lesser 
extent its neighbouring cultures has now come full circle. In the spirit of 
reassessing past scholarship, I have attempted to re-examine the corpus 
of ancient material and inscriptions from both a historical and doctrinal 
angle. The study has clearly demonstrated the essential Buddhist 
ideologies of gift-giving and dedicating that are conducive to merit-
making, often directed toward a good “rebirth” in a future existence. 
The purpose of accumulating merit has become the most important 
goal of the modern follower of Buddhism in Thailand.
We have also seen how the crucial ritual elements include the act of 
producing and, at times, inscribing the objects with certain sacred verses 
deemed most effective. This also adds to our understanding of the 
essential Buddhist approaches to merit-making. Particularly instructive 
are the regional distribution of such artefacts and the language of 
the epigraphs [Map 1]. Among the Buddhist artefacts found in 
profusion are the objects inscribed in Pāli, from present-day central 
Thailand [Tables 3-4], or in Old Mon, mainly from the contemporary 
northeast [Table 2]. Sanskrit and Old Khmer are also attested in a few 
donation inscriptions [Table 1] found in the outskirts of the Dvāravatī 
cultural sphere where cases of regional bilingualism (e.g. Mon-Pāli, 
Mon-Sanskrit, Mon-Khmer) are indicated. These linguistic trends may 
be an indication of the two major ethnic groups living in the region 
(i.e. Mon and Khmer) and of the sacred languages used (Pāli and 
Sanskrit). Although it cannot be definitely established that the Dvāravatī 
rulers of central Thailand were Buddhists, several inscriptions show 
that a significant portion of the population at least supported Buddhist 
temples and monasteries by the seventh and eighth centuries. This is a 
clear indication that Buddhism firmly took root in Thailand only from 
this period onwards and not as far back to the time of King Asoka, 
circa 250 BCE, as often accounted in local traditions and school 
textbooks (Revire 2011). 
Table 3: Pāli Citation Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand (Except Ye Dhammā)
Inscr.no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/
Location
Date
Category of objects/
Material/Condition
Contents of Citations
References
KTh 29
Phra Pathom Chedi,  
Nakhon Pathom/Bangkok 
National Museum
7th-8th c. dharmacakra/stone
First Sermon/Four Truths
Cœdès (1956); FAD (2529: I, 59-64);  
Brown (1996: 99-103, figs 5a-b); Skilling  
(1997: 149-150); Phasook (2008: 24-25); 
Prapod (2010: 76-77)
unregistered/
NTh i
Nakhon Chaisi, Nakhon Pathom 
prov./Culture Hall Project, 
Silpakorn University,  
Nakhon Pathom (?)
7th-8th c. stone bar
list of the Four Truths and the 12 links  
of Dependent Origination (Face A);
list of the 37 factors conducive to 
enlightenment (Face B); Sn 558 (Face C); 
Dhp 191 and D II 123 (Face D)
Naiyana et al. (2534);  
Skilling (1997: 123-133)
SPh 1/
37/2541
Khampaeng Saen,  
Nakhon Pathom prov./ Phra 
Pathom Chedi National Museum
7th-8th c. cakra base/stone
Four Truths
FAD (2529: I, 98-99); Brown (1996: 108,  
fig. 64b); Skilling (1997: 149-150);  
FAD (2548: 136); Phasook (2008: 26); 
unregistered/
SPh i
U Thong, Suphan Buri prov./  
U Thong National Museum
7th-8th c. brick/fragmentary
Dhp 191(Face A); [ye dhammā on Face B;  
cf. Table 4: SP 2]
Prasan (2509: 82); 
Skilling (1991: 243-244)
LB 8
Sap Champa, Lop Buri prov./ 
Phra Narai National Museum
7th-8th c. cakra pillar/stone/
fragmentary
First Sermon/Four Truths
FAD (2524: 26-27); FAD (2529: I, 103-105); 
Brown (1996: 113); U-tain (2556)
LB 14
Wat Mahathat, Lop Buri/ Phra 
Narai National Museum
7th-8th c. cakra spoke/
stone/fragmentary
Dependent Origination
FAD (2529: I, 109-111); Brown  
(1996: 104-105); Phasook (2008: 28)
unregistered/
86/2529
Sap Champa, Lop Buri prov./ 
Phra Narai National Museum
7th-8th c. cakra spoke/stone
Dependent Origination
Phuthon (2529: 18, fig. 14)
LB 17/
L. 2166-67
Sap Champa, Lop Buri prov./ 
Phra Narai National Museum
7th-8th c. cakra pillar/stone
ye dhammā; Four Truths;
Ud 1-3; Dhp 153f
Uraisi & Anchana (1975); FAD (2529: I,  
116-122); Brown (1996: 109-111); Skilling 
(1997: 149-150); Phasook (2008: 26-27); 
Prapod (2010: 78)
LB 19/
L. 2161 
Wat Mahathat, Lop Buri/ Phra 
Narai National Museum
7th-8th c. dharmacakra/stone/
fragmentary
First Sermon/Four Truths
Boisselier (1961); FAD (2529: I, 123-125); 
Brown (1996: 103, fig. 33); Phasook (2008: 28)
LB 22
Sap Champa, Lop Buri prov./ 
Phra Narai National Museum
8th-9th c. cakra pillar/stone/
fragmentary
ye dhammā; Four Truths;
Ud 1-3; Dhp 153f (?)
FAD (2529: I, 241-243); Brown (1996: 111)
LB 24
Phromthin Tai, Lop Buri prov./
Phra Narai National Museum
8th-9th c. stone slab/fragmentary
Ud 1; Sn 558
FAD (2529: I, 237-240); Brown (1996: 118-
119); Prapod (2010: 78-79)
ChN 14
Ban Hang Nam Sakhon, 
Chai Nat prov./current location 
unknown
7th-8th c. dharmacakra/stone/
fragmentary
First Sermon;
Commentary on the 
Four Truths (?)
Bauer (1991a: 48, 52-55; pls 1-3); Skilling 
(1997: 133-151); Phasook (2008: 29, fig. 36)
ChN 15
Ban Hang Nam Sakhon, 
Chai Nat prov./current location 
unknown
7th-8th c. cakra pillar/stone/
fragmentary
Commentary on the 
Four Truths 
Bauer (1991a: 48, 52-55; pl. 4); Skilling 
(1997: 146-148)

--- PAGE 134 ---
nicolaS revire
265
264
Inscr.no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/
Location
Date
Category of objects/
Material/Condition
Contents of Citations
References
unregistered/
PhCh i
Si Thep, Phetchabun prov./ 
Ramkhamhaeng National 
Museum, Sukhothai
7th-8th c. circular base or 
pedestal(?)/stone/
fragmentary
Dependent Origination 
Brown (1996: 105, fig. 41);
Skilling (2002: 168-169); FAD (2550: 126)
unregistered/
0996
Si Thep, Phetchabun prov./ 
current location unknown
7th-8th c. circular base or pedestal 
(?)/stone/fragmentary
Dependent Origination 
FAD (2550: 127)
unregistered/
82.183
Si Thep, Phetchabun prov./ 
Newark Museum, NJ (USA)
7th-8th c. dharmacakra/stone
First Sermon/Four Truths
Brown (1996: 106-108, figs 6a-b)
Table 3: Pāli Citation Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand (Continued)
Table 4: Ye Dhammā Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand (Continued)
Table 4: Ye Dhammā Inscriptions Found in First-Millennium Thailand
Inscr. no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/
Location
Date
Category of 
objects/Material/
Condition
Recension Type 
References
RB 2
Wat Plaeng/Wat Mahathat,  
Ratchaburi prov. 
7th-8th c.
Buddha image  
(head stolen)/stone
yesaṃ group (variant ending: 
mahāsamano ti)
FAD (2529: I, 72-74); Skilling (1999: 173, 180); 
Skilling (2003-04: 274-275, figs 1-3)
PhB 2
provenance unknown/
rubbing at National Library, Bkk
7th-8th c.
probably stone/lost
tesaṃ group
FAD (2529: I, 65-67); Skilling (1999: 180)
NTh 2/
76/2519
Phra Pathom Chedi, Nakhon Pathom/
Phra Pathom Chedi National Museum
7th-8th c.
stone slab/
fragmentary
tesaṃ group
FAD (2529: I, 75-78); Skilling (1999: 180); FAD 
(2548: 195)
NTh 3
Phra Pathom Chedi, Nakhon Pathom/
Bangkok National Museum
7th c.
stone caitya/
fragmentary
tesaṃ group
FAD (2529: I, 79-82); Skilling (1999: 180)
NTh 4
Phra Pathom Chedi, Nakhon Pathom/in situ
7th-8th c.
stone slab
tesaṃ group
FAD (2529: I, 83-85); Skilling (1999: 180)
NTh 5
Nakhon Pathom prov./ 
National Library, Bkk
7th-8th c.
stone slab
yesaṃ group (variant ending: 
mahāsamano)
FAD (2529: I, 86-88);
Skilling (1999: 180)
NTh 6
Nakhon Pathom prov./
National Library, Bkk
7th-8th c.
stone slab
yesaṃ group
FAD (2529: I, 89-91);
Skilling (1999: 180)
NTh 10
Phra Pathom Chedi, Nakhon Pathom/
current location unknown
7th-8th c.
stone slab
yesaṃ group (variant ending: 
nirodho ca… mahāsamano ti)
FAD (2529: I, 92-94);
Skilling (1999: 181)
unregistered/ 
22/10
Nakhon Pathom prov./ 
Bangkok National Museum
7th-8th c.
brick
yesaṃ group
unpublished
unregistered/
DV 1-1
Phra Pathom Chedi, Nakhon Pathom/
Bangkok National Museum
8th-9th c.
earthenware/
fragmentary
yesaṃ group
unpublished
unregistered/ 
305/2519
Wat Phra Ngam, Nakhon Pathom/
Phra Pathom Chedi National Museum
8th-9th c.
earthenware/
fragmentary
yesaṃ group
Finot (1910: 148); Cœdès (1912: 29);  
L. de Lajonquière (1912: 113, fig. 21);  
FAD (2548: 198)
Inscr. no./
Inv. no.
Provenance/
Location
Date
Category of 
objects/Material/
Condition
Recension Type 
References
NW 7, NW I + 
LB 26
Thap Chumphon, Nakhon Sawan prov./ 
Phra Narai National Museum, Lop Buri;  
Wat Nong Kradon, Nakhon Sawan;  
Chai Nat Hospital (?)
8th-9th c.
earthenwares/
fragmentary
yesaṃ group
(variant ending: mahāsamano)
FAD (2524: 34-40); FAD (2529: I, 244-246;  
II, 95-99); Kannika & Phongkasem (2542); 
Phimphan (2013: 12-13)
unregistered/
L. 4348
Nakhon Pathom prov./
Bangkok National Museum
7th c.
cakra pillar/
fragmentary
unknown
Finot (1910: 148); Cœdès (1912: 29); L. de 
Lajonquière (1912: 112, fig. 19); Brown (1996: 108)
unregistered/
NTh ii
Chaiya province (?)/Phra Pathom Chedi 
Temple Museum, Nakhon Pathom
7th-8th c.
Buddha image/
stone/ fragmentary
unknown
Skilling (2003-04: 280, n. 17)
unregistered/
DV 5-2 + DV 6-2
Wat Phra Men, Nakhon Pathom/
Bangkok National Museum
7th-8th c.
moulded tablets/
fired clay
tesaṃ group
Dupont (1959: I 47-49, II figs 34-40)
unregistered/ 
MW/458
Probably central Thailand/ 
Wat Matchimawat, Songkhla
7th-8th c.
moulded clay/ 
fired clay
yesaṃ group
unpublished
SPh 2
U Thong, Suphan Buri prov./
U Thong National Museum
7th-8th c.
brick/fragmentary
tesaṃ group
(Face B)
Prasan (2509: 81); Skilling (1999: 180)
SPh 4
U Thong, Suphan Buri prov./
National Library, Bkk
7th-8th c.
brick
yesaṃ group
FAD (2529: I, 100-102);
Skilling (1999: 180)
unregistered/
NN i
Dong Lakhon, Nakhon Nayok prov./
current location unknown
8th-9th c.
bowl (?)/terracotta/
fragment
unknown
Bandhit (2542: 531-532)
LB 16/
143/2525
Phromthin Tai, Lop Buri prov./
Phra Narai National Museum
7th-8th c.
stone slab
yesaṃ group (variant ending: 
nirodho ca (?) mahāsamano)
FAD (2529: I, 106-108); Skilling (1999: 181)
LB 23
Si Thep, Phetchabun prov./
Phra Narai National Museum, Lop Buri
7th-8th c.
stone slab
yesaṃ group (variant ending: 
mahāsamaṇo)
FAD (2529: I, 132-134); Skilling (1999: 181); FAD 
(2550: 125)
LB 54
Sap Champa, Lop Buri prov./
current location unknown
8th-9th c.
stone slab/
fragmentary
? (variant ending: nirodho ca)
Amon (2551: 56-60)
unregistered/
LB i
Lop Buri prov./
Phra Narai National Museum
7th-8th c.
Buddha image/
stone/fragmentary
unknown
unpublished
unregistered/
PhB i
Si Thep, Phetchabun prov./ Ramkhamhaeng 
National Museum, Sukhothai
7th-8th c.
Buddha image/ 
stone/fragmentary
? (variant ending: mahāsamaṇo) Skilling (2002: 169); 
Skilling (2003-04: 280-281, fig. 9)
unregistered/ 
K. 987/
323/2497
Dan Khun Tot or Mueang Sema (?), Sung 
Noen dist., Nakhon Ratchasima prov./ 
Maha Viravong National Museum,  
Nakhon Ratchasima
8th-9th c.
Buddha image/
stone
yesaṃ group
Cœdès (1937-66: VII, 162);
Skilling (1999: 173-174, 181);
Skilling (2003-04: 276-278, figs 4-6)
unregistered/ 
K. 1166/ 
46/2536
Nong Bua Daeng, Chaiyaphum prov. or 
Mueang Sema, Nakhon Ratchasima prov. 
(?)/Phimai National Museum
8th-9th c.
stone slab
yesaṃ group
Skilling (2003-04: 278-279, figs 7-8)

--- PAGE 135 ---
nicolaS revire
267
266
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Christian Bauer for his assistance regarding Mon 
inscriptions, to Arlo Griffiths, Peter Masefield and Peter Skilling for 
their close reading and useful comments on an earlier manuscript and 
to Leedom Lefferts for editing the language. My sincere thanks are 
also extended to FAD staff and curators for their warm welcome and 
help during my survey in several branches of the National Museums 
in Thailand.
Abbreviations
Pāli references are made to PTS publications only.
A 
Aṅguttaranikāya
D 
Dīghanikāya
Dhp 
Dhammapada
Dhp-a Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā (Commentary on Dhp)
It 
Itivuttaka
M 
Majjhimanikāya
Pj I 
Paramatthajotikā I (Commentary on Khuddakapāṭha)
S 
Saṃyuttanikāya
Sn 
Suttanipāta
Sp 
Samantapāsādikā (Commentary on Vin)
Sv 
Sumaṅgalavilāsinī (Commentary on D)
Ud 
Udāna
Ud-a 
Paramatthadīpanī (Commentary on Ud)
Vin 
Vinaya
Endnotes
1 
In this essay, “Dvāravatī” refers to both an 
archaeological typology and a cultural entity 
vaguely located in west-central Thailand circa the 
seventh and eighth centuries CE.
2 
The archaeological material and inscriptions 
presented here do not pretend to be exhaustive  
or, in most cases, original. The majority of  
these have been edited or published in Thailand, 
albeit rarely or satisfactorily in English. Several 
readings of inscriptions and their published 
translations in print or available online through 
the “Inscriptions in Thailand Database Project” 
website warrant caution and emendations. All 
translations from Thai and French publications  
in this essay are mine.
3 
The notion of merit-making is shared by several 
Indian religions but in this essay, I will focus only 
on the “Buddhist concept” of merit. 
4 
A brick retrieved from Suphan Buri is inscribed 
in Sanskrit with the following similar verse: namo 
vuddhāya, i.e. “Homage to the Buddha” (Kongkaeo 
2541: 45).
5 
The date given in the opening Khmer portion of 
the inscription has usually been given as 683 śaka 
(761 CE), but a tenth or eleventh century date is 
much more likely (Revire 2012a: 153, n. 2).
6 
In this essay, I give first the registration numbers  
of the inscriptions as recorded in Thailand by  
the Fine Arts Department (FAD), followed by  
the K. numbers if known in the “Corpus des 
inscriptions du Cambodge.” When the inscriptions 
are not recorded as such, I give the artefact 
inventory numbers or an arbitrary number. 
For further information and references to the 
inscriptions cited here, see Tables 1-4.  
7 
For ancient India, see for instance Nath (1987);  
for pre-modern and modern Thai traditions,  
see Gabaude (2003) and Arthid (2012).
8 
Often, the bhikkhu observing this dhutaṅga declines 
invitations to take meals at the houses of lay people. 
9 
In certain vinayas, the khakkhara-staff was 
considered one of the eighteen possessions of 
wandering monks. For Yijing, the function of using 
such a staff was merely “to keep off cows or dogs 
while collecting alms in the village” (Takakusu 
1998: 191). The khakkhara was also a familiar  
object in Dvāravatī and neighbouring cultures 
(Revire 2009 and forthcoming).
10 The terms dāsa or dāsī in Sanskrit, ḍek in Old 
Mon or kñuṃ in Old Khmer have often been 
translated as male or female “slaves” but 
perhaps “servant” would be a better rendering. 
In the same vein, see Vickery (1998: 225-227, 
439-440). 
11 The eye-copy provided by Cœdès (1961: inscr. 
XXII) is clearly not faithful to the original. 
For another, yet likely incorrect, reading and 
translation, see FAD (2529: I, 68-71). For a 
published rubbing and the relationship between 
the image and the inscription, see Revire 
(2012b: 94-95, figs. 1-2). 
12 Another short inscription from Mueang Bueng 
Khok Chang, Uthai Thani province (AN 2), 
whose reading and language are not certain, 
refer to a similar cultivation of merit where the 
word puñ(·) or puña seems to appear but not the 
name of the agent (FAD 2529: II, 48-52).
13 See also the inscription (KhK 25) above the 
head of a large reclining Buddha located  
on top of Phu Wiang, Khon Kaen province. 
The word puṇya(ṃ) is clear at the end of line 2  
(Cha-em 2544: eye-copy on p. 58).
14 Another fragmentary inscription in Sanskrit, 
found at the base of an alleged “Buddha 
image” from Kalasin province (KS 5), has been 
erroneously linked to the donor’s aspiration 
of “transferring happiness to all mankind” 
(FAD 2529: I, 278). The inscription,  
a śārdūlavikrīḍita stanza, is in fact dedicated  
to Śiva and shows some similarities with  
K. 1214 dated to 648 śaka (Griffiths 2005).  
I thank Arlo Griffiths for checking the reference 
and drawing this parallel to my attention.
15 I prefer to avoid the term stūpa (i.e. a reliquary) 
often used in the literature and which implies 
a funerary function. Could these terracotta 
fragments be finials? The hollow structure and 
flat base could suggest that these were used in 
an architectural capacity.
16 From my personal observation, I have noted 
that more bilingual inscribed earthenwares 
of this kind have survived, but have been 
left unnoticed and are not registered as 
inscriptions by the FAD. At least two are kept 
in the Bangkok National Museum (277/2504 
and 278/2504) and one is in the Prachin 
Buri National Museum (129/2526). There 
are also several models or fragments kept at 
the Phra Narai National Museum, Lop Buri 
(e.g. 281/2504 and 286/2504), and I suspect 
that there could be more in museum storages, 
temple or private collections. See also Bauer 
(1991: 49, fig. E) for a tentative list of these 
inscribed objects. 
17 The same inscription has been misinterpreted 
as “this stūpa [kyāk] was made for the three 
ancestors near the vihāra,” (FAD 2529: I, 98) 
giving rise to speculations that these so-called 
“terracotta kumbha-type stūpas” possibly served 
as funeral urns (e.g. Woodward 2003: 101-102).
18 A possible parallel in Sanskrit would be 
brāhmapuṇya, meaning “sublime merit”  
(cf. Skilling 2008: 512).
19 Stephen Murphy recorded twenty-six 
inscriptions in total on sema stones from 
northeast Thailand with the languages 
employed including Mon, Khmer, and Sanskrit 
(2010: 90-95, Appendix 1, Table A5). Many 
of these inscriptions, however, are very worn 
and therefore still unread and/or left without a 
proper translation.
20 The reverse situation is equally possible. For 
example, at least two Khmer inscriptions from 
Nakhon Ratchasima (NM 28/K. 388 and 
NM 31/K. 389) also show traces of Mon loan 
words such as kyāk.
21 The Pāli portion in the Noen Sa Bua 
inscription (PCh 14/K. 997) cannot be 
considered “donative” in this regard since only 
the Khmer portion relates to the donation 
of cows to a temple and the installation of a 
buddhapāda. Prapod (2010: 82-83) classifies the 
Pāli section as a “eulogy inscription” citing an 
extra-canonical text.
22 See in particular the few panegyric inscriptions 
from Chaiyaphum province (ChY 1, ChY 4 
and ChY 5). Other Buddhist Sanskrit 
inscriptions from northeast Thailand are 
tentatively listed by Bauer (1991a: 56, fig. H).
23 Also translated in English as “dependent  
co-arising,” “chain of causation,”  
“conditioned co-production,”  
“conditioned genesis,” and so on.
24 See Brown (1996: 104, n. 44) for a near 
complete list of Pāli texts where the verse 
occurs, to which list one can add the Udāna 
from the Khuddakanikāya. See Masefield (1994) 
for a recent English translation of that text.
25 See in particular inscriptions KTh 29, NTh 1, 
SPh 1, SPh i, LB 19, ChN 14, ChN 15, PhCh i, 
and 82.183 [Table 3]. An inscription on a 
fragmentary cakra pillar from Sap Champa  
(LB 8), first identified as written in Sanskrit 
(FAD 2524: 26-27), has recently been reassessed 
and identified as a portion of the First Sermon 
in Pāli (U-tain 2556).  
26 My emendations and restorations of the 
nearly illegible or missing letters or syllables 
(akṣaras) are given in parenthesis and square 
brackets respectively. While the letters are very 
clear on line 2, my reconstruction of line 1 is 
very much tentative and based on the strong 
assumption that it quotes the paṭiccasamuppāda.

--- PAGE 136 ---
nicolaS revire
269
268
Unfortunately, I have been unable to see the 
reverse Face B of this spoke-fragment.
27 I wish to thank Arlo Griffiths for his assistance  
in restoring the proper reading. 
28 Other occurrences of Ud 1-3 were found in 
Angkor Borei, lower Cambodia, and Kunzeik, 
lower Myanmar, thus attesting to the popularity of 
the verses in the seventh-eighth century Theravāda 
tradition of mainland Southeast Asia (Skilling 
2002: 162-164).
29 Dhp 191, which summarises the Four Truths, is 
inscribed on a terracotta fragment from U Thong 
(Sph.i: Face A; Prasan 2509: 82; Skilling 1991: 
243-244) and on a stone bar from Nakhon Pathom 
province (Nth i: Face D; Skilling 1997: 129-130). 
A parallel version of Dhp 191, albeit in so-called 
“hybrid Pāli-Sanskrit,” is found in line 2 of the 
gold-plate inscription from Go Xoai, southern 
Vietnam (Skilling 1999: 172-173, 175), and also in 
Prakrit from Guntupalle, Andhra Pradesh, in India 
(Skilling 1991).
30 The practice of writing this sacred verse on 
precious metals is so far unattested in Dvāravatī 
although it surely existed in neighbouring regions. 
See for example the engraved gold-plates from Go 
Xoai, southern Vietnam (Skilling 1999: 171-177, 
fig. 1), the one of unknown provenance kept at 
the Musée Guimet in Paris (MA 4649B; Skilling 
2003-04: 284, fig. 13), and another sample from 
Palembang, Sumatra (Griffiths 2011: 143-145,  
fig. 1a).
31 The FAD author who deciphered the inscription 
reconstructs it as belonging to the yesaṃ group 
(Amon 2551: 59) but the reasons behind such 
classification, while likely on the basis which 
follows, are not clearly stated.
32 Finot (1910: 148) read yesaṃ on the “vase en terre 
cuite” from Phra Pathom Chedi but Cœdès (1912: 
29) proposed to read tesaṃ. The eye-copy published 
upside-down by Lunet de Lajonquière (1912: 
113, fig. 21), however, clearly reads yesaṃ. I thank 
Laurent Hennequin for sending these references. 
33 A complete tablet of this type is kept at the 
Nakhon Si Thammarat National Museum 
(19/246/kho) and was transferred from the 
Bangkok National Museum but its exact 
provenance is not known. In addition, a fragment 
found in Khu Bua is currently on display at the 
Ratchaburi National Museum (inv. no. unknown), 
and another fragment, presumably from Nakhon 
Pathom, is kept at the Chaiya National Museum 
(DV 244).  
34 See Baptiste & Zéphir (2009: 56, 106, cats 13-14) 
for fine illustrations of two samples, one from 
Ratchaburi (242/2533) and the other from Suphan 
Buri provinces (64/2511). In addition, one tablet 
probably originating from Nakhon Pathom is  
kept at the Bangkok National Museum (151/2511), 
with an additional one on display at the Phra 
Narai National Museum, Lop Buri (225/2526), 
and yet another one at the Ashmolean Museum 
in Oxford (EAX. 170). For a recent iconographic 
study on the obverse of these tablets  
[e.g. Figure 15a], see Woodward (2009).
35 In Thailand, King Mongkut or Rama IV  
(r. 1851-1868), an ex-monk and Buddhist scholar 
in his own right, first proposed that the ye dhammā 
gāthā was a précis of the paṭiccasamuppāda and the 
Four Truths. See the inscription left in Thai by the 
king in 1856 at Phra Pathom Chedi in Nakhon 
Pathom and reproduced in extenso on pages 43-45 
of Cœdès 1961 (Thai edition).
36 The full quote is: yo kho [vakkali] dhammaṃ passati  
so maṃ passati yo maṃ passati so dhammaṃ passati.  
See also M I 190f and It 91.
37 That the ye dharma gāthā was later blurred 
with a type of mantra is clearly attested in the 
abbreviated Sanskrit form oṃ ye te svāhā found in 
(Pen)insular Southeast Asia (Cruijsen et al. 2013:  
n. 50). In the Tibetan tradition, Atiśa (ca 982-1054) 
also referred to the mantric use of this verse in his 
Ritual for Making Miniature Clay Stūpas of the Vehicle of 
Perfections (Bentor 1996: 115; Skilling 2008: 514).
38 For a similar analysis regarding the “conceptual 
copying” of a revered icon during the later 
Sukhothai period (1238-1438) in Thailand,  
see Pattaratorn (2009: 176-181).
References
Amon Chaosuan 
2551  Charuek phop mai thi 
mueang boran sap champa (New 
Inscription Found at Sap Champa 
Ancient Town). Silpakorn Journal 
51(5): 52-61. [In Thai; 2008 CE]
Arthid Sheravanichkul 
2012  Narrative and Gift-giving 
in Thai Ānisaṃsa Texts. In 
Skilling, Peter & McDaniel, Justin 
(eds), Buddhist Narrative in Asia 
and Beyond, Volume One. Bangkok: 
Chulalongkorn University,  
pp. 37-46. 
Bandhit Liuchaichan 
2542  Bat phra: lakthan thang 
prawatisat lae borannakhadi  
(The Food Bowl and Its History).  
In Sangkhom lae watthanatham nai 
prathet thai/Thailand: Culture and 
Society. Bangkok: Maha Chakri 
Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre, 
pp. 525-537. [In Thai with English 
Abstract; 1999 CE]
Bauer, Christian 
1991a  Notes on Mon Epigraphy. 
Journal of the Siam Society 79(1): 
31-83.
1991b  Notes on Mon Epigraphy 
II. Journal of the Siam Society 79(2): 
61-79.
Bentor, Yael 
1996  Consecration of Images and 
Stūpas in Indo-Tibetan Tantric 
Buddhism. Leiden: Brill.
Boisselier, Jean 
1961  un fragment inscrit de Roue 
de la Loi de Lop’buri. Artibus Asiae 
24(3/4): 225-231.
Boucher, daniel 
1991  The Pratītyasamutpāda- 
gāthā and Its Role in the Medieval 
Cult of the Relics. Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 14(1): 1-27.
Brown, Robert l. 
1996  The Dvāravatī Wheels of the 
Law and the Indianization of South East 
Asia. Leiden: Brill.
Cha-em Kaeoklai 
2537a  Charuek kaset sombun 
(The Kaset Sombun Inscription). 
Silpakorn Journal 37(3): 59-65. [In 
Thai; 1994 CE] 
2537b  Charuek ban hua khua 
(The Ban Hua Khua Inscription). 
Silpakorn Journal 37(6): 90-95.  
[In Thai; 1994 CE]
2544  Charuek phra phuttha saiyat 
phu wiang (An Inscription Found 
on the Reclining Buddha Image 
of Phu Wiang). Silpakorn Journal 
44(3): 56-61. [In Thai with English 
Abstract; 2001 CE] 
Cœdès, George 
1912  Compte rendu de Lunet de 
Lajonquière, 1912. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 12: 29.
1926-27  Siamese Votive Tablets. 
Journal of the Siam Society 20(1): 1-23.
1952  À propos de deux fragments 
d’inscription récemment 
découverts à P‘ră Păthŏm 
(Thaïlande). Comptes rendus des 
séances de l’Académie des Inscriptions et 
Belles-Lettres 96(1): 146-150.
1956  Une roue de la loi avec 
inscriptions en pāli provenant du 
site de P‘ră Păthŏm. Artibus Asiae 
19: 221-226.
1961  Recueil des inscriptions du Siam. 
Pt. II. Inscriptions de Dvāravati, de 
Çrīvijaya et Lăvo. Bangkok: Fine  
Arts Department. [Second  
Revised Edition; First Edition 
1924. In Thai and French]
1937-66  Inscriptions du Cambodge. 
Eight Volumes. Hanoi-Paris:  
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Cruijsen, Thomas, Griffiths, 
Arlo & Klokke, Marijke 
2013 The Cult of the Buddhist 
Dhāraṇī Deity Mahāpratisarā 
along the Maritime Silk Route:  
New Epigraphical and 
Iconographic Evidence from the 
Indonesian Archipelago. Journal  
of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 35(1-2), pp. 71-157.
Dayal, Har 
1970  The Bodhisattva Doctrine in 
Buddhist Sanskrit Literature.  
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
[Reprint; First Edition 1932]
Dupont, Pierre 
1959  L’archéologie mône de Dvāravatī. 
Two Volumes. Paris: Publication de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2524  Charuek boran run raek phop thi 
lop buri lae klai khiang (The Earliest 
Inscriptions from Lop Buri and Its 
Surrounding Areas). Lop Buri: Fine Arts  
Department. [In Thai; 1981 CE]
2529  Charuek nai prathet thai 
(Inscriptions of Thailand). Five 
Volumes. Bangkok: National 
Library of Thailand. [In Thai; 
1986 CE]
2548  Borannawatthu nai phiphithaphan 
sathan haeng chat phra pathom chedi 
(Ancient Artefacts from the Phra Pathom 
Chedi National Museum). Nonthaburi: 
Fine Arts Department. [In Thai; 
2005 CE]
2550  Uthayan prawatisat si thep  
(Si Thep Historical Park). Lop Buri: 
Fine Arts Department. [In Thai 
with English Summary; 2007 CE]
Finot, Louis  
1910  Inscriptions du Siam et 
de la Péninsule malaise (Mission 
Lunet de Lajonquière). Bulletin de la 
Commission archéologique de l’Indochine 
(1910): 147-154.
Gabaude, Louis 
2003  Le don ou dāna comme 
fenêtre sur les mentalités 
bouddhistes thaïes. Paper 
presented at the Conference 
Buddhist Legacies in Southeast Asia: 
Mentalities, Interpretations and Practices, 
Bangkok, 18-20 December 2003. 
[Unpublished]
Gagneux, Pierre-Marie 
1972  Vers une révolution dans 
l’archéologie indochinoise : le 
Buddha et les stèles de Thalat, 
Vientiane. Bulletin des amis du 
royaume lao 7-8: 83-105.
Griffiths, Arlo 
2005  La stèle d’installation de Śrī 
Tribhuvaneśvara : une nouvelle 
inscription préangkorienne du 
musée national de Phnom Penh 
(K. 1214). Journal Asiatique 293(1): 
11-43. [In collaboration with J.C. 
Eade & G. Gerschheimer]
2011  Inscriptions of Sumatra: 
Further Data on the Epigraphy of 
the Musi and Batang Hari Rivers 
Basins. Archipel 81: 139-175.
Guillon, Emmanuel 
1974  Recherches sur quelques 
inscriptions môn. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 61: 339-348.
Guy, John 
2002  Offering Up a Rare Jewel: 
Buddhist Merit-making and Votive 
Tablets in Early Burma. In Green, 
Alexandra & Blurton, T. Richard 
(eds), Burma: Art and Archaeology. 
London: The British Museum 
Press, pp. 23-33.

--- PAGE 137 ---
nicolaS revire
271
270
Halliday, Robert 
1930  Les inscriptions môn du 
Siam, éditées et traduites. Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 30: 
81-105.
Horner, Isaline Blew (trans.)  
1951  The Book of the Discipline 
(Vinaya-Piṭaka), Volume IV 
(Mahāvagga). London: Pali Text 
Society and Luzac & Co. 
1954  The Collection of the Middle 
Length Sayings (Majjhima-Nikāya), 
Volume I. London: Pali Text Society 
and Luzac & Co.
Kannika Wimonkasem  
1995  Étude paléographique des 
inscriptions mônes découvertes 
dans le nord-est de la Thaïlande.  
In Silpakorn University (ed.), 
Premier symposium franco-thaï, 18-24 
juillet 1988. La Thaïlande des débuts 
de son histoire jusqu’au XVe siècle. 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University,  
pp. 236-319.
Kannika Wimonkasem & 
Phongkasem Sonthithai 
2542  Charuek than sathup din 
phao wat nong kradon (The 
Earthenware Stūpa Inscription of 
Wat Nong Kradon). Phasa-Charuek 
6: 143-149. [In Thai; 1999 CE]
Kongkaeo Wiraprachak 
2541  Charuek bot namasakan 
bon phaen it samai thawarawadi 
(Dvāravatī Brick Inscription of 
Homage). Silpakorn Journal 41(4): 
44-47. [In Thai; 1998 CE]
2550  Charuek bai sema ban 
phanna (Sema Inscription at Ban 
Phanna). Silpakorn Journal 50(2): 
53-57. [In Thai; 2007 CE]  
Lunet de Lajonquière,  
Étienne Edmond 
1909  Le domaine archéologique 
du Siam. Bulletin de la Commission 
archéologique de l’Indochine (1909): 
188-262. 
1912  Essai d’inventaire 
archéologique du Siam. Bulletin 
de la Commission archéologique de 
l’Indochine (1912): 19-181.
Masefield, Peter (trans.) 
1994  The Udāna. Oxford:  
Pali Text Society. 
Murphy, Stephen A. 
2010   The Buddhist Boundary 
Markers of Northeast Thailand and 
Central Laos, 7th-12th Centuries CE: 
Towards an Understanding of the 
Archaeological, Religious and Artistic 
Landscapes of the Khorat Plateau. 
Doctoral Dissertation. London: 
School of Oriental and African 
Studies, University of London. 
[Unpublished]
Naiyana Prongthura et al. 
2534  Charuek rup thaeng si liam 
akson pallawa thi khrongkan ho 
watthanatham mahawithayalai 
sinlapakon phraratchatwang  
sanam chan nakhon pathom  
(An Inscription on a Rectangular 
Bar in Pallava Script in the 
Cultural Project Centre, Silpakorn 
University, Sanam Chandra Palace 
Campus, Nakhon Pathom).  
Phasa-Charuek 3: 40-44. [In Thai; 
1991 CE]
Nath, Vijay  
1987  Dāna: Gift System in Ancient 
India (c. 600 B.C.-c. A.D. 300). A 
Socio-economic Perspective. New Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal.
Pattaratorn Chirapravati, M.L. 
2009  From Text to Image: 
Copying as Buddhist Practice 
in Late Fourteenth Century 
Sukhothai. In Berkwitz, Stephen 
C. et al. (eds), Buddhist Manuscript 
Cultures: Knowledge, Ritual and Art. 
New York & London: Routledge, 
pp. 172-188.
Phasook Indrawooth 
2008  Dvāravati Dharmacakra/
Thawarawadi thammachak. Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University.  
[In English and Thai; 2551 BE]
Phimphan Phaibunwangcharoen 
2013  Buddhist Doctrine 
(Dhamma) Found in Early Days 
Thailand. Paper presented at the 
International Conference titled The 
Origin of Buddhism in Southeast Asia: 
Dhamma and Archaeology, Nakhon Si 
Thammarat, 12-13 January 2013. 
[Unpublished] 
Phuthon Phumathon 
2529  Mueang boran sap champa  
(The Ancient City of Sap Champa). 
Lop Buri: Lop Buri Conservation 
of Ancient Monuments, Objects 
and Environments Club. [In Thai; 
1986 CE]
Piriya Krairiksh 
2517  Phuttha sasana nithan thi 
chedi chula pathon/Buddhist Folk 
Tales Depicted at Chula Pathon Cedi. 
Bangkok: Private Publisher. [In 
Thai & English; 1974 CE]
Prapod Assavavirulhakarn 
2010  The Ascendancy of Theravāda 
Buddhism in Southeast Asia. Chiang 
Mai: Silkworm Books.
Prasan Bunprakhong 
2509  Charuek bon phaen din 
phao lae thi than phra phuttharup 
(Inscriptions on Terracotta and 
at the Base of a Buddha Image). 
Silpakorn Journal 10(1): 81-82.  
[In Thai; 1966 CE]
2511  Kham an charuek thi than 
phra phuttharup akson lae phasa 
mon boran (Reading Inscriptions 
on the Base of Buddha Images in 
Old Mon Language and Script). 
Silpakorn Journal 11(6): 108-111.  
[In Thai; 1968 CE]
Ray, Reginald A. 
1994  Buddhist Saints in India:  
A Study in Buddhist Values & 
Orientations. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Revire, Nicolas 
2009  À propos d’une « tête » de 
khakkhara conservée au Musée 
national de Bangkok. Aséanie 24: 
111-134.
2011  Facts and Fiction: The Myth 
of Suvaṇṇabhūmi through the 
Thai and Burmese Looking Glass. 
Mahachulalongkorn Journal of Buddhist 
Studies 4: 79-114.
2012a  Compte rendu de 
Raignanphonkan wichairuangkan 
pradisathan phraphutthasasana chak 
lankathawip nai dindaen prathet thai 
samai watthanatham thawarawadi/
Research Report on: The Establishment 
of Sri Lankan Buddhism in Thailand 
during the Dvaravati Period, Bandhit 
Liuchaichan et al., Bangkok: Fine 
Arts Department of Thailand, 
2553 [2010 CE], 320 p., en thaï 
avec résumé en anglais. Aséanie  
29: 151-157.
2012b  A Comprehensive Study of 
Bhadrāsana Buddha Images from 
First-Millennium Thailand. Rian 
Thai: International Journal of Thai 
Studies 5: 91-152.
Forthcoming  Re-exploring the 
Buddhist “Foundation Deposits” 
at Chedi Chula Prathon, Nakhon 
Pathom. In Lammerts, Christian 
(ed.), Buddhist Dynamics in Pre-modern 
Southeast Asia. Singapore.
Skilling, Peter 
1991  A Buddhist Verse Inscription 
from Andhra Pradesh. Indo-Iranian 
Journal 34: 239-246.
1997  New Pāli Inscriptions from 
Southeast Asia. Journal of the Pali 
Text Society 23: 123-157.
1999  A Buddhist Inscription from 
Go Xoai, Southern Vietnam and 
Notes Towards a classification of  
Ye Dharma Inscriptions. In 
Silpakorn University (ed.), 80 pi 
sattrachan dr. prasoet na nakhon: ruam 
bot khwam wichakan dan charuek lae 
ekasan boran (80 Years: A  Collection  
of Articles  on  Epigraphy  and  Ancient  
Documents Published on  the Occasion 
of the Celebration of the 80th Birthday 
or Prof. Dr. Prasert  Na  Nagara). 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University,  
pp. 171- 187.
2002  Some Citation Inscriptions 
from South-East Asia. Journal of  
the Pali Text Society 27: 159-175.
2003-04  Traces of the Dharma: 
Preliminary Reports on Some  
Ye Dhammā and Ye Dharmā 
Inscriptions from Mainland  
South-East Asia. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 90-91: 
273-287.
2008  Buddhist Sealings and the 
Ye Dharmā stanza. In Gautam 
Sengupta & Sharmi Chakraborty 
(eds), Archaeology of Early Historic 
South Asia. New Delhi: Pragati 
Publications, pp. 503-525.
2009  Des images moulées au  
service de l’idéologie du mérite. 
In Baptiste, Pierre & Zéphir, 
Thierry (eds), Dvāravatī : aux sources 
du bouddhisme en Thaïlande. Paris: 
Réunion des Musées nationaux, 
pp. 107-113.
Swearer, Donald K.  
2004  Becoming the Buddha: The Ritual 
of Image Consecration in Thailand. 
Princeton & Oxford: Princeton 
University Press. 
Takakusu Junjirō (trans.)  
1998  A Record of the Buddhist Religion 
as Practiced in India and the Malaya 
Archipelago. New Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal. [Reprint; First 
Edition, 1896]
Uraisi Varasarin 
1995  Les inscriptions mônes 
découvertes dans le nord-est de la 
Thaïlande. In Silpakorn University 
(ed.), Premier symposium franco-thaï, 
18-24 juillet 1988. La Thaïlande des 
débuts de son histoire jusqu’au XVe siècle. 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University,  
pp. 196-211.  
Uraisi Varasarin & Anchana 
Imsombat 
1975  Une nouvelle inscription 
de la région de Lopburi. In Fine 
Arts Department (ed.), Art and 
Archaeology in Thailand, Volume II. 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department, 
pp. 70-76.
U-tain Wongsathit  
2556  Kham an lae kantit khwam 
mai charuek sao paet liam 2, 
sap champa (New Reading and 
Interpretation on the Octogonal 
Pillar no. 2 from Sap Champa). 
Electronic Paper published in 
the website of the Maha Chakri 
Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre 
on 6 February 2013. [Available 
online in Thai: http://www.
sac.or.th/main/content_detail.
php?content_id=311]
Vickery, Michael 
1998  Society, Economics, and  
Politics in Pre-Angkor Cambodia: The 
7th-8th Centuries. Tokyo: The Centre 
for East Asian Cultural Studies for 
Unesco/The Toyo Bunko.
Woodward, Hiram, Jr 
2003  The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand. From Prehistoric Times 
through the Thirteenth Century.  
Leiden-Boston: Brill.
2009  A Dvāravatī Tablet 
Reconsidered. Aséanie 23: 63-75.
Website 
The Inscriptions in Thailand 
Database Project: http://www.sac.
or.th/databases/inscriptions

--- PAGE 138 ---
273
272
Introduction
C
arved stone cakras (wheels) found at Dvāravatī sites in Thailand, 
once mounted on columns (stambha), are generally agreed to be 
dharmacakras representing the Turning of the Wheel of the Law, i.e., 
the Buddha’s First Sermon. They are considered unique to the Mon 
Dvāravatī culture since no other place or time has left a comparable 
abundance of such remains. There are, however, many cakras throughout 
the early Buddhist world. Cakrastambhas were part of a broader Indian 
tradition, so were dhvajastambhas (banner-columns) of diverse types, and 
the cakra is one of the treasures of a cakravartin. A stūpa facing panel 
from Jaggayyapeta (Zimmer 1984: pl. 37) depicting the treasures of a 
cakravartin shows both wheel- and gem-stambhas. Gupta period coins show 
kings holding a small staff crowned with a cakra, said to be a palladium 
(Gutman 1986: 282-284). The period of the sixth-ninth centuries CE, 
the age of Dvāravatī’s prominence in the Chao Phraya Delta, was a time 
of tremendous development for both religions and states, and the two 
spheres were inter-related. For these reasons, and since the remains are 
numerous, it seems there should be more to learn from them and their 
diversity of detail. This essay re-evaluates this diversity and questions its 
significance regarding a potential socio-political role. 
Clues relevant to this possible significance emerged from four 
aspects, namely:
1. The range of types of cakras and dhvajastambhas and their 
contexts.
2. Details in the Dīghanikāya (D III 59-76) regarding the Celestial 
Wheel of a cakravartin.
3. The significance of the base ornament and numbers of spokes 
on the cakras themselves, facets not yet typologically documented.
4. Rituals revealed in historical records, which might reflect cultural 
survivals of Mon Buddhism or Dvāravatī kingship practices.
Cakras and Dhvajastambhas among  
Dvāravatī’s Neighbours
A few cakras can be found among the remains of Dvāravatī’s 
predecessors and contemporaries. Most significantly, a fragment of a 
stone cakra in the Funan collection of the Museum of History, Ho Chi 
Minh City shows a striking similarity to one found at Yarang (B #38).1 
Louis Malleret (1959: pl. LXXXIVb) shows one (diameter 50 cm.) from 
Oc Eo, southern Vietnam, which has a lotus motif on its hub and three 
incised lines around the felly.2 Another fragment of a cakra exists from 
Dvāravatī Cakras: Questions of 
Their Significance
Pinna indorf
Opposite: Cakra from Nakhon 
Pathom with Sūrya and dwarves  
at the base, ca 8th century,  
diameter 72 cm. Bangkok National 
Museum, inv. no. DV 4 [Photograph 
courtesy of Paisarn Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 139 ---
Pinna indorf
275
274
Wat Phu, southern Laos,3 with eight low-relief spokes and a felly band 
of indistinct ornament. Its triangular edge motifs are similar to some 
on one from Lingarajupalem [Table 1: Andhra Pradesh] and one 
from Nakhon Si Thammarat (B #42). Vaiṣṇava cakra motifs turned up 
in what may be royal graves of Funan (Dao Lin Côn 1994: 114, fig. 7). 
Evidence of cakrastambhas also survives from Zhenla on the south bhadra 
tympanum of the Śaiva sanctuary at Hanchey [Figures 1a-b], which 
has door frame inscriptions from the reign of Bhavavarman.4 The 
low-relief shows a pair of cakrastambha flanking what was probably a 
shrine. This arrangement is also seen in the west bhadra tympanum 
of Sambor Prei Kuk N1 [Figure 2] where the dhvajastambhas were 
crowned with vidhyādharas. 
To Dvāravatī’s west, an inscription from a Pyu site mentions a 
cakra (Gutman 1976: 77) and two column capitals from Rakhine state 
(Arakan) have cakras fronted with figures of Indra (Gutman 1986: 
282-284). These examples show the regional co-existence of Buddhist 
and Brahmanical cakra symbols. Viewed from the perspective of tenth 
century CE and later texts and practices, the mix of elements is hard 
to reconcile. However, if they are viewed in terms of early “syncretic,” 
transitional practices, for example, when the Pāśupatas 
and multi-deity worship evolved, absorbing and replacing 
varied traditional practices (Maxwell 1997; Mus 2001), 
then perhaps emerging cultural powers were able to apply 
thematic elements of the different streams of influence 
to different levels of their evolving practices, e.g., at one 
level, in statecraft ritual; another, as personal model for the 
individual “king;” and yet another, as personal religion.
Dhvajastambhas in a Buddhist context in India also show 
various themes, which by example, allowed Dvāravatī’s 
elite to find equally varied expression. A third century 
inscription in Andhra Pradesh mentions a buddhunikambha, 
a column crowned with a Buddha image (Rao et al. 1998: 
176-178). Peter Harvey (1990: 81-82) explains a column 
fringed by flame represented the body of the Buddha and 
spiritual energy. A low-relief pillar from Sarnath is crowned 
with a pūrṇaghaṭa (marked by a circular lotus), a triratna, a 
cakra and an umbrella (Harvey 1990: fig. 4). Other low-
relief plaques show flaming, luminous columns of various 
forms (Rosen Stone 1994: pl. 123; Phasook 2008: 30-31, 
figs 13-15) adorned with so-called triratna symbols including 
a cakra [Figure 3]. A fifth century pillar from Sāñcī was 
crowned with an image of the Bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi. Susan 
Huntington (1985: 56-57, fig. 10.14) notes this stambha 
signals an important shift in focus from the Buddha as the 
enlightened being to the potential for all to be enlightened. 
These examples may suggest that Dvāravatī’s cakras could 
have specifically symbolised aspects of enlightenment 
attainable by many not just the notion of the preaching of 
the First Sermon. John Irwin (1990: 14) in fact argues that 
the early worship of the Buddhist wheel-pillar [Figure 4] 
is not explained by the “Turning of the Wheel of the 
Law” (i.e., the First Sermon), but by its association with 
the moment of enlightenment because it can be seen as 
parallel with the cosmic act of Viṣṇu or Indra (also know 
as Śakra or Sakka) in a creation myth, i.e., the beginning 
of a new era. There is also cause to argue that Dvāravatī’s 
so-called “Phanasbodi” Buddha images [e.g. Figure 7] 
may have been part of its dhvajastambha tradition. The fiery 
or foliated column, as a symbol of the enlightened being, has 
its parallel in the cosmic axis of the rājasūya ritual. When the 
initiate (king) raises his arms to assume the role of cosmic 
pillar, he is said to be mounted by either Indra or Mitra-
Varuna plus Sūrya (Heesterman 1957: 12-13, 102-103, 
114). This has its conceptual parallel in the Ajanta Buddha 
with the crown being held above his head (Huntington 1985: 
fig. 12.4). The “Phanasbodi” image is often associated with 
the Buddha’s ascent to the Heaven of the Thirty-three (Skt, 
Trāyastriṃśa; P., Tāvatiṃsa) to preach the dharma, which 
can be associated with the bodhisattvābhiṣeka confirming the 
Buddha as manifestation of the Universal (Huntington 
1985: 245, 247). Sarah Tiffin and Martin Stuart-Fox (2002: 
58-59) also discuss “Phanasbodi” images as signifying both 
Figure 1a: The south tympanum 
brick shrine at Hanchey (late 6th 
or mid-7th c.) bears traces of 
two cakrastambhas flanking a 
weathered form [Photograph by 
Pinna Indorf].
Figure 1b: Detail of the  
Hanchey tympanum, highlighting  
the two cakrastambhas  
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf].
Top opposite Figure 2:  
The tympanum of the west bhadra 
of Sambor Prei Kuk N1 had a  
low-relief of dhvajastambhas 
crowned by vidhyādharas flanking 
a shrine [Drawing courtesy of Keo 
Sophal, after Tranet 1997: I, 125].
Below opposite Figure 3: 
Triratna column in low-relief 
from a stūpa at Gummididurru, 
Andhra Pradesh, India, now in 
the Cincinnati Museum of Art 
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf, after 
Rosen Stone 1994: pl. 123].

--- PAGE 140 ---
Pinna indorf
277
276
Bodhisattva-hood and the descent from Trāyastriṃśa.5 They 
suggest cakras functioned, as did Aśokan pillars, as “signposts” 
of power, and they also draw parallels with the abhiṣeka rituals 
of kingship. The “Phanasbodi” images mounted in the column 
capital of a cakrastambha as proposed by Robert Brown (1996: 
fig. 4) or on the front of a pillar, like the triratna motif of Andhra 
Pradesh (Rosen Stone 1994: fig. 123), would have the same dual 
significance [Figure 3]. This duality would be appropriate 
if Dvāravatī had dual models of kingship as Dhida Saraya 
(1999: 200-203) argues. Such duality would have echoed the 
Pyu practice, which seems to have merged Bodhisattva and 
kingship ideals (Gutman 1996: 166-167; Tiffin & Stuart-Fox 
2002: 64). It would increase the need and, when combined with 
other motifs such as the base detail and number of spokes, also 
the potential for nuanced significance of the cakra as a symbol. 
The Cakra of a Buddhist Cakravartin
The story told in the Dīghanikāya (D III 59-76) is of a cakravartin 
who, on advice that the luster of his “Celestial Wheel” was 
fading, stepped down from his throne, handing it over to his 
son. Once his son was on the throne, the Celestial Wheel 
disappeared and the father told his son that this was normal, 
and the son’s own Celestial Wheel would appear only when the time 
was right, when he had ruled wisely. And so it did. He claimed it and 
followed it throughout his kingdom. From this story, several significant 
details emerge:
• The Celestial Wheel, as cakkaratana (“Wheel Treasure,” in Pāli), 
is unique to each king. A son cannot inherit his father’s wheel.
• The Celestial Wheel only appears some time after the king 
ascends the throne, after he rules wisely, not when he ascends 
the throne.
• When the wheel does appear, it appears in a monastic context 
where the king is present and the king, thus a new cakravartin, 
then performs an abhiṣeka ceremony for the wheel. The abhiṣeka 
of a stūpa is shown in a column capital at Kaṇherī (Dehejia 
1972: 184, pl. 77), confirming that the ceremony was performed 
for significant monuments in India [Figure 5].
The implications of this are clear. Each cakkaratana represents 
only one king, related to his wise kingship. This need for uniqueness 
is also true in the case of the more ancient traditions of leadership 
incorporating spirit of ancestor and place practices as explained by Paul 
Mus (2001: 74-80). In those ancient traditions, specifically in the context 
of India and Southeast Asia, each spirit or ancestor stone (located at the 
centre of the domain) represented a unique spiritual intermediary for 
a community. In the transition to kingship based on Indian traditions, 
the cakra as a unique palladium, could be mapped over the notion of 
the old intermediary of earlier practices, the ancestral spirit stones. The 
importance of dwarves on Dvāravatī monument bases seems to hint 
of those earlier place spirit practices.6 Could the two large stones with 
quincunx arrangements of auspicious motifs, from Dvāravatī sites, one in 
the Phra Pathom Chedi National Museum in Nakhon 
Pathom [Figure 6] and another in the Bangkok 
National Museum, be such transitional ancestor 
stones? Were they replaced with cakras having specific 
references to aspects of Buddhist virtues and wisdom 
set up at a sacred place, a royal monastery? A ritual 
abhiṣeka would not necessarily have been connected 
to the coronation.7 First the king had to establish his 
sacred place or demonstrate his meritorious deeds, also 
giving him time to get his cakra ready for an abhiṣeka 
ceremony. If Brahmanical or Buddhist neighbours 
were using the common, shared symbolic vocabulary 
in royal ritual, Dvāravatī’s cakras must be made specific 
supraregionally.
Symbolic Significance of the Base Element 
and Number of Spokes
Phasook Indrawooth (2008: 34) has specifically proposed that 
Dvāravatī cakras were meant to convey that Dvāravatī “kings” were 
cakravartins through the Dharma (dharmavijaya). This notion can be 
taken a step further with the ideals of a proposed dual kingship model, 
Bodhisattva as cakravartin (Dhida 1999; Tiffin & Stuart-Fox 2002: 
64). The model of the Bodhisattva would emphasise the practice 
of Dharma, but does not stop there; it is the practice of Dharma as 
leading toward enlightenment and to the ability to help others also 
attain enlightenment. Earlier studies have shown, for example, that 
some (Phasook 2008: 30-33) or all (Indorf & Reddy 2007 and 2009) 
Buddhist cakras of Dvāravatī address specific aspects of enlightenment 
as represented by their inscriptions and ornament (see also Revire, 
this volume). The symbolism was shown to be varied, rich and nuanced, 
but the main aspects can be summarised briefly as follows. 
Sūrya on the cakras [Table 1: MKV], as mentioned above, may 
allude to the bodhisattvābhiṣeka or the Buddha as the Supernal Sun,8 the 
Great Awakening and the nascent notion of Vairocana.9 The Gaja-
Lakṣmī [Table 1: MKII.B] or “abhiṣeka of Śrī” motif, usually taken 
simply as a symbol of prosperity, when in a symmetrical composition, 
can refer to enlightenment. In the Viṣṇupurāṇa (XII) Mahālakṣmī is 
said by Indra (Śakra) to be “great knowledge, mystic knowledge, and 
spiritual knowledge which confers eternal liberation” (Boner 1990: 74). 
The Brahmanical Gaja-Lakṣmī motif, according to Albert Grünwedel 
(1974: 39-40), was taken into Buddhism in full iconographical 
form. Another deity, shown emerging from a lotus pericarp (B #35) 
[Table 1: MKII.A], could be the Earth Goddess bearing witness to 
the Buddha’s great virtue at his enlightenment. Finally, the Kala 
face [Table 1: KIII], also known as Kīrtimukha, is associated 
with cycles of Time and saṃsāra (Wheel of Life), which is also 
expressed in the Chain of Causation in the Buddhist teachings. 
It could be expressed in the twelve or twenty-four spokes found 
on the Kala face cakras. That is, the twelve-factor formulation 
of the Chain of Causation (e.g., S II 21) as it first moves forward 
in saṃsāra and then in reverse order as the elements are destroyed 
Figure 4: A low-relief panel on 
the railing around the bodhi-tree 
at Bodhgayā, India, showing a 
cakrastambha in a caityagṛha 
flanked by two dhvajastambhas 
and two devotees paying their 
personal respects [Photograph by 
Pinna Indorf].
Figure 5: Column capital at 
Kaṇherī, India, which shows the 
abhiṣeka of a stūpa [Drawing by 
Pinna Indorf, after Dehejia 1972: 
184, pl. 77].
Figure 6: Stone (68 x 79 cm.) 
carved with an elephant and 
auspicious motifs, now in the Phra 
Pathom Chedi National Museum, 
Nakhon Pathom, inv. no. 32/2530 
[Photograph courtesy of G. Swati 
Reddy].

--- PAGE 141 ---
Pinna indorf
279
278
Table 1 (Continued)
Dvāravatī Period Cakras of Thailand (see Table 2-A for information on additional examples)
Type Definition
Typical Base and Felly detail
Type F = Funan
Base 1B, 1C or 2A + Felly group 6
Plain felly (group 6) and spokes, 
with:
FI: Base of plain felly raised  
(base 1B)
FII: Base has figural motif (2A) just 
overlapping felly or also spokes
FI.A: Cakra, ø 20 cm., from Yarang  
(B #38), which has a raised rectangle 
at the felly base (1C) with  
a plain prism and sphere below 
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf, after 
Phasook 2008: 174, bottom]
FII.C: Cakra with low-relief spokes, 
which seems to have a raised arm at 
the base (2A) thus making its base 
similar to the Rakhine cakras. Its find-
site is not known [Drawing by Pinna 
Indorf, after Dhanit 1990: 13]
FIII: Plain felly continues 
uninterrupted at base (1B)  
with plain tenon below
FIII.A: Cakra from Sing Buri (B #39), 
with cut spokes, which could have 
had a thicken felly (base 1B or 1C?), 
or perhaps a small base element, as in 
the Andhra Pradesh cakra, but appears 
similar to the one shown at right 
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf,  
after Gosling 2004: 58]
FIII.B: Cakra from Nakhon Pathom  
(B #40), with plain felly,  
low-relief spokes and a base type 1B 
with a tenon below  
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf,  
after Dhanit 1990: 12]
Type K = Khmer
Base 1B, 1C, 2A or 2B + felly group 1
Felly with lozenge and floral motif 
(group 1), having the following  
base treatments:
KI: Felly continues uninterrupted at 
the base (1B) 
KI.C: Cakra at  
Khao Khlang Nai,  
Si Thep with base 1B  
[Photograph by Pinna Indorf]
KI.C: Detail of the felly pattern 
(group 1) of the cakra at  
Khao Khlang Nai, Si Thep shown to 
the left [Photograph by Pinna Indorf] 
Table 1: Cakra Types, Determined by Base Element and Felly Patterns
Regional precedents
Type Definition
Typical Base and Felly detail
Andhra Pradesh Cakra
Plain felly and cut spokes, felly 
edged with sculpted motifs.  
Plain stele form base element
Lingarajupalem, ca 4th century, edged with triangles and a form identified  
as a triratna. The base is supported with a stele form overlapping the felly
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf, after ASI 1960: pl. LVII.C]
Funan Cakras 
Plain or relatively plain felly 
and cut spokes. No examples 
of base treatment have so far 
been found
Oc Eo, Mekong Delta, Vietnam,  
6th century [Drawing by Pinna Indorf, 
after Malleret 1959: 401,  
pl. LXXXIVb no. 129]
Mekong Delta,  
Vietnam History Museum,  
Ho Chi Minh City, ca 6th century (?) 
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf]
Rakhine Cakra
Plain felly and low-relief spokes.
Figural element at base 
extends up in front of cakra
Capital of Rakhine Indrakila, 6th century 
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf, after Gutman 1986: pl. 2a]
Note: Felly group numbers and cakra numbers follow Brown (1996): e.g. B #21 = Brown’s cakra #21

--- PAGE 142 ---
Pinna indorf
281
280
Table 1 (Continued)
Dvāravatī Period Cakras of Thailand (see Table 2-A for information on additional examples)
Type Definition
Typical Base and Felly detail
Type M = Mon
Base 1A, 1B or 3A + felly group 
2, 4, or 5
Felly with bead bands and floral 
motifs with spirals (group 2) in 
reflected or cyclical symmetry,  
or translated leaves or spirals 
(group 4), or plain bands edged 
by beads on one or both sides 
(group 5)
MI: Felly group 2 or 5. Base 
of felly is often missing, thus 
unknown; when present, it shows  
a continuous felly band, some with 
a lotus below (1A, 1B)
MI.E: Detail of cakra from  
Ban Nong Chik, Khao Yoi dist., 
Phetchaburi prov., in the  
Bangkok National Museum.  
The felly pattern (group 5) continues 
uninterrupted at the base (1B) 
[Photograph by Pinna Indorf]
MI.A2: Fragment of felly (group 5)  
from Chai Nat in which the plain 
band had been inscribed [Drawing by 
Pinna Indorf, after Bauer 1991: pl. 2]
MI.F: Felly ornament has floral motif 
incorporating spiral (group 2),  
turning outward in reflected symmetry, 
on a cakra fragment (B #19)  
at Wat Borommathat, Chaiya  
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf,  
after Brown 1996: drawing 8b]
MI.J: Cakra (B #23) in the Bangkok 
National Museum, with continuous 
felly band (group 2) and  
(on one side only) a single row of lotus 
petals below (base 1A)  
[Photograph by Pinna Indorf]
MI.J: Detail of the felly (group 2) of 
cakra shown to the left with a floral 
motif incorporating spirals in cyclical 
symmetry. Note the hub band with  
radial curled tip leaves, a motif 
element used in at least two cakra fellies 
[Photograph by Pinna Indorf]
Table 1 (Continued)
Dvāravatī Period Cakras of Thailand (see Table 2-A for information on additional examples)
Type Definition
Typical Base and Felly detail
KII: Base has non-figural male 
energy symbol (2A), floral column 
or triangulated, foliated flame
KII.B: Triangulated flame column (2A) 
at the base of a cakra (B #5) from 
Nakhon Pathom, in the Bangkok 
National Museum  
[Photograph by Pinna Indorf]
KII.B: Felly detail of the cakra  
shown to the left, showing  
a clear lozenge and  
floral motif (group 1)  
[Photograph by Pinna Indorf]
KIII: Base has figural male energy 
symbol (2B), a Kala face
KIII.B: Detail of a Kala face base (2B) 
on a cakra, now in Guimet Museum, 
Paris (B #10) 
[Photograph by Nicolas Revire]
KIII.B: Felly detail (group 1)  
of cakra shown to the left now in  
Guimet Museum, Paris  
[Photograph by Nicolas Revire]
KIV: Base of felly is thickened (1C) 
and carved with low-relief motif
KIV.C: Base (1C)  
detail of a cakra from  
Nakhon Pathom (B #14)
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf, 
after Phasook 2008: 144, bottom]
KIV.C: Felly detail on the same cakra 
as base shown to the left. Showing 
lozenge and floral motif (group 1) in 
which spirals in reflected symmetry are 
dominant [Drawing by Pinna Indorf, 
after Phasook 2008: 144, top left]

--- PAGE 143 ---
Pinna indorf
283
282
Table 1 (Continued)
Dvāravatī Period Cakras of Thailand (see Table 2-A for information on additional examples)
Type Definition
Typical Base and Felly detail
Type MK =  
Mon-Khmer
The base and felly 
elements of types K,  
and M are mixed in this 
type. The base generally 
has a lotus motif below 
the felly
MKI: Felly with  
lozenge and floral motif 
(group 1) continuous 
felly band, as in KI,  
but with a lotus below 
(base 1A) as in some M
MKII: Felly with 
lozenge and floral motif 
(group 1) or plain bands 
(group 5), female figure 
as base (3B). In MII, 
the group 5 felly is used 
with non-figural female 
element, but not a 
figural element.  
A figural base element is 
used in KIII cakras
MKI.B: Large cakra (B #15) in the  
Bangkok National Museum from Nakhon 
Pathom, with detail of felly pattern (group 1) 
of lozenge and floral motif (right) in which 
spiral leaves are dominant at the expense of the 
lozenge [Photographs by Pinna Indorf]
MKI.B: Detail of large cakra  
shown at left with double lotus  
base and continuous felly (base 1A)  
[Photograph by Pinna Indorf]
MKII.A: Cakra from Kamphaeng Saen,  
Nakhon Pathom (B #35) with plain bands on 
felly (group 5) and a female figure base (3B)  
[Photograph by G. Swati Reddy]
MKII.A: Detail of  
base figure (3B) on cakra  
shown at the left  
[Photograph by G. Swati Reddy]
MKII.B: The Gaja-Lakṣmī cakra 
(B #16) in the Phra Pathom Chedi National 
Museum, Nakhon Pathom  
[Photograph by Nicolas Revire]
MKII.B: Details of cakra to  
the left: upper – felly pattern (group 1); 
lower – Gaja-Lakṣmī base motif (3B)
[Photographs by Nicolas Revire]
Table 1 (Continued)
Dvāravatī Period Cakras of Thailand (see Table 2-A for information on additional examples)
Type Definition
Typical Base and Felly detail
MII: Felly group 2, 4 or 5.  
Base with a floral stele form (3A)
MII.H: Cakra (B #31) in the  
Phra Pathom Chedi National 
Museum, with floral stele base (3A)
(Photograph by G. Swati Reddy)
MII.A2: Cakra from Nakhon Pathom (B #21)  
in the Phra Pathom Chedi National Museum, with floral stele base (3A)  
and a felly motif (group 2) with extended spirals in cyclical symmetry  
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf, after Brown 1996: fig. 21a, drawing 23]
MII.E: Cakra (B #34) from  
Nakhon Pathom with plain felly band 
(group 5) and a lotus petal fan as a 
base stele (3A) [Drawing by Pinna 
Indorf, after Dhanit 1990: 17]
MII.G: Translated curl-tipped leaf 
motif between bead bands (group 4)  
on cakra fragment (B #32) from 
Nakhon Pathom [Drawing by Pinna 
Indorf, after Phasook 2008: 142]
MII.H: Cakra (B #31) with translated 
straight-tipped leaf band felly  
(group 4) and articulated floral stele 
base (3A) [Drawing by Pinna Indorf, 
after Phasook 2008: fig. 18]
MII.B: Cakra (B #20) with an 
articulated floral stele base (3A)  
and felly band motif (group 2) with 
spirals in cyclical symmetry  
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf,  
after Brown 1996: 154, fig. 20]

--- PAGE 144 ---
Pinna indorf
285
284
by enlightenment. In addition, Heinrich Zimmer (1984: 315) notes 
that the Kala face is also known as “Vanaspati” in Indian tradition and 
“Banaspati” in Javanese lore (T., “Phanasbodi”), and it was originally 
equated with the devouring aspect of Agni. The Kala face cakra 
[Table 1: KIII] can thus be seen as the devouring of defilements, 
which brings about enlightenment. It is a different expression, but could 
embody similar significance as the Dvāravatī Buddha images with 
“Phanasbodi” [Figure 7] or Sūrya as mount.
A number of cakras have carved foliage motifs within a more or 
less triangular form or rounded stele form overlapping the felly. The 
triangular forms are detailed as central tapered columns or triangles 
edged with foliated motifs. They are thematically similar to flaming 
columns in Andhra Pradesh, which represent the Buddha or the Triple 
Gem at Amarāvatī (ca 300 CE) and Nāgārjunakoṇḍā.10 This suggests 
that the tapered column or triangular form with apex upward, which 
in the śilpaśastras is a male symbol (Boner 1990: 170), represents an 
enlightened male being (arhat, Bodhisattva or Buddha). The rounded 
stele could be a form of śrī (or śakti) symbol representing Lakṣmī or the 
Earth Goddess (Gutman 1978). Similar symbols can be seen on Gupta 
coins (Gutman 1978: fig. 1.8) and on śakti ritual plaques (Sarma 1994: 
92, pl. 120A). The Pāli Canon also gives additional basis for considering 
these motifs as related to enlightenment. In the Dīghanikāya (D III 64), 
the “Wheel Treasure” is presented as lighting up the front of the palace 
hall.11 This splendor may be represented simply by floral motifs or 
flame-like foliage motifs. Thus the śrī symbol, as base stele of a wheel, 
may represent the illuminating aspects of enlightenment. 
The number of spokes further particularises references to 
enlightenment or its enablement, modes of attaining enlightenment 
[Table 2-B]. To find this significance, the numbers must sometimes 
be broken into components, e.g., five times four. Some numbers have 
several possible interpretations which may be clearer if all the cakra’s 
details are considered carefully together. All, however, can be related 
directly to some mode, aspect, means or process of enlightenment. 
These numbers doubled or tripled (a formula known as “Three 
Knowledges”12) to represent a process and/or increased by one for the 
final, enlightened state, are as follows: 
• Eight for the Eightfold Path (S V 358).
• Being endowed with “Ten Powers” and “Four Confidences” 
(thus fourteen qualities), the Buddha turns the “Divine Wheel” 
or brahmacakka (S II 23-24).
• The Chain of Causation doctrine, can be represented by several 
different numbers, depending on the text source and the basis 
of the causal chain. The most common, twelve-factors related 
to khandhas,13 is in Ud 1-3, S II 21, 23-24 and Vin IV 1-2 and is 
linked to saṃsāra (Vism 207, 666). It was also expressed in the 
ye dhammā verse which is very prevalent in inscriptions (Revire, 
this volume).14 
• Purified modes of experience provide: seven factors of 
enlightenment (S V 85-109), nine “gradual abiding,” or nine 
facets of wisdom (A IV 269-270), all leading to enlightenment. 
As a process they result in fourteen, eighteen, twenty-one or 
twenty-seven and/or add one.
Table 1 (Continued)
Dvāravatī Period Cakras of Thailand (see Table 2-A for information on additional examples)
Type Definition
Typical Base and Felly detail
MKIII: Felly with 
lozenge and floral motif 
(group 1), used in type 
K. Base has stele form 
with floral motif (3A), 
as used in MII
MKIV: Translated 
spiral motifs (group 3), 
or leaves (group 4) on 
felly as in MII, although 
the leaves appear here 
to be in radial order. 
Base motif is a flame 
column (2A), as in KII, 
a narrow attenuated or 
triangulated floral motif
MKV: Felly ornament 
incorporates a motif 
with spirals (group 2) 
as in M, in reflected 
symmetry or alternating 
as in a vine motif  
(group 3). Base has a 
figure of Sūrya, a male 
figural element (2B) as 
in KIII
MKIII.A: Details of a cakra (B #18)  
from Dong Si Mahosot, Prachin Buri, felly above 
(group 1) and floral stele (base 3A) below.  
Similar floral elements were found at  
Chedi Chula Prathon, Nakhon Pathom,  
dated ca 7th century (Dupont 1959:  
nos. 226, 233, 235) [Drawing by Pinna Indorf, 
after Phasook 2008: 165] 
MKIV.A: Detail of a cakra from  
Nakhon Pathom (B #30) with a felly 
band of translated curled-tip leaves 
(group 4) and a floral flame at the base 
above an amalaka [Drawing by Pinna 
Indorf, after Phasook 2008: fig. 19]  
MKIV.B: Cakra base fragment (B #25) 
with a triangulated flame stele  
(base 2A) and translated (?) spirals  
on the felly (group 3?) [Drawing by 
Pinna Indorf, after Brown 1996: fig. 25] 
MKV.B: Cakra (B #22) from Nakhon Pathom 
with Sūrya and dwarves at the base (2B)  
and felly motif (group 2) with spirals in  
reflected symmetry, turning inward  
[Photograph by Pinna Indorf; Drawing  
by Pinna Indorf, after Brown 1996: drawing 13]
MKV.C: Cakra base (2B) fragment from 
Nakhon Pathom, with winged deity 
[Drawing by Pinna Indorf,
 after Dhanit 1990: 24]
MKV.D: Cakra (B #24) in the  
Phra Pathom Chedi National Museum 
with Sūrya base (2B) and spirals  
on the felly (group 3)  
[Photograph by G. Swati Reddy]
Figure 7: An image of the Buddha 
mounted on a “monster” (known as 
“Phanasbodi”) with two flanking 
figures now in the Bangkok National 
Museum, inv. no. 270/2511 
[Photograph by Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 145 ---
Pinna indorf
287
286
• Application of “Five Powers”15 in several modes: twenty-five as 
applied to five khandhas, thirty-five as applied to seven factors 
of enlightenment,16 and twenty related to four aspects of 
enlightenment or the “Four Noble Truths.”
• The moment of enlightenment as the four-fold maggasacca 
(“Path-Truth”) of the sixteen-fold “Noble Truths” (Vism 809, 
811) is expressed through an inscription on Brown’s cakra #5 
[Table 1: KII.B] and thus probably also in sixteen spokes. 
But it could be marks of the birth of a Bodhisattva (D II 8-13).
And this does not exhaust the numbers with significance in Buddhist 
teachings, which means that cakras would have been able to express 
particular aspects of enlightenment to serve as royal ritual implements. 
With this variety in the significance, not only could cakras have 
represented particular kings, common themes expressed in a similar 
way on several wheels could indicate lineage branches, while the felly 
ornament represented wider ancestral lines. A “gigantic golden wheel” 
is said in the Traiphum written by Lithai (or Lüthai) of Sukhothai 
(r. ca 1346/47-1368/74), to accompany a cakravartin on his cosmic 
journey (Gosling 1991: 63, 69) as is also recorded in the Dīghanikāya 
(D III 59, 64), i.e., it served as a palladium, personally associated with 
the king (D III 69). Sinhalese kings used the Buddha’s Tooth Relic as 
a palladium and Sukhothai kings used a Buddha image. An Indrakila, 
also said to be a vajra (i.e., Indra’s thunderbolt or stake), represents the 
unshakeable nature of the enlightened mind full of dharma, as well as 
the cosmic axis (Harvey 1990: 95; A I 124). One was also erected in one 
of Lithai royal monasteries (Gosling 1996: 135).17 A cakra on a column, 
in miniature, served the Gupta kings and was depicted on their coins 
(Gutman 1986: 282-284).18 The royal palladium tradition is also seen 
as early as the end of the fourth century CE in the royal liṅga (Śiva 
Bhadreśvara) of My-son, central Vietnam, and in later royal liṅgas of 
the Khmers (Cœdès 1972: 64, 89), and perhaps also in one established 
by a certain Harṣavarman at U Thong in the seventh century (Higham 
2002: 26). The Khmer kings of ninth century Angkor seem to have used 
the liṅga as a kind of personal palladium (Cœdès 1968: 30, 101, 103, 
112, 119; Kulke 1986: 14; Wolters 1979: 441), but in 921 CE, for the 
first time, it was ascribed a wider significance and became a symbol of 
universal monarchy (Cœdès 1972: 98-99). Perhaps there was a similar 
personal palladium in Dvāravatī tradition. Nuanced, particularised 
references to enlightenment on cakras could thus have defined the 
individual king’s wisdom and virtue for the spiritual well-being of his 
kingship and the security and prosperity of the kingdom. 
Contexts for Rituals 
Little has been written about the possible rituals associated with the 
cakras. Karel van Kooij (1995: 33-35) has pointed out that low-reliefs of 
India show two types of Buddhist ritual. One type is the public festival 
(manas) held to honour relics, consecrate monuments and for certain 
periodic ceremonies. The other is the individual homage paid to sacred 
objects. Considering the cakras depicted and found in Buddhist India, 
cakras played both roles:
1. Cakras represent the Buddha or the Dharma and are thus objects 
of personal respect. In the monastic complex, they stand alone 
like the columns at Sarnath and Sāñcī, perhaps surrounded by 
a railing or are housed in caityagṛhas as shown on the Bodhgayā 
railing [Figure 4]. Given this prominence, they were also the 
object of festive ritual (manas) as shown in Andhra Pradesh stūpa 
drum slabs (Rosen Stone 1994: pls 36, 72). 
2. Framing an important structure or monument in pairs as seen 
in the dome plaque from Site 3, Nāgārjunakoṇḍā (Rosen Stone 
1994: pl. 148), they take a secondary position in the hierarchy of 
the complex and may have been object of individual homage, but 
perhaps were less likely to be the focus of a major public festival. 
The cakrastambhas shown on the tympanum at Hanchey 
[Figures 1a-b] and dhvajastambhas at Sambor Prei Kuk N1 [Figure 2] 
indicate that the Zhenla culture used the stambhas in the second mode. 
Unfortunately the placement of Dvāravatī cakras in their original site 
context is unclear. However, they seem generally associated with stūpa 
sites. Many cakras were deposited over the years at Phra Pathom Chedi, 
Nakhon Pathom, which had been renovated in the Ayutthaya and 
Rattanakosin periods (FAD 2548: 24). In contrast, three cakras from 
U Thong were found at three different stūpa sites (Phasook 2008: 
154-156). A large cakra (diameter 1.80 or 2.0 m.) found at U Taphao, 
Chai Nat province, was supported on an inscribed octagonal column, 
mounted on a large circular brick base (diameter 7 m.) (Phasook 2008: 
110, 162-163). It is not entirely clear how it related to other structures, 
but the base shows its significance. So far, there is no indication in 
Dvāravatī remains that the cakras were secondary elements enhancing 
the chedis.19 It thus seems likely they were independent, significant 
structures in the religious complex. Perhaps, as with the Indrakila of the 
Mango Grove Monastery of Sukhothai (Gosling 1996: pl. 4.76), they 
were clustered, side by side with other elements of the monastery, but 
not subsumed into the composition of the major monument.
Historic accounts of rituals in seventeenth century Myanmar 
(Aung-Thwin 1983: 66-69) and in fourteenth century Sukhothai (Gosling 
1983: 302-306) may contain cultural survivals providing some insight 
into elements of earlier royal rituals. While Myanmar’s later cultures 
are thought to have had Mon Buddhist influences, Sukhothai is thought 
to have had Mon-Khmer, Khmer and perhaps “Burmese” influences 
(Gosling 1983: 5, 16, 112-114; 1996: 135). Betty Gosling (1983: 263) 
also compared these rituals of Sukhothai to the later rituals of Luang 
Prabang, which involved four monasteries at the four directions. Such 
comparisons are more relevant in terms of understanding the regional 
reliance on adaptations of Indian models in general than the particulars 
of a given precedence and can only help frame hypotheses. Even though 
there may not have been direct Mon influence, Sukhothai rulers were no 
doubt familiar with the ritual traditions of the region and would conduct 
their own using similar strategies and elements as they saw fit. Michael 
Aung-Thwin (1983: 66-69) describes the investiture ceremonies of kings 
in seventeenth century Myanmar as found in inscriptions and the Great 
Chronicle (Mahāvaṃsa). During the ceremony, the king sat on a throne 
made of wood from a bodhi-tree, which was decorated with lotuses and 
flanked by Brahmā and Indra (Sakka). These details seem to be a direct

--- PAGE 146 ---
Pinna indorf
289
288
reference to the bodhisattvābhiṣeka tradition. After these rites in the palace, 
there was a grand procession by the king and his entire court and army. 
They first visited the king’s “royal good deed” where the ceremony for 
installing the spire was conducted. The entourage then circled the city 
on royal barges before entering and taking possession of the city. In the 
thirteenth-fourteenth centuries, Sukhothai rituals to periodically renew 
the spiritual validity and energy of kingship included festive processions. 
Ramkhamhaeng’s route for a biweekly ritual connected his throne in 
the Sugar Palm Grove at the centre of the city next to his palace to a 
sacred hill (now Wat Saphan Hin). Lithai’s processional route to and 
from that hill also took him by his newly constructed Mango Grove 
Monastery, in which he had erected the Indrakila (Gosling 1983: 
302-306; 1996: 135). Lithai’s Indrakila, like the Rakhine state (Arakan) 
stambha [Table 1], may have included a cakra. 
Although different in their details, the Sukhothai and “Burmese” 
processions linked together one or more sources of spiritual energy at 
sacred sites outside the city with the palace inside the city. Such rituals 
align the hierarchy of temporal powers with a religious or spiritual 
hierarchy and with the physical domain (Wolters 1979: 432). In 
Myanmar, the sacred site was the new “good deed” of the king, and in 
Sukhothai, both Ramkhamhaeng and Lithai had gone to a sacred hill 
before returning in a festive procession to the palace near the centre 
of the city. In the case of Myanmar, the procession involved a route 
encircling the city before returning to the palace. This, in fact, echoes 
the Dīghanikāya in that the wheel of the cakravartin rolls to the four 
directions covering the entire domain of the new king. The Sukhothai 
inscriptions do not seem to say the route encircled the city, however, it 
may have as other sites, like “the acan statue” (Wat Si Chum) and the 
prāsāda (Phra Pai Luang) to the north are mentioned. 
Whether or not the route circled the city does not, however, change 
the implications for Dvāravatī cakras, and indeed for the locations of 
some Dvāravatī sacred sites. Some of the many Dvāravatī cakras at Phra 
Pathom Chedi may have originated there. The site is located outside 
the old walled city of Nakhon Pathom to the west, more or less on 
an extension of its east-west axis. Southeast of Phra Pathom Chedi is 
another significant monument, Wat Phra Men (Meru), more or less 
aligned with the southwest corner of the old city (Revire 2010: fig. 1). 
Noen Phra, a few kilometres outside the city, south of the centre, had 
a column, presumably of a cakra, still standing in the early twentieth 
century (Dupont 2006: pl. 316, map 3). This site and the Noen Hin 
site near the city centre seem to define the north-south axis of the city. 
The city plan seems to be a slightly bent rectangle. The eastern part 
is aligned with an axis from the northwest (around Wat Phra Ngam, 
outside the old city) to the southeast (around Wat Thammasala) passing 
through the centre around Noen Hin. The Phra Pathom Chedi and the 
centre of the city seem to be on an east-west axis perpendicular to a 
portion of the west wall. The presence of these sites on slightly shifted 
axes may signal phases in the city’s development and corresponding 
ritual contexts. If such religious sites were the actual find sites of cakras, 
it could suggest these sites were royal monasteries, either “good deeds” 
or “sacred hills” connected with the ritual renewal of the spiritual 
power of kingship.
The location of such major sites, e.g., the footprints on four hills 
around Sukhothai (Gosling 1991: 65-66) or Phra Pathom Chedi and 
Wat Phra Men at Dvāravatī’s principal city, has puzzled some scholars, 
even Gosling. However, seen in this ritual context, which spans centuries 
and several kingdoms, locations of important religious sites would 
appear to reflect a ritual strategy. Through processions to and from 
such sites, encompassing specific sacred elements, a sacred domain with 
specific qualities could be defined. The procession revealed these to the 
population, which in joining the procession, was thereby also bonded 
with the sacred domain, kingdom and king. The Dvāravatī sites, are in 
some measure similar to the sacred sites of Sukhothai, including their 
distribution in the landscape. It seems likely that Nakhon Pathom, with 
sacred sites aligned with cardinal axes, may have had such a public 
festival tradition, including processions linking these sites. An Old Mon 
inscription of the sixth-seventh century at Saraburi clearly refers to a 
festive procession, which included the “ruler” and went to a sacred cave 
(Nai Pan Hla 1991: 16; Bauer 1991: 35, 38), confirming at least one 
Mon royal ritual procession to a sacred hill site. 
Dvāravatī cakras, perhaps representing the “king,” were outside the 
city at least at one other Dvāravatī city. U Thong’s sites 1, 2, and 11 
with cakras near to stūpas are outside the city. It can be noted also that, at 
U Thong, sites 1 and 10 seem to form a cross axis to the central north-
south axis20 marked by site 2 at the north end (Piriya 1975: map 5; FAD 
2545: 31). Site 10 is aligned with sites 9 and 11 and a prominent spur on 
the hill west of the city and may align with the crest of the range. It is 
not possible from published data to know if other sites fit this model,21 
but it does seem that two other oblong cities, Si Thep and Khu Bua had 
sacred sites outside the city and large hills relatively nearby to the west.22 
At Si Thep there are two sacred hill sites. One to the northwest, Khao 
Thamorat, is well known for its cave with low-reliefs of Buddhist figures, 
including a triad comprised of the Buddha flanked by a cakrastambha 
and a stūpa (FAD 2550: 54, 127). The other, known as Khao Khlang 
Nok, just outside the city to the north has remains of a stūpa, which is 
alleged as the find site of a large cakra.23 At U Thong, Nakhon Pathom 
and Khao Khlang Nok, Si Thep, the hills are quite near. If this ritual 
context is correct, as both the Dīghanikāya (D III 62-63) and the Sukhothai 
inscription show, each king may have ensured his own spiritual power 
source with periodic ritual processions, which inscribed that heritage onto 
the landscape including a sacred hill or monument outside and a sacred 
centre inside the city (Gallon, this volume). The Dvāravatī “king” quite 
likely had a palladium as the practice dates to the Gupta period (Gutman 
1986: 282-284) and parallels the practices of the royal liṅga followed by 
the Khmers (Cœdès 1972; Higham 2002). The “Dvāravatī palladium” 
just might have been a cakra, a large copy of which, like Lithai’s Indrakila, 
was established in a royal monastery.
Typology
The following typology shows Dvāravatī cakras carry themes, which 
could represent several royal lineages concentrated in the central Delta 
regions of Thailand. Brown (1996) classified the felly ornament on 
about forty cakras and determined only six categories. That number is 
obviously too small to represent Dvāravatī’s individual “kings,” but could

--- PAGE 147 ---
Pinna indorf
291
290
represent lineage groups and branches. Just as Gosling (1996) found, in 
classifying Sukhothai halls (T., wihan), a necessity to use more than one 
element in the classification of architectural types, perhaps so too with 
these cakras. Therefore, base elements and felly patterns were compared. 
This resulted in the identification of four general types giving priority to 
base element motifs and their use with a felly pattern. No two are exactly 
alike, but they can be grouped by themes. All the types had two or more 
variations with others expressed in hub detail. Base and felly seem much 
more prominent and are thus analysed in this essay. Shoji Ito made a 
preliminary study of hub elements and bases, but failed to classify some 
themes such as the floral stele (1977: 1231, nos. 15, 25). On further study, 
the themes of the base elements fall into three groups [Tables 1, 2-A]: 
1) Neutral bases, those in which the felly continues around the 
whole perimeter: 1A, with, or 1B, without a lotus below the 
felly, or 1C, those with only a raised rectangle on the felly, i.e., 
a thickening of the felly. 
2) Male base elements, either: 2A, a tapered or triangulated flame 
column, or 2B, a figure, Sūrya or a Kala face. 
3) Base elements which reflects a female energy, either: 3A, 
non-figural, floral śrī stele, or 3B, figural, e.g., Lakṣmī. 
The lozenge and floral motif, Brown’s (1996) group 1 felly pattern, 
was identified by him as influenced by Khmer culture. The presence of 
a “Khmer style” felly motif suggests the others could perhaps also have 
“cultural themes.”24 A small cakra fragment in the Museum of History 
in Ho Chi Minh City compared to a cakra from Yarang [Table 1: F1.A] 
suggested that some cakras found in Thailand with very plain fellies may 
have resulted from direct Funanese cultural or aesthetic influence. For 
those not plain or “Khmer,” a cultural style is not entirely clear, but in 
the context of Dvāravatī, with its Mon inscriptions, there could also be a 
“Mon” influence. Given the importance of the female ancestor spirits in 
Mon culture (Guillon 1991: 26-28), the female elements and associated 
spirals have been tentatively identified as “Mon.” When a fragment 
lacks either the base or the felly, its type was designated based on closest 
similarity of the remaining part to others. About two-thirds of the cakras 
published retained their base elements. Four general themes emerged 
[Tables 1, 2-A], viz.:
F “Funan style”: relatively plain (Brown’s group 6), sometimes 
with beads or a thickened felly base and perhaps a figure below 
(base types 1B, 1C or 2B).
K “Khmer style”: felly band ornament with lozenge and floral 
motif linked by a central line parallel to the band edges (Brown’s 
group 1); if base elements are present, they are male symbols of 
energy (base types 1B, 1C, 2A or 2B).
M “Mon style”: felly band ornament with only beads and/or 
foliage motifs including spirals (Brown’s groups 2, 4 and 5) plus, 
when base elements are present, female symbols of energy 
(base types 1A, 1B or 3A).
MK “Mon-Khmer mixed style”: combining or mixing the above 
elements, e.g., felly 1 with female base (3A or 3B), or felly 2 with 
male base (2A or 2B). 
Table 2-A: Summary of Cakra Types
Base 
+ Felly 
Type
References
FT
BT
Description:  
Felly motif/ base 
of felly detail/c. = 
cut spokes
Place reportedly 
found (current loc.)
Size: ø = 
diameter
No. of 
spokes Phase
FI.A
B #38
6
1C
Plain/raised 
rectangle with 
prism and sphere 
below/c.
Yarang, Pattani
(not given)
ht 35 cm., ø 
ca 20 cm.
8
1a
FII.A
B #42
6
Bead band, 
triangles on edge/
missing/c.
N. Si Thammarat  
(N. Si Thammarat  
N. Museum)
frag. spokes 
+ felly ca 19 
cm.)
1a
FII.B
Brown 1996: 
fig. 93 
6
?
Plain/curved 
element/c.
Prachin Buri  
(Prachin Buri  
N. Museum)
ø 17 cm.
12
1a
FII.C
Dhanit 1990: 
13
6
2A
Plain/arm of 
figure?/c.
?
12
1a
FIII.A
B #39
6
Plain/missing/c.
In Buri, Sing Buri  
(Wat Bot museum,  
Khu Mueang, In Buri)
12
1a
FIII.B
B #40
6
1B
Plain/continuous 
felly, broken tenon 
below? 
N. Pathom (purported 
Phra Pathom Chedi,  
N. Pathom)
ø 42 cm.
8
1b
KI.A
B #9
1
1B
Loz. & Fl./
continuous felly/c.
Si Thep 
(private col.)
1b
KI.B
B #7
1
1B
Loz. & Fl./
continuous felly
Si Thep 
(Si Thep dist. office)
ø ca 178 cm.
29?
2
KI.C
Phasook  
2008: 164
1
1B
Loz. & Fl./
continuous felly
Si Thep 
(Si Thep  
Historical Park)
ø 110 cm.
29
2
KI.D
B #6
1
1B
Loz. & Fl./
continuous felly
Si Thep 
(Newark Museum)
ø 114.8 cm.
23/24
2
KI.E
B #8
1
1B
Loz. & Fl./
continuous felly
Si Thep 
(private col.)
27
2
KII.A
B #3
1
2A
Loz. & Fl./flame 
column/c.
U Thong 11 
(U Thong N. Museum)
ø 94 cm.
15
1b
KII.B
B #5
1
2A
Loz. & Fl./flame 
column/c.
N. Pathom  
(Bangkok N. Museum)
ø 94 cm.
1b
KII.C1
B #2
1
Loz. & Fl./
missing/c.
Lop Buri 
(Phra Narai N. 
Museum)
frag. ca 39 
cm.
1b
KII.C2
Phasook 2008: 
160, middle
1
Loz. & Fl./
missing/c.
Sap Champa,  
Lop Buri (Phra Narai 
N. Museum)
frag. 34 cm. 
long
1b
KII.C3
Phasook 2008: 
160, bottom
1
Loz. & Fl./
missing/c.
Sap Champa,  
Lop Buri (Phra Narai 
N. Museum)
3 frags total 
44 cm. long
1b
KII.D
B #1
1
2A
Loz. & Fl./flame 
column
U Thong 2 
(U Thong N. Museum)
ht ca 105 
cm.
11/12
2
KII.E
B #4
1
2A
Loz. & Fl./flame 
column
N. Sawan (Wat Thai 
Mai, Nakhon Sawan)
? 
2
Note: Dimensions of a given cakra sometimes vary in different sources by 1 cm. or more.  
FT = Felly Type according to Brown’s (1996) group numbers; BT = Base Type; B #21 = Brown’s cakra #21

--- PAGE 148 ---
Pinna indorf
293
292
Base 
+ Felly 
Type
References
FT
BT
Description:  
Felly motif/ base 
of felly detail/c. = 
cut spokes
Place reportedly 
found (current loc.)
Size: ø = 
diameter
No. of 
spokes Phase
KII.F1
Phasook 2008: 
170, top right
1
Loz. & Fl./missing
Phetchaburi  
(Wat Pet Pli, 
Phetchaburi)
2
KII.F2
Phasook 2008: 
160, top
1
Loz. & Fl./missing?
Sap Champa, Lop Buri 
(private col.) 
frag.
24 or 
28?
2
KII.G
B #17
1
Loz. & Fl./missing
U Thong 1 
(U Thong N. Museum)
ø ca 77 cm.
20?
2
KIII.A
Dhanit 
1990: 8
1
2B
Loz. & Fl./Kala 
face
Phetchaburi  
(Wat Mahathat, 
Phetchaburi)
 ø 100 cm.
24
3b
KIII.B
B #10 = 
Higham  
2004: 92
1
2B
Loz. & Fl./Kala 
face
“Thailand”  
(Guimet Museum)
ø ca 160 cm.
12
3b
KIII.C
Phasook  
2008: 167
1
Loz. & Fl./missing
Mueang Sema 
monument  
no. 2 (not given;  
excavated 1999)
3b
KIII.D
B #11
1
2B
Loz. & Fl./Kala 
face
Mueang Sema  
(Wat Khlong Khwang,  
N. Ratchasima)
ø ca 150 cm.
12/13?
3b
KIV.A
B #12
1
1C
Loz. & Fl./
rectangle on felly
N. Pathom  
(Phra Pathom Chedi  
N. Museum)
ø 95 cm.,  
ht 105 cm.
24
2
KIV.B
Dhanit 1990: 
15
1
1C
Loz. & Fl./
rectangle on felly
N. Pathom  
(Phra Pathom Chedi?)
ø 104 cm., 
ht 114 cm.
24?
2
KIV.C
B #14
1
1C
Loz. & Fl./
rectangle on felly
N. Pathom (Phra 
Pathom Chedi N. 
Museum)
16
2
MI.A1
B #33
5
Plain & beads 
bands, inscription/
missing/c.
Lop Buri  
(Phra Narai N. 
Museum)
frag. 
ca 32 cm.
1b
MI.A2
Phasook 2008: 
162 = Bauer 
1991: 52, pls 1-2
5
Plain & beads 
bands, inscription/
missing/c.
U Taphao,  
Chai Nat (not given)
1b
MI.B
Phasook 2008: 
157, second to 
the top
5
Plain & beads 
bands, beads 
elongated/
missing/c.
Khu Bua (not given)
1b
MI.C
Phasook 2008: 
169, bottom
5
Plain & beads 
bands/missing/c.
Ban Nong Chik, 
Phetchaburi (not given)
felly frag.
1b
MI.D
Phasook 2008: 
170
5
Plain & beads 
band/missing?  
(not shown)
Phetchaburi (?) 
(Collection Wat Pet Pli)
frag.
2
MI.E
Phasook 2008: 
169, top
5
1B
Plain & beads 
bands/continuous 
felly, lotus below 
one side
Ban Nong Chik, 
Phetchaburi (NMB)
ø 94 cm.
18
2
MI.F
Phasook 2008: 
174, centre
 = B #19 
2
1A
Beads bands, 
reflected spirals 
motif/missing/c.
Chaiya 
(Chaiya N. Museum)
frag. spoke 
to felly edge 
28 cm.
1b
Base 
+ Felly 
Type
References
FT
BT
Description:  
Felly motif/ base 
of felly detail/c. = 
cut spokes
Place reportedly 
found (current loc.)
Size: ø = 
diameter
No. of 
spokes Phase
MI.G
Dhanit 1990: 
19
2
1A
Fillet bands & spiral 
motif, reflected 
symmetry/
continuous felly band
N. Pathom  
(not given)
ø 65 cm.
18
2
MI.H
B #36 
5
1B
Plain & beads 
band/continuous 
felly, double lotus 
below
N. Pathom  
(Phra Pathom Chedi  
N. Museum)
ø 71 cm.,  
ht 87 cm.
16
2
MI.J
B #23
2
1B
Floral motif, cyclical 
spirals/continuous 
felly, single lotus 
below
N. Pathom 
(Phra Pathom Chedi  
N. Museum)
ø 88 cm.
20/21
2
MI.K
Phasook 2008: 
172, top
2
Floral motif, cyclical 
spirals/missing
Ban Lat, Phetchaburi  
(not given)
frags
2
MII.A1
Phasook 2008: 
133
2
3A
Floral motif, cyclical 
spirals/floral  
S ´ rı ¯ stele
N. Pathom 
(Phra Pathom Chedi  
N. Museum)
25
2
MII.A2
Phasook 2008: 
131, top = B 
#21
2
3A
Floral motif,  
cyclical spirals/
floral S ´ rı ¯ stele
N. Pathom 
(Phra Pathom Chedi 
N. Museum)
ø 67 cm.
26
2
MII.B
B #20
2
Floral motif, cyclical 
spirals/missing
? (not given)
ø 99 cm.
20
2
MII.C
B #27
4
Floral motif, cyclical 
spirals/missing
N. Pathom (Songkhla 
N. Museum)
ø 65 cm.
20?
2
MII.D
Phasook 2008: 
157, top
2
Floral motif, cyclical 
spirals/missing
Wat Mahathat, 
Ratchaburi (in situ)
2
MII.E
B #34
5
3A
Plain & beads 
bands/floral stele, 
lotus petal fan
N. Pathom (Phra 
Pathom Chedi 
N. Museum)
ø 96 cm.
16
2
MII.F
B #37
5
3A
Plain & beads 
bands/trefoil floral 
stele
N. Pathom  
(Phra Pathom Chedi 
N. Museum)
frag.
2
MII.G
B #32
4
Beads bands, 
translated leaf, 
curled tip/missing
N. Pathom (Wat 
Phra Pathom Chedi 
Museum)
frags
2
MII.H
B #31
4
3A
Beads bands, 
translated leaf 
straight tip/floral 
stele, reflected spirals
N. Pathom (purported 
Bangkok N. Museum)
ø 90 cm.
22
2
MII.J
B #29
4
Beads bands, 
translated spirals/
missing/c.
Khu Bua  
(purported Wat Thong 
Chedi, Ratchaburi)
felly frag.
1b
MKI.A
Phasook 2008: 
147 
= B #15
1
1A
Loz. & Fl./
continuous felly, 
double lotus below 
(largely reconstructed)
N. Pathom  
(Wat Don Yai Hom, 
Nakhon Pathom)
23/24
3a
MKI.B
B #13
1
1A
Loz. & Fl./
continuous felly, 
double lotus below
N. Pathom  
(Bangkok N. Museum)
ø 195 cm.
35
3a
Table 2-A (Continued) 
Table 2-A (Continued)

--- PAGE 149 ---
Pinna indorf
295
294
Base 
+ Felly 
Type
References
FT
BT
Description:  
Felly motif/ base 
of felly detail/c. = 
cut spokes
Place reportedly 
found (current loc.)
Size: ø = 
diameter
No. of 
spokes Phase
MKII.A
B #35 
5
3B
Plain & beads 
bands/deity or 
Earth Goddess
N. Pathom  
(U Thong N. Museum)
ø 67 cm.
ht 80 cm.
16
3b
MKII.B
B #16 
1
3B
Loz. & Fl./ 
Gaja-Lakṣmī
N. Pathom  
(Phra Pathom Chedi  
N. Museum)
ø 65 cm.
16
3b
MKIII.A
B #18
1
3A
Loz. & Fl./ 
floral śrī stele
Mueang Si Mahosot, 
Prachin Buri  
(Khok Pip dist. Office)
ø 73 cm.
24?
3a
MKIII.B
Phasook  
2008: 158
1
Loz. & Fl., with  
Si Thep type 
spirals/missing
Chansen (not given)
felly frag. 
3a
MKIV.A
B #30 
4
2A
Plain & beads 
bands, radial 
curled leaves/floral 
flame over mortise, 
amalaka below
N. Pathom 
(Phra Pathom Chedi  
N. Museum)
ø 104 cm.
32
3a
MKIV.B
B #25
3
2A
Fillet band, 
translated spirals?/
foliage triangle over 
single lotus  
below felly
? (Suan Pakkad Palace, 
Bangkok)
hub edge  
to base ca 
65 cm.
3a
MKV.A
B #26 
2
2B
Floral motif, 
reflected spirals/
Sūrya seated
Prachin Buri or 
Aranyaprathet  
(Prachin Buri  
N. Museum)
ø 103 or 95 
cm.
14
3b
MKV.B
B #22
3
2B
Spirals reflected, 
translated (cropped 
vine?)/Sūrya seated
N. Pathom  
(Bangkok N. Museum)
ø 72 cm.
12/13
3b
MKV.C
Dhanit 1990: 
24 
3/2?
2B
? spirals/ 
Sūrya bust with 
wings (emerging 
from lotus)
N. Pathom  
(not given)
frag. 58 cm. 
wide x 60 cm. 
3b
MKV.D
B #24
3
2B
Spirals reflected 
translated  
(cropped vine?)/
Sūrya seated
N. Pathom 
(Phra Pathom Chedi  
N. Museum)
ø 68 cm.
16/17
3b
In only thirty examples, just over half the cakras studied, could the 
number of spokes be easily determined. Out of a total of eighteen 
different numbers or sets of numbers found [Table 2-B], only six 
occurred on more than one type and four of these were on the mixed type 
(MK). This trend seems to support the idea that the numbers signified 
themes, which could have lineage and chronological implications.
Tentative Sequences and Chronology of Types
Robert Brown (1996) has considered the chronological implications 
of the aesthetics. His opinion forms the framework of this assessment, 
but has been considered in relation to several additional points. Most 
of his observations have been accepted, but not his agreement with 
H.G. Quaritch Wales that the plain bands combined with beads are 
a late degeneration of felly motifs. There are several reasons to differ. 
The first derives from the possibility that, as Kenneth Hall (1985: 60) 
has suggested, the Funanese were the catalyst for the development 
of Dvāravatī, and Funan cakras were more or less plain [Table 1]. 
Brown’s discovery of influence from Khmer ornament found on 
Dvāravatī cakras, allows the possibility that plain Mekong Delta cakras 
also influenced Dvāravatī cakras. Cakras with plain fellies (type F) may 
thus have initiated the practice. Furthermore, if cakras were royal as 
well as religious symbols, only through time, once the tradition was 
more widely established and rival power centres competed for territory, 
did the need for specific identity impose a need for more elaborate 
symbolic ornament.
Another reason is related to structural considerations. There are two 
aspects to consider. Quaritch Wales and Brown concur that cakras with 
cut spokes were, in general, earlier than those with low-relief spokes. 
It can be noted that the small Funan or Mekong Delta cakras had cut 
spokes. It is quite clear that when large cut spoke wheels were made, 
problems of handling them, lifting them up onto columns, etc. may 
have subjected the cakras to forces they could not withstand, resulting 
in breakage even when bases were reinforced. Therefore, a carved solid 
disk was used instead. These were also easier and faster to carve. The 
reinforced base provided a convenient place to add symbolic ornament 
and thus enhanced the ability to express very specific notions and 
thereby reflect the identity of a king. Felly patterns along with the base 
motif (themes plus details) would allow for hierarchical nuances of 
lineage branch and individual identity. These base elements were thus 
symbolically important and were retained on some solid disk cakras. 
As many of the early cut spoke cakras are broken, treatment of all 
bases is not known. But it is clear that some base elements, for example 
flame columns (type KII), were on both cut spoke and solid disk cakras. 
Brown identified six felly pattern groups, but it seems two broader early 
themes can be seen. In one theme, a plain or foliage band (including 
spirals) defined by fillets or beads is combined with a basal floral stele, 
which can be considered a śrī or female spiritual energy motif (type 
M). On the other hand, the lozenge and floral motif, when combined 
with a base motif, is found with a tapered or triangulated flame column 
or the Kala face, male motifs (type K). These two themes potentially 
define two broad and discrete lineages. What most clearly distinguishes 
the two groups is the lozenge and the central line in the one, Brown’s 
Table 2-A (Continued)

--- PAGE 150 ---
Pinna indorf
297
296
group 1 on type K. Through time, however, lineage identity could have 
become mixed as a result of marriage alliances. Offspring of these 
mixed-lineage marriages could have identified with one side or the 
other, but some may have attempted to express their link to both sides, 
resulting in the mixed use of motifs (type MK). It can be noted that the 
cut spoke cakras are all in the “Funan,” “Mon,” or “Khmer” types, not 
in the “mixed” types, which would correlate with the scenario of mixed 
lineages emerging over time.
Although Brown and Quaritch Wales considered cut spokes early, 
on purely aesthetic grounds, they placed some with cut spokes in a 
late group because they had only plain bands and beads on the felly. 
It is proposed here that all with cut spokes belong in the early group. 
This remains tentative due to the fact that among them are cakras 
with inscriptions, which at least some scholars (e.g. Bauer 1991: 52) 
date to the sixth century while others consider them eighth century 
(Brown 1996). Those that have low-relief spokes, but are of the same 
theme as a group with cut spokes, would probably follow them in 
time. Many of the cakras, which Brown considered later, were those 
of the “mixed” group, type MK, none of which have cut spokes. It is 
suggested that the cakras of the mixed groups thus comprise the latest 
phase of the cakra tradition. They can be divided into those with non-
figural bases [Table 1: MKI, MKIII, MKIV] and with figural bases 
[Table 1: MKII, MKV], which, as narrative elements have a very 
specific identity, are placed at the end. From the viewpoint of the 
aesthetic theory as followed by Brown, those with figural bases might 
be considered earlier as they are more complex. It might be argued that 
as the tradition endured, the need for complexity increased to enable 
distinctive identity. Given the location and apparent origin of the Kala 
face motif in Khmer territory of the Khorat Plateau,25 it is possible 
that these figural bases reflect a phase, which led to the demise of the 
tradition due to the subjugation of the Dvāravatī territory to some level 
of Khmer influence or control. It is thus tentatively suggested that those 
with figural motifs are probably the latest of the cakras. 
The proposed sequences in Table 3 show cakras primarily in 
uninterrupted groups by types, but that is more a hypothetical model 
than a detailed sequence. It is meant to show the feasibility of a concept, 
that each cakra could represent one ruler within lineage groups, and is 
not meant to fix individual dates per se. Also, one branch’s rule may 
have been interrupted by another, but, if they regained power, their 
earlier model could have reappeared. The sequence could thus be 
more complicated. Certain technical considerations could also alter 
the sequences. Although premature to assign dates to stylistic phases, 
the generally accepted dates for Dvāravatī remain the framework for 
this tentative chronology. Dates suggested by Robert Brown (1996) 
and Piriya Krairiksh (1975) have also been considered as well as the 
dates for major changes in Funan and Zhenla’s history following Hall’s 
suggestion (1985: 60). Thus this chronology starts in the mid-sixth 
century. Brown (1996: 124, 136) considered the most secure dates for 
cakras to be 650-700 CE, and thought the overall production of cakras to 
have been perhaps only about one hundred twenty years. However, he 
also admitted cakras might have been made as late as the tenth century. 
Piriya suggested that Chedi Chula Prathon’s first phase may have pre-
dated Sambor Prei Kuk.26 Nakhon Pathom, however, may not have been 
Table 2-B: Number of Spokes Related to Cakras Types
Cakra 
Types
No.
8
18
22
25
26
11, 12
15
27
29
14
32
35
12
12, 13
16
20, 21
23, 24
24
FI
1 of 1
•
FII
2 of 3
••
FIII
2 of 2
•
•
MI
4 of 13
••
•
•
MII
7 of 11
•
•
••
•
••?
KI
4 of 5
•
••?
•
KII
4 of 10
•
•
•?
•?
KIII
3 of 4
•
•
•
KIV
3 of 3
•
•
MKI
3 of 3
•
•
•
MKII
2 of 2
••
MKIII
1 of 2 
•?
MKIV
1 of 2
•
MKV
3 of 4
•
•
•
F
M
M
M
M
K
K
K
K
MK
MK
MK
No. = number of examples with adequately complete spokes. In some cases (?) the number is tentative.

--- PAGE 151 ---
Pinna indorf
299
298
founded until the seventh century (Dhida 1999). Thus an early phase, 
including all Funan style and cut spokes cakras, is tentatively placed circa 
550-610 CE [Phase 1, Table 3], with the first cakra at Nakhon Pathom 
toward the period’s end. If the cakras FIII.B (B #40) and KII.B (B #5) 
[Table 1] were indeed originally from Nakhon Pathom, this would 
suggest that Nakhon Pathom was founded by a lineage group using 
either the Funan or Khmer style cakra [Maps 1-2]. If corroborated 
with other archaeological data, this could have profound implications, 
proving Hall right, or more specifically, that the Funan to Khmer-
Zhenla transition was a catalyst for Dvāravatī’s development, perhaps 
providing also some of the participants in those developments.
If the Dvāravatī cakras are deemed to begin only at the end of a 
catalyst phase comprising the Funan types [Map 1] in the late sixth 
century, then the one hundred twenty years suggested by Brown takes 
cakras into the early eighth century. If all cakras at Nakhon Pathom 
represented reigns there, the average reign span was about five years. 
It is entirely possible some cakras could represent very short reigns, 
but to accomplish major monument construction, etc. some reigns 
would have been much longer. The possible number of cakras at one 
site being considered, the dates circa 610-690/700 and 690-800 CE 
are suggested for Phases 2 and 3, not far off the timeframe suggested 
by Piriya (1975) for Chedi Chula Prathon [Table 3; Maps 3-4]. The 
suggested longer period of the cakra tradition would have ended close 
to the exile of Jayavarman II, who Michael Vickery (1998: 387) has 
suggested might have spent his “exile” fighting the “Chvae” (according 
to Vickery, perhaps Cham) on his frontier. Given the cakra’s possible role 
in developing statecraft, this would have important implications for the 
history of mainland Southeast Asia as well as Dvāravatī. 
Conclusion
Although the details do not yet all add up, and the sequences within 
type groups and phases are far from fixed, the general outline they begin 
to sketch out is not unreasonable. Changes of lineage or style, perhaps 
with a “Khmer” interlude between Phases I and II of Nakhon Pathom’s 
principal monuments [Table 3] could represent just renovation or 
perhaps destruction and rebuilding.27 Robert Brown (1996: 179-181) 
suggested that the number of spokes was so varied they could not be 
expected to have significance and must have been left to the choice of 
the artisan. This might be so if the cakra simply represented the generic 
notions of the cakravartin and the turning of the Wheel of the Law. 
However, that great variety would be the very root of their effectiveness 
in the role Mus (2001) defined as particularising a royal intermediary. 
Some sites have two or more types. If the cakras reflected royal lineage, 
leadership shifted, or there were shifts in aesthetic taste only. Given the 
importance of symbolism at the time, the latter does not seem likely. 
The distribution of types [Maps 1-4] also seems to place stylistic 
elements in places where language of inscriptions and other artefacts 
also indicate that cultural dominance. Cakras of the same type in 
different locations could indicate co-rulers or subordinates (sons, 
brothers or vassals of a king) and seem to define lineage domains 
related to trade routes and rice production areas concentrated on the 
west and the north of the Chao Phraya Delta, which may or may not 
Table 3: Trial Timeline Sequence Graph, Relative to CCP & WPM & Other Dvāravatī Monuments 
Key: • = monument at that location with characteristics similar to the phase at CCP, according to Piriya (1975).
Abbr.: NP = Nakhon Pathom; CCP = Chedi Chula Prathon; WPM = Wat Phra Men; W = West-central Thailand; P = Phetchaburi; R = Ratchaburi; KB = Khu Bua;  N = Upper-
central Thailand; U = U Thong; L = Lop Buri; SC = Sap Champa; Ct = Chai Nat; Cn = Chansen; S = Sing Buri; NS = Nakhon Sawan; E/NE = East & Northeast Thailand; 
Pr = Prachin Buri; ST = Si Thep; MS = Mueang Sema; PT = Peninsular Thailand; Ca = Chaiya; NST = Nakhon  Si Thammarat; Y = Yarang (see Table 2-A for cakra ID information)
All dates for cakra groups are very tentative. Some cakras at NP may have been relocated. Monument dates given by Piriya (1975): for phases at CCP: I = late 6th-early to mid-7th c.; 
II = mid-to end 7th c./7th decade; III = late 7th c.(8th decade)-2nd decade of 8th c. All three phases of WPM, Piriya (1975: 180) places in CCP phase II. Dupont’s (2006) dating, 
based on images and comparison with other Buddhist monuments known to him in the Buddhist world were from 6th-11th/13th c.
Timeline
550*
575
600
625
650†
675
700
725
750   
**
775
800
NP
• CCP
 
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
?
• WPM
 
Ph. I
Phase II
Phase III
?
W
P
M
KII
KIII
R & KB
•
 
•
••
•
•***
•
•
•
NP
FIII
KII
M****
KIV
MK
?
?
N
U
KII
   • 
††
•
•
•
••
L & SC
KII
Ct & Cn
S
FIII
NS
•••
•
KII
•
E/NE
Pr
FII
ST
KI
?
?
MS
KIII
?
?
PT
Ca
M
†††
NST
FII
Y
FI
Cakra phases:
Phase 1: Cut spokes
Phase 2: Low-relief spokes,  
M & K dominant
Phase 3: Low-relief spokes, MK,  
then return to K with KIII
* End of Rudravarman’s reign in Funan; ** Jayavarman II skirmishes with the “Chvea” until 802 CE (Vickery 1998); *** Total 44 monuments during CCP’s Phase III;
**** If from around NP, these M & KIV types may have alternated at NP in Phase 2, or KIV types may have ended Phase 2 as they are said (Brown 1996) to be ca late 7th c. 
† Jayavarman I expels Buddhists; †† Harṣavarman inscription 640 CE (change in kingship model?); ††† Śailendra/Śrīvijaya inscription, Ligor A, brick sanctuaries at Chaiya.

--- PAGE 152 ---
Pinna indorf
301
300
M
e
k
o
n
g
 
M
e
k
o
ng 
Lop Buri
5
Bangkok
SPK
Hanchey
Wat Phu
1
Phnom Penh
Vientiane
Oc Eo
Tonle Sap
3
2
4
Colour Code:
Funan
0
500  km
N
100
CAMBODIA
LAOS
VIETNAM
THAILAND
GULF 
OF 
THAILAND
M
e
k
o
n
g
 
M
e
k
o
ng 
Lop Buri
5
6
7
8
Bangkok
SPK
Hanchey
Wat Phu
1
Phnom Penh
Vientiane
Oc Eo
Tonle Sap
3
11
9
10
12
2
4
Colour Code:
Funan
Mon
Khmer
0
500  km
N
100
CAMBODIA
LAOS
VIETNAM
THAILAND
GULF 
OF 
THAILAND
Map 1: Catalyst phase.
Funan style cakras: 1. Yarang (FI.A); 2. Sing Buri (FIII.A); 3. Nakhon Pathom (FIII.B);   
4. Dong Si Mahosot (FII.B & FII.C?); 5. Nakhon Si Thammarat (FII.A).  
These might represent the earliest, catalyst phase of cakras, following a Funan tradition (e.g. at Oc Eo)  
and may date between 550-600 CE [Drawing by Pinna Indorf].
Map 2: Phase 1.  Early cakras with cut spokes in Mon and Khmer style may have followed or be contemporary with  
Funan style cakras (sites nos. 1-5): 1. Yarang (FI.A); 2. Sing Buri (FIII.A); 3. Nakhon Pathom (FIII.B); 
4. Dong Si Mahosot (FII.B & FII.C?); 5. Nakhon Si Thammarat (FII.A).
Mon style:  6. Chaiya (MI.F); 7. Phetchaburi (MI.C); 8. Khu Bua (MI.B & MII.J); 9. Lop Buri (MI.A1); 10. Chai Nat (MI.A2 & 3).
Khmer style: 3. Nakhon Pathom (KII.B); 9. Lop Buri (KII.C); 11. U Thong (KII.A); 12. Si Thep (KI.A).
Khmer style was also found at sites with other styles: Nakhon Pathom (site 3: KII.B).
Lop Buri, (site 9: KII.C1) and at Sap Champa, also in Lop Buri prov. (KII.C2-3).
Having cut spokes, these are all potentially early phase cakras, ca 575-610 CE.
The lower Mekong Delta has yielded at least two cakras and the low-relief at Hanchey shows cakras on tall columns flanking  
a shrine. So far, there seems to be no indication that the Dvāravatī cakras were made as pair [Drawing by Pinna Indorf].

--- PAGE 153 ---
Pinna indorf
303
302
M
e
k
o
n
g
 
M
e
k
o
ng 
Lop Buri
5
6
7
8
Bangkok
SPK
Hanchey
Wat Phu
1
Phnom Penh
Vientiane
Oc Eo
Tonle Sap
3
11
13
9
10
12
4
Colour Code:
Funan
Mon
Khmer
2
0
500  km
N
100
CAMBODIA
LAOS
VIETNAM
THAILAND
GULF 
OF 
THAILAND
M
e
k
o
n
g
 
M
e
k
o
ng 
Lop Buri
5
6
7
8
Bangkok
SPK
Hanchey
Wat Phu
1
Phnom Penh
Vientiane
Oc Eo
Tonle Sap
11
14
13
15
9
10
12
2
4
Colour Code:
Funan
Mon
Khmer
Mixed style
3
0
500  km
N
100
CAMBODIA
LAOS
VIETNAM
THAILAND
GULF 
OF 
THAILAND
Map 3: Phase 2. Phase 2, ca 610-690/700 CE, is the transition from cut-spoke cakras to low-relief spoke cakras of a similar type. 
They primarily appeared at the same sites as the earlier cut-spoke versions, but in some cases the styles at the site changed.
Those of Khmer style with low-relief were from sites: 3. Nakhon Pathom (KIV.A-C) with earlier Funan and Khmer styles; 
7. Phetchaburi (KII.F1) which earlier had Mon style; 9. Lop Buri and Sap Champa (KII.F2) which earlier had both Mon  
and Khmer style; 11. U Thong (KII.D & G) which earlier had the cut-spoke version of this style; 12. Si Thep (KI.B-E)  
which earlier had the cut-spoke version of this style; 13. Nakhon Sawan (KII.E) which had no earlier cakras.
Those of Mon style with low-relief spokes were from sites: 3. Nakhon Pathom (MI.G, H. J and MII.A, C, E-H)  
which earlier had Funan and Khmer style; 7. Phetchaburi (MI.D, E & K) had the earlier Mon style and also in this phase had  
Khmer style; 8. Ratchaburi (MII.D) which is near Khu Bua and which earlier had Mon style.
A cakra fragment at Wat Phu with low-relief spokes and perhaps an eroded band of ornament on  
the felly could be similar to the end of this phase or Phase 3 [Drawing by Pinna Indorf].
Map 4: Phase 3.  Phase 3, perhaps ca 690/700-800 CE or later, is the emergence of mixed style cakras, in two versions,  
one with non-figural and the other with figural base elements. The figural style also appears in a modified Khmer version,  
which appears at perhaps only two of the earlier sites and at one, possibly two new sites. 
Sites which have the mixed style cakras are: With non-figural cakras: 3. Nakhon Pathom (MKI.A, B and MKIV.A).  
Another, MKIV.B, is from an unknown site; 4. Prachin Buri (MKIII.A) which earlier had Funan style; 
14. Chansen (MKIII.B) which had no other cakras.  
With figural cakras: 3. Nakhon Pathom (MKII.A-B, MKV.B-D); 4. Prachin Buri (MKV.A).
Figural cakras of modified Khmer style, 7. Phetchaburi (KIII.A); 15. Mueang Sema (KIII.D, B), which had no earlier cakras. 
Perhaps also at: 3. Nakhon Pathom (KIII.C), according to Higham (2004: 92), but not Brown (1996) [Drawing by Pinna Indorf].

--- PAGE 154 ---
Pinna indorf
305
304
have been a bay or wetlands laced with navigable channels (FAD 2548: 
33). The concentration of late cakras at Nakhon Pathom may imply only 
a hoarding of early cakras at the site, or a more unified kingdom, or 
simply that much of the territory no longer followed the royal tradition 
involving cakras. As it stands, the typology and tentative sequence clues 
suggest Dvāravatī was a zone of contention by at least two, possibly 
more, lineage groups. Although more detailed investigation is needed 
for reliable historical interpretation, it is clear that the cakras could have 
represented individual kings and their lineage groups over a period of 
two hundred years or slightly longer. 
The ethnic make-up of Dvāravatī is presumed diverse, but 
dominated by Mon due in part to the Mon inscriptions (Bauer 1991). 
The presence of Khmer and Funan stylistic elements presents several 
historical problems. The typology, stemming from the identity of 
lozenge and floral motif as associated with Khmer art by Brown, has 
been presented here, very tentatively, in terms of three broadly identified 
ethnic affiliations. However, if: 
1) as John Miksic (2003: 23) has suggested, the people of Funan 
were “proto-Mon,” 
2) the Funan legends hint of real connections between the elite of 
the Mekong Delta and the people of the Thai-Malay Peninsula 
in the early centuries of the Common Era, 
3) the shift from “Funan” to “Zhenla” was a shift away from those 
early mixed-lineage elite “proto-Mon” of Funan’s coastal areas 
to a new inland branch of the elite with Khmer roots, and
4) given the “Khmer” style cakras are dominant in areas which also 
have other Khmer style elements and Khmer inscriptions,
then, these ethnic categories may make sense. The “Funan” to 
“Zhenla” shift can be seen as transitions in the dominant lineage 
branches ruling the lower Mekong (Vickery 1998: 324-408). If in that 
shift, an old dominant branch of “Funan” elite fled to areas on the 
Gulf of Thailand coast where they had early lineage links, they may 
have been able to pursue their socio-political and economic aspirations, 
thus serving as the catalyst for Dvāravatī’s development. In such a 
context, the Khmers would not have just stood by. As Vickery’s work 
(1998: 387) seems to show, the “Chvae” of Khmer history from whom 
Jayavarman II fought to be free were a southern coastal group, it is 
possible they were the old elite of coastal “Funan.” 
It does not seem that the earliest “Khmer” cakras of Dvāravatī 
represent direct rule from a strong Khmer Zhenla power centre, but 
local elite, local Khmer elite, e.g. King Harṣavarman (claiming to 
be Īśānavarma’s grandson), who chose to emulate, and were taking 
advantage of, “Zhenla” developments. The cakras with plain fellies 
or motifs involving floral spirals, cyclical symmetry and without the 
linking central line seem to represent coastal powers with early links 
to Funan. The Khmer-“Chvae” (perhaps Khmer-Cham) conflicts (of 
Jayavarman II) being an extension of the coastal-“Funan” and 
inland-Khmer conflict, thus may have had some impact on the Chao 
Phraya Delta. It is impossible to tell from the cakras alone, why or how 
the tradition came to an end, but evidence in terms of distribution 
and stylistic elements on cakras, is clearly suggestive that Khmer 
developments played a significant part. Khmer cultural elements seem 
to have infiltrated or influenced the elite lineages of the north and 
east, and they may have become dominant in the Chao Phraya Delta, 
ending the cakra tradition, but not the popularity of Buddhism. The 
end of the cakra tradition seems to end the role of the combined 
Bodhisattva-cakravartin ideal as the dominant element of political 
ideology, or at least one expression of it. The end of the cakra 
tradition does not mark the end of “Dvāravatī” as a cultural force, but 
probably marked the end of an era of state development and certain 
ruling lineages.
Acknowledgements
This essay developed as an outgrowth of research into the meaning and 
possible functions of ritual trays of Dvāravatī. Gudur Swati Reddy’s 
collaboration in that earlier phase and also her occasional assistance 
in this investigation into the cakras is greatly appreciated. I would also 
like to thank Nicolas Revire, Stephen Murphy, Tran Ky Phuong and 
Amarjiva Lochan for their helpful comments and moral support.
Abbreviations
Pāli text references are to PTS publications, except the Visuddhimagga, 
published by the Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy (Bhikkhu 
Ñāņamoli 1975).
A 
 
Aṅguttaranikāya
D 
 
Dīghanikāya
Dhp  
Dhammapada
M 
 
Majjhimanikāya 
S 
 
Saṃyuttanikāya
Th 
 
Theragāthā
Ud  
Udāna
Vin  
Vinaya
Vism  
Visuddhimagga

--- PAGE 155 ---
Pinna indorf
307
306
Endnotes
  1 B #38 = Brown’s cakra #38 (1996: fig. 38); Brown’s 
work is used as the primary identification for the 
cakras when possible; see Table 2-A for other 
sources and a summary of the cakras studied.
  2 See Table 1 illustrations of cakra types.
  3 Nicolas Revire in personal communication, 
including a photo taken by Pierre Pichard. For 
an additional relief depicting a cakrastambha from 
southern Laos, see Lorrillard (this volume, fig. 2).
  4 Probably Bhavavarman II (seventh century), the 
son of Īśānavarman I (ca 611-630 CE) of Sambor 
Prei Kuk or Īśānapura (Briggs 1951: 42-43, 53-
54). Although it is a Śaiva shrine, the south bhadra 
may have been devoted to Viṣṇu in the multi-deity 
practices of the times (Maxwell 1997: 48-54,  
81-83). 
  5 Tiffin and Stuart-Fox (2002: 59) seem to link the 
descent from Tāvatiṃsa to the Buddha’s last birth 
before he became the Buddha. That descent, 
however, was from Tusita (fourth of six heavens) 
and not Tāvatiṃsa (second of six heavens). 
The descent from Tāvatiṃsa/Trāyastriṃśa was 
associated with the miracle at Śrāvasti and his 
preaching to his mother and the other gods from 
Sakka’s throne. That occurred some years after 
his enlightenment (Malalasekera 1974: I, 1002, 
1033; Huntington 1985: 72-73). It is this descent, 
which has symbolic parallels in the rājasūya ritual. 
However, the descent from heaven to take human 
birth might be symbolic of merit, as they suggest, 
or perfected virtues (pāramitās) of a Bodhisattva.
  6 Pre-Aryan earth spirits or indigenous tutelary 
deities were called in Sanskrit “yakṣas,” and these 
also had to be dealt with during that transition 
in order to maintain order (Wolters 1979: 434-
435). It can be noted that on the base of one of 
early Si Thep’s monument, yakṣas and dwarves 
are depicted as supporting it on their backs (FAD 
2550: 88-91). Similar motifs are found on the base 
of Chedi Chula Prathon  stage III, i.e., a dwarf 
identified as yakṣa (Dupont 2006: 58, pls. 201, see 
also 192, 294-296) and fragments with yakṣa heads 
found at Wat Phra Men, perhaps from stages I 
and II (Dupont 2006: 27, 29, 34, pls 17, 48, 49).
  7 Johannes Heesterman (1957: 3, 7-9) emphasises 
the distinction between coronation of a king and 
the abhiṣeka, which is a consecration, instilling or 
confirming spiritual powers.
  8 John Irwin (1990: 52, 60) also points out that the 
cakra originally symbolised the solar wheel.
  9 Vairocana is associated with the Sun-disc and has 
the characteristic mudrā of turning the dharmacakra, 
(Maxwell 1997: 158-168), which is, however,  
not found in Dvāravatī Buddha images  
(e.g. Revire 2010).
10 For example, the drum slab from a stūpa at 
Gummididurru, Andhra Pradesh (India), now 
in the Cincinnati Museum of Art (Rosen Stone 
1994: pl. 123) [Figure 3]. See also Rosen Stone 
(1994: pls 91, 92, and 97) and Phasook (2008:  
figs 13-15). The inspiration for this depiction, 
Phasook Indrawooth says (2008: 17, 31), could be 
the Dhammapada (Dhp 397) and the Theragāthā  
(Th 1095) where there are references to fiery 
energy. There is also a reference in the latter 
text to paññā (Skt, prajñā) as the sword of 
understanding. Swords can be seen on two of  
the wheels with Kala faces [Table 1: KIII].
11 In Aṅguttaranikāya (A II 9-10), in a context where 
the wheel could be a dharmacakka, the Pāli term 
appears to have been brahmacakka. The term is 
used in the prose text to be the equivalent of a 
dharmacakka so termed in the verse summary of 
the passage (A II 9-10, note 3).
12 The three are saccañāṇam, kiccañāṇam and 
katañāṇam, being “present truth,” “(truth) to be 
known,” and “(truth) which has been known” as 
they appear repeated five times in an inscription 
on a cakra felly (Brown 1996: 101, citing Cœdès 
and Vinaya). This fivefold repetition of “three 
knowledges” implies application to the five 
khandhas, i.e., the path to enlightenment.
13 The term refers to all conditioned phenomena. 
The five khandas are materiality (rūpa) and 
mentality (nāma) classified as four, viz., 
consciousness (viññāṇa), feeling (vedanā), 
remembrance/perception (sañña) and formations 
(sankhāra, all cetasikas except feeling and 
remembrance) (S XXII 5, 48, 56).
14 For eleven or ten factors based on good conduct, 
see Aṅguttaranikāya (A V 311-312 and A V 1-2 
respectively). Also the Sanskrit Nidānasūtra has ten 
(Krishnan 2007: 78), but based on khandhas. For 
nine-factors related to khandhas, see Dīghanikāya  
(D II 55-56). Cakras with ten or twenty spokes 
would be in conformity with the saṁsāracakra of 
the Visuddhimagga (Vism 207) and Majjhimanikāya 
(M I 55), which is based on the ten-factor 
formulation.
15 The Five Powers: faith, energy, mindfulness, 
concentration and insight or wisdom (A III 10).
16 See also Harvey (1990: 99) for numbers which 
correspond to the various components comprising 
the thirty-seven bodhipakkhiyadhammas (things 
pertaining to enlightenment).
17 The top of the Sukhothai Indrakila is missing 
so its detail is not known. Betty Gosling (1996: 
135, pl. 4.76) attributes the column to “Burmese 
influence,” but it is not clear if this was the 
Rakhine cakras fronted by Indra [Table 1].
18 The Pyu may have used the cakra “palladium” 
since a mold for circular forms, which could be  
a miniature version like that on the Rakhine cakra 
[Table 1] and the Gupta coins, was found at 
Beikthano (Aung Thaw 1968: pl. LIVc). 
19 In India, in Buddhist contexts, they occur 
flanking caityagṛha entrances and ayaka platforms 
(Huntington 1985: figs 9.12, 9.17, 9.24; Rosen 
Stone 1994: pl. 16).
20 The alignment is not on the cardinal axes, but 
shifted slightly (FAD 2545: 26, 31). If there was a 
monument toward the south or southwest end of 
this axis, it apparently has not yet been found. 
21 It appears that Mueang Bon in Nakhon Sawan 
province (Dhida 1999: 182), which was a round 
city, has a river to the west and hills to the east.
22 Khao Thamorat and Khao Yai-Khao Lang San 
respectively; see Dhida (1999: 61, 104 for maps).
23 Stephen Murphy (pers. comm.) citing Baptiste & 
Zéphir (2009: 122, fig. 4). See also Table 1: KI.C; 
Dhida (1999: 103) and FAD (2550: 95).
24 Brown (1996) did not take this to be cultural 
influence, but more or less accidental transfer of 
aesthetic traits by the artisans.
25 The felly motifs are also less sharp, which 
tentatively may be a factor of workmanship 
perhaps of hasty production.
26 Known as Īśānapura, it was established by 
Īśānavarman I who reigned circa 611-630 CE 
(Briggs 1951: 46).
27 Also, the puzzling “gutters” in the foundation 
of Wat Phra Men’s phase I (Dupont 2006: 21; 
Piriya 1975: 180, 187, 191), must have originally 
held large wooden foundation beams supporting 
wooden halls on the four sides of the solid core. 
These may have been damaged simply by fire or 
in war so badly as to make a rebuilding necessary.
References
Archaeological Survey of  
India (ASI) 
1960  Indian Archaeology 1959-
60, A Review (IAR). New Delhi: 
Archaeological Survey of India. 
[Reprinted 1996]
Aung Thaw 
1968  Report on the Excavations at 
Beikthano. Rangoon: Ministry of 
Union Culture.
Aung-Thwin, Michael 
1983  Divinity, Spirit, and 
Human Conceptions of Classical 
Burmese Kingship. In Lorraine 
Gesick (ed.), Centers, Symbols, and 
Hierarchies; Essays on the Classical 
States of Southeast Asia. New Haven, 
Connecticut: Yale University 
Southeast Asia Studies, pp. 45-86.
Baptiste, Pierre & Zéphir, 
Thierry (eds) 
2009  Dvāravatī : aux sources du 
bouddhisme en Thaïlande. Paris: 
Réunion des Musées nationaux.
Bauer, Christian 
1991  Notes on Mon Epigraphy. 
Journal of the Siam Society 79(1): 
31-83. 
Bhikkhu Ñāņamoli (trans.) 
1975  Path of Purification 
(Visuddhimagga). Kandy: Buddhist 
Publication Society.
Boner, Alice 
1990  Principles of Composition in 
Hindu Sculpture, Cave Temple Period. 
Delhi & New Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass & Indira Gandhi 
National Centre for the Arts.
Briggs, Lawrence Palmer 
1951  The Ancient Khmer Empire. 
Philadelphia: The American 
Philosophical Society.
Brown, Robert L.  
1996  The Dvāravatī Wheels of  
the Law and the Indianization of  
South East Asia. Leiden: Brill.
Cœdès, George 
1966  Angkor, an Introduction.  
Hong Kong: Oxford  
University Press.
1968  The Indianized States of 
Southeast Asia. Honolulu: University 
Press of Hawai’i.
1972  The Making of South East 
Asia. Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press 
[Fourth Edition].
Dao Linh Côn 
1994  The Oc Eo Burial Group 
Recently Excavated at Go Thap 
(Dong Thap Province, Viet Nam). 
In Manguin, Pierre-Yves (ed.), 
Southeast Asian Archaeology 1994, 
Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference of the European Association 
of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Paris 
24th-28th October 1994. Volume 1. 
Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian 
Studies, pp. 111-117.
Dehejia, Vidya 
1972  Early Buddhist Rock Temples:  
A Chronological Study. London: 
Thames and Hudson.
Dhanit Yupho 
1990  Dharmacakra or the Wheel 
of the Law. Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [Reprint]
Dhida Saraya 
1999  (Sri) Dvaravati: The Initial 
Phase of Siam’s History. Bangkok: 
Muang Boran Publishing House.
Dupont, Pierre 
2006  The Archaeology of the Mons 
of Dvāravatī. English Translation 
by Joyanto K. Sen, with Extensive 
Annotations. Two volumes. 
Bangkok: White Lotus Press.  
[First published in French as 
L’archéologie mône de Dvāravatī, 1959]
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2545  Borannakhadi mueang u thong 
(Archaeology in the Municipality of 
U Thong). Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai with English 
Summary; 2002 CE]

--- PAGE 156 ---
Pinna indorf
309
308
Bangkok: Silpakorn University.  
[In English and Thai; 2551 BE]
Piriya Krairiksh 
1975  The Chula Pathon Chedi: 
Architecture and Sculpture of Dvāravatī. 
Doctoral Dissertation. Cambridge: 
Harvard University. [Unpublished]
Rao, B.S.L. Hanumantha et al. 
(eds) 
1998  Buddhist Inscriptions of 
Andhradesa. Secunderabad: Ananda 
Buddha Vihara Trust.
Revire, Nicolas 
2010  Iconographical Issues in  
the Archeology of Wat Phra Men, 
Nakhon Pathom. Journal of the  
Siam Society 98: 75-115.
Rosen Stone, Elizabeth 
1994  The Buddhist Art of 
Nāgārjunakondā. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Sarma, I.K. 
1994  Parasurâmêsvara Temple at 
Gudimallam. Nagpur: Dattsons.
Shoji Ito 
1977  On the Date and Analysis 
of Stone Dharmacakra Found in 
Thailand. In Proceedings, Seventh 
IAHA Conference, Volume 2. Bangkok: 
Chulalongkorn University,  
pp. 1228-1237.
Tiffin, Sarah & Stuart-Fox, 
Martin 
2002  The Dvaravati “Buddha 
on a Monster” Stelae: A Possible 
Interpretation. Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society 12(1): 47-65.
Tranet, Michel 
1997  Sambaur-Prei-Kuk, monuments 
d’Içanavarma I (615-628). Volume 1. 
Phnom Penh: Foundation Toyota.
Vickery, Michael 
1998  Society, Economics and  
Politics in Pre-Angkor Cambodia: The 
7th-8th Centuries. Tokyo: The Centre 
for East Asian Cultural Studies for 
Unesco/The Toyo Bunko.
Wolters, W.O.  
1979  Khmer “Hinduism” in the 
7th Century. In Smith, R.B. & 
Watson, W. (eds), Early South East 
Asia, Essays in Archaeology, History and 
Historical Geography. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, pp. 427-442.
Zimmer, Heinrich 
1984  The Art of Indian Asia,  
Its Mythology and Transformations. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
2548  Phiphithaphan sathan haeng chat 
phra pathom chedi/Phrapathom Chedi 
National Museum. Bangkok: Fine 
Arts Department. [In Thai and 
English; 2005 CE]
2550  Uthayan prawatisat si thep (Si 
Thep Historical Park). Bangkok: Fine 
Arts Department. [In Thai with 
English Summary; 2007 CE]
Gosling, Betty (Elizabeth) 
1983  The History of Sukhothai 
as a Ceremonial Center: A Study of 
Early Siamese Architecture and Society. 
Doctoral Dissertation. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan. 
[Unpublished]
1991  Sukhothai: Its History, 
Culture and Art. Bangkok: Oxford 
University Press/Asia Books.
1996  A Chronology of Religious 
Architecture at Sukhothai, Late 
Thirteenth to Early Fifteenth Century. 
Ann Arbor: Association for Asian 
Studies, Inc.
2004  Origins of Thai Art. Bangkok: 
River Books.
Grünwedel, Albert 
1974  Buddhist Art in India. Varanasi: 
Bhartiya Publishing House.
Guillon, Emmanuel 
1991  The Ultimate Origin of 
the World, or the Mulâ Muh, and 
Other Mon Beliefs. Journal of the 
Siam Society 79(1): 22-30.
Gutman, Pamela 
1976  Ancient Arakan, with Special 
Reference to Its Cultural History between 
the 5th and 11th Centuries. Doctoral 
Dissertation. Sydney: Australian 
National University. [Unpublished]
1978  The Ancient Coinage of 
Southeast Asia. Journal of the Siam 
Society 66(1): 8-21.
1986  Symbolism of Kingship 
in Arakan. In Marr, David G. & 
Milner, A.C. (eds), Southeast Asia in 
the 9th to 14th Centuries. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies.
1996  The Pyu Maitreyas. In 
Takkasui Myasamuin & Sutesana 
Thana (eds), Traditions in Current 
Perspective: Proceedings of the Conference 
on Myanmar and Southeast Asian 
Studies 15-17 Nov. 1995, Yangon. 
Yangon: University Historical 
Research Center, pp. 166-167.
Hall, Kenneth R.  
1985  Maritime Trade and State 
Development in Early Southeast Asia. 
Honolulu: University of  
Hawai’i Press.
Harvey, Peter 
1990  Venerated Objects and 
Symbols of Early Buddhism. In 
Werner, Karel (ed.), The Indian and 
the Comparative Perspectives. Durham: 
School of Oriental Studies, 
University of Durham, pp. 68-102.
Heesterman, Johannes 
Cornelis 
1957  The Ancient Indian Royal 
Consecration, the Râjasûya Described 
According to the Yajus Texts and 
Annotated. ’S-Gravenhage:  
Mouton & Co.
Higham, Charles 
2002  Early Cultures of Mainland 
Southeast Asia. Bangkok:  
River Books.
2004  Encyclopedia of Ancient Asian 
Civilizations. New York: Facts  
on File.
Huntington, Susan. L.  
1985  The Art of Ancient India.  
New York: Weatherhill.  
[With contributions by John  
C. Huntington]
Indorf, Pinna & Reddy, Swati 
2007  Three Enigmatic Trays or 
Plaques from South & Southeast 
Asia. Paper presented at the 
SSEASR’s 2nd Conference May 24-27, 
2007 in Nakhon Pathom: Institute 
of Language and Culture for Rural 
Development, Mahidol University. 
[Unpublished]
2009  Ritual Trays of Dvāravatī: 
Their Place in the Context of 
Buddhism Across Asia. Paper 
presented at the Buddhism Across 
Asia International Conference, 16-18 
Feb. 2009 in Singapore: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies. 
[Unpublished]
Irwin, John C.  
1990  Origins of Form and 
Structure in Monumental Art. 
In Werner, Karel (ed.), Symbols in 
Art and Religion, the Indian and the 
Comparative Perspectives. Durham: 
School of Oriental Studies, 
University of Durham, pp. 46-67.
Kooij, Karel van 
1995  Remarks on Festivals and 
Altars in Early Buddhist art. In 
Kooij, K.R. van & Veere, H. van 
der (eds), Function and Meaning in 
Buddhist Art, Proceedings of a Seminar 
Held at Leiden University, 21-24 
October 1991. Groningen: Egbert 
Forsten, pp. 33-43.
Krishnan, Gauri Parimoo, (ed.) 
2008  On the Nalanda Trail; Buddhism 
in India, China & Southeast Asia. 
Singapore: Asian Civilisations 
Museum.
Kulke, Herman 
1986  The Early and Imperial 
Kingdom in Southeast Asian 
History. In Marr, David G. & 
Milner, A.C. (eds), Southeast 
Asia in the 9th to 14th Centuries. 
Singapore and Australia: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies and 
Research School of Pacific Studies, 
Australian National University,  
pp. 1-22. 
Malalasekera, G.P.  
1974  Dictionary of Pali Proper Names. 
Two volumes. London: Pali Text 
Society/Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
[Reprint]
Malleret, Louis 
1959  L’archéologie du Delta du Mékong. 
Volume 1 : l’exploration archéologique 
et les fouilles d’Oc-Eo. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Maxwell, Thomas S.  
1997  The Gods of Asia, Image,  
Text and Meaning. New Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.
Miksic, John N. 
2003  The Beginning of Trade in 
Ancient Southeast Asia: The Role 
of Oc Eo and the Lower Mekong 
River. In Khoo, James C.M. (ed.), 
Art and Archaeology of Fu Nan;  
Pre-Khmer Kingdom of the Lower 
Mekong Valley. Bangkok: Orchid 
Press, pp. 1-34.
Mus, Paul 
2001  The Religious Ceremonies 
of Champa. In Parmentier, Henri, 
Mus, Paul & Aymonier, Étienne. 
Cham Sculpture, Religious Ceremonies 
and Superstitions of Champa. Bangkok: 
White Lotus Press, pp. 67-95. 
[Originally published as “Cultes 
indiens et indigènes au Champa” 
in BEFEO 23: 367-410, 1934]
Nai Pan Hla 
1991  The Major Role of the 
Mons in Southeast Asia. Journal  
of the Siam Society 79(1): 13-19.
Phasook Indrawooth 
 
2008  Dvāravati Dharmacakra/
Thawarawadi thammachak.

--- PAGE 157 ---
311
310
Introduction
T
he arrival of Buddhism and Brahmanism in the region of central 
Thailand, traditionally referred to as a period of “Indianisation,” 
was originally presumed to bring with it a shift from prehistoric 
inhumation burial forms to cremations (Bronson 1976: 20-21; Glover 
1980: 20, n. 1). The present essay has been prompted by a series of 
features that appear to combine Dvāravatī-era1 ritual architecture with 
human remains in contradiction to this expectation. The information 
newly presented here is part of a larger reconsideration of Phong 
Tuek,2 estimated to be a mid-to-late first millennium CE occupation 
in Kanchanaburi province, western Thailand, that was germinal to 
development of the Dvāravatī cultural concept [Maps 1-2]. During 
brief investigations by George Cœdès in 1927 and Horace Geoffrey 
Quaritch Wales in 1936, the rural hamlet of Phong Tuek yielded 
Buddha figures of various sizes and materials, so-called “votive tablets” 
and other ritual objects, ritual architecture and architectural terracotta, 
a limited domestic assemblage and information on at least thirteen 
inhumation burials (Cœdès 1928a, 1928b; Quaritch Wales 1936a, 
1936b, 1937a, 1937b). Field reconnaissance by the present author in 
January 2008 produced additional information in all these categories, 
including descriptions of another structure with human remains 
associated (Clarke 2009, 2010 and 2011). The present essay focuses 
on the potential association at Phong Tuek of non-cremated human 
remains with the ritual architecture to which they are proximal, taking 
into consideration comparative data from other first millennium CE 
sites in Thailand labeled Dvāravatī by their investigators. 
Phong Tuek was a key source of information for Cœdès’ and 
Quaritch Wales’ formulation of the “Dvāravatī concept,” being one 
of the first sites where this cultural identification was applied. It also 
appears that the eleven burials excavated by Quaritch Wales in 1936 
was the first systematically collected archaeological sample of human 
remains in Thailand (cf. Tayles & Oxenham 2006: 9). Even so, relatively 
little comment on these remains was offered by the original investigator 
or subsequent commentators, no doubt largely because Quaritch 
Wales asserted that the eleven burials he uncovered were not associated 
with the Dvāravatī component at the site.3 Indeed, the investigative 
narrative for the human remains at Phong Tuek is a curious story of 
incomplete information, miscommunication, and dramatically shifting 
interpretation. The looted skeleton of a human “giant” noted by 
Cœdès (1928a: 195) was scattered and lost before it could be examined. 
None of the burials uncovered by Quaritch Wales were illustrated or 
The Skeletons of Phong Tuek: 
Human Remains in Dvāravatī  
Ritual Contexts
WeSley clarke
Map 1: Location of Phong Tuek and other sites mentioned, including Three Pagodas 
Pass on the Thailand-Myanmar border [Drawing courtesy of Matthew Gallon].

--- PAGE 158 ---
WeSley clarke
313
312
described in even moderate detail; neither were their stratigraphic 
contexts diagrammed (Quaritch Wales 1936b). His assessment of the 
burials also wavered: Quaritch Wales initially suspected a connection 
between the burials and Dvāravatī architecture, but ultimately asserted 
that these were more likely to be “warriors killed in battle,” residing 
in accidental proximity to the Phong Tuek structures (1936b: 46). A 
published consideration of three of the excavated crania, including 
one specimen purported to exhibit tooth-filing (Quaritch Wales 1937a) 
[Figure 1], was revealed after many years to reflect a misunderstanding 
between Quaritch Wales and his London analyst which, however, could 
not be redressed because the three retained skulls had been destroyed by 
German bombs during World War II! 
The minimal and irregular nature of the published mortuary data 
from Phong Tuek has been subsequently mitigated to some degree 
by the “rediscovery” of Quaritch Wales’ field notes for his Phong 
Tuek explorations.4 These notes provide significant new information 
on mortuary, architectural, stratigraphic, and other categories of 
information beyond that published by Quaritch Wales. On the other 
hand, the notes are relatively minimal, considering the amount of 
work undertaken, and visually sketchy to the point of being difficult to 
decipher in many instances. Drawings of feature plans are not to scale, 
but still convey spatial relationships totally lacking in the published 
reports, which border on the anecdotal. Of particular interest to the 
present evaluation, the burials’ general layout, individual disposition, 
associated artefacts, and relationship to structural elements are recorded 
in the field notes.
The Site of Phong Tuek
The rural hamlets of Phong Tuek sub-district reside on the westward 
bank of the Mae Klong river in southern Kanchanaburi province,5 
Tha Maka district, western Thailand [Maps 1-2]. Phong Tuek has 
maintained a rural character, dominated by stands of banana palms 
and fields of cultivated sugar cane, corn, and chili peppers. The site 
locality resides on an elevated late Pleistocene deltaic fan at the foot of a 
mountainous zone to the west (Tanabe et al. 2003: 790, fig. 1; Fukui 1976: 
figs 1-2). The well-drained, drier soils are not suited for rice cultivation, 
and modern farming methods have permitted the development of 
dryland crops (cf. Glover 1991: 351). Passes in the western mountains 
allow direct connections between west-central Thailand and lower 
Myanmar, and Phong Tuek resides in a valley leading directly to the 
main such crossing, namely the Three Pagodas Pass [Map 1].
Based on reports of villager finds spectacular enough to raise 
interest 100 kilometres distant in Bangkok, George Cœdès, then 
General Secretary of the Royal Institute of Siam, organised subsurface 
explorations in 1927 (Cœdès 1928a). These “excavations” were focused 
on the most productive villager find-spots and several low mounds of 
structural rubble, and they uncovered significant architectural remains 
and several ritual artefacts. Field work was halted, however, after 
less than four months and before all the extant rubble-mounds were 
explored (Cœdès 1928a: 195, 198; Quaritch Wales 1936b: 43).
In January 1936, while waiting for the end of unseasonably late 
rains to gain passage to the walled urban centre of Si Thep, Quaritch 
Wales (1936b: 42-43) spent two weeks at Phong Tuek. This field work 
was part of a larger archaeological expedition organised by the Greater-
Indian Research Committee (1936b: 42). Despite substantial looting 
by villagers during the nine years since Cœdès’ visit, Quaritch Wales 
uncovered additional significant material data at the site, including 
structural foundations and adjacent inhumation burials.
The architecture and artefacts recovered by the 1927 and 1936 
investigations, over a distance of 800 metres [Figure 2], were 
interpreted by both Cœdès and Quaritch Wales to indicate “a city of 
the Buddhist kingdom located […] between Cambodia and Burma 
[i.e. central Thailand] and provisionally referred to […] under the 
name Dvaravati” (Cœdès 1928a: 208-209; Quaritch Wales 1936b: 42). 
Despite this urban attribution, the true nature of 
the Phong Tuek settlement, and its placement in a 
larger Dvāravatī settlement hierarchy or heterarchy, 
remains uncertain. The lack of adequate information 
on Phong Tuek’s content and layout – indeed, even a 
general impression of its areal extent – is reflected by 
Pierre Dupont’s observation that “we are unaware 
of its true importance because research there was 
stopped rather quickly” (2006: 77-78).  
Phong Tuek was among the first sites to be 
attributed by Cœdès to a Dvāravatī cultural 
tradition; it was also long considered to be the 
earliest known “Dvāravatī” settlement, based on 
the attribution of a so-called “Amarāvatī style” 
Buddha figure and a Mediterranean-style lamp to 
the early first millennium (Cœdès 1928a: 204, 207-
208; Briggs 1945: 99, 106). Subsequent reanalysis of 
these objects, however, has placed them later in time 
(Brown & McDonnell 1989; Borell 2008; Clarke 
2011: 59-63). 
Map 2: Phong Tuek’s position  
(blue triangle) intermediate to  
the Central Plain on the east and  
the Tenasserim Highlands on  
the west [Base map courtesy of  
Podjanok Kanjanajuntorn].
Figure 1: Cranium excavated 
by Quaritch Wales at his “stūpa 
location” and placed with the RCS 
Museum in London [After Quaritch 
Wales 1937a: pl. F]. 
Figure 2: Drawing showing  
Cœdès mounded architectural 
locations and locality designations 
(black circles), the Quaritch Wales 
site locations (black squares), and 
sites newly identified by the 2008 
reconnaissance (black triangles) 
[Drawing adapted from Cœdès  
1928a: pl. 1].
Laterite in
river 2008
Lalat Ta Wa
Dong Sak
San Chao
Giant skeleton
“Banana Garden”
Quaritch Wales vihāra
Quaritch Wales stūpa
0
N
1
2
2008 Structure with skulls
Ban Nai Ma
Talat Phong Tuek
Ban Plak Sake
Kilometres
Ban Wang Tong

--- PAGE 159 ---
WeSley clarke
315
314
The Field Notes
The relocation of the field notes for Quaritch Wales’ investigation at 
Phong Tuek provides significant new information for interpretation 
of the site, and also new dilemmas. The field notes encompass sixteen 
unnumbered pages in approximately a 20 by 25 cm.6 composition 
book. What is presumed to be Quaritch Wales’ writing is in a heavy 
hand that is rather “slapdash” and often difficult to read. Maps and 
drawings are similarly sketchy and not done to scale. There is a second, 
minority set of notations in the field notes, in a lighter and readily 
intelligible hand that is suspected to belong to his wife, Dorothy, who 
accompanied him to Phong Tuek (Quaritch Wales 1937: 128). These 
secondary notes follow a pattern of adding clarification to the heavy-
handed notes, in some cases correcting information or providing an 
alternative interpretation. For example, the primary notes repeatedly 
refer to iron implements found with certain burials as a “weapon” or 
“dagger,” reflecting Quaritch Wales’ interpretation that these were the 
remains of “warriors killed in battle” (1936b: 45-46). Written above 
the first hand’s “weapon” for one of the burials, however, is the second 
hand’s “cutting instrument,” inserting a more prosaic utilitarian label 
(Quaritch Wales 1936a: 11).  
Reconstructions presented in this essay are extrapolations from both 
the field notes and the published reports. There are inconsistencies both 
within the notes and between the notes and Quaritch Wales’ published 
accounts, and no doubt alternative reconstructions are possible. The 
present analysis has tended to give greater weight to information in 
the field notes, since this source has a more direct relationship to the 
original observations.
Human Remains at Phong Tuek
Human remains were part of the Phong Tuek narrative from the 
first villager accounts in 1927. Among the reports of substantial finds 
drawing Cœdès’ attention was the description of a “giant skeleton 
among gold and silver Buddha statues” (part of a headline in Bangkok’s 
Daily Mail for July 28th, 1927, quoted in Cœdès 1928a: 195). The 
precious relics reported to have been found with these human remains 
apparently added to the frenzy of discovery at Phong Tuek, for 
by the time Cœdès arrived less than a month later the skeleton had 
been broken up and dispersed along with the associated artefacts, and 
additional villagers had “flocked to the place to dig for other treasures” 
(1928a: 195). Likewise, when Quaritch Wales arrived nine years later, 
he found evidence for much additional looting.
Structural Features with Human Remains
The Cœdès and Quaritch Wales field investigations of 1927 and 1936, 
and the present author’s field reconnaissance in January 2008, resulted 
in the documentation of four instances of human remains at or near 
“Dvāravatī” levels and architecture. These include:
(1) A “giant” skeleton obtained from a “small cave 
in the ground” discovered by “a peasant tilling the 
soil in his farm” (Cœdès 1928a: 195). In the “cave,” 
which was presumably a hollow architectural feature 
(burial or ritual vault?), the apparently extended 
body was lying next to a group of Buddha figures in 
gold, silver, and “brass.” This feature was situated at 
the northern end of the Phong Tuek site locale, in a 
complex of ritual structures designated the “Banana 
Garden”7 (Cœdès 1928a: 197, 199-200) [Figure 2]. 
Although little else can be related for the disposition 
and context of these human remains, it does appear 
to present a burial in association with a structure (the 
“cave”), as opposed to a simple mortuary pit, and 
with more substantial ritual structures close by.
(2) Quaritch Wales’ short visit to Phong Tuek in 
1936 focused on several brick rubble-mounds not 
examined by Cœdès (1936b: 43). The first of these, 
located approximately 450 metres southeast of the 
“Banana Garden” structures [Figures 2-3], had 
been extensively and recently looted, but Quaritch 
Wales nonetheless uncovered a relatively intact rectangular brick 
foundation measuring 6.3 metres northeast-southwest by 11 metres 
northwest-southeast (1936b: 44 and 1936a: 2-7). The basal course 
of this foundation was 80 cm. below ground surface. Quaritch Wales 
indicated that he uncovered an extended inhumation burial “just within 
the walls;” verbal and sketched notations suggest that this burial was in 
the structure’s northern corner, paralleling the outer wall with the head 
situated to the southwest. The skeleton measured 1.7 metres in “height” 
(length), and was not accompanied by any “objects that might have 
thrown light on its period.” It appears that the vertical range of this 
burial deposit was between 1.2 and 1.4 metres below ground surface 
(Quaritch Wales 1936a: 2-3 and 1936b: 44). A second burial previously 
dug up by local residents apparently more-or-less paralleled the grave 
excavated by Quaritch Wales, being described as having its feet pointing 
to near the midpoint of the northeast wall (Quaritch Wales 1936a: 3). 
Quaritch Wales interpreted this structure to be a monastic assembly 
hall or “vihāra” (1936: 44). Villagers reported that about two years 
previously fifteen small images (presumably of Buddha) had been found 
within this foundation, along with a limestone double lotus pedestal 
with feet attached, and twenty heads and other fragments of images 
(Quaritch Wales 1936a: 3). During his excavation, Quaritch Wales also 
found “small fragments of the limbs of images in the blue limestone 
characteristic of the Dvaravati period” (1936: 44). 
(3) At a second rubble-mound 60 metres distant from the previous 
location [Figure 2], and less disturbed by looting, Quaritch Wales 
uncovered the lower sections of “the first stupa of the Dvaravati 
period that has been discovered, of which anything more than a base 
remains” (1936b: 45). These structural remains were entirely of brick, 
and included two rectangular platforms at the base, surmounted by four 
recessive octagonal levels [Figures 4-5]. The outside dimensions of 
Figure 3: Reconstruction of the 
rectangular “vihāra foundation” 
layout excavated by Quaritch Wales 
in 1936, including locations for 
the uncovered burials [Drawing by 
Wesley Clarke].

--- PAGE 160 ---
WeSley clarke
317
316
the lowest rectangular platform were 2.9 metres northwest-southeast by 
2.7 metres northeast-southwest; the largest octagonal level was 69 cm. 
long on each of the eight sides (Quaritch Wales 1936a: 10). The lowest 
course of brick rested at 97 cm. below ground surface.
Quaritch Wales excavated along the perimeter of the “stūpa” base 
to a depth of 1.8-2.1 metres below ground surface “with the object of 
ascertaining that natural soil had been reached;” he also dug at least nine 
radial trenches into the surrounding area (Quaritch Wales 1936a: 8-11; 
1936b: 45). These explorations uncovered ten extended inhumation 
burials close to the “stūpa” (Quaritch Wales 1936a: 8; 1936b: 47). The 
burials resided in a vertical zone between 1.3 and 1.4 metres below 
ground surface (Quaritch Wales 1936a: 9-10; 1936b: 46), and were 
“lying full length” (1937a: 89), with none extending beneath the “stūpa” 
structure (Quaritch Wales 1936b: 45). There was a concentration of 
four burials adjacent to and paralleling the southeast margin of the 
“stūpa” platform, and what may be intentional pairs of inhumations on 
the northeast, northwest and southwest sides of the “stūpa.” Among the 
paired inhumations, four included iron implements – which Quaritch 
Wales labeled “weapons” and “daggers” – and one also had a “copper 
ring,” presumably bronze, at the area of the right ear. No other grave 
goods were noted among the ten burials.
The elevated central core of the “stūpa” remnant was composed of 
earthen fill and Quaritch Wales (1936b: 45) excavated this medial axis, 
encountering a ritual deposit at a depth of 1.3 metres below ground 
surface (33 cm. below the brick base).8 Items in this deposit included “a 
small silver casket containing cremated human relics;” 10 cm. below the 
casket, an “iron object of unknown use,9 as well as a piece of bone” were 
found at 1.4 metres below ground surface on the central axis – “hence 
at the level of the skeletons” (Quaritch Wales 1936a: 11; 1936b: 45-46). 
Despite the latter comment, Quaritch Wales did not speculate further 
on whether this iron and bone might represent a burial underneath the 
so-called stūpa.
(4) During the January 2008 field reconnaissance of Phong Tuek, 
the interview of elderly resident Khun Chuan Laochan resulted in 
the tentative identification of a new structural location with associated 
human remains (Clarke 2011: 169-170) [Figure 2]. A small, lightly 
built structural remnant had been uncovered circa 1949, and a crew 
of seven monks was dispatched from nearby Wat Dong Sak to retrieve 
the large bricks for use in constructing a stairway at the temple. The 
newly uncovered structure was described as a square platform of brick 
(one course thick) approximately 5 metres on a side, with remnants of 
a light wall laid in a simple overlapping bond around the perimeter 
[Figure 6]. On the brick floor inside, a human skull was present in each 
corner, facing inward, and one skull was placed at the centre. There 
was no recollection of associated artefacts. The base of the structure 
floor was estimated to be between 1.4 and 1.5 metres below ground 
surface. This small structure had light brick construction similar to that 
of Quaritch Wales’ octagonal “stūpa,” and appears to be a subterranean 
compartment at a maximum depth similar to the graves surrounding 
the “stūpa.”  
Khun Chuan Laochan reported that the central cranium was 
collected by the monks, due to its presence where bricks were being 
removed, and taken to nearby Wat Dong Sak, where it remained for 
about a year before it was burned as part of the annual mortuary 
cleansing of Chinese-style graves (surface vaults). The four corner skulls 
were said to have been left in place and reburied.
The ritual nature of the four structural locations described above is 
inferred from the associated ritual contents (the “giant’s cave,” excavated 
“vihāra” and “stūpa”), the architectural form (stūpa), or the arrangement 
of human remains and architecture (structure identified in 2008). Five 
additional structures documented for Phong Tuek [Figure 2] included 
a purported vihāra foundation at the “San Chao” location, composed 
of laterite (Cœdès 1928a: 200); a square laterite foundation at the 
“Banana Garden” location 100 metres southwest of the San Chao 
Figure 4: Reconstruction of the 
“stūpa base” and surrounding 
burial layout excavated by Quaritch 
Wales in 1936. Trench outlines 
are estimated with dashed lines; the 
pottery kiln location is approximate, 
based on a description in the field 
notes [Drawing by Wesley Clarke].
Figure 5: Reconstruction of the 
vertical profile of the small “stūpa” 
excavated by Quaritch Wales in 
1936 [Drawing by Wesley Clarke].

--- PAGE 161 ---
WeSley clarke
319
318
“vihāra,” with remnants of a brick superstructure, probably a small 
temple or shrine (Cœdès 1928a: 199); a square foundation of laterite 
at the “Ban Nai Ma” location approximately 800 metres southwest of 
San Chao, with square statue pedestal at the centre; a round foundation 
of laterite at the Ban Nai Ma location, interpreted to be a stūpa 
base (Cœdès 1928a: 198-199); and a deposit of large blocky laterite 
fragments in the Mae Klong river channel near the southern bank, 
approximately 488 metres northwest of the San Chao area, tentatively 
interpreted as the remains of a laterite structure eroded into the river 
(Clarke 2011: 166-168). One reason that human remains may not have 
been detected with these additional structures is the lesser depths of 
excavation at these locations. Photographs of the San Chao “vihāra” 
excavation indicate that subsurface exploration did not extend beyond 
the lowest construction course. This also appears to be the case at the 
“Banana Garden” structure. Photographs of the Ban Nai Ma structural 
excavations suggest that excavation continued to circa 25-30 cm. beyond 
the lowest foundation level, just short of the 30 to 56 cm. vertical 
separation between Quaritch Wales’ excavated burials and foundations.
Collected Skulls
Quaritch Wales retained three crania from the “stūpa” burials and 
delivered them to the Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) Museum in 
London, to be stored there permanently as comparative specimens, and 
with the hope that they would “throw some light on the little understood 
ethnic structure of this region at the dawn of the historical period” 
(1936b: 47; 1937a: 90; 1964: 121). One of these skulls was determined 
to exhibit “tooth-filing,” apparently on the upper medial incisors 
[Figure 1]. Quaritch Wales’ request to the museum staff that a 
comparative study be made resulted in the assertion by curator 
A.J.E. Cave that “the skulls are certainly not Indian and they appear 
to be those of Thai people since they exactly resemble the Siamese 
skulls in the museum of the R.C.S., and show the same filing of teeth” 
(Quaritch Wales 1937a: 89). Quaritch Wales noted the startling nature 
of this information, suggesting as it did that “Thai colonies were already 
established in the Meklong valley […] in the early centuries of the 
Christian era,” directly contradicting the belief (still supported today) 
that Thai groups did not enter the region of Siam until the late first 
millennium or early second millennium CE (Quaritch Wales 1937a: 90). 
These assertions had to be withdrawn over twenty-five years later, 
however, when subsequent communication between Quaritch Wales 
and Cave revealed that the curator’s Thai attribution was an extremely 
generalised identification, asserting only that crania used for comparison 
with the Phong Tuek specimen were “of a similar provenance [Thailand] 
even though this was not accurately indicative of their racial affinity” 
(Quaritch Wales 1964: 121). In other words, Cave’s original report 
that the Phong Tuek skull with tooth-filing “exactly resemble[s] the 
Siamese skulls in the museum” was not asserting that these comparative 
“Siamese skulls” were Tai or Thai specimens; they could, he later 
said, have “represented Malays hailing from Siam rather than genuine 
Thai people.” As for an up-dated study of the Phong Tuek specimens, 
“unfortunately these skulls are not available for re-examination, since 
they were destroyed when the R.C.S. museum was bombed in 1941.” 
Quaritch Wales assured (1964: 121), however, that “more such skulls 
could probably be found at P’ong Tuk.”
Most mortuary data from Thailand, and the concomitant dental 
information, is prehistoric. While tooth-filing is not prehistorically 
unknown on the Southeast Asian mainland, intentional dental alteration 
in the region appears to have mostly involved ablation, that is, tooth 
removal (cf. Tayles 1996; Pietrusewsky & Douglas 2002: 70; Domett & 
Tayles 2004). Unintentional alteration observed on Thailand specimens 
includes abrasion, notching, and surface wear (Domett & Tayles 2004). 
Quaritch Wales and Cave asserted that the pattern observed on 
the illustrated cranium was intentional filing. Given the limited, now 
unverifiable, record available for this behaviour at Phong Tuek, this 
assertion must be considered tentative at best, even as it is worth noting 
for comparison with any additional data that may be generated from 
the site or region.
Spatial and Temporal Relationships 
Quaritch Wales (1936b: 46) wavered in his evaluation of a potential 
connection between the excavated burials and the proximal architecture 
at Phong Tuek.
I was at first inclined to think that there was indeed a 
relationship between the skeletons and the stupa, which might 
have been built over the shallow grave of warriors killed in battle 
as a memorial to the occasion. While not being able absolutely 
to rule out this explanation I am now more inclined to think 
that the juxtaposition of the ten skeletons and the stupa is a 
matter of coincidence, and that had I been able to dig many 
more trenches I might have found more skeletons. For we have 
to explain the finding of at least one other skeleton beneath the 
vihara 65 yards away and lying in a similar position at practically 
the same level. Moreover, the finding of the silver relic casket, 
buried a few inches above the level of the skeletons, seems to be 
a sufficient explanation of the raison d’etre of the stupa.
 
The factors that led Quaritch Wales to an opinion that the human 
remains and structural features were not directly related included: the 
absence of diagnostic Dvāravatī-era artefacts in association with the 
burials (1936b: 44; 1937a: 89); the broad distribution of skeletons, as if 
in a large cemetery zone (1936b: 46); differences in depth between the 
burials and architecture, which Quaritch Wales calculated to represent 
as much as five centuries difference in age (1936b: 47; 1937a: 89); and 
the functional identification of the remains at the “stūpa” as being those 
of “warriors,” in contrast to the ritual and reliquary functions of the so-
called stūpa (1936b: 46). On each of these points, the line of reasoning 
taken by Quaritch Wales has obvious alternatives, and in some cases his 
evaluation seems to be faulty.
The low incidence of artefacts among the so-called vihāra and stūpa 
graves excavated by Quaritch Wales provides no strong basis to confirm 
Dvāravatī affiliation, but neither do the iron tools and bronze earring 
contradict a Dvāravatī age in the mid-to-later first millennium CE. 
Perhaps more significant is the consistent sparseness of the mortuary

--- PAGE 162 ---
WeSley clarke
321
320
assemblage among the eleven excavated graves, a 
condition also present in the Dvāravatī-era graves at Dong 
Mae Nang Mueang, Nakhon Sawan province, and at Wat 
Chom Chuen, Sukhothai province, where human remains 
are also juxtaposed with ritual architecture (see infra and 
Table 1). One postulate would be that this limited material 
presence is an intentional aspect of a ritual association, 
with materialism de-emphasised in graves placed in these 
ritual contexts. The incidence of four similar, plainly 
formed iron tools in four of the “stūpa” graves [Figure 7] 
also raises a question as to whether this material repetition 
indicates a social or functional connection among these 
individuals. Quaritch Wales chose to extrapolate the 
function of “warrior” to all ten “stūpa” graves from these 
material patterns, but his “weapons” (Quaritch Wales 
1936a: 11; 1936b: 46) for use by warriors could just as 
well be utilitarian or ritual “cutting instrument[s]” (an 
alternative label applied in the field notes) used by lay 
residents or monks.
Quaritch Wales cited the presence of a “skeleton 
beneath the vihara 65 yards [59 metres] away and lying in 
a similar position at practically the same level” in his reasoning against 
an intentional relationship between the human remains and ritual 
architecture (1936b: 46). This seems to suggest (but does not explicitly 
state) that the excavated burial distribution is a window on a larger 
cemetery pattern. No intervening burials, however, were encountered 
by Quaritch Wales’ excavations, which included multiple long trenches 
[Figure 4]; nor were intervening graves reported by local diggers. 
Quaritch Wales suspected, however, that “had I been able to dig many 
more trenches I might have found more skeletons” (1936b: 46). He did 
not recognise that the discrete incidence of graves with architecture at a 
substantial interval could be an indicator of a functional pattern.
Alternatively, the close spatial relationships of the exposed graves 
and architecture are apparent in Quaritch Wales’ sketches and on the 
reconstructed plans [Figures 3-4]. The location of the “vihāra” burials 
within the foundation is obviously proximal, and Quaritch Wales 
himself described the ten burials at the “stūpa” as close to and “fairly well 
distributed all round the building” (1936b: 45), perhaps unintentionally 
implying a distributional focus on the structural location. He also 
speculated that these burials might be “a shallow grave of warriors” 
(1936b: 46 – see quote supra), apparently recognising the possibility that 
these burials could be a functionally unified feature.  
Other aspects of the burials’ spatial disposition suggest relationships 
with their respective structures. Just as both of the Quaritch Wales’ 
structures have a northwest-southeast axis, so also do nine of the eleven 
exposed burials, with heads to the southwest – and the remaining two 
have their heads in westward orientations [Figures 3-4]. Additionally, 
the concentration of four burials on the southeast margin of the “stūpa” 
is striking. Quaritch Wales stated that these inhumations “were closely 
pressed together, the nearest being almost under the brick base” (1936b: 45; 
my emphasis). This suggests that these remains were deposited close 
to an existing architectural feature, rather than prior to construction 
of the “stūpa,” since Quaritch Wales indicated that they did not 
Figure 6: Reconstruction of a 
brick structure and associated crania 
described by local informants during 
the 2008 reconnaissance at Phong 
Tuek [Drawing by Wesley Clarke].
Figure 7: Outlines of three iron 
tools illustrated by Quaritch Wales 
in the 1936 report, recovered from 
burials surrounding the excavated 
“stūpa base” at Phong Tuek 
[Drawing by Wesley Clarke].
extend underneath the structural base. The possibility that the “stūpa” 
construction randomly missed, or was intentionally placed in the midst 
of a concentration of pre-existing graves is judged to be less likely than 
the burials being installed adjacent to the existing “stūpa” foundation. 
Indeed, it would seem a remarkable coincidence that the so-called stūpa, 
superimposed on an earlier cemetery, would narrowly miss so many 
closely situated graves.
The “stūpa” burials can be interpreted to reside as four groups at 
roughly the four sides of the structure’s base, with paired inhumations 
on the northwest, northeast and southwest (the latter at a greater 
distance), and the “closely pressed” group of four on the southeast 
[Figure 4]. Two pairs each have one individual with an iron implement. 
The wealthiest pair at the southwest, with two iron implements and 
a bronze earring, are located furthest from the “stūpa;” the group of 
four, with no grave goods noted, are deposited closest to the “stūpa.” 
Whether these observed patterns of content and spatial arrangement 
are intentional is uncertain, but they would be consistent with a ritual 
program where material impoverishment is a virtue.
Quaritch Wales also emphasised differences in vertical stratigraphic 
separation between the architecture and the burials. Much of this focus 
was based on his calculation of the rate of alluvial accretion in the 
Phong Tuek locality, a procedure that seems flawed.10 Assigning a highly 
generalised date of the sixth century CE to a Dvāravatī stratum 97 cm. 
below ground surface at Phong Tuek, and an eleventh century age to a 
Khmer stratum 61 cm. deep “at a site three miles up river,” Quaritch 
Wales calculated an accretion rate of “1 foot [30.5 cm.] every 450 years” 
to account for the 35.5 cm. separation of these Khmer and Dvāravatī 
levels (1936b: 46-47). Several factors make this calculation problematical 
at best. The one-century “periods” assigned to the Khmer and Dvāravatī 
occupations are vague and arbitrary, unsupported by absolute dates 
and ignoring the usual temporal variation from site to site. Also, using 
occupational depths from positions “three miles distant [ca 5 km.],” 
and at different positions on the river’s course, ignores the typical 
variation in riverine and alluvial dynamics; rates of alluviation and 
depths of occupational burial by sedimentation can in fact vary 
significantly even within a single locale, all the more so between 
localities “three miles distant.” Quaritch Wales’ computation, then, 
utilises overly generalised temporal periods and site areas likely to have 
dissimilar fluvial dynamics.
Given the measurements recorded by Quaritch Wales, the range 
of elevation among the burials and structural features does not seem to 
be substantial, certainly not to the point of demonstrating significant 
temporal separation [Figure 5]. Quaritch Wales’ temporal calculation 
in fact assumed that the human remains “were not artificially buried 
and that the level on which they were found was the level at which they 
lived” (1936b: 46). Given this presumption, differential depths of even a 
few centimetres take on greater significance. Given a greater likelihood, 
however, that the human remains were not left on an open living 
surface, but were placed in burial pits or grave shafts, differences in basal 
elevation do not necessarily reflect differences in age. Quaritch Wales 
himself implied a recognition of these stratigraphic principles, stating 
that if the “warriors” were “artificially buried,” this could “place their 
death between the first century B.C. [the placement he calculated using

--- PAGE 163 ---
WeSley clarke
323
322
his alluviation rate] and the sixth century A.D. [the date he assigned to 
the architectural features]” (1936b: 46-47). Quaritch Wales therefore 
recognised that, if the excavated human remains were not lying on a 
living surface contemporaneous with their deposition – a stratigraphic 
interpretation for which he admitted “no evidence (as of potsherds, etc.) 
was obtained” (1936b: 46-47) – that these inhumations could just as well 
be contemporaneous with the nearby Dvāravatī architecture.
By Quaritch Wales’ measurements at the “vihāra” structure, the 
excavated skeleton ranged 1.2 to 1.4 metres below ground surface 
(Quaritch Wales 1936a: 3; 1936b: 44), indicating a vertical separation 
from the architectural base of 41 to 56 cm., a difference readily 
accounted for by the excavation of a burial pit. At the “stūpa,” the 
skeletal deposits ranged vertically between 1.3 to 1.4 metres, creating a 
vertical separation from the architectural base of 30 to 46 cm. (Quaritch 
Wales 1936a: 9-11; 1936b: 45). Perhaps most significantly, the axial 
ritual deposit excavated by Quaritch Wales at the so-called stūpa was 
recorded at 1.3 metres below ground surface, crossing into the vertical 
range of the burials. An iron object and bone fragment encountered a 
few centimetres deeper on this axis were even more firmly “at the level 
of the skeletons” (1936b: 46). It is therefore the case that a principal 
element of the “stūpa” configuration, the foundational ritual deposit, 
was positioned at essentially the same depth as the nearby burials 
[Figure 5].
Quaritch Wales’ functional attribution of the human remains 
as “those of warriors killed in battle” seems rather fanciful, by all 
accounts based on the presence of iron “weapons” with four of the 
ten “stūpa” burials. A secondary notation in the field notes, believed to 
be by Dorothy Quaritch Wales, suggested that these items be labeled a 
“cutting instrument,” but Horace Geoffrey seems to have been fixated 
on the warrior theme:  “It is impossible to say,” he wrote, “whether 
a weapon was the cause of a mortal wound, since none was found 
penetrating bone, or whether the weapon was the warrior’s own, 
having remained clutched in his hand after death” (1936b: 46). In light 
of the numerous Iron Age burials now documented with iron tools on 
the Southeast Asian mainland, there would seem to be no compelling 
reason to view the Phong Tuek artefacts as other than domestic items, 
particularly in the absence of other conditions that would support a 
militaristic attribution, for example other categories of weaponry, or 
wounds noted for the skeletal remains.
Single extended inhumations with varying amounts of grave goods 
are said to be the “most common burial ritual in Thailand during the 
pre-metal, bronze, and iron ages” (Pietrusewsky & Douglas 2002: 177). 
Inhumations without surviving grave goods also occur. It has been 
asserted that inhumation burials are a pre-Indianisation phenomenon 
– that is, essentially prehistoric (Glover 1980: 20, n. 1). As of 1976, 
Bennet Bronson stated that “not a single inhumation burial associated 
with Indianized protohistoric or historic period artifacts has ever been 
discovered in Thailand” (1976: 20-21). True to this principle, the small 
“casket” excavated by Quaritch Wales at the octagonal “stūpa” was 
described as containing “cremated human relics” (1936b: 45), though 
there is no indication that the human nature of these contents was 
objectively verified.11  
It is possible that the juxtaposition of burials and ritual architecture 
at Phong Tuek is nothing more than the superimposition of structures on 
a pre-existing field of graves. For the reasons discussed above, however, 
the spatial relationships observed at these locations seem to favour an 
interpretation of contemporaneous association of the human remains 
and the ritual structures: burial orientations, and their horizontal and 
vertical positions, all appear to relate to the structural positions. Even 
so, it is still the case that the currently available data does not permit a 
conclusive assessment.
Regarding the newly identified structure reconstructed from the 
reports of local residents [Figure 6], the intentional association of 
human remains and the brick feature are obvious. The presence of 
multiple crania and absence of post-cranial remains is clearly unusual 
and ritualistic in nature (cf. Pietrusewsky & Douglas 2002: 179-181). In 
general size, this structure, at 5-metres-square, is similar to the shrine 
foundation excavated by Cœdès nearby at the Ban Nai Ma location, 
which measured approximately 5.8-metres-square (1928a: 198). The 
deepest vertical extent of the newly documented structure, roughly 
estimated from memory, was said to be between 1.4 and 1.5 metres. 
This places the structure base in the general region of Quaritch Wales’ 
maximum burial depths. Obviously, the identification and reconstruction 
of this structure is based on hearsay and must be treated with caution, 
but it seems to follow a consistent pattern of human remains occurring 
in association with Dvāravatī-level structures at Phong Tuek.
Comparative Sites
The first sites labeled “Dvāravatī” and having architectural remains 
(a total of seven) were reviewed by Pierre Dupont; the recent English 
edition of this work with updates added seven more sites to this list 
(Dupont 2006: 17-93). The only site among these where human 
remains were noted by Dupont was Phong Tuek. These remains were, 
however, dismissed by Dupont as not seeming “to make any significant 
contribution to justify further research” (2006: 83), i.e. Dupont probably 
accepted Quaritch Wales’ assertion that these burials were not related 
to the Dvāravatī component at Phong Tuek.
Sites with locations and ages potentially relevant for comparison to 
Phong Tuek have also been summarised by Amara Srisuchat (1998), 
Andrew Barram and Ian Glover (2008), the present author (Clarke 
2011) as well as Pimchanok Pongkasetkan and Stephen Murphy (2012). 
Among the site reports available for this late prehistoric-early historic 
era, only a few include mortuary data. Table 1 summarises four 
sites identified for consideration along with the mortuary patterns at 
Phong Tuek. These sites have been attributed by their investigators to 
“Dvāravatī” or to components dated to the Dvāravatī time period as 
it is generally established, and are located within a geographic range 
associated with Dvāravatī in the literature. The brief consideration here 
of these sites and their mortuary data is not intended to ignore their 
varying temporal placements or potential associations with distinctive 
regional cultural traditions. These sites are considered, however, to be 
among the principal examples of inhumation burial so far documented 
for the mid-to-late segments of the first millennium CE.

--- PAGE 164 ---
WeSley clarke
325
324
Extended inhumation and non-cremation jar burials at Mueang 
Fa Daet, a moated centre in northeast Thailand, have been published 
with a Dvāravatī attribution (Phasook et al. 1991; Phasook 2537 and 
2544). Mueang Fa Daet has been extensively explored, including the 
excavation of fourteen brick-and-laterite foundations, and substantial 
Buddhist remains, including sculptural images, sema stones (Murphy, this 
volume), and moulded tablets of a regional style have been uncovered 
at the site. During excavation of a habitation area in 1991, cultural 
deposits up to four metres deep revealed a long sequence of occupation 
ranging from the “late Prehistoric” Iron Age, beginning circa 300 BCE, 
to an “Ayutthaya culture” component terminating circa 1800 CE. In the 
middle of this sequence, Phase 3 is identified by Phasook Indrawooth 
(2544: 75) as a “Dvāravatī culture” component circa 700-1100 CE. It is 
asserted that “the most interesting discoveries” in this level were “three 
human skeletons buried in full length with their head turned to the 
west and the south” (2001: 75). Items with these extended inhumations 
included spouted pots, small cup lamps, iron implements, and glass and 
stone beads (Phasook 2544: 76), an assemblage associated with so-called 
Dvāravatī sites as well as sites found elsewhere in Southeast Asia. Jar 
burials with uncremated contents were also present in this cultural level.
Phasook observes that the “Dvāravatī residents” of Mueang 
Fa Daet, unlike their contemporaries in the Chao Phraya valley of 
central Thailand, “continued to bury their dead,” rather than shifting 
to cremation immediately after Buddhism arrived (2537: 120, figs 15, 
17). The presence of these extended inhumations with typical grave 
goods in an excavated cultural sequence (earlier segments of which are 
radiocarbon dated) dispels the assertion that inhumation graves did not 
occur after Indic influences arrived in northeast Thailand.
Other comparative sites include two localities at the moated centre 
of Si Satchanalai (Hein et al. 1988; FAD 2540). One set of Si Satchanalai 
remains (Chaliang section) consists of nine inhumations eroding out of 
the Yom riverbank. These were encountered approximately 5 metres 
below ground surface, apparently extending out of a habitation level 
radiocarbon dated to circa the seventh-ninth centuries CE (Hein et al. 
1988: 12, 14). The midden contained impressed and cord-marked 
earthenware pots, some burnished and painted, and spouted “kendi” and 
“flared mouth” (carinated?) jars – an assemblage that fits within the early 
historic pattern. No grave goods were noted with the eroded burials, 
which were all extended. Despite the absolute date, associated pottery 
types and proximity to the “Dvāravatī centre,” the Si Satchanalai analysts 
state that the burials “appear to belong to an early habitation phase which 
may be prehistoric and non-Buddhist” (Hein et al. 1988: 14). No explicit 
reasoning is provided, but the fact that the burials are inhumations may 
be the basis of this observation, reflecting the presumption of cremations-
only after the arrival of Indic religious practices.
Fifteen burials were also encountered below architecture, perhaps 
a stūpa base, at Si Satchanalai’s Wat Chom Chuen locality (FAD 
2540; Pimchanok & Murphy 2012: 85). These were mostly extended 
inhumations, with a few flexed and bundle (“bag”) burials as well, 
located in a stratum radiocarbon dated between the third and fifth 
centuries CE, “most likely belong[ing] to the Early  Dvāravatī period” 
(Pimchanok & Murphy 2012: 85). Grave goods were sparse, but 
included terracotta figurines and paddles, glass and stone beads, and 
one small iron object, possibly a blade, with a male skeleton.
Fifty-two graves were excavated in 2009 among structural 
foundations at Dong Mae Nang Mueang (Murphy & Pimchanok 2010; 
Pimchanok & Murphy 2012), a smaller double-moated centre that has 
been investigated in various aspects over several decades. The site of 
a rubble-mound exhibiting sema-like “standing stones” was partially 
excavated, revealing a layer of architectural rubble including finger-
marked bricks, stucco fragments that included floral and vegetal motifs, 
a few earthenware sherds and a possible terracotta finial, attributed to 
the “Late Dvāravatī period of the 10th to 12th centuries;” no prehistoric 
or historic Sukhothai/Ayutthaya components were encountered 
(Pimchanok & Murphy 2012: 78). Beneath this layer was a stratum 
one metre deep containing the burials at various levels and distributed 
across the entire area of the mound, with some brick and “Late 
Dvāravatī style” stucco, as well as green-glazed Angkorian ware, in 
the stratigraphic matrix. These graves included eight extended burials, 
eleven flexed, and twelve “bag” burials, with the remaining twenty-one 
unassigned. A group of two green-glazed Angkorian “boxes” or urns 
were also present in the burial stratum, containing “cremated human 
bone” (Pimchanok & Murphy 2012: 78).   
As with other “Dvāravatī-era” inhumations discussed here, the 
remains at Dong Mae Nang Mueang also exhibit a paucity of grave 
goods, a condition said to be in “stark contrast to Iron Age mortuary 
traditions in central Thailand” (Pimchanok & Murphy 2012: 84). The 
only objects directly associated with these inhumations were a gold 
earring and an object that “may be iron.”
The limited nature of this comparative data illustrates the current 
scarcity of mortuary information for Dvāravatī sites. Nonetheless, 
the repeated occurrence of non-cremation burials described above 
demonstrates the presence of this mortuary type during the “early 
historic” period in Thailand. The scarcity of information for both 
Table 1: Dvāravatī-era Sites with Inhumation Burials
Site Name
Location
Date Range
# Burials
Burial Type
Grave Goods
Phong Tuek
Kanchanaburi 
province,  
western Thailand
7th-11th centuries CE
12-18
Extended 
inhumation, 
secondary 
inhumation
Minimal grave 
goods; iron knives,  
bronze earring
Dong Mae 
Nang Mueang
Nakhon Sawan 
province,  
central Thailand
8th-12th centuries CE
52
Extended, 
flexed, bagged 
inhumations; late 
cremations in 
stoneware boxes
Minimal grave 
goods; gold earring, 
iron object
Wat Chom 
Chuen, Si 
Satchanalai
Sukhothai 
province,  
north-central 
Thailand
“Early Dvāravatī”  
(5th-6th centuries CE)
15
Mostly extended 
inhumations, also 
flexed and bagged
Limited grave goods; 
terracotta paddles 
and figurines, glass 
and stone beads,  
iron object
Chaliang,  
Si Satchanalai
Sukhothai 
province, north-
central Thailand
7th-9th centuries CE
9
Extended 
inhumation
Eroded on 
riverbank; no grave 
goods observed
Mueang  
Fa Daet
Kalasin province, 
northeast 
Thailand
7th-11th centuries CE
3 or  
more
Extended, jar  
(non cremation) 
inhumations;  
urn cremations
Spouted pots, small 
cup lamps, beads, 
bronze bracelets, 
iron implements

--- PAGE 165 ---
WeSley clarke
327
326
inhumation and cremation graves in central Thailand from that period 
may partly reflect the fugitive nature of the latter, and of not looking 
in the right places for the former. The excavation of early structural 
remains has often stopped at the foundation level, potentially leaving 
even modestly deeper burials undiscovered. This situation may pertain 
at Phong Tuek, for it is the case that of the six structural locations 
systematically excavated at the site, contiguous human remains 
were encountered only at the two locations where Quaritch Wales’ 
investigation proceeded well beyond the foundation level.
Conclusion
The principal objective of this inquiry has been to describe and 
evaluate the co-occurrence of human remains and ritual architecture 
at the Dvāravatī site of Phong Tuek. Recognising that the available 
data on the content and stratigraphic disposition of mortuary features 
at Phong Tuek is not adequate to support definitive evaluation, even 
when augmented by the excavator’s field notes, the reconstructed 
spatial relationships are nonetheless compelling in their suggestion of a 
contemporaneous, functional connection between the human remains 
and structural features. Taken together with the evidence accumulating 
from other sites, the proposition that inhumation burials are sometimes 
present in early historic ritual contexts is strongly supported, and it 
behooves field workers to develop excavation strategies that take this 
into account. As detailed information is generated at Dvāravatī and 
other early historic sites, and specific mortuary regimes described, 
questions regarding ritual practices and other social functions, as 
well as social ranking and sacred-secular differentiation can be better 
addressed. In particular, the pattern of inhumations and sparse grave 
furnishings in proximity to ritual structures is an intriguing phenomenon 
in need of more study. Such features may represent early Buddhist 
or Brahmanical practices that are heretofore un-described in pre-
modern Thailand.
It would appear that a new paradigm for mortuary practices can now 
be postulated, in keeping with Phasook Indrawooth’s previous observation 
that the residents of Mueang Fa Daet “continued to bury their dead” 
rather than shift to cremation. Contrary to earlier observations, such a 
shift did not occur uniformly across the early historic horizon in Thailand. 
Indeed, the persistence of Southeast Asian burial traditions after the 
arrival of Indic religious and socio-political cultural elements speaks to the 
process by which such exogenous practices were accepted and adapted. 
Since the late 1970s, as systematic information has accumulated from 
excavated sites, there has been a growing recognition that a “sub-regional” 
or “localised” diversity of social practices and material forms has been 
typical on the Southeast Asian mainland through time. This is certainly 
the case in Thailand, where “one of the most interesting outcomes of 
surveys and excavations […] is the recognition of regional variability; that 
what is true for the northeast does not hold for central, west or southern 
Thailand” (Glover 1991: 352).
Sub-regional distinctiveness is particularly evident among ceramic 
assemblages during the first millennium (Glover 1980: 19; Sawang 2005: 
66; Stark 2006: 100), but is also reflected in other material categories, 
including mortuary practices (Pietrusewsky & Douglas 2002: 188; White 
1995). Distinctiveness is often observable even among sites “closely 
situated to one another” (Glover 1980: 19). Peter Skilling indicates that 
the dominant religious tradition was also subject to regional adjustment, 
noting that “the Buddhisms of the Mon, Burmese, Central Thai, Shan, 
Lanna Tai, Lao, and Khmer are each quite distinctive” in their art 
and practices (2003: 103, n. 39). The persistence of Southeast Asian 
inhumation burial is another demonstration that the response to new 
Indic ideas and objects on the Southeast Asian mainland was neither 
uniform nor wholesale. Instead, new elements were selectively adopted 
and amalgamated with local indigenous traditions. Field strategies that 
include the active search for and recovery of mortuary data at Dvāravatī 
sites will be an important component in expanding our understanding 
of this process.
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to extend his appreciation to the many colleagues 
who were helpful in the re-evaluation of Phong Tuek:  Kanchana 
Pankhoyngam, Chobvit Lubpairee, Pannee Panyawattanaporn, and 
Yada Sommarat of the National Research Council of Thailand; 
venerable Phra Khru Jariyaphirat, abbot of Wat Dong Sak; Supamas 
Doungsakun of the Fine Arts Department regional office, Suphanburi; 
Somchai na Nakhonphanom, former Director of the Bangkok National 
Museum; Rachanie Thosarat, retired from the Fine Arts Department; 
Podjanok Kanjanajuntorn of Thammasat University; and Katherine 
McConigley, with the Australian Department of Environment and 
Conservation. Kob Kachonsittinoppakun and Pop Indrapiboon 
also provided indispensible logistical support and friendship in these 
research efforts.
Endnotes
1 
The term “Dvāravatī,” as a label for an 
archaeological culture, a time period, a polity 
or polities, and/or an art style, continues to be 
variously defined (cf. Barram 2003; Skilling 2003; 
Barram & Glover 2008; Glover 2010; Saritpong 
et al. 2011; and Gallon 2013). Elements that are 
emphasised in describing a Dvāravatī phenomenon 
or for postulating what such a phenomenon 
may encompass often reflect the differing foci 
of scholarly disciplines, particularly those of art 
history and archaeology. In the present essay, the 
term “Dvāravatī” is used in its most generic sense, 
reflecting the wide-ranging manner by which the 
term has been applied in reference to the period 
and territory where Buddhist and Brahmanical 
practices first became widespread in the region 
of Thailand. These conceptualisations generally 
involve the mid-to-later first millennium CE  
(ca seventh-eleventh centuries) in the area of 
central Thailand, though adjacent regions and  
sites are also often included. The conceptualisation 
of Dvāravatī requires additional refinement, 
including non-elite and non-ritualistic aspects 
of this cultural phenomenon, and substantial 
additional data collection and analysis will be 
necessary to accomplish this.
2 
Per the editorial requirements of the present 
volume, the site name is given here as the modern 
transliteration “Phong Tuek.” Bibliographical or 
general online searches, however, will find that 
virtually all scholarly studies connected to the site 
use a derived spelling originally given by Cœdès  
as P’ong Tük.
3 
A scholarly observation in the 1960s appears to 
have remained true into the twenty-first century: 
“the skeletons discovered at P’ong Tuk were 
ignored entirely by students of Thai history”  
(Sood 1966: 234).
4 
These notes were found with a collection of Dr 
Quaritch Wales’ papers at the archives of the Royal 
Asiatic Society (RAS), London. This collection was 
donated by his widow, Dorothy, circa 1995 (Guy 
1995; RAS 1995). The author is grateful to the 
Society for allowing a photocopy of the notes to be 
made for use in the reevaluation of Phong Tuek.
  5 At the time of the Cœdès investigation, Phong 
Tuek was in “Ratburi” (Ratchaburi) province.

--- PAGE 166 ---
WeSley clarke
329
328
References
Amara Srisuchat 
1998  A Proposed Outline of the 
Chronology of Early History in 
Thailand: Dating and Re-analysis 
of Data from Recently Excavated 
Sites in Thailand. In Klokke, 
Marijke & de Bruijn, Thomas (eds), 
Southeast Asian Archaeology 1996: 
Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference of the European Association of 
Southeast Asian Archaeologists. Kingston 
upon Hull: Centre for Southeast 
Asian Studies, pp. 99-115.
Barram, Andrew &  
Glover, Ian C. 
2008  Re-thinking Dvaravati. In 
Pautreau, Jean-Pierre et al. (eds), 
From Homo Erectus to the Living 
Traditions. Choice of Papers from the 
11th International Conference of the 
European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists. Chiang Mai: Siam 
Ratana Ltd., pp. 175-182.
Borell, Brigitte 
2008  The Early Byzantine Lamp 
from Pong Tuk. Journal of the Siam 
Society 96: 1-26.
Briggs, Lawrence Palmer  
1945  Dvāravatī: The Most Ancient 
Kingdom of Siam. Journal of the 
American Oriental Society 65(2): 98-107.
Bronson, Bennet  
1976  Excavations at Chansen and the 
Cultural Chronology of Protohistoric  
Central Thailand. Doctoral Dissertation. 
Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania. [Unpublished]
Bronson, Bennet &  
Dales, George F.  
1972  Excavations at Chansen, 
Thailand, 1968 and 1969. 
A Preliminary Report. Asian 
Perspectives 15: 15-46.
Brown, Robert L. & 
MacDonnell, Anna M. 
1989  The Pong Tuk Lamp: A 
Reconsideration, Journal of the  
Siam Society 77(2):  9-20.
Clarke, Wesley  
2009  The Skeletons of P’ong Tuk: 
Human Remains in Dvaravati 
Ritual Contexts? Paper presented 
at the 19th Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association Congress, Hanoi, 29 
November-5 December 2009. 
[Unpublished]
2010  Buddhist Bones? The 
Intriguing Evidence from P’ong 
Tuk. Paper presented at the 
Council on Thai Studies 38th Annual 
Meeting, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, 29-30 October 2010. 
[Unpublished] 
2011  Return to P’ong Tuk: Preliminary 
Reconnaissance of a Seminal Dvaravati 
Site in West-central Thailand. Master 
Thesis. Athens: Ohio University. 
[Unpublished; Available online at: 
http://rave.ohiolink.edu/etdc/
view?acc_num=ohiou1321396671] 
Cœdès, George  
1928a  Excavations at P’ong Tuk 
and Their Importance for the 
Ancient History of Siam. Journal  
of the Siam Society 21(3): 195-209.
1928b  New Archaeological 
Discoveries in Siam. Indian Arts  
and Letters, New Series 2(1): 9-20. 
Domett, Kate & Tayles, Nancy  
2004  Tooth Modification in Late 
Iron Age Cambodia. Journal of 
Physical Anthropology, Supplement 
38: 88-89.
Dupont, Pierre  
2006  The Archaeology of the Mons 
of Dvāravatī. English Translation 
by Joyanto K. Sen, with Extensive 
Annotations. Two Volumes. 
Bangkok: White Lotus Press. [First 
published in French as L’archéologie 
mône de Dvāravatī, 1959]
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2540  Wat Chom Chuen. Bangkok: 
Fine Arts Department. [In Thai; 
1997 CE]
Fukui, Hayao 
1976  Environmental Determinants 
Affecting the Potential Dissemination 
of High Yielding Varieties of 
Rice – A Case Study of the Chao 
Phraya Basin. In Ichimura, S. (ed.), 
Southeast Asia: Nature, Society, and 
Development. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press, pp. 139-166.
Gallon, Matthew D. 
2013  Ideology, Identity and the 
Construction of Urban Communities: 
The Archaeology of Kamphaeng Saen, 
Central Thailand (c. Fifth to Ninth 
Centuries CE). Doctoral Dissertation. 
Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan. [Unpublished]
  6 Per editorial requirements, dimensions are 
given here in metric units; the original English 
measurements are eight by ten inches.
  7 Cœdès also refers to this location as the  
“Banana Plantation” (e.g. 1928a: pl. 6).
  8  Whether this axial deposit should be assigned a 
reliquary function is uncertain. Ślączka (2007: 6) 
makes a convincing case that many foundational 
deposits termed “relic” or “reliquary” are actually 
consecration deposits (garbhanyāsa – i.e. “the placing 
of the embryo”) offered during rituals that insure 
the safety and prosperity of the facility and its 
occupants, as well as animating and consecrating 
the ground where construction is occurring (2007: 
201-202, 217-219).  
  9 This item is identified as an “iron hook” in 
Quaritch Wales (1936a: 11). 
10 “It is necessary to emphasise that introducing 
fictitious details is dangerous since the chronology 
of the Dvāravatī sites has not yet been accurately 
established. By assigning ex abrupto the 6th century 
as the age of the Dvāravatī ruins whatever they 
may be, and similarly the 11th century to the 
Khmer ruins of Thailand, one seems to lose 
sight of the fact that the historical civilizations 
in Thailand were not distinct periods, and that 
the territory of Dvāravatī – which is still a vague 
concept – existed after the 6th century and that 
Khmer influence was not limited to the 11th. It is 
thus not possible to subscribe to the conclusions  
of H.G. Quaritch Wales” (Dupont 2006: 78).
11 It appears that the human origin of the calcined 
bone contents of this ritual container is a 
presumption on Quaritch Wales’ part, as may be 
his functional attribution of “stūpa” instead of 
caitya. Ślączka (2007: 259, n. 101) observes that  
the “ashes” found in such “reliquary caskets”  
are usually unverified chemically and may not  
even be “anything of animal origin at all.”
Glover, Ian C. 
1980  Ban Don Ta Phet and Its 
Relevance to Problems in the 
Pre- and Protohistory of Thailand. 
Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association 2: 16-30.
1991  The Late Prehistoric Period 
in West-central Thailand. Bulletin 
of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 
10: 349-356.
Guy, John 
1995  The Dorothy and Horace 
Quaritch Wales Bequest – A Note. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
Third Series 5(1): 91-92.
Hein, Don et al. 
1988  Inhumation Burials at 
Sisatchanalai. Siam Society Newsletter 
4(2): 12-15.
Kaida, Yoshihiro &  
Surarerks, Vanpen 
1983  Climate and Agricultural 
Land Use in Thailand. In Yoshino, 
M.M. (ed.), Climate and Agricultural 
Land Use in Monsoon Asia. Tokyo: 
University of Tokyo Press,  
pp. 231-254. 
Murphy, Stephen A. & 
Pimchanok Pongkasetkan 
2010  Fifty Years of Archaeological 
Research at Dong Mae Nang 
Muang. An Ancient Gateway to 
the Upper Chao Phraya Basin. 
Journal of the Siam Society 98: 49-74.
Phasook Indrawooth 
2537  Watthanatham thawarawadi 
nai phak isan: wikhro lakthan chak 
laeng borannakhadi mueang fa daet 
song yang (Dvaravati Culture in 
the Chi Valley: A Study on Muang 
Fa Daed Song Yang). Muang Boran 
20(1): 99-120. [In Thai with English 
Summary; 1994 CE]
2544  Raingan kankhutkhon mueang 
boran fa daet song yang, amphoe 
kamalasai, changwat kalasin  
(Report on the Excavation at Mueang 
Fa Daet Song Yang, Kamalasai District, 
Kalasin Province). Nakhon Pathom: 
Silpakorn University. [In Thai; 
2001 CE]
Phasook Indrawooth,  Sinchai 
Krabuansang & Payao Narkwake 
1991  Muang Fa Daed Song Yang: 
New Archaeological Discoveries.  
In Silpakorn University (ed.), 
Récentes recherches en archéologie en 
Thaïlande : deuxième symposium franco-
thaï. Bangkok: Silpakorn University, 
pp. 98-111.
Pietrusewsky, Michael & 
Douglas, Michele T. 
2002  Ban Chiang: A Prehistoric 
Village Site in Northeast Thailand. 
1: The Human Skeletal Remains. 
Philadelphia: Museum of 
Archaeology and Anthropology, 
University of Pennsylvania. 
Pimchanok Pongkasetkan & 
Murphy, Stephen A. 
2012  Transitions from Late 
Prehistoric to Dvaravati Period 
Funerary Practices: New Evidence 
from Dong Mae Nang Muang, 
Central Thailand. In Bonatz, 
Dominik, Reinecke, Andreas 
& Tjoa-Bonatz, Mai Lin (eds), 
Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from 
the 13th International Conference of the 
European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Volume 1. Singapore: 
NUS Press, pp. 75-89.
Quaritch Wales, Horace Geoffrey 
1936a  Greater-Indian Research 
Expedition, Season 1935-1936,  
Manuscript on file at the 
Royal Asiatic Society, London, 
H.G. Quaritch Wales Archive, 
inventoried as Notebook #28 – 
two hardbound notebooks the 
earlier of which (dated January 
1936) contains the P’ong Tuk 
field notes. [Handwritten pages 
not individually numbered; page 
numbers used here are inferred] 
1936b  Further Excavations at 
P’ong Tuk (Siam). Indian Arts and 
Letters, New Series 10(1): 42-48.
1937a  Some Ancient Human 
Skeletons Excavated in Siam.  
Man 37: 89-90.
1937b  Towards Angkor. In the 
Footsteps of the Indian Invaders. 
London: Harrap & Co.
1964  “Some Ancient Human 
Skeletons Excavated in Siam:”  
A Correction. Man 64: 121.
1966  Dvāravatī in South-East 
Asian Cultural History. Journal of 
the Royal Asiatic Society, New Series 
98(1):  40-52. 
Royal Asiatic Society (RAS) 
1995  Wales Bequest to the Society. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
Third Series 5(1): 169-170.
Saritpong Khunsong,  
Phasook Indrawooth & 
Surapol Natapintu 
2011  Excavation of a  
Pre-Dvāravāti Site at Hor-Ek  
in Ancient Nakhon Pathom.  
Journal of the Siam Society 99:  
150-171.
Skilling, Peter 
2003  Dvāravatī: Recent 
Revelations and Research. In 
Baker, Chris (ed.), Dedications to 
HRH Princess Galyani Vadhana Krom 
Luang Naradhiwas Rajanagarindra on 
Her 80th Birthday. Bangkok: The 
Siam Society, pp. 87-112.
Ślączka, Anna A. 
2007  Temple Consecration Rituals  
in Ancient India: Text and Archaeology. 
Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Sood Sangvichien 
1966  Neolithic Skeletons from  
Ban Kao, Thailand, and the 
Problem of Thai Origins.  
Current Anthropology 7(2): 234-235.
Stark, Miriam T. 
2006  Pre-Angkorian Settlement 
Trends in Cambodia’s Mekong 
Delta and the Lower Mekong 
Archaeological Project. Bulletin of 
the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 
26: 98-109.
Tanabe Susumu et al. 
2003  Stratigraphy and Holocene 
Evolution of the Mud-dominated 
Chao Phraya Delta, Thailand. 
Quaternary Science Reviews 22: 789-807.
Tayles, Nancy 
1996  Tooth Ablation in Prehistoric 
Southeast Asia. International Journal 
of Osteoarchaeology 6: 333-345.
Tayles, Nancy & Marc 
oxenham (eds) 
2006  Bioarchaeology of Southeast 
Asia. New York and Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Thanik Lertcharnrit 
2005  Late Prehistoric and Early 
Historic Archaeology in Thailand: 
Recent Evidence from the Central 
Highland. Silpakorn University 
International Journal 5(1-2): 55-72.
White, Joyce 
1995  Incorporating Heterarchy 
into Theory on Socio-political 
Development: The Case from 
Southeast Asia. In Ehrenreich, 
R.M., Crumley, C.L. & Levy, J.E. 
(eds), Heterarchy and the Analysis of 
Complex Societies. Virginia: American 
Anthropological Association,  
pp. 101-123.

--- PAGE 167 ---
331
330
Introduction
T
hroughout the ancient world, the emergence of urban centres 
entailed a dramatic growth in the number of people living within 
a single settlement. The diversity and size of the populations of early 
urban centres often overwhelmed the kinship-based mechanisms that 
for several millennia had maintained social cohesion in sedentary 
village communities. New social identities and relationships were 
needed to help unite groups of people who lacked strong kinship ties, 
and in some cases, had significant cultural differences. During the first 
millennium CE, the people of central and northeast Thailand faced 
these challenges as they underwent increased population aggregation, 
political centralisation and urbanisation. As part of these dramatic 
changes, the residents of these regions developed new social identities, 
expressed in part through shared forms of material culture, town plans 
and religious practices. The spread of this suite of cultural similarities 
marks the rise of an archaeological culture known as Dvāravatī.1
In this essay, I focus on how Dvāravatī communities created and 
reinforced religious, specifically Buddhist, identities through monument 
construction and the configuration of space within and around their 
settlements. Using the results of my archaeological research at the 
Dvāravatī centre of Kamphaeng Saen as an example, I show how the 
residents placed monuments and sculpture to materialise Buddhist 
concepts within their settlement’s landscape. I then argue that the 
location of Buddhist material at Kamphaeng Saen fits within a broader 
pattern of the spatial configuration of Buddhist monuments in central 
Thailand. This pattern reveals shared concepts of religious space and 
identity among the residents of these centres. The spatial context of 
Buddhist monuments within these settlements also provides insights 
into some of the dynamics between political and monastic institutions 
at that time, and how Buddhist practices and monuments helped create 
new group identities and relations among and between both groups.
Preliminary Explorations at the Dvāravatī 
Centre of Kamphaeng Saen, 1939-1992
Kamphaeng Saen is located in Nakhon Pathom province, in west-
central Thailand, often considered the heartland of the Dvāravatī 
culture [Map 1]. A moat and wall enclose a 53 hectare area at 
Kamphaeng Saen. Based on measurements of the moated area of 
Dvāravatī period sites (Gallon 2013: figs 4.16, 4.18), Kamphaeng 
Saen can be considered a fourth-tier centre and the smallest enclosed 
settlement in the west-central region from this period [Map 2].2 
Monuments and Identity at the 
Dvāravatī Town of Kamphaeng Saen 
maTTHeW d. gallon
Map 1: Moated Dvāravatī settlements of central Thailand and a selection of significant 
moated settlements in northeast Thailand [Drawing by Matthew D. Gallon].

--- PAGE 168 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
333
332
By contrast, Kamphaeng Saen’s nearest neighbouring enclosed 
settlement, only 25 kilometres to the south, is the urban centre of ancient 
Nakhon Pathom, whose impressive 659 hectare moated enclosure 
makes it the largest Dvāravatī settlement. U Thong, located roughly 40 
kilometres north of Kamphaeng Saen, is the next closest moated centre, 
with an enclosed area of 96 hectares. Nakhon Pathom and U Thong have 
well-documented Buddhist monuments both inside and outside their 
enclosures, as well as numerous Buddhist sculptures, often from unknown 
intra-site locations (Dupont 1959; Boisselier 1968 and 1970; Arunsak 
et al. 2545; Usa 2009). Several stone Brahmanical or Hindu sculptures 
(i.e. Śiva liṅgams and a stele of a mitred-Viṣṇu) were recovered at 
U Thong (Quaritch Wales 1946; Arunsak et al. 2545), and two Śiva 
liṅgams were found associated with laterite structures interpreted as 
temples at Khok Chang Din, located roughly 3 kilometres outside 
U Thong (Somsak 2510; Phattharaphong 2545).
Even though Kamphaeng Saen’s enclosure is significantly smaller 
than other moated settlements in west-central Thailand, it shares some 
key features with its larger neighbours and with Dvāravatī settlements 
elsewhere in central Thailand. Dvāravatī moated settlements are 
typically located near waterways that feed their moats. Kamphaeng 
Saen is located adjacent to the south bank of the Huai Yang stream, 
which ultimately flows into the Tha Chin river. The Huai Yang feeds 
a moat that encircles the site in an irregular polygon shape of roughly 
750 x 780 metres. The moat is 16 to 20 metres wide and is still filled 
with water throughout the entire year. The earth removed during the 
moat’s construction was piled along its interior edge forming a rounded 
Map 2: A map of Kamphaeng 
Saen showing the location of exterior 
religious monuments and the KSAP 
test excavations [Drawing by 
Matthew D. Gallon].
earthen wall, which is currently 2.5 
to 4 metres above ground surface 
and 18 to 30 metres wide.3 The 
moat and wall enclosure follow an 
irregular polygon plan, consistent 
with other early Dvāravatī enclosures 
that typically have irregular to oval 
plans (Quaritch Wales 1969: 116-
117; Mudar 1999: 5).
Pierre Dupont (1939), Jean 
Boisselier (1965) and H.G. Quaritch 
Wales (1969) all made brief visits 
to Kamphaeng Saen to investigate 
Dvāravatī-style sculpture found by 
local residents. During a visit to the 
site in the late 1930s, Dupont (1939: 
364-365 and 1959: 199-200, figs 
401-403) examined three sculptures 
of standing Buddhas (approximately 
50 cm. high) found outside the 
settlement enclosure and then moved to the modern Kamphaeng Saen 
monastery [Figures 1a-b].4 All were carved out of laterite and then 
covered with stucco. The production technique and style of the images 
led Dupont (1939: 364-365 and 1959: 144) to characterise them as part 
of a localised sculptural tradition of the “late Dvāravatī period.”  Based 
on the slab backing on these images, he also hypothesised that they 
were set in niches of a religious structure (Dupont 1959: 199). Dupont 
(1939: 364-365) noted that the monks had recovered the images from 
small brick-covered mounds that were located outside the settlement 
enclosure to the northwest; however, Quaritch Wales (1969: 50) later 
observed that the mounds where the statues were found were located 
“outside the eastern gate of the town,” and in 1992 Somprasong 
Nuamboonlue (2539) and his team documented an oral history by a 
local resident confirming their recovery east of the settlement.  
In 1963, a dharmacakra (Buddhist Wheel of Law) [Figure 2] 
carved from blue-green limestone and a carved stone base or socle 
[Figure 3] were found at Kamphaeng Saen (Chira & Woodward 
2509: cat. 22; Quaritch Wales 1969: 50). Today both sculptural pieces 
are housed in the Phra Pathom Chedi National Museum in Nakhon 
Pathom. Little is known about their in situ context, but Quaritch Wales 
(1969: 50) mentioned that they were found “somewhat further to the 
east” of the brick mounds where the three statues of the Buddha were 
recovered. The triangular base of the dharmacakra frames a figure that 
Chira Chongkol and Hiram Woodward (2509) identified as “a divinity 
or royal personage holding an unopened lotus in each hand.” Due 
to the simplification of the decoration around its rim both Quaritch 
Wales (1969: 138) and Robert Brown (1996: 132) placed the dharmacakra 
from Kamphaeng Saen in a late group in their typologies of Dvāravatī 
dharmacakras (Quaritch Wales’s type 4; Brown’s group 5). Brown (1996: 
136-137) suggested that this group of wheels may date to the late seventh 
or eighth century CE, but cautioned that this was highly speculative. 
The socle found with the dharmacakra bears an inscription that refers 
to the “Four Noble Truths” of Buddhism.5 The inscription is written in 
Figures 1a-b: Two of three stucco  
on laterite Buddhas recovered at 
Kamphaeng Saen in the early  
20th century CE: left, currently 
located in Wat Kamphaeng Saen; 
right, currently located in Wat Sawang 
Chat Pracha Bamrung [Photographs 
by Matthew D. Gallon].

--- PAGE 169 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
335
334
all built after the mid-1960s. With the assistance of the scout camp 
watchman, Quaritch Wales (1969: 50) identified low densities of 
potsherds on the surface in some parts of the site, with other areas 
void of any surface material. He noted that the surface ceramics 
included earthenware sherds from cord-marked vessels and carinated 
vessels, resembling those commonly found at other sites affiliated 
with the Dvāravatī culture. Based on the irregularity of the plan of 
the enclosure and the low density of surface material, Quaritch Wales 
(1969: 51) speculated that Kamphaeng Saen was founded as “an early 
outpost towards the sea which stagnated rather than developed with the 
establishment of a definitive seaside capital at Nak’on Pathom.”
Dupont (1939), Boisselier (1965) and Quaritch Wales (1969) did not 
report seeing any monuments inside the settlement enclosure during 
their visits to the site. Alternatively, Somprasong (2539: 32) recorded oral 
histories from local residents who claimed a stūpa base (i.e. chedi in Thai) 
had been located at the centre of the settlement enclosure. Somprasong 
did not provide any details on the size or construction of the monument, 
although he noted that one informant said there was an inscription on 
a stone that was apparently part of the monument. Attempts to plough 
this area with a tractor were reportedly unsuccessful and, as a result, a 
flagpole was built over the location of the monument. Today no pre-
modern construction materials are visible under the flagpole base. In 
the southeastern part of the enclosed area, Somprasong (2539: 34) was 
shown more substantive evidence for a monument in the form of a 
pile of bricks, whose base he believed resembled that of a monument. 
Unfortunately, he did not report the exact location of the pile, its 
dimensions, or the sizes of the bricks it comprised. In the north part of 
the site, Somprasong (2539: 31) documented the recovery of numerous 
Indo-Pacific glass beads, of types typically found at first millennium CE 
sites in central Thailand, as well as a clay Buddha image of uncertain 
age. Two bronze Buddha images were reportedly found in the northeast 
part of the site. One is small and eroded, making its age difficult to 
determine; the other appears to be a later Ayutthaya period Buddha 
(ca 1350-1767). These opportunistic finds and observations confirmed 
that the site was occupied during the Dvāravatī period, while 
raising additional questions about the chronology and nature 
of its establishment, growth and decline.
The 2009-2010 Kamphaeng Saen  
Archaeology Project 
From January 2009 to August 2010, I directed the Kamphaeng 
Saen Archaeology Project (KSAP), under the supervision of the 2nd 
Regional Office of the Fine Arts Department (FAD), to investigate 
the site through field research and subsequent analyses (Gallon 2013). 
Despite the chance finds of Dvāravatī sculpture and cultural materials 
discussed above, no site-wide systematic archaeological investigation 
had yet been conducted at Kamphaeng Saen. As a result, the project 
addressed fundamental questions about site chronology, organisation 
and function; baseline information essential for examining how the 
emergence of urban centres in central Thailand affected both the 
residents of ancient Kamphaeng Saen, as well as their relationships 
Figure 3: The Pāli inscribed socle 
from Kamphaeng Saen; 36.5 cm. 
wide x 38.5 cm. long. Currently 
located in the Phra Pathom Chedi 
National Museum, Nakhon Pathom, 
inv. no. 37/2541 [Photograph by 
Matthew D. Gallon].
Pāli with a script derived from southern India (similar 
to Pallava), which Cœdès’s dated to the eighth century 
CE.6 It is located on either the top or bottom of the 
socle, depending on the sculpture’s original orientation. 
Brown (1996: 108) observed that the script is relatively 
large, which might indicate that it was meant to be read 
from the ground by a viewer looking upward at the 
bottom of the socle as it sat atop a pillar supporting a 
dharmacakra. Literacy in Pāli, however, was likely low, 
and the inscription’s primary function may have been 
to spiritually empower the sculpture or impress viewers 
rather than provide information about Buddhist 
doctrine (Revire, this volume).
Based on reports and oral histories, Somprasong 
(2539: 31-34) identified the general locations of four 
groups of ruins of brick structures outside the settlement 
enclosure to the north, east, south and west. Due to 
their brick construction and mound-like character, 
these structures were probably either reliquary or 
commemorative Buddhist stūpas.7 The group of ruins to 
the north of the enclosure were located on the opposite 
side of the Huai Yang stream and included a large 
mound with a base roughly 12 x 12 metres (Somprasong 
2539: 33). Four smaller (2 x 2 metres) structures were 
reportedly located at each of its corners, but had been 
destroyed by ploughing. The structures located east of the settlement 
were described by Somprasong (2539: 32) as seven mounds aligned 
in an east-west line, with a small circular pool of water at its eastern 
end. Unfortunately, he did not specify the mounds’ dimensions or their 
distances from each other and the settlement. About 400 metres south 
of the settlement enclosure, Somprasong (2539: 32-33) identified a third 
group of ruins with six brick mounds. They had bases approximately 
4 x 4 metres and, like the eastern group, were configured in an east-
west line. Based on this similarity, he speculated that there had been a 
seventh stūpa mound in the southern group that had been destroyed and 
was no longer visible. The final group Somprasong (2539: 32) identified 
was located about 2 kilometres west of the town, significantly further 
from the settlement than the other groups. Half of the main mound 
in this group had been destroyed by road construction; the base of the 
ruins of the remaining structure was 15 x 24 metres. He also identified 
the base (roughly 12 x 12 metres) of a smaller structure due  east of 
the main structure, as well as a 45 metre square water pool 100 metres 
further east. Somprasong’s documentation of ruins and oral histories 
in the area around Kamphaeng Saen provided a valuable record of 
this landscape, which has undergone significant changes even since his 
study. While there is a strong likelihood that many of the structures he 
documented are contemporaneous with the Dvāravatī occupation of 
Kamphaeng Saen, it was beyond the scope of his study to conclusively 
determine the age and function of the structures or precisely map their 
location and configuration.
In contrast to the area outside the settlement’s moat, there is little 
evidence for religious monuments inside the moat and wall enclosure. 
Today, this area contains a scout camp, primary school and arboretum, 
Figure 2: The dharmacakra 
from Kamphaeng Saen; 67 cm. 
diameter. Currently located in the 
Phra Pathom Chedi National 
Museum, Nakhon Pathom, inv.  
no. 38/2541 [Photograph by 
Matthew D. Gallon].

--- PAGE 170 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
337
336
with neighbouring communities like Nakhon Pathom and U Thong. 
The KSAP team was particularly interested in how the construction 
and configuration of religious monuments may have both encouraged 
and reflected the emergence of shared concepts of identity among the 
residents of these centres. To investigate these questions the KSAP 
employed a combination of pedestrian survey, auger coring and 
excavation.8
Full coverage survey of the area inside the enclosure confirmed 
Quaritch Wales’s (1969: 50) observation of an uneven distribution of 
low densities of ceramics on the ground surface, almost exclusively 
earthenware sherds resembling those in assemblages from other 
Dvāravatī culture sites. The KSAP team did not find any mounds of 
in situ Dvāravatī-style bricks within the site interior, although we did 
document a few isolated bricks of indeterminate age and numerous 
earthen mounds that post-date the Dvāravatī occupation of the 
site.9 Auger core samples collected throughout the interior revealed 
a combination of open and occupied areas, but did not encounter 
any indications of sub-surface monuments. Auger coring around the 
flagpole base at the centre of the site, the location of the supposed 
stūpa base mentioned by Somprasong (2539: 32), did not encounter any 
sub-surface impediments or architectural debris, and only one brick 
fragment of indeterminate age was identified in this area on the surface. 
The lack of architectural debris in this area raises serious doubts about 
the existence of a brick monument in this location, but it is possible 
that it may underlie the flagpole base (approximately 3.5 x 5 metres) or 
was completely destroyed and removed during the construction of the 
flagpole and the surrounding road.
Test excavations in four different parts of the site interior recovered 
Dvāravatī ceramics, ground stone, and glass beads, without significant 
evidence for pre- or post-Dvāravatī phases of occupation. We found 
a few isolated bricks, but they were not associated with any other 
evidence for monuments or religious objects, and appear to have 
been used in domestic contexts. We also cleaned a pre-existing cut 
through the earthen enclosure wall and extended it to natural soil, 
revealing that the wall was entirely built of earth and dated to the 
site’s initial occupation.10 AMS radiocarbon dates from the excavated 
contexts indicated that occupation of the site began around the fifth or 
sixth century CE and was most intensive from this initial period 
through the seventh century CE. After this initial phase, the density 
of occupation significantly decreased, but continued until the 
ninth century CE, after which the site was largely abandoned. Our 
excavations did not identify any evidence to explain the site’s premature 
decline, but as Quaritch Wales’s (1969: 51) speculated, urbanisation and 
centralisation of political power at nearby Nakhon Pathom likely 
played an important role.
Investigations of the landscape outside the enclosure included 
surveys and attempts to locate and more precisely document the 
exterior monument ruins described by Somprasong (2539: 32-33). We 
were unable to locate either the south or west monument groups, but 
identified the north stūpa 155 metres from the settlement enclosure on 
the opposite side of the river and scatters of bricks 50 to 300 metres 
east of the enclosure [Map 2]. The north stūpa ruins were covered 
by dense brush making it difficult to document; however, the mound 
appeared to have a square foundation, roughly 12 x 12 metres, a 
solid core roughly 2 metres high and an approximate orientation of 9 
degrees east of true north [Figure 4]. On average, the bricks of this 
monument were slightly smaller than those in the field east of the site 
(see infra), but they contained similar temper of rice grains and chaff 
and were within the size-range of bricks found at Dvāravatī period sites. 
No stucco ornaments or sculptural fragments were visible on the 
surface of the mound or the surrounding ground surface, and a survey 
of adjacent fallow fields encountered no other archaeological material. 
Future clearance and excavation are needed to more conclusively 
determine the monument’s plan and age.  
Our surveys of a selection of fallow fields within 1 kilometre of the 
enclosure exterior identified only a few modern ceramic sherds in fields 
north, south and west of the site, but in an area east of the enclosure 
we identified complete and fragmentary Dvāravatī-style bricks scattered 
around a recently dug reservoir and nearby fields [Figure 5]. We did 
not identify any in situ bricks or structures in this area. The bricks had 
variable dimensions and levels of oxidation, but were on average 32 x 
16 x 8 cm., incompletely oxidised (i.e. had a black core) and tempered 
Figure 4: Ruins of the north stūpa 
mound with members of the survey 
team (view north) [Photograph by 
Matthew D. Gallon].
Figure 5: A scatter of Dvāravatī-
style bricks in a field east of the 
settlement enclosure (view north, 
north-west) [Photograph by  
Matthew D. Gallon].

--- PAGE 171 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
339
338
with rice husks and grains [Figures 6a-b]. The bricks from the scatters 
resemble examples from other Dvāravatī sites such as U Thong, Nakhon 
Pathom and Khu Bua. The brick scatters likely represent the remains 
of the “much dug-over” brick mounds described by Quaritch Wales 
(1969: 50) and the seven mounds described by Somprasong (2539: 32). 
Just east of the brick scatters, Mr Pisit Thonatanat, a member of 
the local historical society and long-time resident, showed us the general 
location where the dharmacakra and inscribed socle had been recovered 
in 1963, roughly 350 metres east of the moat and 100 metres south of 
the river [Map 2]. This location is consistent with Quaritch Wales’s 
(1969: 50) description of the discovery of these two sculptural pieces 
“somewhat further to the east” of the mounds with bricks. In our 
surveys of the fields east of the settlement enclosure we identified only 
the scatters of brick and no other archaeological materials. This initially 
perplexed us, but through discussions with a local farmer we learned 
that he and others had found and collected a few earthenware sherds 
and sculptural fragments near the brick scatters. His small collection 
of sherds comprised fragments of earthenware vessels with features 
common in Dvāravatī assemblages, and included three notable pieces: 
a rim that resembles those typically found on a type of high-necked 
vessels referred to as “water-pots” (e.g. Phasook 2528: pl. 27, fig. 10.1-5, 
10.10); a fragment of a tall tubular finial that came from either a small 
stūpa or an ornate lid (e.g. Phasook 2528: fig. 15) [Figure 7]; and a leg 
from a vessel stand (e.g. Phasook 2528: pl. 45, fig. 16) [Figure 8].  
The farmer also found two sculptural objects in the field east of 
the settlement enclosure. The first was a terracotta head of a deer 
[Figure 9], a symbol commonly associated with Buddhism, and 
documented at other Dvāravatī sites, albeit in stone (Brown 1996: figs 
69-75). The second was a bronze pedestal in the shape of a lotus with 
the feet of a standing figure on its top [Figure 10]. Unfortunately 
the sculpture had broken at both the lotus’s stem and just above the 
figure’s ankles. Two Dvāravatī stone sculptures, one from Lop Buri 
(FAD 2552: fig. 22) and another from Nakhon Pathom (Brown 1996: 
fig. 79; FAD 2552: fig. 25), depict the Buddha a top a mythical beast 
(either identified as Phanasbodi or Sūrya respectively) and flanked on 
either side by an attendant (variously identified as Bodhisattvas or gods 
Indra or Brahmā) who is standing on a stemmed lotus. The depiction 
of the Buddha on a mythical beast flanked by attendants is unique to 
Dvāravatī art; art historians believe the motif developed between the 
end of the eighth and the ninth century CE (FAD 2552; Baptiste & 
Zéphir 2009: 82-87). Two other Dvāravatī stone and bronze sculptures 
depict a celestial Buddha and an attendant to either side, with the three 
figures standing on lotus blossoms that all emanate from the same stalk. 
These images were recovered from Khok Samrong, Lop Buri province 
and the Chedi Chula Prathon in Nakhon Pathom, and may date to 
the first and second half of the eighth century CE, respectively (Piriya 
2012: 92-93, figs 1.88, 1.89). To varying degrees, the lotus bases in these 
images resemble the bronze sculptural fragment from Kamphaeng 
Saen and raise the possibility that it came from a similar image.11 The 
relative dating of these lotus bases overlaps with the timeframe given 
for the dharmacakra and inscription from Kamphaeng Saen, suggesting 
significant investment in Buddhist sculpture at the settlement in the 
eighth century CE. 
In addition to the sculptural pieces whose provenance east of the 
site was verified by the farmer, the modern Wat Kamphaeng Saen has 
several Dvāravatī-style stucco and terracotta sculptural pieces in its 
museum that were reportedly recovered at Kamphaeng Saen.12 Dupont 
(1939), Boisselier (1965) and Quaritch Wales (1969) reported seeing only 
the three stucco and laterite Buddhas and no other stucco fragments 
during their visits; however, Somprasong (2539: 30) later documented 
several of the pieces, raising the possibility that they were discovered 
since the late 1960s. During a visit to Wat Kamphaeng Saen in 2010, 
we examined two stucco human faces [Figures 11-12] that closely 
resemble the many stucco faces from Buddhist monuments at other 
Dvāravatī settlements in western Thailand (e.g. Thung Setthi, Nakhon 
Pathom, Khu Bua and U Thong). These faces share distinctive features 
including connected eyebrows, thick lips and a large nose. Somprasong 
(2539: 30) reported additional stucco objects from Kamphaeng 
Saen, including a third face with similar features to the two we saw, 
a hand fragment, the hind leg of a lion and a scroll-like architectural 
ornament; unfortunately, these pieces could not be located at the time 
of our visit. Additionally, the U Thong National Museum has a typical 
Dvāravatī-style lion made of stucco whose provenance is listed as 
Kamphaeng Saen.13
We also examined two terracotta sculptural fragments in the 
Wat Kamphaeng Saen collection. The first was the upper torso and 
Figures 6a-b
Figure 9
Figure 7
Figure 10
Figure 8
Figures 6a-b: A complete example 
(top) and width cross-section (bottom) 
of Dvāravatī-style bricks found in a 
field east of the settlement enclosure. 
Note the incompletely-oxidised core 
and rice grain and husk temper in  
the cross-section [Photographs by  
Matthew D. Gallon].
Figure 7: Fragment of a terracotta 
finial, found in a field east of the 
settlement enclosure [Photograph by 
Matthew D. Gallon].
Figure 8: Leg from a clay vessel 
stand, found in a field east of the 
settlement enclosure [Photograph by 
Matthew D. Gallon].
Figure 9: Terracotta deer head 
fragment, found in a field east of the 
settlement enclosure [Photograph by 
Matthew D. Gallon].
Figure 10: Fragmented bronze lotus 
base with feet, found in a field east of 
the settlement enclosure [Photograph 
by Matthew D. Gallon].

--- PAGE 172 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
341
340
arms of a figure in the añjali gesture, signifying homage or worship 
[Figure 13]. The figure has what appear to be armbands around 
both upper biceps and bracelets around both wrists. In Dvāravatī art, 
these types of ornaments are generally worn by individuals such as 
Bodhisattvas, Brahmanical or Hindu deities, celestial beings, or the laity, 
who are in some examples shown worshipping or assisting the Buddha 
almost always depicted without ornaments (Somsak 2535: figs 25, 26, 
71; FAD 2552: figs 7, 40, cats 24, 25, 36, 37). The second terracotta 
fragment we examined was not documented by Somprasong (2539), 
and depicts two adjacent heads [Figure 14]. The hairstyle of the figure 
on the left resembles that of the female musicians and the noble woman 
and her attendant depicted in the stucco panels recovered from stūpa 
no. 10 at Khu Bua (Somsak 2535: figs 71, 72).
The Buddhist Landscape at  
Kamphaeng Saen and Beyond
When we examine the landscape of Kamphaeng Saen, including 
both areas inside and outside the settlement enclosure, there is a 
striking division of space between the habitation areas presumably in 
the settlement core and the surrounding Buddhist monuments and 
sculpture on its periphery. Even though our investigations could not 
provide absolute dates for any of the religious monuments outside the 
enclosure, the east group clearly dates to the Dvāravatī period based on 
the style of the bricks, sculpture and ceramics found there. The north 
stūpa is also likely from this same period based on its square base and 
style of bricks. While we could not inspect the south group, the apparent 
similarity between the configuration of the south and east group of 
monuments in Somprasong’s report (2539) suggest they may be roughly 
contemporaneous. The age of the west monument group is the least 
certain, although the bricks on the surface of the monument shown in 
Somprasong’s photo (2539: fig. 26) appear to have similar dimensions 
as the typical oversized bricks from other Dvāravatī period monuments.
In addition to the spatial divisions, there is an interesting 
chronological difference between the interior occupation area and 
the Buddhist sculpture from the exterior religious areas. The absolute 
dates obtained in our test excavations of Dvāravatī contexts inside the 
enclosure indicated the most intensive occupation of the site was from 
the fifth or sixth century CE to the seventh century CE. After this time, 
occupation at the site dramatically diminished until its abandonment 
circa the ninth century CE.14 The dates of the construction of the 
brick religious monuments are unknown, but relative dates for the 
dharmacakra (late seventh to eighth century CE), the socle inscription 
(eighth century CE) and the three laterite Buddhas (eighth to ninth 
century CE), all correspond to when the site was in decline. If these 
dates are accurate, they suggest investment and activity at the site by 
the Buddhist community after the town’s population began to decrease. 
Since Buddhist monastic communities primarily relied on donations 
from the laity for the resources required to support themselves and 
the construction of monuments, it is possible that the investment in 
the Buddhist sculpture during Kamphaeng Saen’s nadir was actually 
funded by sources from outside the community, such as individuals 
located in the nearby thriving centre of Nakhon Pathom.
Direct evidence for the presence of a Buddhist monastic community 
at Kamphaeng Saen is limited. As Murphy (2010b) observed, sema 
stones are useful indicators of consecrated spaces specifically used for 
monastic rituals (e.g. ordinations) and are therefore suggestive of where 
monastic compounds were likely located. Unfortunately, during the 
Dvāravatī period such boundary stones are primarily found in northeast 
Thailand, suggesting the monastic communities of central Thailand 
may have established consecrated spaces in other ways, such as wooden 
semas which have not survived in the archaeological record.15 This makes 
it difficult to identify the actual spaces where Buddhist monks lived and 
practised in central Thailand. Buddhist monks may have been present 
during the consecration of stūpas, but the efficacy of these monuments 
did not require their constant presence. At Kamphaeng Saen, the brick 
monuments appear to have been either reliquary or memorial stūpas, 
although their advanced state of ruin makes it difficult to conclusively 
identify them. The recovery of Dvāravatī-style earthenware sherds in 
the vicinity of the east monument group suggests some individuals, 
possibly monks, were consuming, cooking or storing food in this area. 
While this is far from conclusive evidence of a monastic compound at 
Kamphaeng Saen, the location of most, if not all, of the monuments at 
Kamphaeng Saen outside the enclosure on the settlement’s periphery 
Left Figure 11: Stucco face, 
reportedly found at Kamphaeng Saen. 
Currently located in Wat Kamphaeng 
Saen [Photograph by Matthew D. 
Gallon].
Right Figure 12: Stucco face, 
reportedly found at Kamphaeng Saen. 
Currently located in Wat  
Kamphaeng Saen [Photograph by 
Matthew D. Gallon].
Left Figure 13: Terracotta hands, 
reportedly found at Kamphaeng 
Saen. Now in Wat Kamphaeng Saen 
[Photograph by Matthew D. Gallon].
Right Figure 14: Terracotta 
double head, reportedly found at 
Kamphaeng Saen. Now in Wat 
Kamphaeng Saen [Photograph by 
Matthew D. Gallon].

--- PAGE 173 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
343
342
suggests a clear preference for building Buddhist structures in these 
locations by the monks and the community who supported them. Two 
possible factors influencing this configuration, examined below, include 
the monastic ideals of renouncing the laymen’s life and the construction 
of a spiritually protective boundary.
Early Buddhist monastic communities had to find ways to reconcile 
the contradiction of withdrawing from society while still relying on the 
laity for patronage and new monks to fill their ranks (Bailey & Mabbett 
2003: 1-38). Textual and archaeological evidence of early historic 
Buddhist communities in India suggest that one spatial solution they 
pursued was to build monasteries on the outskirts of settlements (Fogelin 
2004: 318-326 and 2006). From circa 200 BCE-300 CE, Buddhist 
monasteries in India were commonly built in locations along important 
trade routes and outside urban centres (Heitzman 1984; Ray 1986; 
Morrison 1995: 214-217; Fogelin 2004: 318-326 and 2006). Many of 
the ports on India’s east and west coasts had monasteries overlooking 
them (Ray 1994: 136-143). These locations along trade routes or near 
key centres of trade, but outside habitation areas, allowed the monks 
to strike a balance between renouncing domestic life in a town or city, 
while remaining within close proximity to urban populations to provide 
them with ritual and educational services and ensure their continued 
patronage. In particular, donations from the growing merchant guilds 
provided an important source of income, and the monasteries in turn 
acquired goods from these donors (Ray 1986). This mutually beneficial 
relationship had the added benefit of allowing both parties to expand 
their influence and authority outside of the traditional Brahmin-based 
political structure.
The spatial patterns of Dvāravatī period Buddhist monuments 
in central Thailand suggest that the early monastic communities in 
these areas also maintained symbiotic relationships with the residents 
of urban centres. Most studies of Dvāravatī religious sculpture 
and monuments have focused on identifying foreign influences and 
chronological relationships through stylistic and iconographic analyses 
rather than examining the significance of their spatial distribution 
within settlements (e.g. Cœdès 1928; Dupont 1959; Brown 1996; 
Woodward 1997: 43-73; Piriya 2012: 45-95). Several scholars 
(e.g. Quaritch Wales 1969: figs 2, 3, 5, 7, 10; Higham 2002: 256; Phasook 
2004: 138) have noted in passing that religious monuments were located 
both inside and outside of settlement enclosures at protohistoric walled 
and moated sites, but few have elaborated on the significance of this 
distribution. Piriya Krairiksh (1975) and later Nicolas Revire (2010) 
have considered the significance of monuments outside the enclosure 
within the site-specific context of Nakhon Pathom. Piriya (1975: 173) 
suggested that the exterior monuments were later, and resulted from the 
community’s expansion beyond the enclosure after the seventh century 
CE; Revire (2010: 81-82) entertained the possibility of a more functional 
explanation, in which the exterior monuments were part of a monastic 
complex that provided a more isolated context for greater asceticism. 
In northeast Thailand, Stephen Murphy (forthcoming) examined 
the location of different types of Buddhist art and monuments in the 
regional landscape, and determined that the monastic communities 
were divided between larger groups associated with the riverine urban 
centres and smaller groups or even isolated individuals located at forest 
or cave retreats. Due to the urban monastic communities’ access to 
surplus food and labour from the riverine urban centres, they were able 
to support both larger populations of monks and the construction of 
Buddhist monuments.
Murphy (forthcoming) also examined the spatial distribution of 
Buddhist monuments within the landscape of a selection of lowland 
urban centres. At Mueang Sema, Nakhon Ratchasima province, he 
noted that structures indicative of monastic compounds (e.g. ubosots or 
vihāras) were located both outside the site’s enclosure as well as near the 
centre of the inner enclosure. The location of these latter monuments 
is significant, since it suggests that a monastery or at least monastic 
rituals were located at the centre of the community, unlike in South 
Asia. Mueang Fa Daet in Kalasin province, also contained an ubosot 
close to the centre of the site, as well as stūpas both inside and outside 
the enclosure. The seven exterior stūpas, all roughly contemporaneous, 
ringed the exterior of the enclosure, which Murphy suggested may have 
been to establish a sacred field around the settlement. Interestingly, 
Uthara Suvrathan (2013: 89-91) identified a similar configuration of 
early historic stūpas around the town of Banavasi in Karnataka, southern 
India, a pattern seen at other ancient cities in India at that time. For 
Mueang Fa Daet and other Dvāravatī enclosed centres, Murphy 
(forthcoming) suggested that the construction of monuments outside of 
the enclosures signified a change in the way residents conceived of the 
boundaries of settlements, since unlike their Iron Age predecessors they 
now extended built space beyond the settlement enclosure.  
In my own survey of Dvāravatī centres in central Thailand (Gallon 
2013: 178-180, Appendix B), I found the majority of documented 
Buddhist monuments16 are found in one of three locations: 1) 
approximately 1.5 to 3.5 kilometres outside the settlement; 2) 
within 500 metres of the outside of the moat; 3) inside the moated 
enclosures. There are monuments that are exceptions to this pattern, 
including some monuments up to 6.7 kilometres outside the enclosure 
(e.g. Nakhon Pathom’s Noen Phra); however, these three groups are the 
most robust. There are far fewer monuments in the third category than 
the other two. At Kamphaeng Saen, the west monument group falls 
into the first category; the north, east and south monument groups fall 
into the second. The second category of Buddhist structures, located 
on the exterior of the settlement but still in close proximity to it, may 
have been built to serve the laity; whereas the more distant category 
may have been devoted to monastic-focused activities, while still 
within a day’s walk of the settlement. Both of these locations reflect 
the monastic communities’ need to reconcile the ideal of renouncing 
domestic life with the economic reality of dependence on patronage 
from the community. Additionally, by conducting their affairs in 
peripheral locations, monastic leaders would have been able to more 
easily accumulate political and economic influence independently of 
political elites, who could monitor and control them more closely if 
they were within the core of the settlement. The ability of the monastic 
community to operate outside the supervision of political elites suggests 
that political administrators and the monastic communities may have 
formed separate hierarchies of authority within the society. Even 
within this alleged heterarchical organisation, both groups were likely 
interdependent, as the monastic communities required patronage and

--- PAGE 174 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
345
344
military defence, and the political elite needed the monks to perform 
ceremonies and receive merit-building donations.
In central Thailand, Dvāravatī Buddhist monuments built inside 
settlement enclosures may have played important roles in power 
negotiations between political elites and monastic communities. These 
included large monuments, which can be described as mahāstūpas or 
mahācaityas (great stūpas or caityas), located near the centre of sites such 
as Nakhon Pathom, Si Thep and Khu Bua (Phasook 2004: 138).17 Such 
monuments were also built outside the settlement enclosures (e.g. Khao 
Khlang Nok at Si Thep), but it is the large Buddhist monuments located 
near the centre of Dvāravatī centres that represent a significant adaptation 
of the mahāstūpa tradition. In early historic India and Sri Lanka, 
communities also built mahāstūpas, but located them on the periphery 
or several kilometres away from major urban centres. Compared to the 
intra-site distribution of monuments in South Asia, the placement of 
large Buddhist monuments at the centre of major Dvāravatī centres 
most closely resembles the location of Hindu temple complexes at the 
core of medieval towns in southern India (Champakalakshmi 1996; 
Heitzman 1997). The Hindu temple complexes in medieval southern 
India served as ritual, political and administrative centres, and were built 
and sustained through elite patronage. The construction of Dvāravatī 
so-called mahāstūpas at the centre of larger settlements in a publicly 
visible location suggests that they may have played important roles in 
political and monastic ceremonies intended for a broad audience. If 
Dvāravatī rulers incorporated concepts of Buddhist kingship, such as 
the cakravartin, into their court rituals, royal personae and governance, 
they may have modified traditional Buddhist spatial ideals of placing 
monuments outside habitation areas to pursue their own political and 
religious agendas. That such mahāstūpas are almost exclusively found at 
sites in the upper-tiers of the settlement hierarchy in central Thailand 
further reinforces their ties to administrative activities and political 
performance. If there actually was a stūpa at the centre of Kamphaeng 
Saen, as reported in Somprasong (2539: 32) but undetectable in our 
investigations, its reported size would be too small to have served as 
a mahāstūpa.
In addition to Buddhist monuments built of bricks and laterite, 
Dvāravatī monumental construction projects also included the 
earthen walls and moats that enclosed many of the centres in central 
and northeast Thailand at that time. These earthworks provided 
a combination of military defence, water control and a source of 
aquatic resources; however, the residents of these centres may have also 
conceived of them as sacred structures if their plan held cosmological 
significance. The strongest evidence for this possibility comes through 
analogy with neighbouring Cambodia during the Angkorian period 
(ninth-fifteenth centuries CE) when the Khmer built moats around 
many of the settlements or temples in this area (Moore 1989: 208-
121; Higham 2000: 355 and 2004: 344-346). Inscriptions associated 
with Angkorian period sites suggest that in addition to their defensive 
and irrigation functions, the Khmer moats also defined a cosmological 
landscape based on Hindu conceptions of the universe (Cœdès 1963; 
Wheatley 1971: 295-296; Moore 1989: 208-212; Higham 2000). The 
Dvāravatī site enclosures, and their Iron Age predecessors, may have 
similarly created a spiritually protected or empowered space.
The Buddhist monuments around Dvāravatī settlements may have 
also established a protective sacred space. Due to the relics they contain, 
stūpas are considered to emit a sacred energy. As noted above, Murphy 
(forthcoming) suggested that the enclosed settlement of Mueang 
Fa Daet in northeast Thailand was surrounded by seven stūpas, 
possibly for the spiritual protection of the settlement. The configuration 
of brick monuments, likely stūpas, in the four cardinal directions 
around Kamphaeng Saen may have served a similar purpose. Our 
field work revealed that the construction of the earthwork enclosure 
around Kamphaeng Saen occurred during its initial occupation. It is 
still unclear when the alleged brick stūpas or caityas were built, but the 
Buddhist sculptures appear to date to the end of the site’s occupation, 
circa eighth to ninth century CE. It is possible that along with the 
sculpture, the Buddhist monuments were added later to either reinforce 
or replace the sacred protection provided by the initial earthwork 
enclosure. Other enclosed Dvāravatī centres in west-central Thailand, 
such as Nakhon Pathom, U Thong and Khu Bua, also have Buddhist 
monuments ringing their enclosures, although not always in the four 
cardinal directions as at Kamphaeng Saen. These patterns may 
represent a “translation” of cosmological concepts about the power of 
earthwork enclosures into the configuration of Buddhist monuments 
within the landscape; however, a more refined chronology for both the 
construction of Dvāravatī earthworks and brick or laterite monuments 
in central Thailand is needed to more fully evaluate this hypothesis.
Conclusion
Earthwork enclosures and religious monuments, both during their 
construction and as a lasting physical presence in the urban landscape, 
would have been well-suited to uniting various groups within 
newly formed or growing Dvāravatī centres. The residents of these 
communities inevitably included migrants from multiple villages and, 
therefore, required new social bonds and group identities to supplement 
and transcend their more exclusive kinship-ties based on former 
village residence. The construction of monuments required labourers, 
planners and sponsors to invest time and resources on a public project 
rather than activities that benefitted their individual households. For 
this reason, Monica Smith (2003: 282) has described some monumental 
construction projects, such as city walls, as an “architecture of 
consensus,” because they encouraged cooperation and reinforced a 
shared civic identity among diverse social groups within an urban centre. 
While Dvāravatī public monuments may have served as important civic 
symbols in this way, their success in fostering intra-community bonds 
did not require that all members of the community view them in the 
same way. 
We know little about who actually participated in Dvāravatī 
monument construction, and differences in gender and class may have 
dictated who was required, or allowed, to work on monuments, leading to 
different perceptions and experiences of this process among community 
members. Historically, both slavery and corvée labour have existed in 
the region (Beemer 2009), and probably played an important role in 
Dvāravatī period monument construction (Gallon 2013: 323-325). 
The difference between those who laboured in monument construction

--- PAGE 175 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
347
346
and those who did not, therefore, may have marked and reinforced new 
types of social groups within the community. Monument construction 
was undoubtedly gruelling work, and the shared experience of such 
hardship may have strengthened bonds among those who laboured. 
Such work-groups may have initially been based on kinship, ethnicity 
or former village residence, but over time labourers’ shared experiences 
may have provided the basis for new, more widely shared, identities that 
cross-cut kinship. The lack of participation in monument construction, 
due to privileged status, gender, limited physical ability, or other 
social differences, may have also served to highlight and strengthen 
new social groups within the community. The varying experiences 
of monument construction could therefore play an important role in 
bringing different groups of residents together in newly created or 
expanding Dvāravatī centres. 
Monument construction also enabled Dvāravatī period political 
and religious leaders to materialise the labour and resources they 
had amassed in a relatively permanent and publically visible medium 
(Baines & Yoffee 2000; Stark 2006: 420-421). The ability to successfully 
coordinate work on such monuments demonstrated the wealth and 
authority at the command of these elites. The construction of religious 
monuments, with elite planning and sponsorship and non-elite labour, 
also put in to practice the social order and stratification legitimised by 
elements within Hindu and Buddhist ideologies. Additionally, monastic 
groups may have used the construction of Buddhist monuments to 
demonstrate their autonomy and political power within a heterarchical 
or contested system of authority. By situating Buddhist monuments 
and monasteries on the periphery of urban centres, monastic orders 
may have demonstrated their relative independence; whereas those 
monuments built within the settlement, and particularly the large 
mahāstūpas, may represent the monastic community’s participation in 
more religio-political activities, such as the legitimisation of a monarch. 
In both cases, monument construction would have played an active role 
in the negotiation of authority between political and religious leaders, 
as well as an important source of identity for the community members 
who contributed resources and labour.
In addition to supporting the development of new social groups 
within the community during their construction, earthwork enclosures 
and religious monuments also helped to create shared world-
views among the residents by constraining, or “normalising,” their 
movements and perceptions of the landscape (Bradley 1998: 108; A. 
Smith 2003: 67-77). The fact that many Dvāravatī enclosed centres 
had similar spatial configurations of monuments indicates that not 
only did their leaders share concepts of how to define and empower 
a sacred landscape through the placement of monuments, but also 
their residents subsequently experienced similar patterns of religious 
practice and daily movement. These similarities enabled an individual 
to potentially relocate from one centre to another and not only 
recognise and understand the organisation of the new settlement, but 
feel physically and spiritually secure once there. In a landscape where 
slave-raiding may have been fairly common, such security, or at least 
the illusion thereof, would have been highly valued. This security may 
have enabled, along with other factors, the population aggregation and 
urbanisation that took place during the Dvāravatī period. In the case of 
the decline of Kamphaeng Saen, if its residents moved or were forcibly 
resettled to Nakhon Pathom, they would have been familiar with 
some of the spatial logic behind the configuration of the monumental 
landscape in their new home due to the similarity in the configuration 
of monumental space at these two settlements, albeit on different 
scales. Participation in the construction of new monuments at Nakhon 
Pathom would have in turn helped them forge bonds with groups within 
the community, as well as begin to internalise the socio-political order 
of their new home.
Acknowledgements
I thank the editors of this volume and the anonymous reviewer for 
their constructive feedback on this essay. I gratefully acknowledge 
the 2nd Regional Office of the Fine Arts Department of Thailand 
(FAD) and the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT) for 
their support of the field work at Kamphaeng Saen. Funding for the 
Kamphaeng Saen Archaeology Project was provided by the Henry 
Luce Foundation/American Council of Learned Societies, the National 
Science Foundation (USA), and the University of Michigan Rackham 
School of Graduate Studies. This project would not have been possible 
without a dedicated field crew of local residents and student volunteers 
from Silpakorn University. Finally, Carla Sinopoli, Henry Wright and 
Norman Yoffee provided invaluable support and insights during the 
research project and the writing of this essay.

--- PAGE 176 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
349
348
Endnotes
1 
The term “Dvāravatī” has been used to describe an 
art style, a chronological period, an archaeological 
culture and one or more polities; for discussion, 
see Skilling (2003: 104-106), and Gallon (2013: 
79-117). According to a given author’s use of the 
term, the time span and phenomena identified as 
“Dvāravatī” can vary considerably. The differences 
in the label’s usage often follow disciplinary 
boundaries between archaeology, art history and 
history; yet, even within these disciplines there is a 
significant lack of consensus over what constitutes  
“Dvāravatī.” As an archaeologist, I use the term 
to describe an archaeological culture defined 
by a suite of shared forms of material culture 
and practices. I consider the “Dvāravatī period” 
to be the roughly defined span of time when 
a significant number of the elements of this suite 
can be identified, circa fifth to eleventh centuries 
CE. The starting date for this range is one to 
two centuries earlier than archaeologists have 
traditionally given for the Dvāravatī culture  
(e.g. Quaritch Wales 1969; Phasook 2004; Murphy, 
forthcoming), but accounts for the recent absolute 
dates (Barram & Glover 2003; Gallon 2013: 244-
269, Table 5.5) from contexts with ceramics and 
other non-ritual objects in styles conventionally 
attributed to the “Dvāravatī culture.” 
2 
Mudar (1999) identified several moated settlements 
in west-central Thailand that are smaller than 
Kamphaeng Saen, but they are not included in 
other lists of moated Dvāravatī sites (e.g. Phasook 
2004), and it is unclear if they contain Dvāravatī 
period material. 
3 
After his two visits to the site in the 1960s, 
Quaritch Wales (1969: 49) noted the presence of 
a second wall, possibly lining the moat’s exterior 
edge, but no traces of this wall remain today. In 
the 1930s, Dupont (1939: 364) noted only a single 
wall on the moat’s interior edge.
4 
When Dupont (1939: 364) examined the three 
sculptures they were all housed at Wat Kamphaeng 
Saen. Since that time, the set of sculptures 
has been divided; one image remains at Wat 
Kamphaeng Saen, a second image has been 
moved to another local monastery (Wat Sawang 
Chat Pracha Bamrung), and the third image was 
reportedly taken by the FAD. The two sculptures 
that remain at the local monasteries have been 
covered with gold leaf as a result of continued 
veneration, making it difficult to assess their 
features or construction. 
5 
Chira & Woodward (2509: cat. 22) transliterated 
and translated the inscription as: saccakiccakatañāṇaṁ 
catudhā catudhā kataṁ tivaṭṭaṁ dvādasākāraṁ 
dhammacakkaṁ mahesino; i.e. “the knowledge of each 
of the Four Noble Truths, the knowledge of the 
obligation entailed by each, and the knowledge 
that these obligations have been fulfilled, making 
three revolutions for a total of twelve aspects of 
knowledge, are the foundation of the Buddha’s 
dhammacakka (wisdom).”
  6 Cœdès’s chronological assessment of the script 
is mentioned by Quaritch Wales (1969: 50), but 
it is unclear if this was based on their personal 
communication or Cœdès’s work on similar 
inscriptions. According to Brown (1996: 108) the 
inscription on the socle from Kamphaeng Saen is 
the same as the inscription on the inner hub of an 
early dharmacakra from Nakhon Pathom translated 
by Cœdès (1956: 225).
  7 Buddhist structures built in first millennium CE 
Thailand included what have been identified as 
stūpas (reliquary or commemorative mound-like 
structures), vihāras (assembly halls) and ubosots 
(halls for monastic ordinations or other prescribed 
rituals) (Murphy 2010b: 269-270 and forthcoming). 
Each of these structures has rough counterparts 
in early historic South Asia (Coningham 2001); 
however, in South Asia the term “vihāra” may refer 
to an entire monastery or a block of monastic cells 
and “ubosots” are largely restricted to Sri Lanka 
(Murphy, forthcoming). In Thailand, the terms 
“caitya” or “chedi” refer to commemorative stūpas 
that do not necessarily contain relics (Woodward 
1993: 75-77), whereas in South Asia caitya is most 
often applied to a type of gṛha, or hall, containing 
an image or stūpa (Coningham 2001). It is difficult 
to differentiate between stūpas and caityas in the 
archaeological record in Thailand. Furthermore, 
it is unclear if the Dvāravatī monuments that 
have been identified as belonging to these two 
categories were considered to have completely 
separate functions, and it is possible that there 
was a functional continuum between the two 
types of structures. Dvāravatī monuments that 
are characterised as stūpas or caityas also include 
rectilinear mound-like structures that have flat 
tops, which likely served as the platform for a hall 
built of perishable materials (e.g. Wat Khlong at 
Khu Bua). The religious and political functions  
of these structures are unclear, and they may  
have served as an image or assembly hall, as well 
as a stūpa.
  8 For details of the methodology and results of these 
investigations, see Gallon (2013).
  9 We were unable to identify the mound of bricks 
Somprasong documented inside the eastern gate 
of the site. There were a few concentrations of 
Dvāravatī style-bricks around the arboretum 
office, but staff members told us that the bricks 
had recently been brought in from the area 
outside the site to the east for various uses. 
We also identified several mounds of bricks 
of indeterminate age roughly 140-150 metres 
northwest of the site centre; however, the mounds 
also had modern construction materials embedded 
in them, and if the bricks date to the Dvāravatī 
period they have clearly been heavily disturbed 
and likely moved. Finally, there are more than 
three hundred earthen mounds, many roughly 
conical-shaped, scattered around the interior of 
the enclosure at Kamphaeng Saen. Auger coring 
of several of these features and excavation of one 
mound showed them to be completely void of 
archaeological material, and overlie the Dvāravatī 
period strata. So while they post-date the Dvāravatī 
occupation of the site, the origin of these features 
remains unclear.
10 The profile through the earthen wall contained 
no brick or stone construction materials or any 
artefacts. The absence of any refuse in the matrix 
of the wall suggests the moat was dug into sterile 
soil rather than pre-existing cultural deposits, 
and that the construction of the moat and wall 
therefore took place around the initial occupation 
of the site. Auger core tests in other sections of the 
wall also failed to identify any artefacts or stone or 
brick construction materials in the wall.
11 There are other depictions of a Buddhist figure 
standing atop a lotus (e.g. Piriya 2012: 79, 89, 
90; figs 1.59, 1.60, 1.82); however, these images 
are often free standing and do not show a stem 
below the lotus blossom, as this is the base of the 
sculpture.
12 Monastery museums often serve as repositories for 
objects members of the community suspect to be 
old or spiritually empowered, regardless of their 
original provenance. Archaeological materials 
obtained on journeys outside the local area 
occasionally find their way into these collections, 
and for this reason the provenance of material in 
monastery collections must be treated with caution. 
In the case of the Wat Kamphaeng Saen sculptural 
fragments, the monastery curator, members 
of the local historical society and Somprasong 
(2539: 30) all claimed that the material was 
found at Kamphaeng Saen. Questions about the 
provenance of these objects, however, do arise 
since more stucco objects have not been reported 
from the site and there is no evidence of stucco 
fragments on the surface in the areas around the 
destroyed brick structures we surveyed.
13 Seen by the author on display in 2009.
14 The recovery of a single sherd of twelfth century 
imported Chinese stoneware from just below  
the surface inside the enclosure during KSAP 
auger coring, and Somprasong’s report of the 
discovery of a Ayutthaya style Buddha, suggest 
that even after the ninth century CE, there was 
still occasional activity at the site. However, our 
test excavations found no evidence of significant 
full-time habitation at the site after this time. See 
Gallon (2013: 282-308) for additional discussion of 
causes behind the site’s decline.
15 One of the rare examples of possible stone semas 
in central Thailand comes from Mueang Bon, 
where Quaritch Wales (1969: 79) noted eight 
pairs of small “roughly-shaped” sema stones found 
in situ adjacent to stūpa no. 4 on the hill outside 
the site’s moated enclosure. It is notable that the 
stones were both small and lacked the often ornate 
carvings of the sema stones found in the Northeast. 
Unfortunately, Quaritch Wales did not publish any 
images of the stones.
16 There are a few monuments associated with 
smaller unmoated settlements (e.g. Thung 
Setthi and Phong Tuek in Phetchaburi and 
Kanchanaburi provinces respectively). A few 
relatively isolated cave sites with Dvāravatī 
period Buddhist carvings (e.g. Khao Ngu caves in 
Ratchaburi province and Khao Thamorat cave 
in Phetchabun province) are also known and may 
have served as the residences of ascetic monks.
17 It is notable that the large monuments located 
at the centre of these sites include the rectilinear 
mound structures with flat tops and single 
staircases (e.g.Wat Khlong at Khu Bua).  
As I noted above, while these monuments are 
often classified as stūpas, they may have served 
additional or alternative functions. The presence 
of a single stairway leading to an elevated platform 
would be well-suited to increasing the visibility and 
emphasising the privileged status of leaders who 
may have used these monuments in religio-political 
ceremonies; although the existence of such 
ceremonies is speculative.

--- PAGE 177 ---
maTTHeW d. gallon
351
350
References
Arunsak Kingmani, 
Wasan Thepsuriyanont & 
Phattharaphong Kaongoen  
2545  Borannakhadi mueang u thong 
(Archaeology of U-Thong). Suphan 
Buri: Fine Arts Department.  
[In Thai; 2002 CE]
Bailey, Greg & Mabbett,  
Ian W.  
2003  The Sociology of Early 
Buddhism. Cambridge:  
Cambridge University Press.
Baines, John & Yoffee,  
Norman 
2000  Order, Legitimacy, and 
Wealth: Setting the Terms. In 
Richards, J. & Buren, M.V. (eds), 
Order Legitimacy, and Wealth in Ancient 
States. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 13-17.
Baptiste, Pierre & Zéphir, 
Thierry (eds) 
2009  Dvāravatī : aux sources du 
bouddhisme en Thaïlande. Paris: 
Réunion des musées nationaux.
Beemer, Bryce 
2009  Southeast Asian Slavery 
and Slave-Gathering Warfare as a 
Vector for Cultural Transmission: 
The Case of Burma and 
Thailand. Historian 71(3): 481-506.
Boisselier, Jean  
1965  Récentes recherches 
archéologiques en Thaïlande.  
Arts Asiatiques 12: 125-174.
1968  Nouvelles connaissances 
archéologiques de la ville d’U-T’ong. 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department  
of Thailand.
1970  Récentes recherches à 
Nakhon Pathom. Journal of the  
Siam Society 58: 55-65.
Bradley, Richard 
1998  The Significance of Monuments: 
On the Shaping of Human Experience  
in Neolithic and Bronze Age Europe. 
New York: Routledge.
Brown, Robert L.  
1996  The Dvāravatī Wheels  
of the Law and the Indianization  
of South East Asia. Leiden:  
E.J. Brill.
Champakalakshmi, R.  
1996  Trade, Ideology and 
Urbanization: South India 300 BC 
to AD 1300. New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press.
Chira Chongkol & Woodward, 
Hiram, Jr 
2509  Namchom phiphithaphan sathan 
haeng chat u thong changwat suphan 
buri/Guide to the U-Thong National 
Museum, Suphanburi. Bangkok: Fine 
Arts Department. [In Thai and 
English; 1966 CE]
Cœdès, George  
1928  Les collections archéologiques  
du Musée national de Bangkok. 
Bruxelles-Paris: G. Van Oest.
1956  Une Roue de la Loi avec 
inscription en Pāli provenant du 
site P’ra Pathom. Artibus Asiae  
19(3-4): 221-226.
1963  Angkor. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Dupont, Pierre  
1939  Rapport de M. P. Dupont 
sur sa mission archéologique en 
Thaïlande (18 janvier-25 mai 
1939). Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 39: 351-366.
1959  L’archéologie mône de Dvāravatī. 
Two Volumes. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2552  Sinlapa thawarawadi tonkamnoet 
phutthasin nai prathet thai/Dvaravati 
Art: The Early Buddhist Art of 
Thailand. Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai and English; 
2009 CE]
Fogelin, Lars  
2004  Beyond the Monastery Walls: 
The Archaeology of Early Buddhism  
in North Coastal Andhra Pradesh,  
India. Doctoral Dissertation.  
Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan. [Unpublished]
2006  Archaeology of Early Buddhism. 
Lanham: AltaMira Press.
Gallon, Matthew D.  
2013  Ideology, Identity and the 
Construction of Urban Communities: 
The Archaeology of Kamphaeng Saen, 
Central Thailand (c. Fifth to Ninth 
Century CE). Doctoral Dissertation. 
Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan. [Unpublished]
Heitzman, James  
1984  Early Buddhism: Trade  
and Empire. In Kennedy, K.A.R. 
& Possehl, G.L. (eds), Studies in 
the Archaeology and Paleoanthropology 
of South Asia. New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press, pp. 121-137.
1997  Gifts of Power: Lordship in 
an Early Indian State. New Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.
Higham, Charles  
2000  The Symbolism of the 
Angkorian City. Cambridge 
Archaeological Journal 10: 355-57.
2002  Early Cultures of Mainland 
Southeast Asia. Bangkok:  
River Books.
Moore, Elizabeth H.  
1989  Water Management in  
Early Cambodia: Evidence 
from Aerial Photography. The 
Geographical Journal 155: 204-214.
Morrison, Kathleen D.  
1995  Trade, Urbanism, and 
Agricultural Expansion: Buddhist 
Monastic Institutions and the  
State in the Early Historic  
Western Deccan. World Archaeology 
27: 203-221.
Mudar, Karen M.  
1999  How Many Dvaravati 
Kingdoms? Locational Analysis 
of First Millennium A.D. Moated 
Settlements in Central Thailand. 
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 
18: 1-28.
Murphy, Stephen A.  
2010a  The Buddhist Boundary 
Markers of Northeast Thailand and 
Central Laos, 7th-12th Centuries CE: 
Towards an Understanding of the 
Archaeological, Religous and Artistic 
Landscapes of the Khorat Plateau. 
Doctoral Dissertation. London: 
School of Oriental and African 
Studies, University of London. 
[Unpublished]
2010b  Dvaravati Period Sema 
Stones: Shifting Meanings and 
Definitions in Archaeology, 
Epigraphy, Texts and Religious  
Re-use. Rian Thai: International 
Journal of Thai Studies 3: 259-282.
Forthcoming  Buddhism and its 
Relationship to Dvaravati Period 
Settlement Patterns and Material 
Culture in Northeast Thailand 
and Central Laos ca. 6th -11th 
centuries CE: A Historical Ecology 
Approach to the Landscape of the 
Khorat Plateau. Asian Perspectives 
52(2). 
Phasook Indrawooth  
2528  Dachani phachana dinphao samai 
thawarawadi (Index Pottery of Dvāravati 
Period). Bangkok: Silpakorn 
University. [In Thai with English 
Summary; 1985 CE]
2004  The Archaeology of the 
Early Buddhist Kingdoms of 
Thailand. In Glover, Ian C. & 
Bellwood, Peter S. (eds), Southeast 
Asia: From Prehistory to History.  
New York: Routledge Curzon,  
pp. 120-148.
Phattharaphong Kaongoen  
2545  Borannakhadi khok chang din 
(The Archaeology of Khok Chang 
Din). Suphan Buri: Fine Arts 
Department. [In Thai; 2002 CE]
Piriya Krairiksh 
2012  The Roots of Thai Art. 
Bangkok: River Books.  
[First published in Thai as Rakngao 
haeng sinlapa thai, 2553 (2010 CE)]
Quaritch Wales, Horace 
Geoffrey 
1946  Recent Malayan Excavations 
and Some Wider Implications. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
New Series 78(3-4): 142-149.
1969  Dvāravatī: The Earliest Kingdom 
of Siam (6th to 11th century A.D.). 
London: Bernard Quaritch Press.
Ray, Himanshu Prabha  
1986  Monastery and Guild: Commerce 
under the Satavahanas. New Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.
1994  The Winds of Change:  
Buddhism and the Maritime Links  
of Early South Asia. New Delhi:  
Oxford University Press.
Revire, Nicolas 
2010  Iconographical Issues in  
the Archeology of Wat Phra Men, 
Nakhon Pathom. Journal of the  
Siam Society 98: 75-115.
Skilling, Peter 
Dvāravatī: Recent Revelations and 
Research. In Baker, Chris (ed.), 
Dedications to HRH Princess Galyani 
Vadhana Krom Luang Naradhiwas 
Rajanagarindra on Her 80th Birthday. 
Bangkok: The Siam Society,  
pp. 87-112.
Smith, Adam 
2003  The Political Landscape: 
Constellations of Authority in  
Early Complex Polities. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Smith, Monica L. 
2003  Early Walled Cities of the 
Indian Subcontinent as “Small 
Worlds.” In Smith, M.L. (ed.), The 
Social Construction of Ancient Cities. 
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian 
Institution, pp. 269-289.
Somprasong Nuamboonlue  
2539  Raingan kansueksa ruapruam 
lakthan kiaokap mueang kao kamphaeng 
saen khong amphoe kamphaeng saen 
(Report on the Investigation of Evidence 
about the Ancient Settlement of 
Kamphaeng Saen of Kamphaeng Saen 
District). Bangkok: Amarin Press. 
[In Thai; 1996 CE]
Somsak Rattanakun  
2510  Kankuttaeng borannasathan 
dan thi nuea khong khok chang din 
amphoe u thong changwat suphan 
buri (Excavation of an Ancient 
Site in the Northern Part of Khok 
Chang Din, U Thong District, 
Suphan Buri Province). Silpakorn 
Journal 11(2): 78-83. [In Thai with 
English Abstract; 1967 CE]
2535  Borannakhadi mueang khu 
bua (The Archaeology of Khu Bua). 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department. 
[In Thai; 1992 CE]
Stark, Miriam T. 
2006  Early Mainland Southeast 
Asia Landscapes in the First 
Millennium A.D. Annual Review  
of Anthropology 35: 407-432.
Suvrathan, Uthara 
2013  Complexity on the Periphery: 
A Study of Regional Organization at 
Banavasi, c. 1st – 18th century A.D. 
Doctoral Dissertation.  
Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan. [Unpublished]
Usa Nguanphienphak  
2009  Fouilles récentes au Phra 
Pathon Chedi. In Baptiste, Pierre 
& Zéphir, Thierry (eds), Dvāravatī : 
aux sources du bouddhisme en Thaïlande. 
Paris: Réunion des musées 
nationaux, pp. 144-149.
Wheatley, Paul  
1971  The Pivot of the Four Quarters: 
A Preliminary Enquiry into the Origins 
and Character of the Ancient Chinese 
City. Chicago: Aldine Publishing 
Company.
Woodward, Hiram, Jr 
1997  The Sacred Sculpture of 
Thailand. Bangkok: River Books.

--- PAGE 178 ---
353
352
Introduction
T
he narrative art depicted on various sema stones (Buddhist 
boundary markers) from northeast Thailand dating from the 
seventh to eleventh centuries CE and generally considered to be part 
of the Dvāravatī art style or culture1 have long been admired for both 
the quality of their carvings and the skilful rendering of their subject 
matters.2  The subjects consist primarily of jātaka tales and scenes from 
the life of the Buddha. Similarly, a group of semas from the Kalyāṇī Sīmā 
in Thaton, lower Myanmar, also depict narrative scenes from jātakas 
and have therefore invited comparison from a number of scholars.
Piriya Krairiksh (1974: 63) in particular stresses this point, arguing 
that a group of Mons may have fled northeast Thailand as the Khmers 
began to take over their territories.3 The natural place for them to seek 
refuge, he argues, was Thaton, being as it was, one of the main centres 
of “Mon Buddhism.” Furthermore, he states that as there does not seem 
to be any “Burmese” forerunners to the Thaton semas, it is plausible that 
the Mons of northeast Thailand brought this tradition with them.
This hypothesis, however, has a number of problems. Upon close 
investigation of the semas from both northeast Thailand and Thaton, it 
becomes apparent that while the content of these narrative scenes are 
similar and at times identical, the style, composition and morphology of 
the semas from both locations differ considerably.
What follows is a comparison between the sema stones of lower 
Myanmar and northeast Thailand from the seventh to eleventh 
centuries. The origins and use of semas shall first be briefly discussed, 
followed by an overview of the earliest evidence for these objects in 
both Myanmar and Thailand. Excavations at Vesāli in Rakhine 
(Arakan) state in the west of Myanmar have led to the discovery of 
a number of semas from circa fifth to seventh centuries CE, while the 
so-called “Buddhist megaliths” (Luce 1985: 130-131, pls 12, 13, 15) at 
the site of Śrīkṣetra, while not clearly identifiable as sema, do appear to 
have fulfilled a somewhat similar function in defining ritual space and 
provide evidence for a well-established stone carving tradition.
The narrative art on the semas from northeast Thailand, in 
particular from the sites of Mueang Fa Daet and Ban Nong Chat,4 
shall then be compared with that from Thaton. In doing so, it will be 
shown that whilst there are many similarities in terms of function and 
narrative content, there are also various differences in terms of how the 
narrative art is depicted, the form of the semas themselves and certain 
stylistic renderings. Overall, it will be shown that the “Mon refugee” 
hypothesis is untenable. This raises a further question, that is, whether 
or not the sema tradition of northeast Thailand can be seen as a model 
or forerunner for those in lower Myanmar. The evidence discussed 
Sema Stones in Lower Myanmar and 
Northeast Thailand: A Comparison
STePHen a. murPHy
Opposite: Detail of Figure 4  
depicting an episode of the 
Mahosadhajātaka. Khon Kaen 
National Museum [Photograph  
by Stephen A. Murphy].

--- PAGE 179 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
355
354
herein, however, indicates it is more probable that the semas at Thaton 
developed independently of those in northeast Thailand, drawing 
their inspiration from the already rich and well-established indigenous 
tradition of carving Buddhist imagery and motifs. 
Sema Stones: origins and Use
The gradual and pervasive movement of Buddhism into Southeast Asia 
from the early centuries of the first millennium CE onwards brought 
with it a variety of new rituals, concepts, customs and artistic traditions. 
As a result, Buddhist ideas of sacred space and sacred art merged with 
the pre-existing local cultures that they encountered, resulting in unique 
expressions particular to these communities. 
As Buddhism became established in these areas the need to perform 
certain prescribed rituals led to the development of specific artistic and 
religious traditions. Regulations concerning the demarcation of ritual 
space were paramount among these considerations and as a result the 
tradition of erecting sema stones emerged in northeast Thailand and 
lower Myanmar.
The importance of demarcating ritual space arose from the need to 
perform the pāṭimokkha on uposatha days and ordination ceremonies. The 
pāṭimokkha ceremony, which consists of the recitation of the rules of the 
order, is performed twice a month, on the full and new moon, and once 
a year at the end of the rainy season on the pavāraṇā day. Furthermore, 
Pāli Buddhist praxis stipulates that it must take place within clearly 
marked consecrated ground (Horner 1962: 6-13, 137-146). However, 
this ritual ground need not consist of a building, such as an ubosot/bot 
or sim/sīmā (ordination hall), but can take place in the open air as long 
as the space has been clearly demarcated. It is for this specific function 
therefore, that sema stones were erected (Murphy 2010: 86-124; Arunsak 
2010: 67-82).5 
The Pāli word sīmā means boundary. As No Na Paknam (1981: 
57) points out, the Thai term sema is therefore a vulgarisation of the 
Pāli word sīmā. In modern Thailand, sema stones are usually called bai 
semas, with bai, meaning leaf, generally referring to the shape of the 
predominant slab type sema, particularly from the Ayutthaya period 
onwards (ca fourteenth century to present).6 In Myanmar, however, 
the word sīmā (pronounced as thein) refers to both a boundary and an 
ordination hall, as in the Kalyāṇī Sīmā at Thaton for example (Luce 
1969: 252-253).
The function of sema therefore, was to create this necessary 
boundary (sīmā) within which key Buddhist ceremonies such as the 
pāṭimokkha or ordination ceremony could take place.7 As Petra Kieffer-
Pülz points out, this is one of the conditions for the continued existence 
of the Saṅgha, as without a clearly defined sīmā, there would be no 
space to perform valid Buddhist rituals (1997: 141). In modern-day 
Thailand for example, a set of eight semas are placed around an ubosot, 
either singularly or in pairs (therefore amounting to sixteen sema stones 
in total).8 Once this formal procedure has been correctly carried out, 
the area is then deemed sacred and the requisite ceremonies can take 
place within it.  
In modern Myanmar, a similar consecration ceremony takes place. 
Nagasena Bhikkhu (forthcoming) has recently carried out an exhaustive 
account of sīmā literature in Myanmar language giving a number of 
accounts of this consecration ceremony in a modern context. Some 
of the earliest related epigraphic evidence in Myanmar comes from 
the Kalyāṇī inscriptions of King Dhammazedi, set up in Bago (Pegu) 
in circa 1477-78 CE. In these bilingual inscriptions (Mon and Pāli), 
the arrangement of the semas is outlined in the Mon portion of the 
text stating,
[… ] having been marked (at) the corners (facing) the four 
quarters [four boundary stones were planted. When] these four 
middle stones [were planted,] it being an advantage to have 
eight boundary stones with a view to making other than four-
sided figure […]. (trans. Blagden 1928: 247)
Clearly therefore, by the fifteenth century the rituals, regulations 
and ceremonies concerning the demarcation of the sīmā precinct had 
been firmly formulated in lower Myanmar.9
However, while the need to create ritual space is clearly defined in 
the Pāli texts, as Pinna Indorf (1994: 19) points out, nowhere in these 
texts does it state how this is to be done. The Vinaya Mahāvagga lists a 
number of possibilities, such as anthills, trees and rivers to define ritual 
space, however, they need to be clearly identifiable in order to suffice.10 
The evidence from northeast Thailand and central Laos illustrates that 
in these regions this need to fix Buddhist ritual space was met by the 
setting up of sema stones. Therefore, being found throughout Myanmar, 
Thailand, Cambodia and Laos, semas today seem to represent a specific 
Southeast Asian response to the creation of ritual space.11 To the best of 
my knowledge no such practice has been recorded to date from India or 
Sri Lanka prior to circa tenth century CE.  
Early Evidence for Sema Stones in Myanmar
The earliest evidence for semas in Myanmar comes from a number of 
sites in the central and western regions, with none of them falling under 
the umbrella of the so-called “Mon” regions. In fact, one of the sites 
discussed, Śrīkṣetra, is in the Pyu region of Myanmar, while the other, 
Vesāli, is neither Mon nor Pyu.
Elizabeth Moore (2007: 129) has recently debunked these ethnic 
terms as over-simplistic concepts and argues that we should view pre-
Bagan (Pagan) Myanmar more from a perspective of its landscape 
and human interaction with it, than in terms of reductive ethnocentric 
definitions. She further points out that during the first millennium CE, 
there was active interchange between upper and lower Myanmar, brought 
about more by ecological conditions than anything else. Michael Aung-
Thwin (2005) has also cautioned against the blanket use of terms such as 
“Mon” and “Pyu,” but for very different reasons, seeing them more as 
constructions of British colonialism. His critique, however, is problematic 
in parts, particularly in terms of his claims regarding the apparent lack 
of archaeological evidence in lower Myanmar, as has been outlined by 
Donald Stadtner (2008; see also Moore & San Win, this volume) who for 
his part, is a firm advocate of the Pyu and Mon paradigms. 
A similar line to Moore’s understanding is taken in this essay. 
From the archaeological record it seems clear that early Buddhism

--- PAGE 180 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
357
356
did not distinguish between Pyu and 
Mon. As it moved into what is today 
modern Myanmar, it disseminated 
its doctrine and teachings among the 
various cultures and traditions that it 
encountered.  Therefore, while the early 
evidence for Myanmar semas discussed 
below do not come from Mon areas, it 
is argued that the same religious and 
doctrinal forces were at play, and thus 
semas from Vesāli and the Buddhist 
stone carvings from Śrīkṣetra may 
legitimately be considered as possible 
forerunners to those found in eleventh 
century Thaton. Furthermore, while 
they may not be the direct prototypes 
for the Thaton semas, they do illustrate 
that the tradition of stone carving and 
depicting Buddhist narrative art on 
large stone pillars/stele was in existence 
in this region of Myanmar from circa 
the sixth century onwards. In addition, 
Moore (2007: 129-225) has shown that 
communication between the areas 
of Vesāli, Śrīkṣetra and Kyaikkatha 
in lower Myanmar is clearly evident 
during the first millennium and it is not 
inconceivable that religious and artistic 
ideas moved freely between them.
The earliest evidence for the setting 
up of semas in Myanmar comes from 
the ancient city of Vesāli located in 
modern-day Rakhine state. This site 
lies in a coastal region of western Myanmar, close to the border with 
modern-day Bangladesh. The settlement itself lies about 10 kilometres 
north of Mrauk U.
Excavations at Vesāli between November 1983 and February 1984 
led to the discovery of a brick building (mound no. 5), which was 
rectangular in shape and measured 22.5 x 15.2 metres.12 Surrounding 
this building, the excavation team found thirteen fossilised wood pillars, 
set up in pairs and roughly equidistant, which stood at a height of 
about 60 cm above the ground [Figure 1]. This building was identified 
by the excavation team as a thein, or ordination hall, due to factors 
such as its ground plan and its location in relation to other buildings 
excavated during the course of their research. The thirteen fossilised 
pillars were therefore identified as semas, erected to mark out the sīmā 
precinct of this thein. The site itself was dated from between the fifth to 
ninth centuries CE. 
In terms of the dating of this site, Moore (2007: 23) further points 
outs that while there are no radiocarbon dates available, there is an 
eighth century inscription of  King Anandacandra at Vesāli recording 
eighteen previous rulers. This timeframe is also consistent with the 
evidence for sema stones from northeast Thailand.
The site of Śrīkṣetra is located in upper Myanmar, approximately 
6 kilometres outside the modern town of Pyay (Prome). It is one of 
the most substantial early urban sites in Myanmar with its surrounding 
walls measuring approximately 14 kilometres in circumference (Moore 
2007: 167-172).
The evidence at Śrīkṣetra in terms of possible forerunners for the 
Thaton semas comes in the form of the so-called Buddhist megaliths 
(Luce 1985: 130-131, pls 12, 13, 15c). These two sets faced each other 
each surrounded by a small brick wall. While these are not strictly 
themselves called sema stones, Stadtner for instance has suggested that 
they did function in a similar way as they too possibly demarcated an 
ordination hall (1998: 45). This usage, and the fact that these large 
stone objects do indicate the existence of a well-establish stone carving 
tradition of Buddhist imagery by this period, make them favourable 
objects of comparison with sema stones. 
On a related point, Gordon Luce’s term “Buddhist megalith” seems 
somewhat inappropriate. Firstly, megaliths in a Southeast Asian context 
usually refer to pre- or non-Buddhist religious practices that involved 
human burials of one sort or another. Secondly, the term megalith 
itself is problematic in regard to Southeast Asian archaeology as it has 
been used in a rather loose fashion and, in some cases, incorrectly.13 
In a Myanmar context, no in-depth research into megaliths has been 
carried out and what this culture may actually have consisted of is as 
yet uncertain. Instead, it is perhaps more appropriate to refer to these 
objects as monumental Buddhist art. This term emphasises that at times 
these stone sculptures can be extremely large in size while at the same 
time it avoids any confusion with implied burial or inhumation practices 
connoted by the term megalith.
Eight monumental Buddhist stones in particular emphasise the 
level and sophistication that Myanmar sculpture has reached by circa 
the sixth century. Six of them were discovered set up as triads at the 
Kyaukka Thein and at the time of their excavation were in situ (Beylié 
1907). Another [Figure 2] probably comes from the Kyaukka stūpa 
Figure 1: Ground plan of the 
excavated “thein” from the site 
of Vesāli in western Myanmar 
(Rakhine/Arakan state). The pillars 
identified as semas are located in 
grid squares A2, B4, C1, C2, D2, 
D6, E1, F3, F5 [Drawing courtesy 
of U Nyunt Han].
Figure 2: Buddhist stele from 
Śrīkṣetra (upper Myanmar) depicting 
the Buddha and two attendants. 
Height 107 cm., width 112 
cm., depth 23 cm. Housed at the 
Thayekhittra Archaeological Museum 
[Photograph by Stephen A. Murphy].

--- PAGE 181 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
359
358
while the last one [Figure 3] was found south of the Bawbawgyi stūpa 
(Luce 1985: 131). They have now all been relocated to the site museum. 
The stone triads, the largest of which measures 250 cm. in height, 201 
cm. in width and 47 cm. in thickness is carved in relief with a Buddha 
image in dhyānamudrā [Figure 2]. The Buddha in turn, is flanked by two 
disciples seated in prayer with all three figures depicted with circular 
halos radiating from around their heads. Unfortunately, the relief 
carving on the majority of these stones is quite badly worn, however, 
Figures 2 and 3 are still quite well preserved. Figure 2 exhibits some 
fine relief carving showing the Buddha in dhyānamudrā, sitting cross-
legged with a flaming halo radiating from behind his head. Behind 
the Buddha’s shoulders is a throne motif which appears to terminate 
in makara designs. Furthermore, a bodhi-tree is represented by a stone 
projecting above the Buddha.
The second stone [Figure 3] again shows the Buddha seated cross-
legged, this time in vajrāsana, with a halo encircling his head. Once again 
he is in dhyānamudrā and is seated on a throne. The whole composition is 
framed under an arch-shaped leafed pediment.
The dimensions and aesthetic quality of these two pieces as well as 
the stone triads indicate that sophisticated levels of Buddhist art had 
been reached by this period and provides evidence for the existence of a 
stone carving tradition employing Buddhist motifs and themes from as 
early as the sixth to seventh centuries CE. Furthermore, the use of the 
halo device around the head of the Buddha image on the majority of 
the triads from Śrīkṣetra is encountered once again on the Thaton semas 
from the Kalyāṇī Sīmā and may represent some form of iconographic 
continuity between the two sites.
The 1983-84 Vesāli excavations seems to establish that the practice 
of erecting fossilised wood semas around ordination halls was already in 
existence in Myanmar from possibly as early as the fifth to sixth century 
CE. The lacuna of material evidence for other areas of Myanmar 
does not necessarily indicate that semas were not being used. It could 
be the case that they were also made from perishable materials such as 
wood which would therefore not survive. Furthermore, evidence from 
Śrīkṣetra illustrates that by the sixth to seventh centuries CE a tradition 
of setting up large stone slabs with Buddhist relief carving upon them 
and used to demarcate an ordination hall was well established in this 
region. It seems quite plausible therefore, that the semas from the 
Kalyāṇī Sīmā at Thaton may have found their antecedents in at least 
one, or both of these sites.
Early Evidence from Northeast Thailand
When we come to northeast Thailand, the evidence for semas is much 
more abundant. Surveys of semas from this region have been carried 
out by the Fine Arts Department of Thailand (FAD 2502), Srisakra 
Vallibhotama (2518) and myself (Murphy 2010). I have, for instance, 
recorded 111 sites and over 1,200 sema stones throughout northeast 
Thailand and central and southern Laos (2010: 125, 202-204, 398-439 
and 2013). 
Clear evidence for the use of semas in northeast Thailand from 
the seventh to eighth centuries CE is illustrated by a circular stone, 
now in the Khon Kaen National Museum, found at Wat Si That, 
in Kumphawapi district of Udon Thani province. This sema was 
discovered in 1963-64 during the Archaeological Salvage Expedition 
led by William G. Solheim II and Chester Gorman (1966: 159). It bears 
a fragmentary Sanskrit inscription in Pallava script (K. 981) edited and 
translated by George Cœdès, who dated it to approximately the seventh 
or early eighth century CE (1964: 159-160): 
 (1)  […] māyo  
 
yatir vviprādipūjitaḥ
      śilām imām asau saimīṃ 
sthāpayām āsa bhikṣubhiḥ
(2)  […] ne 
 
 
śucisaṃvatsare śake
      daśame caitraśukle bhūt  
sīmeyaṃ saṅghasammatā
The inscription provides indisputable evidence for the function 
of this stone with Cœdès’ French translation of the first line reading, 
“[…] cet ascète honoré par les brahmanes a érigé cette pierre tenant 
l’office de borne, avec les bhikṣu.” This has been translated into English 
by Piriya Krairiksh (1974: 41) as follows, “[…] this ascetic honoured by 
the Brahmans erected this stone having the function of boundary stone 
with the Bhikkhus [sic]”   
However, Peter Skilling (pers. comm.) has recently presented me 
with a revised reading of this inscription that seems to downplay the 
Brahmins︐ role somewhat: 
(1) [Name or epithet] the renuncient venerated by Brahmins 
and others caused, this stone in the form of a boundary by 
the monks to be established.
(2) [Year in words] the tenth day of the bright half of Caitra, 
this boundary was agreed by the Saṅgha.
As Piriya (1974: 42) states, this inscription leaves no doubt as to 
the function of semas. Furthermore, on Cœdès’ reading, it appears 
that the ritual was conducted by Brahmins, however, in Skilling’s it 
looks as if Brahmins were present but perhaps did not in fact conduct 
the consecration. Either way it serves to remind us that the cultural 
and religious milieu of Southeast Asia at this period was in no way 
homogenous, nor for that matter did it seem to be in any way sectarian, 
with Brahmanism, and Buddhism of various schools, all coexisting to 
a greater or lesser extent alongside each other at various times and in 
various regions.   
A Comparison of the Narrative Art
When we come to the eighth to eleventh centuries, we are on much 
firmer ground. In lower Myanmar, the semas from the Kalyāṇī Sīmā 
at Thaton are finely carved with Buddhist narrative scenes of jātaka 
tales. Equally, from the eighth century onwards in Thailand, Buddhist 
narrative scenes also of jātakas begin to appear on semas throughout the 
region, particularly from the site of Mueang Fa Daet (Murphy 2010: 
189-192 and 2013). What follows is a comparison and discussion of the 
aforementioned semas from the two regions.
The first mention in the academic literature of “Dvāravatī period” 
sema stones from northeast Thailand was by Major Erik Seidenfaden 
Figure 3: Buddhist stele from 
Śrīkṣetra (upper Myanmar) with  
a Pyu inscription, showing the  
Buddha flanked by two attendants. 
Height 99 cm., width 46 cm.,  
depth 10 cm. Housed at the 
Thayekhittra Archaeological  
Museum [Photograph courtesy of  
Donald M. Stadtner].

--- PAGE 182 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
361
360
in 1954 in the Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient. In this work, 
based upon reports he received from a Thai civil servant living in the 
area, he discussed the site of Mueang Fa Daet, which he referred to as 
“Kanok Nakhon.” On observing photographs of sema stones present 
at this site, he concluded that they were Mon in origin stating that they 
were “the handiwork of Mon artists wearing the distinct impression 
of the Dvāravatī School of Art” (Seidenfaden 1954: 643). To confirm 
his identification he consulted Cœdès, who replied in a personal 
communication that he agreed with Seidenfaden. 
This identification was further strengthened a few years later when 
M.C. Subhadradis Diskul wrote an article on the semas of Mueang 
Fa Daet published in Artibus Asiae (1956). It is clear that from early 
on Mueang Fa Daet was identified and recognised as an important 
Dvāravatī period archaeological site. 
In 1968, the Fine Arts Department of Thailand (FAD 2514) 
conducted excavations at this site and among the structures that they 
uncovered were found the remains of two ubosots. Around one of these 
structures (site no. 14), they found in situ pillar-type semas erected in 
pairs, while at the other ubosot (site no. 4), sema stones were also found 
but no mention is given of what type they were. The director of the 
excavation also stated that there were approximately two hundred sema 
stones at the site of Mueang Fa Daet.  
During the course of my research, I recorded 172 semas from this 
site (Murphy 2010: 189-191). Of this number, fifty-five had jātaka tales 
or scenes from the life of the Buddha depicted on them. The rest had 
Buddhist symbols such as stūpas and water-pots (kumbha), or were just 
decorated with a lotus band on their base.
The jātaka tales on sema stones, particularly from Mueang Fa Daet and 
also the site of Ban Nong Hang, were first identified by Piriya Krairiksh 
(1974) in his study of the semas at the Khon Kaen National Museum. 
Piriya succeeded in identifying five out of the ten Mahānipātajātakas 
on the semas. He identifies one instance of the Mahājanakajātaka, two 
instances of the Mahāummagga/Mahosadhajātaka, one instance of the 
Khaṇḍahālajātaka, two instances of the Vidhurapaṇḍitajātaka and one 
instance of the Vessantarajātaka. 
The Kalyāṇī Sīmā  in Thaton cannot compete with either the site of 
Mueang Fa Daet or other sites throughout northeast Thailand in terms 
of the quantity of semas present, however, in terms of the narrative art 
depicted on them and the motifs present, it compares very favourably. 
As at Mueang Fa Daet and other sites throughout northeast Thailand, 
the most common Buddhist narrative scenes are those from the jātakas, 
in particular the Mahānipātajātakas, that is, the last ten past lives of 
the Buddha.
The jātakas from Thaton were first illustrated and identified by 
Maung Mya (1934: 203-204, pl. 1 CXVI) who, on the basis of an 
inscription on one of the stones at the Kalyāṇī Sīmā, dated them from 
the twelfth to thirteenth centuries. Both Luce (1969), and Shorto (1971: 
xxxviii), however, date the inscription to pre-1057 CE, that is, before 
the conquest of Aniruddha recorded in later Burmese chronicles. What 
follows is a comparison of four jātaka tales that the semas from Thaton, 
lower Myanmar, and from northeast Thailand have in common.14
The Mahāummagga-/Mahosadhajātaka
The Mahāummaggajātaka, or Mahosadhajātaka as it is more commonly 
known in the Pāli literature, espouses the virtue of wisdom and is well 
represented in the narrative art of both Myanmar and Thailand from 
ancient times up to the present. In terms of sema stones it is depicted on 
one sema from Thaton and three semas from Mueang Fa Daet. 
The semas from Mueang Fa Daet show a variety of different episodes 
from the Mahosadhajātaka. Of particular interest is a sema [Figure 4] 
carved with episodes on both sides, one side showing the scene in which 
the Bodhisattva Mahosadha decides the case of the stolen child, while 
the other side shows the “Battle of the Law” episode.15
In the judgement of the stolen child episode, Mahosadha is 
located at the centre of the composition while the two women to be 
judged kneel prostrate at his feet. The woman to Mahosadha’s right 
is holding the child. There is also an architectural feature above 
Mahosadha, which acts to frame the composition. The “Battle of the 
Law” scene is depicted on the reverse of this sema. Once again, the 
composition is framed by a stylised architectural feature, under which 
sit four figures, three of whom are attendants. There is also another 
figure lying underneath, which Mahosadha, located on the far left and 
identifiable by the parasol above his head, is holding down with his 
hand and foot. This figure is the Brahmin Kevaṭṭa who is forced into 
obeisance by Mahosadha. 
Overall, these two episodes illustrate that the ancient artists of 
Mueang Fa Daet were extremely well versed in this jātaka and succeeded 
in conveying its narrative by clearly constructed and conceptualised 
compositions. Also characteristic of the narrative art of the Mueang 
Fa Daet semas are the conical headdresses and “Dvāravatī style” facial 
features, particularly in terms of the eyes and lips. Furthermore, the 
narrative compositions are at times framed by stylised architectural 
motifs [Figure 13]. 
Interestingly, the placement of these two scenes on either side of the 
same sema may not be accidental. As Piriya (1974: 49-50) has pointed 
out, these two scenes appear side-by-side on terracotta plaques at the 
Thagya hpaya/stūpa at Thaton. It is worth noting, therefore, that while 
they are stylistically rather different, in terms of content, the Mahosadha 
sema from Mueang Fa Daet and the terracotta plaques are identical.
The sema from Thaton on the other hand, depicts the episode in 
which Mahosadha’s wife is presenting the four nobles dressed up like 
white monkeys to the king while her husband is absent [Figure 5]. 
The depiction of the four nobles dressed up like monkeys allows for the 
scene to be clearly identified.16 Skilfully rendered in low-relief, with the 
characters clearly shown, this scene, as with the Mueang Fa Daet sema, 
competently conveys the narrative episode.  
When we look closely at the style of the carving and the arrangement 
of the composition itself, however, there is little to suggest a direct link 
with the sema from northeast Thailand. For instance, the architectural 
feature present on the sema from Thaton, a stylised-tiered tower of 
some kind, bears no resemblance to the architectural features on the 
sema from Mueang Fa Daet, nor does it have any parallel with other 
architectural motifs from semas throughout northeast Thailand. There 
is also no obvious “Dvāravatī stylistic influence” and furthermore, the 
Bodhisattva is depicted with a halo, a device that is rarely shown on 
Figure 4: Sema from Mueang Fa 
Daet (Kalasin province, northeast 
Thailand) depicting the episode of 
the “Battle of the Law” from the 
Mahosadhajātaka. Height 170 cm., 
width 84 cm. depth 24 cm. Housed  
at the Khon Kaen National Museum,  
inv. no. 466, 467/2517 [Photograph 
by Stephen A. Murphy].
Figure 5: Sema from the Kalyāṇī 
Sīmā in Thaton (lower Myanmar; 
still in situ) depicting the scene from 
the Mahosadhajātaka in which 
Mahosadha’s wife is presenting the 
four nobles dressed up like white 
monkeys to the king [Photograph by 
Stephen A. Murphy].

--- PAGE 183 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
363
362
of his conical headdress. There is also another figure placed 
above the large fish to the top right, however, it is unidentifiable 
as the top part of this sema is missing. It is also possible that this 
figure may represent Mahājanaka due to his placement in the 
composition, as in this episode Mahājanaka climbs to the top of 
the mast as the ship begins to sink, while his shipmates, unable 
to do so are eaten alive by various types of sea creatures as they 
swim helplessly in the sea. 
The sema from Thaton depicts the exact same episode, however, 
it does so using a very different compositional arrangement. Firstly, 
the narrative is conflated, as there are two episodes being depicted in 
the one composition. On the top register the shipwreck scene is shown 
with Mahājanaka standing in the centre of the ship beside the mast. 
However, below the ship, the next episode in this narrative is shown. 
Mahājanaka, after surviving the shipwreck and swimming in the ocean 
for seven days, is eventually saved by the goddess Maṇīmekhalā, who is 
shown lifting him out of the water and bearing him away.  
When we compare the Mahājanaka episode on the top register of the 
Thaton sema with its counterpart from Ban Non Chat, we again observe 
that while the content is identical, the compositional arrangement and 
style once more differ. Firstly, in terms of scale, we see that the artist of 
the Thaton sema has chosen to depict the episode from a more distanced 
standpoint, allowing the viewer to take in the entire scene, or in this 
case the two concurrent narrative episodes. The sema from Ban Non 
Chat, on the other hand, has chosen to represent the episode up close, 
clearly depicting the characters of the narrative but not the backdrop. 
In fact, the only suggestion of a ship is the narrow mast to which the 
figures cling. Furthermore, the conflation of the narrative as seen on the 
sema from Thaton is never encountered in northeast Thailand during 
the “Dvāravatī period.”18  
Once again, while the narrative content is very similar and at times 
identical, the style and arrangement of the compositions from northeast 
Thailand differ quite significantly from those at Thaton.    
Bodhisattvas in semas from northeast Thailand, though it does appear 
on Buddha images.
Overall, therefore, while there are direct comparisons in terms of 
narrative content, particularly between the terracotta plaques of the 
Thagya hpaya/stūpa and the Mahosadha sema from Mueang Fa Daet, 
stylistically there are many divergences between the stones from these 
two regions.
The Mahājanakajātaka
Scenes from the Mahājanakajātaka have been identified on semas from 
three separate locations, Thaton [Figures 6a-b], Ban Nong Hang in 
Kalasin province [Figure 7] and Ban Non Chat [Figures 8 a-b] in 
Khon Kaen province.17 The semas from Ban Non Chat and Thaton 
appear to depict the same scene. The sema from Ban Nong Hang has 
been identified by Piriya as the Mahājanakajātaka (1974: 47-48) although 
I have previously questioned this identification (2010: 225-227). The 
sema is fragmentary but Piriya proposes that it depicts the Bodhisattva 
Mahājanaka and his estranged wife, Queen Sīvalī. He further argues 
that it represents the scene after Mahājanaka has renounced his kingship 
and become an ascetic (cf. Cowell 1957: VI, 30-37). Mahājanaka, Piriya 
argues, is depicted at the bottom centre of the composition in an ascetic’s 
garb, holding an ascetic’s staff, while Queen Sīvalī is placed above him. 
She is shown leaning on her right shoulder, with her right hand raised 
to support herself. If this identification is correct, this posture may have 
been chosen to convey her grief and sorrow at the fact that Mahājanaka 
has resolved to remain an ascetic and, consequently, she can no longer 
accompany him. Overall, the compositional arrangement is uncrowded 
and as far as can be made out from the fragment, there are no further 
motifs or features present in this scene. The viewer’s attention is 
therefore solely focused on the interaction between the two figures.
This identification, while compelling is far from certain. First of all, 
the identification of the bottom figure as Mahājanaka seems to rest solely 
on the staff he carries, which Piriya argues is that of an ascetic. However, 
it has been pointed out by a number of authors that it represents a 
khakkhara (Lorrillard 2008: 123-124; Revire 2009: 120-123) and that this 
instrument is not restricted to ascetics alone but to monks of various 
different monastic lineages. Furthermore, the khakkhara is also depicted 
on a further sema (No Na Paknam 1981: front cover; Murphy 2010: 
272, fig. 5.74), and in this scene it is held by the Buddha. Additionally, 
the figure Piriya argues is Mahājanaka has his hair cut short in the style 
of a monk as opposed to the conical hairstyle of a Bodhisattva. As he 
does not have an uṣṇīṣa, he cannot be said to represent the Buddha 
either. The identification of the upper figure as a queen is also far from 
certain. It is more probable that this scene represents an unidentified 
episode involving a monk as opposed to the Mahājanakajātaka. Due to the 
uncertainty surrounding the actual narrative being shown, it is therefore 
omitted from consideration in the discussion below.  
The sema from Ban Non Chat [Figures 8 a-b] depicts the episode 
of the shipwreck, identifiable by the large fish in the bottom right corner, 
and also by the mast of the ship, shown just to the left of the central 
stūpa motif. Two figures are clinging to this mast as the ship begins to 
sink, with the lower of the two possibly being Mahājanaka on account 
Figure 7: Fragmentary sema from 
Ban Nong Hang (Kalasin province, 
northeast Thailand) supposedly 
depicting the Mahājanakajātaka. 
Height 64 cm., width 60 cm.,  
depth 11 cm. Housed at the  
Khon Kaen National Museum,  
inv. no. 504/2517 [Photograph  
by Stephen A. Murphy].
Figure 8b: Detail of the sema from 
Ban Non Chat depicting the sea monster 
[Photograph by Stephen A. Murphy]. 
Figure 8a: Sema from Ban Non 
Chat (Khon Kaen province, northeast 
Thailand) depicting the shipwreck 
scene from the Mahājanakajātaka. 
Height 120 cm., width 70 cm., 
depth 20 cm. Housed at the village 
temple, Ban Non Chat, Khon Kaen 
province [Photograph by Stephen  
A. Murphy].
363
Figures 6a-b: Detail of a sema 
from the Kalyāṇī Sīmā in Thaton 
(lower Myanmar; still in situ) 
depicting the Mahājanakajātaka. 
Top: Mahājanaka holds on to 
the mast of the ship. Bottom: 
The goddess Maṇīmekhalā saves 
Mahājanaka from the ocean 
[photographs by Stephen A. Murphy].

--- PAGE 184 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
365
364
The Vidhurapaṇḍitajātaka
The Vidhurapaṇḍitajātaka is depicted on two semas from Thaton 
[Figures 10a-b] and one sema from Mueang Fa Daet. The latter sema 
[Figure 9] depicts the scene in which the yakkha general, Puṇṇaka, is 
converted by the Bodhisattva Vidhura (Piriya 1974: 53-55; Murphy 
2010: 237-243; Cowell 1957: VI, 131). This episode takes place on 
a mountaintop, represented here by the clouds in the background. 
After being dangled upside down and about to be thrown off the 
mountainside by Puṇṇaka, Vidhura manages to persuade the yakkha 
general to let him preach the Law first. Puṇṇaka agrees and upon 
hearing the wisdom of Vidhura, is converted and no longer seeks to 
kill the Bodhisattva. It is this moment of the preaching of the Law that 
is being depicted in this narrative scene. Vidhura sits in the top left of 
the scene while Puṇṇaka sits slightly below him to the right. Puṇṇaka is 
further identified by the depiction of his horse directly below him. 
The sema stones from Thaton, on the other hand, show different 
episodes. One fragmentary sema depicts the episode in which the four 
kings meet [Figure 10a]. They are shown sitting around a table, engaged 
in conversation. It is highly probably, that this sema, like that depicting 
the Vessantarajātaka from Thaton discussed below [Figure 11], was 
divided into two panels, each illustrating a different part of the narrative 
of the jātaka in question. Unfortunately, due to the fragmentary nature 
of this sema, it is impossible to know what this scene may have been. 
Once again, it is also worth noting that this compositional arrangement 
of dividing the face of the sema into two panels is never encountered in 
northeast Thailand. 
The other sema from Thaton also depicting the Vidhurapaṇḍitajātaka 
illustrates the episode in which Puṇṇaka challenges King Dhananjaya 
to a game of dice [Figure 10b]. In this scene, King Dhannajaya sits 
on an elaborate throne which frames his person, while Puṇṇaka stands 
to his right. Stylistically, this throne bears no resemblance whatsoever 
to the thrones depicted on the semas from northeast Thailand which 
are usually shown as either consisting of a matt/cushion-type seat or a 
polygonal motif with the throne itself rising behind, but not enclosing 
the Bodhisattva as is the case at Thaton (Murphy 2010: 344-365). This 
further serves to illustrate the stylistic differences that exist between the 
two regions.  
The Vessantarajātaka
The Vessantarajātaka is depicted on two semas from Thaton (Luce 1985: 
pl. 94c) [Figure 11], one sema from Mueang Fa Daet [Figure 12] and 
one sema currently located at Wat Sibunrueang in Kalasin province but 
most likely also from the site of Mueang Fa Daet (Piriya 1974: fig. 22) 
[Figure 13]. All four semas depict different scenes from this jātaka and 
once again the arrangement and the composition of the scenes from 
Thaton and northeast Thailand differ considerably.  
The sema from Mueang Fa Daet depicts an episode preceding 
Vessantara’s banishment from the palace. In this scene, the Bodhisattva 
Vessantara is seated on a throne below a parasol while his wife sits to 
his right, slightly below him in front of an architectural motif most 
likely meant to represent the palace. Vessantara’s children are shown 
at the bottom of the scene, sleeping together on a mat. The fact that 
Vessantara is seated on a throne and the presence of the stylised 
architectural feature behind his wife confirm that they are still within 
the palace.
The sema from Wat Sibunrueang depicts the episode in which 
Vessantara gives away Maddī to Sakka, who is disguised as a Brahmin. 
Vessantara is shown in the centre of the scene with Sakka to his left 
and Maddī to his right. The donation of Maddī is symbolically depicted 
by the pouring of water onto the right hand of the recipient, who in this 
case is Sakka (Piriya 1974: 57 and 2012: 340-341; Cowell 1957: VI, 293). 
The narrative takes place under a building of some kind, rather 
reminiscent of a modern Thai sala, or pavilion. This pavilion is in 
turn flanked by trees on either side above which float a pair of celestial 
beings. Overall, the architecture detail helps to create a well-balanced 
composition and as with the Mahosadhajātaka from Mueang Fa Daet, has 
the effect of framing the scene. 
When we compare these two scenes with those found at Thaton, 
we once again see great differences in the style and execution of 
the narratives. One sema from Thaton, for instance, has been divided 
into two panels, the upper depicting the episode in which Vessantara 
gives away the white elephant to the eight Brahmins of Kāliṅga, while 
the lower panel has not been clearly identified (Luce 1985: pl. 94c).
Also depicted on a sema from Thaton is the scene in which the 
forester threatens to shoot Jūjaka with his bow after the latter has 
climbed up a tree after being chased by a pack of dogs [Figure 11]. 
If we compare the style and composition of this sema with the sema 
from Mueang Fa Daet, we observe that they differ in many ways, for 
instance in terms of the proportions of the figures and the style of their 
depiction. This points towards two different traditions separated by at 
Figure 10a: The episode from the 
Vidhurapaṇḍitajātaka when the 
four kings meet, from the Kalyāṇī 
Sīmā in Thaton (lower Myanmar; 
still in situ) [Photograph by Stephen 
A. Murphy].
Figure 10b: Sema from 
the Kalyāṇī Sīmā in Thaton 
(lower Myanmar; still in situ) 
depicting the episode from the 
Vidhurapaṇḍitajātaka in which 
Puṇṇaka challenges King Dhananjaya 
to a game of dice [Photograph by 
Stephen A. Murphy].
Figure 11: Sema from the Kalyāṇī 
Sīmā in Thaton (lower Myanmar; 
still in situ) depicting the episode 
from the Vessantarajātaka in which 
the forester threatens to shoot Jūjaka 
[Photograph by Stephen A. Murphy].
Figure 9: Sema from Mueang  
Fa Daet (Kalasin province, northeast 
Thailand) depicting the episode 
from the Vidhurapaṇḍitajātaka 
where Vidhura preaches the Law to 
Puṇṇaka. Height 176 cm., width  
76 cm., depth 25 cm. Housed 
at Khon Kaen National Museum 
[Photograph by Stephen A. Murphy].

--- PAGE 185 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
367
366
least two centuries. It is difficult therefore to imagine any direct link or 
affiliation between the artists who carved the semas from Mueang Fa 
Daet and those who were at work in Thaton. 
Floral Motifs and the Form of the Semas
It has been shown that by comparing jātaka scenes from northeast 
Thailand and Thaton that, while there is a large degree of similarity in 
terms of narrative content between the two regions, there is little direct 
connection in terms of the style and composition of the episodes. This 
lack of similarity is further emphasised and confirmed when we analyse 
the form of the semas and their floral motifs.
In terms of form, the semas from northeast Thailand and Thaton 
are quite different. The majority of sema stones from northeast Thailand 
with narrative scenes are of the slab type variety and resemble a stylised 
leaf in design, usually slightly tapered and curving inwards at the top 
to form a point (Murphy 2010: 344-365). The semas from Thaton 
[Figure 14], on the other hand, are more similar, albeit not exactly 
the same in design, to the tapered pillar type semas 
from northeast Thailand. They taper inwards 
towards the centre before tapering outwards 
again toward the top, a design that is nowhere 
encountered in northeast Thailand. In fact the 
closest parallel in terms of design are perhaps the 
Khmer pillars found along causeways at temples 
throughout northeast Thailand and the Khmer 
empire itself. It is uncertain, however, whether 
there is any direct link between these two forms.
Furthermore, in terms of the floral motifs 
present on the semas, there is little in common 
between the two regions. The large majority of 
the semas from Thailand possess either a single or 
double band of lotus petals along the base, above 
which the narrative scene is usually depicted 
[Figures 4, 9 and 12]. The top part of the sema, 
on the other hand, is never carved with floral 
motifs (Murphy 2010: 334-336). In comparison, 
the Thaton semas usually have both the upper 
and lower sections decorated with floral motifs. 
The lower part is usually a single band, with 
triangular-shaped lotus leaves, while the upper 
section can be very elaborate consisting of the 
whole upper section of the sema [Figure 14]. This 
floral carving is extremely reminiscent of Khmer 
art and may in fact be due to Khmer presence in 
the region of lower Myanmar from the early eleventh century onwards 
(Luce 1969: 21-23). It is worth noting here that if the Khmers were in 
fact present in Thaton at this period, it would seem a very unlikely place 
for a group of Mon “refugees” from Thailand attempting to escape the 
Khmers to settle.
Another important difference is the presence of a stylised stūpa 
motif on either the front or rear of the majority semas from northeast 
Thailand. This stylised axial stūpa can appear within the narrative scene 
such as in Figure 8a depicting the Mahājanakajātaka, on the reverse side 
of a carved sema, or it can be the main artistic component of the sema 
itself (Woodward 2003: 101-103; Murphy 2010: 312-314). Significantly, 
no such motif appears on the semas from Thaton. 
 
Conclusion
This essay has outlined the earliest evidence for semas in Myanmar and 
northeast Thailand and in doing so has attempted to show that there 
was a sufficient artistic and religious tradition in place to point towards 
a “Burmese” origin for the semas at the Kalyāṇī Sīmā in Thaton as 
opposed to an external source such as suggested by Piriya Krairiksh 
(1974). The site of Vesāli in particular, seems to provide evidence for 
the early use of semas while the stone triads at Śrīkṣetra illustrate that 
there was a well-established tradition of monumental Buddhist relief 
carving and sculpture in upper Myanmar from the sixth to seventh 
centuries onwards.  
Figure 14: Illustration of the  
sema with the Mahājanakajātaka 
from the Kalyāṇī Sīmā, Thaton 
(lower Myanmar; still in situ) 
showing its tapering form and upper 
and lower parts carved with floral 
motifs. Approximate dimensions:  
height 130 cm., width 48 cm.  
depth 10 cm. [Photograph by  
Stephen A. Murphy].
Figure 13: Sema from Wat Sibunrueang, Kalasin province, 
depicting the episode in which Vessantara gives away Maddī 
to Sakka, who is disguised as a Brahmin. Height 144 cm. 
[Photograph courtesy of Paisarn Piemmettawat].  
Figure 12: Sema from Mueang Fa Daet depicting an 
episode from the Vessantarajātaka where Vessantara and  
his family are in the palace. Height 140 cm., width 80 cm., 
depth 20 cm. Housed at Khon Kaen National Museum,  
inv. no. 226/2517 [Photograph courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 186 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
369
368
In comparing the semas from northeast Thailand and those from 
the Kalyāṇī Sīmā in Thaton, it becomes apparent that while there is a 
large degree of uniformity in terms of content, there is also significant 
divergence in terms of style, composition and form. This leads to the 
conclusion that there was no direct contact between those who carved 
and set up the semas at Thaton and their counterparts in northeast 
Thailand. The semas from northeast Thailand therefore do not appear 
to be the artistic source for those at Thaton. If Piriya’s hypothesis was 
correct and a group of “Mon refugees” had settled in Thaton, leading 
to the creation of the sema stones at the Kalyāṇī Sīmā, then we would 
expect to see much more continuity in terms of style and form.  
It seems much more plausible that the inhabitants of northeast 
Thailand and those in lower Myanmar shared extremely similar 
Buddhist religious traditions, perhaps derived from the same Pāli 
Canon.19 This would provide a much more satisfactorily explanation of 
the similarities, and at times identical content of the sema stones from 
the two regions. To further emphasis this point, it should be noted that 
the movement of ideas and the movement of peoples are not the same 
thing. While ideas, be they religious, artistic or technical can move swiftly 
and freely along pre-existing trade routes and lines of communication, 
leaving very little material evidence in their wake, the movement of 
peoples, on the other hand, is an entirely different proposition. If the 
Mons of northeast Thailand did in fact migrate to Thaton, we would 
expect to see a much larger archaeological, material, epigraphic and 
artistic footprint than what we are left with today. 
What is clear however, it that the semas from Thaton and those 
spread throughout northeast Thailand, bear testament to the common 
religious traditions and artistic languages shared by both these regions 
as expressed through the medium of Buddhist narrative art. 
Acknowledgements 
Many thanks to Pamela Gutman, Elizabeth Moore, Nicolas Revire, 
Donald Stadtner, and Hiram Woodward for their comments and 
advice on earlier drafts of this essay. Thanks also to U Nyunt Han for 
his kindness and generosity in translating the report on the excavations 
at Vesāli, Terrance Tan for arranging the field trip to Śrīkṣetra and to 
Win Kyaing, the director of the field school of archaeology at Śrīkṣetra 
for showing me around the site and opening the site museum at very 
short notice. Finally, thanks are also due to all the staff at the Khon 
Kaen National Museum, who were extremely welcoming and helpful 
throughout my research there.    
Endnotes 
1 
A discussion of what constitutes Dvāravatī is 
beyond the limits of this essay. Suffice to say  
that the prevailing view in scholarship is that it  
is a primarily early Buddhist culture and to a  
lesser extent Brahmanical, that arose in central  
and part of northeast Thailand consisting of  
urbanised polities more often than not based  
around moated sites. The degree to which it 
formed a uniform “state” or political entity is still  
a contentious issue. For an up-to-date overview of  
the definitions and debates surrounding the term  
Dvāravatī, see Skilling (2003); for a summary of  
the archaeological evidence, see Phasook (2542  
and 2004); for definitions of the Dvāravatī art  
style, see Boisselier (1975: 73-92) and Woodward  
(1997: 43-74); for issues regarding the dating of  
the Dvāravatī period, see Barram & Glover (2008) 
and Glover (2010); for inscriptions, see Revire  
(this volume).
2 
Sema stones from this period are also found in 
central and southern Laos. However, this essay 
will focus on those found in northeast Thailand 
only. For discussion of semas in Laos, see Lorrillard 
(2008: 119, figs 3-6; see also this volume) and 
Murphy (2010 and 2013).  
3 
Piriya for instance states “harassed by the 
encroachments of the Khmers into their 
territories, some of the Mons in northeast 
Dvāravatī may have decided to seek safety at 
Thaton, the fabled cradle of Mon Buddhism [...]. 
On arrival they probably would have consecrated 
a chapter house for the continuation of their 
religion, and, as was the custom of their forebears, 
they would have embellished the semas with 
scenes from the Mahānipāta-Jātakas [...]” (1974: 
63). Piriya is here building on an idea floated by 
Quaritch Wales (1947: 152-156) that Buddhism 
was reintroduced to Thaton by the Mons of 
Lamphun (ancient Haripuñjaya/Haripunchai) in 
the mid-eleventh century and Cœdès (1966), who 
mentions a reference in Pāli sources stating that, 
in the eleventh century, Mons from Lamphun fled 
to Thaton to escape a cholera epidemic (see also 
Moore & San Win, this volume).
4 
Mueang Fa Daet is located in modern-day  
Kalasin province while Ban Nong Chat is in  
Khon Kaen province, northeast Thailand. For 
further discussion, see Murphy (2010: 157-160, 
163-164 and 2013).
5 
For a discussion of sīmā in a modern-day 
Cambodian context, see Harris (2010).
6 
For comprehensive surveys of bai semas in Thailand 
spanning the Ayutthaya to Thonburi periods, see 
No Na Paknam (2524) and Pitya (2550). 
7 
For the sake of consistency, the Thai term sema 
(as opposed to the Pāli term sīmā) is employed 
throughout this essay to define “boundary 
markers.” 
  8 I have demonstrated, however, that the numbers 
can vary. For instance during the so-called 
Dvāravatī period the number of semas employed 
can be as high as twenty-four stones being use at 
certain sites (Murphy 2010: 95-103).
  9 For an account of the corresponding ceremony in 
Cambodia, see Giteau (1969).
10 See the Uposathakkhandhaka (Vin IV 139-147).
11 For Cambodia, see Boulbet & Dagens (1973); 
for Laos, see Lorrillard (2008: 119) and Murphy 
(2010: 173-81 and 2013).
12 Unpublished site report by the Burmese 
Department of Archaeology.
13  For further discussion on the problematic nature 
of the term “megalith” in a Southeast Asian 
context, see Glover (1998) and Murphy (2010:  
365-374).  
14 Today the semas at the Kalyāṇī Sīmā in Thaton 
are enclosed in metal cages and are thus difficult 
to photograph [e.g. Figure 14]. Upon visiting the 
site in July 2011, I managed to photograph them 
as best as possible through the bars, allowing for 
close up details of the carvings but not illustrations 
of the overall stones. For good quality photographs 
of the stones before they were enclosed, see Luce 
(1985: pls 92-95).
15 Unfortunately the side depicting the stolen child 
episode is now extremely badly eroded and difficult 
to make out. However, there is a good illustration 
of this in Piriya (1974: fig. 9). For the relevant 
section of the Pāli text, see Cowell’s translation 
(1957: VI, 207).
16 Unfortunately the nobles are not quite visible in 
Figure 5. However, they are clearly shown in Luce 
(1985: pl. 93d).
17 For Thaton, see Maung Mya, (1934: 203-204).  
The Mahājanaka scene on the sema from Ban  
Non Chat has been identified by the author of this 
article in Murphy (2010: 227-228). For its textual 
basis, see Cowell’s translation (1957: VI, 22-23).  
18 There is one possible exception to this on a  
sema from Mueang Fa Daet. See Murphy  
(2010: 222-224).
19 Pāli inscriptions for instance are attested in upper 
Myanmar, at Śrīkṣetra, from the fifth-sixth century 
CE onwards (Stargardt 2000) and in central 
Thailand from the seventh-eighth centuries 
(Revire, this volume). However, to the best of my 
knowledge, to date, no Pāli inscriptions have been 
discovered in northeast Thailand prior to the 
eleventh century.

--- PAGE 187 ---
STePHen a. murPHy
371
370
References
Arunsak Kingmanee 
2010  Boundary Stones of the 
Dvaravati Period: A Preliminary 
Overview. In Leelananda 
Prematilleke et al. (eds), 
Abhinandanamālā, Nandana Chutiwongs 
Felicitation Volume. Bangkok and 
Colombo: SPAFA, pp. 67-82.
Aung-Thwin, Michael 
2005  The Mists of Rāmañña:  
The Legend That Was Lower Burma. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press.
Barram, Andrew &  
Glover, Ian C. 
2008  Re-thinking Dvaravati.  
In Pautreau, J.P. (ed.), From Homo 
Erectus to the Living Traditions; Choice 
of Papers from the 11th International 
Conference of the European Association 
of Southeast Asian Archaeologists. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Press,  
pp. 175-82.
Beylié, Léon de  
1907  Prome et Samara. Paris:  
Ernest Leroux. 
Blagden, Charles otto (trans.) 
1928  Mon Inscriptions, Section II- 
The Mediaeval Mon Records. No. XII. 
The Inscriptions of the Kalyanisima, 
Pegu. Rangoon: Epigraphia 
Birmanica, III, 2.
Boisselier, Jean 
1975  The Heritage of Thai Sculpture, 
New York: Weatherhill. [First 
published in French as La sculpture 
en Thaïlande, 1974; In collaboration 
with J.M. Beurdeley]
Boulbet, Jean &  
Dagens, Bruno 
1973  Les sites archéologiques  
de la région du Bhnam Gūlen 
(Phnom Kulen). Arts Asiatiques  
27: 1-130.
Cœdès, George 
1964  Inscriptions du Cambodge. 
Volume VII. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
1966  Les Môns de Dvāravatī. 
In Ba Shin, Boisselier, Jean & 
Griswold, A.B. (eds), Essays Offered 
to G. H. Luce by His Colleagues and 
Friends in Honour of His Seventy-
Fifth Birthday. Volume 1: Papers on 
Asian History, Religion, Languages, 
Literature, Music Folklore, and 
Anthropology. Ascona: Artibus Asiae 
Supplementum, pp. 112-116.
Cowell, Edward B. (trans.) 
1957  The Jātaka or Stories of the 
Buddha’s Former Births. Six Volumes. 
London: Pali Text Society & 
Luzac.
Giteau, Madeleine 
1969  Le bornage rituel des temples 
bouddhiques au Cambodge. Paris:  
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Glover, Ian C. 
1998  The Archaeological Past of 
Island Southeast Asia. In Barbier-
Mueller, J.P. et al. (eds), Messages 
in Stone: Statues and Sculptures from 
Tribal Indonesia in the Collection 
of the Barbier-Mueller Museum.
Geneva: Musée Barbier-Mueller, 
pp. 17-34.
2010  The Dvaravati Gap – 
Linking Prehistory and History 
in Early Thailand. Bulletin of the 
Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 30: 
79-86. [Accessible at: https://
digital.lib.washington.edu/
ojs/index.php/BIPPA/article/
view/10809/10667] 
Fine Arts Department (FAD) 
2502  Krongkan lae raingan kansamruat 
lae kotdaeng borannawatthu satan nai 
pak tawan ok chiang nuea (Plan and 
Report of the Survey and Excavations 
of Ancient Monuments in Northeast 
Thailand). [Unpublished Report in 
Thai; 1959 CE]
2514  Concluding Report of the 
Excavations of Ancient Monuments 
at Mueang Fa Daet Song Yang. 
[Unpublished Report in Thai; 
1971 CE]
Harris, Ian 
2010  Rethinking Cambodian 
Political Discourse on Territory: 
Genealogy of the Buddhist Ritual 
Boundary (Sima). Journal of Southeast 
Asian Studies 41(2): 215-239. 
Horner, Isaline Blew (trans.) 
1962  The Book of the Discipline 
(Vinaya-Piṭaka), Volume IV 
(Mahāvagga). London: Pali Text 
Society and Luzac & Co.  
[Reprint; First Edition 1951]
Indorf, Pinna 
1994  The Precinct of the  
Thai Uposatha Hall [BOT].  
A Southeast Asian Spirit World 
Domain. Journal of the Siam Society 
82: 19-54.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra 
1997  Rules for the Sīmā 
Regulation in the Vinaya and 
Its Commentaries and Their 
Application in Thailand. Journal  
of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 20(2): 141-153.
Lorrillard, Michel 
2008  Pour une géographie 
historique du bouddhisme au Laos. 
In Goudineau, Yves & Lorrillard, 
Michel (eds), Recherches nouvelles 
sur le Laos/New Research on Laos. 
Vientiane-Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient, pp. 113-181.
Luce, Gordon H.  
1969  Old Burma-Early Pagan. New 
York: J.J. Augustin, Locust Valley.
1985  Phases of Pre-Pagan Burma. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maung Mya 
1934  Pillars with Scenes from 
the Mahānipāta-Jātakas around 
the Kalyāṇī Sīmā, Thaton. 
Archaeological Survey of India.  
Annual Report 1930-34: 203-204.
Moore, Elizabeth H. 
2007  Early Landscapes of Myanmar. 
Bangkok: River Books.
Murphy, Stephen A.  
2010  The Buddhist Boundary 
Markers of Northeast Thailand and 
Central Laos, 7th-12th Centuries CE: 
Towards an Understanding of the 
Archaeological, Religious and Artistic 
Landscape of the Khorat Plateau. 
Doctoral Dissertation. London: 
School of Oriental and African 
Studies, University of London. 
[Unpublished; Accessible at: 
http://eprints.soas.ac.uk/12204/]
2013  The Distribution of Sema 
Stones throughout the Khorat 
Plateau during the Dvaravati 
Period. In Klokke, Marijke & 
Degroot, Véronique (eds),  
Unearthing Southeast Asia’s Past: Selected 
Papers from the Twelfth  International 
Conference of the European Association of 
Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 1. 
Singapore: NUS Press, pp. 215-233.
Nagasena Bhikkhu 
Forthcoming  The Significance of  
the Sima (Buddhist Monastic Boundary) 
in Burmese Theravada: Authority  
and Practice. Doctoral Dissertation. 
London: School of Oriental  
and African Studies, University  
of London.
No Na Paknam 
2524  Sinlapa bon baisema/ 
The Buddhist Boundary Markers of 
Thailand. Bangkok: Muang Boran 
Press. [In Thai and English;  
1981 CE]
Phasook Indrawooth 
2542  Thawarawadi: kansueksa 
choeng wikhro chak lakthan thang 
borannakhadi/ Dvaravati: A Critical 
Study Based on Archaeological Evidence. 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University 
Press. [In Thai and English;  
1999 CE] 
2004  The Archaeology of the 
Early Buddhist Kingdoms of 
Thailand. In Bellwood, Peter & 
Glover, Ian C. (eds), Southeast Asia, 
from Prehistory to History. London  
and New York: Routledge Curzon, 
pp. 120-148.
Piriya Krairiksh 
1974  Semas with Scenes from 
the Mahānipāta-Jātakas in the 
National Museum at Khon Kaen. 
In Fine Arts Department (ed.), Art 
and Archaeology in Thailand. Bangkok: 
Fine Arts Department, pp. 35-100.
2012  The Roots of Thai Art. 
Bangkok: River Books. [First 
published in Thai as Rakngao haeng 
sinlapa thai, 2553 (2010 CE)]
Pitya Bunnag 
2550  Sema sima: laksima nai sinlapa 
thai samai Ayutthaya chuang lang siang 
krong raek tueng krang lang lae krong 
thonburi (Sema Sima, Sema Stones in 
Thai Art-spanning the Period from the 
First Fall of Ayutthaya to the Thonburi 
Period). Bangkok: Office of the 
National Buddhist Association.  
[In Thai; 2007 CE]
Quaritch Wales,  
Horace Geoffrey  
1947  Anuruddha and the  
Thaton Tradition. Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, New Series 
79(3-4): 152-156. 
Revire, Nicolas 
2009  À propos d’une « tête » de 
khakkhara conservée au Musée 
national de Bangkok. Aséanie 24: 
111-134.
Seidenfaden, Erik 
1954  Kanok Nakhon, an Ancient 
Mon Settlement in Northeast 
Siam (Thailand) and Its Treasures 
of Art. Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 54(2): 643-648.
Skilling, Peter 
2003  Dvāravatī: Recent 
Revelations and Research. In 
Baker, Chris (ed.), Dedications to 
HRH Princess Galyani Vadhana Krom 
Luang Naradhiwas Rajanagarindra 
on her 80th Birthday. Bangkok: The 
Siam Society, pp. 87-112.
Solheim, William G. (II) & 
Gorman, Chester 
1966  Archaeological Salvage 
Program; Northeast Thailand, 
First Season. Journal of the Siam 
Society 54(2): 111-210.
Srisakra Vallibhotama  
2518  Sema isan (Semas in Isan). 
Muang Boran 1(2): 89-116.  
[In Thai; 1975 CE]
Stadtner, Donald 
1998  The Art of Burma. In 
Girard-Geslan, Maud et al. (eds), 
Art of Southeast Asia. New York: 
Harry N. Abrams, pp. 40-91.
2008  The Mon of Lower Burma. 
Journal of the Siam Society 96:  
193-215.
Stargardt, Janice 
2000  Tracing Thought through 
Things: The Oldest Pali Texts and the 
Early Buddhist Archaeology of India 
and Burma. Amsterdam: Royal 
Netherlands Academy of Arts  
and Sciences.
Subhadradis Diskul, M.C. 
1956  Mueng Fa Dæd. An Ancient 
Town in Northeast Thailand. 
Artibus Asiae 19(3/4): 362-367.
Woodward, Hiram, Jr 
1997  The Sacred Sculpture of 
Thailand: The Alexander B. Griswold 
Collection, The Walters Art Gallery. 
Bangkok: River Books. 
2003  The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand. From Prehistoric Times 
through the Thirteenth Century.  
Leiden-Boston: Brill.

--- PAGE 188 ---
372
PART IV
laTer kHmer imPeTuS

--- PAGE 189 ---
375
374
Introduction
T
he beautifully carved sandstone temple at Phimai on the Khorat 
Plateau is the first tantric Buddhist sanctuary built on a royal scale 
in the ancient Khmer empire. It was built between 1080 and 1108 CE 
in the reign of Jayavarman VI (r. 1080-1107 CE) who founded the 
Mahīdharapura dynasty that took Angkor to its apogee of power in the 
twelfth century. Jayavarman VI was crowned in Angkor, but he did not 
build a state temple there. The great work of sacred architecture of his 
reign was Prasat Hin Phimai with its powerful new message from the 
gods of tantric Buddhism. Prasat Hin Phimai is the only major temple 
in the Khmer empire to be adorned with tantric Buddhist imagery 
before Jayavarman VII (r. 1181/2-1216 CE) made tantric Buddhism 
the “state religion” in Angkor at the end of the twelfth century.
This essay presents a new English translation of a key tantric 
Buddhist inscription found at Sap Bak, near Phimai, and argues that 
the tradition of tantric Buddhism had long thrived on the Khorat 
Plateau. Tantric beliefs cross several generations and have links to both 
the tantric Buddhist history of tenth century central Cambodia as well 
as to the birth place of Buddhism in India. A discussion of these links 
paves the way for a new reading of Prasat Hin Phimai’s famous inner 
lintels showing that one of their key functions is to symbolise the unity 
of body, speech and mind, as a central idea of this tradition. It takes 
the maṇḍala of the Guhyasamājatantra and of the Cakrasaṃvaratantra to be 
primary influences on its iconography. 
Background and New Research  
on Tantric Buddhism
In 1966, Jan Boeles wrote a ground-breaking article suggesting that 
the Hevajra cult had adherents in northeast Thailand in the early 
twelfth century and that a form of Vajrayāna, originating from Phimai 
on the Khorat Plateau, might have spread to Angkor, the capital city 
of the Khmer empire (1966: 28). The religious orientation of the 
Khmer empire subsequently changed under Jaya varman VII from a 
Brahmanical outlook to Buddhism of a tantric kind. 
Two newly published bronzes of dancing women inspired Boeles’ 
thesis: a fierce looking one from somewhere east of Nakhon Ratchasima; 
the other one, rather friendly looking, originating from Khon Kaen. 
Boeles connected them to a small collection of bronzes of dancing 
deities from the Bangkok National Museum and identified them as 
Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai: 
A New Reading of  
Its Iconographic Message
Pia conTi
Opposite Figure 1a: Stele with 
nāga-enthroned Buddha, Thailand, 
10th century, Bangkok National 
Museum, inv. no. 12/2475 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
Previous pages: Stone lintel 
characteristic of the Bayon style,  
late 12th-13th century. Phimai 
National Museum [Photograph 
courtesy of Paisarn Piemmettawat].

--- PAGE 190 ---
Pia conTi
377
376
yoginīs, probably companions of the tantric deity Hevajra. A Hevajra- 
or Trailokyavijayamaṇḍala, a clay tablet displaying the world order of a 
tantric universe, and a lintel from the Khmer Buddhist temple of Prasat 
Hin Phimai in the province of Nakhon Ratchasima provided the core 
material for his suggestion (Boeles 1966: pls 1-9).
Boeles found help in his endeavour to interpret the rather mysterious 
Vajrayāna figures in the then recently published translation of the 
Hevajratantra (henceforth HT) by David Snellgrove (1959). The book had 
given him “a valuable instrument” for the study of tantrism, then still in 
its infancy in Europe (1966: 21). Since the publication of his article and 
Snellgrove’s pioneering translation, more tantras relevant to Prasat Hin 
Phimai have been reconstructed and translated into western languages, 
for example the Guhyasamājatantra (henceforth GST) by Francesca 
Fremantle (1971) and the Cakrasaṃvaratantra (CS) by David Gray (2007).
Art historical and epigraphic research into Cambodian Buddhism, 
especially in its tantric form, has brought new findings as well. 
Phnom Trap, a small temple in Kompong Cham province, previously 
interpreted as Brahmanical (Aymonier 1900: I, 32), has now shown to 
be tantric Buddhist (Green 2012). Moreover, the famous inscription of 
Wat Sithor, recently retranslated by Tadeusz Skorupski, sheds new light 
on the extent tantric Buddhism was likely to have in the Khmer empire 
in the tenth century.
Furthermore, new research on the history of tantric Buddhism and 
its sculptural traditions in India, the birth place of the tantric movement, 
has broadened our general knowledge on this branch of Buddhism. In 
the light of these recent discoveries, we will have to reconsider Boeles’ 
proposition on the movement of Vajrayāna from Khorat to Angkor 
in favour of a much more reciprocal relationship between the Khorat 
Plateau and the Angkorian heartland.
Traces of Tantric Buddhism on the 
Khorat Plateau before Prasat Hin Phimai
Until recently evidence for the presence of tantric Buddhism on the 
Khorat Plateau has been rather sparse. Besides the material from 
Phimai and the inscription of Sap Bak, we have two Khmer style steles 
with tantric images hailing from the northeast, now located in the 
Bangkok National Museum [Figures 1a-b, 2]. The first stele is dated 
to the tenth century (Woodward 2007: 74), the second to the beginning 
of the twelfth century (Piriya 2012: 301), that is, contemporaneous to 
Prasat Hin Phimai. 
The first stele shows images of a nāga-enthroned Buddha 
[Figure 1a], a dancing Vajrapāṇi, a Prajñāpāramitā, a Tārā (possibly), 
a four-armed Avalokiteśvara and a eight-armed Avalokiteśvara 
[Figure 1b] whose lower arms are in a particular gesture, called 
pretasantarpita, which seem to relate to an early tantric text, the 
Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra (Woodward, forthcoming). There is also epigraphic 
evidence for the presence of the Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra in the Khmer empire 
(Woodward 2007: 72).
The second stele shows an assemblage of Vajrapāṇi, the nāga-
enthroned Buddha and possibly Prajñāpāramitā [Figure 2]. Three early 
tantric, Bengali-style, bronzes found on the Khorat Plateau (Woodward 
2003: 93) are further proof of the presence of tantric images. Since 
bronzes are easily movable objects, it is likely that itinerant monks or 
merchants brought them to the region or that travelling bronze casters 
made them for local patrons.
Besides these previously known icons, Emma Bunker and Douglas 
Latchford (2011: 185-218) presented a whole series of tantric bronzes 
from private collections which were said to have been found on 
the Khorat Plateau or in northwestern Cambodia. These bronzes, 
among them one eight- and two four-armed Avalokiteśvaras and two 
Padmapaṇīs, four Vajrasattvas, one Vajradhara, and a Cundā were 
previously unknown, hidden as they were in private collec tions. Their 
presence substantially enlarges the amount of tantric material known 
from the region and leads us to infer that tantric Buddhism had a much 
greater presence on the plateau than previously surmised. 
There is also one image of a nāga-enthroned Buddha, exhibiting 
Khmer features, which was found on the Khorat Plateau. Woodward 
(1997: 72) assigned it a tenth century date and concluded that the little 
Buddha figure illustrates the “exchange of iconographic ideas between 
workshops of the Dvāravatī towns and the Kingdom of Cambodia.” 
A unique caitya, i.e. a Buddhistic monument or object of veneration 
[Figure 8], which was found at Prasat Ta Muean [Map 1], a small 
Figure 1b: Stele with preta 
satisfied Avalokiteśvara, Thailand, 
10th century, Bangkok National 
Museum, inv. no. 12.2475 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
V
I
E
T
N
A
M
C
A
M
B
O
D
I
A
T
H
A
I
L
A
N
D
L
A
O
S
Siem Reap
Phnom
Penh
Nakhon Ratchasima
Lop Buri
Angkor
Bayon
Phnom Srok
Prasat Ta Muean
Phimai
Sap Bak
Phnom Trap
Ancient Sites
Modern Cities
Wat Sithor
Poipet
Banteay Chhmar
Thma Puok
Bat Cum
Tonle Sap
0
100
200
300 km
Map 1: Sites from northeast 
Thailand and Cambodia mentioned 
in the essay [Drawing courtesy of 
Hélène David-Cuny].
Opposite Figure 2: Stele  
with dancing Vajrapāṇi and nāga-
Buddha, Thailand, 10th century, 
Bangkok National Museum,  
inv. no. 1/2475 [Photograph by  
Pia Conti].

--- PAGE 191 ---
Pia conTi
379
378
A similar group of tantric deities appear, chiseled in brick, inside the 
three prasat shrine of Phnom Trap D where a four-armed Avalokiteśvara, 
flanked by two four-armed Devīs, is depicted in the central shrine; an 
eight-armed Avalokiteśvara embellishes the southern and a four-armed 
Vajrapāṇi the northern shrine (Green 2012).
The deities praised at Bat Cum are also portrayed on the 
caitya of Kbal Sre Yeay Yin, where a nāga-enthroned Buddha 
[Figure 6a] appears in company of Vajrin [Figure 6b], Prajñāpāramitā 
[Figure 6c] and Avalokiteśvara [Figure 6d]. Another caitya features 
Vajrin/Vajrapāṇi [Figure 7a] with a tantric ten-armed Prajñāpāramitā 
[Figure 7b] and Avalokiteśvara. These four deities thus seem to form 
an important sacred nexus for the tenth century Buddhist devotees. 
Interestingly only Vajrapāṇi and the nāga-enthroned Buddha feature at 
Prasat Hin Phimai. Avalokiteśvara and Prajñāpāramitā, so prevalent in 
the tenth century, did not make their way to Prasat Hin Phimai. They 
gained supreme importance only under Jayavarman VII, who installed 
them as protectors of Buddhism and patron deities of two of his major 
temples, Preah Khan and Ta Prohm.
The inscription (K. 111) of Wat Sithor (980 CE) also bears tes-
timony to the fact that tantric Buddhism had a significant presence in the 
Khmer empire. A recent retranslation by Skorupski showed that many 
tantras were known at the time of Jayavarman V (r. 968-1000/1 CE). 
This Angkorian king, though publicly a Śaiva, encouraged his Buddhist 
minister Kīrtipaṇḍita to strengthen Buddhism and to import Buddhist 
texts from abroad (Sharrock 2012: 233). One of these texts is named 
the Tattvasaṃgrahaṭīkā, a sub-commentary to the Tathāgatatattvasaṃgraha-
nāma mahāyānasūtra (STTS), the principal scripture of the Yoga Tantras 
(Sanderson 2003-04: 427; Sharrock 2012: 208). This tantra probably 
originated in the Bud dhist monasteries of Nālandā and had a wide-
spread influence in medieval Indian society and many Buddhist 
communities in Asia. A fair number of subsequent tantric texts took 
their inspiration from it.
One of the protagonists of this tantra is the deity Trailokyavijaya, 
“the conqueror of the three worlds,” who features prominently in the 
Phimai inscription K. 397. Vajrin/Vajrapāṇi is another major player 
in the STTS, where he appears in two maṇḍalas. One, dedicated to 
Vajrapāṇi, is called the Trailokyavijayamaṇḍala. Thus the STTS presents 
Vajrapāṇi as an aspect of Trailokyavijaya and vice versa. The central 
myth celebrated in the STTS is the subjugation of Maheśvara (or Śiva) 
by Vajrapāṇi and the former’s subsequent conversion to Buddhism. 
Tantric Buddhism thus seems to have had a significant presence 
in ancient Cambodia, though it never functioned as the official “state 
religion” which remained Śaiva. Buddhism appears to have played 
a role as private faith for the Khmer intelligentsia – for important 
intellectuals such as Kavīn drārimathana and Kīrtipaṇḍita. There are 
even hints in the inscriptions which suggest that Jayavarman V was 
privately a Buddhist (Sanderson 2003-04: 429). Tantric deities were 
Figure 3: Vajrapāṇi, Tuol Chi 
Tep, Cambodia, 10th century, Musée 
Guimet, Paris, inv. no. MG 14892 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
Figure 4: Avalokiteśvara, Tuol Chi 
Tep, Cambodia, 10th century, Musée 
Guimet, Paris, inv. no. MG 14912 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
Figure 5: Buddha, Tuol Chi Tep,  
Cambodia, 10th century, Musée Guimet, Paris,  
inv. no. MG 14880 [Photograph by Pia Conti].
Buddhist temple in the Dangrek range on the route between Angkor 
and Phimai, also bears testimony to the exchange of iconographic 
ideas. The caitya, now in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, features 
one Prajñāpāramitā with a nāga-enthroned Buddha over her head, two 
unidentified female deities and an Avalokiteśvara. 
The nāga-enthroned Buddha became the most widespread image 
representing the Buddha in tenth century Cambodia (Dupont 1950). It 
has been proposed by various scholars that the nāga-enthroned Buddha 
came to symbolise, for the Khmers, the transcendent nature of the 
Buddha (Cœdès 1923: 37; Lobo 1997; Woodward 2003: 152, 311; 
Sharrock 2011: 487).1 George Cœdès and Wibke Lobo see the Buddha 
on the nāga-throne as representing the so-called Ādibuddha, who was 
“enlightened before the beginning of time.” He is the “personification 
of the most fundamental principles of Buddhism.” Peter Sharrock 
(2011: 488) suggests that in the tenth century Buddhist context, the 
Khmer nāga-enthroned Buddha came to symbolise Vairocana, the 
main Buddha of the Vajradhātumaṇḍala. It is interesting to note in this 
context that the nāga-enthroned Buddha was first portrayed in ancient 
Cambodia in company of the tantric deity Vajrin [Figure 6b]. 
The presence of the nāga-enthroned Buddha in ancient Khmer 
territories could thus be interpreted as an indicator of the presence of 
tantric thought.
Traces of Tantric Buddhism in the Angkorian 
Heartland before Prasat Hin Phimai 
In tenth century Cambodia we find other early expressions of Buddhist 
tantrism. The presence of the deities Vajrin (“possessor of the vajra”) 
or Vajrapāṇi (“vajra in hand”) and of Trailokyavijaya (“conqueror of 
the three worlds”) in the Khmer heartland and their reappearance in 
Phimai one hundred and thirty years later, suggests that Angkor’s strand 
of tantric Buddhism may have travelled to the Khorat Plateau and 
influenced the choice of icons presented in Phimai.
One of the first manifestations of Vajrayāna in Angkor can be 
found in the inscription K. 266 of the little three tower temple at 
Bat Cum which was built around 953 CE. The temple is dedicated 
to the deities Vajrapāṇi, the Buddha and Divyadevī (Prajñāpāramitā) 
(Cœdès 1908: 8). Bat Cum was built by Kavīn drārimathana, the 
Buddhist architect and military leader of King Rājendravarman 
(r. 944-968 CE). It celebrates a military victory over the Cham. This 
military success has been credited to the spiritual help of Vajrapāṇi, the 
tantric warrior deity. 
Un fortu nately, no images of Vajrapāṇi, Prajñāpāramitā or the 
Buddha hailing from Bat Cum have been recovered. There is, however, 
a group of tenth century images found at Tuol Chi Tep near Phnom 
Trap at the Musée Guimet in Paris which hails from the same period. 
The group includes a fierce Vajrapāṇi with bulging eyes and fangs 
[Figure 3], an Avalokiteśvara [Figure 4] and a Buddha [Figure 5] 
(Baptiste & Zéphir 2008: 166-170).

--- PAGE 192 ---
Pia conTi
381
380
invoked as protectors during war as well as during times of peace. The 
inscription of Wat Sithor also relates that tantric Buddhist rituals, such 
as homa rites, were performed daily in Jayavarman V’s palace in order 
to protect the state (Sharrock 2012: 205). Kīrtipaṇḍita also established 
Buddhist āśramas for the saṃgha and guests.
The Inscription of Sap Bak (K. 1158)
The inscription K. 1158 is the major text documenting the presence 
of tantric Buddhism on the Khorat Plateau. The inscription stone 
was found broken near the village of Sap Bak, located about 40 km 
southwest of Phimai in the province of Nakhon Ratchasima [Map 1], 
and there is no other archaeological context for it. No remains of a 
sanctuary or monastery have been unearthed. Sap Bak’s pro ximity to 
Phimai, and the extent of the tradition of tantric Buddhism it alludes to, 
suggests that the deities cele brated in the inscription were well known in 
the region. Information gathered from the inscription will contribute to 
this essay’s interpretation of Prasat Hin Phimai’s iconography.
The inscription is dated to the year 1066 CE, to the end of 
the reign of King Udayāditya varman II (r. 1050-1066 CE). Only 
a short interval of fourteen years between the inscription and 
the time in which the temple of Prasat Hin Phimai was most 
likely conceived. The extant temple was built under the reign of 
Jayavarman VI. Prasat Hin Phimai itself, however, has a long history as 
a sacred site. Archaeological evidence shows that there were previous 
holy structures at the site (Groslier 1962; Talbot 2002). An inscription, 
K. 1000, which is undated, mentions a stone image of the Buddha, a 
muniraj (Jacques 1969: 58), and K. 954, dated 1041 CE, found at the site, 
gives homage to Śiva and Buddha. 
The inscription has been translated several times: first by Chirapat 
Prapandvidya (1990: 12-15) into English shortly after its discovery. 
Another Sanskritist, Julia Estève (2009: 442-520), went over the 
rubbings of the inscrip tion and proposed an alternative Sanskrit recon-
struction of the text together with a new translation into French. Based 
on her Sanskrit reconstruction, Tadeusz Skorupski, a tantra specialist, 
has provided another English translation from which I will procure most 
of my information. Skorupski’s trans lation is published as an appendix 
to this essay [Appendix 1].
The inscription has two parts. The first part consists of fifteen verses 
written in Sanskrit praising a deity called Śrī Samāja. This deity appears 
to be the name of the main deity in the GST. The second part is an 
inscrip tion in Khmer referring to a restoration of nine Buddhist images 
(buddhalokeśvara) undertaken by the author of the Sanskrit in scription 
whose name is Dhanus. Both Chirapat (1990: 13) and Estève (2009: 
450) have offered translations of the Khmer part.
The Sanskrit Portion of K. 1158
These verses give us a small, but precious insight into the tradition of 
tantric Buddhism among the Khmers of the Khorat Plateau. 
Left Figure 6a: Nāga-Buddha, 
Caitya Kbal Sre Yeay Yin, 
Cambodia, 10th century, Musée 
Guimet, Paris, inv. no. MG 17487 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
Right Figure 6b: Vajrin,  
Caitya Kbal Sre Yeay Yin, 
Cambodia, 10th century, Musée 
Guimet, Paris, inv. no. MG 17487 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
Left Figure 6c: Prajñāpāramitā, 
Caitya Kbal Sre Yeay Yin, 
Cambodia, 10th century, Musée 
Guimet, Paris, inv. no. MG 17487 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
Right Figure 6d: Avalokiteśvara, 
Caitya Kbal Sre Yeay Yin, 
Cambodia, 10th century, Musée 
Guimet, Paris, inv. no. MG 17487 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
Left Figure 7a: Vajrin, Kbal Sre 
Yeay Yin, Cambodia, 10th century, 
Phnom Penh National Museum,  
inv. no. Ga 1735 [Photograph by 
Pia Conti].
Right Figure 7b: Ten-armed 
Prajñāpāramitā, Kbal Sre Yeay Yin, 
Cambodia, 10th century, Phnom 
Penh National Museum, inv. no. Ga 
1735 [Photograph by Pia Conti].

--- PAGE 193 ---
Pia conTi
383
382
Verse 1 starts with Vraḥ Dhanus, the author of the inscription, 
bowing to “the five Sugatas” which are seen as “the originators of the 
glorious bodies of the excellent gods.” The term sugata is here used as an 
epithet for the five directional Buddhas, or Jinas, Akṣobhya, Vairocana, 
Ratnasambhava, Amitā bha and Amogasiddhi.
Verse 2 praises Vajrasattva, “the sixth, the preeminent lord of the 
ex isting Bodhisattvas, the foundation of all Buddhas.” In the GST, 
Vajrasattva is the supreme Buddha who is above the five Buddhas or Jinas 
and, at the same time, seen as the ground or foundation of all of them. 
Verse 3 expresses the hope that the author of the inscription will 
become part of the tradition of believers in the deity Śrī Samāja in 
all his future rebirths or lives. The first three verses thus establish the 
deities praised in the in scription as the five Sugatas (Jinas), Vajrasattva, 
and Śrī Samāja who here is meant to be a deity and not a text. These 
three entities appear later under the name triguru or the triple gurus 
(cf. verse 11).
Verse 4 relates that Dhanus “has heard the command of the supreme 
guru,” presumably Śrī Samāja and that he pays homage to him. 
Verse 5 introduces a region or place called “Chpārransī, which 
was originally called Jayantrapura,” where “the protector Śrī 
Samantaprabheśvara has resided.” 
Verse 6 relates that the above named Śrī Samantaprabheśvara “has 
made the Buddha’s dispensation or teachings firm in Kambuja down to 
the present time,” after “having ap peased the fear [or apprehension] of 
the Buddhists.”
As Sap Bak is located on the Khorat Plateau near Phimai, there has 
been a lot of speculation on the whereabouts of Chpārransī. According 
to Étienne Aymonier “Chpārransī” is the Khmer translation of the 
Sanskrit word aṃśārāma, which is the equivalent of veṇuvana, the famous 
Bamboo Grove of the Bud dhist texts. Aymonier has thus given an early 
hint that the place may be Buddhist (Estève 2009: 433). Chpārransī is 
mentioned fourteen times in the corpus of Khmer inscriptions between 
924-1190 CE. Estève has gone over all the inscriptions in the Khmer 
corpus which mention Chpār ransī and has argued that it is an im-
portant tantric Bud dhist place in the Angkor region (Estève & Vincent 
2010: 150). She also concluded from the corpus of inscrip tions that 
Chpārransī had been an important religious place for centuries.
Several identities have been suggested for the “protector Śrī 
Samantaprabheśvara.” Chirapat (1990: 13) speculated that he could be 
King Sūryavarman I because he was believed to have been in favour 
of the Buddhists during religious rivalries in the eleventh century. 
Alternatively, Chirapat proposed that Śrī Samantaprabheśvara could 
be a deity. Estève (2009: 444-450) argued that Śrī Samantaprabheśvara 
is the very deity of Chpārransī, either a Buddha or his image. According 
to the latter, the deity protected the Buddhists in Kambuja during times 
of religious strife and helped to anchor tantric Buddhism in Cambodia. 
Jacques (1969: 60) also finds that Srī Samantaprabheśa is a Buddha. 
The in scription on the Khorat Plateau would thus connect its religious 
heritage to a place in the re gion around Angkor which, according to 
the different sources studied, may have been Buddhist from “mid-tenth 
century onwards until the fourteenth century” (Estève & Vincent 2010: 
154). This evidence ties in well with the other manifestations of tantric 
Buddhism in the tenth century as discussed above. 
The inscription’s verses 7-9 praise three venerable teachers. They 
are likely to be the teachers of the author Dhanus. The three individuals, 
all accomplished beings, seem to form a lineage of gurus, thus implying 
that the GST, or related tantras, and its adepts have been in the region 
for an extended amount of time.
The first guru in line is Cuṅvi; the second guru is called Campakapāda. 
He is respected by other siddhas, or accomplished beings, and may have 
been a teacher in Chpārransī. He is said to have reached nirvāṇa in the 
region of Sthalāsvāy. The third guru, the venerable Dharaṇīndrapura, 
has “settled his heart in enlightenment” and possibly contributed to the 
adoration of the Bud dhas by giving treasures to images.
These three “calmed ones,” says verse 10, “have reached the fruit 
of reality [or the fruit that is the ultimate reality] under the secret tree 
[or the mystical tree], after having traversed the ocean by way of the 
perfection of wisdom, the commentaries on logic and the rest.” In other 
words, the three gurus reached enlightenment after having studied the 
Mahāyāna scriptures such as the Perfection of Wisdom, and logic, and 
gained true know ledge of reality, of what really exists, and then passed 
away. In short, they became Buddhas.
Verse 11 says that Dhanus is a student of the “established doctrine” 
and venerates the triple gurus. The triple gurus relates back to the deities 
introduced in the first three verses, namely the five Jinas, Vajra sattva 
and Śrī Samāja. These are the deities of Dhanus’ three teachers, Cuṅvi, 
Campakapāda and Dharaṇīndrapura, the three gurus in our translation. 
Verse 12 relates that Dhanus with a mind inflamed with “sparks of 
the Kāśikā, poetry and other outer texts,” sips “the secret elixir” already 
for a long time and is keen on “the sap of fire oblations, re citations, and 
yoga.” Dhanus thus is involved in all kinds of tantric rituals such as the 
homa ritual, mantra recitations and yogic exercises.
Verse 13 tells us that Dhanus has “installed Jinas and other images 
in Teṅpāsnaga, the fortunate place of pilgrimage.” 
Verse 14 is an invocation of several deities through which Dhanus 
“has realised and personally grasped something about the destruction 
in this world and, indeed, in the other world.”
Dhanus finishes the inscription in verse 15 expressing the hope that 
due to his meritorious deeds he will be reborn in Kambuja. He is still on 
the way to being enlightened and finds Kambuja an ideal place for the 
achievement of this goal.
The Khmer Portion of K. 1158
The Khmer text describes the erection of nine Buddhist images 
(buddhalokeśvara) on mount Abhayagiri by Śrī Satyavarman, a tantric 
practitioner of the past, who was renowned for supernatural powers. 
The images were erected to deter “Javā” from attacking the Khmer 
territories. These ima ges all deteriorated in the course of time and were 
renovated by the above mentioned guru Dharaṇ īndrapura. In turn, his 
pupil, Dhanus, reinstalled them in 1066 CE. 
K. 1158 thus gives us a quite extensive account of the presence of 
tantric Bud dhism in the Khorat Plateau. It reveals that there is a lineage 
of tantric adepts which is in its fourth generation now and which have 
chosen Śrī Samāja as their deity. It also shows that there is a connection 
Figure 8: Prajñāpāramitā, 
Cambodia, mid-10th century, 
Ashmolean Museum, Oxford,  
inv. no. EA 1999.102 [Photograph 
courtesy of Delphine Desoutter].

--- PAGE 194 ---
Pia conTi
385
384
between the followers of the GST on the Khorat Plateau and an as yet 
unidentified sacred place in the Angkor region named Chpārransī, and 
that one of the followers of the GST also played a role in that sacred 
place. It implies that the way to achieve nirvāṇa is through the studying 
of the Mahā yāna scriptures, Buddhist logic and grammar, performing 
rituals, erecting images, emitting mantras, and above all through 
identification with Śrī Samāja. It tells us that all the adepts of the tantras 
have reached their goal and left this earthly existence for nirvāṇa. It tells 
us that the deities worshipped in the tantra are Śrī Samāja, the Jinas 
and Vajra sattva, and indicates that tantric Buddhism is the established 
doctrine in the land. In addition it speaks of a tīrtha, a sacred place of 
pilgrimage, at Teṅpāsnaga, which was probably in the region. This 
pilgrimage site was in existence for a substantial amount of time, since 
images, which had deteriorated, were reinstalled by two successive gurus.
The Khmer part also gives some interesting information regarding 
the erection of images at Teṅpāsnaga by Satyavarman. A Satyavarman 
is also mentioned in an earlier Khmer inscription, K. 111 (Wat Sithor), 
discussed above, which relates that Kīrtipaṇḍita, who lived in the tenth 
century, had re-erected more than “nine and or ten images of Vajrin 
and Lokeśa, which were raised by Satyavarman on the eastern hill and 
whose pedestals were damaged” (Sharrock 2011: 216). The fact that a 
Satyavarman is mentioned in both inscriptions, K. 111 and K. 1158, 
in connection with the erection of tantric images, makes it likely that 
we are dealing with the same person.2 The images at the tīrtha of 
Teṅpāsnaga on mount Abhayagiri thus have a long history; they may 
have been erected as early as the ninth century. Unfortunately, I have 
not yet been able to further determine the location of the tīrtha, but it 
is not unreasonable to assume that it was located somewhere near Sap 
Bak on the Khorat Plateau.3 
I would now like to link these results with Prasat Hin Phimai and 
see if we can find any correspondences between the elements in the 
material record in the area surrounding Phimai and the Buddhism 
celebrated at the temple itself.
The Deities of Prasat Hin Phimai
The late eleventh-early twelfth century Khmer temple of Prasat Hin 
Phimai [Figure 9] is innovative in more than one way. It provided the 
pro totype for the “pine-cone” shaped towers which later crowned the 
temple of Angkor Wat, built under Sūryavarman II (r. 1113-1150 CE), 
and was the model for the later prang structure of central Thailand. 
Moreover, it features a cruciform layout in the main sanctuary that 
inspired later Khmer temples such as Phanom Rung on the Khorat 
Plateau and Banteay Samre in Angkor.4 
The iconography of Prasat Hin Phimai has several elements which 
connect it with the above described tradition. Epigraphic fragments 
provide vital information as well. The fragment K. 397, dated 1108 
CE, found on the pedestal of the southern gopura of the second 
enclosure, states that an image of Trailokyavijaya was erected at the 
Prasat Hin Phimai sanctuary by a local dignitary “Kamrateṇ Añ Srī 
Vīrendrādhipatvarma of Chok Vakula.ˮ This image is called a general 
(senāpati) to the Kamrateṇ Jagat Vimāya, presumably the main image 
of Prasat Hin Phimai, which was probably a Buddha (Cœdès 1924: 
346-350). The Trailokyavijaya image was installed most likely in the 
southern gopura.
Srī Vīrendrādhi patvarma, the author of the inscription, is known 
to us as a participant in the big military parade of dignitaries on the 
southern relief enclosure at Angkor Wat (Cœdès 1924: 346), where 
he is identified by an inscription. His participation in the parade 
depicted in Angkor indicates he was still a powerful individual under 
Sūryavarman II, the builder of the temple, and one of the successors 
in the line of kings from Mahīdharapura which was founded by 
Jayavarman VI probably in the Khorat region.
Trailokyavijaya, the “conqueror of the three worlds,ˮ is a tantric 
deity who became pro minent in the second phase of the development 
of tantrism in India during the eighth cen tury (Linrothe 1999: 270). 
He is a form of Vajrapāṇi and has a key maṇḍala in the STTS. The 
Sādhanamālā, an important manual on tantric deities, sees Trailokyavijaya 
as an emanation of the Jina Akṣobhya. Trai lokyavijaya shares the 
colour blue with Akṣobhya, a colour that is generally as sociated with 
fierce deities and with “gruesome rites” in the tantras (Bhattacharya 
1924: 60). Akṣobhya is seen as the source of other wrathful deities such 
as Heruka, Hevajra and Cakrasaṃvara.
Trailokyavijaya generally displays the vajrahūṃkāramudrā, the gesture 
of “being victorious over the three worlds.” A bronze which is now at 
the Bangkok National Museum represents Trailokyavijaya with this 
gesture. This unique image [Figure 10] came from Prasat Hin Phimai 
(Woodward 2003: 154; Piriya 2012: 298) and may have had some 
similarities to the stone image of Trailokyavijaya evoked in K. 397. 
Prasat Hin Phimai also features the early manifestation of 
Trailokyavijaya as Vajrapāṇi. The main sanctuary is guarded at its 
doors by this longstanding bodyguard of the Buddha and master of 
magic ceremonies, shaking the bell (ghaṇṭā) and the thunderbolt (vajra), 
and holding off unwanted visitors [Figure 11]. 
Figure 9: View of Prasat 
Hin Phimai from the northwest, 
Thailand, 11th-12th century 
[Photograph by Pia Conti].
Figure 10: Bronze Trailokyavijaya,  
Phimai, Thailand, 11th-12th century, 
Bangkok National Museum,  
inv. no. 2.271 [Photograph courtesy 
of Paisarn Piemmettawat].
Figure 11: Vajrapāṇi, Gate of Victory, southern 
gopura, Prasat Hin Phimai, Thailand,  
11th-12th century [Photograph by Pia Conti].

--- PAGE 195 ---
Pia conTi
387
386
The Buddhist Lintels of  
Prasat Hin Phimai’s Inner Sanctuary
There are five Buddhist lintels in the interior central sanctuary of 
Prasat Hin Phimai. Four of them are located above the entrance to the 
central cella, one over the entrance to the antechamber (antarala). The 
iconography of the lintels is complex and it is especially difficult to find 
an interpretation including all five lintels.5 
Four of the central lintels have similarities in design: they display a 
central figure in a medallion and two registers with subordinate figures. 
The eastern, northern and western lintel feature dancing yoginīs, an 
element, which connects them thematically and visually. The southern 
lintel depicts the nāga-enthroned Buddha surrounded by worshippers on 
the lower register and by seated Buddhas on the upper register (Manit 
1962: fig. 35). Rows of seated Buddhas in dhyānamudrā are a recurrent 
motive at Prasat Hin Phimai. The presence of the nāga-enthroned 
Buddha in the southern lintel has lead researchers to suggest that the 
central image of the temple was probably also a nāga-Buddha (Manit 
1962; Woodward 2003: 149). Erik Seidenfaden (1923: 17), the first 
western visitor to describe the temple in a lecture at the Siam Society, 
had found the central sanctuary empty, so there is no definite proof as 
to the identity of the central Buddha. 
In the remaining part of this essay, I will mainly focus on two of the 
lintels, namely the northern and the eastern lintels.6
The Northern Lintel
The northern lintel [Figure 12a], I argue, shows a streched out maṇḍala 
of Akṣobhya (as Śrī Samāja) with his four fellow Jinas. The five Buddhas 
sitting cross-legged feature three crowned heads and six arms. The front 
arms are folded in the meditation gesture (dhyānamudrā), the second 
proper right hand holds a very clearly sculpted akṣamāla or rosary. In 
their third right hand the deities, who are all identical, seem to hold a 
lotus [Figure 12b]. Possibly, the second proper left hand holds a bell 
(ghaṇṭā) and the third hand a jewel (or a different kind of lotus). Some 
of these attributes make the identification of the deities more difficult, 
since they do not correspond to the usual attributes given to the Jinas 
in various texts. The only deities in the Buddhist pantheon holding an 
akṣamāla so pro minently are Avalokiteśvara, Prajñāpāramitā, Tārā or 
Cundā.7 
Several 
scholars 
have 
identified 
the images as representing Vajrasattva 
(e.g. Boisselier 1966: 302; Dagens 1995: 19), 
although they also admit that the attributes 
do not fit the usual iconographic scheme. 
Bruno Dagens in particular points out that 
the rosary is not an attribute of Vajrasattva.
Regarding the identification of the 
central image of the northern lintel as 
Vajrasattva, it is worth noting that most 
Khmer Vajrasattvas found on the Khorat 
Plateau or in Cambodia do not generally 
feature six arms and three heads, but only 
one head and two arms [e.g. Figure 13]. 
Most of the local Vajrasattva images 
balance the vajra on their right hand in 
front of their chest. They hold the ghaṇṭā in the left hand on the left 
hip (Bunker & Latchford 2011: 207-210; Sharrock 2011: 493-496). 
Despite the iconographic inconsistencies which pose problems for 
all interpretations, and against the received view, I identify here the 
central deity as Akṣobhya, with his four fellow Jinas. Akṣobhya is the 
Jina in the centre of the Guhyasamājamaṇḍala and the supreme “deity.” 
The Jinas in Prasat Hin Phimai fit the description given in the GST 
where they are described in their “vajra form” as “three-headed” with 
“six arms” and wearing a “crown.” The following excerpt of the GST 
describes them: 
Imagine Vairocana [delusion], the color of autumn clouds, 
three-headed, white, black and deep red, adorned with piled-up 
hair and a crown; imagine the Vajra Lord [Akṣobhya], three-
headed, his faces black, red and white, blazing, wearing piled-
up hair and a crown, agitating the world-realms; imagine the 
Passionate One [Amitābha], three-headed, his faces, red, black 
and white, delighting in piled-up hair and a crown, and you will 
surely succeed; imagine in their right hands the wheel, vajra and 
lotus; imagine their vajra forms with six arms, beautiful, bearing 
various weapons. (Fremantle 1971: 80)
I identify the central deity with Akṣobhya because Guhyasamāja or 
Śrī Samāja himself is regarded as a tantric form of Akṣobhya. 
Furthermore, we know from the Sap Bak inscription that the GST was 
already known in the region. Vajrasattva, the sixth deity of Sap Bak, may 
also have had a place in the temple. He could have been represented 
by the central icon of the temple, possibly a nāga-enthroned Buddha.
The Eastern Lintel
The eastern lintel [Figure 14a] seems to feature the tantric deity 
Cakrasaṃvara (or Trailokyavijaya) with three heads and eight arms 
dancing on an elephant head. On both sides of the deity are rows of 
repeated figures: the top row shows ten Buddhas in dhyānamudrā, the row 
below consists of eight yoginīs and two yogins dancing on corpses. The 
difference between the yogins and the yoginīs is threefold: the male figures 
Figure 12a: Akṣobhya lintel, 
Prasat Hin Phimai, Thailand, 
11th-12th century [Photograph 
courtesy of Paisarn Piemmettawat].
Figure 12b: Akṣobhya (close-up), 
Prasat Hin Phimai, Thailand, 
11th-12th century [Photograph by 
Pia Conti].
Figure 13: Bronze Vajrasattva, 
Barong Lovea, Cambodia, 10th-
11th century, Phnom Penh National 
Museum, inv. no. Ga 5432 
(formerly E. 808) [Photograph 
courtesy of Peter Sharrock].

--- PAGE 196 ---
Pia conTi
389
388
hold a vajra and a ghaṇṭā. The females hold a variety of attributes. The 
yogins dance on their proper left leg, and the yoginīs on their proper right 
leg on a row of corpses. The amazing precision of the sculptural work 
suggests that they may have been related to real dance performances at 
the temple.
The Cakrasaṃvara in stone which we see here is almost unique in 
the Khmer material record. His only other representation is in bronze 
on the Poipet mould discussed below. The deity can be identified with 
certainty because of the outstretched elephant hide from which he 
emerges. He dances in ardhaparyaṅka on the bodies of two prone figures 
which lie on top of the elephant head. It is most unusual to show the 
elephant head underneath the dancing deity and the corpses. In India, 
the head of the elephant hide is stretched behind the deity. 
As Chirapat (2007) has pointed out, the ardhaparyaṅka is not in 
tune with the position Trailokyavijaya/Cakrasaṃvara is given in the 
Sādhanamālā which should be the pratyālīḍhāsana, that is the archer 
position with one foot forward and the back leg stretched. 
The Cakrasaṃvara in ardhaparyaṅka is in fact closer to another 
famous angry deity, the dancing Hevajra. This deity, another 
Heruka (wrathful Buddhist deity), with its sixteen arms and 
eight heads, will become more prominent under Jayavarman 
VII. Cakrasaṃvara’s wild dance on the corpses may 
symbolise the dynamism of the process of enlighten ment as 
it does for Hevajra (Lobo 1994: 119) and the conversion of 
Śaiva deities to Buddhism.
A twelfth century bronze mould from Poipet shows 
a pantheon of deities [Figures 15a-b] which seem to 
belong together conceptually. The mould has three registers. 
The first register features a nāga-enthroned Buddha. The 
second register apparently features a Cakrasaṃvara, here 
in pratyāliḍha pose to the left and Hevajra, dancing, to the 
right of a six-armed, three-headed, sitting figure, most 
likely Akṣobhya, the alleged deity of the northern lintel at 
Prasat Hin Phimai. Vajrapāṇi can be seen dancing in the 
third row next to a standing six-armed figure which may 
be Avalokiteśvara. On its right there is a figure, holding a 
lotus, possibly Padmapāṇi, another form of Avalokiteśvara. 
There is a lintel at Prasat Hin Phimai which Dagens (1995: 
35) identified as showing Padmapaṇī, its precise location, 
though, is not given by Dagens who visited the temple before 
its reconstuction.
On the Poipet mould, the identified 
Cakrasaṃvara, Hevajra and Vajrapāṇi 
dance on a corpse, just like they do at Prasat 
Hin Phimai.8 The nāga-enthroned Buddha 
placed above the other figures may perhaps 
represent the so-called Ādibuddha, the 
“primordial Buddha” of the tantric universe, 
or possibly Vajrasattva, the form the 
“Ādibuddha” would assume in saṃbhogakāya. 
If the Poipet mould has any information to 
offer for a reading of Phimai’s temple deities, 
the nagā-Buddha’s position in the tablet 
reinforces the argument that Vajrasattva may 
possibly be represented as the nagā-enthroned 
Buddha in Khmer iconography.
The Saṃvara of Prasat Hin Phimai displays other peculiarities. In 
Pāla India, where the original iconography was most likely conceived, 
Cakrasaṃvara usually holds his hands in prajñālinganābhinaya, embracing 
his virtual consort. The Saṃvara of Phimai’s temple, however, has a 
special wrist touching mudrā [Figure 14b] which is very rare; it only 
appears once more in a pedestal at Banteay Samre. In the Indian tradition 
there are two-, six- and twelve-armed versions of Cakrasaṃvara (like 
the one in the Poipet mould). Only the Phimai version has eight arms 
and holds the split elephant hide with the remaining six arms. One 
textual variant interprets the split elephant hide as a symbol for “the 
splitting of illusions,” or a liberation from the illusionary world that 
keeps non-enlightened people in bondage (Dawa-Samdup 1919: 19).
In his study of the development of tantric iconography, Robert 
Linrothe (1999) has proposed a three phase scheme to distinguish 
between several generations of tantric deities. In the first phase, 
Buddhist deities are accompanied by angry deities or krodha which are in 
a subservient role. In the second phase, angry deities play an im portant 
role, but are not central to a tantra or a maṇḍala. In the third phase, 
these deities have their own maṇḍala and tantras. Linrothe suggests that 
Trailokyavijaya and the wrathful Vajrapāṇi are tantric deities of the 
second phase out of which the deities of the third phase, Cakrasaṃvara 
and Hevajra, developed. According to this author, Cakrasaṃvara 
appears in India just as Trailokyavijaya disappears. The former has so 
much in common with the latter that he may be considered “a phase 
three reincarnation of Trailokyavijaya” (Linrothe 1999: 278). One of 
the CS’s most powerful mantras is the Trailokyavijayamantra. It is called 
the “universal king of spells (vidyārājacakravartī)” (Gray 2007: 295). 
This shows how intimately connected the two deities still are in the CS. 
At Prasat Hin Phimai, Trailokyavijaya and Vajrapāṇi play a subordinate 
role in relation to Cakrasaṃvara, who dwells in the centre of the temple 
– they both have a place in the southern quarter of a possible maṇḍala.9
In addition to the five central lintels, all found in situ, there are several 
lintels with related subjects still laying on the ground in the temple area. 
More lintels presenting Buddhist subjects are on display in the Phimai 
National Museum.10 Some lintels feature rows of crowned teaching 
Buddhas in double vitarkamudrā and yoginīs, some just display dancing 
yoginīs, and some just depict standing crowned Buddhas.
Figures 15a-b: Bronze mould 
(right) and its impression (left) 
showing Khmer tantric universe, 
Poipet, Cambodia, 12th century, 
Phnom Penh Museum, inv. no.  
Ga 5657 [Photograph courtesy of 
the Phnom Penh National Museum].
Figure 14a: Cakrasaṃvara lintel, 
Prasat Hin Phimai, Thailand, 
11th-12th century [Photograph 
courtesy of Paisarn Piemmettawat].
Figure 14b: Cakrasaṃvara 
dancing on elephant head (close-up), 
Prasat Hin Phimai, Thailand, 
11th-12th century [Photograph by 
Pia Conti].

--- PAGE 197 ---
Pia conTi
391
390
A New Interpretation of the Two Inner Lintels
Cakrasaṃvara is the main protagonist of the CS and other texts which 
together form the Cakrasaṃvara tradition. The tantra refers to itself 
as the “Great King of Yoginī Tantras, called the Śrī Cakra saṃvara 
(śricakrasaṃvaranāmāmahāyoginītantrarāja)” (Gray 2007: 4). This tantra 
was very popular in India from the late tenth through late thirteenth 
century, thus during the time Prasat Hin Phimai was built. Together 
with the HT, it is the most important “mother tantra” emphasising 
female deities.
What does saṃvara mean in Sanskrit? Snellgrove (2004: 152) 
takes the term to mean a “vow or a bond.” Shinichi Tsuda (1974: 55) 
interprets it as “union of aspects of the world fused into one.” Linrothe 
(1999: 278) proposes “supreme bliss.” The different translations of the 
name stem from a variant in spelling as Snell grove (2004: 152) explains: 
Śambara and saṃvara represent the same name in Sanskrit with 
slightly variant spellings, but the second spelling happens to be 
identical with the word meaning a vow or a bond. Thus the 
Tibetans translated them differently: Śambara as bDe-mchog, 
“Supreme Bliss,” which is how they interpret this name, 
whatever the spelling, and Saṃvara as sDom-pa, under stood as 
“binding” or “union.” The compound name, Cakra saṃvara, is 
thus interpreted as the “union of the wheel of the elements” 
explained in various ways, but suggesting in every case the 
blissful state of perfect wisdom. 
In his recent translation of the tantra, Gray (2007: 36) suggests 
cakrasaṃvara should best be translated as the “binding of the wheels,” 
or the “binding of the dākinī network.”
The Cakrasaṃvaramaṇḍala consists of the main deity Cakrasaṃvara 
and three wheels of yoginīs or dākīnīs, eight to each circle. The maṇḍala is 
called the “triple wheel” (Gray 2007: 179). To the wheels of the maṇḍala, 
three dimensions of human experience are assigned. The first wheel is 
called the “body wheel,” the second the “speech wheel,” and the third the 
“mind wheel.” The tantra uses the expression “body, speech and mind” 
to symbolise the three essential dimensions of a human being. “Body, 
speech and mind,” in Sanskrit kāyavākcittā, is an expression widely used in 
all kinds of Buddhist texts for the three-fold human experience, but also 
for the experience of Buddhahood. The idea behind this formulation 
is to transform human experience into an experience of transcendence 
and unity, into the Buddha︐s body, speech and mind. In CS, the yoginīs 
stand precisely for the idea of transformation of the human experience 
into Buddha experience, in other words for the path to enlightenment. 
On the northern and southern lintels of the inner sanctuary as well as 
on lintels found in various locations at Prasat Hin Phimai, the yoginīs are 
very prominent. Phimai is the first place where yoginīs appear in stone in 
the history of Buddhism in Cambodia and Thailand, and they appear 
together with Saṃvara. Parallel to the depiction of yoginīs in Phimai︐s 
temple, we have the set of yoginī bronze sculptures as well as the bronze 
Hevajra in Baphuon style (mid-eleventh century) which Boeles (1966: 
pl. 5) discussed. The presence of both the bronze sculpture of Hevajra 
and the stone representation of Cakrasaṃvara indicates that both the 
HT and the CS must have had some followers in the eleventh century; 
and it shows that at Prasat Hin Phimai the latter was given precedence 
over the former. The yoginīs will play an important part again under 
Jayavarman VII, whose preference for the HT is well documented 
(Woodward 1981). Several bronze Hevajra images and several 
Hevajramaṇḍalas, in two or three dimensions, show Hevajra surrounded 
by his eight yoginīs (Boeles 1966: pl. 4; Dalsheimer 2001: 269).
The GST does not refer to yoginīs, though it features female consorts. 
It is thought to be earlier than the CS and the concept of the yoginīs had 
not yet been developed. However, the GST expresses a similar idea of 
unity using dif ferent metaphors. Guhyasamāja can be translated simply 
as the “secret union,” but the full title of the tantra is according to its 
translator, “The Union [or Assembly] of the secret Body, Speech and 
Mind of all Tathā gatas.” Fremantle (1971: 15) explains: 
Body, speech and mind together comprise the total activity and 
experience of a living being; the body alone may be interpreted as 
the material form nirmānakāya, while speech and mind represent 
the spiritual and absolute natures, saṃbhoga kāya and dharmakāya.
The concept of kāyavākcittā (body, speech and mind) is used many 
times in the tantra. Its main mantra is oṃ sarvatathāgatakāyavākcitta- 
vajrasvabhāvātmako’ham which means “Oṃ I am of the nature of the vajra 
of body, speech and mind of all Tathāgatas.” This mantra expresses the 
wish of the tantric adept to become a Buddha.
In the GST, Akṣobhya is “Vajra Mind,” Vairocana is “Vajra Body,” 
and Amitābha is “Vajra Speech.” Vajrasattva, the sixth Buddha, 
or ground of all Buddhas, sym bolises this unity of body, speech and 
mind. Vajrasattva’s name varies according to his function. According 
to Chirapat (1990), Vajrasattva may be called “Sarvatathāgatakāya-
vākcittavajra, or Sarvatathāgata kāyavākcittādhipati. He is also 
called Vajradhara, Mahāvajradhara, Vajrapāṇi, etc.” The identity of 
kāyavākcittā with Vajrasattva is expressed in the first two names.
There are other concepts which connect the two tantras. Akṣobhya 
in the GST and Saṃvara in the CS are both described as emanations 
of Vajrasattva. The two northern and eastern inner lintels at Prasat Hin 
Phimai would thus display two different emanations of Vajrasattva – 
one representing Akṣobhya and the Jinas, peaceful forms of Vajra sattva, 
the other Cakrasaṃvara, an angry emanation of Vajrasattva. Though 
the lintels in Phimai appear to represent two different tantra traditions – 
the GST and the CS –, they are closely related in the idea of the union 
of all aspects of the world, the central idea of many tantric texts. This is 
the idea they express symbolically, either in the metaphor of emanation 
and fusion of Buddhas or Jinas in a transcendental Buddha, or through 
the unifying of all elements constituting human experience.
Chronologically speaking the CS tradition is slightly later than the 
GST tradition and may also have arrived on the Khorat Plateau a little 
later. The CS tradition sees itself as an exten sion of other tantras and 
as more powerful, in fact as “the most excellent, the highest of all the 
yogas, which can kill anyone, gods, titans and men” (Gray 2007: 176). 
The adept who masters the yoga of the CS will be invincible and cannot 
die of natural causes. The yoga of the CS is described as the most 
powerful yoga, because “everything, whatsoever, spoken or unspoken,

--- PAGE 198 ---
Pia conTi
393
392
exists in Śrī Heruka” (Gray 2007: 177). The CS promotes itself as the 
latest tantric weapon. Using its yoga one will have the powers of being 
unhindered in the three worlds, of being invisible, and of travelling in 
the underworld. Its yoga would also give the powers of resurrection, 
flight and alchemy. The CS promises to be even more powerful than 
the previous tantras and provide even faster liberation. Seen from an 
internal Buddhist perspective, Prasat Hin Phimai seems to honour the 
deities of the latest, most powerful tantra from India at the time.
Conclusion
The iconographic program of Prasat Hin Phimai builds partially on 
the tantric traditions of tenth century Cambodia, but not as much as 
one might expect, given that Phimai is situated along the important 
trade route between Angkor and the western frontiers of the Khmer 
empire. Deities such as Vajrin/Vajrapāṇi, Trailokyavijaya and the nāga-
enthroned Buddha are present and play a substantial role in Phimai. 
Others, such as Avalokiteśvara and Prajñāpāramitā, do not appear yet 
at Prasat Hin Phimai, but become important again eighty years later.
The Buddhist tradition from the Khmer heartland is complemented 
by the presence of deities invoked in the Sap Bak inscription which 
celebrates the powers of the Jinas, Vajrasattva and Śrī Samāja. In 
addition, it is argued that at Phimai a new tantra was introduced, 
the Cakrasaṃvaratantra with its main deity Saṃvara and its wheels of 
dancing yoginīs. In my reading, the deities Cakrasaṃvara and Akṣobhya 
(Śrī Samāja) and their entourage of male and female deities embody 
two different aspects of a central idea celebrated in the tantras: the 
unity of body, speech and mind and the transformation of human 
fragmentation into Buddhahood. Whereas the Guhyasamājatantra and the 
Cakrasaṃvaratantra do not seem to have had many followers among later 
Khmer Buddhist generations, the Hevajratantra, another, later, “mother 
tantraˮ in which yoginīs also play an important role, will be taken up 
by the Khmer’s most renowned Buddhist king, Jayavarman VII. The 
latter showed his appreciation for Prasat Hin Phimai and his ancestor 
Jayavarman VI by erecting two side shrines within Phimai’s temple first 
enclosure ground and a “hospital” chapel outside the city walls. One of 
the side-shrines, the so-called Prang Brahmadatta, featured his and his 
wife’s portrait (Multzer o’Naghten, this volume).
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Peter Sharrock for introducing me to Southeast Asian 
art and architecture and for guiding me with unreserved energy in my 
research on Khmer tantric Buddhism, and to Tadeusz Skorupski who 
introduced me to the philosophical concepts of Buddhism and who 
provided the new English translation of the Sap Bak inscription used in 
this essay. Thanks also to Julia Estève for sending me her work, to Roger 
P. Wright for sharing his insights on the Guhyasamājatantra, to Hiram 
Woodward, Wibke Lobo and Ken Gemes for reading and commenting 
on my manuscript, to Paisarn Piemmettawat for the use of Figures 10, 
12a, and 14a, and finally to Hélène David-Cuny for help with the map 
of the region.
Abbreviations to Sanskrit Texts
CS      
Cakrasaṃvaratantra
GST    
Guhyasamājatantra
HT      
Hevajratantra
STTS  
Tathāgatatattvasaṃgraha nāma mahāyānasūtra
Appendix 1: Sap Bak Inscription (K. 1158) 
Translation from Sanskrit by Tadeusz Skorupski Based on Julia Estève’s 
Transliteration (2009: 541-542)
  1. In the first instance, the glorious five Sugatas are 
the originators of the Śrīghanas, and the Śrīghanas 
of the excellent gods. I bow to them, the givers  
of glory.
(Alternatively: Primordially, the glorious five 
Sugatas are the originators of the glorious bodies, 
and the glorious bodies of the excellent gods.  
I bow to them, the givers of glory.)
  2. But Vajrasattva is the sixth (as) the pre-eminent 
lord of the existing Bodhisattvas, (and) the 
repository (or foundation) of all the Buddhas.  
I bow to him for the sake of deliverance. 
  3. In all my existences, may I become a servant of  
the servant who has supreme devotion and stainless 
faith in the glorious Samāja. 
  4. Having thus heard the command of the supreme 
guru, I respect it with praises, (and) having 
repeated it with devotion, I always pay homage  
to the glorious Samāja.
  5. The region originally called Jayantrapura and 
afterwards Chpārransī, it is there that the protector 
Śrī Samantaprabheśvara has stayed (or resided).
  6. He indeed, having appeased the fear 
(apprehension) of the Buddhists, has made firm  
the Buddha’s dispensation in Kambuja down to 
the present time. I bow to him again and again.
  7. The venerable Cuṅvi, delightful in manners,  
pure, accomplished in many activities,  
blameless in speech, eloquent and pious, is 
supreme in recitation and devotion to the Jina(s)  
[= Buddha(s)]. 
  8. The venerable Campakapāda, devoted to his 
teacher’s feet, respected by the siddhas, (and) 
the teacher in Chpārransī, has passed into 
appeasement (tranquillity, śama) in the region  
of Sthalāsvāy.
  9. Pious and steadfast, the venerable 
Dharaṇīndrapura, having adorned the base  
(aṅghrir alaṃkṛtavān?), and having enriched the  
wise (or firm) ones with fine treasures, has settled 
his pure heart in enlightenment.
10. Having traversed the ocean by way of the 
perfection of wisdom, the commentaries on 
logic and the rest, those calmed ones (śrānta) have 
reached the fruit of reality under the secret tree. 
11. The one called Vraḥ Dhanus, steadfast, intelligent, 
and student of the established doctrine, constantly 
and joyfully venerates the triple gurus of the  
three gurus.
12. (With his) mind inflamed with the sparks of the 
Kāśikā, poetry and other outer (compositions), 
since a long time he sips the secret elixir, (and is) 
intent on the sap of fire oblations, recitations,  
and yoga.
13. In the year 988 [śaka = 1066 CE], on the  
seventh day of the bright fortnight of the month 
of Tapasya, this learned Vraḥ Dhanus is the one 
who has installed the Sugata and other images 
in Tenpāsnaga, the fortunate and excellent 
pilgrimage place (tīrtha). 
14. Śrī, Śakti, Kīrtti, Devendra and many more, 
through them I have realised and personally 
grasped something about the destruction in  
this world and indeed in the other world. 
15. If I have the fruit of my merit, (it is my) swift 
rebirth in Kambuja, but we work here for the sake 
of the deity through the deliberation of Sāmāja, 
not for anything else. Moreover, there are other 
aspirations, not just one.
Endnotes
1 
The term nāga-enthroned (instead of the usual 
nāga-protected) Buddha dissociates the icon from 
the Mucalinda myth which plays a significant role 
in Theravāda Buddhism, but does not seem to  
play a role in Mahāyānist Buddhist societies 
(Sharrock 2011). Furthermore, the term nāga-
enthroned Buddha seems to convey more 
powerfully the acquisition of the transcendent 
status which the Buddha gained in Mahāyāna  
and tantric belief systems.

--- PAGE 199 ---
Pia conTi
395
394
References
Aymonier, Étienne 
1900  Le Cambodge I. Paris: Ernest 
Leroux.
Baptiste, Pierre &  
Zéphir, Thierry 
2008  L’art khmer dans les collections 
du Musée Guimet. Paris: Réunion des 
musées nationaux.
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh 
1924  Indian Buddhist Iconography. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Boeles, Jan J.  
1966  Two Yoginīs from Thailand. 
In Ba Shin (ed.), Essays Offered to  
G. H. Luce. Volume 2. Ascona: 
Artibus Asiae Supplementum,  
pp. 14-29.
Boisselier, Jean 
1966  Asie du Sud-Est. Le Cambodge. 
Paris: Éditions A. & J. Picard.
Bunker, Emma & Latchford, 
Douglas 
2004  Adoration and Glory: The Golden 
Age of Khmer Art. Chicago: Media 
Art Resources.
2011  Khmer Bronzes:  
New Interpretations of the Past.  
Chicago: Media Art Resources.
Chirapat Prapandvidya 
1990  The Sab Bak Inscription: 
Evidence of an Early Vajrayāna 
Buddhist Presence in Thailand. 
Journal of the Siam Society 78(2): 
11-14.
2007  Phimai (Vimāya) Temple in 
Thailand. Paper Presented at 
the Conference on Buddhism 
and the 21st Century Organised 
by the Government of India in 
Bodh Gaya, February 3-6, 2007. 
[Unpublished]
Cœdès, George 
1908  Les inscriptions de Bàt Čum. 
Journal asiatique, New Series 12: 
213-254.
1923  Bronzes khmèrs. Paris/
Bruxelles: Van Ouest & Cie.
1924  Études cambodgiennes. 
Bulletin de l’École française  
d’Extrême-Orient 4: 345-358.
Dagens, Bruno 
1995  Autour de l’iconographie de 
Phimai. In Silpakorn University 
(ed.), Actes du Premier Symposium 
franco-thaïlandais. La Thaïlande des 
origines de son histoire au XVème siècle. 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University,  
pp. 17-37. 
Dalsheimer, Nadine 
2001  Les collections du Musée de 
Phnom Penh. Paris: Magellan & Cie.
Dawa-Samdup, Kazi (ed.) 
1919  Shrīchakrasambhāra Tantra.  
A Buddhist Tantra. Arthur Avalon’s 
Tantrik Texts, Vol. VII. Calcutta: 
Tacker, Spink & Co. [Reprint,  
New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan 1987]
Dupont, Pierre 
1950  Les Buddha sur Nāga  
dans l’art khmer. Artibus Asiae  
13: 39-62.
Estève, Julia 
2009  Étude critique des phénomènes 
du syncrétisme religieux du Cambodge 
ancien. Doctoral Dissertation.  
Paris: École Pratique des Hautes 
Études. [Unpublished]
Estève, Julia & Vincent, Brice 
2010  L’about inscrit du musée 
national du Cambodge (K. 943) : 
nouveaux éléments sur le 
bouddhisme tantrique à l’époque 
angkorienne. Arts asiatiques 65: 
133-158.
Fremantle, Francesca 
1971  A Critical Study of the 
Guhyasamāja Tantra. Doctoral 
Dissertation. London: School 
of Oriental and African 
Studies, University of London. 
[Unpublished]
Gray, David B.  
2007  The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra.  
New York: The American  
Institute of Buddhist Studies.
Green, Phillip 
2012  A Century of Confusion: 
The Brick Reliefs of Phnom Trap. 
Paper Presented at the Conference 
Religious Studies in Cambodia: 
Understanding the Old and Tracing the 
New, organised in Siem Reap,  
9-11 June 2012. [Unpublished]
Griffiths, Arlo 
2013  The Problem of the Ancient 
Name Java and the Role of 
Satyavarman in Southeast Asian 
International Relations Around  
the Turn of the Ninth Century 
CE. Archipel 85: 43-81.
Groslier, George Philippe 
1962  Études sur Phimai pour sa 
reconstruction. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.  
[Unpublished]
Jacques, Claude 
1969  Études d’épigraphie 
cambodgienne. II. Inscriptions 
diverses récemment découvertes 
en Thaïlande. III. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 56: 57-74. 
Linrothe, Robert 
1999  Ruthless Compassion.  
London: Serindia Publications. 
Lobo, Wibke 
1997  Caitya - Buddhistic 
Monument. In Jessup, Helen I. & 
Zéphir, Thierry (eds.), The Sculpture 
of Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: 
Millennium of Glory. Washington: 
National Gallery of Washington, 
pp. 242-243.
1998  Reflections on the Tantric 
Buddhist Deity Hevajra in 
Cambodia. In Manguin, Pierre-
Yves (ed.), Southeast Asian Archaeology  
1994, Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference of the European Association  
of Southeast Asian Archaeologists,  
Volume 2. Hull: Centre for Southeast 
Asian Studies, pp. 113-127.
Ly, Boreth 
2007  Protecting the Protector of 
Phimai. The Journal of the Walters Art 
Museum 64/65: 35-48.
Mallmann, Marie-Thérèse de  
1975  Introduction à l’iconographie 
du tantrisme bouddhique. Paris: 
Maisonneuve.
Manit Vallibothama 
1962  Guide to Phimai and Its 
Antiquities. Bangkok: Fine Arts 
Department.
Pichard, Pierre 
1976  Pimay : étude architecturale 
du temple. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Piriya Krairiksh 
2012  The Roots of Thai Art. 
Bangkok: River Books. [First 
published in Thai as Rakngao haeng 
sinlapa thai, 2553 (2010 CE)]
Sanderson, Alexis 
2003-04  The Śaiva Religion 
among the Khmer. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 90-91: 
349-462.
Seidenfaden, Erik 
1923  An Excursion to Phimai. 
A City Temple in the Khorat 
Province. Journal of the Siam Society 
17: 1-19.
Sharrock, Peter 
2011  The Nāga-enthroned 
Buddha of Angkor. In Bunker, 
Emma & Latchford, Douglas (eds), 
Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations 
of the Past. Chicago: Media Art 
Resources, pp. 481-491.
2012  Kīrtipaṇḍita and the 
Tantras. Udaya Journal of Khmer 
Studies 10 [for 2009]: 203-237.
Snellgrove, David 
1959  The Hevajra Tantra: A  
Critical Study. London: Oxford 
University Press. 
2004  Indo-Tibetan Buddhism. 
Bangkok: Orchid Press.  
[Second Edition; First Ed. 1987]
Talbot, Sarah 
2002  Northeast Thailand 
before Angkor: Evidence from 
an Archaeological Excavation at 
Prasat Hin Phimai. Asian Perspectives 
40(2): 179-194.
Tsuda, Shinichi 
1974  The Saṁvaryodana-Tantra. 
Selected Chapters. Tokyo: The 
Hokuseido Press.
Woodward, Hiram, Jr  
1981  Tantric Buddhism in Angkor 
Thom. Ars Orientalis 12: 57-67.
1997  The Sacred Sculpture of 
Thailand. Bangkok: River Books. 
2002  Esoteric Buddhism in 
Southeast Asia in the Light of 
Recent Scholarship. Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies 35(2): 329-354.
2003  The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand. From Prehistoric Times 
through the Thirteenth Century.  
Leiden-Boston: Brill.
2007  The Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra 
and Buddhist Art in 10th century 
Cambodia. In Pratapaditya Pal 
(ed.), Buddhist Art: Form & Meaning. 
Mumbai: Marg, pp. 72-82.
Forthcoming Aspects of Buddhism 
in Tenth-Century Cambodia. In 
Lammerts, Christian (ed.), Buddhist 
Dynamics in Premodern Southeast Asia. 
Singapore. 
2 
Arlo Griffiths (2013: 72-75) has recently proposed 
to identify our “Satyavarmanˮ of K. 1158 as  
King Satyavarman of Pāṇḍuraṅga in Campā.  
This Satyavarman reigned in the last quarter of 
the eighth century CE. 
3 
Griffiths (2013: 75) also proposed that the 
“Abhayagiriˮ of K. 1158 may be identified as 
“Ratu Baka hillockˮ in central Java. It seems 
to me, however, that the field of references in 
the inscription is local. The lineage of the three 
tantric gurus which are mentioned in the Sanskrit 
part is a local lineage, with possible connections 
to a region near Angkor. Moreover, Dhanus 
identifies “Kambujaˮ as the land in which the 
Buddhists work for their liberation (cf. verse 15). An 
overseas location for their sacred tīrtha, or place of 
pilgrimage, seems unlikely, since it would imply that 
several tantric Buddhists travelled repeatedly from 
Khorat or Angkor to Java during three centuries to 
keep up images placed in a holy place there.
4 
The ground plans, cross-sections and an excellent 
description of the achitectural history of Prasat 
Hin Phimai are given by Pierre Pichard (1976).
5 
Hiram Woodward (2003: 151) has proposed that 
the four central lintels represent the four bodies 
of Māra. This interpretation is grounded on his 
reading of  inscription K. 953 found at Phimai  
and dated to 1041 CE in which the four bodies 
Māra are mentioned. Woodward’s  proposal is 
highly speculative and relies on a complex web 
of possible associations which seem to me too 
tendentious to work.
6 
Most of the lintels and pediments on the outside  
of Prasat Hin Phimai represent Brahmanical 
topics. Many pediments and lintels feature 
scenes from the Rāmāyaṇa. There does not seem 
to be a general tenor to the chosen scenes. The 
most common denominator I could find is the 
representation of a fight between just and unjust 
causes.  Boreth Ly (2007: 35) reads the pediments 
and lintels surrounding the central sanctuary 
providing a political and apotropaic function. 
  7 According to Marie-Thérèse de Mallmann  
(1975: 21), Vairocana in the Vajradhātumaṇḍala  
may have a rosary, but not his three-headed  
and six-armed form.
  8 For a schematic representation of the Poipet 
mould, see Woodward (1981: 61).
  9 Many thanks to Hiram Woodward for pointing  
out that two of the wrathful deities at Prasat  
Hin Phimai (Vajrapāṇi and Trailokyavijaya) 
are located in the southern part of the maṇḍala, 
a location traditionally assigned to krodha, as, 
for example in the esoteric mahākaruṇagarbha of 
Japan. If the temple indeed represents a three 
dimensional maṇḍala, the southern position of 
the krodhas may go some way in explaining the 
orientation of Prasat Hin Phimai. The temple is 
facing south and not east, as most Khmer temples 
do. Woodward (2003: 148) reads Vajrapāṇi as 
representing Vajrasattva in his secondary role 
as one of the sixteen vajra beings represented in 
esoteric Japanese maṇḍalas.
10 I have been trying to find an excavation report 
showing where the lintels which were not in 
situ were found exactly, but have as yet been 
unsuccessful. The closest to a report is Dagens’ 
(1995) paper where he gives an inventory list of 
lintels found in situ and scattered on the ground. 
With many lintels, he gives only a vague indication 
of where they were found and a description of  
their likely content. Dagens is also not entirely  
sure where the various lintels were located on the 
outer structures, since at the time he went to  
Phimai many were still broken and scattered on  
the ground. Dagens concluded his research stating  
that it is not possible to say whether the particular 
layout of the central group, where the non- 
Buddhist themes surround the Buddhist ones inside 
the temple, can be found elsewhere in the temple.

--- PAGE 200 ---
397
396
Introduction
O
ver a century of Southeast Asian studies has highlighted the 
importance attached by Khmer people to certain territories 
located in present-day Thailand. In Isan, that is northeast Thailand, 
the Khmer presence seems to be attested from the late sixth century, 
according to the most ancient inscriptions,1 and then weakened until 
the tenth century during which the construction of temples intensifies 
sharply, a sign of a more constant occupation of this region. Outside of 
Isan, there are others, albeit episodic, Khmer ruins in the Chao Phraya 
river basin or in Lop Buri, Prachin Buri, Sa Kaeo and Kanchanaburi 
provinces (Smitthi et al. 1992). Obviously, following the territorial logic, 
Khmer rulers were mainly interested in the regions bordering their 
kingdoms, located north of the Dangrek range and west of Angkor. But 
at the end of the twelfth century, during King Jayavarman VII’s reign 
(ca 1182-1219/1220), the situation evolved differently as evidenced by 
the archaeological material of his time found in various places, sometimes 
at considerable distance from each other, delimiting a wide sphere of 
influence. Being more than just the single expression of a hegemonic will, 
these remains draw an archaeological map which may also reflect the king’s 
political and religious orientations implemented in land use planning.2
Jayavarman VII’s Presence in Pre-modern 
Thailand: Archaeological Remains
In present-day Thailand, archaeological remains dating from 
Jayavarman VII’s reign have been found in significant quantities. They 
demonstrate the concrete presence of the Khmer king, not only in 
Isan as often pointed out, but also in other parts of the country. The 
stylistic architectural or iconographic specificities that characterise the 
art and the production of this period, known as “Bayon style,” give 
it a remarkable originality (Boisselier 1974). They all represent strong 
criteria for identifying monuments as well as sculptures with the margin 
of error being low. 
The Monuments
The most visible traces of the Khmer presence in pre-modern Thailand 
lie in the monuments built during Jayavarman VII’s reign. These 
are mainly located in the western, central and northeastern parts of 
the country. The temple or prasat of Mueang Sing [Figure 1], in 
The organisation of Space in  
Pre-modern Thailand under  
Jayavarman VII 
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
Figure 1: Mueang Sing, Kanchanaburi province, west side 
[Photograph by Hedwige Multzer o’Naghten].

--- PAGE 201 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
399
398
Kanchanaburi province, and Wat Kamphaeng Laeng in Phetchaburi 
province, mark the empire’s western confines.3 Not far from there, the 
ancient city of Ratchaburi was probably the location of a monument 
of the same era which is now in the premises of Wat Mahathat. In 
the central region, the ancient cities of Lop Buri and Sukhothai 
also housed Jayavarman VII’s temples such as Phra Prang Sam Yot 
[Figure 2] in Lop Buri, Wat Phra Phai Luang [Figure 3] and Wat 
Si Sawai [Figure 4] in Sukhothai. Apparently unfinished, the temples 
of Mueang Sing, Wat Kamphaeng Laeng and Phra Prang Sam Yot 
belong most likely to the “Bayon style,” according to their still evident 
architectural features. As for the other temples, it is less visible due 
to a late and continuous occupation and the adoption 
of Theravāda Buddhism as seen at Wat Mahathat in 
Ratchaburi where only a few original vestiges of the 
Khmer period remain. Most of these sites, however, 
offer an architectural composition relatively common in 
Thailand, centred on an alignment of three towers. Only 
the temple of Mueang Sing (Suriyavudh 2526a and 2526b), 
which appears to be the most important of Jayavarman 
VII’s projects in pre-modern Thailand, adopted the more 
usual Khmer temple layout, consisting of a central tower 
and another structure often designated as a “library” 
surrounded by two enclosures.
In the northeast, the majority of buildings located 
on the Khorat Plateau present some radically different 
architectural characteristics. These buildings are mostly 
so-called “repetitive” foundations which owe their name 
to their architectural composition reproduced identically 
all over the kingdom, making their identification easy. 
They are divided in two categories: chapels of hospitals 
(ārogyaśāla) and “houses of Fire” (vahnigṛha), the construction 
of which, according to the Ta Prohm (Cœdès 1906: 66, 80) 
and Preah Khan (Cœdès 1941: 280, 297) inscriptions of 
Angkor, was planned in large quantities4 throughout the 
kingdom, that is to say the area of present day Cambodia, 
part of Thailand, southern Laos and southern Vietnam.
The hospital chapel’s plan conforms to the ordinary layout of the 
small classical Khmer temple, comprising a central tower with attached 
vestibule facing east and a so-called “library” in the southeastern section 
inside an enclosure with an eastern entrance pavilion, and very often 
a basin in the northeast, but outside the compound (Cœdès 1940) 
[e.g. Figure 5]. This peculiar layout enabled George Cœdès to identify 
fourteen such structures according to the descriptions provided by 
Lunet de Lajonquière (1907), seven more were later acknowledged and 
published by Bruno Dagens (1993), five more by Bruno Bruguier,5 and 
five additional ones by a Thai archaeologist (Rungrot 2547: 51-52).6 
Moreover, in Prachin Buri province, the site of Ban Khok Pip or Prasat 
Sa Morakot revealed architectural remains and a sandstone pedestal for 
three idols that suits perfectly with the worship of a certain Buddhist 
triad at hospital chapels (Boisselier 1969: 56-57). It would seem possible 
to complete this list with other monuments which undeniably have 
the same typical composition like Prasat Ban Noi (Sa Kaeo province, 
Cisark no. 7656), as pointed out by Asger Mollerup recently (2012: 
67). All together, about thirty-two such hospital chapels in pre-modern 
Thailand have been securely identified to date [Map 1; Appendix 1].
The other series of “repetitive” buildings, namely the “houses of 
Fire,” often wrongly called dharmaśālā or “religious resting house” due 
to their position along axes of communication, have been discovered 
mostly between Angkor and Phimai (Lunet de Lajonquière 1902: l). 
They were designed as a single laterite building divided into three 
consecutive parts: a vestibule facing east, followed by a long central hall 
leading to a tower with a door opening on the west side. They all display 
unusual architectural features like the presence of windows only on the 
southern side or the tower communicating directly with the central hall 
Figure 2: Phra Prang Sam Yot, 
Lop Buri province [Photograph by 
Hedwige Multzer o’Naghten].
Figure 3: Wat Phra Phai Luang, 
Sukhothai province [Photograph 
courtesy of Pierre Pichard, 1980].
Figure 4: Wat Si Sawai, 
Sukhothai province [Photograph by 
Hedwige Multzer o’Naghten].

--- PAGE 202 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
401
400
through a wide and high opening framed by two pilasters instead of the 
usual narrow door of the Khmer cella [e.g. Figure 6].
About eight of them have been discovered in Isan so far, 
but, according to the Preah Khan stele (Cœdès 1941: 279, 296), 
there was another one at Phimai which has not yet been found 
[Map 1; Appendix 2]. Moreover, at the ancient city Kosinarai, near 
Nakhon Pathom, the clearing of a site brought to light one Avalokiteśvara 
and a “Bayon style” monument identified by Jean Boisselier as a “house 
of Fire” (1972: 42) [Map 2].
In Isan again, the construction of laterite towers, placed on both 
sides of the maṇḍapa attached to the central tower of Prasat Hin 
Phimai [Figure 7], also dates from Jayavarman VII’s reign, as well 
as the third enclosure wall and its laterite entrance pavilions (Pichard 
1976: 3-4). The attribution to the same period of an unfinished laterite 
tower covered up by the Prasat Wat Phra That, in the vicinity of 
Phra That Phanom in Nakhon Phanom province, appears much less 
certain (Boisselier 1965: 139). 
Figure 5: Hospital chapel, Prasat 
Ta Muean Tot, Surin province 
[Photograph by Hedwige Multzer 
o’Naghten].
Figure 6: “House of Fire,” 
Prasat Ta Muean, Surin province 
[Photograph by Hedwige Multzer 
o’Naghten].
Map 1: Archaeological sites and remains in northeast Thailand during  
Jayavarman VII’s reign [Drawing courtesy of Nicolas Revire and Pierre Pichard].

--- PAGE 203 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
403
402
The Inscriptions 
Compared 
to 
the 
numerous 
monuments, 
inscriptions from the time of Jayavarman VII 
discovered in Thailand to this day are much 
rarer. They are basically of two types: on the one 
hand, approximately twelve hospital edicts7 
recording the installation of Bhaiṣajyaguru, the 
Medicine Buddha, and his Bodhisattva assistants – 
Sūryavairocana (“Sunlight”) and Candravairocana 
(“Moonlight”) –, and at the same time specifying 
the institution’s rules [Appendix 3; e.g. Figure 8]; 
on the other hand, about eight dedications 
engraved on cult objects such as conches, bowls and 
vases offered to deities. For example, site no. 11 at 
Ban Khok Pip in Prachin Buri province, excavated 
by Boisselier (1972: 46-48), has provided five 
inscribed bronze objects.8 Two of these (K. 1052 
and K. 1056) give the names of two hospitals, 
Avadhyapura and Saṃvok, one of which should 
stand exactly on the site of the excavation. In 
addition, one support of a mirror (K. 973; Cœdès 
1937-66: VII, 154) was found in the hospital 
chapel at Prasat Khok Ngiu (Buri Ram province) 
and two tripod vases were discovered at Wat Ban 
Na Sam (Surin province). One of these tripods is 
dated 1123 śaka (1201 CE) and is probably related to a “house of Fire” 
named Thmo Yol (Cœdès 1937-66: VII, 155). Except for the conch 
from Ban Khok Pip (K. 1053) and one of the two vases mentioned 
above (K. 974) which can be similarly paleographically dated to the 
“Bayon period,” all these objects carry a date from Jayavarman’s reign 
and some of them are even king’s donations (Boisselier 1972: 46-48).9
Most of these inscriptions or inscribed objects have been found on 
sites set up by Jayavarman VII. In some cases, however, such as at Prasat 
Phanom Wan, in Nakhon Ratchasima province, only a fragment of a 
hospital stele remains, but there are no traces of an edifice. One can 
perhaps assume that, in ancient times, there was a hospital chapel near 
this temple. 
Concurrently, inscriptions originating from major royal temples at 
Angkor mention the existence of several Jayavarman VII’s foundations 
where the remains are of questionable attribution, and sometimes 
non-existent. The Preah Khan inscription (K. 908, stanzas 116-117), 
for example, assert that there was an image of Jayabuddhamahānātha 
in Lavodayapura, Jayarājapurī and Jayavajrapurī (Cœdès 1941: 280, 
296; Jacques 2005: 13), which would presumably have been housed 
in the premises of Phra Prang Sam Yot (Lop Buri), Wat Mahathat 
(Ratchaburi) and Wat Kamphaeng Laeng (Phetchaburi). Similarly, a 
couple of small inscriptions from the Bayon (K. 293-3 and K. 293-6; 
Cœdès 1937-66: III, 194, 196) remind us of the Medicine Buddha’s 
presence in Ratchaburi and Phetchaburi where, accordingly, a hospital 
chapel should have existed even though no trace can be found nowadays. 
The Sculptures
The “Bayon style” sculpture sheds a different light on this period 
because it gives evidence of another form of the ascendency of royal 
power related to the spreading of religious ideas. Its characteristics make 
it one of the most representative and relevant markers to this research. 
While perpetuating traditional aesthetics on Khmer sculpture, “Bayon 
art” undoubtedly brings a renewal of artistic expression. Besides its 
most famous expression of intense spirituality reflected by closed eyes 
and a barely sketched mystic smile, its anthropomorphic sculpture 
presents specific features, stylistic as well as iconographic, which make it 
genuinely unique. All the statues share the same stylistic characteristics, 
both anatomical and clothing. 
Physically, anthropomorphic images show an anatomy that is 
very realistic and closer to the human model, especially in the body’s 
modeling which is softer and more rounded where the musculature is 
discretely suggested. The male images perfectly illustrate this trend: a 
fleshier bust, a wide neck and legs often massive and heavy, making a 
thick silhouette and giving the impression of physical power. In contrast, 
female images adopt a face close to skinniness, a very frail body and a 
narrow bust. 
Generally, garments and ornaments are rather simple. The statues 
are clothed in a sampot, pleated and short for men, long and decorated 
with small flowers and a wide panel folded on the front for women, 
and attached by a wide belt made of small square plates adorned with 
flowers, a detail typical of this period. Even more characteristic is the 
chignon hairstyle consisting of parallel pigtails incised in crescent-shape. 
For men, the hairs are gathered in a jaṭāmukuṭa, a cylindrical or conical 
crown sometimes encircled at its base by a string of pearls. Women 
frequently wear a conical chignon-cover with four concentric rows of 
lotus petals. 
According to the iconographic tradition, Buddha images of the 
“Bayon style” display some distinctive signs peculiar to the Blessed 
One, like hair treated in regular and stylised coiled curls or the cranial 
protuberance. This last feature can assume two different aspects under 
this style: high and pointed or slightly protruding, and can sometimes be 
covered by a simple mukuṭa adorned with lotus petals. 
If the Buddha seated on the coils of a snake (i.e, nāga-Buddha; see 
also Conti, this volume) was indubitably the main icon of this reign 
[e.g. Figures 9-10], representations of Lokeśvara, another name for 
the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, were also found in great number. Most 
of them opt for the common form with one head wearing a small seated 
Amitābha Buddha on the front of the chignon, and four arms holding 
the traditional attributes, that is to say, a lotus bud on the lower right 
hand and a rosary on the upper right hand, and on the left side, a flask 
and a book on the lower and upper hands respectively [e.g. Figure 11]. 
Concurrently, Prajñāpāramitā was elevated to the rank of highest deity 
alongside the Buddha and Lokeśvara. For the first time in Cambodia, she 
was carved in free-standing life-size sandstone sculptures, with two arms 
borrowing attributes from the two Indian goddesses, Prajñāpāramitā 
and Tārā, who commonly hold the book for the former and the lotus 
for the latter [e.g. Figure 12].
Figure 7: Prang Brahmadatta, 
Prasat Hin Phimai, Nakhon 
Ratchasima province [Photograph by 
Hedwige Multzer o’Naghten]. 
Figure 8: Hospital edict, from  
Ku Khanthanam, Roi Et province,  
Roi Et National Museum [Photograph 
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 204 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
405
404
But the most striking facet of “Bayon art” lies in original creations, 
purely Khmer and hitherto unknown in India, partly due to the 
adoption of Mahāyāna Buddhism as the official religion. Indeed, new 
iconographic types such as Lokeśvara under his “radiating” aspect 
illustrating one Buddha emerging from each pore of the Bodhisattva10 
[e.g. Figure 13], or seated leaning against a stele [e.g. Figure 14], as 
well as the so-called “Vajradhara” [e.g. Figure 15] who actually would 
be none other than Bhaiṣajyaguru, the Medicine Buddha (Woodward 
2011), can be associated only to Jayavarman VII’s reign. Even more so, 
the portrait-statues of the sovereign and his queen, discovered at Prasat 
Hin Phimai, symbolise the supremacy of royal power (Cœdès 1960: 
184, 193) [Figures 16 and 17]. 
The identification of these images poses little difficulty insofar as 
they follow accurately their own iconographic codes. The particularity 
of the “radiating” eight-armed standing Lokeśvara is expressed by 
the physical appearance of the body, covered with a myriad of small 
Buddhas seated in meditation (samādhimudrā) and distributed on the 
torso, the hair, around the wrists and ankles as well as the fingers and 
toes. Equally new in Khmer art, Avalokiteśvara appears now in a seated 
posture. As usual, he wears a tiny Amitābha Buddha on the front of his 
chignon, sometimes worn away. He often bears no adornment, except 
earrings, and has four arms. The upper hands hold the rosary on the 
right side and the flask on the left one. The lower hands, as can be 
observed on different well-preserved pieces, held a small round object 
in the palm of the right hand, sometimes identified as the jewel, and in 
the left hand, a more or less stylised fly-whisk. As for “Vajradhara,” alias 
Bhaiṣajyaguru (Woodward 2011), holding a vajrā in the left hand and a 
bell in the right one, he is always seated crossed-legs. 
Almost all of the “Bayon style” sculptures found within the present-
day Thai territory come from temples built by Jayavarman VII or 
sites reoccupied by him [Map 2]. Outside of Cambodia, Phimai and 
Mueang Sing (Suriyavudh 2526a: 103) house the largest concentration 
of Buddhist statues of this art-period. Unsurprisingly, we find there again 
Left Figure 9: Nāga-Buddha, 
Lop Buri National Museum 
[Photograph by Hedwige Multzer 
o’Naghten].
Right Figure 10: Nāga-Buddha, 
from the main shrine of Prasat 
Hin Phimai, Nakhon Ratchasima 
province, Phimai National Museum 
[Photograph courtesy of Nicolas 
Revire].
Figure 11: Four-armed standing Lokeśvara, from Prasat Nang Ram, Nakhon Ratchasima 
province, Phimai National Museum [Photograph courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 205 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
407
406
an iconographic program gathering three major figures of Mahāyāna 
Buddhism, that is, the nāga-Buddha, the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara and 
the Goddess Prajñāpāramitā who form the sovereign’s favourite triad. 
But certain other representations of deities, also in favour during the 
reign, have been found in smaller quantities, like “Vajradhara,” or the 
Medicine Buddha in hospital chapels. In contrast, small Buddhist triads 
[e.g. Figure 18], or steles carved with four-armed seated Lokeśvara 
were plentiful. All of these sculptures are particularly representative of 
that period.
Overall, the abundance of archaeological remains from Jayavarman 
VII’s reign, discovered in pre-modern Thailand, certifies a well-
established Khmer presence from the late twelfth century to the early 
thirteenth century. It also reflects the major position of these regions in 
the imperial sphere of Jayavarman VII as well as their prominent role 
in his territorial policy.
Jayavarman VII’s Royal Policies in  
Pre-modern Thailand and Land Use Planning
There are different ways to show that a territory is under a sovereign’s 
authority, or in his dependence, and to mark thus the extent of his empire. 
Inscriptions, sculptures, and monuments, Jayavarman VII has used all 
these devices to append his own print on the surface of his kingdom. 
Their locations enable us to not only trace the theoretical limits of his 
power, but also to constitute the framework of an archaeological map 
revealing the fundamental choices that have shaped it.
Archaeological Remains as Territory Markers
The distribution of archaeological remains found in situ in Thailand 
reveals a high density in some specific geographical areas such as the 
Khorat Plateau, as well as the valleys of the Chao Phraya river in the 
central region and the Mae Klong river in the western region. 
The establishment of Jayavarman VII’s foundations was developed 
depending on two radically different approaches of spatial organisation; 
in Isan, one can note a high concentration of at least forty monuments, 
all “repetitive” – approximately thirty-two hospitals and eight “houses 
of Fire” –, on the latest account, all distributed along the Dangrek 
range and between the arms of the Mun and Chi rivers as far north as 
modern Udon Thani [Map 1]. Conversely, in the western and central 
regions, sites are spaced out from south to north, along different river 
valleys, the Khwae Noi river on the western frontier (Mueang Sing), the 
Mae Klong river (Ratchaburi and Phetchaburi), the Bang Pakong river 
(Ban Khok Pip or Prasat Sa Morakot) and the Chao Phraya river as 
well as its tributary rivers in the North (Lop Buri and up to Sukhothai) 
[Map 2]. Obviously, this geographical layout can be partially explained 
by the geomorphologic configuration of these spaces, focused on river 
basins and compartmentalised by mountain ranges, however, it also seems 
to correspond to the former settlements from the time of Dvāravatī.
The circulation between central and northeast Thailand, two 
neighbouring regions separated by the Dong Phaya Yen chain, was 
achieved by roads and waterways, both known since ancient times. The 
Figure 12: Two-armed standing 
Prajñāpāramitā (replica in situ), 
from Mueang Sing, Kanchanaburi 
province [Photograph courtesy of 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 13: Eight-armed 
“radiating” Lokeśvara (replica 
in situ), from Mueang Sing, 
Kanchanaburi province [Photograph 
by Hedwige Multzer o’Naghten].
Figure 14: Stele of 
Four-armed seated 
Lokeśvara found at 
Ku Phon Rakhang, 
Roi Et province, Roi 
Et National Museum 
[Photograph courtesy of 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 15: Medicine Buddha 
(formerly identified as Vajradhara), 
from Prasat Nang Ram, Nakhon 
Ratchasima province, Phimai 
National Museum [Photograph 
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].
Figure 16: King 
Jayavarman VII’s 
portrait-statue, from Prang 
Brahmadatta, Prasat Hin 
Phimai, Phimai National 
Museum [Photograph courtesy 
of Nicolas Revire].
Figure 17: Queen’s 
portrait-statue, from 
Prasat Hin Phimai, 
Phimai National Museum 
[Photograph courtesy of 
Nicolas Revire].
Figure 18: Stone stele of Buddhist triad, 
Phimai National Museum [Photograph 
courtesy of Nicolas Revire].

--- PAGE 206 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
409
408
layout of several main roads, portions of which are still known and 
used today, can be retraced from abandoned paths or tracks that linked 
ancient occupation sites (Boisselier 1965: 136). It is thus possible to 
ascertain that some of these transversal axes were connected, from west 
to east, with the major centres of the kingdom of Jayavarman VII. In 
its western part, most of them date from the Dvāravatī culture, whose 
settlements were established by the middle of the first millennium of 
the Common Era along the Chao Phraya river and its tributaries, as 
well as in the basin of the Mun river. They all offer the connection 
between the Gulf of Muttama (Martaban) and the Indian Ocean, and 
inland through the Tenasserim chain and its more common passes. 
The famous Three Pagodas Pass, which leads to the valleys of the two 
Khwae rivers, provides access to Kanchanaburi as a starting point of 
a body of roads. One of these roads descends to the south towards 
Ratchaburi and Phetchaburi and up to the modern Gulf of Thailand. 
Another one, through U Thong, runs eastward towards Lop Buri which 
is the link between western and eastern parts of the Chao Phraya river 
basin (Boisselier 1965: 145). Nearby Lop Buri, traces of ancient roads 
led probably to the north and the modern city of Nakhon Sawan, while 
other roads brought directly to the Khorat Plateau. They apparently led 
up to present-day Khon Kaen by crossing the Dong Phaya Yen chain 
or passing through Si Thep which ensured the transition between the 
Pasak river valley and the Mun river through the Chai Badan threshold 
[Map 2]. Further south, Jean Boisselier (1965: 145) also noticed the 
existence of age-old paths between U Thong and the Bang Pakong 
river valley, where Ban Khok Pip is located, landmarked by a large 
number of ancient sites like Prasat Sa Morakot, Dong Si Mahosot and 
Mueang Phra Rot on the east bank of the river (Prachin Buri province) 
or Mueang Phra Rot II on the west shore (Chon Buri province). This 
valley leads without obstruction to the Tonle Sap basin. The remains of 
a road, perhaps unfinished, from Watthana to Angkor, seem to come 
from the Gulf of Thailand (Geiringer 1891: 28; Lunet de Lajonquière 
1909: 244).
All these territories, whether in central or northeast Thailand, 
were connected to the Angkorian capital by a few crossing points. For 
example, the Watthana threshold in the Aranyaprathet plain, between 
the Dangrek’s western end and the Cardamom mountain’s northern tip, 
gives access to the Great Lake (Tonle Sap) of present-day Cambodia, 
while communication with the Khorat Plateau occurs through a series 
of passes spaced out on the Dangrek’s cliff tops (Aymonier 1901: 112, 
192, 224, 304). It should also be noted that, at the end of the twelfth 
century, the Angkorian central authority extended to most parts of 
what is today Thailand, maintaining control over one of the largest 
hydrographic systems of mainland Southeast Asia, that of the Chao 
Phraya river, and, via the Mun river basin, that of the Mekong’s river 
system, but also over most of the arable land and a huge operational 
network of riverine and overland communications routes (Hendrickson 
2010; Multzer o’Naghten 2011: 134-137, 139-141, 167).
Finally, the location of archaeological remains in Thailand reveals 
regional disparities, emphasising the importance of certain areas whose 
development certainly meets the projection and implementation of 
different choices made by the king and very often situated on ancient 
settlements. This clear organisation leads us to question the king’s 
principles of management in foreign lands. Besides a likely expansionist 
policy, the historical factor, in addition to the king’s religious beliefs and 
the economic requirements – rarely mentioned in previous Khmer 
studies –, have obviously played a role in the territorial planning of the 
Khmer kingdom. 
Socio-political Analysis and Land Use Planning
Since the eleventh century, the Chao Phraya river basin, and for even 
longer, the Khorat Plateau, have been in the territorial expansion sphere 
of Khmer power. Jayavarman VII’s policy in ancient Thailand was in 
historical continuity with the previous Khmer rulers. He reinforced the 
domination upon this region, consolidated it in the north, and extended 
it in the west almost as far as the present-day Myanmar border, nearby 
which he probably built the temple of Mueang Sing.
Map 2: Greatest extent of the 
Khmer empire during Jayavarman 
VII’s rule [Drawing courtesy of 
Nicolas Revire and Pierre Pichard].

--- PAGE 207 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
411
410
In Isan, Jayavarman VII established foundations on or near 
sites created or honoured by members of his paternal lineage who 
were all kings in Angkor, namely Jayavarman VI (r. 1080-1107), 
Dharaṇīndravarman I (r. 1107- ca 1113) and Sūryavarman II (r. 1113- 
ca 1150). It seems that the location of his temples was chosen in relation 
to former foundations of these previous kings, especially on a route 
leading from Angkor to the Khorat Plateau. At Prasat Phanom Wan, 
where a Jayavarman VI edict is inscribed (K. 391) on a central tower’s 
door jamb (Cœdès 1937-66: VI, 297-299), a fragment of a hospital stele 
(K. 395) has been found (Cœdès 1940: 344), and at Phanom Rung, where 
a stele (K. 384) gives the genealogical origins of the three sovereigns 
(Cœdès 1937-66: V, 297-305), Jayavarman VII planned a hospital 
chapel (Kuti Ruesi Nong Bua Lai/Rai). Along the road leading from 
Angkor to Phimai, the king ordered the building of “houses of Fire,” 
and notably also between Ta Muean Thom and Prasat Hin Phimai.
By appropriating these sites, Jayavarman VII presented himself 
as the direct heir of the kings of Angkor stressing the “dynastic” link 
with kings who appear in his genealogy, justifying on the one hand, his 
domination over these lands, and on the other hand, his legitimacy to 
the throne. However, the high archaeological density in Isan also reflects 
another reality, that of a developing region. Concurrent to the roads 
and the hydrological works, the two main networks of monuments, 
hospitals and “houses of Fire,” sometimes presented as institutions of 
“public utility,” give evidence of the existence of a dynamic and densely 
populated environment. Indeed, the construction of hospitals is easily 
explained by the social necessities imposed by the presence of more or 
less developed cities, while the “houses of Fire,” known as landmarks 
on the roads leading to the capital, suggest the existence of active 
commercial and human traffic.
The exceptional concentration of hospitals located throughout 
Isan, – around thirty-two out of the one hundred and two mentioned 
in the Ta Prohm stele (Cœdès 1906: 66, 80) –, reflects the vitality of this 
region, inhabited since prehistoric times. Indeed, most of Jayavarman 
VII’s hospitals fit into a landscape already organised and widely 
developed by the Khmers and their predecessors for many centuries. 
A large number have been built in an environment already marked by 
the presence of Khmer temples dating from the tenth (Mueang Kaeo 
near Prasat Non Ku and Prasat Mueang Khaek, Nakhon Ratchasima 
province), eleventh (Kamphaeng Noi near Kamphaeng Yai, Si Sa 
Ket province) and twelfth centuries (Prasat Chom Phra and Prasat 
Ban Chang Pi near Prasat Sikhoraphum, Surin province), especially 
for the sites located between the Mun river and the Dangrek range. 
The concentration is more noteworthy in the vicinity of Phimai and 
Prasat Phanom Wan, as well as around Phanom Rung, Mueang Tam 
and Ta Muean Thom, which are major centres of Khmer power from 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Some others hospitals are close to 
ancient cities characterised by circular earthworks, moats and barai 
(Ku Santarat at Mueang Champasi, Maha Sarakham province; Prasat 
Ban Noi at Mueang Phai, Sa Kaeo province or Prasat Sa Morakot, 
Prachin Buri province). Conversely, it seems that the line of Khmer 
expansion extends significantly to the north with new foundations in the 
provinces of Chaiyaphum (Prang Ku), Maha Sarakham (Ku Santarat, 
Ku Ban Khewa), Roi Et (Ku Phon Rakhang, Ku Khanthanam, 
Prang Ku), Khon Kaen (Ku Kaeo, Prasat Praphachai), Udon Thani 
(Ku Kaeo Ban Chit) and Sakon Nakhon (Ban Phanna) [Map 1].
All these permanent developments attest of the demographic 
dynamism in the region. As indicated by stanza 119 of the Ta Prohm 
stele, 81,640 men and women in total, were working for the benefit of 
the 102 hospitals, representing an average of 800 people per hospital 
(Cœdès 1906: 66, 80).11 At the scale of the Isan region, the total rises to 
a minimum of 24,000 people, within the hospitals or in the surrounding 
villages, which should generate significant economic prosperity. 
Owing to the hospital stele’s content, we know that according to 
the number of staff allocated, there were four hospital categories, the 
size of which varied (Jacques 1991: 36-41).12 Thus we can deduce that 
logically the size should be proportional to the locality to which they 
were attached. Indeed the largest hospital in Isan is located next to 
Prasat Hin Phimai which is one of the main Khmer sites in the region, 
and, as stated by Jayavarman VII’s inscriptions, of great importance 
for the king. Regarding the hospital steles found in situ in Isan, we know 
that five of them assigned ninety-eight employees to large hospitals – for 
example, at Prasat Phanom Wan (Nakhon Ratchasima province) and 
Prasat Khok Ngiu (Buri Ram province), situated in the western part 
of the region, that is to say close to the largest urban centres and near 
the busiest traffic axis. But also at Prang Ku (Chaiyaphum province), 
Ku Kaeo (Khon Kaen province) and Prasat Tham Chan (Si Sa Ket 
province) all of which are on the limits of the territories developed 
under Jayavarman VII’s reign. Some steles allocating fifty people to 
the service of the hospital were also found in Prasat Ta Muean Tot 
and Prang Khon Buri, located near passes crossing the Dangrek range, 
which suggests an almost certain permanent influx. 
More closely related to the communication route’s network are 
the “houses of Fire” because, as intended in the Preah Khan stele, 
most of them lined three main roads leading to Angkor (Cœdès 1941: 
279-280, 296-297). From the quantities discovered compared with that 
announced (twenty-five out of one hundred and twenty-one and only 
eight in pre-modern Thailand), one cannot draw valid conclusions 
about their role in the territory’s organisation. However, those that still 
exist confirm the existence of two out of the three major axes detailed 
in the Preah Khan stele, one in the northwest and another one in the 
east, probable main lines of intense trade circulation.
Strangely, we do not find any “houses of Fire” on the third axis. But, 
it might be interesting to compare two lists of toponyms mentioned in 
the Preah Khan inscription. The first one gives the name of different 
places where a Buddha image called Jayabuddhamahānātha was 
erected by Jayavarman VII (Cœdès 1941: 279, 295-296) and the 
second one enumerates the names of the cities with a “house of Fire” 
(Cœdès 1941: 279-280, 296-297). Through linguistic analysis, Cœdès 
(1941: 296) has identified some places in the Jayabuddhamahānātha’s 
list with towns which are situated in present-day Thailand. According 
to him, Lavodayapura is Lop Buri, Svarnapura is Suphan Buri, 
Śambūkapaṭṭana is a site in the Chao Phraya valley, Jayarājapurī 
is Ratchaburi, Jayasiṃhapurī is Mueang Sing and Jayavajrapurī is 
Phetchaburi. Actually, the complete list begins with two unknown 
toponyms, Jayasiṃhavatī and Jayavīravatī, and ends with one also 
unidentified, Jayarājagiri.

--- PAGE 208 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
413
412
Curiously enough, the third axis of “houses of Fire,” according to 
the Preah Khan stele, contains the same names at the beginning and at 
the end of its own list. Thus, it appears that the places that are part of the 
Jayabuddhamahānātha’s list situated in Thailand, from north to south 
of the Chao Phraya river valley, could be inserted exactly in the middle 
of the third list of “houses of Fire” [Table 1]. We know that the names 
given in this list follows a geographical order because there were located 
along roads starting from Angkor (Yaśodharapura). Consequently, 
it is suggested that the third main road, beginning at Jayasiṃhavatī 
and Jayavīravatī and ending at Jayarājagiri, which locations are still 
unknown, was on the same axis as that of Lavodayapura, Svarnapura, 
Śambūkapaṭṭana, Jayarājapurī, Jayasiṃhapurī and Jayavajrapurī, that 
is to say toward present-day Thailand. 
Table 1: Comparative Itineraries between Axis Related to 
“Houses of Fire” and Jayabuddhamahānātha
“Houses of Fire”
Jayabuddhamahānātha
Identification
Yaśodharapura
-
Angkor
Jayavatī
-
?
Jayasiṃhavatī
Jayasiṃhavatī
?
Jayavīravatī
Jayavīravatī
?
-
Lavodayapura
Lop Buri
-
Svarnapura
Suphan Buri
-
Śambūkapaṭṭana
Chao Phraya river 
valley
-
Jayarājapurī
Ratchaburi
-
Jayasiṃhapurī
Mueang Sing
-
Jayavajrapurī
Phetchaburi
-
Jayastambhapurī
?
Jayarājagiri
Jayarājagiri
?
Yaśodharapura
-
Angkor
Comparatively, other foundations located in the Chao Phraya river 
valley or on the western borders, seem to be scattered in marginalised 
areas. As the isolated Mueang Sing complex on the western border, or 
the cities of Sukhothai in the north and Phetchaburi in the south, they 
seem to mark the expansion line of Jayavarman VII’s power. Distant 
from the political centre, they however occupied strategic positions like 
communication nodes, trade centres and outposts of the kingdom at the 
boundaries of the areas they dominated.
However, another possible criteria for the places of Jayavarman 
VII’s foundations lies in the clear intention of honouring, and, as a 
matter of fact, multiplying the Buddhist sites in his kingdom.
Religious Analysis and Land Use Planning 
It is certainly not a coincidence that the territories on which Jayavarman 
VII strengthened his authority were the first settlements of the 
introduction of Buddhism into this part of mainland Southeast Asia. 
Acting as a Buddhist sovereign, he had the duty to protect Buddhist sites, 
while ensuring the spreading of the Buddha’s teaching. It is therefore 
not surprising to find Jayavarman VII’s foundations on old Dvāravatī 
cities where the king strove to rebuild eminently Buddhist sites. The 
main settlements of Dvāravatī appear to have been at Nakhon Pathom, 
U Thong and Khu Bua west of the Chao Phraya river and at Lop Buri, 
all places where Jayavarman VII built his own foundations or restored 
preexistent monuments (Phasook 2009). In the Mae Klong river valley, 
remains of the “Bayon style” have been brought to light at Kosinarai, 
near Nakhon Pathom (Jarunee 2534). Similarly, further south in the 
vicinity of Khu Bua, Jayavarman VII’s temples were constructed in 
Ratchaburi and Phetchaburi, as well as in the Bang Pakong river valley 
at Ban Khok Pip (Prasat Sa Morakot) in Prachin Buri, and also in Isan. 
Of note, contrary to Khmer territories where Brahmanical images 
were still present in the repertoire, all the statues discovered in Thailand 
from this period are Buddhist, with the exception of portraits of the 
king and the queen erected at Prasat Hin Phimai.
The so-called Dvāravatī period corresponds to the introduction or 
expansion of Buddhism in this region of Southeast Asia, but also to 
the development of trade routes established from the early centuries 
of the Common Era, for the transportation of precious woods, metals, 
and rare goods. Historically, the Three Pagodas Pass is one of the 
main overland routes between lower Myanmar and western Thailand 
through which Buddhism entered the territory of present-day Thailand 
during the early centuries CE. Similarly, the abundance of Dvāravatī 
remains in the lower Mae Klong river valley seems to suggest that, 
in the first millennium, there was a trade route between the Bay of 
Bengal and the Gulf of Thailand by way of the Three Pagodas Pass. 
We know how Buddhism and commercial exchanges were closely 
associated, often using the same axis. The Dvāravatī culture has deeply 
structured the territories where it spread, through the establishment of 
a communication network to link its main principalities and possibly to 
support trade between the Gulf of Muttama (Martaban) and the Gulf 
of Thailand up to the South China Sea. 
Thus, all these Buddhist locations are steps on the trade routes that 
Jayavarman VII had sought to control in order to take advantage for the 
benefit of his kingdom’s economic development. Often neglected in the 
historical analysis of the reign, the economic point of view appears as a 
main parameter of the empire’s power.
Economic Analysis and Land Use Planning
In terms of natural resources, the territories under Khmer domination 
include the majority of river plains, lowlands fertilised by the silty 
flooding of major rivers (Multzer o’Naghten 2011: 138-141). In the 
central regions of Thailand, a long alluvial corridor is drained by 
the Chao Phraya river’s tributaries, while the lowlands are organised 
around the Delta and receive sediments from the Mae Klong river and

--- PAGE 209 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
415
414
the Bang Pakong river. In the northeast, the Mun river watering the 
Khorat Plateau is enriched by Mekong river silts (Multzer o’Naghten 
2011: 134-137).
In addition to their agricultural value, these regions have metal 
resources which are sorely lacking in Cambodia. In the west, 
Kanchanaburi province is famous for its lead mines (Pottier 1997: 
198), and tin is extracted in the Tenasserim chain. The Chao Phraya 
river valley is rich in natural and highly sought products such as eagle 
wood, lacquer, oleoresin, teak and pepper. Near Lop Buri, iron deposits 
were exploited (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2004: 100), while the Watthana 
plain contains rich enough lead, tin and gold veins (Geiringer 1891: 
27-34). There are again tin and iron on the Khorat Plateau (Dagens 
1994: 46), which is also the hub of huge salt production related to the 
salted fish traffic between Phimai and Angkor (Hendrickson 2007: 244-
245). However, it appears highly unlikely that the economic power 
of Cambodia was based on trading. The geographical position of 
the kingdom, enclosed between mountain barriers which do not help 
transversal itineraries, and disadvantaged by a very short coastline, does 
not facilitate its integration into the intense activity which increased in 
Southeast Asia from the tenth century onwards. From the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries on, the Khmer rulers, must have been fully aware of 
the problem, and presumably tried to remedy the situation and to assert 
themselves in trading networks. From the economic point of view, the 
expansionist policy in which they got involved, by coercive ways or by 
the changing of alliances, had a doubly specific purpose: firstly, to annex 
territories rich in natural resources which they needed and secondly, to 
conquer maritime accesses. In the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the 
different attempts by the Khmer kings were not particularly successful. 
Therefore, Jayavarman VII adopted a different policy. He understood 
that it was not enough to conquer accesses to the sea in order to integrate 
maritime networks, but that he should also extend his domination over 
all the communications networks and especially on the water routes 
connected to the three main basins which are those of the Chao Phraya 
river, the Mun river and the Tonle Sap, part of the Mekong river’s 
system (Multzer o’Naghten 2011: 363-368).
To impose itself in the circle of major trading powers, the region 
of Cambodia needed to turn its continental central position within 
mainland Southeast Asia to its advantage. The movement of goods in 
the interior (harvested products and manufactured goods) could only 
flow according to specific routes and crossing points. By controlling 
these strategic points and by levying customs duties, the kingdom might 
have flourished significantly under the condition that it kept control of 
the entire network. In this context, land use planning was organised on 
control points and crossroads situated at intersections of land routes and 
rivers. In the light of this analysis, the geographical location of some 
of Jayavarman VII’s foundations can be better understood (Multzer 
o’Naghten 2011: 368-374). 
The first key point located in the most western region is the great 
temple of Mueang Sing, connecting the western routes related to the 
Ayeyarwady (Irrawaddy) river basin via the Three Pagodas Pass. There 
are also those sites deployed in the lower Chao Phraya river valley 
towards Ratchaburi and Phetchaburi. These cities, firmly established 
in the commercial traffic for centuries, offered, moreover, a real interest 
because they led to the sea through the Gulf of Thailand. From 
Phetchaburi in particular, which functioned as an inland port overlooking 
the Gulf of Thailand, it was possible to join the cities situated on the 
northeastern coast of this gulf and the South China Sea (Wolters 1960) 
[Map 2]. Going north, from Kosinarai to Sukhothai, “Bayon style” 
monuments and sculptures confirm, from place to place, Jayavarman 
VII’s dominion over the Chao Phraya river basin. The Khmer presence 
at Lop Buri assured the rule over the junction between the Chao Phraya 
river valley and that of the Pasak river, space controlled to the north by 
Sukhothai (Lunet de Lajonquière 1904: 246). On the other hand, Lop 
Buri also ensures the transition, via the Chai Badan’s threshold, between 
the Chao Phraya river valley and that of the Mun river which extends 
east up to the Mekong and the Champassak plain. On the Khorat 
Plateau, around Prasat Hin Phimai and Prasat Phanom Wan, two main 
poles of communication of the region, hospital chapels and “houses of 
Fire” are located in the vicinity of the most currently used Dangrek’s 
passes, such as Chong Ta Ko and Chong Samet [Map 1]. In addition, 
there is the pass at Pak Chong leading to Prachin Buri province, and 
that of Chong Ta Ko, enabling the reach of the Watthana’s threshold, 
the single passage in the plain giving access to the Tonle Sap and 
Angkor. Prachin Buri’s area, where remains of the time of Jayavarman 
VII has been discovered, especially at Prasat Sa Morakot, is another 
hub of this network which communicates by waterways with Lop Buri 
and leads to the Gulf of Thailand via the Bang Pakong’s valley, another 
commercial corridor (Lunet de Lajonquière 1909: 245).The location 
of some of Jayavarman VII’s most important monuments seem to fit 
judiciously in the mesh of a vast communication network much used 
by merchants for centuries, covering a wide area where traffic between 
isolated regions can be made only through some corridors and narrow 
passages. The control of these roads and the levy of taxes (nature tolls) 
certainly assured to the ruler in command, a source of considerable 
revenue.13
Conclusion 
King Jayavarman VII has often been seen, paradoxically, as a 
megalomaniac despot who led his country to ruin, on the one hand, 
and, on the other hand, as a Buddhist and altruistic sovereign concerned 
with the happiness and welfare of his subjects. 
The study of the considerable archaeological material dating from 
his time analysed on the scale of the territory under his control, the 
largest ever area that a Khmer kingdom has experienced in its history 
[Map 2], reveals other aspects of this reign that reflect the real historical 
and human dimensions of this king. In this context, the position held by 
pre-modern Thailand in this vast empire illustrates perfectly the main 
guidelines of the royal policy based on a highly efficient system of land 
use planning that had remarkably integrated all variables, geographical, 
human and economic, in order to ensure its optimal management. 
In this centralised organisation, large urban centres played the role 
of administrative, economic, and religious relays of the political power. 
All were connected to the capital city, Angkor (Yaśodharapura), by a 
network of overland or fluvial communication channels which allowed

--- PAGE 210 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
417
416
control over the provinces, but also trade flows transiting through 
strategic accesses, and contributed to the wealth development and the 
kingdom’s prosperity. Moreover, the numerous Buddhist foundations 
testify to the royal policy conducted in the field of religion as much 
for the spread of Buddhism as for federating the dominated territories 
under this religious royal patronage.
Finally, by means of this policy implemented throughout his 
kingdom, and by controlling sites and regions of significant importance, 
politically, economically or religiously, Jayavarman VII hoisted 
his empire up among the greatest powers of Asia at the turn of the 
thirteenth century.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Vincent Lefèvre for reading and commenting this text, 
to Nicolas Revire for providing pictures, maps and further assistance 
with Thai references, to Pierre Pichard and Christophe Pottier for our 
enriching exchanges and their valuable advices. 
Appendix 1:  
List of “Hospital Chapels” in Thailand [see Map 1]
No. 1: Prasat Hin Mueang Kao or Prasat Mueang Kao 
(IK. 452), Sung Noen district, Nakhon Ratchasima 
province.
No. 2: Prasat Ban Prasat (IK. 439), Non Sung district, 
Nakhon Ratchasima province.
No. 3: Prang Phon Songkhram (IK. 441),  
Non Sung district, Nakhon Ratchasima province.
No. 4: Prang Ku or Wat Ku (IK. 457), Mueang district, 
Chaiyaphum province. 
No. 5: Prang Ku (unregistered), Ban Thaen district, 
Chaiyaphum province.
No. 6: Ku Kaeo (Cisark no. 7620), Mueang district, 
Khon Kaen province.
No. 7: Ku Praphachai (Cisark no. 7619), Nam Phong 
district, Khon Kaen province.
No. 8: Ku Kaeo or Ku Kaeo Ban Chit (Cisark  
no. 6214), Ku Kaeo district, Udon Thani province.
No. 9: Ku Phanna (Cisark no. 3889), Sawang  
Daen Din district, Sakon Nakhon province.
No. 10: Ku Ban Khewa (Cisark no.1190),  
Mueang district, Maha Sarakham province.
No. 11: Prang Ku (IK. 357), Thawat Buri district,  
Roi Et province
No. 12: Ku Santarat (IK. 367), Na Dun district,  
Maha Sarakham province.
No. 13: Ku Phon Rakhang (IK. 363),  
Kaset Wisai district, Roi Et province.
No. 14: Ku Khanthanam or Ku Ban Dan (IK. 358), 
Phon Sai district, Roi Et province.
No. 15: Prasat Chom Phra (IK. 380),  
Chom Phra district, Surin province.
No. 16: Prasat (Sa) Kamphaeng Noi (IK. 372),  
Mueang district, Si Sa Ket province.
No. 17: Prasat Ban Chaniang (IK. 378),  
Mueang district, Surin province.
No. 18: Prasat (Ban) Chang Pi (IK. 381),  
Sikhoraphum district, Surin province.
No. 19: Prasat Tham Chan or Prasat Ban Samo  
(IK. 393), Prang Ku district, Si Sa Ket province.
No. 20: Prasat Ban Prasat or Prasat Kangaen  
(IK. 385), Sangkha district, Surin province.
No. 21: Prasat Ta Muean Tot (IK. 373), Phanom Dong 
Rak district, Surin province.
No. 22: Kuti Ruesi Ban Khok Mueang/Mueang Tam 
(IK. 404), Prakhon Chai district, Buri Ram province.
No. 23: Kuti Ruesi Nong Bua Rai or Bua Lai/ 
Phanom Rung (IK. 402), Prakhon Chai district, 
Buri Ram province.
No. 24: Prasat Khok Ngiu or Prasat Hin Khok Prasat 
(IK. 410), Pakham district, Buri Ram province.
No. 25: Prang Khon Buri (IK. 422), Khon Buri district, 
Nakhon Ratchasima province.
No. 26: Prasat Sa Phleng (IK. 433), Chok Chai district, 
Nakhon Ratchasima province.
No. 27: Prang Ban Prang (Cisark no. 7578), Huai 
Thalaeng district, Nakhon Ratchasima province. 
No. 28: Kuti Ruesi (Noi) (Cisark no. 7577),  
Phimai district, Nakhon Ratchasima province.
No. 29: Kuti Ruesi (IK. 420), Ban Mai Chaiyaphot 
district, Buri Ram province.
No. 30: Prasat Nang Ram (IK. 445), Prathai district, 
Nakhon Ratchasima province.
No. 31: Prasat Ban Noi (Cisark no. 7656),  
Watthana Nakhon district, Sa Kaeo province.
No. 32: Prasat Sa Morakot (Cisark no. 1311),  
Si Mahosot district, Prachin Buri province.
Appendix 2:  
List of “Houses of Fire” in Thailand [see Maps 1-2]
No. 33: Prasat Ta Muean (Cisark no.7575),  
Kap Choeng district [formerly  
Phanom Dong Rak], Surin province.
No. 34: Prasat Thamo (IK. 400), Ban Kruat district, 
Buri Ram province.
No. 35: Prasat Ban Bu/Phanom Rung (Cisark  
no. 2422), Prakhon Chai district, Buri Ram 
province.
No. 36: Prasat Khok Prasat [formerly Prasat  
Nong Khong] (Cisark no.6048), Nang Rong 
district, Buri Ram province.
No. 37: Prasat Nong Prong [formerly Prasat  
Nong Plong] (IK.413), Nang Rong district,  
Buri Ram province.
No. 38: Prasat Nong Ta Pleng [formerly Prasat Sebo] 
(IK. 415), Nang Rong district, Buri Ram province.
No. 39: Prasat Huai Khaen (Cisark no.7573),  
Huai Thalaeng district, Nakhon Ratchasima 
province.
No. 40: Prasat Ku Sila (Cisark no.7571),  
Huai Thalaeng district, Nakhon Ratchasima 
province.
No. 41: Phimai (?), mentioned in K. 908,  
Phimai district, Nakhon Ratchasima province.
No. 42: Kosinarai (unregistered), Ban Pong district, 
Nakhon Pathom province [Map 2].
Appendix 3:  
List of “Hospital Edicts” in Thailand [cf. Appendix 1]
No. I: Prang Ku (K. 402), Mueang district, 
Chaiyaphum province [Appendix 1, no. 4].
No. II: Ku Kaeo (K. 1170), Mueang district,  
Khon Kaen province [Appendix 1, no. 6].
No. III: Prasat Khok Ngiu (K. 386), Pakham district, 
Buri Ram province [Appendix 1, no. 24].
No. IV: Prang Khon Buri (K. 387), Khon Buri district, 
Nakhon Ratchasima province [Appendix 1,  
no. 25].
No. V: Prasat Phanom Wan (K. 395), Mueang district, 
Nakhon Ratchasima province. 
No. VI: Prasat Hin Phimai (K. 952), Phimai district, 
Nakhon Ratchasima province [Appendix 1,  
no. 28].
No. VII: Prasat Ta Muean Tot (K. 375), Phanom Dong 
Rak district, Surin province [Appendix 1, no. 21].
No. VIII: Unknown provenance (SR 4 = K. 1115), 
Prasat district, Surin province 
No. IX: Unknown provenance (SR 6), Mueang district, 
Surin province.
No. X: Ku Khanthanam (unregistered), Phon Sai 
district, Roi Et province [Appendix 1, no. 14].
No. XI: Ku Phon Rakhang (unregistered), Kaset Wisai 
district, Roi Et province [Appendix 1, no. 13].
No. XII: Prasat Tham Chan (unregistered), Prang Ku 
district, Si Sa Ket province [Appendix 1, no. 19].

--- PAGE 211 ---
HedWige mulTzer o’nagHTen
419
418
Endnotes
1 
Several Sanskrit inscriptions of the Khmer prince 
Citrasena (later King Mahendravarman) have been 
found in different provinces of northeast Thailand. 
See Vickery (1998: 71-75); also Lorrillard, this 
volume.
2 
This essay is drawn from my doctoral dissertation 
submitted at Paris 3-Sorbonne nouvelle under the 
supervision of Michel Jacq-Hergoualc’h (Multzer 
o’Naghten 2011: 125-416). 
3 
Contra Groslier (1980: 41-42). 
4 
One hundred and two hospital chapels are quoted 
in the Ta Prohm stele (K. 273, st. 117) and one 
hundred and twenty-one “houses of Fire” appear 
in the Preah Khan stele (K. 908, st. 126).
5 
See Appendix 1, nos. 7, 8, 9, 20, and 27. 
6 
See Appendix 1, nos. 1, 5, 13, 14, and 23. 
Rungrot, however, erroneously identifies chapel 
no. 5 as IK. 433 which actually corresponds to 
chapel no. 26. To be totally accurate, most of the 
aforementioned monuments have already been 
identified by B.-P. Groslier during his investigations 
conducted in Thailand between 1973 and 1975 
(Groslier 1980), in collaboration with the Fine 
Arts Department of Thailand (FAD). Several 
FAD reports also provide relevant surveys and 
information, but unfortunately they are written 
in Thai and are, therefore, inaccessible to most 
researchers who do not read this language. 
7 
Claude Jacques (1993: 39) enumerates seven 
steles [Appendix 3, nos. I-VII] and an additional 
one for which he did not know the name, located 
near Surin. Jacques perhaps referred to one of 
the inscriptions registered in Thailand as SR 4 
(K. 1115) or SR 6 with no precise provenance 
[Appendix 3, nos. VIII-IX]. More recent 
discoveries have also been made since the 1990s. 
Two stone edicts were found in 2002 in Roi Et 
province, respectively at Ku Khanthanam, Phon 
Sai district, and Ku Phon Rakhang, Kaset Wisai 
district (Phimphan 2546; Appendix 3, nos. X-XI), 
and one edict of the third category was excavated 
in 2008 near Prasat Tham Chan (IK. 393) in 
Prang Ku district, Si Sa Ket province (Kongkaeo 
2553; Appendix 3, no. XII). I thank Nicolas Revire 
for these new references published only in Thai. 
  8 These are kept at the Prachin Buri National 
Museum and received the following K. accession 
numbers for the inscriptions: K. 1052 for the mirror 
support in crescent shaped, K. 1053 for the conch, 
K. 1054 and K. 1055 for the round and oval bowls, 
and K. 1056 for the tetrapod support of a conch.
  9 K. 1052 and K. 1056, from Ban Khok Pip, are 
both donations made from Jayavarman VII, 
respectively in 1192 and 1193 CE (Boisselier 1972: 
46-47), as well as K. 973, offered in 1192 CE at the 
hospital named Vīrendrapura, today Prasat Khok 
Ngiu (Cœdès 1937-66: VII, 154). K. 1054 and 
K. 1055, from Ban Khok Pip (Prasat Sa Morakot), 
are dated 1187-88 CE (Boisselier 1972: 47). 
10 Woodward (1994-95) has proposed to identify 
images of Jayabuddhamahānātha with the 
“radiating” Lokeśvara. This hypothesis is not really 
convincing, however, for a Bodhisattva cannot 
be considered a Buddha in Cambodia. See also 
Jacques (2005).
11 I thank Christophe Pottier for drawing my 
attention to this fact.
12 Jacques notes that only the hospital stele found in 
Phimai belongs to the second category.
13 Christoval de Jaque remarks that “the Laos paid 
tribute of one tenth of their mines, herds, and 
agricultural products, which one should probably 
interpret as a customs duty levied on merchandise 
passing through Cambodia” (Groslier 2006: 123). 
References
Aymonier, Étienne 
1901  Le Cambodge II. Les provinces 
Siamoises. Paris: Ernest Leroux. 
Boisselier, Jean 
1965  Récentes recherches 
archéologiques en Thaïlande. 
Rapport préliminaire de mission 
1965 (25 juil.- 28 nov. 1964).  
Arts Asiatiques 12: 125-174.
1969  Travaux de la mission 
archéologique française en 
Thaïlande II. Rapport sommaire 
de la mission 1965 (juil.- nov. 
1966). Arts Asiatiques 20: 47-98. 
1972  Travaux de la mission 
archéologique française en 
Thaïlande (juil.- nov. 1966).  
Arts Asiatiques 25: 28-90.
1974  La sculpture en Thaïlande. 
Fribourg: Office du Livre. [With 
contributions of J.M. Beurdeley]
Cœdès, George 
1906  La stèle de Ta-Prohm. 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 6(2): 44-82. 
1940  Études cambodgiennes. 
XXXIV. Les hôpitaux de 
Jayavarman VII. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 40(2):  
344-347.
1941  La stèle du Práḥ Khằn 
d’Aṅkor. Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 41: 255-302. 
1960  Le portrait dans l’art khmèr. 
Arts Asiatiques 7(3): 179-198.
1937-66  Inscriptions du Cambodge. 
Eight Volumes. Hanoi-Paris:  
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Dagens, Bruno 
1993  Centralisme et architecture : 
les hôpitaux de Jayavarman VII en 
Thaïlande. In Silpakorn University 
(ed.), Deuxième symposium franco-
thaï : récentes recherches en archéologie 
en Thaïlande. Bangkok: Silpakorn 
University, pp. 24-35.
1994  Recherches archéologiques 
franco-thaï dans la Thaïlande du 
Nord-Est. Les fouilles de Muang 
Champasi. Compte-rendu de l’Académie 
des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres 138: 
43-67.
Geiringer, G.  
1891  Excursion dans les provinces 
de Péchim et de Korat, royaume de 
Siam. Bulletin de la Société des Études 
Indochinoises (1891): 27-34.
Groslier, Bernard-Philippe 
1980  Prospection des sites khmers 
du Siam. In Coûts et profits en 
archéologie. Sophia-Antipolis: CNRS, 
Centre régional de publications, 
pp. 33-61. [Reprinted in Mélanges 
sur l’archéologie du Cambodge, Paris: 
École française d’Extrême-Orient, 
1997, pp. 189-220].
2006  Angkor and Cambodia in the 
Sixteenth Century. Bangkok: Orchid 
Press. [Originally published as 
Angkor et le Cambodge au XVIe siècle, 
Paris: PUF, 1958]
Hendrickson, Mitch 
2007  Arteries of Empire. An 
Operational Study of Transport and 
Communications in Angkor, South-
East Asia (9th to 15th Centuries 
CE). Doctoral Dissertation. 
Sydney: University of Sydney. 
[Unpublished]
2010  Historic Routes to Angkor: 
Development of the Khmer Road 
System (Ninth to Thirteenth 
Centuries AD) in Mainland 
Southeast Asia. Antiquity 84:  
480-496.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel 
2004  Le Siam. Paris: Les Belles 
Lettres.
Jacques, Claude 
1993  Les repères de l’Empire de 
Jayavarman VII en Thaïlande.  
In Silpakorn University (ed.), 
Deuxième symposium franco-thaï : 
récentes recherches en archéologie en 
Thaïlande. Bangkok: Silpakorn 
University, pp. 36-41.
2005  Deux problèmes posés par 
l’inscription de la stèle de Praḥ 
Khan K. 908. Aséanie 15: 11-32.
Jarunee Inshurdchai 
2534  Phra phothisat lokesuan 
pleng rasami: nai phiphithaphan 
sathan haeng chat ratchaburi/ 
A Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara 
Image with Rays of Light in the 
National Museum of Changwat 
Ratchaburi. Silpakorn Journal 34(3): 
23-36. [In Thai and English;  
1991 CE]
Kongkaeo Wiraprachak 
2553  Charuek prasat tham chan 
(The Tham Chan Sanctuary 
Inscription). Silpakorn Journal 53(4): 
33-45. [In Thai with English 
Abstract; 2010 CE] 
Lunet de Lajonquière,  
Étienne Edmond 
1902  Inventaire descriptif des 
monuments du Cambodge, volume I. 
Paris: Ernest Leroux. 
1907  Inventaire descriptif des 
monuments du Cambodge, volume II. 
Paris: Ernest Leroux.
1909  Le domaine archéologique 
du Siam. Bulletin de la Commission 
Archéologique de l’Indochine (1909): 
188-262.
Mollerup, Asger 
2012  Ancient Khmer Sites in  
Eastern Thailand. Bangkok:  
White Lotus Press. 
Multzer o’Naghten, Hedwige 
2011  Les fondations de Jayavarman VII : 
l’aménagement d’un territoire et son 
interprétation historique et religieuse. 
Doctoral Dissertation. Paris: 
Paris 3-Sorbonne Nouvelle. 
[Unpublished]
Phasook Indrawooth 
2009  Un antique royaume 
urbanisé de Thaïlande. In Baptiste, 
Pierre & Zéphir, Thierry (eds), 
Dvāravatī : aux sources du bouddhisme 
en Thaïlande. Paris: Réunion des 
musées nationaux, pp. 31-45.
Phimphan 
Phaibunwangcharoen 
2546  Phop mai charuek phra chao 
chaiyoworaman thi chet ik song lak 
thi changwat roi et (The Discovery 
of Two Inscriptions of Jayavarman 
VII in Roi Et). Silpakorn Journal 
46(4): 44-49. [In Thai with English 
Abstract; 2003 CE] 
Pichard, Pierre 
1976  Pimay : étude architecturale 
du temple. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Pottier, Christophe 
1997  Nouvelles données sur les 
couvertures en plomb à Angkor. 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 84: 183-201.
Rungrot Phiromanukun 
2547  Arokhayasan: khwamru 
thua pai lae kho sang ket bueang 
tan (Arogyasala: The Hospitals 
of Jayavarman VII). Muang Boran 
30(3): 15-54. [In Thai with English 
Abstract; 2004 CE] 
Smitthi Siribhadra,  
Moore, Elisabeth H. & 
Freeman, Michael 
1992  Palaces of the Gods: Khmer Art 
and Architecture in Thailand. Bangkok: 
River Books.
Suriyavudh Suksvast, M.R. 
2526a  Prasat mueang sing  
(Prasat Muang Singh, Part 1). 
Muang Boran 9(2): 90-103. [In Thai 
with English Summary; 1983 CE] 
2526b  Prasat mueang sing  
(Prasat Muang Singh, Part 2). 
Muang Boran 9(3): 102-111.  
[In Thai with English Summary; 
1983 CE] 
Vickery, Michael 
1998  Society, Economics, and  
Politics in Pre-Angkor Cambodia: The 
7th-8th Centuries. Tokyo: The Centre 
for East Asian Cultural Studies for 
Unesco/The Toyo Bunko.
Wolters, oliver W. 
1960  Chên-Li-Fu. A State of the 
Gulf of Siam at the Beginning of 
the 13th Century. Journal of Siam 
Society 48(2): 1-35. 
Woodward, Hiram, Jr 
1994-95  The 
Jayabuddhamahānātha Images of 
Cambodia. The Journal of the Walters 
Art Gallery 52/53: 105-111.
2011  Cambodian Images of 
Bhaisajyaguru. In Bunker, Emma 
C. & Latchford, Douglas (eds), 
Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations 
of the Past. Chicago: Art Media 
Resources, pp. 497-502. 
Websites 
Carte interactive des sites 
archéologiques khmers (Cisark):  
http://www.site-archeologique-
khmer.org
The Inscriptions in Thailand 
Database Project:  
http://www.sac.or.th/databases/
inscriptions

--- PAGE 212 ---
421
420
Contributors
The list of contributors follows the order of their appearance in the volume. 
Chris Baker has a doctorate from the University 
of Cambridge where he taught Asian history and 
politics. He has lived in Thailand for over 30 years. 
With Pasuk Phongpaichit, he has written Thailand: 
Economy and Politics (OUP, 1995), A History of 
Thailand (CUP, 2005), Thaksin (Silkworm Books, 
2004), and translated the epic poem, The Tale of 
Khun Chang Khun Phaen (Silkworm Books, 2010). He 
is honourary editor of the Journal of the Siam Society.
Hiram Woodward, Curator Emeritus of Asian 
Art at the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, 
Maryland, is the chief author of Sacred Sculpture 
of Thailand: The Alexander B. Griswold Collection, The 
Walters Art Museum (River Books, 1997) and author 
of The Art and Architecture of Thailand: From Prehistoric 
Times through the Thirteenth Century (Brill, 2003).
Trongjai Hutangkura received his doctorate 
in 2012 from the University of Nice-Sophia 
Antipolis with a dissertation on archaeology using 
the application of palynology, geomorphology 
and archaeology to investigate the chronology of 
phytogeography of the Lower Central Plain of 
Thailand in the Holocene period. He currently 
works as a full-time researcher at the Sirindhorn 
Anthropology Centre in Bangkok. 
Bérénice Bellina is a member of the CNRS in 
France. Her research focuses on exchange and 
cultural transfer processes around the Indian Ocean 
and between South and Southeast Asia. Since 
2005, she has been the director of the Thai-French 
archaeological mission in the upper Thai-Malay 
Peninsula that investigates the co-evolution of the 
different populations and ecosystems in relation to 
long-distance exchange from the early/mid-first 
millennium BCE to the late first millennium CE. 
Ian C. Glover is the Emeritus Reader in Southeast 
Asian archaeology at the Institute of Archaeology, 
University College London. He studied at the 
University of Sydney and the Australian National 
University where he undertook field research in 
East Timor, Sulawesi, Sumatra, Thailand, and 
India and continues research on the Champa 
civilisation of Vietnam. He has interests in glass 
and metal-working and in early trade networks 
linking South and Southeast Asia.
Shahnaj Husne Jahan is a professor and director 
of the Centre for Archaeological Studies at the 
University of Liberal Arts Bangladesh. She is 
involved in research in the field of archaeology, 
history and culture of South and Southeast Asia 
and is currently excavating the archaeological site 
of Bhitargarh, a fortified settlement in Panchagarh 
district, Bangladesh. She has three books and 
several research papers on archaeology and art 
history to her credit.
Brigitte Borell earned her doctorate from 
Heidelberg University in classical archaeology. 
She first worked as a researcher for the German 
Archaeological Institute (DAI) and the Institute for 
Classical Archaeology of Heidelberg University 
before moving to Southeast Asia where she lived 
for several years due to family reasons. She is 
currently working and living near Heidelberg as an 
independent scholar. Her research interest is in the 
Maritime Silk Road in the early centuries CE. 
Boonyarit Chaisuwan graduated in archaeology 
from Silpakorn University, Bangkok. He first 
worked as a curator at the History and Military 
Museum, Ministry of Defense, before being 
transferred to the FAD, Ministry of Culture, as 
an archaeologist in Suphan Buri, Ayutthaya and 
Phuket provinces. He is currently the head of the 
Mueang Sing Historical Park in Kanchanaburi 
province. Together with Rarai Naiyawat, he has 
co-authored Thung Tuk: A Settlement Linking Together 
the Maritime Silk Route (Trio Creation, 2009).
Thanik Lertcharnrit (formerly known as Sawang 
Lertrit) received a doctorate in anthropology from 
Washington State University. He is an associate 
professor of archaeology at the Department of 
Archaeology, Silpakorn University in Bangkok, 
and an adjunct professor at Mahidol University 
International 
College. 
He 
has 
conducted 
excavations in central Thailand for the past ten 
years, including at the sites of Sap Champa and 
Phromthin Tai in Lop Buri province to recover 
archaeological remains dating from the late 
prehistoric to the early historic periods.
Himanshu Prabha Ray is at present chairperson, 
National Monuments Authority, Ministry of 
Culture, New Delhi. She was recently honoured 
with the Anneliese Maier award of the Humboldt 
Foundation for 2013. Until August 2012, she was 
Professor at the Centre for Historical Studies, 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, which 
she joined in 1980. Her research interests include 
the archaeology of religion in Asia, especially 
Buddhism and maritime history and archaeology 
of the Indian Ocean.
Paul A. Lavy is assistant professor of South and 
Southeast Asian art history at the University 
of Hawai’i, Manoā. His research interests and 
publications focus on the Hindu and Buddhist 
artistic traditions of early mainland Southeast Asia, 
and particularly on the pre-Angkorian period. He is 
currently writing a book on the early Brahmanical 
sculpture of Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, and 
Vietnam.  
Wannasarn Noonsuk was awarded the Ananda 
Mahidol Foundation scholarship to pursue his 
graduate studies in the United States where he 
received his doctorate in art history and archaeology 
from Cornell University in 2012. He is now teaching 
at Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, 
where he is also directing the Research Unit for 
Archaeology. He recently published Tambralinga and 
Nakhon Si Thammarat: Early Kingdoms on the Isthmus 
of Southeast Asia (Rajabhat Nakhon Si Thammarat 
University Press, 2013).
Michel Lorrillard received his doctorate from the 
École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris. He joined 
the EFEO in 1997 and was appointed director 
of the Chiang Mai (1999-2000) and Vientiane 
(2000-2011) centres. Between 2001 and 2009, he 
conducted systematic surveys across the provinces 
of Laos, leading to the discovery of numerous 
manuscripts, inscriptions, and archaeological 
remains linked mainly with Khmer and Mon 
cultures of the middle Mekong valley preceding 
the foundation of the first Lao kingdom. He is 
currently pursuing his research in France.
Elizabeth H. Moore is Professor in the 
Department of History of Art and Archaeology, 
SOAS, University of London. She has published 
extensively on the archaeology of Myanmar, 
Thailand and Cambodia. Her most recent 
monograph is Early Landscapes of Myanmar (River 
Books, 2007).
San Win is a member of the Historical Research 
Commission and teaches at the University of 
Yangon, Department of Archaeology, where he 
received his Master’s degree. Recent publications, 
in Myanmar language, include Research on 
Suvaṇṇabhūmi (Kyonma Nge Press, 2013).
Nicolas Revire graduated from the University 
of Paris 3-Sorbonne nouvelle in France. He 
is a full-time lecturer at the Faculty of Liberal 
Arts, Thammasat University, since 2003, and a 
guest lecturer at Mahachulalongkorn Buddhist 
University, Bangkok. He specialises in the early art 
and archaeology of Southeast Asia with a research 
focus on Buddhist iconography and Dvāravatī. 
He has contributed several articles and reviews in 
the Journal of the Siam Society and other academic 
journals, and translated numerous scholarly 
publications from Thai and English into French. 
Pinna Indorf, now an independent scholar, began 
her career with a degree in architecture from the 
University of Texas. After practising in the United 
States for about one year, the Philippines for two 
and nearly ten in Thailand, she earned a doctorate 
at the National University of Singapore where she 
taught and did research for twenty-five years in the 
School of Architecture, focusing on the history of 
traditional architecture of Southeast Asia (Hindu, 
Buddhist and indigenous) and the relationship 
between culture and architecture.
Wesley Clarke is a registered professional 
archaeologist with forty years experience in 
the American Midwest. His first Southeast 
Asian research was conducted in 1974 in 
northern Thailand for an undergraduate thesis 
in anthropology at Prescott College (Prescott, 
Arizona). Since 2003, he has been involved 
with 
archaeological 
research 
in 
Cambodia 
and Thailand, most recently focusing on issues 
surrounding the Dvāravatī cultural concept. He 
has a Master’s degree in Southeast Asian studies 
from Ohio University (Athens), and is on the staff 
of The Castle Museum (Marietta, Ohio).
Matthew D. Gallon served as the director of the 
Kamphaeng Saen Archaeology Project from 2009-
2010. The project investigated the chronology, 
organisation and function of the fifth to ninth century 
CE centre of Kamphaeng Saen, located in central 
Thailand. He has also conducted archaeological 
field research on early urban communities in India, 
China and Mongolia. He received a doctorate in 
anthropological archaeology from the University of 
Michigan in 2013. 
Stephen A. Murphy completed his doctorate 
at SOAS, University of London in 2011, after 
which he spent two years as a research associate 
at the Department of Asian Art, the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, New York. He is currently a 
research fellow at The Asian Civilisations Museum, 
Singapore. His research focuses primarily on the 
early development of Buddhist material culture in 
northeast Thailand and Laos. 
Pia Conti is an independent scholar based in 
London. She graduated at the University of 
Zurich and worked in the English Department as 
a wissenschaftliche Assistentin. She subsequently 
took a degree in art and archaeology at SOAS in 
London where she occasionally teaches.
Hedwige Multzer o’Naghten completed her 
doctorate at the University of Paris 3-Sorbonne 
nouvelle in 2011. She later joined the research unit 
UMR 7528 (Monde iranien et indien) and also 
works as an associate researcher with CREOPS 
(Paris 4-Sorbonne). She specialises in Khmer art 
history and is currently pursuing her research on 
the Buddhism of Jayavarman VII from the angle of 
iconography through a comparative study between 
temples and sculpture (in partnership with the 
Centre for Khmer Studies).
Contributors420-421.indd   All Pages
11/25/56 BE   11:37 AM

--- PAGE 213 ---
general index
423
422
General Index
Numbers in bold refer to illustrations
 
Abhayagiri  383-4, 394 n. 3
Abhayagirivihāra  141
ābhiṣeka 275-7, 288
ablution base(s)/basin(s), 
see also snānadroṇī(s)  140, 
180-1, 182-3, 192, 195, 
199, 201
Ādibuddha, see Buddha(s)
Afghanistan  93
agate pendants  77
Agnipurāṇa  158
Ajanta  275
Ajivika  135
akṣamāla, see rosary
Akṣobhya, see Buddha(s)
Ak Yum  209
Alagankulam  150 n. 1
Alexandros  110-1
algal remain(s)  44-6, 47, 48
alluvial/alluvium  219, 321-2, 
413
alluvial fans 36-7
alms round  241, 243
Amarāvatī  93, 138, 141, 146, 
160, 285, 313
ambassadorial mission, see also 
embassy  179
amethyst  102
Amitābha, see Buddha(s)
Amnat Charoen province  
200
Amogasiddhi, see Buddha(s)  
382
amphitheatre  143
ancestor cult  158
ancestor stones  277
Andaman Sea  48, 79-80, 
100, 177
Andhra Pradesh  142, 144, 
146-7, 159, 161, 268 n. 29, 
275, 285, 287
Andun  111
anemia  127
An Giang province  154
Angkor  155, 188-90, 195, 
197, 204, 286, 344, 375, 
378, 382, 384-5, 392, 
397, 399, 402, 408, 410-2, 
414-5
Angkor Borei  204, 211,  
268 n. 28
Angkor Thom  23
Angkorian period/style  19, 
193, 203, 206, 212
Ang Thong province  33-4, 
53, 59, 61
Anhui  77 
animal(s)  126-7
animism  9, 129
Annamite range  192-3, 200, 
202, 205
anthill  355
Anurādhapura  145, 150 n. 1
apsidal  142
Arabian Peninsula  107
Arabic trade  76
Arakan, see Rakhine
Āraṇyakas (texts)  158
Aranyaprathet  408
archaeobotanical research  85
arhat  285
Arikamedu  83, 107, 110, 
146, 150 n. 1
armband  163, 340
ārogyaśāla, see also chapel(s) of 
hospital(s)  399
Arthaśastra  144, 147
ascetic(s), see also ṛṣi/śramaṇa  
81, 135, 138-9, 148, 342, 
359, 362
Ashmolean Museum (Oxford) 
268 n. 34, 378
Aśoka/Asoka, see King
āśrama(s)  194, 380
Assa (prince)  227
astrology  144
astronomy  144
Atiśa  268 n. 37
Attopeu province  187, 191-2, 
207, 209
augur coring  337
Austro-Asiatic  190
avādana(s)  243
Avalokiteśvara  174-5, 376-9, 
380, 386, 388, 392, 400, 
403-4, 406
ayakas, see also column(s)/
pillar(s)  145
Ayetthama  223, 225, 234
Ayutthaya  25, 33, 37, 62, 
121, 217, 222, 287, 324-5, 
335, 354
chronicles  61, 64
Bacchic scene  83
Bacchus  101-4
bael fruit  165
Bagan (Pagan)  20, 228, 355
Bago (Pegu)  223, 225-9, 231, 
233-4
Balarāma  163
Bamboo Grove  382
Banavasi  343
Ban Bana  177, 180-5
Ban Chale  177, 179
Ban Don Seng  201
Ban Don Ta Phet  75-6, 78, 
91, 93, 122, 128
Ban Fang Daeng  192
Ban Halang  192
Ban Huei Na  196
Ban Kaeng Toi  198
Ban Kang  202
Ban Khok Khong  195
Ban Khok Pip  399, 402, 406, 
408, 413, 418 n. 9
Ban Khum Kham  192
Ban Mai Chaimongkon  128
Ban Mueang Phin  202
Ban Na Katang  202
Ban Na Khi Khuai  195
Ban Na Khu  201, 204, 207
Ban Na Moang  202
Ban Na Moang Noi  199
Ban Na Pha Bang  200
Ban Na Tan Se  200
Ban Nai Ma  318, 323
Ban Non Chat  353, 362
Ban Non Hai  201
Ban Non Savang  202
Ban Non Wat  205
Ban Nong Hang  360, 362-3
Ban Nong Song Hong  57, 
59, 62
Ban Okat Yai  200
Ban Phanna  411  
Ban Phumma Chedi  202
Ban Pong Manao  122, 125, 
128
Ban Prawae  177, 179
Ban Sakhae  187, 192, 209
Ban Saphang  195
Ban Sapoan  192
Ban Se Tha Moak  202
Ban Sikhai  202
Ban Sok  192, 207
Ban Tak Daet  202
Ban Tamyae  205
Ban Tatkum  193
Ban Thalat, see inscription(s)
Ban Tum Ye  202
Ban Wat  177, 179
Ban Xieng Vang Tha  203
Bang Khlak 1  72, 79
Bang Khlak 2  72, 79
Bang Kluai Nok  71-2, 79-85, 
99-100, 103
Bangkok  61-2, 64, 138, 313
Bangkok National Museum  
156, 242, 256-8, 277, 
375-6, 385
Bangladesh  356
Banteay Meanchey  197
Banteay Prei Nokor  205
Banteay Samre  385, 389
Banten  71
Baphuon (style)  390
barai  196, 203, 410
Basra  83
Bat Cum  378-9
Ba The  154
Bawbawgyi  358
Bay of Bangkok  149
Bay of Bengal  20, 70, 78,  
81, 85, 136, 144, 149, 
154, 413
Bay of Pattani  177
Bayon art/style  202, 397-8, 
400, 403-4, 413, 415
period  402
temple  156, 402
bead(s)  121, 125, 129, 146, 
222-3, 233
agate  122, 125
carnelian  122, 125
glass  75, 91, 121-6, 336
glass bead manufacture  83
gold  81, 125
Indo-Pacific  335
ivory  181
semi-precious stone(s)   
91, 146
stone(s)  100, 121-2, 125, 
324-5, 336
Begrām  93
Beikthano  222
bell, see ghaṇṭā
belt  161
beneficiary/beneficiaries  
242, 250-2
Bengal  147, 149
Bengali  376
Berenike  81
Betong district  177
bhadrapīṭha  84
Bhāgavata/Bhāgavatism  158
Bhaiṣajyaguru, see Buddha(s)
Bhakti  136
Bhārhut  93
bhāvanā, see  mental 
development
bhāvayantra  22
bhikṣu/bhikkhu, see also monk(s)  
81, 140, 266, 359
Bhinmāl  159, 161-2, 164
Bhita  74
Bhopal State Museum  161
bicephalous ornaments  76
Bihar  162
bilingualism  246-7, 262
Bingyi cave  219, 230, 234
Binnaka  83
birds  126
bivalve shell(s)  122, 124
Black Sea  93
bloomer-smelting  76
boa constrictor  227
boars  126
Bodhgayā  20, 138
bodhi  244, 276
sammāsambodhi  243
-tree  253, 255, 287, 358
Bodhisattva(s)  26, 162, 179, 
243-4, 276-7, 285-6, 338, 
340, 361-2, 382, 393,  
402-6, 418 n. 10
Bodhisattva cave  132-3, 
135, 140
Bo Ika, see inscription(s)
Boloven Plateau  192, 199
bone(s)  81, 126-7, 322
Borneo  149
bot, see ubosot
boundary stone(s), see also 
sema(s)  123
bovid species  126
bowl(s)  76, 83, 90, 91-6,  
102, 105-8, 124, 146, 402, 
418 n. 8
bracelet  163, 167, 325, 340
Brahmā  193, 287, 338
brāhmaṇa(s), see also Brahmin(s)  
135
Brāhmaṇas (texts)  158
Brahmanical 
communities  184
deities  9, 340 
image(s)/iconography/
sculpture(s)/symbols  
70, 78, 138, 153, 169, 
212, 375, 394 n. 6, 413
practices  326
shrine(s)/temple(s)/
remain(s)  142, 182, 376
Brahmanism  136, 175, 180, 
183, 274, 311, 359
brāhmapuṇya, see also merit   
267 n. 18
Brahmin(s)  24, 135-7, 144, 
148, 342, 359, 365
Brāhmī, see inscription(s)
brass  93, 315
brick(s)  125, 127, 139, 180-3, 
192, 198, 200-1, 221, 222, 
223, 230, 233, 287, 315, 
317, 325, 333-7, 340-1, 
344-5, 356
bronze  7, 81, 91, 107, 109, 
317, 335
anklet(s)  122, 124, 126, 338
bowl(s)  91-6, 122
bracelet(s)  121-2, 124, 324
conch  155
drum  205
earring(s)  121, 321, 324
high-tin bronze  76, 90, 91, 
124, 126
mould(s)  388-9, 394 n. 8
object(s)  129, 377
(toe, finger) ring(s)  121-2, 
124, 126
sculpture(s)  241, 375-7, 
385, 387, 390-1
Bronze Age  91, 128
burial(s)  122-3
late  122, 124
Brunei  149
Buddha(s)  17-8, 135, 149, 
179, 222, 241-2, 244, 253, 
255-6, 260, 262, 266 n. 4, 
285, 287, 378, 381-3, 385, 
390-1, 413
Ādibuddha  378, 389
Akṣobhya  382, 385-7, 
391-2
Amitābha  382, 387, 391, 
403-4
Amogasiddhi  382
Bhaiṣajyaguru/Medicine  
402, 404, 406-7
Jambūpati  231-2
life of  353, 360
Maitreya  140, 247
Ratnasambhava  382
Śākyamuni  245
Vairocana  277, 306 n. 9, 
378, 382, 387, 391
Buddhadasa Indapanno 
Archives  91
Buddhagupta  84, 149
Buddhahood, see also bodhi  
244, 390, 392
Buddha image(s)/statue(s)  
212, 221, 230, 244-6, 256, 
260-2, 267 n. 14, 311, 333, 
335, 341, 356, 377-8, 379, 
386, 403-4, 406-7, 411, 
418 n. 10
crowned  389
on-a-monster  118, 121
on-a-snake, see nāga-Buddha
pendant-legged  132, 211, 
245
reclining  26, 267 n. 13
seated  257, 404, 407
silver  314
standing  245, 246, 257, 
333
Buddhaʼs Order, see also  
Saṅgha  256
buddhapāda, see also footprint(s)  
267 n. 21
Buddhism(s)  17-8, 78, 81, 
93, 138, 175, 180, 183, 
241-68, 277, 305, 311, 
338, 342, 344, 353-5, 359, 
413, 416
Burmese  327
Dharmaguptaka  141
Hīnayāna  141
Khmer  327, 375-394
Lanna Tai  327
Lao  327
Mahāyāna  22, 141,  
393 n. 1, 404, 406
Mon  273, 287, 327, 353, 
369 n. 3
Mūlasarvāstivāda  27, 141
Sarvāstivāda  27, 141
Shan  327
Sri Lankan  242
tantric  375-394
Thai  261-2, 327
Theravāda  17, 137, 141, 
243, 253, 268 n. 28,  
393 n. 1, 399
Vajrayāna  375-6, 378
Buddhist(s)  135, 137, 180, 
274, 331, 334, 344, 346, 
354, 368
austerity  243, 266 n. 8
clergy, see also  Saṅgha  146
deities  9
establishment(s)/
remain(s)/structure(s)/
architecture/
monument(s)  70, 140, 
142, 179, 182, 332, 377
imagery  354
kingship  344
lineage(s) (nikāya)  243
practice(s)  240-68, 326, 354
stories  243-4
symbols  78
triad(s)  202, 358, 367, 399, 
406-7
buddhunikambha  275
Bujang cultural complex  177
bull (of Śiva)  123, 179-80, 
198, 206, 211
Bhumara  161, 163
burial(s)  7, 122-4, 312, 317, 
319-22, 357
bag  324-5
extended inhumation   
315-6, 324-5
extended supine position  
124
flexed  324-5, 327
inhumation  311, 313, 317, 
322-3, 325
jar  324
secondary inhumation  324
supine human burials  122
Buri Ram province/town  
402, 411, 416-7
Byzantine  112
caitya(s)  241, 246, 256, 260-2, 
344-5, 348 n. 7, 377-9, 380
cakra(s)  8, 22, 155, 158,  
165-6, 193, 211, 272-307
Cakrasaṃvara  385, 387-9, 
388, 390-2
Cakrasaṃvaramaṇḍala  390
Cakrasaṃvaratantra (CS)  375-6, 
389-92
cakravartin  273, 276-7, 286, 
288, 299, 305, 344
Cāmadevīvaṃsa  17-8, 228
Cambodia  11, 74, 76, 84, 
154-5, 158, 166, 187-90, 
193-7, 203-4, 206, 212, 
261, 268 n. 28, 313, 344, 
375-9, 382, 387, 390, 392, 
399, 403-4, 408, 414,  
418 n. 10, n. 13
cameo  83, 85, 98, 101-5
Campā, see also Cham  188, 
193, 204, 209, 394 n. 2
candraśālā  163
Candravairocana  402
Can Tho  154
Cardamom (mountain)  408
carnelian  101-3, 147, 222
cave(s)  18, 75, 80, 86, 197, 
230-2, 245, 342
inscriptions  136, 144, 146
paintings  177, 199
sites  36
celestial beings  340, 365
cella  386
Celtic Gaul  93
cemetery  74, 180, 319-21
ceramic(s), see also  pottery  76, 
129, 145, 335-7, 340
all-black ware  147
assemblage  236
black-and-red ware  147
Blue & White  123
Chinese  100, 181, 183
coarse ware  145
earthenware  183, 325
Fine Ware(s)  76, 81, 83-4
glazed ware  81
green-glazed Angkorian 
ware  325
Han style  77
Indian  79, 100
Indian Fine Ware(s)  80, 
100
Indian knobbed ware  76
Indian rouletted ware  76
medium black ware  145
orange and buff ware  126
red ware  145
rouletted ware  80, 84, 
100, 147
russet-coated painted ware  
147
shell-incised  75
sigillata  106
stamped designs  123
flower-stamped designs  
126
stamped ware  84
stoneware  123, 324
storage jar sherds  77
Tang  139
turquoise-glazed ware  
83-4
Ceres  101
cetiya, see also caitya(s)  23
Chachoengsao province/
town  34, 59, 61
Chaddantajātaka, see jātaka(s)
Chai Badan  408, 415
Chai Nat province  128, 287
Chain of Causation, see 
Dependent Origination/
paṭiccasamuppāda
chaîne opératoire  75
Chaiya National Museum  
268 n. 33
Chaiya province/town  140, 
147, 153-71, 180
Chaiyaphum province/town  
247, 259, 267 n. 22, 410-1, 
416-7
Chaliang  324
Cham, see also Campā  299, 
378
Champassak  187, 189,  
193-6, 415
Chana (valley)  175
Chansen  122-3, 128
chapel(s) of hospital(s)   
399-400, 402, 406, 410, 
414, 416-7, 418 n. 4, n. 6
Chao Phraya, see river(s)  
charcoal sample  122
chedi(s), see also caitya(s)/cetiya  
241, 261, 287, 335
Chedi Chula Prathon  243, 
297, 299, 338
Chhattisgarh  160
Chiang Mai  17, 229
chiefdoms  205
chignon  212, 403-4
China/Chinese  7-8, 20, 27, 
77, 84, 91, 99, 179
annal(s), see also Han/ 
Lian Shu  187, 212

--- PAGE 214 ---
general index
425
424
dynasties  183, see also  
Han China/Southern 
Liu/Wu
chiton  101
Chon Buri province/town  
59, 245-6, 408
Chong Samet  415
Chong Ta Ko  415
Chpārransī  382-4, 393
Chronicle of the Mons  225
Chryse Chersonesos  110
Chumphon province  70, 80, 
91, 100
citron  165
circumambulation  26
circumnavigation  111
citadel  143
Citrasena (prince), see also 
King Mahendravarman  
197, 418 n. 1
Civilisation of steles  190
clay
acidic dark clay  119
anvils  121
Bangkok clay horizon  35, 
48, 53, 59, 61
bracelets  122
brackish  34, 41
coins  123
covered soil horizon  42
old marine  34
moulds  125
seal(s)  123-4
soft  41
stiff  41
tablet(s)  138, 242, 245-6, 
256-7, 258-9, 260, 262, 
376
weathered  42, 46
coastal networks  143
cocks  101
Coimbatore district  146
coins  83, 85, 107-10, 112, 121, 
123, 139, 147, 233, 273
Co Loa citadel  72, 74, 77
colonettes  198
column  277, 285, 287, 295
conch(es)  139, 145, 163-5, 
402, 418 n. 8
conch-on-hip  153-9, 161-2
consecration/consecrating 
ceremony 260-1, 328 n. 8,  
359
copper  76, 119, 128, 317
copper-base alloy  74
ingots  124
ore  124
plates  148
smelting  125
coring sites  40
corn-ear  101
cornice  193
cornucopia  101
corvée labour  345
cow  207
craft production  8, 76
craftspersons/craftsmen  75, 
78, 110
crania/cranium  312, 317-9, 
320, 323
cranial protuberance, see also 
uṣṇīṣa  403
cremation  311, 317, 322, 
324, 326
cribra orbitalia  127
crocodiles  127
crops  313
crown, see also mitre(s)  159
crystal  81
Cūḷāmaṇi Cetiya  24
Cundā  377, 386
cup  24, 27, 102, 124
dado  193, 200
dagger  315, 317
Daily Mail  314
dākīnī(s)  390
dāna, see giving
dānapāramitā, see perfection of 
giving
Dangrek range  190, 195-8, 
204, 378, 397, 406, 408, 
410-1, 415
Da Qin  111-2
Dāṭhāvaṃsa, the “History of 
the Tooth Relic”  20
Deccan  144
deer  93, 126, 338-9
Dependent Origination,  
see also paṭiccasamuppāda  
253-4, 267 n. 23, 277, 285
deva  19
Devangaṛh  162-3
devī(s)  379
Dhammacakkappavattanasutta  
253
dhammadāna, see giving
Dhammapada  254-5
Dhanus  381-3, 393, 394 n. 3
Dhañyawaddy  217, 227, 
230-2
Dharanikota  83, 107
Dharma/dhamma  135, 275, 
277, 287
dharmacakra(s), see also wheel(s)  
138, 253-4, 273-309,  
333-5, 338, 341
base(s)  253-4
pillar(s)  141-2, 244-5,  
253-6, 267 n. 25
spoke(s)  253-4, 267,  
268 n. 26
Dharmaguptaka(s), see 
Buddhism(s)
dharmakāya  391
dharmaśālā, see also house(s)  
of Fire  399
Dhat taw ywa  219, 234
dhotī  211
dhutaṅga, see Buddhist austerity
dice  364
Dīghanikāya  273, 276, 285-6, 
288-9, 305
discus, see also cakra(s)  155,  
166
divination  143
dog(s)  104, 122, 126
Doṇa  24, 27
donation(s), see also donor(s)  
148, 242-4, 247, 249-50, 
341, 365
Don Khum Ngoen  198
Don Mueang Toei  198, 211
Don Sai  204
Don wun  223, 225-6, 234
Dong Lakhon  123, 127
Dong Mae Nang Mueang  
321, 324-5
Dong Phaya Yen  406, 408
Dong Si Mahosot (Dong Si 
Maha Pot) 128, 169, 190, 
205, 408, 417
Dong Son drums  77
Dong Tako sub-district  157
donor(s), see also donation(s)  
138, 142, 242, 244-5, 247, 
249-52, 260-2, 267 n. 14, 
342
door frame(s)/head(s)/jamb(s) 
/sill 182-3, 192, 201, 209
drapery, see also garment   
167, 169
dryland cultivation  72, 86
Durgā  211 n. 13
Du︐Wop  230-2, 234
Dvāravatī  7-9, 17-8, 27, 83, 
123, 137-8, 188, 222-3, 
241-68, 274-7, 285, 289, 
295, 297, 299, 304, 313-4, 
319, 320-2, 324-6, 331-47, 
413
art  211, 353, 360
cities/town(s)/settlement(s)  
23, 61, 63, 331-49, 377, 
406, 413
culture  36-7, 57, 61, 100, 
121, 123, 137, 241, 256, 
261-2, 266 n. 1, 267 n. 
9, 311, 324, 335-6, 353, 
408, 413
inscription(s)  18, 241-68
kingdom  149
period  36, 53, 61-2, 123, 
125, 127-9, 242, 315, 
323-4, 333, 335, 337, 
340-1, 346, 359, 363, 
413
sculpture  26, 333, 335
dwarf/dwarves  272-3, 276, 
306 n. 6
eagle  93, 104
eagle wood, see also wood(s)  
414
earring(s)  157, 159, 161-3, 
167, 324-5, 404
earth (bhū), see also orb  166
Earth Goddess  277, 285
earthenware(s), see pottery
earthworks  344-6, 410
École française d︐Extrême 
Orient (EFEO)  189, 191
Eightfold Path  284
ekamukhaliṅga, see liṅga(s)
electron microscopic study  
126
Elephanta  162, 164
elephant(s)  70, 93, 111, 126, 
222-3, 225, 229, 365, 
387-9
elite(s)  71, 78, 87, 136, 143, 
275, 304-5, 343-4, 346
embankments  62
embassy, see also 
ambassadorial mission  111
Emperor 
Antonine emperors  108
Antoninus Pius  107-9, 111
Augustus  108-10
Commodus  108-9
Guangwu  107
Huan  111
Lucius Verus  111
Marcus Aurelius  107-8
Marcus Aurelius 
Antoninus  111
Tiberius  109-10, 112
Victorinus  110
Wu  70, 110
enclosure(s)  202, 332, 336, 
345-6, 399-400
enlightenment, see also bodhi  
277, 285-6
entrepôts, see also port(s)  79, 
100
epigraph(s)/epigraphy/
epigraphic/epigraphist(s), 
see also inscription(s) 158, 
241, 243-5, 247, 262 
faunal remain(s)  126, 129
felly  273-4, 279, 286, 289-97
Fengtian  76
fern spores  44
figurine  324-5
finial(s)  267 n. 15, 325, 339
First Sermon  253, 267 n. 25, 
273, 275
fish/fishing  126-7
floodplain environment  34-6, 
45-7, 61-2
fluvial communication  415
flying palaces  207
footprint(s) of the Buddha(s)  
14-5, 18, 289
forest  196, 229, 342
products  87
resources  180
Fortuna  101
fossil coral(s)  48, 57
Four (Noble) Truths  247, 
253-6, 260, 268 n. 29, n. 
35, 286, 333, 348 n. 5
foxtail millet  72
freshwater sediments/
sedimentation  36, 41-2
Funan  84, 107, 112, 187-9, 
204, 211-2, 273-4, 295, 
297, 299, 300, 304
fungal remain(s)  44-5, 48
gadā, see mace
Gaja-Lakṣmī  277
Gallic empire  110
Gandhāra  81, 160
Gaṇeśa  140
garment  157, 159, 161-2, 
167, 169, 170 n. 10
Garuḍa  209, 211
gastropod  154
gāthā, see Pāli verse(s)
Gavampati  231
geese, see also haṃsa  93
gem(s)/gem-cutting  101, 103
Geography  110
Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS)  75
ghaṇṭā  385-8
giant  311, 314-5
gift of teaching (dhammadāna)  
243
giving (dāna)  242-5, 262
glass  79, 83, 91, 105-7, 147
bead(s), see also bead(s)  75, 
91, 100, 121-6, 335
bracelet  74-5
bright sealing-wax red  106
cobalt blue  105
Hellenistic mosaic glass 
vessels  106
industry  85
intaglios  104
lapidary  74-5
Mediterranean  106
mosaic  81, 106
moulded glass bowls  83
opaque bright red  105
potash  83
Roman  105-6
soda glass  105
translucent green  106
transparent green  75
vessels  100, 106, 109
yellow  106
globalisation  87
Go Xoai  268 n. 29, n. 30
goat  101, 104
gold  81, 84, 93, 107-8, 110, 
314-5, 324-5, 414
Golden Peninsula  110
goldsmith  148
Graeco-Bactrian  93
Graeco-Roman  104
graffiti  147
grapes  101
grave goods  122, 322,  
324-5
Greater-Indian Research 
Committee  313
Greek literature  93
griffin  93, 94-6
Guangdong  77
Guhyasamāja, see also Śrī 
Samāja  381, 387
Guhyasamājamaṇḍala  387
Guhyasamājatantra (GST)   
375-6, 381-4, 387, 391-2
Gujarat  162
Gulf of Muttama (Martaban) 
219, 408, 413
Gulf of Thailand  33, 72, 
107, 150, 175-7, 304, 408, 
413, 415
Gulf of Tonkin  99-100, 110
Gundla  93
Gupta art/period/sculpture  
139, 155, 158-62, 164-6, 
273
guru(s)  382-4, 393
Halin  83, 222
halo  167, 361
haṃsa, see also geese  76
Haṃsavatī, see also Bago  228
Han China/dynasty   
69-70, 112
Eastern  84
empire  111-2
tombs  107
Western  77, 99
Han Shu, see also Hou/ 
Qian Han Shu  110
Hanchey  274, 287
Hanoi  74, 77
Hanthawaddy  225
Harihara  160-1, 167, 211
Haripuñjaya, see also Lamphun 
17-8, 23, 227-8, 233
Hat Sai Kaeo  21
Heaven of the Thirty-three, 
see also Tāvatiṃsa  24, 26, 
275
Hepu  110
hermit  18, 139
Hermit cave  139
Heruka  385, 388, 392
Hevajra  375-6, 385, 388-91
Hevajramaṇḍala  376, 391
Hevajratantra  376, 390-2
high pedestal bowls, see also 
bowl(s)  124
high-tin bronze, see bronze
Himachal Pradesh  93
himation  101
Himavanta forest  18
Hindu temple  344
Hinduism  136, 344
Hinthagon  225, 234
Ho Chi Minh City  84
Ho Chi Minh City Museum 
of Vietnamese History  
154, 273, 290
Hoabinhian  36, 53
Holocene 
Early  34-6, 57
landform  41
Maximum Transgression  
33, 36, 41-2, 48, 53, 57, 
61-2, 180
Mid-Holocene Highstand  
35
Middle  34, 36
period  35, 48
regression  33, 36
sea-level changes  37
sedimentary sequences  36
homa rites/ritual(s)  380, 383
Ho Phra Narai  156, 159-60, 
165-7, 169
horse  20, 93-4, 103, 364
horse gram  72
hospital(s)  411
hospital edict(s)/stele(s),  
see inscription(s)
Hou Han Shu, see also Han 
Shu  111
house(s) of Fire  9, 399-400, 
402, 406, 410-2, 415, 417, 
418 n. 4
Hsin Phyu Kyun  225-6, 234
Huangwu  112
Huangzhi  70, 110
Huei Kadien  195
Huei Tomo  187, 192-3
human remain(s), see also 
burial(s)/crania/skeleton(s)  
127, 129, 314-23, 325-6
hunting  126
Ikṣvāku  142
India  91, 93, 99, 107-8, 110, 
136, 148-9, 153-4, 157, 
161-4, 181, 184, 187, 190,  
210, 212, 241, 253, 256, 
261, 266 n. 7, 275-6, 286-7, 
334, 342, 344, 355, 375-6, 
385, 388, 390, 392, 404
Indian Chank  154
Indian Ocean  20, 83, 99, 
110, 148, 177, 408
Indian societies/traditions  
379, 389
Indianisation  18, 61, 70, 78 
136, 187-8, 198, 212, 311
Indic beliefs/culture  127, 129
Indonesia  83, 256
Indra, see also Sakka/Śakra  
22, 24, 160, 274-5, 277, 
286-7, 338
Indrakila  286-9
inscribed 
artefact(s)/object(s)  244, 
246, 257, 260, 262,  
266 n. 1, 267 n. 16
bowl(s)  146, 402, 418 n. 8
Buddha image(s)  245-6
conches  402, 418 n. 8
mirror support  402,  
418 n. 8
pillar(s), see pillar 
inscription(s)
potsherds  146
sema(s)  246-7, 267 n. 19, 
358-9
tablet(s)  246-7, 258
vases  402, 418 n. 8
wheel(s)/cakra(s)  138, 
253-5
inscription(s)  2, 4, 7-8, 81, 
136, 138, 140-2, 148-9, 
189-90, 197, 206-7, 212, 
241-68, 277, 297, 299, 
304, 344, 356, 360, 382, 
397, 399, 402, 406, 411
Ban Thalat  244
bilingual  245, 257,  
267 n. 16
Bo Ika, see also  K. 400  
140, 244
Brāhmī  76, 84, 136, 138, 
144-8
canonical  247-59
Chinese  77
citation/quotation  260-1
dedicatory  246-7
donation/donative  207, 
243, 262
eulogy/panegyric  242, 
267  n. 21
eye-copy  254, 267 n. 11, 
n. 13, 268 n. 32
hospital edict(s)/stele(s)  
402-3, 410, 417, 418 n. 7
hybrid Pāli-Sanskrit   
268 n. 29 
Kalyāṇī  355
Khao Rang, see also K. 
505  247
Kharoṣṭhī  136, 144, 147
Kunzeik  268 n. 28
no. 1 of Ramkhamhaeng  
6, 236 n. 11
no. 2 of Sukhothai  23
Noen Sa Bua, see also K. 
997  242, 267 n. 21
Old Khmer  243-4, 247, 
266 n. 5, 267, n. 20
K. 21  171 n. 25
K. 111  379-80, 384
K. 116  197, 213 n. 8
K. 122  197, 213 n. 8
K. 134  158
K. 149  213 n. 8
K. 151  158, 213 n. 8
K. 153  213 n. 8
K. 165  171 n. 25
K. 262  171 n. 25
K. 263  171 n. 25
K. 266  378
K. 273  418 n. 4
K. 278  171 n. 25
K. 293-3  402
K. 293-6  402
K. 341  195
K. 362  194
K. 363  187, 197
K. 365  188, 206
K. 366  206
K. 367  187, 207
K. 375  417
K. 377  197-8
K. 384  410
K. 386  417
K. 387  417
K. 388  213 n. 5, 249, 
267 n. 20
K. 389  244, 249,  
267 n. 20
K. 391  410
K. 395  410, 417
K. 397  379, 385
K. 400  244, 249
K. 402  417
K. 404  252
K. 409  244-5, 249
K. 475  187
K. 477  206
K. 496  197
K. 497  197
K. 505  247, 249

--- PAGE 215 ---
general index
427
426
K. 508  197
K. 509  197-8
K. 513  213 n. 4
K. 514  197
K. 563  158
K. 577  245, 250
K. 695  245, 250
K. 723  196
K. 724  196
K. 908  402, 417,  
418 n. 4
K. 952  417
K. 953  394 n. 5
K. 954  381
K. 965  252
K. 969  198
K. 973  402, 418 n. 9
K. 974  402
K. 981  140, 359
K. 987  259, 265
K. 995  2, 4
K. 997  242, 267 n. 21
K. 1000  381
K. 1040  196
K. 1052  402,  
418 n. 8, n. 9
K. 1053  402, 418 n. 8
K. 1054  418 n. 8, n. 9
K. 1055  418 n. 8, n. 9
K. 1056  402, 418 n. 9
K. 1059  196, 207
K. 1082  198
K. 1096  198
K. 1102  197-8
K. 1106  198
K. 1115  417, 418 n. 7
K. 1158  380-4, 393, 
394 n. 2, n. 3
K. 1166  259, 265
K. 1170  417
K. 1174  206
K. 1190  197
K. 1193  197-8
K. 1194  197-8
K. 1197  207
K. 1201  195, 207
K. 1214  267 n. 14
K. 1224  207
K. 1262  207
K. 1263  207
K. 1264  207
K. 1280  198
Old Mon  138-9, 231-2, 
243-7, 246-7, 355
Pāli  121, 138, 247,  
253-62, 334, 355
Prakrit  144, 146-7, 261, 
268 n. 29
Sanskritised-Prakrit  84
Sinhala-Prakrit  145-6
Preah Khan, see also K. 908 
399-400, 402, 411-2, 
418 n. 4, 
pre-Angkorian  158, 206-7
rock-edict(s)  135, 148
rubbing  213 n. 5, 267 n. 11
Sanskrit  147, 149, 187, 
225, 243-5, 247, 262, 
266 n. 4, 267 n. 10,  
n. 22, 359
Sap Bak, see also K. 1158  
375-6, 380, 382, 387, 
392-3
Tamil-Brāhmī  81, 146
Ta Prohm, see also K. 273  
399, 410-1, 418 n. 4
Wat Luang Kau, see also K. 
365  188, 204, 206
Wat Maheyong  137
Wat Sithor, see also K. 111  
376, 379-80, 384
intaglio(s)  81, 83, 85, 101-5, 
112, 147
Iran  81, 83, 93
Iraq  83
iron  7, 74, 222, 317, 322, 324
implement(s)  121, 314, 
317, 321, 324
knife  124
ore  125
slag  121
smithies  75
technology  91
tool(s)  122, 320
working  76
Iron Age  122, 126, 128, 145, 
189, 205, 324, 343
burial(s)  124, 322
deposits  414
irrigation  344
Isan, see also Thailand 
(northeast)  397, 400, 406, 
410-1, 413
Īśānapura, see also Sambor 
Prei Kuk  306 n. 4, 307 
n. 26
Islam  184
Isthmus of Kra  70, 79,  
99-100, 111
ivory  81, 93, 96, 145, 217
beads  181
bracelets  121
Jaggayyapeta  273
Jain(s)  78, 136, 137, 142, 148
Jainism  144
Japan  83
jātaka(s)  9, 243-4, 353, 359
Chaddanta-  244
Khaṇḍahāla-  360
Mahājanaka-  360, 362-3
Mahānipāta-  360
Mahosadha- (Mahāummagga-) 
352, 360-2
Vessantara-  243, 360, 364-6
Vidhurapaṇḍita-  360, 364
jaṭāmukuṭa  212, 403
Java/Javā  155, 161, 166, 383, 
394 n. 3
Jayabuddhamahānātha  402, 
411-2, 418 n. 10
Jayantrapura  382, 393
Jayarājagiri  411-2
Jayarājapurī  402, 411-2
Jayasiṃhapurī  411-2
Jayasiṃhavatī  411-2
Jayavajrapurī  402, 411-2
Jayavarman, see King
Jayavīravatī  411-2
Jetavana  145
jewellery  101, 104, 159, 162
jewel(s)  81, 386, 404
Jiangsu  77, 107
Jiaozhi  112
Jina(s), see also Buddha(s)   
382-7, 391-3
Jinakālamālī  17
Kadaikgyi  226
Kala  277, 285, 290, 295, 297
Kalaśapura  225
Kalasin province/town  190, 
246-7, 267 n. 14, 324, 343, 
362, 364
Kalimantan, see also Borneo  
149
Kalinga  20, 365
Kalyāṇī Sīmā  353, 358-60, 
367-8
kamaṇḍalu, see also water-pot(s)  
193
Kambu  187
Kambuja  382-3, 393, 394 n. 3
Kamphaeng Noi  410, 416
Kamphaeng Saen  330-49
Kamphaeng Saen 
Archaeology Project 
(KSAP)  335-40
Kamphaeng Yai  410
Kamrateṇ Añ Srī  385
kamrateṅ p(h)dai karom  247
Kanchanaburi  24-5, 36, 112, 
128, 233, 311-2
Kanchipuram  70
Kaṇherī  276
Kantharawichai  190, 212
Kāpiśa  93
Kapoe district  81
Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra  376
Karawang regency  161
Karen, see Kayin
karma  25
karmic results  242
Karnataka  343
Kattaharama  146
Kavīndrārimathana  378-9
Kaw gun cave  219, 222, 
230-4
kāyavākcittā  390-1
Kayin state (Karen)  219, 
228, 232
Kbal Sre Yeay Yin  379
Kedah  72, 83, 177, 184
kendi(s)  183, 325
Kevaṭṭa  361
khakkhara  266-7 n. 9, 362
Kham Khuean Kaeo district  
211
Khammuan province  189, 
203, 205
Khan Thewada  197
Khaṇḍahālajātaka, see jātaka(s)
Khao Chamuk  76, 91, 93
Khao Dok  139
Khao Kha  140, 181, 183
Khao Khlang Nok  289, 344
Khao Muenni caves  86
Khao Ngu caves, see also 
Hermit cave  18, 245,  
343 n. 16
Khao Rang, see inscription(s)
Khao Sam Kaeo  71-9, 91, 
99-100, 102, 104-5, 147
Khao Sapphalinga  138
Khao Si Wichai  140
Khao Thamorat cave  289, 
349 n. 16
Khao Thap Kwai  125
Khao Wong Prachan   
119, 125
Kharoṣṭhī, see inscription(s)
Khlong Thom, see also  
Khuan Luk Pat  99-101, 
104-5, 108-9
Khmer(s)  7, 9, 202 , 290, 
295, 297, 299, 304, 321, 
344, 353, 367, 397, 410
art style/sculpture(s)  155, 
377, 403-4, 409
culture  189, 203
domination/expansion/
presence/power/
territories  27, 397, 
406, 409-10, 413, 415
empire/kingdom/polities  
190, 375-6, 379, 392, 
409, 415
history/period/studies  
212, 399, 409
inscription(s), see 
inscription(s)
king(s)/prince(s)/ruler(s)  
397, 409, 414, 418 n. 1
language, see also Old 
Khmer  4, 23, 247
ruin(s)/site(s)/temple(s)  
397, 399, 410-1
Khok Chang Din  139, 332
Khok Mai Den  242-4
Khok Phanom Di  59, 62
Khok Phlap  57, 59, 62
Khok Samrong district   
119, 338
Khon Kaen National 
Museum  358
Khon Kaen province/town  
140, 198, 247, 267 n. 13, 
362, 375, 408, 411, 416-7
Khone falls  187, 191, 198, 
203, 206, 212
Khone island  194
Khong island  193, 195, 203
Khorat Plateau  128, 190, 
205, 246, 297, 375-8, 
380-5, 387, 391, 399, 406, 
408-10, 414-5
Khuan Luk Pat, see also  
Khlong Thom 81, 99, 147
Khu Bua  123, 126, 138,  
217, 223, 233, 268 n. 33, 
289, 338, 340, 344-5, 413
Khu Mueang  128, 222
kilns  222
king(s)  138, 142, 207, 273, 
275-7, 286, 288-9, 295, 
304, 361, 364, 410, 413-4
King
Ādittarāja  18
Ajātasatru  20-1
Anandacandra  356
Aniruddha  228, 361
Aśoka/Asoka  19-22, 24, 
135, 148, 262
Banya-Oo  229
Bayinnaung  225
Bhavavarman  II  207, 
274, 306 n. 4
Bodawpaya  227, 229
Devānampiyatissa  21
Dhammazedi  355
Dhananjaya  364
Dharaṇīndravarman I  410
Gupta  286
Harṣavarman  286, 304
Īśānavarman I  206, 304, 
306 n. 4, 307 n. 26
Jayavarman I  195, 206-7
Jayavarman  II  206, 299, 
304
Jayavarman V  379-80
Jayavarman VI  375, 381, 
385, 388, 392, 410
Jayavarman VII  375, 379, 
391-2, 397-418, 407
Kyanzittha  18
Lithai (Lüthai)  286, 288-9
Mahendravarman, see also 
Citrasena  197-8, 206, 
418 n. 1
Mongkut  23-5, 28 n. 9-10, 
268 n. 35
Mūlavarman  149
Nṛpendrapativarman  198
Rajādhiraj  229
Rājendravarman  378
Rama I  28 n. 9
Rama IV, see Mongkut
Ramkhamhaeng  18, 288
Setthāthirāt  193
Siṁhavarman  148
Sitta  227
Śrī Devānīka  188, 206
Śrī Parameśvara  225, 232
(Śrī) Satyavarman  383-4,  
394 n. 2
Sūryavarman I  382
Sūryavarman II  385, 410
Tabinshwehti  229-30
Thammasokarat 
(Dharmāsokarāja)  21-2
Theinnaginga  227
Udayādityavarman II  381
Wareru  219
Yaśovarman I  194
kingship  9, 138, 331, 346, 
362
kinnarā-kinnarī  230
kirīṭamukuta, see also mitre(s) 
159-61
Kīrtipaṇḍita  379-80, 384
Kodumanal  146
Ko Kluai  79
Ko Thapao Yai  48
Koh Krieng  203
Kompong Cham province  
376
Kon Tum province  192
Koṇḍamoṭu  159-61, 163-4
Kosinarai  400, 413, 415, 417
Kota Cina  83
Krabi province  81, 99, 147-8
Kratie  203, 206
krodha  389, 394 n. 9
Kṛṣṇa  23
Kuala Selinsing  147
Ku Ban Khewa  410, 416
Kubera  146
Ku Kaeo  411, 416-7
Ku Kaeo Ban Chit  411, 416
Ku Khanthanam  410, 416-7, 
418 n. 7
kumbha, see also water-pot(s), 
200, 267 n. 17, 360
Kumphawapi district  358
Kumrahar  162
Kunzeik, see inscription(s)
Ku Phon Rakhang  410,  
416-7, 418 n. 7 
Kurukṣetra  188 n. 1, 206
Kuṣāṇa  
art/period  155, 157-60, 
162-3, 166
ruler(s)  93, 147
Ku Santarat  410, 416
Kutei  149
Kyaik Kalunpun  223
Kyaikkatha  225-6, 235, 356
Kyaikphyinku “pagoda”  223
kyāk  244-7, 267 n. 17, n. 20
kyāk puṇya, see also merit  245-7
Kyaukka stūpa /Thein  357
lacquer  414
Laem Pho  177
Lakhon Pheng  200
Lakṣmī  285, 290
Lakunbyin  228-30, 235
lamp  112, 313, 324
pottery  30-1 
Lampang  217, 223, 228
Lamphun, see also 
Haripuñjaya  17, 228, 233
land use planning  397, 406-15
Langyaxiu/Langkasuka  179
Lān Xāng  188
Lao/Laos  11, 19, 187-91, 
194-7, 199-201, 203, 212, 
244, 274
Lao Bao Pass  202
Laser Ablation Inductively 
Coupled Plasma Mass 
Spectrometry  
(LA-ICP-MSA)  125
laterite  139, 221, 225-6,  
317-8, 332-3, 344-5, 
399-400
Lavodayapura  402, 411-2
lead  414 
earrings  123
levee  188, 196, 202, 205
Liang Shu  112
libations  155
library  399
liṅga  138-40, 141, 179, 180-1, 
183, 187, 195, 199-200, 
211, 286, 332
ekamukhaliṅga  134-5, 140
mukhaliṅga(s)  139, 193
pancaliṅga  195
sarvaliṅga  138
Lingarajupalem  274
Liṅgaparvata  187
Liṅgapura  188 n. 1
linglingʼo  76
lineage(s)  9, 243, 286
lintel(s)  182-3, 192-3, 195, 
198, 208-10, 375, 386-92
lion  79, 93, 163, 222, 231, 339
local spirits  141
Lokapaññati  20, 22
Lokeśvara, see also 
Avalokiteśvara  403-5,  
406-7, 418 n. 10
looting  77, 99, 192, 222, 311, 
314-5
Lop Buri province/town  17, 
37, 119, 123, 126, 128, 
138, 154, 244-5, 253-5, 
257, 259, 338, 397-8, 402, 
406, 408, 411-5
lotus, see also padma  93-4,  
155 n. 7, 165-6, 287, 333, 
338-9, 360, 386-8, 403
Lower Central Plain of 
Thailand  33
Luang Prabang  287
lustrations  155
mace or club (gadā)  155,  
158-9, 165-6 
Maddī  365-6
Madhya Pradesh  161
Madurai  144
Mahābhārata  158 n. 13
Mahājanakajātaka, see jātaka(s)
mahākaruṇagarbha  394 n. 9
Mahākassapa  18
mahānāvika  84
Mahānipātajātaka, see jātaka(s)
mahārājādhirāja  188
Maharasthra  162
Maha Sarakham province/
town  410, 416
mahāthera  21
mahātīrtha, see also tīrtha(s)  206
mahāstūpa, see also stūpa(s)  346
Mahāvaṃsa  18, 24, 28 n. 9, 
287
Mahāyāna scriptures, see also 
Buddhism(s)  383-4
Mahīdharapura (dynasty)  
375, 385
Mahosadhajātaka, see jātaka(s)
Mahut Hill (Khuan Mahut)  
183-4
Maingmaw (Pinle)  222
Maitreya, see Buddha(s)
makara  193, 195, 201, 209-10
Malabar coast  107
Malacca  71
Malay Peninsula, see also  
Thai-Malay Peninsula  
136, 147, 149, 256
Malays  318
Malaysia  11, 72, 76, 83-4, 
175-7
Malhār  161
maṇḍala(s)  138, 375-6, 379, 
385-6, 389-90, 394 n. 9
maṇḍapa  400
Mandsaur  161-2, 164
Mango Grove Monastery  
287
mangrove  36
back  42, 45-6
belt  57
ecology  44, 47, 53, 62
environment  53
fern marsh  45-6
forest  33, 57, 180
highland vegetation  45-6, 
48
landward  44, 46-7
landward edge  45-6
lowland  46
swampy  44-7
tropical ferns  45, 48
wetland  45-6
Maṇīmekhalā  362-3
mantra(s)  383-4, 389, 391
Māra  394 n. 5
marine-influenced cores  41-2
marine resources  127
Marinus  110
Mars  101-2
maritime network(s)/trade 
route(s)  69, 85, 87, 91, 99, 
107, 110, 149, 414
Maritime Silk Road  70, 72
Martaban, see Muttama
Martaban hills/range  219, 
223
mathematics  144
Mathurā  93, 136, 141, 155, 
157-60, 162
Mauryan  69-70, 135, 139, 
148
Mawlamyaing (Moulmein)  
219, 227, 229, 235
mean sea level (MSL)  37, 119
Mediterranean  8, 83, 91, 99, 
105, 107, 109-10, 112, 313
meditation  242, 244-5
Medusa  101 n. 4
megalith/megalithic  144, 
146, 353, 357
Mekong, see river(s)
mental development, see also 
meditation  242
merchant(s)  83, 111, 180, 
227, 342, 377, 415
merit(s)  9, 241-7, 261-2,  
267 n. 12
bases of merit  242
field of merit  242
holy merit  246-7
sublime merit  267 n. 18

--- PAGE 216 ---
general index
429
428
merit-making  243, 247, 
262, 266 n. 3
Metal Age  36-7, 57, 59, 70
metal resources  413-4
metal technology  129
metalworking  7
midden  325
Milindapañha  147
Mimotian sites  74
miniature shrines/caityas/
stūpas  244, 256, 268 n. 37
mirror(s)  77, 402, 418 n. 8
mitre(s), see also Viṣṇu mitred  
157, 159, 161-3, 166-7, 332
moated settlement(s)/town(s)  
37-8, 121, 128, 139, 149, 
177, 190, 205, 325, 330, 
332, 342
moats  91, 219, 223, 333-4, 
344, 410
molluscan remains  35
Mon(s)  9, 17, 189-90, 200-1, 
203, 207, 212, 219,  222, 
228, 231-2, 297, 304, 353, 
355-6, 360, 367-8
Mon-Khmer(s)  233, 287
Mon-Khmer language(s)  
245, 247, 262
Mon state  216, 233
monastic centre(s)/
establishment(s)  138, 144, 
148, 276, 288-9, 331
money  207
monk(s)  18, 21-2, 137, 141, 
144, 222, 228, 241, 243-4, 
247, 256, 260, 268 n. 35, 
341-2, 362, 377
ascetic /forest/recluse/
wandering 243, 245, 256, 
266 n. 9, 342
monkey  361
moonstone  184
morality  242
mortise(s)  140
mortuary data/practice  312, 
319, 326
mosque  180-1, 184
mould(s)  94, 109, 112, 313, 
315, 388-9, 394 n. 8
moulded tablet(s), see also 
votive/clay  251-2, 257, 
258-9, 261, 265
Moulmein, see Mawlamyaing
mound  333-4, 336-8
Mrauk U  356
Mucalinda  393 n. 1
mudrā(s)  389
abhaya-  158, 165, 231
añjali-  340
dhyāna-  358, 386-7
prajñālinganābhinaya  389
samādhi-  404
vajrahūṃkāra-  385
vitarka-  389
vyāvṛtta-  158, 165
Mueang Champasi  410
Mueang Fa Daet  190, 212, 
246-7, 324, 326, 353,  
359-61, 363-6
Mueang Kaeo  410
Mueang Phai  410
Mueang Phin  202
Mueang Phra Rot  408
Mueang Sema  128, 244, 
259, 343
Mueang Sing  396-9, 404, 
406, 409, 411-2, 414
Mueang Tam  410, 416
Mūlasarvāstivādin(s),  
see Buddhism(s)
mung beans  72
mural(s)/painting(s)  24-5, 
177
Musée Guimet  268 n. 30, 
378
musicians  340
Muslim  175
Muttama (Martaban)  217, 
223, 235
Muttama 32 myos  222, 225-7, 
229-30
Muziris  107
My-son  286
Myanmar  11, 20, 83, 139, 
155, 217-35, 256, 261,  
268 n. 28, 287-8, 313,  
353-68, 409, 413
Myaungmya  229
mye-bon-hpaya, see also clay/
moulded/tablet(s)  221, 
225, 230
Na Dun  247
Na San sub-district  156
nāga(s)  203, 233 
nāga-Buddha  2, 4, 374-6, 
377-9, 380, 386-9, 392, 
403-4, 406 
-king  21
-queen  227
-princess  227
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa  138, 141-3, 
145, 160, 163, 285, 287
Nakhon Chaisi  25
Nakhon Nayok  59, 123, 127
Nakhon Pathom province/
town 17, 23-6, 34, 57, 59, 
62, 123, 126, 138, 147, 
217, 238-9, 243, 255,  
257-9, 268 n. 29, n. 34, 
289, 297, 299, 304, 331-3, 
336, 338-40, 342, 344-5, 
347, 400, 413, 417
Nakhon Phanom province/
town  18, 190, 203, 400
Nakhon Ratchasima 
province/town  198, 205, 
244, 259, 267 n. 20, 343, 
375-6, 380, 402, 410-1, 
416-7
Nakhon Sawan province/
town  34, 37, 128, 242-5, 
247, 257, 259, 321, 324, 
408
Nakhon Si Thammarat 
National Museum  156, 
268 n. 33
Nakhon Si Thammarat 
province/town  17, 19-23, 
137, 140, 153, 156, 165, 
180-1, 183, 274
Nālandā  379
Nam Yuen district  198
nandipāda  76
Nanjing  112
Nārasiṃha  159, 162
Nārāyaṇa  158
necklace  161, 163, 167
Neolithic  36, 59, 142
nephrite  76
Nhon Nghia  154
nikāya(s), see Buddhist lineage(s)
nirat  23, 26
Nirat Phra Prathom  25
nirmānakāya  391
nirvāṇa/nibbāna  142, 244, 
383-4
Noen Makok  122, 128
Noen Mueang Kao  205
Noen Phra  288, 363
Noen Sa Bua, see inscription(s)
Noen U Loke  77, 205
Non Pha Khao  195
Non Sombat  195
Nong Daeng  128
Nong Hua Thong  201-5, 
207, 212
Nong Mung  189
Nong No  59
Nong Phayu  205
Nong Saming  195
Nong Sombat Gnai  195
Nong Sombat Nai  195
Nong Sombat Noi  195
Nong Vienne  211
Nong Wai  140
non-marine-influenced core  
42
non-pollen palynomorph(s)  
44-5
Nonthaburi  53, 62
Norton Simon Museum  212
Oc Eo  84, 107-8, 147, 154, 
166, 204, 273
ogee  192
Old Khmer, see also 
inscription(s)  243-4, 247, 
266 n. 5, 267, n. 20
Old Mon, see also inscription(s) 
243-7, 289-90
oleoresin  414
Oṃ ye te svāhā, see also ye dhammā 
268 n. 37
orb, see also earth (bhū)  155, 
166
ordination hall, see also ubosot  
356-8
Outhoum Mai  195
overland routes  212
oyster 
assemblage  62
shell colonies  48
shell samples  48
Pa-an (Hpa-an)  217, 219, 
232, 235
paddle  324-5
padma, see also lotus  155 n. 7, 
165-6
Padmapaṇī(s), see also 
Avalokiteśvara  377, 388
Pagan, see Bagan
Pak Chong  415
Pak Nam  64
Pakistan  81, 83
Pāla  389
palace  221, 288, 364-5
palaeo-environment  45, 53, 
62, 64
Palaeo-gulf  33-4
of Dvāravatī  37, 39
Palaeolithic  57
palaeo-mangrove  46, 53, 
57, 59
palaeo-shoreline  33, 35, 
57, 61
Palawan  75
Palembang, see also Sumatra/
Indonesia  268 n. 30
Pāli  12, 17, 24, 136, 138-9, 
141, 227, 334, 360
Buddhism  137
Canon, 241, 253, 255, 
260-1, 285, 368
literacy  261, 334
text(s)/textual source(s)  
20-2, 27, 253, 255, 260, 
267 n. 21, n. 24
inscription(s)  121, 138, 
247, 253-62, 334
verse(s)/stanza(s)/
formula(s)  242, 246, 
253-62, 266 n. 4,  
267 n. 24, 268 n. 28, 
n. 30
palisade  72
palladium  273, 276, 286, 
289, 306 n. 18
Pallava  138-9, 148, 160, 
334, 359
palynology  33, 35
Panpan  70
panther  102
paramadhātu (bǫrommathat), 
see also relic(s)/reliquary  
20, 26
pāramitā, see perfection(s) 
Parel stele  163
Parthians  111
Pasai  71
pastoral poetry  104
Paśupatas  275
Pataliputra  74
Pathom Somphothikatha 
(Paṭhamasambodhi)  27
Pathumphon district  211
Pathum Thani  53, 57, 59, 61
paṭiccasamuppāda/
pratītyasamutpāda, see also 
Dependent Origination/ 
ye dhammā  247, 253-6,  
260-2, 267 n. 26, 268 n. 35
pāṭimokkha  354
patrons/patronage  242-3, 
260
Pattanam  83, 107
Pattani province/town  
175-185
valley/river  175-7
pavāraṇā day  354
pearl(s)  163, 403
pedestal(s)  192-3, 199, 201, 
206, 315, 318, 338, 384-5, 
389, 399
peer-polity interaction  78
Pegu, see Bago
pendant(s)  77, 81, 107-10, 112
Perfect self-enlightenment, 
see bodhi
perfection(s)  243
perfection of giving  244
Perfection of Wisdom  383, 393
Periplus Maris Erythraei  110
Perseus  101 n. 4
Persia  91
Phai Sali  128
Phanasbodi, see also Buddha-
on-a-monster  121, 275-6, 
285, 338
Phang-nga province  48, 81
Phanom Rung  385, 410, 
416-7
Phetchabun province/town  
161, 259
Phetchaburi province/town  
259, 398, 402, 406, 408, 
411-5
Phibun Mangsahan district  
198, 211
Philippines  75-6
Phimai district/town  399, 
404, 410, 414, 417, 418 
n. 12
Phimai National Museum  
245-6
Phimai temple, see Prasat Hin 
Phimai 
Phnom Penh  191
Phnom Penh National 
Museum  154, 389
Phnom Trap  378-9
Pho, see also Laem Pho  177, 
180
Pho Thong sub-district  156
Phong Tuek  112, 311-49
Phra Borommathat, see also 
Wat Phra Borommathat  
20-1
Phra Narai National Museum 
121, 147, 246-7, 254-5, 
267 n. 16, 268 n. 34
Phra Pathom Chedi  23, 25, 
268 n. 32, n. 35, 287-9
Phra Pathom Chedi National 
Museum  37, 257, 277, 333
Phra Phrom district  156
Phra Prang Sam Yot  398, 
402
Phra Prathon Chedi  23
Phra That Haripunchai   
16, 18
Phra That Phanom  17-20, 
23, 201, 204, 400
Phrae  217, 223, 228
Phraya Kong  24-6
Phraya Phan  25-6
Phromthin Tai  119-29, 255
Phu Kao  196
Phu Khao Thong  71, 79-85, 
99-100, 103, 106
Phu Lakkhon  187, 193, 206
Phu Malong  195-6, 203
Phu Noi  128
Phu Pasak  196
Phuket  48, 57
physiognomy  144
phytogeography  33, 54-6, 
58, 60, 63
pilasters  400
pilgrim(s)  138, 149
pilgrimage, see also tīrtha(s)  9, 
135, 206, 226, 383-4, 393, 
394 n. 3
pillar(s) 
base(s)  182 
inscription(s)  138, 141-2, 
144, 166, 244-5, 253-5
Khmer  367
piṇḍapāta, see alms round
pirates  70
Pit Tong  205
plague  20
plaque(s)  230, 243-4, 257, 
361-2
plateaux  74-6, 86
platform  315-6
Pleistocene
landform  59
Late  35, 313
Poipet  388-9, 394 n. 8
polished stone adzes  122
polished stone tools  121, 177
polity/polities  11, 69, 72, 77, 
107, 136
coastal trading 70, 78, 87
northern Indian  74
pollen  53, 62
analysis  44
diagrams  46-8
zonation  46-8
pond(s)  181, 183, 196
Pong Ta Khop  125
poppy-head  101
population  331
porotic hyperostosis  127
ports  342
ancient  37
port-cities  69-70
port-entrepôts  69, 71, 
81, 85
port-of-trade  96
pottery, see also ceramics  7, 
121-2, 129, 148, 181, 222
burnished  325
carinated pots  123-4, 325, 
335
cord-marked  325, 335
earthenware(s)  121, 245-7, 
257, 262, 267 n. 16, 
325, 335-6, 338, 341
fine-grained  126
jars  222-4
Martaban jars  222
potsherds  123-4, 129, 
146, 335
sherd(s)  121, 139, 150 n. 1, 
224, 322, 337
spouted pots  123, 126, 
324
unglazed stoneware  222
Prachin Buri National 
Museum  267 n. 16, 418 
n. 8
Prachin Buri province/town  
128, 140, 198, 242, 247, 
397, 399, 402, 408, 410, 
413, 415, 417
Prajñāpāramitā  376, 378-9, 
380-2, 386, 392, 403, 406
Prakrit, see also inscription(s)  
76, 84, 136, 141-2, 144-6, 
148
prang  23, 25, 385
Prang Brahmadatta  392, 402
Prang Khon Buri  411, 416-7
Prang Ku  410-1, 416-7, 418 
n. 7
prasat  397
Prasat Ban Chang Pi  410, 
416 
Prasat Ban Noi  399, 410, 417
Prasat Chom Phra  410
Prasat Hin Phimai  375-94, 
400, 404, 410-1, 413, 
415-7
Prasat Khok Ngiu  402, 411, 
416-7, 418 n. 9
Prasat Muang Khaek  410
Prasat Non Ku  410
Prasat Phanom Wan  402, 
410-1, 415, 417
Prasat Phum Pon  198
Prasat Praphachai  411, 416
Prasat Sa Morakot  399, 406, 
408, 410, 413, 415, 417, 
418 n. 9
Prasat Sikhoraphum  410, 
416
Prasat Ta Muean  377, 400, 
417
Prasat Ta Muean Tot  400, 
411, 416-7
Prasat Tham Chan  411,  
416-7, 418 n. 7
Prasat Wat Phra That  400
Preah Khan temple, see also 
inscription(s)  379
Preah Vihear temple  195, 
204
pre-Angkorian  155, 187-212
prehistory  7, 119, 311, 325
prehistoric mortuary 
variability  129
prehistoric paintings  177
prehistoric period  128, 
324, 410
pre-Islamic  177, 183
Prei Kmeng style  209-11
prestige goods  77, 91
Princess Galyani Vadhana 
Institute  179
Prince of Songkhla University 
179
Projet de recherche en archéologie lao 
(PRAL)  188-9
proto-cities  7
protohistoric sites  128, 190, 
212
protohistory  33, 205, 342
proto-urbanisation  8
Ptolemy, Claudius  110-1
Pukam, see also Bagan  228
Puṇṇaka  364
Puññakiriyavatthusutta  242
puṇya/puñña, see merit(s)
Purāṇic worship/Hinduism  
135-6
pūrṇaghaṭa  275
Pushpabhadrasvami temple  
142
python  227
Pyu  225, 274, 276, 355-6
Qian Han Shu, see also Han 
Shu  70
Quang Nam province  192
Quang Tri province  203
queen(s)  143, 227, 404, 407, 
413
Queen 
Cāmadevī (Samadevi)  
17-8, 228
Muh Tah  232
Sīvalī  362
Śrī Māyā (Medaw)  229
radiocarbon date(s)/dating  
33, 41, 50-2, 72, 100, 122, 
324-5, 356
accelerator mass 
spectrometry (AMS)  35, 
72, 336
CALIB 6.0  35, 41, 48
calibrated  35
OxCal 4.1  123
radiometric  35
radiometric determinations 
122
sample(s)  61, 122
rāja(s), see king(s)
Rajasthan  159
rājasūya  275
Rakhine state  231, 274,  
278-9, 288, 306 n. 17,  
n. 18, 353, 356
Rama, see King
Rāmāyaṇa  394 n. 6
rampart  72, 74, 219, 221
Ranong  70, 79, 81, 100
Ratanapura  219, 235
Ratchaburi National Museum 
268 n. 33
Ratchaburi province/town  
18, 24, 57, 59, 123, 126, 
139, 245, 258-9, 268 n. 34, 
312 n. 5, 398-9, 402, 406, 
408, 411-3
Ratnasambhava, see Buddha(s)
Rattanakosin  287

--- PAGE 217 ---
general index
431
430
recipient(s), see also beneficiary 
242, 244, 249-50
Red Sea  83, 99, 107, 110
refugees  353, 367
relic(s)  21, 24, 26, 260, 314, 
345
breast-bone  19
casket  317, 319
cult  260
Dharma-relic  260
human  316, 322
of the Buddha  18
tooth  24, 286
relief  240, 243
reliquary/reliquaries  81, 
138, 341
chamber  20, 222
“Supreme Reliquaryˮ  
20-1
repoussé  107-8
rhinoceros  111
rice  72, 86, 125-6, 180,  
221-2, 225, 231
agriculture/cultivation  
121, 127, 149, 313
chaff  337
consumption  127
domestication  127
grains  337-9
husk  338-9
imprints  127
wet-rice agriculture  125
Rinan  111-2
ring  102, 104, 112, 222, 317
riparian habitats/sites  192, 
195
ritual(s)  135, 138, 148, 154-5, 
167, 241, 260-2, 273,  
286-7, 288-9, 311-27,  
354-5, 359, 380, 383-4
ritual tray  238-9
Ritual for Making Miniature 
Clay Stūpas of the Vehicle of 
Perfections  268 n. 37
river(s)  191, 355
Attaran  219, 234
Ayeyarwady  414
Bang Pakong  34, 406, 
408, 413-5
Chao Phraya  8, 34, 64, 
91, 190, 273, 299,  
304-5, 324, 397, 406, 
408-9, 411-5
Chi  203, 406
Dontami  219, 234
Ganges  22
Hlaingbwe  219
Huei Khammuan  196
Huei Tomo  193, 211
Huei Yang  332-3
Jaing  219
Khlong Thom  100
Khwae  406, 408
Kraburi  79, 84
Krishna  142
Lam Dom Yai  198
Lam Se Bok  198
Lop Buri  34
Mae Klong  34, 312, 318, 
406, 413
Maning  180
Mekong  8, 18, 187-9, 191, 
193-8, 201-2, 204-6, 
295, 304, 408, 414-5
Merbok  177
Mun  8, 190, 193, 196-7, 
203, 205-6, 406, 408, 
410, 414-5
Nam Kam  203
Nam Songkhram  203
Nan  34
Naring  180
Pasak  34, 128, 408, 415
Pattani  177, 180, 183
Ping  34
Sakae Krang  34
Se Bang Fai  200-4
Se Bang Hieng  200-3, 205
Se Champon  202
Sa Chaung  225
Se Don  199-200, 206
Se Kaman  192-3
Se Kong  187, 192, 206-7
Se San  191
Se Su  192, 209
Se Tha Moak  202
Se Xang Noi  202
Stœng Saen  195
Tha Chin  34, 332
Tha Taphao  72, 91, 147
Thanlwin (Salween)   
217-8, 226-8, 233
Thaton  225-6
Tonle Repou  195, 198
Wang  34
Yangzi  107
Yanzalin  228
Yaring  180
Yom  34, 325
Roi Et province/town  198, 
410, 416-7, 418 n. 7                
Roman
coin(s)  107-10
emperors  107-10
empire  109-12, 
Imperial period  99, 101, 
104
literature  104
“robotsˮ  20, 22
world  81
rosary  386-7, 394 n. 7, 403-4
Royal Chronicle of the Old City of 
Ayutthaya  61
Royal College of Surgeons 
Museum  318
Royal Institute of Siam  313
ṛṣi, see also ascetic(s)/hermit(s)  
18, 81, 139
Sa Huynh-Kalanay  75
sacred thread  167
sacrificial post  149
Sādhanamālā  385, 388
Saiburi (valley)  175
Śaiva  179, 183, 211, 274, 
379, 388
Sa Kaeo province/town  397, 
399, 410, 417
Sakka/Śakra, see also Indra  
275-6, 287, 365-6
Sakon Nakhon province/town 
190, 203, 244, 411, 416
Śākyamuni, see Buddha(s)
Salihundam  146
salt production  414
Samādhigupta  139, 245
Śāmalājī  162-3
saṃbhogakāya  389, 391
Sambor  203-4, 206, 210
Sambor Prei Kuk  188, 191, 
195, 205, 207, 209-10, 
274, 287, 297
Śāmbūka  245
Śambūkapaṭṭana  411-2
Śambupura  206
Sampanago  217-35
sampot  211, 403
saṃsāra  253, 277, 285
Samut Prakan  34, 62
Samut Sakhon  57, 59, 62, 64
Samut Songkhram city  64
Saṃvara, see also 
Cakrasaṃvara  389-92
Sāñci  93, 160, 275, 287
Saṅgha(s)/saṃgha, see also 
community of monks/
Buddha’s Order/Buddhist 
clergy  137, 143, 241-2, 
244, 354, 359, 380
Sankalakhiri mountain/ 
range  175-7
śaṅkha, see also conch(es)  154-
5, 166
San Phra Kan  154
Sanskrit, see also inscription(s)  
12, 20, 27, 135-6, 139, 
141-2, 144, 148-9, 190, 
207, 233, 381-3, 390, 393, 
394 n. 3
Sap Bak, see inscription(s)
Sap Champa  122-3, 126, 
128, 254, 255, 257, 267 
n. 25
Sap Takhien  128
Saraburi  135, 139, 289
Saravane province  199-200, 
205
sardonyx  103
Sarmatians  93
Sarnath  275, 287
Sarvāstivādin(s), see 
Buddhism(s)
sāsana  14
sashes  157, 159, 161-3
Śātavāhana  147
Sathing Phra  140
satyr  98, 101-3
Savannakhet province  187, 
200-2, 204-9, 211
Scanning Electron 
Microscope (SEM)  126
Scythian  93
sea-level changes  48, 180
seal(s)/sealing(s)  76-7, 100, 
104-5, 147-9
clay/terracotta  123-4, 
146-7, 149
copper 147
gold  84, 147
ivory  147
stone  147
seasonal floods/flood area/
floodplain  62-4
Seberang Perai province  84
Sekong province  191
sema stone(s)  8-9, 140, 190, 
200-3, 243, 246-7, 261, 
267 n. 19, 324-5, 341, 
353-68
senāpati  385
shaman  18
shellfish  127
Shwemadaw Thamaing  225
Shwesayan “pagoda”  232, 
235
Si Sa Ket province  205
Si Satchanalai  325
Si Thep  9, 128, 138, 140, 
161, 190, 204, 212, 254, 
259, 289, 313, 344, 408
Sichon district/town 140, 
181
sīla, see morality
silk  111
Silk Road, see also Maritime 
Silk Road  70
śilpaśastra(s)  285
silver  207, 211, 314-5, 317, 
319
sīma,  see also sema stone(s) 
354-5
siṁhamukha  160
Sing Buri  128, 222
Sinhala  148
Si Sa Ket province/town  
410-1, 416-7, 418 n. 7
Sittanavasal  136, 144
Sittaung  225-6, 235
Śiva  135, 139, 161, 163, 
179, 193, 207, 267 n. 14, 
379, 381
Skanda-Mahāsena  163
skeleton(s), see also burial(s)  
121-2, 317, 319-20, 322, 
324
skull(s), see also crania/
cranium  312-3, 317-9
slag  125
slaves  207, 244, 267 n. 10, 
345-6
smithing  76
snakes, see also nāga(s)  126
snānadroṇī(s)  192, 195, 199, 
201
socio-political systems  78
socle  333-5, 338
somasūtra(s)  181, 192-3, 195, 
198, 201
Soṇa  24
Songkhla National Museum 
179
Songkhla province/town  
183, 258, 259
South Asia  69, 99, 153, 160
South China Sea  70-2, 75-8, 
83, 85, 177, 413, 415
Southern Liang dynasty  112
spatial analysis  75
spices  81
spindle whorl(s)  122-4
spoke(s)  273-4, 276-9, 290-9
sponsor(s)/sponsored/
sponsorship 242, 244, 
246, 262
śramaṇa(s)  135
Śramaṇism  135
Śreṣṭapura  188 n. 1
Śrī Devānīka  188
Śrī Kapilavāsudeva  158
Śrīkṣetra  222, 225, 353, 
355-8, 367
Sri Lanka  17-8, 20-1, 137, 
139, 143, 145-7, 154, 
344, 355
Śrī Samāja, see also 
Guhyasamāja  381-4, 
386-7, 392
Śrī Samantaprabheśvara  
382, 393
śrīvatsa  83, 85
Śrīvijaya  7, 25, 177
Srī Vīrendrādhipatvarma  385
staff, see also khakkhara  102, 
266-7 n. 9, 362
stambha, see also column(s)/
pillar(s)  273, 275, 287-8
cakra-  274, 276, 287-9
dhvaja-  274-5, 287
steatite container(s)  81-2
stele(s), see also inscription(s)  
193, 294, 356, 375-6
Stœng Treng province  187, 
191, 194, 203-4
stone(s)
bead(s)  100, 324-5, 336
bracelet(s)  121-2, 126
cakra base/pedestal 254
earrings  122
granite  181-2, 184
grinding  181-2, 200
hard stone  74-5, 78-9, 147
hard stone ornament(s)  
68, 75-6
lion  79
lozenge  79
nandipāda  79
industry  85
limestone  181, 315, 333
mould  109
production  77, 85
sandstone  181, 192-3, 
198, 200, 399, 403
sculpture(s)/image(s)  241, 
246, 256-7
semi-precious  81
siliceous stone ornaments  
83
tablet(s)/plaque(s)/bar  
238-9, 256, 268 n. 29
tools  91
triad(s)  358, 367, 407
stucco  24, 241, 325, 337, 
339, 340-1
stūpa(s)  20-1, 25, 81, 138, 145, 
149, 175, 193, 200-1, 203, 
221-3, 241, 244, 256, 260, 
267 n. 15, n. 17, 273, 276, 
287, 289, 315-7, 319-22, 
334-6, 337-8, 340-1, 344-6, 
360-2, 367
subsistence strategies  129
Sudhamma  228
Sugar Palm Grove  288
Sugata(s), see also Buddha(s)  
382, 393
Suk Samran sub-district  79
Sukhothai  18, 25, 217,  
222, 225, 230, 268 n. 38,  
286-90, 320, 324-5, 398, 
406, 412-5
Sumatra, see also Indonesia  
83, 268 n. 30
Sun Quan  112
Śuṅga dynasty/period  93, 96
Sunthon Phu  23-6
Suphan Buri province/town  
33, 53, 57, 100, 123, 128, 
154, 222, 258-9, 266 n. 4, 
411-2
Surat Thani province/town  
80-1, 153, 156, 183
Surin province/town  198, 
402, 410, 413, 416-7,  
418 n. 7
Sūrya  160-1, 273, 275, 277, 
285, 290, 338
Sūryavairocana  402
Suttanipāta  255
Suvaṇṇabhūmi  24, 231, 
234-6
Svarnapura  411-2
svastika  76
swamp  219, 225
freshwater  34
transitional  46-8
swampy condition  45
tablet(s)  221-2, 225, 230, 
242, 245-6, 256-9, 262, 
376, 389
Tagara  93
Tai  188
Tai-Lao  188-9
Taiwan  76
Takbai (valley)  175
Ta Keo province  154
Takua Pa  83, 140
Tāmbraliṅga, see also Nakhon 
Si Thammarat  179, 181-4
Tamil  136, 144, 148
Tamil-Brāhmī, see 
inscription(s)
Tamil Nadu  70, 110, 136, 
144, 146
Ta Muean Thom  410
tamnan chronicles  7
tantra(s)  376, 379, 381,  
383-5, 389-92
Tanzania  83
Ta Prohm temple, see also 
inscription(s)    379
Tārā  376, 386, 403
Tathāgata(s), see also Buddha(s) 
391
Tathāgatatattvasaṃgraha-
nāmamahāyānasūtra (STTS)  
379, 385
tattoo  93
Tattvasaṃgrahaṭīkā  379
Taungdwingyi  222
Taungoo  229
Tāvatiṃsa/Trāyastriṃśa,  
see also Heaven of the 
Thirty-three  232, 275-6
taxes  415
teak, see also wood(s)  414
Telakaṭāhagāthā  242
Tenasserim  408, 414
tenon  183
Teṅpāsnaga  383-4, 393
Ter  93
terrace  34, 37, 59, 62, 74, 79, 
119, 230
terracotta  139, 146-7, 222-3, 
225, 241, 246, 256-7, 260, 
267 n. 15, n. 17, 268 n. 29, 
324-5, 339, 341, 361-2
Tha Chana  80-1, 99-100, 
102, 104-5
Tha Chin  64
Tha Khae  122, 128
Tha Maka district  312
Tha Sala district  140, 157
Thagya hpaya  361-2
Thai-French Archaeological 
Mission  69, 79, 87 
Thailand
central  75, 119, 123, 188, 
223, 241, 243, 247, 254, 
257-9, 261-2, 266 n. 1, 
311, 324, 326-7, 331, 
335, 385, 397-8,, 406, 
408, 413
eastern  140, 155, 169, 
241, 247
north-central  324, 331
northeast  74, 91, 189-91, 
200, 241, 243, 247, 259, 
262, 267 n. 19, n. 22, 
324, 342, 344, 353-68, 
375, 397, 399, 406, 408, 
414-5, 418 n. 1
northern  91
peninsular  76-7, 105,  
153-71, 179-81, 184
southern  81, 107, 137, 
147, 223
west-central  331-2, 345
western  311-2, 324, 397, 
406, 408-9, 412-4
Thai-Malay Peninsula, see also 
Malay Peninsula  8, 20, 
69, 76, 99, 107, 110-11, 
147, 304 
Thala Borivat  187, 191, 
203-4, 210
Tham Phra Phothisat, see also 
Bodhisattva cave  139
Tham Prasat cave  197-8
Tham Ruesi, see also Hermit 
cave  139
Tham Sinlapa  177 
Tham Thuai caves  80
Thamala (prince)  225, 227, 
233
Thanh Hoa  77
Thap Chumphon  245, 247, 
257
That Don Sai  195
That In Hang  187, 200-1, 
204, 209, 211
That Phon  187, 200-2, 209
That Sikhot  203
Thaton  219, 225-6, 228, 
232-3, 235, 353-4, 358-63, 
366-8
The Ayutthaya Chronicle of 
Phanchanthanumat  64
Thepa (valley)  175
Theravāda, see Buddhism(s)
Thermoluminescence dating  
182
Thiphakorawong  24, 27
Thme Kre  203
Thon Buri  64
three gems/jewels  241-2
Three Pagodas Pass  313, 
408, 413-4
threshold  179, 181-2, 192
throne  364-5
throwing stick  101
Thung Setthi  339
Thung Tuek  222
thunderbolt, see vajra(s)
Thūpavaṃsa  20, 22
Tibetans  390
tigers  126
tin  77, 147, 414
tin ores  76
Tipiṭaka, see Pāli Canon
tīrtha(s)  135, 384, 393,  
394 n. 3
Tonle Sap  191, 408, 414-5
tooth-filing  312, 318-9
tortoise  111
touchstone  81
town plan  331
trade/trading  9, 125, 144, 
226, 233, 411, 413, 416
boom  108
community  180
network(s)  78, 91, 100, 
135, 414
overland  143, 198
posts  7
route(s)  8, 299, 342, 368, 
413
station/centre(s)  183, 412
trans-isthmian  184
traders, see also merchant(s)  
112
Trailokyavijaya  376, 378-9, 
385, 387-9, 392
Trailokyavijayamaṇḍala  376, 
379
Traiphum  286
trala/tarla, see also Old Mon  
246-7
trans-Asiatic networks  86
trans-isthmian route(s)  176-7

--- PAGE 218 ---
432
transitional zone  62
transregional network  86
transpeninsular route(s)  84, 
99-100
trapeang, see also pond(s)  196, 
203
Trapeang Veng  154
Tra Vinh province  154
treasure  207
tribute  111, 418 n. 13
trident, see triśūla
trimūrti  192-3, 232
triratna, see also three gems   
76, 275-6
triśūla  193
Tuol Chi Tep  378
Tuol Koh province  154
turban  159
Turbinella pyrum  154
turtle  127, 193
tutelary deity  104
tympanum  275
U Taphao  128, 287
U Thong district/town   
83, 100, 109, 123, 128, 
138-40, 147, 154, 217, 
222-3, 233, 243, 259, 268 
n. 29, 286-7, 289, 332, 
336, 338-9, 408, 413
U Thong National Museum  
139, 223, 241, 339, 345
Ubon Ratchathani province/
town  197-8, 200, 211
ubosot, see also ordination hall  
26, 343, 354, 360
Udāna  253-5, 267 n. 24
Udon Thani province/town  
140, 359, 406, 411, 416
Umā  211 n. 13
universal king(s), see also 
cakravartin  247
Upmung Se Su  187, 192, 196
uposatha  355
Urāṅganidāna (“Tale of the 
Breastbone”)  18, 20
urban centre(s), see also moated 
settlement(s)/town(s)  144, 
232, 331, 335, 342, 344, 
346, 357, 415
urbanism/urbanisation  69, 
331, 336, 346
urn  325
uṣṇīṣa, see also cranial 
protuberance  362
Utdor Meanchey  197
Uthai Thani province/town  
267 n. 12
Uttara  24
vahnigṛha, see also house(s) of 
Fire  399
Vairocana, see Buddha(s
Vaiṣṇava iconography/
image(s)/ sculpture(s),  
see also Viṣṇu  153-71, 211
Vaiṣṇavism  158, 274
vajra(s)  286, 378, 385, 387-8, 
391, 394 n. 9, 404
Vajradhara  377, 391, 404, 
406-7
Vajradhātumaṇḍala  378, 394 n. 7
Vajrapāṇi  275, 376, 378-9, 
385, 388-9, 392
vajrāsana  358
Vajrasattva  377, 382-4, 387, 
389, 391-2
Vajrayāna, see Buddhism(s)
Vajrin  378-9, 380-1, 384, 392
Vanaspati, see also Buddha-on-
a-monster  285
vases  402
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa  153,  
157-64, 167
vault  315
Vedas  158
Vedic  135-6, 143
veṇuvana, see Bamboo Grove
Vesāli  353, 355-6, 358, 367
Vessantarajātaka, see jātaka(s)
Veun Khan  211
Vidhurapaṇḍitajātaka, see jātaka(s) 
Vidhyādharas  274
Vientiane  189, 191, 201, 
207, 244
Vietnam  11, 111, 189, 192-3
central  188, 286
northern  75, 77, 91
southern  75-6, 84, 107, 
147, 154-5, 166, 204, 
211-2, 256, 268 n. 29,  
n. 30, 273
vihāra(s), see also wihan  138, 
246, 267 n. 17, 315,  
317-20, 322, 343
Vilavetti (copper plates)  148
Vinaya, see also Pāli Canon  
256, 355
vinayas (non-Pāli)  266 n. 9
Viṣṇu  135, 139-40, 142,  
153-71, 193, 198, 210, 
233, 275
caturviṃśatimūrti  158
four arms (caturbhuja)  154
mitred  154, 159-63, 169, 
332
no. 1 from Cibuaya  160, 
166
Viṣṇupurāṇa  277
Viśvakarman  20-1
Viśvarūpa  163
Vong The  154
votive
plaque  137
stūpa(s)  179, 185 n. 2
tablet(s), see also moulded/
clay  179, 311
Vṛṣṇi Vīra(s)  158-9, 162
Vuen Kaen  195
waistband  169
walls  183, 219, 221, 223, 
226, 333, 344-5
Wang Pai  128
warfare  74 
warriors  312, 314, 319-21
Wat Ban Fang Daeng  193
Wat Ban Na Sam  402
Wat Chom Chuen  321,  
324-5
Wat Dong Sak  317
Wat Kaeng Toi  211
Wat Kamphaeng Laen  398, 
402
Wat Kamphaeng Saen  333, 
339
Wat Khlong  334 n. 7
Wat Khlong Thom (museum) 
147
Wat Krapau Brik  154
Wat Lakhon  195, 211
Wat Luang Kau, see 
inscription(s)
Wat Mahathat
Lop Buri  245, 253
Ratchaburi  398-9, 402
Wat Maheyong, see 
inscription(s)
Wat Matchimawat (museum)  
258
Wat Mokkhalan  140
Wat Non Sila  140
Wat Pathumthararam  80
Wat Phanan Choeng  61
Wat Phetcharik  181
Wat Pho  138
Wat Phra Borommathat 
(Wat Phra Mahathat 
Woramahawihan)  20-2, 
156 n. 10
Wat Phra Mahathat 
(museum)  156
Wat Phra Men  257-8, 288-9
Wat Phra Phai Luang  398
Wat Phra Phikanet  140
Wat Phra Phreng  156,  
159-63, 165-69, 170 n. 10
Wat Phra Prathon  23
Wat Phromtin Tai  121
Wat Phu  187-90, 192-8, 204, 
206, 210-2, 274
Wat Phu (museum)  211
Wat Sa Kaeo  198
Wat Sai Kham  157
Wat Sala Thueng  140, 156
Wat Sang-O  189
Wat Saphan Hin  288
Wat Sawang Chat Pracha 
Bamrung  333 n. 4
Wat Sibunrueang  364-5
Wat Si Chum  288
Wat Si Sawai  398-9
Wat Si That (Pramancha)  
140, 358
Wat Sithor, see inscription(s)
Wat Ta Nen  156-7, 165-9
Wat Thammasala  288
Wat Thao Khot  182
Wat Trang  183
water vessel (loṭā)  93, 96
water-pot(s)  193, 338, 360
Watthana  408, 414-5, 417
weapon  315, 317, 322
wheel(s)  387, 390, 392 
of the Law, see also 
dharmacakra(s)  245, 
253-5, 261
Wiang Sa  140
Wimala (prince)  225, 227, 
233
wihan, see also vihāra 25-6, 290
Winka  223, 225, 233, 236
wood(s)  182, 356, 358, 413-4
wood apple  165
Wu dynasty  112
Wu Miao  112
Xuwen  110
Yai Hom  25-6
yajñopavīta, see sacred thread
yakkha(s)/yakṣa(s)  231, 364
Yala province  177
yantra  22
Yanxi  111
Yao Silian  112
Yarang (archaeological 
complex)  175-80, 183, 
273, 290
Yaśodharapura, see also 
Angkor  412, 415
Yasothon province  198, 211
Yathebyan  230
Ye dhammā  121, 139, 246-7, 
256-62, 264-5, 268 n. 35, 
285
Yeleśwaram  159, 163-4
Yijing  241, 243, 261,  
266-7 n. 9
Yoga Tantras  379
yogin(s)  387-8
yoginī(s)  376, 386-92
Yoginī Tantras  390
yonī(s)  141, 181, 183-4
Zhejiang  77
Zhenla  187, 189, 206, 212, 
274, 287, 297, 299, 304
Zimkyaik  219, 236

