--- Page 1 ---
Book Reviews
629
References
Murray Li, Tania.  2007.  The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development, and the Practice of Politics. 
Durham: Duke University Press.
Piketty, Thomas.  2014.  Capital in the Twenty-First Century.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Scott, James C.  2009.  The Art of Not Being Governed: An Anarchist History of Upland Southeast Asia. 
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt.  2005.  Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connections.  Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Champions of Buddhism: Weikza Cults in Contemporary Burma
BÉNÉDICTE BRAC DE LA PERRIÈRE, GUILLAUME ROZENBERG, and ALICIA TURNER, eds.
Singapore: NUS Press, 2014, xxvii+261p.
Exciting things are happening in the study of Burmese Buddhism.  Recent years have seen the 
publication of very important contributions to our understanding of this field.  In particular, inves-
tigations of the roots of the “mindfulness” meditation phenomenon as a Burmese reaction to 
colonialism have garnered attention far beyond a scholarly audience concerned with Burma exclu-
sively (for example, Braun 2013).  Though fascinating, this focus on the origins and spread of the 
so-called vipassanā meditation movement has neglected what Kate Crosby, in the preface to 
 Champions of Buddhism, calls “the Other Burmese Buddhism,” by which she means the popular 
yet politically marginal set of practices belonging to the so-called weikza-path.  It is to examining 
this path that Champions of Buddhism is devoted, both as an introduction to this under-investigated 
phenomenon and as a stimulus to further inquiries into the nature of Buddhism in Burma and Bud-
dhist global modernity in general.  In both respects, it succeeds marvelously.
Unless they are experts in Burmese Buddhism, readers may at this point wonder what exactly 
is meant by the term weikza.  In the foreword to the volume, the editors give a good idea by describ-
ing weikza as “a religious virtuoso” (p. ix).  Because of his behavior, meditation skills, and expertise 
in the magical arts, a weikza attains the ability to live very long, with the purpose of being present 
when the next Buddha, Maitreya, appears in our world.  Though the usage of magic with the explicit 
purpose of lengthening one’s life may not sound very “Buddhist” to some, one argument that this 
volume forcefully makes is that such practices are as Buddhist as monks singing sutras or meditat-
ing in temples.  In her preface (the book has both a foreword and a preface, but—puzzlingly—no 
introduction), Crosby explores this alternative Burmese Buddhism by sketching the practical, 
political, and ideological motivations that have kept it in obscurity for so long.  Together with 
Steven Collins’ postscript, Crosby’s piece connects the materials in the volume to a larger context, 
a context that is sometimes lost in the detailed accounts collected here.
The main body of the volume is divided into three thematic parts.  In the first, the weikza 
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 2 ---
Book Reviews
630
phenomenon is further defined by contrasting it to a number of other Burmese Buddhist and non-
Buddhist indigenous practices.  In chapter 1, Patrick Pranke distinguishes weikza from another, 
better known ideal, that of the arahant (Sanskrit: arhat).  Whereas the latter are the ultimate goal 
of practitioners in the vipassanā tradition, the former belong to a different, esoteric path.  Neverthe-
less, both arhats and weikza are revered after their physical body has disappeared (which does not 
mean that they are considered “dead”).  In the course of his description, Pranke provides a useful 
history of Buddhism in colonial and postcolonial Burma, serving to orient the reader for the 
chapters to come.  In the next chapter, Juliane Schober expands this comparison between vipassanā 
and weikza practices by affirming that, although weikza are certainly marginalized politically (not 
having strong connections with the Burmese leaders), doctrinally they are firmly Theravāda Bud-
dhist.  In the last chapter of the first part, Bénédicte Brac de la Perrière introduces a final distinc-
tion, namely between different types of spirit mediums: on the one hand, there are the nat gadaw, 
who contact the spirits of dead Burmese kings.  On the other, there are the bodaw or medaw, who 
contact the spirits of physically departed weikza.  Brac de la Perrière’s discussion is interesting for 
several reasons, not in the least because the division she describes is gendered: whereas weikza 
mediums tend to be male, nat gadaw tend to be female.
The second part of the book then details the role of weikza as protectors of Buddhism.  In what 
I found the most stimulating contribution to the volume, Niklas Foxeus shows that the ariya-weikza 
organization, a millenarian group centered around a historical person who claimed to be a weikza, 
can be adequately characterized as a Buddhist fundamentalist group with an anti-Western and 
anti-colonial agenda.  Though the group does not itself perpetrate violence, adherents claim their 
meditation efforts and rituals lead to the demise of many who threaten Burmese Buddhism. 
Recently, this group’s primary targets have become Muslims who mass-migrated to Burma under 
British colonial rule.  The group’s stance reminds one of the combative Burmese monks whom we 
have seen appear in the news headlines more and more often.  Foxeus concludes his fascinating 
treatment with a consideration of how these Buddhists justify violence doctrinally, in other words, 
how bringing about someone’s death is not a violation of the Buddhist precept of non-violence.  In 
the next contribution to the second part, Keiko Tosa provides a detailed overview of how weikza 
are called upon to ensure the successful completion of pagodas.  In the process, weikza can often 
steer the construction of such pagodas to reflect their personal viewpoints.
The last part of the book continues the trend of Tosa’s examination by detailing other weikza 
practices.  Thomas Patton documents how sacred diagrams are constructed and used.  This focus 
on non-canonical material allows him to criticize conventional approaches to Buddhism, which tend 
to be normative in trying to discern the “real” Buddhism.  Patton shows that such approaches are 
not only misguided; they also play into the hands of those who would cast Burma as a protector of 
such a “pure” Buddhism.  The last two chapters of the volume, by Céline Coderey and Guillaume 
Rozenberg, both address the roles of weikza as healers of non-conventional diseases.  Coderey 
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service

--- Page 3 ---
Book Reviews
631
does this within Arakan, a province located in the periphery of Burma.  Despite being located at 
the fringes, Arakan healers nevertheless utilize the prestige of weikza to boost the power and 
prestige of their healing practices.  Finally, Guillaume Rozenberg further explores one specific 
healing practice, namely exorcism.  He is concerned mainly with how weikza exorcists see their 
own practice, which he situates between active and passive: on the one hand, the exorcist lets 
another power act through him.  On the other, the manifestation of this power depends on his 
personal virtues.
In exploring a phenomenon about which we know comparatively little, Champions of Buddhism 
does a superb job.  The volume is very well organized, beautifully illustrated, and the contributions 
are consistently of high quality.  My criticisms stem mostly from my position as neither an expert 
on Burma nor an anthropologist.  Since this material is in dialogue with the larger theme of Bud-
dhism and modernity, it could have provided interested readers from different fields a better way 
in by providing a comprehensive glossary.  Such a glossary is included, but at merely three pages 
it is wholly insufficient for a reader for whom many of the Burmese and Pāli terms will be unfamil-
iar.  For example, in the opening essay sentences like the following caused me pause: “Waya-zawta 
[a monk] promised his followers sotāpanna through anāgāmī status if they would follow his teach-
ings” (p. 4).  Another problem is that the preoccupation with documenting phenomena that were 
previously not described (such as the building of pagodas, how magical inscriptions work, and so 
on) prevents many of the contributors in the book from making more solid connections with the 
socio-political realities of post-colonial Burma.  For example, though we are consistently told that 
weikza are politically marginalized, a consistent analysis of why this is the case is not provided.  As 
I said before, the preface and postscript partly address this problem, but it would have been better 
had such connections been integrated throughout the volume.  However, these are minor objec-
tions to a work that both continues exciting conversations and breaks new ground.
Ben Van Overmeire
Literature Department, University of California, San Diego
Reference
Braun, Erik.  2013.  The Birth of Insight: Meditation, Modern Buddhism, and the Burmese Monk Ledi 
Sayadaw.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service