# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2015-blackburn-buddhist-connections-in-the-indian-ocean.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 14:04:08
# Total Pages: 30
# File Size: 0.25 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 2801.1 chars/page, total chars: 84,033)
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
© koninklijke brill nv, leiden, 5 | doi 0.63/568509-34374
Journal of the Economic and  
Social History of the Orient 58 (05) 37-66
brill.com/jesh
Buddhist Connections in the Indian Ocean: 
Changes in Monastic Mobility, 1000-1500
Anne M. Blackburn
Cornell University
amb242@cornell.edu
Abstract
Since the nineteenth century, Buddhists residing in the present-day nations of 
Myanmar, Thailand, and Sri Lanka have thought of themselves as participants in a 
shared southern Asian Buddhist world characterized by a long and continuous history 
of integration across the Bay of Bengal region, dating at least to the third century BCE 
reign of the Indic King Asoka. Recently, scholars of Buddhism and historians of the 
region have begun to develop a more historically variegated account of Buddhism in 
South and Southeast Asia, using epigraphic, art historical, and archaeological evi-
dence, as well as new interpretations of Buddhist chronicle texts.1 This paper examines 
* I am grateful to the anonymous reviewers at JESHO for their incisive and helpful comments 
during the preparation of this article and to Dr. Paolo Sartori for his dedicated editorial 
guidance. Early versions of some of the material discussed here were presented at the Asia 
Research Institute of the National University of Singapore, the Department of History at 
the National University of Singapore, the Institute for Comparative Modernities at Cornell 
University, and Stanford University’s Ho Center for Buddhist Studies. Research contribut-
ing to this article was made possible by a Senior Research Fellowship at the Asia Research 
Institute of the National University of Singapore. During that period I benefited from conver-
sations with many colleagues. I offer special thanks to Prasenjit Duara, Michael Feener, Geoff 
Wade, Alexey Kirichenko, and Christian Lammerts.
1   “Chronicles” is a term of art, used here to refer collectively to texts composed in Pāli or local 
literary vernacular languages derived, directly or indirectly, from the Pāli-language vaṃsa 
genre popularized in Laṅkā (now Sri Lanka) during the first millennium CE. In the Buddhist 
world, vaṃsas are texts that celebrate the lineage of a place, person, polity, community, and/
or object, typically in relation to Buddhist monastic institutions and royal families. Shared 
access, direct or indirect, to Mahāvaṃsa, an early sixth-century Pāli-language text from the 
kingdom of Anurādhapura in Laṅkā, led to the popularization of a written style celebrating 
monastic-cum-royal institutional developments in the Buddhist world (sāsana).

--- PAGE 2 ---
238
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
three historical episodes in the eleventh- to fifteenth-century history of Sri Lankan-
Southeast Asian Buddhist connections attested by epigraphic and Buddhist chronicle 
accounts. These indicate changes in regional Buddhist monastic connectivity during 
the period 1000-1500, which were due to new patterns of mobility related to changing 
conditions of trade and to an altered political ecosystem in maritime southern Asia.
Keywords
Buddhism – Buddhist chronicles – Buddhist networks – Indian Ocean – Sri Lanka
 
Introduction
Writing from self-imposed exile in Laṅkā in 1897, the Siamese monk-prince 
Prisdang (Jinavāravaṃsa), formerly a high-level envoy from Bangkok to many 
European capitals, celebrated the forthcoming visit of the Siamese king 
Chulalongkorn to the island colony as an opportunity to renew long-standing 
connections of Buddhist fraternity and amity among the “nations” of Ceylon, 
Burma, and Siam. Prisdang sought to make King Chulalongkorn the pro-
tector of Buddhism in the region and to subsume all Buddhist monks from 
these three locations in an ecclesiastical council administered from Bangkok 
(Blackburn 2010: 167-86). Prisdang’s vision of enduring connections between 
Laṅkā, Burma, and Siam would have come as no surprise to most of his monas-
tic colleagues in Laṅkā and Southeast Asia, as the nineteenth century was a 
period of intense communication among Buddhist monks in Laṅkā, Burma, 
and Siam, as they sought to address intellectual, political, and institutional 
challenges to Buddhism linked to French and British colonial projects in the 
region (Reynolds 1973; Malalgoda 1976; Blackburn 2010). The Buddhists of 
Prisdang’s day studied Buddhist textual reports of historical trans-regional 
connection, seeking models and precedents for nineteenth-century activities.
While Prisdang and his monastic colleagues often celebrated unbroken 
Buddhist connections in the Indian Ocean region in a manner that empha-
sized continuities with the era of the third-century BCE King Asoka, scholars 
of Buddhism and historians of the region have lately begun to forge a more 
detailed and temporally sensitive account of Buddhist mobility and religio-
cultural exchange and influence across South and Southeast Asian lands. This 
article is intended as a contribution to our understanding of Buddhist mobil-
ity and trans-regional Buddhist institution-building, focusing on the period 
between 1000 and 1500. It examines three episodes of trans-regional Buddhist

--- PAGE 3 ---
239
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
activity recounted in epigraphic and/or Buddhist chronicle sources: the 
importation of Buddhist bhikkhus (fully ordained monks) from Ramañña to 
Poḷonnāruva, in Laṅkā, during the late eleventh century, the pilgrimage jour-
ney of the Sukhothai Buddhist monk Si Satha to Laṅkā in the early fourteenth 
century, and the embassy sent by Bago’s King Dhammazedi to Koṭṭē in Laṅkā in 
the late fifteenth century to secure a new monastic higher-ordination lineage 
for bhikkhus in Bago. These events are all instances of trans-regional southern2 
Asian Buddhist connection, involving ties between Laṅkā and Southeast Asian 
Buddhist locations. They might be said to support monk-prince Prisdang’s 
invocation of a regional Buddhist history of continuous fraternity and support. 
Examined more closely, however, they reveal significant differences, including 
the scale of activity, the geographic locus of Buddhist authority in the transac-
tion, and the routes and technologies involved in Buddhist travel. This paper 
argues that these three episodes of Buddhist mobility across oceanic space and 
the borders of polity reflect changes in the trading and political ecosystem of the 
Indian Ocean in the first half of the second millennium CE, as well as the gradual 
crystallization of new forms of royal and monastic Buddhist institution-building 
that relied on trans-regional communication and the transmission of Buddhist 
texts, ideas, and persons. Attending to them closely helps us envision in a more 
nuanced manner a dynamic history of Buddhist connection during this period.
1 
Bhikkhus from Ramañña
According to Cūlavaṃsa chapters composed in the thirteenth century,3 King 
Vijayabāhu I (r. 1058-1114), ruling from Poḷonnāruva after defeating Cōla forces 
in the mid-1070s, restored Laṅkā’s Buddhist monastic community by bringing 
fully ordained Buddhist monks from Ramañña to recommence a bhikkhu lin-
eage within the island.
2   In the pages that follow, I generally use the term “southern Asia” when referring to the geo-
graphic space encompassing Laṅkā, the southern Indian mainland, and locations typically 
referred to as falling within ‘Southeast Asia.’ The mobile persons and communities investi-
gated here understood themselves to function within a broad trans-regional geography that 
transcends the boundaries of current academic area studies. The frameworks of “South Asia” 
and “Southeast Asia” are of recent vintage, established during the Cold War. Relying on those 
frameworks and the anachronistic distinction between them makes it more difficult to rec-
ognize Laṅkā’s historical participation within networks and processes traversing the wider 
region.
3   Cūlavaṃsa extends the earlier Mahāvaṃsa chronicle and was composed serially. The chap-
ters describing Vijayabāhu I are in the section composed during the thirteenth century.

--- PAGE 4 ---
240
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
As there not enough bhikkhus to fulfill the quorum for higher ordination 
and other monastic rituals, focused on the stability of the sāsana [Buddhist 
tradition], the Ruler of Men had messengers with presents sent to the 
realm of Ramañña, into the presence of his friend King Anuruddha. From 
there he had brought bhikkhus characterized by moral discipline and 
other virtues, with a complete knowledge of the Three Piṭakas [Buddhist 
“scriptures”], who were acknowledged as senior monks [theras]. Having 
had them reverenced with costly gifts, the Ruler of Men had many acts of 
first and final monastic ordination performed (Cūlavaṃsa 60: 4-7).4
4   I have revised the translation in Geiger (1992). This is also reported in Pūjavaliya, Rājāvaliya, 
and Nikāya Saṅgrahaya. See also EZ 2.40.
Map of the Bay of Bengal and the Indian Ocean, 1000-1500. We gratefully acknowledge the 
assistance of Michael Hradesky, Staff Cartographer, Ball State University.
Mantai
Nagore
Nāgapattanam
Kovalam
KALINGA
MALABAR COAST
LANKA
Koṭṭē
Anurādhapura
Trincomalee
Poḷonnāruva
Bagan
Bago
Pathein
BURMA
DELTA
Mottama
Sukhothai
Dawai
Tennassarim
Ayutthaya
CHAMPA
Gulf 
of
Siam
Melaka
Strait of Melaka
Kengtung
Phitsanulok
Chiang Mai
Nakhon Si Thammarat
Bay
of 
Bengal
C
O
R
O
M
A
N
D
E
L
  
C
O
A
S
T
0
0
500 km
500 mi
Ava

--- PAGE 5 ---
241
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
Seen from the perspective of Laṅkā’s later Kandyan and colonial periods 
( seventeenth-twentieth centuries), characterized by a large volume of ordination 
traffic between Kandy, Arakan, Bago, Ayutthaya, Bangkok, Amarapura, and 
Mandalay (Malalgoda 1976; Blackburn 2001, 2010), Vijayabāhu I’s overtures to 
Ramañña appear unremarkable.
Vijayabāhu I’s importation of bhikkhus from Ramañña is, however, the first 
introduction of non-Lankan monks into the island for ordination purposes 
reported in Mahāvaṃsa-Cūlavaṃsa chronicles after the establishment of the 
Lankan monastic order at Anurādhapura, in the time of the third-century 
BCE King Asoka. Although many other instances of monastic reorganization 
or renewal of royal favor to monastics are reported in these chronicles before 
the eleventh-century era of Vijayabāhu I, there is no reference to ordination 
through or with foreign monks after the foundational acts of Asoka’s son and 
emissary Mahinda. Given the extant evidence, we cannot know with certainty 
whether foreign monks were used for this purpose earlier but not celebrated as 
such in royal-monastic narratives, but there is no reference to such activities in 
extant inscriptions or in the Nikāya Saṅgrahaya, a Sinhala-language monastic 
history composed in the late fourteenth century. At the least, the thirteenth-
century Cūlavaṃsa treatment of Vijayabāhu I’s activities marks an important 
shift in Lankan literary imaginings of the Buddhist world and trans-regional 
possibilities for the creation and re-creation of Buddhist institutions.
It is possible that Vijayabāhu I’s move to import bhikkhus from Ramañña 
marks the start of such ordination traffic on the island. The timing supports 
such a hypothesis, inasmuch as the period of Cōla rule in Laṅkā (1017-69/70) 
appears to have been the first occasion in which local rulers of the island’s 
Anurādhapura-based polity were displaced by foreign powers for a sustained 
period. Cōla rule on the island was long enough to affect at least two genera-
tions of Buddhist monastics. Perhaps Cōla attacks on Buddhist properties—
narrated but probably sensationalized in Cūlavaṃsa (55: 20-22)—and/or the 
transfer of the capital eastward from Anurādhapura to Poḷonnāruva inter-
rupted the patronage and ritual systems of Anurādhapura on a scale large 
enough to render Buddhist monastic institutional and ritual life dysfunctional. 
This would have required the reintroduction of Buddhist monastic ordination 
lineages and practices after the end of Cōla rule. Or, perhaps Buddhist monastic 
institutional and ritual life did continue on the island during the Cōla era from 
the new capital at Poḷonnāruva. In that case, the move by Vijayabāhu I’s court 
to introduce a bhikkhu lineage from Ramañña would have provided a means 
to replace a Cōla-supported monastic administration with one loyal to the 
new court. Vijayabāhu I’s choice of monks from Ramañña followed his earlier

--- PAGE 6 ---
242
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
overture to the ruler of Ramañña (Cūlavaṃsa 58: 8-10).5 This is the first  reference 
in the Mahāvaṃsa-Cūlavaṃsa chronicles to such a diplomatic overture to a 
location in what we now call Southeast Asia. The name Ramañña refers to 
the southern maritime region of what is now Burma, as the same Cūlavaṃsa 
author, when describing a twelfth-century Lankan raid on Kusumi (Pathein), 
refers to Kusumi (Pathein) and Ukkama (Mottama) as in Ramañña (Cūlavaṃsa 
76: 59-67; Epigraphia Zeylanica 3.34).6 It is possible that the Aniruddha men-
tioned in the context of imported Buddhist monks is King Anawrahta of Bagan 
(r. 1044-77), given Bagan’s growing interest in southern maritime commercial 
centers (Aung-Thwin 2005, 111-3; Hall 2011, 218). Bagan’s efforts to control the 
delta may have been recognized at Poḷonnāruva. On the other hand, the name 
may have been used to refer to a local ruler in Ramañña at that time or applied 
retrospectively by the thirteenth-century author of Cūlavaṃsa on the basis 
of reports of Burmese kingship circulating in the Buddhist world by the thir-
teenth century.7
The orientation of Vijayabāhu I towards Ramañña for projects Buddhist 
and otherwise is more intelligible when seen in a wider Indian Ocean context. 
Laṅkā’s place in the Indian Ocean trading sphere changed during the eleventh 
and twelfth centuries. These changes had implications for Lankan military and 
diplomatic activities and for how Buddhist persons, ideas, and practices moved 
to and from the island. The eleventh century saw a sharp rise in international 
trade through the Indian Ocean region, due to the coincidence of three strong, 
trade-oriented polities: the Cōlas, the Song, and the Fāṭimids (e.g., Kulke 1999: 
5   The Pāli passage is ambiguous, however, as to whether the “ships filled with goods including 
diverse items such as camphor and sandalwood” were those carrying gifts from Vijayabāhu I 
to Ramañña or received from the latter.
6   Cf. Aung-Thwin (2005: 49). Nikāya Saṅgrahaya, composed in the thirteenth century and 
indebted to the Mahāvaṃsa-Cūlavaṃsa chronicle, also refers to Ramañña (in Sinhala, 
Aramaṇa) when discussing Vijayabāhu I’s importation of monks (cf. Aung-Thwin (2005: 51). 
Note “Kusima” in Cūlavaṃsa’s thirteenth-century Pāli usage (cf. Aung-Thwin 2005: 60).
7   It is unclear what Lankan Buddhists knew about Bagan and other Burmese and Mon sites by 
this time and whether any textual accounts of Anawrahta circulated in Laṅkā. The Burmese 
and Pāli chronicles from Burma that mention Anawrahta were compiled later. On the tex-
tualization of Anawrahta and the possibility that Buddhists in Bagan, northern Thailand, 
and Laṅkā understood themselves as participants in a Buddhist oikoumene starting in the 
eleventh century, see Goh (2007: esp. 18). There is, however, no extant textual or epigraphic 
record of that understanding so early, as Goh recognizes (59). Goh’s study is a salutary 
reminder that we have much to learn about pre-modern southern Asian Buddhists’ concep-
tion of the geographic and political space of Buddha sāsana (the world of Buddhism).

--- PAGE 7 ---
243
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
20; Ray 1999: 37).8 Smaller ports supplied local and subregional commodities 
to larger outlets. Relationships between smaller and larger ports, and the char-
acter and volume of commodity flows, were dynamic, being reconstituted in 
response to changing political and military conditions and market demands. 
Hall has aptly characterized this trading world as a “poly-centric networked 
realm” (2010: 113).9
Competition for control of ports and goods in the region stretching from 
India and Laṅkā to insular Southeast Asia resulted in rapidly shifting politico-
military arrangements (including expansion of Cōla power in the region) 
and the extension of trade guilds and material forms associated with south-
ern India.10 Archaeological and inscriptional evidence from Laṅkā points to 
the eleventh century as a transformative period for the island’s trans-regional 
engagements, including a greater impact of the China trade. Bopearachchi 
notes that Chinese coins appear in the island’s archaeological record begin-
ning in the eleventh century, including finds at the new political centers that 
developed southwest of Anurādhapura and Poḷonnāruva (1996: 72-3). Evidence 
from ceramics is also striking. In the late first millennium, Near Eastern and 
Chinese ceramics made their way to Lankan ports (including Mantai). By the 
eleventh century, however, “the former balance between Chinese and Near 
Eastern ceramic goods . . . tipped sharply towards the Chinese” (Prickett-
Fernando 1990: 71).11 Cōla threats to the island from southern India and Laṅkan 
courtly engagement with Ramañña are signs of the island’s changing place in 
Indian Ocean circuits oriented to the expanding trans-oceanic trade between 
Egypt and China. The location of the kingdom of Poḷonnāruva made it read-
ily accessible to such wider oceanic processes. It was connected by riverine 
routes to the eastern port of Trincomalee, which came to dominate Lankan 
trade during the eleventh century, outstripping the earlier centrality of Mantai 
in the northwest (Kirabamune 1985: 101; Kirabamune 2013: 51-2; Bopearachchi 
1996: 72).
8    
 Wade (2009) provides a valuable summary of relevant changes in Song China, includ-
ing new financial systems, internal trade regions, and demographic changes in Fujian. 
See Christie (1998a: 253; 1998b: 369) for arguments that the Southeast Asian trade boom 
began in the tenth century.
9    
 See further Abraham (1988), Karashima (2009b), Kulke (1999), Hall (2011), Jacq-
Hergoualc’h (2002), McKinnon (2011), and Wade (2009).
10    See also Sen (2003, 159, 220-4). According to Karashima (2009a), the twelfth century was 
the high point of Tamil-language trade guild inscriptions extant in Sri Lanka. See also 
Velupillai (1971: 46, 48; 1972: 13, 19-21).
11    See also Kanazawa (2004) and Karashima (2004).

--- PAGE 8 ---
244
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
This context illuminates connections between the Poḷonnāruva court 
of Vijayabāhu I and Ramañña, as well as the unprecedented reference to 
trans-regional Buddhist monastic reordination in Cūlavaṃsa’s chapters on 
Vijayabāhu I. The shift of the northern Lankan royal center from Anurādhapura 
to Poḷonnāruva—thus providing better access to eastern trading sectors 
through Trincomalee, contemporary with the expanding speed and volume 
of Indian Ocean trade—greatly altered conditions in which Lankan Buddhist 
institution-building and reorganization occurred. The introduction of 
bhikkhus from Ramañña to Poḷonnāruva to establish a new lineage of fully 
ordained Buddhist monks in Vijayabāhu I’s realm signals an early phase of 
intensifying high-level Buddhist connections between the island and main-
land Southeast Asia.12
2 
A Sukhothai Pilgrim to Laṅkā
The undated Sukhothai inscription no. 2 records the Buddhist devotional activ-
ities of a high-placed monk, Venerable Si Satha, born into the leading family of 
the neighboring Rat kingdom, which had helped to secure Sukhothai’s inde-
pendence from Khmer control during the eleventh century. The inscription 
celebrating Si Satha’s activities is remarkable; it is the only extant Sukhothai 
inscription that rivals royal epigraphs in its detailed account of religious 
patronage and the patron’s person. Vickery has suggested that the inscription 
was intended to glorify Si Satha’s family line, in a context of regional familial 
rivalry (1978, 212); the inscription readily supports this reading.13 It is also strik-
ing for reporting Si Satha’s activities in a narrative style indebted to biographies 
of Buddha Gautama and to Gautama’s previous life as Bodhisattva Vessantara 
(Griswold and Prasert 1992: 387-9). In inscription no. 2, Si Satha’s construction 
and reconstruction of Buddhist devotional sites includes travels in the area of 
Sukhothai and Si Sajjanalai, as well as Sīhala (Laṅkā).
Si Satha’s journey to Laṅkā probably occurred in the mid-fourteenth cen-
tury. Sukhothai inscription no. 2 portrays him as of the generation of King 
Mahā Dhammarāja I, enthroned in 1347. According to Jinakālamālī, a monk 
12    I do not discuss here the possible travels to Laṅkā from Bagan by the monk Uttarajīva 
and novice Chapada during the late twelfth century. This account appears only in later 
Burmese and Pāli sources and, as Win remarks (2002, esp. 88-9), there is no epigraphic 
reference to a Chapada until 1240 (which may or may not refer to Uttarajīva’s co-traveler) 
and the name Uttarajīva does not appear in Bagan inscriptions. Cf. Goh (2007, 42).
13    See also Griswold and Prasert (1992: 342-96) and Blackburn (2007).

--- PAGE 9 ---
245
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
trained in Ramañña by a Lankan monk reached Sukhothai in the late 1330s or 
early 1340s (Buddhadatta 1962: 84-5). If this is correct, it would probably have 
encouraged the interest of Mahā Dhammarāja I (r. 1347-?) in Lankan Buddhist 
sites, which is evident in Sukhothai inscription no. 3 (dated 1357) (Griswold 
and Prasert 1992: 448-65).14 Reports of Lankan Buddhist sites and institu-
tions circulating at this time informed Si Satha’s journey to Laṅkā. Moreover, 
if Si Satha was a rival to the line of King Mahā Dhammarāja I, as inscription 
no. 2 suggests, a merit-making journey to Laṅkā was a natural response to the 
Sukhothai politics of his time. It provided high status through a competitive 
merit-making that trumped King Mahā Dhammarāja I’s indirect contact with 
Lankan Buddhism, while providing an excellent reason for Si Satha’s departure 
from Sukhothai.15 According to face 2 of insciption no. 11, he spent ten years 
in Laṅkā.
Si Satha’s journey is a sign of changes underway in the relationship of Tai 
and Lankan Buddhist institutions, as Tai Buddhists began to make direct con-
tact with Laṇkā and Lankan Buddhist institutions, rather than mediating their 
contact with desirable Lankan Buddhism through southern maritime realms 
such as Nakhon Si Thammarat and Mottama. Inscriptions no. 2 and 11 are our 
first extant evidence in chronicles or inscriptions of direct monastic contact 
between Tai regions and Laṅkā. These possibilities for direct contact continued 
to develop, as we see from monastic-lineage texts composed in Chiang Mai and 
Kengtung in the northern Thai and Pāli languages and celebrating the travel 
of monks from Chiang Mai and Kengtung to Laṅkā in the 1420s (Buddhadatta 
1962; Swearer and Premchit 1977; Sao Saimong 1971). This journey resulted in 
the creation of the new monastic higher-ordination lineage associated with 
Wat Pa Däng, in what is now northern Thailand and the Burmese Shan States. 
The possibility of direct contact between monks from Tai territories and their 
counterparts in Laṅkā created a new flexibility in the constitution and recon-
stitution of Buddhist monastic lineages and Buddhist institutions in Tai lands. 
Obtaining new ordinations from the island—described as more pure and 
authoritative than those existing previously on local soil—was an effective 
ritual-cum-political tactic. As discussed below, during the fifteenth century Tai 
monastic leaders and royal courts resorted to Lankan Buddhist monastic lin-
eages and Buddhist institutions to reorganize monastic administration in Tai 
territories and to neutralize monks and temples associated with political rivals.
14    See also Coedès (1924: 84-90) and Blackburn 2007.
15    The inscriptions of Sukhothai King Mahā Dhammarāja I reveal his fascination with pro-
ducing copies of Lankan Buddhist relic sites in his realm. See Blackburn (2007).

--- PAGE 10 ---
246
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
The emerging possibilities of Buddhist trans-regional connection indicated 
by Si Satha’s voyage to Laṅkā should be understood in relation to changes in 
the Indian Ocean trading environment during this time, as well as to shifts 
in regional political formations. Trading practices and political relationships 
shifted significantly during the late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in the 
area encompassing the Bay of Bengal, Laṅkā, and the Malay Peninsula. As to 
Buddhist transactions between Tai territories and Laṅkā, the most important 
development during this period was the gradual rise of Ayutthaya in the lower 
Menam River Basin, with access to the Gulf of Siam. The early years of the four-
teenth century—the era of Si Satha and Mahā Dhammarāja I at Sukhothai—
saw the rise of the kingdom that Charnvit calls Ayodhya, a pre-Ayutthayan polity 
able to control Menam River Basin traffic and access to the Gulf of Siam that 
gained strength in the river basin region over several decades through trade and 
effective marriage alliances with other nearby polities (Charnvit 1976: 83-6).16 
Despite tensions with Sukhothai and Chiang Mai, Ayutthaya came to func-
tion as a key entrepôt for maritime Southeast Asia, linked to China, Champa, 
a vast riverine network stretching north and northwest from the mouth of 
the Chao Phraya River, and the Malay Peninsula. This coincided with growing 
Chinese participation in trade within Southeast Asia (Heng 2009: 129), which 
helped reshape port polities in the wider Malay region (213). This extension of 
Ayutthaya’s power involved attacks on locations in insular and lower penin-
sular Southeast Asia during much of the fourteenth and part of the fifteenth 
centuries (Baker 2003: 46-8). By the 1460s Ayutthaya “dominated the affairs of 
the upper Malay Peninsula,” annexing the Tenassarim (1460s) and Dawai (1488) 
regions (Hall 2011: 235; see also Heng 2009: 138). Ayutthaya’s rise altered the 
routes available for Tai Buddhist traffic to Laṅkā, as the inscriptions celebrat-
ing Si Satha themselves suggest. According to face 2 of Sukhothai inscription 
no. 11, Si Satha traveled to Laṅkā by way Kalinga (Orissa), Cōla lands, and the 
kingdom of Malala (Griswold and Prasert 1992: 410-11); we have no information 
about his first port of departure.17 He is explicitly reported to have returned via 
Tennasarim (Tanāvsrī) and Ayutthaya (Ayodyā Sri Rāmadebanagara) (412-13).18
The possibility of generating wealth by dominating sectors of the Indian 
Ocean trade catalyzed the reorganization of political relations also in what 
16    On the maritime trading roots of Ayutthaya’s rise see also Vickery (2010: 293; 2004: 23) and 
Baker (2003). On tributary missions to China from Sukhothai and Xian-guo (eventually, 
Ayutthaya), see Fukami (2004: 63).
17    Griswold and Prasert locate the Malala kingdom on the Malabar coast.
18    See also Coèdes (1924: 149).

--- PAGE 11 ---
247
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
is now Burma.19 Despite warfare with the southern polity of Bago through 
the fourteenth and into the early fifteenth century, Bagan’s successor king-
dom, Innwa, was unable to maintain control of the delta port of Pathein at 
the mouth of the Irrawaddy River on the Indian Ocean, providing access to 
and from northern Burma (Fernquist 2008). Contemporary with the rise of 
Ayutthaya in the fourteenth century was the emergence of Bago as a major pol-
ity in maritime Burma, which extended its reach in the south throughout the 
century (Lieberman 1.126: 130-1; Fernquist 2006: esp. 50-1; Fernquist 2008: esp. 
85-93, Aung-Thwin 2005: 310-11).20 The fourteenth century was thus a transfor-
mative century with respect to regional Buddhist mobility, a century charac-
terized by the final decline of Cōla power in the region and the consolidation 
of two larger Buddhist-inclined polities—Ayutthaya and Bago—active in the 
Burma delta, the Malay Peninsula, and the Gulf of Siam. Both were invested 
in Buddhist institutions and participated substantially in Indian Ocean trade.
3 
King Dhammazedi’s Embassy to Koṭṭē
According to manuscript texts of the Kalyāṇi Inscriptions21 (KI) in 1475, Bago’s 
King Dhammazedi sent an embassy of twenty-two senior bhikkhus, with 
younger monks and attendants, to the court of Koṭṭē, in Laṅkā, to make devo-
tional offerings at the island’s most celebrated pilgrimage locations and to 
obtain a pure monastic higher ordination suitable for Dhammazedi’s realm. 
In these KI texts, the decision to send the embassy is framed in terms of the 
19    See Hall (2010: esp. 113) on the rise of “more port-centered regional states” and Hall (2006: 
esp. 455).
20    Note, however, Hall’s distinction between Ayutthaya and Bago with respect to the degree 
of upstream control achieved by the former (2011: 234).
21    The manuscripts used to prepare the existing print edition of the KI are later and of 
uncertain date, bearing an unclear relationship to the extant epigraphs containing nar-
ratives of King Dhammazedi’s embassy. The epigraphs themselves are in poor condition 
and have not yet been systematically compared to KI manuscripts; see the comments 
by Temple (1893) regarding a comparison of the stones and manuscripts. No mention of 
Dhammazedi’s embassy has yet been found in the literary and inscriptional records of 
Laṅkā. Nonetheless, the details about Lankan geography, monastic leadership, and the 
Lankan court at Koṭṭē are accurate and consistent with other, Lankan, literary sources 
from the period. See Sannasgala (1964) and Ilangasinha (1992). The KI’s treatment of 
Buddhist history, monastic discipline, and the technical details of Buddhist ritual life sug-
gest that it draws on a variety of Buddhist genres, including vinaya commentary. This 
composite character of the KI deserves further attention.

--- PAGE 12 ---
248
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
heterogeneity and impurity of existing monastic lineages in the kingdom 
(Taw Sein Ko 1893: 33-4, 155-6), and the king’s desire to secure the future of the 
Buddha sāsana (39, 207).
Having appropriately invited experienced and competent bhikkhus, hav-
ing had them properly bring the extremely pure Lankan upasampadā 
and establish it in this Ramaññadesa . . . I would make the sāsana, having 
become clean and pure, able to extend to the limit of its 5000-year extent 
(40, 207).22
King Dhammazedi is explicitly compared to the Indic King Asoka and the 
Lankan King Parakramabāhu I) (r. 1153-1186) (38-9, 159, 207). This compari-
son sets the scene for King Dhammazedi’s intentions, as both Asoka and 
Parakramabāhu I are portrayed in Mahāvaṃsa-Cūlavaṃsa chronicle-traditions 
as rulers strong enough to control all Buddhist monks in their polity through a 
royally sponsored act of monastic “purification.”
The KI describes Dhammazedi’s realm specifically as including the 
Haṃsavati maṇdala, the Kusima maṇdala, and the Muttima maṇdala (34, 155-6), 
thus encompassing the entire Burma delta region, from Pathein to Mottama. 
The monks sent from Bago received higher ordination at the hands of Lankan 
bhikkhus in Koṭṭē (210). This replaced their earlier monastic ordination status, 
creating a new company of bhikkhus ordained at the Lankan Kalyāṅī ritual 
boundary and ritually prepared to ordain other Bago monks in their Kalyāṇī 
lineage. Upon returning to Bago the following year, the new ordinands partici-
pated in Dhammazedi’s elaborate reorganization of monastic life in his realm. 
According to the KI report, monastic ritual sites were replaced, authority for 
monastic ordination put in the hands of the king and the new Kalyāṇī com-
pany of monks, and local conferral of monastic higher ordination outside the 
Kalyāṇī lineage expressly forbidden (52, 241-2).
The embassy to Koṭṭē and subsequent reordination of Buddhist monks in 
the sphere of King Dhammazedi’s control was closely related to the recent 
political history of Bago. The incorporation of Burma delta areas in Bago’s 
control was a gradual process. The broadest control by the court at Bago was 
attained during Dhammazedi’s reign (Aung-Thwin 2005, 311). From at least 
the late first millennium onwards in the southern Asian region—as shown 
by examples from Anurādhapura (Gunawardena 1979), Bagan (Aung-Thwin 
1985), Chiang Mai (Swearer and Premchit 1978), and Kandy (Blackburn 
2001)—achieving and retaining political and economic control in Buddhist-
22    I have modified the translation given by Taw Sein Ko.

--- PAGE 13 ---
249
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
oriented kingdoms characterized by substantial monastic institutional pres-
ence required the state to control monastic administration and property. King 
Dhammazedi sought to use the new Kalyāṅī ordination lineage brought from 
Koṭṭē to assert control over Buddhist monks in his realm. Bhikkhus ordained in 
earlier  ordination lines lost monastic seniority and control over Buddhist insti-
tutions and property; monastic assignments could be made according to new 
hierarchies introduced through the imported ordination line. This is explicitly 
remarked in the KI. The Kalyāṇī bhikkhus fresh from their Lankan ordination 
refuse to ordain any monks who do not first resume lay status. Within the new 
monastic hierarchy, this protected the seniority of the monks associated with 
the new Kalyāṇī lineage (52, 241).23
The embassy from Bago to Koṭṭē is an important indication of the matura-
tion of Buddhist connections and institutional ties linking mainland Southeast 
Asia and Laṅkā during the first half of the second millennium. The scale of 
Dhammazedi’s activities—the size of the embassy, the ability of his court to 
command transportation technologies, and the extent to which a new monas-
tic order was institutionalized within the kingdom to further court control of 
the monastic community—was remarkable. While the paucity of evidence 
demands cautious comparison, it appears that both the size and local institu-
tional impact of the late-fifteenth-century Bago embassy were unprecedented. 
It also required a command of wealth and maritime transportation sufficient 
to support the grand overture to Koṭṭē. The scale of Indian Ocean trade by 
the late fifteenth century, and the place of Bago in it, helped make possible 
Dhammazedi’s Lankan adventure.24
The account of Tomé Pires, composed largely in the 1510s in Melaka, por-
trays a trading world in which Bago and Ayutthaya control the Burma delta 
and northern Malay Peninsula, while Melaka serves as the key port of insu-
lar Southeast Asia and the main entrepôt between western India and China 
(Cortesão 1944: esp. 97-105).25 At that time, well after the wars between Innwa 
and Bago, Bago controlled three ports within the Burma delta region: Pathein 
23    See also Aung-Thwin (2005: 115-6).
24    Hall suggests (2010: 134-7), drawing partly on Holt (1991) and Ilangasinha (1991), that 
Dhammazedi was drawn to Koṭṭē in part by the fame of Koṭṭē’s court and Buddhist insti-
tutions, developed during the reign of King Parakramabāhu VI (r. 1412-68). This is possi-
ble, but we have as yet no evidence of whether or how reports of Parakramabāhu VI or the 
still more famous Buddhist royal patron and centralizing force, King Parakramabāhu I 
(r. 1153-86) circulated in the Buddhist world beyond Laṅkā. Chronicles thus far available 
from Tai, Mon, and Burmese areas do not highlight the activities of these rulers.
25    See also the account of Barbosa from the early sixteenth century (Stanley 1866, 188).

--- PAGE 14 ---
250
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
(Cosmin), Yangon (Dagon), and Mottama (Martaban). Other evidence sug-
gests that the division of power between Bago and Ayutthaya portrayed by 
Pires existed already in the last third of the fifteenth century. Inscriptions 
from Tenassarim dated from 1462 to 1466 strongly suggest the influence of the 
Ayutthayan court there by this time (Vickery 1973: esp. 51-7),26 while Bago had 
gradually consolidated control of the delta region (Fernquist 2006: esp. 50-1; 
2008: esp. 85-93).
It is possible to distinguish more sharply between two scales of trade in the 
Indian Ocean region after the rise of Melaka,27 and this helps us identify more 
clearly the arena for Buddhist movements involving Bago and Laṅkā. Long-haul 
trade between Cambay and Melaka circumnavigated Laṅkā before entering 
the Straits of Melaka. At the same time, there were various shorter trade routes 
that involved Lankan kingdoms and Buddhist-oriented polities in Southeast 
Asia possessing maritime access. These shorter routes functioned partly to 
provide goods from various Indian Ocean subregions to Cambay and Melaka, 
via strong intermediary ports such as those on the Malabar and Coromandel 
coasts, at Bengal, in Bago, and further south, on the Malay Peninsula. The 
shorter trade routes could also serve more local needs, transporting goods not 
destined for the larger east-west trade. It is possible that the voyages of Zheng 
He and his activities along the Lankan coast also encouraged increased trade 
after 1411 by securing sea lanes (Hall 2010: 113-4 n.12).28
Koṭṭē and Bago appear to have been bound together in the late fourteenth 
and early fifteenth centuries partly through a rice-based trading relationship 
routed via the Coromandel Coast. The reliance of parts of Laṅkā on imported 
rice dated at least to the twelfth century (Nainar 1942: 17-8, 41; Strathern 2009, 
52, citing de Silva 1995). Judging from Pires’s slightly later account, areca nuts 
were among the prized Lankan commodities, traded on the Coromandel 
Coast in return for rice and other commodities (Cortesão 1944: 84-6). Rice was 
Bago’s major export. Bago’s port at Pathein traded with Bengal and ports on 
India’s eastern coast, while her port at Mottama sent rice to Melaka (97-8). 
Pires’s depiction of the intersection of Bago’s and Laṅkā’s interests at 
Coromandel Coast ports is supported by the detailed account of maritime trans-
portation found in the KI, according to which travel to Bago was possible via the 
seaport of Nāgapattanam and other outlets on the southeastern Indian coast.29 
26    Cf. Coedès (1965).
27    I am grateful to Engseng Ho for his comment on this point.
28    See also Wade (2012). One man’s pirate is, of course, another’s entrepreneur.
29    Two ships left Laṅkā for Bago. The ship sent by the Lankan king with royal gifts for 
his counterpart at Bago was shipwrecked in what KI calls the Silla (Sīhaḷa?) Strait,

--- PAGE 15 ---
251
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
The KI mentions specifically two port administrators (paṭṭanādhikarinō [sic]) 
at Nāvutapattanam—Mālimparakāya and Pacchaḷiya—who were already con-
nected to Dhammazedi’s court at Bago via two ships sent annually for trade.30 
These port administrators housed and cared for the shipwrecked party return-
ing from Laṅkā and arranged their onward journey to Bago.
 
Conclusion
Hall suggests that the period from 1300 to 1500 was characterized by “expansive 
human networking” in the Bay of Bengal maritime region and that “sojourn-
ing merchants” and “religious clerics” played a central role in the integrity of 
Indian Ocean port-polity networks during this period (2010: 138). According 
to Hall, various types of “community interests,” beyond the “exclusively com-
mercial,” characterized this maritime space (139), one marked by Buddhist as 
well Chinese, Persian and Yemeni-linked networks, and South Indian Muslim 
and Hindu sojourners.
Hall’s discussion of merchant sojourners and religious clerics is suggestive 
for the three episodes of Buddhist movement within southern Asia discussed 
above, helping us to imagine better the interlocking interests, agencies, and 
flow of ideas that were involved in the movement of Buddhist monks—as well 
as their ritual forms and institutionally transformative lineages—in the Indian 
between Laṅkā and the southeast coast of the Indian peninsula. This, in turn, triggered 
a relay between ports on the eastern Indian coast and Bago, stopping at Nāgapattanaṃ 
(Nagapattinaṃ), site of a long-famous coastal Buddhist temple-monastery, and 
Nāvutapattanaṃ. From there, one party continued to Bago from Pathein, while another 
went to Kōmālapattanaṃ and thence to Bago. According to Subbarayalu (personal 
 communication via O. Bopearachchi, June 2013), Nāvutapattanaṃ may be Nagur 
(Nagore), a little north of Nagapattinam, mentioned as Tiru-Naavuur (see “Leyden 
Plates.” Epigraphia Indica 22 (1933-34). Kōmālapattanam is probably Kovalam, north of 
Mamallapuram. Kovalam is mentioned as a paṭṭanam (emporium), along with some 
other paṭṭanams in a Vijayanagara inscription at Pennesvaramadam, Krishnagiri Taluk, 
Krishnagri District, dated 21 July 1367 (see Krishnagiri District Inscriptions, Chennai 2007, 
no. 77b/1973). I am grateful to Professors K. Subbarayalu, K. Rajan, S. Rajagopal, and 
O. Bopearachchi for their assistance in this matter, and to Prof. B. Wentworth for discus-
sions of these references.
30    “[T]wo officers of the port had sent people for trade annually through two ships; sending 
a gift to King Rāmādhipati [Dhammazedi] and experiencing his royal favor, they were 
devoted to King Rāmādhipati. Thus, having given the senior monks robes and meals and 
a place to reside, they served them” (45, 211-12). I have modified Taw Sein Ko’s translation.

--- PAGE 16 ---
252
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
Ocean subregion encompassing the Bay of Bengal, the Burma delta, the Malay 
Peninsula, and the Gulf of Siam. Although we do not yet possess adequate evi-
dence to link firmly the episodes of Buddhist mobility discussed above with 
specific sojourning communities and mercantile interests, the instances of 
Buddhist monastic movement addressed in this article do suggest a growth in 
royally-supported Buddhist monastic movement in the region from the elev-
enth century, with larger and more elaborate Buddhist embassies to Laṅkā 
developing during the fifteenth century. It is possible that the increasing scale 
and ambition evident in the Buddhist embassies of the fifteenth century, 
including that from Bago to Koṭṭē and the Chiang Mai/Kengtung monastic 
cohort that traveled a half-century earlier, was due partly to the expansion and 
consolidation of trading communities in the maritime space and its connected 
riverine and overland routes, traveled by Buddhist monks. These communities 
would have been in a position to support—financially, technologically, and 
sometimes devotionally—large-scale, high-status Buddhist missions in the 
region, supplementing whatever resources were provided by royal and monas-
tic patrons.
It is worth considering (in addition to the role of merchant communities) 
as one of the conditions favoring the emergence of more substantial missions 
in the fifteenth century, the ways in which the Buddhist-oriented royal courts 
of Tai, Mon, and Burmese areas were linked through relations of competitive 
imitation within the arena of Buddhist kingship. As noted earlier, Bago and 
Ayutthaya had, by the fifteenth century, developed as flourishing maritime 
kingdoms supportive of Buddhist ritual sites and monastic establishments. 
These polities were rivals for trade, labor, and land. They were, along with 
Chiang Mai, also rivals for recognition as the leading Buddhist righteous mon-
arch in the region.31 This is evident from the Buddhist titles adopted by the 
kings of Bago, Ayutthaya, and Chiang Mai and the ways in which Buddhist 
texts associated with Bago and Chiang Mai narrated the activities of their 
rulers as continuous with the example of Buddhist kingship set by the Indic 
King Asoka.32
31    On links and rivalries among these polities see, for instance, Aung-Thwin (2005: 125-30), 
Wyatt (2004), Wyatt and Aroonrut (1995), Hall (2011), Charnvit (1976), Griswold (1965), and 
Dhida (1982). Economic and other links between Chiang Mai and Bago offer promising 
avenues for further investigation. I am grateful to professors U Hto La and Sarasawadee 
Ongsakul for conversations about the overland-riverine economic ties between Bago and 
Chiang Mai.
32    See, for instance, the translations in Cushman (2000), Jayawickrema (1968), and Taw Sein 
Ko (1893). See also Aung-Thwin (2005: 115).

--- PAGE 17 ---
253
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
There are striking temporal conjunctions between royally sponsored con-
struction of Buddhist buildings in these kingdoms, royally sponsored Buddhist 
monastic reordination rituals, and Buddhist-related diplomatic contact 
among these kingdoms. According to the Jinakālamālī and Tamnān Wat Jet Yòt, 
Chiang Mai’s King Tilokarāja (r. 1441/2-87) in 1455 began construction of Wat 
Bodhārama, a monastery and devotional site constructed over twenty years, 
which—in name, ground plan, and architectural style—evoked Buddha’s 
enlightenment site at Bodh Gaya, on the Indian mainland (Griswold 1965: 
182-6; Jayawickrama 1968: 139-40; Buddhadatta 1962: 98; Hutchinson 1951: 43; 
Blackburn 2007). During the same period, closely following Tilokarāja’s inau-
gural work at Wat Bodhārama in Chiang Mai,33 the Bago King Dhammazedi 
sent a mission to Bodh Gaya via Laṅkā, with the assistance of a Sīhala (Lankan) 
merchant residing at Bago, to obtain exact descriptions of the Buddhist sites 
and monuments at Bodh Gaya, resulting in the construction of the Mahā Bodhi 
Temple at Bago (Griswold 1965: 186-7).34
A growing mutual interest in foundational Indian Buddhist sites at Chiang 
Mai and Bago during this period was matched by a striking conjunction 
of large-scale royally sponsored Buddhist monastic reordinations held in 
Ayutthaya, Chiang Mai, and Bago. Monks from Chiang Mai, Kengtung, and 
“Kambojja” (perhaps the Lopburi area) traveled to Koṭṭē in Laṅkā, with the sup-
port of the monastic leaders of Chiang Mai and Ayutthaya. Upon their return 
to Chiang Mai in 1424, the Chiang Mai monks were drawn into a royally spon-
sored reordination of Chiang Mai bhikkhus during the reign of King Sām Fang 
Kän (r. 1401-41) and into the reorganization of local monastic administration 
and hierarchy (Buddhadatta 1962: 93-5; see also Blackburn 2007). Throughout 
the northern region, the newly imported Lankan higher ordinations enabled 
the reorganization of local monastic ritual practice and hierarchy (Swearer 
and Premchit 1977; Saimong 1981). Forty years later, towards the middle of 
the reign of the Ayutthaya King Trailokarāja (r. 1448?-88), during a period of 
increasing military threat from Chiang Mai and the relocation of Ayutthaya’s 
capital to the north, near Sukhothai, Trailokarāja engaged in grand Buddhist 
merit-making schemes to assure the protection of his realm (Charnvit 1976: 
137-8; Cushman 2000: 17). According to Prachum Chotmaihet Samai Ayudhya 
(Collected Ayudhyan Records) cited by Charnvit, King Trailokarāja in 1465 
33    This occurred sometime between 1458 and 1472, according to the Burmese and Mon 
sources Dhammacetimaṅ-atthuppatti and Nidāna Ārambhakathā (cited in Griswold 1965: 
186-7).
34    For descriptions and images of the Bodh Gaya replicas at Chiang Mai and Bago, as well as 
other locations, see Griswold (1965).

--- PAGE 18 ---
254
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
organized a monastic ordination35 of more than two thousand men, including 
his own temporary ordination (Charnvit 1976: 138-9; see also Cushman 2000: 17).36 
The ordination ceremony was led by a Lankan monk, said to have been brought 
from the island to the northern Ayutthayan capital of Phitsanulok. As Charnvit 
notes, this bypassed the leaderships of the Sukhothai monastic community, 
previously dominant in the north of the Ayutthayan realm. King Trailokarāja 
was thus able to establish, near the military border with Chiang Mai, a new 
monastic community at Phitsanulok, loyal to his administration. In addition 
to its strategic value in the Ayutthayan realm, the ordination ceremony was 
obviously intended as a larger diplomatic gesture to neighboring polities. The 
rulers of Chiang Mai, Bago, and Luang Prabang reportedly sent gifts on the 
occasion of King Trailokarāja’s temporary monastic ordination (Charnvit 1976: 
138-9). Given Trailokarāja’s proximity to Chiang Mai and Sukhothai monastic 
institutions at this time, his choice to ordain a new company of Buddhist monks 
in the northern area of his kingdom with the support of a Lankan Buddhist 
ritual officiant was probably informed by the earlier history of royal Buddhist 
overtures to Laṅkā at Sukhothai and Chiang Mai, including the 1423-4 Chiang 
Mai mission. King Trailokarāja’s monastic undertaking occurred just a decade 
before King Dhammazedi’s massive reordination of bhikkhus under his control 
at Bago in the new Kalyāṇī lineage from Koṭṭē (see previous section).
The episodes of Buddhist mobility discussed in this article, running from 
the eleventh-century importation of Buddhist monks by the Poḷonnāruva King 
Vijayabāhu I, through the fourteenth-century pilgrimage of the Sukhothai 
monk Si Satha, to King Dhammazedi’s fifteenth-century embassy to Koṭṭē, sug-
gest that the first half of the second millennium was a transformative period 
that saw the creation of new Buddhist institutional linkages in the Indian 
Ocean Buddhist world, as new regimes of trade drew Laṅkā into faster and 
closer connection with Burmese, Mon, peninsular Malay, and Tai locations. 
Although we do not yet have adequate evidence from Buddhist sources to 
support the view that “fifteenth-century Sri Lanka under Parakramabāhu VI 
assumed significance as the acknowledged center of a conceptual Bay of 
Bengal Theravada Buddhist cultural cosmopolis network” (Hall 2010: 139),37 it 
35    This probably included the reordination of existing bhikkhus, but this is not clear in 
Charnvit (1976); I do not have direct access to the Thai source.
36    Temporary royal ordination, especially in times of military or political duress, was not 
uncommon in Tai areas, as shown in the inscriptions of Sukhothai and in Chiang Mai’s 
Jinakālamālī. See also Blackburn (2007).
37    On the anachronism of “Theravāda Buddhist” applied outside narrow technical monastic 
contexts before the nineteenth century, see Skilling 2012.

--- PAGE 19 ---
255
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
is clear that the island played a significant role in the religious and maritime 
trade networks of the period, including those of Hindus and Muslims as well 
as Buddhists.
The changing patterns of trade referred to in this article help clarify how 
such religious networks were constituted during the early second millennium. 
Tilman Frasch argues that a long-standing Buddhist network in the Bay of 
Bengal, active since the third century CE, fell into decline towards the end of the 
thirteenth century, due in part to the disintegration of the Burman kingdom of 
Bagan (1998, 92).38 Further investigation of inscriptions and monastic-lineage 
texts from Burman territories is necessary in order to develop a clearer picture 
of trans-regional Buddhist mobility involving Buddhist institutions at Bagan 
and Innwa from the late thirteenth century on.39 The material presented in this 
essay, however, indicates that, even if the northern inland Burman area became 
less active in the trans-regional Buddhist mobility of the Bay of Bengal and the 
Indian Ocean regions, Buddhist networks across this seascape remained viable 
and were, in fact, strengthened by the conjunction of new trading patterns and 
new political centers that grew up along the southern coastal areas of what 
is now Sri Lanka, Burma, and Thailand. Further research is needed to clarify 
whether Lankan Kandyan monastic overtures to Bago, Arakan, and Ayutthaya 
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries should be understood as another 
new chapter in trans-regional Buddhist mobility (Frasch 1998: 90), or whether 
they may be understood as an extension, during the Dutch-English colonial 
period, of the new patterns of southern Asian Buddhist traffic that developed 
between the eleventh and the fifteenth centuries.
With respect to the new patterns of trans-regional Buddhist mobility that 
developed during the first half of the second millennium, Buddhist sources clar-
ify the logic of overtures to Laṅkā at this time. According to the political theory 
implied by Buddhist-royal histories like the chronicle texts referred to above, 
the consolidation of royal power by a Buddhist-oriented monarch (whether or 
not freshly consecrated) required several interventions in Buddhist arenas: 
public merit-making activities that signaled the right to rule and protected the 
ruler and the realm; the reorganization of monastic administration in order to 
ensure that high-ranking monks (sometimes also functioning in court admin-
istration and/or as landholders) were loyal to the throne; and “purification” of 
the monastic community as a sign of the ruler’s devoted wish to extend the 
vitality and longevity of the Buddhist tradition. “Purification” of the monas-
tic community and the reorganization of monastic administration typically 
38    See also Goh (2007: 53).
39    I am grateful to Alexey Kirichenko for preliminary conversations on this matter.

--- PAGE 20 ---
256
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
occurred together. One effective means of accomplishing both was to intro-
duce a new monastic higher-ordination lineage from another Buddhist loca-
tion held in esteem. Such goals evidently shaped King Dhammazedi’s approach 
to Koṭṭē in the 1470s and King Sām Fang Kän’s response to the monks returning 
from Koṭṭē in the 1420s. They may have influenced King Vijayabāhu I’s over-
tures to Ramañña in the late eleventh century.
It is striking that, in a period of approximately fifty years during the fifteenth 
century, Bago, Chiang Mai, and Ayutthaya all took steps to consolidate their 
authority according to the Buddhist political theory outlined above. In doing 
so, all resorted to Laṅkā as the source for a new monastic higher-ordination 
lineage capable of “purifying” and reorganizing monastic administration in the 
realm. Why did they focus on Laṅkā in this way? Laṅkā’s authoritative posi-
tion was due partly to the island’s long-standing and positive image within 
Buddhist contexts. Laṅkā had a long and impeccable pedigree as a center 
of Buddhist life. It was celebrated by early Buddhist chronicles (in Sanskrit 
as well as Pāli) as a site honored by Gautama Buddha himself, said to have 
predicted Lankan guardianship of Buddhist teachings. Laṅkā’s lineages of 
Buddhist monks and nuns descended from the famous Indian Mauryas. The 
island had played host to the most famous commentator on authoritative 
Pāli Buddhist texts, Buddhaghosa, whose fifth-century Lankan compositions 
traveled  gradually outwards through Southern Asia. At least in Pāli-language 
works, Laṅkā was the location most frequently and thoroughly described after 
northeastern India/Nepal, the site of Gautama Buddha’s first activities, and 
reports of Laṅkā were carried around Asia by pilgrims such as the seventh-
century traveler Yijing.
Another factor was the regional decline of Buddhist intellectual and ritual 
centers concomitant with the rise of Islam in northeastern India and insular 
Southeast Asia from the thirteenth century onward. Although it is now clear 
that earlier arguments for the wholesale displacement of Buddhism by Islam 
in northeastern India during this period were overstated, massive monastic 
centers such as that at Nālanda no longer received large-scale royal patronage. 
On the islands of Java and Sumatra, earlier Buddhist centers gave way to sul-
tanates oriented towards Islam. Therefore, when royal courts of Tai, Mon, and 
Burmese lands sought to import new monastic higher ordination lineages that 
could be used to “purify” and reorganize Buddhist monasticism in their king-
doms, they faced a shrinking Buddhist world.40 If they wished to use monastic 
higher ordination lineages that shared their existing use of Pāli as a scriptural/
liturgical language and that could argue for historical connections to the third-
40    I am grateful to Geoff Wade and Alexey Kirichenko for conversations on this point.

--- PAGE 21 ---
257
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
century BCE monastic community of the Indian King Asoka, they could look 
only among their mainland neighbors or to Laṅkā.
Laṅkā was a strategic choice. In addition to the positive historical associa-
tions that had long existed around Lankan Buddhist monks and institutions, 
the island was generally distant from political and military conflicts on the 
Southeast Asian mainland. There is no evidence of aggression from Laṅkā 
against Tai, Mon, or Burmese polities, apart from Poḷonnāruva’s raid on the 
Burma delta.41 Long described as a center of Buddhist education and monas-
tic practice, with deep historical links to early Indian Buddhist lineages and 
institutions, Laṅkā was ideologically close. Lankan kingdoms were, however, 
usually politically distant from mainland competition and aggression, without 
the military might to intervene in the region of the Burma delta and the Gulf 
of Siam.42 Thus, Laṅkā’s desirability in Buddhist ideological terms was further 
enhanced by the island’s relative weakness in politico-military terms. It stood 
outside the fraught history of mainland diplomatic and military adventuring 
that characterized kingdoms in what is now Burma and Thailand, including 
the dominant Buddhist-oriented polities of the fourteenth and fifteenth cen-
turies: Chiang Mai, Ayutthaya, and Bago.
Bibliography
Abraham, Meera. 1988. Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India. Delhi: Manohar.
Andaya, Leonard Y. 2008. Leaves of the Same Tree: Trade and Ethnicity in the Straits of 
Melaka. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Aung-Thwin, Michael. 2005. The Mists of Ramañña: The Legend That Was Lower Burma. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
———. Pagan: The Origins of Modern Burma. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Blackburn, Anne M. 1999. Looking for the Vinaya: Monastic Discipline in the Practical 
Canons of the Theravāda. Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies. 22/2: 281-309.
———. 2001. Buddhist Learning and Textual Practice in Eighteenth-Century Lankan 
Monastic Culture. Princeton University Press.
41    The chronicles of Nakhon Si Thammarat (Wyatt 1975) are late compositions, extant only 
in poor manuscript witnesses. I am not yet persuaded that Laṅkā made military incur-
sions into Nakhon Si Thammarat in the twelfth century or made that polity a tributary of 
the island.
42    I have benefited from discussions with Chris Hinkle, Drew Johnson, and Steve Collins on 
this point.

--- PAGE 22 ---
258
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
———. 2007. Writing Histories from Landscape and Architecture: Sukhothai and 
Chiang Mai. Buddhist Studies Review 24/2: 192-225.
———. 2010. Locations of Buddhism: Colonialism and Modernity in Sri Lanka. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
———. 2012. Lineage, Inheritance, and Belonging: Expressions of Monastic Affiliation 
from Laṅkā. In How Theravāda is the Theravāda?, ed. Peter Skilling, Jason Carbine, 
Claudio Cicuzza, and Santi Pakdeekham. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books: 275-96.
———. Forthcoming. Sīhaḷa Saṅgha and Laṅkā in Later Premodern Southeast Asia. In 
Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern Southeast Asia, ed. D. Christian Lammerts. 
Singapore: Institute for Southeast Asian Studies.
Baker, Chris. 2003. Ayutthaya Rising: From Land or Sea? Journal of Southeast Asian 
Studies 34/1: 41-62.
Bauer, Christian. 1991a. Notes on Mon Epigraphy I. Journal of the Siam Society 79/1: 31-83.
———. 1991b. Notes on Mon Epigraphy II. Journal of the Siam Society 79/2: 61-77.
Bode, Mabel. 1996. Sāsanavaṃsa. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Bopearachchi, O. 1996. Seafaring in the Indian Ocean: Archaeological Evidence from 
Sri Lanka. In Tradition and Archaeology: Early Maritime Contacts in the Indian 
Ocean, ed. H.P. Ray and J.F. Salles. Delhi: Manohar Publications: 59-77.
Buddhadatta, A.P. 1962. Jinakālamālī. London: Pali Text Society.
Chamberlain, James R. 1991. The Ram Khamhaeng Controversy: Collected Papers. 
Bangkok: Siam Society.
Carswell, John, Siran Deraniyagala, and Alan Graham, ed. 2013. Mantai: City by the Sea. 
Aichwald: Archaeology Department of Sri Lanka.
Charnvit Kasetsiri. 1976. The Rise of Ayudhya: A History of Siam in the Fourteenth and 
Fifteenth Centuries. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press.
Christie, Jan Wisseman. 1998a. The Medieval Tamil-Language Inscriptions in Southeast 
Asia and China. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 29/2: 239-68.
———. 1998b. Javanese Markets and the Asian Sea Trade Boom of the Tenth to 
Thirteenth Centuries AD. Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 
41:3: 344-81.
Coedès, Georges. 1965. Documents épigraphiques provenant de Tenasserim. In 
Felicitation Volumes of South-East Asian Studies Presented to His Highness Prince 
Dhaninivat Kromamun Bidyalabh Bridhyakorn. Bangkok: Siam Society: 2: 203-9.
———, ed. and trans. 1924. Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, I. Bangkok: National 
Library of Thailand.
Collins, Steven. 2003. What is Literature in Pāli? In Literary Culture in History: 
Reconstructions from South Asia, ed. Sheldon Pollock. Berkeley: University of 
California Press: 649-88.
Cortesão, Armando, trans. and ed. 1944. The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires: An Account of 
the East: From the Red Sea to Japan, Written in Malacca and India in 1512-1515. London: 
Hakluyt Society.

--- PAGE 23 ---
259
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
Cushman, Richard D., trans. 2000. The Royal Chronicles of Ayutthaya. Bangkok: Siam 
Society.
Cūlavaṃsa. 1925. Ed. Wilhelm Geiger. London: Pali Text Society.
Daniels, Christian. 2000. The Formation of Tai Polities Between 13th to 16th Centuries: 
The Role of Technological Transfer. Memoirs of the Toyo Bunko 58: 51-98.
Davidson, Ronald. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
De Silva, C.R. 1985. Muslim Traders in the Indian Ocean in the Sixteenth Century and 
the Portuguese Impact. In The Muslims of Sri Lanka, ed. M.A.M. Shukri. Beruwala: 
Jamiah Naleemia Institute: 147-65.
Dewaraja, Lorna. 1990. Muslim Merchants and Pilgrims in Serandib c. 900-1500 AD. In 
Sri Lanka and the Silk Road of the Sea, ed. Senake Bandaranayake et al. Colombo: Sri 
Lanka National Committee for UNESCO and Central Cultural Fund: 191-8.
———. 1988. The Kandyan Kingdom of Sri Lanka, 1707-1782. Colombo: Lake House.
Dhida Saraya. 1982. The Development of the Tai States from the Twelfth to the Fifteenth 
Centuries. Unpublished Ph.D. diss., University of Sydney.
Epigraphia Zeylanica, Being Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Ceylon. 1904-84. 7 vols. 
Colombo: Ceylon Government Printer.
Feener, R. Michael. 2010. South-East Asian Localizations of Islam and Participation 
within a Global Umma, c. 1500-1800. In The New Cambridge History of Islam, ed. 
David O. Morgan and Anthony Reid. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 
3:470-503.
——— and Michael F. Laffan. 2005. Sufi Scents Across the Indian Ocean: Yemeni 
Hagiography and the Earliest History of Southeast Asian Islam. Archipel 70: 185-208.
Fernquest, Jon. 2008. The Ecology of Burman-Mon Warfare and the Premodern 
Agrarian State (1383-1425). SOAS Bulletin of Burma Research 6/1-2: 70-118.
———. 2006. Crucible of War: Burma and the Ming in the Tai Frontier Zone (1382-
1454). SOAS Bulletin of Burma Research 4:2:27-81.
Frasch, Tilman. 1998. A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal: Relations between 
Bodhgaya, Burma, and Sri Lanka, c. 300-1300. In From the Mediterranean to the China 
Sea: Miscellaneous Notes, ed. Glaude Guillot, Denys Lombard, and Roderick Ptak. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 69-92.
———. 2002. Coastal Peripheries during the Pagan Period. In The Maritime Frontier of 
Burma: Exploring Political, Cultural and Commercial Interaction in the Indian Ocean 
World, 1200-1800, ed. Jos Gommans and Jacques Leider. Leiden: KITLV Press: 590-78.
Fukami Sumio, 2004. The Long 13th Century of Tambralinga: From Javaka to Siam. 
Memoirs of the Toyo Bunko, 62: 45-79.
Geiger, Wilhelm, trans. 1992. Cūḷavaṃsa, Being the More Recent Part of the Mahāvaṃsa. 
London: Pali Text Society.
Goitein, S.D., and Mordechai Akiva Friedman. 2008. Indian Traders from the Middle 
Ages: Documents from the Cairo Geniza. Leiden: Brill.

--- PAGE 24 ---
260
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
Goh, Geok Yian. 2007. Cakkravatiy Anuruddha and the Buddhist Oikoumene: Historical 
Narratives of Kingship and Religious Networks in Burma, Northern Thailand, and 
Sri Lanka (11th-14th Centuries). Unpublished Ph.D. diss., University of Hawai’i.
Grabowsky, Volker. 2010. The Northern Tai Polity of Lan Na (Ba-ba Da-dian) in the 14th 
and 15th Centuries: The Ming Factor. In Southeast Asia in the Fifteenth Century: The 
China Factor, ed. Geoff Wade and Sun Laichen. Singapore: National University of 
Singapore Press: 197-245.
Griswold, A.B. 1965. Holy Land Transported. Colombo: Gunasena and Sons.
——— and Prasert ṇa Nagara. 1992. Epigraphical and Historical Studies. Bangkok: 
Historical Society.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. 1990. Seaways to Serendib: Changing Patterns of Navigation in 
the Indian Ocean and Their Impact on Precolonial Sri Lanka. In Sri Lanka and the 
Silk Road of the Sea, ed. Senake Bandaranayake et al. Colombo: Sri Lanka National 
Committee for UNESCO and Central Cultural Fund: 25-43.
———. 1979. Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in Early Medieval Sri 
Lanka. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Gutman, Pamela. 2002. The Martaban Trade: An Examination of the Literature from 
the Seventh Century until the Eighteenth Century. Asian Perspectives 40/1: 108-18.
Haider, Najaf. 2007. The Network of Monetary Exchange in the Indian Ocean Trade, 
1200-1700. In Cross Currents and Community Networks: The History of the Indian 
Ocean World, ed. Himanshu Prabha Ray and Edward A. Alpers. Delhi: Oxford 
University Press: 181-205.
Hall, Kenneth R. 2011. A History of Early Southeast Asia: Maritime Trade and Societal 
Development, 100-1500. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield.
———. 2010. Ports-of-Trade, Maritime Diasporas, and Networks of Trade and Cultural 
Integration in the Bay of Bengal Region of the Indian Ocean: c. 1300-1500. Journal of 
the Economic and Social History of the Orient 53: 109-45.
———. 2006. Multi-Dimensional Networking: Fifteenth-Century Indian Ocean 
Maritime Diaspora in Southeast Asian Perspective. Journal of the Economic and 
Social History of the Orient 49/4: 454-81.
Hazra, Kanai Lal. 1981. History of Theravada Buddhism in South-East Asia. Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal.
Heng, Derek Thiam Soon. 2009. Sino-Malay Trade and Diplomacy from the Tenth 
through the Fourteenth Century. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Hettiaratchi, S.B. 2003. Studies in Cheng-Ho in Sri Lanka. In Zheng He xia Xiyang guoji 
xueshu yantaohui lunwen ji (Papers from the International Academic Conference on 
Zheng He’s Voyages to the Western Ocean), ed. Chen Xin-xiong and Chen Yu-nü. 
Taipei: Daw Shiang.
Ho, Engseng. 2006. Genealogy and Mobility Across the Indian Ocean. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.

--- PAGE 25 ---
261
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
Holt, John Clifford. 2004. The Buddhist Visnu. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hultzsch, E. 1902-3. A Vaishnava Inscription at Pagan. Epigraphia Indica 7: 197-98.
Hutchinson, E. 1933. Journey of Mgr. Lambert, Bishop of Beritus, from Tenasserim to 
Siam in 1662. Journal of the Siam Society 26/2: 215-17.
Indrapala, K. 1985. The Role of Peninsular Indian Muslim Trading Communities in the 
Indian Ocean Trade. In The Muslims of Sri Lanka, ed. M.A.M. Shukri. Beruwala: 
Jamiah Naleemia Institute.
———. 1971-2. South Indian Mercantile Communities in Ceylon, Circa 950-1250. 
Ceylon Journal of Historical and Social Studies n.s. 1/2: 101-13.
———. 1963. The Nainativu Tamil Inscription of Parakramabahu I. University of Ceylon 
Review 21/1: 63-70.
Ilangasinha, H.B.M. 1992. Buddhism in Medieval Sri Lanka. Delhi: Sri Satguru.
Ishii, Yoneo. 2003. A Note on the Identification of a Group of Siamese Port-Polities 
along the Bay of Thailand. Memoirs of the Research Department of the Toyo Bunko 61: 
75-82.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel, 2002a. Trans. Victoria Hobson. The Malay Peninsula: 
Crossroads of the Maritime Silk Road. Leiden: Brill.
———. 2002b. The Mergui-Tennaserim Region in the Context of the Maritime Silk 
Road: From the Beginning of the Christian Era to the End of the Thirteenth Century 
AD. In The Maritime Frontier of Burma: Exploring Political, Cultural and Commercial 
Interaction in the Indian Ocean World, 1200-1800, ed. Jos Gommans and Jacques 
Leider. Leiden: KITLV Press: 79-92.
———, Michel, Tharapong Srisuchat, Thiva Supajanya, and Wichapan Krisanapol. 
1996. La région de Nakhon Si Thammarat (Thaïlande péninsulaire) du Ve au XIVe 
siècle. Journal Asiatique 284/2: 361-435.
Jayawickrema, N.A. 1968. The Sheaf of Garlands of the Epochs of the Conqueror. London: 
Pali Text Society.
Kanazawa Yoh. 2004. Chinese Trade Ceramics Discovered in Sri Lanka. In In Search of 
Chinese Ceramic-Sherds in South India and Sri Lanka, ed. Karashima Noboru. Tokyo: 
Taisho University Press: 56-8.
———. 2004. Mantai and Polonnaruva. In In Search of Chinese Ceramic-Sherds in South 
India and Sri Lanka, ed. Karashima Noboru. Tokyo: Taisho University Press: 59-60.
Karashima. Noboru. 2009a. Medieval Commercial Activities in the Indian Ocean. In 
Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to 
Southeast Asia, ed. Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany, and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: 
Institute for Southeast Asian Studies: 20-60.
———. 2009b. South Indian Merchant Guilds in the Indian Ocean and Southeast Asia. 
In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to 
Southeast Asia, ed. Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany, and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: 
Institute for Southeast Asian Studies: 135-57.

--- PAGE 26 ---
262
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
Kirabamune, Sirima. 2013. The Role of the Port City of Mahatittha (Mantai) in the 
Trade Networks of the Indian Ocean. In Mantai: City by the Sea, ed. John Carswell, 
Siran Deraniyagala, and Alan Graham. Aichwald: Archaeology Department of 
Sri Lanka: 40-52.
———. 1985. Muslims and the Trade of the Arabian Sea with Special Reference to Sri 
Lanka from the Birth of Islam to the Fifteenth Century. In The Muslims of Sri Lanka, 
ed. M.A.M. Shukri. Beruwala: Jamiah Naleemia Institute: 89-112.
Kirichenko, Alexey. 2005. History in the Retrospect of Discipline: Constructing the 
Genealogy of Transmission of the Buddhist Teaching in the Nineteenth Century 
Myanmar. In Asiatica: Papers on Oriental Philosophies and Cultures. Issue 1: Prof. 
Evgeny A. Torchinov 50th Anniversary Commemoration Volume. St. Petersburg: 
St. Petersburg University Press (in Russian).
———. 2009. What’s in a Name? The Evolution of Nomenclature and Scope of 
Lordship in Indigenous Burmese Discourse. Paper presented at the Association of 
Asian Studies, Chicago.
———. 2011. Change, Fluidity, and Unidentified Actors: Understanding the Organiza-
tion and History of Upper Burmese Saṃgha from the Seventeenth to the Nineteenth 
Centuries. Paper presented at the Association of Asian Studies, Honolulu.
———. 2013. Travels of “Sīhaḷa Monk” Sāralaṅka and Buddhist Transregionalism in 
Eighteenth-Century Burma. Paper presented at the Asia Research Institute work-
shop “Orders and Itineraries: Buddhist, Christian and Islamic Networks in Southern 
Asia, 900-1900,” Singapore.
———. Forthcoming a. New Spaces for Interaction: Contacts between Burmese and 
Sinhalese Monks in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries. Institute for 
Southeast Asia Working Papers, Singapore.
———. Forthcoming b. Dynamics of Monastic Mobility and Networking in Upper 
Myanmar of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries. In Buddhist Dynamics in 
Premodern Southeast Asia, ed. D. Christian Lammerts. Singapore: Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies.
Kulasuriya, Ananda S. 1976. Regional Independence and Elite Change in the Politics of 
14th Century Sri Lanka. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 2: 136-55.
Kulke, Hermann. 1999. Rivalry and Competition in the Bay of Bengal in the Eleventh 
Century and Its Bearing on Indian Ocean Studies. In Commerce and Culture in the 
Bay of Bengal, 1500-1800, ed. Om Prakash and Denys Lombard. Delhi: Manohar: 17-36.
Lammerts, Dietrich Christian. 2005. The Dhammavilāsa Dhammathat: A Critical 
Historiography, Analysis, and Translation of the Text. M.A. Thesis, Cornell University.
Law, Bimala Churn. 1952. The History of the Buddha’s Religion (Sāsanavaṃsa). London: 
Luzac.
Leider, Jacques P. 2008. Forging Buddhist Credentials as a Tool of Legitimacy and 
Ethnic Identity: A Study of Arakan’s Subjection in Nineteenth-Century Burma. 
Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 51: 409-59.

--- PAGE 27 ---
263
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
Lieberman, Victor B. 2003-9. Strange Parallels. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
———. 1976. A New Look at the Sāsanavaṃsa. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 39/1: 137-49.
Malalgoda, Kitsiri. 1976. Buddhism and Sinhalese Society, 1750-1900: A Study of Revival 
and Change. Berkeley: University of California.
Manatunga, Anura. 2009. Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia during the Period of the 
Polonnaruva Kingdom. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola 
Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia, ed. Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany, and Vijay 
Sakhuja. Singapore: Institute for Southeast Asian Studies: 193-207.
McKinnon, E. Edwards. 2011. Continuity and Change in South Indian Involvement in 
Northern Sumatra: The Inferences of Archaeological Evidence from Kota Cina and 
Lamreh. In Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-
Cultural Exchange, ed. Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani, and Geoff Wade. Singapore: 
Institute for Southeast Asian Studies: 137-60.
Mon Bokay. 1966. Relations Between Ceylon and Burma in the 11th Century AD. In 
Essays Offered to G.H. Luce, ed. Ba Shin, Jean Boisselier, and A.B. Griswold. Ascona: 
Artibus Asiae: 1: 93-5.
Nainar, S. Muhammad Husayn. 1942. Arab Geographers’ Knowledge of Southern India. 
Madras: University of Madras.
Nichols, C.W. 1958. Sinhalese Naval Power. University of Ceylon Review 16/3-4: 78-92.
Penth, Hans. 1997. Buddhist Literature of Lan Na on the History of Lan Na’s Buddhism. 
Journal of the Pali Text Society 23: 43-81.
Penth, Hans, et al. 1997-9. Corpus of Lān Nā Inscriptions. Chiang Mai: Social Research 
Institute.
Perret, Daniel, and Heddy Surachman. 2011. South Asia and the Tapanuli Area (North-
West Sumatra): Ninth-Fourteenth Centuries CE. In Early Interactions between South 
and Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-Cultural Exchange, ed. Pierre-Yves Manguin, 
A. Mani, and Geoff Wade. Singapore: Institute for Southeast Asian Studies: 161-76.
Prakash, Om. 2002. Coastal Burma and the Trading World of the Bay of Bengal, 1500-
1680. In The Maritime Frontier of Burma: Exploring Political, Cultural and Commercial 
Interaction in the Indian Ocean World, 1200-1800, ed. Jos Gommans and Jacques 
Leider. Leiden: KITLV Press: 93-105.
Prapod Assavavirulhakorn. 2010. The Ascendancy of Theravāda Buddhism in Southeast 
Asia. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Publications.
Prickett-Fernando, Martha. 1990. Durable Goods: The Archaeological Evidence of Sri 
Lanka’s Role in the Indian Ocean Trade. In Sri Lanka and the Silk Road of the Sea, ed. 
Senake Bandaranayake et al. Colombo: Sri Lanka National Committee for UNESCO 
and Central Cultural Fund: 61-84.
RMK (Rhe:hoà Mranmâ Kyokcâmyâ) [Old Myanmar Inscriptions]. 1972-98. Vols. 1-5. 
Yangon: Archaeology Department.

--- PAGE 28 ---
264
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
Ray, Haraprasad. 1999. Trade between South India and China, 1368-1644. In Commerce 
and Culture in the Bay of Bengal, 1500-1800, ed. Om Prakash and Denys Lombard. 
Delhi: Manohar: 37-46.
Reid, Anthony. 1993. Southeast Asia in the Age of Commerce 1450-1680. Vol. 2. Expansion 
and Crisis. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Saeng Manavidura. 1968. Some Observations on the Jinakālamālīpakaraṇa. In The 
Sheaf of Garlands of the Epochs of the Conqueror, ed. N.A. Jayawickrema. London: 
Pali Text Society: xxxii-xlvi.
Saimong Mangrāi, Sao. 1981. The Pā Daeng Chronicle and the Jengtung State Chronicle. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Sannasgala, P.B. 1964. Siṃhala Sahitya Vaṃśaya. Colombo: Lake House.
Sen, Tansen. 2003. Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The Realignment of Sino-Indian 
Relations, 600-1400. Honolulu: AAS and University of Hawai’i.
Siriweera, W.I. 1990. Pre-Colonial Sri Lanka’s Maritime Commerce with Special 
Reference to Ports. In Sri Lanka and the Silk Road of the Sea, ed. Senake Bandaranayake 
et al. Colombo: Sri Lanka National Committee for UNESCO and Central Cultural 
Fund: 125-33.
Sirisena, W.M. 1978. Sri Lanka and South-East Asia: Political, Religious and Cultural 
Relations from AD c. 1000 to c. 1500. Leiden: Brill.
Skilling, Peter, et al. 2012. How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
———. 1997. The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to Mainland South-East Asia. Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 20/1: 1-17.
Smithies, Michael. 1995. Seventeenth Century Siam: Its Extent and Urban Centers 
According to Dutch and French Observers. Journal of the Siam Society 83/1-2: 63-78.
Stanley, Henry E.J. 1866. A Description of the Coasts of East Africa and Malabar in the 
Beginning of the Sixteenth Century, by Duarte Barbosa, a Portuguese. London: The 
Haklyut Society.
Strathern, Alan. 2009. Sri Lanka in the Long Early Modern Period: Its Place in a 
Comparative Theory of Second Millenium Eurasian History. Modern Asian Studies 
43/4: 815-69.
———. 2007. Kingship and Conversion in Sixteenth-Century Sri Lanka: Portuguese 
Imperialism in a Buddhist Land. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Subrahmanyam, Sanjay. 1990. The Political Economy of Commerce, Southern India 1500-
1650. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1997. Connected Histories: Notes towards a Reconfiguration of Early Modern 
Eurasia. Modern Asian Studies 31/3: 735-62.
———. 1998. Notes on Circulation and Asymmetry in Two Mediterraneans, c. 1400-
1800. In From the Mediterranean to the China Sea: Miscellaneous Notes, ed. Glaude 
Guillot, Denys Lombard, and Roderick Ptak. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz: 21-44.

--- PAGE 29 ---
265
Buddhist Connections In The Indian Ocean
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
———. 1999. “Persianization” and “Mercantilism”: Two Themes in Bay of Bengal 
History, 1400-1700. In Commerce and Culture in the Bay of Bengal, 1500-1800, ed. Om 
Prakash and Denys Lombard. Delhi: Manohar: 47-85.
———. 2002. And a River Runs Through It: The Mrauk-U Kingdom and its Bay of 
Bengal Context. In The Maritime Frontier of Burma: Exploring Political, Cultural and 
Commercial Interaction in the Indian Ocean World, 1200-1800, ed. Jos Gommans and 
Jacques Leiden. Leiden: KITLV Press: 107-26.
Subbarayalu, Y. 2009. Anjuvannam: A Maritime Trade Guild of Medieval Times. In 
Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to 
Southeast Asia, ed. Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany, and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: 
Institute for Southeast Asian Studies: 158-67.
Sun Laichen. 2010. Assessing the Ming Role in China’s Southern Expansion. In Southeast 
Asia in the Fifteenth Century: The China Factor, ed. Geoff Wade and Sun Laichen. 
Singapore: National University of Singapore Press: 44-79.
———. 2010. Shan Gems. In Southeast Asia in the Fifteenth Century: The China Factor, 
ed. Geoff Wade and Sun Laichen. Singapore: National University of Singapore Press: 
169-96.
Swearer, Donald K., and Sommai Premchit. 1977. A Translation of Tamnān Mūlasāsanā 
Wat Pā Daeng: The Chronicle of the Founding of Buddhism of the Wat Pā Daeng 
Tradition. Journal of the Siam Society 65/2: 73-110.
———. 1978. The Relationship between the Religious and Political Orders in Northern 
Thailand (14th-16th Centuries). In Religion and the Legitimation of Power in Thailand, 
Laos, and Burma, ed. Bardwell L. Smith. Chambersburg: Anima Books: 20-33.
Tampoe, Moira. 1990. Tracing the Silk Road of the Sea: Ceramic and Other Evidence 
from the Partner Ports of the Western Indian Ocean (8th-10th c. AD). In Sri Lanka 
and the Silk Road of the Sea, ed. Senake Bandaranayake et al. Colombo: Sri Lanka 
National Committee for UNESCO and Central Cultural Fund: 85-103.
Taw Sein Ko, trans. and ed. 1893. The Kalyāṇī Inscriptions Erected by King Dhammaceti 
at Pegu in 1476. Indian Antiquary 22: 11-17, 29-52, 85-89, 150-159, 236-242.
Temple, R.C. 1893. A Preliminary Study of the Kalyāṅī Inscriptions Postscript. Indian 
Antiquary 22: 274-5.
Terwiel, Berendt. 2002. Burma in Early Thai Sources: An Essay on Models of Perception. 
In The Maritime Frontier of Burma: Exploring Political, Cultural and Commercial 
Interaction in the Indian Ocean World, 1200-1800, ed. Jos Gommans and Jacques 
Leider. Leiden: KITLV Press: 9-23.
Tibbetts, G.R., trans. 1981. Arab Navigation in the Indian Ocean before the Coming of the 
Portuguese. London: Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Vickery, Michael. 2010. Cambodia and Its Neighbors in the 15th Century. In Southeast 
Asia in the Fifteenth Century: The China Factor, ed. Geoff Wade and Sun Laichen. 
Singapore: National University of Singapore Press: 271-306.

--- PAGE 30 ---
266
Blackburn
jesho 58 (2015) 237-266
———. 2004. Cambodia and Its Neighbors in the 15th Century. ARI Working Papers 27. 
Singapore: Asia Research Institute, National University of Singapore.
———. 1995. Piltdown 3: Further Discussion of the Rām Khamhaeng Inscription. 
Journal of the Siam Society 83/1-2: 103-98. (See http://michaelvickery.org/ for refer-
ence to the re-edited version.)
———. 1973. The Khmer Inscriptions of Tenasserim: A Reinterpretation. Journal of the 
Siam Society 61/1: 51-70.
Velupillai, A. 1971. Ceylon Tamil Inscriptions, I. Peradeniya: University of Ceylon.
———. 1972. Ceylon Tamil Inscriptions, II. Peradeniya: University of Ceylon.
Wade, Geoff. 2012a. Maritime Islam across the Indian Ocean to 1500. Paper presented 
at Ghent University.
———. 2012b. Southeast Asian Historical Writing. In The Oxford History of Historical 
Writing. Vol. 3. 1400-1800, ed. José Rabasa, Masayuki Sato, Edoardo Tortarolo, and 
Daniel Woolf. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 119-47.
———. 2010. Early Muslim Expansion in South-East Asia, Eighth to Fifteenth 
Centuries. In The New Cambridge History of Islam, ed. David O. Morgan and Anthony 
Reid. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 3: 366-408.
———. 2009. An Early Age of Commerce in Southeast Asia, 900-1300 CE. Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies 40/2: 221-65.
Walters, Jonathan. 2002. Buddhist History: The Sri Lankan Pāli Vaṃsas and Their 
Community. In Querying the Medieval: Texts and the History of Practices in South 
Asia, ed. Ronald Inden, Jonathan Walters, and Daud Ali. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press: 99-164.
Wheatley, Paul. 1961. The Golden Khersonese. Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press.
Win Than Tun. 2002. Myanmar Buddhism of the Pagan Period (AD 1000-1300). 
Unpublished Ph.D. diss., National University of Singapore.
Wyatt, David K. 2004. Thailand: A Short History. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
———. 1975. The Crystal Sands: The Chronicles of Nagara Sri Dharrmaraja. Data Paper 
98. Ithaca NY: Cornell University Southeast Asia Program.
——— and Aroonrut Wichienkeeo. 1995. The Chiang Mai Chronicle. Chiang Mai: 
Silkworm Books.
Young, Jonathan A. 2011. Adornments of Virtue: The Production of Lay Buddhist Virtuosity 
in the Upāsakajanālaṅkāra. Unpublished Ph.D. diss., Cornell University.
