# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2016-acri-kandahjaya-esoteric-buddhism-maritime-asia-ch3.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 13:54:37
# Total Pages: 46
# File Size: 1.29 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 3901.3 chars/page, total chars: 179,461)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
Chapter 3
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, Borobudur, and the Origins 
of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
h u daya k a n da h jaya
R
esearch into the Sanskrit-Old Java-
nese Buddhist compendium Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Kamahāyānikan (hereafter SHK) has been 
going on for over a century.1 Despite the long 
history of scholarship, however, a number of per-
tinent questions still linger. We are yet to identify 
the date when this scripture was compiled. We also 
are far from being able to map its relationship with 
other Buddhist scriptures or to appreciate its role 
in the development of Buddhism, particularly in 
Indonesia. Suggested answers to these questions 
from previous studies are generally conflicting. The 
status quo is thus intriguing and urges this study 
to re-examine this unique Buddhist scripture. This 
time I will necessarily limit the report to providing 
preliminary answers to some key questions, namely 
the origins of the SHK, its date and relationship 
with other textual as well as visual materials, and 
its role in the development of Esoteric Buddhism 
in premodern Indonesia. 
My report is briefly sketched as follows. Having 
summarized the inherited issues on dating and 
origin of the SHK, I will retrace the prototypical 
1.
I have been fortunate to encounter Andrea Acri, a
kalyāṇamitra, whose attention to detail and keen eyes
have given me the opportunity not only to learn further
even from my own paper but also to save me from em-
barrassing mistakes. I am grateful and deeply indebted
to his efforts, which made this paper more legible. In the
interim, Prof. Lokesh Chandra sent me his valuable review 
and encouragement; later, Hiram Woodward too provided 
me with many useful suggestions. Comments also came
from Jeffrey Roger Sundberg. While I gratefully accepted 
the help of those scholars and revised this paper accord-
ingly, because of all types of constraints, I was forced to
leave many of their worthy suggestions for the future. So,
despite all the feedback, errors may still remain and they
are no doubt mine.
sources from which the text drew its teachings. My 
reassessment individuates some Sanskrit texts that 
were previously not deemed to have any relation-
ship with Buddhist developments in the premodern 
Indonesian Archipelago. Those newly identified 
sources help confirm the SHK’s claim that its own 
teachings came from Dignāga—perhaps through 
oral tradition. I will then argue that bits and pieces 
of data from the Indonesian Archipelago contribute 
in recovering a still poorly documented stage in 
the development of ‘hidden’ Buddhist teachings 
that, as sug­gested by Chinese Buddhist sources, 
might have already started as early as the 3rd cen- 
tury ad.
Having explored a range of possibilities with 
regard to the transmission of Esoteric Buddhist 
teachings to Sumatra and Java, I argue that the ad-
vanced ‘hidden’ teachings recorded in the SHK may 
be dated to the 8th century at the latest. Because of 
the long period of incubation occurring between 
the earliest attestations of those teachings and their 
appearance in the SHK, I venture to suggest that 
this text has preserved components of esoteric 
doctrines attributable to a Buddhist lineage that 
died out, and has thereby been forgotten ever since. 
Finally, in an attempt to recapture this lost tradi-
tion, I will compare some doctrinal features found 
in the SHK and other Esoteric Buddhist texts to 
features of the architectural plan and iconographic 
programme of Borobudur—the most magnificent, 
yet perhaps least understood, Buddhist monument 
in the world.
the discovery of the shk
Jacob Kats was the scholar who made the SHK 
widely available through a critical edition accom-

--- PAGE 2 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
68
panied by a Dutch translation published in 1910.2 
And yet, except for his reference to the information 
given by Jan Brandes in his monograph on Candi 
Jago, published in 1904, we find no further clari-
fication about the discovery of the SHK. Brandes 
himself only mentioned Puri Cakranegara (on 
the island of Lombok, Indonesia) being the site 
from where in the year 1894 he obtained the lontar 
palm-leaf manuscript preserving this important 
Javanese Buddhist scripture, along with the famous 
Old Javanese historical records, the Deśavarṇana 
(formerly referred to as Nāgarakṛtāgama).3 While 
this was likely the earliest information about the 
manuscript of the SHK coming from the discoverer 
himself, the description was disappointingly brief. 
The obscurity is even more intriguing when we read 
the statement by Hendrik Juynboll in 1908 that 
the year of the discovery was 1895, which is not in 
agreement with Brandes’ description. Kats (1910: 4) 
did read and quote Brandes’ as well as Juynboll’s 
accounts,4 and yet surprisingly he did not try to 
explain how exactly the SHK was discovered, or—if 
he ever noticed the discrepancy—to reconcile the 
accounts by Brandes and Juynboll.
It is from Juynboll that we get a sense for the first 
time that the discovery was related to an assault on 
Puri Cakranegara. Many decades later Theodore 
Pigeaud gave a more informative account of this 
event in his study on the Deśavarṇana, which was 
published in 1960. Even though he did not provide 
us with a source, Pigeaud (1960: xi) described the 
circumstances of the discovery of the manuscript 
of the Deśavarṇana as follows:
2.  See Kats 1910. A brief mention of the SHK was made 
earlier by H. Juynboll (1908: 56–61).
3.  See Brandes 1904: 94: ‘Not less remarkable is what one 
finds in a very important and remarkable Old Javanese 
Buddhist text, which was also found in 1894 in the puri at 
Tjakranagara, and which is titled Sang hyang Kamahāyānan 
(or Kamahāyānikan), i.e. ‘‘The Sacred Mahāyānistic Ca-
thechism’’’ (my translation from original Dutch).
4.  Juynboll 1908: 56: ‘Among the descriptions of the col-
lection of Old Javanese manuscripts that were looted in 
1895 during the raid of the puri of Cakranegara, and that 
were incorporated in the Legatum Warnerianum in Leiden 
after the death of Dr. Brandes, I found a few manuscripts, 
from which better appears, what the ancient Javanese have 
known of Mahāyānism’ (my translation from the original 
Dutch).
The old-Javanese manuscript written on palm-
leaves, now known as Codex Orientalis 5023 of 
the Legatum Warnerianum, Leyden University 
Library, was discovered on the 18th of Novem-
ber 1894 by Dr J. Brandes in the palace-com-
pound of the Balinese King of Cakra Nĕgara, 
on the island of Lombok, one of the Lesser 
Sunda Islands to the east of Bali. By order of 
the Governor-General of the Netherlands East 
Indies, Dr Brandes, then Government linguist, 
was attached to the staff of the military forc-
es engaged in the Lombok war, with a view to 
preserve from destruction all objects of cultur-
al interest to be found, especially manuscripts.
Pigeaud’s description gives us a much better 
sense of what was going on and, more importantly, 
a clue as to where we would be able to acquire clearer 
understanding out of this vagueness. A detailed 
description of the Lombok War, and probably its 
earliest published account, was written by Wouter 
Cool, a Captain of Dutch Military Engineers. Cool 
(1896: 455–67) gives a full account of what happened 
when the soldiers of the Netherlands East Indies 
attacked Puri Cakranegara.5 His reconstruction 
leads us to believe that 19 November 1894 was most 
likely the day Brandes collected all manuscripts 
from Puri Cakranegara, and only later—probably 
in 1895—did he discover the SHK among them.6 The 
collection was essentially looted out of the Lombok 
War and in a way might suggest a reason for the 
terseness of the scholarly accounts.
inherited issues on dating 
 and source
Kats identified three versions of the SHK, which he 
named A, B, and C.7 He also clarified that the SHK 
consists of two sections. The first section is titled 
5.  An English translation of this passage may be found in 
Cool 1897: 346–54. The summary by Wahyu Ernawati (2007: 
195–96) in her study on the Lombok Treasure provides us 
with succinct, yet most relevant and revealing, information 
on the assault on Puri Cakranegara.
6.  This was probably the reason for Juynboll (1908: 56) 
to put the discovery in 1895 when he mentioned it in his 
‘Nieuwe bijdrage tot de kennis van het Mahâyânisme of Java’.
7.  A recension of version C, which is in fact a Śaiva 
or ‘Śaivized’ text, was later published in full by Lokesh 
Chandra (1997: 7–101).

--- PAGE 3 ---
69
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya (SHKM), 
meaning ‘The Mantra System of Mahāyāna’ (Kats 
1910: 30). The second, as witnessed by version B, is 
called Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Advayasādhana 
(SHKAS), meaning ‘The Mahāyāna Method for 
Attaining Non-Duality’ (Kats 1910: 70). Version A, 
consisting of 65 palm leaves, is more complete than 
version B, which consists of only 27 palm leaves 
(Kats 1910: 5–6); both versions A and B contain 
Buddhist teachings, while C contains mostly Śaiva 
teachings. For this reason, both A and B are called 
the Bauddha version and C the Śaiva version.
Out of the three, only version C can be dated 
with a terminus ante quem, because the colophon 
mentions the name Mpu Siṇḍok of the Īśāna 
dynasty (r. 929–47 ad). However, this did not stop 
further studies to determine the actual date of 
version C, as well as of the two other versions. 
Being a Śaiva recension derived from the 
Bauddha version, version C must have necessarily 
been written after the latter, which must have been 
compiled in an earlier period (Gonda 1976: 193); 
furthermore, its Sanskrit verses must have existed 
before the Old Javanese commentaries were written 
(de Jong 1974: 477). Roelof Goris suggested on 
philological grounds that the oldest Old Javanese 
commentary is that of version A, which possibly 
was already in existence in the Śailendra period:
It is therefore not impossible that the older parts 
already existed during the Śailendra period [ca. 
750–850 ad] as a commentary to a Sanskrit 
work, and that our A version with its younger 
parts might be dated before the time of Siṇḍok, 
whilst the C version, being a revision, might be 
considered Eastern Javanese and recorded dur-
ing or after the time of Siṇḍok. (Goris 1926: 156, 
English trans. Stutterheim 1956: 35)
Kurt Wulff (1935: 9–10), while summarizing 
scholarly opinions on the date of the SHK which 
varied from before the first half of the 10th century 
to the 15th century, did not seem convinced by Goris’ 
suggestion. In due course, Jan Willem de Jong (1974: 
477) aptly clarified that we need to address two 
dating problems at the same time: the date of the 
original composition of the Sanskrit verses and the 
date of their arrival in Java. Establishing himself 
mainly on the general history of the Adhyardhaśa-
tikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra (APP)8 because its verses 
had already been found in the SHKM, de Jong (1974: 
482), pace Goris, concluded that the Old Javanese 
text could not be older than the 10th century. This 
controversy clearly indicates that the dating issues 
surrounding the three versions of the SHK have 
not been resolved.
Scholars began investigating the contents of 
the SHK soon after Kats published the text. Even 
more attention has been paid to the SHKM.9 Some 
attempted to improve the readings, while others 
tried to identify the sources of the Sanskrit verses.10 
As we received it, the SHKM contains 42 Sanskrit 
verses provided with Old Javanese paraphrases. 
Early investigations discerned that some of these 
Sanskrit verses are found in Buddhist scrip-
tures from the Indian Subcontinent, such as the 
Mahāvairocanābhisaṁbodhitantra (MVA), the APP, 
etc. Lokesh Chandra (1995: 297) has collected and 
tabulated the correspondences of all the 42 verses. 
Here his table is reproduced with minor modifi-
cation for convenience (Table 3.1).
Given the relationship existing between the 
SHKM and a variety of prototypical Esoteric 
Buddhist Sanskrit texts, it has been suggested that 
verses of the SHKM reflect some kind of Tantric 
initiation ritual (Lokesh Chandra 1995: 298–99). 
The MVA and APP alone supply a total of 32 verses 
to the SHKM. This is probably the reason why de 
Jong (1974: 467–68) seemed to consider these two 
scriptures the primary sources from which the 
SHKM obtained its teachings. And yet, if such was 
the case, there has been no adequate explanation as 
to why the compiler extracted those 32 particular 
verses and not the rest. In addition, since verses 23 
to 25 have thus far never been identified, the MVA 
and APP cannot be the only primary sources for 
the SHK. The issue becomes even more problematic 
when we notice that the other text in the manu-
script, the SHKAS—which, unlike the SHKM, has 
not received much scholarly attention—establishes, 
8.  For extensive studies on this scripture, see Astley-Kris-
tensen 1991; for a critical edition and brief summary, see 
Tomabechi 2009.
9.  De Jong (1974) provides us with a useful survey of 
efforts up to the early 1970s. Lokesh Chandra (1995: 295–
300) supplies additional notes up to the early 1990s.
10.  See de Jong 1974: 465–68; Lokesh Chandra 1995: 295–300.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
70
Table 3.1: Correlation of the SHKM with other texts
SHKM
MVA
(T 848)
STTS
(T 865)
JS
(T 866)
SV
KS
KSP
SDP
APP  
(T 244)
1
◉
◉
2
◉
◉
3
◉
◉
4
◉
◉
5a
◉
◉
6
◉
◉
7
◉
◉
8
◉
◉
9
◉
◉
10
◉
11
◉
12
◉
◉
◉
13
◉
◉
◉
◉
14
◉
15
◉
16
◉
◉
◉
◉
17
◉
◉
◉
◉
18
◉
◉
◉
19
◉
20
◉
◉
◉
◉
◉
21
◉
◉
◉
◉
◉
22
◉
◉
◉
◉
◉
23
24
25
26
◉
◉
◉
27
◉
◉
◉
28
◉
◉
29
◉
◉
◉
30
◉
◉
◉
31
◉
◉
◉
32
◉
◉
◉
33
◉
34
◉
35
◉
36
◉
37
◉
38
◉
39
◉
40
◉
41
◉
42
◉
Total
15
2
14
8
15
11
4
17

--- PAGE 5 ---
71
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
along with the SHKM, one whole set of practical 
teachings, so the two texts and their Buddhist 
textual sources should not be considered separately.
Thus far, only two authors have attempted 
to unravel the mysteries of the SHK. Magetsari 
(1997)11 tried to exploit Goris’ suggestion on the 
early dating of the SHK in order to explain the doc-
trinal status quo that inspired the construction of 
Borobudur, but unfortunately employed an anach-
ronistic classification of Buddhist currents into 
Pāramitānaya and Mantranaya.12 Lokesh Chandra 
(1995: 295–434) supported de Jong’s conclusion that 
the SHKM originated from the MVA and the APP, 
and continued to maintain that the SHKAS reflects 
both the Caryātantras and Yogatantras, with the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha being the primary 
source, but unfortunately did not elaborate on how 
the unique daśapāramitā and the catur- or the pañ-
ca-devī of the SHKAS came to exist. 
newly identified sources
Tadeusz Skorupski (2002: 3–4) recently published 
an English translation of the Kriyāsaṅgraha (KS), 
which a number of scholars consider to have been 
composed in the period between the 8th to the 
13th century. This translation, which represents a 
version of the entire KS integrating all parts that 
earlier came under the title KS and Kriyāsaṅgra-
hapañjikā (Skorupski 2002: 1), opens up an option 
to merge the columns of the KS and Kriyāsaṅgra-
hapañjikā (KSP)13 in Table 1. By collapsing these 
two columns, there would be 17 verses of the KS 
matching with those in the SHKM. As such, the KS 
comes closer to the APP in terms of the number of 
11.  This is a revision of the author’s dissertation (1982). 
12.  The term pāramitānaya itself is well known from the 
Prajñāpāramitānayaśatapañcaśatikā, where it is not clearly 
put in contrast to mantranaya. The contrast or the pairing 
comes later. Magetsari (1982: 44), while insisting that the 
‘Pāla synthesis’ described by Edward Conze was the key 
for analysing the SHK, anachronistically uses the later 
classificatory terminology of Pāramitānaya and Mantra-
naya—probably introduced by Nāropā or Advayavajra in 
the 10th or 11th century (Joshi 1977: 274)—and therefore 
detracts credibility from his own theory. In addition, the 
SHK itself never uses the term pāramitānaya.
13.  Skorupski (2002: 5) explains how these two titles got 
mixed up.
verses contributed to the SHKM. In terms of range, 
however, the KS covers verses which originally were 
considered only parts of either the MVA or the 
APP. Upon further examination, instead of just 17 
verses, I have found a total of 26 Sanskrit verses of 
the SHKM to be recorded in the KS. Those 26 verses 
are located among the first 32 verses of the SHKM 
(see Table 3.2). This indicates that the KS as a single 
text contains the most verses among the texts that 
have hitherto been matched against the SHKM. 
However, despite the significant number of cor-
respondences, we may still question the source(s) 
for the last 10 verses of the SHKM, which are not 
attested in the KS.
Guhyasamājamaṇḍala rituals
A rare Sanskrit ritual text titled the Śrīguhya­
samājamaṇḍalavidhi (hereafter, the GSMV) has 
been recently discovered (Bahulkar 2010). Accord-
ing to the colophon of the manuscript through 
which it has survived for us, the text was composed 
by Dīpaṅkarabhadra. In the history of Vikramaśīla 
monastery, Dīpaṅkarabhadra was known as the 
second preceptor after Buddhajñāna. He was thus 
commonly considered to belong to the Jñānapāda 
or the Jñāna tradition of the Guhyasamāja. The two 
masters were active in this monastery towards the 
end of the 8th century (Gray 2005: 62). The text that 
we receive today carries only 436 verses, fewer than 
the total 450 mentioned in the last verse (ślokaiḥ 
śataiḥ sārddhacatuṣṭayaiḥ). More importantly, how­
ever, the GSMV contains 27 verses corresponding 
with those in the SHKM. These verses are spread 
rather evenly from the first up to the last verse. In 
other words, the GSMV includes most of the verses of 
the SHKM that were previously thought to be found 
either in two separate scriptures, as in the case of 
the MVA and the APP, or in a single text, i.e. the KS.
There is another rare Sanskrit text which has 
also been recently discovered, titled the Śrīguhya­
samājamaṇḍalopāyikāviṁśatividhi (hereafter, the 
GSVV). The GSVV is ascribed to Nāgabodhi (a.k.a. 
Nāgabuddhi; see Appendix A), who is considered 
a member of the Āryapāda, or the Ārya tradition 
of the Guhyasamāja.14 According to this tradition,
14.  A series of articles related to Nāgabodhi’s GSVV has 
been published by Tanaka (2000, 2002, 2003a, 2003b, 2004).

--- PAGE 6 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
72
Table 3.2: Correlation of the SHKM with newly identified texts
SHKM
KS
GSMV
GSVV
Guhyendutilaka
Gurupañcaśikhā
Ratnamegha
1
◉
◉
◉
2
◉
◉
◉
3
◉
◉
◉
4
◉
◉
◉
5ab
◉
◉
◉
6
◉
◉
7
◉
8
◉
9
◉
10
◉
◉
◉
11
◉
◉
12
◉
◉
◉
13
◉
◉
◉
14
◉
◉
15
◉
16
◉
◉
17
◉
◉
◉
18
◉
19
20
◉
21
◉
◉
22
◉
◉
23
◉
◉
24
◉
25
◉
26
◉
◉
27
◉
◉
◉
28
◉
◉
29
◉
◉
30
◉
◉
31
◉
◉
32
◉
◉
◉
33
◉
◉
◉
34
◉
◉
◉
35
◉
◉
◉
36
◉
◉
37
◉
38
◉
◉
39
◉
◉
40
◉
41
◉
◉
42
◉
Total
26
27
24
1
6
1

--- PAGE 7 ---
73
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
Nāgabodhi received the teachings from Nāgārjuna 
and eventually imparted them to Vajrabodhi (a.k.a. 
Vajrabuddhi: see Appendix A). However, in contrast 
to the GSMV, the GSVV shares 24 verses with the 
SHKM, 7 of which are not found in the GSMV. At 
this point, we cannot determine if the difference 
reflects some sort of distinguishing feature between 
the two traditions, or is merely due to corruption 
in textual transmission. Interestingly, the title 
of the GSVV contains the phrase guhyasamāja-
maṇḍalopāyikā, and the colophon of the GSMV 
claims the same. If these two texts actually came 
from the same source, then we would have obtained 
the prototype containing all the 34 verses that the 
GSVV and GSMV together share with the SHKM, 
from the beginning to the end. 
Ratnameghasūtra
Having identified the last 2 of those 10 verses, we 
are left with 8 unidentified ones. A question arises, 
again, as to how we are to explain these 8 verses 
of the SHKM that are neither in the GSMV nor in 
the GSVV.
If we inspect Table 3.2, we see that 6 verses out 
of those 8 unaccounted ones correspond in one 
way or another with verses in one or more texts. 
Verses 7, 8, and 9 are recorded in the MVA; verse 
15 in the KS; verse 19 in the SV; and verse 20 in 
the KS, MVA, JS, or SV. Thus, these 6 verses are 
recorded in the collection of texts that is somehow 
related to other SHKM verses. The last 2 of those 
8, i.e verses 25 and 37, are problematic in terms of 
concept, origin, and date. Verse 25 of the SHKM 
in Sanskrit runs as follows:
ye cānye samayadviṣṭāḥ 
samayabhraṣṭāḥ ye janāḥ / 
māraṇīyāḥ prayatnena 
buddhaśāsanapālane //
The śloka is followed by an Old Javanese commen-
tary that in a way also translates the Sanskrit verse:15
15.  Ka: Hana vvaṅ dveṣa ri saṅ hyaṅ samaya, melik ri 
saṅ hyaṅ Mantrānaya; samayabhraṣṭāḥ ye janāḥ, hana 
vvaṅ samayabhraṣṭāḥ vih sampun kṛtasamaya, manaḍah 
upadeśa. Apa kunaṅ vivartika ta ya vәkasan? Kinasam-
payannya ta saṅ guru, inumpәtnya sira. Māraṇīyāḥ prayat-
nena, ikaṅ vvaṅ maṅkana nāṅ samayadviṣṭa mvaṅ sa-
The meaning is: There are persons who [feel] 
aversion towards the Saṅ Hyaṅ Samaya, who 
dislike the Saṅ Hyaṅ Mantrānaya; samaya-
bhraṣṭāḥ ye janāḥ, there are persons who are 
samayabhraṣṭaḥ, i.e. have already completed 
initiation (kṛtasamaya) and received teachings 
(upadeśa). Why have they turned away [from 
them] at last? They treat scornfully the rever-
end master, speak ill of him. Māraṇīyāḥ prayat-
nena, such persons that are samayadviṣṭa and 
samayabhraṣṭa, they should be ordered to be 
killed, they should not be an object of concern 
for the Lord; buddhaśāsanapālane, in order to 
protect the teachings of the Lord Buddha, and 
the respect of the Saṅ Hyaṅ Samaya, thus is the 
fruit of the killing of the samaya-haters, etc.
I haven’t been able to find this verse anywhere 
thus far. However, according to Śantideva, the 
concept of permitting the killing of a person who 
is going to commit a deadly sin (ānantarya) is re-
corded in the Ratnameghasūtra: ‘In the holy Rat-
namegha the slaying of a man who was intending 
to commit a deadly sin, is allowed’ (Bendall and 
Rouse 1922: 164).16
Gurupañcaśikhā
The Sanskrit verse 37 of the SHKM and the trans-
lation of its Old Javanese commentary are as 
follows:
nityaṁ svasamayācāryyaṁ 
praṇair api nijair bhajet / 
mayabhraṣṭa kinonaken ikā pejahana, tan patagvakna de 
bhaṭāra, buddhaśāsanapālane, yatanyan karakṣā śāsana 
bhaṭāra hyaṅ buddha, lāvan katvaṅana saṅ hyaṅ samaya, 
maṅkana phalanyan patyana ikaṅ samayavidveṣādi (Kats 
1910: 25).
16.  Śikṣāsamuccaya: sphuṭaṁ cāryaratnameghe ānan-
taryacikīrṣupuruṣamāraṇānujñānāt (Bendall 1897: 168). On 
the other hand, the Sarvadurgatipariśodhanasūtra seems 
to suggest a different concept: ‘There are living beings who 
are desirous of all kinds of wealth, food, drink and pleasure, 
who are (potentially) Lords. They hate the pledge and are 
unable to aspire to the previously mentioned practice and 
the rest. But even they on entering here will gain com-
plete fulfillment of all their hopes in accordance with their 
wish’ (santi bhagavantaḥ sattvāḥ sarvārthabhojanakāma-
guṇagṛddhāḥ samayadviṣṭāḥ puraścaraṇādīṣṭāśaktās teṣām 
apy atra yathākāmakaraṇīyā praviṣṭānāṁ sarvāśāparipūr-
tir bhaviṣyati; see Skorupski 1983: 100, 284).

--- PAGE 8 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
74
adeyaiḥ putradārair vā 
kim punar vibhavaiś calaiḥ // 
The meaning is: Even life is to be given to the 
reverend Guru, its goal is to serve him; adeyaiḥ 
putradārair vā, let alone children and wife, all 
are to be offered to Bharāla Guru; dāsabhūtā, 
having become his servants, their task is to 
serve him, kim punar vibhavaiś calaiḥ, do not 
speak about possessions, like gold, jewels, gar-
ments, silver, all these are to be offered to the 
reverend Guru.17
When we do a further search, verse 37—and in 
fact the whole range of verses from 33 to 38—of the 
SHKM actually corresponds to verses 10, 15, 19, 21, 
17, and 18 of the Gurupañcaśikhā (‘The Fifty Verses 
of Guru Devotion’).
Guhyendutilaka
Verse 23 of the SHKM provides one of the most fun-
damental arguments defending Tantric practices:18
nāsti kiñcid akartabyaṁ 
prajñopāyena cetasā / 
nirviśaṅkaḥ sadā bhūtvā 
prabhuṅkṣva kāmapañcakam //
The meaning is: There is no work that you will 
not be able to do, even though the work appears 
as [the most] difficult in the triple world, which 
cannot be done by those in heavens, those 
among mankind, those in the underworlds. 
17.  Ka: Hurip tuvi tinarimakan ri ḍaṅ guru, gumavaya 
kabyāpāran ira donya, adeyaiḥ putradārair vā, āstām ikaṅ 
anak rabi inarpaṇāken ikā kabeh i bharāla guru, dāsabhūtā, 
hulunan ira umyāpāra ri sira pakenanya, kim punar vibha-
vaiś calaiḥ, hayva ta vinuvus ikaṅ dṛvya ṅaranya, kady 
āṅgan iṅ mās maṇik dodot pirak pinūjākennikā kabeh i 
ḍaṅ guru (Kats 1910: 29).
18.  Ka: Nora gavai anuṅ tan ta kavenaṅa gavayan, ta yady-
apin tribhuvanaduṣkara lviran iṅ karmma, tan kavәnaṅa 
ginave de saṅ hana riṅ svargga, manuṣya, pātāla, ikān 
maṅkana atiduṣkara nikaṅ karmma kavәnaṅ i taya ginave 
denta; prajñopāyena cetasā, ndan ikaṅ prajñā atah āmbәka-
kәnanta, nirviśaṅkaḥ sadā bhūtvā, lāvan tan kahilaṅana 
atah kita irika nissandehacitta sadākāla; prabhuṅkṣva 
kāmapañcakam, paribhogan taṅ pañcakāmaguṇa denta, 
salvir niṅ kaviṣayan hayva pinilihan paribhogan kabeh 
denta, āpan don ni kadi kita sādhaka, ndan hayvatah tan 
pakāmbәk ika nissaṅśaya (Kats 1910: 24).
While such very difficult work can be done [by 
you], there is none done by you; prajñopāyena 
cetasā, that is the prajñā, which you should 
strive to attain with the mind, nirviśaṅkaḥ 
sadā bhūtvā, moreover you should not lose the 
state of a mind free from apprehension at all 
times; prabhuṅkṣva kāmapañcakam, objects 
of the five senses (pañcakāmaguṇa) should be 
enjoyed by you—do not give your preference to 
that which pleases [the senses only], [but] all 
[the objects] should be enjoyed by you, because 
[that is] the goal of a practitioner like you; do 
not cease to strive to attain that [state], without 
doubt.
Verse 23 is found in the GSVV, and also in 
the Tattvasiddhi.19 The latter text was ascribed to 
Śāntarakṣita, who is believed to be a renowned 
abbot of the Nālandā monastery in the 8th century. 
Śāntarakṣita, however, stated that the verse in 
question—like some adjacent verses in his Tat-
tvasiddhi—as shown below, was quoted from the 
Guhyendutilaka.
According to the Tibetan record The Blue Annals, 
there are three Tantric traditions out of eighteen 
that have had a significant influence on Tibetan 
Buddhism from the start. Those three are named 
after their foundational texts, i.e. the Guhyasamāja 
(‘The Secret Assembly’), the Guhyendutilaka (‘The 
Secret Moon Drop’), and the Buddhasamayoga 
(‘The Yoga of Buddha Equality’):20
Here the first three divisions of the eighteen 
great divisions of the Tantras of the Mantra 
school of the Old Believers (rNying ma pa): the 
Śrīguhyasamāja (dpal gsang ba ‘dus pa), the Can-
draguhyatilaka or Guhyendutilaka (zla gsang 
 thig le), and the Buddhasamayoga (sangs rgyas 
mnyam sbyor). They are also called the Tantras 
19.  As verse 2cd and 3ab. S.B. Dasgupta (1974: 179–98) 
devoted a whole chapter to the arguments produced by 
the Tantric Buddhists in defence of their yoga, in which 
he uses the Tattvasiddhi as one of his two main sources. 
On pages 186–87, Dasgupta gives the Sanskrit verse cor-
responding to verse 23 of the SHKM and its translation: 
‘There is nothing not to be done by a man whose mind is 
equipped with Prajña and Upāya; he should always enjoy 
the five objects of desire most unhesitatingly’.
20.  Louis de la Vallée Poussin (1898: 146) lists five treatis-
es: Guhyasamāja, Mayajāla [sic], Buddhasamayoga, Can-
draguhyatilaka, and Mañjuśrīkrodha.

--- PAGE 9 ---
75
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
of Mind, Speech, and Body (thugs gsung sku’i 
rgyud [kāyavākcittatantra]). Their preaching 
lasted long. (Roerich 1979: 102)
Among those just mentioned, the Guhyendutila-
ka is the most obscure, as we know next to nothing 
about the tradition it stems from. However, an in-
teresting series of quotations may be found in the 
Tattvasiddhi (see Dvivedi and Śāsanī 1989: 35–36):
aśeṣayogatantreṣu  
guhyendutilakādiṣu / 
nāsti kiñcid akartavyaṁ 
prajñopāyena cetasā // 2  
nirviśaṅkaḥ sadā bhūtvā 
bhoktavyaṁ pañcakāmakam / 
oṣadhīcūrṇasaṁyogād 
uragasyeva bandhanam //3 
kāmino nityaraktasya 
gītavādyaratasyaṁ ca / 
kāmasaukhyair atṛptasya 
sidhyate nātra saṁśayaḥ // 4  
bodhicittaṁ dṛḍhaṁ yasya 
niḥsaṅgā ca matir bhavet / 
vicikitsā naiva karttavyā 
tasyedaṁ sidhyate dhruvam // 5 
sunirūpya susañcintya 
praveśaṁ kārayed budhaḥ / 
anyathāgnipraveśo ’sya 
kalāṁ nārhati ṣoḍaśīm // 6 
tattvaṁ vijñāya tattvena 
yo ’dhimuktiṁ niṣevate / 
sa sidhyaty anyathā tasya  
mahānirayapātanam // 7
As seen above, the half-verses 2cd–3ab of the 
Tattvasiddhi are practically the same as verse 23 of 
the SHK. Verse 5 of the Tattvasiddhi is also found 
in the Śikṣāsamuccaya, but here Śantideva says that 
this verse came from the Trisamayarāja (Bendall 
and Rouse 1922: 137).21 According to Stephen Hodge 
(2003: 9), the Trisamayarāja was one of the sources 
of the MVA.
Indrabhūti quoted some verses of the Guh- 
yendutilaka also in his Jñanasiddhi:
sarvāṅgabhāvanātītaṁ 
kalpanākalpavarjitaṁ / 
mātrābindusamātītam 
21.  Without having a complete text of both, we cannot 
determine if these texts are the same.
etan maṇḍalam uttamam // 
sa caiva sarvabhāvena 
sarvadā samavasthitaḥ / 
anādinidhanaḥ sattvo 
vajrasattvaḥ paraṁ sukhaṁ // 
bodhicitthād ṛte nānyat 
saukhyam asti tridhātuke / 
bodhicittam ayaṁ saukhyaṁ 
sarvasaukhyaprasarpaṇam //
The first verse of the Jñānasiddhi cited above is 
found in the Pradīpodyotana, a commentary to the 
Guhyasamājatantra composed by Candrakīrti.22 
But, there, Candrakīrti says that it came from the 
Bhagavatavyākhyātantra, perhaps a synonymous 
title for the Guhyendutilaka.23 Then, the Pradīpo-
dyotana quoted another verse from the Guhyendu-
tilaka, as follows:24
Utsṛjya ratnojvalapadmamadhyataḥ saṅguh- 
ya mūrtiḥ sakalaṁ jinānām / 
abhiṣiñcya mūrdhnāmalaratnavarṣair viśud-
dhavajrodbhavajñānatoyaiḥ //
A verse from the Guhyendutilaka is also retained 
in an early Tantric text, the Caryāmelāpakapradīpa 
by Āryadeva. Christian Wedemeyer (1999: 243) has 
translated the verse from the Guhyendutilaka in 
the Caryāmelāpakapradīpa as follows:25
Again, the aggregates and so on are each sub-
divided into five making one hundred; in the 
Secret Moon Drop it says: Families are taught 
to be hundred-fold; Briefly summarized, five. 
Correlated with body, speech and mind, they 
are also three-fold.
22.  See Chakravarti 1984: 45. A reference to this source 
is also mentioned by Campbell (2009: 72).
23.  Again, as in the case of the Trisamayarāja, without 
having a complete text of both, we cannot determine if 
these texts are the same, or if one is quoting the other.
24.  See Chakravarti 1984: 79. It is to be noted, though, 
that the title given here is Guhyendratilaka, which may 
be a typo.
25.  This comes from lines 12 to 15 in Chapter 2 of the 
Caryāmelāpakapradīpa: ete skandhadhātvādayaḥ punar 
ekaikaśaḥ pañcapañcākārair bhidyamānāḥ śatadhā 
bhavanti / kulāḥ śatavidhāḥ proktāḥ saṅkṣepeṇa tu pañ-
cadhā / punas trividhatāṁ yānti kāyavākcittayogata iti / 
śrīguhyendutilake vacanāt //.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
76
Yogāvatāra, Yogāvatāropadeśa, and  
Yogabhāvanāmārga
The SHK presents us with a set of comprehensive 
practical teachings that goes through four steps. 
They are: one, Mahā-mārga (the great path); two, 
Parama-bodhi-mārga or Parama-mārga (the 
supreme path); three, Mahā-guhya (the great secret); 
and four, Parama-guhya (the supreme secret). The 
first step, the Mahā-mārga, is described in the 
SHKM. The remaining three steps are explained in 
the SHKAS. When we examine the paths explained 
in the SHKAS, we find many unusual concepts 
or terms that immediately attract our attention, 
such as yoga and bhāvanā, and the daśapāramitā 
(ten perfections). Upon further examination, these 
prove to be entry points that enable us to distinc-
tively identify potential sources.
A significant clue comes from a paragraph in 
the SHKAS telling us that the method for attain-
ing non-duality (advaya) was received from Ḍaṅ 
Ācāryya Śrī Dignāgapāda:
Mahā-guhya is the method to be united with 
the Bharāla, viz.: yoga and bhāvanā. There are 
four yogas, according to the instructions left 
by Ḍang Ācāryya Śrī Dignāgapāda, viz.: the 
mūla-yoga, the madhya-yoga, the vasāna-yoga, 
and the anta-yoga.26
This Dignāgapāda might be identified with 
the famous Buddhist philosopher Dignāga, who 
flourished in India circa ad 480–540. According 
to Hajime Nakamura (1980: 281):
The teaching of yoga as was set forth in 
Dignāga’s Yogāvatāra was elaborated on in 
Ye-śes-zla-ba (Jñānacandra?)’s Yogācāryābhā- 
vanātātparyārthanirdeśa and Ye-śes-sñiṅ-po 
(Jñānagarbha?)’s Yogabhāvanāmārga, and fi-
nally culminates in Kamalaśīla’s Bhāvanāyo-
gāvatāra. This information leads us to a small 
Sanskrit meditation text, titled the Yogāvatāra. 
The colophon says that the composer was 
Dignāga. However, according to Vidhushekha- 
ra Bhattacharya (1928: 775–78), there was an-
26.  Mahāguhya: ikaṅ kāraṇa ri kapaṅguhan bharāla, 
lvirnya: yoga lāvan bhāvanā. Pāt lvir niṅ yoga, pavәkas ḍaṅ 
ācāryya śrī Dignāgapāda, lvirnya; mūla-yoga, madhya-yoga, 
vasāna-yoga, anta-yoga (Kats 1910: 45).
other Sanskrit recension attributed to Nāgār-
juna, and this one was found under the title 
Prajñopāyaviniścayasiddhi by Anaṅgavajra.
The Yogāvatāra was commented by Dharmen-
dra, who was allegedly contemporaneous with 
Dignāga. Dharmendra’s commentary is titled the 
Yogāvatāropadeśa (Chatterji 1929: 249–59). There 
are two significant messages in this commentary. 
First, according to Dharmendra:
Any devoted and noble young man or woman 
whose character has been purified by śīlapāramitā 
and who thinks in his or her mind that all beings 
are to be liberated in accordance with the pre-
scribed manner and begins to act upon the teach-
ings of yoga by means of the supreme knowledge, 
obtains the said knowledge in this very life, being 
fired with enthusiasm, strong through discipline, 
and ever irresistible. (Chatterji 1929: 258) 
In emphasizing the importance of meditation 
practice, Dharmendra quoted Tathāgata’s statement 
in the Gambhīraśīla: ‘Those who have recourse to 
books only, foregoing the prescribed process, fail to 
obtain success and to them come various miseries 
and mortifications’ (Chatterji 1929: 258). Secondly, 
Dharmendra points out that ‘now any subject that is 
appropriate, profound and not easily comprehensi-
ble should be learnt orally from the teacher’ (ibid.).
Dharmendra’s messages underline the im-
portance of yoga, teacher, and oral teaching.27 
Dharmendra’s comment was well perpetuated by 
Buddhajñāna (or Buddhaśrījñāna) when the latter 
stressed the concept of mukhāgama—‘the tradi-
tion from the mouth’, or ‘from the mouth of one’s 
own guru’ (Wayman 1977: 95). All these elements 
resonate with what we find in the SHK, when the 
SHKAS from the beginning emphasizes the prac-
tice of yoga, and when the SHKM cites six verses 
verbatim from the Gurupañcaśikhā.
Jñānagarbha (ca. ad 700–760) was considered 
the teacher of Śāntarakṣita (Hodge 1988). He com-
posed the Yogabhāvanāmārga, which in many ways 
is similar to the Yogāvatāra or Yogāvatāropadeśa, 
putting emphasis on practical teachings. In his 
English translation of this text, Stephen Hodge 
(1988: 34) indicates that the sources of some pas-
27.  See also De La Vallée Poussin 1932: 416–17.

--- PAGE 11 ---
77
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
sages in Jñānagarbha’s writing were likely the 
Mahāvairocanatantra and the Guhyasamājatantra. 
Then, in explaining his meditation technique based 
on the formula śamatha-vipaśyanā, Jñānagarbha 
urged the mind of the meditator to abide in the 
brahmavihāra while wishing to guide beings. 
Yet because perceptions of things contrary to 
that may be encountered, a yogin should act 
without relinquishing his mindfulness that 
all dharmas are like space, therefore his mind 
will not become involved in the unwholesome. 
While abiding with the wish to guide beings, 
you should transmute all perturbations with 
the purity of the three elements [the purity of 
the agent, the action, and the recipient of the 
action], even regarding the wholesome. In 
that way, you should always abide in kindness, 
compassion, joy and equanimity [= the four 
brahmavihāras].
Yet without entirely fulfilling the accumula-
tions of merit and awareness, you will not be 
able to acquire in this way the means to bring 
about the Enlightenment of infinite numbers 
of beings or the state of supreme Enlighten-
ment. The two accumulations are summarized 
by the Six Perfections [i.e., merit (puṇya) is ful-
filled by the first five Perfections, and aware-
ness (jñāna) by the Perfection of Insight], and 
therefore, beginning with the Perfection of 
Generosity, you should be mindful that you 
should continually fulfil all aspects of it, and 
likewise for each of the six. (Hodge 1988: 36–37)
The combination of the six pāramitās and the 
brahmavihāras as stated in the Yogabhāvanāmār-
ga turns out to be similar to the SHKAS’s unique 
definition of the daśa pāramitā (ten perfections) 
as a collection of the six perfections (ṣaṭ pāramitā) 
and the four perfections or immeasurables (catur 
pāramitā), corresponding to the four brahmavi-
hāras (metrī, karuṇā, muditā, upekṣā): see Kats 
1910: 42, 45. This tenfold arrangement is different 
from the ten perfections generally known in either 
Mahāyāna or Theravāda today.
Bhāvanākrama
Śāntarakṣita is known to have attempted to inte-
grate Madhyamaka teachings from Nāgārjuna with 
teachings from the Yogācāra tradition introduced 
by Asaṅga. He too was considered one among 
the pioneers who brought Buddhism to Tibet. A 
famous disciple of Śāntarakṣita was Kamalaśīla. 
The debate between Kamalaśīla and the Chinese 
monk Heshang at Bsam yas Monastery in Tibet in 
the years 792 to 794 is well known. The debate was 
performed before King Khri Srong Lde Bstan, who 
reigned from 742 to 798. At the end of the debate, 
the king declared Kamalaśīla the winner.
Kamalaśīla composed a text titled the Bhā­
vanākrama in three parts. If we meticulously 
examine the first part of the Bhāvanākrama, we 
find that some passages are related to the SHKAS 
(Kats 1910: 31, 42, 45, 64). The corresponding pas-
sages are tabulated in Table 3 (next page).
The comparison shows that some basic concepts 
in these passages of the SHKAS correspond with 
those in the first part of the Bhāvanākrama. Both 
of them call the disciple an ādikarmika (adhikarmi-
ka in SHKAS, arguably a corruption) who follows 
the Mahāyāna path. Three practices to achieve the 
highest attainment are karuṇā, bodhicitta, prati-
patti, which in the SHKAS are spelled out as asih 
(Old Javanese for ‘compassion’), puṇya, and bhakti. 
Another interesting correspondence is the concept 
related to the compound pāramitāpramāṇa, or the 
six pāramitās and the four apramāṇas, as stated 
in the Bhāvanākrama. This unique configuration 
parallels the definition of the daśapāramitā (‘ten 
perfections’) described in the SHKAS.
The first part of the Bhāvanākrama was written 
by Kamalaśīla while he was still in India (Tan-
iguchi 1992: 307). As displayed in Table 3.3, Ka-
malaśīla stated that the sources for the concept 
pāramitāpramāṇa were the Akṣayamatisūtra and 
the Ratnameghasūtra.28 Even though the concepts
28.  The Pāli Dhammapada 368 (also Aṅguttara Nikāya 
I.10) describes a meditation based on kindness (metta). The 
Mahāvastu describes the system mentioned in Dhamma-
pada 368 together with compassion, joy, and equanimity. 
The Yogasūtra of Patañjali also explains the brahmavihāra, 
as follows: maitrīkaruṇāmuditopekṣāṇāṁ sukhaduḥkha-
puṇyāpuṇya-viṣayāṇāṁ bhāvanātaś cittaprasādanam 
(1.33). The Akṣayamatisūtra likely refers to T 310(45), or 
the Akṣayamatiparipṛcchāsūtra, which together with the 
Kāśyapaparivartasūtra is considered the earliest core, 
already in existence by the time of Nāgārjuna, out of 
which the Mahāratnakūṭa was compiled (see Nakamura 
1980: 210).

--- PAGE 12 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
78
Table 3.3: Correlation between the Advayasādhana  
and the Bhāvanākrama
Advayasādhana
Bhāvanākrama
Nihan saṅ hyaṅ Ka-
mahāyānikan ya 
varahakna mami ri kitaṅ 
tathāgatakula jinaputra, 
adhikarmika saṅ hyaṅ 
Mahāyāna, ya ta vara-
hakna mami ri kita.
mahāyānasūtrāṇāṁ ya 
ādikarmikasya caryāni-
yamaḥ /
tamadhikṛtya saṁkṣepād 
bhāvanākramas tv 
abhidhīyate //
Nihan tattva niṅ tri-
parārtha kavruhana, 
triparārtha ṅaranya: 
asih, puṇya, bhakti.
acireṇa sarvajñatāṁ 
prāptukāmaiḥ saṁkṣepa-
taḥ karuṇā, bodhicittam, 
pratipattiś ceti triṣu 
sthāneṣu prayatitavyam /
Papupul ni caturpāramitā 
mvaṅ ṣaṭpāramitā, 
lvirnya: dāna, śīla, kṣānti, 
vīryya, dhyāna, prajñā, 
metrī, karuṇā, muditā, 
upekṣā. Ya tikā sinaṅguh 
daśapāramitā.
sā ca pratipattir bodhisat-­ 
­tvasya pāramitāpramāṇa­
saṅgrahavastvādibhedena 
akṣayamatiratnameghā­di- 
sūtreṣu vistareṇa varṇitā /
Karuṇā ṅaranya: 
paraduḥkhaviyogec ca, 
ākāra niṅ jñāna saṅ satva 
viśeṣa ahyun hilaṅa ni 
duḥka niṅ sarbva satva. 
Tiga lvir niṅ duḥka niṅ 
para, pagavayan saṅ satva 
viśeṣa karuṇā, lvirnya: 
duḥka-duḥkatā, saṅskāra-
duḥkatā, pariṇāma­
duḥkatā. Nāhan lvirnyan 
tigaṅ duhka.
sā ca karuṇā sarvapīḍi-
tasattvaduḥkhāvagamec 
chākārāsti / lokatrayasya 
sarvasattvānāṁ trivi- 
dhaduḥkhatayā yathāyo-
gam atyantaduḥkhitatvāt 
tadartha sarvasattveṣu sā 
bhāvanīyā /
outlined in the SHK are not exactly the same as 
those found in the Bhāvanākrama, the resonances 
shown above suggest that both Kamalaśīla and 
the compiler of the SHK might have obtained 
their doctrines from a common Sanskrit source. 
This reminds us of the concept behind verse 25 of 
the SHKM, which according to Śāntideva was re-
corded in the Ratnameghasūtra. Since Śāntideva 
apparently inserted many quotations from the 
Ratnameghasūtra in his works, we can infer that 
this scripture was considered authoritative in that 
period. Unfortunately, no Sanskrit manuscripts of 
the Ratnameghasūtra have been found so far, and 
the text is known to us only through a Chinese 
translation dating back to as early as ad 503 (T 658). 
If the Sanskrit text employed by Śāntideva was the 
same as the one translated into Chinese, its doc-
trines must have been known in Indian Buddhist 
milieux from at least the 5th century.
Piṇḍīkrama
Verse 2 of the SHKM and the translation of its 
commentary are as follows:
atītā ye hi sambuddhāḥ 
tathā caivāpy anāgatāḥ / 
pratyutpannāś ca ye nāthāḥ 
tiṣṭhanti ca jagaddhitāḥ //
The meaning is: The Lord Buddhas, those of 
the past, those who attained perfect enlight-
enment in the former times, like the Lord 
Vipaśyī, Viśvabhū, Krakucchanda, Kanaka-
muni, and Kāśyapa, all of them are the Bud-
dhas of the past. Tathā caivāpy anāgatāḥ: 
The Lord Buddhas of the future are those ap-
proaching to attain the perfect enlightenment, 
like those [in the series] starting with Lord 
Āryya Maitreya and ending with Samantai-
bhadra [sic], all of them are the Buddhas of 
the future. Pratyutpannāś ca ye nāthāḥ: In 
addition, the Lord Śrī Śākyamuni is the Bud-
dha of the present: he is [worshipped as] your 
divine Buddha now [in our era], his teachings 
are what your heart is to follow. Tiṣṭhanti ca 
jagaddhitāḥ, they continuously strive after 
the happines of all beings, thinking about the 
release of all beings from rebirth, while mak-
ing plans against the extinction by the total 
annihilation in this world.29
29.  Ka: Bhaṭāra hyaṅ buddha saṅ atīta, saṅ maṅ­
abhisaṁbuddha ṅūni riṅ āsitkāla, kady aṅgān bhaṭāra 
Vipaśyī, Viśvabhū, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, Kāśyapa, 
atīta buddha ṅaranira kabeh. Tathā caivāpy anāgatāḥ, 
kunaṅ bhaṭāra buddha saṅ anāgata, saṅ abhimukha 
maṅabhisaṁbuddha, kady aṅgān: bhaṭāra āryya Mai-
treyādi, Samantabhadra paryyanta, anāgatabuddha ṅa-
ranira kabeh. Pratyutpannāś ca ye nāthāḥ, tumamvah 
bhaṭāra śrī Śākyamuni, vartamānabuddha ṅaranira, sira 
ta pinakahyaṅ buddhanta maṅke, śāsananira ikeṅ tinūt 
atinta. Tiṣṭhanti ca jagaddhitāḥ, tamolah ta sira kum[i]
ṅkiṅ hitasuka niṅ sarbvasatva, umaṅәn-aṅәna kalәpasan 
ikaṅ rāt kabeh saka riṅ saṅsāra, duvәg kumirakira paḍәma 
niṅ mahāpralaya rike bhuvana (Kats 1910: 17).

--- PAGE 13 ---
79
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
The three categories of Buddhas of the past, 
present, and future are well known. But there are 
two aspects in the description here that attract our 
attention. First, in the SHKM, the name of one of 
the past Buddhas, i.e. Śikhin, is missing. It may be 
that the commentator or the scribe made a mistake, 
and yet this feature reminds us of the list inscribed 
on the stūpa of Bharhut. This stūpa is regarded as 
one of the oldest great Buddhist stūpas built around 
the 2nd century before the Common Era. Alexander 
Cunningham suspected that the railing inscribing 
the name Śikhin was missing.30 To date, however, 
there has been no confirmation, and therefore there 
is still a chance that the name was not there. If that 
was the case, it may suggest that there once existed 
a list containing no Śikhin and such was probably 
the one transmitted to the SHK.
Secondly, the name Samantabhadra (in the 
SHKM: Samantaibhadra) is added behind Maitreya, 
both being the future Buddhas. Nicholaas J. Krom 
(1920 I: 609) was the first scholar to notice this 
peculiar list. In an earlier article about the Bo-
dhisattvas at Mendut, Krom (1918: 419–37) argued 
that they belonged to the Eight Great Bodhisattvas 
of Esoteric Buddhism,31 and conformed to the list 
found in the Piṇḍīkrama of the Pañcakrama (ed. 
De la Vallée Poussin 1896: 3), as follows:
paṭṭikāyāṁ nyaset pūrve 
maitreyaṁ kṣitigarbhakam /  
vajrapāṇiṁ khagarbhaṁ ca 
nyased dakṣiṇato vratī // 30  
lokeśaṁ mañjughoṣaṁ ca 
paścimāyāṁ nyaset punaḥ /  
sarvāvaraṇaviṣkambhiṁ 
samantabhadrañ cottare // 31
These verses show that those Eight Great Bo-
dhisattvas are assigned to the four cardinal direc-
tions, as follows (Table 3.4):
30.  See Cunningham 1879: 45–46 and Barua 1979 I: 50, 
II: 2.
31.  Following Krom’s identification, Bautze-Picron (1997) 
and Shōji Itō (1985) expanded and discussed the appearance 
of these Bodhisattvas as depicted in the Javanese Buddhist 
temples of Mendut, Borobudur, and Plaosan; among these 
temples, Mendut is considered the oldest and is usually 
dated to the 8th century.
Table 3.4: Assignment of Eight Great Bodhisattvas to 
the four cardinal points
Cardinal Points
Eight Great Bodhisattvas
East
Maitreya
Kṣitigarbha
South
Vajrapāṇi
Khagarbha
West
Lokeśvara
Mañjughoṣa
North
Sarvanivaraṇaviṣkambhin
Samantabhadra
Krom overlooked the arrangement in this as-
signment, but if we observe this list carefully, it is 
clear that the series of Eight Great Bodhisattvas 
begins with Maitreya and ends with Samantab-
hadra, thus corresponding exactly to the Old Ja-
vanese commentary to verse 2 of the SHKM. That 
commentary was possibly composed while bearing 
in mind this list, which begins with Maitreya and 
ends with Samantabhadra.
Furthermore, in addition to the group of Eight 
Great Bodhisattvas, the Piṇḍīkrama provides yet 
another significant grouping: a group of six Bo-
dhisattvas in relation to the six sense organs.32 The 
Piṇḍīkrama describes the grouping of six as follows 
(ed. De la Vallée Poussin 1896: 5):
thlīṁkāraṁ cakṣuṣi nyasya  
kṣitigarbhaṁ vibhāvayet /  
oṁkāraṁ karṇayornyasya  
vajra-pāṇiṁ vibhāvayet // 61  
oṁkāraṁ vinyased ghrāṇe 
khagarbhaṁ tu vibhāvayet /  
oṁkāraṁ rasane dhyātvā 
lokeśaṁ ca vikalpayet // 62  
hūṁkāraṁ manasi dhyātvā  
mañjughoṣaṁ prabhāvayet /  
oṁkāraṁ sarvakāye ca  
dhyātvā viṣkambhiṇaṁ smaret // 63
32.  This text is an early source in which the two group-
ings appear together. Wayman (1977: 239, 247–48) shows 
the configuration for the group of six and a list of Eight 
Great Bodhisattvas.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
80
A similar systematization is recorded in the 
Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa,33 the Sādhanamālā,34 and 
verse 16 of the Guhyasamājanidānakārikā.35 Verse 
34 of the GSMV records the association as follows:
kṣitigarbhādikāñ chaṭkāṁś  
cakṣurādisvabhāvajān / 
kṣiṁ jrīṁ khaṁ gaṁ ṣkam ity ebhiḥ 
saṁ bījāc ca yathākramam // 34
This verse associates Kṣitigarbha with the 
eye-organ and with the syllable kṣiṁ. The corre-
lations among the group of six Bodhisattvas, the six 
sense organs, and the seed syllables are tabulated 
in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Correlation among the Group of Six’
Bodhisattva
Sense Organs
(kāyaviveka/indriya)
Seeds
(bīja)
Kṣitigarbha
Eye (cakṣuḥ)
kṣiṁ
Vajrapaṇi
Ear (śrotraṁ)
jaṁ
Khagarbha
Nose (nāsā or ghrāṇa)
khaṁ
Lokeśvara 
(Avalokiteśvara)
Tongue (jihvā)
gaṁ
Sarvanivaraṇa- 
viṣkambhin
Body-surface 
(kāya or tvak)
ṣkaṁ
Mañjuśrī
Mind (manas)
saṁ
The Shilun jing (十輪經 or Daśacakrasūtra) is 
the earliest scripture related to Kṣitigarbha known 
in China. This scripture contains a dhāraṇī, which 
is shown on the left column of Table 6 below. A 
parallel dhāraṇī associated with Bodhisattva 
Ava­lokiteśvara is shown on the right column. The 
33.  Ed. Vaidya (1964: 315): kṣitigarbhasya mahāmudrā / 
mantraṁ cātra bhavati sarvaṁkarmikam—kṣiṁ /
34.  Ed. Bhattacharya (1925 I: 20): paścāt ṣaḍaṅganyāsaṁ 
kuryāt / bhagavato cakṣuṣorubhayoś candramaṇḍalaṁ 
tadupari kṣiṁkāraṁ śuklavarṇaṁ, śrotrayoś candra-
maṇḍalopari jaṁkāraṁ nīlavarṇaṁ, nāsāpuṭayoś can-
dramaṇḍalopari khaṁkāraṁ pītavarṇaṁ, jihvāyāṁ 
candramaṇḍalopari gaṁkāraṁ raktavarṇaṁ, lalāṭa-
candramaṇḍalopari skaṁkāraṁ, śyāmavarṇaṁ, stana- 
dvaye candramaṇḍalopari saṁkāraṁ śuklavarṇam iti 
ṣaḍaṅganyāsaṁ.
35.  Wayman (1977: 10, 238–39): sarvatathāgatakāyaś ca-
turmudrayā mudritaḥ / cakṣurādyātmanā tatra kṣitigar-
bhādijinaurasāḥ.
right-column dhāraṇī (T 1336.616c1) comes from 
the collection of 185 dhāraṇīs compiled during 
the Liang dynasty and translated by an unknown 
translator between 502 and 557.
Table 3.6: Two dhāraṇīs associated with the Group of Six
T 410.685b21: The Shilun 
jing (the Daśacakrasūtra)
T 1336.616c1 觀世音說滅一
切罪過得一切所願陀羅尼 
(M10047)
namo ratnatrayāya /
tad yathā /
kṣobha kṣobha /
saṁkṣobha /
ākaśakṣobha /
bhaskarakṣobha /
akrakṣobha /
barakṣobha /
bajrakṣobha /
ālokakṣobha /
dharmakṣobha /
bācamakṣobha /
patyanirharakṣobha /
byāvalokaśamakṣobha /
upaśamakṣobha /
nāyanakṣobha /
prajñānasammuccaraṇa-
ksobha /
kṣanakṣobha /
biśariyanakṣobha /
śāstrabākṣobha /
cumbu cumbu /
akṣa cumbu /
bakara cumbu /
java cumbu /
bira cumbu /
bakti cumbu /
aloka cumbu /
tama cumbu /
satata cumbu /
satinihara cumbu /
avalokyata cumbu /
upaśama cumbu /
nanaya cumbu /
baracasamuktirana cumbu /
bidhiśriya cumbu /
śastaba cumbu /
biatrasotamahile /
yamayame / cakrase / 
cakramāśrīḥ / mili /
kalpapravarte / 
śrīprabhe /
paracarabandhani /
ratne / baracacacaca /
hilimili / āgaccha / duḥkhe / 
duḥkheruttaretare /
hilimili / mocantakaṁ /
kule mile / 
aṁkucittabi / are gire /
pare gire / kutaśambari / 
ṭiṁke tiṁke / ṭiṅkule /
hulu hulu hulu / kulutos- 
mire / miritre miritre / 
paṣā /
tahara / hare / huru huru /
rūpa pacabiśodhane 
svāhā /
mahābhūtakaluṣat-
biśodhane svāhā /
kaluṣarabhabhiśodhane 
payaṭamahritami /
śami cani rasi / cani ramasri 
/ caridhirihe kisvarabatati / 
hetra biprabatati /
ratati caṭa caṭa /
hili mili / ekadaki / 
takṣuru dahri dhari /
mili manṭadanṭa /
kuri miri 
akṣacita bimuri / 
prakrikuṭa cambari
taṅki taṅkuri /
śuru śuru krutu /
mili mili 
cibhanṭa /
daha rahri śuru śuru
rūpapasparśa / biśodhani 
svāhā /
mahābuddha karuśa 
biśodhani svāhā /
karuśa ucchabiśodhani

--- PAGE 15 ---
81
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
svāhā /
kaluṣa ojabiśodhane svāhā /
sarvāśaparipūraṇi svāhā /
sarvasaṁsyasaṁpadani 
svāhā /
sarvatathāgata arthe 
svāhā /
sarvabodhisattva arthe 
svāhā //
svāhā /
sarva avaranibiśodhani 
svāhā /
karuravabiśodhani svāhā /
sarva aśaparapūrani svāhā /
sarvatiṣṭha adhiṣṭhi 
svāhā /
sarvabodhisattva adhiṣṭhiti 
namaḥ stuti svāhā //
tad yathā /
munimūle / munigarbhe /
munihṛdaya / muniruha- 
bicale / munihṛde / 
munigame / śuklapakṣe / 
pālaśapakṣe / nīlapakṣe / 
saurisakṛte / toraṇakṛcale / 
pātākakṛte / kukunamile / 
apakṣasāre / anohakilpi 
munipathāpi svāhā //
The selected words for these dhāraṇīs provide 
us with another clue. The dhāraṇī from the Shilun 
jing uses kṣobha at the beginning, while the one 
for Avalokiteśvara uses cumbu. The Sanskrit word 
cumbu comes from the root cumb, meaning ‘to kiss’. 
We may surmise that this refers to the organ of 
themouth, or to the tongue. The kṣ in kṣobha does 
not seem to be arbitrary either, because this akṣara 
occurs in the Sanskrit words caksuḥ and kṣiṁ. 
Then, the word kṣobha is the opposite of akṣobha, 
meaning ‘unagitated, unmoved’, and the trans-
formed word, akṣobhya, is known to be a Buddha 
name. The word kṣobha means ‘shaking, agitation, 
disturbance, tossing, trembling, and emotion’ 
(Monier-Williams 1899: 331). This word probably 
refers to the eye-organ. For this reason, these two 
dhāraṇīs are likely to have originated from a pro-
totypical set that associated the six Bodhisattvas to 
the six sense organs, though unfortunately we have 
yet to find the remaining four dhāraṇīs. Nonethe-
less, from what we have obtained so far we may infer 
that they must be dhāraṇīs that circulated among 
those who practised the hidden early teachings of 
the Guhyasamāja tradition. Then, if the dating of 
the Chinese collection of the dhāraṇīs can serve 
as a guide, the Guhyasamāja tradition could have 
already been in existence in an embryonic form 
around the 5th or early 6th century.
dating of the shk
Some concepts culled from a series of texts belong-
ing to Dignāga’s line of teachings, ranging from 
the Yogāvatāra to the Bhāvanākrama, clearly echo 
those retained in the SHK. These correspondences 
corroborate and support the SHK’s claim that its 
set of teachings was received from Ḍaṅ Ācāryya Śrī 
Dignāgapāda, who lived in India circa ad 480–540 
(Buswell and Lopez 2013: 259). While this does not 
automatically date the SHK to the 6th century, it 
nonetheless helps us to draw a terminus post quem: 
The SHK must have been compiled some time after 
ad 540.
The following discussion attempts to determine 
the upper limit of the range and, if possible, narrow 
the range of the compilation time. In order to do 
so, some gruelling controversies surrounding the 
rituals, texts, events, and authors behind the newly 
identified sources of the SHK need to be addressed. 
To elucidate intricate points I shall draw upon Bud-
dhist data from, or closely related to, insular South-
east Asia, which have been hitherto overlooked. My 
comparative analysis will hopefully cast a fresh 
perspective on the way Buddhism was transmitted 
to insular Southeast Asia, and possibly suggest a 
new view on how the process took place.
hidden teachings from sumatra
In many past studies on Buddhism in Indonesia, 
the source for the story of the early transmission 
of Yogācāra teachings to the Archipelago was the 
Tibetan account compiled by 16th- to 17th-century 
Tibetan historian Tāranātha. The record relates that 
Dharmapāla, a disciple of Dignāga, having taught at 
Nālandā for more than thirty years, spent the end of 
his life in Sumatra (D. Chattopadhyaya 1980: 212–14). 
These events probably occurred in the second half 
of the 6th century.36 However, the validity of this 
claim depends on Tāranātha’s reliability.37 In fact, 
36.  Nakamura (1980: 276), following Chinese accounts, 
fixed Dharmapāla’s life in India between the years 530 and 
561. On the other hand, Takakusu (1966: lvii–lviii) suggested 
that Dharmapāla was a contemporary of Bhartṛhari and 
that he must have died before 635. So, if he ever moved to 
Sumatra, the event likely happened after 561.
37.  One source for his compilation was his guru, Bud-
dhagupta, who travelled to many places, including Java

--- PAGE 16 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
82
a different picture is given by Chinese accounts, 
which regard Dharmapāla as having died young in 
India (Buswell and Lopez 2013: 250). Confirming 
either one of these accounts is difficult, especially 
when data from Sumatra itself are not readily avail-
able, controversial, or stem from a later historical 
period (e.g., from the 11th to the 13th century). Thus, 
the status of Buddhism in 7th-century Śrīvijaya 
has been far from clear, since even the location 
of this kingdom has until recently been contested 
(see Jordaan and Colless 2009; Zacharov 2012). 
The transmission of Buddhism to Java is not clear 
either. However, this state of uncertainty is bound 
to change after a careful re-examination of data 
from Sumatra and Java.
(1) Talang Tuo Inscription. The earliest dated 
evidence of Esoteric Buddhism in the Archipelago 
comes from the Talang Tuo Old Malay inscrip-
tion of ad 684. The inscription, discovered near 
Palembang in 1920, was written when Dapunta 
Hyaṅ Śrī Jayanāśa was the king of Śrīvijaya. Ph.S. 
van Ronkel published a transcription along with its 
English translation in 1923; in 1930, Georges Cœdès 
took notice of the term vajraśarīra inscribed in 
this inscription. He first elaborated on its signifi-
cance by pointing it out as a synonym to vajrakāya, 
meaning ‘diamond body’. Cœdès connected it to 
an earlier study on the kāyavākcittavajrasādhana 
of Anuttarayoga by Louis de la Vallée Poussin, who 
explained that one who could successfully gener-
ate the diamond body would be able to identify 
Tathāgata in his body.38 This explanation comes 
from the Pañcakrama, a commentary to the Gu-
hyasamājatantra. Because of the date of the Talang 
Tuo inscription, Cœdès connected the teachings in 
the inscription to coeval Tantric developments in 
Bengal, where Anaṅgavajra—who was a contempo-
rary of Dapunta Hyaṅ Śrī Jayanāśa—composed the 
Prajñopāyaviniścayasiddhi. This text of Anaṅgava-
and Sumatra in the 16th century (see Tucci 1931: 684, 696, 
698–701, and Ray 1936: 81–86). Ray (1936), in his Stellingen 
no. VII at the end of his dissertation, indicated that ‘the 
Tibetan tradition regarding the introduction of Mahāyāna 
Buddhism and allied cults into Burma, as recorded by 
Tāranātha and Buddhagupta as well as in the Pag Sam 
Jon Zang, is in the main in accordance with the evidence 
of archaeological research’.
38.  De la Vallée Poussin 1898: 146; Wayman 1977: 94.
jra, as I have mentioned earlier, was closely related 
to the Yogāvatāra.
Cœdès also made a point—thereby supporting 
the earlier attempt by Krom—to relate the SHK to 
Borobudur. He suggested that the development in 
Java was under the influence of Śrīvijaya. Although 
none seem to have ever heeded his advice, in the 
light of the newly identified sources related to the 
SHK, the direction Cœdès has shown is worthy 
of consideration. In fact, it is now easy to demon-
strate that the Talang Tuo inscription contains 
many concepts akin to the instructions recorded 
in the SHKAS. As pointed out earlier, the SHKAS 
contains an exceptional concept of daśapāramitā 
(ten perfections) combining the six pāramitās and 
the four apramāṇas, which also occurs in teach-
ings leaning towards Tantric Buddhism. Besides 
the term vajraśarīra, elements of daśapāramitā of 
the SHKAS appear in the Talang Tuo inscription, 
thereby setting the teachings in this inscription 
apart from those commonly found in Mahāyāna 
doctrine. Thus, cultivating brahmavihāra (maitrī) 
in combination with the ṣaṭpāramitā (tyāga [= 
dāna], kṣānti, vīryya, samāhitacinta [= dhyāna], 
and prajñā) while establishing vodhicitta and 
producing the vajraśarīra for the attainment of 
anuttarābhisamyaksaṅvodhi as recorded in the 
Talang Tuo inscription echo the unique pattern of 
teachings set in the SHKAS.
(2) Yijing on Dhāraṇī Practitioners, and His Res-
idence in Śrīvijaya. The transmission of Yogācāra 
teachings to the Archipelago is documented by 
Yijing (ad 635–713). But because of scholastic con-
troversies surrounding the development of Tantric 
Buddhism and especially the controversy about the 
existence of Śrīvijaya in Sumatra, few have paid 
attention to Yijing’s information on Esoteric Bud-
dhism39 and for this very reason we have missed a 
piece of substantial evidence linking up Buddhist 
data from Sumatra with those from Java, India, 
and China.
Yijing tells us that his teacher, Śākyakīrti, was 
one among the five most respected Buddhist 
masters of the time, matching Dignāga in his logical 
skills and possessing an unrivalled knowledge of 
39.  Among the few were Seyfort Ruegg (1981: 104) and 
Hodge (2003: 9–11).

--- PAGE 17 ---
83
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
the (Yogācāra) teachings of Asaṅga, Nāgārjuna, and 
Saṅghabhadra (Li 2000: 154). From Yijing’s per-
spective, Śākyakīrti was a very significant figure,40 
who mastered a broad range of Buddhist teachings. 
If we consider that Yijing’s sojourn in Śrīvijaya41 
occurred in the period within which the Talang 
Tuo inscription was inscribed in Palembang, the 
teachings as reflected from the inscription were 
probably within the range of Śākyakīrti’s. 
Additional information from Yijing’s accounts 
on the practice and stories associated with dhāraṇīs 
may provide evidence that embryonic forms of 
Tantric Buddhism had already been practised 
for some time in India as well as in other regions 
(Hodge 2003: 10). The following are relevant ex-
cerpts from Yijing’s accounts. The first character-
izes the monks Daolin, Shanxing, Shibian, Bi’an, 
and Zhi’an (Lahiri 1986: 18, 45, 63–68, 83): 
40.  Yijing’s estimate was in the ballpark, as Śākyakīrti’s 
work, the Shouzhang-lun 手杖論 or the Hastadaṇḍaśāstra 
translated by Yijing in 711, has survived for us as part of 
the Chinese Buddhist canon (T 1657).
41.  The location where Yijing resided during his sojourn 
in Śrīvijaya is not known. Yet, the empirical verification of 
astronomical events—the shadow on the sundial during 
different seasons and times of the day—recorded by Yijing 
while residing in Śrīvijaya, and confirmed through a pre-
liminary empirical observation carried out by an Indone-
sian team, suggests that Muara Jambi was in all likelihood 
the location where Yijing resided (I am indebted to the 
Indonesian team leaders who readily volunteered and 
helped with the successful measuring of the shadow of a 
stick placed vertically on the ground of Muara Takus and 
Muara Jambi in 2011: Hermanto [Riau], Pak Hidayat and 
Rudy Zhang [Jambi], Pak Sudhamek and Heru Suherman 
Lim [Jakarta]). Archaeological sites such as that of Mua-
rojambi and the area surrounding the River Batanghari 
have produced quite a number of Buddhist artefacts, a 
fact suggesting that there must have been lots of activities 
related to Buddhism in the past. In the site of Muarojam-
bi alone, covering an area of around 26 square kilome-
tres (around 10 square miles), more than eighty Buddhist 
temples (candis, or manapos) of different sizes have been 
discovered, marked, or identified, and some of them have 
been restored. The site is the largest Buddhist complex in 
the southern hemisphere thus far known. Although the 
majority of the artefacts and vestiges date back to a much 
later period, namely between the 11th and 14th century, 
some of them have been dated—albeit with some degree 
of uncertainty—to between the 7th and 9th century (Budi 
Utomo 2011).
[Daolin] with a mendicant stick, reached the 
South Sea in a foreign ship and from there set 
sail for India. On his way he passed through 
copper pillar and arrived at Langka. He 
crossed Holing and Luoguo to reach India. He 
received very warm and affectionate welcome 
from the kings of those countries he passed 
through. He spent a couple of years there and 
then he reached Tāmralipti in East India. He 
spent three years there in studying Sanskrit 
language.
The pilgrim spent much of his time in stud-
ying carefully Dhāraṇī Piṭaka…. Then he pro-
ceeded to West India where he spent hardly a 
year at Lāṭa country. There he established an 
altar [maṇḍala?], got acquainted with spells 
(vidyā). Sometimes he tried to explain the 
teachings of that Śāstra…. [D]ao-lin desired 
to protect his mysterious Sūtra. Because this 
Dhāraṇī Piṭaka says, ‘one may ascend to heaven 
sitting on the dragon-drawn vehicle, one may 
order hundreds of gods as one’s slaves. One’s 
desired object may be achieved only by recit-
ing the mystic gestures and formulae.’ While 
Yijing was at Nālandā, he regularly went to 
the altar [maṇḍala?] and wholeheartedly tried 
to study this Sūtra; he worked quite hard but 
could not attain full success. His primary aim 
was to propagate this idea among a vast mul-
titude of heterodox people. So he wrote down 
only a general outline.
The priest Shanxing…. As he grew, he 
studied the rites on Discipline and expressed 
his feelings to learn Vidyāmantra, spells. Mild 
and humble, frugal and simple by nature, he 
became the disciple of Yijing and followed him 
to Śrīvijaya but always remembered his own 
country. When he got ulcer, he took a small 
boat and returned to China at the age of a little 
over forty.
Dharmācārya Shibian, Śrī Kaśa … thor-
oughly studied the Sanskrit language and 
Vidyāmantra.
Bi’an, Dharmācārya Nirvāṇa, and Zhi’an, 
Jñā­napārin. Both these monks were the 
natives of Turfan. They went to the capital city 
cherishing the idea of becoming monks. They 
were anxious to visit Mid-India and to witness 
with their own eyes the transforming influence 
(of the Doctrine) that had taken place there.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
84
Then, Bi’an and Zhi’an with the Chinese envoy 
Wang Xuanguo boarded the ship. On board 
they fell sick and died. Many copies of Bud-
dhist Sūtras and Śāstras in Chinese translation, 
texts on Yoga belonging to them were left in 
the country of Śrīvijaya.
Yijing also vividly narrated stories on Nāgārjuna 
and Dignāga in relation to Tantric Buddhism, as 
follows (Lahiri 1986: 65–68):
Generally, the meaning of Vidyā in Sanskrit is 
Vidyādhara Piṭaka. Vidyā has been translated 
as Mingzhou…. Thus, it is called Vidyādhara 
Piṭaka. The Sanskrit text, it is told, contained 
100,000 ślokas. It might have been translated 
into Chinese three hundred juans, (chapter, fas-
ciculi). Now (at the time of Yijing) most of those 
translations were lost, only a few were extant.
After the Mahāparinirvāṇa of the Great 
Sacred One (Buddha), Arya Nāgārjuna that 
is Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva preserved the true 
spirit of the Piṭaka.
One of his disciples, known as Nanda, was 
a brilliant scholar, and was very much proud of 
his knowledge; he paid special attention to this 
text. He spent twelve years in Western India, 
wholeheartedly studied the Vidyā or Spell and 
acquired great knowledge of the mystic man-
tras. Every mealtime he chanted the mantras 
and food would fall from the sky. No sooner 
did he recite the mantras and ask for food with 
magic bowl than he obtained it from the sky. 
He could get all the desired objects with this 
magic bowl in his hand. Supposing the man-
tras were not chanted the bowl would vanish 
in no time.
Therefore, the great monk Nanda was 
afraid that his knowledge of the Vidyā would 
be of no use if it was not practised regularly. 
He collected 12,000 ślokas which later on were 
compiled into a separate school of thought. 
Each and every word of the printed text was 
carefully compared. Although the language 
and the words of the book were same, the 
meaning and applications were completely dif-
ferent. Until it was expounded orally no one 
could understand and realise the significance 
of the mantras.
Later on, when the Śāstrācārya Dinnāga 
studied his works, he was astonished to find his 
lofty and noble ideas, profound knowledge and 
his extreme attachment to the subject.
Touching the Sūtra affectionately, he said 
with a deep sigh—‘If he (Nanda) attains per-
fection in Hetu Vidyā could I be compared any 
longer with him in scholarship? Not only a 
wise man could comprehend the range of his 
knowledge but also a stupid one could under-
stand his profound scholarship’. This Dhāraṇī 
Piṭaka was never very popular in China.
Yijing’s account suggests five important points: 
(1) Yijing likely picked up his stories from those 
being commonly narrated during his stay in 
India or Sumatra. (2) In regard to Nāgārjuna and 
Dignāga, the accounts must be prevailing stories 
from India, and these stories clearly put them in 
direct connection with Tantric practices. Yijing’s 
stories appear to be first-hand accounts, and look 
different in comparison to Kumārajīva’s account 
of Nāgārjuna’s association with Tantric teach-
ings (Corless 1995: 525–31). Yijing’s stories also 
predate any Tibetan records. (3) Yijing said that 
the Vidyādhara Piṭaka was already translated and 
known in China, but to his understanding it was 
lost and was never popular; yet, from accounts of 
Shanxing and Shibian we may infer that Chinese 
monks seemed to know the practice while they 
were still in China (Lahiri 1986: 18, 83). (4) Yijing 
apparently was not successful in mastering Tantric 
teachings. (5) Yijing’s statements that Nanda col-
lected 12,000 ślokas that were later compiled into 
a separate school of thought, that their meanings 
and applications were completely different, and 
that until they were expounded orally no one could 
understand the significance of the mantras, suggest 
that there was a different type of manuscript pro-
duction intended for a special audience, perhaps 
for the purpose of transmitting hidden meaning. 
tantric transmission to java
Having explored some Buddhist data from Sumatra, 
however briefly, I take the opportunity to roughly 
sketch the range of possibilities with regard to dates 
and patterns of the transmission of Esoteric Bud-
dhist teachings to the Archipelago, and to Java in 
particular. The evidence gathered thus far allows 
us to surmise that early hidden teachings, e.g. those

--- PAGE 19 ---
85
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
that were related to the Guhyasamāja tradition, 
were already redacted and thriving in India in the 
5th to 6th century at the latest. From there, those 
hidden teachings spread to regions outside. The two 
Chinese dhāraṇīs associated with the Group of Six 
dated to the 6th century corroborate development 
in outlying regions. The Talang Tuo inscription 
dated to 684 may provide additional clues on such 
development.
When we now ponder over Buddhist data from 
Java, we must first of all keep in mind that this 
island was not a blank sheet while Sumatra was 
bustling with Buddhist activities. Chinese records 
on Faxian and Guṇavarman suggest that Buddhism 
in Java began in the 5th century at the latest.42 
Early on, J.G. de Casparis (1956: 70) ascribed the 
appearance of eleven gold plates engraved with 
the complete texts of the Pratītyasamutpādasūtra, 
the Vibhaṅga, and the Upadeśa to the missionary 
activity of Guṇavarman, who disembarked in Java 
from his seaborne journey in the beginning of the 
5th century. The appearance of the gold plates de-
scribed above supports the report given by Yijing 
that there was a Buddhist centre in Java, called 
Kaliṅga (Heling 訶陵), in the 7th century.43 Accord-
ing to his story, a Chinese monk, Huining 會寧 by 
name, a native of Chengdu in Sichuan, travelled 
by the sea route and reached Kaliṅga in Java in 
the year 665, and then lived there for three years 
with a well-reputed monk, Jñānabhadra (Lahiri 
1986: 36–38). In the Chinese canon, the name 
Jñānabhadra indeed appears as the translator of 
the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra.44
42.  See Kandahjaya 2004: 42–44, where I discussed the 
state of Buddhism in Java in relation to these two monks.
43.  See Lahiri 1986: 36–38. The Balinese Aṣṭa-mahā-bha-
ya-kliṅ contains the toponym Kliṅ (Kәliṅ), which has been 
identified as Java by Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1970: 311). It 
has been debated whether the name Heling 訶陵 refers to 
Kaliṅga, also the location of this toponym. Damais (1964), 
van der Meulen (1977), and lately Mahdi (2008) are among 
those who have contributed to the discussions. While the 
discussions on Heling may have pointed to a number of 
geographical locations, including Kaliṅga in India and 
the Malay Peninsula, the Chinese accounts from the Tang 
dynasty record descriptions of Heling unmistakably refer-
ring to Java (Groeneveldt 1960: 12–15). 
44.  T 377: Daban niepan jing hou fen 大般涅槃經後分 (2 
juans).
Huining ordered his disciple monk Yunqi 運
期 to go back to China to present the Chinese 
translation of the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra. Yunqi 
returned to Kaliṅga and spent more than ten years 
there. He was well acquainted with the language 
of the people of Kunlun (the South Seas) and ac-
quired some knowledge of Sanskrit. Later on, he 
retired to lay life and lived in Śrīvijaya up to the 
time of Yijing. A sudden change took place in him; 
he was greatly moved by the Law of the Buddha 
and again he travelled across the island preaching 
the religion in the city. He propagated the religion 
among non-believers. He breathed his last when 
he was forty (Lahiri 1986: 38–39). While we do not 
have further information about Yunqi, this account 
reveals a truly significant clue about insular com-
munication and transmission. It shows that Java 
and Sumatra were not secluded islands, and that 
a Chinese monk could acquire and speak the local 
language and even preach.
Recently, a large Buddhist complex has been 
unearthed at Batujaya, Karawang, in West Java 
(Djafar 2010). Archaeological activities, which 
started in 1984, have identified thirty Buddhist 
temples within an area of around 5 square kilo-
metres (around 2 square miles). The temples have 
been dated to the 5th to 8th century. In this area, 
the excavation unearthed clay votive tablets and 
gold leaf inscriptions at the Blandongan site. Some 
scholars believe that those clay votive tablets display 
a depiction of the miracles of Śrāvastī (Manguin 
and Indradjaja 2011). The inscriptions were dated 
on palaeographic grounds to the 6th to 7th century. 
These inscriptions contain passages similar to those 
discovered in the Malay Peninsula, and interesting-
ly enough to those in Sungai Tekarek, Batu Pahat 
(West Kalimantan), which were palaeographically 
dated to the 5th century.45 
45.  The Kedah inscription, Cherok Tokun inscription, 
Mahānāvika Buddhagupta inscription in the Malay 
Peninsula, and inscriptions from Sungai Tekarek, Batu 
Pahat, West Kalimantan, include lines which are similar 
to inscriptions from Blandongan (see Chhabra 1935, Her-
goualc’h 2002: 213–15). The Sungai Tekarek inscription 
runs as follows: ajñānāc=cīyate karma janmanāḥ karma 
kāraṇam / jñānān=na kriyate karmma karmmābhāvān=na 
jāyate (‘Through ignorance karma is accumulated. The 
cause of birth is karma. Through knowledge karma is not

--- PAGE 20 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
86
Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra and Prājña
Besides the early indications of Buddhist influence 
described above, more definitive information on 
initial Tantric activities comes from Chinese ac-
counts of Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, and Prājña,46 
as well as the Kalasan and the Kelurak inscriptions 
from Central Java. All of these are dated to the 
8th century.
The sea route transported two prominent Eso-
teric Buddhist masters in the 8th century.47 They 
were Vajrabodhi, who travelled extensively in the 
South Seas before going to China, and his disciple, 
Amoghavajra. These two, together with Śubhāka­
rasiṁha, who reached China overland,48 were later 
considered to be the three founders of the Chinese 
Esoteric Buddhist school.49 Because of Vajrabodhi’s 
and Amoghavajra’s vital roles in the development 
of Esoteric Buddhism in China and other countries, 
their biographies have been subjected to repeated 
studies and at the same time have spurred schol-
arly debates. One of the controversies is related to 
whether or not these two monks met in Java in 719, 
or whether Amoghavajra took the sea route on his 
first trip from his native land to China.50 I agree 
accumulated. Through absence of karma one is not [re-]
born’; trans. Chhabra).
46.  I conveniently borrow the writing of the accounts 
of Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, and Prājña from my own 
dissertation (Kandahjaya 2004).
47.  I am referring to records of Vajrabodhi disembarking 
on Java around 719 on the way to China (Chou 1945: 321) 
and of Amoghavajra disembarking on Java on the way to 
Sri Lanka around 742 (ibid.: 290).
48.  Śubhākarasiṁha himself reached Xian in China in 716 
via overland route (see Chou 1945: 263). He was famous for 
his translation of the Mahāvairocanasūtra (T 848).
49.  See Soothill and Hodous 1977: 333. This school is 
often referred to as the True Word or Mantra School or 
Zhenyanzong 真言宗 in Chinese or Shingonshū in Japa-
nese. Another term is the True Word or Mantra Vehicle 
or Zhenyancheng 真言乘. From the latter, one may get a 
back-translation Mantrayāna.
50.  For this debate, see, for instance, Orzech 1998: 140 and 
Sundberg and Giebel 2011. Amoghavajra’s native land is 
also a subject of debate, because one source said his native 
country is Sri Lanka (Pachow 1958: 17–18), and Weerasin­
ghe (1995: 27) even considered Amoghavajra a Sri Lankan 
Brahmin who was once sent to China as the king’s envoy; 
Chou (1945: 321) opted for Samarkand.
with Raffaello Orlando (1981: 10) that even though 
Chou Yi-liang tried his best, Amoghavajra’s origin 
is not yet sufficiently established. However, by the 
same token, until it can be convincingly proven 
otherwise, the possibility of Amoghavajra taking 
the sea route to China and therefore meeting Va-
jrabodhi on the way to China cannot be dismissed. 
Regardless of this dispute, in addition to a number 
of scriptures which Vajrabodhi himself carried 
to China, Amoghavajra greatly expanded the col-
lection of esoteric texts in China after gathering 
more scriptures in Sri Lanka (and perhaps also 
India) from 741 to 746. From his translations, we 
have inherited many Esoteric Buddhist texts of 
primary importance, such as portions of the Va-
jraśekharasūtra, which is often considered to be a 
collection of sutras that includes, for example, the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgrahasūtra.51
Considering Vajrabodhi a disciple of Nāgabo-
dhi, the author of the GSVV, and Amoghavajra the 
successor of Vajrabodhi as well as a translator of 
many esoteric texts—which are nota bene all related 
to the identified sources of the SHK discussed pre-
viously—we now have a study by Sundberg and 
Giebel (2011) to reconsider their relation with Java 
beyond just a casual disembarkment. This relation 
is significant, as a Javanese monk named Bian-
hong became a disciple of Huiguo, the successor 
of Amoghavajra. Thus, Vajrabodhi’s meeting with 
Amoghavajra in Java in 719, and Amoghavajra’s 
possible disembarkation in Java in 742 on his way 
to Sri Lanka, might have provided a spur for further 
developments in Javanese Esoteric Buddhism. As a 
result, we could raise the lower limit for the range 
of the compilation time of the SHK to the year 719.
Furthermore, when Amoghavajra was ap-
51.  T 865 was translated by Amoghavajra, T 866 by Va-
jrabodhi. On the relation between the Sarvatathāgatatat-
tvasaṅgraha and the Vajraśekhara, see Todaro 1985: 36–39. 
Amoghavajra also retranslated some sūtras, such as the 
Ghanavyūhasūtra (T 682) and the Renwangjing 經 (T 246). 
The complete title is Ren wang hu guo ban ruo bo luo mi 
duo jing 仁王護國般若波羅密多經. C.D. Orzech (1998) has 
already translated this text, the English title of which is 
The Scripture for Humane Kings. These two sutras were 
especially worth noting as Emperor Daizong wrote prefaces 
to them (Chou 1945: 296), which indicates both the intimate 
relationship between Amoghavajra and the emperor and 
the degree to which Buddhism had received royal patronage.

--- PAGE 21 ---
87
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
proaching his final days, one of the texts he greatly 
praised and talked about frequently was the Bhad-
racarī.52 Buddhabhadra had already translated this 
text (T 296), and afterwards Prājña translated it 
again for the third time. But, differing from the 
previous two translations in which the Bhadracarī 
appeared as a discrete text, the third translation by 
Prājña incorporates it—as its last chapter—in the 
40-fascicle Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra (T 293), the text for 
which Prājña was especially famous. Prājña himself 
was probably the last notable Indian monk who 
used the sea route and whose final destination was 
China. Before arriving in Canton in 780, he trav-
elled extensively in the South Seas (Pachow 1958: 19). 
His presence in the South Seas might be the source 
for the depiction of Prājña’s Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra at 
Borobudur, even though there was also a chance 
that Bianhong took a copy of that text back to Java 
from China (Kandahjaya 2009). 
Kalasan inscription
The Kalasan inscription contains an opening 
passage (maṅgalācaraṇa) paying homage to Tārā 
(tārādevī), as follows (Sarkar 1971 I: 35):
Namo bhagavatyai āryātārāyai // 
yā tārayaty amitaduḥkhabhavādbhimagnaṁ 
lokaṁ vilokya vidhivattrividhair upayaiḥ / 
sā vaḥ surendranaralokavibhūtisāraṁ tārā 
diśatvabhimataṁ jagadekatārā //
Two significant corollaries result from this 
passage. First, the maṅgalācaraṇa of the Kalasan 
inscription may relate the worship of Tārā to the 
teachings of Dignāga, because the Yogāvatāra opens 
with a homage to Tārā as well (namas tārāyai). Sec-
ondly, this inscription consecrated the construction 
of a temple for Tārā (tārābhavana) in the year ad 
782. The date draws our utmost attention, as Stephen 
Beyer (1973: 6) considered it the oldest epigraphic 
evidence for the worship of Tārā. Furthermore, 
in addition to the characterization of Tārā being 
a goddess (tārādevī), the first adoration statement 
in this inscription bears the epithet Bhagavatī 
Āryātārā (‘Blessed Noble Tārā’), which is also 
found in the extended title of the Tantric manual 
52.  See Chou 1945: 299. The text itself is T 297.
Tārāmūlakalpa, and in the text itself.53 Thus, this 
inscription is by far the earliest evidence showing 
the appearance of Tantric Buddhism in Java. The 
Tārā cult may have been partially preserved in Bali, 
since her famous mantra for protection from the 
eight fears, the Aṣṭa-mahā-bhaya-kliṅ, is declared 
to have originated in Kliṅ (Kaliṅga, or Java) and is 
still being chanted in the Balinese living tradition.54
Kelurak inscription
The Kelurak inscription, dated ad 782, consecrates 
an image of Mañjuśrī installed by Kumāraghoṣa, 
a guru from Gauḍīdvīpa (modern Bengal or 
Bangladesh). Its maṅgalācaraṇa is as follows (Bosch 
1928: 18; Sarkar 1971 I: 42, 44):
namo ratnatrayāya 
jayalokeśvarasugatapadākṣara jayabhad-
reśvarasugatapadākṣara / 
jayaviśveśvarasugatapadākṣara jaya - - 
śvarasugatapadākṣara //
Homage to the Triple Jewels.
The victorious Lokeśvara, the imperishable 
Sugata; the victorious Bhadreśvara, the imper-
ishable Sugata.
The victorius Viśveśvara, the imperishable 
Sugata; the victorius - - śvara, the imperishable 
Sugata.
Attempts have not been lacking to identify this 
Mañjuśrī by resorting to this maṅgalācaraṇa. Yet, 
the last one in the list of Lokeśvara, Bhadreśvara, 
Viśveśvara, and - -śvara is missing two syllables and 
therefore hinders scholars from identifying the list 
right away. At the time of his reading, F.D.K. Bosch 
53.  See Landesman 2008: 44–59 and Shaw 2006: 315. 
Marcelle Lalou (1936: 327–49) shows that these two texts 
are correlated. It is worth noting that the colophon of the 
manuscript preserving the Tārāmūlakalpa attributes this 
text to Atīśa, who according to Tibetan sources introduced 
(or, more likely, reinvigorated) the cult of Tārā in Tibet from 
Suvarṇadvīpa, which has been identified with Sumatra (see 
Schoterman, this volume).
54.  See Goudrian and Hooykaas 1971: 309–12. This mantra 
identifies the deity being the essence of all (sarvasattva). 
In the Kalasan inscription, Tārā carries the essence of 
spiritual power of heaven and human realms (surendra-
naralokavibhūtisāra).

--- PAGE 22 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
88
proposed Ratneśvara as the most likely reconstruc-
tion.55 There is ample reason to adopt Bosch’s sug-
gestion, as Mañjuśrī is in fact often associated with 
the Tathāgatas. A relevant iconographic form for 
this is Mañjuśrī in the form of Arapacana. This 
form includes Vairocana, Ratnasaṁbhava, Amitā­
bha, and Amoghasiddhi.56 These four, as suggested 
by Bosch, may be related to Bhadreśvara (Samant-
abhadra), Lokeśvara (Padmapāṇi), Viśveśvara 
(Viśvapāṇi), and thus Ratneśvara (Ratnapāṇi). 
Verse 8 mentions a nīlotpala, suggesting that he 
holds a ‘blue lotus’ (blue water-lily)—one of the 
three principal symbols of Mañjuśrī (Sarkar 1971 I: 
48). It is therefore likely that this Mañjuśrī belongs 
to the family of Akṣobhya,57 and thus may be iden-
tified as Vajrapāṇi, Mañjuvajra, or Vajreśvara. This 
form of Arapacana became more explicit later and 
was known to the Javanese.58 Moreover, the SHKAS 
corroborates this association when it says that the 
five Tathāgatas create the five Īśvaras.59 Later, King 
Kṛtanagara (1268–92) of the Siṅhasāri dynasty was 
consecrated as a Jina, Jñānabajreśvara, thus incor-
porating the name Vajreśvara. When he died, King 
Kṛtanagara was enshrined as Śiva-Buddha at Candi 
Jawi, where Akṣobhya was placed at the pinnacle 
of this tower temple.
We obtain the identification of Mañjuśrī being 
Vajrapāṇi, or vice versa, from the Guhyasamājatan-
tra. Verses 72 to 75 in Chapter 17 of this text identify 
55.  See Bosch 1928: 44–45. This reconstruction is supported by 
Sarkar (1971 I: 47), but rejected by Lokesh Chandra (1995: 218).
56.  Bhattacharyya (1968: 120–21) describes Mañjuśrī in 
the form of Arapacana, while Foucher (1900: 40–41) de-
scribes Mañjuśrī depicted together with Vairocana, Rat-
nasaṁbhava, Amitābha, and Amoghasiddhi.
57.  See Bhattacharyya 1968: 102–23 and Foucher 1900: 
40–41. None of the Tathāgatas belonging to the family of 
Amitābha holds a lotus (Bhattacharyya 1968: 49).
58.  Archaeologists discovered at least one copy of his 
image in Candi Jago in East Java. Unfortunately, we do 
not know exactly where this statue is now. See Kinney, 
Klokke, and Kieven (2004: 117): ‘An important statue of 
Manjushri dated 1343 was taken from Candi Jago to the 
Berlin Museum in 1861 and disappeared at the end of World 
War II. [Endnote: This sculpture along with other objects 
from Berlin museums is rumored to be in storage at the 
Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg]’.
59.  SHKAS, folio 54a: …Pañcatathāgata maṅdadyakәn 
pañceśvara…
Vajrapāṇi as the supreme lord of all Tathāgatas 
(sarvatathāgatādhipati), Mahāvajradhara, as well 
as Mañjunātha, another name for Mañjuśrī, Mañ-
juvāk, or Mañjughoṣa.60 These verses also show the 
relationship between Vajradhara and the four god-
desses (devī) of Locanā, Māmakī, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, 
and Tārā. In verse 51 of this chapter, the relationship 
is described via the five elements (dhātu), as follows:
prthivī locanākhyātā abdhātur māmakī smṛtā /
pāndarakhyā bhavet tejo vāyus tārā prakīrtitā / 
khavajradhātusamayaḥ saiva vajradharaḥ 
smṛtaḥ // 51
ity āha bhagavān sarvatathāgatabhuvaneśvaro 
mahāvajrasattvaḥ /
These correspondences are recorded in the 
GSMV as well as the GSVV. Verses 36 and 37 of 
the GSMV are as follows:61
60.  Matsunaga (1978: 110), basing himself on other wit-
nesses and commentaries, attempts to emend the phrase 
mañjunātha, found in the Bhattacharyya or Bagchi edi-
tions, into adya nātha. While this is of course a possibility, 
it is important to remember that even if it is just nātha, 
the Mañjuśrīnāmasaṅgīti informs us that nātha is also 
an epithet of Mañjuśrī. See also Wayman 1977: 299–301.
61.  Pak Hidayat in Jambi brought my attention to a stone 
inscription discovered at Candi Bungsu in Muara Takus 
(Sumatra), which bears a viśvavajra motif and nine bījas in 
Nāgarī script (see Fig. 11.8 in Miksic, this volume, p. 270). 
Although this inscription has already been described by 
J.W. Yzerman (1891: 59) and recently by Griffiths (2014: 236), 
it has not been properly read or understood in terms of its 
meaning and role for Indonesian Buddhism. My reading 
of this inscription shows that the syllable in the centre 
is hūm̐ (usually for Akṣobhya). Then, clockwise, starting 
from the eastern direction (in the middle on the far right 
side of the stone), the syllables are: kham̐ (for Vairocana; 
contrast Griffiths’ ṇam̐), on the southern direction below is 
om̐ (for Ratnasambhava), on the western side is am̐ (for Am-
itābha; contrast Griffiths’ tram̐), and on the north at the 
top is hrīm̐ (for Amoghasiddhi). On the four corners, be-
ginning from the southeast, the syllable is tam̐ (Tārā), on 
the southwest it is lam̐ (Locanā), on the northwest it is 
mam̐ (Māmakī), and on the northeast it is pam̐ (Pāṇḍar-
avāsinī). All these syllables are enumerated in verses 36 
and 37 of the GSMV, with minor variants (e.g., ā-s for the 
correlates to the Devīs). I have found similar series of bījas 
(i.e., in different order, in full or partial count) in many 
other sources, such as the Mañjuvajramaṇḍala in the first 
chapter of the Niṣpannayogāvalī, the Gurumaṇḍalapūjā, 
the Mañjuśrīsamaguhyānuttaradhyānamukhamahātan-
trarājasūtra, and the Hevajra[dākinījālasambara]tantra.

--- PAGE 23 ---
89
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
locanādyās tu tā vidyāḥ 
pṛthivyādisvabhāvajāḥ /
lāṁ māṁ pāṁ tām iti tv ebhir 
jagaddharmātmatattvajāḥ // 36
śāśvatādyāṁs tu saṁbuddhān 
rūpādiskandhasvabhāvajān /
buṁ āṁ jrīṁ-bhiś ca khaṁ hūṁ-bhyāṁ 
sarvadharmān samutsṛjet // 37
These are followed by a description that also 
includes the connection of each goddess with each 
of the four brahmavihāras:
moharatīti āgneyāṁ 
kṛpopāyajanārthadā /
kāyeśavat svarūpā syāl
locanā svendumaṇḍale // 76
dveṣaratīti nairṛtyāṁ
maitrī praṇidhikāmadā /
citteśavad ratautsukyā
māmakī candramaṇḍale // 77
rāgaratīti vāyavyāṁ
modabalasamādhidā /
vāgīśābhārthaśuddhā sā
pāṇḍarā candramaṇḍale // 78
vajraratīti caiśānyām
upekṣā jñānasādhikā /
ratneśavat svarūpā syāc 
candre tārā manoramā // 79
The SHKAS contains parallel descriptions for all 
the pentads. The relationship between and among 
all the pentads is presented in Table 3.7. 
An echo of the Guhyasamāja may be found in 
the Kelurak inscription. Verses 13 to 15 run:62
This peerless pillar of glory is an excellent 
bridge of religion.63 The image of Mañjuśrī is
62.  See Bosch 1928: 19–20, Sarkar 1971 I: 41–48, and 
Chandra 1995: 218–24. The verses are as follows: kīrti­
stambho ’yam atulo dharmmasetur anuttaraḥ / rakṣārthaṁ 
sarvasatvānāṁ mañjuśrīpratimākṛtiḥ // atrabuddhaś ca 
dharmmaś ca saṅghaś cāntargataḥ sthitāḥ / dṛṣţavyo dṛś-
yaratne ’smin smarārāti nisūdane // ayaṁ sa vajradhṛk 
śrīmān brahmā viṣṇur mmaheśvaraḥ / sarvadevamayaḥ 
svāmī mañjuvāg iti giyate //.
63.  In support of the translation of dharmasetu as ‘bridge 
of religion’ I may refer to the Kalasan inscription dated to 
778, which consecrated a statue of Tārā. This inscription 
also contains the term dharmasetu in verse 10, as follows: 
sarvān evāgāminaḥ pārthivendrān bhūyo bhūyo yācate 
rājasiṃhaḥ / sāmānyo yaṃ dharmmasetur narānāṃ kāle 
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan
Guhyasamājatantra
Ratnatraya
Tathāgata
Śīla
Pāramitā
Devī
Elements
Tathāgata
Devī
Tathāgata
Buddha
kāya
Vairocana
asih
catur pāramitā
metrī
ya
Locanā
ākāśa
Akṣobhya
Locanā
Akṣobhya
karuṇā
e
Māmakī
āpaḥ
Ratnasambhava Māmakī
Ratnasambhava
muditā
vaṁ
Pāṇḍaravāsinī
teja
Amitābha
Pāṇḍaravāsinī
Amitābha
upekṣā
ma
Tārā
bāyu
Amoghasiddhi
Tārā
Amoghasiddhi
Dharmma
vāk
Amitābha
puṇya
ṣaṭ pāramitā
ṣaṭ pāramitā
ya
Bajradhātvīś-
varī
pṛthivī
Vairocana
(Vajradhātvīś-
varī)
Vairocana
Saṅgha
citta
Akṣobhya
bhakti
acts in accord 
with āgama
Table 3.7: Correlations between and among the triads and the pentads

--- PAGE 24 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
90
for the protection of all beings.
Here standing inside are the Buddha, the Dharm-
ma, and the Saṅgha. They are to be seen in this 
beautiful jewel destroying the enemy Smara. 
This one, he, vajradhṛk, the auspicious one, is 
Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara. This lord, made 
of all gods, is praised as Mañjuvāk.
These verses state that Mañjuśrī is a lord made 
of all gods (sarvadevamayaḥ svāmī), and is identi-
fied with vajradhṛk (= vajradhara, and hence, as in 
the Guhyasamāja, Vajrapāṇi). The relation of the 
highest form of the Buddha—here Mañjuśrī—to 
the totality of divine manifestations finds a parallel 
in the SHKAS (Kats 1910: 59–61), where Bhaṭāra 
Divarūpa (Divine Light) is characterized as em-
bodying different divine forms, among which is a 
triad formed by the Buddha Śākyamuni, Lokeśvara, 
and Vajrapāṇi, which is called Ratnatraya and rep-
resents the triad of Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. 
Vairocana—who ultimately constitutes an ema-
nation of the above triad—is said to be the source 
from where all the gods and lesser beings emerge, 
namely the triad of Īśvara, Brahmā, and Viṣṇu, 
who ‘are ordered to perfect the Triple-World’ (sira 
ta kinon mamaripūrṇāknaṅ tribhuvana) and are 
the ‘accomplisher of all deeds’ (sarvakāryakarttā) 
on behalf of Vairocana. 
Thus we find a commonality of ideas between 
this passage of the SHKAS and the verses of the 
inscriptions, which indicate that Mañjuśrī possesses 
the Triratna (Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha) and is 
also identical to the Trimūrti (Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and 
Maheśvara). As unusual as it may have been from 
the perspective of ordinary Buddhism, a similar as-
sociation with the triad of Brahmanical gods is also 
recorded in the Guhyasamāja (ed. Tripathi 1988: 44):
kāle pālanīyo bhavadbhiḥ (‘The lion of kings again and 
again requests to all future kings. This bridge of religion 
of all people should be protected by you at all times’). A 
dictionary of Chinese-Sanskrit compiled by Liyan 禮言 and 
dated to the Tang dynasty Fanyu zaming (T 2135 梵語雜名) 
lists the transcription for setu as xidu 細睹 (T 2135.1234b8) 
and the meaning as qiao 橋 (i.e., bridge). The term suggests 
that the Javanese of the time viewed the monuments of 
Kalasan and Kelurak as ‘equipment’ (i.e., a bridge) which 
‘took one to the other shore’. However, since the Kelurak 
inscription also stated that Ratnatraya was identical to the 
Trimūrti, the term dharmasetu may as well be interpreted 
as a bridge between Buddhism and Śaivism.
Trivajrasamaya siddhyartha 
bhavet trikāya vajriṇaḥ / 
daśadik sarvabuddhānāṁ 
bhavec cintamaṇyodadhiḥ // 12.50 
The three diamond samayas are identical to the 
triple diamond bodies, the ocean of cintamaṇi 
creates all Buddhas in the ten directions.
Compare the following passage:64 
atha vajrapāṇiḥ sarvatathāgatādhipatiḥ trivajra­
samayaṁ svakāyavākcittebhyo niṣcārayām āsa /
kāyavajro bhaved brahmā 
vāgvajras tu maheśvaraḥ /
cittavajradharo rājā 
saiva viṣṇur mahardhikaḥ // 17.19
Then Vajrapāṇi, the supreme lord of all Ta- 
thāgatas, caused to appear to all Svakāyavākcit-
tas the three diamond samayas:
Granted the diamond-like body is Brahmā, the 
diamond-like speech is Maheśvara;
Likewise, he, the king, the Vajradhara-like mind 
is Viṣṇu, the great power.
This identification is also attested in the Dale-jin-
gang-bukong-zhenshi-sanmeiye-jing-banruo-boluo-
miduo-liqushi 大樂金剛不空真實三昧耶經般若波
羅蜜多理趣釋 translated by Amoghavajra (T 1003), 
which is a commentary to his own Chinese trans-
lation of the Adhyardhaśatikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra 
(T 243: Dale-jingang-bukong-zhenshi-sanmeiye-jing 
大樂金剛不空眞實三摩耶經). In the commentary, 
Amoghavajra said that the three brothers (三兄弟) 
mentioned in the sutra are the three gods, Brahmā, 
Nārāyaṇa, and Maheśvara, and they represent 
the Triratna and the Trikāya of Buddhism.65 It 
further identifies the Buddha with Vajrasattva, 
the Dharma with Avalokiteśvara, and the Saṅgha 
with Ākāśagarbha.66
If we peruse and tabulate the associations 
related to all the triads mentioned in the SHK, we 
find that the compiler of the Old Javanese text knew 
64.  See Tripathi 1988: 105; also Wayman 1977: 33, 106–7, 
118–19, 218–19, 248–49. In the text the three Brahmani-
cal gods are identified with Vairocana, Amitābha, and 
Akṣobhya, and further homologized with the tryakṣara 
consisting of oṁ, āḥ, and hūṁ (see also Wayman 1973: 177–82).
65.  T 1003.616b6: 此三天表佛法中三寶三身.
66.  T 1003.616b6-b8: 佛寶者是金剛薩埵. 法寶者觀自在菩薩. 
僧寶者是虛空藏菩薩.

--- PAGE 25 ---
91
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
this identity. The identification of the Buddha with 
Vajrasattva is recorded in the SHKAS. Then the 
opening paragraph of the SHKM relates the three 
syllables (tryakṣara: oṁ aḥ hūṁ) to the three di-
amonds (kāya-, vāk-, citta-bajra), and then to the 
Triratna, and to the Trimūrti (see Table 3.8). By 
looking at the correlations among and between 
the triads, Akṣobhya is identified with Vajradhṛk, 
Sarvajñāna, and hūṁ, and in turn is identical to 
his procreator Vajrapāṇi, and to Śākyamuni, and 
ultimately to Bhaṭāra Divarūpa (which is likely 
a reference to divine clear light, or prabhāsvara).
Miji jingang lishi hui
The three categories of Body, Speech, and Mind 
are commonly known from many early Buddhist 
texts. They are fundamental categories for actions 
(karma) and are critical for comprehending prac-
tical activities that go towards or come from en-
lightenment, or else force downward towards the 
realm of miseries. But then the nuance shifts if one 
considers them as three mysteries. The shift marks 
a significant change in Buddhism, when the empha-
sis was attached to secret or hidden aspects. Richard 
McBride II (2006 [2008]: 305–55) pointed out that 
the origins of the three mysteries or three secrets 
(triguhya) as related to the three mysteries of Body, 
Speech, and Mind first occurred in the Miji jingang 
lishi hui 密迹金剛力士會. This scripture was trans-
lated into Chinese by Dharmarakṣa (Fahu 法護) 
in ad 280. Its Chinese title has been variously 
retranslated into Sanskrit as the Tathāgatācint-
yaguhyanirdeśa or Tathāgataguhya(ka)sūtra.67 
The latter is in fact mentioned as Rulai miyao jing 
如來祕要經 in the scripture itself.68 The relationship 
between the latter text and the Guhyasamājatantra 
is still debated.
Hara Prasad Shāstri (1917: 17–21) noted that 
a confusion between the Guhyasamāja and the 
Tathāgathaguhyaka occurred at some point. He be-
lieved that the manuscript with catalogue number 
10765 is the original Tathāgataguhyaka and that 
the first book of Guhyasamāja and sometimes 
the second also are called Tathāgataguhyaka by 
67.  See K. 22(3), Nj. 23(3), or T 310(3) in Lancaster and 
Park (1979).
68.  T 310.80b25: 又復名曰如來祕要經法之品.
Kelurak Inscription
Guhyasamājatantra
Commentary to the Adhyardhaśatikā Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan
Mañjuśrī
Vajrapāṇi
Mahāvajradhara
Mañjunātha
Mañjuśrī
Mañjuvāk
Mañjughoṣa
Mañjuvajra
Vairocana
 Deva Viśeṣa (God Par Excellence)
Bhaṭāra Paramaśūnya
Saṅ Hyaṅ Advaya
Saṅ Hyaṅ Advaya-jñāna
Saṅ Hyaṅ Yogādi Parama Nairātmya
Bhaṭāra Divarūpa
Bhaṭāra Hyaṅ Buddha
ratna
mūrti
vajra mūrti
kāya
mūrti
ratna
kāya
ratna
akṣara
kāya
Buddha
Brahmā
kāya
Brahmā
Vairo-
cana
Nirmāṇa
oṁ
Brahmā
Buddha
Vajrasattva
Buddha
Śākyamuni
Vairocana
Īśvara
Brahmā
Viṣṇu
oṁ
kāya
Dharmma
Maheśvara vāk
Maheśvara Amitābha
Saṁ­
bhoga
aḥ
Maheś-
vara
Dharma Avalokiteśvara Dharmma
Lokeśvara
Amitābha
aḥ
vāk
Saṅgha
Viṣṇu
citta
Viṣṇu
Akṣobhya Dharma
huṁNārāyaṇa
Saṅgha
Ākāśagarbha
Saṅgha
Bajrapāṇi
Akṣobhya
huṁ
citta
Table 3.8: Correlations between and among the triads

--- PAGE 26 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
92
analogy. Unfortunately, Shāstri’s suggestion was 
not taken up for further investigation. The follow-
ing analysis—while not exhaustive—attempts to 
demonstrate that Shāstri was probably right and 
that we can suggest a clue for the gradual devel-
opment of the Guhyasamāja corpus. This is sum-
marized in Table 3.9 through Table 3.11 (pp. 94–98).
Table 3.9 tabulates sixty sounds as listed in 
Chapter 4 of the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra, titled the 
Speech (Sound) Mystery (vākguhyaparivarta).69 The 
total in this table is not precisely sixty but this may 
be because the exact sound names are not properly 
recognized. However, this table attempts to corre-
late the sound names in Sanskrit in the Tathāga-
taguhyakasūtra, the Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra, the 
Mahāvyutpatti, and their approximate corre-
sponding Chinese translations as they appear in 
the Chinese Tathāgataguhyasūtra (T 310(3) Miji 
jingang lishi hui), as well as in Chengguan’s com-
mentary (T 1736 Dafangguang fo huayan jing shu). 
The latter demonstrates that the Miji jingang lishi 
hui had truly been utilized in the past. Meanwhile, 
in the commentary to the Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra, 
Vasubandhu explained that those sixty elements are 
taken from the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa;70 or in his
other work, the Vyākhyāyukti, he called the source 
the Tathāgataguhya (Nance 2012: 218). The correla-
tion in this table establishes the connection among 
these texts. The correspondences also suggest that 
T 310(3) is likely a Chinese translation of one of the 
early recensions of the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra, or 
its alias the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa. Table 3.10 tab-
ulates a couple of phrases from the Tathāgataguh­
yakasūtra that are quoted by Śantideva and in his 
Śikṣāsamuccaya (the first phrase from Chapter 14 
and the second from Chapter 1).71 This table does 
not exhaust all of Śantideva’s quotations, as it is 
merely an attempt to show that T 310(3) and T 312 
are correlated with the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra, or 
at least share similarities with the scripture referred 
to by Śantideva.
69.  My study on the sixty sounds has grown over time. 
I conveniently borrow the updated table and discussion 
inserted herein from my recent paper (Kandahjaya 2014: 
196).
70.  Jamspal (2004: 156), following Sylvain Lévi, shows that 
this list is also recorded in the Mahāvyutpatti.
71.  See Bendall 1897: 242, 7–8. 
Table 3.11 tabulates the opening statements of 
the Sanskrit Tathāgataguhyakasūtra, the Sanskrit 
Guhyasamājatantra, and T 310(3). This table shows 
that the opening line of the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra 
and the Guhyasamājatantra is identical, while 
the opening line in T 310(3) is different, being a 
phrase commonly found in many Buddhist scrip-
tures. The discrepancy indicates that the extant 
Sanskrit Tathāgataguhyakasūtra must have already 
been modified vis-à-vis the Chinese version. This 
modification was likely the cause of the confusion 
between the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra and the Guh­
yasamājatantra.
At this time, without the Sanskrit original, it 
is unlikely that we would be able to restore the 
Chinese title Miji jingang lishi hui 密迹金剛力士會 
to its former Sanskrit title. Nonetheless, having 
examined its relationship to the Tathāgataguh­
yakasūtra, or the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa, it is now 
clear that the original Sanskrit title for the Chinese 
translation was likely the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa. 
Then, considering that the Guhyasamājatantra 
is indeed all about the secret assembly in which 
Vajrapāṇi describes the mysteries of Tathāgata, it 
is then likely that the Miji jingang lishi hui 密迹金
剛力士會 was one among the early versions of the 
Guhyasamājatantra, or the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra, 
or the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa.
The previously mentioned suggestion, however, 
directly resurrects the dating problem of the Guh­
yasamājatantra. A lot of ink has been spilled on this 
problem. Until recently, scholars have assigned the 
latter half of the 8th century as the likely (formative) 
period when this scripture was fixed in its present 
form (Matsunaga 1978: xxvi). But this leads to an 
inconsistency when we take into consideration the 
composition of the GSMV and the GSVV, and their 
compilers, Dīpaṅkarabhadra and Nāgabodhi. If 
Nāgabodhi was truly the teacher of Vajrabodhi, 
and Vajrabodhi arrived in Luoyang, China, around 
720, Nāgabodhi must have already compiled his 
GSVV at the beginning of the 8th century at the 
latest. Then if the GSVV is a ritual based on the 
Guhyasamājatantra, how could it be that the ritual 
was composed while the Tantra itself had not been 
completed? Or, do we now have to think about the 
ritual as the actual base from which the Tantra 
was written up? Else, we have to accept that the

--- PAGE 27 ---
93
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
dating of the Guhyasamājatantra to the second half 
of the 8th century is incorrect. If such is the case, 
some Buddhist circles must have already known the 
hidden teachings as recorded in the initial version 
of this scripture in the 3rd century, as suggested 
by the translation date of the Miji jingang lishi hui 
密迹金剛力士會. In other words, this also means 
that the historical development of Tantric systems 
did not seem to follow the famous four classifica-
tion of Kriyā, Caryā, Yoga, and Niruttarayoga,72 
and even less that the start of the systems should 
be dated to the 7th century or after.73 Evidence 
supporting the latter claim is available.74
72.  Dalton (2005: 152) suggests that Niruttarayoga is a 
better back-translation than Anuttarayoga. See Matsunaga 
(1978: xviii–xix) for a brief discussion on the chronology of 
the four classes of Buddhist Tantra. De Jong (1984: 93), re-
viewing Matsunaga’s Mikkyō kyōten seiritsushi-ron, shows 
that the four groups, kriyā, caryā, yoga, and anuttarayoga, 
came from the 13th century Bu-ston.
73.  Williams (2012: 144–45) suggests: ‘Yet to think of the 
third century as the starting point for tantric Buddhism 
is somewhat misleading. As a self-conscious tradition 
within the Mahāyāna tantric Buddhism probably does 
not appear until the mid to late seventh century…. From 
around the beginning of the eighth century tantric tech-
niques and approaches increasingly dominated Buddhist 
praxis in India’.
74.  In discussing the Piṇḍīkrama above, I report that 
dhāraṇīs of the Guhyasamāja family were already in cir-
culation around the 5th century. In this regard, I may 
suggest that the reason why we have been off the mark 
may have something to do with the underlying research 
paradigm. In strictly applying a modern scholarly meth-
odology necessitating proof by material evidence (textual 
or visual), we may have neglected or even discounted the 
significance of oral teaching imparted by gurus, or non-ma-
terial transmission. In some cases we may obtain hints to 
support this argument, namely: information documented 
by Yijing mentioned earlier; multiple references to ‘the 
tradition from the mouth’, or ‘from the mouth of one’s 
own guru’ (mukhāgama); and the prohibition of diffusing 
secret teachings, such as those promulgated in the SHK. All 
these elements show that particular teachings might have 
been intentionally disguised, or might have been required 
to be orally imparted and ‘decoded’ by a competent guru. 
For this reason, we may have to re-examine our research 
norms, as the requirement for orality may entail a number 
of factors to be seriously reconsidered. First, orality is part 
of legitimate tradition. Secondly, orality did not end when 
the tradition began to shift by employing script or visual 
objects. Thirdly, orality may be considered a silent agent of 
Saṅ Hyaṅ Tantra Bajradhātu Subhūti
The colophon of the ‘Śaivized’ version of the SHK 
(version C) records the following:75
Hail to the Buddha!
This is the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, the in-
struction of he who had accomplished siddhis, 
Hyaṅ Sarbvasiddhi (all siddhis); he was Śrī 
Sambhara Sūryāvaraṇa. He was the noble guru 
in Vañjaṅ. You have to keep in mind that your 
duty is [to study] the scriptures; you, Son of 
the Victor (jinaputra), are of the same lineage 
(vaṁśa) as him, who inherited the freehold [of] 
Vañjaṅ, which was an offering to this master 
(guruyāga) by [King] Śrī Īśāṇa Bhadrottuṅga[l]
deva Mpu Siṇḍok, who had perfected the Saṅ 
Hyaṅ Tantra Bajradhātu Subhūti, who had 
mastered instructions in the esoteric teachings 
of Mahāyāna, the supreme secret, the culmina-
tion of the teachings of the Guru, for it is the 
essence of the teachings of Tantra, logic, and 
grammar. It is the quintessence of the holy pos-
session (aveśa < Skt āveśa), and embodiment of 
the ultimate reality. It is right knowledge. That 
is the reason why the Jinaputra should be zeal-
ous when embracing the Saṅ Hyaṅ Pustaka 
Kamahāyānan; if [you do] so, clearly you will 
be blessed by Bhaṭāra Samyaksambuddhāya (= 
Samyaksambuddha?) himself.
change, as it allows teachings to shift over time. Fourthly, 
due partly to orality, we may never be able to fully recover 
earlier occurrences of doctrines that only by chance ended 
up being partially preserved in texts. Fifthly, we may be able 
to get a glimpse of what earlier masters might have said in 
their time through a series of treatises and commentaries 
that record their lives and teachings.
75.  Namo Buddhāya. Nihan saṅ hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, 
pamәkas saṅ siddhagati hyaṅ sarbvasiddhi, sira Śrī Sam-
bhara Sūryyāvaraṇa, sira Śrī aryya guru pāda ri vañjaṅ 
ya ta keṅәtaknanta dentāji denta, kita jinaputra, makādi 
savaṅśanira saṅ kumalilir iṅ sima vañjaṅ guruyaga Śrī 
Īśāṇa Bhadrottuṅga[l]deva mpu Siṇḍok, mvaṅ saṅ mak-
abvatan saṅ hyaṅ tantra bajradhātu Subhūti, ya ta kuma-
vaśākna saṅ hyaṅ samayopadeśa mahāyāna paramāra-
hasya, vәkas iṅ varah saṅ guru sira, apan sira peh niṅ 
haji, tantra tarkka vyākaraṇa, sāri saṅ hyaṅ aveśa sira, 
pāvak niṅ paramārttika, pramāṇa sira, ya ta mataṅnyan 
hayva tan prayatna sira jinaputra tumәmva saṅ hyaṅ 
pustaka kamahāyanan sākṣāt hinanugrahan de bhaṭāra 
samyaksambuddhāya kita yan maṅkana (Kats 1910: 118–19 
and Lokesh Chandra 1997: 10).

--- PAGE 28 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
94
Table 3.9: Correlation among the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra, Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra, Mahāvyutpatti, T 310(3), and T 1736
Tathāgataguhya-
kasūtra
Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra
Mahāvyutpatti
T 310(3)
T 1736
vāk ṣaṣṭyākāra
Sanskrit
English
ṣaṣṭyaṅgasarvanāmāni
六十種音
1
snigdhā
snigdhā
kindly
445. snigdhā
【中】柔軟
【中】流澤
柔軟音。
柔軟音。
2
mṛdukā
mṛdukā
gentle
446. mṛdukā
妙
吉祥音。
吉祥音。
3
manojñā
manojñā 
beautiful
447. manojñā
【中】如意
【中】悅意
4
manoramā
manoramā
appealing
448. manoramā
【中】得意
【中】可樂聲
可樂音。
可愛樂音。
5
śuddhā
śuddhā 
pure
449. śuddhā
【中】真實
【中】清淨
悅意清淨音。
悅意清淨音。
6
vimalā
vimalā 
stainless
450. vimalā
【中】無垢
【中】離於垢聲
離垢音。
離垢音。
7
prabhāsvarā
prabhāsvarā 
luminous
451. prabhāsvarā
【中】明顯
【中】明亮
顯曜音。
顯曜音。
8
varṇa
valguḥ 
attractive
452. valguḥ
入耳甘美
微妙音。
微妙音。
9
śravaṇīyā
śravaṇīyā 
worth hearing
453. śravaṇīyāḥ
【中】堪敬
【中】樂聞
明聽音。
明德音。
10
anelā
anantā[anelā] 
unassailable
454. anelā
【中】不能
【中】無劣
11
kalā
kalā 
melodious
455. kalā (kālā)
【中】聞
【中】圓具
無亂音。
無亂音。
12
vinītā
vinītā
disciplined
456. vinītā
【中】柔善
【中】調順
無憒音。
無憒音。師父音。
13
akakkarśā
akarkaśā
without harshness
457. akarkaśā
【中】不粗俗
【中】無澁
無剛硬音。
14
aparuṣā
aparūṣā
without severity
458. aparuṣā
【中】無惡
【中】無盡意
無麤獷音。
15
suvinītā
suvinītā
well-disciplined
459. suvinītā
【中】極柔善
【中】柔善
善順音。
16
karṇasukhā
karṇasukhā
pleasant to the ear
460. karṇasukhā
【中】悅耳
【中】悅耳鼻
安重音。
安重音。
17
kāyaprahlādakarī
kāyaprahṇā­danakarī
physically satisfying
461. kāyaprahlā­danakarī
【中】適身
身所吉和音。
身所吉利音。
18
cittodvillajanana
cittaudvilyakarī
mentally satisfying
462. cittodvilyakarī
【中】滲於心
【中】心生勇銳
隨心時音。
隨心隨時音。
19
hṛdayasantuṣṭikarī
hṛdayasaṁtuṣṭikarī
gladdening to the heart
463. hṛdayasaṁtuṣṭikarī
【中】心中喜
【中】心喜
空悅音。
如如悅意音。

--- PAGE 29 ---
95
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
Tathāgataguhya-
kasūtra
Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra
Mahāvyutpatti
T 310(3)
T 1736
vāk ṣaṣṭyākāra
Sanskrit
English
ṣaṣṭyaṅgasarvanāmāni
六十種音
20
prītisukhasaṁjananī
prītisukhasaṁjananī
creative of joy and bliss
464. prītisukhajananī
【中】發喜樂
【中】悅樂
與愛安想音。
天愛安想音。
21
niṣparidāhā
niḥparidāhā
not disturbing
465. niṣparidāhā
【中】無煩惱
【中】無熱惱
無惱熱音。
無熱惱音。
22
ājñeyā
ājñeyā
eminently understandable 466. ājñeyā
【中】周知
【中】如教令
方正音。
方正音。
23
vijñeyj
vijñeyā
to be realized
467. vijñeyā
【中】覺諸事
【中】善了知
識達音。
識達音。
24
vispaṣṭā
viṣpaṣṭā
transparent
468. vispaṣṭā
【中】明諸事
【中】分明
親近音。
親近音。
25
premakaraṇīyā
premaṇīyā
lovable
469. premaṇīyā
【中】作意
【中】善愛
意好音。
意好音。
26
abhinandanṇīy
abhinandanīyā
delightful
470. abhinandanīyā
【中】現前喜
【中】令生歡喜
歡悅音。
歡悅音。
27
ājñāpanīyā
ājñāpanīyā
authoritative
471. ājñāpanīyā
【中】遍知
【中】使他如教令
和教音。
和雅音。
28
vijñāpanīyā
vijñāpanīyā
informative
472. vijñāpanīyā
【中】普覺
【中】使他善了知
曉了音。
29
yuktā
yuktā
reasonable
473. yuktā
【中】如理
精勤音。
30
sahitā
sahitā
appropriate
474. sahitā
【中】相連
【中】利益
和忍音。
31
punaruktadāṣa
punarūktadoṣajahā
without redundancy
475. punaruktadoṣajahā
【中】言無過
【中】離重複過失
重了音。
重了音。
ūhanī mohavidhama­
nī māragnasanī
其響去穢音。
其響去穢音。
32
siṁhasvaravegā
siṁhasvaravegā
energetic as the lion’s roar
476. simhasvaravegā
【中】獅音力
【中】如獅子音
應師子音。
應師子音。
33
nāgasvaraśabdā
nāgasvaraśabdā
sounding like an ele-
phant’s trumpeting
477. nāgasvara­śabdā
【中】如象音
【中】如龍音
龍鳴音。
龍嗚音。
34
meghasvaraghrṣā
meghasvaraghoṣā
sounding like the crash of 
thunder
478. meghasvara­ghoṣā
【中】如雲雷吼
【中】如龍音
雨好音。
好雨音。
35
sāgaragarjjitasvarā 
nāgendrarutā
nāgendrarutā
like the voice of the drag-
on-king
479. nāgendrarutā
【中】如龍音
【中】如龍王音
海雷龍王音。
海雷龍王音。
36
kinnarasaṅgitighoṣā
kinnarasaṅgītighoṣā
like the kinnaras’ song
480. gandharva­saṅgīti­ghoṣā 【中】如緊那羅
妙歌
真陀羅伎音。
真陀羅伎音。

--- PAGE 30 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
96
Tathāgataguhya-
kasūtra
Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra
Mahāvyutpatti
T 310(3)
T 1736
vāk ṣaṣṭyākāra
Sanskrit
English
ṣaṣṭyaṅgasarvanāmāni
六十種音
37
kalaviṅkirutasvarā
kalaviṅkasvararūtaravitā 
like the kalaviṅka’s song
481. kalaviṇka­svararutā
【中】頻伽鳥音
【中】如迦陵頻
伽音
哀鸞音。
哀鸞音。
38
brahmasvararuta-
racitu
brahmasvararutaravitā
like Brahma’s cry
482. brahma­svararutāravitā 【中】梵音
【中】梵王如音
鷹暢音。
鷹暢音。
39
jīvañjīvakasvararuta­
racitā
jīvaṁjīvakasvararuta­
ravitā
like the pheas­ant’s call
483. jīvañjīvaka­svararutā­
ravitā
【中】響錢音
【中】如共命鳥音
鶴鳴音。耆域
音。英鳥音。
鶴嗚音。耆域音。
英鳥音。
40
devendramadhura­
nirghoṣā
devendramadhura­
nirghoṣā 
sweet as the voice of Indra 484. devendramadhura­
nirghoṣā
【中】如天主妙音
【中】如天帝釋美
妙音
41
dundubhisvara
dundubhisvarā
like the sound of the 
drum
485. dundubhisvarā
【中】鼓音
【中】如震鼓音
雷震音。
雷震音。
42
anunnatā
anunnatā
not haughty
486. anunnatā
【中】不滿足
【中】不高
不卒音。
不卒音。
43
anavanatā
anavanatā
not lowly
487. anavanatā
【中】不低
【中】不下
不暴音。
不暴音。
44
sarvvanavanatā-
varāṣṭā
sarvaśabdānupraviṣṭā
immersed in language
488. sarvaśabdānupraviṣṭā
【中】隨諸音所入
【中】隨入一切音
普入響音。
普入響音。
45
apaśabdavigatā
apaśabdavigatā
grammatically impeccable 489. apaśabdavigatā
【中】無邪音
【中】無缺減
去非時音。
去非時音。
46
avikalā
avikalā
never fragmented
490. avikalā
【中】無不備具
【中】無破壞
無乏音。
無乏音。
47
alīnā
alīnā
undaunted
491. alīnā
【中】無退縮
【中】無染汙
無怯音。
無怯音。
48
adīnā
irrepressible
492. adīnā
【中】無劣
【中】無希取
49
pramuditā
pramuditā
joyful
493. pramuditā
【中】具足
【中】令眾意歡喜
悅豫音。
悅豫音。
50
prasṭatā
prasṛtā
comprehensive
494. prasṛtā
【中】莊嚴
【中】具足
通暢音。
通暢音。
51
sakhilā
akhilā[sakhilā]
holistic
495. sakhilā
【中】入
【中】說眾生心行
具足音。
具足音。
52
saritā
saritā
continuous
496. saritā
【中】長貪
【中】莊嚴
53
luḍitā madhurā 
sphuṭā darśanīya
lalitā
playful
497. lalitā
【中】連續
【中】顯示
戒禁音。美甘
音。進行音。
戒禁音。甘美音。
進行音。

--- PAGE 31 ---
97
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
Tathāgataguhya-
kasūtra
Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra
Mahāvyutpatti
T 310(3)
T 1736
vāk ṣaṣṭyākāra
Sanskrit
English
ṣaṣṭyaṅgasarvanāmāni
六十種音
54
sarvvasvarapūranī
sarvasvarapūraṇī
fulfilling all words
498. sarvasvarapūraṇī
【中】諸音滿圓
【中】圓滿一切音
廣普音。
廣普音。
55
sarvvondrayatoṣanī
sarvasattvendriyasan-
toṣaṇī
satisfying to the faculties 
of all beings
499. sarvendriyasaṁtoṣaṇī
【中】諸根滿足
【中】諸根適悅
諸根無瑕音。
諸根無班音。
56
aninditā
aninditā
irreproachable
500. aninditā
【中】不欺
【中】無譏毀
57
acañcalā
acañcalā
unchangeable
501. acañcalā
【中】無輕轉
無住音。
無住音。
58
acapalā
acapalā
unwavering
502. acapalā
【中】無動搖
不輕疾音。
不輕疾音。
59
sarvvaparṣadanura­citā, 
rāgaśamanī, doṣavina- 
yanīī, mohavi­dharmanī, 
māragnasanī
sarvaparṣadanuravitā
resounds through all 
audiences
503. sarvapariṣadanuravitā 【中】名稱普遍
【中】隨入一切
眾會
響普入眾會音。
響聲普入眾會音。
60
sarvvākāravaropetā
sarvākāravaropetā
endowed with the best of 
all forms
504. sarvākāravaropetā
【中】具足諸最勝
【中】諸相具足
宣諸德音。
宣諸德音。
Table 3.10: Correlation between T 310(3), T 312, and the Śikṣāsamuccaya
T 310(3) 密迹金剛力士會 (280 ad)
T 312 (1018–58 ad)
Śikṣāsamuccaya of Śāntideva
66a21║猶如寂意。拔樹根株。莖節枝葉花實一時
并除永無有樹。行者如是。以消貪身便無諸見六
十二疑。以無貪身。
732c07║寂慧。譬如大樹若斷其根。即枝葉莖幹而
悉枯悴。此有身見亦復如是。若近止已諸煩惱亦
止。寂慧當知。
From Chapter 14 (Bendall 1897: 242):
yathoktam āryatathāgataguhyasūtre—tadyathāpi nāma śāntamate 
vṛkṣasya mūlacchinnasya sarvaśākhāpatrapalāśāḥ śuṣyanti, evam 
eva śāntamate satkāyadṛṣṭyupaśamāt sarvakleśā upaśāmyantīti //
76b21║誰興佛乎。答曰。大王。能興篤信了本無
者也。又問。誰興篤信乎。答曰。若有能發菩薩
心者也。又問。誰發菩薩心乎。答曰。其有志性
定不亂者也。又問。誰有志性定不亂乎。答曰。
其行大哀未曾絕者也。又問。誰不絕大哀乎。答
曰。其不棄捨一切眾生者也。又問。誰不捨眾生
乎。答曰。其安己身并安一切者也。
746b09║如何是佛出世。佛言大王。隨發菩提心即
是佛出世。王言。云何發菩提心。佛言。所謂大悲
出生。王言。云何大悲出生。佛言。謂即發起淨
信。王言。云何發起淨信。佛言。若發菩提心。即
是發淨信。王言。當云何發彼菩提心。佛言。深心
不退轉。是發菩提心。王言。云何是深心不退轉。
佛言。即是所起大悲。王言。云何能發大悲。佛
言。於一切眾生不生厭捨之心。即是大悲。王言。
云何於眾生得不厭捨。佛言。所謂不著己樂。王
言。云何是不著己樂。佛言。謂於三寶常不捨離。
王言。云何能於三寶不捨離邪。佛言。若能除去一
切煩惱。即於三寶而不捨離
From Chapter 1 (Bendall 1897: 7–8):
asya punas tathāgataguhyasūtrasya ko ’bhiprāyaḥ? Yaduktam—
kasya bhagavan bodhicittotpādaḥ? Āha—yasya mahārāja adhy­
āśayo ’vikopitaḥ / āha—kasya bhagavannadhyāśayo ’vikopitaḥ? 
Āha—yasya mahārāja mahākaruṇotpādaḥ / āha—kasya bhaga-
van mahākaruṇotpādaḥ? Āha—yasya mahārāja sarvasattvāpar-
ityāgaḥ / āha—kathaṁ bhagavan sattvā aparityaktā bhavanti? 
Āha—yadā mahārāja ātmasaukhyaṁ parityaktaṁ bhavatīti //

--- PAGE 32 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
98
The Tantra Subhūti is again mentioned in Canto 
43.3 of the Deśavarṇana:76
But as he grew somewhat older he held to all 
sorts of esoteric rites;
Mainly of course it was the Subhūti Tantra the 
essence of which he guarded and cherished in 
his heart.
He applied himself to worship, yoga and medi-
tation for the stability of the whole world,
Not to mention the Gaṇacakra always accom-
panied by gifts, beloved of his subjects. (Rob-
son 1995: 55–56)
The reference to the Saṅ Hyaṅ Tantra Bajradhā-
tu Subhūti in version C of the SHK draws our at-
tention as it mentions an important personal name, 
i.e. Subhūti, and the title of a scripture, i.e. Tantra 
Bajradhātu.
Subhūti
While exploring Javanese Tantric Buddhism, N.J. 
Krom mused whether whenever the Javanese 
texts mentioned the name Subhūti, they referred 
to Dhārmika-Subhūti. Krom went along with the 
lead by Sylvain Lévi who, following Tibetan ac-
counts, attempted to identify Dhārmika-Subhūti 
with Aśvaghoṣa, whose name is mentioned as the 
author of the Gurupañcaśikhā, a text that is well 
76.  Ndan riṅ vrәddha nireki mātra rumәgәp sarvva kri-
yādhyatmika, mukyaṅ tantra subhūti rakva tineṅәt kempәn 
rasanye hati, pūjā yoga samādhi pinrihiran amrih sthityan 
iṅ rāt kabeh, hastam taṅ gaṇacakra nitya madulur dānenivö 
hiṅ prajā.
known among the adherents of Vajrayāna. Scholars 
have debated whether this name is the same as that 
of the famous author of the Buddhacarita, and 
Lévi’s idea was eventually rejected by Paul Mus.77 
A current scholarly opinion thinks of two 
masters with the same name Aśvaghoṣa, because 
they were ascribed to two different sets of Buddhist 
teachings, i.e. Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna. Aśvaghoṣa, 
the author of the Gurupañcaśikhā, has been as-
signed to the 10th century (Buswell and Lopez 
2013: 76), perhaps on account of the date of the 
Chinese translation done during the Northern Song 
dynasty in the 11th century. But, if such reasoning 
was correct, we should then assign Śantideva to the 
10th century as well, because the Chinese transla-
tion of the Śikṣāsamuccaya was done during the 
same period, though evidently we know that such 
dating cannot be true. Furthermore, the fact that 
some Sanskrit verses of the Gurupañcaśikhā had 
already been recorded in the GSVV and the GSMV 
suggests that the dating of Aśvaghoṣa—the author 
of the Gurupañcaśikhā—to the 10th century must 
be considered an educated error.
 As Christian Wedemeyer (1999: 6, 27–73) 
demonstrated in his dissertation Vajrayāna and its 
Doubles, there is actually no sufficient evidence to 
support the view that prominent Buddhist authors 
such as Nāgārjuna, Candrakīrti, and Āryadeva, 
had ‘doubles’, or homonyms. It is therefore possi-
ble that the author of the Buddhacarita and of the 
Gurupañcaśikhā were the same Aśvaghoṣa. Further 
77.  See Lévi 1928: 193–216; Mus 1939: 186–91; Seyfort Ruegg 
1981: 119–21.
T 310(3) 密迹金剛力士會
Tathāgataguhyaka
Guhyasamāja
Oṁ namaḥ śrīvajrasattvāy­a, oṁ namo 
buddhāya, oṁ namo dharmāya, oṁ namaḥ 
saṅghāya,
聞如是。
evaṁ mayā śrutam
evaṁ mayā śrutam /
一時佛遊王舍城靈鷲山。
ekasmin samaye bhagavān sarvatathāgata­
kāyavākcittaguhyahṛdayavajrayoṣid- 
bhageṣu vijahāra /
ekasmin samaye bhagavān sarvatathāgata­
kāyavākcittahṛdayavajrayoṣid­-
bhageṣu vijahāra /
anabhilāpyānabhilāpyaiḥ kāyasyārthāya 
hitāya sukhā[ya] devānāṁ ca 
manuṣyāṇāṁ ca yasya tathāgatam arthaṁ 
paripṛṣṭavyaṁ manyase /
anabhilapyānabhilāpyaiḥ sarvabuddha­
kṣetrasumeru­paramāṇurajaḥsamair 
bodhisattvair mahāsattvaiḥ /
Table 3.11: Correlation among T 310(3), the Tathāgataguhyaka, and the Guhyasamāja

--- PAGE 33 ---
99
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
research in the doctrinal outlook of the two texts 
is needed to throw light on the matter. For the 
time being, it is difficult to judge with certainty 
to which figure the Subhūti mentioned in the Old 
Javanese texts referred, as this name is known to 
have been ascribed to quite a number of texts. Yet, 
the possibility of Subhūti having a relation with the 
Gurupañcaśikhā is interesting since this text is one 
of the sources of the SHK.78 On the other hand, it 
is important to note that a new twist in research 
on the Gurupañcaśikhā has occurred: Péter-Dániel 
Szántó (2013) recently discovered a Nepalese San-
skrit manuscript of the Gurupañcaśikhā, whose 
colophon attributes the authorship of the text to 
Vāpilladatta.79
Tantra Bajradhātu
An even more significant piece of evidence for 
the present study is the occurrence of Tantra Ba-
jradhātu in the version C of the SHK. This name 
confirms that by the time that version was compiled, 
i.e. during the reign of Mpu Siṇḍok (929 to 947), 
Tantric teachings relating to vajradhātu—appar-
ently the Vajradhātumaṇḍala—had already been 
circulated among Javanese Buddhists.
In Shingon Buddhism, the Vajradhātumaṇḍala 
is considered a complement for the garbhamaṇḍala. 
This is significant as the latter maṇḍala is connect-
ed with Bianhong 僧辨弘, the Javanese Buddhist 
monk from Kaliṅga 訶陵國 who is said to have 
been initiated by Huiguo 慧果 and consecrated as 
ācārya for the garbhamaṇḍala. In Chinese records 
we read that Bianhong arrived at Chang’an 長安 in 
78.  In Tibetan records we also find a Subhūtipālita (Su­
bhūtipāla) who was the teacher of Ānandagarbha. Ānan-
dagarbha is one among the three most influential teach-
ers of Tibetan Buddhism: Buddhaguhya, Ānandagarbha, 
and Śākyamitra (see Dalai Lama, Dzong-ka-ba, Hopkins 
2005: 18; Weinberger 2003: 83; Chandra Das 1907: 223). Su­
bhūtipālita was the pupil of King Prakāśacandra (Wein-
berger 2003: 3, 86): King Prakāśacandra received the 
Tattvasaṅgrahatantra descending onto his palatial roof; 
and that Ānandagarbha was the latest of the three: Bud-
dhaguhya, Śākyamitra, and Ānandagarbha. Ānandagarbha 
wrote the Vajradhātumahāmaṇḍalopāyikāsarvavajrodaya 
(the same as the Sarvavajrodaya?).
79.  I thank Andrea Acri for bringing my attention to 
this new development, and Péter-Dániel Szántó for swiftly 
providing me with a copy of his article. 
the first year of Jianzhong 建中 (780 ad). By the 
time he arrived there, we are told that he already 
mastered Esoteric Buddhism. The purpose of his 
visit to China was to study the Mahāvairocan-
amahākaruṇagarbha-mahāmaṇḍala 大毗盧遮那
大悲胎藏大慢荼羅法 from Huiguo:80
In the first year of Jiànzhōng (780), there was 
a monk from Kaliṅga [of Central Java], Bian-
hong, [who] from his native country brought 
a copper cymbal [and] respectfully presented 
it to the sagely Buddhist Monastery, [as well 
as] two conches [and] four copper … bottles … 
[which he] respectfully presented to the Vener-
able Master [Huiguo]. He made offerings, and 
earnestly sought for the great teachings of the 
garbhadhātu of Vairocana.
Huiguo was the successor to Amoghavajra and 
was considered one among the three founders of 
the Chinese Mantra school (zhen-yan 真言). While 
studying at the Green Dragon Monastery (Qin-
glong-si 青龍寺), Bianhong was accompanied by 
Huiri 慧日 from Korea, and Hongfa (J. Kōbō, or 
Konghai 空海, J. Kūkai) from Japan. The latter in 
turn became the founder of the Japanese Shingon 
school 真言 at Kōya-san 高野山, in Japan, and told 
the story of Bianhong as follows (Sundberg and 
Giebel 2011: 130–31):
Bianhong, a monk of the country of Heling, 
was while in his native land practicing the yoga 
of Cakravarticintāmaṇi and had attained some 
degree of spiritual power. On suddenly hearing 
that the teachings of Mahāvairocana’s Great 
Mandala of the Matrix of Great Compassion 
were to be found in South India, he fervently 
yearned to study them and set out for South 
India. On the way he suddenly met someone 
who asked, ‘Where are you going?’ He replied, 
‘I have heard it said that the great teachings of 
the Matrix [of Great Compassion] are to be 
found in South India. I yearn in my heart to 
study them, and therefore I have equipped my-
self for a journey and taken to the road’. That 
person informed him, ‘Those teachings have 
been taken by the Ācārya Amoghavajra and 
transmitted to the land of the Great Tang, and 
80.  T 2057.295b16–18: 建中年初。有訶陵國僧辨弘。從本國。
將銅鈸一具。奉上聖佛院。螺兩具。銅□瓶四。□奉上和上。充供
養。求援胎藏毘盧遮那大法。

--- PAGE 34 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
100
his pupil, the Ācārya Huiguo, is presently at 
Qinglong Temple (青龍寺) in Chang’an (長安), 
where he is giving instruction in them. If you 
go there, you will certainly be able to receive 
them together with others, but otherwise they 
will be difficult to obtain’. When he had fin-
ished speaking, he vanished. It is thus evident 
that he was a divine being. [Bianhong] turned 
back and set out for the Great Tang. He even-
tually visited Qinglong Temple, where he met 
His Reverence [Huiguo] and explained in de-
tail the purpose of his visit, offering him one 
seven-gemmed initiation flask, one bronze 
bowl, three conch shells, and various famed ar-
omatics. His Reverence held an initiation [cer-
emony] for him and conferred on him the great 
teachings of the Matrix [of Great Compassion]. 
Bianhong presently resides in Bianzhou (汴州), 
where he propagates the esoteric teachings [lit. 
‘esoteric wheel’].
Kūkai’s account mentioning that Bianhong 
while in his native land had already practised the 
yoga of Cakravarticintāmaṇi and had attained 
some degree of spiritual power (訶陵國僧辯弘在
本國日誦持如意輪瑜伽稍得法力) is significant. The 
term for the practice is parallel to the term used in 
the SHKAS. In the cultivation to find the supreme 
secret (paramaguhya), the embodiment of Bhaṭāra 
Viśeṣa, or the Saṅ Hyaṅ Divarūpa, is summarized 
by the SHKAS as follows:81
When there is someone in pain, or even sor-
row, your mindfulness should become like a 
wish-fulfilling jewel (cintāmaṇi); [then] the 
miseries are annihilated by it, because [when] 
your mind (jñāna) is touched by the spotless 
form (nirmmalākāra) in your own intellect (ri 
svacittanta), it becomes Saṅ Hyaṅ Divarūpa.
The cultivation involves seven concentrations 
(samādhi). One of these is called the mahāmuni-
varacintāmaṇisamādhi and is described as follows:82
81.  Yan hana vvaṅ alara prihati kunaṅ katuturananta 
kady aṅgan iṅ cintāmaṇi, hilaṅ ikaṅ duḥka denya, apan 
ikaṅ jñāna kita kәna nirmmalākāra ri svacittanta, atәma-
han saṅ hyaṅ divarūpa sira (Kats 1910: 52).
82.  Dadi taṅ āmbәk ādibuddha ni ratu cakravartti huvus 
malahaken śatru sakti vәnaṅ aveh sakaharәp niṅ sarbva-
satva, ikaṅ āmbәk maṅkana mahāmunivaracintāmaṇi­
samādhi ṅaranikā (Kats 1910: 57).
Then the Ādibuddha-mind of the Cakravarti 
king after defeating powerful enemy is able to 
fulfil all wishes of all beings, hence such mind 
is called the mahāmunivaracintāmaṇisamādhi.
The parallel suggests that by the time Bianhong 
left for China around 780, the so-called teachings 
of the Tantra Bajradhātu Subhūti, as recorded in 
the SHK, had already been secured by Javanese 
Buddhists. On one hand, this explains the reason 
that compelled Bianhong to study the complemen-
tary set of teachings, the garbhamaṇḍala; on the 
other, it corroborates the fact that the teachings 
of the Kalasan inscription dated to 778 and the 
Kelurak inscription dated to 782 have a parallel 
with those of the SHK. The short time between 
the installations of these two inscriptions may, as 
rightly suggested by Roy Jordaan (1997), be due to 
the fact that they were instigated by the same royal 
guru, Kumāraghoṣa. We may therefore consider 
782 as the date marking the upper limit by which 
the SHK had already been compiled or diffused by 
a Javanese Buddhist master, possibly during the 
period in between the arrivals of Vajrabodhi and 
Kumāraghoṣa. This inference first of all supports 
Goris’ early dating of the text. Then, we may also 
conclude that the compilation time of the identi-
fied sources of the SHK must naturally have been 
much earlier. As indicated by the Guanshiyinshuo 
mieyijiezuiguode yijiesuoyuan tuoluoni 觀世音說滅
一切罪過得一切所願陀羅尼, and further confirmed 
by the Miji jingang lishi hui 密迹金剛力士會, the 
hidden teachings related to the tradition of the 
Guhyasamāja might have started before the 6th 
century already.
The fact that there are altogether 34 verses out 
of all 42 verses of the SHKM that can be traced 
back to a manual for an initiatory ritual (abhiṣeka) 
related to the Guhyasamāja is interesting. It may 
simply suggest that the SHKM originated from the 
Guhyasamāja tradition, especially when those 34 
verses are spread evenly from the beginning to the 
end of the SHKM. On the other hand, it is clear 
that neither the GSMV nor the GSVV individual-
ly corresponds one-to-one with the SHKM, and 
even if we only select the corresponding verses, 
these ritual texts cannot make up the whole SHKM. 
There are also other peculiarities of the SHK, such 
as a different order of the verses, and a dissimilar

--- PAGE 35 ---
101
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
pairing of dhātu. Therefore, we may wonder if this 
again is just a matter of corrupt transmission, or if 
we are in fact encountering yet another lineage or 
tradition, or an earlier common source.
The appearance of concepts parallel to the 
teachings in the Ratnameghasūtra in verse 25 of 
the SHKM, which is found neither in the GSMV nor 
in the GSVV nor in any other text, suggests that the 
Old Javanese text came from a different tradition, 
perhaps older, than that of Ācārya Dīpaṅkara­
bhadra, or even Ācārya Nāgabodhi. The archaic 
doctrinal outlook and the succinctness of the SHK 
in comparison with the GSMV and the GSVV may 
give the additional impression that that was proba-
bly the case.83 Since thus far we have two prominent 
names, i.e. Vajrabodhi and Kumāraghoṣa, related 
to Java, both have a chance of being the carriers 
of esoteric teachings. However, we are yet to find 
sources in East Asian Buddhist collections to in-
dicate that Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, Huiguo, or 
even Śubhākarasiṁha, ever carried a ritual manual 
similar to the GSMV or the GSVV. In the absence 
of such evidence, it is difficult to justify Vajrabodhi 
being the carrier.84 On the other hand, as discussed 
earlier, the majority of newly identified sources of the 
SHK are mainly related to regions in Northeast India. 
Hence, Kumāraghoṣa, although obscure, seemingly 
has the greater chance of the two. Considering that 
the Kelurak inscription mentions Kumāraghoṣa, a 
master at the rank of a royal preceptor who came 
directly from Gauḍīdvīpa—the site of Vikramaśīla, 
Nālandā, and Somapura—he himself might have 
been the one who transmitted to Java this esoteric 
tradition.
83.  The SHKM has only 42 verses, while the GSMV and 
GSVV both have more than 400 verses.
84.  If the initial trip plan of Bianhong could serve as an 
indicator of his perception of the source of the teachings 
he had acquired, the original destination was a region 
outside of China, thus more likely South Asia. But then, 
when Giebel (2012: 187–230) documents the Sanskrit texts 
brought back to Japan by Kūkai, this information does not 
give any additional indication that might lead us to the 
set of teachings parallel to those preserved by the SHK. In 
other words, the set of teachings brought by Vajrabodhi 
or Amoghavajra from either South India or Sri Lanka was 
somewhat different from those transmitted to Java. Of 
course, new evidence that may change our current perspec-
tive on how the transmission flowed might come to light.
The SHK, although compact and succinct, is ap-
parently a complete scripture combining initiatory 
ritual, fundamental doctrine, as well as practical 
instructions for daily cultivation to achieve the 
highest goal. Despite its relatively simple and un-
sophisticated look, it is underpinned by a complex 
system that cannot be easily unpacked without as-
sistance from a fully competent master, and thereby 
follows the tradition of the Mukhāgama that is well 
known in the lineage of Dignāga in particular, or 
in the Mantranaya tradition in general. 
borobudur
In an attempt to explain the Buddhism of Boro-
budur, Krom took the SHK, together with other 
sources, and briefly analysed them in his mon-
ograph on the Javanese monument. Krom (1931: 
332) concluded that Borobudur was a stūpa em-
bodying teachings of Tantric Mahāyāna based on 
the Yogācāra school. He was not quite certain if 
Borobudur represented exactly the teachings re-
corded in the SHK (ibid.: 331). It is only later, when 
Willem F. Stutterheim took his turn investigating 
Borobudur, that the SHK became the main source 
for interpreting the architecture of the monument. 
Stutterheim (1961: 35), while resorting to the con-
clusion suggested earlier by Goris (1926: 156), indi-
viduated some key concepts in the SHK—mainly 
the tridhātu and stūpa-prāsāda—and related them 
to Borobudur. Mus (1978: 57–65, 85–106) modified 
Stutterheim’s idea of stūpa-prāsāda and incorpo-
rated it into his voluminous study of Borobudur. 
In due time, de Casparis discarded the compound 
bhūmisam­bhārabhūdara being the origin of the 
name Borobudur, and shifted to a combination 
of the Ratu Boko and Tri Tepusan inscriptions to 
recapture Mus’ idea of stūpa-prāsāda to arrive at 
the notion of the ‘dual nature’ of Borobudur. De 
Casparis did it while still insisting that no Tantric 
elements could be detected in Borobudur, not real-
izing that around 1960 Mus himself had dramati-
cally changed his views on the monument (Soekmo-
no 1981: 132). Another attempt to utilize the SHK to 
explain Borobudur re-emerged in the study on the 
worship of Tathāgatas in Java by Nurhadi Magetsari 
(1982). Magetsari concludes that Borobudur surely 
represents the progress in a yogin’s experience, and

--- PAGE 36 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
102
that it contains elements from Mahāyāna, Yogācāra, 
and Tantra, yet he does not specifically elaborate 
on how exactly those elements informed the archi-
tectural plan and iconography of Borobudur. In 
other words, if we follow Magetsari’s view closely, it 
would seem that the plan does not necessarily have 
to come from the SHK, as it was posited by Krom, 
but that anything possessing Mahāyāna, Yogācāra, 
and Tantric elements could be the driving force 
behind the creation of Borobudur. However, if such 
were the case, studies on the relationship between 
the SHK and Borobudur would have been pointless.
Many scholars have contended that Borobu-
dur has nothing to do with Tantric Buddhism.85 
If Borobudur truly has no Tantric elements, there 
could naturally be no talk about relating the SHK 
to it. Thus, even before citing the SHK, one has 
to prove beyond doubt that Borobudur is really a 
Tantric Buddhist monument, or at least one related 
to Buddhist Tantric practices. This fundamental 
problem is difficult to solve, as the rationale behind 
Borobudur architecture, symbolism, and function 
is not readily accessible. This fact justifies the 
continued scholarly disputes on the Buddhism of 
Borobudur, while at the same time the debaters do 
not seem to offer solid arguments to address the 
underlying problem.
For the reason just mentioned, we have to con-
sider it very fortunate that a team of archaeologists 
unearthed a large number of clay stūpikās and 
votive tablets, a few silver plates, and a lead-bronze 
inscription from the Borobudur yard in 1974. Many 
of these artefacts are dated to no later than the 
second half of the 9th century. They were therefore 
likely in use when Borobudur was consecrated. As I 
reported earlier (Kandahjaya 2009), these artefacts 
help us confirm that Borobudur was architectur-
ally a stūpa-prāsāda representing a dharmadhātu-
maṇḍala. These artefacts were related to practices 
of both the exoteric Mahāyāna and esoteric Man-
tranaya tradition, yet their association with the site 
named Buḍur which according to the 14th-century 
Deśavarṇana belonged to the Vajradhara school 
(kabajradharan) suggests that Esoteric Buddhism 
85.  Such as Omura Segai, Heinrich Zimmer, Lokesh 
Chandra, John Huntington, Jan Moens, Ph. Pott, J.G. de 
Casparis, Jan Fontein, and Marijke Klokke.
played an important role there. The sanctum was 
consecrated by the Kayumvuṅan inscription of 
824 and was later addressed as Bhūmisambhāra.
The SHK, together with the clay stūpikās and 
the Kayumvuṅan inscription,86 jointly provide us 
with further insight into the doctrinal background 
of Borobudur and enable us to deduce that Boro-
budur architects had access to stūpa construction 
manuals and to rituals for the confession of faults, 
and thereby had embedded a set of instructions for 
moral cultivation in the monument. I will describe 
the details in the following discussion.
Stūpa-prāsāda
As some of the clay stūpikās are inscribed with an 
abbreviated form of the formula oṁ ye te svāhā in 
ancient Javanese script,87 they provide us with an 
86.  Jeffrey Sundberg and Mark Long have persistent-
ly reminded me of an issue affecting the relationship of 
the Kayumvuṅan inscription to Borobudur, which was 
hypothesized by de Casparis (1981: 60–63) and myself 
(2004: 256–57, 2009: 13). This issue is the (still debated) 
provenance of the inscription, which Long (2014: 177) has 
argued to be relatively far from the environs of Borobudur. 
However, while in certain cases provenance helps, in others 
it may not be as helpful. I do not think we can or should be 
totally dependent simply on provenance to explain things 
happening more than a thousand years ago, for ancient 
inscriptions were often found in locations far removed from 
their original whereabouts (such is the case of the ‘Calcutta 
stone’ or Pucangan inscription, which was sent to India by 
Thomas Stamford Raffles). Furthermore, archaeology in 
Java knows of a sīma called aṅśa, which allows granted land 
to be located far from the temple (Poesponegoro and Noto-
susanto 1984: 114). What is even more important to stress 
here is that the Kayumvuṅan inscription, irrespective of 
its original location, clearly partakes of the set of Buddhist 
doctrines prevalent in 8th- and early 9th-century Śailen-
dra-ruled Java, which are reflected in Borobudur. While 
the burden of proof demonstrating that the Kayumvuṅan 
inscription relates to another Buddhist temple remains 
on Sundberg’s and Long’s shoulders, in the absence of a 
convincing argument, I prefer to keep de Casparis’ take as 
it is more in line with the context and doctrinal message 
of the inscription, as well as the form of Buddhism that 
seems to have been followed by the builders of Borobudur.
87.  See Boechari 1982: 93. The full formula runs: ‘Tathāga-
ta, the great śramaṇa, has stated those things that have a 
cause and their cause, also their cessation’ (ye dharmā 
hetuprabhavā hetuṁ teṣāṁ tathāgataḥ / hy avadat teṣāṁ 
ca yo nirodha evaṁvādī mahāśramaṇaḥ).

--- PAGE 37 ---
103
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
indication that the people who used these objects 
in the vicinity of Borobudur were familiar with 
the concept of dharmakāya-caitya (a caitya of the 
Dharma body), and particularly with caityavan-
dana (‘worship of caitya’) inscribed on a panel at 
the hidden foot of Borobudur (Tucci 1988: 27–29). 
Yijing states that producing and offering a votive 
stūpa is believed to grant merit (Li Rongxi 2000: 12). 
Familiarity with a dharmakāya-caitya implies that 
the constructed stūpa does not necessarily contain 
relics,88 and the Javanese must have understood that 
by building such stūpa (or caitya, as these terms 
are often interchangeable) they would renew the 
preaching of the Dharma, gain merit and accumu-
late knowledge, grasp the law of causation, and have 
the vision of the Buddha.89 We can further deter-
mine that the architects of Borobudur followed an 
Indian prototype called the kūṭāgāra-prāsāda—or 
the stūpa-prāsāda in the SHK—to memorialize the 
eight miraculous events in the life of Śākyamuni, 
and to represent the body of the Tathāgata (dhar-
madhātu) embedded with multifarious virtues (Śrī 
Ghananātha),90 so that builders, supporters, and 
cultivators could accumulate virtues to speedily 
accomplish the highest goal.
Considering the inscription of caityavandana 
on the hidden foot, the thousands of votive stūpas 
recovered in the vicinity of the monument, the 
expiatory ritual to be described later, and the 
structure of the monument itself, we cannot but 
be certain that the architects of Borobudur must 
have had access to manuals for stūpa or caitya 
construction. A number of scholars have inves-
tigated and documented Buddhist scriptures that 
prescribe a set of techniques for building a stūpa.91 
88.  See Lokesh Chandra, ‘Introduction’ in Tucci 1988: vii: 
‘If stūpa/caitya had been primarily a funerary monument, 
it would not have been associated with the birth of Lord 
Buddha. That would be blasphemous’. Then, on page 24, 
Tucci states: ‘Not all the caityas were built to contain relics, 
but … most of them had a symbolic value’.
89.  For a fuller discussion on this, see Tucci 1988: 28–32.
90.  I suggested a relationship between the name Śrī 
Ghananātha and the multitude of virtues of the Sugata 
(sugataguṇagaṇa) occurring in verses 11 and 15 respectively 
of the Kayumvuṅan inscription (see Kandahjaya 2009). 
91.  See Tucci 1988: 13–21; Roth 1980: 182–209; Pema Dorjee 
1996: 1–21.
According to their examination, a stūpa structurally 
comprises two main components: the (lion) throne, 
which is often missing in the production of stūpikā, 
and the stūpa proper.92 The stūpa proper consists 
mainly of eight parts: (1) a base of ten virtues (Tib. 
dge-ba bcu; Skt. daśakuśala) at the bottom with 
a shape following the steps above the base; (2) a 
flight of steps that is square, circular, or polygonal 
in shape;93 (3) a base for the dome; (4) the dome; 
(5) the harmikā in rectangular or polygonal form; 
(6) the spire; (7) the wheels; and (8) the umbrella.94 
Then, if we compare and tabulate the structure of 
Borobudur with the structure of a stūpa proper, we 
find more correspondences than differences (see 
Table 3.12, p. 104). 
From the comparison in Table 3.12, it is clear 
that if it were not for the changes at the base and at 
the top, Borobudur would have perfectly fitted the 
structure of a stūpa. While this definitely brings us 
back to the same question as to why the architects 
made such changes, a better understanding of the 
eight different types of stūpas seems to lead us to a 
possible answer, especially when we recall that the 
dominant set of votive stūpas from the Borobudur 
yard has an elongated aṇḍa with eight subsidiary 
stūpikās around it. Those eight types of stūpas are 
of two categories: four commemorating the essen-
tial moments of Śākyamuni’s earthly life, and four 
commemorating some of his most famous miracles 
(Tucci 1988: 24). Each of the series of eight stūpas 
has some specific features, usually on their steps, 
which differentiate one from another. Those eight 
may reflect a further development in the concept 
of commemorating the miraculous events, in con-
trast to the initial four commemorating Buddha’s 
92.  This is according to Tucci (1988: 15–17), whereas Dorjee 
(1996: 61) divides it into three parts: (1) the lion throne, (2) 
the intermediate section, and (3) the upper section.
93.  The polygonal shape in twenty corners like the one 
shaping Borobudur is called viṁśatikoṇa; the word is 
attested, e.g., in the Sanskrit ritual manual titled Kri-
yāsaṅgrahapañjikā compiled by Kuladatta (see Skorupski 
2002: 165).
94.  I specifically choose these eight parts among other 
parts mentioned by Tucci and Dorjee for the purpose of 
comparing them with the parts in Borobudur. For a more 
complete enumeration of the parts of a stūpa, see Tucci 
1988: 40–43 and Dorjee 1996: 61–71.

--- PAGE 38 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
104
life recommended by the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra.95 
By comparing the architecture of the eight stūpas 
with Borobudur, we may envisage a correspondence 
between the features of the eight stūpas commem-
orating the eight miraculous events in the life of 
Śākyamuni and the main architectural elements of 
the monument. In Table 3.13 we can see that, except 
95.  See Mahākarmavibhaṅga, paragraph LXII (Lévi 1933: 
82–83): ‘Which are the ten benefits if one pays homage and 
prostrates before the caitya of the Tathāgata, i.e., the four 
great caityas at Lumbinī, Mahābodhi, and others in the 
Middle Kingdom (Madhyadeśa)?... Here is the summary: 
country-clothings-family-form-voice-intelligence-faith-re-
ligious disciplines-scholarship-liberality-memory-wisdom. 
When one joins the palms in worship before Buddha shrine 
of Tathāgata, with devotion, one obtains excellent mind 
of wisdom, and exhaustion of the flows. And it is as in the 
sūtra, O Ānanda, all those who circumambulate the caityas 
with devotion, when they die, like an arrow fixed at the 
ground, after the dispersion of their body, they will be born 
in heavens’ (katame daśānuśaṁsā madhyadeśe caturmahā-
caityalumbinīmahābodhiprabhṛtiṣu tathāgatacaityāñja-
likarmapraṇipāte…. asyoddānam. deśavastrakularūpa­sva­
rapratibhānatāśraddhāśīlaśrutatyāgān smṛtimān bhavati 
for the octagonal shape in the stūpa of Reconcilia-
tion, most of the main features of the eight stūpas 
correspond to features of Borobudur. Also, except 
for two types of stūpas, i.e. of Victor and Parinir-
vāṇa, all the stūpas have four steps—a feature that 
can be related to the four polygonal platforms or 
altars at Borobudur. The 108 niches and the four 
doors of the stūpa of Preaching correspond neatly 
with the 108 niches and four doors at each side of 
Borobudur.96 The bell-shaped dome of the stūpa of 
Parinirvāṇa matches the bell-shaped dome of the 
main stūpa of Borobudur. The ladders demanded 
by the stūpa of Descent from Trayastrīṁśa and 
prajñāvān tathāgatasya buddhaprasādaṁ kṛtvāñjaliṁ 
labhate dhīraḥ saprajña udāram āśravakṣayam. uktaṁ ca 
sūtre. ye kecid ānanda caityacaryāṁ caramāṇāḥ prasanna­
cittāḥ kālaṁ kariṣyanti. athā bhallo nikṣiptaḥ pṛthivyāṁ 
tiṣṭhate evaṁ kāyasya bhedāt svargeṣūpapatsyanti).
96.  As Tucci (1988: 128, 142) points out, the stūpa of 
Preaching in Tibet typically has Buddha niches, which 
are also found at Borobudur. See also Chemburkar’s con-
tribution in this volume.
Table 3.12: A stūpa proper vis-à-vis Borobudur
Structure of a stūpa
Symbolic Meaning
Borobudur
Umbrella
Great compassion 
(mahākaruṇā)
Three umbrellas were installed by van Erp for experiment 
in 1910 and subsequently removed
Wheels
Ten knowledge-powers 
(daśa jñāna-balāni)
Nine wheels were installed by van Erp for experiment in 
1910 and subsequently removed
Spire (yaṣṭi)
Ten knowledges 
(daśa jñānāni)
The spire for the abandoned original main stūpa is un-
known; now the octagonal spire of the main stūpa
Harmikā/droṇa
Eightfold path 
(aṣṭāṅga-mārga)
The harmikā for the abandoned original main stūpa is un-
known; now the quadrangular harmikā of the main stūpa
The dome (kuṁbha/aṇḍa)
Seven factors of enlighten-
ment (sapta bodhyaṅgāni)
The dome for the abandoned original main stūpa is un-
known; now the dome of the main stūpa
The base of the dome 
(kuṁbha sandhī/kaṇṭhaka)
Five powers 
(pañca balāni)
The base of the dome for the abandoned original main 
stūpa now hidden underneath the first circular terrace
The steps (cataśro vedyaḥ/ 
caturthā jaṅghā vedī): 4
Five faculties 
(pañcendriyāni)
4th platform or altar in polygonal shape
(tṛtīyā vedī): 3
Four spiritual powers 
(catvāri ṛddhipādā)
3rd platform or altar in polygonal shape
(dvitīyā vedī): 2
Four renunciations 
(catvāri prahāṇani)
2nd platform or altar in polygonal shape
(ādhāra vedī): 1
Four awareness 
(catvāri smṛty-upasthāna)
1st platform or altar in polygonal shape
The base of ten virtues
Ten virtues 
(daśa kuśala)
Hidden foot with reliefs from the scripture on ten good 
and bad deeds (the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra)

--- PAGE 39 ---
105
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
the reliefs demanded by this stūpa as well as by 
the Grand Miracle are all present at Borobudur. 
Should there be no expanded base, even the re-
quirement for a base of ten virtues is met with 
what now constitutes the hidden foot of Borobu-
dur, displaying reliefs from the scripture on ten 
good and bad deeds (the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra). But 
the most fascinating feature in this list is perhaps 
the prescription to have three circular steps for 
the stūpa of Victor, which in Borobudur are not 
located where we would expect them—i.e. at the 
bottom, starting from the ground—but on top 
of the four polygonal platforms or altars. There 
is also an exclusive requirement for the stūpa of 
Parinirvāṇa (i.e., bell-shaped dome without steps), 
which at Borobudur is again fulfilled by placing the 
whole solid bell-shaped stūpa on top of the third 
circular terrace. From all these arrangements we 
can perceive the architects’ desire to conform to 
all specifications at once, so as to make Borobu-­ 
dur contain all the major features of all the eight 
stūpas.97
97.  Tucci (1988: 51) records that the most common type 
in Tibet is the Enlightenment, followed by the Preaching, 
the Victor, and the Descent from Trayastrīṁśa.
Anuttarapūjā
Verses 14 and 15 of the SHKM describe an instruc-
tion to practise mantra, japa, and pūjā:98
Idañ ca maṇḍalam paśya 
śraddhāñ janayathādhunā / 
kule jāto ’si buddhānāṁ 
sarbvamantrair adhiṣṭhitaḥ
Behold the Holy Maṇḍala, śraddhāñ janaya-
thādhunā: generate faith, do not be disrespect-
ful to the Holy Maṇḍala, kule jāto ’si bud-
dhānām: because you are now [in] the Buddha 
family (buddhakula), because soon your name 
will be Bhaṭāra Hyaṅ Buddha, sarbvamantrair 
98.  Comm. Verse 14: ka: vulati saṅ hyaṅ maṇḍala, 
śraddhāñ janayathādhunā, gavayakәn taṅ śṛddha, hayva 
tan sagorava ri saṅ hyaṅ maṇḍala, kule jāto ’si bud-
dhānāṁ, apan kita buddhakula maṅke, apan bhaṭāra hyaṅ 
buddha ṅaranta mәnә, sarbvamantrair adhiṣṭhitaḥ, tuvi 
sampun kṛtādhiṣṭhāna iki de saṅ sarbvatathāgata, inajyan 
sinaṅaskāra rikaṅ sarbvamantra. Comm. Verse 15: ka: 
Aparәk tekaṅ hayu ri kita, siddhayo gatayaś ca te, samaṅka-
na ikaṅ kasiddhyan abhimuka ikā kabeh, agya kapaṅguha 
denta; pālaya samayaṁ siddhye, lәkas ta umabhyāsa saṅ 
hyaṅ samaya, marapvan katәmu ikaṅ kasiddhyan usәn 
denta; mantreṣūdyogavān bhava, gavayakan taṅ utsāha 
ri mantra japa pūja usәn, hayva hәlәm-hәlәm, yatānyan 
kopalambha ikaṅ kasugatin irikeṅ ihajanma ṅūniveh dlāha 
(Kats 1910: 21–22).
Table 3.13: Eight stūpas vis-à-vis Borobudur
Type of stūpa
Site
Main Features
Borobudur
1
Birth (Heap of 
Lotuses)
Kapilavastu
Four (or seven) steps with lotuses
Four polygonal platforms or altars
2
Enlightenment
Nairañjanā- 
Magadha
Square; four steps above a base of 
ten virtues
Four polygonal platforms or altars 
above the hidden foot with reliefs from 
the scripture on ten good and bad deeds 
(the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra)
3
Preaching 
(Many Doors)
Vārāṇasī
108 niches; four doors in four sides 
are four truths
108 niches each in four sides
4
Grand Miracle
Jetavana- 
Śrāvastī
Square; four steps and reliefs in four 
sides
Four polygonal platforms or altars and 
reliefs
5
Descent from 
Trayastrīṁśa
Kānyakubja- 
Sāṁkāśya
Ladders; four (or eight steps) and 
reliefs
Four polygonal platforms or altars; 
stairs in four sides and reliefs
6
Reconciliation
Rājagṛha
Octagonal; four steps
Four polygonal platforms or altars
7
Victor (Medita-
tion on Life)
Vaiśālī
Three circular steps
Three circular terraces
8
Parinirvāṇa
Kuśīnagara
Bell-shaped dome without steps
Bell-shaped dome of the main stūpa

--- PAGE 40 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
106
adhiṣṭhitaḥ: you also have already become an 
abode for all Tathāgatas, have been instructed 
and consecrated in all mantras.
Sampado ’bhimukhāḥ sarbvāḥ 
siddhayo gatayaś ca te / 
pālaya samayaṁ siddhyai 
mantreṣūdyogawān bhava //
Fulfillments come closer to you; siddhayo ga-
tayaś ca te, likewise all the perfections are 
close at hand, and you will attain them quick-
ly; pālaya samayam siddhye, begin to practise 
the Holy Samaya, so that the state of perfection 
is quickly attained by you; mantreṣūdyogavān 
bhava, diligently perform mantra, japa, pūja 
immediately, do not delay, so that Buddhahood 
will be obtained accordingly in this very life, 
and even more in the future.
These two verses are found in a Sanskrit ritual 
manual titled Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā compiled by 
Kuladatta.99 In this manual, those verses are recited 
after obeisance at the four gates of a maṇḍala and 
followed by a recitation of the formula of the con-
fession of faults (pāpadeśanā). The passages that 
surround the two verses are as follows (trans. Sko-
rupski 2002: 114–15):
[Ch. 6] Four obeisances, confession of sins, vows 
Next the disciple makes obeisances (praṇā-
ma) at the four portals of the maṇḍala while 
reciting the appropriate mantras. Making the 
puṣpāñjali, and prostrating himself at the east-
ern portal, he recites:
‘oṁ, as I prostrate before the body, speech and 
mind of the Tathāgatas, I worship the vajra. 
May I be blessed by all the Tathāgatas. oṁ I 
offer myself for the service of worshipping 
(pūjopasthāna) all the Tathāgatas. O Vajrasat-
tva of all the Tathāgatas bestow upon me your 
99.  See Ishii (1989: 55–70 and 1992: 228). The portion of 
this manual edited and published by Sakurai (1988: 17) 
records verses 14 and 15 of the SHK with minor variants, 
as follows: idam hi maṇḍalam paśyan śraddhām janayamś 
cādhunā / kule jāto ’si buddhānām vidyāmantrair adhis-
thitah // sampado ’bhimukhāh sarvāh siddhiyogatayaś ca 
te / pālayan samayān siddho mantresūdyogavān bhava //. 
In 1984 Alex Wayman, who used a manuscript of the Kri-
yāsaṅgraha reproduced by Sharada Rani in the Śatapiṭaka 
series, pointed out that verses 6–9, 16–17, 20–22, 26–27, 
29–32 of the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan are found in this 
manuscript (see Ishii 1992: 228).
blessing’. He executes similar recitations at 
the remaining portals, offering himself at the 
southern portal for the consecration of wor-
ship (pūjābhiṣeka), at the western portal for 
the continuation of worship (pūjāpravartana), 
and at the northern portal for the performance 
of worship (pūjākarma), and asks to be blessed 
by Vajraratna (south), Vajradharma (west), and 
Vajrakarma (north).
The teacher envisages the disciple as being fully 
confirmed (adhiṣṭhita) by the Tathāgatas, and 
then invigorates his faith (śraddhā):
‘Behold this maṇḍala, and generate faith. You 
have been born in the family of the Buddhas, 
and blessed with vidyās and mudrās. You are 
confronted with excellent advantages (sampad) 
and the yoga of attainments (siddhi). Gain the 
attainments through protecting the pledges, and 
apply yourself to the practices of the mantras’.
After that, the disciple recites the formula of the 
confession of sins (pāpa-deśanā), rejoices in 
the merit (puṇyānumodana) of all the Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas, supplicates the Buddhas not 
to pass into nirvāṇa, and offers his merit and 
himself for the attainment of buddhahood.
Next, the disciple raises the thought of enlight-
enment, and recites the vows relating to the 
Buddha families.
‘I raise the perfect and highest thought of en-
lightenment in the same way as it has been 
raised by the Buddhas of the three times.
I firmly embrace the threefold morality: the mo-
rality of precepts (śīlaśiksā), the morality of ac-
cumulating wholesome qualities (kuśaladhar-
maśīla), and the morality of acting for the 
benefit of living beings (sattvārthakriyāśīla).
From today onwards, I take the vow born in the 
Buddha family, the highest and best Three Jew-
els: the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha.
In the great Vajra family, I truly grasp the vajra, 
the bell, and the mudrā, and receive my teacher.
In the great Ratna family with the pleasing 
yoga and pledge, I offer the four gifts (caturdā-
na), six times every day.100
In the great Padma family, pure and born from 
the great enlightenment, I receive the holy 
Dharma in its outer, inner and secret Vehicles.
100.  According to the SDP, the four gifts include worldly 
possessions, fearlessness, dharma, and friendship (Skorups-
ki 1983: 288): caturdānaṁ pradātavyaṁ tridive ca trirātri­ke 
// āmīṣābhayadharmākhyā maitrī ratnakuloccaye // (for 
English translation, see Skorupski 1983: 102).

--- PAGE 41 ---
107
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
In the great assembly of the Karma family, I 
truly take on the comprehensive vow of per-
forming the task of worship (pūjakarma) to the 
best of my abilities.
It is for the benefit of all living beings that I raise 
the perfect and highest thought of enlighten-
ment, and embrace this comprehensive vow.
I shall lead to the other shore those who have not 
as yet reached there. I shall liberate those who 
are not liberated, inspire those who are inert, and 
bring living beings to emancipation (nirvṛti)’.
This concludes the procedure of taking the 
vows (saṁvaragrahaṇa).
These passages are also found in the SDP as well 
as the GSVV. Moreover, it is important to note that 
a portion of the passage on the confession of faults 
(pāpa­deśanā) survives in the Balinese tradition and 
is known as the Anuttarapūjā (see Table 3.14, p. 108).101
The Sevenfold Supreme Worship (sapta­vidhā-
anuttarapūjā) is one of the more popular repent-
ance rituals known in Buddhist practice today. 
This ritual is often associated with two Buddhist 
masters, Śāntideva and Atīśa. In the beginning of 
the Śikṣāsamuccaya, Śāntideva quotes a passage 
from the Bhaiṣajyaguruvaiḍūryaprabhasūtra in 
which the seven members of the anuttarapūjā are 
listed in connection with the ‘walk of the Bodhisat-
tva’ (bodhisattvacaryā).102 But the vital source for 
101.  See Lévi 1933: 82; Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971: 
433–38.
102.  The members are: homage (vandana), worship 
(pūjana), confession of faults (pāpadeśana), delight in 
virtue (puṇya), solicitation and entreaty of Buddhas (anu-
modanabuddhādhyeṣaṇa), application of the merit to the 
attainment of enlightenment (yācana bodhipariṇāmana). 
The Chinese translation of the list is in T 1636 from 78b10 
to 78b12: 禮拜供養。說罪及隨喜福。勸請諸佛住世說法。乃至
迴向菩提。 The Dharmasaṅgraha (entry number 14) gives 
the following seven items: vandanā, pūjanā, pāpadeśanā, 
anumodanā, adhyeṣaṇā, bodhicittotpādaḥ, pariṇāmanā. It 
is possible that the manuscript used by Śāntideva is different 
to what we have today, because the exact quotation cannot 
be found either in the Sanskrit or in the many Chinese 
versions of the Bhaiṣajyaguruvaiḍūryaprabharajasūtra that 
have come down to us (for the translation of the Chinese 
versions, see Birnbaum 1989). The family of this scripture 
indeed contains many references to pūjā and repentance 
ritual and how to perform it. In fact, T 1161, the Sūtra 
Spoken by the Buddha on the Contemplation of the Two 
Bodhisattvas, King of Healing and Supreme Healer is the 
original source for praises to the fifty-three past Buddhas. 
the anuttarapūjā is actually the Bhadracarī, to 
which Śāntideva also refers (Bendall 1922: 264–65, 
269). Atīśa confirms the role of the Bhadracarī in 
his commentary to the Bodhipathapradīpa (Sher-
burne 2000: 43). He explains that the anuttarapūjā 
is related to verses 1 to 12 of the Bhadracarī, and 
that all other verses, i.e. verses 13 to 62, are for 
transferring merit. Verse 12 includes all the seven 
elements of the anuttarapūjā, namely (1) homage 
(vandanā), (2) worship (pūjanā), (3) confession of 
faults (pāpa-deśanā), (4) rejoicing (anumodanā), 
(5) prayer (adhyeṣaṇā), (6) supplication (yācanā), 
and (7) transfer of merit (pariṇāmanā), as follows:
vandanapūjanadeśanatāya modanādhyeṣa­
ṇayācanatāya /
yac ca śubhaṁ mayi saṁcitu kiṁcid bodhayi 
nāmayamī ahu sarvaṁ // 12
Panel IV12 of the Bhadracarī at Borobudur 
(Fig. 3.1, p. 109) likely depicts verse 12. This depiction, 
together with the survival of a Balinese recension, 
may imply that the anuttarapūjā was widely known 
in ancient Indonesia, and performed at Borobudur. 
Krom (1931 II: 104) interprets this panel as follows:
[I]n the middle, a Buddha seated in vitarka- 
mudrā with a very high uṣṇīṣa, at his back the 
tablet with a flaming border; beneath him sits 
Samantabhadra, his hands folded in sĕmbah, 
on each side of him a dish of incense with the 
smoke rising out of it placed on a little cush-
ion in the air. On either side of this group is 
a Bodhisattva standing on a lotus cushion, on 
the right Vajrapāṇi with his emblem worn-off, 
left, one with a flower in bud shape and a dam-
aged headdress. Then kneeling on the ground, 
to the right, the second chief person with his 
escort; left another group of worshippers, and 
up above on clouds, heavenly beings with right 
and left a Buddha in dhyāna-mudrā.
The standing figure to the left of the Buddha is 
probably Avalokiteśvara, while the one kneeling 
on the right—arguably the second most important 
character in the relief—is Sudhana, who is making 
various offerings and performing merit transfer 
together with his retinue.
The latter is part of the main ingredient for the liturgy of 
the 88 Buddhas Repentance (see Kandahjaya 2010).

--- PAGE 42 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
108
Table 3.14: Anuttara-Pūjā
Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā, Chapter 6 
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan
Balinese Anuttara-Pūjā 
Idaṁ hi maṇḍalam paśyañ śraddhāṁ jan-
ayaṁś cādhunā /
kule jātāsi buddhānāṁ vidyāmantrair 
adhiṣṭhitaḥ // 1
Idañ ca maṇḍalam paśya śraddhāñ 
janayathādhunā /
kule jāto ’si buddhānāṁ sarbvamantrair 
adhiṣṭhitaḥ // 14
sampado ’bhimukhāḥ sarvāḥ siddhiyogata-
yaś ca te /
pālayan samayān siddho mantreṣūdyo-
gavāṁ bhava // 2
sampado ’bhimukhāḥ sarbvāḥ siddhayo-
gatayaś ca te /
pālaya samayaṁ siddhyai mantreṣūdyo-
gavān bhava // 15
Ratnatrayaṁ me śaraṇaṁ 
sarvaṁ pratidiśāmy agham / 
anumode jagatpuṇyaṁ 
Buddhabodhau dadhe manaḥ //
utpādayāmi varabodhicittaṁ 
nimantrayāmi bahu sarvasattvān / 
iṣṭāṁ cariṣye varabodhicārikāṁ 
Buddho bhaveyaṁ jagato hitāya //
Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra
utpādayāmi paramaṁ 
bodhicittam anuttaram /
yathā traiyadvikā nā [128a] thāḥ 
sambodhau kṛtaniścayāh // 3
Utpādayāmi paramaṁ 
bodhicittam anuttaram //
yathā traiyadhvikanāthāḥ
saṁbodhau kṛtaniścayāḥ //
utpādayāmi paramaṁ
Bodhicittaṁ anuttaram / 
yathā traiyadhvakā nāthāḥ
saṁbodhau kṛtaniścayāḥ //
trividhāṁ śīlaśikṣān ca 
kuśalaṁ dharmasaṅgraham /
sattvārthakriyāśīlañ ca 
pratigṛhṇāmy ahaṁ dṛḍham // 4
trividhāṁ śīlaśikṣāṁ ca
kuśaladharmasaṅgraham //
sattvārthakriyāśīlaṁ ca
pratigṛhṇāmy ahaṁ dṛḍham //
trividhāṁ śīlaśikṣāṁ ca 
kuśaladharmasaṅgraham / 
sattvārthakriyāśīlāṁ ca
pratigṛhṇāmy ahaṁ dṛḍham //
buddhaṁ dharmañ ca saṅghañ ca
triratnāgram anuttaram /
adyāgreṇa gṛhīsyāmi
saṁvaraṁ buddhayogajam // 5
buddhaṁ dharmaṁ ca saṅghaṁ ca 
triratnāgram anuttaram // 
adyāgreṇa grahīṣyāmi 
saṁvaraṁ buddhayogajam //
Buddhaṁ Dharmañ ca Saṅghañ ca 
Triratnāgram anuttaram / 
adyāgreṇa grahiṣyāmi
aṁvaraṁ Buddha-yoga-jam /
vajraṁ ghaṇṭāñ ca mudrāñ ca 
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ /
ācāryañ ca gṛhīṣyāmi
mahāvajrakulōccaye // 6
vajraghaṇṭāṁ ca mudrāṁ ca 
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ / 
ācāryaṁ ca grahīṣyāmi 
mahāvajrakuloccaye //
vajraṁ ghaṇṭāñ ca mudrāñ ca 
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ / 
ācāryāt tān grahiṣyāmi
mahāvajrakuloccaye //
caturdānaṁ pradāṣyāmi 
ṣaṭkṛtvā ca dine dine /
mahāratnakule yoge 
samaye ca manorame // 7
caturdānaṁ pradāsyāmi 
ṣaṭkṛtvā tu dine dine / 
mahāratnakule yoge 
samaye ca manorame //
caturdānaṁ pradāsyāmi 
satkṛtaṁ tu dine dine / 
mahāratnakule yoge
samaye ca manorame //
saddharmaṁ pratigṛhṇāmi
bāhyaṁ guhyaṁ triyānikam /
mahāpadmakule śuddhe
mahābodhisamudbave // 8
saddharmaṁ pratigṛhṇāmi
bāhyaṁ guhyaṁ triyānikam / 
mahāpadmakule śuddhe
mahābodhisamudbhave //
saddharmaṁ pratigṛhṇāmi 
bāhyaguhya-kriyānvitam / 
mahāpadmakule śuddhe
mahābodhisamudbhave //
saṁvaraṁ sarvasamyuktaṁ
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvatah /
pūjākarma yathāśaktyā
mahākarmakuloccaye // 9
saṁvaraṁ sarvasaṁyuktaṁ 
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ / 
pūjākarma yathāśaktyā
mahākarmakuloccaye //
saṁvaraṁ sarvasaṁyuktaṁ
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ / 
pūjākarma yathāśaktyā 
mahāvajrakuloccaye //
utpādayāmi paramaṁ
bodhicittam anuttaram /
gṛhītaṁ saṁvaraṁ kṛtsnaṁ
sarvasattvārthakāraṇāt // 10
utpādayitvā paramaṁ
bodhicittam anuttaram /
gṛhītaṁ saṁvaraṁ kṛtsnaṁ
sarvasattvārthakāraṇāt //
utpādayāmi paramaṁ
Bodhicittam anuttaram /
gṛhītaṁ saṁvaraṁ kṛtsnaṁ
sarvasattvārthakāraṇam //
tīrṇāṁ tārayiṣyāmi 
amuktān mocayāmy aham /
anāśvastān āśvāsayiṣyāmi
sattvān sthāpayiṣyāmi nirvṛttau // 11
atīrṇān tārayiṣyāmy
amuktān mocayiṣyāmy aham // 
anāthān nāthayiṣyāmi 
sattvān sthāpayāmi nirvṛttāv iti //
atīrṇān tārayiṣyāmi
amuktān mocayāmy aham / 
anāthān nāthayiṣyāmi
sthāpayiṣyāmi nirvṛtau //

--- PAGE 43 ---
109
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
A practice which is usually related to the anut-
tarapūjā is the liberation of living beings.103 Verse 
21 of the Bhadracarī describes it in this way:104
Extinguishing all pains in the evil paths, es-
tablishing all creatures in happiness, let me 
practice [the life of Bhadra] for the benefit of 
all creatures, as far as there are lands and paths 
in the ten quarters.
Panel IV43 (Fig. 3.2) shows Samantabhadra 
sitting in a pavilion liberating a bird (Krom 1930 
103.  This ceremony is widely known in Chinese Bud-
dhism; it is called fang sheng (放生): ‘to set free captive 
animals’. It is also known in Japanese and Tibetan Bud-
dhism. See Shiu and Stokes 2008, and Law 1994.
104.  Sarvi apāya dukhāṁ praśamanto sarvajagaṁ sukhi 
sthāpayamānaḥ sarvajagasya hitāya careyaṁ yāvata kṣetra-
pathā diśa tāsu // 21
II: 109), while those that have already been liber-
ated are seen flying away on the upper left corner. 
One of the people on the left side of the panel is 
seen emptying a bowl of fish into a lotus pond and 
the man behind him is carrying a squirrel. Other 
animals that are freely roaming are on the lower 
left corner. This panel is closely following verse 21 
and shows how all beings live freely and peacefully.
The whole Bhadracarī is uniquely depicted in 
full on 72 panels along the main wall of the top 
gallery of Borobudur. This placement likely reflects 
the highest regard that Borobudur architects had 
conferred upon the Bhadracarī. Moreover, since 62 
verses of the Bhadracarī are allotted into 72 panels 
of reliefs, those verses are not mapped against the 
panels in one-to-one fashion. Thus, this assignment 
provides us with a supplementary indication that 
the figure 72 was not selected at random but must 
Fig. 3.2: Panel IV43. (Photo: adapted from Krom 1920 II: 109)
Fig. 3.1: Panel IV12. (Photo: adapted from Krom 1920 II: 104)

--- PAGE 44 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
110
have been chosen deliberately, so as to conform to 
a grid formula that I have discussed earlier (Kan-
dahjaya 2009), and to which I will return anon.
Vuddhacarita
The Kayumvuṅan inscription praises Princess 
Prāmodavarddhanī for not only practising bhakti 
(verse 9) but also performing conducts of Buddha 
(vuddhacarita, verse 4). Not knowing the context, 
we may comprehend this statement as it is but will 
not be able to appreciate it to the fullest extent of its 
meaning. The SHK, however, allows us to further 
appreciate these two concepts in the inscription. The 
SHK explains the meaning of bhakti as follows:105
[When] one acts by always following the es-
sence of the sacred scriptures, is firm in main-
taining asceticism, observances, purification 
rituals, and the teachings of Buddha, and is 
never satisfied in practising the Dharmma, 
that is considered bhakti.
We can also ascertain that the vuddhacarita is 
identical to buddhacārya and the latter is described 
as such in the last verse-cum-commentary of the 
SHK:106
This bodhi rising from samādhi, all mudrās, 
and tathāgatas,
The ultimate secret sown, are to be known by 
one of wisdom and buddhacārya.
The meaning is: The teaching on enlightenment, 
samādhi, and all mudrās are to be possessed 
105.  Ikaṅ lumaku satatānut rasa niṅ āgama, matәguh 
rumakṣa tapa brata saṅskāra mvaṅ buddhaśāsana tan 
kavanәhan maṅulahakәn dharmma, ya sinaṅguh bhakti 
ṅaranya (Kats 1910: 64–65).
106.  Evaṁ bodhisamadhyottaḥ sarbvamudrātathāga-
ta, suguhyatopitajñeyo buddhacāryyavicakṣanaiḥ. Ka: 
Ikaṅ kājaran iṅ bodhi samādhi mvaṅ ikaṅ sarbvamudrā 
pinakalakṣaṇanta mvaṅ ikaṅ tathāgata inaṅәn-aṅәnta, 
mvaṅ ikaṅ paramaguhya tathāgata niyata ikā kavruhana 
de saṅ buddhacāryyavicakṣaṇa, ka, ikaṅ mahābodhi, ikaṅ 
samādhi, ikaṅ sarbvamudrā mantra yoga bhāvanā mvaṅ 
kavicakṣaṇan ya tikāvak niṅ caturdevī Locanā, Pāṇḍara-
vāsinī, Māmakī, Tārā. Iti caturdevī kavruhana hayva tan 
prayatna, paḍa pavitranira mvaṅ bhaṭāra hyaṅ Buddha 
yan ta kapaṅgih pāvaknira caturdevī de saṅ yogīśvara (Kats 
1910: 69–70).
by you. Further, you should constantly med-
itate on the tathāgata, and this paramaguhya 
tathāgata is indeed to be known by one of wis-
dom and buddhacāryya, i.e.: mahābodhi, samā-
dhi, all mudra-mantra-yoga-bhāvanā, and wis- 
dom are the bodies of the four Devīs: Locanā, 
Pāṇḍaravāsinī, Māmakī, and Tārā. The four 
Devīs should be known as such; do not be inat-
tentive. They are as pure as Bhaṭāra Hyaṅ Bud-
dha; if these four Devīs are found they are to be 
embodied by the Yogīśvara.
If we now recall that Samantabhadra is one of 
the many epithets of Buddha Gautama,107 then we 
can find the identity of the terms Vuddhacarita 
in the Kayumvuṅan inscription, Buddhacāryya 
in the final verse of the SHK, and the Bhadracarī. 
In other words, all of them are pointing out the 
same practice: the Bhadracarī, the conducts of 
the Buddha.
The description of buddhacārya also reveals a 
well-defined understanding of the four goddesses 
(caturdevī) of Locanā, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, Māmakī, and 
Tārā. All of their bodies are said to be identified 
with mahābodhi, samādhi, all mudrās, mantras, 
yoga, bhāvanā, and wisdom; or in other words, with 
buddhacārya and wisdom. Thus, according to the 
SHK, those four goddesses are really not female 
deities, as the word goddess might conventionally 
suggest, but conducts of the Buddha and wisdom. 
These conducts and wisdom are the objects that the 
Yogīśvara is to acquire and embody. As such, we will 
never find at Borobudur conventional female forms 
of Locanā, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, Māmakī, and Tārā,108 
nor for that matter, Bajradhātvīśvarī, because those 
forms did not represent the symbolism espoused by 
the SHK or Borobudur architects. Instead, they are 
embedded in the totality of the reliefs. At Borobu-
dur, various conducts of the Buddha are displayed 
through many accounts of buddhacarita, from 
those recounted in the Jātakas, the Jātakamālā, 
the Avadānas, and the Lalitavistara, up to the 
107.  Thus in verse 29 of the Amaramālā (see Lokesh 
Chandra 1997: 149), an 8th-century Sanskrit-Old Javanese 
dictionary, which is perhaps related to the Amarakośa 
known to Indian literati.
108.  However, as we have seen above, the syllables asso-
ciated with these four goddesses are found on a stone in-
scription from Candi Bungsu in Muara Takus (see my n. 61).

--- PAGE 45 ---
111
SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
Gaṇḍa­vyūha, and the summary of all these feats 
is depicted on the panels of the Bhadracarī.
The final configuration of the Borobudur ar-
chitecture thus reflects a complete instruction for 
cultivation by undergoing four steps as expounded 
in the SHK, i.e., one, Mahā-mārga (the great path); 
two, Parama-bodhi-mārga or Parama-mārga (the 
supreme path); three, Mahā-guhya (the great secret); 
and four, Parama-guhya (the supreme secret).
The broad terrace at the base functions as an 
altar for offerings while performing the anuttara-
pūjā or initiatory rituals (abhiṣeka), and as such is 
specially built to conduct processes necessitated 
by the first step, the Mahā-mārga. The formed 
corridors become the venue for undertaking the 
second step, the Parama-bodhi-mārga or the Para-
ma-mārga, whereby the disciple learns and acquires 
the ten perfections (daśapāramitā) by cultivating 
all Buddha’s conducts (buddhacārya) and wisdom. 
These two steps provide the necessary equipment for 
the disciple to be able to fully engage in the tasks 
required by the last two steps, the Mahā-guhya and 
the Parama-guhya. The symbolism underpinning 
the circular terraces, where the perforated stūpas 
make the Buddha inside visible, may reflect the de-
scription of the Mahā-guhya. In addition, it seems 
that the transition from the rectangular to the cir-
cular terraces was deliberately made perceptible 
as a continuity, implying as it does a correlation 
between the 72 Bhadracarī panels running along 
the main wall of the top gallery of Borobudur and 
the 72 Buddha statues inside the perforated stūpas 
on the circular terraces. As I have demonstrated 
earlier (Kandahjaya 2009), the number of Buddha 
statues on each floor is designated in accordance 
with the figure in the series calculated following 
Amoghavajra’s grid formula for the construction 
of the Garbhadhātumaṇḍala. For this reason, the 
correlation must have denoted that, on the reverse, 
all the Buddhas too continue reverberating the Bhad-
racarī while observing and listening to the universe.
The central stūpa on the very top is a fully en-
closed construction. It is singular and non-dual 
(advaya), solid and dense (ghana), and the chief 
(nātha), and thereby is correlated with the descrip-
tion of the Parama-guhya in the SHK, and with the 
name Śrī Ghananātha in the Kayumvuṅan inscrip-
tion. This main stūpa crowns the whole structure, 
as if it embraces the manifold attributes embedded 
in the edifice. Hence, Śrī Ghananātha, being the 
Buddha as the Lord of All Virtues, is portrayed 
as an Excellent Buddha Image (Sinhalese, vara-
budu-r; Skt. vara-buddha-rūpa).
conclusion
Comparative content analysis reveals that, in addi-
tion to the Sanskrit sources that have already been 
identified in previous studies, a number of newly 
identified texts are related to the SHK, namely:
Śrīguhyasamājamaṇḍalavidhi
Śrīguhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikāviṁśatividhi
Ratnameghasūtra
Gurupañcaśikhā
Guhyendutilaka
Yogāvatāra
Yogāvatāropadeśa
Yogabhāvanāmārga
Bhāvanākrama
Piṇḍīkrama
In contrast to earlier identifications, these new 
sources are significant insofar that they allow us 
to elucidate many peculiarities of the SHK, as well 
as other epigraphic and archaeological documents 
from both Java and Sumatra. Some preliminary, 
and yet relevant, findings are the following:
1) 	 There are resonances, in terms of emphasis on 
practice, yoga, and oral teaching received from 
the guru, between the SHK and a series of texts 
including the Yogāvatāra, the Yogāvatāropadeśa, 
the Yogabhāvanāmārga, and the Bhāvanākra-
ma. As these texts are connected to the 5th- to 
6th-century Buddhist logician Dignāga and his 
scions, the claim made in the SHK that its set 
of teachings was received from Ḍaṅ Ācāryya 
Śrī Dignāgapāda opens up the possibility that 
this figure might be none other than the famous 
Buddhist logician. The possibility that doctrines 
related to Dignāga and his tradition reached 
the Indonesian Archipelago by the late 6th or 
early 7th century is conceivable on account of 
the information provided by Tāranātha, who 
relates that Dharmapāla, a disciple of Dignāga, 
spent the end of his life in Sumatra.

--- PAGE 46 ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
112
2) 	 Several verses and concepts of the SHK resonate 
with similar ones retained in the Guhyasamāja 
scriptural tradition. However, the brevity of 
the SHK, its ‘idiosyncratic’ re-ordering of the 
verses, the peculiar configuration of some key 
concepts, and the echoes of teachings attested in 
the Ratnameghasūtra in the hitherto untraced 
verse 25 of the SHKM all suggest that the SHK 
as a whole originated from a tradition that is 
yet to be recognized, or that—being perhaps a 
remarkably early one—did not survive for us.
3) 	 Inscriptions from the Indonesian Archipelago 
and foreign accounts, particularly the Chinese 
ones, assist us in fixing the upper chronolog-
ical limit of the SHK to the 8th century (thus 
confirming Goris’ conclusion); however, the 
deployment of early ‘hidden teachings’, like the 
ones advocated by the Guhyasamāja tradition, 
suggests that its lower limit may be pushed back 
to as early as the 5th century. 
4) 	 There are indications that the SHK teach-
ings came from the northeastern regions of 
the Indian Subcontinent; this is in harmony 
with the evidence attested in the Sanskrit in-
scription of Kelurak (ad 782), written in Sid-
dhamātṛkā script, mentioning a royal precep-
tor Kumāraghoṣa from Gauḍīdvīpa (modern 
Bengal or Bangladesh).
5) 	 The SHK preserves an integrated set of practi-
cal esoteric teachings for the attainment of the 
highest Buddhist goal. The set consists of four 
steps: one, Mahā-mārga (the great path); two, 
Parama-bodhi-mārga or Parama-mārga (the 
supreme path); three, Mahā-guhya (the great 
secret); and four, Parama-guhya (the supreme 
secret). This set inspired the architects to final-
ize the design and symbolism of Borobudur, 
so that the sanctum would represent this pro-
gramme and in turn provide the practitioners 
with an aid to achieve the highest goal.
6) 	The SHK mentions a set of four goddesses (devī) 
attested in Tantric texts from other regions of 
the Buddhist world, and it explicitly connects 
them to a set of doctrinal practices rather than 
representing them uniquely as conventional 
female deities. The same may also be true in 
the case of Borobudur, where such commonly 
conceived female deities are not depicted as such 
on any of its reliefs, and yet the latter symboli-
cally embody the doctrinal practices connected 
to the deities.
All of the above outcomes are preliminary 
results that need verification and confirmation. 
There are also many other details of the SHK that 
necessitate further investigation. For instance, we 
are yet to clarify its concealed background, to 
unpack its complex system, and to draw a more 
accurate map of its relationship with textual as well 
as visual sources of other Buddhist (and Śaiva) tra-
ditions. I would naturally hope that future studies 
will verify and expand the investigation.
