--- Page 1 ---
© 2017 Estonian Literary Museum, Estonian National Museum, University of Tartu
ISSN 1736-6518 (print), ISSN 2228-0987 (online)
65
I N I T I A T I O N S I N T H E B U R M E S E  
R I T UA L L A N D S C A P E
BÉNÉDICTE BRAC DE LA PERRIÈRE
PhD, Senior Researcher
Centre Asie du Sud-Est (CNRS-EHESS)
31 rue Maurice Ripoche
75014 Paris, France
e-mail: brac@cnrs.fr
ABSTRACT 
In Buddhist Burma, a variety of ritual has been found pertaining to quite differen-
tiated aspects of religion. This rich ritual landscape remains under-examined due 
partly to the Buddhist-studies bias of most of the scholars looking at religion in 
Burma. In this paper,* I develop comparative analysis of a class of ritual, namely 
that of initiation, in three components of Burmese religion: Buddhist monasticism, 
Buddhist esotericism, and spirit worship. At least from the present analytic per-
spective, the three components considered could be taken as encompassing the 
entire Buddhist religious sphere in Burma. Looking at initiation rituals in these 
three ‘paths’ is a means of understanding how they frame contrasting kinds of 
differently valued religious practice, and of showing that, although not often dis-
cussed, rituals do matter in Burma because they help to distinguish categories of 
action according to their relative religiosity. By doing so, I aim to give a sense of 
the real diversity of the Burmese ritual landscape, which until recently was rarely 
taken into account, and to contribute to the on-going debate in the field of Bud-
dhist studies on what could be encapsulated as the question of Buddhism and 
spirit cults in Southeast Asian Theravada. 
KEYWORDS: Buddhist esotericism • Buddhist monasticism • Burmese religion • 
initiation rituals • spirit worship
In Buddhist Burma,1 a variety of ritual has been found pertaining to quite differentiated 
aspects of religion. This rich ritual landscape2 remains under-examined, due partly to 
the Buddhist-studies bias of most of the scholars looking at religion in Burma.3 This bias 
has to be understood in the light of a contrast between religion and ritual that was his-
torically produced in early modern Europe by the progressive differentiation of a prop-
erly religious field (Bourdieu 1971). Since its inception in the 16th century, the concept 
of ritual has been looked down on as the practice of ‘others’. According to this view, 
actions that are not truly ‘religious’ in a given society are termed ritual (Muir 1997). In 
Journal of Ethnology and Folkloristics 11 (1): 65–82
DOI: 10.1515/jef-2017-0005
* My warmest thanks go to the anonymous readers, and to Jake Carbine and Alexandra de 
Mersan, who provided very helpful comments and suggestions. Errors or omissions are mine.

--- Page 2 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
66
Southeast Asian studies, the bias against ritual is further reinforced by the tendency of 
reformist monastic and lay Buddhism to discard rituals altogether. As stated recently 
by Erik Davis (2016: 223), quoting Donald Swearer (2010), Buddhist rituals in Southeast 
Asia are often considered the best example of ‘syncretism’, although in ways that con-
firm Buddhism’s hegemony.
Ritual, or action that deals with the sacred, according to the Émile Durkheim stance, 
is one of those categories that have been much discussed among social scientists since 
the turn of the 1970s. With the work of Catherine Bell (1992) among others, the focus has 
shifted towards the ritualisation process, that is, the setting apart of categories of action 
classified as ritual in a specified society. How is the so-called sacred produced in any 
given society? Or, how are some events spatially and temporally set apart, isolated or 
encapsulated in a different time and space?
In this paper I will argue that, although not often discussed as a scholarly domain 
per se, rituals do matter in Burma precisely because they help distinguish categories of 
action according to their relative ‘religiosity’ – that is, according to varying cultural pre-
scriptions of what should religion be. By doing so, I aim to give a sense of the concrete 
diversity of the Burmese ritual landscape, which until recently was rarely taken into 
account,4 and to contribute to the on-going debate in the field of the Buddhist studies on 
what could be encapsulated as the question of Buddhism and spirit cults in Southeast 
Asia.
Andrew Strathern and Pamela Stewart-Strathern (2013) recently stated that when 
the denying of actions classified as ritual has occurred in the history of European Chris-
tianity, in favour of other values, ritual has also re-established itself in contexts where 
it had apparently been excluded. Comparisons of kinds of rituals in different realms of 
Burmese religion strongly suggest that reformist trends tend to affirm the pre-eminence 
of Burmese Buddhism through the denial of the efficacy of these events. I have previ-
ously analysed how the consecration of religious objects such as statues is one instance 
of this kind of occurrence. In Burma, the consecration of images of Buddha is performed 
in a very straightforward manner through the recitation of the first verse of the first 
Buddha’s sermon, hence the name of the ritual (aneikaza tin-) enhancing the religious 
focus on the Buddha’s teachings and on their scriptural legacy. Compared to the ‘bring-
ing to life’ (a thek thwin-/leippya theik-) enacted to consecrate images in spirit worship, or 
to the ‘opening of the eyes’ of Buddhist images elsewhere in the Theravada world, the 
Burmese consecration of Buddha images appears as ostensibly simple and deprived of 
any fancy ritual.5
In this paper, I develop the comparative analysis of another class of ritual, namely 
that of initiation, in three components of Burmese religion: Buddhist monasticism, 
Buddhist esotericism,6 and spirit worship. Initiation will be considered here, for the 
sake of this comparison, as a class of loosely defined rituals through which a person is 
transformed from a former status and becomes a practitioner of one particular ‘path’ 
(lan) within the religious field: a monk, an exorcist or a spirit medium. It does not start 
from the preliminary characterisation of rituals as formally structured along a ternary 
sequence as established by Arnold van Gennep in his famous study Les rites de passage 
(1909).

--- Page 3 ---
Brac de la Perrière: Initiations in the Burmese Ritual Landscape
67
At least from the present analytical perspective, the three components considered 
could be taken as being encompassed in the entire Buddhist religious sphere. They 
are constituted as fields of practice called paths (lan) in Burmese and identified as con-
trasting. Although all three paths are inhabited by Burmese Buddhists, they are each 
articulated in a specific way in the encompassing religious whole. Spirit worship and 
Buddhist esotericism are the province of laypeople (lu, ‘human beings’) as opposed to 
monks (hpongyi) who, as a rule, do not engage with these practices. In fact, spirit wor-
ship and Buddhist esotericism are the product of a history of differentiation, discarding 
and relegation, constitutive of the Buddhist-dominated religious sphere in Burma.7
More rigorist Buddhists do not indulge in spirit worship, which does not pertain to 
‘religion’ as they see it. Nor do they consider it as forming another religion, as argued by 
Spiro in his Burmese Supernaturalism (1967).8 They see it, rather, as part of Burmese tra-
dition (yoya), while spirit worshippers and mediums consider their practice integrated 
in their Buddhist identity. As for esotericism, it is widely understood as a deviance of 
mainstream Buddhism while practitioners of this path see themselves as safekeeping 
Buddha’s teachings.
These views on the relative religiosity of various practices are grounded in ways to 
conceptualise religion that have radically evolved throughout the colonial encounter. 
As told by Gustaaf Houtman (1990a) and Alexey Kirichenko (2009), this history is that 
of the emergence of a new word batha (P. bâshâ) in the missionaries’ mid-19th century 
dictionaries to signify religion as a professed denomination and a qualifier of personal 
identity. This introduction of a concept largely predicated by the Western notion of 
world religions then in formation would have been meant to make up for the inad-
equacy of the Burmese thathana (P. sâsana) whose original meaning of Buddha’s teach-
ings had come to designate different levels of Buddhist dispensation and particularly 
the previous all-encompassing Buddhist royal order – in other words, Burmese Bud-
dhicised social space (see Brac de la Perrière 2017). 
In this paper, I examine initiation in Buddhist monasticism, Buddhist esotericism 
and spirit worship as belonging to the same religious and ritual world in order to better 
understand how they frame contrasting kinds of religious practice, differently valued. 
Initiation as a transitional rite involves a radical transformation of the person, estab-
lishing a boundary between the new initiate and the non-initiate that is conceived of 
as ontological. As stated by Pierre Bourdieu (1971), initiation defines and produces 
the identity of its subjects as antagonists to the non-initiate and contributes to social 
reproduction. By comparing rituals of initiation in three major fields constitutive of the 
all-encompassing religious sphere in Burma, I aim to demonstrate that rituals do con-
tribute to the construction and transmission of differentiated worlds of behaviour and 
understanding, or of differentiated ontologies. However, while producing the impres-
sion of well-bounded fields, initiations in these paths still resonate with each other. As 
stated by Davis (2016) about Cambodia, differentiated fields emerge from the same 
ritual ‘imagination’, the distinction established being more moral than cosmological. 
The comparison of initiations aims at demonstrating how they contribute to the reli-
gious differentiation as well as to the production and reproduction of an original and 
diversified Burmese ritual landscape.

--- Page 4 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
68
M O N A S T I C I S M
Entrance into the monastic order (thanga, P. samgha) will be my starting point, as it 
determines the pivotal social differentiation in Buddhist Burma that opposes monks 
(hpongyi) to all other human beings (lu, the laity). The importance of the Sangha comes 
from the fact that it is considered vital to the survival of Buddha’s teachings (thathana), 
that is to say, to the very existence of Buddhism in society. Being linked to the Buddha 
through a supposedly unbroken line of transmission, monks are taken for the living 
embodiment of these teachings and are said to be sons of Buddha. As such, they have 
to comply with the renouncer’s way of life established by the Buddha and fixed in 
the 227 rules of the Vinaya, and to submit themselves fully to the religious practice, of 
which there are two main kinds: the study of the texts (P. pariyatti) and the practice of 
meditation (P. patipatti). This entitles monks to their specific status, which is conceived 
of as the result of good karma, i.e. the merits accumulated in previous lives. This status 
makes them worthy of receiving donations from lay people who expect meritorious 
reward – that is, karmic enhancement – from their generosity. In short, both statuses 
are strongly contrasting and structure society along the interdependent relationship 
between ordinary Buddhists, who depend on the Sangha for their spiritual progress, 
and monks, who depend on them for their material maintenance. These statuses are 
also highly hierarchical. However, any male member of society can seek to enter the 
monastic order,9 and any monk may request to discard his robe when he feels he is no 
longer able to sustain the moral standard of the status. In any case, the monk status is 
the highest in Burmese Buddhist society.
Two distinct rituals mark entry into the Sangha, and both can be considered initia-
tions because they transform a simple Buddhist male into a worthy recipient of reli-
gious donations: this transformation makes of a layperson a religious one. One ritual – 
known as shinbyu – is undertaken by most young boys, who must all enter the monas-
tery as novices, as a rule, usually for a short stay. The gift of a son to the monastery is 
considered highly meritorious for parents. The ceremonies performed on this occasion 
may be huge affairs consisting of two phases, one lavishly ostentatious, in which the 
young boys are taken by their entourage in royal pageant around their locality, and the 
other more modest, taking place in the monastery through which their admission to the 
Sangha (P. pabbajjâ) is performed.10 The temporary ordination of the young boys has 
been analysed elsewhere as a rite of passage allowing the person to become an accom-
plished Buddhist young man able to take his place in secular society. In this sense, shin-
byu appears an essentially transitional rite celebrating the coming of age of males, and 
in which the temporary initiation to the religious status signals the preeminent role of 
renouncing in social organisation (Brac de la Perrière 2009b).
In this regard, the higher ordination (P. upasampadâ) through which a simple Bud-
dhist becomes a full monk is the reverse. However, it can only be performed after the 
candidate has been accepted in the monastery as a novice. In Burmese, the higher ordi-
nation is called yahan tek bwe, that is, the ritual to ascend to yahan status, yahan being 
one of the terms designating a monk.11 My presentation relies on the analysis made by 
Jason Carbine, completed by my own observations.12 Carbine focuses on the Shwegyin 
case, a particular monastic group (gain) originating in a 19th century reformist split of 
the Burmese order. Shwegyin, known for its rigorist respect of monastic rule, is the

--- Page 5 ---
Brac de la Perrière: Initiations in the Burmese Ritual Landscape
69
only monastic branch to have preserved its own ordination lineage besides the monas-
tic mainstream lineage (Thudhamma) after the 1980 monastic reform. Carbine demon-
strates that the procedure to fully ordinate a monk is a “community transaction” that 
has been established progressively and fixed in the Vinaya (the Pali book of monastic 
rules) in order to ensure the continuity of the monastic community and Buddhist teach-
ings (thathana). For an ordination to be valid, five conditions must be fulfilled: a proper 
bounded space called thein (P. simâ), usually located in the monastery; a required num-
ber of fully ordained monks (five is the most commonly stated number); the eligibility 
of the candidate; and the two kinds of Pali statements, the motions put in the name of 
the candidate to the present monks and the decisions made in the name of the monks’ 
assembly. All together, these statements are known as the upasampadâ-kammavâcâ (P.), 
attributed to the Buddha and specified in the Vinaya. These five conditions are such as 
to signal the specificity of the situation that makes of the higher ordination a ritual and 
renders it effective.13 The higher ordination is thus a process of transformation: through 
this process a simple human being (lu) is ritually endowed with a radically new reli-
gious status by a body of monks representing the community he seeks to enter.
The transaction is mainly performed in Pali – the language of the corpus of religious 
texts in the Theravada tradition – and explained in Burmese. It starts when the candi-
date enters the bounded space (thein) with his alms bowl and his robes, which are the 
requisites of the monastic life, and when he sits close to the present monks in order to 
facilitate concentration on the proceedings. The first stage is the appointment of the 
preceptor who will become like a “father figure responsible for [his] care”, an analogue 
to the Buddha-disciples’ relationship (Carbine 2011: 121–122), and the recognition that 
the alms bowl and the robes are the candidate’s belongings. Then, he is taken aside by 
another monk acting as an instructor to prepare him for the next phase of examina-
tion. The purpose of this phase is to make sure that the candidate is eligible for the role 
and status of a monk. He has to be a male over 20, free of debts and obligations, and 
in good health. Finally, monks recite the Pali formula through which the ordination is 
performed three times. As Carbine (2011: 131) states, the proper recitation of these for-
mulas is crucial, since they “are considered to be the very words of the Buddha himself 
regarding the communal decision-making process entailed in the higher ordination”. 
Once the recitation is over, without any objection from the monks present, the decision 
is effective. This is followed by instructions delivered to the new monk about monastic 
life and the four misdemeanours that might entail a fall from the religious status. When 
this is done, the newly ordained monk takes leave of his seniors, and the group of 
monks goes out of the thein. Then, family and friends attending the ceremony outside 
of the place give them alms in their bowl. By this collective transaction made in concord 
with the Vinaya, the new monk is integrated into the collective embodying Buddha’s 
teachings and becomes a worthy recipient of religious donations.
To my knowledge, the Theravada Buddhist higher ordination has not been formally 
analysed as an initiation case, although the radical transformation of the person that 
is performed through it would allow for such consideration. Interestingly, Carbine 
discusses the interpretative metaphor of spiritual rebirth, a decisive marker of initia-
tion rituals, generally, which has also been found in the higher ordination elsewhere in 
Theravada monasticism.14 While he dismisses it in the Shwegyin higher ordination case 
on the ground of the legal form of its communal decision-making procedure, he further

--- Page 6 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
70
considers that, from the ethical perspective, what is produced is indeed a new son of the 
Buddha, a new kind of spiritually-oriented human being (Carbine 2011: 115–116). The 
lack of ritually-performed spiritual rebirth dimension in the higher ordination, leaving 
way to the wrapping of the event in a formally-legal cloak, seems to me indicative of a 
distance with more ritual elaboration found in other domains of religious life. The ritual 
initiating a simple Buddhist man into the religious order transforms his body and mind 
through the apposition of the Buddha’s words from the Vinaya, displaying a textual 
inflexion that resonates with the consecration of Buddha images through the recita-
tion of the first Buddha sermon. This textual inflexion and ritual lessening of processes 
making a man or an image ‘religious’ in Burmese Buddhism are very distinctive when 
viewed in regard to the initiations performed in the other ritual fields of practice that 
will be now examined.
B U D D H I S T E S O T E R I C I S M
Buddhist esotericism is, in Burma, a large ubiquitous realm identified as the weikza 
path, from the Pâli vijjâ, in reference to the specific knowledge cultivated by the practi-
tioners of this path.15 To belong to this path, which is mainly a lay path, is to engage in 
dedicated Buddhist practice through the respect of the precepts in a varying number (3, 
5 or 8, according to the level of practice), through meditation, and through the cultiva-
tion of specific knowledge: alchemy, magic squares and formulas, traditional medicine 
and exorcism. Through this intensive Buddhist practice and knowledge cultivation, 
one may obtain specific powers (ubiquity, longevity, healing power, etc.) active in this 
world. That is why the domain is classified as worldly or lawki and is mainly located 
outside of monasticism. However, the ultimate goal of these intensive practices is to get 
out of the karmic cycle (thandeya, P. samsâra), alive or dead, but staying in a mysterious 
place called Maha Myaing from where it is still possible to rescue people and to protect 
the Buddha’s teachings. In other words, the goal is double: it is at once self-oriented, 
with the aim of being freed from the karmic cycle, and altruistic, insuring the protection 
of Buddhism for the rescue of fellow beings. Virtuosi of the weikza path are thus sup-
posed to reach htwe yap pauk, the ‘way out’, and to become weikza do, or weikza bearers, 
the beings that are addressed by the multifarious weikza cults. 
For the sake of this comparison, I focus on the analysis of the initiation ritual in the 
Manaw seittokpad congregation, which is a relatively well-known organisation of Bur-
mese Buddhist exorcists.16 Exorcists or ‘masters of unnatural diseases’ (pe yawga hsaya) 
are healers who deal with illness considered to be caused by malevolence of humans 
or evil powers (meissa). They release patients of these negative influences thanks to 
their practice of the weikza path and of healing knowledge. Exorcists’ congregations 
are known as gaing as are the branches of the monastic order. They are the most organ-
ised structures of the highly diverse and volatile field of weikza practice. Among them, 
the Manaw seittokpad is one of the few weikza organisations operating freely in Burma. 
The most decisive feature of the structured organisation of the Manaw seittokpad is a 
formally rigorous procedure of registration through the initiation process performed 
during annual meetings. On this occasion, all the healers of the congregation coming 
from all over Burma with their patient-disciples meet at the headquarters pagoda of the

--- Page 7 ---
Brac de la Perrière: Initiations in the Burmese Ritual Landscape
71
congregation for a few days of initiation to the master’s grade (hantima), giving access 
to healing practice, under the organisation’s control, hence the ritual name: hantima tek 
bwe, or the ritual to ascend to hantima status.
The pagoda campus is a closed space featuring the main figures of the congregation’s 
ideo-scape so as to make entering visitors recall and turn to Manaw seittokpad world-
views and behavioural codification. The initiations to the master’s grade are performed 
inside a specific ritual enclosure set up in an elevated building opened on its four sides 
and oriented towards the pagoda. During the annual meetings of the congregation this 
building is referred to by many members as a thein (P. sîma), like the bounded space of 
monastic initiation. The ritual enclosure is set up in the building for the meeting time 
only and dismantled at the end of the proceedings. It is made of a fence called yazamat 
and of cotton threads on which Buddha’s words have been chanted: the space thus 
enclosed is considered protected from any intrusion from spirits and other lesser beings 
thanks to the protection of Buddha’s words, of Buddhist saints and of the benevolent 
weizza of the congregation invoked during the installation of the yazamat.
The initiation is also called the gift of knowledge (pinnya pay-). What it involves, 
however, is the tattooing of substances considered to be the congregation’s medicines. 
The process starts inside the yazamat, with a tattoo along the hair central parting and 
other tattoos on the upper part of the body, which all together confer the protection of 
higher beings.17 After a change in officiator and substance, it goes on with the tattooing 
of the lesser and nevertheless powerful beings on the lower part of the body. Finally, 
it ends up with the tattooing of the feet and heels and with the mastering of the ogres 
(bilu) outside of the yazamat. In continuity with the healing process, the initiation tat-
tooing follows a path starting with the top of the head and going down to the heels and 
consists of drawing sacred letters or figures with substances corresponding to various 
entities inhabiting the cosmos. Note that this process equates the initiate’s body to a 
spatial map of the cosmos. Maurice Eisenbruch (1992: 286) aptly demonstrated about 
exorcism in Cambodia that “the body of the patient is a metaphor for the cosmos”. 
What is tattooed, however, is not mere ink but congregation medicine (gaing hsay), 
which is conceived of as knowledge (pinnya). Hsay, the substance tattooed, means both 
ink and medicine, in Burmese, and the initiation process plays fully on this double 
meaning. The medicine thus tattooed is specific to the congregation (gaing) because it 
is considered to originate in the medicine first created by U Aye, the founding weikza-
healer, and it is produced since that time, collectively, at the end of the general meeting, 
using a bit of this root substance.
Initiation into the Manaw seittokpad is made up of iterative procedures of tattooing 
congregation medicine on the body, in a highly ritualised way, playing on analogies 
between tattooing protective drawings, applying congregation medicine and dispens-
ing congregation knowledge and healing powers. These procedures involving the body 
create a sense of renewed belonging to a bounded Buddhist community of hsaya and 
hsayama (masters) whose commonality is based on ‘reformed’ Buddhist behaviour: 
keeping the main Buddhist precepts, particularly those of not drinking alcohol and not 
having improper sex, to be protected from influences considered nefarious in the gaing 
understanding of Buddhist cosmology. Thus, spirits (nat) that can be protective if pro-
pitiated as in spirit worship (see below) are discarded in the Manaw seittokpad practices 
and may be harmful. The rigorous procedure of registration in the Manaw seittokpad

--- Page 8 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
72
seems to be a specificity of this exorcist congregation aiming at guaranteeing the proper 
use of the congregation’s healing knowledge, the efficiency of which depends more on 
the respect of hierarchies than on charismatic powers. 
These procedures for entering this reformed Buddhist community resonate strangely 
with procedures leading to the entering of the Sangha: the collective aspect of the pro-
cess and the value placed on seniority, which are reinforced by the use of monastic 
metaphors such as gaing for the congregation, thein (P. sîma) for the bounded space 
in which ritual takes place, and ‘monks’ rice serving’ (hsun kap) for the collective food 
offering to the founding weikza-healers. However, the Manaw seittokpad’s procedures 
are also clearly distinct from monastic practice, as shown for example by the discarding 
of religious monetary donations (ahlu): it is an explicit rule of the congregation’s pro-
cedures that the masters must not ask for such offerings but only receive the homage 
fee (puzaw bwe) for their transactions (Brac de la Perrière 2015). Moreover, the highly 
ritualised process of giving knowledge through tattooing gaing medicine is in itself in 
contrast to the denial of ritual efficacy that may be found in reformist monastic Bud-
dhism. Nevertheless, this highly ritualised process is what creates for the initiate the 
sense of becoming a distinctively and consciously reformed Buddhist.
Photo 1. Tattooing along the hair central parting. Photo by the author.

--- Page 9 ---
Brac de la Perrière: Initiations in the Burmese Ritual Landscape
73
S P I R I T W O R S H I P
Spirit worship is a common practice of the Burmese Buddhists and is mainly framed 
by the pantheon of spirit possession, known as the Thirty-Seven Lords (thonze hkunit 
min).18 This pantheon includes a number of individual tutelary spirits, known as nat and 
worshiped in local communities. Its emergence may be seen as the legacy of the Bud-
dhist kings’ ritual policy of recognising and paying homage to the main local spirits. 
However, it survived the collapse of kingship (1885) as an impressive ritual complex 
that underpins huge annual public festivals, celebrating each member of the pantheon 
in its specific domain, as well as private ceremonies organised at the client’s request – 
anywhere in Burma but particularly in urban contexts – in which all the spirits of the 
pantheon are called on to be embodied by spirit-mediums. In short, it articulates local 
rituals commemorating tutelary spirits with spirit possession ceremonies focused on a 
pantheon of spirits whose specialists are spirit mediums.
Burmese spirit possession conforms remarkably closely to the general description, 
as found in many cultures, of what Gilbert Rouget (1980), among others, labels positive 
spirit possession.19 It implies that there is both worship of the possessing entity and 
identification with it. In practice, it consists of embodying a spirit within a necessarily 
ritual frame. Recruitment to it is thought of as being instigated by the spirits. Spirits 
who wish to embody themselves, choose their medium-to-be within the communities 
of people who worship them. This choice is manifested through the causing of symp-
toms, which could be seen as initiatic disease. It can be stated that spirit possession is 
at the core of the working and reproduction of spirit worship as it is practiced today in 
Burma and that it is the province of spirit mediums. In Burma, spirit mediums are called 
nat kadaw. The term is made up of nat, meaning ‘spirit’, and kadaw, ‘wife of an official’. 
Mediums are said to be the wives of the spirits, who are lords of the domains where 
the monarchy has established them. This term applies equally to male and female spirit 
mediums, although some men prefer to be called nat hsaya (‘spirit master’).
Spirit possession ceremonies are performed in distinctive ritual structures (kana) 
usually set up for the occasion for which this category of ritual is named (nat kana bwe). 
This ritual structure is a possession-enabling device marked at one end by altars full of 
statues representing the spirits and of the offerings presented to them, and at the other 
end, by the richly-decorated traditional orchestra playing tunes calling on the spirits 
during the performance. Thus the material scene of possession is wedged between 
these two powerful sensorial poles, one musical, in which the spirits are summoned, the 
other representational, in which they are present in a latent fashion and in which they 
manifest themselves. It is therefore a particularly dense yet open space, in accordance 
with the ritual’s logic, which is that of an encounter between spirits and humans, one 
requiring the free circulation of both. This is what makes a possession-enabling device 
of the ceremonial pavilion. 
Becoming a spirit medium requires a long process of familiarisation under the guid-
ance of an experienced medium, usually the one who identified the spirit responsi-
ble for possession (gaunswe). By attending ceremonies supervised by this master, the 
person a spirit has chosen undergoes an apprenticeship in embodiment by letting the 
entity enter him or her (nat win-) when it appears, taking the place of the person’s inner

--- Page 10 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
74
and invisible component, called leippya (‘butterfly soul’). The initial instances are called 
‘wild’ (yaing) but gradually become more orderly. The process is ritualised in different 
stages, although always within the context of ceremonies held in honour of the Thirty-
Seven Lords. Begun with the ‘handing over of the gaunswe’ (gaunswe a-), it concludes 
with the initiate’s ‘marriage’ to the spirit, which marks the newly attained status of nat 
kadaw. 
This marriage could be taken as the initiation ritual of the spirit mediums and is 
performed by the master.20 A nuptial chamber is set up, signalling a specific ritual space 
(san hkan, ‘residence’) inside the usual ceremonial pavilion (kana). This space is covered 
with white and red fabric featuring the nuptial bed and bounded by hanks of white 
cotton, watched over and manipulated by six full-fledged mediums. The latter are the 
guarantors of the space’s purity, and through their skilful manipulation of the threads, 
they allow only the master and his disciple-candidate to enter. This bounded space 
gives its name to the ritual, which is called entering the residence (san hkan win-).
Photo 2. The initiate dressed as the ‘spirit’s wife’ before entering the ‘residence’. Photo by the author.

--- Page 11 ---
Brac de la Perrière: Initiations in the Burmese Ritual Landscape
75
Within this space, the performing master subjects the person to a series of ritual gestures: 
those of bringing something to life (a thek thwin-), just as in the case of surrendering to 
the seducing spirit (gaunswe a-) and like rituals for the bringing to life of statues (leippya 
theip-).21 These gestures serve to introduce into the person the spirit’s vital energies by 
a number of means, among them a series of strokes on the body’s openings and sense 
organs made using bunches of rose-apple leaves, the ‘leaves of victory’. They make the 
medium into the spirit’s receptacle. In this sense, they can be said to construct posses-
sion metonymically. Since the marriage entails an element of enlivening or animating, 
this ritual involves both a wedding and a rebirth, much as mediums enter into ambigu-
ous relations – at once conjugal and filial – with spirits. The relationship that allows a 
person to become the means to a spirit’s embodiment is described as an amorous one. 
At the same time, the new ‘spirit-spouse’ enters into a web of ritual obligations to the 
spirits and to the master, called and marked through the gesture of respect (kadaw). She/
he enters into a new spirit family whose leader is her/his spiritual master whose power 
(tago) to deal with the spirits is incorporated into the medium’s ritual objects, especially 
in the statues. In other words, the disciple’s master is like a father or a mother and will 
often be referred to as such. From this point, the person’s life will be oriented anew by 
the ritual obligations of spirit worship and by her/his growing ability to master posses-
sion by any of the possessing entities belonging to the pantheon until she/he becomes 
a master, in turn.
A C H A N G I N G L A N D S C A P E O F D I V E R S I F I E D R I T U A L S : 
C O M PA R I S O N S
From the point of view of the analysis, all three rituals may be said to transform the 
person into a ritual specialist, be it a monk, an exorcist or a spirit medium. The ritual 
formula imposes in each of the three cases the same conditions as those required in 
higher ordination for the change in status to be effective: a bounded space, a quorum 
of specialists serving as guarantors of the process, an eligible candidate and a specific 
process. These can be said to be the technical requisites of initiation rituals allowing for 
the change of status to be effected.
However, the three rituals are also very contrasting. This is evidenced first in the 
shape and appearance of the specific places in which they are held, and which pertain 
to very different statuses: the consecrated bounded space (thein) the establishment of 
which is vital for the preservation of a Sangha, the ritual enclosure protecting exorcism 
from spirit intrusion (yazamat), and the ceremonial pavilion enabling spirit possession 
(kana). While the first tends to be a permanent building, the other two are usually only 
temporary ritual devices. Their contrasting aesthetics and materialities are representa-
tive of the divergent worldviews displayed in the fields the initiates seek to enter. This 
contributes to the diversity of the ritual landscape.
The thein, as a closed ordination hall usually located in a monastery, appears to 
be designed only to encapsulate the words of Buddha and ensure the continuity of 
his teachings for this five-thousand-year era. In contrast, the kana features flamboy-
ant shrines and an orchestra to host the ephemeral visit of the spirits belonging to the 
Thirty-Seven Lords, but only for a limited period, hence its makeshift character. Inside

--- Page 12 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
76
the ritual pavilion, the hanks of cotton threads delineate the residence space to protect 
the intimacy of the spiritual wedding. As for the yazamat, it is a generic tool for spatial 
ritualisation inherited from royal ceremonies. While in the Sweyingyaw congregation 
studied by Rozenberg (2014: 194), initiation takes place in front of the initiator’s house-
hold Buddha altar, apparently without any specific ritual device, the Manaw seittok-
pad initiation requires the use of yazamat for spatial ritualisation. The strictly contained 
ritual device of the exorcists provides a safe space for the exorcised patient through a 
selection of the spiritual agencies allowed to be present in it.
Thus, thein and kana are spatially organised structures serving contrasting religiosi-
ties – that is, contrasting presencing of numinous agency – and also displaying different 
temporalities and relative closure or openness. The thein is designed to prevent the entry 
of worldly spiritual entities in its purified space. Devoted to the performative agency of 
Buddha’s teachings for the time of their dispensation, it is determined by its closure and 
permanence. As for the kana, it is a pavilion allowing for the encounter of spirits and peo-
ple, and dedicated to the ephemeral manifestation of spirits belonging to the possession 
pantheon: it is rather characterised by its openness and temporariness. Finally, an exor-
cist yazamat combines the hosting of protective agencies with the expelling of nefarious 
ones to prevent the exorcised patient from the attack of miscellaneous and potentially 
dangerous spiritual entities inhabiting the world. Strikingly, what is good and what is 
bad in the cosmos according to the Manaw seittokpad worldviews is concretely discrimi-
nated through this function of the yazamat in the initiation. As a tool for ritualisation, 
the yazamat inhabits an interstitial place that structures the whole ritual landscape. As in 
Cambodia, every exorcist ritual replays the drama in which the patient’s body verticality 
represents the moral axis of good and bad (Eisenbruch 1992: 311).
However, these varied ritual spaces are not without commonalities: the general ori-
entation of the area, the ritual offerings all made of coconuts and bananas, and at least 
in the yazamat and kana cases, threads infused with words partitioning the space, rose 
apple leaves called ‘leaves of victory’ (aung thabyay) used as an operator of the ritual 
efficiency in a performative way, and more. In other words, as contrasting as these 
ritual devices appear, they are fundamentally part of the same ritual world.
The way the transformation is effected is also worth commenting on. For what is 
done to the person who undergoes the transformation is, in each case, very different. 
In all three cases, however, the initiation is performed only after a phase during which 
the neophyte becomes acquainted with the field of practice. In the spirit medium case, 
this period usually starts with disease or life accidents that prompt the person – either 
a man or a woman – to seek help from a specialist. This may also be said to be true of 
the exorcist case since levels of initiation are considered part of the healing treatment.22 
In both cases, initiation marks the return to a ‘normal’ state but with a new status. In 
the spirit medium case the influence and the powers attributed to the spirits are added 
to the person through the wedding, and that allows him/her to embody or manifest the 
spirits at will, for a ritual purpose. In the exorcist case, after he/she has been freed from 
any negative spiritual influences through reiterated exorcist procedures, the specific 
knowledge of the congregation is implanted in the person through the tattooing of the 
congregation’s medicine onto the person’s body. In both cases the person is transformed 
through the addition of either spiritual agency or protective ‘knowledge’. Interestingly, 
this transformation is definitive although not apparent to an outsider in daily life. It is

--- Page 13 ---
Brac de la Perrière: Initiations in the Burmese Ritual Landscape
77
only manifested in the spirit worship context or exorcist practice. In the case of a monk, 
what is done is to separate him from his previous life, and from worldly life in general, 
through the shaving of his head and the changing of his clothes, and to inculcate in him 
the words of the Buddha. The transformation is not definitive, as the monk may request 
to withdraw from the Sangha or be expelled from it if the situation requires it, i.e. if 
he cannot comply with monastic rule. But the change in status is visible in all circum-
stances through the outward appearance and behaviour of the religious man, inducing 
specific manners on the part of laypeople in their daily interactions.
These contrasting transformative rituals also introduce the initiates into a very dif-
ferent milieu. In all three cases, the new specialist enters into a new social belonging 
through the initiation. The ordinand has to quit his original familial background to 
enter the Sangha, which is mainly ordered by seniority. The senior monk of the mon-
astery in which the ordinand settles serves as his substitute parents. The spirit medium 
definitely joins a new spirit-family in which relationships are governed by spirit pos-
session. As for the exorcist, he belongs to a congregation that is egalitarian in spirit and 
ordered by seniority, like the Sangha, and in which everybody is addressed as a master 
(hsaya).
The three initiations also involve contrasting performances of gender. The higher 
ordination is exclusively male oriented. Women are excluded from the status gained 
through the ritual and from the bounded space in which it takes place although they 
give their sons to the Sangha and contribute to the daily maintenance of the monks 
through food donations. The exorcist congregation is comprised of males and females, 
all treated with the same respect, although the masters who officiate to confer the han-
tima grade are exclusively male. As for the spirit’s spouses, they may be male or female 
but are envisioned as ideally feminine, hence the growing presence of transgender peo-
ple in spirit medium circles.
Moving from one field of practice to the other, the observer also has to adapt to very 
different ways of interacting. From the restrained demeanour expected in the monastic 
context to the joyful extravaganza displayed in spirit possession ceremonies, the behav-
iours are poles apart. The rituals display various knowledge, sounds, smells, foods and 
visual elements which create the specific character of each event: the tense examination 
of the monastic candidate, the solemn tattooing of the congregation medicine or the 
frenzied dance of the medium embodying a spirit. This variety of ritual means and of 
bodily deportments makes up for the truly diversified ritual landscape found in Burma.
W H E N L E S S I S M O R E
In this way, the three initiation rituals make new specialists adopt very specific and 
contrasting worldviews. In particular, the initiations create distinctive ontologies: the 
monk embodying Buddha’s teachings and whose body and mind are ideally oriented 
toward salvation, the exorcist cultivating knowledge and keeping Buddhist precepts to 
protect himself and rescue people from worldly impediments, and the medium seeking 
protection and prosperity in his intimate relationship with the spirit world. While the 
whole life of the spirit medium is governed by intense relationships to spirits thought of 
as purveyors of all the necessities if well propitiated, the exorcist sees them as a poten-

--- Page 14 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
78
tial source of harm and spares no efforts to keep them at bay through the cultivation of 
the congregation’s knowledge and of reformed Buddhist behaviour. As for the monk, 
his embodiment of Buddha’s teachings makes him immune to the spirit’s actions, at 
least in theory. 
Actually, the worldviews ritually displayed in Burmese Buddhist monasticism, 
esotericism and spirit mediumship are properly distinctive in that they are differently 
valued. These worldviews as exemplified through attitudes toward the spirits seem 
irreconcilable. At face value, at least, they leave few avenues for hybridisation. This is 
not to say, however, that some blurred zones do not exist at their margins, neither that 
ritual creativity does not carve up space for new less clearly identifiable practice, nor 
that individual entrepreneurs do not trace their own trajectories in this ritual landscape. 
However, it can be said that each of these fields of practice is related to two exclusive 
positions regarding the world (to which the spirits are attached): the withdrawal of the 
monk or the involvement of both the exorcist and the spirit medium. The renunciation 
orientation performed by the monks in their daily behaviours is what bestows on them 
their unique status, on moral grounds.
It is significant to see that this distinctive position of the monks is also built into the 
relative rituality of the ordination compared to other initiations. We have seen that the 
three rituals examined here share the same formal specificities pertaining to their com-
mon transformative nature. However, one of the most common dimensions of initiation 
rituals, generally speaking, the enacting of a rebirth (and of a death), is not ritually per-
formed in the Burmese higher ordination, while it is at the core of the ‘bringing-to-life’ 
kind of process performed in the wedding of a new medium. Yet, the transformative 
dimension of the monastic ritual is the most radical because it produces a change in 
status that encompasses the other transformations. Not only does it create a new son of 
the Buddha, but also one who is defined in relation to mere humans – the non-initiates – 
who become, through the same process, supporters of Buddhist teachings (dayaka). The 
exorcists and spirit mediums belong to this non-initiate category, while designing for 
themselves, through differentiated initiations, their own fields of ritual action.
The avoidance of enacting the rebirth symbolism in the Burmese higher ordination 
can be taken as another mark of the general distance with rituality as the one signalled in 
the introduction concerning the example of the consecration of Buddha’s image. While 
Burmese Buddhism is far from devoid of rituals, the kind of ritual means brought into 
play appears rather sober compared to the flamboyance of the spirit worship rituals. 
More generally, when comparing the initiation rituals in Burmese Buddhist monasti-
cism, esotericism and spirit mediumship, we observe a gradation in ritual expressivity, 
ranging from less to more. From this perspective, the low level of ritual elaboration and 
the textual inflexion of the higher ordination may be seen as having a distinctive effect 
that allows it to stand apart from other initiations.
I suggest that this ritual minimalism of the Burmese higher ordination is in itself 
part of the distinctiveness of the monastic religious stance – which is oriented towards 
the embodiment of Buddha’s words –, and that it is a statement the meaning of which 
comes out relatively, from the ordination being part of the same, although diversified, 
ritual universe as the two other initiation rituals. A comparison of three initiations in 
apparently discreet segments of religion enables us to see how they are in fact speaking 
to each other to establish dialogically differentiated fields of practice. The ritual sobri-

--- Page 15 ---
Brac de la Perrière: Initiations in the Burmese Ritual Landscape
79
ety of the ordination is a way to ritually construct monastic others: spirit mediums and 
exorcists. All three belong to the same Buddhist world and, also, to the same world of 
ritual action in which more or less elaboration of the ritual is distinctive. Their differ-
entiation through a history of ‘religion’ in Burma built up against ritualistic action has 
produced this rich and varied ritual landscape.
N O T E S
1 When not signalled otherwise, vernacular terms are Burmese and transcribed according 
to the Burmese romanisation of John Okell, without diacritics. Pali words are specified by a P. 
placed before or after, depending on the case. 
The population of Burma is complex, as it is made up of a dominant Theravadin Buddhist 
majority and of many diverse ethnic or religious groups. Apart from Buddhism and ethnic reli-
gions, various denominations of Christianity, Hinduism and Islam are also present in the coun-
try, adding to the complexity of the religious landscape. However, in this chapter, I will only deal 
with the rituals of the Buddhist majority.
2 In this paper, ritual landscape is used in a metaphorical sense rather than as it has emerged in 
the wake of archeological landscape studies such as those discussed by Tony J. Wilkinson in Archael-
ogy of Landscape (2003). This metaphorical use of ritual landscape aims to consider as a whole a 
range of rituals pertaining to different brands or aspects of Burmese religion.
3 For an overview of the field of religious studies about Burma that highlights this bias, see 
Brac de la Perrière 2009 and Schober 2003.
4 The main exceptions are the work of Melford Spiro (1967), the thesis of Juliane Schober 
(1989) and Gustaaf Houtman (1990b).
5 On the comparison of images of Buddha with those of spirits, see Brac de la Perrière 2006; 
on consecrations of Buddha images in Theravada Buddhism, see mainly Swearer 2004. Schober 
(2003: 16), in contrast with my observations, reports on “opening eyes” consecration ceremonies 
concerning a Burmese Buddha image in Mandalay (the Kyauktawgyi).
6 Buddhist esotericism is used here as a convenient shorthand for a field of practice desig-
nated in Burmese as the ‘path of knowledge’ or weikza lan. While this label was introduced by 
Spiro (1970: 167–187), its pertinence has been discussed particularly by Niklas Foxeus (2011: 3–10) 
and Steven Collins (2014: 224–225). For recent scholarly contributions to this field of practice, see 
Brac de la Perrière et al. 2014.
7 This is not to say that these fields exhaust the variety of practices found in Burmese religion. 
In particular, lay Buddhists may engage in different brands of meditation on a regular basis. 
However, the engagement in these practices does not involve an initiation ritual, as is the case for 
those examined here.
8 For a rare Burmese defence of spirit worship as part of the Buddhist cosmos, see Nu 1989 
and Brac de la Perrière 2009a.
9 In Burma, women can enter religious life as thilashin, ‘keeper of the precepts’, but they are 
not entitled to the same status as monks and do not go through the full higher ordination that will 
be considered below (Kawanami 2013).
10 Shinbyu has been described by a number of authors, among them Htin Aung 1962; Spiro 
1970; Houtman 1990b; Robinne 2002, and Brac de la Perrière 2009b.
11 A variant of this phrase is yahan khan- ‘to bear (the status of) yahan’. Another expression is 
phongyi wut- referring to another word, more profane, for monk: phongyi.
12 See Carbine 2011: chapter 3. On higher ordination, see also Shway Yoe 1963 [1882]; Bigan-
det 1979 [1858]; Sao Htun Hmat Win 1986; Carbine and Kellycooper 2016.

--- Page 16 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
80
13 ‘Condition’ is my rendering of the Buddhist concept translated as accomplishment (P. sam-
patti) by Carbine (2011: 111). Through this rendering, I aim to suggest how the Buddhist concep-
tualisation of higher ordination fits the theorisation of ritual as ‘ritualisation’ (Bell 1992).
14 On the spiritual rebirth metaphor in Cambodian Buddhist ordination, see Bizot 1988 in 
particular, as well as Davis’s (2016: 234) discussion of the symbolic death (and rebirth) involved 
in the ritual equation of the ordination in Cambodia. In this regard, the difference in approaches 
of rituals may very well explain the gap in the findings, and a plausible objection could be that a 
more thorough symbolic analysis of higher ordination in Burma than that which was possible in 
this essay, and referring to materials beyond the Shwegyin reformist tradition, could change our 
view of it. However, I do think the difference has more to do with the specificity of the Burmese 
case and its particular articulation of the whole religious field.
15 There is a wealth of well-established research on weikza practices, such as that of Spiro 1970; 
Ferguson and Mendelson 1981; Schober 1989; Pranke 1995; and of new research such as that of 
Foxeus 2011, and those that have been recently published in Champions of Buddhism (Brac de la 
Perrière et al. 2014). In the latter volume one will find a piece authored by Guillaume Rozenberg 
(2014), who has recently produced a very comprehensive ethnography of exorcism in the congre-
gation of Shweyingyaw masters, which is another important congregation of Burmese exorcists. In 
this piece, Rozenberg focuses on the way the Shweyingyaw initiation shapes the exorcist’s identity.
16 The congregation has its headquarters in Bago (Pegu) and is already known through Pat-
rick Pranke’s paper “On Becoming a Buddhist Wizard” (1995), in which he translates and com-
ments on a manual that is a useful introduction to the tenets of this organisation, “The Goal and 
Path of the great Manosetopad Gaing”. I base my analysis of the initiation ritual on my observa-
tion of the annual congregation meeting in December 2012 and 2013, in Pegu.
17 See Rozenberg (2014: 199) for a list of the higher beings involved. The list, consisting of the 
5 Buddhas of this world cycle, the guardian-founders of the congregation, the guardian deities 
of the world and the main deities such as Thagyamin and Thuyathadi, is very close of that of the 
higher beings whose protection is tattooed on the upper part of the initiate’s body in the Manaw 
seittokpad.
18 Concerning the worship of the Thirty-Seven Lords, see Spiro 1967 and Brac de la Perrière 
1989.
19 Rouget (1980), it will be recalled, suggests that spirit possession can only be positive, by 
which he means that possession implies adorcism. This stance differs from that of Luc de Heusch 
(1971), who, apart from distinguishing the ideology of possession from that of shamanism, also 
contrasts adorcism to exorcism in that, in the former case, the presence of the external spiritual 
agent is sought by the person, while in the latter case, the spiritual agent is chased from the per-
son.
20 About this ritual, see Spiro 1967: 213–217 and Brac de la Perrière 1989: 104–111.
21 For the bringing to life of statues, see Brac de la Perrière 2006, and above.
22 For the sake of accuracy, it has to be noted that among exorcists, some do not report to 
have gone through the ordeal of any initiatic disease. In the Manaw Seittokpad case, they are those 
belonging to the leaders’ family and this may be taken for a statement about their status in the 
congregation. Cf. Rozenberg’s (2014: 213) statement about Shweyingyaw exorcist: “accession to the 
role does not require having been exorcized”.

--- Page 17 ---
Brac de la Perrière: Initiations in the Burmese Ritual Landscape
81
R E F E R E N C E S
Bell, Catherine. 1992. Ritual Theory, Ritual Practice. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Bigandet, Paul. 1979 [1858]. The Life or Legend of Gaudama, the Buddha of the Burmese 1–2. Varnasi; 
Delhi: Bharatiya Publications House. 
Bizot, François. 1988. Les traditions de la pabbajja en Asie du Sud-Est: recherches sur le bouddhisme 
khmer IV. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1971. Genèse et structure du champ religieux. – Revue Française de Sociologie 12 
(3): 295–334. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/3320234. 
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte. 1989.	Les rituels de possession en Birmanie: du culte d’Etat aux cérémo-
nies privées. Paris: Editions Recherche sur les Civilisations, ADPF.
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte. 2006. Les rituels de consécration des statues de Bouddha et de naq 
en Birmanie (Myanmar). – Purushartha 25, Rites hindous, Transferts et Transformations, edited 
by Gilles Tarabout and Gérard Colas. Paris: EHESS, 201–236.
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte. 2009a. An Overview on the Field of Religion in Burmese Studies. 
– Asian Ethnology (Special Issue: Power, Authority and Contested Hegemony in Burmese-Myanmar 
Religion) 68 (2): 185–210. 
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte. 2009b. Quitter le monde pour y prendre sa place. – Moines et 
moniales de par le monde. La vie monastique au miroir de la parenté, edited by Adeline Herrou and 
Gisèle Krauskopff. Paris: L’hamattan, 113–130.
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte. 2013. La nuit de l’énergie birmane. Ou la transmutation de simples 
en remèdes souverains. – D’une anthropologie du chamanisme vers une anthropologie du croire. 
Hommage à l’œuvre de Roberte Hamayon, edited by Katia Buffetrille, Jean-Luc Lambert, Nathalie 
Luca and Anne de Sales. Paris: Centre d’Etudes Mongoles et Sibériennes; Ecole Pratique des 
Hautes Etudes, 451–463.
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte. 2015. Religious Donations, Ritual Offerings, and Humanitarian 
Aid: Fields of Practice according to Forms of Giving in Burma. – Religion Compass 9 (11): 
386–403. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/rec3.12187. 
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte. 2017. About Buddhist Burma. Thathana or ‘Religion’ as Social Space. 
– The Appropriation of ‘Religion’ in Southeast Asia and Beyond, edited by Michel Picard. Palgrave.
Brac de la Perrière; Guillaume Rozenberg and Alicia Turner, eds. 2014. Champions of Buddhism. 
Singapore: NUS Press.
Carbine, Jason A. 2011. Sons of the Buddha. Continuities and Ruptures in a Burmese Monastic Tradi-
tion. Berlin; New York, NY: de Gruyter. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110254105. 
Carbine, Jason A. and Patrick C. Kellycooper. 2016. Buddhist Ordination. – Oxford Bibliogra-
phies. 
http://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo-9780195393521/obo-978­
019­5393521-0226.xml (accessed March 8, 2017). 
Collins, Steven. 2014. What Kind of Buddhism is That? – Champions of Buddhism. Weikza Cults in 
Contemporary Burma, edited by Bénédicte Brac de la Perrière, Guillaume Rozenberg and Alicia 
Turner. Singapore: NUS Press, 216–227.
Davis, Erik W. 2016. Deathpower. Buddhism’s Ritual Imagination in Cambodia. New York, NY: 
Columbia University Press.
de Heusch, Luc. 1971. Possession et chamanisme. – Pourquoi l’épouser? Paris: Gallimard, 226–244. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3917/gall.deheu.1971.01. 
Eisenbruch, Maurice. 1992. The Ritual Space of Patients and Traditional Healers in Cambodia. 
– Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient 79 (2): 283–316. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3406/
befeo.1992.1882. 
Ferguson, John P. and Michael E. Mendelson. 1981. Masters of the Buddhist Occult: The Burmese 
Weikzas. – Essays on Burma. Contributions to Asian Studies XVI, edited by John Ferguson. Lei-
den: E. J. Brill, 62–80.

--- Page 18 ---
J O U R N A L O F E T H N O L O G Y A N D F O L K L O R I S T I C S 11 (1)
82
Foxeus, Niklas. 2011. The Buddhist World Emperor’s Mission. Millenarian Buddhism in Postcolonial 
Burma. Stockholm: Stockholm University.
Houtman, Gustaaf. 1990a. How a Foreigner Invented Buddhendom in Burmese: From Tha-tha-na 
to Bok-da’ ba-tha. – Journal of the Anthropological Society of Oxford 21 (2): 113–128.
Houtman, Gustaaf. 1990b. Traditions of Buddhist Practice in Burma. PhD Thesis. London: School of 
Oriental and African Studies.
Htin Aung. 1962. Folk Elements in Burmese Buddhism. London: Oxford University Press.
Kawanami, Hiroko. 2013. Renunciation and Empowerment of Buddhist Nuns in Myanmar-Burma. Lei-
den; Boston, MA: Brill. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004245723. 
Kirichenko, Alexey. 2009. From Thathanadaw to Theravâda Buddhism: Constructions of Religion 
and Religious Idnetity in Nineteenth and Early Twentieth-Century Myanmar. – Casting Faiths. 
Technology and the Creation of Religion in East and Southeast Asia, edited by Thomas DuBois. 
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 23–45.
Muir, Edward. 1997. Ritual in Early Modern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nu, U. 1989. Nats. – Crossroads 4 (1): 1–12.
Pranke, Patrick. 1995. On Becoming Buddhist Wizard. – Buddhism in Practice. Princeton Readings in 
Religion, edited by Donald Lopez. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 343–358. 
Robinne, François. 2002. L’initiation bouddhique au mariage. Formes rituelles en Birmanie. – 
Aséanie 10: 11–37. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3406/asean.2002.1748. 
Rouget, Gilbert.1980. La musique et la transe: esquisse d’une théorie générale des relations de la musique 
et de la possession. Paris: Gallimard.
Rozenberg, Guillaume. 2014. Powerful yet Powerless, Powerless yet Powerful: Being an Exorcist 
in Burma. – Champions of Buddhism. Weikza Cults in Contemporary Burma, edited by Bénédicte 
Brac de la Perrière, Guillaume Rozenberg and Alicia Turner. Singapore: NIUS Press, 188–215.
Sao Htun Hmat Win. 1986. The Initiation of Novicehood and the Ordination of Monkhood in the Bur-
mese Buddhist Culture. Rangoon: Department of Religious Affairs.
Schober, Juliane Sybille. 1989. Paths to Enlightement. Theravada Buddhism in Upper Burma. PhD 
Thesis. Urbana-Champaign, IL: University of Illinois.
Schober, Juliane. 2003. Mapping the Sacred in Theravada Buddhist Southeast Asia. – Sacred Places 
and Modern Landscapes. Sacred Geography and Social-Religious Transformations in South and 
Southeast Asia, edited by Ronald A. Lukens-Bull. Tempe, AZ: Arizona State University, 1–19.
Shway Yoe. 1963 [1882]. The Burman. His Life and Notions. New York, NY: The Norton Library.
Spiro, Melford. 1967. Burmese Supernaturalism. A Study in the Explanation and Reduction of Suffering. 
New Jersey, NJ: Prentice Hall Anthropology Series.
Spiro, Melford. 1970. Buddhism and Society. A Great Tradition and Its Burmese Vicissitudes. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press.
Strathern, Andrew and Pamela Stewart (Strathern). 2013. Comment: The Affirmative Powers of 
Denial. – Journal of Ritual Studies 27 (1): 95–97.
Swearer, Donald. 2004. Becoming the Buddha: The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Swearer, Donald. 2010. The Buddhist World of Southeast Asia. 2nd edn. Albany, NY: State Univer-
sity of New York Press.
van Gennep, Arnold. 2000 [1909]. Les rites de passage. Paris: Picard.
Wilkinson, Tony J. 2003. Archaelogical Landscapes of the Near East. Tucson, AZ: University of Ari-
zona Press.