--- Page 1 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY, Vol. 32, Issue 1, pp.68–92, ISSN 0886-7356, online ISSN1548-1360.bytheAmerican
Anthropological Association. All rights reserved. DOI: 10.14506/ca32.1.07
FRAMED BY FREEDOM: Emancipation and
Oppression in Post-Fordist Thailand
CLAUDIO SOPRANZETTI
University of Oxford
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6044-9147
Freedom is a project . . . ﬂanked by the problem of power on all sides: the
power against which it arrays itself as well as the power it must claim to
enact itself.
—Wendy Brown
Seen from above, Bangkok resembles an octopus, scarred on its left side by
the sinuous bends of the Chao Praya River and squeezed in the middle, with its
tentacles distending sideways. Zooming in, the structure of the city starts to break
down, and the octopus contorts into cramped and convoluted patterns. Long and
narrow streets branch out of the major roads and conquer the space between
them without connecting. Every morning, the city wakes up from these small
alleys (soi): the octopus moving the tips of its tentacles. Inhabitants and their
children ﬂood into the city center, where most of them work but cannot afford
to live. Small vans, collective taxis, and buses ferry the working class through the
complex maze of radial roads and branching streets, all the way to their work-
places. Those who have the means take taxis, or their own cars, to the under-
ground or to an elevated mass-transit terminus, and continue their commutes
inside air-conditioned trains. People living along the few remaining navigable
canals jump on slim longboats and endure the pungent smell of the waterways in
exchange for bypassing trafﬁc. Nonetheless, even in a city that serves different

--- Page 2 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
69
locations, capacity to pay, and levels of rush with multiple modes of transporta-
tion, few of them are able to reach deep into the maze of soi, where most of
Bangkok’s city dwellers live. Mobility inside those alleys—too narrow for buses,
vans, and the Skytrain, and often clogged with cars—remains largely in the hands
of motorcycle taxi drivers who arrive at their street corners every morning, just
before the city revives.
Bangkok is traversed every day by two hundred thousand of these drivers,
most of them migrant men from outer provinces. Collectively, they operate
between four to six million trips per day, roughly ten times the number of trips
traveled by Bangkok’s subway and Skytrain combined.1 Perched on their seats,
the city keeps moving, even during its infamous trafﬁc jams. While many of the
drivers arrived in Bangkok with dreams and desires that went beyond allowing
its population and commodities to circulate smoothly (Sopranzetti 2012), they
eventually took up their occupation through personal and collective paths that
aligned with those of Thai capitalism in the past two decades. Most important,
the massive layoffs that followed the 1997 crisis (addressed in what follows),
combined with a difﬁcult adjustment to the discipline of labor in the factories
where many migrants found themselves after having landed in Bangkok, compelled
them to become drivers. If these causes brought them to the job, ‘itsarapha¯p
(freedom, independence),2 many of the drivers like to repeat, is what keeps them
in this hectic, stressful, and health-threatening occupation. The drivers acknowl-
edge job insecurity and the risks of road accidents, and they often resort to the
protection of amulets and magic tattoos (Sopranzetti, forthcoming). Nonetheless,
they insist—as do many other workers in the urban service economy—that the
job’s ‘itsarapha¯p makes up for the precarity of their labor.3 As Yai, the vice
president of the Association of Motorcycle Taxis of Thailand (AMTT) told me,
staring into my eyes, “motorcycle taxi drivers die young, but live free.”
This article examines the discourse of freedom among the drivers as both
an emancipatory and an oppressive force. ‘Itsarapha¯p, I show, is emerging as a
central framework through which to understand life in contemporary Thailand.
It is by mobilizing this principle that self-employed and precarious workers make
sense of and make do with political-economic, social, and conceptual shifts taking
place around them by casting themselves as successful migrants, entrepreneurial
subjects, and autonomous urban dwellers. In this sense, the drivers adopt ‘itsar-
apha¯p to reconcile their personal desires and aspirations with the changing struc-
tural conﬁgurations of capital and labor in post-crisis Thailand. To show this
process, in the ﬁrst section of this article I focus on the drivers’ experience since

--- Page 3 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
70
the 1997 crisis and their formulation of freedom. In the second section, I show
how this formulation relates to larger political-economic shifts in the Thai econ-
omy toward post-Fordism during the past two decades.4 It is only when juxta-
posing the two dimensions—that of experience and of political economy—and
exploring their entanglements, as I do in the conclusion, that the signiﬁcance of
freedom in contemporary Thailand is revealed.
TOWARD AN ANTHROPOLOGY OF FREEDOM
The paradox of freedom as both an emancipatory and an oppressive force
has been extensively studied, both in social theory and in the social sciences.
Explorations of the role of freedom as a way to accept and often push for dere-
gularization, ﬂexibilization of labor, and precarity—as well as the reduction of
civil and political rights—in the contemporary world have been numerous (Clarke
2005; Peters 2001; Rose 1999; Roberts 2010). These analyses, however, have
largely revolved around two established arguments.5
The ﬁrst, derived from Karl Marx’s early writings, poses freedom as a toll
of exploitation that displaces structural oppressive forces into the realm of indi-
vidual decisions. As Marx (1975, 232) said in his exploration of the introduction
of constitutional rights to liberty, “man was not freed from religion, he received
religious freedom. He was not freed from property; he received freedom to own
property. He was not freed from the egoism of business; he received freedom to
engage in business.” In the development of this line of thought, freedom becomes
a hook that drags people into a false sense of empowerment while interpellating
them into accepting and participating in contemporary capitalism or similarly
oppressive projects (Althusser 1984; Santoro 2003; Zˇizˇek 1989). When applied
to the drivers, this reading would see ‘itsarapha¯p operating as a mechanism through
which they are not freed from their exploitation but rather given the freedom to
exploit themselves by becoming their own bosses—entrepreneurial subjects who
accept unstable and unsecure employment.
The second explanation, deriving from Michel Foucault’s early writings on
disciplinary apparatuses but largely ignoring his later explorations of ethics and
techniques of the self, sees freedom as an apparatus that operates by creating its
own subjects, “free individuals [who] become governable . . . as normal subjects”
(Rose 1999, 76). In this view, most notably expressed in the work of Nikolas
Rose, the ethics of freedom has come to provide the ground for our conceptions
of how we should be ruled, how our practices of everyday life should be orga-
nized, how we should understand ourselves and our predicament—in other

--- Page 4 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
71
words, for our conduct of conduct. In this sense, Rose (1999, 87) argues, “modern
individuals are not merely ‘free to choose,’ but obliged to be free, to understand
and enact their lives in terms of choice.”
Both of these approaches, while invaluable in positioning subjects in relation
to capitalism, disciplinary apparatuses, and discursive imaginaries, miss the aspir-
ational, affective, and personal dimensions of adopting freedom as an organizing
principle that sustains conscious decisions to accept new forms of precarity, or
stubborn refusals to do so. These explanations, in short, miss one basic question,
namely: why do people accept and at times resist both this hegemonic discourse
and its material consequences? The vocabularies of receiving freedom or being obliged
to be free reduce the mechanisms of consent to brainwashing—false conscious-
ness—or brain-shaping under the rubric of subject formation.6 In so doing, these
approaches present passive subjects and dismiss their ability to understand the
paradoxical nature of the political-economic and hegemonic processes, while also
deciding to take part in them.7
This reduction, I argue, has largely derived from an analytic mistake, one
that anthropology is particularly well suited to reveal and correct. Both analyses
implicitly compare, and ultimately conﬂate, whichever local and contextual use
of freedom they encounter in the real world with an abstract, absolute, and
universal conception of Freedom—with a capital f—as something obtained and
not given or obliged to exercise. As a result, they always ﬁnd the former lacking
when compared with the latter, and cast passive subjects to explain and justify
the gap between the two. In other words, both arguments ignore the core lesson
of anthropology: context matters.
Nonetheless, while our discipline would seem to have a lot to contribute
to this debate, it “has [historically] had strikingly little to say [about freedom]”
(Laidlaw 2002, 311). Partly, this results from the fact that anthropologists have
been as guilty as other social scientists of turning their attention—however criti-
cal—to Freedom with a capital f. As a discipline, we have pointed out its analytical
shortcomings and unmasked its universalist, normative, and elitist nature (Bidney
1963; Mahmood 2005); we have revealed its grounding in Protestant and Western
modernity (Keane 2007; Asad 2003) and its centrality to colonial and postcolonial
governance (van der Veer 2001; Viswanathan 1998). In the process, however,
we have too often turned our attention away from what I call freedom with a small
f, away from the contextual understandings of freedom that we encounter in our
ethnographic engagements. These freedoms are not predicated on a metaphysical
and ahistorical ideal, but always develop against a local experience of unfreedom

--- Page 5 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
72
and are therefore much more entangled in the complexity of people’s experiences
and political-economic transformations.
Recently, under the rubric of the anthropology of ethics, a number of au-
thors have argued for a limited, qualiﬁed, and restricted understanding of freedom
(Fassin 2014; Faubion 2011; Laidlaw 2013). Building on the late Foucault’s ex-
plorations of freedom as a necessary condition of ethical practice (Foucault 1997,
283; 1984c, 245), rather than on his analysis of disciplinary power, they have
pointed out that degrees of freedom—understood as the capacity to exercise
choice and pursue alternatives—are always situated in an existing ﬁeld of power
relations and have called for an investigation of “how freedom is exercised in
different social contexts and cultural traditions” (Laidlaw 2002, 311). While res-
onating with my own argument, their engagements have largely remained at the
analytical level. As a result, they have stopped short of exploring local conceptions
of freedom ethnographically and revealing how they operate as systems of value,
objects of reﬂection, and compasses that orient people’s lives,8 not just in relation
to local moral worlds (Kleinman and Kleinman 1996) but also to political-eco-
nomic restructurings. In this sense, our disciplinary engagements with freedom
have yet fully to live up to our epistemological strengths, those of considering
our informants as themselves social theorists and adopting their contextual use of
freedom to recalibrate our own social theories, rather than the other way round.
In this article, I propose to do just that.
In the traditional ethnographic manner I take the drivers’ claims to ‘itsara-
pha¯p seriously9—not as a product of brainwashing or brain-shaping—and ask:
What do these migrants mean by freedom? Why have they decided to leave formal
jobs in factories for the supposedly free life of job insecurity? How does this claim
relate to changes in political-economic relations since the 1997 crisis? Finally,
what can we learn about contemporary capitalism in and beyond Thailand by
exploring how the ‘itsarapha¯p simultaneously operates as an emancipatory and an
oppressive construct?
TALES OF FREED MEN
Adun was born in a small village in the northeastern province of Udon
Thani, some ﬁfty miles from the Laotian border. He arrived in Bangkok in 1979,
at the age of ﬁfteen. Adun spent his ﬁrst month in the city walking to his job in
a small shoe shop. As soon as he saved up a few hundred baht, he went back to
the village, homesick. Desires for a stable income and a different life, however,
quickly brought him back to Bangkok. He worked in jewelry-polishing, construc-

--- Page 6 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
73
tion, and furniture-making, only to land by the mid-1990s in a small chemical
factory. In the seasonal trips back to his village, Adun got married, had children,
but never moved his family to Bangkok, because of the high material and emo-
tional costs of raising his kids away from land, family, and the village school.
After a few years in Bangkok, Adun got to know a group of motorcycle taxi
drivers from his province who operated close to his factory. Saving up a little
money, he bought a battered motorcycle and started to drive after his work hours.
It was not until 1998, when he lost his job as a result of the ﬁnancial crisis, that
Adun turned his after-hours job into a full-time occupation. After the crisis and
years of economic stagnation, the new job allowed him a renewed freedom. He
had no boss to order him around and the opportunity to go back home whenever
he wanted, without having to ask anyone or lose face with a refusal. On these
trips Adun, like many other drivers, was able to reclaim what he saw as his central
role as a man in the economic and social life of his family and village, a role that
he had lost during his years working in a factory.
Adun was outspoken about the importance of ‘itsarapha¯p to his personal
choices. Sitting at his street corner, he told me: “My family and I are happy with
this job. It is a free life. You can come and go from home anytime. You can get
money fast, every day, without waiting for the salary. I have ‘itsarapha¯p.” “What
is this ‘itsarapha¯p?” I asked. Adun responded:
I can go home whenever I want. I don’t have to take leave. Don’t have to
ask anyone. I don’t have to come to work. I can remain home if I get sick
or get drunk. If I earn enough money for the day and I want to go home
to sleep, I can do that. This is ‘itsarapha¯p. I used to work for a company, I
went home often and I was never promoted. I have to go back home to the
village regularly: my family is there, my farm is there. . .. I like my job
because it is a free job. They offered to take me back in the company I used
to work for, but that job in Bangkok is bad for a countryman like me. The
boss always looks down on you, always orders you around, always insults
you. The last place I worked, the boss’s son kept insulting me, shouting at
me: a twenty-year-old kid with no experience, just out of university. I could
not accept that. So I am happy now; I am my own boss.
The idea of being one’s own boss also kept Boon, another driver, in this
profession, even though his life was less connected to the village in which he grew
up. Boon moved to Bangkok from an uncharacteristically prosperous cluster of
villages in northeastern Thailand. The area was selected in the 1990s for a pilot

--- Page 7 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
74
agricultural project to expand rubber farming beyond southern Thailand, where
the bulk of its production took place. The results were, at least at the time of
my research, remarkable.10 Each house had a pickup truck parked outside, roads
were paved, the village school had a computer room, and a steady ﬂow of re-
turnees from Bangkok were joining the remunerative agricultural business. Boon
was not, and would not be, among them.
Boon had moved to Bangkok in the 1980s looking, like thousands of other
migrants from the impoverished northeast, for a good income, entertainment and
adventure (pai thı¯eo), and a modern life (chı¯witbæpthansamai) (Pattana 2006;
Walker 2012; Mills 1997). After the plantations were introduced in his village,
the modern technology of rubber production cut him off from home. During the
family’s ﬁrst harvest, Boon discovered he was allergic to the chemicals used to
transform latex into rubber, and from then on he visited only occasionally and
accepted he could never work there. Similarly to Adun’s, Boon’s life in Bangkok
was a sequence of low-paid jobs, some of them decent and some remembered
with contempt, which came to an abrupt end with the 1997 crisis, when he was
laid off. Unable to go back to his village, Boon bought a bike and became a driver.
Income was not a central concern to Boon, as a share of the family farm
ensured him a regular cash ﬂow. Nor, it seemed, was personal safety, as testiﬁed
by his upper body, scarred by the signs of multiple road accidents, which shattered
his forearm bones and left his right arm slightly bent, unable to extend fully. But
Boon was a prideful man, and the ‘itsarapha¯p offered by his new occupation proved
central to keeping him in this line of business. “I never liked to follow orders,”
he told me, sitting on his bike, a cigarette hanging from his mouth. “I came to
Bangkok to have my own life, and I found myself sitting at a table, ﬁxing electric
components or sewing bags. Now I have a free life [‘a¯chı¯p‘itsara]; I come to work
whenever I want, I leave whenever I need.”
“But you always stay until night,” I responded. “I see you here every morning
until sundown; you work more than in a factory.”
“Yes, maybe,” he interrupted, “but it’s my own decision.”
Similar exchanges were repeated, with minimal variations, hundreds of times
during the course of my research. Through the idiom of ‘itsarapha¯p, the drivers
claimed their human and economic independence from the crushing machine of
mass production and its organization of labor, as well as—at least for drivers who
traveled back home—a renewed form of participation in the economic and emo-
tional life of their villages. If the language of adventure and modernity had directed
internal migration and permanence into the industrial and service economy, as

--- Page 8 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
75
Boon mentioned and as Mary Beth Mills’s (1999) work among female migrants
has analyzed in detail, by the time of my ﬁeldwork in the early 2010s, the idiom
of ‘itsarapha¯p had taken over, at least among workers who were pushed off of the
factory ﬂoor and joined the booming ﬂexible service economy.11
To understand the role of ‘itsarapha¯p in the drivers’ professional decisions
following the 1997 crisis, therefore, it is fundamental to dissect how the word is
used in Thai, as well as the meaning it acquired for workers like Adun and Boon
after the crash. Composed by ‘itsara (to be free, independent) and pha¯p (vision,
image), the word ‘itsarapha¯p started to be used at the end of the nineteenth century
in relation to the colonial encounter. The word was interchangeable with sover-
eignty and referred to collective entities, dominating the debates over the abolition
of slavery in the country in 1905 and the Siamese risks of colonial subjugation.
It was only between the 1920s and the 1930s that ‘itsarapha¯p assumed its individual
connotations, as Western-educated Siamese elites diffused the idea of individual
free will against the authority of the sovereign, initiating a debate that would
bring the end of absolute monarchy in 1932 (Aphornsuvan 1998). Thus under-
stood, the word acquired its contemporary use and carried strong individual
connotations of self-reliance and sovereignty over oneself.
Adun’s and Boon’s depiction of ‘itsarapha¯p retains this meaning, and does
so in a double sense. On the one hand, they conceive of it as a form of autonomy
from the factory discipline of labor that infantilized, dehumanized, and forced them
to subordinate their working hours and participation in family and agricultural
life to the whims of their bosses. On the other hand, they talk about the freedom
to go back home whenever they want, to organize their own schedules, and
ultimately to be their “own bosses” and make their “own decisions.” This duality
echoes the British philosopher Isaiah Berlin’s (1969) double understanding of
freedom as positive and negative.12 It is in this double territory of positive freedom
(as freedom to) and negative freedom (freedom from) that the drivers sustain their
commitment to their occupation. To begin to understand why the ‘itsarapha¯p of
precarious employment becomes attractive to them, therefore, we need to in-
vestigate not only the drivers’ everyday life and aspirations but also the political-
economic conditions under which this precarious, insecure, and unstable job has
become a synonym of freedom.
Adun and Boon, like many other drivers, moved to Bangkok from villages
where occasional and sporadic wage labor complemented regular yet seasonal
work in the ﬁelds. Their activities in the village—whether as wage or agricultural
labor—were organized according to social hierarchies and relations that went

--- Page 9 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
76
beyond the factory-ﬂoor division of labor. Back home, age, family relations, ex-
pertise, and status provided a hierarchy in and beyond labor processes, which
appeared to them more transparent and navigable, compared to the division of
labor in the factories where they landed once in the city. This does not mean that
the village offered some mythological and precapitalist space of free and equitable
production—much as the drivers, as well as the larger dominant discourses in
Thai society, often nostalgically seem to imply (Dayley 2011). Nor does it mean
that economic class, bureaucratic titles, and social capital played no role in the
village. Rather, and more concretely, all these social relations and interactions in
the village preceded and extended beyond the labor transaction. As a result,
disciplining labor could not take the form of direct and frontal dismissal, attack,
or scolding, or at least not without the risk of jeopardizing social standing, for
both the employer and the employee.
Very different is the matter in the anonymity of urban industrial production.
Here both the actors involved have nothing at stake in the preservation of a good
relationship with any speciﬁc worker or employer beyond keeping their working
arrangement. To use Marxist terms, labor in the city has been abstracted. While
this conﬁguration offers a respite from the expectations of the localized and in-
timate social hierarchies that orient labor in the village, it also creates a space in
which disdain, scorn, and open derision—forms of engagement considered ex-
tremely offensive in Thailand (Persons 2016)—color the relations between work-
ers and employers. To make things worse for rural migrants, a deeply rooted
urban bias against them often orients these already uneven interactions in urban
factories. In particular, the discourses of the backward and stupid villager (cha¯o
ba¯n) provide a framework inside which the relation between urban employers and
rural employees is understood and experienced. A failure to adjust to the factory’s
organization of labor is accepted, justiﬁed, or exacerbated through this lens by
migrant workers and urban employers alike. This failure, when it occurs, is often
framed in a dehumanizing language, which compares migrants to water buffalos
(khwa¯i), quintessentially stubborn and stupid animals—another unacceptable
offense.
In this context, Adun’s and Boon’s occupation as motorcycle taxi drivers,
even if taken up as a result of post-crisis layoffs, offers a step away from the
system of control and discrimination experienced on the factory ﬂoor. In their
words, being a motorcycle taxi driver provides ‘itsarapha¯p from such forms of
discipline and stigma, but it also conﬁgures a positive freedom or ‘itsarapha¯p to.
Adun views positive freedom as entailing two levels: ﬁrst, the freedom to decide

--- Page 10 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
77
if and when to go to work, and therefore to claim ownership over his own life,
income, and daily rhythms; second, the freedom to leave the city and go back to
his village, where his family resides and where their ﬁelds are, whenever he wants
or needs to. Both of these forms of freedom are presented as emancipatory forces
that enable him to live a less alienated life. In the ﬁrst case, it amounts to the
exercise of a refusal of alienated labor on the factory ﬂoor and a reclaiming of
control over his own body and time; in the second, to the practical realization of
the demand to participate in family and village life and to pursue alternatives
threatened by regional migration and the urban organization of labor (Rigg et al.
2008).
‘Itsarapha¯p, as Boon and Adun conceive it, operates on a personal level as a
construct that helps them make sense of their labor trajectories, as well as claim
pride in and agency over their lives. Its role, however, does not stop at the
personal and experiential level. As William Roseberry (1994, 361) has argued,
similar hegemonic constructs generate “not a shared ideology but a common
material and meaningful framework for living through, talking about, and acting
upon social orders characterized by domination.” In other words, ‘Itsarapha¯p not
only becomes a framework for making sense of their new lives as an experience of
emancipation but also provides a framework for making do with new forms of
domination and the increasingly precarious lives generated by the post-crisis re-
structuring of Thai capitalism. ‘Itsarapha¯p, therefore, not only operates on the
personal level I have so far analyzed but also functions at a collective and structural
one, as a way to push an increasing number of unnecessary industrial laborers
toward more precarious forms of employment, such as driving motorcycle taxis.
Focusing our attention only on the ﬁrst level, therefore, would mean seeing these
individual stories as plots of land but failing to grasp the larger landscape in which
they are located and by which they are shaped. Until now I have focused only on
Adun’s and Boon’s plots and explored the role of ‘itsarapha¯p in organizing them.
In the following sections, I place them into the larger landscape of shifting relations
between labor and capital in Thailand since 1997, away from industrial produc-
tion, unionized labor, and collective bargaining toward ﬂexible accumulation,
entrepreneurship, and precarity (Sauwalak 2002; Hewison and Tularak 2013).
FREEDOM AS POST-FORDIST HEGEMONY
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Southeast Asian economies experienced
a period of unprecedented growth, led by a massive inﬂux of foreign capital and
a realignment of national economies toward export-oriented industrialization.

--- Page 11 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
78
Between 1986 and 1996, Thailand’s GDP grew faster than in any other nation of
the world, 9.5 percent per year. This unprecedented growth came to a halt in
1997.
On May 14 and 15, 1997, the Thai baht was hit by speculative attacks,
driven by the ease with which capital moved in and out of the country and the
increasing instability of the national economy. This was the spark that ignited the
Asian ﬁnancial crisis. In a few days, the Thai currency lost more than half of its
value. Suddenly most Thai companies that had borrowed in foreign currencies
saw their debt burden doubled and went into bankruptcy, provoking an estimated
two million layoffs in ﬁnance, real estate, industry, and construction (Pasuk and
Baker 1998). Migrant workers reacted either by returning to agricultural land,
which had traditionally offered a security net in times of economic recession, or
by entering the swelling informal economy. The growth in the ranks of motor-
cycle taxis after the crisis was stark, even at a time when the city was getting
smaller because of the departures of many laid-off workers. In 1994, Bangkok
was home to an estimated 37,500 drivers. By 2003, their numbers had expanded
almost threefold, to 109,056.13
More broadly, Thai capital shifted toward ﬂexible accumulation, a regime
that pushed “ﬂexibility with respect to labor processes, labor markets, products,
and patterns of consumption, . . . characterized by the emergence of entirely
new sectors of production, new ways of providing ﬁnancial and business services,
new markets, and, above all, greatly intensiﬁed rates of commercial, technological
and organizational innovation” (Harvey 1990, 1). Following the crisis, the Thai
economy began to move away from the centrality of industrial production, col-
lective bargaining, and the support of workers’ buying power through rising
salaries rather than the welfare provisions that had characterized Thai Fordism.
As a result, it shifted toward a post-Fordist conﬁguration dominated by ﬂexible
labor based on risk-taking entrepreneurialism, easier access to debt, and more
precarious lives, even if in the context of an expansion of state-run welfare pol-
icies.14 For millions of workers, this meant the reduction of ﬁxed contracts and
the expansion of occupations not protected by any form of labor rights or col-
lective bargaining (Warr 2005; Pasuk and Baker 2008).
‘Itsarapha¯p played a central role in providing a “meaningful framework for
living through, talking about, and acting upon” (Roseberry 1994, 361) this ﬂex-
ibilization of labor, self-employment, and its growing insecurity. It made precarity
not only acceptable and bearable to workers, including motorcycle taxi drivers,
but in fact desirable. This does not mean that ‘itsarapha¯p operated solely as a bait

--- Page 12 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
79
into post-Fordist capitalism. Rather, for the drivers and millions of other workers,
freedom supported their emancipation from the factory discipline of labor and its
limited mobility, but also framed new oppressive structures. This occurred not
despite the real advantages that the new conﬁguration offered, but precisely be-
cause of them. The framework of ‘itsarapha¯p became dominant not because it
duped these workers or obliged them to conform to it, but because it connected
the requirements of post-Fordist restructuring with the everyday desires and as-
pirations of its increasingly precarious workers, who wanted to deﬁne themselves
in opposition to the factory discipline of labor they had experienced before the
crisis. In this sense, it is always—as Raymond Williams (1977) has stressed—an
alignment between people’s agency, desires, previous experiences, and existing
possibilities that pulls them into hegemonic consent, and not passive understand-
ings of false consciousness or subjugation.
This dynamic is by no means peculiar to motorcycle taxi drivers or to
Thailand, even though its speciﬁc conﬁgurations are. Many have accepted self-
employment and ﬂexible labor as a recovered independence from the tyranny and
dullness of ﬁxed-schedule jobs, only to ﬁnd themselves outside the protective net
of collective bargaining and permanent jobs. Have they acquired renewed freedom
by becoming their own bosses and being able to mold their working hours to
family arrangements or personal preferences? Most deﬁnitely. Have they, at the
same time, accepted a retreat of both government and employers from providing
basic services and securities? Absolutely. How is this paradox possible? And, more
to the point, does this acceptance mean they were passively given freedom or
obliged to be free?
The work of Antonio Gramsci helps us to answer these questions and to
understand the daunting tensions they suggest. In his prison writings on Italian
history, Gramsci (1971) clariﬁes how hegemony and control sustain each other
and how an emancipating personal discourse—such as that of ‘itsarapha¯p as voiced
by Adun and Boon—can also sustain an oppressive form of hegemony. This is as
much the case with fascism, the implicit reference of Gramsci’s analysis, as it is
with post-Fordism in Thailand. The Italian workers who supported Mussolini, to
whom Gramsci hints between the lines of his heavily controlled prison notebooks,
were not gullible passive agents, tricked into false consciousness. Neither, for
their part, are the drivers who willingly accept reduced job security and limited
social services. Rather, as Gavin Smith (2004, 99–100) has pointed out, “the
epistemological bedrock of the ideas contained in the notion of hegemony rejects
the possibility of the social person as object, passive recipient, or cultural dupe,

--- Page 13 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
80
just as it minimizes the moments when consciousness can be false.” Starting from
this bedrock, Gramsci (1971, 12) elucidates how control over social groups takes
two forms: domination and hegemony. While the ﬁrst is obtained through the
coercive organs of the state, the second entails an “intellectual and moral lead-
ership” exercised through civil society—a composition of educational, religious,
and associational institutions. This second form of submission operates through
the “spontaneous consent given by the great masses of the population to the
general direction imposed on social life by the dominant fundamental group,
consent ‘historically’ caused by the prestige (and therefore by the trust) accruing
to the dominant group.” While until now I have shown what this spontaneous
consent is based on among motorcycle taxi drivers in Thailand, I will now turn
toward an analysis of how the hegemony of ‘itsarapha¯p emerged after the 1997
crisis and, to go back to the question I started with, why people accepted it.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF POST-FORDIST ‘ITSARAPHA¯P
In the ﬁrst few years after the 1997 economic collapse, Thailand followed
the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) gospel of structural readjustment. The
country opened to foreign investors, cut government spending—in particular,
spending on social services—and deregulated its labor and ﬁnancial markets. The
plan ensured that foreign lenders would be repaid, but it proved disastrous for
the country and its economic sovereignty. The national GDP fell by 7.9 percent
in 1997, 12.3 percent in 1998, and 7 percent in the ﬁrst half of 1999. By 2000,
three years after the crisis, Thailand was still in recession, while Malaysia, ignoring
the IMF’s suggestions, was in full recovery (Stiglitz 2002). In Thailand, the crisis
became known as wikrit IMF (IMF crisis) and was understood to have neoliberal
policies as its source. The country, therefore, called for solutions that kept their
distance from a classic neoliberal agenda. Thaksin Shinawatra—a billionaire who
made his money in telecommunications—was elected prime minister in 2001 and
pushed for a signiﬁcant expansion of the state’s role in promoting economic
growth and managing its social consequences, against the IMF’s prescriptions.
At the core of Thaksin’s vision was a post-Fordist ﬂexibilization of labor,
the application of the logic of management to public administration, and a re-
deﬁning of citizens as entrepreneurs. This meant providing them with access to
credit, both as a way of freeing up their economic activities and supporting their
consumption, as well as pushing for an expansion of state interventions in the
national economy—not the shrinking theorized by the IMF. His recipe revolved
around ﬁve main policies that were implemented during the ﬁrst six months of

--- Page 14 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
81
his premiership: a rural debt moratorium, a village and urban community re-
volving fund, the creation of the People’s Bank, the One Tambon (district), One
Product scheme, and universal health-care coverage.15 Overall, this system was
aimed at fostering universal participation in capitalism by making small businesses
and low-income people into free entrepreneurs—a classic neoliberal project—
but it did so by expanding welfare provisions to protect these entrepreneurs from
unexpected difﬁculties, in particular health expenses and outstanding debts.
The idea of turning workers into free entrepreneurs became the new or-
ganizing principle of contemporary Thailand, a set of material and symbolic pro-
visions that emerged under Thaksin’s premiership but survived its deposition in
2006 by a military coup. Even though military ofﬁcers, royalist forces, and ﬁscal
conservatives have attempted in the past decade to shift this approach, time and
again electoral masses have thrown their support behind it. The aim of these
provisions, in Thaksin’s words, was to create “a new class of entrepreneurs who
could marry local skills with international technology and hence move up the
value chain” (Pasuk and Baker 2002, 3). Among these new entrepreneurs, Thaksin
liked to repeat, were motorcycle taxi drivers: a new free labor force that decided
to leave behind the shackles of dependent occupation to enter the brand-new
world of self-employment and entrepreneurship.
This “liberal reason”—as Michel Foucault (2008, 69) has pointed out—
“must produce freedom, but this very act entails the establishment of limitations,
controls, forms of coercion, and obligations relying on threats.” Thailand was no
exception. First, by becoming their own bosses, the drivers also became their
own exploiters and, as both entrepreneurs and workers, they morphed exploi-
tation into forms of sacriﬁce to build their own capital, investing in themselves.
Second, as Thaksin ostensibly freed entrepreneurial forces from the binds of the
Fordist discipline of labor, he also proceeded to control their ﬂows, effectively
posing limits on their free entrepreneurship. In 2003, two years into his ﬁrst
premiership, Thaksin registered, archived, and controlled the drivers’ operations.
Like many state institutions that advance deregulation and free markets as they
tighten control on their borders and strengthen their intelligence apparatus to spy
on their own citizens, the Thai government pushed its workers toward free and
ﬂexible forms of labour while registering and making them more visible and
controllable.
The registration of motorcycle taxis constituted a central piece in a larger
government campaign, known as the “war on dark inﬂuence” (‘itthiphon mu¯’t).
This formulation pointed to a variety of interventions that attempted to bring

--- Page 15 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
82
different sectors of the illegal economy—from logging to prostitution, from un-
derground lotto to motorcycle taxi operations—under the administrative and
economic control of the government, include them in the formal market, and
provide assistance to its entrepreneurs. More broadly, this campaign represented
a litmus test for the new approach to low-income economic actors proposed by
Thaksin. In his vision, their entrepreneurship had been constrained by a lack of
state services and access to credit for too long. It was now time to free their
capitalist acumen, but only inside the control of a strong state able to see, control,
and ultimately tax.16 Motorcycle taxis became the showcases of this new approach.
On May 20, 2003, Thaksin initiated a registration of operating drivers with their
district ofﬁces, and by late August, district ofﬁces in Bangkok distributed new
vests to the drivers, which would operate as personal licenses and, at least in
theory, as collateral. Now the drivers were free entrepreneurs, but only insofar
as they were framed by a new system of registration and control, allowing the
state to monitor their location, take away their licenses in the case of accidents
or drunk driving, and keep their numbers stable.
Boon was very much aware of this paradox and still refuses to this day to
put on one of the government’s ofﬁcial vests and register with the local admin-
istration. “I chose this job because it gave me ‘itsarapha¯p, and I am not going to
give them my name and location to be under government control,” he told me.
Boon’s adamant reaction, however, was just a drop in the sea. Most of the drivers
accepted the registration as recognition of their roles as signiﬁcant actors in the
life of the city, stakeholders in the Thai state, as well as as free entrepreneurs,
rather than as good-for-nothing, lazy country bumpkins.
On the whole, the emergent discourse of free entrepreneurship, the drivers’
participation in it, the establishment of new systems of control, and the precar-
itization of their lives reveals the complex role of ‘itsarapha¯p in post-Fordist Thai-
land as both personally emancipating and structurally oppressive. On the one
hand, the vision of drivers as entrepreneurs depoliticized exploitation, job inse-
curity, and social inequality by reframing them as individual successes or failures
based on effective decisions, rather than on structural relations. On the other
hand, it provided the drivers with recognition, pride, and a sense of dignity in
their decision to escape the industrial discipline of labor and become their own
bosses, as voiced by Adun and Boon.

--- Page 16 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
83
CONCLUSION
The analysis of the drivers’ emancipatory experiences of ‘itsarapha¯p and its
relation to oppressive capitalist restructuring in Thailand since the 1997 crisis has
brought us to two central paradoxes. First, the paradox of using freedom to
motivate the acceptance of precarious labor arrangements. Second, the paradox
of unleashing free entrepreneurship only to enforce more stringent state control.
These two paradoxes are by no means exclusive to motorcycle taxi drivers in
Bangkok or even to migrant workers in Thailand. They, in fact, echo existing
ethnographic engagements with entrepreneurship, precarity, and late capitalism
globally (Ferguson 2006, 2010; Elyachar 2012; Li 2007; Ong 2006; Slocum 2006;
Comaroff and Comaroff 2001; Muehlebach 2012). These echoes are deliberate
and, while they cannot be further explored in the context of this article, provide
a backdrop and an implicit comparison to my argument.17
Even though they take speciﬁc forms in different contexts, these apparent
contradictions largely revolve around allowing free ﬂows and activities only insofar
as they can be transformed into legible aggregate ﬂows, and externalizing social
relations—such as exploitation or job security—to individual entrepreneurship
by fostering individual freedom. These paradoxes lie at the core of the question
that directed my investigation, namely, why people consent to their roles within
hegemonic systems—be they nation-states, dictatorships, or capitalist structures.
As I have argued, orthodox Marxism solved these paradoxes through the idea of
false consciousness, and certain strains of poststructuralism through an analysis of
the roles of discipline and subjugation in exercising power. Both attempt to give
a general answer to a question that, as I have tried to show, requires contextual
analysis and responses. Once we abandon this generality, we can provide an
answer that does not entail an account of people being duped. Moreover, we
reveal these paradoxes not as contradictions that challenge capitalism but as gen-
erative forces that, on the contrary, sustain this system by offering signiﬁcant
emancipatory possibilities while framing new forms of oppression. In this sense,
capitalism—here in its speciﬁc post-Fordist forms it has taken in contemporary
Thailand—proves to operate, like electricity, by creating opposite magnetic poles
(freedom and control; emancipation and oppression) and harnessing energy from
their tension, rather than crumbling under the resulting contradictions.18 The
paradoxes I have pointed out constitute two of the many ways in which these
tensions are created in contemporary Thailand.
Let me address the second paradox, that between the growth of free en-
terprise and tighter control over its activities—which is the contextual declension

--- Page 17 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
84
of a larger paradox between free markets and the expansion of state control and
repression. Presenting states and markets as in opposition to one another has been
one of the main myths told by apologists of neoliberalism, one taken at face value
by many scholars (e.g., Ong 2006; Boyer and Drache 1996).19 However, as Karl
Polanyi (1944) has argued and the 2008 bailouts revealed most strikingly, markets
are not architectonic; they need states to create, preserve, and manage them. As
a consequence, “under capitalism the impetus to increase productivity generates
a tension having to do with the enhancement of the creative potential of people
and its harnessing with an enclosure that captures the value that results and directs
it back toward capital” (Smith 2011, 24). In other words, free markets need tight
state interventions to direct ﬂows, without which their fruits are of no use. This
was certainly true in the case of motorcycle taxis in Thailand, where the new
entrepreneurship of the drivers needed state control and visibility to ﬂourish and
be aggregated and harnessed into signiﬁcant economic forces.
The same generative tension lies at the core of the two uses of ‘itsarapha¯p
as workers’ emancipation from labor discipline and as oppressive justiﬁcation for
labor restructuring. At ﬁrst glance, the contradiction seems irreconcilable. This,
however, holds true only if we understand Freedom with a capital f, a universal
and absolute category that stands in opposition to control, as its archenemy and
not its ally. In this view, any form of freedom that does not achieve decontex-
tualized liberation remains incomplete and does not deserve the name. This vision
limits our ability to understand the drivers’ attitudes, as well as those of millions
of workers around the world, basically pronouncing them unable to understand
their own situations. On the contrary, as Wendy Brown (1995, 6) has argued,
“freedom is neither a philosophical absolute nor a tangible entity but a relational
and contextual practice that takes shape in opposition to whatever is locally and
ideologically conceived as un-freedom.” For the drivers, the Fordist disciplining
of labor was, around the time of the crisis, the epitome of unfreedom, an op-
pressive system that limited their mobility, controlled their time, and broke their
spirit. Post-Fordist ‘itsarapha¯p offered a way out of that, attractive even as it
constructed new limitations around them.
If we abandon the abstract idea of Freedom, the answer to the question with
which I began this article—why do people accept being part of hegemonic systems
or being interpellated in them—is quite simple. It is because they understand
freedom, emancipation, and oppression as contextual practices and processes. As
a result, the personal freedoms obtained by moving toward self-employment are
not illusory and do make a difference in the drivers’ lives, freeing them from

--- Page 18 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
85
degrading labor conditions on the factory ﬂoor and allowing them to work in the
city without cutting themselves off from life in their villages. Being their own
bosses and being able to participate in agricultural life, therefore, constitutes
emancipation, at least from the Fordist disciplining of labor. At the same time,
this new freedom also frames new forms of oppression—of which the drivers are
both aware and against which they often mobilize (Sopranzetti 2014)—that keep
them in a precarious occupation under increasing state control. In this sense, the
drivers, like the rest of us, always navigate between double binds, limited by our
own frameworks but also freed by them, claiming a freedom that is both an
emancipatory demand for activities outside the dictates of our present oppression
and the raw material of a new one. Freedom is emancipation and oppression all
the way down, but each speciﬁc conﬁguration frames the reality of our social life,
offers a horizon of emancipation from the previous level, and shapes the oppres-
sion of the present one.
ABSTRACT
Based on ethnographic research conducted between 2009 and 2014, this article
examines the discourse of freedom (‘itsarapha¯p) among motorcycle taxi drivers in
Bangkok and the practices, both emancipatory and oppressive, that it supports and
makes possible. I explore its central role in their self-construction as successful mi-
grants, entrepreneurial subjects, and autonomous urban dwellers, as well as its re-
lations to capitalist restructuring and precarity in post-crisis Thailand. I show how
freedom offers a way for precarious workers—such as the drivers—to consciously
make sense of and make do with political-economic, social, and conceptual shifts
taking place around them. In this sense, this article explores the construction of
consent in contemporary Thailand without falling in the trap of assigning false
consciousness to the drivers or of framing them as subjugated subjects. Rather, I locate
the effectiveness of ‘itsarapha¯p discourse precisely in its ability to connect preexisting
forms of exploitation, personal desires, and aspirations with a restructuring of the
relations between capital and labor in contemporary Bangkok. [freedom; capital-
ism; entrepreneurialism; Thailand]
NOTES
Acknowledgments
I thank Anand Vaidya, Eli Elinoff, Lizzie Presser, David Gellner and
Michael Herzfeld for reading multiple versions of this article and making it better at each turn.
The three anonymous reviewers contributed greatly to the development of this piece, which
could not exist in the present form without the careful assistance and engagement of James
Faubion.
1.
These numbers are an estimate, generated in collaboration with the Association of
Motorcycle Taxis of Thailand.
2.
This article follows the American Library Association/Library of Congress (ALA-LC)

--- Page 19 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
86
system of Romanization, which uses diacritics to mark length of vowels rather than
tones, leaving tones unmarked.
3.
Anthropological engagements with precarity have mostly emerged in the context of
retreating welfare states (Mole´ 2013; Allison 2012; Muehlebach 2013). As a result,
their deﬁnition of precarity has taken a speciﬁc form of precaritization—the retreat of
welfare states—and expanded it to deﬁne much larger trends in contemporary capitalism
(Kalleberg and Hewison 2013; Lee and Kofman 2012). While some scholars have argued
for the use of the concept exclusively in these contexts (Neilson and Rossiter 2008), I
take the opposite view and argue for its relevance to contemporary Thailand. The
concept has been adopted recently by a few anthropologists of Thailand (Endo 2014;
Johnson 2012), but without deﬁning its meaning in a country in which the welfare state
has been expanding in the past decades, rather than contracting. To exit this impasse,
I here deﬁne precarity as an experience created by a variety of forms of unstable, ﬂexible,
unbounded, and individualized employment, one only marginally protected by social
beneﬁts, legal provisions, or collective bargaining. These include the informalization of
labor, seasonal and temporary employment, homework, ﬂex and temp work, subcon-
tracting, freelancing, and self-employment. While this status emerges out of labor ar-
rangements, the conditions they generate go well beyond the sphere of employment
and extend their characteristics of instability, ﬂexibility, and individualization to subjec-
tivities, social relations, and imaginaries of the future.
4.
Here, Fordism describes an alignment between the form of the organization of labor
based on mass-serialized production and a compromise between labor and capital—
predicated on transforming workers into consumers through salaries, which dominated
Thai capitalism from the 1980s to 1997. In Euro-America, this alignment is often con-
ﬂated with Keynesian anticyclical welfare programs that emerged there—but not in
Thailand—in relation to Fordism. Acknowledging the different histories in relation to
social welfare and the state’s economic planning, I deﬁne the contemporary shift in
Thailand as post-Fordist and not neoliberal. The neoliberal doctrine emerged—in the
words of its founding fathers in the Mont Pe`lerin society—to ﬁnd a middle path between
Keynesian state planning and Adam Smith’s liberal market (Burgin 2012). As a dominant
political project—one that advocated for market liberalization, cuts in labor rights,
reduction to income taxes for the wealthy, and the retreat of the welfare state—
neoliberalism emerged in the 1980s under the governments of Ronald Reagan and
Margaret Thatcher. Ignoring its contextual history, the label of neoliberalism has been
projected onto the rest of the world, often with little analytical rigor (see Ferguson
2010). In this reading, any restructuring of relations of production, labor practices, and
national policies is seen as a sign of neoliberalism, even in countries like Thailand, where
the state has been expanding its planning presence in the economy and introducing
unprecedented welfare schemes. Refusing this oversimpliﬁcation, I prefer to focus on
post-Fordism, a system that does not conﬁgure speciﬁc relations between states and
capital, or to the retreat of the welfare state, but rather reorganizes the relations between
capital and labor away from mass-serialized production and raising workers’ buying
power through salaries, as has been happening in Thailand since 2001, even as the
welfare state has expanded.
5.
These are obviously ideal types of existing arguments, presented in their most extreme
versions, which may not be fully endorsed by most, or even any, of their proponents.
Exaggerating their characteristics, however, helps us to reveal the existing spectrum of
explanations and, in so doing, to shed light on underexplored alternative routes.
6.
A signiﬁcant body of literature that questions these two views by focusing on local
desires among postpeasants is emerging in Southeast Asia, speciﬁcally in relation to
shifting logics of capital (Walker 2012; Sopranzetti 2012; High 2014; Li 2014). The
present article is an attempt to expand these approaches to a study of freedom in
Thailand.
7.
I am here referring to a speciﬁc—and possibly incorrect—understanding of subject
formation and freedom. As James Faubion has shown, Foucault himself pointed out the

--- Page 20 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
87
fallacious nature of this passive understanding of subject formation in the later part of
his life. For Foucault, “ethical practice proceeds after all in the middle voice, actively
and passively often at one and the same time” (Faubion 2011, 50). In this sense, Foucault
(1997, 1984a, 1984b), while acknowledging his role in allowing this misunderstanding
to emerge, showed how subjects are neither unfree to participate in their formation
nor fully at liberty to invent their own techniques of the self.
8.
For exceptions, see Riesman 1977, Slocum 2006, and Englund 2006.
9.
In doing this, I make no claims of moving away from the realm of epistemology and,
somehow, elevating myself to a study of ontologies. I am dealing with how people make
sense of and make do with realities around them, not with a hard-to-defend claim of
gaining access to some ontological dimension of radical alterity (see Graeber 2015).
10.
The global price of rubber has since plummeted.
11.
Maureen Hickey (2010, 146) has pointed out the emergence of the discourse of ‘itsara
in her study of cab drivers in Bangkok and argued that after the crisis, the traditional
Thai conception of ‘itsara, “stressing free will and responsibility for one’s actions, has
been reworked to reﬂect the neoliberal ideals of the autonomous individual and rational
economic actor.” Despite her laudable attempt to connect conceptions of personal free-
dom with larger economic, social, and political restructurings, her reading—following
an argument proposed by Nikolas Rose—concludes that freedom is reworked from an
emancipating force to an oppressive one, one in which subjects are obliged to take part.
12.
For an extensive analysis of the centrality of Berlin’s liberal conception of freedom, see
Laidlaw 2013.
13.
These numbers come from unpublished data on motorcycles registered for public use,
which I obtained from the Ministry of Land Transportation.
14.
In my book manuscript, I analyze the characteristics of this expansion of the welfare
state in detail (Sopranzetti, forthcoming). Sufﬁce it to say here that welfare provisions
established since 2003 were not Fordist/Keynesian anticyclical interventions aimed at
supporting workers in their unproductive phases, but rather represented a Schumpe-
terian welfare state that supported already productive forces and fostered their
entrepreneurialism.
15.
The debt moratorium allowed farmers to postpone their repayments to the Bank for
Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives, while the revolving fund for villages or urban
communities provided cheap loans, promoted local community-building, and stimulated
the entry of farmers and the urban poor into the capitalist economy. The People’s Bank
funded low-income people to invest in microbusinesses, while the One Tambon, One
Product scheme provided government-led guidance to such microbusinesses. Under this
policy, the state offered local districts technical support to choose a speciﬁc product or
service typical of their area and develop its production and marketing, with the purpose
of making it attractive to international markets. Finally, and most successfully, the
universal health-care system, popularly known as the “thirty-baht scheme,” provided
lower-income citizens with affordable health assistance.
16.
This idea was predicated on the theories of the Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto,
which were introduced to Thaksin by President Bill Clinton.
17.
In my forthcoming monograph (Sopranzetti, forthcoming), I explore more fully the role
of these paradoxes in contemporary Thai capitalism.
18.
However, most contemporary Marxists have failed to accept that the contradictions they
rightfully describe, rather than weakening capital, have become its central strengths,
allowing the system to constantly renew itself.
19.
Aiwa Ong’s (2006, 6) deﬁnition of neoliberalism offers a prime example of this analytical
slippage. According to Ong, neoliberalism is “(a) a claim that the market is better than
the state at distributing public resources and (b) a return to a primitive form of indi-
vidualism: an individualism which is competitive; possessive; and construed often in
terms of the doctrine of ‘consumer sovereignty.’”

--- Page 21 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
88
REFERENCES
Allison, Anne
2012
“Ordinary Refugees: Social Precarity and Soul in Twenty-First-Century Japan.”
Anthropological Quarterly 85, no. 2: 345–70. https://doi.org/10.1353/anq.
2012.0027.
Althusser, Louis
1984
Essays on Ideology. London: Verso.
Aphornsuvan, Thanet
1998
“Slavery and Modernity: Freedom in the Making of Modern Siam.” In Asian
Freedoms: The Idea of Freedom in East and Southeast Asia, edited by David Kelly and
Anthony Reed, 161–82. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Asad, Talal
2003
Formations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press.
Berlin, Isaiah
1969
Four Essays on Liberty. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bidney, David, ed.
1963
The Concept of Freedom in Anthropology. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Boyer, Robert, and Daniel Drache, eds.
1996
States against Markets: The Limits of Globalization. New York: Routledge.
Brown, Wendy
1995
States of Injury: Power and Freedom in Late Modernity. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Burgin, Angus
2012
The Great Persuasion: Reinventing Free Markets since the Depression. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Clarke, Simon
2005
“The Neoliberal Theory of Society.” In Neoliberalism: A Critical Reader, edited by
Alfredo Saad-Filho and Deborah Johnston, 50–59. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Pluto
Press.
Comaroff, Jean, and John L. Comaroff, eds.
2001
Millennial Capitalism and the Culture of Neoliberalism. Durham, N.C: Duke
University Press.
Dayley, Robert
2011
“Thailand’s Agrarian Myth and Its Proponents.” Journal of Asian and African Studies
46, no. 4: 342–60. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021909611400547.
Elyachar, Julia
2012
“Before (and After) Neoliberalism: Tacit Knowledge, Secrets of the Trade, and
the Public Sector in Egypt.” Cultural Anthropology 27, no. 1: 76–96. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1360.2012.01127.x.
Endo, Tamaki
2014
Living with Risk: Precarity and Bangkok’s Urban Poor. Singapore: National University
of Singapore Press.
Englund, Harri
2006
Prisoners of Freedom: Human Rights and the African Poor. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Fassin, Didier
2014
“The Ethical Turn in Anthropology: Promises and Uncertainties.” HAU: Journal
of Ethnographic Theory 4, no. 1: 429–35. https://doi.org/10.14318/hau4.1.025.
Faubion, James D.
2011
An Anthropology of Ethics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ferguson, James
2006
Global Shadows: Africa in the Neoliberal World Order. Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press.

--- Page 22 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
89
2010
“The Uses of Neoliberalism.” Antipode 41, S1: 166–84. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1467-8330.2009.00721.x.
Foucault, Michel
1984a “On the Genealogy of Ethics: An Overview of Work in Progress.” In The Foucault
Reader, edited by Paul Rabinow, 340–72. New York: Pantheon. Originally
published in 1982.
1984b “Politics and Ethics: An Interview.” In The Foucault Reader, edited by Paul
Rabinow, 373–80. New York: Pantheon.
1984c “Space, Knowledge, and Power.” In The Foucault Reader, edited by Paul Rabinow,
239–56. New York: Pantheon. Originally published in 1982.
1997
“The Ethics of the Concern of the Self as a Practice of Freedom.” In Ethics:
Subjectivity and Truth, edited by Paul Rabinow, 281–302. New York: New Press.
Originally published in 1984.
2008
The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Colle`ge de France, 1978–1979. Translated by
Graham Burchell. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Originally published in 2004.
Graeber, David
2015
“Radical Alterity is Just Another Way of Saying ‘Reality’: A Reply to Eduardo
Viveiros de Castro.” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 5, no. 2: 1–41. https://
doi.org/10.14318/hau5.2.003.
Gramsci, Antonio
1971
Selections from the Prison Notebooks. Edited and translated by Quintin Hoare and
Geoffrey Nowell Smith. New York: International Publishers.
Harvey, David
1990
The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change.
Malden, Mass.: Blackwell.
Hewison, Kevin, and Woradul Tularak
2013
“Thailand and Precarious Work: An Assessment.” American Behavioral Scientist 57,
no. 4: 444–67. https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764212466244.
Hickey, Maureen Helen
2010
“Driving Globalization: Bangkok Taxi Drivers and the Restructuring of Work
and Masculinity in Thailand.” PhD dissertation, University of Washington.
High, Holly
2014
Fields of Desire: Poverty and Policy in Laos. Singapore: National University of
Singapore Press.
Johnson, Andrew Alan
2012
“Naming Chaos: Accident, Precariousness, and the Spirits of Wildness in Urban
Thai Spirit Cults.” American Ethnologist 39, no. 4: 766–78. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1548-1425.2012.01394.x.
Kalleberg, Arne L., and Kevin Hewison
2013
“Precarious Work and the Challenge for Asia.” American Behavioral Scientist 57,
no. 3: 271–88. https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764212466238.
Keane, Webb
2007
Christian Moderns: Freedom and Fetish in the Mission Encounter. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Kleinman, Arthur, and Joan Kleinman
1996
“The Appeal of Experience, the Dismay of Images: Cultural Appropriations of
Suffering in Our Times.” Daedalus 125, no. 1: 1–23. http://www.jstor.org/
stable/20027351.
Laidlaw, James
2002
“For an Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute 8, no. 2: 311–32. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9655.00110.
2013
The Subject of Virtue: An Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

--- Page 23 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
90
Lee, Ching Kwan, and Yelizavetta Kofman
2012
“The Politics of Precarity: Views beyond the United States.” Work and Occupations
39, no. 4: 388–408. https://doi.org/10.1177/0730888412446710.
Li, Tania Murray
2007
The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development, and the Practice of Politics.
Durham: Duke University Press.
2014
Land’s End: Capitalist Relations on an Indigenous Frontier. Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press.
Mahmood, Saba
2005
Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.
Marx, Karl
1975
“On the Jewish Question.” In Early Writings, translated by Rodney Livingstone
and Gregory Benton, 211–241. New York: Vintage Books. Originally published
in 1843.
Mills, Mary Beth
1997
“Contesting the Margins of Modernity: Women, Migration, and Consumption
in Thailand.” American Ethnologist 24, no. 1: 37–61. https://doi.org/10.1525/
ae.1997.24.1.37.
1999
Thai Women in the Global Labor Force: Consuming desires, Contested selves. New
Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.
Mole´, Noelle J.
2013
“Existential Damages: The Injury of Precarity Goes to Court.” Cultural
Anthropology 28, no. 1: 22–43. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1360.2012.
01171.x.
Muehlebach, Andrea
2012
The Moral Neoliberal: Welfare and Citizenship in Italy. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
2013
“On Precariousness and the Ethical Imagination: The Year 2012 in Sociocultural
Anthropology.” American Anthropologist 115, no. 2: 297–311. https://doi.org/
10.1111/aman.12011.
Neilson, Brett, and Ned Rossiter
2008
“Precarity as a Political Concept, or, Fordism as Exception.” Theory, Culture, and
Society 25, nos. 7–8: 51–72. https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276408097796.
Ong, Aihwa
2006
Neoliberalism as Exception: Mutations in Citizenship and Sovereignty. Durham, N.C.:
Duke University Press.
Pasuk, Phongpaichit, and Chris Baker
1998
Thailand’s Boom and Bust. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
2002
Thailand: Economy and Politics. 2nd edition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pasuk, Phongpaichit, and Chris Baker, eds.
2008
Thai Capital: After the 1997 Crisis. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
Pattana, Kitiarsa
2006
“Village Transnationalism: Transborder Identities among Thai-Isan Migrant
Workers in Singapore.” Asia Research Institute Working Paper Series, no. 71.
https://ari.nus.edu.sg/Publication/Detail/577.
Persons, Larry S.
2016
The Way Thais Lead: Face as Social Capital. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
Peters, Michael A.
2001
Poststructuralism, Marxism, and Neoliberalism: Between Theory and Politics. Lanham,
Md.: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
Polanyi, Karl
1944
The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time. New York:
Farrar and Rinehart.

--- Page 24 ---
FRAMED BY FREEDOM
91
Riesman, Paul
1977
Freedom in Fulani Social Life: An Introspective Ethnography. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Rigg, Jonathan, Suriya Veeravongs, Lalida Veeravongs, and Piyawadee Rohitarachoon
2008
“Reconﬁguring Rural Spaces and Remaking Rural Lives in Central Thailand.”
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 39, no. 3: 355–81. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0022463408000350.
Roberts, Alasdair
2010
The Logic of Discipline: Global Capitalism and the Architecture of Government. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Rose, Nikolas
1999
Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Roseberry, William
1994
“Hegemony and the Language of Contention.” In Everyday Forms of State Formation:
Revolution and the Negotiation of Rule in Modern Mexico, edited by Gilbert M. Joseph
and Daniel Nugent, 355–66. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
Santoro, Emilio
2003
Autonomy, Freedom, and Rights: A Critique of Liberal Subjectivity. Boston: Kluwer
Academic.
Sauwalak, Kittiprapas
2002
“Social Impacts of Financial and Economic Crisis in Thailand.” Report, East Asian
Development Network Regional Project on the Social Impact of the Asian
Financial Crisis.
Slocum, Karla
2006
Free Trade and Freedom: Neoliberalism, Place, and Nation in the Caribbean. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Smith, Gavin
2004
“Hegemony: Critical Interpretations in Anthropology and Beyond.” Focaal, no.
43: 99–120. https://doi.org/10.3167/092012904782311425.
2011
“Selective Hegemony and Beyond—Populations with ‘No Productive Function’:
A Framework for Enquiry.” Identities 18, no. 1: 2–38. https://doi.org/10.
1080/1070289X.2011.593413.
Sopranzetti, Claudio
2012
“Burning Red Desires: Isan Migrants and the Politics of Desire in Contemporary
Thailand.” Journal of Southeast Asia Research 20, no. 3: 361–79. https://doi.org/
10.5367/sear.2012.0112.
2014
“Owners of the Map: Mobility and Mobilization among Motorcycle Taxi Drivers
in Bangkok.” City and Society 26, no. 1: 120–46. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ciso.12030.
Forthcoming The Owners of the Map: Mobility and Politics in Bangkok. Oakland: University
of California Press.
Stiglitz, Joseph E.
2002
Globalization and Its Discontents. New York: W. W. Norton.
van der Veer, Peter
2001
Imperial Encounters: Religion and Modernity in India and Britain. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.
Viswanathan, Gauri
1998
Outside the Fold: Conversion, Modernity, and Belief. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Walker, Andrew
2012
Thailand’s Political Peasants: Power in the Modern Rural Economy. Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press.
Warr, Peter, ed.
2005
Thailand Beyond the Crisis. New York: RoutledgeCurzon.

--- Page 25 ---
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 32:1
92
Williams, Raymond
1977
Marxism and Literature. New York: Oxford University Press.
Zˇizˇek, Slavoj
1989
The Sublime Object of Ideology. New York: Verso.