# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2017-acri-spirits-and-ships-cultural-transfers.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 06:27:33
# Total Pages: 588
# File Size: 42.83 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 707.4 chars/page in sample)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 2 ---
SPIRITS 
AND SHIPS

--- PAGE 3 ---
The Nalanda-Sriwijaya Series, established under the publishing 
programme of ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, Singapore, has been 
created as a publications avenue for the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre. The 
Centre focuses on the ways in which Asian polities and societies have 
interacted over time. To this end, the series invites submissions which 
engage with Asian historical connectivities. Such works might examine 
political relations between states; the trading, financial and other 
networks which connected regions; cultural, linguistic and intellectual 
interactions between societies; or religious links across and between 
large parts of Asia.
ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute (formerly the Institute of Southeast 
Asian Studies) was established as an autonomous organization in 1968. 
It is a regional centre dedicated to the study of socio-political, security 
and economic trends and developments in Southeast Asia and its wider 
geostrategic and economic environment.
The Institute’s research programmes are the Regional Economic 
Studies (RES, including ASEAN and APEC), Regional Strategic and 
Political Studies (RSPS), and Regional Social and Cultural Studies 
(RSCS).
ISEAS Publishing, an established academic press, has issued 
more than 2,000 books and journals. It is the largest scholarly publisher 
of research about Southeast Asia from within the region. ISEAS 
Publications works with many other academic and trade publishers 
and distributors to disseminate important research and analyses from and 
about Southeast Asia to the rest of the world.

--- PAGE 4 ---
SPIRITS 
AND SHIPS 
Cultural Transfers in 
Early Monsoon Asia 
Edited by Andrea Acri, Roger 
Blench, Alexandra Landmann 
I5EA5 
YUSOF ISHAK 
INSTITUTE

--- PAGE 5 ---
First published in Singapore in 2017 by
ISEAS Publishing
30 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, Pasir Panjang
Singapore 119614
E-mail: publish@iseas.edu.sg
Website: bookshop.iseas.edu.sg
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the  
ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
© 2017 ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, Singapore
The responsibility for facts and opinions in this publication rests exclusively with the 
authors and their interpretations do not necessarily reflect the views or the policy of 
the publisher or its supporters.
ISEAS Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Spirits and Ships : Cultural Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia / editors, Andrea Acri, 
Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann.
1.	 Asia—Civilization.
2.	 Asia—Relations.
I.	
Acri, Andrea, 1981-
II.	 Blench, R.
III.	 Landmann, Alexandra.
DS12 S75          2017
ISBN 978-981-47-6275-5 (soft cover)
ISBN 978-981-47-6277-9 (E-book PDF)
Typeset by International Typesetters Pte Ltd
Printed in Singapore by Mainland Press Pte Ltd

--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
About the Contributors	
vii
Map of Monsoon Asia	
ix
1. Introduction: Re-connecting Histories across the Indo-Pacific 
1
	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann	
2.	 Fearsome Bleeding, Boogeyman Gods and Chaos Victorious:	
38 
A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious  
Tropes
	
Robert Dentan
3.	 Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
71
	
Andrea Acri
4.	 Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
145
	
Alexandra Landmann
5.	 Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an	
207 
Mainland Southeast Asia Linguistic Area
	
Roger Blench
6.	 Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian	
239 
Maritime Space? Insight from Settlements and Industries
	
Bérénice Bellina
7.	 Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
273
	
Christopher Buckley

--- PAGE 7 ---
vi	
Contents
8.	 Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast	
325 
Asia
	
Waruno Mahdi
9.	 The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia through	
375 
101 Etymologies
	
Tom Hoogervorst
10.	 Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
441
	
Alexander Adelaar
11. Śāstric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives: Parallel 
470 
Frameworks on Indic Architectural and Cultural Translations 
among Western Malayo-Polynesian Societies
	
Imran bin Tajudeen
12.	 The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
515
	
Robert Wessing
Index	
557

--- PAGE 8 ---
about the Contributors
Andrea Acri (PhD 2011, Leiden University) is Maître de Conférences 
in Tantric Studies at the École Pratique des Hautes Études (Paris) and 
Associate Fellow at the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre (Singapore). 
Alexander Adelaar is a principal Fellow in the Asia Institute at the 
University of Melbourne. His research is about the structure and history 
of Austronesian languages in West Indonesia and Malaysia, Madagascar 
and Taiwan. 
Bérénice Bellina is Senior Researcher at the National Centre for 
Scientific Research (France). She specializes on South and Southeast 
Asian archaeology, and is the Director of the Thai–French Archaeological 
Mission in Upper Thai–Malay Peninsula since 2005.
Roger Blench is Visiting Fellow at the McDonald Institute for 
Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, and International 
Research Officer at the Department of History, University of Jos, Plateau 
State, Nigeria.
Christopher Buckley (D.Phil Wolfson College, Oxford University, 
1987) is an independent scholar and a Member of the Common Room 
at Wolfson College (Oxford).
Robert Dentan is Professor Emeritus of Anthropology and American 
Studies at the State University of New York, University at Buffalo.

--- PAGE 9 ---
About the Contributors
Tom Hoogervorst (PhD 2013, University of Oxford) is a researcher 
at the Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean 
Studies (Leiden).
Imran bin Tajudeen (PhD 2009, National University of Singapore) is 
Assistant Professor at the Department of Architecture, School of Design 
and Environment, National University of Singapore.
Alexandra Landmann (MA and PhD Goethe University, Frankfurt) was 
a Research Fellow at Peace Research Institute Frankfurt, 2009–11, and 
Visiting Fellow at Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre (Singapore) in 2013. She 
lectured at the Indonesian Hindu University from 2011–15 and is currently 
ICGSE and IB Teacher for Environmental Management at GMIS Bali.
Waruno Mahdi (M.A. and Chem. Eng. 1965, Mendeleyev Institute of 
Chemical Technology, Moscow) is post-retirement part-time technical 
assistant at the Department of Physical Chemistry, Fritz Haber Institute 
(Berlin) of the Max Planck Society, and has done freelance historical 
linguistics since 1972. 
Robert Wessing (PhD 1974, University of Illinois, Urbana) is a retired 
anthropologist who last taught at Leiden University.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Map of Monsoon Asia
Source: Courtesy of Andrea Acri (modified from file Asie.svg, by user Gerge, via Wikimedia Commons, <https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Asie-color.svg>).
z 
0<( 
o_ 
VlVl 
Z<( 
0 
Uz 
g;~ 
uu 
CEo 
zz 
<t:<t: 
-
u.J 
Ou 
~0 
Q) 
c: 
0 
N 
0 u 
u.J 
~ 
"' '" 
E 
0 
"0 
.!: 
I 
~ 
_o 
E 
5. 
Q) a. 
1 
Q) 
Vl 
Q) 
:!.-
_o 
"' 
B 
5 
u 
Q. 
c: 
0 
c: 
~ 
0 
c: 
~ 
0 
c: 
:;; 
0 
0; 
:;; 
2 
E 
E 
~ 
::J 
Vl 
~ t

--- PAGE 11 ---
[BLANK PAGE OR NO DIGITAL TEXT LAYER]

--- PAGE 12 ---
1
1
Introduction
Re-connecting Histories across the 
Indo-Pacific
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
1.  Origin of This Volume
This volume is the result of a collaborative project that culminated in 
the conference “Cultural Transfer in Early Monsoon Asia: Austronesian-
Indic Encounters”, organized by Andrea Acri and Alexandra Landmann in 
December 2013 at the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre, ISEAS – Yusof Ishak 
Institute.1 The event brought together fourteen scholars from different 
disciplinary backgrounds and regional expertise, in the attempt to provide 
the widest possible framework to synthesize and (re-)assess the broad 
subject under investigation. Besides providing a venue for dialogue
 
1	 Although Roger Blench was not able to make it to the meeting in Singapore, he was 
invited to join the editorial committee in view of his multidisciplinary experience in 
the field.

--- PAGE 13 ---
2	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
between various disciplines, it has aimed to (re-)focus scholarly attention 
on cultural phenomena side-by-side with linguistics, archaeology, and 
genetics.
Conceptually, the conference sought to foreground a “borderless” 
history and geography of South, Southeast and East Asian littoral 
zones that would be maritime-focused, and thereby explore the 
ancient connections and dynamics of interaction that favoured fruitful 
“encounters” among the cultures found throughout the region stretching 
from the Indian Ocean littorals to the Western Pacific, from the early 
historical period to the present. A hallmark of its intellectual framework 
has been to transcend the artificial spatial demarcations and imagined 
boundaries of macro-regions and nation-states, as well as to bridge the 
arbitrary divide between (inherently cosmopolitan) “high” cultures (e.g. 
Sanskritic, Sinitic, or Islamicate) and “local” or “indigenous” cultures. 
Indeed, many “local” small-scale societies and cosmopolitan cultures 
in the region stretching from Eastern India and Southeast Asia to 
China and Japan were already plural from the earliest times, yet retain 
some remarkable common features, such as wet-rice monoculture and 
houses on stilts (Abalahin 2011, p. 661). Religion, too, shows common 
forms, in terms of dual organization and a focus on an ancestor cult, 
often vaguely defined as “shamanic” or “animist” (Reuter 2014). 
Remarkably similar head-hunting and burial practices characterize the 
religion of Nāga tribes of Eastern India, as well as the past religions 
of some Tibeto-Burman and Austroasiatic-speaking ethnic groups 
settled in Myanmar, and might have been once widespread in maritime 
Southeast Asia, Taiwan, and the whole of Oceania (Brighenti 2009, 
p. 92; Hutton 1928, pp. 406–7). A shared core of cultural identity 
or Weltanschauung across Southeast Asia and Melanesia includes 
narratives of multiple origins, the importance of precedence, clan and 
social binding systems, small-scale societies, autonomy for women, 
and a specific close interconnection of spatial, social and religious 
differentiation marking centre and periphery. Many authors (see reviews 
in Fox 1993; Bellwood, Fox and Tryon 1995; Fox and Sather 1996) 
have noted the persistence of dualism, i.e. culturally defined oppositions 
that include poetry, house-form, clan structures and much else. 
Ironically, these dichotomies appear to reflect models proposed by

--- PAGE 14 ---
1. Introduction	
3
Levi-Strauss more closely than the Amazonian societies he chose to 
study.
One of the main hypotheses discussed in the forum is that despite 
the rich ethnic, linguistic and sociocultural diversity, a shared pattern of 
values, norms and cultural models occurs throughout Monsoon Asia—a 
vast geographical area inhabited by speakers of numerous language 
phyla, where the circulatory dynamics of cultural transfer, interaction, 
acceptance, selection and avoidance can be discerned. For millennia, this 
region has been an integrated system of littorals where crops, goods, 
ideas, cosmologies and ritual practices circulated along the sea-routes 
governed by the seasonal monsoon winds. Some of the questions 
asked during the forum included: what were the translocal cultural 
dynamics before (and beyond) “Indianization”? What were the flows and 
interactions across the Indo-Pacific area? Did a common cultural matrix 
exist in the region stretching from the Bay of Bengal to the Western 
Pacific? Can we reconstruct an early shared matrix or common source for 
widespread cultural traits that we observe empirically today throughout 
the region?
Adhering to the spirit of the intellectual enquiry informing the 
conference, this multidisciplinary volume encourages both an “oceanic 
turn” and a longue durée approach to the study of the fluid and 
complex translocal dynamics governing historical processes that 
transcend the boundaries of both nation-states and macro-regions as 
they are commonly framed in the Area Studies paradigm. In focusing 
on Monsoon Asia, we encourage a widening of the geo-historical 
framework through which cultural phenomena linked by a shared 
history going back to a remote past are to be investigated. In so doing, 
we advocate a change of paradigm in studying the cultural exchanges 
between premodern South Asia, Southeast Asia, and East Asia—as 
if those concepts were actual distinctive entities, with intrinsic, clear-
cut and enduring geographical and ethno-linguistic boundaries—as well 
as a disciplinary de-parochialization. At any rate, it is important to 
remind us that the Area Studies segregation of region-bound separate and 
self-contained fields of study is a modern construct. It creates imagined 
boundaries and, as rightly noted by Ali (2009, p. 11), obscures rather 
than reveals:

--- PAGE 15 ---
4	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
When speaking about pre-modern cultural interactions… the ways we 
conceptualise these often has as much to do with the ‘onward historical 
developments’ which culminated in the formation of modern nationalism 
as with the cultural, economical and political flows which traversed the 
pre-colonial world.
Our perspective posits the occurrence of circulatory dynamics of 
globalization and diverse intercontinental, cross-cultural human relations 
that have configured trajectories of the existing cultural patterns in the 
area. These were formed and accommodated in prehistoric and early 
historical times, and constitute processual continuities that are still being 
negotiated in the modern period. By focusing on agency, interaction, 
and multi-directional transfer, our perspective aims at avoiding both 
essentialism and extreme fragmentation, thereby achieving greater depth 
in historical analysis. 
2.  (Re-)connected Histories: Conceptualizing  
Monsoon Asia
Kauz (2010, p. 1) highlights the interconnected and cosmopolitan nature 
of the premodern Indian Ocean trade network, noting that it has emerged 
as a “largely coherent structure, and has been a space which served as 
a huge stratum connecting the various kingdoms and cultures adjacent 
to it, causing interchanges in all possible fields and certainly mutual 
influences”. Asking whether the history of the civilizations around and 
beyond the Indian Ocean exhibits any intrinsic and perceptible unity, 
expressed in terms of space, time, or structures, Chaudhuri has found 
“a basic underlying structure, the ground floor of material life, which 
remained invariant while displaying variations within certain limits” 
(1993, pp. 1, 7). Andre G. Frank (1998) has considered the Indian Ocean 
area as extending to the South China Sea, and as having been central 
in global history for at least five millennia up to about 1800. 
Starting from these ocean-focused premises we imagine Monsoon Asia 
as a vast geographical, historical, and environmental space characterized 
by great variation and, at the same time, an underlying unity. From a 
geographical perspective, this space may be conceptualized as the belt 
of territory spanning from the eastern shores of the Indian Subcontinent

--- PAGE 16 ---
1. Introduction	
5
(and their hinterlands) in the west to the South China Sea, the Philippine 
islands and Papua New Guinea in the west.2 Its fulcrums are the 
littorals of peninsular and mainland Southeast Asia, and what is now the 
Malay-Indonesian Archipelago or Nusantara. Cutting across the natural 
boundaries and barriers of continental topography as well as the 
political borders of modern nation states, and transcending such 
constructed geographical divisions as South/Southeast/East Asia, this 
largely maritime expanse—which encompasses the environmental 
region of the “Indo-Pacific” and the “Indomalaya ecozone”—was 
influenced by environmental and climatic factors, such as the seasonal 
monsoon winds. Monsoon Asia can be theorized as an environmentally 
unified space and also as an interconnected and integrated network 
that—just like Eurasia (Lewis and Wigen 1997, p. 143)—presents the 
characteristics of a cultural ecumene. What Reynolds (2006, p. x) calls 
“the geoenvironmental metaphor of Monsoon Asia” could be translated 
into a “human-environmental metaphor” indeed, which here is offered 
as an heuristic device for the purpose of suggesting a commonality of 
cultural traits and epistemes against the background of millennia of 
human interaction—or, to say it with Abalahin (2011, p. 664), to frame 
“a series of world-historical developments that bring together histories 
that have customarily been viewed apart”.
Monsoon Asia, by virtue of its maritime corridors, formed a natural 
space that favoured the long-distance movement of people, commodities, 
languages and ideas across the Indian and the Western Pacific Oceans. 
While a great deal of scholarly attention has been traditionally devoted 
to the phenomenon of “Indianization” of Southeast Asia, the past two 
or three decades have witnessed intensive archaeological research 
into its early history, which has resulted in the formulation of new 
paradigms in the study of South and Southeast Asian exchanges (Bellina 
2002, 2003; Smith 1999; Theunissen, Grave and Bailey 2000). These 
paradigms are taken by Gupta (2005) as the basis for conceptualizing 
2	 If we strictly apply geoenvironmental criteria, and at the same time take into account 
historical and ethnolinguistic factors, Korea and Japan would belong to Monsoon Asia 
as its “appendices” or “edges”.

--- PAGE 17 ---
6	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
the Bay of Bengal as an “Interaction Sphere” in the period from 1000 BC 
to 500 AD. Abalahin (2011), discussing the non-Sinitic, i.e. (proto-) 
Austronesian identity in the pre- and proto-historic periods of what we 
now call “China”, has connected—and at the same time dissolved—
early Southeast Asia and Inner/North/East Asia into the macro-region 
called “Sino-Pacifica”. Using these innovative models as sources of 
inspiration, the collective body of work presented here intends to 
emphasize processes of cultural exchange and integration, and to raise 
the question as to whether these dynamics may have extended to an 
even wider geographical area over a longer period of time. By taking 
the “early” as our main chronological frame, we focus on the crucial 
transitional proto-historic period from 1500 BC to 500 AD, while at 
the same time taking into account earlier periods that paved the way 
for later historical developments, as well as modern phenomena that 
may give us a key to access and reconstruct an older layer of resilient 
cultural frameworks.
The idea of an interconnected and integral Monsoon Asia is not 
new. As pointed out by Yule and Rath (2000, quoted in Gupta 2005, 
p. 22), already in the 1920s, “eastern India came into the spotlight of 
world archaeology as the westernmost link in a complex of prehistoric 
cross-cultural relations which extended as far east as Japan”. At the same 
time, French scholars like Paul Mus, Sylvain Lévi, Jean Przyluski and 
George Coedès—whose studies at a later date inspired the proponents 
of the Greater India perspective—hypothesized the existence of a 
cultural substrate, labelled “Austroasiatic” or “Austric”, common to 
South, Southeast, and parts of East Asia. An “Austroasiatic culture” that 
included ancestor worship and funerary practices, matrilineal dualism, 
and structural analogies of myths was inferred on the basis of evidence 
from linguistic, mythology, art history, and archaeology. Mus (1975, 
pp. 8–9 [1933]) posited the “existence in ancient times of a certain 
unity of culture throughout an extensive zone in which India, Indo-
China, Indonesia, a Pacific islands fringe and doubtless southern China 
are to be united”. Further, Mus rightly emphasized the “borderless” 
character of long-distance cultural transfer in Monsoon Asia, favoured 
by its unique maritime geography:

--- PAGE 18 ---
1. Introduction	
7
The wide distribution over the surface of the globe of the regions 
I have just mentioned is not as absolute a barrier as you might be 
tempted to believe at first. For too long, ethnography has proceeded by 
purely continental groupings.… A hundred, two hundred or a thousand  
kilometres of sea, especially where there are prevailing winds, are 
a distance much less considerable than a hundred, two hundred or a 
thousand kilometres of land, divided by mountains, forests and hostile 
tribes… whenever sea lanes establish communication, it is reasonable to 
expect a cultural unity, and it makes more sense to speak of a religion of 
the monsoon zone of Asia than to speak of Indian religion, or Chinese  
religion, prior to the civilizations which were later to give meaning to 
these words.
Following Mus’ idea of Monsoon Asia as an integrated cultural zone, 
Coedès (1968, p. 15) espoused an analogous perspective by stating that 
Southeast Asian people were “endowed with a civilization that had traits 
in common with the civilization of pre-Aryan India”, and that there 
existed, “under an Indian veneer, a base common to all of monsoon 
Asia”, which made the spread of Indic cultural elements throughout 
Southeast Asia so quick and productive. 
The rise of post-WWII Area Studies paradigm reflecting current 
geopolitical trends relegated the approach of the earlier generation of 
scholars to an intellectual dustbin. Attempts to revive the Monsoon 
Asia perspective have remained sporadic and isolated at best; these 
include, e.g., Ian Mabbett’s (1977a, 1977b) idea that “Indianization of 
Southeast Asia” is a “confusion of categories”, suggesting as it does that 
South and Southeast Asia already shared common socio-cultural traits 
before “Indianization”; Chihara’s (1996, p. 7) hypothesis concerning a 
“substratum of pre-Aryan culture” shared between India and Southeast 
Asia, which made it easy for the waves of Indianization to penetrate 
Southeast Asian societies “as if by osmosis”; and the case-studies by 
Emigh (1996), Jordaan and Wessing (1996, 1999), and Dentan (2002a, 
2002b, this volume), which have attempted to unravel the intricate 
relationship between “Indic” and “autochthonous” phenomena (and their 
ultimate origin) from a wider-ranging Monsoon Asia perspective (see 
Acri, this volume).

--- PAGE 19 ---
8	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
As a reaction to the “Indianization” or “Greater India” paradigm in 
vogue around the first half of the twentieth century, which stressed the 
civilizing role of India and West–East dynamics of transfer, the Area 
Studies paradigm has insisted on Southeast Asian agency in regional 
“localizations” of Indic phenomena. This perspective is the hallmark 
of the influential model proposed by Wolters (1999 [1982]), who took 
into account the Southeast Asian region as a “broadly based community 
of outlook”, or a distinctive “mosaic of literary cultures characterised 
by foreign and local features fitting into various text-like wholes” 
(p. 65). While we recognize Wolters’ masterful contribution to the field 
of Southeast Asian studies, his characteristic focus on literacy does 
not do full justice to the concept of “cultural matrix”: whatever was 
responsible for the unity of the Southeast Asian area, it was certainly 
not a relatively late external factor such as literacy.
Some scholars attempted to refine the theoretical parameters of both 
extremes adding a new element of complexity. For instance, de Casparis 
(1983) put the emphasis on the fact that this process of cultural exchange 
was hitherto analysed in too simplistic a way, implying on the contrary 
“a complicated network of relations, both between various parts of 
each of the two great regions and between the two regions themselves” 
(ibid., pp. 18–19). He further considered that in analysing the phenomenon 
of Indianization one could hardly avoid focusing on either India or 
Southeast Asia, implying that one area “gave” and the other “received”, 
whereas the picture is much more complicated by the mosaic of different 
cultures which characterized both regions (ibid., p. 2). Kulke (1990) 
suggested an (independent) socio-cultural “convergence”. Calling India 
and Southeast Asia “partners of mutual ‘processes of civilisation’ which 
comprised both sides of the Bay of Bengal”, Kulke (2014, p. 10) posits 
a socio-economic and political convergence in both regions during the 
early centuries AD that enabled similar solutions to similar problems 
of social change. 
A recent trend in contemporary scholarship has been the emphasis on 
cosmopolitan phenomena. Such is the case of the “Sanskrit Cosmopolis” 
model advanced by Pollock (1996, 2006), which has developed a critique 
of the “civilizationalist indigenism” of Wolters and any “defensive 
indigenist” approaches that see an undeterminable cultural matrix in

--- PAGE 20 ---
1. Introduction	
9
Southeast Asia, i.e. an echt “Southeast Asianness”. However, Pollock’s 
model is limited to Sanskrit and “Cosmopolitan vernacular” languages 
and literatures, and therefore biased towards high cultural, top-down 
phenomena; the supralocal dynamics shaping bottom-up phenomena 
that do not fit the model, such as e.g. magic, folk religion, ritual, 
and performances remain largely to be investigated. As noted by Ali 
(2009, p. 16), “the full implications of Pollock’s theory have yet to be 
explored and may still help us reconceptualize the nature of linkages 
between South and Southeast Asia in ways perhaps consonant with 
Kulke’s suggestive remarks”. One cannot but agree with Lombard’s 
(1995, p. 15) hope that one day the historical reconstructions made 
by archaeologists, linguists, geneticists, and scholars of culture “will 
give way to a true consideration of synchronisms, that is to say 
to a comparative theory, which will examine parallels between the 
evolutionary paths of the different ‘layers’ or ‘sectors’”. (Lombard was 
a follower of Heine-Geldern (1932a), for whom the synchronisms of the 
Dongsonian period and its bronze drums and the so-called “Indianized” 
period, characterized by state formation and dissemination of the Indian 
script and Sanskrit languages, seemed significant, although we now know 
this was a chronological accident.) This perspective may be compared to 
Lieberman’s (2009) “strange parallels”, i.e. synchronous developments 
between geographically distant regions in Southeast Asia and the wider 
Eurasian area.
It is worth commenting here on the significance of bronze drums, 
since they are so widely—yet unwarrantedly—cited by so many authors 
as somehow typical of the Southeast Asian region and the period of 
“Indianization”. The most recent summary of the archaeology and 
ethnography of bronze drums is Calò (2014). The drums, which were 
manufactured in workshops in Northern Vietnam and possibly adjacent 
Laos from 400 BC onwards, were traded widely across the region for 
nearly a millennium. A radically different type, the moko, began to be 
manufactured and spread in Indonesia from 600 AD (see Figure 1.1). 
We have no idea who the makers of the drums were and why this 
particular object was so widely diffused. Other products of the Dongson 
culture, such as the daggers and the bronze vessels, largely stayed on 
the mainland. In later periods, the bossed gong, originally from China,

--- PAGE 21 ---
10	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
figure 1.1
Moko and Classical Bronze Drum
Source: Roger Blench.

--- PAGE 22 ---
1. Introduction	
11
replaced the bronze drum. Bronze drums are rich markers of early trade 
routes, but in the end cannot be regarded as being characteristic of the 
Southeast Asian region.
In a recent appraisal of the dynamics of early interactions and 
cross-cultural exchange between South and Southeast Asia, Manguin 
(2011, p. xx) argues that the “relationship between Southeast Asian and 
Indian societies had already come a very long way” before the first 
Indian-inspired archaeological, linguistic and cultural vestiges begin 
to appear between the third and fifth century CE. This fact prompted 
him to formulate the question, was Southeast Asia Indianized before 
Indianization? If so, the preceding period “would then only be considered 
as a contact and exchange phase with South Asia, allowing for a variety 
of comparable but variable processes at play”. While this formulation 
shifts the chronological parameters of the issue at stake, it does not 
introduce a substantial change in the theoretical framework. Whether 
the “comparable processes” constituted independent developments, as 
in Kulke’s “convergence” theory, or stemmed from an early common 
source or civilizational configuration, as in the “Monsoon Asia” paradigm, 
remains to be investigated. 
3. The Genesis of Early Seafaring in the Southeast  
Asian Region
Much of the historical writing on Southeast Asia has failed to read 
the literature on the prehistory of the region. Archaeology has now 
demonstrated that the maritime history of Southeast Asia is virtually 
coincident with the earliest human settlement of the region. Australia was 
settled from Timor around 55,000 BP, a voyage which cannot be explained 
as accidental drift (O’Connor 2003). Burials on the islands of the 
Ryukyus, the chain stretching north of Taiwan to Southern Japan, indicate 
inter-island traffic as early as 35,000 BP (Pearson 2014). Bednarik 
(2003) reviews the evidence for inter-island voyaging in island 
Southeast Asia in the Pleistocene, as well as attempting to reproduce 
a possible vessel of the period and test its feasibility. Bulbeck (2008) 
has shown that inter-island transfers of trade goods in island Southeast 
Asia long predate the Neolithic. Regrettably, we do not know the

--- PAGE 23 ---
12	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
identity of these early voyagers, nor what languages they spoke or the 
types of watercraft they used. But we can say that the dramatic expansion 
of sea-voyaging following the Austronesian dispersal had antecedents 
in deep antiquity (Mahdi, this volume).
After 4,000 BP it can be fairly said there was a revolution in ship 
construction that made possible long distance and large-scale inter-
island traffic (Bellwood 1995, 2007). Neolithic sites in island Southeast 
Asia multiply rapidly and by 3,500 BP, the Austronesians have 
reached the Marianas, some 3,500 km east of the Philippines. The 
first archaeologist to point to similarities around the South China Sea 
indicating early maritime contact was Solheim (1957) who identified 
the remarkable Kulanay complex which joins the Philippines with 
the Southeast Asian mainland. Solheim (1984–85) later went on to 
model the similarities defining the Austronesian culture area as the 
“Nusantao”. Although this model has been quite influential, Solheim 
never really engaged with the lingusitic data, in contrast to Bellwood, 
and his concept of Austronesian as a trade language is no longer 
considered viable. 
With these skills, trade goods, such as nephrite from Taiwan, 
began to diffuse throughout the whole Southeast Asian area, 
both mainland and islands (Hung et al. 2013). The advantage of 
archaeology over vague speculation is that the geography of finds 
can provide concrete evidence for both shared cultural elements 
and chronology. From the distribution of shared ceramic types and 
motifs, we can see how improved maritime skills stimulated a web of 
connections across the South China Sea from 3,500 BP onwards (see 
Figure 1.2). Only later do Dongson artefacts enter the record, spreading 
out from workshops in what is now Vietnam. Such maps provide 
graphic evidence for the complete independence between the 
evolution of a Southeast Asian shared culture and the later impact of 
Indianization.
Parallel developments were taking place on the mainland at exactly 
this period. A revised chronology using direct dates from a sample major 
of sites from Southeast Asia (Higham et al. 2011) has indicated the 
Southeast Asian mainland Neolithic was confined to a small window, from

--- PAGE 24 ---
1. Introduction	
13
figure 1.2
Kalanay and Dongson Culture Areas
Source: Adapted from Hung et al. (2013)
3,800–4,100 BP. It is difficult not to associate this with the dispersal of 
Austroasiatic (cf. arguments in Sidwell and Blench 2011) and possibly 
also Tai-Kadai languages. Austroasiatic at least seems to have been an 
aquatic dispersal, driven by improved rivercraft, following the main 
watersheds of the region.
A consequence of this period of parallel expansions is a “community of 
culture”. Austronesian in particular is characterized by a raft of common 
cultural features, which can be identified from Taiwan to New Zealand 
(Bellwood et al. 1995). Austroasiatic societies and cultures are more

--- PAGE 25 ---
14	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
diverse, presumably due to their fragmentation caused by subsequent 
incursions from speakers of Tai-Kadai and Sino-Tibetan languages. 
Even so, the significance of improved boats in exploring the inland 
waterways of mainland Southeast Asia created a similarly rapid 
expansion. The intense circulation of ideas in parallel with material 
culture goes a long way towards explaining the consensus culture which 
characterized the region long before the arrival of the first ships from 
South Asia.
A second maritime revolution seems to have occurred with the 
evolution of new ship types (Manguin 1993). Moving away from simple 
boats to larger outriggers constructed with nails meant that much larger 
cargoes and crews could ply regular routes. Figure 1.3 neatly illustrates 
this transition, showing the contrast between the flimsy construction of 
earlier boats (left) compared with the large trade ships (right) in the 
friezes at Borobudur (eighth/ninth century AD).
Figure 1.3
Two Types of Boat Shown at Borobudur
Source: Andrea Acri.

--- PAGE 26 ---
1. Introduction	
15
This period sees the genesis of the Srivijaya thalassocracy which 
begins to move trade goods, ideas and languages around the region. 
The frontiers of exploration reach as far as the east coast of Africa 
westwards and to Papua in the east. The multilingual crews that reached 
East Africa and went on to colonize Madagascar (Adelaar, this volume) 
mark the entry of Southeast Asia into the world system, pioneering the 
trans-Indian Ocean trade (Blench 2010).
South Asian contact had begun prior to 0 AD, but with a strong focus 
on religion, and with impacts typically on architecture and iconography. 
There is very little evidence for technological transfers, and it seems 
that shipbuilding techniques were most likely indigenous to the region. 
What can be said is that the pre-existing networks of the region were 
already adapted to the pioneering of new trade routes, and for this reason 
there were significant transfers of crops and maritime technology to 
South Asia (Mahdi 1999). The imbalanced picture presented by scholars 
focusing on writing and stone architecture is gradually being rectified 
as archaeology and cultural analysis demonstrates ever more clearly the 
existence of two-way traffic.
4. The Contribution of Linguistics
Linguistic data has shed new light on cultural contact in the Indian 
Ocean from the mid-second millennium BCE. The online Austronesian 
Comparative Dictionary of Blust3 reconstructs over 5,000 forms and 
is accompanied by an interpretative commentary, providing a resource 
unequalled even in Indo-European for understanding regional history. 
The advanced knowledge of seafaring testified to by numerous nautical 
terms in Malayo-Polynesian languages from Malaysia to Hawaii 
suggests the existence of reconstructible forms in proto-Malayo-Polynesian 
(Pawley and Pawley 1994). While there is increasing evidence of the 
traces left by Southeast Asian seafarers on the Western Indian Ocean 
shores (Blench 2010), the impact of Southeast Asia on India remains 
3	 URL: <http://www.trussel2.com/acd/> (accessed 20 September 2015).

--- PAGE 27 ---
16	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
poorly understood, in terms of the dispersal of cultigens, languages, and 
ideas. Mahdi (1999) is one of the few scholars to discuss this topic in 
detail. Connections can be discerned along two quite distinct routes, the 
sea-routes to the east coast of mainland South Asia and the overland 
trade routes passing through Yunnan into the valley of the Brahmaputra. 
Potential links include megalithic traditions and cultural practices of 
the northeastern region of the Indian Subcontinent and Southeast Asia 
(ibid., p. 4). For example, it has recently been discovered that the rice 
domesticated in India (Oryza sativa var. indica) was subject to early 
introgression with the japonica varieties domesticated in East Asia 
(Castillo et al. 2015). This can only have occurred in the corridor 
linking China to the valley of the Brahmaputra via Yunnan. There can 
be little doubt the Austroasiatic-speaking Munda peoples, who arrived 
in the northeastern region of the Indian Subcontinent from Southeast 
Asia with a fully-realized agricultural package, played a major role in 
this meeting of traditions.
The ever-increasing body of linguistic, genetic and archaeological 
evidence unearthed in the past two decades can tell us much about the 
origin and dispersal of population across the Indo-Pacific (Lansing et al. 
2011). There is little doubt the Austronesians originated in Taiwan, 
although their ancestral source was clearly the Chinese mainland. What 
remains controversial is whether this was a demographic expansion 
driven by agriculture (the Bellwood model) or rather a seaborne dispersal 
motivated by trade and the quest for aquatic resources (Bulbeck 2008; 
Blench 2012b). Recent dates for the Neolithic of island Southeast 
Asia point ever more strongly to a very rapid expansion favouring the 
second interpretation (Spriggs 2011). Genetics indicates that the “Asian” 
component in western Island Southeast Asia is overwhelming and 
Lansing et al. (2011) provide a useful model of how marriage patterns 
and cultural dominance all but eliminated the traces of pre-existing 
resident populations. 
On the mainland, there was a meeting of four major language 
phyla. An important chapter in this saga is the debate over whether a 
“Neolithic package” of rice cultivation was superimposed on a substrate 
of vegeculturalists (van Driem 2001, pp. 324–7, 2012; Diffloth 2005; 
Ferlus 2010). The core language group in the region is evidently

--- PAGE 28 ---
1. Introduction	
17
Austroasiatic, spreading both along the Mekong and parallel watersheds 
westwards, as well as down the Thai Peninsular and on to the Nicobar 
Islands (Sidwell and Blench 2011). However, as the map shows all too 
clearly, Austroasiatic has been fragmented by the subsequent southward 
spread of Sino-Tibetan and Tai-Kadai languages (Blench 2011b, 2013a). 
The homeland of Sino-Tibetan is disputed, but the broad consensus is 
that it must have been in the west, Nepal, Bhutan and Northeast India, 
where the diversity is greatest (Blench 2014a). The dispersal eastwards 
seems to have occurred multiple times; isolated languages such as 
Tujia and Bai testify to these early movements. The ancestors of the 
Chinese apparently moved to North China, where they picked up millet 
and other cold weather crops from the resident Altaic speakers. It is 
likely that they subsequently moved south to the valley of the Yangtse, 
displacing the resident Hmong-Mien speakers. Rice is domesticated 
(as opposed to the management of wild rice) at about 6,500 BP and it 
becomes a core cultural concept of Sinitic society, fuelling the massive 
demographic increase which allowed the Han to dominate a vast 
geographical region.
5.  Cosmopolitanism vis-à-vis Indigenism 
Area Studies scholars, ethnographers, historians and philologists in the 
past fifty years or so have tended to analyse Southeast Asian cultural 
phenomena in terms of a synthesis or hybridization between foreign 
elements/influences and “local” or “indigenous” phenomena. The 
former have been regarded as intrinsically cosmopolitan, whereas the 
latter as intrinsically embedded or vernacular. Thus, elements of the 
Indic/Sanskritic, Sinitic, and Islamicate high culture would have been 
localized along the prevalent place-specific socio-cultural and linguistic 
coordinates. Even when a higher degree of agency and dynamism 
is accorded to the pre-existing civilizations of Southeast Asia, those 
civilizational configurations are too often only vaguely defined through 
such self-explanatory labels as “local” or “indigenous”—without a 
clear definition of what is to be understood as local or indigenous. For 
example, to describe Southeast Asian varieties of imported religions and 
their mixture of Indic (or Sinitic) elements and pre-existing indigenous

--- PAGE 29 ---
18	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
(e.g. “shamanic” or “animist”) cultural features, such vague notions as 
“hybrid”, “assimilated”, or “syncretic” are often invoked, yet hardly 
ever explained. No detailed comparative research has unravelled whether 
there had been or not a common civilizational configuration prior to 
“Indianization”, and what the features of such a civilizational configuration 
might have been.
The concept of “local genius” has been popular among Indonesianists, 
and especially art historians, who generally speak of an “indigenous 
Indonesian spirit” (Holt 1967, p. 29); yet, it is not entirely clear in 
what exactly this indigenous spirit consists of, and where its “local” 
boundaries lay. Edi Sedyawati, when referring to premodern Central 
Javanese dance, rightly notes that “the adjective ‘local’ and ‘indigenous’ 
are ambiguous terms used to denote anything which does not belong to 
‘standard’ classical Hindu (sic) dance style” (1982). Similar considerations 
can be made with respect to religious ideas and practices, which 
are often deemed to be “local” but may in fact be part of a shared 
heritage that circulated through networks of folk practitioners—or what 
scholarship has tended to call “shamans” (see Acri 2014). In short, we 
feel that there is a need to realize that features that are often perceived 
as local or indigenous have turned out to be the product of 
circulatory dynamics, whereby local developments took place against 
the background of translocal exchanges. In other words, the “local” 
was already, at least in part, “cosmopolitan”: compare Pollock’s concept 
of “Cosmopolitan vernacular”. This is the case, for instance, of the 
“Austronesian cultural package” that seafaring voyagers spread as they 
gradually settled through Southeast Asia, and which eventually was 
localized. 
The last two decades have witnessed the emergence of a focus 
on a linguistically and archeologically defined Austronesian shared 
background of the people inhabiting mainland and insular Southeast 
Asia, as well as Oceania. New findings from genetics and physical 
anthropology, point to a more nuanced model of migration. A combined 
approach to reconstruct the history and evolution of ideas that 
integrates and moves beyond linguistics, archaeology, and genetics, could 
produce and connect new insights by delving into the hitherto little 
explored domains of production and transfer of knowledge, mythologies,

--- PAGE 30 ---
1. Introduction	
19
ancestral legal systems and religious beliefs, as well as aspects of 
material culture such as trade, navigation technology, etc.
Fox (2006, p. 1 [1996]) lamented a “localization” of interests and 
disciplinary/areal parochialization reflected in current academe. Going 
against this trend, Bellwood, Fox and colleagues, in many publications 
stemming from the “Comparative Austronesian Project”, have drawn 
together different disciplinary approaches for the study of the Austronesian-
speaking populations and to elaborate a general framework for the 
interpretation of the complexities of the Austronesian heritage across 
Southeast Asia and the Pacific Ocean. They have compared features 
traceable to a common heritage beyond language despite millennia of 
interaction and change, namely a “Southern Mongoloid” genetic ancestry 
for Austronesian-speakers. These include widespread cultural features 
such as tattooing, use of outriggers on canoes, features of ethnographic 
and prehistoric art styles, and social norms concerning siblings’ rank 
and a reverence for ancestral kin group founders (Fox 2006, p. 6). In 
spite of these common features, however, “there is little which can be 
characterised as exclusively and uniquely Austronesian held widely today 
in common among all the Austronesian-speaking regions” (2006, p. 3). 
This state of affairs suggests that a polythetic approach is needed to 
evaluate the complex issue of origin, dispersal, and transformation of 
the “Austronesians” and their “cultural package(s)” through millennia 
(see Landmann, this volume). 
In the short manifesto “Towards an integrated comparative study of 
Austronesian Cultures”, Edi Sedyawati (2011, pp. 54–5) has noted that 
by comparing cultures and their respective culture bearers it would be 
possible to discern whether they are related, and therefore presumably 
share the same origin. Blench (2012b, p. 135), discussing the pervasive 
and highly distinctive set of iconographic elements in figurative art 
that is widely spread across the Austronesian-speaking areas, argues 
that this strongly religion-associated imagery may be “a manifestation 
of adat, the traditional religion of I[sland] S[outh] E[ast] A[sia] prior 
to the spread of world religions”. The curious irony is that this type 
of regional cultural comparison is the major feature of what is now 
considered outmoded or bypassed Kulturkreislehre, the typical pattern 
of North European ethnology from about 1890 to the 1950s. The careful

--- PAGE 31 ---
20	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
mapping of comparable features of culture was typical of this period and 
monographs such as Speiser’s (1923) work on Vanuatu illustrate the value 
of these approaches. The authors of these studies had no archaeological 
chronology to guide them and were hobbled by interpretations which 
emphasized cultural “layers”. Nonetheless, the comparative side of their 
work could well be emulated by modern scholars concerned with the 
identification of a common Austronesian cultural core. 
6. Where Do We Stand?
Monsoon Asia constitutes a geographical arena with a shared, millennia-
long history of migration of people, long-distance trade, linguistic contact 
and dispersal, and cultural transfer. Gupta (2005, p. 21) distinguishes 
interactive, long-distance “processes of human dispersals and techno-
cultural diffusions (including the Neolithic expansion from southern 
China into Southeast Asia) and short term movements of men and 
material inspired by trade opportunities”, arguing that the latter were 
usually effected through conduits opened by earlier expansions. More 
evidence of prehistoric contacts between South Asia, Southeast Asia 
and East Asia has turned up in recent years. The presence of jar burials 
along the Indo-Pacific arc suggests the possibility of interactivity and 
sharing of religious ideas and practices from East to South Asia, while 
studies on the distribution of ceramics, cultigens, and nautical terms 
and devices, have highlighted the regular maritime links between early 
farming communities in South and Southeast Asia since at least the first 
millennium BCE (Gupta 2005, p. 22, Hoogervorst 2013, p. 102). 
As noted by Hoogervorst (2013, p. 12), there is an increasing 
awareness that “literary references to commercial activities between 
these state-level societies [across the Indian Ocean] only reveal the 
culmination of much older networks”, which in the case of South 
and Southeast Asia go back to at least the second half of the second 
millennium BCE. Intra-regional Southeast Asian circuits of interaction 
preceding an “Indianization” period have also been deduced from the 
distribution of Dongson drums, Sa-Huynh ornaments and jar burials, 
and agate and carnelian beads (Theunissen, Grave and Bailey 2000). 
Nephrite artefacts from Southeast Asia and Taiwan, dating to between

--- PAGE 32 ---
1. Introduction	
21
3,000 BCE and 500 CE, have been unearthed through much of mainland 
Southeast Asia and the Philippines, thus providing evidence for extensive 
sea-based trade networks across the South China Sea (Hung et al. 2007). 
Long-range contacts between North China and the South China Sea or 
even the Indian Ocean are suggested by the findings of shell cowries in 
elite burials of Northern China as early as the second millennium BCE 
(Li Shuicheng 2003, Liu 2004). Blench (2013b) has hypothesized the 
existence of an arc of vegeculture as early as 10,000 BP, characterized 
by tubers, Musaceae, sago exploitation and sugar-cane stretching between 
Melanesia and Eastern Nepal, correlated with linguistic evidence as 
well as a suite of material culture items and, perhaps, ideas. Certain 
Austronesian cultural and religious features have been detected in 
premodern Japan (Abalahin 2011, pp. 661, 676), while an argument 
in favour of an early direct influence from pre-Indicized Java to Japan 
has been made by Kumar (2009); other intriguing similarities in the 
realm of the performing arts from Java, Bali and Japan have been 
pointed out by Coldiron (2005a, 2005b). Many specialists in the 
region are sceptical of these (in some cases) rather vaguely defined 
similarities and we must be wary of assuming these represent a 
scholarly consensus. The possibility of pre- or early-historical exchanges 
and commonalities between South and Southeast Asia in the realm of 
religion have been proposed by Dentan and Acri (see their respective 
chapters in this volume). An attempt to revise the mainstream 
historical paradigm concerning human dispersal across Monsoon Asia 
and the Pacific Ocean has been made by Oppenheimer (1998) and 
Santos (2005), who have traced the ultimate origin of the Austronesians 
back to the Sunda shelf or Sundaland; although these works remain 
highly controversial, they reflect the uncertainty—and openness— 
of a field that promises exciting discoveries, and which makes an 
increasingly important contribution to global history.
Given the paucity of records, research on cultural elements going 
back to a remote past is bound to be fraught with uncertainty; however, 
it needs to be pursued with renewed vigour as it could help us to link 
together, and make sense of, data drawn from linguistics, archaeology, 
and genetics.

--- PAGE 33 ---
22	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
7. The Present in the Past
Modern visitors to Southeast Asia often express frustration at the rush 
to modernity; traditional architecture demolished, older clothing styles 
discarded and musical traditions displaced in the hurry to reach the 
twenty-first century on schedule. Angkor or Borobudur are valued, 
not much for their artistry or their place in the identity of the present 
residents of the area, but as tourist and commercial opportunities. 
Perhaps the fact that both were forgotten, covered by the humid 
forest, and had to be uncovered by European visitors, points to a local 
perception of impermanence of the material world. Culture is politics 
in Southeast Asia and the unfolding perception of the region’s past 
is being rapidly incorporated into the narrative of the present (Glover 
2006).
Nonetheless, perhaps characteristically, both the Sinitic and “Malay” 
areas have begun to recognize the importance of history and culture 
in constructing national identity. Mobile phones can be made anywhere, 
but distinctive regional cultures which can re-inspire architecture, 
writing and build national consciousness are beginning to be valued. 
The National Museum and Asian Civilisations Museum of Singapore 
are striking examples of this approach. While Singapore is largely a 
colonial construct, recent archaeological excavations have unearthed 
its precolonial heritage, which has been integrated into the national 
master-narrative of the (old and modern) port-city at the crossroads 
of the maritime routes connecting India and China via Southeast Asia 
(Miksic 2013). But the bulk of the heritage must be bought in and so it 
has been, on a considerable scale, to the benefit of international auction 
houses. The three major communities which make up the population—
the Chinese, Malay, and Indian—are all represented by artefacts from 
their ancestral areas, the emphasis being on the harmonious relations 
between them. 
A somewhat different approach can be seen in Taiwan, the ancestral 
home of the Austronesians. Inhabited from roughly 25,000 BP by 
diverse peoples from the mainland, the island was revolutionized by 
the appearance of Neolithic migrants at around 5,500 BP. These spread 
out and diversified into every possible ecozonal niche. Han migration 
began in the seventeenth century, encouraged by the Dutch, and by the

--- PAGE 34 ---
1. Introduction	
23
period of the Japanese occupation, the indigenous Austronesians had 
been swamped demographically, and many lowland populations 
assimilated. During most of the twentieth century, these “aborigines” 
were disdained and marginalised. In a disgraceful act of indifference, 
the Nationalist government turned Lanyu, the home of the Yami people, 
into a nuclear waste dump. However, the evolution of democracy in 
Taiwan in the 1990s, began an almost magical transformation. The 
notion of Taiwan as the seat of ancestral Austronesian culture suddenly 
implied the indigenous populations were to be respected if not entirely 
understood. Literacy programmes were rolled out, museums were 
opened or expanded, international conferences were funded, foreign 
scholars who had taken an interest in Austronesians in Taiwan invited. 
In 2016, the Taiwanese Government issued a formal apology to its 
indigenous populations for their treatment. Welcome as this was, it was 
not entirely disinterested; it was clearly intended to reflect an identity 
separate from mainland China. The requirement for Taiwan to be seen 
as distinctive, not simply another province of the People’s Republic, 
clearly underlies the rather sudden interest in the Austronesians. 
Sadly, it is too late for many languages. Kavalan and Pazeh have 
disappeared in the late twentieth century and some others are set to 
follow. Meanwhile Taiwanese logging companies are complicit in the 
logging and eviction of Austronesian speakers in the highlands of 
northeastern Cambodia. The rise of the nation state entertains a wide 
variety of ironies.
A recent phenomenon of “Pan-Austronesianism” involving the 
valorisation of Malayo-Polynesian origins and identity can be witnessed 
in Malaysia and Indonesia. This can be charitably divided into what 
might be called the “lunatic fringe”, the alignment of Austronesians 
with the inhabitants of the lost continent of Lemuria proposed by 
the Theosophists, which would be coterminous with the submerged 
continental shelf of Sundaland (a link between Lemuria or Atlantis 
and Java was theorized by the Theosophist Leadbeater in 1951). More 
recently, the above-mentioned studies by Oppenheimer and Santos, as 
well as the discovery of allegedly man-made early structures on Gunung 
Padang in West Java, have fuelled a wave of historical/historiographic 
revisionism in the Malay-Indonesian world—both in scholarly press and

--- PAGE 35 ---
24	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
on social media, mainstream press and TV. Alas, the ensuing body of 
work is characterized entirely by a nationalistic agenda, and therefore 
is more interesting as a socio-cultural phenomenon than for its potential 
to revolutionize the current historical paradigms.
More mainstream are the groups headed by academics and public 
intellectuals to bring together the so-called “Malay race”—which would 
include all Malayo-Polynesian language speakers, as far east as the 
Māori. There is nothing wrong with this idea in principle, although 
the framing of Austronesian as a type of Malay expansion goes back 
to the long-discredited Proto- and Deutero-Malay model espoused 
by Heine-Geldern (1932b). These groups are also elaborating a 
(trans-)national narrative that revives and re-evaluates the Austronesian 
roots of the Malay people and culture by linking them to an ancestral 
“lost civilization” that would predate the earliest known vestiges of the 
Sumerian and Chinese civilizations. This has rather odd consequences: 
some of the papers in a volume on the Austronesians of Sulawesi 
suggest that some ethnic groups are “more Austronesian” than others 
(Simanjuntak 2008). 
8.  Summary of the Contributions
This volume includes seven of the fourteen papers presented at the 
conference, with the addition of four papers from invited contributors. 
The aim of our intellectual enquiry is to investigate the cultural 
flows, interactions and agencies across the seas and land masses of 
Monsoon Asia. The chapters reflect the disciplinary perspectives of 
History and Historiography, Linguistics, Ethnography, Archaeology and 
Art History, and Religious Studies. They discuss various expressions 
of cultural trajectories, shared commonalities, and continuities before, 
during and after the Austronesian ethnolinguistic and cultural 
expansion. They interpret its encounter with an indigenous substrate of 
Austroasiatic-speaking cultures on the one hand and Indic Cosmopolitan 
polities on the other—a process of cross-fertilization that might have 
occurred over a millennium. Taken collectively, they try to transcend 
the traditional paradigm of “Indianization”/“Sanskritization” vs. “local 
genius”, and explore the possibility of the existence of supra-local

--- PAGE 36 ---
1. Introduction	
25
cultural formations both before and after the emergence of the so-called 
“Sanskrit Cosmopolis” around 500 AD. 
The discussion is opened by two closely-related chapters that, 
situating themselves in the “Monsoon Asian approach” advanced by early 
twentieth-century French scholarship, tackle the controversial issue 
of a shared religious matrix in early Monsoon Asia. Robert Dentan’s 
“Fearsome Bleeding, Boogeyman Gods and Chaos Victorious: A 
Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes” tries to 
reconstruct the religious situation current among Austroasiatic-speaking 
populations of islands across South and Southeast Asia around 1500 BC 
—that is, before Indian thought took solid form in the Vedas and 
Austronesian-speakers dominated the islands. Drawing from his previous 
comparative work, Dentan hypothesizes a common ancestry between 
Nkuu’, the thundersquall-God of the Semai ethnic group in highland 
peninsular Malaysia, and the fierce Vedic Rudra, on account of their 
similar nature and common features. 
Andrea Acri’s “Tantrism ‘Seen from the East’” raises the question 
as to whether the socio-religious current we now call “Tantrism” may 
represent a wider Monsoon Asian areal phenomenon, with roots in a 
past that predates the common era. Being directly inspired by, and 
engaging with, the work of Robert Dentan, this chapter evaluates his 
theory of a common religious base in South and Southeast Asia. It 
focuses on the hypostases of the Vedic god Rudra-Śiva and the related 
Śaiva and Śākta Tantric traditions that arose in South Asia in the 
mediaeval (Post-Gupta) period, and adds evidence from premodern and 
modern South Asian, Javano-Balinese, and Malay contexts. The presence 
of similar religious tropes and a shared vocabulary suggest long-standing 
historical connections between South and Southeast Asian societies, which 
cannot always be explained in terms of influences of the former over 
the latter but are rather suggestive of a complex process of exchange, 
and perhaps of a common ancestry.
Next come three chapters dealing with the tantalizing relationship 
between ethnolinguistic, socio-cultural, and archaeological features 
over mainland and island Southeast Asia. Alexandra Landmann’s “Can 
We Reconstruct a ‘Malayo-Javanic’ Law Area?” advances a hypothesis

--- PAGE 37 ---
26	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
concerning the reconstruction of a posited ethno-linguistic Malayo-Javanic 
cultural and law area, and pinpoints lines of evidence to delineate the 
boundaries of such an area. On the basis of secondary literature, and 
previous fieldwork on indigenous and traditional legal systems (adat, 
pikukuh karuhun, dresta) in Bali, Banten and Central Kalimantan, 
it uses historical anthropology and a triangulation of linguistic, 
archaeological and biological evidence to reconstruct a cultural and 
legal complex that would be shared by several ethnic groups of the 
Western Malayo-Polynesian linguistic area.
In his “Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an Mainland 
Southeast Asia Linguistic Area”, Roger Blench argues that the broadly-
recognized linguistic convergence area of mainland Southeast Asia must 
also have material and social correlates. Setting out the evidence for 
musical instruments, the crossbow, house types and dress, he considers 
whether this area can also be connected with the Southeast Asian 
distribution of sumatraliths. Finally, the chapter speculates that the type 
of linguistic similarities reflect a “consensus” culture, where sounding 
and behaving like neighbouring peoples is desirable, while underlining 
minor differences.
“Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime 
Space? Insight from Settlements and Industries” by Bérénice Bellina 
investigates the hypothesis that the strong spatial and human integration 
in Southeast Asia that we can see in modern times is the outcome 
of much earlier dynamics of maritime Southeast Asian globalization, 
possibly dominated by Austronesian speakers. Recent archaeological 
excavations have indeed demonstrated that the second millennium BC 
populations actively interacted within the South China Sea, establishing 
networks that could have laid the ground for common practices and 
cultural affinities by 500 BC. To answer the question as to whether 
there is evidence for shared patterns of values, norms and cultural 
models during the late prehistoric period that could be indicative of 
an ancient regional integration, the author discusses two sets of data. 
The first are the settlements of Co Loa in northern Vietnam and the 
Khao Sam Kaeo in the Thai-Malay Peninsula, where processes of 
urbanism emerged in the late prehistoric period, that is well before

--- PAGE 38 ---
1. Introduction	
27
the emergence of early States. The second are the two types of 
industries found within maritime networks, i.e. stone ornaments and the 
“Sa Huynh-Kalanay” ceramics. These archaeological datasets throw light 
on the socio-political and economic dynamics that many populations 
were facing in Southeast Asia at that time, which arguably prefigure 
later historical configurations.
The ensuing two chapters extend the correlation of linguistic features, 
social mores and material culture to the issue of human dispersal. “Looms, 
Weaving, and the Austronesian Expansion” by Chris Buckley focuses on 
a fascinating and important aspect of the material culture of mainland 
and island Southeast Asia and Southern China, namely the distributions 
of the body-tensioned loom and the ikat weaving technologies for 
making decorated textiles. The author attempts to interpret the present-
day distributions of these technologies stemming from the premodern 
past by contrasting it to the archaeological record, and elaborate a theory 
about prehistoric dispersals by comparing the looms of the mainland 
with those of the Austronesian-speaking peoples of island Southeast Asia. 
He concludes that it is difficult to explain the present-day distribution 
of looms and ikat weaving according to the popular “out of Taiwan” 
model, and that these characteristically “Austronesian” technologies 
appear to have originated directly from the Asian mainland.
Waruno Mahdi’s “Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular 
Southeast Asia” is an enquiry into an important yet poorly understood 
chapter of global history, namely the earliest sea crossings and 
offshore fishing. On the basis of archaeological and linguistic data, Mahdi 
argues that island Southeast Asia was the area where these activities 
could have originated, around 45,000 BP. Using biogenetic data that 
place the populations of Taiwan and island Southeast Asia closer to 
one another than either of them to that of the Chinese mainland, the 
author argues that early navigational technology was acquired from 
ancestors of present-day “Negritos” who, retreating before the rising 
seas, travelled to Fujian and then Taiwan. By correlating these findings 
with linguistic data, Mahdi makes a case for the existence of early 
maritime networks spanning from the South China Sea to the Bay of 
Bengal.

--- PAGE 39 ---
28	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
An approach to cultural transfer and human migration from the 
disciplinary perspective of linguistics is the hallmark of the next two 
chapters. In “The Role of ‘Prakrit’ in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 
101 Etymologies”, Tom Hoogervorst presents a novel contribution to 
the study of language contact between South and Southeast Asia, in 
particular the oft-neglected “Prakrit” or Middle Indo-Aryan loanwords 
that were borrowed by Malay, Old Javanese and many other Southeast 
Asian languages during the first millennium CE. While scholarship 
on the exchange of vocabulary between South and Southeast Asia 
has traditionally prioritized the role of Sanskrit and the “high culture” 
carried by it, a focus on (North) India’s historical spoken languages 
reveals a vernacular dimension of interethnic contact, challenging 
scholars to reconsider the shape, structure and nature of the maritime 
networks that have shaped Asia’s pre-colonial past.
Alexander Adelaar’s “Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did 
They Speak?” offers a glimpse of island Southeast Asia and Madagascar 
as parts of an interconnected world by investigating what the Malagasy 
homeland in Borneo looked like from a geographical, social, and 
political perspective. Adelaar discusses what the linguistic information 
about Malagasy and other members of the Southeast Barito language 
family in South Borneo tell us about the time when Malagasy became 
a separate language. Several linguistic developments (the abundance 
of Malay, Javanese and Sanskrit loanwords, the slightly different ways 
in which certain consonants have changed, and the adoption of the 
Javanese politeness marking prefix ra-) set Malagasy off against other 
Southeast Barito languages. They show that it is not a direct continuation 
of any of these languages. On the contrary, it had already undergone 
a separate evolution before the migration of its speakers to East Africa. 
This has possible implications for the way we should view the social 
position of these speakers. Rather than slaves obtained from communities 
that have persisted until today in any of the existing Southeast Barito 
speaking groups, they may have been vassals who lived on a relatively 
equal footing with members of the Malay metropolis (nowadays 
Banjarmasin) and were on their way to become assimilated to that 
metropolis.

--- PAGE 40 ---
1. Introduction	
29
The two chapters closing this collection elaborate on the interplay 
between the cosmopolitan and the local in Southeast Asia and the 
wider Western Malayo-Polynesian/Austronesian worlds. “Śāstric and 
Austronesian Comparative Perspectives: Parallel Frameworks on Indic 
Architectural and Cultural Translations Among Western Malayo-
Polynesian Societies” by Imran bin Tajudeen investigates the nature 
of the interplay between autochthonous and Indian elements in the 
formation of Southeast Asia’s Indic cultures. The author describes 
the translations of śāstric sources into architecture and art forms 
according to patterns that integrated Indic and Austronesian paradigms. 
Early architectural examples from Central Java, Sumatran sites 
and Kedah prompts us to reconsider some existing assumptions on 
processes and phases of “Indianization” resting upon a dichotomous 
conception of Indian and indigenous elements that assume a separation 
between them and their juxtaposition as distinct elements accessible 
to “stratigraphic” scrutiny. Neither the “Sanskrit Cosmopolis” perspective 
nor the opposite reactionary emphasis on “localization” or “indigenization” 
is adequate, since they do not go beyond the presumption of a 
model of centre-periphery relations that presume Indian agency and 
indigenous passivity followed belatedly by a “vernacular” response. Thus, 
Imran argues, the analysis of the Austronesian-Indic cultural encounter 
and its outcomes in architecture and art should seek to identify the 
interaction and mutual transformation of the autochthonous and Indic 
simultaneously.
Robert Wessing’s “The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast 
Asia” focuses on a figure whose position, though locally referred to 
by various titles, can be characterized as “the Lord of the Land”, and 
whose referent can vary from a spirit, the founder of a community, the 
head of a village or localized descent line, or a king. In his capacity 
as leader of this descent group, this figure fulfils a role that encompasses 
land-rightly, priestly, and politico-administrative tasks. Rather than 
attributing the differences to local variation, Wessing tries to link 
together the ideas that—at least in the past—underlay and unified these 
usages throughout Southeast Asia. His findings pave the ground for 
further comparative study of this apparently translocal trope in the wider 
Austronesian world.

--- PAGE 41 ---
30	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
References
Abalahin, Andrew. “‘Sino-Pacifica’: Conceptualizing Greater Southeast Asia 
as a Sub-Arena of World History”. Journal of World History 22, no. 4 (2011): 
659–91.
Acri, Andrea. “Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans: (Re-)Tracing the Indic Roots 
of Some Ancient and Modern Performing Characters from Java and Bali”. 
Archipel 88 (2014): 13–70.
Ali, Daud. “Connected Histories? Regional Historiography and Theories of 
Cultural Contact between Early South and Southeast Asia”. In Islamic 
Connections: Muslim Societies in South and Southeast Asia, edited by 
R. Michael Feener and Terenjit Sevea. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2009.
Bednarik, Robert G. “Seafaring in the Pleistocene”. Cambridge Archaeological 
Journal 13, no. 1 (2003): 41–66.
Bellina, Bérénice. “Le port protohistorique de Khao Sam Kaeo en Thaïlande 
péninsulaire: lieu privilégié pour l’étude des premières interactions indiennes 
et sud-est asiatiques”. Bulletin de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême-Orient 89 
(2002): 329–43.
———. “Beads, Social Change and Interaction between India and Southeast 
Asia”. Antiquity 77, no. 296 (2003): 285–97.
Bellwood, Peter. “Austronesian Prehistory in Southeast Asia: Homeland, Expansion 
and Transformation”. In The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative 
Perspectives, edited by Peter Bellwood, James J. Fox and Darrell Tryon. 
Canberra: ANU Press, 1995.
———. “Southeast China and the Prehistory of the Austronesians”. In Lost 
Maritime Cultures: China and the Pacific, edited by Tianlong Jiao. Hawaii: 
Bishop Museum Press, 2007.
Bellwood, Peter, James J. Fox, and Darrell Tryon, eds. The Austronesians: Historical 
and Comparative Perspectives. Canberra: Anthropology, Research School of 
Pacific and Asian Studies, 1995.
Blench, Roger M. “From the Mountains to the Valleys: Understanding 
Ethnolinguistic Geography in SE Asia”. In The Peopling of East Asia, edited 
by Laurent Sagart, Roger M. Blench, and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. London: 
Routledge, 2005a.
———. “Fruits and Arboriculture in the Indo-Pacific Region”. Bulletin of the 
Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 24 (2005b): 31–50. 
———. “Stratification in the Peopling of China: How Far does the Linguistic Evidence 
Match Genetics and Archaeology?”. In Human Migrations in Continental East 
Asia and Taiwan: Matching Archaeology, Linguistics and Genetics, edited by 
Alicia Sanchez-Mazas, Roger M. Blench, Malcolm D. Ross, Illia Peiros and 
Marie Lin. London: Routledge, 2008a.

--- PAGE 42 ---
1. Introduction	
31
———. “Re-evaluating the Linguistic Prehistory of South Asia”. In Occasional 
Paper 3: Linguistics, Archaeology and the Human Past, edited by Toshiki Osada 
and Akinori Uesugi. Kyoto: Indus Project, Research Institute for Humanity and 
Nature, 2008b. 
———. “A History of Fruits on the SE Asian Mainland”. In Occasional Paper 4: 
Linguistics, Archaeology and the Human Past, edited by Toshiki Osada and 
Akinori Uesugi. Kyoto: Indus Project, Research Institute for Humanity and 
Nature, 2008c. 
———. “Remapping the Austronesian Expansion”. In Discovering History through 
Language: Papers in Honour of Malcolm Ross, edited by Bethwyn Evans. 
Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 2009a.
———. “New Evidence for the Austronesian Impact on the East African Coast”. 
In Global Origins and the Development of Seafaring, edited by Atholl 
Anderson, James H. Barrett and Katherine V. Boyle. Cambridge: Macdonald 
Institute, 2010.
———. “Was there an Austroasiatic Presence in Island SE Asia prior to the 
Austronesian Expansion?”. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 
30 (2011a): 133–44.
———. “The Role of Agriculture in the Evolution of Southeast Asian Language 
Phyla”. In Dynamics of Human Diversity in Mainland SE Asia, edited by Nick 
J. Enfield. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 2011b.
———. “Vernacular Names for Taro in the Indo-Pacific Region and Their Possible 
Implications for Centres of Diversification”. In Irrigated Taro Colocasia 
Esculenta in the Indo-Pacific: Biological, Social and Historical Perspectives, 
edited by Matthew Spriggs, David Addison and Peter J. Matthews. Osaka: 
Minpaku, 2012a.
———. “Almost Everything You Believed about the Austronesians Isn’t True”. In 
Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from the 13th International Conference of 
the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 1, edited 
by Dominik Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke and Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz. Singapore: 
NUS Press, 2012b.
———. “Finger-millet: The Contribution of Vernacular Names towards Its 
Prehistory”. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, 2012c. Available at 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12520-012-0103-6>.
———. “The Prehistory of the Daic (Tai-Kadai) Speaking Peoples and the 
Hypothesis of an Austronesian Connection”. In Unearthing Southeast Asia’s 
Past: Selected Papers from the 12th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 1, edited by Marijke J. 
Klokke and Véronique Degroot. Singapore: NUS Press, 2013a.
———. “Was There Once an Arc of Vegeculture Linking Melanesia with Northeast 
India?”. In Pacific Archaeology: Documenting the Past 50,000 Years: Papers

--- PAGE 43 ---
32	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
from the 2011 Lapita Pacific Archaeology Conference, edited by Glenn R. 
Summerhayes and Hallie Buckley. University of Otago Studies in Archaeology, 
no. 25, Dunedin: Otago University Press, 2013b. 
———. “The Contribution of Linguistics to Understanding the Foraging/Farming 
Transition in NE India”. In 50 Years after Daojali Hading: Emerging 
Perspectives in the Archaeology of Northeast India: Essays in Honour of T.C. 
Sharma, edited by Tia Toshi Jamir and Manjil Hazarika. New Delhi: Research 
India Press, 2014a.
———. “The Origins of Nominal Affixes in MSEA Languages: Convergence, 
Contact and Some African Parallels”. In Mainland Southeast Asian Languages: 
The State of the Art, edited by Nick J. Enfield and Bernard Comrie. Canberra: 
Pacific Linguistics, 2014b.
Brighenti, Francesco. “Traditions of Human Sacrifice in Ancient and Tribal India 
and their Relation to Śāktism”. In Breaking Boundaries with the Goddess: 
New Directions in the Study of Śāktism: Essays in Honor of Narendra Nath 
Bhattacharyya, edited by Cynthia Ann Humes and Rachel Fell McDermott. 
New Delhi: Manohar, 2009.
Bulbeck, Francis. “An Integrated Perspective on the Austronesian Diaspora: The 
Switch from Cereal Agriculture to Maritime Foraging in the Colonisation of 
Island Southeast Asia”. Australian Archaeology 67 (2008): 31–52.
Calò, Ambra. Trails of Bronze Drums Across Early Southeast Asia: Exchange 
Routes and Connected Cultural Spheres. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2014.
de Casparis, Johannes Gijsbertus. India and Maritime Southeast Asia: A Lasting 
Relationship. Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya, 1983.
Castillo, Cristina Cobo, Katsunori Tanaka, Yo-Ichiro Sato, Ryuji Ishikawa, Bérénice 
Bellina, Charles Higham, Nigel Chang, Rabi Mohanty, Mukund Kajale and 
Dorian Q. Fuller. “Archaeogenetic Study of Prehistoric Rice Remains from 
Thailand and India: Evidence of Early Japonica in South and Southeast Asia”. 
Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, 2015. Available at <http://link.
springer.com/article/10.1007/s12520-015-0236-5>.
Chaudhuri, Kirti Narayan. “The Unity and Disunity of Indian Ocean History from 
the Rise of Islam to 1750: The Outline of a Theory and Historical Discourse”. 
Journal of World History 4, no. 1 (1993).
Chihara, Daigoro. Hindu-Buddhist Architecture in Southeast Asia. Leiden, New 
York, Köln: E.J. Brill, 1996.
Coedès, George. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia, translated by Susan 
Brown Cowing and edited by Walter F. Vella. Kuala Lumpur: University of 
Malaya Press, 1968.
Coldiron, Margaret J. Trance and Transformation of the Actor in Japanese Noh 
and Balinese Masked Dance-Drama. Lewiston/Queenston/Lampeter: The Edwin 
Mellew Press, 2005a.

--- PAGE 44 ---
1. Introduction	
33
———. “Lions, Witches, and Happy Old Men: Some Parallels between Balinese 
and Japanese Ritual Masks”. Asian Theatre Journal 22, no. 2 (2005b): 
227–48. 
Dentan, Robert Knox. “‘Disreputable Magicians’, the Dark Destroyer, and the 
Trickster Lord”. Asian Anthropology 1 (2002a): 153–94. 
———. “Against the Kingdom of the Beast: An Introduction to Semai Theology, 
Pre-Aryan Religion and the Dynamics of Abjection”. In Tribal Communities 
in the Malay World: Historical, Cultural and Social Perspectives, edited by 
Geoffrey Benjamin and Cynthia Chou. Leiden: International Institute for 
Asian Studies and Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2002b. 
Diffloth, Gérard. “The Contribution of Linguistic Palaeontology and Austroasiatic”. 
In The Peopling of East Asia: Putting Together Archaeology, Linguistics and 
Genetics, edited by Laurent Sagart, Roger Blench and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. 
London: Routledge Curzon, 2005. 
van Driem, George. Languages of the Himalayas: An Ethnolinguistic Handbook. 
Handbuch der Orientalistik. Leiden: Brill, 2001.
———. “The Ethnolinguistic Identity of the Domesticators of Asian Rice”. 
Comptes Rendus Palevol 11, no. 2 (2012): 117–32.
Emigh, John. Masked Performance: The Play of Self and Other in Ritual and 
Theatre. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996.
Ferlus, Michel. “The Austroasiatic Vocabulary for Rice: Its Origin and 
Expansion”. Journal of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society 3 (2010): 
61–76.
Fox, James J. “Comparative Perspectives on Austronesian Houses”. In Inside 
Austronesian Houses: Perspectives on Domestic Designs for Living, edited by 
James Fox. Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian 
National University, 1993.
———. “Chapter One: Introduction”. In Origins, Ancestry and Alliance: 
Explorations in Austronesian Ethnography, edited by James J. Fox and 
Clifford Sather. Canberra: Department of Anthropology in association with 
the Comparative Austronesian Project, Research School of Pacific Studies, 
Australian National University, 1996.
Fox, James J. and Clifford Sather, eds. Origins, Ancestry and Alliance: Explorations 
in Austronesian Ethnography. Canberra: Department of Anthropology in 
association with the Comparative Austronesian Project, Research School of 
Pacific Studies, Australian National University, 1996.
Frank, Andre G. ReORIENT: Global Economy in the Asian Age. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1998.
Glover, Ian C. “Some National, Regional, and Political Uses of Archaeology in 
East and Southeast Asia”. In Archaeology of Asia, edited by Miriam T. Stark. 
Oxford: Blackwell, 2006.

--- PAGE 45 ---
34	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
Gupta, Sunil. “The Bay of Bengal Interaction Sphere (1000 BC–AD 500)”. Indo-
Pacific Prehistory Association Bulletin 25 (2005): 21–30. 
Heine-Geldern, Robert. Bedeutung und herkunft der ältesten hinterindischen 
metalltrommeln (kesselgongs). Leipzig: Verlag Asia Major GMBH, 1932a.
———. “Urheimat und früheste Wanderungen der Austronesier”. Anthropos XXVII 
(1932b): 543–619.
Higham, Charles, Thomas Higham and Amphan Kijngam. “Cutting a Gordian Knot: 
The Bronze Age of Southeast Asia: Origins, Timing and Impact”. Antiquity 85 
(2011): 583–98.
Holt, Claire. Art in Indonesia: Continuities and Changes. Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1967. 
Hoogervorst, Tom. Southeast Asia in the Ancient Indian Ocean World. Oxford: 
Archaeopress, 2013.
Hung, Hsiao-Chun, Yoshiyuki Iizuka, Peter Bellwood, Kim Dung Nguyen, Bérénice 
Bellina, Praon Silapanth, Eusebio Dizon, Rey Santiago, Ipoi Datan, and Jonathan 
H. Manton. “Ancient Jades Map 3,000 Years of Prehistoric Exchange in Southeast 
Asia”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America 104, no. 50 (December 2007): 19745–50.
Hung, Hsiao-Chun, Kim Dung Nguyen, Peter Bellwood, and Mike T. Carson. 
“Coastal Connectivity: Long-term Trading Networks Across the South China 
Sea”. The Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 8, no. 3 (2013): 384–404.
Hutton, J.H. “The Significance of Head-Hunting in Assam”. The Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 58 (July–December 
1928): 399–408.
Jordaan, Roy and Robert Wessing. “Human Sacrifice at Prambanan”. Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 152 (1996): 45–74. 
———. “Construction Sacrifice in India, seen from the East”. In Violence Denied, 
edited by Jan E.M. Houben and Karel R. van Kooij. Leiden: Brill, 1999.
Kauz, Ralph. “Preface”. In Aspects of the Maritime Silk Road: From the Persian 
Gulf to the East China Sea, edited by Ralph Kauz. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz 
Verlag, 2010.
Kulke, Hermann. “Indian Colonies, Indianization or Cultural Convergence? 
Reflections on the Changing Image of India’s Role in South East Asia”. In 
Onderzoek in Zuidoost-Azie. Agenda’s voor de jaren negentig, edited by Henk 
Schulte-Nordholt. Leiden: Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden, 1990.
———. “The Concept of Cultural Convergence Revisited: Reflections on India’s 
Early Influence in Southeast Asia”. In Asian Encounters: Exploring Connected 
Histories, edited by Parul Pandya Dhar and Upinder Singh. New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press, 2014.
Kumar, Ann. Globalizing the Prehistory of Japan: Language, Genes and 
Civilization. London: Routledge, 2009.

--- PAGE 46 ---
1. Introduction	
35
Lansing, J. Stephen, Murray P. Cox, Therese A. de Vet, Sean S. Downey, Brian 
Hallmark, and Herawati Sudoyo. “An Ongoing Austronesian Expansion in 
Island Southeast Asia”. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30, no. 3 
(2011): 262–72.
Leadbeater, Charles W. The Occult History of Java. Madras: Theosophical Pub. 
House, 1951.
Lewis, Martin W. and Kären Wigen. The Myth of Continents: A Critique of 
Metageography. London and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 
1997.
Li Shuicheng. “Ancient Interactions in Eurasia and Northwest China: Revisiting 
J.G. Andersson’s Legacy”. Bulletin of the Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities 
75 (2003): 9–30. 
Lieberman, Victor. Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in Global Context, c. 800–1830. 
Volume 2: Mainland Mirrors: Europe, Japan, China, South Asia, and the Islands. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Liu, Li. The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 
Lombard, Dénis. “Networks and Synchronisms in Southeast Asian History”. 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 26, no. 1 (1995): 10–16.
Mabbett, Ian W. “The ‘Indianization’ of Southeast Asia: Reflections on the 
Prehistoric Sources”. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 8 (1977a): 1–14.
———. “The ‘Indianization’ of Southeast Asia: Reflections on the Historic Sources”. 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 8 (1977b): 143–61. 
Mahdi, Waruno. “Linguistc and Philological Data towards a Chronology of 
Austronesian Activity in India and Sri Lanka”. In Archaeology and Language 
IV: Language Change and Cultural Transformatiom, edited by Roger Blench 
and Matthew Spriggs. London and New York: Routledge, 1999.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. “Trading Ships of the South China Sea: Shipbuilding 
Techniques and their Role in the History of the Development of Asian Trade 
Networks”. Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient/Journal 
de l’histoire economique et sociale de l’Orient 36, no. 3 (1993): 253–80.
———. “Introduction”. In Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: 
Reflections on Cross-Cultural Exchange, edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, 
A. Mani, and Geoff Wade. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 
2011.
Miksic, John. Singapore and the Silk Road of the Sea, 1300–1800. Singapore: NUS 
Press, 2013.
Mus, Paul. “India seen from the East: Indian and Indigenous Cults in Champa” 
(translation). Monash Papers on Southeast Asia 3 (1975). [“Cultes indiens 
et indigènes au Champa”. Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 33 
(1933): 367–410.]

--- PAGE 47 ---
36	
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
O’Connor, S. and J. Chappell. “Colonisation and Coastal Subsistence in Australia 
and Papua New Guinea: Different Timing, Different Modes?”. In Pacific 
Archaeology: Assessments and Anniversary of the First Lapita Excavation 
(July 1952) Koné, Nouméa, 2002, edited by C. Sand. Nouméa, New Caledonia: 
Les Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie, 2003.
Oppenheimer, Stephen. Eden in the East: The Drowned Continent of Southeast 
Asia. London: Phoenix, 1998.
Pawley, A. and M. Pawley. “Early Austronesian Terms for Canoe Parts and Seafaring”. 
In Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change, edited by Andrew K. 
Pawley and Malcolm D. Ross. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 1994.
Pearson, Michael. The Indian Ocean. London and New York: Routledge, 2003.
Pearson, Richard J. Ancient Ryukyu: An Archaeological Study of Island Communities. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2014.
Pollock, Sheldon. “The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, 300–1300: Transculturation, 
Vernacularization and the Question of Ideology”. In Ideology and the Status 
of Sanskrit: Contributions to the History of the Sanskrit Language, edited by 
J.E.M. Houben. Leiden: Brill, 1996. 
———. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and 
Power in Premodern India. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006. 
Reuter, Thomas. “Is Ancestor Veneration the Most Universal of All World 
Religions? A Critique of Modernist Cosmological Bias”. Wacana 15, no. 2 
(2014): 223–53.
Reynolds, Craig J. “A New Look at Old Southeast Asia”. Journal of Asian Studies 
54, no. 2 (1995): 419–46. 
———. Seditious Histories: Contesting Thai and Southeast Asian Pasts. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press, 2006.
Santos, Arysio. Atlantis, The Lost Continent Finally Found: The Definitive 
Localization of Plato’s Lost Civilization. Lynwood: Atlantis Publications, 2005.
Sedyawati, Edi. “The Question of Indian Influence on Ancient Javanese Dance”. 
Review of Indonesian and Malayan Affairs 16, no. 2 (1982): 59–82.
———. “Towards an Integrated Comparative Study of Austronesian Cultures”. In 
Paths of Origins: The Austronesian Heritage in the Collections of the National 
Museum of the Philippines, the Museum Nasional Indonesia and the Netherlands 
Rijksmuseum voor Völkenkunde, edited by Purissima Benitez-Johannot. Manila: 
Artpostasia, 2011.
Sidwell, Paul and Roger M. Blench. “The Austroasiatic Urheimat: The Southeastern 
Riverine Hypothesis”. In Dynamics of Human Diversity in Mainland SE Asia, 
edited by Nick Enfield. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 2011.
Simanjuntak, Truman. Austronesian in Sulawesi. Depok: Centre for Prehistoric and 
Austronesian Studies, 2008.

--- PAGE 48 ---
1. Introduction	
37
Smith, Monica L. “Indianization from the Indian Point of View: Trade and Cultural 
Contacts with Southeast Asia in the Early First Millennium CE”. Journal of the 
Economic and Social History of the Orient 42, no. 1 (1999): 1–26.
Solheim, Wilhelm G. II. “The Kulanay Pottery Complex in the Philippines”. Artibus 
Asiae 20 (1957): 279–88.
———. “The Nusantao Hypothesis: The Origin and Spread of Austronesian 
Speakers”. Asian Perspectives 26 (1984–85): 77–88.
Speiser, Felix. Ethnographische Materialen aus den Neuen Hebriden und den 
Banks-Inseln. Berlin: C.W. Kreidel’s Verlag, 1923.
Spriggs, Matthew T.J. “Archaeology and the Austronesian Expansion: Where Are 
We Now?”. Antiquity 85 (2011): 10–528.
Theunissen, Robert, Peter Grave, and Grahame Bailey. “Doubts on Diffusion: 
Challenging the Assumed Indian Origin of Iron Age Agate and Carnelian 
Beads in Southeast Asia”. World Archaeology 32, no. 1 (2000): 84–105.
Wolters, Oliver W. History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives. 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies [1982], 1999.

--- PAGE 49 ---
38
2
FEARSOME BLEEDING, 
BOOGEYMAN GODS AND  
CHAOS VICTORIOUS
A Conjectural History of Insular 
South Asian Religious Tropes
Robert Dentan
What song the Syrens sang, or what name Achilles assumed when he 
hid himself among women, though puzzling questions, are not beyond 
all conjecture.
Sir Thomas Browne, Urn Buriall (n.d. [1643], p. 190)
One…source, though not strictly legitimate as evidence for…ancient 
religious traditions as they existed before Indian or Chinese influence…[is] 
our knowledge of the religious practices current in recent times among…
tribal peoples of the area. Such communities have preserved distinctive 
cultural traditions characteristic of those who, like  the ancestors of modern 
Southeast Asians, live in small groups and lack a written language or full-
time religious specialists.
de Casparis and Mabbett (1999, p. 280)

--- PAGE 50 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
39
It seems fitting that we start our inquiry into the relationships between 
Indic, Austroasiatic, and Austronesian language-speaking peoples in 
Monsoon Asia by trying to reconstruct the situation around 1500 BC, 
before Indian thought took solid form in the Vedas and Austronesian-
speakers dominated the islands. We know that there were people in the 
islands for thousands of years before that, early forms of Homo erectus 
and now-extinct variants of Homo sapiens like the Hobbits of Flores 
or the Denisovans who left traces of their genetic material in the outer 
islands. At a guess, these people tended to be short and dark, like Munda 
of Chota Nagpur, some inhabitants of the Mentawai islands, or Semang 
of interior central West Malaysia. 
Little trace of their original languages remains (Blust 2013). “It 
seems reasonably safe to assume that Andamanese is the sole remaining 
linguistic representative of pre-Neolithic Southeast Asia, its roots 
perhaps going back as far as the initial colonization of Southeast Asia 
by modern humans—an isolate that has remained largely unaffected by 
the vast linguistic spreads that have occurred elsewhere in Southeast 
Asia in Neolithic and post-Neolithic times” (Burenhult 1996, p. 14), 
though northern Andamanese may have Austroasiatic affinities (Blevins 
in Blust 2013, p. xx, fn. 7). The other linguistic isolate is Shompen, 
traditionally spoken by foragers among the Austroasiatic-speaking 
Nicobarese (Blench 2010). Blust (2013) suggests that these people 
may have migrated to Indonesia not through Malaysia but by sea, 
from Burma.
Linguists (e.g., Kaskija 2012) suggest that some other dominant 
language families of the region were Austroasiatic, like Munda or 
Semang. For instance, Blench (2010, p. 140) suggests that “there were 
Austroasiatic-speakers in West-Central Borneo, as far as the island of 
Palawan, prior to the arrival of Austronesian in the area”. Adelaar (2006) 
concurs. Together with remnants in the Nicobars and perhaps in Sumatra, 
the distribution of Austroasiatic resembles “a pattern associated in other 
parts of the world with early populations that have been fragmented 
by the subsequent migrations of economically more dominant peoples” 
(Blust 1994, pp. 25–30; 2013). Although Blust (e.g., 1994) and others 
suggest Nicobarese and possibly the language of the Onge may be 
remnants of a separate, earlier Austroasiatic migration, Blevins (2007)

--- PAGE 51 ---
40	
Robert Dentan
suggests that Ongan is the “long lost sister” of Austronesian. The 
frequent interaction in historic times of Sumatrans along the east coast 
with adjacent Austroasiatic peoples of Malaysia suggests that parts of 
Sumatra could have been also, at least in part, once Austroasiatic- 
speaking (cf. Bulbeck 1998). Btsisi’ (“Mah Meri”) told Dentan in the 
1970s that until the Konfrontasi with Indonesia they had routinely 
crossed the Straits of Malacca to visit their compeers in east Sumatra. 
There seems no compelling reason that their progenitors in what is now 
Johor, Malacca and Selangor would have eschewed such trips. 
The bulk of the populace were probably foragers or simple swiddeners, 
like most West Malaysian indigenes (Orang Asli), with whom I have 
lived for over half-a-dozen years, all told, over the last half century 
or so. It is important not to overdraw the distinction between foraging 
and agriculture, particularly in this area (Dentan 2008; 2011, pp. 93–95; 
2013; Ellen 1982; 1988; Kaskija 2012, pp. 75–76, 79; Rousseau 1990, 
p. 1). Most foragers in this area tend and even plant “wild” trees 
(Dentan 1991; Dentan and Ong 1995), traditionally settling down near 
groves of especially valued trees during the fruit season, which they 
marked with “great jubilees” (Cameron 1865, p. 116; cf. Sager 2008, 
p. 43). Applied to sago, the enormously productive starch staple in 
Malaysia and Borneo until the arrival of British colonialists, this tactic 
supported large semi-sedentary populations (Ellen 1982; 1988). The 
stereotype that pre-Austronesian peoples in Indonesia were all hunters 
and gatherers persists in the myth that all Orang Asli were feckless 
“wanderers” until recently (Munan and Foo 2005, p. 41; cf. Dove 1983; 
1985). Most peoples know enough about both forms of subsistence to 
slip back and forth from one to another (e.g. Dallos 2011). Punan of 
Borneo are notorious for this flexibility, which also characterizes 
Austroasiatic foragers like Juang and Birhor in Orissa (Zide and Zide 
1976, p. 1330, note 2), Adivasi Dravidian ones like Paliyan in Kerala 
and Tamil Nadu (Gardner 1985), and Austronesian ones in the 
Philippines (Eder 1987). It is impossible to document whether peoples 
who oscillate between the two forms of subsistence began as foragers 
or as agriculturalists; but both forms of life require specialized bodies 
of knowledge, so that, for example, Semai and Temiar swiddeners 
were unable to subsist off the rainforest after the British bombed

--- PAGE 52 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
41
their settlements during the Malayan Emergency in the mid-twentieth 
century. Moreover, there is some evidence that Austroasiatic speakers 
are responsible for at least some of the artifacts traditionally attributed 
to—in hindsight—more “civilized” Austronesian influences, like slab 
graves (Benjamin 1986; 1987; Bulbeck 1998). However flimsy the 
evidence for a widespread Austroasiatic population of swiddeners and 
foragers in the area before the arrival of Austronesians, the possibility 
remains open. 
Among Orang Asli, the rituals and folk theology discussed here 
occur among both swiddeners and foragers, with no indication that 
they originated with Austronesians. Criteria more relevant to our topic 
than the vulgar Marxist “dominant style of subsistence” might include 
such social and political considerations as demography (settlement 
size and pattern), governance (acephalous vs. patriarchal), stratification 
(egalitarian vs. ranked or class-ridden) (see Gibson and Sillander 2011 
for more detailed discussion). 
The advance of Austronesian and/or its speakers into Orang 
Asli territory in the last few centuries involved “displacement, 
dispossession…, deprivation” (Gomes 2010, p. 246), extinction and 
assimilation (Anonymous 2013; Barroux 2013; Dentan et al. 1997; Dentan 
1998; Sibon and Yap 2013). That process probably recapitulates the 
Austronesian advance into Austroasiatic-speaking areas elsewhere in 
Southeast Asia. Under these circumstances, for indigenous Austroasiatic-
speakers “to be unknown was the means of their continuation and 
obscurity their protection” (Browne n.d. [1643], p. 188). That adaptive 
obscurity exacerbates the difficulty of the task this chapter proposes 
to make. It is hard, for example, to find any reference to Job’s tears 
or foxtail millet in reconstructions of Indonesian history, though these 
were the ancient cereal crops of Orang Asli, particularly in the highlands, 
as recently as the early 1960s, and Semai, the Orang Asli with whom 
I spent most of my time, said that Job’s tears was the “mother of foxtail 
millet”, which was their next cereal crop (Dentan 1968a, p. 47; 1971; 
cf. Bellwood 1993, pp. 92–94). Rice reached “east Semai” around the 
end of the nineteenth century (Dentan 1971, p. 142). Census data from 
the mid-twentieth century document that foxtail millet was the dominant 
cereal crop of maay cnaan, Semai in the highest mountains along the

--- PAGE 53 ---
42	
Robert Dentan
Pahang Perak border (Dentan 1971, pp. 138, 140). The proliferation of 
named cultivars of millet, far more than any other crop, confirms this 
relative antiquity. The same elision of ancient Austroasiatic crops like 
millet occurs in accounts of ancient India (Zide and Zide 1976, p. 1303). 
Rice agriculture, especially of wet rice, is relatively recent in much of 
the area under discussion; in Malaysia, for example, extensive wet rice 
cropping was a British, not an Austronesian, introduction. 
Presumably, these ancient Austroasiatic peoples lacked an intelligentsia. 
That is, there was no one with the job of systematizing concepts, 
rejecting outside influences or otherwise declaring authoritatively which 
ideas were acceptable (de Casparis and Mabbett 1999, p. 280; Gardner 
1976). In their quotidian lives, most people then—like most people 
now, actually—used a heterogeneous ragbag of ill-considered and 
unsystematized ideas and metaphors to rationalize, justify and obfuscate 
whatever activity they were currently engaged in, usually after the 
fact.1 So “what we find in specific Southeast Asian cultures is not a 
coherent system…but only what appear to be fragments of former 
systems, some of which may have been fairly elaborate” (Jenner 1976, 
pp. 713–14).
These fragments provide clues to ancient ideas, though they certainly 
have not survived unchanged (de Casparis and Mabbett 1999, p. 280). 
But we can use the insights of mid-twentieth century geographers 
and linguists, who used geographical distributions to provide clues 
to unwritten history. Even since the advent of other less speculative 
tools, their conclusions have held up pretty well (e.g., Dvorak, Luo 
and Akhunov 2011; Vavilov 1992; Sauer 1969). Indeed, although Clark 
Wissler’s “age area hypothesis”, that how widely a particular cultural 
item is distributed indicates how ancient it is, is only useful in its 
vaguest sense (Woods 1934; Murdock 1948), still the idea persists 
that the study of culture areas provides clues to unwritten history of 
1	 See Dentan and Nicholls 2011, and also Beals 1962, pp. 46, 49; Brooks 2011; 
Eder 1987, p. 200; Gardner 1966, 1976, 1991; Guenther 1979; Macdonald 
2007, p. 91; Nietzsche 2008, pp. 7–13; Pucci 1992, pp. 28–29; Rousseau 1995; 
Sellato and Sercombe 2007, p. 24; Sercombe 2007, pp. 245–46; Sweet 2008, 
pp. xxiv–xxv.

--- PAGE 54 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
43
particular ecological zones. We would not, after all, be discussing this 
topic if we did not agree with the formulation of another museum curator 
(and colleague of Wissler’s) Josselin de Jong (e.g., 1935), that insular 
Southeast Asia constitutes a legitimate “field of ethnological study”, 
though, as Geoffrey Benjamin points out (personal communication), 
Josselin de Jong himself asserted that Malaysian Austroasiatic-speakers 
and Malays fit into different fields of ethnological study. 
The speculative reconstruction I propose rests primarily on 
ethnological comparison within this field. Its own history begins with 
the speculations of the Kulturkreislehre of the early twentieth century, 
a largely Catholic variant of the areal/reconstructive movement 
discussed above. By the 1930s this school centred in Vienna, its major 
practitioners being Catholic missionary priests, Paul Schebesta, a 
Czech, among them. Their religion and their ethnographic studies 
combined to produce the notion of an Urkultur, primordial culture, 
localized among negritos all over the world and characterized by 
monogamy, patriarchy and monotheism. From this beginning, human 
lifeways entered, they believed, an unbroken moral decline. Schebesta’s 
extensive and ethnographically rich work in Malaysia (notably 1926, 
1927, 1957, 1973 [1928]) confirmed, he thought, this reconstruction of 
the past. By the mid-twentieth century he dropped strict adherence to 
the Kulturkreislehre, as did almost all of its early devotees. 
1.  Blood Sacrifice
When it thunders the women cut their legs with knives till the blood  
flows, and then catching the drops in a piece of bamboo, they cast them 
aloft towards the sky to propitiate the angry deities.
Maxwell (1879, p. 48)
During a storm of thunder and lightning the Semang draw a few drops  
of blood from the region of the shin-bone, mix it with a little [rain]water 
in a bamboo receptacle, and throw it up to the angry skies (according to 
the East Semang or Pangan [Kensiu or Batek?]) once up to the sky and 
once on the ground, saying…‘stop’… .
Skeat and Blagden (1906, II, p. 104)

--- PAGE 55 ---
44	
Robert Dentan
Anthropologists nowadays do not accept the reality of the Urkultur. 
For example, gender equality is more marked among Batek Semang 
than among most documented peoples (Endicott and Endicott 2008). In 
practice, moreover, although married couples are the fundamental units 
of most Austroasiatic peoples in this region (e.g., Endicott and Endicott 
2008; Nowak 1984, 1988), marriage tends to shade into serial polygamy, 
at least while the partners remain young. But the blood sacrifice that 
Schebesta made famous (1926, 1927, 1973, pp. 87–88) remains a puzzle 
for ethnologists. 
A salient but less widespread feature of the “thunder complex” 
(Blust 1981), this rite manifests an emotional focus that links flowing 
human blood, panic and supernatural possession. Temiar express this 
connection by saying that the smell of blood attracts tigers, the fearful 
objective correlative for supernatural phenomena in general (Benjamin 
2014). It is central to twentieth-century thunder squall rituals from West 
Malaysia to the Philippines, including several Semang peoples, Semai 
and Temiar in central West Malaysia; some Punan foragers in Borneo; 
Mamanua and Aeta foragers in the Philippines and Austronesian-speakers 
as far as Papua New Guinea.2 Blood is a “natural symbol” (Douglas 
1970; Needham 1967) in the sense that it tends to produce an “affective 
response which is as natural to the [human] organism…as… 
the phototropism of marigolds is natural in other realms of life” 
(Needham 1967, p. 284; cf. Freeman 1987). Blood is salient in sacrifices 
around the world, including Holy Communion.
But among Semai and Semang, moreover, the sight of spurting blood 
can produce a state Semai call “blood intoxication”, blnuul bhiip, which 
is salient and unique enough to have produced its own analytic literature 
(e.g., Robarchek and Dentan 1987). Sue Jennings devotes a chapter to 
the significance of blood for Temiar (1995, pp. 118–36). Similarly, 
Borneo Punan make a “great fuss” about blood, as do their Kenyah 
2	 See, for example, Benjamin 2014, pp. 82–85; Blust 1981, 1991, 2013; Brosius 1989, 
p. 91; Dentan 1968a, pp. 21–24 and 2008, pp. 65–85; Evans 1923, pp. 151–54 and 
1937; Maceda 1964, p. 107; Macdonald 1988; Needham 1967, p. 273; Schebesta 
1957, pp. 88, 99; Skeat and Blagden 1906, vol. II, p. 204; Slimming 1958, pp. 153–55; 
Vaughan-Stevens in Skeat and Blagden 1906, vol. II, p. 205n.

--- PAGE 56 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
45
neighbours (Needham 1967, p. 276; Elshout 1932 in Needham 1967, 
p. 279n2). In other words, both the sight of freshly spilt human blood 
and the experience of a tropical cyclonic storm produce a kind of 
culturally specific panic. I use the term “panic” here deliberately to 
recall the experience ancient Greeks reported of being overwhelmed 
by terror in their trackless forests, a panic which the Greeks attributed 
to possession by the great god Pan, Everything. 
Semai interpret this panic as part of a psychic process, lnwic, which 
involves disorientation and dissociation, dizziness, loss of consciousness 
and of self-control. A Semai term for the Emergency in Malaya in the 
1950s, was Ln(g)wic. The Terror. People entering possession trance 
also -lwic. Herman Melville, who understood the Dark Powers, explains: 
“Though in many of its aspects this visible world seems formed in 
love, the invisible spheres were formed in fright” (1989, p. 182). In 
other words, panic opens the way into the demonic dimensions Semai 
feel are manifest in thunder squalls; conversely, irruptions of demonic 
forces into this world produce panic. For the peoples under discussion, 
spurting blood evokes panic and, for the people involved, represents 
the breakthrough of overwhelming supernatural threats into the safe and 
familiar cosmos where people can be secure in their daily lives. 
Anything their imagination associates with spilt blood makes people 
uneasy. “[P]ouring certain kinds of blood into streams” seems dangerous 
to Batek Semang (Endicott 1979a, p. 70; cf. pp. 71n, 76–77, 157). 
Several of these peoples say that careless treatment of bloodsucking 
leeches risks generating a storm.3 Any red, yellow or orange thing—
e.g., tree saps—recalls blood, people say, and thus warrants ritual 
circumspection. When skies grow red and yellow in the morning or 
evening or during a heavy mist in daytime, east Semai withdrew into 
their houses and fell silent. Citing Gérard Diffloth, Benjamin (2014) 
reports that ŋεbŋaab, the Temiar term for this condition, is cognate 
with Batek Semang yamp “blood”. East Semai nyamp describes this 
3	 See, for example, Blust 2013, p. x6; Cooper 1941, p. 31; Endicott 1979a, pp. 63, 
71, 73, 74, 156–57; Maceda 1964, p. 116; Needham 1967, p. 277; Schebesta 1973, 
pp. 189, 223, but contrast 122.

--- PAGE 57 ---
46	
Robert Dentan
spooky atmospheric condition which, one man said, resulted from 
tigers’ spattering the blood from their prey against the sky (Dentan 
1968a, pp. 20–21 and 2008, p. 72; cf. Evans 1970, p. 208). Rainbows, 
foggy sunrises and misty sunsets had the same effect and explanation. 
Mamanua say rainbows, especially red ones, presage death (Maceda 
1964, p. 115, citing similar beliefs among Andamanese). Semang claim 
rainbows are shadows of the subterranean Dragon which brings the 
floods that accompany thunder squalls (Dentan 1999a, p. 28; Endicott 
1979a, pp. 186–87). East Semai and some North-Aslian-speaking Semai 
hold that the thunder-god Karey smears the blood sacrifice on his body. 
The rainbow/dragon association, however, seems to be a human near-
universal, not regionally or “culturally” specific (Blust 2000).
The “sacrifice” in this case is generally though not exclusively by 
women, usually girls. Semai explain that girls are even more likely 
than boys to lose the self-control that is so important in an egalitarian 
society where external sanctions are by definition generally ineffective. 
The blood comes generally from the shin because cutting there is 
convenient and relatively painless, not for any ritual reason. 
So, how are we to understand this complex? Edmund Leach (1967) 
divides systems of tropes like those involved in this blood-and-thunder 
complex into two basic types, public and private. Explaining the 
former requires knowing the context; the latter needs a psychological 
explanation. To grossly oversimplify, the former requires a cultural or 
historical explanation, the latter a psychological or biological one. The 
first set of phenomena is local, the latter universal—provided certain 
conditions obtain. Thus one could argue that the complex is a “survival” 
(Tylor 1920) of an ancient and widespread tradition, not internally 
consistent in all details, but suggestive of the ground against which 
more recent religious complexes formed. Or one could argue that any 
small-scale egalitarian society subjected to tropical cyclones would 
develop a similar set of beliefs. Moreover, there are, as Needham (1967, 
pp. 283–84) and Douglas (1970) suggest, certain natural phenomena 
that impress people everywhere—charismatic megafauna, for instance, 
so that it is unsurprising to find bears salient in the symbolism of 
circumpolar peoples or tigers in the symbolism of Southeast Asians. The 
difficulty that confronts us here is that both explanations seem correct,

--- PAGE 58 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
47
as Leach’s discussion of “magical hair” suggests (1967). Pounding or 
burning hair features in some versions of the blood-and-thunder complex.4 
The peoples under discussion manifest no unique response to hair that 
corresponds to blood-intoxication, so the fact that it features in the 
complex seems more “natural” (or less “cultural”) than the fact that 
blood is so salient both in the complex and elsewhere in people’s lives. 
But the fact that a group of Semang Orang Asli say that the red skies 
preceding a storm (presumably suggestive of blood) have a distinct smell 
(presumably “bloody”) and that the smell of burning hair neutralizes 
the smell of blood (Wnuk 2014) implies a rationale for burning hair to 
drive away a storm. Any serious account of the system (e.g., Endicott 
1979a; Robarchek 1987a, 1987b) must treat the complex as the 
product both of cultural convergence as a result of semi-isolated groups 
responding to mutually similar environmental factors and also as 
a fragmentary inheritance from an ancient religious system which, 
due to egalitarianism and dispersion, probably never lacked internal 
variation. 
East Semai associate blood with femininity: menstruation, childbirth, 
post-partum recovery. These literally bloody and therefore ritually 
dangerous activities generate a wide range of ritual restrictions, especially 
for neophytes. Husbands and children are also involved, although to 
a lesser extent. Men explain not attending childbirth by saying things 
like “I can’t stand all that blood”. People take precautions to prevent 
blood from childbirth falling to the earth. So an structuralist analyst, if 
any survive, might explain the symbolic trope of the blood sacrifice as 
contrasting “women/blood/warmth/life creativity” with the (male) thunder 
god’s cold rain, death and destruction. 
For purposes of our discussion, the elements that are important 
are those which do not seem to be universal responses of small-scale 
egalitarian foragers to tropical cyclones, the salience of human blood in 
the rituals, for instance, and the consequent elaboration of the symbolic 
weight of taboos on leeches. These features do not seem to be elaborated 
4	 See, for example, Blust 2013; Dentan 2002a, p. 208; Endicott 1979a, pp. 143–44, 155; 
Macdonald 1988; Needham 1967, pp. 279–80.

--- PAGE 59 ---
48	
Robert Dentan
in Sumatra, the Nicobars or the Andamans, or even among some 
southern Aslians like Btsisi’ (“Mah Meri”) with whom I lived in 
1975 (cf. Nowak 2013), although Skeat and Blagden (1906, vol. II, 
pp. 187n3) refer to Btsisi’ deity called “‘Gaffer Engkoh’ or Jongkoh”. 
Although absence is impossible to demonstrate, a universal reaction to a 
universal stimulus should occur everywhere (cf. Robarchek 1987a, 
1987b). Moreover, this blood-and-thunder complex involves so large 
a number of common and similarly unique elements spread over so 
wide an area, from West Malaysia to New Guinea and Luzon, that time 
does not allow their enumeration here. Blust (1981, 1991), Endicott 
(1979b), Macdonald (1988) and Maceda (1964) have masterfully 
marshalled these mutually correlated data (and cf. Needham 1967, 
p. 280). For all its faults, the age-area hypothesis suggests the complex 
comprises a set of tropes left over from an ancient ritual praxis in the 
islands. But there is another common feature, this one more widespread 
in maritime South Asia: a stupid, violent, mostly male God.
2. The Boogeyman as God?
As Eiuga lives in the sky, the thunder is his voice, and the wind his breath; 
if he is angry he breathes out storms…The Onges do not love Eiuga or 
any of the other spirits. They merely fear them, and seek to evade their 
anger by various expedients…they never hesitate to try and deceive the 
spirits…by simple tricks.
Cipriani (1966, p. 44)
Violent thunderstorms arise because somewhere a Batak has laughed at 
an animal….
Eder (1987, p. 200)
[M]an at first multiplied so fast as to make the earth too crowded. Kari 
the Thunder god slays them with his fiery breath and thus reduces the 
number of mouths to be fed.
Skeat and Blagden (1906, vol. II, p. 184)

--- PAGE 60 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
49
Analogs to the male thunder deity central to Schebesta’s Semang 
“monotheism” occur throughout eastern insular Southeast Asia as well 
as on the Andamans, from Malaysia to the Philippines, sometimes in 
addition to a more orthodox high god who, at least among Semai and 
unlike the thunder deity, lacks gender identity (Dentan 2006; Tijah, 
Thambiah and Leong 2000; cf. Sellato and Sercombe 2007, p. 24). 
Indeed, there is some question whether the thunder god is unitary or 
merely a superordinate concretion of the category “thunder gods” (for 
a sophisticated discussion of this complex question, see Benjamin 2014, 
pp. 164–70). When I asked east Semai how many thunder gods there 
were, they indicated that they had not thought about that question, 
but guessed, since storms occurred simultaneously in widely scattered 
locales, that there were probably several of them (Dentan 1968a, p. 39). 
A west Semai man said in 2006 that a looming cumulus storm front, 
ja’ar, was the ghosts, kcmooc, of my friends who had died since 
I was last in Malaysia, coming to welcome me back. (The Temiar word 
ja’ar refers primarily to the flood which attends such thunder squalls 
[Benjamin, personal communication]). Similarly, Batek Semang say 
their version of the thunder god, Gobar
is a single male, but Gobar was sometimes described as two brothers, a 
married couple, and a brother and sister pair, One informant said Gobar 
wears a plaited waistband, which is a woman’s garment, as well as a shirt, 
a man’s garment.
Endicott and Endicott (2008, p. 34)
Although the same ambivalence of gender and number also characterizes 
some Temiar versions of the thunder god, both Semai and Temiar versions 
are male enough that, e.g., they send their penises off to seduce their 
younger brothers’ wives (Benjamin 2014, pp. 142, 143; Dentan 2008, 
p. 104; cf. Macdonald 1988, p. 65). The thunder god seems anomalous 
in several ways besides maleness. 
As a unitary deity, the thunder god resembles the boogeyman (or Thor 
or Zeus) more closely than it resembles Allah, Yahweh or Indra. For 
those unfamiliar with the boogeyman, let me take a moment to introduce 
you. The etymology of this word is uncertain, although it seems to come 
from the same root as the noun “bug” (insect). This root may refer to

--- PAGE 61 ---
50	
Robert Dentan
dread (Warner 1998). Coincidentally, some Semai use the word cee’, 
“bug”, to refer to demons. The ideal type form, at least among Temiar, 
is the head louse (Benjamin, personal communication) but Semai use 
the term, with modifiers, to refer to various insects and demons (1968b). 
The boogeyman is so grotesque and stupid as to be the subject of 
mockery despite the fear it provokes (Warner 1998), like zombies in 
modern U.S. movies. Adults use the boogeyman to frighten children 
into silent submission to adult authority but in many stories the children 
outwit the boogeyman. Finally, the boogeyman associates with packs 
of demonic animals like the baby-headed “gabble ratchets”, black dogs 
with babies’ heads that hunt down. Both the European and Southeast 
Asian figures are thus fundamentally ambiguous (feared/mocked, rule-
enforcers/rule-breakers, terrorizing children/mocked by children, etc.). 
In other words, this is a completely ambivalent deity, far more feared 
and mocked than worshipped, whom people importune not for benefits 
but to go away. 
For comparison, take the east Semai thunder god, Nkuu’, with 
whose cultus in 1962 I became familiar (and cf. Baharon 1966; Tacey 
2013; cf. Endicott 1979a, 1979b; Skeat and Blagden 1906, vol. II, 
pp. 299–300). Semai said, sometimes, that you could think of Nkuu’ 
as a sunbear, though a siamang, also black and white, was a more 
frequent representation, and a huge red or black ape, “like King Kong”, 
was another common image (cf. Endicott 1979a, p. 175; Schebesta 
1957, p. 24; Skeat and Blagden 1906, vol. II, p. 187n3). The use of 
bear symbolism in an area in which normally tigers are what Mary 
Douglas (1970) calls “natural symbols” of magical potency and danger 
(e.g., Bakels 2000; Wessing 1986) suggests a possible extra-peninsular 
northern origin for this trope (e.g., Hallowell 1926). On the other hand, 
monkeys and bears in the Rāmāyaṇa seem to represent pre-Aryan 
indigenes (Dube 1967, p. 95n). The name “Karei” for Semang and 
Temiar versions of this deity (Benjamin 2014; Schebesta 1973, 
pp. 189–92; Skeat and Blagden 1906, vol. II, p. 737) is homonymous 
with a Mentaweian term for an authoritative magical-medical expert or 
“seer” (Loeb 1972, p. 167; Salmeno 1994), a fact of interest because 
Mentawaians were isolated from mainstream Indonesian culture until 
the last century, constituting an internal frontier like Aceh (Geertz 1963,

--- PAGE 62 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
51
p. 91; Nooy-Palm 1972). They share “ossuary practices and some other 
customs” with the Austroasiatic-speaking Nicobarese (Nag 1972); but 
neither group seems to have a thunder deity of the sort discussed here. Taro, 
not rice, was until recently the main Mentaweian crop, and traditionally 
Nicobarese planted no rice. Benjamin (personal communication) says 
the r-to-g alterations the word Karei goes through in Austronesian 
languages suggests that it is an old Austronesian word. 
Because Karei is merciless, Semang and Temiar call him evil 
(Benjamin 2014, p. 170; Schebesta 1973, p. 192). Variants of the name 
in the peninsula include Karai, Kari, Karey, and Kaii. Macdonald (n.d.) 
reports, significantly, that on Palawan in the Philippines, an apparent 
variant, kuyaw (kuyew) seems related to uyew (monkey); kuyawen (fear 
of being hit by thunder); and keuyewen (improper things or behaviour) 
(Benjamin 2014; Evans 1923, p. 149; Williams-Hunt 1952, p. 75), 
and there are near homonyms among Philippine foragers (Blust 2013). 
Adela Baer suggests that some Borneo names for orangutan seem to 
relate to Karei/Kuyaw, such as kayies, kayas, kagiu, kagyu, kogiu, 
kuyang (2008). 
The alternative name Tapern (Evans 1923, pp. 149–50) may be a 
version of Semai Bah Pent; in Semai Ta’ is a title for an elder, Bah for 
a person too immature to have opinions one needs to heed. Variants of 
pent mean “short” in several Aslian languages (Benjamin 1976, p. 115; 
Skeat and Blagden 1906, vol. II, p. 715 (word 281)). Thus the name 
of this figure would be “Master Shorty”. Still, though tempting, this is 
probably a false etymology (Benjamin 2013). There are many stories 
of Bah Pent’s greed, credulity and humiliation (e.g., Dentan 1968a, 
p. 23; Endicott 1979a, pp. 133, 189, 192, 195–98, 212; Juli Edo 1990, 
pp. 86–94; cf. Benjamin 2014, pp. 142, 143). Similarly, Gubar, the 
Batek Semang version of the thunder god, “has a double persona (he is 
also a Trickster-like figure) subject to …a set of tales that mercilessly 
mocks the Gubar character” and provoke “helpless giggles” (Lye 2004, 
p. 155; cf. Endicott 1979a, pp. 70–79, 163, 164; Lye 2004, p. 203). 
Second, there is a Malay title engku or tengku, whose etymology 
Wilkinson (1959) says is unclear and which appears in Malay literature 
about the time of the founding of Malacca. This term seems not to be 
a variant of tunku, the short form of tun aku or tuan aku, which can

--- PAGE 63 ---
52	
Robert Dentan
be glossed as “milord”. In the Riaus, engku was the title of children 
of princes of the highest rank by wives of lesser status. Marrying local 
princesses was a standard way for Austronesian adventurers to establish 
claim to new territories, and the use of variants of engku for lineages 
of non-Malay indigenous peoples in southern West Malaysia suggests 
that something of the sort may be going on here. Moreover, throughout 
Southeast Asian conquerors identified themselves with the “ancient 
storm god” of the people they conquered (Cady 1964, pp. 37–38). The 
choice of an ambivalent god that both manifests and punishes violence 
as a symbol for the rulers of a terrorist conquest statelet seems 
appropriate, at least from the viewpoint of the subordinated indigenes 
(e.g., Dentan 2008; Tacey 2013; cf. Endicott 2013, pp. 247, 248 and 
in prep. 15; van der Sluys 2006, p. 30). Later on, the piratical 
conquerors in Southeast Asia would identify themselves with Rudra or 
with Śiva the Destroyer. The Palawan title empuq, “‘master, owner’…. 
‘Lord’ or ‘God’”, refers to a more benign high god, a superior sort of 
“spirit” (Macdonald 2007, p. 102). 
Presumably the conquerors chose the title to express their fearsome­
ness. But, although Nkuu’ is scary because he is violent, he is also 
stupid and easily tricked, often a figure of fun. Semai tricked him into 
sharing his cold shamanic power with humanity, for instance. Such 
duplicity is central to Semai ideas of srnlook, betraying or hunting 
down and killing, the dominant relationship between people and the 
animals which, manifesting as demons, make people sicken and die, 
or if erotically attracted to someone, provide him assistance in finding 
cures. The Semai relationship with Nkuu’ is similarly complex. When 
it seems safe to do so Semai and most foragers who practise this cult 
tell funny stories about Nkuu’s remarkable stupidity and mock the 
animals who are his protégés, for example holding out the arms of a 
wounded gibbon and making it dance, despite the rule against such 
mockery, which disrespects and blurs the boundary between humans 
and animals (but cf. Brosius 1989, p. 91; Mera’ee 2001, p. v; Schebesta 
1973, pp. 189, 190). If detected, such mockery can bring on thunder 
squalls, but mockery is intrinsic to people’s relationship with Nkuu’ and 
his animal minions (Dentan 2008, pp. 87–89).

--- PAGE 64 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
53
The new rulers may not have realized that among egalitarian 
peoples asserting authority is distasteful, so that appointed east Semai 
headmen making speeches by which they hope to influence political 
decisions usually preface their remarks with a little riff about being old 
and feeble, perhaps “deaf in one ear”, so as not to seem “arrogant”, 
one of the transgressions that Semai say Nkuu’ punishes with thunder 
squalls. The Semai word for “arrogant” conflates Malay words for 
arrogance and incest; incest is a horror in part because it crosses 
generational or other boundaries between which respect relationships 
 are proper (cf. Evans 1923, p. 153; Schebesta 1973, pp. 97, 109, 
190–91). The ritual restrictions would include categories we would call 
incestuous but in fact the salient feature of these actions seems to be 
disrespecting the boundaries of kinship categories. Like mixing categories 
of food that should be kept separate, such behaviour creates ritual 
confusion and chaos (Blust 1981, Blust 2013; Brosius 1989; Dentan 
1970, Dentan et al. (1997), pp. 37, 46; Endicott in prep. 14) and can 
generate a thunder squall. For Western peoples, sex is the important 
part of incest; for Semai and Semang, it is blurring the distinctions 
which keep the cosmos orderly and safe (cf. Nagata 2011, p. 145). The 
general term for such carelessness is rawuuc, a term used for wandering 
from the path and thus a metaphor like English “errant”, a term which 
also used to mean “wandering” (cf. Roseman 1984, p. 428).
There are several terms that refer to actions that incur thunder 
squalls. Probably the best known is Semai-Temiar trlaij (telaidn in 
some sources), cognate with lawaij, “taboo” and perhaps with lij-laij, 
“throw a snit/hissy”, “lose it” (as in American slang), i.e. lose self-control 
and “wander” in the sense introduced in the last paragraph. 
Such disorder in the human sphere naturally generates disorder in the 
cosmos. One name for the thunder god is Cmam, the Kensiw Semang 
word for what we call “incest” (Evans 1937, p. 184), as if the two 
disorders, thunder squalls and incest, were basically one. Schebesta says 
that “incest” is “caused by a lightning strike” (1957, p. 97). In Borneo the 
word baliw like báliw among Cebuano Bisayan in the Philippines, refers 
to divine punishment for “crazy” behaviour, often incest, consisting of 
being struck by lightning and turned into stone (Blust 2013). Blust (2013, 
p. 408) dismisses as mistaken reports of a Sarawak Malay word, buak,

--- PAGE 65 ---
54	
Robert Dentan
meaning “calamitous retribution brought about by mocking another 
being or animal—often involving storm and petrefaction” (Mera’ee 
2001, p. v). A peninsular Malay homonym refers, among other things, 
to spurting, as of arterial blood. 
While many of the peoples under discussion describe thunder squalls 
as punishment for bad behaviour, there is another sense in which it is 
simply a phenomenon of the same kind, naturally co-occurrent. The 
violent rain blurs one’s eyes, the indiscriminate wind and floods wash 
away safe and familiar categories, dissolving the world into demonic 
violence and death. Nkuu’, the boogeyman, himself an ambiguous 
and ambivalent figure, represents as well as generates the chaos which 
violating proper boundaries brings. The annual earth cleansing ceremony 
of Palawan peoples, failure to perform which releases the forces 
of chaos, also focuses on “incest” and violence (Macdonald 2007, 
pp. 107–13; and cf. Blust 1981, 1991). Even in English, “violence” 
and “violating” stem from the same root. Panic is the only appropriate 
response.
3.  Hantu Buru, Rudra and Hundun
A careful investigation of the magic rites…used by a nation which has 
changed its religion will not unfrequently show, that what is generally 
called witchcraft is merely the debris of the older ritual, condemned by  
the priests of the newer faith, but yet stubbornly, though secretly, 
persisting, through the unconquerable religious conservatism of the mass 
of the people.
Skeat (1900, p. 83)
Since the middle of the twentieth century, anthropologists and historians 
have tended to construe peasants as living in “little societies” whose 
culture was a partial and ill-conceived and partial version of the more 
reflective high culture of their economic and political superiors (e.g., 
Redfield 1956). In peninsular Southeast Asia, for example, scholars cast 
the Malay “spectre huntsman”, hantu pemburu, hantu langut (McHugh 
1959, pp. 23–35) and kindred demons like the hantu raya (great demon), 
hantu tinggi (tall demon) or hantu rimba (primary rainforest demon)

--- PAGE 66 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
55
(Ahmad Embun 1959, pp. 1–4, 19–23; McHugh 1959, pp. 35–41) as 
“discarded divinities of older faiths” (Wilkinson 1901, p. 395, s.v. hantu). 
These “great demons”, like Nkuu’, appear “especially at times when 
there is a storm with heavy rain and wind mixed with lightening” (Malay 
informant, in McHugh 1959, p. 36). Like Nkuu’, they are associated 
with leeches and storm birds (McHugh 1959, pp. 31, 32). 
Since Indic religions were dominant in the area before the arrival 
of Islam, it made sense for British colonial scholars to link the spectre 
huntsman, a boogeyman-like thunder deity, with Śiva or Indra. Not 
only ethnologists, but probably many of the Indian immigrants 
and Indianized Malay quislings who made up the ruling class of 
Malaysia saw the spectre huntsman and primal demon as avatars of 
Śiva, Batara Guru, “Avatar Mentor” (Skeat 1900, pp. 86–87). This 
version of Śiva, at least in Indonesia, is “a powerful, mischievous, and 
malignant tyrant” (Crawfurd 1820, vol. II, p. 219), like Nkuu’ a good 
representative of the piratical coastal regimes that afflicted Southeast 
Asia in olden times (cf. Dentan 2002b, pp. 178–79, n. 10; Tacey 2013). 
I want to suggest, however, that, rather than thinking of the spectre 
huntsman or Batara Guru as inferior peasant versions of Śiva, it 
would make more sense to think of them as Indianized versions of the 
thunder god of the Austroasiatics and early Austronesians whom they 
so closely resemble. 
Let me cite an analogous case. The Semai heartland along the 
Bernam River was once a Khmer colony. The name Bernam comes 
from Mon-Khmer bnuum, phnom, mountain. The name for the trance- 
possession ceremony there is n’asiik, from the Arabic-Malay word 
asyik, pleasure, in this case referring to the ecstasy of mystical 
experience. There was extensive Sufi missionary activity in the area in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and both Semai and Malays still 
make pilgrimages to the grave “mounds” (busut) where the spiritual 
powers (Arabic-Malay keramat, from Greek charisma) might linger 
(cf. Beals 1962, p. 48). That is, there was considerable interaction 
between the two parties, enough that they could recognize the 
similarities between Sufi self-immolation in God and Semai demonic 
possession and therefore give both the same name. (Remember: Sufism 
is a heresy in Islam because it recognizes multiple, personal ways to

--- PAGE 67 ---
56	
Robert Dentan
God.) Still, though both involve trance, the Sufi version is conceptually 
and experientially distinct from the Semai one, and it is extremely 
unlikely that either party learned its praxis from the other. What I want 
to suggest is (1) that, in the peninsula, most indigenous Malays are 
Orang Asli converted to Islam and retaining versions of the earlier 
Austroasiatic boogeyman god, and (2) that before the conversion, Hindu 
Malaysians (i.e., Śaivite) recognized the similarities between their 
storm God and the earlier Austroasiatic one, and, like the Sufis, used 
terms and concepts familiar to themselves to understand the prior 
Austroasiatic reality; and (3) that the Austroasiatics in turn may have 
refined their notions of the boogeyman god by incorporating Malay 
and Hindu ideas. This two-way traffic has occurred in other areas (e.g., 
Benjamin 2012; Dentan 1999b, 2001).
These Austroasiatic boogeyman thunder deities and their Austronesian 
kin may have a pre-Vedic Indian cousin, Rudra “Cruel and Wild” 
(Doniger O’Flaherty 1975) who “is addressed more in the hope of 
keeping him at bay than with the wish to keep him near…fierce and 
destructive like a terrible beast, like a wild storm… Yet Rudra is not 
merely demonic, for he is the healer and cooler as well as the bringer of 
disease and destructive fever” (Doniger O’Flaherty 1981, p. 219). Rudra, 
Hindu mythology says, is an ancient, dark deity, first an elder brother 
of the gods, and later their implacable enemy. As a trope, 
Rudra was the embodiment of wildness, unpredictable danger, and fever 
but also of the healer and cooler, who attacks ‘like a ferocious wild beast’ 
([Ṛg Veda] 2.33). He lives on the margins of the civilized world as one 
who comes from the outside, an intruder, and is excluded from the Vedic 
sacrifice.
Doniger (2009, p. 120)
This characterization is almost synonymous with Riboli’s (2013) 
description of Gobar, a Semang thunder god. There are enough 
other similarities between Rudra and Nkuu’/Gobar that some sort of 
historical kinship seems probable, as I have argued in detail elsewhere 
(Dentan 2002a, pp. 217–20; 2002b), too many similarities to repeat 
here. And Rudra’s stressed “outsider” status may be literal as well as 
metaphoric.

--- PAGE 68 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
57
One need not take Oppenheimer’s (1999) discredited view that 
Indian culture in general originates from ancient Austronesians (see, 
e.g., Baer 1999) to recognize the ways in which “Hinduism”, which is 
an “extremely eclectic” (Cady 1964, p. 37; Dube 1967, p. 94) syncretic 
grab bag of once probably discrete traditions, took the religious ideas of 
subordinated peoples, demoted them to accord with basic ethnocentric 
Aryan Hindu beliefs and incorporated some of their elements as 
asura, demigods or demons (see Doniger 2009). After a few “cameo 
appearances in the Veda” (Doniger 2009, p. 129) Rudra is subsumed 
into the image of Śiva the Destroyer, in much the same way as Nkuu’, 
Gobar and the other thunder gods disappeared into the cult of Śiva in 
Malaysia. Their earlier presence seems to have softened up Southeast 
Asians for Śaivism, leaving them more resistant to worshipping Vishnu 
(Cady 1964, p. 37). For instance, Nkuu’s comic priapism, mocked 
in Semai stories (e.g., Dentan 2008, p. 74; cf. Benjamin 2014), may 
manifest itself in the liṅgas that litter Malaysia and Indonesia to 
honour the male creativity of Śiva the Destroyer. Still, some elements 
of the old intolerance of ambiguity and horror of category violation 
remain after the rise of Śaivism and temple cities around 500 AD 
(Doniger 2009, p. 258). For instance, an early Śaivite sect, the 
Pāśupatas, “acting in imitation of Rudra (the Vedic antecedent of Siva)” 
(Flood 2004, p. 113) worshipped Śiva as Lord of Beasts (paśupati); 
their prescribed regimen of worship and asceticism included violating 
dietary norms and acting in socially-improper manners, i.e. behaving 
like “a dog, or a bull, or the like” (Acharya 2013, p. 105). Indeed, the 
elaborate Balinese “Eleven Powers” ceremony (Lansing and Abrams 
1980, 1995, pp. 117–21), which involves a hecatomb of beasts, “is an 
attempt to transform Rudra from an agent of chaos into his godlike form 
as Siwa” (Lansing 1995, p. 117).
In short, the rising urbanized despotisms first incorporate the 
ancient thunder gods as symbols of mastery and then demote them to 
demonic status. Their Indo-Aryan avatars mutate from violent lords of 
beasts and chaos suitable as tropes for piratical rule into creative lords 
of order and hierarchy, flipping the evaluation of their ability to destroy 
everything safe and familiar into an ability also to order and sustain 
daily life, at least for the docile peasants within the walls of spreading

--- PAGE 69 ---
58	
Robert Dentan
Indic religions. From an apostle of universal destruction the deity 
becomes an apostle of unquestioning obedience, from radical to apparent 
conservative (Ovesen, Trankell and Ojendal 1996, pp. 36–38; for a similar 
transformation of religion into a buttress of the Thai state, see Ishii 
1993). Though established by violence that its victims and perpetrators 
alike could imagine as Gobar, Karey, Nkuu’ or Rudra, “[p]ower 
could be part of the cosmic order” (Pye 1985, p. 93), manifest in four-
armed Śiva holding together the four corners of the world (Pucci 1992, 
p. 27). 
Elsewhere I have also listed some similarities between the deities 
in the Chinese Ministry of Storms and the thunder deities of India 
and Southeast Asia. There is even a hint of the blood sacrifice in an 
otherwise anomalous Chinese myth (Dentan 2002a, pp. 206–7). I refer 
the reader to my earlier discussion of this complicated topic. What 
I want to look at here in conclusion is a subtler, more elusive commonality 
between these religious traditions. 
4.  Summary and Conclusion
Most of us…are naturally more sanguine and hopeful than logic 
would justify. We seem to be so constituted that in the absence of any  
facts to go upon we are happy and self-satisﬁed; so that the effect of 
experience is continually to contract our hopes and aspirations. Yet a 
lifetime of the application of this corrective does not usually eradicate 
our sanguine disposition. Where hope is unchecked by any experience,  
it is likely that our optimism is extravagant.
Peirce (1877, p. 3)
Intellectuals tend to treat such traditions as intellectual artifacts, the 
sort of data with which they are comfortable. To hammers, everything 
looks like a nail. Geoffrey Benjamin’s (2014) brilliant analysis of 
Temiar religion as a theological system and Kirk and Karen Endicott’s 
exhaustive presentation of Batek religion as a belief system exemplify 
the best of this approach, which is rooted in the tradition of British 
social anthropology (Endicott 1979a; Endicott and Endicott 2008). More 
relevant here, perhaps is Lye Tuck-Po’s (2004) brilliant ethnography of

--- PAGE 70 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
59
Batek Semang, which, at the request of her Batek collaborators, she casts 
as a warning from the Thunder God Gobar to the peoples destroying 
the rainforest, that wanton “development” will provoke unimaginable 
punitive catastrophe. 
My analysis by contrast is of a shared emotional response to 
existence. Indeed, “Existence” (bhava) is another name for Rudra 
(Doniger O’Flaherty 1975, p. 50). The “natural symbols” of storm 
and blood evoke that response, call it existential dread. Like our 
intelligentsia, the original peoples of Southeast Asia sought to impose 
intellectual order on the world in which they lived. But they knew 
that now and then the dark reality onto which human schemes seek 
to impose order billows up and overpowers them; drowns them and 
blows them away; and there is nothing anyone can do about it: “the 
first blast of nature’s verity will bring them down, houses of cards that 
they are” (Peirce 1901, p. 68). The fragility of the world that humans 
construct was not an intellectual postulate for them but a matter of 
observation, as was their own powerlessness. The boogeyman god—
laughable, ambiguous, cruel, ambivalent, mindless, chaotic, dark and 
cold—that is the world, not the orderly, predictable, comprehensible 
fantasy of sheltered modern intellectuals or Hindu potentates shielded 
from nature’s verity. Rudra’s rage stems from the differentiation of 
primordial Unity in Creation, which is a trope for the human division 
of experience into intellectually accessible categories; Rudra’s goal, like 
Nkuu’s, is to bring back primordial “darkness covered by darkness” 
(Kramrisch 1981, p. 20). 
In this context, talking about people with this sort of egalitarian 
small-scale social organization as if their theological impulses were 
consciously serried like those of, say, Sir Thomas Browne, can be 
misleading, especially when dealing with impulses like dread and 
mockery in situations of existential peril and epistemological ambiguity. 
Words are shabby equipment, constantly deteriorating, to apprehend this 
sort of phenomenon. But let us try, at risk, to paraphrase Bai Juyi’s 
Confucian dig at Laozi’s Daoism, of taking 5,000 words to argue that 
words are useless.
I suggest that the perceptual experience of a thunder squall is the 
equivalent on an emotional-cognitive level of the conceptual experience

--- PAGE 71 ---
60	
Robert Dentan
of Indian saṁsāra (Beals 1962, pp. 49, 50) or Chinese hundun, chaos, 
the Void, on an intellectual level. The Daoist (or Buddhist) formulation is, 
in Nietzsche’s dichotomy, Apollonian, Platonic, abstract; the Austroasiatic 
unformulation seems Dionysian, shamanic, and overwhelmingly concrete. 
The difference seems to lie in the rise of class society, which allows 
some people—and some peoples—to live their lives sheltered from the 
unmediated world. The lyric poets of the Tang Dynasty understood that 
life in the gated communities of the urban world was different from 
ordinary life.
    zhū mén jǐu ròu chòu
 
    lù yǒu dòng sí gǔ
“Inside the gates uneaten wine and meat rot/ 
Outside people starve to death” 
(Du Fu, Dentan gloss) 
Imagining the collapse of cognitive categories and the slippage of 
everything known into meaninglessness in one’s monastic retreat on 
the slopes of Tai Shan can leave one serene and prepared to abandon 
all striving as meaningless. Experiencing the apparent dissolution of 
the world as Semang and related peoples did is more thoroughgoing a 
mental cleansing and leaves one not serene but in panic. I use the word 
“panic” deliberately here, because it seems to have originated in a similar 
experience of being overwhelmed by the immensity and indifference of 
the great god Pan, “Everything”, in the trackless forests of ancient Greece. 
The unmediated world, hundun, makes no sense and cares nothing for 
people. Without differentiation by human imagination and differentiating, 
“chaos is not even chaos… it is blank nothing” (Peirce 1960, p. 98). 
Panic is not a particularly primitive response to that enormous empty 
indifference. Nor is amusement at its inhuman stupidity. 
References
Acharya, Diwakar. “How to Behave like a Bull? New Insight into the Origin and 
Religious Practices of Pāś upatas”. Indo-Iranian Journal 56 (2013): 101–31.
Adelaar, K. Alexander. “Borneo as a Cross-Roads for Comparative Austronesian 
Linguistics”. In The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Persepectives,

--- PAGE 72 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
61
edited by Peter Bellwood, James J. Fox and Darell Tryon. Melbourne: Australian 
National University Press, 2006. 
Ahmad Embun. Hantu dan Kerja-ny, I. Penang: Bukubuku Pelajaran Melayu, 1959.
Anonymous. “Indigenous Penan Again Blockade Murum River Dam”, 19 September 
2013. Available at <http://ens-newswire.com/2013/09/19/indigenous-penan-again-
blockade-murum-river-dam/>.
Baer, Adela. “Review of Eden in the East: The Drowned Continent of Southeast 
Asia, by Stephen Oppenheimer”. Asian Perspectives 38, no. 2 (1999): 256–58.
———. “Orangutan: History, Myth, Oblivion”. Sarawak Museum Journal 65 
(2008): 339–54. 
Baharon Azhar bin Raffie’i. “Engku’ – Spirit of Thunder”. Federation Museums 
Journal (new 	series) 11 (1966): 34–37.
Bakels, Jet. Het Verbond met de Tijger. Visies op mensenentende dieren in Kerinci, 
Sumatra. Leiden: Research School of Asian, African, and Amerindian Studies 
(CNWS), Universiteit Leiden, 2000. 
Barroux, Rémi. 2013. «Dans la forêt malaisienne, un village fait de la résistance.» 
Le Monde 07.11.2013 à 09h14 • Mis à jour le 08.11.2013 à 13h08
Beals, Alan R. Gopalpur: A South Indian Village. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1962. 
Bellwood, Peter. “Southeast Asia Before History”. In The Cambridge History of 
Southeast Asia: Volume I, From Early Times to c. 1500, edited by Nicholas 
Tarling. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Benjamin, Geoffrey. “Austroasiatic Subgroupings and Prehistory in the Malay 
Peninsula”. In Austroasiatic Studies, Part I, edited by Philip N. Jenner, 
Laurence C. Thompson and Stanley Starosta. Honolulu: University Press of 
Hawaii, 1976.
———. Between Isthmus and Islands: Reflections on Malayan Palaeo-Sociology. 
Department of Sociology Working Paper 71. Singapore: National University of 
Singapore, 1986. 
———. “Ethnohistorical Perspectives on Kelantan’s Prehistory”. In Kelantan 
Zaman Awal: Kajian Arkeologi dan Sejarah di Malaysia, edited by Nik Hassan 
Shuhaimi bin Nik Abdul Rahman. Kota Bahru, Malaysia: Perpaduan Muzium 
Negeri Kelantan, 1987.
———. “The Aslian Languages of Malaysia and Thailand: An Assessment”. In 
Language Documentation and Description, Volume 11, edited by Peter K. 
Austin and Stuart McGill. London: Endangered Languages Project, School of 
Oriental and African Studies, 2012.
———. “Why Have the Peninsular ‘Negritos’ Remained Distinct?” Human Biology 
85, nos. 1–3 (February–June 2013): 435–72.
———. Temiar Religion, 1964–2002. Singapore: National University of Singapore 
Press, 2014.

--- PAGE 73 ---
62	
Robert Dentan
Blench, Roger. “Was there an Austroasiatic Presence in Island Southeast Asia 
prior to the Austronesian Expansion?” Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association 30 (2010): 133–45.
Blevins, Juliette. “A Long Lost Sister of Porto-Austronesian?”. Oceanic Linguistics 
46 (2007): 154–98.
Blust, Robert. “Linguistic Evidence for Some Early Austronesian Taboos”. 
American Anthropologist 83 (1981): 285–319.
———. “On the Limits of the ‘Thunder Complex’ in Australasia”. Anthropos 86, 
no. 4/6 (1991): 517–28.
———. “The Austronesian Settlement of Mainland Southeast Asia”. In Papers 
from the Second Annual Meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society, 
edited by Karen L. Adams and Thomas John Hudak. Tempe, AZ: Program 
for Southeast Asian Studies, Arizona State University, 1994. 
———. “The Origin of Dragons”. Anthropos 95 (2000): 519–36. 
———. “Terror from the Sky: Unconventional Linguistic Clues to the Negrito Past”. 
Human Biology 85, nos. 1–3 (2013): 401–16.
Brooks, David. The Social Animal: The Hidden Sources of Love, Character, and 
Achievement. New York: Random House, 2011.
Brosius, J. Peter. “Landscape and Society in Borneo: Penan Hunter-Gatherers of 
Sarawak”. Paper presented at the symposium Rainforest: Life in a Canopied 
World, University Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 4 February 1989.
Browne, Sir Thomas. “Hydriotaphia. Urn Buriall; or, a Discourse of the Sepulchral 
Urns Lately Found in Norfolk”. In Religio Medici and Other Essays of 
Sir Thomas Browne. London: Chapman and Hall, n.d. [1643].
Bulbeck, David. “Origins of Civilization in West Malaysia and the Orang Asli”. 
Jurnal Arkeologi Malaysia 11 (1998): 95–99.
Burenhult, Niclas. “Deep Linguistic Prehistory with Particular Reference to 
Andamanese”. Lund University, Dept. of Linguistics Working Papers 45 (1996): 
5–24.
Cady, John F. Southeast Asia: Its Historical Development. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1964. 
Cameron, John. Our Tropical Possessions on Malayan India: Being a Descriptive 
Account of Singapore, Penang, Province Wellesley and Malacca. Their 
Peoples, Products, Commerce, and Government. London: Smith, Elder and 
Co., 1865. 
de Casparis, J.G. and I.W. Mabbett. “Religion and Popular Beliefs of Southeast 
Asia before c. 1500”. In The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia: Volume I, 
From Early Times to c. 1500, edited by Nicholas Tarling. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1999.
Cipriani, Lidio. The Andaman Islanders, translated by D. Taylor Cox. London: 
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1966.

--- PAGE 74 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
63
Cooper, John M. Temporal Sequence and the Marginal Cultures. Catholic University 
of America Anthropological Series #10. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University 
of America, 1941. 
Crawfurd, John. History of the Indian Archipelago, Containing an Account of 
the Manners, Arts, Languages, Religions, Institutions, and Commerce of its 
Inhabitants. Three volumes. London: Frank Cass, 1820.
Dallos, Csilla. From Equality to Inequality: Social Change among Newly 
Sedentary Lanoh Hunter-Gatherer Traders of Peninsular Malaysia. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 2011.
Dentan, Robert Knox. The Semai: A Nonviolent People of Malaysia. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1968a.
———. “Notes on Semai Ethnoentomology”. Malayan Nature Journal 21 (1968b): 
17–28.
———. “Labels and Rituals in Semai Classification”. Ethnology 9 (1970): 
16–25.
———. “Some Senoi Semai Planting Techniques”. Economic Botany 25 (1971): 
136–59.
———. “Potential Food Sources for Foragers in Malaysian Rainforest: Sago, Yams 
and Lots of Little Things”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 147 
(1991): 420–44.
———. “Orang Asli: Missionising, Manipulation and Misery”. Aliran Monthly 
18 (6 July 1998): 26–27.
———. “Untransfiguring Death: Rape, Drunkenness, Development and Homicide 
in an Apprehensive Void”. RIMA [Review of Indonesian and Malaysian 
Affairs] 33, no. 1 (1999a): 17–66.
———. Semai-Malay Ethnobotany: Hindu Influences on the Trade in Sacred 
Plants. Penang: AKASS Heritage Series, 1999b.
———. “Semai-Malay Ethnobotany: Hindu Influences on the Trade in Sacred 
Plants, Ho Hiang”. In Minority Cultures of Peninsular Malaysia: Survivals 
of Indigenous Heritage, edited by Razha Rashid and Wazir Jahan Karim. 
Penang, Malaysia: Academy of Social Sciences (AKASS), 2001.
———. “Against the Kingdom of the Beast: An Introduction to Semai Theology, 
Pre-Aryan Religion and the Dynamics of Abjection”. In Tribal Communities 
in the Malay World: Historical, Cultural and Social Perspectives, edited by 
Geoffrey Benjamin and Cynthia Lau. Leiden: International Institute for Asian 
Studies and Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2002a. 
———. “Disreputable Magicians, the Dark Destroyer, and the Trickster Lord”. 
Asian Anthropology 1 (2002b): 153–94. 
———. “How the Androgynous Bird God Brought Agriculture to Semai of West 
Malaysia: Discipline, Hard Work and Subordination to the Cycle of Time”. 
In Les Messagers Divins: Aspects Esthetiques et Symboliques des Oiseaux en 
Asie du Sud-Est, edited by Pierre Le Roux and Bernard Sellato. Aix-en-

--- PAGE 75 ---
64	
Robert Dentan
Provence/Marseille: IRASEC and Paris: Editions Seven Orients/Connaissances 
et Savoirs, 2006.
———. Overwhelming Terror: Love, Fear, Peace, and Violence among Semai of 
Malaysia. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 2008.
———. “Nonkilling Social Arrangements”. In Nonkilling Societies, edited by 
Joao Evans-Pym. Honolulu: Center for Global Nonkilling, 2010. 
———. “Childhood, Familiarity, and Social Life among East Semai”. In Anarchic 
Solidarity: Autonomy, Equality and Fellowship in Island Southeast Asia, edited 
by Thomas Gibson and Kenneth Sillander. New Haven: Yale University Southeast 
Asia Studies, 2011.
———. “Review of Images of a Forest People: Punan Malinau—Identity, 
Sociality, and Encapsulation in Borneo, by Lars Kaskija”. Journal of Southeast 
Asian Studies 44, no. 3 (2013): 529–33.
Dentan, Robert K., Kirk Michael Endicott, Alberto G. Gomes and Barry 
Hooker. Malaysia and the Original People: A Case Study of the Impact of 
Development on Indigenous Peoples. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1997. 
Dentan, Robert K. and David Nicholls. “Stress, Equality and Nonkilling among 
East Semai: A Preliminary Account”. Paper presented at the American 
Anthropological Association Meetings (Montreal), 2011. 
Dentan, Robert K. and Ong Hean Chooi. “‘Stewards of the Green and Beautiful 
World’: A Preliminary Report on Semai Arboriculture and its Policy 
Implications”. In Dimensions of Traditions and Development in Malaysia, edited 
by Rokiah Talib and Tan Chee Beng. Kuala Lumpur: Pelanduk Publications, 
1995.
Doniger, Wendy. The Hindus: An Alternative History. New York: Penguin, 2009.
Doniger O’Flaherty, Wendy. Hindu Myths: A Sourcebook Translated from the 
Sanskrit. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1975.
———. The Rig Veda: An Anthology. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1981.
Douglas, Mary Tew. Natural Symbols. New York: Pantheon, 1970. 
Dove, Michael R. “Theories of Agriculture and the Political Economy of Ignorance”. 
Agroforestry Systems 1 (1983): 85–99.
———. “The Agroecological Mythology of the Javanese and the Political Economy 
of Indonesia”. Indonesia 39 (April 1985): 1–36.
Dube, S.C. Indian Village. New York: Harper Colophon, 1967. 
Dvorak, J., M.-Ch. Luo and E.D. Akhunov. “N.I. Vavilov’s Theory of Centres 
of Diversity in the Light of Current Understanding of Wheat Diversity, 
Domestication and Evolution”. Czech Journal of Genetics and Plant Breeding 
47 (Special Issue) (2011): 20–27.
Eder, James F. On the Road to Tribal Extinction: Depopulation, Deculturation, and 
Adaptive Well-being among the Batak of the Philippines. Berkeley and London: 
University of California Press. 1987.

--- PAGE 76 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
65
Ellen, Roy. Environment, Subsistence and System: The Ecology of Small-Scale 
Social Formations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
———. “Foraging, Starch Extraction and the Sedentary Lifestyle in the Lowland 
Rainforest of Central Seram”. In Hunters and Gatherers, I. History, Evolution 
and Social Change, edited by Tim Ingold, David Riches and James Woodburn. 
Oxford: Berg, 1988.
Endicott, Kirk M. Batek Negrito Religion: The World-View and Rituals of a 
Hunting and Gathering People of Peninsular Malaysia. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1979a. 
———. “The Batek Negrito Thunder God: The Personification of a Natural Force”. 
In The Imagination of Reality: Essays in Southeast Asia Coherence Systems, 
edited by A.L. Becker and Aram A. Yengoyan. Norwood, NJ: Alex Publishing 
Corp, 1979b.
———. “Peaceful Foragers: The Significance of the Batek and Moriori for the 
Questions of Innate Human Violence”. In War, Peace, and Human Nature: The 
Convergence of Evolutionary and Cultural Views, edited by Douglas P. Fry. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2013. 
———. “The Cause of Nonviolence among Orang Asli of Malaysia”. In 
Anthropological Explorations of Human Nature, edited by Jon Henrick Remme 
Ziegler and Kenneth Sillander. Forthcoming.
Endicott, Kirk M. and Karen L. Endicott. The Headman was a Woman: The 
Gender Egalitarian Batek of Malaysia. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press, 
2008. 
Evans, Ivor H.N. Studies in Religion, Folk-Lore, & Custom in British North 
Borneo and the Malay Peninsula. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1923. 
———. The Negritos of Malaya. London: Frank Cass, 1937. 
Flood, Gavin. An Introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2004. 
Freeman, Derek. “Thunder, Blood, and the Nicknaming of God’s Creatures”. 
Psychoanalytic Quarterly 37 (1968[1965]): 353–99.
———. “A Succinct Rejoinder to Clayton A. Robarchek”. Journal of Anthropo-
logical Research 43 (1987): 301–6. 
Gardner, Peter. “Symmetric Respect and Memorate Knowledge: The Structure and 
Ecology of Individualistic Culture”. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 22 
(1966): 389–415. 
———. “Birds, Words, and a Requiem for the Omniscient Informant”. American 
Ethnologist 3 (1976): 446–68.
———. “Bicultural Oscillation as a Long-term Adaptation to Cultural Frontiers: 
Cases and Questions”. Human Ecology 13 (1985): 411–32.
———. “Foragers’ Pursuit of Individual Autonomy”. Current Anthropology 32 
(1991): 543–72.

--- PAGE 77 ---
66	
Robert Dentan
Geertz, Hilda. “Indonesian Cultures and Communities”. In Indonesia, edited by 
Ruth McVey. New Haven, CT: Human Relations Area Files, 1963. 
Gibson, Thomas and Kenneth Sillander, eds. Anarchic Solidarity: Autonomy, Equality, 
and Fellowship in Southeast Asia. New Haven: Yale Southeast Asia Studies 
Program, 2011. 
Gomes, Alberto. “Menraq and the Violence of Modernity”. In Nonkilling 
Societies, edited by J. Evans Pim. Honolulu: Center for Global Nonkilling, 
2010. 
Guenther, Matthias G. “Bushman Religion and the (non)sense of Anthropological 
Theory of Religion”. Sociologus 29 (1979): 102–32.
Hallowell, A. Irving. “Bear Ceremonialism in the Northern Hemisphere”. American 
Anthropologist 28 (1926): 1–174.
Ishii, Yoneo. “Religious Patterns and Economic Change in Siam in the Sixteenth 
and Seventeenth Centuries”. In Southeast Asia in the Early Modern Era: Trade, 
Power, and Belief, edited by Anthony Reid. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1993.
Jenner, Philip N. “A Possible Case of Cosmological Gender in Khmer”. In 
Austroasiatic Studies, Part II, edited by Philip N. Jenner, Laurence C. 
Thompson and Stanley Starosta. Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1976.
Jennings, Sue. Theatre, Ritual and Transformation: The Senoi Temiars. London: 
Routledge, 1995.
Josselin de Jong, J.P.B. de. De Maleische Archipel als Ethnologisch Studieveld. 
Leiden: Ginsberg, 1935.
Juli Edo. “Tradisi Lisan Masyarakat Semai”. Monograf Fakulti SaIns 
Kemasyarakatan dan Kemanusiaan 16. Kuala Lumpur: Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia, 1990. 
Kaskija, Lars. Images of a Forest People: Punan Malinau – Identity, Sociality, 
and Encapsulation in Borneo. Uppsala Studies in Cultural Anthropology 52 
(2012). 
Kramrisch, Stella. The Presence of Śiva. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981.
Lansing, J. Stephen. The Balinese. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
1995. 
Lansing, J. Stephen and Ira Abrams. Eleven Powers. Color film, 48 minutes. 
Filmakers Library, 1980.
Leach, Edmund. “Magical Hair”. In Myth and Cosmos, edited by J.M. Middletom. 
New York: Natural History Press, 1967 [1958].
Loeb, Edwin M. Sumatra: Its History and People. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University 
Press, 1972 [1935].
Lye, Tuck-Po. Changing Pathways: Forest Degradation and the Batek of Pahang, 
Malaysia. Lanham and New York: Lexington Books, 2004.
Macdonald, Charles J.-H. “Bons et Mauvais Coups de Tonnerre”. L’Homme 28, 
no. 106/107 (1988): 58–74.

--- PAGE 78 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
67
———. Uncultural Behavior: An Anthropological Investigation of Suicide in the 
Southern Philippines. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2007. 
———. “SIL Philippines Palawan-English-Tagalog Dictionary”, n.d. Available at 
<http://www01.sil.org/asia/Philippines/prog/palawan/lexicon/main.htm>.
Maceda, Marcelino N. The Culture of the Mamanua (Northeast Mindinao) as 
Compared with that of the Other Negritos of Southeast Asia. San Carlos 
[University Graduate School] Publications (Series A) #1 (1964). 
Maxwell, W.E. “The Aboriginal Tribes of Perak”. Journal of the Straits Branch of 
the Royal Asiatic Society 4 (1879): 46–50. 
McHugh, James N. Hantu Hantu: An Account of Ghost Belief in Modern Malaya. 
Singapore: Eastern Universities Press, 1959. 
Melville, Herman. Moby Dick. Pleasantville, NY: Reader’s Digest, 1989 [1851]. 
Mera’ee bin Abdullah, Haji. Sya’ir Jerjezang: Cetera Niah Zaman yang Bahari 
[The Ballad of Jerjezang: A Tale of Niah in the Age of Splendour]. Gathorne, 
Lord Medway tr. Leiston, Suffolk: Leiston Press, 2001. 
Munan, Heidi and Foo Yuk Yee. Malaysia: Wonderland of Nature and Culture. 
Singapore: Times Books, 2005. 
Murdock, George Peter. “Clark Wissler, 1870–1947”. American Anthropologist 50 
(1948): 292–304.
Nag, Moni. “Nicobarese”. In Ethnic Groups of Insular Southeast Asia, I: Indonesia, 
Andaman Islands and Madagascar, edited by Frank M. LeBar. New Haven: 
Human Relations Area Files Press, 1972.
Nagata, Shuichi. “Decline of Rituals among the Orang Asli of a Resettlement 
Community of Kedah, Malaysia”. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of 
the American Anthropological Association, 1995.
———. “Cemam or Sexual Prohibition among the Kensiw of Kedah, Malaysia”. 
Moussons 16 (2011): 133–55. 
Needham, Rodney. “Blood, Thunder and the Mockery of Animals”. In Myth and 
Cosmos, edited by John M. Middleton. New York: Natural History Press, 1967 
[1964].
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Twilight of the Idols, translated by A.M. Ludovici. New York: 
Barnes and Noble, 2008 [1888].
Nooy-Palm, C.H.M. “Mentaweians”. In Ethnic Groups of Insular Southeast Asia, I: 
Indonesia, Andaman Islands and Madagascar, edited by Frank M. LeBar. New 
Haven: Human Relations Area Files Press, 1972.
Nowak, Barbara S. “Can the Partnership Last? Btsisi’ Marital Partners and 
Development”. Cultural Survival Quarterly 8, no. 2 (1984): 9–11.
———. “The Cooperative Nature of Women’s and Men’s Roles in Btsisi’ Culture”. 
In To Work and to Weep: Women in Fishing Economies, edited by Jane 
Nadel-Klein and Dona Davis. Social and Economic Paper #18. St. John’s, 
Newfoundland: Institute of Social and Economic Research, Memorial University 
of Newfoundland, 1988.
———. Personal communication.

--- PAGE 79 ---
68	
Robert Dentan
Oppenheimer, Stephen. Eden in the East: The Drowned Continent of Southeast Asia. 
London: Phoenix (Orion), 1999.
Ovesen, Jan, Ing-Britt Trankell and Joakim Ojendal. Where Every Household is an 
Island: Social Organization and Power Structures in Rural Cambodia. Uppsala 
Research Reports in Cultural Anthropology 15 (1996).
Peirce, Charles Sanders. “The Fixation of Belief”. Popular Science Monthly 12 
(November 1877): 1–15. 
———. “Principles of Philosophy”. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. 
Cambridge: Belknap Press, Harvard University Press, 1960. 
———. “The Laws of Nature”. In The Essential Peirce, vol. 2. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press, 1992 [1901]. 
Pucci, Idanna. Bhima Swarga: The Balinese Journey of the Soul. Boston: Little 
Brown, 1992.
Pye, Lucian W. Asian Power and Politics: The Cultural Dimensions of Authority. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985.
Redfield, Robert. Peasant Society and Culture: An Anthropological Approach to 
Civilization. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1956.
Riboli, Diana. “Of Angry Thunders, Smelly Intruders and Human Tigers: Shamanic 
Representations of Violence and Conflict in Nonviolent Peoples: The Semang-
Negrito (Malaysia)”. In Shamanism and Violence: Power, Repression and 
Suffering in Indigenous Religious Contexts, edited by Diana Riboli and Davide 
Torri. London: Ashgate Publishers, 2013.
Robarchek, Clayton A. “Conflict, Emotion, and Abreaction: Resolution of Conflict 
among the Semai Senoi”. Ethos 7 (1979): 104–23. 
———. “Blood, Thunder, and the Mockery of Anthropology: Derek Freeman and 
the Semang Thunder God”. Journal of Anthropological Research 43 (1987a): 
273–300.
———. “Response to Freeman”. Journal of Anthropological Research 43 (1987b): 
307–8. 
Robarchek, Clayton A. and Robert K. Dentan. “‘Blood Drunkenness’ and the 
Bloodthirsty Semai: Unmaking Another Anthropological Myth”. American 
Anthropologist 89 (1987): 356–65.
Roseman, Marina. “The Social Structuring of Sound”. Ethnomusicology 28, no. 3 
(1984): 411–45.
Rousseau, Jérôme. Central Borneo: Ethnic Identification and Social Life in a Stratified 
Society. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990. 
———. “The Subject of Knowledge”. In Beyond Textuality: Asceticism and 
Violence in Anthropological Interpretation, edited by Gilles Bibeau and Ellen 
E. Corin. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1995.
Sager, Steven. “The Sky is Our Roof, the Earth Our Floor: Orang Rimba Adat and 
Religion in the Bukit Duabelas Region of Jambi, Sumatra”. PhD thesis draft, 
Australian National University, 2008.

--- PAGE 80 ---
2. A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes	
69
Salmeno, Yongki. Menyusuri Pelosok Mentawai. Jakarta: PUSPA SWARA [Pustaka 
Pembangunan Swadaya Nusantara], 1994.
Sauer, Carl O. Seeds, Spades, Hearths, and Herds: The Domestication of Animals 
and Foodstuffs. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969. 
Schebesta, Paul. “Religiose Anschauungen der Semang uber die Orang Hidop (die 
Unsterblichen)”. Archiv fur Religionswissenschaft 24 (1926): 209–33.
———. “Religiose Anschauungen der Semang uber die Orang Hidop (die 
Unsterblichen)”. Archiv fur Religionswissenschaft 25 (1927): 5–35. 
———. Die Negrito Asiens: Religion und Mythologie. Modling: St. Gabriel-Verlag, 
1957.
———. Among the Forest Dwarfs of Malaya. Kuala Lumpur and Singapore: Oxford 
University Press, 1973 [1928]. 
Sellato, Bernard and Peter G. Sercombe. “Introduction: Borneo, Hunter-Gatherers, 
and Change”. In Beyond the Green Myth: Hunter-Gatherers of Borneo in 
the Twenty-First Century, edited by Peter G. Sercombe and Bernard Sellato. 
Copenhagen: Nordic Institute of Asian Studies, 2007.
Sercombe, Peter G. “Continuity and Adaptation among the Penan of Brunei”. 
In Beyond the Green Myth: Hunter-Gatherers of Borneo in the Twenty-First 
Century, edited by Peter G. Sercombe and Bernard Sellato. Copenhagen: 
Nordic Institute of Asian Studies, 2007.
Sibon, Peter and Joanna Yap. “Two Penans Visiting Detained Relatives 
Arrested”. Borneo Post Online, 9 November 2013. Available at <http://www. 
theborneopost.com/2013/11/09/two-penans-visiting-detained-relatives-arrested/>.
Skeat, Walter William. Malay Magic: Being an Introduction to the Folklore and 
Popular Religion of the Malay Peninsula. London: Macmillan, 1900.
Skeat, Walter William and Charles Otto Blagden. Pagan Races of the Malay 
Peninsula. Two volumes. London: MacMillan, 1906.
Slimming, John. Temiar Jungle: A Malayan Journey. London: John Murray, 1958.
Sweet, Bernard. “Introduction”. In Twilight of the Idols, by Friedrich Nietzsche 
and translated by A.M. Ludovici. New York: Barnes and Noble, 2008 [1888].
Tacey, Ivan. “Tropes of Fear: The Impact of Globalization on Batek Religious 
Landscapes”. Religions 4 (2013): 240–66. Available at <http://www.mdpi.
com/2077-1444/4/2/240>.
Tijah knoon Yok Chopil, Shanthi Thambiah and Leong Yoke Lian. “The 
Ungendered God: An Investigation into Gender Relations in Semai Religion 
and Cosmology”. Paper presented at the Conference on Wanita Malaysia 
dalam Alam Baru, Petaling Jaya, Selangor, 16–17 September 2000. Also in 
Patricia Martinez, eds., Gender, Culture and Religion in Malaysia (Kuala 
Lumpur: SAMA, forthcoming). 
Tylor, Edward. Primitive Culture. New York: J.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1920 [1871].
van der Sluys, Cornelia M.I. “Are the Jahai a Non-Violent People?” In Orang 
Asli Women of Malaysia: Perceptions, Situations and Aspirations, edited by 
Adela Baer. Subang Jaya, Malaysia: Center for Orang Asli Concerns, 2006.

--- PAGE 81 ---
70	
Robert Dentan
Vavilov, N.I. Origin and Geography of Cultivated Plants. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1992.
Warner, Marina. No Go the Bogeyman: Scaring, Lulling, and Making Mock. New 
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1998. 
Wessing, Robert. The Soul of Ambiguity: The Tiger in Southeast Asia. Special 
Report #24, Center for Southeast Asian Studies. DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois 
University, 1986. 
Wilkinson, Richard J. A Malay-English Dictionary. Two volumes. London: Macmillan, 
1959 [1901]. 
Williams-Hunt. An Introduction to the Malayan Aborigines. Kuala Lumpur: 
Government Press, 1952.
Wnuk, Ewelina. “What Makes Orang Asli Languages Interesting?: Maniq as a 
Case Study of the Richness of Aslian Verbal Lexicons”. Paper delivered at the 
Orang Asli Symposium, Keene State College, Keene, NH, 11 June 2014. 
Woods, C.A. “A Criticism of Wissler’s North American Culture Areas”. American 
Anthropologist 36 (1934): 517–23.
Zide, Arlene R.K. and Norman H. Zide. “Proto-Munda Cultural Vocabulary: Evidence 
for Early Agriculture”. In Austroasiatic Studies, Part II, edited by Philip N. 
Jenner, Laurence C. Thompson and Stanley Starosta. Honolulu: University Press 
of Hawaii, 1976.

--- PAGE 82 ---
71
3
tantrism “seen from the East” 
Andrea Acri1
An isolated feature of the incomplete picture of an ancient epoch, full of 
gaps as it may be, may not convey any meaning to us, but if we find it 
again at a later epoch just as a part of an organic whole, we can conclude 
its being a similar part of an organic whole at the ancient epoch, only 
perhaps in an earlier stage of development.
Hermann Oldenberg (1973, p. 43)
The original form of Hindu spirituality would have been a spirituality of 
“Spirit Beings”.
David Gordon White (2012, p. 165)
1	 I thank Geoffrey Benjamin, Johannes Bronkhorst, Roy Jordaan, Alexandra Landmann, 
Fernando Rosa, Michele Stephen, Robert Wessing, and David Gordon White for 
having read and commented on a draft of this chapter. I am also grateful to John 
Peterson for having shared with me some of his unpublished writings. The responsibility 
for the views expressed here and any mistakes is, of course, entirely my own.

--- PAGE 83 ---
72	
Andrea Acri
1. Introduction
This chapter intends to raise the question as to whether the socio-religious 
movement we now call “Tantrism” may represent a wider Monsoon 
Asian areal phenomenon, with roots in a past that predates the earliest 
available textual data. It has been directly inspired by, and it engages 
with, three thought-provoking essays by anthropologist Robert Dentan 
on a common religious base in South and Southeast Asia (2002a, 2002b, 
this volume).2 As a scholar trained in Sanskrit and Classical Indology 
focusing on the adoption of Indic religions across Southeast Asia, I intend 
to take up the challenge cast by Dentan, namely that “speculative 
reconstruction of Semai theological history… suggests that serious 
students of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Daoism, need to pay attention to 
the indigenous religions of Peninsular Malaysia” (2002b, p. 207). 
I begin the discussion by surveying the historiographical parameters 
concerning the complex process of cultural and religious transfer between 
premodern South and Southeast Asia, and the origin of Tantrism. Next, 
I revisit the idea, advanced by early twentieth-century French scholarship, 
of a shared cultural matrix in Monsoon Asia, within which framework 
Dentan’s hypothesis may be situated. I then move to review Dentan’s 
main argument that a comparison of similar religious tropes found in the 
late Vedic tradition and in the oral lore of the Austroasiatic language-
speaking ethnic group of the Semai in Peninsular Malaysia would 
suggest a common ancestry. By taking into account additional evidence 
from premodern and modern South Asian, Javano-Balinese, and Malay 
contexts, I suggest that many of the similarities detected by Dentan 
extend to the post-Vedic period, i.e. to Tantric Śaivism and Tantric 
Buddhism in the mediaeval or post-Gupta period (ca. 500–1300 CE). 
My main thesis is that phenomena that are perceived by current 
scholarship as being either “Indic” or “local”/”indigenous” in nature were 
in fact already shaped by multi-directional and supra-local circulatory 
2	 In choosing the title of this chapter, and with respect to its pivotal conceptual issues, 
I have also been inspired by the essays “India seen from the East: Indian and 
Indigenous Cults in Champa” by Paul Mus (1975 [1933]) and “Construction Sacrifice 
in India ‘Seen from the East’” by Roy Jordaan and Robert Wessing (1999).

--- PAGE 84 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
73
dynamics; therefore, a perspective transcending the current paradigm is 
required to make sense of their genesis and transfer over a long period 
of time. Because of the complexity of the issues at stake here, and the 
vastness of this field of enquiry, my investigation is preliminary; rather 
than answering all the pressing questions, it only intends to provoke 
discussion and point at possible directions for future study. 
2. Indic Religions and Premodern Dynamics of  
Globalization
Having discussed some uncanny similarities between the Vedic “outsider 
God” Rudra and Nkuu’, the “Dark Lord” of the Semai, Dentan (2002b, 
pp. 219–20) suggests that the two figures, 
rather than being respectively ancestor and descendent, are cousins, 
developments of a primordial religion that stretched at least from eastern 
India to southern China.… If students of Hinduism and Buddhism want 
to familiarize themselves with pre-Aryan religion, it might be useful 
for them to spend some time with the indigenous religions of Malaysia, 
which, rather than being ‘primitive’ or ‘bizarre’, may represent a parallel 
development from a common base; and be closer to that base than 
theologies elaborated by generations of professional theologians.
The key hypothesis revisited by Dentan, i.e. that premodern Monsoon 
Asia shared a common ancestral religious matrix, was advanced by the 
French savants Jean Przyluski, Sylvain Lévi and Paul Mus in the first 
half of the twentieth century. This wider-ranging Monsoon Asia areal 
approach appears to have lost ground in the second half of the century 
to the advantage of more context-specific regional approaches to the 
study of premodern cultural and religious phenomena across South 
and Southeast Asia, which focus on regions and/or nation-states, and 
emphasize local genius and cultural specificity. Whenever supra-local 
(“cosmopolitan”) cultural phenomena are taken into account, they have 
been nearly always described through the lens of the Indic and Sanskritic 
high culture—as opposed to a (by definition) “local” or indigenous 
(i.e. deśi) culture. With respect to the religious history of the Indian 
Subcontinent, this tendency has resulted in a widespread scholarly opinion 
regarding Classical Hinduism, and Tantrism, as mainly orthogenetic

--- PAGE 85 ---
74	
Andrea Acri
developments from a Vedic and Brahmanical matrix, enriched by 
influences from local or regional cults of South Asia. Indic religions of 
Southeast Asia are usually described in terms of either local religions 
featuring varying degrees of Indic influences, or Indic religions featuring 
varying degrees of local adaptation. The problem of directionality and 
historical influence, hence the question of Southeast Asian agency in 
the spread of ideas and practices to South Asia, has rarely—if ever—
been raised; furthermore, Southeast Asia has been usually regarded 
as peripheral—at most a crossroads, or passive receiver, of Indic cults.
According to Dentan, older—yet still prevalent—views regarding 
Hinduism (and Śaivism) as a pot-pourri of beliefs and practices 
accumulated from all periods of South (and Southeast) Asian history 
need to be revisited. Such views (see, for example, Cady 1964, 
pp. 36–37) maintained that Śaivism, in both South and Southeast Asia, 
absorbed in a selective way “primitive cults of fertility” and of the 
Mother, Sun worship, etc., embedding (autochthonous) spirit-cults and 
what are often called “shamanic” practices. Dentan’s study, on the other 
hand, “fleshes out and modifies the old theory that Indian ideology, 
particularly Śaivism, found an ‘easy accommodation’ with Southeast 
Asian religions because of syncretic Hindu praxis back in India” (2002a, 
p. 157). Dentan rather suggests a contrary—yet multi-faceted—process, 
i.e. one that involved
the slow internal differentiation of an unformalized and unnamed 
aboriginal religion which spread throughout south and southeast Asia; its 
resultant differentiation into diverse forms in India and… the mountainous 
interior of Peninsular Malaysia; and a subsequent convergence in the first 
millenium AD as Indian traders, princes and missionaries introduced their 
Hindu and Buddhist modifications of the original religions into the area. 
(ibid.). 
Dentan (ibid., p. 155) challenges his readers with a series of questions, 
then offers a preliminary answer:
What kinds of similarities were there between the Indian Motherland and 
the peoples of Malaysia? What ways did knowledge flow? Perhaps, in the 
figure of the monstruous God of Beasts, who taught humans magic, we 
moderns can discern the foreshadow of globalization.

--- PAGE 86 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
75
Discussions of premodern dynamics of globalization in the wide 
geographical area spanning from Northwestern India to insular 
Southeast Asia can be subsumed under the abundant literature on 
“Indianization”, which has been briefly surveyed in the introduction 
to this volume. Here suffices it to point out that religious history 
has often been left out of the picture. This is the case, for 
instance, of the compelling hypothesis on a “Sanskrit Cosmopolis” 
elaborated by Sheldon Pollock (1996, 2006), which covers the 
expression of aesthetics of politics through first Sanskrit and then 
cosmopolitan vernaculars, yet glosses over the most widespread and 
long-lasting of all religions spread over South and Southeast Asia 
in the mediaeval period: Śaivism. Alexis Sanderson (2009) has 
produced a masterful study on what he has termed the “Śaiva 
age”, the geographical extent of which largely coincides with that 
of Pollock’s Sanskrit Cosmopolis. Sanderson presents detailed 
text-historical evidence on the rise and dominance of this religion 
in the Indian Subcontinent and “peripheral” areas, such as 
Southeast Asia, in the mediaeval period; however—and understandably 
so, given the paucity of evidence—Sanderson does not adequately 
address the question of its genesis (as we shall see, this question 
may be connected with the predominance of Śaivism throughout 
Monsoon Asia, namely its penetration into all stratas of societies 
and not just among the elites). Ronald Davidson (2002) and 
Geoffrey Samuel (2008) have delved into the question of the 
genesis of Tantric Buddhism and Tantric Śaivism, discussing social 
dynamics in which “subaltern/marginal” or “foreign/indigenous” 
agents and milieux played a role, yet have only marginally taken 
into account Southeast Asia. In an excellent study on what he calls 
a “Demonological cosmopolis”, David White (2012) investigates 
the supra-local nature of Tantric phenomena attested over much 
of Asia; “looking west”, he hypothesizes an Iranian/Central Asian 
origin for several widespread Tantric tropes. In this light, an 
evaluation of Dentan’s theories against the background of recent 
developments in the fields of Indology and Tantric studies seems now 
in order.

--- PAGE 87 ---
76	
Andrea Acri
3. The Quest for Origins: History (and Geography) of 
Tantrism 
Before reviewing Dentan’s hypothesis about a possible shared religious 
matrix, I would like to define my main subject of enquiry, i.e. “Tantrism”, 
and discuss its genesis in its (posited) homeland, namely the Indian 
Subcontinent. Tantrism is a complex term, used both emically (tantra, 
tantraśāstra, and the adj. tāntrika) and etically as a catch-all category 
to refer to an equally complex socio-religious phenomenon. According 
to Gavin Flood’s definition (2006, p. 9), “The term tantra as a noun 
is a term of self-description that refers to specific texts of revelation 
and is also a term designating a system of revealed teaching that leads 
to liberation and power”. The phenomenon of Tantrism has been 
a vehicle for cultural transfer, and indeed it encompasses disparate 
beliefs and practices, soteriological and ritual systems, and their 
related cultural manifestations across much of South, Central, Southeast, 
and East Asia. 
These phenomena or orientations, occurring across religious divides 
(i.e. Śaiva, Buddhist, Vaiṣṇava, and even Jaina) in both elite and lay 
milieux, featured elements of initiation and secrecy; empowerment and 
divinization with the assistance of psycho-physical techniques and/
or magico-ritual procedures (e.g. mantras, yantras, and maṇḍalas); 
transgression of social, sexual, and dietary norms; worship of wrathful 
deities; ritual violence; possession and exorcism; and different genres of 
sacred performance. As argued by Urban (1999, p. 126), 
‘Tantra’ is not something that can be defined as a singular, unified  
category; rather, it can only be described by means of what J.Z. Smith 
calls a ‘polythetic classification’, in which ‘large number of characteristics 
are possessed by a large number of class members’.
Although it is hardly possible to formulate a comprehensive working 
definition of the elusive “Tantric”, I believe that on the basis of the ever-
growing body of scholarship produced in the past three or so decades, 
and by applying a polythetic approach (see Landmann, this volume), it 
is legitimate to posit a complex, distinctive, and eminently cross-cultural 
phenomenon comprising several of the above features. This phenomenon

--- PAGE 88 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
77
developed in its most distinctive forms around the first half of the 
first millennium CE, and eventually spread to many socio-cultural and 
religious milieux across Asia (and Monsoon Asia in particular).3
The vexed question concerning the (socio-)historical origin of 
Tantrism has dominated the scholarly debate since the inception of 
the academic study of Indian religions. Two general paradigms may 
be identified: heterogenetic vs. orthogenetic. The former, which is 
the earlier, envisages a non- or pre-Aryan origin of Tantrism (and 
especially its feminine-oriented currents, subsumed under the category 
of “Śāktism”), and “Classical” or “post-Vedic” Hinduism at large, by 
positing a contact between an imported (adstratal) Vedic religion and 
a pre-existing cultic substratum in the Indian Subcontinent.4 Various 
cultural and geographical origins of this pre-Aryan substratum have 
been proposed, i.e. Dravidian (Conze 1975, p. 178), Austric (including 
“Negrito” and Malayo-Polynesian),5 shamanic (whether Central Asian 
or not, see Eliade 1971 and Samuel 2005), Harappan (Basham 1954, 
p. 23, Bhattacharyya 1999, pp. 156–60), “folk” (Hardy 1983, p. 141), or 
3	 Not unreasonably, Urban (2003, p. 27) warns agains the anachronistic projection 
of the abstract category of “Tantrism” onto premodern traditions, arguing that 
Tantrism is a modern construct that arose, like Hinduism, from the dialectical 
encounter between Indians and Western Orientalists. Yet, the existence of 
“Tantras” and distinctive discourses concerning them in the premodern period, 
both within and without South Asia, cannot be denied. Furthermore, the terms 
“Tantrism”/”Tantric” aptly capture the apparently common milieu of ritual practice 
characterizing both Śaivism and Buddhism (as well as other religious streams) in 
the mediaeval period.
4	 An offshoot of this debate is, for instance, whether yoga developed within a Vedic 
milieu or as a result of the influx of non-Vedic (i.e. shamanic, or even Chinese/Daoist) 
psycho-physical practices (see Eliade 1971; Samuel 2008, p. 84).
5	 For instance, S.K. Chatterjee (1965, p. 153) refers to “certain remarkable agreements 
between the cosmogony of the Polynesians and that of the Nāsadīya hymn in the 
Ṛg Veda (X.129)”, and to some astronomical ideas and terminology, e.g. the 
enumeration of the days by the phases of the moon, the “Austric” names for the two 
phases of the moon, the creation of the world from an egg, and Nāga-lore (see ibid., 
pp. 149–67 for a wider discussion of Austro-Asiatic and Austronesian loan-words 
and cultural tropes). Some of these views are clearly the product of the nationalistic 
milieu of the Greater India Society, and have been long since discredited.

--- PAGE 89 ---
78	
Andrea Acri
tribal (≈ “local”, “autochthonous”, or “indigenous”).6 As a reaction to 
this trend of thought, an orthogenetic model has gained popularity in 
the past two or three decades, which regards Classical Hinduism on 
the one hand, and Tantrism on the other, as a direct development 
of Vedic religious ideology and Indo-Aryan (magico-)ritual praxis.7 
Championing an orthogenetic model, Flood (2006, p. 14) offers the 
following synthesis:
There is much speculation about the origins of Tantrism. On the one 
hand the origins have been seen in an autochthonous spirituality or 
Shamanism that reaches back to pre-Aryan times in the subcontinent, yet 
textual historical evidence only dates from a more recent period. While 
certainly there are elements in tantric traditions that may well reach 
back into pre-history—particularly the use of skulls and the themes of 
death and possession*—we simply do not have sufficient evidence to 
speculate in this way. As Robert Mayer has shown, there is no evidence 
for a non-Aryan substratum for Tantrism, which must be understood as a 
predominantly Brahmanical, Sanskritic tradition with its roots in the Veda. 
In an important book on the origins of Indian civilisation, Sergent has 
argued that our main resources for understanding the past are linguistic 
6	 See, for example, van Gulik (1935, p. 4), Tucci (1949, p. 216), and Beane (1977, 
p. 37ff.). More recently, Vidya Dehejia (1986, p. 1) has argued that the Kaula Tantric 
tradition has “roots outside the fold of Brahmanical Hinduism” and “deep connections 
with tribal traditions” (of Orissa, Eastern India, etc.). For recent discussions of the 
“tribal hypothesis”, see Davidson (2002, pp. 211–14) and Samuel (2005, p. 410); 
cf. Urban 2011. White (2012, pp. 1s64–65) includes the “local or regional cults of 
yakṣas, devatās, bhūtas, and the like” in the substratal traditions that ought to be 
taken into account when reckoning the origins of and influences on “Tantric 
demonology—which is the foundation upon which all of the magnificent Tantric 
systems and hierarchies that Hindu Tantra specialists study are grounded”.
7	 A “strong” orthogenetic model has been championed also by Biardeau and 
Heesterman, among others, while scholars like Dumont, Eliade and Olivelle, have 
advanced a “weak” orthogenetic model, which posits a process of “‘challenge and 
assimilation’ in which new models and approaches, not necessarily emerging from 
within the Vedic context, are confronted and incorporated more or less successfully” 
(Samuel 2008, p. 160). To Samuel, the “‘orthogenetic’ approach offers elegance and 
closure, but it lacks a certain degree of realism, especially given that the logic of 
Vedic thought and practice is such that new developments are regularly incorporated 
through the use of resources already present within the tradition”.

--- PAGE 90 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
79
and archaeological. There is no early archaeological evidence for tantric 
traditions beyond the common era, and while there is textual evidence 
for a cremation ground asceticism as far back as the time of the Buddha, 
as well as tantric-like goddesses in the Veda, the specificity of the tantric 
revelation appears more recently in the history of South Asia.
In footnote (*), Flood adds that “There are spiritual practices, such as 
breathing techniques, in both East and West that may share a common 
heritage and probably reach back into prehistory” (referring to Eliade 
1971, pp. 104–7 and La Barre 1974, pp. 404–6). 
Urban (1999, p. 126) asserts that the history of Tantrism is 
impossible to write because of poverty of data at present, and that “the 
most we can say is that, although Dravidian or pre-Aryan origins may 
be possible, Tantric traditions have clear relations to the Vedic tradition 
as well”. Along similar lines, White elaborates a synthesis between an 
orthogenetic and heterogenetic approach (2000, p. 18), contextualizing 
the historical origin of Tantrism as follows: 
Tantra was an orthogenic development out of prior mainstream (but not 
necessarily elite) traditions, that nonetheless also drew on both foreign 
(adstratal) and popular (substratal) sources.
Brighenti (2009, pp. 63–64), while discussing the question of the origins 
of the mediaeval Śākta practices of human sacrifice, argues that 
this process of cultural interaction, out of which the whole Tantric  
religious complex has originated, had as its vectors the ‘people of 
the Veda’ on the one hand, and people of disparate ethnic origins  
(Dravidian, Austro-Asiatic, Austronesian and Tibeto-Burman) on the 
other…. I regard the Śakta ritual to be the final outcome of a long  
process of cultural syncreticism through the development, contact, and 
combination of diverse ethnocultural streams.
Elaborating on the controversial issue of the origins of Rudra-Śiva, the 
“outsider god” of the Vedic pantheon, Peter Bisschop (2013) takes a 
cautious stance:
The question of Śiva’s cultural background is one that has received much 
attention from scholars past and present.… A central issue at stake here

--- PAGE 91 ---
80	
Andrea Acri
is whether Śiva stems from a vedic (Aryan) or a nonvedic (non-Aryan, 
Dravidian) background. The debate revolves around the question of 
whether the deity Rudra, thought to be Śiva’s predecessor in the Vedas, 
is essentially an outsider or an insider to the vedic pantheon…. The issue 
of the true background of Rudra remains unresolved, but the complex  
nature of Śiva himself most probably points to a complex cultural 
background in which both vedic and extra-vedic elements have played  
a role. (emphasis mine)
The matter is still far from being settled, and chances are it never will. 
Yet, it is interesting to note that, in spite of the fact that so many blank 
spots remain, the “Indian” origin of Tantrism is hardly ever questioned, 
being taken for granted as an axiom by most scholars. Whenever 
“peripheral” areas such as Southeast Asia or the Himalayan region 
are worked into scholarly account, “India”—as if it was a monolithic 
and clearly defined entity!—is invariably seen as the cradle of “Indic” 
religious and cultural phenomena, and other areas as the “borrowers”. 
Yet, if one looks at the emic accounts, i.e. those found in the mediaeval 
Tantric texts from South Asia and Tibet, one notes a fascination for 
the “foreign” and the “exotic”. This fascination is articulated through 
the attribution of the origin of Tantric cults to either tribal milieux or 
peripheral, far away lands.8 Davidson’s (2002) reflections on South 
Asian Esoteric or Tantric Buddhism (and related Hindu traditions) are 
instructive here. Davidson (ibid., p. 226) notes that
the obscure words of coded language found in the Hevajra-tantra and 
elsewhere are often designated ‘foreign speech’ (mleccha-bhāṣā) or ‘the 
language of Oḍiyāna’.… ‘foreign’ in early medieval India did not simply  
8	 Several of the major Tantric seats were in regions at the “margins” of the Indic world, 
for example Kāmarūpa (Assam), Oḍḍiyāna (either Central Asia/the Northwestern 
part of the Indian Subcontinent, or South India), Śrīśailam (in a Southeastern 
Indian, prevalently tribal area); compare the Tibetan fascination with Shambhala, 
or the attribution of the origin of certain doctrines or schools to remote lands, such 
as Suvarṇadvīpa (Java or Sumatra, in the case of the Kālacakra system revealed to 
Atīśa by Piṇḍo/Kaiki śrīpāla) or Mahācīna (in the case of a transgressive form of 
Tārā). See White 2000, p. 18, and Samuel 2008, p. 84ff; for examples of Tantric 
teachers from tribal milieux, see Davidson 2002, p. 228.

--- PAGE 92 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
81
designate ‘extraterritorial’. As a term, it also applied to the plethora 
of tribal peoples found throughout the areas now known as Madhya 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Gujarat, Koṅkana, Bengal, 
Assam, Kashmir, and Swat—precisely in all the strongholds of esoteric  
Buddhism. 
A controversial point in the debate is the dichotomy between “Sanskritic” 
and “tribal”—a dichotomy that is also relevant to the present discussion 
of Dentan’s hypothesis. In both South and Southeast Asian contexts, the 
problem of directionality and historical influence remains crucial. Having 
pointed out that “it is not easy to see how an orally based, hunter-
gatherer culture is directly related to religious scriptures (tantras) that are 
generated in an agrarian society”, Davidson (ibid., p. 225) concludes that 
tribal peoples were aggressively Hinduized since the early mediaeval 
period, and this Hinduization included the appropriation of tribal 
deities, rituals, and cultic sites. In short, Davidson suggests that complex 
interactions between Tantric practitioners and members of indigenous 
communities were going on in South Asia, and speaks of a two-
way process, which illuminates the phenomenon of cross-fertilization 
between Sanskritic and tribal religions. To him, these trajectories brought 
a strong “sense of affiliation” between Tantric Buddhist (or Śaiva) 
ascetics, generally labelled Siddhas, and the “peoples of the forest” (ibid., 
p. 227).
Reasoning along similar lines, Samuel (2005) associates Tantra 
(especially in its Tibetan Buddhist variety) with what he calls 
“shamanism”.9 Samuel defines Vajrayāna Buddhism as a “sophisticated 
version of Shamanism” (2005, p. 74), for elements of Vajrayāna ritual are 
9	 The caveat here is that Samuel (2005, p. 11) uses “shamanic” (and “shaman, 
shamanism”) as analytic categories of mediumship that do not imply any 
historical association with the category of Siberian shamanism. To him, a shaman 
is a “shapeshifter, in the sense of someone who moves between different roles or 
personae”; “the symbolic entities used in shamanic procedures in many small-scale 
societies… could be seen as shared cultural resources facilitating these shifts and 
alterations, shifts which affected both mind and body, both the individual and their 
social group. Shamanic practitioners operate with these spirits or with analogous 
symbolic identities”. I conform to this usage throughout my essay.

--- PAGE 93 ---
82	
Andrea Acri
similar to certain practices of mediumship, which could partly account 
for its origins. Blaming a restrictive and typological fashion in which 
shamanism has often been treated, he encourages a more polythetic 
approach in the study of such practices as healing, exorcism, divination, 
and spirit mediumship involved in the transformation of consciousness. 
He suggests that the basic structure of Tantric (Vajrayāna) ritual can 
be found, besides in Sanskrit texts and their Tibetan translations, also 
“in the surviving traditions of Tantric practice of Japan, Bali and the 
Newar population of the Kathmandu valley”, thereby betraying an 
apparent Indian origin (p. 77). Samuel opens to the possibility that 
“siddha lineages include a number of figures that might be regarded 
as ‘tribal’ in origin”, and that “it is tempting to look to tribal 
populations as sources of the shamanic aspects of the Vajrayāna, since 
the tribal people of today certainly preserve elements of shamanic 
practice (Rahmann 1959)”, whose idiom however “does not seem 
particularly close to that of Vajrayāna shamanism” (p. 86). Urban, in 
his discussion of the rise of Tantra in Northeastern India (2011), notes 
that the situation “most likely involved a more subtle interaction, 
negotiation, and mutual transformation between brāhmaṇic and local 
non-Hindu traditions” (emphasis original),10 and that Śākta Tantra in 
Assam “is largely the result of a long, historical negotiation between 
Sanskritic traditions and the indigenous kings who patronised them, 
almost all of whom came from the non-Hindu tribes of the northeast 
hills” (p. 232). 
Turning to a more historical endeavour, Samuel (2008, p. 343) 
senses a tension or opposition between Vedic-Brahmanical culture in 
the Northern Indian region of Kuru-Pañcāla and the surrounding belt 
of cities and states in the Central Gangetic region and the Deccan. 
10	 Urban here follows “the lead of Wendy Doniger, who suggests that the development 
of Hinduism as a whole in South Asia was not simply a process of Sanskritisation, 
that is, the absorption of non-Hindu traditions into the brāhmaṇic system; rather, 
it also involved a process of ‘Deshification’, that is, the influence of local (deshi) 
and indigenous cultures on brāhmaṇic religion and the mutual interaction between 
Sanskritic and deshi traditions”. To both scholars, it would appear that these deśi 
traditions are “local” or autochthonous by definition, i.e. themselves not the result of 
supralocal dynamics.

--- PAGE 94 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
83
Bringing in connections with other regions of India, Central Asia, and 
Southeast Asia, Samuel frames the question of origin not as the contrast 
between indigenous people and “Aryan invaders”, but rather in terms of 
a cultural opposition (i.e., a pastoralist warrior-chieftain culture vs. an 
agrarian culture having elements of the philosopher and the renunciate) 
between genetically mixed populations already speaking mostly Indo-
Aryan languages. 
The above-mentioned historical narrative reminds us of that 
advanced by Johannes Bronkhorst in his “Greater Magadha hypothesis”. 
Bronkhorst (2007) argues that Brahmanism did not constitute the 
background in which Buddhism arose, for while Brahmanism was the 
dominant ideology in the region centred on the Doab of the rivers 
Ganga and Yamuna, Buddhism arose in the region to the east of the 
confluence of these two rivers (“Greater Magadha”), which had a 
different culture and ideology. Vedic and early post-Vedic literature 
contains little information about the culture of its eastern neighbours, 
yet early Brahmanical literature contains sparse evidence, such as 
references to demonic “people from the east” constructing sepulchral 
mounds, whose later embodiments might be the Buddhist stūpas 
(Bronkhorst 2007, pp. 4–5). While Bronkhorst does not attempt to 
comprehensively unpack the historical, genetic, and sociolinguistic aspects 
of the Aryan/Brahmanical vs. Non-Aryan/non-Brahmanical divide, some 
promising findings by John Peterson suggest that an overlap may have 
existed between the cultural and linguistic (i.e., Munda/Austroasiatic 
vs. Indo-Aryan) boundary of “Greater Magadha”.11
An issue that has been subject of much scholarly controversy, 
and that directly bears on the genesis and development of Classical 
Hinduism, Tantric Buddhism and Tantric Śaivism in South Asia, 
is that of a “pan-Indian religious substratum”. The idea of an early 
religious substratum was (re-)elaborated by David Seyfort Ruegg 
 
11	 I thank John Peterson for having discussed his findings and their relation with 
Bronkhorst’s theory in a series of emails, and for having shared with me an unpublished 
paper (Peterson forthcoming). See also below, pp. 105–6.

--- PAGE 95 ---
84	
Andrea Acri
(1964, 2008), who advocated a common cultic stock that would 
ex hypothesi form the common source from which both Śaiva and 
Bauddha Tantric traditions derived, and to which they ultimately owe 
their shared common elements. This “substratum model”, which is 
theoretically and historically neutral towards the problem of pre-Aryan 
or non-Aryan elements (ibid. 2008, pp. 41, 90),12 has been criticized 
by Alexis Sanderson (1994, 2001), mainly on account of its being 
an abstract and unverifiable, i.e. purely inferred, concept or entity. 
Sanderson himself has advanced a paradigm that has been later labelled 
by his readers as a “borrowing model”. Sanderson’s research 
on Sanskrit primary sources of the Śaiva Mantramārga and the 
Bauddha Yogatantra has highlighted the divide between the two 
traditions, and justified the common elements on the grounds of 
a great deal of mutual influences, or even manifest plagiarism, 
occurring between both systems—but especially the incorporation 
of materials of the former (and arguably earlier) textual corpus into 
the latter.
A negative stance against the quest for origins has been taken by 
Christian Wedemeyer (2013), according to whom a “consistent appeal 
to origins would (and, in fact, practically does) make the study of 
Tantric Buddhism impossible” (p. 34). Championing an orthogenetic 
approach, Wedemeyer has criticized the “tribal hypothesis” by teasing 
out formal fallacies in the approach of Davidson and others. According 
to Wedemeyer, a notion that would characterize “much of contemporary 
thought about the origin of the Tantras” is 
that—even after the ascendancy of the Vedic cultural model—primordial, 
pre-Āryan religious currents continued to be practiced among ‘marginal’ 
communities that included primitive groups such as India’s so-called 
‘tribal’ population. (p. 21) 
12	 Contrast Hardy (1983, p. 141), who explains a number of close similarities between 
the manifestations of “folk religion” in the northern and southern areas of the Indian 
Subcontinent “by postulating a very archaic and universally Indian form of popular 
religion of non-Āryan origin”.

--- PAGE 96 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
85
Having criticized this view, Wedemeyer does not provide a truly 
compelling alternative either.13 He does not do full justice to the 
complexity of the issue at stake when he claims that militating against 
this view is the absence of “any literary evidence for these supposed 
traditions and their communities”, and that the best evidence “that can 
be marshaled are vague and ambiguous traces such as busty Harrappan 
[sic] terra-cottas, sanguinary rites of tribal groups, or speculations on 
the non-Āryan elements in the secret tantric codes” (ibid., p. 197). 
Although Wedemeyer is right in stressing that tribals have in the past 
been too often naively perceived—in a Taylorean fashion—as bearers 
of a timeless, primordial, and “primitive” culture, it seems nonetheless 
unreasonable to rule out the fact that relatively isolated non-literate 
small-scale communities (such as the Semai of peninsular Malaysia) 
may have been more stable than others, and may thus have preserved 
distinctive, and remarkably resilient, cultural traits alongside foreign 
(i.e. Indic or Islamic) influences. 
However useful they are to capture the elusive dynamics that shaped 
the South Asian religious discourse in the mediaeval period, all the above 
approaches do not fully address the question of their ultimate origin, 
nor explain why cross-fertilization seems to have taken place in such a 
productive manner—in spite of the caveat expressed by Davidson about 
the difficult-to-explain relation between orally-based hunter-gatherer 
cultures and religious scriptures produced in agrarian societies;14 at 
the same time, they limit their main scope to South Asia and Tibet, 
13	 His dismissal, along Sanderson’s lines, of the “religious substratum model” on the 
ground of the absence of evidence is somewhat simplistic, reducing the issue to 
either a “devilishly clever” eradication of traces of primitive forms of Tantrism by the 
assimilating traditions (e.g. Śaivism, Buddhism, etc.), which he considers unlikely, 
or a total eradication by historical, cultural, economic, or other circumstances, 
which he consider a more cogent explanation, especially because “[t]hese postulated 
preassimilated forms of Tantrism were allegedly practiced by marginal, illiterate 
tribals, without the skills and finances necessary to leave lasting traces such as texts, 
statues, and inscriptions” (Wedemeyer 2013, p. 197).
14	 This is all the more pertinent in the case of Southeast Asia. It is worth reminding that 
that the oldest Sanskrit inscriptions from the region (ca. sixth century CE) are found 
in a remote area of present-day Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo), which is populated 
by small-scale societies.

--- PAGE 97 ---
86	
Andrea Acri
leaving Southeast Asia largely out of the picture. It is, therefore, 
high time to revive the quest for the origins of Tantrism from a 
wider geographical and historical perspective, and by making use of 
a comparative methodology. In revisiting the issue of a pan-Indian 
religious substratum—or, rather, of a shared cultural matrix—one may 
wonder, along with Dentan, whether this inferred matrix could have 
been part of an ancestral areal phenomenon that extended outside the 
borders of the Subcontinent, across what is now Southeast Asia, and 
perhaps even Southern China.15
4. A Shared Cultural Matrix in Monsoon Asia?
While surveying the scholarship on the “Indianization” of Southeast 
Asia in the past half a century or so, one notes a shift from a trans- 
local, “Greater India” perspective, to a more Southeast Asia-
centred approach. This shift reflects new geopolitical scenarios, the 
compartmentalization of knowledge through an Area Studies approach 
in global academe, and the need to counteract the India-centric approach 
of earlier generations of scholars by attributing a greater agency to 
Southeast Asian people. 
Yet, before the Greater India perspective became popular, French 
Indologists Jean Przyluski and Sylvain Lévi in the 1920s hypothesized 
the existence of a cultural substratum—labelled “Austroasiatic” (or 
“Austric”)—common to South, Southeast, and parts of East Asia (Coedès 
1968, pp. 8–9; 1944, pp. 8–9). An ancestral Austroasiatic/Austric/Proto-
Malay culture or civilization was inferred on the basis of evidence from 
linguistics, mythology, art history, and archaeology. This culture or 
civilization would have been characterized by the cult of ancestors, the 
worship of gods on high places, the figure of the “Lord of the Land”,16 
similar funerary practices related to megalithic burials, matrilineal 
15	 While I believe that the southern part of China was closely involved in the cultural 
interactions that I am going to suggest, it has not been possible to include it in the 
present discussion, lest it assume unwieldy proportions. The same holds true for Papua 
New Guinea and Melanesia.
16	 Cf. Wessing, this volume, on the theme of “Lord of the land” (tuan tanah) in Nusantara.

--- PAGE 98 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
87
dualism, and structural analogies of myths; its technology would have 
included the use of complex irrigation systems for growing rice, and 
advanced skills in navigation. In the 1930s, Paul Mus elaborated on 
the idea of “Monsoon Asia” as an area characterized by an underlying 
cultural unity, which would explain the existence of some shared religious 
practices across it. According to Mus (1975, pp. 8–9 [1933]), through 
ethnography of the tribals of Vietnam,
it will be possible to start from the biased and relatively late evidence of 
the texts and work back to the ethnological conditions, or at any rate to 
social and religious conditions strictly anterior to the literary compilations. 
It will thus be possible gradually to restore many of the antecedents that 
have been subordinated and submerged by the brahmanical or confucian 
importations. 
Further, Mus (1975, pp. 8–9) hypothesized 
[t]he existence, in ancient times, of a certain unity of culture throughout 
an extensive zone in which India, Indo-China, Indonesia, a Pacific  
islands fringe and doubtless southern China are to be united.… whenever 
sea lanes establish communication, it is reasonable to expect a cultural 
unity, and it makes more sense to speak of a religion of the monsoon  
zone of Asia than to speak of Indian religion, or Chinese religion, prior  
to the civilizations which were later to give meaning to these words.
Mus reminds us that, in such a culturally diverse and widespread 
geographical area, this hypothesized unity is bound to remain a relative 
unity, the ultimate origin of which has to be “reconstructed”; yet this 
relative unity is particularly true in the domain of religion. To him, 
the fundamentals of the religion of the monsoon zone of Asia lay in 
worship of the energies of the soil deified as god (or goddess), the 
belief in a primeval spirit/energy permeating the whole nature, and the 
institution of mediumship. Mus then directs our attention to the belief in 
a collective divinity without individual personality in the autochthonous 
religions of many Southeast Asian tribal groups, which would be due to 
“a level of abstraction marking the termination of an already extensive 
process of elaboration” (ibid., p. 12).

--- PAGE 99 ---
88	
Andrea Acri
Coedès (1968, p. 8), who passed to history for his view that Southeast 
Asian people, although already civilized, advanced in many domains as 
a consequence of peaceful cultural and commercial interactions with 
the Indians, embraced Przyluski’s—in his words, “prudent formula”— 
that “during the second Bronze Age [in Europe], the Indo-Chinese 
peninsula entered the orbit of a maritime civilization comprising both 
the mainland and the archipelago of Southeast Asia”. Coedès added 
that, whatever its origin, this civilization might have touched Japan, 
given the relations in the realm of language, folklore and material 
culture going back to the prehistoric period.17 In a remarkable paragraph, 
he clearly espoused Mus’ idea of Monsoon Asia as an integrated 
cultural area:
Indians were not confronted by naked ‘savages’ but, on the contrary, 
by people endowed with a civilization that had traits in common with 
the civilization of pre-Aryan India. The speed and ease with which the 
Aryanized Indians propagated their culture is undoubtedly explained in 
part by the fact that, in the customs and beliefs of these immigrants, the 
natives discovered, under an Indian veneer, a base common to all of 
monsoon Asia. (ibid., p. 15; emphasis mine)
This “cultural matrix along a broad band stretching from pre-Aryan 
India through Island and Mainland Southeast Asia into Southern China” 
would comprise wet rice technology, bronze (the Dongson drums), 
the important role of women in societies, and distinctive social and 
mythological features (Reynolds 1995, pp. 422–23).
Following a similar train of thought, Richard Winstedt in his The 
Malay Magician, Being Shaman, Shaiva, and Sufi (1961) invoked an 
ancestral “paganism” common to tribals from India, Southeast Asia, 
and China:
17	 Cf. Coedès 1968, p. 8, fns. 50–52. Kumar (2009) has suggested ancient Southeast 
Asian, and in particular Javanese, linguistic and cultural influences on Japan in the 
late prehistoric era. On the similarities between Japanese and Javano-Balinese masks 
posited by Coldiron, cf. below.

--- PAGE 100 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
89
Europeans not presented with the evidence of geography, history and 
religions have been apt to talk as if Malay magic were unique and 
indigenous. (p. 1)
The Malays… have accepted the idea of two great civilisations, the Hindu 
and the Muslim, without abandoning their own prehistoric paganism. That 
paganism can be reconstructed directly from study of backward tribes in 
Assam, Indochina and the Malay archipelago and, viewed more widely, 
is of a piece with the paganism of all the races from Southern India to 
China. What has been written of every Dravidian village is true of every 
Malay village. (p. 4; emphasis mine)
While the quote by Winstedt transpires a judgemental positivism, its 
underlying idea of a “translocal paganism” covering a wide geographical 
area from Southern India to China is tantalizing, and calls to mind a 
paragraph by Hutton (1928, pp. 406–7) on the similar religious practices 
and beliefs of small-scale societies of Assam, island Southeast Asia, and 
Melanesia:
Beliefs as to the soul in the Celebes differ little, if not at all, from those  
in Assam, and to read an account of a hill tribe in Borneo or the  
Philippines gives a Naga Hills reader a vivid impression of reading of 
some Naga tribe with whose general culture he is perfectly familiar, but 
whose acquaintance he has never made…. There seems to be a pretty clear 
cultural connection between the Naga Hills and Melanesia.
The idea of a shared cultural matrix across Monsoon Asia, however 
outdated, romanticizing and far-fetched it may sound nowadays, is 
not altogether dissimilar from the scenarios that more recent scholars 
have suggested on the basis of extensive empirical work and more 
sophisticated theoretical models. Cases in point are Blust’s acceptance 
of the “Austric hypothesis” positing a genetic relationship between 
Austroasiatic and Austronesian languages, and locating the ancestral 
habitat of the Austric family “in the general region where the Salween, 
Mekong and Yangzi rivers run parallel on the Burma-Yunnan frontier” 
(1996, p. 136); Blench’s (2013) individuation of linguistic and cultural 
correlates between Eastern India and Melanesia; Reuter’s (2014) 
description of an “Ancestor Religion” widespread in the Austronesian

--- PAGE 101 ---
90	
Andrea Acri
world and East Asia; and Brighenti’s (2005) discussion of buffalo 
sacrifices and mortuary rituals in tribal cultures of Monsoon Asia. 
A brief review of the literature on cultural transfers between South 
and Southeast Asia further illuminates my point. For instance, in 
declaring that “Indianization of Southeast Asia” is a “confusion of 
categories”, Mabbett (1977a, 1977b) suggested that the dichotomy 
between an autonomous Southeast Asia and a civilizing Indian culture 
was a false one, and that the two areas already shared common 
socio-cultural traits. Gutman, in a fashion that is strongly remindful 
of Mus, argued that Arakanese society was particularly receptive 
to Indian religion because it “was familiar in its substratum of beliefs 
developed in the same monsoon-dominated environment” (1976, p. 320). 
At a later date, Chihara (1996, p. 7) posited a “substratum of pre-Aryan 
culture” shared between India and Southeast Asia, and surmised that 
“there were few fundamental differences between Indian civilisation 
and Southeast Asian civilisation, [so] the wave of Indianisation would 
seem to have penetrated Southeast Asian societies as if by osmosis”. 
Wolters (1999 [1982]) regarded the Southeast Asian region—and that 
region only, unlike his predecessors—as a “broadly based community 
of outlook”, characterized by a shared “cultural matrix”.
A theory focusing on “convergence” rather than a shared matrix (or 
substratum) has been advanced by Kulke (1990, p. 24). Kulke suggested 
that “the socio-political development of Eastern India during the first 
half of the first millennium AD… resembles in many respects the 
development in parts of Southeast Asia”, which in its turn is indicative 
of a socio-cultural convergence on both sides of the bay of Bengal. 
Kulke’s model of convergence between South and Southeast Asia, 
which redefines the process of Indianization as a “misnomer”, may 
be regarded as either implying a shared cultural matrix, which would 
have led to parallel developments starting from similar premises and 
ending in similar results, or as being the outcome of independent 
origination. 
When trying to transcend the nowadays likely old-fashioned 
“Indianization” paradigm, contemporary scholarship has emphasized 
cosmopolitan phenomena, and entertained the possibility of convergences 
across South and Southeast Asia. Nonetheless, in spite of occasional

--- PAGE 102 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
91
winkings towards the existence of a shared cultural matrix in early 
Monsoon Asia, it seems to me that scholars have been hesitant to 
seriously consider the implications connected with that paradigm, failing 
to carry its premises to their logical conclusions. Besides Dentan, few 
have attempted to move beyond the paradigm of Indic/Sanskritic vs. 
“local” and revive the idea of an integrated Monsoon Asia. A relevant 
case study is that by Roy Jordaan and Robert Wessing (1999) on 
human and animal sacrifice in South and Southeast Asia.18 Situating 
themselves within the track started by Mus, Jordaan and Wessing replied 
to Henk Bodewitz’s challenging claim that construction sacrifice of 
humans had been unknown in India. Taking into account both 
ethnographic and textual data from various geographical areas of 
South Asia, Southeast Asia, and China, they pointed at the striking 
correspondences between construction sacrifice—which, in its Tantric 
form, might have involved human sacrifice—across Monsoon Asia and 
ritual prescriptions recommended by the Sanskrit Śilpaśāstras:
As Mus (1975:39) has argued, and as is borne out by the ethnographic 
literature (Wessing & Jordaan 1997), Indian usages can be seen as being 
but a local variant of practices once prevailing throughout ‘Monsoon Asia’, 
the difference between the Indian ones and the others lying in the fact that 
the former were infused with Vedic notions and later became doctrinized 
as ‘Hinduism’ (which itself is, of course, a cover term for a wide variety of 
beliefs and practices) while the others more or less remained folk practices. 
Jordaan and Wessing (1999, p. 239)
As Jordaan and Wessing (ibid., p. 218) put it, paraphrasing Mus, “a 
study of the customs of present-day groups in Southeast Asia, like the 
Cham in Vietnam, could teach us more about the hidden, still continuing 
pre-Aryan cultural influences which have contributed to the form that 
Hinduism has taken”. The desideratum put forward by these two scholars 
with respect to Hinduism and contemporary (ethnic) groups in Southeast 
Asia clearly resonates with that invoked by Dentan.
18	 That book chapter in fact constitutes a sequel to earlier studies by the same authors, 
appeared in 1996 and 1997.

--- PAGE 103 ---
92	
Andrea Acri
A similar view on the issue of “Indianization” has been advanced 
by John Emigh (1996) in his comparative study on Southeastern 
Indian (especially Orissan) and Javano-Balinese performance traditions 
and iconographic motifs. Emigh (1996, p. 96), in a series of striking 
paragraphs that are worth being quoted in full, attempted to go beyond 
the “(Indian/Tantric) influence” paradigm by positing a common ground 
for both areas:
What I am suggesting is that performative traditions, as well as linguistic 
and agricultural ones, may well have flowed south and west before 
returning towards the east; and that the Tantric traditions that took  
root in Bali may already have been nurtured in common ground. While 
independent invention is always a possibility, it is difficult to regard  
the dancing Shakti figures and not think of the ‘feminine’ tubuan  
coming from the wild momboto time in an act of visitation during  
mortuary rites of New Britain; on the gables of the men’s spirit houses 
in Iatmul villages, distant female cousins of the Kirtimukha and the  
guardian witch of Bali’s Goa Gajah can be found—tongues distended, 
horrific countenances in place.
We probably will not be able to fill in the blanks more precisely until 
further archaeological work is done to refine the nature of the trade 
contacts between South and Southeast Asia, a reassessment is made of the 
contributions of the Austro-Asiatic and Dravidian populations to ‘classical’ 
Indian culture in general, and more is known about the early cultural and 
historical links connecting the Indonesian archipelago to India, southern 
China, mainland Southeast Asia and Melanesia.
The current calon arang, like so many performative traditions, emerged 
after many passes from many directions, traces of which were kept 
and altered in a continuing process of accommodation, invention, and 
interpretation. It seems likely that both the Balinese calon arang and the 
Orissan Prahlada Nataka fundamentally grew out of related ritual and 
theatrical traditions connected to Shakti worship, and that these traditions 
were themselves made possible by thousands of years of a partially shared 
prehistory. (emphasis mine)
Emigh’s considerations on “thousands of years of a partially shared 
prehistory” as the catalyst for the emergence of mediaeval Tantric

--- PAGE 104 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
93
ritual and performance traditions of South and Southeast Asia reminds 
us of Dentan’s idea of an ancestral horrific Dark Lord—and the complex 
of motifs revolving around him, including conceptions of power as 
female and bloody sacrifices—deriving from a common source rather 
than being (uniquely) an Indic “import”. 
Scholar of performance Margaret Coldiron (2005a, 2005b) wonders 
whether a common origin can be postulated to explain the remarkable 
analogies between some masked theatrical characters in Japan and the 
Javano-Balinese world:
The masks are the dog/lions Shishi (Japan) and Barong (Bali), the  
witch-like Hannya (Japan) and Rangda (Bali), and the sacred old men 
Okina (Japan) and Sidha Karya (Bali). Whatever information exists 
concerning the sources of these masks is lost in the murky world of  
myth and legend, and the task of finding historical or archaeological 
evidence is further complicated by the ephemeral nature of the materials 
from which the masks are made, the paucity of documentary records 
concerning ritual and theatrical performance, and conflicting local 
traditions. The arguments I shall offer here are therefore speculations 
about matters for which there may be no definitive answers, but they 
form a part of my ongoing research into the possible source or sources 
of these images. Is there a cultural or historical link between them or is 
there some deeper, perhaps universal “source” for these archetypes that  
has given rise to such similar iconographic forms in these two quite 
separate cultures? (2005, p. 228)
Coldiron (2005a, p. 230) ventures to speculate that the similarities can 
be explained via a common (mediaeval) Tantric Buddhist source, or even 
via direct influence from Java. 
Art Historian Natasha Reichle (2007, p. 157) discusses Batak religious 
lore as a case of convergence between imported Tantric cults and local 
beliefs. Quoting an account by Heine-Geldern on the central image 
at Bahal II at Padang Lawas, according to whom the worship of the 
fierce Heruka “formed a point of contact between the Indian and the 
indigenous rites… and gave impulse to the transformed interpretation 
of Batak cannibalism into a magic rite of degenerate Buddhism”, she 
claims that the Bataks readily recognized their old indigenous elements

--- PAGE 105 ---
94	
Andrea Acri
and customs in Tantric rites (ibid., p. 159).19 As a case in point, she 
compares the iconography and function of skull-topped magic staff carried 
by Batak shamans and the khaṭvāṅga carried by Śaiva and Buddhist 
Tantric practitioners and their elected deity, Heruka/Śaṃbara—who, as 
Bosch theorized, was the “special deity of sorcerers” (ibid., p. 161), and 
who, according to Przyluski (1937), originated in a pre-Aryan, Munda 
(i.e. Austroasiatic) linguistic and cultural substratum. Although Reichle 
herself does not make that point, one may wonder whether such case 
of convergence is due to independent invention or rather stems from 
an early layer that formed the shared matrix of both autochthonous and 
Indic Tantric elements. Cultural and religious phenomena that would seem 
to imply a convergence between certain Indic and Austronesian motifs in 
Java and Bali—namely, the five Śaiva seers (pañcarṣi or pañcakuśika) 
and related “mystical siblings” (kanda mpat)—have been described by 
Headley (2004, p. 123) and Acri (2014a). At the core of these 
similarities there lies an epistemic system of categorization of the 
internal and external universe through related series of visible and 
invisible interfaces that stand in meaningful relation to the individual, 
and provide the links to bridge different levels of reality. Whether this 
epistemic system developed from a common shared matrix or was 
“brought into sharper focus” (to say it with Wolters) by Indic influence 
is a question that awaits further investigation.
Clearly, in the absence of concrete data, any hypothesis concerning the 
origin of cultural phenomena in a remote past is bound to remain within 
the realm of speculation. Nevertheless, in recent years there has been an 
increasing tendency among scholars to map the possible common origins 
of cultural phenomena across different areas of the world, by resorting 
to oral history, mythology and folklore, and push back chronological 
boundaries into late prehistory (see, for example, Bellah 2011 on religion 
in human evolution). An ambitious and bold attempt to trace a shared 
19	 For example, the killing of a slave under the pole of a new house recalls the human 
sacrifices that were alleged to have taken place at Prambanan upon its consecration 
(see Jordaan and Wessing 1996; Wessing and Jordaan 1997).

--- PAGE 106 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
95
ancestral global mythology back to a remote human past has been 
carried out by Sanskritist and Vedicist Michael Witzel in his recent 
monograph The Origins of the World’s Mythologies (2012). Witzel 
individuates a “Laurasian mythology” diffused over North Africa, 
Eurasia and the Americas, and a “Gondwana mythology” found in sub-
Saharan Africa, the Andaman Islands, Papua and Australia, as well as 
in smaller enclaves elsewhere, such as among the Todas in South India 
and the Semang in Malaysia. Witzel’s hypothesis is relevant to our 
discussion insofar as (1) it individuates an ancestral areal phenomenon 
spanning the geographical extent of Monsoon Asia, and including 
Austroasiatic-speaking people of “Negrito” ethnic descent; (2) it employs 
a comparative and diachronic/phylogenetic methodology to explain the 
diffusion of mythologemes across the world. Witzel (2012, p. 279) admits 
that comparative mythology is not a hard science; however, reminding 
the reader that reconstruction of proto-Indoeuropean and other linguistic 
families is an established fact in science (p. 278), Witzel argues that 
the realm of mythology should be considered as a legitimate realm of 
enquiry to formulate hypotheses on the origin and migration of people, 
languages and cultures:20
[p. 284] we can make predictions about which particular facts must have 
existed at certain stages in the past, as has been done successfully in 
historical comparative linguistics…. I assume the same can eventually 
be done for mythology, even though script and written texts earlier 
than c. 3000 BCE will hardly emerge to prove my case. Early human 
art, however, such as some cave paintings…, may indicate whether  
I have been right or not.… [R]econstructions of early mythologies that  
precede the Indo-European, Semitic, and Austronesian ones and so on… 
by 10,000 or more years can be made probable by detecting their common 
motifs, their structures, and eventually, their narrational frameworks.
20	 Witzel (2012, p. 46) rightly reminds us that “the historical comparative approach 
is not one of old-fashioned Romanticism looking for and speculating on distant 
ur-situations, but it is the cladistic procedure also used by genetics, human 
anthropology, archaeology, linguistics, and philological manuscript research: all 
of them present pedigrees or stemmas of subsequent historical layers and their 
interrelations, filiations, or branchings”.

--- PAGE 107 ---
96	
Andrea Acri
[285] Of great theoretical interest is the question of the close interlinking, 
or the side-by-side existence, of ‘genetically’ transmitted mythologies 
(that is, via a parents-to-children type of pedigree) and of those that have 
arrived by diffusion. Both can occur side by side within one and the same 
local mythology.
To illustrate his last point, Witzel embarks on an “imagined investigation”:
[286] if we were ignorant of ancient European mythology and history, 
we might think of the various Christian myths and legends as typically 
European and wonder about their close relationship with those of  
Israel and the Near East. One might regard the Near East as an outlying 
area, not the actual center of diffusion. Nevertheless, we would be 
surprised by the large number of items in European folksongs, customs, 
and fairy tales that do not fit biblical topics at all, for example, the 
multifaceted role of the ‘devil’. Much of their individual background 
would quickly be ‘explained’ as being secondary explanations of  
natural phenomena and the like, which occur in other etiological  
tales.... Then, there are tales about the Milky Way as the path of  
the dead or the lambs, the threatening figure of the ‘Wild Hunter  
and his troop’ at Christmas, and so forth.... Pursuing this kind of  
imagined investigation, we would, however, quickly be led to  
conclude that these are remnants of an older level of European myth. 
(emphasis mine)
Witzel’s thought experiment opens up fascinating scenarios for the 
study of the deep human past, suggesting as it does that scholars must 
try to resort to theoretical comparative reconstruction whenever “hard 
evidence” is not available—a process that is routinely applied by historical 
linguistics. Witzel’s imagined investigation may be translated into a 
metaphor that is relevant to the study of Indic religions over Monsoon 
Asia, where instantiations of Tantric cults known to us through the body 
of mediaeval texts, artefacts, and archaeological remains may be the result 
of a complex multi-directional historical process of transfer in the cadre 
of a region, to say it with Emigh, with “thousands of years of a partially 
shared prehistory”. Indeed, one may argue that what made possible at 
all the fruitful transfer, adoption and adaption of cultural tropes was a 
commonality of epistemes rooted in a shared matrix extending across 
Monsoon Asia.

--- PAGE 108 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
97
5. The Religion of the Violent Godhead: Nkuu’, Rudra-S´ iva, 
and Ka¯la-Bhairava
Having outlined the historiographic parameters of the issues under 
discussion, I will now test some of the hypotheses advanced by Dentan 
to support a connection between Semai religious tropes and aspects 
of Vedic and post-Vedic religion in India. Our starting point is the key 
figure of Nkuu’, the Semai godhead.21 What Indo-European ideologies 
call “devil” and “wild hunter and his troop” (Witzel 2012, p. 286) 
correspond to the “Dark Lord” and his malevolent hosts feared by the 
Semai, the Temiars, and their “Negrito” cousins from the Andaman 
islands to the Philippines.22 Dentan (2002a, p. 120) describes the salient 
elements of the postulated shared prehistoric religion as follows:
a high storm God feared but not worshiped; a notion of shamanic power 
embodied in demon wives; the use of blood to counteract that power; 
a congeries of particular sacred plants; and huge chthonic serpents or 
dragons associated with water.
On account of the feature shared by the two gods, Dentan argues 
that Nkuu’ would be the counterpart of Vedic Rudra (“the Howler”), 
which later developed into the Śiva of Classical Hinduism. Below 
I list the features pointed out by Dentan, then integrate them with new 
insights:
—Associations with hunt, wilderness, and thunder(bolt)s. The terrifying 
Godhead of the Semai is a frightening, violent, blood-thirsty, and 
tricksterish boogeyman-god (Dentan 2002a, p. 161). Like Nkuu’, 
and like the “Spectre huntsman” of the Malays (see below), Rudra 
21	 The word Nkuu’ is cognate with Malay tengku, “Prince” or “Lord” (also a title of 
nobility), of uncertain etymology (Dentan 2002a, p. 160). Nkuu’ is recognized as a 
thunder-god also by the Temiars, another aboriginal group of peninsular Malaysia, 
among whom he plays a major role as the embodiment of evil, known as Karey 
(Benjamin 2014, pp. 60, 195–96). 
22	 To Blust (2013), among the cultural evidence suggesting an ancestral historical 
relationship between the “Negritos” of the Philippines and those of the Malay 
Peninsula is precisely the name of the thunder god, as well as the “thunder-complex” 
(cf. below, fn. 57).

--- PAGE 109 ---
98	
Andrea Acri
is wild and fierce—“a hunter in the wilderness whose abode is 
in the mountains in the north, who is clad in animal hide, has 
braided hair, and is excluded from the vedic sacrificial cult” 
(Bisschop 2013). Rudra, being initially an outsider, “by the end 
of the Vedic period… grew in stature, absorbing many aspects of 
other deities, especially Agni (fire, heat) and Indra (thunderbolt-
bearer)” (ibid.). 
—Ability to assume many forms; close ties with animals. Just like 
the god of the Semai, Rudra-Śiva is capable of taking all forms 
(viśvarūpa), including that of animals (Dentan 2002a, p. 172; 
Bisschop 2013). Śiva wears or sits on a tiger skin, and rides a 
bull; Nkuu’ is sometimes conceived of as a monkey.
—Being “Lords of Beasts”. The Lord from whom the Semai stole 
shamanic power is a “Lord of Beasts” (Dentan 2002a, p. 163).23 
This equals the appellative “Paśupati” of Rudra/Śiva in the 
post-Vedic early Śaiva tradition (where paśu, “beast”, has been 
“intellectualized” as a reference to the bound souls). 
—Being not worshiped but feared/appeased. Just like Nkuu’, 
Rudra is wild and fierce, “a terrible beast, like a wild storm” (Doniger 
O’Flaherty 1981, p. 219), worshiped “more in fear than in the 
spirit of devotion” (Doniger O’Flaherty 1975, p. 116), and “more to 
be pacified than to be adored” (ibid., p. 118); yet, in the Vedas he 
is invoked as healer and cooler of fevers. Śiva (“the benevolent”) 
is an apotropaic term for Rudra, worshipped to ward off his 
wrath. Bisschop (2013) points out that “a sense of fear underlies 
the depictions of Rudra in the Veda”, who comes across as a 
dangerous god; only three out of the 1,028 hymns of the Ṛgveda 
are exclusively dedicated to Rudra (for example, 1.114, 2.33, 
7.46), and these 
23	 Beyond the Semai, the idea that the godhead is a lord of beasts is also found among 
the Aetas (Negritos) of Luzon; to Winstedt, this fact suggests that “primitive man 
in south-east Asia had a god in a Lord of Beasts, the nomad’s food” (Winstedt 1961, 
p. 4).

--- PAGE 110 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
99
play upon Rudra’s dangerous and unpredictable nature. He is 
typically requested not to strike with his arrows and to spare the 
cattle, children, and people of the village. However, these same 
hymns also stress Rudra’s healing powers. The god who strikes 
with disease and death also has the power to heal. These hymns 
are obviously meant to pacify a deity who could be malevolent if 
not treated properly.
	 Like Nkuu’, Rudra embodies the destructive aspect of a supreme 
deity who annihilates the universe at the end of a cosmic age.
—Malevolent offspring and demonic entourage. Nkuu’ is chief of 
a host of fearsome demons (Dentan 2002a, p. 164), while Rudra 
is “the master of thousands of Rudras roaming in all directions” 
(Bisschop 2013). Rudra’s sons are sometimes identified with the 
Maruts, thundersquall gods who are part of his (or Indra’s) entourage 
(Dentan 2002a, p. 169), along with various categories of malevolent 
beings, such as bhūtas, pretas and piśācas. There is an association 
between Sanskrit piśāca “flesh eater” and Semai ceep caa’ sej 
“flesh-eater birds” (or bees), which are associated with Nkuu’; in 
both contexts, these are malevolent beings regarded as bugs and 
creeping creatures. Rudra and his hypostases (e.g. Tumburu) are 
associated with wrathful female deities, and supernatural female 
beings called ḍākinīs or yoginīs (see below). 
—Relationship with power, theorized as female (and often demonic). 
In the Indic sphere, we find the concept of Śiva’s śakti, and such 
figures as the ḍākinīs/yoginīs. Dentan (2002a, pp. 163–64) discusses 
a conceptualization of power as female, and its articulation through 
an erotic relationship between Semai adepts and demonic wives. 
Furthermore, there appears to be a parallel between seven power-
bestowing female deities among the Semai and the Indic Kṛttikās/
Mātṛs (see below).
 —Association with a congeries of particular sacred plants. Besides 
Nkuu’, this is also the case of Tumburu, an early form of Rudra, 
and of his hypostasis Kāla/Vanaspati (see below).
If taken singularly, these—admittedly rather generic—ideas and 
activities could be regarded as the result of independent creation,

--- PAGE 111 ---
100	
Andrea Acri
while linguistic borrowings may be seen as Sanskritic influxes into 
Semai language. However, if taken collectively, and especially when 
reinforced with evidence of linguistic and cultural contact between the 
Indo-Aryan and the Austroasiatic spheres, they may suggest that more 
complex circulatory processes were at play.
The similarities outlined above are mostly between Nkuu’ and Śiva 
in the form of Rudra, the terrible outsider god of the Vedic and early 
post-Vedic textual corpus, i.e. the earliest stage of what we now call 
“Hinduism”. Dentan did not discuss the later historical development of 
that deity, which gave rise to the hypostases of Tumburu, Bhairava, and 
Kāla, as attested in the enormous Tantric textual corpus that came to 
the fore since ca. the fifth century CE in the Indian Subcontinent and the 
wider Indic world. It is this literature, and other contemporary genres 
that were influenced by it in both South and Southeast Asia, which 
yields some interesting leads for further comparison. Below I present 
some additional evidence drawn from Sanskrit and Old Javanese textual 
sources, as well as ancient and modern Javano-Balinese folklore, that 
would appear to substantiate some of Dentan’s claims with respect to 
the existence of a link between Semai lore and (Tantric) Hinduism.
5.1  Of Words
Possible historical links between Nkuu’ and Rudra may be found in the 
traces of Sanskrit vocabulary featuring in Semai mythology. As we have 
seen above, there exists a thematic relationship between Sanskrit piśāca 
and Semai ceep caa’ sej, a category of flesh-eating malevolent beings 
associated to Rudra and Nkuu’ respectively. The Sanskrit form might 
have been borrowed from Austroasiatic, as suggested by the obvious 
relation between phonetic and morphological elements: the former word 
may be an inversion and contraction of the latter (ceep > piś, caa’ sej 
> śaca); alternatively, both words could have derived from a common 
proto-form.24 Conversely, terms of likely Sanskrit derivation attested in 
24	 Notably, the largely unattested Paiśācī language (“the language spoken by flesh-eating 
ghouls”, piśāca) is connected in Sanskritic imaginary to an archaic language current 
among (Austroasiatic-speaking) tribal communities of the Indian Subcontinent.

--- PAGE 112 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
101
Semai language are mrgaas (< Skt mṛga),25 dangaa’ or naga’ (< Skt 
nāga),26 and rahuu’ (< Skt Rāhu) (Dentan 2002a, pp. 163, 169). Rahuu’ 
(“Dark cloud”), denoting the home of Nkuu’, is obviously derived 
from the Sanskrit Rāhu, “the Seizer”—a mythological and astronomical 
dragon-like demonic character who swallows the sun and moon during 
eclipses (see Figure 3.1).27 Dentan notes that the existence of these 
Sanskrit terms among the Semai may be explained as borrowings; yet, 
the related Indic concepts they carry usually retain a secondary role: 
“although there are filigrees of Śaivism in Semai theology, its core seems 
indigenous” (2002a, p. 171).
Rāhu is a prominent figure in the literatures and arts of both peninsular 
and insular Southeast Asia. In mediaeval Indic lore, Rāhu is presided over 
by the demonic aspect of Śiva known as Kāla (“the Black/Dark One”, 
or “Time”, as devourer of everything) or Bhairava. In Java and Bali, as 
well as in the Malay world, Kāla is conceived of as Śiva’s unruly son, 
who stole the elixir of life from the gods and got burnt in the process, 
keeping only his head; Kāla(mukha) is often depicted as eating the sun 
(i.e. during eclipses) or devouring himself. An equivalence between Kāla, 
Rāhu, and Kīrtimukha/Kālamukha (also called Vanaspati/Banaspati28 in 
Java and Assam, Boma in Bali, and Vajramastaka in Orissa) may be 
established with respect to the widespread architectonic element (demon-
head) standing as a guardian above doorways of temples and monumental 
25	 As Semai mythology has it, “to commit the incest, both the Creator and His daughter 
took the form of deer, mrga. Deer seem to be the mothers of sacred cows in India 
and are associated with motherhood and incest by Semai; but the Semai term mrgaas 
is a euphemism for ‘tiger’, the embodiment of the violent shamanic power which 
the Lord God stupidly gave to humans” (Dentan 2002a, p. 169). For an alternative 
etymology (of the possibly related Temiar word mèrgeeh “demoniac”), see Benjamin 
2014, p. 125, fn. 33.
26	 That word, and the related concept, is also found among the Temiars (Benjamin 
2014, p. 183); see discussion below, p. 114.
27	 For a discussion of this word among the Temiars, see Benjamin 2014, p. 57.
28	 This means “the king of the wood” in Sanskrit, and may at times indicate the fig tree, or 
timber. The Javano-Balinese form Banaspati, used to refer to the Kālamukha/Kīrtimukha 
element, appears to have a counterpart in India as well: cf. vanaspatiśiras (“the head of 
Vanaspati”) invoked in the Niśvāsaguhya (2.90b), belonging to the early Śaiva Tantra 
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (cf. the analogous, and tautologic, compound rāhuśiras).

--- PAGE 113 ---
102	
Andrea Acri
edifices in Southeast Asia, India, and Nepal (see Figure 3.2).29 White 
(2010, p. 206) points out that in the Kathmandu Valley Bhairava is 
often represented as nothing but a face or head (the Kīrtimukha among 
them), and fanciful stories are offered to account for this fact. These 
elements highlight the fascination for the terrible aspect of the godhead 
(and his various emanations) current in the Indic world, and especially 
in Southeast Asia.
29	 For a discussion of the Kāla/Kīrtimukha motif in the Indic world, see Dhar 2007.
Figure 3.1
Rāhu (note the Kīrtimukha at the top), 
Konarak, Orissa, Thirteenth Century 
(now at British Museum)
Source: Courtesy of Redtigerxyz at English 
Wikipedia (Wikimedia Commons).

--- PAGE 114 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
103
Figure 3.2
Kāla Heads (Kīrtimukha), Trowulan Museum, East Java
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 115 ---
104	
Andrea Acri
While so far we have considered some concepts and Sanskrit 
loanwords found among the Semai and Indicized societies of Southeast 
Asia, we may now investigate loanwords of putative Austroasiatic origin 
occurring in Sanskrit literature from South Asia. These may bear some 
relevance to the much-debated issue of origin of the figure of Rudra-
Śiva and its cults, which, as remarked by Bisschop (2013), seem to 
have originated in a “complex cultural background in which both vedic 
and extra-vedic elements have played a role”. Dentan’s hypothesis 
concerning the common origin of Rudra and Nkuu’ in a pre- or non-
Aryan, i.e. Austroasiatic cultural milieu addresses these points, yet needs 
to be tested from a historical perspective grounded in linguistic and 
textual data. A possible pointer to a pre-Aryan context is the presence 
of Austroasiatic words in the early Śaiva vocabulary and cultic stock. 
By “Austroasiatic” here I mean words borrowed from attested Munda 
languages, which belong to the Austroasiatic family of languages.30 While 
Austroasiatic languages are mainly represented in mainland Southeast 
Asia (i.e. Vietnamese, Khmer and Mon, as well as the Aslian language 
spoken by the Semai and other ethnic minorities), pockets of speakers 
of Austroasiatic languages are found in Central and Eastern India and 
in the Andaman and Nicobar islands. 
It has been long since noted that some words for cultigens in 
(Middle) Indo-Aryan languages have been borrowed from Austroasiatic 
languages: see Masica (1979) with respect to Hindi, and Southworth 
(2005, p. 223) with respect to Sanskrit (and a possible Southeast 
Asian origin for seven crops). The historical/migratory dynamics behind 
the Austroasiatic influence on (Middle) Indo-Aryan languages are still 
unclear. Most scholars accept the Austroasiatic language family as 
forming, along with the Dravidian, a linguistic layer existing prior to 
the arrival of Indo-Aryan languages into the (central and southern parts 
30	 Problems still exist in the classification of Austroasiatic languages (see Sidwell 
2015, pp. 144–49). For instance, an increasing number of scholars now think that the 
Munda languages do not form a primary-level subdivision of Austroasiatic separate 
from Mon-Khmer, and the very term “Mon-Khmer” is currently being replaced by 
“Austroasiatic” (p.c. Geoffrey Benjamin, June 2015).

--- PAGE 116 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
105
of the) Indian Subcontinent,31 yet the issue of the origin of the 
Austroasiatic-speaking Munda populations—whether from South or 
Southeast Asia—remains controversial.32 According to Gupta (2005, p. 22), 
“The Austroasiatic infusions into Sanskrit can perhaps be best explained 
in terms of maritime crossings from Southeast Asia to peninsular India in 
some undetermined time in antiquity”;33 indeed, parallels in the Calcolithic 
and Neolithic material culture of Eastern India and mainland Southeast 
Asia have been regarded as evidence of overlaps, or even influence from 
the latter area on the former (Gupta 2005, pp. 22–23; Selvakumar 2011, 
pp. 201–2; Gaillard, Singh, and Dambricourt Malassé 2012; Blench 2013, 
p. 12). Elst (2005, pp. 255–56) argues that “at least linguistically, the 
Munda tribals are not ‘aboriginals’ (with a pseudo-native modern term, 
ādivāsi), but carriers and importers of Southeast-Asian culture”,34 while 
Blench (2013) individuates an “arc of vegeculture” stretching between 
Melanesia and Eastern Nepal that, correlating with linguistic evidence 
and material culture items, may have constituted an early corridor of 
diffusion of ideas. Peterson (forthcoming) suggests that what has been 
labelled by Bronkhorst “Greater Magadhan” culture of Northeastern India 
may have been substantially influenced by a considerable number of 
autochthonous Munda-speaking linguistic groups who at that time were 
31	 Similarly, (proto-)Austroasiatic may have formed the earliest linguistic phylum 
in Southeast Asia, and indeed Austroasiatic lexicon is found in some Austronesian 
languages (especially Chamic and some Malay dialects).
32	 It is now recognized by historical/comparative linguistics that the separation of the 
two main Austroasiatic subfamilies—Munda and Mon-Khmer—must be placed well 
back in prehistory (see Riccio et al. 2011 and Chaubey et al. 2011 for a discussion in 
the light of genetic evidence). Blust (1996, p. 132) suggests that by 7,000–7,500 BP, 
Proto-Austroasiatic had already separated into Munda and Mon-Khmer dialect areas: 
Munda moved “down the Brahmaputra Valley into Assam and Bangladesh, gradually 
spreading westward, and Mon-Khmer down the Salween and Mekong valleys into 
mainland Southeast Asia”. 
33	 Mahdi (this volume) argues that the Austroasiatic-speaking Negritos were the first 
to navigate in a remote past. If this was the case, they might have taken along other 
tangible and intangible cultural goods to South and East Asia.
34	 On the cultural and linguistic evidence supporting the existence of almost certain 
historical relationship among the Austroasiatic-speaking Negrito groups of Southeast 
Asia (and perhaps of the Andaman Islands too), see Blust 2013.

--- PAGE 117 ---
106	
Andrea Acri
only beginning to be assimilated into the culture of the Indo-Aryan-
speaking “invaders”, and who did not recognize the Brahmans as the 
highest class of society. At the same time, he advances the working 
hypothesis that the Munda languages, which today are restricted to four 
residual zones in the Subcontinent, were once spoken over a much wider 
area (at least in the eastern half of the Indo-Gangetic plain). Be this as 
it may, what is relevant to our discussion is that 1) the Austroasiatic-
speaking ethnic groups scattered over the eastern (and insular) areas of 
the modern Indian Subcontinent may carry, in a modified form, cultural 
themes that are/were shared by their Southeast Asian Negrito cousins 
(see Dentan, this volume); and 2) given the relative paucity of Austroasiatic 
loan-words in (Middle) Indo-Aryan languages (ca. 6 per cent, see Witzel 
1999a), even in domains where loanwords abound (e.g. agriculture), the 
influx of ultimately Austroasiatic terms into the Sanskritic Śaiva cultic 
sphere is an intriguing fact.
An Austroasiatic loan-word associated to the earliest Indian phase of 
Śaivism (ca. third to fifth century CE) is lākula, which we find in the 
Sanskrit forms Lakulīśa (“the Lord with the Club”) and Lāguḍi/Lākulin 
(“club-bearer”). Conceived of as the human incarnation of Śiva-Rudra 
in the corpse of a Brahmin, this central figure of Pāśupatism was 
venerated as a teacher and promulgator on earth of the Śaiva doctrine. 
Przyluski (1929a, pp. 8–15) derived lākula from the Austroasiatic 
ḷāṅgula (“penis”, “stick”), which is related to lāṅgala (“plough”, 
“digging-stick for ploughing”).35 The origin of the word laguḍa/lakuṭa 
and its use in Sanskrit literature in the sense of “club” is not yet clear 
(Bakker 2011, pp. 27–28); nonetheless, Przyluski’s equation with the 
35	 See Shorto 2006, p. 448 (*lngal, *ŋgal; by dissimilation *lnguur; *lngu[ə]r 
“plough”), and Turner 1966 s.v. lāṅgūlá (“tail”, adj. “having a tail”, “penis”); cf. 
*laṅga3 (“end of loincloth”, cf. lañja3 “end of cloth tucked in behind”, possibly 
same as lañja2 “tail”?, and connected with liṅga). Southworth (2005, p. 68) 
regards lāngala as “[o]ne important word which seems to have a clear A[ustro]
A[siatic] source”; Hoogervorst (2013, p. 3, fn. 1) points out that “an Austro-Asiatic 
origin of OIA *lāṅgala ‘plough’ is certainly plausible from the perspective of 
Mon-Khmer linguistics”, and that these forms “presumably stood at the head of a series 
of loanwords in Malayo-Polynesian languages”.

--- PAGE 118 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
107
Austroasiatic lāṅgula in the meaning of “stick” or “penis” is convincing, 
as an analogy between the club and the phallus in early iconography 
of (itiphallic) Lakulīśa may be established.36 Notably, a cognate 
(likely Austroasiatic) word is liṅga, which plays an important role in 
Śaiva worship.
Another Sanskrit word of putative Austroasiatic origin that is 
connected to the early phase of Śaivism in both the Subcontinent and 
Southeast Asia is tumburu. Przyluski (1929b, p. 154ff.) traced it back 
to uḍumbara/udumbara, a type of fig-tree, which may be related to 
tumba, a cucurbit.37 While there has been a lot of discussion as to 
whether the udumbara, and fig- or banyan-trees in general, were 
assimilated by Vedic Hinduism from an Austroasiatic-speaking Negrito or 
Austronesian-speaking milieu (see Dahlquist 1977, pp. 230–31, Mahdi 
1999, pp. 189–209), the tropes associated with the deity named 
Tumburu (whatever the origin of the word may be) are remindful 
of the similarities individuated by Dentan with respect to Rudra and 
Nkuu’. Tumburu originally ranked among the Gandharvas—the celestial 
flying-musicians headed by Indra, the thunderbolt-bearing god—, and 
featured in the Atharvaveda as a healing tree or tree-god bearing that 
36	 See Turner 1966 s.v. lakuṭa. Bakker (2011) mentions Przyluski’s hypothesis in 
connection with the genesis of Lakulīśa en passant, while discussing more elaborately 
Ingall’s hypothesis of a Greek origin (from Heracles). To Bakker, “even if we do 
not accept Przyluski’s etymology that links the word to the Austro-Asiatic lāṅgula, 
meaning ‘stick’ or ‘penis’, we may assume that phallic symbolism easily suggested 
itself to the Indian mind and came to be associated with this particular attribute” 
(p. 28).
37	 Udumbára is considered Austroasiatic also by Mayrhofer (1956, vol. I, p. 104; cf. 
Turner 1966 s.v.), and identified with Ficus glomerata or Ficus racemosa, native 
of Australia, Malaysia, Southeast Asia and the Indian Subcontinent; Austroasiatic 
*Ṭumba (Skt tumbā, cf. gōḍumbikā, Turner 1966 s.v.) is a cucurbit of coloquintida 
(Lagenaria vulgaris) that, like a large number of gourds, are of Eastern Asiatic origin. 
Ṭumburu may also betray a contamination with the instrument ṭamburā vīṇā— 
for Tumburu is the king of the Gandharvas—, and perhaps be related to ḍombā, 
“outcaste tribe” (see Przyluski 1929b, pp. 149–55ff.). Southworth (2005, p. 74) 
considers this etymology “tortuous” and, in spite of the difference between “fig” and 
“date”, suggests a derivation from Dravidian “fig/date tree” (Proto-Dravidian *uttu 
“date”, *mara “tree”).

--- PAGE 119 ---
108	
Andrea Acri
name (Griffiths 2004–5).38 In Śaiva and Buddhist Tantric literature 
he is first represented as a harmful demon to be warded off, then 
identified with (a manifestation of) Śiva/Bhairava and ultimate revealer 
of the north/left-facing stream (vāmastrotas) of the Śaiva textual corpus. 
In the Vīnāśikhatantra, one of the early Śaivatantras stemming from 
that stream (Goudriaan 1985, p. 4), he represents the paramount aspect 
of Śiva indeed; his four śaktis or sisters, Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, and 
Aparājitā, play a central role in his cult. Tumburu was known in 
Cambodia, Bali, and China by the 9th century.39 Bourdonneau (2011, 
p. 1357) describes Tumburu as a divinity with a royal dimension, but 
also as a warring god, prolonging the human life, a protective yet 
ambivalent divinity able to exercise destructive powers. This ambiguity 
is concretized by the terrible goddesses who form his entourage. These 
could be either the four above-mentioned sisters or the seven or eight 
Mother Goddesses (Mātṛs). Tumburu spearheads these deities and can 
also act as a mitigator to their nefarious influences (Goudriaan 1985, 
p. 23; Sanderson 2001, p. 46; Hatley 2007, p. 142).40
Hatley (2007, p. 282) regards the cult of the Sisters of Tumburu as 
“most historically significant”, and connects it to a later Tantric corpus 
(the Bhairatavatantras and Yoginītantras) centred around the cult of 
38	 Griffiths traces Tumburu to the Vedic tumburu/audumbara, a copper-coloured fig tree 
belonging to the Zanthoxylum species. In Paippalādasaṃhitā 15.23.3–4, Tumburu 
protects from thunderbolt (“we keep away the Thunderbolt with a branch of the 
Udumbara”), whereas in 61.9 it is counterposed to hypostases of Rudra: “Bhava 
(= Rudra) does not strike, Śarva (= Rudra) does not shoot [his] arrow, there where 
you, o heavenly Tumburu, grow wide on the mountains” (ibid.). A relation between 
tumburu and udumbara/udumbalá seems likely, also in view of the fact that both 
words are associated with red/copper-colour (see Witzel 1983 on the latter; note that 
in Ṛg Veda 10.14.12, udumbalá is referred to Yama’s demonic dogs). 
39	 On Tumburu and his four sisters, see Goudriaan 1973 and Goudriaan 1985, pp. 18–30, 
47–48; cf. Sanderson 2001, pp. 8, 12–13, 32; Sanderson 2003–4, pp. 355ff., 373ff.; 
Sanderson 2004, p. 278). On the verses of the Vīṇāśikhatantra found in a Sanskrit 
magical stuti from Bali, see Goudriaan 1973, pp. 51–56.
40	 Hatley (2007, p. 146) notes that in the early Tantric Buddhist text Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa 
“the iconography of the Four Sisters and Tumburu has unusual maritime elements. 
The Four Sisters are repeatedly described as mounted in a boat… with Tumburu as the 
helmsman” (cf. Netratantra 11.25cd–26ab).

--- PAGE 120 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
109
Rudra-Bhairava and associated with malignant magical practices and 
exorcism, the Bhūtatantras, and one concerned with the cult of Ḍākinīs 
and Yoginīs. He (ibid., p. 143) describes these female beings as largely 
malevolent and parasitic, but also as bestowers of supernatural powers 
on yogins who invoke or worship them through mantras, or actually 
copulate with them. Further, he (ibid., p. 32) points out that “it has 
been widely acknowledged that yoginīs have roots in early traditions 
of Mother goddesses, mātṛs or mātṛkās, whose qualities they inherit 
in no small measure”. These Mātṛs become widespread in the Gupta 
era, and may be the result of cultural assimilation. There may be a 
historical connection between the Tantric Mātṛs or Yoginīs/Ḍākinīs, 
whose cult was widespread throughout the mediaeval period, and the 
Vedic Mātṛs, the wives of the seven sages or seers (saptarṣi). Dentan 
(2002a, p. 166) has argued that there is a parallel between seven 
power-bestowing female deities among the Semai and the Indic Mātṛs/
Kṛttikās:
Shamanic powers came to humans via the seven Original Adepts (halaa’ 
asal) and Original Midwives; as seven is not a traditional magic number 
in Semai culture, these are obviously derived from the Vedic seven sages 
(saptarṣi) and their wives, the seven kṛttikas, ‘cutters or razors’. As the 
seven Seers founded Hinduism, so the seven Adepts founded Semai 
shamanism. Since Semai freely add exogenous explanatory accounts  
of various phenomena to indigenous ones…, perhaps they just tacked  
the Seers and Razors onto their own ideology, without bothering with 
details. 
Early Sanskrit sources, such as the Mahābhārata, as well as Kuṣāṇa- 
period sculptural evidence, attest to an association between these Mātṛs/
Kṛttkās and Skanda/Kumāra, Śiva’s son;41 the accounts “are many and 
highly layered, no doubt the products of a long development” (Hatley 
2007, p. 36). In fact, Parpola (1985, pp. 121, 151) traces the genealogy 
of the Kṛttikās to the Indus Valley Civilization through the Mohenjo-
41	 See discussion in White 2003, pp. 35–63; cf. Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa 22.24b, mentioning 
the Skandamātṛs (ed. Vaidya 1964).

--- PAGE 121 ---
110	
Andrea Acri
daro “fig deity seal”. It is interesting in the present context to point 
out that the names of most of these Kṛttikās (= Pleiades) betray 
non-Indoeuropean origins—possibly Austroasiatic: ambā, dulā/buḷā, 
nitatnī, cupuṇīkā. Ambā and Cupuṇīkā, as well as the remaining three, 
show an association with water, rain and cloud (and therefore, the 
monsoon), e.g. abharayantī, meghayantī, varṣayantī.42 According to 
Newar folklore, the Kṛttikās are the mothers of Kumāra (i.e. Skanda), 
the rain-child whose birthday rite is celebrated at the beginning of the 
rainy season. The word kumāra (“young man”) itself has been identified 
as an Austroasiatic/Para-Munda borrowing (Southworth 2005, p. 68), 
while the identification of Skanda with Murugan, a South Indian deity, 
may reflect a process of Vedic-Dravidian synthesis that is also 
represented in the story of Murugan’s two consorts, one of whom is 
seen as the daughter of a tribal chief (Frazier 2011, p. 303). As 
suggested by Vajracharya (1997), an emphasis on water, rain, and 
seasonal atmospheric phenomena may be indicative of an influence 
of “monsoonal culture” of non-Aryan agriculturalist populations on 
Vedic nomadic culture.43
42	 Interestingly, these are also the names of bricks in the agnicayana (Witzel 1999b). 
Cupuṇikā, related to nicumpuṇa, “effusion, bubbling, water spirit” (Witzel 1999b), 
“flood” (Keith, in Kuiper 1991, p. 85), is one of the Pleiades’ stars. In early Kuṣāṇa 
art from Mathura, the Kṛttkās are depicted holding river/cloud as their main attributes 
(Vajracharya 1997). The fifth-century stone inscription of Gaṅgdhār (Rajasthan) 
mentions a “terrifying home of the Mothers, filled with female demons (ḍā kinī)…. 
These Mothers impel the great booming of the rain clouds and rouse the ocean with 
the mighty wind that arises from the tāntras (sic)” (Sullivan 2006, p. 11). In general, 
the Goddess (and her various embodiments) is regarded to rule over plants and favour 
feritility/rains, and worshiped in specific trees, among them the Banyan and the Sal.
43	 Vajracharya argues that, while the Avesta shows little interest in rain-making, “the 
Ṛgveda is full of prayers for rain and contains many different speculations about the 
phenomena of rain and lightning”. This would reflect the growing importance of the 
monsoon as the Indo-Aryans moved toward the basin of the Ganges in the Subcontinent. 
According to Vajracharya, deities such as Indra and Varuṇa, who originally had 
nothing to do with the phenomena of rain, due to the association of agriculture with 
the monsoon became regarded as rain makers; for instance, Varuṇa was originally the 
god of the night sky representing the primeval water and later became the god of the 
Indian monsoon, while Indra’s slaying of Vṛtra should be interpreted, besides as a 
creation myth, also as a story of “drought and rain”.

--- PAGE 122 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
111
The parallels outlined above, both distributional (i.e. linguistic) and 
functional, between Semai and Sanskritic lore may be regarded as the 
result of a (superficial) Indic influence, as hinted at by Dentan in the 
case of Sanskrit loanwords and related concepts adopted by the Semai. 
While the existence of some Austroasiatic words associated with the early 
cult of Rudra-Śiva and his entourage in the Indian Subcontinent do not 
allow us to make any assumptions of a wide-ranging nature, they may 
nonetheless lead us to reconsider the matter of directionality, especially 
in the light of Dentan’s hypothesis concerning the existence of shared 
religious tropes across Monsoon Asia in pre- or proto-historical times 
and a subsequent “convergence” in historical times. By pinpointing 
those Austroasiatic loans I do not intend to “prove” a direct influence 
of a putative Austroasiatic religion on Indo-Aryan milieux, but rather 
strengthen the view, already advanced by many scholars, that the early 
phase of Śaivism was indeed shaped by both Vedic and non-Vedic cultural 
milieux, in which the carriers of an “Austroasiatic cultural package” 
could have played a role. 
5.2  On the Feminine as Power
Dentan (2002a) has noted an association between shamanic power, the 
Lord Nkuu’, fierce/bloody rituals, and (demonic) female practitioners 
among the Semai:
[A] person’s shamanic power is his ‘wife’…. Semai adepts and successful 
hunters have demonic wives. (p. 163)44
Some Semai strive to connect to the fearsome demons of which the 
Lord is chief. The relationship is erotic and produces an altered state 
of consciousness that resembles an erotic ecstasy. The Semai use the  
Arabic word asyik, which refers to loss of self in both sexual and  
divine unions. (p. 164)
[W]hile Semai adepts are not ascetics, they often have to restrict their diets 
and behaviour in order to placate their demonic wives/familiar. (p. 166)
44	 The Temiars use gunig (from Malay gundik “consort, secondary wife”) as one of 
their words for “spirit-guide”, male or female (Benjamin 2014, p. 35).

--- PAGE 123 ---
112	
Andrea Acri
Semai conceptions of, and metaphors for, power recall a constellation 
of themes found in South Asian Tantric cults. In these cults the 
providers of supernatural powers are often the Yoginīs or Mātṛs, 
semi-divine (or demonic) female beings who may entertain an erotic 
partnership with male adepts. White (2003, p. 8) characterizes 
Yoginīs as 
preternatural or supernatural hybrid between the human, animal, bird, 
and plant worlds… terrible and benign with regards to humans, who 
traditionally worshiped them with blood offerings and animal sacrifice. 
Once gratified by said oblations, the Yoginīs would reveal themselves as 
ravishing young women and gratify their human devotees with supernatural 
powers.
Yoginīs were worshiped in the erotico-mystical mileux of the Kaula 
Tantric stream, which focused on the (internalized) cult of “clan 
deities” (kuladevatā). This cult was not limited to elite milieux, but 
was widespread in society, as can be evinced from its presence in Indic 
folklore and, more importantly, among Austroasiatic-speaking Munda 
tribal groups. Among the Santals of eastern India, Yoginīs or female 
Tantric deities called boṅgas “often interact with human beings and 
are attractive to humans [… and] are often said to become the lovers 
or ‘spirit wives’ of human beings” (McDaniel 2013, p. 136); just like 
Yoginīs (and the “spirit wives” of the Semai), “[b]oṅga wives give 
blessings, wealth and supernatural powers”; however, they “may also be 
hostile and vengeful” (ibid., p. 137). To Davidson (2002, p. 198), adepts 
of a sort of “disciplined eroticism” conceived as a means to spiritual 
liberation, attracted one such non-human women in a secluded place, 
in order that their sanctified sexual intercourse would yield worldly 
benefits. Samuel (2008, p. 246) describes Kāpālika-style power-seeking 
sorcerers who 
were linked to their relationships with the female spirits and/or human 
female practitioners known as yoginīs, ḍākinīs, and by other names. 
These were frightening and dangerous spirits, and they form part of an 
‘alternative pantheon’ of dark and scary female deities associated with 
Bhairava and his various transforms.

--- PAGE 124 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
113
In Semai shamanic seances, the joining of opposites resembles the 
relationship between śakti, i.e. energy/supernatural power intended as 
female, and a male divine or human actor. Furthermore, there is a 
relationship with (female menstrual) blood and the shamanic power 
of counteracting the influence of demonic beings and Nkuu’ himself: 
“Semai women slash their shins and throw the ‘heating’ blood into 
the rain to repel the Lord God” (Dentan 2002a, p. 167). A ritual of 
thigh-blood sacrifice, where the practitioner outpours his or her own 
blood (perhaps in substitution of human sacrifice), is enacted by the 
Austroasiatic-speaking Munda people of the Chhota Nagpur plateau to 
propitiate the female divinities or spirits called saket-bongas (saket < 
Skr. śakti); those spirits are the tutelary deities of the Santal mediums 
called ojhās, who used to offer their blood in fulfillment of a vow 
(Brighenti 2009, p. 77).45 In mediaeval South Asia, the power of 
Yoginīs “was intimately connected to the flow of blood, both their 
own sexual and menstrual emissions, and the blood of their animal 
(and human?) victims” (White 2003, p. 27). Samuel (2006, p. 26) 
outlines the pan-Indic, trans-local nature of the cult of fierce fermale 
spirit-deities, which has its roots in the Gupta period, and reaches the 
periphery of the Indic world:
The female deities associated with the fierce deity rituals are closely 
linked to a class of Indian spirits who cause disease and are propitiated 
to bring healing. Versions of such female deities can be found in the 
Mahābhārata and in early medical texts, and they have remained  
staples of folk and village ritual into modern times. The set of deities 
known as the Saptamātṛkā, though mostly presented as consorts to the 
major Brahmanical deities, make up a Brahmanical version of these 
disease-spirits… masked figures possessed by these deities have played  
an important role in the ritual cycles of Hindu communities from the  
Nepal Valley to Kerala, Bengal, and Bali.
45	 Brighenti also describes the sacrifice of bul-mayam offered to bongas of purely 
Santal origin by the non-Hinduized tribal priests called kudam naeke, who offer 
drops of their blood mixed with rice.

--- PAGE 125 ---
114	
Andrea Acri
The Semai regard dragons called dangaa’ or naga’ (Skt nāga) as wives 
of the Lord Nkuu’. These beings recall the serpentine female beings 
(nāgī, nāginī) of Indic lore, who were conceived of as carriers of 
supernatural power. Male heroes who engaged in erotic or romantic 
relationships with nāgīs became the founders of royal dynasties in 
various areas of South and Eastern India, Southeast Asia (Cambodia, 
Java), and China; a cult of serpents embodied in Nāgas, intended as 
benign beings who bestow wealth and power has been interpreted as 
non- or pre-Indo-Aryan in origin, as it is prevalent in the same areas.46 
Przyluski (1924) discussed examples of (sexual) union between a human 
being and an acquatic creature—usually a fish—recorded in Indian and 
Chinese mythology and folklore, concluding that the area from where 
this theme originated was the “maritime civilization” of Southeast Asia, 
and in particular the Austroasiatic- (and, I would add, Austronesian-)
speaking populations living along the shores of rivers or on the sea. The 
fish eventually became a Nāga in India and a “dragon” in China. To 
him, as was already noted by Finot (1911, p. 32), the connection 
between the transmission of sovereignty and women would fit societies 
in which a matrilinear system of succession was implemented, such as 
among several ethic groups of Southeast Asia. More recently, Mahdi 
(1999) has proposed a Southeast Asian pedigree for the pre-Aryan 
populations called Nāgas in Sanskrit sources on account of their maritime 
orientation, associations with piracy, and a cult of serpents and sacred 
fig trees.
Although the impressionistic and perforce general discussion offered 
in the above paragraphs is only preliminary, it nonetheless suggests 
46	 See Spagnoli 2002 for a survey of the topic and the secondary literature. The cult 
of Nāgas has been fully integrated within Hinduism and Buddhism, where they 
represented tribal deities “tamed” by Buddhist (e.g. Vajrapāṇi) or Hindu deities, 
which in turn would indicate a paradigm expressing the victory over tribal religion 
(Verardi 2011). In Tantric Buddhism we find a connection between Nāgas and 
important masters (Nāgārjuna, Nāgabuddhi) and localities (e.g. Nāgārjunakoṇḍa); 
according to post-eighth century Buddhist hagiography, the scriptural canon of 
Tantric Buddhism was received by Vajrasattva from the Nāgas, and then revealed to 
Nāgārjuna in an iron tower in Central India.

--- PAGE 126 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
115
that some functional and distributional similarities existed between the 
various forms and transformations of female deities—from the Mātṛs to 
the Yoginīs, Nāgīs, and bongas—and their relationship to practitioners, 
blood, and sacrifice across both Indic and “tribal” religions attested 
across South and Southeast Asia. If anything, this state of affairs speaks 
in favour of the existence of closer interactions between the cultures 
of Indo-Aryan-, Austroasiatic-, and Austronesian-language speaking 
populations in South and Southeast Asia than is generally assumed, and 
cries out for further research.
5.3  On Monstruosity, Mockery, and Association with Animals
The Semai conceive Nkuu’ as a “brutal deity, emotionally incontinent 
and often himself subject to being tricked and mocked”, a “ludicrous 
monster” indeed, an “evil ferocious destroyer God… so grotesquely 
stupid, so much a prey to his own passions, as to be a figure of fun; 
He knows that, and is ashamed” (Dentan 2002a, pp. 161–62). Nkuu’ 
is violent and yet stupid: “His desire to hurt makes Him stupid; His 
stupidity makes him desire to hurt; in stories about him, wanting to hurt, 
He hurts Himself” (Dentan 2008, p. 70). The reference to the “hurting 
oneself” due to one’s own stupidity and incontinence finds a striking 
parallel in the stories about the origin of the architectural element 
of Kāla(mukha), which in Java and Bali was identified with Bhaṭāra 
Kāla—intended as either the demonic child of Śiva, or as a demonic 
hypostase of the same. According to a popular legend, Kāla, out of a 
permanently insatiable hunger—and at Śiva’s studious request, in order 
to save other living beings—devoured his own body, thereby leaving 
only his head. 
The practice of mocking the ludicrous qualities of the Godhead 
among the Semai for apotropaic aims is a feature that merits a close 
comparison with Indic (Tantric) religions in both South and Southeast 
Asia. For instance, the wild and inopportune behaviour of Kāla is mocked 
during theatrical performances in Bali. The Kāla Purāṇa relates how the 
ever-hungry Kāla wanted to devour his brother Kumāra on account of 
the fact that he had been given by Śiva the right to eat all persons born 
on the day of his younger brother’s birth (Stephen 2002, pp. 67–71).

--- PAGE 127 ---
116	
Andrea Acri
The story is still put on stage in Bali, in slightly different versions, in 
(comic) performances held during rites of passage. Rather than being 
just a source of entertainment, such parodic performances are regularly 
enacted for apotropaic aims—in fact, just to make the gods ashamed 
of their deviant or destructive behaviours, and reorient their demonic 
nature towards their divine (benign) original form. As Stephen (2002, 
pp. 77–79) argues: 
The significance of wayaṅ performances and other entertainments as 
the means of causing Durgā and Kāla Rudra to return to their positive 
forms of Śiwa and Umā… seems to me an idea worthy of considerably 
more attention than has previously been given it.… Kāla Rudra and  
Durgā were publicly shamed and their actions parodied in song, dance 
and wayaṅ theatre.… Why? Because parody and humour are used to  
point to the evil doings of the god and goddess. There is no power that 
can control Śiwa and Umā in their terrible forms, only they can choose 
to transform themselves, but ridicule and laughter can cause shame and 
thus bring the pair to self-awareness.
Wayang performances of the legend of the birth of Kāla are also conducted 
in Java by dalangs for “exorcistic” and purificatory purposes (Headley 
2004, pp. 321, 330).
The grotesque aspect of the Divine, embodied in a demonic trickster, 
is evident in an enigmatic passage of the Old/Middle Javanese text 
Navaruci (Prijohoetomo 1934, p. 110). Having described the invisible 
and formless aspect of the Lord (bhaṭāra = Śiva), Devaruci reveals to 
the hero Bhīma the characteristics of one of His embodiments:
[… The Lord] becomes a human being; He becomes a male, He 
becomes a female; He becomes a four-legged animal, moving on all  
fours, His belly facing down.… He is skilled in singing and reciting.  
He knows to perform yoga and absorption. He is endowed with Gnosis 
and Power, there is nobody who equals Him. As for what constitutes  
His food, He pays little attention to what He eats: He eats his own 
body, He drinks his own blood…. He is not beautiful; He really likes 
to laugh. His manner of haughty speaking is not pleasant. [Being only]  
supernaturally mighty, He is in trouble with the discernment of the sacred 
scriptures.

--- PAGE 128 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
117
The character described in the passage is indeed Bhīma himself, who 
shares many features with Kāla-Bhairava, the demonic aspect of the 
Lord Śiva. Bhīma combines features of Bhairava (both meaning: “the 
frightful one”) with those of the Pāṇḍava hero Bhīma—a mighty, and 
often wrathful and impulsive, warrior of gigantic proportions, whose 
strong point is almost uniquely his physical strength; in both the 
Sanskrit and Javanese versions of the Mahābhārata he is known as 
vṛkodara, “wolf-bellied”, because of his wild character and insatiable 
appetite.47 The other features of this divine figure mentioned there, such 
as the ability to dance and recite, his violent laughter, his possession 
of Power (śakti), are all consonant with those attributed to Bhīma/ 
Bhairava. The references to Bhīma as paying no attention to his diet, 
and especially as eating his own body and drinking his own blood, 
call to mind the myth of Kāla discussed above, and, on a human level, 
the dietary habits of Śaiva practitioners and the notorious practice 
of cannibalism and blood-drinking attributed to the Kāpālikas, the 
antinomian devotees of Kāla-Bhairava. A focus on performance and 
mockery can be also found among the Kāpālikas and their female 
attendants, the Kapālinīs or Yoginīs. These practitioners aimed at 
achieving a direct connection with their elected deity, the male Bhairava 
and/or various terrifying hypostases of the Goddess, through their 
observance of mimicking or taking upon themselves some of their 
elected deity’s features in order to reach a complete identification with 
it, i.e. be “penetrated” or possessed (āveśa) in a trance-like state, often 
triggered by frantic dances and transgressive behaviours. As pointed out 
by Dentan (2002a, p. 164), the Semai know the analogous concept of 
“loss of self” in both sexual and divine unions, which they call asyik 
(an Arabic loanword acquired via Malay).
47	 The “comparisons of Bhīma to wild animals (including lions, tigers and elephants), 
which are frequently made in the epic, show that he is considered wild, barbaric, 
demonic and almost animal-like. In Pampa’s tenth-century Kannada work Bhārata, 
Bhīma not only slays Duḥśāsana but also drinks his blood and eats his flesh” 
(Bühnemann 2015, p. 470).

--- PAGE 129 ---
118	
Andrea Acri
FIGURE 3.3
Relief Identified by Acri and Jordaan (2012) as Portraying the Directional Deity Kāla and His Entourage at Candi 
Śiva, Loro Jonggrang Complex (Prambanan, Central Java), Ninth Century
Source: Courtesy of Mark Long.

--- PAGE 130 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
119
The similarities between Nkuu’ and Kāla-Bhairava extend further. For 
instance, the Semai classify Nkuu’ as a giant red, black, or black and 
white ape. His younger brother is Pnoos, “Wind” (Dentan 2008, p. 70). 
Intriguingly enough, we find an association between Kāla-Bhairava, a 
monkey, and wind in the Indic imaginary. Kāla-Bhairava (alias Bhīma) 
is the brother of Hanumān, the mighty (and tricksterish) monkey-deity; 
Hanumān himself is regarded, and worshiped, as a manifestation of 
Bhairava in both South Asia and the Javano-Balinese world. In the 
Balinese Kapiparwa it is Hanumān who eats the Sun instead of his brother 
Kāla, as another popular Indic version of the story has it (see Vickers 
2011, p. 127). East Javanese iconography of Hanumān (e.g. the reliefs 
of Candi Jago) is consonant with the iconography of Bhīma/Bhairava, 
as both characters share demonic and gigantic traits, a tricksterish 
nature, supernatural power, a connection with clouds and thunder, and 
a checquered, black-and-white loincloth (see Kieven 2011, pp. 222–23; 
Vickers 2011, p. 127). According to a widespread tradition, both Kāla-
Bhairava/Bhīma and his brother Hanumān are the children of the (Vedic) 
god Vāyu/Bāyu and therefore share the appellative bāyuputra (“son of 
Wind”); furthermore, they are characterized by common iconographic 
features.48 In the ninth-century temple-complex of Loro Jonggrang at 
Prambanan, a relief of Caṇḍi Śiva (Figure 3.3) displays a directional 
deity that Acri and Jordaan (2012, pp. 301–2) have identified as Kāla 
on the basis of the Sanskrit-Old Javanese text Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa, which 
apparently inform the iconographical masterplan of the monument. 
A human-sized, fanged monkey is part of his entourage; the cloud 
right above then monkey’s head is evidently a symbolic pictorial 
representation of the wind, i.e. the atmospheric god Vāyu—the storm-
god often equated to Rudra and Bhairava (both partaking of the root ru, 
48	 When discussing the Balinese Kapiparwa, Vickers (2011, p. 127) notes that “[t]he 
link to Bayu explains a connection… which is otherwise mysterious…. They both 
have the ‘prawn claw’ (supit urang) coiffure of the semi-divine heroes of the epics, 
and both wear very little clothing except for the chequered (poleng) loincloth. In 
Balinese ritual use these poleng cloths, as the union of opposites, represent power 
(sakti)”. Bayu is “iconographically identical to Bima, except that he has the aureole 
and what Forge refers to as a ‘god spot’”.

--- PAGE 131 ---
120	
Andrea Acri
“to roar, howl”). It would thus appear as if the Indic and Javano-Balinese 
worlds developed a variant configuration—in terms of different family 
relationships—of the association between a terrible manifestation of the 
Lord, a monkey, and wind, which we find among the Semai. 
As I have remarked throughout this chapter, Kāla/Bhairava, the 
demonic embodiment of Śiva, holds a prominent position in the 
Southeast Asian mediaeval Tantric pantheon of both Śaiva and Buddhist 
persuasion. Even in the Islamic period the Malays paid homage to Śiva 
in his sinister aspect of Kāla, the destroyer of life (Danaraj 1964, p. 9, 
Dentan 2008, p. 67). Śiva as Kāla is called upon in Kelantan’s invocation 
at a state séance, and cycle of five days and five parts of the day are 
assigned to him (who is placed in the second position after Mahādeva, 
and before Śrī, Brahmā, and Viṣṇu). Winstedt (1961, p. 34) posited 
an affinity between the Rudra-Śiva worshiped by the Bhils, Kols and 
Gonds tribals of India and the “Demon Raja” or “Spectre Huntsman”, 
whose cult was popular among rural Malays; according to Dentan (2008, 
p. 66), these deities “may also descend from ‘the Lord’, as Semai call 
their thundersquall God”. 
The fascination with a Dark Lord attested among all social strata 
of Austroasiatic- and Austronesian-speaking communities of the 
Indonesian and Malay world can hardly be explainable uniquely in 
terms of a (mediaeval) import of the prevailing South Asian/Sanskritic 
religious fashions. Conversely, to posit an Austroasiatic origin for the 
Rudra/Bhairava/Kāla complex, which has its roots in both Vedic and 
extra-Vedic milieux, would be equally misleading. To account for the 
widespread geographical diffusion and chronological resilience of this 
complex, one may perhaps regard it as a “convergent development” 
stemming from deep-rooted cultural tropes sharing a common ancestry 
across Monsoon Asia. 
6. “Disreputable Magicians”: On Shamans and Yogins
There seems to be a connection between what Dentan calls “terrorist 
gods” and fringe socio-religious phenomena that scholars have tended 
to define as “shamanistic” in Semai, Vedic, and Tantric lore. For 
instance, the sinister Vedic thunder god Rudra was worshipped by

--- PAGE 132 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
121
the Vrātyas, a class of “shamans” who “seem to have been outside 
the normal Aryan scheme of things” and may represent “survivors of 
some non-Aryan ascetic fraternity that was later loosely associated 
with the Brahmanic religion” (Basham and Zysk 1989, p. 16; cf. p. 58). 
The enigmatic vrātyas were “organized bands of young, celibate warrior 
ascetics living on the edges of vedic society…. It is not altogether 
unlikely that their livelihood advanced and influenced the development 
of the god’s cultic worship” (Bisschop 2013). Later counterparts of the 
Vrātyas were the Pāśupatas who, although belonging to the Brahmanical 
class, sought to achieve unity with Rudra by identifying with him through 
the antisocial (and impure) behaviours of “outsiders”; Ingalls (1962) 
argued that some of their observances, including babbling, making 
animal noises, and inopportune jokes, are remindful of those carried 
out by shamans.49 
As noted by Weber (1967, p. 295), outside of the Brahmanical order 
there was a “scorned substratum of disreputable magicians preoccupied 
with the problem of folk religiosity”—and, I would add, with the 
quest of supernatural powers (siddhi). Indeed, in many Asian contexts 
throughout the mediaeval period we find a wide array of marginal, non-
Brahmanical practitioners who played the roles of paripatetic ascetics, 
performers, healers, astrologers, magicians, mediums, and exorcists. The 
South Asian regional instantiations of those practitioners-cum-ritual agents 
are known under a variety of names—e.g. Ojhas in Uttar Pradesh, 
Baigas in Madhya Pradesh, Bhopas in Rajasthan, etc.—, but have 
also been included in the broad category of “Siddha” (White 1996; 
Davidson 2002; Samuel 2006). A discussion of these figures may be 
relevant to the—still very much open—question of the transfer of 
religious and cultural ideas outside the Indian Subcontinent, across 
Monsoon Asia indeed, by agents other than the elite carriers of 
49	 Subsequent Indological scholarship has abandoned this view, pointing out that 
the acts of Pāśupata adepts were not, as in the case of the shaman, manifestations 
of supernatural powers meant to cut them off from society, but rather aimed at 
provoking the contempt of others and thus gain good karma on the basis of a complex 
mechanism of transfer of merit (Lorenzen 1991, p. 188).

--- PAGE 133 ---
122	
Andrea Acri
high culture, such as Hindu/Brahmanical or Buddhist religious/ritual 
specialists.
Dentan (2002a, p. 166) describes a class of Semai practitioners who 
observed dietary restrictions to placate their demonic wives (from whom 
they obtain supernatural power). Furthermore, there is a relationship 
between those practitioners and the tricksterish figure of Nkuu’ (and the 
vicious supernatural beings associated with him), whose “power, which 
demons manifest, is the power to hurt, sicken and terrorize” (ibid., 
p. 164). This peculiar relationship reminds us of the relationship between 
what White (2009, p. 105) calls a “sinister yogin” and his elected deity, 
Bhairava:
The yogin is, in popular South Asian traditions, none other than the bogey-
man or the stock figure of the villain, the terrifying outsider who penetrates 
sleeping villages under the cover of night to carry off naughty children or 
unprotected village women. This, I would argue is the most perennial and 
pervasive understanding of the person/a of the yogin in South Asia: not a 
meditating sage absorbed in quietistic introspection, but rather, a powerful, 
terrifying Bhairava-like figure who penetrates the cosms of other people 
bodies, villages, citadels, and armies to conquer his own death by taking 
the lives of others. (emphasis mine)
The yogin, like the shaman, literally enters and possesses others’ 
bodies (paraśarīrapraveśa)—including those of animals. The class 
of yogins of the Kaula and Kāpālika type carried out transgressive 
practices in order to be “entered” (āveśa) by Bhairava, their elected 
deity. Samuel (2006, p. 26) argues:
The key image in these practices is a male figure of magical power and 
control, a tantric sorcerer surrounded by a circle of fierce female deities. 
The magician, who takes on the role of a fierce deity associated with the 
god Śiva, masters and controls these female spirits. Through this mastery, 
he gains power over the elements and the cosmos, and is able to wield 
destructive magic.
Various scholars have suggested that the invocation of fierce female 
deities in magical rituals seems to stem from tribal milieux in mediaeval 
Indic society. According to Davidson (2002, p. 181), key Tantric temples

--- PAGE 134 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
123
devoted to the cults and rituals associated with Yoginīs were “located 
in areas dominated by tribal peoples that were involved in sanguinary 
rituals”, which suggests that these sites “were constructed with a 
similar ritual in mind”, and were tribal before they became Hinduized 
(Urban 2011, p. 245). 
Davidson (2002, p. 227) speaks of a convergence existing between 
the shaman and the Tantric Buddhist master, or the Śaiva/Buddhist 
wandering Siddha. This idea is not new: already in 1905, Oldenberg 
implied an analogous convergence between Vedic and tribal ritualists by 
declaring that we would have rightly understood dīkṣā, the dedicatory 
rite for him who wishes to celebrate the great Soma sacrifice, 
if we compare the performer, hungry and sleepless, uttering stammering 
words, covered with an antilope’s skin and sitting near the magical fire 
which scares away demons, with the savage magic-priest, a well-known 
ethnological figure who seeks to secure mastery over evil spirits by 
mortification of the flesh. 
Oldenberg (1973, p. 52) 
Winstedt, linking Malay shamans to Hindu Tantrism, also implied some 
sort of convergence: “Hinduism in tantric form fortified the Malay 
shaman by corroborating the efficacy of fasting and seclusion and 
confirming the notion that trances bring supernatural power” (1961, p. 28). 
To him, the propitiatory ceremony to purify the Malay state (pūjā 
negeri) by seance, dancing, and sacrifice, conducted by a male or 
female shaman, would be a relic of Śaktism (ibid., p. 153–54); the 
Malay and Javanese enthronement ceremonies, the use of regalia, 
and the attribution of certain posthumous titles, all “would appear to 
belong to a very early layer of civilization” (ibid., p. 157). Hooykaas 
(1964) defined the Balinese low-status priest called Ṛṣi Bhujaṅga/
Seṅguhu50 as “a Shaman but not a Sufi, a Śaiva, and a Vaiṣṇava”. 
50	 This is a Śaiva, non-Brahmanical ritual specialist serving the rural population, who 
probably derived from the Javanese class of practitioners called Ṛṣis, who in their turn 
might have been descendants of Pāśupata ascetics (Sanderson 2003–4, p. 376).

--- PAGE 135 ---
124	
Andrea Acri
Certain types of religious practitioners of premodern Java have 
been regarded by scholars as shamanic in nature. These peripatetic 
figures involved in public performances (dance, pantomime, wayang, 
masked dance, trance) appear to be connected to a complex of elements 
associated with forms of shamanism or mediumship, namely thunder, 
ominous birds, sorcery, supernatural powers, antinomian behaviours, 
and exorcism. Among such figures were the vidus, whom I have suggested 
to identify as Śaiva practitioners specialized in performance (Acri 2011, 
p. 63, 2014b). In Sargas 24 and 25 of the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa 
kakavin (ca. ninth century CE) they are satirically linked to a bird, 
kuvoṅ or manuk vidu (“vidu bird”), namely the migratory black coucal. 
In a passage of the Old Javanese Bhomāntaka (70.1), the coucal’s loud 
voice is connected with thunderclaps. The stanza, using the imagery of 
a ceremony, allegorically depicts the sounds produced by thunder, birds, 
and bull-frogs, evoking the accompaniment of musical instruments during 
a frenzy dance.51 
The word vidu denotes an “actor (dancer, singer, reciter, leader in 
a performance?)” (Zoetmulder 1982) as well as a religious practitioner 
and medium. Echoes of this figure and the practices connected 
with him can be found throughout Southeast Asia, from the Malay 
peninsula to the Philippines. Aichele (1969, p. 134) pointed out 
that the words bidu and biduan in Classical Malay and buduo’n in 
Cham denote a class of comic (shamanic) dancers and musicians; 
furthermore, he drew attention to the modern Buginese form widu-widu, 
meaning “to joke, to play about”, and the Tagalog biro, meaning “quirk, 
51	 In the Indic imaginary, frogs—like the cuckoos and coucals in Old Javanese 
literature—call upon rain (cf. Ṛg Veda 7.103: “the frogs have raised their voice that 
the god of the rainstorm has inspired”); furthermore, croaking is compared to the 
religious chanting of priests (cf. Rāmāyaṇa kakavin 24.117, where frogs are disciples 
of the coot, who is the alter ego of a Pāśupata master). The association of the kuvoṅ/
manuk vidu with a call resembling the rumbling of a thunder is found in other 
Old Javanese passages, namely in the prose Tantri Kamaṇḍ aka B and its cognate 
Kiduṅ versions Tantri Kĕḍiri and Tantri Dĕmuṅ. The former text narrates the story 
“cuckoo and waterbirds”, where the kuvoṅ features under the nomen omen of 
Vākbajra “thunder-voice(d)” (p. 5). The kuvoṅ has a bajragīta “song of thunder” and 
is able to chant in a beautiful way to accompany dance.

--- PAGE 136 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
125
joke, jest” (the reduplicate form pagbibiro is attested in a passage 
of a text dealing with the practices of a magician).52 Robson (1983, 
p. 293), in agreement with his predecessor, related the term vidu to 
the Malay bidu and biduan, “a singer at a shamanistic séance” 
(according to Wilkinson’s Malay-English dictionary), and argued that 
the root was indigenous Javanese and not Sanskrit. He connected this 
figure to a practitioner wandering the countryside to perform a kind 
of drama linked to exorcism, ritual, and the deeds of ancestors (ibid., 
p. 294).
A striking description of the vidu is found in stanza 112 of 
Sarga 24 of the Rāmāyaṇa kakavin: a black coucal is homologized to 
a vidu, who is in turn characterized—through the lenses of Indic social 
categories—as a low-ranking wandering performer, accused of deceit 
and criminal intents, and declared to be guṇya (“having manifold 
supernatural abilities”, “powerful”, “endowed with good qualities”, or: 
“a sorcerer”) and saguṇa (“possessing magical/supernatural powers”, 
or “fitting in all roles”, i.e. play-acting) (Acri 2011, p. 62; cf. below). 
The word guṇya is found in Indic tribal milieux, where it is connected 
with sorcery. In contemporary Orissa, Tantric practitioners are referred 
to as guṇiā: Keul (2013, p. 6) characterizes them as “local tantriks” 
connected to Yoginī-cults, cremation-ground offerings and healing 
practices; among the Baigas of Central India and the Santals of (South-)
Eastern India, gunia means “sorcerer” (Koppers 1940–41, p. 770).53 
Rahmann (1959, p. 687) describes a type of Munda village-priest, 
the marang (great) deora, primarily a “witch-finder” who derives his 
powers (gun) from Mahadeo (Śiva); gun is connected to the name of the 
Baiga sorcerer, gunia (Koppers 1940–41, p. 770). The word sa-guṇa in 
Rāmāyaṇa kakavin 24.112, as per Aichele’s (1969, p. 154) translation, 
52	 On the association of bards with shamanism in the Philippines, see Revel, Gage and 
Railing 1998.
53	 According to one recent study (Kumar et al. 2009), the Baigas share two synonymous 
polymorphisms with a haplogroup specific to Australian Aborigines, and their 
later ancestors are believed to have spoken an Austroasiatc language (Elwin 1939, 
pp. 53–55). The Santals speak an Austroasiatic language, Santali.

--- PAGE 137 ---
126	
Andrea Acri
is a reference to the ability of the black coucal alias vidu to “fit in 
all roles” (namely, play-acting)—more literally, “endowed with [the 
ability to assume] any quality”. As we have seen in the case of guṇya, 
guṇa is commonly used as a synonym of “supernatural powers” (siddhi) 
in both Sanskrit and Old Javanese sources; in the latter, it also means 
“magic?” (Zoetmulder 1982, p. 553), while in modern Indonesian 
guna-guna means “(black) magic”, “charm”, “magical formula”. Among 
the goals of Pāś upata ascetics there was the obtainment of the eight 
supernatural powers/wondrous qualities (guṇa) of Rudra-Śiva, one of 
which was kāmarūpitva, “the ability to assume any form at will”. In 
the South Indian farce Mattavilāsa (6, p. 2), a drunk Kāpālika praises 
his Kapālinī for having obtained a beautiful appearance through the 
supernatural ability to assume any form at will (kāmarūpatā). Koppers 
(1940–41, p. 766) reports that the Santals know of one Kamru (also: 
Kambru, Kamruk, or Kam), who was the first magician and teacher 
of witchcraft (Ojhaism); according to Bodding, “It seems natural to 
connect the word with Skr. kāma, and kāmarūpa, whether in its 
original meaning of ‘taking any shape at will, beautiful pleasing’, or 
as the name of a country, the western portion of Assam. This makes 
it possible to take it either as the name of a person so called, or 
as the name of a person from Kamrup” (quoted in ibid.). A class 
of Indian mendicant actors are called Bahrūpia, from Sanskrit bahu 
(“many”) + rūpa (“form”; bāhurūpya = “manifoldness”), as referring 
to the ability to act; at the same time, Bahurūpa is a name for the 
black, fanged Southern face of Śiva/Bhairava (Aghora). The Bahrūpia 
were known for impersonating gods, especially in their terrible forms 
(cf. the image of a female impersonator of the goddess Kālī in 
Napier 1986, p. 165), and to imitate the notes of animals (Russell 1916, 
p. 344).
Other elements in the description of the vidu/black coucal in the 
Rāmāyaṇa kakavin seem to point to a Tantric milieu. For instance, in 
24.114 the kuvoṅ invites a she-kuvoṅ to become a female ascetic (kili) 
and bring satisfaction to naked wandering ascetics (kalavan 
lagnāmutusana), thereby becoming an object of enjoyment (bhukti) 
for the devotees (bhakta) in the forest, who have lower-ranking wives

--- PAGE 138 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
127
(kula-kula).54 There is the possibility that (ma-)kula-kula may be 
a pun, meaning “having kulas” (= “gathering in clans”), implying a 
reference to the Sanskrit word kula in the sense of secret clans or 
families of initiated devotees, Yoginīs, and minor goddesses around 
which revolved the theology and ritual practice of the Tantric texts 
of the Kaula stream—themselves probably derived from an earlier 
Kāpālika milieu. Samuel (2006, p. 26), when discussing Kāpālika-related 
practices, refers to 
the widespread role of low-caste ritual specialists in relation to kingship 
and political power, a pattern that has been identified in early Tamil 
literature and occurs in different forms in many parts of South Asia and 
the Himalayas. If fierce deity practices were originally performed by  
such low-caste specialists, then the kula, ‘families,’ of early tantric  
practice may derive from the families who carried them out.
Intriguingly enough, the same relationship between low-status ritual 
specialists and political power applies to the Javanese characters of the 
vidu and pirus (see Acri 2014b). 
The association between the vidu and pirus performing characters 
and birds in various Old Javanese sources is significant. The black 
coucal (alias vidu) is an ominous bird in Javanese lore; coucals, as well 
as (black) crows and yellow wild pigeons (alias pirus) are taboo in 
both Semai and Old Javano-Balinese lore. In the Old Javanese manual 
for Śaiva priests Ṛṣiśāsana, these birds are mentioned as krūrapakṣi 
(“fierce/wild/bloody/terrifying birds”), whose meat is forbidden food for 
practitioners of the mainstream Śaiva Siddhānta. Indeed in the Sanskritic 
imaginaire, black birds, such as crows, and scavengers in general, were 
associated with Tantric practitioners (Zeiler 2013). Among the Semai, 
coucals as well as several yellow and black birds (such as crows), are 
trlaac-birds, i.e. connected with any action that might bring on violent 
disruption; other birds are “wives of thunder” (Dentan 2006, p. 298), or 
the evil offspring of the Dark Lord, the ceep caas’seic “flesh-eater birds”.
54	 Zoetmulder 1982, p. 914 s.v. kula II, kula-kula: “prob.: wife of lower rank, second 
wife to the queen (= matur, q.v.?)”.

--- PAGE 139 ---
128	
Andrea Acri
Some premodern Javanese performing characters evoke tantalizing 
resonances with the figures of Kāpālika, Kaula, and Siddha practitioners 
described in South Asian Sanskrit texts on the one hand, and with the 
mediums and performers found among modern Indian tribals of the 
Munda-belt on the other. Are the Javanese characters to be regarded 
as the localized heirs to a category of mediaeval Indic practitioners 
who travelled from the Indian Subcontinent to Southeast Asia? Or, do 
they represent “shamanic” figures with an Indic (Tantric) overlay, who 
survived to the modern period among some small-scale societies across 
Monsoon Asia, and ultimately share common traits derived from the 
same ancestry? More comparative research is required in order to throw 
light on this fascinating issue.
7. Conclusion
In this chapter I have discussed some of the distributional and functional 
similarities individuated by Dentan between certain features (both primary 
and secondary) of Semai religion and Hinduism, and argued that they 
extend beyond the Vedic period, being found in the religious systems 
prevalent in mediaeval South and Southeast Asia: Tantric Śaivism and 
Tantric Buddhism. The analyses of these similarities, and the hypotheses 
concerning their origin, give rise to a series of four possible positions 
and outcomes, either (or combinations) of which must be true:
1)	The similarities are only alleged, i.e. they are the result of a 
fallacious methodology, wrong perception, or biased judgement 
by the investigator(s). In reality, no relationship exist between 
the religious tropes of (Tantric) Hinduism and Semai lore, and/or 
Sanskrit and Semai language.
2)	The similarities exist, but they are not attributable to common 
origins and historical diffusion; on the contrary, they are are 
merely coincidental, due to [a] pure chance; [b] analogous 
sociocultural responses/reactions to similar environmental stimuli 
(i.e. independent invention); or [c] a psychological or neuro-
cognitive framework that is common to all mankind (i.e., human 
universals). This scenario implies what may be described as a

--- PAGE 140 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
129
form of “weak convergence theory” (according to Wittgenstein’s 
concept of family resemblances, see Landmann, this volume), 
presupposing independent invention and development that is due 
to neither direct transfer nor indirect borrowing or influence (e.g. 
through a common genitor).
3)	The similarities exist, and are due to a process of diffusion from 
an original source (or “giver”) to a “receiver”. Thus, it may be 
the case that [a] South Asian carriers of Sanskritic culture were 
the sources of Indic traits, and Austroasiatic- and Austronesian-
speaking members of Indicized/Sanskritized Southeast Asian 
societies were the receivers; or [b] Southeast Asian agents were 
the sources of the “adstratal” cultural and linguistic traits borrowed 
by South Asian individuals. The first model would fit a “strong 
orthogenetic approach” in the study of Indian/Indic religions, 
which maintains that the origin of Hinduism and Tantrism are 
to be sought (exclusively) in a Vedic/Brahmanical milieu within 
the Indian Subcontinent; in such context, “tribals” of outlying 
areas were influenced by Sanskritic, Brahmanical, and/or Tantric 
traditions since the beginning of the early mediaeval period. The 
second model would fit an heterogenetic approach championing the 
opposite scenario, whereby the origin of “Classical Hinduism” and 
Tantrism is to be sought in an extra-Vedic context, which could 
have originated in South(east) Asian tribals contexts—possibly at 
an early historical period. Of course, the simultaneous occurrence 
of both processes is possible: as noted by Dentan (2002a, p. 171) 
with respect to the religion of the Semai, some Sanskrit words and 
Indic features were borrowed and “localized”, yet they retained a 
secondary role in their religious system, implying that a different 
wave of Sanskritzation might have taken place.55 In either cases, the 
55	 Cf. Benjamin (2014, p. 274) who, while admitting that component elements derived 
from Brahmanical religions formed part of the practices of non-metropolitan 
communities in the Malay peninsula, asserts that “Brahminism as a functioning 
religious system did not spread far beyond the boundaries of Indianised settlements… 
neither the Malays nor the Semang could be said to have been Brahminists in any 
overall sense”.

--- PAGE 141 ---
130	
Andrea Acri
similar traits would derive from early historical contacts between 
South and Southeast Asian people, and would have undergone 
an analogous process of localization on both sides of the Bay of 
Bengal.
4)	The similarities exist, and represent parallel developments out of 
a common source—a cultural matrix extending across South Asia, 
Southeast Asia, and perhaps even into Southern China. I should like to 
stress that this cultural matrix is not an echt, essence or substratum, 
but rather a dynamic process—the result of centuries of circulation of 
people, languages and ideas—involving exchange, negotiation, and 
adaptation. It needs not have been homogeneous in its main traits; 
rather, it may have partaken of a plural set of “cultural packages” 
carried by multiple ethnic and linguistic groups (i.e. Austroasiatic- and 
Austronesian-speaking people). This paradigm represents a sort of 
“strong convergence theory”, which envisages the diffusion, filiation 
and localization of cultural and linguistic elements that developed 
across Monsoon Asia in parallel, as it were, and with cross-
contaminations, out of a shared matrix. This shared matrix, which 
is earlier than the first attestations of written documents, may be 
only inferred by comparing, by means of a polythetic approach and 
family resemblances, the traits existing among modern purported 
“survivors” (such as the Semai, or Munda tribals), premodern textual 
corpora, and other historical datas from geographically distant (yet 
culturally related) contexts across Monsoon Asia.
I leave it to my readers to judge the likelihood of position 1. Position 2 
and each of its subsets cannot be entirely dismissed; yet, the linguistic 
(diffusional) evidence and the documented historical links existing among 
many cultures across Monsoon Asia makes it improbable that all or 
most similarities are due to unrelated, independent developments.56 For 
instance, we are not comparing randomly picked heterogeneous features 
in a de-contextualized fashion (think, for example, about the occurrence 
56	 Blench (2013, p. 8) ironically points out that, whereas diffusionist approaches are now 
being generally regarded as outmoded in ethnography, “for some reason archaeologists 
do not generally use this argument [i.e. independent invention] for pottery”.

--- PAGE 142 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
131
of a “thunder complex” among Indo-Europeans, Southeast Asians, and 
Amerindians), but a constellation of cultural tropes and linguistic features 
found within a geographical context with a long history of human 
interaction. As noted by Blust (1991, p. 518) with reference to the 
“thunder complex” in Australasia, “the explanation of the psychological 
or cultural dynamics of a coherent unit of culture… is distinct from the 
explanation of its distribution across culture”.57 What I am suggesting 
here is the possibility of historical contacts that enabled the multi-
directional distribution and adoption of certain tropes—such as a “Dark 
Lord complex”—across Monsoon Asia. Some of the tropes detected by 
Dentan among the Semai would have been carried by Austroasiatic-
speaking Negritos and incorporated into the religion, mythology, and 
languages of Austronesian-speaking people during their ever-expanding 
migrations across Southeast Asia and the Pacific, therefore becoming 
part of their cultural heritage; comparable dynamics could have 
happened on the opposite shore of the Bay of Bengal. A similar 
argument has been advanced by Blench (2013) regarding the arc of 
vegeculture and its cultural correlates stretching between Melanesia 
and eastern Nepal; by Gupta (2005, p. 22) regarding the distributions 
of jar burials along the Indo-Pacific arc, suggesting “the possibility of 
interactivity and sharing of otherwordly precepts from East Asia to 
South Asia”; and by Manguin (1996, p. 191), who speaks about “a fair 
amount of interchange and cross-fertilization, if not of homogenity in 
technical traditions” across the western and eastern shores of the Bay 
of Bengal. Brighenti’s (2009, p. 63) arguments concerning the South 
57	 Blust (1991) characterizes the “thunder complex” as one of the most distinctive and 
widespread ethnological markers known in Southeast Asia. This cultural complex, 
which is focally concerned with the belief that mockery of animals will precipitate a 
punitive thunderstorm entailing some type of physical transformation of the offender, 
is known among the Semai and many other tribal societies in the Philippines, Borneo 
and Eastern Indonesia. According to Blust (ibid., p. 517), even though “nativized and 
augmented with features it probably did not have in its original form”, this complex 
could still be traced back “to a prehistoric society which was ancestral not only to the 
modern Austronesian-speaking societies of western and eastern Indonesia, but also to 
those of Oceania”. A wider discussion of linguistic and cultural features supporting a 
common Negrito ancestry across Southeast Asia may be found in Blust 2013.

--- PAGE 143 ---
132	
Andrea Acri
Asian Tantric instantiations of human sacrifice are directly relevant to 
the present discussion, positing as they do that “continuous interchange 
of socioreligious customs and of mythical, doctrinal, and ritual elements 
relating to human sacrifice has taken place since protohistoric epochs 
in the Indian subcontinent”, and had as its vectors the “people of 
the Veda” as well as people of disparate ethnic origins and linguistic 
background (viz. Dravidian, Austroasiatic, Austronesian, and Tibeto- 
Burman).
On the basis of the quantitatively scant, but qualitatively significant, 
cumulative evidence presented in this chapter, I consider positions 3 
and 4 the most likely. These hypotheses are not mutually exclusive, 
as they do not preclude the occurrence of two-way contacts. In the 
specific, one may hypothesize that a certain ideology or mythologeme 
might have returned to its place of origin after centuries of independent 
development in an outlying geographic and cultural context (compare 
Witzel’s “imagined investigation” quoted above). This model, along with 
the “Monsoon Asian shared cultural matrix”, could help explain why 
certain ideas and practices that once existed in the Indian Subcontinent 
could so easily be revived or connected with those still found in other 
parts of the Indic world, namely mainland and insular Southeast Asia. 
In short, the fundamental affinity between cultural traits/trajectories 
in South and Southeast Asia would be due to historical processes of 
multi-directional interaction, transfer, and filiation, which could have 
taken place in the context of an inteconnected geo-environmental area. 
More importantly, the continuous presence in the Indian Subcontinent of 
Austroasiatic-speaking people, who most likely shared an early core of 
socio-cultural features with their “cousins” in Southeast Asia, suggests 
that these contacts and transfers are not a mere theoretical possibility. 
The attestation of Sanskrit loanwords among the South and Southeast 
Asian tribals and, concomitantly, of Austroasiatic loanwords in Sanskrit 
and Middle Indo-Aryan languages, further supports this scenario of 
long-standing historical connections. These connections, inferred on 
the basis of recent archaeological findings, have been described by 
Manguin as a “millenium-long phase of exchange” (2011, p. xvi) that 
predates the beginnings of “Indianization” in the third–fifth centuries 
CE, when “the relationship between Southeast Asian and Indian societies 
had already come a very long way” (ibid., p. xix).

--- PAGE 144 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
133
Whatever the case may be, this chapter makes a case to de-parochialize 
the study of Indic religions, so as to transcend the intellectual and geo-
political boundaries that, unduly compartmentalizing this cross-cultural 
subject of enquiry, hamper our understanding of the larger picture. 
I cannot but side with Samuel who, noting the “arbitrary nature of regional 
traditions of intellectual inquiry”, calls for a change of perspective in 
trying to look at Tibeto-Burman-speaking societies of Tibet, Ladakh, 
Nepal and Sikkim as part of Southeast Asia rather than Central or South 
Asia—the rationale being that the Tibeto-Burman linguistic family has 
been biased towards South and Central Asia, yet Eastern India belongs 
culturally more to Southeast Asia than South Asia (2005, pp. 199–200).58 
Warning us not to confuse analytic categories with reality, and expressing 
the need to “move beyond the parochial concerns to which it… has so 
often been restricted”, Samuel (ibid., p. 208) points out that 
Frameworks to which Tibetanists have become attached for historical 
reasons are not necessarily the most appropriate, and that the kind of shift 
in perspective which I have described may be a valuable supplement and 
corrective to our established practices.
In a similar fashion, in his analysis of the “Demonological Cosmopolis”, 
White (2012, pp. 164–65) recognizes that
While it remains useful to speak of regional or local traditions 
(Bengali Tantra, for example), it is totally inappropriate to assume that 
translocal traditions conform to modern geopolitical maps of the Indian  
subcontinent. Hindu Tantra is ‘Indic’ only to the extent that KGB  
[i.e. Kashmir, Gandhara, and Bactria], Nepal, and even the Tarim Basin 
are parts of India, which they are not. 
Analogous considerations could be extended to Southeast Asia and its 
“Indic” religions. As Samuel (2011, p. 348) notes when discussing the 
theoretical framework of his monograph The Origins of Yoga and Tantra 
(2008), 
58	 A similar argument was advanced by Kunstandter (1967, p. 205), who included 
Eastern India in Southeast Asia on account of linguistic and cultural similarities: “Just 
as the southern boundary of China does not mark a cultural or linguistic division, the 
eastern border of India does not mark off a cultural or linguistic area”.

--- PAGE 145 ---
134	
Andrea Acri
India as we know it today is a very recent entity. It is all too easy to 
think of the development of ‘Hinduism’ or at least of ‘Indian religions’ 
as a process that took place within a territory called ‘India’ and 
which corresponds roughly to present-day India or even to the rather  
problematic wider region called ‘South Asia’ for purposes of Western 
academia.… I deliberately worked Southeast Asia into the account 
throughout the book, in part to stress that the adoption of Brāhmaṇical 
religion was an ongoing process and that Cambodia was in much the 
same position in relation to this process, if at a slightly later date, than 
Bengal or South India. It is important to understand these processes 
within a common frame. The fact that we now have an India that is 
mainly Hindu and a Southeast Asia that is Buddhist, Muslim and so on is 
a much later development, and we need to think back to a quite different 
sort of geography to make sense of these earlier periods. This is not a 
dramatically new thing to say, but the consequences of working it into the 
account was to bring up some issues that had not been raised so clearly 
by many previous authors. (emphasis mine)
Key concepts here are the “common frame”, and the “quite different sort 
of geography”, which Samuel invokes to make sense of the complex 
religious and cross-cultural processes that occurred over an extended 
period of time throughout a large swathe of continental and maritime 
Asia. I would add a “quite different sort of history” too, which would 
help us to make sense of phenomena whose roots lie in a remote 
past, i.e. an older core of religious beliefs, practices, and mythologies 
that is difficult to reconstruct given the scantness of the records that 
have survived the ravages of time. I believe, however, that the lack 
of textual and archaeological evidence should not deter scholars from 
elaborating wider-ranging narratives that include a remote past to 
explain premodern and modern phenomena on the basis of data 
analysed from the perspective of comparative mythology and religion, 
historical linguistics, and with insights from modern and contemporary 
ethnography. More research on the small-scale societies of South and 
Southeast Asia and their historical interactions with Sanskritic ideologies 
and Indic cosmopolitan societies is needed to test Dentan’s provocative 
hypothesis.
To date, the prevalent attitude among contemporary Indologists 
towards the manifestations of Indic religions and cultural traits in

--- PAGE 146 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
135
Southeast Asia has not gone beyond the uncritical subscription to 
a monodirectional “Hinduization” paradigm; on the other hand, the 
majority of Southeast Asianists has tended to favour an “indigenistic” 
paradigm, stressing Southeast Asian agency in the “localization” of 
Indic ideas and practices. Concomitantly, Indologists have predilected 
an orthogenetic paradigm to explain the emergence of the phenomenon 
of Tantrism in South Asia from a (late) Vedic matrix. On the other hand, 
as rightly noted by Brighenti (2009, p. 95), to explain the various stages 
of the process of tribal-Śākta interactions in the Indian Subcontinent 
we “may necessitate moving beyond the ancient limits of Vedic India”. 
In fact, one may even include the Vedic “antecedents” of Tantrism in 
a wider-ranging analysis that approaches the study of Indic religions 
“from the East”, so to speak, as partaking of a shared cultural matrix 
out of which parallel developments originated across the Bay of Bengal 
and South China Sea, in the context of a millenia-long shared history. 
In order to do so, it would perhaps be appropriate to revive, and refine, 
the “Monsoon Asia perspective” elaborated by early twentieth century 
scholarship. By extending the field of study to the wider geo-environmental 
area of Monsoon Asia, the synthesis advocated here would regard 
seemingly convergent religious and cultural phenomena as the outcome 
of multi-directional and circulatory processes rather than separate, self-
contained entities, and propose a possible shared ancestry.
References
Acri, Andrea. “More on Birds, Ascetics and Kings in Central Java. Kakawin 
Rāmāyaṇa, 24.111–115 and 25.19–22”. In From Laṅkā Eastwards, edited by 
Andrea Acri, Helen Creese and Arlo Griffiths. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2011.
———. “Pañcakuśika and Kanda Mpat: From a Pāśupata Śaiva Myth to Balinese 
Folklore”. Journal of Hindu Studies 7, no. 2 (2014a): 146–78.
———. “Birds, Bards, Buffoons, and Brahmans: (Re-)Tracing the Indic Origins of 
Some Ancient and Modern Javano-Balinese Performing Characters”. Archipel 
88 (2014b): 13–70.
Acri, Andrea and Roy Jordaan. “The Dikpālas of Ancient Java Revisited: A New 
Identification for the Twenty-Four Directional Deities on the Śiva Temple of 
the Loro Jonggrang Complex”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde/
Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia 168 (2012): 
274–313.

--- PAGE 147 ---
136	
Andrea Acri
Aichele, Walter. “Vergessene Metaphern als Kriterien der Datierung des altjavanischen 
Rāmāyaṇa”. Oriens Extremus 16 (1969): 127–66. 
Bakker, Hans. “Origin and Spread of the Pāśupata Movement: About Heracles, 
Lakulīśa, and Symbols of Masculinity”. Studia Orientalia 110 (2011): 21–37.
Basham, Arthur L. The Wonder that was India. New York: Grove Press, 1954.
Basham, Arthur L. and Kenneth G. Zysk, eds. The Origins and Development of 
Classical Hinduism. Boston: Beacon Press, 1989. 
Beane, Wendell Charles. Myth, Cult and Symbols in Suakta Hinduism: Study of the 
Indian Mother Goddess. Leiden: Brill, 1977. 
Bellah, Robert N. Religion in Human Evolution: From the Paleolithic to the Axial 
Age. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2011.
Benjamin, Geoffrey. Temiar Religion, 1964–2012: Enchantment, Disenchantment 
and Re-enchantment in Malaysia’s Uplands. Singapore: NUS Press, 2014.
Bhattacharyya, Narendra Nath. History of the Tantric Religion: A Historical, 
Ritualistic and Philosophical Study. 2nd rev. ed. Delhi: Manohar Publishers, 
1999.
Bisschop, Peter. “Śiva”. In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, edited by Knut A. 
Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha Narayanan. Brill Online, 
2013.
Blench, Roger. “Was There Once a Zone of Vegeculture Linking Melanesia with 
Northeast India?”. In Pacific Archaeology: Documenting the Past 50,000 Years: 
Papers from the 2011 Lapita Pacific Archaeology Conference, edited by Glenn 
R. Summerhayes and Hallie Buckley. Dunedin, New Zealand: Otago University 
Press, 2013.
Blust, Robert. “On the Limits of the ‘Thunder Complex’ in Australasia: A Reply 
to Gregory Forth”. Anthropos 86, nos. 4–6 (1991): 517–28.
———. “Beyond the Austronesian Homeland: The Austric Hypothesis and Its 
Implications for Archaeology”. In Prehistoric Settlement of the Pacific, Volume 
86, Part 5, edited by Ward H. Goodenough. American Philosophical Society, 
1996.
———. “Terror from the Sky: Unconventional Linguistic Clues to the Negrito 
Past”. Human Biology 85, no. 1 (2013): 401–16. (Special Issue on “Revisiting 
the ‘Negrito’ Hypothesis”).
Bourdonneau, Éric M. “Communication. La fondation du culte du devaraja. Danse, 
sacrifice et royauté au Prasat Thom de Koh Ker”. Comptes rendus de l’académie 
des inscriptions III (Juillet-Octobre 2011): 1343–82.
Brighenti, Francesco. “Traditions of Human Sacrifice in Ancient and Tribal India 
and their Relation to Śāktism”. In Breaking Boundaries with the Goddess: 
New Directions in the Study of Śāktism. Essays in Honor of Narendra Nath 
Bhattacharyya, edited by Cynthia Ann Humes and Rachel Fell McDermott. 
New Delhi: Manohar, 2009.

--- PAGE 148 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
137
Bühnemann, Gudrun. “Bhīmasena as Bhairava in Nepal”. Zeitschrift der Deutschen 
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 163, no. 2 (2015): 455–76.
Cady, John F. Southeast Asia: Its Historical Development. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1964. 
Chatterjee, S.K. “VIII. Race-Movements and Prehistoric Culture”. In The History 
and Culture of the Indian People, Vol. I: The Vedic Age, edited by Ramesh 
Chandra Majumdar. London: George Allen & Unwind Ltd., 1965.
Chaubey, Gyaneshwer, Mait Metspalu, Ying Choi, Reedik Mägi, Irene Gallego 
Romero, Pedro Soares, Mannis van Oven, Doron M. Behar1, Siiri Rootsi, Georgi 
Hudjashov1, Chandana Basu Mallick, Monika Karmin, Mari Nelis8 Jüri Parik, 
Alla Goverdhana Reddy, Ene Metspalu, George van Driem, Yali Xue, Chris 
Tyler-Smith, Kumarasamy Thangaraj, Lalji Singh, Maido Remm, Martin B. 
Richards, Marta Mirazon Lahr, Manfred Kayser, Richard Villems, and Toomas 
Kivisild. “Population Genetic Structure in Indian Austroasiatic Speakers: The 
Role of Landscape Barriers and Sex-specific Admixture”. Molecular Biology 
and Evolution 28, no. 2 (2011): 1013–24. 
Chihara, Daigoro. Hindu-Buddhist Architecture in Southeast Asia. Leiden, New 
York, Köln: E.J. Brill, 1996.
Coedès, George. Histoire ancienne des états hindouisés d’Extrême-Orient. Hanoi: 
Imprimerie d’Extrême-Orient, 1944.
———. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia, translated by Susan Brown 
Cowing and edited by Walter F. Vella. Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya 
Press, 1968.
Coldiron, Margaret. “Lions, Witches, and Happy Old Men: Some Parallels between 
Balinese and Japanese Ritual Masks”. Asian Theatre Journal 22, no. 2 (2005a): 
227–48.
———. Trance and Transformation of the Actor in Japanese Noh and Balinese 
Masked Dance-Drama. Lewiston/Queenston/Lampeter: The Edwin Mellew 
Press, 2005b. 
Conze, Edward. Buddhism: Its Essence and Development. New York: Harper 
Torchbooks, 1975 [1951].
Dahlquist, Allan. Megasthenes and Indian Religion. Delhi: Motilal banrsidass, 1977 
[Uppsala 1962].
Danaraj, A.G.S. Mysticism in Malaysia. Singapore: Asia Publishing Co., 1964.
Davidson, Ronald. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press, 2002.
Dehejia, Vidya. Yogin: Cult and Temples. Delhi: National Museum, 1986. 
Dentan, Robert Knox. “‘Disreputable Magicians’, the Dark Destroyer, and the 
Trickster Lord”. Asian Anthropology 1 (2002a): 153–94. 
———. “Against the Kingdom of the Beast: An Introduction to Semai Theology, 
Pre-Aryan Religion and the Dynamics of Abjection”. In Tribal Communities

--- PAGE 149 ---
138	
Andrea Acri
in the Malay World: Historical, Cultural and Social Perspectives, edited by 
Geoffrey Benjamin and Cynthia Chou. Leiden: International Institute for Asian 
Studies and Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2002b. 
———. “How the Androgynous Bird God Brought Agriculture to Semai of West 
Malaysia: Discipline, Hard Work and Subordination to the Cycle of Time”. 
In Les Messagers Divins: Aspects Esthetiques et Symboliques des Oiseaux 
en Asie du Sud-Est, edited by Pierre Le Roux and Bernard Sellato. Aix-en-
Provence/Marseille: IRASEC; and Paris: Editions Seven Orients/Connaisances 
et Savoirs, 2006. 
———. Overwhelming Terror: Love, Fear, Peace, and Violence among Semai of 
Malaysia. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 2008.
Dhar, Parul Pandya. “Kāla-Makara-Toraṇas: Javanese Expressions of a Shared 
Motif”. In Sacred Landscapes in Asia: Shared Traditions, Multiple Histories, 
edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray. New Delhi: Manohar, 2007.
Doniger O’ Flaherty, Wendy. Hindu Myths: A Sourcebook Translated from the 
Sanskrit. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1975. 
———. The Rig Veda: An Anthology. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1981.  
Eliade, Mircea. Yoga: Immortality and Freedom. Rev. ed. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1971. 
Elst, Koenrad. “Linguistic Aspects of the Aryan Non-invasion Theory”. In The 
Indo-Aryan Controversy, edited by Edwin F. Bryant and Laurie L. Patton. London 
and New York: Routledge, 2005.
Elwin, Verrier. The Baiga. London: John Murray, 1939.
Emigh, John. Masked Performance: The Play of Self and Other in Ritual and 
Theatre. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996.
Finot, Louis. “Sur quelques traditions Indochinoises”. Bulletin de la Commission 
Archéologique de l’Indochine 11 (1911): 20–37.
Flood, Gavin. Tantric Body: The Secret Tradition of Hindu Religion. London: I.B. 
Tauris, 2006. 
Frazier, Jessica. “Local, Tantric and ‘Caste’ Hinduism”. In The Continuum Companion 
to Hinduism, edited by Jessica Frazer. London/New York: Continuum International 
Publishing, 2011.
Gaillard, Claire, Mukesh Singh, and Anne Dambricourt Malassé. “Hoabinhian in the 
Siwaliks of north-western India?” In Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from the 
13th International Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Volume 1, edited by Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke, 
and Dominik Bonatz. Singapore: NUS Press, 2012.
Goudriaan, Teun. “Tumburu and His Sisters”. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde 
Südasiens 17 (1973): 4–95. 
———. The Vīṇāśikhatantra, a Śaiva Tantra of the Left Current. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1985.

--- PAGE 150 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
139
Griffiths, Arlo. “Tumburu: A Deified Tree”. Bulletin d’Études Indiennes 22–23 
(2004–5): 249–64.
van Gulik, Robert H. Hayagrīva: The Mantrayanic Aspect of Horse-cult in China 
and Japan. Leiden: Brill, 1935.
Gupta, Sunil. “The Bay of Bengal Interaction Sphere (1000 BC–AD 500)”. Indo-
Pacific Prehistory Association Bulletin 25 (2005): 21–30.
Gutman, Pamela. “Ancient Arakan, with Special Reference to its Cultural History 
between the 5th and 11th Centuries”. PhD thesis, Australian National University, 
1976. 
Hardy, Friedhelm. Viraha-Bhakti: The Early History of Kṛṣṇa Devotion in South 
India. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1983.
Hatley, Shaman. “The Brahmayāmalatantra and Early Śaiva cult of Yoginīs”. PhD 
dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 2007.
Headley, Stephen C. Durga’s Mosque: Cosmology, Conversion and Community 
in Central Javanese Islam. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 
2004. 
Hoogervorst, Tom. Southeast Asia in the Ancient Indian Ocean World. Oxford: 
Archaeopress, 2013.
Hooykaas, Christiaan. “The Balinese Sengguhu priest, a Shaman, but not a Sufi, 
a Śaiva, and a Vaiṣṇava”. In Malayan and Indonesian Studies, edited by John 
Bastin and R. Roolvink. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964.
Hutton, J.H. “The Significance of Head-Hunting in Assam”. The Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 58 (July–December 
1928): 399–408.
Ingalls, Daniel H.H. “Cynics and Pāśupatas: The Seeking of Dishonor”. Harward 
Theological Review 55 (1962): 281–98.
Jordaan, Roy and Robert Wessing. “Human Sacrifice at Prambanan”. Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 152 (1996): 45–74. 
———. “Construction Sacrifice in India, seen from the East”. In Violence Denied, 
edited by Jan E.M. Houben and Karel R. van Kooij. Leiden: Brill, 1999.
Keul, István. “Introduction: Tracing Yoginīs — Religious Polysemy in Cultural 
Contexts”. In ‘Yoginī’ in South Asia: Interdisciplinary Approaches, edited by 
István Keul. London: Routledge, 2013.
Kieven, Lydia. “Hanuman, the Flying Monkey: The Symbolism of the Rāmāyaṇa 
Reliefs at the Main Temple of Caṇḍ i Panataran”. In From laṅkā Eastwards: The 
Rāṃāyana in the Literature and Visual Arts of Indonesia, edited by Andrea Acri, 
Helen Creese, and Arlo Griffiths. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2011.
Koppers, W. “Probleme der indischen Religionsgeschichte”. Anthropos 35/36, nos. 
4–6 (1940–41): 761–814.
Kuiper, Franciscus B.J. Aryans in the Rigveda. Amsterdam and Atlanta: Rodopi, 
1991.

--- PAGE 151 ---
140	
Andrea Acri
Kulke, Hermann. “Indian Colonies, Indianization or Cultural Convergence? Reflections 
on the Changing Image of India’s Role in South East Asia”. In Onderzoek in 
Zuidoost-Azie. Agenda’s voor de jaren negentig, edited by Henk Schulte-Nordholt. 
Leiden: Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden, 1990.
Kumar, Ann. Globalizing the Prehistory of Japan: Language, Genes and Civilization. 
London: Routledge, 2009.
Kumar, Satish, Rajasekhara Reddy Ravuri, Padmaja Koneru, B.P. Urade, B.N. Sarkar, 
A. Chandrasekar, and V.R. Rao. “Reconstructing Indian-Australian Phylogenetic 
Link”. BMC Evolutionary Biology 9 (2009): 173.
Kunstandter, Peter. “India: Introduction”. In Southeast Asian Tribes, Minorities, and 
Nations, vol. 1, edited by Peter Kunstandter. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1967.
La Barre, Weston. The Ghost Dance: Origins of Religion. London: Allen & Unwin, 
1974. 
Lorenzen, David N. The Kāpālikas and Kālamukhas: Two Lost Śaivite Sects. 2nd 
rev. ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1991.
Mabbett, Ian W. “The ‘Indianization’ of Southeast Asia: Reflections on the 
Prehistoric 	
Sources”. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 8 (1977a): 1–14.
———. “The ‘Indianization’ of Southeast Asia: Reflections on the Historic Sources”. 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 8 (1977b): 143–61. 
Mahdi, Waruno. “Linguistc and Philological Data towards a Cronology of 
Austronesian Activity in India and Sri Lanka”. In Archaeology and Language 
IV: Language Change and Cultural Transformatiom, edited by Roger Blench 
and Matthew Spriggs. One World Archaeology 35. London and New York: 
Routledge, 1999.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. “Southeast Asian Shipping in the Indian Ocean during the 
First Millennium AD”. In Tradition and Archaeology, Early Maritime Contacts 
in the Indian Ocean, edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray and Jean-Francois Salles. 
Delhi: Manohar, 1996.
———. “Introduction”. In Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: 
Reflections on Cross-Cultural Exchange, edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, 
A. Mani, and Geoff Wade. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 
2011.
Masica, Colin P. “Aryan and Non-Aryan Elements in North Indian Agriculture”. In 
Aryan and Non-Aryan in India, edited by M. Deshpande and P.E. Hook. Ann 
Arbor: Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies, University of Michigan, 
1979.
Mayrhofer, Manfred. Kurzgefaßtes etymologisches Wörterbuch des Altindischen. 
Three vols. Heidelberg: Cark Winter, 1956.
McDaniel, June. “Yoginīs in Bengali Religious Traditions: Tribal, Tantric and 
Bhakti Influences”. In ‘Yoginī’ in South Asia: Interdisciplinary Approaches, 
edited by István Keul. London and New York: Routledge, 2013.

--- PAGE 152 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
141
Mus, Paul. “Cultes indiens et indigenes au Champa”. Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 33 (1933): 367–410.  
———. “India seen from the East: Indian and Indigenous Cults in Champa” 
(translation). Monash Papers on Southeast Asia 3 (1975). 
Napier, David A. Masks, Transformation, and Paradox. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and 
London: University of California Press, 1986.
Oldenberg, Hermann. Vedic Research. Poona: Āryasaṁskṛti-Prakaśana, 1973. 
[Translated by Paranjape of Vedaforschung. Berlin-Stuttgart, 1905.] 
Parpola, Asko. “The Sky-Garment: A Study of the Harappan Religion and its Relation 
to the Mesopotamian and Later Indian Religions”. Studia Orientalia 57 (1985).
Peterson, John. “Towards a Linguistic Prehistory of Eastern-Central South Asia 
(and Beyond)”. Unpublished draft paper, forthcoming.
Pollock, Sheldon. “The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, 300–1300: Transculturation, 
Vernacularization and the Question of Ideology”. In Ideology and the Status 
of Sanskrit: Contributions to the History of the Sanskrit Language, edited by 
Jan E.M. Houben. Leiden: Brill, 1996. 
———. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and 
Power in Premodern India. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006. 
Prijohoetomo, M. Nawaruci: inleiding, Middel-Javaansche prozatekst, vertaling, 
vergeleken met de Bimasoetji in Oud-Javaansch metrum. Groningen: Wolters, 
1934.
Przyluski, Jean. “La princesse à l’odeur de poisson et la nāgī dans les traditions de 
l’Asie Orientale”. Études Asiatiques 2 (1924): 265–84. 
———. “Part I: Non-Aryan Loans in Indo-Aryan”. In Pre-Aryan and Pre-Dravidian 
in India, edited by Sylvain Lévi, Jules Bloch, and Jean Przyluski. Calcutta: 
University of Calcutta, 1929a.
———. “Appendix to Part II: Further Notes on Non-Aryan Loans in Indo-Aryan”. 
In Pre-Aryan and Pre-Dravidian in India, edited by Sylvain Lévi, Jules Bloch, 
and Jean Przyluski. Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1929b.
———. “Heruka-Śambhara”. Polski Biuletyn Orientalistyczny 1 (1937): 42–45. 
Rahmann, Rudolf. “Shamanistic and Related Phenomena in Northern and Middle 
India”. Anthropos 54, nos. 5–6 (1959): 681–760. 
Reichle, Natasha. Violence and Serenity: Late Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2007.
Reuter, Thomas. “Is Ancestor Veneration the Most Universal of All World 
Religions? A Critique of Modernist Cosmological Bias”. Wacana 15, no. 2 
(2014): 223–53.
Revel, Nicole, Jennifer Curtiss Gage and Patricia Railing. “‘As if in a Dream ...’: 
Epics and Shamanism among Hunters. Palawan Island, The Philippines”. Diogenes 
181 (1998): 7–30.
Reynolds, Craig J. “A New Look at Old Southeast Asia”. Journal of Asian Studies 
54, no. 2 (1995): 419–46.

--- PAGE 153 ---
142	
Andrea Acri
Riccio, Maria E., José M. Nunes, Melissa Rahal, Barbara Kervaire, Jean-Marie 
Tiercy, and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. “The Austroasiatic Munda Population from 
India and its Enigmatic Origin: A HLA Diversity Study”. Human Biology 83, 
no. 3 (June 2011): 405–35.
Robson, Stuart. “Kakawin Reconsidered: Toward a Theory of Old Javanese 
Poetics”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 139 (1983): 291–319.
Russell, Robert V. The Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces of India. London: 
Macmillan and Co. Ltd., 1916.
Samuel, Geoffrey. Tantric Revisionings: New Understandings of Tibetan Buddhism 
and Indian Religion. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing, 2005.
———. “The Siddha as a Cultural Category”. In Holy Madness: Portraits of 
Tantric Siddhas, edited by Rob Linrothe. New York: Rubin Museum of Art; 
Chicago: Serindia Publications, 2006. 
———. The Origins of Yoga and Tantra: Indic Religions to the Thirteenth Century. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
———. “The Writing of The Origins of Yoga and Tantra’ & ‘Response”. In 
Stuart Ray Sarbacker, Laurie L. Patton, Johannes Bronkhorst, Christopher 
Key Chapple, Vesna Wallace, and Geoffrey Samuel, “Contextualizing the 
History of Yoga in Geoffrey Samuel’s ‘The Origins of Yoga and Tantra’: 
A Review Symposium”. International Journal of Hindu Studies 15, no. 3 
(2011): 303–57.
Sanderson, Alexis J.G.S. “Vajrayāna: Origin and Function”. In Buddhism into 
the Year 2000: International Conference Proceedings. Bangkok/Los Angeles: 
Dhammakaya Foundation, 1994.
———. “History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the Pañcarātra 
and the Buddhist Yoginītantras”. In Les sources et le temps: A colloquium. 
Pondicherry, 11–13 January 1997, edited by Francois Grimal. Pondicherry: 
IFP/EFEO, 2001.
———. “Śaivism among the Khmers; Part I”. Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 90–91 (2003–4): 349–462.
———. “Religion and the State: Śaiva Officiants in the Territory of the 
Brahmanical Royal Chaplain with an Appendix on the Provenance and Date of 
the Netratantra”. Indo-Iranian Journal 47 (2004): 229–300. 
———. “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early 
Medieval Period”. In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo 
Einoo. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo, 2009.
Selvakumar, Veerasamy. “Contacts between India and Southeast Asia in Ceramic 
and Boat Building Traditions”. In Early Interactions between South and 
Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-Cultural Exchange, edited by Pierre-Yves 
Manguin, A. Mani, and Geoff Wade. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2011.

--- PAGE 154 ---
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East”	
143
Seyfort Ruegg, David. “Sur les rapports entre le bouddhisme et le ‘substrat 
religieux’ indien et tibétain”. Journal Asiatique 252 (1964): 77–95.
———. The Symbiosis of Buddhism with Brahmanism/Hinduism in South Asia and 
of Buddhism with ‘Local Cults’ in Tibet and the Himalayan Region. Wien: Verlag 
der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2008.
Shorto, Harry L. A Mon-Khmer Comparative Dictionary. Canberra: Pacific 
Linguistics, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, The Australian 
National University, 2006.
Sidwell, Paul. “Austroasiatic Classification”. In The Handbook of Austroasiatic 
Languages, Vol. 1, edited by Paul Sidwell and Mathias Jenny. Leiden/Boston: 
Brill, 2015.
Southworth, Franklin C. Linguistic Archaeology of South Asia. London and New 
York: Routledge Curzon, 2005.
Spagnoli, Maria-Luisa. “Le nozze del serpente”. Rivista degli Studi Orientali 75, 
nos. 1–4 (2002): 189–204.
Stephen, Michele. “Returning to Original Form: A Central Dynamic in Balinese 
Ritual”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 158 (2002): 61–94.
Sullivan, Bruce M. “Tantroid Phenomena in Early Indic Literature: An Essay in 
Honor of Jim Sanford”. Pacific World, Journal of the Institute of Buddhist 
Studies, Third Series, no. 8 (Fall 2006): 9–20.
Tucci, Giuseppe. Tibetan Painted Scrolls. Roma: La Libreria dello Stato, 1949.
Turner, Ralph L. A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages. London: 
Oxford University Press, 1966.
Urban, Hugh B. “The Extreme Orient: The Construction of ‘Tantrism’ as a Category 
in the Orientalist Imagination”. Religion 29 (1999): 123–46.
———. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics, and Power in the Study of Religion. Oakland: 
University of California Press, 2003.
———. “The Womb of Tantra: Goddesses, Tribals, and Kings in Assam”. Journal 
of Hindu Studies 4 (2011): 231–47.
Vaidya, P.L. Mahāyānasūtrasaṁgraha Part II. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute of 
Post-Graduate Studies and Research in Sanskrit Learning, 1964. [Reprint of 
T. Gaṇapati Śāstrī. The Âryamanjusrîmûlakalpa. Trivandrum: Government 
Press, 1920–25.]
Vajracharya, Gautamavajra. “The Adaptation of Monsoonal Culture by Ṛgvedic 
Aryans: A Further Study of the Frog Hymn”. Electronic Journal of Vedic 
Studies 3, no. 2 (1997). Available at <http://www.ejvs.laurasianacademy.com/
ejvs0302/ejvs0302.txt>.
Verardi, Giovanni. Hardships and Downfall of Buddhism in India. Delhi: Manohar 
Publishers, 2011.
Vickers, Adrian. “The Old Javanese Kapiparwa and a Recent Balinese Painting”. 
In From Laṅkā Eastwards, edited by Andrea Acri, Helen Creese and Arlo 
Griffiths. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2011.

--- PAGE 155 ---
144	
Andrea Acri
Weber, Max. The Religion of India. New York: The Free Press, 1967. 
Wedemeyer, C. Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology, and 
Transgression in the Indian Traditions. New York: Columbia University Press, 
2013.
Wessing, Robert and Roy Jordaan. “Death at the Building-Site: Construction 
Sacrifice in Southeast Asia”. History of Religions 37, no. 2 (1997): 101–21. 
White, David G. The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India. 
Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1996.
———. “Introduction: Tantra in Practice: Mapping a Tradition”. In Tantra in 
Practice, edited by David G. White. Princeton/Oxford: Princeton University 
Press, 2000.
———. Kiss of the Yoginī: ‘Tantric Sex’ in Its South Asian Contexts. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2003. 
———. “At the Mandala’s Dark Fringe: Possession and Protection in Tantric 
Bhairava Cults”. In Notes from a Maṇḍala: Essays in the History of Religions 
in Honor of Wendy Doniger, edited by Laurie L. Patton and David L. 
Haberman. Newark: University of Delaware Press, 2010.
———. Sinister Yogis: In the Eye of the Beholder. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2011. 
———. “Netra Tantra at the Crossroads of the Demonological Cosmopolis”. 
Journal of Hindu Studies 5 (2012): 145–71.
Winstedt, Richard. The Malay Magician: Being Shaman, Shaiva and Sufi (Revised 
and Enlarged with a Malay Appendix). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
1961.
Witzel, Michael E.J. “Ṛgvedisch udumbalá-”. Indo-Iranian Journal 25 (1983): 
239–40.
———. “Aryan and Non-Aryan Names in Vedic India: Data for the Linguistic 
Situation, c. 1900–500 B.C.”. In Aryans and Non-Aryans: Evidence, Interpretation 
and Ideology, edited by Johannes Bronkhorst and Madhav Deshpande. Columbia: 
South Asia Books, 1999a.
———. “The Pleiades and the Bears Viewed from Inside the Vedic Texts”. Electronic 
Journal of Vedic Studies 5, no. 2 (December 1999b). Available at <http://www.
ejvs.laurasianacademy.com/ejvs0502/ejvs0502.txt>.
———. The Origins of the World’s Mythologies. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2012.
Wolters, Oliver W. History, Culture, and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives. 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies [1982], 1999.
Zeiler, Xenia. “Dark Shades of Power: The Crow in Hindu and Tantric Religious 
Traditions”. Religions of South Asia 7 (2013): 212–29.
Zoetmulder, Petrus J. Old Javanese-English Dictionary. Two vols. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1982.

--- PAGE 156 ---
145
4
Can We Reconstruct a 
“Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?
Alexandra Landmann
This chapter suggests the reconstruction of a hypothesized ethno- 
linguistic “Malayo-Javanic cultural and law area”, and pinpoints lines 
of evidence to delineate the boundaries of such an area. On the basis 
of secondary literature, and previous fieldwork on indigenous and 
traditional legal systems (adat, pikukuh karuhun, dresta) in Bali, Banten 
and Central Kalimantan, it uses historical anthropology and a triangulation 
of linguistic, archaeological and biological evidence (Sapir 1916) to 
reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic law area”.
The chapter first outlines a polythetic approach to a Western Malayo-
Polynesian (WMP) cultural complex. Second, it sketches my idea of a 
multi-layered model of the settlement process of Sunda and Sahul and 
the later Austronesian expansion, as well as a Western Malayo-Polynesian 
language node. It outlines the idea of a “Malayo-Javanic cultural area” 
and adat as a form of social control and of a “Malayo-Javanic law 
area”. It presents an integrated hypothesis on religion as the source of 
a possible scenario supporting the cultural advantage of the WMP. The

--- PAGE 157 ---
146	
Alexandra Landmann
model of adat is thus a contemporary trajectory of the “Western Malayo-
Polynesian civilization”. 
1.  A Polythetic Approach to a Western Malayo- 
Polynesian Cultural Complex
The term Austronesian has supplanted an older adjective Malayo-
Polynesian, to identify a language phylum spoken by handsome,  
brown-skinned people across a vast expanse of the Pacific, from  
Eastern Island to Indonesia, and westward to an outlier in Madagascar. 
Relatively small cultural differences are recognized by subdivision  
into areas called Polynesia, Micronesia, Indonesia, Melanesia and 
Madagascar […].
Doran Jr. (1981, pp. 8, emphasis in original)
Today, Austronesian studies is a well-established academic field. A variety 
of disciplines, such as archaeology, linguistics, genetics, anthropology, 
palaeobotany, ethnomusicology, art and zoogeography, contribute 
new perspectives to an enhanced understanding of the Austronesian 
languages speaking world. The Austronesian language phylum covers a 
vast geographical area halfway the globe from Madagascar in the west 
to the Eastern Island in the east, from Taiwan and Hawaii in the north 
and to New Zealand in the south. According to linguist Robert Blust 
(1977 in Adelaar 2005b, p. 9), nine of the ten primary subgroups of 
Austronesian languages are attested only on Taiwan. The tenth subgroup, 
Malayo-Polynesian (henceforth MP, on the origin of the term see 
Ross 1996) comprises all of the 1,200 Austronesian languages spoken 
outside Taiwan. In the history of Austronesian Studies, the term MP 
has physical, linguistic, sociocultural and geographic connotations. I use 
the term MP here to refer to 
1)	 the linguistic subgroup branching from the Austronesian language 
tree—that is the 1,200 languages spoken from Madagascar to 
Hawaii, minus the languages spoken in Taiwan (see Himmelmann 
2005, pp. 110–11), and 
2)	 the geographic area in which MP languages are spoken.

--- PAGE 158 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
147
MP languages are divided into Western Malayo-Polynesian (henceforth 
WMP) and Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian (henceforth CEMP; see 
Blust 1977 in Nothofer 1991, p. 388; Adelaar 2005b; Lynch 2002, p. 4). 
WMP is spoken in the Philippines, Malaysia and most of Indonesia 
as well as in Madagascar; one group of languages (Chamic) is spoken 
in Cambodia, Vietnam and China, and there are two Pacific outlier 
languages. CEMP is spoken in eastern Indonesia and in the archipelagos 
of Micronesia, Melanesia and Polynesia as well as in some areas of 
New Guinea. CEMP is further divided in South Halmahera-West New 
Guinea and Oceanic. Adelaar (2005b, p. 9) notes: “The classification 
of Austronesian languages proposed by Blust (1977 and later) is not 
without its problems […]. Nevertheless, it is the one that is referred to 
most frequently in recent literature […]”. This classification served as 
a point of reference in Adelaar and Himmelmann (2005b) as well as in 
Lynch (2002).
The population history of the Indo-Pacific region shows that highly-
mobile, small sailing communities, as well as climate change ~6–60 ka 
BC shaped circulatory dynamics and plurality as an intrinsic feature of 
the geographic area where Austronesian languages are spoken today. 
Peter Bellwood (in Bellwood, Fox and Tryon 2006, p. 4, emphasis in 
original) observed:
[...] in order to approach questions of Austronesian history and common 
ancestry [...] we need to keep separate [...], biology, language and  
culture [...]. Languages, populations and cultures evolve, diversify and 
mix through different, albeit conceptually overlapping, mechanisms. 
When considering something on the whole Austronesian scale it would 
be naïve to assume that linguistic, cultural and biological entities and 
their boundaries must correlate precisely, or will ever have done so in 
any absolute way, although relatively high degrees of coordination and 
correlation, despite variations, are an essential part of the concept of a 
phylogenetic unit.
Even if physical, sociocultural, and linguistic diversity appears to be 
salient throughout the Austronesian world, we can identify traits common 
to a “cultural complex” (Sapir 1916, p. 15), “cultural genus” (Sahlins 1958, 
p. ix in Kirch and Green 2001, p. 16), “cultural area” (Josselin de

--- PAGE 159 ---
148	
Alexandra Landmann
Jong 1977, p. 167) or “cultural region” (Kirch and Green 2001, p. 6), 
and advance hypotheses as to where its distinctive boundaries—
albeit overlapping and intersecting—are to be drawn. For example, 
the area inhabited by speakers of the Oceanic languages is divided 
into three “cultural areas”: Melanesia in the west, Micronesia in 
the north, and Polynesia in the south (Lynch, Ross and Crowley 
2002; Kirch and Green 2001). In these areas, the linguistic and 
archaeological accounts are commonly accepted and there is much 
less controversy than with respect to the classifications developed for 
Island Southeast Asia (henceforth ISEA), “Indonesia” (Doran 1981, 
p. 8), or the area in which “Western Austronesian languages” are 
spoken (Himmelmann 2005, p. 111).
Edward Sapir (1916, p. 15) promoted the idea of a “cultural complex”, 
not “the whole of a culture” but a “definite nucleus of associated 
traits” (ibid., p. 30) that are able to travel, “to ‘diffuse’ together from 
society to society, without requiring the people adopting them to 
abandon all their old ways (their former ‘culture’) in favor of these 
new ones” (Terrell 2008, p. 76). By 1935, the Dutch anthropologist 
Josselin de Jong (1977, pp. 167–68) had identified the Indonesian 
Archipelago as a field of comparative ethnographic study of Indonesian 
societies and recognized a “cultural type/area”1 and a “structural core” 
among the populations in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands (see 
also Bellwood, Fox and Tryon 2006, and Dentan, this volume). In 
his attempt to investigate the genealo­gies/trajectories of culture, the 
characterization of cultural genera and the delimitation of cultural 
areas, he (ibid., pp. 167–68) advanced the view that the cultures of 
the people inhabiting the Indonesian Archipelago appeared to be 
“sufficiently homogenous, to form a separate object of ethnological 
study, which at the same time apparently reveals sufficient local shades 
of differences to make internal comparative research worthwhile”. 
Marshall Sahlins in his classic comparative analysis of Polynesian 
1	 On the Kulturkreislehre, see Dentan, Blench this volume. On “Austronesians as a 
Phylogenetic Unit”, see Bellwood, Fox and Tryon 2006, pp. 1–4; on Polynesians, see 
Kirch and Green 2001, on Polynesia, Melanesia, and Micronesia see Lynch, Ross and 
Crowley 2002.

--- PAGE 160 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
149
cultures, made use of a biological metaphor when he wrote that “the 
Polynesian cultures derive from a single source; they are members of 
a single cultural genus that has filled in and adapted to a variety of 
local habitats” (Kirch and Green 2001, p. 16, referring to Sahlins 1958, 
p. ix). 
A “Western Malayo-Polynesian cultural genus” or a “WMP cultural 
complex” should have a definite nucleus of associated traits that has 
filled in and adapted to a variety of localities. Apparently, such a WMP 
cultural complex has progressively grown out of a pre-Austronesian 
offshore and/or Asian “substratum” (see Nothofer 1991; Anderson 2005), 
succeeding convergence and cultural contact with WMP speakers, and 
later experiencing distinctive processes of Indicization that diversified 
into a pre- and post-Islamic “Javanosphere” and “Malayosphere”. While 
we can detect a strong Javanese or Malayic impact with relation to 
political organization and religious institutionalization, we do not know 
much about where prehistoric and pre-Islamic internal boundaries of 
smaller areas might be drawn and to which extent cultural traits overlap 
or diverge. 
David L. Clarke (1968, p. 357) already mentioned the difficulties 
in comprehending the pre-Austronesian Hoabinhian phenomenon as 
either a culture, tradition, or industry; he defined the Hoabinhian 
techno-complex as “[a] group of cultures characterized by assemblages 
sharing a polythetic range but differing specific types of the same 
general families of artifact-types […]” (ibid.). Spriggs (2012, p. 115) 
proposes a polythetic model for understanding the Neolithic in ISEA: 
There is an increasing recognition of the complexity of Neolithic  
spread in ISEA, and a complex situation requires complex models.  
There is a need to get away from earlier conceptions of a simple  
monolithic and monothetic (to use David Clarke’s 1968 term) Neolithic 
“package” where all artefact types are expected to occur at all sites.  
We should in fact expect a distinctively polythetic (Clarke’s term  
again) set of artefacts and practices, as a colonizing group moves  
through varied environments with changing resources, and encounters 
a variety of in situ or indigenous cultures with their own effective local 
adaptations.

--- PAGE 161 ---
150	
Alexandra Landmann
I think it is useful to apply the polythetic approach also called a 
“family resemblance approach” (see Wittgenstein 2009) to Austronesian 
studies in order to capture the main features of the controversial WMP 
cultural complex: shared ancestry on the one hand, and culture- and 
region-specific diversifications induced by convergence and cultural 
contact on the other. The approach provides a middle path between 
essentialist and functionalist approaches to definition. In the 
anthropological theory of religion as a cultural system, we find essentialist 
and functional definitions of religions that are either monothetic 
or polythetic. Those terms derive from Greek for either one, alone 
(mono-) or many, much (poly-) that are “capable of placing”, as in 
one-placement and many-placements. Monothetic definitions presume 
a single characteristic or limited set of necessary characteristics or 
purposes, whereas polythetic definitions identify a range of traits or 
functions, none of which is sufficient in order for the object to qualify 
as a member of a class, but a certain combination or cluster of traits 
is necessary to identify membership (Landmann 2013). Wittgenstein 
(2009, p. 36) coined the term “family resemblances” to denote that 
“complicated net-work of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing: 
similarities in the large and in the small” of a delimited series of 
characteristics or cluster of similar traits. 
When applied to Austronesian studies, a polythetically defined 
cultural complex, or cultural genus and its aspects of shared ancestry, 
does not necessarily imply a single homeland or prototypical genus, a 
completely shared set of cultural traits, or a necessary correspondence 
between genetics, language, and “tangible and intangible culture” 
(Manguin 2011). Members of the family overlap to varying degrees and 
in differing respects, despite their best efforts to portray themselves as 
authoritative, no family member constitutes the definitive instance of 
the group—rather, all members share in the identity to varying degrees. 
Moreover, group membership is never a matter of yes or no (as in 
the essentialist approach) but always a matter of degree and affinitiesa 
matter of “more or less” (Landmann 2013, p. 11, see Doran 1981, 
pp. 86–87 for an approach to map the complexity of traits for wangka, 
and Mahdi this volume). In brief, members of a family do not share an

--- PAGE 162 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
151
“essence”, i.e. deﬁning characteristic marks (Merkmale); but they share 
a “specifiable nature” (see Wittgenstein 2009, p. 250, Editor’s Notes to 
Philosophical Investigations). 
This chapter identifies preliminary evidence of trajectories/genealogies 
and family resemblances or a “specifiable nature” among the WMP 
speaking peoples found by archaeological research, linguistics, and 
genetics by applying ethno-historical methodology (Sapir 1916). WMP-
speaking peoples avoid monothetic definitions, comparable to various 
religious cultures found on the Indian subcontinent and in Indonesia that 
today we label “Hinduism”, whose genealogies refuse to be integrated 
into a monothetic definition. With regard to Hinduism, Doniger (2009, 
p. 25, emphasis in original) remarked that one “objection to regarding 
Hinduism as a monolithic entity is that it is hard to spell out what 
‘they [the Hindus] all’ believe and do […]”. She (ibid., p. 28) points to 
scholars who have attempted “to identify a cluster of qualities each of 
which is important to Hinduism; not every Hindu will believe in, or do, 
all of them, but each Hindu will adhere to some combination of them, 
as a non-Hindu would not”. After having enlisted a few of those traits, 
she (ibid., pp. 28–29) continues that:
[t]his polytethic approach, which owes much to the concept of family 
resemblances laid out by the philosopher Wittgenstein, could be 
represented by a Venn diagram, a chart made of intersecting circles. It 
might be grouped into sectors of different colors […]. But since there is 
no central quality that all Hindus must have, the emptiness of the center 
[…] suggests that the figure might better named a Zen diagram […] that 
has no central ring. […] The configuration of the clusters of Hinduism’s 
defining characteristics changes through time, through space and through 
each individual.
We might produce an analogous Venn diagram of an Austronesian, 
respectively a Malayo-Polynesian cultural complex that portrays a 
cluster of traits. This diagram, however, would have to be graphically 
represented for the Indo-Pacific region as a whole, where Malayo-
Polynesian languages are spoken; this area would exclude Taiwan, but 
include the WMP geographic region and its linguistic outliers, as well 
as Polynesia, Micronesia, and Melanesia. Some traits that appear in

--- PAGE 163 ---
152	
Alexandra Landmann
the Proto-MP language community and seem therefore to make out the 
qualities of an ancient WMP cultural complex: 
1)	
ancestor-oriented kin groups or descent groups (Blust 1980, in 
Blust 1993, p. 24); 
2)	
the pervasive use of botanical metaphors to express the concept 
of growth from an ori­gin (Fox et al. 1995; Fox 1980, in Lansing 
et al. 2011, p. 263); 
3)	
matrilocality, and status and autonomy for women (Jordan 
2009);
4)	
founder-focused ideology relating to both genitor and genetrix 
lines of descent (Bellwood in Lansing et al. 2011, p. 263); 
5)	
apical demotion of these lines of descent, with an emphasis on 
elder/younger relation­ships (Fox et al. 1995, in Lansing et al. 
2011, p. 263); 
6)	
the spatial and social ordering of space along fundamental 
two- and (later) four-axis sys­tems as orientation systems in 
space (Fox 2006b, p. 5; Blust 1993, pp. 23–24), and social 
relations framed in terms of inner and outer; (Fox 2006b, p. 8) 
“Topogenies take a great variety of forms among Austronesian 
populations. They may recount the journey of an ancestor, the 
migration of a group, or the trans­mission of an object’’;
7)	
a rule of matrilateral cross-cousin marriage, or asymmetric 
alliance (Blust 1993, pp. 23–24); 
8)	
marked localization in material culture, or small-scale societies 
and local economies that tend to be characterized by a 
development of specialized craft communities/exchange systems 
(Bellina-Price this volume); 
9)	
canoe-complex (use of outriggers on canoes, sailing technology, 
terms for marine life) (Doran 1981); 
10)	 tattooing; 
11)	 weaving; 
12)	 headhunting/feuding, or avoidance mechanisms to reduce such 
practices (Landmann and Fathurrokman 2013); 
13)	 religious tropes: religious activities focussed on shamanism, 
ancestor veneration, earth and mountains, stone sanctuaries, blood

--- PAGE 164 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
153
sacrifice, and the acquisition of supernatural power (Dentan, 
Acri, this volume).
Robert Blust’s pioneering work (2013, 2010, 1991, 1993, 1981) and 
Blust’s Online Austronesian Comparative Dictionary provide clues on 
where ethno-linguistic traits should be regarded as a) convergence, 
or independent invention, b) diffusion (historical contact, with 
borrowing), or c) common inheritance (linear transmission from a 
common cultural antecedent) (see Blust’s 1981 typology of culture 
trait distribution). Processes of establishment in new habitats and 
local recruitment of indigenous settlers shaped the Austronesian 
dispersal; as a consequence, tangible and intangible culture moved 
from space to space or media to media answering local challenges and 
demands promoting retentions, adaptations, elaborations of intrusive 
patterns, and producing innovations, borrowing or convergences with 
pre-existent local mechanisms (see Blust 1981; Kirch and Green 2001). 
Due to the geographic extent of the region, the mix of indigenous, 
intrusive, and innovative elements of tangible and intangible culture 
would be subject to frequent and manifold changes according to the 
new local human and environmental situations encountered by the 
settlers. In the context of Austronesian tangible culture, Spriggs (2012, 
p. 115) observes: 
Mobile maritime based Neolithic groups could have re-adopted dropped 
elements of any cultural package as they leapfrogged across the region 
[...]. Any putative design system could move on and off various media, 
perhaps on house posts or cloth here, on pottery there, or in rock art. Only 
some of these media can be expected to survive, giving a palimpsest of 
perhaps more widespread patterns.
2.  Population Processes of the Sunda Shelf: “All I Know  
is that I Know Nothing”
This part will discuss theories on the population process of the 
Sunda shelf to substantiate the necessitry of a polythetic approach to 
Austtronesian studies. Who did actually carry traits of the here posited 
WMP cultural complex? According to Mahdi (this volume), the first

--- PAGE 165 ---
154	
Alexandra Landmann
inhabitants of Sunda and Sahul were Australoids without necessarily 
constituting an assumed or actual biogenetic unity. Mahdi divides 
them on a geographical basis into Negritos when located to the west 
of Halmahera, New Guinea and Timor; Papuans, when located on the 
islands or further east; and Australian Aborigines. Moreover, Austronesian-
speaking populations indicate that their dispersal involved populations 
of two distinct phenotypes, 1) the dispersal of Qata or Australoids of a 
dark skin complexion that 2) was followed by migration of Tau with a 
lighter skin complexion. 
Presumably the western part of Indonesia would have been inhabited 
during the Pleistocene by Australoid hunters, fishers and foragers that 
coexisted and mixed with incoming Asian hunters, fishers and foragers 
at the Pleistocene-Holocene junction. During the mid-Holocene coastal 
environments stabilized and small groups of Austronesian-speaking 
fishers, swidden farmers and foragers appeared in the region. As all these 
groups were in contact and exchange, they would have 1) developed a 
complex genetic picture by intermarriage, 2) adopted WMP languages, 
probably due to a cultural advantage of Austronesian languages 
speakers, and 3) developed permanent agricultural systems and 
residence pattern around the first centuries during the Common Era. 
In the following, I summarize Allen and O’Connell’s (2008, 2012) 
model for the colonization of Sunda, Wallacea, the Bismarcks, and Sahul, 
as it aptly exemplifies the processes for how and why the region has 
been settled by human groups of different phenotypes (Qata and Tau, 
Mahdi this volume) before and during “some level of emigration from 
Taiwan into ISEA” (Bulbeck 2008, p. 32). ISEA was inhabited by 
modern humans ~ 38–68 ka BC (Hill et al. 2007) who migrated eastwards 
between ~ 43–48 ka BC—the impulse for movement may have come 
from the build-up of human populations on the Asian mainland (Allen 
and O’Connell 2008, 2012). During the Pleistocene, the islands on the 
Sunda shelf, such as Sumatra, Java, Bali, Borneo and many smaller 
islands, were directly united through dry land with Mainland Southeast 
Asia (henceforth MSEA), forming a continent dubbed Sundaland. The 
region was therefore split between the continent of Sunda, offshore 
Palawan, Wallacea, which included the islands east of Wallace’s line 
and the Bismarck’s (see Solheim 1972, p. 36; O’Connor 2007; and Allen

--- PAGE 166 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
155
and O’Connell 2008 for maps) and the giant continent Sahul, which 
comprised Australia and Papua New Guinea.2 
Allen and O’Connell (2012, p. 7) suggest that population growth 
in Sunda and Sahul was in general “disrupted by the frequent, high 
amplitude climate changes characteristic of Marine Isotope Stage 3 
(MIS-3, 28–59 ka BP)’’, and that ‘‘[s]hallow tidal ﬂats and estuaries of 
the sort that supported large human populations in late Holocene times 
were high-ranked when present, but rare and short-lived throughout most 
of MIS-3 due to the frequency and amplitude of sea-level change and 
the time required for productive habitats to be re-established” (ibid., 
p. 8). The overall climatic conditions facilitated in­frequent, short-term 
occupation by small, highly mo­bile human groups of Qata (Australoid 
phenotype) and progressively Tau (Asian phenotype) foragers and 
seafarers (ibid., pp. 8, 11) who practised economies based on the 
exploitation of intermediate- and high-ranked plant and animal foods in 
coastal areas and estuaries (O’Connor 2006, 2007; Allen and O’Connell 
2008, 2012). Thus, the late Pleistocene migrations into Sahul might be 
interpreted as the product of climatic instability, when modern humans 
crossed Wallacea as a consequence of specialized foraging behaviour 
2	 During the mid-Pleistocene glaciations, accumulation of water in glaciers and ice 
caps produced sea levels approximately 160 m lower than at present, and during 
the late-Pleistocene (~ 16–18 ka BC) about 120 m lower than at present (Smith 
2000, p. 275). Three major floods ~ 14 ka BC, ~ 11 ka BC (Pleistocene–Holocene 
junction), and ~ 8 ka BC triggered a significant rise in sea levels up to their 
current levels (Soares et al., p. 2011). This sea level rise separated continental 
Asia and Sundaland and contemporary western ISEA appeared. Sulawesi was 
apparently never connected by dry land to Sundaland and MSEA (Smith 2000, 
p. 275). The degree by which the Philippine islands were connected to Sundaland 
and MSEA/Asia had been influenced by the changes in the sea levels that continue 
to affect the islands on the Sunda shelf. The islands of the Palawan island chain 
were united into a larger island (Greater Palawan) that connected to MSEA through 
Borneo in the mid-Pleistocene, but not during the late-Pleistocene (ibid., p. 275). 
The Philippine oceanic islands were never connected to MSEA, but formed larger 
units or mega islands of Greater Luzon, Greater Mindanao, and Greater Negros-
Panay (ibid., p. 275). Whether Greater-Luzon and Greater Mindanao joined in 
the mid-Pleistocene is uncertain (ibid., pp. 275–76). The Palawan chain between 
Borneo and Mindoro and the Sulu Archipelago between Borneo and Mindanao may 
have served as “stepping stones” (ibid., p. 275) between Borneo and the oceanic 
islands of the Philippines.

--- PAGE 167 ---
156	
Alexandra Landmann
using watercraft of sufficient size or number to transport founding 
populations of a minimum of a hundred individuals which would select 
the most suitable natural habitats at coastal and estuarine regions. Parts 
of Sunda had poor vegetation a low-ranked plant and animal foods. The 
very early faunal and animal transport from New Guinea was necessary 
to make these regions more fertile. 
As suggested by archaeological evidence (see Bulbeck 2008 for an 
overview), the ensuing drowning of Sunda and Sahul at the Pleistocene–
Holocene junction ~ 11 ka BC led to the emergence of new social, 
economic, technological, and demographic patterns for translocation of 
people, animals, gems, exotic materials and plants. When sea levels rose 
after the Last Glaciations Maximum between ~ 6–12 ka BC, the Sunda 
shelf was ﬂooded, which caused migrations and the development of 
maritime ex­change between populations on the remnant Sundaland 
Islands (especially Borneo and Palawan) and populations in Wallacea. 
Specific Haplogroups associated exclusively with Austronesian speakers 
begin to diversify following the first flood ~ 14 ka BC, but virtually 
starburst with onset of the second and third flood ~ 11 ka BC and 
~ 8 ka BC, especially after the stabilization of coastal environments 
~ 6 ka BC. After the stabilization of coastal environments, the speakers 
of a language, today termed Austronesian, made their appearance in the 
South China Sea and the Pacific. 
Various origin-dispersal models have been proposed to explain 
the expansion of an Austronesian complex from an assumed Asian or 
offshore homeland giving rise to the Austronesian Diaspora. Multi-linear 
models suggest an offshore ISEA maritime homeland (Solheim 1984–85; 
Meacham 1984–85; Oppenheimer 1998, 2006), whereas one uni-linear 
models proposes South China as homeland and subsequent migration 
to Taiwan and then “out of Taiwan” into the Indo-Pacific (Bellwood 
1997, 2004, 2006; Grey 2009). Lansing et al. (2011, p. 263) pointedly 
observe: “Despite decades of debate there is as yet no consensus on 
either the geographic ori­gins of the Austronesian expansion, or the 
social mechanisms that led to the adoption of Aus­tronesian language 
and cultural traits by so many societies across the Paciﬁc”. An increasing 
consensus, however, consolidates to give up the idea of the more 
recent uni-directional dispersal of Austronesian speaking farmers from a

--- PAGE 168 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
157
clearly identified homeland in South China/Taiwan re­placing indigenous 
Pap­uan foragers and hunters (on two short discussions, see Bulbeck 
2008, pp. 31–32; Oppenheimer 2006; also Blench 2012). It seems, 
however, that the discussion has not yet yielded a satisfying and 
uncontroversial common understanding. In the following I summarize 
the two models.
Based on linguistic and archaeological data (Blust 1987; Bellwood 
1997, 2004, 2006), the “Austronesian hypothesis”, the “Out of Taiwan” 
event or the “Express Train from Taiwan to Polynesia” (Oppenheimer 
2006, p. 65) pictures the prehistory of ISEA in a two-layered model 
of two population dispersals: the initial colonization of Sundaland and 
Sahul by Australoid foragers and hunters ~ 45–48 ka BC and a much 
later expansion of Asian Austronesian-speaking farmers from Taiwan ~ 
2–4 ka BC. The expansion or migration of those farmers was propelled 
by “rizicul­ture” (Bulbeck 2008, p. 38) and demographic growth. During 
their migration from Southern China to Taiwan ~ 5 ka BC, they carried 
a marked Neolithic assemblage including pigs, dogs, chickens, rice, 
red slipped pottery, stone adzes, and distinctive types of jewellery. 
After a considerable delay in Taiwan, which gave rise to lan­guage-
diversification of Formosan languages spoken in Taiwan and the 
Malayo-Polynesian languages, some groups left Taiwan ~ 2.5–4 ka 
BC, developed elaborate watercraft skills and pulsed into ISEA via the 
Lu­zon Strait to the Philippines, Borneo, and Sulawesi, and to Island 
Melanesia, and Near and Remote Oceania. These Malayo-Polynesian 
sailors eventually replaced the earlier Papuan foragers-hunters and 
their languages. The tangible media of their arrival in Island Melanesia 
is the Lapita culture. Its pottery first appeared on the coasts of the 
Bismarck Archipelago ~ 3.1–3.3 ka BC (Soares et al. 2011) and 
then spread across the Pacific islands into Remote Oceania. Around 
1.5–2 ka BC, some groups hived off from ISEA and sailed to the East 
African coast colonizing Madagascar. 
The uni-directional model outlined above appears to be mainly 
accepted for the Oceanic language node, and the fast and rapid settlement 
process of the many—mostly uninhabited—islands scattered throughout 
the Pacific. But the “Out of Taiwan” model faces serious chal­lenges 
with regard to 1) the inclusion of climatic instability; 2) the settlement

--- PAGE 169 ---
158	
Alexandra Landmann
of the Western part of ISEA, most notably the Philippines, Borneo, 
Sulawesi, Java, and Sumatra; 3) models of long-lasting coexistence 
and cultural contact; 4) social mechanisms that led to the adoption of 
Austronesian languages; and 5) subsistence strategies. Likewise, it is 
still open to question 1) where did the people speaking Austronesian 
languages originate—in South China or in maritime offshore ISEA? 
2) How did the history of populating the enormous region in which 
we encounter the contemporary speakers of Austronesian proceed? 
And 3) whether Austronesian language speakers ever shared a common 
cultural complex or a set of shared tangible and intangible culture apart 
from their language. In my view, the two-layer settlement model does 
not capture the complexity of demographic history of the Sundaland 
region, as genetics and recent archaeological evidence strengthen 
heteroge­neity, contact and convergence rather than an abrupt transition 
in the region. 
Various multi-linear models (Solheim 1984–85; Solheim, Bulbeck, 
and Flavel 2006; Oppenheimer 1998, 2006) argue for an offshore ISEA 
maritime homeland and support a maritime theory on Austronesian 
origins (see also Doran 1981, pp. 86–87, Fig 50 who identifies eight 
to ten of the total twelve Austronesian boat traits in an area centred 
on Sulawesi). Solheim (1984–85) named the Austronesian speaking 
sailors who expanded from their homeland that connected central 
Vietnam, northern Borneo, Palawan and Luzon across the South China Sea 
the “Nusantao”. Oppenheimer (1998) argued rightly that the drowning 
of Sundaland at the Pleistocene–Holocene junction triggered the 
maritime expansion of the early Austronesians. This thesis of migrations 
related to late Quaternary sea level rises has been given strong support 
from the genetic analyses by Hill et al. (2007) and Soares et al. (2011). 
Trying to consolidate the debates on the Austronesian homeland, 
Blanchard et al. (ibid., p. 24) argue that a root for Proto-AN in ISEA 
would integrate archaeological evidence that places ISEA at the centre 
and Tai­wan at the periphery of population dispersals experiencing only 
sporadic mainland inﬂuence during the Pleistocene–Holocene junction. 
During the Holocene, the languages most likely emerged within ISEA. 
This model would imply an early offshoot to Taiwan and “subsequent 
levelling of language diversity across the Malayo-Polynesian area as a

--- PAGE 170 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
159
result of the formation of extensive socio-economic networks” (ibid., 
p. 24)—that might have transported a religious system.
Additionally, evidence exists for recent smaller mid-Holocene 
dispersal from Taiwan to ISEA, but not to Near Oceania or Remote 
Oceania. While Soares et al.’s (2011, pp. 244–45) findings dismiss 
any substantial maternal ancestry in Taiwan for Polynesians, they 
do not preclude an Austronesian linguistic dispersal from Taiwan to 
Oceania ~ 3–4 ka BC, mediated by social networks rather than directly 
by people of Taiwanese ancestry but perhaps involving small numbers 
of migrants at various times. The mtDNA patterns point to the possibility 
of a staged series of dispersals of small numbers of Austronesian 
speakers, each followed by a period of extensive acculturation and 
language shift.
It seems therefore reasonable to assume that spheres of social 
interactions and circulation of values, ideas, peo­ple and goods between 
South China, MSEA, ISEA, Near Oceania and Australia existed 
throughout the end of the Pleistocene and during the course of the 
Holocene. Seasonal two-way sea journeys westward and eastward 
would have been facilitated by winds, currents, and island inter- 
visibility. The voyaging and/or settling groups were required to remain 
in contact with their origin or other offshoots in order to exchange 
spouses/mates and they would intermarry with the earlier settlers too. 
Linguistic reconstructions show that the terminology associated with 
the outrigger canoe complex can only be traced back to Proto-Malayo-
Polynesian and not Proto-Austronesian (see Lansing et al. 2011, p. 265, 
Mahdi this volume). 
Bulbeck (2008, p. 32) assumes that the further east the MP-speaking 
groups sailed, the more they abdandoned rice as staple and switched 
to root and tree crops. This switch from a rice-growing economy to 
vegeculture and arboriculture was propelled by climatic constraints 
and the natural habitats they encountered in eastern ISEA and Near 
Oceania. It seems that the settlement process of ISEA and Oceania was 
influenced by the ability of the MP groups “to combine exploitation 
of maritime environments with the planting of locally-adapted crops 
which could be productively harvested with minimal tending” (Bulbeck 
2008, p. 32). These groups may have learnt local production techniques

--- PAGE 171 ---
160	
Alexandra Landmann
from interaction with indigenous populations. One might therefore 
describe the MP expansion as opportunistic: initially, “fisher-foragers” 
(Bulbeck 2008) and, later, “raiders and traders” (Blench 2012, p. 127) 
dispersed on various routes forth and backward through the archipelago, 
perhaps trading prestigious trade goods for staples and tree products 
with local populations. Thus, these newcomers continuously reinvented 
themselves, and incorporated innovations into their cultural repertoire. 
Linguistic, genetic, archaeological evidence reveal models of 
coexistence and contact over a long period of time in Sundaland/
contemporary ISEA, mobile social interaction spheres, and the presence 
of pre-Austronesian agriculture in ISEA. Blench (2010) gives an 
interesting example how to imagine such cultural contacts. Based on 
striking elements in material culture and similarities in Aslian and 
Dayak, he suggests the existence of an Austro-Asiatic farming culture 
on Borneo and Palawan marked by taro and rice, shouldered adzes, 
paddle-impressed pottery and mouth-organs prior to the Austronesian 
expansion. The probable origin of this culture was present-day Vietnam. 
Eventually, Malayo-Polynesian settlers coexisted with them and 
adopted taro cultivation. A mixed Austroasiatic/Austronesian culture 
developed, which resulted in language shift. These populations reached 
peninsular Malaya and Sumatra with paddle-impressed pottery. Subsequent 
to this there is the Chamic (i.e. Austronesian) migration from SW 
Kalimantan or a similar Malayic region ~ 2.2 BC. 
Based on archaeo-botanical, archaeological and genetic evi­
dence, it seems therefore justified to assume 1) a pre-Austronesian 
agricultural tradition throughout ISEA and New Guinea; 2) a Neolithic 
westward migration of New Guinean root and tree crops into eastern 
ISEA and even further west, which is also attested in linguistics and 
genetics; 3) since many words associated with riziculture have been 
reconstructed for Proto-Aus­tronesian, early Austronesian speakers were 
most likely agricultural, and during the course of dispersal throughout 
ISEA, the ethno-linguistic groups speaking Malayo-Polynesian languages 
increasingly relied on maritime craft, op­portunistic foraging-hunting 
strategies and the incorporation of local subsistence strate­gies. Based 
on genetic, linguistic, and archaeological evidence (see Allen and 
O’Connell 2008, 2012; Hill et al. 2007; Bulbeck 2008; Spriggs 2012,

--- PAGE 172 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
161
Soares et al. 2011; Blench 2012), I assume a sphere of complex social 
interaction in the Sunda-Sahul region since the late Pleistocene and a 
four-phase Austronesian linguistic colonization model, adapted from 
Lansing et al. (2011, p. 263) and Mahdi (this volume):
1.	 the arrival and initial dispersals of mobile, but small groups 
of the ﬁrst modern humans, Australoid foragers and hunters 
in Sunda, Wallacea, the Bismarcks, and Sahul ~ 38–68 ka 
BC; these dipsersals where followed by Asian foragers and 
hunters ~ 23–52 ka (Allen and O’Connor 2012, p. 8; Hill et al. 
2007).
2.	 later multidirectional dispersals of mobile and small Qata/Tao/
mixed genotype groups searching for suitable habi­tats occurred 
throughout Sunda, Wallacea, the Bismarcks and North Sahul 
~ 8–35 ka BC:
a.	 small groups from MSEA and Eastern Asia continuously 
dispersed into Sunda, Walla­cea, and the Bismarcks ~ 3–23 ka 
BC (Hill et al. 2007; Soares et al. 2011);
b.	 MSEA farmers dispersed into Sunda when the climate and 
sea levels had stabilized af­ter the Late Glacial Maximum 
20 ka BC and established some degree of pre-Austronesian 
vegeculture (rice, taro). They mixed and/or coexisted with 
indigenous foragers and hunters—whenever existent—as 
farmers and foragers coexist today in Peninsular Malaysia, 
the Philippines, Sulawesi and Borneo.
c.	 Papuan or New Guinean inhabitants spread westwards as a 
westward transloca­tion of Melanesian vegetative crops and 
genes into ISEA occurred. Bananas, sago, greater yam, and 
sugarcane all underwent early domestication in the New 
Guinea re­gion. These cultivars, and the cultivation practices 
to them associated, spread into ISEA, where the plants and 
linguistic terms for them were adopted by PMP speak­ers 
upon their arrival ~ 4 ka BC. According to Anderson (2004, 
p. 37, cf. Soares 2011, p. 245; Hill 2007, p. 39; Hoogervorst, 
Mahdi this volume), “The vegetative cultivation of these 
plants evidently occurred within ISEA before any Taiwanese

--- PAGE 173 ---
162	
Alexandra Landmann
influences became signifi­cant and arguably contributed far 
more to a change in subsistence in the Neolithic pe­riod of 
the region than did the introduction of rice farming from the 
north or west”. However, “there was no linear dispersal from 
east to west” (ibid., p. 37);
3.	 an Austronesian linguistic expansion ~ 2–5 BC or a smaller level 
of genetic dispersals from Taiwan/Batanes across the region of 
Austronesian speakers throughout the early and mid-Holocene 
(Anderson 2005; Hill 2007; Bulbeck 2008; Blanchard 2011; 
Soares 2011), whereas Hill et al. (2007) propose the movement 
and expansion of indigenous, rather than introgressive mtDNA 
lineages dated to between 3–13 ka BC; Greenhill and Gray 
(2005) and Gray, Drummond, and Greenhill (2009) predict 
an origin of proto-Austronesian ~ 3.23 BC and of Malayo-
Polynesian ~ 1.8–2.5 ka BC because the phylogeny of Malayo-
Polynesian language node suggests very rapid geographic 
expansion, with four major expansion pulses and two pauses in 
Paciﬁc settlement.
4.	 during the historic era we find influences from southern Asia, 
Arabia and China and later from Europe. 
Having discussed the population process of the Western Indonesia, 
ISEA and the Indo-Pacific, as well as the Austronesian linguistic 
expansion, we will now turn to the question if we can find or reconstruct 
a cultural complex and a law family based on linguistic groupings for 
that region or a common legal culture in its areas. Therefore I will 
discuss the WMP language branch first. In this context, I highlight 
Spriggs’ (2012, p. 115) comment again, which I cited above: “Mobile 
maritime based Neolithic groups could have re-adopted dropped 
elements of any cultural package as they leapfrogged across the 
region [...]”—those above described dispersal and migration 
processes demonstrate that the polythetic model advocated here as an 
overlapping and criss-crossing set of affinities and corresponding traits 
or principles to define a particular group as member of the common 
cultural complex might be helpful to identify cultural traits and there 
boundaries.

--- PAGE 174 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
163
3. The Western Malayo-Polynesian Branch of  
Austronesian
Himmelmann (2005, p. 111) states that “no well-established term for 
the non-Oceanic Austronesian languages exists”. Apparently, the internal 
classifications and genetic affiliations of non-Oceanic Austronesian 
languages are problematic insofar as they contain isolates and nuclear 
members that do not seem to form further subgroups. Adelaar (2005b, 
pp. 14–24) discusses in detail the problems related to the clear-cut 
establishment of an internal classification and subdivision of the genetic 
classification of WMP languages node; 
In contrast to Malayo-Polynesian, WMP does not have a clear linguistic 
foundation. In the literature, this category is often referred to as if it were 
an established subgroup, but the linguistic criteria for it have not been 
formulated and tested properly, and the genetic affiliations of its putative 
members remain to be investigated.
Adelaar (2005b, p. 14)
WMP languages constitute a “convenient ‘catch-all’ category for all 
MP languages other than CEMP ones” (Blust in Adelaar 2005b, p. 14) 
and include the languages spoken on the Philippines and in western 
Indonesia (Sumatra, Java, parts of Borneo, Bali, Lombok, West 
Sumbawa and Sulawesi), the pacific outliers of Chamorro and Paluan, 
as well as Moken (sea nomads in Thailand and Myanmar) Sama Bajau 
(a nuclear language group ranging over the Philippines, Sabah and 
eastern Indonesia, spoken by sea nomads), Malagasy and Chamic. 
Adelaar (2005b, pp. 10–14) includes in his genetic categorization 
of WMP languages: 1) Philippine languages (including various language 
groups in North Sulawesi), 2) Chamorro (Pacific outlier), 3) Palauan 
(Pacific Outlier) in Micronesia, 4) Sama Bajau (sea nomads on the 
Philippines, Sabah, eastern Indonesia), 5) Malayo-Sumbawan (including 
Malayic, Acehnese, and Chamic, Sundanese, Madurese, Balinese, Sasak, 
Sumbawanese), 6) Javanese, 7) Moken-Moklen (Mergui archipelago, 
Myanmar, insular and coastal West Thailand), 8) North Bornean, 
9) Kayanic (central and eastern Borneo), 10) Land Dayak (western 
Borneo), 11) East-Barito (including Malagasy, southeastern Borneo 
and Madagascar), 12) Barito-Mahakam (East Borneo), 13) West-Barito

--- PAGE 175 ---
164	
Alexandra Landmann
(central and southern Borneo), 14) Lampung (South Sumatra), 15) Rejang 
(Southwest Sumatra), 16) Northwest Sumatra/Barrier Islands, 17) Tomini- 
Tolitoli (northwestern Sulawesi), 18) Kaili-Pamona (western Sulawesi), 
19) Saluan (eastern Sulawesi), 20) Bungku-Tolaki (southeastern 
Sulawesi), 21) Muno-Buton (southeastern Sulawesi), 22) Wolio-Wotu, 
(southeastern Sulawesi), 23) South Sulawesi (including Tamanic in 
Borneo). 
If we accept the language family grouping and its nodes for 
analytical purposes, then we must also be ready to accept the fact 
that ethnic groups speaking WMP languages share a “WMP cultural 
complex”, the family resemblances of this “WMP cultural complex” 
and to varying degrees physical and genetic features, tangible culture 
(such as pottery, axes, maritime technology, weaving, honey bees, 
etc.), and intangible culture (such as kinship and marriage patterns, a 
general precedence of origin, and descent groups, and therefore also a 
political and legal culture). This shared cultural complex may be 
derived from a common cultural ancestor, convergence, diffusion, 
borrowing, or local development (see Blust 1981; Kirch and Green 
2001, p. 16). Based on striking similarities in material culture, kinship 
systems, cosmogony, cosmology and ritual, a polythetically defined 
WMP cultural complex grew organically following the stabilization of 
coastal environments in 6,000 BP, the Malayo-Polynesian—linguistic 
expansion after 4,000 BP. These cultural complexes experienced to 
varying degrees pre-Islamic processes of Indicization, Javanization 
or Malayicization that make the reconstruction of the earlier cultural 
complex difficult.
I will focus here on the “Malayo-Sumbawan”3 language subgroup 
postulated by Adelaar (2005a and 2005b) that has a Madurese branch, 
3	 WMP refers here to that “catch-all” group of languages including the languages 
spoken in the Philippines and Sulawesi, but not the languages spoken in Taiwan or 
the Oceanic languages, while Malayo-Sumbawan denotes Adelaar’s (2005a, 2005b) 
linguistic subgroup. I borrow Nothofer’s (1985, p. 289) linguistic term Malayic-
Javanic to refer to a geographic area inhabited by speakers of Malayo-Sumbawan 
and Javanese which logically excludes the languages and ethnic groups in Taiwan 
and the Philippines (see Himmelmann 2005, p. 111).

--- PAGE 176 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
165
a Sundanese branch, and one branch comprising the Malayic-, Chamic-, 
and Bali-, Sasak-Sumbawa branches. The homeland of Malayic is 
believed to be in West Borneo, although Malay (at least in its literary 
and standard forms) most likely originated in South Sumatra (Adelaar 
2005b, p. 18). Tentatively, I include Javanese as well as, which Adelaar 
(2005a, 2005b; Blust 1981 in Nothofer 1985, p. 289) categorizes as an 
own linguistic group, but Bernd Nothofer (1985, pp. 289, 295, 299) 
includes Malay, Madurese, Javanese and Sundanese into Proto-Malayo-
Javanic. Javanese should have socio-culturally a lot in common with 
Malayo-Sumbawan. Adelaar (2005b, p. 20) attributes these common 
features to the linguistic and cultural influence from Java on Bali and 
Lombok, where the influence of Malay has been rather weak. The 
influence of Malayic has been strong on its homeland in Borneo, 
Sumatra, and contemporary Malaysia. Nothofer (1985, p. 290) attributes 
the similarities in words existing only in Malay and Sundanese to 
borrowings during intensive historical relations between Srivijaya and 
Sunda from the seventh century to the eleventh century and in the 
thirteenth century. “[…] Sundanese was influenced by Malay, but Malay 
borrowed little from Sundanese. Sundanese nevertheless borrowed a 
relatively small proportion from Malay compared with the material it 
borrowed from Javanese” (Nothofer 1985, p. 290). “Both Malay and 
Javanese have heavily influenced most other languages of western 
Indonesia, including languages such as Balinese, Sasak, Makasarese, 
Buginese or Batak and Ngaju-Dayak” (Nothofer 1985, p. 300). Malay 
would have most likely intervened between Sundanese and Bornean 
communities with which it was in closer contact (Nothofer 1985, 
p. 298 referring to Blust 1981, p. 464 in). If Malay and Javanese had 
a strong impact on other Malayo-Javanic languages, then it follows 
that cultural perception, and hence concepts of social control, have also 
been influenced. Acehnese and Chamic must be including into this group 
due to linguistic and cultural migration processes.
Concerning the clas­sification of WMP, Nothofer (1991, pp. 395–96, 
see Mahdi 1988 in Nothofer 1991, Mahdi this volume) proposes a 
two-stage migration of speakers into the region. In his view, the WMP 
region in Indonesia, the Philippines, Sulawesi, Borneo, Java-Bali-Lombok-
Sum­bawa, Sumatra and the Barrier Islands formed a rather homogenous

--- PAGE 177 ---
166	
Alexandra Landmann
linguistic area in which Pre- or Paleo-WMP languages were spoken. 
This region intricately reflects the region of the drowned Sundaland. At 
a later date, speakers of WMP languages intruded into this area, became 
culturally dominant in western Indone­sia, and largely replaced the 
languages of Pre-Western Malayo-Polynesian ori­gin. Thereby remnants 
of language communities were left over that scattered around the 
pe­riphery of the WMP region. Nothofer’s (1991, p. 396) “substratum 
thesis” assumes therefore two separate migrations into Western 
Austronesia both of which probably originated in the Philippines or 
Sulawesi. The languages of northern Sulawesi and the central and 
south­ern Philip­pines, together with those of north-west Sumatra and the 
Barrier Islands, north-west Borneo and central and southern Sulawesi 
would be Paleo-Malayo-Polynesian, while the Malayo-Chamic, Java-
Bali-Sasak and Barito groups are MP. Alternatively, Nothofer’s (1991, 
p. 396) “borrowing hypothesis” assumes that the Malayo-Javanic 
languages may have extensively influenced most of their surrounding 
languages around the first centu­ries AD. Either the Pre-WMP substratum 
thesis or the borrowing thesis indicate, in my view, that we are justified 
to assume the later discussed organically grown pre-Islamic and pre-
colonial “Malayo-Javanic culture and law area”. Hence, WMP languages 
indicate a two-way migration model and later cultural Indic impact. 
Undeniably, there has been an extensive Islamic impact too, but I will 
exclude and ignore this impact, as it is comparable recent, and my 
primary focus lies in precolonial and pre-Islamic social control systems 
of adats (on the plural use of adat, see Hooker 1978)—that by definition 
are not Islamic. 
I suggest that the here posited “Malayo-Javanic cultural and law 
area” emerged as a cultural complex among people of mixed genetic 
background inhabiting the region of the drowned Sundaland through 
convergence, diffusion and common inheritance perhaps around 2, 5 
ka BC when the languages of Pre-WMP origin were replaced by WMP 
languages. This cultural complex has been influenced by Indicization 
in the first centuries AD. Based on the geographic distribution of WMP, 
its time depth, and the dispersal area, family resemblances in perceptions 
of right and wrong within such a WMP cultural complex would therefore 
most likely be organically grown out of 1) an pre-Austronesian (Asian

--- PAGE 178 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
167
and Australoid? Or mixed?) lin­guistic and cultural sub­stratum that 
might account for deep homolo­gies and subsequent differentiation/
localization, 2) the advent of WMP speakers that became culturally 
dominant, that might account for a second layer of homologies and 
subsequent processes of differentiation/localization and 3) Indic impact on 
languages, the introduction of Indic scripts, concepts of kingship and 
state, and geographic directional methods. However, this hypothesis 
may only be verified or falsified by the qualitative and quantitative 
reconstruction of Pre- and Proto-WMP language and culture based 
methods of historical linguistics, lexical reconstruction, archaeological 
in-depth analyses, and historical anthropology. 
4.  Malayo-Javanic Cultural Area
Here I posit the existence of a ‘‘Malayo-Javanic cultural area of family 
resemblances’’ that is comparable to what Sapir (1916, p. 15) described 
as a cultural complex and Josselin de Jong (1977, pp. 167–68) 
as “cultural area”. As I focus on the geographic area inhabited by 
speakers of the Malayo-Sumbawan and the Javanese subgroups 
(Adelaar 2005a, 2005b; Nothofer 1985), I exclude tangible and 
intangible culture from Taiwan, the Philippines and parts of Sulawesi. 
Further I tentatively include the Barito ethno-linguistic groups into 
the ‘‘Malayo-Javanic cultural area”. As to how far a) convergence, or 
independent invention, b) diffusion (historical contact, with borrowing), 
or c) common inheritance (lineal transmission from a common cultural 
antecedent, see Blust 1981, p. 286) in legal culture exist in these 
regions remains open to further linguistic, archaeological, genetic, and 
ethno-historiographical comparisons. 
In reconstructing a segment of a common WMP cultural region 
and/or Malayo-Javanic cultural complex, a first step is to indicate a 
tentative cultural area based on ar­chaeological, linguistic, genetic, and 
ethnographic data within a clearly demarcated geographic area inhabited 
by populations speaking closely related languages and ideally showing 
some indicators of genetic familiarity. For example, Sumatra, Riau, 
parts of the Malaysian Penin­sula, Sunda, Java, Bali, Lombok and parts 
of Borneo which are inhabited by speakers of WMP languages were

--- PAGE 179 ---
168	
Alexandra Landmann
here hypothesized to constitute a Malayo-Javanic cultural and law area, 
even if the indicated region appears problematic from the per­spective 
of linguistics, genetics and geographic migrations, and undeniably 
share intangible and tangible culture with Austro-Asiatic speakers, and 
speakers of WMP in the Philippines, Sulawesi and the remaining parts 
of Borneo. Since after the arrival of the speakers of WMP the historic 
substratum of pre-WMP has become integrated into an overlapping 
and crisscrossing WMP cultural complex, this complex does not 
necessarily have one single “cultural prototype”; it may have more 
prototypes, which were progressively accommodated into the variety of 
intangible (values, norms, ideas) and tangible (artefacts, iconography, 
material) culture of ethno-linguistic WMP groups. The WMP cultural 
region probably diversified into two cultural areas: the Malayo-Javanic 
area and the Philippines-Celebes area. We can observe trajectories of 
this ancestral complex(es) in the variety of adat law systems among 
traditional communities or on isolated islands (see Lansing et al. 2011; 
Hollemann 1981). 
Based on Adelaar’s (2005b, p. 17) genetic categorization of the WMP 
languages, and Nothofer’s (1985; 1986, p. 88) “substratum thesis” and 
categorization of the languages of the Sumatra group and the Northwest 
Sumatra/Barrier Islands group (which include Chamic, Acehnese, the 
Batak languages and Gayo in Northwest Sumatra, Minangkabau, Malay, 
Lampung, Rejang, and Nias, Mentawai, Sichule, Simalur, and Enggano 
off Sumatra’s west coast), I tentatively include those linguistic groups 
into the hypothesized Malayic-Javanic cultural group because of the 
occurrence of cultural contact and borrowings (Nothofer 1986, p. 89). This 
is suggested by the existence of several similar tangible and intangible 
cultural elements, despite their unclear status as isolates or nuclear groups 
in historical linguistics. Evidently, Proto-MP *salaq “wrong, in error 
(of behavior); miss (a target); mistake, error, fault” is evenly distributed 
among the Malayo-Javanic cultural area and among the languages of 
the Barrier islands indicating a shared concept of “deviance”. 
As we have obviously Australoid and Asian pre-Austronesian 
settlers (Nothofer 1986, pp. 89, 94 referring to Kähler 1940 and Mahdi 
1988), for the time being I will ignore the unclear linguistic status of 
the Barrier Islands languages, and include those ethnic groups into the

--- PAGE 180 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
169
“Malayo-Javanic cultural and law area”, as their culture and hence their 
legal conceptions might probably be a product of a migration from the 
Sumatran mainland spanning from different periods of contact with 
Sumatra and Malayic (Blench 2014).
In addition to Nothofers’ (1986) pre-Austronesian substratum, 
archaeological findings on maritime interaction spheres hint on a WMP 
cultural complex that naturally diversified into smaller areas during the 
course of history. Bulbeck (2008, pp. 36–38) identifies pre-4 ka BC 
and post-4 ka BC interaction spheres of widespread maritime travel 
and cultural exchange; however, he notes that “archaeological evidence 
for richly interconnected maritime networks […] postdates 4 ka BC” 
(ibid., p. 42) and the stabilization of coastal environments. The 
“overlapping complexity of the interaction axes” (ibid., p. 44) does 
not support a single interaction sphere with linear and unidirectional 
migration from one location of ISEA to the other, or relentless migration 
from a single source. Rather, the pictures indicates specific structures 
within a complex network:
[...] including a far northern sphere (from Taiwan to northern Luzon), 
a Wallacean sphere from the Batanes to East Timor, a western sphere 
(including most of Sumatra, Java and Borneo), and a Java-Sulawesi  
sphere (linking the two previously mentioned spheres).
Bulbeck (2008, p. 44)
Around 2,5-4 ka BC, Bulbeck (ibid., p. 41; see Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig 6. 
46–47) located striking archaeological evidence for a western interaction 
sphere throughout the Malayic-Javanic cultural area, where historic 
family resemblances of the here hypothesized “Malayo-Javanic cultural 
and law area” had emerged. 
5.  Law Families, Adat as Social Control and the  
Malayo-Javanic Law Area
Adat law is generally conceived as a type of social control. If a social 
group has established a social order, and thereby values, norms and 
rules, which basically classify what is right and what is wrong, then 
social control denotes the mechanism to uphold this social order within

--- PAGE 181 ---
170	
Alexandra Landmann
a particular social space. Social space “is created by human interaction 
itself” (Black 1998, p. xx). “It is multidimensional, including vertical 
space (social stratification), horizontal space (social morphology), 
symbolic space (culture), corporate space (organization), and normative 
space (social control)” (Black 1998, p. xx). Black (1998, p. xiii) 
defines social conflict as a clash of right and wrong; “it occurs 
whenever someone engages in conduct that someone else defines as 
deviant or whenever someone subjects someone else to social control”. 
The type of social control that has legal consequences or sanctions 
employed by an authority (traditional or modern states) is called law. 
Social control, dispute resolution or conflict management, as handling 
of “right and wrong” (Black 1998, p. xxiii), constitutes a mechanism 
that is crucial to systemic survival by perpetuating social order and 
stratification in a given social group, maintaining systemic stability, 
and integrating change (ibid.). More narrowly, social control refers to 
any process by which people define and respond to deviant behaviour 
(ibid., p. 21, fn 1). 
The social groups in Maritime Southeast Asia and the Malaysian 
Pensinsular had ancient systems of social control, which today are 
termed “adat” and “adat law”. Adat itself represents in Arabic (‘ada) 
pre-Islamic customs or legal systems and traditional customary rules 
as distinct from shari’a, the law of the Muslims (see Bousquet and 
Lokhandwalla 2010, short comprehensive introduction see Brill 1987 
s.v. adat). In the languages of the people of the “Malay Archipelago” 
(Brill 1987, p. 7) or Maritime Southeast Asia, ‘ada is the generic 
term in use for “customs, practice, use and wont” (Brill 1987, p. 7). 
‘Ada describes therefore the diversity of local customary practices and 
tradition as observed by Muslim in Southeast Asia. But in spite of its 
Islamic subtext, most likely due to colonial influence, the usage of the 
term adat has been institutionalized into various non-Muslim communities 
throughout Maritime Southeast Asia. 
In the […] community […], harmony is only secured if every one of 
the members observes the traditional customs […]. An adat can never 
be neglected without misgivings for the community or the individual; 
unforeseen harmful results might ensue. […] That section of legal 
consequences are associated, is now generally called […] “Adat law”

--- PAGE 182 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
171
[…]. […] It is also applied to Non-Muslim peoples and extended to  
the whole area in which Indonesian law is in force. This includes in  
addition to the Dutch Indies, the Philippines, Formosa and Madagascar. 
Brill (1987, p. 7)
Consequently, here adat refers to the “old ways” and adat law to the 
“old law of the lands”. That is to say, adat law as a system of social 
control refers to the diversity of local “norms, rules, interdictions, and 
injunctions that guide an individual’s conduct as a member of the 
community and the sanctions and forms of redress by which these norms 
and rules are upheld” (Sather 2004, p. 124).
The ethnic groups in the Malay Peninusla and Western ISEA had 
ancient social control systems or uncodified plural legal orders. Uncodified 
law refers to practices of social control that invoke sanctions by a 
traditional authority. The term adat law (adatrecht) was systematically 
used for the first time by Christiaan Hurgronje, Dutch colonial advisor 
on Islamic policy, and subsequently by Van Vollenhoven, Dutch legal 
scholar. They had recognized that the term adat was used throughout 
the Dutch Indies to describe an “entity united by morality, customs, 
traditions, and legal institutions” (Arizona and Cahyadi 2013, p. 46) even 
though the concept was not found on all the islands of ISEA. Hence 
they invented the term adat law to denote local types of social control 
on base of local terms. While the Arabic word [‘ada] was used in 
Javanese, Malay, Acehnese, Minahasan Malay, and Minangkabau, there 
has never been a fixed terminology. In Balinese, we find dresta, the 
Baduy speak of pikukuh karuhun, and the Karo Batak of basa or bicara. 
Moreover, as it is a “wholly erroneous supposition that law follows 
religion” (Hollemann 1981, p. 8), van Vollenhoven suggested an 
organically grown legal practice and stated that “Indonesian never (or 
hardly ever?) includes those elements of the religious laws which are 
not rooted in ‘the old law of the land’. These elements are distinguished 
from adat under such terms as hukum agama (Javanese; see Hoadley 
and Hooker 1981), hukom (Acehnese and Gayonese) and hukum agama 
(Southern Sumatra)” (Hollemann 1981, p. 4). It is important to note, 
therefore, as Sather (2004, p. 124) remarked that “among Muslim 
societies in Southeast Asia, the concept of adat is generally distinguished

--- PAGE 183 ---
172	
Alexandra Landmann
from ugama’ religion (which is separately concerned with the rules 
of religious observance) and from Islamic law. For most non-Muslim 
groups, this distinction between adat and religion is not recognized”.
In 1893, Snouck Hurgronje made a distinction between Islamic 
law and adat law (“custom that has legal consequences”, Hollemann 
1981, p. xliii), as distinct from adat or mere custom (ibid., p. 5). 
Legal consequences denote rules that carry enforceable sanctions and 
necessitate a traditional authority with the political and judicial 
legitimation to enforce rules and carry out sanctions. Enforceable 
sanctions refer to human punishment, “or the human power to make 
something pantang, forbidden” (ibid., p. xliii). Different types of 
headmen, village tribunals, and courtly judges would carry out sanctions 
as legal consequences or sanctions for deviance and forbidden conduct. 
Hollemann (ibid., p. xliii) tells us that van Vollenhoven employed the 
term adat law because “the term did not imply a rigid division between 
matters of law and other adat”. However, “difficulties and confusion 
arise, when certain conduct is prohibited as likely to provoke the wrath 
of the gods or spirits (pantang, rebu, pemali), but its violation is 
punished by humans as well” (ibid., p. xliii). Clifford Sather (2004., 
p. 124) captures adat as follows: 
[…] the prime function of adat is to ensure harmonious relations  
among community members. At the same time, conduct in accordance 
with adat is believed to maintain the community in a state of ritual  
well-being in respect to the gods, ancestors, and spirits. The correct 
observance of adat is thought to result in a continuing state of spiritual 
well-being, demonstrated outwardly by the health, longevity, and  
material prosperity of community members. In this sense, the meaning  
of the word is not restricted to customary law but rather applies to the 
entire normative framework of traditional social and religious life.
Here I use adat as a shorthand reference for an analytical category 
thought not to represent “traditional religion” (Blench 2012) but the 
trajectory of a normative framework of sociocultural and economic life 
that would have characterized WMP civilization. Thus, adat law and 
systems of local knowledge (kearifan lokal in contemporary Indonesia 
and Malaysia) would form the remains of that civilization. I am aware

--- PAGE 184 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
173
that my understanding is innovative as adat is usually understood as 
“customs, practice, use and wont” (Brill 1987, p. 7). Further, I understand 
adat law as a generic term applied to denote the local systems of 
social control throughout the Malaysian Peninsular (including present 
day South Thailand) and maritime Southeast Asia (modern Indonesia, 
Brunei, Malaysia, and South Philippines). Due to its history and 
geographic expansion, adat law is in itself plural; however, although 
the local systems of social control differ locally and regionally in their 
body of rules, we might still try to map out boundaries where their 
basic mechanisms of dispute or conflict resolution and sanctioning appear 
to be similar or different. 
Van Vollenhoven (Hollemann 1981, p. 2) indicated that in pre-history, 
the islands of the archipelago only knew uncodified law. Its “jural 
communities” were larger or smaller “constituent corporate units of 
an organized indigenous society” (ibid., p. 43), which derived “their 
distinct, legal autonomy in domestic affairs from the fact that each 
has a) its discrete representative authority, and b) its discrete communal 
property, especially land, over which it exercises control” (ibid.)—
that is, politico-legal authority over their ancestral domain. In other 
words, common origin (genealogy), a representative authority and a 
shared territory are the key aspects that unite and characterize an adat 
community. Such adat communities vary according to the way they 
combine the genealogical, political and territorial aspects. Van Vollenhoven 
(ibid., p. xlvi) pointed to land rights—and until today indigenous land 
rights remains a highly sensitive issue—as to be “religiously rooted 
and to reflect the fundamental connexion of a human group to the 
deities and spirits of the land it inhabits”. These pre-colonial systems of 
social control incorporated to varying degrees Hindu and Islamic legal 
concepts and mechanisms. Before the introduction of Indian script, 
dated to fifth or early sixth century AD in South Kalimantan, sixth or 
early seventh century AD in West Java, and in the early eighth century 
in Central Java, one is inclined to assume with van Vollenhoven (ibid., 
p. 2) that “only the indigenous law of the Malayo-Polynesians was 
found […]”. Foreign contributions, that is Hindu (ca. fifth century), 
Muslim (ca. ninth century), Chinese (ca. twelve century), have been 
worked into that law. “But, with that all, the total law of the archipelago

--- PAGE 185 ---
174	
Alexandra Landmann
remained uncodified. […] It was only when the Europeans appeared on 
the scene and assumed power from the sixteenth century onwards that 
western regulations began to replace or supplement the uncodified law 
[…]” (ibid., p. 2). 
The law of the Malayo-Polynesians or the local politico-legal orders 
incorporated traditions of Indian, Sinic, or Islamic legal thought during 
the course of history. Based on prevalent prehistoric legal systems, Hindu 
legal thought enriched and sophisticated the pre-existent models, which 
have later been reformed by Islam (see Brill 1987); yet, the primary 
mechanisms of social sanctions, compensation, and mediation seem to have 
been conservative and continued throughout all three stages of organic 
legal development in the “Malayo-Javanic law area” (see Landmann 
and Fathurrokman 2012, 2013). Van Vollenhoven (ibid., p. 8) remarked 
that “anyone wishing to investigate the adat law of the present day or 
that of centuries ago, will, like the philologist or ethnologist, have to be 
prepared to strike deposits of foreign origin”. He (ibid.) also underlined 
that “linguistic usage distinguished between original and foreign elements 
of adat law by placing the adat of the ancestors on one side […] and 
parts of the religious law on the other”. He therefore ascribed a secondary 
position to the religious laws (ibid., p. 11), with the exception of identity 
politics, when religion influenced adat as in the case of a Dayak who 
embraces Islam and who “will be accepted as a Malay by the Moslem 
Malays” (ibid., p. 22).
Hence legal plurality of jural communities and the indigenous seed 
of legal pluralism coexisted during pre-colonial times. In this context, it 
seems that the Indianized or Islamic court elites “(…) were, to a large 
degree, legally divorced from the populations amongst whom they 
existed” (Hooker 1978, p. 9; see also Hollemann 1981, p. 37), because 
court tribunals and village tribunals each had a distinctive domain 
of jurisdiction (Tambiah 1976; see also Hollemann 1981, p. 37). As 
archipelagic traditions and practices were regarded as the origin of 
ancestral tradition by the Hindu-Buddhist or Islamic court elites, local 
identity continued to emerge out of the local jural communities bound 
by local collegial-consensus legal orders followed in specific villages or 
groups of villages. In consequence, local communities and early polities 
had already established both 1) adat and adat law or plural systems

--- PAGE 186 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
175
of socio-politico-legal orders and 2) a dual legal order with distinctive 
spheres of jurisdiction. The hierarchical system of the central court in 
which the sovereigns and their royal judges had a certain jurisdiction 
based on court edicts, Hindu law, or rules of the Islamic law-schools, 
whereas the pluriform collegial-consensus legal orders at the villages also 
had a specific sphere of jurisdiction limited to the domain or territory 
of the village.
After having established a WMP cultural region/complex and a 
Malayo-Javanic cultural area, let us now turn to law families that 
could be derived from language groupings. In the 1910s and 1920s, 
C. van Vollenhoven (Hollemann 1981, p. 33) promoted a comparative 
ethnological study of legal systems as a method for studying law. 
In linguistics and the comparative study of religion, six groupings 
are recognized: the Indo-Germanic, Semitic, and Malayo-Polynesian 
languages; and Mesopotamian, Egyptian, and Teutonic religions. With 
regard to the study of what he terms “the indigenous law of the Malayo-
Polynesians” (ibid., p. 2), he remarks: 
Who will indicate what these law groups are and determine this ‘plan  
of selected areas’? There will be little objection to taking the language 
groups as a starting point, although language groupings, ethnic groupings, 
and law groupings certainly need not coincide.
(Ibid., p. 34)
Van Vollenhovern identified the “adat law of Russia, of central Asia, of 
China, India, northwest Africa (the Maghrib), central Africa, and of the 
Red Indians etc., alongside that of our archipelago” as distinctive law 
groups, and advocated the following: 
With regard to each of these laws regions, an effort should be made not 
only to examine the state of adat law, but also its historical growth and the 
nature for its distribution. Each law region, (e.g.) our archipelago should 
be divided into a number of law areas (e.g. southern Sumatra, Bali plus 
Lombok) and most of these law areas into law districts – each with its 
district law or law dialects.
(Ibid., p. 34)
Continuing van Vollenhovern’s discovery of a “Malayo-Polynesian law 
family” in the 1910s and Blust’s (1981) linguistic reconstructions for

--- PAGE 187 ---
176	
Alexandra Landmann
particular taboos in early Austronesian society (PAN *pali, PMP taboo, 
*busung, (PMP “incur supernatural punishment”), I shall outline my 
working hypothesis of a WMP law region. I suggest that this WMP law 
region might be at least composed of two law areas: 
1)	 A Malayo-Javanic law area with its “law-districts” located on 
the islands of Western Indonesia and parts of Malaysia;
2)	 A Philippines-Celebes law area with its “law-districts”. 
I hypothesize the existence of an WMP cultural and law region, 
distributed over Sumatra, the Barrier Islands, Bangka-Belitung, Riau, 
parts of the Malaysian Peninsular, Java, Madura, Bali, Lombok, West- 
Sumbawa, parts of Borneo, parts of Indochina that have—with the 
exception of Lombok and Sumbawa—been connected in the continent 
Sundaland before the sea levels rose. Van Vollenhoven (ibid., p. 44) 
divided the Indies into nineteen law areas (I speak of districts here) 
of which I include ten into my hypothesis of a Malayo-Javanic law 
area: 1) Aceh, 2) the Gayo, Alas, Bataklands, 3) Minangkabau [hence 
also Negeri Sembilan in Malaysia], 4) South Sumatra, 5) the Malay 
territory with Riau and Lingga, 6) Bangka and Belitung, 16) Bali and 
Lombok, 17) Central and East Java, 18) the central Javanese Principalities, 
19) West Java.
The south-western, southern and south-eastern parts of Borneo are 
part of the Malayo-Javanic law area, whereas the remaining parts of 
Borneo would belong to the Philippines-Celebes law area. Following 
tentative parts of Central and Northern Borneo would belong to the 
area, pointed at the following law areas: parts of Borneo, the Minahasa, 
Gorontalo, South Celebes, Toraja, and Ternate (ibid., p. 44). The 
Malayo-Javanic law area shows striking similarities in its socio-political 
organization—its “jural communities”—, the law of communal lands 
(or ancestral domains), the law of wrongs, or how deviance is handled, 
and legal procedures and sanctions. Until today, we may observe legal 
pluralism—a discrimination between court/state law—and “village 
justice” or plural informal law systems throughout the region (see 
Landmann and Fathurrokman 2012). This discrimination has deep 
historical roots and we find it in the division between the law of the 
royal courts and the villages. As argued by Hollemann (1981, p. 37),

--- PAGE 188 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
177
“it should always be remembered that the adat law of the population 
need certainly not be the same as that of their overlords”. Thus, this 
might be a remaining feature of the “house societies” in Western 
Indonesia. 
The currently still opaque Philippines-Celebes law area appears to be 
correlated with a tendency towards headhunting, slave taking, feuding, 
and raiding, and seems to be based on lineage—that is, family or clan 
relations. It is less territory-bound than the “Malayo-Javanic law area”, 
where amicable settlements, therapeutic mechanisms, arbitration and social 
sanctions as ostracism, or denial of communal support as well as such 
avoidance strategies as “magic” prevail, and justice relies on mediators 
or informal village tribunals that express “the spirit of give and take, on 
mediation, and conciliation” (Hollemann 1981, p. lxiii; see Landmann 
and Fathurrokman 2012, 2013 for the basic working mechanism of 
Malayo-Javanic social control mechanisms). In how far those mechanisms 
of social control are related to basic subsistence strategies has not yet 
been comparatively discussed. There are few studies in this area, i.e. that 
on rice cultivation in ancient Java by van Setten van der Meer (1979), 
and, those on the co-evolution of agricultural and sociopolitical systems 
in Bali by Lansing (1987, 1991).
Van Vollenhoven found, as Landmann and Fathurrokman (2012, 
2013) almost a century later, that individuals obey to “adat law not 
because of the threat of judicial force—but because compliance has 
become a habit, because the fear their ancestors, because violation 
would not serve their interests, and finally because of the force of 
oral tradition” (Hollemann 1981, p. xliv). Additionally, practices of 
Indonesian headmen and others give “guidance in the observance 
of adat, of taking it under their care and supervision, without there 
being any question as yet of the resolution of disputes or of action to 
enforce law” (ibid., p. xliv). In contemporary terms, this refers to the 
therapeutic style of social control. Moreover, “the action of Indonesian 
adat-judges when they do adjudicate in dispute, is characterized by 
mediation, accommodation and reconciliation of conflicting individual 
and communal interests” (ibid., p. xliv). In contemporary terms, we speak 
of restorative justice and alternative dispute resolution (see Landmann 
and Fathurrokman 2012, 2013).

--- PAGE 189 ---
178	
Alexandra Landmann
Attested observance of the law by headmen and other socially  
prominent figures, and the accommodation of character of indigenous 
justice – ‘a hundred times more effective than adjudication’ – are  
natural because these notables are seen as part of the cosmic order  
of society. They act and speak as those whose duty is to ‘see that the  
wishes of the ancestors are observed and to act as their earthly 
representatives’ (Hollemann 1981, p. xliv; see Landmann and  
Fathurrokman 2012, 2013 on the function of Baduy headman and  
spiritual leaders, also Tooker 1996).
Adat law or local socio-politico-legal orders are characterized by 
complexity. Perceived from a local perspective, “the idea of proper 
behaviour in one’s relations both with other people and with natural 
phenomena” (Hooker 1978, p. 50) is crucial to a comprehensive 
understanding of adat law, and many adat law rules may not strike the 
Western researcher as “law”. Because adat law is perceived as involving 
an uncontrollable, “non-empiric” (Hooker 1978) dimension (that of the 
divine, the ancestors, and spirits of nature), adat law is actually more 
than just a set of rules. Adats contain a differentiation between empiric-
scientific and non-empiric or pre-scientific or habitual knowledge, but 
also a differentiation between what we can perceive as human: an 
empiric and a non-empiric world. As stated earlier, remains of the WMP 
civilization are to be found in adat law and systems of local knowledge. 
Despite a certain degree of conservatism and resilience, adat law is a 
dynamic system of knowledge; it provides flexibility to actualize and 
negotiate changes in time and space. In fact, naming local or autochthonous 
knowledge “traditional” seems irreverent, because those preserving it think 
of their knowledge as the law of nature. It does not resemble “the so 
called survival of the fittest law made popular by Charles Darwin, but 
a law that was handed down from the gods and mythic heroes” (Cowen 
1993, p. 5). To Cowen, “there is a celestial underpinning of traditional 
law that brooks neither amendment nor change’’, as “each set of laws 
governed the conduct of men in their everyday activities as well as in 
their relationship with the invisible world of nature”. 
In the realm of adats and local knowledge, we deal with an 
anthropocentric world comprised of quadripartite relations—a world where 
the human communicate and maintain close contacts with supernatural

--- PAGE 190 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
179
beings, their group, and nature. A salient feature of the WMP civilization 
conserved in adats may therefore be the concept of an eco-social-spiritual 
kinship between nature, spirits of nature and humanity, and ancestors or 
a higher reality. Adats denote a comprehensive way of life pertaining to 
interactions and relationships between four domains:
1.	 the transcendent dimension of the divine and ancestors, 
2.	 the dimension of humans, 
3.	 the dimension of a non-empirical world (Hooker 1978) and non-
empirical creatures (spirits of nature), 
4.	 the dimension of nature. 
Hence adats exhibit kinship relations between humans and nature. 
In creation myths, nature and its animating spirits often were created 
before or together with humans and hence they are considered to be 
siblings. Usually humans need to ask permission before they interact 
with nature (clearing forest, planting etc). Therefore, a strong connection 
between social group, social control (relations based), and environmental 
management is prevalent in local legal systems. This strong relation 
between communal lands and the community led van Vollenhoven to the 
above discussed term “jural communities” that are bound together by a 
political and juridical authority and the domain they permanently inhabit. 
The ancestral WMP and Malayo-Javanic cultural area is today 
best observed in small adat communities, and amongst other possible 
definitions, adats indeed may be understood as the trajectories of a 
WMP integral worldview or civilization expressing kinship between 
creator beings, ancestors, humans, entire systems of different species 
of benevolent and malevolent spirits, and nature—mostly perceived 
as mother earth. Adats tend to form total conceptual orders where 
spatial, mate­rial, social, and cosmological notions are encompassed 
under unifying dualistic schemata that are traditionally transmitted by 
myth, legends, and stories. In consequence, values, norms, rules and 
mechanisms contained within Indonesian adats of traditional communities 
may constitute con­temporary representations of trajectories of an 
ancestral WMP civilization associated with eco-social-spiritual kinship 
relations that connect the ethnographic present to the prehistoric past— 
a past that shaped a consciousness of worlds beyond the local.

--- PAGE 191 ---
180	
Alexandra Landmann
6. A Religion of the Mother?
An important question concerns the problem as to why MP languages 
replaced nearly all of the pre-existing languages in ISEA. Several 
authors mention a cultural advantage, pointing to particular social 
mechanisms or to a cultural dominance of the speakers of MP during the 
Neolithic. Bulbeck (2008, p. 48) relates this advantage to an advanced 
maritime capacity that allowed for traffic of human experiences and 
trade. The post 4,000 BP maritime network was so pervasive and 
“so advantaged were those who operated it or at least connected to 
it, that, by ethnographic times, the vast majority of the languages of 
ISEA, whether spoken by ‘Mongoloids’ [Tao, AL] or ‘Negritos’ [Qata, 
AL], were Malayo-Polynesian”. Blench (2012, p. 126) interprets this 
advantage as a process of “Austronesianisation” of ISEA—“a process 
whereby Austroasiatic, Papuan, and other unknown languages were 
brought into the Austronesian fold”. The question is now, which 
mechanisms could bring forth such a process? As the mi­gration of a 
farming complex had most likely nothing to do with it, the process 
rather centred around the traffic of values, ideas (hence also cultural 
and legal properties), valuable goods (including fauna and animals) and 
technology (see Spriggs 2003, p. 106; Bulbeck 2008, p. 44). Blench 
mentions that language levelling—the process, “when the spread of a 
major language, usually among languages which are al­ready related, 
causes lexical and grammatical convergence” as “consequence of 
central­ized political authority”—could be a reason for the adoption of 
MP languages (ibid., p. 132). However, if there is “evidence for 
extensive language levelling in is­lands where there is no clear evidence 
for the sort of political process that reduced Java to a single language” 
(ibid., p. 132), how could we imagine such a process, or cultural 
advantage? Blench (ibid., p. 122) assumes that “the spread of Austronesian 
languages was due to a powerful reli­gious/lifestyle ideology which 
assimilated indigenous speech communities and that this can be detected 
from material culture”. 
In this context, Bulbeck (2008, p. 43) describes the Austronesian 
painting tra­dition as “featuring hand stencils, abstract designs, and 
anthropomorphs evidently engaged in rites or travelling in boats, painted 
on high cliffs overlooking the sea”. Likewise, Blench (2012, pp. 128–29)

--- PAGE 192 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
181
identifies iconography as a pervasive marker of a Malayo-Polynesian 
cultural grammar; he refers to 1) the bulul figure which is dispersed 
from the northern Philippines to Vietnam, Indonesia and western 
Melanesia, and 2) the split figure distributed from Vietnam, to the 
Philippines, and the Austral Islands. Blench (2012, p. 129) argues 
that “it is extremely rare for iconographic elements to be conserved 
over such an extensive geographic and temporal range”. Blench (2012, 
p. 138) proposes that religion and life­style expressed in the pervasive 
religious iconography of the MP-speaking fisher-forager-raider-traders 
who had access to innovative maritime technology were the primary 
engine of cultural conversion. He (ibid., p. 129) compares the MP 
iconography to the spread of Catholic iconography over the globe:
Despite a slight trend towards local features, the core images are  
essentially the same. If the Austronesian situation is comparable then  
this pervasive imagery is a manifestation of adat, the traditional religion 
of ISEA prior to the spread of the world religions. 
Glover and Bellina (2011, p. 22) make a similar point referring to intra-
regional exchange net­works during the SEA Bronze Age. As a result 
of the demands and contacts generated, MSEA and ISEA societies 
involved in these exchange networks underwent internal social restruc­
turing. They suggest a first common symbolic system for the prehistoric 
period based on artefacts that were shared by groups in Thailand, of 
the Sa Huynh culture, and Pala­wan in the Philippines: “since the late 
pre-historic period, a set of social groups in different and mutually 
distant Southeast Asian localities involved in exchange might have 
established a common symbolic system” (ibid.). It might be therefore 
reasonable to assume that Glover and Bellina’s symbolic system and 
Blench’s Austronesian religious ideology, hinted at by Bulbeck (2008) 
and Spriggs (2012) as well, indicate the first scientifically detectable 
religious systems in the re­gion.
Lansing et al. (2011, pp. 253, 265, referring to Cox et al. 2010) found 
that the paternal gene pool is sharply subdivided between Western and 
Eastern Indonesia, with a boundary running along Wallace’s phenotypic 
line between the islands of Bali/Sumbawa and Flores. Spriggs (2012) 
assumed that this Wallace’s phenotypic line could mark the border

--- PAGE 193 ---
182	
Alexandra Landmann
between two expanding mid-Holocene cultural and economic systems, 
one Papuan-speaking and patrilocal, the other Austronesian and matrilocal. 
In addition to technology, trade, adaptive subsistence pattern, and religion, 
Jordan et al. (2009) and Lansing et al. (2011) suggest matrilocality 
as another explanation for a gradual Austronesianization of ISEA and 
the adoption of Austronesian languages, which could be integrated 
into Blench’s hypothesis of an advanced religion leading to cultural 
dominance. In my opinion, cultural and lan­guage shift may have been 
promoted by the combination of matrilocality (Jordan et al. 2009; 
Lansing et al. 2011) and faith/lifestyle (Glover and Bellina 2011; Blench 
2012) within early ‘‘house societies’’ (Lansing et al. 2011 referring to 
Lévi-Strauss 1983). A short discussion of this expression may be found 
in González-Ruibal (2006).
Jordan et al. (2009, p. 1957) found that matrilocality was 
predominant in early Austronesian societies ~ 4.5–5 ka BC. 
Matrilocality is found at the root of the Aus­tronesian language family; 
hence, all Aus­tronesian societies have a ‘‘ma­tricentric orientation’’ 
(ibid., p. 1957); that is, a theme of matrilineal descent and matrilocal 
kinship structures (ibid., p. 1957). Terms related to matrilocality are 
found among 99 per cent of the MP languages; moreover, in MP 
social groups, matrilocality, patrilocality, and ambilocality can belong 
to one structure. Lévi-Strauss (1969 in Fox 2006a, p. 6) termed such a 
structure a “house society”, and contrasted it with rigid kinship-based 
social systems, as “houses need to form and retain alliances and to 
com­memorate their origins […] it is absolutely immaterial whether 
the principle of genealogical grouping is matrilineal or patrilineal’’ 
(Lansing et al. 2011, p. 266 referring to Lévi-Strauss 1983). Lansing 
et al. (2011, p. 266) remarked “the house is regarded as the ancestral 
embodiment of the group it represents, engaged in marital and afﬁnal 
alliances with other houses”. Apparently, Lévi-Strauss considered the 
“non-unilineal” forms of social organizations in Polynesia, Indonesia, 
Melanesia as belonging to “house societies”, as houses constitute a key 
symbolic element in those societies and are the focus of all activities, 
especially of rituals and sacrifices. House societies refer to a form of 
social organization that are characterized by:

--- PAGE 194 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
183
their possession of a ‘domain’ consisting of both material and immaterial 
wealth or honors; the extensive use of ﬁctive kin­ship in alliance and 
adoption; and the transmission of the ‘domain’—titles, prerogatives, and 
wealth—via women as well as men (ibid., p. 6; Lansing et al. 2011.,  
p. 263 referring to Lévi-Strauss 1983). 
According to Lansing et al. (2011, p. 267), the Austronesian expansion 
began with the spread of matrilocal Neolithic house societies into ISEA, 
which was already populated by foragers-hunters. In Western Indonesia, 
these foragers-hunters were Asian/Tao, whereas in Eastern Indonesia, 
they were Australoid/Qata (see Hill et al. 2007 and Soares et al. 2011). 
As MP-speaking groups advanced, the initial population of both 
Australoid/Asian and MP groups was most likely small. Due to climatic 
stability, all matrilocal MP settlements underwent a Neolithic population 
expansion. As a result, MP women occasionally married men from 
surrounding non-MP villages, who then lived with the wife’s kin. 
Consequently, as I infer, the children of these marriages would have 
been educated in their mother’s kin religion, and spoken their mother’s 
language, and thereby the total population of MP speakers and faith 
communities grew. Lansing (ibid., pp. 266, 269–70) describes that given 
sufficient time, this process would eventually lead to the replacement 
of non-Austronesian languages—and as I infer, that this process would 
logically lead to highly localized hybrid cultures as described by 
Blench for the Dayak and Aslian speaker of Borneo and Malaysia. 
The smaller the indigenous population at the time of Austronesian 
colonization, the faster this would occur. Thereby, matri-biased social 
organization in Oceania restricted female genetic diversity and increased 
male diversity as non-MP men married in (see Jordan et al. 2009; 
Lansing et al. 2011). Lansing’s model shows a “butterfly effect”: 
“over a time scale of tens of generations a seemingly trivial shift in 
marriage preferences can produce a seismic change in language, culture 
and demography [...] this transformative potential was realized in the 
wake of the Austronesian colonization of ISEA” (Lansing et al. 2011, 
p. 271). Perhaps, matrilocality and the MP religion/lifestyle combined 
in the “mother’s religion” conveyed at the house communities constituted 
the advantage, which led to cultural dominance or “Autronesianization” 
of ISEA, Near and Remote Oceania. This cultural dominance was also

--- PAGE 195 ---
184	
Alexandra Landmann
supported by highly adaptive subsistence strategies, trade of valuable 
goods, and elaborate maritime technologies.
Lansing et al. (2011, p. 269) state that “[t]he current eastward limit 
of rice is to the east of Wallace’s line, which also marks the sharp 
subdivision in the human gene pool between Western and Eastern 
Indonesia”. Their model explains “this break by the disappearance of house 
societies in lowland regions in the western islands, where irrigated rice 
cultivation triggered a population explosion and also brought population 
movement to a standstill” (ibid., p. 270). In their view, the development 
of wet rice agriculture in Java and Bali around the sixth century led to 
the dissolution and/or transformation (see Reuter 2006) of house societies 
as “a consequence of three demographic processes: a shift to endogamous 
marriage, population growth, and reduced mobility” (Lansing et al. 2011, 
p. 269) that were concentrated in the regions where irrigated rice could 
be grown, and lineage-based kingship developed, further: 
House societies vanished from the lowlands, where endogamous farming 
communities grew up along the rivers and irrigation canals. In Bali,  
these communities adapted to population growth by creating new 
settlements downstream (Lansing et al., 2008b; Lansing et al., 2009).  
The effect of these changes was to bring large-scale (inter-island) 
population movement to a standstill, and to magnify existing genetic 
differences on either side of Wallace’s phenotypic line.
Hence patrilocality might have developed around 2000–500 BC together 
with the introduction of dry and later wet paddy economies that made 
permanent settlement necessary and triggered the emergence of villages, 
domains and later lineage-based Hindu polities. The need to cooperate 
and mutual dependence in those agricultural economies might have 
spurred initially the territorial systems of social control today observed 
in the Malayo-Javanic cultural area that rather based on mechanisms 
of social sanctions and therapy than on punishment. Lansing et al. (2011, 
p. 269) suggest that irrigated rice agriculture triggered the dissolution 
and/or transformation (see Reuter 2006) of the house societies, because 
house societies are not found today in the lineage-based rice-growing 
areas of Java and Bali (I would also include Sumatra, Lombok and 
parts of Borneo). Remarkably, they note that on those islands there are

--- PAGE 196 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
185
highland regions inhabited by upland communities that do not grow 
irrigated rice, which retain more social and cultural attributes of 
traditional Austronesian house societies than the lowland rice-growing 
villages. We still find exceptions in upland Bali (see Reuter 2002, 2006): 
the banua refers to alliances of villages in the Balinese Highlands near 
Kintamani, as well as among the Tenggerese, Ammatoa and the Baduy. 
And, I add, we find traces of revered female founding ancestors in 
Trunyan and Tengganan communities, thought of as Balinese aborigines 
(Landmann, fieldnotes). Most likely prehistoric house societies were 
transformed over time as the agricultural overlapping social groups based 
on territory—as banjar and subak systems in Bali—and descent—as family 
and village temples—reflect similar properties as the house societies (see 
Schoenfelder 2000 and Reuter 2003, 2006).
Comparative linguistics provides evidence for the type of social 
organization and social control in early Austronesian societies. For the 
oldest linguistic stages, Blust reconstructed Proto-AN *rumaq (house) 
as a descent group, and PMP *datu (after Dempwolff) as a term for 
a political-spiritual office. Fox (2006a, p. 2) stated that the category 
of “house” may be used abstractly to distinguish social groups of 
varying sizes. As houses may define various social groups, which are 
not necessarily the same as the house’s residential group, hence the 
“house” is a fundamental cultural category. Thomas Reuter (2006, 
p. 73) remarked that “(m)any societies in the Austronesian-speaking 
world show patterns of regional and local organisation wherein a 
category of ‘place’—the kingdom, domain, village or house—serves 
as a key idiom of social identity in its own right, though often also in 
combination with a notion of common ancestry or ‘name’”.
In the Malayo-Javanic cultural area, we find 5 out of 5 lexically 
reconstructed forms of these various house terms: 1) AN *Rumaq, 
2) PMP *balay, 3) PMP *lepaw (ambigious for Malayo-Javanic), 
4) PMP *kalamiR, 5) PMP *banua (see Reuter 2003, 2006 for detailed 
discussion). According to Fox (2006a, p. 12) these house terms suggests 
that the WMP groups retain more of the earlier traditions of the house, 
whereas these traditions among CEMP speakers were transformed. Of 
particular interest is Proto-MP *banua/*panua, glossed as house or 
inhabited territory, homeland, community, and land-owning kin group

--- PAGE 197 ---
186	
Alexandra Landmann
(Blust 2013, p. 346, ACD) or land, country, place, settlement, inhabited 
territory, village (Fox 2006a, p. 12). Most likely the glosses of this term 
reflect back on the transformation from house societies to lineage based 
organization as Proto-MP *banua deﬁnes social groups, their domain and 
connects them to the past emphasizing origins and founder rank (see 
Reuter 2006). The term is widely distributed among the Malayo-Javanic 
cultural area and has reflexes in the Barrier islands with Mentawai being a 
lexical exception. With regard to the overlapping ritual order of a domain 
in Balinese highlands (banua), Thomas Reuter (2006, p. 73) argued:
what we are dealing with here is not a simple kinship system nor a 
complex one, but a Lévi-Straussian house society in a ritualised modality 
(see Reuter 2002b). The organising principle is a sequence of inhabited 
places represented symbolically by sacred ancestor houses or ‘temples’. 
These sacred houses are ranked in order of their foundation. In short, the 
contemporary order of ritual obligations maps and retraces a path of origin 
through a socio-historically inscribed landscape.
Fox (2006a, p. 15) observes that “[t]he definition of ‘inside’ is a relative 
notion within traditional Austronesian houses. Although ‘inside’ may 
include everything beneath the roof, more often the category of ‘inside’ 
(Proto-Austronesian, *dalem) is specifically defined”. Proto-AN *dalem4 
4	 Ibid., available at <http://www.trussel2.com/acd/acd-s_d.htm#7088>. 1) Malay – dalam, 
palace, prince’s home; inside, inner, used as a locative (di dalam “in”, dari dalam “from 
within”); inner, as the inner part or central room of a house; depth; deep, profound; 
2) Old Javanese – dalem, inner part, interior; inner part of the kraton (palace); 
Javanese – dalem, inside of, within; the inner rooms of a house; house, home; walled-
in residence compound of an aristocratic family; Sundanese – dalem, title and dwelling 
of a regent, pa-dalem-an, dwelling of a prince, palace; Balinese – dalem, deep, as 
the sea; the deep (sea); respect, regard; king; Sasak – dalem, depth, innermost part; 
deep, within. Interestingly, Fox (2006a, p. 16) already remarked that dalem is “house” 
(omah) in the highest Javanese speech register; but it may refer in a lower register, 
“to the inner family room(s) of an ordinary house or to the inner precinct of a palace, 
which is not considered to be the place of the ruler but rather the most private abode 
of the women of the palace. Some Javanese see this dalem as the sacred resort of a 
female goddess”. In Bali, dalem often refers to a king, or the royal residence, but in 
pura dalem, which means temple of the deceased, dalem refers to the Hindu goddess 
Durgā, who dwells in the cemetery next to the temple and in the temple.

--- PAGE 198 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
187
appears to have been “inside, area within, inner part of something” (ACD). 
Throughout the Malayo-Javanic cultural area, the term is associated 
with the inner part of a royal compound; this reminds us of the abdi 
dalem, the courtier of Javanese and Balinese royal courts. The glosses of 
*dalem within Malayo-Sumbawan and Javanese demonstrate a specific 
geographic transformation of the definition of “place” and hence support 
the notion of a Malayo-Javanic law area. Reuter (2006, p. 65) described 
the process as follows: 
Indeed, the distinctions house-village, village-domain, and domain-
kingdom are all more or less fluid […]. In part, this conceptual similarity 
and fluidity is a reflection of historical processes. A house with a cluster 
of branch houses could grow into a village, which in turn could acquire 
branch villages and grow into a domain, which could—alone or in 
conjunction with other, allied domains—become the ritual foundation for 
the formation of a Hindu polity.
The proto-forms of the discussed house terms support the Malayo-Javanic 
cultural area, but are inconclusive for the mapping of boundaries of a 
law area as they are found in the Philippines, Borneo and Sulawesi. 
The wide distribution and identical glossing of *banua in the Malayo- 
Javanic cultural area, however, hints to the interlinking of common 
ancestry, political representation and the inhabited domain as a shared 
sociocultural concept. Particularly interesting is the reference to “inner” 
and “inner area” as related to a socially higher status (king, royal residence, 
and respect) in Malay, Old Javanese, Sundanese, Balinese and Sasak, 
which appears to be a later innovation related to contact with Indicized 
cultural concepts, the development of complex social stratification systems 
based on increasingly hereditary ranks that extended clan based or tribal 
relations and ascribed status systems, and the development of economies 
based on wet rice agriculture. 
The idea of origin, as houses and later domains and Hindu polities 
in the pre-Islamic Malayo-Javanic cultural area are associated with PAN 
*pun “trunks” and “origin”, founder events and elaborate ritual activities. 
Fox (2006a, pp. 6, 36) stated that besides PMP “*puqun, reflexes of * 
t-u(m)pu (or *epu), ‘ancestor, master, second generation relative’, and 
*tu(m)buq, ‘growth’, figure prominently in metaphoric statements about

--- PAGE 199 ---
188	
Alexandra Landmann
origins”. PMP *puqun is glossed as “base of a tree; cause; source, origin; 
beginning; foot of a hill or mountain; first wife; model or example 
(to be copied); expression for the mother’s brother”. Reuter’s (2006, 
p. 73) research in Balinese highlands showed that the depth of ancestral 
origin and migration connections in a domain usually amounts to 
only two layers (origin and branch), in this context Fox (2006a, p. 17) 
states that:
One category for designating ‘origin’ refers to the ‘base’ or ‘trunk’ of a tree 
thus connoting and conflating ideas of ‘base’, ‘trunk’, ‘cause’, ‘beginning’, 
‘source’ and ‘origin’. The idea of origin is thus conceived of, in a  
botanic idiom, as a kind of epistemic development from a ‘base’ to a  
‘tip’ or, more divergently, to a myriad of separate ‘tips’ (Fox 1971).  
Houses, by the nature of their construction, lend themselves to the 
expression of this botanic metaphor of origin. 
Fox (2006c, p. 6) pointed out that “[t]he metaphoric linkage of ‘origin’ 
and ‘cause’ with the ‘base’, ‘trunk’ or ‘(tap)-root’ of a tree and the 
implied sense of growth that derives from this botanic idiom may also 
be applied to life in general and to social life in particular” (see Reuter 
2006, pp. 6–7 on the temple system in highland Bali). Fox notes that 
other equivalent terms are among the Karo Batak benakayu; among 
the Minangkabau, pangkalan; among the Javanese and Balinese, wit 
(kawitan). Among the Baduy, puun is the title for the spiritual leader 
associated with origin and fertility (see Landmann and Fathurrokman 
2012, 2013).
In his comparative analysis of WMP “two-axis” relative orientation 
systems in western Indonesia and Madagascar, Adelaar (1997, p. 53) 
stated that “[t]he fundamental axis of orientation in Austronesian 
societies is the inland versus the sea” and directional systems depend 
on the relative position of the sea and the interior (mountains). The 
WMP systems have one relative axis (to the mountain/sea, landward/
seaward or upstream/downstream), and another axis may be aligned 
to the rising and setting sun. These relative spatial directions are 
associated with sociocultural qualities as outer and inner, male and 
female, helpful and dangerous. Reflexes of this two-axis system are 
found throughout the WMP cultural region, namely in Sumatra (Aceh),

--- PAGE 200 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
189
Sunda, Madura, Central and East Java, Bali, Lombok, Madagascar, 
Borneo, and among the speakers of Malay and Chamic languages. Most 
indigenous two-axis systems were doubled during the course of history 
to create four-axis systems and developed into cardinal geographical 
systems with a fixed north, east, south and west axes “for some specific 
[…] usage, and they were often borrowed from another culture” (ibid., 
p. 54). Most likely, this doublings were the result of Malay and/or 
Indian influence—the Malay cardinal systems would be used for 
maritime navigation whereas the Indian cardinal system would apply 
to social and ritual qualities as well. These two-axis and four-axis 
systems have a strong impact on space orientation and cosmological, 
political as well as sociocultural ordering. 
In conclusion, historic houses (and later villages, domains and Hindu 
polities) are ordered social structures oriented according to directional 
axes (right/left of river, mountain/sea, north/south, sunrise/sunset, 
upstream/downstream) that are given gender associations as male and 
female, low and high social status or pure and polluted. It would also 
appear that the connection between origin, land, and kinship groups and 
the kinship between human and land/nature is crucial to WMP social 
groups, and consequentially also to the Malayo-Javanic cultural region 
and its prevalent systems of social control.
Blust (ACD) glosses the term *datu as “lineage priest (?)”: most 
likely, datu referred to ascribed and achieved authority. Reflexes of the 
term datu (political leader or lineage priest) suggest a form of authority, 
and a connection between political rank ritual status and spatial alignment 
(see Tooker 1996). With regard to the political office, *Datu has four 
possible meanings: 1) political leader, chief; 2) priest, custodian and 
administrator of customary law, medical practitioner (hence religious, 
legal and medical authority = traditional scholar); 3) aristocrat, noble; 
and 4) ancestor, grandfather, elder (Scaglion 1996, p. 6). The glosses of 
datu in the Malayo-Javanic cultural and law area range from ancestor, 
shaman, medical practicioner, head of a kin group and guardian of 
traditional law, head of village federations, to chief, prince, king, and 
princess having thus connotations with the indigenous, Indic and Islamic 
political office (see Blust 2010). In this context it is important to note, 
that in MSEA and ISEA (see Dentan this volume) the prehistoric concept

--- PAGE 201 ---
190	
Alexandra Landmann
of socio-political power appears to have been differentiated into two 
dimensions (see Tooker 1996). In modern terms, the political office 
comprised legal-political and religious-spiritual functions:
1)	 potency (fertility/procreation): functionaries (e.g., shaman, priest, 
balian, medium) and places/objects responsible for the channelling 
and infusion of potency into the community for the provision of 
fertility and procreation, and 
2)	 power (rule by force): functionaries responsible for inner order 
and stability, plus external affairs. 
This division is to be found among the Baduy until today as well 
as in contemporary Bali. In addition to the differentiation between 
socio-political power (law and politics) and religious-spiritual potency 
(fertility and procreation), we find a close interconnection of spatial, 
social, and cosmological differentiation marking centre and periphery 
(Tambiah 1976; Tooker 1996). In this model, centre and periphery rather 
depend on the spatial or social position of the subject and are not marked 
or locked systems, hence it allows for contextual indexing since the 
spatial frame for tapping cosmic potency is manipulable and not tied to 
notions of territory and boundaries. As “the infusion of a cosmic potency 
in space and the geomantic properties of that potency” (Tooker 1996, 
p. 343) proceeds right at such a centre, spatial coding and indexing is 
tied to an underlying power dynamic both channelling and reflecting the 
flow of potency (ibid., p. 328). As noted by Tooker (ibid., p. 353), “the 
message being sent is not primarily a message about the design of the 
cosmos, but about through whom/what cosmic potency is channelled, a 
message that inevitably sets up a hierarchical frame”. 
The spatial alignment of a village (most likely also the house, domain 
and later Hindu or Islamic polities) and its social structures reflect the 
directional layout of the flow of potency from a raised centre outward. 
Key components of this alignment are: centre/periphery (equivalent to 
inner/outer) relations, upper/lower, and front/back. When a village centre/
periphery is properly aligned to the indigenous model of socio-spatial 
coding and indexing, then the village will be prosperous, with cosmic 
potency flowing to it through the most centrally located and hierarchically 
highest individual. However, where potency is not flowing or is diminished

--- PAGE 202 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
191
(as at peripheries), space is not neutral. Instead, that space is filled 
with an improper or draining force. When the directions from which 
potency flows are reversed as in lowland–upland social relationships, 
so are the definitions of what may be draining to one’s fortune (Tooker 
1996, pp. 328–53). Tooker (1996, pp. 342–47) identifies interdependent 
themes of socio-political power, whether lowland or highland, developed 
schematically here:
1.	 infusion of potency in space;
2.	 dispersion of potency from an exemplary centre outwards;
3.	 connection of potency to fertility (agricultural and procreation);
4.	 the centre can stand for the whole; 
5.	 rituals of dispersion and aggregation.
Another Proto-MP term relevant to the Malayo-Javanic cultural area is 
*empu, glossed as “grandparent/grandchild (recipr.); ancestor; lord, master, 
owner [doublet: *ampu, *impu2, *umpu]”. The title empu is associated 
in Malaya with old makers of daggers (keris) and is given in Java to 
personified daggers; it suggests a master-craftsman. In Bali Empu is a 
master—smith, and contemporaneously a High priest originating from 
the smith clan (Pande). Blust states (ACD) that the clear association of 
reflexes of PWMP *qiaŋ “ancestor, deity, divinity”: 
with Hindu religious ideas in Malay, Javanese, Balinese, and Sasak 
suggests that this item is not an indigenous term. However, no non-
Austronesian source has yet been found for it, and the semantically  
rather different cognates in Ngaju Dayak, the Chamic languages, and  
Toba Batak suggest a native word. The attested distribution leaves  
serious doubt as to whether *qiaŋ should be assigned to PWMP, but if 
borrowing is not responsible for the forms in Toba Batak and the Chamic 
languages it must have an antiquity of at least three thousand years. 
The time depth of *qiaŋ might be correlated to the ancient system of 
social control among the speakers of WMP and probably indicate the 
early consolidation of the Malayo-Javanic law area. PAN *qaNiCu and 
PMP *qanitu “ghost, ancestral spirit; nature spirit; corpse; owl; various 
plants” represented an important concept in traditional Austronesian-
speaking societies. The basic notion appears to be that of “ghost, spirit

--- PAGE 203 ---
192	
Alexandra Landmann
of the dead”, as opposed to “soul, spirit of the living” (*sumaŋed). In 
some WMP and OC languages (as Karo Batak and Cheke Holo) and in 
many CMP languages, reflexes of *qaNiCu also refer to nature spirits. 
The term supports my definition of adat as a kinship system between 
humans, ancestors and nature spirits. Blust (ACD) observes that in Malay, 
hantu refers to “evil spirit; ghost”. 
Generic for invisible spirits of evil that work in darkness or secrecy. 
They include: (1) demons of localities, (2) demons tied to special 
spots or tutelary spirits of freaks of nature, (3) demons behind natural  
phenomena, such as echoes, will o’ the wisps, meteors, (4) invisible 
elves wandering about the earth, (5) evil spirits associated with definite 
diseases, (6) vengeful ghosts of the dead, e.g. of the murdered, (7) ghost-
birds, harpies or vampires, (8) discarded divinities of older faiths, (9) the 
tiger-spirit attached to a sorcerer, (10) familiar spirits generally, (11) the 
magician’s head as a familiar spirit, (12) familiar spirits of indefinite local 
character. Ghosts are credited by Malays with planting wild varieties of 
fruit; e.g. pisaŋ hantu would mean “wild banana”. The word is therefore 
common in Malay botanical names.
The next paragraphs hint on terms that indicate a pre-Hindu system of 
PWMP and/or Malayo-Javanic social control, but a systematic analysis 
remains to be done. The list is suggestive and incomplete. As the terms 
are distributed among the here posited Philippine-Celebes and Malayo-
Javanic law areas, a detailed mapping of the distribution of the terms 
following Blust’s model (1981) remains to be pursued to individuate 
overlapping and/or distinct traits and concepts, and the linguistic dataset 
then should be triangulated with ethnohistoric research to determine 
historic timelines for changes and differentiation. 
PWMP *pugut “headless, decapitated” is found in Philippine languages 
and in Ngaju Dayak, there with a different meaning, but not in the 
languages of the Malayo-Javanic law area, whereas PWMP *deRep 
communal help is found in Borneo, Murut, dogop communal help (in 
harvesting, planting, house-building, etc.), Sundanese, derep offer one’s 
services at the rice harvest, Javanese, derep offer one’s services at the 
rice harvest, and Balinese, derep help with the rice harvest in return for 
a share of the crop. This linguistic evidence supports my above notion of 
two law areas, of which one is more clan or sib based, with the inclination

--- PAGE 204 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
193
to raid, historical headhunting and feuding, whereas the other area is 
based on mutual cooperation in agriculture and hence, social sanctions, 
as ostracism and denial of communal support, especially in relation to 
death ceremonies. The scientifically largely ignored oath, or adat-oath 
is the most feared sanction in Central Kalimantan, Bali and among the 
Baduy (see Landmann and Fathurrokman 2012, 2013). PWMP *sapaq 
“oath, pledge; curse” is given for the Philippines and Ngaju Dayak, and 
its doublet: *sumpaq is found in the Philippines, Malayo-Sumbawan 
and Javanese, but not in Sulawesi. Blust (ACD) rightly observed that 
“traces of beliefs in supernatural punishment for swearing a false oath 
recur sufficiently often to suggest that this term is native”. Hence the 
term and the idea have not been spread through Malay or Arabic as 
the modern applications of this term in Islamic societies, as with 
speakers of Malay, Javanese or Sundanese, often call upon Allah as 
witness to one’s oath. If one remembers the seventh-century Sabukingking 
inscription in Old Malay where an oath is to be sworn, this is a striking 
example of the continuity of native concepts throughout historic 
sociocultural transformation processes.
An interesting case is PMP *ka-qasiq “mercy, pity, affection”. In 
Ilokano (the only reflex in Philippine languages) it is glossed as “mercy, 
pity, clemency, compassion, commiseration, charity, leniency, indulgence, 
tolerance, forbearance”, in Malay, Sundanese, Javanese, Balinese it is 
related to “love and compassion”, whereas in Ngaju Dayak and Old 
Javanese it refers to a “pitiable condition” and in Sulawesi languages to 
“poor miserable, in need of help”. PMP *ma-qasiq “to pity, have mercy 
on, feel compassion for” is arguably a universal human emotion, yet the 
word is missing from Philippine languages, but given for Central and 
South Sulawesi and Chamorro. Makassarese “feeling of commiseration 
for another person which leads to sympathy or compassion” might 
indicate an ethnolinguistic development stage when the requirement of 
cooperation in agriculture-based domains produced the ability to show 
mercy and social control techniques of mediation, avoidance and therapy 
that triumphed over kin-based induced revenge, feuding, raiding, slave 
taking, and headhunting—this is arguably speculative, but the time depth 
and the distribution of the glosses might help here. Similarly, reflexes of 
PWMP *tuRut “to follow instructions, follow an example; carry along,

--- PAGE 205 ---
194	
Alexandra Landmann
give in, allow something to happen” is found in Malay, Karo-Batak, 
Toba Batak, Sundanese, Old Javanese, Balinese and Sasak.
The PWMP term *ka-salaq-an demonstates that the idea of 
deviance or of offenses that need to be punished. PWMP *ka-salaq-an 
is glossed as “error, mistake; fault, offense”. Its reflex in Karo Batak 
*ke-salah-en means “guilty”, Toba Batak *ha-sala-sala-an refers to 
“a fine with which one makes amends for wrongdoing”, and Old 
Javanese *ka-salah-an it is glossed as “to do wrong to; to deviate, go 
away from, avoid, refuse” in Javanese “mistake; guilt; blame” and in 
Sundanese “fall into error, be mistaken in; error, mistake”. Another 
term related to deviance or violating rules is PWMP *busuŋ (discussed 
by Blust 1981). Briefly, it is argued there that PWMP *busuŋ referred 
to the culturally-defined consequences of violating customary law, in 
particular to offenses against kin-based social hierarchy. As is apparent 
from its reflexes, it was believed that the offense would be supernaturally 
redressed through an affliction of the offender which appears in the form 
of abdominal swelling. Bothy terms indicate a WMP law area. A salient 
feature of the Malayo-Javanic law area is ostracism (Landmann and 
Fathurrokman 2012, 2013). PWMP *buaŋ-an “one who is banished or 
cast out” in Malay, Sundanese and Balinese refers to a person “thrown 
out; in exile, or an exile”—a repater, a person who repeatedly violated 
rules, and has been as a last remedy banished by its community and 
denied social support to upkeep order within the community (Landmann 
and Fathurrokhman 2012, 2013). Today, ostracism and denial of social 
support, especially in relation with death ceremonies, is the most penal 
social sanction to be encountered in Bali and among the Baduy. 
Blust (2010, pp. 41–42, ACD), discussing the difficulties we 
encounter when relying on linguistics for the reconstruction of Malayo-
Javanic cultural and legal notions connected to the term *datu, notes 
that the reflexes of datu in the Malayo-Javanic region “present an 
interesting contrast with the related words in Philippine languages”, 
showing associations with Islamic of Hindu-Buddhist notions due to 
the influences—Indic, Javanese, Malay—occurred through centuries of 
socio-political domination. Thus, each of the distinct blocks of glosses 
would reflect an added layer of history or cultural influences: “from a 
term of respect for a kinsman… to a term of respect for the ruler of a

--- PAGE 206 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
195
Hindu-Buddhist state, to a term of respect for a titular Muslim official 
capable of commanding a following through inherited rank”. Blust (2010, 
p. 42) concludes:
However, in a few languages that were relatively isolated from external 
influences until the twentieth century, as Gayo, the Batak languages,  
or Simalur, the word appears to be native, and its sense is distinct  
from that in languages which historically fell within the so-called 
Malayosphere or Javanosphere—that is, the sphere of Malay or Javanese 
cultural domination.
Blust’s linguistic analysis with respect of such a culturally important 
concept as datu may provide a methodological template through which 
future comparative research on a hypothesized Malayo-Javanic cultural/
legal area will have to be pursued against the background of a wider 
WMP region, and indeed Austronesian, linguistic, ethnic, and cultural 
complex. This part outlined a few lines of evidence and clues to be pursued 
to reconstruct a tentative WMP law region and its internal boundaries. 
7.  Adats as Contemporary Trajectories of a Western 
Malayo-Polynesian and a Malayo-Javanic Civilization
In 1921 Dutch legal scholar Cornelis van Vollenhoven conducted a first 
comparative study of local legal systems in the Indonesian Archipelago 
and postulated an Indonesian legal area. One of his contemporaries, 
J.D. Josselin de Jong (see id. 1977), identified the Indonesian 
Archipelago is an ethnographic ‘‘field of study’’ in 1935. Following 
van Vollenhoven and J.D. Josselin de Jong, I hypothesize a Malayo-
Polynesian Rechtskreis or region of social control, including a set 
of values, norms, authorities, procedures and methods grown out of 
interactions between segments of social groups and subsequently applied 
by speakers of MP to control deviance, regulate social life, organize 
public order and resolve conflicts, which has dispersed with populations 
migrating throughout the area. A Rechtskreis or area of social control 
refers to the plurality of indigenous law systems in the area that appear 
to originate in the same legal stock (Rechtsfamilie). As there has been a 
shared concept of kinship, social stratification, and thus a shared pattern

--- PAGE 207 ---
196	
Alexandra Landmann
of social control, it is only reasonable to assume a shared legal culture 
distributed throughout the area. 
Then I looked for evidence in the western part of the Indonesia and 
parts of Malaysia, where WMP languages are spoken, and I further 
narrowed down my field of enquiry to a “Malayo-Javanic culture and 
law area” based on family resemblances in pre-Islamic legal systems. 
Landmann and Fathurrokman (2012, 2013) put forward the hypothesis 
of an ‘‘Malayo-Sumbawan’’ legal area—our hypothesis has been revised 
to include the Javanese and the ethnic groups of the Barrier Islands. 
A second tentative Philippine-Celebes law area has been indicated on 
basis of specific features of social control. The Papuan and Melanesian 
Central and Eastern Indonesian cultures and law systems have been 
entirely excluded from this chapter. The idea of a Malayo-Javanic (or, 
on an even wider scale, Western Austronesian/Malayo-Polynesian) region 
of social control is substantiated by the following considerations:
1.	 Human culture has generic (universal) elements and specific 
(relativistic) elements, those specific elements are related to the 
particular histories of individual societies (Kirch and Green 2001; 
Landmann 2013).
2.	 Speakers of Western Malayo-Polynesian language phyla share a 
common ancestral language, as well as a stock of genetic and 
cultural features.
3.	 Each social group which has established a pattern of social 
stratification and social organization has also established a system 
of social control.
4.	 Shared cultural features became diffused over the area now 
inhabited by speakers of the (Western) Malayo-Polynesian 
language family, and therefore ethnic groups having certain 
common characteristics might be legitimately taken as samples to 
reconstruct such prototypical features; likewise, similarities and 
differences in the legal systems (like, for example, ostracism) 
could help to map out subgroups and migration patterns. 
Despite about two millennia of foreign cultural imprints—Indic, Chinese, 
Arabic, Turkish, Persian, Islamic, European—, this posited “old law” of 
the “Malayo-Javanic cultural area” has proven to be very resilient (see

--- PAGE 208 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
197
Josselin de Jong 1977, p. 180). The adat laws root in eco-social-spiritual 
kinship relations. 
There is a conspicuous absence of Southeast Asia from the record 
of early civilizations. Suggestively, the paucity and intractability of 
archaeological data (see Bellina-Pryce this volume), unclear subsistence 
strategies and agricultural production, the puzzling processes of political 
formation, and the absence of urbanized centres and written records before 
the first centuries of the first millennium AD seem to have disqualified 
the cultures of Southeast Asia from being included into the pantheon 
of early civilizations. 
From reconstructions of their protolanguage, those speakers of MP 
were small societies of farmers/foragers-hunters, traders and seafarers 
in an advanced state of social de­velopment. In their societies, we find 
among others: 1) marked localization in material culture (assemblages, 
jewellery, weapons); 2) local economies characterized by specialized 
craft communities (localized household-based/community-based units of 
production and economic specialization); 3) competitive, multi-centred, 
and overlapping socio-politico-economic mechanisms; 4) long-distance 
exchange networks; 5) institutions of social status systems that seem 
to be flexible in practice and included mixed systems of personal 
achievement and ascribed rank systems, which were linked to spiritual 
power and the ancestors. These institutions feature elements common 
to Indonesia, Polynesia, and Madagascar; 6) socio-legal-political 
institutions, today referred to as adat. 
The speakers of Austronesian should be included into that pantheon 
about 4,000 BP as their tangible and intangibe culture was in fact complex 
in terms of technology, science, and division of labour. In this context, 
Fuller et al. (2011, p. 545) noted: 
The actors in the drama of Austronesian and Polynesian origins, who 
created new worlds in Island Southeast Asia and the Paciﬁc, and seafaring 
technologies of unparalleled sophistication, were not the river valley 
civilisations or literate cities that so often capture the archaeological 
imagination, and dominate the public image of archaeology. Instead,  
it was small-scale, village or lineage groups of farmers and seafarers 
who played the key role in the peopling of the Paciﬁc and the cultural 
transformation of Neolithic Island Southeast Asia.

--- PAGE 209 ---
198	
Alexandra Landmann
The speakers of MP had socio-political orders with shared tangible and 
intangible cultures (art, religion, politics, law) but different patterns of 
economy, production, and subsistence—and they all lacked urbanization 
and literacy until the Common Era. The link between civilization, 
urbanization and literacy marginalizes cultural achievements in a 
geographic region whose climate and vegetation do neither demand nor 
do support permanent buildings and hence dense archaeological records 
(see Bellina-Pryce in this volume). 
The myth of origin of adat communities describes how the ancestors 
maintain kinship rela­tions with the spirits of the nature, and nature 
itself, after the creator being incepted the world (na­ture and the domain) 
and brought about the ancestors. In consequence, the life of human 
groups, their ancestors, the spirits of nature, their domains, and their 
main subsistence system are closely interrelated. In fact, the ‘‘myth of 
origin’’ functions as manual for proper conduct among ethnic groups 
inhabiting the “Malayo-Javanic” cultural area. This manual is further 
specified by adat and should be followed by the post-ancestral generations. 
The myth of origin reflects the particularities of a group’s founding event 
(ancestors, potency, social or­der, and social control) at a specific domain 
(hill, lake, forest, river, sea). Then, origin and do­main are locked into 
a specific code of conduct, the exemplary conduct of its notables, and 
the main subsistence system. In conse­quence, we find a conceptual link 
between the origin of a group, their domain, the definition of illegal 
behaviour, and the concept of the management of nature and production 
(subsistence system) in Malayo-Javanic adats. 
Today, adat is broadly defined as a generic term to indicate the plural 
indigenous practices and institutions throughout the archipelago; in the 
course of history, these ideas, practices and institutions adapted Hindu, 
Islamic and Western le­gal properties. In fact, adats mixed with Hindu, 
Islamic and Christian traditions depending on the geographic area of 
investigation. Before and after the arrival of the scriptural religions, 
adats continue to comprise the world of the supernatural and beliefs, 
the non-empiric dimen­sion of life, the religious-social vision of kinship 
relationships between cosmos, human, and nature. 
Trajectories of assumed ancestral Malayo-Polynesian civilization are 
to be found in adats, lo­cal eco-socio-legal-political traditions, basing on

--- PAGE 210 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
199
the belief in the sacredness of nature and humanity. A salient feature 
of the Malayo-Polynesian civilization conserved in adats is therefore 
in my view the concept of an eco-social-spiritual kinship between 
nature, spirits of nature and humanity, and ancestors or a higher reality 
suggesting that the well-being of human and nature is inextricably linked 
and interdepend­ent. Insofar, adat provides a religio-social space or an 
actor-network facilitating interaction between empiric human and non-
empiric non-human actors. Each adat group—as a shorthand reference 
for the analytical category of a contemporary rep­resentation of the 
ancestral Malayo-Polynesian civilization—is defined by their distinctive 
adat tradition that regulates subsequent relationships in a specific way:
a.	 non-empiric dimension of the creator being;
b.	 non-empiric dimension of the ancestors; 
c.	 empiric dimension of fellow humans; 
d.	 non-empiric dimension of manifold species of non-empirical 
beings (spirits of nature); 
e.	 empiric dimension of nature/soil.
It is noteworthy that adats exhibit kinship between humans and nature: 
in creation myths, nature and its animating spirits often were created 
before or together with humans and hence they are considered to be 
siblings. Usually humans need to ask permission before they interact 
with nature (clearing forest, planting etc). Therefore a strong connection 
between social group, social control (relations based), and environmental 
management is prevalent in indigenous legal systems. 
Each adat community is defined by their distinctive myths and adat 
that regulates eco-social-spiritual kinship affairs providing continuity 
with the Malayo-Polynesian civiliza­tion. Thus it is less surprising when 
several Indonesian adat communities, the heirs of the Western Malayo-
Polynesian civilization, retain striking similarities of eco-socio-political 
con­cepts despite considerable geographic distance and long-term lack of 
contact. This similarity extends today to the suku of Negeri Sembilan 
in West Malaysia (adat leader, personal com­munication in 2012). Myth, 
adats and local knowledge show family resemblances of eco-socio-
spiritual concepts. In consequence, systems of local knowledge retained 
in adats contain manifold concepts which have theoreti­cal and practical

--- PAGE 211 ---
200	
Alexandra Landmann
implications for modern science, because they preserve or continue 
ancient pre-scientific trajectories of knowledge about 1) values and 
norms which were in existence before the reification of ideological-
dogmatic teaching prevented circular and dynamic ways of acquiring and 
interpreting knowledge; 2) mechanisms of social control that appear to 
be re-discovered in social science and humanities as the spiritual roots 
of restorative justice, alternative dispute resolution, mediation, therapeutic 
healing, and 3) environmental management that uses “built-in regenerative 
qualities” (Cowen 1993, p. 2) of nature by not exploiting her in men’s 
own interest discovered as a spiritual root of deep ecology.
My previous research showed that social control and environmental 
management contained in myth and adats are very similar throughout the 
Western part of the Indonesian archipel­ago. Such common concepts and 
tropes reflect a prehistoric regional consciousness beyond the local—that 
is, a Malayo-Polynesian civilization. Scholars of comparative ethnography 
and mythol­ogy have detected trails of connection in tropes across the 
Malayo-Polynesian speaking world and beyond as in China, MSEA and 
India (see Dentan and Acri this volume). These shared narratives, tropes 
or motifs in myths are of particular interest, as oral traditions retell the 
story of origin and the classification of life in relation to social control 
and the relation or kinship with nature. Dixon (1996) has shown that 
myths astonishingly precise recollect real events that happened ~ 12–10 
ky ago, including geographic features, plant and animal species. 
Malayo-Polynesian civilization is of great significance in human 
history and culture. In this context, a focus on past millennia of shared 
cultural heritage provides recourse to a common culture and a conscious 
understanding of old networks across the Indo-Pacific region. Comparative 
research on adat groups, their stories of origin, social control and 
environmental management will promote the creation of policies that 
may be relevant to deal with the social, political and economic problems 
and conflicts we face today. This might prove true not only for intra-
Indonesian affairs but also for regional cooperation as well as the 
strengthening of political, social and economic bonds between the Indian 
Ocean, the China Sea, and the Pacific. Such local knowledge constitutes 
an irreplaceable value and treasure of human history and civilization—
indeed, several of those systems of local knowledge have been

--- PAGE 212 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
201
acknowledged by national governments or declared by the UNESCO as 
Masterpieces of Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity. 
References
Adelaar, K. Alexander. “An Exploration of Directional Terms in West Indonesia 
and Madagascar”. In Referring to Space: Studies in Austronesian and Papuan 
languages, edited by Gunther Senft. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
———. “Malayo-Sumbawan”. Oceanic Linguistic 44, no. 2 (2005a): 357–88.
———. “The Austronesian Languages of Asia and Madagascar: A Historical 
Perspective”. In The Austronesian Languages of Asia and Madagascar, edited 
by K. Alexander Adelaar and Nikolaus Himmelmann. London: Routledge, 
2005b.
Allen, Jim and James F. O’Connell. “Getting from Sunda to Sahul”. In Islands of 
Inquiry: Colonization, Seafaring and the Archaeology of Maritime Landscapes, 
edited by Geoffrey Clark, Foss Leach, and Sue O’Connor. Canberra: ANU 
E-Press, 2008.
———. “The Restaurant at the End of the Universe: Modelling the Colonisation 
of Sahul”. Australian Archaeology 74 (2012): 5–16.
Anderson, Atholl. “Crossing the Luzon Strait: Archaeological Chronology in the 
Batanes Islands, Philippines and the Regional Sequence of Neolithic Dispersal”. 
Journal of Austronesian Studies 1/2 (December 2005): 25–46.
Arizona, Yance and Erasmus Cahyadi. “The Revival of Indigenous Peoples: 
Contestations over a Special Legislation on Masyarakat Adat”. In Adat and 
Indigeneity in Indonesia (Göttingen Studies in Cultural Property, vol. 7), edited 
by Brigitta Hauser-Schäublin. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag, 2013.
Bellwood, Peter. Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press, 1997.
———. “The Origins and Dispersals of Agricultural Communities in Southeast 
Asia”. In Southeast Asia: From Prehistory to History, edited by Ian Glover and 
Peter Bellwood. London: Routledge Curzon, 2004. 
———. “Hierarchy, Founder Ideology and Austronesian Expansion”. In Origins, 
Ancestry and Alliance: Explorations in Austronesian Ethnography, edited by 
James J. Fox and Clifford Sather. Canberra: ANU E-Press, 2006 (1996).
Bellwood, Peter, James J. Fox, and Darrell Tryon. The Austronesians: Historical 
and Comparative Perspectives. Canberra: ANU E-Press, 2006 (1995).
Bellwood, Peter and Virendra N. Misra. Recent Advances in Indo-Pacific Prehistory: 
Proceedings of the International Symposium held at Poona, December 19–21, 
1978. Leiden: Brill, 1985.
Black, Donald. The Social Structure of Right and Wrong. San Diego: Academic 
Press, 1998.

--- PAGE 213 ---
202	
Alexandra Landmann
Blanchard, Philippe, Filippo Petroni, Maurizio Serva, and Dimitri Volchenkov. 
“Geometric Representations of Language Taxonomies”. Computer Speech & 
Language 25 (July 2011): 679–99.
Blench, Roger. “Was there an Austronesian Presence in Island Southeast Asia 
prior to the Austronesian Expansion?”. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association 30 (2010): 133–44.
———. “Almost Everything You Believed About the Austronesians Isn’t True”. In 
Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from the 13th International Conference of 
the European Association of Southeast Asian Archeologists, Volume 1, edited 
by Mai-Lin Tjoa-Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke, and Dominik Bonatz. Singapore: 
NUS Press, 2012.
———. “The Prehistory of the Daic- or Kra-Dai Speaking Peoples and the 
Hypothesis of an Austronesian Connection”. In Unearthing Southeast Asia’s 
Past: Selected Papers from the 12th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archeologists, Volume 1, edited by Marijke J. 
Klokke and Veronique Degroot. Singapore: NUS Press, 2013.
———. “The Enggano: Archaic Foragers and Their Interactions with the 
Austronesian World”. Draft circulated for comments, 11 August 2014. Available 
at <http://www.rogerblench.info/Language/Austronesian/Enggano/Enggano%20
and%20its%20history.pdf>.
Blust, Robert. “Linguistic Evidence for Some Early Austronesian Taboos”. American 
Anthropologist 83, no. 2 (1981): 285–319.
———. “The Austronesian Homeland: A Linguistic Perspective”. Asian Perspectives 
20 (1984–85): 45–67.
———. “On the Limits of the ‘Thunder Complex’ in Australasia: A Reply to 
Gregory Forth”. Anthropos B. 86, H. 4/6 (1991): 517–28.
———. “Austronesian Sibling Terms and Culture History”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land-en Volkenkunde 149 (1993): 22–76.
———. “On Datus, Ancient and Modern”. In Piakandatu ami: Dr. Howard P. 
McKaughan, edited by Loren Billings and Nelleke Goudswaard. Manila: Linguistic 
Society of the Philippines and SIL Philippines, 2010.
———. The Austronesian Languages; Revised Edition. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 
Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University, 
2013.
Blust, Robert and Stephen Trussel. Online Austronesian Comparative Dictionary, 
n.d. Available at <http://www.trussel2.com/acd/acd-hw_a1.htm>.
Bousquet, G.-H. and Shamoon T. Lokhandwalla. “Āda”. In Encyclopaedia of Islam, 
Second Edition, edited by Peri Bearman, Thierry Bianquis, Edmund Bosworth, 
E.J. Donzel and Wolfhart Heinrichs. Brill: Brill Online, 2010.
Brill, E.J. E.J. Brill’s First Encyclopaedia of Islam 1913–1936, Volume 1. Leiden: 
E.J. Brill, 1987 (1927).
Bulbeck, David. “An Integrated Perspective on the Austronesian Diaspora: The 
Switch from Cereal Agriculture to Maritime Foraging in the Colonisation of 
Island Southeast Asia”. Australian Archaeology 67 (2008): 31–51.

--- PAGE 214 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
203
Clarke, David Leonard. Analythical Archeology. London: Methuen, 1968.
Cowan, James. Messengers of the Gods: Tribal Elders Reveal the Ancient Wisdom 
of the Earth. Random House Australia, 1993.
Dixon, Robert M.W. “Origin Legends and Linguistic Relationships”.  Oceania 67, 
no. 2 (1996): 127–39.
Doniger, Wendy. The Hindus: An Alternative History. New York: Penguin Press, 2009.
Doran Jr., Edwin. Wangka: Austronesian Canoe Origins. College Station, Texas: 
Texas A&M University Press, 1981.
Fox, James. “Comparative Perspectives on Austronesian Houses: An Introductory 
Essay”. In Inside Austronesian Houses: Perspectives on Domestic Designs for 
Living, edited by James J. Fox. Comparative Austronesian Project, Research 
School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. Canberra: ANU 
E-Press, 2006a (1993).
———. The Poetic Power of Place: Comparative Perspectives on Austronesian 
Ideas of Locality. Canberra: ANU E-Press, 2006b (1995).
———. “Introduction”. In Origins, Ancestry and Alliance: Explorations in 
Austronesian Ethnography, edited by James J. Fox and Clifford Sather. Canberra: 
ANU E-Press, 2006c (1996).
Fuller, Dorian Q., Nicole Boivin, Tom Hoogervorst, and Robin G. Allaby. “Across 
the Indian Ocean: The Prehistoric Movement of Plants and Animals”. Antiquity 
85, no. 328 (2011): 544–58. 
Glover, Ian C. and Berenice Bellina. “Ban Don Ta Phet and Khao Sam Kaeo: The 
Earliest Indian Contacts Re-Assessed”. In Early Interactions between South 
and Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-Cultural Exchange, edited by Pierre-
Yves Manguin, A. Mani, and Geoff Wade. Singapore: Institute of Southeast 
Asian Studies, 2011.
González-Ruibal, A. “House Societies vs. Kinship-based Societies: An 
Archaeological Case from Iron Age Europe”. Journal of Anthropological 
Archaeology 25 (2006): 144–73.
Gray, Russell D., Alexei J. Drummond, and Simon J. Greenhill. “Language 
Phylogenies Reveal Expansion Pulses and Pauses in Pacific Settlement”. Science 
323.5913 (2009): 479–83.
Greenhill, Simon J. and Russell D. Gray. “Testing Population Dispersal Hypotheses: 
Pacific Settlement, Phylogenetic Trees and Austronesian Languages”. The 
Evolution of Cultural Diversity: A Phylogenetic Approach (2005): 31–52.
Hill, Catherine, Pedro Soares, Maru Mormina, Vincent Macaulay, Douglas Clarke, 
Petya B. Blumbach, Matthieu Vizuete-Forster, Peter Forster, David Bulbeck, 
Stephen Oppenheimer, and Martin B. Richards. “A Mitochondrial Stratigraphy 
for Island Southeast Asia”. The American Journal of Human Genetics 80 
(2007): 29–43
Himmelmann, Nikolaus. “The Austronesian Languages of Asia and Madagascar: 
Typological Characteristics”. In The Austronesian Languages of Asia and 
Madagascar, edited by K. Alexander Adelaar and Nikolaus Himmelmann. 
London: Routledge, 2005.

--- PAGE 215 ---
204	
Alexandra Landmann
Hoadley, Mason C. and Michael B. Hooker. Introduction to Javanese Law: Translation 
of and Commentary on the Agama. Tucson: University of Arizona, 1981.
Hollemann, J.F. Van Vollenhoven on Indonesian Adat Law. (Koninklijk Institute 
voor Taal-, Land, en Volkenkunde, Translation Series 20). The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1981.
Hooker, Michael B. Adat Law in Modern Indonesia. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford 
University Press, 1978.
Jordan, M. Fiona, Russell D. Gray, Simon J. Greenhill, and Ruth Mace. “Matrilocal 
Residence is Ancestral in Austronesian Societies”. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences 276, no. 1664 (2009): 1957–64.
Josselin de Jong, J.D. “The Malay Archipelago as a Field of Ethnological Study”. 
In Structural Anthropology in the Netherlands: A Reader, edited by P.E. 
Josselin de Jong. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1977 (1935).
Kirch, Patrick V. and Roger C. Green. Hawaikiki, Ancestral Polynesia: An Essay 
in Historical Anthropology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Landmann, Alexandra. “Approach on Studying Religion”. Journal of Religious 
Culture/Journal für Religionskultur 177 (2013): 1–12.
Landmann, Alexandra and Ferry Fathurrokman. “Ancestral Tradition, Social 
Control, and Sentencing in South Banten: ‘1001 Rules of the Wiwitan Polity, 
Part I”. Human and Socio-environmental Studies, Kanazawa University, Japan 
24, no. 2 (2012).
———. “Ancestral Tradition, Social Control, and Sentencing in South Banten: 
‘1001 Rules of the Wiwitan Polity, Part II”. Human and Socio-environmental 
Studies, Kanazawa University, Japan 25, no. 2 (2013).
Lansing, J. Stephen. “Balinese Water Temples and the Management of Irrigation”. 
American Anthropologist 89 (1987): 326–41.
———. Priests and Programmers: Technologies of Power in the Engineered 
Landscape of Bali. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991.
Lansing, J. Stephen, Murray P. Cox, Therese A. de Vet, Sean S. Downey, Brian 
Hallmark, and Herawati Sudoyo. “An Ongoing Austronesian Expansion in Island 
Southeast Asia”. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011): 262–72.
Lynch, John, Malcolm Ross and Terry Crowley. “Chapter One: The Oceanic 
Languages”. In The Oceanic Languages, edited by John Lynch, Malcolm Ross, 
and Terry Crowley. London: Routledge, 2002.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. “Introduction”. In Early Interactions between South and 
Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-Cultural Exchange, edited by Pierre-Yves 
Manguin, A. Mani, and Geoff Wade. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2011.
Meacham, William. “On the Improbability of Austronesian Origins in South 
China”. Asian Perspectives 26 (1984–85): 89–106.
Nothofer, Bernd. “The Subgrouping of the Languages of the Javo-Sumatra Hesion: 
A Reconsideration”. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde/Journal of 
the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia 141 (1985): 288–302.

--- PAGE 216 ---
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area?	
205
———. “The Barrier Island Languages in the Austronesian Language Family”. In 
FOCAL II: Papers from the Fourth International Conference on Austronesian 
Linguistics, edited by Paul Geraghty, Lois Carrington and Stephen A. Wurm. 
Pacific Linguistics Series C No. 94, pp. 87–109. Canberra: Department of 
Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University, 
1986.
———. “Current Interpretations of Western Malayo-Polynesian Linguistic Prehistory”. 
Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 12 (1991): 388–97. 
———. “The Relationship between the Languages of the Barrier Islands and the 
Sulawesi-Philippine Languages”. In Contact-Induced Change in Austronesian 
Languages, edited by Tom Dutton and Darrell Tryon. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter, 1994.
O’Connor, Sue. “Unpacking the Island Southeast Asian Neolithic Cultural Package, 
and Finding Local Complexity”. In Uncovering Southeast Asia’s Past: Selected 
Papers from the 10th International Conference of the European Association of 
Southeast Asian Archaeologists, edited by Ian Glover, Vincent C. Pigott, and 
Elizabeth A. Bacus. Singapore: NUS Press, 2006.
———. “New Evidence from East Timor Contributes to Our Understanding of 
Earliest Modern Human Colonisation East of the Sunda Shelf”. Antiquity 81 
(2007): 523–35.
Oppenheimer, Stephen. Eden in the East. London: Wiedenfeld and Nicholson, 
1998.
———. “The ‘Austronesian’ Story and Farming-Language Dispersals: Cabeats of 
Timing and Independence in Proxy Lines of Evidence from the Indo-European 
Moedel”. In Uncovering Southeast Asia’s Past: Selected Papers from the 
10th International Conference of the EASEAA, edited by Ian Glover, Vincent C. 
Pigott, and Elisabeth A. Bacus. Singapore: NUS Press, 2006.
Reuter, Thomas. The House of Our Ancestors: Precedence and Dualism in Highland 
Balinese Society. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2002.
———, ed. Sharing the Earth, Dividing the Land: Land and Territory in the 
Austronesian World. Canberra: ANU E-Press, 2006.
Ross, Malcolm. “On the Origin of the Term ‘Malayo-Polynesian’”. Oceanic Linguistics 
35, no. 1 (1996): 143–45.
Sapir, Edward. Time Perspective in Aboriginal American Culture: A Study in 
Method. Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau, 1916.
Sather, Clifford. “Adat”. In Southeast Asia: A Historical Encyclopedia, from 
Angkor Wat to East Timor, edited by Ooi Keat Gin. Santa Barbara, California: 
ABC-CLIO, 2004.
Scaglion, Richard. “Chiefly Models In Papua New Guinea”. The Contemporary 
Pacific (1996): 1–31.
Schoenfelder, John W. “On the Co-Evolution of Agricultural and Socio-Political 
Systems in Bali”. Bulletin of the Indi-Pacific Prehistory Association 20 (2000): 
35–47.

--- PAGE 217 ---
206	
Alexandra Landmann
van Setten van der Meer, N.C. Sawah Cultivation in Ancient Java: Aspects of 
Development during the Indo Javanese Period, 5th to 15th Century. Canberra: 
Faculty of Asian Studies, Australian National University, 1979.
Smith, Deborah R., Lynn Villafuerte, Gard Otis, and Michael R. Palmer. 
“Biogeography of Apis cerana F. and A. nigrocinta Smith: Insights from 
mtDNA Studies”. Apidologie 31 (2000): 265–79.
Soares, Pedro, Teresa Rito, Jean Trejaut, Maru Mormina, Catherine Hill, Emma 
Tinkler-Hundal, Michelle Braid, Douglas J. Clarke, Jun-Hun Loo, Noel 
Thomson, Tim Denham, Mark Donohue, Vincent Macaulay, Marie Lin, Stephen 
Oppenheimer, and Martin B. Richards. “Ancient Voyaging and Polynesian 
Origins”. The American Journal of Human Genetics 88 (2011): 239–47.
Solheim, Wilhelm G. “An Earlier Agricultural Revolution?”. Scientific American 
Magazine 1 (April 1972): 36–41.
———. “The Nusantao Hypothesis: The Origin and Spread of Austronesian 
Speakers”. Asian Perspectives 26, no. 1 (1984–85): 77–88.
Solheim, Wilhelm G., David Bulbeck, and Ambika Flavel. Archaeology and Culture 
in Southeast Asia: Unraveling the Nusantao. Quezon City: University of the 
Philippines Press, 2006
Spriggs, Matthew. “Chronology of the Neolithic Transition in Island Southeast 
Asia and the Western Pacific: A View from 2003”. Review of Archaeology 24, 
no. 2 (2003): 57–80.
———. “Is the Neolithic Spread in Island Southeast Asia Really as Confusing 
as the Archeologists (and Some Linguistic) Make It Seem?”. In Crossing 
Borders: Selected Papers from the 13th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archeologists, Volume 1, edited by Mai-Lin Tjoa-
Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke, and Dominik Bonatz. Singapore: NUS Press, 2012.
Tambiah, Stanley J. World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism 
and Polity in Thailand Against a Historical Background. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1976.
Terrell, John E. “Chapter 6. Archaeological Inference and Ethnographic Analogies: 
Rethinking the ‘Lapita Cultural Complex’”. Field Museum of Natural History 
Archeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association 13, no. 1 
(June 2008): 69–76.
Tooker, Deborah E. “Putting the Mandala in its Place: A Practice-based Approach 
to the Spatialization of Power on the Southeast Asian ‘Periphery’ – The Case 
of the Akha”. The Journal of Asian Studies 55, no. 2 (1996): 323–58.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 
2009.

--- PAGE 218 ---
207
5
Ethnographic and 
Archaeological Correlates 
for an Mainland Southeast 
Asia Linguistic Area1
Roger Blench
1.  Introduction
1.1  The MSEA Convergence Zone
There has been considerable investment in the concept of Mainland 
Southeast Asia (MSEA) as a linguistic area (Enfield 2003, 2005; Enfield 
and Comrie 2014). Despite great phyletic diversity, its languages show 
a remarkable homogeneity in terms of structure. Such patterns are often 
1	 This chapter was written following a meeting in Leipzig, MPI, in December 2012 on 
the languages of Mainland Southeast Asia. It was not intended for the proceedings, as 
another paper (Blench 2014) has been published, which discusses the genesis of areal 
linguistic features in some detail. Although I was not at the conference in Singapore 
where the other chapters in this volume were presented, the topic seemed appropriate 
for the present volume.

--- PAGE 219 ---
208	
Roger Blench
described as Sprachbunds, geographical areas characterized by linguistic 
convergence (Trubetzkoy 1928; Becker 1948). Sprachbunds have been 
identified in many regions of the world, with the Balkan Sprachbund 
the most well-known. Regions of convergence are typically cited in 
Africa, notably Ethiopia (Ferguson 1976; see also papers in Heine and 
Nurse 2008) in India, and the Caucasus. However, those characteristics 
of language which converge are by no means the same in different 
regions. In some cases, a high incidence of lexical borrowing can 
coexist with great variations in grammar and morphology, as in Ethiopia. 
Papua, especially the Sepik, and Arnhem Land languages show strong 
typological similarities in grammar and morphology in conjunction 
with high lexical and thus phyletic diversity. A Sprachbund may thus 
be a less useful term than “convergence zone” which leaves open the 
parameters of similarity.
MSEA is undoubtedly a convergence zone, characterized by five 
major language phyla: Austroasiatic, Austronesian, Daic, Sino-Tibetan, 
and Hmong-Mien. Apart from the Andamanese peoples there are no 
language isolates. Phonology, tones, morphology (or more precisely 
the lack of it), word and syntactic structures all show remarkable 
similarities despite the evident lexical diversity (Blench 2014, in 
press a). No clear consensus in the linguistic literature has emerged to 
explain this pattern, but we have good evidence for the rapidity with 
which this type of analogical restructuring occurs. Utsat, the Austronesian 
language spoken in Hainan island, is a good example of this (Thurgood 
and Li 2012). Utsat is Chamic, and would have resembled Malay when 
its ancestral speakers settled on the mainland of modern-day Vietnam 
some 2,000 years ago. Its syntax and phonology were restructured so 
that it more closely resembled the neighbouring Austroasiatic languages. 
However, in 969 AD, part of its speakers fled to Hainan island in 
Southeast China and there came into contact with both Hlaic and Sinitic 
languages. Utsat then converged with these languages, losing all its 
morphology and adopting a complex tonal system.
This is useful evidence that convergence occurs, and because there is 
historical documentation, we have some estimates of timescales. What is 
much less clear is why it occurs, and the social and material correlates of 
this process. There are many examples of the geographical proximity of

--- PAGE 220 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
209
languages with quite different structural features and lexicons, particularly 
in West Africa and the Amazon. If there is an MSEA linguistic area, 
then it is reasonable to assume we can also characterize a culture area, 
a bounded region where social and material culture share commonalties. 
Culture areas may be seen as an unwelcome revival of a Northern 
European ethnographic tradition long discarded. But not all discarded 
traditions are wrong; it is simply that their face does not fit at certain 
times in history. It is certainly the case that the period interpretations 
of Kulturkreislehre have little to contribute to today in the world of 
sophisticated linguistics, direct dating in archaeology and the analysis 
of synchronic and historical DNA. But the underlying assumption, that 
where languages converge and overlap their speakers must interact 
in ways that reflect similar patterns in cultural life, remains valid. 
The purpose of this chapter is not to add to the linguistic debate, but 
rather to put forward social and material correlates of the convergence 
observed in MSEA. In other words, if languages agree with one another 
so evidently, then presumably this indicates lengthy and elaborate 
interchange between populations and thus we should be able to find 
other types of commonalties. Such a broad question cannot be resolved 
in a short space, but a tentative model is advanced. This chapter makes 
some proposals for such common features in the field of material culture 
and ideas, in particular, music, house-forms, weapons and clothing. 
A short section discusses whether there is any credible archaeological 
correlate for the MSEA area while the final part considers the issue of 
boundaries. To what extent can these be geographically defined, and 
where do they have extensions? China and the Austronesian world 
represent the most obvious cases of extensions, since they have carried 
certain features of the MSEA area to remote locations as a consequence 
of later expansion.
1.2  Establishing the Boundaries
If there is such a proposed linguistic area how do we identify its 
boundaries? Clearly, the Sinitic languages share many of the linguistic 
features of the MSEA region, including static tones, short words and a 
lack of morphology. Much of Sino-Tibetan in Eastern Nepal and Bhutan 
also has these features, but both Kuki-Chin and Kiranti are important

--- PAGE 221 ---
210	
Roger Blench
exceptions. Island Southeast Asia (ISEA) is dominated by Austronesian 
languages which are generally non-tonal, with complex morphology, 
although they share other linguistic traits with MSEA languages. Despite 
these fuzzy boundaries, the sense that languages spoken in MSEA 
exhibit a set of common features is palpable. To conceptualize this, we 
can assign a set of features to an array of MSEA languages; one or 
more of these may be picked up by an expansionist culture and carried 
far outside its normal region. For example, Austronesian shares some 
aspects of MSEA linguistic structure (hence the persistent notion of 
Austric, said to unite it with Austroasiatic; Reid 2005). Indeed, the long 
history of genetic hypotheses linking the various phyla of Southeast 
Asia, and the largely barren debate over the classification of Vietnamese, 
are inverted reflections of this convergence. Sinitic has carried MSEA 
features north to the Yangtze, but other languages which have migrated 
out of the MSEA area have been restructured according to the dominant 
language matrix. The Munda languages are the most prominent example 
of this, as their word order and much else approximates to Indic rather 
than Austroasiatic. Nicobarese, a branch of the archetypical MSEA 
phylum, i.e. Austroasiatic, moved to ISEA and developed complex 
morphology. This may have been through metatypy with Austronesian, 
i.e. persistent bilingualism with an Austronesian language but with 
limited lexical borrowing, resulting in analogical morphology without 
segmental cognates. At the same time, language groups that enter an 
area become restructured to fit the regional pattern. There is no scholarly 
consensus on the reasons for what appears to be a unique situation, 
globally. 
The one exception to this is Andamanese, for which we finally 
have reasonable data (Abbi 2006, 2009, 2012, 2013). The Andamanese 
languages represent at least three distinct phyla. They appear to have 
been isolated from MSEA culture for a very long time, and their 
languages now show no trace of convergence with the features of the 
phyla on the mainland. They are characterized by complex verb 
morphology (for Great Andamanese), lack of tones and semantic 
classification of nouns. This argues strongly for an extended period 
when interaction with Southeast Asian cultures was absent, as does their 
phenotypical appearance.

--- PAGE 222 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
211
Typological convergence has both linguistic and cultural facets. 
The linguistic element is usually explained by persistent long-term 
bilingualism without language loss or societal assimilation. In other 
words, speakers maintain their own language but restructure it to the 
typological norms of a dominant speech. The broader question then 
becomes the characterization of the social mechanisms underlying 
this. What common behaviours underlie both linguistic and cultural 
similarities? Why is the area relatively neatly bounded when set against 
comparable situations in Africa or Central America? This requires 
us to look at edge effects as well as the centre. Something clearly 
prevents MSEA features diffusing across certain boundaries. The Munda 
languages, which are underlyingly MSEA insofar as they belong to the 
Austroasiatic phylum, have ended up resembling the neighbouring Indo-
Aryan languages rather than carrying MSEA features into the Indian 
Subcontinent. Nicobaric has equally lost many MSEA features, for 
reasons which are less clear. Blench (2013b) argues that the Daic 
languages were originally Austronesian, but their migration into the 
MSEA region caused them to be restructured as highly tonal, with 
short words and lacking morphology. The cultural features of Formosan 
Austronesian languages were also carried along and again appropriately 
transformed.
Another aspect of this is the prevalence of regional lexemes, words 
which cross phylum boundaries and whose original affiliation is in 
doubt. These are not the same as wanderwords (< German Wanderworte), 
perplexing lexemes that seem to spread across large regions with 
marked geographic limitations. Typical MSEA examples are “hawk” 
(#g.laŋ), “tiger” (#k.la), “elephant” (# a:ŋ), “river” (k.loŋ) and 
“crossbow” (#h.naa). Exactly why animal names are so widespread is 
unclear; tiger and elephant may well be salient species, but the other 
items do not seem to have any greater cultural relevance than many 
others. But for such forms to be so persistent across languages, they 
must have had a high cultural salience, and this apparently maps against 
other regional linguistic features.
An influential conceptual framework has been the “Indosphere” and 
“Sinosphere” proposed by James Matisoff (1991). Matisoff considered 
that within the Sinosphere languages and cultures showed common

--- PAGE 223 ---
212	
Roger Blench
features which resembled those of Chinese culture, and similarly 
with the Indosphere. Certainly within Sino-Tibetan, the gradual shift 
towards (or away from) morphological simplicity can be characterized 
this way. But the term “Sinosphere” suggests a region of Sinitic 
influence. This is almost the reverse of the proposition advanced here, 
which is that the early forms of Sinitic were restructured through 
contact with resident MSEA languages, in other words, influence went 
in exactly the opposite direction. No obvious term presents itself to 
describe this hypothesis.
If we are to go beyond linguistics, we will need conspectuses of 
descriptive ethnography. Historically, although there are some rich 
monographs, notably Milne (1924) or Izikowitz (1951), the coverage 
they represent is limited. The first overview of Southeast Asian island 
groups appears to be Lebar (1972), while mainland groups are covered 
in the surveys of Schlesinger (1997, 1998, 2003a, 2003b, 2003c, 
2003d, 2011a, 2011b, 2011c) and, for Laos, Chazée (1999). But this 
is not a live tradition. We are better at republishing old ethnography 
than doing new research. Ethnographers are occupied with the quirks 
of social media and mobile phones rather than the documentation 
of rural communities. The proposals on which this chapter is based 
are largely from my own research, bringing together visits to both 
rural areas and museums throughout Southeast Asia with a trawl of the 
secondary literature. It should therefore be strongly emphasized that 
the distribution maps presented here in particular are still highly 
provisional.
2.  Music
2.1  General
In tracking cultural areas, music is a productive and also relatively 
unusual feature because it is essentially arbitrary. No society needs music 
to survive, but it is nonetheless a universal feature of social groups 
and societies and in some it is very elaborated. Societies can make 
individual choices, but apparently make similar ones over large areas 
of the world. Humans like music, but they are apparently not very 
inventive, since whole regions, such as Australia, Papua and the New

--- PAGE 224 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
213
World, are missing most classes of instrument types.2 As it happens, 
MSEA is probably the region of the world with the most distinct 
types of instruments, organologically speaking. This is remarkable, 
as its music is very largely of a single structural type, i.e. heterophony. 
This section tracks both musical structure and also the distribution of 
some specific instrument types. The musical form that most people 
associate with Southeast Asia, large orchestras dominated by tuned 
percussion, is almost certainly a late introduction, and thus it cannot be 
taken to characterize the region.
2.2  Heterophony 
Heterophony is a musical texture characterized by the simultaneous 
variation of a single melodic line. Such a texture is a complex 
monophony in which there is only one basic melody, realized 
simultaneously in multiple voices. Each one plays the melody, in either 
a different rhythm or tempo, or with embellishments and elaborations. 
Morton (1976, p. 34) proposed the term “polyphonic stratification”, 
which, he said “seems a more precise description, since each of the 
‘layers’ is not just a close approximation of the main melody, but 
also has distinct characteristics and a style of its own”. This is most 
clearly heard in the large percussion orchestras such as the Indonesian 
gamelan, the Thai pi phat ensemble, the Cambodian pin peat and the 
Burmese hsing waing. The principle was unknown in Western music, 
and when Debussy heard the first gamelan to visit Paris in 1889, he 
adopted aspects of heterophony into his compositions. 
The traditions which oppose heterophony are monody and 
polyphony. Monody is characteristic of a vast area stretching between 
the Maghreb and Northeast India, where the performers each follow a 
single melodic line, often accompanied by drones or percussion. In the 
art music of the region, melodies can be extremely elaborated, with 
rhythms ultra-complex. Polyphony is the simultaneous sounding of 
2	 Broadly speaking, ethnomusicologists divide instruments into four classes: idiophones 
(percussion), membranophones (drums), chordophones (string instruments) and 
aerophones (wind).

--- PAGE 225 ---
214	
Roger Blench
distinct melodies, and is characteristic of European art music, but also 
many intriguing folk traditions, including the polychoral music of the 
Mediterranean islands and the panpipes and distributed flutes of the 
Volga and Baltic regions. In East Asia, vocal polyphony is characteristic 
of Yunnan (Zhang 1997) which in turn is linked to the astonishingly 
diverse traditions of Taiwan (Wu 1994, 1995) and Northern Vietnam, 
yet those traditions are entirely lost in the Philippines. 
Apart from Africa, elsewhere in the Old World, polyphony is 
common in Melanesia (Blench 2014). Polyphonic flute ensembles and 
vocal polyphony occur across much of New Guinea (Collaer 1965) and 
on many of the islands influenced by Papuan cultures (e.g. the panpipe 
ensembles of the Solomons described in Zemp 1978). Polyphony has also 
been reported from islands further west where there is strong reason to 
suspect a Papuan substrate, such as Flores (Rappoport 2011) and Timor 
(Yampolsky 2015).
Map 5.1 represents these distributions graphically.
MAP 5.1 
MSEA Heterophony and Its Extensions
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 226 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
215
The pattern emerging suggests that heterophony was an ancient 
structural principle established in the Southeast Asian region bounded 
strongly in the west by the monodic traditions of South Asia. The folk 
traditions of South China were polyphonic but heterophony was picked 
up by Sinitic speakers and underlies the art music and large-scale 
musical structures of East Asia. Although vocal polyphony was 
dominant in Taiwan, the Yami, whose ancestors became the proto-
Malayo-Polynesians, were monodists. However, heterophony developed 
in ISEA, with the percussion ensembles which stretch from Lombok 
to northern Sumatra and the Philippines. Underlyingly, ISEA may 
well have been polyphonic, reflecting the prior traditions of the 
pre-Austronesian populations as surviving traditions on Flores and 
Timor suggest (Kunst 1942, 1950; Rappoport 2011).
2.3  Mouth-organ
One of the most characteristic instruments of the MSEA area is the 
free-reed mouth-organ (Blench in press b). Using the same principle 
as the European harmonica, free-reeds are found in horns and 
single tube flute-like instruments. The principle of the free-reed was 
confined to a specific geographical area in Southeast Asia, before its 
worldwide diffusion in the last two centuries. Free-reed instruments 
are widely distributed and morphologically highly diverse, pointing 
to several millennia of evolution, as confirmed by archaeological 
evidence. However, most commonly they are found in the free-reed 
mouth-organ which consists of groups of at least five stopped pipes. 
The arrangement of the pipes allows the player to sound block chords, 
which form the underlying metrical frame of large Chinese ensembles. 
Free-reed mouth-organs are played almost everywhere in the region, 
and the oldest types have a spherical gourd resonator. The remains of 
a mouth-organ, alongside the more famous arrays of tuned bells, were 
found in the tomb of Marquis Yi of Zeng, in Suixian country, Hubei 
and dated to 433 BC (Guangsheng 2000). Metal wind-chests, 
skeuomorphs of gourds, occur in archaeological sites in Yunnan as far 
back as 200 BC, as attested in the collections of the Yunnan Provincial 
Museum, Kunming.

--- PAGE 227 ---
216	
Roger Blench
Apart from synchronic ethnography, it is possible to develop the 
history of the free-reed mouth-organ from archaeological and literary 
sources. Existing reviews of the free-reed mouth-organ are somewhat 
limited (e.g. Finsterbüsch 1961; Miller 1981; Schwörer-Kohl 1997). 
Map 5.2 shows the region where the gourd-resonated mouth-organ is 
played in Southeast Asia and where it presumably originates. It was 
picked up by the Chinese for the classical orchestra, probably quite 
early, developed into the sheng, which was in turn borrowed in Japan 
and Korea as the shō.
MAP 5.2 
Gourd Mouth-organ in Southeast Asia
Source: Blench (in press b).

--- PAGE 228 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
217
There is also a unique extension into Borneo, which bespeaks 
early contact between the regions, although it never developed into 
a standard part of the Austronesian instrumentarium (Blench 2011). 
Iconographic evidence shows that mouth-organs were known in both 
Java (Borobudur) and Myanmar (Bagan) but were probably never 
adopted.
2.4  Gong Ensembles
The gong is a circular percussion instrument, usually made of bronze 
or brass, suspended and struck with a soft, padded beater. It is perhaps 
the single most characteristic instrument of the Southeast Asian region 
(Simbriger 1939). Gongs are divided into two main types, the deep-rimmed, 
bossed gong and the flat, shallow-rimmed gong, known respectively 
as mang and luó (
) in Chinese. In Borneo and the Philippines there 
are intermediate types with shallow rims, flat faces and low bosses 
(Frame 1982). The earliest gong that has been excavated is from the 
Luobuwan site in Guangxi Province in southwestern China (Wu Ben 
2002, p. 111) dating from the early Han Dynasty (i.e. after 202 BC). 
Casting of gongs was a highly specialized art, only practised in a few 
places and gongs were traded over great distances as prestige goods 
(Champion 1869; Nicolas 2009).
Despite its widespread dispersion and significance of the gong, we 
have no real idea of its antiquity in Southeast Asia; gongs are not 
shown on the friezes of musical ensembles at Borobudur (eighth to 
ninth century) or at Mỹ Sơn in Vietnam (fourth to fourteenth century), 
but they are present at Angkor in the eleventh century. Despite its 
importance, the gong took a long time to come to the attention of 
European observers. Peter Mundy described it in Sumatra in 1637:
another Copper Instrument called a gung, wheron they strike with a  
little wooden Clubbe, and although it bee butt a small Instrumentt, 
not much More then 1 Foote over and 1/2 Foot Deepe, yet it maketh a  
Deepe hollow humming sound resembling that of a great bell.
Mundy (1919, p. 123)

--- PAGE 229 ---
218	
Roger Blench
Gongs can be played as single large instruments or in tuned 
sets, as in the Burmese gong circle, kyi waing ကြေးဝိုင်း. 
However, their most distinctive music is in the form of large 
ensembles, where instruments are not tuned but graded in size and 
timbre. Throughout MSEA and in the Philippines and Borneo, 
collections of gongs owned by individuals are brought together in 
ensembles (Collaer 1979; Maceda 1998). In 2005, the gong ensembles 
of the Vietnamese highlands were named by UNESCO as part of 
the intangible cultural heritage of mankind. Why the exactly similar 
ensembles of Cambodia and Laos were excluded probably says 
more about heritage politics than any subtle appreciation of cultural 
ethnohistory. 
Nonetheless, these ensembles are sufficiently striking to warrant 
wider recognition. Arsenio Nicolas (2009) has reviewed archaeological 
finds of gongs in the South China Sea, mostly from shipwrecks, which 
suggest that they were expensive traded items. Gongs are known 
throughout much of Northeast India and even into Tibet, but they 
were never used in large ensembles. Some representations of what are 
apparently flat gongs appear in India, but these do not survive in 
the ethnographic record (Arnold 2000). Angkor Wat and Borobudur 
provide some evidence for the time-depth of gong ensembles. Figure 5.1 
shows a fairly typical gong ensemble, played for a marriage ceremony 
by the Bidayuh people at Annah Rais, Sarawak and Figure 5.2 depicts 
nuns supervising a Jarai gong performance in the highlands of Vietnam 
in the 1930s.
Historically speaking it seems as if gongs were first developed 
within the same bronze-casting culture that developed bronze drums in 
Vietnam, Laos, South China borderland (see Calo 2014). They spread 
as a prestige good, a rather less expensive and more portable equivalent 
of the bronze drum. Their musical qualities and the fact that they could 
be owned by individual families and brought together for collective 
celebrations made them a potential fit for the heterophonic music 
and social structures of MSEA. Gongs were carried to the western 
edges of ISEA by Chinese traders, but never penetrated far into the

--- PAGE 230 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
219
Figure 5.1
Gong Ensemble, Annah Rais, Sarawak
Source: Author's photo.
Nuns Supervising Jarai Gong Ensemble, Vietnam
Source: Creative Commons [CC].
Figure 5.2

--- PAGE 231 ---
220	
Roger Blench
eastern islands.3 The growth of gamelan culture in Java allowed for a 
secondary distribution from the eighth century onwards. Map 5.3 shows 
the approximate distribution of the gong ensemble in Southeast Asia.
3	 The easternmost occurrence of gongs appears to be as bridewealth items on the Raja 
Ampat islands, in the western tip of Papua Barat (formerly Irian Jaya). These are 
displayed in the collections of the Loka Budaya Museum, Cenderawasih University, 
Papua Barat, photographed February 2014.
Map 5.3
Southeast Asian Gong Ensembles 
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 232 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
221
Individual gongs and rows of gongs in a frame, typically used for 
orchestral ensembles have a much wider distribution, but they are not 
expressive of heterophony in the same way as gong ensembles.
3.  Crossbow
The crossbow consists of a bow mounted on a stock that shoots 
projectiles, bolts or quarrels, with the string tensioned mechanically 
rather than by the archer. It was known in Ancient Greece and became 
a weapon of choice in medieval Europe. The crossbow was carried 
around the world by the Spanish, and appears in both West Africa and 
the New World after the sixteenth century (Balfour 1909). However, its 
most significant area of distribution is in MSEA. Wooden crossbows 
are found across the arc of highlands between Vietnam and Eastern 
Nepal and so skilled were the Montagnards of Vietnam that they were 
recruited by US Special Forces against the Việt Cộng. Figure 5.3 
illustrates a typical wooden crossbow from this region, from the Naga 
area of Northeast India. Map 5.4 shows the MSEA distribution of the 
traditional, all-wooden crossbow.
Figure 5.3
Naga Wooden Crossbow
Source: Author’s collection.

--- PAGE 233 ---
222	
Roger Blench
Crossbows (nǔ 
) were adopted by the Chinese, who rapidly improved 
on their materials and mechanism (Needham 2004). The earliest evidence 
for crossbows in China goes back to the mid fifth century BC, at a Chu 
burial site in Yutaishan, Hubei where bronze bolts have been found. The 
earliest handheld crossbow stocks with a bronze trigger, dating from 
the sixth century BC, come from Tombs 3 and 12 at Qufu, Shandong, 
capital of Lu. Repeating crossbows, first mentioned in the Records of 
the Three Kingdoms, were discovered in 1986 in Tomb 47 at Qinjiazui, 
Hubei, around the fourth century BC. The earliest Chinese document to 
mention the crossbow is from the fourth–third century BC. 
Map 5.4
Distribution of Wooden Crossbows in MSEA
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 234 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
223
As with the mouth-organ, the crossbow is a distinctive MSEA 
technology, adopted and further spread by the Sinitic cultures. 
Schuessler (2007) argues that Old Chinese *nâʔ is a borrowing from 
Austroasiatic. This is credible on distributional grounds, since other 
Sino-Tibetan languages have quite different terms. Table 5.1 shows 
related MSEA terms for “crossbow” reflecting a protoform something 
like #hnaa.
In ISEA, the crossbow was only present on the Nicobars, where 
it constitutes striking evidence for the Austroasiatic migration to the 
archipelago. The blowpipe was otherwise dominant elsewhere in the 
archipelago. 
Table 5.1
MSEA Terms for “Crossbow” Reflecting #h.naa
Phylum
Subgroup
Language
Form
Austroasiatic
Bahnaric
PSB 
*sdna
Khmeric
Khmer
snaa
Nicobaric
Nancowry
f´
Pearic
Pearic
th
ma
PMnong
PMnong
*so'na
Vietic
PVietic
*s-na:ʔ
Sino-Tibetan
Sinitic
Chinese
nuˇ 
Sinitic
Old Chinese
*nâʔ
Nung
Rawang (Nung)
th ma
Nung
Dulong
ta¯ na¯ 
Lolo-Burmese
Moso
t ˇana
Jingpho
Jingpho
ndan
Daic
Kam-Sui
Sui
hna
Tai
Proto-Tai
*hnaac
Northern Tai
naa (bolt) 
Thai
naa 
Hmong-Mien
Proto-Hmong-Mien
*nhaB

--- PAGE 235 ---
224	
Roger Blench
4.  Raised Houses
One of the most distinctive features of Southeast Asia is the raised 
house, where the occupants live at least one storey above the ground. 
Not typical of the Chinese, it was noted by early observers as in use 
among the Tai populations of Yunnan. It is found across MSEA, but also 
in ISEA (Waterson 1990). Raised houses thus occur between Northeast 
India and Eastern Indonesia. Curiously, the morung, a large house for 
an extended family with an A-frame roof, typical of the Naga area of 
Northeast India, constitutes a major geographical exception, as these 
are flat on the ground. Sometimes these houses can be raised very high 
indeed, as the Orang Ulu house in Borneo shows (see Figure 5.4). These 
houses are found in remote interior parts of Sarawak, and protect the 
inhabitants against floods as well as wild animals.
Figure 5.4
Orang Ulu House, Sarawak
Source: Author’s photo.

--- PAGE 236 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
225
The function of raised houses is somewhat variable. It is defensive, 
and protects against the depredations of termites, flooding, and allows 
livestock to be kept beneath the living space. It is one of the few 
features of the region for which we have good archaeological evidence, 
since the piles of such houses are found at Hemudu in Southeast China 
dated to around 7,000 Before Present [BP] (Chang 1989). In Northeast 
India, this classic MSEA structure halts where it confronts Tibetan-
style housing, which has a multi-storey structure with an enclosed 
basement, and with Assamese ground-level houses. The typical Papuan 
house, with its steeply pitched roof, has a quite different design. 
Map 5.5 shows the distribution of the raised house in Southeast Asia.
Map 5.5
Raised Houses in MSEA and ISEA
Source: Author.
5. The Emblematic Use of Clothing in Marking Ethnicity
Anyone who visits ethnographic museums from Itanagar to Hanoi will 
have been alternately impressed and bored by the endless displays 
of folk costume. Mannequins of crumbling plaster display complex

--- PAGE 237 ---
226	
Roger Blench
arrays of cloth and jewellery that almost no one wears today outside 
cultural festivals. However, it is clear from old photographs that much 
of this was everyday wear until recently, and still may be in remote 
areas. Costume is highly politicized; the Kohima museum in Nagaland 
displays the proposed gear for a “unitary Naga lass” (see Figure 5.5). 
Designed by Naga intellectuals frustrated by Naga disunity, costume 
synthesizes highly differentiated cloth and ornaments characteristic of 
different Naga subgroups (e.g. Oppitz et al. 2008). The Hmong-Mien 
in particular distinguish all their subgroups by the costumes they wear, 
so that language and dress are closely correlated.
Naga Lass, Kohima Museum
Source: Author’s photo.
Figure 5.5

--- PAGE 238 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
227
All this reflects a widespread situation in MSEA, the naming of 
ethnolinguistic groups with clothing terminology. “Folk costumes” are a 
staple of ethnographic museums throughout most of Eurasia. However, 
costumes are generally areal markers rather than used to differentiate 
ethnolinguistic groups. So there is a Basque costume, but its elements 
are also characteristic of non-Basques in northeastern Spain and 
adjacent France. Costume rarely marks ethnicity so sharply as in Southeast 
Asia. Austroasiatic, Daic, Hmong-Mien and Sino-Tibetan speaking 
peoples all use this convention. For example, the Mien peoples have 
numerous subgroups, including the White Trouser, Black Trouser, 
Flowery and Longshirt Mien, ethnolinguistic subgroupings based on 
dress. However, the practice of defining subgroups in this way is lost in 
Northeast India, and it is absent among all the large pluralistic groups 
such as the Chinese, Viet, Khmer, and Thai. It is also curiously absent 
in ISEA, where it might have been expected to spread. 
These examples are about the unity of a culture area, and at first 
sight this might suggest a high degree of differentiation. However, as 
has been observed with the Hmong-Mien, the greater the emphasis 
on difference, the less significant linguistic differences really are. 
Sigmund Freud aptly named this “narcissism of small differences” 
(der Narzißmus der kleinen Differenzen). The two parts of Hmong-
Mien consist of languages which are little more than dialect chains, 
often mutually intelligible, despite the striking contrasts of costume in 
the market. This may correspond to emblematicity in language, i.e. the 
notion that each subgroup has a word which demarcates it from another, 
disguising the fact that the other 99 per cent of the words are in fact 
the same or close cognates. 
6.  Could MSEA Area Culture Have an Archaeological 
Correlate?
Some of the cultural attributes discussed in this chapter must be of 
significant age. We know from both comparative ethnography and 
archaeology that raised houses are at least as old as the settlement 
of Hemudu (7,000 BP). Crossbow mechanisms and bronze resonators 
for mouth-organs are abundant in Chinese archaeology. Unfortunately,

--- PAGE 239 ---
228	
Roger Blench
partly due to preservation conditions, the general archaeology of MSEA 
itself is much weaker with respect to the type of material excavated. 
However, there is a deep-level lithic culture which corresponds 
extremely well with the boundaries of MSEA, i.e. the so-called 
“Sumatraliths” that characterize the Hoabinhian technocomplex. 
Sumatraliths are a type of stone tool, often made from river pebbles, 
and very roughly shaped. The precise use of Sumatraliths is still under 
discussion, but there is a growing consensus that their main use was to 
process bamboos, rattans and other wood-like plants (Blench 2013a). 
Strictly defined, Hoabinhian tool types are virtually absent from 
ISEA, except for those in Northeast Sumatra (Forestier et al. 2005). 
Map 5.6 shows the approximate region where Sumatraliths are found. 
Hoabinhian culture (Văn hóa Hòa Bình), named for the type-site in 
Map 5.6
Approximate Zone of Sumatraliths
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 240 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
229
Vietnam, describes stone artefact assemblages in Southeast Asia with 
flaked, cobble artefacts (see Figure 5.6), ascribed to the period 10,000– 
2,000 BC in earlier sources (Matthews 1964, 1966; Gorman 1971; 
Anisyutkin and Timofeyev 2006). Bacsonian is often regarded as a 
variation of the Hoabinhian industry characterized by a higher frequency 
of edge-ground cobble artefacts, produced by direct percussion with 
hard hammerstone, dated to c. 8,000–4,000 BC. 
Postulating the psychic unity of a region based on the distribution 
of lithics would rightly be regarded with suspicion by archaeologists 
and linguists alike. Nonetheless, it is helpful to think that prior to the 
Neolithic a widespread common culture had already been established 
through the region, which implies a common approach to managing 
the natural environment. The key issue is probably boundedness, the 
notion that when a new idea or technology enters the regional culture, 
whether the crossbows or a musical instrument, they slot into a 
bounded geographical and linguistic area and increase the level of 
interaction which produces the observed linguistic consequences.
Sumatraliths from Malaysia
Source: Author.
Figure 5.6

--- PAGE 241 ---
230	
Roger Blench
7.  Core and Extensions of the MSEA Area
The pattern emerging from these examples is that of “core” and 
“extension”, characteristic objects or behaviours can be consolidated 
in nuclear MSEA but spread further in slightly unpredictable ways, 
when picked up by an expansionist neighbour. Most notably, there are 
strongly delimited lines where a cultural zone is sufficiently marked as 
to block further spread. In the west, this is the Indosphere (see §1.2), 
in the southeast, the Papuan area and the Altaic zone of North China. 
ISEA is a receptor zone, where at least some MSEA innovations were 
picked up and underwent secondary spread (Blench 2012). The Sinitic 
zone was also susceptible to influence, but the Altaic zone to the north 
marked the final boundary. 
There are also what I am calling here “restructuring zones”, where a 
community is a geographical outlier, and undergoes analogical restructur­
ing as a result of interaction with the dominant cultural matrix. The most 
obvious example of this is the Munda area of Northeast India, where 
Austroasiatic languages underwent major typological change. Chamic 
(a group of Austronesian languages spoken on the Vietnamese 
mainland) and Nicobaric (a branch of Austroasiatic spoken on the 
Nicobar islands) represent other well-known examples. In addition, the 
Andamanese isolate zone is a small region of languages and cultures 
protected by geography from the large-scale processes taking place on 
the nearby mainland. This situation can be represented schematically as 
in Map 5.7.
Beyond these geographical observations, however, is the question 
of the forces driving linguistic and cultural convergence. Whatever the 
explanation, the answer must be social, rooted in the way individuals 
and communities conceptualize themselves and interact with one another. 
Linguistic convergence must be a product of this, not its cause or an 
independent variable. The hypothesis is that the underlying feature of 
MSEA culture responsible for this cultural and linguistic convergence zone 
is its high degree of social consensus. This involves making sociological 
generalizations about a vast and highly diverse region and some readers 
will inevitably consider the empirical basis for such a model hard to 
substantiate and therefore impossible to demonstrate. Speculations are what

--- PAGE 242 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
231
they are. However, no matter how sceptical the reader, the distributional 
data highlighted in this chapter are real and need explanation and that 
explanation must include a sociological element.
A not atypical journalistic article is prone to contrast India and China, 
emphasizing democracy in India and authoritarianism in China. Clearly 
caste groups and ethnic minorities in India do not necessarily benefit 
from democracy in India while the Tibetans, Mongols and Uyghurs 
in China do experience the heavy hand of the state. Nonetheless, as 
the 2012 changeover in the Chinese leadership shows, a remarkably 
high proportion of the Han population generally accepts that the state 
will act for their benefit, and consensus would be an alternative 
characterization. This higher degree of social consensus may also be the 
key feature which marks the MSEA area and East Asia more broadly. 
Families, communities, regional governments and nation states all 
consider individualism and personal freedom of less importance than the 
harmony of the social unit. Put another way, social obligations always 
take precedence over individual freedoms. In linguistic terms this would 
Map 5.7
Core and Extensions of the MSEA Linguistic Area
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 243 ---
232	
Roger Blench
involve placing greater emphasis on speaking in a way comparable to 
those you encounter, or cultures with which you wish to assimilate. 
To understand this model by exploring a contrasting region, the 
Papuan area on the southeastern edge of ISEA illustrates the nature of 
acephalous societies characterized by a strong emphasis on individualism 
and personal achievement. In the Papuan area, there are no large-scale, 
hierarchical societies with economic pluralism and the division of 
labour. Equally, Papua is characterized by a high degree of linguistic 
diversity. Papuan cultures are well known to anthropologists for the 
“big man” culture, the achievement of social status through acquisition 
of wealth and the corresponding lack of social hierarchy. There is 
some evidence that social differentiation is underlined by the conscious 
attempt to make your language as different as possible from that of 
your neighbour.
An intriguing cultural correlate of this is that MSEA is above all 
the area where Buddhism has been accepted and persisted. Buddhism 
originated in the northeastern area of the Indian Subcontinent, but 
died out in South Asia (except in Nepal and the areas bordering the 
Himalayan region, as well as Sri Lanka) a few centuries after its spread, 
and has made only a limited comeback in recent times. Dividing into 
two streams early in its career, it became dominant in Sri Lanka, Tibet 
and Bhutan, and MSEA.4 Although, as the archaeological remains 
testify, it was clearly present in ISEA, i.e. in most of Sumatra and 
certain areas of Java, Bali, Kalimantan, and Sulawesi, it never became 
dominant, and coexisted or synthesized with Śaivism throughout most 
of its history. More importantly, Buddhism eventually died out in ISEA 
by the sixteenth century when Islam became the dominant religion of 
both the elites and the general population. 
Buddhism emphasizes the insignificance of the self and the 
importance of denying the ego, which certainly fits the consensus model 
described above. I am not arguing that Buddhism is responsible for the 
4	 Although Buddhism was never dominant in China and Japan, it became very important 
and well-represented in those countries throughout their histories.

--- PAGE 244 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
233
MSEA convergence phenomenon: indeed the reverse, i.e. that it was 
accepted and has persisted because of its congruence with an existing 
mindset. As a consequence it has therefore become dominant in MSEA, 
whereas it has withered in much of the Indian Subcontinent, where its 
value system is ultimately in contradiction to underlying cultural norms 
which emphasize extreme social differentiation. Interestingly, Hinduism, 
a religion which made important incursions throughout Southeast Asia 
(both on the mainland and in the islands) over nearly two millennia, has 
died out everywhere except Bali, Bali-influenced areas of Lombok, and 
pockets in remote areas of East Java. 
The incursion of Islam also seems to tell something of the same 
story. Its impact on MSEA has been very slight, with the exception of 
the Malay Peninsula, which was settled from the islands. By contrast, 
it has been very influential in ISEA almost as far as Melanesia. This 
could well be related to the much more opportunistic nature of 
Austronesian culture, who began their voyages from Taiwan as highly 
mobile fisher-foragers (Bulbeck 2008; Blench 2012). Their very success 
seems to have been their capacity to adapt and adopt cultural identities 
as they went, and Islam, with its mercantile ideology, seems to have 
been a good “fit” with their existing patterns.
Two objections to this model seem obvious, i.e. the prevalence 
of violent confrontation between different ethnic groups in Southeast 
Asian prehistory, and the emblematic use of dress and jewellery styles 
to express difference. Even a cursory reading of MSEA history reveals 
a mind-numbing succession of wars between the Thais, Laos, Burmese, 
Khmer and Viet, seeming to contradict state philosophies espousing 
Buddhist values—notably those underlining the importance of peace. 
However, violence itself does not run counter to the model described 
above; indeed it is driven by the wish to enforce consensus. Communal 
values are not those of the nation state and persist long after individual 
polities pass into history. 
More intriguing is the highly characteristic pattern described in §5, 
i.e. the use of dress styles to mark ethnicity. One way of thinking of 
this is that ethnicity in MSEA corresponds to clan or moiety in other 
regions of the world. Acephalous societies in Africa and Melanesia are

--- PAGE 245 ---
234	
Roger Blench
typically organized via opposing kin groups. The formation of clans or 
similar units is not seen as contradicting the larger ethnic unit, and clans 
do not usually wear marked dress or ornament. Hence dress in MSEA 
expresses unity in diversity, a rather more formal way of operationalizing 
difference. A parallel in western culture might be the ephemeral cultures 
of teenagers, marking their similarity to one another, differentiating them 
from adults through the use of emblematic language and dress. Teenagers, 
however, are unlikely to think this marks them as “not” English, French 
or whatever.
8.  Conclusion
This chapter provides preliminary evidence for an MSEA culture 
area which corresponds to a well-established linguistic convergence 
zone. Language and material culture are relatively objective markers 
which can be plotted on a map and the map reveals a series of sharp 
delimitations, beyond which neither cultural items nor social models 
easily spread. The assumption is that this culture area also reflects a 
structural and psychological map of the many societies within the region. 
The corresponding psychogeographic map which establishes the core and 
delineates the boundaries is inevitably harder to draw and will remain 
controversial, especially as it has clear political implications, some of 
which will be unpalatable to nationalists. Descriptive ethnography is not 
much in favour these days, but a greater understanding of the sociology 
and culture of MSEA peoples will extend our understanding of the 
structural principles that underlie them.
References
Abbi, Anvita. Endangered Languages of the Andaman Islands. Munich: Lincom 
Europa, 2006. 
———. “Is Great Andamanese Genealogically and Typologically Distinct from 
Onge and Jarawa?” Language Sciences 31, no. 6 (2009): 791–812.
———. Dictionary of the Great Andamanese Language (English – Great Andamanese 
– Hindi). (First Edition with a CD-ROM). Delhi, India: Ratna Sagar, 2012.
———. A Grammar of the Great Andamanese Language: An Ethnolinguistic Study. 
Leiden: Brill, 2013.

--- PAGE 246 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
235
Anisyutkin, N.K. and V.I. Timofeyev. “The Paleolithic Flake Industry in Vietnam”. 
Archaeology, Ethnology and Anthropology of Eurasia 3, no. 27 (2006): 
16–24.
Arnold, Alison, ed. South Asia: The Indian Subcontinent. Garland Encyclopaedia 
of World Music, 5. New York and London: Garland Publishing, 2000.
Balfour, Henry. “The Origin of West African Crossbows”. Journal of the Royal 
African Society VIII, no. XXXII (1909): 337–56.
Becker, Henrik. Der Sprachbund. Berlin-Leipzig: G. Mindt, 1948.
Blench, Roger M. “Was There an Austroasiatic Presence in Island SE Asia prior 
to the Austronesian Expansion?” Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association 30 (2011): 133–44.
———. “Almost Everything You Believed about the Austronesians Isn’t True”. In 
Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from the 13th International Conference of 
the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 1, edited 
by Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke and Dominik Bonatz. Singapore: 
NUS Press, 2012.
———. “Was There Once an Arc of Vegeculture Linking Melanesia with Northeast 
India?” In Pacific Archaeology: Documenting the Past 50,000 Years to the 
Present, edited by Glenn R. Summerhayes and Hallie Buckley. Otago: University 
of Otago, 2013a.
———. “The Prehistory of the Daic (Tai-Kadai) Speaking Peoples and the 
Hypothesis of an Austronesian Connection”. Unearthing Southeast Asia’s 
Past: Selected Papers from the 12th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 1, edited by Marijke J. 
Klokke and Véronique Degroot. Singapore: National University of Singapore 
Press, 2013b.
———. “The Origins of Nominal Affixes in MSEA Languages: Convergence, 
Contact and Some African Parallels”. In Mainland Southeast Asian Languages: 
The State of the Art, edited by N.J. Enfield and Bernard Comrie. Canberra: 
Pacific Linguistics, 2014.
———. “The Patterns of Musical Practice in Melanesia: Can This be Tied to 
Linguistic Affiliation?” Paper presented at the 3rd confernce on Papuan Linguistics, 
Manokwari, 2014.
———. “Origins of Ethnolinguistic Identity in Southeast Asia”. In Handbook of 
East and  Southeast Asian Archaeology, edited by Junko Habu, Peter Lape, 
John Olsen and Jing Zhichun. New York: Springer, in press a.
———. “The History and Distribution of the Free-Reed Mouth-Organ in SE 
Asia”. Papers from the 14th EurASEAA, Dublin, 18–21 September 2012, 
edited by H. Lewis. Singapore: NUS Press, in press b.
Bulbeck, David. “An Integrated Perspective on the Austronesian Diaspora: The 
Switch from Cereal Agriculture to Maritime Foraging in the Colonisation of 
Island SE Asia”. Australian Archaeology 67 (2008): 31–52.

--- PAGE 247 ---
236	
Roger Blench
Calo, Ambra. Trails of Bronze Drums Across Early Southeast Asia: Exchange 
Routes and Connected Cultural Spheres. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2014.
Champion, Paul. Fabrication of Gongs or Tom-toms at Un-Chong-Lan, near Shanghai: 
Industries anciennes et modernes de l’empire chinois. Paris, 1869.
Chang, T.T. “Domestication and the Spread of the Cultivated Rices”. In Foraging 
and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation, edited by David R. Harris 
and Gordon C. Hillman. London: Unwin Hyman, 1989.
Chazée, Laurent. The Peoples of Laos: Rural and Ethnic Diversities. Bangkok: 
White Lotus, 1999.
Collaer, Paul. Ozeanien. Musikgeschichte in Bildern, i/1. Leipzig: VEB, 1965.
———. Sudostasien. Musikgeschichte in Bildern, i/3. Leipzig: VEB, 1979.
Enfield, Nick J. Linguistic Epidemiology: Semantics and Grammar of Language 
Contact in Mainland Southeast Asia. London: Routledge Curzon, 2003.
———. “Areal Linguistics and Mainland Southeast Asia”. Annual Review of 
Anthropology 34, no. 1 (2005): 181–206. Available at <http://nickenfield.org/
files/annurevanthro34081804120406.pdf>.
Enfield, Nick J. and Bernard Comrie, eds. Mainland Southeast Asian Languages: 
The State of the Art. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 2014.
Ferguson, Charles. “The Ethiopian Language Area”. In Language in Ethiopia, 
edited by M.L. Bender, J.D. Bowen, R.L. Cooper, and C.A. Ferguson. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1976. 
Finsterbüsch, Käte. “Die Mundorgeln des Museums für Völkerkunde zu Leipzig: 
Beiträge zur Völkerforschung”. In Hans Damm zum 65: Geburtstag, edited by 
Museum für Völkerkunde Leipzig. Textband und Tafelband. (2 Bände). Berlin: 
Akademie-Verlag, 1961. 
Forestier, Hubert, Truman Simanjuntak, Dominique Guillaud, Dubel Driwantoro, 
Ketut Wiradnyana, Darwin Siregar, Rokus Due Awe and Budiman. “Le site de 
Tögi Ndrawa, île de Nias, Sumatra nord: Les premières traces d’une occupation 
hoabinhienne en grotte en Indonésie”. Comptes Rendus Paléoevolution 4 
(2005): 727–33. 
Frame, Edward M. “The Musical Instruments of Sabah, Malaysia”. Ethnomusicology 
26, no. 2 (1982): 247–74. 
Gorman, Chester F. “The Hoabinhian and After: Subsistence Patterns in Southeast 
Asia during the Late Pleistocene and Early Recent Periods”. World Archaeology 
2 (1971): 300–20. 
Guangsheng, Feng. “Winds”. In Music in the Age of Confucius, edited by Jenny 
F. So. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 2000.
Heine, Bernd and Derek Nurse, eds. A Linguistic Geography of Africa. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Izikowitz, Karl Gustav. Lamet: Hill Peasants in French Indochina. Etnologiska 
Studier 17. Goteborg: Etnografiska Museet, 1951.

--- PAGE 248 ---
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an MSEA Linguistic Area	
237
Kunst, Jaap. Music in Flores: A Study of the Vocal and Instrumental Music Among 
the Tribes Living in Flores. Leiden: Brill, 1942.
———. Metre, Rhythm, and Multi-part Music. Leiden: Brill, 1950.
Lebar, Frank M. Ethnic Groups of Insular Southeast Asia. New Haven: HRAF 
Press, 1972.
Maceda, José. Gongs and Bamboo: A Panorama of Philippine Musical Instruments. 
Manila: University of the Philippines Press, 1998.
Matisoff, James A. “Sino-Tibetan Linguistics: Present State and Future Prospects”. 
Annual Review of Anthropology 20 (1991): 469–504.
Matthews, J.M. “The Hoabinhian in Southeast Asia and Elsewhere”. PhD thesis, 
Australian National University, Canberra, 1964.
———. “A Review of the ‘Hoabinhian’ in Indo-China”. Asian Perspectives 9 
(1966): 86–95.
Miller, Terry E. “Free-Reed Instruments in Asia: A Preliminary Classification”. In 
Music East and West: Essays in Honor of Walter Kaufmann, edited by Thomas 
Noblitt. New York: Pendragon Press, 1981. 
Milne, Leslie. The Home of an Eastern Clan: A Study of the Palaungs of the Shan 
States. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press, 1924.
Morton, David. The Traditional Music of Thailand. Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: 
UC Press, 1976.
Mundy, Peter. The Travels of Peter Mundy in Europe and Asia 1608–1667. Three 
vols. London: Hakluyt Society, 1919.
Needham, Joseph. Science and Civilisation in China, 5 (6). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2004.
Nicolas, Arsenio. “Gongs, Bells, and Cymbals: The Archaeological Record in 
Maritime Asia from the Ninth to the Seventeenth Centuries”. Yearbook for 
Traditional Music 41 (2009): 62–93. 
Oppitz, Michael Thomas Kaiser, Alban von Stockhausen and Marion Wettstein, 
eds. Naga Identities Changing Local Cultures in the Northeast of India. Gent: 
Snoeck Publishers, 2008.
Rappoport, Dana. “The Enigma of Alternated Duet in Flores and Solor (Eastern 
Indonesia)”. In Tradition, Identity, and History Making in Eastern Indonesia, 
edited by Hans Hagerdal. Papers from the Sixth Euroseas Conference, 
Gothenburg, 26–28 August 2010. Växjö, Kalmar: Linnaeus University Press, 
2011.
Reid, Lawrence A. “The Current Status of Austric”. In The Peopling of East Asia: 
Putting Together Archaeology, Linguistics and Genetics, edited by Laurent Sagart, 
Roger Blench and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. London: Routledge Curzon, 2005. 
Schlesinger, Joachim. Hill Tribes of Vietnam. Volume 1 – Introduction and Overview. 
Bangkok: White Lotus, 1997.
———. Hill Tribes of Vietnam. Volume 2 – Profile and Existing Hill Tribes. Bangkok: 
White Lotus, 1998.

--- PAGE 249 ---
238	
Roger Blench
———. Ethnic Groups of Laos. Vol. 1: Introduction and Overview. Bangkok: White 
Lotus, 2003a.
———. Ethnic Groups of Laos. Vol. 2: Profile of Austro-Asiatic-Speaking Peoples. 
Bangkok: White Lotus, 2003b.
———. Ethnic Groups of Laos. Vol. 3: Profile of Austro-Thai-Speaking Peoples. 
Bangkok: White Lotus, 2003c.
———. Ethnic Groups of Laos. Vol. 4: Sino-Tibetan-Speaking Peoples. Bangkok: 
White Lotus, 2003d.
———. Ethnic Groups of Cambodia. V.1: Introduction and Overview. Bangkok: 
White Lotus, 2011a.
———. Ethnic Groups of Cambodia. V.2: Profile of Austro-Asiatic-Speaking Peoples. 
Bangkok: White Lotus, 2011b.
———. Ethnic Groups of Cambodia. V.3: Profile of Austro-Thai and Sinitic Peoples. 
Bangkok: White Lotus, 2011c. 
Schuessler, Axel. ABC Etymological Dictionary of Old Chinese. Honolulu: Hawai’i 
University Press, 2007.
Schwörer-Kohl, Gretel. “Mundorgel”. In Die Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart, 
vol 6. Kassel, Germany, 1997.
Simbriger, H. “Gong und Gongspiele”. Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie 
xxxvi (1939): 1–172.
Thurgood, Graham and Fengxiang Li. “Contact Induced Variation and Syntactic 
Change in the Tsat of Hainan”. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the 
Berkeley Linguistics Society 28, no. 2 (2012).
Trubetzkoy, N.S. “Proposition 16”. In Actes du premier congrès international des 
linguistes 17–18. Leiden: Sijthoff, 1928.
Waterson, Roxanna. The Living House: An Anthropology of Architecture in South-
East Asia. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press, 1990. [3rd Edition: Thames 
and Hudson, 1997.]
Wu Ben. “Archaeology and History of Musical Instruments in China”. In East Asia: 
China, Japan and Korea. Garland Encyclopaedia of World Music, Volume 7. 
London: Routledge, 2002.
Wu, Rung-Shun. The Music of the Aborigines on Taiwan Island, Vol. 5. The Songs 
of the Atayal Tribe. TCD 1505. Taipei: Wind Records, 1994.
———. The Music of the Aborigines on Taiwan Island, Vol. 7. The Songs of the 
Paiwan Tribe. TCD 1507. Taipei: Wind Records, 1995.
Yampolsky,
 
Philip. “Is Eastern Insulindia a Distinct Musical Area?” Archipel 90 
(2015): 153–87.
Zemp, Hugo. “Are’are Classification of Musical Types and Instruments”. 
Ethnomusicology 22, no. 1 (1978): 37–67. 
Zhang Xingrong. “A New Discovery: Traditional Eight-part Polyphonic Singing of 
the Hani in Yunnan”, translated by Helen Rees. CHIME, 10–11 (1997): 145–52.

--- PAGE 250 ---
239
6
Was there a late prehistoric 
integrated Southeast Asian 
maritime space? 
Insight from Settlements and 
Industries
Bérénice Bellina
1.  Introduction
The focus on globalization has encouraged researchers in the humanities 
to rethink cultural processes on wide spatial and temporal scales, i.e. 
those of the world and the long-term (Assayag 1998), and to emphasize 
processes of social, economic and cultural integration.1 When understood 
1	 I follow Bentley’s (1999) minimal characterizing criteria, i.e. that integration takes 
place when cross-cultural interactions “bring about a division of labour between and 
among interacting societies or when they facilitate commercial, biological, or cultural 
exchanges between and among these socially and economically integrated maritime 
spaces interacting societies on a regular and systematic basis”.

--- PAGE 251 ---
240	
Bérénice Bellina
as an approach to history, researchers looked for processual continuities 
from prehistory to the modern era that could explain contemporary 
globalization (Beaujard 2005, 2012a, 2012b; Beaujard, Berger and 
Norel 2009). Researchers hold that human history, when understood 
as a global process, has already experienced several sociocultural 
translocal processes of “globalizations”, such as Hellenization and 
Romanization in Europe, and Indianization and Islamization in 
Southeast Asia (Amselle 2000; Assayag 1998). While those translocal 
processes have been made the subject of abundant research over an 
extended period of time, the hypothesis of a maritime Southeast Asian 
globalization, possibly dominated by Austronesian speakers, is a relatively 
new field of research. The notion of an integrated maritime Southeast 
Asian space has long been advocated by Braudel-inspired historians 
such as Anthony Reid, for whom long-established interconnections 
within the South China Sea accounted for the strong spatial and human 
integration he observed in Southeast Asia in modern times. However, 
recent advances in the field of prehistory led a few archaeologists to 
argue for an interaction sphere that existed already in the prehistoric 
period (Bulbeck 2008; Hung et al. in press; Solheim 2006). Indeed, 
it is now demonstrated that in the second millennium BC populations 
actively interacted and exchanged technologies, human experiences 
and valuable goods thanks to an advanced sailing technology within 
the South China Sea. From then on some networks were established, 
as indicated by shared ceramic traditions and the circulation of 
characteristic nephrite ornaments. For these archaeologists, these 
interactions could well have laid the ground for common practices and 
cultural affinities accounting for the ease with which populations have 
been circulating and exchanging goods and ideas from the Metal Age, 
by 500 BC. From this period onward, exchanges increased and trans- 
ethnic networks began to generate significant quantity of characteristic 
stone and glass ornaments, distinctive decorated ceramics related 
to the “Sa Huynh-Kalanay complex”—an expression forged by Solheim 
(1961)—whose distribution spans from the shores of the Thai–Malay 
Peninsula to those of the Philippines and of the Indonesian archipelago. 
In other regions, the common distribution of similar prestige goods 
across large zones observed in various chiefdoms in Central America,

--- PAGE 252 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
241
in Hawaii (Hantman and Plog 1982; Earle 1990), and in the Philippines 
(Junker 1990, 1993, 1999; Bacus 2003) had been interpreted as manifesting 
an inter-polity symbolic system expressing elite group alliances and 
shared identity. In such context, it becomes legitimate to question 
whether some political and sociocultural configurations that prefigured 
certain patterns described for the historical periods in maritime Southeast 
Asia developed during the Metal Age. This in turns leads us to question 
the plausibility that translocal cultural dynamics existed in maritime 
Southeast Asia before “Indianization”. In other words, is there evidence 
for shared patterns of values, norms and cultural models during the 
late prehistoric period that could be indicative of an ancient regional 
integration? If this were the case, can we identify common socio-
political strategies? Also, can we observe an evolution through time and 
especially when South and Southeast Asian networks intertwined by the 
late centuries BC? These are some of the issues this chapter will tackle 
based on recent archaeological data. Two types of evidence, I feel, are 
especially relevant for the discussion:
The first one worth considering, even if data are still scarce, comes 
from investigations of late prehistoric settlements with respect to 
Co Loa in northern Vietnam and Khao Sam Kaeo in the Thai–Malay 
Peninsula. Nam C. Kim (2013) and Bérénice Bellina (Bellina et 
al. 2014; Bellina 2016, in press) respectively argue that for a late 
prehistoric emergence of urbanism, a process traditionally considered as a 
historical one correlated to the development of early States. Though 
the two locales belonged to very different contexts, and Co Loa being 
not immediately adjacent to maritime networks, they still provide 
useful insights to the socio-political and economic changes that many 
populations were facing in Southeast Asia at that time, which arguably 
motivated their elite to display their political agenda upon their 
surrounding topography. How did they choose to materialize their 
power and what may have been their sources of inspiration? This chapter 
argues that there already are hints of an urban tradition in the maritime 
region, and that these features prefigure later historical configurations. 
The second source of information comes from the analysis of the 
socio-technical system of two types of industries found within maritime 
networks, which may be seen as indicative of shared models. The two

--- PAGE 253 ---
242	
Bérénice Bellina
are hybrid-type productions. The first, i.e. stone ornaments, associates 
South Asian technologies and regional style; the second, i.e. the 
“Sa Huynh-Kalanay” ceramics, often associates local technologies with 
South China Sea style. What does this common lexicon tell us about 
the different societies referring to it? I will propose some hypotheses 
on the socio-political context of the societies producing or ordering it 
and the potential socio-political strategies they may have served, and 
argue in favour of the existence of an early integration whereby trading 
nodes constituted cradles for hybrid cultural products at the heart of 
these socio-political practices.
The data discussed here were obtained by the Thai–French 
archaeological mission in the Upper Thai–Malay Peninsula. The Thai–
Malay Peninsula has long been a crossroads for cultural and material 
exchanges. This programme aims at defining the co-evolutions of the 
different populations of the Peninsula and of their environment in 
relation to long-distance trade, whether those were involved directly 
or indirectly. A particular focus is made on the pivotal period of the 
region’s integration in the so-called Maritime Silk roads, by the mid-first 
millennium BC, to highlight the possible continuities or discontinuities 
in the network’s socio-political and cultural constructions following this 
interlocking. To tackle these issues, the Thai–French Archaeological 
mission in Upper Thai–Malay Peninsula (regions of Chumphon and 
Ranong) excavates and surveys different types of sites representing 
various types of populations, socio-political organizations and environ­
ments (see Map 6.1). Those range from coastal sites with socially complex 
systems, cosmopolitan configurations and highly specialized crafts 
such as at the early urban and industrial port of Khao Sam Kaeo 
(Bellina-Pryce and Silapanth 2008; Bellina, Epinal and Favereau 
2012; Bellina in press), Phu Khao Thong (Ranong province) (Bellina 
2014; Borell, Bellina and Chaisuwan 2014) and Khao Sek (Langsuan, 
Chumphon province) to coastal and offshore cave sites such as Tham Tuay, 
Tham Phla, Phu Khao Thong (Langsuan) and Koh Din, used as temporary 
camping sites and for funerary purposes (Bellina, Epinal and Favereau 
2012), and finally to sites in the interior along transpeninsular routes, 
cave sites and open air sites such as Tham Than Nam Lot. The materials

--- PAGE 254 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
243
MAP 6.1 
Archaeological Map of the Chumphon and Ranong Provinces,  
Thai-French Archaeological Mission in Upper Thai-Malay Peninsula
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 255 ---
244	
Bérénice Bellina
or features discussed in this article are diverse and come from these 
different types of contexts, which exemplify the complexity of late 
prehistoric socio-political networks. 
2.  Background: The Construction of the Notion of an 
Integrated Maritime Space
Before examining settlement and socio-technological evidence that could 
provide hints on shared cultural patterns and in particular of socio-political 
traits during the late prehistoric period in maritime Southeast Asia, a 
historiographic overview of the issue is in order. 
In Southeast Asian historiography, the notion of continuity has largely 
dominated explanations on the construction of socio-political models 
and, more broadly, of cultural configurations (Reid 1988, introduction; 
Lieberman 2003; Andaya and Andaya 2015, pp. 35–81). This continuity 
has been postulated at a time when little was known on the prehistoric 
and early historical periods. In the 1980s, Ian Glover opened the avenue 
to studies of long distance late prehistoric period exchange networks, to 
which were traditionally associated issues of State and urban formation, 
and in particular with South Asia (Glover 1983, 1989, 1990a, 1990b, 
1991, 1996a, 1996b, 2000). From then, the topic that has received most 
interest has been the transition from late prehistoric chiefdoms/kingdoms 
to States in relation to trade. Explanations conceived that the region 
owed much of its economic development to demands from South Asian 
or Chinese markets, whilst its political development resulted mainly 
from the desire to control this trade (Wisseman Christie 1995). Inspired 
by later historical situations, it was hypothesized that peer-polity 
interactions between the late prehistoric competing polities was a likely 
driving force for the transmission and elaboration of political models 
found within historical states (Andaya 2008; Wisseman Christie 1995, 
p. 250). Continuity and external impetus from her two neighbours China 
and India have long been seen as two main dynamics of Southeast Asian 
historical trajectories. This position prevailed even if the externalist 
paradigm, born during the colonial period, that contrasted a coherent 
universalist/global Indic cultural package to a mosaic of local, indigenous 
Southeast Asian responses had been obsolete for a long time (Pollock

--- PAGE 256 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
245
1998, 2000). It has been shown that there existed no unified Indian 
culture that produced Indianization and that South Asia itself partook 
of the same process of Indianization (Kulke 1990; Pollock 1996, 1998, 
2000, 2006). Second, in both South and Southeast Asia, societies have 
been shown to be characterized by their diversity and their various 
levels of social development (Smith 1999; Morrison and Junker 2002). 
Third, research focussing on Southeast Asian early historical settlements 
associated to the earliest States has been critical in showing continuity 
with previous occupations. Those settlements include mainly Funan at 
Oc Eo and Angkor Borei in the Mekong delta (Stark 1998, 2006; Stark 
et al. 1999; Stark and Bong 2001; Manguin 2004), Go Cam (a site of the 
polity of Linyi) and Tra Kieu (the ancient capital of Champa) in Central 
Vietnam (Glover and Yamagata 1995; Dung, Glover, and Yamagata 2006; 
Yamagata 2007, 2014), Bujang Valley remains of Kedah in Peninsular 
Malaysia (Chia and Mokhtar 2011; Mokhtar 2009 and undated) and 
Tarumanagara and Batujaya in West Java (Glover and Yamagata 1995; 
Dung, Glover, and Yamagata 2006; Yamagata 2007, 2014). 
Simultaneously, understanding of Southeast Asian long distance 
late prehistoric networks benefited from the construction of broad 
comparative regional databases. Data came from fine compositional 
and technological analysis of crafts products circulating on these 
networks. Those include, to cite only a few, the Indian-type of 
knobbed or decorated high-tin bronze bowls (Glover 1991; Srinivasan 
and Glover 1995; Srinivasan 1997, 2010; Pryce et al. 2011, 2014), 
glass (Dussubieux 2001; Dussubieux and Gratuze 2010; Dussubieux, 
Gratuze, and Blet-Lemarquand 2010; Dussubieux et al. 2012; Carter 
2013), chalcedony ornaments (Theunissen 1998; Theunissen, Grave, and 
Bailey 2000; Bellina 2001, 2003, 2007; Theunissen 2007; Carter 2013; 
Carter and Dussubieux 2016), nephrite ornaments (Hung et al. 2007; 
Hung and Bellwood 2010), Indian fine wares such as rouletted ware 
and kendi-type of ware (Bouvet 2006, 2011, 2012), Sa Huynh-Kalanay-
related ware (Favereau 2015; Favereau and Bellina in press) and metals 
(Pryce, Bellina-Pryce, and Bennett 2008; Murillo-Barroso et al. 2010; 
Pryce et al. 2011, 2014). Beside helping to trace networks and their 
evolution through time, these databases began to provide firmer grounds 
to reconstruct socioeconomic contexts and cultural interactions.

--- PAGE 257 ---
246	
Bérénice Bellina
To what extent can we trace back in time the antiquity of these 
networks is a question at the hearth of current research. It is now clear 
that populations had been actively interacting, exchanging technologies 
and valuable goods thanks to an advanced sailing technology prior to 
the Neolithic (Bulbeck 2008; Soares et al. 2016). In maritime Southeast 
Asia, the dispersal of Austronesian-speaking groups has long been 
correlated to the spread of agricultural practices (Bellwood 1995, 1996, 
1997, 2007), a model that has been increasingly contested (Blench 
2012, 2014, under press; Meacham 1984–85; Oppenheimer 2004; 
Szabo and O’Connor 2004; Spriggs 2007; Bulbeck 2008; Lewis 2008; 
Hunt and Rabett 2013; Blench 2014). Nowadays, three main models 
explain prehistoric maritime Southeast Asian connectivity. Hung and 
Bellwood (2010) postulate the permanence of exchange networks and 
continuity of some cultural practices since the Neolithic through a 
combination of trade and Austronesian-speaking population movements. 
The incentive for the circulations would have begun with the search 
for land, agriculture, demographic expansion and religion. Solheim 
and Bulbeck see a trans-ethnic trading and communication network 
which ended up producing a common culture and an Austronesian 
lingua franca whose main incentive was trade (Solheim 2006). 
Recently, Bulbeck (2008) suggested that the Austronesian-speaking 
traders were, thanks to their advances in navigation technology, highly 
mobile fisher-foragers entering a previously existing Austro-Asiatic 
interaction sphere. Bulbeck (ibid.), Blench (2012) and Soares et al. 
(2016) disconnect the movements of Austronesian-speakers from 
agriculture. Blench opposes an alternative view whereby the so-called 
“Austronesian cultural package” is a late construction made from elements 
that Austronesian speakers integrated opportunistically from the various 
pre-existing populations they encountered on their way, a long process 
he calls “austronesianization”. For him, a pan-Austronesian religion and 
trade were the incentive of this cultural harmonization. These models 
have implications on the later cultural and linguistic shared models 
leading to question whether these interactions and networks established 
during the second millennium were maintained through time. Hung and 
Bellwood and their colleagues believe that a continuity existed. They 
observe shared pottery traditions as early as the second millennium BC

--- PAGE 258 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
247
in the South China Sea (the Bin Chau tradition) that would translate 
into links existing between the Philippines and Vietnam, and which 
would prefigure the late prehistoric Sa Huynh-Kalanay pottery tradition 
(Hung et al. in press). They also believe that the spread of jar burial 
tradition may result from these privileged sea links. The antiquity and 
potential permanence of networks led some researchers to hypothesize 
that this period could also correspond to the formative period when 
socio-political patterns started to be developed. 
Let us now turn to recent lines of data that could bring light on 
the question as to whether data from settlement configuration and from 
specific craft productions entailed different levels of networks.
3.  Late Prehistoric Settlements: Can We Talk of the 
Emergence of an Early Maritime Urban Tradition?
Early Southeast Asian urbanization remains poorly understood, particularly 
in the maritime area. The emergence of cities in Southeast Asia is a 
very complex and hotly debated issue that this chapter will not tackle as 
I deal with it elsewhere (Bellina in press). The issue is complex insofar 
as various definitions apply to what we may now call a “city”, and 
because of the generally poor preservation of settlement remains in a 
tropical context. My aim here is to argue that from the late centuries 
BC complex settlements started to emerge; these settlements were 
seats of polities whose configurations translate into centralization and 
a coherent political and socioeconomic agenda. In maritime Southeast 
Asia, major nodes were characterized by a cosmopolitan configuration; 
they concentrated in socio-professional quarters of various specialized 
groups producing hybrid cultural products. These may be perceived to 
prefigure the later city-states that thrived along the shores of the South 
China Sea. 
Khao Sam Kaeo represents such polity. It is a coastal complex polity 
whose emergence is clearly linked to the development of the maritime 
silk roads and which is securely dated to the very early fourth to 
second or first centuries BC. The site has been described elsewhere in 
detail (Bellina-Pryce and Silapanth 2008; Bellina et al. 2014; Bellina 
and Bernard, in press) so here suffice it to summarize the main features

--- PAGE 259 ---
248	
Bérénice Bellina
necessary for the discussion. Located eight kilometres from the current 
coastline, the site extends over four hills and is limited on its western 
side by the River Tha Tapao, which connects it with the China Sea in the 
east and with resource-rich forests in the north. Its size is of 55 ha and 
its occupation stricto sensu extends over 35 ha delimited by walls and 
palisaded ramparts. The bordering walls include simple and twin parallel 
earth walls that were probably surmounted by wooden palisades that did 
not survive. The presence of these ramparts expresses a double concern: 
first to retain sediments upslope and upstream, avoiding the erosion and 
redeposition that are induced by heavy monsoon rains (Allen in press), 
and second to delineate the urban space, delimiting specialized zones 
(Malakie LaClair 2008). The network of habitations on piles and terraces 
was dense and characterized by accumulations of terraces and drains. 
All craft activities (iron, copper-base alloy, and hard stones) expanded 
both on the tops and bases of the hills, except that the lapidary glass, 
stone, and glass-bracelet craft centers have been identified exclusively 
in the lower parts of Valley 1 and along the river. Two clearly defined 
zones emerge from the spatial analysis: a southern area corresponding to 
Hills 1 and 2, most likely used by local populations and a few foreign 
craftspersons, and a northern area, including Hills 3 and 4, occupied by 
various Asian groups: South Asian, Southeast Asian, and East Asian. 
The southern area yielded different types of productions related to the 
South China Sea lexicon: “Sa Huynh-Kalanay” type of ware, glass and 
stone ornaments. This zone is taken to be the oldest core of the site that 
later expended to the north. The northern part of the settlement (Hills 
3 and 4) yielded evidence for habitation and for different types of craft 
production associated with various groups from South, Southeast, and East 
Asia. Some materials were imported; others were locally produced with 
exogenous or local techniques. Several of these locally made artefacts 
belong to the sets of items shared amongst communities along the shore 
of the South China Sea.
Khao Sam Kaeo cosmopolitan configuration is highlighted by the 
spatial distribution of materials as well as by its monumental constructions. 
The enclosing walls, moats and water systems were built, transformed 
and heavily maintained over centuries and thus appear to be the product 
of what can be regarded as a coherent political agenda that was

--- PAGE 260 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
249
implemented over several generations. In conjunction with other lines of 
evidence, they are indicative of a certain form of perennial centralized 
power and of a common sense of civic community (Bellina in press; 
Bellina and Bernard in press). The walls had multiple purposes, i.e. not 
only acted as a barrier against floods or favoured certain agricultural 
activities, but also covered a symbolic function, playing a great social 
and political significance. This multiplicity of functions seems to have 
often been the case in the early forms of city walls found elsewhere 
in Asia (Smith 2003; Indrawooth 2004; Moore and Win 2007; Kim et 
al. 2010; Kim 2013). In a tropical Southeast Asian environment where 
most remains in urban context are very poorly preserved, enclosures 
constitute a crucial element for discussing socio-political trajectories. 
Besides attesting a form of authority able to control considerable labour 
for their erection and maintenance, they may also have been a means 
by which this authority could be strengthened. Alternatively, these 
monuments may have played a significant symbolic role giving a sense 
of common identity for the community living within its boundaries 
(Smith 2003; Kim 2013; Bellina in press).
In addition to monumental evidence, socio-political complexity is 
indicated by the internal organization of the site characterized by socio-
professional zones hosting different social groups and activities. The socio-
technical system, a reflection of the socioeconomic and political context, 
is also complex. These industries have set up far-reaching supplying 
and distribution networks (the glass industry is a good example) and 
involved foreign specialists often implementing highly skilled techniques 
to produce hybridized products meeting the different levels of demands. 
Finally, this trade-oriented polity has proved to have been able to 
organize the food supply to host full-time specialists in various arts and 
crafts, be it by importing some of them from a more or less distant 
hinterland or by supporting an adequate agricultural base at the site and 
its immediate surroundings (Allen in press; Castillo in press). 
The sources of inspiration for the elaboration of the urban space in 
Southeast Asia constitute a long debated issue. The position currently 
held by Nam Kim for Co Loa in North Vietnam and by myself for 
Khao Sam Kaeo suggests a combination of regional developments and 
external inputs. Both Co Loa and Khao Sam Kaeo represent hybrid

--- PAGE 261 ---
250	
Bérénice Bellina
forms of urbanization, the product of multiple, more or less remote 
sources of inspiration. To be clear, the sources cannot be fully appreciated 
yet, given the state of research on this topic and the paucity of evidence 
in the neighbouring Môn region of Central and Lower Myanmar, and 
in the insular world for this period. However, among the various sources 
of urban inspiration, both sites seem to owe to the contemporaneous 
moated settlements that are found in many parts of Mainland Southeast 
Asia on the one hand and to those settlements belonging to what Kim 
has termed the “moated-settlement tradition” on the other. In Mainland 
Southeast Asia, prehistoric moated settlements are found in various 
regions ranging from Myanmar to Vietnam. Their function and 
precise dating are often still unclear: were they proto-urban inhabited 
settlements, or ceremonial centres? In any case, all these sites reflect 
efforts to control water and hence can be seen as early participants 
in the process of experimentation that led to the elaborate Southeast 
Asian traditions of water management that are well-represented, for 
instance, in the Khmer Empire and the Dvaravati and Pyu cities. 
Besides this regional source of inspiration I believe that Khao Sam Kaeo 
may have found inspiration amongst the South Asian enclosed cities 
that arose during the so-called “second urbanization”, which took 
place by the early to mid-first millennium BC. Similarities concern 
morphology, location, size and rampart system. However, comparison 
cannot be pushed further given the dearth of comparative data on the 
plan and internal organization of early Indian cities. Khao Sam Kaeo, 
with its cosmopolitan configuration marked by walled areas, differs in 
many ways from the known Indian cities; furthermore, the latter were 
not directly involved with overseas trade. Arikamedu (Begley 1996) 
and Pattanam (Cherian et al. 2007), being long-distance trade-oriented 
settlements, would probably provide more pertinent comparisons. 
However, successive excavations for the former and those currently 
taking place for the latter have not highlighted any overall city 
planning. This lack of opportunity to compare trading settlements from 
the Indian Subcontinent is a considerable handicap in our attempts to 
reconstruct the history of port-cities at a wider Asian scale. 
In Southeast Asia, it is very likely that the current absence of 
complex walled late prehistoric settlements comparable to those of

--- PAGE 262 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
251
Khao Sam Kaeo and of Co Loa reflects more the state of archaeological 
research than a historical reality. The existence of a commonality of 
patterns and features in fortified urban settlements across mainland 
Southeast Asia appears all the more plausible as Chinese texts refer 
to them in the early centuries AD. On the Thai–Malay Peninsula, 
Chinese sources describe the existence of several centralized polities. 
From the sixth century AD, the Liang Shu accounts that the capital of 
the Langkasukha polity located in the Pattani area was fortified and 
Wheatley (1983) hypothesized the use of “palisaded enceinte with 
double gates”. Similarly, the capital Siṁhapura of the Red-Earth 
Kingdom (probably in the area of Songkhla, a region located about 
350 km south of Chumphon) was protected by walls with triple gates. 
Within this enclosure the palace consisted of storeyed structures 
(Wheatley 1983, pp. 233–34). In another polity called Buan-Buan 
located somewhere in the Isthmus of Kra, the Chinese describe maritime 
people living mostly by the water-side and in default of city walls, 
depended on palisades. These allusions only provide vague descriptions 
for these early settlements on the Peninsula; this state of affairs is 
most regrettable as for this region archaeology fails to provide hard 
evidence for urbanism in trade-oriented sites before a later period. 
Other slightly later well-preserved evidence of a major trade-oriented 
site come from Sungai Batu, Kedah whose industrial, monumental and 
port structures date back to the third century AD (Chia and Mokhtar 
2011). The next chronological example of early historical walled city is 
Oc-èo pertaining to the Funan polity (first to twelfth centuries AD), 
which Bourdonneau has reinterpreted as an early trading city displaying 
Indian influence in its structuring and prefiguring the typical Khmer 
city model with its geometric cosmological plan (Bourdonneau 2007, 
pp. 122–23). 
One may argue that as early as the late prehistoric period, along with 
the development of long-distance exchanges, the “moated-settlement 
tradition” evolved in Mainland Southeast Asia by integrating foreign 
influences; concomitantly, in maritime Southeast Asia, analogous types 
of settlements started to display South Asian/Indic urban traits. The 
overall configuration of Khao Sam Kaeo bears elements heralding 
those found in much later maritime city-states that thrived along the

--- PAGE 263 ---
252	
Bérénice Bellina
fringes of the South China Sea, like Pasai, Banten, Malacca, Ayutthaya, 
etc. Khao Sam Kaeo shares with these port-cities a cosmopolitan 
topography marked by walls. As for their internal organization, Reid 
(1993, pp. 78–79) specifies that historical port-cities all had some “degree 
of cosmic order at their core, which always risked being completely 
overwhelmed by the chaotic influx of people attracted at times of 
prosperity[; …] only the royal citadel and adjacent public buildings 
were truly planned, while outside settlements clustered irregularly 
around markets, waterways, and the compounds of powerful patrons”. 
Miksic (2000, pp. 118–19), on the other hand, completes this picture 
adding that in reality, each “heterogenetic” city (trading cities) 
had a distinct trajectory with unique social, political and economic 
configurations. These particular configurations specific to each trading 
polity’s trajectory prevent us from elaborating a narrow definition 
and leaves room for flexibility. Khao Sam Kaeo is plausibly an early 
representative example of this tradition of “heterogenetic cities”. 
Historical accounts cited by Reid (1988, pp. 101–3) suggest that these 
cities patronized experts in the arts and crafts coming from various 
regions. Such a situation mirrors what spatial and technological 
reconstructions evidence at Khao Sam Kaeo. Like in later trading ports, 
highly specialized industries were attached to compounds, implementing 
advanced technologies to produce prized products, several of which 
were part of the symbolic assemblage shared by maritime Southeast 
Asian elites. The technological reconstruction of these industries, which 
produced prized objects such as some stone ornaments and specific 
ceramics, has allowed us to characterize their socio-political environment 
and their evolution.
4.  Maritime Southeast Asian Integrated Sphere:  
Evidence from Industries
Amongst the set of items shared in maritime Southeast Asia, some 
circulated prior to the connection with South Asian networks, such as 
the Dong Son drums from north Vietnam/Southern China (Calo 2014) 
or the lingling’o nephrite artefacts (Hung et al. 2007; Hung and 
Bellwood 2010) or hard stone ornaments (Bellina 2007); those support

--- PAGE 264 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
253
the view of an active and interconnected pre-existing prehistoric exchange 
network in the South China Sea with shared symbolic and cultural 
lexicon.
From the connection to South Asian and Chinese networks by the 
mid-first millennium BC onwards, we find a proliferation of production 
centres in the Kra Isthmus in the Thai–Malay peninsula. This proliferation 
is to such an extent that we can virtually talk of an “industrial 
specialization” of this region. The analysis of the distribution of 
ornaments crafted in these production centres, such as Khao Sam Kaeo, 
Phu Khao Thong and Khao Sek, is underway and should eventually 
allow us to determine whether they were feeding different networks: 
peer polities and/or hinterland providing the goods needed for export? 
So far, the analysis of the production at Khao Sam Kaeo provided clues 
to characterize the types of production and its socio-political context, 
and to suggest its social destination. Four traditions or groups were 
identified based on morpho-technological criteria (see Figure 6.1):
1.	 Group 1 was produced in the southern part of the settlement, 
and consists of both finished and unfinished products. This type 
of production, combining Indian raw material, highly skilled 
Indian technologies implying several years of apprenticeship 
with South China Sea-related style, is the earliest type I have 
identified in Southeast Asia, beginning in the fourth century BCE 
and found in Central Thailand (Ban Don Ta Phet), South Vietnam 
(Sa Huynh sites) and Palawan in the Philippines (Tabon caves). 
I have hypothesized that this category of products may have 
been produced by Indian craftsmen (Bellina 2001, 2003, 2007, 
2014). 
2.	 Group 2 consists in artefacts made of nephrite and mica and only 
includes a small range of shapes: three lingling’o comparable to 
those from Sa Huynh sites in Vietnam such as Giong Ca Vo and 
Lai Nghi and sites in the Philippines, the bicephalous ornaments 
(Nguyen 1995; Reinecke and Nguyen 2009) and bracelets 
(excluding fragments and raw material)—a range reduced still 
further at Khao Sam Kaeo where most evidence consists only 
of production evidence and partially worked raw material. Like 
Group 1, Group 2 is characterized by a type of ornament shared

--- PAGE 265 ---
254	
Bérénice Bellina
figure 6.1 
The Four Hard Stone Ornaments Groups Identified at Khao Sam Kaeo
Source: Author.
by South China Sea maritime communities but perhaps extending 
further northeast to include areas stretching to Taiwan (Lan-yu 
Island southeast of Taiwan). Specimens of this group are mainly 
found along with production waste on Hills 3 and 4.

--- PAGE 266 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
255
3.	 Group 3 is an Indian-inspired South China Sea type of production, 
associating Indian-derived morphologies with highly skilled 
Indian technologies. The group comprises ubiquitous 
morphologies alongside a wide variety of figurines, some clearly 
associated with Brahmanical, Buddhist or Jain imagery (at this 
early period, those cannot be differentiated yet). This group 
is characterized by a wide range of morphologies inspired by 
South Asian imagery but developed to an extent not seen 
elsewhere in South Asia. Group 3 is found amidst other Indian 
or Indian-inspired materials on Hill 3. Given the expertise 
implemented in producing artefacts belonging to Group 3, 
I hypothesize that those were likely made by South Asian 
artisans or local artisans trained by South Asians. This group 
was also probably produced at a slightly later stage than Group 
1. Even though some figurines belonging to Group 3, amongst 
which animals such as lions or tigers, tortoises, frogs, fish, etc., 
cannot be undeniably or uniquely related to Indian imagery, one 
notes their sudden appearance and diffusion in both South and 
Southeast Asia during the late centuries BC and early centuries 
CE. Group 3 was probably aimed at South China Sea network 
adapting Indian-inspired vocabulary on the site and in other 
Southeast Asian sites like in Ban Don Ta Phet in Central Thailand. 
This “Indianized South China Sea repertoire” differs in many 
respects from what is found in coeval South Asian contexts. 
Indeed, as noted above, Group 3 associates a vast range of 
morphologies, some of them very rare or absent in South Asia 
itself, with production of such a high quality that is infrequent 
in South Asia. 
4.	 Group 4 can hardly be described in detail as it suffers from the 
small number of specimens and from a lack of secured context, 
which was significantly disturbed by looting activities. It is 
difficult to say whether this type of production results from the 
transfer of Indian mass-production techniques or if it was inherited 
from a local tradition exemplified by polished axes occurring 
frequently in the region. The latter option sounds less plausible 
as the few beads which I have encountered in the region were 
made of soft stone or shell. Made on Hill 4 and found amongst

--- PAGE 267 ---
256	
Bérénice Bellina
Han material, this lower-quality type of production did not 
require great skill. It is also the latest group produced on the 
site since the Han material dates it at best from the late third 
century AD. 
The first three groups have been interpreted as productions made-to-
order by artisans patronized by trading elites. Attached specialization 
involves the manufacturing of restricted goods mostly aimed at elite 
patron consumption and redistribution through gifts; craftsmen’s 
subsistence was supported partially or wholly by the sponsor. This 
kind of specialization develops in complex societies and results from 
the elite’s desire to control both the production and the distribution 
of political currency used for legitimization, alliance-construction 
strategies and stabilization of authority. Because of the control exerted 
by the elites and the dependence of the attached specialists on them, 
the workshops were expected to be found in the vicinity of the elite 
habitation such as in a major regional centre (Brumfield and Earle 
1987). Extrapolating from later historical sources, Khao Sam Kaeo 
industries with what seems to be made-to-order ornaments production 
appears to correspond to this model indeed. So far, no production has 
been recovered outside its boundaries (i.e. walls or embankments). Craft 
specialists are not dispersed in the region but are concentrated within 
well-delimited parts of the settlement. Historical accounts show that 
large cities of the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries AD displayed 
socio-professional quarters each dedicated to a specialized craftsmanship. 
This concentration can be explained by the high demand that we would 
expect in the context of large urban centres, because those were nodes 
concentrating both local and international trading routes, and also 
because the wealthiest consumers, the royal courts and the merchants 
were also found there. Urban production centres continued to display 
this organization into the nineteenth century in Southeast Asian cities, 
such as Batavia and Surabaya, where artisans as well as communities 
of foreign traders continued to live in their specialist quarters or 
“kampung” (Reid 1988, pp. 101–13). Except perhaps in the case of 
Group 4, whose destination could not be determined, ornaments produced 
at Khao Sam Kaeo seem to satisfy specific, well-defined demands for 
very fine quality, high-skilled materials whose style is specific to a

--- PAGE 268 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
257
“South China Sea-network”. Was this demand exclusive for “royal” 
courts and merchant-aristocrats? If so, were they exerting some sort 
of control over the production? It is difficult to answer this question 
with the data at hand. Craft systems’ socio-political environment and 
their evolution in relation to trade is an under-investigated topic of 
archaeological research in Southeast Asia, the only exception being 
the systematic study carried out in the historical chiefdoms of the 
Philippines by Laura L. Junker (1999). Even for major historical 
maritime-trading polities such as Śrīvijaya, Champa or Malacca, 
archaeological data is absent. Allusions to the socioeconomic and 
political context in which craft specialists operated can be found 
in much later textual sources or in even more recent ethnographic 
descriptions. The latter mostly relates to patronized specialists. 
Ethnohistorical sources and archaeological researches of the political 
economy of Philippines chiefdoms show that “political currency” 
was generated through alliance-structures as well as through the 
sponsorship of artisans specializing in the production of luxury goods. 
Historical accounts relate how, in the case of such other high-value 
industries as those of the silversmith and goldsmith, shops were 
not stocked with ready-made ware. William Dampier (1651–1715) 
observed that the artisans’ reluctance to accumulate a large stock 
was explained by the risk of burglary on the one hand, and of using 
expensive raw materials without a secure commission on the other 
(Reid 1988, pp. 101–3). This state of affairs may have applied to 
artisans working other precious materials such as exotic hard stone 
ornaments. At Khao Sam Kaeo, no stock (of finished products) was 
recovered or reported neither in or near the workshops, or anywhere 
on the site. Finished products were found isolated (i.e. not as 
a group). 
How to interpret this commissioned work in socio-political 
terms? The production system probably contributed to the political 
legitimization of the trading elite, whether a ruler or a leading class. 
At Khao Sam Kaeo and most likely also in other port-cities yet to 
excavate, industrial systems probably participated in stabilizing the 
political position in relation to three different types of emulation. The 
first emulation was probably internal and was generated by the diverse

--- PAGE 269 ---
258	
Bérénice Bellina
communities or clans of local and foreign traders, craftsmen or religious 
specialists staying more or less temporarily in port-cities. Those groups 
were probably well aware of the novelties available in other port-cities 
and may have put more pressure on the port-city elite to remain 
up-to-date. 
The second emulation came from the need to maintain good 
relationships with other more volatile societies of different socio- 
political organization, be they seafaring populations or collectors of 
raw materials inhabiting the forested interior linked to the port-city—
populations with whom they developed inter-dependant relationships. 
These more volatile societies had to stay in the pyramidal social 
construction as they were vital for the attractiveness of the trading polity 
and thus the power of its leader. 
The third challenge was probably exerted by other societies of similar 
rank, such as other coastal trading polities whom they were competing 
with. I believe that some sort of “jousts of prestige” between trading 
elites took place in the context of competing trading polities. To what 
extent did those competitions encouraged excellence by pushing the 
limits of expertise (technologies)? This emulation through possible 
contests-like interactions for gaining and maintaining prestige might 
also have contributed to disseminating technologies, complex knowledge 
and cultural features amidst coastal urban elites. Such processes could 
have played a significant role in the transfer of exogenous cultural 
traits. However, the sequence of cultural exchanges between Indic and 
South China Sea sphere that this kind of stone ornament production 
revealed is that exogenous traits were exaggerated, be they technical 
or iconographic. Competing elites from early trading polities over-
emphasized the attributes of “otherness” deemed to be sophisticated. The 
social identity of trading populations across the South China Sea rested 
on the sublimation of what seem to be no longer South Asian cultural 
traits. Paralleling Greek models exaggerated in the Roman world, the 
“more Indian than Indian” cultural traits were synonym of excellence. 
The evolution of these industries and the socio-political strategies they 
served show how the “otherness” was handled in the construction of 
social identity. Such characteristic in the process of cultural exchange 
has also been attested in later historical periods in the realm of Khmer

--- PAGE 270 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
259
architecture (Dagens 2005, 2009), as well as in urbanism at Oc eo 
(Bourdonneau 2007) and may thus represent some sort of recurrent 
pattern throughout the region. 
Let us now look briefly at another hybrid industry whose stylistic 
lexicon is shared by South China Sea networks: the Sa Huynh-Kalanay 
types of ceramics. What does this industry tell us on the cultural sequence 
and the socio-political strategies? Aude Favereau (2014, 2015; Favereau 
and Bellina 2016) carries out a comparative study of Sa Huynh-Kalanay 
type of ceramics found in the Thai–Malay peninsula and along the 
shores of the South China Sea. One difficulty arising from its hazy 
chronological sequence is the lack of absolute dating. Typical of the 
Metal Age, this complex seems to decline after the early centuries AD 
in the Peninsula, but its peculiar style may have survived longer in 
the Philippines (Favereau, personal communication). In the Peninsula, 
most of these decorated ceramics relate to local technological traditions 
within which they seem to constantly represent a minority group. 
Though their decorative repertoire displays an “air de famille”, they 
also show distinctive traits (see Figure 6.2). These ceramics were 
found in an urban context in the southern part of Khao Sam Kaeo as 
well as in Tha Chana, another early trading polity of the Peninsula that 
have not yet been investigated because of their non-secure context; but 
they were also found in coastal cave sites as part of mortuary goods 
such as in Tham Tuay caves and in the recently excavated coastal 
caves of Phu Khao Thong (Langsuan). Their use was most likely 
exclusive and served special occasions. Favereau observes their great 
diversity within the Peninsula. This diversity may indicate a small-
scale production that was the result of occasional demand. Favereau’s 
technological reconstruction led her to conclude that some were locally 
produced with local techniques, others were locally produced with 
imported techniques whilst a small group was imported. All display a 
common style and tend to be sporadic. Who ordered these productions 
amongst whose producers? Although it is still premature to answer this 
question at this stage, one may hypothesize that these productions were 
commissioned to experienced craftsmen possibly staying in commercially 
active nodes.

--- PAGE 271 ---
260	
Bérénice Bellina
figure 6.2
Sa Huynh-type of Ware from the Thai-Malay Peninsula 
Source: Drawing and photos by Aude Favereau.
It is also still unclear who the groups that referred to this stylistic 
repertoire were. Were there natives of the peninsula who adopted a foreign 
style? Were there also groups coming from the Philippines from where

--- PAGE 272 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
261
this style likely originated, or from various regions of the South China 
Sea? This would conform well with G. Benjamin’s (1987) hypothesis. 
Benjamin argues that the ancient settling in the Kra Isthmus area was the 
result of sea-going populations intermarrying with local people. These 
seafarers were interested in trade and in particular in the opportunities 
offered by trans-peninsular routes. They would have come directly from 
the Philippines rather than through Indonesia (Benjamin 1987, p. 131) 
and would have been responsible for the remains of archaic forms of 
Austronesian lexical elements. Some small-scale Sa Huynh-Kalanay 
type of productions also found in the funerary site of Ho Diem in 
Vietnam (Yamagata 2008, 2012), would support this view. These groups 
may relate to very mobile sea populations that some ethnographic 
accounts show to have been guardians of sea lanes, collectors of 
sea products and involved in inter-island trade (Bellina, Epinal, and 
Favereau 2012). In the Malay context, they were part of the port-cities 
maritime hinterland, i.e. part of the polity social structure (Andaya 
2008).
Within the Peninsula, groups of different socioeconomic structure 
belonging to different contexts may have referred to this lexicon. It 
is possible that some of the populations that ordered and used these 
pots, possibly made by craftsmen working in large settlements, may 
have been mobile populations living in a symbiotic relationship with 
complex coastal trading polities. Were those natives of the Peninsula 
that became economically specialized or were they migrants attracted 
by trade and the openings of the trans-peninsular routes? Did 
sea-going elites and port-cities trading elites came to share similar 
tokens of power? These are questions that further research will 
hopefully help clarify.
5.  Conclusion
The study of settlements and crafts help us formulate the hypothesis 
of a late prehistoric maritime Southeast Asian integration area where 
common socio-political practices were elaborated. I believe that the late 
prehistoric period and the entrance of the region into a wider trans-
Asiatic network corresponds to the elaboration of an urban tradition

--- PAGE 273 ---
262	
Bérénice Bellina
that prefigures the later port-cities that thrived across the South China 
Sea. In this urban tradition, the elites may have referred to regional 
as well as Indian models. They chose to materialize their power with 
the erection of walls and the construction of quarters to which were 
attached highly specialized artisans, most likely working under their 
patronage to produce political currency and means of legitimization. 
These productions evolved in time, eventually integrating foreign 
elements that were sublimated and enhanced when deemed to be most 
sophisticated. A core characteristic of this South China Sea network 
culture is its capacity to adopt and exaggerate any foreign innovations 
serving socio-political strategies. This behaviour has been emphasized 
before by researchers such as Oliver Wolters (1999), thus suggesting a 
continuity in cultural practices.
Various groups from the Peninsula and the South China Sea (possibly 
from the Philippines, Indonesia and coastal Vietnam) participated in 
this network. At that time, some of them may have become assimilated 
to the maritime world and become socioeconomically specialized. The 
development of the trans-Asiatic network and of trading nodes that 
structured it may have opened a range of opportunities for groups 
to exploit economic niches, whether as guardians of sea lanes, or as 
gatherers of raw materials, or as traders. To what extent the specialists 
in those trading cities oriented their production to meet the elites’ needs 
for alliance, thus leading to a harmonization of tastes or codes amongst 
the various groups involved, is a question future research will hopefully 
help us to answer. 
As a whole, my preliminary research postulates the plausibility of 
a late prehistoric maritime Southeast Asia integration, where trading 
nodes would have been cradles for some early socio-political practices 
that further developed over time. The control by the trading elites of 
the legitimizing means of production in the landscape or in centres of 
craftsmanship is at the heart of these socio-political practices. 
References
Allen, Jane. “Geoarchaeology”. In Khao Sam Kaeo, an Early Port-City between 
the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea, edited by Bérénice Bellina. Paris: 
Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient, in press.

--- PAGE 274 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
263
Amselle, Jean-Loup. “La globalisation ‘Grand partage’ ou mauvais cadrage?” 
L’Homme 156 (2000): 207–26. 
Andaya, Barbara W. and Leonard Y. Andaya. A History of Early Modern 
Southeast Asia, 1400–1830. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Andaya, Leonard Y. Leaves of the Same Tree: Trade and Ethnicity in the Straits 
of Melaka. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2008.
Assayag, Jackie. “La culture comme fait social global? Anthropologie et (post)
modernité”. L’Homme 38, no. 148 (1998): 201–23. 
Bacus, Elisabeth A. “Styles of Alliance?: Decorated Earthenwares in Late 
Prehistoric and Protohistoric Philippine Polities”. In Earthenware in Southeast 
Asia, edited by John Miksic. Singapore: Singapore University Press, 2003. 
Beaujard, Philippe. “The Indian Ocean in Eurasian and African World-Systems 
before the Sixteenth Century”. Journal of World History 16, no. 4 (2005): 
411–65.
———. Les mondes de l’océan Indien: De la formation de l’Etat au premier 
système-monde afro-eurasien. Tome 1. Paris: Armand Colin, 2012a. 
———. Les mondes de l’océan Indien: L’océan Indien, au cœur des globalisations 
de l’Ancien Monde (7e-15e siècles). Tome 2. Paris: Armand Colin, 2012b. 
Beaujard, Philippe, Laurent Berger, and Philippe Norel, eds. Histoire globale, 
mondialisations et capitalisme. Paris: La découverte, 2009.
Begley, Vimala. The Ancient Port of Arikamedu: New Excavations and Researches, 
1989–92. Pondichery/Paris, 1996. 
Bellina, Bérénice. Témoinages archéologiques d’échanges entre l’Inde et l’Asie 
du Sud-Est: morphologie, morphométrie et techniques de fabrication des 
perles en agate et en cornaline. Paris: Université Paris III, 2001.
———. “Beads, Social Change and Interaction between India and Southeast Asia”. 
Antiquity 77, no. 296 (2003): 285–97.
———. Cultural Exchange between India and Southeast Asia: Production and 
Distribution of Hard Stone Ornaments (VIc. BC-VIc. AD). Paris: Editions de la 
Maison des sciences de l’homme, 2007.
———. “Maritime Silk Roads’ Ornament Industries: Socio-Political Practices and 
Cultural Transfers in the South China Sea”. Cambridge Journal of Archaeology 
24, no. 3 (2014): 345–77.
———. “The Inception of the Trans-national Processes between the Indian 
Ocean and the South China Sea from an Early City-State on the Thai-Malay 
Peninsula (4th-2nd c. BCE)”. Proceedings of the International Conference 
The Ports of the Indian Ocean, from the Red Sea to the Gulf of Bengal, by 
Marie-Francoise Boussac, S. Roychoudhury, Jean-Francois Salles and Jean-
Baptiste Yon. Delhi: Primus Books, 2016.
———. “The Beginning of the Urban Narratives in South and Southeast Asia”. 
In Khao Sam Kaeo, an Early Port-City between the Indian Ocean and the 
South China Sea, edited by B. Bellina. Paris: Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient, 
in press.

--- PAGE 275 ---
264	
Bérénice Bellina
Bellina, Bérénice and V. Bernard. “The Settlement of Khao Sam Kaeo”. In 
Khao Sam Kaeo, an Early Port-City between the Indian Ocean and the 
South China Sea, edited by B. Bellina. Paris: Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient, 
in press.
Bellina, Bérénice, Guillaume Epinal, and Aude Favereau. “Caractérisation 
préliminaire des poteries marqueurs d’échanges en Mer de Chine Méridionale 
à la fin de la préhistoire”. Archipel 84 (2012): 7–33.
Bellina, Bérénice, Praon Silapanth, Boonyarit Chaisuwan, Cholawit 
Thongcharoenchaikit, Jane Allen, Vincent Bernard, Brigitte Borell, Phaedra 
Bouvet, Cristina Castillo, Laure Dussubieux, Julie Malakie LaClair, Sachipan 
Srikanlaya, Sophie Peronnet, and Thomas O. Pryce. “The Development 
of Coastal Polities in the Upper Thai-Malay Peninsula in the Late First 
Millennium BCE”. In Before Siam was Born: New Insights on the Art and 
Archaeology of Pre-Modern Thailand and its Neighbouring Regions, edited by 
Nicholas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: River Books, 2014.
Bellina-Pryce, B. and P. Silapanth. “Weaving Cultural Identities on Trans-Asiatic 
Networks: Upper Thai-Malay Peninsula – An Early Socio-Political Landscape”. 
Bulletin de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême-Orient 93 (2008): 257–93.
Bellwood, Peter. “Early Agriculture, Language History and the Archaeological 
Record in China and Southeast Asia”. In Archaeology in Southeast Asia, edited 
by C.T. Yeung and W.L. Li. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Museum and 
Art Gallery, 1995. 
———. “Early Agriculture and the Dispersal of the Southern Mongoloids”. In 
Prehistoric Mongoloid Dispersals, edited by Takeru Akazawa and Emoke 
Szathmary. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. 
———. “Ancient Seafarers”. Archaeology 50, no. 2 (1997): 20–22.
———. “The Origins and Dispersals of Agricultural Communities in Southeast 
Asia”. In Southeast Asia: From Prehistory to History, edited by Ian Glover 
and Peter Bellwood. London, New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2004.
———. Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press, 2007. 
Benjamin, Geoffrey. “Ethnohistorical Perspectives on Kelantan’s Prehistory”. In 
Kelantan Zaman Awal: Kajian Arkeologi dan Sejarah Di Malaysia, edited by 
Nik Hassan Shuhaimi bin Nik Abd. Rahman. Kuala Lumpur: United Selangor 
Press Sdn. Bhd., 1987.
Bentley, Jerry H. “Sea and Ocean Basins as Frameworks of Historical Analysis”. 
The Geographical Review 89, no. 2 (1999): 215–24.
Blench, Roger M. “Almost Everything You Believed about the Austronesians 
Isn’t True”. In Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from the 13th International 
Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 
Volume 1, edited by Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke and Dominik 
Bonatz. Singapore: NUS Press, 2012.

--- PAGE 276 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
265
———. “The Austronesians: An Agricultural Revolution that Failed”. Unpublished. 
Second International Conference on Taiwan Indigenous Peoples, Taipei, Taiwan, 
2014.
———. “Austronesians or Austronesianisation or Why We Should Take the 
Sociolinguistics of the Past Seriously”. Presented at EURASEAA conference, 
Berlin, 2010, in press. 
Borell, Brigitte, Bérénice Bellina, and Boonyarit Chaisuwan. “Contacts with the 
Mediterranean World in the Early Centuries CE: The Evidence from Greaco-
Roman Intaglios and Pendants”. In Before Siam was Born: New Insights on the 
Art and Archaeology of Pre-Modern Thailand and its Neighbouring Regions, 
edited by Nicholas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: River Books, 
2014.
Bourdonneau, Eric. “Réhabiliter le Funan: Oc Eo ou la première Angkor”. Bulletin 
de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême-Orient 94 (2007): 111–58. 
Bouvet, Phaedra. “Étude préliminaire de céramiques indiennes et « indianisantes » du 
site de Khao Sam Kaeo IVe-IIe siècles av. J.-C.”. Bulletin de l’Ecole Française 
d’Extrême-Orient 93 (2008): 353–90.
———. “Preliminary Study of Indian and Indian Style Wares from Khao Sam Kaeo 
(Chumphon, Peninsular Thailand), Fourth-Second Centuries BCE”. In Early 
Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-Cultural 
Exchange, edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani and Geoff Wade. Singapore 
and New Delhi: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and Manohar, 2011.
———. “Interactions culturelles entre l’Asie du Sud-Est et l’Inde aux 4e-2e s. 
av. J.-C.: étude technologique des céramiques de Khao Sam Kaeo (Thaïlande 
péninsulaire, province de Chumphon)”. Préhistoire et technologies. Nanterre, 
University Paris X PhD, 2012. 
Brumfield, Elizabeth M. and Timothy K. Earle. “Specialization, Exchange, and 
Complex Societies: An Introduction”. In Specialization, Exchange, and Complex 
Societies, edited by Elizabeth M. Brumfiel and Timothy K. Earle. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
Bulbeck, David. “An Integrated Perspective on the Austronesian Diaspora: The 
Switch from Cereal Agriculture to Maritime Foraging in the Colonisation of 
Island Southeast Asia”. Australian Archaeology 67 (2008): 31–51.
Calo, Ambra. Trails of Bronze Drums Across Early Southeast Asia: Exchange 
Routes and Connected Cultural Spheres. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2014.
Carter, Alison. “Trade, Exchange and Sociopolitical Development in Iron Age 
(500 BC – AD 500) Mainland Southeast Asia: An Examination of Stone and 
Glass Beads from Cambodia and Thailand”. PhD dissertation, Department of 
Anthropology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2013.
Carter, Alison and Laure Dussubieux. “Geologic Provenience Analysis of Agate 
and Carnelian Beads Using Laser Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass

--- PAGE 277 ---
266	
Bérénice Bellina
Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS): A Case Study from Iron Age Cambodia and 
Thailand”. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 6 (2016): 321–31.
Castillo, Cristina. “Archaeobotany”. In Khao Sam Kaeo, an Early Port-City 
between the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea, edited by Bérénice 
Bellina. Paris: Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient, in press.
Cherian, P.J., V. Selvakumar, and K.P. Shajan. “The Muziris Heritage Project: 
Excavations at Pattanam – 2007”. Journal of Indian Ocean Archaeology 4 
(2007): 1–10.
Chia, Stephen and Naizatul Akma Mohd Mokhtar. “Evidence of Iron Production 
at Sungai Batu, Kedah”. In Bujang Valley and Early Civilisations in Southeast 
Asia, edited by Stephen Chia and B. Watson Andaya. Kuala Lumpur: 
Department of National Heritage, Ministry of Information, Communications 
and Culture, 2011.
Dagens, Bruno. Traités, temples et images du monde indien: études d’histoire 
et d’archéologie. É. r. p. M.-L. B.-B. e. V. Lefèvre. Paris: Presses Sorbonne 
Nouvelle, 2005.
———. Le temple indien miroir du monde. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2009. 
Dung, Nguyen Kim, Ian C. Glover, and Mariko Yamagata. “Excavations at 
Tra Kieu and Go cam, Quang Nam Province, Central Viet Nam”. In 
Uncovering Southeast Asia’s Past, edited by Elizabeth A. Bacus, Ian C. 
Glover and Vincent C. Pigott. Singapore: NUS Press, 2006.
Dussubieux, Laure. L’apport de l’ablation laser couplée `a l’ICP–MS à la 
charactérisation des verres: application à l’étude due verre archéologique de 
l’Océan Indien. Centre Ernest-Babelon, CNRS, Orleans, 2001.
Dussubieux, Laure and Bernard Gratuze. “Glass in Southeast Asia”. In 50 Years 
of Archaeology in Southeast Asia: Essays in Honour of Ian Glover, edited by 
Bérénice Bellina, Elizabeth A. Bacus, Thomas O. Pryce and Jan Wisseman 
Christie. Bangkok: River Books, 2010.
Dussubieux, Laure, Bernard Gratuze, and Maryse Blet-Lemarquand. “Mineral Soda 
Alumina Glass: Occurence and Meaning”. Journal of Archaeological Science 
37, no. 7 (2010): 1646–55.
Dussubieux, Laure, James W. Lankton, Bérénice Bellina-Pryce, and Boonyarit 
Chaisuwan “Early Glass Trade in South and Southeast Asia: New Insights 
from Two Coastal Sites, Phu Khao Thong in Thailand and Arikamedu in South 
India”. In Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from the 13th International 
Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 
Volume 1, edited by Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke and Dominik 
Bonatz. Singapore: NUS Press, 2012.
Earle, Timothy K. “Style and Iconography as Legitimation in Complex Chiefdoms”. 
In The Use of Style in Archaeology, edited by Margaret Conkey and Christine 
Ann Hastorf. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

--- PAGE 278 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
267
Favereau, Aude. Le matériel céramique de la campagne de fouille 2014. Rapport 
de la campagne de fouille 2014. Mission archéologique franco-thaïe en 
péninsule Thaï-Malaise. Rapport pour la commission des fouilles du Ministère 
des Affaires Etrangères. Bérénice Bellina. Paris: CNRS, 2014.
———. “Interactions et modalités des échanges en Mer de Chine méridionale 
(500 avant notre ère – 200 de notre ère): approche technologique des 
assemblages céramiques”. PhD thesis, Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle, 
Paris, France, 2015.
Favereau, Aude and Bérénice Bellina. “Thai-Malay Peninsula and South China Sea 
Networks (500 BC–AD 200) based on a Reappraisal of ‘Sa Huynh-Kalanay’ 
Ceramics”. Quaternary International (2016): 1–9.
Glover, Ian C. “Excavations at Ban Don Ta Phet, Kanchanaburi Province, 
Thailand 1980–81”. South-East Asian Studies Newsletter 10 (1983): 1–3.
———. Early Trade between India and Southeast Asia: A Link in the Development 
of a World Trading System. University of Hull, Centre for South-East Asian 
Studies, 1989. 
———. “Ban Don Ta Phet: The 1984–85 Excavation”. In Southeast Asian 
Archaeology 1986, edited by Ian C. Glover and Emily Glover. Oxford: BAR, 
1990a. 
———. Early Trade between India and Southeast Asia: A Link in the Development 
of a World Trading System. 2nd ed. University of Hull, Centre for South-East 
Asian Studies, 1990b. 
———. “Beads and Bronzes: Archaeological Indicators of Trade between South 
and Southeast Asia”. In Asian Trade Routes: Continental and Maritime, edited 
by Reinhold Haellquist. Copenhagen: Scandinavian Institute of Asian Studies, 
1991. 
———. “The Archaeological Evidence for Early Trade between India and Southeast 
Asia”. In The Indian Ocean in Antiquity, edited by Julian Reade. London: Kegan 
Paul International, 1996a. 
———. “The Southern Silk Road: Archaeological Evidence for Early Trade 
between India and Southeast Asia”. In Ancient Trade and Cultural Contacts in 
Southeast Asia, edited by Amara Srisuchat. Bangkok: Office of the National 
Cultural Commission, 1996b. 
———. “The Southern Silk Road: Archaeological Evidence of Early Trade 
between India and Southeast Asia”. In The Silk Roads: Highways of Culture 
and Commerce, edited by Vadime Elisseeff. New York and Oxford: Berghahn 
Books, 2000.
Glover, Ian C. and Mariko Yamagata. “The Origins of Cham Civilization: Indigenous, 
Chinese and Indian Influences in Central Vietnam as Revealed by Excavation 
at Tra Kieu, Vietnam, 1990 and 1993”. In Archaeology in Southeast Asia, edited 
by Chun-tong Yeung and Wai-ling Li. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University 
Museum and Art Gallery, 1995.

--- PAGE 279 ---
268	
Bérénice Bellina
Hantman, Jeffrey L. and Stephen Plog. “The Relationship of Stylistic Similarity to 
Patterns of Material Exchange”. In Contexts for Prehistoric Exchange, edited by 
Jonathon E. Ericson and Timothy K. Earle. New York: Academic Press, 1982. 
Hung, Hsiao-chun and Peter Bellwood. “Movement of Raw Materials and 
Manufactured Goods Across the South China Sea after 500 BCE: From 
Taiwan to Thailand, and Back”. In 50 Years of Archaeology in Southeast Asia: 
Essays in Honour of Ian Glover, edited by Bérénice Bellina, Elizabeth A. 
Bacus, Thomas O. Pryce and Jan Wisseman Christie. Bangkok: River Books, 
2010.
Hung, Hsiao-Chun, Yoshiyuki Iizuka, Peter Bellwood, Kim Dung Nguyen, 
Bérénice Bellina, Praon Silapanth, Eusebio Dizon, Rey Santiago, Ipoi Datan, 
and Jonathan H. Manton. “Ancient Jades Map 3,000 Years of Prehistoric 
Exchange in Southeast Asia”. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 104, no. 50 (2007): 19745–50. 
———. “Coastal Connectivity: Long-term Trading Networks Across the South 
China Sea”. Journal of Coastal and Island Archaeology (in press). 
Hunt, Chris O. and Ryan J. Rabett. “Holocene Landscape Intervention and Plant 
Food Production Strategies in Island and Mainland Southeast Asia”. Journal of 
Archaeological Science 30 (2013): 1–12.
Indrawooth, Phasook. “The Archaeology of the Early Buddhist Kingdoms of 
Thailand”. In Southeast Asia: From Prehistory to History, edited by Ian Glover 
and Peter Bellwoord. New York: Routledge, 2004. 
Junker, Laura L. Long Distance Trade and the Development of Socio-Political 
Complexity in Philippine Chiefdoms of the First Millenium to Mid Second 
Millennium AD. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 1990. 
———. “Crafts Goods Specialization and Prestige Goods Exchange in the 
Philippine Chiefdoms of the 15th and 16th Centuries”. Asian Perspectives 32, 
no. 1 (1993): 1–35. 
———. Raiding, Trading, and Feasting: The Political Economy of Philippine 
Chiefdoms. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1999.
Kim, Nam C. “Lasting Monuments and Durable Institutions: Labor, Urbanism, 
and Statehood in Northern Vietnam and Beyond”. Journal of Archaeological 
Research 21 (2013): 217–67.
Kim, Nam C., Lai Van Toi, and Trinh Hoang Hiep. “Walls, Warfare, and Political 
Centralization: Recent Excavations at Vietnam’s Ancient Capital of Co Loa”. 
Antiquity 84 (2010): 1011–27. 
Kulke, Hermann. “Indian Colonies, Indianization or Cultural Convergence? 
Reflections on the Changing Image of India’s Role in South-East Asia”. 
In Onderzoek in Zuidoost-Azie, edited by H. Schulte Nordholt. Leiden: 
Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden, 1990.
Lewis, Helen, Victor Paz, Myra Lara, Huw Barton, Philip Piper, Janine Ochoa, 
Timothy Vitales, Jane A. Carlos, Tom Higham, Lee Neri, Vito Hernandez,

--- PAGE 280 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
269
Janelle Stevenson, Emil Charles Robles, Andrea Ragragio, Rojo Padilla, Wilhelm 
Solheim II, and Wilfredo Ronquillo. “Terminal Pleistocene to mid-Holocene 
Occupation and an Early Cremation Burial at Ille Cave, Palawan, Philippines”. 
Antiquity 82 (2008): 318–35.
Lieberman, Victor. Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in a Global Context, c. 
800–1830. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Malakie, J. and A. Bevan. “Spatial Analysis of an Early Port-City”. In Khao Sam 
Kaeo, an Early Port-City between the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea, 
edited by Bérénice Bellina. Paris: Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient, in press. 
Malakie LaClair, Julie. “Identifying Patterns Between the Looting Pits: Spatial 
Analysis at Khao Sam Kaeo”. Master thesis. Unpublished. London: University 
of London, 2008. 
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. “The Archaeology of Early Maritime Polities of Southeast 
Asia”. In Southeast Asia: From Prehistory to History, edited by Ian Glover 
and Peter Bellwood. London, New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2004.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves and Indradjaja Agustijanto. “The Archaeology of Batujaya 
(West Java, Indonesia): An Interim Report”. In Uncovering Southeast Asia’s 
Past: Selected Papers from the 10th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, edited by Elizabeth Bacus, 
Ian C. Glover and Vincent Piggott. Singapore: NUS Press, 2006. 
———. “The Batujaya Site: New Evidence of Early Indian Influence in West 
Java”. In Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asian: Reflections on 
Cross-Cultural Exchange, edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani and Geoff 
Wade. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and Manohar, 2011.
Meacham, William. “On the Improbability of Austronesian Origins in South 
China”. Asian Perspectives 26, no. 1 (1984–85): 89–106.
Miksic, John. “Heterogenic Cities in Premodern Southeast Asia”. World Archaeology 
32, no. 1 (2000): 106–20.
Mokhtar Naizatul Akma Mohd. The Discovery of Iron Smelting in Sg. Batu, 
Lembah Bujang, Kedah IN IPPA 2009 Program and Abstracts, November 29th–
December 5th 2009, Institute of Archaeology, VASS, 2009.
Mokhtar Naizatul Akma, Mokhtar Saidin and Jeffrey Abdullah. “The Ancient Iron 
Smelting in Sg. Batu, Bujang Valley, Kedah”. Unpublished, undated.
Moore, Elizabeth and San Win. “The Gold Coast: Suvannabhumi? Lower Myanmar 
Walled Sites of the First Millennium A.D.”. Asian Perspectives 46, no. 1 
(2007): 202–32. 
Morrison, Kathleen D. and Laura L. Junker, eds. Forager-Traders in South and 
Southeast Asia: Long Term Histories. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
Murillo-Barroso, Mercedes, Thomas O. Pryce, Bérénice Bellina, and Marcos 
Martinón-Torres. “Khao Sam Kaeo: An Archaeometallurgical Crossroads for 
Trans-Asiatic Technological Traditions”. Journal of Archaeological Science 37 
(2010): 1761–72.

--- PAGE 281 ---
270	
Bérénice Bellina
Nguyen, Kim Dung. “Ornaments from Jar Burial Sites in Can Gio District, 
Ho Chi Minh City”. Khao Co Hoc 2 (1995): 27–46. 
Oppenheimer, Stephen. “The ‘Express Train from Taiwan to Polynesia’: On the 
Congruence of Proxy Lines of Evidence”. World Archaeology 36 (2004): 
591–600.
Pollock, Sheldon. “The Sanskrit Cosmopolis”. In Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: 
Contributions to the History of the Sanskrit Language, edited by Jan E.M. 
Houben. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1996. 
———. “The Cosmopolitan Vernacular”. The Journal of Asian Studies 57, no. 1 
(1998): 6–37.
———. “Cosmopolitan and Vernacular in History”. Public Culture 12, no. 3 (2000): 
591–625.
———. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and 
Power in Premodern India. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California 
Press, 2006. 
Pryce, Thomas O., Bérénice Bellina-Pryce and Anna T.N. Bennett. “The 
Development of Metal Technologies in the Upper Thai-Malay Peninsula: Initial 
Interpretation of the Archaeometallurgical Evidence from Khao Sam Kaeo”. 
Bulletin de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême-Orient 93 (2008): 295–316.
Pryce, Thomas O., Michael Brauns, Nigel Chang, Ernst Pernicka, Mark 
Pollard, Christopher Ramsey, Thilo Rehren, Viengkeo Souksavatdy, Thongsa 
Sayavongkhamdy. “Isotopic and Technological Variation in Prehistoric 
Primary Southeast Asian Copper Production”. Journal of Archaeological 
Science 38 (2011): 3309–22.
———. “More Questions than Answers: The Southeast Asian Lead Isotope 
Project 2009–2012”. Journal of Archaeological Science 42 (2014): 273–94.
Reid, Anthony. Southeast Asia in the Age of Commerce 1450–1680. Volume One: 
The Lands Below the Winds. New Haven: London Yale University Press, 
1988.
———. Southeast Asia in the Age of Commerce 1450–1680. Volume Two: 
Expansion and Crisis. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1993.
Reinecke, Andreas and Nguyen Thi Thanh Luyen. “Recent Discoveries in Vietnam: 
Gold Masks and Other Precious Items”. Arts of Asia 39 (2009): 58–67.
Smith, Monica L. “Indianization from the Indian Point of View: Trade and Cultural 
Contacts with Southeast Asia in the Early First Millennium C.E.”. Journal of 
the Economic and Social History of the Orient 42, no. 1 (1999): 1–26.
———. “Early Walled Cities of the Indian Subcontinent as ‘Small Worlds’”. In 
The Social Construction of Ancient Cities, edited by Monica L. Smith. 
Washington, D.C.: Smithson Inst. Press, 2003.
Soares, Pedro A., Maru Mormina, Jean Trejaut, Teresa Rito, Bruno Cavadas, 
Catherine Hill, Ken Khong Eng, Andreia Brandao, Ross Fraser, Tse-Yi Wang, 
Jun-Hun Loo, Christopher Snell, Tsang-Ming Ko, Antonio Amorim, Maria

--- PAGE 282 ---
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime Space?	
271
Pala, Vincent Macaulay, David Bulbeck, James Wilson, Leonor Gusmao, Luisa 
Pereira, Stephen Oppenheimer, Marie Lin, and Martin Richards. “Resolving the 
Ancestry of Austronesian-speaking Populations”. Human Genetic 135 (2016): 
309–26.
Solheim, Wilhelm G. “Sa-Huynh Related Pottery in Southeast Asia”. Asian 
Perspectives 3, no. 2 (1961): 177–88.
———. “Taiwan, Coastal South China and Northern Vietnam and the Nusantao 
Maritime Trading Network”. Journal of East Asian Archaeology 2, nos. 1–2 
(2000): 273–84.
———. Archaeology and Culture in Southeast Asia: Unravelling the Nusantao, 
with contributions from David Bulbeck and Ambika Flavel. Quezon City: The 
University of the Philippines Press, 2006.
Spriggs, Matthew. “The Neolithic and Austronesian Expansion within Island 
Southeast Asia and into the Pacific”. In From Southeast Asia to the Pacific: 
Archaeological Perspectives on the Austronesian Expansion and the Lapita 
Cultural Complex, edited by Scarlett Chiu and Christophe Sand. Taipei: Centre 
for Archaeological Studies Research and for Humanities and Social Sciences, 
Academica Sinica, 2007.
Srinivasan, S. “Present and Past of South Indian Crafts for Making Mirrors, Lamps, 
Bells, Vessels, Cymbals and Gongs: Links with Prehistoric High-Tin Bronzes 
from Mohenjodaro, Taxila, South Indian Megaliths and Later Finds”. South 
Asian Studies 13 (1997): 209–25.
———. “Megalithic High-Tin Bronzes and Peninsular India’s Living Prehistory”. 
In 50 Years of Archaeology in Southeast Asia: Essays in Honour of Ian Glover, 
edited by Bérénice Bellina, Elizabeth A. Bacus, Thomas O. Pryce and Jan 
Wisseman Christie. Bangkok: River Books, 2010.
Srinivasan, S. and Ian C. Glover. “Wrought and Quenched, and Cast High-Tin 
Bronzes in Kerala State, India”. Journal of Historical Metallurgy 29, no. 2 
(1995): 69–88.
Stark, Miriam T. “The Transition to History in the Mekong Delta: A View from 
Cambodia”. International Journal of Historic Archaeology 2, no. 3 (1998): 
175–204.
———. “Early Mainland Southeast Asian Landscapes in the First Millennium 
A.D.”. Annual Review of Anthropology (2006): 407–32. 
Stark, Miriam T. and Sovath Bong. “Recent Research on the Emergence of Early 
Historic States in Cambodia’s Lower Mekong”. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific 
Prehistory Association 19 (2001): 85–98.
Stark, Miriam T., P. Bion Griffin, Chuch Phoeurn, Judy Ledgerwood, Michael 
Dega, Carol Mortland, Nancy Dowling, James M. Bayman, Bong Sovath, Tea 
Van, Chhan Chamroeun, and Kyle Latinis. “Results of the 1995–1996 Field 
Investigations at Angkor Borei, Cambodia”. Asian Perspectives 38, no. 1 
(1999): 7–36.

--- PAGE 283 ---
272	
Bérénice Bellina
Szabo, Katherine and Sue O’Connor. “Migration and Complexity in Holocene 
Island Southeast Asia”. World Archaeology 36 (2004): 621–28.
Theunissen, Robert. “Agate and Carnelian Ornaments from Noen U-Loke: Some 
Thoughts on Their Social Function and ‘Value’”. Bead Study Trust Newsletter 
32 (1998): 8–11.
———. “The Agate and Carnelian Ornaments”. In The Excavations of Noen 
U-Loke and Non Muang Kao, edited by Charles Higham, A. Kijngam and 
S. Talbot. Bangkok: The Thai Fine Arts Department, 2007. 
Theunissen, Robert, Peter Grave, and Grahame Bailey. “Doubts on Diffusion: 
Challenging the Assumed Indian Origin of Iron Age Agate and Carnelian Beads 
in Southeast Asia”. World Archaeology 32 (2000): 84–105.
Wheatley, Paul. Nagara and Commandery: Origins of Southeast Asian Urban 
Traditions. Chicago: Department of Geography, 1983.
Wisseman Christie, Jan. “State Formation in Early Maritime Southeast Asia: A 
Consideration of the Theories and the Data”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 151, no. 2 (1995): 235–88.
Wolters, Oliver W. History, Culture, and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives. 
New York and Singapore: Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University, and the 
Institute for Southeast Asian Studies, 1999.
Yamagata, Mariko. “The Early History of Lin-i Viewed from Archaeology”. Acta 
Asiatica 92 (2007): 1–30.
———. “Archaelogical Research on the Prehistoric Interrelations Beyond the 
South China Sea”. Report of Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (2006–2007, 
n°18520593), Hanoi, Institute of Social Sciences in Vietnam, Waseda University, 
2008.
———. “The Excavation of Hoa Diem in Central Vietnam”. Showa Women’s 
University Institute of International Culture Bulletin 17 (2012).
———. “The Ancient Citadel of Tra Kieu in Central Vietnam: The Site and the 
Pottery”. Kanazawa Cultural Resource Studies. Ishikawa: Centre for Cultural 
Resource Studies, 2014.

--- PAGE 284 ---
273
7
Looms, Weaving and the 
Austronesian Expansion1
Christopher Buckley2
1.  Introduction
In the last few decades, comparative approaches that map languages and 
archaeological features over a broad area have contributed significantly 
to understanding the prehistory of Southeast Asia. In contrast, despite 
plenty of interest in the material culture of the region, this aspect has 
been relatively little studied in a comparative or regional sense (but see 
Blench, this volume). Pioneering work was done in the first half of the 
1	 All images are by the author unless otherwise specified. The copyright for the 
reproduction of third-party images has been sought whenever possible. In cases where 
this was not possible, common guidelines established for the fair use of images that 
are intended solely for scholarly and research purposes have been followed.
2	 I would like to thank the editors for their constructive and useful inputs. I would also 
like to thank Sandra Niessen, Pamela Cross, Darrell Serizawa, David Bulbeck, Bonnie 
Corwin, Geneviève Duggan and Bernard Sellato for reading the manuscript and for 
their comments, and Laverne Waddington for her comments on New World looms. All 
of these inputs were extremely helpful and have improved this chapter significantly.

--- PAGE 285 ---
274	
Christopher Buckley
twentieth century by ethnologists such as Jasper and Pirngadie (1912) 
and Buhler (1943), who documented the art and material culture of the 
Indonesian archipelago, and by Pelras (1972) who surveyed Indonesian 
loom technology and terminology, but this type of work largely halted 
in the latter part of the twentieth century, when the emphasis shifted 
to examining individual cultures in depth. There are exceptions to 
this, such as surveys by Maxwell (1990), Yoshimoto (1987, 2013) and 
Howard and Howard (2002) and Howard (2010) who explored common 
themes in weaving-related traditions across the region. Recently, there 
have been signs that the “comparative project” in material culture 
in a broad sense is tentatively resuming (see for example the recent 
exhibition catalogue of Austronesian artifacts edited by Benitez- 
Johannot [2011]), spurred on by successes in linguistics and archaeology 
and by the new questions and challenges this work poses.
In this chapter I will review the distributions in Mainland Southeast 
Asia (MSEA) and Island Southeast Asia (ISEA) of two weaving 
technologies with ancient roots: the body-tensioned loom and the ikat 
technique for making decorated textiles. I will attempt to interpret the 
present-day distributions of these technologies, and the archaeological 
record (as it relates to yarn production and weaving), in terms of prehistoric 
dispersals. These prehistoric events have been modulated by processes 
occurring in the historical past that have altered (but not completely 
obscured) the underlying patterns. In particular I will compare the 
looms of the mainland with those of the Austronesian-speaking peoples 
of ISEA, and discuss the consequences for our understanding of how 
the Austronesian expansion occurred. I will show that it is difficult to 
explain the present-day distribution of looms and ikat weaving based 
on the “out of Taiwan” model that has gained currency in the last two 
decades. Instead, these characteristically “Austronesian” technologies 
appear to have originated directly from the Asian mainland.
2. The Significance of Weaving and Textiles
Based on linguistic reconstructions and archaeological evidence, weaving 
is understood to have been part of the cultural repertoires of Neolithic 
farming peoples in Europe and in Asia. Weaving cultures that exist today 
in Asia have both practical and symbolic aspects, and archaeological 
remains of looms made from precious materials (discussed below) suggest 
that this has long been the case. The practical aspects are illustrated by

--- PAGE 286 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
275
artifacts with a very wide distribution, such as the black tents used by 
nomadic peoples across much of Central Asia, and the multi-purpose 
tubeskirt (sarong) that is found across much of ISEA and MSEA. To 
keep this in perspective however, the pre-Neolithic peoples who inhabited 
Asia over a wide range of latitudes seem to have managed without 
woven cloth, using only cordage, plaited work and (perhaps) bark cloth.
Studies of textile culture in the ethnographic present show that the 
significance of woven textiles and the practice of weaving extend beyond 
fulfilling basic needs, and in some cases the practical aspects of textiles 
play only a minor role in comparison. Studies of the social and ceremonial 
roles of Southeast Asian textiles are too numerous to present a thorough 
review, but Ruth Barnes’ 1989 study on the textiles of Lamalera, on the 
island of Lembata, is a seminal example in the field. In most Southeast 
Asian cultures decorated textiles are an important class of luxury goods 
and constitute public markers of status. Connected with this, they play a 
role in rites of passage, particularly relating to marriage. For example, 
Figure 7.1
Weaver Agnes Golole and Family, Adatei 
Region, Lembata, Indonesia, Displaying a 
Bridewealth Sarong that She Wove Herself

--- PAGE 287 ---
276	
Christopher Buckley
the textile in Figure 7.1, from the Atadei region of Lembata, is a type 
that is characteristic of formal gift exchange rituals in the islands of 
East Nusa Tenggara. In basic form it resembles a tubeskirt, though this 
“skirt” is not wearable, and has no practical value. It is too narrow to 
fit over the body, and it is left unfinished: the textile is made of bands 
of woven cloth that are left in their original tubular form exactly as 
they came off the loom. At more than two metres long it is also much 
longer than is necessary for a practical tubeskirt. Textiles such as this 
with uncut warp have ceremonial significance in many parts of Indonesia, 
as reviewed by Duggan (2015).
An item of this type takes around two to three years for a skilled 
Atadei weaver to make, and its sole function is as a gift, which will 
form part of a formalized exchange between the bride’s family and the 
groom’s family. The weaver of such a cloth is normally an older, married 
woman who has accumulated enough skill and experience (and has 
enough spare time, in between farming and other household activities) 
to make a textile of this type. Families in the Atadei area who need 
to make a marriage alliance and who lack skilled weavers amongst 
their household members are obliged to buy several of these cloths at 
significant outlay: the local price of a well-made bridewealth sarong 
was the equivalent of US$500 or more when I last visited this region 
in 2014. Barnes (1989) described similar marriage gift rituals from the 
nearby village of Lamalera: sarongs and ivory bracelets pass from the 
bride’s family to the groom’s family, while elephant tusks are exchanged 
in the opposite direction. The number, sizes and types of each gift are 
laid down by tradition.
3. Technique
In a previous study, I investigated the warp ikat tradition in ISEA, and 
showed, by means of a quantitative study of the distribution of woven 
motifs, that the ikat traditions of ISEA are related to those of the 
mainland and have a common origin (Buckley 2012). In the present 
work I will look primarily at technique rather than motif, and my 
approach will be based on mapping. It has long been recognized (Bird 
1960) that technique is the most conservative part of the weaver’s

--- PAGE 288 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
277
repertoire: whereas motif, colour and layout may change from time 
to time, loom construction and weaving techniques are usually passed 
from generation to generation with great fidelity. Niessen (2009) adds 
to this the concept of “tacit knowledge”: actions and procedures that are 
passed from generation to generation that can only be learned 
thoroughly by observing and doing. In this respect, textile culture 
parallels language: both are learned by copying, whether from one’s 
parents or one’s peers. Some aspects of both, such as clothing style and 
pronunciation, may change within a lifetime. Lexicon and motifs are 
more stable, and structural features such as grammar and loom design 
change at the slowest rates.
“Weaving” is defined, in the most general sense, as interpenetrating 
flexible materials to make two-dimensional or three-dimensional structures. 
With materials such as bamboo and palm fibre (used to make mats or 
baskets) this can be done without a frame, using the natural rigidity of 
the material. In the case of the soft, flexible yarns used to make textiles, 
weaving is usually done on a frame (a loom). In most cases this involves 
mounting a set of yarns (the warp) between two beams (warp beam and 
cloth beam), then interpenetrating another yarn (the weft) at right angles 
to it. The simplest interlace, with warps and wefts alternating over and 
under in strict sequence is called plain weave.
The process of making woven textiles involves interlinked tasks, 
requiring several domesticated plants and animals:
1.	 Cultivating a suitable fibre plant or animal
2.	 Processing the fibre into yarn
3.	 Preparing dye vats (traditionally using domesticated or semi-
domesticated plants as dye sources)
4.	 Dyeing the yarn (sometimes including ikat resist decoration)
5.	 Creating the warp and heddle system, generally on a specialized 
warping frame, and mounting it on the loom
6.	 Weaving
7.	 Assembling, finishing, post-decoration (embroidery, appliqué)
The basics of operating a loom can be learned in a matter of a few weeks 
or months, but acquiring all these steps and carrying them out with a high 
degree of proficiency usually takes years, sometimes a decade or more.

--- PAGE 289 ---
278	
Christopher Buckley
3.1  Fibres and Processing
Fibres that are indigenous in Asia include silk and bast fibres extracted 
from plant stems. The latter include hemp (Cannabis sativa) in northern 
areas of the Asian mainland, ramie (Boehmeria nivea, a type of nettle) 
and wisteria vine (Pueraria thunbergiana) in central and southern parts 
of the mainland and Taiwan. Fibres extracted from leaves are important 
in MSEA and ISEA, including banana fibre (Musa textilis), lemba 
(Curculiga latifolia), pineapple and hibiscus. 
Evidence of the usage of silk and bast fibres to make textiles has 
been found in Neolithic archaeological sites on the Asian mainland. 
Fragments of woven silk textile dating to 4,700 years ago were found 
in Qianshanying, a Liangzhu culture site in Zhejiang province (Kuhn 
1982). Traces of textiles made from bast fibres have been found in burials 
from the Qijia culture in the Yellow River dating to around 4,000 years 
ago (Chen Honghai 2013), and a textile fragment made from wisteria, 
apparently dating to between 5,000 to 6,000 years ago, was found at 
Caoxieshang in Jiangsu province (Kuhn 1997).
The processing of bast fibres involves cutting the stems or leaves of 
the plants, allowing them to partially rot in water (retting) then stripping 
out the long fibres that can be used to make yarn. These can be used 
directly as long, flat strips, or lightly twisted using a spindle, or (in the 
case of hemp) the strips can be flayed to break them down further into 
a mass of fluffy fibres, then spun to make soft yarns similar to cotton. 
Both “twisting” and “spinning” involve similar-looking spindles, but 
these processes are conceptually different. Given the variety of methods 
for making yarn, the absence of spindle-whorls (in the archaeological 
record, for example) does not necessarily imply the absence of yarn 
for weaving: for example, abaca fibres used in the southern Philippines 
are processed into yarn and woven into cloth without any spinning or 
twisting. Ramie is normally twisted into yarn, but may also be used as 
flat, untwisted strips on occasions.
Bast fibres have been in steady retreat in the region since the 
introduction of cotton cultivation from the tenth century onwards (Baker-
Brite and Marston 2013), but hemp and ramie continued to be used in 
the upland areas of Southwest China until recent decades. In Japan, 
where cotton arrived relatively late and remained an expensive luxury 
until the nineteenth century, various bast fibres including wisteria vine

--- PAGE 290 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
279
and elm fibre were used well into the twentieth century. Other types of 
bast fibre and palm leaf fibres were important on Hainan Island, and 
in East Nusa Tenggara until the mid-twentieth century. The cultivation 
and processing of bast fibres has been gradually replaced by cotton, 
which has spread from west to east together with its characteristic 
associated tools, the cotton gin and the spinning wheel. These often 
bear local names derived from Indian terms (karpasa: “cotton”, charkha: 
“spinning wheel”).
As with yarn fibre, dyes are obtained mainly from cultivated plants (and 
a scale insect, in the case of purplish-red lac dyes from the Himalayan 
foothills), with local variation depending on the plants available and 
the climate. Within this variation, there are three classes of dye that are 
particularly important and widespread in the region: indigo blues, reds 
from morinda root (Morinda citrifolia) and black/brown dyes derived 
from the combination of tannins from bark and iron obtained from paddy 
field mud. The chemistry of these dyes and the procedures required to 
obtain deep shades on cellulose fibres (such as bast fibres and cotton) 
are complex, time consuming, and involve secrecy and ritual. An Atadei 
weaver, dyeing yarn with morinda root for the type of bridewealth 
sarong mentioned, above may repeat a cycle of mordanting and dyeing 
twenty or more times over a period of one to two years, on a single set 
of yarns. She does this in order to obtain the particular shade of deep 
red required by tradition. When interviewing weavers in this area it is 
not uncommon to be shown partly dyed yarns that weavers have been 
working on intermittently for a decade or more.
3.2 The Ikat Process
The ikat technique is a compression-resist (“tie-dye”) technique for 
applying decoration to a cloth. It is unique amongst such techniques in 
that the decoration is applied to the warp or weft yarns (occasionally 
both) before the cloth is woven. This is done by tying strips of palm leaf 
(or, in recent times, strips of plastic) tightly around the yarn before it is 
dyed (see Figures 7.2 and 7.3). This may be done once to produce white 
designs on a coloured background, or it may be repeated with several 
dyeing steps to make designs with several colours. After weaving, the 
design appears in the finished cloth as motifs with characteristically soft 
outlines (see Figures 7.4 and 7.5).

--- PAGE 291 ---
280	
Christopher Buckley
Figure 7.2
Figure 7.3
Making Ikat: Adding Resist Ties to Warp Yarn Stretched on a 
Frame, Prior to Dyeing, Pantar, Indonesia
Making Ikat: Partly Dyed Warps with Resists 
Attached to Them, Pulau Buayah, Indonesia

--- PAGE 292 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
281
Figure 7.5
3.3 The Loom: Some Basics and Terminology
The simplest way to make a textile is to stretch a warp on a frame and 
use a needle, made of bone or wood, to insert the weft, going under 
and over the warps one by one, back and forth. This is probably the 
way the first textiles were made, and variations on this technique are 
still occasionally used for making small items such as belts. A more 
efficient method is to divide the warp windings into two groups (“even 
numbered” and “odd numbered”) and to raise one group or the other 
all at once using a bar or a heddle. Weft can then be inserted between 
them in one “throw”, and weaving proceeds more quickly.
Ikat Tubeskirt (53 cm × 103 cm) 
made by Meifu Li People, 
Hainan Island
Figure 7.4
At one time the tubeskirt was the sole item 
of clothing for many Indonesians in the 
remoter islands, most tubeskirts in this 
region being large enough to cover the 
entire body. Today it is generally worn with 
a blouse or jacket.
Ikat Tubeskirt, Pantar, Indonesia

--- PAGE 293 ---
282	
Christopher Buckley
One opening in the warp (called a “shed” in weaving terminology) 
can be saved and used repeatedly by putting a bar, such as a bamboo 
rod (“shed stick”), through it. An opening in which the even numbered 
warps are above the odd numbered ones is called the “natural shed”. The 
other shed that is needed for weaving is the reverse of this (odd above 
even), called the “counter-shed”. The odd warps must be pulled through 
the even warps to switch between these sheds, so adding a second bar 
is of no help. Instead a heddle system is used. This consists of loops 
of cord attached to the odd numbered warps. The loops are normally 
secured on a rod that acts as a handle. When the rod is pulled up the 
odd numbered warps pass through the even warps and the counter-shed 
is opened for weft insertion. Pulling down on the shed stick restores the 
natural shed for another weft insertion and the weaving process continues 
in this manner (see Figure 7.6). I will refer to the complete system of 
cord loops and rod as a “heddle”, for simplicity.
Figure 7.6
Weft is inserted using a shuttle (SH), passed alternately through openings in the warp with 
the heddle lowered, called the natural shed (top) and with the heddle raised, called the 
counter-shed (bottom).
Schematic Drawings of the Weaving Process on a Loom with the Warp Equipped 
with a Cloth Beam (C), Warp Beam (W), Heddle (H) and Shed Stick (S)

--- PAGE 294 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
283
The heddle is a fundamental and non-obvious invention: weavers in 
the Americas (for example) appear to have made textiles for thousands of 
years before acquiring it (Bird 1979). It is used in looms worldwide and 
has probably been invented more than once in different locations. The 
shed-stick plus heddle combination is one of the most basic arrangements 
for a workable loom and it forms part of many Asian body-tensioned 
looms. More complex looms (of more recent development) employ a 
pair of heddles worked by treadles.
3.4  Body-tensioned Looms
The looms I will be mainly concerned with here are the most basic 
kinds: body-tensioned looms in which the cloth beam is attached to 
the weaver’s waist via a strap or a wooden yoke. These looms are 
also called back-tensioned or back-strap looms. Body-tensioning 
works well with the shed-stick plus heddle system, because it allows 
the weaver to adjust the tension in the warp by leaning forwards or 
backwards, which makes it easier to open the shed and counter-shed 
for weft insertion. These simple looms are used by weavers seated at 
ground-level, and they lack frames with raised seats that are present in 
more complex looms, though they may include wooden supports for 
the warp beam. 
Aside from the warp beam, cloth beam and heddle, the other tool 
that is found on nearly all of these simple looms is a weft beater 
(“sword”). Typically this is a long hardwood batten, which is used 
to beat down the weft after it has been inserted, to make a tightly woven 
textile.
The body-tensioned loom is used in Asia, Madagascar and parts of 
central and South America. Entirely different looms are used in Europe, 
Central Asia and most of Africa, where the most ancient kinds seem to 
be the warp-weighted loom (Hoffmann 1964), and a loom that is fixed 
to the ground with four stakes with the heddle supported on a trestle. 
The Malagasy body-tensioned loom seems to have been carried there 
by Austronesian-speaking migrants. In the case of the body-tensioned 
looms in the Americas there is no direct evidence that it was brought 
by Austronesians, but a link with Asia is nevertheless possible. I will 
return to this question later in this chapter.

--- PAGE 295 ---
284	
Christopher Buckley
3.5  Classifying Body-tensioned Looms
Body-tensioned looms can be divided into two kinds, those with circular 
warps and those with flat warps (Gittinger 1979, 1985; Bolland 1979).3 
These differ in the way in which the warp is mounted on the loom 
(see Figure 7.7):
3	 Gittinger (1979) lists five types of body-tensioned looms, but provides only three 
categories (A, B, C) for these five types, and groups foot braced and externally braced 
looms with a circular warp into one category (A). I have not used her classification 
system here because the distinction between the foot braced and externally braced 
forms is critical to the arguments in this chapter.
Figure 7.7
1. Foot-braced loom with circular warp; 2. Externally-braced loom with circular warp; 
3. Externally-braced loom with flat warp and reed; 4. Frame loom with flat warp and reed.
Schematic Drawings of Four Major Types of Body-Tensioned Loom

--- PAGE 296 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
285
Looms with a circular warp
In this type of loom the continuous, spiral-wound warp is mounted on the 
loom in the form of a “tube” (sometimes referred to as a “ring warp”). 
The finished cloth is also in the form of a tube when it comes off the 
loom, until it is cut. As the weaving advances, the weaver shifts the 
cloth around to keep the leading edge at the cloth beam, by her waist. 
All Asian looms with circular warps are body-tensioned, and they 
can be further sub-divided into two kinds:
1.	 Foot-braced: the warp beam is braced with the feet4 
2.	 Externally braced: the warp beam is attached to an external point, 
such as the side of a house, or lodged behind two stakes in the 
ground.
Most looms of this type include a device to maintain the warp yarns in 
the correct order, a necessary feature for a loom that will be rolled up at 
the end of the day and unrolled again later, with consequent opportunities 
for tangling the warps. One such device is the coil rod (Bolland 1979), 
a rod around which the warps are tightly wound and secured (with a 
warp crossing). In some looms this is replaced by a pair of sticks (called 
lease rods or laze rods) bound together and enclosing a warp crossing. 
These devices also help to keep the warp yarns evenly spaced on 
the loom.
A slightly more complicated variant of the circular warp called 
“false circular” warping or “warp lock” is occasionally found in Asian 
body-tensioned looms (see discussion on South American looms, below). 
There are also a few instances where a reed (next section) is used on 
looms with a circular warp, though this is uncommon, perhaps because 
4	 Both Vollmer (1979) and Gittinger (1979) state that weavers using a foot braced back 
tensioned loom are restricted to weaving cloth of a length that is twice the length of the 
weaver’s legs. This assertion has been repeated in numerous subsequent publications. 
If it were true, this type of loom might have had a much shorter history. In fact, longer 
cloths are routinely woven on foot-braced looms by winding the warp or woven cloth 
onto the cloth beam, as can be seen in Figures 7.14–7.16. In the case of Hainan Li 
weavers it is not uncommon for them to weave strips that are twice as long using 
this method, and I have seen cloths up to three metres long on foot-braced looms in 
Hainan. Weavers using externally braced back tensioned looms may also wind a few 
turns of cloth onto the cloth beam, but in this case the main purpose is to hold the 
cloth more securely.

--- PAGE 297 ---
286	
Christopher Buckley
of the difficulty of threading a circular warp through the openings in 
a reed.
3.6  Looms with a Flat Warp
In this type, though the warp is spiral-wound as before, it is mounted on 
the loom as a flat sheet. It is wound onto the warp beam at the beginning, 
and gradually unrolled as the weaving progresses. At the same time the 
weaver rolls the woven cloth onto the cloth beam. Instead of the coil 
rod found on looms with a circular warp, this type of loom usually has 
a reed to maintain warp ordering and spacing: this is a comb-like device 
in which each warp (or pair of warps) passes through a separate slot 
in the reed (Gittinger 1979). In some looms the reed may be also used 
as a weft-beater instead of a weaver’s sword. There are three types of 
body-tensioned looms that use this system:
1.	 Externally-braced body tensioned looms: the weaver sits on 
or near the ground, the warp beam is lodged in slots in two 
uprights;
2.	 Frame looms with body tensioning: these looms have a rigid 
frame, with a raised seat for the weaver;
3.	 Frame looms without body tensioning.
The third category consists mainly of looms of relatively recent origin in 
which both the cloth beam and warp beam are fixed to the loom frame, 
with no body tensioning, such as the ATBM loom that the Indonesian 
government has supplied to rural weavers in recent decades. These looms 
are now found in most parts of Asia and they are gradually replacing 
more traditional forms.
Thus far I have summarized the background to weaving, its importance 
and some key technical aspects. I will now move on to consider the 
distribution of techniques and textiles in the Asian region, reviewing the 
archaeological data first, then the present-day distribution of loom types.
4.  Archaeological Evidence for Weaving
A small but important group of archaeological finds give clues to the 
early development of the loom.

--- PAGE 298 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
287
4.1  Hemudu
The oldest known remains of textile-making equipment in Asia are 
fragments recovered from Hemudu, an archaeological site in present-day 
Zhejiang province on the southeast coast of China. This site was a hut 
settlement, and dated to between 7,000 and 6,500 years ago. Excavated 
remains reveal that the inhabitants of Hemudu cooked and stored rice, and 
made pottery and stone tools. Hemudu is remarkable for the preservation 
of bone and wood implements, an extremely rare occurrence in sites 
of this age. These include a number of implements that may relate to 
weaving, including flat wooden blades that might have been used as 
weft-beaters, pointed sticks, bone needles and hooks of various kinds. 
These have generally been interpreted as loom components, with various 
reconstructions as a foot-braced back-strap loom (Chen Weiji 1992, 
pp. 32–33) and as a frame loom (Peng Hao 2012, p. 74, citing work by 
Song Zhaolin and Mou Yonghang). 
In my view the Hemudu remains are not the remains of a single loom, 
but represent several different textile-related processes, probably including 
net making as well as weaving. Two of the flat-bladed implements from 
Hemudu look like weft-beaters, and a long pointed implement may be 
a weft-opening aid (“pick-up stick”). It seems likely that some kind 
of loom was in use at Hemudu, and a simple back-tensioned loom is 
the most probable type, but there is not enough evidence to be certain 
about its form.
4.2 Yuhang
Clearer evidence of a back-tensioned loom comes from a tomb from the 
Liangzhu culture, dating from around 5,000 to 4,000 years ago, from 
Yuhang, which is part of the present day suburbs of Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
province. The remains consist of a striking set of decorative jade finials 
that seem to have been attached to wooden loom parts (see Figure 7.8). 
The wooden parts have decayed, but it is possible to reconstruct their 
profiles from the jade end-pieces. Two pairs of jade pieces belonged to 
rods that fitted together to form a clamp: this appears to be the cloth 
beam of a backstrap loom. Zhao Feng (2005) presents a reconstruction 
of these parts as a backstrap loom consisting of cloth beam, warp beam

--- PAGE 299 ---
288	
Christopher Buckley
and weft beater, and describes it as a foot braced backstrap loom. The 
relatively small size and flattened profile of the warp beam (suitable for 
bracing the feet against) and its rounded ends, which make it unlikely that 
it fitted into any kind of frame, make this the most likely reconstruction. 
Looms are usually made from humble materials, so the use of jade for 
the end-pieces suggests that the loom and the activity of weaving had 
particular significance for its owner.
Figure 7.8
Top: warp beam; middle: weft beater; bottom: cloth beam 
in two parts, for clamping warp during weaving. Holes in 
the cloth beam finials indicate where rods were inserted to 
hold a back-strap.
Drawings of Jade Finials from a Loom Recovered 
from a Liangzhu Culture Tomb at Yuhang, 
Zhejiang Province

--- PAGE 300 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
289
4.3  Shizhaishan
Similar loom parts of more recent date were found in a tomb from the 
Dian culture (around 400BCE to 100CE) from Shizhaishan, situated 
in what is now Yunnan province. The Dian may have been related to 
present-day Daic (Tai-Kadai) speakers who now inhabit this region. Dian 
artifacts have a distinctive aesthetic with similarities both to contempora-
neous Bronze Age cultures in northern Vietnam and in Han dynasty China. 
The weaving-related remains consist of a well-made and well-preserved 
set of back-tensioned loom parts made of bronze (Vollmer 1977, 1979), 
and a bronze cowrie shell container (see Figures 7.9 and 7.10). The 
loom parts were carefully made and the loom seems functional. 
The container has on its lid a tableau of weavers using foot-braced 
backstrap looms, seated around a person who appears to be an over-
seer, perhaps the occupant of the tomb, who is seated on an elevated 
platform. Several other containers are known from the same region 
with similar scenes of weaving using foot-braced back-tensioned looms. 
Similar loom parts to the Shizhaishan finds have also been found in 
Figure 7.9
From the top: warp beam, shed stick (with bar to prevent 
it sliding out of the warp), weft beater, cloth beam in two 
parts, used to clamp the warp, with attachment points for 
a back-strap. The warp beam is approximately 45 cm long.
Source: Vollmer (1979).
Bronze Loom Parts from Shizhaishan (Tomb 17), 
Dian Period, Yunnan Province

--- PAGE 301 ---
290	
Christopher Buckley
burial contexts in northern Vietnam from approximately the same period 
(Cameron 2011).
As Vollmer points out, the Shizhaishan loom is essentially indistinguish­
able from foot-braced backstrap looms still in use in Taiwan today, and 
is similar to foot-braced looms used in Hainan Island as well. As with 
the Liangzhu remains, the use of precious materials is evidence not only 
that the foot-braced backstrap loom was in use but also that the loom 
and weaving was of importance in Dian culture.
The Yunnan and northern Vietnamese remains show that the foot-
braced loom was in use in parts of the Asian mainland from which it 
has vanished today. However in terms of the overall development of 
weaving these remains are of a relatively late date and correspond to a 
technology that was already marginalized and in the process of being 
replaced by more sophisticated devices. There is evidence of the use 
of a frame loom in China in the Eastern Zhou period (770–221BCE), 
based on finds from tombs in Lizhou’ao and Guixiya in Jiangxi province, 
described by Zhao Feng (2012). Both Cameron and Zhao Feng identify 
Figure 7.10
Weavers using Foot-Braced Back-Tensioned Looms, from the 
Lid of a Bronze Cowrie Shell Container from Shizhaishan 
(Tomb 1), Dian Culture, Yunnan Province
Source: Vollmer (1979).

--- PAGE 302 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
291
these archaeological remains as frameless back-tensioned looms; in my 
view the components correspond to a more advanced type. Though 
incomplete, the loom parts include paddle-shaped warp beams, cloth beams 
with characteristic forked ends, presumably for attaching a backstrap, 
and what appear to be weft beaters. These loom parts, particularly the 
distinctive warp beams, are similar to a loom with a complex frame that 
is still in use today across much of the Asian mainland (see Figure 7.4). 
The “paddles” lodge the warp beam behind uprights in the frame and 
prevent it rotating, while still permitting it to be removed and rolled up 
at the end of the day in the same manner as other back-tensioned looms. 
This type of loom is still used today by Miao weavers in Guizhou, 
Chinese-speaking weavers in southern China and weavers in Korea and 
Japan (see Figure 7.11). In many cases it is associated with the weaving 
of cloth made from ramie and hemp.
Figure 7.11
A Miao Weaver Setting Up a Body-Tensioned Frame Loom in 
Shimen, Guizhou Province Dian Culture, Yunnan Province
The loom lacks the horizontal members connecting the frame to the seat 
that most looms of this type possess. Note the paddle-shaped warp beam 
(behind the frame, on the left in the photo). This type of loom is shown 
schematically in Figure 7.4.

--- PAGE 303 ---
292	
Christopher Buckley
By the Han dynasty, at roughly the same period as the remains 
of ground-level back-tensioned looms from Shizhaishan and northern 
Vietnam, looms with frames seem to have been widely used in central 
China in domestic settings, since they are depicted in numerous tomb 
engravings from this period (Boudot and Buckley 2015).
To summarize, the archaeological remains show that the ground-level 
back-tensioned loom was known as early as the Neolithic period, and 
it was formerly present as far as the east coast of China, an area where 
it is absent today. The earliest type seems to be the foot-braced form. 
The process of replacement of these looms on the mainland by looms 
with frames began around 2,500 years ago, and was well advanced in 
central China by the Han dynasty.
4.4  Early Evidence of Weaving in ISEA
The single piece of evidence for weaving in ISEA in the prehistoric 
period is a famous bronze sculpture of a weaver using a foot-braced loom 
(Adams 1977). This sculpture, dated to around the sixth century AD, 
was kept as an heirloom by a family on the Indonesian island of Flores, 
and is now in the Australian National Museum. Its origin is unknown. It 
shows that this type of loom was known in ISEA in the early historical 
period, though the near-complete absence of the foot-braced type today 
suggests that it was never widespread in this region.
4.5  Spindle Whorls
Aside from archaeological evidence of looms themselves, the other 
form of evidence for yarn production (and, indirectly, for weaving) is 
the presence of spindle whorls. Pottery whorls are found extensively in 
the archaeological record of China and MSEA, as described by Kuhn 
(1998) and Cameron (2011, 2013). The spindle whorl first appears in 
the archaeological record of central China around the same time as 
domesticated crops. Several types are present at Hemudu, and it is 
present in most Neolithic archaeological sites on the coast of southeast 
China. 
Amongst the various kinds of spindle whorl, a distinctive biconical 
type is present in sites in southern China and seems to be associated with 
the coastal region. Cameron (2011, 2013) has mapped the distribution

--- PAGE 304 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
293
and apparent spread of this type from the mainland to Taiwan and the 
Philippines: the earliest known example of this type comes from the 
Tianluoshan site in Zhejiang province (7,000 to 4,500 years ago). It 
appears in northern Vietnam in sites attributed to Phùng Nguyên culture 
(4,000 to 3,500 years ago), around the same time that rice cultivation 
first appears in that region. In Taiwan, spindle whorls are absent from 
the earliest Neolithic remains at Tapenkeng in the north of the island, 
but biconical and conical whorls appear in other sites (Yuanshan, Peinan) 
from about 4,500 years ago onwards. Similar biconical whorls have been 
found in smaller numbers in archaeological sites in the northern part of 
the Philippines (Cameron 2013). The spindle whorl is rare or absent in 
the archaeological record of ISEA south of this region. 
As noted, the dates for the appearance of spindle whorls in 
archaeological sites show a progressive movement from central China 
to coastal regions, and thence to MSEA and Taiwan and the northern 
Philippines. The absence of pottery spindle whorls south of Luzon 
suggests a change in textile processing occurred after this point. This 
may have been, in part at least, a consequence of a shift in the type 
of fibres processed by early settlers, for example from ramie and other 
bast fibres (which require spinning or twisting) in Taiwan, to banana 
and other leaf-based fibres in the southern Philippines (which do not). 
It might also be linked to changes in the materials from which spindle 
whorls were made. Present-day weavers in ISEA use wooden spindles 
to spin or twist both bast fibres and cotton: in most cases these 
materials leave no trace in the archaeological record, particularly in the 
tropics.
In sum, the archaeological record of spindle whorls shows clear 
evidence of links between mainland traditions, Taiwan and the northern 
Philippines between 5,000 and 3,500 years ago. The evidence does not 
support a smooth or continuous transfer of yarn spinning techniques 
further south into ISEA.
5.  Present-day Distributions of Looms and Ikat
The geographic ranges of the ikat technique and the four loom types of 
body-tensioned loom are shown in the maps in Figures 7.12 and 7.13.

--- PAGE 305 ---
Figure 7.12
Present-day Distribution of Ikat Weaving in Asia
Figure 7.13
Present-day Distribution of Body-Tensioned Looms in Asia

--- PAGE 306 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
295
Ikat making is present over a wide area of ISEA and MSEA, where 
it is associated mainly with Daic and Austronesian speakers. It is 
notably absent from Taiwan, and it is not found in China, aside from 
the Hlai (=Li, Daic speakers) of Hainan island, where it is an important 
part of their repertoire. In MSEA it is also made by Wa people 
(Austroasiatic speakers) near the China–Myanmar border and the 
Karen and Chin (Tibeto-Burman speakers) in Thailand and Myanmar. 
Warp ikat is also made by Uighur weavers in Xinjiang; this is the 
eastern extension of a central Asian tradition which is quite different in 
character to other Asian weaving, both in terms of looms and decorative 
tradition.
In the eastern part of ISEA (Wallacea) ikat decoration is mainly 
applied to the warp, which is usually cotton or bast fibre. In the west 
(Java, Sumatra, Malaysia, Cambodia, southern Thailand) it is mainly 
done on the weft, on both silk and cotton. These represent two very 
different styles of weaving, and they are associated with different 
cultural traditions. I will return to discussion of the weft-based style 
in the western region later in this chapter, since it mainly concerns 
developments that took place in the historical period.
Ground-level back-tensioned looms are also used across large parts 
of ISEA and mainland SEA, extending along the Himalayas as far 
west as northern India, where they are used by Tibetan, Naga and 
Kiranti peoples, and several other Tibeto-Burman speaking groups in 
the Himalayan foothills. The most widespread type today is the variant 
with a warp beam fixed to an external point. 
The foot-braced form is the principal loom in three localized areas: 
Taiwan (Formosan-speaking weavers), Hainan (Li), and the border 
between southern Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam (several groups of 
Austroasiatic speakers including Katu, Mnong and Maa) (see 
Figures 7.14–7.16). Foot-braced looms are occasionally found amongst 
Tibetan and Naga weavers in the Himalayan foothills, and amongst 
Austronesian-speaking weavers in northern Irian Jaya (Yoshimoto 1991, 
citing Goslings 1928–29), however in these cases the foot-braced looms 
are rather basic in form, and are used occasionally rather than as the 
main type of weaving loom.

--- PAGE 307 ---
296	
Christopher Buckley
Figure 7.14
Atayal Weaver from Taiwan, using a Foot-Braced Loom
Figure 7.15
Meifu Li Weaver from Hainan, Weaving Cloth 
Decorated with Warp Ikat on a Foot-Braced Loom

--- PAGE 308 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
297
5.1 The Warp-based Tradition
Comparing the distribution of looms with that of ikat weaving, there is 
a clear association between the two. Warp ikat is exclusively made on 
back-tensioned looms with circular warps (except Xinjiang). The range 
of warp ikat also corresponds roughly to the range of the loom, though 
the range of the circular warp loom is somewhat broader. The looms 
used are all rather uniform in design, to the extent that the loom used 
by Karen weavers in Thailand (for example) looks little different to that 
used by Indonesian weavers in the islands of East Nusa Tenggara (see 
Figure 7.17), and operates in exactly the same way.
Though this chapter focuses on the loom and warp ikat, these features 
are markers for a broader textile-related complex, which I will call the 
warp-based tradition. Its characteristic features are the use of bast fibres, 
warp-based decoration, warp ikat, the back-tensioned loom, the wearing 
of tubeskirts (worn by both men and women), blankets and loincloths 
Figure 7.16
Weaver from Southern Laos (probably Katu), using a Foot-Braced Loom

--- PAGE 309 ---
298	
Christopher Buckley
(mainly used by men), baby-carriers in the form of slings, and head-
cloths.5 This complex is rarely found in a “complete” form and is often 
modified by more recently acquired customs, for example by the wearing 
of jackets inspired by styles from mainland China, and the use of cotton 
from India (now nearly universal) but its main features can usually still 
be recognized, particularly in remoter areas.
The features of the warp-based tradition are closely linked with the 
technical characteristics of back-tensioned looms with circular warps. The 
cloth woven on these looms is naturally warp-faced, meaning that the 
warp is prominent in the finished textile, the weft being largely concealed. 
Most decoration therefore utilizes the warp, including warp ikat and warp 
patterning (weaving with warp yarns in contrasting colours and using 
5	 The main features of this tradition have been described by Maxwell (1990, pp. 66–75), 
and by Gittinger and Leedom-Lefferts (1992, pp. 29–47)..
Figure 7.17
Weaver in the Atadei Region of Lembata, Indonesia, using an Externally-
Braced Loom

--- PAGE 310 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
299
these to produce designs). Patterning on the weft is sometimes present 
as well, but in this case special techniques such as weft-wrapping must 
be used in order to make it visible in the finished cloth. 
5.2 The Weft-based Tradition
Similarly, the making of weft ikat is associated with a distinct textile 
complex, which I will call the weft-based tradition. This is characterized 
by the use of looms with flat warps and reeds. The primary fibres are 
silk (particularly for prestige textiles) and cotton. Just as the loom with 
a circular warp determines the type of cloth that can be woven, the 
loom with a flat warp and reed has a distinct influence on the finished 
textile. The reed introduces a wider spacing between the warps, making 
the weft more prominent. This makes decoration on the weft, including 
supplementary weft and weft ikat, a natural choice when weaving with 
this type of loom. As noted, the weft-based tradition is found mainly in 
the western part of the region, where it is associated with the former 
domains of the Indian-influenced kingdoms, including the Dvaravati, 
Champa, Angkor, Srivijaya and Majapahit kingdoms (discussed in more 
detail below). The dividing line between the two traditions is a boundary 
that I call the “Ikat line” (see Figure 7.12).
Aside from the technical differences, these two traditions employ 
different decorative layouts on cloth. Warp-based cloths are mostly based 
upon repeated elements arranged hierarchically, with major bands of 
motifs, subsidiary bands and dots/dashes, divided up by warp stripes. 
Motifs are made up of small dots or dashes, which are often visible within 
the outlines of the design. Decorative layout on the textile surface tends 
to be “fractal” in conception, repeating similar themes at various scales, 
with motifs sometimes nested within each other. Borders, if present, are 
informal, and the edges of cloth are populated with similar motifs to the 
centres. There is a great deal of flexibility in layout (see Figures 7.4, 
7.5, 7.18, 7.19, 7.20). This contrasts with the organization of cloths 
of the weft-based tradition, which are formal in conception and based 
around “frames”. The frame is composed of borders and a central area, 
each of which is filled with different motifs, often including a row of 
elongated triangles at each end of the cloth. The central field is usually

--- PAGE 311 ---
300	
Christopher Buckley
Figure 7.18
Tubeskirt (70 cm × 158 cm) Woven 
from Cotton and Decorated with 
Warp Ikat, Rongkong Area, 
Central Sulawesi 
Figure 7.19
Man’s Cloth (beti, 104 cm × 167 cm), 
made of Cotton and Decorated 
with Warp Ikat and Warp Stripes, 
Insana Region, Timor, Indonesia

--- PAGE 312 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
301
Figure 7.20
Detail of Figure 7.19, Showing Hierarchical Arrangement 
of Ikat Motifs
filled with a regular motif that repeats along the vertical and horizontal 
axes (see Figures 7.21 and 7.22). This format is derived from Indian 
decorative styles, such as patola (double ikat cloths) imported from 
Gujarat (see Figure 7.23).
In summary, a distinctive complex of technique and textiles, the 
warp-based tradition, is distributed over a wide area of eastern ISEA 
and parts of the Asian mainland. In its most characteristic form it 
includes the externally-braced form of the body-tensioned loom with a 
circular warp, and the warp ikat technique. It is particularly associated 
with Austronesian speakers in ISEA, but it is notably absent in Taiwan. 
In a few places (Taiwan, Hainan, Laos–Vietnam) an older foot-braced 
form of the loom survives. In western parts of ISEA there is a different 
tradition, with looms with reeds and flat warps, and textiles oriented 
towards decoration on the weft.
Before attempting to account for this distribution, I will review a 
further important source of information: linguistic evidence.

--- PAGE 313 ---
302	
Christopher Buckley
Figure 7.21
Large Ceremonial Cloth (86 cm × 208 cm) 
Woven from Silk, Decorated with Weft Ikat 
(central field) and Gold Supplementary 
Weft (songket) in the Borders. Found on 
Bali, possibly woven in the Palembang Area 
of Southern Sumatra
Figure 7.22
Detail of Figure 7.21
Figure 7.22
A Patola (92 cm × 400 cm, 
detail), Woven from Silk 
with Double Ikat (warp 
and weft ikat). Made in 
Gujarat for the Indonesian 
Market, Nineteenth 
Century

--- PAGE 314 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
303
6.  Linguistic Evidence Relating to the Spread of Weaving 
in ISEA
Aside from the evidence from spindle whorls, the main evidence for 
the presence of weaving amongst the earliest Austronesian migrants into 
ISEA is linguistic. A notable early attempt to use weaving terminology 
in a systematic way to trace connections between Indonesian traditions 
was made by Christian Pelras, who identified and mapped cognates 
for weaving (tenun), a weaver’s sword beater (balira and its variants), 
the heddle (gun and karap and their variants) and the cloth beam (apit 
and variants) (Pelras 1972).6 My discussion here is based on the more 
recent and comprehensive analysis by Blust (2014), in particular on 
his reconstruction of proto-Austronesian (pAn). This represents the 
vocabulary of the earliest Austronesians, while the vocabulary of the 
first Austronesian migrants is captured by reconstructed proto-Malayo-
Polynesian (pMP). 
Blust deduces four terms in pAn that relate specifically to weaving, 
as well as four related to yarn and cord production, two related to mats 
and baskets and five related to clothing (see Table 7.1). The reconstructed 
pMP vocabulary adds several more terms related to mats, perhaps 
reflecting the increased importance of this craft as the early Austronesian 
settlers moved south into environments with abundant raw materials for 
this craft.
6	 I would like to thank Bernard Sellato for drawing my attention to Pelras’ 1972 paper on 
Indonesian weaving technology and terminology. Pelras employed the same technique 
that I have used in this study: plotting distributions on a map. In his paper he identified 
three main types of looms, which he called the “oriental”, “central” and “occidental” 
types. His “oriental” loom corresponds to my “looms with a circular warp” and he 
speculated that this may be the earliest type. His “central” loom corresponds to my 
“looms with a flat warp” and the “occidental” type is the frame loom with two foot-
treadles, which he regarded (correctly, in my view) as a relatively recent arrival in 
the region. At the time he wrote his paper Pelras did not have the benefit of current 
insights into Austronesian migrations: had he done so he would undoubtedly have 
been able to carry his conclusions considerably further.

--- PAGE 315 ---
304	
Christopher Buckley
TABLE 7.1
Cognates related to Weaving, Textiles and Cloth in proto-Austronesian 
(pAn) and proto-Malayo-Polynesian (pMP)
Gloss
pAn
pMP
Loom
*ta-tenun-an
*tenun-an
To weave
*tenun
Weaver’s sword
*baRija
*balija
Weaving spindle
*qaNi
Breast beam of loom, on which cloth is wound
*qatip
qatip-an
*qatip
Tie, bind, attach by tying
*Siket
*hiket
Clothing
*qules
*qules
Cloth used to carry a child on the back
*SabaN
haban
Long cloth wrapped around body and used for carrying
*Sabit
*habit
Skirt, sarong
*tapis
Source: Blust (2014).
The reconstructed pAn vocabulary includes three terms for parts of 
a backstrap loom: the sword which the weaver uses to part the warp 
threads, to open a shed and to beat down the weft, a spindle or frame 
on which yarn is wound, and the breast beam of the loom. The presence 
of these three cognates is a strong indication that weaving was an 
important part of the repertoire of technologies that settlers carried 
south with them (versus being introduced at a later time by another 
route). The presence of these cognates in pAn, as well as in pMP, 
reflects the presence of weaving on body-tensioned looms in Taiwan at 
a date prior to the expansion of Austronesian-speakers into ISEA.
Blust comments that he was not able to identify any cognates in pAn 
or pMP that relate to bark-cloth production. Stone beaters/grinders that 
have been found in the archaeological record of south China, Taiwan 
and the Philippines have usually been interpreted as implements for 
making bark cloth, though there are also other uses for such implements, 
for example in grinding roots for food preparation. Bark cloth seems

--- PAGE 316 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
305
to have gained importance, however, as migrants moved into regions 
further south in ISEA, attested by cognates such as *zaluan (bark cloth) 
in proto-Western Malayo Polynesian.
The reconstructed terms for clothing and fabric use in pAn are 
interesting. They include several terms for loops of textile used for 
carrying a child on the back, for carrying other items or for climbing 
trees. These applications require a strong textile (bark cloth is not 
strong enough for these uses) and they also imply the use of woven 
or plaited textiles. A term for a tubeskirt (tapis) is present in pMP, but 
(significantly) it is absent in pAn.
7.  Austronesian Weaving: Out of Taiwan, or Out of the 
Mainland?
Putting the archaeological, linguistic and present-day geographic 
evidence together, a picture emerges of the textile-related skills of the 
Austronesian settlers who colonized ISEA. They were equipped with 
an externally braced backstrap loom for weaving cloth, and they made 
mats and cordage as well. They wore tubeskirts and carried their 
children in slings on their backs. They used mainly warp-based 
decorative techniques on their cloths, in which ikat figured prominently. 
These are all elements that are still present today in most parts of 
ISEA that are inhabited by Austronesian speakers, and they are 
recognized as key parts of the Austronesian cultural inventory. Most of 
these items are (or were) also part of the cultures of Daic peoples in 
MSEA. 
The widely accepted narrative for Austronesian migrations identifies 
Taiwan as the “homeland” of the Austronesians. It supposes that early 
migrants moved from southern Taiwan to the northern Philippines, 
followed by continuing migration south into other parts of ISEA 
(Bellwood 2007, 2013). A common linguistic and cultural heritage for 
Austronesian speakers in ISEA is incontrovertible, but the details of the 
earlier stages of this migration, and the relationships between mainland 
linguistic groups, particularly Daic speakers, and Austronesian speakers 
is still a matter of debate (Blench 2012, 2013).

--- PAGE 317 ---
306	
Christopher Buckley
Evidence for the movement of peoples and culture from southern 
Taiwan to the Batanes Islands and thence to northern Philippines 
seems solid. Recent archaeological work (Bellwood and Dizon 2005, 
2013) traces the southward movement of red-slipped pottery and 
other markers characteristic of Neolithic cultures in Taiwan. Evidence 
of southward movement beyond this point is much more patchy 
at present. 
Attempting to fit the dissemination of weaving to the “out of 
Taiwan model” throws up some problems: key components of the 
Austronesian repertoire are absent or play only a secondary role in 
Taiwan. The externally braced version of the back-tensioned loom 
is occasionally used in Taiwan, but it does not appear to have been 
the primary loom for any Austronesian speakers in Taiwan except 
for the Yami of Lanyu (Green Island), who speak a language belonging 
to the Bashiic group, associated with the northern Philippines. Ikat 
is absent in Taiwan, and the characteristically Austronesian tubeskirt 
is rarely if ever found, most Taiwan aboriginals wearing blankets, 
wrap-around skirts, leggings and loincloths (Willis 1954). Positing that 
this group of technologies was present at one time in Taiwan but has 
since vanished or been replaced by simpler forms (such as the foot-
braced form of the loom) in Taiwan, but not in ISEA, involves too 
much special pleading to be credible.
A much more probable source for all three of these key Austronesian 
cultural features (loom, ikat, tubeskirt) is the Asian mainland, specifically 
the area that is now the coast of southern and southeastern China. 
This is based on consideration of the present-day weaving cultures of 
the Daic and other peoples in MSEA who are descended from groups 
who lived in this area, coupled with archaeological evidence from 
Yunnan and northern Vietnam. Regarding the route that these technologies 
took into ISEA, we can be sure that mainland relatives of early 
Austronesians speakers possessed seaworthy vessels (since their ancestors 
made the initial crossing to Taiwan). If early Austronesians were able to 
navigate the difficult north–south route from Taiwan to the Philippines, 
it is very likely that they were also in contact with related groups on 
the mainland via east–west routes.

--- PAGE 318 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
307
The objection to this argument of a mainland component to 
Austronesian migrations is that linguistic and genetic data points to Taiwan 
as the Austronesian “homeland”. In fact, currently available linguistic 
analysis does not provide us with a clear geographic location for pAn. 
The Malayo-Polynesian (MP) languages are indisputably related to the 
Formosan group, but to be sure that they originated solely on Taiwan 
we would need to be able to place them within a clearly defined sub-
branch of those languages. In fact the most widely accepted model for 
the Formosan language “group” lacks discernable internal structure,7 and 
pMP is equally close (or equally distant) from all of them. This being 
the case, we cannot say for certain that pMP is more closely related 
to Formosan languages than to vanished mainland forebears. Similar 
limitations apply to genetic data. 
This is not to say that migrants into ISEA could not have come from 
Taiwan (some evidently did), but to point out that the linguistic and 
genetic data do not exclude a mainland component. Nor is this a 
criticism of reconstructions of pAn. These still represent the “best 
estimate” available, given the linguistic evidence that we have. The 
uncertainty lies with the geographic location of this ancestral language. 
Since proto-languages do not come with a latitude and longitude 
attached this is necessarily a matter of inference and conjecture.
Considering the various pieces of evidence, it seems likely that 
there was an initial movement of weaving culture from Taiwan to the 
northern Philippines, but this proved to be a false start, perhaps due 
to the unsuitability of existing fibre preparation methods in the new 
climatic/vegetation zones in the central Philippines. Subsequently, 
migrants from the mainland brought a new type of loom and (perhaps) 
fibre processing methods that were more successful, together with the 
7	 This model for the relationship between Austronesian languages is the well-known one 
due to Blust (1999). Alternative models have been proposed, such as Malcom Ross’ 
version that places Malayo-Polynesian within a “Nuclear Austronesian” subgroup 
(Ross 2009), and Laurent Sagart’s version that includes Tai-Kadai as a subgroup 
(Sagart 2004). At the time of writing no clear consensus has emerged on these internal 
groupings.

--- PAGE 319 ---
308	
Christopher Buckley
tubeskirt and ikat, and this was the weaving-related repertoire that 
subsequently spread throughout ISEA. This must have occurred fairly 
soon after the initial colonization of the Philippines, given the deep roots 
within Austronesian languages for weaving related terms.
Howard (2010) surveyed ikat weaving in ISEA and MSEA and 
concluded that ikat and its associated weaving cultures originated 
on the mainland, specifically with the late period of the “Dong-Son” 
culture, centred on what is now northern Vietnam and associated with 
the production of spectacular bronze drums. I agree with Howard that 
the evidence points to a mainland origin, but I do not think that such 
a late date (corresponding to the beginning of the historical period, 
around 2,000 years ago) fits the evidence. The linguistic and other data 
that I have reviewed point to an earlier date and to a link with the 
Austronesian migration, and weaving technology itself is clearly much 
older. In addition, there are no known processes operating in the early 
historical period (either demographic or political) that could account 
for the broad distribution of the body-tensioned loom and warp-based 
weaving tradition in eastern ISEA. Trade networks certainly existed at 
that time, but trading networks do not spread novel techniques. On the 
contrary, traders tend to keep such information secret in order to protect 
their monopoly.
I do not rule out the possibility of even earlier (pre-Austronesian) 
transmission(s) of weaving from the Asian mainland to ISEA, and 
the occasional sightings of the older foot-braced form of the loom in 
ISEA hint that this may also have occurred. As mentioned, however, 
it seems unlikely that the foot-braced loom was ever widespread in 
ISEA. If it had been, we would expect to find it still in-use in more 
remote areas (by analogy with Hainan, Taiwan and the Lao–Vietnam 
border regions), since complete replacement of one traditional technology 
by another is rare, as the present-day patchwork of different forms on 
the Asian mainland demonstrates. Some occurrences of foot-braced 
loom weaving, such as sporadic sightings in the Himalayas and in 
New Guinea, may represent a devolution/simplification of externally-
braced back-tensioned looms, rather than a preservation of an archaic 
type. The distinguishing feature in such cases is that the foot-braced

--- PAGE 320 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
309
looms are rather basic in form, they are not the main looms that are 
employed, and they are used occasionally for weaving narrow items such 
as belts, or as teaching-aids for children.8 
8. Weaving Cultures in the Historical Period  
(Around 2,000 Years Ago to the Present Day)
The third phase of development of weaving culture began in two centres, 
both located on the Asian mainland and both associated with the rise 
of kingdoms and social organization on a new scale. These transformed 
the lowland areas of China, MSEA, Sumatra and Java, while leaving 
upland areas and the remoter islands of ISEA, with their older weaving 
traditions, relatively untouched. 
One of the key regions (once again) was central China, where new 
types of looms with frames were developed. As noted, these make their 
first appearance no later than the Warring States period and may have 
an even longer history. These looms transposed the back-tensioned loom 
into a raised frame with a seat, and added various mechanical aids (such 
as treadles) to make weaving easier and faster (see Figure 7.4). There 
are several different types, which were gradually adopted over much 
of what is now China, leaving ground-level back-tensioned looms 
confined to upland areas. These new looms spread east to Korea and 
Japan, but did not spread offshore into ISEA. Mainland textile making 
traditions are still extremely varied today, and cover the range from 
minority traditions in upland areas that preserve ancient styles and 
techniques, to progressive traditions making luxurious silks for the use 
of urban elites.9 
8	 Duggan (2014, 2015) suggests that Indonesian cloths made with uncut warps were 
formerly made on foot-braced back-tensioned looms, and that this (indirectly) 
is evidence for the former presence of this loom in ISEA. This is an interesting 
suggestion, but there are a couple of difficulties. Firstly, it is founded on the notion 
that there is a link between the length of cloth woven on a loom and the type of loom: 
this is debatable (see Note 2 above). Secondly, no actual examples of these cloths 
being woven on foot-braced looms have (to date) come to light.
9	 Boudot and Buckley (2015).

--- PAGE 321 ---
310	
Christopher Buckley
At around the same time as these developments occurred in central 
China, the “Indianized” kingdoms10 of Dvaravati, Angkor and Champa, 
with their associated Hindu and Buddhist cultures, were beginning to 
develop on the mainland. Kingdoms of a similar character, including 
Srivijaya and early Mataram appeared in Sumatra and Java. These 
kingdoms were associated with a new aesthetic that included a taste for 
large and formal cloths made of silk and cotton, decorated with weft ikat 
and supplementary weft, associated with the more sophisticated looms 
with reeds and flat warps that were needed for making these items. 
This weft-based textile tradition largely (but not entirely) replaced older 
warp-based traditions in lowland areas of MSEA, Sumatra and Java. 
In political terms, the difference between the Indianized kingdoms 
and the older Austronesian societies to the east is one of scale. The 
Indianized kingdoms organized people and matériel on a large scale, 
leaving evidence of this in monuments such as Angkor, Borobudur, 
and Prambanan. In contrast, political organization in more remote 
Austronesian societies remained on a smaller and more local scale.
Wisseman Christie (1993) has analyzed sīma charters, records that 
relate to taxation in tenth century Java, which provide an interesting 
insight into societal organization of the period, and into textile 
production in particular. The charters reveal that many textiles produced 
in Java were made on a professional basis, with division of labour 
into several classes. Professional dyers of this period were called 
maṅapus, a term that seems to have been linked to the tying of ikat 
cloth before dyeing, and ikat seems to have been a significant product 
at that time. Both cotton and silk were used, and both were referred 
to by Sanskrit-derived terms (kapas and bsar, respectively). The looms 
used included a reed (suri) and were of an advanced type derived 
from the mainland. Professional weavers seem to have used the most 
sophisticated loom called a candar loom, while households continued to 
use a simpler back-tensioned form, perhaps adapted to weave weft-faced 
textiles by modifying it with a flat warp and a reed (see below). These 
developments paralleled those taking place in weaving on the Chinese 
mainland during the same period, though Java and Sumatra clearly 
10	 A concept that originates from the work of George Coedès (1968).

--- PAGE 322 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
311
looked towards India rather than China for inspiration for both designs 
and methods during this period.
An interesting case that illustrates some of the processes involved 
at the margins of the Indianized kingdoms is that of Batak weaving, 
centred on Lake Toba in a relatively remote part of northern Sumatra. 
Batak weavers make large cotton cloths (called ulos by the Toba 
Batak) that show the influence of the Indianized aesthetic in their 
formal layouts and small motifs, evenly distributed across the cloth (see 
Figure 7.24). Despite their large size and fine weaving these cloths 
are warp-faced, with warp ikat decoration, and they are woven on the 
older Austronesian back-tensioned loom with a circular warp (Niessen 
2009). The loom is significantly wider than most MSEA back-tensioned 
looms: in the case of the widest cloths that are produced it is probably 
close to the limit for a loom of this type, determined by the weaver’s 
reach as she removes and re-inserts the sword-beater at the edge of the 
Figure 7.24
Cotton Ulos (86 cm × 256 cm, 
detail), Decorated with Warp 
Ikat, made by Toba Batak 
People, Northern Sumatra

--- PAGE 323 ---
312	
Christopher Buckley
warp. It seems that the Batak weavers adopted the new Indic-derived 
aesthetic, but re-interpreted it in a warp-based format, retaining their 
Austronesian loom virtually unchanged (Niessen 2009). This contrasts 
with the lowland cultures of Sumatra who adopted both the weft-based 
tradition and the new loom. 
Aside from weaving, the Batak are also renowned for their sculptures 
in wood and stone. In contrast with the abstract motifs of their cloths, 
this is a figurative, representational tradition, based on animals and 
anthropomorphs, including ancestor figures and protectors. Batak 
sculpture was not untouched by influence from the Indianized kingdoms 
(Sibeth and Carpenter 2007), but it remained firmly rooted in a much 
older tradition in both style and technique. The weaving and the 
sculptural traditions responded in divergent ways to outside influences, 
and they record the highly selective adoption of foreign elements into 
Batak society.
As mentioned, in much of the Malaysian peninsula, Sumatra, and Java 
the weft-based tradition is associated with looms with complex frames 
with raised seats. In the southern part of Sumatra, around Palembang, 
in Lombok and in parts of Bali, however, weavers use a ground-level 
version of the loom with a flat warp and a reed (see Figure 7.25), 
using this to weave weft-patterned cloths, including some finely worked 
cloths decorated with weft ikat and gold-thread supplementary weft 
(songket). This loom also occurs in a few other places in ISEA, such 
as western Flores, and amongst Bugis weavers in southern Sumatra, 
where it is also associated with silk textiles in the weft-faced tradition. 
A related loom with a reed is also used by Mandaya weavers in 
southern Philippines. There are two different possibilities for the 
origin of these looms. One is that they are the direct descendants of 
an early form of the loom with flat warp and a reed that preceded the 
development of a frame. A second, perhaps more likely possibility, 
is that these looms are the result of adapting the mainland (reed and flat 
warp) technology to the older Austronesian loom. The names given to 
parts of these looms retain some characteristic Austronesian terms (such 
as beliro for the weavers’ sword, and apit for the cloth beam) which 
lends some support to this idea, as does the fact that it tends to be 
found today in marginal areas where mainland influences from the last 
two millennia have come into contact with older Austronesian traditions.

--- PAGE 324 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
313
9. The Back-tensioned Loom in the Americas
Looms of very similar appearance to Asian body-tensioned looms occur 
along the west coast of the Americas, from Mesoamerica down to Peru. 
Similarities between these looms and Asian looms have long been 
noted: for example Junius Bird discussed the question of a link between 
the two at some length (Bird 1979). The distribution of back-tensioned 
weaving in the Americas is certainly suggestive, and the looms are 
similar. Back-tensioned looms in the Americas are invariably of the 
externally-braced type: the foot-braced form is absent.11 As well as the 
11	 See the various papers on New World looms in Emery and Fiske (1977), also Laverne 
Waddington (private communication).
Figure 7.25
Weaver in Palembang, Southern Sumatra, using a Back-Tensioned Loom with 
a Flat Warp and a Reed to Weave a Silk Cloth Patterned with Supplementary 
Weft (songket)

--- PAGE 325 ---
314	
Christopher Buckley
circular warp already discussed, a more complicated version is also 
found in the Americas called “false circular warping”. In this system 
the warp is actually flat, but is joined into a circle using a stick: when 
the weaving is finished the stick is removed, leaving a flat cloth with 
loops at both ends. This system is also found in a few widely scattered 
places in Asia, including Sulawesi and the Himalayan region. It also 
occurs in some traditional European looms, where it is probably an 
independent invention.
One objection that might be raised to the idea of transmission across 
the Pacific is the absence of weaving in remoter Pacific islands. If 
weaving was not transmitted to these places, where there is evidence of 
migration, why suppose that it was carried to the Americas, where there 
is none? The key factor in the Americas may have been the presence of 
pre-existing weaving cultures. Native Americans who already had yarn 
and understood textiles might have been in a better position to exploit 
back-tensioned loom technology than Austronesians beginning with a 
“blank slate” on a remote and uninhabited island.
Bark cloth also occurs in the Americas, as recently reviewed by 
Cameron (2008), who concluded that there was no firm evidence for 
trans-Pacific transmission of this technology. In the case of weaving 
the evidence is suggestive, but proof of transmission remains elusive.
10.  Summary: A Model for the Early Development of 
Weaving in Asia12 
The earliest loom in Asia of which traces survive today appears to be 
the foot-braced form of the back-tensioned loom. This loom was already 
well-developed by the late Neolithic period, around 4,500 years ago. 
Considering both its present-day distribution and archaeological remains 
it seems to have spread widely on the Asia mainland, presumably 
accompanied by the warp-based decorative tradition, including ikat (see 
Figure 7.26).
12	 Presented in the spirit of George Box’s dictum: “essentially, all models are wrong, but 
some are useful” (Box 1987).

--- PAGE 326 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
315
At some point, prior to the Austronesian expansion into ISEA, 
externally braced back-tensioned looms were developed from the older 
foot-braced type. Because of their advantages for making longer, wider 
cloths these types eventually became the dominant form on the Asian 
mainland (see Figure 7.27(2)), replacing the foot-braced variety over 
much of its original range. The externally-braced loom was also carried 
into much of ISEA by Austronesian settlers, together with its associated 
warp-based tradition (see Figure 7.27(3)). 
The first migrants who colonized the northern Philippines originated 
in Taiwan, but the migrants who brought weaving to ISEA, together with 
their more advanced loom and ikat weaving, came from the mainland. 
These migrants carried weaving as far east as parts of Micronesia, the 
northern coast of New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, and as far west 
as Madagascar. They did not succeed in establishing it in the remoter 
islands in the Pacific, probably because of the complexity of weaving 
Figure 7.26
Map Illustrating a Model for the Development and Spread of Body-Tensioned 
Looms in Asia: Earliest Period (Before 4,500 Years Ago)

--- PAGE 327 ---
316	
Christopher Buckley
Figure 7.27
Map Illustrating a Model for the Development and Spread of Body-Tensioned 
Looms in Asia: Intermediate Period (4,200–2,500 Years Ago)
with its interlinked components: settlers arriving in each far flung island 
were obliged to start afresh to find a suitable fibre source and figure out 
how to process it into yarn. In parts of ISEA, various leaf-based fibres 
were exploited to make yarns, but in smaller and remoter islands the 
challenge of re-invention proved too great. The quicker and more flexible 
method of beating bark to make cloth proved to be more portable.
While the back-tensioned loom was still spreading in ISEA, more 
advanced looms with frames were being developed in central China. The 
first types of frame looms transposed the back-tensioned loom directly 
into a raised frame with a seat, fixing the warp beam in the frame, but 
retaining a cloth beam fixed to the weaver’s waist via a backstrap. The 
circular warp was replaced by a flat warp, kept in order with a reed. 
They made their first appearance in the Eastern Zhou period and 
eventually spread as far as Japan in the east, and MSEA in the west (see 
Figures 7.28 and 7.13).

--- PAGE 328 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
317
At the penultimate stage in the development of Asian weaving, 
looms with flat warps and reeds, associated with a weft-based decorative 
tradition, were carried, together with the Indianized Hindu and Buddhist 
cultures of MSEA, into peninsular Malaysia, Sumatra and Java. This 
tradition is associated with frame looms with raised seats on the 
mainland, but in places where it met the older Austronesian tradition 
(Sumatra, Bali, Lombok) it was re-adapted to the ground-level format. 
This hybrid loom was later carried eastwards into some parts of ISEA, 
for example by Bugis settlers in southern Sulawesi. Most of the eastern 
regions of ISEA retained their older, warp-based traditions however (see 
Figure 7.13).
The dividing line between these two cultural regions is the “Ikat 
line”, that divides the Indianized kingdoms to the west from Austronesian 
cultures closer to their original states in the east. This line, running from 
Figure 7.28
Map Illustrating a Model for the Development and Spread of Body-Tensioned 
Looms in Asia: Later Period (2,500 Years Ago). Compare Present Day 
Distributions (Figure 7.13)

--- PAGE 329 ---
318	
Christopher Buckley
northwest to southeast in Figure 7.12, is reminiscent of the Wallace 
line that divides the flora and fauna of Wallacea from the regions 
to the west. The Wallace line lies to the east of Borneo and the 
Philippines however, and follows the former coastline of Sundaland 
at its maximum extent at the height of the last ice age. The Wallace 
line and the Ikat line are not directly related, but they both stem 
from the same ultimate cause: they reflect the increasing challenge of 
navigating from landmass to landmass as one moves from west to east, 
encountering longer ocean crossings and more remote islands. In fact, 
both lines are not true boundaries but reflect gradients from west 
to east.
The ikat line reflects the approximate limit of direct political 
influence of the Indianized kingdoms. West of this line, they had a 
direct and transformative influence on the former cultures of the region. 
This included the near-complete replacement of the older warp-based 
weaving tradition by weft-based techniques. To the east of the line their 
influence on textile traditions was mediated primarily via trade and 
was more subtle, affecting the decorative layout of certain cloths but 
leaving technique untouched. For example, the large ceremonial cloths 
(pua kumbu) of the Iban people echo the imposing size and layout 
of Indian trade cloths, re-interpreted using native Iban motifs and 
warp-based techniques (see Figure 7.29).
In the most recent stage of loom development, back-tensioning 
was replaced by a cloth beam fixed to the frame, and the older heddle 
plus shed-stick system replaced by a pair of heddles worked by 
treadles. This loom (which is now found worldwide) has been gradually 
replacing older types throughout Asia.
The spread of weaving technology in Asia has been characterized 
by innovation (over a period of millennia) and partial replacement of 
older technologies by newer ones. The replacement process is never 
complete however, and older traditions remain alongside newer ones in 
a complex patchwork. Remarkably, a few regions such as Taiwan and 
Hainan retain looms and traditions that appear to descend directly from 
Neolithic weaving with very few changes.

--- PAGE 330 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
319
To date, reconstructions of the Neolithic and post-Neolithic colonization 
process of ISEA (and the Asian mainland) have been based mainly on 
linguistic and archaeological considerations. Linguistic analysis has 
proved tremendously powerful, but has limitations, particularly in cases 
where living relatives of early languages are absent, and at greater 
time-depths where resolution is poor. Some aspects of conservatively 
transmitted material culture, including weaving technology, may have 
time depths that are equal to or exceed those of linguistic features, 
and offer alternative ways probing the past, as well as appreciating the 
cultural legacy of the present.
Figure 7.29
Cotton Pua Kumbu (108 cm × 214 cm), 
a Ceremonial Cloth made by Iban 
People from Kalimantan. Compare 
with Figure 7.23

--- PAGE 331 ---
320	
Christopher Buckley
TABLE 7.2
Summary of the Characteristics of Two Major Weaving Traditions in 
MSEA and ISEA
Weft-based Tradition
Warp-based Tradition
Locations
Western parts of mainland SEA
Malaysian peninsula
Sumatra
Java
Bali
Lombok
Eastern parts of mainland SEA
Hainan
East Nusa Tenggara
East Timor
Philippines
Borneo
Ikat type
Weft ikat
Warp ikat
Principal 
materials
Silk, cotton
Bast fibre, cotton
Loom types
Flat warp, with reed
Circular warp, with coil rod
Body-tensioned looms
Decorative 
layout
Formatted around a “frame”
Different motifs in centre, 
borders
Small motifs, organized 
hierarchically in bands
Motifs
Chevrons, small figurative 
motifs
Motifs built from dashes and 
ticks, which are often clearly 
visible in the design
Organization 
of labour
1) Home based
2) Family workshops and 
commercial workshops
Home based, mainly for own 
use, some localized trade
Sex of 
weavers
Female, with male 
participation in commercial 
settings
Female
Typical 
uses
Waist wraps, ceremonial 
cloths
Tubeskirts, loincloths, 
ceremonial cloths

--- PAGE 332 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
321
References
Adams, Marie J. “A ‘Forgotten’ Bronze Ship and a Recently Discovered Bronze 
Weaver from Eastern Indonesia”. Asian Perspectives XX, no. I (1977): 
87–109.
Baker-Brite, Elizabeth and John M. Marston. “Environmental Change, Agricultural 
Innovation, and the Spread of Cotton Agriculture in the Old World”. Journal 
of Anthropological Archaeology 32 (2013): 39–53.
Barnes, Ruth. The Ikat Textiles of Lamalera. Leiden: Brill, 1989.
Bellwood, Peter. Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Revised edition. 
Canberra: Australian National University Press, 2007.
———. First Migrants: Ancient Migration in Global Perspective. Oxford: Wiley 
Blackwell, 2013.
Bellwood, Peter and Eusebio Dizon. “The Batanes Archaeological Project and 
the ‘Out of Taiwan’ Hypothesis for Austronesian Dispersal”. Journal of 
Austronesian Studies (National Museum of Prehistory, Taidong, Taiwan) 1 
(2005): 1–32.
———, eds. 4000 Years of Migration and Cultural Exchange: The Archaeology 
of the Batanes Islands, Northern Philippines. Canberra: Australian National 
University Press, 2013.
Benitez-Johannot, Purissima, ed. Paths of Origins, the Austronesian Heritage in the 
Collections of the National Museum of the Philippines, the Museum Nasional 
Indonesia and the Netherlands Rijksmuseum voor Völkenkunde. Manila: Art 
Post Asia, 2011.
Bird, Junius B. “Suggestions for the Recording of Data on Spinning and Weaving 
and the Collection of Material”. The Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers 
22 (Spring 1960): 1–9. (Reprinted in 1975 by The Textile Museum, Washington, 
D.C.)
———. “New World Fabric Production and the Distribution of the Backstrap 
Loom”. In Looms and Their Products: lrene Emery Roundtable on Museum 
Textiles, 1977 Proceedings, edited by Irene Emery and Patricia Fiske. Washington, 
D.C: The Textile Museum, 1979.
Blench, Roger M. “Almost Everything You Believed about the Austronesians 
Isn’t True”. In Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from the 13th International 
Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 
Volume 1, edited by Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke and Dominik 
Bonatz. Singapore: NUS Press, 2012.
———. “The Prehistory of the Daic (Tai-Kadai) Speaking Peoples and the 
Hypothesis of an Austronesian Connection”. In Unearthing Southeast Asia’s 
Past: Selected Papers from the 12th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 1, edited by Marijke J. 
Klokke and Veronique Degroot. Singapore: NUS Press, 2013.

--- PAGE 333 ---
322	
Christopher Buckley
Blust, Robert A. “Subgrouping, Circularity and Extinction: Some Issues in 
Austronesian Comparative Linguistics”. In Selected Papers from the Eighth 
International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics, edited by Elizabeth 
Zeitoun and Paul Jen-Kuei Li. Taipei: Academica Sinica, 1999.
———. “Austronesian Comparative Dictionary: Online Edition”, 2014 (accessed 
17 November 2014).
Bolland, Rita. “Demonstration of Three Looms”. In Looms and Their Products: 
lrene Emery Roundtable on Museum Textiles, 1977 Proceedings, edited by 
Irene Emery and Patricia Fiske. Washington, D.C: The Textile Museum, 
1979.
Boudot, Eric and Chris Buckley. Roots of Asian Weaving: The He Haiyan 
Collection of Textiles and Looms from Southwest China. Oxford: Oxbow Books, 
2015.
Box, George E.P. and Norman R. Draper. Empirical Model-Building and Response 
Surfaces. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1987.
Buckley, Christopher D. “Investigating Cultural Evolution Using Phylogenetic 
Analysis: The Origins and Descent of the Southeast Asian Tradition of Warp Ikat 
Weaving”. PLOS ONE 7, no. 12 (2012): e52064. Available at <http://journals.
plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0052064>.
Bühler, Alfred. Materialen zur Kenntinis der Ikattechnik. Leiden: Brill, 1943.
Cameron, Judith. “Trans-Oceanic Transfer of Bark-Cloth Technology from South 
China–Southeast Asia to Mesoamerica?”. In Islands of Inquiry: Colonisation, 
Seafaring and the Archaeology of Maritime Landscapes, edited by Geoffrey 
Clark, Foss Leach and Sue O’Connor. Canberra: Australian National University 
Press, 2008.
———. “Textile Crafts in the Gulf of Tongking: The Intersection Between 
Archaeology and History”. In The Tongking Gulf Through History, edited 
by Nola Cooke, Tana Li and James A. Anderson. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 2011.
———. “The Spinning Tools from Sunget, Anaro and Savidug”. In 4000 Years of 
Migration and Cultural Exchange: The Archaeology of the Batanes Islands, 
Northern Philippines, edited by Peter Bellwood and Eusebio Dizon. Canberra: 
Australian National University Press, 2013.
Chen Honghai. “The Qijia Culture of the Upper Yellow River Valley”. In 
A Companion to Chinese Archaeology, edited by Anne P. Underhill. Wiley, 
2013.
Chen Weiji. History of Textile Technology in Ancient China. New York: Science 
Press, 1992.
Coedès, George. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia. Hawaii: University of 
Hawaii Press, 1968.
Duggan, G. Meravitalisasi Kantong Sabu [The Revival of the Bridewealth Bag]. 
Jurnal Wastra (December 2014): 34–40.

--- PAGE 334 ---
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion	
323
———. “Tracing Ancient Networks: Linguistics, Looms and Woven Cloths in 
Eastern Indonesia”. Proceedings of Symposium on Ancient Silk Trade Routes, 
Singapore, SMU, 27 October 2011.
Gittinger, Mattiebelle. “An Introduction to the Body-Tension Looms and Simple 
Looms of Southeast Asia”. In Looms and Their Products: Irene Emery 
Roundtable on Museum Textiles, 1977 Proceedings, edited by Irene Emery and 
Patricia Fiske. Washington, D.C: The Textile Museum, 1979.
———. Splendid Symbols: Textiles and Tradition in Indonesia. Revised edition. 
Washington, D.C.: The Textile Museum, 1985.
Gittinger, Mattiebelle and H. Leedom-Lefferts. Textiles and the Tai Experience in 
Southeast Asia. Washington, D.C.: The Textile Museum, 1992.
Goslings, B.M. “Het Primitiefste der Primitieve Indonesische Weefgetouwen”. 
Nederlandsch-Indië, Oud en Nieuw 13 (1928–29): 85–96, 112–25.
Hitchcock, Michael. Indonesian Textiles. London: British Museum Press in association 
with The Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, University of Hull, 1991.
Hoffmann, Marta. The Warp Weighted Loom: Studies in the History and Technology 
of an Ancient Implement. Stockholm: Universitetsforlaget, 1964.
Howard, Michael C. From Dashes to Dragons: The Ikat-Patterned Textiles of 
Southeast Asia. Bangkok: White Lotus Press, 2010.
Howard, Michael C. and Kim B. Howard. Textiles of the Daic Peoples of Vietnam. 
Bangkok: White Lotus Press, 2002.
Jasper, J.E. and Mas Pirngadie. De Inlandsche Kunstnijverheid in Nederlandsch 
Indie. 2. De Weefkunst. The Hague: Mouton, 1912.
Kuhn, Dieter. “The Silk Workshops of the Shang Dynasty (16th-11th Century BC)”. 
In Explorations in the History of Science and Technology in China, edited by 
Hu Daojing. Shanghai: Shanghai Classics Publishing House, 1982.
———. “Textile Technology”. In Science and Civilization in Ancient China, 
vol. 9, edited by Joseph Needham. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1988.
———. “Textiles in China”. In The Encyclopedia of the History of Science, 
Technology and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures, edited by Helaine Selin. 
Netherlands: Springer, 1997.
Maxwell, Robyn. Textiles of Southeast Asia: Tradition, Trade, and Transformation. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Niessen, Sandra. Legacy in Cloth: Batak Textiles of Indonesia. Leiden: KITLV 
Press, 2009.
Pelras, Christian. “Contribution à la géographie et à l’ethnologie du métier à tisser 
en Indonésie”. In Langues et techniques, Nature et Société, edited by Jacqueline 
M.C. Thomas and Lucien Bernot. Paris: Klinksieck, 1972.
Peng Hao. “Sericulture and Silk Weaving from Antiquity to the Zhou Dynasty”. 
In Chinese Silks, edited by Dieter Kuhn. New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2012.

--- PAGE 335 ---
324	
Christopher Buckley
Ross, Malcolm. “Proto Austronesian Verbal Morphology: A Reappraisal”. In 
Austronesian Historical Linguistics and Culture History: A Festschrift for 
Robert Blust, by K. Alexander Adelaar et al. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 
Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University, 
2009.
Sagart, Laurent. “The Higher Phylogeny of Austronesian and the Postion of 
Tai-Kadai”. Oceanic Linguistics 43, no. 2 (2004): 411–44.
Sibeth, Achim and Bruce W. Carpenter. Batak Sculpture. Singapore: Editions 
Didier-Millet, 2007.
Willis, Elizabeth B. “Notes on Aborigine Textiles of Formosa Today, from a Visit 
to the Island in 1954”. The Bulletin of the Needle and Bobbin Club 39 (1954): 
3–29.
Wisseman Christie, Jan. “Texts and Textiles in ‘Medieval’ Java”. Bulletin de l’Ecole 
française d’Extrême-Orient 80 (1993): 181–211.
Vollmer, John E. “Archaeological and Ethnological Considerations of the Foot-Braced 
Body-Tension Loom”. In Studies in Textile History, edited by Veronica Gervers. 
Canada: Royal Ontario Museum, 1977.
———. “Archaeological Evidence for Looms from Yunnan”. In Looms and Their 
Products: lrene Emery Roundtable on Museum Textiles, 1977 Proceedings, 
edited by Irene Emery and Patricia Fiske. Washington, D.C: The Textile 
Museum, 1979.
Yoshimoto Shinobu. “Principles for a Basic Classification of Handlooms”. Bulletin 
of the National Museum of Ethnology, vol. 12, no. 2 (1987). 手織機の構造  • 
機能論的分析と分類, 吉本忍.  国立民族学博物館研究報告  12  巻  2  号  1987.
———. “Typological Studies of Indonesian Handlooms: (1) Types and Distribution”. 
Bulletin of the National Museum of Ethnology 15 (1991): 1.
———. Textiles and Looms of the World (吉本忍,世界の織機と織物). Japan: 
Minpaku Museum, 2013.
Zhao Feng. A History of Chinese Silk Art. Shanghai: Silk Art History Heritage 
Press, 2005
———. Studies of Textile and Weaving Technology (7th–3rd Centuries BC). Shanghai, 
2012.

--- PAGE 336 ---
8
Pre-Austronesian Origins 
of Seafaring in Insular 
Southeast Asia
Waruno Mahdi1
1.  Introduction
Earliest sea crossings and offshore fishing in various parts of the 
world—including Taiwan, the supposed homeland of Austronesian 
languages—are dated in the period of rising seas, from the outgoing 
Pleistocene (c. 14,000 BP) until Mid Holocene, or later. But archaeological
1	 I am indebted to the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre of ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, 
Singapore, for generous funding of my travel costs and accommodation, without 
which I would not have been able to deliver this chapter at the Conference. I am very 
grateful to Gerhard Ertl, former director of the Physical Chemistry Department of the 
Fritz Haber Institute, Berlin, and the present director Martin Wolf, for the generous 
opportunity to use Department facilities in my linguistic studies, and also to Marcel 
Krenz and Albrecht Ropers for invaluable technical support. Many thanks also to 
Amartya Sarkar for crucial help in reading Sanskrit texts.
325

--- PAGE 337 ---
326	
Waruno Mahdi
data to be cited below show that sea crossings and high-sea fishing 
in Insular Southeast Asia (henceforth ISEA) must have begun at 
least three times earlier (c. 45,000 BP). When people elsewhere 
just began developing seaworthy watercraft, equatorial populations 
retreating before the rising seas in ISEA were likely to have already 
accumulated tens of millennia of experience, so it is only natural to 
expect that innovations in the construction of such watercraft originated 
from there. 
In this process of constructional innovation, the raft—the primeval 
watercraft—was likely to have been replaced by a multiple dugout2—a 
“raft” with dugouts instead of logs—and then a double canoe, when 
improved construction of dugouts, and perhaps also smaller loads, made 
more than two hulls superfluous. I cite evidence elsewhere (Mahdi 
2016) indicating that Chinese as well as Malayo-Polynesian (henceforth 
MP)3 shipping had developed from a double canoe. However, as this 
latter was not a primeval watercraft construction, it was likely to 
have been acquired from the very equatorial populations—apparently 
ancestors of present-day Negritos—who, retreating before the rising 
seas, also brought it northwards from ISEA to Fujian, and subsequently 
to Taiwan. 
I will cite biogenetic data which place populations of Taiwan and 
ISEA closer to one another than either of them to that of the Chinese 
mainland. These data have even led to theories, to be cited below, of 
an equatorial origin of the Austronesians. Nevertheless, linguistic 
studies will also be cited, which indicate that the reconstructable 
corpus of Proto-Austronesian shares a significant number of elements 
with language phyla of the mainland. At the same time, one can 
distinguish two distinct protoforms for “person”, depending on whether 
of Australoid or Mongoloid appearance. The first migration wave of 
2	 I discuss another development, i.e. the tapered raft, in Mahdi (2016).
3	 All Non-Taiwanese Austronesian languages are Malayo-Polynesian, and form a 
unique branch of the Austronesian language phylum, all other branches being confined 
to Taiwan (see Blust 2009, p. 49). Furthermore, I will refer to native speakers of 
Austronesian languages as “Austronesians”, and to speakers of Malayo-Polynesian 
languages as “Malayo-Polynesians”.

--- PAGE 338 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
327
Malayo-Polynesians apparently referred to themselves as the former 
(Mahdi 1994; 2016).
Available archaeological and other data to be discussed below 
suggest development of a maritime mercantile tradition in the South 
China Sea, connecting Mainland Southeast Asia (henceforth MSEA) 
with the Philippines, and Southeast China and Taiwan with ISEA. The 
resulting Trans-South-China-Sea network apparently involved populations 
speaking MP languages, having the physical appearance of Negritos 
(as defined below), and being socioeconomically akin to Sea-People- 
or Sama-Bajau communities. This translocal network continued into 
the metal age, as reflected by the Sa Huỳnh–Kalanay material-
culture complex. One of its early features was burial of the dead in 
boat-formed coffins, and the use of MP words for “boat” for “coffin”, 
attested from Assam till Sulawesi. The widespread metal-age “boat-of-
the-dead” cult may be a later development of the tradition of burial in 
boat-formed coffins.
Communities with maritime mobility of various stages of development 
apparently operated around the Bay of Bengal for a long period of 
time too. Data on very early plant transmissions from ISEA to India, 
particularly of the banana and the coconut, will be considered. In a 
much later period, in the course of the first millennium CE, the dispersal 
of alternative variants of the place name Yava[dvīpa] (in Sumatra) 
between China and Greece suggests ancestors of the Moken as carriers 
(Mahdi 2009, pp. 76–78, 80). These and other circumstances, suggest 
that equatorial populations from ISEA had been active in the Bay of 
Bengal since well before 1,000 BCE till perhaps 500 CE.
2. Who Are—and Were—the “Negritos”?
The term “Negrito”—first introduced by the Spanish as a diminutive of 
negro “black” (Endicott 2013, p. 9)—is somewhat diffusely and often 
ambiguously defined in the literature. As Negritos will be central to this 
discussion, this issue needs to be more closely inspected.
Referring to people with equatorial complexion who originally 
inhabited ISEA, New Guinea, Insular Melanesia and Australia, I will 
use the cover term “Australoids” without implications of an either

--- PAGE 339 ---
328	
Waruno Mahdi
assumed or actual biogenetic unity. I will further provisionally 
differentiate Australoids on a geographical basis into: “Negritos”, when 
located to the west of Halmahera, New Guinea and Timor; “Papuans”, 
when located on these islands or further east; and “Aborigines”, when 
located in Australia. It is not yet clear whether all pre-Austronesian 
peoples in ISEA dwelling to the west and north of Wallacea (the sea and 
islands situated between the Sunda and Sahul Shelves) formed a genetic 
unity, so the use of the term Negrito remains provisional in this respect. 
With regard to the linguistic perspective, Greenberg (1971) proposed 
that languages originally spoken in a wider region including ISEA 
and Near Oceania, more specifically in the Andamans, Timor, 
Halmahera, New Guinea, the Solomons, and Tasmania, formed a 
common superfamily. Subsequent more detailed studies have not 
confirmed the shared genetic affiliation of all the included language 
groups.4 However that may be, languages spoken by Negritos were 
not, and could not be, included in the picture, because practically no 
adequate remains of their original languages have survived. In the 
Philippines, the original languages of peoples referred to as “Negritos” 
have been replaced by languages of the MP group (see Reid 1994), 
whereas peoples known in peninsular Malaysia as the Semang, who 
are commonly characterized as belonging to a “Negrito phenotype”, 
now speak languages of the Aslian branch of Austroasiatic languages 
(Diffloth 1975; Benjamin 2013, pp. 475–78). 
The socioeconomic and culture-anthropological aspect of the problem 
is overshadowed by a—to my mind prejudicial—prevalent view that 
subsistence as hunter-gatherers (or foragers) is an intrinsic feature of 
the Negrito phenotype, just as dark complexion, short stature, and 
tightly curled hair (see review in Endicott 2013, pp. 8–9). It is even 
assumed that, at transition to the Neolithic, Negrito hunter-gatherers were 
either adsorbed into agricultural communities speaking Austroasiatic or 
Austronesian languages, or marginalized to ecological zones not under 
pressure of agricultural development (ibid., p. 11), as if Negritos were 
incapable of self-sustained economic development. 
4	 See Pawley (2009) for a detailed and comprehensive review.

--- PAGE 340 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
329
When the concentration of population exceeds levels allowing 
subsistence from natural resources, people are compelled to provide 
for themselves through agriculture and animal husbandry. When given 
ecological conditions provide sufficient natural food resources, people 
retain, or return to, a hunter-gatherer mode of subsistence in spite 
of possessing ample agricultural knowledge (Hutterer 1983, p. 175; 
Bellwood 2005a, pp. 37–38). There is no reason why Negritos should 
be regarded as deviating from this pattern, to assume hunting and 
gathering as an intrinsic feature. Indeed, Benjamin (2013, p. 449) calls 
attention to inconsistent reference to Orang Asli population groups with 
mutually comparably dark complexion in the Malayan Peninsula, as 
either “Negrito”, “Semang”, “Senoi” or “Proto-Malay”. The author’s 
solution to avoid inconsistencies was to use the term “Negrito” only 
with regard to such people of that phenotype who pursued a given 
mode of subsistence, that of hunter-gatherers.
This is methodologically quite correct, but in view of the much 
wider geographical and chronological scope to be considered in the 
present chapter it would be inadequate. Indeed, the concentration of 
mainland populations in consequence of inundation of the Sahul and 
Sunda Shelves by rising sea levels led to development of agriculture 
at the Kuk swamp in East New Guinea and emergence of the 
Bacsonian neolithic in MSEA well before the incursion of speakers of 
Austroasiatic and Austronesian languages (Mahdi 1988, pp. 348–49; 
2016, pp. 28–29). The pattern of social organization of a given population 
changes over time, and a given pattern of social organization may be 
practised by peoples of various phenotypes.
A particular case are the once foraging Toála (lit. “forest people”) 
of Eastern Sulawesi. Although of a dark complexion, Sarasin (1906, 
pp. 117–18) indicates that they do not have as tightly curled hair as 
Negritos do. While the hair of many Toála is fairly curled (cf. ibid., 
p. 54, Figure 3, Tafel VIII/13, IX/15), that of others is not (ibid., Tafel 
VIII/14, X/18). Altogether, the author indicates a closer phenotype 
similarity to the Vedda of Sri Lanka, than to Negritos (ibid., pp. 118–
19). Meanwhile, the Toála are presently no longer hunter-gatherers, but 
farmers.

--- PAGE 341 ---
330	
Waruno Mahdi
Well known are the Mlabri (also known as Yumbri; formerly called 
Phi Tong Luang “spirits of the yellow leaves”) in North Thailand. 
These hunter-gatherers are not Negritos, but belong to the same 
phenotype as the neighbouring agricultural peoples who allegedly 
“marginalized” the Negritos. The Mlabri are characterized by coarse 
(heavy) straight hair and high cheekbones, and speak a language of the 
Khmuic group of the Mon-Khmer branch of Austroasiatic.5 As further 
examples, Bulbeck (2013, p. 98) describes the Austroasiatic-speaking 
Shompen of the Nicobar Islands and the Semaq Beri of peninsular 
Malaysia.
Bulbeck also mentions the Punan (~ Penan), nomadic Non-Negrito 
hunter-gatherers of Central Kalimantan and Sarawak. The following 
possible backgrounds for their present mode of subsistence are suggested 
in the literature: (1) they are remnants of a primeval population, of 
which the others became farmers; (2) they represent a separate group 
which is fully independent of neighbouring farming peoples; (3) they 
are descendants of agricultural peoples who reached Kalimantan and 
underwent socioeconomic “devolution” in the hinterland jungle; and (4) it 
is not (yet) possible to determine their origin.6 One weakness of positions 
(1) and (2), and thus also of (4), is the failure to note the implications of 
the group’s physical complexion. The Punan do not represent an either 
Negrito or other equatorial phenotype; their skin colour is described as 
“light brown to brown”.7 Hence, the Punan must ultimately originate 
from the East Asian mainland,8 and reached their present equatorial 
5	 See Bernatzik (1941, pp. 111–81, and Figures 44–46, 55, 60, 61–66); Flatz (1963, 
particularly Figures 4 and 6–7, compare with a Non-Mlabri in Figure 5); Rischel 
(1995, p. 22, and colour photographs between pp. 16–17).
6	 With regard to bibliographic references for hypotheses (1) till (3), see Sellato (1994, 
pp. 115–16) who himself holds to position (4). 
7	 See Bulbeck (2013, p. 96), and the photographs in Sellato (1994, pp. 111–12), and 
Urquhart (1951, plates XVI a and b). 
8	 Regional diversification (see Bulbeck 2013, p. 100) cannot substantiate a local 
origin of a striking non-equatorial phenotype, bearing in mind the dark complexion 
of descendants of all first Homo sapiens sapiens populations in ISEA, New Guinea 
and Australia. Furthermore, one would rather assume an equatorial origin for the 
Toála of Sulawesi, than for the Punan.

--- PAGE 342 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
331
homeland as part of the MP dispersal. They were thus agriculturists at 
one time in the past.
Being hunter-gatherers is not an exclusive way of life of Negritos, as 
some pre-Austronesian indigenes with “dark skin complexion and tightly 
curled hair” practise farming. For example, swiddening is reported for 
the Lanohs and the Bateks on the Malayan Peninsula (Benjamin 2013, p. 
455). For Philippine Negritos, Bulbeck (2013, p. 97) mentions the Ayta 
(see Bellwood 2005a, p. 33) and the Palawan Bataks (Novellino 2011). 
Besides foraging in primeval (undisturbed natural) forests, and in some 
instances farming, Negrito communities also earned their subsistence 
as maritime hunter-gatherers,9 being described as Negrito sea-nomads 
for example by Sopher (1965, pp. 54–59, 291–93). People of a Negrito 
or similarly equatorial phenotype apparently played a significant 
role in protohistorical maritime communication, particularly as ship 
crews. One Chinese source, Hui Lin’s ninth century “Comprehensive 
pronunciations and meanings of [words in] the [Buddhist] scriptures” 
(一切經音義, Yīqiè jǐng yīn yì), describes Malay-speaking crews of 
Malayan ships (崑崙舶, Kūnlún bó) as follows (Pelliot 1925, pp. 257 
and 261):
Running these ships are mostly Gǔlùn-s serving as seamen. … These are 
Yí-barbarians amidst islands of the South Sea region; entirely black and 
naked-bodied.10
Gǔlùn is apparently a Chinese rendering of hulun ~ kulun, a word 
meaning “person” in languages of former vassals of the Malay 
thalassocracy of Sri Vijaya (Sanskrit Śrī Vijaya),11 which also underwent 
a semantic shift to “servant”, and “I, me [your humble servant]” (Mahdi 
1994, pp. 203–4, n. 23; 2009, pp. 79–80). 
9	 Maritime hunting and gathering also occurs outside Southeast Asia, see for example 
Yesner (1980).
10	 The Chinese original: 運動此船多骨論為水匠· ... 南海 州島中夷人也·甚黑
裸形·(yùndòng cǐ chuán duō Gǔlùn wéi shuǐjiàng; … Nánhǎi zhōu dǎozhōng Yírén 
yě; shènhēi luǒxíng;). 
11	 I write “Sri Vijaya” (noun)/“Srivijayan” (adjective) by analogy to “Sri Lanka”/ 
“Srilankan”.

--- PAGE 343 ---
332	
Waruno Mahdi
Malays and Javanese indeed have a darker complexion than Han 
Chinese, but not sufficiently so to lead to the cited Gǔlùn description. 
Furthermore, the majority in Southeast China at that time were not 
Han Chinese, but the somewhat darker Thai-Kadai and Hmong-Mien, 
so it is unlikely that the quoted description referred to Malays in 
general. This follows more clearly from a passage in the seventh-century 
Chinese Buddhist pilgrim Yijing’s “Account of the Righteous Law12 
sent from the South Seas” (南海寄歸內法傳 Nánhǎi jìguī nèi 
fǎchuàn), which indicated that they were “curly-haired” and black, 
while inhabitants of the islands were “not different from in China, but 
for going barefoot and wearing the sarong (干縵 gānmàn)”.13
Indeed, vassal Negrito Sea-People (Orang Laut) communities 
apparently provided crews and even ships for Malayan monarchs and 
ship owners. Towards the end of this article, below, I will briefly 
return to the relationship between Sea-People vassals and their Malayan 
overlords.
3.  ISEA as Original Scene of Maritime Mobility
As I noted elsewhere (Mahdi 2016, p. 28), it was during the rising sea 
level between the Late Pleistocene and Mid Holocene, mainly from 
c.  14,000 until 4,000  BP (Milliman and Emery 1968, pp. 1122–23) 
that maritime mobility developed in various parts of the world. This 
included crossings to isolated islands in the Mediterranean (Broodbank 
2006; Ammerman 2010; Farr 2010), or to such islands before the west 
coast of North America (Erlandson, Moss and Lauriers 2008; Fitzhugh 
and Kennett 2010). 
However, the humid tropical environment in ISEA apparently 
offered unique conditions which favoured and even motivated 
maritime mobility since a very much earlier period. The settlement of 
Sahul as early as c. 45,000 BP (O’Connell and Allen 2004, p. 849) 
12	 That is Buddhism.
13	 I had no access to the original Chinese text, and quote here from the English of I-Tsing 
(1896, p. 12); cf. also the French of I-Tsing (1894, pp. 63–64, fn. 7).

--- PAGE 344 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
333
or c. 49,000–43,000 BP (Summerhayes et al. 2010, p. 78)14 implied 
maritime mobility to cross more than 100 km wide straits in Wallacea. 
The sea crossings had not been accidental consequences of storms 
or tsunamis. Remains of deep-water fish, implying fishing well 
offshore, were found at sites dated before 30,000 BP in Sahul 
(Erlandson 2010, p. 22; O’Connell, Allen and Hawkes 2010, p. 60), and 
in East Timor (Lape, O’Connor and Burningham 2007, p. 240; O’Connor 
2007, p. 530). It seems likely that the principal forms of watercraft were 
rafts which, besides bark canoes, have been reported along the entire 
east coast of Australia (Doran 1981, pp. 74–75).
So when the rising sea after 14,000 BP encouraged first maritime 
mobility elsewhere, seafaring in ISEA already looked back on experience 
since approximately 45,000 BP. Hence, one may expect that watercraft 
construction then advanced to further sophistications in ISEA. As 
suggested by Mahdi (2016, p. 27), this probably led to a multiple dugout, 
that is a “raft” of dugouts (see Figure 8.1a). Following increasing 
sophistication of the dugout hulls, and perhaps also lighter weight of 
the loads which were carried, the number of hulls could be reduced 
to the minimum of two, resulting in a double canoe (see Figure 8.1b).
It will become evident below, that the original watercraft of both 
the Chinese and the Austronesians was the double canoe. Not being 
a primeval type of boat construction, it must have been introduced by 
population groups—apparently Negritos—migrating northwards from 
ISEA to Southeast China and Taiwan. Then, at a later stage, apparently 
in the course of material-culture exchange as a result of contacts 
between the northwards-migrating Negritos and mainland populations, the 
double canoe underwent further constructional sophistication in that 
the dugout hulls were enhanced to so-called five-part hulls (see 
Figure 8.1c). 
14	 I leave out early radiocarbon dates of Sahul colonization at 65,000–60,000 BP (see 
references in Redd and Stoneking 1999, p. 808) which were apparently not yet 
calibrated.

--- PAGE 345 ---
334	
Waruno Mahdi
(a) a Multiple Dugout, (b) a Double Canoe with Dugout Hulls, and (c) with 
Five-part Hulls 
Source: Based on Mahdi 2016, Fig. 2.1.
Figure 8.1
Primeval Developments in Watercraft Construction in ISEA Beyond the Raft:

--- PAGE 346 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
335
Biogenetic data place populations of Taiwan and ISEA closer to 
one another than either of them to inhabitants of the Chinese mainland 
(Lin et al. 2005, p. 240). Indeed, such biogenetic data even gave rise 
to theories of an equatorial origin of the Austronesians, in particular in 
a “triangular area formed by Taiwan, Sumatra, and Timor” (Meacham 
1984–85, pp. 94–95). However, there are significant historical- 
linguistic arguments against a purely equatorial origin of Austronesians. 
Donohue and Denham (2010) meanwhile indicate that there must have 
been significant exchange of material culture between Austronesians 
and pre-Austronesian inhabitants of ISEA. Furthermore, the observed 
dispersal of DNA could be explained by an early northwards migration 
of equatorial populations and their subsequent participation in the 
southwards MP dispersal (Mahdi, “Comment” in Donohue and Denham 
2010, p. 242).
Linguistic data indicate two distinct protoforms for the word 
“person” in MP languages, depending on whether with darker or 
lighter skin taint. The reference to persons with equatorial complexion, 
*qata, has reflexes meaning “person” in languages of ethnicities with 
equatorial complexion. These are typically distributed in peripherial 
areas, particularly on the Barrier islands to the west of Sumatra and 
closely related languages in North Sumatra, on islands of Nusa 
Tenggara, in Belau and New Caledonia (Mahdi 1988, p. 58; 1994, 
pp. 464–65; 2016, p. 30). For several languages, the reflexes have 
been glossed as “slave”—perhaps to be understood as “member of 
subordinate community”—particularly in Central and East Indonesia 
(ibid.). Reflexes of a variant with *R infix, *qaRta, occur in languages 
of the Philippines, in which it refers explicitly to Negritos (in languages 
of both Negrito and Non-Negrito peoples) (see Charles 1974, p. 460). 
It must be noted that not all dark-skinned people referred to by a reflex 
of the protoform *qata (or *qaRta) answer to an explicit Negrito 
phenotype. For example, the Enggano off the southwest coast of 
Sumatra, though dark-skinned, have straight rather than curled hair. 
I will therefore refer to dark-skinned Malayo-Polynesians named by a 
reflex of *qata as “Qata”, regardless of whether explicitly of a Negrito 
phenotype or not.

--- PAGE 347 ---
336	
Waruno Mahdi
Austronesian languages of ethnicities with apparent mainland—so-
called “Mongoloid”—ancestry frequently have reflexes of the protoform 
*Cau as word for “person” (Zorc 1994, p. 575). The protoform also 
served as first component in the compound form *Cau-mata, reflexes 
of which are the word for “person” in languages forming part of a 
distribution sweep through Central–East Indonesia and Papua New 
Guinea, apparently in transit through former dispersal areas of reflexes 
of *qata in Melanesia, all the way to Polynesia (Mahdi 1994, p. 461; 
where *Cau-mata was reconstructed as *Cau ma-qata). Considering 
that *C is rendered t in just about all MP languages, I will refer to 
the *Cau ~ *Cau-mata—who are generally lighter-skinned than the 
Qata—as “Tau”. Evidently, following their own observations too, 
Austronesians represent populations of two distinct phenotypes. 
Consequently, the meeting of the two types at respective places in 
their distribution area would be felt to result from two happenings: 
a migration wave of darker-skinned Qata, followed in its wake by a 
migration of Tau.
The distinction of the two population types in ISEA based on their 
skin complexion was also made by European ethnologists in now 
obsolete terms of “race”, referring to darker-skinned “Proto-Malays” 
and lighter “Deutero-Malays” till as late as in Bylmer (1943), cf. the 
review of earlier treatments in Glinka (1981, pp. 103–5). With regard 
to Oceania, genetic data presented by Friedlaender et al. (2008) confirm 
the transit through Melanesia of a later population to Polynesia, 
representing a Tau “express train” passing through a region reached 
earlier by an Qata “slow boat” (cf. Oppenheimer and Richards 2001) 
and see Mahdi (1994, p. 466; 2016, p. 31).
The concrete development of maritime communication in the 
South China Sea and into the Indian Ocean will be considered 
below. At this point it is important to corroborate the postulation 
that the watercraft which were introduced to the north were double 
canoes.

--- PAGE 348 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
337
4.  Introduction of Watercraft to Mainland China  
and Taiwan
Hornell (1946, pp. 88–89; see also Gibson 1958, pp. 16–17, 32) 
postulated that the original watercraft from which the Chinese junk 
developed had indeed been a double canoe, which was apparently 
introduced to the Chinese during the Late Shang (also known .as 
Yin) period (1300–1046 BCE as dated in Lee 2002, p. 18, Table I). 
Needham (1971, pp. 392–96, 439) assumed development from a raft 
instead. However, concurring with Hornell, I have confirmed the 
origin from a double canoe on the basis of the early form of the 
corresponding script character Mahdi (1992; 2016, pp. 31–33).
The basic Chinese character for “watercraft”, 舟 zhōu (Giles 1912, 
#2446),15 which also functions as semantic radical in complex characters 
referring to watercraft, indeed appears to have originally depicted a 
double canoe (see Figure 8.2a-e). Rather than numerous longitudinal 
lines depicting the logs of a raft there are just two, one on each side 
like runners of a sleigh. These are connected by two or more transversal 
lines which never mark the bow and stern ends as they would in 
case of a raft (Mahdi 1992, p. 4; 2016, p. 31). The word zhōu (舟) 
“watercraft” must indeed have originally denoted a double canoe. 
15	 I use the currently standard Pinyin transcription for Chinese, while Giles (1912) used 
Giles-Wade.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
( f )
(g)
(h)
(i)
Ancient and Modern Renderings of Chinese Characters: (a–e) zhōu “watercraft”; 
( f–g) fǎng “two boats lashed together”; and  (h–i) chuán “boat, ship”.
a and b are Late Shang bone (c. 1300–1046 BCE); c, d, f and h are Eastern 
Zhou (770–250 BCE); e, g and i are modern.
The pre-modern forms follow Karlgren (1940, ##1084b–e, 740h and 229f).
Source: Author.
Figure 8.2

--- PAGE 349 ---
338	
Waruno Mahdi
The early pronunciation of the word has been reconstructed as:16
•	 zhōu (舟) < EMC *tuw (Pulleyblank 1991, p. 411) < OC *tju 
(Baxter 1992, p. 810).
As semantic radical, the (narrowed) zhōu serves as component—
typically on the left side—of composite characters referring directly 
or indirectly to watercraft, see for example Figures 8.2f-i. The former 
two ( f-g) represent the oldest in a row of words referring to two boats 
lashed together:17
fǎng (舫) “two boats lashed together, a large boat, a galley” (Giles 1912, 
#3447), “two boats attached by the sides to each other, rectangular 
boat” (Couvreur 1904, p. 767) << EMC *puaŋh (Pulleyblank 1991, 
p. 92) < OC *paŋ;
háng (航) “two boats lashed together, a large vessel” (Giles 1912, #3852), 
“two boats attached by the sides to each other, boat” (Couvreur 1904, 
p. 767) << EMC *yaŋ (Pulleyblank 1991, p. 120);
bàng (艕) “two boats fastened side by side” (Giles 1912, #8665);
páng (舽) “two boats lashed together, known as 舽舡 [pángxiāng]18 or 
舽艭 [pángshuāng]”19 (Giles 1912, #8694);
huáng (艎) “a fast sailing boat, a ferry boat” (Giles 1912, #5117), “boat, 
a ferry formed by two boats attached to each other by the sides” 
(Couvreur 1904, p. 768).20
16	 EMC = Early Middle Chinese, c. 590–680 CE (Pulleyblank 1991); OC = Old Chinese, 
c. 770–250 BCE (Baxter 1992).
17	 Due to regional variation in meaning, I cite two different dictionaries.
18	 The second element 舡 has two readings: chuán “boat, ship”, and xiāng “barge” 
(Giles 1912, #2741 and #4275 respectively). For the latter variant, the pronunciation 
in dialects given by Giles corresponds to that of gāng (扛) (ibid., #5886). 
19	 The second element is 艭 shuāng “boat” (Giles 1912, pp. 10,119).
20	 The word also forms the compound huángxiāng (艎舡) “k.o. junk”, a dialectal form 
of which was apparently borrowed into Malay and Javanese as wangkang, cf. Jones 
(2007, p. 340). Giles (1912, #5117/5106 and #4275/5886) provides the following 
dialect forms: Guangzhou wongk’ong; Hakka fongkong; Fuzhou hwongkoung; Ningbo 
wongkong; Sichuan hwangkang; Yangzhou hwangkang; Beijing hwangkang (see 
also footnote 18). The Malay and Javanese cognate was apparently acquired from a

--- PAGE 350 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
339
This custom of lashing two boats together may reflect an earlier use 
of double canoes, which would further confirm the origin of a junk from 
a double canoe. The custom persisted into the twentieth century, when 
two junks were joined by spars for the transport of timber and of reeds 
on the Middle Yangtze (Worcester 1971, pp. 419, 458). Noteworthy is 
that the first of the above series of words also occurred in the composite 
fǎngchuán (舫船)21 which, according to one historiographic source, 
denoted “double hulled boats” used in a military expedition in 312 BCE 
(Needham 1971, p. 441, fn. c).22 
With regard to Taiwan—the presumed homeland of Austronesian 
languages—it is noteworthy that its earliest inhabitants have been 
described as agriculturists (Chang 1969, pp. 60, 64, 249–50; Bellwood 
1984–85; 1995; 2005b, p. 36), not as seafarers. Furthermore, there 
does not seem to be a unique Proto-Austronesian (PAn) protoform for 
“boat”. Instead one finds several protoforms with limited dispersal areas, 
including some probable doublets:23 
*qaCu > (1) Sediq ʔásəʔ, Pazeh ʔasuʔ, Bunun hatoʔ 
(Ferrell 1969, p. 247); 
*qabaŋ > (1) Saaroa ʔabaŋə, Oponohu-Rukai havaŋu, Siraya avang, 
(2) Gaddang ʔabaŋ, Tiruray ʔawaŋ, Ilanun awaŋ, (4) Mentawai 
abak, Moken kabaŋ “boat”
(Ferrell 1969, p. 247; Pawley and Pawley 1994, p. 338; Zorc 1994, p. 585); 
northern dialect. Most Chinese immigrants in ISEA are from the south, particularly 
from Xiamen (a.k.a. Amoy), Southern Fujian, for the dialect of which I did not find a 
cognate in Douglas (1899). This may be the reason why the precursor of wangkang 
remained obscure to the public, leading even to a folk etymological reinterpretation as 
wánggāng (王舡), lit. “royal barge”.
21	 With chuán “watercraft” (Giles 1912, #2742), attested for Eastern Zhou, see Fig. 2f.
22	 Citing the apparently unpublished “Communications and Transport in the Chhin [sic] 
and Han Periods of Lo Jung-pang” (*Singapore 1912, †Davis, California 1981), which 
I was unable to access.
23	 Here and further, to save space, only skeletal listings are cited with representative 
examples from areas numerated as: (1) Taiwan; (2) the Philippines; (3) Sulawesi with 
neighbouring islands; (4) West of Sulawesi; (5) Nusa Tenggara; (6) Maluku; (7) West 
Papua and PNG with neighbouring islands; (8)  Further Oceania. More elaborate 
listings can be found in the cited source references.

--- PAGE 351 ---
340	
Waruno Mahdi
*baŋkaʔ > (1) Kavalan baŋka, (2) Tagalog baŋkáʔ, Tausug baŋkaʔ, 
(3) Mori, Muna baŋka, (5) Sumbawa baŋka ‘boat’ 
(Dempwolff 1938, p. 20; Blust 1972, #83; Pawley and Pawley 1994, 
p. 338; Zorc 1994, p. 572);
*waŋka24 > (5) Manggarai, Rembong waŋka, (6) Tifu waga, (7) Yautefa 
wǎgĕ, Yabem waŋ, Suau waga, (8) Fiji waŋga, Tonga vaka 
“boat”
(Stresemann 1927, p. 67; Capell 1942, p. 115, #319; 
Pawley and Pawley 1994, p. 337).
Reflexes of the two first-cited protoforms *qaCu and *qabaŋ are 
represented in several highest-level branches of Austronesian, meaning 
that both would be formally assignable to PAn. However, coexistence 
of two highest-level proto-synonyms is rather unlikely, and probably 
implies horizontal borrowing over borders of highest-level branches 
in some not more closely definable period I will refer to as Early 
Austronesian (EAn). 
Kavalan baŋka, the unique reflex of *baŋkaʔ in Taiwan, is likely 
to be a borrowing from the Philippines (Ferrell 1969, p. 20; Wolff 
2010, p. 756), so formally, the protoform is Malayo-Polynesian, like 
the fourth cited protoform *waŋka. The respective distribution areas 
of reflexes of baŋkaʔ and *waŋka do not conform to the division 
between West and Central-East MP, meaning that we have another instance 
of horizontal borrowing between across borders of language groups. 
The protoform *waŋka is likely to be a secondary doublet of 
*baŋkaʔ, which in turn seems to share the root *baŋ with the second 
item in the list, *qabaŋ. Furthermore, *qaCu could consist of a root 
*Cu and the same pre-posited *qa- as in *qabaŋ, so that the four 
Austronesian items perhaps only represent two original lexical roots: 
*Cu and *baŋ. 
24	 The protoform was mistakenly reconstructed as *waŋkaŋ, amongst others by 
Dempwolff (1938, p. 164); Zorc (1994, p. 594); and Wolff (2010, p. 1027), who 
precipitously included the Chinese borrowing wangkang (see above, footnote 20) 
into the set of cognates (see Mahdi 1994, p. 217, #109; 2012b, p. 218).

--- PAGE 352 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
341
The former seems likely to be a cognate of OC *tju (modern 
zhōu 舟, see above). Meanwhile, OC *paŋ (modern fǎng 舫) could 
be cognate with *baŋ. Thus, not only do the Austronesian languages not 
have a unique highest-level protoform for “boat”, they share the two 
“closest-to-highest level” protoforms with Old Chinese. It seems likely 
that this lexical exchange—apparently reflecting material culture 
exchange—involved Early Malayo-Polynesians amongst the Baiyue 
(百越 Bǎiyuè) in the Fujian area (cf. Chang and Goodenough 1996, 
pp. 43–52) at a significantly later time than the primary branching of 
Proto-Austronesian.
The Malayo-Polynesians, meanwhile, do not have a uniform basic 
watercraft construction. Besides double canoes they also have single- 
and double-outrigger canoes, as well as single-hulled keeled plank- 
boats without outriggers. Of these, the double-outrigger canoe was at 
first assumed to have been the earliest (Heine-Geldern 1932; Hornell 
1943). However, Doran (1981) showed that it was the double canoe 
that had been the original MP watercraft construction, and Mahdi 
(1988, pp. 54–55; 1994, p. 457, 481, n.  180; 1999a, pp. 145–48; and 
2016, pp. 34–35) confirmed this with additional evidence. Hence, 
the watercraft form which was introduced into the Fujian-Taiwan 
region—presumable by northwards migrating Negritos—and served 
as prototype for Chinese as well as MP watercraft, was indeed the 
double canoe.
5.  Maritime Proto-Globalization: The Trans-South-China-Sea 
Network
It seems likely that the seafarers who brought the common precursor of 
the protoform doublets *qabaŋ ~ *baŋkaʔ ~ *waŋka to the north had 
also been involved in the emergence of a tradition of maritime trade. 
The apparent (i.e. not genuine) protoform *beli “buy” (perhaps also 
“acquire through barter”) seems to have been a secondary development, 
distributed through contact as a result of trade activity. The underlying 
PAn form or root seems to have been *liu “change, exchange, return”—
having the variant (allomorph) *liw in affixed derivations, particularly 
with prefixes *ba- and *sa-:

--- PAGE 353 ---
342	
Waruno Mahdi
*liu > (1) Ami paliw “work on another’s field (in place of payment)”, 
caliw “borrow, lend”, Pazeh bariw “buy, sell”, (2) West 
Bukidnon-Manobo liwan “replace (something)”, (3) Bantik 
liu “turn upside down”, Sangir saliu “exchange”, Bolaang 
Mongondou motaloy “buy”, Bugis bali “answer”, (4) Malay 
baliʔ “turn back”,25 kǝmbali “return”, Kelabit baliw “transform”, 
(5) Manggarai wali “exchange, return”, (6) Buru sali “receive”, 
(8) Fiji soli “be given”, Samoa liu “change” 
(Dempwolff 1938, p. 22; Blust 1989, p. 163, #542; 
Zorc 1994, pp. 558, 571, 589; Wolff 2010, pp. 855, 894). 
Evidently, reflexes of *ba-liw were sporadically used for “exchange” 
and “barter” since a very early period, and transmitted in these 
meanings by trading communities, in whose vernacular it was rendered 
*beli “buy, acquire through barter”. Distribution through contact 
resulted in a secondary cognate set (Mahdi 2012a, pp. 102–3):
*beli > (1) Paiwan vǝli, (2) Tagalog bili “buy”, (3) Bare’e oli “price”, 
Makassarese balli, (4) Malay bǝli, Merina-Malagasy vidi, 
(5) Manggarai wǝli “buy”, Leti vǝli, (6) Buru fili-n “price”, 
(7) Motu hoi, (8) Fiji voli-a “buy”
(Brandstetter 1910, p. 21; Dempwolff 1938, p. 27; 
Zorc 1994, pp. 558, 573; Wolff 2010, p. 765).
The distribution of reflexes of *beli have certain aspects in common 
with that of *qabaŋ ~ *baŋkaʔ ~ *waŋka: in both instances there is a 
limited reflexion in languages of Taiwan on one side, and a widespread 
representation over a significant part of the MP distribution area. 
Possibly, the same trading seafaring communities may have been 
involved in the beginnings of both protoform dispersals. 
Solheim (1984–85, pp. 79–81) proposed an interesting concept for 
which the author coined the name “Nusantao”, supposedly meaning 
“people of the island homeland”.26 The concept appeared at first to 
25	 Some Malayic dialects have automatic postglottalization of final vowels.
26	 Actually, Nusantao more likely means “island homeland of people”. That which 
the author wished to express would be *Tau- or *To-nusa, compare Toraja (lit.

--- PAGE 354 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
343
confuse linguistic, biogenetic, and material culture developments, to 
then assume a migration of Early (or even “Pre-”) Austronesian 
speakers from the north of East Indonesia northwards through the 
Philippines. It seems unlikely, however, that the rising sea level would 
have led to a migration from Wallacea rather than from inundated parts 
of the Sunda and Sahul Shelves.
Remarkable in Solheim’s hypothesis is, however, that the author 
saw the “Sea Gypsies”27 of Myanmar, Thailand and Malaysia and 
the Sama–Bajau of the Philippines, Sabah and Central Indonesia as 
the most direct descendants of his Nusantao (ibid., p. 86), and that 
the South China Sea apparently became the scene of maritime com­
munica­tion and trade involving communities that were linguistically 
MP, physiologically—for the greater part—Negrito, and socio­
economically resembling the Sea-People. One may add that this may 
even have been a precursor of the well-known kula of Kiriwina 
(Trobriand) Islands (see Malinowski 1984) and hiri of the Gulf of 
Papua (Lewis 1969).
The emergence of a Trans-South-China-Sea maritime trade 
network is confirmed in particular by the dispersal of various items of 
material culture between Indochina and the Philippines, particularly 
a pottery complex that spread into the Archipelago (Solheim 1964, 
p. 196). It continued well into the metal age, as attested at Sa Huỳnh 
(Parmentier 1924) and Kalanay (Solheim 1957, pp. 286–88). This 
metal-age phase apparently coincided chronologically with the 
Acheho-Chamic migration into Indochina. It also involved earliest iron, 
bronze and glass objects dated 500 BCE till 500 CE in the Philippines 
(Bacus 2004, p. 263). The beginning of the above-mentioned Trans-
South-China-Sea network, however, apparently dates from before the 
metal age. This includes Taiwan, Indochina, and the Philippines (see 
Hung and Bellwood 2010, particularly Figures 2.1–3).
“people of the interior or highlands”, *daya “direction away from the sea”), or 
Toála (“people of the forest”, *Salas “forest”). 
27	 It is not clear whether by “Sea Gypsies” Solheim implied the Moken-Moklen 
alone here, or also the Sea People (Orang Laut) of Riau and the Strait of Malacca.

--- PAGE 355 ---
344	
Waruno Mahdi
Figure 8.3
The Malayo-Polynesian Migration Through ISEA (2,500–1,000 BCE), and Maritime Communication in the 
ISEA—South China Sea Region (1,000 BCE–500 CE)
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 356 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
345
One cultural feature connected with this network is of particular 
significance for the present study, and that is burial in boat-shaped 
coffins. Its prehistoric dispersal area included the Niah Caves in the 
North of Sarawak (Harrisson 1958) and several sites in Vietnam 
(Higham 1989, pp. 195, 204) and the Philippines (Junker 1999, p. 150). 
Boat-coffin burial in ISEA continued to be practised till recent times, as 
shown by Steinmann (1939, pp. 153–59).
On the island of Tanimbar, the dead were placed in coffins shaped 
like double canoes (van Hoëvell 1890a, p. 159; 1890b, p. 207), although 
contemporaneous watercrafts were single-hulled. The burial ritual thus 
reflected traditions of the past, when double canoes were common in 
ISEA. This, and the pre-metal-age origin of the tradition, is confirmed by 
the dispersal of the boat-coffin burial in Oceania up to as far as Hawaii 
(Holmes 1981, pp. 157–59). 
Noteworthy is also a connection with the contemporaneous dispersal 
of the protoform doublets for “boat”. For example, borrowed reflexes 
of EAn *qabaŋ became a word for “coffin” in some Central-Bahnaric 
Mnong-Sre dialects spoken in the Mekong basin:
•	 Biat-Mnong ʔbaŋ, Sre gəbaŋ “coffin” 
(Shorto 2006, p. 205, #633)
These are not MP, but Mon-Khmer languages. There also are other 
examples of such word borrowing which suggest contacts with Western 
MP speakers sailing up the Mekong (Mahdi 2010). The custom of 
boat-coffin burial, meanwhile, also involved the doublet *baŋkaʔ, as 
evidenced by Mori baŋka “boat, coffin” (Esser 1926, p. 42). 
The boat-coffin custom led to the emergence and development of 
a metal-age ship-of-the-dead cult, with characteristic graphic icons in 
MSEA and ISEA.28
This distribution of boat-coffins and the ship-of-the-dead cult over 
a widespread area encompassing both MSEA and ISEA fits well with 
the concept of a Trans-South-China-Sea maritime trade network 
28	 See Goloubew (1929); Steinmann (1939, pp. 160–82 and plates 71–78); Bernet 
Kempers (1988, pp. 143–62, 586–87), see Mahdi (1994, p. 459).

--- PAGE 357 ---
346	
Waruno Mahdi
described above. However, although this advancement of maritime 
mobility at first probably involved the earliest form of MP watercraft, 
the double canoe, the graphic ship-of-the-dead icons—representing a 
later metal-age phase—show single-hulled watercraft (without outriggers) 
instead. Were it not for the coffin forms in Tanimbar, one would even 
question that boat-burying sailors of double-canoes had ever been 
involved in ISEA. 
6.  Advance of Maritime Proto-Globalization into the  
Indian Ocean
That maritime communication and trade from ISEA also spread into 
the Indian Ocean is meanwhile well known (Solheim 1980, p. 334; 
Manguin 1996; 2004; Bellina and Glover 2004, pp. 73–80). It seemed 
clear that Malayo-Polynesians had played a central role (Mahdi 1999b, 
pp. 169–70, 177–80). 
However, maritime mobility now appears not to have been originally 
initiated by Austronesians, but that the technology essential for it was 
apparently developed and passed on to them by Negritos. One must 
presume, therefore, that Negritos or other Australoids had not only 
moved northwards, but also westwards into and across the Indian Ocean. 
This could have happened in successive stages on rafts, then multiple 
dugouts, and finally double canoes (Mahdi 2016, pp. 36–39).
One noteworthy parallelism is the semantic shift of a word for 
“boat, trough” to mean “coffin” in some Tibeto-Burmic languages, 
particularly since it possibly involves a borrowing of the same EAn 
*qabaŋ “boat”:
•	 Proto-Kukish *r-Kuaŋ > Mikir Kukish, Naga Bari k‘oŋ, Banpara 
Naga k‘uŋ “trough used as a coffin or as a canoe”
•	 Garo riŋ-koŋ “trough”, Middle Burmese k‘oŋ, Rawang (a.k.a. 
Krangku) k‘ōŋ-śi, Tamalu goŋ-śi “boat” 
(Shafer 1974, pp. 406, 427)
This repetition of the same semantic shift suggests that seafarers 
practising burial in boat-shaped coffins not only sailed up the Mekong, 
but also up the Salween, Irawaddy, Ganges and Brahmaputra. However,

--- PAGE 358 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
347
the maritime communication which resulted in the transmission of 
this linguistic feature already involved speakers of Malayo-Polynesian 
(*qabaŋ being Early Austronesian), and not anymore pre-Austronesian 
Negritos. 
The westward extent of the maritime communication network seems 
to reach rather far, to perhaps already proceed around Cape Comorin 
into the Arabian Sea at a very early time. Stargardt (1979, pp. 20–22) 
reports the earliest appearance of iron as well as onyx beads (of South 
Asian origin) at Taungthaman, Myanmar, in the fifth century BCE, and 
notes the appearance of the same two artefact types at Ban Chiang, 
Thailand, and in the Tabon caves in Palawan, the Philippines. The 
author stressed that the cited artefacts were late exotic introductions into 
a local culture which showed unbroken continuity from the preceding 
Neolithic. Hence, these were neither new settlements of immigrants 
from South Asia, nor even reflect adoption of Indic religious culture by 
local communities. Unfortunately, iron and onyx cannot tell us who had 
brought them to the sites at which they were found.
Concrete evidence of westward maritime communication and 
migration of an even much earlier period, i.e. involving either Negrito 
or other Australoid peoples, is the transmission of the banana and the 
coconut. 
The banksii subspecies of the Musa acuminata Colla (genome A) 
banana had already been deliberately planted by 6,950–6,440 BP at the 
Kuk Swamp in Papua New Guinea, as shown in archaeological studies 
by Denham et al. (2003, p. 192), confirmed by Haberle et al. (2012). 
Domestication over several millennia led to seedless varieties and 
generation of an at first diploid (AA), then to further diploid and triploid 
(AAA) cultivars involving also another subspecies, the M. acuminata 
ssp. errans (Denham and Donohue 2009, p. 18). Cross-breeding with 
another species, M. balbisiana Colla (genome B), apparently native to 
MSEA as well as ISEA, led to AB diploids, then to AAB and ABB 
triploids (ibid.).29 M. acuminata-generated cultivars had apparently been 
29	 Previously, the now obsolete terms Musa sapientum L. and M. paradisiaca L. were 
used for varieties of the edible banana. Meanwhile, Musa × paradisiaca seems to be

--- PAGE 359 ---
348	
Waruno Mahdi
transmitted westwards via ISEA to South Asia already before the MP 
dispersal (Donohue and Denham 2009; Perrier et al. 2011). 
The apparently oldest set of cognates—assigned by Denham and 
Donohue (2009, pp. 23–25) to a protoform *muku—is distributed over 
languages of New Guinea, further Melanesia, and East Indonesia (see 
Donohue and Denham 2009, p. 303, Figure 10, p. 308, Figure 15, 
red and yellow). The distribution encompasses languages of mutually 
not affiliated Trans-New Guinean and MP, so the cited *muku cannot 
be a protoform in the strict sense. Denham and Donohue (2009, p. 14, 
Figure 4) propose a scheme of phonological development which, in 
view of a still lacking reconstruction of Proto-Trans-New Guinean 
historical phonology, inevitably remains impressionistic. 
Considering the place of original domestication of the banana in 
PNG, cognates in Papuan languages of East New Guinea are more likely 
to represent directly inherited reflexes, and for these I am inclined to 
propose a protoform like *mug[u] or *mog[u], compare:30
Trans-New Guinean /
/ Southeast Papuan / Yarebanic: Yareba mo, Moikodi moʔo;
/ Madang / 
/ Croisilles: Utu mug, Samosa mogu, Mosimo mugu;
/ Rai Coast / 
/ Peka: Sop mug, Danaru muŋgu;
/ Minjim: Anjam muŋge, Male muŋgo-l, Bongu muga;
/ Bosavi: Kaluli magu;
/ West Trans-New Guinean /
/ Timor-Alor-Pantar /
/ Alor-Pantar /
/ Alor: Kui moga-l, Woisaka moge-r, Kabola moʔo-y;
/ Pantar: Lamma maʔa ~ mag-gi, Teiwa muχu-l;
a common term for A&B-triploid cultivars.
30	 Here (as in further lists) only a representative listing is shown, based on Denham and 
Donohue (2009, pp. 24–25, Tables 2 and 3) and Perrier et al. (2011, online Suppl. 
Table S4), who accumulated a remarkable collection of lexical data. I have revised 
some of the transcriptions for the sake of uniformity. The subclassification of Trans-
New Guinean—provided here to elucidate the geographical distribution—follows the 
Summer Institute of Linguistics’ (SIL) Ethnologue.

--- PAGE 360 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
349
/ Tanglapui maka;
/ Oirata mu;
/ Timor: Fataluku mu, Makasae muʔu;
West Papuan / West Bird’s Head: Tehit oga ‘banana’.
Already in the Papuan languages considered above, horizontal 
dispersal by borrowing must have played a certain role, because primeval 
dispersal of banana cultivars probably postdated the first split of Proto-
Trans-New Guinean. This is all the more so for MP cognates which 
must evidently reflect a Papuan substrate or adstrate in the respective 
languages (cf. Denham and Donohue 2009, p. 26), probably involving 
several parallel acts of Papuan-to-Austronesian lexical transmission:31
•	 (5) Manggarai muku, Li’o muku, Sika muʔu, Lamaholot muko, 
Kemak mu, Aputai mu, Kisat muʔu, Fordata muʔu, Kai muk 
~ muʔu, Batuley mug, (7) Erokwanas maʔo, Ura ya-mek, 
(8) Kokota muku, Sie ya-moʔ, Aneityum na-mek, Kumak mugi-c 
“banana”
(Calon 1891, p. 204; Verheijen 1984, p. 61; Perrier et al. 2011,
online Suppl. Table S4 ##63–104).
The relatively scarce traces in languages of further Melanesia, which 
however include a reflex in Kumak in New Caledonia, suggests that 
the Trans-New Guinean borrowing was carried southwards by the Qata, 
i.e. before the influx of the Tau who transmitted reflexes of a different 
protoform for “banana” which will be considered below. 
Remarkable are possible cognates in Indo-Aryan and Dravidian 
languages in South Asia, as well as in other languages further west, as 
indicated by Hoogervorst (2013a, p. 56) who elicited many of the cognates 
cited below.32 I begin with the Sanskrit cognates and their reflexes: 
31	 The same enumeration of Austronesian distribution areas as above is used here, see 
footnote 23.
32	 Some are also from Perrier et al. (2011, Table S4 ##107, 789–91, 920, 924–25, 941) 
who assign all but #107 (“Pali mokkha, moca”) to an either undefined or Arabic 
precursor. In early sources, the banana is sometimes referred to as “plantain”, which 
will be rendered here as “banana”.

--- PAGE 361 ---
350	
Waruno Mahdi
Sanskrit moca “juice of a tree, Moringa Pterygosperma,33  
Musa Sapientum”34 ~
~ mocā “Musa Sapientum, cotton shrub,35 indigo plant,36 Hingtsha 
Repens,37 banana [fruit]” ~
~ mauca “banana [fruit]” (Monier-Williams 1899, pp. 835–36) > 
>	 Prakrit mocā, Hindi mocā, Bengali mocā, Kusunda motsa,38 Aramaic 
m.w.z.ā (
), Farsi mawz ~ mūz, Arabic mawz ~ mūz, Kurdish 
moz ~ mûz, Turkish muz, Amharic muz, Somali mōs[-ka] ~ mūs[-ka] 
“banana”, Swahili mazu “k.o. banana”.
These reflexes do not seem to result from parallel Papuan or MP 
borrowings. Turner (1966, p. 597, #10348) cites Sanskrit mocā as 
common precursor of the Middle and New Indo-Aryan cognates. Besides 
a specific reference to the banana plant or fruit, the Sanskrit doublets 
reportedly also referred in some primary sources to various other 
plants, but this may at least in part be due to uncertainties in the 
interpretation of source texts. Considering that inherited Middle and 
New Indo-Aryan reflexes, and also borrowed cognates in other languages 
all mean “banana”, this must also have been the basic meaning of the 
Sanskrit forms.
The cited cognate in Kusunda (an almost extinct isolate of Nepal) 
must be of Indo-Aryan provenance; Löw (1881, p. 336) names Sanskrit 
as donor of the Aramaic cognate (which does not yet occur in Talmudic 
texts), and Steingass (1892, p. 1344) notes the same for Farsi. From the 
latter it apparently entered Arabic, and from that further into African 
33	 That is Moringa pterygosperma Gaertn. = M. oleifera Lam., the drumstick or 
horseradish tree.
34	 That is the edible banana plant.
35	 Gossypium arboreum L., native in particular to the South Asian Subcontinent.
36	 Indigofera tinctoria L., the original source of indigo dye.
37	 That is Hingtsha repens Roxb., an obsolete denomination of a surface-creeping, also 
water-floating, plant used in traditional medicine, apparently Enhydra heloncha Dc. or 
E. fluctuans Lour.
38	 Watters (2006, p. 146) cites Kusunda motsa, while Rana (2002) has Kusunda mucha, 
and lists Tibeto-Burman cognates: Central Magar mocha, Tamang moje, Dura muja, 
Gurung mach “banana”.

--- PAGE 362 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
351
languages. Johnson (1959, p. 265) notes the Arabic cognate as precursor 
of the semantically particularized Swahili cognate. The Kurdish and 
Turkish cognates could be from either Farsi or Arabic. Altogether, the 
entire above-cited cognate set appears to ultimately derive from Sanskrit 
mocā ~ mauca. 
Meanwhile, the unspecific plant reference of the apparently original 
Sanskrit moca ~ mocā (masculine ~ feminine) set matches better 
with possible Dravidian cognates cited by Hoogervorst (2013a, p. 56), 
compare:
•	 Tamil mōttai “unblown flower of banana, fragrant pandanus,39 
a.o.”, Kannada mōte “leaf-like envelope around inflorescence of 
the banana, coconut, or fragrant pandanus”, Tulu mōte “banana 
inflorescence” 
(Burrow and Emeneau 1984, p. 464, #5138).
Bananas are not “plucked” individually, but the entire bunch, growing 
from one inflorescence “bud”, is chopped at the stem and taken as a 
whole. Hence, reference to either the inflorescence or the fruit involves 
a relatively light semantic shift. Leaving aside secondary reflexes 
of the Sanskrit forms, the above cited cognates are not widely spread 
in the respective language phyla, and probably do not reflect an either 
Proto-Indo-Aryan or Proto-Dravidian original. The non-specific semantic 
reference may result from the word being acquired from coastal 
seafarers. Until there is further confirmation that the Indian and 
New-Guinean cognate sets are mutually related, one must provisionally 
also consider the possibility of a coincidental phonological similarity, 
particularly in view of the wide gap between the respective dispersal 
areas. I will return to this below.
Another probable dispersal of a word for “banana” involves a 
cognate set with less semantic variation, assigned in Perrier et al. (2011, 
online Suppl. Table S4 ##576–596) to a protoform *baule (perhaps 
*baulai ?), compare:
39	 Pandanus verus Kurz = Pandanus odorifer (Forssk.) Kuntze.

--- PAGE 363 ---
352	
Waruno Mahdi
West Papuan / North Halmahera–Bird’s Head:
Galela bole, Loloda bole, Abui balēy;
Malayo-Polynesian / Western Oceanic /
/ Suau: Saliba baela;  
/ New Britain: Lamogai obul;
Dravidian:
Tamil vāṛai, Malayalam vāṛa, Kannada bāṛe, Kodagu bāḷe, Tulu 
bārè ~ bāḷè
(Burrow and Emeneau 1984, p. 486, #5373);
Indo-Aryan:
Sanskrit vāra-buṣā ~ vāra-bṛiṣā “banana” 
(Monier-Williams 1899, p. 943 s.v. vāra2).
Here we have a comparable dispersal gap as in that of the previously 
considered set, and the form is similarly reflected in several Dravidian 
languages, although in only one Indo-Aryan—Sanskrit. Whereas the 
assumed dispersal of the former cognate set west of PNG advanced 
along the south of East Indonesia through Nusa Tenggara, that of the 
latter set apparently followed soon after that along the north, through 
Halmahera. To my mind, the parallelism in the dispersal of the two 
assumed cognate sets increases the credibility of the first-considered 
one. Furthermore, the dispersal of the second set may have been the 
reason of the semantic shifts which the Indic cognates of the first set 
underwent.
The reason of the dispersal gap between East Indonesia and South 
Asia is probably the very early time of the transmissions, and that 
cognates in the intermediate areas were subsequently displaced by other 
words for “banana”. 
Amongst these are items of a somewhat complicated set of banana 
terms, assigned by Donohue and Denham (2009, p. 303) to an ultimate 
protoform *qaRutay with intermediate doublets cited as *taloy ~ 
*kaloy ~ *kela ~ *kola ~ *loka40 (see Perrier et al. 2011, online Suppl. 
40	 Cognates directly reflecting *qaRutay are restricted to the Philippines.

--- PAGE 364 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
353
Table S4 ##446–540). It would need too much space to consider 
the relationship between all the apparent doublets. With regard to a 
possible westward transmission across the Bay of Bengal, only a set 
of doublets which I provisionally reconstruct as *loka ~ *kalo ~ *kula 
needs to be inspected. I begin with reflexes in MP languages, using the 
same areal numeration as defined in footnote 23:
•	 (3) Mandar loka, Baree loka, Kulawi lokaʔ, Banggai loʔa, (4) Karo- 
Batak galuh, Toba-Batak gaol, Simalur kaol ~ xaol ~ haol, (5) Bima 
kalo, Kambera kalu, (6) Banda kula, Asilulu kula, Haruku kura, 
Sawai lokε “banana”
(Kähler 1961, p. 97; Perrier et al. 2011, ibid., ##461–471, 486–492).
The westward dispersal of cognates through languages of sections (5) 
and (4) fits well with the westward movement of the Qata (see the 
unfilled arrow in the lower left of Figure 8.3, and cf. Nothofer 1994), 
and thus proceeded later, already within the period of the MP migration. 
West of the Bay of Bengal, reflexes of the apparently cognate doublet, 
*kela, presumably brought over by the Qata, indeed do not appear to 
include Middle Indo-Aryan or earlier cognates, and are thus more recent 
than those of the previously inspected sets:
•	 Bengali kola, Nepali kerā, Hindi kelā, Pashto kelá, Farsi kīla, 
Sindhi kīla “banana”.
(Perrier et al. 2011, ibid., ##496–506).
Whereas the two earlier cited forms first reached Dravidian languages 
of South India, apparently brought across by seafarers on primeval 
watercraft—perhaps rafts—using the westward Winter Monsoon 
Current (see Figure 8.4), the presently inspected transmission reached 
India further north, being perhaps introduced into Kalinga (also shown 
in Figure 8.4).
It seems important to support the conclusion on earliest dispersal 
of the banana to the South Asian subcontinent, drawn above on the 
basis of linguistic data, by independent archaeological evidence. Indeed, 
the dispersal routes of the respective words for “banana” into India 
appears to conform with the distribution of particular di- and triploids. 
De Langhe et al. (2009, p. 170, Figure 3) report a high density of the

--- PAGE 365 ---
354	
Waruno Mahdi
Figure 8.4
The Bay of Bengal, Scene of Early Westward Transmission of the Banana and the Coconut to the South Indian Periphery
Source: Author.
.... 
0 
~ 
C'll m 
/ 
I! 
0 
0 
Cl) 
c:: 
0 
:E

--- PAGE 366 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
355
AB diploid around the southern tip of India, while that of the later 
AAB and ABB triploids is spread along the east coast of India till as 
far north as the Ganges delta. This suggests that the borrowing of the 
two first above-mentioned banana-words into Dravidian languages 
coincided with the transmission of the AB diploid, while the later 
introduction of *kela cognates to India accompanied the transmission 
of the triploids. 
Of interest is also the dispersal of the *taloy ~ *kaloy doublets, which 
includes Mon-Khmer and Tai-Kadai languages of the mainland (Perrier 
et al. 2011, ibid., ##446–460) and possibly involved the dispersal of 
Musa balbisiana Colla hybrids, but requires too much space to 
peruse here. Noteworthy in the same connection is another “as-if” 
protoform with a distribution which conforms to that of M. balbisiana, 
reconstructed by Donohue and Denham (2009, pp. 300–1) as *baRat. 
MP reflexes are restricted to the Philippines and the northern half 
of Borneo/Kalimantan, but do not strictly follow regular sound 
correspondences, so that one must postulate effective protoform 
doublets: 
*baRat ~ *balat ~ *balak > (2) Kapampangan balat, Isneg bāgat, 
Bikol batag,41 Ifugao bālat, (4) Tanjong balat, Melanau balak, 
Bintulu balak, Lara’ barak
 (Perrier et al. 2011, online Suppl. Table S4 ##1–25).
With regard to reflexes assigned to *balak, one could assume final -k 
of the original transcription to denote final glottal stop, but several 
more cognates are rendered with final -k in Ray (1913, p. 72, #7 and 
p. 156, #7) so that a final velar probably is indeed implied.
The cognate set is noteworthy in view of its dispersal to Mon-Khmer 
languages of the mainland (Perrier et al. 2011, ibid., ##26–57), reflecting 
the effective protoform doublets *pǝrāt ~ *pǝriăt:42 
41	 With *R/*t metathesis.
42	 In two-register languages, “normal” and “breathy” articulation is indicated by a 
subscript L or B. They imply an historical voiceless and voiced initial consonant 
respectively.

--- PAGE 367 ---
356	
Waruno Mahdi
•	 (Old and Modern) Mon brāt, Nyakur: phrātB; Bru: priatB; Sou: 
pariat; Halang priat, Chrau prīt, Bahnar prīt, Kui prītL, 
(Shorto 1971, p. 275; 2006, p. 304, #1070; Peiros 1996, p. 52, 
#763; Sidwell 2000, p. 85, #294).
With exception of Mon which had been the paramount language of 
the Mon kingdom of Ramaññadesa, the Mon-Khmer languages having 
cognates are located along the middle course of the Mekong. Hence, the 
overall distribution of reflexes of the MP and Mon-Khmer doublet sets 
suggests an original dispersal in the Trans-South-China-Sea trade network 
discussed above. The Mon cognate could be the result of secondary 
transmission through the territorial network of Ramaññadesa.
The list provided by Perrier et al. (2011, online Suppl. Table S4) 
includes many more cognate sets, but besides requiring too much space 
to discuss here, they are less significant for the immediate subject of 
this chapter. Suffice it to consider just one MP protoform for “banana” 
with the widest dispersal of reflexes, apparently transmitted by the Tau, 
amongst others also into West Papua: 
*pu[n]ti > (2)  Palawan-Batak punti, Kalamian-Tagbanwa puntiʔ, 
(3)  Tontemboan punti, Sa’dan-Toraja punti, (4)  Merina-
Malagasy funtsi, Lampung punti, Old Javanese punti, Tarakan 
punti, (5)  Manggarai punti, Leti udi, (6)  Bonfia fudi, 
(7)  Arguni fud,  Irarutu fude, Yamdena fundi, (8)  Fiji vudi, 
Samoa futi “banana”
(Dempwolff 1938, p. 123; Reid 1971, p. 49, #13; Smits and Voorhoeve 
1992, pp. 207–8; Wolff  2010, pp.  945–46; Perrier et al. 2011, 
online Suppl. Table S4 ##165–445).
The dispersal of *pu[n]ti is probably the principal (though not exclusive) 
cause of apparent gaps in dispersals of earlier words for banana.
There is not as much lexical data to trace the westward dispersal 
of the coconut (Cocos nucifera L.), as it is with the banana. It may 
be significant, however, that the Sanskrit Rāmāyaṇa, attributed to 
Vālmīki, mentions amongst the Vanara (vānara, lit. “ape, monkey”) 
peoples, recruited by King Sugriva for his military campaign, also 
one who ate coconuts (Mankad 1965, p. 238; see also Mahdi 1999b, 
p. 168):

--- PAGE 368 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
357
4.36.25  On the Milky Sea’s beach, and in tamāla woods live, 
and of coconuts eat, their number is countless.43
The Milky Sea of Sanskritic literary tradition is the Bay of Bengal, so 
that the peoples who ate the coconut (nārikela)44 lived on the Indian 
east coast. The cited passage, implying that eating coconuts was still 
uncommon or exotic enough to serve as distinctive feature of an 
ethnic group, must evidently originate from long before the turn of the 
Common Era. Indeed, the coconut must have already been transmitted 
around Cape Comorin around the beginning of the first millennium CE, 
because by 120 CE the Saka Ushavadata45 reportedly granted coconut 
plantations to Brahmans on the west coast (Kosambi 1965, p. 189). 
The South Indian periphery (including Sri Lanka, the Maldives and 
Laccadives) was the last to be incorporated into the culture sphere 
reflected in classical Sanskrit literature, so a feature considered exotic 
in that literature may actually not have been novel in the South.
With regard to Austronesian languages, the protoform *nieuR46 
“coconut” is practically not reflected in languages of Taiwan, but only 
in Malayo-Polynesian languages:
* nieuR > (2) Ivatan nioy, Inibaloi niyog, (3) Sangir niuhǝʔ, To Bungku 
nii, (4) Krui-Lampung niwi, Madurese nεyɔr, (5) Sawu ñiu, 
Kai nuer, (6) Kamarian niwer, Bonfia nuos, (7) Sobei niwe, 
Molima niula, (8) Bugotu niu, Hawaii niu “coconut”
(Dempwolff 1938, p. 108; Reid 1971, p. 62, ##53–54; Sneddon 1984, p. 95;  
Mahdi 1998, pp. 394–95; Wolff 2010, p. 906).
43	 The Sanskrit original: kṣīrodavelānilayās tamālavanavāsinaḥ / nārikelāśana ścauva 
teṣaṁ saṁkhyā na vidyate (4.36.25 in Mankad 1965, who also cites the location in 
other editions: Goresio 4.37.22, Bombay 4.37.21, Lahore 4.30.21).
44	 The tamāla tree and some other items in the passage are discussed in Mahdi (1999b, 
pp. 166–69).
45	 Also known as Rishabhadatta, a viceroy of apparently Scythian descent on the west 
coast of India. 
46	 Stresemann (1927, pp. 82–83) had *niuǝR (*niueR in modern transcription) to account 
for some Maluku reflexes; Dyen (1953, pp. 13, 15, n. 49) had *ñiuR to account for 
initial ñ in some other cognates. Mahdi (1999a, pp. 394–95) proposed to unite the 
two as *nieuR, presuming e/u metathesis in the former, and *nie > ñi fusion in the 
latter. An occasional i/e metathesis can also not be excluded.

--- PAGE 369 ---
358	
Waruno Mahdi
The unique Taiwan reflex cited by Wolff (ibid.), Kavalan nuzu 
“coconut”, seems indeed, as noted by the author, to be a MP 
borrowing.
Words for “coconut” in Indic languages are not, however, borrowings 
of the MP form. As pointed out by Hoogervorst (2013b, pp. 73–74), 
Dravidian languages have cognates of Tamil tēṅkāy, literally either 
“south fruit” or “sweet fruit”, while Sanskrit had nārikela, apparently 
from a Dravidian *nari “fibre, rope” + *keṭ-i/a/u “tree, bush”. Borrowed 
reflexes of this and the above-cited MP form practically accompany the 
further dispersal of the coconut, as noted by Gunn, Baudouin and Olsen 
(2011, p. 6). The authors also cite results of recent phylogeographic 
research which established two definitively different genotypes: the one 
Pacific-Ocean specific with an early dispersal covering the Malayan 
Peninsula, ISEA and New Guinea (so-called “Malesia”), termed group 
A; the other Indian-Ocean specific having an early dispersal in the South 
Indian periphery, termed group B. This seemed to suggest two separate 
domestications. 
Even assuming a purely anthropogenic propagation of group A, 
and ignoring a very likely early “complicity” of Papuans, the dispersal 
of the group-A coconut must have happened at the latest during the 
Malayo-Polynesian migration into Near Oceania around 1,500–1,000 
BCE (Pawley 1999, p. 112, map  4). Meanwhile, the coconut in India 
was practically unknown in the north before the writing of the 
Rāmāyaṇa (towards the end of the last millennium BCE). The dispersal 
of group B seems to have been restricted to the South Indian periphery 
until around 200 BCE. Indeed, results of further historiographic and 
archaeological research indicate that the coconut was cultivated in the 
South Indian periphery itself since around 1,000–500 BCE (Gunn, 
Baudouin and Olsen 2011, p. 6).
The limited South Indian dispersal area and low degree of variety 
in group B lets an independent descent of the group from a common 
(A-and-B) precursor in Gondwanaland47 seem most unlikely. Indeed, 
47	 The palaeogeographic supercontinent which broke up into Antarctica, South 
America, Africa, Madagascar, Australia, the Arabian Peninsula, and the South Asian

--- PAGE 370 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
359
neither do biologists classify group B as a different subspecies, nor do 
geneticists refer to a separate group-B genome. Hence, the group-B 
genotype (within a common C. nucifera genome) apparently resulted 
from a relatively late mutation of a group-A original brought to 
Sri Lanka before 1,000 BCE. The assumption that floating coconuts 
were perhaps carried westwards by the Winter Monsoon current (see 
Figure 8.4) also seems unlikely, because the further transmission 
to Africa was evidently anthropogenic (see Gunn, Baudouin and Olsen 
2011, p. 1). The most credible scenario seems to be that the group-B 
mutant appeared, and was exclusively retained, in the course of artificial 
selection within a relatively small and isolated group-A population 
brought across the Bay of Bengal by humans travelling on rafts, drifting 
along with the Winter Monsoon Current. In view of the early date, the 
transmitters were probably pre-Austronesian Negritos.
In general, the Bay of Bengal had been the scene of a lively 
exchange of cultivars between the South Asian subcontinent and ISEA 
(Mahdi 1998; Hoogervorst 2013b). The transmission of the banana 
and the coconut, reviewed above, appears to have occurred before the 
beginning of MP activity in the Indian Ocean. Of further interest may 
be some of the earliest transmissions within the period of MP activity, 
because the earliest Malayo-Polynesians on the scene must have been 
the Qata who were either Negrito or carried a substantial percentage of 
Negrito admixture. 
In discussing the transmission of the banana above, the dispersal of 
the third cognate set (*loka ~ *kalo ~ *kula ~ *kela) across the Bay of 
Bengal seems to have already involved the Qata. In particular, reflexes 
were represented in Karo- and Toba-Batak which seem to also exhibit 
certain particularities in some other cognate sets (see Mahdi 2008, 
p. 135, footnote 76). A noteworthy example is the eastward transmission 
of Prakrit java “barley”,48 which apparently proceeded in two phases. 
Besides the main transmission, reflected amongst others in Old Javanese 
Subcontinent—the last common mainland before separation of the earliest distribution 
areas of coconut-groups A and B.
48	 Hordeum vulgare L.

--- PAGE 371 ---
360	
Waruno Mahdi
jawa “foxtail millet”,49 there must have been an earlier one with only a 
few individual reflexes. These are Karo-Batak jaba “foxtail millet” and 
Toba-Batak jaba-ure “sorghum”,50 in which the reflexion of internal v as 
b betrays that the transmission was mediated by ancestors of the Moken 
(Mahdi 2009, pp. 75, 84). 
A noteworthy feature of traditional Indic—i.e. Sanskrit, Prakrit, 
and Tamil, literature and lore were peoples referred to as Naga (nāga, 
literally “serpent, snake”) occurring along the northeastern till 
southwestern coast of the Bay of Bengal, and in Sri Lanka. Having 
perused a series of primary sources and commentaries, I concluded 
that the Naga were regarded as ferocious warlike peoples who were 
mobile on the sea, and typically inhabited islands, the sea coast, or the 
banks of rivers, were given to pillaging, piracy, or “cannibalism”, being 
also very non-uniform in level of culture development, from relatively 
“primitive” to relatively “civilized”, in the eyes of early Indo-Aryans 
and Tamils (Mahdi 1999b, pp. 169–82). Of all peoples in the wider 
region, only Malayo-Polynesians fit this description relatively well.
It should be noted here, that these Naga are not related to peoples 
previously referred to by that name above, speakers of the Tibeto-Burmic 
Kukish languages cited with regard to words meaning “coffin”. As for 
the presently discussed Naga of literary tradition, their distribution 
within India seems to overlap well with that of the banana AAB and 
ABB triploids assumed above to have been introduced together with 
the protoform *kela by the Qata. Noteworthy, furthermore, is the 
following passage from the Ādiparvan, the first book of the Sanskrit 
Mahābhārata:
1.21.4  To the abode of the Naga, the lovely Ramaniyakaat at the lonely 
ocean bay, do take me there, oh dear Vinata.51
The toponym Ramaniyaka (ramaṇīyaka) apparently refers to the 
land of the Mons, referred to in Middle Mon as Rāmaññadesa (see 
49	 Setaria italica (L.) P. Beauvois.
50	 Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench.
51	 The Sanskrit original: Nāgānām ālayaṁ bhadre suramyaṁ ramaṇīyakaṁ / 
samudrakuksāv ekānte tatra māṁ vinate vaha (Sukthankar 1933, p. 135).

--- PAGE 372 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
361
Figure 8.4), cf. also Old Khmer ramañ ~ rmañ “Mon” (Shorto 1971, 
pp. 317, 325). This implies that the Naga in question probably inhabited 
the Martaban coast, and this is noteworthy for several reasons.
Ptolemy located “Besyngite cannibals” (bēsyngeitói anthrōpophágoi) 
on the Martaban coast between the mouths of the Irrawaddy (Témala) 
and Salween (Bēsýnga) (see Coedès 1977, p. 52). Meanwhile, Luce 
(1965, pp. 145–46) called attention to an ancient Mon tradition that 
the Martaban coast was under constant threat of raids from the sea by 
rakṣasa-s, depicted as “cannibal demons”, termed “Malayan Vikings” 
by the author (see also Forbes 1878, p. 234). Luce believed these 
were the ancestors of the Moken of the Mergui Islands. Mokens were 
indeed seafarers since very early, and Moken kabaŋ “boat, ship” 
(< EAn *qabaŋ) was apparently borrowed into Old Mon as kaŋ 
“ship” (Mahdi 2009, p. 82).
In Myanmar tradition, the rakṣasas of the Mons were called bilù, 
glossed in the dictionary of Judson (Stevenson and Eveleth 1921, p. 
727) as “a kind of monster which eats human flesh and possesses 
super-human eyes”. There still is an island named Bilùgyùn (gyùn 
“island”) in the Gulf of Martaban immediately before Moulmein in the 
mouth of the Salween. 
A tenth-century Buddhist treatise by the Kashmirian poet Kṣemendra, 
the Bodhisattvāvadāna Kalpalatā, notes that nāga “pirates” swore 
allegiance to Ashoka (ruled c. 269–232 BCE) when he converted to 
Buddhism (Mookerji 1912, pp. 113–15). This may perhaps be seen 
as earliest date of religiously or mystically motivated submission of 
Sea-People communities to a paramount monarchy. This feature is 
better known for later periods when such communities submitted to a 
likewise Buddhist Srivijayan paramount who threatened them with 
mystic curses, Old Malay mangmang (see Mahdi 2008, pp. 131, 133, 
fn. 70). Late manifestations of this relationship between Sea-People and 
(meanwhile Muslim) monarchies are recorded for the mid-nineteenth 
century (ibid., p. 135).
Apparently, in traditional literature throughout the South Asian 
subcontinent, nāga was a cover term which was also applicable to 
Sea-People (Orang Laut) freebooters and sea-nomads operating around 
the Gulf of Martaban and perhaps also in the Riau-Johore area. Littoral

--- PAGE 373 ---
362	
Waruno Mahdi
regions around the Strait of Malacca, therefore, seem a likely place 
to locate the islands of the “cannibal” nāgas. Grierson (1906, p. 14) 
proposed that the rakṣasas or bilù of the Martaban coast may have been 
Negritos. The Sea People, many of whom speak dialects of Malay, and 
the Moken, are indeed in the main either Negrito or exhibit a substantial 
Negrito admixture. At the same time, they exhibit a similar equatorial 
complexion as the Qata, so that Tamil and Indo-Aryan observers would 
be likely to have grouped them together as “Naga”. 
7.  Conclusion
Mahdi (2016) cited archaeological and linguistic evidence, suggesting 
primeval development of maritime mobility in ISEA very much earlier 
than anywhere else in the world. During the rising sea levels (Late 
Pleistocene until Mid Holocene), retreating equatorial populations 
from the Sunda Shelf apparently developed the construction of their 
watercraft further, from rafts to multiple dugouts, and then to double 
canoes, which they brought northwards along the southeastern coast 
of China, and westwards across the Bay of Bengal. The double 
canoe was then introduced to other populations, which the migrating 
equatorial peoples (apparently ancestors of Negritos) met in the areas 
they reached.
During the last millennium BCE, the area between the South China 
Sea and the Bay of Bengal had apparently been the scene of further 
development of maritime communication and trade. In this, the decisive 
actors must have been Negritos, and perhaps also other Australoid 
peoples of ISEA. Already before that, however, Australoid peoples had 
apparently transmitted the banana and the coconut across the Bay of 
Bengal. 
Towards the turn of the Common Era, Negrito and other Australoid 
peoples involved in sea communication in and from ISEA had 
apparently adopted MP languages, as was the case with the Moken. From 
this period onwards, a decisive role in maritime communication in the 
area would be played by Malay shipping, fetching cloves from North 
Maluku, nutmegs from Banda, and sandalwood from Nusa Tenggara, and

--- PAGE 374 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
363
delivering these to China and India. I hope to have demonstrated that 
an initial role in the development of maritime mobility and communication 
networks had been performed by equatorial peoples of ISEA, in particular 
by peoples I have referred to as Negritos.
8.  Last-minute Addition
When this chapter was already headed for printing, a remarkable article 
appeared (Soares et al. 2016), providing elaborate genetic evidence 
based on DNA tests, confirming that the dispersal of Malayo- 
Polynesians primarily involved equatorial populations of ISEA origin, 
with a secondary influx of mainland East-Asian peoples (and, I add, 
their language).
References
Ammermann, Albert J. “The First Argonauts: Towards the Study of the Earliest 
Seafaring in the Mediterranean”. In The Global Origins and Development 
of Seafaring, edited by Atholl Anderson, James H. Barrett, and Katherine V. 
Boyle. Cambridge: The McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2010, 
pp. 81–92.
Bacus, Elizabeth A. “The Archaeology of the Philippine Archipelago”. In 
Southeast Asia: From Prehistory to History, edited by Ian Glover and Peter 
Bellwood. London and New York: Routledge Curzon, 2004, pp. 257–81.
Baxter, William H. A Handbook of Old Chinese Phonology. Trends in Linguistics, 
Studies and Monographs 64. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 
1992.
Bellina, Berénice and Ian Glover. “The Archaeology of Early Contact with India 
and the Mediterranean World, from the Fourth Century BC to the Fourth 
Century AD”. In Southeast Asia: From Prehistory to History, edited by Ian 
Glover and Peter Bellwood. London and New York: Routledge Curzon, 2004, 
pp. 68–88.
Bellwood, Peter. “A Hypothesis for Austronesian Origins”. Asian Perspectives 26 
(1984–85): 107–17. 
———. “Austronesian Prehistory in Southeast Asia: Homeland, Expansion 
and Transformation”. In The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative 
Perspective, edited by Peter Bellwood, James J. Fox and Darwell Tryon. 
Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National 
University, 1995, pp. 96–111.

--- PAGE 375 ---
364	
Waruno Mahdi
———. The First Farmers: Origins of Agricultural Societies. Malden (MA), 
London, and Carlton (Australia): Blackwell Publishing, 2005a.
———. “Examining the Farming/Language Dispersal Hypothesis in the East 
Asian Context”. In The Peopling of East Asia: Putting Together Archaeology, 
Linguistics and Genetics, edited by Laurent Sagart, Roger Blench and 
Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. London and New York: Routledge Curzon, 2005b, 
pp. 17–30.
Benjamin, Geoffrey. “Why the Peninsular ‘Negritos’ Remained Distinct”. Human 
Biology 85 (2013): 445–83.
Bernatzik, Hugo Adolf. Die Geister der gelben Blätter. Forschungsreisen in 
Hinterindien. unter Mitarbeit von Emmy Bernatzik. Leipzig: Koehler and 
Voigtländer Verlag, 1941.
Bernet Kempers, A.J. The Kettledrums of Southeast Asia: A Bronze Age World 
and its Aftermath. Modem Quatenary Research in Southeast Asia 10. Rotterdam: 
Balkema, 1988.
Blust, Robert. “Proto-Oceanic Addenda with Cognates in non-Oceanic Austronesian 
Languages: A Preliminary List”. University of Hawaii Working Papers in 
Linguistics 14, no. 1 (1972): 1–43. 
———. “Austronesian Etymologies—IV”. Oceanic Linguistics 28 (1989): 
111–80. 
———. The Austronesian Languages. Pacific Linguistics 602. Canberra: Australian 
National University, 2009.
Brandstetter, Renward. Wurzel und Wort in den Indonesischen Sprachen. Renward 
Brandstetters Monographien zur Indonesischen Sprachforschung 6. Luzern: 
Verlag der Buchhandlung Haag, 1910.
Broodbank, Cyprian. “The Origins and Early Development of Mediterranean Maritime 
Activity”. Journal of Mediteranean Archaeology 19 (2006): 199–230.
Bulbeck, David. “Craniodental Affinities of Southeast Asia’s ‘Negritos’ and 
the Concordance with their Genetic Affinities”. Human Biology 85 (2013): 
95–133.
Burrow, T, and M.B. Emeneau. A Dravidian Etymological Dictionary. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1984.
Bylmer, Hendricus J.T. “Newer Data on Blood Groups from the Indian 
Archipelago, and their Classification in the Triangle of Streng”. Genetica 23 
(1943): 257–76.
Calon, L.F. “Woordenlijst van het dialect van Lio (West Flores)”. Tijdschrift voor 
Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 35 (1891): 200–8.
Capell, Arthur. The Linguistic Position of South-Eastern Papua. PhD thesis, University 
of London. Sydney: Australian Medical Publishing, 1942.
Chang, Kwang-chih. Fengpitou, Tapengkeng, and the Prehistory of Taiwan. Yale 
University Publications in Anthropology no. 73. New Haven: Department of 
Anthropüology, Yale University, 1969.

--- PAGE 376 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
365
Chang, Kwang-chih and Ward H. Goodenough. “Archaeology of Southeastern 
Coastal China and Its Bearing on the Austronesian Homeland”. In Prehistoric 
Settlement of the Pacific, edited by Ward H. Goodenough. Transactions of the 
American Philosophical Society 86.5. Philadelphia: American Philosophical 
Society, 1996, pp. 36–56.
Charles, Mathew. “Problems in the Reconstruction of Proto-Philippine Phonology 
and the Subgrouping of the Philippine Languages”. Oceanic Linguistics 13 
(1974): 457–509.
Coedès, George. Textes d’auteurs grecs et latins relatifs à l’Extrême-Orient. 
Hildesheim/New York: Georg Olms Verlag, 1977. (1st edition 1910).
Couvreur, S. Dictionaire classique de la langue chinoise. Ho Kien Fou: Imprimerie 
de la mission catholique, 1904.
De Langhe, Edmond, Luc Vrydaghs, Pierre de Maret, Xavier Perrier and Tim 
Denham, “Why Bananas Matter: An Introduction to the History of Banana 
Domestication”. Ethnobotany Research & Applications 7 (2009): 165–77.
Dempwolff, Otto. Vergleichende Lautlehre des austronesischen Wortschatzes, 3. 
Bd., Austronesisches Wörterverzeichnis. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer/Hamburg; 
Friederichsen, de Gruyter and Co., 1938.
Denham, T.P., S.G. Haberle, C. Lentfer, R. Fullagar, J. Field, M. Therin, N. Porch, 
B.  Winsborough. “Origins of Agriculture at Kuk Swamp in the Highlands of 
New Guinea”. Science 301 (2003): 189–93.
Denham, Tim and Mark Donohue. “Pre-Austronesian Dispersal of Banana Cultivars 
West from New Guinea: Linguistic Relics from Eastern Indonesia”. Archaeology 
in Oceania 44 (2009): 18–28.
Diffloth, Gérard. “Les langues Mon-Khmer du Malaisie, classification historique 
et innovations”. Asie du Sud-Est et Monde Insulindien 6, no. 4 (1975): 1–19.
Donohue, Mark and Tim Denham. “Banana (Musa spp.) Domestication in the Asia-
Pacific Region: Linguistic and Archaeobotanical Perspectives”. Ethnobotany 
Research & Applications 7 (2009): 293–332.
———. “Farming and Language in Island Southeast Asia: Reframing Austronesian 
History”. Current Anthropology 51 (2010): 223–56. 
Doran, Edwin Jr. Wangka: Austronesian Canoe Origins. College Station: Texas 
A&M University Press, 1981.
Douglas, Carstairs. Chinese–English Dictionary of the Vernacular or Spoken 
Language of Amoy, with the principal variations of the Chang-Chew and 
Chin-Chew dialects. London: Publishing Office of the Presbyterian Church of 
England, 1899.
Dyen, Isidore. The Proto-Malayo-Polynesian Laryngeals. Baltimore: Linguistic 
Society of America, 1953.
Endicott, Phillip. “Introduction: Revisiting the ‘Negrito’ Hypothesis: A 
Transdisciplinary Approach to Human Prehistory in Southeast Asia”. Human 
Biology 85 (2013): 7–20.

--- PAGE 377 ---
366	
Waruno Mahdi
Erlandson, Jon McVey. “Neptune’s Children: The Evolution of Human Seafaring”. 
In The Global Origins and Development of Seafaring, edited by Atholl 
Anderson, James H. Barrett, and Katherine V. Boyle. Cambridge: The 
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2010, pp. 19–27.
Erlandson, Jon M., Madonna L. Moss, and Matthew Des Lauriers. “Life on the 
Edge: Early Maritime Cultures of the Pacific Coast of North America”. 
Quaternary Science Reviews 27 (2008): 2232–45.
Esser, Samuel Jonathan. Klank- en vormleer van het Morisch (eerste gedeelte). 
Leiden: A. Vros, 1926 [1927].
Farr, R. Helen. “Island Colonization and Trade in the Mediterranean”. In The 
Global Origins and Development of Seafaring, edited by Atholl Anderson, 
James H. Barrett, and Katherine V. Boyle. Cambridge: The McDonald Institute 
for Archaeological Research, 2010, pp. 179–89.
Ferrand, G. “Le K’ouen-louen et les anciennes navigations interocéaniques dans 
les mers du sud”. Journal Asiatique 11e série 13 (1929): 239–333, 431–92; 14 
(1929): 5–68, 201–41.
Ferrell, Raleigh. Taiwan Aboriginal Groups: Problems in Culture and Linguistic 
Classification. Institute of Ethnology Academia Sinica monograph no. 17. 
Taipei: Academia Sinica, 1969.
Fitzhugh, Ben and Douglas J. Kennett. “Seafaring Intensity and Island-Mainland 
Interaction along the Pacific Coast of North America”. In The Global 
Origins and Development of Seafaring, edited by Atholl Anderson, James 
H. Barrett, and Katherine V. Boyle. Cambridge: The McDonald Institute for 
Archaeological Research, 2010, pp. 69–80.
Flatz, Gebhard. “The Mlabri: Anthropometric Genetic, and Medical Examinations”. 
Journal of the Siam Society 51 (1963): 161–77.
Forbes, C.J.F.S. “On the Connexions of the Mons of Pegu with the Koles of 
Central India”. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland, new series, 10 (1878): 234–43.
Friedlaender, Jonathan S., Françoise R. Friedlaender, Floyd A. Reed, Kenneth K. 
Kidd, Judith R. Kidd, Geoffrey K. Chambers, Rodney A. Lea, Jun-Hun Loo, 
George Koki, Jason A. Hodgson, D. Andrew Merriwether, James L. Weber. “The 
Genetic Structure of Pacific Islanders”. PLoS Genetics 4, no. 1 (2008): e19.
Gibson, Charles E. The Story of the Ship: From the Earliest Days to the Present. 
London and New York: Abelard-Schuman, 1958.
Giles, Herbert A. A Chinese–English Dictionary, 2nd ed. Shanghai etc.: Kelly and 
Walsh/London: Quaritch, 1912.
Glinka, J. “Racial History of Indonesia”. In Rassengeschichte der Menschheit, 8. 
Lieferung, Asien I: Japan, Indonesien, Ozeanien, edited by Ilse Schwidetzky. 
München and Wien: Oldenbourg Verlag, 1981.
Goloubew, Victor. “L’age du bronze au Tonkin et dans le Nord-Annam”. Bulletin 
de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 29 (1929): 1–46.

--- PAGE 378 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
367
Greenberg, Joseph H. “The Indo-Pacific Hypothesis”. In Current Trends in Linguistics 
8: Linguistics in Oceania, edited by Thomas A. Sebeok. The Hague: Mouton, 
1971, pp. 807–71.
Grierson, George A. Linguistic Survey of India, vol. 4, Muṇḍā and Dravidian 
Languages. Calcutta: Office of the Superintendent, Gov. Print, 1906.
Gunn, Bee F., Luc Baudouin, and Kenneth M. Olsen. “Independent Origins of 
Cultivated Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) in the Old World Tropics”. PLoS ONE 
6 (2011): e21143.
Haberle, Simon G., Carol Lentfer, Shawn O’Donnell, Tim Denham. “The 
Palaeoenvironments of Kuk Swamp from the Beginnings of Agriculture in the 
Highlands of Papua New Guinea”. Quaternary International 249 (2012): 129–39. 
Harrisson, Tom. “The Great Cave, Sarawak: A Ship-of-the-Dead Cult and Related 
Rock Painting”. Archaeological News Letter 6 (1958): 199–203.
Heine-Geldern, Robert. “Urheimat und früheste Wanderung der Austronesier”. 
Anthropos 27 (1932): 543–619.
Higham, Charles. The Archaeology of Mainland Southeast Asia from 10,000 B.C. 
to the Fall of Angkor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Hoëvell, G.W.W.C. Baron van. “Tanimbar en Timoerlaoet Tinoerlaoet-Eilanden”. 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 33 (1890a): 160–86.
———. “Leti-Eilanden”. Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 33 
(1890b): 200–32.
Holmes, Tommy. The Hawaiian Canoe. Hanalei (HI): Editions Limited, 1981.
Hoogervorst, Tom. Southeast Asia in the Ancient Indian Ocean World: Combining 
Historical Linguistic and Archaeological Approaches. BAR International 
Series 2580. Oxford: Archaeopress, 2013a.
———. “If Only Plants Could Talk …: Reconstructing Pre-Modern Biological 
Translocations in the Indian Ocean”. In The Sea, Identity and History: From 
the Bay of Bengal to the South China Sea, edited by Satish Chandra and 
Himanshu Prabha Ray. New Delhi: Manohar, 2013b, pp. 67–92.
Hornell, James. “Outrigger Devices: Distributions and Origin”. Journal of the 
Polynesian Society 52 (1943): 91–100.
———. Water Transport: Origins & Early Evolution. Cambridge: The University 
Press, 1946.
Hung, Hsiao-chun and Peter Bellwood. “Movement of Raw Materials and 
Manufactured Goods Across the South China Sea after 500 BCE: From 
Taiwan to Thailand and Back”. In 50 Years of Archaeology in Southeast Asia: 
Essays in Honour of Ian Glover, edited by Bérénice Bellina, Elisabeth A. 
Bacus, Thomas Oliver Pryce and Jan Wisseman Christie. Bangkok: River Books, 
2010, pp. 234–45.
Hutterer, Karl Leopold. “The Natural and Cultural History of Southeast Asian 
Agriculture: Ecological and Evolutionary Considerations”. Anthropos 78 (1983): 
169–212.

--- PAGE 379 ---
368	
Waruno Mahdi
I-Tsing (
 Yìjìng). Les religieux éminents qui allerent chercher la Loi dans les 
pays d’occident: Mémoire composé a l’époque de la grande dynastie T’ang, 
traduit par Édouard Chavannes. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1894. 
———. A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India and the Malay 
Archipelago (A.D. 671–695), translated by J. Takakusu. Oxford: Clarendon, 
1896.
Johnson, Frederick (gen. ed.). A Standard Swahili–English Dictionary (founded 
on Madan’s Swahili–English dictionary). London: Oxford University Press, 1959. 
Jones, Russell (gen. ed.). Loan-words in Indonesian and Malay, compiled by the 
Indonesian Etymological Project. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2007.
Junker, Laura Lee. Raiding, Trading, and Feasting: The Political Economy of 
Philippine Chiefdoms. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 1999.
Kähler, Hans. Simalur-Deutsches Wörterbuch mit Deutsch-Simaluresischem 
Wörterverzeichnis. Veröffentlichungen des Seminars für Indonesische und 
Südseesprachen der Universität Hamburg 3. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer, 1961.
Karlgren, Bernhard. Grammata Serica: Script and Phonetics in Chinese and 
Sino-Japanese. Bulletin of the Museum of Far East Antiquity 12. Stockholm, 
Gothenburg: Elanders, 1940.
Kosambi, Damodar D. The Culture and Civilization of Ancient India in Historical 
Outline. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1965.
Lape, Peter V., Sue O’Connor, and Nick Burningham. “Rock Art: A Potential 
Source of Information about Past Maritime Technology in the South-East 
Asia-Pacific Region”. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 36 
(2007): 238–53.
Lee, Yun Kuen. “Building the Chronology of Early Chinese History”. Asian 
Perspectives 41 (2002): 15–42.
Lewis, David. Children of Three Oceans. London: Collins, 1969.
Lin, Marie, Chen-Chung Chu, Richard E. Broadberry, Lung-Chih Yu, Jun-Hun Luo, 
and Jean A. Trejaut. “Genetic Diversity of Taiwan’s Indigenous Peoples: Possible 
Relationship with Insular Southeast Asia”. In The Peopling of East Asia: Putting 
Together Archaeology, Linguistics and Genetics, edited by Laurent Sagart, Roger 
Blench and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. London and New York: Routledge Curzon, 
2005, pp. 230–47.
Löw, Immanuel. Aramæische Pflanzennamen. Leipzig: Verlag Wilhelm Engelmann, 
1881.
Luce, Gordon H. “Rice and Religion: A Study of Old Mon-Khmer Evolution and 
Culture”. Journal of the Siam Society 53 (1965): 139–52.
Mahdi, Waruno. Morphophonologische Besonderheiten und historische Phonologie 
des Malagasy. Veröffentlichungen des Seminars für Indonesische und 
Südseesprachen der Universität Hamburg 20. Berlin and Hamburg: Dietrich 
Reimer, 1988.

--- PAGE 380 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
369
———. Zur Ontogenese des austronesischen und malaiischen Schiffes. Poster 
presentation, Tagung des Südostasienarbeitskreises, Königstein im Taunus, 3–5 
July 1992.
———. “Some Austronesian Maverick Protoforms with Culture-Historical 
Implications”. Oceanic Linguistics 33 (1994): 167–229, 431–90.
———. “Linguistic Data on Transmission of Southeast Asian Cultigens to India 
and Sri Lanka”. In Archaeology and Language II: Archaeological Data and 
Linguistic Hypotheses, edited by Roger Blench and Matthew Spriggs. London 
and New York: Routledge, 1998, pp. 390–415.
———. “The Dispersal of Austronesian Boat Forms in the Indian Ocean”. In 
Archaeology and Language III: Artefacts, Languages and Texts, edited by 
Roger Blench and Matthew Spriggs. London and New York: Routledge, 1999a, 
pp. 144–79.
———. “Linguistic and Philological Data Towards a Chronology of Austronesian 
Activity in India and Sri Lanka”. In Archaeology and Language IV: Language 
Change and Cultural Transformation, edited by Roger Blench and Matthew 
Spriggs. London and New York: Routledge, 1999b, pp. 160–242. 
———. “Old Malay”. In The Austronesian Languages of Asia and Madagascar, 
edited by Alexander Adelaar and Nikolaus P. Himmelmann. London and New 
York: Routledge, 2005, pp. 182–201.
———. “Yavadvipa and the Merapi Volcano in West Sumatra”. Archipel 75 (2008): 
111–43.
———. “In Search of an Historical Sea-People Malay Dialect with -aba-”. In 
Austronesian Historical Linguistics and Culture History: A Festschrift for Robert 
Blust, edited by Alexander Adelaar and Andrew Pawley. Pacific Linguistics 601. 
Canberra: The Australian National University, 2009, pp. 73–89. 
———. “The Protohistorical Linguistic, Ethnic, and Political Situation around 
the Gulf of Thailand in the Light of Borrowing between Malayo-Chamic and 
Eastern Austroasiatic Languages”. Paper presented at the 13th International 
Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 
Berlin, 2010.
———. “Bifurcation of Commercial Tradition in West Indonesia, 1850–1930, 
as Reflected in Contemporaneous Malay Print Publishing”. Asian Journal of 
Social Science 40 (2012a): 100–32. 
———. “Review of John U. Wolff (2010, Proto-Austronesian Phonology with 
Glossary. Ithaca [NY]: Southeast Asia Program Publications, Cornell University)”. 
Archipel 83 (2012b): 214–22.
———. “Origins of Southeast Asian Shipping and Maritime Communication 
across the Indian Ocean”. In East Africa and Early Trans-Indian Ocean World 
Interchange, edited by Gwyn Campbell. Palgrave Series in Indian Ocean World 
Studies. Springer Nature, 2016, pp. 25–49.

--- PAGE 381 ---
370	
Waruno Mahdi
Malinowski, Bronislaw. Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of Native 
Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. 
Long Grove (Illinois): Waveland Press, 1984.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. “Southeast Asian Shipping in the Indian Ocean During 
the First Millennium A.D.”. In Tradition and Archaeology: Early Maritime 
Contacts in the Indian Ocean, edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray and Jean- 
François Salles. New Delhi: Manohar, 1996, pp. 181–96.
———. “The Archaeology of Early Maritime Polities of Southeast Asia”. In 
Southeast Asia: From Prehistory to History, edited by Ian Glover and Peter 
Bellwood. London and New York: Routledge Curzon, 2004, pp. 282–313.
Mankad, D.R. The Kiṣkindhākāṇḍa: The Fourth Book of the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, 
the National Epic of India. Baroda: Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda 
Press, 1965.
Meacham, William. “On the Improbability of Austronesian Origins in South China”. 
Asian Perspectives 26 (1984–85): 89–106.
Milliman, John D. and K.O. Emery. “Sea Levels during the Past 35,000 Years”. 
Science 162 (1968): 1121–23.
Monier-Williams, Monier. A Sanskrit–English Dictionary: Etymologically and 
Philologically Arranged with Special Reference to Cognate Indo-European 
Languages, revised by E. Leumann, C. Cappeller et al. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1899.
Mookerji, Radhakumud. Indian Shipping: A History of the Sea-borne Trade and 
Maritime Activity of the Indians from the Earliest Times. Bombay/Calcutta/
London/New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1912.
Needham, Joseph. Science and Civilisation in China. Vol. 4: Physics and Physical 
Technology. Part 3: Civil Engineering and Nautics, with collaboration of 
Wang Ling and Lu Gwei-Djen. Cambridge: The University Press, 1971.
Nothofer, Bernd. “The Relationship Between the Languages of the Barrier Islands 
and the Sulawesi-Philippine Languages”. In Language Contact and Change in 
the Austronesian World, edited by Tom Dutton and Darrel T. Tryon. Trends 
in Linguistics: Studies and Monographs 77. Berlin and New York: Mouton 
de Gruyter, 1994, pp. 389–409.
Novellino, Dario. “Towards a ‘Common Logic of Procurement’: Unravelling the 
Foraging-Farming Interface on Palawan Island (The Philippines)”. In Why 
Cultivate? Anthropological and Archaeological Approaches to Foraging- 
Farming Transitions in Southeast Asia, edited by Graeme Barker and Monica 
Janowski. Cambridge: The McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 
2011, pp. 105–19.
O’Connell, James F. and Jim Allen. “Dating the Colonization of Sahul 
(Pleistocene Australia–New Guinea): A Review of Recent Research”. Journal 
of Archaeological Science 31 (2004): 835–53.

--- PAGE 382 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
371
O’Connell, James F., Jim Allen, and Kristen Hawkes. “Pleistocene Sahul and the 
Origins of Seafaring”. In The Global Origins and Development of Seafaring, 
edited by Atholl Anderson, James H. Barrett, and Katherine V. Boyle. 
Cambridge: The McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2010, 
pp. 57–68.
O’Connor, Sue. “New Evidence from East Timor Contributes to Our Understanding 
of Earliest Modern Human Colonisation East of the Sunda Shelf”. Antiquity 81 
(2007): 523–35.
Oppenheimer Stephen and Martin Richards. “Fast Trains, Slow Boats, and the 
Ancestry of the Polynesian Islanders”. Science Progress 84 (2001): 157–81.
Parmentier, H. “Notes d’archéologie indochinoise. VII—Dépôts de Jarres à Sa-
huỳnh (Guảng-ngãi, Annam)”. Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 
24 (1924): 325–43. 
Pawley, Andrew. “Chasing Rainbows: Implications for the Rapid Dispersal of 
Austronesian Languages for Subgrouping and Reconstruction”. In Selected 
Papers from 8-ICAL, edited by Elizabeth Zeitoun and Paul Jen-kuei Li. Taipei: 
Academia Sinica, 1999.
———. “Greenberg’s Indo-Pacific Hypothesis: An Assessment”. In Discovering 
History through Language: Papers in Honour of Malcolm Ross, Pacific 
Linguistics 605, edited by Bethwyn Evans. Canberra: Australian National 
University, 2009, pp. 153–80.
Pawley, Andrew and Medina Pawley. “Early Austronesian Terms for Canoe Parts 
and Seafaring”. In Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change, Pacific 
Linguistics Series C–127, edited by Andrew K. Pawley and Malcolm D. Ross. 
Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National 
University, 1994, pp. 329–61.
Peiros, Ilia. Katuic Comparative Dictionary, Pacific Linguistics Series C–132. 
Canberra: Research Schools of Pacific and Asian Studies, 1996.
Pelliot, Paul. “Quelques textes chinois concernant l’Indochine Hindouisée”. In 
Études asiatiques, publiées à l’occasion du vingt-cinquième anniversaire 
de l’École Française de l’Extrême-Orient, tôme 2, Publication de l’École 
Française de l’Extrême-Orient 20. Hanoi: EFEO, 1925, pp. 243–63.
Perrier, Xavier, Edmond De Langhe, Mark Donohue, Carol Lentfer, Luc Vrydaghs, 
Frédéric Bakry, Françoise Carreel, Isabelle Hippolyte, Jean-Pierre Horry, 
Christophe Jenny, Vincent Lebot, Ange-Marie Risterucci, Kodjo Tomekpe, 
Hugues Doutrelepont, Terry Ball, Jason Manwaring, Pierre de Maret, and Tim 
Denham. “Multidisciplinary Perspectives on Banana (Musa spp.) Domestication”. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (2011): 11311–18.
Pulleyblank, Edwin G. Lexicon of Reconstructed Pronunciation in Early Middle 
Chinese, Late Middle Chinese, and Early Mandarin. Vancouver: University of 
British Columbia Press, 1991.

--- PAGE 383 ---
372	
Waruno Mahdi
Rana, B.K. “New Materials on Kusunda Language”. Paper presented at the Fourth 
Round Table International Conference on Ethnogenesis of South and Central 
Asia, Harvard University, Cambridge (MA), 2002.
Ray, Sidney H. The Languages of Borneo. The Sarawak Museum Journal 1, no. 4. 
Singapore et al.: Kelly & Walsh, 1913.
Redd, Alan J. and Mark Stoneking. “Peopling of Sahul: mtDNA Variation in 
Aboriginal Australian and Papua New Guinean Populations”. American Journal 
of Human Genetics 65 (1999): 808–28. 
Reid, Lawrence A., ed. Philippine Minor Languages: Word Lists and Phonologies. 
Oceanic Linguistics Special Publications 8. Honolulu: University of Hawaii 
Press, 1971.
———. “Unraveling the Linguistic Histories of Philippine Negritos”. In Language 
Contact and Change in the Austronesian World, Trends in Linguistics Studies 
and Monographs 77, edited by Tom Dutton and Darrel T. Tryon. Berlin – New 
York: Mouton de Gruyter, 1994, pp. 443–75.
Rischel, Jørgen. Minor Mlabri: A Hunter-Gatherer Language of Northern 
Indochina. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1995.
Sarasin, Fritz. Die Varietäten des Menschen auf Celebes. 2. Teil in: Paul Sarasin 
and Fritz Sarasin, Materialien zur Naturgeschichte der Insel Celebes. V. Bd., 
Versuch einer Athropologie der Insel Celebes. Wiesbaden: C.W. Kreidel, 
1906.
Sellato, Bernard. Nomads of the Borneo Rainforest, translated by Stephanie 
Morgan. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1994.
Shafer, Robert. Introduction to Sino-Tibetan. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1974.
Shorto, H.L. A Dictionary of the Mon Inscriptions from the Sixth to the Sixteenth 
Centuries. London: Oxford University Press, 1971.
———. A Mon-Khmer Comparative Dictionary, Pacific Linguistics 579, edited 
by Paul Sidwell (main ed.), Doug Cooper and Christian Bauer (assist. ed.). 
Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National 
University, 2006.
Sidwell, Paul J. Proto South Bahnaric: A Reconstruction of a Mon-Khmer Language 
of Indo-China, Pacific Linguistics 501. Canberra: Research School of Pacific 
and Asian Studies, 2000.
Smits, L. and C.L. Voorhoeve, eds. The J.C. Anceaux Collection of Wordlists of 
Irian Jaya, A: Austronesian Languages, Part I, Irian Jaya Source Materials 
no. 4, Series B, nos. 1. Leiden – Jakarta: Irian Jaya Studies (IRIS) Project, 
Department of Languages and Cultures of Southeast Asia and Oceania 
(DSALCUL), Leiden University, 1992. 
Sneddon, J.N. Proto-Sangiric and the Sangiric Languages, Pacific Linguistics B–91. 
Canberra: Australian National University, 1984.

--- PAGE 384 ---
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia	
373
Soares, Pedro A., Jean A. Trejaut, Teresa Rito, Bruno Cavadas, Catherine Hill, 
Ken Khong Eng, Maru Mormina, Andreia Brandão, Ross M. Fraser, 
Tse‑Yi Wang, Jun‑Hun Loo, Christopher Snell, Tsang‑Ming Ko, António 
Amorim, Maria Pala, Vincent Macaulay, David Bulbeck, James F. Wilson, 
Leonor Gusmão, Luísa Pereira, Stephen Oppenheimer, Marie Lin, Martin B. 
Richards. “Resolving the Ancestry of Austronesian‑speaking Populations”. 
Human Genetics 135 (2016): 309–26.
Solheim, Wilhelm G. II. “The Kulanay Pottery Complex in the Philippines”. Artibus 
Asiae 20 (1957): 279–88.
———. “Further Relationships of the Sa-Huỳnh-Kalanay Pottery Tradition”. Asian 
Perspectives 8 (1964): 196–211.
———. “Neue Befunde zur späten Prähistorie Südostasiens und ihre Interpretation”. 
Saeculum 31 (1980): 275–317, 319–44.
———. “The Nusantao Hypothesis: The Origin and Spread of Austronesian Speakers”. 
Asian Perspectives 26 (1984–85): 77–88.
Sopher, David E. The Sea Nomads: A Study Based on the Literature of the Maritime 
Boat People of Southeast Asia. Memoirs of the National Museum 5. Syracuse: 
Syracuse University, 1965.
Stargardt, Janice. “L’isthme de la Péninsule Malaise dans les navigations au long 
cours: nouvelle données archaeologiques”. Archipel 18 (1979): 15–39.
Steingass, F. A Comprehensive Persian–English Dictionary, Including the Arabic 
Words and Phrases to be Met with in Persian Literature, being Johnson and 
Richardson’s Persian, Arabic and English Dictionary revised, enlarged and 
entirely reconstructed. London: Routledge & Keegan Paul, 1892.
Steinmann, Alfred. Das kultische Schiff in Indonesian (Habilitationsschrift 
zur Erlangung der venia legendi an der Universität Zürich). Jahrbuch für 
prähistorische und ethnographische Kunst, Jg. 1939–40; Bände 13–14: 149–205. 
Published Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1939 [1941].
Stevenson, Robert C. and F.H. Eveleth, eds. The Judson Burmese–English 
Dictionary. Rangoon: American Baptist Mission Press, 1921.
Stresemann, Erwin. Die Lauterscheinungen in den ambonischen Sprachen. Beihefte 
zur Zeitschrift für Eingeborenen-Sprachen 10. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer, 1927.
Sukthankar, Vishnu S., ed. The Mahābhārata, vol. 1. The Ādiparvan. Poona: 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1933. 
Summerhayes, Glen R., Matthew Leavesley, Andrew Fairbairn, Herman Mandui, 
Judith Field, Anne Ford, Richard Fullagar. “Human Adaption and Plant Use 
in Highland New Guinea 49,000 to 44,000 Years Ago”. Science 330 (2010): 
78–81.
Turner, R.L. A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages. London: 
Oxford University Press, 1099.

--- PAGE 385 ---
374	
Waruno Mahdi
Urquhart, Ian A.N. “Some Notes on Jungle Punans in Kapit District”. Sarawak 
Museum Journal 5 (1951): 495–533.
Verheijen, Jilis A.J. Plant Names in Austronesian Linguistics. NUSA Linguistic 
Studies of Indonesian and Other Languages in Indonesia 20. Jakarta: Badan 
Penyelenggara Seri NUSA, 1984.
Watters, David E. “Notes on Kusunda Grammar: A Language Isolate of Nepal”. 
Himalayan Linguistics Archive 3 (2006): 1–182. 
Wolff, John U. Proto-Austronesian Phonology with Glossary. Ithaca [NY]: Southeast 
Asia Program Publications, Cornell University, 2010.
Worcester, G.R.G. The Junks and Sampans of the Yangtze. Annapolis [MD]: Naval 
Institute Press, 1971.
Yesner, David R. “Maritime Hunter-Gatherers: Ecology and Prehistory”. Current 
Anthropology 21 (1980): 727–50.
Zorc, R. David Paul. “Austronesian Culture History Through Reconstructed 
Vocabulary (an Overview)”. In Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and 
Change, Pacific Linguistics Series C–127, edited by Andrew K. Pawley and 
Malcolm D. Ross. Canberra: Australian National University, 1994, pp. 541–94.

--- PAGE 386 ---
9
The Role of “Prakrit” in 
Maritime Southeast Asia 
Through 101 Etymologies
Tom Hoogervorst1
1.  Introduction
This chapter presents a novel contribution to the study of language 
contact between India and Southeast Asia, in particular the oft-neglected 
“Prakrit” or—more accurately—Middle Indo-Aryan (henceforth MIA) 
loanwords in Malay, Old Javanese and other languages of Maritime 
1	 I express my sincere gratitude to the Gonda Foundation and the Sealinks Project 
(funded through the European Research Council, Agreement No. 206148, awarded 
to Nicole Boivin) for their financial support of my research. I am also indebted to 
Alexander Adelaar, Waruno Mahdi, Willem van der Molen and the editors of this 
volume for critically going through previous versions of this chapter. Needless to say, 
I solely carry responsibility for remaining errors and shortcomings.
375

--- PAGE 387 ---
376	
Tom Hoogervorst
Southeast Asia.2 To this end, I will call attention to 101 tentative 
instances of lexical borrowing and present new perspectives on the 
pre-modern dispersal of Indic culture and thought to Southeast Asia 
during the first millennium CE.3 As scholarship on the exchange 
of vocabulary between South and Southeast Asia has traditionally 
prioritized the role of Sanskrit and the associated “high culture”— 
including religion, state organization, art, architecture, literature and 
philosophy (cf. Gonda 1973; De Casparis 1997)—a focus on (North) 
India’s historical spoken languages may reveal more vernacular 
dimensions of interethnic contact, challenging scholars to reconsider 
the structure and nature of the maritime networks that have shaped 
Asia’s pre-colonial past.
Without wanting to delve too deep here into the history of scholarship 
on cultural contact across the Bay of Bengal,4 it is worth pointing out 
that historians and archaeologists frequently present linguistic arguments 
in support of one or the other macrohistorical scenario. In an attempt 
to understand the mechanism through which cultural influence from 
India gained foothold in early Southeast Asia, Van Leur (1934, p. 126) 
contended that if the region had been frequented predominantly by 
warriors (kṣatriya) or merchants (vaiśya), more vernacular elements 
would have been adopted—including the fully developed caste system 
(i.e. the jātis, not just the varṇas), craft industry, political organization, 
and Indian languages other than Sanskrit. He thus rejected the 
then prevailing notion of a “Hindu colonization”, as advocated by 
Mookerji (1912) and other scholars of the Calcutta-based Greater India 
movement, and suggested that the literary and magico-ritual “high 
civilization” of classical Southeast Asia had been introduced by a 
2	 The use of the term “Prakrit”, i.e. Prākr̥ ta ‘ordinary; vulgar; vernacular’, is somewhat 
anachronistic in this context; it is associated with and first documented in the Kāvya 
literature (Tieken 2008, p. 341), postdating the establishment of regular interethnic 
contact networks between South and Southeast Asia in the first centuries BCE.
3	 This sociocultural process has often been termed “Indianization”, a somewhat 
controversial term implying a one-sided transmission of culture. Conversely, 
Hoogervorst (2013) elaborates on ancient Southeast Asian influence in South Asia.
4	 See Acharya (2013) for a recent discussion and summary of scholarship on this topic.

--- PAGE 388 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
377
relatively small number of Brahmins who had ingratiated themselves 
at the local courts. The notion—first advanced by Krom (1931, p. 90) 
and thenceforth commonplace in the field of early Southeast Asian 
history—that indigenous elites were actively and deliberately importing 
Indian traditions and adapting them to local preferences is essential to 
this idea. With regard to this issue, Bosch (1961, pp. 8–9) argues:
It goes without saying that the Indian foreigners, after their supposed 
settling in the Archipelago, did not speak Sanskrit—the sacred and 
scientific language which, most likely, they did not even understand—
with the families founded by them or with the population, but that they 
made use of a Dravidian dialect or one of the vernaculars of Aryan 
origin. Now it is noteworthy that the great number of borrowed words  
of Indian origin in the Javanese, Balinese and Malayan languages show  
the pure Sanskrit form, thus proving their origin from a literary and  
learned entourage, while, at least in Javanese, the Prākṛt and Tamil words 
are almost completely lacking.
As the alleged paucity of vernacular influence, linguistic or otherwise, 
from South to Southeast Asia plays a prominent role in scholarly 
attempts to reconstruct the history of contact between these regions, it 
merits a renewed discussion. Taking up this challenge, the present study 
will commence with a brief treatment of MIA linguistic history. The 
first section addresses the phonological integration of Indic loanwords 
into Western Malayo-Polynesian (henceforth WMP) languages, 
specifically Malay. This will help increase our understanding of the 
expected sound changes of MIA loanwords upon their acquisition 
in Malay, Old Javanese, and other languages. I will then proceed to 
present a list of 34 tentative MIA loanwords in Malay in the second 
section. The third section postulates 22 MIA loanwords attested in 
Old Javanese and other WMP languages, but not in (modern) 
Malay. The fourth section calls attention to the oft-overlooked MIA 
phonological innovation of *k > g in the intervocalic position, listing 26 
tentative loans in Malay and Old Javanese that display this feature and 
may therefore be classified as “Prakritisms”. The fifth section examines 
19 tentative loanwords borrowed from sources representing a later 
developmental stage of Indo-Aryan: the New Indo-Aryan (henceforth NIA)

--- PAGE 389 ---
378	
Tom Hoogervorst
languages. In conclusion, the historical and socio-linguistic conditions 
through which MIA loanwords entered Southeast Asia will be addressed, 
suggesting some directions for further research.
2.  MIA Linguistic History
It is important to first clarify what is meant by MIA and by “Prakrit”. 
Foremost, we are not dealing with a single linguistic entity. In its 
broadest definition, any Indo-Aryan language other than Sanskrit—
in some instances even Old Javanese and Old Tamil—have been 
regarded as a “Prakrit” (cf. Tieken 2008, p. 346). The term MIA, on 
the other hand, specifically denotes a consecutive stage in linguistic 
development from so-called Old Indo-Aryan (henceforth OIA) into 
NIA. OIA became best known to us in the form of classical Sanskrit 
as codified by the grammarian Pāṇini in the fourth century BCE, by 
which time it had ceased to be a mother tongue and chiefly served 
literary and liturgical functions. From the third to the first century BCE, 
however, a diverse range of MIA languages were the only languages in 
epigraphic use, most notably on the Aśokan and Śātavāhana inscriptions, 
before they were gradually superseded by Sanskrit and a mixed 
Sanskrit-Prakrit idiom known as Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit (Edgerton 
1985; Salomon 1998, p. 72; Tieken 2008, p. 340). 
As had been the case with classical Sanskrit, several MIA varieties 
were codified in written form. The best known example is Pali (Pāḷi), 
the chief liturgical language of Theravāda Buddhism used mainly in 
Sri Lanka and on the Southeast Asian mainland, whose first 
unambiguous literary attestations appeared around the first century 
BCE. Several Indic loanwords in Khmer, Thai and other mainland 
Southeast Asian languages were transmitted through Pali.5 The quantity 
of phonological retentions attested in Pali suggests it was based on a 
relatively archaic stage of MIA language development (Woolner 1999, 
pp. 65, 72). In medieval times, some Sanskrit dramas and other literary 
5	 Nihom (1994) has postulated some instances of Pali influence on Old Javanese, but 
in this chapter I demonstrate that the proposed loanwords could have equally well 
been transmitted through other “Prakrits”.

--- PAGE 390 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
379
compositions were partly written in the so-called “Dramatic Prakrits”, 
most notably Śaurasenī, Mahārāṣṭrī and Māgadhī. The main function 
of this usage was to mark certain characters—often women and 
peasants—as non-Sanskrit speakers, with the associated social stigmas 
(Tieken 2008, p. 347). Ardhamāgadhī, a variety based on the vernacular 
of Awadh in ancient Kosala, is considered to be a conservative form 
of Māgadhī with some grammatical influence from Śaurasenī (Woolner 
1999, p. 6). It has been preserved through Jain literature and is also 
known as Ārṣam or “Jaina Prakrit”. On phonological grounds, 
Ardhamāgadhī corresponds to the “Prakrit” of the eastern Aśokan 
inscriptions—used around the Mauryan capital of Pāṭaliputra (modern- 
day Patna in Bihar)—which is therefore also known as Old 
Ardhamāgadhī (Salomon 1998, pp. 73–74). Modern Indo-Aryan 
languages of north-eastern India, such as Bengali, Assamese, Oriya, 
Bhojpuri and Maithili, are believed to go back to the same source. 
The extent to which semi-artificial literary languages, such as 
Ardhamāgadhī and the “Dramatic Prakrits”, resemble actual mother 
tongues once spoken on the Indian Subcontinent remains a matter of 
uncertainty. We can be fairly sure that all these varieties were already 
archaic at the time they appeared in literary works (Tieken 2008, 
pp. 350–51). Historical linguistics can help to fill some of the 
remaining gaps in our knowledge of MIA, especially through a study 
of regular sound correspondences with OIA and modern Indo-Aryan 
languages (Pischel 1900; Turner 1966). The examination of MIA 
loanwords in Dravidian (Emenau and Burrow 1962) or WMP languages, 
as attempted here, can lead to additional insights in this area. A 
complicating factor in doing so is the lexical multilayeredness of 
most Indo-Aryan (and Dravidian) languages—featuring Sanskrit loans 
modified to the phonology of the recipient language (tadbhava) as well 
as “direct”, unmodified loans (tatsama).
Most etymological scholarship on Malay and other WMP languages 
virtually ignores the lexical influence from MIA languages. Jones’ 
standard work on loanwords in Malay (2007), for example, exclusively 
deals with Sanskrit, Tamil, Hindi and Persian as donor languages used 
on the Indian Subcontinent. Several Dutch indologists have mentioned 
in passing the existence of Prakritisms in Old Javanese (Kern 1869,

--- PAGE 391 ---
380	
Tom Hoogervorst
p. 10; Van der Tuuk 1881, p. 46; Gonda 1973, pp. 79–81), but this was 
rarely their primary focus of attention. To the best of my knowledge, 
De Casparis (1988) was the first scholar to dedicate a full paper to MIA 
influence in Old Javanese epigraphy, while Ensink (1978, pp. 179–80, 
fn. 8) postulated four Pali borrowings in Old Javanese (see examples 
5, 18, 47 and fn. 11 of this chapter). However, none of the scholars 
engaged with this topic have called attention to sound correspondences 
and phonological history to gain a better understanding of the 
postulated MIA etyma under research. It is the aim of this chapter to 
fill that gap and to do so by focusing primarily on Southeast Asia’s 
most widely spoken language, Malay, while also looking at Old 
Javanese and other languages.6
3.  Phonological Integration
Compared to the languages of India, Malay has a relatively small 
phonological inventory. I will confine myself here to some introductory 
6	 Throughout this chapter, examples are taken from a wide range of languages in 
South and Southeast Asia. My sources have been: Acehnese (Djajadiningrat 1934), 
Angkola-Mandailing Batak (Eggink 1936), Ardhamāgadhī (Ratnachandraji 1977), 
Balinese (Barber 1979), Bengali (Biswas 2000), Bikol (Mintz 2004), Braj Bhāṣā 
(Snell 1991), Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit (Edgerton 1985), Bugis (Matthes 1874), 
Cebuano (Wolff 1972), Cham (Aymonier and Cabaton 1906), Gayo (Hazeu 1907), 
Gujarati (Karbhari 1898), Hindi (Platts 1884), Ibanag (Bugarin 1850), Ilokano 
(Rubino 2000), Javanese (Robson and Wibisono 2002), Kannada (Kittel 1894), 
Kapampangan (Buenaobra 2004), Karo Batak (Joustra 1907), Khmer (Headley et al. 
1997), Madurese (Pawitra 2008), Mahārāṣṭrī (Jacobi 1886), Makasar (Cense 1979), 
Malagasy (Richardson 1885), Malay (Wilkinson 1932), Malayalam (Gundert 
1962), Maranao (McKaughan and Al-Macaraya 1996), Marathi (Molesworth 1857), 
Minangkabau (Moussay 1995), Old Javanese (Zoetmulder 1982), Old Khmer 
(Jenner 2009), Old Malay (Cœdès 1930; De Casparis 1956), Oriya (Praharaj 1931–
40), Pali (Rhys Davids and Stede 1966), Panjabi (Singh 1895), Persian (Steingass 
1892), Salako (Adelaar 2005), Sanskrit (Monier-Williams 1899), Sinhala (Clough 
1892), Sundanese (Coolsma 1913), Tagalog (Noceda and Sanlucar 1860; Ferrer 
2003), Tamil (Tamil 1924–36), Telugu (Brown 1903), Thai (Haas 1951–present) and 
Toba Batak (Warneck 1977). I have modernized outdated orthographies, translated 
and transliterated glosses and truncated them where required. Obsolete botanical 
names have been updated to reflect the contemporary consensus.

--- PAGE 392 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
381
notes. The voiceless palato-alveolar fricative /ʃ/ is written as <sy> in 
modern orthography. At the coda of a syllable, <k> is normally pronounced 
as a glottal stop /ʔ/. Written Malay does not differentiate between the 
close-mid vowel /e/ and the mid-central vowel or schwa /ə/, although 
I have chosen to do so in this chapter for purposes of clarity. Unlike 
many Indian languages, modern Malay lacks phonemic vowel length, 
gemination (except in compounds), aspiration, retroflex consonants and 
complex consonant clusters. Presumably, some of these features were 
retained in a now extinct variety or acrolectal register of Malay; the 
form of several Sanskrit loanwords in Malagasy and Tagalog reveals 
that speakers of Malay—through whom these borrowings must have 
entered these respective speech communities—pronounced Sanskrit 
loanwords more authentically when contact with India was still regular 
(Adelaar 1994). Early Old Javanese epigraphy generally demonstrates 
a broad familiarity with Sanskrit phonology, although we do not know 
how the language was pronounced in practice. It is worth pointing 
out that Javanese and Madurese still maintain a phonemic distinction 
between dental and retroflex stops, while many of the other “Indic” 
characteristics have disappeared.7 As the phonological integration 
of Indic loanwords into WMP languages has already been discussed 
in detail by Gonda (1973, pp. 355–413), I have confined myself to 
tabulating the author’s findings most relevant for the present study. 
Table 9.1 presents an overview of observed tendencies (some of which 
inconsistent) of sound change between Sanskrit etyma and their Malay 
derivatives.
It is noteworthy that the sociolinguistic prestige of Sanskrit often 
gave rise to restitution-driven hypercorrection or “hyper-Sanskritization”, 
i.e. using knowledge of regular sound innovations from Sanskrit to 
“Prakrit” in an attempt to revert these phonological processes; numerous 
previously unattested Sanskrit words have hence been “falsely” 
reconstructed by scribes and lexicographers (cf. Yakubovich 2010, 
pp. 322–24; Hoogervorst 2013, pp. 9, 103–4). This casts a new light
7	 Aspiration and gemination in Madurese are in all likelihood internal developments 
unrelated to Indic influence.

--- PAGE 393 ---
382	
Tom Hoogervorst
 
TABLE 9.1
Integration of Sanskrit Loanwords into Malay (after Gonda 1973, pp. 355–413)
Sound Change
Example
Definition
Formula
Sanskrit Etymon
Malay Reflex
Highering of close-mid 
vowels (back)
*o > u
drohaka ‘mischief-doer’  
(cf. example 63)
durhaka ‘treason, 
insubordination’
Highering of close-mid 
vowels (front)
*e > i
velā ‘time of day, period’ 
bila ‘when, time when’
Lowering of close 
vowels (back)
*u > o
guha ‘cave’ 
goa ‘cave’
Lowering of close 
vowels (front)
*i > e
līna ‘lying or resting on, 
absorbed in’
lena ‘sound sleep’
Plosivization of 
labiodental 
approximants
*v > b
vañcana ‘cheating, deception, 
fraud’
bǝncana ‘mischief-making, 
trouble’
Affricatization of 
word-initial voiced 
palatal approximants
*y > j/#_
yantra ‘mechanical contrivance, 
machine, etc.’
jǝntǝra ‘spinning wheel’
Voicing of word-initial 
voiceless velar stops
*k > g/#_
kaṁsa ‘brass, bell-metal’
gangsa ‘bell-metal’
Schwa substitution 
(pre-retroflex)
*VC̣ > ǝC
koṭi ‘ten million’
kǝti ‘hundred thousand’
Schwa substitution 
(pre-geminate)8
*VC: > ǝC
matta ‘excited with joy, in rut, 
insane’
mǝta ‘mad or rutting, wild or 
excited’

--- PAGE 394 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
383
Schwa substitution 
(pre-cluster)
*V > ǝ/_CC
samasta ‘combined, united, 
whole’
sǝmǝsta ‘all, entire’
Schwa substitution 
(antepenultimate 
syllable)
*V > ǝ/(C)_(C)CV.(C)CV(C)
bhagavan ‘venerable; holy’
bǝgawan ‘blessed, saintly, holy’
Homorganic 
nasalization (pre-stop)
*Cstop > NCstop/V_V
upamā ‘comparison, 
resemblance, similarity’
umpama ‘example, instance’
Deaspiration
*Ch > C
bhūmi ‘the earth, soil, ground’
bumi ‘earth, world’
Vowel-insertation in 
aspirated stops
*Ch > CVh
bhāṣā ‘speech, language’ 
bahasa ‘diction, language’
Metathesis of aspiration 
(word-initial)
*V(C1)C2
h > hV(C1)C2/#_
argha ‘worth, value, price’
harga ‘price, money-value’
Metathesis of aspiration 
(word-medial)
*C1
hV1.(C2)C3V2 > C1ǝ.(C2)C3(.V2).hV2
bhāṇḍāra ‘a storehouse’
bǝndahara ‘treasurer’ 
(cf. example 3)
Metathesis of aspiration 
(word-final)
*ChV > CVh/_#
dadhi ‘coagulated milk, thick 
sour milk’
dadih ‘sour thick milk, clotted 
milk’
8	 This sound change may have been influenced by the orthographic convention in Javanese and Malay to use gemination to indicate that 
the preceding short /a/ is a schwa (Ras 1968b). Indeed, intervocalic consonants following a schwa are typically longer in these and other 
WMP languages.

--- PAGE 395 ---
384	
Tom Hoogervorst
on certain sound changes attested in Sanskrit loanwords in WMP 
languages that were previously dismissed as irregular. Malay cipta 
‘thought-concentration’ (cf. Javanese cipt ‘ideas; creation; to create’), 
for example, is normally perceived to be an aberrant form of cita in 
the same meaning, reflecting Sanskrit citta ‘thinking, imagining; aim, 
wish’ (e.g. Gonda 1973, p. 364; De Casparis 1997, p. 15; Jones 2007, 
p. 50). Since the Sanskrit consonant cluster /pt/ corresponds to /tt/ in 
MIA (Pischel 1900, p. 187), I would argue that cipta is a deliberate 
back-formation designed to make the word look more Sanskritic. In 
Old Javanese, cipta is indeed used alongside citta in the meaning of 
‘mind, heart; thought, opinion’, although the former only occurs in later 
texts (cf. Zoetmulder 1982, p. 329). If this observation is correct, the 
mechanism has persisted into colonial times. The term rindra ‘lace-work, 
crotcheting?’ found in the Middle Javanese Kidung Malat appears to be 
a Sanskritization of Portuguese renda ‘lace’ (cf. Javanese rend ‘lace 
edging, crocheting’, Malay renda ‘lace’) based on the development of 
MIA /dd/ from /dr/ (cf. Pischel 1900, pp. 185–86, 202). Along the same 
lines, we may explain Javanese bludru ‘velvet’ as a borrowing from 
Portuguese veludo in the same meaning (cf. Malay bəludru ~ bələdu). 
Old Javanese “hyper-Sanskritisms” include jaladri alongside jaladhi 
‘sea, ocean’ (from Sanskrit jaladhi ‘the ocean’)9 and mandra alongside 
manda ‘weak, faint, soft, gentle’ (from Sanskrit manda ‘slow, weak’).
Another relevant feature of particularly Javanese and Malay is the 
tendency to form secondary bases with -i out of words originally ending in 
-a (Gonda 1973, pp. 427–30; De Casparis 1988, p. 53). While alternation 
between /a/ and /i/ is well-documented in Sanskrit and other Indo-Aryan 
languages, depending on several morphological conditions, a number of 
WMP languages feature secondary “i-forms” of Indic loans unattested 
in their prototypes (Hoogervorst 2016). Consider, for example, Malay 
bagi ‘allotting’ (< Sanskrit bhāga ‘a part, allotment’), biji ‘seed, grain’ 
(< bīja), puji ‘praise, laudation’ (< pūjā ‘worship, veneration’) and sunyi 
‘lonely, desolate’ (< śūnya ‘empty, desolate’). This process has become 
remarkably productive in modern Javanese, where numerous words in the 
9	 Only attested in the Kuñjarakarṇa (Zoetmulder 1982, p. 719).

--- PAGE 396 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
385
high speech register, both borrowed and inherited, are formed through 
substitution of /a/ by /i/ in word-final position (a process sometimes 
referred to as kramanization). It should be taken into account when 
examining lexical influence from Indic languages to Southeast Asia.
Some phonological innovations are found both in MIA and WMP 
languages. Apheresis (omission) of the antepenultimate syllable, for 
instance, is attested in MIA languages as well as in Malay. It remains 
therefore uncertain whether Malay words such as puasa ‘fasting’ and 
labu ‘bottle gourd, calabash’, reflecting respectively Sanskrit upavāsa ‘a 
fast, fasting’ and alābu ‘the bottle-gourd (Lagenaria siceraria (Molina) 
Standl.)’, were introduced via a MIA language or lost their initial syllable 
due to internal historico-phonological developments in Malay. I will omit 
loanwords displaying sound changes attested in both language families,10 
and I will also leave out words displaying a “dropped” word-final /s/; 
Gonda (1973, p. 419) demonstrates that Sanskrit stems ending in -as 
(corresponding to -aḥ in pausa) typically lose this word-final consonant 
in Javanese and Malay. Consider, for example, Malay jasa ‘loyal service, 
doing duty’ from Sanskrit yaśas ‘honour; an object of honour; favour, 
etc.‘ (cf. Pali yasa ‘glory, high position’, Old Javanese yaśa ‘honour, 
glory; meritorious deed’, Old Khmer yasa ‘fame, honour, glory’), tapa 
‘ascetic devotion’ from tapas ‘religious austerity, severe meditation’ (cf. 
Pali tapa ‘religious austerity, ascetic practice’, Old Javanese tapa ‘religious 
austerity, asceticism’, Old Khmer tapaḥ ‘ardor, the fervor of religious 
austerities’) and teja ‘lurid sunset-clouds’ from tejas ‘point or top of a 
flame or ray, glow’ (cf. Pali teja ‘a (piercing) flame’, Old Javanese teja 
‘point or top of a flame; glow, fire; fiery energy, spiritual or magical 
power’, Old Khmer tejaḥ ~ teja ‘fiery energy, (religious) fervour’). While 
I am hesitant to attribute such attestations directly to MIA intermediacy, 
10	 Thus, the Old Javanese forms jawa ‘a grain’ (< Sanskrit yava ‘barley’), soca ‘precious 
stone, gem’ (< śauca ‘purity’) and sona ‘dog’ (< śvāna) may resemble MIA forms, 
but can equally well be explained through internal developments. The same holds true 
for modern Javanese bey ‘cost, charge; customs, duty’ (< Sanskrit vyaya ‘spending, 
expense; cost; money’) and (lit.) bomant r ‘heaven, sky’ (< vyomāntara); the latter 
is unattested in the Sanskrit literature, but evidently consists of vyoma ‘heaven, sky, 
atmosphere, air’ + antara ‘being in the interior, interior; near’ (Gonda 1938, p. 496; 
Jones 2007, p. 44).

--- PAGE 397 ---
386	
Tom Hoogervorst
we cannot exclude the possibility that contact between Southeast Asian 
and MIA speech communities gave rise to this phonological tendency.
4.  MIA Loanwords in Malay
The Malay words listed below are presumably borrowings from one or 
more MIA sources.11 Some examples have already been addressed by 
earlier scholars, in which case I have fine-tuned the argument by calling 
attention to MIA phonological innovations and textual attestations in 
support of their etymologies. Other tentative lexical transmissions are 
based on my own postulations.
1.	 baja ‘steel’ (cf. Old Javanese waja, Madurese b jh , Karo Batak 
baja, Bugis baja ) has been connected to Sanskrit vajra (Rigg 
1862, p. 364). Later dictionaries indeed define this word as ‘a 
kind of hard iron or steel’, next to its more familiar meanings 
of ‘thunderbolt’ and ‘diamond’ (Monier-Williams 1899, p. 913). 
The former shade of meaning also manifests itself through such 
compounds as granthivajraka, śaivālavajra, śoṇavajra and 
svarṇavajra, all denoting types of steel (cf. Hoogervorst 2013, p. 
26). As consonant clusters ending in /r/ have become geminated 
consonants in some MIA languages (Pischel 1900, pp. 197–98), we 
find Śaurasenī vajja (Schmidt 1924, p. 13), Māgadhī vajja (Pischel 
11	 It is beyond the scope of this study to explore onomastics. Nevertheless, it is worth 
calling attention to a ninth or tenth century CE inscribed golden bowl found in the 
Riau province displaying the name Lakhaṇi, ultimately reflecting Sanskrit Lakṣaṇī 
(Griffiths 2012, pp. 210–11); this name would phonologically correspond to MIA 
Lakkhaṇī, which is indeed attested on a twelfth century stone inscription found 
near the Mahābodhi pagoda in Bagan, present-day Myanmar (Luce 1969, p. 107). 
Along similar lines, Ensink (1978, p. 180, fn. 8) argues that the spelling of the name 
Poruṣāda (rather than Sanskrit Puruṣāda) in the Old Javanese Sutasoma kakawin was 
due to Pali influence. Nihom (1994) argues that Old Javanese Kāmaloka ‘the world of 
desire’, attested in the late fourteenth or early fifteenth century CE Buddhist didactic 
poem Kuñjarakarṇadharmakathana, goes back to Pali Kāmaloka ‘worlds of sense 
desire’. Finally, the ethnonym Goḍā (e.g. in the fourteenth-century Nāgarakərtāgama; 
Pigeaud 1962, p. 36), appears to reflect Ardhamāgadhī Goḍa ‘a resident of the Gauḍa 
country’. More examples may surface upon closer inspection of proper names, 
toponyms and ethnonyms.

--- PAGE 398 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
387
1900, p. 198) and Mahārāṣṭrī vajjavega ‘having the swiftness of 
a thunderbolt or of lightning’.12 I therefore propose a MIA origin 
of the above WMP attestations in the primary meaning of ‘steel’. 
Secondary to this development, WMP reflexes of this form also 
denote several solutions for dental treatment, which in Southeast 
Asia often contain iron (Wilken 1888; Zumbroich 2009, p. 391; 
Hoogervorst 2013, pp. 25–26), e.g. Old Javanese waja ‘the pieces 
of steel inserted in the mouth of a corpse as teeth, to get him 
beautiful teeth in a later incarnation’ (Van der Tuuk 1897–1912/3, 
p. 599), Malay baja ‘an oily preparation made from burnt coconut-
shell and used to stain the teeth black’,13 Acehnese baja ‘a type 
of blacking to stain the teeth black’, Angkola-Mandailing Batak 
baja ‘blacking for the teeth’, Malagasy vazana ‘molar’, etc.
2.	 bapa or, more commonly, bapak14 ‘father’ (cf. Old Javanese bapa 
‘father’, Salako bapà ‘father (of somebody else)’, Tagalog †bapa 
‘father, said to superiors’) has been interpreted by Adelaar (2004, 
pp. 167–69) as the (colloquial) Tamil appā ‘father’ in combination 
with the archaic prefix *b(a)- ‘someone who fulfils the function 
of or behaves like …’.15 While I find no grounds to discard this 
etymology, it is also worth calling attention to Ardhamāgadhī 
12	 See lāka (example 43) on the degemination of long consonants (*vajja > baja). 
Ardhamāgadhī vaïra ‘thunderbolt’ is also related and may be compared to Tamil 
vayiram ‘thunderbolt, diamond’.
13	 An older dictionary glosses “a metallic and perhaps antimonial preparation for giving 
a black colour to the teeth” (Marsden 1812, p. 30).
14	 See Blust (1979) and Adelaar (1992, pp. 118–19) on the addition of a word-final 
glottal stop <k> to Malay vocatives.
15	 Analogous examples given by the author are bǝtina ‘female’ (< *b(a)- + *tina 
‘mother, woman’), budak ‘child, servant’ (< *b(a)- + *uda ‘youth’ + vocative -k), 
babu ‘female domestic help, maid-servant’ (< *b(a)- + *(i)bu ‘mother’) and besan 
‘people whose children have intermarried’ (< *b(a)- + *isa ‘one’ + *(a)n). The latter 
form is also attested, without the prefix *b(a)-, as Salako isàtn in the same meaning. 
We may also call attention to the following words for ‘father’: Minangkabau apak, 
Iban apay (Adelaar 1992, p. 119), Salako apàʔ ‘speaker’s father’, Acehnese apa and 
Angkola-Mandailing Batak apa, presumably reflecting the abovementioned Tamil 
precursor. The default proto-Austronesian reflex for ‘father’ is *ama.

--- PAGE 399 ---
388	
Tom Hoogervorst
bappa ‘father’, with cognates in NIA languages but not in 
Sanskrit (Turner 1966 #9209), e.g. Sinhala bapa ‘father’, Oriya 
bāpa ‘father; one’s elder who is like one’s father’, Hindi bāp 
‘father; senior, elder, superior’. It seems that the word could have 
equally well ended up in Southeast Asia through a MIA source. 
Old Khmer vappā ~ vāppā ~ vapā ‘father’ has been connected 
to a WMP source (Jenner 2009, p. 529), whereas Sanskrit vapra 
appears to be a back-formation of MIA *bappa.
3.	 bǝndahara ‘treasurer’ (cf. Javanese bǝnd r ‘master, mistress; 
title for the nobility’), which was used as an administrative 
title in the old Malay states, reflects Sanskrit bhāṇḍāgāra 
‘a treasury, a treasurer’ (Gonda 1973, pp. 96, 379; De Casparis 
1997, p. 13; Jones 2007, p. 36). The borrowing presumably 
took place through a MIA source, e.g. Ardhamāgadhī bhaṇḍāra 
‘a storehouse; treasury’. We may also compare late Sanskrit 
bhāṇḍāra ‘a storehouse’, Sinhala baḍahæra ‘storekeeper, man 
who takes care of a treasury, etc.’, Oriya bhaṇḍāra ‘treasury’ 
and Hindi bhaṇḍārā ‘store-house, depository, warehouse, 
etc.’. The intervocalic /h/ in the Malay attestation is due to 
metathesis of aspiration (cf. Table 9.1). Malay bǝndahari 
‘treasury officer’ (cf. Tagalog bandahali ‘housekeeper, manager’) 
is evidently related to bǝndahara. Rather than assuming the 
former to be an “i-form” of the latter, bǝndahari presumably 
entered Malay through an ultimately related NIA source, e.g. 
Hindi bhaṇḍārī ‘a house-steward, a treasurer’, Gujarati bhãḍārī 
‘a treasurer’, Oriya bhaṇḍārī ‘a store keeper; a steward’ (Gonda 
1973, p. 379).
4.	 bǝrhala ‘(animistic) idol, image’ (cf. Javanese br h l ‘giant; 
idol’, Gayo bər
l
 ‘idol’, Karo Batak bǝrhala ‘k.o. ghost’, 
Makasar barahala ~ barala ‘idol’) reflects Old Javanese 
bharāla,16 which is used interchangeably with bhaṭāra in the 
16	 The same word features on the Malay Si Topayan I inscription (probably fourteenth or 
fifteenth century CE) as brahala ‘god’ (Griffiths 2014, p. 228).

--- PAGE 400 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
389
meaning of ‘a great lord, venerable or worshipful person, deity, 
etc.‘ (cf. Malay bǝtara ‘god, male deity’, Javanese bǝṭr ‘male 
mythological deity’, Makasar batara ‘deity’, Tagalog bathalà 
‘God’, Cebuano bathálà ‘God’).17 The latter set of attestations 
presumably reflects MIA bhaṭṭāra ‘a noble lord’—also known 
to Sanskrit lexicographers (Monier-Williams 1899, p. 745)—and 
ultimately Sanskrit bhartr̥  ‘a bearer; a husband’ (cf. Pischel 1900, 
pp. 271–72). As the Old Javanese form bharāla is predominantly 
used to designate Buddhist deities (cf. Kern 1917; De Casparis 
1988, p. 56; Griffiths 2014, p. 228), it has been suggested that 
the word entered Maritime Southeast Asia through Vajrayāna 
Buddhist connections particularly with Nepal (Kandahjaya 
2004, pp. 68–69; Griffiths 2014, pp. 242–43); we find the form 
bharāḍa in archaic Newari (Chandra 1983; Lienhard 1996, 
p. 248), presumably reflecting Sanskrit bhaṭṭāraka ‘a great lord, 
venerable or worshipful person’. Griffiths (2014, p. 242) also 
calls attention to the name Bharāḍa, a sage in the Joko Dolog 
inscription, suggesting that Old Javanese bhaṭāra, bharāḍa 
(through metathesis) and bharāla all have MIA origins.
5.	 biku ‘Buddhist monk’ (cf. Old Javanese wiku ~ biku ‘a person 
who has a religious status or function, priest, monk, etc.’, Balinese 
wiku ‘learned man, doctor, priest’) corresponds to Sanskrit bhikṣu 
‘a beggar; a Buddhist mendicant or monk’ (Jones 2007, p. 38) 
and must have entered Southeast Asia through a MIA source 
(Van der Tuuk 1897–1912/3, p. 502; Ensink 1978, pp. 179–80, 
fn. 8; De Casparis 1997, p. 13).18 We may call attention to 
17	 The corresponding female forms in Old Javanese are bharālī and bhaṭārī ‘goddess 
(esp. Durgā); title of a royal lady (only Kuntī, as queen-mother?)’. The Philippine 
attestations exhibit metathesis of aspiration (cf. Table 9.1).
18	 In support of a MIA etymology, it should be pointed out that the Sanskrit cluster 
/kṣ/ normally yields Malay /ks/, e.g. Malay laksa ‘ten thousand’ (< Sanskrit lakṣa 
‘hundred thousand’), paksa ‘compulsion’ (< pakṣa ‘opinion; a position advanced or 
an argument to be maintained; etc.’, cf. Old Javanese pakṣa ‘fixed intention, firmly 
bent on, wanting by all means, etc.’), saksi ‘witness’ (< sākṣī ‘eye-witness’) and siksa 
‘punishment’ (< śikṣā ‘chastisement, punishment’).

--- PAGE 401 ---
390	
Tom Hoogervorst
Pali bhikkhu ‘mendicant monk’ and Ardhamāgadhī bhikkū 
‘a beggar, an ascetic’; Old Khmer bhikkhu ‘Buddhist mendicant 
or monk’ has presumably been borrowed from Pali. The absence 
of aspirated consonants, which is expectable in Malay but not in 
Old Javanese, has led De Casparis (1988, pp. 65–66) to assume 
a transmission via Old Sinhalese biku ‘Buddhist monk’, found 
in Brāhmī inscriptions. There are, however, more attestations of 
the loss of aspirates consonants in Old Javanese, e.g. camǝṭi ~ 
cǝmǝṭi (example 29), mañjǝṭi (44) and paṭāraṇa (18).
6.	 bilak ‘the bael fruit (Aegle marmelos (L.) Corrêa)’ (cf. Balinese 
bila, Makasar bila, Bugis bila) ultimately goes back to Sanskrit 
bilva ‘the wood-apple tree (commonly called bel)’ (Gonda 
1973, p. 326). Based on the assimilation of the /lv/ cluster, 
I propose that the borrowing took place via a MIA source, such 
as Ardhamāgadhī billa in the same meaning. The addition of a 
word-final glottal stop to Indic loanwords in Malay—other than 
vocatives—is irregular, but does not stand in isolation.19
7.	 cula ‘horn of single-horned animal’ (cf. Javanese cul ‘horn of a 
rhinoceros’) ultimately goes back to Sanskrit cūḍa ‘the hair on the 
top of the head’ (Gonda 1973, p. 101; De Casparis 1997, p. 16), 
also denoting ‘the crest of a cock or peacock’ in lexicographical 
works (Monier-Williams 1899, pp. 400–1). As the intervocalic 
/ḍ/ developed into a liquid consonant in MIA (Pischel 1900, 
pp. 168–69), the borrowing into WMP languages presumably 
took place via Ardhamāgadhī cūlā ‘top’ or a related language.20 
Sanskrit lexicographers, too, list the form cūla (Monier-Williams 
1899, p. 401).
19	 We may compare curik ‘jungle knife’ (< MIA *churī ‘knife’, cf. example 32), manik 
‘bead’ (< Sanskrit maṇi ‘a jewel, gem, pearl’), katik ‘dwarfed’ (< Tamil kaṭṭai ‘that 
which is short, low, dwarfish’) and capek ‘tired, worn, weary’ (< Tamil cappai 
‘that which is weak, lean, emaciated’). Mahdi (2000, p. 850) suggests that the post-
glottalization of word-final vowels is due to interdialectical borrowing across Malay 
varieties.
20	 The MIA retroflex /ḷ/, which corresponds to an older /ḍ/, tends to be written as /l/ in 
north Indian manuscripts (Pischel 1900, pp. 168–69).

--- PAGE 402 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
391
8.	 dǝlima ‘pomegranate (Punica granatum L.)’ (cf. Old Javanese 
dālima ~ dalima, Madurese dh lima) goes back to Sanskrit 
dāḍima ‘the pomegranate tree’ (Gonda 1973, pp. 322–23) through 
a MIA language, such as Ardhamāgadhī dālima. The form dālima 
is also attested in Sanskrit lexicographical works.
9.	 gǝmbala or gombala ‘a man employed to look after animals’ 
has its ultimate origins in Sanskrit gopāla ‘protector of bulls 
(i.e. cowherd); earth-protector (i.e. king)’ (cf. Old Javanese 
gopāla ‘cowherd’). The voicing of the intervocalic /p/ is usually 
attributed to the influence of Tamil, in which non-geminated stops 
are normally pronounced as voiced fricatives between vowels. 
However, Tamil exhibits kōpālaṉ ‘herdsman’, whose word-final 
nasal remains unattested in Malay. Instead, the borrowing may 
have taken place through a MIA source, such as Mahārāṣṭrī 
govāla (cf. Ardhamāgadhī govāli ‘a cowherd’, Hindi gvālā ~ 
goālā ‘a cow-keeper, cow-herd’). Tamil kōvalar ‘herdsmen’ (with 
word-final /r/ indicating plural) is presumably derived from the 
same MIA source. As regards the phonological development from 
MIA govāla to Malay gǝmbala, we may point out that schwa 
substitution in the antepenultimate syllable, the plosivization of 
/v/ and the prenasalization of /b/ can all be explained in terms 
of internal developments (cf. Table 9.1).
10.	 gǝta ‘dais, divan’ (cf. Acehnese k
ta ‘bedstead, cot’) ultimately 
goes back to Sanskrit khaṭvā ‘a bedstead, couch, cot’. Based 
on the absence of the intervocalic /tv/ cluster, I propose that a 
MIA reflex, such as Ardhamāgadhī khaṭṭa ‘a cot’, gave rise to 
the above attestations.
11.	 gula ‘sugar’ (cf. Old Javanese gula ‘sugar; syrup’, Madurese ghul , 
	
Makasar golla, Maranao gola ) goes back to Sanskrit guḍa, which 
has the primary meaning of ‘a globe or ball’ but is also used to 
denote ‘sugar which forms itself into lumps’, ‘dry sugar’ and 
‘molasses’. The direct precursor of the WMP attestations must 
have been a MIA language, such as Ardhamāgadhī gula ‘molasses, 
treacle’. Sanskrit lexicographers, too, list gula ‘raw or unrefined sugar, 
molasses’ as an equivalent of guḍa (Monier-Williams 1899, p. 360).

--- PAGE 403 ---
392	
Tom Hoogervorst
12.	 jaga ‘being awake or vigilant’ (cf. Old Javanese jaga ‘watchful, 
vigilant, on one’s guard, etc.’, Madurese jh gh ‘awake, rise’, 
Tagalog †dagá ‘to watch’, Malagasy zaha ‘to investigate’) can 
be connected to a MIA form reflecting Sanskrit jāgrat ‘waking’ 
(cf. Kern 1869, p. 10; Gonda 1973, p. 106; De Casparis 1997, 
p. 19); Sanskrit /gr/ in intervocalic positions regularly corresponds 
to MIA /gg/ (Pischel 1900, p. 197). We may thus call attention 
to Ardhamāgadhī jagga ‘to remain awake, awake’ as a plausible 
etymon of the WMP attestations.
13.	 juara ‘trainer of fighting-cocks’ (cf. Javanese juw r ‘champion, 
number one, the best known’) seems to have originally referred to 
proficiency in games; an older Malay dictionary glosses ‘skilled 
at games, esp. cockfighting; referee in that game’ (Pijnappel 1863, 
p. 89). In the Rambhāmañjarī, a “Prakrit” work by the fifteenth 
century CE poet and playwright Nayacandra, we find the form 
jūāra ‘gambler’ (Naikar 1993, p. 233). Together with Oriya 
juāra ‘gamester, gambler’, this attestation would correspond to 
Sanskrit dyūtakāra ‘a gambler’—the loss of intervocalic stops 
is regular in late MIA (cf. Turner 1966 #6609).
14.	 mǝnti ‘official, civil servant’ (cf. Minangkabau manti ‘assistant of 
the pǝnghulu in the village administration’), is a by-form of the 
better known mǝntǝri in the same meaning. Whereas the latter 
is derived from Sanskrit mantrī ‘a king’s counsellor, minister’ 
(Gonda 1973, p. 146; De Casparis 1997, p. 25), the former may 
have been borrowed through a MIA language in which the /r/ 
at the end of a consonant cluster is dropped (cf. Pischel 1900, 
pp. 185–86); Ardhamāgadhī exhibits manti ‘a minister, a 
counsellor’.
15.	 mutia ‘pearl’ (cf. Old Javanese mutya, Tagalog mutyâ ‘amulet, 
charm; pearl’, Cebuano mutyà ‘precious gem with magical 
properties’, Bikol mutyáʔ ‘pearl, jewel, gem’) offers an interesting 
instance of lexical borrowing between Dravidian, Indo-Aryan and 
WMP languages. While Kern (1880, p. 557) contends that the 
borrowing took place through a MIA source (cf. Ardhamāgadhī 
muttiya ‘a pearl’), the word is normally derived from Sanskrit

--- PAGE 404 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
393
mutya ‘a pearl’ (Gonda 1973, p. 493; De Casparis 1997, pp. 25, 
26). The latter, however, presumably goes back to MIA *mottia 
~ *muttia ‘a pearl’, of ultimate Dravidian origins (cf. Turner 
1966 #10152; Burrow and Emenau 1984 #4959). Several related 
forms have also spread eastwards. Sanskrit mauktika ‘a pearl’, 
apparently a back-formation of the aforementioned MIA reflex, 
has been adopted into Old Javanese as muktikā ~ moktika ‘pearl’, 
Malay mutika, Tagalog †mutika, Toba Batak mutiha, whereas 
Tamil muttu ‘pearl’ has been borrowed directly into Malay as 
mutu.
16.	 pagi ‘morning’ (cf. Cham pagi ‘tomorrow’) has been reconstructed 
by Adelaar (1992, p. 112) to the level of proto-Malayic; it 
does not seem to have a higher Austronesian pedigree. Instead, 
I propose to derive it from a MIA reflex of Sanskrit prage 
‘early in the morning, at dawn, at day-break’ (cf. Ardhamāgadhī 
page ‘early in the morning’). The syllable-final /e/ was 
historically absent in proto-Malayic and early Malay, hence 
the innovation *e > i/_#.
17.	 pǝlana ‘saddle’ (cf. Old Javanese palana) has been regarded as 
a loan from Sanskrit palyāṇa ‘a saddle’ through a MIA source 
(Gonda 1973, p. 399), which is plausible on phonological 
grounds. The Sanskrit form is presumably a back-formation of 
Persian pālān ‘a pack-saddle; a vestibule’.21 As regards the direct 
precursor of the WMP attestations, we may consider Mahārāṣṭrī 
pallāṇa ‘saddle’ or a related MIA form; Tamil pallaṇam ‘saddle’ 
and Oriya palāṇa ‘pack-saddle’ appear to go back to the same 
source.
18.	 pǝtǝrana ‘a seat near the throne, the seat of the bride and 
bridegroom’ (cf. Old Javanese paṭāraṇa ‘(ceremonial) cushion 
or mat to sit on’, Balinese (Kawi) patrana ‘a throne, high 
seat’, Acehnese patara na ~ p
tara na ‘ceremonial seat, seat 
21	 More examples of hyper-Sanskritized words of Persian origins are given in Baghbidi 
(2006) and Hoogervorst (2013, pp. 9, 103–4).

--- PAGE 405 ---
394	
Tom Hoogervorst
of honour’) goes back to Sanskrit prastaraṇa ‘a couch, seat’ 
through a MIA language (Gonda 1973, p. 375; Ensink 1978, 
pp. 179–80, fn. 8); Ardhamāgadhī exhibits pattharaṇa ‘bedding’. 
The retroflex consonant in Old Javanese can be explained 
through the observation that /st/ occasionally becomes /ṭṭh/ in 
MIA varieties such as Śaurasenī, Māgadhī and Ardhamāgadhī 
(Pischel 1900, pp. 211–22).
19.	 ramah ‘effusive friendliness’ (cf. Cham rumơ̄  ‘friendly, charming, 
pleasant, etc.’, Makasar rama ~ rama-rama ‘make a joint 
effort, do something with many people’) may be connected with 
Sanskrit ramya ‘enjoyable, pleasing, delightful’ through a 
MIA language, such as Ardhamāgadhī ramma ‘attractive, 
beautiful’. The sporadic addition of a word-final /h/ observed 
in the Malay attestation does not stand in isolation.22 The 
original Sanskrit etymon has also spread eastwards, e.g. in 
Old Javanese as ramya ~ rame ‘beautiful; joyful; cheerful; 
etc.’ and Malay ramai ‘cheery, lively; well-attended, populous’ 
(Gonda 1973, pp. 533–34). The association with large 
numbers of people in the Malay and Makasar attestations 
appears to be a secondary development that took place in 
Southeast Asia.
20.	 sǝngkǝla ‘foot fetters’ (cf. Bugis sakkala, Makasar sangkala 
‘block or fetter for the insane’) goes back to Sanskrit śr̥ ṅkhala 
‘chain’ (Jones 2007, p. 282) through a MIA language (Gonda 
1973, pp. 94–95), such as Ardhamāgadhī saṅkala ‘a chain’. 
Tamil caṅkili ‘chain, link’ and Malayalam caṅṅala ‘chain’ 
appear to be derived from the same source. Ilokano tanikalá 
‘gold chain’, Tagalog †talikalá ‘chain’ and Cebuano talikála 
22	 Cf. Malay gajah ‘elephant’ (< Sanskrit gaja), galuh ‘princess’ (< galū ‘a sort of 
gem’), latah ‘paroxysmal neurosis’ (< laṭa ‘one who speaks like a child or like fool’), 
patih ‘minister’ (< pati ‘a master, ruler, sovereign’) and rupiah ‘rupee’ (< rūpya). 
Words ending in a vowel are also frequently given a word-final /h/ in Old Javanese 
epigraphy, Jawi manuscripts and Sino-Malay literature, a phenomenon which I hope 
to address elsewhere.

--- PAGE 406 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
395
~ talikalà ~ talikálà ‘chain, fetter’ are presumably also related 
through folk-etymological association with tali ‘rope’. 
21.	 sukma ‘soul’ (cf. Javanese sukm ‘soul, life; spiritual, immaterial’), 
specifically in the Hindu sense of a substance that passes from 
body to body in the process of reincarnation (ātman), goes back 
to Sanskrit sūkṣma ‘small; atomic; the subtle all-pervading 
spirit; etc.’ (Gonda 1973, p. 253; De Casparis 1997, p. 35; Jones 
2007, p. 302). Kern (1869, p. 10) was the first to suggest that 
the borrowing took place through a MIA source. The fact that 
the cluster /kṣ/ corresponds to /kh/ in MIA (Pischel 1900, p. 
220) would support this; compare, for example, Pali sukhuma 
‘subtle, minute’ and Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit sukhama ~ 
sukhuma ‘fine, subtle’. In support of a MIA intermediacy, it 
should be pointed out that the Sanskrit cluster /kṣm/ is normally 
retained in WMP languages; Old Javanese sūkṣma ‘the 
supernatural manifestation from another world; the invisible 
essence of what is sensually perceptible, etc.’, Javanese suksm 
‘soul, life (of human being)’ and Balinese (Kawi) suksma ‘spirit, 
soul, mind’ appear to be directly borrowed from Sanskrit.23
22.	 tahana ‘state, dignity’ has its ultimate origins in Sanskrit sthāna 
‘the act of standing’, whose numerous secondary meanings 
include ‘rank, dignity’ and ‘locality; province’. The borrowing 
of this word into Malay must have taken place through MIA 
*thāṇa (Gonda 1973, pp. 380, 410), where /th/ corresponds to 
Sanskrit /sth/ (Pischel 1900, p. 211); it has also been borrowed 
into Malayalam as tānam ‘rank, position’. Old Javanese thāni 
‘villager; village, country (opp. to town); (cultivated) field’ (cf. 
Malay tani ‘farmer; peasant’) goes back to the same MIA source 
and constitutes an “i-form” of MIA *thāṇa (De Casparis 1988, 
23	 Also compare Malay laksamana ‘honorific title; king of the sea’ (< Sanskrit Lakṣmaṇa 
‘a character in the Rāmāyaṇa’) and Javanese (lit.) laksmi ‘beautiful (woman)’ (< Old 
Javanese Lakṣmī ‘goddess of beauty, goddess of the kraton’, Sanskrit lakṣmī ‘beauty, 
loveliness, grace’).

--- PAGE 407 ---
396	
Tom Hoogervorst
p. 14).24 The etymon is reflected as ṭhāna in Ardhamāgadhī and 
Pali, hence Old Khmer ṭhāna ‘place; stance; situation; etc.’. Malay 
tanah ‘land’, on the other hand, is unrelated and goes back to 
proto-Malayo-Polynesian *taneq ‘earth, soil, land’, with reflexes 
as far as Remote Oceania.
23.	 tǝlaga ‘a well, tank, or basin of water, a small mere’ (cf. Old 
Javanese talaga ‘tank, pool, pond’, Javanese tl g ‘lake’, Karo 
Batak tǝlagah ‘deep well, pond’, Makasar talaka ‘lake, pond’, 
Tagalog talagà ‘well, spring’) has been connected to Sanskrit 
taḍāga ‘pond, lake’ (De Casparis 1988, p. 63; Jones 2007, p. 318), 
a somewhat enigmatic form displaying the doublets taḍāka and 
taṭāka. On account of the phonological innovation *ḍ > l/V_V 
(Pischel 1900, pp. 168–69), I propose that the borrowing took 
place through a MIA language, such as Ardhamāgadhī talāga 
‘a pond’. The word is attested in Old Malay as talāga ‘lake, 
pond’ and was presumably borrowed into Malagasy (dial.) as 
tahalaka ‘a border, as in a rice-field’ through metathesis.25
24.	 tǝnggala ‘a plough’ is an introduced item into Maritime Southeast 
Asia. In view of Old Javanese naṅgala ‘a plough’, Madurese 
nanggh l , Makasar nangkala, Toba Batak ninggala ~ tinggala 
and Karo Batak nǝnggala ‘to plough’ (but tǝnggala ‘a plough’), it 
seems that an earlier form 

nǝnggala ‘a plough’ was reinterpreted 
as a verb in accordance with WMP sound laws pertaining to 
verbal prenasalization, yielding the hypercorrective would-be 
stem tǝnggala.26 As regards the direct origins of this form, we 
24	 We may also call attention to Hindi thānī ‘a permanent cultivator’, which ultimately 
goes back to the same source.
25	 Dahl (1951, p. 103) lists the equivalents in Malagasy dialects other than Merina: 
Betsimisaraka talaha, Sakalava talahake and Betsileo tahalake (his sources are 
unclear). I have no explanation for the word-final -ka or -ke in these attestations.
26	 Javanese exhibits similar examples outside the domain of verbal prenasalization, 
e.g. pənḍp ‘a large square pavilion or hall’ from Sanskrit maṇḍapa ‘an open hall 
or temporary shed, pavilion’ and (lit.) prad ngg ‘musical instruments; gamelan 
ensemble’ from mr̥ daṅga ‘a kind of drum, tambour’. See also Old Javanese pataṅgi 
‘elephant’ from Sanskrit mataṅga (through word-final /i/-substitution) and pañca

--- PAGE 408 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
397
may call attention to Ardhamāgadhī naṅgala ‘a plough’ (cf. 
Sanskrit lāṅgala). Similar-looking forms are attested in Dravidian 
languages, such as Tamil nāñcil, Malayalam ñēṇṇōl and Telugu 
nāgali. Ultimately, an Austro-Asiatic precursor has been proposed 
(Przyluski 1929, pp. 8–15; Southworth 1988, p. 661; Jenner 2009, 
p. 707). Shorto (2006, p. 448) reconstructs proto-Mon-Khmer 
*lngal ~ *ŋgal (and, by dissimilation, *lngu[ə]r and *lnguur), 
whose reflexes presumably ended up in Cham as langar ~ langal 
‘plough’, Acehnese langay and Gayo n
ng
l ~ n
ngg
l.
25.	 upǝti ‘tribute’ (cf. Javanese upǝti ‘tribute, tax on production (paid 
to king)’), which in Malay literature often denotes a payment to a 
powerful state, is normally connected to Sanskrit utpatti ‘arising, 
production; profit, productiveness’ (Gonda 1973, p. 364; De 
Casparis 1997, p. 37; Jones 2007, p. 333). The direct precursor 
of the WMP attestations must have been MIA source, such as 
Ardhamāgadhī uppatti ‘creation, production, manifestation’. The 
form displays a somewhat unsettled character in Old Javanese, 
which exhibits utpatti ~ utpǝtti ~ utpati ~ utpǝti ~ upǝti ‘coming 
into existence; revenue, production; tribute’.27
26.	 usaha ‘assiduity, industry, persistence’ (cf. Tagalog †osaha ‘to 
do something slowly’) ultimately goes back to Sanskrit utsāha 
‘power; effort, perseverance; firmness’ (Gonda 1973, p. 485; 
De Casparis 1997, p. 37; Jones 2007, p. 333). The segment /ts/ 
prior to an open (“low”) vowel corresponds to MIA /ss/ (Pischel 
1900, p. 224). Hence, we find Pali ussāha ‘strength, power, 
energy; endeavour, goodwill’, yielding Khmer ussahà (
) 
bale ‘pavilion, hall’ and pañca raṅkaṅ ‘small building, pavilion (of a special type?)’, 
whose first element has been connected to Sanskrit mañca ‘a stage or platform on a 
palace or on columns, raised seat, dais, throne’ (Zoetmulder 1982, pp. 1263–64).
27	 Despite the coexistence of these Old Javanese forms, the assimilation of the cluster 
/tp/ cannot be explained away through internal phonological developments, as is it 
preserved in such attestations as Javanese nutpah ‘germ of life, sperm’ from Arabic 
nuṭfaẗ ‘drop; sperm’ and (lit.) utp l ‘blue lotus’ from Sanskrit utpala ‘the blossom of 
the blue lotus (Nymphaea nouchali var. caerulea (Savigny) Verdc.)’.

--- PAGE 409 ---
398	
Tom Hoogervorst
‘seriousness, endeavour, perseverance; to study, work hard, try 
hard’. The Malay attestation is presumably also derived from a 
MIA source.
All tentative MIA precursors postulated above are attested in 
Ardhamāgadhī or other literary “Prakrits”. Elsewhere, we must resort to 
hypothetical reconstructions based on our knowledge of the phonological 
histories of the languages under research. The following etymologies 
rely on MIA etyma unattested in the literature but regular in terms of 
diachronic MIA (and WMP) sound correspondences.
27.	 anggota ‘member, limb’ (cf. Javanese anggot , Sundanese 
anggahota) has been connected to Sanskrit aṅga ‘a limb, 
member’, leaving the second part of the apparent compound 
unexplained (Gonda 1973, p. 489). De Casparis (1997, p. 39, 
n.1) proposes a derivation from the unattested Sanskrit compound 
*aṅgabhūta ‘someone having become a member by joining’ 
through a MIA source, hence the elision of the intervocalic 
/bh/. Normally, we would expect the intervocalic /t/ to become 
/d/ or /y/ in accordance with the MIA sound laws (Pischel 1900, 
p. 146). However, sequences of long vowels preceding short 
consonants occasionally turn into short vowels preceding long 
(i.e. geminated) consonants in MIA (Bhayani 1997, pp. 63–64). 
This would enable us to reconstruct MIA *aṅgahutta, in which 
the element –hutta consistently reflects Sanskrit bhūta (the past 
participle of √bhu ‘becoming, being, existing’). This etymology 
is supported by the Sundanese reflex and by Malay †anggauta, 
attested in earlier literature in the same meaning as anggota.
28.	 bidan ‘midwife, sage-femme’ has been connected to Sanskrit 
vidvan- (Wilkinson 1932/1, p. 136; Jones 2007, p. 38), which 
is only attested in compounds and reflects the stem vidvas ‘one 
who knows, learned, skilled in, etc.’ (and ultimatelty the root 
vid ‘to know, understand, perceive’). Old Javanese has widwan 
~ widon ‘knowing, learned, intelligent, wise’ and mahāwidwan 
~ mahawidon ‘very learned’. In both cases, a derivation from 
Sanskrit vidvān, the nominative singular of vidvas, seems more 
plausible (cf. Tamil vittuvāṉ ‘learned man; wise man’). In MIA,

--- PAGE 410 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
399
semivowels constituting the last part of a consonant cluster are 
normally assimilated (Pischel 1900, p. 204; Schmidt 1924, p. 11). 
This would suggest a MIA form (*?vidān ~ *?viddān) as the 
direct source of the Malay attestation, a suspicion reinforced 
by the presence of a set of lexical doublets borrowed directly 
from Sanskrit: Malay biduan ‘singer, musician, dancer’, 
Acehnese biduən ‘prostitute’, Cham bidu˘ơn ‘actor, juggler, 
clown’ and Bugis biduwang ‘singer, dancer’ (as well as Old 
Javanese widwan ~ widon).28
29.	 cǝmǝti ‘whip’ (cf. Old Javanese camǝṭi ~ cǝmǝṭi, Javanese 
cǝmǝṭi ‘whip, riding crop’, Minangkabau cumati) is normally 
derived from Tamil cammaṭṭi ‘horsewhip’ (cf. Malayalam 
cammaṭṭi ‘scourge, whip’). The latter form goes back to Sanskrit 
carmayaṣṭi ‘whip’, presumably through a MIA source in which 
/rm/ became /mm/, the intervocalic /y/ elided, and /ṣṭ/ became 
/ṭṭh/ (Pischel 1900, pp. 137, 198, 207–8). This would suggest 
MIA *cammaṭṭhi (cf. Bengali cāmāṭi ~ cāmāti ‘a strip of 
leather; a strop’). It is impossible to determine whether the 
above word was introduced into Southeast Asia through Tamil 
or directly through MIA.
30.	 cuaca ‘clear (of atmosphere), pellucid’, which refers to ‘the 
weather’ in contemporary Indonesian, has been connected to 
Sanskrit svaccha ‘very transparent or clear, pellucid, crystalline’ 
(Jones 2007, p. 51; Tadmor 2009, p. 713), consisting of su 
‘good, beautiful, well, very, etc.’ and accha ‘not dark, pellucid, 
transparent, clear’. As the innovation from /s/ to /ch/ in word-
initial position is regular in Ardhamāgadhī and Māgadhī 
(Pischel 1900, pp. 152–53), I propose an unattested MIA 
*chuaccha as the direct precursor of the Malay attestation. Tamil 
28	 Aichele (1969, p. 134) and Acri (2011, pp. 66–67) address a third set of ultimately 
related lexical doublets: Old Javanese widu ‘actor (dancer, singer, reciter, leader in 
a performance?)’, Malay bidu ‘singer at a shamanistic séance’, Bugis widu-widu 
‘joking, playing around’ and Tagalog birò ‘joke, jest, trick, kidding’, which ultimately 
appear to reflect Sanskrit vidu ‘intelligent, wise’.

--- PAGE 411 ---
400	
Tom Hoogervorst
displays the form cuvaccam ‘clearness, as of the atmosphere, 
water’, whose word-final nasal disqualifies it as the etymon of 
Malay cuaca.
31.	 cuka ‘vinegar’ (cf. Tagalog sukà, Cebuano súkà, Malagasy 
(dial.) tsoha ‘lemon’) ultimately goes back to Sanskrit cukra 
‘vinegar made by acetous fermentation’, presumably through a 
MIA source (Kern 1880, p. 562; Van der Tuuk 1897–1912/1, 
p. 602; cf. Jones 2007, p. 51). The /kr/ cluster would yield 
MIA /kk/, enabling us to reconstruct MIA *cukka ‘vinegar, 
anything sour?’. Such attestations as Hindi cūkā ‘wild sorrel’ and 
Bengali (dial.) cukā ‘a sour, acid’ confirm this reconstruction.
32.	 curik ‘jungle knife’ (cf. Old Javanese curik ‘kris, dagger’, Toba 
Batak surik ‘k.o. sword’) and curiga ~ cǝriga ‘a broad-bladed 
short curved sword or dagger’ (cf. Old Javanese curiga ‘kris’, 
Toba Batak suriga ‘k.o. sword’, Makasar curiga ‘iron tool with 
rings on both ends, used during certain rituals’)29 constitute two 
ultimately related sets that can be traced back to Sanskrit kṣura 
‘razor; a knife, dagger’ and its secondary form kṣurikā ‘a knife, 
dagger; a small razor’. In MIA, /kṣ/ often becomes /ch/ in word-
initial position (Pischel 1900, p. 219ff.). In view of late Sanskrit 
chūrī ~ churī ‘a knife, dagger’ and Hindi churī ‘a knife; a 
dagger; a scalpel’, we can be fairly sure that curik and related 
WMP attestations go back to an unattested MIA *churī ‘knife’ 
(see fn. 19 on the post-fixation of a glottal stop in loanwords into 
Malay). This may also be the source of Old Khmer curi ~ curī 
‘an unidentified bladed weapon such as a dagger, dirk, poniard 
or kris’. The Malay form curiga, or cǝriga, has been connected 
to Sanskrit churikā ‘knife, dagger’ (Gonda 1973, pp. 242, 411, 
n. 98; Jones 2007, p. 52), itself derived from the abovementioned 
kṣurikā. More precisely, it corresponds to an unattested MIA 
29	 Also see Gayo cəlik
 ‘k.o. foreign dagger’, whose irregular shape is presumably due 
to confusion with culika ‘cowardly’; a similar confusion may explain the unexpected 
shape of Malay curiga ‘watchful, on one’s guard, vigilant’ (see example 37).

--- PAGE 412 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
401
*churigā (cf. Ardhamāgadhī churiyā ‘a small knife’, Mahārāṣṭrī 
churiyā ‘dagger’).30 Dravidian attestations such as Tamil curikai 
‘dirk, short sword’ and Malayalam curika ‘dagger, small sword’ 
reflect the same etymon (Emenau and Burrow 1962, p. 34). 
Whether this word spread to Southeast Asia through an early MIA 
source or through Malayalam—in which the intervocalic <k> is 
normally pronounced as a voiced velar fricative /γ/—remains 
undetermined.
33.	 gubah ‘cutting and arranging flowers for wearing in aigrette form 
in the hair’ (cf. Old Javanese gubah ‘to string, wreathe (flowers)’, 
Javanese gubah ‘to make an artistic creation’) may be connected 
to the Sanskrit verb guphati ‘to string together, tie or string as a 
garland’, and in particular its present-tense stem gupha-, which 
would correspond to MIA *gubha- on account of the innovation 
*ph > bh between vowels (cf. Pischel 1900, p. 144). The word-
final /h/ in the Malay attestation is due to metathesis of aspiration 
(cf. Table 9.1). As pointed out by Martin Walsh (pers. comm. on 
2 February 2014), Swahili kikuba (pl. vikuba), which in Zanzibar 
denotes ‘a small threaded bouquet of fragrant flowers and/or 
aromatic herbs worn by women on special occasions’, might be 
related; the non-inherited /b/ indicates that it is a loanword, but 
the devoicing of /g/ requires further explanation.
34.	 muara ‘estuary, river mouth’ (cf. Old Malay muara, Old Javanese 
muhara, Sundanese muhara, Madurese mowara) has been 
reconstructed to proto-Malayic *muhara( ) ‘river-mouth’ (Adelaar 
1992, p. 52).31 The form reminds us of Tamil mukattuvāram 
30	 Several analogous MIA borrowings displaying the word-final segment /ga/ are 
addressed in section 5.
31	 Another Malay term for ‘estuary, river mouth’ is kuala, which is used interchangeably 
with muara. We may also call attention to Old Malay mināṅa, presumably in the 
same meaning (contra Coedès 1930, p. 35, n. 1) based on Toba Batak binanga ‘river, 
deep place in the river’, Malagasy vinany ‘the confluence of two or more streams or 
rivers, the mouth of a river’, Makasar binanga ‘river’, Bugis winanga ~ minanga 
‘river’, Ibanag minanga ‘river mouth’ and Maranao minanga ‘outlet; mouth of river 
or stream’.

--- PAGE 413 ---
402	
Tom Hoogervorst
‘mouth of a firth or river’, Telugu nadī-mukhadvāramu ‘the mouth 
of a river’ and Sinhala muvadora ~ mōdara ~ mōya ‘mouth of a 
river, place where a river disembogues’, which appear to reflect 
an unattested Sanskrit compound *mukhadvāra ‘river mouth’ 
(Hoogervorst 2013, p. 35), consisting of mukha ‘face, mouth; 
front; beginning’ and dvāra ‘door, gateway; opening’. In MIA, 
aspirated consonants are reduced to /h/ between vowels (Pischel 
1900, p. 137), whereas the cluster /dv/ would normally assimilate 
to /dd/ (Pischel 1900, p. 204; Schmidt 1924, p. 11) but appears 
to become /v/ before /ā/.32 This enables the reconstruction of 
MIA *muhavāra ‘river mouth’, which presumably gave rise to 
the WMP attestations.
5.  MIA Loanwords in Other WMP Languages
It is generally believed that the Malay language has played a key role 
in the dissemination of lexical influence from the wider Indian Ocean 
World to Southeast Asia—as remains to be the case to date. However, 
the tentative MIA borrowings addressed in this section are not attested 
in (modern) Malay. This may be due to our limited understanding of 
Old Malay, which remains relatively poorly documented. It is indeed 
possible that the loanwords discussed here existed in earlier, undocumented 
Malayic varieties, but this remains a speculation. The vast majority are 
found in Old Javanese, as listed below. As some of these examples 
have also spread beyond the Javanese speech area, we may assume a 
more important role for Java in the dissemination of Indic culture across 
Maritime Southeast Asia than previously given credit for.
35.	 bhiṇḍiwāla, the meaning of which is somewhat uncertain but 
definitely denotes some sort of weapon (cf. Javanese (lit.) binḍiw
l ‘spear’), ultimately goes back to Sanskrit bhindipāla ‘short 
javelin or arrow thrown by hand or shot through a tube’. Van der 
32	 This impression is supported by the following MIA reconstructions: *gharavāra 
‘house door’ < gṛhadvāra, *pacchāvāya ‘west wind’ < paścādvāta and *savāya 
‘truthful’ < sadvāda (Turner 1966, #4433, #8003, #13125).

--- PAGE 414 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
403
Tuuk (1881, p. 46; 1897–1912/4, p. 849) was the first to suggest 
a MIA origin. As the intervocalic /p/ corresponds to /v/ in MIA 
(Pischer 1900, pp. 143–44), the direct precursor must have been 
MIA *bhiṇḍivāla. Ardhamāgadhī normally exhibits bhiṇḍimāla 
‘a knife, a dagger’, but bhiṇḍivāla is also attested (Pischel 1900, 
p. 173).
36.	 catalisa ‘forty’ has been considered a MIA form (Zoetmulder 
1982, p. 312). It ultimately reflects Sanskrit catvāriṁśa ‘the 
40th’ and may have been borrowed through Pali cattāḷīsa ‘forty’, 
Ardhamāgadhī cattālīsa or a related language.
37.	 culi presumably denotes some sort of dishonourable behaviour. It 
is attested in the derivative forms culika ‘cowardly’—exhibiting 
the Sanskrit suffix -ka discussed in section 6—and culibrata 
or curibrata ‘base or cowardly conduct’.33 In the light of the 
form curibrata, we may also call attention to Old Javanese curi 
‘deceitful, false, transgressing the rules (of the dharmayuddha)’. 
On the one hand, a precursor may be sought in Tamil cuḻi- 
‘to be cunning, guileful’. On the other, we may connect it to 
Ardhamāgadhī culla ‘small, tiny’, reflecting Sanskrit kṣulla 
‘small, little, minute, inferior’ based on the regular sound 
correspondence between /kṣ/ and /c/ in that language (Pischel 
1900, p. 223). In that case, Old Javanese culi would constitute 
an “i-form” of this MIA etymon. Sanskrit also exhibits kṣullaka 
‘little, small; wicked, malicious’, after which Old Javanese 
culika may have been modelled. The innovation from /a/ to /i/ 
may have already taken place in South Asia in view of Sinhala 
suliya ‘mischief, wickedness, imposture, deceit’ (suggesting an 
earlier 

kṣullika) and Hindi cullī ‘lewd’. Old Javanese culika is 
reflected in modern Javanese as culik ‘untrustworthy, dishonest’ 
and Balinese cǝlika ‘envious, jealous, unfavourable’ ~ (North 
33	 Old Javanese brata ‘mode or manner of life, conduct, custom’ goes back to Sanskrit 
vrata ‘will; conduct, manner, usage, custom’, also borrowed as Makasar barata 
‘observe certain abstentions’.

--- PAGE 415 ---
404	
Tom Hoogervorst
Bali) clika ‘suspect, be suspicious’. In some WPM languages, 
this word appears to have been confused with reflexes of Old 
Javanese curiga ‘kris’ (cf. example 32). Illustratively, Malay 
curiga ‘watchful, on one’s guard, vigilant’ seems to reflect Old 
Javanese curiga in form but culika in meaning, whereas Gayo 
cəlik
 ‘k.o. foreign dagger’ corresponds to Old Javanese culika 
in form but with curiga in meaning.
38.	 ghariṇī ‘wife’ (cf. Javanese (lit.) garini ‘wife, queen’) ultimately 
goes back to Sanskrit gṛhiṇī ‘the mistress of a house, wife’, 
presumably through a MIA source (Van der Tuuk 1897–1912/4, 
p. 666). We indeed find Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit ghariṇī 
‘housewife’ and Ardhamāgadhī gharaṇī ‘a housewife; a wife’.
39.	 gusali or gosali ‘a smithy’ (cf. Javanese gusali ‘blacksmith’, 
Sundanese gosali ‘smithy’, Bugis †gosali ‘cemetery, residence of 
the deceased’, Tagalog gusali ‘building’) predominantly carries the 
meaning of ‘blacksmith’ in Old Javanese epigraphy (De Casparis 
1988, p. 58). Kern (1873, p. 217, fn. 2) derives the word from 
Sanskrit kauśalya ‘cleverness, skilfulness, experience’.34 This 
derivation becomes especially attractive upon considering the 
corresponding Mahārāṣṭrī reflex: kosalla ‘skill’. As demonstrated 
in section 2, the innovations *k > g/#_, *o > u and *a > i/_# 
can all be explained in terms of internal developments.
40.	 kaḍāha and kaḍāhaka are of uncertain meaning; Zoetmulder 
(1982, p. 761) tentatively glosses ‘lowest part (root) of a 
mountain? crater?’ and connects the forms to Sanskrit kaṭāha ‘a 
frying-pan; a cauldron; hell, the infernal regions; (L.) a turtle’s 
34	 This semantic shift, as Kern points out, resembles that of Javanese kriy ‘skill, craft; 
craftsman’ from Sanskrit kriyā ‘doing, activity; bodily action, etc.’. Comparable 
examples of semantic specification include Malay pandai ‘artist-craftsman, expert, 
specialist’, ultimately from Sanskrit paṇḍita ‘learned, educated, wise, clever in, 
familiar with’ (example 16) and bidu ‘singer at a shamanistic séance’ from vidu 
‘intelligent, wise’ (28). Alternatively, we may connect the form with Sanskrit kuśala 
‘right, proper; able, skilful’.

--- PAGE 416 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
405
shell’.35 If so, the direct precursor must have been a MIA form, 
such as Ardhamāgadhī kaḍāha ‘an iron vessel, a cauldron; the back 
of a tortoise’. The form kaḍāhaka has been given the Sanskrit 
suffix -ka, perhaps in analogy to Sanskrit kaṭāhaka ‘a pan, 
cauldron, pot’. We may call attention to Cebuano kaláhà 
‘frying pan with a rounded bottom and a handle’ and Tagalog 
kalaha ‘iron frying pan’, probably through a now extinct 
Malay or Javanese precursor. This word has also found its way 
into Old Khmer, which exhibits kaṭāha ~ kadāha ~ gadāha 
‘round-bottomed metal pan for frying: wok’, whence it was 
adopted into Khmer as khthaḥ (ខទះ	  ) ‘large pan, frying pan, 
wok’ and Thai katha (กะทะ) ‘frying pan, skillet’. 
41.	 kawittha, of uncertain meaning, features in Javanese epigraphy 
as one of the pañcopacāra “five requisites for respectful attention 
or worship”, alongside flowers (kamwaṅ), lamps (dīpa), incense 
(dhūpa) and scented ointments (gandhalepa) (Bosch 1925, p. 43, 
35	 As regards the exact meaning(s) of the Old Javanese reflex, we may briefly examine 
the textual sources in which it is attested. Zoetmulder’s dictionary only identifies 
kaḍāha in the Smaradahana (8.10) and the Bhomāntaka (2.4, 2.5). The relevant line 
in the former text reads “salwirning bhuwana kadāha mogha liṇḍū” (Poerbatjaraka 
1931, p. 15) and kadāha here is presumably the passive prefix k(a)- in combination 
with dāha, reflecting Sanskrit dāha ‘burning, combustion; internal heat’ (see 
example 62). I would thus translate the segment as “Every corner of the earth was set 
ablaze and shook” and regard Zoetmulder’s identification with kaḍāha as erroneous. 
In the Bhomakāwya, we read the story of Viṣṇu’s unsuccessful attempts to obtain a 
crystal liṅga, towering as high as the eye can see. Enraged, he takes the shape of a 
gigantic boar and tries to uproot the jewel from below, before changing into a hawk 
and trying to split it with his wings. The relevant lines read “lǝpas tǝka ri sor kaḍāha 
sira tan palaca-laca wǝkas nikaṅ maṇik” and “huwus tǝka sire kaḍāhaka nike ruhur 
ika binǝlah nireṅ hǝlar” (Teeuw and Robson 2005, p. 82), which I would translate as 
“having moved underneath the kaḍāha, there was no trace of the jewel” and “after 
reaching the top of the kaḍāhaka, he was to smash it asunder with his wings”. Bearing 
in mind that the Sanskrit etymon can also translate as “hell, the infernal regions” or 
“a turtle’s shell”, we may call attention to the mythical turtle that upholds the world 
in Hindu mythology, known as Kūrmarāja or Akūpāra in Sanskrit and Akūpa in Old 
Javanese. While the kaḍāha, which the Bhomāntaka locates beneath the earth, can be 
identified as the “hell”, I would argue that the celestial kaḍāhaka represents the “vault 
of the heaven”, envisioned here as the upper shell of Akūpa.

--- PAGE 417 ---
406	
Tom Hoogervorst
v. 3a/11; De Casparis 1988, p. 60). Gonda (1973, p. 385) connects 
the word to Sanskrit kapittha ‘the wood-apple tree (Limonia 
acidissima L.)’ through a MIA form. The intervocalic /p/ would 
have become /v/ (Pischel 1900, pp. 143–44), yielding MIA 
kavittha as a plausible direct precursor of the Old Javanese 
attestation. The form kavittha is used alongside kaviṭṭha in 
Ardhamāgadhī (Pischel 1900, p. 227). Heyne (1927, p. 862) 
calls attention to the outward similarity between L. acidissima 
and Aegle marmelos (L.) Corrêa, another fruit-bearing tree 
commonly called “wood-apple”. The latter tree, also known as the 
“holy bael” (cf. example 6), is regarded as sacred in Hinduism 
and may have caused the incorporation of the otherwise rather 
unusable Limonia acidissima into the Javanese pañcopacāra. 
The latter, according to the same source, has also been borrowed 
into Sundanese as kawista, Madurese kabista ~ karabista and 
Javanese kawis ~ kawist . The /st/ cluster, presumably replacing 
an earlier /tth/, may be due to hypercorrection by lexicographers, 
as the former developed into the latter in MIA (Pischel 1900, 
p. 211). This word has also been adopted into Old and modern 
Khmer as khvit (
), presumably through Pali kaviṭṭha.
42.	 kujyarata ~ kujyarakta refers to ‘a certain kind of fabric’, 
which Zoetmulder (1982, p. 911) tentatively connects to 
Gujarat, a centre of textile production from antiquity. In Thai, 
we find the presumably related form kujarāt (
) ‘kind of 
ancient patterned cloth’. If this etymology is correct, the direct 
precursor must have been MIA gujjarattā, reflecting Sanskrit 
gurjaratrā ‘country of the Gurjaras’. This MIA form is 
attested on the Mātā kī Sāl or Ghaṇṭiyālā inscription 
(Bhandarkar 1903, pp. 414–16). I would argue that the presence 
of the consonant clusters /jy/ and /kt/ in Old Javanese, replacing 
respectively /jj/ and /tt/, once again reflects the deliberate 
creation of a hyper-Sanskrit form in accordance with known 
sound changes (cf. Pischel 1900, pp. 187, 193).
43.	 lāka ‘lac (i.e. a resinous secretion)’ (cf. Tagalog lakhâ ‘base 
element for tint and dye preparation’, Cebuano lakhá ‘gum

--- PAGE 418 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
407
shellac’, Maranao laka ‘gum from plants’, Ibanag laka ‘a 
somewhat rubbery timber’), which also appears to denote ‘a red 
fabric (dyed with lac?); red’ (Zoetmulder 1982, p. 957), has been 
derived from Sanskrit lākṣā ‘a kind of red dye, lac’ through a 
MIA language (Kern 1880, p. 552). Ardhamāgadhī has lakkhā 
in the same meaning, reflecting the regular development of 
the intervocalic cluster /kṣ/ into /kkh/ (Pischel 1900, p. 220). 
De Casparis (1988, p. 61) calls attention to Old Javanese 
maṅlākha ‘lac-dyers’, a profession regularly mentioned in lists 
of cottage industries, which undoubtedly goes back to the same 
source.36
44.	 mañjǝṭi ~ mǝñjǝṭi ‘a part. k.o. fabric (prob. an imported cloth)’ 
has been connected by Zoetmulder (1982, p. 1115) to Sanskrit 
mañjiṣṭha ‘bright red’, purportedly borrowed through Hindi. 
Semantically, this would then be an imported, red-dyed cloth. 
We may also call attention to Ardhamāgadhī mañjiṭṭhā ‘a 
red dye’, of which the Old Javanese attestation could be an 
“i-form”. If so, the ultimate precursor is Sanskrit mañjiṣṭhā 
‘Indian madder (Rubia manjith Roxb. ex Fleming)’, a plant from 
whose roots a popular dye was made.
45.	 murawa ‘tambourine’ is related to Sanskrit muraja in the same 
meaning, presumably through a MIA source (Gonda 1973, 
pp. 398–99). The intervocalic /j/ would have normally developed 
into /y/ (Pischel 1900, p. 177), but Ardhamāgadhī indeed 
displays murava ‘a big drum’.
36	 The author further suggests that the borrowing must have taken place through a NIA 
source (*lakhā) on account of the absence of a geminated consonant in Old Javanese. 
However, this study contains numerous analogous examples where consonant 
gemination of the Indic precursor is not reflected in Old Javanese, e.g. asuji (example 
50), bapa (2), bhaṭāra (4), camǝṭi (29), culi (37), gusali (39), jaga (12), kanigara 
(80), mañjǝṭi (44), palana (17), palaŋka (47), peka (49), uṇḍahagi (81) and waja 
(1). The alleged transmission through a NIA source was rejected independently by 
Griffiths (2012, p. 211, fn. 20).

--- PAGE 419 ---
408	
Tom Hoogervorst
46.	 paḍaha ‘drum’, which also displays the “i-form” paḍahi 
(De Casparis 1988, p. 62), goes back to Sanskrit paṭaha 
‘a kettledrum, a war-drum’ through a MIA language. 
Ardhamāgadhī paḍaha ‘a big drum’ is a plausible precursor.
47.	 palaṅka ‘couch, seat, bench, throne’ (cf. Balinese plangka-n 
‘a wooden couch, bedstead’, Bugis palakka ‘k.o. couch’, Ilokano 
palángka ‘chair, swivel chair’) appears to go back to a MIA 
reflex of Sanskrit paryaṅka ‘bed, litter’ (Van der Tuuk 1897–
1912/4, p. 259). Ensink (1978, pp. 179–80, fn. 8) derives the 
word from Pali pallanka ‘a divan, sofa, couch’, but other MIA 
sources are equally plausible; Ardhamāgadhī exhibits pallaṅka 
‘a cot, a bedstead’. Javanese plangki ‘palanquin’ might be an 
“i-form” of Old Javanese palaṅka, if not (re)borrowed from a 
NIA source such as Oriya pālaṅki ‘an old fashioned palanquin; 
sedan chair, palki’.37 The MIA form was also adopted into Old 
Khmer as pallaṅka ‘divan, couch; palanquin’. Old Javanese 
additionally exhibits paryaṅka ‘bed, couch, sofa, litter, palanquin, 
seat, bench, throne’, a direct loan from Sanskrit.
48.	 paṇḍya ‘learned man, holy man, sage’ has been derived from 
Sanskrit paṇḍita ‘learned, educated, wise, clever in, familiar with’ 
through MIA paṇḍia (Gonda 1973, p. 171). In Ardhamāgadhī, 
we find the form paṇḍiya ‘a scholar; a learned or intellectual 
person’. The Sanskrit etymon has also been borrowed directly, 
e.g. Old Javanese paṇḍita ‘scholar, learned man; wise, learned; 
etc.’, Balinese (lit.) paṇḍita ‘learned man, a learned priest, a 
pundit’, Malay pǝndeta ~ pǝndita ‘learned man; clergyman’ and 
Makasar panrita ‘learned, expert’. A third set of lexical doublets 
has been borrowed from a NIA reflex of this protoform: Old 
Javanese paṇḍe ~ paṇḍay ‘skilled worker; smith, goldsmith, 
37	 Its derivative, Javanese plangken (plangki + suffix -an through vowel contraction) 
in essentially the same meaning, presumably yielded Portuguese palanquim, Malay 
pəlangkeng and English “palanquin”.

--- PAGE 420 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
409
etc.’, Malay pandai ‘artist-craftsman, expert, specialist’,38 Toba 
Batak pande ‘skilful, craftsman’, Tagalog panday ‘blacksmith’ 
and Bikol pandáy ‘craftsman, smith; blacksmith, carpenter’. 
It has been tentatively connected to NIA forms such as Hindi 
paṇḍe ‘a title of Brahmins; a schoolmaster’, Bengali pāṁṛe 
‘the family name of some upcountry Brahmins’ (Gonda 1973, 
pp. 170–71; De Casparis 1988, p. 61; Hoogervorst 2013, p. 26), 
ultimately reflecting the aforementioned Sanskrit paṇḍita.
49.	 peka ‘foot-soldier’ has been considered a Persian loan (Gonda 
1973, p. 80). We may, however, put into question whether the 
borrowing was direct. I would argue that the Persian word paik 
‘a running footman; a carrier, messenger’ was adopted in South 
Asia at a relatively early stage, featuring in Sanskrit as pāyika 
‘a foot-soldier, footman’ and Ardhamāgadhī pāikka ‘infantry’. 
On account of the paragogic /a/ in Old Javanese, the borrowing 
presumably took place through a MIA source and not directly 
from Persian (cf. example 17).
As has been done in the previous section, let us now examine plausible 
MIA loanwords in Old Javanese which have not been attested in 
the Indian textual or epigraphical corpus and remain hypothetical 
reconstructions.
50.	 asuji ‘a month of the lunar calendar’ must ultimately go back 
to Sanskrit aśvayuja ‘the month Āśvina’, but the phonological 
changes remain unexplained. In a Sanskrit inscription on a 
thirteenth-century East Javanese Mahākṣobhya statue, it occurs 
as āsuji (Kern 1910). On Madagascar, where several Indic 
names of months have been introduced (Dahl 1951, pp. 98–101; 
Gonda 1973, p. 131), we find asotry ~ asotra (dial.) ‘winter and 
autumn’. The same word features as Toba Batak si Sudiya and 
Karo Batak si Sudi (Parkin 1978, p. 121). As regards its direct 
38	 In contemporary Malay also often in the meaning of ‘clever, able, knowledgeable’, but 
originally referring to any kind of industrial craftsman. In the sequence pandai bəsi 
(bəsi = ‘iron’), for instance, it denotes a ‘smith’.

--- PAGE 421 ---
410	
Tom Hoogervorst
precursor, De Casparis (1988, pp. 52–53) calls attention to Pali 
assayuja ‘Aśvinī’ and Hindi asauj ~ asoj ‘the sixth solar month’, 
suggesting that the borrowing took place in an intermediate stage 
of language development. Ardhamāgadhī displays assoī ‘the full 
moon and the new-moon days of the month Āśvina’, suggesting 
that the word-final /i/ instead of /a/ may already have emerged 
on the Indian Subcontinent. The intervocalic /j/ in the Old 
Javanese attestation is somewhat enigmatic. I would argue that 
it represents the above Sanskrit etymon in combination with the 
oft-occurring suffix -ya (cf. Whitney 1950, pp. 459–64), hence 
*āśvayujya ‘belonging to Aśvayuja; of Aśvayuja’. This form is 
in fact attested in Old Khmer, which exhibits fluctuation between 
’āśvayuja ~ ’aśvayuja ~ ’āśvayujya ~ ’āśvayujj ~ ’āśuyujya ~ 
’āśvajya ~ ’āśujya ‘the eleventh lunar month, also called Āśvina’. 
As Sanskrit /jy/ corresponds to MIA /jj/ (Pischel 1900, p. 193), 
I propose that an unattested MIA *asaujja or *asojja (if not 
*asaujjī ~ *asojjī) gave rise to the WMP attestations, as well 
as the above Hindi tadbhavas.
51.	 gurundaya ‘swiftlet, cliff-swallow, salangane’ (cf. Javanese (lit.) 
grund y ‘variety of swallow’) has been connected to Sanskrit 
guruṇṭaka (Gonda 1973, p. 382), which appears to denote 
‘a kind of peacock’ (cf. gurukāṇṭha in the same meaning). 
Beyond the observation that both are ornithological species, the 
semantic shift eludes me. However, the weakening of /k/ to /y/ 
in intervocalic position and the voicing of retroflex consonants 
and consonant clusters in MIA (Pischel 1900, pp. 137, 143) 
indeed enables the MIA reconstruction *guruṇḍaya, denoting 
an unspecified kind of bird, as the more direct precursor of the 
Javanese attestation.
52.	 lāwuwīṇā ‘lute in the shape of a bottle-gourd’ ultimately reflects 
Sanskrit alābuvīṇā ‘a lute of the shape of a bottle-gourd’. The 
Old Javanese attestation might go back to a MIA source exhibiting 
apheresis of the word-initial vowel (*?lāvuvīṇā). The would-be 
segment lāwu ‘bottle-gourd’ is unattested in Old Javanese, whose 
default word is walū ~ waluh. The latter appear to be derived

--- PAGE 422 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
411
from the former through metathesis, cf. Malay labu ‘bottle-gourd 
(Lagenaria siceraria (Molina) Standl.)’, Madurese labu, Bugis 
lawo and Makasar lau (Mahdi 1998, p. 393), ultimately reflecting 
Sanskrit alābu in the same meaning.39
In addition to these Old Javanese attestations, we may expect to find 
several analogous MIA borrowings in other WMP languages. In this 
chapter, I have prioritized Malay and Old Javanese. Nevertheless, I have 
chanced upon the following borrowings; more may be encountered upon 
further investigation.
53.	 bait (Javanese, krama) ‘boat’ is ultimately related to Sanskrit 
vahitra ‘boat’ (Gonda 1973, p. 387). I would argue that the 
borrowing took place through an unattested MIA *vahitta, 
exhibiting a regular sound correspondence between /tr/ and /tt/ 
(Pischel 1900, pp. 198–99). In support of this reconstruction, we 
may call attention to NIA reflexes such as Oriya bohita ‘boat’, 
Bengali bāhita ‘propelled, paddled, transported, etc.’, Nepali 
bahito ‘voyage’, etc. Conversely, Old Javanese bahitra ‘boat, 
vessel’ and Malay bahtǝra ‘ark, argosy, stately ship’ must be 
direct borrowings from Sanskrit vahitra.
54.	 duta (Balinese, high) ‘evil, bad, debauched’ has been connected 
to Sanskrit duṣṭa ‘defiled, bad’ (Gonda 1973, p. 387). This 
is especially plausible if the borrowing took place via a MIA 
language, such as Ardhamāgadhī duṭṭha ‘evil, wicked’.
55.	 mantagi (Angkola-Mandailing Batak) ‘forehead (used poetically 
to indicate the fate written on someone’s forehead)’, also 
documented as Toba Batak †mantagi and Minangkabau †muntagi 
in the same meaning (Van der Tuuk 1861, p. 418), may be a 
nasalized “i-form” ultimately reflecting Sanskrit mastaka ‘head’ 
through a MIA language, such as Ardhamāgadhī matthaga 
39	 While Mon-Khmer languages display similar-looking attestations (cf. Shorto 2006, 
p. 472), the idea of an Austro-Asiatic origin of this word—as first proposed by 
Przyluski (1929, pp. 155–60)—is problematic. See Mahdi (1998, p. 393) for a 
refutation of this theory.

--- PAGE 423 ---
412	
Tom Hoogervorst
‘the head’ (cf. Tamil mattakam ‘head, forehead’). Analogous 
examples in which Sanskrit /k/ corresponds to MIA /g/ in 
an intervocalic position are given in section 6, whereas the 
prenasalization of intervocalic stops in WMP languages is 
addressed in Table 9.1.
56.	 salaga (Angkola-Mandailing Batak) ‘crossbeam, connecting the 
neck of a buffalo to the yoke’, Toba Batak salaga ‘beam on the 
yoke of a plough, to which the shaft is connected’, Madurese 
salagh ‘harrow of a plough’, Bugis salaga and Makasar salaga 
‘harrow’ seemingly go back to a MIA reflex of Sanskrit śalākā 
‘any small stake or stick, rod, rib, bar; a peg, pin, etc.’, such as 
Ardhamāgadhī salāgā ‘a rod’.
6.  MIA Loanwords with Word-Final /ga/
In several MIA varieties, the voiceless velar stop /k/ of OIA underwent 
voicing in the intervocalic position (Pischel 1900, pp. 145–46). In a 
later stage of language development, this consonant became /y/ and 
eventually disappeared. In this regard, Pali is the most conservative 
MIA language in evidence, as it has not undergone this sound change. 
Illustratively, we may compare Sanskrit udaka ‘water’, Pali udaka, 
MIA udaga > udaya > uaa and Sanskrit svaka ‘one’s own’ > Pali saka > 
MIA saga > saya > saa (Turner 1966 #1921, #13894). A closer examination 
of the words displaying this specific phonological innovation is useful; 
as the Sanskrit suffix -ka is often added to nouns and adjectives 
to create near-synonyms (cf. Whitney 1950, pp. 466–69), the presence 
of a word-final segment /ga/ in WMP languages should arouse 
suspicion of possible MIA influence or intermediacy. In the previous 
sections, a MIA origin has been postulated for the words guliga 
(example 11), curiga (32), mantagi (55) and salaga (56). This section 
features 25 additional examples.
Scholars like Gonda (1973), De Casparis (1988) and Tadmor 
(2009) have identified some WMP attestations displaying word-final 
/ga/—reflecting Sanskrit /ka/—as Sanskrit loans through Tamil-speakers, 
as the phonological innovation *k > g/V_V is also attested in South 
Dravidian pronunciations of Sanskrit loanwords. The problem with

--- PAGE 424 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
413
this interpretation lies with the fact that Tamil typically adds female, 
male or neutral gender suffixes, respectively -ai, -aṉ and -am, to Indo-
Aryan borrowings ending in /a/ (Van Ronkel 1902b, p. 102). Technically, 
Malayalam or a regional variety of Tamil may have been the intermediary 
language of some of these borrowings, but the examples listed in this 
section will serve to demonstrate the importance of focusing directly on 
possible MIA sources. In this light, an evaluation is due of some of the 
Old Javanese etymologies proposed by earlier scholars.
57.	 baṇyaga ~ baṇyāga ‘merchant, captain of a merchant-vessel’ 
(cf. Malay bǝniaga ‘trade, commerce’,40 Sundanese buniyaga 
‘temporary settler’, Toba Batak boniaga ‘trade goods’, Makasar 
†baniaga ‘foreign trader’, Tagalog banyagà ‘stranger, foreigner, 
alien, foreign’, Ilokano baniága ‘commerce, trade, travel, trip’) 
has been connected to Sanskrit vāṇijaka ‘a merchant’ through a 
MIA source (Van der Tuuk 1897–1912/4, p. 863; Gonda 1973, 
p. 443; Zoetmulder 1982, p. 205; De Casparis 1988, p. 55). The 
word is found in Old Malay as vaṇiyāga ‘trader’. As regards its 
specific origins, Kern (1880, p. 542) was the first to specifically 
call attention to Ardhamāgadhī vāṇiyaga ‘trade; merchant, trader’ 
as the direct source for the WMP attestations.
58.	 campaga ‘yellow jade orchid tree (Magnolia champaca (L.) 
Baill. ex Pierre)’41 (cf. Makasar campaga ‘M. champaca’, 
Ilokano sampága ‘Arabian jasmine (Jasminum sambac (L.) Sol.); 
to bloom’, Ibanag sampaga ‘jasmine’, Bikol sampága ‘k.o. 
flower’, Kapampangan sampaga ‘flower’) has been regarded 
as a MIA or Dravidian reflex of Sanskrit campaka ‘Magnolia 
champaca’ (De Casparis 1988, p. 56). Mahārāṣṭrī exhibits campaga 
and Ardhamāgadhī has campaga alongside campaka, the latter 
40	 This form often occurs as bǝrniaga, evidently a reinterpretation of bǝniaga as an 
intransitive verb with the prefix bǝr-. Through back-formation, Malay subsequently 
obtained the would-be stem niaga ‘trade’.
41	 Used alongside campagi and, more commonly, campaka (cf. Malay cǝmpaka 
‘frangipani (Plumeria rubra L.); Magnolia champaca’).

--- PAGE 425 ---
414	
Tom Hoogervorst
presumably a tatsama from Sanskrit. The word-final nasal in 
Tamil campakam, Malayalam ceṁpakam, Telugu campakamu, 
etc. disqualify these forms from having yielded Old Javanese 
campaga.
59.	 sagala ‘altogether, completely, all of them?’ (cf. Malay sǝgala 
‘all, every; the whole’, Sundanese gala ~ sagala ‘all, every; the 
whole’) ultimately goes back to Sanskrit sakala ‘consisting of 
parts; complete, entire, whole, all’ (Jones 2007, p. 278). The 
intervocalic /g/ is normally interpreted as the result of Tamil 
influence (Gonda 1973, p. 162; De Casparis 1997, p. 32; Tadmor 
2009, p. 694). However, the Tamil reflex is cakalam ‘all, the 
whole’, which hardly resembles its alleged Malay derivative. 
Instead, we may call attention to Ardhamāgadhī sagala ‘full, all, 
whole’ as the direct precursor.
60.	 tambaga ‘copper’ (cf. Malay tǝmbaga ‘brass, copper’, 
Makasar tambaga ‘red copper’, Tagalog tumbaga ‘copper-gold 
alloy’, Cebuano tumbága ‘copper, copper alloy’) is generally 
considered to be derived from a MIA reflex of Sanskrit tāmraka 
‘copper’ (Kern 1869, p. 10; 1880, p. 563; Van der Tuuk 1897–
1912/2, p. 788; Gonda 1973, p. 91; De Casparis 1988, pp. 63–64; 
1997, p. 36; Blust 1992, p. 443), consisting of tāmra ‘of a 
coppery red colour’ + suffix -ka. The shift from /mr/ to /mb/ 
between vowels is regular in Mahārāṣṭrī and Ardhamāgadhī 
(Pischel 1900, pp. 202–3). Ardhamāgadhī displays tamba 
‘copper’ and tambaga ‘a four-sensed being’, the latter 
undoubtedly reflecting a second meaning of Sanskrit tāmraka: 
‘of a Gandharva (i.e. a supernatural being)’. Thus, while not 
directly attested in the meaning of ‘copper’, this established 
MIA etymology satisfies historical linguistic criteria regarding 
the expected sound changes.
61.	 tiga ‘three’ (cf. Malay tiga, Javanese (krama) tig ) constitutes 
a substitution of proto-Austronesian *telu ‘three’. Although 
most modern Malay varieties exhibit cognates of tiga, Adelaar

--- PAGE 426 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
415
(1992, p. 117) proposes the proto-Malayic reconstruc­tion 
*tǝlu.42 The similarity of Malay tiga with certain Dravidian 
attestations did not go unnoticed by Van Ronkel (1903) and 
Gonda (1973, p. 315), who dismissed it as chance resemblance. 
Dyen (1946; 1952) argues, correctly to my mind, that the word 
goes back to MIA *tiga, reflecting Sanskrit trika ‘triple’. This 
form is regular in MIA, where consonant clusters ending with 
/r/ typically loose this sound at the syllable onset (Pischel 1900, 
p. 185; Schmidt 1924, p. 11). Ardhamāgadhī, for example, has 
tiga ‘a meeting of three paths’. As mentioned above, the form 
has also been adopted into some Dravidian languages, such 
as Telugu tiga ‘three’ and Kannada tiga ‘a triad’. It is unclear 
whether the borrowing took place through a Dravidian source 
or directly from MIA.
I propose that the following Malay words, whose etyma are based 
on reconstructions rather than attestations, are additional MIA 
borrowings:
62.	 dahaga ‘thirst’ (cf. Javanese ḍg ‘to have an appetite (for)’) has 
been connected to Sanskrit dāha ‘burning, combustion; internal 
heat’ (Gonda 1973, p. 399; De Casparis 1997, p. 41; Jones 2007, 
p. 53). This etymon is reflected as Ardhamāgadhī ḍāha ‘act of 
burning; act of catching fire’, Tamil tākam ‘thirst; eagerness, 
desire; lust’, Malayalam dāham ‘burning; thirst, ardent desire’, 
Kannada dāha ‘burning; ardent desire; thirst’ and Telugu daga 
‘heat, thirst’. It appears from the Dravidian attestations that the 
semantic extention to ‘thirst’ already took place on the Indian 
Subcontinent. I would argue that the direct precursor was a MIA 
reflex of Sanskrit dāhaka ‘burning, setting on fire’ (*ḍāhaga). 
See the next example (63) on the homophonous Malay dǝhaga 
~ dahaga ‘insubordination’.
42	 Both forms coexist in Salako, which features tau ~ talu ‘three’ alongside tiga in the 
same meaning.

--- PAGE 427 ---
416	
Tom Hoogervorst
63.	 dǝhaga ‘insubordination’, with the alternative forms dahaga and 
dahagi (cf. Javanese d g ‘to disregard (orders)’, Minangkabau 
dago ‘opposition, resistance’, Tagalog duhagi ‘oppression, ill-
treatment’), is of uncertain origin. Semantically, the word is 
reminiscent of Malay durhaka ~ dǝrhaka ‘disobedience to lawful 
authority, disloyalty, treason’ (cf. Old Javanese drohaka ~ druhaka 
‘malicious, false, perfidious; villain, wrong-doer’, Minangkabau 
durako ‘unfaithful, treacherous, traitor, etc.’, Madurese dh r ka 
‘disobedient to God, disloyal to one’s parents’, Makasar 
doraka ‘crime, disloyalty, disobedient, etc.’, Tagalog †dolohaka 
‘to gloss over someone’s words’), which features in Old Malay 
epigraphy as drohaka ‘revolt, treason’. Kern (1880, p. 548) 
has connected the latter to Sanskrit drohaka, which, to the best 
of my knowledge, is only attested on the Khoh copper-plate 
inscription of the Mahārāja Saṁkṣobha (Nagod, Madhya 
Pradesh), dated to 528/9 CE; the relevant passage reads cora-
drohaka-varjaḥ ‘with the exception of thieves and mischief-
doers’ (Fleet 1963, pp. 115–16). This term evidently goes back 
to droha ‘injury, mischief, treachery, etc.’ with the suffix -ka. 
I would argue that the WMP attestations are derived from 
*dohaga, an unattested MIA reflex of drohaka. In support, we 
may call attention to Ardhamāgadhī doha ‘doing an evil turn 
with jealousy or enmity’.
64.	 guliga or gəliga ‘talismanic or curative bezoar; snake-stone’ (cf. 
Old Javanese guliga ‘a certain medicament’, Makasar guliga 
‘magic stone’, Angkola-Mandailing Batak bulige ‘bezoar or 
intestinal stone, usually from the porcupine’) can be connected 
to Sanskrit guḍikā ‘a pill; a kernel’ (also gulikā)—itself 
ultimately derived from guḍa (see example 11). The transmission 
must have taken place through an unattested MIA *guḷigā 
(cf. Ardhamāgadhī guliā ‘indigo, a medicinal pill’).
65.	 kəndaga ‘oblong ornamental box’ (cf. Javanese kənḍg ‘an 
oblong box for keeping valuables’, Makasar kandaga ‘k.o. chest 
of trunk from Maluku’) may be compared to Sanskrit karaṇḍaka 
‘a basket’, which consists of karaṇḍa ‘a basket or covered

--- PAGE 428 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
417
box of bamboo wicker-work’ + suffix -ka. This form is reflected 
as Ardhamāgadhī karaṇḍaga ‘a small box or basket (made of 
bamboo)’, Tamil karaṇṭakam ‘basket made of plaited coconut-
leaves; small metal box’ and Malayalam karaṇḍakam ‘chunam 
box of betel chewers’. The direct precursor to the WMP forms 
may be reconstructed as MIA *kāṇḍaga through elision of the 
intervocalic /r/. The presence of Tamil kāṇṭam ‘jewel box; ewer’ 
(presumably reflecting Sanskrit karaṇḍa) and kāṇṭakam ‘pot 
with a spout, ewer’ (< karaṇḍaka) suggest that this innovation 
already took place somewhere on the Indian Subcontinent.
66.	 kǝpulaga ‘cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum (L.) Maton)’ 
(cf. Old Javanese kapulaga, Sundanese kapolaga, Acehnese 
gapulaga ~ gapunana ~ gapunaga ~ kapulaga) has a some­
what enigmatic etymology. Other Old Javanese words for 
‘cardamom’ are karkolaka and kakkolaka (Van der Tuuk 1897– 
1912/2, pp. 76, 130), which appear to reflect Sanskrit kakkola 
‘a species of plant; a perfume prepared from the berries of 
this plant’ (cf. Ardhamāgadhī kakkola ‘a kind of fruit’) and 
especially kakkolaka ‘the above perfume’ (kakkola + suffix 
-ka). The form karkolaka is presumably “hyper-Sanskrit” 
for kakkolaka, following the regular sound correspondence 
between Sanskrit /rk/ and MIA /kk/ (cf. Pischel 1900, p. 197). 
As can be seen from the above glosses, it is uncertain 
which plant was denoted by the Sanskrit attestations. An 
identification with ‘cardamom’ would be plausible in view of 
Tibetan ka ko la ‘cardamom’, Pāzand kākura, Arabic qāqulaẗ 
and Aramaic q-q-w-l-g (Hoogervorst 2013, p. 20, figure 4). If 
this is correct, an unattested MIA *kakkōlaga could have given 
rise to the Southeast Asian attestations, although the presence 
of an intervocalic /p/ instead of /kk/ remains unexplained.
67.	 sǝligi ‘wooden dart or javelin’ (cf. Old Javanese suligi ‘a kind 
of spear, javelin’, Minangkabau suligi ‘lance, spear’, Angkola-
Mandailing Batak suligi ‘splinter’, Tagalog suligí ‘dart, small 
spear or lance’) is presumably the “i-form” of an undocumented 
MIA *sūliga, reflecting Sanskrit śūlika ‘having a spear or

--- PAGE 429 ---
418	
Tom Hoogervorst
any sharp instrument; one who impales criminals; a spit for 
roasting’.43 Ardhamāgadhī exhibits the related compound 
sūliya-bhinnā ‘penetrated by a stake’. The reconstruction of 
MIA *sūliga is further supported by the obsolete Malay form 
†soliga ‘pike (without iron)’ (Eysinga 1855, p. 711). If this 
etymology is correct, high-level Austronesian reconstructions 
of this form, such as proto-Hesperonesian *suligiq ‘bamboo spear’ 
(Zorc 1994, p. 552), must be rejected.
In addition, Malay displays a small set of “substandard” forms with /ga/, 
attested alongside their “correct” counterparts with /ka/. These marginal 
forms are listed below:
68.	 anega ‘kind, species’, a substandard form of aneka, may go back 
to a MIA reflex of Sanskrit aneka ‘not one, many, much’, such 
as Ardhamāgadhī aṇega ‘many, more than one’.
69.	 loga is only attested as part of the compound syurgaloga ‘heaven 
of Śiva’, a less common form of syurgaloka, both reflecting 
Sanskrit svargaloka ‘the celestial world, Indra’s heaven’. The 
first element of this hybrid compound has been interpreted 
as a hyper-Arabization of Sanskrit svarga ‘heaven’ (Gonda 1973, 
p. 160, n. 23).44 The second element can be connected to a 
MIA reflex of Sanskrit loka ‘free or open space; region; the 
43	 This form consists of śūli(n) ‘having a dart or pike, armed with a spear’ + suffix -ka. 
The former goes back to śūla ‘a sharp iron pin or stake, spike, spit (on which meat is 
roasted)’, which has also been borrowed directly into Malay as sula ‘spit, sharp stake, 
spitting, impaling’ (cf. Old Javanese śūla ‘pike, lance’, Balinese sula ‘a skewer, spit, 
pointed stick’, Tagalog †solá ‘to impale’, Cebuano súla ‘unopened terminal stem of 
plants that are sharp’).
44	 It should be borne in mind that fluctuation between /s/, /sy/ and /sw/ is particularly 
common in Javanese, e.g. Old Javanese aweśa ~ awesya ~ aweswa ‘to invite 
to come, summon, call’, uswan ~ ǝsyan ‘fire-drill’, sopadi ~ swapadi ~ syapadi 
‘in comparison with, rather than’ (< prefix sa- + upadi ‘limitation, qualification, 
special condition’, reflecting Sanskrit upādhi ‘a substitute; limitation, qualification’), 
swasa ~ sosya (see example 94) and modern Javanese kasyasih ~ kaswasih 
‘inspiring pity’, kusw (lit.) ~ kosy ‘to kiss’, nus (lit) ~ nusy ‘island’, sisy (lit.) 
~ sisw ‘student, pupil’ (< Sanskrit śiṣya ‘a pupil, scholar, disciple’), wis ~ wisw ~ 
wisy ‘poison’ (< Sanskrit viṣa ‘poison, venom’).

--- PAGE 430 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
419
wide space or world’, such as Ardhamāgadhī loga ‘world, 
universe’.
70.	 naraga ‘hell’ (cf. Minangkabau narago), corresponding to the 
more common attestations nǝraka and naraka (cf. Minangkabau 
narako, Makasar naraka, Maranao narkaʔ, Tagalog narkâ ~ 
narakâ), presumably goes back to a MIA reflex of Sanskrit 
naraka ‘hell’, such as Ardhamāgadhī ṇaraga ‘a hell-abode for 
sinners’.
The following postulated MIA loanwords are restricted to Old 
Javanese:
71.	 ganaga ‘copper’, used alongside tambaga (see example 60), may 
reflect Sanskrit kanaka ‘of gold, golden’ through a MIA source, 
such as Ardhamāgadhī kaṇaga ‘gold’. The word-initial /g/ for an 
earlier /k/ in Old Javanese does not stand in isolation, cf. gusali 
~ gosali (example 39) and Table 9.1.
72.	 kañcuga ‘a dress fitting close to the upper part of the body, 
armour, mail; bodice, jacket’ reflects Sanskrit kañcuka ‘a dress 
fitting close to the upper part of the body, armour, mail’ through 
a MIA language, such as Ardhamāgadhī kañcuga ‘a bodice worn 
by women’.
73.	 laṇḍuga ‘a kind of sweetmeat’ reflects Sanskrit laḍḍuka ‘a 
kind of sweetmeat (made of coarsely ground gram or other 
pulse, or of corn-flour, mixed with sugar and spices, and fried 
in ghee or oil)’ through a MIA source, such as Ardhamāgadhī 
laḍḍuga ‘sweet-ball’. The homorganic prenasalation of /ḍ/ and 
other stops is common in WMP languages (cf. Table 9.1).
74.	 maṇḍaga ‘rice gruel; an adornment (on the cheek), made with 
paste?’ ultimately reflects Sanskrit maṇḍaka ‘rice gruel; a sort 
of pastry or baked flour’. The borrowing presumably took place 
through a MIA language, such as Ardhamāgadhī maṇḍaga ‘a 
sweet cake etc.’.
75.	 saragi ‘a copper kettle or pot’ appears to be an “i-form” going 
back to a MIA reflex of Sanskrit saraka ‘a drinking vessel,

--- PAGE 431 ---
420	
Tom Hoogervorst
goblet’, such as Ardhamāgadhī saraga ‘a winnowing basket woven 
out of a kind of weed’. Tamil carākai ‘metal cup’ presumably 
reflects the same Sanskrit etymon.
The following tentative MIA loanwords in Old Javanese are based on 
hypothetical reconstructions:
76.	 bandoga has been interpreted as ‘pandanus fruit’ (Van der Tuuk 
1897–1912/4, p. 850; Zoetmulder 1982, p. 203). As the etymology 
of botanical names is notoriously difficult, the following two 
mutually exclusive etymologies remain tentative: 1) from Sanskrit 
bandhūka ‘Pentapetes phoenicea L.; Terminalia tomentosa Wight 
& Arn.’ through an unattested MIA *bandhūga, or 2) from 
Sanskrit bhaṇḍuka ‘Indian trumpet flower (Oroxylum indicum 
(L.) Kurz)’45 through an unattested MIA *bhaṇḍuga. In view 
of the retroflex consonants in the latter form, it may be pointed 
out that modern Javanese displays the obsolete form †panḍog 
‘pandanus fruit’ (Jansz 1932, p. 798). We may also compare Tamil 
paṇṭukam ‘bishop’s weed; red-flowered West Indian pea-tree’.46 
It should, however, be pointed out that none of the plants listed 
here closely resemble each other.
77.	 kalyāga ‘name of a tree from the bark of which a red dye 
is made; (dyed) red’ (cf. Balinese kaliaga ‘of reddish yellow 
colour’)47 is presumably the same word as kalyagā ‘a kind 
of cloth (men’s cloths, always reckoned in pairs)’ of Old 
Javanese epigraphy, as listed by De Casparis (1988, p. 59). 
A semantic shift from ‘red dye’ to ‘a kind of cloth’ is not 
hard to fathom if we imagine that this type of cloth was 
dyed yellowish red through the use of a certain tree (cf. 
examples 43 and 44). If so, I propose that the direct precursor 
45	 The outdated gloss ‘Calosanthes indica’ is used in the original source (Monier-
Williams 1899, p. 745).
46	 The botanical names of these plants are Trachyspermum ammi (L.) Sprague and 
Sesbania grandiflora (L.) Pers.
47	 Glossed as such in Ruddyanto (2008, p. 335) and absent in other Balinese dictionaries.

--- PAGE 432 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
421
is a MIA form reflecting Sanskrit kāliyaka ‘a yellow fragrant 
wood (perhaps sandalwood or Agallochum)’ or kālīyaka ‘a kind 
of turmeric (Curcuma zanthorrhiza Roxb.)’. I have found no such 
form (?*kaliyaga) in the available dictionaries, but we may call 
attention to Tamil kaliyakam ‘seeds of conessi bark’.
78.	 kamalagi ~ kambaligi ~ kamaligi ~ kamal ‘tamarind (Tamarindus 
indica L.)’—a plant of presumed African origins and of 
considerable antiquity on the Indian Subcontinent (Asouti and 
Fuller 2008, p. 104)—is attested in Old Balinese as kamalagi 
~ camalagi (Christie 2004, p. 53) and in Ibanag as kalamagi. 
The word-initial /c/ in the Old Balinese attestation does not 
stand in isolation and is reflected by Gayo acamlagi, Balinese 
cəlagi, Minangkabau cumalagi, Malay (Kedah dial.) cəlagi, 
Ilokano salamági and Cebuano sambag, the latter displaying the 
earlier forms †sambagi and †sambalagi (cf. De Mentrida 1841, 
p. 323). Makasar has camba (cf. Bugis campa), but cambalagi 
still survives as a toponym in South Sulawesi. The word-initial 
/k/ in the Old Javanese attestations presumably developed 
under influence of kamal ‘pickled’ (Ras 1968a, p. 550).48 
Upon comparing Indian terminology, one of the most common 
Sanskrit words for ‘tamarind’ is amlaka, derived from amla 
‘sour’. Pali exhibits the related form ambila ‘sour’, which 
may have also denoted ‘tamarind’ in view of Old Khmer 
’aṃvil ~ ’amvil ‘the tamarind tree’.49 Shorto (2006, p. 459) 
reconstructs proto-Mon-Khmer *m[ ]il ~ *[m] iəl ‘tamarind’ on 
account of modern Khmer ambil (
), Cham amil, Acehnese 
mε, Vietnamese me and a number of other attestations, but 
acknowledges its ultimate Pali origins. As the consonant cluster 
48	 Alternatively, the forms have been connected to the toponym Kamal on the island 
Madura, from which a popular variety of tamarind was exported, cf. Ngaju kamal 
‘tamarind’ (Kern 1952, p. 14). Slametmuljana (1954, p. 77) interprets Old Javanese 
kamalagi as kamal lagi ‘sweet tamarind’, although this appears to be a rationalization 
rather than an etymology.
49	 In addition, the twelfth century CE lexicon Abhidhānappadīpikā exhibits Pali ambilakā 
‘tamarind’ (Liyanaratne 1994, p. 76).

--- PAGE 433 ---
422	
Tom Hoogervorst
/ml/ became /mbil/ in MIA (Pischel 1900, p. 205), I propose 
that a MIA reflex of amlaka (*?ambilaga) entered Maritime 
Southeast Asia, possibly as 

ambalagi through metathesis. The 
word-initial /c/ in many of the WMP attestations may have 
developed under influence of seemingly indigenous words, such 
as Old Javanese cəmpaluk ‘young fruit of the tamarind tree’ 
(Van der Tuuk 1897–1912/1, p. 665), cf. Tagalog sampalok 
‘tamarind’ and Bikol sampálok.
79.	 kaṇḍaga ‘sword, dagger’ has been connected to Sanskrit kaṇṭaga 
‘a thorn; the point of a pin or needle’ (Gonda 1973, p. 242). 
I would argue that the form reflects an unattested MIA *khaṇḍaga 
‘sword’. Turner (1966 #3793) reconstructs proto-Indo-Aryan 
*khaṇḍaka ‘sword’ (possibly an early borrowing), which seems 
plausible in view of NIA attestations such as Panjabi khaṇḍā ‘a 
two-edged sword’, Oriya khaṇḍā ‘sword’ and Marathi khāṇḍā ‘a 
kind of sword’ (also cf. Tamil kaṇḍakam ‘sword’). Old Javanese 
kaṇḍa ‘sword, dagger; arrow?’, which Zoetmulder (1982, p. 789) 
derives from Sanskrit kāṇḍa ‘an arrow’, may equally well go 
back to one of these NIA attestations.
80.	 kanigara ‘a part. k.o. tree with yellow flowers (Pterospermum 
acerifolium (L.) Willd.)’ (cf. Malay kanigara ‘the sun flower 
(Helianthus annuus L.)’, Javanese kanig r ‘fez-like headdress 
worn by officials at court’) has been interpreted as a MIA reflex of 
Sanskrit karṇikāra ‘Pterospermum acerifolium (L.) Willd.’ (Kern 
1869, p. 10). I would argue that an unattested MIA *kaṇṇigāra 
(cf. Ardhamāgadhī kaṇṇiyāra) yielded the WMP attestations.
81.	 uṇḍahagi or uṇḍagi ‘craftsman in wood-work, carpenter; skilful, 
craftsmanlike’ has been connected to Sanskrit vardhaki ‘a 
carpenter’ through a MIA source (De Casparis 1988, pp. 64–65; 
Hoogervorst 2013, p. 27). In view of the regular shift from 
/rdh/ to /ḍḍh/ between vowels (Pischel 1900, p. 201), I would 
reconstruct this form as *vaḍḍhagi (cf. Ardhamāgadhī vaḍḍhaï 
‘a carpenter’). It would have been nasalized to *vaṇḍhagi in 
Southeast Asia (cf. Table 9.1), as reflected by Javanese unḍagi 
‘carpenter, woodworker; skilled’, Sasak †bǝndagi ‘carpenter’, 
Lampung †dahagi ~ †duhagi, Tagalog anluwagi ~ anluagi

--- PAGE 434 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
423
~ alwagi, Bikol anluwagi ~ anduwagi, Ilokano allawági and 
Kapampangan aluwaggi (cf. Van der Tuuk 1897–1912/1, p. 35). 
In addition, Old Javanese exhibits the possible doublet duwahagi 
‘workman, labourer, helping hand, person in an inferior position’. 
The vowel insertion or svarabhakti (dVh) observed in some 
of the above attestations reflects the historical presence of the 
aspirated consonant, as shown in Table 9.1. Khmer vaḍḍhakī 
(ី
) ‘carpenter, wood worker’ must have been borrowed from 
Pali vaḍḍhaki ‘a carpenter, builder, architect, mason’, ultimately 
reflecting the same Sanskrit protoform.
82.	 wariga is glossed—somewhat unsatisfactorily—by Zoetmulder 
(1982, p. 2208) as ‘a part. official or functionary’ and refers 
specifically to a ‘village astrologer’ according to De Casparis 
(1988, p. 56). The author connects the word to Sanskrit vārika 
‘the chief person in a court or assembly’. This derivation 
is no doubt correct if we imagine that the borrowing took place 
via an unattested MIA *vāriga. The latter must have become 
*vāriya at a later stage of language development, hence Tamil 
vāriyam ‘office of supervision’.
7.  NIA Loanwords
Contacts between South and Southeast Asia persist to this day and lexical 
borrowing between the regions continued long after MIA languages 
ceased to be mother tongues, around the second half of the first mill. 
CE. The continuation of interethnic contact across the Bay of Bengal is 
reflected by archaeological and epigraphic data (Hoogervorst 2013, p. 17). 
The intermediate developmental stage between MIA and NIA languages 
(i.e. the modern Indo-Aryan languages such as Hindi, Bengali, etc.), 
sometimes designated by the cover term Apabhraṁśa or ‘Late Prakrit’, 
is relatively poorly documented. This makes it considerably more difficult 
to reconstruct protoforms, as has been done in the previous sections. 
In what follows, I list tentative Malay borrowings from an early NIA 
source other than modern Hindi.50
50	 See Van Ronkel (1902a), Hamilton (1919) and Jones (2007) on lexical influence from 
Hindi to Malay.

--- PAGE 435 ---
424	
Tom Hoogervorst
83.	 arwa ‘saw-edged cutting knife’ has been connected to Hindi ārā 
‘a saw; a shoe-maker’s knife or awl’ (Hamilton 1919, p. 13; 
Jones 2007, p. 24), reflecting Sanskrit ārā ‘a shoemaker’s awl 
or knife, a bore, a probe’. In view of the /w/ in the Malay 
attestation, the direct donor language was probably not Hindi 
but another NIA language. We may compare Bhojpuri aruā 
‘spike at the end of a driving stick’ and Maithili aruā 
‘cobbler’s awl’ (cf. Turner 1966 #1313).
84.	 bodoh ‘stupid’ (cf. Javanese boḍo ‘stupid, ignorant’, Madurese 
bhuḍhu ‘stupid’, Balinese bədu ‘slow, lazy’, Malagasy bodo 
‘infantile, childish, young’ and possibly Cham batauk ‘idiot, fool, 
stupid, etc.’) has been tentatively connected to Hindi buddhū 
‘stupid fellow, blockhead, fool, idiot’ (Gonda 1973, p. 410, n. 83). 
We may also compare related forms such as Panjabi buddho 
‘silly’, Nepali bodho ‘blunt; sluggish, torpid’, Oriya bodhukā 
‘dinned, stunned (said of the ear)’, etc. (cf. Turner 1966 #9273). 
The word-final /h/ in the Malay attestation reflects the aspirated 
consonant in the NIA reflexes (see Table 9.1).
85.	 curi ‘theft, steal, rob’, featuring in Old Malay as cūri ‘thief’, 
evidently goes back to an Indo-Aryan prototype (Gonda 1973, 
p. 206). We may call attention to Sanskrit caurikā ‘theft’ from 
the root cur ‘to steal’, yielding such NIA forms as Hindi corī 
‘thieving, theft, robbery’, Bengali curi ‘an instance or act of 
stealing, theft’, Oriya curi ‘theft’, etc.
86.	 duli ‘portable cot, litter for sick or wounded’, exhibiting the related 
form juli ‘swinging litter’ (cf. Old Javanese joli ‘palanquin’, 
Javanese joli), ultimately goes back to Sanskrit dolā ‘litter, 
hammock, palanquin, swing’ through a NIA source (Gonda 1973, 
p. 80). The Malay doublet dola ‘stretcher, litter’ appears to be 
a direct Sanskrit loan. As regards the direct origins of duli, we 
may call attention to Hindi ḍolī ‘a litter, a kind of sedan (for 
women); small portable cot’, Bengali ḍuli ‘a small covered litter, 
an improvised palanquin’, Oriya ḍuli ‘a small closed sedan chair 
for carrying a person; a litter’, etc.; i.e. the ‘dhooly’ of British

--- PAGE 436 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
425
accounts. Tamil ṭōli ‘litter, a kind of sedan’ is apparently derived 
from one of these NIA forms (word-initial voiced consonants are 
normally devoiced in Tamil), but neither can explain the word-
initial /j/ in Malay juli and Javanese joli.
87.	 kǝtumbar ‘coriander (Coriandrum sativum L.)’ (cf. Acehnese 
k
tumba ~ g
tumba ‘coriander seed’, Javanese tumbar, 
Madurese katombh r, Cebuano †katumbal ‘chilli’)51 is often 
connected to Tamil kottamalli in the same meaning. The presence 
of NIA forms such as Hindi kothmīr, Oriya kōthamiri and 
Marathi kōthimbīr, as well as the Tamil and other Dravidian 
attestations (cf. Emenau and Burrow 1962, p. 26), would allow 
the MIA reconstruction *kōtthambarī (cf. Turner 1966 #3380). 
However, we may also call attention to Sanskrit kustumbarī ‘the 
plant coriander’ and Ardhamāgadhī kutthumbharī ‘a collection 
of coriander plants’, exhibiting /u/ in the second syllable. A 
hypothetical NIA reflex with /u/ in that position (*?kuthumbar) 
may have given rise to the WMP attestations.
88.	 kodi ‘corge, (roughly) score’ (cf. Acehnese kud ə, Gayo kudi, 
Karo Batak kodi) may be connected to such NIA forms as 
Hindi koṛī ‘an aggregate of twenty, a score’, Marathi koḍī ‘a 
score; a corge’, Bengali kuḍi ‘twenty’, etc. This word cannot be 
reconstructed to proto-Indo-Aryan. It is also found in Dravidian 
languages, e.g. Tamil kōṭi ‘a score, as in counting precious 
stones, silk, etc.’ and Malayalam kōṭi  ‘the number of twenty, 
a score’. It is uncertain whether the WMP languages acquired 
their attestations through Indo-Aryan or Dravidian languages. 
Khmer kaḷī (
) ‘a unit of measurement of 20 pieces of cloth’ 
and Thai kulī (
) ‘package of 20 pieces of cloth, score’ are 
presumably also related. Ultimately, the word has been assigned 
to a Munda source (Przyluski 1929, pp. 25–32). 
51	 Old Javanese has tumbara, but this form is only attested in the Pārthayajña as part of 
the segment tumbara kǝcur, which may actually represent tumbar akǝcur (Zoetmulder 
1982, p. 2060), thus corresponding to the other WMP forms.

--- PAGE 437 ---
426	
Tom Hoogervorst
89.	 kunci ‘lock or bolt’, but predominantly ‘key’ in modern 
usage (cf. Old Javanese kuñci ‘key’, Madurese konci ‘key’, 
Tagalog kunsî ‘bolt, latch’), has been derived from Hindi kunjī 
‘a key’, reflecting Sanskrit kuñcikā (cf. Ardhamāgadhī 
kuñciyā) in the same meaning (Gonda 1973, p. 158; De Casparis 
1997, p. 43, n. 48; cf. Jones 2007, p. 174). In the light of the 
voiceless affricate, Gujarati kū͂cī, Oriya kuñci or a related NIA 
form are more plausible precursors of the WMP attestations. 
Presumably, Khmer kuñcae (
) and Thai kuñcǣ  (
) ‘key’ 
go back to a WMP language with diphthongization of word-final 
vowels.
90.	 ragi ‘fermenting medium, yeast’ (cf. Old Javanese ragi ‘yeast’, 
Madurese raghi ‘fermenting medium’, Acehnese rag ə ‘yeast, 
sourdough’) has been connected to Hindi rāgī ‘a sort of grain 
(Eleusine coracana (L.) Gaertn.)’ (Wilkinson 1932/2, p. 298). Also 
known as maṇḍvā ~ maṇḍuā or in English as ‘finger millet’ 
or ‘raggy’ (cf. Tamil irāki, Malayalam rāgi, Telugu rāgi, 
Kannada rāgi), this grain is indeed typically made into a flour 
or fermentation medium in South Asia. Hindi rāgī presumably 
goes back to Sanskrit rāga ‘red’, on account of the reddish colour 
of the millet seeds.52
91.	 rani ‘queen’ ultimately goes back to Sanskrit rājñī (Jones 2007, 
p. 260), allegedly via a “Prakrit” source (De Casparis 1997, 
p. 30). As the consonant cluster /jñ/ corresponds to MIA /ṇṇ/ 
(Pischel 1900, p. 191), I propose MIA *raṇṇī ‘queen’ as the 
direct precursor of such attestations as Tamil rāṇi, Hindi rānī and 
Bengali rāni in the same meaning. It remains uncertain which 
of these attestations gave rise to Malay rani, but its complete 
absence in the Old Javanese literature makes a NIA language 
our most plausible option.
52	 If this is correct, Southworth’s derivation of this form from proto-Dravidian *irai 
‘food’ (1988, p. 660) can no longer stand unmodified.

--- PAGE 438 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
427
92.	 sayang ‘longing, pitying, love’ (cf. Acehnese sayang ‘compassion, 
affection, love, etc.’)—reconstructed to proto-Malayic as *sayaŋ 
‘pining, longing, pitying; love, affection’ (Adelaar 1992, p. 107) 
—is often used as an interjection ‘too bad’ (cf. Makasar sayang 
‘too bad; to find something regrettable’, Tagalog sayang ‘too 
bad, hard luck, what a pity; wasted or uselessly spent’) or as 
an appellation ‘lover, darling’. In the latter sense, it reminds 
us of NIA forms such as Hindi saiïyā͂ ‘master, lord; husband’, 
which is also often used as an appellation in the meaning ‘lover, 
beloved’—predominantly by a female to a male. This word is 
ultimately derived from Sanskrit svāmin ‘master; a husband, 
lover’, also reflected as Panjabi sāīyā͂ ‘master’, Nepali saiyā͂ ‘a 
lover, paramour; friend’ (Turner 1966 #13930). If the similarity 
between the forms is not a chance resemblance, the semantic 
developments in Malay of ‘longing’, ‘pitying’ and ‘pining’ are 
secondary to the original meaning of ‘(to) love’ and especially 
‘lover, beloved’.
93.	 sǝrapah ‘cursing, imprecation of evil’, also found as sǝrpa or 
sǝrapa, has been derived from a MIA reflex of Sanskrit śāpa 
‘a curse, malediction, imprecation, etc.’ (Gonda 1973, p. 123; 
De Casparis 1997, p. 33). More specifically, we can connect 
it to an early NIA source. In the early Avadhī language, used 
in the work of Tulsīdās (sixteenth/seventeenth century CE), we 
find śrāpa ‘curse’ (Saksena 1971, p. 53). Hindi srāp ~ sarāp 
‘curse, imprecation, malediction’ and Panjabi sarāph ‘a curse’ 
cannot have yielded the Malay attestation, as they reflect a 
subsequent development in MIA; the dropping of the word-final 
short /a/.
94.	 suai is only attested in the derivative forms bǝrsuai ‘congruous, 
in perfect accord’ and sǝsuai ‘perfect fit or match’. Originally, 
suai thus seems to have denoted something along the lines of 
‘to fit beautifully’. In form and meaning, it may be compared to 
Old Avadhī sohaï ‘looks nice’, Old Gujarati sohaï ‘shines’ and 
especially Middle Bengali sohe ‘suits, befits’, reflecting Sanskrit 
śobhate ‘beautify, embellish, adorn, etc.’ (Turner 1966 #12636).

--- PAGE 439 ---
428	
Tom Hoogervorst
I would thus propose that the Malay attestation, which cannot 
be reconstructed to any deeper level of Malayo-Polynesian, goes 
back to a NIA source.
95.	 suasa ‘pinchbeck’ (cf. Javanese suw s , Toba Batak suasa) 
is an alloy of gold and copper (and sometimes a small ratio of 
silver) used to manufacture ornaments. The word features in 
Old Javanese as nāgaswāsa ~ nagasosa and in the Middle 
Javanese story Dewa Ruci as sosya (Zoetmulder 1982, 
p. 1808).53 Van Ronkel (1902b, p. 109) derives it from Tamil 
cokucā ‘pinchbeck, gold-like alloy of copper and zinc’, which is 
implausible on phonological grounds. Instead, we may consider 
a NIA origin, such as Hindi suā͂sā ‘an alloy of gold and 
copper’ (Hoogervorst 2013, p. 26). I would argue that the Hindi 
attestation reflects the unattested Sanskrit compound *sukaṁsa, 
consisting of su ‘good, beautiful, well, very, etc.’ and kaṁsa 
‘white copper, brass, bell-metal’—the intervocalic /k/ would 
have elided in NIA. If Tamil cokucā is at all related, the 
phonological specifics require further analysis.
96.	 suji ‘embroidery’ (cf. Old Javanese suji ‘spine, quill (of a 
porcupine); embroidery, embroidered piece of cloth’, Sundanese 
suji ‘quill (of a porcupine)’, Acehnese suj ə, Makasar suji 
‘embroidery’, Tagalog †sori ‘needle used in weaving, sharp 
point’) has been tentatively connected to Sanskrit sūcī ‘to sew; a 
needle or any sharp pointed instrument’, although the presumed 
shift from /c/ to /j/ remains unexplained (Gonda 1973, p. 491). 
Normally, /c/ between vowels elides completely in MIA (Pischel 
1900, p. 137), e.g. Ardhamāgadhī sūī ‘needle’. However, NIA 
attestations such as Hindi sūjī ‘a needle, a small awl’ and Oriya 
śuji ‘needle’, apparently tadbhavas of the Sanskrit prototype, 
may have given rise to the WMP forms.
53	 The use of Sanskrit nāga ‘serpent-demon’ as the first element of this compound is 
remarkable. It is also attested in Malayalam as nāgacceṁbu ‘pinchbeck’ (ceṁbu = 
‘copper’).

--- PAGE 440 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
429
97.	 sundal ‘whore, prostitute’ (cf. Old Javanese sundəl, Madurese 
sondhəl, Balinese sundəl) has been connected to Sanskrit caṇḍāla 
‘an outcast’ (Wilkinson 1932/2, p. 502). This is implausible on 
phonological grounds, including the dental instead of an 
expected retroflex prenasalized consonant in Old Javanese. 
Furthermore, the alleged Sanskrit precursor has in fact been 
borrowed into Malay as cəndala ~ jəndala ‘low, mean, 
ignoble, depraved’. The superficial similarity of the WMP 
attestations with Sanskrit śuṇḍā ‘a harlot, prostitute, bawd’ 
must also be fortuitous. Instead, we may call attention to 
Marathi śindaḷ ‘whorish, unchaste, incontinent’, which reflects 
MIA chiṇṇāliā ‘having the line broken’ (Turner 1966 #5048). 
If these words are indeed related, I cannot account for the 
unexpected /u/ in Malay and other WMP languages.
98.	 unta ‘camel’ (cf. Javanese unta, Madurese onta, Cham antā ~ 
untā) is ultimately derived from Sanskrit uṣṭra ‘camel’ (Gonda 
1973, pp. 139, 158). Khmer ūṭṭh (
) and Thai ūṭh (
) 
presumably go back to the related Pali form oṭṭha in the same 
meaning. Old Javanese displays a lot of fluctuation: uṣṭra ~ oṣṭra 
~ hoṣṭra ~ koṣṭra ~ ṅoṣṭra ~ onta ~ konta. The latter two forms 
were probably borrowed via the above Malay attestation, as we 
would otherwise expect retroflex consonants. It seems unlikely 
that camels have often set hoof on pre-colonial Java, hence 
the palpable confusion about them in the literature. NIA forms 
such as Hindi and Marathi uṇṭ are too recent to have 
yielded the Malay attestation, as they display the ‘dropped’ 
word-final /a/ (cf. example 93). In all likelihood, the Malay 
form was borrowed during an intermediate stage between 
MIA (cf. Ardhamāgadhī uṭṭa ‘a camel’) and the above NIA 
forms, some of which indeed reflect the historical cluster /ṣṭ/ 
as /ṇṭ/ (Bhayani 1997, pp. 6–7). Illustratively, Braj Bhāṣā, one 
of the archaic varieties of the Hindi dialect continuum, exhibits 
ūṇṭa in the same meaning.

--- PAGE 441 ---
430	
Tom Hoogervorst
The distribution of the following tentative NIA loanwords appears to be 
restricted to Old Javanese:
99.	 drak is equated by Zoetmulder (1982, p. 415) to drākṣa ‘a 
part. kind of beverage, wine?’, reflecting Sanskrit drākṣā 
‘vine, grape; made of grapes’. If this is correct, the former 
attestation, which is only attested in a kakawin text entitled 
Khāṇḍawawanadahana, may have entered the Old Javanese 
literature through a NIA language, cf. Gujarati darākh ‘grapes’.
100.	 ghāṣa ‘to strike (grind, rub) together; to chafe, etc.’, which also 
occurs as gas, has been connected to Sanskrit gharṣa ‘rubbing, 
friction’ (Zoetmulder 1982, p. 498). If this is indeed the ultimate 
precursor, I propose a transmission through a NIA language, cf. 
Gujarati ghās ‘wear and tear’, Panjabi ghās ‘friction’, Bengali 
ghaṣā ‘to rub’.
101.	 mahari ~ mari ‘small pavilion, bower’, which exhibits the 
secondary form mahantǝn,54 has been connected to Hindi 
mahāṛī ‘a stately dwelling, an edifice, a palace, mansion, house’ 
(Gonda 1973, pp. 80, 640). Needless to say, the presence of 
mahantǝn in the Old Javanese kakawin literature predates by 
centuries the emergence of the language now known as Hindi. It 
seems nonetheless likely that the borrowing took place through 
an undocumented NIA reflex, ultimately going back to Sanskrit 
mahālaya ‘a great dwelling’.
Finally, it should be pointed out that—already in Old Javanese—
the historical word-final vowel of certain Indo-Aryan loanwords is 
lacking, e.g. aṅkus ‘an elephant-driver’s hook’ (cf. Sanskrit aṅkuśa, 
Hindi aṅkus), atal ‘ochre’ (cf. Sanskrit haritāla ‘yellow orpiment 
or sulphuret of arsenic’, Hindi hartāl ‘orpiment’), kapas ‘cotton-tree, 
54	 The substitution of the last syllable of a loanword (as well as some indigenous 
vocabulary) by the segment /ntǝn/ is quite common in Javanese (Hoogervorst 2016). 
See Adelaar (1992, p. 52, fn. 95) on the same phenomenon in Malay.

--- PAGE 442 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
431
cotton’ (cf. Sanskrit karpāsa, Hindi kapās), mās ~ mas ‘gold, golden’ 
(cf. Sanskrit māṣa ‘a bean; a weight of gold’, Hindi māṣ ‘a kind 
of bean, Vigna radiata (L.) R.Wilczek’) and tal ‘a part. k.o. palm-
tree (Borassus flabellifer L.)’ (cf. Sanskrit tāla, Hindi tāl). While the 
phonological process of short vowel deletion (hrasva) is typically 
associated with NIA languages such as Hindi, its manifestations in 
Old Javanese may also be due to vernacular pronunciations or borrow­
ing through a third language, such as Old Khmer (cf. Hoogervorst 
2016).
8.  Concluding Remarks
The linguistic data presented and analyzed in this study should 
suffice to dispel the alleged paucity of “Prakrit” vocabulary in pre-
modern Southeast Asia, in particular the (pen)insular regions in 
direct contact with the Indian Ocean World. The 101 proposed MIA 
etyma, either directly attested or reconstructed through regular sound 
correspondences, represent an underexplored dimension of cultural 
contact characterized by the transmission of practical concepts, 
techniques, manufactured products and cultural items, many of which 
are of a distinctly cultural or commercial nature. It transpires from the 
lexical data discussed here that an early form of Ardhamāgadhī or a 
closely related language—possibly a generic East Indian “Prakrit”— 
played an important and overlooked role in the history of language 
contact across the Bay of Bengal. 
The lexical transmissions addressed in this study permit some general 
observations regarding the adoption of Indo-Aryan linguistic features 
in Maritime Southeast Asia. The high sociolinguistic status of Sanskrit 
led to a preponderance of Sanskrit loans in the literary registers of Old 
Javanese, Malay and other WMP languages, while Prakritisms were 
presumably avoided or “corrected” as much as possible. Historically, we 
may therefore assume a much greater MIA influence in the vernaculars 
that have escaped the attention and interest of courtly scribes. Indeed, 
it seems that notions of language hierarchy led to the deliberate erasure 
of tadbhava vocabulary across Maritime Southeast Asia’s Indian-inspired

--- PAGE 443 ---
432	
Tom Hoogervorst
literature, being largly substituted by tatsama equivalents at a time when 
Sanskrit was still widely understood among literati. In support of this 
claim, I have called attention to Indic grammatical analogy patterns in 
Old Javanese—such as the use of the Sanskrit suffix -ka, including onto 
Indic loanwords that did not originally have the suffix—and processes 
of hypercorrection.
Beyond these observations, however, presenting a coherent 
macroscenario behind the lexical transmissions proposed here is beset 
by several difficulties. Chief among them is the issue of chronology. 
The earliest literary attestations of MIA loanwords are found in Old 
Javanese literature and epigraphy dated no earlier than the ninth 
century CE. The archaeological record informs us that contact with 
India, commercial or otherwise, predates this textual evidence by 
many centuries. Did the loanwords enter Southeast Asia at a time 
when the proposed MIA donor languages were still spoken, or were 
they adopted from semi-artificial literary languages, akin to India’s 
“Dramatic Prakrits” and Ardhamāgadhī? The presence of a small 
set of NIA borrowings in Old Javanese (and Malay) presumably 
reflects contact with different speech communities, but whether 
these differences were chronological, regional or both remains to be 
examined.
Future research might determine whether the detected MIA adstrate 
in Maritime Southeast Asia resembles that of South India, Sri Lanka 
and the Southeast Asian mainland. It has also been beyond the scope 
of this study to examine Indo-Aryan loanwords into Southeast Asia 
that were transmitted via tertiary sources, such as Dravidian or 
Austro-Asiatic languages. While this study rejects some Tamil- 
mediated etymologies prevalent in the wider literature, the Dravidian 
element in Old Javanese and other Southeast Asian languages merits 
a detailed analysis on its own (cf. Hoogervorst 2015). It has proven 
difficult to determine on linguistic grounds whether certain loanwords 
have reached Southeast Asia through Dravidian or MIA languages. 
A closer look at the situation in South India will undoubtedly yield 
significant further insights in the ethno-linguistic history of the Bay 
of Bengal.

--- PAGE 444 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
433
References
Acharya, Amitav. Civilizations in Embrace: The Spread of Ideas and the Transformation 
of Power. India and Southeast Asia in the Classical Age. Singapore: Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies, 2013.
Acri, Andrea. “More on Birds, Ascetics and Kings in Central Java: Kakawin 
Rāmāyaṇa, 24.111–115 and 25.19–22”. In From Laṅkā Eastwards: The 
Rāmāyaṇa in the Literature and Visual Arts of Indonesia, edited by Andrea 
Acri, Helen Creese and Arlo Griffiths. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2011.
Adelaar, K. Alexander. Proto-Malayic: The Reconstruction of its Phonology and 
Parts of its Lexicon and Morphology. Canberra: Australian National University, 
1992.
———. “Malay and Javanese Loanwords in Malagasy, Tagalog and Siraya (Formosa)”. 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 150, no. 1 (1994): 50–65.
———. “À la recherche d’affixes perdus en malais”. In Les langues austronésiennes, 
edited by Elizabeth Zeitoun. Paris: Ophrys, 2004.
———. Salako or Badameà: Sketch Grammar, Texts and Lexicon of a Kanayatn 
Dialect in West Borneo. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 2005.
Aichele, Walther. “Vergessene Metaphern als Kriterien der Datierung des altjavanischen 
Rāmāyaṇa”. Oriens Extremus 16 (1969): 127–66.
Asouti, Eleni and Dorian Q. Fuller. Trees and Woodlands in South India: 
Archaeological Perspectives. Walnut Creek: Left Coast Press, 2008.
Aymonier, Étienne and Antoine Cabaton. Dictionnaire Čam-Français. Paris: Ernest 
Leroux, 1906.
Baghbidi, Hassan R. “Iranian Elements in Sanskrit”. In Themes and Tasks in Old 
and Middle Indo-Aryan Linguistics, edited by Bertil Tikkanen and Heinrich 
Hettrich. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2006.
Barber, Charles C. Dictionary of Balinese–English. Aberdeen University Library 
Occasional Publications No. 2. Aberdeen: University of Aberdeen, 1979.
Bhandarkar, Devadatta R. “Gurjaras”. The Journal of the Bombay Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society 21, no. 58 (1903): 413–34.
Bhayani, Harivallabh C. Some Topics in the Development of OIA, MIA, NIA. 
Ahmedabad: L.D. Institute of Indology, 1997.
Biswas, Sailendra. Samsad Bengali–English Dictionary. Third edition. Calcutta: 
Sahitya Samsad, 2000. Available at <http://dsal.uchicago.edu/> (accessed January 
2014).
Blust, Robert. “Proto-Western Malayo-Polynesian Vocatives”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 135, nos. 2–3 (1979): 205–51.
———. “Tumbaga in Southeast Asia and South America”. Anthropos 87 (1992): 
443–57.
Bosch, Frederik D.K. “De oorkonde van Kembang Aroem”. Oudheidskundig verslag 
(1925): 41–49.

--- PAGE 445 ---
434	
Tom Hoogervorst
———. “The Problem of the Hindu Colonisation of Indonesia”. In Selected 
Studies in Indonesian Archaeology, by F.D.K. Bosch. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1961.
Brown, Charles P. A Telugu–English Dictionary. Second edition. Madras: Promoting 
Christian Knowledge, 1903. Available at <http://dsal.uchicago.edu/> (accessed 
November 2010).
Buenaobra, Nita P. Bokabularyong traylingguwal: Kapampangan Filipino English. 
San Miguel: Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino, 2004.
Bugarin, José. Diccionario Ibanag-Español. Manila: Sanchez, 1850.
Burrow, Thomas and Murray B. Emenau. Dravidian Etymological Dictionary. Second 
edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984. 
Cense, A.A. Makassaars-Nederlands woordenboek. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff 
in collaboration with Abdoerrahim, 1979.
Chandra, Lokesh. “Remarks on Kuñjarakarṇa”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 139, nos. 2–3 (1983): 363–65.
Christie, Jan Wisseman. “The Agricultural Economies of Early Java and Bali”. In 
Smallholders and Stockbreeders: History of Foodcrop and Livestock Farming 
in Southeast Asia, edited by Peter Boomgaard and David Henley. Leiden: 
KITLV Press, 2004.
Clough, Benjamin. Siṅhalese–English Dictionary. Kollupitiya, Colombo: Wesleyan 
Mission Press, 1892.
Cœdès, George. “Les inscriptions malaises de Çrīvijaya”. Bulletin de l’École Française 
d’Extrême Orient 30 (1930): 29–80.
Coolsma, S. Soendaneesch-Hollandsch woordenboek. Second edition. Leiden: A.W. 
Sijthoff, 1913.
Dahl, Otto Christian. Malgache et Maanjan. Oslo: Egede-Instituttet, 1951.
De Casparis, Johannes G. Prasasti Indonesia II. Bandung: Masa Baru, 1956.
———. “Some Notes on Words of ‘Middle-Indian’ Origin in Indonesian Languages 
(especially Old Javanese)”. In Papers from the III European Colloquium on 
Malay and Indonesian Studies, Naples, 2–4 June, 1981, edited by Luigi 
Santa Maria, Faizah Soenoto Rivai and Antonio Sorrentino. Naples: Instituto 
Universitario Orientale, 1988.
———. Sanskrit Loan-words in Indonesian: An Annotated Check-list of Words from 
Sanskrit in Indonesian and Traditional Malay. Jakarta: Badan Penyelenggara 
Seri NUSA, Universitas Katolik Indonesia Atma Jaya, 1997.
De Mentrida, Alonso. Diccionario de la lengua Bisaya, Hiligueina y Haraya de la 
Isla de Panay. [Manila]: Impremeria de D. Manuel y de D. Felis S. Dayot, 1841.
Djajadiningrat, Hoesein. Atjèhsch-Nederlandsch woordenboek. Two volumes. Batavia: 
Landsdrukkerij, 1934.
Dyen, Isidore. “Malay Tiga ‘Three’”. Language 22, no. 2 (1946): 131–37.
———. “Malay Tiga ‘Three’: A Further Note”. Language 28 (1952): 465–72.

--- PAGE 446 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
435
Edgerton, Franklin. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. Vol. II: 
Dictionary. Delhi, etc.: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985. Reproduction.
Eggink, H.J. Angkola- en Mandailing-Bataksch—Nederduitsch woordenboek. 
Bandoeng: A.C. Nix. Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap 
van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 72/5, 1936.
Emenau, Murray B. and Thomas Burrow. Dravidian Borrowings from Indo-Aryan. 
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1962.
Ensink, Jacob. “Śiva-Buddhism in Java and Bali”. In Buddhism in Ceylon and 
Studies on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries, edited by Heinz Bechert. 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1978. 
Eysinga, Philippus Pieter Roorda van. Algemeen Nederduitsch-Maleisch 
woordenboek. The Hague: Van Cleef, 1855.
Ferrer, Alicia S. Diksyunaryo Filipino–English. Manila: MECS Publishing House, 
2003.
Fleet, John F. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. Vol. III: Inscriptions of the Early 
Gupta Kings and Their Successors. Varanasi: Indological Book House, 1963. 
Reprint.
Gonda, J. “Altind. °Anta-, °Antara-, USW”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 97 (1938): 453–500.
———. Sanskrit in Indonesia. Second edition. New Dehli: International Academy 
of Indian Culture, 1973 [1952].
Griffiths, Arlo. “Inscriptions of Sumatra: II. Short Epigraphs in Old Javanese”. 
Wacana 14, no. 2 (2012): 197–214.
———. “Inscriptions of Sumatra: III. The Padang Lawas Corpus studied along 
with Inscriptions from Sorik Merapi (North Sumatra) and from Muara Takus 
(Riau)”. In History of Padang Lawas; North Sumatra; II, edited by Daniel 
Perret. Paris: Cahier d’Archipel 43, 2014.
Gundert, Hermann. A Malayalam and English Dictionary. Second edition. Kottayam: 
Sahitya Pravarthaka, 1962.
Haas, Mary. Thai Dictionary Project. 1951–present. Available at <http://sealang.
net/> (accessed January 2014).
Hamilton, A.W. “Hindustani, Tamil, Sanskrit and Other Loan Words in Malay”. 
Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 80 (1919): 29–38.
Hazeu, G.A.J. Gajōsch-Nederlandsch woordenboek met Nederlandsch-Gajōsch 
register. Batavia: Landsdrukkerij, 1907.
Headley, Robert K., Rath Chim and Ok Soeum. Cambodian–English Dictionary. 
Kensington: Dunwoody Press, 1997. Available at <http://sealang.net/> (accessed 
January 2014).
Heyne, K. De nuttige planten van Nederlandsch Indië. Three volumes. Buitenzorg: 
Departement van Landbouw, Nijverheid en Handel, 1927. 
Hoogervorst, Tom G. Southeast Asia in the Ancient Indian Ocean World. BAR 
International Series 2580. Oxford: Archaeopress, 2013.

--- PAGE 447 ---
436	
Tom Hoogervorst
———. “Detecting Pre-modern Lexical Influence from South India in Maritime 
Southeast Asia”. Archipel 89 (2015): 63–93.
———. “Lexical Influence from North India to Maritime Southeast Asia: Some 
New Directions”. Man in India 97, no. 1 (2016): 293–334.
Jacobi, Hermann. Ausgewählte Erzählungen in Mâhârâshṭrî. Leipzig: S. Hirzel, 1886.
Jansz, P. Practisch Javaansch-Nederlandsch woordenboek met Latijnsche karakters. 
Semarang, etc.: G.C.T. van Dorp, 1932.
Jen-kuei Li, Paul. “Some Plant Names in Formosan Languages”. In Austronesian 
Terminologies: Continuity and Change, edited by Andrew K. Pawley and 
Malcolm D. Ross. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics Series C–127, 1994.
Jenner, Phillip. Dictionary of Angkorian Khmer. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics 
Series 598, 2009.
Jones, Russel, ed. Loan-words in Indonesian and Malay. Compiled by the Indonesian 
Etymological Project. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2007. 
Joustra, M. Karo-Bataksch woordenboek. Leiden: Boekhandel en drukkerij voorheen 
E.J. Brill, 1907.
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. A Study on the Origin and Significance of Borobudur. PhD 
dissertation. Berkeley, California: Graduate Theological Union, 2004. 
Karbhari, Bhagu F. The Student’s Gujarati–English Dictionary. Ahmedabad: Vijaya 
Pravartak, 1898.
Kern, J.H.C. “Bijdrage ter verklaring van eenige uitdrukkingen in de wayang-
verhalen Palasara en Paṇḍu”. Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch-Indië 16 (1869): 1–23.
———. “Oudjavaansche eedformulieren op Bali gebruikelijk”. Bijdragen tot de 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 20 (1873): 211–28.
———. “Sanskritsche woorden in het Tagala”. Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en 
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 28 (1880): 535–64.
———. “Sanskritsche woorden in het Bisaya”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 29 (1881): 128–35.
———. “De Sanskrit-inscriptie van ‘t Mahākṣobhya-beeld te Simpang”. Tijdschrift 
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde 52 (1910): 99–108.
———. “Barhala”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-
Indië 73 (1917): 495–96.
———. Woordenlijst van het Bandjarees-Maleis. University of Leiden (cod. or. 
8332), 1952.
Kittel, Ferdinand. A Kannada–English Dictionary. Mangalore: Basel Mission Book 
& Tract Depository, 1894.
Krom, Nicolaas J. Hindoe-Javaansche geschiedenis. Second edition. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1931.
Lienhard, Siegfried. “On Some Key Terms in Newar Buddhism”. In Change and 
Continuity: Studies in the Nepalese Culture of the Kathmandu Valley, edited by 
Siegfried Lienhard. Torino: Edizioni dell’Orso, 1996.

--- PAGE 448 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
437
Liyanaratne, Jinadasa. “South Asian Flora as Reflected in the Twelfth-Century 
Pāli Lexicon Abhidhānappadīpikā”. Journal of the Pali Text Society 20 (1994): 
43–161.
Luce, Gordon H. Old Burma: Early Pagán. Artibus Asiae Supplementum 25. Two 
volumes. Locust Valley, New York: New York University, 1969. 
Mahdi, Waruno. “Linguistic Data on Transmission of Southeast Asian Cultigens to 
India and Sri Lanka”. In Archaeology and Language II: Archaeological Data 
and Linguistic Hypotheses, edited by Roger Blench and Matthew Spriggs. 
London and New York: Routledge, 1998. 
———. “Review of J.G. de Casparis (1997, Sanskrit Loan-words in Indonesian: 
An Annotated Check-list of Words from Sanskrit in Indonesian and Traditional 
Malay, NUSA Linguistic Studies of Indonesian and Other Languages in 
Indonesia 41. Jakarta: Badan Penyelenggara Seri NUSA, Universitas Katolik 
Indonesia Atma Jaya)”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 156 
(2000): 844–52.
Marsden, William. A Dictionary of the Malayan Language: To Which is 
Prefixed a Grammar, with an Introduction and Praxis. London: Cox & Baylis, 
1812.
Matthes, B.F. Boegineesch-Hollandsch woordenboek met Hollandsch-Boegineesche 
woordenlijst en verklaring van een tot opheldering bijgevoegden ethnographischen 
atlas. Two volumes. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1874. 
McKaughan, Howard and Batua Al-Macaraya. A Maranao Dictionary. Manila: De 
La Salle University and the Summer Institute of Linguistics, 1996. Available at 
<http://sealang.net/> (accessed January 2014).
Mintz, Malcolm W. Bikol dictionary—diksionáriong Bíkol. Volume II. Bikol—English 
dictionary: diksionáriong Bíkol—Inglés. Perth: Indonesian/Malay texts and 
resources, 2004.
Molesworth, James T. A Dictionary, Marathi and English. Second edition. Bombay: 
Bombay Education Society’s press, 1857. Available at <http://dsal.uchicago.
edu/> (accessed January 2014).
Monier-Williams, Monier. A Sanskṛit-English Dictionary: Etymologically and 
Philologically Arranged with Special Reference to Cognate Indo-European 
Languages. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1899.
Mookerji, Radha K. Indian Shipping: A History of the Sea-borne Trade and Maritime 
History of the Indians from the Earliest Times. Second edition (revised). Bombay 
and Calcutta and Madras: Orient Longmans, 1912. 
Moussay, Gérard. Dictionnaire Minangabau—Indonesien—Français. Two volumes. 
Paris: l’Harmattan, 1995. 
Naikar, Chandramouli S. Saṭṭaka Literature: A Study. Dharwad, Karnataka: Medhā 
Publishers, 1993.
Nihom, Max. “Kāmaloka: A Rare Pāli Loanword in Old Javanese?” Journal of the 
Pali Text Society 20 (1994): 163–70.

--- PAGE 449 ---
438	
Tom Hoogervorst
Noceda, P. Juan de and P. Pedro de Sanlucar. Vocabulario de la lengua Tagala. 
Manila: Ramirez y Giraudier, 1860.
Parkin, H. Batak Fruit of Hindu Thought. Madras: Christian Literature Society, 1978.
Pawitra, Adrian. Kamus standard Bahasa Madura—Indonesia. Jakarta: Dian Rakyat, 
2008.
Pigeaud, Gauthier Th. Java in the Fourteenth Century: A Study in Cultural 
History. The Nāgara-Kĕrtāgama by Rakawi Prapanca of Majapahit, 1365 A.D.: 
IV. Commentaries and Recapitulations. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1962.
Pijnappel, J. Maleisch-Nederduitsch woordenboek. Haarlem: John Enschedé en 
zonen/Amsterdam: Frederik Muller, 1863.
Pischel, Richard. Grammatik der Prakrit-Sprachen. Strassburg: Karl J. Trübner, 1900.
Platts, John T. A Dictionary of Urdu, Classical Hindi, and English. London: 
W.H. Allen, 1884. Available at <http://dsal.uchicago.edu/> (accessed January 
2014).
Poerbatjaraka. Smaradahana: Oud-Javaansche tekst met vertaling. Bandoeng: A.C. 
Nix, 1931.
Praharaj, G.C. Purnnachandra Ordia bhashakosha. Cuttack: Utkal Sahitya Press, 
1931–40. Available at <http://dsal.uchicago.edu/dictionaries/> (accessed 
January 2014).
Przyluski, Jean. “Non-Aryan Loans in Indo-Aryan”. In Pre-Aryan and pre- 
Dravidian in India, edited by Sylvain Lévi, Jean Przyluski and Jules Bloch 
and translated by Prabodh Chandra Bagchi. Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 
1929.
Ras, J.J. Hikajat Bandjar: A Study in Malay Historiography. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1968a.
———. “Lange consonanten in enige Indonesische talen—Dubbel geschreven 
mediale consonanten”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 124, no. 4 
(1968b): 521–41.
Ratnachandraji, Shatavdhani The Jaina Muni Shri. An Illustrated Ardha-Magadhi 
Dictionary. Five volumes. Tokyo: Meicho-Fukyū-Kai, 1977. 
Rhys Davids, Thomas W. and William Stede, eds. The Pali Text Society’s Pali–
English Dictionary. London: Luzac, 1966. Reprint.
Richardson, James. A New Malagasy–English Dictionary. Antananarivo: The London 
Missionary Society, 1885.
Rigg, Jonathan. A Dictionary of the Sunda Language. Batavia: Lange & Co., 
1862.
Robson, Stuart and Singgih Wibisono. Javanese English Dictionary. Singapore: 
Periplus, 2002.
Rubino, Carl R. Galvez. Ilocano Dictionary and Grammar: Ilocano–English, 
English–Ilocano. [s.l.:] University of Hawai‘i Press, 2000.
Ruddyanto, Caesarius, ed. Kamus Bali-Indonesia. Second edition. Yogyakarta: 
Yayasan Pustaka Nusatama, 2008.

--- PAGE 450 ---
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 101 Etymologies	
439
Saksena, Baburam. Evolution of Awadhi (a branch of Hindi). Second edition. 
Delhi/Patna/Varanasi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1971. 
Salomon, Richard. Indian Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in 
Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the Other Indo-Aryan Languages. New York/Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1998.
Schmidt, Richard. Elementarbuch der Śaurasenī mit Vergleichung der Mahārāṣṭrī 
und Māgadhī. Hannover: Heinz Lafaire, 1924.
Shorto, Harry L. A Mon-Khmer Comparative Dictionary. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics 
Series 579, 2006. Main editor: Paul Sidwell; assisting editors: Doug Cooper 
and Christian Bauer.
Singh, Maya. The Panjabi Dictionary. Lahore: Munshi Gulab Singh & Sons, 1895. 
Available at <http://dsal.uchicago.edu/> (accessed January 2014).
Slametmuljana, R.B. Poëzie in Indonesia: een literaire en taalkundige studie. 
Leuven: Université de Louvain, 1954.
Snell, Rupert. The Hindi Classical Tradition: A Braj Bhāṣā Reader. London: School 
of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, 1991.
Southworth, Franklin C. “Ancient Economic Plants of South Asia: Linguistic 
Archaeology and Early Agriculture”. In Languages and Cultures: Studies in 
Honor of Edgar C. Polomé, edited by Mohammad Ali Jazayery and Werner 
Winter. Berlin, New York, Amsterdam: Mouton de Gruyter, 1988.
Steingass, Francis J. A Comprehensive Persian–English Dictionary, Including the 
Arabic Words and Phrases to be met with in Persian Literature. London: 
Routledge & K. Paul, 1892. Available at <http://dsal.uchicago.edu/> (accessed 
January 2014).
Tadmor, Uri. “Loanwords in Indonesian”. In Loanwords in the World’s 
Languages: A Comparative Handbook, edited by Martin Haspelmath and Uri 
Tadmor. Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton, 2009.
Tamil. Tamil Lexicon. Six volumes. [Madras:] University of Madras, 1924–36. 
Available at <http://dsal.uchicago.edu/dictionaries/> (accessed January 2014).
Teeuw, A. and Stuart O. Robson. Bhomāntaka: The Death of Bhoma. Leiden: 
KITLV Press, 2005.
Tieken, Herman. “The Process of Vernacularization in South Asia”. Journal of the 
Economic and Social History of the Orient 51 (2008): 338–83.
Turner, Ralph L. A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages. London: 
Oxford University Press, 1966.
Van Leur, Jacob C. Eenige beschouwingen betreffende den ouden Aziatischen handel. 
Middelburg: G.W. den Boer, 1934.
Van der Tuuk, Hermanus N. Bataksch-Nederduitsch woordenboek. Amsterdam: 
Frederik Muller, 1861.
———. “Notes on the Kawi Language and Literature”. Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (new series) 13, no. 1 (1881): 
42–58.

--- PAGE 451 ---
440	
Tom Hoogervorst
———. Kawi–Balineesch–Nederlandsch woordenboek. Four volumes. Batavia: 
Landsdrukkerij, 1897–1912. 
Van Ronkel, Philippus Samuel van. “L’élément hindoûstânî dans la langue 
malaise”. In Hommage au Congrès des Orientalistes de Hanoi de la part du 
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen. Batavia: Albrecht, 
1902a. 
———. “Het Tamil-element in het Maleisch”. Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- 
en Volkenkunde 45 (1902b): 97–119.
———. “Een Maleisch telwoord in het Teloegoe?” Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- 
Land- en Volkenkunde 46 (1903): 568.
Warneck, Joh. Toba-Batak–Deutsches Wörterbuch. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1977.
Whitney, William D. Sanskrit Grammar: Including Both the Classical Language, 
and the Older Dialects, of Veda and Brahmana. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press/London: Oxford University Press, 1950.
Wilken, G.A. “Iets over de mutilatie der tanden bij de volken van den Indischen 
archipel: Opmerkingen naar aanleiding van Uhle’s ‘Über die ethnologische 
Bedeuting der malaiischen Zahnfeilung’”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-en 
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 3 (1888): 472–504.
Wilkinson, Richard Jamers. A Malay-English Dictionary (Romanised). Mytilene: 
Salavopoulos and Kinderlis, 1932. Two volumes.
Wolff, John U. A Dictionary of Cebuano Visayan. Manila: The Linguistic Society 
of the Philippines, 1972.
Woolner, Alfred C. Introduction to Prakrit. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1999. 
Reprint.
Yakubovich, Ilya. Sociolinguistics of the Luvian Language. Leiden/Boston: Brill, 
2010.
Zoetmulder, Petrus J. Old Javanese–English Dictionary. Two volumes. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1982. 
Zorc, R. David Paul. “Austronesian Culture History Through Reconstructed 
Vocabulary (an Overview)”. In Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and 
Change, edited by Andrew K. Pawley and Malcolm D. Ross. Canberra: Pacific 
Linguistics Series C–127, 1994. 
Zumbroich, Thomas J. “‘Teeth as Black as a Bumble Bee’s Wings’: The Ethnobotany 
of Teeth Blackening in Southeast Asia”. Ethnobotany Research & Applications 
7 (2009): 381–98.

--- PAGE 452 ---
10
Who Were the First Malagasy, 
and What Did They Speak?
Alexander Adelaar1
1.  Introduction
In this chapter I investigate the way Malagasy split off from other 
Austronesian languages, and the sociopolitical circumstances under which 
this may have happened.
Malagasy is an Austronesian language spoken in a variety of dialects 
in Madagascar. It is a member of the South East Barito (henceforth SEB) 
language subgroup, the members of which2 are predominantly spoken on 
1	 My research into the linguistic history of Madagascar is supported by a Discovery 
Grant (DP120100390) from the Australian Research Council. I wrote this chapter in late 
2013 during my stay as a Fellow-in-Residence at the NIAS (Netherlands Institute for 
Advanced Study, Wassenaar, Netherlands). I would like to thank the NIAS for hosting 
me, Bernard Sellato (CNRS, Aix-en-Provence), Tom Hoogervorst (Royal Institute of 
Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies, Leiden), and Arlo Griffiths (EFEO, Lyon) 
for their useful comments on previous drafts of this chapter, and Chandra Jayasuriya 
(cartographer at Melbourne University) for providing maps. All mistakes in the final 
version are my own responsibility.
2	 These members are Ma’anyan, Samihim, Dusun Malang, Dusun Witu and Bayan. Paku 
is sometimes also included, but it has a slightly different phonological history (Dahl 
1977; Mahdi 1988).
441

--- PAGE 453 ---
442	
Alexander Adelaar
the eastern shores of the Barito River in South Borneo (Dahl 1951; 
see Map 10.1). This region is considered the original homeland of 
Malagasy.
Malagasy underwent influence from Malay and Javanese, the hegemonic 
languages par excellence in insular South East Asia (henceforth ISEA), 
as well as from Sanskrit. In fact, the Sanskrit loanwords in Malagasy 
can be shown to have been borrowed via Malay and Javanese, and not 
directly from a source in South Asia. Malagasy also borrowed from 
Austronesian languages close to South Borneo homeland: it has loanwords 
from South Sulawesi languages (Adelaar 1995a), and from Ngaju (Dahl 
1951), which is spoken west of the Barito River (see Map 10.1). 
Map 10.1
The Malagasy Homeland and the East Barito Language Area in South Borneo
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 454 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
443
Malay, Javanese and Sanskrit loanwords testify to the fact that 
already very early onwards the Malays and Javanese were passing on 
to other peoples in ISEA Indic cultural influences that had been 
transformed by their own local cultures. This must already have happened 
on a large scale around the time that ancestors of the present-day 
Malagasy people began to migrate to East Africa, which was possibly in 
the seventh century AD,3 if not earlier (see Map 10.2). Malay loanwords 
3	 See Adelaar (1989, p. 32). Kumar (2011, p. 92) argues that the migrations could have 
taken place several centuries earlier. While this remains a possibility, the seventh 
century AD is still a more likely date given that (1) the Malagasy migration is linked 
to the rise of Srivijaya (for which there is no evidence prior to the seventh century 
AD), (2) the settlement of Madagascar by SEB speakers must have begun in the eighth 
century AD (Wright and Fanony 1992), and (3) Buddhism was particularly strong in 
ISEAS in the sixth to eighth centuries AD (as shown in this chapter).
Map 10.2
The Indian Ocean Region Including East Africa, Madagascar and East Asia
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 455 ---
444	
Alexander Adelaar
also enable us to see that the ancestors of the Malagasy were not only 
in touch with Malays in Borneo but also with Malays from Sumatra. 
They were so for a considerably long time, starting from before the 
first migrations to East Africa and continuing until after the Portuguese 
made their appearance in the Indian Ocean region (sixteenth century 
AD; Adelaar 2009, p. 158). Some Malay loanwords in East Madagascar 
have a Muslim signature, indicating that Islam may have been 
introduced from ISEA to this part of the island; other loanwords are 
from South Sulawesi languages, showing that there was a certain 
measure of inter-insular contact and ethnic integration going on across 
ISEA, something that does not readily appear from historical evidence 
based on written records (Adelaar 1995a). These loanwords give us a 
glimpse of ISEA and Madagascar as parts of an interconnected world 
in the past.
An intriguing question remains what the Malagasy homeland in 
Borneo looked like from a geographical, social, and political perspective. 
We also do not know how and under what circumstances SEB speaking 
people ended up in East Africa. Were they members of ethnic communities 
that can still be identified today, such as the Ma’anyan and Samihim, or 
had they already acquired a separate identity prior to their impressive 
migration(s) across the Indian Ocean? 
There is probably no definite answer to the last question, but if we 
rephrase it as a linguistic one, we may be able to throw some light on 
the matter: did these migrants speak an early form of one of the SEB 
languages still extant today, or had they already formed a separate 
speech community? The direction of the answer may help us to 
determine the social position of the early Malagasy people vis-à-vis 
the Malays. If, upon their departure, they spoke an early form of 
one of the current East Barito languages, one may surmise that they 
were recruited as a sort of subordinate labourers from local traditional 
communities that existed at the time (Adelaar 1995a; Kumar 2011), 
and this conceivably happened under force. On the other hand, if they 
had already begun to have their own SEB dialect in Borneo, they may 
have formed a group that was distinct from other SEB speaking 
societies, and they may have co-existed in a symbiotic relationship

--- PAGE 456 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
445
with Malays. The interaction with these Malays might have been on a 
more egalitarian basis, or at least, it might have been on a basis under-
emphasizing the actual power relation involved (see below, Section 3). 
In both scenarios, they may have been employed as crew members on 
Malay ships.
In an endeavour to find answers to these questions, I will investigate 
two issues. First, what can the linguistic information we have about 
Malagasy and other SEB languages tell us about the time when 
Malagasy became a separate language? Was it before or after the early 
Malagasy went to Africa? And second, what historical information do 
we have about the homeland of the early Malagasy in South Borneo? 
How does it fit in with the hypothesis that they already had their 
own language before migrating to East Africa? And with the idea of 
a symbiosis between local Malay rulers (this time in South Borneo) 
and some of the surrounding indigenous peoples? I will address 
these issues in Sections 2 and 3 and I will end with a conclusion in 
Section 4.
2.  Proto-Malagasy was Already a Separate Speech Form 
in Borneo: Linguistic Evidence
While this is not an altogether obvious issue, there are strong indications 
that when Malagasy speakers were still in South Borneo, they already 
spoke a distinct dialect. Malagasy was probably not just an early form 
of one of the extant SEB languages, which after the migration(s) to East 
Africa underwent post-migratory changes that can generally be ascribed 
to contact with languages in situ. Linguistic evidence for this is given 
in the following sub-sections 2.1 and 2.2.
Unless specified otherwise, the Malagasy data in this chapter represent 
the Merina dialect, which is spoken in the central highlands of Madagascar 
and was the basis for the development of standard Malagasy. Ma’anyan is 
taken as default sample language for SEB, as it is the only SEB language 
that is sufficiently documented for comparative use. It is spoken east 
of the Barito River in the Central and South Kalimantan provinces of 
Indonesian Borneo.

--- PAGE 457 ---
446	
Alexander Adelaar
2.1  Reflexes of Proto-Malayo-Polynesian * in Malagasy and 
Ma’anyan
Proto-Malayo-Polynesian (henceforth PMP) had a consonant *ɣ, which 
must have been a velar fricative.4 In SEB languages, this *ɣ became 
either *y or Ø (that is to say, it was lost). In Ma’anyan the *y reflex 
has remained y (and occasionally j as a secondary development), but 
in Merina and most other dialects of Malagasy it evolved further into z. 
A schematic representation of the changes looks as follows:
PMP *ɣ > Proto SEB *y > Ma’anyan y, (/j), Malagasy z 
(y in some vernacular dialects) 
 
Proto SEB Ø > Ma’anyan Ø (/ʔ)5, Malagasy Ø
This creates the impression that *ɣ developed in parallel ways in both 
languages, but this is not entirely the case: while they both reflect 
*y or Ø, they differ in the way these two reflexes are distributed in their 
respective lexicons. Compare Table 10.1, showing some of the different 
reflexes of PMP *ɣ found in Malagasy and Ma’anyan. (In the glosses 
below and in the following pages, “id.” stands for “same meaning as 
previous word”).
On the whole, Malagasy has more *y reflexes than Ma’anyan.6 The 
different ways in which these languages reflect *y and Ø are a strong 
indication that they had already become different dialects before Malagasy 
speakers left Borneo. They are most likely the result of borrowing between 
different SEB dialects in an early stage of their divergence: apparently, 
some SEB varieties changed PMP *ɣ to *y, and others lost *ɣ altogether. 
Through continued contact among these varieties, and (possibly) motivated 
by sociolinguistic differences between them, some varieties ended up
with two reflexes of *ɣ. This apparently also happened in Ma’anyan
4	 It is usually represented as *R in the comparative-linguistic literature.
5	 An epenthetic glottal stop may emerge as a secondary development in positions where 
a *ɣ was lost.
6	 This observation is based on the total inventory of *ɣ reflexes in both languages. It is 
not based on the list presented in Table 10.1, which is not exhaustive and therefore not 
critical.

--- PAGE 458 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
447
TABLE 10.1
Ma’anyan and Malagasy Reflexes of PMP *  in Word-Initial and Intervocalic Position
PMP *ɣ
Ma’anyan j
Malagasy z
(Malay)
(Javanese)
*ɣatus ‘hundred’
jatuh ‘id.’
zàtu ‘id.’
ratus ‘id.’
atos ‘id.’
*suɣuq ‘to order’
huyu ‘id.’
—
suruh ‘id.’
(suruh ‘id.’ < Malay)
*tǝɣas7 ‘quick, fast’ 
—
tèza ‘firm, durable; hardwood’ tǝras ‘hardwood’
—
PMP *ɣ 
Ma’anyan Ø
Malagasy z
(Malay)
(Javanese)
*quɣat ‘nerve, tendon’
uat ‘id.’
ùzatră ‘id.’
urat ‘id.’
ot-ot ‘muscle’
*bǝɣat ‘heavy’
weʔat ‘heavy’
vèzatră ‘id.’
brat ‘id.’
a-bot ‘id.’
*ɣabun ? ‘hazy, dim, vague’ awun ‘barely audible (voice)’ zàvună ‘fog’
rabun ‘dim (vision)’ awun-awun ‘fine rain, dew’
*ɣumaq ‘house’
—
zùma ‘cave’
rumah ‘house’
omah ‘id.’
PMP *ɣ 
Ma’anyan Ø
Malagasy Ø
(Malay)
(Javanese)
*baqǝɣuh ‘new; recently’
waʔu ‘recently’
vàu ‘id.’
ba(ha)ru ‘now’
wau ‘recently’
*suɣut ‘to recede’
uut ‘to drink’
ùtră ‘to massage’
surut ‘to recede’
(surud < Malay)
*paɣi ‘stingray’
pahiʔ ‘id.’
fài ‘id.’
pari ‘id.’
—
*daɣaq ‘blood’
ira ‘id.’
rà ‘id.’
darah ‘id.’
(Old Javanese) rāh ‘id.’
*ɣasǝŋ ‘to breathe’
aheŋ ‘spirit,’ thought’
àină ‘life; breath’
—
—
*bǝɣas ‘uncooked rice’
wɛah ‘id.’
—
bǝras ‘id.’
uwos ‘id.’
PMP *ɣ (no instances)
Ma’anyan j
Malagasy Ø 
7	 Blust (online) labels this as a Proto-Western Malayo-Polynesian etymon and reconstructs it with an apical *r; however, the Malagasy 
evidence favours a velar fricative *ɣ instead.

--- PAGE 459 ---
448	
Alexander Adelaar
and Malagasy. Since they have a different distributional outcome, and 
the outcome must be the result of language contact within the SEB area 
in Borneo, the most likely conclusion is that they had already become 
different dialects before the migration(s) to East Africa took place.
In Malagasy, the different distribution of z and Ø reflexes cannot 
be explained by the presence of Malay or Javanese, the two main 
languages that influenced Ma’anyan and Malagasy (and kept influencing 
the latter even after the migrations). Borrowing from Malay is excluded 
because this language has maintained r, which is a very different 
reflex from *y/z or Ø. Borrowing from Javanese is also impossible: 
although this language does have Ø for *ɣ, the corresponding Javanese 
words have structures that are totally different from their Malagasy 
and Ma’anyan counterparts. Finally, the different distribution of *y 
and Ø reflexes can hardly be explained as post-migratory influence on 
Malagasy from Austronesian languages other than Malay or Javanese, 
given the improbability of such influence to have reached Malagasy in 
its East African evolutionary stage (Adelaar 2016).
2.2  Reflexes of Borrowed *s in Malagasy and Ma’anyan
In the history of SEB languages, PMP *s became *h. This *h was 
maintained in Ma’anyan but lost in Malagasy, as follows:
PMP *s > Proto SEB *h > Ma’anyan h  
 
> Malagasy Ø
In both languages, this change and loss also affected early loanwords 
from Malay (and possibly other languages), but continued borrowing from 
these sources were the cause that s was eventually re-introduced into the 
Ma’anyan and Malagasy phoneme systems. As a result, both Malagasy 
and Ma’anyan have “recent” Malay loanwords maintaining Malay s, 
and “earlier” Malay loanwords showing Ma’anyan h and Malagasy Ø 
for it. (Note that while relative age is the most obvious explanation for 
the fact that *s was lost in some loanwords and maintained in others, 
another important explaining factor may be frequency of usage and level 
of adaptation of these loanwords). 
Whereas both languages share this overall pattern, they do not always 
maintain *s in the same loanwords, and Malagasy tends to maintain *s

--- PAGE 460 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
449
more often than Ma’anyan. These differences suggest that both languages 
borrowed their Malay loanwords independently. Observe the list in 
Table 10.2, which is not exhaustive, of Malay loanwords containing s 
that ended up in Malagasy and Ma’anyan:
TABLE 10.2
Malagasy and Ma’anyan Reflexes of *s in Malay Loanwords
Malay
Malagasy
Ma’anyan
S :
S :
S
sǝdia ‘already; admittedly’ 
satria ‘because’
sadia ‘already’
(< Sanskrit sādhya)
sambaw ‘cargo ship’
sambu ‘ship, large boat’
sammaw ‘celestial ship’
sisa (< Skt śeṣa) ‘remains’
sisa ‘remains’
—
S :
S :
H
sakay ‘subject’ (< Sanskrit 
sakhāy-, accusative form: 
sakhāyam)
sakaiza ‘companion’
hake ‘stranger; Muslim’
gasiŋ ‘spinning top’
hasină ‘spinning top’
kahiŋ ‘spinning top’
salah ‘wrong’
salasala ‘wrong’
hala ‘wrong’
k-asih ‘love’
asi ‘veneration’
ahi ‘compassion’
sakit ‘sick, ill’ (?)
sahir-ană ‘worried, in trouble’ hakit ‘difficult’
S : 
Ø :
H
suŋay ‘river’
uni ‘river’
huŋey ‘river’
sampay ‘until; (orig. ‘to hang’)
ampi ‘enough’
hampe ‘until’
S :
(no corresponding forms)
H
sayaŋ ‘sad’
—
hayaŋ ‘sad’
sǝdikit ‘a bit’
—
hadikit ‘a bit’
soal (< Ar su’āl) ‘case, issue’
—
hual ‘case, issue’
mahesa (< Skt mahiṣa) ‘buffalo’ —
eha ‘animal’

--- PAGE 461 ---
450	
Alexander Adelaar
These instances of historical reflexes of Malay s form a pattern that 
is reminiscent of the distributional pattern of reflexes of PMP *ɣ in 
Ma’anyan and Malagasy. It suggests that borrowing of these instances 
constituted separate events in both languages. However, this outcome 
could in principle also be the result of continued influence from Malay 
on Malagasy after its speakers had migrated to East Africa. As such, 
it is less critical evidence than in the *ɣ case: although the relatively 
large number of Malay loanwords containing s in Malagasy is likely 
to be due to a higher exposure to Malay of an early form of Malagasy 
when it was still spoken in Borneo, it can hypothetically also be 
ascribed to borrowing from Malay into Malagasy after its speakers had 
left Borneo. 
2.3  Reflexes of PMP *ti in Malagasy and Other SEB Languages
In SEB languages in Borneo, PMP *t has become s before a following 
*i. In Merina and other Malagasy dialects, *t has become an affricate 
ts (and sometimes s) when occurring in this position. It is obvious that 
these manifestations of *t(i) are historically part of the same sound 
change, as follows:
PMP *ti > (early SEB) *tsi > modern SEB si  
 
> Merina tsi, (si)
On the face of it, this development is strong evidence for the inclusion 
of Malagasy in the SEB subgroup, but it is disqualified by the fact 
that it did not take place in some of the dialects of North, West and 
South Madagascar. This indicates that it had not yet taken place in 
Proto Malagasy, and hence also not in Proto SEB (Adelaar 2013). It 
appears that the *ti > tsi, si change is not a shared innovation but 
rather the result of a parallel development (Dahl 1951; Adelaar 2013). 
Interestingly, this sets off Proto-Malagasy against the SEB languages, 
which all exhibit si. Compare the following SEB lexical data reflecting 
PMP *ti, which are taken from Hudson’s (1967a) wordlists. They are 
held against corresponding Proto SEB etyma as well as Merina and 
dialectal Malagasy forms (of which the former have undergone the 
developments in question, and the latter have not). Note incidentally that

--- PAGE 462 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
451
the change also took place in Dusun Deyah,8 which does not belong to 
the SEB subgroup but to the Central-East Barito branch, of which it is 
the only member:
Proto SEB *tiliŋ ‘to fly’: Merina tsìdină, South Sakalava Malagasy 
tìli, Ma’anyan sidiŋ, Samihim s<um>idiŋ Dusun Deyah 
s<amb>iliŋ, Dusun Malang min-sidiŋ, Dusun Witu s<am>idiŋ, 
Paku s<am>iliŋ ‘id.’
Proto SEB *witik ‘ant’: Merina vìtsikă, South Sakalava Malagasy vìtike, 
Samihim, Ma’anyan, Dusun Deyah, Dusun Malang, Paku 
wisik, Dusun Witu usik ‘id.’	
Proto SEB *punsi ‘banana’: Merina akùndru afùntsi ‘banana species’, 
Dusun Deyah, Dusun Witu, Ma’anyan punsi, Paku punši 
‘banana’
Proto SEB *t<in>aʔi ‘guts’: Merina tsinài, South Sakalava Malagasy 
tinài, Dusun Deyah, Dusun Witu, Ma’anyan, Paku sanaʔi 
‘guts’, Dusun Malang sanai ‘belly’
Proto SEB *bitih ‘calf of leg’: Merina vìtsi, Ma’anyan wisis, Samihim 
wisih ‘id.’, North Malagasy vìti ‘leg’
Proto Malagasy *i *tikaN ‘1st person plural inclusive topicalized 
nominative pronoun’: Merina isìka, Tanala itsìka, Taisaka 
intsìka (with nasal accretion); compare also some reflexes 
derived from Proto Malagasy *tikaN (without topical 
marker): Tandroy tìka(ŋe), Mahafaly tìka (Adelaar and 
Kikusawa 2014, pp. 492–93).
There are some other Malagasy/SEB word pairs reflecting PMP *ti, but 
they are less representative because available cognates are limited to 
Malagasy and Ma’anyan:
8	 A language currently spoken along the Tabalong River in the northern part of South 
Kalimantan Province (Indonesian Borneo).

--- PAGE 463 ---
452	
Alexander Adelaar
Proto SEB *timpun ‘to collect’: Merina tsìmpună, South Sakalava 
Malagasy tìmpu, Ma’anyan simpun ‘id.’
Proto SEB *wi(n)tiŋ ‘satiatied’ > Tanala Malagasy vìntsiŋă, Bara Malagasy 
vìti, Ma’anyan wisiŋ ‘id.’
In these pairs, SEB languages (and Dusun Deyah) systematically exhibit 
si and Merina has tsi (/si), whereas South Sakalava Malagasy and various 
other Malagasy dialects have retained ti. Therefore I assume that Proto 
Malagasy also had *ti.
Another development that seems diagnostic for subgrouping Malagasy 
with the SEB languages but actually is not because it never took place 
in various Malagasy regional dialects is the change from PMP *li to 
di. In contrast to the *ti > tsi/si change, this change is absent in Dusun 
Deyah, and it took place in only part of the Paku cognates.9 Consider 
the following instances:
Proto SEB *kali ‘to dig’: Merina hàdi, South Sakalava Malagasy hàli, 
Dusun Malang, Dusun Witu, Ma’anyan, Samihim, Paku ŋadi 
(<- N- + kadi) ‘id.’
Proto SEB *tali ‘rope’: South Sakalava Malagasy, northern Malagasy 
tàli ‘to plait’, Merina tàdi, Dusun Witu, Ma’anyan, Samihim, 
Paku tadi ‘rope’
Proto SEB *lipen ‘tooth’: Merina nìfi, Dusun Witu, Ma’anyan, Samihim, 
Paku dipɛn ‘id.’
Proto SEB *lime ‘five’: Merina dìmi, South Sakalava Malagasy lìme, 
Dusun Malang, Dusun Witu, Ma’anyan, Samihim dimɛ ‘id.’; 
compare also Paku limɔ
Proto SEB *tiliŋ ‘to fly’: Merina tsìdină, South Sakalava Malagasy tìli, 
Ma’anyan sidiŋ, Samihim s<um>idiŋ, DM minsidiŋ, Dusun 
Witu samidiŋ ‘id.’; compare also Dusun Deyah sambiliŋ, 
Pak samiliŋ ‘id.’
9	 In this respect it is interesting to note that unlike Hudson (1967), Dahl (1977) and 
Mahdi (1988) did not classify Paku inside the SEB core group. (Note also that 
Paku reflects historical schwa and final *a as ɔ, in contrast to a corresponding ɛ in 
Ma’anyan, Samihim, Dusun Malang and Dusun Witu).

--- PAGE 464 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
453
Proto SEB *kulit ‘skin’: Merina hùditră, South Sakalava Malagasy hùlitse, 
Ma’anyan, Samihim kudit ‘id.’
Proto SEB *lite ‘sticky substance’: Merina dìti, South Sakalava Malagasy 
lìteke (with unexplained final syllable) ‘gum, raisin’, Dusun 
Witu, Ma’anyan, Samihim, Paku ditɛʔ ‘sticky rice’.
Various other instances occur but their reflexes are limited to Malagasy 
dialects and Ma’anyan only. What all instances clearly demonstrate 
is that SEB languages in Borneo and in central, and eastern 
Malagasy exhibit di, whereas other Malagasy dialects such as South 
Sakalava have maintained li. And again, as li was maintained in 
Malagasy many regional dialects, it must also have been present in 
Proto Malagasy.
Although the changes from *ti to tsi/si and from *li to di are shared 
by all SEB languages in Borneo, the above phonological divergences 
between regional Malagasy dialects and other SEB languages show that 
they had not yet taken place in Proto SEB. If this contrast between 
Proto-Malagasy and other SEB languages already existed in Borneo, 
it would support the theory that the current SEB languages in Borneo 
had already begun to diverge from Proto Malagasy in the homeland, 
before the migration(s) of Proto Malagasy speakers to East Africa, and 
that the latter had already acquired a separate dialect. However, the 
argument is not hard evidence, as it is still possible that at the time 
of the Malagasy migration(s) in the seventh century, the *ti > tsi/si 
and *li > di changes had only just started to spread in SEB languages 
in Borneo, and that they took their full course in these languages 
only after the Malagasy migrants had left. In Madagascar the changes 
only systematically affected the eastern and central Malagasy dialects. 
Although it is likely that there was already a tendency for these changes 
to take place in Proto Malagasy, they had not yet fully materialized 
and cannot be reconstructed at that level (Adelaar 2013). In short, the 
current different reflexes of *ti and *li in SEB languages in Borneo and 
in Malagasy dialects add to the overall impression that Malagasy had 
already become a separate dialect before the migrations, although they 
do not provide hard evidence for it.

--- PAGE 465 ---
454	
Alexander Adelaar
2.4  Person Markers in Malagasy, and the Lack of it in Ma’anyan
In the history of Malagasy there are two person markers, ra- and *i. 
The prefix ra- occurs with kinship terms, some dialectal personal 
pronouns, some common nouns with a human reference, and (very 
frequently) names. It adds a notion of respect to some of the resulting 
derivations. The following examples show the occurrence of ra- in 
kinship terms:
rèni ‘mother’ (< *ra- + SEB *ine < PMP *ina ‘mother’)
rahavàvi ‘sister (of a woman)’ (< *ra- + SEB *aka ‘older sibling’ + 
SEB *wawey ‘woman’ < PMP *aka ‘older sibling’ + *babehi‘ 
‘woman’)
rahalàhi ‘brother (of a man)’ (< *ra- + SEB *aka + *laki ‘man’ < PMP 
*aka + *laki ‘man’)
raìvu ‘sister who is neither the youngest nor the oldest’ (< *ra- + SEB *iwo 
‘halfway’; cf. Malagasy ivo ‘middle’, and Ma’anyan iwo ‘half’)
ravinàntu (Comorian Malagasy) ‘child-in-law’ (< *ra- + SEB *winantu 
< PMP *b-in-antu ‘id.’)
rafùzană ‘parent; parent-in-law’ (< *ra- + Malay moyaŋ, (Malay dialects) 
puyaŋ ‘ancestor(s)’ (Adelaar 1992, pp. 109, 200)
Examples of ra- prefixed to personal pronouns in regional Malagasy 
forms are (Adelaar and Kikusawa 2014):
Tandroy Malagasy ràhu (< ra- + *ahu) ‘1st person sg.’
Tandroy Malagasy rèhe (< ra- + *iha) ‘2nd person sg.’
Tandroy Malagasy re (< ra- + *iye) ‘3rd person sg.’
South Sakalava Malagasy rìe, ri (< ra- + *iye) ‘3rd person sg.’
South Sakalava Malagasy rahài (< ra- + *ahai) ‘1st person plural exclusive’
Common nouns with a human reference include the following ones:
rafùtsi ‘term of address for old lady’ (< *ra- + fùtsi ‘white’)
rànună ‘what’s-his-name’ (< *ra- + ànuna ‘thing, whatchamallit’)
North Malagasy ramatùa ‘Madam, Mrs.’ (< *ra- + matùa ‘eldest child’)
Examples of personal names with ra- are for instance Radàma (name of 
a Malagasy royalty in the nineteenth century) and Razafintsalàma (name 
of a Malagasy linguist).

--- PAGE 466 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
455
Interestingly, this prefix is also used with European roots, as in 
ramusè ‘sir’ (< French monsieur), ramulè ‘donkey’ (< French mulet), 
bìtrŭ, rabìtrŭ ‘rabbit’ (< English), suggesting that it is still productive. 
It also appears in the following form containing a concatenation of 
personal prefixes. In it, the fossilized person marker -z- (see further 
below) is directly prefixed to the root, whereas ra- has a more peripheral 
position, showing that the latter is more productive and recent than the 
former:
razàndri ‘(respectful term of address for younger sibling or to any 
younger person)’ < (*ra- + SEB *hi + àndri ‘younger sibling’ 
< PMP *si + *a(N)ji ‘younger sibling’)
The person marker *i is realized as i-, y-, z-, iz-, ia- in the various 
forms of Malagasy, and it is a reflex of the PMP person marker *si. It 
often occurs with 1st person nominative pronouns (with which it 
originally formed a “topicalized” subseries (Adelaar and Kikusawa 
2014)), kinship terms and some common nouns with a human reference. 
Examples are:
(1st person nominative pronouns:)
Proto Malagasy *i ahu ‘1st person singular’ > Merina zàhu, Taisaka 
iàhu, Tankarana izàhu
Proto Malagasy *i tikaN ‘1st person plural inclusive’ > Merina isìka, 
Taisaka intsìka
Proto Malagasy *i ahai ‘1st person plural exclusive’ > Merina izahài, 
Taisaka iahài, (sixteenth century Malagasy in Arabic script) 
yahai
(kinship terms:)
PMP *si + (Dravidian) *appa: ‘father’ (Adelaar 1992, p. 104, fns. 149 
and 150) > Proto Malagasy *i+apɛ > *yape > Merina zàfi ‘child, 
descendant’, àfi ‘grandchild’10 
10	 The semantic change from “father” to “child” and “grandchild” is not easy to explain: 
maybe *apa was originally a reciprocal kinship term used between a father and his 
children?

--- PAGE 467 ---
456	
Alexander Adelaar
PMP *si + *anak ‘offspring’ > Proto Malagasy *i+anak(ă) > *yanak > 
Merina zànakă ‘offspring’
*si + *ama ‘father’ > Proto Malagasy *i+ama > (dialectal) zàma 
‘mother’s brother’
*si + *a(N)ji ‘younger sibling’ > Proto Malagasy *i+andi > *yandri > 
Merina zàndri ‘younger sibling’
(common noun with a human reference:)
*i(a) + tùvu ‘unmarried’ > zatùvu ‘a youth’
*i + (French) (mon)sieur ‘sir; mister’ > isè ‘you (used between men)’
PMP *si is maintained in Ma’anyan as hi, a person marker occurring 
before personal names (e.g. Hi Gayuhan, a character in Ma’anyan 
folk stories). It does not occur in other positions (Adelaar personal 
fieldwork notes). In other SEB languages, the occurrence and role of 
PMP *si reflexes is not well documented. Therefore it remains unclear 
whether the difference in application scope between *i in Malagasy 
and hi in Ma’anyan is due to an expansion of the original role of *i 
in Malagasy, or a reduction of the original role of hi in Ma’anyan. 
However, what is clear is that Malagasy *i and Ma’anyan hi both 
reflect an earlier PMP *si. In contrast, ra- is an innovation. It does 
have corresponding forms in western Indonesian languages such as 
Javanese and Balinese (ra-), Malay and Batak (fossilized da-) and, 
on first sight, even Fijian (ra-), but these are in all likelihood spread 
through borrowing or (in the case of Fijian) are an independent 
development. In South East Asia, ra- and da- only occur in some 
languages spoken in the western part of Indonesia and Malaysia, and 
among the SEB languages, only in Malagasy. In Malagasy (and in 
Balinese), ra- must be a loan morpheme from Javanese (Adelaar 1995b, 
2010). It occurs in all Malagasy dialects, although its distribution varies 
according to dialect.
Given this spread, it must already have been part of Proto Malagasy. 
Furthermore, as the Javanese language and culture played a major role 
in the early history of South Borneo, and only a minor role in the post-
migratory history of Madagascar, the borrowing of ra- from Javanese 
into Proto Malagasy is much more likely to have happened in South 
Borneo than in Madagascar.

--- PAGE 468 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
457
2.5  Evaluation of the Linguistic Evidence
The linguistic evidence presented above confirms that Proto Malagasy 
must already have started to develop as an own entity before its speakers 
moved away from South Borneo and crossed the Indian ocean to settle 
eventually in Madagascar. 
Not all of the evidence is equally decisive. The most critical piece 
of it is the different distribution of PMP *ɣ reflexes in Ma’anyan and 
Malagasy, because the different phonetic ingredients for this distribution 
were already present in the East Barito area, but not later in East 
Africa. Almost equally strong evidence is the presence of the originally 
Javanese ra- prefix in Malagasy. As stated above, Javanese political, 
cultural and linguistic influence has been a salient factor in the 
history of South Borneo ever since the foundation of the kingdom of 
Banjarmasin,11 if not from before that time. It is in this very region,12 
and hence at a time well before the migration(s) of Proto Malagasy 
speakers to East Africa, that ra- must have been adopted by some 
speakers of SEB. Such morphological borrowing is rather unlikely to 
have happened after the migrations, even if Indonesia and Madagascar 
remained in contact. Finally, the maintenance of PMP/SEB *ti and *li 
in Proto Malagasy and the fact that the Malay consonant s occurs more 
often in Malagasy loanwords than in Ma’anyan ones support the theory 
that Proto Malagasy had already taken an independent course from other 
SEB languages before the migrations. However, they remain circumstantial 
evidence at best because it cannot entirely be excluded that they are the 
outcome of post-migratory developments.
11	 Nowadays, Banjarmasin (or Banjar, as it is also called) is a metropolis in South 
Borneo. In the past, it used to be the centre of a sultanate, and before that, of a Hindu 
kingdom. As explained further below, this centre changed its name and location a 
number of times. Unless indicated otherwise, in what follows “Banjarmasin” stands 
for the current metropolis as well as for its predecessors in other locations in South 
Borneo.
12	 It is worth noting here that the oldest Indic inscriptions in ISEA were also found in 
Borneo, in Muara Kaman, close to Kutai Town in East Kalimantan. They date from 
ca. 400 AD (Dahl 1951, p. 368). Although Muara Kaman is not in South Borneo, it is 
relatively close to it.

--- PAGE 469 ---
458	
Alexander Adelaar
3.  Malagasy as a Separate Speech Form in Borneo:  
The Historical Context
As indicated at the beginning of this chapter, if Malagasy was already a 
distinct speech form before the migrations, chances are that its speakers 
were in a relatively equal relationship with Malays; in contrast, if it was 
not yet distinct, subordination of its speakers to the Malays is more 
likely, all things being equal. Having a distinct speech form would 
suggest that they already formed their own community and had taken 
some distance from their traditional society, which implies a certain 
amount of acculturation to Malay society. If the relationship was relatively 
equal in terms of social hierarchy and stratification (and not, say, one of 
slave versus slave owner), one would understand why there are so many 
Malay, Javanese and Sanskrit elements in Malagasy, which include not 
only words, but also the Javanese honorific prefix ra-, an indicator of 
respect and social status. One would also be able to put into perspective 
the fact that the seventh-century Old Malay inscriptions from South 
Sumatra and Bangka Island (see Map 10.2) include a few lines in an 
unknown language that seems to represent a form of SEB (Aichele 1936; 
Dahl 1951, p. 158; Adelaar 1989, pp. 35–36). Yet, I am not going as 
far as Kullanda (2009) or Beaujard (2012), who both argue that this 
language is evidence for a prominent role of the Malagasy in Indonesian 
maritime history before they disappeared to Madagascar. Even if this 
unidentified language turns out to be an early form of Malagasy (which 
is likely), it does not justify such a far-reaching conclusion, for which 
there is no correlating historical and ethnographic support. A more 
likely scenario is that there was a symbiotic (but still asymmetric) social 
relation between Malays and early Malagasy people, comparable to the 
one that existed between the Malays and surrounding Orang Asli groups 
during the heydays of Malacca (fifteenth and early sixteenth century 
AD; see further below).
Historical information about South Borneo is scarce. Most academic 
research has concentrated on colonial and post-colonial times, and for the 
pre-colonial past we basically only have the “Banjar Chronicles” (Hikayat 
Banjar in Malay), which are the chronicles of the city of Banjarmasin. 
While this document is a valuable historical source, it is essentially

--- PAGE 470 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
459
concerned with legitimizing the rule of the Sultanate in Banjarmasin in 
the sixteenth century, meaning that a true representation of historical 
facts is somewhat subordinated to this socio-political cause. As such, 
it should not be read uncritically and taken as faithfully representing 
historical facts. However, it should neither be rejected as a piece of fiction 
but interpreted as the reworking and manipulation of actual historical 
facts in order to meet the political ends of legitimizing a ruling dynasty. 
The most insightful study of the “Banjar Chronicles” along such an 
interpretation was published by Hans Ras (1968). He drew attention to 
the following points:13 
1.	 Toponyms cannot be taken on face value simply because they can 
be used again in different areas. The Banjar Chronicles mention 
Tanjung Pura as an old Malay settlement, the establishment of 
which preceded Banjarmasin and its associated court locations 
(see below). It is often identified with a rather distant coastal 
town of the same name in West Borneo. However, in the Banjar 
Chronicles, Tanjung Pura seems to refer to a nearby town in 
South Borneo (see Map 10.1). Ras (1968, pp. 187–92) identifies 
it with the current town of Tanjung, a land-locked town which is 
situated northeast of Banjarmasin and may have lost its importance 
because the royal court had been shifted to places closer to the 
coast—most likely for economic reasons. He considers the town 
of Tanjung Pura in West Borneo as a more recent settlement that 
was given the same name as the historical Tanjung Pura in South 
Borneo (see Map 10.1).14 
2.	 The coast line of South Borneo was radically different in 
the past and has been subject to rapid change throughout the 
Quaternary. Expanding coastlines in South Borneo are due to 
the augmentation of alluvial material brought along by the large 
13	 These are unfortunately ignored in later historical studies such as Knapen (2001).
14	 This is not unlike the history of many European place names which were used again 
in regions where Europeans established themselves later on, as in Northern America, 
Africa or Australia.

--- PAGE 471 ---
460	
Alexander Adelaar
rivers running through this area. Ras (1968, pp. 196–200), who 
was a geologist as well as a philologist, referred to Soekmono 
(1957) and Van Bemmelen (1949) to argue that the coast of 
South Borneo was originally split by a gulf. It ran almost 
200 kilometres into the interior, covering an area which is 
currently crossed by the Barito River and several other large 
rivers and consists of tidal wetlands. It would have provided 
easy access to the sea to Tanjung, the town that had a key role 
in the foundation history of Banjarmasin. Obviously, recurrent 
and heavy siltation constituted a major problem to the then 
flourishing trading ports and court capitals. In order to maintain 
access to the sea, these settlements often had to move closer to 
an ever expanding coast. Court removals are a constant theme 
in the Banjar Chronicles, although in the story they are usually 
ascribed to politics and intrigue rather than to natural events. 
However, Ras’ claim of a gulf extending almost 200 kilometres 
into the current interior of Borneo in historical times is a rather 
bold one and needs further verification.
3.	 Like toponyms, ethnonyms cannot always be taken on face value. 
According to the Banjar Chronicles, the Banjarese royal family 
descends from a Kaling founding father. Kaling is the Banjarese 
Malay pronunciation and orthography of the Malay word kǝliŋ, 
nowadays an appellation for (South) Indians. Ras doubted that 
the founding family was of South Indian descent and argued 
that they originated from Java. This is indirectly supported by 
Damais (1964),15 who investigated the original meaning of kǝliŋ. 
He argued that a contamination must have happened between 
the Indian ethnonym Kaliṅga, which referred to people from the 
Coromandel coast, and a native Indonesian term kǝliŋ designating 
foreigners in general, sometimes including Javanese. Europeans 
must have conflated both forms, which resulted in a single term 
15	 For some reason this source was not used by Ras (1968).

--- PAGE 472 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
461
kǝliŋ designating South Indians in particular. This designation 
was then taken over in some Indonesian languages, eclipsing the 
original meaning of the word kǝliŋ (Damais 1964, pp. 103–4). This 
sort of historical confusion is also observed in the use of various 
European ethnonyms: one recalls the original meanings of words 
like “Russians” (historically referring to Swedes) and “Dutch” 
(related to the adjective Deutsch with which Germans refer to 
themselves). So, using the Banjar Chronicles is not only a matter 
of retrieving historical information from a manipulated text: it 
also requires understanding facts that were accurate in the past 
but have become obscure through semantic change affecting 
their signifiers. This text should not be taken literally but can 
still be used as an invaluable source of information about things 
that happened in the past and are still remembered, albeit in a 
distorted way. It does contribute to an investigation into the 
origins of the Malagasy and their language. It mentions various 
historical facts, but as far as indications of time are concerned, 
we have to do with narrative time rather than chronological time. 
For instance, the story and genealogical list suggest a limited 
time span of maybe four centuries (cf. Knapen 2001), which 
ends with the establishment of the court in Martapura. However, 
it is likely that this is the result of a temporal compression, 
especially concerning the earliest events. The span involved was 
most likely much longer. The fact that the term Kaling refers to 
Javanese people, as suggested by Ras (and supported by Damais) 
has a direct bearing on chronology. It corresponds with a distinct 
period in Chinese historiography (sixth to eighth century AD) in 
which the Javanese were referred to as Holing, which is most 
likely a Chinese rendering of *kəliŋ. It was apparently a period 
in which Buddhism (rather than Hinduism) was in the ascendant 
in Java. In other words, could it be that the founding fathers 
of Banjarmasin and its precursors were in fact Javanese (and 
possibly Buddhists) who moved to Borneo between the sixth and 
eighth century? If yes, it would correspond rather neatly with 
the estimated migration period of the early Malagasy. The latter 
probably left in the seventh century AD (Adelaar 1989): at any

--- PAGE 473 ---
462	
Alexander Adelaar
rate, archeological evidence in Madagascar shows that they arrived 
there no earlier than 700 AD (Wright and Fanony 1992). It would 
also fit in with the occurrence of Buddhist inscriptions elsewhere 
on Borneo Island, in the Sambas region (West Kalimantan) 
(Griffiths 2014), and in Sanggau (West Kalimantan) and Brunei 
Darussalam (Machi Suhadi 1989, pp. 112–14; Sukarto K. Atmodjo 
1994, pp. 1–8). Griffiths (2014, pp. 148–49) estimates the 
inscriptions in Sambas to be at least from the mid-ninth century 
AD, with an earlier date in the first half of the eighth century 
AD as a possibility. He considers these and other inscriptions in 
Java, Bali, Sumatra and Borneo, as a clear written testimony to 
the fact that the Indonesian archipelago was an integral part of the 
Buddhist world at the turn of the second millennium AD (Griffiths 
2014, pp. 185–87).
The Banjar Chronicles also mention that Banjarmasin and its precursors 
were founded at the expense of Tanjung Pura, which was an even 
earlier establishment. According to Ras, Tanjung Pura was an outpost 
of Srivijaya, and it was more distinctly Malay than Banjarmasin. The 
latter became very Javanese in style, even if the Banjarese language 
has remained a Malay dialect. Ras’ speculation that Tanjung Pura must 
have been located in an area upriver from Negara Dipa (the earliest 
precursor of Banjarmasin) rather than in West Borneo fits in with the 
fact that we find in Malagasy a strong influence from Malay and, to 
a lesser extent, from Javanese and Sanskrit. The different extent of 
influence that Malagasy underwent from Malay and Javanese somehow 
reflects a situation in which Malay was more prevalent, but Javanese was 
making inroads in a sociolinguistic setting in which SEB speakers and 
Malays were interacting. Either Malay or both Malay and Javanese must 
have contributed Sanskrit vocabulary to Malagasy before the Malagasy 
migration(s) to East Africa. 
The presence of the Javanese was already apparent in the earliest 
period in the Banjar Chronicles, and may even predate the time span 
covered by this text. The Javanese were important trading partners for 
polities in South Borneo because of their position directly opposite of 
South Borneo across the Java Sea. The Banjar Chronicles suggest a

--- PAGE 474 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
463
Javanese influence on politics and economic life, especially with reference 
to pepper production. Ras and Van Bemmelen’s accounts of shifting 
coastlines match a situation in which the court in Negara Dipa was initially 
located in a region downriver from Tanjung and was subsequently moved 
three times to locations further downriver (to wit Amuntai, Banjarmasin 
and Martapura) in response to these natural events (see Map 10.1). 
However, as noted above, the extent of Ras’ use of expanding coastlines 
to explain early Banjarese history is speculative and should be 
handled with caution awaiting further research into the geography of 
South Borneo.
The historical accounts of SEB peoples themselves are of limited use 
in search of their early history. The Ma’anyan place their original 
homeland in the Nan Sarunai area near Amuntai (Nan Sarunai literally 
stands for the mouth of the Sarunai tributary). Since Amuntai was 
the seat of the court before it moved to Banjarmasin and Martapura, 
there must have been a much closer contact between Ma’anyan and 
Banjarese in the past. The account of this earlier Ma’anyan homeland 
runs parallel to certain passages in the Banjar Chronicles referring to 
events in the sixteenth century AD. However, it is not clear to what 
extent the Ma’anyan account is coloured by “feedback” from the Banjar 
Chronicles.16 Furthermore, the leaving of the Nan Sarunai homeland by 
the Ma’anyan happened in the sixteenth to seventeenth century AD and 
is a fairly recent affair (Hudson 1967b, pp. 20, 24). It does not give us 
much certainty as to where they may have lived in the preceding centuries. 
The identity, role and status of the ancestors of the early Malagasy 
migrants before they left South Borneo remains uncertain. Nevertheless, 
rather than war captives or forced labour they may have been a section 
of the SEB speakers who cooperated with local Malays and began 
to acculturate to them in a similar way as the Orang Asli (Bidadari) 
people once did in the Malay Peninsula. Some of the Orang Asli groups 
16	 For instance, Ma’anyan historical accounts sometimes include references to 
Madagascar and Malagasy migrations. Such references are no doubt also the result of 
academic feedback on traditional history.

--- PAGE 475 ---
464	
Alexander Adelaar
were economically and politically in a symbiotic relationship with the 
local Malays. They were loyal to the ruler of Malacca, contributing 
to the welfare and safety of his kingdom up to the eighteenth century 
(Andaya and Andaya 2001, pp. 44–49, 81, 87). The Malays in Malacca 
were most likely also assimilating Orang Asli into their community. 
A similar symbiotic relationship between Malays and some of the early 
Malagasy people in South Borneo would explain the participation of the 
latter in the maritime expeditions of the former, and the likelihood that 
the few lines in an unknown language occurring in the oldest Malay 
inscriptions represent early Malagasy. In the Malay peninsula, conversion 
to Islam of the Malays apparently had some contrary effects on their 
relationship with the Orang Asli. It must have had similar effects on 
the relationship between Malays and SEB people in South Borneo. 
For the latter, abstention from pork and alcohol must have been an 
initial impediment to conversion, as these ingredients are essential in 
traditional Ma’anyan rituals.
Sellato (2013) gives a very useful insight in the various ways in 
which the native peoples of Borneo must have interacted in the past. He 
distinguishes three main types of traditional populations in Borneo in 
terms of social organization, economic systems, ethno-cultural identities 
and location relative to the coast. They are the Malays, Dayak and 
Punan.17 The Malays lived in Borneo’s “outer ring”, that is to say, in 
places close to the coast (although not exactly on the coast for security 
reasons) or at economically strategic places where rivers meet. They 
initially formed trading posts which would develop into local kingdoms 
later on. They controlled the trade between the world outside Borneo 
and the island’s interior. Ultimately, the coastal Malay kingdoms used 
to be under the authority of Javanese kingdoms such as Demak. The 
Malays also tended to exercise control over the Dayak who lived 
more inland although they were not always able to do so. The Dayak 
usually lived more inland (the “middle ring”): they produced rice and 
were basically self-sufficient but were also engaged in trade with the 
17	 For the sake of simplicity, this term is used here in its wider application as a cover 
term for all traditional nomads in Borneo.

--- PAGE 476 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
465
Malays, who provided them with certain luxury goods. Being more 
numerous than the Malays, they were potentially also more powerful, 
but in practice they were often divided among themselves. In some 
cases Dayak groups were able to form impressive political federations, 
controlling large territories, subordinating other groups and even making 
slaves, but they never developed these federations into kingdoms. 
Some Dayak groups underwent strong influence from the more 
cosmopolitan Malays, who were under Indian cultural influence and 
would eventually adopt Islam. Dayak traders operated as middlemen 
between the Punan and the Malays. The Punan are nomads who live 
even further into the interior (the “inner ring”) and traditionally collect 
forest products. Via the Dayak and Malays these products would find 
their way to the world outside Borneo.
According to Sellato, in the remote interior Dayak and Punan groups 
were independent and paid no tribute. In the middle courses of main 
rivers, strong Dayak societies developed political bonds with Malay kings 
and became their vassals. In lower river regions, some Dayak groups 
participated in the formation of coastal kingdoms. Some other groups 
in these regions would end up under the kingdom’s control and their 
territories became part of the kingdom’s land: they became sǝrah, which 
Sellato translates as “dependent”; however, the word also carries the notion 
of surrendering and most likely refers to tributaries. The term is Malay: 
Banjar Malay has a dialectal form sarah (same meaning), which was also 
adopted with the same form and meaning into Ma’anyan. Malagasy has 
a corresponding term sàra “payment; cost, price”, referring to the tribute 
to be paid as a consequence of dependency or surrendering rather than 
the state of dependency or surrendering itself. People who had given 
in to the kingdom’s control in this way would gradually assimilate to 
Malays (and eventually embrace Islam). 
Sellato’s model of a Dayak/Malay interface, especially in the middle 
courses of main rivers, provides a very good setting for the Malagasy 
homeland. It also provides a scenario that is more convincing than 
one involving a master-slave relationship. Early Malagasy society 
may have contributed more actively to the formation of the Banjarese 
kingdom, and part of it (that is, the part that did not migrate to east 
Africa) may also have surrendered to it and eventually merged with

--- PAGE 477 ---
466	
Alexander Adelaar
it at some stage. In this context it is worth noting that recent genetic 
tests based on autosomal DNA have shown that the Malagasy are 
genetically closer to the population of Banjarmasin than to the Ma’anyan 
(Brucato et al. 2016).
4.  Concluding Remarks 
For want of historical records and archaeological data, the linguistic and 
literary history of Malagasy and the traditional Malay literature of South 
Borneo are invaluable sources for a better understanding of early relations 
between India and South Borneo. They help us to understand some of 
the circumstances under which the early Malagasy left their native land 
and sailed all the way across the Indian Ocean to East Africa. They give 
us a glimpse of the level of Indic influence via (Buddhist) Śrīvijaya 
and (Buddhist and Hindu) Javanese courts on the civilization and 
intellectual development of Indonesia in the seventh century AD. They 
also give a glimpse of the impact that Indic religious and political 
ideologies used to have on governments in ISEA. Indic concepts of power 
and a related administrative terminology were introduced to the Malays 
and Javanese in the early centuries of the Common Era; some of this 
heritage was passed on to the early Malagasy and even survived in the 
Merina kingdom in the nineteenth century AD (Ottino 1983; Beaujard 
2012).
There are various early developments that set off Malagasy against 
other SEB languages, leaving a strong impression that Malagasy had 
already become a separate dialect before its speakers migrated to East 
Africa in the seventh century and implying that there already was a 
separate Malagasy speech community in Borneo. Especially indicative 
of this early separate development are the reflexes of Proto Malayo-
Polynesian *ɣ and the acquisition of a polite person prefix ra-. Proto 
Malayo-Polynesian *ɣ has two reflexes in all SEB languages, but the 
distribution of each or these reflexes in Malagasy is different from that 
in other SEB languages. The Javanese respect marker ra- was adopted 
into Malagasy but is absent in other SEB languages. 
SEB languages have been exposed to Malay and Javanese for far 
much longer than Malagasy. The exposure of the latter to influences

--- PAGE 478 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
467
from other Indonesian languages became rather limited after its speakers 
had migrated to East Africa. Considering the geographical constraint 
imposed on this event, the Malagasy language and culture still exhibit a 
remarkably high level of Malay and Javanese influence, including some 
vocabulary and cultural elements that are ultimately of Indic provenance. 
This influence is explained best by a symbiotic model of co-existence 
between the early Malagasy and Malays living in their direct vicinity 
before the migration(s) to East Africa. These early Malagasy were 
probably already much further on the way to assimilation to Malay 
language and culture than other SEB societies. This model explains more 
than a scenario involving the participation of early Malagasy as forced 
labour, and it also fits in better with the general traditional patterns of 
ethnic co-existence and cultural assimilation in Borneo and elsewhere 
in Indonesia.
References
Adelaar, Alexander. “Malay Influence on Malagasy: Linguistic and Culture Historical 
Inferences”. Oceanic Linguistics 28, no. 1 (1989): 1–46.
———. Proto-Malayic: The Reconstruction of Its Phonology and Parts of Its 
Morphology and Lexicon. Pacific Linguistics C-119. Canberra: Australian 
National University, 1992.
———. “Asian Roots of the Malagasy: A Linguistic Perspective”. Bijdragen tot de 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 151, no. 3 (1995a): 325–57.
———. “Bentuk pinjaman bahasa Melayu dan Jawa di Malagasi”. In Tamadun 
Melayu. Jilid Pertama, edited by Ismail Hussain, A. Aziz Deraman and 
Abd. Rahman Al-Ahmadi. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1995b, 
pp. 21–40.
———. “Towards an Integrated Theory about the Indonesian Migrations to 
Madagascar”. In Ancient Human Migrations: A Multidisciplinary Approach, 
edited by Peter N. Peregrine, Ilia Peiros and Marcus Feldman. Salt Lake City: 
University of Utah Press, 2009, pp. 149–72.
———. “The Amalgamation of Malagasy”. In A Journey through Austronesian 
and Papuan Linguistic and Cultural Space: Papers in Honour of Andrew K 
Pawley, edited by John Bowden, Nikolaus P. Himmelmann and Malcolm D. 
Ross. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 2010, pp. 161–78.
———. “Malagasy Dialect Divisions: Genetic versus Emblematic Criteria”. 
Oceanic Linguistics 52, no. 2 (2013): 457–80.

--- PAGE 479 ---
468	
Alexander Adelaar
———. “Austronesians in Madagascar: A Critical Assessment of the Works of 
Paul Ottino and Philippe Beaujard”. In East Africa and Early Trans Indian 
Ocean World Interchange, edited by Gwyn Campbell. Indian Ocean World 
Studies series. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016, pp. 71–113.
Adelaar, Alexander and Ritsuko Kikusawa. “Malagasy Personal Pronouns: A Lexical 
History”. Oceanic Linguistics 53, no. 2 (2014): 480–516.
Aichele, Walther. “Ein neu erschlossene frühindonesische Literatursprache in ihrem 
Einfluss auf das Altjavanische”. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen 
Gesellschaft 90 (1936): back matter, pp. 18–19.
Andaya, Leonard Y. and Barbara Watson Andaya. A History of Malaysia. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press, 2001.
Beaujard, Philippe. Les mondes de l’Océan Indien. Tome I. De la formation de l’état 
au premier système-monde afro-eurasien (14e millénaire av. J.-C. – 6e siècle 
apr. J.-C.). Paris: Armand Colin, 2012.
Brucato, Nicolas, Pradiptajati Kusuma, Murray P. Cox, Denis Pierron, Harilanto 
Razafindrazaka, Gludhug Purnomo, Thierry Letellier, Toomas Kivisild, Alexander 
Adelaar, Herawati Sudoyo, and François-Xavier Ricaut. “Malagasy Genetic 
Ancestry comes from an Historical Malay Trading Post in Southeast Borneo”.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 33, no. 9 (2016): 2396–2400.
Dahl, Otto Christian. Malgache et Ma’anyan. Une comparaison linguistique. 
Avhandlinger utgitt av Instituttet 3. Oslo: Egede Instituttet, 1951.
———. “La subdivision de la famille barito et la place du malgache”. Acta 
Orientalia (Copenhagen) 38 (1977): 77–134.
Damais. “Études sino-indonésiennes: III La transcription chinoise Ho-ling comme	
désignation de Java”. Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 52, no. 1 
(1964): 93–141.
Griffiths, Arlo. “Written Traces of the Buddhist Past: Mantras and Dhāraṇīs in 
Indonesian Inscriptions”. BSOAS 77, no. 1 (2014): 137–94.
Gueunier, Noél J., ed. “Dictionnaire des dialectes malgaches du sud-ouest” 
(fondé sur le Dictionnaire sakalava-merina-français de Victor Denis Mahavere 
[1925–26], revu et complété par Noél J. Gueunier, unpublished manuscript).
Hudson, Alfred B. The Barito Isolects of Borneo. Southeast Asia Program 
(Department of Asian Studies), Data Paper no. 68. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1967a.
———. “The Padju Epat Ma’anjan Dajak in Historical Perspective”. Indonesia 4 
(1967b): 8–42.
Knapen, Han. Forests of Fortune? The Environmental History of Southeast 
Borneo 1600–1880. Verhandelingen van het KITLV 189. Leiden: KITLV Press, 
2001.
Kullanda, Sergey V. “What the Unknown Language Told”. Epigrafika Wostoka 
(Moscow) XXVIII (2009): 90–96.

--- PAGE 480 ---
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak?	
469
Kumar, Ann. “The Single Most Astonishing Fact of Human Geography: Indonesia’s 
Far	 West Colony”. Indonesia 92 (2011): 59–95.
Machi Suhadi. “Mantra Buddha di negara ASEAN”. In Proceedings Pertemuan 
Ilmiah Arkeologi V, part I Studi Regional. (Yogya: 4-7-Juli 1989). Yogyakarta: 
Ikatan Ahli Ilmiah Arkeologi Indonesia, 1989, pp. 103–32.
Mahdi, Waruno. Morphophonologische Besonderheiten und historische Phonologie 
des Malagasy. Veröffentlichungen des Seminars für Indonesische und 
Südseesprachen der Universität Hamburg, Band 20. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer, 
1988.
Ottino, Paul. L’Étrangère intime. Essai d’anthropologie de la civilisation de l’ancien 
Madagascar. Tomes I et II. Paris: Collection de l’École des Hautes Études en 
Sciences Sociales, Éditions des Archives contemporaines, 1983.
Ras, J.J. Hikajat Banjar: A Study in Malay Historiography. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1968.
Sellato, Bernard. “Settlement, Migration, and Trade along River Axes in Borneo”. 
Paper: Seventh EUROSEAS Conference, Lisbon, 2–6 July 2013.
Soekmono, R. “Geomorphology and the Location of Çrivijaya”. Madjalah Ilmu-ilmu 
Sastra Indonesia 1, no. 1 (1957): 79–92, IX 24.
Sukarto K. Atmodjo. “Beberapa temuan prasasti baru di Indonesia”. Berkala Arkeologi 
(Edisi Khusus) (1994): 1–8. 
Van Bemmelen, R.W. The Geology of Indonesia. Volume 1a. The Hague: Government 
Printing Office/Martinus Nijhoff, 1949.
Wright, Henry T. and F. Fanony. “L’évolution des systèmes d’occupation des sols 
dans	la vallée de la rivière Mananara au nord-est de Madagascar”. Taloha 11 
(1992): 16–64.

--- PAGE 481 ---
11
S 
´ ¯ astric and Austronesian 
Comparative Perspectives
Parallel Frameworks on Indic 
Architectural and Cultural 
Translations among Western  
Malayo-Polynesian Societies
Imran bin Tajudeen
1.  Cultural Transfer in Early Historical Maritime Asia
A number of recent articles have rekindled the debate on agency in the 
production of Southeast Asia’s Indic religious monuments by suggesting, 
on the basis of specific readings of architecture, that an initial period 
of Indian involvement must have occurred. Roy E. Jordaan (2006) 
argues for a dichotomous periodization: that a “foreign, Indian” Central 
Javanese Mahāyāna Buddhist period preceded a more indigenous East 
Javanese period. To bolster this claim that Indian agency and tutelage 
was necessary in eighth-century south Central Java, Jordaan quotes the 
opinions of Willem F. Stutterheim (1925) and Horace G. Quaritch Wales 
470

--- PAGE 482 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
471
(1961) that Central and East Javanese art represents, respectively, “Hindu 
art in Java” and “Hindu-Javanese art”.
Michel Jacq-Hergoualc’h (2002, p. 229) has meanwhile opined that 
the temples of Kedah were the work of “foreign merchants” who were 
allowed to build there—a surmise based on an overview of extant masonry 
remains. Like Jordaan, Jacq-Hergoualc’h’s claim rests on a reading of 
masonry remains that has excluded their larger physical setting and the 
epigraphic evidence connected with their construction or sociocultural 
milieu.
This chapter re-evaluates the architectural and art historical evidence 
from early extant monuments in Central Java, Sumatra and Kedah and 
their architectural innovation and literary references with a focus on 
highlighting two aspects. First, architectural or iconographic innovations 
in the early Indic monuments whose significance can be connected to 
original syntheses expressed in epigraphic or literary sources have been 
overlooked in the above claims. Second, the syntheses between Indic 
and Austronesian form typology occurred not only in masonry structures 
but in aspects of built form that extend well beyond these and involved 
not just architectural form but conceptual and literary integration and 
innovation. In some cases, the sources make it clear that literate Western 
Malayo-Polynesian (WMP) cultures were consciously refashioning 
Indic ideas, sometimes through their synthesis with autochthonous 
conceptions; where concepts of Indian origin were expressed in 
architectural or iconographic schema these translations into form often 
had no precedence in India and even occurred earlier than the śāstric 
canonization of the Indic ideas concerned. In this re-evaluation, F.D.K. 
Bosch’s śāstric thesis—that Indic classical features on Javanese candi and 
religious art were the outcome of the periodic renewal of śāstric references 
by the Javanese—and Hermann Kulke’s (1990, 2014) concept of “cultural 
convergence”—which emphasizes the contemporaneity of developments 
in South India and Southeast Asia, and their “social nearness” in terms 
of similarities or parallels in their social and political developments and 
needs—are extended to take into account Java’s position within not 
only the Indic religious-literary world, but also, simultaneously, in an 
Austronesian architectural typological continuum.

--- PAGE 483 ---
472	
Imran bin Tajudeen
2.  Indian Intervention before “Indigenization”? 
Stratigraphic and Chronological Assumptions
Jordaan (1999, pp. 227–28) has claimed that a number of Central 
Javanese monuments are transplanted edifices, the outcome of a putatively 
foreign Śailendra dynasty, whose members “ushered in a new phase in 
Javanese cultural history, which for the sake of convenience [he terms] 
the Mahāyāna Buddhist period”. He reasons that a foreign, Indian phase 
was necessary before a two-way exchange between India and Indic 
Southeast Asia could commence: 
This ‘cultural convergence’ (Kulke) and ‘two way cultural exchange’ 
seems to me inconceivable without the Śailendras, however, who can be 
regarded as its pioneers and props, in short, as cultural brokers of this 
more thoroughgoing Indianization process.
There are several problems with Jordaan’s claims,1 and this discussion 
will focus on the fact that it assumes a separation between the 
indigenous and the Indic, and their juxtaposition as distinct elements 
accessible to what Craig Reynolds (1995) has termed “stratigraphic” 
scrutiny. This stratigraphic model is not just a synchronic frame but also 
assumes a teleological schema from a pre-Indian to an Indian phase, 
followed by localization. Jordaan aligns himself with Quaritch Wales 
(1961, p. 14) who speaks of “the principle of cultural resurgence”, 
wherein indigenous elements are said to have been “suppressed” by an 
1	 Jordaan (1999) overstated the case in his list of “exogenous changes”, derived mainly 
from Majumdar (1934, p. 15), that are said to mark the appearance of the purportedly 
foreign Śailendras in Central Java and their “departure”, in an attempt to demonstrate 
a definite break between the Central and East Javanese periods of architecture and 
art and to emphasize the purported foreign design of the Mahāyāna Buddhist 
monuments of Central Java. He passes over in silence the pre-Śailendra Javanese 
temples at Dieng and Gedong Songo, which were original in their conception and 
possessed both formal and iconographic innovations and bear an imprint upon 
Śailendra-era Central Javanese structures, particularly in their early phases before 
subsequent modifications (Dumarçay 1986, p. 29). Jordaan also claims that “the 
impact of the Śailendras’ departure was so great as to be a major factor in the 
art-historical break that can be discerned in the temple art of Java”—this is an 
overstatement that has been challenged by Zakharov (2012).

--- PAGE 484 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
473
Indian overlay that shaped the Indic “states”, to re-emerge or resurface 
later. In art historical scholarship on Indic Southeast Asia, such notions 
are slowly being revised—Robert Brown (1996, p. 185) has pointed 
out, for instance, that based on the analysis of the distinct dharmacakra 
motif in Mon Dvāravatī art, 
Seeing Indianization as the product of two constants does not consider 
that Indianization/localization is a process… [the outcomes] are neither  
Indian nor pre-Indian, but products of a specific culture and period that 
transforms constantly. In this light, ‘indigenous’ is problematical, as it 
assumes that indigenous culture ceased developing with the arrival of 
Indian culture. 
Further, Jordaan’s statements also restate Quaritch Wales’ (1961, p. 13) 
assumption that there is a wide gulf between the societies of South 
Asia and Southeast Asia, expressed through the claim that 
“acculturation” on a “mutual basis” between “Aryan” and local culture 
could only occur in South India, where it led to “fusion, synthesis”, 
or “hybridization”, but not in “Greater India” (the term by which 
Indic Southeast Asia was formerly designated), where we are instead 
“always concerned there with some stage either in Indianization, or 
in the resurgence of the pre-Indian civilizations”. Jordaan is thus 
dismissive of Kulke’s (1990) “cultural convergence” theory which sees 
parallels rather than contrasts between the societies on the two sides 
of the Bay of Bengal. Kulke (1986, p. 2) was also against the 
“transplantation theory” which assumes that Indian concepts of state 
and statecraft have been simply “‘transplanted’ to the virgin soil of 
Southeast Asia”. In contrast, Jordaan (1999, p. 236) even goes as far 
as to opine that “foreign artists” must have been “invited for and 
subsequently supervising the construction of some of the ‘classical’-
looking East Javanese works of art”. Jordaan flatly dismisses Bosch’s 
(1920, p. 167) aforementioned śāstric thesis, which would stand in the 
way of these claims. 
The evidence from Southeast Asian Indic cultural forms and expression 
in architecture and literature indicate the following points that are 
reviewed in the ensuing sections. First, there is compelling evidence

--- PAGE 485 ---
474	
Imran bin Tajudeen
of highly original interpretations and extensions of śāstric material from 
the earliest examples, which are expressed in both literary and architectural 
expression, which may be cited in support of Bosch’s śāstric thesis 
and point to a widespread literate culture beyond śāstric circles—and 
in literary culture these involved both Sanskrit and WMP vernacular 
languages, namely Old Malay, Old Javanese, and Old Cam. Second, 
early Southeast Asian Indic art shows autonomy from Indian examples 
and in several instances actually pioneered a number of unprecedented 
extensions of śāstric sources and their translation into architecture and 
iconographic schema—these cases bear out Kulke’s perspective on 
the simultaneity of Sanskrit cultural adoptions in South and Southeast 
Asia. Third, the syncretic integration between, and translation of, 
Indic sources and Austronesian forms and concepts are already 
observable early in the Central Javanese period, while the differences 
between Central and East Javanese architecture have also been 
overstated, ignoring the considerable continuities between them. Fourth, 
the Austronesian–Indic integration extended to Java’s vernacular 
architecture, and moreover Javanese vernacular typological develop­
ments during the so-called Central and East Javanese periods have 
immense significance within an Austronesian, rather than Indic, 
comparative architectural perspective.
2.1  Examples that Pre-date Indian Developments or S´ a¯ stric 
Canonization
Bosch’s (1920) śāstric thesis, rejected outright by Jordaan, posits that 
Javanese Indic religious monuments were the outcome of the study and 
transmission of Indic architectural treatises (Śilpaśāstra) by Indonesian 
“clerics”. Bosch’s thesis requires modification, as the śāstric element 
in Javanese and WMP agency involved not just the consultation of 
Śilpaśāstra. The śāstric references in Borobudur, Prambanan, and the very 
term caṇḍi point firstly to a sophisticated engagement with a variety of 
literary materials by the Javanese, but more importantly to their having 
pioneered the translation of concepts from various religious sources into 
architecture or sculpture before such translations occurred in India. More 
astonishingly, these developments appear to precede the earliest known

--- PAGE 486 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
475
canonical consolidation of the relevant śāstra in India. In addition, a 
number of texts and inscriptions in Sanskrit and WMP languages from 
the early first millennium AD—before the “Śailendra era” of Java—point 
to a possibly widespread general literacy extending beyond court scribes 
and priestly circles, and beyond Sanskrit to Old Malay, Old Cam, Old 
Javanese and even Old Ma’anyan. 
We look briefly at six cases of śāstric engagement and architectural, 
art or iconographic innovations. First, the Javanese term used to refer 
to Indic temples, caṇḍi, suggests early Javanese engagement with 
and reworking of śāstric sources. Its first known use is found in the 
Ngabean Inscription of AD 882 in the hybrid form “pacaṇḍdyan” 
(Soekmono 1995, p. 68) bearing Javanese affixes, and Mark Long 
(2009, p. 90) connects it to the term caṇḍita which is used in the 
Buddhist śilpa text Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyaśāstra in place of the generic 
term vāstupuruṣa-maṇḍala used in Śaiva Saiddhāntika texts such as the 
Mānasāra and the Mayamatam for temple layouts or “cosmograms”—
specifically, “The Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyaśāstra presents caṇḍita as its all-
embracing term for referring to temples of varying size and plan”. 
Astonishingly these śilpa texts, whether Śaiva Saiddhāntika or 
Buddhist, date no earlier than the early ninth century—this is at least a 
century later than the earliest known Javanese caṇḍi. These examples, 
where architectural translation of śāstric prescriptions in Java appear 
to predate the earliest known texts, serve to remind us of Kulke’s 
(1990) convergence hypothesis—namely, that independent invention 
characterized the developments in South and Southeast Asia despite 
the shared bases. And as Julie Romain (2011, p. 314) has concluded, 
the earliest Javanese caṇḍi at Dieng appeared simultaneously with the 
earliest free-standing temples in South Asia, and were already “uniquely 
Javanese in style”.
Long (2009, p. 89) opines that the link to the term caṇḍita betrays 
a Sri Lankan connection, since the Abhayagiri monastery is referred 
to in an inscription found at the Ratu Boko site, and further since the 
Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyaśāstra was written in a Sinhalese script. However, 
this link merely strengthens Bosch’s śāstric thesis since the connection 
to Sri Lanka is textual rather than architectural—the Javanese caṇḍi in

--- PAGE 487 ---
476	
Imran bin Tajudeen
both typological and iconographic terms (Dumarcay 1986, p. 16) were 
unique from its earliest period. They bear little correlation to Sri Lankan 
examples of the caitya gṛha or core sanctuary.
Second, Borobudur presents an enigma concerning its pioneering 
translation of Mahāyāna and Esoteric Buddhist śāstric sources into its 
narrative reliefs and iconography. The Deśavarṇana (also known as 
Nāgarakĕrtāgama), as Bosch (1920) points out, lists Borobudur among 
the Esoteric Buddhist “Vajradhara shrines” or kabajradharan—but 
J.E. van Lohuizen-de Leeuw (1965, p. 416) notes that the Vajradhara 
(i.e. Vajrayāna) system seems to have been canonized only around 
the tenth century, leaving us with the astonishing fact that Borobudur 
translated a system of Esoteric Buddhism into its iconography before 
its known śāstric canonization:
The possibility, therefore, exists that the Buddhist system of Barabuḍur 
presents a very early phase in the development of the Vajradhara, 
Vajrācārya or Yogācārya [sic] sect of Mahāyāna Buddhism, a phase of 
which little or no material evidence has been preserved elsewhere in the 
Buddhist world.
Similarly, Max Nihom (1994, p. 189) has—more correctly—argued that 
Esoteric Buddhist data preserved on Java and Sumatra reflect a doctrinal 
situation preceding eighth-century systematizations, and therefore “may 
greatly aid us in attempting to reconstruct the intellectual history of the 
Tantras in India itself”. 
The third and fourth examples point to the translation of Vajrayāna 
Buddhist precepts into built forms before the tenth century, this time in 
Sumatra. Śrīvijaya’s Old Malay Talang Tuwo inscription of AD 684 is 
significant in attesting to the even earlier existence of an early form of 
Vajrayāna Buddhism in southeast Sumatra (Coedès and Damais 1992, 
pp. 60–61), which was becoming popular in Nālandā monastery in 
Bengal then (Yijing’s testimony of 671 only noted Hīnayāna Buddhism). 
The inscription records a “park” bearing the Sanskrit name Śrīkṣetra 
dedicated by the ruler of Śrīvijaya as a sign of his compassion as a 
Bodhisattva; significantly the term used for “park” in the inscription 
is the Old Malay term parlak, no longer used in Malay but still found

--- PAGE 488 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
477
in modern Batak (Coedès and Damais 1992; Kulke 1993). Meanwhile, 
Hariani Santiko (2006, pp. 378–79) has observed that Candi Gumpung 
at Muara Jambi is a Vajrayāna temple and quotes Soekmono’s (1987) 
reconstruction that it is a terraced platform with an open pavilion at 
its summit during its second phase of enlargement in the eleventh to 
twelfth centuries, while in its initial phase from the ninth century 
it most likely contained stūpikās—remains of which can be found in 
ruins surrounding the caṇḍi—arranged in a concentric pattern to the 
Vajradhatu-maṇḍala as signalled by the names of the requisite five 
Jina-Buddhas deities inscribed in the deposit-boxes. 
The fifth example is the relief panels on Prambanan containing the 
sculptural depiction of Indian dance movements known as karaṇa. 
Alessandra Iyer (1995, p. 398) has noted, however, that these are 
“not copies of Indian material”, for “they are about 200 years older 
than the first known karaṇa series, at the Bṛhadīśvara temple in 
Tanjore, South India”. Iyer (1995, p. 398) then makes the following 
observation:
It is likely that the Coḷa King Rājarāja may have been inspired to have  
a karaṇa sequence in his temple after learning about Prambanan. […]  
The figures [in Prambanan] are too accurate, from a technical viewpoint, 
to have been carved without a knowledge of a living dance tradition  
based on the principles of body manipulation known from the  
Nāṭyaśāstra.
Further, Iyer (1995, p. 399) responds to claims “that the carvers [in 
Prambanan] may have been foreign or imitating samples of a foreign 
sculptural tradition”, by reminding us that 
our data show very clearly that there were no prototypes or ‘samples’ 
for the karaṇa of Prambanan and thus the images were an entirely local 
creative endeavour. This is very important because it shows that Southeast 
Asian Hindus did not depend on Indian input, but had knowledge of the 
śāstra(s) to draw upon.
Finally, it should also be noted that Prambanan’s reliefs portray certain 
episodes from the Ramāyāṇa before they appear in either the Indian 
or Indonesian literary traditions, which likely points to the existence

--- PAGE 489 ---
478	
Imran bin Tajudeen
of an “alternate oral tradition” (Saran 2007, p. 365). Here we are 
confronted with the possibility that “literacy” in śāstric references may 
have assumed theatrical or even oral literary dimensions in addition to, 
and preceding, sculptural or architectural expression.
3.  Revisiting Bosch’s S´ a¯ stric Thesis—WMP Agency in 
Literate Culture
There is in fact evidence that the literary developments and associated 
chronology in Southeast Asia, particularly among its Malayo-Polynesian 
language speakers, depart considerably from Sheldon Pollock’s (2006) 
framework of an earlier phase of Sanskrit Cosmopolitanism followed 
by that of the “cosmopolitan vernacular”. One may cite Śrīvijaya’s 
seventh-century Old Malay inscriptions that already used Sanskrit in 
its own adapted, peculiar ways (de Casparis 1956, pp. 16–19) and 
the “extraordinary efflorescence of courtly texts” in Old Javanese that 
astounded Pollock (2006, p. 389) and elicited the following remarks from 
him in connection with the Old Javanese Ramāyāṇa kakawin: 
It is indicative of the narrative and aesthetic independence of vernacu-
larisation in Java that the final 44 percent of the text, according to one  
careful estimate, corresponds to nothing in the Bhaṭṭikāvya [on which it 
is based]. 
Pollock (2006, pp. 387–88) turns to literature in Old Javanese in general 
with the remark that “Java has special claim on our attention, given 
the dramatic example it provides”, because Java’s earliest Old Javanese 
text 
fully evinces the cosmopolitan-vernacular style – but not only style… 
when Javanese seized the place of Sanskrit in the domain of royal 
inscription, vernacular poets began to produce a grand new literature… 
Pollock’s astonishment with the Old Javanese evidence is not unfounded 
and parallels the surprise expressed by James Fergusson in his 
discussion of Javanese Indic architecture to be reviewed later. Further, 
the Old Javanese Ramāyāṇa kakawin presents a number of surprises 
not detailed by Pollock.

--- PAGE 490 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
479
To begin with, Supomo (1995, p. 322) has pointed out that “the choice 
of Bhaṭṭi’s poem, rather than Vālmīki’s epic, to serve as the poet’s 
model in writing [the Old Javanese Ramāyāṇa kakawin], is remarkable”, 
given that the poem is written in more difficult Sanskrit and was less 
well-known, and adduces that this choice illustrates the high level of 
scholarship then prevailing in Java. The allegorical Sargas of the Old 
Javanese Ramāyāṇa also provide a satirical account of contemporary 
events in Java involving individuals understood as belonging to the 
Śailendras and the Sañjaya line of kings—Stuart Robson (1983, p. 302) 
and Andrea Acri (2010) have both discussed this fascinating feature after 
Aichele’s (1969) work that compares these Sargas with ninth-century 
Javanese inscriptions. 
More importantly, however, the text also provides a tantalizing 
clue of a robust literate culture in Old Javanese beyond the courtly 
kakawin genre—another point that escapes Pollock’s scope of analysis. 
Van der Molen (2003, p. 339) explains that “One of the differences 
[between the Old Javanese and Sanskrit Ramāyāṇa] is that the Old 
Javanese Sita writes a letter, whereas the Indian Sita of the Bhaṭṭikāvya 
limits herself to sending an object”. This curious innovation to the 
story suggests the prevalence of a literate culture among WMP 
societies in the form of letter-writing and other ephemera. This 
anecdote can also be compared with Spanish accounts of lively writing 
traditions in various so-called baybayin scripts in the sixteenth-century 
Philippines (Scott 1997), as well as de Casparis’ (1956, p. 73) reference 
to the prevalence of literacy among the Mangyans of Mindoro as 
support for the possibility “that scripts in parts of ancient maritime 
South East Asia was by no means limited to clerks and monks”, and 
with the ubiquity of religious literacy within Balinese society beyond 
priestly or court circles along with its thorough integration into 
indigenous (or indigenized) notions of magic (Rubinstein 2000). 
This socio-literary context might be expected to have allowed for 
the sophisticated literary and doctrinal references that supported the 
astonishing innovations so evident in ninth-century Central Javanese 
temples’ narrative sculpture, original iconographies and architectural 
forms.

--- PAGE 491 ---
480	
Imran bin Tajudeen
There are also several seventh- and eighth-century notices in 
Chinese records of Buddhist texts that were written in Old Malay, 
meaning that the “vernacular cosmopolitanism” phase among WMP 
speakers detracts from the chronology offered by Pollock.2 In 
addition, inscriptions in both Sanskrit and WMP languages that are 
older than the Old Javanese Ramāyāṇa bear clues that further indicate 
the agency of WMP societies in processes of conceptual translation 
and synthesis. A number of scholars have noted that the earliest 
inscriptions, whether in Sanskrit or in WMP languages, were already 
written using scripts that showed considerable independence from 
Indian prototypes.3 Sanskrit words or terms were also employed or 
modified in ways that are unexpected and have no Indian precedent.4 
De Casparis (1975, p. 17, fn. 7) even proffers that “there are indications 
that Buddhist Sanskrit texts might have been an important source from 
which words were incorporated in Indonesian languages”—such an 
observation lends further support to Bosch’s śāstric thesis. Javanese 
word chronograms, meanwhile, indicate one ubiquitous form of 
sophisticated literary innovation upon Indic material that began with the 
earliest Old Javanese inscriptions (Noorduyn 1993). 
2	 This body of evidence is reviewed in the penultimate section of this chapter, on Old 
Malay.
3	 See de Casparis (1956, pp. 1, 16–19) on how Śrīvijayan inscriptions showed 
standardized modifications of the “Pallava” script for writing Old Malay—we note 
also that more recently Griffiths (2014, p. 54) has gone further to argue that the 
script used in Śrīvijayan inscriptions should be more properly termed “Late Southern 
Brāhmī” rather than “Pallava” since the former “developed in separate directions in 
various regions”, including seventh-century southeastern Sumatra. Pierre Baptiste 
(2014, p. 69) observes that the Nāgarī script used on the fourth-century Vo Canh stele 
“had already evolved from its Indian predecessors”. 
4	 De Casparis (1956, pp. 16–19) also notes that Sanskrit words were used in ways that 
are odd, or which present a slight variation in meaning from the classical usage, or 
combined in unusual ways, all of which indicate their assimilation into Old Malay 
at an earlier period. Kulke (1993) meanwhile notes that the Old Malay inscriptions 
of Śrīvijaya coined a number of new unconventional Sanskrit-derived terms relating 
to bureaucratic functionaries as well as the structure of the capital and surrounding 
realm.

--- PAGE 492 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
481
4.  Autochthonous–Indic Syncretism in Architecture and 
Ornament
Returning to our focus on architecture and art, we may observe the 
integration between Indic and indigenous concepts and forms in the 
temples of Central Java, Sumatra, and Kedah between the eighth and 
eleventh centuries, wherein Sanskrit or Indic ideas or forms have been 
applied or extended innovatively in ways that have no precedent in India. 
Jordaan’s assumption on the Indian character of the buildings of Java’s 
“Mahāyāna Buddhist period” ignores the syncretic integration of Indic 
and Austronesian forms and concepts and the fundamental typological 
hybridity already found in Central Javanese Indic architecture. These 
aspects suggest an independent reworking of Indic and indigenous 
material from the earliest period through their integration and mutual 
translation at both the formal and conceptual levels, rather than the kind 
of initial Indian intervention Jordaan has imagined. The Old Javanese 
sīma grants also remind us that, beneath a Sanskrit term used to refer to 
an institution whose concept is Indian in origin, temple construction in 
Java rests entirely upon a complex indigenous system. The production 
of Indic religious sanctuaries were enmeshed with Javanese structures 
of authority, socio-spatial organization, and mechanisms of economic 
redistribution that are revealed through these sīma grants (Wisseman-
Christie 1999). 
James Fergusson (1972 [1876], p. 414), in his two-volume History of 
Indian and Eastern Architecture—the first text to locate Java in a larger 
Asian architectural context—expressed his great astonishment with the 
enigmas presented by Java’s Indic architecture. He started his chapter 
on Java with the following remarks: 
There is no chapter in the whole history of Eastern art so full of apparent 
anomalies, or which so completely upsets our preconceived ideas of things 
as they ought to be, as that which treats of the architectural history of the 
island of Java.
I have discussed the context of his observations in greater detail in a 
previous article where I emphasize the need to locate Javanese Indic and

--- PAGE 493 ---
482	
Imran bin Tajudeen
Islamic architecture within not only an Asian comparative framework (with 
South and West Asia) but also an Austronesian comparative perspective 
(Imran 2013). Fergusson’s words deserve our special attention, as he 
discusses Java last, after a detailed survey of the Indic monuments of 
the rest of Southeast Asia and in India. 
Fergusson refers particularly to Borobudur’s and Mendut’s form and 
ornament in his discussion. Certainly Borobudur extends and reworks 
Indic art in ways never seen in India.5 In fact, the reworking of Indic 
cosmography began earlier in Java—the pre-Śailendra eighth-century 
Śaiva temples at Dieng already presented a unique Javanese iconographic 
format that remained constant into the thirteenth century (Dumarçay 
1986, p. 16), along with the ubiquitous kāla-makara combination motif, 
also already present in the Gedung Songo temples, that is a unique 
and unprecedented extension of the kīrtimukha ornament—Parul 
Pandya Dhar’s (2007, pp. 276–77) detailed study of Central Javanese 
examples concludes that the Javanese kāla-makara-toraṇa motifs, 
“though affiliated to Indian counterparts, signifies several complex 
layers of cultural consciousness that suggest newer shades of meaning 
and resultant formalistic manifestations” and for which “there is not 
even a single equivalent... in the entire realm of Indian art”. The 
narrative reliefs on “Śailendra-era” caṇḍis, whether Hindu or 
Mahāyāna, also depict animals and animal tales, local narratives and 
original figurative conventions (Totton 2003) as well as the enigmatic 
“curious ‘terraced towers’” motif that appears to refer to an independent 
sculptural or architectural feature found in Javanese gardens (Lombard 
2010, pp. 47–51) (see Figure 11.1). 
5	 The particular articulation of the wishing trees motif on Borobudur and Mendut, the 
overall conception of Borobudur’s narrative reliefs, their particular local content, 
ornamental motifs and arrangement, and the perforated stupas containing life-sized 
Buddha statues, while all obviously based on Indian art and architecture, have been 
combined and re-invented in ways that are entirely unprecedented.

--- PAGE 494 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
483
Figure 11.1 
Enigmatic “Terraced Towers” Motif, Here Repeated Twenty-two Times, That Possibly Refers to an Independent Sculptural or 
Architectural Feature Found in Javanese Gardens (Lombard 2010, pp. 47–51), Borobudur, Central Java, Ninth Century
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 495 ---
484	
Imran bin Tajudeen
5. The Pundèn Terraced Mound and S´ a¯ stric Integration  
in the Kamu¯ l a¯ n and Kahyan·an
The significance of Borobudur, apparently the most grandiose Buddhist 
edifice constructed by the Śailendra, extends well beyond its ornamental 
aspects. Like Prambanan and Sambisari, two Central Javanese Hindu 
structures, Borobudur is characterized by typological and conceptual 
hybridity incorporating a concentric pundèn or terraced ancestral mound. 
A full reading of Borobudur and Prambanan in particular cannot be based 
on Indic conceptual or ritual bases alone, but this is not simply because 
they have been hybridized with Austronesian forms. Their Indic śāstric 
references are not mere applications of Indian precedents whether from 
an architectural or conceptual point of view.
Consistent with a conscious śāstric engagement, Borobudur’s unique 
terraced form, where a stūpa and maṇḍala is translated into, and 
integrated with, the pundèn mound, is signalled unequivocally in Javanese 
inscriptions in two ways. First, the term sugata, the “ten-fold Buddha”, 
is employed in place of the common term bodhisattva (Miksic 2003a, 
p. 30; de Casparis 1950, p. 147). Meanwhile, besides the hybrid 
Sanskrit-Javanese term kabajradharan used for Borobudur as mentioned 
earlier, another hybrid term kamūlān also appears in a ninth-century 
inscription linked to it. De Casparis (1981, pp. 66–67) has connected 
the present-day folk name Borobudur to the compound term 
Bhūmisambhāra found in two inscriptions dated 824 and 842 CE, with 
the additional term bhūdhara denoting mountain. He notes:
The inscription of 842 applies to Bhūmisambhāra not any of the well-
known terms used by modern scholars to describe Barabudur—stūpa, 
stūpa-prāsāda, or maṇḍala—but kamūlān… kamūlān indicates the original 
center of the kingdom. 
As a “place of origin”, kamūlān Borobudur’s stepped profile assumes the 
form of the Austronesian ancestral mound (see Figure 11.2). In Javanese 
this terraced mound is called the pundèn and belongs with similar 
monumental terraced mounds found in the Yap and Caroline Islands in 
the Federated States of Micronesia, Palau and the Marianas (Morgan 
1988) as well as in Polynesia from Tahiti and the Marquesas to Hawaii 
and Tonga (Crouch and Johnson 2001; Stokes 1991). And in light of the

--- PAGE 496 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
485
Kamūlān Borobudur’s Stepped Profile Assumes the Form of the Austronesian Ancestral Mound which in Javanese is Called 
the Pundèn, Central Java, Ninth Century
Source: Author.
Figure 11.2

--- PAGE 497 ---
486	
Imran bin Tajudeen
Javanese usage of the term sugata or “ten-fold Buddha” noted earlier, 
the ten terraces of kamūlān Borobudur becomes highly significant. It 
provides the key clue on both the typological basis and symbolic meaning 
of the unique ten-terraced form of this Mahāyāna monument. 
Simultaneously, Borobudur is also a hybrid maṇḍala configuration. 
The components of this hybrid maṇḍala are orchestrated through their 
position on different levels of a pundhèn. In the niches above the 
first three galleries, the five Jina-Buddhas display different mudrās 
according to their orientation; in contrast, identical Buddhas face all 
four directions in the niches above the fourth gallery and in the 
latticed stūpas of the circular terrace, corresponding in this case to the 
multiplication of identical Buddha figures described in the Gaṇḍavyūha 
which narrates events immediately following the Buddha’s enlightenment 
(Fontein 2013, p. 7). The translation of texts and doctrinal schema in 
this manner is novel. 
Besides Borobudur, there are further clues that other “Śailendra-era” 
Central Javanese temples express autochthonous concepts of ancestor 
veneration expected of a kamūlān “place of origin” or a pundèn 
“terraced ancestral mound”. Jordaan and Wessing (1996, p. 69), quoting 
earlier observations by de Casparis (1956) and Bosch (1954), remark 
that evidence from Prambanan and other Javanese Indic monuments 
provide “a strong confirmation of the hypothesis of a syncretic 
adaptation of the Indic cult of royalty to indigenous Javanese ancestral 
beliefs”. 
Indeed, the whole Prambanan complex is built as a series of 
rising stepped terraces—a fact that usually goes unmentioned, and 
which shall be discussed further later (see Figure 11.3). But the full 
significance of Prambanan’s uniqueness only emerges with a combined 
religio-political reading of both layout and iconography. The evidence 
from associated inscriptions indicate that the complex not only presents 
the unprecedented combination of the Trimūrti in a single, integrated 
plan with Śaivism occupying the centre, but bears an original synthesis 
of known Indic iconography and is simultaneously the indigenous 
ancestral shrine for the monarch. Acri and Jordaan (2012) have 
proposed, on the basis of art historical and scriptural sources, that the 
twenty-four directional deities depicted on Candi Siva in Prambanan

--- PAGE 498 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
487
Model of the Prambanan Hindu Temple Complex, Central Java, Ninth Century, Referred to in an Inscription from 856 
as Both a Parhyan·an or Sanctuary to the Indigenous Ancestral Cult, and a Śivagr·ha or Śivālaya, Built as a Series of 
Rising Stepped Terraces Recalling the Pundèn Ancestral Mound, Including the Four Terraces of the Array of Perwara 
Temples within the Second Enclosure; in the Prambanan Archaeological Park International Visitors Centre 
Source: Author.
Figure 11.3

--- PAGE 499 ---
488	
Imran bin Tajudeen
merge an established series of eight Brahmanic Lokapālas with another 
series of sixteen Śaiva Digbandhas—a unique pantheon attested to in 
Old Javanese sources. Besides this merging of Brahmanic and Śaiva 
iconography, Soekmono (1995, p. 65) has also referred to the Śivagṛha 
Inscription of 856, associated with the Prambanan complex, which states 
that this temple complex or dharma built by Rakai Pikatan is also called 
a parhyaṅan, which denotes a sanctuary to the indigenous cult of 
ancestors or hyaṅ, even as it simultaneously bears the name Śivagṛha 
or Śivālaya, while the central image is referred to in the inscription 
twice as bhaṭāra, “which can apply to a deified deceased king”. De 
Casparis and Mabbett (1992, p. 288) have emphasized that Brahmanism 
is more correctly understood as comprising “priests [who] stood for a 
social order” by enhancing a royal cult and is “distinct from the specific 
cults of Śiva or Viṣṇu”. In a similar vein, Supomo (1972) has pointed 
to the importance expressed in several fourteenth-century kakawins of 
the belief in a Mountain God or “Lord of the Mountains” tied to the 
Javanese monarch; he characterizes this as a “national creed” that stood 
above Buddhism and Śaivism, and allowed for the celebrated expression 
of the “unity within diversity” (bhinneka tuṅgal ika) of Śiva-Buddha 
expressed by Mpu Tantular in Sutasoma and also Arjunawijaya. 
Similarly, a little later Pu Siṇḍok, whose reign (c. 929–47) witnessed 
the shift of Java’s paramount polity from Central to East Java, was 
recorded to have restored old ancestral sites termed kamūlān and 
kahyaṅan—the latter term denoting sanctuaries honouring ancestors or 
hyaṅ—to bolster his new kingdom’s legitimacy (Van der Meulen 1977, 
p. 106). Another term often used in the Old Javanese inscriptions, 
kabuyutan, is likewise a sanctuary to ancestors. The WMP term saṅ 
hyaṅ was often also used interchangeably with, or in addition to, srī or 
bhaṭāra as the honorific for deities.
At the Sumatran Buddhist monuments of Candi Tinggi in Muara 
Jambi and Candi Bungsu in Muara Takus, tiered stepped bases 
dominate compositions that feature stūpikās surrounding a central stūpa 
at the summit. The arrangement on Candi Bungsu of a central stūpa 
surrounded by a circle of stūpikās, recorded by Ijzerman in an 1893 
report and no longer extant today, is “reminiscent of the upper terrace 
of Borobudur” (Chihara 1996, pp. 217–18). Unlike the temples in the

--- PAGE 500 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
489
Javanese context, however, the epigraphic record for these Sumatran sites 
do not furnish direct references to terms denoting ancestral mounds in 
connection with these Indic sanctuaries, although the prominence of the 
tall stepped bases strongly suggests a very similar association.
6. Terraced Natar-Complexes, Unconventional Man˙ d˙ ala, 
and Layout Principles
Terraced Indic sanctuary complexes built by WMP speakers may 
assume two forms—concentric layouts that merge the square maṇḍala 
grid with the concentric pundèn mound, and ex-centric layouts that 
combine the autochthonous natar-type complexes and linear pundèn 
terraces with original, unconventional maṇḍala grid layouts. In Central 
Java a number of temple complexes integrate the terraced mound or 
pundèn with a series of walled compounds, called the natar in Java, 
a layout format seen in a number of Austronesian building traditions. 
In many architectural assemblages, extensive series of compounds, 
enclosures or gradually rising stone-faced terraces extend far beyond 
the core masonry sanctuary. The main shrine, which might itself be 
built as a pundèn, usually as a tall, stepped masonry base, is located in 
the innermost or final court.
The contrast and typological discontinuity between Central and 
East Javanese architecture has been rather overstated. Central Javanese 
sites were also used in the thirteenth century—Dieng has dated 
inscriptions as late as 1210 while Candi Belahan’s Gateway A dates from 
the eleventh century (Resink 1968). Further, while ex-centric layouts 
with walled courtyards and the incorporation of wooden architecture, 
including for the main shrine, are a feature of many East Javanese 
natar-type temple complexes, they also characterize several Central 
Javanese temples, including the Śailendra-era Mahāyāna Buddhist 
temples at Plaosan Lor, which present a unique layout with two 
rectangular stone halls and a third wooden pavilion (pendopo) each 
with its own enclosure, and arranged in a line along their long 
axis facing west (see Figure 11.4)—the pendopo platform and the 
tripartite division into an ex-centric composition of compounds do 
not seem to conform to a known maṇḍala format (Miksic, Nayati

--- PAGE 501 ---
490	
Imran bin Tajudeen
Plaosan Lor, Mahāyāna Buddhist Temple Complex, Central Java, Ninth Century, with Two Double-storey Rectangular Stone 
Halls based on Wooden Prototypes (see Figure 11.7) but Surmounted by stūpikās and Diminishing False Storeys
Source: Author.
Figure 11.4

--- PAGE 502 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
491
and Tjahjono 2001). However, Long (2009, p. 82) posits that Plaosan 
Lor along with the ruined ex-centric Plaosan Kidul array of temples 
to its south, are together laid out in accordance with a particular 
maṇḍala. If Long’s analysis is correct, then Plaosan Lor and Kidul, 
like the ex-centric stepped base of Jajaghu (Jago) from the East 
Javanese period (O’Brien 1988), present truly remarkable and 
unconventional maṇḍala layouts that do not follow any known Indian 
precedent. The extensive Śailendra-era Ratu Boko complex meanwhile 
contains elaborate terraces and courtyards. The Plaosan and Ratu Boko 
Buddhist complexes exhibit layouts that are clearly not derived from 
the straightforward application of Indian śāstric prescriptions alone and 
seem to point to the tradition of walled compounds among Austronesian-
speaking societies.
A recent detailed study of Central Javanese temples concluded that 
the “more Indian” concentric temples were mainly Buddhist, while 
the linear terraced temples were Hindu (Degroot 2009, pp. 176–77). 
However, the examples of Plaosan Lor and Kidul and of Ratu Boko—
both Buddhist—caution against such a neat association. Moreover, the 
Hindu Javanese complexes at Prambanan and Sambisari are concentric in 
layout, with pundèn-type terraces. Prambanan’s overall layout comprises 
three concentric enclosures that are terraced. The outermost enclosure is 
tilted off axis, while the innermost enclosure is raised upon a high stone 
plinth with gateways and balustrades. The middle enclosure comprises 
four terraces corresponding to four rows of perwara temples.6 At 
Sambisari in Central Java, the main Hindu sanctuary sits upon a walled 
stone plinth set upon “a stepped pyramid with stairways projecting from 
the axes” akin to Borobudur’s first stage—only two of the terraces have 
been excavated due to the water table level of the land (Dumarçay 1986, 
pp. 48–49) (see Figure 11.5).
The ex-centric linear terraced Hindu temple layout in the Central 
Javanese period is represented by Candi Barong and Ijo. The three-tiered 
terraced courtyards of Barong, a Vaiṣṇava temple, comprise stone-faced 
6	 Dumarçay (1986, p. 42) mistakenly refers to only three terraces for Prambanan’s 
middle enclosure.

--- PAGE 503 ---
492	
Imran bin Tajudeen
Figure 11.5
Sambisari, Hindu Temple Complex, Central Java, Ninth Century, with Concentric Stepped Terraces Recalling the 
Pundèn Ancestral Mound, and a Stone Central Shrine with Pillar Bases for a Wooden Superstructure
Source: Courtesy of Andrea Acri.

--- PAGE 504 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
493
retaining walls and various gateways, while Ijo comprises seventeen 
buildings on eleven terraces as identified by the Yogyakarta archaeological 
service (Degroot 2009, p. 131).
Away from Java, the ex-centric, linear layout of terraces is seen at 
the only extensively-restored Kedah site, Candi Bukit Batu Pahat, where 
this aspect of its overall architectural composition is typically overlooked 
in discussions that focus narrowly upon the laterite brick remains. Like 
Sambisari, the brick shrine actually sits upon a substantial, extensive 
terraced base, but unlike Sambisari the terraces here are linear and ascend 
a slope, like those at Ijo, rather than concentric, with multiple levels 
ascending in the approach to the shrine, and higher levels ascending far 
behind it (Lamb 1960, p. 18).
The comparisons with “Austronesian building traditions” that is 
being invoked here requires some elaboration. First, differentiated floor 
platform levels are of fundamental importance among Austronesian 
speakers—thus for instance while such stepped floors are typical of 
raised wooden buildings among some Austronesian-speaking communities 
and symbolically denote spatial hierarchy, such stepped levels have also 
been faithfully replicated as four to five differentiated levels even in the 
Formosan (Taiwan Austronesian) houses that are not built with raised 
wooden platform floors, as seen in the stone-built semi-subterranean 
houses of the Tau or Yami of Orchid Island (Lan Yu) off Taiwan, which 
are built into the slopes of the island’s rocky shores, as well as in Rukai 
houses, which are built directly upon the ground (Oliver 1997, pp. 1231, 
1234). Second, complexes of walled compounds incorporating terraced 
mounds are also found in the Micronesian artificial islet-settlements 
in basalt stone such as eleventh-century Nan Madol in Pohnpei and 
fifteenth-century Lelu in Kosrae (Morgan 1988; Cordy 1993), as well 
as in the large terraced stone platforms and courtyards that make up 
the heiau shrines of the Hawaiian islands and the marae complexes 
of French Polynesia (Crouch and Johnson 2001). Walled complexes 
and terraced mounds are depicted in both Central Javanese and East 
Javanese reliefs, such as at Borobudur, Jajaghu (Jago) and Panataran. 
Courtyards in Java were also denoted by the indigenous term kuwu 
(Wisseman-Christie 1999, p. 246). The principles that are discussed here 
continued in numerous Javanese Islamic sites long after the period under

--- PAGE 505 ---
494	
Imran bin Tajudeen
investigation here, and the configuration and variation of these Javanese 
complexes, whether Indic or Islamic, with their variety of ornamented 
gateways and pavilion types, have not received sufficient study (Imran 
2013; Imran forthcoming).
7. Wooden Sanctuaries and Arrays of Subsidiary Temples
Plaosan’s two double-storey rectangular-plan main buildings and the 
similar main building of Sari also present an original building type 
that is without Indian precedent. These Mahāyāna buildings are based 
on an Austronesian timber building type which incidentally is depicted 
on several Prambanan and Borobudur relief panels (Dumarçay 1986, 
p. 34) (see Figure 11.7). In Plaosan and Sari they have been rendered in 
stone and ornamented with stūpikās and other accoutrements expected 
of a Javanese Indic edifice. The single-storey rectangular-plan main 
sanctuary of Banyunibo is yet another stone building based upon 
a local timber structure. Meanwhile, the gable-roofed and lean-to roofed 
entrance vestibules of Central Javanese Mahāyāna caṇḍi at Plaosan Lor, 
Plaosan Kidul and Sewu integrate Austronesian roof forms, in exactly 
the same fashion seen on some of the masonry buildings with roofed 
vestibules depicted on Borobudur relief panels (see Figure 11.6). 
Walled enclosures with masonry plinths for wooden pavilions, seen 
as characteristic of East Javanese complexes such as Panataran, were 
in fact also a feature of several Central Javanese Mahāyāna complexes. 
The wooden pavilion of Plaosan Lor mentioned earlier was an integral 
part of the complex rather than a subsidiary building, judging from the 
results of excavations (Miksic, Nayati and Tjahjono 2001). Wooden 
superstructures were likewise part of the main Hindu shrines of Sambisari 
and Klero/Tengaran, the latter featuring a huge plinth with pillar bases 
surrounding a small stone cella. 
In the concentric Central Javanese complexes of Prambanan and 
Sewu, and the ex-centric Plaosan Lor and Kidul, the main shrines 
are surrounded by an array of subsidiary self-standing temples that 
number in the hundreds: the so-called perwara temples. Such arrays of 
individual subsidiary temples are not found in India, contrary to 
Chihara’s view (1996, p. 99) that the perwara array resembles the

--- PAGE 506 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
495
Figure 11.6
The Austronesian-type Extended Gable-on-Hip Roof Buildings or Pavilions, and Entrance Vestibules of Masonry Buildings with 
either Lean-to or Gable Roofs Depicted on Borobudur, Central Java, Ninth Century
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 507 ---
496	
Imran bin Tajudeen
ground plan of the Paharpur Somapura Mahāvihāra—its core sanctuary 
is actually surrounded by rows of conjoined cells along the prākāra 
perimeter, not individual subsidiary temples. Besides the fact that Central 
Javanese, Kedah, and Sumatran Indic religious complexes present layouts 
that are highly idiosyncratic from an Indian perspective, the study by 
Véronique Degroot (2009) indicates that the principles of siting and 
orientation of Javanese temple complexes are also informed by a number 
of autochthonous ideas or responses to landscape. A similarly thorough 
and comprehensive study awaits the numerous shrines of Kedah and 
Sumatran sites—the orientation of Candi Bukit Batu Pahat, for instance, 
does not conform to standard Indian prescription and an explanation 
may perhaps be sought in autochthonous symbolic signification of the 
natural landscape of its site.
8.  Austronesian Comparative Perspective:  
Java’s Vais˙ n˙ ava Granary Cult-Houses and the Pendopo
An investigation of two vernacular wooden granary types in Java that 
came to stand for an Indic sanctuary further serves to highlight the 
importance of an Austronesian comparative framework for aspects of 
culture during the Indic period. Vaiṣṇava symbolism was integrated in 
Java to a most indigenous cult building—the rice granary shrine, which 
can be distinguished into two historical architectural models with a 
transition in the fourteenth century. The ensuing discussion demonstrates 
how the architectural and symbolic integration of Indic and indigenous 
elements also developed beyond the architecture of masonry temples. 
An Austronesian comparative perspective, however, also reveals an 
unexpected insight into a development in Java’s vernacular architecture.
The older granary model in Java features “saddle-profile” gable 
roofs with outward-slanting gable ends and a granary floor raised above 
the ground by four or six columns with flat discs as their “capitals” 
that function as rat guards. This specific granary form is depicted on 
Borobudur and Prambanan reliefs, and corresponds with what Reimar 
Schefold (2004) has opted to call the “Southeast Asian-type house” 
defined by a sagging roof profile with extended gable ends, and a floor 
raised on posts. Roxana Waterson (2009) argues for this building type

--- PAGE 508 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
497
to be understood as an Austronesian tradition with a wider distribution 
on mainland Asia and Japan beyond maritime Southeast Asia and 
Oceania corresponding to prehistoric Austronesian networks. According 
to Jacques Dumarçay (1986, p. 37), granaries of this first type became 
“dedicated to Śrī, the wife of Viṣṇu and the protectress of rice”, 
and this form persisted into the fourteenth century—further, this 
roof form apparently became a symbol of Vaiṣṇavism in Java, 
such that “a carving in brick or stone showing a sagging roofline, 
in no specific architectural context, as at Candi Pari or Candi 
Belahan, for example, is sufficient to indicate the cult of Visnu” (see 
Figure 11.7).
Dumarçay’s observation does not consider the subsequent developments 
of the Javanese granary form after the fourteenth century into the 
contemporary period, nor does it position the forms within an Austronesian 
comparative perspective. This older granary model on Java belongs 
to a family of structures with a geographic distribution among WMP 
speakers where granaries with gable roofs are built as separate 
structures from dwellings—namely among the Sumatran Batak Karo 
and Minangkabau as well as among the Sundanese of West Java and 
the Sa’dan Toraja of South Sulawesi—and also in Micronesia, extending 
to Neolithic Yunnan and Yayoi Japan (Domenig 1980, p. 85; Waterson 
2009, pp. 15–18).
In contrast, a very different rice granary-shrine model with an 
entirely contrasting Austronesian roof form with a distribution among 
CMP speakers appeared in Java after the fourteenth century. As is 
common in CMP-speaking societies, this granary-shrine was not a 
separate structure from the dwelling, but was instead completely integrated 
as the core house unit, called the omah jero or dalem ageng in Javanese. 
In Java this integrated granary-shrine-dwelling became the preserve 
of aristocratic dwellings in the island’s interior and that of wealthy 
merchants and the elite along the north coastal (Pesisir) cities. It 
features a high-peaked hip-roof form called the joglo in Java, a form 
which again has a distribution among CMP speakers but also in 
Fijian spirit houses (bure kalou); this remarkable historical change, 
traceable from narrative reliefs and contemporary examples that give

--- PAGE 509 ---
498	
Imran bin Tajudeen
Figure 11.7
Two-storeyed Buildings with Extended Gable Roofs Depicted on Prambanan, Central Java, Ninth Century
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 510 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
499
a chronological record rare for vernacular architectural history, has 
implications on the understanding of Java’s changing socio-economic 
connections during the Central and East Javanese periods, but this 
discussion lies beyond the scope of this chapter. 
The joglo roof is supported by four principal columns called soko 
guru,7 and the whole structure is called the pendopo today. This term 
invites association with the Indian mandapa, while the term soko guru 
along with the term used for the rice goddess Dewi Sri who is placed 
in the pendopo facing the four principal columns invites the assumption 
that this structure has Indian origins. 
Yet, despite these Sanksrit-derived terms, the pendopo and its 
associated symbolism belong to a widespread family of Austronesian 
structures which involve four or six principal columns beneath a 
tall hip or saddle-back gable roof (Sato 1991) and may function as 
granary-cult-dwellings, granary-pavilions, or simply cult-houses or 
spirit shrines. Neighbouring Sumba’s uma mbatangu/marapu also 
contains four principal columns supporting a high peaked roof, and 
is thus closely related to the joglo in both formal and structural 
terms, but in the Sumba house the sacred granary is in the attic 
whereas in the Javanese house the granary is found in the rooms 
against the rear wall flanking the central, nuptial chamber called the 
krobongan which faces the four principal columns and in front of 
which the rice goddess Dewi Sri and her consort Sadana are placed 
(see Figure 11.8).8 A comparative typological rubric thus allows the 
Javanese joglo-roofed pendopo and its Dewi Sri cult to be contextualized 
within an Austronesian cult-architectural context despite the adoption of 
terms connected with the mandapa and śrī devi.
7	 The four-columned, high-peaked hip-roof granary-as-dwelling is an Austronesian 
building form that is neglected in existing studies, and has only recently been discussed 
in a survey by Koji Sato (1991).
8	 O’Neill (1994) has drawn a comparison between the Sumba house and the meru-
derived tajug form of Javanese mosques rather than the pendopo.

--- PAGE 511 ---
500	
Imran bin Tajudeen
Figure 11.8
The Now Obsolete Raised-floor Granary-pavilions of Ninth-century Java 
with Extended Gable-roof and Prominent Columns with Rat-guard Discs, 
Depicted on Borobudur, Ninth Century (top left), Contrasted with the 
Modern Javanese Joglo-roof Pendopo, the Rice Shrine-Granary-Dwelling 
Form whose Core Space is Traditionally Dedicated to the Rice Goddess Dewi 
Sri (top right). The Javanese Pendopo of Today Belongs with the Same Type 
as Buildings to the East such as Sumba’s Granary-dwelling Uma Mbatangu 
(bottom left) and Village Shrine (bottom left foreground), and the Fijian 
Spirit House Bure Kalou, Rebuilt at the Polynesian Cultural Centre, Hawaii
Source: Author.

--- PAGE 512 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
501
Both models—the older saddle-roof granary of ninth-century Java and 
the contemporary joglo-pendopo granary-shrine-dwelling—belong to a 
widespread Austronesian rice granary cult and is therefore an example 
of what de Casparis (1997, p. 51) calls “eclecticism” involving “ancient 
Austronesian beliefs” integrated with Indic religious associations. With 
an Austronesian comparative framework we are able to understand 
why the saddle-profile roof and then the joglo roof—two different 
models of the rice granary cult house—became associated with 
Śrī and grew in significance to denote Vaiṣṇavism between the eighth 
and fourteenth centuries in Java, contracting again to denote simply 
the rice goddess cult in Islamized Java today. These examples also 
point to the problem of a separation between studies of autochthonous/
Austronesian vernacular wooden architecture and Indic masonry ones, 
whereas both forms of construction were integral to Indic architecture 
in Southeast Asia. 
The examples also caution us against relying on the presence or 
use of Sanskrit terms to ascertain the “Indian” origins of specific traits 
without also subjecting such features to an Austronesian comparative 
framework. We may note that Dutch philologist Jan Laurens Andries 
Brandes’ (1889, pp. 122–29) compilation of ten pre-Hindu aspects of 
culture in Java9 presupposes the exclusive use of native terminology 
as the determining indicator of indigenous origins. But Sanskrit terms 
have also been applied to indigenous elements of culture and only a 
comparative perspective with other Austronesian societies may shed 
light on its origins.
9	 “Brandes Tien Punten” or “Brandes Ten Points” are aspects of Javanese [or: 
Indonesian?] culture that Brandes regarded to have existed by AD 700, and to have 
been developed since pre-history. They are: (1) the puppet show (wayang), (2) gamelan 
or orchestra, (3) metric or measurement tools, (4) batik or ornamental art, (5) metal 
crafts, (6) coin exchange, (7) sailing and wind direction, (8) astronomy, (9) wet rice 
cultivation, and (10) organized society.

--- PAGE 513 ---
502	
Imran bin Tajudeen
9.  Beyond Sanskrit Integration: What the Non-Sanskrit 
Words Indicate 
Beyond the surface “integration” of architectural forms, I have pointed 
out the sophistication by which this physical integration was reinforced 
through conceptual engagement expressed through hybrid terms and the 
śāstric association they are meant to evoke. Thus, the term kamūlān, 
itself a hybrid term that is integrated with the indigenous pundèn form, 
is not an isolated example. Many other indigenous and Indic concepts 
and their associated terms were also interchangeably translated or 
integrated. An indigenous trait or phenomenon might be assigned a 
Sanskrit term; conversely a practice or feature of Indic origin may be 
called by an indigenous name. Such instances of conceptual and literary 
integration can be seen in further examples of hybrid terms involving 
the application of Sanskrit upon non-Indic aspects of culture. Restricting 
ourselves to key indigenous systems of organizing time and space, we 
may cite the following cases. First, the indigenous Javanese five- and 
six-day cycles peken/pasaran (the root word in the latter term being the 
Persian pasar!) and pariṅkelan respectively are also assigned Sanskrit 
terms pañcawara and sadwara respectively; they continued to operate 
alongside the Indic seven-day cycle or saptawara. Meanwhile, the earliest 
dated Old Javanese inscription that has been found (685 Śaka or 763 
CE), from Batang, in the north coast of Java, contains the Old Javanese 
(or Javanized?) month name asuji (Griffiths 2012, p. 477). The example 
of Javanese chronograms has already been mentioned earlier. Yet another 
hybrid term monco-pat (five-four) is used to refer to an autochthonous 
Javanese spatial classification system (Ossenbruggen 1977; Lombard 
1996, vol. III, p. 101). 
Such hybrid terms suggest the extent of the literary engagement by 
WMP societies with the Indic cultural world, but a look at the terms or 
names that remain non-Sanskrit and untranslated is just as instructive 
and revealing. Possibly the most lucid evidence against the theory of 
foreign origin for WMP rulers during the early Indic era comes, ironically, 
from the earliest Indic inscriptions from four WMP-speaking societies. 
They record the moment when local ruling lineages adopted Sanskrit 
titles, but simultaneously reveal also the non-Sanskrit names of their

--- PAGE 514 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
503
immediate forebears. They bear testimony to the conscious, deliberate 
linguistic-cultural adoption of Sanskrit.10 
In the Old Malay and Old Javanese inscriptions, we encounter the 
remarkable fact that several aspects most intimately connected to the 
core of the royal domain and to the institution of shipping were left 
“untranslated” or un-Sanskritized despite the deliberate Indic śāstric 
reference or Sanskrit terms assigned to so many indigenous elements. 
—The Old Malay and Old Javanese inscriptions, despite their heavy 
Sanskritization, retain the indigenous terms for lord/ruler, the royal 
domain/palace complex, and the royal capital or core settlement, namely 
dātu/hāji/tuhān, kadātuan, and vanua/wanua; the royal title remains 
ḍapunta hiyaṅ; and as mentioned earlier the term for the “park” 
dedicated by the ruler of Śrīvijaya as a sign of his compassion as a 
Bodhisattva is still parlak even though it bears the Sanskrit name Śrīkṣetra 
(Coedès and Damais 1992; Kulke 1993). Similarly the indigenous cult 
of Tandrun Luah and Ulun are invoked as guardians of kadātuan 
Śrīvijaya even as, simultaneously as Woodward (2004, p. 336) notes, 
the Śrīvijaya inscriptions indicate familiarity with Mahāyānist doctrines, 
specifically of Perfection Path Buddhism. 
10.  Old Malay Agency: Shippers, Trade and Buddhist 
Literary Networks
The indigenous title for ship captains (puhawaṅ) is also retained in 
Old Malay inscriptions. This example, along with the ones cited above, 
provide strong evidence for both the non-Indian origins of Sanskritized 
10	 In the fifth-century Kutei inscriptions, Mūlavarman is recorded as the grandson of 
Kuṇḍuṅga. One of the fifth-century Tarumanagara inscriptions of Pūrṇavarman 
mentions a father Pīnabāhu and an unnamed grandfather. The Old Malay Sojomerto 
inscription of circa late seventh century from north coast Central Java states that 
the father of Ḍapunta Selendra—a name that has occasioned much controversy—
was Santanu. Finally, the Canggal inscription of 732 CE mentions Sañjaya’s father 
Sannāha whose sister is Sanna—the reference to a paternal aunt is interesting and may 
indicate a form of matrilineal reckoning, in other words an Austronesian accent on the 
inheritance of rank integrated into Indic conceptions of power.

--- PAGE 515 ---
504	
Imran bin Tajudeen
royal families in early Indic WMP societies and of the agency of 
indigenous shippers, and suggests their symbiotic relationship. In the 
Telaga Batu inscription of Śrīvijaya, puhavaṅ appears alongside royal 
functionaries of the capital and the staff of the royal household (Kulke 
1993). A number of Old Malay inscriptions from Java record puhawaṅ 
as the sponsors of temples (Suhadi 1983). In fact, altogether seven Old 
Malay inscriptions from Java connect persons bearing Malay titles to 
shipping or temple sponsorship or construction (Suhadi 1983; van der 
Meulen 1979, p. 32, fn. 43). Even more astonishingly, the Old Malay 
inscriptions of Śrīvijaya include words that can only be understood 
by relating them to Batak, Malagasy, or Old Ma’anyan (Coedès and 
Damais 1992, pp. 72–82), thus linking Śrīvijaya directly to the trans 
Indian Ocean Cinnamon Route to East Africa and Madagascar (Dahl 
1991; Miller 1969).
Indeed, evidence of the primacy of Malay-speaking shippers’ 
networks and agency in long-distance trade from the pre-Indic into 
the early Indic period—and of the role of the Old Malay language in 
Buddhism—is further reinforced by a number of other observations. 
Peter Bellwood (1995, p. 114) associates the distribution of protohistoric 
metallurgical artefacts particularly with the trade networks of the 
“Western Austronesian area” beginning from 500 BC. More signif­icantly, 
Bellwood opines that this wide-ranging maritime trade had a linguistic 
effect—namely that this period witnessed “a great deal of linguistic 
assimilation of prior diversity” involving “the Malayic languages 
(especially Old Malay itself), Javanese and perhaps other languages”. 
Bellwood’s conjecture is in agreement with the wide distribution and 
early emergence of literacy in Old Malay using Indic script, as noted 
above and including the inscription from Laguna de Bay near Manila 
dated AD 900 incorporating Old Malay, Old Javanese and Old Tagalog 
(Postma 1992). This protohistoric development enters the Indic period 
when by AD 500, “the Western Austronesian area was perhaps a zone 
of continuously-flourishing inter-island travel and trade”.
The Old Malay language appears to have been a literary lingua franca 
for Buddhist works: in AD 605 a Chinese general took 1,350 Buddhist 
works in “K’un-lun language” from Campa’s capital (Sarkar 2001b, p. 63), 
while in AD 672 Yijing, who stayed six months in Śrīvijaya en route to

--- PAGE 516 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
505
Tamralipti, records that many Chinese Buddhist pilgrims “made prolonged 
stay [in Śrīvijaya] and learned or could speak K’un-lun” (Sarkar 2001a, 
p. 27 and Wolters 1986, p. 28).11 The picture of the maritime connections 
of Old Malay speakers painted by Bellwood is reinforced by what is 
recorded of the K’un-lun in Chinese sources. The Chinese Buddhist pilgrim 
Yijing referred to the eleven principal chou (port-cities) of the Straits 
of Melaka region, which included Śrīvijaya and Malayu, as “generally 
known by the general name of ‘the countries of K’un-lun,’ since the 
people of K’un-lun first visited Tongking and Canton” (Braddell 1980, 
p. 45). Further, we know that in the eighth century the K’un-lun were 
distinguished from the Po-lo-men (Brahmins, or Indians) and the Po-ssu 
(Parsi) as merchants along the river of Guangzhou, as noted by Kanshin 
in circa AD 750 (Guy 2001, p. 283). It is clear from these sources that 
the term K’un-lun refers to Old Malay speakers of the Straits of Melaka. 
Chinese sources (with a mention in Ptolemy’s Periplus) and later 
Portuguese sources refer to large ships (bo) of the k’un-lun (in the Periplus 
rendered as “kolandia phonta”) in the Indian Ocean and in Southeast 
Asian waters (Manguin 1996). The Old Malay and Old Javanese term 
sambau for sea-going ships was adopted into Old Khmer and, later, Thai 
(Coedès and Damais 1992, p. 47) while WMP shipping in the Bay of 
Bengal—and hence connections to India—appears to be affirmed by the 
presence of the term waṅkaṅ in Old Mon inscriptions and in early first 
millennium Tamil Sangam texts (Manguin 1996).
In light of the evidence cited above on Malay shipping and the role 
of Old Malay language and its speakers, Keith Taylor’s (1976, p. 49) 
remarks appear apposite: 
Compared with the Malayo-Polynesians, Indo-Aryan and Dravidian 
seafaring tendencies were notably low; in light of this, it might make more 
sense to see the Malayo-Polynesians going to India and coming back with 
Sanskrit than to invent Indian Sanskritizers radiating through Southeast 
Asia. The truth of the matter can be expected to lie somewhere between 
these bald extremes.
11	 Other Buddhist pilgrims also stopped over in other Śrīvijaya-controlled ports along 
the Straits—chiefly Malayu and Kedah (Wolters 1979, p. 5). Yijing, for instance, 
stayed for two months in Malayu in AD 672.

--- PAGE 517 ---
506	
Imran bin Tajudeen
We are reminded here of the point raised by de Casparis and Mabbett 
(1992, p. 287) on the greater likelihood of the Brahmans operating in 
Southeast Asia being Southeast Asians rather than Indians, particularly 
given the curious fact that Indian gotra names are not found in Southeast 
Asian inscriptions. Their contention lends further weight to Bosch’s 
śāstric thesis. 
11.  Conclusion
By analogy with the innovations in literary culture reviewed earlier, 
two forms of innovation in Indic material culture among WMP-speakers 
can be distinguished: first, the original translation or reworking of Indic 
forms and concepts, and second, the syncretic integration of Indic and 
Austronesian sources—including in Śailendra-era Mahāyāna Buddhist 
monuments. The extent and variety of innovations in Javanese Indic 
architecture bear no parallels anywhere else in the Indic world. The 
variety of innovations upon Indic templates shown in Javanese, Sumatran 
and Kedah temple architecture and its hybridity with Austronesian 
typological features point to local initiative rather than to Indian tutelage 
and conception. Any neat attribution of the Indic architectural legacy in 
the WMP and larger Southeast Asian context to foreign design is always 
highly problematic. 
Given the early onset and extent of translation and integration 
between Indic and indigenous concepts and forms and the overwhelming 
evidence for indigenous maritime agency—specifically by speakers 
of Old Malay—neither the “Sanskrit Cosmopolis” perspective nor 
the opposite reactionary emphasis on localization or indigenization is 
adequate, since they are both premised upon comparisons with India and 
thus do not go beyond the presumption of a model of centre-periphery 
relations that presume Indian agency and indigenous passivity followed 
belatedly by a “vernacular” response. The rejection of the indigenous- 
Indic dichotomy implies that the analysis of the Austronesian-Indic 
cultural encounter and its outcomes in architecture and art should seek to 
identify the interaction and mutual transformation of the autochthonous 
and Indic simultaneously.

--- PAGE 518 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
507
Despite the problems with some of his ideas mentioned earlier, 
Quaritch Wales (1961, p. 18) may have been among the first to have 
pointed the way to a perspective that does not fix the “constant features” 
of local culture as an immutable essence, but rather, through his concept 
of “local genius” explains it “as a preference” for aspects of Indic culture 
to which it is amenable, expressed in “a specific way of handling the 
newly acquired [Indic] concepts”; thus, local genius “will determine the 
reaction to the new culture and give direction to subsequent evolution”. 
To recapitulate: in Java, Sumatra and Kedah, at the formal-physical level 
we can point to two “constant features” that shaped Indic architecture 
whose character as a persistent “preference” can be more fully appreciated 
through an Austronesian comparative perspective. These are the 
importance of terraced mounds or differentiated levels and second, 
the use of walled complexes to demarcate places of religious or regal 
importance. Yet a third aspect comes from the singular persistence of 
the granary cult among Austronesian societies—and in Java the form of 
this cult-house showed a remarkable change from a type with a WMP 
distribution to one that is found among CMP speakers.
The “local” element in the Indic civilization of WMP speakers is not 
some substratum that is overwhelmed before reasserting its identity later, 
but one that initiated the reworking and translation of Indic sources to 
shape Indic architecture and aspects of its synthetic culture among WMP 
societies from the beginning. The preceding discussion also makes it clear 
that “indigenous society” was not one that was isolated and static, but 
networked and interlinked, with the WMP groups, including speakers of 
Old Malay and Old Javanese, engaged in various roles. Key among these 
roles is the close link between Malay shipping and Buddhist scholarship, 
including works in the Old Malay language. As discussed, Old Malay 
speakers have also left inscriptions in Java. Literacy among WMP speakers 
appears to have been more substantial than has been recognized, and 
“vernacular cosmopolitanism” through Buddhist literature in Old Malay 
preceded the construction of the earliest extant temples in Central Java 
by a few centuries. The local or indigenous in the Indic architecture 
of WMP societies is thus better understood through the careful study 
of the śāstric references recorded or reinterpreted by these societies

--- PAGE 519 ---
508	
Imran bin Tajudeen
rather than by conjuring imagined Indian Sanskritisers—but equally 
by also recognizing the Austronesian references (or “preferences”) that 
reshaped or even fundamentally revised the form and content of Indian 
prescriptions or precedents, and created new types of śāstric symbolic 
signification. New approach may be greatly facilitated by asking questions 
relating not only to Indic śāstric translations, but also to an Austronesian 
comparative framework—in short, through the operation of a parallel 
cultural perspective. 
References
Acri, Andrea. “On Birds, Ascetics, and Kings in Central Java: Rãmãyana Kakawin, 
24.95–126 and 25”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 166, no. 4 
(2010): 475–506.
Acri, Andrea and Roy E. Jordaan. “The Dikpālas of Ancient Java Revisited: A 
New Identification for the 24 Directional Deities on the Śiva Temple of the 
Loro Jonggrang Complex”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 168, 
no. 2/3 (2012): 274–313.
Aichele, Walther. “Vergessene Metaphern als Kriterien der Datierung des altjavanischen 
Rāmāyaṇa”. Oriens Extremus 16 (1969): 127–66.
Baptiste, Pierre. “Early Cham Art: Indigenous Styles and Regional Connections”. 
In Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia, edited 
by John Guy. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2014, pp. 69–73.
Bellwood, Peter. “Austronesian Prehistory in Southeast Asia: Homeland, Expansion 
and Transformation”. In The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative 
Perspectives, edited by Peter Bellwood, James J. Fox and Darrell Tryon. Canberra: 
Australian National University, 1995, pp. 103–18.
———. Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press, 1997.
Bosch, F.D.K. “Een hypothese omtrent den oorsprong der Hindoe-Javaansche kunst”. 
Weltevreden: Albrecht & Co., 1920. 
———. “Uit het grensgebied tussen Indische invloedssfeer en oud-inheems 
volksgeloof op Java”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 110 (1954): 
1–20. 
Braddell, Roland. Most Ancient Kedah. Lembah Bujang – The Bujang Valley. Kuala 
Lumpur: Malaysian Historical Society, 1980, pp. 32–54.
Brandes, Jan Laurens Andries. “Een Jayapattra of acte van eene rechterlijke uitspraak 
van Çaka 849”. Tijdschrift BG 32 (1889): 98–150.
Brown, Robert. The Dvaravati Wheels of the Law and the Indianization of South 
East Asia. Leiden; New York: E.J. Brill, 1996.

--- PAGE 520 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
509
Chihara, Daigoro. Hindu-Buddhist Architecture in Southeast Asia. Leiden; New 
York: E.J. Brill, 1996.
Coedès, George and Louis-Charles Damais. Sriwijaya: History, Religion and Language 
of an Early Malay Polity. Kuala Lumpur: MBRAS, 1992. 
Cordy, Ross. The Lelu Stone Ruins (Kosrae, Micronesia): 1978–1981 Historical 
and Archaeological Research. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1993.
Crouch, Dora P. and June G. Johnson. Traditions in Architecture: Africa, America, 
Asia, and Oceania. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Dahl, Otto. Migration from Kalimantan to Madagascar. Oslo: Norwegian University 
Press, 1991.
De Casparis, J.G. Incripties uit de Çailendra-tijd [Prasasti Indonesia I]. Bandung: 
Nix, 1950. 
———. Selected Inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th Century A.D. Bandung: Masa 
Baru, 1956.
———. Indonesian Palaeography: A History of Writing in Indonesia from the 
Beginnings to c. A.D. 1500. Leiden: Brill, 1975.
———. “The Dual Nature of Barabudur”. In Barabudur: History and Significance 
of a Buddhist Monument, edited by Luis O. Gomez and Hiram W. Woodward. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981, pp. 47–83.
———. “Hindu Revival in Fifteenth-century Java”. In India and Beyond: Aspects 
of Literature, Meaning, Ritual, and Thought: Essays in Honour of Frits 
Staal, edited by Dick van der Meij. London and New York: Routledge, 1997, 
pp. 50–54. 
De Casparis, J.G. and Ian Mabbett. “Religion and Popular Beliefs of Southeast 
Asia Before c. 1500”. In The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia, Vol. 1. 
From Early Times to circa 1800, edited by Nicholas Tarling. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992, pp. 276–339.
Degroot, Véronique. Candi, Space and Landscape: A Study on the Distribution, 
Orientation and Spatial Organization of Central Javanese Temple Remains. 
Amsterdam: Sidestone Press, 2009.
Dhar, Parul Pandya. “Kāla-Makara-Toraṇas: Javanese Expressions of a Shared 
Motif”. In Sacred Landscapes in Asia: Shared Traditions, Multiple Histories, 
edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray. Delhi: Manohar, 2007, pp. 257–81.
Domenig, Gaudenz. Tektonik im Primitiven Dachbau. Zurich: Eidgenossische 
Technische Hochschule, 1980.
Dumarçay, Jacques. The Temples of Java. Singapore: Oxford University Press, 
1986.
Fergusson, James. History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. Rev. ed. New Delhi: 
M. Manoharlal, 1972 [1876].
Fontein, Jan. “Borobudur: A Monument of Avataṃsaka Buddhism”. In 
Materializing Southeast Asia’s Past: Selected Papers from the 12th International

--- PAGE 521 ---
510	
Imran bin Tajudeen
Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists 
Volume 2, edited by Marijke J. Klokke and Veronique Degroot. Singapore: 
NUS Press, 2013.
Griffiths, Arlo. “The Epigraphical Collection of Museum Ranggawarsita in Semarang 
(Central Java, Indonesia)”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 168, 
no. 4 (2012): 472–96.
———. “Early Indic Inscriptions of Southeast Asia”. In Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-
Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia, edited by John Guy. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2014, pp. 53–57.
Guy, John. “Tamil Merchant Guilds and the Quanzhou Trade”. In The Emporium of 
the World: Maritime Quanzhou, 1000–1400, edited by Angela Schottenhammer. 
Leiden, Boston: Brill, 2001, pp. 283–308.
Imran bin Tajudeen. “Java’s Architectural Enigma: The Austronesian World and 
the Limits of ‘Asia’”. In Architecturalized Asia: Mapping a Continent through 
History, edited by Vimalin Rujivacharakul, Ken Oshima, Hazel Hahn and Peter 
Christensen. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2013, pp. 121–38.
———. “Trade, Politics, and Sufi Synthesis in the Formation of Southeast Asian 
Islamic”. In Blackwell Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture, edited by 
Gulru Necipoğlu and Finbarr Barry Flood. Malden, MA:  Wiley-Blackwell, 
forthcoming.
Iyer, Alessandra. “Dance in Ancient Java: The Dance Sculptures of the Śiwa Temple 
at Prambanan”. East and West 45, no. 1/4 (1995): 395–403.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel. The Malay Peninsula: Crossroads of the Maritime Silk 
Road (100BC–1300AD). Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2002. 
Jordaan, Roy E. “The Śailendras, the Status of the Kṣatriya Theory, and the 
Development of Hindu-Javanese Temple Architecture”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 155, no. 2 (1999): 210–43.
———. “Why the Śailendras Were Not a Javanese Dynasty”. Indonesia and the 
Malay World 34, no. 98 (2006): 3–22.
Jordaan, Roy E. and Robert Wessing. “Human Sacrifice in Prambanan”. Bijdragen 
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 152, no. 1 (1996): 45–73.
Kulke, Hermann. “The Early and Imperial Kingdom in Southeast Asian History”. 
In Southeast Asia in the 9th to 14th Centuries, edited by David G. Marr and 
Anthony C. Milner. Canberra: Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian 
National University and Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 1986, 
pp. 1–23.
———. “Indian Colonies, Indianization or Cultural Convergence? Reflections 
on the Changing Image of India’s Role in Southeast Asia”. In Onderzoek 
in Zuidoost Azie: Agenda’s voor de Jaren negentig, edited by Henk Schulte 
Nordholt. Leiden: Vakgroep Talen en Culturen van Zuidoost Azie en Oceanie, 
1990, pp. 8–32.

--- PAGE 522 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
511
———. “‘Kadātuan Śrīvijaya’ - Empire or Kraton of Śrīvijaya? A Reassessment 
of the Epigraphical Evidence”. Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient 
80 (1993): 159–80.
———. “The Concept of Cultural Convergence Revisited: Reflections on India’s 
Early Influence in Southeast Asia”. In Asian Encounters: Exploring Connected 
Histories, edited by Upendra Singh and Parul Pandya Dhar. New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press, 2014, pp. 1–24.
Lamb, Alastair. Chandi Bukit Batu Pahat: A Report on the Excavation of an Ancient 
Temple in Kedah. Singapore: Eastern Universities Press, 1960.
Lombard, Denys. Nusa Jawa: Silang Budaya [Le carrefour javanais: essai d’histoire 
globale], translated by Winarsih et al. Three volumes. Jakarta: PT Gramedia 
Pustaka Utama, 1996 [1990]. 
———. Gardens in Java, translated by John N. Miksic. Jakarta: Ecole francaise 
d’Extreme Orient, 2010.
Long, Mark. Caṇḍi Mendut: Womb of the Tathāgata. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan, 
2009.
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra. “The Ṥailendra Empire (up to the end of the tenth 
century A.D.)”. Journal of the Greater India Society 1 (1934): 11–27.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. “Southeast Asian Shipping in the Indian Ocean during 
the First Millennium AD”. In Tradition and Archaeology: Early Maritime 
Contacts in the Indian Ocean, edited by Himanshu P. Ray and Jean-Francois 
Salles. New Delhi: Manohar, 1996, pp. 181–96.
Miksic, John N. “The Mañjuśrīgṛha Inscription of Candi Sewu, Śaka 714/A.D. 
792”. In Texts and Contexts in Southeast Asia: Proceedings of the Texts 
and Contexts in Southeast Asia Conference, Yangon, 12–14 December 2001. 
Yangon: Universities Historical Research Centre, 2003a, pp. 19–42.
———. “Introduction: The Beginning of Trade in Ancient Southeast Asia: The 
Role of Oc-Eo and the Lower Mekong Delta”. In Art and Archaeology of 
Funan: The Pre-Khmer Kingdom of the Lower Mekong Valley, edited by James 
C.M. Khoo. Bangkok: Orchid Press, 2003b, pp. 1–34.
Miksic, John N., Widya Nayati, and Tjahjono. “Recent Archaeological Research 
at Candi Plaosan”. In Fruits of Inspiration: Studies in Honour of Prof. J.G. 
de Casparis, retired Professor of the Early History and Archaeology of South 
and Southeast Asia at the University of Leiden, the Netherlands, on the 
occasion of his 85th birthday, edited by Marijke J. Klokke and K.R. van Kooij. 
Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 2001, pp. 319–32.
Miller, James Innes. “The Cinnamon Route”. In The Spice Trade of the Roman 
Empire, 29 B.C. to A.D. 641. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1969.
Morgan, William N. Prehistoric Architecture in Micronesia. Austin: University of 
Texas Press, 1988.
Nihom, Max. Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism: The 
Kunjarakarnadharmakathana and the Yogatantra. Vienna: Sammlung De Nobili/
Institut für Indologie der Universität Wien, 1994.

--- PAGE 523 ---
512	
Imran bin Tajudeen
Noorduyn, J. “Some Remarks on Javanese Chronogram Words: A Case of 
Localization”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 149, no. 2 (1993): 
298–317.
O’Brien, Kathleen. “Candi Jago as a Mandala: Symbolism of Its Narratives”. 
Review of Indonesian and Malaysian Affairs 22, no. 2 (1988): 1–61.
O’Neill, Hugh. “Southeast Asia”. In The Mosque: History, Architectural Development 
and Regional Diversity, edited by Martin Frishman and Hasan-Uddin Khan. 
London: Thames and Hudson, 1994, pp. 224–40.
Oliver, Paul. Encyclopedia of the Vernacular Architecture of the World. Vol. 2: 
Cultures and Habitats. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Ossenbruggen, F.D.E. van. “Java’s Moncopat: Origins of a Primitive Classification 
System”. In Structural Anthropology in the Netherlands, edited by P.E. de 
Josselin de Jong. The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1977, pp. 30–60.
Pollock, Sheldon. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, 
Culture, and Power in Premodern India. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2006. 
Postma, Antoon. “The Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription: Text and Commentary”. 
Philippine Studies 40, no. 2 (1992): 183–203.
Quaritch Wales, Horace G. The Making of Greater India: A Study in South-East 
Asian Culture Change. 2nd ed. London: Bernard Quaritch, 1961.
Resink, Th. A. “Belahan or a Myth Dispelled”. Indonesia 6 (1968): 37–79.
Reynolds, Craig. “A New Look at Old Southeast Asia”. Journal of Asian Studies 
54, no. 2 (1995): 419–46.
Robson, Stuart. “Kakawin Reconsidered: Toward a Theory of Old Javanese Poetics”. 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 139, no. 2/3 (1983): 291–319.
Romain, Julie. “Indian Architecture in the ‘Sanskrit Cosmopolis’: The Temples of 
the Dieng Plateau”. In Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: 
Reflections on Cross-cultural Exchange, edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. 
Mani and Geoff Wade. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2011, 
pp. 299–316.
Rubinstein, Raechelle. Beyond the Realm of the Senses: The Balinese Ritual of 
Kakawin Composition. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2000.
Santiko, Hariani. “The Structure of Candi Gumpung at Muara Jambi”. In 
Archaeology: Indonesian Perspective: R.P. Soejono’s Festschrift, edited by 
Truman Simanjuntak et. al. Jakarta: Indonesian Institute of Sciences, International 
Center for Prehistoric and Austronesian Studies, 2006, pp. 373–82.
Saran, Malini. “A System of Knowledge Transmission: The Narrative in Indonesia 
(c. AD 700-900)”. In Sacred Landscapes in Asia: Shared Traditions, Multiple 
Histories, edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray. New Delhi: Manohar Publishers, 
2007, pp. 349–72. 
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan. “The Cultural and Political Background of Indo-Javanese 
History – The First Phase: Contact in the Twilight”. In Glimpses of Early

--- PAGE 524 ---
11. S´ ¯astric and Austronesian Comparative Perspectives	
513
Indo-Indonesian Culture: Collected Papers of Himansu Bhusan Sarkar, edited 
by Bachchan Kumar. New Delhi: Aryan Books International, 2001a, pp. 26–50. 
———. “The Cultural and Political Background of Indo-Javanese History – The 
Second Phase: The First Fruits of the Impact of Indian and Austronesian 
Civilization in Indonesia”. In Glimpses of Early Indo-Indonesian Culture: 
Collected Papers of Himansu Bhusan Sarkar, edited by Bachchan Kumar. New 
Delhi: Aryan Books International, 2001b, pp. 50–70.
Sato, Koji. “Menghuni Lumbung: Beberapa Pertimbangan mengenai Asal-usul 
Konstruksi Rumah Panggung di Kepulauan Pasifik”. Antropologi Indonesia 49 
(1991): 31–47.
Schefold, Reimar. “The Southeast Asian-type House: Common Features and 
Local Transformations of an Ancient Architectural Tradition”. In Indonesian 
Houses 1: Tradition and Transformation in Vernacular Architecture, edited by 
Reimar Schefold, Peter J.M. Nas and Gaudenz Domenig. Singapore: National 
University Press, 2004, pp. 19–60.
Schnitger, Frederic Martin. Forgotten Kingdoms in Sumatra. Singapore: Oxford 
University Press, 1989 [1939].
Scott, William Henry. Barangay: Sixteenth-century Philippine Culture and Society. 
Manila: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 1997.
Soekmono, R. Chandi Gumpung of Muara Jambi: A Platform instead of a 
Conventional Chandi. Jakarta: Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, 
1987.
———. The Javanese Candi: Function and Meaning. Leiden; New York: E.J. 
Brill, 1995.
Stokes, John F.G. Heiau of the Island of Hawai’i: A Historic Survey of Native 
Hawaiian Stone Temple Sites. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press, 1991.
Stutterheim, Willem F. Rama-Legenden und Rama-Reliefs in Indonesien. München: 
Müller, 1925. 
Suhadi, Machi. “Seven Old-Malay Inscriptions found in Java”. In SPAFA 
(SEAMEO Project in Archaeology and Fine Arts) Final Report, Consultative 
Workshop on Archaeological and Environmental Studies on Srivijaya (T-W3), 
Bangkok and south Thailand, 6l-SL. Bangkok: Southeast Asian Ministers of 
Education Organization, 1983.
Supomo S. “Lord of the Mountains in the Fourteenth Century Kakawin”. Bijdragen 
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 128, no. 2/3 (1972): 281–97.
———. “Indic Transformation: The Sanskritization of Jawa and the Javanization of 
the Bharata”. In The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, 
edited by Peter Bellwood, James J. Fox, and Darrell Tryon. Canberra: ANU 
Press, 1995, pp. 309–32. 
Taylor, Keith W. “Madagascar in the Malayo-Polynesian Myths”. In Explorations in 
Early Southeast Asian History: The Origins of Southeast Asian Statecraft, edited

--- PAGE 525 ---
514	
Imran bin Tajudeen
by Kenneth R. Hall and John K. Whitmore. Ann Arbor: Center for South and 
Southeast Asian Studies, University of Michigan, 1976, pp. 25–59.
Theunissen, Robert, Peter Grave and Grahame Bailey. “Doubts on Diffusion: 
Challenging the Assumed Indian Origin of Iron Age Agate and Carnelian 
Beads in Southeast Asia”. World Archaeology 32, no. 1 (2000): Archaeology 
in Southeast Asia, pp. 84–105.
Totton, Marie-Louise. “Narrating  Animals  on  the  Screen  of  the  World”. The Art 
Bulletin 85 (2003): 6–24.
van der Meulen, W.J. “In Search of ‘Ho-Ling’”. Indonesia 23 (April 1977): 87–111.
———. “King Sanjaya and His Successors”. Indonesia 28 (October 1979): 17–54.
van der Molen, Willem. “A Token of My Longing: A  Rhetorical Analysis of 
Sita’s Letter  to  Rama, Old Javanese Ramayana 11.22–32”. Indonesia and the 
Malay World 11, no. 31 (2003): 339–55.
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, J.E. “The Dhyāni Buddhas of Barabudur”. Bijdragen tot 
de Taal, Land en Volkenkunde 121 (1965): 389–416.
van Ossenbruggen, F.G.E. “Java’s Manca Pat: Origin of a Primitive Classification 
System”. In Structural Anthropology in the Netherlands: A Reader, edited by 
Patrick Edward J. de Josseling de Jong. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1977 
[1916], pp. 30–60.
Waterson, Roxana. The Living House: An Anthropology of Architecture in 
South-East Asia. 3rd ed. London: Thames and Hudson, 2009 [1990].
Wisseman-Christie, Jan. “Javanese Markets and the Asian Sea Trade Boom of 
the Tenth to Thirteenth Centuries A.D.”. Journal of the Economic and Social 
History of the Orient 41, no. 3 (1998): 344–81.
———. “Asian Trade between the Tenth and Thirteenth Centuries and its Impact 
on the States of Java and Bali”. In Archaeology of Seafaring: The Indian 
Ocean in the Ancient Period, edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray. Delhi: Pragati 
Publications, 1999, pp. 221–70.
Wolters, Oliver W. “Studying Srivijaya”. Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society 52, no. 2 (1979): 1–32.
———. “Restudying Some Chinese Writings on Sriwijaya”. Indonesia 42 (1986): 
1–42.
Woodward, Hiram. “Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia in the Light of Recent 
Scholarship”. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 35, no. 2 (2004): 329–54.
Zakharov, Anton E. The Śailendras Reconsidered. Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre 
Working Paper No. 12. Singapore: Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre, Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies, 2012.

--- PAGE 526 ---
12
The Lord of the Land 
Relationship in Southeast Asia
Robert Wessing1
1.  Introduction
This chapter examines the position of a frequently mentioned figure 
in the ethnographic literature on Southeast Asia2 who is often called 
the Lord of the Land, though he is known locally by various titles 
(cf. Tannenbaum and Kammerer 2003). Although I focus on Southeast 
Asia and specifically Indonesia, this delimitation is ultimately an 
artificial one because the patterns I describe are found in a much wider 
area and, as is clear from discussions by Abalahin (2011), Shaffer 
(1994), and Sen (2014), the “boundary” between East, Southeast, and 
1	 I thank Jos Platenkamp and Rosemary Gianno for their comments on a previous draft 
of this chapter.
2	 This chapter is written in the “ethnographic present”. The extent to which the 
phenomena discussed continue locally varies considerably as peoples’ perceptions 
have come to be influenced by religious teachings and modern schooling (see Wessing 
2013).
515

--- PAGE 527 ---
516	
Robert Wessing
South Asia, and ultimately also Austronesia (Sahlins 2008), is an elusive 
and shifting one. It is, therefore, perhaps better to consider this region 
as a component of what Mus (1975) characterized as “Monsoon Asia”, 
especially given the common cultural substratum noted by Mus, and 
the active participation of regional traders in the commerce that linked 
East, Southeast, and South Asia to the Middle Eastern Muslim 
caliphates and ultimately Europe (Shaffer 1994; Sen 2014), and the 
state and local level cultural exchanges that inevitably resulted from 
this participation (e.g. Wessing 2011, in press; Sen 2014). I therefore 
use the term Southeast Asia here as a “convenient geographical 
indicator” (Fifield 1976, p. 151), rather than as a reference to a “bounded” 
cultural entity.3
While parts of the argument to be presented here have been discussed 
at length before, e.g. the idea of the Stranger King, much of the data 
on villagers’ relationship with the spirit world has existed primarily as 
scattered mentions in the ethnographic literature: locally specific and 
not seen to form a coherent pattern with other such local traditions, 
and the relationship of these to ideas such as that of the Stranger 
King. This chapter, therefore, attempts to demonstrate their mutual 
interdependence and ultimate unity, and in doing so aims to show the 
highlighted pattern to be a trans-local cultural motif that, with other 
such motifs, forms a coherent substratum underlying (traditional) power 
relations in Southeast Asia, an integrative or centripetal factor in an 
area increasingly seen as eluding definition.
In spite of its above mentioned frequent appearance, it is not always 
clear what is meant by the term Lord of the Land, or who the occupant 
of the position is. In the literature this can vary from a spirit, the 
founder of a community, the head of a village or localized descent line, 
or even a king. Thus Scholz (1962, pp. 9, 12) writes about the matter 
generally that 
3	 Although the name Southeast Asia was used prior to and during the Second World 
War, its popularity as a regional concept only came about since the War (Fifield 1976, 
p. 151).

--- PAGE 528 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
517
the Lord of the Land is the leader of a descent group who, in a land-
use area covering one or more villages, is traditionally considered to 
be a founder [first clearer of the land]. In his capacity as leader of this  
descent group the Lord of the Land represents the communal right to 
the use of the land, and within the legal community [e.g. the category of 
people covered by the local regulations] fulfills a role that encompasses 
land-rightly, priestly, and often also political tasks.4 
In other words, Scholz sees the Lord of the Land primarily as an 
administrator with added “priestly” functions. Although he later depicts 
these tasks as more equally balanced (1962, p. 155), his emphasis 
remains on the administrative function (1962, p. 128): “because the head 
of the village (Herr des Dorfes) can give strangers the right to build 
a house in the village and to lay out a field on land belonging to the 
village, he exercises a real function of the Tuan Tanah” (Herr des Bodens) 
(cf. Ellen 1978, p. 86; Visser 1984, p. 159).5 The power of disposal of 
the land, and the right to determine who may or may not exploit it, are 
indeed an important aspect of the position. However, as will be seen, 
this right is predicated on the occupant’s cosmological position and his 
relationship to other claimants to the title.6
The priestly function mentioned by Scholz rests on the fact that 
the founding line not only has authority over the land, but must 
also maintain contact with the spirit-forces resident in the earth, the 
4	 Der Herr des Bodens ist der Vorsteher einer Verwantengruppe, die in einem ein oder 
mehrere Dörfer umfassendes Bodenverfügungsgebied auf Grund der Traditionellen 
Überlieferungen als die Erstbesiedlerin angesehen wird. In seiner Eigenschaft als 
Vorsteher dieser Verwantengruppe ist der Herr des Bodens der Repräsentant des 
gemeinschaflichen Bodenverfügungsrechtes und übt innerhalb der Rechtsgemeinschaft 
ein Amt aus, das boderrechtliche, priesterliche und manchmal auch politische 
Aufgaben unfaßt.
5	 Similarly, Bertling (1955, p. 35) cites Holleman as noting that in Ambon the lords of 
the land (grondheren) are the heads of lineages that represent the founding families in 
the area. In the Kerinci valley in Sumatra, also, the tuan tanah (the lord of the soil) 
is the representative of the oldest lineage that is descended from the founder of the 
village, the first person to settle in an area. 
6	 In colonial times the reach of the title was even extended to the administrators of 
Dutch plantations (Fokker 1912, p. 63; De Jong 1998, p. 265).

--- PAGE 529 ---
518	
Robert Wessing
forest,7 and the water of the area under their control (Bakels 2000, 
pp. 81–82). Ter Haar (1946, p. 67) indeed notes that in the literature 
the term grondvoogd (guardian of the land) is used in two ways, 
namely as the title for those with authority in matters of land-holding 
in the community, and second to refer to a kind of magician-mediator8 
between the people and the spirits of the land. Elsewhere we read 
about Timor that the king (Dutch: vorst) is addressed as Lord of the 
Earth or Priest of the Earth (rai nain), which is also the title given to 
local tutelary spirits (Bertling 1955, p. 33; see below). This emphasizes 
the connection of the Lord of the Land with the spirits, something 
Van Vollenhoven (1925, p. 535) characterized as the old religious 
significance of his position. Indeed, the king is equivalent to, or at 
least categorized with, the spirits that protect the earth, spirits that 
elsewhere are said to be the real owners of the land (Downs 1956, 
p. 26; Buijs 2006, p. 21; Scholz 1962, p. 155), while the Lord of the 
Land is sometimes seen as the ruler’s spiritual counterpart (Van Wouden 
1968, p. 82). 
To summarize, the Lord of the Land is often said to be the person 
or descendant of the person who first cleared the land in either a local 
community or a larger region. Depending on the locality, he may be 
the administrator of land-rights but can also be the mediator between 
the people and the spirits, the ultimate owners of the land. These spirits 
guard over its fertility, and the founder must cooperate with them if 
he is to succeed. At times these functions are in the hands of one 
person, at other times they are not (Scholz 1962, p. 157). Rather than 
7	 The disappearance of the forest from many areas of Southeast Asia does not mean that 
it has everywhere ceased to be a factor in peoples’ cosmological perceptions. While 
the extensive woodlands near villages have gone, people in East Java, for instance, 
now speak of forests inhabited by guardian spirits and (also disappeared) tigers as 
existing, some vague distance away, and often point to the Alas Purwa forest in Java’s 
East Hook and the island Nusabarongan as places to which they have retreated (cf. 
Wessing 1995, pp. 196, 209).
8	 Bertling (1955, p. 40) writes that the legal term grondvoogd (guardian of the land) 
fails to appreciate this person’s divinatory tasks.

--- PAGE 530 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
519
attributing these differences to local variation, the aim of this chapter, 
as was pointed out above, is to explore the ideas that at least in the 
past underlay and unified these usages throughout the region. Most 
of the data presented will be from Indonesia, the area with which 
I am most familiar. However, as is clear from Tannenbaum and 
Kammerer (2003), the phenomenon, which is based on the relationship 
between people and nature spirits, exists and is current throughout 
Southeast Asia, and is also found in India, China, and Japan, extending 
its scope beyond Mus’ 1975 “Monsoon Asia” (see e.g. Stutley and 
Stutley 1984, pp. 345–46; Falk 1973; Schnepel 1995; Holm 2003, 
p. 70; Domenig 1988).
2.  Spirits and People
In order to explore these ideas, it is necessary to first look at the 
relationship between the various local groups and the spirits. This 
is important because traditionally throughout Southeast Asia, and 
South and East Asia as well, people utilize the land on which their 
settlements and fields lie only as a kind of leasehold. The owners of 
the land are said to be spirits that embody the land’s fertility, and thus 
can influence the prosperity of the human group (cf. Buijs 2006, p. 45). 
These spirits’ approval is required before settlements can be built and 
crops planted.9 Even after this permission has initially been obtained, 
the spirit(s) must be notified and feasted when a new agricultural cycle 
commences. They are invited to visit the community and participate in 
9	 Obtaining this agreement is not always easy. The babad (story, history) of Yogyakarta 
relates that when the Sultan of Ngrum sent out an expedition to populate Java, the 
spirits residing there resisted with all their might. The “Southern Ocean roared and 
Mt. Mĕrapi thundered [and] the Ngrum expedition was destroyed almost to a man” 
(Ricklefs 1974a, pp. 342–43). This stiff resistance, however, may reflect the fact that 
the Ngrum expedition brought the Islamic faith with it, which in principle forbids 
dealings with the very spirits opposing the expedition. Normally things go rather more 
smoothly.

--- PAGE 531 ---
520	
Robert Wessing
e.g. dances and a ritual feast (cf. Wessing 1999a; Anwarmufied n.d., 
pp. iii, 34).
The whole arrangement, therefore, is based on an agreement between 
the settlers and the spirits. As Lehman (2003, p. 16) notes for Southeast 
Asia generally, 
… the original and ultimate owners having dominion over the face  
of the land are the spirit lords commonly associated with more or less 
prominent features of the landscape. What is rather more particular  
to this part of the world is the idea that when the first human beings 
began to clear any given tract of land, they had to make a contract 
with these spirit lords. This contract ensured that there would continue 
to be communication between the two parties as long as both sides 
lived up to the requirements of that contract. The exclusive right to 
serve as mediators between the lords and human settlers is supposed to  
pass to the hereditary heirs and successors of the original founders  
of the settlement, in perpetuity.
In brief, the relationship rests on an agreement between the first founder 
of the human community and the owner-spirit of the place: in return 
for permission to utilize the land the human community committed 
itself to make specified offerings and, quite often, feast the spirit in an 
annual ritual (cf. Wessing 1999a; 2006a; Hayami 2003, p. 139). As 
Coville (2003, p. 88) writes, this agreement “is the very essence 
of life”, since the success of the community, and thus the lives of the 
settlers depend on it (cf. Buijs 2006, pp. 45–46). The feasting of the 
spirit, or other offerings made to it, can be seen as counter-prestations 
in the sense of Mauss (1967) for the spirit’s gift of fertility. Through 
this mechanism the spirit is enmeshed in a set of mutual obligations 
with the founder and his or her community: the spirit is, at least 
partially, socialized. This is the only way that interaction between the 
two sides is possible.
Since the community’s founder made the agreement, the responsibility 
of assuring that it continues to be lived up to rests with him and his 
descendants. These persons, each in turn, personify the agreement with 
the lord of the land; among the Karen of Thailand, the community must

--- PAGE 532 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
521
even move after the death of the founder or his descendant in order 
to renew the compact (Hayami 2003, pp. 139, 140). In other words, 
there the successor to the position becomes a founder in his or her 
own right.10 
The obligation to continue the compact with the spirit makes the 
founder’s descent line an important one, as this responsibility cannot 
be casually transferred to others (cf. Buijs 2006, p. 21). It is also a 
powerful position because with it comes control over the distribution 
of the land (Scholz 1962, p. 9; Bakels 2000, p. 82; Hayami 2003, 
p. 134). Most important in the human community, therefore, is the line 
descended from the community’s founder, the person who established a 
relationship with the spirit-owner,11 allowing the community to occupy 
and utilize the land. 
This relationship sometimes takes the form of a marriage between 
the two parties. Thus Bakels (2000, p. 114) writes of a marriage 
between the spirit and the founder of the village, creating a bond 
between the two parties. This marriage, Bakels continues, is similar 
to the one made between an immigrant founder of a kingdom and an 
autochthonous woman. This would imply either that spirits and humans 
are interfertile, or that this is a spiritual marriage that enhances the 
fertility of the ruler, who then has offspring with an autochthonous 
human woman (Wessing 1997, p. 333). The dividing line between 
autochthonous women and local spirits is indeed rather vague here 
(see below).
So important is this relationship between the spirit(s) and the 
founder’s line that colonial and also post-colonial measures combining 
various areas administratively often did not affect them. The areas that 
were combined “still maintain a degree of independence, and community 
life is conducted within the old borders” (Scholz 1962, p. 10). In other 
10	 Esser (1877, p. 164) reports from Sumba that the tuan tanah is considered immortal. 
At his death his son buries him in the yard and immediately succeeds him. The 
deceased holder of the office is never mentioned again.
11	 How this is done need not concern us here. For one description see Domenig (1988).

--- PAGE 533 ---
522	
Robert Wessing
words, ritual concerns override administrative ones (cf. Hayami 2003, 
p. 136).12
3.  Spirit Owners
As we saw, one category of Lords of the Land are the spirit-owners 
of the soil and the forest (Bakels 2000, p. 104; Buijs 2006, p. 45). 
They are thought to be old and to have always been in the area, 
to be “the elders” that embody the fertility of the soil,13 and must be 
propitiated if humans are to exploit the resources of the forest and the 
soil (cf. Downs 1956, pp. 26, 93; Platenkamp 2007, p. 107; DeBernardi 
2006, p. 175). Other than this, however, little can be said about them. 
The spirits may embody the fertility of the land, but this fertility is 
unordered or random. In order to be of use to humans it must be made 
orderly or channelled, something that comes about through an interaction 
between the spirit and a human founder during which a relationship 
12	 In 1970–71, during fieldwork in the village Pameuntasan in West Java, people 
identified by name settlements (kampung) that had long been administratively 
combined with other kampung. To the people involved, these old names 
continued to be significant. Although efforts at the consolidation of these hamlets 
into villages date back to 1844 (Anonymous 1876, p. 175; Hardeman 1906, p. 2), 
with an official governmental decision in 1879 (Van den Berg 1901, p. 13) followed 
by the gemeenteordonnantie (community ordinance) in 1906 (Korn 1941, p. 122), the 
old arrangements tended to prevail, and people had little liking for the new ones (Van 
Dam 1937, p. 81; Korn 1941, p. 122). This primacy of ritual considerations over 
administrative ones is not always clear in the literature, which tends to reflect the 
interests of the compilers or their employers. Thus, Van Vollenhoven (1919, pp. 8–9), 
a Dutch colonial expert on customary law, logically focused on the power of 
disposal (beschikkingsrecht) over land, rather than on the ritual basis of this 
power, even though he recognized the power’s religious background throughout 
Indonesia. Similarly Visser (1984, p. 159) writes about the term tuan tanah as 
“a label for quite variable social-territorial phenomena [that were] originally part 
of the territorial rights of the first inhabitants of area”, without exploring the 
ritual basis of these phenomena.
13	 Henninger (2004, p. 49) observes, however, that these entities are not necessarily the 
embodiment or personification of e.g. fertility, but must rather be seen as references 
to “the trepidation inspired by whatever is mysterious and awesome”.

--- PAGE 534 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
523
is established,14 and the spheres of the spirit and the incoming human 
community are defined.15
This is indeed a crucial point in the process of founding a community. 
In the act of founding, the founder separates an area that will be 
occupied by the community and its agricultural lands from the previously 
undifferentiated forest. In other words, the act creates a boundary that 
defines two spheres of interest, and across which relations between 
the spirits and the people are conducted. This boundary is especially 
marked, and is the location where the community’s various guardians 
are located, including the tutelary spirit and (perhaps later) the guardian 
ancestor, who may appear in the form of a tiger (Wessing 2006a, p. 40; 
1986, pp. 34–40).16
14	 At the village level this is often seen as a relationship between equals (e.g. Schefold 
2002, p. 428)—unlike the relationship of kings with the spirit world (see below).
15	 Jos Platenkamp (personal communication) notes that in mainland Southeast Asia this 
idea of separation is known especially among the Thai, Lao, Miao, Lanten, Black Tai 
peoples. “To claim the fertility of spirit owned territory, or the embodiment of ‘life’ in 
humans, houses etc.”, he writes, “one binds cotton threads around a plot, a house, a 
human body and the like”. See also Wessing 2010.
16	 Boundaries are the locations par excellence of guardian spirits (Wessing and Jordaan 
1997). The idea of the village as separate from the forest is illustrated by a tale told 
by the Angami Naga who live on the border between India and Myanmar (Hutton 
1921, p. 529; 1969, pp. 261–62). This tale relates that man, the tiger, and the spirit 
were the sons of one mother. While the man was a good son, the tiger grumbled and 
was unpleasant to live with. The three also kept different diets, making life difficult 
for their mother. One day she grew tired of the disharmony and set up a grass marker 
in the forest. The man and the tiger were to race to it, and the winner could live in 
the village while the loser would live in the forest. However, man and the spirit made 
an alliance in which the spirit agreed to shoot an arrow into the marker, allowing the 
man to claim he had reached it first. So it happened, and the tiger retreated to the 
jungle, e.g. he left the sphere of the village and crossed the boundary into the wild. A 
Sumatran tale about the conflict between Serunting and his brother-in-law Rie Tabing 
(Barendregt 2002, p. 294) illustrates the same principle: the champion Rie Tabing 
is said to have been the original inhabitant of the area around Mt. Dempo. He was 
reputed to be invincible. Rie Tabing’s sister, however, told her husband Serunting that 
Rie Tabing had hidden his spirit in a clump of ilalang grass. Knowing this, Serunting 
was able to wound Ria Tabing and force him to retreat to the mountains where he 
became Lord of the Wilderness, and, it is said, a companion of tigers. In this tale, 
Serunting takes the role of the man in the previous tale, while the sister acts that of 
the spirit, which is often a female entity (cf. Buijs 2006, pp. 17–19; Pemberton 1994,

--- PAGE 535 ---
524	
Robert Wessing
From the human point of view, this relationship is said to bring 
order or civilization into the spirits’ domain, the humans bringing in a 
cosmology that incorporates the spirits and thereby makes them at least 
somewhat orderly. This is necessary because dealing with the spirits is 
not without danger, not because they represent unordered chaos, as is 
often assumed (e.g. Hayami 2003, p. 138), but rather because the forest 
and its guardians have rules that differ from those of human society 
(cf. Schefold 1989; 2002, p. 427). While generally similar, the habits 
and preferences of individual local spirits may differ, as may their ritual 
requirements. Such customs, therefore, are local affairs (Bakels 2000, 
p. 147; Kroes 2002, p. 143), making the spirits somewhat unpredictable, 
especially for outsiders. The irritability of these spirits and their 
quickness to take offence at human errors and slights, accounts for 
people’s reluctance to enter the territory of unfamiliar ones (cf. Pemberton 
1994, p. 237). An inadvertent error can have dire consequences (Wessing 
2010).
The act of founding, then, establishes a new domain in the territory 
that previously belonged exclusively to spirits. It creates a boundary 
between the sphere of the human settlement, or human order, and 
the forest where the spirits live. Going into the forest means entering 
the domain of the guardians of the forest (penunggu), including 
the tiger. This forest continues to be important, even though, as the 
community expands, only a symbolic remnant of it remains (Bakels 
2000, p. 104; Wessing 1999b; cf. Visser 1984, p. 41; Downs 1956, 
p. 21).
p. 263; Wessing 1986). Rie Tabing, finally, becomes the expelled tiger that guards 
the forest and, under proper circumstances, the boundary of the village as well (cf. 
Schefold 2002, p. 423; Wessing 1986). The conjunction of Serunting’s wife and the 
spirit can also be seen in Bakels’ (2000, p. 147) account of the founder among the 
Kerinci (Sumatra), who is said to marry an autochthonous woman, usually a beautiful 
forest fairy, though she occasionally may look like an ape. In Sulawesi also the 
male founder married a local spirit, a woman that emerged from the waters (Buijs 
2006, pp. 19, 50).

--- PAGE 536 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
525
4. The Village Founding Line
The existence of human communities, then, is only possible through 
human cooperation with the spirit world, and the spirits, while central 
because of their position as owners of the soil, can only be understood 
in relation to the various categories of founders that come into contact 
with them. These latter include founders of villages, the ones who first 
opened the forest in a particular area, but also previous inhabitants of 
a location, and those having power over a larger area, such as rulers 
or heads of (extended) lineages (Dutch: stamhoofd), depending on the 
political structure of the community in question. 
In considering these social positions, we must be careful to place 
them in their individual contexts. For example, the position of village 
head (kepala desa) in Indonesia today is seductive in that in the context 
of the modern Indonesian state17 it indicates a person of authority and 
relative power in the state hierarchy. This does not necessarily mean, 
however, that this person is a member of the community’s founding 
line. Although many village heads in Indonesia still are descendants of 
a village founder, since the troubles of the late 1960s there have also 
been many who were political or military appointees. Being outsiders, 
such appointees would have no relationship with the local tutelary spirit, 
and would therefore not necessarily feel an obligation to feast it or 
maintain other customary relations with it (cf. De Josselin de Jong 1947, 
p. 26). Especially in the stressful post-coup times of the early 1970s in 
Indonesia, such feasting might well have been considered subversive 
and thus dangerous.18
17	 As well as in the past in the colonial state.
18	 During eighteen months research in 1970–71 in especially Kampung Gajah of the 
village Pameuntasan in West Java (Wessing 1978) the tutelary spirit was never 
mentioned as such, and it was only during a return visit in 1998 to the now-
autonomous village of Gajah Mekar that the nature of what in the 1970s had 
been a brooding presence in the hills was identified as the original tutelary spirit 
which had been displaced by a Muslim jinn (Wessing 2001, p. 43). Similarly in the 
East Javanese community of Alasmalang, the feasting of the tutelary spirit in the 
form of the kebo-keboan ritual was forbidden from 1970 until 1990 (Siswanto and 
Prasetyo 2009, pp. 96–97).

--- PAGE 537 ---
526	
Robert Wessing
Under more traditional circumstances, however, the village leader­
ship would have consisted of descendants of the founder (Indische Gids 
1897, p. 1432; Bezemer 1921, p. 154; Geurtjens 1921, p. 187; Tichelman 
1925, p. 717). Founders were persons of considerable authority in 
their community, being revered by their descendants, and the source of 
both high rank and an advantageous position regarding the distribution 
of land. “The first founder and his or her followers … had free 
access to all resources [and were] able to choose the best dwelling, 
agricultural and fishing locations, and they would have had moral rights 
to claim and mark these against the encroachments of later comers” 
(Bellwood 1996, p. 30). They have precedence in their community 
vis-à-vis newcomers, who need permission to exploit village land 
(Scholz 1962, p. 8; Tambiah 1975, p. 264). Strangers and newcomers 
must be introduced to the ancestral founder and the tutelary spirit; 
in other words, they must be made into members of the community of 
venerators.19
However, even when only considering the “traditional” arrangement 
we must be cautious, as the position of administrative head may well 
not coincide with the ritual one, occupied by the person who liaises 
with the tutelary spirit, even though both may be descendants of the 
founder (cf. Van Wouden 1968, p. 29). Depending on local circumstances, 
the power held by either may differ considerably because the right to 
allocate agricultural land often lies with the administrative head, while 
relations with the spirit are maintained by the ritual leader. Sometimes, 
as among the Kanekes20 of South Banten (West Java), these positions 
are combined. The head of the community, the pu’un, is both the ritual 
19	 This seems to also include newborn children and is the idea behind the turun tanah 
ritual (the first introduction to the earth; Koperberg 1934; Wessing 1978, p. 130; Rikin 
1973, pp. 14–15) or to the source of water (Van der Goes 1997, p. 400, n. 23). In 1970, 
when doing fieldwork in the hamlet Gajah, I had to be introduced to the spirit of the 
founder before my work could progress.
20	 In the literature these people are also known as the Baduy. They themselves, however, 
do not use this term, but rather call themselves after the hamlet they live in, or after 
the village Kanekes that encompasses these hamlets (Barendregt and Wessing 2008, 
p. 551, n. 2).

--- PAGE 538 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
527
leader and the head of the community. This can be explained by the 
fact that Kanekes is a ritual community, whose primary duty is the 
maintenance of relations with the tutelary spirit of the old Sundanese 
kingdom of Pajajaran (Wessing and Barendregt 2005). It is therefore 
not surprising that this ritual leader has great authority, and is able to 
harangue his villagers when they offend against the tutelary spirit’s 
domain (Djoewisno 1987, p. 36).21 
Elsewhere, in less ritually oriented communities, the person who 
liaises with the spirit may be less obvious in daily life, especially in areas 
where a state sanctioned religion has gained prominence. His authority 
in non-ritual matters varies, and the daily affairs of the community are 
often in the hands of its administrative head (Ind. kepala desa, lurah) 
(cf. Hayami 2003, p. 140; De Josselin de Jong 1947, p. 26). However, 
this does not mean that the ritual leader is less important, at least not 
until relatively recently (Wessing 2013). While he is sometimes among 
the economically better off in the community (Hayami 2003, p. 140), 
he also often lives in a simple dwelling, sometimes near the fields, with 
little material evidence of his standing in the community. Yet, the whole 
community pays attention to what he does (Buijs 2006, p. 112),22 and 
even the decisions of the head of the village or wider area may need 
his approval (Van Wouden 1968, p. 29; Tichelman 1925, pp. 716–17). 
When a village becomes too large, daughter communities may be 
founded, but here too, at least at first, the influence of the original 
founding line continues to be felt. People usually know the name of 
the mother village23 and, along with family ties, relationships with the 
tutelary spirit are long maintained (Ter Haar 1946, p. 82; Pemberton 
1994, p. 243; cf. Hayami 2003, p. 138).
21	 The Kanekes also have a person who liaises with the national government 
and the outside world, but he is quite secondary to the pu’un. Drabbe (1940, 
p. 150) reports from the island Tanembar that the position of (administrative) 
village head is unknown there. A descendant of the community’s founder sees to 
daily affairs.
22	 Compare the position of the Chau Phau in Thailand (Tambiah 1975, p. 265).
23	 Cf. Koloniaal Instituut IV-A 1918, p. 133, #404, #405.

--- PAGE 539 ---
528	
Robert Wessing
5.  Previous Inhabitants
The above account of a founder demarcating an area and creating a 
relationship with its spirit-owner is, of course, an ideal model. It does 
not take into consideration that others may have lived in the area before, 
having left because of a calamity like drought or war. Especially in 
the latter case the previous inhabitants may have disappeared, leaving 
behind only traces of their occupation. For example, when the hamlet 
Sagat (East Java) was founded, the incoming group found a grave there. 
Although the identity of the deceased was unknown, it was assumed 
that he or she was one of, or represented the original inhabitants of the 
place, and his/her spirit was pressed into service as that of the founder. 
Later someone received a firasat (mystical insight) that the deceased 
had been a patih (chief councillor) from the kingdom of Mataram, and 
that he had had two siblings whose graves are located respectively in 
Banyuwangi and in Macan Putih (both in East Java). Since this presumed 
founder is deceased, the current inhabitants of Sagat also have no way of 
knowing the name of their tutelary spirit. When the agricultural season 
gets underway, they just notify this presumptive founder and leave it to 
him to deal with the spirits. Informants, indeed, sometimes referred to 
him as a founder and at other times as the tutelary spirit, merging the 
two identities.24 
6.  Backward Feet
A similar merging of previous inhabitants with the nature spirits is found 
in Northern Halmahera where, having lost their war with the sultans 
of Ternate, Tidore and Jailolo, the Moro inhabitants “‘walked backwards’ 
into the forest” (Platenkamp 2007, pp. 105, 116) when the Tobelo occupied 
their land.25 They are said to occasionally show themselves, as if to 
24	 This is found elsewhere as well (Schefold 2002, p. 428; Scholz 1962, p. 12; cf. 
Platenkamp 2007, p. 115), even as far a field as Madagascar where the Merina 
say that before the arrival of their ancestors, their territory was occupied by an 
autochthonous people who were the “masters of wild plants and animals” (Bloch 
1985, p. 640).
25	 Similarly, the Nage of the island of Flores tell of wildmen (ebu gogo) whose description

--- PAGE 540 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
529
remind the current residents that they, the Moro, used to rule there, 
even though they are now believed to have become one with the spirit 
world (Lapian 1987, p. 216; Berg 1955, p. 252), as was symbolized by 
their backwards movement. Elsewhere too being inverted or backwards 
indicates a link with the forces of nature and its powers (cf. Wessing 
1986, pp. 84, 88, n. 8; Diamond 1998, p. 332). Similarly in Sulawesi, 
the name of the Toraja agricultural deity, Sumboli, is derived from 
woli, which means “turned about, … backwards”. This deity walked 
“on reversed feet, with the foot soles on top. He also had horns on his 
knees” (Downs 1956, p. 25).
Actually, the merger of the previous or elder inhabitants with the 
spirit world seems to be part of a more general pattern. In Java, for 
instance, the elderly have the power to mete out supernatural punishment 
(kuwalat), indicating their increasing involvement with the spirit forces. 
In this regard it is interesting that the Houailon of north-east New 
Caledonia, which is part of the New Hebrides, an area that has cultural 
affinities with Southeast Asia (cf. Heine-Geldern 1923, p. 185), perceive 
of life as a “process of ‘becoming more spirit’, and the older one is, 
the more one sheds humanness” and takes on bao (the character of 
spirit) (Trompf 1995, p. 154). The merger or identification of the spirit 
of the founder with the tutelary spirit, which is often found throughout 
Southeast Asia, may also be seen as part of this pattern (Mus 1975; 
Schefold 2002, p. 430; cf. Bouman 1943, p. 491).26
overlaps with their conception of tuan tanah-like nature spirits (nitu), especially the 
sub-category noa, although the two certainly are not identical. The ebu gogo were 
defeated by the Nage, and the partial overlap of the two categories could well reflect 
the ebu gogo’s merging with the spirit world – even though the ebu gogo are not said 
to be tuan tanah (Forth 1998, pp. 65, 80, 82, 98–99, 105, n. 9). It is tempting to link 
the noa and the ebu gogo with the remains of Homo floresiensis (the Flores Hobbit), 
but this idea remains disputed (Forth 2006).
26	 By burying the ancestors in the land and becoming one with it, the land as it were 
becomes the ancestor. This raises the question what the difference is between the 
ancestors and the original owning spirits, and may account for the merger with them. 
Indeed, long-ago ancestors are often indistinguishable from owning spirits (cf. Mus 
1975). The Merina of Madagascar see the land as one with the people through the 
agency of their ancestors, who are buried in it and with whom the living are merged 
in a mystical unity (cf. Bloch 1985, pp. 635; 1986, pp. 168–69).

--- PAGE 541 ---
530	
Robert Wessing
Having taken over the position of the previous inhabitants, the 
newcomers must take on the role of the founders, and fulfill the auto­
chthonous people’s obligations to the spirits by becoming the “guardians 
of customary law” (cf. Platenkamp 2007, p. 105). There also are 
cases where previous inhabitants of an area were absorbed by an incoming 
group, as has happened to the Lelak people of Sarawak, who were 
integrated into the Berawan (Metcalf 1982, p. 197), the latter continuing 
to use the Lelak’s shamanic chants.27 This suggests that the newcomers 
recognized the power of the prior position of the earlier inhabitants 
vis-à-vis the spirits addressed in these chants.
The autochthonous people, therefore, may be driven out, absorbed, 
or otherwise incorporated, but continue nevertheless to be associated 
with the wilderness and its forces, with which the newcomers must 
deal (cf. Platenkamp 2008, pp. 10–11). Having precedence in the area, 
they continue to be regarded as the Lords of the Land (Scholz 1962, 
p. 5; cf. Francis 1838, p. 27), and mediate between the newcomers and 
the spirits (Platenkamp 2007, p. 117). Without their cooperation fertility 
would not flow into the community.28
7. Wider Authority
The final category that is often designated as Lords of the Land are 
the heads of territories encompassing more than one local community. 
This can include such figures as kings (raja, ratu) but also the heads 
of lineages (e.g. marga) and other larger territorial groupings. The 
literature is somewhat unclear on this point, and often speaks of raja 
without making clear what is meant by this term locally, which can 
vary considerably. In Indonesian and Malay, as well as in several other, 
local languages, raja means king or ruler, without further discussion 
of the size of this ruler’s kingdom. In several local languages of 
 
27	 I thank Dr Rosemary Gianno for calling this case to my attention. 
28	 Platenkamp (2008, p. 9) characterizes relationship of the autochthonous peoples with 
the old Kingdom of Laos as life-giving and supporting the prosperity of the realm and 
the ruler’s longevity.

--- PAGE 542 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
531
Indonesia, however, the meaning of the term varies from village head, 
to lineage head, to ruler.29
These positions are obviously not identical because, leaving aside 
the village head here, the cosmological positions of a lineage head and 
a king, while the territories under their control may not differ much in 
size, are rather different. A lineage head may well have gained authority 
over a large area as a result of local expansion due to natural growth, 
leading to the founding of daughter communities and the expansion of the 
original contract with the local tutelary spirit. Such daughter communities 
then often tend to form clusters with their community of origin, in 
which the daughter community continues to maintain ritual ties with 
the tutelary spirit of the community from which it sprang (cf. Hayami 
2003, p. 138). A lineage head, therefore, can be seen as representing 
the founder of the original community (see e.g. Bertling 1955, p. 37), 
and consequently assume the role of Lord of the Land. Thus Holleman 
(1923, pp. 23–25) writes of Hitu (Ambon) that the lineage head 
(stamhoofd), who is addressed as upu aman (tuan tanah), has a major 
voice in agrarian affairs and matters of custom (adat), and often has 
greater authority than the village head. He represents the extended descent 
group or family of the founder of the community. Similarly, Coville 
(2003, pp. 87, 105) notes that the indo padang or mothers of the land 
of the Toraja, who “mediate between the living community and the 
‘spirits of the land’”, must be “of noble birth”, without defining what 
constitutes noble birth: the Toraja raja kampung is a village head. This 
also seems to be true of the Malays of Sumatra (Koloniaal Instituut 
IV-A 1918, p. 107, #333).
29	 For the Toba Batak (North Sumatra) Warneck (1977, p. 195) translates it as king (Fürst) 
but then also uses the gloss headman (Häuptling). In Ambon and among the Toraja, 
raja is the title used for a village head (Takaria and Pieter 1998, p. 113; Tammu and 
van der Veen 1972, p. 455), while among the Pakpak (North Sumatra) the term can 
indicate anything from government in general to the members of the lineage (marga) 
in power (Manik 1977, p. 245). In Aceh, furthermore, it can be used for the king or the 
sultan, and for the uléëbalang, the autochthonous leaders with whose consent the king 
rules (see below) (Djajadiningrat 1934, p. 460; Kreemer 1931, p. 245). Among the 
Minangkabau, finally, raja also seems to be used for a variety of positions (Saydam 
2004, p. 307).

--- PAGE 543 ---
532	
Robert Wessing
Kings, on the other hand, are often said to have come from elsewhere, 
and are either a prince or man with great powers on a quest for a 
territory of his own, which he carves out of the wilderness, or one who is 
invited by a local population to become their ruler (cf. De Josselin de 
Jong 1965, p. 285; 1980, p. 3; Bellwood 1996, pp. 18–19).
Examples of the first kind are found in the foundational myths 
of several kingdoms in Java, and the establishment of a kingdom in 
Cambodia by an immigrant prince (Gaudes 1993). In Java, for instance, 
the kingdom of Pajang was founded on the basis of a deed of wilderness 
land that had to be cleared by the prospective ruler (Olthof 1987, p. 65), 
e.g. there is no mention of a pre-existing village population that invited 
the ruler to become king. The new ruler and his following had to 
clear the forest and face its dangers, and thus enter into an agreement 
with the local spirit-owner.30 Most famous is the case of Penembahan 
Senapati, the founder of the kingdom of Mataram, a successor state 
to Pajang and ancestral to the Sultanates of Yogyakarta and Surakarta. 
In his quest for his own kingdom, Panembahan Senapati meditated in 
various wilderness areas, gaining supernatural powers, before eventually 
coming to the shore of the Indian Ocean. There his meditations attracted 
the attention of Nyai Rara Kidul, the Queen of the Sprits and Goddess 
of the Southern Ocean. They are said to have made love for three 
days and nights in her underwater palace, during which time she also 
instructed him in the arts of statecraft and kingship. After this experience 
Senapati returned to land and founded his kingdom in Mataram 
(Olthof 1987, pp. 80–82).31 His lover, the Queen, who is often depicted 
as a nāginī, promised the aid of her spirit forces when this realm is 
threatened.
30	 The site of the court of Yogyakarta, which was founded in the eighteenth century, was 
located in the forest of Bringan, a place inhabited by many wild animals (Adam 1940, 
p. 187).
31	 Hayami (2003, p. 144) writes of “a person with supernatural power returning as 
the new central figure, adopting legitimizing power sources from the world beyond 
the forest”. In a more Islamic context, the future ruler “defeats” the nāginī, Islam 
obviously not recognizing any source of fertility other than God (cf. Winstedt 1926, 
pp. 414–16).

--- PAGE 544 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
533
The various versions of the Cambodian myth are quite similar to 
this tale of Senapati and the Queen (cf. Gaudes 1993, p. 335; Wessing 
in press). They relate how Prince Phreah Thaong arrives at an island 
in the ocean where he marries a Naga princess whom he finds there, 
bathing. After their marriage her father, the Nāga King, constructs a 
kingdom for them in Cambodia (or elsewhere causes it to rise out of 
the waters) (Gaudes 1993, pp. 334–35). In both cases, then, the founder 
of the kingdom enters a marriage (or sexual) relationship with a spirit 
being that rules the waters. It is only after this relationship has been 
established that they succeeded in founding their kingdoms.
In these cases, the relationship between the ruler and his realm’s 
tutelary spirit is much like that between a village founder and the local 
spirit owner of the land, except that in the ruler’s case the relationship 
has a sexual as well as a contractual aspect, while the village founder’s 
is strictly contractual. In both cases, however, the relationship must be 
renewed, time and again; in the case of the village through an annual 
feasting, and in the case of the ruler through continued cohabitation 
with the water-princess. Even the current Sultan of Yogyakarta is said to 
still maintain relations with the Southern Ocean’s Queen (Wessing 2003, 
p. 231; Tempo 1989, p. 71).
How such a ruler subsequently attracted villagers to become his 
subjects is not mentioned in the annals. One drawing point must have 
been the protection offered by the state, isolated villages often being 
subject to the predation of bandits. This protection, translated as the 
king’s supernatural endowment (Jav: kasektèn) that made protective spirits 
willing to submit to him, would have been preferable to the ravages 
of either bandits or the king’s own forces. Furthermore, although it 
became difficult to extract oneself once one was part of the system, 
groups of people could leave for the hills if the king’s demands became 
too onerous, or his protection ineffective (Schulte Nordholt 1991, 
p. 475).
The second type of king is the one discussed by De Josselin de Jong, 
in which a prince from outside the area is invited to become a ruler 
in an already established community, e.g. in a community the founder 
of which had already entered into a relationship with the local tutelary 
spirit. In order to assume this position, the potential ruler must marry

--- PAGE 545 ---
534	
Robert Wessing
a local woman (De Josselin de Jong 1980, p. 6). This, furthermore, 
cannot be just any woman, but must be one from the local founding 
line (De Josselin de Jong 1980, p. 7; 1986, pp. 220–21; Jordaan and 
De Josselin de Jong 1985, p. 254). He must also marry her under 
the proper circumstances, e.g. by following the rules and rituals that, 
as was discussed earlier, are part of the custom (adat) of that location 
(Bertling 1955, p. 26; cf. Heinschke 2010, p. 110). We may see such 
a marriage as at once a relationship between the king and the local 
woman, and, through her also with the tutelary spirit that represents 
the local forces of nature and fertility.32 Both the founding line and 
the tutelary spirit, then, act as wife-givers to the ruler, and, indeed, the 
wife-giving founding line, because of its relationship with the tutelary 
spirit, is the “point of access” to the fertility and welfare that flow 
from these spirits (Schefold 2002, p. 431). Given the merger of the 
autochthonous people with the spirits, the ruler literally marries his 
realm (cf. Snouck Hurgronje 1906, p. 132; Berg 1951, pp. 494, 510; 
Falk 1973, p. 2; Schnepel 1955, p. 149; Hara 1973), and, since title 
to the land is retained by the spirits as represented by the autochthonous 
chiefs, the ruler, as wife-taker, must defer to his wife-givers, the local 
leaders (Bertling 1955, p. 28; Schefold 2002, p. 422).33 While the 
immigrant king is the source of the ruling line, Barendregt (2005, p. 274) 
observes, access to land remains in the hands of the autochthonous 
32	 Bakels (2000, p. 173) seems to confuse the founding of a village and the founding of 
a kingdom, writing that relations between village and forest follow a pan-Indonesian 
pattern in which an immigrant-hero from a powerful kingdom of Sumatra’s past, 
enters into a mystical marriage with a woman of the forest. As we saw, this is true of 
the immigrant ruler or stranger-king, but not necessarily so of village founders. On 
the other hand, the sexual aspect of the founder’s relationship with the female tutelary 
spirit should not be underestimated. The Using of eastern-most Java characterize first 
sexual relations between newlyweds as babad alas, masuk guwa (clear the forest [and] 
enter the cave), calling the woman’s mons veneris her hutan larangan (forbidden 
forest, e.g. home of the female tutelary spirit; cf. Wessing 1999b, pp. 66–67), which 
likens the wedding night to a first penetration or clearing of a virginal forest.
33	 In Bali the pasek, the Lord of the Land of a village was the representative of the king, 
charged with guarding his village (Korn 1932, p. 195). This, of course, was his task 
vis-à-vis the spirits in any case.

--- PAGE 546 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
535
community who, therefore, are the human Lords of the Land, based on 
their contract with the tutelary spirit (cf. Sahlins 2008, p. 183).34 
In Central Timor the king has the title of “lord of the earth”, which 
is also the title given to the local tutelary spirits, indicating a unity 
between them. The Timorese king, furthermore, makes use of altars that 
are said to have existed since the country was founded and to have been 
raised by the original inhabitants. When the king makes offerings at 
these he must do so in the presence of the original inhabitants (Bertling 
1955, p. 33; cf. Barendregt 2005, p. 247, n. 43).35 In Laos, similarly, 
the hill people represent the autochthonous inhabitants, and are said to 
have spiritual connections, or to have turned into spirits.36 These hill 
people represent the court in the making of offerings during the New 
Year’s rituals that assure the welfare of the realm, especially through 
the water that irrigates the fields (Platenkamp 2007, pp. 116–17; 2008, 
pp. 10–11; cf. Sahlins 2008, p. 192).37 In the case of the “founder-king”, 
on the other hand, his relationship is directly with a powerful tutelary 
spirit, which, as is evident from Nyai Rara Kidul’s title of Queen of 
the Spirits, outranks the local fertility spirits that reside in her domain. 
Once his kingship was established, this second type of ruler would have 
34	 Hall (1999, p. 213) observes that “Javanese monarchs did not normally have local land 
rights, and even their tax rights were subject to social restraint”. Such rights remained 
with the local founding line, and the ruler’s income came from commerce, making it 
unnecessary for him “to confront the foundation of local autonomy and prosperity” by 
making demands on local agricultural produce (Hall 1999, p. 222).
35	 In Bali local custom was dominant to the degree that people in villages that had always 
had their own spiritual leaders often rejected the services of Hindu priests (Korn 1932, 
p. 165).
36	 Jos Platenkamp (personal communication) notes that the autochthonous people in 
Laos do not offer the king “community”. Rather, the king, through his royal gaze, 
socialized the autochthonous people, making them visible to the outside world.
37	 In return the king clothed, advised and took care of the families of the hill people 
(Platenkamp 2007, pp. 116–17). This is reminiscent of the Kanekes of Banten, who 
annually visit the regent in Serang (West Java), bringing him evidence of the continued 
fertility of the realm of the old kingdom of Pajajaran. During this visit, the Kanekes’ 
demeanour and speech indicate a level of familiarity and equality with the regent, 
rather than the hierarchical relationship that this official has vis-à-vis the common 
people of West Java (Wessing and Barendregt 2005, pp. 12–13).

--- PAGE 547 ---
536	
Robert Wessing
faced the same constraints as the first: he had to show the advantages 
of his presence or risk losing his subjects.
To summarize, an immigrant king can only be a Lord of the Land 
by extension. As long as he rules well, maintains peace and tranquility, 
and fulfils his covenant with the autochthonous population (Winstedt 
1926, p. 418; De Josselin de Jong 1980, p. 7), they, “acting on behalf 
of the spiritual owners of the autochthonous fertility” offer him gifts 
symbolic of fruits, marriage and healing, e.g. fertility and community 
(Platenkamp 2007, p. 117). In return he gives them security and welfare 
and treats them with the deference due to the older, founding people 
(Bertling 1955, p. 28).38 
8.  Femaleness
We note then that a connection with either an autochthonous woman or 
with the local (female) tutelary spirit (or both) is crucial in establishing 
the ruler’s position (cf. Schrieke 1957, p. 14, citing Djajadiningrat).39 
At this point we must take a further look at femaleness and fertility as 
aspects of the tutelary spirit. As we have seen, in both the Javanese 
and Cambodian cases the spirit that is responsible for, or perhaps the 
reification of, the fertility of the land, is thought to be female and to 
incarnate as a snake (nāginī) (Pleyte 1894, pt. 1, p. 99; Wessing 1997, 
p. 321; Singaravelu 1969, p. 5; Gaudes 1993, pp. 334, 339, 346). The 
line dividing spirits and autochthonous women is also rather vague in 
Buijs’ (2006, pp. 17–19) account in which an immigrant ancestor meets 
and marries a human woman that emerges from the waters (= a spirit 
being) (cf. Heinschke 2010, p. 109).
38	 Jos Platenkamp (personal communication) suggests that the “royal gaze” socializes the 
autochthonous people and in so doing makes them visible.
39	 The association of tutelary spirits with autochthonous women works in reverse as well, 
and such a woman may be “depicted as a kind of spirit of the wilderness” assuming 
the form of “wild and dangerous animals”. Immigrant peoples must acknowledge the 
autochthones’ spiritual connection with nature in order to use the fertility of the area 
(Schefold 2002, p. 423).

--- PAGE 548 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
537
The female-snake feature that we saw playing a central role in the 
Javanese and Cambodian kingdoms is an important aspect of village 
tutelary spirits as well. For instance, one Central Javanese community’s 
tutelary spirit is a snake that incarnates as an old woman and is 
associated with the village well. Another came in the shape of a white 
eel (Pemberton 1994, p. 263). Tutelary spirits, Pemberton continues, are 
most often associated with water sources such as wells, springs, pools 
and rivers, or with trees (cf. Jawa Pos 2008c, p. 11). They are strongly 
associated with fertility and with autochthonous women (Wessing 1997, 
p. 321, n. 12; cf. Schefold 2002, p. 423). In Sulawesi, too, in rituals 
connected with fertility and welfare, the ­spirit-owners of the land are 
represented by a woman, the toburake, who is closely associated with 
water and the forest and its spirits (Buijs 2006, pp. 45–46, 140). Among 
the Kanekes of South Banten, also, this tutelary spirit is said to be 
female. Here her marriage to the community’s founder is thought to be 
the source of the fertility of the land (Jacobs and Meijer 1891, p. 37). 
In predominantly Islamic Java, on the other hand, the founder of a local 
village community does not marry the tutelary spirit. Rather, theirs is 
a contractual relationship in which the spirit, in return for a guarantee 
of good crops and welfare, is or was honoured with an annual feast.40
Clearly, both founder-rulers and village-founders, by their act of 
clearing the forest to build either a palace or establish a settlement, 
are intruders into the sphere of the spirits. Immigrant rulers are so by 
extension through their marriage alliance with both the original founder 
and his spirit allies. Yet, whereas founders retain their male aspect in 
their contractual relationship with the female spirits, an immigrant ruler, 
because of his position as wife-taker at the centre, is categorized with his 
wife and comes to be classified, sometimes only subtly so, as symbolically 
female vis-à-vis the elder or autochthonous founders (Cunningham 1965, 
p. 367). This may be expressed in their demeanour. For instance, in Java 
the king, especially when making a public appearance, must be passive, 
calm and contained, staring ahead without expression, “expressing his 
40	 Whether these celebrations continue and in what form depends on the community’s 
relationship with Islam (see Wessing 2013; Beatty 2009).

--- PAGE 549 ---
538	
Robert Wessing
power through ascetic equanimity” (Minard 2012, p. 6; cf. Wessing 
2003, p. 234). In neighbouring Bali, being passive, calm, and contained 
is part of a female behavioural style (Parker 1997, p. 506), casting an 
aura of femininity on the ruler’s ideal “style” (gaya) (cf. Coville 2003, 
pp. 98–99; Beatty 2009, p. 145; Ross 2009, p. 18; Sahlins 1981, p. 122).
Kingship, then, is based on the ruler’s contract with the autochthonous 
inhabitants of his realm, either human or spirit or both (cf. Wessing 
2003, p. 205). This is realized through his marriage with a woman of 
the local founding lineage and the local tutelary spirit, or, as in the 
case of Javanese Panembahan Senapati, through his direct alliance with 
a superior spirit. In either case the spirit, as Wolters (1982, p. 102) 
writes, recognizes and is attracted to the ruler’s superior spiritual 
qualities,41 and places itself at his disposal (cf. Olthof 1987, p. 82). It 
may well be that the presence of a king in a community also reflects 
upon the local tutelary spirit. Having been able to attract such a powerful 
person increases the spirit’s power and prestige.42 However, since the 
autochthonous inhabitants must already have had a relationship with this 
spirit, the ruler’s superiority can only be a matter of degree, especially 
since fertility continues to be a matter of local concern in individual 
communities. The basic relationship here is between the ruler and the 
autochthonous elders, based on “cosmologically sanctioned contracts” 
between them.43 Such a relationship must periodically be renewed through 
“ritual transactions” (Platenkamp 2013), such as the Kanekes’ visit to 
the regent at Serang mentioned earlier.
41	 He is often said to have shamanistic qualities (Winstedt 1945, pp. 135–37). In 
Panembahan Senapati’s case these qualities were demonstrated through his powerful 
meditation. In several Malay and Sumatran cases the new ruler is said to be a 
descendant of Alexander the Great, a testament to his superior ancestry (Winstedt 
1926, pp. 415, 417).
42	 As Mus (1975, pp. 29–31) writes, some Hindu gods often manifest as earth or fertility 
spirits that “have succeeded brilliantly”. Similarly, it was after Panembahan Senapati’s 
marriage with Nyai Rara Kidul that this fisherman’s protective spirit began to move in 
palace circles (Wessing 2006b, pp. 48–49; 2007, pp. 532–33; in press). On the other 
hand, ordinary peoples’ relationships with these spirits often end in disaster (Wessing 
1988, p. 54; 2007, pp. 534–35).
43	 Winstedt (1926, p. 418) writes that the autochthonous leader “promises that his family 
will never show treachery to [the ruler] … or his descendants, so long as they never 
put him or his descendants to shame”.

--- PAGE 550 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
539
9.  Systemic Stress
The picture I have sketched thus far of the relationship between a ruler 
and the heads of the communities making up his realm is, of course, an 
ideal one, in which both parties live up to each other’s expectations. In 
practice things do not always go so smoothly because it is, in the final 
analysis, a question of power and the control over, and the disposition 
of resources. Especially when a ruler gains renown, it may be tempting 
for him to expect to get his way when setting policies that affect 
local communities. These, however, as we saw earlier, have their own 
relationship with their various tutelary spirits to consider. Local welfare 
and tranquility, we remember, depend on the adherence to the local 
custom (adat), which grew out of the agreement between the founder 
and the tutelary spirit and is, it must be emphasized again, part of the 
locality itself (cf. Hefner 2011, p. 79).44
Yet the ruler has his own relationship with his realm’s tutelary spirit 
(Wessing 2003, pp. 204–5; Wessing and Barendregt 2005, p. 13), a spirit 
that has gained in stature with the rise of the ruler’s pamor (luster, prestige) 
(cf. Mus 1975, pp. 29–31). This has on occasion led to a contest of 
wills, especially where the autochthonous leaders traditionally had a great 
degree of autonomy in dealing with affairs in their local areas. Illustrative 
here are the tensions between the Sultan of Aceh and his uléëbalang,45 
whose support was needed for the Sultan to occupy his office. In cases 
of succession, these uléëbalang helped determine who would be chosen 
44	 Beatty (2012, p. 184) seems to see the scattered local particularism that he found in 
Using East Java as due to the absence of a kraton or exemplary centre, a consequence 
of the contests for this area in the late eighteenth century. Thus “power was — and 
is — dispersed among sacred locations … and among semi-historical figures … and 
their shrines access is controlled by dukun, caretakers and mystics able to tap the circuits 
and manipulate the relics for contemporary meanings”. While the disappearance of the 
centre may well have exacerbated the situation, it likely was not its primary cause as 
the local particularism preceded the troubles, and is inherent in the situation in which 
each locality has its own tutelary spirit and associated local customs. 
45	 Amin (1982, p. 11) defines these uléëbalang as raja-raja kecil, which one might at 
first be tempted to translate as “kings of small states”. However, bearing in mind 
Djajadiningrat’s (1934, p. 460) gloss of landschapshoofd (head of a region or district), 
it is probably more appropriate to see them as equivalent to the heads lineages or 
marga elsewhere.

--- PAGE 551 ---
540	
Robert Wessing
to be the next Sultan. At the same time, their position as local leaders 
needed to be legitimized by a letter of appointment from the Sultan. 
While in theory there was a balance between them, many uléëbalang 
would have preferred to remain independent (Amin 1982, pp. 10–11). 
This balance between the Sultan and the uléëbalang depended primarily 
on the strength of the personalities involved, and strategic murders of 
uléëbalang that opposed the will of the Sultan were not unknown (Amin 
1982, p. 12). The outcome of a clash of wills between them may well, 
among other things, have influenced who could legitimately bear the 
title of Lord of the Land. The same was often true of the relationship 
between rulers and autochthonous heads elsewhere. Thus Gullick (1958, 
p. 44) writes that in most nineteenth-century Malay states, the ruler did 
not “embody any exceptional concentration of administrative authority” 
but rather symbolized and preserved the unity of the state. “Powerful 
district chiefs could and sometimes did flout his wishes with impunity” 
(Gullick 1958, p. 44). Tambiah (2013, p. 517) indeed differentiates 
between the exceptional stronger form of the state and the “more usual” 
weaker form, in which real competition existed between the ruler and 
the chiefs who, as Gullick (1958, p. 44) writes, often were wealthier 
than the ruler. The ruler in the latter cases was the symbolic glue that 
held things together: he was the source of titles, regalia, and privileges 
(Tambiah 2013, p. 518).
As was pointed out earlier, the ruler must show himself to be a person 
of excellence. One way to achieve this status is, of course, by providing 
security through force of arms: the ruler possesses superior physical 
qualities, which he then parlays into political advantage (cf. Sahlins 
1981, p. 115). In this case the local leaders can still claim precedence 
based on their relationship with the tutelary spirit, while the ruler does 
so based on his physical might (cf. Sahlins 2008, p. 184). This is an 
uncertain way to gain a superior position, however, as one can never be 
certain of the ultimate loyalty of the forces that support one’s position. 
Another way, perhaps in combination with physical might, is for the 
ruler to proclaim himself to be an adherent of a more powerful religion,46 
46	 Or to himself become a god (Sahlins 1981, p. 119).

--- PAGE 552 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
541
one without ties to local spirits, or which subsumes local spirits and 
deities into its cosmology, either as followers of the new god, or as 
opposing devils.47 If the ruler (or his proselytizers) manages to convince 
the people to also convert to the new religion, he places himself in a 
morally superior position, while at the same time weakening the ritual 
position of the autochthonous leaders that was the basis of his kingship 
to begin with. After all, one of the ruler’s duties is to bring order and 
civilization to his realm, and a cosmology, even a new one, is one 
way of accomplishing this (cf. McVey 1993, p. 10). As Bowen (1995, 
p. 1066) writes of contemporary Southeast Asia, people in marginal 
areas are increasingly “pressured to convert to the center’s religions”, 
e.g. to acknowledge the superiority of the rulers’ cosmology to the 
detriment of their own, sometimes under pressure from a “new 
[approved] class of religious authorities” (Hornbacher 2011, pp. 168, 
170; Hefner 2011, pp. 80–81).48 It might even be posited that when the 
ruler and the local founding lines adhere to the same religious doctrine, 
the likelihood of a power-conflict between them is reduced, though not 
fully eliminated. Where they work from different assumptions, e.g. when 
the state’s claim to power is based on a different cosmology, the likelihood 
of conflict may well increase. The people’s task, McVey (1993, p. 10) 
observes, “is to be instructed and obey”, which is all well and good 
47	 For example, whereas the Javanese ruler Penembahan Senapati was warned early in 
his rise to power not to rely on his sekti (e.g. the Goddess Nyai Rara Kidul mentioned 
earlier) (Olthof 1987, p. 82), by the middle of the eighteenth century the goddess is 
said to have told the Javanese to read the Koran and pray to Allah (Ricklefs 1974b, 
p. 203). During the Java War (1825–30) this goddess encouraged Prince Dipanegara 
to adopt the name Ngabdulhamid (Servant of God) (Wachtel 1977, p. 20). Many 
Indonesian spirits, furthermore, came to be reclassified as jinn, some of whom had 
entered the Islamic faith while others remain obdurate. Which is which, and whether 
any dealings with spirits are valid at all, is an ongoing discussion among different 
factions of Islam in Indonesia.
48	 I take exception to classifying many of these people as marginal, since even urban 
villagers are faced with this dilemma. It is more a matter of the relevance of the 
teachings to one’s immediate concerns. Hefner (2011, p. 80) paints a rather negative 
picture of the decline of these traditions, seeming to disregard their strength at the 
private level. In my own research I have found the tradition ongoing, although its 
public performance has declined in the face of normative Islam (Wessing 2013), while 
some aspects of it are being islamicized.

--- PAGE 553 ---
542	
Robert Wessing
except that the centre’s deities are often more concerned with transcendent 
matters like the afterlife, and have little to say about this year’s food 
crop or relief from local calamities: the “divine power” concentrated at 
the centre (Sahlins 2008, p. 190) is of a different nature than that which 
has been relevant to the people. The “transformation of local traditions 
(adat) into a universalist religious doctrine” (Hornbacher 2011, p. 183) 
therefore tends to disenfranchise the local spirits upon whose goodwill 
local communities feel themselves to depend.
Thus, for solutions to their daily problems local people continue to 
varying degrees to rely on the goodwill of their familiar old spirits and 
ancestors, even if these have come to more or less be integrated into 
the centre’s faith (cf. Wessing 2010; 2013; 2016). Pemberton (1994, 
p. 341) sees these local spirits as becoming “marginalized in deference 
to God”, but it is perhaps more accurate to see spirits and gods as 
aspects of each other, the emphasized accent depending on the nature 
and context of the occasion (Wessing 2010; cf. Bowen 1995, p. 1054).49 
Locally, then, spirits and ancestors continue to have some power, and 
are thus able to challenge the claims of the centre (see Chambert-Loir 
and Reid 2002). In any case, the ruler himself must also continue to 
rely on the goodwill of his realm’s tutelary deity, no matter how the 
latter is presented. Thus we read of candidates for a position at various 
levels visiting the graves of their predecessors (De Jonge 2008, p. 115; 
Surya 2004, p. 4; Jawa Pos 2009, p. 12), hoping for this deceased’s 
blessing on their effort to gain the position.
The modern state furthermore, aside from its recognition of a 
superior religion that in theory supersedes local beliefs, also challenges 
the traditional relationship by denying the role of tutelary spirits, and 
recognizing no alternative to its own authority. The state lays claim to a 
defined territory that includes all local areas as well as forests (the home 
of many spirits) (Hayami 2003, pp. 136–37). The impact of these claims 
by the state on the position of the Lord of the Land varies. In Buddhist 
Thailand, Hayami (2003, p. 136) writes, the state attempts to “Thai-ize” the 
49	 Often the tutelary deity, the current God, and various protective spirits tend to merge 
in people’s perceptions anyway (cf. Wessing 2010, pp. 72–73).

--- PAGE 554 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
543
hill populations among whom the tradition persists. This is done through 
the introduction of Buddhism, as well as through resettlement programmes 
and, occasionally, by military force. Elsewhere, in e.g. predominantly 
Muslim Indonesia, there has recently been a strong and persistent effort 
to eliminate unorthodox beliefs and practices, especially those involving 
the claims of local spirits. This has led to social stress, especially when 
these priorities of the government and religious councils run counter to 
local convictions (Wessing 2016; Jawa Pos 2008a, p. 31; 2008b, p. 31; 
2008d, p. 32; cf. Pemberton 1994, pp. 239–40). One government tactic 
has been to define traditional ritual events as appropriate for the tourist 
gaze, which has led to changes in, and the secularization of the rituals 
(Aryanti 2007; Volkman 1990; cf. Platenkamp 2008, pp. 8–9, 18–20).
Yet, other than its ability to enforce its claims through modern 
arms and political and religious pressure, the state’s dilemma today 
does not differ that much from previous times. Then too the ruler, 
if he were to effectively tax and make claims on the areas over which 
he claimed suzerainty, somehow had to prove that he was a proper 
ruler, and that his rule benefited his subject people. This hopefully gave 
him the moral authority to assert that the state’s tutelary spirit 
outranked local ones, and thus that demands and instructions from 
above outweighed local priorities. The outcome of such an evaluation 
influenced the degree to which the autochthonous leaders either 
retained their own authority in matters dealing with the spirits, or saw 
themselves, as in the Kanekes example, as stewards of the land and 
representatives of the ruler in their villages (Koloniaal Instituut IV-A 
1918, p. 103, #317). 
To summarize, traditionally the land was seen as owned by the 
spirits with whom the founder had entered into a contractual relation­
ship through which he and his descendants gained authority over the 
land and the right to determine who could use it. These rights lay 
with the community and not with the individuals (cf. Ter Haar 1946, 
pp. 54–59; Koloniaal Instituut IV-A 1918, p. 109, #342; Barendregt 
2005, p. 274; Hayami 2003, p. 134). Individual ownership would, 
indeed, have been impossible. This in effect created a second layer 
of authority over the land, namely the one relating to day-to-day affairs, 
which was in the hands of the community’s leadership, the Lords of the

--- PAGE 555 ---
544	
Robert Wessing
Land.50 This authority, however, was always seen as contingent on the spirits’ 
goodwill. As the community succeeded and grew, leading to the 
founding of daughter communities, the founding line gained greater 
prestige and authority over a wider area, although their relationship 
with the tutelary spirits did not change much: the contractual obligations 
still had to be met.
The adoption of an outside ruler, a “stranger king” (cf. Sahlins 1981; 
2008), added a third layer of authority. Like the relationship between 
the founding line and the tutelary spirits, this one too was a contractual 
one, although this time between the ruler and the founding line, 
expressed through the marriage of the ruler with an autochthonous 
woman who symbolically represented the tutelary spirit. In some 
cases, as we have seen, the autochthonous woman was skipped and the 
ruler entered into a direct sexual relationship with a powerful spirit. 
Yet, in either case he was obliged to carry out the terms of the 
contract if his realm were to prosper and flourish. In this sense then, 
the positions of the ruler, the lineage head, and the founder tend to 
telescope: they are but ever grander, more powerful versions of the 
original position, yet always dependent on the original relationship 
between the tutelary spirit and the founder.
10.  Conclusion
The foregoing discussion has highlighted a pattern, a cultural matrix, 
that underlies power relationships both within communities and between 
local communities and the traditional state in much of “Southeast Asia” 
and beyond. Focusing on the social categories often associated with 
the title Lord of the Land, namely the owning spirit(s), the founders of 
communities and their descendants, and the king, it has been shown that 
50	 Bartholo (1864, p. 16) writes that the human tuan tanah is sometimes erroneously 
called the owner of the land (landeigenaar), and that it would be more appropriate 
to call him the lord of the land (landheer). This, however, begs the question because 
according to Koenen and Drewes (1982, p. 726), Geerts and Heestermans (1992, 
p. 1618), and Martin and Tops (1994, p. 747) the landheer is respectively the owner 
of a farmstead, the owner of the land, and the Lord of the Manor.

--- PAGE 556 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
545
the significance lies not in these positions themselves, but rather in the 
nature of the relationships among them; rather than being independent, 
these positions are contingent and stand in an ordinal relation to each 
other. While the claims of the spirits are seen as primordial, and thus 
indisputable, they are irrelevant until someone wants to found a community 
in a spirit’s territory. At that time the rights of the spirits come to be 
juxtaposed to the wishes of the founder, and a relationship between 
them must be established if the founder’s endeavours are to succeed. 
The claims of the founder and his descendants, and of the ruler, 
therefore, are based on contractual relations between a (usually) male 
“invader” and the symbolically female spirit-force to whom the fertility 
of the land is attributed. Where there were previous human inhabitants of 
the area, these tend to be assimilated to the category of the spirits. This is 
also true of the category of the autochthones vis-à-vis an incoming ruler.
The relationship being a contractual one, the owning spirits are seen 
as ambiguous: they are at once the source of the community’s welfare, 
and a source of uncertainty. As Kris Lehman characterizes them (Wessing 
2006a, p. 23, n. 19), “worse than merely touchy, they are Lords, and 
hence they are arbitrary, self-satisfied, temperamental, prone to sudden 
anger and so on”. 
An in-coming ruler can also be a source of tension, as the question 
of a balance of power and authority between the ruler in the centre and 
the local power holders must be negotiated. A ruler’s claim to a superior 
cosmology, e.g. an imported religion or, these days, appeals to science and 
modernity, can only alleviate this problem if significant portions of the 
citizenry follow him in more or less fully adopting the new world-view, 
and if allowance can be made for those who persist in the old ways. To 
the degree to which this succeeds the situation remains relatively free 
of stress, but where emphasis is placed on a literal following of the 
dictates of the new cosmology, difficulties usually ensue (cf. Wessing 
2002; Beatty 1999).
Even in the absence of an alternate cosmology, however, a potential 
for stress remains in the system. While the ruler can make demands based 
on his superior cosmological position, and that of the tutelary spirit of 
his realm, local communities remain dependent of the goodwill of their

--- PAGE 557 ---
546	
Robert Wessing
local tutelary spirits, and these do not always approve of the changes 
and demands made by the ruler at the centre (Wessing 2016). The ruler, 
then, is often also both a source of welfare and of danger, just like the 
tutelary spirits are. No wonder that the Atoni of Timor place the king 
and the spirits in the same category (Bertling 1955, p. 33).
In closing, the system that includes the spirits, previous inhabitants, 
present inhabitants, and rulers is a recursive one, in which the symbolically 
female centre progressively encompasses all categories, and in which 
entities become relatively more male as one moves outward from the 
centre. Yet, in the end the system folds in upon itself as the ruler displays 
his “dual state” (Platenkamp 2008, p. 13): he merges with the spirits to 
at once exhibit female characteristics in his position as wife-taker to the 
autochthons and in his position in the centre, but male ones in his power 
relationships beyond his realm (cf. Wessing 1990, p. 251), including 
the forest to which he continues to stand in an ambiguous relationship. 
Finally, variations on the pattern described here can also be found in 
other parts of Asia and, following Abalahin (2011), may be fruitfully 
explored in a comparative Austronesian perspective.
References
Abalahin, Andrew J. “‘Sino-Pacifica’: Conceptualizing Greater Southeast Asia as a 
Sub-Arena of World History”. Journal of World History 22, no. 4 (2011): 659–91.
Adam, L. “De pleinen, poorten en gebouwen van de kraton van Jogjakarta”. Djawa 
20 (1940): 185–205.
Amin, M. Masyur. Kedudukan Kelompok Elite Aceh dalam Perspektif Sejarah. 
Darussalam-Banda Aceh: Pusat Latihan Penelitian Ilmu-ilmu Sosial, Aceh, 
1982. [Laporan Hasil Penelitian.]
Anonymous. Eindresumé van het bij goevernements besluit dd. 10 Juni 1867 
No. 2 bevolen onderzoek naar de rechten van den inlander op den grond op 
Java en Madoera, pt. 1. Batavia: Ernst & Co., 1876.
Anwarmufied, Sofyan. Ritus Tanah. Studi Analisa Deskriptif tentang Upacara 
Tanah yang berkaitan dengan Adat Pertanian Padi di Desa Mengempang 
Kabupaten Barru. Ujung Pandang: Pusat Latihan Penelitian Ilmu-ilmu Sosial 
Universitas Hasanuddin, n.d.
Aryanti, Dani. “Dari Realitas Transenden ke Estetika Panggung”. In Jagat 
Upacara. Indonesia dalam Dialektika yang Sakral dan yang Profan, edited by 
M. Safrinal Lubis et al. Yogyakarta: Ekspresibuku, 2007, pp. 119–43.

--- PAGE 558 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
547
Bakels, Jet. Het verbond met de tijger. Visies op mensenetende dieren in Kerinci, 
Sumatra. Leiden: Research School of Asian, African, and Amerindian Studies, 
Universiteit Leiden, 2000.
Barendregt, Bart. “Representing the Ancient Other”. Indonesia and the Malay 
World 30, no. 88 (2002): 277–308.
———. From the Realm of Many Rivers: Memory, Places and Notions of 
Home in the Southern Sumatran Highlands. Dissertation, Leiden University, 
2005.
Barendregt, Bart and Robert Wessing. “Centered on the Source: Hamlets and 
Houses of Kanekes”. In Indonesian Houses: House Forms and Settlement 
Patterns in Western Indonesia, edited by Reimar Schefold, Peter J.M. 
Nas, Gaudenz Domenig and Robert Wessing. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2008, 
pp. 551–96.
Bartholo [D.W. Schiff]. Een woord aan den heer J.J. Hasselman, oud-resident 
van Djokjokarta. ‘s-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff, 1864.
Beatty, Andrew. Varieties of Javanese Religion: An Anthropological Account. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. [Cambridge Studies in Social 
and Cultural Anthropology.]
———. A Shadow Falls in the Heart of Java. London: Faber and Faber, 2009.
———. “Kala Defanged: Managing Power in Java away from the Centre”. 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 168, nos. 2&3 (2012): 173–94.
Bellwood, Peter. “Hierarchy, Founder Ideology and Austronesian Expansion”. In 
Origins, Ancestry and Alliance: Explorations in Austronesian Ethnography, 
edited by James J. Fox and Clifford Sather. Canberra: Department of 
Anthropology, Australian National University, 1996, pp. 18–40.
Berg, C.C. “De Geschiedenis van Pril Majapahit”. Indonesië 4 (1951): 481–520.
———. “Geschiedenis en Geschiedschrijving van Mataram”. Indonesië 8, no. 3 
(1955): 231–69.
Bertling, G. Tj. “De Indonesische grondpriester”. In De Wereld der Mensen, edited 
by J. Brummelkamp et al. Groningen: J.B. Wolters, 1955, pp. 22–44.
Bezemer, T.J. Beknopte encyclopædie van Nederlandsch-Indië. ‘s-Gravenhage: 
Martinus Nijhoff/Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1921.
Bloch, Maurice. “Almost Eating the Ancestors”. Man 20, no. 4 (1985): 631–46. 
———. From Blessing to Violence: History and Ideology in the Circumcision 
Ritual of the Merina of Madagascar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1986. [Cambridge Studies in Social Anthropology.]
Bouman, M.A. “De Aloreesche dansplaats”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 102 (1943): 481–500.
Bowen, John R. “The Forms Culture Takes: A State-of-the-Field Essay on the 
Anthropology of Southeast Asia”. Journal of Asian Studies 54, no. 4 (1995): 
1047–78.

--- PAGE 559 ---
548	
Robert Wessing
Buijs, Kees. Powers of Blessing from the Wilderness and from Heaven: Structure 
and Transformations in the Religion of the Toraja in the Mamasa Area of 
South Sulawesi. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2006. [Verhandelingen van het 
Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 229.]
Chambert-Loir, Henri and Anthony Reid, eds. The Potent Dead: Ancestors, Saints 
and Heroes in Contemporary Indonesia. Crows Nest NSW: Allen and Unwin/
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2002.
Coville, Elizabeth. “Mothers of the Land: Vitality and Order in the Toraja Highlands”. 
In Founders’ Cults in Southeast Asia: Ancestors, Polity, and Identity, edited by 
Nicola Tannenbaum and Cornelia Ann Kammerer. New Haven: Yale University 
Southeast Asian Studies, 2003, pp. 87–112. [Monograph 52.]
Cunningham, Clark E. “Order and Change in an Atoni Diarchy”. Southwestern 
Journal of Anthropology 21 (1965): 359–82.
DeBernardi, Jean. The Way That Lives in the Heart: Chinese Popular Religion and 
Spirit Mediums in Penang, Malaysia. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2006.
De Jong, J.J.P. De waaier van het fortuin. Van handelscompagnie tot koloniaal 
imperium. De Nederlanders in Azië en de Indonesische archipel 1595–1950. 
Den Haag: Sdu Uitgevers, 1998.
De Jonge, Huub. “Patriotism and Religion: Pilgrimages to Soekarno’s Grave”. In 
Shrines and Pilgrimage in the Modern World: New Itineraries into the Sacred, 
edited by Peter J. Margry. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2008, 
pp. 95–120.
De Josselin de Jong, J.P.B. Studies in Indonesian Culture II: The Community of 
Erai (Wetar). (Texts and Notes). Amsterdam: Noord-Hollandsche Uitgevers 
Maatschappij, 1947. [Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandsche Akademie 
van Wetenschappen, afd. Letterkunde.]
De Josselin de Jong, P.E. “An Interpretation of Agricultural Rites in Southeast 
Asia, with a Demonstration of Use of Data from both Continental and Insular 
Areas”. Journal of Asian Studies 24, no. 2 (1965): 283–98.
———. Ruler and Realm: Political Myths in Western Indonesia. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland Publishing Co., 1980. [Akademie van Wetenschappen, afd. 
Letterkunde, 43, no. 1.] 
———. “Textual Anthropology and History: The Sick King”. In Cultural Context 
and Textual Interpretation, edited by C.D. Grijns and R.O. Robson. Dordrecht: 
Foris, 1986, pp. 219–32.
Diamond, Jared. Guns, Germs and Steel: A Short History of Everybody for the Last 
13,000 Years. London: Vintage, 1998.
Djajadiningrat, Hoesein. Atjèhsch-Nederlandsch Woordenboek, vol. 2. Batavia: 
Landsdrukkerij, 1934.
Djoewisno MS. Potret Kehidupan Masyarakat Baduy. Jakarta: Khas Studio, 1987.
Domenig, Gaudenz. “Das Götterland jenseits der Grenze: Interpretation einer 
altjapanischen Landnahmelegende”. In Das Gold im Wachs, edited by 
E. Gössmann and G. Zobel. München: Iudicium, 1988, pp. 61–88.

--- PAGE 560 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
549
Downs, Richard Erskine. The Religion of the Bare’e-Speaking Toradja of Central 
Celebes. Dissertation Rijksuniversiteit Leiden, 1956.
Drabbe, P. “Het leven van den Tanémbarees: Ethnografische studie over het 
Tanémbareesche volk”. Internationales Archiv fűr Ethnographie 38, supplement 
(1940): 1–432 + plates.
Ellen, Roy F. Nuaulu Settlement and Ecology: An Approach to the Environmental 
Relations of an Eastern Indonesian Community. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1978. [Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 83.]
Esser, J. “Aanteekeningen over Soemba”. Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië 6, 
pt. 2 (1877): 161–69.
Falk, Nancy E. “Wilderness and Kingship in Ancient South Asia”. History of 
Religions 13, no. 1 (1973): 1–15.
Fifield, Russell H. “Southeast Asian Studies: Origins, Development, Future”. 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 7, no. 2 (1976): 151–61.
Fokker, A.A. Kitap tjonto Soerat-soerat Melajoe. Maleisch Brievenboek en 
woordenlijst. 3rd ed. Leiden: Boekhandel en Drukkerij v.h. E.J. Brill, 1912.
Forth, Gregory. Beneath the Volcano: Religion, Cosmology and Spirit Classification 
among the Nage of Eastern Indonesia. Leiden: KITLV Press, 1998. [Verhandelingen 
van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 177.]
———. “Flores After Floresiensis: Implications of Local Reactions to Recent 
Paleoanthropological Discoveries on an Eastern Indonesian Island”. Bijdragen 
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 162, 2+3 (2006): 336–49.
Francis. “Timor in 1831”. Tijdschrift voor Neêrland’s Indië 1, pt. 2 (1838): 
25–53.
Gaudes, Rudiger. “Kaundiya, Preah Thaong, and the ‘Nāgī Somā’: Some 
Aspects of a Cambodian Legend”. Asian Folklore Studies 52 (1993): 333–58.
Geerts, G. and H. Heestermans. Van Dale groot woordenboek der Nederlandse taal. 
Utrecht: Van Dale Lexicografie, 1992.
Geurtjens, H. Uit een vreemde wereld of het leven en streven der inlanders op de 
Kei-eilanden. ’s-Hertogenbosch: Teulings’ Uitgevers-Maatschappij, 1921.
Gullick, J.M. Indigenous Political Systems of Western Malaya. London: The 
Athlone Press, 1958. [London School of Economics, Monographs on Social 
Anthropology No. 17.]
Hall, Kenneth R. “Economic History of Early Southeast Asia”. In The Cambridge 
History of Southeast Asia, vol. 1: From Early Times to c. 1500, edited by 
Nicholas Tarling. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999, pp. 183–275.
Hara, Minoru. “The King as a Husband of the Earth”. Asiatische Studien. 
Zeitschrift der schweizerischen Gesellschaft für Asienkunde 27 (1973): 
97–114.
Hardeman, J.A. Memorie van overgave van het bestuur der residentie Bantam 
in April 1906. The Hague: National Archives of the Netherlands, 1906.

--- PAGE 561 ---
550	
Robert Wessing
Hayami, Yoko. “The Decline of Founders’ Cults and Changing Configurations of 
Power: Village and Forest among Karen in the Thai State”. In Founders’ Cults 
in Southeast Asia: Ancestors, Polity, and Identity, edited by Nicola Tannenbaum 
and Cornelia Ann Kammerer. New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2003, pp. 134–58. [Monograph 52.]
Hefner, Robert W. “Where Have All the Abangan Gone? Religionization and the 
Decline of Non-standard Islam in Contemporary Indonesia”. In The Politics 
of Religion in Indonesia: Syncretism, Orthodoxy, and Religious Contention 
in Java and Bali, edited by Michel Picard and Rémy Madinier. London: 
Routledge, 2011, pp. 72–91.
Heine-Geldern, Robert. “Südost Asien”. In Illustrierte Völkerkunde, vol. 2, part 1, 
edited by Georg Buschan. Stutgard: Strecker und Schröder, 1923, pp. 689–968.
Heinschke, Martina. “Politische Mythen und Geschlechterordnung in vormodernen 
Java”. In Göttinnen, Heldinnen, und Herrscherinnen in Asien und Afrika, edited 
by Tatiana Oranskaia and Barbara Schuler. Frankfurt-am-Main: Peter Lang, 
2010, pp. 107–31.
Henninger, Joseph. “Beliefs in Spirits among the Pre-Islamic Arabs”. In Magic 
and Divination in Early Islam, edited by E. Savage-Smith. Aldershot: Ashgate/
Variorum, 2004, pp. 1–53. [The Formation of the Classical Islamic World 42].
Holleman, F.D. Het adat-grondenrecht van Ambon en de Oeliasers. Delft: W.D. 
Meinema, 1923.
Holm, David. Killing a Buffalo for the Ancestors: A Zhuang Cosmological Text 
from Southwest China. DeKalb: Northern Illinois University, Center for 
Southeast Asian Studies, 2003. [Monograph Series on Southeast Asia No. 5.]
Hornbacher, Annette. “The Withdrawal of the Gods: Remarks on Ritual Trance-
possession and its Decline in Bali”. In The Politics of Religion in Indonesia: 
Syncretism, Orthodoxy, and Religious Contention in Java and Bali, edited by 
Michel Picard and Rémy Madinier. London: Routledge, 2011, pp. 167–91.
Hutton, J.H. “Leopard-men in the Naga Hills”. Annual Report of the Board of 
Regents of the Smithsonian Institution. Washington: Government Printing 
Office, 1921.
———. The Angami Nagas. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969.
Indische Gids. “De afschaffing der gedwongen koffiecultuur in de residentie Menado”. 
Indische Gids 19 (1897): 1430–36.
Jacobs, Jul. and J.J. Meijer. De Badoej’s. ‘s-Gravenhage: Nijhoff, 1891.
Jawa Pos. “Jember Rawan Aliran Sesat”. Jawa Pos (Radar Jember), 10 January 
2008a, p. 31.
———. “Fatwa MUI Disoal”. Jawa Pos (Radar Jember), 21 January 2008b, p. 31.
———. “Tiap Safar, untuk Datangkan Berkah”. Jawa Pos, 10 March 2008c, 
p. 11.
———. “Maulid Hijau Dukung Pelestarian Lingkungan”. Jawa Pos (Radar 
Jember), 23 May 2008d, p. 32.

--- PAGE 562 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
551
———. “Caleg Rame-Rame Nyekar ke Makam BK”. Jawa Pos, 27 March 2009, 
p. 12.
Jordaan, Roy E. and P.E. de Josselin de Jong. “Sickness as a Methaphor in 
Indonesian Political Myths”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 141 
(1985): 253–74.
Koenen, M.J. and J.B. Drewes. Verklarend handwoordenboek der Nederlandse 
taal. Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff, 1982.
Koloniaal Instituut. Pandecten van het adatrecht IV-A. De overige rechten op 
grond en water. Amsterdam: Koloniaal Instituut te Amsterdam, 1918. 
[Mededeeling No. IV, Afdeeling Volkenkunde No. 2.]
Koperberg, S. “Het betreden der aarde (tědak sitèn)”. Djawa 14 (1934): 213–14.
Korn, V.E. Het adatrecht van Bali, 2nd ed. ‘s-Gravenhage: G. Naeff, 1932.
———. “Het Indonesische dorp”. In Daar wérd wat groots verricht…. 
Nederlandsch-Indië in de xxste Eeuw, edited by W.H. van Helsdingen and 
H. Hoogenbeeks. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1941, pp. 114–25. 
Kreemer, J. Atjèhsch handwoordenboek (Atjèhsch-Nederlandsch). Leiden: N.V. 
Boekhandel en Drukkerij, 1931.
Kroes, Gerco. Same Hair Different Hearts. Semai Identity in a Malay Context: 
An Analysis of Ideas and Practices Concerning Health and Illness. Leiden: 
Research School of Asian, African, and Amerindian Studies (CNWS) Universiteit 
Leiden, 2002.
Lapian, A.B. “Bencana Alam dan Penulisan Sejarah (Krakatau 1883 dan Cilegong 
1888)”. In Dari Babad dan Hikayat Sampai Sejarah Kritis. Kumpulan 
Karangan Dipersembahkan Kepada Prof. Dr. Sartono Kartodirdjo, edited by 
T. Ibrahim Alfian et al. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press, 1987, 
pp. 211–31.
Lehman, F.K. “The Relevance of the Founders’ Cult for Understanding the 
Political Systems of the Peoples of Northern Southeast Asia and its Chinese 
Borderlands”. In Founders’ Cults in Southeast Asia: Ancestors, Polity, and 
Identity, edited by Nicola Tannenbaum and Cornelia Ann Kammerer. 
New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asian Studies, 2003, pp. 15–39. 
[Monograph 52.]
Manik, Tindi Radja. Kamus Bahasa Dairi Pakpak-Indonesia. Jakarta: Pusat 
Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa, Departemen Pendidikan dan 
Kebudayaan, 1977.
Martin, W. and G.A.J. Tops. Van Dale groot woordenboek Nederlands-Engels. 
Utrecht: Van Dale Lexicografie, 1994.
Mauss, Marcel. The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Society. 
New York: W.W. Norton, 1967.
McVey, Ruth. Redesigning the Cosmos: Belief Systems and State Power in 
Indonesia. Copenhagen: The Nordic Institute of Asian Studies, 1993. [NIAS 
Report no. 14.]

--- PAGE 563 ---
552	
Robert Wessing
Metcalf, Peter. A Borneo Journey into Death: Berawan Eschatology from its Rituals. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1982.
Minard, Philippe. “Dutchmen and Javanese: Connected History”. Review of Romain 
Bertrand, L’Histoire à parts égales. Available at <booksandideas.net>, 11 May 
2012.
Mus, Paul. India seen from the East: Indian and Indigenous Cults in Champa, 
translated and edited by I.W. Mabbett and D.P. Chandler. Clayton: Centre of 
Southeast Asian Studies, Monash University, 1975. [Monash Papers on Southeast 
Asia No. 3.]
Olthof, W.L. Babad Tanah Jawi. Javaanse rijkskroniek. Dordrecht: Foris Publications, 
1987. [Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde Indonesische 
Herdrukken.]
Parker, Lynette. “Engendering School Children in Bali”. Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute 3, no. 3 (1997): 497–516.
Pemberton, John. On the Subject of “Java”. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1994.
Penninga, P. and H. Hendriks. Practisch Madurees-Nederlands woordenboek. 
Semarang: G.C.T. van Dorp, 1913.
Platenkamp, Jos. D.M. “Spirit Representations in Southeast Asia: A Comparative 
View”. In La nature des esprits dans le cosmologies autochtones/Nature of 
Spirits in Aboriginal Cosmologies, edited by Frédérig B. Laugrand and Jarich 
G. Oosten. Québec: Les Presses de L’Université Laval, 2007, pp. 99–129.
———. “The Canoe-racing Ritual of Luang Prabang”. Social Analysis 52, no. 3 
(2008): 1–32.
———. “Sovereignty in the North Moluccas: Historical Transformations”. History 
and Anthropology 24, no. 2 (2013): 206–32.
Pleyte, C.M. “Die Schlange im Volksglauben der Indonesier, pt. 1&2”. Globus 65, 
no. 6 (1894): 95–100; 65, no. 11 (1894): 169–76.
Ricklefs, M.C. “Dipanagara’s Early Inspirational Experience”. Bijdragen tot de 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 130, 2+3 (1974a): 227–58.
———. Jogjakarta under Sultan Mangkubumi 1749–1792: A History of the Division 
of Java. London: Oxford University Press, 1974b. [London Oriental Series 
volume 30.]
Rikin, W. Mintarja. Ngabersihan als knoop in de tali paranti. Bijdrage tot het 
verstaan van de besnijdenis der Soendanezen. PhD dissertation, Rijksuniversiteit 
Leiden, 1973.
Ross, Laurie Margot. Journeying, Adaptation, and Translation: Topeng Cirebon at 
the Margins. PhD dissertation, University of Callifornia, Berkeley, 2009.
Sahlins, Marshall. “The Stranger-King or Dumézil among the Fijians”. Journal of 
Pacific History 16, no. 3 (1981): 107–32.
———. “The Stranger-King or, Elementary Forms of the Politics of Life”. 
Indonesia and the Malay World 36, no. 105 (2008): 177–99.

--- PAGE 564 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
553
Saydam, Gouzali. Kamus Lengkap Bahasa Minang, Pt. 1: Minang-Indonesia. Padang: 
Pusat Pengkajian Islam dan Minangkabau (PPIM), 2004.
Schefold, Reimar. “De wildernis als cultuur van gene zijde; tribale concepten van 
‘natuur’ in Indonesië”. Antropologische Verkenningen 7, no. 4 (1989): 5–22.
———. “Visions of the Wilderness on Siberut in a Comparative Southeast Asian 
Perspective”. In Tribal Communities in the Malay World: Historical, Cultural 
and Social Perspectives, edited by Geoffrey Benjamin and Cynthia Chou. 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2002, pp. 422–38.
Schnepel, Burkhard. “Durga and the King: Ethnohistorical Aspects of Politico- 
Ritual Life in a South Orissan Jungle Kingdom”. Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute 1, no. 1 (1995): 145–66.
Scholz, Friedhelm. “Der Herr des Bodens in Ostindonesien”. Inaugural-Dissertation, 
Universität Köln, 1962.
Schrieke, B. Indonesian Sociological Studies, part 2: Ruler and Realm in Early 
Java. The Hague and Bandung: W. van Hoeve, 1957.
Schulte Nordholt, Henk. “The Jago in the Shadow: Crime and ‘Order’ in the 
Colonial State in Java”. Review of Indonesian and Malay Affairs 25, no. 1 
(1991): 74–92. 
Sen, Tansen. “Maritime Southeast Asia between South Asia and China to the 
Sixteenth Century”. TRaNS: Trans-Regional and –National Studies of Southeast 
Asia 2, no. 1 (2014): 31–59.
Shaffer, Lynda. “Southernization”. World History 5, no. 1 (1994): 1–21.
Singaravelu, S. “The Legends of the Nāga-Princess in South India and Southeast 
Asia”. Paper presented at the 25th session of the all-India Oriental Conference, 
Calcutta, 29–31 October 1969.
Siswanto and Eko Prasetyo. Tradisi Keboan Aliyan & Keboan-keboan Alasmalang. 
Banyuwangi: Dinas Kebudayaan dan Pariwisata Kabupaten Banyuwangi, 
2009.
Snouck Hurgronje, C. The Acehnese, vol. 1. Leyden: E.J. Brill, 1906. [AMS 
Reprint.]
Stutley, Margaret and James Stutley. Harper’s Dictionary of Hinduism: Its 
Mythology, Folklore, Philosophy, Literature, and History. New York: Harper 
and Row, 1984.
Surya. “Sudut Pemilu”. Surya 18, no. 105 (2004): 4.
Takaria, D. and C. Pieter. Kamus Bahasa Melayu Ambon-Indonesia. Jakarta: 
Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa, Departemen Pendidikan dan 
Kebudayaan, 1998.
Tambiah, S.J. Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in North-east Thailand. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1975.
———. “The Galactic Polity in Southeast Asia”. Hau: Journal of Ethnographic 
Theory 3, no. 3 (2013): 503–34.

--- PAGE 565 ---
554	
Robert Wessing
Tammu, J. and H. van der Veen. Kamus Toradja-Indonesia. Rantepao: Jajasan 
Perguruan Kristen Toradja, 1972.
Tannenbaum, Nicola and Cornelia A. Kammerer, eds. Founders’ Cults in Southeast 
Asia: Ancestors, Polity, and Identity. New Haven: Yale University Southeast 
Asian Studies, 2003. [Monograph 52.] 
Tempo. “‘Daag ..., Kanjeng Sultan,’ Teriak Mereka”. Tempo, 18 March 1989, 
pp. 70–72.
Ter Haar, B. Beginselen en stelsel van het adatrecht. Groningen/Batavia: J.B. 
Wolters Uitgevers-maatschappij, 1946.
Tichelman, G.L. “De onder-afdeeling Amahei (Seran)”. Tijdschrift van het 
Koninklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap 42 (1925): 653–724.
Trompf, Garry. “Pacific Islands”. In The Religions of Oceania, edited by Tony 
Swain and Garry Trompf. London: Routledge, 1995, pp. 121–222.
Van Dam, W.P. Inlandsche gemeente en Indonesisch dorp. Leiden: Rijksuniversiteit 
Leiden, 1937. [Dissertation]
Van den Berg, L.W.C. “Het inlandsche gemeentewezen op Java en Madoera”. 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 52 
(1901): 1–140.
Van der Goes, Beatriz. “Beru Dayang: The Concept of Female Spirits and the 
Movement of Fertility in Karo Batak Culture”. Asian Folklore Studies 56, no. 2 
(1997): 379–405.
Van Vollenhoven. De Indonesiër en zijn grond. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1919.
———. Het adatrecht van Nederlandsch-Indië, vol. 1, pt. 2. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 
1925.
Van Wouden, F.A.E. Types of Social Structure in Eastern Indonesia. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1968. [Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 
Translation Series 11.]
Visser, Leontine E. Mijn tuin is mijn kind. Een antropologische studie van de droge 
rijstteelt in Sahu (Indonesië). Dissertation, Rijksuniversiteit Leiden, 1984.
Volkman, Toby A. “Visions and Revisions: Toraja Culture and the Tourist Gaze”. 
American Ethnologist 17, no. 1 (1990): 91–110.
Wachtel, Paul Spencer. “Fire Mountain”. Silver Kris (November–December 1977): 
18–23.
Warneck, Joh. Toba-Batak-Deutsches Wörterbuch. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff, 
1977.
Wessing, Robert. Cosmology and Social Behavior in a West Javanese Settlement. 
Papers in International Studies, Southeast Asia Series No. 47. Athens: Ohio 
University Center for International Studies, Southeast Asia Program, 1978.
———. The Soul of Ambiguity: The Tiger in Southeast Asia. DeKalb: Center 
for Southeast Asian Studies, Northern Illinois University, 1986. [Monograph 
Series on Southeast Asia, Special Report No. 24.]

--- PAGE 566 ---
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia	
555
———. “Spirits of the Earth and Spirits of the Water: Chthonic Forces in the 
Mountains of West Java”. Asian Folklore Studies 47, no. 1 (1988): 43–61.
———. “Sri and Sedana and Sita and Rama: Myths of Fertility and Generation”. 
Asian Folklore Studies 49, no. 2 (1990): 235–57.
———. “The Last Tiger in East Java: Symbolic Continuity in Ecological 
Change”. Asian Folklore Studies 54 (1995): 191–218.
———. “A Princess from Sunda: Some Aspects of Nyai Roro Kidul”. Asian 
Folklore Studies 56, no. 2 (1997): 317–53.
———. “A Dance of Life: The Seblang of Banyuwangi, Indonesia”. Bijdragen 
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 155 (1999a): 644–83.
———. “The Sacred Grove: Founders and the Owners of the Forest in West 
Java, Indonesia”. In L’homme et la forêt tropicale, edited by S. Bahuchet, 
D. Bley, H. Pagezy and N. Vernazza-Licht. Marseille: Société d’Écologie 
Humaine, Université de la Méditerrané, 1999b, pp. 59–74.
———. “Telling the Landscape: Place and Meaning in Sunda (West Java)”. 
Moussons 4 (2001): 33–61.
———. “Shifting Boundaries: Cosmological Discourse in Java”. In Riding a 
Tiger: Dilemmas of Integration and Decentralization in Indonesia, edited by 
C. Holtzappel, M. Sanders and M. Titus. Amsterdam: Rozenberg Publishers, 
2002, pp. 162–80.
———. “The Kraton-city and the Realm: Sources and Movement of Power in 
Java”. In Framing Indonesian Realities: Essays in Symbolic Anthropology in 
Honour of Reimar Schefold, edited by Peter Nas, Gerard Persoon, and Rivke 
Jaffe. Leiden: KITLV Press, 2003. [Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut 
voor Taal-, Land en Volkenkunde 209.]
———. “A Community of Spirits: People, Ancestors, and Nature Spirits in Java”. 
Crossroads 18, no. 1 (2006a): 11–111.
———. “Homo narrans in East Java: Regional Myths and Local Concerns”. Bijdragen 
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 65 (2006b): 45–68.
———. “Dislodged Tales: Javanese Goddesses and Spirits on the Silver Screen”. 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 163, no. 4 (2007): 529–55.
———. “Porous Boundaries: Addressing Calamities in East Java, Indonesia”. 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 166, no. 1 (2010): 49–82.
———. “Tarumanagara: What’s in a Name?”. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 
42, no. 2 (2011): 325–37.
———. “The Osing Agricultural Spirit-Mediator”. Moussons 22, no. 2 (2013): 
111–24. 
———. “When the Tutelary Spirit Objected: Conflict and Possession among the 
Using of East Java, Indonesia”. Anthropological Forum (2016). Available at 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00664677.2016.1211508>.
———. “Nyai Rara Kidul: The Antecedents of a Cosmopolitan Queen”. Anthropos, 
in press.

--- PAGE 567 ---
556	
Robert Wessing
Wessing, Robert and Bart Barendregt. “Tending the Spirit’s Shrine: Kanekes and 
Pajajaran in West Java”. Moussons 8 (2005): 3–26.
Wessing, Robert and Roy E. Jordaan. “Death at the Building Site: Construction 
Sacrifice in Southeast Asia”. History of Religions 37, no. 2 (1997): 101–21.
Winstedt, R.O. “The Founder of Malay Royalty and his Conquest of Saktimuna, 
the Serpent”. Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 4 
(1926): 413–19.
———. “Kingship and Enthronement in Malaya”. Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society 45, 3+4 (1945): 134–45.
Wolters, O.W. History, Culture, and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives. 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 1982.

--- PAGE 568 ---
index
A
Abalahin, Andrew, 5, 6
adat law
alternative dispute resolution, 
177–78
community, 199
complexity, 178
definition of, 170
domains, 179
elements of, 171
enforceable sanctions, 172
jural communities, 179
local communities and early 
polities, 174
Maritime Southeast Asia, 170–71
myth of origin of, 198
prehistoric legal systems, 174
restorative justice, 177–78
social space, 170
agnicayana, 110n42
Ancestor Religion, 2, 89–90
Andamanese languages, 39, 210
anega ‘kind, species’, 418
anggota ‘member, limb’, 398
Apabhraṁśa or ‘Late Prakrit’, 423
archaeological evidence for 
weaving, 286
Note: Page numbers followed with “n” refer to endnotes.
Hemudu, 287
in Island Southeast Asia (ISEA), 
292
Shizhaishan, 289–92
spindle whorls, 292–93
Yuhang, 287–88
archaeology, advantage of, 12
Ardhamāgadhī, 379, 398
Ārṣam or “Jaina Prakrit”, 379
arwa ‘saw-edged cutting knife’, 424
Asian Civilisations Museum of 
Singapore, 22
asuji ‘a month of the lunar 
calendar’, 409–10
Atharvaveda, 107
Australoids, 327–28
Austric hypothesis, 89
“Austroasiatic culture”, 6
Austroasiatic languages, 41, 86, 
104, 111
loanwords in Middle Indo-Aryan 
languages, 104–6, 132
loanwords in Sanskrit, 106–7, 
110
loanwords in Middle Indo-Aryan 
languages, 104–6, 132Munda 
populations, 105
557

--- PAGE 569 ---
558	
Index
Negritos, 105n33
in West-Central Borneo, 39
Austronesian building traditions, 493
Austronesian Comparative 
Dictionary (Blust), 15, 153
Austronesian cultural package, 
12–14, 246
Austronesian dispersal, 12, 16
Austronesianisation of ISEA, 180, 
182
Austronesian language, 210–11
groups in maritime Southeast 
Asia, 246
Java’s Vaiṣṇava symbolism, 496–99
migrations of, 305
Paharpur’s core sanctuary, 496
pendopo, 499–501
perwara temples, 494
roof buildings, 494, 495
Austronesian linguistic colonization 
model, 161–62
Austronesian societies
house societies, 182–85
matricentric orientation, 182–83
painting tradition, 180–81
autochthonous phenomena, 7
B
back-tensioned/back-strap looms, 
283, 316
in Americas, 313–14
braced version of, 306
bagi ‘allotting’, 384
baitɔ ‘boat’, 411
baja ‘steel’, 386–87
bandoga ‘pandanus fruit’, 420
“Banjar Chronicles”, 458–63
Banjar Malay, 465
*banua, 185–87
baṇyaga ~ baṇyāga ‘merchant, 
captain of a merchant-vessel’, 
413
bapa ‘father’, 387–88
bast fibres, processing of, 278
Batak, 93, 311, 312
baybayin scripts, 479
Bay of Bengal, conceptualizing, 
5–6
Bellwood, Peter, 12, 16, 19, 147
Benjamin, Geoffrey, 58, 261
beschikkingsrecht, 522n12
Bhairava. See Kāla-Bhairava
Bhaṭṭikāvya, 479
bhaṭāra, 488
bhaṭṭāraka ‘a great lord, venerable 
or worshipful person’, 389
bhikkhu, 390
Bhīma, 117
bhiṇḍiwāla, 402–3
bhūdhara, 484
Bhūmisambhāra, 484
Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa, 119
bidan ‘midwife, sage-femme’, 
398–99
bidu/biduan. See vidu
biku ‘Buddhist monk’, 389–90
bilak ‘the bael fruit’, 390
blnuul bhiip “blood intoxication”, 
44
blood-and-thunder complex, 48, 
131
bǝndahara ‘treasurer’, 388
bodhisattva, 484
bodoh ‘stupid’, 424
body-tensioned looms, 274, 283
in Asia, 315–17
classification of, 284
types of, 286, 293–94
Boogeyman gods, 48–54
blood sacrifice, 43–48
Hantu Buru, 54–58
hundun, 54–58
overview of, 38–43
Rudra, 54–58, 97–98

--- PAGE 570 ---
Index	
559
Bosch’s śāstric thesis, 471, 474, 
475, 480
Brahmanism, 83
bǝrhala ‘(animistic) idol, image’, 
388–89
Bronkhorst, Johannes, 83, 105
Btsisi’, 40, 48
*buaŋ-an “one who is banished or 
cast out”, 194
Buddhism, in Mainland Southeast 
Asia, 232–33
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, 378, 395
Buddhist monk, 389–90
*busuŋ, 194
C
caṇḍi, 475
campaga ‘yellow jade orchid tree’, 
413–14
candar loom, 310
catalisa ‘forty’, 403
Catholic iconography, 181
*Cau-mata, 336
Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian 
(CEMP), 147, 163
Central Javanese Mahāyāna 
complexes, 494
cipta ‘thought-concentration’, 384
circular warp, 285–86
citta ‘thinking, imagining; aim, 
wish’, 384
cloth beam, 282, 283
cǝmǝti ‘whip’, 399
convergence theory, 11
cosmopolitan configuration, 247–48, 
	
252
cosmopolitanism vis-à-vis 
Indigenism, 17–20
Cosmopolitan vernacular languages, 
9, 18
counter-shed, 282
crossbow, 221–23
cuaca ‘clear (of atmosphere), 
pellucid’, 399–400
cuka ‘vinegar’, 400
cula ‘horn of single-horned 
animal’, 390
culi, 403–4
cultural exchange process, 8
cultural identity, 2
cultural matrix, 8, 544
Ancestor Religion, 89–90
Austric hypothesis, 89
Austroasiatic culture, 86
Batak religion, 93–94
epistemic system, 94
hypothesized unity, 87
imagined investigation (Witzel’s), 
96
Indianization of Southeast Asia, 
90, 92
paganism, 88–89
performative traditions, 92–93
realm of mythology, 95
remarkable analogies, 93
Śilpaśāstras, 91
curi ‘theft, steal, rob’, 424
curik ‘jungle knife’, 400–401
D
Dahaga ‘thrist’, 415
*dalem, 186–87
Dampier, William, 257
dangaa’ or naga’, 114
Daoist formulation, 60
Dark Lord, 120
*datu, 185, 189, 194–95
daughter communities, 531
Dayak. See Malay
“defensive indigenist” approaches, 
8
Demonological cosmopolis 
(White’s), 75, 133
*deRep, 192

--- PAGE 571 ---
560	
Index
Deutero-Malays, 336
dǝhaga ‘insubordination’, 416
dīkṣā, 123
dǝlima ‘pomegranate’, 391
Dongson drums, 20
drak, 430
“Dramatic Prakrits”, 379
duli ‘portable cot, litter for sick or 
wounded’, 424–25
durhaka ~ dǝrhaka ‘disobedience 
to lawful authority, disloyalty, 
treason’, 416
duta ‘evil, bad, debauched’, 411
E
Early Austronesian (EAn), 340
East New Guinea, Papuan 
languages of, 348, 349
ebu gogo, 528–29n25
*empu, 191
empuq, Palawan title, 52
enforceable sanctions, definition 
of, 172
engku or tengku, 51, 52, 97n21
Esoteric Buddhism, 476
ethnonyms, 460
F
false circular warping, 285, 314
family resemblance approach, 150
Favereau, Aude, 259
femaleness, tutelary spirit and, 
536–38
Fergusson, James, 481–82
fibres, 278–79
flat warp, 286
folk costumes, 225–27
foot-braced form, 295–97
free-reed mouth-organ, 215–17
G
Gaffer Engkoh, 48
ganaga ‘copper’, 419
Gaṇḍavyūha, 486
ghāṣa ‘to strike (grind, rub) 
together; to chafe, etc.’, 430
ghariṇī ‘wife’, 404
Gǔlùn, 331–32
gǝmbala or gombala ‘a man 
employed to look after 
animals’, 391
Gondwana mythology, 95
gong ensembles, 217–21
granary-shrine model, 497, 501
Greater India, 6, 8, 86
Greater Magadha, 83, 105
grondvoogd (guardian of land), 
517, 518
gǝta ‘dais, divan’, 391
gubah ‘cutting and arranging 
flowers for wearing in aigrette 
form in the hair’, 401
Gubar, 51
gula ‘sugar’, 391
guliga or gəliga ‘talismanic or 
curative bezoar; snake-stone’, 
416
guṇiā ‘sorcerer’, 125, 126
gurundaya ‘swiftlet, cliff-swallow, 
salangane’, 410
gusali or gosali ‘a smithy’, 404
H
Hantu Buru, 54–58
hard stone ornaments groups, Khao 
Sam Kaeo, 253, 254
heddle, 282
Hemudu, 287
heterogenetic cities, tradition of, 
252
heterogenetic model (origin of 
Tantrism), 77–79, 129
heterophony, 213–15
high civilization, 376

--- PAGE 572 ---
Index	
561
high culture, 2, 19, 73, 122
Hindu colonization, 376
Hindu temple complex, Sambisari, 
491, 492
History of Indian and Eastern 
Architecture (Fergusson), 481
Hoabinhian culture, 228–29
Hoabinhian techno-complex, 149
Holing, 461
homo erectus, 39
homo sapiens, 39
house societies, 182–85
hukum agama, 171
human-environmental metaphor, 5
hundun, 54–58, 60
hunter-gatherer mode, Negritos, 
329–31
hyper-Sanskritization, 381, 384
I
iconography, 180–81
ikat technique, 274, 279–81, 318
present-day distributions of. See 
present-day distributions, of 
looms
Indianization of Southeast Asia, 5, 
7–11, 20, 75, 90, 132
Indian Ocean, history of, 4
Indic phenomena, 7–8
Indic religions, 73–74, 128, 133
indigenous Indonesian spirit, 18
Indo-Aryan languages, 104, 377–79, 
	
431
Indonesian Archipelago, 148
Indosphere, Sinosphere and, 211–12
integrated Southeast Asian maritime 
space
Austronesian-speaking groups, 
246
Benjamin’s hypothesis, 261
cosmopolitan configuration, 
247–48, 252
emulation processes, types of, 
257–58
hard stone ornaments groups, 
253–56
heterogenetic cities tradition, 252
moated-settlement tradition, 250, 
251
networks and regional databases, 
245
notion of continuity, 244–47
Sa Huynh-Kalanay complex, 240, 
259–60
second urbanization process, 250
socio-political complexity, 249, 
257
South China Sea network, 252–57
translocal process of 
globalization, 240
intraregional exchange networks, 
181
irrigated rice agriculture, 184
Island Southeast Asia (ISEA)
accidental consequences, 333
Austronesianization of, 180, 182
Austronesian languages, 210
biogenetic data, 335
Buddhism in, 232
crossbow, 223
darker-skinned people, 336
double canoe, 333, 334
evidence of weaving in, 292
exchange networks, 181
five-part hulls, 333, 334
gong ensembles, 218
heterophony, development of, 215
Hoabinhian culture, 228
humid tropical environment in, 
332
lighter-skinned people, 336
linguistic data, 335
Mongoloid, 336
multiple dugout, 333, 334

--- PAGE 573 ---
562	
Index
raised houses in, 224–25
watercraft construction, 333
weaving traditions in, 320
J
ja’ar, 49
jaga ‘being awake or vigilant’, 392
Jarai gong performance, Vietnam, 
218, 219
jar burial tradition, 247
Javanese caṇḍi, 475–76
Javanese gardens, 482, 483
Java’s Vaiṣṇava symbolism, 496–99
Jongkoh. See Gaffer Engkoh
juara ‘trainer of fighting-cocks’, 
392
K
kabajradharan, 484
kaḍāha, 404–5
kaḍāhaka, 404–5
kahyaṅan, 488
Kāla-Bhairava
association with Kīrtimukha/
Kālamukha architectural 
element, 101–2, 115
birth of, 116
elements of, 97–99
features of, 115–17
Kathmandu Valley, 102
Nkuu’ vs., 115, 119
Kaling, 460–61
kalyāga ‘name of a tree from the 
bark of which a red dye is 
made; (dyed) red’, 420–21
kamalagi ~ kambaligi ~ kamaligi 
~ kamal ‘a plant of presumed 
African origins and of 
considerable antiquity on the 
Indian Subcontinent’, 421–22
kāmarūpitva ‘the ability to assume 
any form at will’, 126
kamūlān, 484, 488, 502
kampung, 522
kañcuga ‘a dress fitting close to the 
upper part of the body, armour, 
mail; bodice, jacket’, 419
kaṇḍaga ‘sword, dagger’, 422
kanigara ‘a part. k.o. tree with 
yellow flowers (Pterospermum 
acerifolium (L.) Willd.)’, 422
Kāpālika-related practices, 127
Kāpālikas, 117
Kāpālika-style power-seeking 
sorcerers, 112
Kapiparwa, 119
*ka-qasiq “mercy, pity, affection”, 
193
karaṇa, 477
Karei, 51
for Semang versions, 50
for Temiar versions, 50
*ka-salaq-an “error, mistake; fault, 
offense”, 194
Kaula Tantric stream, 112
kawittha, 405–6
Khao Sam Kaeo
cosmopolitan configuration, 
247–48, 252
hard stone ornaments, 253–56
heterogenetic cities, 252
moated-settlement tradition, 250
specialized craftsmanship, 256
in Thai-Malay Peninsula, 26, 241
types of emulation, 257–58
urban and industrial port of, 242
kāla-makara, 482
Kāla Purāṇa, 115
Kīrtimukha/kīrtimukha (also: 
Kālamukha, kāla-makara), 
101–2, 115, 482
kəndaga ‘oblong ornamental box’, 
416–17
kodi ‘corge, (roughly) score’, 425

--- PAGE 574 ---
Index	
563
Kohima museum, Nagaland, 226
kǝpulaga ‘cardamom (Elettaria 
cardamomum (L.) Maton)’,  
417
kǝtumbar ‘coriander (Coriandrum 
sativum L.)’, 425
kramanization, 385
krobongan, 499
Kṛttikās, 109–10
kudam naeke, 113
kujyarata ~ kujyarakta ‘a certain 
kind of fabric’, 406
Kulturkreislehre, 19, 43, 209
Kumāra, 110
kunci ‘lock or bolt’, 426
K’un-lun, 505
kyi waing, 218
L
labu ‘bottle gourd, calabash’, 385
lāka ‘lac (i.e. a resinous secretion)’, 
406–7
lākula, 106
Lakulīśa, 106–7
laṇḍuga ‘a kind of sweetmeat’,  
419
lāṅgala, 106, 107
language levelling, 180
Late Prakrit, 423
Laurasian mythology, 95
lāwuwīṇā ‘lute in the shape of a 
bottle-gourd’, 410–11
lease/laze rods, 285
liṅga, 107
linguistic evidence, 15–17, 104, 
111, 129–30, 303–5, 457
 “local genius”, concept of, 17–18, 
24, 73
loga, 418–19
longue durée approach, 3
looms, weaving and the 
austronesian expansion
archaeological evidence for 
weaving. See archaeological 
evidence for weaving
austronesian weaving, 305–9
back-tensioned loom, in 
Americas, 313–15
body-tensioned looms, 283–84
circular warp, 285–86
cultures, in historical period, 
309–13
fibres and processing, 278–79
flat warp, 286
ikat technique, 279–81
linguistic evidence, 303–5
loom, 281–83
overview of, 273–74
present-day distributions of. See 
present-day distributions, of 
looms
proto-Austronesian (pAn). See 
proto-Austronesian (pAn)
proto-Malayo-Polynesian (pMP). 
See proto-Malayo-Polynesian 
(pMP)
technique, 276–77
weaving and textiles, significance 
of, 274–76
“Lord of Beasts”, 98
Lord of the Land
in religion of Monsoon Asia, 
18–19agreement with settlers, 
519–20
backward feet, 528–30
beschikkingsrecht, 522
femaleness, 536–38
grondvoogd (guardian of the 
land), 518
 in religion of Monsoon Asia, 
18–19
previous inhabitants, 528
“priestly” functions, 517
ritual basis of power, 522

--- PAGE 575 ---
564	
Index
spirit-owners, 552–24
spiritual marriage, 521–22
Stranger King, idea of, 516, 544
systemic stress, 539–44
village founding line, 525–27
wider authority, 530–36
M
Ma’anyan reflexes, 454–56
account, 463
borrowed in, 448–50
in Malay loanwords, 449
of proto-Malayo-Polynesian 
(PMP), 446–48
maṅapus, 310
mahari ~ mari ‘small pavilion, 
bower’, 430
Mahāyāna Buddhist period, 481
Mahāyāna Buddhist temples, 
Plaosan Lor, 489, 490
mainland Southeast Asia (MSEA), 
155, 161
Buddhism, 232–33
convergence zone, linguistic 
phyla and, 207–9
core and extensions of, 230–34
crossbow, 221–23
east coast of, 16
exchange networks, 181
folk costumes, 225–27
gong ensembles, 217–21
heterophony, 213–15
identification of boundaries, 
209–12
inland waterways of, 14
mouth-organ, 215–17
Philippines with, 12, 21
raised houses, 224–25
Sumatraliths, 228–29
weaving traditions in, 320
Malagasy reflexes
borrowed in, 448–50
and East Barito language area, in 
South Borneo, 442
in Malay loanwords, 449
overview of, 441–45
person markers in, 454–56
of proto-Malayo-Polynesian 
(pMP), 446–48, 450–53
Sanskrit loanwords in, 442
South Borneo, historical 
information of, 458–66
Malay
historical reflexes of, 450
in Malacca, 464
MIA loanwords in, 386–402
Sellato’s model of, 465
WMP languages and, 377, 379
Malayo-Javanic cultural/legal area
adat law. See adat law
house terms, 185–89
legal-political and religious-
spiritual functions, 190
old law of, 196–97
overview of, 145–46
of social control, 196
socio-political power, 191
Sunda shelf. See Sunda shelf, 
population process of
western Malayo-Polynesian 
(WMP) and, 195–201
Malayo-Polynesians (MP) 
languages, 15, 24, 307, 341, 
357–58
Austronesian studies, 146
Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian, 
	
147
civilization, 199, 200
cultural areas, 148
definition of, 146
“fisher-foragers”, 160
indigenous law of, 175
Indo-Pacific region, 147, 151
PWMP, 192–93

--- PAGE 576 ---
Index	
565
“raiders and traders”, 160
salient feature of, 199
speakers of, 198
Western Malayo-Polynesian 
languages. See Western 
Malayo-Polynesian (WMP) 
languages
Malayo-Sumbawan language, 
164–65, 196
Malay race, 24
Malaysia, Sumatraliths from, 229
maṇḍaga ‘rice gruel; an adornment 
(on the cheek), made with 
paste?’, 419
maṇḍala, 76, 486, 489–94
mañjǝṭi ~ mǝñjǝṭi ‘a part. k.o. 
fabric (prob. an imported 
cloth)’, 407
Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa, 108
Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyaśāstra, 475
mantagi ‘forehead (used poetically 
to indicate the fate written on 
someone’s forehead)’, 411–12
*ma-qasiq “to pity, have mercy on, 
feel compassion for”, 193
Marine Isotope Stage 3 (MIS-3), 
155
maritime communication network 
Bay of Bengal, 353, 354, 359
cannibal demons, 361–62
genotypes, 358–59
Indian and New-Guinean cognate 
sets, 351
Milky Sea, 357
Mon-Khmer languages, 356
Musa acuminata, 347–48
Musa balbisiana, 355
Naga, 360–61
Papuan-to-Austronesian 
transmission, 349
protoforms, 348–52, 358
Tibeto-Burmic languages, 346
westward maritime 
communication, 347
Matisoff, James, 211
matricentric orientation, 182
matrilocality, in Austronesian 
societies, 182–83
Mātṛs, 108–9, 112
Mattavilāsa, 126
mauktika ‘a pearl’, 393
Melville, Herman, 45
mendicant monk, 390
Middle Indo-Aryan (MIA), 104, 
377–80
Austroasiatic loanwords in, 
104–6, 132
in Malay words, 386–402
and NIA languages, 423–31
and WMP languages, 384, 385, 
402–12
with word-final /ga/, 412–23
minimal characterizing criteria, 
Bentley’s notion of, 239
Mlabri people, in North Thailand, 
330
mǝnti ‘official, civil servant’, 392
moated-settlement tradition, 250, 
251
modern Indo-Aryan languages, 379
monco-pat, 502
Mon-Khmer, 104, 105
mouth-organ, 215–17
mrgaas, 101
muara ‘estuary, river mouth’, 
401–2
mudrās, 486
*muku, 348
Munda languages, 104–6, 210, 211
Mundy, Peter, 217
murawa ‘tambourine’, 407
Murugan, 110
Musa acuminata, 347–48
Musa balbisiana, 355

--- PAGE 577 ---
566	
Index
Mus, Paul, 6–7, 87–88, 90, 91
mutia ‘pearl’, 392
N
Naga lass, Kohima museum, 226
Nāgas, 114
Naga wooden crossbow, 221
naraga ‘hell’, 419
natural shed, 282
Negritos 
common ancestry across 
Southeast Asia, 105n, 131n
geographical and chronological 
scope, 329
geographical basis into, 328
hunter-gatherer mode, 329–31
languages spoken by, 328
phenotype, 328
Sea-People communities, 332
Neolithic, 11–12
reconstructions of, 319
New Indo-Aryan (NIA), 377, 423–31
Nkuu’, 53, 54
elements of, 97–99
great demons, 55
in pre-/non- Aryan, 104
vs. Kāla-Bhairava, 119
phonetic and morphological 
elements, 100
Rāhu, 101, 102
vs. Rudra-Śiva, 59, 97–100
Semai mythology, 111–13
Semai relationship with, 52
violent godhead, 115
O
Oc-èo, 251
Old Ardhamāgadhī, 379
Old Indo-Aryan (OIA), 378, 379
Old Javanese, 377, 379
and Malay languages, 384
Old Khmer language, 385, 431
Old Malay inscriptions, 480,  
503–6
omah dalem, 497
Orang Asli, 41
Orang Ulu house, 224
Origins of the World’s Mythologies, 
The (Witzel), 95
Origins of Yoga and Tantra, The 
(Samuel), 133
orthogenetic model (origin of 
Tantrism), 77–79, 129
“Out of Taiwan” model, 27, 157–58, 
	
305–9
P
paḍaha ‘drum’, 408
pagi ‘morning’, 393
palaṅka ‘couch, seat, bench, 
throne’, 408
Pali (Pāḷi), 378
“Pan-Austronesianism”, 23
paṇḍya ‘learned man, holy man, 
sage’, 408–9
Panembahan Senapati, 532, 538
Papuan languages
of East New Guinea, 348, 349
linguistic diversity in, 232
Papuan-to-Austronesian lexical 
transmission, 349
parhyaṅan, 488
Pāśupatas, 121
patrilocality, 184
peka ‘foot-soldier’, 409
Pendopo, 499–501
perwara temples, 494
Philippine-Celebes law area, 196
plain weave, 277
pǝlana ‘saddle’, 393
Plaosan Buddhist complex, Central 
Java, 491
Platenkamp, Jos, 523, 530, 536
Pleistocene, 11

--- PAGE 578 ---
Index	
567
Pleistocene-Holocene junction, 
154–56, 158
polyphonic stratification, 213
post-Neolithic colonization, 
reconstructions of, 319
post-WWII Area Studies, 7
“Prakrit”, in Maritime Southeast 
Asia
anega ‘kind, species’, 418
anggota ‘member, limb’, 398
arwa ‘saw-edged cutting knife’, 
424
asuji ‘a month of the lunar 
calendar’, 409–10
baitↄ ‘boat’, 411
baja ‘steel’, 386–87
bandoga ‘pandanus fruit’, 420
bapa ‘father’, 387–88
baṇyaga ~ baṇyāga ‘merchant, 
captain of a merchant-
vessel’, 413
bhāṇḍāgāra ‘a treasury, a 
treasurer’, 388
bhiṇḍiwāla, 402–3
bidan ‘midwife, sage-femme’, 
398–99
biku ‘Buddhist monk’, 389–90
bilak ‘the bael fruit (Aegle 
marmelos (L.) Corrêa)’, 390
bǝndahara ‘treasurer’, 388
bodoh ‘stupid’, 424
bǝrhala ‘(animistic) idol, image’, 
388–89
campaga ‘yellow jade orchid tree 
(Magnolia champaca (L.) 
Baill. ex Pierre)’, 413–14
catalisa ‘forty’, 403
cǝmǝti ‘whip’, 399
cuaca ‘clear (of atmosphere), 
pellucid’, 399–400
cuka ‘vinegar’, 400
cula ‘horn of single-horned 
animal’, 390
culi, 403–4
curi ‘theft, steal, rob’, 424
curik ‘jungle knife’, 400–401
dahaga ‘thirst’, 415
dǝhaga ‘insubordination’, 416
dǝlima ‘pomegranate (Punica 
granatum L.)’, 391
drak, 430
duli ‘portable cot, litter for sick 
or wounded’, 424–25
duta ‘evil, bad, debauched’, 411
ganaga ‘copper’, 419
ghāṣa ‘to strike (grind, rub) 
together; to chafe, etc.’, 430
ghariṇī ‘wife’, 404
gǝmbala ‘a man employed to 
look after animals’, 391
gǝta ‘dais, divan’, 391
gubah ‘cutting and arranging 
flowers for wearing in 
aigrette form
in the hair’, 401
gula ‘sugar’, 391
guliga ‘talismanic or curative 
bezoar; snake-stone’, 416
gurundaya ‘swiftlet, cliff-
swallow, salangane’, 410
gusali ‘a smithy’, 404
high civilization of, 375–76
Indo-Aryan stage, 377–78, 431
Jaga ‘being awake or vigilant’, 
392
Juara ‘trainer of fighting-cocks’, 
392
kaṇḍaga ‘sword, dagger’, 422
kaḍāha, 404–5
kaḍāhaka, 404–5
kalyāga ‘name of a tree from the 
bark of which a red dye is 
made; (dyed) red’, 420–21

--- PAGE 579 ---
568	
Index
kamalagi ~ kambaligi ~ kamaligi 
~ kamal ‘a plant of presumed 
African origins and of 
considerable antiquity on  
the Indian Subcontinent’, 
421–22
kañcuga ‘a dress fitting close to 
the upper part of the body, 
armour, mail; bodice, jacket’, 
419
kanigara ‘a part. k.o. tree 
with yellow flowers 
(Pterospermum acerifolium 
(L.) Willd.)’, 422
kawittha, 405–6
kəndaga ‘oblong ornamental 
box’, 416–17
kodi ‘corge, (roughly) score’,  
425
kǝpulaga ‘cardamom (Elettaria 
cardamomum (L.) Maton)’, 
417
kǝtumbar ‘coriander (Coriandrum 
sativum L.)’, 425
kujyarata ~ kujyarakta ‘a certain 
kind of fabric’, 406
kunci ‘lock or bolt’, 426
lāka ‘lac (i.e. a resinous 
secretion)’, 406–7
laṇḍuga ‘a kind of sweetmeat’, 
419
lāwuwīṇā ‘lute in the shape of a 
bottle-gourd’, 410–11
loga, 418–19
mahari ~ mari ‘small pavilion, 
bower’, 430
maṇḍaga ‘rice gruel; an 
adornment (on the cheek), 
made with paste?’, 419
mañjǝṭi ~ mǝñjǝṭi ‘a part. k.o. 
fabric (prob. an imported 
cloth)’, 407
mantagi ‘forehead (used 
poetically to indicate the 
fate written on someone’s 
forehead)’, 411–12
Middle Indo-Aryan and, 378–80
mǝnti ‘official, civil servant’, 392
muara ‘estuary, river mouth’, 
401–2
murawa, 407
mutia ‘pearl’, 392–93
naraga ‘hell’, 419
Old Javanese and, 377, 379
overview of, 375–76
paḍaha ‘drum’, 408
pagi ‘morning’, 393
palaṅka ‘couch, seat, bench, 
throne’, 408
paṇḍya ‘learned man, holy man, 
sage’, 408–9
peka ‘foot-soldier’, 409
phonological integration, 380–86
pǝlana ‘saddle’, 393
pǝtǝrana ‘a seat near the throne, 
the seat of the bride and 
bridegroom’, 393–94
ragi ‘fermenting medium, yeast’, 
426
ramah ‘effusive friendliness’, 
394
rani ‘queen’, 426
sagala ‘altogether, completely, all 
of them?’, 414
salaga ‘crossbeam, connecting 
the neck of a buffalo to the 
yoke’, 412
saragi ‘a copper kettle or pot’, 
419–20
saying ‘longing, pitying, love’, 
427
sǝligi ‘wooden dart or javelin’, 
417–18
sǝngkǝla ‘foot fetters’, 394–95

--- PAGE 580 ---
Index	
569
sǝrapah ‘cursing, imprecation of 
evil’, 427
suai, 427–28
suasa ‘pinchbeck’, 428
suji ‘embroidery’, 428
sukma ‘soul’, 395
sundal ‘whore, prostitute’, 429
tahana ‘state, dignity’, 395–96
tambaga ‘copper’, 414
tiga ‘three’, 414–15
tǝlaga ‘a well, tank, or basin of 
water, a small mere’, 396
tǝnggala ‘a plough’, 396–97
uṇḍahagi ‘craftsman in wood-
work, carpenter; skillful, 
craftsmanlike’, 422–23
unta ‘camel’, 429
upǝti ‘tribute’, 397
usaha ‘assiduity, industry, 
persistence’, 397–98
wariga ‘a part. official or 
functionary’, 423
Western Malayo-Polynesian 
languages, 377
Prambanan Hindu temple complex, 
486–88
prastaraṇa ‘a couch, seat’, 394
present-day distributions, of looms, 
293–97
warp-based tradition, 297–99, 
318
weft-based tradition, 299–302, 
318
Proto- and Deutero-Malay model, 
24
proto-Austronesian (pAn), 303–5, 
339, 340
proto-Malayo-Polynesian (pMP), 
305, 307, 445
linguistic evidence, evaluation 
of, 457
in Ma’anyan reflexes. See 
Ma’anyan reflexes
maintenance of, 457
weaving, textiles and cloth in, 
304
Proto-Malays, 336
Przyluski, Jean, 86, 88, 94, 106–7, 
114
pǝtǝrana ‘a seat near the throne, 
the seat of the bride and 
bridegroom’, 393–94
puasa ‘fasting’, 385
*pugut “headless, decapitated”, 192
puhavaṅ, 504
Punan of Borneo, 40
Pundèn terraced mound
definition of, 484
kamūlān Borobudur’s stepped 
profile, 484–86
natar-type complexes and, 489
Prambanan hindu temple 
complex, 486–88
*puqun, 187–88
Q
*qaNiCu, 191, 192
*qanitu “ghost, ancestral spirit; 
nature spirit; corpse; owl; 
various
plants”, 191
*qata, 336
*qiaŋ “ancestor, deity, divinity”, 
191
R
ragi ‘fermenting medium, yeast’, 
426
Raised-floor Granary-pavilions, 
ninth-century Java, 500
raised houses, 224–25
raja (village head), 530–31
ramah ‘effusive friendliness’, 394

--- PAGE 581 ---
570	
Index
Ramāyāṇa kakawin, 125, 478–80
rani ‘queen’, 426
Ratu Boko complex, Central Java, 
491
Rechtskreis, 195
renda ‘lace’, 384
restitution-driven hypercorrection, 
381
rindra ‘lace-work, crotcheting?’, 
384
ring warp, 285
riziculture, 157, 160
Ṛṣis, 123
Ṛṣiśāsana, 127
Rudra, 54–58, 97–98
Rudra-Śiva, 79–80
elements of, 97–99
Kāla heads, 101, 103
phonetic and morphological 
elements, 100
in pre-/non-Aryan cultural 
milieux, 104
vs. Nkuu’, 97–100
S
sagala ‘altogether, completely, all 
of them?’, 414
Sa Huynh-Kalanay complex, 240
ceramics, 242, 259–60
pottery tradition, 247
Śaivism, 74, 75
saket-bongas, 113
salaga ‘crossbeam, connecting the 
neck of a buffalo to the yoke’, 
412
Sanderson, Alexis, 75, 84
Sanskrit
influxes into Semai language, 
100
loanwords, integration of, 382–83
role of, 376
sociolinguistic prestige of, 381
“Sanskrit Cosmopolis” model, 8, 9, 
25, 29, 75
*sapaq “oath, pledge; curse”, 193
saragi ‘a copper kettle or pot’, 
419–20
sarah, 465
Sarawak
gong ensembles, 218, 219
Orang Ulu house in, 224
śāstric, 29
architecture and art, 481–83
Central Javanese monuments, 472
Deśavarṇana, 476
dharmacakra motif, 473
exogenous changes, 472
Indic temples, 475–76
Javanese Indic religious 
monuments, 474
kabajradharan, 476
karaṇa, 477
maṇḍala, 489–94
natar-type complexes, 489–94
non-Sanskrit words, 502–3
Old Malay inscriptions, 503–6
Pundèn terraced mound. See 
Pundèn terraced mound
Ramāyāṇa, 477–78
stratigraphic model, 472
transplantation theory, 473
Vajrayāna Buddhist, 476–77
Western Malayo-Polynesian 
agency, 478–80
Śātavāhana, 378
sayang ‘longing, pitying, love’, 427
seafaring, pre-Austronesian origins 
of
archaeological data, 11, 325–26
biogenetic data, 326
constructional innovation, 12, 
326
Indian Ocean. See maritime 
communication network

--- PAGE 582 ---
Index	
571
ISEA, maritime mobility. See 
Island Southeast Asia  
(ISEA)
maritime mercantile tradition, 
327
Negritos. See Negritos
Trans-South-China-Sea maritime. 
See Trans-South-China-Sea 
maritime
watercraft, to China and Taiwan. 
See watercraft, to China and 
Taiwan
Sea Gypsies, 343
second urbanization process, 250
Semai, 41, 46
blood with femininity, 47
Nkuu’, relationship with, 52
nyamp, 45–46
Semai mythology, 100, 101, 111–13
Semai practitioners, 122
Semai-Temiar trlaij, 53
semi-artificial literary languages, 
379
shamanic practices, 74
shamans, 81–82
definition of, 120
elements of, 124
Vrātyas, 121
shed stick, 282
Shizhaishan, 289–92
Siddhas, 81–2, 121, 123
Śilpaśāstras, 91
“Sino-Pacifica”, 6
Sinosphere and Indosphere, 211–12
Sino-Tibetan language, 17
sǝligi ‘wooden dart or javelin’, 
417–18
sǝngkǝla ‘foot fetters’, 394–95
Solheim, Wilhelm G. II., 12, 343
South Borneo
coast line of, 459–60
East Barito language area in, 442
historical information of, 458–66
history of, 456
Malagasy homeland in, 442
South China Sea network, 4–5, 
252–57
Southeast Asia, history of, 11–15
Southeast Asian-type house, 496
South East Barito (SEB) language, 
441–42, 466–67
in Borneo, 450
Central-East Barito branch, 
subgroup of, 451
historical accounts of, 463
maintenance of, 457
South Indian periphery, 354, 357, 
358
speculative reconstruction, 43
spindle whorls, 292–93, 303
appearance of, 293
archaeological record of, 293
spirit-owners, 552–24
spiritual marriage, 521
sǝrapah ‘cursing, imprecation of 
evil’, 427
Śrīvijaya inscriptions, 480, 504
Srivijaya thalassocracy, 15
srnlook, Semai ideas of, 52
stūpikās, 488
Stranger King, idea of, 516, 544
suai, 427–28
suasa ‘pinchbeck’, 428
suji ‘embroidery’, 428
sukma ‘soul’, 395
Sumatraliths, 228–29
sundal ‘whore, prostitute’, 429
Sunda shelf, population process of
archaeological evidence, 156
Austronesian linguistic 
colonization model, 161–62
Austronesian-speaking 
populations, 154
ISEA, 158–59, 162

--- PAGE 583 ---
572	
Index
linguistic and archaeological 
data, 157
Marine Isotope Stage 3, 155
multi-linear models, 156, 158
two-layer settlement model, 158
uni-directional model, 156–57
Sundaland, 21, 23
systemic stress, 539–44
syurgaloka, 418
T
tacit knowledge, 277
tahana ‘state, dignity’, 395–96
tambaga ‘copper’, 414
Tanimbar island, 345
Tanjung Pura, 462
in West Borneo, 459
Tantric demonology, 78
Tantrism
borrowing model, 84
Brahmanism, 83
cultural matrix. See cultural 
matrix
definition of, 76, 77
Hinduism in, 123
historical origin of, 79
historiographical parameters, 72
vs. hunter-gatherer culture, 81
Indic religions, 73–74, 80, 133
Kāla-Bhairava. See Kāla-Bhairava
Nkuu’. See Nkuu’
orthogenetic model, 78–79
premodern dynamics of 
globalization, 75
Rudra-Śiva. See Rudra-Śiva
Śaivism and Buddhism, 128–30
Sanskritic vs. tribal religions, 81
Semai theological history, 72
shamans. See shamans
socio-historical origin of, 77
substratum model, 84, 85
tribal hypothesis, 78
Vajrayāna Buddhism, 81–82
Yogins, 52, 53, 55, 57, 122
Tapern, 51
tengku or engku, 51
terraced Natar-complexes, 489–94
textile culture, 275
Thai–French archaeological 
mission, 242, 243
Thai–Malay Peninsula, existence 
of, 251, 259–60
Theravāda Buddhism, 378
thunder complex, 131
blood and, 48
widespread feature of, 44
tiga ‘three’, 414–15
Timorese kingship, 535
tǝlaga ‘a well, tank, or basin of 
water, a small mere’, 396
tǝnggala ‘a plough’, 396–97
toponyms, 459, 460
translocal process of globalization, 
240
transplantation theory, 473
Trans-South-China-Sea maritime
boat-coffin, 345
emergence of, 343
Malayo-Polynesian Migration, 
344
Proto-Austronesian, 341
protoform, 342
Sea Gypsies, 343
ship-of-the-dead icons, 345–46
Tanimbar island, 345
tuan tanah, conception of, 517, 
522, 544
tumba, 107
Tumburu, 108
tun aku or tuan aku, 51–52
*tuRut “to follow instructions, 
follow an example; carry along, 
give in, allow something to 
happen”, 193–94

--- PAGE 584 ---
Index	
573
tutelary spirits, 528, 537
“two-axis” relative orientation 
systems, 188–89
U
udumbara, 107
uléëbalang, 539–40
uncodified law, 171, 173
uṇḍahagi or uṇḍagi ‘craftsman in 
wood-work, carpenter; skilful, 
craftsmanlike’, 422–23
unta ‘camel’, 429
upǝti ‘tribute’, 397
usaha ‘assiduity, industry, 
persistence’, 397–98
Utsat, 208
V
vaḍḍhaki, 423
vahitra ‘boat’, 411
Vajrayāna Buddhism, 81–82, 
476–77
van Vollenhoven, Cornelis, 171–73, 
175–76, 195
Vedic-Dravidian synthesis, 110
vernacular cosmopolitanism, 480
vidu ‘actor, dancer, singer, reciter; 
singer at a shamanistic séance 
’, 124–27
Vietnam, Jarai gong performance, 
218, 219
village founding line, 525–27
Vīnāśikhatantra, 108
Vrātyas, 121
vṛkodara, 117
W
waṅkaṅ, 505
Wallace line, 318
wariga ‘a part. official or 
functionary’, 423
warp-based tradition, 297–99
warp beam, 282, 283
warp lock. See false circular 
warping
watercraft, to China and Taiwan
bàng, 337, 338
chuán, 339
double canoe, 337
fǎng, 337, 338
fǎngchuán, 339
háng, 337, 338
huáng, 337, 338
Malayo-Polynesians, 341
páng, 337, 338
protoforms, 339–41
zhōu, 337–38
weak convergence theory, 129
weaving
definition of, 277
and textiles, significance of, 
274–76
Wedemeyer, Christian, 84–85
weft-based tradition, 299–302
West Borneo, Tanjung Pura in, 459
Western Malayo-Polynesian (WMP) 
languages, 377, 402–12, 471
adat law. See adat law
“borrowing hypothesis”, 166
Bosch’s śāstric thesis, 478–80
classification of, 163, 166
cultural and law region, 176
cultural complex, 149, 152–53, 
164, 168
family resemblances, 151
genetic categorization of, 163–64, 
168
Hinduism, 151
Hoabinhian techno-complex, 149
Malayo-Sumbawan language, 
164–65
maritime interaction spheres on, 
169
monothetic definitions, 150

--- PAGE 585 ---
574	
Index
non-Oceanic Austronesian 
languages, 163
polythetic model, 149–50
segment reconstruction, 167
trajectories/genealogies, 151
working hypothesis of, 176
White, David, 71, 75
Winstedt, Richard, 88–89
Witzel, Michael, 95
Wolters, Oliver W., 8
wooden crossbows, 221–23
Y
yoginīs, 52, 53, 55, 57, 99, 109, 
112, 113
Yuhang, 287–88

--- PAGE 586 ---
nalanda-sriwijaya series
  1	 Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval 
Expeditions to Southeast Asia, edited by Hermann Kulke, K. 
Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja
  2.	 Preserving Cultural Identity through Education: The Schools of the 
Chinese Community in Calcutta, India, by Zhang Xing
  3.	 Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: Reflections on 
Cross-Cultural Exchange, edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani 
and Geoff Wade
  4.	 Hardships and Downfall of Buddhism in India, by Giovanni Verardi
  5.	 Portuguese and Luso-Asian Legacies in Southeast Asia, 1511-
2011, vol. 1: The Making of the Luso-Asian World: Intricacies of 
Engagement, edited by Laura Jarnagin
  6.	 Anthony Reid and the Study of the Southeast Asian Past, edited by 
Geoff Wade and Li Tana
  7.	 Portuguese and Luso-Asian Legacies in Southeast Asia, 1511-2011, 
vol. 2: Culture and Identity in the Luso-Asian World, edited by Laura 
Jarnagin
  8.	 Sino-Malay Trade and Diplomacy from the Tenth through the 
Fourteenth Century, by Derek Heng
  9.	 Tradition and Archaeology: Early Maritime Contacts in the Indian 
Ocean, edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray and Jean-Francois Salles
575

--- PAGE 587 ---
576	
Nalanda-Sriwijaya Series
10.	 Civilizations in Embrace: The Spread of Ideas and the Transformation 
of Power; India and Southeast Asia in the Classical Age, by Amitav 
Acharya
11.	 India and China: Interactions through Buddhism and Diplomacy A 
Collection of Essays by Professor Prabodh Chandra Bagchi, compiled 
by Bangwei Wang and Tansen Sen
12.	 Of Palm Wine, Women and War: The Mongolian Naval Expedition to 
Java in the 13th Century, by David Bade
13.	 Literary Migrations: Traditional Chinese Fiction in Asia (17th-20th 
Centuries), edited by Claudine Salmon
14.	 Offshore Asia: Maritime Interactions in Eastern Asia before 
Steamships, edited by Fujita Kayoko, Momoki Shiro and Anthony 
Reid
15.	 Buddhism and Islam on the Silk Road, by Johan Elverskog
16.	 The Tongking Gulf Through History, edited by Nola Cooke, Li Tana 
and James A. Anderson
17.	 The Royal Hunt in Eurasian History, by Thomas T. Allsen
18.	 Ethnic Identity in Tang China, by Marc S. Abramson
19.	 Eurasian Influences on Yuan China, edited by Morris Rossabi
20.	 The Sea, Identity and History: From the Bay of Bengal to the 
South China Sea, edited by Satish Chandra and Himanshu 
Prabha Ray
21.	 Early Southeast Asia Viewed from India: An Anthology of Articles 
from the Journal of the Greater India Society, edited by Kwa Chong-
Guan
22.	 Asia Redux: Conceptualizing a Region for Our Times, edited by 
Prasenjit Duara
23.	 Buddhism Across Asia: Networks of Material, Intellectual and Cultural 
Exchange, volume 1, edited by Tansen Sen

--- PAGE 588 ---
Nalanda-Sriwijaya Series	
577
24.	 Trails of Bronze Drums Across Early Southeast Asia: Exchange Routes 
and Connected Cultural Spheres, by Ambra Calo
25.	 Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia, 
edited by Christian Lammerts
26.	 Imperial China and Its Southern Neighbours, edited by Victor H. Mair 
and Liam Kelley
27.	 China and Beyond in the Mediaeval Period: Cultural Crossings and 
Inter-Regional Connections, edited by Dorothy C. Wong and Gustav 
Heldt
28.	 A 14th Century Malay Code of Laws: The Nitisarasamuccaya, by Uli 
Kozok
29.	 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons, edited by Andrea Acri
30.	 Indian and Chinese Immigrant Communities Comparative 
Perspectives, edited by Jayati Bhattacharya and Coonoor Kripalani
31.	 Spirits and Ships: Cultural Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia, edited 
by Andrea Acri, Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann

