# EXTRACTED TEXT: 2018-hettiarachchi-lineage-buddhism-sri-lanka-katikavata.pdf
# Total Pages: 10 | Direct: 10 | OCR: 0 | Blank/Sparse: 0
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 17:49:24
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51411 
Introduction 
This study on the succession or lineage among the 
community of Buddhist sangha in Sri Lanka seeks to examine 
to what extent the principles laid down by the Buddha in 
establishing the institution of sangha have been followed in 
Sri Lanka. Among the fundamental objectives of establishing 
the institution of the sangha by the Buddha are the creation of 
a democratic organization based on common ownership of 
property and engaged in learning and practice of the dhamma 
and its propagation. The Buddhist Vinaya (code of discipline) 
and other instructions to monks have been intended to avoid 
emergence of private ownership of property and a sense of 
individuality among the monks. An example of this is the 
episode of the City of Kosambi where a conflict arose 
between two factions of the sangha known as „dharmadhara‟ 
and „vinayadhara. ‟The Buddha addressing those monks 
advised them to give up their dispute and to live peacefully. 
But the monks would not listen to the Buddha and reconcile. 
The Buddha was disgusted and left the city to spend the rainy 
season in the Parileyya forest. When the monks of the two 
factions were compelled to meet the Buddha after the rains, 
the Buddha advised them that the basic principle of his code 
of conduct was „unity.‟ The Buddha further stated that the 
idea of   „community‟ is the principle on which a united 
fraternity of monks has to be established. This is expressed in 
Pali as „vinayo namasa sanassa ayu‟- the life of the order is 
discipline (Majjhimanikāya Atuva, 1962, p.880). This implies 
that the sangha should solve their problems through cordial 
and peaceful means. This is institutionalized in the „vinaya 
karma providing a mechanism for the monks to solve 
monastic problems and conflicts peacefully throught 
democratic ways. 'yvakivancha bhikkawe Bhikku samagga 
sannipathissanthi 
samagga 
uttabissanthi 
samagga 
sangakaraniyni' (Maha parinibbana sutta). [The Buddha‟s 
administration of the sangha, resembled that of a real 
democratic system. Though in fact, he was in command of the 
sangha, he did not appear to have exercised that power. The 
Mahaparinibbana Sutta reports him as telling Ananda that he 
never thought of him m self as „managing‟‟the sangha as 
depending on him] ((Maha parinibbana sutta, 1999. P.62.) 
 
Further, the Buddha has stated ‟Sukhā sanghassa 
sāmaggi‟- the unity of the sangha is pleasurable.‟ This 
underlines further the importance of peace and unity in the 
community of monks (Angutthara nikaya, 1999). 
Another important aspect in the institution of the sangha 
is the concept of „common ownership of property.‟ This is 
also accepted as the basis of a democratic social order. The 
Vinaya disallows marriage for monks and as a result there is 
no possibility of an institution of a family or the need for 
genealogies in the community of the sangha. The concept of 
„Sānghika‟ incorporates the idea of common ownership of 
property. According to this everything given to a Buddhist 
monk must be received not as a personal gift, but as a 
common gift for all the „sangha‟ or members of the 
community. In the „Dakkhināsutta‟ preached by the Buddha 
when Maha Prajapati Gotami offered him a robe personally, 
the Buddha advised her to offer it to the sangha as a common 
gift but not to him as a personal one. When it is offered to the 
sangha, 
the 
Buddha 
too 
will 
become 
a 
receiver 
(Majjhimanikāya, 1974, p.523).  
 Thus the Buddha made it clear that the common 
ownership of property is one of the most important principles 
in the institution of Buddhist sangha. This process of 
„Sānghikakarana‟ or the „giving to all members of the 
community‟ is further illustrated in the „Chīvarakk 
handhaSutta‟ in the Mahavagga.„Bhikkhu Sanghassadema‟- 
means giving alms or other offerings to the community of 
monks (Mahavaggapali, 1951). The prominent idea in the 
concept of common property relates to ownership of land, 
houses and other gifts. In the section on „offering of „arama‟- 
monasteries‟ in the  Chullavagga pali, it has  been explained 
that there is no provision for private ownership of property in 
the community of the sangha and also that all monasteries,  
caves etc.  offered by the laity should belong to the entire 
community of monks. (Chullavagga pali, II, 1982, P.128). 
monasteries,  caves etc.  offered by the laity should belong to 
the entire community of monks. (Chullavagga pali, II, 1982, 
P.128). 
When the treasurer of the City of Rajagruha sought 
permission to donate a monastery, Buddha told him that such 
gifts should be given to the „sangha‟(community) and not to 
Tele: 094716382246  
E-mail address: nadihistory@gmail.com  
         © 2018 Elixir All rights reserved 
ARTICLE INFO 
 
Article history: 
Received: 26 February 2018; 
Received in revised form: 
01 August 2018; 
Accepted: 10 August 2018;
 
Keywords 
Buddhism, 
Lineage, 
Sutta and Vinaya. 
The Lineage and Buddhism in Sri Lanka  
Ramani Hettiarachchi  
Senior Lecturer, Department of History, University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka. 
ABSTRACT 
The conventional thinking on the „gnatisisya Parampara’(hereditary succession) and 
Shiyanishiya Parampara (pupillary Succession) tradition in the kandyan area is that it 
was primarily, economically determined. But this research will inquire into the structure 
of political power and legitimacy, social factors- both caste and service tenor system, 
internal fraternity conflict and external forces that draw these parties onto conflicts 
paving the way for the formation of their lineage tradition. The new sectarianism was 
possible not only because of caste mobility in society but also because the colonial state 
was prepared to promote such division and competition to legal recognition.                            
                                                                                                  © 2018 Elixir All rights reserved. 
Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
Social Studies  
Available online at www.elixirpublishers.com (Elixir International Journal)

--- PAGE 2 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51412 
individuals. „Agata Anagata Catudisa Sagasa‟ means 
monasteries and caves etc. are given to the „sangha‟ of the 
four quarters who have come or who are yet to come‟. Thus 
this concept of common property implies the need to create a 
special community devoid of individuality and egoistic 
motives. In addition to these values, the Buddha expected to 
create a community of monks consisting of persons 
possessing a high standard of intelligence. The Buddha has 
stated, ‟Paññānarānamratanam‟- wisdom is the gem for men‟. 
Among vocations of a Buddhist monk learning the dhamma, 
understanding and perusing it, and spreading it have been 
highlighted. In relation to the learning of „dharma‟ for the 
development of wisdom, the Buddha has pointed out the 
correct way in the Alagaddupama Sutra. In this „sutra‟, 
Buddha has taught that one should understand instructions 
correctly before practicing them (Majjhimanikāya, part III, 
2001, p.224).   Further the Buddha led his disciples of monks 
focusing on critical thinking and independent perception. 
Origin of Sangha Lineage (Parampara) in Sri Lanka 
A strong influence of this tradition of lineage upon the 
Order of sangha in Sri Lanka was seen during the 
Anuradhapura and Polonnaruva periods. The acceptance of 
property introduced a new concept in to the organization of 
sangha. The earliest donations, mostly of caves, were made 
“To the sangha of the four directions, present and absent” or 
in other words, to the entire sangha. It is very lightly that 
donations of other type of dwelling, situated in parks, were of 
a similar character, but donations of sources of income were 
made from the start to individual monasteries. As a result of 
this practice, the monastery came to represent not merely a 
group of resident monk but also a corporate property owning 
institution (Sulubodhi Vansaya,, 1991, pp. 32-33). 
In R.A.L.H. Gunawardhana‟s view glory of the monks of 
the Abhayagiriya with regard to their learning and adherence 
to Vinaya had spread as far as Java(Gunawardhana, 1979, 
p.17). The reason for disappearance of that fame the Sri 
Lankan monks had gained during the subsequent period is a 
matter for further investigation. In a study of this period it is 
expected to examine the objectives of the lineage of the 
sangha 
established 
by 
the 
office 
of 
„Sangharaja‟ 
(Saranankara) and to find to what extent his objectives have 
been meaningful. The biography of Mahakashyapa Thero 
throws some light on this subject. As mentioned in 
Saddharmalankara, written during the Gampola period, 
intelligence, education, virtue etc. are among the qualities for 
continuous maintenance of lineages based on teacher-student 
relationship. This text has placed more emphasis on the 
ability to bear the responsibility of maintaining the „sasana‟ 
or the religion. This highlights that the perpetuation of the 
„sasana‟ required the continuity of the community of the 
sangha organized on a lineage system based on teacher- 
student relationship (Buddadaththa, p.80). 
„Generation‟ or „lineage‟ had been in use in the 
community of the sangha as a means of its continuance. We 
can see two systems of succession in Sri Lanka, I. Succession 
from teacher to pupil and II. Succession based on relationship 
cum pupil. As an example for the succession on teacher-
student relationship we can consider the Dharmakirti lineage 
of Palabatgala. This has been mentioned in the Saddhar 
malankara as “the Dharmakirti lineage that descends from the 
teacher-student lineage of Mahakashyapa Sthavira of the 
forest monastery”  (Saddarmalankaraya, 1934, p.532). 
Further, this lineage was connected to the monks of the forest 
monastery at Dimbulagala. Another lineage of monks of this 
nature called „Vilgammula‟ lineage (parampara) was in 
existence during the reign of King Parakramabahu iv. 
According to the „Sulu Bodhivamsa‟, a monk of the 
Vilgammula lineage who was a „Sanghanayaka‟ or a chief 
monk resident of the Kelani Vihara, was the author of the 
Simhala Bodhivamsa. The Sulu Bodhivamsa mentions further 
that this monk was a descendant of the „Gantala 
Karmabavalan‟ generation which originated at the time of 
King Kitsirimevan and was the tenth member of that lineage 
(Sulubodhi Vansaya, pp. 32-33) 
The focus of this study will be the developments in the 
„generation‟ or „lineage‟ system in the community of monks 
in more recent times and how it has affected the traditional 
value system of the order of monks. We will be analyzing 
first the nature of the relationship between the concepts s of 
„inheritance‟ and property. There are three systems of lineage 
identifiable and out of the more prevalent is the Sisyanusisya 
paramparawa where succession and the trusteeship over the 
temple property falls on the first pupil or the first ordained 
pupil of an incumbent priest. According to the variga-
Parampara system, the successor to the property of an 
individual priest or to the property that had devolved on a 
priest by virtue of his office as the incumbent head of the 
temple, may be a relation of the priest in question and this 
relation could be a priest himself or a laymen. According to 
the ''Sivuru Paramparawa'' system a priest may grant his 
personal property or that of the temple of which he is the 
head, to a relation who must necessarily be a priest and the 
successors of this recipient priest themselves must likewise be 
priests. An instance of the Variga parampara system may be 
noticed in Vatapuluva „‟talpata‟‟ or the ola-leaf grant 
pertaining to the Embala vihara in Kandy dated Ad 1699.Its 
recorded that the grant of lands made by a priest named 
Devamitta Silavamsa to his elder sister, Soma Ethana, the 
lands having devolved on him as a share to meet his priestly 
requisites out of the land given to maluve Ganninnanse 
(Mirando, 1985, p.123). 
Two instances of the succession under the Sivuru 
parampara system may be cited, first, in the „sannass‟ dated 
AD 1808 given under the hand of Sri Wickrama Rajasimha 
and the second, in a deed of gift to the Bomaluwe Vihara. The 
„sannasa‟ records the grant of lands given to Imbulvela 
Anomadassi which is to be held after him by his relations 
who themselves must be priest. In the latter Vaththegama 
Devarakkita 
Therunnanse 
granted 
temple 
lands 
to 
Gunarathana Bhiksunvahanse, his younger brother (ibid., 
p.126). 
In an epigraph Vilgammula mahimi claims descent from 
the Gangatalan Karambavalan family, while the monastery is 
described as property of his family for ten generations. 
Furthermore, he mentions that Gatara-Pirivenatana, the 
incumbent of the Gatara Pirivena as his successor of the 
Bandu-parampara . In addition to this, Sri Rahula of 
Thotagamuve claims in his ''Padasadana-Tika‟ that he was the 
grandson of a hierarch named Uuturumula Rahula who hailed 
from Sariputta Mahasami of Polonnaruwa (Nanavimala, 
p.111). 
Legal Procedure Relating to Lineage 
The original sources of the law are undoubtedly the 
Buddhist scriptures or the three-pitakas. These pitakas contain 
a large body of rules and regulations with reference to the 
conduct of the sangha succession to ecclesiastical property, 
and so forth, but the Buddhists of Sri Lanka have not adopted 
all these rules and our courts have only given effect to such 
rules as have been adopted in this country. For instance, 
notwithstanding the rules of absolute poverty, sangha

--- PAGE 3 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51413 
 generally hold considerable private property at their 
disposal and on their death these properties descends to their 
lay heirs. Again, a bhikku may acquire property by special 
gift or bequest and he may inherit from his brothers or sisters 
or mother, or if be the only child, he has a right to his father‟s 
property in preference to collaterals. The jurisdiction 
exercised by the Asgiriya and Malwatta chapters in 
appointing incumbents to vacant temples where the line of 
succession has been broken appears to have no support in the 
pitakas, which confer that power upon the entire sangha  
(Dissanayake, 1963, p. 250). 
Incumbent or viharadhipathi is an office unknown to the 
Vinaya. The vinaya make provision for the appointment of a 
great number of special officers of viharas. Sangha who 
frequent a monastery for purposes of meditation must notify 
the dwelling in the monastery to the comentery keeper, the 
chief elder of the vihara (Mahathera) and the officer in charge 
of the village (ibid., p.253) 
Succession to Incumbencies and Rights and Duties  of 
Sangha 
There are four classes of pupils or antevasika, namely:  
1. Pabbajjantevasika, 
2. Upasampadantevasika,  
3. Nissayantevasika,  
4. Dhammantevasika.  
The word antevasika or pupil is equivalent to Sinhalese 
Shishya. 
• Pabbajjantevasika or pupils by robing is a pupil who has 
been admitted to the status o pabbajja /samanera through 
formal robbing or ordination by his preceptor or Upagghaya 
(Upadhiyaya) 
• Upasampadantevasika or pupil by ordination is a pupil who 
receives the upasampada ordination from his preceptor: no 
person under 20 years of agree receive this ordination, and it 
can only be confers by an ordained Bhikku of 10 years 
standing. 
• Nissayantevasika or pupil by obedience (or dependence) 
after the Upasampada ordination, every bhikku so ordained 
must undergo a period of dependence or Nissaya. 
• Dhammantevasika or pupil by instruction. There is nothing 
to prevent a bhikku choosing for his instructor a bhikku other 
than those who have robed or ordained him, or given him a 
Nissaya (ibid., 257). 
Urulewatte was succeeded by his pupil Dambawa 
Anunayaka Unnanse, who was succeeded by his two pupils 
Ambagoda and Doratiyawe, the former being the senior pupil. 
Doratiyawe was disrobed by the king and banished and 
Ambagoda disrobed and became a layman for some time. 
After the British rule was established both put on robes again, 
took possession of the vihare. Goluwewa unnanse claiming 
through Doratiyawe as his only surviving pupil brought an 
action against Dambawa unnanse as the only surviving pupil 
of Ambagoda. The Judicial Commissioner and Assessors 
were of opinion that the claim of both parties should be 
dismissed, the vihare declared vacant, and that a fit person 
should be selected from the pupils of the original incumbent 
and his two successors, Danbawa and Ambagoda, to fill the 
incumbency. The selection to be made by the notice to all the 
pupils of the incumbents to assemble at the Maligawa and 
there undergo examination before the principle priests of the 
Asgiri establishment and certain chiefs, and that the pupil 
found best qualified be nominated to the vacancy, agreeably 
to the tenor and intention of the sannas. Pursuant to the order 
of court of 26th March 1828, the assessors and other chiefs in 
presence of the principal priest, and stated that Galagama 
Indrajothi unnanse was the most eligible person for the 
incumbency (Lawrie, 1896, p.93). 
Another court case reported as following: Pevadeniya 
Indajoti Nayaka unnanse, Konwewe Kuda unnanse and three 
other layman claimed the temple and its endowments, which 
form ed an appendage of the Huduhumpola vihare, where of 
plaintiff was the Nayaka or chief priest. First defendant 
claimed to be incumbent as the pupil of Konwewa 
Buddharakkhita unnanse. One claimant held that the 
incumbency of this vihare does not descent by siyana-sisya 
paramparawa, but was the gift of the priest of Huduhumpola 
vihare (ibid.,). 
Walivita Saranankara and the Lineage System 
Saranankara and his colleagues of the Silvat Samagama, 
when they met people who wished to be admitted to the 
order, made them wear the yellow robe made them observe 
the ten precepts and they were called „SilvatTäna.‟ The 
Sangharaja who started a lineage system through the „Silvat 
Samagama‟, addressed his pupils as „My pupil sons‟. As 
mentioned in the Sangharaja Sàdhu Cariyava‟, his activities 
were not confined to one area only. He attracted students for 
his „Silvatsamàgama‟ even from such distant villages as 
Alutnuvara, Ahugoda and Tihagoda (Sadhuchariyava, 1969, 
p.18). Further, as reported by Moratota Dhammakkhanda in 
his diary, he had ordained some of his pupils as „samanera‟- 
novice monks. During that period, these lines of succession 
among monks split further into divisions and sub-divisions. 
The lineage of the Saranankara expanded so much that at the 
monastic school at Niyamakanda that he founded, the number 
of students is reported to have increased to seven hundred 
(ibid). He then raised the status of the sangha and their moral 
and spiritual behaviors by re-establishing the valid ordination. 
At the first „upasampada‟ ceremony, it has been reported that 
over five hundred novice monks received higher ordination 
and three thousand „samanera‟ novice monks were admitted 
to the order (Ibid. p.19). These numbers make it clear how 
fast the movement started by Saranankara had spread in the 
Island. 
The Sinhala Vimanavastu Prakarana provides useful 
information on lineage system that prevailed at this time. The 
aristocrats of the upcountry appear to have restricted 
ordination as monks only to members of higher castes as a 
strategy of retaining the right over the vast temple for 
themselves. This situation in the order of monks had been 
recorded in the „Kadadora Seettuva‟ as follows: “It is a major 
issue at this time that ordination is limited only to a certain 
section in society on account of caste discrimination and 
through that it is further limited to their relatives, who are a 
minor section of that caste." As Sarannakara, lifted that 
restriction and allowed men of every caste to be ordained, he 
is regarded as a revolutionary. Moreover, he did not care for 
the discrimination based on up-country and low-country 
division and tried to develop a unitary community of monks. 
After the establishment of the Siamese chapter it was 
seen that the king appointed the Saranankara sangaraja and 
his deputy, as well as the head of two importance monastic 
establishment in Kandy (Asgiriya and Malwaththa). All the 
monasteries in the kingdom were loosely affiliated to these 
two places. These scattered monasteries were separately 
endowed and their incumbency passed as usual from teacher 
to pupil. But any dispute arose regarding the incumbency or a 
benefice, an appeal could be made to the king who was the 
final arbiter. It is likely that the number of monks who desired 
such arbitration was considerable, for the RajadiRajasimha 
Kathikavata lays down that Bhikkus should communicate

--- PAGE 4 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51414 
with the king only through their respective heads (Jayatilake, 
1955, p.45-46). Saranankara maintained friendly relations 
with the monks of the low-country even at the stage when he 
was referred to as asilvattäna (1730). Sending a handwritten 
letter to the monks (Silvattänas) of the low-country he 
requested all of them to read it. After the higher ordination 
ceremony held in 1753, he had appointed a chief monk for the 
southern part of the country – Wehelle Dhammadinna. 
Further he caused the incumbency of the Sri Pada to be given 
to the Wehelle generation of monks with the approval of the 
king. However, as the Moratotavata reveals, it was not 
possible to continue the system founded by Saranankara 
Sangharaja unhindered: 
Villages offered were maintained in due manner 
After some time, they ordained their own children 
Assuming powers to themselves, inheriting everything 
They did not allow anyone else enter the order, except 
themselves. (Morathotta, 1813) 
This shows how some monks tried to retain the right of 
land and property to themselves by allowing members of 
some selected families only to become monks. Under these 
circumstances, King Kirti Sri Rajasinghe delegated power to 
Ven. Moratota Dhammakkhandha to cleanse the „Sasana‟ of 
immoral monks and to support monks of good conduct 
(Pallaththara, 2002, p.86). 
We shall now examine how the attempts of the Wälivita 
Sangharaja to introduce a more democratic sangha lineage 
system was hampered and disrupted by forces of regionalism 
and family favoritisms. Another phase in the development of 
the institution of the sangha was the partitioning of lineages 
into minor groups based on caste identity. These factors are 
often inseparably interrelated. For example, the caste factor is 
essentially connected to regionalism which in its turn is 
related to sectarianism. In examining this process we can see 
that the concept of community and unity of the sangha 
between the low country and the up country at the time of 
Saranankara was replaced by forces of separatism. A 
determining factor in this development was the appearance of 
individual temples in both those regions and the emergence of 
a new sponsorship system with more parochial vested interest 
and their own agendas. For example, some prominent up 
country families such as Kobbekaduva, Ratwatte, Nugawela 
etc., for the purpose of demonstrating their family status and 
wealth, built temples on the lands they donated. The 
Gonigoda temple in the Kandy district was built by Dunuwila 
Disave on a land gifted by him while the Kobbekaduva 
family built the Kobbekaduva Vihara on the lands granted by 
them  (Thundeniya, 1967, p.23). The famous Suriyagoda 
Vihara was built by Vijayasundara Senarat Vijayakoon 
Mudali. M.B. Nugawela, (ibid.,68) another prominent 
aristocrat of the up-country built the Udugala Nigrodha 
temple on a land belonging to his family and provided for its 
maintenance (Ibid., p 60). The Tikiribogahagoda Vihara at 
Kamburadeniya was built by Muhandiram Nilame of the 
Kamburadeniya Walawwa who retained it under his control. 
A noteworthy feature of this Vihara is that the sponsor‟s 
younger brother becoming a monk and lived at the Vihara as 
family property. Thus the building of Viharas by private 
individuals and their involvement in maintaining them 
violated the initial requirement that donations to temples were 
in the name of the sangha from the four directions and for 
those who visited the temple or who did not. All these 
affected the unity and cordial relationships in the community 
of monks. 
 
Low Country Lineage 
Information on the lineage system of low-country 
Buddhist monks can be obtained from a document that dates 
back 
to 
the 
reign 
of 
King 
Parakramabahu 
vi. 
„Vruttamālākhyāna of Sri Ramachandrabharatis mention that 
the Venerable Rammungoda Dipankara was once known as 
„Mahānetramula Mahāsthavira, the Chief incumbent of 
„śailantanayatana‟. The term „śailantanayanādhipati‟ has been 
rendered into Sinhala as „The Great Sthavira who was the 
Chief incumbent of Bentara Galapāta Vihara. According to 
this, Mendis Rohandhira argues that by this period the 
Galapata Vihara of Bentara had been affiliated to „Maha Net 
Pāmula.‟ Further, there is evidence of the fact that the 
Galapata Vihara of Bentara had been attached to Vilgammula 
at the time of King Parakramabahu I. However, according to 
the Vruttamala, by the year 1484 A.D., it belonged to the 
Mahā Net Pamula and therefore this information should be 
subjected to further investigation. Moreover, while King 
Parakramabahu was collecting monks for uniting the three 
sects, the Mahavamsa says that Venerable Nanda residing at 
the Selantanayatana vihara arrived in the company of monks 
of the three sects. This report shows that by that time the 
Venerable Nanda of the Selantanayatana was in such a 
powerful position to assemble monks of the three sects in the 
southern area. Further, it is possible to conclude that this 
institute was in a position to command the respect of the 
monks of the low-country. Venerable Sangharakkhita, the 
author of the Vuttodaya in the colophon to his work, refers to 
a Seela Sthavira of the Selantarayatana which confirms the 
existence of a vihara at the time (Rohanadeera, PP.204-210). 
In the subsequent periods, there is scarcity of information 
on the sangha of the low-country. The reason for this was the 
flight of the monks from that area in fear of the Portuguese, 
and Dutch persecution. During the period 1627-1753, there 
have been monks known by the derogatory appellation 
„Ganinnanse‟ just as they were known in the up-country 
areas. Such monks attended to the renovation of the Viharas, 
Stupas etc. that were destroyed by the Portuguese and the 
Dutch. The Ganinnnanses of the low country have been 
conducting themselves according to the principles, as 
mentioned in a „punyanumodana‟ (transferring of merit) 
notice sent by Ganavolin of Ransähägoda to King Kirti Sri 
Rajasingha (Polonaruwe, 1990. P.34). There is evidence of 
the service rendered by another Ganinnnanse named 
Buddharakkhita 
Navaratne, 
who 
had 
received 
the 
Tissamaharama 
Vihara 
from 
King 
Vira 
Parakrama 
Narendrasinghe. He had trained some virtuous student monks 
while working for the development of that Vihara. The two 
famous monks, Sitinamaluve Dhammajoti and Vehellle 
Dhammadinna are believed to be descendants of the 
generation of the Buddharakkhita Ganinvahanse. Venerable 
Sitinamaluva was famous at that time not only in the low-
country but also in the Kandyan kingdom. The Silvattäna of 
Sitinamaluve was such a capable monk that the Sangharaja of 
Velivita took him to Kandy to work for the progress of his 
Silvat Samagama. We can form an idea of the kind of respect 
the Kandyan kings paid to the monks of the low country from 
the incident of King Kirti Sri Rajasingha appointing Vehelle 
Dhammadinna in 1753 as custodian of the Sir Pāda [the 
Adam‟s Peak]. It is a matter of special interest that among the 
monks of the low-country too a „generation‟ or lineage‟ had 
been 
developing. 
Accordingly, 
the 
two 
Ganinanses, 
Sitinamaluve and Vehelle belonged to the generation of the 
Ganinnanse of Kadurpokuna. Those three monks living at the 
Kirivehera at Kataragama, Tangalle Vihara, Kasagala,

--- PAGE 5 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51415 
Kotavaya and Galagama inthe low country exchanged their 
learning (what they had learned) with other „Ganinnanses‟ of 
the region. The report of Maitland (1805-1812) helps us form 
an opinion on the monks of the low-country. “the monks of 
that area are divided into several classes. Although there is no 
dispute among them over the fundamental disciplinary rules 
of the monks, the students of (some chief monks) are divided 
into various sects. Those sects are named after the leader of 
each group or the name of the place of their residence. 
Although there are many sects in that area, only four out of 
them are regarded as important. They are the Mulkirigala 
sect, Vehelle sect, Wevasingama sect and Ransahagoda sect” 
(Ilangasinghe, 1995. P.70). 
The low country sangha were however not separated into 
separate sects as mentioned in the Maitland report. By a letter 
of Venerable Watarakkgoda Dhammapala written in 1757 
too, it becomes clear that the monks of the low country lived 
in unity at that time. “The monk of Siyambalagoda, up to the 
Patala Varga in the Abhidhāna, and up to the Aniyatain the 
Patimokkha studied the dharma and the six monks mentioned 
at the beginning of this document learning and mastering 
other sections in the doctrine, practicing principles of the 
religious life, performed acts of Vinaya under the 
Dhammadinna of the Tangalle Vihara” (Polonnaruwe, 1990, 
p.35). 
The Tangalle Vihara mentioned here was possibly the 
Vanavasa Vihara. The Venerable Dhammadinna, the Chief 
Monk of the low country is mentioned here by the name 
Vehelle Himi. Although Watarakgoda and Dhammadinna 
belong to two fraternities, this letter shows that they have 
been working cordially like two brothers. Further in the letter 
sent by the Sangharaja Saranankara to the monks of the low 
country, “This is addressed to the „sons of the Buddha‟ in the 
Matara area, who are living in the company of senior monks 
such as Watarakkgoda, Wehelle, Weva etc.” Nevertheless, 
the Ransegoda generation is not included in this statement. 
The reason for this can be assumed as the generation of 
monks in the Ransegoda and those of the Wehelle generation 
lived as one fraternity (Hewawasam,, 1966). 
  The following ganninanses were involved in this 
endeavor. (Sadhuchariyava,1969, pp. 34-35). 
Another important fact was, Wataraggoda Dhammapala 
thero reformed the Mulkirigala Temple and thought to their 
pupils amount five hundred (ibid.). 
 
 
Due to the Dutch policy of suppressing Buddhism in the 
18th century the Ganinnànses of the low-country had to seek 
safety in the Hambantota and Matara districts. Using rock-
caves located in areas close to the up-country their permanent 
residences, they engaged in religious activities by living at 
safe areas such as Mulkirigala and Kataragama. If a chieftain 
in a certain village offered to provide safety to a Ganinnanse 
he would spend his rainy season there and continue to 
perform his religious duties and teach his pupils. While 
conducting themselves according to religious principles they 
imparted knowledge to their students and preserved palm leaf 
manuscripts. The Roman Catholic Friar, Jacome Gonsalvez, 
while criticizing the monks of the up-country in his work 
„Buddhabana Pratyaksya‟, has referred to the Ganinnanse of 
the low- country thus: „People (Buddhist monks) of Matara 
are learned. Appearing to be the best among the followers of 
Buddhism, they have split into many sects. If they could be 
converted to our religion, it will be easier to convert people in 
other areas.‟ In the meantime it has been reported that a close 
relationship of the Buddhist monks of the up-country and 
low-country too have existed. It is reported that in 1706, a 
Ganinnanse who set out from Ukuwela with fifteen other 
Ganinnases to go to Weligama, was stopped on the way and 
sent back. Further, in 1699, when the Stupa of the Kelani 
Vihara was repaired, a chief monk of the up-country went 
there accompanied by three hundred monks and made an 
offering of light with 1000 oil lamps. The gift of a land by a 
certain Lady named Illangakoon in 1707 to Ganinnanses who 
were engaged in religious work is an example the place they 
held in society at that time (Silva, 1994, pp. 23-49).This study 
has revealed specially the existence of sub leaning among 
members of the different lineage in low country and up 
country communities. (See appendix 1, 2, 3). 
Caste and Lineage 
The author of the Hatthavanagalla Vihara Vamsa, 
written during the reign of King Parakramabahu II says that 
Venerable Anomadassi who lived at that time was a 
descendant of the Brahmana Vamsa. The author of 
the Pujavaliaya has referred to his teacher as belonging to the 
Ganaväsi Caste of the Great Pandi generation (Poojawaliya, 
1930, pp. 145-146). In the Saddharma Ratnavaliya too, which 
was written in the 14th century, in a description of the 
generation of monks of the forest dwelling faction of the 
Palabatgala, says that Dharmakirti lineage descended from 
the Vaishya caste (Saddarmarathnavaliya , 1984).The author 
does not stop there, but continues to say that the entire 
generation of monks was descendants of the Vaishya clan. 
What is more interesting is this author, while mentioning the 
chronology of the members of this generation, giving detailed 
information on family and caste background of individual 
teachers. By doing this the author may have intended to show 
that those families were descendants of generations of 
respectable castes. In the Hamsa Sandesha, composed during 
the reign of King Parakramabahu VI, there is a long 
description of Venerable Vanaratana, the Principal of the 
Keragala Padmavati Pirivena. In this poetic description he is 
referred to as the nephew of the Great Sthavira Nagasena who 
lived in the forest monastery after developing the Vihara at 
Wattala, and further, he was closely related to the nobleman 
Alasengamu Hunannaru who was the Chief of the 
Bodhipalaka caste. This implies a royal alliance as well. The 
author of this text has tried not only to mention the caste, but 
also to highlight kinship relationships of the noble families of 
the laity. By the time of King Parakramabahu II, the caste of a 
„Bhikkhu‟- a monk- appears to become more important than 
in previous times. As the „Dambadeniya Katikavata’ reveals, 
the caste factor had been among the qualifications of a person 
wishing to be admitted to the order of monks. 
“yatatpiriseyin teratunnamak ätulu sesu upayukta 
sanghayā madhyayehi jātigotra vicārā rogabalā 
livīmkiyavīm balā nāyaka tändanvā siyalla sälakota

--- PAGE 6 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51416 
kuladoshayan nätäyi dannā sanga kenekun 
pratignākala” (Suraweera, 1971,p. 94). 
[“In the middle of the assembly of the sangha including 
at least three Sthaviras and other senior monks, having 
questioned on the caste and clan, checking on diseases and 
knowledge of reading and writing, informing the Chief monk, 
when a monk who knows there are no problems with caste 
etc. has given assurance…] 
This means that the „purity‟ of the caste of a candidate 
for admission to the „sangha‟ had to be certified by a monk 
who was familiar with his family background. Therefore it is 
necessary to examine further why the former situation 
regarding the caste had developed to this level by the 
Dambadeniya period. It is surprising to note that even some 
well-known senior monks referring to themselves proudly as 
belonging either to the Brahmin or the Vasishya caste. One of 
the decisive factors influencing this change could have been 
the invasion of the island by Magha. During that time the 
monks had tried to refer their castes more often. By the mid-
13th century, as a result of Magha‟s invasion, the political 
stability of the country was weakened making it easy for 
external powers to interfere in the political affairs of the 
Island. At the same time, there was a tendency for senior 
monks to be related with f prominent families in the state 
administration. As a result religious and political power was 
concentrating around the same network. By the 14th century, 
while some monks were able to claim ownership of property 
some aristocratic families tried to claim the right for the 
property of temples by getting their kin admitted to the order. 
With these new developments there arose a tendency to 
ordain persons of higher castes, preventing at the same time 
persons of lower castes entering the order. 
 We can see this tendency more developed in the 
Kandyan period with compare with earlier period. In 1586 
Rajasinha I gave the village of Gonadeniya, in the Atakalan 
Korale in Sabaragamuve to a Brahmin and his family. A few 
of these Brahmins and their dependents served in the 
Kandyan court. Morathota Dhammakkandha, the chief monk 
of the Malwatta Vihare from 1787-1811, was of Brahmin 
caste. A grandson of Brahmin named Balakrishna, who 
immigrated to Sri Lanka from Madura in the region of 
Bhuvenakabahu of Kotte, served under Rajasimha 1 as a 
minister. Although a Bhddhist, his Brahmin ancestry was 
remembered with pride (Dewaraja, 1972 .p. 40). 
According to Lorna Devaraja the introduction of the 
Siamese upasampada tradition led to new social trends within 
the Sri Lankan society. One such trend was the caste 
qualification which was imposed on all entrants to the sangha 
who at this time came under a single nikaya. *iIt is significant 
that even the first six monks who were ordained at the hands 
of Upali thero not only belonged to the govikula but were also 
selected from aristrocatic families, Kobbekaduwe, Kulatunga 
(Saranankara), Hulamgamuve, Bambaradeniya, Tibbotuwave 
and Navinne. 
1. Kobbakaduwe Himi-He was the offspring of a Polyandrous 
union between Galagoda Kumarihami, daughter of Galagoda 
Disava of Uva. 
2. Saranankara Himi- A descended of Kulatunga Mudali, 
Disave of Tumpane in the time of Wimaladharma Suriya. 
3. Hulangamiwe Himi was the brother of the second Adigar 
of 1731. 
4. Tibbotuwave was the brother in law of the second Adigar 
of Samarakkodi. 
5. Nawinne was a close associate of the head of the Asgiri 
Vihare. (Ibid. p.103). 
This illustrates the extent to which Upali thera‟s 
Upasampada ceremony was manipulated to serve caste 
exclusives within the Kandyan sangha and the aristocracy. 
Sitinamaluve, a learned monk who was a close associate of 
Saranankara right throughout his career, was denied the 
Upasampada at the hands of Upali Thera, as he did not 
belong to the govikula. The infiltration of the aristocracy in to 
the sangha had begun at the very top. It is likely that these 
monks who were in authority at the time imposed rules 
restricting entrance to the Siam Nikaya to members of the 
Govikula in order to avoid the possibility of men of lower 
castes from gaining places of importance in the ecclesiastical 
hierarchy (Ibid. p. 43). The Mandarampuwatha, however, 
relates an incident which appears to give royal sanction to this 
restriction. The king, it is said, was informed that certain 
monks of the lower castes were in the habit of removing their 
upper garments and prostrating themselves before the 
noblemen, thus continuing with the customs and practices 
that they were used to as laymen. This perturbed the king and 
he summoned an assembly of all the prominent monks and 
noblemen where it was further disclosed that some monks 
practiced dancing and drumming and performed professional 
services which were their traditional obligations as laymen. In 
order to stop this it is said that the king requested the elders of 
the sangha to bestow the Upasampada only on men of noble 
birth, by which he meant the govikula. According to 
Mandarampura Puwata it was the king‟s wish that this 
restriction should stand as long as two monasteries lasted. 
(Mandaram, 1958. PP.12-13). The king‟s injunction was 
conveyed to the low-country sangha leading to regional and 
caste separatism among them.  
Property, Kinship and Lineage 
According 
to 
R.A.L.H. 
Gunawardhana, certain 
inscriptions of the ninth and tenth centuries contain grants of 
exemption from royal dues on land held by monasteries. The 
practice of endowing monasteries with property in land 
irrigation works can be traced back to a period as early as the 
latter part of the second century BC. The Duvegala and Na-
ulpota inscriptions of Lanjatissa (119-109B.C) record a grant 
of tracts of land and of an irrigation reservoir to a monastery. 
It has also been suggested that the Na-ulopota and 
Galgamuva inscriptions, which mention donations of both 
agricultural and irrigation property to monasteries, date from 
the 
reign 
of 
Vattagamani 
(103-102, 
89-77 
B.C.) 
(Gunawardhana,1 979, P.56) 
Most probably these grants of immunity merely 
amounted to thetransfer of revenue to the monasteries. 
Gunawardhana further mentions that another important 
development noticeable during the period was strengthening 
of the rights of individual monks over monastic property. The 
references in the Chulawansa to a category of monks, first 
referred to in the account of the reign of Mahinda»¼, 
mentions donation of wealth to labhavasin monks of all the 
three nikayas. (C:V: 54.27) (Ibid. p.80). The appearance of 
the practice of property by ownership by individual monks, in 
spite of the ideal they set for themselves, was in very close 
association with the lay society so that some of the salient 
economic features of lay life were introduced into the life of 
monks. This concept of ownership is made clearly obvious by 
the Mihinthale tablets. According to this source the income 
accruing from the villages and the land belonging to the 
monastery should be enjoyed only by the regular residents of 
monastery. (E2 . vol. p. 91). Though ownership of property 
was at times vested in individual monks all such sources of 
income were considered to be the property of the respective

--- PAGE 7 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51417 
monasteries and ultimately of the Nikayas. Several 
inscriptions of this period refer to the “property of the three 
nikayas” (Ibid. p.348.). (E2. Vol. »¼ p. 42). The vow of 
rejection of individual property by which the monastic order 
was bound seems to have been violated in this manner. As 
kings and laymen dedicated so much of property for purposes 
of accumulating merit, that in the course of time paradoxical 
as it may sound the Bhikkhu sangha or the „fraternity of 
beggars‟ became in Weberian phraseology, “monastic 
landlords (Dewaraja, 1972, p.136). During the Kandyan 
period certain monks even earned private incomes by 
accepting state employment. A monk could donate private 
property to a relative though not Sanghika property dedicated 
for the use of the monastery and its residents. But this 
difficulty was surmounted when the system of gnati sisya 
parampara became widespread and sanghika lands came to 
be handed down in the families of the incumbents. With 
this lineage system inheritance of monastic property from 
pupil within the same family, “monastic land-lordism” had 
come to stay (ibid.). 
In addition to this Robert Knox observed the wealth and 
influence of the temples when he said; 
“Unto each of these pagodas, there are great revenues of 
land belonging ; which have been allotted to them by former 
kings, according to the state of the kingdom; but they have 
much impaired the revenues of the crown, there being rather 
more towns belonging to the church, than up to the king ( 
Knox, 1911, P.116). 
The tenant cultivators of temple lands were exempt from 
many of the services that other villagers owed to the state. 
The relatively lighter tax burden, due partly perhaps to the 
spiritual 
association, 
made 
many 
cultivators 
prefer 
attachments to temple villages rather than to villages assigned 
to the royalty or the aristocracy. There were instances where 
cultivators themselves granted their lands to temple villages 
in order to avoid payment of certain taxes to the state 
(Bandarage, 1983, P.34). H.L Senevitatne pointed out that 
this condition due to the irrevocability of temples villages by 
the king, many aristocrats preferred to grant their lands to 
temples headed by blood relatives (Senevirathne, 1978, page 
08). An important development that contributed to this 
process during the Kandyan period was the appointment of 
heads of temples (Viharadhipathis0) and the selection of their 
successors according to the tradition of pupillary succession. 
(Sisyanusisya paramparawa). 
This 
so-called 
papillary 
succession 
(sisyanusisya 
parampara) was widely used to retain the monasteries, in the 
hands of influential families… For a number of monasteries, 
another 
rule 
of 
succession 
termed(gnathisisya 
parampara)…because valid. Under this rule, only a relative 
of the deceased viharadipathi could be the successor to a 
deceased monk, provided he was ready to take up the robes. 
Several instances may be cited where the Sinhalese kings 
in negotiations of some special service rendered to them or in 
consideration of loyalty and faithfulness shown to them by 
certain Buddhist priests have endowed such priests or their 
temples with lands. Kirthi Sri Rajasinghe granted to Wehalle 
Dhammadhinna not only the chief incumbency of the vihara 
at Sripadha but also land appertaining to that high office as 
can be seem from the Wehalle „tamba sannasa‟ (copper 
plate) dated Ad 1751 (Nanavimala, p. 17). (Morathota 
Dhammakkhanda received a gift of lands from Rajadhi 
Rjasimha for instructing the king in the Dhamma as can be 
noticed from the Degaldoruwa sannasa (Lawrie, 1896, p.688). 
The Sinhalese kings were also accustomed to grant lands to 
individual temples or priest with the yeJanctions that the 
income from such lands should be used to have the customary 
religious rites performed at the respective temples. By the 
„Madagammana 
sannasa‟, 
Narendrasingha 
granted 
to 
Madagammana Heranunnanse the holy shrine Sripada no 
doubt with the benefices appertaining to this shrine so that the 
priest in question and his pupils shall perform without 
interruption the necessary religious rites (Nanavimala, p. 16). 
The Sinhalese kings it would appear granted lands to 
individual priests subject to the condition that the rules 
promulgated by the Buddha. 
In addition to this we see that the community of priests 
although it received large extents of lands, yet there was a 
system for the management of these lands in a way that was 
not detrimental to the well, being of the Buddhist priesthood. 
In this research clearly obvious that due to this trusted of 
property Parampara tradition maintain within the Buddhist 
society. This system underwent we notice the tendency on the 
part of certain priests to cause to be admitted to the order and 
thereby also to their live of pupils, their relations for the sole 
purpose of retaining temples and the temple lands in their 
own families. An instance of such manipulation may be 
noticed in a deed pertaining to the Aludeniya Vihare (Lawrie, 
1896, p.688). Here is stated that the incumbent of the Vihara, 
Chandajothi Unnanse, on his deathbed caused one of his 
grandnephews to the ordained and to him was given the 
temple and its land. It is important fact is to note that in this 
case, the temple lands continued to the owned by the grand. 
Nephew of Chandajothi Unnanse even after, he had left the 
robes. 
An examination of types of services rendered by the 
temple tenants would illustrate how the monasteries were 
maintained and also now the cast system entered the monastic 
organization. According to the act of 1870, No: 4 included 
that the temple tenants functions relating to their own 
mechanism. For instance the tenants who occupied the paddy 
cultivation, temple repairing. Another important matter was 
according the temple tenants of Kobbekaduwe vihara mention 
that washer men caste people have to wash the clothes of 
temple and arrange „Uduviyan‟. we see through the act of 
1870, how the monastic organization as it developed in 
Ceylon upheld the social and economic differences based on 
caste structure (Service Tenure, 1870, p. 46). As Pridham 
estimates 1/5 of the cultivable land in the Kandyan territory 
belonged to temples and devales (Jayasekera, 1970, p.70) In 
addition to this we can understand real situation through the 
statically analysis from the temple land reports of 1876 
(Buddhist temporaries commission, Sessional paper, 1876, P. 
41). 
Temple Lands of 1876 in Ceylon. 
Province 
Amount 
Central 
239,232 
Western 
75,303 
North-west 
58,360 
North 
1,583 
South 
1,559 
Total 
376,037 
Source: Report of the Buddhist Temporaries Commission, 
Ceylon Legislative Council, Sessional Paper, no. 18, led 
1876, p. 41. 
This state of affairs is well illustrates by the land 
transactions 
of 
one 
Kandy 
an 
chief, 
Parantala 
Ratemahatmaya, noted in the Buddhist temporalities 
commission report of 1876. 
“Threw of the robes and ceased to be a priest in 1849, 
has held several incumbencies first Degaladoru vihare, then

--- PAGE 8 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51418 
selavihare… explains his conviction with the lease of the 
coffee land Dunuwilkana belonging to the Degaldoru vihare. 
He and his fellow priests after they had thrown of the robes, 
in order to protect the interest of the vihare. The waste land 
belonging to which was being encroached upon and the 
timber felled by natives leased the land to an European 
planter to be planted with coffee, first for a small rent, and 
afterwards under a fresh agreement for £ 300 a year” 
(Sessional Paper 1876, P: xxx.). 
Baragalle vihare, Alagoda vihare and Rambukavela 
vihare were after the death of pinnapaye unnanse, in ruins. As 
there was no priest then living who had descended in a direct 
line from him, and as it is improper for layman to enjoy the 
benefits arising from vihare property, the matter was brought 
to the notice of the victorious and prosperous great. Gate by 
Dunuwila Ratemahatmaya of sarasiya pattuwa, the grand, 
Nephew of pinnapaye unnanse. And accordingly the same 
were presented to Molagoda Attadhassi unnanse, to be held 
by him and his papillary succession, maintaining the benefits 
arising there from (Lawrie, 1896,p.717). 
British Colonial Attitude towards Lineage System 
Chief monks of various fraternities of the low country 
had come to play influential roles in society at the advent of 
British power in Sri Lanka This situation developed from the 
last stages of Dutch rule. In recognition of the influence of 
Koratota Dharmarama the Dutch Governor Von de Graff 
(1785-94) appointed him as the Chief monk of their territory 
and paid him a monthly allowance of 35 pagodas as fare for 
his „palanquin.‟ This was done for political reasons as a 
gesture to win over the sangha who had always kept close 
relations with the Kandyan court. The fact that this allowance 
was paid to Koratota even by the British Governor Brownrigg 
shows the political influence commanded by the Chief monks 
of that time. (Kamburupitiye,1950, p. 162).  Furthermore, 
some official flags have been assigned for the exclusive use 
of certain r monks holding new positions were created by 
British rulers. These influential monks used their positions to 
resolve some legal disputes among the sangha. The Chief 
Monks, after passing judgment on the cases of monks and 
temples forwarded their decisions to the „Mudali‟ for 
implementing them (Ilangasinghe, 1995, p.70). Governor 
Thomas Maitland, during his tenure, realized the strength of 
these Buddhist monks and therefore adopted a strategy of 
undermining their influence.. Maitland instructed Thomas 
Eden, Collector of revenue, Matara, „ As the King of Kandy 
has won the support of the monks, you must now try to win 
them over to our side.‟ For this Maitland adopted two 
methods: promulgating laws for the administration of affairs 
of the Buddhist sangha and obtaining their consent for those 
laws and winning the support of the Buddhist public (ibid.) 
Maitland used these strategies of awarding positions to 
monks and creating conflicts between them and the laity for 
the purpose of strengthening British authority and breaking 
the existing close relationship between the king of Kandy and 
Buddhist monks. The authority for appointing monks to 
„Nayaka‟ positions was so far exercised by the king. The 
statement in his letter is an example of Maitland‟s attempt to 
practically disrupt the relationship of the laity with the 
monks. “Power of a Buddhist monk in the south is immense. 
It is greater than the power of a Mudliyar.“ They were 
especially concerned with the importance of the Mulkirigala 
Vihara which had become the centre of activities of the 
monks in the south. Therefore, the British Governor 
instructed Eden to undermine the authority of the monks 
living in that temple (Ibid, p.68).  
The most important point here is the attempt of the 
British rulers to create disruption among lineages of monks in 
the south. Especially, as the monk of Bovala was maintaining 
close relations with the Mudliyars of the low-country, 
Governor Maitland reported in his letter that the Monk of 
Bovala was passing information to the king of Kandy. He had 
tried to break the friendship between the monk of Bovala and 
Saram, the Mudliyar of the Low-country. Moreover, he 
attempted to create a contest for power between the monk of 
Karatota who belonged to the Vehella lineage with Bovala of 
the Mulkirigala lineage. This disrupted the traditional unity 
that existed among generations of the sangha and created new 
competitions among them for the position of the Nayaka of 
the South. Maitland continued to disrupt the unity of the 
sangha furthering regionalism among the monks. For this 
purpose he tried to establish an executive committee for each 
district with the power of resolving issues relating to the 
traditions/ritual of the monks and their temple lands. 
Although this proposal could not be implemented, Maitland 
was successful in creating competition among the Buddhist 
monks of the low country for state recognition and positions. 
A good example of this is the letter sent to Governor 
Maitland by Venerable Mahagoda Indasara requesting a post 
of chief incumbency (ibid). Although he was already holding 
the position of the chief monk for the „upasampada monks‟ 
of the District of Galle he wanted another position of a 
„Nayaka‟ – appointed by the British Government with 
provision for use of „Hewisi‟ whenever he visited places, 
official security, facility for travelling in a palanquin and 
ordering officers in each region to support him. This shows 
the benefits the monks wished to enjoy along with the 
positions and also the fact that Maitland‟s strategy had 
produced the expected results. 
These developments in the low-country show the 
Buddhist affairs were undergoing an even more revolutionary 
change than in the up-country. We have mentioned earlier 
that there was an overall unity among the lineages of monks 
in the low-country. But processes of social change under the 
impact of colonialism from at least Dutch times stimulated a 
caste competition in lay society that was inevitably reflected 
in the sangha organization. Under the British this process was 
aggravated as a result of new sources of wealth and 
opportunities for education invariably leading to caste 
mobility. Based on those new social classes a new culture 
appeared around the Buddhist Viharas. The newly emergent 
wealthy Buddhists extended their philanthropy for building of 
temples and patronized the sangha of their own castes and 
localities as new social capital to enhance their relative social 
status in the caste hierarchy. As a result new communities of 
monks emerge sponsored by private funds further disrupting 
the process spearheaded by Walivita Saranakara. In other 
words, these developments eventually led to the creation of 
new sectarian divisions based on caste among the sangha. 
[The goyigama Buddhist benefactors included some who has 
made their initial fortunes from the graphite and later 
branched out in to plantation crop and arrack renting, as did 
the Senanayake, Kotalawala and Artugalle families. One such 
family was that of N F Fernando, of the vahumpura caste, an 
important local merchant in the export-import trade who 
generously subscribed to Buddhist charities: Fernando 
employed only Buddhists on his shop, and observed 
“Buddhist ceremonies and festivals”. In 1898, he financed a 
pilgrims rest house in Anuradhapura for the convenience of 
pilgrims. Many Salagama capitalists were keen supporters 
Buddhist revival.

--- PAGE 9 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51419 
Among them: William de Abrew Rajapaksa and his son 
Peter the Abrew who gave land and money for the Meusaeus 
college, a Buddhist girls‟ school. Tudor Rajapaksa founded 
the Rajapaksa boys‟ school in Balapitiya. The Duvava caste 
also produced a strong Buddhist lobby including Mallika 
Hewavitarana 
and 
her 
father 
Don 
Andris 
Perera 
Dhammagunawardhana who gave land and money for the 
Vidyodaya Pirivena. (Wimalaratne K.D.G. Personalities of 
Sri Lanka, A Biographical study, Colombo, Ceylon Buddhist 
Publications, 1999) Influential members of the caste, 
specially Simon Alwis and members of the Tudawe Panditha 
- Gunawardhana, de Soysa and Gomes families funded the 
Vajiraramaya temple an Colombo, founded in 1901. The 
temple, 
accounted 
with 
the 
famed 
bhikkhu 
Palane 
Vajiragnana Mahanayaka (1878-1955) a prolific writer on 
Buddhism, became an important focal point for the Durava 
Buddhists. 
Karawa caste: Ponnehennedige Domingo Dis, another 
member of the Dias family of panadura, who also a great 
Buddhist benefactor. He was the trustee and a contributor 
towards the movement for the acquisition by the Buddhists of 
Buddha Gaya in India. Jeremias, Dias, a successful arrack 
renter and capitalist who also sponsored the Panaduravadaya. 
He gave large sums of money for temples and Buddhist 
schools and was the chief lay benefactor of the Rankoth 
vihara in Panadura]  (Jayawardhana, 2000, P.167, 264-266), 
(Wright, 1907, pp. 291-292). 
The initial move in this direction came from the 
Salagama caste forming the Amarapura Nikaya in the early 
19th century and soon it spread to Karawa and Durava castes 
etc. splitting the monks into over two dozen fraternities 
within the Amarapura sect (ibid). Within these new sects 
regionalism raises its head as another fast growing trend 
while at the same time maintaining the up-country –low 
country distinction. A dispute that occurred in 1836 the 
Siamese sect split into three sects as Malwatta, Asgiriya and 
Kelaniya in 1856. In 1864, a new sect named Kotte Chapter 
branched off from the Siamese sect. All these groups 
admitted only persons of the Govigama caste into their 
communities as monks. The Ramañña Nikaya was started in 
1864 as an attempt to arrest the division of the sangha on 
caste basis but it too eventually succumbed to the strength of 
caste. According to P.V.J Jayasekera thee new sectarianism 
was possible not only because of caste mobility in society but 
also because the colonial state was prepared to promote such 
divisions 
and 
competition 
through 
legal 
recognition 
(Jayasekara, 1970). [Lay patronage was however crucial in 
these developments. In the Kalutara where the Siam Nikaya 
was dominant, the families of Don Philip Wijewardhana, 
Helena Wijewardhana and D.R. Wijewardhana extended their 
patronage extensively to Buddhist temples. Wealthy members 
of the Salagama caste, such as Salamon Soyza Appuhami, 
Norman de Silva and Dona Christina Jayasuriya of the 
Karava caste sponsorerd the temples of the Amarapura 
Nikaya. Mallika Hewavitarana, Don Andris Perera and 
Dharma Guanwardhana etc., too rendered religious and social 
services in association with temples related to their castes]. 
Thus with the association of the new wealthy Buddhists 
with the Nikayas founded on caste and regional identities 
created a trend which started with the temples related to sects 
in the areas such as Matara, Galle, Hakmana and Beli Atta, 
where the population was predominantly of the Govigama 
caste moves gradually to urban areas such as Colombo. The 
Amarapura sect was active mainly in the Balapitiya and 
Ambalangoda areas where the majority of the residents 
belonged to the Salagama caste. The Amarapura which was 
connected with the Karava caste became popular in 
Alutgama, Beruvala, Payagala and Ambalangoda. Although 
these diverse sects operated keeping some towns as the 
centre, their influence reached out to rural areas as well. It 
was the new rich comprador class which was the dynamic 
force that pushed the Buddhist society towards regionalism. 
Acknowledgment 
I‟m grateful to Prof. P.V.J. Jayasekara former Head of the 
Department, 
Department 
of 
History, 
University 
of 
Peradeniya, , for his encouragement, suggesions and fullest 
cooperation  in this research. He provided very useful 
comments and criticisms after read this research article. In 
addition I need to thanks my sincere gratitude to Prof. Anne 
M. Blackburn, Department of Asian Studies, Cornell 
University, USA. Because she has invited and encouraged me 
pursue this research project and created a great opportunity to 
present this research paper for international conference, 
„Orders and Itineraries; Buddhist, Islamic and Christian 
Networks in Southern Asia, c.900-1900. 21-22 February 
2013, Asia Research Institute and FASS Religion Cluster, 
National University of Singapore. 
Reference 
[1]Angutthara Nikaya, (Dasaka Nipatha, Upali Vagga, 
Duthiya nanda Suttha) Chatta Sangyan. CD - Rom, Vipassana 
Research Institute India, 1999. 
[2]A Palm Leaf Manuscript, Andawala temple. 
[3]Bandarage, Asoka,  Colonialsim in Ceylon, Stamford Lake 
(Pvt) Ltd., 1983. 
[4]Chullavagga pali, II, (B. J. THRI) Colomb, 1982. 
[5]Dewaraja, Lorna, Kandyan Kingdom of Ceylon 1707- 
1760, Lake House Investment LTD, Colombo.1970. 
[6]Dissanayake, 
T.B., 
Kandyan 
Law 
and 
Buddhist 
Ecclesiastical law, Dhamasamaya Press, Colombo, 1963. 
[7]Gunawardena, R.A.L.H., Robe and Plough, The University 
of Arizona Press, 1979. 
[8]Hewawasam, P.B.G., Matara Yugaye Sahithya Darayan 
ha Sahithya Nibandana, Cultural affairs Department, 
Colombo, 1966. 
[9]Ilangasinghe, 
Mangala, 
Rajaya,Agama 
saha 
Buddhagama,University press,moratuwa,1995. 
[10]Jayasekera, P.V.J.. Social and Political Change in 
Ceylon, 1900-1919. Unpublished Phd. Theses University of 
London, 1970. 
[11]Jayawardena, K., Nobodies to Somebodies: the rise of the 
colonial Bourseoisie in Sri Lanka, the social scientists 
association, Sri Lanka, 2000. 
[12]Kamburupitiye 
wanarathana, Mthara 
wangsaya 
H Purvidyathmaka Ithihasaya,1950. 
[13]Knox, Robert, An Historical Relations of Ceylon , 
Glasgow, London, 1911. 
[14]Lankananda, Labugama, (ed), Mandaram Pura Puwatha, 
Department of Cultural Affairs, Colombo, 1958.  
[15]Lawrie, A.C.,  A Gazetteer of the Central province of 
Ceylon, Vol. 1. Colombo, Govt, printers, 1896. 
[16]Maha parinibbana sutta, Chatta Sangyan, Vipassana 
Research Institute, India, 1999. 
[17]Mahavaggapali, 
Karagampitiye 
Jothirathana 
, 
Silpalankara Press, Pandura, 1951. 
[18]Majjhimanikāya Atuva 2, (upari pannasakaya) (Sinhala 
trans) A. P. D. Soysa, Dharma samaya priters. 
[19]Majjhimanikāya, 
(part 
III) 
(ed) 
Rev. 
Labugama 
Lankānanda, The Republic of Sri Lanka, 1974. 
[20]Majjhimanikāya, (part III) (Trans) Bhikku Bodhi, 
Wisdom Publications, Boston, 2001

--- PAGE 10 [DIRECT] ---

Ramani Hettiarachchi / Elixir Social Studies 121 (2018) 51411-51420 
51420 
[21]Mangala 
Ilangasinghe, 
Rajaya,Agama 
saha 
Buddhagama,University press,moratuwa,1995.. 
[22]Mirando, A.M., Buddhism in Sri Lanka in the 17th and 
18th Centuries, Tisara Prakashakayo Ltd., Sri Lanka, 1985.. 
[23]Morathota Dinapotha, National Archives of Colombo, 
No: 5/63/101-1 
[24]Nanavimala, 
Kirialle, 
(ed), 
Sabaragamuwe 
Parani 
Liyavili, Colombo. 
[25]Polonaruwe 
Hmasiri, Ruhunu 
Sangha 
samajaya, 
Maathara Bodhi Araksaka sabhawa,1990. 
[26]Polwaththe Buddadaththa, Theravadi Bauddacharyayo, 
Colombo. 
[27]Poojawaliya, Benthara Saddathissa (ed), Panadura, 1930. 
[28]Rajadi Rajasimha Katikavata, in D.B. Jayatilake (ed) 
Katikavath Sangara, Vidyalankara press, 1955. 
[29]Report of the Buddhist Temporaries Commission, Ceylon 
Legislative Council, Sessional paper, No 18 led 1876. 
[30] Rohanadeera, M., Sasanabandu Paramparawa. 
[31]Saddarmalankaraya, Benthara saddathissa (ed), Panadura, 
1934. 
[32]Saddarmarathnavaliya, Ven Darmasena Thero, S. 
Godage & sons, Colombo, 1984. 
[33]Sadhuchariyava, Sangharja ,(ed) Rev.Hnpiragedara 
Piyanandha, Rathnapoth prakasakayo. Colombo, 1969. 
[34]Senevirathne, H.L., Rituals of the Kandyan State, 
Cambridge University press, London,1978. 
[35]Sessional Paper 1876, No 18, the report of the 
commissioners appointed 
to the 
inquire in to 
the 
administration of the Buddhist temporalities. 
[36]Silva, M.U. de, ''Dahathwana saha Daha Atawana 
Siyawashi Sri Lankwe Muhudubada Palathwala visu 
 ganinnnsela saha owungen Budhdha ssanayata Ha siya 
sangskruthiyata vu  sewawa, Rohana,1994. 
[37]Sulubodhi Vansaya, (ed) Rev. H. Sumangala, Simhala 
Pusthaka Samithiya, Nugegoda, 1991. 
[38]Sumanajothi, Pallaththara Sri, Mulagiri Maha Vihara 
Vansaya, Upul Offset Printers, Galle, 2002. 
[39]Suraweera, 
A.V., 
Dhambatheniya 
Kathikawatha, 
Singhala Kathikaawak saha biksu samajaya, M.D Gunasena 
samagama, Colombo, 1971. 
[40]The Diary of Morathota Dhammakkanda. Ceylon 
National Archives, Colombo, CAN/HMC/ 5/63/101 (1) 
[41]Thundeniya, M., Mahanuwara Viharavansa,Unpublished 
documents,main Library, University of Peradeniya, 1967. 
[42]Wright, Arnold, Ceylon: Twentieth Century Impressions 
- Its History, People, Commerce , Industries & Resources, 
Asian Educational Services, 1907.
