--- Page 1 ---
Cracow Indological Studies
Vol. XX, No. 1 (2018), pp. 1–30
https://doi.org/10.12797/CIS.20.2018.01.03
Andrea Acri
(EPHE, PSL, Paris)
andrea.acri@ephe.sorbonne.fr
Performance as Religious Observance in Some Śaiva Ascetic 
­Traditions from South and Southeast Asia
SUMMARY: My essay synthesizes, and  elaborates on, previous research on 
the ­overlaps between performative arts and ascetic traditions of the Śaiva Atimārga 
in South and Southeast Asia. My analysis focuses mainly on textual data from ­Sanskrit 
and Old Javanese literature from the 4th to the 15th centuries, with contributions from 
modern and contemporary ethnography of Java and Bali. Here I will argue that ­categories 
of Śaiva practitioners who combined dance, recitation, and drama in both areas may 
derive from a shared tantric fund, and that those low-status agents characterized by 
antinomian behaviours were not only driven by ideals of individual salvation or quest 
for powers, but also contributed to their local social milieus (i.e. as ‘folk’ entertainers) 
and ritual economies (i.e., as performers attached to temples and royal palaces).
KEYWORDS: dance, dramaturgy, comedy, Śaivism, Tantra, Atimārga, Pāśupatas, 
Lākulas, Kārukas, Kāpālikas, Nāṭyaśāstra, Vidus, Canthang Balungs, Sidha Karya
The relationship between Śaiva Tantric traditions and the ­performing 
arts constitutes a  fascinating and  still little explored field of study. 
Besides being aware of theatrical technical terminology, various 
sources within the  medieval Śaiva traditions of both the  Atimārga 
and Mantramārga describe rituals or observances (vrata) ­incorporating 
acting, ­singing, and dancing. This internal, prescriptive evidence seems 
to be ­confirmed by the external testimony provided by a number of 
coeval non-Śaiva (either religious or belletristic) texts, which ­mention 
­categories of practitioners involved in  the  performing arts, often 
associating them  (with  satirical intent) with  antinomian behaviours

--- Page 2 ---
2
Andrea Acri
and ‘marginal’ or non-elite social contexts. Additional evidence can be 
gathered from the realm of the visual arts, in particular temple reliefs, 
where we find depictions of ascetic types involved in worship through 
dance and music-making,1 as well as from ethnographic accounts record­
ing different types of ‘folk’ religious practitioners-cum-­performers
in modern India. This state of affairs suggests that, while the ­Sanskrit 
sources often display a  tendency to  represent stereotypical types 
according to a “prescriptive imagination” (White 2005: 9), they may 
nonetheless reflect actual, and common enough, realities in the socio-
religious landscape of South Asia and beyond. At any rate, the task 
of matching this disparate array of evidence about heterogeneous—
and often extinct—Śaiva groups who integrated some elements of per­
formance in their practice (or vice-versa) in the course of more than 
a millennium is still a desideratum.
Building on  my previous research, in  this chapter I will ­present 
a survey of the textual data on ascetics or, more generally, Śaiva sādhakas 
enjoining singing, dancing, and  drama in  the  Śaiva Atimārga tradi­
tion (and its offshoots) in South and Southeast Asia. I will first focus 
on groups of Atimārga ascetics known to us from Sanskrit sources, 
such as  the  Pāśupatas, Lākulas/Kārukas, and  Kāpālikas, then move 
on to describe their putative descendants or ‘cousins’ in Java and Bali.
Pāśupatas
The earliest textual evidence prescribing dancing and singing as a con­sti­
tutive part of the worship of Śaiva ascetics is found in the Pāśupatasūtra 
[PS] and its commentary (Pañcārthabhāṣya) attributed to Kauṇḍinya 
(probably 4th–5th century AD). Singing (gīta) and dancing (nṛtya) are 
mentioned among the six ‘offerings’ (upahāra)—intended as forms of 
­worship—to be undertaken by the Pāśupata practitioner in the first stage 
of his ascetic career: “One should serve [the Lord] with the offerings 
1	 Studies in this area are still lacking. For a survey of evidence from 
the Khmer and Cam domains, see Chemburkar, Kapoor 2018; for a discussion 
of some temple reliefs in Java, see Acri 2014a.

--- Page 3 ---
3
Performance as Religious Observance…
of laughing, singing, dancing, making the  sound huḍu(k),2 making 
­internal salutations, and mantra recitations” (hasitagītanṛttahuḍukkāra-
namaskārajapyopahāreṇopatiṣṭ het).3
The engagement in dancing, singing, and playing musical ­instruments 
as a form of Śaiva personal and communal worship is ­attested in lay 
milieus of early Śaiva devotionalism and ritual;4 yet, in the Niśvāsa­
mukha (1.169cdef) we read that the  performance of dancing, sing­
ing, playing the lute (tantrīvādya), and making the sound huḍu(k) for 
the worship of liṅgas was also (i.e. not only) the preserve of lay people, 
for those initiated into the Śaiva (i.e. Pāśupata?) system are deemed 
to receive an even greater benefit from these activities—namely, lib­
eration (apavarga). We could compare this information to the reliefs 
on  the  well-known liṅga pedestal from the  Mỹ Sơn E1 temple 
in Campā (ca. 7th century), representing Śaiva ascetics while dancing, 
playing the  lute and  percussion instruments, and  worshiping liṅgas 
with ­offerings.5 It may therefore be assumed that some Pāśupatas resided 
in temples, where they were actively and legitimately involved in per­
formance activities according to the prescription of PS 1.8.6 However, 
2	 Either huḍu(k) or  huḍduṅ appear to  be the  most likely readings/
renderings of the bull’s cry according to Kauṇḍ inya and various other sources 
(the variants being duṃḍuṃ, huṃḍum, huḍuṃ; see Kafle 2015: 205 fn. 271, 
and the various secondary sources mentioned therein). Cf. also infra, note 27.
3	 Cf. also Niśvāsamukha 4.72 and the compound <ṣaḍaṅ>genopahā­
reṇa occurring in Niśvāsaguhya 12.8a (Acri 2014b: 15).
4	 See, e.g., Skandapurāṇa 26.37; Niśvāsamukha 1.69ab, 75cd, 
165–167; Niśvāsamūla 1.4–6, and the references to the Śivadharma corpus 
and other sources listed by Kafle 2015: 219–20, fn. 370.
5	 Another relevant relief is  a  sandstone lintel from Sambor Prei 
Kuk (7th century) displaying six ascetics with  jaṭās and  beards, wearing 
­simple dhotis and sacred threads, playing musical instruments, and dancing 
(see Chemburkar, Kapoor 2018).
6	 Epigraphic documents from the latter half of the first millennium 
in  both South and  Southeast Asia mention Pāśupata masters in  connec­
tion with  temple foundations where male and  female dancers and  singers

--- Page 4 ---
4
Andrea Acri
the occurrence of boisterous laughter (aṭṭahāsa) and the imitation of 
the bull’s cry (huḍukkāra) would lead one to think that the injunction 
of PS 1.8 was originally conceived in a different, more antinomian 
context of practice and ideology that could be linked to the ‘theatrical’ 
acts of trembling, snoring, etc., prescribed in PS 3.11–15 (see infra). 
Indeed, acting is an activity that we would not expect to find associ­
ated with consecrated Brahmins, lest their status be lowered to that of 
a śūdra;7 moreover, the Pañcārthabhāṣya ad loc. explains that sing­ing
and dancing have to be performed randomly and not in strict accor­
dance with  the  rules of the  Nāṭyaśāstra and  Gandharva­śāstra 
(Törzsök 2016: 460), as well as simultaneously, unlike in a proper perfor­
mance (ibid.: 461).8 Since these acts (especially aṭṭahāsa and huḍukkāra) 
were employed for the worship of Śiva, although it is not clear whether the Pāśu­
patas themselves were involved in such activities: see, e.g., the 8th-century Lodhiā 
copper plates of Mahāśivagupta Bālārjuna, mentioning the  Pāśupata ācārya 
Pra­mathā­cārya and an endowment for the temple worship with dance (nṛtya) 
and music (vādira) (Rajaguru 1966: 86–87). The 8th-century novel Kuṭṭa­nīmata 
by Dāmo­dara­gupta (vv. 539 and 753) informs us that the Pāśupata ācārya Bhāva­
śuddha built a mansion for the dancer An­aṅga­devī, who was then mockingly 
addressed as ācāryanī by the people.
7	 See Ganser, Cuneo 2012; cf. Ratnaṭīkā 1.7, p. 57, quoted infra, p. 6.
8	 Pañcārthabhāṣya, p. 14, line 1: niyamakāle niyamārthaṃ geya­saha­kṛ­
taṃ nṛttaṃ prayoktavyam / “At the time of the particular ­commandment, dancing 
should be performed along with singing for the sake of the [fulfillment of the] 
particular commandment” (cf. ibid. ad PS 3.12, which unfortunately appears 
to be garbled); and Ratnaṭīkā 1.7, p. 18, line 27: tato gītasahitam eva nṛtyaṃ 
kuryāt / tatrādau gītaṃ parisamāpya paścān nṛtyaṃ samāpayet / “Then 
he  should dance along with  song; at first he  should complete the  singing, 
and  thereafter the  dance”. Törzsök, to  my mind correctly, concludes that 
“unlike in  a  proper performance, the  practitioner here acts as  singer and 
dan­cer at the same time” (Törzsök 2016: 461); however, it is also possible that 
the  author might have wanted to  convey just the  opposite idea, namely 
that the Pāśupata practitioner should perform dancing together with singing 
and not one after the other, that is just like in a performance, where one never 
dances to no music.

--- Page 5 ---
5
Performance as Religious Observance…
are regarded as  improper for orthodox Brahmins during ritual and 
­worship, the point of the sūtra may be that the practitioners, while living 
in a temple (āyatanavāsī, PS 1.7), are required to unorthodoxly execute 
what would be normal worship activities, such as namaskāra and japa, 
along with other improper behaviours.9 However, a ­mimetic intent—
that is, to embody Śiva’s persona by enacting his deeds—may also 
have been conveyed.10 An additional list of antisocial and uncivilized 
behaviours is given in chapter three of the PS, where it is prescribed 
that the practitioner should “act like a demon” (pretavat caret, PS 3.11), 
namely snore, pretend to be limp, make explicit gestures, speak non­
sensical words, etc. These behaviours were  apparently ‘acted out’ 
by the Pāśupata ascetic, “as if he were an actor in the middle of people 
9	 Cf. the  verse of the  Niśvāsaguhya quoted below, fn.  12, where 
the activities of singing, dancing, laughing and bellowing (bruvan?), as well 
as the prescribed Pāśupata attire, are associated with the unmattavrata. With 
time, these antinomian behaviours might have been incorporated into main­
stream practice (even among the laity), and perhaps also regulated—witness 
the alternative reading nāṭyaśāstrasamayānusāreṇa, “according to the rules of 
the Nāṭyaśāstra”, attested in the Nakulīśa-pāśupata-darśana section of such 
a late source as the Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha (Hara 2002: 216).
10	 Commenting on a passage of the Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha describing 
the offerings, Hara argues that “The laugh ­intended, of course, is the laugh 
ascribed to Siva himself. Similarly, the dance […] may have been intended 
as mimesis of Siva’s dance” (Hara 2002: 216, fn. 123). The behaviours men­
tioned in PS 1.8 (as well as those associated with unmatta) are indeed enacted 
by Śiva himself in a passage of the Anuśāsanaparvan of the Mahābhārata 
(13.14.84d04): nandate kupyate cāpi tathā huṃkārayaty api (52) […] hasate 
gāyate caiva nṛtyate sumanoharam (56) vādayaty api vādyāni vicitrāṇi 
gaṇair vṛtaḥ (57) […] unmattamattarūpaṃ ca bhāṣate cāpi susvaraḥ (59) 
atīva hasate raudras trāsayan nayanair janam (60), “At times he rejoices, at 
times he is angry, and at times he utters the sound huṁ […] He laughs, sings, 
and dances beautifully. He plays a variety of musical instruments, surrounded 
by the Gaṇas. […] At times he assumes the appearance of a madman, at times 
of a drunk, while at times he utters sweet words. Endowed with fierceness, 
he laughs loudly, frightening the creatures with his eyes”.

--- Page 6 ---
6
Andrea Acri
standing [around him] like spectators” (raṅgavad avasthiteṣu janeṣu 
madhye naṭavad avasthito, Ratnaṭīkā 1.7, p. 57), with the aim of attract­
ing the disgust and slander of the onlookers. Addressing him as a mad­
man (unmatta)11 instead of a  consecrated Brahmin, common people 
would pass their good karma to him and take his bad karma upon them, 
through the  mechanism of “transfer of karma” (Ingalls 1962: 293). 
Here it is relevant to point out that, in order to describe how to act 
out madness, the Nāṭyaśāstra (7.83ff.) gives a ‘proverbial’ description 
of a Pāśupata ascetic engaged in causeless laughing (hasita) and non­
sensical speech, alternating lying down, sitting, standing up, running,
dancing (nṛtta) and singing (gīta), along with other typically Pāśupata 
practices of wearing used garlands, smearing ashes on the body, etc. 
(Acharya 2013: 103–104). The same acts of dancing, singing, laughing, 
and speaking (randomly), along with smearing with ashes and wear­
ing rags, are associated with the gaṇavrata performed by a madman 
(unmatta, apparently a Pāśupata or Lākula performing the unmattavrata) 
in Niśvāsaguhya 3.32cd–33ab.12
All the  above epitomizes the  fundamentally paradoxical status 
of Pāśupata practitioners, having a Brahmanical pedigree and ascet­
ic status while at the same time being studiously involved in actions 
and behaviours associated with lower castes, madmen, and demons. 
While the  Pāśupatas acted out antinomian behaviours primarily 
in order to provoke an exchange of karma, the sources suggest that 
11	 In PS 4.6, the practitioner is required to remain alone and act like 
a madman in the world or towards people (unmattavad eko vicareta loke). 
12	 Cf. Niśvāsaguhya 3.30–33: nṛtyate gāyate caiva unmatto hasate ­bruvan / 
bhasmāṅgī cīravāsaś ca gaṇavratam idaṃ smṛtam. The context of the ­passage 
is that of Lākula observances, such as the carrying of skull, khaṭvāṅga, the per­
manent ash-smear, taking residence in  a  cremation ground, etc. Compare 
Niśvāsamukha (1.166–167b), stating that the playing of the lute (tantrīvādya), 
­bellowing (huḍukkāra), dancing (nṛtya), performing the  mouth-sound 
(mukhavādya) and boisterously laughing (aṭṭahāsa) confers the status of gaṇa.

--- Page 7 ---
7
Performance as Religious Observance…
they were  also imitating the  wild behaviours of their  iṣṭadevatā, 
Rudra-Śiva—perhaps to facilitate the mental visualization of him.13
Lākulas and Kārukas
The public practice of Pāśupata ascetics, and especially the ­emphasis 
on  staged performance, will become a  characterizing feature of 
post-Pāñcārthika Atimārga groups like the  Lākulas, the  Kārukas, 
and the Kāpālikas. These groups added an extra set of observances 
to  the  pāśupatavrata, including the  carrying of a  skull (kapāla) 
and a skull-topped staff (khaṭvāṅga), and had an ever more dramatic 
aspect insofar that they engaged in acting and role-playing in order 
to  identify themselves with  their  elected deity. This identification 
was  presumably achieved by  mimicking some of his/her  features 
and actions, or by being possessed by the same deity in a trance-like 
state (āveśa), probably induced by frantic dances.
While virtually no textual sources of the Lākulas have reached us, 
scant evidence on their practices is found in secondary accounts interspersed 
13	 A mention of reflection or meditation is found in ­association with gīta 
and the performance of the upahāras in Pāśupata texts: cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya 
ad 1.8 (p. 13, lines 14–16): gītam api gāndharvaśāstrasamayānabhiṣv­
aṅgena yatra bhagavato maheśvarasya sabhāyāṃ gauṇadravyajakarmajāni- 
nāmāni cintyante, “Song is  what is  performed according to  the  rules of 
Gāndharvaśāstra and in which, in public hearing, the names of God, those which 
derive from his qualities, his substances, and his acts, are called to mind” 
(trans. Hara 1966: 182); Ratnaṭī kā ad kārikā 1.7 (p. 19, lines 4–7): dhyāyann 
īś aṃ hasitagīta­nṛtya­huḍuk­kāra­namas­kāra­japyaiḥ ṣad­̣aṅgo­pahāraṃ bhaga­
van mahādeva yuṣmadanujñayā nirvartitavān aham avabhṛthasnānaṃ ca 
kariṣyāmi­̄ty evaṃ ni­vedayet, “Meditating upon the Lord, he should declare thus: 
‘O Lord Mahādeva, with your consent I have performed the acts consisting of 
six parts, [namely] laughter, song, dance, bellowing, inner worship and prayer, 
and [now] I will carry out the purificatory bath’”; Lakulīśapāśupatadarśanam, 
Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha (p. 63, lines 9–10): gītaṃ […] maheśvarasaṃbandhi­
guṇadharmādinimittānāṃ cintanam, “Singing […] is the reflecting upon such 
signs as the qualities, properties, etc., which are connected with Maheśvara”.

--- Page 8 ---
8
Andrea Acri
within the later Mantramārga literature, especially in Śākta- and Bhairava-
tantras. As argued by Törzsök, these sources show “much more aware­
ness of theatre and performing […] than in pretantric pāśupata practice 
and particular effort seems to be made to integrate some aspects of theatre 
into religious practice” (Törzsök 2016: 485). Indeed, the various vratas, 
like the above-mentioned unmatta- and gaṇa-vratas, as well as the devī-/
strī-, kāma-, and vidyā-vratas, all involve an element of performance like 
singing, dancing, acting out and/or masquerading, and laughing.14 These 
observances involved the transgression of mainstream norms pertaining 
to socio-ritual etiquette, hierarchy, gender, and sex. Another eminently 
performative religious observance—where, indeed, a  play is  actually 
enacted—is the mahākrīḍa described in chapter 54 of the Brahmayā­mala 
(ibid.: 482–483). This is an observance infused with the terminology of 
music, dance, and theatre, in which the practitioner, after carrying out anti­
nomian activities associated with Bhairava, such as wandering around at 
night in the cremation ground, eating meat, drinking alcohol, and shouting,
should play on  an  hourglass-shaped drum or  a  kettle drum and  emit 
a jackal’s cry or the sound of a demon. Then he should take up there, at 
the sound [of musical instruments] (śabdāt), the starting position in dance 
(nṛtyārambham),
 
while his self is infused with the [dominant] sentiment.
 
He must undertake the performance of a play (nāṭyam) with yoginīs, which 
is based on the heroic sentiment (vīrabhāva-). (Trans. ibid.: 483) 
The fact that yoginīs are mentioned in the role of actresses would point at 
some sort of ritual context, much of which however still remains obscure, 
or perhaps at a Kāpālika-style staged performance. ­Apparently, Śākta 
sources took over some Pāśupata and Lākula observances and changed 
their original purpose (perhaps towards a ritual or ritualized direction) 
14	 Cf. Jayadrathayāmala 1.47.10cd–15ab (quoted and  translated 
in Törzsök 2016: 475–476), describing how a practitioner should decorate him­
self in various ways, sing, babble and play around a lot (gītālāpavilāsāḍhyo), 
and wander around singing (gāyan), laughing (hasan), reciting texts (paṭhan), 
dancing (nṛttaṃ>nṛtyan), etc. On the  strīvrata, cf. Niśvāsaguhya 3.35cd: 
gāyate nṛtyate jāpī strīrūpī valabhūṣitaḥ. Cf. also Kiss 2015 for references 
to such vratas in the Brahmayāmala, and translations thereupon.

--- Page 9 ---
9
Performance as Religious Observance…
so as to fit the goal of achieving the identification between the practi­
tioner and the deity through antinomian rituals leading to the ­elimination 
of dualities (e.g. pure and impure, male and female, etc.) and social 
norms of ­Brahmanical society.
A little-known subgroup of the  post-Pāñcārthika stream of 
Pāśupatism was  the  Kāruka. From rare references in  the  Śaiva 
Mantramārga sources and those of rival systems we can infer that this 
group was accorded a particularly low status in the Śaiva hierarchy, 
even within the  Atimārga division. Elsewhere (Acri 2011: 78–79) 
I suggested en passant that the Kārukas might have come to be regard­
ed as a category of itinerant Śaiva ascetics focusing on performance 
as their main religious practice. I will elaborate on this below.
The first type of evidence in support of this hypothesis may be 
concealed in their very name: while the prima facie interpretation of 
the  word kāruka would be “maker, doer, artisan” (Monier-Williams 
1899 s.v. kāru, from ­kṛ 1; cf. Böthlingk and Roth 1855–75, s.v.), one could 
also consider a derivation from the other stem kāru, attested in Vedic 
and  Classical Sanskrit literature in  the  meaning of “one who sings 
or praises, a poet” (ibid., from kṛ 2).15 The latter meaning of ‘bard’, 
where the  -ka may be a  mere expletive or  even have the  ­function 
of a  pejorative, would seem to  make more sense in  the  context of 
15	 Besides in  the  Ṛgveda and  Atharvaveda (see Böthlingk, Roth 
1855–75: 238–239), the  word kāru is  also attested in  the  Arthaśāstra, 
where it  occurs in  invariably defamatory passages featuring the  com­
pound kārukuśīlava: cf., e.g., 1.3.8 (śū drasya dvijātiśuśrūṣ ā vārttā kāru­
kuśī lavakarma ca), 3.18.8, “By  that are explained defamation concerning 
the learning of professional story-tellers (vāgjīvana), slander of the profession 
of artisans and actors (kārukuśī lava), and libel of the country of those from 
Prājjūṇ a, Gandhāra and so on” (trans. Kangle 1963). While kāru is gener­
ally understood and  translated as  ‘artisan’, the  latter passage is  ambigu­
ous. Other ­instances where kārus and  kuśīlavas are mentioned alongside 
service-persons are Mānavadharmaśāstra 8.102 (gorakṣakān vāṇijakāṃs 
tathā kārukuśī lavān / preṣyān vārdhuṣikāṃś caiva viprāñ chūdravad ācaret) 
and chapter 35 of the Nāṭyaśāstra, vv. 90 and 105–106.

--- Page 10 ---
10
Andrea Acri
an itinerant Śaiva group than the former. This state of affairs is also 
suggested by the occurrence of the term kāṭhakasiddhāntin besides 
the (mainstream, i.e. Saiddhāntika) Śaivas, Pāśupatas, and Kāpālikas, 
as a gloss to the denominator Māheśvaras in Bhaskara’s (ca. AD 850) 
commentary to Śaṅkara’s Brahmasūtrabhāṣya. The term kāṭhaka­
siddhāntin (and presumably its real-world referent too) corresponds 
to kāruṇikasiddhāntin found in the other commentaries Ratnaprabhā, 
Bhāmatī and  Bhāṣyanyāyanirṇaya, and  both of them  corre­
spond to  the  denominator kālamukha (another Atimārga group) 
found in  Yāmuna’s and  Rāmānuja’s commentaries. As noted 
by  Hara, Bhāskara’s text “suffers from considerable ­difficulties” 
(Hara 2002: 189);  indeed, the link between the Kāṭhaka school of 
the Black Yajur­veda and this Atimārga group is tenuous (Lorenzen 
1991: 182, fn. 48), although passages in Sanskrit literature associ­
ate the sage Kaṭha (the promulgator of the Chāndasa-Śākhā text) 
and the so-called ‘Kaṭhas’ (the students of this body of doctrine) 
with  oral recitation (vyākhyāna, pravacana, uccāraṇa) in  oppo­
sition to  ­written composition.16 A more compelling solution 
could be to  read kāthaka(-siddhāntinaḥ), “those following
the doctrine ­related to kāthakas”, where kāthaka is “­relating, 
reciting […] m. a  narrator, relater, one who recites a  story 
(or who publicly reads and expounds the Purāṇas &c.), one who 
speaks or tells, a professional story-teller...”, “the speaker of a pro­
logue or  monologue, chief actor” (Monier-Williams 1899, s.v.), 
“a  type of storyteller, whose oral renditions of devotional texts 
were accompanied by gesture and dance and whose art eventually 
moved from the temple to the royal court” (Lutgendorf 1991: 124). 
Kathakas were  also considered synonymous with  granthikas or 
“book specialists” (that is, reciters of books: see Varma 1962: 107–108). 
The term kāruṇikasiddhāntin (kāruṇika = compassionate?) is ­
equally problematic, and may be interpreted as either an ex-post
16	 See, e.g., Abhinavagupta ad Nāṭyaśāstra 1.1 (p. 2); commentary 
by Śrī Nandamiśra ad Siddhāntadarpaṇa 21.

--- Page 11 ---
11
Performance as Religious Observance…
attempt to make sense, or be a corruption, of kārukasiddhāntin—
an  ­obvious reference to  the  little-known group of the  Kārukas 
mentioned in rare Śaiva sources.17
In my opinion all the above instances suggest that the commen­
tators misunderstood, or were trying to make sense of, the names of 
groups of the Śaiva Atimārga they were not familiar with. But even 
in the scriptural and post-scriptural sources of the Śaiva Mantramārga, 
the term kāruka was in several instances—namely, passages describ­
ing the subdivisions of the Atimārga—­corrupted and/or changed into 
the more intelligible kāraka, an ‘agent’ or ‘doer’.18 A more uncertain 
instance is a lost verse-­quarter from the Raurava cited in Sadyo­
jyotis’ Paramokṣanirāsakārikā and  in  the  Vṛtti by  Rāmakaṇṭha 
as  viśikhāmalakārakāḥ, “[those] agents [who hold that liberation 
is brought about by the transference] of powers, those agents who 
are devoid of Impurity” (Watson et al. 2013: 222; see also 65–69). 
This could be a  corruption of (or  an  attempt to  make sense of, 
perhaps from a  ­philosophically-oriented perspective) an  original 
viśikhāmalakārukāḥ. If my reading is correct, the compound in its 
original form could have referred to  a  threefold division within 
17	 It is only after this article reached the proofreading stage that 
I  realised I had overlooked a relevant footnote in a recent publication by 
Alexis  Sanderson, where he proposes to emend both kāṭhaka­siddhāntinaś 
and kāruṇikasiddhāntinaś in this passage into kārukasiddhāntinaś ‘followers 
of the Kāruka doctrine’—the spurious readings having been “introduced by 
later Vaidika scholars unfamiliar with this somewhat obscure Śaiva tradition” 
(Sanderson 2015: 164, fn. 20). Sanderson’s independent conclusion lends 
further credibility to the hypothesis that both readings are corrupted. Even 
though his suggestion to emend kāṭhaka- into kāruka- is sound and justifi­
able on paleographic grounds, I still regard kāthaka- as a viable alternative, 
­suggesting as it does that a social reality or textual trope known to Bhāskara 
could have played a role in his exegesis.
18	 Cf. Siddhayogeśvarīmata 1.18 (Brunner et al. 2004, s.v. kāruka), 
Niśvāsaguhya 12.18b and  Niśvāsakārikā (Dīkṣottara) 18.123 (Acri 2014b: 
28, 38),  Lakṣaṇasamuccaya 16.212.

--- Page 12 ---
12
Andrea Acri
the Atimārga, namely “those  without a  topknot” (vi-śikhā), i.e. 
the  Pāśupatas,19 “those  without impurity”, i.e. the  Vaimalas,20 
and the Kārukas. 
One more piece of evidence found within the Śaiva ­tradition in ­support 
of a connection between the Kārukas and performance is the reference 
by the 11th-century Kashmirian Śaiva exegete Kṣemarāja in his commen­
tary ad Sva­cchanda­tantra 11.73 to the Kārukas and Mausulas as infe­
rior to the followers of the gnostic Pramāṇa­śāstras and the Vaimalas 
(vaimala­pramāṇaśāstraniṣṭ ho) on account of the former’s allegiance 
to  the  ­chiefly ritual- and  observance-oriented among the  Pramāṇa­
śāstras (­proktakriyāpradhānavratamātraniṣṭhamausulakārukebhyo). 
These scrip­tures (all of which are lost) are the six Pramāṇas extract­
ed from the  Hṛdayapramāṇa, and  chiefly devoted to  the  six ritual 
acts (ṣaṭkriyāpradhānāni pramāṇāni).21 As suggested by  Bakker, 
these “six ritual acts” or ṣatkriyās could have been subsumed under 
the “six forms of worship” (upahāra) mentioned in Pāśupatasūtra 1.8 
and other sources, including, as we have seen above, singing (gīta), 
dancing (nṛtta), laughing (hasita), etc. (Bakker 2004: 4, fn. 12). This 
indicates that the Kārukas may have considered these acts as the main­
stay of their ascetic practice. It is, perhaps, for this reason that they 
were  regarded as  occupying a  relatively low position in  the  Śaiva 
hierarchy, i.e.  just above the  Pāśupatas and  below the  Vaimalas 
and the followers of the gnostic Pramāṇas, and having their ultimate
19	 On the  identification of the  viśikha/viśikhā with  Pāśupatas, 
see Watson et al. 2013: 66–67; noteworthy is  the  mention in  the  Saṃ­
skāravidhi of the  removal of the  topknot in  Pāśupata initiation 
(see Acharya 2007: 35–36 and 46–47), as well as the testimony of the Old 
Javanese Kuñjarakarṇa about a  group of Śaiva ascetics named viśikhin 
(“Those who lack a topknot”; see Acri 2008: 201, fn. 37). 
20	 The amalakārakas are identified by Rāmakaṇṭ ha as those who regard 
liberation as consisting in what Sadyojyotis calls nirmalatvaṃ ca kevalam, i.e. 
a lack of impurity alone (and not omniscience or omnipotence). 
21	 Cf. Kṣemarāja ad Svacchandatantra 10.1134 (Bakker 2000: 4; 
­Sanderson 2006: 171).

--- Page 13 ---
13
Performance as Religious Observance…
goals within the realm of māyā, below the pure universe (and thus still 
qualifying as bound souls). Even though practice is commonly regarded 
as inferior to gnosis in the Indian tradition, their involvement with singing 
and  ­dancing—and, eventually, stage performance too?—could have been 
another reason behind their ‘bad name’, for the latter activity in particular is 
regarded as impure and relegated to the lower castes. Kārukas were, indeed, 
considered impure and polluting, and contact with them was avoided even 
by other Śaivas.22 
Kāpālikas
The Kāpālikas were antinomian itinerant ascetics worshiping the ter­
rific hypostases of Śiva (e.g. Kapālin, Kapāleśvara/Kapālīśa, Bhairava) 
and/or  the  Goddess (e.g. Cāmuṇḍā, Caṇḍ ā Kapālinī); they likely 
evolved from the  Lākula stream of Atimārga Śaivism. While no 
original Kāpālika sources have survived to us, from the  7th century 
references to Kāpālikas become widespread in the Sanskrit and ver­
nacular literature from all over the Indian Subcontinent and beyond 
(e.g. Java; see below), eventually fading away after the 12th century. 
Their name is derived from the observance of the skull (kapālavrata), 
which they took over from the  Lākulas, adding an  additional set 
of insignia, such as  a  sacred thread made of the  hairs of a  corpse, 
­necklaces, large earrings, bracelets and other ornaments crafted out of 
human bones. 
The Kāpālikas were scornfully depicted in the literature as evil 
sorcerers who often posed as false Brahmans or ascetics; who sang, 
danced, and played in theatrical (comic) performances; who encour­
aged the  practice of drinking alcohol and  engaging in  sexual inter­
course with promiscuous female attendants (dūtīs, kapālinīs, yoginīs); 
and whose attire included ornaments and musical instruments made 
of (allegedly human) bones, as well as human skulls or parts there­
of. As such, they were considered the scum of society, highly impure 
22	 Cf. Kiraṇatantra 35.8, 38.7; Mohacūḍottara fol. 44v; Pūrva­kāmikāgama 
1.111 (listed in Brunner et al. 2004, s.v. kāruka).

--- Page 14 ---
14
Andrea Acri
and to be avoided by mainstream Śaivas. The Kāpālikas aimed at identi­
fying themselves with their elected deity not only by mimicking it, but also 
through possession, i.e. being penetrated by it through the mouth (āveśa); 
this trance-like state may also have been triggered by  frantic dances, 
mudrās, and transgressive behaviours (Törzsök 2011, 2016: 457–461).
The Kāpālikas’ imitative behaviours and  their  engagement in 
­possession open up intriguing connections with the realm of the per­
forming arts as well as folk milieus. The emphasis on dancing, singing, 
drama, buffoonery, etc., may reflect their goal to become the ‘­theatrical’ 
human embodiments of their selected deity; see, for instance, the tex­
tual and iconographical representations of dancing Bhairavas carrying 
mṛḍaṅgas and ḍamarus.23 But we also know of folk/tribal wandering 
practitioners specialised in dramatic performances, sorcery and exor­
cism, and  the  worship of demonic forms of Śiva and  the  Goddess; 
these  could have been linked to  the  Kāpālikas in  the  Indic imagi­
nary. For instance, in the 7th-century South Indian farce Mattavilāsa 
a drunk Kāpālika praises his Kapālinī for having obtained a beautiful 
appearance through the supernatural ability to assume any form at will 
(kāmarūpatā): compare the term kāmarūpitva, “the ability to assume 
any form at will”, which could be interpreted as a technical term denot­
ing one of the eight supernatural qualities of Śiva, an usual attribute 
of demons (rākṣasa) in Sanskrit literature, as well as a descriptor for 
actors. Thus, the compound kāmarūpatā/kāmarūpitva could be con­
nected to  both play-acting (in  a  literal sense) and  to  supernatural 
powers (in a technical sense).24 The Santal tribal group knows of one 
23	 Cf. the Tirthikacāṇḍālikā by the Siddha Acinta, describing ­himself 
as  follows: “the  Kāpālika is  a  glorious dancer; he  will beat the  ḍamaru 
in the sky and on the ground” (Davidson 2002: 218).
24	 The analogy between the actor/dancer (naṭa) and the Self, as well 
as the former and the Lord, is found in non-dualist Śaiva sources to convey 
the identity between the Self and godhead or consciousness, enacting the play 
constituted by  the  phenomenal world (see Törzsök 2016: 462, 468–470). 
It is possible that the concept of kāmarūpitva and its association to drama­
turgy may stem from the same constellation of ideas.

--- Page 15 ---
15
Performance as Religious Observance…
Kamru (also: Kambru, Kamruk, or Kam), who was the first magician 
and teacher of witchcraft (Ojhaism); it seems natural to connect the word 
with Sanskrit kāma and kāmarūpa, whether in its original meaning of
“taking any shape at will, beautiful, pleasing”, or  as  the  name of 
the  predominantly tribal western portion of Assam, i.e. Kāmarūpa 
(Koppers 1940–41: 766). Similarly, a class of Indian mendicant actors 
are called Bahrūpia, from Sanskrit bahū (‘many’) + rūpa (‘form’; 
bāhurūpya = ‘manifoldness’), as  referring to  the  ability to  enact 
and masquerading; at the same time, Bahurūpa is a name for the black, 
fanged Southern face of the  skull-bearing Aghora form of Śiva/­
Bhairava. The Bahrūpia were known for impersonating gods, especial­
ly in their terrible forms (such as the Goddess Kālī) (ibid.). 
The strong association reflected in the sources between Kāpālikas 
and the performing arts suggests that those practitioners could have made 
a living as travelling performers-cum-ritual agents (Samuel 2005: 219); 
furthermore, there might have been a cross-fertilization between San­
skritic and marginal/tribal milieus where folk practitioners/­magicians 
akin to ‘shamans’ also covered the roles of itinerant ­performers—like 
it happened, for instance, over much of Southeast Asia.
Atimārga ascetics-cum-performers in Java
On the basis of evidence gathered from Old Javanese textual ­sources—
most notably the  9th-century Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa kakavin (RK), 
the  early 13th-century Sumanasāntaka, and  the  ca. 15th-­century 
Pārtha­yajña—and 
Central 
Javanese 
temple 
reliefs, 
elsewhere 
(Acri 2011, 2014b) I proposed to  identify some figures of ­itinerant 
ascetics-cum-performers (e.g. the vidus and piruses) as localised coun­
terparts of Indic prototypes, namely low-status, antinomian practitio­
ners belonging to the Atimārga stream of Śaivism. Our knowledge about 
these categories of ascetics could contribute to appreciate the extent of 
the expansion of Śaivism in Southeast Asia, and perhaps illuminate little-
known groups in India itself.25 I will summarize my findings below. 
25	 See, for instance, Acri 2008 on the Vaimalas/Alepakas.

--- Page 16 ---
16
Andrea Acri
A category of itinerant, power-seeking ascetics is scornfully ­portrayed 
in stanzas 6 and 9 of the eighth canto of the Pārthayajña: 
hana viku maṅidan maṅidǝri bhuvana
makuravit agǝluṅ sukǝr aburarutan
tǝhǝr ikana purih niṅ avak apǝniṅan
si hurip ika ya vastu sukǝr aburarutan (6) 
There are ascetics who behave in  a  crazy manner, wandering through 
the world; untidy, hindered by their matted hair, in disorder.
And so it  is  the  natural state of the  body [of one] exerting [himself 
in ­performing austerities]. The Life principle is in fact hindered, in disorder.
hana viku maṅigǝl macarita rinubuṅ
biṣa tivas ika siṅ vvaṅ atika vihikan
vvaṅ atika maṅalǝm ri guṇa nika lǝvih
vvaṅ atika saṅ asuṅ mamiguṇani guṇa (9) 
There are ascetics who dance and recite stories, surrounded [by ­spectators]. 
Everyone should know that they are powerful [and  yet] they come 
to ­nothing. 
Such persons boast of their exceeding magical powers;
Such persons are the ones who render magical powers worthless. 
The first stanza seems to  depict a  Pāśupata or  Lākula wandering 
ascetic performing the unmattavrata—witness the Old Javanese word 
maṅidan, ‘to  behave in  a  crazy manner’, while the  second epito­
mizes a class of itinerant anchorites-cum-performers of the Kāpālika 
or ­Siddha type. Both types were despised in Sanskrit and vernacular 
sources produced in elite milieus on account of their uniting a quest for 
asceticism and supernatural powers (siddhi, guṇa) with transgressive 
behaviours and a career in the performing arts. 
A series of stanzas satirically depicting behaviours that are 
­strongly remindful of those of an Atimārga ascetic is found in the alle­
gorical Sargas 24 and  25 of the  RK. There, various kinds of birds 
are comically equated to  ascetics and  other religious figures. 
Such is the case of the kuvoṅ (black coucal) and the vidu, a kind

--- Page 17 ---
17
Performance as Religious Observance…
of performer who appears to  hold religious functions, and  also 
to carry out the Atimārga observance of lying on ashes. In stanza 
24.112, a bird, having accused the kuvoṅ of being stained, to reside 
in  a  hole26 and  to  “perform like a  vidu” (mamidu-midu), jeers at 
it as follows:
tan pomah tan katṛ ṣṇān laku vidu mavayaṅ kom guṇya saguṇa
Homeless, unattached, while leading the life of a vidu-performer, a ­wayang-player, 
you are a sorcerer, endowed with magical powers!
The word guṇya could mean ‘having manifold supernatural abilities’, 
‘powerful’, or  simply a  ‘sorcerer’—note that among the  Baigals of 
Central India and the Santals of (South-)Eastern India, guṇia means 
“sorcerer” (Koppers 1940–41: 770), and a class of Tantric practitioners 
connected to yoginī-cults referred to as guṇiā is still known in contem­
porary Orissa (cf. Keul 2013: 6). In 24.114 the kuvoṅ invites a she-
kuvoṅ to become a female ascetic (kili) and bring satisfaction to naked 
wandering ascetics (kalavan lagnāmutusana), obviously of his  own 
kind, thereby becoming an object of enjoyment (bhukti) for the devo­
tees (bhakta) in the forest, who have low-ranking wives (kula-kula). 
In stanza 25.22, the she-kuvoṅ is said to have successfully attained 
liberation by  following the  path of the  kuvoṅ (makamārga mārga 
niṅ kuvoṅ), who has renounced  the  world and  performs austerities 
in the hollow of a tree.
In stanza 25.21ab the kuvoṅ is called “vidu-bird” (manuk vidu) 
and associated with storytelling and drama:
tat ujar manuk vidu vidagdha dahat
prakaṭākathak maṅaji nāṭaka ya
One should not say that the vidu-bird is very clever! Making much noise, 
he recites a story, and practices the art of acting.
26	 This could be the hollow in a tree or, allegorically, a cave, in the case 
of the bird’s human alter ego.

--- Page 18 ---
18
Andrea Acri
Zoetmulder’s (Zoetmulder 1982) dictionary s.v. kaṭak (a hapax) gives 
the meaning of “frog?” (on account of a much later Balinese gloss), 
and adds: “is akaṭak perhaps the call of the manuk vidu?”. However, 
given the great variability and uncertainty between the sounds ṭ and th 
in Old Javanese language and their graphic representation in the ­later 
Javanese manuscript tradition, it  may be proposed to  emend kaṭak 
into kathak, a  Middle Indo-Aryan word corresponding to  the  San­
skrit kathaka “to recite; a professional story-teller”, which we have 
encountered supra as possibly referring to the Kārukas. The fact that 
in  the  Old Javanese text the  bird is  said to  be practicing recitation 
and dance—activities that require a good amount of study and exper­
tise: witness the  synonymy between kathakas and  granthikas that 
I mentioned supra—and, at the same time, defined as not “very clever” 
(vidagdha dahat) is  somewhat paradoxical; apparently, the  author 
here is  satirically playing on  the  double meaning of the  word vidu
(‘intelligent’, ‘wise’ in Sanskrit vs. a type of performer in Old Javanese). 
Perhaps significantly, in  the  Nāṭyaśāstra (cf. e.g. 1.48) ­vidagdha 
is  one of the  characteristics of actors, famously in  1.48, along 
with kuśala and other good qualities attributed to Bharata’s disciple; 
further, Nāṭyaśāstra 35.106 makes a  connection between clever­
ness and the ability to play music while giving the semantic analy­
sis of the word kuśīlava ‘actor’, ‘bard’, ‘mime’: “He who can apply 
the principles of instrumental music (ātodya) and is himself an expert 
in playing instruments is called a kuśīlava because of his being clever 
(kuśala) and refined (avadāta) and free from agitation (avyathita)”. 
I may also refer to Abhinavagupta’s gloss of the  term naṭa ‘actor’ 
as meaning ‘foolish’ (mūrkha), implying that the term “already har­
bours some despicable connotations” in  the  Sanskritic tradition 
(Ganser, Cuneo 2012: 97). Although the learned author(s) of the RK 
composed the text before Abhinavagupta flourished, it seems to me 
that they might have been aware of (and played on) the controversial 
and paradoxical status of the actor in the Indic tradition.
Stanzas 3–4 of canto 113 of the  East Javanese kaka­
vin Sumanasāntaka describe some vidus in  the  context of

--- Page 19 ---
19
Performance as Religious Observance…
a comic performance staged during a royal wedding ceremony. In stan­
za 4, the vidus are mentioned along with another category of religious 
functionaries-cum-performers called taṅkil hyaṅs:27
para vidu sәḍәṅ ayvan saṅ taṅkil hyaṅ acarita
paḍa gumuyu kapūhan sakveh niṅ vidu binisa
hana kavatәk ujarnyān guyvāvarṇa macarita
uḍuh uḍuh uḍuh āhāhāhāhāh bisa dahatĕn 
The vidus were  acting together; the  taṅkil hyaṅs were  reciting a  story. 
­Laughing all together and [appearing] highly astonished were the ­vidus, 
skillful. Some of them  felt compelled to  cry out while laughing 
(or: ­jesting), ­narrating, and  reciting: uḍuh uḍuh uḍuh āhāhāhāhāh—
with too much ­power.
What is  striking here is  the  vidus’ triple uttering of the  sounds 
uḍuh uḍuh uḍuh, which may be compared to  the  exclamation 
hud(ḍ)u(k)28 attributed to  the  Pāśupatas by  some Sanskrit sources, 
follow­ed by āhāhāhāhāh, a boisterous laughter reminding of aṭṭ ahāsa 
(aṭṭa ‘high, over-measured’ is identical in meaning to the Old Javanese 
dahatәn in line d). Both acts were performed while narrating (avarṇa) 
and reciting (macarita).
An explicit link between vidus and ascetics is made in an alle­
gorical stanza of the  probably 15th–16th-century text Nītisāra (4.8), 
which is part of a larger passage describing the disruption of the social 
27	 We may compare these  figures, including the  vidus, the  piruses, 
and the bvat hyaṅ, to the various categories of reciters and singers performing 
divine service or entertainers of the ‘bard’ type of the temple-communities 
recorded in Khmer inscriptions (see Pou 1997: 242). 
28	 The reading huḍukāra is  attested in  the  oldest manuscript of 
the  Śivadharmasaṅgraha (Kafle 2015: 205, fn. 271). In the  light of this 
Old Javanese passage, I wonder whether the  other frequently encoun­
tered form, huḍukkāra, could be the  result of the  sandhi huḍuḥ+kāra. 
A type of ḍamaru-like drum called huḍukkā is mentioned in Sanskrit texts, 
such as  the  Abhinavabhāratī, Saṅgītaratnākara, as  well as  the  Prakrit 
Karpūramañjarī (Ganser 2016).

--- Page 20 ---
20
Andrea Acri
and religious order in the Kali-age. Two simultaneous translations of 
it are possible:
saṅ vidv aṅga vanapraveśana samudragati manut i lampah iṅ kali
(1) The naked vidus29 enter the forest and reach the sea (i.e., reach liberation), 
following the course of the rivers.
(2) The naked vidus live as  hermits, while they perform mudrās 
(sa+mudra+gati), in harmony with the fashion of the Kali(-age).
The above may be one of the last occurrences of the word vidu in 
the Old Javanese corpus, from which an element of mockery and social 
­critique is still discernible. The word mudra clearly hides a pun hint­
ing at mudrā, the hand-gestures used in storytelling and, perhaps, also 
the  bodily positions—probably a  heritage of Kāpālika ­practices—
described in  some Śāktatantras to  induce possession and  worship 
the deity (Serbaeva Saraogi 2012).
A striking evidence of the existence in Java of Kāpālikas30 are 
the mysterious canthang balungs, a category of antinomian, low-status 
29	 Aichele (Aichele 1931: 156) envisaged the presence of a double-entendre 
in the line, and interpreted the words vidv aṅga in the light of Modern Javanese 
mārā badan ‘naked’, often attributed to the topeng (the name of the mask-
dancers coming naked at a performance), where the Arabic loanword badan 
‘body’ would be a synonym of the Sanskrit aṅga.
30	 Kāpālika ascetics and Kāpālika-influenced traditions of the Kaula- and 
Bhairavatantras appear to have reached Java by the 9th century. The ­expression 
(saṅ brāhmaṇa) kāpālikabrata “(a  Brahman) adhering to  the  observance 
of the  Kāpālikas” is  attested in  the  ca. 10th-century Udyogaparva, while 
a prob. 8th–10th-century bronze skullcap has been unearthed in Central Java. 
The use of skulls as  drinking-bowls is  mentioned in  the  ca. 16th-century 
text Tantu Paṅgәlaran, which also describes a  grueling ritual performed 
at a  cemetery at midnight by  two devotees of Bhairava (bheravapakṣin) 
with a corpse (Pigeaud 1924: 104–106, 112–113, 121). The depiction of skulls 
and ­cemetery-ground lore is pervasive in the statuary of the East Javanese king­
doms of Siṅhasāri (13th century), to  which period is  ascribed the  impressive 
‘dancing Bhairava’ from Candi Siṅhasāri, bearing many of the Kāpālika ­insignia.

--- Page 21 ---
21
Performance as Religious Observance…
functionaries observed at the court of Surakarta in the late 19th and 
early 20th century, who Brandts Buys not unreasonably described as 
“degenerate Brahmans” (gedegenereerde Brah­manen)  (Brandts Buys 
1933: 259).31 Their name, meaning ‘rattling bones’, could be a ‘surviv­
al’ pointing to their former status of Kāpālikas, who were indeed wear­
ing ornaments made of bones and carrying musical instruments made 
of the same material. The canthang balungs wore strings of flowers 
adorning their naked bodies—being reminiscent of the garland of flow­
ers offered to the gods (nirmālya) worn by Pāśupata ascetics; performed 
dances and buffooneries; emitted dog’s cries (and imitated their mating), 
nonsensical interjections, and vehement laughter; superintended female 
dancers (taledhek) who also doubled as  prostitutes, and  engaged 
in obscene acts on stage during their plays; indulged in drinking liquor 
on stage; held a staff or a pike; used mudrās during their ­performances; 
and  originally possessed seals of office depicting a  phallus inside 
a heart-shaped vulva, which are remindful of the heart-shaped pubic 
plaques worn by ascetics in East Javanese art. Their most un-Islamic 
and  transgressive practices, as  well as  their  role as  superintendents 
of dancing girls-cum-prostitutes, strongly suggest that they represent 
localized Javanese ‘descendants’ of the Kāpālikas, who became mar­
ginally Islamized and integrated within the ritual economy of the Sura­
karta royal palace.32 This transformation could perhaps be explained 
in  the  light of Samuel’s insightful observation that “[m]any siddha
and  kāpālika ascetics made a  living, at least in  the  earlier period, 
as travelling ritual performers, but over time there was a growth of per­
manent centres and of formal patron-client relations between Tantric 
practitioners and the upper social strata” (Samuel 2005: 219).
31	 See Acri 2014a: 32–42 for a detailed discussion of this group. 
32	 The canthang balungs were also involved in a dance called ­edan-edanan 
‘dance of the crazy ones/playing the fool’, performed with female counter­
parts during royal weddings. This seems to correspond to the comic perform­
ance staged by vidus, taṅkil hyaṅs, piruses, and female dancers, described 
in the Sumanas­āntaka (see above and especially Acri 2011: 70–74, 2014a: 23–28).

--- Page 22 ---
22
Andrea Acri
The Balinese mask Sidha Karya
Let us now  turn to  Bali, where some of the  ceremonies and  ­ritual 
­performances that are still practiced today both within and  ­outside 
the  temple context may find their  historical predecessors in those 
described in  Old Javanese epigraphic and  textual sources.33 Among 
such Balinese ceremonies are those involving Sidha Karya, a funda­
mentally paradoxical Balinese mask character that evokes many of 
the antinomian, and more specifically Tantric, features that we have 
seen in some of the performing figures thus far discussed. Sidha Karya 
is a dancer and comic performer who appears at the end of topeng 
­pajegan masked dance-drama; but his function is of paramount impor­
tance in that it ‘makes the ritual (karya) accomplished (sidha)’. His 
appearance is that of “an old man with bright eyes, a smiling, buck­
toothed mouth, and  large bushy white mustache and  eyebrows. 
He enacts an odd comic dance [...]. He is said to be a form of the demon 
Kala, and his act dramatizes the submission of the demon and his trans­
formation into a being of beneficent attitudes toward the congregation” 
(Geertz 1994: 125). According to various Balinese stories—with vari­
ants with  respect to details—reported by  oral informants or written 
chronicles (babad), Sidha Karya was a Brahman travelling from Java 
(in some versions, the son of a Śaiva priestess and a Buddhist priest), 
who arrived at Pura Besakih when an important ritual to avert a disgrace 
that had fallen upon the kingdom was being performed. On account of 
his filthy attire—he was covered in ash—he was not believed to be 
a real Brahman; he was not allowed to cross the temple’s premises, but 
rather ordered to go south (kelod)—the inauspicious point of the com­
pass associated with the ‘demonic’ in both Indic and Javano-Balinese 
cosmology. Sidha Karya cursed the  ritual, which resulted in  even 
direr consequences for the  kingdom and  its inhabitants. Eventually, 
33	 Stephen has rightly drawn attention to  the  important role played 
by  entertainment and  the  performing arts in  the  Balinese ritual cycle, 
and especially in the process of Kāla’s and Durgā’s returning to the original 
(divine/benign) form of Śiva and Umā (Stephen 2002).

--- Page 23 ---
23
Performance as Religious Observance…
his Brahmanical status and kinship relationship with the ruling prince 
is recognized, and Sidha Karya ‘makes the ritual complete’, thereby 
healing the kingdom. 
Sidha Karya’s mask may be white or black; a third eye—Śiva’s 
attribute—is represented in the middle of the forehead. Some masks 
have large teeth and  wide grin, whereas others have fangs. This 
mask shares with demonic characters his bushy eyebrows, mous­
tache, large eyes, and  unruly hair; however, “while iconographi­
cally the character looks a lot like a demon, narratively we know 
that this is a high-class Brahman” (Kodi et al. 2005: 176). Coldi­
ron  describes his dance as follows: “Sidha Karya laughs mania­
cally, as  if privy of some great joke at the  expense of the  audi­
ence. He waves his  white cloth, laughs, executes bird-like hops 
to the right and left, laughs again in the manner of ­Rangda and then 
rushes at the  audience” (Coldiron 2005a: 186). In another study, 
Coldiron drew attention to  the  apparent similarities between this 
figure and the Tantric Siddhas known from Vajrayāna Buddhism, 
observing that, although the Sidha Karya’s dance contains elements 
of entertainment such as  storytelling and  buffoonery, it  is  main­
ly “addressed to  the  gods and  fulfill a  purely ritual function”,
including the appeasement of the bhūta kālas or malignant ghostly
beings through the recitation of mantras and offerings to the cardinal
directions, beginning from the  demonic/inauspicious South 
and  endingwith  Śiva in  the  centre (Coldiron 2005b: 241). His 
Brahmanical pedigree and ascetic attire, oddly mixed with demon­
ic and frightening features, such as the stylized lines on the face 
that seem to  denote laughter, his  ash-smear, and  his  dance, all 
conjure up the prototypical devotee of Rudra/Bhairava, an ancho­
rite of the Pāśupata, Kāpālika, or Siddha type. It is possible that 
Sidha Karya represents a Balinese development of that model, i.e., 
a  quintessentially ‘unorthodox’, impure, and marginal character, 
which eventually became integrated into the local ritual economy 
as a ‘specialized’ temple dancer.

--- Page 24 ---
24
Andrea Acri
Conclusion
In this article I have presented evidence from Sanskrit and  Old 
­Javanese textual sources on Śaiva groups that integrated, to vary­
ing degrees of magnitude, elements of performance into their religious 
practice—from the dancing and singing of the Pāśupatas to the more 
theatrical observances of the Lākulas and Kāpālikas. While most of 
these groups are long extinct, I have argued that some modern Javanese 
and contemporary Balinese performers might represent the historical 
continuations of Atimārga or Tantric practitioners, who ended up ‘spe­
cializing’ as professional singers, dancers, actors, and storytellers.
A characteristic common to  both Indian and  Javanese Śaiva 
anchorites is their somewhat paradoxical role: in spite of their ascetic 
(and, in some cases, Brahmanical) status, and their being grounded 
in the Sanskritic śāstric tradition of the elites, they also held a low 
position in  the  social hierarchy (as  well as  within the  Śaiva fold) 
and were often mocked by the establishment because of their antino­
mian behaviours and, perhaps, their  engagement in  the  performing 
arts. Indeed, the profession of performer (especially actor) was held 
in both India and Java in particularly low esteem, probably because 
it  involved a  vagrant and  promiscuous lifestyle and  other ­polluting 
or  inappropriate behaviours. This state of affairs is  also reflected 
in the ambiguous and paradoxical status of the actor in ancient India: 
while the mythical author of the Nāṭyaśāstra, Bharata, is customar­
ily regarded as  a  ­Brahman and  a  sage (muni), he  is  also attributed 
a decayed status of śūdra; furthermore, both the Sanskrit legal codes 
and the very Nāṭyaśāstra count actors in the ranks of unreliable testi­
monies and other low-status characters (Ganser, Cuneo 2012). A simi­
lar fate could have been suffered by the Kāpālikas and other categories 
of Śaiva itinerant ascetics and ritual practitioners of śūdra status. 
As to the ritual function that the Javanese and Balinese ­practitioners 
(and, perhaps, their Indian forerunners) appear to have come to cover, 
one may note a commonality of themes like the ­reorientation and paci­
fication of evil forces, especially on the occasion of liminal moments

--- Page 25 ---
25
Performance as Religious Observance…
(royal consecrations, weddings, and  key calendrical ­festivals). This 
association could have been dictated by the fact that the performers 
themselves lived at the margins of society and were connected with 
impurity and the ‘Demonic’. More comparative research is required 
in  order to  unravel the  possible common tantric roots of related 
­categories of ritual performers in South and Southeast Asia.34
References
Primary Sources
Anusasanaparvan, Electronic text (C) Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti­
tute, Pune, India. 1999. E-texts entered by Muneo Tokunaga et al., revised 
by  John Smith, Cambridge et al. [http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/
gretil/1_sanskr/2_epic/mbh/mbh_13_u.htm].
Arthaśāstra of Kauṭilya: A Critical Edition With a Glossary. R. P. Kangle 
(ed.). 1960. Bombay: University of Bombay Studies. 
Brahmasūtrabhāṣya of Bhāskara. Vindhyeśvarīprasāda Dvivedin (ed.). 
1903–1915. Benares: Chowkhamba [Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 
70, 185, 209].
Gaṇakārikā of Bhāsarvajña with  the  Commentary Ratnaṭīkā. C. D. Dalal 
(ed.). 1920. Baroda: Gaekwad’s Oriental Series. 
Kuṭṭ anīmatam, Dāmodaraguptaviracitam = The Bawd‘s Counsel. C. Dezső 
and D. Goodall (ed. and transl.). 2012. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 
Mānava­dharmaśāstra = Manu’s Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Trans­
lation of the Mānava­dharmaśāstra. P. Olivelle (ed. and transl.). 2005. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharatamuṇi with the Commentary Abhinavabhāratī by Abhinava­
guptā­cārya. M. Ramakrishna Kavi (ed.). 1954–1964. ­Baroda: Oriental 
Institute [Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 36, 68, 124, 145].
34	 Interesting in this respect are the studies by Emigh (Emigh 1996, cf. in 
particular p. 96) and Coldiron (Coldiron 2005a, Coldiron 2005b); cf. Acri 2014a.

--- Page 26 ---
26
Andrea Acri
Niśvāsaguhya cf. Nisvāsatattvasaṃhitā
Niśvāsamukha cf. Kafle 2015.
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā
(1) Palm-leaf MS, early Nepalese “Licchavi” script, NAK 1-227, NGMPP 
Reel No. A 41/14; 114 leaves. 
(2)   e-text (Roman and Devanāgarī) prepared by Dominic Goodall, with the con­
tribution of Diwakar Acharya, Peter Bisschop and ­Nirajan Kafle, from 
MS NAK 1-227, supplemented with readings from its two Devanāgarī 
apographs, MS 5-2401, NGMPP Reel No. A 159/18 and  Sanskrit MS 
i.33 of the  Wellcome Institute for the  History of ­Medicine, London. 
[Includes the  Niśvāsamukha, Niśvāsamūla, Niśvāsottara, Niśvāsanaya 
and Niśvāsaguhya]. 
(3) The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra, ­Volume 1. 
A Critical Edition of the  Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra and Nayasūtra, ed. 
by  Dominic Goodall in  collaboration with  Alexis ­Sanderson and 
­Harunaga Isaacson. With contributions of Nirajan Kafle,  Diwakar 
­Acharya and  others. 2015. Pondicherry: EFEO / IFP / Asien-Afrika-­
Institut, Universität Hamburg.
Pañcārthabhāṣya cf. Pāśupatasūtra.
Paramokṣanirāsakārikā cf. Watson et al. 2013.
Pārthayajña = Zoetmulder, P. J. 2011* (unpublished manuscript). Pārthayajña, 
Old Javanese Text (excerpts). In: T. Hunter and  S. Supomo (eds.). 
Sěkar Inikět, a Reader in Old Javanese Kakawin Literature. Part XIV: 
Pārthayajña.
Pasupata Sutras with Pancharthabhashya of Kaundinya. R. Ananthakrishna 
Sastri (ed.). 1940. Trivandrum: The Oriental Manuscripts Library of 
the University of Travancore.
Pratiṣṭhālakṣaṇasārasamuccaya. Dāmodaraśarman and  Bābukṛṣṇaśarman 
(eds.). Vikrama 2023 and  2025 [= AD 1966 and  1968]. Kathmandu: 
Rāṣṭriyābhilekhālaya. 
Ratnaṭīkā cf. Gaṇakārikā
Siddhāntadarpaṇa = The Mirror of Philosophical Conclusions by Baladeva 
Vidyabhūṣaṇa with the Commentary of Nanda Miśra. D. Martins (ed.). 
2013. Faridabad: Jiva Institute.

--- Page 27 ---
27
Performance as Religious Observance…
Svacchandatantram with  Commentary Uddyota by  Kṣemarājācārya. V.  V. 
­Dvivedi (ed.). 1985. Delhi: Parimal. 
Tantu Paṅgәlaran cf. Pigeaud 1924.
Secondary Sources
Acharya, D. 2007. The Saṃskāravidhi: A Manual on the Transformatory Rite 
of the Lakulīśa-Pāśupatas. In: D. Goodall and A. Padoux (eds.). Mélanges 
tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of 
Hélène Brunner. Pondicherry: IFI/EFEO: 27–48. 
 —. 2013. How to  Behave Like a  Bull? New Insight into the  Origin and 
Religious Practice of Pāśupatas. In: Indo-Iranian Journal, 56(2): 
101–131, [online:] http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/15728536-0000001.
Acri, A. 2008. The Vaimala Sect of the Pāśupatas. New Data from Old Javanese 
Sources. In: Tantric Studies, 1: 193–208.
—. 2011. More on Birds, Ascetics and  Kings in  Central Java. Kakawin 
Rāmāyaṇa, 24.111–115 and  25.19–22. In: A. Acri et al. (eds.). From 
Laṅkā Eastwards. Leiden: KITLV Press: 53–91.
—. 2014a. Birds, Bards, Buffoons, and  Brahmans: (Re-)Tracing the  Indic 
­Origins of Some Ancient and  Modern Javano-Balinese Performing 
­Characters. In: Archipel, 88: 13–70.
—. 2014b. The Śaiva Atimārga in  the  Light of Niśvāsaguhya 12.1–22ab. 
In: Cracow Indological Studies, 16: 7–49 , [online:] http://dx.doi.org/10.12797/
CIS.16.2014.16.03.
Aichele, W. 1931. Oudjavaansche beroepsnamen. In: Djåwå, 11: 147–158.
Bakker, H. 2000. Somaśarman, Somavaṃś a and Somasiddhānta: A Pāśu­
pata Tradition in Seventh-century Dakṣiṇa Kosala. In: R. ­Tsuchida 
and  A. Wezler (eds.). Hara­nanda­lahari. Volume in  Honour of 
­Professor Minoru Hara on  His  Seventieth Birthday. Reinbeck: 
Dr. Inge Wezler Verlag für Orientalistische Fachpublikationen: 1–20. 
Böhtlingk, O. and R. Roth. 1855–1875. Sanskrit-Wörterbuch. 7 vols. St. Petersburg. 
Brandts Buys, J. S. 1933. Uit de pers. De tjaṇṭang baloeng’s.—Javaansche 
en ­Balische kleppers.—Beḍåjå ketawang.—Édan-édanan. In: Djåwå, 13: 
258–262.

--- Page 28 ---
28
Andrea Acri
Brunner, H. et al. (eds.). 2004. Tāntrikābhidhānakośa II. Dictionnaire des 
termes techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique. Wien: Verlag der 
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Chemburkar, S. and S. Kapoor. 2018. Pāśupata Sect in Ancient ­Cambodia 
and  Champa. In: V. V. Thang and P. D. Sharrock (eds.). Vibrancy 
in  Stone:  Masterpieces of the  Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham ­Sculpture. 
Bangkok: River Books: 45–56.
Coldiron, M. 2005a. Trance and Transformation of the Actor in Japanese Noh 
and  Balinese Masked Dance-Drama. Lewiston–Queenston–Lampeter: 
The Edwin Mellew Press.
—. 2005b. Lions, Witches, and  Happy Old Men: Some Parallels between 
­Balinese and  Japanese Ritual Masks. In: Asian Theatre Journal, 22(2): 
227–248, [online:] http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/atj.2005.0021.
Davidson, R. M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism. A Social History of the ­Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
Emigh, J. 1996. Masked Performance. The Play of Self and Other in Ritual 
and Theatre. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Ganser, E. 2016. When Dramatic Performance Domesticated Tantric Rit­
ual: Insights on Mimicry, Parody and Oblivion of Transgressive Prac­
tices from Medieval Dramaturgical Sources. Draft paper (unpublished) 
presented at the  workshop “Transgression and  Encounters with 
the Terrible in ­Buddhist and Śaiva Tantras”, University of Zurich, 19–20 
February 2016. 
Ganser, E. and Cuneo, D. 2012. The Actor’s Social Status and Agency: Fame 
or Misery? In: Cracow Indological Studies, 14: 87–131. 
Geertz, H. 1994. Images of Power; Balinese Paintings Made for Gregory 
Bateson and Margaret Mead. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Hara, M. 1966. Materials for the Study of Paśupata Śaivism. Ph. D. disserta­
tion, University of Harvard.
—. 2002. Pāśupata Studies. Edited by  J. Takashima. Vienna: Sammlung 
de Nobili, Institut für Südasien-, Tibet- und Buddhismuskunde. 
Ingalls, D.  H.  H. 1962. Cynics and  Pāśupatas: The Seeking of Dishonor. 
In: Harvard Teological Review, 55(4): 281–298, [online:] http://dx.doi.
org/10.1017/S001781600000794X.

--- Page 29 ---
29
Performance as Religious Observance…
Kafle, N. 2015. The Niśvāsamukha, the Introductory Book of the Niśvāsa­
tattva­saṃhitā Critical Edition, with  an  Introduction and  Annotated 
Translation Appended by Śivadharmasaṅgraha 5–9. Ph. D. dissertation, 
Leiden ­University.
Kangle, R. P. 1963. The Kauṭilya Arthaśāstra. An English Translation with 
Critical and Explanatory Notes. Bombay: University of Bombay Studies. 
Keul, I. 2013. Introduction: Tracing Yoginīs: Religious Polysemy in ­Cultural 
Contexts. In: I. Keul (ed.). ‘Yoginī’ in  South Asia: Interdisciplinary 
Approaches. London: Routledge: 1–18.
Kiss, C. 2015. The Brahmayāmalatantra or Picumata. Volume II. The ­Religious 
Observances and  Sexual Rituals of the  Tantric ­Practitioner: Chapters 
3, 21, and 45. Pondicherry–Hamburg: Institut Français de ­Pondichéry / 
Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient / Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universität 
­Hamburg.
Kodi, K. et al. 2005. Topeng Sidha Karya: A Balinese Mask Dance. In: 
Asian Theatre Journal, 22(2): 171–198, http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/atj.­
2005.0030.
Koppers, W. 1940–1941. Probleme der indischen Religionsgeschichte. 
In: Anthro­pos, 35–36(4–6): 761–814.
Lorenzen, D. N. 1991. The Kāpālikas and Kālāmukhas. Two Lost Śaivite 
Sects. 2nd, revised edition. New Delhi: Thomson.
Lutgendorf, P. 1991. The Life of a Text: Performing the Ramcaritmanas of 
Tulsidas. Berkeley–Los Angeles–Oxford: University of California Press.
Monier-Williams, M. 1899. Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pigeaud, Th. 1924. De Tantu Panggĕlaran: Uitgegeven, vertaald en ­toegelicht. 
Ph. D. dissertation, Leiden University.
Rajaguru, S.  S. 1966. Inscriptions of Orissa, Vol. 4. Bhubaneswar: Orissa 
State Museum.
Samuel, G. 2005. Tantric Revisionings: New Understandings of Tibetan 
Buddhism and  Indian Religion. Aldershot–Burlington, VT: Ashgate 
­Publishing.
Sanderson, A. 2006. The Lākulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate 
between Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism and āgamic Śaivism. In: Indian Philo­
sophical Annual, 24 [2003–2005]: 143–217.

--- Page 30 ---
30
Andrea Acri
—. 2015. Tolerance, Exclusivity, Inclusivity, and Persecution in Indian Reli­
gion during the Early Mediaeval Period. In:  J. Makinson (ed.). Honoris 
Causa: Essays in Honour of Aveek Sarkar.  London: Allen Lane: 155–224.
Serbaeva Saraogi, O. 2012. Mudrās. In: K. A. Jacobsen et al. (eds.). Brill’s 
Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 5. Leiden–Boston: Brill, 91–99, http://
dx.doi.org/10.5167/uzh-86419.
Stephen, M. 2002. Returning to Original Form; A Central Dynamic in ­Balinese 
Ritual. In: Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 158(1): 61–94.
Törzsök, J. 2011. Kāpālikas. In: K. A. Jacobsen et al. (eds.). Brill’s Encyclo­
pedia of Hinduism, vol. 3. Leiden: Brill: 355–361.
—. 2016. Theatre, Acting and  the  Image of the Actor in ­Abhinavagupta’s 
­Tantric Sources. In: E. Franco and I. Ratié (eds.). Around ­Abhinava­gupta: 
Aspects of the  Intellectual History of Kashmir from the  Ninth to 
the ­Eleventh Century. Berlin: LIT Verlag: 451–493.
Varma, K.  M. 1962. The Art Medium of Śaubhikas and  Its Nature. In: 
­Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques, 15(3/4): 95–109, [online:] http://
doi.org/10.5169/seals-145864.
Watson, A. et al. 2013. An Enquiry into the  Nature of Liberation; Bhaṭṭa 
Rāmakaṇṭ ha’s Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvṛtti, a  Commentary on Sadyo­
jyotiḥ’s Refutation of Twenty Conceptions of the Liberated State (mokṣa), 
for the First Time Critically Edited, Translated into English and Anno­
tated. Pondicherry: IFP-EFEO. 
White, D. G. 2005. Review of Ronald M. Davidson. Indian Esoteric Buddhism. A 
Social History of the Tantric Movement. In: Journal of the International Asso­
ciation of Tibetan, 1 (on-line: http://www.thlib.org/static/reprints/jiats/01/
pdfs/whiteJIATS_01_2005.pdf).
Zoetmulder, P. J. 1982. Old Javanese-English Dictionary. With the collabo­
ration of S.O.Robson. Two vols. The Hague: Nijhoff.