# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2020-crosby-esoteric-theravada-forgotten-tradition.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 06:27:39
# Total Pages: 294
# File Size: 4.81 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 1265.6 chars/page in sample)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 2 ---
ADDITIONAL PRAISE FOR ESOTERIC THERAVADA
“Crosby’s acribic detective work has uncovered the principles of a hitherto
almost forgotten meditation tradition that was called ‘the old practices’
(borān kammaṭṭhāna). The principles of borān kammaṭṭhāna are hidden in
texts abounding with metaphors and substitutions. Crosby unravels and
explains these texts by entering thought modes of preindustrial times,
mapping correspondences between parts of the body and mystical ideas, and
using letter, sound, and number symbolism. By showing us ‘the old
practices,’ Crosby lays to rest the myth of a pure authentic original
Theravada tradition, a myth that too long obscured the diversity of the past.”
—Barend Jan Terwiel, Emeritus Professor of Thai and Lao Languages and
Literatures, Hamburg University
“Kate Crosby’s Esoteric Theravada is a fascinating and wide-ranging
treatment of traditional borān kammaṭṭhāna style meditation in Theravada
Buddhism. Readable and accessible to anyone interested in meditation and
an absolute goldmine for historians of Buddhism, this remarkable study of a
meditation tradition, its texts, technologies, and the history of its decline
gives us insight into the profound thought worlds of Buddhists who were on
the ‘losing’ side of the modernist reforms of Buddhism in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. Crosby’s rare combination of painstaking historical
research, linguistic prowess, and engrossing ethnographic interviews in
combination with her own experience as a practitioner of borān meditation
deftly opens up an important strand of the Theravada tradition that has too
often been lost from view.”
—Anne Hansen, Professor of Southeast Asian History & Religious Studies,
University of Wisconsin–Madison

--- PAGE 3 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 1 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 4 ---
Shambhala Publications, Inc.
4720 Walnut Street
Boulder, Colorado 80301
www.shambhala.com
© 2020 by Kate Crosby
Some material in this book has been previously published or adapted, including substantial
parts of chapters 4 and 5, from Traditional Theravada Meditation and Its Modern-Era
Suppression (Buddha-dharma Centre of Hong Kong, 2013).
Cover art: bpk Bildagentur / Museum für Asiatische Kunst, Staatliche
Museen, Berlin, Germany / Art Resource, NY
Cover design: Claudine Mansour Design
Interior design: Gopa & Ted2, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Names: Crosby, Kate (Religion scholar), author.
Title: Esoteric Theravada: the story of the forgotten meditation tradition of Southeast Asia
/ Kate Crosby.
Description: First edition. | Boulder, Colorado: Shambhala Publications, Inc., [2020] |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2020011074 | ISBN 9781611807943 (trade paperback)
eISBN 9780834843073
Subjects: LCSH: Borān kammaṭṭhāna. | Theravāda Buddhism—Southeast Asia—History.
Classiﬁcation: LCC BQ5630.B67 C76 2020 | DDC 294.3/910959—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020011074
a_prh_5.6.0_c0_r0

--- PAGE 5 ---
In grateful and aﬀectionate memory of
John Crosby (1935–2016)
Lance Cousins (1942–2015)
Surana Neil Burns (1965–2017)
Steven Collins (1951–2018)
Yey Oun Sophy (c. 1934–2019)

--- PAGE 6 ---
CONTENTS
 
Acknowledgments
Transliteration
Introduction
1. The Colonial Gaze: The Invisibility of Pre-Modern Theravada Meditation
2. Abhidhamma and Practice: The Path in Theravada Meditation Systems
3. Documenting the Esoteric: The Production and Survival of Evidence for
Borān Kammaṭṭhāna Meditation
4. Technologies of Transformation: Grammar, Mathematics, and the
Signiﬁcance of Substitution
5. Transformation of the Body: Meditation, Medicine, and Chemistry
6. From Center to Periphery: The Changing Place of Borān Kammaṭṭhāna
under Thai Inﬂuence
7. Meditation in Modern Revivals
Conclusion
Notes
Bibliography
Index
About the Author
E-mail Sign-Up

--- PAGE 7 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I oﬀer my sincere thanks to Richard Gombrich, who, back in the early 1990s,
ﬁrst drew my attention to the meditation text, the Amatākaravaṇṇanā; to the
late Heinz Bechert, who wrote the brief entry that had caught Richard’s
attention and encouraged me to undertake this research; and to Andrew
Skilton and the late Lance Cousins, who both alerted me to the work of
François Bizot. I was fortunate that in Lance’s ﬁnal years he made time to
discuss meditation with me, with a refreshing open-mindedness, a serious
consideration of practice, and an inspiring facility for detailed engagement in
Abhidhamma. It was only after his death that I came to understand the
signiﬁcance of the practice element in Lance’s approach. This was thanks to
Grevel Lindop, Keith Munnings, and others of the Samatha Trust.
I would like to thank practitioners of meditation in Thailand and
Cambodia for their assistance and support. While I name speciﬁc sources in
the body of the text, I would like to highlight here the personal contributions
of Ven. Veera Virandharo, former Director of the Dhammakaya International
Society of the United Kingdom, and Ven. Veera Thanaveero of Wat
Ratchasittharam, Thonburi. Of the many who have helped me in Cambodia, I
would like to highlight the help of the late Achar Te Tong Yi, my teacher
Ven. Neang Sam Ol, the late Yey Oun Sophy, and Yey Srean. I thank Ven.
Uch Yoeurn for the repeated loan of his former kuṭi, and Elizabeth Guthrie,
John Marston, and the late Ian Harris for their kindness and expertise. I
would also like to thank my long-time friends and occasional assistants,
Long Sarou and Chea Bunnary.
Deserving of special mention are those who worked with me in Thailand
and London on materials related to this tradition and shared my enthusiasm
for putting together the puzzle: Phibul Choompolpaisal, Andrew Skilton, and
Amal Gunasena. For encouragement on the subject over the years, I would
like to thank Phyllis Granoﬀ, Gregory Schopen, and Paul Dundas. For the
past decade, I have beneﬁted from membership of the Theravada
Civilizations Project established by Juliane Schober and the late Steven
Collins, and from Steve’s galvanizing comments and breathtaking
enthusiasm. For their important work on the subject, as well as their kindness
in sending me their writings, I thank François Bizot, Olivier de Bernon,

--- PAGE 8 ---
Phibul Choompolpaisal, Oskar von Hinüber, François Lagirarde, Mano
(erstwhile) Mettanando Laohavanich, Andrew Skilton, Barend (Baas)
Terwiel, and Kitchai Urkasame.
For help in access to resources and references, I thank Mike Charney,
Romola Dane, Alastair Gornall, Jotika Khur-Yearn, Atsuko Naono, Liz
Harris, and Pyi Phyo Kyaw, whom I also thank for her expertise in
Abhidhamma and important help of various kinds. For their practical
support, I thank Isara Treesahakiat, Kampol Treesahakiat, and Patcharin
Yimpatna.
In helping me to develop the subject and my understanding over the past
decade, I should additionally like thank the co-organizers, contributors, and
audiences at conferences on variety in Theravada meditation and on
Abhidhamma, at King’s College London in October 2014 and June 2015, at
the École française d’Extrême-Orient in Siem Reap in July 2016, and at Shan
State Buddhist University near Taunggyi in November 2019. The ﬁrst three
of these conferences were generously funded by Dhammakaya International
Society of the United Kingdom and the Ji Chanqun Buddhist Studies funding
of King’s College London. I am also grateful to David Germano, colleagues
and students at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, and Kurtis
Schaeﬀer and Andrew Quintman, who organized the thought-provoking
2017 IABS panel on Literatures of Contemplation, as well as students at
King’s and elsewhere, who all pushed me to think in diﬀerent ways.
For both the path and the fruit, I would like to thank Nikko Odiseos,
Breanna Locke, Katherine Ulrich, Matt Zepelin, and their colleagues at
Shambhala. I also thank the Hong Kong Centre for Buddhist Studies for
allowing me to reuse material from my now out-of-print work, Traditional
Theravāda Meditation and Its Modern-Era Suppression, that they published
in 2013.
The most recent period of research leading to this book has also been a
period of farewells: to my father, John Crosby; my senior colleagues and
mentors Steven Collins and Lance Cousins; Achar Te Tong Yi, who after the
Pol Pot period resuscitated the lineage in which I practice in Cambodia; my
guide Yey Oun Sophy and my dearest friend, Surana Neil Burns; deep in
history, profound in reﬂection, and inspiring in the telling, all kind and
generous teachers. My ﬁnal expression of thanks is to my partner, Andrew
Nash.
—Kate Crosby Hastings, a little adrift oﬀ the coast of France
January 2020

--- PAGE 9 ---
TRANSLITERATION
For Pali and Sanskrit, I employ the standard international conventions
stemming from International Congress of Orientalists at Geneva in 1894.
Anglicized Indic terms are given in their anglicized form, unless being used
in a technical sense or in quotation. For Thai, I use the Royal Thai General
System of Transcription, except again with words that have been anglicized,
such as Wat “monastic complex/temple” (Pali vatthu), or accepted
transliterations that circulate within the tradition under discussion. Where
there are multiple transcriptions and names in circulation, as there are for a
number of Thai monks, I have tried to provide them all at the ﬁrst main point
of discussion of the person in question. For Cambodian names and Thai and
Cambodian temple names, I have either employed an established
romanization or given my own or my informant’s phonetic transcription. For
Sinhala, unless a standard romanization for a given name exists, I have used
the UN system adapted from D. N. Sharma, with the exception that I do not
mark short vowels with a short marker, thus short and long o and e are
undiﬀerentiated here. For countries, I have mostly used their modern names,
such as “Sri Lanka,” or both the modern name and the name at the time of
the event under discussion where appropriate, such as “Siam/Thailand,”
although I have mainly used “Burma,” rather than “Myanmar,” since the
name continued to be used throughout the period under discussion.

--- PAGE 10 ---
INTRODUCTION
Today we are surrounded by a rich profusion of meditation teachings from
the Theravada world as well as the array of secularized Mindfulness
practices that they have inspired. The early Buddhist texts that teach
meditation are also familiar to many, widely available in translation, and
have been for over a century. This situation might lead us to assume that
these present-day practices represent unbroken, uncontested lineages of
meditation teaching going back to the Buddha himself. Those more familiar
with the history of how Theravada Buddhists had to ﬁght for the survival of
their religion, against the devastation and upheaval of the European colonial
period, know that many of these modern oﬀerings were stirred into life by
that ﬁght. It has been said that there was little or no meditation at all (or
perhaps only isolated and fragmentary forest traditions) in Theravada
countries before its well-documented reconstruction as part of that revival.
There did exist, however, an extensive, older tradition of meditation. It was
represented across the Theravada world at court and among the Sangha
(monastic) hierarchy as much as in rural contexts. Reﬂecting its anteriority to
the meditations of the revival period, I shall here refer to that system of
meditation as borān kammaṭṭhāna, “the old meditation.” This book is about
its history, its distinctive practices, the evidence we have for it, how it sat
within its broader cultural context, and why it disappeared.
This older tradition was marginalized and suppressed in the course of the
reforms and revivals of Buddhism from the nineteenth century onward
because of characteristics no longer seen as ﬁtting in the new world order:
sequential, body-based practices that internalize meditative experiences to
create an enlightened being within, which utilize potent language and are
transmitted in an esoteric teacher-pupil relationship. As such they reminded
some modern observers of tantra, others of magical lore, and were dismissed
as corruptions or as inﬂuences from beyond Theravada.
Hidden beneath those characteristics, however, is a rigorous framework of
Abhidhamma, the orthodox Theravada teaching of how causality and
transformation happen. This framework is not immediately visible to the
casual observer or even the beginner practitioner. Moreover, many of the
somatic characteristics that at ﬁrst seem strange in fact point to the

--- PAGE 11 ---
participation of meditators in scientiﬁc techniques unrecognized and
unappreciated by Western observers and Buddhist modernizers. This book
attempts to present a holistic view of the nature of this meditation system. I
am particularly interested in its understanding of how change happens and
how it relates to other technologies of transformation.
THE CHALLENGES OF THIS BOOK
My task is complicated by the intersection of several factors:
1. Although the beginner levels of some modernized versions are
widely accessible, borān kammaṭṭhāna has for most of its history
been an esoteric tradition, not disseminated publicly but through
initiation into closed teacher-pupil lineages. In this respect, borān
kammaṭṭhāna presents similar ethical, access, and disclosure issues
as does the scholarly exposition of Vajrayana and other esoteric
tantric traditions within Mahayana Buddhism.
2. It is a meditation system, and meditation by its nature is a somewhat
intractable subject of academic discourse.
3. Once widespread, the practice of this meditation has collapsed to the
point of extinction. This collapse has occurred under a diverse range
of factors including the impact of colonialism, modernism, reform,
technological innovation, and geo-politics.
4. The evidence for the existence and former importance of borān
kammaṭṭhāna 
is 
scanty, 
sometimes 
hidden, 
sometimes
misunderstood, and sometimes discarded.
5. The meditation system is complex, employing a range of methods to
induce transformation in the individual. Some of these methods are
usually associated with other ﬁelds, especially generative grammar,
ayurvedic obstetrics, and alchemy. These features of the practice take
me into the technicalities of areas no longer seen as related either to
Buddhism or spiritual transformation.
These factors mean that I am attempting to introduce a method of
meditation that does not ﬁt our preconceptions of what Theravada meditation
is, particularly in its inclusion of mechanisms aimed at somatic
transformation. To explain these unfamiliar aspects, I must delve into the
technicalities of the practice itself, of Abhidhamma, and of pre-modern
sciences. I must also trace the sometimes complex history of modern
Theravada to explain how these practices were lost. Specialists in some areas
may feel that I ride roughshod over subjects that deserve fuller treatment.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Meanwhile, non-specialist readers may, at times, feel trampled by technical
details. I have attempted to alleviate this second issue by providing
introductions and conclusions to each chapter. These summarize key points,
highlight the place of the chapter within the ﬂow of the book, its contribution
to our understanding of the workings and history of borān kammaṭṭhāna, or
how it related to the scientiﬁc and political landscapes within which it thrived
and disappeared.
Despite these challenges, the evidence for borān kammaṭṭhāna, once we
know what we are looking for, is far more widespread, accessible, and
unproblematic to deal with than other esoteric forms of Theravada
meditation, such as, for example, the weikza meditation in Burma
(Myanmar). For although the core practices of borān kammaṭṭhāna were
esoteric, its existence was visible, sponsored as it was at the highest levels of
court society as well as practiced at key points in the Buddhist and harvest
calendar among the rural population. Moreover, the more practical aspects of
it, such as its use in protection, are still visible today in what in the modern
period have come to be labeled as the magical or apotropaic practices of
Theravada Buddhists.
Drawing on texts, earlier studies, and practitioners’ explanations, I
presume to discuss traditional esoteric Theravada meditation in such a public
forum under the active encouragement of practitioners who are concerned for
its preservation. However, the understanding I present of it is my own, as are
the ﬂaws in this presentation. While I have been taught by teachers in several
branches of this tradition, my experience as a practitioner is very limited.
WHAT’S NEW IN THIS BOOK?
Almost a decade ago, I wrote a book on the disappearance of this meditation
practice, primarily by looking at global developments and the impact of
European knowledge systems on Theravada Buddhism.1 Since then, both the
ﬁeld and my knowledge have developed. My colleagues and I have held
several conferences to explore in and around the subject. New authors,
whose work I shall reference in the following pages, have made discoveries
and published important contributions, in part responding to that book. This
has allowed a broader as well as a more nuanced picture to emerge. Far more
of the material that practitioners left behind, in manuscripts and art, or
through publications of the early to mid-twentieth century, is now visible.
The response to this form of meditation by observers of the colonial period
has been further explored. My predictions about the picture that would
emerge as Thailand documented and made its manuscript collections more

--- PAGE 13 ---
accessible have been not only conﬁrmed but superseded. I have now
understood why Abhidhamma is such a strong feature of the practice,
underlying the process of transformation enacted. This conﬁrms the
fundamental role of Abhidhamma in the development of this meditation
system, a speculation I had only mooted then against the backdrop of
alternative theories. I have been able to participate in practice lineages,
which I had back then only just encountered, as well as meet many more
practitioners. This book reﬂects those developments. Here the global and
European history that formed the structure of the previous work has been left
behind, as have other theories about its origins, only touched on where
necessary. We follow instead the practice and its foundations in
Abhidhamma, the varieties of its manifestations, its history, dating, and
disappearance. We can provide a clearer and more detailed account of the
practice and have established a timeline. There is overlap with my previous
book, as I have expanded upon the evidence known then. This particularly
applies in the explanation of the parallel technologies of transformation,
namely generative grammar, the harnessing of potent language, obstetrics,
and chemistry, updated in chapters 4 and 5. Some historical aspects have also
been reused but ﬁlled out. Meanwhile, in a separate publication, several
authors, including me, have written about the various branches and aspects of
the practice and the evidence available for them in more detail than space
here allows.2
THE STRUCTURE OF THIS BOOK
In chapter 1, I look at attitudes to Theravada Buddhism and its meditation
during the colonial period, in order to understand why borān kammaṭṭhāna
was so invisible, even though it was still widely practiced. I examine various
dichotomies that arose in the colonial period, between religion and science,
between Theravada as a philosophy and as practiced, between the spiritual
and material. This background will help us understand the shape that the
revival of Buddhist meditation took, and why borān kammaṭṭhāna was
marginalized and dismissed as contrived or corrupt. The criticisms made
against it beg the question of what it was that outsiders disliked or found
diﬃcult to understand about this meditation.
Chapter 2 will seek to address this question, discussing the key features
seen as unorthodox and looking at how it is practiced. This will entail
looking at its distinctive use of nimitta, the “signs” seen in meditation, and
how these are used to incorporate meditative attainments into the body. We
shall compare borān kammaṭṭhāna with two more familiar systems of

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theravada meditation. The ﬁrst is the Path of Puriﬁcation, the
Visuddhimagga, an important and highly inﬂuential treatise by the ﬁfth-
century scholar-monk Buddhaghosa. The second is Vipassanā, the form of
meditation developed as part of the Burmese revival of Buddhism, which
went on to inﬂuence the modern Mindfulness movement. Looking in more
detail at borān meditation instructions, we shall see how all three systems
relate to Abhidhamma, the Theravada project to unravel the steps and
possibilities of causality and human transformation. The pervasiveness of
Abhidhamma in borān kammaṭṭhāna presents a conundrum. Is it the
superimposition of Theravada orthodoxy on a pre-existing, non-Theravada
tradition? Alternatively, does it reﬂect a detailed working out of the
Abhidhamma path to liberation?
Chapter 3 looks at the evidence we can draw on to understand borān
kammaṭṭhāna and its dating. There we also learn how the visibility of the
practice was variously helped or hindered by the technologies of manuscript
production and printing. This chapter begins to provide some of the history
of borān kammaṭṭhāna, revealing how politics, both at the global and local
levels, shaped the availability and visibility of the tradition. While chapter 2
had sought to explain the Abhidhamma underpinnings of borān
kammaṭṭhāna, this did not account for many of the features that seem
unorthodox, or rather unorthoprax, making it vulnerable at times of challenge
and reform.
In chapters 4 and 5 we seek to account for these features by looking at
technologies of the material world that were important in the pre-modern
Theravada context. These help explain ideas about how transformation is
brought about, ideas found in the somatic aspects of borān kammaṭṭhāna
practice. First, in chapter 4, we look at ideas of language and generative
grammar, which inform the use of potent language in borān kammaṭṭhāna.
Then, in chapter 5, we turn to the medicine, particularly ayurvedic obstetrics,
as well as the chemistry of the puriﬁcation of mercury, to see how these too
relate to meditation practice. They indicate shared understandings of how
transformation may be brought about. I suggest that it was the suppression
and disappearance of these resonating technologies that left borān
kammaṭṭhāna isolated and vulnerable to being misunderstood at times of
Buddhist reform.
Chapter 6 turns to the subject of revivals and reforms of Buddhism in the
eighteenth to early twentieth centuries, to discuss the rise and fall of borān
kammaṭṭhāna under the inﬂuence of Siam/Thailand. Borān kammaṭṭhāna
had been the form of meditation at the heart of Buddhist revival in Sri Lanka

--- PAGE 15 ---
in the mid-eighteenth century, brought there by missions from Ayutthaya, the
then-capital of Siam. However, political events and the modernization of
Siam/Thailand led to reforms in Buddhism and education. These contributed
to the marginalization of borān meditation both there and in countries under
its inﬂuence.
Chapter 7 traces the patterns of revival in the late nineteenth and twentieth
centuries outside of Thailand in order to understand why certain meditations
were selected and others deselected. This includes the eﬀect of the rise of
Vipassanā and text-based meditation. We look at how Marxist revolutions
devastated the remaining strongholds of practice and the abortive revival of
borān kammaṭṭhāna in Cambodia after the end of the Pol Pot period. We
return to Thailand to see how the Cold War and local politics inﬂuenced
meditation there, culminating with a look at those borān kammaṭṭhāna
traditions that have survived, in adapted form, including the popularity of the
modernized lineages stemming from Candasaro Sot of Wat Paknam.
Finally, we conclude by bringing together these diﬀerent strands to make
sense of the esoteric meditation tradition of Southeast Asia and how it is that
we have come so close to both losing and losing sight of such a major strand
of Theravada practice, the oldest living lineage of Theravada meditation,
which brought together the insights of Abhidhamma and the sciences that
surrounded it, only to be misunderstood and suppressed in the politics and
rivalries of the modern period.

--- PAGE 16 ---
1
THE COLONIAL GAZE
The Invisibility of Pre-Modern Theravada Meditation
There are, it is true, many passages, especially among those that
deal with meditation or with supernatural attainments, which
entirely leave behind all that is human, natural, probable, all that is
genial or attractive, and sail away into a region of empty
abstraction, which it would be ﬂattery to call a cloudland.
Reginald Copleston, Bishop of Colombo, 18921
Nowadays Buddhism is inextricably linked with meditation in popular
imagination, scholarship, and global practice. How was it then that—little
more than a century ago—in his best-selling book on Theravada Buddhism,
Bishop Copleston, a highly regarded scholar, should so roundly dismiss the
subject? In fact, he writes positively of the gentleness, calm, earnestness, and
purity of Buddhist ideals and morality, and liberalism of its practice, but he
struggles with what he regarded as a negative end goal: “for the Buddhist
solitude is a withdrawal from all things to nothing, the Christian’s, from
other things to God…It is impossible to imagine a greater interval between
two ideals [of Buddhist and Christian salvation]…between that which
contains only the negative, and that which adds to it the inﬁnite positive.”2
He does attempt to present some canonical material on the subject of
meditation, and acknowledges the miraculous powers thought to attend it, but
expected the practice to be simple: “The elaborate systems of what may be
called mechanical meditation or self-mesmerism by mechanical processes
(kammaṭṭhānaṃ) belong to a later phase.”3 Copleston was writing in Sri
Lanka (then Ceylon), at a point when it had already suﬀered three centuries
of European colonial control over substantial parts of the island. This began
with the Portuguese at the end of the sixteenth century, followed by the
Dutch and then, from the early nineteenth century, the British. Copleston’s
position may well have been the same had he been writing in Burma,
colonized by the British over the course of the nineteenth century. His

--- PAGE 17 ---
information seems to come entirely from texts, with no mention of living
practitioners. His dismissal, then, is at once an act of reporting, reﬂecting a
religious landscape depleted by colonial oppression, and an act of
suppression, 
ridiculing 
Buddhism’s 
key 
technology 
of 
spiritual
transformation. This trivialization, the colonial disinterest in the subject,
would facilitate resurgent forces to gather around this very practice, with
meditation at the heart of the impending Buddhist revival.
The widespread practices we see today are testament to the work of
important activists who revived and popularized meditation, a process
underway as Copleston wrote. Often these revivalists drew on texts that went
back to the early centuries of Buddhism, to create reenvisaged forms of
practice, accessible en masse and adapted to the modern period. These would
spread throughout the Theravada region of mainland Southeast Asia and Sri
Lanka and, after the retreat of European colonialism, across the world.
This text-based revival in Burma and Sri Lanka may have been
necessitated by a lack of living meditation lineages.4 However, an extensive,
living tradition of meditation was widely available at that time, namely the
family of practices that I shall here call borān kammaṭṭhāna, “the old
meditation.” This name was applied to it by early twentieth-century scholars
in Thailand as it disappeared, replaced by revivalist forms. It had been found
at court and among the hierarchy of the monastic community, the Sangha, as
well as in rural contexts. While today this type of meditation in its more
traditional forms is conﬁned to a few small pockets, it had dominated the
Buddhism of Sri Lanka at the height of an earlier revival in the preceding
century.5 While it had died out there by the end of the nineteenth century, it
still thrived in the regions now covered by Cambodia, southern Vietnam,
Laos, and Thailand.
Thailand (then Siam) was never colonized, and Copleston’s contemporary
there, the British vice-consul to Siam, Henry Alabaster (1836–1884),
presents a more informed picture of meditation in his The Wheel of the Law:
Buddhism Illustrated from Siamese Sources.6 His work is based on a Thai
book by Chao Phya Thipakon, the former foreign minister for Siam.
Alabaster is aware that meditation, far from being “a region of empty
abstraction,” has content, and he mentions some of the Theravada practices
familiar to us today, such as the meditation on the thirty-two constituents of
the body and the “divine abidings,” brahmavihāra, in which one develops
positive emotional responses beginning with loving kindness, mettā. Unlike
Copleston, he does not elevate Christianity and is against conversion to it
—“It is a pity to see good Buddhists turned into bad Christians.”7 However,

--- PAGE 18 ---
his view of meditation is still disparaging:
We ﬁnd monastic Buddhism sharing the fate which must attend all
religions which encourage a professional class of monks, or men
who lead unnatural lives, that is cumbered with dogmas and
absurdities, the result of warped, fantastic and prurient minds….
we ﬁnd that the professional religious class, in the absence of a
useful occupation, has invented an intolerable terminology, has
multiplied ridiculous distinctions, has twisted the elementary
principles into all manner of shapes, and has invented a system of
meditation which, in lieu of expanding the mind, tends to contract
it almost to idiocy.8
Here the objection is not only to meditation, but also to “intolerable
terminology” and “ridiculous distinctions.” These comments are possibly a
reference to Abhidhamma, Buddhism’s highly evolved and detailed analysis
of causality, which seeks to explain ethics, experience, and the path to
liberation (nibbana) from the cycle of death and rebirth (samsara).
Alabaster’s criticisms may diﬀer in the speciﬁcs but share Copleston’s
colonial attitudes: the dismissal of local expertise that they did not
acknowledge, and the expectations of what Buddhism and religion should
and should not be.
BUDDHISM IN THE EMERGING RELIGION-SCIENCE DIVIDE
These attitudes reﬂect the dramatic reconﬁguration of religion and science
that developed over the course of the nineteenth century. In the West, having
previously been considered aspects of a single quest to understand and
harness God’s creation, they were redeﬁned as separate enterprises in such a
way as to require a discourse explaining the relationship between them. In
1874, the acclaimed Protestant Christian writer John William Draper (1811–
1882) published a best-selling work entitled the History of the Conﬂict
between Religion and Science. He reﬂected the educated, Protestant view of
his day when summing up the history of the relationship as “a narrative of
the conﬂict of two contending powers, the expansive force of the human
intellect on the one side, and the compression arising from traditionary faith
and human interests on the other.”9 Draper’s work is in essence a history of
science that seeks to remold the meaning of religion such that true religion is
in line with “Progress.” Indeed, the title he originally intended for the book
was “The Intellectual Development of Europe.”10 Like modern histories of

--- PAGE 19 ---
religion and science, he began his account with Galileo’s conviction for
heresy in 1633, a story that by Draper’s time was taught to schoolchildren,
and on that basis represented Catholicism as the “traditionary faith” that
compresses intellect.11 Alabaster’s reference to “a professional class of
monks, or men who lead unnatural lives,…cumbered with dogmas,” is also
clearly leveled at Catholicism, a criticism extended to forms of Buddhism
that look like it.
It was also in the nineteenth century that Western observers labeled and
deﬁned Buddhism as a discrete religion. By the mid-nineteenth century the
congeries of idolatrous religious expression across Asia that had been
derided by European observers in the past centuries was coalescing in the
European consciousness into an atheistic philosophy or religion, now termed
“Buddhism,” recognized as having a common history and a single, historical
founder, Gautama Buddha. The Buddha was now regarded as a human being
whereas it had previously been assumed that he was some kind of god.
European scholars and missionaries, having studied classical Asian
languages, claimed ownership of Buddhist canons and contributed to the
popular understanding of original Buddhism as rational and scientiﬁc.12
Comparing the divergent texts and practices of Buddhism, Protestant
observers assessed the Buddhism of Tibet unfavorably against the Buddhism
of Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia. The Buddhism of the latter region was
identiﬁed as a form of hīnayāna, or pre-Mahayana Buddhism, so an early
form of the religion. This label was later replaced with “Theravada,”
“doctrine of the elders,” picking up on the self-description of its teachings
found in ﬁfth-century commentarial texts.13 Theravada was regarded as the
only survivor of a number of branches of early Buddhism, and elements of its
practice that were seen as later developments were therefore seen as
corruptions. Parallels were drawn with Christianity: Tibetan Buddhism was
the “corrupt popery” of Catholicism; Theravada—in its proper form—the
more authentic Protestantism. The discovery and excavation of Buddhist
remains in British India, where Buddhism was long extinct in most regions,
enhanced the British claim to ownership of early Buddhism. It was admired
for its philosophy, its antiquity, its tolerance, its androcentrism, as well as for
the artworks brought back by colonial oﬃcers, particularly Gandharan
sculptures, found to be so reminiscent of Western classical art. Even that
most alien of Buddhist theological presuppositions, rebirth, conjured up for
Victorians the newly popular Darwinian theory of evolution.14
Emerging knowledge about Buddhism, and the attendant diﬃculties of
ﬁtting it into existing understandings of the term “religion,” informed the

--- PAGE 20 ---
redeﬁning of the religion-science relationship. This is reﬂected in Draper’s
work. His appreciation of Buddhism is clear when he uses it to authorize his
theory of “a vast spiritual existence pervading the universe, even as there is a
vast existence of matter pervading it…In one of its forms, as we have seen,
this idea was developed by Chakia Monni [Śākyamuni, the Buddha], in
India, in a most masterly manner, and embodied in the vast practical system
of Buddhism.”15 Another point we should note here is that Draper contrasts
the spiritual with the material, and indicates that Buddhism deals with the
former. This divide between the spiritual and physical realms would
undermine aspects of Buddhism that relate to the physical, both in its
practices and the engagement of the Sangha in practical matters.
While Draper wrote appreciatively of Buddhism, the “Progress” of which
he wrote was elsewhere oﬀered as an apologetic justiﬁcation of European
colonialism and missionizing. The ruthless wars of expansion in Asia and
Africa in search of economic advantage were defended as bringing both
progress and the hope of Christian salvation to primitive peoples eager for
the beneﬁts that the supposedly superior European had to oﬀer.16 The
rhetoric of European superiority that pervades Draper’s book had been
widely employed during the period to justify the contemporary exploitation
of Asia to secure the continuation of those very economic gains that had
supported Europe’s scientiﬁc and social advances in the ﬁrst place. While
Draper acknowledges the reverse inﬂuence of Asia on Europe in the past, he
is silent on Asia’s scientiﬁc present and on the new advances stemming from
contemporary interactions with her. This mirrors the ways in which Asia’s
contributions were downplayed and her institutions ignored by the
instruments of colonial power of the day.
Since millions of those in the newly beneﬁting territories of Asia were
Buddhists, this contributed to radically contrasting attitudes to Buddhism, on
the one hand, and to Buddhists, on the other. Europeans writers increasingly
represented Buddhists themselves as incapable of understanding the true
meaning of the texts they had been preserving for the previous two millennia
and depicted them as following only a debased and corrupted form of the
religion. “Buddhism, as he taught it, is not the religion of the ﬁve hundred
millions who are said to reverence his shrines,” wrote the Countess of Jersey,
an admirer of the Buddha but not of Buddhists. “Much of which its founder
never dreamed was introduced into the system, and which, had he heard it, he
would have treated as foolishness or presumption. Simple as his teaching
was, his disciples have spun it out into an aﬀair so lengthened and prolix, that
it requires the labour and patience of years to disentangle its intricacies,”
complained the challenged author of the entry on Buddhism in the Journal of

--- PAGE 21 ---
Sacred Literature in 1865.17 Complexities in Buddhism were not to be taken
seriously, since they were mere corruptions of an originally simple message.
These dissonant attitudes to Buddhism and Buddhists, coupled with the
disestablishment of Buddhist institutions in territories colonized by European
powers, would in turn inﬂuence the ways in which the peoples of these
colonies and emerging nations in Asia came to redeﬁne and adapt their own
traditional forms of Buddhism. This was particularly true of mainland
Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka, which were dominated by French and British
colonialists, and a rapidly modernizing Siam (Thailand), Siam in turn being
reshaped by its eﬀorts to retain its sovereignty. The new European desire to
distinguish religion from science and to modify one’s religion in response
was assimilated in these countries too. The result was that Buddhism was
reformed in the light of what was then considered rational and scientiﬁc.
BUDDHISM AS MIND-SCIENCE
The colonialist idea that Buddhism had become corrupt and now fell short of
the Buddha’s original ideal resonated with indigenous Buddhist beliefs about
the inevitable decline over the centuries of the Buddha’s teachings and
institutions. The collective term for these is sāsana, “teaching,” in a broader
sense than that conveyed by the term dhamma, “truth,” “reality.” The decline
of the sāsana would be marked by devastating warfare, disease, and other
hardships, exactly what people were witnessing with the arrival of European
colonialism. Whereas previous reforms throughout the history of Buddhism
had emphasized the continued preservation of the texts and a pure monastic
lineage, and these concerns continued in reforms of the modern period, the
modern approach to reform also discarded or marginalized “accretions”
regarded as not conforming to “pure,” “original” Buddhism.
Another taxonomic division being negotiated and explored during this
period of Western discourse was the axiomatic separation of body and mind,
or between physis and psyche, reﬂected in Draper’s division between
materiality and spirituality. For modernist Christians, religion concerned only
the latter. This approach was reﬂected in the increasing acceptability among
Christians of non-literal interpretations of biblical statements on the material
world, such as the creation myth in the book of Genesis.
Early Buddhism also divided the world, particularly living beings and
what they experienced, into a broad taxonomy of materiality or form, rūpa,
and mentality or consciousness, literally “naming,” nāma. Theravada
Buddhism, however, teaches the interdependence of materiality and
consciousness in a well-known analysis of the individual into a set of ﬁve

--- PAGE 22 ---
aggregates that coexist interdependently in an ever-changing ﬂux. These ﬁve
aggregates (khandha) are (1) rūpa, materiality; (2) vedanā, sensation; (3)
saññā, apperception; (4) saṅkhārā, volitional responses; and (5) viññāṇa,
consciousness. This list can be further analyzed under three main headings.
The ﬁrst is still rūpa, materiality, the ﬁrst of the ﬁve khandha, which consists
of the material elements and matter derived from them. The other four
khandha are divided into two: aspects of consciousness, cetasika, and states
of consciousness, citta. An important function of Abhidhamma, which
Alabaster and the challenged contributor to the Journal of Sacred Literature
had found so objectionable, was to explain how these diﬀerent categories
combine and mutually cause one another. The result is a highly complex
analysis of the human condition.
Abhidhamma underpins Buddhism’s practical path of ethics and self-
transformation, but was dismissed by external observers as a form of
unnecessary scholasticism, secondary to Buddhism. Despite similarities in
the overall recognition of materiality and consciousness, Buddhism does not,
therefore, share the Cartesian mind-body distinction. Nevertheless, the
dominance of the latter in European thinking meant that the resonances that
can be found, particularly in Buddhist teachings on the primacy of the mind,
would be inﬂuential in forming new emphases in Buddhism itself. It
inﬂuenced meditation, which came to be seen more as a mind-science and
less concerned with the physical realm. Those meditation practices that were
associated with cognitive change from realizing Buddhist truths such as
impermanence, suﬀering, and no-self were emphasized, while those more
associated with physical transformation and material power were
marginalized.
The resulting perception that meditation was primarily concerned with the
mind and psyche to some extent protected it from colonial scrutiny, since
scientiﬁc research of the period on the whole ignored the psyche, choosing
the physical world as the focus of research.18 Only in the second half of the
twentieth century in the West did an explicit interest in Buddhist meditation
become part of the continuing redeﬁnition of religion and of the emerging
study of consciousness and the brain.19 This later interest in Buddhism’s
potential contribution to cognitive science built upon another, related shift in
attitudes that saw its origins in the colonial period. Back then, in the face of
European hegemony in the physical realm, evinced initially in military
technology and later in medical procedures and medicines, Asians began to
claim superiority in the realm of the mind. Buddhism’s superiority, then, was
to be found speciﬁcally in its mind-culture, particularly the technology of
meditation and the analysis of mental processes. These were activities

--- PAGE 23 ---
dismissed or ignored by colonial writers on Buddhism.
These approaches to Buddhism in the colonial period are neatly reﬂected
in the early twentieth-century writings of the Burmese scholar Shwe Zan
Aung (1871–1932), who both accepted and countered them, drawing on
Abhidhamma. Whereas colonial-period external observers and modernist
reformers in Thailand, such as those who had inﬂuenced Alabaster (above),
regarded Abhidhamma as a form of dry scholasticism that developed after
the Buddha, revivalists in Burma saw it as the fundamental teaching of the
Buddha, representing the realization of his omniscience. Indeed, predictions
of the decline of the sāsana identiﬁed the Abhidhamma section of the
Buddhist scriptural canon as the most vulnerable, the ﬁrst to disappear. In
response, Burmese monks and laypeople dedicated themselves to the serious
study and practice of Abhidhamma as a way of protecting Buddhism, leading
to the expertise in Abhidhamma found throughout Myanmar to this day.20
As both a retired government servant for the British and a committed lay
student of Burmese monks learned in Abhidhamma, Shwe Zan Aung was
uniquely instrumental in conveying the knowledge of Abhidhamma to a
global audience, providing the ﬁrst translation of an Abhidhamma text in
English.21 In an article replete with Abhidhamma terminology, entitled
“Buddhism and Science,” he writes, “There is no essential diﬀerence
between scientiﬁc and Buddhistic methods…. There is Buddhism in every
science which accepts the theory of change, the theory of causation and the
theory of evolution.” Drawing parallels with Darwinism in terms of the
content and its initial treatment by skeptics, he proceeds to point out
Buddhism’s strengths: “Psychology is the stronghold of Buddhism. Buddhist
psychology is at once complete and comprehensive, providing a place for
every possible form of thought known or unknown in Western
psychology.”22 By way of example, he includes an astute analysis of the
anteriority and superiority of Buddhism’s practice of hypnotism, which had
“only recently been recognized as a science in the West.”23 Shwe Zan Aung
is, of course, referring on the Buddhist side to meditation, as can be seen
from his observation, “The Western method begins with a subject, while the
Buddhist method begins with the operator himself.” As might be expected of
an experienced administrator writing at a point when British-educated
Burmese were challenging the colonial system from within, Shwe Zan Aung
also reacts to the prevailing assumption of Buddhists’ lack of expertise in
materiality: “Buddhism has been held to be weakest in the physical
sciences.”24 He does this in part by explaining Buddhist cosmology as an
allegory, in part by pointing out the knowledge of the physical world
displayed in Abhidhamma.

--- PAGE 24 ---
THE RISE OF VIPASSANĀ
The conceptual divisions of the period between mind and body and religion
and science, coupled with the emerging belief in the superiority of the Asian
mind, inﬂuenced other aspects of the response of Buddhists to the fear that
the long-prophesied demise of the Buddha’s teaching was imminent. As
colonial powers increasingly followed policies of non-involvement in
religion, this meant that there was no royal authority to provide sponsorship
to ensure the maintenance of the material fabric of Buddhism or deal with
disputes within the Sangha. This policy of non-involvement therefore
increased anxiety about the demise of the sāsana. At the same time, it made
religion an arena within which to express dissent, leading to an association
between Buddhism and emerging national identities.25 In Burma, the
increasing emphasis on personal salvation or liberation in this life, while the
Buddha’s teachings were still available, led to a revival of meditation as the
most direct path to liberation. People turned to the teachings on meditation
preserved in the sacred texts of the Pali canon and to the guidance provided
in authoritative commentaries on those texts. While local attempts had been
made to popularize meditation among monks in eighteenth-century Burma, it
was in the second half of the nineteenth century that such endeavors proved
eﬀective. Without a king to protect the religion, it was now the responsibility
of everyone, monk and non-monk alike, to do so.
One of the most inﬂuential ﬁgures in this project, popularizing meditation
among both monastics and laypeople, was the Burmese monk Ledi Sayadaw
(1846–1923). His mentor, who inﬂuenced both his clear writing style and his
treatment of Buddhism as a scientiﬁc enterprise, was King Mindon’s minister
Hpo Hlaing (1830–1883). Hpo Hlaing had an avid interest in European
scientiﬁc works and even wrote a meditation text that drew on Western
anatomy.26 The meditation techniques that ﬁrst developed out of these
inﬂuences—spreading ﬁrst to the rest of the region, then worldwide during
the 
twentieth 
century—were 
therefore 
informed 
by 
contemporary
cosmopolitan learning as well as by the return to the earlier Pali texts.
As we will see when examining diﬀerent systems of meditation, these
techniques emphasized the transformative insight into reality as taught by the
Buddha. The word for insight is vipassanā. As a result, the meditations that
emerged at this time are themselves called Vipassanā, “Insight.” They de-
emphasized other outcomes of meditation, called samatha, “calming”
techniques, that trained the mind, making it more receptive to insight.
Samatha was sometimes associated with suprahuman powers and with
gaining access to diﬀerent realms of traditional Buddhist cosmology, two

--- PAGE 25 ---
aspects of religious belief challenged by Western worldviews. Suprahuman
powers included the ability to master the physical realm, for example by
visiting diﬀerent realms of the Buddhist cosmology, increasingly now seen
as allegorical. The emphasis on insight was in part an attempt to speed up the
transformative process of meditation, to create a fast track to the liberating
insights into reality while the dhamma was still accessible. It was also a
response to the psyche-physis divide, seen in the writings of Draper, and the
colonial dominance of the material world.
In the revivals of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Buddhist
meditation focused on insight and the development of the mind, rather than
on physical transformation. This selectiveness facilitated the later uptake and
adaptation of these forms of meditation in the West, when Buddhist
meditation practices were increasingly adopted by Westerners. This, in turn,
informed scientiﬁc developments in the newly developing ﬁelds of cognitive
science and psychology, including therapy. Buddhist meditation, and
applications derived from it, have since the last decades of the twentieth
century become of interest for the treatment of a range of psychological
issues including depression, anxiety, pain management and, more recently,
cognitive reserve in aging. Empirical testing has conﬁrmed the value of
meditation in these areas, and yet these applications have been developed
from only a limited range of the technologies of transformation comprised
within meditation practice, those that—through their emphasis on mental
culture—successfully navigated the transition into the modern world. Borān
kammaṭṭhāna is a major missing strand.
DISMISSAL OF PRE-MODERN THERAVADA MEDITATION
This history begs two questions. (1) What happened to the forms of
meditation that were still practiced in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, at least in those parts of the Theravada world not colonized by the
British? (2) Given that meditation within Theravada Buddhism itself was not
new—even if its teaching en masse in centers specially constructed for the
purpose was a new departure—and given that science is in itself a culturally
constructed approach to knowledge, what was the relationship between
meditation and “science” (or its analogous cultural counterparts) before these
new developments?
As we shall see, some of those pre-existing living traditions of meditation
adapted to become more in line with the revisionist tendencies. Practices
were checked against early authoritative texts on the subject and aligned with
expectations of Buddhist meditation as mind-science. At the same time, those

--- PAGE 26 ---
that were not adapted, including practices referred to here as “the old
meditation” (borān kammaṭṭhāna), began to disappear. They began to
disappear at exactly the time when Vipassanā and the other meditation
practices based on normative Pali texts began to spread and increase in
popularity. This family of older practices came to be referred to as the
“traditional or old.” This appears to have happened in the early twentieth
century as new practices, especially modern Vipassanā and the practice of a
newly established revisionist wing of the Thai forest tradition, were gaining
currency. The phrase boran kammatthan (Thai) is found in texts about the
tradition published by Jai Yasothararat in 1936.27 The same distinction is
used in Cambodia to contrast borān “traditional” with samay “modern”
practice, a division that initially referred to divisions within the majority
“Mahanikay” monastic lineages of Cambodia as Thai and then French
colonial authorities sponsored modernizing approaches to Buddhism and the
modern study of Pali. The Khmer and Thai term boran is the equivalent of
Pali purāṇa, meaning “former,” “ancient.” In commentarial Pali texts from
the ﬁfth century, the Pali term kammaṭṭhāna meant meditation exercise or
practice, but by the early modern period it had come to mean meditation in
general or meditation path.28 The phrase I am using is composite, Khmer/
Thai (borān) “old/former” and Pali (kammaṭṭhāna) “meditation.” The Pali
purāṇa, although written the same way and having the same literal meaning
as Khmer/Thai borān, is not used with the same connotation. The term
kammaṭṭhān(a) is recognized in all three languages, as is its Sanskritized
counterpart, karmasthāna, in Sinhala, to refer to both a speciﬁc meditation
topic or exercise and meditation practice in general.
While in the early twentieth century these methods were labeled “old,”
there is no such mention of being “old,” or consciousness of being a separate
tradition, indicated in the texts belonging to these traditions themselves. The
terms used in borān kammaṭṭhāna practice manuals are standard terms for
meditation from within Theravada: kammaṭṭhāna, samatha, vidarśanā, and
vipassanā. This indicates that the practitioners did not, before the modern
period, see a need to diﬀerentiate their training as a distinctive form of
meditation. This practice was just kammaṭṭhāna, “meditation,” although—on
the basis of both living and earlier documented practice—we can assume that
people sought out diﬀerent masters for diﬀerent levels of initiation and for
diﬀerent perspectives. One surviving example of the tradition at Wat
Ratchasittharam, Thonburi, Bangkok, describes this system as majjhima-
kammaṭṭhāna-baep-lamdap, “the progressive development of meditation
subjects on the middle path.”29
Although it was an esoteric tradition, suﬃcient evidence of borān

--- PAGE 27 ---
kammaṭṭhāna survives for us to gain some understanding of how it diﬀered
from the reform practices of the modern period, and how it related to the
scientiﬁc world it inhabited. In fact, the ﬁrst book on Theravada Buddhist
meditation ever to be published in the West was a manual of borān
kammaṭṭhāna from Sri Lanka. It was published in 1896, just a few years
after Copleston’s book. The manual, given the title The Yogāvacara’s
Manual, was edited by T. W. Rhys Davids, who had founded the Pali Text
Society in 1881 to promote the publication and understanding of Pali
literature. The basis of the edition was a copy of a manuscript composed in a
mixture of Pali and Sinhala lent to Rhys Davids by the renowned Sri Lankan
Buddhist revivalist Anagarika Dharmapala.
Anagarika Dharmapala was personally interested in the practice of
meditation, so one might say meditation here was in safer hands.30 However,
for those with more positive interest in the subject, meditation was inﬂuenced
by the same shifts in attitudes to religion that had informed Draper.
Particularly inﬂuential was the Theosophical Society, set up in 1875.
Theosophists assumed that meditation represented a universal mysticism
underlying a number of religions, the variations between them being merely
skin-deep. While drawing on Buddhism, they also incorporated other strands
of thought inﬂuential at the time, such as the magnetic healing of Franz
Anton Mesmer, particularly as reenvisaged in relation to trance states and
clairvoyance by his student Armand Marie Jacques de Chastenet.31 This
inﬂuence is seen in Bishop Copleston’s reference to mesmerism, which
inﬂuenced the later development of hypnosis referenced by Shwe Zan Aung.
The inﬂuence of Theosophy on attitudes to meditation at the time is reﬂected
in remarks made by the colonial oﬃcer Hugh Nevill (1847–1897) in relation
to the content of some texts related to The Yogāvacara’s Manual found in
manuscripts that he was collecting in Sri Lanka at around the same time:
I myself regard the whole treatment as an attempt to pass a
Buddhist paramattha gloss [using the Buddhist term for “ultimate
truth,” but possibly a reference to Abhidhamma] over an
established system of bhāvānā [(sic) meditation], which amounted
to what we should call a magnetic concentration of thought on any
subject, not necessarily a Buddhist dhyāna [meditative state], and
consequent clairvoyance.32
No attempt appears to have been made to study the method with a living
practitioner and when, twenty years later, a translation was produced, the last

--- PAGE 28 ---
known living practitioner in Sri Lanka had already died. The result was that
the practice represented by the text was not understood. T. W. Rhys Davids’s
wife, Caroline, wrote a preface to the new translation, dismissing it as the
product of seventeenth-century “decadence.”33
Caroline Rhys Davids had little experience to go on in making her
remarks, but signiﬁcant textual knowledge by this time. To have learned
more about meditation as a practice would have required her studying under
a meditation master, controverting the hierarchy of the European-Asian
relationship of the period. As it was, her own edition of Buddhaghosa’s ﬁfth-
century treatise, the Visuddhimagga, was to be published in 1920,34 and she
may have been contrasting the content of the earlier publication—which she
had typed out at her husband’s dictation35—with her textual knowledge of
the latter text. The Visuddhimagga, which we will explore later, was already
inﬂuencing text-based revivals of Buddhism. In 1897 Dharmapala himself
used it as the basis of teaching meditation at Greenacre in Maine, an
important center for the dissemination of Asian spirituality to the United
States.36
Over half a century later, the borān meditation system published in The
Yogāvacara’s Manual would again be the subject of a negative assessment.
The Sri Lankan monk Mātara Ñāṇārāma, seeking textual sources as the basis
for the revival of practice for a new forest meditation tradition, declared: “It
is not a method of meditation.” Michael Carrithers, reporting on Ñāṇārāma’s
work, expands on this: “I suspect that here we have an example of an
imaginative but not very insightful attempt to revive meditation from the
texts, for the texts seem to have been treated as repositories of magical
lore.”37
Interestingly Carrithers notes a Thai work by T. Magness on meditation,
“which does much the same for the analytic categories so important to the
Visuddhimagga. This is what happens when the sense of such categories is
lost.”38
Unwittingly Carrithers had recognized the family connection between two
lineages of borān kammaṭṭhāna. In the 1950s–1970s, Terence Magness had
been, as we shall explore later in chapter 7, a student in the lineage of
Candasaro Sot (1884–1959), the abbot of the Wat Paknam, a royal temple in
Bangkok. Sot’s method forms the basis of the teachings of the Dhammakaya
Foundation, a network of temples led by Wat Phra Dhammakaya, a temple
established in the 1970s in Pathumthani. The meditation teachings of this
latter temple, which now has thousands of adherents worldwide, have also
been widely criticized as unorthodox, even in recent years, most notably by

--- PAGE 29 ---
the highly regarded and inﬂuential Thai scholar-monk Payuth Payutto (b.
1938). Western scholars have also proposed that it developed under the
inﬂuence of Tibetan tantra.39 As we shall see, Candasaro Sot had studied in
one of the lineages transmitted from the senior monks of eighteenth-century
Ayutthaya, which was also the source of the lineage represented by The
Yogāvacara’s Manual.
While negative assessments of Buddhist meditation in general may be a
thing of the past, negative estimations of the family of practices here termed
borān kammaṭṭhāna have remained. Yet the evidence, which we shall
discuss more fully in chapter 3, indicates that its practice and transmission
was widespread before the modern period. Particularly compelling is the
further material that began to be published in the 1970s–1990s, informed by
the texts, oral traditions, and living practices of Cambodia and neighboring
Laos by François Bizot and other colleagues of the École française
d’Extrême-Orient, recorded just prior to the devastation of Buddhism by
Marxist revolutions in those countries. Unhindered by the expectations of a
classical training in Pali, the usual route to textual scholarship on Theravada
Buddhism, Bizot’s works indicate the extraordinary depth and richness of
this tradition, as well as how it sits within the Theravada culture of the
region.40 In the past decade a substantial amount of new textual material has
come to light, and works have been published examining the systems of
practice that this material represents.
Why then, given the signiﬁcant body of evidence and an increasing
number of publications on this family of related traditions, has borān
kammaṭṭhāna been so negatively assessed? Why has it remained relatively
unknown, even among scholars of Buddhism? Its neglect in scholarship
reﬂects two things: its esoteric nature and its marginalization as
“unorthodox” within the reform-oriented Buddhism that dominated Sri
Lanka and mainland Southeast Asia from the nineteenth century onward. As
an esoteric practice it was closed to the uninitiated. Moreover, its connection
with Buddhist understandings of causality, as explained in the Abhidhamma
Piṭaka, is not obvious until one reaches high-level stages of the practice. This
meant that its place in relation to Theravada Buddhist orthodoxy was not
recognized by outsiders and unclear even to those who had practiced its
lower stages. As an esoteric practice, it also could not be advertised or
publicly defended. From the teachers’ perspective, it was available only to
those whose past kamma (actions) and inclinations drew them to it, and who
were accepted as worthy disciples. A further development that has led to its
dismissal is that in the modern period, expectations of what Theravada
meditation should entail have been dominated by the understanding of

--- PAGE 30 ---
meditation as mind-science. Borān kammaṭṭhāna, in contrast, also takes into
account the somatic aspects of Buddhist transformation. As we have seen,
this understanding of meditation as mind-science, which developed in
response to colonialism in the revival of meditation, has continued to grow
and develop further in the post-independence period. It has done so at the
expense of the earlier somatic approach.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has examined expectations of what Buddhism and meditation
are, and how these, coupled with other developments of the colonial and
post-independence period, have taken their toll on the recognition of borān
kammaṭṭhāna. In its more traditional forms, it has disappeared and is now on
the verge of extinction. Meanwhile, some modernized forms from Sot’s
lineage thrive but are primarily associated with speciﬁc groups within Thai
Buddhism and are subjected to the discourse that emerges from competition
between rival allegiances. In the next chapter, we shall look at what it was
about borān kammaṭṭhāna that went against expectations of what Theravada
meditation should be. We shall discuss the main features of its practice,
compare it with more familiar forms of Theravada meditation, and then
examine how it was understood by its practitioners to work as a system of
spiritual transformation. This requires a consideration of Abhidhamma, the
Theravada system of thought that explains experience, ethics, and causality
and oﬀers a detailed map of the spiritual path. After considering the evidence
for the tradition and the methods of transformation it seeks to harness in
more detail in subsequent chapters, we shall return to the colonial context
more fully equipped to understand how this aﬀected the perceptions of this
tradition and its fate in the modern period.

--- PAGE 31 ---
2
ABHIDHAMMA AND PRACTICE
The Path in Theravada Meditation Systems
Sit comfortably in a position which you can hold for hours if
necessary. Then fold your hands in your lap…. Close the eyes and
try to imagine that you are concentrating the mind in the opening
of the right nostril. I want you then to repeat the words samma
arahan three times. Next, concentrate the mind at the inside corner
of the right eye and repeat the words as before. Next, try to
concentrate your whole attention at the centre of the skull. Then to
the back of the mouth just above the uvula. Then to the bottom of
the throat. Then right down to the navel. And ﬁnally at a position
two ﬁnger-breadths from the navel. At each of these positions you
are to repeat samma arahan three times, but when you come to the
last position you should keep on repeating the words. If you ﬁnd
that the mind wanders come straight back to the ﬁnal position: do
not go through all positions again. From this you will learn much.
If you have success you will be conscious of a pinpoint of light
seen as if in the mind’s eye.
—Candasaro Sot1
These were the ﬁrst instructions in meditation given to the British monk
Kapilavaḍḍho in 1954 at the temple Wat Paknam in Bangkok by its abbot
Candasaro Sot, who was instrumental in popularizing a modernized, more
accessible form of borān kammaṭṭhāna. Even this simpliﬁed instruction
begins to give us some idea of what is unusual or distinctive: the importance
of pinpoints of light, sometimes referred to as crystal spheres or gems; the
use of mantra, sacred phrases, called parikamma, “aids,” in this tradition; the
attention to a pathway of physical locations from the nostril to a place two
ﬁngers’ breadth from the navel. This last location is referred to as the
“womb,” gabbha, regardless of the gender of the practitioner.
We shall look at diﬀerent teaching lineages in the next chapter, where we

--- PAGE 32 ---
will be able to locate Candasaro Sot’s teachings within the broader family of
borān kammaṭṭhāna. First, I want to examine here what it was that outside
observers found strange or unorthodox about the practice. Then I shall
consider how we might nonetheless understand much of borān kammaṭṭhāna
in relation to Theravada Buddhist understandings of causality, and how to
bring about change.
DISTINCTIVE FEATURES OF ESOTERIC THERAVADA MEDITATION
This section explores a few of the most striking features of borān
kammaṭṭhāna that mark it out as distinctive from all other forms of
Theravada meditation practice. As we shall see, some of these features go
against expectations of Theravada as an early, simple form of Buddhism.
Five Pīti as the Initial Practice
A distinctive feature of borān kammaṭṭhāna is that the practices—at least in
the non-modernized forms—invariably begin with the ﬁve pīti, or joys.
These are a subdivision of the pīti, joy or thrill, experienced during the ﬁrst
jhāna. The jhāna are a sequence of successively more reﬁned states of calm
and concentration associated with the samatha, “calming,” eﬀects of
meditation practice. The subdivision of pīti had been established by the time
of the ﬁfth-century commentaries on the Pali canon. Beginning with pīti
breaks the path down into more manageable stages. Rather than try to attain
the ﬁrst jhāna in one go, progress is broken down into its components.2
Possibly also relevant is the theory found in Buddhist texts that beings in the
higher planes of Buddhist cosmology, above the realm of desire
(kāmadhātu), are nourished by pīti, which functions as a form of subtle food.
As noted previously, there is a correlation between Buddhist meditative
attainments and cosmology, particularly in relation to samatha practice.
Before the recognition of the umbilical cord, mentioned in one ﬁfth-century
Buddhist commentary, it was speculated that the developing embryo in the
womb was also nourished on such subtle food.3
The Fetus as Model for Spiritual Transformation
The imagery of the womb as the locus of practice is not merely to provide a
guide to the rough location of meditative focus. Fetal development and
embryology are found everywhere in pre-modern borān kammaṭṭhāna,
including in rebirthing rituals.4 Of the thirty-three constituents of the human
body, found in Theravada analysis, twelve are equated with qualities of the

--- PAGE 33 ---
mother of the fetus and the remaining twenty-one with the qualities of the
father. We also ﬁnd a division between right hand as male and left hand as
female, alongside other male-female divisions. A more striking feature of
borān kammaṭṭhāna, found nowhere in the Pali canon or its commentaries, is
the practice of bringing the meditative attainments beginning with the ﬁve
pīti into the body. This is done by drawing the visual representation of each
attainment along a pathway from the intranasal cavity inside the nostril down
to the womb. The attainments are usually represented in the form of spheres
of light or other nimitta, “signs,” that emerge during meditation. Once
brought to the womb, they are rearranged in various combinations and
deposited there. We shall return to this process, and the relationship between
these meditations and the traditional medical treatment of the developing
embryo in ayurvedic obstetrics, in chapter 5.
The Potency of the Pali Language
The language of the Theravada scriptural canon, Pali, is treated as a sacred
language at least as far back as the ﬁfth century C.E. The implications of this
sanctity are taken to greater lengths in borān culture, with the Pali alphabet
understood as a creative and potent force, used in letter symbolism and letter
alchemy. For example, the Buddhanorakan, a borān kammaṭṭhāna text from
northeastern Thailand edited by Kitchai Urkasame, provides a cosmogonic
myth in which nothing exists prior to the Pali phonemes ma, a, and u. These
are then equated with diﬀerent sets of three: illumination, light, and rays of
six colors; the Buddhist virtues of good conduct, inner dhamma, and
generosity; and life, breath, and mind. Indologists will immediately associate
these three syllables with an inversion of the components of the Sanskrit
syllable oṃ, to which similar cosmogonic potency is attributed in Hinduism.
Oṃ breaks down into a, u and m/ṃ.5 We shall explore another cosmogony
based on the Pali alphabet in chapter 4. In terms of practice, this conception
of Pali means that Pali syllables are treated as potent, able to represent
components of the cosmos and the Buddha’s teaching. They are used in
symbolism and in the mechanism of transformation, by using syllables to
impart the qualities that they represent, just like the nimitta mentioned above.
This letter alchemy is found not only in meditation but in protective practice
to create sacred diagrams, yantra, made up of Pali syllables, to protect from
danger. This practice has now spread globally through the popularity of
tattoos from Thailand and Cambodia, although its association with
meditation and the potency of Pali is now largely forgotten. This approach to
Pali corresponds with the treatment of Sanskrit in the Indic cultural sphere.

--- PAGE 34 ---
Moreover, to outsiders it looks similar to tantra, or even—for secular and
Protestant colonial observers—the hocus pocus of dismissed Catholic
incantations, and thus appears alien to Theravada.
Numerology
Numerology or number symbolism is also important in borān kammaṭṭhāna,
particularly in relation to the number ﬁve. Rather than the standard set of
three gems or refuges, namely the Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha, we ﬁnd
ﬁve with the addition of the meditation practice itself as the fourth gem and
the meditation teacher as the ﬁfth. The oﬀerings made to the Buddha and to
the teacher ahead of beginning each stage of the practice are made in ﬁvefold
sets of candles, incense, popped rice, water, et cetera. This numerology
combines with the use of potent syllables. For example, the set of ﬁve
syllables na mo bu ddhā ya, in exoteric Pali meaning “homage to the
Buddha,” are said to represent various sets of ﬁve, such as the ﬁve elements
(earth, water, ﬁre, wind, and space), or the ﬁve khandha (aggregates) that
make up the individual, or the ﬁve pīti. In the last instance, this means that
the syllables na mo bu ddhā ya may represent the ﬁve pīti when
incorporating the meditative attainments into the body.
Similarities with Tantra
In addition to letter alchemy and numerology, a number of other features
may have led to an association between these practices and tantra. These
include the creation of a Buddha or enlightened being (arhat) within the body
of the practitioner, the process that will be the focus of this chapter. As with
tantra, we also see a diﬀerentiation between these diﬀerent types of
application, between the internal transformation of oneself, the practitioner,
and external transformation of and for others. The latter include methods for
healing, bestowing invincibility, or even harming others. The “internal”
practice is referred to as the right-hand path and the “external” as the left-
hand path. Right-hand/left-hand categorization is found elsewhere in
traditional Theravada. It is found in physical symbolism such as the
association of the right-hand side with male and the left-hand with female,
already noted above, and also in the organization of the Sangha at the
national and the monastery level. The right-hand division has priority over
that of the left-hand. Although the right-hand/left-hand divide is also found
in Śaiva Hindu and Vajrayana Buddhist tantra, the use of the phrase “left
hand” in borān kammaṭṭhāna does not have the antinomian connotations that
it can have there. In other words, we do not see it referring to the charnel

--- PAGE 35 ---
ground practices, sexual intercourse and caste transgression, or the
consumption of impure substances found in Indic tantra.
Another similarity with tantra is the need for initiation from a teacher in
order to practice, though this is not found in the initial stages of the more
modernized lineages. The litany used for initiation includes a formula for the
teacher taking on any pāpa (evil or bad karma) accrued by the initiate and
giving the initiate their puṇya (merit or good karma), as found in tantric
initiation.
ABHIDHAMMA AND THE QUESTION OF ORTHODOXY
These and other features make borān kammaṭṭhāna look unorthodox in the
light of both canonical scripture and contemporary understandings of what
Theravada should be. However, alongside these features, we ﬁnd others that
seem entirely in accord with Theravada. The most signiﬁcant of these is the
pervasive presence of Abhidhamma terminology. We have already met with
Abhidhamma, the Theravada analysis of the universe and causality, primarily
from the perspective of our embodied experience. It provides a framework
for understanding how transformation from an unenlightened individual to an
arhat, or Buddha, can take place, including a detailed understanding of
consciousness and ethics. Contained in the third section of the Pali canon, the
Abhidhamma Piṭaka, it represents ultimate truth from the Theravada
perspective. As such, it is the most authoritative expression of the Dhamma,
the truth taught by the Buddha. Because it is more detailed and systematized
than the teachings in the Sutta Piṭaka, it represents orthodoxy. The seventh
book of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka, the Paṭṭhāna focuses on synthesis,
explaining how all the components of reality, dhammas (as distinct from
dhamma in the singular), interact. The Paṭṭhāna is believed to be an
expression of the Buddha’s omniscience.
Abhidhamma continued to develop and has remained a living tradition of
exegesis, scholarship, and practice to this day. As we shall see, borān
kammaṭṭhāna uses extensive Abhidhamma terminology, drawn not from the
canon, but from the ﬁfth-century commentarial literature. A useful
comparator from that period is the inﬂuential treatise, the Visuddhimagga,
Path of Puriﬁcation, which provides a systematic account of the path to
becoming an arhat through the practice of good conduct and meditation,
culminating in those meditations leading to liberating wisdom (paññā) or
insight, as we shall explore further below. The Visuddhimagga is a work of
Abhidhamma, applied to the path of practice. Highly authoritative, it can also
be taken to represent Theravada orthodoxy, making it a valuable reference

--- PAGE 36 ---
point.
Since Theravada has existed alongside brahmanical Hinduism and various
traditions of Hindu and Buddhist tantra in Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka, an
obvious question is whether borān kammaṭṭhāna developed from the placing
of a Theravada mantel over a body of practice that is essentially brahmanical
or tantric. In other words, is the Abhidhamma terminology a
superimposition, an attempt to make non-orthodox teachings appear
orthodox? Such a process could have taken place at a time when court
sponsorship in one of the regions that are Theravada today switched to
Theravada from Śaivism or Vajrayana, for example. Alternatively, is borān
kammaṭṭhāna a development within Abhidhamma-based Buddhism that
formed organically within Theravada, perhaps under some of the same
inﬂuences that shaped those other traditions too? This question is particularly
intriguing in the absence of any direct indication of borrowing from tantra,
such as a tantric pantheon, the sublimation of sexual union, or the speciﬁcs of
any tantric rituals known from elsewhere. Kitchai Urkasame’s extensive
study of borān kammaṭṭhāna materials from Thailand provides a thorough
and useful consideration of features associated with borān kammaṭṭhāna that
might be considered tantric in nature. He compares them with examples from
non-Theravada sources that are explicitly tantric, conﬁrming the lack of
direct borrowing. He also looks at the possibility of local developments to
explain some of the distinctive features.6
Here, I shall examine borān kammaṭṭhāna within the context of Theravada
meditation and doctrine. First I shall consider it as a path of practice
alongside other Theravada systems of meditation that we more commonly
associate with Theravada orthodoxy. I shall then look at instructions on how
to perform borān meditation in the light of the Abhidhamma terminology it
uses. At the end I shall return to this question of whether Abhidhamma is
fundamental or superﬁcial to borān kammaṭṭhāna. Not all features of the
borān kammaṭṭhāna processes of transformation apparent in the meditation
instructions can be understood with reference to Abhidhamma. I shall
identify some of these, so that we can consider them in subsequent chapters.
COMPARING SYSTEMS OF THERAVADA MEDITATION
While there are many meditation traditions in Theravada, and they are often
inﬂuenced by one another, I shall discuss borān kammaṭṭhāna as a
meditation system in the context of two comparators:
1. The normative, highly inﬂuential account of meditation derived from

--- PAGE 37 ---
and authorized by the ﬁfth-century-C.E. commentator Buddhaghosa
in his Visuddhimagga.
2. The modernized, also highly inﬂuential reform method of meditation
usually referred to as Vipassanā, originating in late nineteenth-
century Burma. Here I shall use Vipassanā for this type of
meditation in contrast to vipassanā to refer to “insight” as an
outcome of meditation.
In order to help make sense of the discussion as it develops I shall include
here a brief description of each meditation system, by which I mean the
structure of the path rather than the individual practices, followed by an
outline of borān kammaṭṭhāna to give an indication of what it shares with
these systems, as well as how it diﬀers. Parts of this description are fairly
technical, because the systems of meditation all relate to the Abhidhamma
accounts of the types of transformative puriﬁcation that lead to Awakening.
Buddhaghosa
The name of Buddhaghosa’s highly inﬂuential treatise, the Visuddhimagga,
means Path of Puriﬁcation and refers to the sequence of seven puriﬁcations,
visuddhi, that it describes.7 It does this in three sections, with meditation
being described in the second and third of these. The Visuddhimagga
diﬀerentiates two types or outcomes of meditation: calming samatha and
insight vipassanā. Both are predicated on the primary “puriﬁcation of good
conduct,” sīla (visuddhi 1). (I number these puriﬁcations in parentheses for
the purpose of clariﬁcation.) Sīla is the subject of the ﬁrst of the three
sections.
The process of calming meditation is achievable in varying degrees
through the forty kammaṭṭhāna or meditation methods described in the
Samādhi or concentration section, the second of the three sections of the
Visuddhimagga. It prepares the mind, making it focused, supple, positive,
and receptive. This preparation is described in the Visuddhimagga as the
“puriﬁcation of mind” (visuddhi 2). Leaving aside the psychological and a
range of secondary outcomes of speciﬁc samatha meditations, the primary
desired outcome of samatha practice is entry into a sequence of successively
more reﬁned states of calmness and concentration, termed jhāna, in which
the mind becomes completely focused, literally “one-pointed consciousness,”
ekaggacitta.
Samatha meditation is preparatory for reﬂective vipassanā meditation
processes found in the ﬁnal Paññā, “Wisdom,” section of the

--- PAGE 38 ---
Visuddhimagga. The vipassanā meditation processes are presented as
methods that precipitate “insight,” vipassanā, the transformative cognitive
insight into “the way things are,” which lies at the heart of Buddhism and
which constitutes Awakening. Vipassanā techniques involve the observation
of experience and the reductive analysis of that experience, following the
analyses oﬀered by Abhidhamma. This is achieved through a sequence of
three further puriﬁcations (visuddhi 3, 4, and 5). “Puriﬁcation of view”
(visuddhi 3) is achieved by analytic review of the body and mind. This
review of the body and mind is performed using one of a number of
deconstructions into their interrelating components: the ﬁve aggregates,
khandha, that constitute consciousness, aspects of consciousness, and
physicality that make up the individual and their experience, as discussed in
the previous chapter;8 the twelve bases, āyatana, of experience, namely the
six senses (the ﬁve physical senses and mind) and their objects (the ﬁve types
of tangible object, and thoughts); or the eighteen “elements,” dhātu, which
consist of the twelve āyatana plus their corresponding consciousness. In the
case of the eye, the āyatana are the parts of the eye that see and the visible
object, whereas the dhātu add the corresponding consciousness, namely
sight, to this pair. The next vipassanā-related visuddhi, “puriﬁcation of
doubt” (visuddhi 4), entails realizing the application of the twelve links of
dependent origination, paticcasamuppāda, the early Buddhist explanation of
the chain of causality that perpetuates samsara, the cycle of death and rebirth.
The ﬁnal vipassanā puriﬁcation is “puriﬁcation of knowledge and vision of
the right and wrong path” (visuddhi 5), through understanding precisely how
all phenomena, beginning with states that are familiar to the practitioner,
embody the three characteristics (lakkhaṇa) of conditioned existence:
impermanence (anicca), suﬀering (dukkha), and non-self (anattā).
Progress in this system has two aspects: on the one hand, there is progress
in samatha, which is measured through the practitioner’s attainment and
control of jhāna; and on the other hand, the practitioner also needs to
progress through this sequence of three vipassanā “puriﬁcations” described
in the previous paragraph in order to access two further and ﬁnal
puriﬁcations. The ﬁrst of the two ﬁnal puriﬁcations consists of a series of
nine sequential insights collectively known as the “puriﬁcation by knowledge
and vision of the Way” (visuddhi 6), paṭipadā-ñāṇa-dassana-visuddhi (Vism
XXI 1–128). This culminates in the second of the two ﬁnal puriﬁcations.
This ﬁnal stage is the acquisition of the four “paths and fruits” (magga-
phala) of the supramundane states, in which the practitioner transcends the
mundane existence of the ordinary person and enters the stages of personal
transformation that lead out of samsara. The four stages are “stream enterer,”

--- PAGE 39 ---
“once-returner,” “non-returner,” and “worthy one” or “arhat,” this last being
the Pali term for one who has attained Awakening under the teaching of a
Buddha. This supramundane stage is known as the “puriﬁcation by
knowledge and vision” (visuddhi 7), ñāṇa-dassana-visuddhi (Vism XXII 1–
32). The entire series of insight knowledges can be summarized as involving
a deepening insight into the three characteristics (lakkhaṇa).9
Buddhaghosa’s approach therefore proposes a hierarchical relationship
between samatha and vipassanā meditation, since it is vipassanā that
delivers the decisive insights of Buddhist Awakening. At the same time, the
two have a symbiosis in that the preparations of samatha are presented as a
necessary foundation for successful vipassanā. Implicit in this system is that
soteriological Buddhism requires the transformation of the individual. While
the methods of meditation are described in detail, the mechanisms of the
transformation that takes place are not discussed. It nevertheless requires the
combination of samatha and vipassanā to achieve that transformation.
The terminology and techniques discussed by Buddhaghosa became the
standard terms and techniques contended by all successive Theravada
meditation traditions. Even though Buddhaghosa’s account of meditation
became authoritative for much of Theravada, it should be noted that his
account is a selective synthesis of canonical materials that discarded some
practices described in the Pali canon, the set of authoritative texts believed
by Theravada Buddhists to record the teachings of the Buddha.
Vipassanā, or Insight Meditation
In discussing Vipassanā meditation in this book, I am primarily referring to
traditions developed in Burma from the late nineteenth century onward. The
most inﬂuential lineages emerged from teachings primarily associated with
two Burmese monks of the late nineteenth–early twentieth centuries: U
Nārada, the ﬁrst Mingun Sayadaw (1868–1955), and U Ñāṇadhaja, the Ledi
Sayadaw (1846–1923). Similar reforms were instigated by other Theravada
masters in the same period. The lineage from the ﬁrst Mingun Sayadaw via
Mahasi Sayadaw is also known as the “New Burmese Method” or the
“Mahasi Method,” or sometimes as “rising and falling.” Both lineages were
concerned to revive the practice of meditation, in part by simplifying it and
in part by making it accessible for practice by lay followers. For textual
authority both look back to the two closely related canonical texts, the
Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta and the more expansive Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta, as seen
through the explanations of them in the ﬁfth-century commentaries by
Buddhaghosa.10 Indeed, while the laicization of practice has been seen as a

--- PAGE 40 ---
response to various aspects of colonialism and modernity, the direct
inspiration may be Buddhaghosa’s commentary to the Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna
Sutta, which describes the ideal country as one where meditation is practiced
by all, and the subject of lively conversation by ordinary people as they go
about their business.
The overall thrust of Vipassanā as a system is to emphasize the direct
practice and experience of vipassanā insight meditation. This is achieved in a
large part by de-emphasizing samatha meditation. Some go so far as to
suggest that Vipassanā maintains that samatha is completely unnecessary,
but diﬀerent traditions vary on this aspect. Samatha is used in a restricted
fashion, for example, by the popular Goenka system of Vipassanā in the Ledi
lineage through U Ba Khin, which employs mindfulness of breathing,
ānāpānasati, a samatha technique, as a precursor to intensive review of
bodily sensations section by section. The Mahasi technique has the
practitioner observing the rising and falling of their abdomen as they sit and
labeling these sensations, or any other observations on posture or action that
arise, with single words—thus, “rising” or “falling,” et cetera.
Progress in Vipassanā is measured primarily in relation to the
practitioner’s experience of insight knowledges, vipassanā-ñāṇa.11 We came
across these in the Visuddhimagga as the set of nine sequential insights
collectively known as the “puriﬁcation by knowledge and vision of the
Way,” which constitute the sixth puriﬁcation (visuddhi 6). The Burmese
Vipassanā tradition looks to a diﬀerent formulation of these found in the
highly inﬂuential twelfth-century Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma,
the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha. This text lists a set of ten vipassanā-ñāṇa by
combining “puriﬁcation of knowledge and vision of the right and wrong
path” (visuddhi 5) in the Visuddhimagga with the nine sequential insights
that constitute visuddhi 6 of the Visuddhimagga path.12
While the higher attainments are not strictly secret—after all, they are
described explicitly in the Visuddhimagga and elsewhere—discussion of
them in Vipassanā circles is a matter of one-to-one interaction between
teacher and pupil, subject to expectations of privacy and decorum. In
contrast, basic entry-level practices are widely and freely taught, often to
large groups.13
As the above summary indicates, there emerged two uses of the term
vipassanā, “insight.” The ﬁrst is as the desired outcome of meditation. For
clarity, we are using vipassanā to represent this usage. The second is as the
name given to a system of meditations that focuses on achieving this
outcome, while downplaying the value of its partner outcome, samatha. For

--- PAGE 41 ---
clarity, I shall use “Vipassanā” to represent this usage, referring to the types
of meditation that developed in nineteenth–twentieth century Burma and
spread worldwide. It is primarily Vipassanā that has been adapted as
“Mindfulness” in the Western therapeutic context, with input from other
sources such as Zen.
Borān Kammaṭṭhāna
Here I provide an overview of borān kammaṭṭhāna in order to locate it
within Theravada meditation and contrast it with more familiar systems.
Despite its diﬀerences from them, borān kammaṭṭhāna describes itself as
system of samatha-vipassanā meditation, in other words, a meditation
system that achieves both the samatha and vipassanā outcomes, so the full
Buddhist path, as found also in the Visuddhimagga. Like the Visuddhimagga,
it presupposes the Abhidhamma worldview attested by the ﬁfth century in a
number of ways, playing close attention to its understanding of how causality
works.
One aspect of this worldview is the concept of momentariness, which
elaborated on the early Buddhist teaching of impermanence. All phenomena
or aspects of reality, dhammas have only momentary existence and are then
substituted by other dhammas. The constant termination and substitution of
dhammas provide the appearance of continuity. Dhamma in the sense of
phenomena or aspects of reality are divided into four kinds: rūpa,
materiality; citta, states of consciousness; cetasika, aspects of consciousness;
and nibbana, enlightenment. Momentariness and substitution apply to the
ﬁrst three. Progression on the path from ordinary person to arhat entails
inculcating positive attributes or factors of consciousness (cetasika) in the
development of the beautiful mental states (sobhana citta). The sobhana citta
consist of the skillful, resultant, and functional states (kusala, vipāka, and
kiriya citta). Functional states are those experienced by arhats, the equivalent
of skillful and resultant states of consciousness of those lower on the path but
without any attendant karmic consequences. All the sobhana citta feature in
borān manuals as the practitioner, having discarded unskillful mental states,
progresses very gradually from skillful to functional states.
In Abhidhamma, the process of substitution is carefully worked out. Only
certain types of citta may be replaced by other type of citta, meaning that
change follows certain sequences and is not random. Borān kammaṭṭhāna
follows those rules of possible causality, the possible permutations that allow
one to progress on the path. The most signiﬁcant diﬀerence in practice
between it and the Visuddhimagga and Vipassanā systems of meditation is

--- PAGE 42 ---
that borān methods then explicitly use the sobhana citta and cetasika
dhamma to create a new, enlightened body. This is achieved by the
practitioner pervading their body, their physical form (rūpa), with the
positive mental states (citta), and aspects of consciousness (cetasika) as they
are developed in meditation. In other words, the practice is extended beyond
altering the quality of consciousness and attainment of insight to altering the
physicality of the practitioner. In some lineages this is clearly envisaged as
building a Buddha within the practitioner’s “womb,” or core of their body.
These somatic aspects of the practice may seem alien to modern
practitioners who think of meditation primarily in terms of mind-science, but
they in fact reﬂect a detailed understanding of the relationship between
mentality and physicality found in Abhidhamma. The process uses physical
locations within the body, centering on the heart-base (hadayavatthu in Pali)
and the navel (nābhi), important also in the Visuddhimagga. Whereas
Abhidhamma canonical texts do not identify a speciﬁc physical basis or seat
for consciousness, the commentaries identiﬁed the hadayavatthu as that
basis, and it is to be found within the heart, the physical organ. The
Visuddhimagga mentions it also as a “pre-nascence condition” for mind-
consciousness. This means that the hadayavatthu is a precondition for the
arising of mental consciousness, an internal physical basis for thought,
parallel to the eye as the internal physical basis for seeing, et cetera. While
the Abhidhamma commentaries identify it as being implicit but unexpressed
in the canon, it seems likely that they identiﬁed it as implicit in response to
new knowledge in Indic anatomical understanding that arose after the
Buddhist canonical scripture began to be composed, in around the ﬁfth
century B.C.E, and before the commentaries on the canon were written, from
around the ﬁfth century C.E. onward. This new anatomical knowledge is
found in ayurvedic medical treatises such as the Suśruta Saṃhitā and
Caraka Saṃhitā that were composed during this intervening period.14
The somatic aspects of borān practice thus take seriously the Abhidhamma
understanding of the complex interrelationship between consciousness,
aspects of conscious, and materiality, and thus draw on developments in
understanding of rūpa. The concept of cittaja-rūpa, materiality (rūpa) that
arises (ja) from consciousness (citta), seems to be relevant here, even though
not explicitly named, because the process seems to involve creating new
form, a new body (rūpa), by bringing the citta and cetasika into these
physical locations in the body. While we have seen that borān kammaṭṭhāna
drew on the Abhidhamma material formulated between the closing of the
canonical material and the ﬁfth-century commentarial period, it does not
explicitly include the more detailed analysis of materiality found in later

--- PAGE 43 ---
Abhidhamma such as the inﬂuential twelfth-century compendium of
Abhidhamma, the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha, which further breaks down the
form of materiality (for example, into particles, kalāpa). Nonetheless, the
process of transformation described in the latter is helpful for understanding
the model of change underlying borān meditation because the
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha explains how causality in relation to rūpa, citta,
and cetasika works. Since the Visuddhimagga oﬀers an explanation of
progression in relation to meditation practice, both texts are useful for
understanding how borān kammaṭṭhāna conceptualized progress toward
arhatship in terms of the causality of rūpa, citta, and cetasika, and what this
means in terms of meditation.
COMPARING THE AMATĀKARAVAṆṆANĀ AND THE VISUDDHIMAGGA
For a more direct comparison with the Visuddhimagga in terms of meditation
topics, let us examine the broad contents of a borān kammaṭṭhāna meditation
manual from Sri Lanka called the Amatākaravaṇṇanā, “Account of the
Mine of Immortality.” The Amatākaravaṇṇanā is one of most the extensive
of the extant borān manuals. It was recorded in Pali by disciples of the
Siamese meditation masters who brought the method from Ayutthaya to
Kandy in the middle of the eighteenth century.
The Amatākaravaṇṇanā employs all but one of the kammaṭṭhāna that are
listed by Buddhaghosa under samatha meditation. It combines them with
another six components so as to create a thirteen-stage path. This adds three
additional stages at the start of the kammaṭṭhāna, which consists of diﬀerent
types of cetasika important in the development of jhāna. Then come seven
types of practice classiﬁed as samatha in the Visuddhimagga but in a slightly
diﬀerent conﬁguration. Then we move into the vipassanā stage, with the ten
insight knowledges (vipassanā-ñāṇa) of Vipassanā, which combines
visuddhis 5 and 6 of the Visuddhimagga, then the supramundane states
(magga-phala), and ﬁnally nibbana. The kammaṭṭhāna on the physical
elements, dhātu, is not given as a separate meditation subject in the
Amatākaravaṇṇanā. There are ﬁve physical elements, namely earth, water,
ﬁre, wind, and space, and they make up all materiality, rūpa. The reason no
kammaṭṭhāna dedicated to the elements is found here is because, rather than
being a separate meditation, they are found throughout all the meditations.
This is because of the method of incorporating the desired citta and cetasika
into the body, through combination with the elements that make up the
materiality, rūpa, of the body.
The aim of this path to Awakening is for the practitioner to embody the

--- PAGE 44 ---
full constituents of Buddhahood. The process takes the practitioner through
all the stages of mental and physical development via the step-by-step
development of the appropriate cetasika, aspects of consciousness, and citta,
states of consciousness. In this path, for each component, or each of its
subsets, until the higher levels, the practitioner’s concentration leads them to
experience a nimitta or “sign,” usually an intensely vivid, eidetic image.
Nimitta are explained in detail in the Visuddhimagga, but they are not as
pervasive there as they are in borān practice.15 The Amatākaravaṇṇanā
provides nimitta for almost all stages, although some of the advanced stages
have no corresponding sign. Those stages are said to lack any equivalent
sign, so are “without sign,” animitta. The Amatākaravaṇṇanā then—and this
is what makes borān kammaṭṭhāna distinctive—instructs the meditator to
internalize the nimitta for each of the thirteen stages into the body, from the
tip of the nostril to the practitioner’s navel. What are variously described as
meditation objects, processes, or states in the Visuddhimagga are here all
treated as being akin to subtle objects that can be physically manipulated
inside the body of the practitioner, in combination with diﬀerent aspects of
consciousness and physicality. The practice thereby combines the desirable
states of consciousness (citta), aspects of consciousness (cetasika), and
materiality (rūpa), the three types of phenomena or aspects of reality
(dhamma) according to Abhidhamma.
Figure 1
Comparison of the Kammaṭṭhāna Lists of the Amatākaravaṇṇanā and
the Visuddhimagga
NO.
PATH OF THE
AMATĀKARAVAṆṆANĀ
FORTY KAMMAṬṬHĀNA
OF THE VISUDDHIMAGGA
1
pañca-pīti – ﬁve joys
(5)
 
2
cha-yugala – six pairs
(12)
 
3
kāyacittasukha – ease
of body and mind

--- PAGE 45 ---
4
ānāpānasati –
mindfulness of
breathing (1)
(one of the 10 anussati,
below)
5
kasiṇa (10)
10 kasiṇa – the ten
visual devices
6
asubha (10)
10 asubha – the ten
impurities
7
kāyagatāsati –
mindfulness of the
body (32)
10 anussati – the
recollections
8
buddhānussati, etc.
(10)
9
arūpāvacara (4)
4 arūpāvacara – the
formless realms
10
brahmavihāra (4)
4 brahmavihāras – the
four “divine abidings”
11
dasañāṇa – the ten
knowledges (10)
 
12
catummaggaphala –
the four “paths and
results/fruits” (8)
 
13
amata-nibbana – the
deathless state of
Awakening (1)
 
 
 
the repulsiveness of
food

--- PAGE 46 ---
No separate elements
section, but elements
employed
“longitudinally” to
assist the integration of
all nimitta.
the elements (4)
As noted above, traditional borān practice begins with the ﬁve pīti, aspects
of consciousness (cetasika) present in the ﬁrst jhāna, itself a state of
consciousness, citta. The subsequent two stages also bring in cetasika
important in the early stages of meditation. Next we have the yugala, “pairs,”
six pairs of positive attributes of body and mind. These cetasika act as
antidotes to the ﬁve hindrances that block progress in meditation: desire, ill
will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and worry, and doubt. Once the hindrances
have been removed it is possible to attain the next set, kāyacittasukha, “ease
or happiness of body and of mind.” These are in turn necessary for attaining
three levels of focus or concentration, samādhi: momentary, access, and
absorption concentration, important at successive levels of transformation.
The third of these, absorption samādhi, allows full experience of jhāna. It
also enables the consciousness to avoid falling back into its habitual resting
state within samsara, so is crucial in the attainment of arhatship.16
While many of the stages of meditation in the Amatākaravaṇṇanā
correlate with those found in the Visuddhimagga, the Amatākaravaṇṇanā
uses a “delivery method” that is very distinctive to borān kammaṭṭhāna and
is not found in the Visuddhimagga or in Vipassanā. My reason for using the
phrase “delivery method” is that once an experience has been established,
such as the experience of the ﬁrst pīti, or joy, that comes with initial jhāna
experience, it must be taken into the body just as a pharmaceutical substance
might be delivered into the body in medicine. It is this taking in of the
experiences into the body that constructs the Buddha within. The nimitta
corresponding to the desired experiences are key to this delivery. The
Amatākaravaṇṇanā gives instructions for how to incorporate the meditation
stages into the practitioner’s body using the nimitta. Before looking at that
delivery method, let us ﬁrst consider the place of nimitta in Theravada
meditation.
NIMITTA IN THERAVADA MEDITATION
Both the Visuddhimagga and the Amatākaravaṇṇanā teach the nimitta as the

--- PAGE 47 ---
primarily visual characteristic of experiencing the outcome of a meditation,
but their use in borān texts is far more extensive. Early on in the manual,
some attention is given to describing what they are like, so that the
practitioner and teacher can both recognize that a stage has been successfully
reached. Here is the ﬁrst mention of the nimitta experience in the
Amatākaravaṇṇanā in relation to the ﬁrst pīti, or joy:
With his eye consciousness focused on the tip of his nose, he
should establish the consciousness of his mind on the supports
[ārammaṇa, objects of cognition] that are the in and out breaths.
While watching in this way drops of foam or rays of smoke-like
lines appear. He should recognize this as the acquiring sign
(uggahanimitta).17 Here alternative appearances for the nimitta are
given because they may be seen diﬀerently by diﬀerent people. In
the higher stages of some of the Sri Lankan manuals the experience
of nimitta is brieﬂy said to correlate to the nimitta for earlier
stages; in other words, the physical and visual experiences are
reused to represent diﬀerent meditation results at diﬀerent stages in
the practice.
In the Visuddhimagga, although nimitta are also noted as arising in a number
of other practices, the most extensive explanation of them and their use
comes in the section on the kasiṇa practices, the ten contemplations of
colored disks and other visual objects.18 In the borān traditions, the use of
nimitta is found with most stages of the practice, where the visual experience
of the nimitta often has no obvious correlation with the meditation from
which they develop. While meditators of non-borān methods often report the
experience of nimitta even with practices such as mettā, because of their
correlation with jhāna experience, they may treat them as interesting but
ultimately as side eﬀects of meditation. In contrast, the borān tradition
systematizes them. It treats them as both diagnostics of achievement and as
the medium for transporting what they represent into the body.19 Here is how
the Amatākaravaṇṇanā chapter on the brahmavihāra practices begins its
summary of the nimitta for mettā (loving kindness, the ﬁrst brahmavihāra):
The preliminary sign is like a ﬁreﬂy. The acquiring sign is like the
feathers of a peacock’s tail. The counterpart sign has the color of a
kālaguṇa stone.20 Such are the distinguishing marks of mettā.21

--- PAGE 48 ---
Three stages of nimitta are mentioned here. They are explained in the
Visuddhimagga in terms of the stages of progress in using a kasiṇa as a basis
for meditation. The ﬁrst, the preliminary sign, parikamma-nimitta, is what
the practitioner sees when relying on the external object. The second, the
acquiring sign, uggahanimitta, is when the practitioner is able to see the
object with their eyes shut as clearly as with them open. The third is the
counterpart sign, paṭibhāga-nimitta, which is a mental image of the
meditation object that the practitioner can manipulate independently of the
initial object. The counterpart sign is the object of jhāna citta, the states of
consciousness that constitute the experience of jhāna.22 As Eric Greene
points out, the ﬁnal stage, the counterpart sign, paṭibhāga-nimitta, is of an
altogether diﬀerent quality from the other two. It is more pure than the
original object and functions as a kind of essence of it.
The counterpart sign is not the perfect, “eidetic” visualization…of
the initial object of meditation, but rather something like the
puriﬁed essence of the object. For the water kasiṇa, for example,
both the original object and the “acquired sign” have bubbles,
froth, and other such details, while the counterpart sign “appears
inactive, like a crystal fan set in space”…(There is thus actually a
loss of visual “resolution” relative to the original physical object,
as one moves from the acquired sign to the counterpart sign.)
Signiﬁcantly, the counterpart sign is sometimes described in visual
terms even when the initial meditation object itself is not in any
sense a “visual” one. Thus in the case of meditation on the
breath,…it is said that the counterpart sign appears “to some like
star or a cluster of gems,” and to others “like a stretched-out
cobweb or a ﬁlm or cloud or a lotus ﬂower or a chariot wheel or
the moon’s disk or the sun’s disk.”23
It is this puriﬁed essence that the Amatākaravaṇṇanā draws down into the
body.24 The counterpart sign is particularly important in that it can lead to the
absorption samādhi, crucial in jhāna attainment.
While the Amatākaravaṇṇanā appears to add additional stages to the
meditation in comparison with the Visuddhimagga, for example by treating
the cetasika of the early stages of jhāna and the attainment of the eight
supramundane states as separate meditation exercises, it is clear that the more
discursive explanation of the Visuddhimagga is often helpful in explaining
the concepts the Amatākaravaṇṇanā mentions. In fact, while treated as

--- PAGE 49 ---
separate kammaṭṭhāna, all these additional topics are found in the
Visuddhimagga. 
Let 
us 
return 
to 
the 
comparison 
between 
the
Amatākaravaṇṇanā and Visuddhimagga that we began above. There we
provided a broad comparison of the meditation topics, the kammaṭṭhāna,
found in each, which revealed the broad correlation between the two, but also
revealed the additional stages found in the Amatākaravaṇṇanā. Here Figure
2 shows how each of the components within the thirteen meditation stages
contained in the Amatākaravaṇṇanā are all in fact also found in the
Visuddhimagga. The right-hand column provides the parallel occurrences in
the Visuddhimagga for each of the topics found in the Amatākaravaṇṇanā
Figure 2
Correspondence between Topics in the Amatākaravaṇṇanā and
Subjects Discussed in the Visuddhimagga
NO.
AMATĀKARAVAṆṆANĀ
VISUDDHIMAGGA
1
pañcapīti – ﬁve joys,
aspects of
consciousness
(cetasika) that arise in
early stages of jhāna,
the increasingly
elevated, focused state
of body and mind that
results from successful
meditation practice.
Vism IV 94–99; pp.
141–142
2
[cha-] yugala – six
pairs – positive
attributes of body and
mind. Again cetasika,
in this case the
antidotes to the ﬁve
hindrances.
Vism XIV 145–149;
pp. 468–469

--- PAGE 50 ---
3
kāyacittasukha – ease/
happiness of body and
of mind. The prelude to
the three levels of
concentration:
momentary, access,
and absorption
concentration.
Vism IV 99–100; p.
142
4
ānāpānasati –
mindfulness of
breathing
Vism VIII 145–244;
pp. 259–285
5
kasiṇa – the ten visual
devices that can be
employed as objects of
concentration
Earth Kasiṇa: Vism IV
2–198; pp. 118–165
Remaining Kasiṇa:
Vism V 1–42; pp. 166–
172
6
asubha – the ten ugly
sights of a corpse
Vism VI 1–94; pp.
173–190
7
kāyagatāsati –
mindfulness of the
body including
awareness of its thirty-
two constituent parts
Vism VIII 42–144; pp.
235–259

--- PAGE 51 ---
8
buddhānussati – the
ten recollections or
applications of
mindfulness sati,
beginning with the
recollection of the
Buddha
Recollection of the
Buddha: Vism VII 2–
67; pp. 192–209
Recollection of the
Dhamma: Vism VII
68–88; pp. 209–215
Recollection of the
Sangha: Vism VII 89–
100; pp. 215–218
Recollection of virtue:
Vism VII 101–106; pp.
218–219
Recollection of
generosity: Vism VII
107–114; pp. 219– 221
Recollection of deities:
Vism VII 115–118; pp.
221–222
Recollection of death:
Vism VIII 1–41; pp.
225–235
Recollection of the
body: Vism VIII 42–
144; pp. 235–259
Recollection of
breathing: Vism VIII
145–244; pp. 259–285
Recollection of peace:
Vism VIII 245–251;
pp. 285–287
9
arūpāvacara – the
formless realms – i.e.,
non-material jhāna
Vism X 1–66; pp. 320–
336

--- PAGE 52 ---
10
brahmavihāra – the
four “divine abidings”
meditations: mettā,
loving-kindness;
karuṇā, compassion;
muditā, sympathetic
joy; and upekkhā,
equanimity
Vism IX 1–124; pp.
288–319

--- PAGE 53 ---
11
dasañāṇa – the ten
knowledges or insights.
These are Puriﬁcations
(5) and (6) of the
Visuddhimagga, and
the vipassanā-ñāṇa of
Vipassanā.
1. sammasana-ñāṇa
knowledge of
comprehension Vism
XX passim
2. udaya-vyaya-
dassana-ñāṇa
knowledge of rise and
fall Vism XX 93–104;
pp. 652– 656 and Vism
XXI 3–9; pp. 662–663
3. bhaṅgānudassana-
ñāṇa knowledge of
dissolution Vism XXI
10–28; pp. 663–668
4. bhayatupaṭṭhāna-
dassana-ñāṇa
knowledge of
appearance as terror
Vism XXI 29–34; pp.
668–669
5. ādīnavānudassana-
ñāṇa knowledge of
danger Vism XXI 35–
42; pp. 670–673
6. nibbidānudassana-
ñāṇa knowledge of
dispassion Vism XXI
43–44; pp. 673–674
7. muccitu-kamyatā-
dassana-ñāṇa
knowledge of desire
for deliverance Vism
XXI 45–46; pp. 674
8.
paṭisaṅkhānupassanā-
ñāṇa knowledge of
reﬂection Vism XXI
47–52; pp. 674–676

--- PAGE 54 ---
9.
saṅkhārupekkānupassanā-
ñāṇa knowledge of
equanimity about
formations Vism XXI
61–65; pp. 678–679
10. anuloma-
anupassanā-ñāṇa
conformity knowledge
Vism XXI 128–136;
pp. 692–695
12
catummaggaphala –
the four “paths and
results/fruits” – i.e., the
four stages on the path
to arhatship, beginning
with stream entrance,
divided into eight, the
path and the result
Vism XXII 3–31; pp.
696–702
The ﬁrst path – ﬁrst
noble person
The ﬁrst fruition –
second noble person
The second path – third
noble person…
The fourth fruition –
eighth noble person
13
amata-nibbana – the
deathless state of
Enlightenment
The attainment of
cessation:
Vism XXIII 15–60; pp.
730–740
This means that there is resounding overlap in terms of technical language
and 
the 
envisaged 
pathway 
of 
transformation 
between 
the
Amatākaravaṇṇanā and the Visuddhimagga, even while the internalization
of the meditation attainments into the body through the combining of the
citta and cetasika with the rūpa of the body is absent from the latter.
INITIAL GENERATION OF NIMITTA
Diﬀerent lineages of borān practice teach the initial steps leading to nimitta
diﬀerently. In the more traditional versions of the practice at Wat Damrei Sar
in Cambodia and at Wat Ratchasittharam in Thonburi, Thailand, the

--- PAGE 55 ---
practitioner is speciﬁcally not told what to expect from their meditation. The
nimitta must arise spontaneously. In the former, one is taught how to breathe
while reciting arahaṃ and given a question to ﬁnd the answer to, even
though the meaning of the question is not obvious. At Wat Ratchasittharam,
one again begins with a basic breathing practice, this time speciﬁcally
focusing on the area two-ﬁngers breadths below the navel, while repeating
the phrase bu-ddho.25 As the mind settles and gains focus, the nimitta arise
and these are reported to the teacher. In other lineages, such as that used by
the Dhammakaya network of temples, one actively visualizes the crystal gem
or crystal-like Buddha image. This practice is therefore more akin to kasiṇa
practice, but with diﬀerent objects of meditation to start with. One might
conjecture that providing the practitioner with a description of what to look
for is a feature of the modernization of the practice to make it easier to teach
in large groups, or at speed. However, Phibul Choompolpaisal has recently
identiﬁed it as deriving from the practice associated with a group of ﬁfty-six
unnamed meditation teachers from Ayutthaya, so dating back to at least the
eighteenth century.26 Sot’s instruction to Kapilavaḍḍho, quoted at the outset
of this chapter, represents a midway point between these two ends of the
spectrum. Sot told Kapilavaḍḍho what to expect, but not to actively visualize
it.
More traditional lineages also include a preliminary stage prior to the
actual meditation practice. At the preliminary stage, the practitioner invites
the dhamma, the desired phenomenon that he wishes to experience, usually
the appropriate cetasika, to arise. The Pali term for the invitation is
ārādhanā, from the verb ārādheti, “to please, propitiate.” The same term is
used when inviting a god to attend a ceremony at a temple. In Wat Damrei
Sar in Cambodia, although the dhammas are regarded as external realities,
there is no detailed litany for this. Rather, the nimitta representing these
dhamma arise spontaneously in the correct order in response to the
practitioner seeking answers to the “question” the teacher has posed.
However, Wat Ratchasittharam in Thonburi, Thailand, preserves a process of
invitation that closely corresponds to the more elaborate invitations found in
the Sri Lankan manuscripts of the eighteenth-century practitioners. One such
text is a litany called the Vākkapprakaraṇa to be used in conjunction with
the Amatākaravaṇṇanā. When the practitioner invites the dhammas in the
Wat Ratchasittharam practice, he uses honoriﬁcs that reﬂect the treatment of
them as high-status, independent entities. These honoriﬁcs are also applied to
the kammaṭṭhāna, the meditation exercises themselves, which ties in with
them being one of the ﬁve refuges. The Thai honoriﬁcs are ong and phra
before the term, both used in Thai culture before the name or term for

--- PAGE 56 ---
something sacred such as a Buddha image and a Buddhist monk, and chao
used after. Thus the cetasika desired in the ﬁrst stage of meditation practice,
the pīti or delights, is addressed as ong-phra-pitithamma-chao.27 The use of
an invitation to the desired dhamma reﬂects the understanding that they have
a certain amount of autonomy, even though they are conditioned. This may
correspond with the Abhidhamma analysis of citta as internal, ajjhattika, and
cetasika as external, bāhira, like visitors, despite the fact that citta cannot
arise without a minimum of seven concomitant cetasika.
We know from current practice, from the diagrams in the Sri Lankan and
Lao manuals, and from other borān kammaṭṭhāna evidence that the nimitta
may be experienced as spheres of light. These may be marked by individual
Pali syllables, such as a, ra, or haṃ if it is a set of three, or na mo bu ddhā
ya if it is a set of ﬁve. This relates to the borān conceptualization and use of
sacred language. The expectation is that these are in Khom script, the
Cambodian script used for the Pali language across the Khmer-Tai cultural
region until the modern period. Simple nimitta, then, appear as colored lights
or spheres, on their own or with Buddha images or sacred syllables, and may
be attended by physical symptoms such as coolness, tingling, or
horripilation. Phibul Choompolpaisal has recently provided a detailed survey
of the varied types of nimitta found in manuals from Thailand and Laos from
the seventeenth century onward, which were published in the 1930s.28
In some lineages, nimitta may become more complex and even narrative.
This is a feature characteristic of the Cambodian tradition, where the nimitta
may become didactic or give access to living beings in other realms. Thus the
nimitta of the lower stages of the path at Wat Damrei Sar in Cambodia not
only indicate attainment of the ﬁve pīti, but also such important cultural
values as the qualities of parents, family, and teachers, as well as important
Buddhist teachings such as rebirth and asubha, the impurity and
impermanence of the body. It is also believed that through the practice
people may also meet with the dying, deceased, and inhabitants of other
realms, either deliberately or spontaneously. This last aspect explains the role
of meditation practitioners in Cambodian funerals, a role that continues in
name even as the availability of actual meditation practitioners has become
more scarce. With these more complex nimitta, we ﬁnd an interesting
parallel between borān kammaṭṭhāna and Tibetan dream yoga. In the latter,
the illusory nature of the external world may be harnessed to move between
dream, life, and interlife states. In Theravada, by contrast, the external world
really exists, creating the reverse relationship: the nimitta experienced by the
practitioner are indicative of external realities. Both worldviews allow the
harnessing of meditation experience to navigate this life and the next.

--- PAGE 57 ---
INCORPORATION OF THE NIMITTA
Keeping for now with the simple nimitta in the forms of spheres of light, the
practitioner, after developing the nimitta, grasps or catches (Pali gaṇheti)
each sphere of light at the tip of the nose, one by one, and repeatedly moves
them inside through the nostril. Male practitioners bring the visual image
through the right nostril, female practitioners through the left nostril. This
right-hand/left-hand division is parallel to the treatment of male and female
embryos in Ayurveda, a point to which we shall return later, but we shall see
from this point on correspondences between the treatment of the baby-to-be
in traditional South Asian medicine and the treatment of the Buddha-to-be in
borān kammaṭṭhāna.29 From the nostril the practitioner moves the visual
images down to place them (ṭhapeti) in the energy bases in the body. The list
varies, but always starts with the tip of the nose and ends up in the “womb,”
two ﬁngers’ width from the navel, as seen in the instruction to Kapilavaḍḍho
at the start of this chapter. In fuller lists, the nimitta is moved from the tip of
the nose, to the back of the nose between the eyes, between the eyebrows, to
the top of the head, at the back of the head, the epiglottis, the heart, the navel,
and ﬁnally the place situated at a distance two ﬁngers’ width from the navel.
Some manuals, including the Amatākaravaṇṇanā, do not mention the bases
between the nostril and the epiglottis. Other Sri Lankan manuals include
locations around the mouth and further down in the body, including the
groin.30 Again, this use of energy channels from the right or left nasal cavity
down to the womb parallels the use of delivery pathways to deliver medicine
to treat a male and female embryo respectively in traditional obstetrics.
While the locations may be reminiscent of the cakra centers used in yoga and
tantra, or the marma of traditional Indian medicine, I have found no use of
these terms in the manuals I have examined to date. I have, however, found
the term nāḍī, “energy channel.”
After placing these visual representations of the meditative experiences in
or near the navel, the practitioner combines them at that point, in diﬀerent
arrangements within the body, both vertically, especially between the heart
and navel, and horizontally, on the plane at the level of the navel. In other
words, the navel functions as the central location of a horizontal plane across
the body, around which these nimitta can be moved. It seems that this is the
way for them to enter the “interior of the womb” (antogabbhasmiṃ) two
ﬁngers’ width from the navel. Although the womb imagery might suggest
that the practitioner, whether male or female, is identiﬁed as female, at least
symbolically, this issue is nowhere raised in the existing teachings. The
practitioner repeatedly draws down along this channel from the nostril to the

--- PAGE 58 ---
womb the successive jhāna and dhammasaññā, “realization of the quality”
sought in relation to each of the kammaṭṭhāna to build the enlightened being
within. They draw the qualities in, ﬁrst in order, anuloma, and then in reverse
order, paṭiloma, terms also used in Abhidhamma in relation to the positive
and negative ordering of permutations to represent all the possible
combinations of causality.31
The practitioner continues the process of internalization by invoking the
ﬁve elements (earth, water, ﬁre, wind, and space) that make up all
physicality, including the human body, and plants them also at the place on
which the meditation is focused, the navel, again in diﬀerent arrangements.
The practitioner brings further aspects of the meditation such as the skillful,
resultant, and functional (kusala, vipāka, kiriya) states of consciousness and
aspects of consciousness (citta and cetasika) into this physical location, again
bringing the jhāna and placing them on the points they had been previously.
Increasing combinations are brought into the body in relation to each
kammaṭṭhāna including a grammatical element, the “six sounds.” These are
the six places of articulation that allow diﬀerent phonemes to be produced in
the mouth.32 After completing the various cycles of combination, the
practitioner now “ties” (Pali bandhati) each element of this new Buddha
body into the fabric of their own physical being and, in so doing, recreates
themselves as an arhat or a Buddha.
The various manuals from Sri Lanka all teach the same process but vary in
what information they provide and how fully they represent the techniques.
This indicates that they were composed as a record of the practice by
individual practitioners. Sometimes these give us additional details. For
example, one manual mentions an inspiring sermon as an occasion that might
lead to the experience of pīti. Small snippets like this in manuals that are
otherwise dry and technical remind us that even where the early stages of the
process are not described, the ritualistic aspects of this practice harness actual
experiences. They do not appear to be purely formulaic, yet for the most part
they leave the process for inculcating the experience unspoken.
This movement of desirable aspects and states of consciousness between
and at speciﬁc places throughout the body reﬂects pre-modern South Asian
understandings of consciousness as mobile, while the reconstructing of these
aspects in diﬀerent combinations relates to the Abhidhamma understanding
of consciousness as composite and ever-changing. The rapid iteration of the
process, as well as reﬂecting the Abhidhamma understanding of
momentariness, may reﬂect the process of transformation found in the
puriﬁcation of mercury and gold, as we shall discuss later, when looking at

--- PAGE 59 ---
parallels with traditional chemistry. Here, embryology is again relevant,
since traditional mercury puriﬁcation was also thought of in terms of the
creation of a new being through the union of male and female elements.
Progression in borān kammaṭṭhāna is obviously aimed at reaching the
supramundane states from stream entrant to arhat. In practical terms it is
measured by the practitioner’s experience of the nimitta and other signs—
experiences that are recognized and interpreted by their teacher—as well as
by their ability to control the process of internalization of nimitta and the
construction of the internal Buddha. How the progressive incorporation of
the qualities of consciousness into the body relates to nibbana is not
completely explained in any of the manuals. Some accounts of this path refer
to the discarding of the transient, physical body on death, at which point the
successful practitioner enters full nibbana.
ORTHODOXY, ORTHOPRAXY, AND ABHIDHAMMA
The extensive use of Abhidhamma concepts, path, and terminology in borān
kammaṭṭhāna locates it within Theravada “orthodoxy.” The earliest high-
proﬁle criticism of borān kammaṭṭhāna as unorthodox came from the monk
Vajirañāṇa, Prince Mongkut, later King Rāma IV (1804–1868). When he
was still a monk and was trained in these practices, Mongkut dismissed them
as unorthodox because they were not visible in canonical and commentarial
texts. As Mongkut became more powerful, meditation practitioners
responded to this critique by aligning their practices with normative textual
sources. We shall return to the reforms of Buddhism in the modernization of
Thailand later, but here I want to consider the possibility that such criticism
altered how borān texts were presented, to make them look more orthodox.
In other words, is the Abhidhamma of borān material the result of what is
referred to in textual studies as “contamination,” the changing of one
recension of texts under the inﬂuence of a diﬀerent lineage?
This process of making the manuals look more orthodox could certainly
apply from the time of Mongkut onward. According to Olivier de Bernon, we
can see the normalization of texts within the tradition by comparing two
printed 
texts 
of 
the 
borān 
kammaṭṭhāna 
manual 
entitled 
the
Mūlakammaṭṭhāna published in 1931 and 1934, both based on the same
now-lost eighteenth-century manuscript from Wat Ratchathiwat (Wat
Samoray) in Bangkok, which contained a manual belonging to the late
eighteenth-century abbot of that temple. The second version of this text was
published by Phrayakosakonvijan (also known as Boonsri Praphasiri, 1882–
1963), a senior oﬃcer in the Thai Government.33 According to Bernon,

--- PAGE 60 ---
Phrayakosakonvijan altered the text, trying to make sense of it by adding
passages from the normative Visuddhimagga and Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha,
both mentioned above, into the texts.34 In this same period, in 1936,
Yasothararat produced an edition of multiple borān kammaṭṭhāna texts,
whose range in geography and time, from regions now covered by Laos and
Thailand between the sixteenth to early twentieth centuries, makes it one of
the most important sources of evidence for the chronology and range of
borān kammaṭṭhāna in Southeast Asia. In his introduction, he mentions
comparing the texts with the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha and Visuddhimagga,
which, as Phibul Choompolpaisal points out, begs the question of
contamination in his edition.35
However, the Amatākaravaṇṇanā manual explored above stems from the
eighteenth century. If we turn to borān kammaṭṭhāna evidence that predates
Mongkut or falls outside of his sphere of inﬂuence, we ﬁnd that the
concordance with Abhidhamma and the categories and worldview of the
Visuddhimagga is ubiquitous. The related Phitsanulok dhammakāya
inscription of 1549, and the longer versions of the dhammakāya text that
circulate, use Abhidhamma terminology.36 A particularly striking piece of
evidence for the compatibility of normative Pali texts and borān
kammaṭṭhāna is the Cambodian royal decree of 1920. This decree sought to
suppress traditional Cambodian Buddhism of which borān meditation is just
one aspect. It names attainments of which practitioners should not boast, yet
these attainments are instantly recognizable from the “orthodox” account of
progress in Abhidhamma, and they are found listed in the Visuddhimagga.
These include the following results of successfully following the path of
Theravada meditation, terms all found in our discussion above, in both borān
texts and the Visuddhimagga: jhāna, vimokkha, samādhi, sampat, magga,
and phala. However, for me it is the very detail of the path to nibbana laid
out in texts such as the Amatākaravaṇṇanā and other manuals compiled in
Sri Lanka following the meditation mission from Ayutthaya in the mid-
eighteenth century that conﬁrms the extensive correspondence between
borān kammaṭṭhāna and Abhidhamma. It is too fundamental to the structure
and the practice to be the result of superimposition.
The 
Amatākaravaṇṇanā 
and 
its 
accompanying 
litany, 
the
Vākkapprakaraṇa, break down the entire path toward the practitioner’s goal
of achieving nibbana into progressive stages, through a process of discarding
unskillful mental factors (akusala cetasika), and developing skillful mental
states (kusala citta) and their attendant mental factors (kusala cetasika) and
the higher beautiful mental states in ways that demonstrate a detailed
understanding 
of 
the 
Abhidhamma 
analysis 
of 
causality. 
Phibul

--- PAGE 61 ---
Choompolpaisal has pointed out that some of the modernization of borān
methods entailed a simpliﬁcation of the practice by focusing on individual
sections, rather than following the entire sequence of practices.37 As we have
seen, it is the sequence that clariﬁes the relationship with the Abhidhamma
analysis of the path. The modernization methods seem to obscure rather than
clarify or enhance the relationship with Abhidhamma. This may explain why
the extent to which the few surviving lineages of borān kammaṭṭhāna
recognize the extent of the relationship with Abhidhamma varies. Indeed, in
Thailand reform Buddhists emphasized the ﬁrst two of the three sections of
the Pali canon, the Vinaya Piṭaka on Monastic Discipline and the Sutta
Piṭaka, to the detriment of expertise in the Abhidhamma Piṭaka, facilitating a
rift between meditation and Abhidhamma. The loss of expertise in
Abhidhamma may have contributed to the lack of recognition of the
processes envisaged in borān practice.
It is possible, then, that the additions of sections of the Visuddhimagga and
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha and their consultation in publications of the 1930s
were an attempt to provide clarity, prompted by the recognizable
Abhidhamma character of the material before the redactor, just as we have
drawn on these same texts above. For if this “orthodoxy” is a
superimposition onto an unorthodox underlay or framework, it must have
been imposed prior to any of our existing evidence for the tradition, prior to
the diﬀerent branches of borān kammaṭṭhāna spreading throughout the
Theravada world, and long prior to any of the accusations of unorthodoxy
made in the modern period. There is no evidence of an unorthodox
“framework.”
Rather than speculating about alternative sources for which there is no
evidence, we can have better success in construing the issue not as a question
of orthodoxy, correct doctrine, but as one of orthopraxy, correct practice. The
ways in which the realization and embodiment of those orthodox doctrines
are delivered to the practitioner, through a process of internalization into the
body, are not described in the Pali canon or the Visuddhimagga. The delivery
methods of borān kammaṭṭhāna are what make it distinctive and at ﬁrst sight
hard to understand. While not mentioned in such texts as the Visuddhimagga,
these too appear to be a working out of causality and how change is brought
about, based on Abhidhamma conceptions of momentariness and an Indic
model of consciousness. The Abhidhamma substructure to the practice does
not explain all aspects of it. Why the mechanism employed took the exact
form that it did will be examined in subsequent chapters. For now, let us
consider the issue of physical change as an aspect of spiritual transformation
in Theravada Buddhism. Borān kammaṭṭhāna goes beyond the meditation

--- PAGE 62 ---
systems with which we have compared it by providing a process of ensuring
that the changes in consciousness (citta and cetasika) bring about a change in
materiality (rūpa). In other words, the practitioner’s body is changed, not just
their mentality: meditation is not just a mind-science. How does this compare
with Abhidhamma expectations of enlightenment? Was it envisaged purely
as a matter of consciousness, or also somatic transformation?
Abhidhamma makes a direct link between our consciousness and resulting
physical manifestations. This applies not only to ordinary humans but to
enlightened beings. When, in Theravada, the concept of the Buddha was
subjected to analysis, a more detailed conception emerged of both the
“wisdom” and “physical” attributes or strengths of the Buddha (ñāṇabala
and kāyabala).38 Enlightenment transforms the Buddha psychosomatically,
in a way that precludes the dichotomy that isolates body from mind.
The following account is taken from the commentary on the Paṭṭhāna, the
seventh book of the Abhidhamma. The Paṭṭhāna encapsulates the Buddha’s
omniscience in relation to the doctrine of causality that underpins Theravada
understanding of samsara and the path to nibbana. The physical
transformation described here takes place after the Buddha’s enlightenment
when he is contemplating the Abhidhamma, but it only takes place once he
contemplates the Paṭṭhāna in particular, which, as noted above, explains
how all the components of reality, dhammas, interact. The six rays that
emanate from the Buddha, described below, are ﬁrst mentioned in the
canonical Paṭisambhidāmagga (III 1.2). They recur throughout borān
kammaṭṭhāna materials, with some variation in the colors ascribed to them,
where various functions are attributed to them.39
But when coming to the Great Book [Paṭṭhāna], he [the Buddha]
began to contemplate the twenty-four universal causal relations of
condition and so on, his omniscience certainly found its
opportunity therein…. Rays of six colours—indigo, golden, red,
white, tawny, and dazzling—issued from the Teacher’s [the
Buddha’s] body…. The indigo rays issued from his hair and the
blue portions of his eyes. Owing to them the surface of the sky
appeared as though besprinkled with collyrium powder, or covered
with ﬂax and blue lotus-ﬂowers…The golden rays issued from his
skin and the golden portions of his eyes. Owing to them the
diﬀerent quarters of the globe shone as though besprinkled with
some golden liquid, or overlaid with sheets of gold, or bestrewn
with saﬀron powder…. The red rays issued from his ﬂesh and

--- PAGE 63 ---
blood and the red portions of his eyes. Owing to them the quarters
of the globe were coloured as if painted with red-lead powder, or
besprinkled with the liquid of molten lac,…The white rays issued
from his bones, teeth, and the white portions of his eyes. Owing to
them the quarters of the globe were bright as though overﬂowing
with streams of milk poured out of silver pots, or overspread with a
canopy of silver plates…The tawny and dazzling rays issued from
the diﬀerent parts of his body. Thus the six-coloured rays came
forth and caught the great mass of earth…. The rays penetrated the
earth and caught the water below…. They penetrated the water and
caught the atmosphere…they sprang forth into the open space
beyond…. into the open space across to the inﬁnite world-
systems…. Even Great Brahmā, able to diﬀuse light throughout a
billion world-systems, became like a glow-worm at sunrise.40
CONCLUSION
This chapter has explored how Theravada Buddhist meditation relates to
Abhidhamma, the Theravada analysis of causality that provides the blueprint
for spiritual transformation. We set out by identifying distinctive features of
borān kammaṭṭhāna. We then compared borān kammaṭṭhāna with two
systems of more widely recognized types of meditation: the system found in
the Visuddhimagga and that found in Vipassanā, the nineteenth–twentieth
century meditation revival stemming mainly from Burma. We found
signiﬁcant correspondences between them.
While all three systems relate to Abhidhamma, borān kammaṭṭhāna takes
the realization of Abhidhamma a stage further. It considers not only the
transformation of consciousness, citta, and aspects of consciousness,
cetasika, the objective of all Theravada meditations, but how these also aﬀect
materiality, rūpa, the body of the practitioner. This makes borān
kammaṭṭhāna a somatic practice in which the body is not just the object of
meditation, but its subject. The body is the locus of personal transformation.
We therefore considered the process whereby borān kammaṭṭhāna seeks to
harness changes in consciousness to bring about physical change in the body
by drawing the achieved meditative attainments into the body, centered in the
“womb” of the practitioner, and embedding them there.
Key to this process is the manipulation of the meditation attainments,
usually represented by their corresponding eidetic experiences, nimitta.
While nimitta are explained in the Visuddhimagga, their use in borān
kammaṭṭhāna is far more extensive and the delivery methods unique to the

--- PAGE 64 ---
practice. This led us to the question of whether the pervasive Abhidhamma
of borān kammaṭṭhāna is fundamental to it or a superimposition on an
earlier, non-Theravada system of practice. We concluded that modernity has
obscured rather than emphasized the Abhidhamma foundations of this
practice, and that borān kammaṭṭhāna is the literal, detailed enactment of the
Abhidhamma path. This enactment takes the physical transformation of
enlightenment seriously, a transformation recognized in colorful accounts of
the Buddha’s own enlightenment journey in late canonical and early
commentarial texts.
While this chapter has identiﬁed the Abhidhamma elements of borān
kammaṭṭhāna, we also noted other methods it employs for bringing about
transformation, methods that are not found in the authoritative literature of
Theravada. Before turning to examine these other features in more detail, the
next chapter summarizes the evidentiary basis for our understanding of borān
kammaṭṭhāna. How extensive is the evidence, and can it provide a timeline
for the practice?

--- PAGE 65 ---
3
DOCUMENTING THE ESOTERIC
The Production and Survival of Evidence for Borān
Kammaṭṭhāna Meditation
The princess cowers within the sāl tree, still shifting anxiously
between its ﬁve branches. Every day now the ﬁve giants who have
protected her grow weaker even though she continues to care for
them. The three warrior queens have persistently attacked her in
her refuge. She has resisted but is tired, and now the most insidious
of the queens has infected the tree with termites. As the infestation
takes hold it grows ever more doubtful that the tree can continue to
support the princess and her giants. The three spiteful queens have
sent ingratiating messages to the king, informing him of the next
strategy he should employ: “Send a snarling tiger, your majesty, or
a rampaging elephant; otherwise a wild bear or a fearsome man
brandishing a sword. If she sees them coming to get her she’ll
weigh her options quickly and rush to you to escape.” The king
comes in person and stands quietly watching. Then as the princess
drops out of the tree, hoping to ﬁnd a new one nearby, the king
snatches her. He rapes her. Afterward she escapes from him to a
new tree. The king cannot see her, but stands there waiting,
knowing that at some point she will have to leave her new
sanctuary too.
—Abridged, adapted translation from the non-canonical
Maraṇañānasutta, Sinhala redaction by Varañāṇa Mahāthera, c.
17591
In the previous chapter, I gave an account of borān kammaṭṭhāna practice
and how, despite the shared underpinnings of Abhidhamma, it diﬀered from
the Theravada meditation systems most well known in the modern period. In
this chapter, I want to look at the evidence on which that account was based.
Given that borān meditation is an esoteric practice, and one close to

--- PAGE 66 ---
extinction, what evidence for the practice is there? Also, while the practices
indicate an Abhidhamma worldview in place by the ﬁfth century C.E., this
only establishes the terminus post quem, the period during or after which
these practices arose. What does concrete evidence for the practice tell us
about the terminus ante quem, the date by which these practices were in
circulation?
This chapter will provide a broad description of the genres of textual
evidence available for borān kammaṭṭhāna and an account of where we ﬁnd
this evidence. By way of background we will discuss the material culture of
Theravada manuscripts. We shall examine the eﬀect and politics of the
adoption of printing, as well as resistance to it. In this context, we start to see
how modernity began to aﬀect the nature of Theravada Buddhism and the
place of borān kammaṭṭhāna within it. This leads us to examine how the
material evidence that we do have came to be produced and how it survived,
as well as how it relates to both extinct and surviving, living lineages. At the
end we shall examine what the existing evidence tells us about the dating of
this tradition. A summary of this evidence and the timeline it provides is
found at the end of the chapter, in Figure 3.
GENRES OF BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀNA TEXTS
First, let us look at the textual evidence for borān kammaṭṭhāna in terms of
content. What genres of text provide evidence for it? Since borān
kammaṭṭhāna was part of a broader culture, there is no clear cutoﬀ for this,
but I shall focus on the two main genres pertinent to meditation. At the end
of this section I shall touch brieﬂy on a few other types of text that indicate
either the conceptual framework for borān practice or ways in which it is
applied to other areas. The main two genres are narratives that provide
allegories and explain the broader context and manuals directly related to
instructions for meditation.
Exoteric and Esoteric Narratives
Not all material related to borān kammaṭṭhāna is esoteric. The opening
excerpt above is from a narrative text redacted for one of the queens of the
Kandyan kingdom of Sri Lanka by one of the meditation masters from Siam.
The text is an allegory. The princess hiding in the trees is called Princess
Mind or Consciousness, citta. The king who lusts after her, determined to
dominate and control her, is Māra, king of the realm of death and rebirth,
samsara. The ﬁve-branched tree is her body in this life, the ﬁve giants her

--- PAGE 67 ---
inner strengths. There are ﬁve birds of prey in the tree, which guard the gems
within. These birds are the senses, and one must overcome them to realize
the gems, the truths, of Buddhism. The three warrior queens constantly on
the attack are called Birth, Old Age, and Sickness, the most insidious being
the last. The termites represent the diseases that in life gradually weaken our
body. The entire story is an allegory for the inevitability of death and rebirth,
unless one can ﬁnd the gems that are the Four Truths, or four stages of
spiritual progress, hidden within oneself. This timeless story, the story of
each and every one of us, was recounted by the Siamese monk Varañāṇa
Mahāthera to the chief queen of Kandy in Sri Lanka at some point in the late
1750s.2
Such allegories are used to convey both the doctrine and the experience of
medical and existential crisis. Using narrative to teach doctrine adds the
experiential, emotional dimension not represented in a dry treatise or
textbook. The story conveys the anxiety of daily life and the inevitability and
horror of death, which one needs to acknowledge and accept at a
fundamental level if one is to make the life-changing eﬀort to ﬁnd a way out
of samsara. It is the horror of this experience that sends Princess Cittā, or
Prince Citto in the versions for men, in search of the Buddha and the truths
he taught.
Here, I have abridged the story of Princess Cittā; in full it includes
interlinear commentary that draws out the allegorical meaning much as I
have just done.3 It explains the psychology of death, that even when people
survive other onslaughts, shock and fear may still kill them: hence the ﬁnal
shock tactics suggested by the three queens to the king whom they serve.
Asides in the text add further information on how to interpret the signs that
people begin to see shortly before death as prognostications of their
imminent rebirth.
The text about Princess Cittā typiﬁes one of two genres prevalent in the
evidence for traditional meditation: narratives and meditation manuals. Each
narrative provides an explanation of doctrine in an accessible, memorable,
and motivational form, conveying complex concepts and emotions. The
concepts explained are the Buddhist theories of death, rebirth, life, and
salvation. Another such narrative text, which appears to be connected with
borān kammaṭṭhāna, is the non-canonical Nibbāna Sutta. It also opens with a
tree, this time representative of our deﬁlements, which hold us back from
nibbana, and must be cut down. The text goes on to describe the otherwise
intangible state of nibbana as a beautiful city, thronging with birds and bees,
each component a metaphor for some aspect of the Buddhist path, an image

--- PAGE 68 ---
found beautifully depicted in eighteenth-century Thai manuscripts.4
While these two apocryphal suttas are exoteric texts, some narratives
reveal a hidden symbolism. For example, the well-known Indian epic the
Rāmāyaṇa, in which Prince Rāma must rescue his abducted wife Sītā, is
recast in borān Theravada as an allegory for the path to nibbana. Prince
Rāma is the citta, the mind of the practitioner. His devoted servant, the
monkey god Hanumān, is the internal breath of the practitioner. Sītā is the
internal gem or sphere of light that the practitioner must realize within him-
or herself. The gem represents the nimitta that mark the stages of successful
meditation culminating in nibbana—just as Rāma progressively comes closer
to ﬁnding and releasing Sītā, so the practitioner must undertake the
progressive stages to ﬁnd and realize nibbana. The island of Laṅkā on which
Sītā is imprisoned is the maternal womb. The crossing of the ocean is the
initiation that the practitioner undertakes with the meditation master. The
army of monkeys that help Rāma are the meritorious actions of the
practitioner. The villain Rāvaṇa and his twelve brothers are the negative
qualities that the practitioner must overcome. Sītā’s banishment is the death
of the practitioner, and the ﬁnal reunion of Rāma and Sītā is entry into
nibbana.5 Such narratives can be extensive. The narration of the Rāmāyaṇa
was recorded by François Bizot in Cambodia in 1969. It was related to him
by a traditional storyteller over the course of several days.6 Anne Hansen
observes that earlier generations of Cambodians had been very wary of
revealing this and other esoteric material to outsiders. In 1903, one of the
ﬁrst outsiders to document borān material, Louis Finot (1864–1935), then
director of the École française d’Extrême-Orient, repeatedly requested a copy
of this very text but was declined.7
Practice Manuals
In contrast to this rich imagery, the manuals of borān kammaṭṭhāna tend to
be technical and minimalist rather than evocative and discursive. They are
extremely terse, often in the form of mnemonics and semi-encoded. These
features reﬂect the esoteric nature of the practice, the fact that the manuals
are prompts rather than complete set of instructions. In the longer manuals,
the aspiration appears to be to contain the entire path to liberation, as detailed
in the Abhidhamma, in a single set of instructions. While lengthy, they are
still tightly composed and technical. So laconic are these manuals that,
without the evidence of living practice lineages—many of which came to an
end in the mid-to-late twentieth century—the guidance they provide for
meditation practice would be impossible to follow. It may well be this that

--- PAGE 69 ---
confounded early textual scholars and led outsiders to dismiss the practices.
The living practices recorded by Bizot and others in Cambodia before they
died out and the few remaining adapted living traditions, which are detailed
below, have been crucial in understanding how the practices are to be
performed. For the higher level practices, some elements are a matter of
speculation, since I am unaware of a living tradition that pursues the
unmodernized practices at the highest level documented in some of the early
modern manuscripts.
Manuals vary in length from a few pages to thousands of verses.
Traditional meditation teachers (achar/grū) in Cambodia would carry one on
their person, sometimes tucked inside their shirt. Such manuals tend to
consist of around ten short-length palm-leaf folios and provide diagnostics
for the teacher to check when listening to the experience of his pupils. They
simply list meditation subjects and the possible physical and visual
phenomena, the nimitta, that the meditator might experience at diﬀerent
stages of practice. They therefore remind the teacher of the order of practice
and what to expect at each stage, so that he can keep track when dealing with
the regular reports of multiple meditators, all at diﬀerent stages of the
practice. Fuller manuals provide the nimitta, the places that these should be
moved to in the body, and the patterns and combinations of movements to be
made. They may break down the entire path from ordinary mortal,
puthujjana, to arhat into cumulative stages of bringing the nimitta,
representing the desired cetasika, aspect of consciousness, into the body, in
combination with the desired citta, state of consciousness, and the physical
elements. The Sri Lankan manual that we drew on in the previous chapter,
the Amatākaravaṇṇanā, is terse and uses a variety of abbreviation
techniques. Nonetheless, it takes up 100 full-length palm-leaf folios.8
Some manuals also provide litanies for the rituals of devotion and
oﬀerings to the Buddha and the teacher, to be performed by the practitioner,
as well as the requests to the meditation experiences, which, as we have seen
in the previous chapter, must be invited to appear as if autonomous, external
entities. Litanies may be embedded in meditation manuals or freestanding.
The litany that accompanies the Amatākaravaṇṇanā is presented separately
and, on its own, takes up a further 50 folios, making the complete set of
instructions 150 folios in length. Bearing in mind that these 150 folios are an
abbreviated form of the practice, we can see that the complete practice
entails an extensive period of meditation, and progression is envisaged as
taking place over months if not years. Even the ﬁrst stage undertaken in
Cambodia today takes place over the course of the three months rainy season
and is not necessarily completed in a single year.

--- PAGE 70 ---
Other than manuals for meditation and preparatory devotional practice,
there are instructions for how to apply the meditation, for example to healing
or protection.
Other Topics in Borān Kammaṭṭhāna Texts
While these two broad textual genres, the narrative and the technical manual,
are the most common texts available to date, other texts touch on aspects
pertinent to borān kammaṭṭhāna or its worldview. These include texts on
language and cosmogony, the origin of the world, and even texts for
consecrating Buddha images. Also, narrative and manual texts are not always
exclusive: occasionally they intertwine. Each might include additional
information in the form of numerology in association with language,
alchemy and embryology, explanations of symbolism, or signs relevant to
prognostication.
MATERIAL EVIDENCE
Having looked at the borān texts in terms of content, I now turn to the
material evidence: in what form are these texts preserved? The material
evidence provides us with piecemeal information that will allow us to draw
up a timeline for the most recent centuries of borān practice traditions.
Inscriptions
As we shall see, few manuscripts in the Theravada world date back more
than two to three centuries, with the earliest—other than those inscribed on
more durable materials such as stone or metal—dating to the sixteenth
century. It is therefore tantalizing that an inscription discovered at Wat Suea,
Changwat Phitsanukok, the “Phitsanulok inscription,” dated to 1549,
contains a text that in versions preserved at later dates in manuscript form
have a connection with borān kammaṭṭhāna. Now housed in the National
Museum in Bangkok, the text equates parts of the Buddha’s body with
diﬀerent components of the attributes of the Buddha and the doctrines of
Abhidhamma.9 The text continues to circulate and is used, as seems
appropriate, in the consecration and empowerment of Buddha images. In
addition to the use of drawing parallels between the physical and the spiritual
attributes, slightly longer versions of this text also guide the meditator to
recognize these parallels. This and the conscious construction of a Buddha
body within the practitioner as a composite body of spiritual attributes
suggest that the inscription is related to the borān kammaṭṭhāna tradition.

--- PAGE 71 ---
However, the brevity of the inscription prevents us from using it as a source
of dating for borān kammaṭṭhāna, even though, as we will see, a text
associated with the Lao Supreme Patriarch Sivisuddhisom in the early
sixteenth 
century 
conﬁrms 
the 
contemporary 
presence 
of 
borān
kammaṭṭhāna in the region.10
Some other inscriptions from the Sukhothai cultural region, centered to the
west of Phitsanulok, may also be of relevance, not as direct evidence of
borān kammaṭṭhāna, but of the attitude to language as a potent force. Dated
to around the ﬁfteenth century, they contain Pali formulae of the qualities of
the Buddha and the contents of Abhidhamma, condensed down to
representative syllables. In the middle of the sixteenth century, Ayutthaya
was sacked by the Burmese. Traditional Southeast Asian warfare involved
the capture and relocation of large numbers of war slaves, so with Ayutthaya
depopulated, people from the Sukhothai region were forced to migrate to
Ayutthaya to restore its numbers. Peter Skilling, in his study of these
inscriptions, suggests that the culture of letter alchemy represented by these
inscriptions, also found in shorter form on images from the region, may have
been taken to Ayutthaya with them.11 Given the contemporary presence of
borān kammaṭṭhāna in the region, it is possible that this mass relocation
inﬂuenced the subsequent development of Ayutthaya as a hub of borān
kammaṭṭhāna. As we shall see below, Ayutthaya’s inﬂuence in the
transmission of borān kammaṭṭhāna reached its height in the eighteenth
century, until it was again sacked by the Burmese in 1767. At this point
Ayutthaya’s direct inﬂuence ended, but it continued indirectly through those
who moved with the capital to Thonburi.
The Physical Manuscript
Manuscripts in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia were mainly written on two
kinds of material: the stacked palm leaf, following the traditional Indian
format; and the much softer local paper formed in long, folded sheets. Both
are vulnerable to insects and animals, to rotting if damp, and to becoming
brittle, cracking, and turning to powder if they dry out. Most extant
manuscripts therefore only date back to the past few centuries. A small
number of manuscripts date back to the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
but these are the minority. Texts from before the eighteenth century were
therefore usually only preserved for as long as they were used, because these
would be recopied. This means that we cannot look to manuscripts to provide
physical evidence to oﬀer a full timeline for Theravada meditation, be it
borān kammaṭṭhāna or other practice lineages. On the other hand, the

--- PAGE 72 ---
importance of reproducing texts to ensure the survival of the Buddhist
religion, the sāsana, meant that manuscript copying was highly meritorious
in its own right. This, and the ready availability of the most commonly used
materials, means that hundreds of thousands of manuscripts have survived
from the eighteenth and twentieth centuries. These were produced throughout
the Theravada world by Buddhist monks and laypeople, who for the most
part received their training in literacy at the monastery, often during
temporary ordination. The number of these that relate to borān kammaṭṭhāna
is at least in the hundreds, and possibly more.
Palm-Leaf Manuscripts
Palm-leaf manuscripts are made mostly from the Talipot palm, Corypha
umbraculifera Linn. They are usually preserved ﬂat, two inches in height and
twelve to eighteen inches in length. They are bound together by rods or
strings passed through one central or two proportionately spaced holes,
depending on the length of the leaf, and clamped between two rigid wooden
cover boards. Those borān-related texts that were treated as literary
compositions, 
such 
as 
the 
story 
of 
Princess 
Cittā 
and 
the
Amatākaravaṇṇanā, both mentioned above, are found in this form. Manuals
appropriate for carrying about on the person tend to use shorter leaf sections,
perhaps eight inches in length. This is the form taken by some of the
meditation manuals of borān kammaṭṭhāna still circulating in Cambodia
today, retained by teachers on their person for quick consultation, containing
just key terms and descriptions of nimitta. Shorter texts, such as those used
for astrological records, may also be rolled along their length, the palm leaf
remaining highly ﬂexible for a number of years. I have not come across any
borān kammaṭṭhāna–related texts in this form.
The lettering on palm-leaf manuscripts is cut into the leaves with a sharp
stylus, after which soot is rubbed over the leaf, catching in the incisions so as
to make the letters stand out black against the creamy yellow of the leaf. A
single manuscript may contain a few leaves or several hundred, and may
contain only part of a text, a single text, or several texts.
Since palm leaf splits easily and the available surface space is relatively
small, illustrations on them are rare, although their covers may be highly
decorated. Despite the rarity of illustrations within the body of palm-leaf
manuscripts overall, both medical manuals and borān kammaṭṭhāna
meditation manuals contain line drawings that illustrate instructions. The
diagrams in the meditation manuals mostly indicate the correct placing of
nimitta, signs of meditation experiences, on or in the body. These are often in

--- PAGE 73 ---
the form of concentric circles, perhaps with lines coming from them
indicating patterns of movement for manipulating the nimitta.
Paper Manuscripts
In Southeast Asia, there are paper manuscripts with a larger format, with the
writing surface of each opening measuring as much as ten to twelve inches
by ﬁfteen to twenty-four inches, made of two diﬀerent trees belonging to the
family Moraceae. One is mulberry paper, made from the paper mulberry tree,
Broussonetia papyrifera (Moraceae). The other paper is called khoi (Thai)
and is made from Streblus asper (Moraceae), common in central Thailand.12
Although Streblus asper is also grown in Sri Lanka for its medical
properties, the paper is not found there. The pulp made from the bark of
either plant is set in long strips, which are glued together to form a
continuous leporello, or folded book. The larger format allows for painted
illustrations and detailed depictions of medical diagrams and narrative
scenes. The softer mulberry paper is also used for protective diagrams,
yantra. Yantra on mulberry paper may be pulverized and drunk mixed in a
liquid, such as water or milk. Other types of surface may also be used for
yantra, such as cloth, so that it may be worn; lead, so they can be inserted
under the skin; and the body itself, with the diagrams drawn on the skin
through tattooing.
Ink, Secrecy, and Printing
The ink used on paper manuscripts is also traditionally made of soot, in this
case made liquid by being dissolved in animal bile and other substances.
Secrecy surrounds the additional ingredients used in such ink when the
syllables to be written are medical or protective. Because of the furor in
1920s Cambodia over the printing of a Buddhist text (below), the
signiﬁcance assigned by traditionalists to all aspects of manuscript
production is well documented. Not only the paper, the ink, and the script,
but also other aspects of the manuscript including the wrappings were
regarded as sacred and also richly symbolic of matters considered
fundamental to esoteric Theravada practice, such as fetal development.13
However, by the second half of the twentieth century, partly as a result of the
gradual erosion of manuscript culture after the arrival of the printing press,
partly for convenience, modern European-style school notebooks also began
to be used for the writing down of Buddhist texts. Cambodian borān
kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts in closed teacher-pupil lineages from the
1960s–’70s are often in this form.

--- PAGE 74 ---
Since borān practice was still widespread when manuscript culture gave
way to printing in the twentieth century, we can still hope to ﬁnd a
substantial amount of evidence of pre-modern Theravada Buddhist thought
and practices. The challenge for identifying material on borān kammaṭṭhāna
is the esoteric nature of the tradition and the lack of distinguishing
terminology. This means that cataloguers may not recognize the lineage to
which a meditation manual belongs. The identiﬁcation of related materials is
also hindered by the lack of accessibility of some national collections in
Theravada countries.
THE PRODUCTION AND SURVIVAL OF BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀNA MANUSCRIPTS
The esotericism of borān meditation and symbolism was retained until
recently and explanations were not to be passed on to any but initiated
students. As such, manuscripts were made to support such esoteric teachings
and not for general circulation. This limited the number of manuscripts that
circulated as well as the content.14 As noted above, meditation manuals
created in the context of disciple-pupil transmission were for the most part
straightforward lists of key terms intended as supporting documents to an
oral tradition. They focused on providing lists of nimitta, diagnostic
checklists for teachers to assess the level of attainment reached by their
students. On their own, they tell little about the practice, and this meant that
those seeking to revive or understand meditation solely on the basis of texts
found the sophistication and rationale of the practice hard to detect or
appreciate.
The inclusion of such texts and more extensive manuals in personal and
temple library collections seems to have come about largely when they
ceased to be used as a support for practice. This lack of use made them
vulnerable to being recycled or given away without new copies being made.
One form of recycling of manuscripts in mainland Southeast Asia is to
pulverize them as powerful ingredients for protective amulets. This has been
the fate of some of the manuscripts at Wat Hong in Thonburi, once an
important center of borān kammaṭṭhāna associated with King Taksin in the
late eighteenth century and still home to a historically signiﬁcant collection.
Nonetheless, a signiﬁcant number of borān manuscripts have survived into
the modern period, becoming part of bigger collections once they had ceased
to be used by the practice tradition. Individual borān kammaṭṭhāna
manuscripts also turn up in temple collections in Laos, Cambodia, Thailand,
and Sri Lanka.
More extensive borān kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts seem to have been

--- PAGE 75 ---
produced at speciﬁc periods in response to a crisis or some kind of
insecurity: the need to secure for posterity what had previously been
transmitted orally from teacher to pupil outweighed the concern for secrecy.
The high concentration of manuscripts at Wat Hong and at other temples in
Thonburi such as Wat Ratchasittharam may be a reﬂection of the status of
these temples as the homes to lineages transmitted from Ayutthaya, the old
capital of Siam (Thailand), in the aftermath of the Burmese destruction of
Ayutthaya in 1767. We shall discuss the history of these lineages and others
in later chapters.
The in-depth nature of borān kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts that circulated in
Sri Lanka from earlier in the same century also reﬂects the feared fragility of
the transmission. Three missions of monks and texts were sent from
Ayutthaya a decade before its sack to help revive Buddhism in Sri Lanka.
The second mission, in 1756, brought borān meditation masters. The
Sinhalese monks they trained knew they would not have the luxury of being
able to consult their teachers for long. After eight years, their Siamese
teachers returned home, and many of the local monks were dispersed to
provincial monasteries throughout Sri Lanka. Anticipating this disruption,
the students wrote manuals to support their continued long-term practice
once they were without a teacher, and it is thanks to their foresight that we
are able to relate borān practice to a detailed expertise in Abhidhamma.
These manuals tell us little about the initial stages of the meditation, but a
great deal about the advanced practice.
Since the importation of the tradition to Sri Lanka in the mid-eighteenth
century was part of an attempt to revive Buddhism on the island, it coincided
with an escalation of Pali and Sinhala literary production. Narratives and
commentaries relevant to the tradition were also written down, such as the
allegory of Princess Cittā cited above. Some meditation manuals were also
ornamented with literary ﬂourishes such as poetic openings to the sections
and the inclusion of paritta newly composed by Väliviṭa Saraṇaṃkara, the
supreme patriarch who led the revival.15
The resulting texts related to borān meditation were produced within these
practice lineages after the arrival of the meditation masters from Siam, and as
such were not part of the prestigious, well-documented consignment of texts
that was also sent from Siam at this time, which were housed in important
temples of the period. If we studied only the latter texts, we would learn
nothing of the meditation practices that were part of the revival. As the
lineages of pupils from these initial practitioners died out, their manuscripts
passed into local temple libraries, and that is how we have access to them

--- PAGE 76 ---
today. Several were still circulating in Sri Lanka when two monks, Ratnajoti
and Ratnapāla (below), consulted them in the early 1960s. Individual
manuscripts are found in temple libraries in Sri Lanka and in the Colombo
Museum. They also found their way into European collections, such as the
Museum für Indische Kunst in Berlin,16 and the British Library.
Another crisis that led to the writing down of this otherwise primarily oral
tradition took place in the 1970s in Cambodia, in the lead-up to the
Democratic Kampuchea period, in which the Marxist-Leninist Khmer Rouge
under the leadership of Pol Pot oversaw the suppression of religion,
economic policies that led to mass starvation, and mass genocide. To prevent
the tradition from being lost, Cambodian practitioners wrote down what they
could recall. These modern manuscripts were important for the research of
French scholars working for the École française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO),
primarily François Bizot and Olivier de Bernon. After the Pol Pot period,
when EFEO returned to Cambodia in 1990, Olivier de Bernon and local staﬀ
based at Wat Uṇṇalom began to organize the collection, documentation, and
storage of Cambodian manuscripts that had survived the devastation of the
civil war. They estimated that over 90% of Cambodia’s literary heritage had
been destroyed in a period of just ﬁfteen years. Nonetheless, at least ﬁve
borān kammaṭṭhāna manuals (the Mūlakammaṭṭhāna) are recorded in their
catalogue, the FEMC, launched in 2011.17 Meanwhile, some practitioners
within the tradition had also done their best to keep as many texts as possible
safe. One such practitioner was Achar Oun of Kampong Cham Province,
who gathered a collection of approximately seventy traditional manuscripts,
including some from the families of fellow practitioners who had died in the
civil war. Five of them are speciﬁcally borān meditation manuals, and there
are also about a dozen modern-style notebooks on the subject.18 These have
also been copied by staﬀ at the École française d’Extrême-Orient.
In Laos the Marxist revolution of the 1970s appears to have done less
damage to manuscripts than in Cambodia. Although the tradition was not
revived in Laos, some borān kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts have been identiﬁed
by researchers, and at least nine borān kammatthāna manuals appear in the
catalogue of the Digital Library of Lao Manuscripts (DLLM) launched in
2009.19 Individual copies from Laos also occasionally appear in European
collections.20
THE DIFFICULTY OF IDENTIFYING BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀNA MANUSCRIPTS
Many temple and library manuscript collections are yet to be fully
catalogued, and more borān kammaṭṭhāna texts seem likely to emerge when

--- PAGE 77 ---
they are. Because of the shared Abhidhamma basis of meditation
terminology, distinguishing between diﬀerent systems of practice when
cataloguing a manuscript can be diﬃcult. Also, cataloguers may be unaware
that there are such diﬀerences. When the borān aﬃliation of a manuscript is
recognized, it is often a result of its resemblance to the Yogāvacara’s Manual
published by Rhys Davids in 1896 or its similarity to works published by
François Bizot and Olivier de Bernon. The presence of the unusual circular
diagrams peculiar to these meditation manuals is of additional assistance in
identiﬁcation. Of the nine manuscripts identiﬁed in the DLLM, two have the
distinctive diagrams; the remaining were recognized by the title of
Mūlakammaṭṭhāna, “fundaments of meditation” or “fundamental/original
meditation,” the subject of the PhD thesis of Olivier de Bernon and of work
by Bizot.21 Mūlakammaṭṭhāna is the usual Southeast Asian name for the
manual that in Sri Lanka circulates as the Amatākaravaṇṇanā, drawn on in
our examination of the more complex aspects of the practice. However, the
term Mūlakammaṭṭhāna is found elsewhere in Theravada meditation
literature and does not necessarily indicate that a text belongs to this
tradition.22
THE FORMATION OF LARGE MANUSCRIPT COLLECTIONS
There are large collections of Sri Lankan and Southeast Asian manuscripts in
Europe, Calcutta, and Bangkok that were formed by a process of laying
claim to the material and knowledge cultures of the newly colonized, or, in
the case of Bangkok, newly centralized territories in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. Although British, Thai, and French dominance of
the region is reﬂected in the collections of the British Library in London, the
National Library of Thailand in Bangkok, and the Bibliothèque Nationale in
Paris, at this time other European countries, such as Russia and Germany,
were also adding to their manuscript collections.23 The Nevill collection at
the British Library, put together by the British colonial oﬃcer Hugh Nevill in
Sri Lanka, contains a particularly high concentration of borān manuscripts,
consisting of at least seventeen separate texts across eleven manuscripts.
During the period when Nevill was building his collection, meditation
appears to have been pursued primarily by members of the newly introduced
Rāmañña Nikāya monastic lineage. Monks of the Rāmañña Nikāya were
inﬂuenced by canonical text-based meditation and the beginnings of
Vipassanā meditation that were being developed in Burma. The manuscripts
related to borān kammaṭṭhāna had largely been discarded. One century on
from the Siamese mission that had introduced them, they were now to be

--- PAGE 78 ---
found, unused, in monastic libraries around the country. Nevill, with his eye
for the unusual, acquired them, even though knowledge about Buddhist
meditation among Europeans at the time was minimal, as we have seen. The
manuscripts are particularly interesting because of their extensive detail.
They also represent the single branch that arrived from Ayutthaya in 1756,
allowing us to form a relatively complete picture of a single system of
practice. For while there is overlap between the diﬀerent texts, none is
completely the same, each adding more details of the instructions. The
collection was bought by the British Library in 1897 after Nevill’s early
retirement and death, ultimately believed to have come about from his injury
in a riot against the British six years earlier.24
An as yet little-explored collection of manuscripts that already looks set to
contain a signiﬁcant number of borān kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts is held in
the National Library in Bangkok. It was formed during the ﬁrst decades of
the twentieth century when the policy in Thailand was to gather up and—in
public—destroy the nation’s regional manuscripts. Some manuscript
collections survived, some by favor, some by subterfuge. Others were
overlooked, and some survived because the manuscripts were in the personal
possession of monks and laypeople rather than in the temple libraries.
However, hundreds of thousands of vernacular and Pali-vernacular mixed
language texts were removed from monasteries and villages throughout the
country.
This destruction or removal of vernacular, local materials took place in
parallel with the government-sponsored publication of normative materials in
high numbers. Normative texts were those now regarded as representing
orthodoxy or orthopraxy by the hierarchy of the Thammayut (Pali
Dhammayutika) monastic lineage, a minority, reform wing of the Sangha
established by the future King Mongkut (Rāma IV) in 1833 when he was
himself a monk. Although the lineage was in a minority, it was given
precedence and power over the majority Mahanikay (Pali Mahānikāya)
“large monastic lineage” under King Mongkut and his successors. The
normative publications they produced in Pali and Bangkok Thai languages
were distributed nationally. One set of texts was the entire Pali canon. This
was the Chulachomklao Tipiṭaka of 1893, the ﬁrst-ever printed edition of the
Pali canon, compiled in twenty-eight volumes under the patronage of King
Chulalongkorn, Rāma V, the son and successor of King Mongkut. Other
printings circulated included works on meditation and monastic discipline on
the model of the new textbooks produced to roll out the educational reforms
of another of Mongkut’s sons and Chulalongkorn’s half-brother, the scholar-
monk Wachirayan. We shall look at the eﬀect of these reforms on meditation

--- PAGE 79 ---
practice later.
An additional reason behind the removal of manuscripts across the country
may have been the ongoing belief in the knowledge and supernatural power
contained within them, knowledge mastered in traditional training. We can
see a parallel in the European treatment of Buddha relics. Whereas the
Protestant British and Americans were merely dismissive of the tooth relic of
Sri Lanka, the Portuguese Catholics went to great lengths in their attempts to
acquire and destroy the tooth relic in ways speciﬁcally designed to destroy its
inherent power—indicating the extent to which they accepted the power of
relics as real.25 Similarly, in the 1890s–1910s, Thai authorities burnt many
manuscripts to destroy their inherent power. However, they also wanted to
retain that power for themselves. So, many—perhaps the majority—of the
manuscripts were not in fact destroyed but transported to Bangkok. Several
hundred thousand manuscripts collected by the authorities over a period of
two decades now lie in the National Library in Bangkok, an institution that
was set up in the midst of this process in 1905 by the merging of royal
libraries. For the most part the extent of this wealth of manuscripts was not
public knowledge until very recently, although a fraction of the collection
began to be digitized and catalogued in the 2000s. Among many other
subjects covered are writings relating to borān kammaṭṭhāna and to the
transmission of the Ayutthaya tradition of borān meditation to Sri Lanka.26
A collection based on interest in meditation was made by the monk Jan,
abbot of Wat Baromnivat in Bangkok, in the 1890s. His collection included
our earliest datable text, a seventeenth-century manuscript that recorded a
text that had once belonged to the early sixteenth-century Lao Supreme
Patriarch Sivisuddhisom, giving us the earliest conclusive date for borān
kammaṭṭhāna. We shall discuss this collection more in the context of
publications made in the 1930s.
A collection of manuscripts dating back to the Ayutthaya period has been
recently reassembled in khana 5, the meditation section of Wat
Ratchasittharam, former home to the late eighteenth-century Supreme
Patriarch Suk Kaitheun. These texts were dispersed within the monastery
under the tenure of the section head prior to the present incumbent,
Phrakhrusangkharak Veera Thanaveero, who is his son. According to Veera
Thanaveero, other section heads borrowed interesting or important
manuscripts, including personal manuscripts that had previously belonged to
Suk, and did not return them. Veera Thanaveero has spent the last forty years
trying to reassemble and protect the collection. It is not yet clear to me
whether this implies that the living practice lineage also underwent duress,

--- PAGE 80 ---
although the temple has a continuous, named teacher lineage. In 2012, Veera
Thanaveero set up a foundation dedicated to its preservation, the
“Foundation Institution Kammatthan Majjhima Baablumdup.” Another
Thonburi temple with a signiﬁcant number of relevant manuscripts is Wat
Hong, associated with King Taksin, who is known to have practiced this
form of meditation.
As noted above, even though palm-leaf manuscripts contain little room for
illustrations, diagrams were drawn on them to show the positioning of
nimitta in the body. Some of the larger format folding manuscripts from the
Ayutthaya and Thonburi periods, which permit fuller illustration, attempt to
show the ﬁnal stages of the path by showing the arhat, fully enlightened
practitioner, realizing the gem at his navel. One such illustration, depicting
the ﬁnal four of eight supramundane states into which the culmination of the
spiritual path are categorized in Theravada, is shown on the cover of this
book. The eight stages are the path to, and realization of, these four stages:
stream entrant (one who has a maximum of seven lifetimes left in samsara),
once-returner, non-returner (who, not quite becoming an arhat in this life,
matures to that status in a particular heaven), and arhat, the liberated,
awakening individual. The cover illustration is of the non-returner and
arhat.27
THE INTRODUCTION OF PRINTING TO THE THERAVADA WORLD
The printing press acted as a catalyst both in the expression of new ideas
developed in the response to colonialism, and in the imposition of centralized
reform on the former diversity and relative autonomy of Theravada teaching
lineages in Southeast Asia. Here we shall show how print both marginalized
borān kammaṭṭhāna and provides us with some of our most extensive,
informative, and earliest evidence.
Printing had its origins in East Asia at the end of the seventh century. A
contributing factor was the desire to stem the decline of Buddhism by
preserving the Dhamma, combined with the idea that the written word was
representative of the presence of the Buddha.28 Although the same beliefs
were also found in Southeast Asia, and the related technology of seals in the
creation of Buddhist sealings was employed in the region, the printing press
was not adopted in Southeast Asia prior to European inﬂuence. Rather,
beliefs about the protective power of the Dhamma and the importance of
ensuring the ongoing presence of the Buddha’s teachings informed and
sustained the long tradition of manuscript sponsoring and copying, with the
production of manuscripts being an integral part of the culture of merit-

--- PAGE 81 ---
making that lay at the heart of Theravada practice.29 When the printing press
did arrive in the modern period, it was not immediately adopted by
Buddhists. Even once it was, some traditionalists continued to resist it.
It had taken several centuries for printing technology from East and
Central Asia to reach Europe.30 When European presses such as that of the
German printer Johannes Gutenberg were developed in the ﬁfteenth century,
they had a signiﬁcant impact on the transmission of new religious ideas, and
were instrumental in the spread of the Reformation.31 Similarly, the
mechanical high-speed printing press, ﬁrst designed by Friedrich Gottlob
Koenig for The Times in London, led in the early 1800s to a rapid increase in
the transmission of ideas and new scientiﬁc discoveries, as well as to the
development of the Press as an institution. Mindful of printing’s initial
impact during the Reformation and its subsequent usefulness in cheaply
producing tracts in debates between Christian groups, Christian missionaries
of the colonial period introduced printing to Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka in
the mid-nineteenth century.32 Their intention was to spread “the Word” and
thereby displace Buddhist and other beliefs.
The activities of the missionaries awoke Buddhist reformers and
revivalists in the region to the potential of printing to spread new ideas and
help prolong the now-imperiled teaching of the Buddha. They were inspired
to acquire presses of their own both to try to stem the encroachment of
Western ideas and Christianity, and also to inﬂuence fellow Buddhists.
Prince Mongkut of Thailand acquired a printing press at Wat Bovornnivet
shortly after the American missionary Dan Beach Bradley introduced the
printing press from Singapore in 1835.33 In 1862 the Sri Lankan Buddhist
monk Mohoṭṭivattē Gunananda, who went on to win a decisive and
inﬂuential debate between Buddhists and Christians at Pānadura in 1873,
acquired a press that had been imported by Christian missionaries.34 Both
Mongkut and Gunananda were inﬂuential in the development of modernized,
rationalized Buddhism with claims to its civilizational superiority and its
congruence with modern science. Located as these presses initially were in
the hands of those ready to adopt new technology, it was not the more
conservative, the supporters of borān kammaṭṭhāna, who used them to
express their worldview.
THE IMPACT OF PRINTING ON BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀNA
A noted impact of the printing press is to “democratize” literacy and access
to literature, including newly introduced or freshly written literature, beyond
the circles of the literati—as the Catholic Church had found to its cost during

--- PAGE 82 ---
the Reformation. The printing press can free people up from the set canons of
their traditional sources of learning. It allows individual writers and small
organizations to reproduce and distribute any texts they choose, and to have
their name associated with them. It can encourage diversity and support
subversion. On the other hand, when publication is in the hands of a
centralized authority or works are printed by a prestigious, powerful
individual or group, or if the distribution of books is accompanied by a
rhetoric of state-building or of defending against the decline of Buddhism, it
can have the opposite eﬀect. We see both eﬀects in the Theravada world of
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Among Theravada Buddhists, once they too adopted the printing press, the
former eﬀect was more pronounced in countries such as Burma and Sri
Lanka where the king had been deposed, leaving the Sangha without royal
patronage and in need of popular support. The printing press empowered
those engaging in a response to Christians and colonialism, such as the
lowland Buddhists in Sri Lanka. It enabled the rise to prominence of
individual writers such as Ledi Sayadaw, mentioned in the previous chapter
as one of the key promulgators of the newly honed Vipassanā meditation.
On the other hand, the second phenomenon, of imposing uniformity, was
more pronounced in countries where a Buddhist royal court and Sangha
hierarchy still represented the central locus of power, namely Thailand and
Cambodia. There, printing was adopted in response to colonial
encroachment, to promote modernizing Buddhist teachings, and to
undermine the existing hierarchies in local competitions for power, as
elsewhere, but it was also used to further enhance central state control over
the periphery. While in Burma and Sri Lanka colonial power represented the
center, in Thailand it was at the periphery that colonial encroachment was
most feared. Combined with the centralization of education and
reorganization of the Sangha under a single, centralized hierarchy with the
backing of the court, and the imposition of Thai language in education and
administration, the impact of printing was to suppress diversity.35 This was
especially true after the publication of normative Pali canonical and
commentarial works, noted above, and their translation into the vernaculars
of the political center, namely Bangkok Thai and, later, under Thai inﬂuence,
modernized Khmer. These printed editions could then be used as a yardstick
against which to judge national religion, not only among an elite as had been
the case in previous textual reforms, but among the population as a whole.
Authoritative writers at the time with the backing of the palace, such as the
Thai monk-scholar Prince Wachirayan (1860–1921), who was appointed as
supreme patriarch of Siam, now had their dominant voices ampliﬁed by the

--- PAGE 83 ---
technology of the press. A similar development occurred in Burma after
Independence, with the printing of the Pali canon following the Sixth
Council in 1956.36
Initially printing was not adopted in Cambodia for Buddhist materials even
by the more modernized members of the Sangha hierarchy. There was a
strong belief in the sanctity of all aspects of Buddhist writing and manuscript
production. Internal reform in the majority wing of the Sangha, the
Mahanikay, was taking place with Thai and later French colonial support. It
was modeled on the Thai reformist wing of the Sangha, the Thammayut
ordination lineage founded by Prince Mongkut when he had been a monk. At
the same time, within the Mahanikay there were also more traditionalist
monks who sought to preserve pre-reform Buddhism, including borān
kammaṭṭhāna. With the Thammayut representing Thai and globalized
Buddhism, pre-reform Buddhism in Cambodia increasingly seemed to
characterize a distinctively national, Cambodian tradition. The developing
international networks between Buddhist countries from the end of the
nineteenth century onward brought together those at the reformist end of the
spectrum, while those preserving the traditional forms of Buddhism became
increasingly isolated from one another, and this also encouraged the growing
tendency to identify borān tradition with the local. Over a timespan of three
or four generations the pan-Theravada presence of borān Buddhism was
forgotten. Cambodians familiar with the practice, interviewed in 2012, were
surprised to learn of Thai branches.37
While the power of language as a catalyst for change was motivating
missionaries, reformers, and modernists alike to use printing technology, an
alternative view of the power of language as a catalyst for change saw
traditionalists in Cambodia actively preventing the printing of borān
materials. There, practitioners of the borān tradition sought to protect
traditional knowledge and to contain the power of borān writings in the safe
hands of those within the esoteric teaching lineages empowered to receive
and transmit it. They prevented the printing and publication (i.e., making
public) of all Cambodian Buddhist texts, retaining their reproduction within
the hands of skilled manual copyists.
This protectiveness was seen as reactionary, elitist, and backward by
younger, modernist monks within the Mahanikay camp, and ironically the
unwillingness to allow traditional teachings to be committed to print
eventually led to the loss of the very thing it sought to preserve. In 1920,
three reform-minded monks within the Mahanikay, based at the supreme
patriarch’s headquarters at Wat Uṇṇalom in Phnom Penh, deliberately

--- PAGE 84 ---
ﬂouted the Sangha hierarchy by using a printing press to publish and
disseminate an accessible work on monastic rules, Vinaya, composed by one
of the three.38 In the eyes of traditionalists, this not only desecrated the
teaching of the Buddha, but also, by making the contents of a religious book
accessible to anyone regardless of whether they had a teacher’s permission
and guidance, broke the emphasis on teacher-pupil transmission and ﬂouted a
law enacted just two years earlier to prevent such a development.
The three reformists were defended by the Cambodian royal family and
later supported by the French colonial administration then governing
Cambodia including by Louis Finot, head of the École française d’Extrême-
Orient in Hanoi. This abrogated the privilege of the supreme patriarch to
discipline his junior monks’ insubordination, and ultimately ushered in a
further phase of the marginalization of borān kammaṭṭhāna. Borān
kammaṭṭhāna was just one aspect of the traditional Buddhism being
criticized by the young, modernizing monks, but it was expertise in this that
gave the then supreme patriarch his authority. The modernizers, in contrast,
promoted knowledge of the canonical texts as a higher source of authority.
The response of the temporal powers undermined moderate traditionalists
within the Mahanikay hierarchy. As a result, the three younger, more radical
modernists—to whom we shall return when considering the decline of borān
kammaṭṭhāna—rose in power and were instrumental in introducing Western
and Thammayut-inspired Pali scholarship and the printing of Buddhist texts
to Cambodia, extending this approach beyond the direct inﬂuence of the
Thammayut. They were also involved in the translation into Khmer of the
Pali canon, which appears not to have formed part of Cambodia’s repertoire
of religious literature until that point, although decades of devastating
warfare prior to the arrival of the French complicate an assessment of the
historical state of Cambodian religious literature.39
THE FIRST PRINTED SOURCES
As a result of this convergence between the acceptance of the printing press
and the espousal of reformist, Pali-canon-based Buddhism, we do not ﬁnd
borān materials (including meditation texts) being published in the early
days of the printing press in Cambodia. In fact, throughout the entire region,
it was only after the disruption of the living tradition that borān
kammaṭṭhāna materials began to appear in print, and it ﬁrst happened in
those areas where familiarity with it had ﬁrst faded from memory. The Sri
Lankan meditation manual published in Britain as The Yogāvacara’s Manual
at the end of the nineteenth century, through collaboration between British

--- PAGE 85 ---
Pali text scholars and the Buddhist revivalist Anagarika Dharmapala, was
done on the basis of a single manuscript and no practitioner input.40 Around
the same time, this being the period that saw the creation of French
Indochina, two French scholars published snippets or descriptions of borān
materials from Southeast Asia. The ﬁrst was a passage relating the origin of
the universe from Pali syllables from a text called the Dhammaviṅsun
included in a book on Cambodian Buddhism by Adhémard Leclère. Leclère
spent a considerable time in Cambodia, holding various oﬃcial posts there
between 1886 and 1911.41 The second was published by Louis Finot, the
director of the newly established École française d’Extrême-Orient, who later
taught two and helped the careers of all three of the above-mentioned
modernists. In 1917 Finot published a survey of traditional Lao literature,
which oﬀered the most detailed coverage of borān works until work began
over half a century later by successor generations of scholars at EFEO, from
the late 1970s to the early 2000s, notably François Bizot, François Lagirarde,
and Olivier de Bernon.
INTEREST IN PUBLICATION OF MEDITATION MATERIALS IN THE 1930S
The next bout of publication of borān materials took place in the 1930s,
among those interested in using textual studies to promote meditation and
Buddhist revival.42 Senior members of the Thai Sangha hierarchy, after a
crisis in their ranks caused by the pro-democracy coup of 1932, sought to
promote meditation, the practice of which had been undermined even within
their own lineage, the Thammayut, which had been established by Prince
Mongkut a century earlier. A likely motivation contributing to this greater
interest in meditation is that the pro-democracy change in government also
altered the structure of the Thai Sangha. Members of the Thammayut no
longer had automatic authority over monks of the majority Mahanikay
lineage. The association with meditating monks provided an alternative
source of authority for the Thammayut as they now needed to enhance their
popularity in the absence of the security that royal endorsement had
provided.43
The loss of endorsement for the Thammayut administrative hierarchy in
itself gave greater freedom to those who had maintained an interest in
meditation. These two factors enabled the publication of books containing
borān kammaṭṭhāna meditation manuals, the most signiﬁcant being the
anthology by Yasothararat in 1936. Some of the manuals it contains had been
gathered in the northeast of the country where the Thammayut forest
tradition had adapted their meditation practice to ensure conformity with the

--- PAGE 86 ---
Pali-normative reform, making traditional borān materials redundant. The
similarly important and partially overlapping anthology by Darunnakon in
1935 was additionally informed by the continuous living tradition at Wat
Ratchasittharam, discussed above, even though this is not immediately
apparent in the volume. (The temple maintains to this day the policy of
nondisclosure of practice details until one has reached the appropriate stage
of training in one’s apprenticeship to an established, authorized teacher.)
These publications by Yasothararat and Darunnakon are extremely
important for the study and dating of borān kammaṭṭhāna. They provide the
most extensive published documentation of the tradition, including both
meditation instructions and manuals on the application of the methods to
healing. These publications identify the former owners of some of the
manuscript manuals they used, allowing us to establish that the court-
sponsored Sangha hierarchies of Siam and Laos, and the supreme patriarchs
and meditation lineages of Ayutthaya and Vientiane, were advocating borān
practices as far back as at least the sixteenth century.44 It was a branch of the
Ayutthaya lineage recorded in these manuals that found its way to Sri Lanka
in the mid-eighteenth century, through the missions of royal monks
authorized by the supreme patriarchs and by the kings of the two realms,
Ayutthaya and Kandy. Thus the text published by T. W. Rhys Davids on the
basis of a Sri Lankan manuscript also represents this transmission.
Publications in Thailand in the 1930s would go on to inform the ﬁrst
doctoral dissertations on the subject of borān kammaṭṭhāna at Western
universities. The ﬁrst, defended at Hamburg University in 1999, was based
on Yasothararat 1936. It was written by the then-monk Mettanando Bhikkhu,
who had recently left Wat Phra Dhammakaya (the headquarters of the
Dhammakaya movement, to which we shall return below), which maintains a
later branch of this transmission.45 Olivier de Bernon, in his PhD, defended
in 2000, describes two other publications from 1930s Thailand. Both are
editions of a short manual called the Mūlakammaṭṭhāna, mentioned above,
both based on a late eighteenth-century manuscript that may now be lost.46
One of these refers to a manuscript of 1661 as the basis for the eighteenth-
century version.47
It was also in the 1930s that the two monks in Sri Lanka, Ratnajoti and
Ratnapāla, began working toward the publication of a pair of borān
kammaṭṭhāna manuals, one a mixed Sinhala-Pali work related to the text
published by T. W. Rhys Davids, the other a version of the Pali
Amatākaravaṇṇanā, the text we examined in the previous chapter. In other
words, both texts represented the mid-eighteenth-century transmission from

--- PAGE 87 ---
Ayutthaya. The interest in meditation and in Buddhism’s past reﬂects the
ethos of revivalism in Sri Lanka in the interwar period, as Buddhism
continued to be viewed as a source of inspiration and national pride in the
independence movement. However, Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla’s endeavor was
interrupted by World War II, which also led to the loss of the source
manuscript on which they had based their initial editions. In the introduction
to their published version they report that the manuscript they had worked
from had been discovered in the storage chest of a monk who had died. It
bore a label identifying it as deriving from the Asgiriya temple in Kandy, but
they explain that it was moved and lost during the war.
POST–WORLD WAR II INDEPENDENCE-PERIOD PUBLICATIONS
Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla were able to make a renewed eﬀort to publish the
material they had been working on some time later when, in post-
independence Sri Lanka, Buddhism and Buddhist publications were
promoted by the Bandaranaike government as part of their quest for a
majority mandate in the late 1950s–1960s. The two monks were able to ﬁnd
a number of related manuscripts in Sri Lankan libraries to conﬁrm their
earlier work, and they eventually published the pair of texts—alongside a
third unrelated text—in 1963, twenty-ﬁve years after they had begun.48 The
titles of other borān manuscripts that they report consulting during the
revision of their pre-war work are conﬁrmed by the colophons of related,
extant manuscripts collected by Hugh Nevill in the preceding century and
now in the above-mentioned Nevill collection of the British Library.
Following World War II, with independence for the region’s nations came
a resurgence of Buddhism. Helped by the Buddha Jayanti celebrations
marking 2,500 years of the Buddha’s sāsana (religion) in the mid-1950s,
particularly by the Sixth Council held in Burma, meditation practices
inspired by looking afresh at the early Pali canonical and commentarial texts
came to the fore. Burmese Vipassanā began to move into a dominant position
in Southeast Asian meditation teaching. Nonetheless, in Thailand a diversity
of practices included a modernized branch of borān kammaṭṭhāna called
vijjā dhammakāya. Developed and popularized by the monk Candasaro Sot
(1884–1959), the abbot of Wat Paknam in Bangkok, this system included
practices available in a non-esoteric form, more openly available.
This period saw the stirrings of the Western interest in Buddhist mind-
culture, which from the 1970s onward would radically transform global
access to and adaptations of Buddhist teachings. In these early days Sot’s
method was well represented among pioneering Westerners. Summaries of

--- PAGE 88 ---
his practice made by his disciples began to appear, including the ﬁrst-hand
account, cited in the previous chapter, of Kapilavaḍḍho, ordained by Sot in
the early 1950s. He was the ﬁrst British monk from the English Sangha Trust
to be ordained in Thailand, and he wrote his account when back in England
and convalescing from a severe illness, now disrobed and under the assumed
name of Richard Randall. Considered insuﬃciently sensational for the
publishers approached at the time, it only appeared in 1990. Another British
devotee, Terence Magness, began to write English accounts of Candasaro Sot
and his teachings from the 1960s onward.49 The earlier branch of borān
kammaṭṭhāna that Sot’s vijjā dhammakāya method most resembles has been
identiﬁed by Phibul Choompolpaisal as that taught by ﬁfty-six meditation
masters at Ayutthaya in the eighteenth century.50
PUBLICATIONS IN LAOS AND CAMBODIA FROM THE 1970S
From the mid-1970s onward in Cambodia, at a point when borān
kammaṭṭhāna had largely been suppressed and on the eve of communist
revolution, François Bizot, an archaeologist working under the auspices of
EFEO, began to document the remains of the textual and living traditions
there. His access to both was the result of a chance connection with the living
tradition through the Khmer family into which he had married.51 He
recognized the vulnerability and unique nature of the practice. The ﬁrst book
he published on the subject centered on the story of Princess Cittā / Prince
Citto in the ﬁve-branched tree, published as Le Figuier à cinq branches. This
is the story also retold for one of the queens of Kandy in Sri Lanka by one of
the Siamese meditation masters who took borān kammaṭṭhāna there in the
mid-eighteenth century, with which this chapter opened. The combination of
textual and anthropological work makes Bizot’s the most signiﬁcant
academic portrayal of borān Buddhism and borān kammaṭṭhāna. He ensured
the documentation of aspects unrecorded in texts and largely discontinued
after the Marxist revolution. We shall return to a discussion of this period
later in this work.
In 1975, a Marxist government was also established in Laos by the Pathet
Lao. This saw the initial suppression and ongoing government control of
Buddhism and the abolishment of the rank of supreme patriarch
(Sangharāja). Just the year before, however, the government had published
an authorized account of meditation practice in Laos entitled Samatha-
kammatthan lae Vipassana-kammatthan Chabab Boran (Muang Vientiane-
Luang Prabang) [Samatha and Vipassana Meditation, Traditional Version
(Vientiane-Luang Prabang City)]. This contains a number of borān

--- PAGE 89 ---
kammaṭṭhāna texts also found in Yasothararat’s work (above). As pointed
out by Phibul Choompolpaisal, who has written on this Lao text, it is
extremely important for two reasons. First, it indicates that borān
kammaṭṭhāna was still authorized by the Lao Sangha hierarchy as
representing orthodox Lao practice as late as 1974. Second, it provides dates
and names high-ranking authors or owners for the manuals it contains,
including our earliest date yet for a borān kammaṭṭhāna text, that of
Supreme Patriarch Rachathibbadee Sivisuddhisom, who recorded his text in
1501. Choompolpaisal’s recent study of this work alongside those from
Thailand in the 1930s provides the most detailed study to date of the
diversity and historical extent of borān kammaṭṭhāna in Southeast Asia.52
PUBLICATIONS FROM THE 1990S ONWARD
While François Bizot and colleagues in EFEO continued to publish work on
materials from Cambodia, Laos, and Thailand, the next phase of publications
in Thailand itself came in the 1990s with Thai practitioners beginning to
publish on the subject. Ven. Sermchai Jayamangalo, abbot of Wat Luang Pho
Sot Dhammakayaram in Ratchaburi, which follows Sot’s vijjā dhammakāya
method, began publishing material in both Thai and English.53 Also inspired
by Sot’s teaching is the network of Dhammakaya temples with their
headquarters at Wat Phra Dhammakaya in Pathumthani. This movement has
taken Sot’s internationalizing mission further and produced a range of paper
and online publications, including videos to teach entrance-level practices.54
More recently, in 2015, Niras Ruangsan has provided an analysis and
translations of ﬁve texts of Sot’s teachings directly related to his meditation
practice and its applications.
Supreme Patriarch Suk Kaitheun (1733–1822) forms a key bridge between
the pre-modern period, before the sack of Ayutthaya, and the early modern,
colonial period, after the capital was moved ﬁrst to Thonburi, then Bangkok.
Two living traditions in Thailand can trace their lineage back to Suk
Kaitheun. One is the lineage at Wat Pradusongtham in Ayutthaya, recently
identiﬁed by Phibul Choompolpaisal.55 The other is at Wat Ratchasittharam,
in Thonburi. It was this lineage that Darunnakon consulted in the early 1930s
when working on his anthology of borān texts. The monk who now heads the
meditation section at Wat Ratchasittharam, Veera Thanaveero, whom we met
above, has been publishing on it since the mid-1990s using both his practice
experience and the collection of manuscripts there.56 Some of the academic
scholarship conducted since the 1990s has beneﬁted from the input of Veera
Thanaveero, who has also collaborated with a group of researchers based at

--- PAGE 90 ---
the Bodleian Library to document the manuscript collections housed in his
section and at nearby temples.57 The Dhammakaya Foundation, noted above
as following Sot’s vijjā dhammakāya, has also inspired academic research in
this area, searching for the precursors to Sot and the early origins of the
method. In addition to the research by Mettanando Bhikkhu on Suk’s
medicine manual, noted above, an important contribution is the survey of
Southeast Asian evidence for borān kammaṭṭhāna by Kitchai Urkasame.58
Among the additional evidence provided by Urkasame are two important
texts, the Buddhanorakan and Phra Ñāṇakasiṇa, which he edits on the basis
of manuscripts discovered in northeast Thailand.
ORAL TRADITION
Despite borān kammaṭṭhāna being an esoteric tradition, then, substantial
manuscript and printed evidence is available. In fact, collections of
Theravada manuscripts often contain texts relating to meditation, and these
have been little explored. The diversity and practice of meditation in pre-
modern Theravada await discovery.59 Nevertheless, the substantial
disappearance of the living lineages of the tradition in the twentieth century
means that our access to the oral teachings necessary to understand how
these traditions work in practice is very limited and in some areas entirely
lost.
In Thailand, we noted the living lineages of Wat Pradusongtham and Wat
Ratchasittharam and the importance of the latter in producing materials of its
own as well as informing studies of the subject. We also noted the
importance of various modernized transmissions through Candasaro Sot. In
Cambodia, signiﬁcant oral history was recorded before the Democratic
Kampuchea (Khmer Rouge) period by François Bizot, as noted above. After
the Democratic Kampuchea period, some elderly practitioners who
remembered early practice were interviewed by Olivier de Bernon. He also
recorded a few still extant practice lineages in the late 1990s. Information
from interviews and practice that I have undertaken at a few temples in
Cambodia since 2012 informs some of the material in this book. Other
possible living traditions have been reported to me from elsewhere, but I
have not been able to verify these.
TIMELINE
The above evidence gives us the following broad timeline for borān
kammaṭṭhāna (Figure 3). The earliest date comes from the 1501 text from

--- PAGE 91 ---
Laos recorded in the publications of 1936 and 1974 noted above. The 1936
publication was based on manuscripts collected from the northeast by Jan in
the late nineteenth century. Later, we shall return to Jan and why, though
based in Bangkok, he had both interest in and access to this material. The
1974 book was published in Laos reﬂecting practices still current just prior to
the Marxist revolution there. Both works also contain additional material
from Laos from after the sixteenth century.60 The practice ﬂourished most
recently in Cambodia and Laos, but the longest sequence and greatest range
of evidence comes from Thailand. This is in large part thanks to the
publications in the early twentieth century. Thailand is where the active
marginalization and suppression of borān meditation ﬁrst began, but also the
source of adaptations that enabled the practice to survive as a living tradition
in modiﬁed forms. The fact that Cambodian, khom, script was used in central
Thai manuscripts until the modern period, and is still used in Thai yantra and
tattoos, confuses this picture in that some of the manuscripts referred to in
early twentieth-century publications may in fact have come from Cambodia.
Not all of them have a provenance or an associated owner, author, or date.
In addition to the 1501 date from the Lao Sangharāja’s text, we also have
the suggestive Phitsanulok inscription dated to 1549. This means that, despite
its esoteric nature, suﬃcient evidence is available to conﬁrm a pre-sixteenth-
century origin for borān kammaṭṭhāna. This is three centuries earlier than
any other living meditation lineage documented as still extant in the
contemporary Theravada world. For all other lineages, we have to look to
more recent, modern origins, even if they drew on the early Pali canonical
and commentarial sources. In other words, other practices may at ﬁrst sight
seem more genuine and closer to the teaching of the Buddha, because they
are recognizable in the early texts on meditation in the Sutta Piṭaka of the
Pali canon, and their ﬁfth-century commentaries. However, this conceals a
rupture in the tradition.
As indicated in the previous chapter, we can also recognize in borān
kammaṭṭhāna the worldview of the ﬁfth-century commentarial period, but in
the Abhidhamma material, not in the more familiar Sutta material that
provides the discursive doctrinal teachings. We cannot for now know
whether borān kammaṭṭhāna dates back to that period, or was even formed
alongside it. Abhidhamma learning became de-emphasized in Thailand in the
late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and this may have contributed to the
misunderstanding of the practice. Additionally, we also noted that its
approach to language and to the body ceased to be recognized in the modern
period.

--- PAGE 92 ---
CONCLUSION
This chapter examined the evidence for borān kammaṭṭhāna, from
inscriptions to manuscripts, printed texts, and oral tradition. We noted the
two broad genres of texts, narratives and manuals. Then we considered the
fragile nature of Theravada manuscripts and how they are made. We
observed that the recording of borān manuscripts often reﬂected some kind
of crisis in Theravada history, a fear that the transmission might not survive
or that there might be rupture to a teaching lineage.
The esoteric nature of borān kammaṭṭhāna prevented printing of its
materials, with the printing press in its early days more often used by
modernizers. One result of this is that the ﬁrst printed works relating to the
tradition were published by complete outsiders, Europeans from the end of
the nineteenth century. The next phase of publications was in Thailand in the
early twentieth century after decades of suppression and reform had already
marginalized these practices. Fortunately, even though the genres of borān
materials, as narratives and manuals, are not subsumed within the more
easily datable commentarial lineages, these publications, in combination with
those manuscripts that have come to light, allow us to trace borān
kammaṭṭhāna back to the early sixteenth century, longer than any other
living tradition of Theravada meditation. Interpreting such evidence is made
easier by the documentation of living traditions that survived in Laos and
Cambodia until the Marxist revolutions of the 1970s, as well as by simpliﬁed
practice lineages that have continued to this day.
Figure 3
Summary of Evidence for Borān Kammaṭṭhāna

--- PAGE 93 ---
Now that we have established the evidentiary basis for our knowledge of
pre-modern esoteric Theravada Buddhism, we return to the processes
involved in its practice. In the previous chapter we had looked at how borān
kammaṭṭhāna 
enacts 
the 
process 
of 
transformation 
explained 
in
Abhidhamma. Thus aligned with Theravada orthodoxy, it nonetheless
extends the Abhidhamma approach beyond that seen in other, more well-
known systems of Theravada meditation, in seeking to exact a somatic
transformation by internalizing and embedding meditation experience in the
practitioner’s body.
In the next two chapters, we shall look at approaches to the physical realm
and body that were marginalized in the modern period and see how borān
kammaṭṭhāna relates to them. These approaches are language in the form of
generative grammar, medicine, especially ayurvedic obstetrics, and
chemistry or alchemy, particularly the puriﬁcation of mercury used in turn in
the puriﬁcation of gold. Relevant is also the type of mathematics and models
of change underlying these sciences. It is possible that closer examination of
the parallels between borān kammaṭṭhāna and these resonating technologies
will eventually provide us with more concrete, earlier dating. They will for
now help us understand its disappearance. We shall ﬁrst examine the borān
approach to language.

--- PAGE 94 ---
4
TECHNOLOGIES OF TRANSFORMATION
Grammar, Mathematics, and the Signiﬁcance of Substitution
The Buddha proclaimed,
“Meaning is understood through phonemes. The sense of all
speech is understood only through the phonemes. When there is a
mistake in the phonemes, there is confusion as to the meaning.
Therefore, skillfulness regarding phonemes is very helpful in
relation to the Sutta-teachings.”1
On hearing the Buddha, Venerable Mahākaccāyana said,
“Lord, please permit me to compose a book on phonemes that
would henceforth protect the teaching contained in the Tipiṭaka,
with its 84,000 portions. It would enable living beings to refer to
the constituents of materiality, rūpa-dhamma, the constituents of
mentality, nāma-dhamma, all the volitional formations, sabba-
saṅkhāra-dhamma, and functional consciousness as conditioning
states, kiriya-citta-paccaya-dhamma, in conformity with the
phonemes (sadda) that make up the entire collection of texts.”2
The Buddha replied, “Excellent! Proceed, Mahākaccāyana.”
At these words, the venerable Mahākaccāyana composed the
book of phonemes in its entirety. He began,
“Now the phonemes beginning with the letter a are forty-one in
number, namely, a ā i ī u ū e o | ka kha ga gha ṅa | ca cha ja jha
ña | ṭa ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇa | ta tha da dha na | pa pha ba bha ma | ya ra
la va | sa ha ḷa aṃ.
“These forty-one become the constituents of materiality and the
constituents of consciousness. The vowels become materiality. The
three vowels of light measure are the short vowels a i u. They are
the articulation of the two ankles, the two knees, and the two
elbows. The others are called long vowels ā ī ū e o. They divide
into ﬁve branches. The phoneme ā becomes the left leg. The
phoneme ī becomes the right leg. The phoneme ū becomes the left

--- PAGE 95 ---
arm. The phoneme e becomes the right arm. The phoneme o
becomes the torso. This is why the vowels are called ‘constituents
of materiality.’ The thirty-two consonants become the thirty-two
physical constituents of the body beginning with the hair. The
single phoneme aṃ produces the 52 aspects of consciousness
(cetasika), comprising the 13 neutral cetasika, the 14 unskillful
cetasika and the 25 beautiful cetasika. The ﬁve sets of plosives (ka-
ma) form the ﬁve aggregates that make up the psychosomatic being
(khandha). The remaining eight consonants (ya…aṃ) become the
eight factors of the noble eightfold path, beginning with correct
view.”
—Adapted and translated from the translation of Bizot and
Lagirarde, Saddavimala3
In this passage from the borān kammaṭṭhāna text, the Saddavimala, “The
Purity of Sound,” we ﬁrst see the standard opening of the Pali grammar
composed by the sixth-century-C.E. scholar-monk Kaccāyana. It is a treatise
within the Indic system of generative grammar. The opening explains the
importance of grammar for understanding Pali canonical texts. It then
anachronously attributes the origins of both Pali grammar in general and
Kaccāyana’s grammar in particular to the Buddha and his close disciple
Mahākaccāyana respectively. When this version from the Saddavimala goes
on to explain the phonemes that make up the Pali language, there is an
unexpected twist. The phonemes morph into the creation of the individual,
including all aspects of the Abhidhamma analysis of what makes up the
psychosomatic person: their physicality and consciousness with all the
possible attributes, good and bad, that can attend them. The noble eightfold
path, the traditional summary of Buddhist practice, and—later—the creation
and periodization of the cosmos are all said to develop from the phonemes of
the Pali alphabet, with generative grammar literally acting as the source of all
creation.
We have already seen that borān practitioners had a distinctive attitude to
language, one that allowed Pali phonemes to represent meditational states,
and at the same time initially prohibited the representation of the esoteric
tradition in print for public distribution. In borān culture, the oral and
physical representations of the Dhamma, the Buddha’s teaching, have two
functions. They make the Dhamma semantically available, accessible for its
meaning, and they make it potently present, accessible for its creative and
protective power. The ﬁrst is a linguistic approach in which grammar is the

--- PAGE 96 ---
branch of learning that describes the correct formation of the language for
conveying semantic meaning. The other approach is to see grammar as a
creative, potent—one might say “magical”—event, which captures the power
of the Dhamma.
In chapter 2, we recognized that borān meditation was an enactment of the
Abhidhamma path to enlightenment, but that this did not account for all of its
features. In this chapter, we turn to one of those features, the harnessing of
language, found both in its meditation and in related protective practices. The
treatment of language as a creative principle has more in common with
traditional Indic grammar systems and Abhidhamma analysis than at ﬁrst
apparent. The Abhidhamma understanding of language as a two-way link
between consciousness and physicality in the process of communication, in
which meaning moves from the intention of the speaker through the
physicality of the sound to the comprehension of the listener, may have
informed these connections. What I want to show here is that the underlying
conception of how change comes about, and the mathematics that facilitate
predicting and enacting change, are shared across Abhidhamma, classical
Indic grammar, and the use of language as a creative force. We will then
ﬁnd, in the following chapter, that the same conceptualization of change and
use of mathematics also inform traditional medicine and chemistry.
Important across all of these methods for bringing about change is the
principle of substitution in carrying forward transitions from one state to
another, so some attention will be given to a consideration of how
substitution was theorized and applied across these technologies. Examining
the shared principles and processes of these at-ﬁrst-sight-unrelated sciences
or technologies—generative grammar, mathematics, and medicine including
pharmacy, chemistry, and Abhidhamma—allows us to understand the models
of transformation that underlie borān kammaṭṭhāna.
Since the discussion in this chapter pertains to technology, it naturally
becomes quite technical in places. A description of the applications of borān
practice to worldly (lokiya) ends comes toward the end of the chapter, while
a summary of the implications of the discussion is provided in the
conclusion.
CONTRASTING ATTITUDES TO GRAMMAR
Although authoritative texts in non-reform Theravada tended to be in
vernacular languages, Pali, the language of the Theravada scriptural canon,
was retained for important and powerful terminology, such as words for
sacred entities including the Buddha, and the technical words of

--- PAGE 97 ---
Abhidhamma and meditation. The potency ascribed to Pali language was
greater and its range of applications wider in traditional Theravada than in
modern reform Theravada. The clash between reform and tradition over
language was not about Pali per se. Both groups accepted its signiﬁcance and
were purists in their own way. The clash was, rather, between their diﬀerent
approaches to grammar. For the traditionalists it might be better to speak of
these as modes of grammar that they did not regard as mutually exclusive. As
Catherine Becchetti explains in her study of the yantra, the potent geometric
patterns used in the Theravada of mainland Southeast Asia, the use of Pali
letters in the potent sense transcends their linguistic value without doing
away with that value: the linguistic value supports the creative potency.4 The
concepts underlying generative grammar, the type of grammar used in Indic
culture since the ﬁrst millennium B.C.E. to teach correct language use, which
we explore below, support both types of application, and the full implications
of generative grammar are drawn out in traditional Theravada.
In the modern period reform scholars began to be inﬂuenced by Western
philology, sometimes directly, sometimes through changes in attitudes to
textual study in Thailand. For example, the three inﬂuential monks involved
in the printing of the ﬁrst Buddhist text in Cambodia discussed in the
previous chapter were inﬂuenced by new approaches to Pali studies in
Thailand, and two of them went on to study at the École française
d’Extrême-Orient in Hanoi (now the National Museum of Vietnamese
History) under the French archaeologist and orientalist Louis Finot.
Western learning of Asian classical languages such as Sanskrit and Pali
was modeled on European training in Greek and Latin. It focused on the
understanding of literal meaning and the prestige performance of perfect
grammar. It was also informed by comparative philology, a subject that had
developed in the nineteenth century. This had itself been strongly inﬂuenced
by the discovery of the relationship of Sanskrit with other languages—
especially Persian, Classical Greek, and Latin—leading to the deﬁnition of
the “Indo-European” language family in the early nineteenth century by
Thomas Young.5 Etymology in the European context was about analyzing
the linguistic components of words, drawing out their historical evolution,
and recognizing lexical and morphological connections between diﬀerent
languages.
Throughout Theravada history the study of Pali and Sanskrit had also been
used for the public display of knowledge and prestige learning, in addition to
understanding the literal meaning. In the pre-modern period, correct
grammatical usage had been a weapon employed in political rivalries and the

--- PAGE 98 ---
competition for patronage. High-level debates about Pali grammar and
phonetics had resulted in the change of royal patronage to the victors and the
introduction of new ordination lineages. These debates were informed by a
concern with correct grammar to ensure the validity of Vinaya rituals,
including ordination.6 If the Pali wording of a legal act was not enunciated or
performed in a grammatically correct fashion, then doubts could be raised
over its legitimacy. Perfect grammar was thus a legal necessity within the
monastic institution. Such considerations had grown stronger by the middle
of the second millennium C.E., perhaps in relation to millenarian anxiety, and
have continued in the modern period.7 The importance of preserving the texts
and correct grammar went hand in hand with a philosophy of language that
took into consideration developments of the subject in India. According to
Mabel Bode, over 90% of the Pali literature composed in Pagan (Burma)
from the tenth to the fourteenth centuries was dedicated to “grammar,” under
which should be included works on the philosophy of language drawing on
Abhidhamma analysis.8
The traditional grammars on which Sanskrit and Pali learning had been
based were generative grammars, in which the entire language can be
generated from a set of roots and formulae. We shall explore the systematic,
logically unfurling nature of generative grammar as a means of teaching
correct language use below. Generative grammar was not, at that time, used
in European language study, where descriptive conjugations and declensions
were used to build up a prescriptive grammar. Indic generative grammar
existed within a grammatical culture, with philosophical and practical
resonances. Traditional practices applied the philosophy and creative potency
of generative grammar to a number of ends. It was these creative aspects that
informed the production of yantras from Pali syllables, and the use of Pali
phrases and syllables in the meditation practices of borān kammaṭṭhāna.
Reformers and outsiders rejected as “magical” the practical applications of
these creative aspects of language.
To reject this creative aspect of language was in accordance with the
Protestant, secularist, and reformist agendas of colonial and modernizing
governments and monks. For them, it reﬂected irrational beliefs and was one
of the hocus pocus accretions in European negative assessments of traditional
Theravada religion, echoing critiques of Catholicism. By discarding this
creative aspect, however, Theravada reformists also lost a fundamental
branch of their traditional learning. This loss led to a divergence between
reform and traditional learning at the elite level, even while the application of
generative grammar to practical ends continued at the popular level. This
created a fundamental rift between reformist and traditional ways of

--- PAGE 99 ---
thinking. It also created a rift between Buddhism for lokuttara
(supramundane, soteriological) purposes and Buddhism for lokiya (this-
worldly, mundane, including apotropaic) purposes, a rift not present in pre-
reform Theravada.9
GENERATIVE GRAMMAR IN INDIC CULTURES
European descriptive grammar oﬀers paradigms and rules that can be used to
predict and prescribe the formation of “correct” language. Generative
grammar also prescribes correct language formation and use, but through the
application of algorithms and codes. The Indic form of generative grammar
was originally designed for Sanskrit. Such is the similarity between Sanskrit
and Pali that it was adapted for the correct formation of the latter when it too
became a prestige language.
The seminal work of Indic generative grammar is the Aṣṭadhyāyī of
Pāṇini (c. fourth century B.C.E.). This extraordinary text in 3,959 very tersely
enunciated rules—some consisting of just a single syllable—uses code letters
alongside linguistic items such as suﬃxes, all deﬁned within the text itself, to
guide a series of substitutions that generates the entire Sanskrit language, its
morphology, syntax, and semantics, all out of a discrete set of monosyllabic
verbal “roots.” The root is a theoretical original word or language element
(dhātu) from which all other related word forms are derived. Thus one may
begin with the theoretical root bhū, “to become,” and through the application
of the appropriate transformations, suﬃxes, and endings arrive, via the
present stem bhava, at the form bhavāmi, “I become.” In this sense, the end
result is the same as Western prescriptive grammar—in this case the ﬁrst
person singular present active of a verb. However, instead of teaching
paradigms and sets of endings, the generative grammar uses codes that
trigger 
discrete 
processes 
involving 
meta-rules, 
recursion, 
and
transformation, that link bhū to bhavāmi, and that can be applied universally
to lead every other theorized verbal root to its correct range of semantically
related forms for use in the real world. It is as if, in English, we change the
root “go” to “I went,” not by learning that pattern, but by learning some
algorithms and applying them to the root “go,” algorithms that can also be
applied to every other verbal root to arrive at every other verbal statement in
real language.
Pāṇini’s Aṣṭadhyāyī is the foundational text of a highly developed system
of grammar that pervades Sanskritic culture. Until the modern period,
training in the generative grammar of Pāṇini or later grammarians was
considered fundamental to elite education in all regions strongly inﬂuenced

--- PAGE 100 ---
by that culture, including Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia. The work of Pāṇini
and other South Asian generative grammarians became familiar to European
linguistics in the nineteenth century, eventually inﬂuencing the development
of generative grammar in Western linguistics by Zellig Harris and Noam
Chomsky in the 1950s.10 In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
European grammatical science was primitive in comparison with that found
in Indic and Indic-inﬂuenced cultures for over two millennia.11
The methods used in generative grammar also had broader cultural
implications. The motivation for the development of such sophisticated
grammatical expertise in South Asian culture is one that we would now deem
religious. In brahmanical Hinduism correct language use was one of the
crucial technologies employed to control and maintain the universe.
Language was believed to be a creative force, fundamental to the eﬀective
performance of Vedic sacriﬁcial rites. Originally a medium of
communication with the gods, by the beginning of the ﬁrst millennium B.C.E.
the Sanskrit hymns and sacriﬁcial language expressions of the Vedas of early
Hinduism—the earliest of which can be dated to around 1500 B.C.E.—came
to be regarded as themselves potent in ensuring the eﬃcacy of religious
ritual. Language therefore held power over the universe, and thus the usage
of language needed to be precise and accurate. The emphasis on correct
Sanskrit led to an advanced science of language (grammar), including
phonetics, morphology, and semantics. In parallel, we also see the
development of geometry, the branch of mathematics used in the technology
of constructing the sacriﬁcial enclosures and ﬁres necessary for the
performance of Vedic rites.12 The development of grammar and mathematics
of various kinds went hand in hand.
MATHEMATICS, MEMORIZATION, AND SEQUENCING
The emphasis on accurate language use led to sophisticated memorization
techniques in brahmanical Hindu culture. While this was designed primarily
to ensure pinpoint accuracy in the recitation of Vedic hymns, the culture of
memorization was not only applied to rote recitation of sacred text but to
other sources of knowledge. To this day traditional Sanskrit scholars
routinely retain by memory and with accuracy large amounts of analytically
retrievable and semantically applicable textual material. Another branch of
mathematics, group theory mathematics, which deals with permutations and
combinations, is relevant to both generative grammar and the method of
memorization applied to learning Vedic hymns. Recitation of Vedic verses to
ensure correct memorization, pronunciation, and understanding involved the

--- PAGE 101 ---
repetition of the words of each line in increasingly complex sets of
permutations. For example, a line reading [word A] [word B] [word C] might
be repeated, without altering the meaning, in the form [word B] [word A]
[word C], and then again as [word C] [word B] [word A].13 Each line of the
verse would undergo the same set of permutations, and thus as the recitation
progressed the text would be rehearsed over and again. This process
facilitated greater phonetic and semantic accuracy than the simple
recollecting of single strings of sound could achieve. The permutations
ranged from simple rearrangements of words to complex permutations, so-
called ghana-pāṭha, “compact recitation”: AB, BA, ABC, CBA, ABC, BC,
CB, BCD, DCB, BCD, et cetera.14 The recitations back and forth in these
various permutations, although performed orally, can also be represented
visually. When this is done, the diﬀerent permutations, through interweaving
the syllables, create diﬀerent geometric shapes, such as those found in yantra
made of Pali syllables in traditional Theravada.15 These mathematical
methods of memorization were applied not just to religious texts but to
mathematical texts too, conﬁrming the sharing of techniques across these two
ﬁelds.16
While useful in memorization, an understanding of permutation was also
crucial in the development of Indic generative grammar. It allowed the
totality of alternative options to be encoded in the grammar. In other words,
the aim was to represent the entire language with the minimum number of
rules possible, and permutation was harnessed to the task of working out the
minimum number of rules necessary to enable all the necessary number of
combinations. A single code could then be used to activate a set of rules in
the correct sequence ultimately to generate each linguistic feature of the
language. Through this mechanism a limited number of rules could represent
the immeasurable totality of language. To develop this system, grammarians
analyzed the language in search of the minimum number of processes that
could combine to create the total range of linguistic features actually in
occurrence. They also worked out the optimal sequencing of the generative
procedures needed to bring them about.
GROUP THEORY MATHEMATICS IN ABHIDHAMMA AND BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀṆA
At this stage in our consideration of grammar, it is worth pointing out that
this use of sequencing is also found in Abhidhamma and borān meditation.
In Abhidhamma, group theory mathematics was used in calculating and
representing the totality of possible combinations of, and causal connections
between, the constituents of reality, dhammas. These are the dhammas that

--- PAGE 102 ---
make up the individual and their experience, namely materiality, rūpa,
aspects of consciousness, cetasika, and states of consciousness, citta.
We will recall that the analysis of mental states into skillful and unskillful
was an elaboration of the fundamental Buddhist analysis of the cause of our
entrapment in samsara (the realm of rebirth and suﬀering) in terms of the
three “ﬁres” of greed (lobha), hatred (dosa), and delusion (moha). Unskillful
states were those based on greed, hatred, and delusion, while skillful states
were those based on non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion. There are also
resultant (vipāka) mental states arising from these and so-called inoperative
or functional (kiriya) mental states that have no karmic eﬀect.
Our experienced psychophysical state results from the totality of the three
fundamental causes of soteriological imbalance, greed (lobha), hatred (dosa),
and delusion (moha), combined in varying degrees and diﬀerent
circumstances. 
Abhidhamma 
therefore 
harnessed 
the 
mathematical
knowledge of permutation to consider the most eﬃcient manner to develop
the positive attributes that lead one out of samsara to enlightenment.17
Commentarial Abhidhamma takes this further by expanding on the canonical
teaching of impermanence to formulate the doctrine of momentariness, in
which physicality and mentality are constantly replaced, and only appear to
continue because of the quick succession with which one dhamma is
replaced by another.18 This constant replacement oﬀers the possibility of
change: if one interrupts the sequence of replacements by substituting a
diﬀerent kind of dhamma from the one that precedes, one can move
ultimately from negative to increasingly positive mental states.19 The
substitution of one dhamma by another happens naturally, but now it can be
directed. We saw, when looking at borān kammaṭṭhāna meditation practice
in chapter 2, how the borān system of meditation sought to enact such
substitution.
The ﬁrst Theravada text to try to represent the totality of these causal
combinations is the Paṭṭhāna, “Conditional Relations,” the seventh book of
the Abhidhamma Piṭaka, which constitutes the third division of the Pali
canon.20 The Paṭṭhāna was compiled at a point—between 200–100 B.C.E.21
—when group theory mathematics had not yet reached that stage of
development whereby the full number of possibilities of a particular
permutation could be calculated by an algorithm and represented by an
arithmetical, algebraic formula. Instead, the Paṭṭhāna gives examples of the
calculations, using iterative listing. This process is also found in early
ayurvedic medical works, to which we shall turn in the next chapter, until
algorithms were developed to represent all the options. Whereas some early

--- PAGE 103 ---
ayurvedic texts list all the possible permutations, the early Abhidhamma
tradition recognized that presenting every possible permutation of causal
factors, in other words, all the possible ways in which dhammas can relate to
each other, was not viable, so examples modeling the possibilities were
provided instead. Although the magnitude of the total number of
combinations made full writing out of the Paṭṭhāna impossible—
commentators described the totality of combinations as being as vast as the
ocean—successive generations of commentaries did make attempts to
calculate exactly how many that total was, with results ranging from
388,778,713,344 to 404,948,533,288.22
The borān kammaṭṭhāna meditation manuals similarly ﬁrst provide
examples of how to combine skillful and other beautiful citta and their
attendant cetasika into the body, similar to the kind of iterative listing found
in medical texts and the Paṭṭhāna. Then, in order to avoid the problem of
creating extremely long texts, the meditation manuals use shortened
formulae, which trigger the process that the practitioner has learned in the
preceding stages. A single word can then trigger an entire meditation
process, even though that process is quite complex and cumulative. The mid-
eighteenth-century manual, the Amatākaravaṇṇanā, explored in chapter 2,
despite heavy abbreviation through this process of triggering with single
words, is an extensive 3,818 verses long. The practitioner brings down
processes learned earlier on in the technique throughout the entire system
contained in those 3,818 verses.23
PHONEMES AS PRODUCTIVE SYMBOLS
This bringing down of processes from previous stages in the manual is
reminiscent of Sanskritic generative grammar. Moreover, while the Paṭṭhāna
does not use code words as symbols of quantities or processes to assist in the
management of its combinations, generative grammar does. It also uses
letters as symbols. Here I want to look at its use of such letters to represent
components of language and transformative grammatical processes, since
this will help us with understanding both borān language use and the
principles underlying the processes of change employed in borān practice. I
will use Pāṇini’s Aṣṭadhyāyī from around the fourth century B.C.E. to explore
Indic generative grammar in the following paragraphs because it is the most
inﬂuential.24
An example of its use of language symbols is the combination of an
element of language ti (the third-person singular ending of a verb) and the
code letter P to make the artiﬁcial code word tiP, which stands for all the

--- PAGE 104 ---
verbal endings that indicate person and number. Similarly, the combination
of an element of language lu (part of the verb “to elide”) and the letter K
creates luK, a code word that only applies in grammar and speciﬁes a type of
elision (lopa), that causes phonemes to disappear in the process of generating
a word.
An important instance of this symbolic use of letters is found in Pāṇini’s
treatment of the Sanskrit alphabet. The standard Sanskrit alphabet order is
structured around the place of articulation of the sounds in the mouth. It
consists of vowels, diphthongs, two non-consonants that alter the sound of a
preceding vowel, followed by the consonants. The plosive consonants are
ordered according to ﬁve of the six positions of articulation (sthāna in
Sanskrit). These are (1) throat/velar; (2) the back of the palate; (3) the head/
roof of the palate; (4) the teeth; and (5) lips.25 (The sixth sthāna is the
nose.)26 These are followed by the semi-vowels or liquids, and the fricatives,
i.e. the sibilants and the ﬁnal consonant h. The standard Sanskrit alphabet
order is as follows. Note that the consonants are listed with an inherent vowel
a that eases their pronunciation, so ka not k:
(vowels)
a ā i ī u ū ṛ ṛˉ ḷ ḷˉ e o ai au | ṃ ḥ |
(plosives)
(1) ka kha ga gha ṅa |
(2) ca cha ja jha ña |
(3) ṭa ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇa |
(4) ta tha da dha na |
(5) pa pha ba bha ma |
(liquids)
ya ra la va |
(fricatives)
śa ṣa sa ha
For the purposes of generative grammar, however, the alphabet is re-ordered
and has code letters or “tags,” anubandha, inserted into it.27 The alphabet,
with code letters at intervals (below), is re-ordered in such a way that
diﬀerent subsets of vowels or consonants can be referred to in a single
syllable, pratyāhāra, made up of the ﬁrst phoneme in the set or subset and
the code letter that ends that set or subset. The entire set or subset can

--- PAGE 105 ---
thereby be referred to without the need to list it in full. The signiﬁcance of
the re-arrangement is that the new sets and subsets consist of groups of
sounds that, at diﬀerent points in the Aṣṭadhyāyī, are subject to a shared
generative process, rather than sharing a common place of articulation. The
alphabet so re-arranged is called the Śiva sūtras, with reference to the Hindu
myth that grammar has its divine origin with the god Śiva (a myth recalled
diﬀerently by Theravada Buddhists, who, as we have seen, locate its origins
with the Buddha and his disciple Mahākaccāyana). The Śiva sūtras read as
follows:
a i u Ṇ ṛ ḷ K e o Ṅ ai au C ha ya va ra Ṭ la Ṇ ña ma ṅa ṇa na M
jha bha Ñ gha ḍha dha Ṣ ja ba ga ḍa da Ś kha pha cha ṭha tha ca ṭa
ta V ka pa Y śa ṣa sa R ha L
The actual phonemes of the Sanskrit language included in the Śiva sūtras,
with the exception of the vowels themselves, all include an inherent a vowel,
whereas the code letters, marked in bold above, lack an inherent vowel: they
are all ﬁnal consonants.28 In other words, the sound for the letter k as an
ordinary member of the alphabet is “ka,” but where the letter k is used as a
code, the sound is “-k.” This allows one to distinguish between phoneme and
code letter. Thus in Pāṇini the syllable “aK” refers to the sequence of simple
vowels (a i u ṛ ḷ), but “aC” to all vowels (a i u ṛ ḷ o e ai au). On the same
principle, “aL” refers to the entire alphabet, “haṬ” to the sequence “ha ya va
ra,” and “haL” to all consonants, and so on. The code letters or tags,
anubandha, are substitutes for real sounds and carry their distinct qualities
forward into a new discussion. We shall look more at this principle of
substitution below.
The Pali grammars adapted from this system were simpler, with far fewer
rules, because the range of Pali word forms (morphology) is smaller than the
range in Sanskrit. There are also fewer phonemes in the Pali alphabet, as
given in the passage cited at the start of this chapter:
a ā i ī u ū e o |
ka kha ga gha ṅa |
ca cha ja jha ña |
ṭa ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇa |
ta tha da dha na |
pa pha ba bha ma |

--- PAGE 106 ---
ya ra la va |
sa ha ḷa aṃ
THE PRINCIPLE OF SUBSTITUTION
The use of code letters in this way, just as in algebra, requires an act of
substitution, the mechanism that we have also noted underlies momentariness
and change in Abhidhamma. Here in grammar, one substitutes a given
language element or type—a list, series, or process—with a tag made up of a
syllable or letter in order to make a calculation or apply a process. For
example, the code syllables using the Śiva sūtras are substitutes for
sequences of sounds. This is just one kind of substitution that takes place in
the Aṣṭadhyāyī. One also substitutes one item with another in procedures or a
series of procedures in generative grammar. Thus the root of a verb is
replaced by a functional entity, a verb stem. The verb stem is another
theorized representative that is only “real” or functional within the
grammatical system, but takes us a step closer to the real language item. One
may then in turn substitute the whole or a part of that representative form
with a further substitute in turn. Eventually one resolves the procedure to
arrive at a speciﬁc result, a word, in the real world by substituting a real word
element in place of the last theoretical substitute in the series. Pāṇini’s
grammar relies on the process of substitution. We have the substitution of
theoretical suﬃxes and codes by other theoretical items then real suﬃxes,
and of theoretical endings or codes by real word endings. Each substitution
lasts for as long as is necessary—which means for as long as the particular
substitution is useful in the series of procedures that take us from root to verb
stem to the actual derived word. It is only when one has taken the root—and
the suﬃxes plus the endings that each triggers in turn—through the minimum
number of substitutions necessary to create the real word that one can release
the process and discard all substitution.29
Underpinning this process of substitution is a crucial principle that
maintains the continuity from start to ﬁnish of the process: the substitute is
treated like the original, the real thing. In other words, the qualities of the
original are transferred into the item that represents it—in our example of the
Śiva sūtras, the qualities of various sets of sounds are transferred into the
substitute letter codes. Similarly, qualities that begin in a verbal root
(including the meaning) are enhanced as additional qualities are cumulatively
added, and they all continue to be carried forward during the process even
where they are the subject of substitution. As a result, the ﬁnal output
contains the entire process within it, without losing the value of the original

--- PAGE 107 ---
item, such as the semantic meaning of the original root. If I take our example
from English, if we start oﬀ with the root “to go” and form the ﬁrst-person
past tense of the verb “I went,” the meaning of “go” is still present in the
form “went,” even though the form “go” has been lost through substitution,
in the course of which loss it has additionally acquired the meaning of
happening in the past.
This crucial principle is taught in a fundamental grammatical rule in the
Aṣṭadhyāyī. We will also see how it reﬂects a principle understood more
broadly in Indic culture in the ﬁrst millennium B.C.E. with world-changing
consequences. The principle is stated in rule 1.1.56, which reads,
sthānivad ādeśo ’nalvidhau.
The substitute (ādeśa) is like (-vat) the original place-holder
(sthāni-) with the exception (’n = an-) of procedures (-vidhau) that
apply to the phonemes (-aL-).
I shall explain what this rule means in a moment. First, let’s note that this
rule governs all substitutions except those that relate to phonemes.
“Phonemes” here are represented by the code aL. It refers to all the
phonemes of the alphabet in the order given in the Śiva sūtras, as identiﬁed
above, beginning with ﬁrst vowel a and ending with the ﬁnal code letter L.
(In itself, aL is an example of substitution in action, as L substitutes for and
carries forward into the rule all the sounds of the alphabet after a.)
The purpose of the rule is that it allows the transference of meaning and
applications from one stage of the grammatical process to another through
the process of substitution: “The substitute is like the original place-holder.”
It is this rule that facilitates the generative process. This principle of
substitution allows, for example, the meaning of a verbal root (dhātu, e.g.,
“to go” in our English example), to continue even if it is replaced by a
diﬀerent one in the process of grammatical generation (e.g., “went” in our
English example). The rule also explains that there is a limitation to this
process of substitution. It does not apply when dealing with “procedures that
apply to phonemes,” aL. For example, rules that apply to the phonemes
include rules about sandhi or “euphony” between real phonemes juxtaposed
in real-life sentences. Here the speciﬁc individual qualities of the phoneme
are relevant, not those of the substituted item.30 This restriction implies that
the substituted item, the sthānin, retains its individual characteristics, despite
being substituted by something else or transforming into a new form, while
allowing that new sound form to replace the old one. Some aspects of

--- PAGE 108 ---
substitution are temporary. Pāṇini teaches the elision of the code letters (rule
1.3.9 tasya lopaḥ), for example, discarded once they have served their
purpose, but other elements in the series of substitution remain present in the
ﬁnal language item. Nonetheless, the sthānin, the original place-holder, is not
lost in the ādeśa, the process of substitution, even when elided (below).
This principle of transferring the qualities of the original to the substitute
is also applied in the brahmanical Hindu ritual context that had given rise to
the close concern with grammar. This need to transfer qualities arose from
the consideration of sometimes needing to use a substitute in place of the
originally speciﬁed substance (e.g., the sacriﬁcial oﬀering), implement (e.g.,
a type of vessel for holding a substance), or agent (e.g., the sacriﬁcer’s wife).
Eivind Kahrs cites two brahmanical ritual texts dating to around 500 B.C.E.,
so within about a century of both Pāṇini (400 B.C.E.) and the Buddha (sixth–
ﬁfth centuries B.C.E.), that explain this principle in order to conﬁrm that a
ritual can still be valid when a substitute is used:
When someone teaches a modiﬁcation to occur in the place of a
sacriﬁcial requisite pertaining to the prototype, it takes on the
characteristics of the latter. For example…a vessel that of
potsherds, and boiled rice that of a cake…
and
When the prescribed [sacriﬁcial requisite] is lacking, a substitute…
[must be used] on the basis of similarity. And [this substitute]
would possess the characteristics of that [which it replaces].31
Here, an additional component of substitution is referred to, that of
“similarity.”
The theorization of a principle of substitution in early Indic culture had
many ramiﬁcations beyond grammar and ritual. For example, it lay behind
the conceptualization of the mathematical value zero (śūnya, “empty”) in
Pāṇini itself. How so? On occasion a word element or code is deleted in the
process of grammatical formation, but it still exerts its inﬂuence on the word
being formed, even though we can no longer see it. In the Aṣṭadhyāyī,
deletion (lopa) of an item is theorized as the substitution of the substituend
by zero (i.e., an empty place or place-holder, a crucial function performed by
zero in mathematics), a substitution necessary for processes to continue
despite the apparent absence through deletion of what has been substituted.

--- PAGE 109 ---
As already explained, the substitute, here zero, takes on the qualities of what
has been substituted and carries them forward. So in the deletion, lopa, of a
verbal root, for example, even though it becomes invisible, its meaning
continues. Thanks to the zero, the qualities of the original place-holder,
sthānin, and subsequent place-holders in the series of procedures, continue
through the process even if nothing is visible. Thus the qualities can even
transfer after a place-holder has been erased or—as Pāṇini deﬁnes it—
replaced by zero. This concept of a place-holder that is empty (śūnya), in
other words “zero,” is believed to have originated in the context of
generative grammar. It was used by Pāṇini for the process of substitution in
the generative process. This use then inspired the broader applications of
zero in other ﬁelds in Indic culture including mathematics.32
SUBSTITUTION IN ABHIDHAMMA AND BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀNA
We have already seen when looking at Abhidhamma in the context of
meditation that the notion of substitution is crucial to explain both apparent
continuity in the light of momentariness and the possibility of generating
positive change. The concept of zero as a place-holder may also have
informed the Abhidhamma understanding of continuity in the process of
consciousness. States of consciousness are momentary and, according to
Theravada Buddhism, consciousness is always consciousness of an object.
There is no permanent consciousness that just exists; it only arises because of
a process. The problem then is what happens between moments of
consciousness that allows for an individual’s mind to transition between
unconscious and conscious moments. The Paṭṭhāna, the ﬁnal book of the
Abhidhamma Piṭaka, appears to be the ﬁrst text to mention the bhavaṅga,
literally “factor of becoming.”33 This is developed in the Abhidhamma
commentaries as the momentary resting state of consciousness that provides
continuity between phases of active cognition, a kind of default process in
which nothing seems to be happening but which carries forward the
continuity of the karmic process between moments of consciousness, like a
zero place-holder. The bhavaṅga also provides the connection between the
last moment of consciousness in one life and the moment of rebirth in the
next.
If we turn to borān kammaṭṭhāna practices, we have also seen that the
principle of substitution is crucial for the method of delivering the meditation
objects and their results such as positive, resultant, and functional mental
states (kusala, vipāka, and kiriya citta) and concomitant mental factors
(cetasika) into the body in order to internalize them. Borān kammaṭṭhāna

--- PAGE 110 ---
combines the Abhidhamma understanding of substitution with processes
related to those found in grammatical transformation. The visual
representations such as the nimitta or code letters of attained cetasika and
citta used in borān practice vary according to the branch, stage, speciﬁc topic
of meditation, and the individual. That variety aside, they all act as
substitutes for the qualities the practitioner should acquire, and these are
progressively substituted in turn during the meditation. Finally they are
embedded in the khandha, the mental and physical make-up of the
practitioner, and create the practitioner’s cittaja rūpa, materiality born of
consciousness. In this way these qualities are progressively incorporated,
forming the new, increasingly supramundane body.
The use of substitution in the representation of cetasika by nimitta or letter
symbols might draw on a certain similarity between substitute and
substituend, as in the case of the principle of ritual substitution noted above.
However, that similarity might be mathematical: the similarity of place in a
group or series. Thus, as noted previously, the series of ﬁve joys, pīti, mental
factors, cetasika, that form part of the ﬁrst jhāna, can be represented by a
series of ﬁve sacred syllables, such as the series na, mo, bu, (d)dhā, ya.
Exoterically these syllables mean “Homage to the Buddha,” namo buddhāya,
a phrase used to show reverence to the Buddha when initiating Buddhist
ceremonies. Esoterically they substitute for a chosen series of ﬁve concepts,
in this case the ﬁve pīti.34
Regardless of whether or not the term sthānin was ever used for the
original place-holder qualities, the same process of substitution is applied. In
the sequence, the substituend brings new attributes while retaining attributes
of the substituted item. The application of these substitutions in series
employs the type of group theory mathematics we have outlined above, for
the purpose of seeking the optimal number of combinations. This contributes
to our understanding of the high level of permutations and apparent
repetitiveness of the meditation instructions found in the fuller manuals of
the borān kammaṭṭhāna tradition. We shall return to this use of substitution,
language, and mathematics in borān kammaṭṭhāna below.
PALI AS A SACRED LANGUAGE
The use of letter syllables in the substitution of citta and cetasika in borān
kammaṭṭhāna harnesses a unique aspect of language. While the state of mind
and intention to speak are aspects of consciousness, language itself is an
aspect of materiality, formed by the wind element (breath) moving from,
against, or through various places of articulation from the larynx to the nose,

--- PAGE 111 ---
all aspects of materiality, and this being comprehended by hitting against the
ear, before comprehension and aspects of consciousness take place in
response. Thus materiality can transfer meaning and aﬀect consciousness.
Language is therefore a material product of consciousness, cittaja rūpa, and
can also act as a material bridge between consciousnesses.35
The use of letter syllables in borān practice only uses Pali language and
this reﬂects an understanding of the Pali language as potent in a way that is
diﬀerent from ordinary languages. All language is potent in that it has the
power to convey meaning. When someone speaks, meaning is conveyed;
when writing is applied to a surface, it suddenly bears meaning, referring to a
dynamic world beyond itself. We might therefore regard all language as
inherently potent and magical. But Theravada Buddhists attributed uniquely
to Pali the same attributes that in the brahmanical world had been uniquely
attributed to Sanskrit as a powerful, creative, and transformative agent.
While early Buddhism may have emphasized meaning over form, the
Theravada tradition came to believe that Pali was the language spoken by the
Buddha. They further believed that it was uniquely appropriate for the
encapsulation of the Dhamma, the transformative truth taught by the Buddha,
because its expression was innate rather than derived. The reformers of the
modern period, in contrast, were inﬂuenced by comparative philology in
which all languages are historically derived. Indeed, in the Western
discipline of Indology, Pali is treated as “derived from,” or at least closely
related and secondary to, Sanskrit. Whereas modernists and traditionalists
shared an understanding of etymology that examined the derivation of words
from roots and stems, modernists also saw etymology in terms of historical
derivation of one language or linguistic form from historical precursors. In
contrast, etymology for the traditionalists was about understanding the power
held within Pali phonemes, a power that could be harnessed through the
principle of substitution and the application of mathematics. This type of
etymology, understanding broader concepts represented by sets of Pali
syllables and the possibility of their metamorphosing into something else, is
a distinctive feature of the explanations found in borān kammaṭṭhāna
manuals.
The diﬀerence, in the modern period, between traditionalist and reformist
beliefs about language is not a diﬀerence found in earlier reforms. The
treatment of Pali as a sacred language for Buddhism, on a par with the
similar conceptualization of Sanskrit in brahmanical Hinduism, can be traced
with certainty to the ﬁfth-century commentaries attributed to Buddhaghosa,
which Theravada monastic scholarship has taken as representative of
orthodoxy.36

--- PAGE 112 ---
Buddhaghosa identiﬁes Pali as the “primary language of all creatures,” one
that a child left untutored in the vernaculars of his parents will automatically
start speaking37 and one that is universally understood: “in hell, in the realm
of animals, in the realm of ghosts, in the world of mankind, and the world of
the gods.”38 Buddhaghosa, the most “orthodox” representative of Theravada,
credits Pali with being innate, universal, pure, uniquely pleasing and the sole
language appropriate for the words of the Buddha and for this reason
undertakes the translation of the commentaries from the vernacular into Pali.
Borān kammaṭṭhāna narratives take the signiﬁcance of Pali a stage further.
Cosmogonic texts such as the Dhammajhān or Dhammaviṅsun from
Cambodia describe how the universe and the Dhamma originate from the
mantras of borān kammaṭṭhāna using signiﬁcant groupings of the syllables
of the Pali alphabet such as na mo bu ddhā ya; ma a u; ku sa lā a ku sa lā; or
a ā i ī u ū e o.) These phonemes are produced by “Divine Ear.” Having a
divine ear or divine hearing is one of the attributes of the Buddha in
canonical texts, but here it is personiﬁed as a creative principle. Another
creative principle is embodied as the qualities of the Buddha, buddhaguṇ,
which uses the phonemes provided by Divine Ear to create the elements, the
ﬁrst boy and girl, the components of the Dhamma, et cetera.39 A variation of
this account, in which this cosmogony is explained as being made possible
by grammar, and which extends the creativity that unfolds from the
phonemes further, is seen in the excerpt from the Saddavimala that opened
this chapter.
APPLICATION OF POTENT LANGUAGE TO WORLDLY ENDS
I mentioned above that the divergence between reform and traditional
understandings of grammar led to a rift between lokuttara (supramundane,
soteriological) and lokiya (this-worldly, mundane, including apotropaic)
applications of Buddhism in reform Theravada that is not found in traditional
Theravada. In traditional Theravada the right-hand and left-hand paths use
the same procedures to deliver transformation, whether salviﬁc (right-hand)
or practical (left-hand). The following summary account of a practitioner
making yantra using sacred powder is taken from a study of borān practice
by François Bizot and Oskar von Hinüber. It documents the explicit use of
grammatical substitution in relation to Buddhist qualities and Buddhist
sacred phrases in a left-hand application. To their description I have added
explanations of how this relates to rules of substitution within Pali generative
grammar.
The grū (lay master) is using protective powder to make yantra, geometric

--- PAGE 113 ---
designs made up of Pali syllables. The word yantra means “mechanism for
restraining, controlling, or subduing,” and these designs oﬀer protection from
harm and control over others.40 The grū uses the powder to write Pali
syllables on a slate. He writes ﬁve Pali words: idha cetaso daḷhaṃ gaṇhāhi
thāmasā. The exoteric meaning of this phrase is “In this connection grasp it
ﬁrmly with perseverance of the mind.”41 The Cambodian esoteric meaning
given to the phrase is “Young girl, come here and love me forcefully with the
strength of the love in your heart.” However, the Pali phrase is taken from
Kaccāyana’s grammar. It comes at the end of the section that teaches sandhi
(phonetic change or euphony when phonemes are juxtaposed). It occurs at
the end of a rule that teaches the substitution of a single voiced or unvoiced
consonant with a double consonant after a vowel—for example, ca + jhā =
cajjhā. It also teaches that the ﬁrst consonant of the two should be the
unaspirated version of the second. Aspiration is indicated in the transcription
of Sanskrit and Pali phonemes by h, so ca + jhā becomes cajjhā not cajhjhā.
It gives as an example ca + jhāna + phalo, which becomes cajjhānapphalo.
The phrase idha cetaso daḷhaṃ gaṇhāhi thāmasā is oﬀered, however, as a
counter-example, not for its semantic meaning but because of its form: these
are forms of words where the rule does not apply and the consonants are not
duplicated after the vowels.
It is possible that this line is chosen because the rule is about the
substitution of sets of ﬁve. If we think back to the Sanskrit and Pali alphabet,
the main consonants form a set of ﬁve ﬁves. Phonemes in the same
horizontal row are all pronounced in the same place in the mouth, from velar
k, kha, et cetera down to labial pa, pha, et cetera. The phonemes in the same
vertical column are all pronounced with the same eﬀort, from unaspirated,
unvoiced k, ca, et cetera to nasal ṅa, ña, et cetera:
ka kha ga gha ṅa
ca cha ja jha ña
ṭa ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇa
ta tha da dha na
pa pha ba bha ma
The non-aspiration of the ﬁrst consonant in the pair of phonemes created by
duplication after a short vowel means that when jha from the fourth column
is duplicated, ja from the third column takes its place. Likewise duplications
of any of the ﬁve consonants in column four, the column of voiced aspirated
consonants (gha, jha, ḍha, dha, bha) will be replaced by its corresponding

--- PAGE 114 ---
consonant among the ﬁve consonants in column three (ga, ja, ḍa, da, ba),
resulting in the conjunct consonants ggha, jjha, ḍḍha, ddha, bbha. The same
applies to the second and ﬁrst columns respectively. The grū’s activity is not
about word formation in the grammatical sense, but about the formation of
potent syllables, and will culminate with the substitution of sets of ﬁve by
sets of ﬁve.
The grū erases the ﬁve words of the initial phrase idha cetaso daḷhaṃ
gaṇhāhi thāmasā and then reorders it, using substitutions nominally based
on Kaccāyana’s generative grammar. The result is twelve “word stems”
consisting of a total of twenty-four syllables as follows: ida iti iti assā udaṃ
ahaṃ aggaṃ ahaṃ ahaṃ ithaṃ amma assā. He erases it again with a new
set of substitutions. In each transition he has in mind speciﬁc substitution
rules from Kaccāyana’s grammar, as he cycles through several more sets of
substitutions, until ﬁnally he arrives back to the phrase idha cetaso daḷhaṃ
gaṇhāhi thāmasā. All the while he is repeating in a high voice the
grammatical rules that name the vowels and diﬀerent consonant groups
(short, long, voiced, unvoiced, et cetera). The grū then explicitly employs the
grammatical principle of lopa, elision, to remove the ﬁve words and replace
them with the ﬁve syllables na mo bu ddhā ya “homage to the Buddha”:
paṭhamaṃ idha lopo ca na-kāro hoti sambhavo
duṭiyaṃ cetaso lopo ca mo-kāro hoti sambhavo
ṭatiyaṃ daḷhaṃ lopo ca bu-kāro hoti sambhavo
catutthaṃ gaṇhāhi lopo ca dhā-kāro hoti sambhavo
pañcamaṃ thāmasā lopo ca ya-kāro hoti sambhavo
First elision of idha, then the phoneme na comes into being.
Second elision of cetaso, then the phoneme mo comes into being.
Third elision of daḷhaṃ, then the phoneme bu comes into being.
Fourth elision of gaṇhāhi, then the phoneme dhā comes into
being.
Fifth elision of thāmasā, then the phoneme ya comes into being.42
Here there is elision of the ﬁve original Pali words. They are substituted by
nothing, zero. As a result, the ﬁve sacred syllables arise—as if from nothing,
but in fact as another stage in the substitution process. From these ﬁve
syllables further aspects of creation, of the path, or of the qualities of the
Buddha may be created through further substitution, as the text goes on to

--- PAGE 115 ---
elaborate. Bizot and von Hinüber proceed to show how this kind of
substitution process, particularly to the stanzas listing the qualities of the
Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha, a set of stanzas beginning with the phrase
itipiso commonly used in Theravada litanies, can be rearranged in these
ways. Complex yantra, the geometrical representations of the substitution
process, are thus formed and complex permutations employed in their
creation.43 The greater the number of repeated substitutions, the more
“dense” the yantra, making it more powerful and more impervious to attack.
It thereby increases in terms of its impenetrability and protective power.
THE GRAMMAR OF KACCĀYANA IN BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀNA
Kaccāyana’s grammar is the earliest extant Pali grammar, in part based on
two Sanskrit precursors, Pāṇini’s Aṣṭadhyāyī and the Kātantra, which is in
turn a simpliﬁed grammar based on the Aṣṭadhyāyī.44 It continues to be
taught throughout Southeast Asia to this day and, as we have seen, is
referenced in borān kammaṭṭhāna and related practices. Kaccāyana is dated
to around the sixth century C.E. as a historical author. However, in the origin
narrative for the teaching of grammar, he is identiﬁed with the Buddha’s
personal disciple Mahākaccāyana, “The Great Kaccāyana.” This conﬂation
of the two Kaccāyanas allows the origin of grammar to be presented as
occurring in response to an intervention by the Buddha, as related at the
opening of this chapter. In that story, the ﬁrst words of Kaccāyana’s
grammar, attho akkharasaññāto, are spoken not by Kaccāyana but by the
Buddha himself, making grammar the sacred word of the Buddha,
buddhavacana. There are a number of versions of the story, all of which
occur in the context of kammaṭṭhāna, the practice of meditation. The crux of
the story lies in the phrase that monks use while meditating, called the “aid,”
parikamma, in borān kammaṭṭhāna, but equivalent to a mantra in other
Buddhist traditions. While some of the key parikamma have symbolic
meanings beyond their literal meaning, such as “a ra haṃ” and “na mo bu
ddhā ya,” the literal meaning of others is directly relevant to the practice. For
example, the phrase sukhī homi, “May I be happy,” is recited as the aid to the
ﬁrst stage of the loving kindness (mettā) practice. The basic origin story for
the need to teach grammar relates to the practice of using such aids to
meditation and runs along the following lines—I have conﬂated it from
various sources to give the gist:
An elderly monk sits at the edge of a lake, his mind composed.
“Arising 
and 
ﬂeeting, 
arising 
and 
ﬂeeting. 
Udayavaya,

--- PAGE 116 ---
udayavaya,” he murmurs to himself, accepting the transient nature
of all in his purview. Across his ﬁeld of vision moves a heron,
hunting in the shallows. “Heron in the water, heron in the water.
Udakabaka, udakabaka,” murmurs the old monk. The Buddha
senses the change in the monk and intervenes. Kaccāyana
volunteers to provide a grammar to prevent errors of this kind.
This tale is reminiscent of a story that introduces the error behind the divine
origin of Sanskrit grammar told in the Kathāsaritsāgara, a collection of tales
composed in eleventh-century Kashmir, and thought to trace back to a
second-century-B.C.E. precursor. When King Sātavāhana is playing at the
edge of a lake with the women of his harem and the queen says, “Stop
splashing me with water, sire! m’odakair deva paritāḍaya mām!” the king
hears, “Throw sweets at me, sire! modakair deva paritāḍaya mām!”
Humiliated by her ensuing scorn, he seeks to learn the secrets of grammar.45
The protagonists in these two stories, both set in ancient India, have fallen
foul of the transformative power of language. A mere syllable misconstrued
(or undisambiguated as we might now say) or out of place spells the
diﬀerence between victory and humiliation. In the second case, it is the
confusion over meaning that causes the problem. The king, not knowing the
laws of euphony (sandhi in Sanskrit) fails to realize that what sounds like
“sweets” modaka can also mean “not water” mā + udaka = m’odaka. In the
ﬁrst case, the confusion is over form, as the old monk, losing focus, allows
the sound y to switch to k and the sound v to b. “Arising,” udaya, becomes
“water,” udaka, and “ﬂeeting,” vaya, becomes “heron,” baka. While it seems
strange to confuse y and k, the mistake makes sense in an Indic rather than a
Southeast Asian context: someone is confusing their Pali with their Prakrit,
another of the languages close to both Sanskrit and Pali, in which k can be
replaced by y, and v by b.46 The question is whether the change in form will
aﬀect the quality of the practitioner’s meditation. On the one hand, because
of the innate relationship between Pali and its meaning, a parikamma/mantra
recited will take eﬀect even if the reciter is unfamiliar with its semantics.
According to Veera Thanaveero of Wat Ratchasittharam, head of the borān
kammaṭṭhāna lineage there, knowing the semantic meaning can even be a
hindrance as the practitioner then projects an expected experience onto the
process rather than allowing the experience to arise spontaneously from the
process. Does this mean that our meditator will shift from practicing a
meditation that will lead to an understanding of the truth of impermanence to
being entranced by a creature killing ﬁsh, potentially a bad kamma for which
the Buddha himself once suﬀered negative consequences? Or is the quality

--- PAGE 117 ---
of the meditator’s mind unaﬀected, or unaﬀected if still focused on the
original meaning?
The Southeast Asia versions of this story are ambivalent. In the ﬁfteenth-
century commentary on Kaccāyana’s grammar by the Burmese monk
Chapaṭa Saddhammajotipāla of Pagan,47 two monks are meditating using the
phrase “destruction and decay,” khaya-vaya. One sees the heron and recites
“water heron,” udako bako; the other sees a cloth in a pot and recites “in the
pot a cloth,” ghaṭe paṭaṃ. Although the Buddha, by means of a supernatural
light, proclaims the sentence attho akkharasaññāto, “Meaning is understood
through phonemes,” and Kaccāyana composes his grammar in response to
the Buddha’s statement, the text nonetheless conﬁrms: “Their Kammaṭṭhāna
was also eﬀectual.”48
In the Saddavimala, the borān kammaṭṭhāna text, the elderly monk is not
confused. The Buddha gives him the choice of gantha-dhura or vipassanā-
dhura, the duty of book-learning or the duty of meditation leading to insight.
The monk chooses the latter.
Seeing a ﬂock of herons feasting on the ﬁsh in the lake, the monk
is profoundly moved and says, “These numerous ﬁsh live in
perpetual fear of being exterminated by beings who torment them.
It is just the same for people, and for me too. We are all subject to
birth, aging, sickness, death, destruction, and danger, which
torment us. We are destined for destruction, doomed to die.” When
he had ﬁnished this observation, he used it as the basis of his
meditation and repeated without interruption, “The herons are
eating the ﬁsh. The herons are eating the ﬁsh.” Just then, eighty
thousand monks were returning from their alms round, and hearing
the elderly monk they criticized him, assuming he was speaking in
error and was a fraud. They reported the matter to the Buddha. The
Buddha replied, “Monks, the elderly monk is a true son of the
Buddha. He is certainly no fraud. The way in which he is
meditating is quite correct for he is not aware of the prescribed
syllables for meditation. Moreover, he is meditating in accordance
with both the semantics and the phonemes in the vernacular.
Indeed, this is in no way a case of a fraud.” At this the monk
Anuruddha prostrated himself before the Buddha and asked,
“Please, Lord, what are ‘phonemes’?” Whereupon the Buddha
proclaimed, “Meaning is understood through phonemes, attho
akkharasaññāto. The sense of all speech is understood through the

--- PAGE 118 ---
phonemes. When there is a mistake in the phonemes, there is
confusion as to the meaning. Therefore, skillfulness regarding
phonemes is very helpful in relation to the Sutta-teachings.”49
This brings us to the textual excerpt from the Saddavimala with which this
chapter opened. In consequence of the Buddha’s further explanation of the
importance of understanding phonemes, Kaccāyana then volunteers to teach
his grammar.
In the Saddavimala, then, the meditating monk is vindicated. He does not
need to know the prescribed wording to meditate successfully. Moreover, he
is in fact using the correct phrasing for the meaning in the vernacular. The
younger monks who insist on following the prescribed text are in error in
dismissing the elderly monk as a fraud, and it is they who are in fact ignorant
of the true importance of phonemes. When Kaccāyana then teaches his
grammar, it is not only the semantic value of the phonemes that he teaches,
but their creative potential. It is the creative potential of Pali that is
emphasized in the Saddavimala.
The story is emblematic of the longstanding debate between experience/
practice, paṭipatti, and textual study, pariyatti, but also suggests that the
textualists are themselves arrogant, ignorant that they are falling short of a
true understanding of the importance of grammar. In borān kammaṭṭhāna,
generative grammar was applied not just in the learning of Pali and the
generation of correct Pali sentences. It underpinned the belief in Pali as a
potent, generative force. Its phonemes, speciﬁc words, and whole sentences
could embody entities greater than themselves, and, through a process of
substitution, were instrumental in creation itself at both a cosmic and
personal level. Etymology in this context is about drawing out hidden
meaning and cosmic resonances, which are timeless.
The understanding of grammar for correct sentence formation was
maintained. We can see the shared concern between Vinaya specialists and at
least some borān practitioners for correct language. The former were
concerned to ensure correct grammar and pronunciation of Pali phonemes to
ensure the validity of monastic rituals, particularly those that pertain to
ordination. The litanies used in borān kammaṭṭhāna employ the same Pali
wording used for ordination into the Sangha to ensure the validity of the
initiation into the meditation practice.50 At the same time, in the right-hand
path, the entities that Pali phonemes represent can be employed to internalize
factors and stages of spiritual development, including the positive mental
states (kusala citta) and attendant mental factors (cetasika). Meanwhile, in

--- PAGE 119 ---
practices of the left-hand path, they are recited or applied to a surface using
the appropriate script in order to harness the power of statements of the
Buddha, his buddhavacana, including the grammar believed to have been
initiated by him, for more worldly ends.
Borān kammaṭṭhāna, being directly concerned with transformation, paid
close attention to how transformation was to be achieved and the range of
transformations that can be achieved by language. These include the ability
of generative grammar to create language, the ability of language to convey
signiﬁcance beyond itself, and to carry processes from forms of
consciousness to forms of materiality. Also included are the related concepts
of letter alchemy, which uses phonemes to bring about change in the
substratum to which they are applied.
A similar attitude to language is found in the tantric Buddhism of the
Himalayas and Central Asia. It was one of the features criticized by early
European observers, who detected in it echoes of Catholicism’s hocus pocus,
or superstitious accretions, just as modernizers in Cambodia regarded the
borān use of Pali. They therefore saw such practice as counter to the speciﬁc
type of rationalism that they projected onto their understanding of original
Buddhism. However, in the European portrayal of Buddhism, there was no
need to take seriously the issue of the actual mechanisms for transformation
involved in the Buddhist path since Nibbana was not accepted as a valid or
real goal of religious life.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we examined how borān kammaṭṭhāna participates in a
worldview that valued, analyzed, and sought to harness the creative potential
of language. This related to the importance of the science of generative
grammar, developed in Sanskrit and Pali, the sacred language of Theravada
Buddhism, a technology largely displaced in modernist Buddhism of the
colonial period. This attitude to language is signiﬁcant in understanding how
borān kammaṭṭhāna understood the process of transformation in two key
ways. First, in terms of potent language itself, we saw that traditional
Theravada Buddhism interpreted this creative power more broadly, in terms
of the creation of the universe and the dhamma, the Buddha’s teaching and
the components of reality. It harnesses this potency in its borān
kammaṭṭhāna by using Pali syllables to represent and convey qualities
attained in meditation to embed them in the body, and to protect the body, for
example in creating protective powder and yantra, including tattoos. Second,
the mathematics underlying generative grammar provides models for

--- PAGE 120 ---
transformation also applied in borān kammaṭṭhāna. One key mathematical
tool was substitution, including the use of zero as a place-holder, the
substitution on the basis of similarity (numerical similarity and similarity in
quality), and the transfer of qualities from the substituted into the
substituend.
The other key mathematical tool was group theory mathematics, which
can be used to work out which components are necessary for a particular
transformation and the minimum number of changes required to complete the
full range of options or processes necessary to reach the end goal. In
grammar, this is used in the creation of a word, whereas in borān
kammaṭṭhāna and Paṭṭhāna, the portion of Abhidhamma that analyzes the
interrelationship of causal factors, the end goal is an enlightened being.
Substitution and group theory mathematics allow for the replacement of
successive states of consciousness and materiality, and group theory
mathematics underlies the combinations and sequencing. This is then applied
in relation to changes made through meditation in the states of consciousness
(citta) and aspects of consciousness (cetasika), which are then internalized to
transform the materiality (rūpa) of the embodied practitioner. The theory and
processes of bringing about change are shared between generative grammar,
letter alchemy, Abhidhamma, and borān kammaṭṭhāna. How traditionalists
and modernists diﬀer in their applications of this same background
knowledge is important in understanding how borān kammaṭṭhāna functions
and why the orthodox theoretical basis of its functionality ceased to be
recognized in the modern period.
This exploration of generative grammar has helped us understand how
potent language and sequential substitution are distinctive features of borān
kammaṭṭhāna. There are three further distinctive aspects of borān
kammaṭṭhāna still to be explained. The ﬁrst is the use of speciﬁc pathways to
deliver the desired aspects of consciousness into the body starting with the
nasal cavity. The second is the location in which these aspects of
consciousness are combined and bound into the body, primarily in the
practitioner’s “womb,” regardless of the gender of the practitioner. The third
is that the practice involves extensive repetition. In the next chapter, we shall
look at two other sciences or technologies current in pre-modern Theravada
cultures to make sense of these features.

--- PAGE 121 ---
5
TRANSFORMATION OF THE BODY
Meditation, Medicine, and Chemistry
Here we are, in the center of the womb, where the embryo sucks
water from its mother, grasping the umbilical cord…. Having just
completed our visit inside this cave we have acquired great merit,
for this is the womb of our sacred mother. The opening here is the
golden gate. In going through it to practice asceticism, we have
regressed into the mother’s stomach. In this way we are born anew.
Let us ask for forgiveness for having soiled our sacred mother.
—Teaching inside the “cave of birth” at Mount Sampau near
Battambang, Cambodia1
The above teaching was given to a group of pilgrims performing a rebirthing
ritual in the womb-shaped cave at Mount Sampau, the core of which
involved borān meditation and the chanting of the parikamma that attend it.
François Bizot recorded this pilgrimage in 1971, just three years before the
last such ritual took place in 1974, as the practice was interrupted by the
Khmer Rouge period. Following his discussion of this rite, Bizot provides
descriptions of other embryology-related rituals and translates Khmer texts
explaining the embryological signiﬁcance and symbolism of borān
meditation practice, the use of sacred syllables, and the requisites of the
monks, such as their monastic robes.
In the previous chapter we examined the use of potent language and letter
alchemy in relation to Indic generative grammar. We saw the role of the
underlying concepts of substitution and group theory mathematics in
bringing about change. In this chapter, we will extend our consideration of
technologies in the pre-modern Theravada world, so that we can further
unravel the processes of transformation envisaged in borān meditation. The
progressive substitution of lower states of consciousness and concomitant
mental factors with higher ones is clearly an enactment of Abhidhamma. The
infusion of those aspects of consciousness into the body in order to transform
the materiality of the individual is also clearly based on the Abhidhamma

--- PAGE 122 ---
understanding of cittaja rūpa, that some materiality is generated by
consciousness. However, the process of infusion is distinctive. Here we seek
to understand the process of the infusion of the body with the desired mental
states. Why is it that the mental factors are brought into the body through the
nasal cavity and down to an area referred to as the womb of the practitioner?
And why is this process performed iteratively?
The most obvious and widespread transformative technology for
improving the state of the body is medicine, and we shall look at traditional
Indic medicine (Ayurveda) here. As we shall see, borān kammaṭṭhāna is
used as a type of medicine, drawing on ayurvedic analysis of illness. But we
also ﬁnd medicine as a model for meditation, particularly as it applies to the
creation and treatment of a new being.2 In Buddhist meditation, the new
being is the enlightened individual. In medicine, the new being is the embryo
in the womb, and it is in ayurvedic obstetrics, medicine for embryos, that we
will ﬁnd parallels with the processes of transformation used in borān
kammaṭṭhāna. As Bizot has extensively demonstrated, embryology pervades
borān kammaṭṭhāna. Here we shall see that it is not only symbolic, but of
practical relevance for process of transformation.
Borān kammaṭṭhāna is also about purifying the individual. It is in the
technology for the puriﬁcation of metals, an aspect of chemistry, that we
shall ﬁnd further parallels with the processes applied in borān meditation.
Thus we ﬁnd a correlation between embryology, chemistry, and spiritual
transformation.
After looking at the parallels between borān kammaṭṭhāna and these
technologies, we shall examine what happened to these technologies,
particularly to medicine, during the colonial period to see if this helps us
understand how the techniques applied in meditation changed during that
period.
GROUP THEORY MATHEMATICS IN AYURVEDIC MEDICINE
Substitution and group theory mathematics, two concepts discussed in the
previous chapter in relation to ritual, grammar, Abhidhamma, and borān
kammaṭṭhāna, were also important in Indian medicine. Substitution
contributed, for example, to the highly advanced development of plastic
surgery for the reconstruction of noses, genitalia, and limbs lost through
disease, punishment, or ﬁghting, including rhinoplasty from the reversal of
the forehead skin ﬂap. The physical substitutes, such as the skin ﬂap in
rhinoplasty, took on the attributes of what they replaced, just like the
grammatical substitutes discussed in the previous chapter. Such medical

--- PAGE 123 ---
procedures are described in the seminal ayurvedic treatise the Suśruta
Saṃhitā, thought to date back as far as 500 B.C.E., and were among the
medical technologies adopted from India by neighboring cultures.3 In the late
eighteenth century Indian rhinoplasty also reached Britain, after being
witnessed by British surgeons in the Third Anglo-Mysore War (1789–1792),
even though at this time, as we shall see, the British were claiming
superiority in medicine over local physicians.
Substitution is also important in the preparation of medicines. It is
necessitated by the variable availability of herbs and other pharmaceutical
substances according to region and season. In this case the pharmaceutical
substance represents a particular quality that the medical practitioner wishes
to inculcate in the body of the patient according to the problem being
addressed. Therefore, a quality is represented by a substance that may be
substituted and may undergo various procedures such as pulverization or
cooking. Again the principle of substitution still applies: the substitute
transmits the quality for which the original substance was selected.
Group theory mathematics is likewise important in traditional Indian
medicine, in diagnostics and pharmaceuticals. In ayurvedic medicine disease
and illness are understood as arising from an imbalance of the three doṣa
(Sanskrit; dosa Pali). The term doṣa is often translated into English with the
word “humor,” on the basis of the pre-modern European medical analysis of
biological imbalance, although the parallels are limited. The three doṣa are
vāta “wind,” pitta “bile,” and kapha “phlegm,” and they all have a role in the
functioning and maintenance of the body.4
Ayurveda used group theory mathematics to understand the possible
permutations of each of the three doṣa in combination with the bodily tissues
(dhātu) and other variables. Blood was also considered in addition to these
three in the case of wounds.5 How many combinations of humor imbalances
this could lead to according to strength and combination was worked out in
ayurvedic texts. According to how they assessed the variation of humors and
whether blood was added, the options varied from ﬁfty to sixty-two. Armed
with this knowledge, ayurvedic physicians could then apply the appropriate
combination and proportions of pharmaceutical substances, such as speciﬁc
herbs, to counter the speciﬁc imbalance identiﬁed by the physician in relation
to their ﬂavors, potency, et cetera.6 How many combinations of these items
were then possible was diﬀerently calculated by diﬀerent medical treatises,
with the number sixty-three reached by Caraka Saṃhitā, the other key
foundational text of Ayurveda, which dates from before 300 C.E. and had
reached its current form by 500 C.E.7

--- PAGE 124 ---
Although algorithms for working out combinations came to be used in
other sciences such as astronomy from the sixth century C.E. onward, in early
ayurvedic medical texts, iterative listing was still required.8 We similarly ﬁnd
such iterative listing in the Paṭṭhāna, the seventh book of the Abhidhamma
that deals with combinations of causes and eﬀects, and in borān
kammaṭṭhāna manuals. The calculations in both medicine and Abhidhamma
are about progressive substitutions, whether to replace a humor imbalance
(medicine) or change from one mental or ethical state to another (Paṭṭhāna
and meditation). Thus two important mechanisms for understanding and
generating change that we found in generative grammar, namely substitution
and group theory mathematics, are also found in medicine. Moreover, they
are also found in Abhidhamma and in borān kammaṭṭhāna, which, like early
Ayurveda, uses iterative listing to work through the possibilities.
THE INVOLVEMENT OF THERAVADA MONKS IN MEDICINE
Training in grammatical expertise was provided to Buddhist monks as a way
to ensure the correct transmission of the Dhamma and the correct
performance of ecclesiastical rites. Hence a correlation between meditation
and generative grammar is understandable within a monastic context. Before
looking in greater depth at the correlation between medicine and borān
meditation, we should establish the extent to which Theravada Buddhist
monks were exposed to medical expertise. Was medical training a part of
monastic culture?
Reformers of Buddhism sought to prohibit monks from practicing
medicine. These included the kings of Burma, following the eighteenth-
century Thudhamma reform, the monk Väliviṭa Saraṇaṃkara, who led the
eighteenth-century reform in Sri Lanka, and Mongkut, who initiated the
reform of Thai Buddhism in the nineteenth century. They applied more
restrictive interpretations of monastic conduct. This in itself suggests the
practice of medicine by monks was suﬃciently widespread to warrant their
disapprobation. For Buddhists, the most famous medical practitioner in
history is Jīvaka, not a monk but a lay devotee who tended to the Buddha. He
is credited with using such techniques as surgery, including cranial surgery,
the treatment of humor (doṣa/dosa) imbalance, and intranasal applications of
medicine, a point to which we shall return below, using wax as the medium
of delivery. Several Buddhist medical traditions, including the royal Thai
ayurvedic tradition, claim to trace their origins to him.9
While Jīvaka was a layman, the long history of monks also having medical
expertise is nonetheless conﬁrmed by the range of medical literature authored

--- PAGE 125 ---
and transmitted by them since the early centuries of Buddhism.10 The earliest
Buddhist medical text for which we have evidence is contained in the
Buddhist canon itself. Ironically it is in the division of the canon dedicated to
monastic regulations, the Vinaya Piṭaka, on the basis of which reformers
sought to prohibit monastic medical practice. In the Pali canon of Theravada
Buddhism the relevant text is the Bhesajja-khandha, “Medical Section.”
Vernacular versions of the Bhesajja-khandha were still being composed in
Burma in the nineteenth century.11 The canonical version includes a list of
implements to deliver medicine, such as those to deliver substances to the
eyes and nose to avoid infection from application with the hands. The reason
these utensils are included in a work on monastic regulations is that the
Vinaya as a whole delineates what monks may or may not do, and what they
may or may not own, beyond the permitted eight “requisites” allowed to all
monks.12 The utensils listed in the Bhesajja-khandha are indicated as medical
items that may be personally owned by monks.13 These utensils tell us that
the delivery pathways used for applying medicine include, again, the
intranasal cavity.
While such utensils may have been owned by monks so that they could
treat themselves and fellow monks, a range of evidence including
archaeological remains of hospitals excavated in close correspondence with
monastic sites in ancient India and Sri Lanka suggests that provision of
medical care outside the Sangha had long been a recognized element of
monastic life.14 It is possible that Buddhist missionaries recognized medical
care as a technology of conversion, just as it was for Christian medical
missionaries in the early modern period. On the other hand, both medicine
and other technologies of transformation employed by Buddhist monks, such
as meditation, share an optimistic worldview: one can and should use
knowledge and the treatments based on that knowledge to intervene in the
psychophysical given. One’s physical body and attendant consciousness
should be treated to ameliorate one’s experience, reduce suﬀering, and
transform one’s condition.
In the case of a newborn baby, for example, the character and physicality
are the products of a number of factors including karma (actions) in previous
lifetimes, the qualities of its parent, its experience and nutrition in the womb,
and the relative balance of humors (dosa). The individual at any point in his
or her life may suﬀer or improve according to the maturing of the cumulative
eﬀect of such factors and others. Since some of these factors are susceptible
to intervention, whether by religious practice or medical action, Buddhist
monks, as technicians of transformation, naturally drew on whatever
technologies were available to treat individuals in order to alleviate suﬀering

--- PAGE 126 ---
and guide people to a better state.
This holistic approach was later disrupted by the mind-body and science-
religion dichotomies that informed Buddhist reform movements of the
colonial period, and later still by the specialization of religious and medical
vocations. Until such time medical expertise was one strand of knowledge to
be gained through ordination, which until the modern period was the primary
means of gaining literacy and other types of education that built upon
literacy. Former monks were also among the foremost native medical
practitioners and authors in Burma and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. While
on the whole socially conservative, monks were also often pioneers in taking
up new knowledge.15
MEDICINE AND BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHANA
Having established that expertise in medicine circulated among Theravada
monks, meaning that medicine and meditation were two technologies found
alongside each other, let us now look at the diﬀerent ways in which this
juxtaposition or relationship is manifest in borān meditation.
Borān kammaṭṭhāna is associated with medicine in two main ways: ﬁrst, it
is applied to medical ends, and second, it shares with medicine the same
underlying model of transformation. First, let us look at the application of
borān kammaṭṭhāna to medical ends. Those who have attained the advanced
stages of borān kammaṭṭhāna are believed to be able to beneﬁt others
medically with their acquired power. The texts of Suk Kaitheun, the supreme
patriarch of Siam (Thailand) from the end of the eighteenth century (1794–
1816), include detailed instructions for the application of meditation to treat
medical ailments. A detailed knowledge of ayurvedic medicine, including the
issue of imbalance of the doṣa/dosa in relation to the diﬀerent bodily tissues,
dhātu, pervades his work. What the borān kammaṭṭhāna medical system
adds to Ayurveda is a way of using the nimitta experienced in meditation to
address medical problems in speciﬁc bodily areas. The method utilizes the
combining of qualities, represented by the nimitta, and the ability to move
the nimitta around the body and embed them in the chosen area.
The meditator who has mastered the technique of…samatha and
vipassanā can transfer a well-established visualized image
[nimitta] which he has cultivated, or any member of the ﬁve joys
(pīti) which he has well cultivated, or the visualized image of the
relic of the Buddha to one of the nine Bases [locations within the

--- PAGE 127 ---
body] and work according to the speciﬁc purpose, for example, for
warding oﬀ pain and curing diseases.
Before knowing the arts of healing, the meditator must know
thoroughly the following fourteen evils [akusala, unskillful mental
states/factors]…
For the [=to] cure element aggravation, the meditator is to move
the visualized image right down to the lower space surface, and
then make a resolution: drawing together all the four elements, the
ﬁve faculties for enlightenment together with the seven
constituents of wisdom. Having got them all stabilized at the Base,
he is to suppress all the entities at the Base with a number of
repeated resolution[s]. He must keep them all together there at one
place and not to allow any of the constituents to move up from the
Base. While doing this, even breathing, he is to keep them all there
suppressed with his consciousness until the symptom subsides.16
Here the positive aspects of consciousness, mental factors that can counteract
the unskillful aspects and states of consciousness, are combined with the
elements at the relevant part of the body. So whereas in ayurvedic medicine a
pharmaceutical element of the correct combination and strength should be
applied to the imbalance in the dosa in combination with the elements, in the
borān kammaṭṭhāna medical system, the positive, purifying aspects of
consciousness are used in place of, or as, the pharmaceutical elements. This
makes sense given two aspects of the Abhidhamma understanding of the
psychophysical being. First, pain is an aspect of consciousness, cetasika,
coming under the category of sensation vedanā, one of the ﬁve aggregates
that make up each individual. Vedanā can be pleasant, painful/unpleasant, or
neutral. A painful vedanā can therefore be dealt with by replacing it with
diﬀerent types of cetasika. Second, according to the Abhidhamma analysis of
causality, some materiality, or aspects of physicality, are “consciousness-
born,” citta-ja. This means that mental states directly aﬀect the body and can
be used to treat it.
The treatise of another supreme patriarch, Vichay That Mahamuni, who
was the head of the Sangha in Laos at some date between the sixteenth and
eighteenth centuries, also attests to the use of borān kammaṭṭhāna in treating
medical disorders. The manual indicates that the facility acquired by the
meditator to switch back and forth between diﬀerent meditation experiences
and to hold multiple experiences at the same time is applied to sort out
disorders of the wind element and restore physical balance and health.17

--- PAGE 128 ---
Overall the parallel between ayurvedic medicine and borān kammaṭṭhāna
medicine is that both treat imbalances in the dosa (humors) in combination
with the physical elements (dhātu, i.e., earth, water, ﬁre, wind, and space), by
applying pharmaceutical agents or medicine and manipulation. In Ayurveda
those medicines are made up of herbal and mineral extractions, each
providing the qualities which need to be combined to combat the three types
of dosa imbalance. In borān medicine, the medicines are created from
positive mental states, combining elements of non-greed, non-hatred, and
non-delusion with the physical elements to treat three types of dosa
imbalance. Movement of these states are used to free up blockages just as
movement of water, or another liquid, might be used to free up blockages in
medicine.
This application of positive mental states, combining elements of non-
greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion to treat medical imbalances might relate
to the three roots of imbalance in the individual, namely greed, hatred, and
delusion, the cause of us being trapped in samsara. Our embodiment is the
combination of the elements (dhātu), earth, water, ﬁre, wind, and space, with
our states of consciousness and their concomitants (citta and cetasika), which
are either based in the three unskillful roots (greed, hatred, and delusion) or
their opposite: the mental and the physical are interrelated. Being able to
replace the negative with the positive, as in medicine, is what is needed to
change the unenlightened individual (puthujjana) into an enlightened one, an
arhat.
This aim helps us understand the second connection between borān
kammaṭṭhāna and medicine, namely that there is a medical model underlying
borān kammaṭṭhāna that shapes its distinctive somatic practices. To deliver
desired changes in the meditator’s mind and body, borān kammaṭṭhāna uses
a delivery process that corresponds with delivery of pharmaceutical
substances in Ayurveda. The meditation brings nimitta, which represent the
qualities of mind achieved in meditation, into the body based on the idea that
one is recreating oneself as a Buddha or arhat from within. This process will
transform the individual into an enlightened being by drawing in the qualities
that will progressively substitute any weaknesses with the desired qualities.
Perhaps because of the idea that one is creating a new individual, the model
of transformation is the creation of a new child, a fetus. Just as a mother
nurtures the new child-to-be in her womb, the locus to which these desired
qualities are directed is the “womb” of the practitioner, whether male or
female. Corresponding to this imagery, the delivery system used in borān
meditation parallels that for the medication of the fetus in ayurvedic
obstetrics, as will be explained below.

--- PAGE 129 ---
The model of transformation in ayurvedic obstetrics is so fundamental to
borān kammaṭṭhāna that extensive references to embryology pervade every
aspect of the tradition across the entire spectrum of applications. These
include the rebirthing ritual alluded to at the start of this chapter, longevity
rituals, the symbolism of manuscripts and monastic robes, correlations made
between the development of the embryo, Pali sacred formulae, and aspects of
the Dhamma.18
The pervasive references to embryological development in borān
kammaṭṭhāna are understandable as a metaphor for the creation of a new
being within, but it is also more than a metaphor. It underpins the technology
of transformation in a completely literal sense. The methods for treating the
unborn fetus in Ayurveda are applied in inducing change in the meditation
practitioner as they generate a Buddha within themselves. The delivery
methods are applied with the help of the techniques of substitution and
combination in both borān kammaṭṭhāna and ayurvedic medicine. In borān
kammaṭṭhāna the pharmaceutical substances are replaced by the nimitta that
arise in meditation or by the Pali syllables that represent them.
AYURVEDIC OBSTETRICS
To understand the pathways for delivering medicine and meditative states to
baby and practitioner respectively, and thereby understand the relationship
between borān kammaṭṭhāna and ayurvedic obstetrics, this section looks at
the treatment of a real embryo during pregnancy. As noted above, ayurvedic
medicine and Buddhism both accept that intervention can ameliorate or
enhance one’s inherited condition. The belief that current karma/kamma can
aﬀect the psychophysical organism in fact encourages intervention. Like
Buddhism, ayurvedic medicine accepts karma as one cause of one’s current
condition, but it also looks to other factors, such as imbalances of the doṣa,
astrology, and the intervention of supernatural beings, that may be addressed
through a variety of means to cure illness. As continued to be the case in
ayurvedic practice in Thailand in the nineteenth century, we therefore see
multiple methods of treatment being used to treat and prevent disease in the
unborn embryo/fetus.19
Ayurveda and Buddhism both assume that the stay in the womb for the
fetus is precarious, uncomfortable, and painful.20 A developed theory on how
to treat the fetus is found in the Caraka Saṃhitā, one of the two seminal
works of ayurvedic medicine mentioned above. The treatment was not only
to ensure safe gestation and delivery, but also to inﬂuence the baby’s
character and gender. The right side of the body is associated with a male

--- PAGE 130 ---
fetus and the left side of the body with a female fetus. In order to change the
gender to a male child, one should apply medicine to the right nostril of the
pregnant mother. Male gender could also be achieved by using a small
metallic model of a man to infuse milk for the mother-to-be to drink, or by
wearing the metallic model hung to the right of the mother’s navel.21 Both
methods parallel the way in which nimitta of light and of a visualized
Buddha are used in borān kammaṭṭhāna. The treatment of the fetus by
application of pharmaceutical substances through both intranasal and oral
pathways, requiring ﬁne pulverization or liquid in the case of the former,
continued throughout the history of Ayurveda, as can be seen in the
nineteenth-century prescription of “snuﬀ” in Thai ayurvedic medicine.22
Mitchell Weiss explains,
The garbha [fetus] is made up of the four elements (prabhava,
bhūta)—namely, wind, ﬁre, earth, and water—and six types of
nourishment (rasa). These are also constituents of maternal blood,
paternal semen, food, and one’s own deeds, which in turn
contribute the components of the garbha. Contributions from
karma and the parents thus have a physical basis.23
In the Caraka Saṃhitā the physical components of the body are divided
according to whether they come from the mother or the father. There is a
general tendency for bloody and softer components such as the ﬂesh, fat, and
heart to come from the mother, and harder substances, such as nails, teeth,
and bones, to come from the father,24 a division also found throughout borān
kammaṭṭhāna. The heart is the place where the fetus experiences feelings. Its
heart is linked to the mother’s heart. Nutrients pass from the mother’s heart
to the fetus’s heart through connecting channels.25
The three doṣa/dosa (Sanskrit/Pali) are further associated with three
strands or qualities, guṇa, that make up the material realm: suddha “pure,”
rajas “impulsive,” and tamas “lethargic.”26 The Caraka Saṃhitā
understands that the character of the fetus and future child relate to the
relative predominance of each of these. It also equates the character of the
fetus with diﬀerent cosmological realms. Fetuses in which the pure (suddha)
quality predominates are equated with diﬀerent deities, and the character of
the child-to-be will match the qualities of the relevant gods. The Brahmā-god
fetus will be truthful and wise, the Indra type powerful, et cetera.27 Buddhism
similarly equates diﬀerent mental states, based on the three roots of akusala
(greed, hatred, and delusion) and the three roots of the beautiful mental states

--- PAGE 131 ---
(non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion), which are present in such
meditative attainments as the jhāna, with diﬀerent cosmological realms.28
Both traditional medicine and Buddhism therefore correlate the character of
an individual with their constitution and with cosmological realms.
MONASTIC KNOWLEDGE OF OBSTETRICS
Before taking this similarity between obstetrics and esoteric Theravada
meditation further, we might ask how this might be possible when the
Theravada Sangha is a celibate monastic order, with monks forbidden from
having physical contact with women. Obstetrics treats the unborn child from
conception to birth, so is associated with reproduction and entails physical
contact with women. While the involvement of monks in medicine
throughout the history of Theravada is well attested,29 it might be reasonable
to assume that monks were not involved in obstetrics.
However, Leslie (R.A.L.H.) Gunawardana has demonstrated that the
composers and compilers of Theravada texts, from the ﬁrst-century-B.C.E.
Milindapañha through to the ﬁfth-century commentaries attributed to
Buddhaghosa onward, maintained a detailed and up-to-date knowledge of the
subject.30 Not only did their knowledge reﬂect developments in ayurvedic
learning, according to Gunawardana they developed improvements on the
knowledge to be found in the two seminal ayurvedic works, the Suśruta
Saṃhitā and Caraka Saṃhitā, mentioned above. While such interest may in
part reﬂect the Abhidhamma focus on analyzing the human condition and
causality, attention is also paid to medical details. These include the factors
leading to conception, which developed from the early Indic assumption that
conception occurred during menstruation (presumably on the model of
animals in season), to an understanding that menstruation was the least likely
time for conception to take place, and the understanding that nutrition was
transmitted through the umbilical cord/navel rather than from the heart of the
mother to that of the fetus.31 This familiarity does not mean that monks
treated women. Throughout Theravada history, most ordinations have been
undertaken only temporarily, so medical education within the Sangha may
have been for use after disrobing, and it is also possible that some medical
knowledge displayed by monks was acquired before the period of
monkhood.32
OBSTETRICS AS A MODEL FOR CREATING THE BUDDHA WITHIN
Let us now see the extent to which the shared interest between ayurvedic

--- PAGE 132 ---
obstetrics and borān kammaṭṭhāna in the creation of an ideal, healthy new
being leads to shared technology of transformation. In ayurvedic obstetrics,
with the goal of creating a healthy human being of good character, a range of
treatments are applied to the mother, among which are alchemy and the
application of pharmaceutical substances either orally or within the intranasal
cavity, as noted above. Once applied intranasally or orally the substances
then pass down the energy channels and centers of ayurvedic anatomy. In
borān kammaṭṭhāna, with the goal of creating a being that is higher than
human, visual alchemy may be used to apply the attributes of the stages of
the path to the embryonic Buddha in the practitioner’s “womb.” In other
words, the nimitta that represent the desired factors of consciousness, or Pali
letters in their place, are moved from the nostril to the “womb” of the
practitioner where the new enlightened being is constructed. The meditation
technique uses the same channels of delivery, particularly the intranasal
route.
Multiple aspects of the ayurvedic treatment of the embryo ﬁnd parallels in
borān kammaṭṭhāna: the assignment of the right- and left-hand sides of the
body to male and female respectively, the terminology for the stages of the
embryo, and the terms for the implantation by the father/practitioner of his
semen/the attributes in the “womb.”33 The division of physical substances
into male and female in borān kammaṭṭhāna extends earlier Buddhist
analysis of the body into thirty-two components by aligning them with male
and female.34 As we have seen, the male-female division pervades other
aspects of symbolism in borān kammaṭṭhāna and traditional Theravada in
general.35
The pharmaceutical elements in the case of borān kammaṭṭhāna are not
physical substances, but the stages of the meditative path to enlightenment,
broken down into elements and typically represented by their nimitta, or
adapted nimitta including letters or a visualized image of the Buddha. Just as
Ayurveda uses group theory mathematics to match the pharmaceutical
constituents to the desired rebalancing of the three doṣa, so borān
kammaṭṭhāna uses group theory mathematics to ensure all the positive
attributes of the path are thoroughly bound into the body of the practitioner.
We could analyze this more speciﬁcally to the overcoming of the three roots
of negative/unskillful attributes, akusala dhamma, since the early meditative
exercises displace the akusala, unskillful, negative, with kusala dhamma,
positive/skillful attributes, and their resultant states (vipāka). At the higher
levels these are then replaced with the functional (kiriya) states that in the
enlightened individual replace and are the equivalent of the kusala states of
those lower on the path, but have no karmic consequences. The substitution

--- PAGE 133 ---
of negative/unskillful attributes with positive attributes and the generation of
components of materiality, the physical body, from consciousness, ﬁts with
Abhidhamma understandings of causality. Moreover, in the Indic model,
consciousness is mobile. However, the pathways used in borān
kammaṭṭhāna, from the nostril to the womb, can only be understood by
seeing the correlation between this form of meditation and ayurvedic
obstetrics.
While the medicines applied in obstetrics draw on the combinatorics of
ayurvedic pharmacy to address dosa imbalance to create a child of the right
qualities, in borān kammaṭṭhāna we observe the use of permutation, where
the order of the combination is important. In other words, the desired
attributes of consciousness or their representative nimitta must be combined
in the body in speciﬁc order, its reverse and other combinations. This is
because some causes cannot lead to some results, for example, an unskillful
mental state, akusala dhamma, cannot be directly substituted by kiriya
dhamma, the functional mental states of those who have reached the
supramundane states in becoming an arhat. The sequence is important in
progressing from the starting point to the end goal. So while combinatorics
applies in each moment, in that certain cetasika, attributes of consciousness,
coexist in certain states of consciousness, permutations apply over a series of
moments. In the Paṭṭhāna, the book of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka that looks at
combinations and permutations in relation to causality, we ﬁnd two terms:
anuloma, “in order,” and paṭiloma, “in reverse order.” These two terms are
those most frequently found for designating the order in borān meditation,
alongside other terms for more complex types of permutations. Much space
in the more extensive of the borān manuals is dedicated to listing the nimitta
and elements to be combined in order, reverse order, and more complex
permutations, and the details of their movements.
To sum up, the use of the intranasal cavity to bring the nimitta, which
represent the desired attributes of mentality achieved in meditation, into the
body of the meditator at his or her “womb,” is based on the medical method
of using the intranasal cavity of the mother to deliver pharmaceutical and
alchemical substances into the body of the baby-to-be located in the mother’s
womb. The use of speciﬁc combinations of cetasika to counteract imbalances
derived from the three ﬁres of greed, hatred, and delusion, or to induce
desired positive attributes, is parallel to the use of speciﬁc combinations of
pharmaceutical agents in obstetrics to counteract imbalances of the dosa
(humors) and induce desired positive attributes in the child-to-be.

--- PAGE 134 ---
PURIFICATION OF MERCURY AND GOLD: ALCHEMY OR TRADITIONAL
CHEMISTRY
Looking at parallels with medicine has helped us to understand the
combinations, the intranasal delivery pathway, and the central location of the
womb in borān meditation. However, this does not explain the degree of
repetition in borān meditation, with the nimitta repeatedly brought into and
out of the practitioner’s womb. To understand this process of repeatedly
applying and withdrawing the transformative substance we need to turn to
another technology. That technology is alchemy or, rather, traditional
chemistry.
Alchemy involves the addition of mercury and sulfur to base metals to
create new compounds, with the highest transmutation thought possible
being the creation of gold.36 To be used for alchemy, mercury must be
extracted from its ore as quicksilver and then reﬁned to diﬀerent degrees. Its
most dense form is a dense solid. To reach this stage, in which mercury’s
volatility has been subdued, the puriﬁcation process must be repeated. David
Gordon White describes the process of puriﬁcation based on a twelfth-
century Indian treatise on alchemy:
The process takes place in two steps: ﬁrst the mercury [seen as
male] penetrates the sulphur [seen as female] and other female
elements…, and it subsequently absorbs into itself the power
residing in those female, less subtle elements…. The mercury then
emerges from the crucible, reborn as it were, from the womb
(garbha) of the female elements, puriﬁed and fortiﬁed, having left
behind its own impurities in a useless compound (bhasma; ash,
oxide) with the sulphur and the other female elements. At each
successive “killing” [the puriﬁcatory process], the mercury enters
into greater and greater quantities of sulphur…The puriﬁcation
process of mercury may be repeated over and over again, as
mercury mounts the six stages of its form, and thus increases its
powers of transmutation. In the end, it becomes capable of
transmuting hundreds, thousands and millions of times its own
weight of base metals into gold.37
The process of repeated penetration of the sulfur by the mercury requires the
mercury ﬁrst to suﬀuse the sulfur and then be withdrawn out of the sulfur
again. In other words, the mercury is moved in order (Pali anuloma) and
reverse order (paṭiloma) just as the meditation attainments suﬀuse the body

--- PAGE 135 ---
in order and reverse order.38
The chemical process of Indian alchemy is also harnessed in Indian
religious practices, applied internally to bring about personal transformation
and immortality. White shows how this model is also used for the
performance of sexual practices in Śaiva tantra. The semen is seen as the
mercury and the female is seen as the crucible containing the sulfur, parallel
to the blood and other female substances. The mercury (semen) and sulphur
(female substances) combine in the formation of the new being. In certain
Hindu sexual practices the male practitioner retains the power of his semen/
mercury not by withholding it (one possibility in Indian religious practice),
but by withdrawing back into his penis the “essence” of the ejaculated
semen. White writes of both alchemy and Śaiva tantra, “In many ways, the
Sāṅkhyan system [the earliest school of Indian philosophy for which we
have evidence] from which these traditions took their structure, is based upon
embryology.”39
In the discussion of Pali as a potent creative principle in the previous
chapter, letter alchemy was mentioned as one of the means to induce
transformation, on a par with letter alchemy found in tantric systems. The use
of the phrase “letter alchemy” appears to be literally applicable to the method
of transformation here. The elements of the path to Buddhahood, the
realization of the progressive desired mental states developed in meditation
and represented by nimitta and phonemes of the Pali alphabet, penetrate the
female (i.e., practitioner’s) body and enter the womb. They are then
withdrawn again and applied again, with the result that the body becomes
more and more suﬀused with the elements of Buddhahood. The same
embryological imagery is found in alchemy, Śaivism, and borān
kammaṭṭhāna. Borān kammaṭṭhāna does not use sexual practice or identify
mercury with semen, but rather identiﬁes the substance that causes
transmutation, the mercury, as the qualities achieved through meditation. In
other words, boran kammaṭṭhāna recognizes the outcomes of meditation,
represented by the corresponding nimitta, as transformative elements and
provides a technology whereby those elements can systematically transform
the individual from an ordinary mortal subject to samsara into a pure,
enlightened being, an arhat. The parallels in terminology we noted between
meditation and obstetrics also apply to mercury puriﬁcation, including the
use of terms for womb (gabbha, Sanskrit garbha) and impregnation/
implantation (ṭhapeti).
The greater the density of the mercury resulting from the alchemical
process outlined above, the greater is its impenetrability. Such

--- PAGE 136 ---
impenetrability through density is a key concept in the use of alchemy for
self-transformation in order to attain invincibility and immortality.40 Once
the alchemist has achieved this state, he can use his power to transmute other
things and other persons. Similar notions are present in borān kammaṭṭhāna.
The repetitions of the practice strengthen the practitioner, transforming his
physicality, rūpa, bringing him closer to nibbana. Density is also increased
by repetition in the creation of yantra used for protective purposes, as
described in the previous chapter.
In borān meditation, the process of bringing the desired attributes of
consciousness—or their representative nimitta or Pali phonemes—into the
body becomes more complex at the more advanced stages. While this may
replicate the process for increasing the density of mercury, there is a
possibility that it also represents a further stage in the chemical process: the
use of mercury to either transmute the base metal into gold or to purify gold.
The chemistry of using mercury to purify gold involves the suﬀusion of the
substratum that contains the gold with mercury. The gold dissolves in the
mercury resulting in metallic beads. When heated, the mercury evaporates to
leave the gold. This may explain various aspects of borān kammaṭṭhāna
practice, such as the retention of heat in the Cambodian initiation practice
and the movement of nimitta to suﬀuse the practitioner’s body with qualities,
in meditation, or to transform the sensations in a speciﬁc part of the patient’s
body, in medicine. The heating and stirring of gold without mercury, while
skimming oﬀ impurities, is another method of gold puriﬁcation. The history
of these processes in ancient India is not yet clear, but the connection
between the puriﬁcation of the individual and the puriﬁcation of gold and
silver in a furnace or crucible is explicit in borān kammaṭṭhāna. Prayers that
precede the diﬀerent stages of the practice recorded in the litany from Sri
Lanka, the Vākkapprakaraṇa, that accompanies the Amatākaravaṇṇanā,
one of our most extensive meditation manuals, repeatedly beseech the
Buddha:
Lord, make me pure without blemish. When I have been made pure
like silver or gold burnished in the mouth of a furnace, may I have
a radiance like that of the spotless orb of the moon over Mount
Yugandhara.41
To sum up, the iterative processes of borān kammaṭṭhāna practice reveal
parallels with the traditional method for purifying mercury. Correlations
between mercury puriﬁcation, embryology, and religious practice are found

--- PAGE 137 ---
in other Indic religions, such as Śaiva tantra. The complexity of the higher
stages of borān kammaṭṭhāna practice may further reﬂect the use of mercury
to purify gold.
DISAPPEARING TECHNOLOGIES
In the previous chapter, we noted the correlation between meditation and
generative grammar had become misunderstood by the early twentieth
century as a new, European model of learning inﬂuenced modernizers and
revivalists. In this chapter, we have observed correlations between
meditation and two other technologies or sciences: medicine and chemistry.42
The traditional forms of these technologies also began to lose ground from
the end of the nineteenth century, as European colonialism introduced
diﬀerent knowledge systems and sought to control the extraction of minerals
and the practice of meditation. Thailand followed suit and was often the
primary agent in modernizing the technologies with which borān
kammaṭṭhāna resonated. In this section we will examine how changes in
hegemonic technology, particularly medicine, took place and how these
would have aﬀected practitioners of borān kammaṭṭhāna.
COLONIAL COMPETITION
The two colonial powers that dominated the nineteenth-century heartlands of
Theravada Buddhism were Britain and France, with Britain annexing Burma
(Myanmar) and Ceylon (Sri Lanka) and France controlling Indochina (now
Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam). Siam (Thailand) lay between them. Although the
Bowring Treaty of 1855 gave Britain the advantage in central Thailand, both
countries continued to compete for cultural inﬂuence there. Neither side
would give up the possibility of Siam’s “annexation”—to British territories
in the south and to the west of the Chao Phraya (Menam) river basin, or to
French territories to its east—until their Entente Cordiale was formalized in
1904. Siam’s position was only guaranteed after her involvement in World
War I, to which we shall return in the next chapter. Both Britain and France
sought to impose their views of progress and science on their colonial
subjects where this served their economic and political purposes, either
directly or indirectly, for example, by way of demonstrating the beneﬁcence
of their rule.43
Among the beneﬁts of progress through scientiﬁc and social advancement,
the historian of religion Draper, whose views on Buddhism and “Progress”
we explored in chapter 1, includes medical advances such as progress in the

--- PAGE 138 ---
eradication of smallpox. Since the history of smallpox prevention is
relatively well documented globally, we can follow its path to understand
how medical knowledge was an arena for competition, and why the
hegemony of Western medicine in the colonial period could have an impact
on such an apparently unrelated matter as Buddhist meditation.
METHODS OF SMALLPOX PREVENTION
Before the development of vaccination, smallpox prevention was by means
of inoculation, by giving the patient a weakened form of the virus. For
smallpox, this was done by variolation, using the weakened form of the
smallpox virus (variola), extracted from the smallpox scabs of those who had
survived the disease. In the eighteenth century, variolation was introduced to
America from Africa by slaves and to Europe from Asia via the Ottoman
Empire, with oﬃcers of the East India Company also learning the technique
from local medical practitioners in Bengal. It had been practiced in Asia
since the ﬁrst millennium C.E. through the blowing of the pulverized pock
scab into the nostril.44 Other delivery methods were trans- and subdermal.
They included inserting the infected matter directly into the blood or lymph
system using a sharp implement to abrase, scratch, or cut the skin; and an
oral method, the consumption of the variola particles mixed with other
substances, such as milk.45 Similar delivery methods are used for a range of
pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical treatments.
Success in the intranasal delivery of medication depends on the size of the
particles or droplets administered, hence pulverizing the scab.46 In Asia, this
is documented at least as far back as the Caraka Saṃhitā, so the middle of
the ﬁrst millennium C.E.47 We observed above its use in ayurvedic obstetrics,
a method paralleled in borān meditation.
The second method of delivering inoculation, that of introducing the
infected material under the skin, akin to intravenous, transdermal, and
subdermal drug delivery in Western medicine, is similar to the traditional
Asian method of tattooing.48 Other protective practices related to tattooing in
the region include the subdermal implanting of lead yantra (protective
geometric drawings), using the same designs as tattoos, to protect the bearer
against bullets. Finally, oral delivery, while universally familiar on the model
of, and overlapping with, the consumption of food, was also used for
ingesting substances that would not nowadays strike us as medicinal, such as
powerful texts. We can therefore see a number of parallels between the
delivery of medicine, including inoculation, and delivery methods used in
traditional Theravada meditation and protective practices.

--- PAGE 139 ---
These methods of improving the well-being of the subject and oﬀering
protection from a range of dangers predate the division of religion and
science (including medicine) into discrete enterprises. In the absence of the
necessary microbiology to isolate which factors were essential, a variety of
interpretations were given for their eﬀectiveness. Atsuko Naono writes,
“Smallpox, as we know from several cases in nineteenth-century Burma [as
elsewhere in Asia], was often viewed as a powerful, hostile spirit, and
inoculation could easily have been presented as a means not unlike a tattoo
that granted some kind of special protection against it.”49 Similarly, inserting
lead yantra under the skin to protect against bullets draws on a range of
protective devices, which include the implantation of a smaller dose of the
dangerous enemy (or the power of the enemy)—here a smaller “dose” of a
lead bullet—both against and through whom the device oﬀers protection.
Such practice can be seen as another type of inoculation. Theories
concerning the underlying reasons for the eﬀectiveness of inoculation, then,
drew on a range of religious, cultural, and scientiﬁc frameworks and sat
alongside other methods of prevention, such as other medical procedures,
dietary prescription, and good or meritorious works in both Asia and the
West.50
COMPETING CLAIMS TO MEDICAL SUPERIORITY
Surgeons attached to the East India Company ﬁrst implemented sporadic
smallpox inoculation among the military in the late 1780s, launching a wider,
highly successful campaign during 1800–1802 among the civilian
population. Variolation was promoted as an improved method of European
innovation, and its pre-existence in India was downplayed. As routines for
inoculation became standardized and universally accepted, many of the
unshared cultural aspects of treatment were discarded. The weight of the
risks and relative advantages of competing delivery methods were debated
and disputed. While these may seem to be primarily medical issues, aspects
of culture and competition also inﬂuenced the rhetoric. Intranasal and
transdermal methods, popular in Asia, were dismissed by Western medical
oﬃcers. From a medical perspective, Indian-style variolation may in fact
have been safer. Indian variolators preferred to use dried matter (which they
would moisten before application to abrasions on the arm, for example),
while the British “preferred to use fresh matter taken directly from a ripe
pustule.”51 This diﬀerence stemmed from British concerns about the
possibility of storing variolous matter and its eﬀectiveness if it was not fresh,
but using fresh matter and the arm-to-arm technique enhanced the risk of

--- PAGE 140 ---
infection with other diseases. Initially, then, claims about the superiority of
Western inoculation related to the delivery method. Then, with the arrival in
1802 of vaccination using cowpox, inoculation was dismissed as an inferior,
native technology in spite of its continued greater reliability for several
decades in that context.52
Vaccination had been developed at the end of the eighteenth century by
Edward Jenner (1749–1823) using the milder cowpox virus, vaccinia, from
vacca, “cow,” which gave its name to the new treatment. As Louis Pasteur
(1822–1895) developed artiﬁcially weakened strains of other viruses for
prophylaxis he extended the term’s usage in Jenner’s honor. Although
vaccination was available in British colonial territories in Asia as early as
1802, it was often made ineﬀective and diﬃcult to implement by the
instability and inadequacy of the bovine lymph available in Asia. Inoculation
through variolation remained the preference of the majority of local people.
In the late 1910s, James Entrican, the British superintendent of vaccination in
Burma, reported:
I believe the chief cause of its [variolation’s] popularity is the
absence in the majority of cases of any troublesome symptoms,
such as sometimes follow vaccination under insanitary conditions.
The inoculated child may of course develop generalised small-pox
and die, this risk is clearly recognised, but accepted, because in the
majority of cases the after-eﬀects are almost nil. A small pock with
perhaps 2 or 3 still smaller ones round it, is the usual course of an
inoculation, and the children require little if any attention.53
The method of delivery remained a perennial issue. Direct contact between
the pocks of cowpox-infected children to cuts made in the arms of those to be
vaccinated bore with it the risk of the transmission of other infectious, fatal,
or disﬁguring diseases such as syphilis (“the great pox”).54 Vaccination
through contact with infected calves or animal lymph led to outbreaks of
painful pocks, might be ineﬀective if the lymph was poor quality, and could
lead to fatal complications from unsterile treatment. Despite his
acknowledgment that Burmese preference for variolation over vaccination
could be justiﬁed, Entrican still regarded variolation as a mumpsimus, the
“folly of ignorant people.”55
The American medical missionary Francis Mason (1799–1874) recognized
that many monks fulﬁlled the role of medical practitioner, despite attempts
by the ﬁnal kings of Burma to prevent monks from providing this service. He

--- PAGE 141 ---
therefore distributed information to monks, as a way of introducing
vaccination to the broader community. His Materia Medica, translated into
Burmese, gave a clear explanation of vaccination including its relative
mortality risks and was incorporated into an important Burmese work on
Western medicine in 1881.56 In Burma, vaccination became common in
urban centers such as Rangoon (Yangon), where the colonial administration
could enforce policy, and popular among ethnic minorities, where Christian
missionaries had more success. Otherwise variolation, which gave lifelong
immunity, remained the norm. It was not until the early twentieth century
that locally based doctors came up with solutions that were eﬀective for their
area and cheap enough to implement successfully.57
THE BAN ON TRADITIONAL MEDICINE IN FRENCH INDOCHINA AND THAILAND
As in Burma, so in Cambodia and Thailand, there were several competing
medical systems including Chinese medicine and various branches of local
systems that drew on Indian Ayurveda either directly or through Buddhist
medical traditions. Resistance to Western medical developments was strong,
and the preference for inoculation over vaccination continued until the early
twentieth century. Vaccination was made compulsory by the French in
Cochinchina (southern Vietnam) in 1871, and Louis Pasteur himself was
involved in the setting up of the Institut Pasteur in Saigon in 1890.
Variolation was banned in Cambodia in 1907. Nonetheless, the
implementation of vaccination in rural regions, including much of Cambodia
and Laos, continued to be hindered by the inaccessibility of rural areas
coupled with deterioration of the lymph in transmission. Although the
popularity of vaccinations generally was given a boost when King Sisowath
of Cambodia received a vaccination against plague after the death of one of
his favorite sons during a plague epidemic in 1908, medical oﬃcers were still
reporting on the use of variolation in 1924.58 Therefore, the impact of
Western medicine was conﬁned to the urban centers, especially Phnom Penh,
leaving traditional meditation and medicine to continue unaﬀected in rural
Cambodia.
In Thailand, King Chulalongkorn (Rāma V, r. 1868–1910) had taken an
interest in traditional medicine, instigating the publication of works on the
Royal Thai medical tradition that had developed at court.59 However, his
modernization of the country, in both response to and reaction against the
presence of British and French colonial powers, led to the undermining of
traditional medicine, particularly during the ﬁnal years of his reign. Two
years after his death, the ongoing resistance to vaccination collapsed

--- PAGE 142 ---
following an epidemic in 1911–1912.
Around this time, Chulalongkorn’s son and successor, King Vajiravudh
(Rāma VI, r. 1910–1926), began to sponsor research into vaccination, setting
up an institute to seek a rabies vaccination following the death of his cousin,
Prince Damrong’s daughter, from the disease. In 1917, following Pasteur’s
breakthrough discovery in relation to rabies, this institute was renamed the
Pasteur Institute and was involved in the promotion of other types of
vaccination. The royal promotion of vaccination meant that in February of
1914 it was possible to implement a law in Thailand making smallpox
vaccination compulsory.60 Vaccination was delivered at temporary clinics set
up in Buddhist temples, hospitals, and police stations. By 1922, vaccination
had become almost universal thanks to Thailand’s highly centralized,
organizational structures, well-funded and staged preparation, and a move to
require vaccination certiﬁcates for attendance at schools and government
employment. 
In 
1923, 
Vajiravudh 
took 
this 
modernization 
and
Westernization a stage further by banning traditional medicine.
THE EFFECT OF UNDERMINING TRADITIONAL MEDICINE ON BORĀN
KAMMAṬṬHĀNA
While the outlawing of traditional medicine was later reversed, the ban and
the promotion of Western medicine aﬀected borān kammaṭṭhāna in several
ways. First, borān kammaṭṭhāna was in itself a form of traditional medicine,
applied to healing the body as well as the psychophysical organism as a
whole. Second, borān kammaṭṭhāna is based on the model of the human
psychophysical organism that—derived from Indic Ayurveda—underlies
traditional medicine. The delivery pathways in the body, beginning with the
intranasal cavity, used in meditation for delivering the desired aspects of
consciousness into the body, are based on those of traditional medicine.
Third, while those who study borān kammaṭṭhāna in the traditional manner
contribute to the livelihood of their meditation masters in the form of the
oﬀerings they make to them, the more reliable income for such meditation
masters comes from their ability to oﬀer rituals, blessings, protection, and
healing.
With the undermining of traditional medicine and, as noted previously,
traditional attitudes to the potency of language, the methods of bringing
about change found in borān kammaṭṭhāna began to become isolated, no
longer part of a network of resonating technologies. Other resonating
technologies, such as chemistry, were also disrupted by the processes of
modernization and centralized control, whether on the part of European

--- PAGE 143 ---
colonial powers or the Thai monarchy. In more rural areas of former French
colonies, where these modernizing policies had less impact and traditional
medicine would continue to be the main recourse for treatment well into the
second half of the twentieth century, borān kammaṭṭhāna also continued to
thrive.
During the thirty years or so before the outlawing of traditional medicine
in Thailand in 1923, the place and practice of meditation monks in the
country had been transformed beyond recognition by far-reaching changes to
Buddhism, administrative structures, and education. These set the context for
the rejection of borān kammaṭṭhāna by the elite, and for the discarding of its
practices more widely, particularly after its resonating technologies were no
longer recognized. We shall examine these developments in the next chapter.
Here, let us brieﬂy return to the theory put forward in the late twentieth
century that borān kammaṭṭhāna is not orthodox Theravada at all, but a
borrowing from another Buddhist tradition, such as Tibetan tantra. I
countered that suggestion with the observation that borān kammaṭṭhāna is
based on Abhidhamma and an enactment of the Abhidhamma path of
transformation. Having looked at the relationship between borān
kammaṭṭhāna and medicine, we can see a reason for the apparent
similarities. While there is no evidence of borrowing between borān
kammaṭṭhāna and Tibetan or other forms of tantra, they both use somatic
practices that seek to transform both the consciousness and physicality of the
practitioner. The understanding of the body that underlies the somatic
practices in both cases is derived from traditional medicine, heavily
inﬂuenced in both regions by Indian Ayurveda. While there are almost no
Buddhist texts shared between Theravada and Tibetan tantric Buddhism,
Indian medical texts such as Suśruta Saṃhitā were used and translated
throughout the region, as far west as the Middle East, to Cambodia in the
east, and to Tibet in the north.61 We may therefore look to the spread of the
mathematics, 
medicine, 
and 
other 
technologies 
underlying 
borān
kammaṭṭhāna, rather than to a direct inﬂuence from another religious
tradition, to understand similarities between them.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has explored the close parallels between borān kammaṭṭhāna
and other technologies designed to bring about change, especially the
obstetrics of ayurvedic medicine and the chemistry of mercury puriﬁcation. It
was noted that the same underlying principle of substitution as the process
whereby change is brought about, and application of group theory

--- PAGE 144 ---
mathematics for the eﬀective harnessing of that process of change, were
shared between these technologies, the generative grammar examined in the
previous chapter, Abhidhamma, and borān kammaṭṭhāna itself. While the
creation of a new being might be seen as a metaphor for spiritual
transformation, the pervasive presence of embryology in borān practice and
analysis, and the mirroring of obstetric practice in borān meditation,
indicated a more literal, practical relationship. These were resonating
technologies based on shared understandings of how to bring about change.
The question then arose of how these resonating technologies disappeared,
leaving borān kammaṭṭhāna isolated. Having examined competition over
ideas concerning language, and manuscript and print technology, previously,
we turned here to the competition between medical systems fought
throughout the colonial period. Local traditions were suppressed, even when
they remained more eﬀective. In those areas under the control of
modernizing power structures, namely urban centers in the European
colonies, the centralized Thai state, and groups inﬂuenced by Christian
missionaries, Western knowledge systems became increasingly hegemonic.
This altered the model of the body and the visible technologies of
transformation. The methods to bring about change that had shaped borān
kammaṭṭhāna ceased to be recognized.
Having explored the methods for bringing about change in borān
kammaṭṭhāna and examined how the resonating technologies were
undermined in the modern period, in the next two chapters we return to
broader changes to Buddhism. We will trace the place of borān
kammaṭṭhāna from center to periphery and adaption. To do this, we must
examine the ways in which Buddhists sought to protect their religion from
decline and revitalize it to face the challenges of the modern period.

--- PAGE 145 ---
6
FROM CENTER TO PERIPHERY
The Changing Place of Borān Kammaṭṭhāna under Thai Inﬂuence
King Kīrti Śri Rājasiṃha, “in his lofty desire to promote the
religion of the Omniscient One, and with great loving-kindness,
built a forest abode for the two venerable teachers of vidarśana
meditation, Mahānāma and Brahmasvara, who were endued with
manifold virtues, such as love of solitude, and entrusted to them
twenty-four bhikshus [monks] who had received ordination under
them to be instructed in the method of vidarśana meditation, and
entreated them to train these (pupils) carefully in the practice of
forty karmaṣṭhāna meditations.
—Kuśalakriyānusandeśaya1
Before the late nineteenth century the “old meditation,” borān kammaṭṭhāna,
had yet to be deemed old or corrupt. It was current technology, referred to
here simply by such generic names for meditation as vidarśanā “insight”
(Sinhala; vipassanā in Pali) and karmaṣṭhāna (Sinhala; kammaṭṭhāna in
Pali).2 As indicated in the passage cited here, it was the dominant practice
established and promoted by royalty and by the supreme patriarchs of the
Buddhist Sangha in the countries that would become Cambodia, Laos, Sri
Lanka, and Thailand. As we saw in the previous two chapters, it also
resonated with other technologies of cultural importance from generative
grammar to medicine. Here we shall see that it was an instrument of
international diplomacy, a subject of interest to members of the royal
families of the region, and was sought after by the vanguard of the ﬁrst major
revival movement responding to the threat of European colonialism. We
have already touched on how modernization in the context of Western
hegemony represented a challenge to the technologies with which borān
kammaṭṭhāna was related. In this chapter, we shall follow the further history
of Theravada countries, to see how political events coupled with distinctive
responses to colonialism conspired to marginalize the practice, pushing it
from the center to the margins of Buddhist culture.

--- PAGE 146 ---
ESOTERIC MEDITATION AT THE HEART OF REVIVAL
In the mid-eighteenth century, the royal house of Ayutthaya, the capital of
Siam (Thailand), responded to a request from the royal house and aristocracy
of Śrīvardhanapura (Kandy), the capital of the Kandyan Kingdom in the
central highlands of Ceylon (Sri Lanka). After two and a half centuries of
European colonial presence, the Sinhalese embassy to Ayutthaya reported
Buddhism to be in a sorry state of decline on the island, with no viable
ordination lineage. King Boromakot (Pali Paramakośa, r. 1733–1758)
responded by sending three separate missions of monks.3
The ﬁrst monks from Ayutthaya reestablished the full ordination lineage in
Kandy at the behest of Kīrti Śrī Rājasiṃha (r. 1747–1782), ruler of the
Kandyan kingdom, and Väliviṭa Saraṇaṃkara (1698–1778), the monk who
would be appointed supreme patriarch and head the revitalized Sangha. In
1756 a second mission followed, speciﬁcally dedicated to reviving
meditation. One of the Siamese was Varañāṇa Mahāthera, the monk who
composed the Sinhalese version of the borān narrative of Princess Mind
(Cittakumāri) for Kīrti Śrī’s chief queen, recounted in chapter 3. Varañāṇa
had a reputation as a scholar of grammar, which, as we have seen, was an
important strand of transformative technology that runs through borān
kammaṭṭhāna. It may have been his language skills that led him to undertake
the task of presenting this text for the queen. Varañāṇa’s companion,
Mahāvisuddhācariya, was better known for giving meditation instruction. At
least twenty-four local monks studied under two other meditation masters,
Ven. Mahānāma and Ven. Brahmasvara, an event captured in the account of
the second mission cited above. They or their disciples wrote down, as
reminders of their instructions, the manuals still found in Sri Lankan
manuscript libraries. King Kīrti Śrī’s patronage was continued by his brother
and successor, Śrī Rājādhi Rājasiṃha (r. 1780–1798), who issued an edict
(katikāvata) encouraging monks to meditate.4
THE MEDITATION LINEAGE FROM SIAM
When the Sri Lankan monks wrote down the methods in their own personal
manuals, they focused not on the preliminary phases of meditation but the
details of the advanced methods. Presumably basic skills in inducing
meditative states and attainments had been learned suﬃciently well in the
ﬁrst eight years of the transmission. It was the advanced guidance that
needed recording before the Siamese teachers returned home. It is this
activity that has recorded for us the most in-depth representation of the full

--- PAGE 147 ---
practice and allowed us to see how closely it correlates with the
Abhidhamma path, as discussed in chapter 2. Mostly written in a mixture of
Pali and Sinhala, these manuals were mnemonic aides to individual private
practice, however, not part of the impressive literary repertoire being built up
within the large monastic libraries of the eighteenth-century revival. This
aspect of the Siyam Nikāya’s agenda was therefore less visible than others.
This low visibility, in conjunction with the demise of the tradition, has led to
its receiving little attention in studies of the period, despite its relatively
recent date.5 The manuals had fallen into disuse by the end of the nineteenth
century, and it was this that allowed a number of them to be acquired by the
British colonial oﬃcer Hugh Nevill (1848–1897).
At least one line of the Siyam Nikāya transmission of borān kammaṭṭhāna
continued until the end of the nineteenth century.6 This last known case was
reported in 1916 by G. Sagāris de Silva to F. L. Woodward, when he was
assisting him with the translation of the Bambaragala manual that Rhys
Davids had published as The Yogāvacara’s Manual twenty years earlier.
Rhys Davids had published it at the behest of Anagarika Dharmapala, who
was not alone in his struggle to make sense of the text. Its mysteries so
confounded the pair of erudite monks who also published the related Pali
manual, the Amatākaravaṇṇanā, in the 1960s that they mistook the latter’s
mathematical permutations and ﬁne-tuned mnemonics for bad grammar and
bowdlerized it beyond use.7
Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla were unfortunate not to have come across one of
the many living practitioners still to be found in Cambodia, Laos, and to a
lesser extent Thailand in the 1960s. The recent international gatherings—the
World Fellowship of Buddhism in Colombo in 1950 and the Sixth Council in
Rangoon in 1954–1956—had brought together many monks from all the
Theravada countries, but these representatives tended to be from reform
branches of the Sangha. Those among them who knew of borān
kammaṭṭhāna had by that time rejected it as a corruption of Buddhism, a
view held by the supreme patriarchs of both the Cambodian nikāya (monastic
lineages) by that time (below). As a result, the form of meditation that spread
through the connections made at those gatherings was Burmese Vipassanā. It
seems that Anagarika Dharmapala had also been unfortunate in missing a
living lineage during his search in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
However, Dharmapala seems mainly to have turned to outsiders, including
the 
theosophist 
Madame 
Blavatsky 
and 
to 
texts, 
primarily 
the
Visuddhimagga, despite his interest in this manual and despite the fact that
he knew of the monk Doratiyāveye Atthadassī. Doratiyāveye was the last
known disciple in a borān lineage, as Woodward found out when translating

--- PAGE 148 ---
the manual in 1916, but by that time, Doratiyāveye had died.8
THE RUPTURE WITH AYUTTHAYA
The disappearance of borān meditation practice from Sri Lanka relatively
early, given that it continued to thrive in mainland Southeast Asia at this
time, reﬂects two things: the position of the Siyam Nikāya in Sri Lanka, to
which we shall return, and the dwindling inﬂuence of Ayutthaya almost
immediately after the Siyam Nikāya was founded.
As mentioned above, King Boromkot authorized three missions of
Siamese monks to Kandy in the mid-eighteenth century. The third mission
arrived in 1759, bringing more Siamese monks, ostensibly to support the
revival. Its undercover purpose was a conspiracy between the Siamese and
one of the factions of the Sinhalese aristocracy to replace King Kīrti Śrī on
the throne with one of the Siamese princes. The prince had even come along
with the mission ordained as a monk. It may seem surprising that Väliviṭa
Saraṇaṃkara, the leading light of the reform and new supreme patriarch,
whose polemics against the existing priests had included purist attacks on
their unspiritual motivation, would be involved in a plot to kill the king. Yet
the eﬀorts to introduce a new ordination lineage to Sri Lanka had partly
stemmed from the jostling for power among the Sinhalese aristocracy in ﬁrst
place, the rhetoric of decline and reform masking the power struggle.
The assassination plot was foiled, the lay conspirators were beheaded for
treason, and Saraṇaṃkara was imprisoned. Hulaṃgomuvē Buddharakkhita,
the monk who informed on the conspirators, was granted a substantial tract
of land for his loyalty.9 This led to a rupture with Siam, and moves on the
part of Sri Lankan Buddhists to secure the protection of Buddhism on the
island with help from the Siamese royal family were put on hold until the
nineteenth century.
The other factor in this rupture, and one that would contribute to borān
kammaṭṭhāna not being reintroduced at a later date, was the Burmese
invasion of Siam the same year. Despite a cessation of the hostilities the
following year, the ﬁghting resumed and culminated in the sack of Ayutthaya
in 1767. The king was killed, hundreds of thousands of inhabitants
slaughtered, and tens of thousands taken in captivity to Burma. City
buildings, religious artifacts, and many manuscript libraries were destroyed.
When the Burmese had to redeploy their troops at the end of the year to
combat an invading Chinese army to the north, the power vacuum in Siam
following the Burmese withdrawal led to a civil war that lasted between 1767
and 1770.

--- PAGE 149 ---
THONBURI, TAKSIN, AND THE BEGINNINGS OF MODERN THAILAND
From the Siamese civil war, Taksin (r. 1767–1782) emerged the sole victor.
He established a new capital at Thonburi (now a district absorbed by the
expansion of Bangkok). Thonburi had been suﬃciently remote from
Ayutthaya to escape the Burmese destruction, and temples there such as Wat
Hong and Wat Ratchasittharam, which were now relatively close to the new
centers of power, became important centers for meditation. While at least
one lineage from Suk Kaitheun, the supreme patriarch between 1794 and
1816, survived in Ayutthaya at the temple Wat Pradusongtham, Suk moved
to Thonburi, basing himself at Wat Ratchasittharam. Both Wat Hong and
Wat Ratchasittharam still house borān kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts, and the
latter is still the home of a living tradition of borān kammaṭṭhāna.10 Wat
Hong is associated with King Taksin.
While the story of Taksin’s interest in meditation and his claims to
supramundane attainments are well known, speciﬁc details of his religious
practices have been hard to ascertain because of the distortions of the
historiography that immediately followed his execution by his own prime
minister in 1782. That prime minister would become known by the names
Buddha Yodfa Chulalok (Rāma I), for he was the founder of the Chakri
dynasty, which replaced Taksin and continues to this day. However, a recent
analysis by B. J. Terwiel of an illustrated Thai manuscript commissioned by
Taksin in 1777 conﬁrms the link. The manuscript, after describing and
illustrating the City of Nibbana, presents eight Buddha-like ﬁgures in
monastic dress, each representing one of the eight stages of enlightenment:
the path and fruit (maggaphala) of stream entrant, once-returner, non-
returner, and arhat. The ﬁnal stage shows the arhat holding a crystal ball in
front of him, at around the level of his navel, imagery that immediately
associates it with the realization of crystal-like nimitta at the womb of the
practitioner. This illustration on the manuscript commissioned by Taksin
shows that the imagery of borān kammaṭṭhāna practice was familiar to
Taksin and the artists who created these manuscripts, indicating that Taksin
was practicing within one of the borān kammaṭṭhāna lineages that came to
Thonburi after the Burmese sack of Ayutthaya.11
From the earlier defeat at the hands of the Burmese emerged a stronger,
more militant Siam. Taksin and the Chakri dynasty exploited Burma’s
overstretched military capacity to regain lost territories. They also drew on
Burmese models for ethnic integration, taking them much further, in part by
using Buddhism and the Sangha as a unifying, centralizing institution. The
new Chakri capital was established at Bangkok on the opposite bank of the

--- PAGE 150 ---
Chao Phraya river from Thonburi. This allowed the new dynasty to take
advantage of the large natural harbor at Bangkok to engage in international
trade, which included importing the latest weaponry initially from China and
then from Europe. It was the beginning of the transformation of Siam into a
modern state. The engagement of the Chakri dynasty with global modernity
would later have signiﬁcant impact on the shape of meditation promoted as
part of future reforms of Buddhism.
The success of the early Chakri dynasty with its military, weaponry, and
economic reforms led to rapid modernization. There were two alterations in
the organization of the Sangha during the ﬁrst Chakri reign (1782–1809) that
contributed to the later marginalization of borān kammaṭṭhāna. The ﬁrst was
a restriction on the movement of monks: they were now required to hold
identity papers, and monasteries were required to report guest monks and
check their papers. This inhibited the institution-free lifestyle of the majority
of wandering forest monks, those most likely to dedicate their lives to serious
meditation practice.12 The second factor was the structural reorganization of
the Sangha with the loss of the separate “forest dwelling” āraññavāsī section,
which had formerly been represented institutionally among the highest ranks
of the Sangha hierarchy and therefore at court.13 The beginnings of
modernization, centralized control, and a shift in favor of non-meditating
monks would pave the way for developments under subsequent Chakri kings.
MONGKUT’S ESTABLISHMENT OF THE REFORMIST THAMMAYUT MONASTIC
LINEAGE
Prince Mongkut (1804–1868), later King Rāma IV, is the single ﬁgure most
associated with the reform of Buddhism in Thailand. As a royal prince he
was ordained as a monk, in line with the Thai tradition of temporary
ordination for all young men, at the age of twenty in 1824. As heir-designate
of Rāma II, Mongkut was expected to disrobe to become king. However, he
remained a monk for twenty-seven years, until 1851, because his half-brother
Nangklao, though regarded as having a lesser claim, managed to accede to
the throne as Rāma III.
In 1833, while still a monk (1824–1851), Mongkut founded a new
monastic lineage, the Thammayut (Pali Dhammayutika) Nikāya, on a
reformist, rationalist platform. Its name means “the monastic lineage that
adheres to the Buddha’s teaching” and represents an explicit rejection of
those practices for which he saw no canonical authorization. An example of
the way in which consultation of the Pali canon inﬂuenced Mongkut is how
monks in his lineage dressed. In Mongkut’s new nikāya the traditional robes,

--- PAGE 151 ---
which had symbolic signiﬁcance for borān practitioners, were discarded and
a simpler monastic dress used, based on the description found in the canon of
just three robes with no accoutrements.14
Most of the existing Sangha lineages had already been centralized and
uniﬁed to a degree under the ﬁrst Chakri reign and were now given the
collective term “Mahanikay” (Pali Mahānikāya), mahā meaning “great/
majority” and nikāya meaning “monastic fraternity or ordination lineage.”
The Thammayut did not have the monopoly on modernization and reform.
While monks within the Mahanikay were later to mirror Thammayut
developments, for example by adapting monastic robes, reformist elements
were already being promoted within the Mahanikay by Nangklao.
While Mongkut had received a modern, Western-style education, had
good command of Pali, and was genuinely interested in modern science and
reform, the political situation and rivalry with his brother acted as an
additional motive. By accusing the existing Sangha of being lax and
establishing the new ordination lineage with himself at the head, he could
circumvent his personal subordination to the existing hierarchy within the
Thai Sangha, including those loyal to King Nangklao. This ploy allowed him
to establish his autonomy while still enjoying the safety of remaining a
monk, thus avoiding the dangerous, sometimes deadly competition to accede
to the throne. King Nangklao nonetheless sought to intervene in this strategy.
In the late 1840s, still anxious about his younger half-brother’s more obvious
claim 
to 
the 
throne, 
Nangklao 
promoted 
the 
princely 
monk
Paramanuchitchinorot (1790–1853), whom he could control, to lead the
Thammayut order and the Sangha in Bangkok and the central area of Siam.15
Nangklao also hindered the rise of the Thammayut by promoting Mahanikay
monks and sending some to Cambodia as representatives of Thai royalty just
as Mongkut would later send Thammayut monks.
Once king, Mongkut would use the Thammayut order to strengthen the
court’s hold over Thailand, using the rhetoric of a reformist, rationalist
agenda. Just like the contemporary claims to scientiﬁc and civilizational
knowledge on the part of European colonizers, notions of correct Buddhist
behavior had become part of political rhetoric for a country defending its
invasions and occupations of other lands, for a king seeking to shore up his
position against foreign and local threat, for writers opining on fashionable
subjects for their sponsoring readership. During Mongkut’s reign as the
fourth Chakri king, Rāma IV (r. 1851–1868), the external military threat
switched from the Burmese to the Europeans. He and his son and successor
Chulalongkorn (Rāma V) (r. 1868–1910) oversaw increased centralization

--- PAGE 152 ---
and radical modernization including of administration and education. The
Thammayut, now deeply loyal to the throne, became one of the Siamese
state’s key instruments of centralization. From 1851 until the early 1930s
Thammayut monks, although a minority, were given hierarchical preferment
over the monks of the Mahanikay.16
MONGKUT’S REJECTION OF BORĀN MEDITATION
Mongkut had received training in borān kammaṭṭhāna as a young monk in
the 1820s. This had been at Wat Ratchasittharam, the temple in Thonburi that
continued the lineage of the earlier Supreme Patriarch Suk Kaitheun.
Mongkut was soon disaﬀected. It seems his natural inclination was more for
study, pariyatti, than practice, paṭipatti.17 This and his sense of personal
status led Mongkut to be critical of his teachers. The explicit reason for
Mongkut’s criticism of the meditation was that his teachers declined to
justify their instructions with reference to the Pali canon.18
We have already observed that borān kammaṭṭhāna is related to
Abhidhamma commentarial material and to traditional sciences of the time.
However, these connections are not apparent at the beginner stages of the
practice. Also, among reform-minded Buddhists of the nineteenth to mid-
twentieth centuries in Thailand, while consulting of canonical texts was
important in the quest to return to the original teaching of the Buddha, the
emphasis was on the Sutta Piṭaka and Vinaya Piṭaka rather than
Abhidhamma. This lack of emphasis on Abhidhamma may well have
conﬁrmed the impression that borān methods had no authority in the canon.
Mongkut was happier with the meditation monk Thap (below), whose
practice, like that of the Burmese Vipassanā tradition emerging at this time,
paid close attention to the canonical sources and their commentaries. Thap
used these sources in developing his insight meditation based on charnel
ground observation of the decomposition of the body. To date, Mongkut is
the earliest person known to have explicitly rejected the old methods of
meditation, and his status lent weight to the side of study (pariyatti) over that
of practice (paṭipatti) in an ongoing debate that has continued in Thailand to
the present.
STUDY VERSUS EXPERIENTIAL PRACTICE
Mongkut’s insistence that paṭipatti should be authorized with reference to
pariyatti became a dominant feature of Thai Buddhist culture. It encouraged
the patronage of those meditation monks who could demonstrate pariyatti

--- PAGE 153 ---
credentials and instigated the search for texts to authorize practice.
The debate about pariyatti and paṭipatti in Thailand is mirrored elsewhere,
especially in Burma. The issue is whether or not it is permissible for
Buddhist teachers within a living tradition to teach on the basis of experience
alone or whether their practice must be authorized with reference to textual
sources, primarily those of the Pali canon. The theme is not new. In his
Visuddhimagga, Buddhaghosa explains that if no teacher with direct personal
spiritual attainment can be found, one should take as one’s teacher somebody
familiar with the canonical texts to avoid being led astray.19 Therefore one
can construe the debate in terms of a concern that the Dhamma taught is the
true Dhamma, and not in some way misguided. Textual study therefore acts
as the bottom-line guarantor of this. However, there is then the risk that, by
adverting to the bottom line, direct religious experience is sidelined, even
suppressed. Moreover, the canonical and commentarial sources are extensive
and diverse: a sutta-based practice could be somewhat diﬀerent from an
Abhidhamma-based practice.
In the ongoing debate over the relationship between pariyatti and paṭipatti
those more oriented toward institutional control and those oriented toward
reform tend to advocate pariyatti as the priority over and prerequisite for
paṭipatti. This position creates an external authority, potentially—and
historically—controlled by centralized authorities, against which those
making claims on the basis of experience may be judged.20 On the other
hand, even those who feel that they have successfully used canonical and
commentarial texts as the direct basis for their meditation practice feel able,
on the basis of their personal experience, to critique texts as falling short. In
borān kammaṭṭhāna and in the Tai-Lao meditation traditions that were to be
de-institutionalized by the coming reforms, textual study might be considered
insuﬃcient, irrelevant, or even counterproductive to successful practice, and
some practitioners retain that position to this day.21
LAST MOMENTS OF BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀNA AT THE CENTER
In spite of his personal rejection of the borān meditation practice he had been
taught, Mongkut did not actively suppress it. Even a century later, in 1932,
one of Mongkut’s own sons, Prince Vivitthavanpreecha (1860–1932), would
publish a small book on meditation containing an abridged version of an
eighteenth-century borān kammaṭṭhāna text.22 The interest shown in borān
meditation by one of the leading lights of the reform within the Thammayut
Nikāya, Phussadeva Sa (also known as Pusso Sa and Somdet Sa) (1812–
1899), is particularly telling.23 Manuscripts of Phussadeva Sa relating to the

--- PAGE 154 ---
subject are to be found in the National Library in Bangkok.24 According to
Kittivuddho (Kittiwuttho), Somdet Sa included elements of borān
kammaṭṭhāna in his ﬁrst rendering of the Paṭhamasambodhi, which he wrote
in the 1850s during the reign of Mongkut.25 The Paṭhamasambodhi is the
most widely distributed biography of the Buddha in Khmer-Tai Buddhism,
with versions in Pali as well as at least eight vernacular languages.26 Sa’s is
the last version produced in Thailand to contain such references. Later in his
career, however, Sa’s position seems to have changed, reﬂecting the
expansion of the modernizing inﬂuence of Mongkut’s successors.
Sa had been ordained at Wat Bovornnivet, where Mongkut was abbot,
during the 1830s. He disrobed in 1839, but secured Mongkut’s permission in
the 1850s—with Mongkut now king and patronizing the expansion of the
Thammayut Nikāya—to reordain and return to Wat Bovornnivet. During this
time he wrote his ﬁrst version of the Paṭhamasambodhi, but in 1880, with
Mongkut’s son Chulalongkorn now on the throne, at a time of textual reform
ahead of the ﬁrst printing of the Pali canon, Sa reformed the royal chanting
curriculum. Woramat Malasart has shown that in doing so, he removed from
it the Dhammakāya verses, a text related to borān meditation practice that we
met in chapter 1 in connection with the Phitsanulok inscription.27 In 1890, he
also produced a new version of the Paṭhamasambodhi, also stripped of more
traditional aspects, which was later published.28 Sa’s position at the center of
the modernizing Sangha hierarchy was rewarded by his appointment in 1893
as supreme patriarch, a position he held for the rest of his life. The
appointment was a high honor in its own right but all the more indicative of
the approval of the court and the Sangha hierarchy given that there had been
no supreme patriarch appointed during the preceding forty years.29
The absence of a supreme patriarch throughout most of the reigns of
Mongkut and Chulalongkorn had been part of their strategy to facilitate the
centralized control of the Sangha throughout Siam. In the early decades of
the Thammayut Nikāya its monks were insuﬃciently numerous to stamp its
authority on the Sangha in the country as a whole.30 The numbers of
Thammayut monks increased during Mongkut’s reign as a result of his
patronage and the establishment of new monasteries throughout the country.
Nonetheless, they remained a small minority.31 The numbers continued to
increase under Chulalongkorn as part of the policy of creating a national
identity. People emulated royal patronage by donating residences to
Thammayut forest monks and by providing support for rural Thammayut
novices, to the degree that ordination in a Thammayut monastery oﬀered
advantageous living conditions over Mahanikay ordination.32

--- PAGE 155 ---
Although other Thammayut monks interested in meditation explored
borān kammaṭṭhāna texts, this may have been an expression of personal
autonomy from the modernization process as we shall see below, even as
other factors at large conspired to escalate its marginalization in the early
decades of the twentieth century. Active support for borān kammaṭṭhāna
from the highest ranks of the Thai Sangha hierarchy seems to have come to
an end with Somdet Sa. The policies of a new supreme patriarch and a new
king combined to ensure the radical marginalization of the “old method” in
Siam.
MODERNIZATION OF MEDITATION AND EDUCATION
Contemporary with Somdet Sa was the meditation monk Buddhasiri
(Phutthasiri) Thap (1806–1891), mentioned above as a favorite of
Mongkut’s. Thap was one of the leading lights of the Thammayut reform.
Thap’s form of meditation focused on the ten stages of decomposition of the
body known as asubha “unbeautiful” or “loathsome” practices. In the
ordination hall at Wat Somanat where he became abbot he commissioned
images of the stages of asubha as wall paintings. Although the asubha are
included in the borān kammaṭṭhāna practices, Thap’s practice seems to have
been normative, based on textual studies. His text on the subject remains a
standard text at Mahāmakut Buddhist University.33 It was Thap’s approach to
meditation that was approved by Somdet Sa’s successor as supreme
patriarch, Prince Wachirayan.
Immediately after Sa’s death in 1899 there was another interregnum
between supreme patriarchs, of eleven years, but this is misleading: the man
who would be appointed to that post, Prince Wachirayan (Vajirañāṇa)
(1860–1921), was already the most powerful monk in the country. He had
taken over as head of the Thammayut Nikāya in 1893, when Somdet Sa had
become supreme patriarch. It was on the accession of his nephew Vajiravudh
to the throne that Wachirayan—a good match for the new king in terms of
enthusiasm for centralization and reform—was appointed to the vacant post
of supreme patriarch.
Wachirayan combined his modern, liberal, English-medium education in
the palace and his knowledge of Pali to write many works on Buddhism,
especially on Vinaya, and his writings reﬂect the reformist modernizing
approach of his father, King Mongkut. He continued the emphasis on the
Sutta and Vinaya Piṭaka texts of canon as the primary authority, discarding
where he saw ﬁt the views of both the commentarial and the living traditions,
as well as sections of the canon itself. We can see their approach to textual

--- PAGE 156 ---
authorities in their attitude to interpretations of the sīmā, the sacred monastic
boundary used for such important rites as ordination, which lies at the heart
of monastic validity. The importance placed on the validity of sīmā had
caused decade-long disputes and much close investigation of commentaries
in Burma and Sri Lanka over the centuries. However, rather than insisting on
pursuing the legal developments found in commentarial guidance and the
extensive literature resulting from these disputes, Wachirayan felt
comfortable taking a “commonsense” approach.34 We can see how, within
this context, expertise in commentarial exegesis as well as in Abhidhamma
diminished.
Alongside his productivity in writings on the Pali Vinaya, Wachirayan was
highly inﬂuential in political and educational reform. He led and designed the
reform and centralization not only of monastic education but also secular
education throughout the country.35 With the support of his brother King
Chulalongkorn, who had patronized the ﬁrst printing of the Pali canon a
decade earlier, Wachirayan pushed through the 1902 Sangha Reform Act.36
This created a single, national hierarchical system that incorporated all
monks and a centralized system of monastic education and examination. In
the early decades of the twentieth century, as Siam’s government sought to
increase control over its outlying areas, partially in response to having lost
territories to the British and French, those monks seen as representing a
threat to this process were persecuted.37 Resisting the “reformist” agenda
became dangerous. Parallel political developments under the guise of
puriﬁcation and reform would also take place in Cambodia to undermine the
authority of rural monks.
The higher-ranking monks of the Thammayut Nikāya in the main period
of centralization from the very end of the nineteenth into the ﬁrst decades of
twentieth century were—like Wachirayan himself—closely associated with
administration and pariyatti, textual education. Although they admired
meditation monks such as Thap, who could align their practice with textual
scholarship, meditation was not, then, a primary concern of the powerful
administrative monks of this period. The conferment of rank and status was
now granted by the central authorities, in part on the basis of a centralized
exam system. The position of supreme patriarch was no longer a position
associated with meditation at all but entirely with administration and textual
scholarship. In this period other posts traditionally associated with
meditation, such as the headship of Wat Sangwet in Bangkok, were given to
administrative monks who had passed the central Pali exams made possible
by the preceding printing project.38 As Andrew Skilton has pointed out, this
context sheds some light on the views of Thai meditation expressed by the

--- PAGE 157 ---
British vice-consul Henry Alabaster in 1871, whom we met in chapter 1.
Alabaster had arrived in Thailand in 1851, the year of Mongkut’s accession
to the throne, and the work was published in the early years of King
Chulalongkorn’s reign, based on a book written by Chao Phya Thipakon, the
former foreign minister for Siam. While one might initially expect a Thai
source to be more sympathetic to local meditation, Thipakon was writing
from the perspective of the modernizing elite of this time.39
Preferment through administrative ranks meant that even monks with the
Thammayut lineage who pursued meditation were rarely promoted, despite
the important role Thammayut forest meditation monks played in the
increasing numbers of Thammayut temples and monks in the northeast from
the 1890s onward under King Chulalongkorn’s patronage. The Tai-Lao
forest meditation tradition that had preceded this was largely displaced by the
Thammayut forest tradition, which developed text-compatible practices and
were dismissive of practice within the Mahanikay.40 Chulalongkorn was
interested in supporting this development because this remote area was
considered both resistant to Bangkok control and vulnerable to French
annexation. Kamala Tiyavanich in her study of the wandering forest monks
in the early twentieth century paints a picture of a divided Sangha in which
power lay in the hands of the Bangkok-based Thammayut monks while rural,
non-administrative meditation monks, even those within the Thammayut
Nikāya by this time, struggled to maintain their religious pursuits.41
REVOLT, RESISTANCE, AND TEXTUAL INTEREST IN BORĀN KAMMAṬṬHĀNA
This is not the complete picture, however, as some urban Thammayut monks
took at least a textual interest in borān practices, and their eﬀorts would be
inﬂuential in securing some of the evidence for the practice that has survived
to this day, discussed in chapter 3.
The senior Thammayut meditation monk Jan Sirijantho, more popularly
known as Ajan Upāli/Ubali (also transcribed as Ubaalii), was a leading
administrator and text-based scholar of the Thammayut reform, but also a
supporter of the forest meditation monks of the northeast where his
popularity remains visible to this day. As Jim Taylor explains,
He was seemingly caught in the middle between ‘theory’ and
‘practice’, and because of his continuing concern for improving
education (Pali and Thai studies) and related administrative matters
pertaining to the promotion of the Thammayut, he was closer to the

--- PAGE 158 ---
centre than the periphery. Nevertheless because of his conﬁdence
in Man [Man Bhūridatto, the most famous northern Thai forest
monk (1870–1949)] and the latter’s respect for Ubaalii [Jan]
(shared also by Man’s early teacher Ajaan Sao Kantasiilo [1859–
1941]), he was seen as the senior patron and father ﬁgure of the
northeastern forest tradition. Importantly, Ubaalii had helped Man
and his wandering pupils gain normative credence and
acceptability by many sangha administrators.42
Jan (Ubali) was born into a farming family in the region of
Ubonratchathani (Ubon), relatively close to the Lao and Cambodian borders,
one of the main areas targeted by the Thammayut under the centralization
policy. He was promoted on the basis of his scholarly, teaching, and
organizational ability. In 1888 he was the ﬁrst to establish the Thammayut in
Laos, although his criticism of a popular Lao monk for drunkenness
combined with the French expansion in the region from 1893 onward
minimized Thammayut inﬂuence there.
From the 1890s onward Jan made repeated journeys between the northeast
and Bangkok, where he became abbot of the inﬂuential temple Wat
Baromnivat, which had been set up by Mongkut as a forest-dwelling
(āraññavāsī) counterpart to Wat Bovornnivet.43 He brought with him
promising young monks from Ubon to study in Bangkok. Throughout his life
he felt torn between his administrative and educational roles and a hankering
to pursue meditation, as seen in his resignation in 1899 from a senior,
prestigious administrative role. He also showed a readiness to ﬂout authority.
In 1915 Jan published an anti-war pamphlet Thammavitjayanusat
“Instruction on the Conquest through Dhamma.” This was seen as an attack
on the decision by King Vajiravudh, Chulalongkorn’s son and successor as
Rāma VI, to take Siam into World War I in an alliance with the British and
French. This alliance was successful in its aim of securing Siam’s ongoing
sovereignty, but the modernization Vajiravudh also introduced into the Thai
military, reﬂecting his military training and education in England, sparked
resentment among the Thai military establishment. The abortive Palace
Revolt of 1912 in response to militarism and Eurocentrism had left
Vajiravudh sensitive to the need to stiﬂe dissent. In response to his
publication of Thammavitjayanusat, Vajiravudh placed Jan under house
arrest in his monastery, with the terms of his conﬁnement stipulated by
Wachirayan, now supreme patriarch. Jan appears to have been conﬁdent of
his position, however. Taylor reports, “One informant mentioned that whilst

--- PAGE 159 ---
under ‘monastery arrest,’ Ubaalii [Jan] hung a bag of potatoes or yams (man)
outside his room…The word man can also imply determination and
impenitence.”44
It is in the ﬁgure of Jan that rank, scholarship, an interest in meditation, a
sense of entitlement to criticize, and access to northeastern materials
combined to preserve for us the texts that reveal much about the history of
borān kammaṭṭhāna in Southeast Asia. It is the texts that Jan collected that
indicate the earlier practice of borān kammaṭṭhāna by the highest-ranking
monks of Ayutthaya and at courts of the northeast such as Vientiane.45
Between 1906 and the early 1920s Jan put together a collection of
manuscripts, including some from Wat Sirijannimit (Wat Khao Phra Ngam)
in Lopburi, that formed the basis for one of the most important publications
on the subject, though it was not he who published it. Jan’s manuscript-
collecting activities are more obviously subversive when considered in the
light of the policy enacted from the 1890s to 1910s, designed to destroy
history, permanently undermine local loyalties, and enhance dependency on
the central state.
By this point borān kammaṭṭhāna had already been substantially
undermined by the Pali text-based reform so it is in the publications from the
early twentieth century, made possible by Jan’s collection, that the method
starts receiving the description “borān,” “old,” “former,” “traditional.”46 It is
unclear whether Jan’s interest in non-reform meditation texts was entirely a
reﬂection of his meditative interests or also an expression of his distaste for
the increasingly modernist agenda of the government and Sangha hierarchy.
It is also unclear whether his activity in this area was, like his anti-militarism,
frowned upon. After only a few months he was released from his
conﬁnement, and he went on to have renewed good relations with the king.47
Jan’s inﬂuence on borān kammaṭṭhāna continued in two directions. First,
his work on the collecting of manuscripts and the editing of relevant
meditation materials was handed over to one of his meditation students, the
Thammayut monk Jai Yasothararat of Wat Baromnivat. Yasothararat was
tasked with this work by Jan’s successor as abbot, Tisso Uan (Phra
Phrommuni, abbot 1932–1942), and by the vice-abbot Piyatharo Rang (Phra
Yan Rakkhit) at Wat Baromnivat.48 In 1936 Yasothararat published a
collection of these manuscripts. The manuscript materials he drew on also
included some held in Wat Ratchasittharam, the former seat of supreme
patriarch Suk Kaitheun, who had brought the tradition from Ayutthaya. It
was this tradition that Mongkut had rejected as a young monk.
Second, Jan’s disciples had constructive interactions concerning borān

--- PAGE 160 ---
kammaṭṭhāna techniques with Candasaro Sot (Sot Janthasaro), a Mahanikay
meditation monk who was, according to those who follow in his lineage
today, also targeted by the government in the late 1910s and 1920s.49 His
followers report that he was publicly accused of exaggerating his meditation
experience and of promulgating teachings that deviated from Theravada
Buddhism.50 The former is a particularly serious accusation in that it could
be taken to be in breach of the fourth of the pārājika rules, contravention of
which can lead to permanent expulsion from the Sangha. Sot had studied at a
number of meditation temples, including Wat Ratchasittharam, where the
borān method of Suk Kaitheun was still being taught. In 1917, he became
abbot at Wat Paknam where he taught an accessible version of the practice,
simpliﬁed for beginners. In the 1950s his students included foreign monks
such as Terence Magness and Kapilavaḍḍho (Richard Randall), to whom we
shall return. Sot’s methods were also later promoted by other temples,
including those in the Dhammakaya movement. As we shall see in the next
chapter, Jan’s inﬂuence thus not only preserved crucial evidence for boran
kammaṭṭhāna, it also helped ensure its ongoing teaching in forms that have
lasted to this day.
THE INFLUENCE OF REFORM IN SIAM ON CAMBODIA
Siam’s dominance in the region meant that the patterns of reform there were
reﬂected in Laos and Cambodia, shaping Buddhism on the east of the later
Cold War divide as well. Until the end of the nineteenth century, the courts
of Laos and Cambodia were heavily inﬂuenced by developments in Siam,
with both monks and members of the royalty being trained there. Siam ceded
some territory to France when the latter, at the end of the nineteenth century,
created French Indochina by merging its territories in Cochinchina, Annam,
Tonkin, Laos, and Cambodia. Both Thai and French inﬂuence led to a reform
branch within Cambodia’s Mahanikay, to which the French lent support as a
way of extending their worldview and in rivalry with the Thai modernizing
inﬂuence borne by the Thammayut.
Before the arrival of the French, King Aung Duang (r. 1841–1860) of
Cambodia, placed on the throne by Thailand, accepted those of Siam’s
emerging reform policies that related to Buddhism. This can be seen in his
request to King Mongkut in 1854 for a complete copy of the Pali canon, the
tipiṭaka.51 This was the tipiṭaka in the restricted sense familiar to Western
Buddhist studies. Until and even after that point the term tipiṭaka was used in
Cambodia in an inclusive sense to refer to Buddhist and related texts in
general, most of which were in the vernacular.52 Such traditional literature

--- PAGE 161 ---
was associated with the symbolic and narrative repertoire of borān
kammaṭṭhāna and related ritual practices alongside traditional astrology and
cosmology. The broader repertoire had previously been given far more
weight than the texts of the Pali canon, which were relatively rare in
monastic libraries. However, over the next century, reform emphasizing the
authority of the Pali canon grew in strength, associated as it came to be with
both Thai and French-derived power at court. It was also an important
feature of the response of a younger generation of Cambodian monks to
modernization and a disillusionment with what they regarded as the
corruption of the older generations of monks.53
In 1855, the year following Aung Duang’s request for the canon, a branch
of the Thammayut Nikāya was established at Aung Duang’s capital in
Udong. Its abbot was Mahā Pan (1824–1894), a Cambodian who had been
based at Wat Bovornnivet under Mongkut. When the French built Phnom
Penh as the capital for Aung Duang’s son, King Norodom (r.1860–1904),
who had himself spent time as a monk ordained by Mongkut, Norodom’s
Buddhist aﬃliation was reﬂected by the allocation of a temple in a central
location close to the royal palace to the Thammayut Nikāya. The temple was
renamed Wat Botum and has been the Thammayut headquarters in Cambodia
ever since. In 1880 Norodom ordered the translation of the Pali canon into
Khmer. He also reorganized the Sangha on the model of the Thai
restructuring, but, while doing so, he gave precedence to the supreme
patriarch of the Mahanikay, Samdech Tieng, rather than to Samdech Pan of
the Thammayut Nikāya. Tieng (1823–1913), a Khmer who had studied as a
monk in Bangkok since the age of twelve, had been a favorite of King Rāma
III, who, it will be remembered, speciﬁcally promoted Mahanikay monks in
order to thwart the ambitions of his younger half-brother Mongkut.
Norodom’s support of Tieng reﬂected his desire at this stage for a degree of
autonomy from Mongkut, which may also have inﬂuenced his decision to
sign a new treaty with the French making Cambodia a French protectorate.54
REFORM AND CENTRALIZATION WITHIN THE CAMBODIAN MAHANIKAY
Tieng’s base in the new capital of Phnom Penh was at Wat Uṇṇalom, which
remains the headquarters of the Mahanikay supreme patriarch of Cambodia
to this day. Tieng was ﬂuent in Thai, Sanskrit, and Pali and conversant with
those sciences important to Mongkut and Chulalongkorn: mathematics and
astronomy. Like his Thammayut counterpart, Tieng was a modernist.
Norodom placed his support unambiguously behind the modernists by
issuing a royal ordinance in 1881. It commanded that “all Mahanikay monks

--- PAGE 162 ---
should follow the precepts and methods established and observed by
Samdech Tieng.”55 This left the traditionalists in the Mahanikay, initially the
majority within the majority, without institutional support or representation
either at court or within the Sangha hierarchy.
The political motivation inﬂuencing both the Cambodian royal family and
the French colonial powers to promote extensive reform throughout the
country was, as with Siam, an issue of military and economic control. The
reforms and centralization were undertaken to reduce the power of the quasi-
independent and often wealthy monasteries throughout the country and to
ensure that new abbots were appointed with the approval of the supreme
patriarchs and the relevant government ministry. This undermined the
independence of abbots, and as traditionalists died they were replaced with
modernists approved by the government and Sangha hierarchies. Measures
designed to contain the modernists gave way to a crescendo of measures
designed to undermine traditional monasteries. These culminated in the royal
ordinance of December 1920, which, with reference to the Vinaya Piṭaka and
the Pali canon, banned much economic activity, as well as many traditional
practices. Traditional meditation and related healing practices are explicitly
mentioned.
Monks were forbidden
from making out that they had acquired attainments such as Jhāna
[higher states of meditative absorption], Vimokkha [liberation],
Samādhi [meditative concentration], Sampat [attainments], Magga
[the four paths of supramundane achievements that culminate in
arhatship], Phala [the four fruits of supramundane achievements
that culminate in arhatship]; from practicing the meditation called
“Angkuy Thor” to treat the sick; from diagnosing the outcome of
someone’s illness to them (i.e., their recovery or death); from
making claims concerning the rebirth of a deceased person, that s/
he is reborn at such and such a place; from making out that they are
a person of attainments and therefore powerful, strong, et cetera.
from playing games connected with money…
from asking for the hand in marriage of a young woman in order
to wed her on disrobing
from engaging in agriculture, business, diverse employments
such as wood-carver, carpenter, draughtsman, mason, jeweler,…
from engaging in the occupations of medicine, astrology,
sorcery, tattooist, from doing tattoos, from creating numerological

--- PAGE 163 ---
signs, from studying or teaching magical formulae, in a word, the
whole 
range 
of 
Dérachchan 
Vichéa 
[tiracchāna-vijjā,
lower/“animal” sciences]. From studying or teaching sword-
ﬁghting, boxing, wrestling, from taking medicines that supposedly
render one invulnerable or from giving such medicine to another to
take.
From animal husbandry, from owning carriages, carts and
canoes, from keeping in the temple any kind of musical
instruments except for the drums, gongs and bells required for
religious services, from engaging in an entire range of games
(chess, boat-racing, ball, kite-ﬂying, etc.)
From carrying a load on the shoulders, or a double load attached
to the ends of a pole, when crossing an inhabited place or a market;
from going to a ﬁsh market, a meat market or alcohol stall…
From making use of any scents except in the case of an illness
where its use is necessary; from wearing wooden clogs, slippers or
embroidered slippers; from carrying a mat or a stick; from using
ornaments or money; from wearing the hair long, from sporting a
moustache, beard, or nails longer than permitted in the Vinaya;
from dressing badly or in the manner of a layperson.56
This extraordinary list of prohibitions looks quite reasonable from the
reformist perspective, and from that of the Western expectations of the
conduct of Buddhist monks that had developed in the second half of the
preceding century. However, the list actually proscribes the normal monastic
conduct that had for centuries allowed monasteries to function at the heart of
the village agricultural system, as centers of education and commerce. The
decree also forbids many of the practices that go hand in hand with borān
kammaṭṭhāna and those that share borān kammaṭṭhāna motifs, technologies,
and delivery methods, such as medicine, astrology, prognostication,
tattooing, and protective devices. Some of these activities were the main
sources of income for borān kammaṭṭhāna experts as individuals as well as
for institutions such as monasteries. The prohibition on medicine for the sake
of healing, one of the main applications of borān kammaṭṭhāna, coincided
with the introduction of Western medicine to the region, and came on the eve
of traditional medicine being banned in Siam.
Also signiﬁcant is the prohibition on claiming to have spiritual
attainments. This prohibition might seem straightforward in that it is
reminiscent of the monastic fourth pārājika oﬀense, which prohibits falsely

--- PAGE 164 ---
claiming supramundane powers, for transgression of which one can be
expelled from the Sangha. However, in this context, the motivation was
presumably to undermine rival sources of power—no monk was allowed to
claim any kind of spiritual achievement, even if true, and thereby have any
status beyond being a religious functionary. The terms employed for the
prohibited claims are, as previously observed, remarkable for their orthodoxy
—all the attainments listed are to be found in the Visuddhimagga and
Abhidhamma accounts of the spiritual path, the very sources that were also
authoritative for reform Buddhists. Although the reformists charged
traditional practitioners and traditional meditation with being corrupt and
unorthodox, the evidence signals that they could recognize that concepts
used within borān kammaṭṭhāna were consistent with normative Theravada.
As the century progressed modernist monks within the Mahanikay further
developed reformist tendencies collaborating to varying degrees with French
language, education, and legal policies. The people who best exemplify the
ﬁnal stage of the sidelining of the old traditions are Ven. Chuon Nath (1883–
1969), Ven. Huot Tath (1891–1975), and Ven. Oum Sour (1881–1939). They
were friends within the reform wing of the Mahanikay based at Wat
Uṇṇalom, who, while progressing smoothly through their academic studies,
took on board the reform Thai and Western critical approach to the study of
Buddhism and languages. Chuon Nath and Huot Tath were inﬂuenced by
developments in Thai monastic education that emphasized meaning and
interpretation of the canonical text. They would later study under Louis Finot
at the École française d’Extrême-Orient in Hanoi. Their studies aﬀected their
stance in relation to traditional Buddhism. While still at Wat Uṇṇalom,
before their period in Hanoi, the three caused a stir by claiming that the
traditional texts were corruptions rather than the genuine word of the Buddha
and set up a group to study canonical and commentarial Vinaya texts in
secret.57 This was the background to the ﬁrst printing of a Buddhist text from
within the Cambodian Mahanikay in 1920, discussed in chapter 3. The
supreme patriarch of the time, Dhammalikhit Ouk, sought to defrock the
group of three, all of whose names appeared on the book. The three young
monks, convinced that they were reviving and protecting Buddhism, were
scornful of the supreme patriarch’s response. For while the supreme patriarch
also saw himself as protecting the tradition, the young monks little
understood this position and thought the old monks ignorant and jealous.
When the young monks appealed to the royal family, King Sisowath and his
son, the future King Monivong, took the reformists’ side. Through the
support of Finot the careers of Chuon Nath and Huot Tath were then secured,
and both went on to become the supreme patriarch in Cambodia, in 1948–

--- PAGE 165 ---
1969 and 1969–1975 respectively.58
Traditional Buddhism and with it borān kammaṭṭhāna continued in rural
areas that were beyond the everyday inﬂuence of Phnom Penh, Thailand, and
France, particularly in areas to which Western medicine had not spread. Its
protective practices were taken up by soldiers of all ranks right up to the
1970s.59 However, it had by this time been actively discouraged by the
Sangha hierarchy of both the Thammayut and the Mahanikay. As supreme
patriarch, Chuon Nath continued to issue prohibitions against borān practices
and to purify traditional rites and rituals from what were now seen as non-
Buddhist accretions. The reformist agenda in which Buddhism was
understood as a universal religion in an essentialized form, and in tune with
the European view of Buddhism, was privileged at the hierarchical center.
Chuon Nath’s position takes our story of borān kammaṭṭhāna in Cambodia,
where it is suppressed at the center, but continues at the margins, up to the
period of the Marxist revolution under Pol Pot. In Laos, meanwhile, it
remained the centrally authorized practice as late as 1974. We shall return to
this subject in the next chapter, when looking at meditation in twentieth-
century revivals.
SHIFTING POWER AND PARTIAL SURVIVAL IN THAILAND
Neither traditional medicine nor traditional meditation would ever recover
from the political and religio-political measures that undermined and
suppressed them between the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth and ﬁrst half of the
twentieth century. However, in Thailand the pro-democracy coup of 1932
would at least interrupt those measures enough to allow for some evidence of
the Buddhist meditation dominant before this period to be published. After
the coup, the power of the palace and the concomitant dominance of the
Thammayut hierarchy rapidly diminished. For a while King Prajadhipok
(Rāma VII) (r. 1925–1935) had to live in exile, with the result that his two
sons, Ananda (Rāma VIII) (r. 1935–1946) and the future King Bhumibol
(Rāma IX) (r. 1946–2016), grew up in Switzerland. In 1938, for the ﬁrst time
in a century, a Mahanikay monk was promoted to the position of supreme
patriarch, and four years later in 1942 the pro-democratic Sangha Act sought
to redress the balance of power between the two nikāya.60 With this change
of aﬀairs came three developments: traditional medicine was re-allowed and
taught by traditional doctors in local areas (although, unlike Western
medicine, it was still not taught at universities);61 the imperiled borān
kammaṭṭhāna teaching survived at least among some Mahanikay monks,
such as Candasaro Sot; and Thammayut meditation monks were granted

--- PAGE 166 ---
more support by monks in the Thammayut administration.
It may be the easing of controls and suppression in relation to meditation
as well as monastic and textual variety that provided the context for the work
on borān kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts facilitated by Jan (above), to come to
fruition. When Yasothararat published Jan’s collection of old meditation
manuals in 1936, he took advantage of the assistance of a former Mahanikay
monk working on related materials, Luangvisan Darunnakon, who had also
published a collection of borān kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts the year before.
Some of the manuscripts he used are available today in the meditation
section at Wat Ratchasittharam. Darunnakon was a student of Chum (Phra
Sangwaranuwonthera), 
the 
abbot 
and 
meditation 
master 
at 
Wat
Ratchasittharam who continued the teaching lineage of Somdet Suk
Kaitheun, the supreme patriarch who had brought the borān kammaṭṭhāna
tradition from Ayutthaya. Darunnakon helped Yasothararat by providing,
among other things, the distinctive meditation diagrams that help the
practitioner understand the relative positioning of nimitta in the body,
diagrams also found within the meditation manuscripts of the mid-eighteenth
century used by Siyam Nikāya monks in Sri Lanka.62
LEGACY
Although the 1932 coup interrupted the Thammayut dominance of Sangha
aﬀairs in Siam, it was not the end of the story of marginalization for borān
kammaṭṭhāna and meditation monks. First, the rhetoric and understanding of
orthodoxy, reform, and pariyatti over paṭipatti had established a ﬁrmly
embedded culture whereby control and intervention in the practices of monks
by the Sangha hierarchy and/or the state were accepted. This was readily
used to stiﬂe anything perceived as dissent or an independent power base.
Second, the understandings of orthodoxy more commonly associated with
the Thammayut had also inﬁltrated and now permeated the Mahanikay
hierarchy.63 Third, meditation became part of a claim to orthodoxy for monks
seeking to exert their inﬂuence, and so we see the promotion of particular
forms of meditation as a mark of political identity, when we look to the
choices made in revivals of meditation in the twentieth century in the next
chapter.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter we saw how borān kammaṭṭhāna was at the center of the ﬁrst
Theravada Buddhist revival of the modern period: the eighteenth-century

--- PAGE 167 ---
revival of the ordination lineage in Sri Lanka from Ayutthaya, the then
capital of Siam. Ayutthaya was also the source of a further dispersal of borān
kammaṭṭhāna lineages to Thonburi and Bangkok through the court and
Sangha elite. The subsequent disappearance of borān kammaṭṭhāna from the
center was not only in response to change in hegemonic sciences, such as the
rise of Western medicine, outlined in the previous chapter. It also reﬂected
political changes, such as the Burmese sack of Ayutthaya, the modernization
and centralization policies of the Chakri dynasty, the creation of the modern
nation state of Thailand and its dominance in the region, the suppression of
the culture of the northeast of Thailand—a process that would later be
continued during the Cold War—and even the education of Thai royalty
abroad.
Within this context, Buddhism was a tool in political rivalries as well as an
object of protection and revival. This changed the nature of Buddhism. In
Thailand, the focus on textual learning over practice, on canon over
commentary, on the canonical texts of the Sutta Piṭaka and Visuddhimagga
rather than Abhidhamma, and on exam-success and administration in
authorizing practice and monastic status all conspired to sideline regional
practice. This particularly aﬀected practice that could not easily be
recognized in the canonical Sutta and Vinaya texts. These reforms also
impacted Cambodian Buddhism, with Thailand and France both seeking to
inﬂuence the country by patronizing reform-oriented Buddhist lineages.
A change in the political context in the 1930s inspired a number of
publications in Thailand that, against this backdrop of sidelining and
disappearance, preserved crucial information about the long history of borān
kammaṭṭhāna in the region, including at the highest levels of the monastic
hierarchy. In the next chapter, we shall turn our attention to reforms from the
late nineteenth century onward to ﬁnd out how these changes inﬂuenced the
selection of other meditations then, and why borān kammaṭṭhāna continued
to be deselected. We shall observe the eﬀect of Marxist revolutions on the
remaining strongholds of borān kammaṭṭhāna, and what happened to those
lineages that did survive into the late twentieth and early twenty-ﬁrst century.

--- PAGE 168 ---
7
MEDITATION IN MODERN REVIVALS
I kept these manuscripts tucked inside the rafters of the roof of my
house because I realized that the soldiers could destroy them. I had
learned that many manuscripts had been destroyed in diﬀerent
pagodas, and so I needed to keep them safe at the top of my roof.
The destruction of manuscripts during the war, we believe that it
had been predicted in Buddhist prophecies. So we cannot really say
why soldiers would destroy them.
—Achar Oun, borān practitioner, Cambodia 2012
In the previous chapter we saw how changes in Thailand (Siam) from the end
of the eighteenth century to the early twentieth century ushered in periods of
change, reform, and modernization, as well as the use of the Buddhist
Sangha in the process of centralizing political control. These changes led to
the marginalization, loss, and even active suppression of borān
kammaṭṭhāna. In this chapter, we will look at what happened in subsequent
periods of revival. While borān kammaṭṭhāna had been at the center of the
mid-eighteenth-century Buddhist revival of Sri Lanka, how did it fare in the
twentieth century?
CASTE RESTRICTIONS AND MONASTIC LINEAGES IN SRI LANKA
Sri Lanka now has three monastic lineages, nikāya, with multiple
subdivisions. The lineage that promoted borān kammaṭṭhāna, introduced
from Ayutthaya in the mid-eighteenth century, is the earliest and became
known as the “lineage from Siam,” the Siyam Nikāya, to diﬀerentiate it from
two later lineages introduced from Burma from the beginning of the
nineteenth century. Initially the Siyam Nikāya embodied the spirit of radical
reform, advocating a puritanical monasticism, in-depth canonical and
commentarial study, scholarship, and preaching. It was also very much
associated with royalty, aristocracy, and the center of court power in

--- PAGE 169 ---
upcountry Kandy, serving as it did to bolster the power of the Kandyan
kingdom even in the coastal areas oﬃcially within the territory of European
colonial powers. It was this association that came to deﬁne it throughout its
subsequent history.1
Although two of the pupils of Saraṇaṃkara, the leading light of the
revival, were monks from other castes, ordination came to be restricted
exclusively to the Goyigama caste, usually reckoned as the highest caste
among the Sinhalese.2 Hierarchical rank within the monastic order paralleled
the feudal structure of temporal roles. Monastic lands were cultivated by
Goyigama tenants who provided the monastery, which often also managed
the large reservoirs and irrigation systems, with a share of the crop. Other
castes had speciﬁc tasks in providing the monastery with its material, social,
and festival requirements. The high status of abbots was indicated by their
traveling in palanquins borne by the Paduvō caste, and by the annual
presentation to them of gifts and betel leaves by those who rendered these
services to them.3 While the Siyam Nikāya began as a revivalist movement,
its high-ranking monks ceased to be interested in reform.
The occupation of the coastal regions of Sri Lanka by successive European
colonial powers had eroded the position of the Sangha there, and the
consequent changes in economic and social structures created signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between the colonized regions and the still-independent interior.
Lowland monks still received their titles and recognition from the Kandyan
king in the Dutch and early British periods, and higher ordination was
received in the royal ordination festival in Kandy, but the lowland
monasteries did not have the advantage of receiving service and goods from
feudal temple lands traditionally granted by the king. So while monks in the
Kandyan kingdom acted as landlords, with a degree of autonomy, lowland
monks depended on the strength of their relationship with their lay donors
and needed to be responsive to their needs and concerns. Since ordination
here brought relatively little material advantage or status, young men of the
Goyigama caste were instead drawn toward government administration. This
left a need for monks that could be fulﬁlled by other castes, if only higher
ordination were permitted them.
A factor in the subsequent development of a new nikāya to ﬁll this gap
was the economic reliance of consecutive colonial powers on the lucrative
cinnamon trade. The Salāgama caste, which included the cinnamon
producers, grew relatively wealthy and powerful, and began to aspire to the
same privileges for their monks as those allowed to monks of the Goyigama
caste. While one could perform rituals and serve laypeople with only novice

--- PAGE 170 ---
ordination, it was only as a fully ordained monk (bhikkhu) that one could
pursue title, privileges, and a career through the monastic ranks: a novice of
forty years’ standing is hierarchically junior to a monk fully ordained only a
single year. To become a novice one only needed a bhikkhu, a fully ordained
monk, to give one the lower ordination, but becoming a bhikkhu required a
formal ecclesiastical act conducted by at least ﬁve other bhikkhu in a
formally consecrated area, called a sīmā. It often also required the permission
of temporal authorities. The court and Sangha hierarchy at Kandy had the
monopoly on higher ordination on the island and declined requests from
members of the Salāgama caste to lift the caste restriction. The Salāgama and
others turned elsewhere: to textual authority, and to the king and supreme
patriarch of Burma. They went to Amarapura, the then capital of Burma, now
in greater Mandalay.
BURMA AS THE SOURCE OF NEW MONASTIC LINEAGES
In Burma, too, this was a time of change and reform. The ﬁnal dynasty of
independent Burma before the British completed their annexation was the
Konbaung (1752–1885). In the eighteenth century they oversaw a reform of
the Sangha, appointing an ecclesiastical body known as the Thudhamma
Council to govern the Buddhist Sangha of the entire kingdom, and granting it
far-reaching powers.4 The Thudhamma reform emphasized textual learning
and correct monastic conduct in accordance with the Pali canon as
interpreted through the commentaries; this required novices and monks to sit
annual Vinaya examinations. From 1783 the Council could also prevent
monks from making their living through traditional monastic occupations
such as astrology and medicine, which were now deemed inappropriate.5 The
new Amarapura Nikāya of Sri Lanka received their ordinations and
instruction under the head of the Thudhamma reform, the ﬁrst Maung Taung
Sayadaw Saṅgharāja Ñāṇa, and so it was these elements of reform—textual
scholarship and Vinaya practice—that inﬂuenced the type of reform
Buddhism established in Sri Lanka. The Amarapura Nikāya was founded in
stages from 1803 onward as members of diﬀerent caste groups regarded as
unﬁt for ordination by the Siyam Nikāya sought ordination in Amarapura.
Everyone knew that caste restriction had no authority in the Pali canon or
commentaries, and it was this issue that allowed the Amarapura monks to
challenge the Siyam Nikāya monks’ authority. It made their focus on textual
knowledge particularly apposite.
To conduct their own ordinations in Sri Lanka independently of the Siyam
Nikāya, the Amarapura Nikāya needed their own sacred ordination

--- PAGE 171 ---
enclosure, sīmā, independently of the one in Kandy to which they had
previously been denied access. To deﬂect any possible accusation that their
sīmā was invalid, an accusation that could undermine the validity of the
ordination that took place within it, the monks who returned to Sri Lanka
from Amarapura needed to establish their sīmā with uncontested legal
accuracy. This required in-depth commentarial knowledge, the very area of
Thudhamma expertise. The Amarapura succeeded in establishing their new
sīmā at Balapiṭiya using a speciﬁc type known as an udakukkhepa “splashing
of water” sīmā. Choosing this type cleverly allowed the monks concerned to
establish a sīmā independently without the permission or cooperation either
of other monks in the area or of the “king,” or, in the absence of a king, the
state authorities, cooperation they would have needed had they wanted to
consecrate a sīmā on land.6
For the Amarapura monks, then, textual knowledge and correct Vinaya
application were what made for authority, reform, and revival. The
Amarapura Nikāya was described to Europeans in the middle of the century
as seeking “to bring back the doctrines of Buddhism to their pristine purity,
by disentangling them from caste, polytheism and other corruptions to which
they had been subject for ages.”7
MEDITATION IN THE NEW LINEAGES FROM BURMA
At the time that the ﬁrst Sri Lankan Amarapura monks trained in Burma,
meditation was yet to be popularized there among monks, let alone the laity.
Moreover, to have undertaken meditation would have required patronage,
and at least temporary withdrawal from their everyday duties, potentially
disrupting their close day-to-day relationship with the lay supporters on
whom they were reliant. These Sri Lankan monks were consciously breaking
from the Siamese lineage in Ceylon, where borān kammaṭṭhāna was still
practiced by some, and perhaps it was also for this reason that they did not
adopt the practice. So although borān kammaṭṭhāna was still practiced in
Siam, Laos, and Cambodia and for a time even in Sri Lanka, and although
borān kammaṭṭhāna had been a feature of reform and revival in Sri Lanka
half a century earlier, it was not part of the reform Buddhism of the early
Amarapura Nikāya. One hundred and ﬁfty years later, however, the spread of
a diﬀerent form of meditation to Sri Lanka, the Burmese Vipassanā that
would be developed later in the nineteenth century, and popularized
internationally in the 1950s, was facilitated through the connections initiated
between Burma and the Amarapura monks at this time.
While meditation was not a part of the early Amarapura Nikāya, it was a

--- PAGE 172 ---
part of the foundation of the next nikāya, the Rāmañña Nikāya, in 1864.
Initially this was not intended to be a separate nikāya, but a fresh branch of
the Amarapura Nikāya when the older branches had become tangled in
contention. The reformist stance of the Amarapura Nikāya had attracted
Goyigama men in both the upcountry and the low country who were
disaﬀected by the ritualism and inﬁghting of the Siyam Nikāya. However,
the Amarapura Nikāya in the low country soon began to fracture as much as
the Siyam Nikāya that these Goyigama had discarded. The low-country
Goyigama who had joined the Amarapura Nikāya found themselves
disillusioned once again.
The contentions that arose reﬂected the high value placed by both
Amarapura and Siyam Nikāya hierarchies on detailed textual scholarship
particularly in the realm of Vinaya (monastic discipline). The crucial issue
for the Amarapura was again the sīmā. A debate arose over technical points
concerning whether a bridge-section temporarily placed over the gap
between the water sīmā at Balapiṭiya and the walkway to the shore, even
though lifted during ecclesiastical rituals, had invalidated the sīmā and
therefore the entire Amarapura ordination lineage. At stake were issues of
control, autonomy, and caste status, as well as the status and identity of the
monks already ordained there.
The monk who started the debate was Laṅkāgoḍa Dhīrānanda, a student
of the monk Kapugama Dhammakkhandha. Dhammakkhandha had
introduced the second Amarapura lineage in 1809, but in 1816 became the
darling of Christians for disrobing and converting to Christianity.8
Dhīrānanda took over the leadership of this second lineage, which had its
own sīmā. When a uniﬁcation of the two Amarapura lineages brieﬂy took
place it was decided that there should be, as an indication of unity, only one
sīmā. The Balapiṭiya sīmā, as the ﬁrst sīmā, was the obvious choice, but
Dhīrānanda balked at the control this would give the ﬁrst Amarapura lineage
over his, just as the Siyam Nikāya in Kandy had previously been able to
exercise authority over all monks in the island. Dhīrānanda was from one of
the higher sub-castes within the Salāgama caste. He later went on to create an
autonomous splinter lineage, at which point he again expressed this concern
with autonomy and status by imposing a caste restriction. Just as the Siyam
Nikāya had excluded non-Goyigama, so Dhīrānanda restricted ordination in
his lineage to his own Salāgama sub-caste.
Meanwhile, an expert on Vinaya matters, Dhīrānanda started the sīmā
controversy by questioning the validity of the Balapiṭiya sīmā once it had
been enlarged to accommodate the larger number of monks who would need

--- PAGE 173 ---
to attend ecclesiastical rituals after the uniﬁcation. This was also the occasion
on which the oﬀending bridge was built.
Initially Dhīrānanda’s complaint stirred up suﬃcient doubt for monks who
had been ordained in the one sīmā to go for reordination in the other, but
there was resistance to his view. Soon there were large-scale debates, the
exchange of scholarly tracts, and the sending of competing missions to the
supreme patriarch Ñeyya, the second Maung Taung Sayadaw, in Burma for a
ruling, since he was an authority recognized by both sides.9 The dispute
escalated to such an extent that for decades almost all the high-ranking
monks in the Amarapura Nikāya of the low country were embroiled in the
controversy, repeatedly debating the point with detailed reference to
commentarial literature. Even a ruling from Ñeyya was to no avail, and the
debate only died with its initial protagonists.
For all parties, to interpret the Vinaya correctly was to be true to the
original teaching of the Buddha, but as we can see, the issue of what was
correct only arose because of rivalry for power and control. The Goyigama
monks who had joined the Amarapura Nikāya had, by doing so, already
indicated their willingness to subordinate themselves to monks of lower
castes. Caste hierarchy was not therefore of primary importance to them.
Among the disaﬀected was Ambagahavattē Saraṇaṃkara, who as a young
monk had been ordained in the Siyam Nikāya and observed the previous
controversy, in 1844–1845, which had been over a diﬀerent matter, the
astrological calculations that inﬂuenced the timing of a particular ritual.
When he then joined the Amarapura in 1857 he walked right into the sīmā
debate. So in 1860 he set oﬀ with four other ex-Siyam Amarapura
companions in search of direct contact with the Burmese supreme patriarch,
Ñeyya. In Burma, some took higher ordination, while some had their
previous ordination conﬁrmed through a special strengthening ritual. By
going to the source of the Amarapura lineage, they circumvented the strife
over sīmās that had arisen within the Sri Lankan branch after its departure
from Burma. More monks followed them.
The returnees were still in the same ordination lineage as other Amarapura
monks but their identity as a separate nikāya, the Rāmañña Nikāya, emerged
gradually toward the end of the 1860s. These monks were deeply interested
in the purity of their monastic lineage. To assure them of the validity of their
ordinations, the Burmese supreme patriarch’s pupil, Paññasāmi, composed
for them the famous Pali chronicle of the lineage, the Sāsanavaṃsa. Like the
reformist monks of the Siyam Nikāya a hundred years earlier, Paññasāmi
was convinced of the possibility of enlightenment in the present age. He was

--- PAGE 174 ---
also aware that at the time meditation was growing in popularity in the
Sagaing hills a short distance from Mandalay.10 Meditation was therefore
part of reform Buddhism in Burma at this time, and some of the Sri Lankan
monks gained a reputation for serious and extensive forest practice and
meditation after their return. Monks from other nikāya interested in this
aspect of Buddhism switched their allegiance to the Rāmañña Nikāya.11
MEDITATION IN THE RĀMAÑÑA NIKĀYA
To what extent the meditation practice pursued by members of the Rāmañña
Nikāya was a close reﬂection of the practices that were emerging within
Burma is not entirely clear. This was a quarter of a century before Ledi
Sayadaw, associated with the popularization of Vipassanā, would retreat
from Mandalay to begin his own meditation practice. However, a description
of the meditation practice of one of the later generations of monks,
Harumalgoḍa Sīlālaṃkāra, who lived in the early to mid-twentieth century,
indicates a meditation similar in emphasis to that of Burmese Vipassanā. He
is described by his biographer as practicing meditation on the eighteen dhātu,
one of the Abhidhamma categories that form the basis of meditations
designed to bring about insight, vipassanā.12 It is found in the Paññā
“Insight” section of the Visuddhimagga as well as in Burmese Vipassanā,
discussed in chapter 2.
Early Rāmañña Nikāya monks were clearly keen to experiment, honing
their Vinaya practices to regain what they felt to be the lost spirit of early
Buddhism. If they also sought out diﬀerent meditation teachers then borān
kammaṭṭhāna was still available from two immediate sources. One was the
Sri Lankan borān kammaṭṭhāna tradition that had been imported with the
establishment of the Siyam Nikāya in 1756, and which would still be
practiced to some extent for a few more decades. Another potential source of
knowledge on borān practice was directly from Siam. By this point in Sri
Lanka the Siyam Nikāya hierarchy had been weakened by the loss of royal
backing after the British had removed the last king of Kandy in 1815 and
then reneged on their promise of support to the Buddhist establishment. It
was therefore to authorities in Siam (Thailand) that the Siyam Nikāya monks
in Sri Lanka turned as an authority at times of dispute.13 However, it was the
increasingly powerful future king Mongkut, then still a monk, who was the
primary contact. He was sought out as a source of both royal and Vinaya
authority.
The new reformists in the proto-Rāmañña Nikāya, then still part of the
Amarapura Nikāya, felt that they shared an agenda with the relatively new

--- PAGE 175 ---
Thammayut Nikāya, the branch of Buddhism recently created by Prince
Mongkut, and their Vinaya experts also exchanged letters with him. At one
point it even seemed that the Thammayut might be established in Sri
Lanka.14 One of the monks from the 1844 delegation concerning astrological
calculations stayed with Mongkut until the latter’s disrobing to become king
in 1851. He had reordained in the Thammayut and on his return to Sri Lanka
was invited to participate in performing the ordination ceremony at a new
sīmā. This event is generally accepted as marking the start of the Rāmañña
Nikāya of Sri Lanka as a lineage separate from the Amarapura Nikāya.15 The
inﬂuence of Mongkut at this point in Sri Lanka’s history makes it unlikely
that borān kammaṭṭhāna was introduced as part of the uptake of meditation
within the Rāmañña Nikāya. Mongkut had already dismissed its validity.
MID-TWENTIETH-CENTURY MEDITATION REVIVAL IN SRI LANKA
The early monks of the Rāmañña Nikāya in Sri Lanka shared Mongkut’s
interest in the original teachings of Buddhism and also had access to the
Vipassanā tradition emerging in Sagaing in Burma. In Sri Lanka the
Rāmañña lineage continues as a minority tradition, retaining to this day its
reputation for strict Vinaya observance. Its current forest lineage, while heir
to activities of the nineteenth century, is however the product of a crisis in
the 1950s, at which point a new forest meditation center was established and
an advertisement published for suitable recruits to become its resident
monks. The forest lineage was the mission of the monk Kaḍavädduvē
Jinavaṃsa (1907–2003), who from the late 1940s waged a war of words
against what he saw as the inadequate state of the Sri Lankan Sangha at the
time.16 His new center was founded on the basis of the clearly advertised
premise that enlightenment is possible in this life. In setting it up, Jinavaṃsa
enlisted the help of Mātara Ñāṇārāma, a monk who had withdrawn to
develop his own meditation practice after failing to reinvoke the forest
tradition at a previous mission. Jinavaṃsa’s fraught relationship with the
Sangha authorities of the time and the lack of a strong, existing meditation
lineage on which he and Ñāṇārāma felt they could rely is reﬂected in their
turn to a new origin narrative for their center rather than to a living
meditation tradition:
On the advice of a hunter, they discovered a few miles from
Tissamahārāma, the site of an ancient temple…This temple, to the
immense satisfaction of all concerned, was associated with an
ancient saint, Dhammadinna, a noted meditation teacher and

--- PAGE 176 ---
miracle worker.17
Tissamahārāma is a sacred site associated with the conversion of the island to
Buddhism by the monk Mahinda, the son of the Indian emperor Ashoka, in
the third century B.C.E. It is believed to have been visited by the Buddha
himself, who meditated there in the company of ﬁve hundred enlightened
disciples. The new meditation center was thereby authorized with direct
reference to a site of incomparable importance in Sri Lankan history and to
an ancient, long-dead meditation master, as well as indirect reference to the
Buddha himself practicing meditation on the island.
By the time this new forest meditation center was studied by
anthropologist Michael Carrithers in the 1970s, Mātara Ñāṇārāma had had
many years of developing his own meditation practice on the basis of his
textual explorations and experimentation. He had also tried out the Burmese
Vipassanā that was imported in the 1950s. Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga
was important in his studies, but he was critical of gaps in it. In creating his
system on a mainly textual basis, Ñāṇārāma was clear that there was no
living tradition, even though theoretically he was in a teaching lineage from
one of the earlier meditation monks. He believed that Buddhism had ossiﬁed
and that forest meditation practitioners had, by virtue of their choosing to
live remotely, become not only hard to access but scarce, too, with the result
that their knowledge had been lost:
He quotes from a letter written by the great scholar-monk Polvattē
Buddhadatta: “We receive no help from history of written sources
to show that a meditation tradition came [to us] unbroken.” The
chief reason for this break in the tradition was nearly four centuries
of internal dissension and external colonisation that preceded the
founding of the Siyam Nikāya in 1753. Meditation ﬂourished
brieﬂy under monks from Thailand then, but their methods, like the
older ones, were written down in books which were then forgotten
by the village monks. His ﬁrst task, therefore, was to marshal those
written methods available to him.18
The assessment by Mātara Ñāṇārāma and, following him, Michael Carrithers
of the works from the 1756 Siyam Nikāya’s borān kammaṭṭhāna lineage is
intriguing. We explored their response in chapter 1 but return to it here in
order to understand why these works were not inﬂuential in the revival of the
twentieth century. In response to a work entitled the Amṛtākara Varṇanāva

--- PAGE 177 ---
(Sinhala; the equivalent of the Pali Amatākaravaṇṇanā), they claim it was
descended from Thai monks of the eighteenth century, and…
preserved in Kandy by the Bambaragala line of monks…It gave a
fairly circumstantial account of meditation, and went into some
detail about mindfulness of breathing. Ñāṇārāma found this very
useful, if not conclusive. And indeed one may say generally of
these texts that they can be quite eﬀectively compared and
corrected by referring to the canon and commentaries.19
Ñāṇārāma assesses The Yogāvacara’s Manual, published by Rhys Davids in
1896 on the basis of the copy of the Bambaragala manuscript given to him by
Anagarika Dharmapala and translated as The Manual of a Mystic, diﬀerently:
“It is not a method of meditation.” Carrithers expands on this:
This method [also] arrived from Thailand in the eighteenth century,
and its author(s) succumbed to the fascination of the meditative
absorptions (jhāna), which are so extensively treated with the
kasiṇa meditations. I suspect that here we have an example of an
imaginative but not very insightful attempt to revive meditation
from the texts, for the texts seem to have been treated as
repositories of magical lore.
Carrithers here seems to have picked up on the extensive use of nimitta
discussed earlier, but not on its links with Abhidhamma categories of reality.
He adds a note about similarities he observes between this text and a work
published in Thailand:
There is a Thai book on meditation which does much the same for
the analytic categories so important to the Visuddhimagga. This is
what happens when the sense of such categories is lost. See
Sammā-Samādhi, presented by T. Magness (Bangkok n.d.).20
These statements are signiﬁcant for a number of reasons. The dismissive
comments that The Yogāvacara’s Manual is about “magical lore,” the
product of imagination without insight, and the suggestion that a similar Thai
text has lost the sense of the true analytical meaning of the categories of the
Visuddhimagga are surprisingly reminiscent of the kind of comments seen in

--- PAGE 178 ---
mid-to-late nineteenth-century European writings on Buddhism. Another
curiosity is that The Yogāvacara’s Manual is, like the Amatākaravaṇṇanā,
from the Bambaragala tradition. They are in fact closely related. It is hard to
see how the one is accepted as “conclusive” but the other an “imaginative but
not insightful attempt.” Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla published both texts together
in 1963. Although they published the Amatākaravaṇṇanā under a diﬀerent
name, Vimuttimagga-uddāna, I have established the identity through
comparison with manuscript versions. They make the same comparative
assessment of the two texts as Ñāṇārāma. The material, presumably the
somatic aspects and use of nimitta, obviously confounded them, but it
remains unclear what aspects Ñāṇārāma found conclusive and useful.
Finally, the similarity observed by Carrithers between The Yogāvacara’s
Manual and the Thai text translated by T. Magness in 1961 is not
coincidental: they, too, are related, as we shall see below.
For the forest monks of the Rāmañña Nikāya in the 1970s, we can see that
although Ñāṇārāma claimed to have taken some inspiration from one of the
borān kammaṭṭhāna texts brought to Sri Lanka two centuries earlier, his
studies were based on texts rather than part of a living master-pupil lineage.
He believed that no genuine living tradition of meditation had survived.
Initially, when Vipassanā was introduced from Burma in the mid-twentieth
century as a practice for both monks and for laypeople as part of their
everyday lives, it was through the Burmese lineages. The ﬁrst head of the
highly successful Kanduboda retreat center was a Sri Lankan member of the
Amarapura Nikāya.21 Since the 1950s, meditation in Sri Lanka has been
dominated by Burmese Vipassanā and other practices revived on the basis of
canonical and commentarial textual sources.
THE COLD WAR PERIOD IN CAMBODIA AND LAOS
While revivals of meditation inspired by texts such as the Visuddhimagga
and by the introduction of Burmese Vipassanā began to thrive in Sri Lanka in
the decades after independence, a diﬀerent situation was unfolding in
mainland Southeast Asia. As we have seen, in 1974 the Sangha authorities in
Laos published a text that conﬁrms that borān kammaṭṭhāna was still seen as
a valid form of meditation there, while in Cambodia, those at the highest
levels of the Sangha were the modernizers who had suppressed borān
practice, leading to it become primarily a rural practice of the periphery.
This was how things stood at the brink of the civil war that would usher in
the Pol Pot, Khmer Rouge, or Democratic Kampuchea period. Although
many of the leaders of Cambodian communism had Buddhist backgrounds

--- PAGE 179 ---
and had been former monks, and Buddhism had been used to recruit people
in rural areas to the communist cause, after the communist victory Buddhism
and traditional religion were dismantled. Villagers were threatened with
execution if they fed monks. Monks were put on meager rations and had to
be economically self-supporting. Leading monks, especially any that oﬀered
any criticism or resistance, were executed. Chuon Nath had died in 1969 at
the age of eighty-six. Huot Tath, the last survivor of the three modernizers of
the 1920s, now supreme patriarch, was executed in 1975 for issuing a call for
a cease-ﬁre during a radio broadcast. Estimated to number 65,000 before the
Pol Pot period, by the time of the traditional three months’ rains retreat that
same year those monks who had not managed to ﬂee the country had
disrobed, died, or been killed, and most monasteries had been closed. The
mass relocations of people had also disrupted other traditional religious
practices such as the worship of guardian spirits and ancestors, dislocated as
people were from the place of the spirits and ancestors connected to them.22
It is estimated that over 90% of Cambodia’s literary heritage was also
destroyed. Practitioners, practice, and the material basis of the practice were
gone.
For some Cambodians on the traditionalist side of the borān (traditional)–
samay (modernist) factions that had emerged in the modern period under
Thai and French inﬂuence, the catastrophic war, starvation, and killing of the
period conﬁrmed the importance of preserving the traditional Dhamma that
they had witnessed being dismantled. One such person was Achar Moun Oun
from Kampong Cham Province. Fearing the predicted demise of the sāsana,
he risked his life and that of his family to preserve what evidence he could of
the tradition. I met him in 2012, when he performed one of the embryology-
based rebirthing rituals at night near a temple I was visiting not far from his
village.23 Though in his eighties and rapidly losing his hearing, he was still in
demand for performing such borān-related rituals and cycled to diﬀerent
locations to perform them. He and his family explained how, amid all the
warfare, he had managed to preserve an extensive collection of
manuscripts.24
Achar Oun recollected,
I received these manuscripts from my teachers. I had many more
manuscripts but I shared and distributed to the pagodas [that had
lost their manuscripts during the war]. During the war in Pol Pot’s
time, I decided to collect as many manuscripts as possible from
everywhere and I wrapped and tied them together.

--- PAGE 180 ---
Achar Oun then related the events of the war to the prediction of the
eventual, inevitable decline of the Buddhist teaching, quoted at the head of
this chapter, the same prediction that had inspired the Burmese revival of
meditation in the form of Vipassanā nearly a century earlier. His daughter,
then forty-three years old, was sitting nearby as her father related this
account. She interrupted to emphasize her father’s concern to protect the
manuscripts:
My father did not care about anything during war, but he cared
about his manuscripts, he wanted to keep them safe. When this
area was caught up in the conﬂict [after 1979, the ongoing ﬁghting
between Khmer Rouge and Vietnamese forces in the area], and
ﬁghting was all around, he decided to collect the manuscripts from
diﬀerent places and he hid them in the oxcart in case the house was
burnt down. Everyone else gathered together what food they could,
because they were afraid of not having anything to eat, but not my
father. He cared more about the manuscripts than even his own
children, and decided to keep them safe. After the war was over,
some people realized he had kept many manuscripts so that they
came here and asked to borrow them but didn’t return what they
borrowed.
Achar Oun continued,
I kept these manuscripts. I have had several teachers and I always
dedicate my respect to them. I always dedicate my respect to my
parents as well. As a result, it seems that I have power, and
wherever I go people respect and love me. Many people always
come to me and ask me to guide them in performing ceremonies;
they want me to serve as Achar [lay oﬃciant] for the ceremony.
For example, people as far away as Phnom Penh and Pursat
province invite me to lead the ceremony. I can say many people
respect me in this life, but I believe that I will be even better in the
next life.
Achar Oun also explained that in the past teachers kept kammaṭṭhāna secret
and warned him that he should not teach those who ask him, but that he
teaches whoever asks in the hope of passing on these endangered traditional
practices to future generations.25

--- PAGE 181 ---
INITIAL BORĀN REVIVAL FOLLOWING THE RESTORATION OF BUDDHISM IN
CAMBODIA
In the immediate aftermath of the Pol Pot period, it looked as if borān
kammaṭṭhāna might have died out in Cambodia, but soon there were signs of
its resurrection. Following the Vietnamese taking control of Phnom Penh at
the end of the 1970s, monastic ordination was once more permitted, but it
was soon restricted to those over ﬁfty-ﬁve years old: soldiers were needed by
both the Vietnamese and the Khmer Rouge, who still controlled areas such as
Kampong Cham. As the age restriction took eﬀect, younger men who had
received ordination disrobed, with the exception of a particularly determined
few.26
In Kampong Cham and neighboring regions borān kammaṭṭhāna was
revived almost immediately after the height of the Pol Pot period. At Wat
Pras Meas, “Temple of the Golden Deer,” in Kampong Cham, the Khmer
Rouge territory where Achar Oun had protected his manuscripts, a monk
returned to the robes in 1979 and immediately resumed the practice. From
conversations, it seem this was a pattern found elsewhere in rural areas, the
practice being undertaken for a period of just over a week after the rice
harvest and for three months during the annual rains retreat each year.27 By
the time I visited in 2012 the practice had discontinued at Wat Pras Meas,
and also at other temples: people could recall an initial but abortive revival.
At a temple called Wat Damrei Sar, “Temple of the White Elephant,” in
neighboring Kandal Province, northeast from Phnom Penh on the road to
Vietnam, the revival has lasted longer. A former monk called Phong Vorn
also took the opportunity to become a monk once more in 1979. He was in
his late ﬁfties at that time, so the age restriction did not aﬀect him, and he
became the abbot until his death at the age of eighty-two in 2002. Ven.
Phong Vorn had been a student of Ven. So Kheav, the previous head monk
of Wat Damrei Sar, who had been killed by the Khmer Rouge. His teacher in
turn was Achar Keo, a layman, as indicated by the title Achar, literally,
“teacher,” often used to refer to laymen who perform ritual and other
services at temples in Cambodia. After reordaining, Ven. Phong Vorn began
to teach the practice once more at the temple.
Also in 1979, just after his reordination, Phong Vorn took in forty-ﬁve-
year-old mother Oun Sophy and her twenty-two-year-old son. They had
traveled from neighboring Kampong Cham Province, one of the heartlands
of borān kammaṭṭhāna. Her husband and her nine other children including
her newborn baby had been killed by the Khmer Rouge. She had nothing left,
nowhere to go. The abbot ordained the son, who would stay a monk for two

--- PAGE 182 ---
or three rainy seasons.28 Oun Sophy would stay for forty years, until her own
death, outliving both Ven. Phong Vorn and her son. Initiated by Ven. Phong
Vorn into the borān meditation system, she became a highly experienced
meditator, saying it gave her inner peace and security after so much loss.
Soon she was joined by lay practitioners, usually those in their ﬁfties and
above, who began to enter the temple temporarily each year to undertake the
practice during the three months Buddhist rains retreat, as had been the
tradition in Cambodia. Both she and the temporary practitioners occupied a
set of traditional huts built in a corner of the monastic compound for this
purpose.
Oun Sophy declined to teach the imperiled practice, because to have done
so would have contravened Cambodian bpap srei, the code of conduct for
women: women should not be teachers.29 The teaching lineage passed to the
new deputy abbot, Ven. Neang Sam Ol, then in his late thirties. Now in his
early ﬁfties, he began to learn the tradition shortly before the death of Phong
Vorn, initially out of curiosity: “What are these things that people see when
they meditate?” he had wondered. To commence teaching so soon was,
Neang Sam Ol himself suggested, a departure from the more lengthy, staged
initiation process of the past. Now he is hoping to preserve the tradition: “I
want to prevent the knowledge handed down by past ancestors from being
lost.”30
Neang Sam Ol was supported in his role by Achar Te Tong Yi (Achar Yi)
(d. 2018), who, like Ven. Kheav, had studied with Achar Keo. Achar Yi, in
his early eighties when I ﬁrst met him in 2012, worked hard to support the
revived teaching of borān kammaṭṭhāna at a number of temples in Phnom
Penh and surrounding Kandal Province. According to Achar Yi, it took
longer for people to resume meditation in Phnom Penh. Most people were
too preoccupied with the practicalities of survival and rebuilding. Also, the
city did not celebrate the rites of the agricultural cycle that traditionally
prompt communal kammaṭṭhāna. It was nearly a decade later, in the late
1980s, that people in the Phnom Penh area also began to return to the
tradition.31
Achar Keo, the teacher of both Achar Yi and So Kheav, had also taught
Ven. Ros So, the previous head monk of Wat Russei Chrouy in Kandal
Province at which Achar Yi was still teaching when I ﬁrst interviewed him in
2012. Another of Achar Yi’s pupils is Ven. Noun Soth, the monk who
undertook the teaching of borān kammaṭṭhāna at Wat Champukaek in
Phnom Penh. Another well-endowed and wealthy temple that retains these
practices is Wat Preak Brang, also in Kandal Province. The abbot there,

--- PAGE 183 ---
Samdech Oudam Ponha Doung Phang, is a well-known meditation teacher,
and renowned for his blessings. Both temples are attended by senior
members of the government and military.32
The nature of the resumed practice seems to be at the physically more
gentle end of the spectrum. While the rebirth rituals that I witnessed
performed by Achar Oun were resumed, I have not heard accounts of
anything like the physically demanding initiation rituals described by Ven.
Vanarot Ken Vong (1924–1994) as taking place in the 1950s and recorded by
Olivier de Bernon.33 Thus there seems to have been a shift within borān
kammaṭṭhāna toward focus on just the sitting form of meditation, in other
words to become closer to the more globally accepted conception of what
meditation should entail. Nonetheless, with increasing numbers ﬁnding time
to take up the practice or seek out practitioners to perform the related rituals
for them, it looked by the 1990s as if at least some elements of the practice
lineages that the Khmer Rouge had done so much to annihilate were poised
to ﬂourish once more.34
Borān kammaṭṭhāna had a number of factors in its favor, which seem to
promote this revival: in contrast to Vipassanā, which at the time was still
regarded by some as a foreign intrusion, it was seen by Cambodians as being
fundamentally Khmer in character.35 It also had a reputation for providing
healing, longevity, and protection.36 Furthermore, it was embedded in the
traditional ritual calendar: the rainy season, the rice harvest, and funerals; the
crucial role played at Cambodian funerals by monks and the lay temple
oﬃciators (achar) who are trained in kammaṭṭhāna is still a motivation for
undergoing training.37 While they have diﬀerent roles at funerals, both
monks and laymen can act as teachers in the borān meditation tradition.
FURTHER DECLINE IN CAMBODIA
Despite these positive signs, by the 2010s the initial ﬂames of enthusiasm
had died down to a ﬂicker, and few are those with the commitment required
to master the method and ensure its continued transmission to future
generations. When I ﬁrst tried to track down living lineages, attendance at the
training that a few temples put on annually for short periods, typically during
the monastic rainy season in October/November and after the rice harvest in
January/February, was fairly strong, and many people, particularly from the
older generations, continue to request the rituals that practitioners are
empowered to conduct. By 2015, I was unable to ﬁnd any temple hosting the
practice after the rice harvest.38 The teaching lineages and the ability to deal
with the texts are at risk. In other words, there are insuﬃcient experienced

--- PAGE 184 ---
practitioners and few able to understand the texts and manuscript manuals
handed down from teachers of previous generations. Even some of the
temples most associated with the practices, both historically and more
recently, struggle to sustain the tradition. In other temples it has disappeared
entirely as elderly achar have died with no one qualiﬁed to take their place.
In spite of the eﬀorts and aspirations of elderly teachers such as Achar
Oun and the late Achar Yi, and the work of the vice-abbot Neang Sam Ol at
Wat Damrei Sar, hopes of reviving the borān tradition at present seem
unrealistic. It is not clear that there is a sustainable teaching lineage even at
the wealthy and powerful temples, Wat Champukaek and Wat Preak Brang.
After two centuries of suppression and marginalization, borān kammaṭṭhāna
had survived into the second half of the twentieth century mainly in those
areas that were then those most aﬀected by communist revolution. In Laos
there has been no comeback, although recently attempts have been made to
secure other aspects of traditional Lao Buddhism. It also seems to me that the
method of practice used, while valuing nimitta, does not sustain the
movements in the body described in the manuals that have come down to us
from the eighteenth century.
When examining the reasons for the lack of a widespread revival several
factors become apparent. Borān meditation was divorced from other
branches of learning and occupations, such as medicine, in the 1920
ordinance. That aﬀected how it was perceived but also meant that those who
made their living by applying what they learned in meditation to medical
treatments could no longer do so. This undermined its attractiveness for
young men seeking a career in medicine. Its close relationship with medicine
is conﬁrmed by it surviving longest where modern (Western-derived)
biomedicine remained absent the longest. Wat Preah Thomlanga, not far
from Achar Oun’s home, is among the cluster of temples in Kampong Cham
that used to be well known for borān rituals and meditation, some of which
initially hosted a revival. It no longer hosts borān kammaṭṭhāna or its related
rituals, but it did so in living memory. The abbot and the group of wat achar
who manage the temple conﬁrmed that the disappearance of borān
kammaṭṭhāna coincided with the advent of modern medicine. In spite of
being only a few hours’ drive from Phnom Penh, this area still feels
relatively remote—although this is changing with the completion of the new,
high-speed road between Phnom Penh and Vietnam—and was one of the last
regions to receive Western medicine. Meditation teachers of non-borān
methods in rural Battambang, an area more under Thai inﬂuence and a
relatively early recipient of Western medicine, conﬁrmed that there too
borān kammaṭṭhāna’s disappearance coincided with the acceptance of

--- PAGE 185 ---
Western medicine during the pre-revolutionary period of reform.39 The initial
post–Pol Pot revival in some areas may have been because it was a resource
for medicine and healing, and there was a dearth of medical expertise. Those
with Western-style education, including medics, had been among those ﬁrst
targeted for elimination by the Khmer Rouge.
However, there are additional reasons for the demise of borān
kammaṭṭhāna in Cambodia today. Even for those seeking out meditation, it
is not to borān kammaṭṭhāna that they turn. Two particularly successful
Buddhist teachers since the restoration of Buddhism in 1989 have been Ven.
Sam Buntheoun (1957–2003) and Buth Savong (b. 1960);40 both have been
critical of borān kammaṭṭhāna and related practices.
THE RISE OF VIPASSANĀ IN CAMBODIA
Sam Buntheoun was a key ﬁgure in the popularization of Vipassanā after the
restoration, presumably—since he remained in Cambodia during the Khmer
Rouge period—drawing on forms that had reached Cambodia in the 1950s.
Although other traditions, especially Goenka, have begun to open centers in
Cambodia, Sam Buntheoun’s meditation center at Udong has continued to
grow in popularity and success even since his assassination in 2003.
Numerous groups of monks, lay adults, and school children have gone on
courses there or at the many regional branch centers set up by those who
have trained there. When the topic of meditation arises in Cambodia more
generally, it is invariably to Vipassanā within this tradition that people now
allude. Vipassanā has now eclipsed borān kammaṭṭhāna to such an extent
that the younger generation of monks in Kandal Province is largely unaware
of the existence of borān kammaṭṭhāna.41
Sam Buntheoun was conscious of the diﬀerence. Indicative of his
modernist stance was his criticism of water blessing. Water sprinkling using
empowered water is the usual way for monks in Cambodia, Laos, and
Thailand to give blessings and protection to laypeople, parallel to the more
ubiquitous use of paritta string in Sri Lanka. To be critical of it is a standard
modernist stance in that water blessing suggests that good fortune can be
gained in this way, rather than through one’s own karmic eﬀorts. However,
according to borān practitioners, Sam Buntheoun was also directly critical of
borān kammaṭṭhāna itself and had asked Saṅgharāja Thep Vong to put a halt
to it, a request that the latter declined.42
Another inﬂuential Buddhist teacher of recent decades is Buth Savong.
Buth Savong had taken ordination as a monk when Buddhism was restored at
the end of the Democratic Kampuchea period but in 1984 succumbed, like

--- PAGE 186 ---
Oun Sophy’s son, to the pressure for young men to disrobe. He nevertheless
continued be a religious teacher after his disrobing. He follows monastic
precepts, dressing in white with his head shaved. His centers, radio
preaching, and YouTube videos are very popular. Originally from
Battambang, his criticism of the borān monks led to a split at the temple
where he was based, with the borān monks leaving to establish a separate
temple. Because of Buth Savong’s popularity, people accepted his criticisms
and made it hard for the borān monks to receive support. One informant
reported,
At the time when Achar Buth Savong gave Buddhist sermons
between 1991 and 1993, borān kammaṭṭhāna gradually
disappeared. Actually, the intention of his sermons was not to
provoke people to give up borān kammaṭṭhāna or thudong [ascetic
practice, associated with meditation while living in the forest].
Rather, he meant that to do kammaṭṭhāna, people do not need to
stay only in the forest; they can do it anywhere. But laypeople
misunderstood his teaching: his followers came to look down on
people doing kammaṭṭhāna in the forest or thudong; and some
people said that Achar Buth Savong was promoting Thai Dhamma
in Cambodia.43
We can see in this speaker’s account of Buth Savong’s eﬀect on borān
kammaṭṭhāna a desire to minimize the suggestion that Buth Savong was
actually hostile. When I was conducting interviews in 2012, there was a
move to be more conciliatory when talking about the relationship between
Vipassanā and borān kammaṭṭhāna, though now the further decline of borān
kammaṭṭhāna seems to have made this redundant. This move reﬂected the
lead taken by the current supreme patriarch Thep Vong, who declined to side
with one or the other. Borān practices are still sought out as a source of
blessing and power including by members of the government and military,
but with the declining practice, particularly among young people, the
diﬃculty will be ﬁnding the next generation of teachers.
Even if open animosity is a thing of the past, the religious teachings and
practice of Sam Buntheoun and Buth Savong are part of the cause of the
further decline of borān kammaṭṭhāna. Although both men are Cambodian
and both were in Cambodia during the Pol Pot period and so cannot be
dismissed as foreign impositions, they both oﬀer an approach to Buddhist
practice that seems to provide a welcome fresh start unconnected with

--- PAGE 187 ---
Cambodia’s recent past. Moreover, Sam Buntheoun taught a form of
meditation that can be practiced in everyday life without the need to retreat
from the world (although many do attend retreats). The practices are taught
in large classes that are well-organized. One does not need to enter a formal
relationship with an individual teacher. There is no need to enter into lengthy
and, for the average Cambodian, relatively costly initiation stages that also
take one away from income-generating work. Even borān practitioners
themselves were appreciative of these qualities and the speed with which one
can experience beneﬁts in the newer meditation systems. Some former borān
practitioners have switched to the new methods in recent decades, just as
people did before the Pol Pot period.
MEDITATION AND MONASTIC RIVALRY IN THAILAND IN THE COLD WAR
PERIOD
In the preceding chapter we saw that the modernizing and reform of Thailand
had been particularly signiﬁcant for the marginalization of borān
kammaṭṭhāna earlier in the twentieth century because of its impact through
the Theravada world. This had already pushed borān practice from the center
in Cambodia, though it remained the recognized practice of the Sangha
hierarchy and government in Laos. Despite this pattern, interest in borān
kammaṭṭhāna had revived to some extent in Thailand in the early decades of
the twentieth century. The disruption to the Thammayut control of the
Sangha following the coup of 1932 seems to have contributed to publications
of borān texts and collaborations with borān practitioners that followed. As
we saw in the previous chapter, the senior Thammayut meditation monk Jan
Sirijantho (Ubāli) was instrumental in the most signiﬁcant of these
publications, through his collecting of manuscripts, his students, and the
networks he had forged between the northeast of the country and Bangkok.
In Bangkok, he had discussed borān practices with representatives of at least
two living traditions, the lineage at Wat Ratchasittharam and that of
Candasaro Sot (1884–1959), the abbot of Wat Paknam. Both lineages
continue to this day. What then of developments in Thailand in the post-war
period? Did a more relaxed or interested approach to non-reform meditation
methods allow for a revival, and did those practices remain true to the
complex Abhidhamma structure of their precursors in the Ayutthaya period?
Again, global and monastic politics shaped the unfolding situation in
Thailand. How these factors played out can be seen in the case of
Phimonlatham, the most prominent monk in Thailand in the 1950s. In this
period, Burmese Vipassanā was beginning to spread throughout the region

--- PAGE 188 ---
among both monks and laypeople, following its popularization, the new
phenomenon of urban meditation centers, and the upbeat expectations of the
Buddha Jayanti, the celebration of 2,500 years since the death of the Buddha,
marking the halfway point in the lifespan of the sāsana, the Buddhist
religion.
Phimonlatham (also known as At Asapho) was the third-most powerful
monk in the national Thai Sangha, and the second-most powerful monk in
the Mahanikay sect. Successful at home and abroad, he developed good
relationships with inﬂuential Buddhist monks in several Southeast and South
Asian countries.44 In 1952 he sent his assistant, Chodok Yannasittho, to
study meditation with Mahasi Sayadaw in Rangoon (now Yangon). After
Chodok returned, Phimonlatham established the National Oﬃce of
Vipassanākammaṭṭhāna (Insight Meditation) at Wat Mahathat in Bangkok,
the temple that had since the eighteenth century been the national
administrative center of the Mahanikay. Phimonlatham appointed Chodok as
the head of the new National Oﬃce, and over the following decade Chodok’s
teaching of Mahasi Sayadaw’s “rising and falling” meditation technique
attracted many followers.45
In many of his public talks in the 1950s, Chodok criticized two meditation
techniques still popular in Thailand at the time. One was the ānāpānasati,
mindfulness of breathing meditation, as taught in the Thammayut forest
lineage of Man Bhūridatto largely on the authority of Pali canonical texts.
The other was the vijjā dhammakāya. This is the term that Candasaro Sot, the
abbot of Wat Paknam, gave to his practice of borān kammaṭṭhāna. The main
criticism made by Chodok relied on the new dichotomy between samatha
and vipassanā created in Burma, which usurped their formerly
complementary status. Many of the modern Burmese Vipassanā lineages
promoted vipassanā without samatha support. Chodok, on this basis, claimed
that the ānāpānasati and vijjā dhammakāya techniques could only help
practitioners attain samatha (the calming and jhāna outcomes) while
Chodok’s “rising and falling” technique could lead to liberating insight,
vipassanā.46 The comment appears to be a misreading of both traditions, and
in the case of vijjā dhammakāya possibly reﬂects a modernist projection of
meditation as mind-science, which therefore assumes that somatic, body-
based practices relate to samatha. Chodok’s position indicates how
thoroughly a reformist, modernist agenda had permeated the highest ranks of
the Mahanikay. The diﬀerence was that he was now taking authority from
Vipassanā, with his criticism of both the post-reform forest tradition and the
older, pre-reform borān style of meditation practice.

--- PAGE 189 ---
When Phimonlatham himself became an object of adverse political
attention, it again aﬀected practitioners within the lineages criticized by
Chodok. This happened in the 1960s, when Phimonlatham was defrocked
and put in jail on charges of being a communist sympathizer, which had been
criminalized in the 1930s. As Phibul Choompolpaisal has shown, the
accusations were primarily due to ecclesiastical rivalry and a power struggle
among the higher echelons of the Sangha hierarchy. In Thailand at that time,
just as it had been in the United States of America a decade earlier, the
accusation of communist sympathy was an easy way to attack an enemy. One
of the after-eﬀects of Phimonlatham’s downfall was the oﬃcial promotion of
monks who had not been close to Phimonlatham, such as the Mahanikay
monk Kittivuddho (Kittiwuttho). Kittivuddho famously made his anti-
communist sympathies extremely clear.47 Phimonlatham’s imprisonment
meant that his followers and activities at Wat Mahathat, the Mahanikay
headquarters, also fell from grace.48 This turn of events appears to have
meant that the Burmese Vipassanā method introduced by Chodok became
less popular than before, while the Thammayut’s ānāpānasati method and
Sot’s vijjā dhammakāya method became more widely accepted, although Sot
himself had died in 1959.
We see similar rivalry aﬀecting meditation in response to Sot’s
internationalization of his vijjā dhammakāya method in the context of
increasing levels of Western convert Buddhism in the 1950s. Andrew Skilton
has documented how events in Bangkok led to the alternating popularities of
these same three traditions—Vipassanā, Thai forest ānāpānasati, and Sot’s
vijjā dhammakāya (a form of borān kammaṭṭhāna)—in the United Kingdom
in the early years of the English Sangha Trust (EST). Inspired by the
missionary monk Ṭhitavedo, sent to London by Sot, the ﬁrst British monks of
the EST had been ordained by Sot at Wat Paknam in the 1950s including
Kapilavaḍḍho, ordained in 1954. He was taught vijjā dhammakāya directly
by Sot, and also observed the high number of experienced meditation nuns
(mae chi) at Wat Paknam.49 He returned to Thailand with three further men
who wanted to receive ordination in 1956. However, after their ordination,
Kapilavaḍḍho fell out with Sot and left Wat Paknam for the Thammayut
temple Wat Thathong. Soon after that, Kapilavaḍḍho returned to the United
Kingdom, and although he initially continued teaching the vijjā dhammakāya
method, he later switched to teaching Burmese Vipassanā, promoted at the
EST during the 1960s by the then-incumbent Ananda Bodhi, who had
studied in Burma under Mahasi Sayadaw as well as in Thailand at Wat
Mahathat under Phra Rajasiddhimuni. The EST then switched again, perhaps
in part as a result of Vipassanā’s decrease in popularity after the fall of

--- PAGE 190 ---
Phimonlatham. This time it took up the transmission of the Thammayut
northern Thai forest tradition, which by now also had followers in the
Mahanikay, such as Ajan Chah (1918–1992). The EST follows Ajan Chah’s
method to this day, with the Thai forest tradition being widespread among
Western converts, especially ordained monastics, globally.50 As in the case
of the fate of borān kammaṭṭhāna in Sri Lanka, the interplay of personal,
monastic, national, and international politics shaped the choices of
meditation method taken up in a region, even if the meditators themselves
have had little interest in such matters.
Thailand’s position on the Cold War frontline in the international politics
of this time would have a more serious and lasting eﬀect on the densely
forested regions of the northeast. These were the last remaining territories
available to forest monks in northeastern Thailand, the area from which Jan
had collected borān kammaṭṭhāna manuscripts, and the heartland of the
wandering forest monks. The area’s poverty, isolation, and proximity to
China, Laos, and Cambodia meant that it was targeted for communist
insurgency by the military. To counter this it was also provided with
American development aid. As a consequence, the indigenous forest habitat
that supported the forest monks rapidly altered; the military targeting and
economic development of the 1950s–1970s culminated in the closure of the
forests in the 1980s with the forcible relocation of three to ﬁve million forest-
dwellers.51 Given that borān kammaṭṭhāna was still promoted by the senior
monks in neighboring Laos in the mid-1970s, it seems likely that up until this
time, although Thammayut forest monks had dominated interactions with
Bangkok, a wider variety of practice had continued.
THE GLOBAL SPREAD OF SOT’S METHOD
Sot’s approach to meditation inspired other followers and gave an
international ﬂavor to meditation lineages that see him as their founder.
Another foreigner who began to study meditation at Wat Paknam around the
same time as Kapilavaḍḍho was Terence Barnett Magness (1929–2012),
initially as a layman over the course of a dozen years in the 1950s and ’60s.
Magness was born into an English Catholic family in Penang in what was
then British Malaya and managed to survive the Japanese invasion, although
other members of his family did not. Despite the British withdrawal, he
stayed in Southeast Asia, living and working in Thailand. In 1970 he became
a monk at Wat Doi Suthep in Chiang Mai where he lived for most of the rest
of his life. For a few years shortly after his ordination he left Wat Doi Suthep
to resume his study of Sot’s vijjā dhammakāya under the nun Ajan

--- PAGE 191 ---
Kayawadee, one of the late Sot’s most experienced students. In response to
the perceived need to provide English-language materials for foreigners,
Magness translated a number of Sot’s teachings as well as a biography of
him.52 It was one of these works that anthropologist Michael Carrithers
criticized in the early 1980s, little realizing that Magness and the Sri Lankan
texts shared their descent from the meditation practices of Ayutthaya at the
height of its power. Many followers of Sot have been unaware of the
relationship 
between 
Sot’s 
vijjā 
dhammakāya 
and 
earlier 
borān
kammaṭṭhāna methods because of the importance of the account of Sot’s
own direct realization of the truth in the year 1916, which provides an origin
narrative and conﬁrms for practitioners the validity of his method.53
Some lineages of Candasaro Sot’s spread directly from Wat Paknam into
the wider world.54 However, it was not until more than three decades after
Sot’s death, in the early 1990s, that one of these temples, Wat Phra
Dhammakaya in Pathumthani outside of Bangkok, set up its international
missionizing project.55 This project has spread Sot’s modiﬁed form of borān
kammaṭṭhāna globally. Interestingly, one of the reasons for its success is that
it has taken Sot’s mission to make meditation accessible to another level,
harnessing modern technology and pioneering the provision of online
instructions, even creating cartoons to teach it to children. In simplifying the
technique and making it available to a broader public, Sot and Dhammakaya
have echoed the further expansion of modern Vipassanā in Burma four
decades earlier.56
The method taught at Wat Paknam and temples derived from it is again
criticized as unorthodox. This is partly for the reasons we have already
identiﬁed: the changes in expectations in what meditation should be, which
stem from the colonial period and the reformist responses to it; the lack of
awareness of its relationship with the methods promoted by the Sangha
hierarchy and royal court of Ayutthaya; the failure to recognize how the
methods promoted by Ayutthaya reﬂect a detailed working out of the
Abhidhamma path of liberation. However, politics and rivalry also contribute
to this criticism. Since the end of the twentieth century, the wealth and
success of the network of temples headed by Wat Phra Dhammakaya have
made it an object of suspicion, a potentially powerful player in the red shirt–
yellow shirt factions of Thai politics, and a possible source of revenue.
Dhammakaya’s 
meditation—its 
long 
history 
and 
Abhidhamma
underpinnings unfamiliar to most—is seen as emblematic of the movement,
part of its identity. We must therefore see criticism of it as unorthodox within
this broader context.

--- PAGE 192 ---
CONCLUSION
This chapter has traced the fortunes of borān kammaṭṭhāna from the late
nineteenth century to the present day. We observed how caste politics,
changing relations with lay supporters, and rupture both in and with
Thailand, meant that borān meditation was not a feature of the new
ordination lineages in Sri Lanka, which, when they were interested in
meditation at all, drew on Burmese Vipassanā and texts such as the
Visuddhimagga.
We had learned in previous chapters of the eﬀect on Cambodia of reforms
and modernization inspired by Thailand and France in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, pushing borān kammaṭṭhāna to the margins away
from direct government and Sangha hierarchy control. The only place where
it remained at the center was in Laos. The last bastions of borān
kammaṭṭhāna were then precisely those places where Buddhism and local
traditions were devasted during the Cold War period, by the Marxist
revolutions of Laos and Cambodia, and the anti-communist forest closures
and forced migrations in northeast Thailand.
Global and monastic politics in Thailand for a while conspired to promote
Vipassanā in Burma, which has also dominated the revival of meditation in
post–Pol Pot Cambodia. This changed, and some borān kammaṭṭhāna
lineages have survived there to this day, though the most popular form is
widely criticized as unorthodox, partly because of monastic rivalry and
politics within Thailand, partly because the history of these practices has
been forgotten.
Those borān kammaṭṭhāna lineages that have survived seem to have
adapted to the modern period, so that they are less somatic, less detailed, and
not recognizable as the detailed working out of the Abhidhamma path to
becoming an arhat. The closest living tradition to the pre-modern lineages
appears to be that taught at Wat Ratchasittharam, which continues to use the
movements of the nimitta around the body. However, even here we ﬁnd a
change. The practices using these movements are regarded as samatha
practices only, a preparation for vipassanā. Skilton and Choompolpaisal
comment, “Future comparative study may be able to shed light on whether or
not this is a concession to the reformist prioritizing of the meditation
structure outlined in Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga.”57 We know from the
Sri Lankan manuals that the incorporation of meditation attainments into the
fabric of the practitioner’s body was practiced at all stages of the path. How
else could it enact the complete the transformation of the individual through
the step-by-step progression of citta, cetasika, and rūpa provided by

--- PAGE 193 ---
Abhidhamma?

--- PAGE 194 ---
CONCLUSION
This book has revealed the extensive existence of a form of meditation
system that dominated the Theravada Buddhist world at the dawn of the
modern period. We have examined its characteristics and followed its
trajectory as, over the course of the past century and a half, it has disappeared
to the verge of extinction.
In the late nineteenth century, when evidence for this tradition ﬁrst came
to the attention of Western scholars, meditation was misunderstood through
the lens of Theosophy or even despised. We ﬁnd it described as “a
cloudland” or an invented system of “multiplied ridiculous distinctions,…
which, in lieu of expanding the mind, tends to contract it almost to idiocy.”1
While the esoteric nature of these practices hindered a proper understanding,
these dismissive attitudes reﬂected a colonial worldview: the expectations of
Buddhism as a this-life philosophy and negative attitudes to Buddhists as
backward, colonial subjects awaiting the Progress of imperial governance
and civilization.
Within ﬁfty years, this form of esoteric Theravada meditation had been
displaced by text-based revivals of meditation from within the Thai reform
wing of the monastic community and the spread of Burmese Vipassanā, so
much so that writers in Thailand then labeled it as the “old method,” borān
kammaṭṭhāna. Tied as it was to funerary rites and the religious and harvest
calendar, it continued to thrive in Laos and—despite attempts at its
suppression—in rural Cambodia, until the 1970s. At that point the massive
upheavals of the Cold War period destroyed the ﬁnal remnants there and in
Thailand’s far northeast. Initial attempts at revival in Cambodia after the
restoration of Buddhism have proved abortive—only a few temples retain the
practice.
Back in the eighteenth century, borān kammaṭṭhāna was introduced to Sri
Lanka from Thailand as part of the revival of Buddhism there, accepted as
the valid means to enlightenment. The manuscripts left behind by the monks
who learned the practice reveal that it entails an in-depth working out of the
Abhidhamma path to liberation. Abhidhamma provides the most thorough
presentation of Theravada Buddhist doctrine, explaining causality, and how

--- PAGE 195 ---
to harness causality to bring about personal transformation. By the ﬁfth
century C.E., Abhidhamma analysis of the early Buddhist doctrine of
impermanence had led to a theory of relative momentariness, whereby all the
constituents of reality, dhammas, are constantly replaced, giving the
appearance of continuity and the actuality of incessant change. These
constituents of reality are categorized into four kinds: materiality, rūpa;
states of consciousness, citta; aspects of consciousness, cetasika; and
nibbana. As individuals, we are constituted of materiality, states of
consciousness, and aspects of consciousness that mutually condition each
other, constantly disappearing at diﬀerent speeds, only to be replaced by
other dhammas. Borān kammaṭṭhāna seeks to harness this process of
constant substitution by directing it, generating higher states of
consciousness to replace lower states in a detailed progression from ordinary
mortal to enlightened being, to the attainment of nibbana.
All Theravada meditation systems, beyond the elementary practices of the
initial stages, relate to Abhidhamma. So what is diﬀerent about this system?
The key points of contrast are that borān kammaṭṭhāna as a meditation
system describes the process of transformation in detail and relates that
transformation to changes in consciousness, mentality and materiality, or, in
Western terms, mind and body. The body is the locus of change. Other
Theravada meditation systems familiar today emphasize the transformation
of mind, leaving the transformation of the body implicit or ignored. In the
latter, the body is object, not subject.
The treatment of meditation as purely a mind-science arose during the
European colonial period, a reaction to the Western dominance in areas of
physicality. It corresponded to the Cartesian divide between psyche and
physis, and the related rift between religion and science, then prevalent in the
West. This adaptation of meditation in the modern period allowed for its
revival and eventual widespread adoption, even by the West, once feared as
the cause of Buddhism’s demise.
Amid the changing worldviews, power structures, and politics of the
modern period, the fear that colonialism was ushering in the long-prophesied
apocalyptic demise of Buddhism led to attempts to protect it. The shape of
these revivalist movements varied from place to place. One reaction was the
idea that genuine meditation is mind-science and that in psychology lies the
superiority of Buddhism and Buddhists. This approach circumvented the
colonial dominance of the physical realm. The resulting types of meditation
practice, labeled Vipassanā because of their focus on cognitive insight,
gained widespread popularity, ousting other forms. Theravada monastic and

--- PAGE 196 ---
doctrinal expertise relating to material culture was sidelined.
While the Burmese revival emphasized the importance of Abhidhamma,
text-based revival elsewhere, in emphasizing a return to the early canonical
texts, regarded Abhidhamma as a developed form of scholasticism. Such
textual fundamentalism shaped the reform of Buddhism in those regions
where the evidence for borān kammaṭṭhāna is substantial: Cambodia, Laos,
Sri Lanka, and Thailand. While the colonial powers of France and Britain set
the rapidly changing scene, Thailand was the fastest to modernize and the
only country to retain an autonomous royal family and successfully resist
colonization. The Thai royal family was at the forefront in shaping this
fundamentalist reaction and highly inﬂuential in changes throughout the
region.
In this context, borān kammaṭṭhāna’s highly complex somatic practices
were misunderstood. It was rejected by both internal reformers and external
observers as a corruption or fundamental misunderstanding of Buddhism.
Vipassanā and text-based meditation ﬁlled the voids created by these changes
and by the subsequent ramiﬁcations of the Cold War. The longest living
tradition of Theravada meditation, which can be traced back at least as far as
the late ﬁfteenth century, and may even reach back to the early commentarial
period, was displaced by practices that, though newly developed, were
authorized with reference to the Pali canon of early Buddhism.
But is it a corruption? Or is borān kammaṭṭhāna the only Theravada
system of meditation that seeks to complete the process of transformation
laid out in Abhidhamma, based on serious consideration of the
transformation attained by the Buddha? Borān kammaṭṭhāna not only
accepts the genuine nature of the Buddha’s enlightenment, but provides an
extremely detailed, technical method for practitioners to reach it in their
current embodiment in this lifetime. We have shown how it employs the
progressive substitution of our corrupt states by consecutive skillful,
resultant, and functional mental states found in the Abhidhamma, which
provides an analysis of consciousness as composite and explains the complex
relationship between consciousness and form. We have also shown that
borān kammaṭṭhāna displays features not recorded in Abhidhamma treatises
to bring about transformation.
Since Buddhist practice is centrally concerned with transformation, it was
inevitable that close attention would be paid to other methods used to bring
about change within its broader cultural milieu. Where appropriate and
possible, it is natural that such methods be integrated with soteriological
purposes. It is likely that some or most of this was as much a matter of

--- PAGE 197 ---
shared development and cultural assimilation as conscious adaptation. On
close inspection, we can see that borān kammaṭṭhāna applies a range of
theories and technologies of transformation to provide a delivery method for
its transformative practices, a delivery method that allows the supramundane
(lokuttara) to be realized in the present life by an individual within the
mundane (lokiya) world.
The technologies of transformation on which it drew—or with which it
shares techniques—include generative grammar, letter alchemy, ayurvedic
pharmacy and obstetrics, and the chemistry of mercury puriﬁcation. In this
book we have examined these technologies to see how their methods
correlate with those in found in pre-modern Theravada meditation. These
technologies also share with Abhidhamma and borān kammaṭṭhāna a
sophisticated principle of substitution and the use of group theory
mathematics to predict change and maximize the eﬀectiveness of substitution
in their diﬀerent domains. Examining these sciences explains many of the
features of borān kammaṭṭhāna unrecognized in the modern world.
The lack of recognition of these features in meditation reﬂects the
changing position of the sciences from which they are drawn. These sciences
with their common principles of transformation were ousted, indeed
outgunned, during the colonial period by a competing set of technologies
introduced from Europe. European science was a competing knowledge
system: a new and powerful means of understanding the world, exploiting
causality, and predicting outcomes. Although in many ways European
“science” was demonstrably inferior in a number of areas and still learning
from Asian sciences, the political rhetoric was otherwise. This rhetoric had
the backing of the more advanced military technology of the West, as well as
ways in which Western players took advantage of local rivalries. The
technologies developed in the period on the basis of European empirical
science began to seem, and in some cases to be, more reliable or eﬀective
than those based on traditional knowledge systems. Even where they were
not more eﬀective, they were sometimes implemented at the expense of
traditional technologies for political, economic, or other reasons.
The marginalization and disappearance of these technologies of
transformation, with which borān kammaṭṭhāna resonated, inevitably left
this older system of meditation isolated and vulnerable in the new world
order. While the Buddhist truth of “the way things really are,” yathā-bhūta-
ñāṇa-dassana, is unchanging, we have seen in this book how competing
worldviews and technologies altered the systems that Theravada Buddhists
employed for realizing it.

--- PAGE 198 ---
While some meditation lineages derived from pre-modern esoteric
Theravada have survived into the modern period, their adaptation and
simpliﬁcation make the historical process and experience of esoteric
Theravada diﬃcult to comprehend. The use of nimitta and other outcomes of
meditative experience to incorporate attainments into the body more
naturally aligns with contemporary understanding of samatha practices used
to improve the receptiveness of the mind. Situated as we are in a post-
Cartesian world, it may be unimaginable to inhabit the pre-Cartesian
consciousness of the practitioners who used these methods for the full
sequence of the path, including the deep insight and profound puriﬁcation
that culminate in enlightenment and freedom from samsara. Cognitive
science has allowed us to reevaluate the transformative eﬀectiveness within a
single lifetime even of simpliﬁed meditation practice, identifying
mechanisms and evidence unimagined back when such practices were ﬁrst
devised.2 It will take advanced practitioners able to inhabit both worlds, or
new understandings of consciousness to pervade modern culture, for us to
fully appreciate what this sophisticated system of transformation had and has
to oﬀer.

--- PAGE 199 ---
NOTES
 
INTRODUCTION
1.
Crosby 2013.
2.
Crosby, Skilton, and Kyaw 2019.
CHAPTER 1. THE COLONIAL GAZE
1.
Copleston (1892) 1908: 60. For his discussion of aspects of meditation
such as the jhāna and kasiṇa, see Copleston (1892) 1908: 130–131.
2.
Copleston (1892) 1908: 88–89.
3.
Copleston (1892) 1908: 130.
4.
Complicating the picture are two things. First, meditation manuscripts
indicate the presence of Burmese meditation before the revival. Second,
samatha meditation that has implications for the physical body is also
understood to be practiced by another form of esoteric Theravada, not
addressed in this work, namely weikza. Weikza lineages of practice
emerged within Theravada Buddhism in Burma in the late nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, away from the urban centers of power and
colonial political and medical inﬂuence (Rozenberg, Brac de la
Perrière, and Turner 2014). Weikza is associated with longevity
practices. Little represented in scholarship until recently, yet pervading
Burmese Buddhist culture once one’s eyes have been opened to its
presence, its meditation practices may in any case be hard to recover or
examine because of the restrictive normalizing lens of Vipassanā
methods imposed by Burmese Sangha authorities (Kyaw 2019; Ashin
and Crosby 2017).

--- PAGE 200 ---
5.
At least one living lineage continued in Copleston’s time, sadly
unrecognized by outsiders interested in the subject until after it had
died. See Kemper 2019 and Harris 2019 for the struggles of internal
and external observers respectively to comprehend meditation, or to
make contact with living traditions.
6.
Alabaster 1871.
7.
Alabaster 1871: xxiii.
8.
Alabaster 1871: xxviii–xxix, cited with this ellipsis in Skilton 2019: 62.
See Skilton for an extensive analysis of Alabaster’s portrayal of
Buddhist meditation and how it was informed by both colonial
orientalism and Thai reformist attitudes of the period.
9.
Draper 1874: vi.
10.
Barker 1886: 375.
11.
Draper 1874: 11. For a modern example, see Dixon 2008: 1 and 16. On
nineteenth-century attitudes to Buddhism see Almond 1988, and on the
teaching of Galileo to school children, ibid., 91.
12.
For a more nuanced discussion of the development of the
representation of Theravada Buddhism by missionaries and other
colonial-period outside observers see Elizabeth Harris (2006). She
documents how even individual authors’ attitudes changed toward
Buddhism and locals during this period, becoming more antagonistic.
On the acultural understanding of “Progress,” i.e., that modernity is a
natural outcome toward which all cultures progress, rather than
variable, reversible (in the form of regression), and culturally speciﬁc,
see Taylor 1995. For a discussion focusing on the impact of the
acultural notion of “Progress” on colonial attitudes to war, technology,
and religion in the Theravada region, see Crosby 2017.
13.
Perreira 2012. On the problematic nature of this identiﬁcation, see also
Crosby 2014: Introduction and passim.

--- PAGE 201 ---
14.
Almond 1988: 90. The cofounders of Theosophy, Madame Blavatsky
and General Olcott, would reinterpret the rebirth theory in the light of
evolutionary theory to dismiss the notion of humans being reborn as
animals, further down the evolutionary chain. This revisionary attitude
was symptomatic of how conﬁdently Westerners laid claim to
ownership of “true Buddhism.” For an example of the uptake of this
attitude to rebirth in Theravada see Ashin and Crosby 2016.
15.
Draper 1874: 138.
16.
See Crosby 2017 on the growth and application of Social Darwinism in
this period.
17.
Countess of Jersey 1884–1885 and J.M.M. 1865. Both cited in Almond
1988: 39.
18.
Bornaetxea, Fernando, and Morón 2014.
19.
On the largely forgotten earlier inﬂuence, see Hickey 2019.
20.
Kyaw 2014: 113–121.
21.
Min 
2018. 
The 
book 
was 
his 
translation 
of 
the
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha, which was published as Compendium of
Philosophy by the Pali Text Society in 1910 and is still in print.
22.
Aung 1918: 102.
23.
Aung 1918: 103. Shwe Zan Aung is referring on the Buddhist side to
meditation, as can be seen from his observation, “The Western method
begins with a subject, while the Buddhist method begins with the
operator himself.”
24.
Aung 1918: 103.
25.
For an extensive explanation of these responses, see Turner 2014.
26.

--- PAGE 202 ---
Braun 2013: 31–33.
27.
Yasothararat 1936: 2.
28.
Skilton 2019. In a survey article, I also referred to these marginalized
practices as “tantric Theravāda” and “yogāvacara” (Crosby 2000a).
The term yoga, literally “union,” means practice or discipline and can
refer to a range of technologies including medicine and meditation. The
term yogāvacara, “practitioner of yoga,” means a meditator in Pali. I
used it because of the title of the ﬁrst published manual of the tradition
by Rhys Davids (1896) and because of the frequent reference to the
yogāvacara in it and related Sri Lankan texts. Additionally, François
Bizot has also used the terms non-Mahāvihāra, Mahanikay (Pali
Mahānikāya), non-reform, and traditional/indigenous Southeast Asian
Buddhism (e.g., Bizot 1989: 16), to refer to the range of practices
related to borān kammaṭṭhāna that he observed in Cambodia and in
Southeast Asian texts. He has used them in contrast to terms such as
Mahāvihārin, Dhammayutika Nikāya, Sinhalese orthodoxy, and
reformed Buddhism to denote normative contemporary Theravada.
These terms make sense from a Cambodian context, but not in relation
to Sri Lanka: much of our evidence for borān kammaṭṭhāna there
comes from within the eighteenth-century Siam Nikāya reform
tradition that was heir to the Mahāvihāra monastic and literary lineage
that had dominated Theravāda since the twelfth century. During
ﬁeldwork in Cambodia in the early 2000s, some informants made a
distinction between borān methods as kammaṭṭhāna and the newly
popular Burmese-derived Vipassanā, although only the relatively few
familiar with borān kammaṭṭhāna were able to make this distinction.
Since the restoration of Buddhism in Cambodia from the 1990s onward
the terms borān and samay have been extended to have rather general
meanings of more traditional/Cambodian (borān) and modern/imported
(samay), although the deﬁnition of “modern” should not be taken too
literally—borān practitioners do not eschew modernity or modern
technology (Marston 2008).
29.
Skilton and Choompolpaisal 2014.
30.
Kemper 2019.
31.

--- PAGE 203 ---
Hickey 2019: 24–27, 68.
32.
Cited in Somadasa 1987–1995, 1:241. Nevill made the comment in
reference to the manuscript now catalogued in the British Library as
Or.6601(6), which is related in content to a number of other
manuscripts collected by him (see chapter 3). Nevill made no claims to
understand the subject of meditation: the opinion expressed here is
preceded by, “the subject is so little understood by me, I make these
remarks with diﬃdence as to their utility.” It is not clear to me what
Nevill intended when using the Pali term paramattha “ultimate reality/
truth” in this context. It could be a reference to the Abhidhamma,
regarded as expressing a paramattha perspective, and thus indicate that
he recognized the Abhidhamma vocabulary that pervades these texts.
33.
C. A. F. Rhys Davids 1916: vi–vii, citing the authority of Don Martino
de Zilva Wickremasinghe of the British Museum.
34.
C. A. F. Rhys Davids 1920.
35.
T. W. Rhys Davids 1896: V.
36.
Hickey 2019: 85–87.
37.
Carrithers 1983: 232.
38.
Carrithers 1983: 232.
39.
Bowers 1996: 33–45. Mackenzie 2007: 16, 105–109.
40.
See works by Bizot, Lagirarde, and Bernon in the bibliography. See
Crosby 2000a for a bibliographic essay on Bizot’s writings.
CHAPTER 2. ABHIDHAMMA AND PRACTICE
1.
Randall 1990: 28. The phrase sammā arahaṃ in Pali means “perfectly
worthy one,” a description of the Buddha contained in the itipiso
formula that lists the Buddha’s qualities and is the basis of meditation
on them. The ﬁve-syllable formulae may also be given an esoteric

--- PAGE 204 ---
meaning representing important groups of ﬁve. Some borān lineages,
such as the one at Wat Damrei Sar in Cambodia, think it wrong to use
the phrase sammā arahaṃ, preferring instead the phrase arahaṃ,
while the initial phrase used at Wat Ratchasittharam is bu-ddho
“Buddha.”
2.
This analysis of the subdivision providing a gradual path is taken from
Andrew Skilton 2016.
3.
Kong 2015: 47. Kong provides an extensive discussion of beliefs
concerning the diﬀerences between subtle and gross food, cosmology,
and fetal nutrition.
4.
Some of these elements will be discussed in greater detail in this book,
but here I am primarily concerned with meditation, so for a survey of
the broader ritual aspects, see Crosby 2000a and works by Bizot and
Bernon.
5.
Buddhanorakan 1.3, quoted in Urkasame 2013: 29–30.
6.
Urkasame 2013: 345–368.
7.
This is the title provided by Ñāṇamoli Bhikkhu 1956 (reprint 1991),
whose translation I shall be using. Page references are to the 1991
reprint.
8.
The khandha are rūpa, form; vedanā, feeling; saññā, apperception;
saṅkhārā, volitional responses; and viññāṇa, consciousness.
9.
Anālayo 2012: 32–35; 42–43.
10.
Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta is Majjhima Nikāya No. 10 and Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna
Sutta is Dīgha Nikāya No. 22. For a translation of the former and
partial translation of the commentary, see Soma Thera 1949, revised
online edition 2013.
11.
Anālayo 2012: 29.
12.

--- PAGE 205 ---
Bodhi et al. 1993: 9.25.
13.
For a more nuanced discussion of samatha and vipassanā in modern
Myanmar, see Kyaw’s study of the Theinngu and Sunlun traditions
which challenge this simple classiﬁcation (Kyaw 2019). On the origins
and popularity of Vipassanā see Braun 2013 and Jordt 2007.
14.
Karunadasa 2010: 79–81.
15.
Vism IV 27–31, Ñāṇamoli (1956) 1991: 119–121.
16.
See Crosby 2019 for a more in-depth discussion of the importance of
the diﬀerent types of samādhi, including how absorption samādhi
relates to interrupting continuity in samsara.
17.
Amatākaravaṇṇanā (unpublished manuscript) chapter 1, verses 65–66.
Translations are my own and unpublished unless otherwise stated.
18.
Ñāṇamoli (1956) 1991: 145; 277–279.
19.
For an understanding of nimitta in terms of cognitive processes such as
responses to sensory deprivation, see Lindahl et al. 2014.
20.
I do not know what kind of stone or gem kālaguṇa is.
21.
Amatākaravaṇṇanā chapter 10, verse 6.
22.
Bodhi et al. 1993: 56.
23.
Greene forthcoming: chapter 2, citing the translation of the
Visuddhimagga by Ñāṇamoli 1991: 276–277.
24.
See Crosby 2019 for more details of the place and role of nimitta in this
tradition.
25.
Patrick Ong reports that it was explained to him that this initial stage
generates energy “possible because of the location of the body’s
elements (the four elements of earth, wind, ﬁre, water) around the

--- PAGE 206 ---
navel, which comprise the basic constitutions of the human body.” Ong
2011: 171.
26.
Choompolpaisal 2019: 176–177.
27.
Skilton and Choompolpaisal 2014: 93.
28.
Choompolpaisal 2019.
29.
The right-male, left-female instruction is not given in the
Amatākaravaṇṇanā, which was transmitted in an entirely male
monastic context, but is known from other texts and from living
practice.
30.
For a survey of these other manuals, see Crosby 2019.
31.
The presentation of causality there is on the basis of the twenty-four
conditions, paccaya, that the Buddha understood through his
omniscience; Kyaw 2014: 89–90.
32.
The mention of the places of articulation is an interesting feature that I
have yet to fully understand, in part because I have come across no
discursive explanation of it and no use of it in a living practice. While it
may in general relate to the overall understanding of the potency of the
Pali language, I suspect its interest is because of speech as a medium
between consciousness and physicality according to Abhidhamma: the
intention to speak leads to articulation using the six places associated
with sound formation in the mouth, nose, and throat; the sound then
produced, which is physical, an aspect of rūpa, then causes
understanding in the recipient.
33.
Choompolpaisal 2019.
34.
Bernon 2002: 150–151.
35.
Choompolpaisal 2019: 156.
36.
Urkasame 2013: 246–256.

--- PAGE 207 ---
37.
Choompolpaisal 2019: 158–160.
38.
Crosby 2014: 35–39.
39.
Urkasame 2013: 318–320. Urkasame provides a more detailed
exploration of the signiﬁcance, variation, and understanding of these
rays. One use is that the rays are the basis for prognostication, as the
color of the rays of light seen by those who are about to die is
indicative of their future state of rebirth, a theme important in borān
culture and the application of meditation. Since the Buddha here is
examining the complex workings and ramiﬁcations of causality, it
makes sense that he would experience all these lights, while ordinary
mortals will only experience what is directly relevant to their own
destiny.
40.
Extracted from the translation of the Atthasālinī by Pe Maung Tin
1920: 17–18.
CHAPTER 3. DOCUMENTING THE ESOTERIC
1.
British Library manuscript Or6600(90).
2.
Crosby, Skilton, and Gunasena 2012.
3.
See also Bizot 1976: 117.
4.
For the text, see Hallisey 1993. For the illustrations, see Terwiel 2019.
5.
Bizot 1989. See Crosby 2000a: 153–156 for a summary.
6.
Bizot 1973 and 1989.
7.
Hansen 2007: 81.
8.
On the Amatākaravaṇṇanā’s length and abbreviation techniques, see
Crosby 2007.

--- PAGE 208 ---
9.
Coedès 1956; Urkasame 2013: 245–246 and Urkasame’s Figure 24.
10.
See Urkasame 2013 for further inscriptions that postdate the
Phitsanulok inscription.
11.
Skilling 2018: 181–182. See also Urkasame 2013.
12.
On its extensive medical uses in Ayurveda and modern evidence-based
assessment see Rastogi, Kulshrestha, and Rawat 2006. I would like to
thank David Wharton for explaining the diﬀerence between these two
plants and their use in papermaking.
13.
Becchetti 1994. See Crosby 2000a: 166–167 for a summary.
14.
Bizot 1976: 43–44.
15.
For more on this mission, see Crosby, Skilton, and Gunasena 2012. For
more on the manuscripts resulting from the mission, see Crosby 2019.
On the revival more broadly and on Saraṇaṃkara, see Blackburn 2001.
16.
Bechert 1989.
17.
FEMC, http://khmermanuscripts.efeo.fr, accessed April 21, 2020.
18.
Interviews, December 2012.
19.
Digital Library of Lao Manuscripts, www.laomanuscripts.net/en/index.
20.
An example in the Staatsbibliothek in Berlin is Ms.or.fol. 3276, part 6,
Wenk 1975: 74–75.
21.
Bernon 2000. For the extensive writings by Bizot, see the bibliography.
22.
On the development of the term and title Mūlakammaṭṭhāna, see
Skilton 2019.
23.
The travels during which the Russian scholar Minayeﬀ collected

--- PAGE 209 ---
manuscripts are recorded in his memoir translated into English in the
1950s (Minayeﬀ n.d.).
24.
For a brief survey see Crosby 2019, or individual entries in Somadasa
1987–1995. The story of the development of Nevill’s collection, with
the inclusion of a high number of relatively rare texts, and its
acquisition by the British Library exempliﬁes the forces that shaped
such acquisitions at the time. Hugh Nevill (1847–1897) worked in the
Ceylon Civil Service. He rose to the position of district judge and
police magistrate by the time of his premature retirement. These were
not considered high achievements, and he seems to have been far more
interested in research and the advancement of knowledge than in his
career in the civil service. In spite of his interest and detailed
knowledge of Sri Lanka, he retained an assumption that superior
knowledge was to be found in Europe, and it was there that he sent his
identiﬁcations and collections, which were primarily zoological. He
also worked on comparative linguistics and the anthropology of ethnic
and caste groups in Sri Lanka. In collecting and providing detailed
descriptions of all his manuscripts, Nevill was helped by a Sri Lankan
called Wijeratne. With his help he developed considerable expertise
and was in a position to seek out rare manuscripts. His collection in the
British Library consists of 2,227 manuscripts, including at least 11
manuscripts containing 17 borān kammaṭṭhāna texts. For a survey, see
Crosby 2019. One of these texts is the subject of Crosby, Skilton, and
Gunasena 2012; two are discussed in Crosby 1999a, chapter 6 of which
provides an edition and translation of one of the works, a litany for the
devotional practices that precede meditation. The manuscripts ended up
in Europe after Nevill was forced to retire with injuries incurred
fulﬁlling his oﬃcial duties during a cholera epidemic. Whenever
smallpox and cholera broke out in Sri Lanka, the general population
preferred treatment with local herbs and indigenous medicine. They
distrusted government medicine and sanatoriums, and so resisted the
government’s attempts to enforce the reporting of cases. Reporting
became a legal requirement in 1897, the British administration in Sri
Lanka acting to protect exports to Europe from the harm it feared the
plague epidemic in India might inﬂict on the reputation of the island’s
produce. Cholera and smallpox had been brought into Sri Lanka
repeatedly by plantation workers migrating from India. Migration
escalated in the 1890s as the more labor-intensive tea began to replace
the failed coﬀee crops. The enforcement of a quarantine period on new

--- PAGE 210 ---
arrivals had previously been considered too costly (5 days for cholera
and 18 days for smallpox). It was also easy to circumvent. The number
of migrant workers who became ill and were discarded en route to the
main plantation areas in the south was so high that it led to
depopulation in the north as locals then contracted the diseases also
(Meegama 1986: 13–14). The importance of quarantine and water
sanitation was well understood by the British by this time, but through
a combination of racism—whereby plantation workers were seen as
having a quite diﬀerent physical make-up and as being uninterested in
hygiene—and short-term economic gain, British plantation owners
failed to provide sanitation for their workers (Meegama 1986: 19). In
1891, in response to a cholera outbreak in his district, Nevill and his
fellow oﬃcers sought to impose a range of measures. It is unclear
exactly what they were, but presumably they included quarantine. The
general resistance from the locals (which Nevill attributed to ignorance)
escalated into a riot in which Nevill was stoned. He never fully
recovered, and six years later he retired to Europe with his collection.
As the climate in France was regarded as more beneﬁcial to his health,
he retired there rather than England, but he died later the same year. At
the time Don Martino de Zilva Wickremasinghe was working at the
British Library, cataloguing its Sri Lankan printed books (de Zilva
Wickremasinghe 1901). He arranged for the purchase of Nevill’s
collection by the library and its transportation to London.
25.
Strong 2010.
26.
This account is based on personal communication from Phibul
Choompolpaisal of conversations he had since October 2011 with Dr.
Prachark Wattananusit, former senior librarian of National Library of
Thailand and current vice president of the Thai Library Association,
and other library staﬀ, as well as on conferences and discussions held
by the Manuscript Conservation Association of Thailand established in
2015. See also Matt Reeder’s summary of the collection (2016).
27.
For a discussion of these manuscripts and illustration, see Terwiel
2019, to whom I am indebted for this explanation.
28.
Printing in East Asia developed through a combination of available
materials and technologies with Daoist and Buddhist religious beliefs.

--- PAGE 211 ---
For Buddhists, maintaining the presence of Buddha relics and the
Buddha’s teaching was important to stem the decline of Buddhism and
the attendant apocalyptic consequences of such decline (Barrett 2008a).
Its precursors, beyond the use of stamps for reproducing designs on
coins and religious sealings, were the use by Daoists of talismanic
forms of Chinese characters to cast “spells” that controlled the spirit
world, and the stamping of skin, known also to Indian Buddhists
(Barrett 2008b: 50). The wood technology to develop printing on paper
was in place in China from the end of the ﬁfth century (Barrett 2008b:
51). However, it was the belief that the words of the Buddha
represented the Buddha himself, i.e., were his “essence” (dhātu)—
usually translated into English as “relic”—that was reported to Empress
Wu of China by the monk Yiching (635–713) and led to mass printing
on paper (Barrett 2008b: 86–89). The mid-third-century-B.C.E. Emperor
Ashoka is regarded in Buddhist literature as the archetypal Buddhist
ruler, a “universal emperor” with unsurpassed dominion and a
cosmological right to rule. He is also famed for redistributing the
Buddha’s funerary relics (dhātu) and re-enshrining them in 84,000
stūpas (funerary mounds). Empress Wu had adopted Ashoka’s title of
“universal emperor.” Concerned to undertake religious works to ensure
her well-being after death as she approached old age, and keen to
reassure her subjects of her right to rule and her ability to maintain the
presence of Buddha relics like Ashoka, she had 100,000 copies of a text
called the Great Spell of Unsullied Pure Light printed and distributed.
Between 764 and 770 a Japanese empress followed this model by
distributing one million small stūpas containing printed copies of
potent passages excerpted from the same text (Barrett 2008b: 94).
While the print culture established by Empress Wu in China was
disrupted by the restoration of the Tang dynasty, commercial printing
for the meritorious reproduction of Buddhist texts in order to maintain
the Buddha’s Dhamma and relics in the world had developed by the
end of the ninth century, leading to the invention of movable type by
the twelfth century (Barrett 2008b: 130–131).
29.
Merit-making is the performance of positive actions that store up
“merit,” an intangible form of beneﬁt or good fortune, which then leads
to a better experience and fortune in this life or the next. One may make
merit for oneself or on behalf of others, especially the recently
deceased. Having a book copied, or—in the modern period—printed, is
traditionally done as part of the funeral or death commemoration rites,

--- PAGE 212 ---
although this is not the only occasion for the copying of texts.
30.
Barrett suggests that the technology could have arrived through several
routes, including via Tangut slaves brought into Italy from northeastern
Tibet (Barrett 2008a: 36–39).
31.
MacCulloch 2003: 71–76.
32.
Charney 2006: 182; Olson 1992: 280.
33.
Olson 1992: 280–281.
34.
Gombrich and Obeyesekere 1988: 203.
35.
Becchetti 1994: 47.
36.
Despite attempts by U Nu, the ﬁrst prime minister of independent
Burma, to set up state-backed monastic courts in the 1950s, this only
proved successful in the early 1980s under military dictator General Ne
Win (Ashin and Crosby 2017).
37.
During ﬁeldwork in Cambodia in 2012, Long Sarou and I began many
of our interviews with a short slideshow showing evidence of practice
elsewhere, from Sri Lankan manuscripts through to the early twentieth
century and living practice in Cambodia and Thailand. Most of the
information was new to most of our informants. While the response of
Thais within borān and borān-derived traditions was to see authority
for their practices as lying with the origins of Buddhism, in India,
Cambodians tended to see Cambodia as the original source of their
practices and were on the whole inclined to dismiss the validity of the
other branches outside of Cambodia. Preserving aspects of Buddhism
identiﬁed as borān has a history of being defended with reference to
preserving Khmer culture. Curiously, Wat Damrei Sar in Kandal
Province, now one of the few places in Cambodia where these practices
are still taught, sees its particular branch as in part deriving from a
monk who returned from Thailand, and relates this to some Thai
features of their litanies.
38.

--- PAGE 213 ---
Hansen 2007: 105–107. Mongkut had also chosen Vinaya as his ﬁrst
publication (Olson 1992: 281). This emphasis on correct and accessible
Vinaya developed in Cambodia after Khmer monks, pursuing their
studies in Thailand, were inﬂuenced by Mongkut and new ways of
teaching Buddhist texts (Hansen 2007: 101–102).
39.
Hansen 2007: 79.
40.
T. W. Rhys Davids 1896; Woodward 1916.
41.
Leclère 1899. More has been written on this by François Bizot (1976:
224–225).
42.
I understand from Phibul Choompolpaisal that there were journal
publications on the subject in Thailand in the two decades preceding
this, which may modify this picture. This is the subject of
Choompolpaisal’s ongoing research, and I have not yet seen such
materials. Choompolpaisal (2019) provides summaries of the diﬀerent
methods of meditation recorded in the Thai publications from the
1930s.
43.
On some ways in which association with spiritually advanced
meditation monks has been seen as a means to enhance secular status
more recently, see Gabaude 2003a and 2003b.
44.
Choompolpaisal 2019.
45.
Mettanando 1999.
46.
Olivier de Bernon did not have access to this manuscript. The temple
librarian says that the manuscript had been borrowed by a French
scholar and never returned (Skilton, personal communication, May
2019).
47.
Bernon 2002: 150.
48.
Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla 1963. The ﬁrst of the three texts in the volume
is unrelated. It is a translation into Pali of a modern summary of the

--- PAGE 214 ---
Vimuttimagga by Bapat based on its translation from Chinese (Bapat
1972), although in their introduction Ratnapāla and Ratnajoti seem
unaware of its origins. Their story of the interruption in their work at
least explains how the two separate types of material they had in their
papers came to be seen as a part of the same manuscript.
49.
For a biography and bibliography of Terence Magness, see www.triple-
gem.net/phra-terry, accessed May 20, 2019.
50.
Choompolpaisal 2019.
51.
Bizot 1976.
52.
Choompolpaisal 2019.
53.
Sermchai 1991.
54.
http://meditation.dmc.tv/.
55.
Choompolpaisal forthcoming.
56.
Thanaveero 1994.
57.
A handlist of manuscripts in his collection may be downloaded from
the 
Bodleian 
website: 
www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/bodley/ﬁnding-
resources/special/projects/hidden-collections, accessed April 17, 2019.
Academic works assisted by Veera Thanaveero include Bernon 2000,
which also covers a much broader range of material, then Newell 2011,
Ong 2011, and Skilton and Choompolpaisal 2014 and 2015. These last
are a direct engagement with the textual materials under Veera’s
guidance.
58.
Urkasame’s thesis (2013) provides detailed analyses of several borān
kammaṭṭhāna 
texts, 
identifying 
substantial 
concordance 
with
Theravada canonical and commentarial texts as well as further evidence
of the distinctive features of borān meditation discussed in this book.
59.
For a recent attempt to consider variety in Theravada meditation, see

--- PAGE 215 ---
Crosby, Skilton, and Kyaw 2019.
60.
Choompolpaisal 2019.
CHAPTER 4. TECHNOLOGIES OF TRANSFORMATION
1.
attho 
akkharasaññāto. 
sabbavacanānaṃ 
attho 
akkhareh’ 
eva
saññāyate. akkharavipattiyaṃ hi atthassa dunnayatā hoti; tasmā
akkharakosallaṃ bahūpakāraṃ suttantesu. These are the opening
lines of Kaccāyana’s grammar. On these lines of Kaccāyana and the
later divergence between forty-one and forty-three phonemes through
the addition of a short e and o, see Gornall 2012: 139–140 and 2020:
70.
2.
These are specialized technical terms from the Abhidhamma
commentarial tradition. Rūpa, “form,” and nāma, literally “name/
naming,” refer to physical and mental processes other than
consciousness. The saṅkhāra are volitional, so contain skillful and
unskillful mental states, which contrasts with the neutral or functional
kiriya mental states.
3.
I have adapted and translated this passage from the translation of Bizot
and Lagirarde 1996: 224–227.
4.
Becchetti 1991: 71.
5.
European awareness of the relationship between Sanskrit and other
languages and on Sanskrit grammar goes back to Italian observations in
the sixteenth century (Shendge 1996: 311). Indian surgery also
inﬂuenced Italian surgery in the sixteenth century.
6.
Bizot 1988: 60–86; von Hinüber (1987) 1994; Crosby 2000b; Gornall
2012: 168–169.
7.
Gornall 2012: 176; Nagasena 2012: 273–276.
8.
Bode 1909, cited in Ruiz-Falqués 2012, who discusses this
convergence of Abhidhamma and grammatical interest.

--- PAGE 216 ---
9.
Terwiel notes this rift in relation to tattoos. The apotropaic usage of
diagrams is still popular throughout Southeast Asia, particularly among
ordinary people, and contrasts with a rejection of the practice by the
urban elite (Terwiel 1979).
10.
Chomsky repeatedly acknowledged his debt to and the primacy of
Sanskrit generative grammar, reﬂecting its continued place in linguistic
history to this day.
11.
It is tempting to think that Waskaḍuwē Subhūti, in characterizing
Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhala as “cultivated” because they have grammars
—in contrast to uncivilized languages with no grammar—was making
an adverse comparison with the European languages of those scholars
for whom he provided manuscript and Pali-language assistance, such as
Robert Childers (1838–1876), Wilhelm Geiger (1856–1943), and
Viggo Fausbøll (1821–1908) (Subhūti 1876: i).
12.
The related mathematics of trigonometry also developed early in South
Asia. See Shaw 2007: 237–253 on the sophisticated hydrology of
Indian Buddhist sites such as Sanchi in the ﬁrst millennium C.E.,
enabling the single-phase construction of dams to enable rice
production.
13.
As a highly inﬂected language, word position is considerably less
important for meaning in Sanskrit and Pali, thus allowing this ﬂexibility
without loss of semantic content.
14.
Filliozat 2004: 139.
15.
Becchetti 1991.
16.
Filliozat 2004.
17.
See Kyaw 2014: chapter 5.
18.
Von Rospatt 1998: 471.
19.

--- PAGE 217 ---
Von Rospatt 1995: 11, 81.
20.
Nārada 1969 and 1981.
21.
Cousins 1981.
22.
Kyaw 2014: 88 and 274. The commentaries analyze the ways the
dhammas can relate to each other in terms of twenty-four paccaya,
conditional relations or causal factors, that together determine the
trajectory of causality.
23.
Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla did not recognize this triggering process when
editing a version of this text, and so assumed the text was
ungrammatical and needed correcting, meaning that the system no
longer works in their redactions (Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla 1963,
discussed in Crosby 2005).
24.
For discussion of Pali grammarians and variations between them see
Gornall 2012 and 2020, and work by Ruiz-Falqués.
25.
Internally each of these groups is organized according to the manner or
eﬀort (prayatna in Sanskrit) required to say them, i.e., voiceless,
voiced, non-aspirate, aspirate, nasalized.
26.
The ﬁnal phoneme in each set of plosives is produced in two places,
one of the ﬁrst ﬁve places plus the nose. Because of this the nasal
consonants are distributed across the ﬁrst ﬁve sthāna groupings as the
ﬁnal sound. The nasalization thus corresponds with one of the “eﬀorts”
(see previous note).
27.
Pāṇini invents the codeword it to refer to the anubandha in his
Aṣṭadhyāyī, whereas the term anubandha, literally “tagged on,” is used
by later grammarians.
28.
Not all of them can act as ﬁnal consonants in the real Sanskrit
language, but only here when used as codes by Pāṇini. Note that the
simple long vowels ā, ī, and ū are not included in Śiva sutras, but their
use is taught in the grammar.

--- PAGE 218 ---
29.
The ﬁnal rule of the Aṣṭadhyāyī is “a a.” This is in itself releasing a
substitution that had been eﬀective throughout the entire grammar. The
short vowel a, pronounced as the u in the English word “cup,” is
regarded as the short version of the long vowel ā, pronounced like a in
“car.” However, the shape of the mouth for producing these two vowels
is in fact diﬀerent. They diﬀer by more than just duration. Nonetheless,
for the grammar to work, we must accept not only the ﬁction of a
simply being a short version of ā throughout the grammar, but also
their diﬀerence in order to be able to use it in the real language.
30.
Joshi and Roodbergen 1985: 469–472. Joshi and Roodbergen helpfully
summarize their interpretation of alvidhi (which becomes alvidhau
when inﬂected in the seventh case), a procedure applying to phonemes,
as follows: “To sum up, the new interpretation proposed for alvidhi in
P. 1.1.56 assumes that class properties which are not conditioned by a
sound or sequence of sounds of the sthāṇin, that is, by speciﬁcally
phonemic properties of the sthānin, are transferable. But individual
properties of the sthānin, that is, sound properties, like vyañjanatva
‘being a consonant,’ udāttatva ‘having udātta accent,’ hantva ‘being
(the sequence) h-a-n’ are never transferable” (Joshi and Roodbergen
1987: 476). In other words, when substituting phonemes, some aspects
of the substituted items may transfer, just not aspects of sound—the
sound is replaced and does not continue.
31.
Kahrs 1998: 188–189.
32.
Piera Candotti and Pontillo 2013.
33.
Cousins 1981: 23.
34.
Kitchai Urkasame discusses how some of the syllabic identiﬁcations
work by means of a phonetic similarity with the name for the
substituted item, such as the syllable na in na mo bu ddhā ya
representing the element water, the word for which is nam in Thai
(Urkasame 2013: 306), though it is hard to know whether this phonetic
similarity is primary to the association between water and na or
coincidental and retrospective, given that we do not know the local
language at the time and place of boran kammaṭṭhāna’s origins.

--- PAGE 219 ---
It is possible that the principle of substitution is relevant to
understanding the esoteric interpretation within borān kammaṭṭhāna of
the term kammaṭṭhāna itself. It literally means “place or locus of work”
(karmasthāna in Sanskrit), or occupation, coming to have the meaning
of meditation after the Buddha described meditation as the
kammaṭṭhāna, occupation, of the monk just as other occupations are
the work of diﬀerent laypeople. (See Dīghajāṇusutta, Aṅguttara
Nikāya 8.54, cited by Skilton 2019 where this development is
explained.) The esoteric interpretation provided by the borān tradition
is that this “locus of work” is the body (Bernon 2000: 23). The body
then becomes the locus, thāna/sthāna, onto which diﬀerent aspects of
the meditation practices and stages on the path to arhatship
(enlightenment) may be transferred (becoming the sthānin in the
language of the grammatical rule) and substituted in sequence until the
desired outcome is achieved.
35.
Ruiz-Falqués examines the development of this aspect of Buddhist
philosophy of language further in relation to the Saddatthabhedacintā,
a 
grammatical 
philosophical 
work 
composed 
by 
the 
monk
Saddhammasiri in thirteenth–fourteenth-century Pagan, making the link
between 
Abhidhamma 
and 
generative 
grammar 
clear. 
The
Saddatthabhedacintā identiﬁes speech sounds as a type of materiality
(rūpa) born of consciousness, citta-ja, an understanding of the
relationship between mental processes and materiality found in
Abhidhamma. The commentary explains, “What the masters mean is
that word/sound is manifested in articulatory organs such as the throat,
etc. but it is actually originated when a verbal intimation in
consciousness (vacīviññatti) enters into contact with the earth element
[of action]” (Ruiz-Falqués 2012: 9). Ruiz-Falqués also observes that in
this text, “We also ﬁnd the remarkable statement that phonemes are the
highest reality (paramattha) whereas words are only conventional
concepts (paññatti)” (Ruiz-Falqués 2012: 10).
36.
Crosby 2006. This treatment of Buddhaghosa as the primary authority
for Theravada dates back at least to the twelfth-century reform led by
the Mahāvihāra monastery in Sri Lanka, and possibly earlier.
37.
Norman (1976) 1991: 87.
38.

--- PAGE 220 ---
Crosby 1999a: chapter 5. On attitudes to Pali in Theravada from
Buddhaghosa onward, see Crosby 2003.
39.
Bizot and von Hinüber 1994: 39.
40.
White 1984: 49.
41.
The ﬁnal three words are a phrase taken from a popular tale, Jātaka
400, in the context of one ﬁsherman telling another to catch hold of
large ﬁsh ﬁrmly (Fausbøll [1883] 1990: 334). The meaning of the term
cetaso here is unclear to me, unless it is simply to add a further
example. The description of the grū’s activity is from Bizot and von
Hinüber 1994: 44–46.
42.
The English is my translation from the Pali and French.
43.
Bizot and von Hinüber 1994: 49–84.
44.
Ruiz-Falqués 2017: 251. For an edition, see Pind 2013.
45.
My telling based on the Sanskrit text in Lanman 1884: 50. For a new
edition and full translation of the text, see Mallinson 2007: 150–151.
46.
The error is thus a hypercorrection, one mistake made while trying to
avoid making another (Hitchings 2011: 187). This is explained as the
underlying issue by Norman in relation to another version of the story
found in the Chinese version of the Mūlasarvāstivādavinaya. There
Ānanda hears “a monk reciting a Dharmapada verse which ended with
the words, ‘It were better that a man live only for one day, and see a
water-heron.’ Ānanda’s eﬀorts to persuade the monk that the verse
should have ended with the words ‘and see the principle of coming into
existence and passing away’ were unsuccessful. This Chinese version
was following a tradition based up on a Sanskrit form *udaka-baka,
which could only come from a Gāndhārī-type dialect (cf. udaka-vaya,
GDhp 317) which inserted a non-historic -k-, in the place of a glide -y-,
in the compound udaya-vyaya ‘arising and passing away’ ” (Norman
[1997] 2006: 90–91). Bizot considers possible north Indian sources for
aspects of traditional Cambodian Theravada in the light of these
connections (Bizot and Lagirarde 1996: 49).

--- PAGE 221 ---
47.
Ruiz-Falqués 2014.
48.
D’Alwis 1863: xxi–xxii.
49.
Adapted and translated from Bizot and Lagirarde 1996: 223–224.
50.
Crosby 1999a: chapter 6.
CHAPTER 5. TRANSFORMATION OF THE BODY
1.
Bizot 1980: 238–239. My translation into English.
2.
I am using the term Ayurveda to refer to traditional Indian medicine,
rather than in the more technical sense in which it refers to one
particular branch of traditional Indian medicine in contrast to others,
such as Siddha medicine.
3.
Unschuld 1979.
4.
Wujastyk (1998) 2001: 4.
5.
Wujastyk 2000: 485.
6.
Wujastyk 2000: 479.
7.
Weiss 1980: 94.
8.
Wujastyk 2000: 486.
9.
Mulholland 1989.
10.
Chhem 2007: 107.
11.
Naono 2009: 121–122.
12.
These are three robes, an alms bowl, a waistband, a razor, a sewing kit,

--- PAGE 222 ---
and a water strainer, and were not just permitted but required. The list
of permitted items increases as the Vinaya progresses.
13.
Rhys Davids and Oldenberg (1882) 1982: 51–55.
14.
Gunawardana 1984.
15.
On resistance to modernization in colonial Burma see Turner 2014,
and, for a counter-example, see Ashin and Crosby 2016.
16.
Mettanando 1999: 52–54.
17.
See Andrew Skilton and Phibul Choompolpaisal’s translation of the
section of his medical work that deals with illnesses stemming from an
imbalance in the air or wind element (2017).
18.
See Bizot 1981a; Bizot 1980; Urkasame 2013: 322–333; and Becchetti
1994. Crosby 2000a provides a short summary.
19.
Mulholland 1989: 20–38. In obstetrics the term embryo is used in the
ﬁrst eight weeks from conception, and the term fetus thereafter.
However, I have used the terms interchangeably to refer to the unborn
child.
20.
This is not the case for the Buddha-to-be when in the womb.
21.
Weiss 1980: 99–100.
22.
Mulholland 1989: 37.
23.
Weiss 1980: 101.
24.
Weiss 1980: 104.
25.
Weiss 1980: 108.
26.
Weiss 1980: 105.

--- PAGE 223 ---
27.
Weiss 1980: 108.
28.
Crosby 2014: 153–154.
29.
Zysk (1991) 1998: 42–49.
30.
Gunawardana 1984: 13–14. For the Milindapañha references, see
Horner (1963) 1996: 172–181.
31.
Gunawardana 1984: 14–15. Since the pathway of repeated
combinations between heart and navel suggests that the earlier heart-to-
heart model of fetal nutrition, before the recognition of the role of the
umbilical cord in Pali commentaries, may underlie borān kammaṭṭhāna
practice, this may provide us with a date before which borān
kammaṭṭhāna must have developed, with the inclusion of the
hadayavatthu found in Abhidhamma commentaries indicating that the
practice did not emerge before the commentarial period.
32.
Gunawardana does not consider—and it is not known—whether or not
nuns were involved in the development of these texts. The nuns order
continued in Theravada Buddhism until as late as the thirteenth century.
33.
For the parallels between ayurvedic and Theravada commentarial
understandings of the stages of development of the womb, see
Gunawardana 1984: 19, which also reveals that the Buddhist accounts
are relatively close to modern embryology. Terms shared between
medical and Buddhist texts on embryology and the meditation texts of
borān kammaṭṭhāna include the stages in the development of the
embryo and the terms for the father depositing or “placing” (ṭhapeti)
his semen (bīja, dhātu) in the womb/embryo (gabbha—the term
gabbha can mean both) found as early as the ﬁrst century B.C.E.
Milindapañha (Trenckner 1928: 125). These terms are the same as
those used for the borān practitioner placing (ṭhapeti) the elements
(dhātu) of the path in his womb/the embryo (gabbha) that becomes the
future enlightened being. There is a possible parallel between the ghana
“compact” stage of fetal development in Ayurveda and borān
kammaṭṭhāna, at which the embryo is fully formed prior to the
emergence of gender distinctions, and the most advanced ghana level

--- PAGE 224 ---
of recitation using permutations, but this is only a speculation at
present.
34.
Bizot and von Hinüber 1994: 40.
35.
Crosby 2014: 203. We see it still in Tai-Khmer Buddhism in the
association of lower ordination at age twelve with one’s mother (twelve
being the number of female constituents in the body) and higher
ordination at age twenty with one’s father (twenty being the number of
male constituents in the body).
36.
White 1984: 50.
37.
White 1984: 51–52.
38.
White 1984: 66.
39.
White 1984: 66.
40.
White 1984: 51–52.
41.
Crosby 1999a: 188, cf. Bizot 1992: 214. The transformative eﬀect of
suﬀusion of one substance with another would also have been familiar
to Buddhist monks from water irrigataion, another expertise that may
have been important for monks in propagating the religion and ensuring
healthy supplies for the monastery. See Shaw 2007.
42.
On the longstanding relationship between Buddhist medicine and
alchemy in Cambodia, see Chhem 2007: 112.
43.
This antagonism has often been construed in religious terms. However,
in its impact on Buddhism in Indochina, France was more
representative of secularism than Catholicism. While Catholicism was
strongly represented in the army and by missionaries, the
administrators of French colonialism tended to be secularists and
freemasons, particularly after the formal separation of church and state
in 1905 (Ovesen and Trankell 2010: 25–26).
44.

--- PAGE 225 ---
The History of Vaccines, www.historyofvaccines.org, accessed May
27, 2013.
45.
Naono 2009: 137.
46.
Putheti, Patil, and Obire 2009: 11.
47.
Meulenbeld 1999–2002, vol. 1A: 13. The advantages only began to
receive recognition in modern biomedicine in the 1980s. These include
direct access to the blood stream through the rich vascular plexus of the
nasal cavity and bypassing the possibility of gastro-intestinal
destruction. It also avoids the risks and pain of intravenous catheters. It
is currently of interest for a range of applications including the potential
to bypass the blood-brain barrier and treat the central nervous system,
and thus neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimers (Alsarra et al.
2010: 175; intranasal.net, accessed February 8, 2020).
48.
Naono 2009: 117, 121. Recent developments in modern transdermal
delivery using ultrasound to remove the top layer of the skin’s surface
to make it more permeable are reﬁned versions of the method for
delivering ink in tattooing, also long associated with delivering
medicine and other forms of protection in Southeast Asia as elsewhere
(Kearney 2012). The earliest known tattoos are the ﬁfty-seven tattoos
of “Oetzi the Ice Man,” whose mummiﬁed remains date back at least
5,000 years. The tattoos, coinciding with acupuncture points, are
believed by many to be a medical map of the body for curative
purposes (Pabst et al. 2009). The permanence of tattooing that makes it
useful for this purpose also underlies its use in other contexts:
protective yantras branding criminals, and marking aﬃliation. There
may be an overlap between the concept of tattoo as an indication of
belonging and that of it as protection, i.e., one is protected by, rather
than a possible victim of, the more powerful group/individual with
whom one is thereby aﬃliated. Attitudes in China (where tattooing is
associated more with the branding of criminals) may explain changes in
Thailand in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, where the use of
tattoos at court was no longer required and it became associated with
the non-elite classes (Terwiel 1979).
49.
Naono 2009: 121. An interesting example comes from Sri Lanka,

--- PAGE 226 ---
where smallpox was thought to be inﬂicted by gods and particularly
associated with the goddess Pattini to whom one made oﬀerings for
protection from it.
50.
Glynn 2004: 20–21. In late eighteenth-century America, variolation
continued to be prescribed alongside purging and alchemy using
mercury and antimony, as in the case of U.S. President John Adams,
who recorded his experience of being inoculated against the Boston
epidemic in 1764 (Blinderman 1977).
51.
Brimnes 2004.
52.
Brimnes 2004.
53.
Entrican, Triennial Report on Vaccination in Burma for 1917–18 to
1919–20, cited by Naono 2009: 128–129.
54.
Glynn 2004: 118.
55.
Naono 2009: 129.
56.
Naono 2009: 100–101.
57.
Naono 2009: 16–39, 85.
58.
Ovesen and Trankell 2010: 27, 55–59.
59.
Mulholland 1989: 11.
60.
Highet 1914.
61.
Meulenbeld 1999–2002, vol. 1A: 352.
CHAPTER 6. FROM CENTER TO PERIPHERY
1.
Translated in Woodward 1916: 150.
2.

--- PAGE 227 ---
Although borān kammaṭṭhāna manuals provide more than the forty
kammaṭṭhāna of the Visuddhimagga and both samatha and vipassanā
outcomes, as outlined in chapter 1, the terms used in the passage cited
here, namely vidarśanā and “forty karmaṣṭhāna,” are among the most
common descriptive names found on Sinhalese manuscripts of this
tradition (see Crosby 2019). This may relate to the Visuddhimagga’s
position as an exoteric text, while the more detailed breakdown of
borān methods are esoteric aspects of the practice.
3.
Na Bangchang 1988: 1.
4.
Rājādhirājasiṃha Katikāvatā, cited by Jayatilaka 1916: 149–150,
manuscript catalogued Somadasa 1987–1995, vol. 4: 270–271. For
translations of the edicts of Sri Lankan kings, see Ratnapala 1971.
5.
Anne Blackburn, in her study of the nature of the Siyam Nikāya revival
under Saraṇaṃkara, notes that the leading lights of the revival such as
Saraṇaṃkara himself are described as meditators and that
Saraṇaṃkara wrote on aspects of meditation in his commentaries
(Blackburn 2001: 95). She does not discuss the nature of the meditation
that he practiced. No borān kammaṭṭhāna manuals have been identiﬁed
in the temple libraries she documents, and the identiﬁcation of the
tradition within the Siyam Nikāya, though suggested by Jayatilaka
(1916) and reported by the Rāmañña Nikāya meditation monk
Ñāṇarāma (studied by Carrithers 1983: 232–233), was only conﬁrmed
more recently from evidence within the manuals themselves (Crosby,
Skilton, Gunasena 2012). Some of the paritta verses found in the
Vākkapprakaraṇa text of litanies (chapter 3) to accompany borān
kammaṭṭhāna practice have been identiﬁed by Amal Gunasena
(personal communication, 2009) as compositions by Saraṇaṃkara.
6.
It is possible that the tradition continued longer, but I have no ﬁrm
evidence. Some monks from Sri Lanka visited Wat Ratchasittharam in
Thonburi, Bangkok, in 2012 and reported the continued existence of
such practice to Veera Thanaveero, the head of the borān kammaṭṭhāna
meditation tradition there, even though such practice was not their own.
Unfortunately, they did not leave their details, so I have been unable to
contact them to verify these claims (personal conversation, Veera
Thanaveero, January 2013).

--- PAGE 228 ---
7.
Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla 1963; Crosby 2005.
8.
“The 
bhikkhu 
Doratiyāveye, 
Thera, 
was 
incumbent 
of 
the
Hangurangketa Wihāra in the Western [sic] Province of Ceylon, and
was living so recently as 1900” (Woodward 1916: xviii). Although
Woodward identiﬁes this as being in Western Province, this monastery
is in Central Province (correction from Amal Gunasena, personal
communication, September 5, 2013).
For the extent to which Madame Blavatsky continued to inﬂuence
Anagarika Dharmapala’s meditation and personal spiritual quest
throughout his life, see Kemper 2015 and 2019.
9.
Fernando 1960; Suraweera 1968; Blackburn 2001: 54–55. It seems to
have been speciﬁcally in the modern era, as colonial powers and court
and Sangha hierarchies each sought to enhance their own power, that
monks who might prove non-compliant were disempowered through
both rhetoric and regulation that conﬁned them to “non-worldly”
activities. In Thailand and Cambodia, during the Bangkok and Phnom
Penh periods, a major motivation for reform was the fear of militant
monks who lay beyond royal control. Even among those who accept a
stark lay-monastic divide, the anxiety to protect the Dhamma and the
rhetoric that anxiety inspires perennially motivate enterprising and
ambitious monks to engage directly in politics. This anxiety may justify
an interpretation that connects the conspiracy against Kīrti Śrī with his
status as an “alien” king, a Śaiva from South India, although political
intermarriage with Nayakkars of South India since the seventeenth
century meant that he was not the ﬁrst king in this dynasty.
10.
Choompolpaisal forthcoming.
11.
Terwiel 2019: 8–13. Phibul Choompolpaisal and Andrew Skilton have
also found a manuscript of a text called the Lakkhaṇadhamma ascribed
to King Taksin and previously thought lost (Skilton 2019: 54).
12.
Taylor 1993: 24.
13.
Taylor 1993: 30.
14.

--- PAGE 229 ---
For diﬀerent types of monastic dress in Thailand, see Bizot 1993.
15.
Choompolpaisal 2011: 189.
16.
Choompolpaisal 2011: 259–263, 268–269, 280–281.
17.
It seems possible that Mongkut had no immediate facility in meditation.
One may speculate that his status and his personal identity, divided
between patriotic traditionalism and modernist reform, compromised
the usual incentives for a monk to make progress in the absence of the
rewards that some practitioners gain more easily. On the one hand, as
crown prince, Mongkut hardly needed incentives of status; on the other
hand, his reformist convictions were at odds with the “spiritual”
attainments on oﬀer. Most of all, potential long-term subordination to a
meditation teacher may have been unappealing to an ambitious young
man already endowed with political inﬂuence and intellectual ability.
18.
Taylor 1993: 42.
19.
Ñāṇamoli 1956: III, 64.
20.
For an example of this process in relation to Burma, see Kyaw’s
discussion of the Theinngu Sayadaw’s meditation practice and the
necessity and manner of its authorization (Kyaw 2019).
21.
Taylor 1993: 43; Crosby 2014: 91.
22.
Choompolpaisal 2019: 155.
23.
Taylor 1993: 42.
24.
For example, manuscripts call number pho 20 and ko 8; personal
communication, Phibul Choompolpaisal, July 2013.
25.
Kittivuttho 2003: 64–65. I have not yet seen this text of the
Paṭhamasambodhi, nor do I know if the manuscript by him
corresponds with the book version published in 1923, and republished
1925–1926. I therefore do not know the nature of the borān

--- PAGE 230 ---
kammaṭṭhāna elements thought to be contained in it.
26.
Laulertvorakul 2003: 27–30.
27.
Malasart 2019: 45 and in preparation.
28.
Hansen 2007: 94.
29.
During this and later periods when no sangharat was appointed the
highest-ranking monks in the kingdom were members of the royal
family ordained in the Thammayut Nikāya.
30.
Choompolpaisal 2011: 268–269.
31.
Choompolpaisal 2011: 267–269.
32.
Taylor 1993: 33.
33.
Taylor 1993: 42–43.
34.
Nagasena 2012: 23.
35.
Wyatt 1969: 234–242.
36.
Taylor 1993: 34.
37.
Choompolpaisal 2011: 279–286.
38.
Taylor 1993: 32.
39.
Skilton 2019. Skilton’s article includes a detailed discussion of
Mongkut’s criticism of the Buddhism of his compatriots.
40.
There seem to be some common elements between borān
kammaṭṭhāna and Thammayut forest tradition practice, including in the
litanies used for worship, the use of the preparatory recitation of
“buddho,” and the simpliﬁed visualization of a sphere of light, all of

--- PAGE 231 ---
which warrant further consideration.
41.
Tiyavanich 1997: 172–198, 252–273.
42.
Taylor 1993: 53; material in square brackets is my addition.
43.
www.dhammathai.org.
44.
Taylor 1993: 57.
45.
Yasothararat 1936: 10.
46.
Yasothararat 1936: 2.
47.
Taylor 1993: 57.
48.
Yasothararat 1936: 4–8.
49.
Article by Assistant Prof. Huan Phinthuphan of the Faculty of
Education, Srinakarinwirot University: http://facstaﬀ.swu.ac.th/huan,
accessed August 11, 2013. www.vajira.org/index.php/temple-public-
news, accessed April 20, 2019. The latter is the website of the Thai
temple Vajiradhammapadip, which follows the meditation lineage from
Wat Paknam.
50.
Unfortunately, the websites that mention this do not specify the source
either of the accusation or of the information about the accusation.
Further details of attacks on Sot, including an apparent attempted
shooting, are given on the website of the Dhammakaya Foundation,
which also draws authority for its meditation practices from Sot:
www.dmc.tv/pages/phramongkolthepmuni/2007-04-21-1.html,
accessed August 11, 2013, conﬁrmed April 20, 2019. The shooting
incident is recounted in print in Anonymous 2010: 54–55.
51.
Harris 2005: 106.
52.
Bernon 2012: 379.
53.

--- PAGE 232 ---
On the development of modernist Buddhism among Cambodian monks
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and the role played by new
approaches to textual studies, see Hansen 2007: chapter 3.
54.
Harris 2005: 105–109.
55.
Harris 2005: 110.
56.
Translated with my additional comments in square brackets from the
French of Bizot 1976: 11–12.
57.
Hansen 2007: 102–103.
58.
Bernon 2000: 32; Harris 2005: 117–119.
59.
Harris 2005: 168.
60.
Choompolpaisal 2011: 288–289.
61.
Matpimon 2009: 3.
62.
Darunnakon 1935; Choompolpaisal 2019.
63.
We can see this most obviously with monastic robes. In Cambodia
modernizing Mahanikay monks began adopting the simpler robes of the
Thammayut Nikāya around 1918 (Harris 2005: 107). Those who
wanted to retain the old borān practices also retained the old method of
dress and the older generation of conservative monks sought to prevent
the adoption of the simpliﬁed robes with an ordinance in 1918 under
which several modernizing monks were prosecuted (Hansen 2007:
106). In Thailand the adoption of Thammayut dress style was more
widespread. Monks who practice borān kammaṭṭhāna in Cambodia
today, on seeing photographs of borān kammaṭṭhāna practitioners in
Thailand, conﬁrm that they are doing the correct devotional rituals
(judged from a photograph of the standard ﬁve-candle oﬀering), but say
with conviction that their practice must be wrong since they are
wearing incorrect monastic dress (Crosby and Long ﬁeldwork
December 2012).

--- PAGE 233 ---
CHAPTER 7. MEDITATION IN MODERN REVIVALS
1.
Blackburn 2001.
2.
Malalgoda 1976: 91. As the Salāgama caste rose in power it developed
a self-narrative claiming descent from a very high brahmin caste, a
claim presumably made to indicate that they were higher status than the
Goyigama (Malalgoda 1976: 102).
3.
Malalgoda 1976: 89–90.
4.
Sudhamma in standard Pali transcription. On the Thudhamma reform,
see Charney 2006: 96–105. The council’s powers included the
authority to defrock monks for infringements other than the four
pārājika oﬀenses, in monastic vinaya law the exclusive grounds for
expulsion (Pranke 2004: v–vi). The four pārājika oﬀenses are sexual
intercourse, murder, theft of a substantial amount, and falsely claiming
superhuman powers. State and state-sponsored hierarchies have
frequently sought to defrock monks for reasons other than these four.
However, a state-sanctioned defrocking is only recognized within the
state that organizes it, leading such hierarchies to prefer to pin the
universally recognized pārājika oﬀenses on those whom they wish to
disempower, particularly those with an international following outside
local state control (see Crosby 2014: 208 and 278). (Here I use the term
“defrock” to mean “expel someone from the Sangha,” and “disrobe” to
mean “leave the Sangha voluntarily,” although the ritual process of
returning to lay life is the same.)
5.
Pranke 2004: 5.
6.
Nagasena 2012: 166, 224–233.
7.
De Silva 1847, cited in Malalgoda 1976: 103. Although the Amarapura
Nikāya was described as being anti-polytheist by de Silva, it is not clear
to me how true this is and how much it was part of the Amarapura
Nikāya when ﬁrst formed. Although the worship of local gods instead
of the Buddha is an accusation that appears against the mythical “Ari
heretical monks” in the chronicles that the Thudhamma hierarchy

--- PAGE 234 ---
wrote, even Ledi Sayadaw, the epitome of Burmese reform Buddhism
and author of an important anti-monotheist work, accepted the belief in
non-human beings (Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Patrick Pranke, personal
communication, August 2013). In the twentieth century dismissing the
importance or ultimate validity of worship was a fairly consistent
feature of scholarly Buddhism in Burma and Sri Lanka. The third Sri
Lankan nikāya, the Rāmañña Nikāya, would later criticize both the
Amarapura and the Siyam Nikāya for their tolerance of polytheism.
While polytheism does not, then, appear to have been an issue for the
Thudhamma monks or the initial founders of the Amarapura Nikāya, it
was an aspect deemed un-Buddhist by Christian observers. The
adoption of this stance could have been a response to the Christian
missionary context within which Amarapura monks were working,
based as they were in colonial territory. Later it facilitated their alliance
with the theosophists, important in supporting aspects of the Buddhist
revival, including ﬁnancial support for Anagarika Dharmapala’s project
to restore Buddhist sites in India to Buddhist control through the
Mahābodhi Society.
8.
Malalgoda 1976: 152.
9.
Malalgoda 1976: 151–161. As an aside, it was this extensive practice at
writing tracts and debating that stood the Sangha in good stead for the
debates with the Christians later, particularly the Pānadura debate of
1873.
10.
Pranke 2004: 28–29.
11.
Malalgoda 1976: 166–169.
12.
Carrithers 1983: 236. Carrithers oﬀers the following comment,
indicating that his negative views of the meditation practices of Sri
Lanka were not conﬁned to the borān kammaṭṭhāna: “If I am correct in
assuming that the line of meditation advice began to take on a purely
dogmatic—rather than experiential—character, this is a manifestation
of that tendency…. And indeed, if one really ‘begins with attention to
the eighteen elements,’ one may never get past learning them by heart.
The point may very easily be obscured behind a mass of scholastic
detail, never to emerge” (Carrithers 1983: 236–237).

--- PAGE 235 ---
13.
Malalgoda 1976: 133–134, 155; Kariyawasam 1973: 4–5.
14.
Blackburn 2010: 147.
15.
Malalgoda 1976: 165–166.
16.
Carrithers 1983: 113.
17.
Carrithers 1983: 210–213.
18.
Carrithers 1983: 232.
19.
Carrithers 1983: 233.
20.
Carrithers 1983: 233 with note 16.
21.
Bond 1988: 133.
22.
Harris 2005: 174–178.
23.
These rituals are described in Bizot 1981a.
24.
Achar Oun was concerned about the future of his collection of borān
kammaṭṭhāna texts, which Long Sarou and I arranged to be copied by
the staﬀ of EFEO in Phnom Penh. While we also arranged for a
cupboard suitable to protect the manuscripts, it does not seem to have
been used for this purpose for long, and we are not sure what happened
to the originals as his eyesight then clarity deteriorated over the
following years.
25.
Crosby and Long, interviews throughout December 2012.
26.
The restriction in the Khmer Rouge–controlled area was only in place
there for four or ﬁve years, but nearer to ten—i. e., until 1988—in the
Vietnamese-controlled areas. This picture of a more ﬂexible approach
in the Khmer Rouge territories of Kampong Cham was conﬁrmed by
several sources. Possibly the nun’s son disrobed once restrictions in the

--- PAGE 236 ---
Vietnamese-controlled area began to be enforced.
27.
Ven. Sopheap, interview, Wat Pras Meas, December 12, 2012.
28.
The nun, Oun Sophy, or Yey Phy (“Grandma Phy”), when ﬁrst
recounting her relationship with the abbot told me that the abbot had
shown his recognition of her achievement by ordaining her—not in the
simple clothing of a nun, but the robes of a monk dyed white,
distinguishing her from the other women who become nuns, usually
just for the annual three-month rainy season retreat. A few years later,
when I had joined the rains retreat meditation myself, Yey Phy clariﬁed
that the abbot did not bestow these robes during her lifetime but after
his death, when they met in her meditation. For Cambodians, the access
the practice gives one to beings in other realms, particularly the
deceased, is very important and one of the reasons for its survival.
Regarding the robes, although the full ordination of nuns, bhikkhunī,
has been revived in Sri Lanka, nuns in Southeast Asia, called don chi in
Cambodia, are “precept nuns” rather than “fully ordained.” This means
that on the whole they follow the ten precepts of a novice monk,
sāmaṇera, rather than the full set of vinaya rules followed by monks,
bhikkhu, who have undergone the higher ordination, upasampadā.
Precept nuns wear simple white robes rather than the set of three
yellow, brown, or orange robes of the monks. The process of ordination
for precept nuns is ﬂexible and can be performed by a single monk,
whereas a bhikkhunī must be ordained both by other bhikkhunī and
bhikkhu. For a discussion of the history of bhikkhunī and precept nuns
see Crosby 2014: chapter 9.
29.
Interview, December 31, 2012, and ongoing discussions in subsequent
years.
30.
Interview, December 31, 2012. Since 2015 I have undertaken the
practice under Neang Sam Ol’s guidance.
31.
Interview, Wat Champukaek, December 18, 2012.
32.
Interview, December 25, 2012. On Wat Preak Brang, see Marston
2008: 110–112. Samdech Preah Krou Om Bunheng, the head monk at
Wat Champukaek, does not teach borān kammaṭṭhāna, but has made

--- PAGE 237 ---
great eﬀorts to ensure there is always such a teacher there. At the time
of the interviews that my colleague Long Sarou and I conducted at
these temples in December 2012, both temples were providing services
for individual members of the then-ruling Shinowatra family of
Thailand.
33.
Bernon 2000: 19–21.
34.
The nature of the resumed practice seems to be at the physically more
gentle end of the spectrum. While I have witnessed the “rebirth rituals”
described by Bizot (1981a), I have not heard accounts of anything like
the physically demanding initiation rituals described by Ven. Vanarot
Ken Vong (1924–1994) as taking place in the 1950s and recorded by de
Bernon (2000: 19–21). Thus there seems to have been a shift within
borān kammaṭṭhāna toward a focus on sitting meditation, in other
words to become closer to the more globally accepted conception of
what meditation should entail.
35.
Marston 2008: 108.
36.
Group interview at Wat Champukaek, 2003.
37.
The wat achar, the lay men who manage and perform important
services at temples, often provide continuity and consistency across the
generations of monks. One that we met at a temple in Kandal Province
had traveled a long way to stay at the temple and learn the practice in
response to the collective decision of all the achar at his temple (there
are often around 7–8) that one of them should acquire suﬃcient
expertise in borān kammaṭṭhāna to help with funerals (interview,
December 31, 2012).
38.
In 2017 I heard of the revival of the practice by a former and
reordained monk in the Kulen mountains but have yet to verify the
nature of this revival. I have not come across the practice among the
younger generations, though this was still widespread in the ﬁrst half of
the twentieth century.
39.
Crosby and Long interviews, December 2012.
40.

--- PAGE 238 ---
Marston 2009: 238–247.
41.
Crosby and Long interviews, Kandal Province, December 2012.
42.
Interviews, December 2012. In asking the supreme patriarch to
suppress borān kammaṭṭhāna, Sam Buntheoun was in a sense invoking
the pre–Khmer Rouge antagonism between borān and samay, i.e.,
modern Buddhism (Marston 2008: 99), just as his teaching of
Vipassanā seems to have drawn on its developing popularity prior to
the Khmer Rouge period.
43.
Email interview, Battambang, December 2012. In the light of the
ongoing border disputes with Thailand and the earlier history of
conﬂict between the two nations, to claim that someone promotes Thai
Dhamma is a criticism in the modern period. It is accurate to associate
Vipassanā with Thailand in that pre-war Vipassanā teachers had trained
there (interview with Achar Long Bok, a senior Vipassanā meditation
teacher, Kos Krolor District, Battambang Province, December 26,
2012), but it is not clear to me that Buth Savong promoted Vipassanā. I
would like to thank John Marston for replying to my questions about
Buth Savong. In terms of the view of borān kammaṭṭhāna as
originating in Cambodia, the picture is quite complex. In the case of
Wat Damrei Sar, the pronunciation of the litanies and the oral history of
the temple suggest that while the practice is clearly related to other
borān kammaṭṭhāna in Cambodia, their particular branch at some point
came from Thailand.
44.
Choompolpaisal 2011: 293–296.
45.
Akaramahabhandit 2003: 9–21.
46.
Soundclips of Chodok can be found at www.youtube.com/watch?v=B-
VGBLGwjC9Y, accessed May 21, 2019.
47.
Much has been written on Kittivuddho’s infamous anti-communist
statements, including in books discussing Buddhism and violence. See,
for example, Suksamran 1982: 132–157.
48.
Choompolpaisal 2011: 296–309, 315–319.

--- PAGE 239 ---
49.
Randall 1990: 23. Mae chi is the Thai prase for “precept nuns” who
usually take the same ten precepts of novice monks. The full ordination
of nuns as bhikkhunī is not permitted in Thailand.
50.
Skilton 2013b. Kapilavaḍḍho wrote about his experiences in the
posthumously published Life as a Siamese Monk under the name
Richard Randall (1990). For ﬁlm footage of the ordination of the three
monks, see www.youtube.com/watch?v=SZwxJyfJ3Oo, accessed May
20, 2019.
51.
Crosby 2014: 162. The death toll is still unclear, with widely diﬀerent
estimates.
52.
www.triple-gem.net/phra-terry, accessed May 20, 2019.
53.
Mettanando 1999: 2.
54.
Cadge 2004.
55.
In 1992 Wat Phra Dhammakaya established its ﬁrst international
branch in California.
56.
It is possible that the simpliﬁcation attributed to Sot is only at the early
stages, in which case he popularized meditation rather than changed it,
for the early stages are also relatively simple in other traditions of
borān kammaṭṭhāna. Other factors usually emphasized in the success
of Dhammakaya are its business model, encouragement of large
donations, and high level of organization. See Scott 2009.
57.
Skilton and Choompolpaisal 2014: 112.
CONCLUSION
1.
See the discussion of Copleston and Alabaster in chapter 1.
2.
I am thinking here of such developments as the identiﬁcation of
telomeres, the eﬀect of meditation on them, and their role in the

--- PAGE 240 ---
retention of cognitive reserve.

--- PAGE 241 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Akaramahabhandit, Phrasophonmahathera. 2003 [2546 B.E.]. Lakkarn
Patibat Vipatsana Kammatthan [The Principles of the Practice of
Vipassana-Kammatthan]. Bangkok: Mahachula University Publication.
Alabaster, Henry. 1871. The Wheel of the Law: Buddhism Illustrated from
Siamese Sources. London: Trübner & Co.
Almond, Philip C. 1988. The British Discovery of Buddhism. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Alsarra, Ibrahim A., Amel Y. Hamed, Fars K. Alanazi, and Gamal M. El
Maghraby. 2010. “Vesicular Systems for Intranasal Drug Delivery.” In
Drug Delivery to the Central Nervous System, edited by K. K. Jain,
175–203. Neuromethods 45. New York: Humana Press.
“Amatākaravaṇṇanā.” Unpublished manuscript, number Or6601(85)I,
around late 1750s. London: Nevill Collection, Asia and Africa
Collections, British Library.
Anālayo, Bhikkhu. 2012. “The Dynamics of Theravāda Insight Meditation.”
In 
 [Buddhist Meditation
Traditions: An International Symposium], edited by Kuo-pin Chuang,
23–56. Taiwan: Dharma Drum Publishing Corporation.
www.semanticscholar.org/paper/The-Dynamics-of-Theravada-Insight-
Meditation-
An%C4%81layo/30bccc6816d0b17712b1815c25556d9e73be5820,
accessed September 13, 2013.
Anonymous. 2010. The Life and Times of Luang Phaw Wat Paknam. 4th ed.
Pathumthani: Dhammakaya Foundation.
Ashin, Janaka, and Kate Crosby. 2016. “All Too Human: The Impact of
International Buddhist Networks on the Life and Posthumous
Conviction of the Burmese Nationalist Monk, Shin Ukkaṭṭha (1897–
1978).” Journal for the Irish Society for the Academic Study of
Religions 3: 219–235.
———.2017. “Heresy and Monastic Malpractice in the Buddhist Court
Cases (Vinicchaya) of Modern Burma (Myanmar).” Contemporary
Buddhism 18 (1): 199–261.

--- PAGE 242 ---
Aung, Shwe Zan. 1910. Compendium of Philosophy Being a Translation
Now Made for the First Time from the Original Pali of the
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha. London: The Pali Text Society.
———. 1918. “Buddhism and Science.” Journal of Burma Research Society
8 (1): 99–106.
Bapat, P. V. 1972. Review of Galkätiyagama Ratnajoti and Karalliyaddē
Ratnapāla (1963). Journal of the Vidyalankara University of Ceylon 1
(1): 172–190.
Barker, George F. 1886. “Memoir of John William Draper 1811–1882.”
(Read before the National Academy, April 21, 1886.) Oﬀprint, National
Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoirs 2: 349–388. Washington,
DC: National Academy of Sciences.
Barrett, T. H. 2008a. The Rise and Spread of Printing: A New Account of
Religious Factors. 2nd ed. Watford, UK: Minnow Press.
———. 2008b. The Woman who Discovered Printing. New Haven and
London: Yale University Press.
Becchetti, C. 1991. Le Mystère dans les Lettres. Bangkok: Éditions de
Cahiers de France.
———. 1994. “Une ancienne tradition de manuscrits au Cambodge.” In
Recherches nouvelles sur le Cambodge, edited by François Bizot, 47–
62. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Bechert, H. 1989. “Vimuttimagga and Amatakaravannana.” In Amalā
Prajñā: Aspects of Buddhist Studies: Professor P. V. Bapat Felicitation
Volume, edited by N. H. Samtani and H. S. Prasad, 11–14. Bibliotheca
Indo-Buddhica 63. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Bernon, Olivier de. 2000. “Le Manuel des Maîtres de kammaṭṭhān, Études et
présentation de rituels de méditation dans la tradition du bouddhisme
khmer.” PhD thesis, Institut National des Langues et Civilisations
Orientales.
———. 2002. “Le mūl kammaṭṭhān du Wat Ratchathiwat daté de 1661
A.D.: Présentation et traduction.” Journal of the Siam Society 90–91:
149–160.
———. 2012. “Circulation of Texts in Mid-Nineteenth Century Cambodia:
A New Reading of Inscription K. 892 (Vatt Tā Tok, CE 1857).” In
Skilling et al. 2012: 371–399.
Bizot, François. 1971. “La ﬁguration des pieds du Bouddha au Cambodge.”
Asiatische Studien: Zeitschrift der Schweizerischen Asiengesellschaft =
Études asiatiques: revue de la Société Suisse-Asie 25: 407–439.

--- PAGE 243 ---
———. 1973. Histoire du Reamker. Rion ramakerti nai tā cak’. Phnom
Penh: École française d’Extrême-Orient. Reprint, Bangkok: École
française d’Extrême-Orient, 1980, 1983; and Phnom Penh: Éditions
sauvages, 1991, 1993.
———. 1976. Le ﬁguier à cinq branches. Recherches sur le bouddhisme
khmer I, Publications de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 107. Paris:
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
———. 1980. “La grotte de la naissance.” Recherches sur le bouddhisme
khmer II, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême Orient 67: 222–273.
———. 1981a. Le don de soi-même. Recherches sur le bouddhisme khmer
III, Publications de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 130. Paris: École
française d’Extrême-Orient.
———. 1981b. “Notes sur les yantra bouddhiques d’Indochine.” In Tantric
and Taoist Studies in Honour of R. A. Stein, edited by M. Strickmann,
155–191. Mélanges Chinois et Bouddhiques 20. Brussels: Institut Belge
des Hautes Etudes Chinoises.
———. 1988. Les traditions de la pabbajjā en Asie du Sud-Est. Recherches
sur le bouddhisme khmer IV. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
———. 1989. Reamaker ou l’Amour Symbolique de Rām et Setā.
Recherches sur le bouddhisme khmer V. Paris: École française
d’Extrême-Orient.
———. 1992. Le chemin de Lankā. Textes bouddhiques du Cambodge I.
Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
———. 1993. Le Bouddhisme des Thaïs. Bangkok: Éditions des Cahiers de
France.
———. 1994a. “La Consécration des Statues et le culte des Morts.” In
Recherches nouvelles sur le Cambodge, edited by François Bizot, 101–
127. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
———, ed. 1994b. Recherches nouvelles sur le Cambodge. Paris: École
française d’Extrême-Orient.
———. 2000. “La place des communautés du Nord-Laos dans l’histoire du
bouddhisme d’Asie du Sud-Est.” Bulletin de l’École française
d’Extrême-Orient 87 (2): 511–528.
Bizot, François, and François Lagirarde. 1996. Saddavimala: La pureté par
les mots. Paris and Chiang Mai, Thailand: École française d’Extrême-
Orient.
Bizot, François, and Oskar von Hinüber. 1994. La guirlande de Joyaux.
Textes bouddhiques du Cambodge II. Paris: École française d’Extrême-

--- PAGE 244 ---
Orient.
Blackburn, Anne M. 2001. Buddhist Learning and Textual Practice in
Eighteenth-Century Lankan Monastic Culture. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
———. 2010. Locations of Buddhism: Colonialism and Modernity in Sri
Lanka. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blinderman, A. 1977. “John Adams: Fears, Depressions, and Ailments.” New
York State Journal of Medicine 77: 268–276.
Bode, Mabel Haynes. 1909. The Pali Literature of Burma. London: Royal
Asiatic Society.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu et al. 1993. A Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma: The
Abhidhammattha Sangaha of Ācariya Anuruddha. Kandy: Buddhist
Publication Society.
Bond, George. 1988. The Buddhist Revival in Sri Lanka: Religious Tradition,
Reinterpretation, and Response. Columbia: University of South
Carolina Press.
Bornaetxea, Rodriguez Fernando, and David Alvear Morón. 2014.
“Construction of Reality or Dependent Origination? From Scientiﬁc
Psychotherapy to Responsible Attention.” Contemporary Buddhism 15:
216–243.
Bowers, Jeﬀrey. 1996. Dhammakaya Meditation in Thai Society. Bangkok:
Chulalongkorn University Printing House.
Braun, Erik C. 2013. The Birth of Insight: Meditation, Modern Buddhism,
and the Burmese Monk Ledi Sayadaw. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Brimnes, Niels. 2004. “Variolation, Vaccination and Popular Resistance in
Early Colonial South India.” Medical History 48 (2), April 1: 199–228.
Cadge, Wendy. 2004. Heartwood: The First Generation of Theravada
Buddhism in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Carrithers, M. 1983. The Forest Monks of Sri Lanka: An Anthropological
and Historical Study. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Charney, Michael W. 2006. Powerful Learning: Buddhist Literati and the
Throne in Burma’s Last Dynasty, 1752–1885. Ann Arbor: Centers for
South and Southeast Asian Studies, The University of Michigan.
Chhem, Rethy K. 2007. “La médecine au service du pourvoir angkorien:
Universités monastiques, transmission du savoir et formation médicale
sous le règne de Jayavarman VII (1181–1220 A.D.).” Canadian Journal
of Buddhist Studies 3: 95–124.

--- PAGE 245 ---
Choompolpaisal, Phibul. 2011. “Reassessing Modern Thai Political
Buddhism: A Critical Study of Sociological Literature from Weber to
Keyes.” PhD thesis, School of Oriental and African Studies, University
of London.
———. 2019. “Nimitta and Visual Methods in Siamese and Lao Meditation
Traditions from the 17th Century to the Present Day.” Contemporary
Buddhism 20 (1): 152–183.
———. Forthcoming. “Boran Kammaṭṭhan (Ancient Theravāda) Meditation
Transmissions from Late Ayutthaya to Rattanakosin Periods”
(provisional title). Buddhist Studies Review.
Chulachomklao Tipiṭaka. 1893. Compiled in 28 volumes under the patronage
of the Thai king Chulalongkorn, or Rama V.
Coedès, G. 1915. “Dhammakāya.” Adyar Library Bulletin 20: 248–285.
Copleston, R. S. (1892) 1908. Buddhism Primitive and Present in Magadha
and in Ceylon. London: Longmans, Green.
Cousins, Lance. 1981. “The Paṭṭhāna and the Development of the
Theravādin Abhidhamma.” Journal of the Pāli Text Society 9: 22–46.
Crosby, Henrietta Kate. 1999a. “Studies in the Medieval Pali Literature of
Sri Lanka with Special Reference to the Esoteric Yogavacara
Tradition.” DPhil thesis, University of Oxford.
Crosby, Kate. 2000a. “Tantric Theravada: A Bibliographic Essay on the
Writings of François Bizot and Other Literature on the Yogāvacara
Tradition.” Contemporary Buddhism 1 (2): 141–198.
———. 2000b. “Uddis and Ācikh: The Inclusion of the Sikkhāpada in the
Pabbajjā Liturgy According to the Samantapāsādikā. Journal of Indian
Philosophy 28 (5–6): 461–477.
———. 2003. “The Origin of the Language Name Pāli in Medieval
Theravāda Literature.” Journal of Buddhist Studies, Centre for Buddhist
Studies, Sri Lanka, 2: 70–116.
———. 2005. “Diﬀerences between the Vimuttimagga-uddāna and the
Amatākaravaṇṇanā.” Journal of Buddhist Studies, Centre for Buddhist
Studies, Sri Lanka, 3: 139–151.
———. 2006. “Sāriputta’s Three Works on the Samantapāsādikā.” Journal
of the Pali Text Society 28: 49–59.
———. 2007. “Saṅkhepasārasaṅgaha.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 29:
169–174.
———. 2013. Traditional Theravada Meditation and Its Modern-Era
Suppression. Hong Kong: Buddha-Dharma Centre of Hong Kong.

--- PAGE 246 ---
———. 2014. Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, Identity. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell.
———. 2017. “The Impact of the Science-Religion Bifurcation on the
Landscape of Modern Theravada Meditation.” In Theravada Encounters
with Modernity, edited by Steven Collins and Juliane Schober, 29–46.
London: Routledge.
———. 2019. “Abhidhamma and Nimitta in 18th-Century Meditation
Manuscripts from Sri Lanka: A Consideration of Orthodoxy and
Heteropraxy in Boran Kammaṭṭḥāna.” Contemporary Buddhism 20 (1):
111–151.
Crosby, Kate, Andrew Skilton, and Amal Gunasena. 2012. “The Sutta on
Understanding Death in the Transmission of Borān Meditation from
Siam to the Kandyan Court.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 40 (2): 177–
198.
Crosby, Kate, Andrew Skilton, and Pyi Phyo Kyaw, eds. 2019. Variety in
Theravada Meditation. Special issue, Contemporary Buddhism 20 (1).
D’Alwis, James. 1863. An Introduction to Kachchāyana’s Grammar of the
Pāli Language. London: Williams & Northgate.
Darunnakon, Luangvisan. 1935. [2478 B.E.]. Samatha-Vipassana
Kammathan. A funeral publication in commemoration of Phraphuttha
Vithi Nayok (Bun) at the Meru of Wat Klang Bangkaew (Bangkok). No
publisher details.
De Silva, A. 1847. “On the Corruptions of Buddhism and the Diﬀerent
Tenets, Opinions and Principles of the Amarapoora and Siamese Sects.”
Appendix XII to Ribeyro’s History of Ceylon (1685), retranslated from
the French edition (with an appendix) by George Lee. Colombo.
de Zilva Wickremasinghe, Don Martino. 1901. Catalogue of the Sinhalese
Printed Books in the Library of the British Museum. London: British
Museum.
Dixon, Thomas. 2008. Science and Religion: A Very Short Introduction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Draper, John William. 1874. History of the Conﬂict between Religion and
Science. London and New York: D. Appleton.
Fausbøll, Viggo. (1883) 1990. The Jātaka together with Its Commentary
Being Tales of the Anterior Births of Gotama Buddha. III. Oxford: Pali
Text Society.
Fernando, P. E. E. 1960. “Indian Oﬃce Land Grant of King Kīrti Śrī
Rājasiṃha.” Ceylon Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences 3 (1):

--- PAGE 247 ---
72–81.
Filliozat, Pierre-Sylvain. 2004. “Ancient Sanskrit Mathematics: An Oral
Tradition and a Written Literature.” In History of Science, History of
Text, edited by Karine Chemla, 137–157, 360–375. Boston Studies in
the Philosophy of Science 238. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
Finot, L. 1917. “Recherches sur la littérature laotienne.” Bulletin de l’École
française d’Extrême-Orient 17 (5): 1–219.
Gabaude, Louis. 2003a. “Where Ascetics Get Comfort and Recluses Go
Public: Museums for Buddhist Saints in Thailand.” In Pilgrims,
Patrons, and Place: Localizing Sanctity in Asian Religions, edited by
Phyllis Granoﬀ and Koichi Shinohara, 103–123. Vancouver and
Toronto: University of British Columbia Press.
———. 2003b. “A New Phenomenon in Thai Monasteries: The Stūpa-
Museum.” In The Buddhist Monastery. A Cross-Cultural Survey, edited
by Pierre Pichard and François Lagirarde, 169–186. Paris: École
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Glynn, Ian, and Jennifer. 2004. The Life and Death of Smallpox. London:
Proﬁle Books.
Gombrich, R. F., and G. Obeyesekere. 1988. Buddhism Transformed:
Religious Change in Sri Lanka. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Gornall, Alastair. 2012. “Buddhism and Grammar: The Scholarly Cultivation
of Pāli in Medieval Laṅkā.” PhD thesis, University of Cambridge.
Gornall, Alastair. 2020. Rewriting Buddhism. Pali Literature and Monastic
Reform in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270. London: UCL Press.
Greene, Eric M. Forthcoming. Chan Before Chan: Meditation, Repentance,
and Visionary Experience in Early Medieval Chinese Buddhism.
Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Gunawardana, R. A. L. H. 1984. “Obstetrics and Theories of Reproduction in
Ancient and Early Medieval Sri Lanka.” Journal of Humanities and
Social Sciences of the University of Kelaniya (Kalyani) 3–4: 1–22.
Hallisey, Charles. 1993. “Nibbānasutta: An Allegedly Non-Canonical Sutta
on Nibbāna as a Great City.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 18: 97–
130.
Hansen, Anne Ruth. 2007. How to Behave: Buddhism and Modernity in
Colonial Cambodia, 1860–1930. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i
Press.
Harris, Elizabeth J. 2006. Theravāda Buddhism and the British Encounter:

--- PAGE 248 ---
Religious, Missionary and Colonial Experience in Nineteenth-Century
Sri Lanka. London: Routledge.
———. 2019. “Buddhist Meditation and the British Colonial Gaze in
Nineteenth-Century Sri Lanka.” Contemporary Buddhism 20 (1): 200–
222.
Harris, Ian. 2005. Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice. Honolulu:
University of Hawai‘i Press. Reprint, Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm,
2006.
Hickey, Wakoh Shannon. 2019. Mind Cure: How Meditation Became
Medicine. New York: Oxford University Press.
Highet, Campbell H. 1914. “Small Pox Vaccination and the New
Vaccination Law in Siam.” Journal of the Siam Society 11: 13–32.
von Hinüber, Oskar. (1987) 1994. “Das buddhistische Recht und die
Phonetik des Pāli.” Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 13/14
(Festschrift Wilhelm Rau): 101–127; English translation, “Buddhist
Law and the Phonetics of Pāli,” in Selected Papers on Pāli Studies, by
Oskar von Hinüber, 198–232. Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1994.
Hitchings, Henry. 2011. The Language Wars: A History of Proper English.
London: John Murray.
Horner, I. B. (1963) 1996. Milinda’s Questions. Volume 1. Oxford: Pali Text
Society.
Jayatilaka, D. B. 1916. “A Dhyāna Book.” Appendix to Woodward 1916:
143–150.
Jersey, Countess of [Child-Villers, Margaret]. 1884–1885. “Buddhism and
Christianity.” The National Review 4: 577–591.
J. M. M. 1865. “Buddhism.” Journal of Sacred Literature 35: 281–300.
Jordt, Ingrid. 2007. Burma’s Lay Meditation Movement: Buddhism and the
Cultural Construction of Power. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press.
Joshi, Shivaram Dattatray, and J. A. F. Roodbergen, trans. 1985. “On P.
1.1.56.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 105 (3): 469–477.
Kahrs, Eivind. 1998. Indian Semantic Analysis: The Nirvacana Tradition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kariyawasam, Tissa. 1973. “Religious Activities and the Development of a
New Poetical Tradition in Sinhalese, 1852–1906.” PhD thesis,
University of London.
Karunadasa, Y. 2010. The Theravāda Abhidhamma: Its Inquiry into the
Nature of Conditioned Reality. Hong Kong: Centre of Buddhist Studies,

--- PAGE 249 ---
The University of Hong Kong.
Kearney, Christine. 2012. “Breakthrough Method of Delivering Drugs Under
the Skin.” Medical News Today, September 15, 2012.
www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/250296.php, accessed June 29,
2013.
Kemper, Steven. 2015. Rescued from the Nation: Anagarika Dharmapala
and the Buddhist World. Chicago and London: University of Chicago
Press.
———. 2019. “Anagarika Dharmapala’s Meditation.” Contemporary
Buddhism 20 (1): 223–246.
Kittivuddho, Phrathepkittipanyakhun. 2003 [2546 B.E.]. Thammakay Kaen
Triphob [Dhammakaya as the Core of Three Worlds]. 4th ed. Bangkok:
Abhidhamma Mahathat Foundation and Dhammakaya Foundation. First
edition published same year by Abhidhamma Mahathat Foundation.
Kong, Man-Shik. 2015. “Food and Craving in Early Buddhist Monasticism
Focusing on Pali Literature.” PhD thesis, King’s College London.
Kyaw, Pyi Phyo. 2014. “Paṭṭhāna in Burmese Buddhism.” PhD thesis,
King’s College London.
———. 2019. “The Sound of the Breath: Sunlun and Theinngu Meditation
Traditions of Myanmar.” Contemporary Buddhism 20 (1): 247–291.
Lagirarde, F. 1994. “Textes bouddhiques du pay khmer et du Lanna: Un
exemple de parenté.” In Recherches Nouvelles sur le Cambodge, edited
by F. Bizot, 63–77. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
———. 1996. “Les manuscrits en thaï du Nord de la Siam Society.” Journal
of the Siam Society 84 (1): 91–115.
———. 1998. “Une interprétation bouddhique des rites funéraires du Lanna
et du Laos: Le sutta apocryphe de Mahā Kāla.” Aséanie, Sciences
humaines en Asie du Sud-Est 2:47–77.
Lanman, Charles Rockwell. 1884. A Sanskrit Reader. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Laulertvorakul, Anant. 2003. “Paṭhamasambodhi in Nine Languages: Their
Relation and Evolution.” Manusya: Journal of Humanities 6 (2): 11–34.
Leclère, Adhémard. 1899. Le Bouddhisme au Cambodge. Paris: Ernest
Leroux.
Lindahl, Jared R., Christopher T. Kaplan, Even M. Winget, and Willoughby
B. Britton. 2014. “A Phenomenology of Meditation-Induced Light
Experiences: Traditional Buddhist and Neurobiological Perspectives.”
Frontiers in Psychology 4, Article 973: 1–16. www.frontiersin.org.

--- PAGE 250 ---
MacCulloch, Diarmaid. 2003. Reformation: Europe’s House Divided, 1490–
1700. London: Penguin Books.
Mackenzie, Rory. 2007. New Buddhist Movements in Thailand: Towards an
Understanding of Wat Phra Dhammakāya and Santi Asoke. London:
Routledge.
Magness, Terence B. 1961. Sammā Samādhi: Being an Exposition of the
Method of Samatha-Vipassanā as Discovered and Attained by All
Buddhas. Bangkok: Ladda Valaya Vorapitaksanon.
Malalgoda, Kitsiri. 1976. Buddhism and Sinhalese Society, 1750–1900.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Malasart, Woramat. 2019. “The Dhammakāyānussatti-kathā: A Trace of
‘Siam’s Borān Buddhism’ from the Reign of Rāmā I (1782–1809).” MA
thesis, University of Otago, Dunedin.
———. In preparation. “The Dhammakāya Text Genre and Its Signiﬁcance
on ‘Siam’s Borān Buddhism’ and Modern Suppression” (title
provisional).
Mallinson, Sir James. 2007. The Ocean of the Rivers of Story. Volume 1.
New York: New York University Press, JJC Foundation.
Marston, John. 2008. “Reconstructing ‘Ancient’ Cambodian Buddhism.”
Contemporary Buddhism 9 (1): 99–121.
———. 2009. “Cambodian Religion since 1989.” In Beyond Democracy in
Cambodia: Political Reconstruction in a Post-Conﬂict Society, edited
by Joakim Öjendal and Mona Lilja, 224–249. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Matpimon, Krai. 2009. “Kwamru Buangton Keaw Kub Phesatchakam (Basic
Knowledge Relating to Medical Treatment).” www.kmitl.ac.th [Oﬃcial
website of King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology, Ladkrabang
University]. Accessed July 31, 2013.
Min, Nitra Soe. 2018. “A Study on U Shwe Zan Aung, A Prominent Writer
Who Made the First Translation of Buddha Abhidhamma into English.”
Journal of the Myanmar Academy of Arts and Sciences 16 (7): 245–264.
Meegama, S. A. 1986. “The Mortality Transition in Sri Lanka.” Chapter 2 in
Determinants of Mortality Change and Diﬀerentials in Developing
Countries: The Five-Country Case Study Project, 1–32. New York:
United Nations.
Mettanando Bhikkhu. 1999. “Meditation and Healing in the Theravada
Buddhist Order of Thailand and Laos.” PhD thesis, Hamburg
University.
Meulenbeld, Gerrit Jan. 1999–2002. A History of Indian Medical Literature.

--- PAGE 251 ---
3 volumes. Groningen: E. Forsten.
Minayeﬀ, Ivan Pavlovich. n.d. [1950s]. Travels in and Diaries of India and
Burma, trans. Hirendranath Sanyal. Calcutta: Eastern Trading Co.
Mulholland, Jean. 1989. Herbal Medicine in Paediatrics: Translation of a
Thai Book of Genesis. Canberra: Faculty of Asian Studies, ANU.
Na Bangchang, Supaphan. 1988. “A Pali Letter Sent by the
Aggamahāsenāpati of Siam to the Court at Kandy in 1756.” Journal of
the Pali Text Society 12:185–212.
Nagasena Bhikkhu. 2012. “The Monastic Boundary (Sīmā) in Burmese
Buddhism: Authority, Purity and Validity in Historical and Modern
Contexts.” PhD thesis, School of Oriental and African Studies,
University of London.
Ñāṇamoli Bhikkhu, trans. (1956) 1991. The Path of Puriﬁcation. 5th ed.
Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society. First edition, Colombo: A.
Semage.
Naono, Atsuko. 2009. State of Vaccination: The Fight Against Smallpox in
Colonial Burma. Hyderabad: Orient Blackswan.
Nārada, U. 1969 & 1981. Conditional Relations. Volume 1, London: Luzac;
volume 2, London: Pali Text Society.
Newell, Catherine. 2011. “Two Meditation Traditions from Contemporary
Thailand: A Summary Overview.” Rian Thai: International Journal of
Thai Studies 4: 81–110.
Norman, K. R. (1976) 1991. “The Language in which the Buddha Taught.”
In Collected Papers, vol. 2, by K. R. Norman, 84–98. Oxford: Pali Text
Society.
———. (1997) 2006. A Philological Approach to Buddhism. 2nd ed.
Lancaster: Pali Text Society.
Olson, Grant A. 1992. “Thai Cremation Volumes: A Brief History of a
Unique Genre of Literature.” Asian Folklore Studies 51 (2): 279–294.
Ong, Pei Wen Patrick. 2011. “Examining and Analysing the Meditation
System Passed Down by the Supreme Patriarch Suk Kaithuean, Now
Taught at Wat Ratchasittharam.” Rian Thai: International Journal of
Thai Studies 4: 115–189.
Ovesen, Jan, and Ing-Britt Trankell. 2010. Cambodians and Their Doctors: A
Medical Anthropology of Colonial and Post-Colonial Cambodia.
Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Pabst, M.A., I. Letofsky-Pabst, E. Bock, M. Moser, et al. 2009. “The Tattoos
of the Tyrolean Iceman: A Light Microscopical, Ultrastructural and

--- PAGE 252 ---
Element Analytical Study.” Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (10):
2335–2341.
Pe Maung Tin. 1920. The Expositor (Aṭṭhasālinī): Buddhaghosa’s
Commentary on the Dhammasaṅgani, the First Book of the
Abhidhammapiṭaka. Edited and revised by C. A. F. Rhys Davids.
London: Pali Text Society.
Perreira, Todd LeRoy. 2012. “Whence Theravāda? The Modern Genealogy
of an Ancient Term.” In Skilling et al. 443–571.
Piera Candotti, Maria, and Tiziana Pontillo. 2013. “The Earlier Pāṇinian
Tradition on the Imperceptible Sign.” In Signless Signiﬁcation in
Ancient India and Beyond, edited by Tiziana Pontillo and Maria Piera
Candotti, 99–154. London and New York: Anthem Press.
Pind, Ole Holten. 2013. Kaccāyana and Kaccāyanavutti. Bristol: Pali Text
Society.
Pranke, Patrick Arthur. 2004. “The ‘Treatise on the Lineage of Elders’
(Vaṃsadīpanī): Monastic Reform and the Writing of Buddhist History
in Eighteenth-Century Burma.” PhD thesis, University of Michigan.
Putheti, Ramesh R., Mahesh C. Patil, and O. Obire. 2009. “Nasal Drug
Delivery in Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology: Present and Future.” e-
Journal of Science & Technology 12 (3): 1–21.
Randall, Richard. 1990. Life as a Siamese Monk. Bradford on Avon, UK:
Aukana Publishing.
Rastogi, Subha, Dinesh K. Kulshrestha, and Ajay Kumar Singh Rawat. 2006.
“ ‘Streblus asper’ Lour. (Shakhotaka): A Review of Its Chemical,
Pharmacological and Ethnomedicinal Properties.” Evidence-Based
Complementary and Alternative Medicine 3 (2): 217–222.
Ratnajoti, Galkätiyagama, and Karalliyaddē Ratnapāla. 1963. Vimuttimaggo:
Bhadantārahanta-Mahāriṭṭha-Upatissa-tthera-vara-ppanīto. Colombo:
Government Press of Ceylon.
Ratnapala, Nandasena. 1971. The Katikavatas. Munich: R. Kitzinger.
Reeder, Matt. 2016. “The National Library of Thailand, Manuscript
Collection.” http://dissertationreviews.org/archives/13975, accessed
May 14, 2019.
Rhys Davids, C. A. F. 1916. “Editor’s Preface.” In Woodward 1916.
———. 1920. The Visuddhi-magga of Buddhaghosa. London: Pali Text
Society.
Rhys Davids, T. W. (1896) 1981. The Yogāvacara’s Manual. London: Pali
Text Society.

--- PAGE 253 ---
Rhys Davids, T. W., and H. Oldenberg. (1882) 1982. Vinaya Texts. Pt. 2.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Von Rospatt, Alexander. 1995. The Buddhist Doctrine of Momentariness: A
Survey of Origins and Early Phase of This Doctrine up to Vasubandhu.
Stuttgart: Franz Stainer Verlag.
———. 1998. “Momentariness, Buddhist Doctrine of.” In Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by Edward Craig, 469–473. London
and New York: Routledge.
Rozenberg, Guillaume, Bénédicte Brac de la Perrière, and Alicia Turner, eds.
2014. Champions of Buddhism: Weikza Cults in Contemporary Burma.
Singapore: National University of Singapore Press.
Ruangsan, Phramaha Niras. 2015. “Vijjādhammakāya: Presentation of the
Essential Elements and Core Doctrines through the Translation of Its
Five Primary Texts.” PhD thesis, University of Sydney.
Ruiz-Falqués, Aleix. 2012. “Saddhammasiri and His Philosophy of
Language.” Unpublished paper delivered at the International Burma
Studies Conference, 2012.
———. 2014. “The Creative Erudition of Chapaṭa Saddhammajotipāla, a
15th-Century Grammarian and Philosopher from Burma.” Journal of
Indian Philosophy 43 (4–5): 389–426.
———. 2017. “On the Authorship of Kaccāyana, the Oldest Pāli Grammar.”
In Pariyatti: Studies in Pāli Language and Literature, edited by
Bimalendra Kumar and Ujjwal Kumar, 251–268. New Delhi: Aditya
Prakashan.
Scott, Rachelle M. 2009. Nirvana for Sale? Buddhism, Wealth, and the
Dhammakāya Temple in Contemporary Thailand. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Sermchai, Jayamangalo. 1991. The Heart of Dhammakaya Meditation.
Bangkok: Dhammakaya Buddhist Meditation Foundation Sala
Karnparien (Wat Saket).
Shaw, Julia. 2007. Buddhist Landscapes in Central India: Sanchi Hill and
Archaeologies of Religious and Social Change in c. Third Century BC
to Fifth Century AD. London: The British Academy.
Shendge, Malati J. 1996. “Beginning of Scientiﬁc Observations: Founding of
Linguistic Science in India.” Indian Journal of History of Science 31
(4): 303–326.
Skilling, Peter. 2018. “Calligraphic Magic: Abhidhamma Inscriptions from
Sukhodaya.” Buddhist Studies Review 35 (1–2): 161–187

--- PAGE 254 ---
Skilling, Peter, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza, and Santi Pakdeekham,
eds. 2012. How Theravāda Is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist
Identities. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
Skilton, Andrew. 2013a. “Theravada.” In A Companion to Buddhist
Philosophy, edited by Steven M. Emmanuel, 71–85. 1st ed. John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.
———. 2013b. “Elective Aﬃnities: The Reconstruction of a Forgotten
Episode in the Shared History of Thai and British Buddhism—
Kapilavaḍḍho and Wat Paknam.” In A Buddhist Crossroads: Pioneer
European Buddhists and Globalizing Asian Networks, 1860–1960.
Contemporary Buddhism 14 (1): special issue edited by Alicia Turner,
Laurence Cox, and Brian Bocking, 149-168.
———. 2016. “Pīti in the ‘Old Meditation’ (Boran Kammatthan), or Why Is
Pīti Always the First Stage of the Boran Kammatthan Meditation
Process?” Unpublished paper delivered at Traditional Theravada
Meditation (boran kammatthan), Siem Reap, July 5–6, 2016.
———. 2019. “Meditation and Its Subjects: Tracing Kammaṭṭhāna from the
Early Canon to the Boran Kammathan Traditions of Southeast Asia.”
Contemporary Buddhism 20 (1): 36–72.
Skilton, Andrew, and Phibul Choompolpaisal. 2014. “The Old Meditation
(Boran Kammatthan), a Pre-reform Theravāda Meditation System from
Wat Ratchasittharam: The Pīti Section of the Kammatthan Matchima
Baeb Lamdub.” Aséanie 33:83–116.
———. 2015. “The Ancient Theravāda Meditation System, Borān
Kammaṭṭhāna: Ānāpānasati or ‘Mindfulness of the Breath’ in
Kammatthan Majjima Baeb Lamdub.” Buddhist Studies Review 32 (2):
207–229.
———. 2017. “How to Deal with Wind Illnesses: Two Short Meditation
Texts from Buddhist Southeast Asia.” In Buddhism and Medicine: An
Anthology of Premodern Sources, edited by C. Pierce Salguero, 425–
430. New York: Columbia University Press.
Soma Thera. 1949. The Way of Mindfulness: Being the Translation of the
Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta of the Majjhima Nikaya; Its Commentary, the
Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta Vaṇṇanā of the Papañcasūdannī of Buddhaghosa
Thera; and Excerpts from the Līnatthapakāsanā Tīkā, Marginal Notes,
of Dhammapāla Thera on the Commentary. Colombo: Vaijrama. Rev.
online ed., “The Way of Mindfulness: The Satipatthana Sutta and Its
Commentary,” Access to Insight (BCBS Edition), November 30, 2013,
www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/soma/wayof.html, accessed

--- PAGE 255 ---
December 1, 2019.
Somadasa, K. D. 1987–1995. Catalogue of the Hugh Nevill Collection of
Sinhalese Manuscripts in the British Library. 7 vols. London and
Henley on Thames: British Library and Pali Text Society.
Strong, John S. 2010. “ ‘The Devil Was in That Little Bone’: The Portuguese
Capture and Destruction of the Buddha’s Tooth Relic.” In Relics and
Remains, edited by Alexandra Walsham, 184–198. Past and Present
Supplement 5. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Subhūti, Waskaḍuwē. (1876) 2001. Nāmamālā or A Work on Pali Grammar.
Colombo: Government Printing Oﬃce. Reprint, New Delhi: Asian
Educational Services.
Suksamran, Somboon. 1982. Buddhism and Politics in Thailand: A Study of
Socio-political Change and Political Activism of the Thai Sangha.
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Suraweera, A. V. 1968. “The Imprisonment of Sangharāja Saranaṃkara.”
Vidyodaya Journal of Arts, Sciences and Letters 1: 53–57.
Taylor, James L. 1993. Forest Monks and the Nation-State: An
Anthropological and Historical Study in Northeastern Thailand.
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Taylor, Charles. 1995. “Two Theories of Modernity.” Hastings Center
Report 25 (2): 24–33.
Terwiel, B. J. 1979. “Tattooing in Thailand’s History.” Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Great Britain & Ireland 111: 156–166.
———. 2019. “The City of Nibbāna in the Thai Picture Books of the Three
Worlds.” Contemporary Buddhism 20 (1): 184–199.
Thanaveero, Veera (Phrakhrusangkharak). 1994 [2537 B.E.]. Kammatthan
Kae Kam Raksa Rok [Meditation: The Solving of Kamma, the Curing of
Illnesss]. Nonthaburi, Thailand: Sampachanya Press.
Tiyavanich, Kamala. 1997. Forest Recollections: Wandering Monks in
Twentieth-Century Thailand. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Trenckner, V. 1928. The Milindapanho: Being Dialogues between King
Milinda and the Buddhist Sage Nāgasena. London: Royal Asiatic
Society.
Turner, Alicia. 2014. Saving Buddhism: Moral Community and the
Impermanence of Colonial Religion. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i
Press.
Unschuld, Paul U. 1979. “The Chinese Reception of Indian Medicine in the
First Millennium A.D.” Bulletin of the History of Medicine 53 (3): 329–

--- PAGE 256 ---
345.
Urkasame, Kitchai. 2013. “A Study of Elements in Yogāvacara Tradition
from Tham Scripts Palm-Leaf Manuscripts.” PhD thesis, University of
Sydney.
Weiss, Mitchell G. 1980. “Caraka Saṃhitā on the Doctrine of Karma.” In
Karma and Rebirth in the Classical Indian Traditions, edited by Wendy
Doniger O’Flaherty, 90–115. London: University of California Press.
Wenk, Klaus. 1975. Laotische Handschriften. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner
Verlag.
White, David Gordon. 1984. “Why Gurus Are Heavy.” Numen 31 (1): 40–
73.
Woodward, F. L. 1916. Manual of a Mystic: Being a Translation from the
Pali and Sinhalese Work Entitled the Yogāvachara’s Manual. London:
Pali Text Society.
Wujastyk, Dominik. (1998) 2001. The Roots of Ayurveda: Selections from
the Ayurvedic Classics. Rev. ed. Penguin Classics. New Delhi: Penguin
Books.
———. 2000. “The Combinatorics of Tastes and Humours in Indian
Medicine and Mathematics.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 28 (5–6):
479–495.
Wyatt, David K. 1969. The Politics of Reform in Thailand: Education in the
Reign of King Chulalongkorn. New Haven and London: Yale University
Press.
Yasothararat, Phramaha Jai. 1936 [2478 B.E.]. Nangsue Phuttha-
rangsithrisadi-yan wa duai Samatha lae Vipassana-kammathan Si Yuk
[Book on Buddha-rangsī-trisadī-yan Relating to Samatha and Vipassanā
Meditation During the Four Periods]. Bangkok: n.p.
Zysk, Kenneth G. (1991) 1998. Asceticism and Healing in Ancient India:
Medicine in the Buddhist Monastery. Rev. ed. Indian Medical Tradition
2. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

--- PAGE 257 ---
INDEX
Note: Index entries from the print edition of this book have been included for
use as search terms. They can be located by using the search feature of your
e-book reader.
Abhidhamma
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
colonial views of
diminished importance of
functions of
and generative grammar, link between
group theory mathematics in
hadayavatthu in
iterative listing in
language, understanding of in
in meditation manuals
phonemes and
psychophysical being in
shared basis of
somatic transformation and
substitution in
in Theravada
vipassanā in
and Visuddhimagga, concordance with
See also causality; dhammas
Abhidhamma Piṭaka. See also Paṭṭhāna (“Conditional Relations”)
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma)
absorption concentration. See jhāna
Adams, John

--- PAGE 258 ---
aggregates, ﬁve
Alabaster, Henry
alchemy
letter
of mercury and gold
allegory
Amarapura Nikāya lineage
Amatākaravaṇṇanā
alchemy in
body pathway in
male monastic context of
nimitta in
publication of
triggering process in
views on
and Visuddhimagga, comparison of
Amṛtākara Varṇanāva
Ananda Bodhi
animitta (“without sign”)
arahaṃ recitation
arhatship
attainment of
mental states of
path of
articulation, six places of.
See also sthānin
Asgiriya temple
Ashoka
Aṣṭadhyāyī (Pāṇini)
astrology
Aung Duang, King
Aung, Shwe Zan
Awakening
Ayurveda

--- PAGE 259 ---
human psychophysical model in
obstetrics in
permutations in
substitution in
use of term
See also Caraka Saṃhitā; Suśruta Saṃhitā
Ayutthaya
dwindling inﬂuence of
lineages of
manuscripts from
meditation method of
missions to Sri Lanka from
royal court of
sacking of
Balapiṭiya
Bambaragala lineage
Bangkok
manuscripts in
Thammayut lineage in
wats in
See also National Library of Thailand
Bangkok Thai language
bases (āyatana)
Battambang, Cambodia
Becchetti, Catherine
Bernon, Olivier de
on initiation rituals
manuscripts documented by
works of
Bhesajja-khandha
Bibliothèque Nationale
Bizot, François
contributions of
on embryology

--- PAGE 260 ---
on grammatical substitution
on living traditions
manuscripts documented by
on Rāmāyaṇa
on rebirthing rituals
works of
Blackburn, Anne
Blavatsky, Helena
Bode, Mabel
Bodleian Library
body
constituents of
ease of
as locus of transformation
meditation on decomposition of, (see also impurities, ten)
and mind, relationship between
modern approach to
pathways in
supramundane
See also somatic practices; somatic transformation
borān kammaṭṭhāna (“old meditation”)
alchemy and
ayurvedic obstetrics and
Buddha’s light rays in
dating
direct experience, emphasis on
disappearance of
as distinct practice
distinctive features of
earliest printed sources
generative grammar in
isolation of
Jan’s inﬂuence on
Kaccāyana’s grammar in

--- PAGE 261 ---
lineages of, connection between
marginalization of
medical model of transformation
in
misunderstanding
Mongkut’s inﬂuence on
negative assessments of
nimitta in
normative Pali texts and
overview
phonemes in
progression in
rejection of
secrecy in
shifting focus in
simpliﬁed
sources of
suppression of
terms for
textual contamination in
textual evidence, (see also meditation manuals; narratives)
during Thai reform
Thammayut forest tradition and
Tibetan dream yoga and
and traditional medicine, eﬀect of undermining
and Vipassanā, relationship between
Western scholarship on
See also under Abhidhamma
Boromakot, King
Bowring Treaty
Bradley, Dan Beach
brahmanical Hinduism
Brahmasvara
Britain. See also United Kingdom

--- PAGE 262 ---
British Library
Buddha
biography of
images of
in itipiso formula
language of
original teachings of
qualities of
sacred word of
somatic transformation of
in Sri Lanka
Western views of
written words representing
Buddha Jayanti celebrations
Buddhadatta, Polvattē
Buddhaghosa. See also Visuddhimagga (Path of Puriﬁcation, Buddhaghosa)
Buddhahood
Buddhanorakan
Buddharakkhita, Hulaṃgomuvē
Buddhas, generating within
Buddhism
Ayurveda and
and Buddhists, dissonant attitudes on
centralizing
conversion to
critical approach to
decline of
early
embryology in
medicine and
mundane and supramundane in
national identities and
as political tool
science and

--- PAGE 263 ---
Sixth Council
transformation in
as universal religion
Western interest in
Western views of
Buddhist revival/reform
in colonial period
meditation in
monastic medical practice in
post–World War II
printing and
See also under individual countries
Bunheng, Samdech Preah Krou Om
Buntheoun, Sam
Burma (Myanmar)
Abhidhamma in
Buddhist revival in
colonialism in
medicine in
monastic lineages in
printing in
scholarly Buddhism in
smallpox in
study and practice debate in
Thudhamma reform in
Vipassanā in
weikza in
cakras
Calcutta
Cambodia
borān kammaṭṭhāna, decline of
borān kammaṭṭhāna, initial revival of
borān kammaṭṭhāna in
Cold War period in

--- PAGE 264 ---
colonialism in
living traditions in
Mahanikay monks in
manuscripts in
Marxism in
medicine in
meditation manuals in
militant monks in
modernizers in
monastic conduct in
nuns ordination in
printing in
Rāmāyaṇa in
reform in
suppression of Buddhism in
textual evidence in
Vinaya in
Vipassanā in
Caraka Saṃhitā
Carrithers, Michael
caste
Catholicism
causality
in Abhidhamma
borān kammaṭṭhāna and
omniscience and
order and reverse order of
See also dependent origination
celibacy
cetasika dhamma (aspects of consciousness)
Abhidhamma analysis of
arising of
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
causality and

--- PAGE 265 ---
in healing
meditation and
phonemes and
substitution and
Ceylon. See Sri Lanka (Ceylon)
Chah, Ajan
Chakri dynasty
Chao Phya Thipakon
chemistry. See also alchemy
Chiang Mai
China
printing in
Chinese translations
Chodok Yannasittho
Chomsky, Noam
Choompolpaisal, Phibul
Christianity
conversion to
encroachment of
missionaries of
responding to
view of religion in
Chulachomklao Tipiṭaka
Chum (Phra Sangwaranuwonthera)
Chuon Nath
citta (states of consciousness)
Abhidhamma analysis of
desirable states of
internalizing
jhāna
khandha of
materiality arising from
substitution of
See also mental states

--- PAGE 266 ---
Cittā, Princess (also Prince Citto)
clairvoyance
Cold War
Colombo
Colombo Museum
colonialism
competing powers of
French
language in
material dominance of
meditation, view of in
non-involvement in religion
printing during
responses to
retreat of
in Sri Lanka
traditional medicine and
traditional technologies and
communism
Compendium of Philosophy (Aung)
conditions, twenty-four
consciousness
in Abhidhamma
aggregates and
continuity of
Indic model of
language and
meditation and
as mobile
and physicality, link between
See also cetasika dhamma (aspects of consciousness); citta (states of
consciousness)
Copleston, Reginald
corpses, ten ugly sights of. See impurities, ten

--- PAGE 267 ---
cosmogony
cosmology
court society. See also royalty
Darunnakon, Luangvisan
Darwinism
de Chastenet, Armand Marie Jacques
de Silva, G. Sagāris
de Zilva Wickremasinghe, Don Martino
delivery methods
Democratic Kampuchea period (Cambodia)
dependent origination
devotion
Dhammadinna
Dhammajhān
Dhammakaya Foundation
Dhammakaya movement
Dhammakkhandha, Kapugama
dhammas
inviting
types of
use of term
dhammasaññā
Dhammaviṅsun
Dharmapada
Dharmapala, Anagarika
Dhīrānanda, Laṅkāgoḍa
Digital Library of Lao Manuscripts
divine abidings (brahmavihāra)
divine ear
Doratiyāveye
doṣa (Pali dosa)
doubt
Draper, John William
dream yoga

--- PAGE 268 ---
East India Company
École française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO). See also Finot, Louis
education
eightfold path
elements
ﬁve
four
elements (dhātu), eighteen
elision (lopa)
embryology. See also Ayurveda, obstetrics in; rebirthing rituals
energy channels
English language
English Sangha Trust
enlightenment, physical
transformation of
Entrican, James
Esoteric Theravada
cover
structure of
ethics
Europe
and Asia, relationship between
manuscript collections in
printing in
science from
superiority of, rhetorical
fetal development. See embryology
Finot, Louis
food
repulsiveness of
subtle
forest traditions
in Sri Lanka
Tai-Lao

--- PAGE 269 ---
Thammayut
“Foundation Institution Kammatthan Majjhima Baablumdup,”
Four Truths
Goenka system
gold. See alchemy
grammar
classical Indic
cosmogony and
descriptive
origin of
Pali
prescriptive
traditional and reform approaches to
grammar, generative
and Abhidhamma, link between
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
mathematics and
and meditation, correlation between
methods of
permutation in
Sanskrit
substitution in
See also Kaccāyana’s grammar
Great Spell of Unsullied Pure Light
Greene, Eric
group theory mathematics
Gunananda, Mohoṭṭivattē
guṇas
Gunawardana, Leslie
Guttenberg, Johannes
Hangurangketa Wihāra
Hansen, Anne
Harris, Zellig

--- PAGE 270 ---
heart-base
heat, retention of
hīnayāna
hindrances, ﬁve
Hinduism. See also brahmanical Hinduism; Śaivism
History of the Conﬂict between Religion and Science (Draper)
Hpo Hlaing
humors. See doṣa (Pali dosa)
Huot Tath
hypnotism
immortality
impermanence
impurities, ten
India
alchemy in
anatomical understanding in
Buddhism in
cholera epidemic in
generative grammar in
stamps and sealings in
Indochina
initiations
inoculation. See also variolation
inscriptions. See also Phitsanulok inscription
insight (vipassanā)
emphasis on
and samatha, dichotomy between
uses of term
in Visuddhimagga
insight knowledges
intranasal cavity
itipiso formula
Jan Sirijantho (Ubali)

--- PAGE 271 ---
Jātaka
Jenner, Edward
jhāna
attainment of
developing
internalizing
joy in
nimitta and
phonemes representing
Jinavaṃsa, Kaḍavädduvē
Jīvaka
Journal of Sacred Literature
Kaccāyana’s grammar
Kahrs, Eivind
Kaitheun, Suk
kammaṭṭhāna
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
honoriﬁcs for
Kampong Cham Province
Kandal Province
Kanduboda retreat center
Kandy
Kapilavaḍḍho
karma (Pali kamma)
kasiṇa, ten
Kātantra
Kayawadee, Ajan
Keo, Achar
Kheav, So
Khmer-Tai culture/Buddhism
Khmer language
Khmer Rouge. See also Democratic Kampuchea period (Cambodia)
Khom script
Kīrti Śri Rājasiṃha, King

--- PAGE 272 ---
Kittivuddho, Phrathepkittipanyakhun
knowledges, ten (dasañaṇa)
Koenig, Friedrich Gottlob
Konbaung dynasty
Kuśalakriyānusandeśaya
Lagirarde, François
laity
in Cambodia
oﬃciators (achar)
role of
Vipassanā and
Lakkhaṇadhamma
language
as creative principle
as material bridge to consciousness
philosophy of
potency of
transformative power of
worldly applications of
Laos
borān kammaṭṭhāna in
colonialism in
living traditions in
manuscripts in
medicine in
nimitta in
publications in
reform in
textual evidence in
Thammayut lineage in
Leclère, Adhémard
Ledi lineage
Ledi Sayadaw
light, pinpoints/spheres of

--- PAGE 273 ---
light rays, six
linguistics, Western
living meditation lineages
in Cambodia
dating of
in Laos
oral tradition in
in Thailand
at Wat Ratchasittharam
longevity practices
Lopburi
loving kindness practice
Magness, Terence
Mahā Pan
Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta
Mahābodhi Society
Mahākaccāyana
Mahāmakut Buddhist University
Mahānāma
Mahanikay monastic lineage
borān kammaṭṭhāna in
in Cambodia
forest meditation in
ordination in
practice in
reform in
supreme patriarch from
Mahasi Sayadaw
Mahāvihāra monastery
Mahāvisuddhācariya
Mahinda
Malasart, Woramat
Man Bhūridatto
Mandalay

--- PAGE 274 ---
mantra. See also parikamma (“aid,” meditative)
Manuscript Conservation Association of Thailand
manuscripts
circulation of
collections of
dating
destruction/removal of
identifying
palm-leaf
paper
production of
recycling
Maraṇañānasutta
Marxism
Materia Medica (Mason)
materiality
and consciousness, interrelationship between
as consciousness-born
constituents of
of language
and spirituality, relationship between
transforming
mathematics. See also group theory mathematics
medicine
British superiority claim
manuals for
traditional, bans on
traditional, re-allowance of
Western, impact of
See also Ayurveda
meditation
and Abhidhamma, rift between
colonial views of
and generative grammar, correlation between

--- PAGE 275 ---
mechanical
medicine and
as mind-science
misunderstanding
modern applications of
as political identity
textual sources, emphasis on
Thai interest in
Theravada traditions of
as universal mysticism
Western medicine’s impact on
See also mindfulness
meditation manuals
identifying
materials for
permutations in
production of
of Siyam Nikāya
style and contents of
memorization
mental factors. See also cetasika dhamma (aspects of consciousness)
mental states
beautiful (sobhana citta)
functional (kiriya)
medicine from
skillful (kusala citta)
substitution and
types of
mercury. See alchemy
merit
Mesmer, Franz Anton
mesmerism
Mettanando Bhikkhu
Milindapañha

--- PAGE 276 ---
mind
Asian primacy of
and body, relationship between
ease of
puriﬁcation
mind-consciousness
mindfulness
of body
of breathing
Western context of
miraculous powers. See suprahuman/supramundane powers
modernity
momentariness
monastic community
expulsion from
hierarchy in
during Khmer Rouge
literacy in
medical practice by
militancy in
modernizations of
ordination in
reform in
requisites in
study and practice debate in
Western expectations of
See also nuns; sīmā (monastic boundary)
Mongkut (Rāma IV)
authority of
borān kammaṭṭhāna critique of
Buddhist reform of
meditation ability of
Monivong, King
Mūlakammaṭṭhāna

--- PAGE 277 ---
Mūlasarvāstivādavinaya
Museum für Indische Kunst (Berlin)
Myanmar. See Burma (Myanmar)
name and form
Ñāṇa, Saṅgharāja (Maung Taung Sayadaw)
Ñāṇadhaja, U
Ñāṇārāma, Mātara
Nangklao
Naono, Atsuko
Nārada, U
narratives
nasal cavity. See also intranasal cavity
National Library of Thailand
National Museum of Vietnamese History
National Oﬃce of Vipassanākammaṭṭhāna
navel
Neang Sam Ol
Nevill, Hugh
Ñeyya (second Maung Taung Sayadaw)
nibbana
allegories for
amata (deathless)
progressive stages to
Nibbāna Sutta
nimitta (“signs”)
in creating Buddha within
diagrams
initial generation of
internalizing
inviting
as measurement of attainment
medical application of
in meditation manuals
misunderstandings about

--- PAGE 278 ---
physical symptoms of
substitution and
symbols of
three stages of
as transformative elements
non-returner
Norodom, King, royal ordinance of
no-self/non-self
Noun Soth
numerology
nuns
oﬀerings
Olcott, Henry Steel
omniscience
once-returner
one-pointed consciousness (ekaggacitta)
Ong, Patrick
oral tradition
Oudam Ponha Doung Phang, Samdech
Ouk, Dhammalikhit
Oum Sour
Oun, Achar
Oun Sophy (a.k.a Yey Phy)
Pagan Kingdom
Pali canon
caste in
Khmer translation of
language of
medicine in
mindfulness of breathing in
publication of
in reform, emphasis of
Visuddhimagga and

--- PAGE 279 ---
See also Abhidhamma Piṭaka; Sutta Piṭaka; Vinaya Piṭaka
Pali language
alphabet/phonemes of
creative potential of
generative grammar of
literary production in
meditation manuals in
potency of
and Prakrit, confusing
as sacred
study of
word position in
in yantras
Pali Text Society
Pan, Samdech
Pānadura
Paññasāmi
pārājika oﬀenses
Paramanuchitchinorot
parikamma (“aid,” meditative)
paritta verses
Pasteur, Louis
Paṭhamasambodhi (Sa)
paths and fruits, four
Pathumthani
Paṭisambhidāmagga
patronage
in Burma
competition for
loss of
in Sri Lanka
in Thailand
Paṭṭhāna (“Conditional Relations”)
Payutto, Payuth

--- PAGE 280 ---
permutations
in Abhidhamma
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
generative grammar and
philology
Phimonlatham (a.k.a. At Asapho)
Phitsanulok inscription
Phnom Penh
phonemes
alvidhi of
articulation places, (see also sthānin)
bringing into body
importance of understanding
as paramattha
potency of
skillfulness in
as symbols
Phong Vorn
Phra Ñāṇakasiṇa
Phrayakosakonvijan
pīti (joys), ﬁve
experiencing
internalizing
medical application of
nimitta and
substitution and
Piyatharo Rang
polytheism
Prakrit
printing
development of
impact on borān kammaṭṭhāna
prohibitions of
secrecy in

--- PAGE 281 ---
prognostication
protective practices
amulets
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
language in
manuscripts in
prohibition of
water blessing
yantras
Protestantism
psychology
Rājādhi Rājasiṃha, King
Rajasiddhimuni, Phra
Rāma I, Chulalok
Rāma II
Rāma III
Rāma IV. See Mongkut (Rāma IV)
Rāma V, Chulalongkorn
Rāma VI, Vajiravudh
Rāma VII, Prajadhipok
Rāma VIII, Ananda
Rāma IX, Bhumibol
Rāmañña Nikāya monastic lineage
Rāmāyaṇa
Rangoon (Yangon)
Ratchamahamuni, Somdet Phramaha Vichaithat
Ratnajoti and Ratnapāla
rebirth
rebirthing rituals
recollections (anussati). See also mindfulness
Reformation
refuge
relics
religion

--- PAGE 282 ---
repetition
Rhys Davids, Caroline
Rhys Davids, T. W.. See also Yogāvacara’s Manual, The
right-hand/left-hand categories
robes
Ros So
royalty
authority of
borān kammaṭṭhāna and
See also court society; patronage
Ruangsan, Niras
Ruiz-Falqués, Aleix
Sa, Phussadeva (a.k.a. Pusso Sa/Somdet Sa)
Saddatthabhedacintā
Saddavimala (Purity of Sound)
Saddhammajotipāla, Chapaṭa
Śaivism
samādhi
samatha meditation
contemporary understanding of
de-emphasizing
progress in
in Visuddhimagga
Sampau, Mount
samsara
interrupting
liberation from
mental states and
perpetuating
Sangha Act
Sangha Reform Act
Sāṅkhyan system
Sanskrit
alphabet, (see also Śiva Sūtras)

--- PAGE 283 ---
generative grammar of
grammar, divine origin of
as sacred
sandhi of
Western study of
word position in
Saraṇaṃkara, Ambagahavattē
Saraṇaṃkara, Väliviṭa
sāsana, decline of. See under Buddhism, decline of
Sāsanavaṃsa
Sātavāhana, King
Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta
Savong, Buth
science
changing position of
cognitive
and religion, relationship between
sealings
self-mesmerism
senses, six
Sermchai Jayamangalo
sexual practices
Siam. See Thailand (formerly Siam)
Sīlālaṃkāra, Harumalgoḍa
sīmā (monastic boundary)
Sinhala
Sisowath, King
Śiva sūtras
Sivisuddhisom, Rachathibbadee
six pairs
Siyam Nikāya lineage
authority of
disaﬀection with
meditation in

--- PAGE 284 ---
in Sri Lanka
Skilling, Peter
Skilton, Andrew
smallpox prevention
somatic practices
somatic transformation
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
in Theravada
Sot, Candasaro
lineage of
meditation instructions of
reputation of
vijjā dhammakāya of
Southeast Asia
borān kammaṭṭhāna
Buddhist revival in
colonialism in
grammar training in
Kaccāyana’s grammar in
manuscripts in
medicine in
printing in
yantra in
spiritual attainment
Sri Lanka (formerly Ceylon)
borān kammaṭṭhāna in
Buddhist revival in
colonialism in
grammar training in
manuscripts from
medicine in
meditation manuals in
meditation revival in
monastic lineages in

--- PAGE 285 ---
Nevill in
nimitta in
nun ordination in
printing in
royal edicts
scholarly Buddhism in
textual evidence in
tooth relic in
Vipassanā in
sthānin
stream enterer
stūpas
Subhūti, Waskaḍuwē
substitution
in Abhidhamma
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
in brahmanical rituals
in generative grammar
in Indian medicine
in Indic culture
of mental states
methods of
in yantras
suﬀering
Sukhothai cultural region
supernatural beings
suprahuman/supramundane powers
supramundane states
Suśruta Saṃhitā
Sutta Piṭaka
symbolism
letter
literary
male/female

--- PAGE 286 ---
number
in parikamma
right-hand/left-hand
robes
See also womb imagery
Tai-Khmer Buddhism
Tai-Lao meditation
Taksin, King
tantra
borān kammaṭṭhāna and
Buddhist
sacred language in
Tibetan
tattoos
Taylor, Jim
teacher-pupil relationships
technology
in meditation instruction
traditional, loss of
of transformation
See also delivery methods
Terwiel, B. J.
Te Tong Yi. See Yi, Achar
textual study
and experience/practice, debate between
high value on
Thailand (formerly Siam)
Abhidhamma in
borān kammaṭṭhāna, revival of
interest in
borān kammaṭṭhāna in
Burmese invasion of
civil war in
Cold War in

--- PAGE 287 ---
colonialism in
education in
ethnic integration in
living traditions in
manuscripts in
medicine in
militant monks in
as modern state
Pali studies in
printing in
pro-democracy coup in
reform in
royal ayurvedic tradition in
tattoos in
technology in
textual evidence in
vijjā dhammakāya in
Vipassanā in
in World War I
Thammavitjayanusat (Jan)
Thammayut Nikāya lineage
expansion of
forest meditation in
inﬂuence of
Mahanikay and
reformist platform of
robes of
Thap, Buddhasiri
Theosophy
Thep Vong, Saṅgharāja
Theravada Buddhism
alphabet origins in
borān kammaṭṭhāna elements in
colonial attitudes toward

--- PAGE 288 ---
consciousness in
materiality and consciousness in
meditation texts in
meditation traditions of
mundane and supramundane in
nuns order in
orthodoxy in
Pali, role of in
printing, impact of
somatic transformation in
Third Anglo-Mysore War
Ṭhitavedo
Thonburi.
See also Wat Ratchasittharam
three characteristics (lakkhaṇa)
three unskillful roots/ﬁres
Thudhamma reform
Tibetan Buddhism
Tieng, Samdech
Tissamahārāma
Tisso Uan
transformation
Abhidhamma’s role in
alchemy and
in borān kammaṭṭhāna
embryology and chemistry, correlations between
methods of
technologies of
through language
trigonometry
U Ba Khin
Ubonratchathani
Udong
ultimate reality/truth (paramattha)

--- PAGE 289 ---
United Kingdom
universal emperor
U Nu
Urkasame, Kitchai
vaccination
Vanarot Ken Vong
Vichay That Mahamuni
Vajirañāṇa. See Mongkut (Rāma IV)
Vajrayana. See also tantra
Vākkapprakaraṇa
Varañāṇa Mahāthera
variolation
Vedic tradition
Veera Thanaveero, Phrakhrusangkharak
Vientiane lineage
Vietnam
vijjā dhammakāya
Vimuttimagga-uddāna
Vinaya
Chinese
correct interpretation of
grammar debates and
in reform
Vinaya Piṭaka
Vipassanā
borān kammaṭṭhāna and
dominance of
inﬂuence of
printing and
rise of
and samatha, de-emphasizing
in Sri Lanka
teaching environment
in United Kingdom

--- PAGE 290 ---
Visuddhimagga (Path of Puriﬁcation, Buddhaghosa)
alterations to
and Amatākaravaṇṇanā, comparison of
attainments in
borān kammaṭṭhāna and
emphasis on
inﬂuence of
insight meditation in
on meditation teachers
nimitta in
seven puriﬁcation in
Vivitthavanpreecha
volitional formations
von Hinüber, Oskar
Wachirayan, Prince
Wat Baromnivat
Wat Botum
Wat Bovornnivet
Wat Champukaek
Wat Damrei Sar
Wat Doi Suthep
Wat Hong
Wat Luang Pho Sot
Dhammakayaram
Wat Mahathat
Wat Paknam
Wat Phra Dhammakaya
Wat Pradusongtham
Wat Pras Meas
Wat Preah Thomlanga
Wat Preak Brang
Wat Ratchasittharam
borān kammaṭṭhāna at
dhammas and

--- PAGE 291 ---
living meditation lineages at
manuscripts at
nimitta instruction of
Wat Ratchathiwat (Wat Samoray)
Wat Russei Chrouy
Wat Sangwet
Wat Sirijannimit (Wat Khao Phra Ngam)
Wat Suea
Wat Thathong
Wat Uṇṇalom
water irrigation
Wattananusit, Prachark
weikza meditation
Weiss, Mitchell
Wheel of the Law, The (Alabaster)
White, David Gordon
Wijeratne
wisdom
womb imagery
alchemy and
in creating Buddha within
nimitta and
in rebirthing ritual
See also embryology
Woodward, F. L.
World Fellowship of Buddhism
World War I
World War II
Wu, Empress
yantras (sacred diagrams)
generative grammar and
repetition in creating
subdermal implanting of
Yasothararat, Jai

--- PAGE 292 ---
Yi, Achar
Yiching
yogāvacara
Yogāvacara’s Manual, The
Young, Thomas
Zen
zero place-holder

--- PAGE 293 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Kate Crosby’s interest in Buddhism began as an infant, when she was
enraptured by a large Kuan-yin she met in the courtyard garden of the
Victoria and Albert Museum, London. The Kuan-yin has since moved to Fa-
Yue Buddhist temple in Brierley Hill. Meanwhile Kate was introduced to
Buddhist meditation and Indo-European languages at high school and went
on to study Buddhism and related languages in Oxford, Hamburg, Kelaniya,
Pune, and Varanasi. Her translations of Sanskrit works include the eighth-
century Buddhist treatise, the Bodhicaryāvatāra (1995), and two books of the
Indian epic, the Mahābhārata: The Dead of Night and the Women (2009).
Her main research interest is the literature, history, and practice of Theravada
Buddhism throughout Asia, reﬂected in publications such as Theravada
Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, Identity (2013), Traditional Theravada
Meditation and Its Modern-Era Suppression (2014), and Variety in
Theravada Meditation (ed., 2019). She is Professor of Buddhist Studies in
the Department of Theology and Religious Studies at King’s College
London.

--- PAGE 294 ---
Sign up to receive news and special oﬀers from Shambhala
Publications.
Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.

