--- Page 1 ---
313
BOOK REVIEWS
Southeast Asian Studies, Vol. 10, No. 2, August 2021, pp. 313–336
©Center for Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University
Tides of Empire: Religion, Development, and Environment in Cambodia
Courtney Work
New York: Berghahn Books, 2020.
After a long hiatus, there is a welcome resurgence of ethnographic research emerging from Cam-
bodia.  Monographs have recently been written by Eve Zucker (2013), Erik Davis (2015), and Krisna 
Uk (2016), and 2020 marked the publication of both Courtney Work’s ethnography and a study by 
Jonathan Padwe (2020).  With the exception of Davis’s urban study, these are anthropological stud-
ies of rural or forest-dwelling communities, and most focus upon the social and material changes 
wrought by the three decades of intermittent warfare and suffering that wracked Cambodia from 
the late 1960s to the late 1990s.
Tides of Empire is an innovative study of a Cambodian village’s rapidly changing forest frontier, 
based upon fieldwork conducted in 2015.  Although Work does not explicitly frame it as such, her 
work is a landscape study, embedded in contemporary theoretical treatments of landscape as an 
entangled material and immaterial terrain that is processual and always becoming.  Work employs 
a post-humanist approach to her material, paying attention to both human and non-human actors 
and agencies, including the weather-world, the trails and roads, the nearby mountain, and the 
spiritual entities embedded in the landscape and residents’ social imaginaries.
Unlike her contemporaries, Work intentionally avoids a focus on the years of conflict and 
genocide except for when they were directly discussed by her interlocutors.  She argues that the 
residents of her field site were focused on present and future subsistence and the discursive 
promises of the development state rather than the vicissitudes of the war years or the vagaries of 
the Khmer Rouge tribunals.  The study is populated with former soldiers and land-hungry postwar 
settlers, but Work keeps her historical gaze wide, aiming to show the similarities in various forms 
of state and non-state formations that have by turns swept across the landscape and its residents. 
Work names all these forms “empire,” a term she defines as a “container for the various formations 
of state” that have influenced the people of her study (p. 4).  Her use of the term also encompasses 
contemporary flows of global capital, development and poverty reduction schemes, and religious 
traditions, specifically Buddhism and Islam.

--- Page 2 ---
Book Reviews
314
Work employs a tidal metaphor in relation to these formations, invoking both the image of 
incoming and receding tides and the debris that retreating ideologies and states leave behind in 
their wake.  She also emphasizes the interstitial nature of her field site, a frontier zone situated 
between “subsistence and accumulation” (p. 1), which she conceptualizes as a contact zone where 
mutual but unequal constitution of subjects and relations to power emerge (p. 15), following Mary 
Louise Pratt (2008).  Work emphasizes both the fragility and the hegemonic properties of these 
successive “tides of empire,” although the book is primarily focused on the contemporary forces 
of extraction, accumulation, religion, and development influencing the frontier setting of her 
study.
After placing the residents of the village into the scene by describing postwar settlement and 
in-migration, Work focuses on other actors in the landscape.  In the second chapter, playfully titled 
a “roadology,” Work explores the history of the village’s trails, roads, and rails.  Local use and 
projects by the Cambodian state, development actors, and private companies are all examined.  The 
abandoned railway is also discussed as an example of long-neglected infrastructure, now being 
reconsidered in the current era of market intensification in ways that will end residents’ creative 
use of the tracks with simple motorized platforms (lorries) that locally move goods (p. 41).  The 
chapter effectively contrasts the discourse of promises of development and progress offered by 
roads with the grounded realities of road building and disintegration in what Work terms the “soft 
and malleable world” of the landscape, where monsoon weather and moving soil change the surface 
of the land every rainy season (p. 46).
In contrast to the many and diverse articulations of power that have swept across the land-
scape, Work argues that landscape itself contains a foundational force of place, which she terms 
chthonic energies or “other-than-human power” (p. 5).  By doing so, keeping tides as our meta-
phor, Work wades out into the complex cross-currents of the ontological turn.  She never directly 
states her ontological stance, but since her text argues for the primacy and prehuman existence of 
animating natural forces, she appears to position herself within a plural ecological approach to 
post-humanist theory (Cadena 2015).  In effect, with her emphasis on chthonic energies, Work is 
presenting an ur-narrative that predates the arrival of humans or the practice of organized religion, 
which she argues is inextricably entangled with king-making, imperial enterprises, and claims to 
territory in Southeast Asia.  This is provocative positioning but also places Work in somewhat 
murky theoretical waters.  On what grounds can any scholar firmly posit the ontological existence 
of nonbiological beings and forces?  We can present no evidence beyond the phenomenological 
experiences and interpretive narratives of human subjects.  Cosmological subjects by definition 
evade empirical examination.
Work argues that the neak ta (literally “the old ones,” and generally conceptualized as tutelary 
or land guardian spirits) are not spirits but rather more fundamental forces at the heart of economic 
and political relations.  The book contains little focus on human-spirit engagements common in

--- Page 3 ---
Book Reviews
315
similar studies, such as the interpretive and diagnostic role of human mediums and diviners. 
Instead, Work makes a strong historical case that beliefs in the powers of animist entities were 
channeled into imperial claims of legitimacy and continue to be sought after by both local human 
inhabitants of a place and the contemporary elite in Cambodia.  However, Work limits her engage-
ment with other scholars of what has been termed the new animism studies, presumably because 
she takes an iconoclastic approach to traditional classificatory systems and wishes to position 
animism outside of what scholars generally term religion.  A productive comparison of her own 
field site, for example, could have been made with Zucker’s 2013 ethnography of another frontier 
village, a work which discusses local beliefs about increasing inaccessibility to the spirit world in 
the postwar milieu of economic accumulation.  One concept that Work does productively engage 
with at length is the polyvalent use of the concept of parami, which is drawn from the concept of 
perfection in Buddhism yet is also used in Cambodia to describe potency emerging from natural 
places with varying degrees of connection to animism and Buddhism.  Work equates parami with 
her concept of chthonic energy and argues that this circulating energy has always undergirded 
and strengthened claims to legitimacy and power by “Buddhism, Brahminism and the kings they 
support” (p. 72).
Postwar scholarship on religion in Cambodia initially largely focused upon the revival of reli-
gious practice and new movements.  Work’s study is a valuable addition to emerging scholarship 
offering a critique of the inequities in power and privilege connected to such religious practice. 
Work’s study is more engaged with themes of political ecology than traditional themes of the 
anthropology of religion.  Work focuses upon “the political and the religious as coexisting modes 
of power, each with particular agendas for making subjects” (p. 134).  The ways in which power 
and protection are sought through engagements with animist entities, Buddhist forces, and global 
Islam by her interlocutors are carefully explored.  These efforts are analyzed in parallel with efforts 
to channel the promises of the development state and the current capitalist forces of extraction. 
Work’s ability to demonstrate similarities across very different objects of analysis is one of the 
strongest contributions of her novel study.  Her chapter on merit building and claims to moral 
power is particularly insightful.
All too often academia continues to ignore the material, to write as if humans and their meaning-­
making projects exist in thin air.  This ethnography has a laudable emphasis on the grounding 
offered by a material landscape that weather plays upon in largely predictable seasonal patterns, 
often stymying human efforts at landscape transformation.  Village residents are subjects of the 
study but do not dominate the analytical stage.  Instead, Work seeks to remove historical debris 
and excavate chthonic forces of place that are acted upon by external projects of state formation 
and organized religion.  Whether or not one agrees that such forces can be divorced from the clas-
sificatory categories of religion, this study provides a provocative analytical perspective for a study 
of landscape.  Using a diverse set of methodological perspectives, Work repeatedly foregrounds

--- Page 4 ---
Book Reviews
316
the power and potency of the mountain and the soil in the face of tides of historical and ideological 
change.  In one final provocation of my own, I question whether this emphasis upon the chthonic 
aspects of landscape is actually too grounded, offering too little recognition to the mobility and 
uncertainty of the cosmological world.  As Andrew Johnson (2020) has argued in another recent 
study, ecological and infrastructural change brings new sources of uncertainty, and that emergent 
uncertainty holds the potency and the promise of new powers—utopic and potentially apocalyptic 
ones.  An exploration of the cosmological implications of the dramatic changes Work outlines in 
her closing chapter, which occurred only a few short years after the end of her fieldwork, could 
yield fertile future analysis.
Lisa Arensen
Institute of Asian Studies, Universiti of Brunei Darussalam
References
Cadena, Marisol de la.  2015.  Earth Beings: Ecologies of Practice across Andean Worlds.  Durham: Duke 
University Press.
Davis, Erik.  2015.  Deathpower: Buddhism’s Ritual Imagination in Cambodia.  New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Johnson, Andrew.  2020.  Mekong Dreaming: Life and Death along a Changing River.  Durham: Duke 
University Press.
Padwe, Jonathan.  2020.  Disturbed Forests, Fragmented Memories: Jarai and Other Lives in the Cambodian 
Highlands.  Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Pratt, Mary Louise.  2008.  Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation.  London: Routledge.
Uk, Krisna.  2016.  Salvage: Cultural Resilience among the Jorai of Northeast Cambodia.  Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press.
Zucker, Eve.  2013.  Forest of Struggle: Moralities of Remembrance in Upland Cambodia.  Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Islam, Humanity, and Indonesian Identity: Reflections on History
Ahmad Syafii Maarif
Translated by George A. Fowler
Singapore: NUS Press, 2019.
This book is valuable for its exposition of a characteristically modernist Muslim perspective on 
Indonesia’s future.  Its writer, Ahmad Syafii Maarif (b. West Sumatra 1935), finds models for that 
future in the history of Islamic modernism in the country, and especially in the example of the 
Masyumi party.  This party was a strong player in Indonesian politics until 1960, when it was 
broken apart by Sukarno, who was at that time intent on reducing the legislative power of the