--- Page 1 ---
769
Reviews
The Sanskrit text is attractively typeset in Devanāgarī script. My only complaint is that the print 
should be larger for both the text and apparatus—a constraint perhaps imposed by the press to save 
paper, but which makes it difficult to study the rich, multi-level critical apparatus, and unnecessarily 
taxing to read the text itself.
	
	
	
	
	
	
Shaman Hatley 
	
	
	
	
	
	
University of Massachusetts Boston
The Brahmayāmalatantra or Picumata, vol. 1: Chapters 1–2, 39–40, & 83: Revelation, Ritual, and 
Material Culture in an Early Śaiva Tantra. By Shaman Hatley. Collection Indologie, vol. 133; 
Early Tantra Series, vol. 5. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/École Française 
d’Extrême-Orient/Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universität Hamburg, 2018. Pp. xiv + 695. Rs 
1600.
In 2007 Shaman Hatley completed a doctoral thesis entitled “The Brahmayāmalatantra and Early 
Śaiva Cult of Yoginīs,” a work that I consider to be the finest study of the Yoginīs written to date. Hatley 
never published that dissertation (although it is accessible online), and it is only now that he has brought 
out his first monograph on the subject of the same Brahmayāmalatantra (BraYā). This volume is nei-
ther simply one of “three separate projects . . . carried over” (p. v) from his dissertation nor, in spite of 
its title, a simple edition and translation of five chapters from that massive Tantra. Nor is it simply the 
first volume (albeit published three years after volume two: Csaba Kiss, The Brahmayāmalatantra or 
Picumata, vol. 2: The Religious Observances and Sexual Rituals of the Tantric Practitioner: Chapters 
3, 21, and 45. A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation [Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondi-
chéry, 2015]) of a projected set of three critical editions and translations of portions of the BraYā (p. 
22). Nor is it a return to the Yoginīs that were at the heart of the 2007 dissertation. They and their cults 
are not treated in any of the five chapters edited and translated here; however, as Hatley promises, these 
will figure prominently in the chapters of the BraYā slated to appear in a forthcoming volume three (p. 
23). What one does find here are “heavily revised or re-written” passages excerpted from other parts of 
the original thesis, appearing as portions of chapter 1 and all of chapter 2 of the present volume’s part 
I, together with the edition and translation of the BraYā’s first two chapters, and an appendix (A) com-
prising a list of chapter titles and colophons in the work’s principal manuscript source (NAK 3-370). 
New here are editions and translations of the BraYā’s chapters 39, 40, and 83, together with Hatley’s 
extensive general introduction, a set of “topical studies” (chaps. 2 through 6) based on the BraYā chap-
ters edited and translated in the book’s part II, and several additional appendices (B–F). Three of the 
chapters treated here (1, 39, and 83) “form a coherent group insofar as all three set forth narratives of 
origin” in contradistinction to the rest of the text, “which is otherwise almost entirely prescriptive in 
nature.” The subjects of these chapters are the mythology of the “descent” of the BraYā (chap. 1), the 
origin myth of the “streams” (srotas) of the broader Śaiva revelation (chap. 39), and the origin myth 
of the regalia and practice of the “Great Vow” (mahāvrata) (chap. 83). The BraYā’s chapters 2 and 40, 
prescriptive rather than narrative, treat of the work’s pantheon of mantra deities and the “Razor’s Edge 
Observance” of ascetic (non-orgasmic) coitus, respectively. I will not pass judgment on the quality 
of the edition and translation of this highly challenging text, since Hatley’s expertise in these matters 
surpasses my own. The critical apparatus is a model of erudition, with non-critical readings, grammati-
cal and critical notes, and cross-references to dozens of other (mainly) tantric scriptures provided in 
remarkable detail. The edited text of the five translated chapters is provided in both Devanāgarī (part 
II) and romanized (appendix F) scripts.
After several introductory sections containing requisite information on the BraYā’s manuscript wit-
nesses, editorial conventions, and so forth, the latter part of part I, chapter 1 provides the reader with 
what is to date the most comprehensive account of the BraYā’s redactional strata, relationship to other 
tantric scriptures (both Buddhist and Hindu, extant and non-extant), and, most importantly, the thorny

--- Page 2 ---
770
Journal of the American Oriental Society 140.3 (2020)
problem of the work’s date. On the first count, Hatley suggests that the BraYā was compiled in three 
stages, roughly corresponding to chapters 1–50 (“the core of the old text”), followed by chapters 51–86, 
and chapters 87–104 (p. 65). Concerning the work’s original “core,” Hatley notes its “close relationship 
to a lost text: the Ucchuṣmabhairavatantra” (pp. 66–68, 185–93). Critical discussion of this possibly 
Buddhist ghost in the machine was studiously avoided by Kiss in his 2015 volume, concerning which 
I made a number of critical remarks in my review (JAOS 138.3 [2018]: 96–98). In the masterful bal-
ance of this long chapter, Hatley approaches this work from every possible angle: parameters for dating 
(pp. 71–76), situating the BraYā in tantric literature, both Hindu and Buddhist (pp. 76–124), internal 
evidence (pp. 124–28), geographical and social horizons (pp. 128–37), leading up to a final section 
comprising “provisional conclusions on the dating” of the text (pp. 137–41). Here, Hatley places the 
work “more or less in the seventh to eighth centuries” (p. 139), with its “old core” dating “perhaps 
between 650 and 700 CE” (p. 141).
Hatley’s second chapter, on the multiple names by which the BraYā has called itself and been called 
by others, is uneven in terms of both its presentation of the material and the relevance of its content. His 
treatment of the name Mūlatantra (“Root Scripture”) occasions a review of the evolution of the various 
systematizations of the tantric canon, which culminated in the “normative” five-stream (pañcasrotas) 
model. Here, a set of three stemma representing the “descent of scripture” according to the BraYā and 
two other early sources (pp. 170–72) will be of interest to textualists. Approaching Picumata, the most 
opaque of these names, from every possible angle, Hatley concludes that this title is best translated as 
the “Doctrine Tantra of the Divine Phallus and Cosmic Womb.” This he does on the basis of various 
niruktis from the BraYā itself, which, taken together, indicate that pi denotes semen, the penis, and 
Śiva, while cu denotes menses, the vulva, and Śakti (pp. 153–59).
Oddly juxtaposed to this important datum is Hatley’s chapter three, the least successful of the 
topical studies in the volume, which is based on the BraYā’s fortieth chapter on the asidhārāvrata 
(“sword’s edge practice”: Hatley prefers “razor’s edge observance”). Devoted to the practice of coitus 
reservatus, this chapter is an outlier in a scripture otherwise overflowing with sexual emissions, as the 
title Picumata indicates. Hatley’s characterization of this as “an inflection of a Brāhmaṇical observance 
of the same name” (p. 200), what “seems to be the first tantric ritual attested which involves sexual 
contact” (p. 203), and one of the “practices of Śaiva brahmin ascetics” that “found their way into the 
Mantramārga or Tantric Śaivism” (pp. 209–10) lays bare a contradiction lying at the heart of a scholarly 
convention concerning the advent of Śaiva Tantra. In a ritual system in which the picu figured “among 
the most important substances utilized in ritual . . . the asidhārāvrata’s focus upon ascetic mastery of 
sexual arousal and abjuration of orgasm [were] hence anomalous”—an assessment with which Abhi-
navagupta agreed, when he “viewed it as a form of penance (tapas) not specifically tantric in character” 
(p. 207). Yet, in spite of this, Hatley attempts to make the case that given its historical priority “this 
observance may have had a profoundly important role in the development of ‘tantric sex,’ and has 
continuity with a range of later practices emphasizing seminal retention” (pp. 207–8).
None of the works that preceded the Bhairava Tantras or the scriptures of the Mantrapīṭha—neither 
the orthodox teachings and rituals of the Śaivasiddhānta nor the demonological and magical content 
of the so-called bhūta-tantras and gāruḍa-tantras—were tantric. As Alexis Sanderson has shown for 
medieval Kashmiri royal protection rites (“Religion and the State: Śaiva Officiants in the Territory of 
the King’s Brahmanical Chaplain,” Indo-Iranian Journal 47 [2004]: 251–54), much of the ritual con-
tent of these earlier canons simply involves Śaiva overcodings of Atharvanic rituals and traditions. To 
be sure, in their post-scriptural systematizations, later works would identify these as subdivisions of the 
greater tantric canon; but in spite of superficial similarities (a form of Śiva as supreme being, cosmol-
ogy, ritual protocols) between the works of the Atimārga and Mantramārga on the one hand and, on the 
other, the Yāmala Tantras and Śakti Tantras of the Vidyāpīṭha—of which the BraYā is an exemplary 
work—the break between the two was not what Sanderson (“Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions,” in 
The World’s Religions, ed. S. Sutherland et al. [London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1988], 679) long 
ago termed a “Kaula Reformation.” Rather, it was a paradigm shift, the emergence of a new religion, 
whose scriptures generally called themselves “Tantras.”

--- Page 3 ---
771
Reviews
Unlike the exoteric Śaiva scriptures that preceded them, these esoteric works were, in the main, non-
dualist and deeply invested in the “culture of the cremation ground,” subordinating forms of the male 
Śiva to all-powerful goddesses whose entourages were dominated by circles of yoginīs and elevating 
transactions in sexual emissions to the forefront of their ritual programs. This new religion—Tan-
tra—whose traditions are recorded in the Vidyāpīṭha scriptures nonetheless acknowledged its (mainly) 
Mantramārgic foundation. This does not, however, authorize a teleological projection, back onto those 
earlier Śaiva ritual works, of the tantric moniker. A close analogy to this is the canon of the Christian 
Bible, whose “Old Testament” is none other than the scripture of another religion, Judaism—yet no 
responsible historian would claim the Jewish Bible to be a work of early Christianity.
Another scholarly convention to which Hatley subscribes, yet for which there is no hard data, con-
cerns the “elusive Atimārga Kāpālikas” (pp. 248, 274), “whose texts are almost entirely lost” (p. 215) 
and for which there exists virtually no inscriptional evidence. To be sure, human and divine skull-bear-
ers abound in Śaiva mythology and iconography (the subject of Hatley’s chap. 4), but these data do not 
constitute proof for the existence of the Kāpālikas as an “ascetic order” (p. 215). In my judgment, the 
tradition of the skull-bearing ascetic was a literary trope and, perhaps, the reflection of a period in the 
ritual life of the individual tantric practitioner, in which he followed a specific “great vow” (mahāvrata) 
in imitation of the great god Bhairava. This notwithstanding, Hatley’s treatment of the mythology of 
the origins of the skull and skull-staff is, from the standpoint of literary criticism, exemplary. The same 
may be said of the topical studies comprising Hatley’s chapters 5 and 6, devoted to the origin myth and 
description of another signal element of the regalia of tantric gods and practitioners, the skull-topped 
staff known as the khaṭvāṅga. Of especial interest in these chapters are Hatley’s hypothetical model 
of the staff (p. 293, fig. 6.1), which he bases on textual sources, the visual record, material culture (pp. 
287–92), and “a degree of speculation” (p. 280).
David Gordon White
University of California, Santa Barbara 
Zur Didaktik mittelindischer Sprachen. By Klaus Mylius. Beiträge zur Kenntnis südasiatischer 
Sprachen und Literaturen, vol. 23. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2013. Pp. 100. €24.
In the same series, with the same author and publisher: 
Lehrbuch der Ardhamāgadhī.  . . ., vol. 24.  . . ., 2014. Pp. 110. €29.
Māhārāṣṭrī: Grammatischer Abriss und Wörterbuch.  . . ., vol. 25.  . . ., 2016. Pp. 131. €29.90.
Śaurasenī: Grammatik und Glossar.  . . ., vol. 27.  . . ., 2018. Pp. 89. €29.90.
Māgadhī: Grammatik, Textproben und Glossar.  . . ., vol. 29.  . . ., 2019. Pp. 74. €29.
The linguistic, literary, and religious riches of the various Middle Indo-Aryan languages are difficult 
of access for beginners, once they detour off the well-trodden path of Pāli. Although these languages 
have attracted scholars of remarkable skill—just to mention a few of the early giants like Jacobi, 
Pischel, and Weber and their worthy successors such as Alsdorf, Bloch, Caillat, von Hinüber, Lüders, 
Norman, again naming just a few. But tools that will allow a tyro to make a start on the study of these 
vernaculars, even a tyro with solid Sanskrit and Pāli, are harder to find. The still standard grammar, 
that of Richard Pischel (Grammatik der Prakrit-Sprachen, 1900), though packed full with matter, is 
extremely difficult to use; Mylius refers to it several times as “antididaktisch” (e.g., 2013: 5; 2018: 3), 
an assessment with which I wholeheartedly concur. Among other things, the word index in its original 
German version is barely over ten pages, despite the thousands of forms treated in the dense volume: 
one essentially has to know what the form is and what phonological changes it exemplifies to find 
it—rather defeating the purpose. Only in the English translation of Subhadra Jha (1957) do we find an 
adequate—or at least considerably better—index of approximately 150 pages. Oskar von Hinüber’s 
Das ältere Mittelindisch im Überblick (1985, 2nd enl. and rev. ed. 2001) is invaluable—and much 
easier to navigate than Pischel—but it is not, nor was it intended to be, a primary pedagogical tool.